6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Turbulent Thermal Diﬀusion in a Multi-Fan Turbulence Generator with the Imposed
Mean Temperature Gradient

A. Eidelman, T. Elperin,∗ N. Kleeorin, I. Rogachevskii, and I. Sapir-Katiraie
The Pearlstone Center for Aeronautical Engineering Studies, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, P. O. Box 653, Israel
(Dated: January 10, 2014)

We studied experimentally the eﬀect of turbulent thermal diﬀusion in a multi-fan turbulence
generator which produces a nearly homogeneous and isotropic ﬂow with a small mean velocity. Using
Particle Image Velocimetry and Image Processing techniques we showed that in a turbulent ﬂow with
an imposed mean vertical temperature gradient (stably stratiﬁed ﬂow) particles accumulate in the
regions with the mean temperature minimum. These experiments detected the eﬀect of turbulent
thermal diﬀusion in a multi-fan turbulence generator for relatively high Reynolds numbers. The
experimental results are in compliance with the results of the previous experimental studies of
turbulent thermal diﬀusion in oscillating grids turbulence (Buchholz et al. 2004; Eidelman et al.
2004). We demonstrated that turbulent thermal diﬀusion is an universal phenomenon. It occurs
independently of the method of turbulence generation, and the qualitative behavior of particle spatial
distribution in these very diﬀerent turbulent ﬂows is similar. Competition between turbulent ﬂuxes
caused by turbulent thermal diﬀusion and turbulent diﬀusion determines the formation of particle
inhomogeneities.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

The main goal of this study is to describe the ex-
perimental investigation of the eﬀect of turbulent ther-
mal diﬀusion in a multi-fan turbulence generator. Tur-
bulent thermal diﬀusion is associated with the correla-
tion between temperature and velocity ﬂuctuations in a
turbulent ﬂow with an imposed mean temperature gra-
dient and causes a relatively strong non-diﬀusive mean
ﬂux of particles in the direction of the mean heat ﬂux.
This eﬀect results in the formation of large-scale inhomo-
geneities in particle spatial distribution whereby particles
accumulate in the vicinity of the minimum of the mean
ﬂuid temperature. Turbulent thermal diﬀusion was pre-
dicted theoretically by Elperin et al. (1996; 1997) and
detected experimentally by Buchholz et al. (2004) and
Eidelman et al. (2004) in oscillating grids turbulence.

The mechanism of the phenomenon of turbulent ther-
mal diﬀusion for inertial solid particles is as follows. In-
ertia causes particles inside the turbulent eddies to drift
out to the boundary regions between the eddies (i.e., re-
gions with low vorticity and maximum of ﬂuid pressure).
Therefore, particles accumulate in regions with maxi-
mum pressure of the turbulent ﬂuid. Similarly, there is
an outﬂow of particles from regions with minimum pres-
sure of ﬂuid. In a homogeneous and isotropic turbulence
without large-scale external gradients of temperature, a
drift from regions with increased or decreased concentra-
tion of particles by a turbulent ﬂow of ﬂuid is equiproba-
ble in all directions, as well as pressure and temperature
of the surrounding ﬂuid do not correlate with the tur-

∗Electronic address: elperin@bgu.ac.il

bulent velocity ﬁeld. Therefore, only turbulent diﬀusion
determines the turbulent ﬂux of particles.

In a turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow with a mean temperature gra-
dient, the mean heat ﬂux is not zero, i.e., the ﬂuctuations
of temperature and the velocity of the ﬂuid are corre-
lated. Fluctuations of temperature cause ﬂuctuations of
ﬂuid pressure. These ﬂuctuations result in ﬂuctuations
of the number density of particles. Indeed, an increase of
pressure of the surrounding ﬂuid is accompanied by an
accumulation of particles due to their inertia. Therefore,
the direction of the mean ﬂux of particles coincides with
that of the heat ﬂux, and the mean ﬂux of particles is
directed to the region with minimum mean temperature,
and the particles accumulate in this region (Elperin et
al. 1996).

The mechanism of turbulent thermal diﬀusion is as-
sociated with a nonzero divergence of a particle velocity
ﬁeld. The latter is caused either by particle inertia or
inhomogeneity of ﬂuid density in a non-isothermal low-
Mach number turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow. Therefore, the eﬀect
of turbulent thermal diﬀusion can be also observed in the
suspension of non-inertial particles (e.g., particles with a
Stokes time of the order of 10−6 − 10−5 s in air ﬂows) or
for gaseous admixtures in non-isothermal low-Mach num-
ber turbulent ﬂuid ﬂows (see Elperin et al., 1997). Note
that when we refer to compressible non-isothermal ﬂuid
ﬂow with low Mach numbers, it means that div (ρ v) ≈ 0,
where v is the ﬂuid velocity and ρ is the ﬂuid density. The
latter implies that div v ≈ −(v · ∇)ρ/ρ 6= 0. In partic-
ular, in a non-isothermal ﬂuid ﬂow with a temperature
gradient div v ≈ −(v · ∇)ρ/ρ ≈ (v · ∇)T /T 6= 0, where
T is the ﬂuid temperature.

Numerical simulations,

laboratory experiments and
observations in the atmospheric turbulence revealed for-
mation of long-living inhomogeneities in spatial distri-

bution of small inertial particles and droplets in turbu-
lent ﬂuid ﬂows (see, e.g., Wang and Maxey 1993; Ko-
rolev and Mazin 1993; Eaton and Fessler 1994; Fessler
et al. 1994; Maxey et al. 1996; Aliseda et al. 2002;
Shaw 2003). The origin of these inhomogeneities was in-
tensively studied by Elperin et al. (1996; 1997; 2000a;
2000b). It was pointed out that the eﬀect of turbulent
thermal diﬀusion is important for understanding diﬀer-
ent atmospheric phenomena (e.g., atmospheric aerosols,
smog formation, etc).
In particular, the existence of a
correlation between the appearance of temperature in-
versions and the aerosol layers (pollutants) in the vicin-
ity of the temperature inversions is well known (see, e.g.,
Csanady 1980; Seinfeld 1986; Flagan and Seinfeld 1988).
Turbulent thermal diﬀusion can cause the formation of
large-scale aerosol layers in the vicinity of temperature in-
versions in atmospheric turbulence (Elperin et al. 2000a;
2000b). Observations of the vertical distributions of pol-
lutants in the atmosphere show that maximum concen-
trations can occur within temperature inversion layers
(see, e. g., Csanady 1980; Seinfeld 1986; Jaenicke 1987).
The characteristic parameters of the atmospheric turbu-
lent boundary layer are: the maximum scale of turbulent
ﬂow is L ∼ 103 − 104 cm; the turbulent ﬂuid velocity in
the scale L is u ∼ 30 − 100 cm/s; the Reynolds num-
ber is Re = uL/ν ∼ 106 − 107 (see, e. g., Csanady
1980; Seinfeld 1986; Blackadar 1997), where ν is the kine-
matic viscosity. For instance, for particles with material
density ρp ∼ 1 − 2 g / cm3 and radius a = 20 µm the
characteristic time of formation of inhomogeneities is of
the order of 1 hour for the temperature gradient 1K/100
m and 2 hours for the temperature gradient 1K/200 m.
The eﬀect of turbulent thermal diﬀusion might be also of
relevance in diﬀerent industrial non-isothermal turbulent
ﬂows (Elperin et al. 1998).

Turbulent thermal diﬀusion is a new and fundamen-
tal phenomenon. Therefore, this phenomenon should be
studied for diﬀerent types of turbulence and diﬀerent ex-
perimental set-ups. Previously phenomenon of turbu-
lent thermal diﬀusion was studied experimentally only in
oscillating grids turbulence whereby the Reynolds num-
bers were not so high (see for details Buchholz et al.
2004; Eidelman et al. 2004). In order to study the ef-
fect of turbulent thermal diﬀusion at higher Reynolds
numbers we constructed a multi-fan turbulence gener-
ator. Similar apparatus was used in the past in tur-
bulent combustion studies (Birouk et al. 1996) and in
studies of turbulence-induced preferential concentration
of solid particles in microgravity conditions (Fallon and
Rogers 2002). The multi-fan turbulence generator allows
us to produce nearly homogeneous isotropic turbulent
ﬂuid ﬂow with a small mean velocity. Using Particle
Image Velocimetry and Image Processing Techniques we
determined velocities and spatial distribution of tracer
particles in the isothermal and non-isothermal turbulent
ﬂows. Our experiments with non-isothermal turbulent
ﬂows were performed for a stably stratiﬁed ﬂuid ﬂow with
a vertical mean temperature gradient which was formed

2

FIG. 1: The scheme of the test section.

by a cooled bottom wall and a heated top wall of the
chamber. We found that particles accumulate in the
vicinity of the bottom wall of the chamber (where the
mean ﬂuid temperature is minimum) due to the eﬀect of
turbulent thermal diﬀusion. Sedimentation of particles
in a gravity ﬁeld in these experiments was very slow in
comparison with accumulation of particles caused by tur-
bulent thermal diﬀusion. In the present study we demon-
strated that turbulent thermal diﬀusion occurs indepen-
dently of the method of turbulence generation.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

A multi-fan turbulence generator includes eight fans
(120 mm in outer diameter and with controlled rotation
frequency of up to 2800 rpm) mounted in the corners of
a cubic Perspex box and facing the center of the box.
The Perspex box is a cube 400 × 400 × 400 mm3, with
eight 272 mm equilateral triangles mounted in its corners
used as solid bases for the fans (see Fig. 1). Each fan was
calibrated separately, and the input current and rotation
speed were measured and logged. We also tested one
fan operating above an electric heat source. We placed
a thermocouple in the vicinity of the fan’s motor, and
repeated this test for diﬀerent temperatures (290, 310,
330 K). These experiments showed that the fan rotation
speed does not depend on the temperature.

At the top and bottom walls of the Perspex box we
installed two heat exchangers with rectangular 3 × 3 × 15
mm3 ﬁns. The upper wall was heated up to 343 K, the
bottom wall was cooled to 283 K. Therefore, compera-
tively large vertical mean temperature gradient (∼ 92
K/m) was formed in the core of the ﬂow. The tem-
perature was measured with a high-frequency response
thermocouple (0.005 inches in diameter) which was glued
externally to a wire (2.2 mm of Cu in diameter coated
with 0.85 mm Teﬂon). The accuracy of the temperature

measurements was of the order of 0.1 K. We found that
the temperature measurements aﬀected the ﬂow in a very
small area around the wire. Two additional fans were in-
stalled at the bottom and top walls of the chamber in or-
der to produce a large mean temperature gradient in the
core of the ﬂow. Our measurements showed that these
two additional fans only weakly aﬀected considerably the
homogeneity and isotropy of the turbulent ﬂow.

Velocity ﬁelds were measured using Particle Image Ve-
locimetry (PIV) technique. The ﬂow was seeded with
incense smoke and was illuminated by a Surelite LSI-10
(Continuum) Nd:YAG pulsed laser with a power of 170
mJ/pulse. The light sheet optics includes spherical and
cylindrical Galilei telescopes with tuneable divergence
and adjustable focus length. We used a progressive-scan
12 bit digital CCD camera (pixel size 6.7 µm ×6.7 µm
each) with a dual-frame-technique for cross-correlation
processing of captured images. A programmable Timing
Unit (PC interface card) generated sequences of pulses
to control the laser, camera and data acquisition rate.
The data was processed using standard cross correlation
techniques (DaVis 7.0 code, LaVision, G¨ottingen).

An incense smoke with sub-micron particles as a tracer
for the PIV measurements was produced by high temper-
ature sublimation of solid incense particles. Analysis of
smoke particles using a microscope (Nikon, Epiphot with
an ampliﬁcation of 560) and a PM-300 portable laser par-
ticulate analyzer showed that these particles have an ap-
proximately spherical shape and that their mean diame-
ter is of the order of 0.7µm. In order to prevent from any
thermal eﬀects caused by the incense smoke generator,
we placed it far away from the test section behind a wall,
so that the incense smoke was transported through a ﬁve
meter long pipeline and was cooled before it entered the
test section. The smoke was feeded into the test section
at room temperature. We measured the smoke tempera-
ture inside the pipeline at two locations: 0.5 m and 3.5 m
from the generator. At the ﬁrst location the smoke tem-
perature was 318 K, while at the second location it was
294 K. The number density of smoke particles inserted
to the test section in the experiments was of the order of
104 cm−3.

We determined mean and r.m.s. velocities, two-point
correlation functions and an integral scale of turbulence
from the measured velocity ﬁelds. A series of 130 pairs
of images acquired with a frequency of 4 Hz were stored
for calculating the velocity maps and for ensemble and
spatial averaging of turbulence characteristics. The cen-
ter of the measurement region coincides with the center
of the chamber. We measured the velocity in ﬂow area
of 92 × 92 mm2 with a spatial resolution of 1024 × 1024
pixels. These regions were analyzed with interrogation
windows of 32 × 32 pixels. A velocity vector was de-
termined in every interrogation window, allowing us to
construct a velocity map comprising 32 × 32 vectors. The
mean and r.m.s. velocities for each point of the velocity
map (1024 points) were determined by averaging over
130 independent maps, and then over 1024 points. The

3

FIG. 2: The scheme of the temperature measurements. The
wire that holds the thermocouple is inserted from the bottom
of the chamber (some parts of the test section are not shown).

Table 1
Flow parameters in a multi-fan turbulence generator
Y
Z
Horizontal and vertical directions
703 875
Reynolds number Re = u L/ν
14.85 16.4
Integral length scale L (mm)
0.71 0.8
r.m.s. velocity u (m/s)
Turbulence integral time scale τ = L/u (ms) 20.9 20.5
Rate of dissipation ε = u3/L (m2/ s3)
24.1 31.2
Taylor microscale λ = √15 ν τ (mm)
2.17 2.15
Kolmogorov length scale η = L Re−3/4 (µm) 109 102
103 115
Reλ = u λ/ν in the Taylor microscale

two-point correlation functions of the velocity ﬁeld were
determined for each point of the central part of the ve-
locity map (16 × 16 vectors) by averaging over 130 inde-
pendent velocity maps, and then over 256 points. Our
tests showed that 130 image pairs contain enough data
to obtain reliable statistical estimates. An integral scale
L of turbulence was determined from the two-point cor-
relation functions of the velocity ﬁeld. For this end we
used exponential approximation of the correlation func-
tion since the experimentally measured correlation func-
tion did not reach zero values.

Spatial resolution of of the velocity measurements was
about 2.9 mm for a probed area 92 × 92 mm2 with in-
terrogation window 32 × 32 pixels. The maximum tracer
particle displacement in the experiment was of the order
of 8 pixels, i.e., 1/4 of the interrogation window. The av-
erage displacement of tracer particles was of the order of

2.5 pixels. Therefore, the average accuracy of the velocity
measurements was of the order of 4% for the accuracy of
the correlation peak detection in the interrogation win-
dow which was of the order of 0.1 pixels (see, e.g., Adrian
1991; Westerweel 1997; 2000).

In order to create large mean temperature gradient,
the top and bottom fans were run at diﬀerent speeds than
the peripheral fans (see below). This regime was found
empirically. Clearly, this introduces a weak anisotropy
in velocity ﬂuctuations in the vertical direction which is
less than 10%. Note that the anisotropy of turbulence
is not essential for the validation of the phenomenon of
turbulent thermal diﬀusion.

Fluid ﬂow parameters (at the rotation speed 1500 rpm
for eight corner fans and 2300 rpm for top and bottom
fans) at the horizontal Y and vertical Z directions are
presented in Table 1. In the experiments the maximum
mean ﬂow velocity was of the order of 0.1 − 0.2 m/s while
the r.m.s. velocity was of the order of 0.7 − 1.1 m/s.
Thus, the measured r.m.s. velocity was much higher
than the mean ﬂuid velocity in the core of the ﬂow. Fig-
ure 3 shows the two-point correlation functions of the
velocity ﬁeld at the horizontal and vertical directions. In
particular, in Fig. 3 we plotted the longitudinal velocity
correlation coeﬃcients, f (y) = huy(0)uy(y)i/hu2
y(0)i and
f (z) = huz(0)uz(z)i/hu2
z(0)i, where u are the ﬂuid veloc-
ity ﬂuctuations. Figure 3 and Table 1 demonstrate that
the multi-fan turbulence generator produced a weakly
anisotropic turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow with a small mean veloc-
ity.

The energy spectrum of the ﬂuid ﬂow is shown in
Fig. 4. The one-dimensional longitudinal energy spec-
trum was determined by a standard procedure. In par-
ticular, we determined the Fourier components uy(ky)
and uz(kz) of the ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁeld, and then de-
termined h|uy(ky)|2i and h|uz(kz)|2i, where h...i is the
ensemble averaging over 130 independent velocity maps.
In Fig. 4 we plotted horizontal and vertical energy com-
ponent spectra. As can be seen from Fig. 4, the energy
spectrum is diﬀerent from −5/3 law. However, our study
showed that the existence of the eﬀect of turbulent ther-
mal diﬀusion is independent of the slope of the energy
spectrum.

Spatial particle number density distributions were ob-
tained using a single frame from the double frame cap-
tured for PIV measurements. For this purpose the in-
tensity of laser light Mie scattering by tracer particles
was recorded and averaged over 130 single frames. We
probed the central 9.2 × 9.2 cm region in the chamber
by determining the mean intensity of scattered light in
32 × 16 interrogation windows with a size of 32 × 64 pix-
els. The vertical distribution of the intensity of the scat-
tered light was determined in 16 vertical strips, which are
composed of 32 interrogation windows. Variations of the
obtained vertical distributions between these strips were
very small. We used spatial average across the strips and
ensemble average over 130 images of the vertical distri-
butions of the intensity of scattered light. The turbu-

4

f(r)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

 

log(E)

-1.5

 

-2.0

-2.5

0

2

4

6

8

r,mm

FIG. 3: The two-point longitudinal correlation functions of
the velocity ﬁeld at the horizontal direction (ﬁlled squares)
and vertical direction (unﬁlled squares).

-5/3

3.8

 

3.2

3.4

3.6

4.0

4.2

log(k)

FIG. 4: The energy spectrum of the ﬂuid ﬂow.

lent diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the test section DT was of
the order of DT ∼ 40 cm2 / s. The turbulent diﬀu-
sion time τT D = L2
d/DT ∼ 3 seconds in the scale of core
ﬂow Ld = 10 cm. Thus the steady state particle spatial
distribution is reached during several seconds, while the
turbulence integral time scale τ ∼ 2 × 10−2 s. The mea-
surements were started several minutes after the seed was
inserted in the chamber.

III. TURBULENT THERMAL DIFFUSION:
THEORY AND EXPERIMENT

Now let us discuss the eﬀect of turbulent thermal dif-
fusion and compare the theoretical predictions with the
experimental results. The mean number density of par-
ticles ¯N advected by a turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow is given by

∂ ¯N
∂t

+ div [ ¯N ( ¯V + Veﬀ ) − DT ∇ ¯N ] = 0 ,

(1)

5

(4)

non-isothermal ﬂow reads

∂C
∂t

1
ρ

+ (v · ∇)C =

div (D ρ ∇C) ,

(3)

where mp is the particle mass and n is the instantaneous
number density of particles. For very small molecular
diﬀusion D, this equation reads

∂C
∂t

+ (v · ∇)C ≈ 0 ,

which implies that the mass concentration C is conserved
along the ﬂuid particle trajectory. In homogeneous tur-
bulence all trajectories are similar. Therefore, the num-
ber density of non-inertial particles n ∝ ρ, i.e., the num-
ber density of non-inertial particles behaves locally as the
ﬂuid density. In particular, the location of the maximum
of the number density of non-inertial particles coincides
with the location of the maximum of the ﬂuid density,
and vice versa. For very small mean ﬂuid pressure gra-
dients, ∇¯ρ/ ¯ρ ≈ −∇ ¯T / ¯T , where ¯ρ is the mean ﬂuid tem-
perature. Therefore, the location of the maximum of the
mean number density of non-inertial particles coincides
with the location of the minimum of the mean ﬂuid tem-
perature, and vice versa. The equation for the mean
number density of non-inertial particles ¯N is equivalent
to the following equation for the mean mass concentra-
tion ¯C = mp ¯N/ ¯ρ of non-inertial particles:

∂ ¯C
∂t

1
¯ρ

+ ( ¯V · ∇) ¯C =

div (DT ¯ρ ∇ ¯C) .

(5)

If one ignores the turbulent thermal diﬀusion term in
Eq. (1) for the mean number density of non-inertial par-
ticles ¯N , then the equation for the mean mass concentra-
tion ¯C of non-inertial particles has an incorrect form.

For inertial particles, their velocity vp depends on
the velocity of the surrounding ﬂuid v.
In particu-
lar, for a small Stokes time vp ≈ v − τpdv/dt + O(τ 2
p )
(see Maxey 1987), where τp is the Stokes time. Us-
ing the Navier-Stokes equation it can be shown that
div vp ≈ div v + τp∆P/ρ + O(τ 2
p ) (Elperin et al. 1996).
The eﬀective velocity (2) for inertial particles is given by
Veﬀ = −DT α(∇ ¯T )/ ¯T , where the coeﬃcient α = 1+κ(a),
κ(a) ∝ τp ∝ a2 and a is the particle size. Therefore,
the mean particle velocity is ¯Vp = ¯V + Veﬀ . Turbulent
thermal diﬀusion implies an additional non-diﬀusive tur-
bulent ﬂux of inertial particles to the minimum of mean
ﬂuid temperature (i.e., the additional turbulent ﬂux of
inertial particles in the direction of the turbulent heat
ﬂux). In order to demonstrate that the directions of the
turbulent ﬂux of inertial particles and the turbulent heat
ﬂux coincide, let us assume that the mean temperature
¯T2 at point 2 is larger than the mean temperature ¯T1
at point 1 (see Fig. 5). Consider two small control vol-
umes ”a” and ”b” located between these two points (see
Fig. 5), and let the direction of the local turbulent veloc-
ity at the control volume ”a” at some instant be the same
as the direction of the turbulent heat ﬂux huθi (i.e., it is

FIG. 5: Mechanism of turbulent thermal diﬀusion of inertial
particles.

Veﬀ = −τ hup div upi = −DT (1 + κ)

,

(2)

∇ ¯T
¯T

where DT = (τ /3)hu2i is the turbulent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient, τ is the momentum relaxation time of the turbu-
lent velocity ﬁeld, u are ﬂuctuations of ﬂuid velocity, ¯V
is the mean ﬂuid velocity, up are ﬂuctuations of parti-
cle velocity, ¯T is the mean ﬂuid temperature. Coeﬃcient
κ depends on particle inertia (the particle size a), the
In
Reynolds number and the mean ﬂuid temperature.
Eq. (1) we neglected a small molecular mean ﬂux of par-
ticles caused by molecular (Brownian) diﬀusion, molecu-
lar thermal diﬀusion (or molecular thermophoresis) and
small particle terminal fall velocity. Equation (1) was
previously derived by diﬀerent methods (see Elperin et
al. 1996; 1997; 1998; 2000b; 2001; Pandya and Mashayek
2002; Reeks 2005).

For non-inertial particles, their velocity coincides with
ﬂuid velocity v = ¯V + u, and div v ≈ −(v · ∇)ρ/ρ ≈
(v · ∇)T /T, where ρ and T are the density and temper-
ature of the ﬂuid, and ¯V = hvi. Therefore, the eﬀective
velocity of non-inertial particles Veﬀ = −τ hu div ui is
given by Veﬀ = −DT (∇ ¯T )/ ¯T . Here we used the equation
of state for an ideal gas, and neglected small gradients
of the mean ﬂuid pressure. This eﬀective velocity causes
an additional turbulent ﬂux of particles directed to the
minimum of mean ﬂuid temperature (phenomenon of tur-
bulent thermal diﬀusion). Note that turbulent thermal
diﬀusion for non-inertial particles is the purely kinematic
eﬀect. Indeed, the equation for the instantaneous mass
concentration, C = mp n/ρ, of non-inertial particles in

0.55

 

Z

0.65

0.60

0.50

0.45

0.40

310

312

314

316

318

T,K

FIG. 6: Vertical temperature proﬁle. Here Z is a dimension-
less vertical coordinate measured in units of the height of the
chamber, and Z = 0 at the bottom of the chamber.

 

directed to the point 1). Let the local turbulent veloc-
ity at the control volume ”b” be directed at this instant
opposite to the turbulent heat ﬂux (i.e., it is directed to
the point 2). In a ﬂuid ﬂow with an imposed mean tem-
perature gradient, pressure p and velocity u ﬂuctuations
are correlated, and regions with a higher level of pres-
sure ﬂuctuations have higher temperature and velocity
ﬂuctuations. Indeed, using equation of state of the ideal
gas it can be easily shown that the ﬂuctuations of the
temperature θ and pressure p at the control volumes ”a”
are positive, and at the control volume ”b” they are neg-
ative. Therefore, the ﬂuctuations of the particle number
density n are positive in the control volume ”a” (because
inertial particles are locally accumulated in the vicinity
of the maximum of pressure ﬂuctuations), and they are
negative at the control volume ”b” (because there is an
outﬂow of inertial particles from regions with a low pres-
sure). The mean ﬂux of particles huni is positive in the
control volume ”a” (i.e., it is directed to the point 1), and
it is also positive at the control volume ”b” (because both
ﬂuctuations of velocity and number density of particles
are negative at the control volume ”b”). Therefore, the
mean ﬂux of inertial particles huni is directed, as is the
turbulent heat ﬂux huθi, towards the point 1.

The contribution of turbulent thermal diﬀusion to the

turbulent ﬂux of particles is given by

J T T D

T

= −DT α

¯N = −DT kT

(6)

∇ ¯T
¯T

∇ ¯T
¯T

,

6

where DT kT is the coeﬃcient of turbulent thermal dif-
fusion, kT = α ¯N = (1 + κ) ¯N is the turbulent thermal
diﬀusion ratio, and the coeﬃcient α = kT / ¯N is the spe-
ciﬁc turbulent thermal diﬀusion ratio.

Neglecting the term ¯N Veﬀ in Eq. (1) for the mean
number density of particles, we arrive at simple diﬀu-
sion equation: ∂ ¯N /∂t = DT ∆ ¯N , where we neglected a
small mean velocity ¯V. The steady-state solution of this
equation is ¯N = const, i.e., a uniform spatial distribu-
tion of particles. On the other hand, our measurements
in both, the multi-fan turbulence generator and an oscil-
lating grids turbulence generator (Buchholz et al. 2004;
Eidelman et al. 2004) demonstrate that the solution ¯N =
const is valid only for an isothermal turbulent ﬂow. Let
us take into account the eﬀect of turbulent thermal diﬀu-
sion in Eq. (1). Then the steady-state solution of Eq. (1)
reads: ∇ ¯N / ¯N = −α∇ ¯T / ¯T , which yields

¯N
¯N0

= 1 − α

¯T − ¯T0
¯T0

,

(7)

where ¯N0 = ¯N ( ¯T = ¯T0) and ¯T0 is the reference mean
temperature.

Now let us discuss the measurements of mean tempera-
ture and particle spatial distribution in the multi-fan tur-
bulence generator, and compare the experimental results
with the theoretical predictions. The mean temperature
vertical proﬁle in the multi-fan turbulence generator is
shown in Fig. 6. Here Z is a dimensionless vertical coor-
dinate measured in the units of the height of the chamber,
and Z = 0 at the bottom of the chamber.

Measurements performed using diﬀerent concentra-
tions of the incense smoke in the ﬂow showed that the
distribution of the scattered light intensity normalized
by the average over the vertical coordinate light inten-
sity, is independent of the mean particles number density
in the isothermal ﬂow. In order to characterize the spa-
tial distribution of particle number density, ¯N ∝ ET /E,
in a non-isothermal ﬂow, the distribution of the scat-
tered light intensity E for the isothermal case was used
to normalize the scattered light intensity ET obtained in
a non-isothermal ﬂow under the same conditions. The
scattered light intensities ET and E in each experiment
were normalized by corresponding scattered light inten-
sities averaged over the vertical coordinate. The ratio
ET /E of the normalized average distributions of the in-
tensity of scattered light as a function of the normalized
vertical coordinate Z is shown in Fig. 7. A typical nor-
malized ET /E image in Y Z plane is shown in Fig. 8.
Inspection of Figs. 7-8 demonstrates that particles are re-
distributed in a turbulent ﬂow with a mean temperature
gradient, e.g., they accumulate in regions with minimum
mean temperature (in the lower part of the chamber).

In order to determine the speciﬁc turbulent thermal
diﬀusion ratio, α, in Fig. 9 we plotted the normalized
particle number density Nz ≡ ¯N / ¯N0 versus the normal-
ized temperature diﬀerence Tz ≡ ( ¯T − ¯T0)/ ¯T0, where ¯T0 is
the reference temperature and ¯N0 = ¯N ( ¯T = ¯T0). Figure 9
was plotted using the mean temperature vertical proﬁle

7

0.50

 

Z
0.60

0.55

0.45

0.40

0.35

ET/ E

0.96

0.98

1.00

1.02

1.04

FIG. 7: Ratio ET /E of the normalized average distributions
of the intensity of scattered light versus the normalized verti-
cal coordinate Z.

 

shown in Fig. 6. The normalized local mean tempera-
tures [the relative temperature diﬀerences ( ¯T − ¯T0)/ ¯T0]
in Fig. 9 correspond to the diﬀerent locations inside the
probed region. In particular, in Fig. 9 the location of the
point with reference temperature ¯T0 is Z = 0 (the lowest
point of the probed region with a maximum ¯N ). In these
experiments we found that the coeﬃcient α ≈ 2.68.

The speciﬁc turbulent thermal diﬀusion ratio α in the
experiments with oscillating grids turbulence (Eidelman
et al., 2004; Buchholz et al., 2004) was α = 1.29 − 1.87
(depending on the frequency of the grid oscillations and
on the direction of the imposed vertical mean temper-
ature gradient), while in the multi-fan turbulence α =
2.68. The latter value of the coeﬃcient α is larger
than that obtained in the experiments in oscillating grids
turbulence, where the Reynolds numbers were smaller
than those achieved in the multi-fan turbulence genera-
tor. Therefore, we demonstrated that the speciﬁc turbu-
lent thermal diﬀusion ratio α increases with increase of
Reynolds number. Note also that the experiments with
oscillating grids turbulence were performed with two di-
rections of the imposed vertical mean temperature gra-
dient (for stable and unstable stratiﬁcations).

The speciﬁc turbulent thermal diﬀusion ratio, α =
1 + κ(a), comprises two terms, the ﬁrst one (which equals
to 1) is independent of the particle size and the second
In particular,
term depends on the size of particles.

Nz
1.00

0.99

0.98

 

0.97

0.96

0.95

FIG. 8: A typical normalized ET /E image in Y Z plane. Here
Y and Z are the horizontal and vertical coordinates.

0

5

10

 

15

Tzx103

FIG. 9: Normalized particle number density Nz
( ¯T
versus normalized temperature diﬀerence Tz

¯N / ¯N0
≡
¯T0)/ ¯T0.

≡

−

κ(a) ∝ τp ∝ a2, where a is the particle size. For non-
inertial particles, κ(a) = 0, and α = 1. The deviation
of the coeﬃcient α in both experiments from α = 1 is
caused by a small yet ﬁnite inertia of the particles and
also by the dependence of coeﬃcient κ on the Reynolds
numbers. The exact value of parameter α for inertial par-
ticles cannot be found within the framework of the theory

of turbulent thermal diﬀusion (Elperin et al. 1996; 1997;
1998; 2000b; 2001) for the conditions of our experiments
(i.e., for large mean temperature gradients). However,
in the experiments performed for diﬀerent ranges of pa-
rameters and diﬀerent directions of a mean temperature
gradient, and in two diﬀerent experimental set-ups, the
coeﬃcient α was more than 1, that agrees with the the-
ory. Therefore, we demonstrated that turbulent thermal
diﬀusion occurs independently of the method of turbu-
lence generation.

The size of the probed region did not aﬀect our re-
sults. The variability of the results obtained in diﬀerent
experiments was within 0.5%. This is caused by variabil-
ity of optical conditions, light intensity variations in a
light sheet and errors in light intensity detection. There-
fore, it can be concluded that error in particle number
density measurements is less than 0.5%. Note that the
contribution of the mean ﬂow to the spatial distribution
of particles is negligibly small. In particular, the normal-
ized distribution of the scattered light intensity measured
in the diﬀerent vertical strips in the regions where the
mean ﬂow velocity and the coeﬃcient of turbulent dif-
fusion may vary, are practically identical (the diﬀerence
being only about 1%).

The eﬀect of the gravitational settling of small particles
(0.5 − 1 µm) is negligibly small (the terminal fall velocity
of these particles being less than 0.01 cm/s). Due to the
eﬀect of turbulent thermal diﬀusion, particles are redis-
tributed in the vertical direction in the chamber: parti-
cles accumulated in the lower part of the chamber, i.e., in
regions with a minimum mean temperature. Some frac-
tion of particles sticks to the fan propellers and chamber
walls, and the total number of particles without feeding
fresh smoke slowly decreases. The characteristic time of
this decrease is about 15 minutes. However, the spatial
distribution of the normalized number density of parti-
cles does not change over time. It must be noted that
the accuracy of the measurements in these experiments
(∼ 0.5%) is considerably higher than the magnitude of
the observed eﬀect (∼ 5%). Therefore, our experiments

8

detected the eﬀect of turbulent thermal diﬀusion in the
multi-fan turbulence generator. These results are in com-
pliance with the results of the previous experiments in
oscillating grids turbulence (see Buchholz et al. 2004;
Eidelman et al. 2004).

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We studied experimentally the eﬀect of turbulent ther-
mal diﬀusion in a multi-fan turbulence generator using
Particle Image Velocimetry and Image Processing Tech-
niques.
In a turbulent ﬂow with an imposed vertical
mean temperature gradient (stably stratiﬁed ﬂow) par-
ticles accumulate in regions of minimum mean temper-
ature. Therefore, our experiments detected the eﬀect of
turbulent thermal diﬀusion in the multi-fan turbulence
generator, i.e., non-diﬀusive mean ﬂux of particles in the
direction of the mean heat ﬂux. Turbulent thermal dif-
fusion is an universal phenomenon. In particular, using
two very diﬀerent turbulent ﬂows created by oscillating
grids turbulence generator (Buchholz et al. 2004; Eidel-
man et al. 2004) and multi-fan turbulence generator, we
demonstrated that the qualitative behavior of particle
spatial distribution in non-isothermal turbulent ﬂow is
similar. The same physics is responsible for formation of
particle inhomogeneities, i.e., competition between tur-
bulent ﬂuxes caused by turbulent thermal diﬀusion and
turbulent diﬀusion.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to two anonymous referees for their
very helpful and important comments. This research was
partly supported by the German-Israeli Project Cooper-
ation (DIP) administered by the Federal Ministry of Ed-
ucation and Research (BMBF) and Israel Science Foun-
dation governed by the Israeli Academy of Science.

[1] Adrian RJ (1991) Particle imaging techniques for exper-
imental ﬂuid mechanics. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 23: 261-
304

[2] Aliseda A; Cartellier A; Hainaux F; Lasheras JC (2002)
Eﬀect of preferential concentration on the settling veloc-
ity of heavy particles in homogeneous isotropic turbu-
lence. J. Fluid Mech. 468: 77-105

[3] Birouk M; Chauveau C; Sarh B; Quilgars A; Gokalp I
(1996) Turbulence eﬀects on the vaporization of mono-
component single droplets. Combustion Science and
Technology 413: 113-114

[4] Blackadar AK (1997) Turbulence and diﬀusion in the at-

mosphere. Springer, Berlin

[5] Buchholz J; Eidelman A; Elperin T; Gr¨unefeld G; Klee-
orin N; Krein A; Rogachevskii I (2004) Experimental
study of turbulent thermal diﬀusion in oscillating grids

turbulence. Experiments in Fluids 36: 879-887

[6] Csanady GT (1980) Turbulent diﬀusion in the environ-

ment. Reidel, Dordrecht

[7] Eaton JK; Fessler JR (1994) Preferential concentration of
particles by turbulence. Int J Multiphase Flow 20: 169-
209

[8] Eidelman A; Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Krein A; Ro-
gachevskii I; Buchholz J; Gr¨unefeld G (2004) Turbulent
thermal diﬀusion of aerosols in geophysics and in labora-
tory experiments. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics 11:
343-350

[9] Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Rogachevskii I (1996) Turbulent
inertial particles. Phys Rev

thermal diﬃsion of small
Lett. 76: 224-228

[10] Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Rogachevskii I (1997) Turbulent
barodiﬀusion, turbulent thermal diﬀusion and large-scale

instability in gases. Phys Rev E 55: 2713-2721

[11] Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Rogachevskii I (1998) Formation
of inhomogeneities in two-phase low-mach-number com-
pressible turbulent ﬂows. Int J Multiphase Flow 24: 1163-
1182

[12] Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Rogachevskii I (2000a) Mech-
anisms of
formation of aerosol and gaseous inhomo-
geneities in the turbulent atmosphere. Atmosph Res 53:
117-129

[13] Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Rogachevskii I; Sokoloﬀ D (2000b)
Turbulent transport of atmospheric aerosols and forma-
tion of large-scale structures. Physics and Chemistry of
the Earth A25: 797-803

[14] Elperin T; Kleeorin N; Rogachevskii I; Sokoloﬀ D (2001)
Mean-ﬁeld theory for a passive scalar advected by a tur-
bulent velocity ﬁeld with a random renewal time. Phys
Rev E 64: 026304 (1-9)

[15] Fallon T; Rogers CB (2002) Turbulence-induced prefer-
ential concentration of solid particles in microgravity con-
ditions. Experiments in Fluids 33: 233-241

[16] Fessler JR; Kulick JD; Eaton JK (1994) Preferential con-
centration of heavy particles in a turbulent channel ﬂow.
Phys. Fluids 6: 3742-3749

[17] Flagan R; Seinfeld JH (1988) Fundamentals of air pollu-

tion engineering. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs

[18] Jaenicke R (1987) Aerosol physics and chemistry.

Springer, Berlin

[19] Korolev AV; Mazin IP (1993) Zones of increased and de-

9

creased concentration in stratiform clouds. J. Appl. Me-
teorol. 32: 760-773

[20] Maxey MR (1987) The gravitational settling of aerosol
particles in homogeneous turbulence and random ﬂow
ﬁeld. J Fluid Mech 174: 441-465

[21] Maxey MR; Chang EJ; Wang LP (1996) Interaction of
particles and microbubbles with turbulence. Experim.
Thermal and Fluid Science 12: 417-425

[22] Pandya RVR; Mashayek F (2002) Turbulent thermal dif-
fusion and barodiﬀusion of passive scalar and dispersed
phase of particles in turbulent ﬂows. Phys Rev Lett 88:
044501 (1-4)

[23] Reeks MW (2005) On model equations for particle dis-
persion in inhomogeneous turbulence. Int J Multiphase
Flow 31: 93-114

[24] Seinfeld JH (1986) Atmospheric chemistry and physics of

air pollution. John Wiley, New York

[25] Shaw RA (2003) Particle-turbulence interactions in at-
mospheric clouds. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 35: 183-227
[26] Wang LP; Maxey MR (1993) Settling velocity and con-
centration distribution of heavy particles in homogeneous
isotropic turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 256: 27-68

[27] Westerweel J (1997) Fundamentals of digital particle im-
age velocimetry. Meas. Sci. Technology 8: 1379-1392
[28] Westerweel J (2000) Theoretical analysis of the measure-
ment precision of particle image velocimetry. Exp. Fluids,
Suppl. 29: S3-S12

