6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A dynamical equation for the distribution of a scalar advected by turbulence

Antoine Venaille∗ and Joel Sommeria†
Coriolis-LEGI 21 rue des martyrs 38000 Grenoble France
(Dated: August 14, 2013)

A phenomenological model for the dissipation of scalar ﬂuctuations due to the straining by the
ﬂuid motion is proposed in this letter. An explicit equation is obtained for the time evolution of
the probability distribution function of a coarse-grained scalar concentration. The model relies on
a self-convolution process. We ﬁrst present this model in the Batchelor regime and then extend
empirically our result to the turbulent case. The inclusion of this model in more general transport
equations, including spatial gradients, is discussed in relation with 2D turbulence and stratiﬁed
ﬂows.

PACS numbers: 47.51.+a, 92.10.Lq

The turbulent transport of tracers such as tempera-
ture or salinity is an important issue for many applica-
tions [1]. Available models usually provide a set of closed
equations for the mean quantities and their second mo-
ments (variance), and sometimes for the third and the
fourth moments [2]. However, it may be useful to model
the evolution of the whole probability distribution of the
scalar. This problem has been discussed in the context of
reactive ﬂows [3]. It could be also important to properly
model the turbulent mixing of water masses in a stably
stratiﬁed ﬂuid, where sedimentation under gravity has
an opposite eﬀect for ﬂuid particles heavier and lighter
than the surrounding ﬂuid. The case of vorticity in two-
dimensional turbulence is also of interest. Indeed statis-
tical mechanics of two-dimensional turbulence provides
predictions for the ﬁnal ﬂow organisation depending on
an initial distribution of vorticity values[4, 5]. This the-
ory can be used as a starting point for non-equilibrium
transport models [6, 7], expressed in terms of the local
probability density function of vorticity. Turbulent cas-
cade however modiﬁes this probability distribution in the
presence of a small viscosity, with a dissipation of its ﬂuc-
tuations. In two-dimensional turbulence, this eﬀect leads
to a modiﬁcation of the equilibrium state resulting from
turbulent mixing[8]. We propose here a simple model for
this cascade eﬀect, which could be combined with trans-
port equations in the presence of spatial gradients.

Let us consider a scalar ﬁeld σ(r, t) transported and
conserved by the divergenceless turbulent motion of ﬂuid
parcels. The eﬀect of molecular diﬀusion is expected
to smooth out the scalar ﬁeld at the Batchelor’s dif-
fusive cut-oﬀ scale rd. We however prefer to consider
the case of a purely advected scalar, with no diﬀu-
sion, and introduce a local average at a given scale l,
Gl(r−r′)σ(r′, t)dr′, obtained with a linear ﬁl-
σl(r, t) =
tering operator Gl. This coarse-grained description cor-
responds to a ﬁnite measurement resolution at a scale l
larger than rd. The ﬁne-grained probability distribution

R

∗Electronic address: venaille@coriolis-legi.org
†Electronic address: sommeria@coriolis-legi.org

of the scalar is preserved in time as the scalar value and
the volume of each ﬂuid parcel is conserved in the absence
of diﬀusion. However the coarse-grained probability dis-
tribution function (pdf) ρl(σ, t) is not preserved because
ﬂuctuations are transferred to scales smaller than the cut-
oﬀ l.

The problem is then to ﬁnd a time evolution equation
for this pdf. The result should of course depend on the
properties of the turbulent ﬁeld. In the usual Kolmogo-
roﬀ regime, the dissipation of scalar variance is equal to
its cascade ﬂux, independent of the cut-oﬀ scale. This
ﬂux is set by the energy and integral scale of the tur-
bulence, which are described by transport equations in
empirical turbulence models (like k-epsilon).

Instead of a Kolmogoroﬀ cascade, we shall here con-
sider a random but smooth and persistent straining mo-
tion, in which the velocity diﬀerence v(x + r, t) − v(x, t)
is a linear function of the separation r [9]. This hypothe-
sis holds whenever the kinetic energy spectrum is steeper
than k−3. It could be an appropriate model for vorticity
in two-dimensional turbulence.

The straining is charaterized by the symmetric part
of the strain tensor : Σij = 1
2 (∂jui + ∂iuj), while the
antisymmetric part accounts for the rotation of a ﬂuid
element. As a consequence of the ﬂuid incompressibility,
the trace of Σ is zero and a basis exists on which this
matrix is diagonal with two opposite eigenvalues ±s(t).
The axes of an initial spherical blob corresponding to
positive or negative eigenvalues will respectively grow or
decrease. We assume that the angle between the posi-
tive eigendirection of Σ and the iso-scalar lines evolves
slowly compared to the straining rate s(t), i.e. the time
for the eigendirections to rotate by π/2 is longer than
the time for the scalar patterns to be strained from the
integral scale L to the ﬁltering scale l. With this hypoth-
esis, our problem becomes locally one-dimensional: the
ﬂuid is composed of adjacent sheets of ﬂuid uncorrelated
with each other in one direction (which can be tilted with
respect to the eigendirection of the strain matrix [10]).

After the time ∆t1/2 needed for the width of a strip
to be divided by 2, the scalar ﬁeld ﬁltered at scale l be-
comes the average of two realisations of the ﬁeld at the
previous time. The probabilities of scalar values in adja-

cent strips can be assumed independent, as they result of
the straining of regions which were initially far apart, at
a distance beyond the integral scale of the scalar. Thus
the new probability distribution is the self-convolution of
the previous one, describing the sum of the independent
random variables, followed by a contraction by a factor
2: ρl(σ, t + ∆t1/2) = 2

ρl(σ′, t)ρl(σ − σ′, t)dσ′.

R

The convolution can be transformed in a product of
the Fourier transform of the pdf (characteristic function).
If the scalar σ has only positive values (which can be
generally obtained by changing σ in σ − min(σ)), it is
ρl(κ) =
more convenient to use the Laplace Transform
ρl(σ)e−κσdσ. The Laplace transform of the previous
ρl(2κ, t + ∆t1/2) =
self-convolution relationship leads to
R
ρl(κ, t)]2. Similarly, calling ∆t 1
the time to divide the
[
thickness of a sheet of ﬂuid by a factor n, the pdf at time
b
will be an nth-selfconvolution. In the spectral
t + ∆t 1
representation, this becomes the product of n identical
characteristic functions [11]:

b

b

n

n

ρl(nκ, t + ∆t1/n) = [

ρl(κ, t)]n.

(1)

b

In order to get a diﬀerential equation in time, we now
take the limit n = 1 + ǫ with ǫ = s(t)dt small in (1). This
ρl(κ, t)]1+ǫ . Taking the limit
yields:
ǫ ֌ 0, we can express ρl(κ+ ǫκ, t+ dt) in terms of partial
b
derivatives with respect to t and κ:

ρl(κ + ǫκ, t + dt) = [

b

b

∂t

ρl = s(t)[

ρl ln

ρl − κ∂κ

ρl]

(2)

b

b

b
b
One can check that the normalisation
ρl(σ, t)dσ =
ρl(0, t) = 1 is preserved in time by this equation. The
ρl(0, t) is also con-
σρl(σ, t)dσ = −∂κ
mean scalar value
b
ρl were
served (if it is initially deﬁned). Note that if
standing for a Fourier instead of a Laplace transform,
ρl(σ)e−iκσdσ, the same equation would be ob-
ρl(κ) =
ρl, with an additional equation for
tained for the norm of
b
its phase φ: ∂tφ + s(t)κ∂κφ = s(t)φ.

b

b

R

R

R

The right hand term of equation (2) describes the ef-
fect of strain on the pdf of the scalar, which could be
used with additional terms expressing scalar generation
or spatial transport. Equation (2) itself can be analyt-
ically solved (using the method of characteristics). For
that purpose, we deﬁne the integral:

b

f (t) = exp(

s(t′)dt′)

(3)

t

Z
0

(such that s(t) = f ′(t)/f (t)). We can easily show that
a strip with initial width R(0) reaches a width R(t) =
R(0)/f (t) at time t, so that f (t) is the reduction factor
in the straining process. We can check that the result

f (t)

κ
f (t)

, 0

(cid:19)(cid:21)

ρl(κ, t) =

b

(cid:20)

ρl(cid:18)
b

(4)

is solution of (2). When f (t) is an integer, we recover
the expression (1) for the eﬀect of n self-convolutions, in
agreement with our initial assumption.

2

(5)

The equation (2) and its solution (4) describe the pro-
cess of convergence to a Gaussian stated by the central
limit theorem: at times goes on, scalar ﬂuctuations ini-
tially extending over more and more area become packed
by the straining eﬀect below the ﬁltering scale. This can
be be checked by the convergence to zero of all the cumu-
lants beyond the second order one. The mth cumulant,
deﬁned as hσmic(t) = (−∂κ)m ln(ρl(κ, t))
κ=0, is readily
obtained from (4),
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

hσmic(t) =

hσmic(0)
[f (t)]m−1

The cumulant of order 2, equal to the variance, hσ2ic =
hσ2i− hσi2, decays as 1/f (t). This expresses the decay of
the scalar variance by the cascade through the ﬁltering
scale. The relative value of the higher order cumulants is
expressed as hσmic/hσ2im/2
c ∼ f (t)−(m/2−1), so it decays
in time, approaching a Gaussian, for which the cumu-
lants with order larger than 2 are strictly equal to 0.
Note however that if the ﬁrst or second cumulants are
not deﬁned at time t = 0, the expression (4) converges
to a Levy distribution [11], another form of stable pdf,
although the result (5) for the cumulants would not be
applicable.

Equation (2) can be extented to the three dimensional
case. The symmetric part of the deformation tensor may
have

• one negative eignevalue s(t): the problem remains
one dimensionnal, but the ﬂuid is now seen as a
succession of adjacent iso-scalar planes

• two negative eignevalues s1(t), s2(t) : ﬁlaments are
formed instead of sheets and the above description
remains valid provided that s(t) = s1(t) + s2(t).

In the case of a scalar cascade in usual isotropic tur-
bulence, our hypothesis of a uniform straining rate does
not apply, but our approach can be still used in a more
empirical way. We have seen indeed that the relative rate
of decay of the scalar variance is equal to s(t), and this
should be equal to the ﬂux of scalar variance in the Kol-
mogoroﬀ cascade, independent of the cut-oﬀ scale. Then
the model equation (2) can be applied to determine the
evolution of the whole pdf. This approach ignores the
ﬂuctuations of s(t), which are known to generate inter-
nal intermittence[12]. Nevertheless, this can be a good
model if cascade is of limited extent in wave numbers,
or if larger sources of intermittence come from spatial
gradients.

The evolution of the pdf has been studied by [13] from a
numerical computation of isotropic turbulence, in which
a passive scalar is introduced. The initial pdf was made of
two symmetric peaks, and the convergence to a Gaussian
pdf with decreasing variance was numerically observed.
The corresponding result from our model is represented
in ﬁgure (1-b). The time scale is arbitrary, but s(t) could

f=1
f=2
f=3
f=8

f=1
f=2
f=3
f=8

0

1

3

4

2
σ/<σ>

)
σ
(
ρ

1.2

0.8

0.4

0   

a)

1.6

1.2

)
σ
(
ρ

0.8

0.4

0

b)

0

1
σ/<σ>

2

FIG. 1: Evolution of the shape of the scalar distribution
as a sel-convolution process when the initial condition is a)
strongly asymmetric (a decreasing exponential) b) symmetric

be adjusted to ﬁt the observed decay of the scalar vari-
ance. Then the higher order cumulants can be calculated
from the model.

As a second example, we consider experiments per-
formed by locally introducing a dye in a stirred ﬂow [14].
In that case the initial concentration is 0 everywhere ex-
cept in the dye streaks, so the corresponding pdf is very
skewed. Later in time it progressively tends to a Gaus-
sian as stirring proceeds. Villermaux and Duplat [14]
have provided a quantitative model of this evolution as
an aggregation process of streaks of scalar, which leads
to the following kinetic equation :

∂t

ρ = s(t)
(cid:2)

f (t)[

ρ1+1/f −

ρ] − κ∂κ

ρ

(6)

(cid:3)
b

b

b

b

where f (t) is the integrated strain deﬁned by relation (3)
like in our model. The ﬁrst term accounts for the for-
mation of scalar sheets, while the second one describes
the decay of the concentration by the competing eﬀects
of strain and diﬀusion in scalar streaks. The solution
of (6) approaches a sequence of gamma pdf at large
σf −1
time, γ(σ/hσi) = f f
hσif −1 e−f σ/hσi, whose character-
Γ(f )

3

(7)

istic function is

γ(κ) =

1
1 + hσiκ/f (t) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

f (t)

b

The average concentration hσi is a constant, while the
exponent f (t) increases in time. The pdf is very skewed
at the beginning and becomes more and more symmetric
and narrow at time goes on. The solution (7) has been
found to be in good agreement with the experimental
results obtained by introducing dye either in a steady
stirring motion or in a turbulent pipe ﬂow.

Note that (7) is in the form (4), so that it is also a solu-
tion of our dynamical equation (2). Therefore our model
can also account for the experimental results. However
in our case, it corresponds to a particular initial condi-
tion, an exponential pdf (see ﬁgure 1-a). Such an initial
condition could result from non-homogeneous processes
occuring near the dye injector. Other forms can be ob-
tained from diﬀerent initial conditions, although with the
same qualitative behavior. By contrast, Villermaux and
Duplat found that the family of gamma pdf is an attrac-
tive solution [14] , so that it can be approached for a wider
class of initial conditions. One can easily check that the
dynamical equation (6) becomes identical to (2) for long
times, f → ∞. The change of the pdf in our model (2)
depends only on the straining rate s(t), while in (6) it
keeps track of the previous history through f (t), which
may not be suitable in the presence of spatial ﬂuxes. An-
other diﬀerence with the model of Villermaux and Duplat
[14] is that we consider concentration averaged on a small
domain (in the absence of diﬀusion) instead of pointwise
concentration. Distinguishing between the two models
would require careful analysis of the experimental data.
The eﬀect of a turbulent diﬀusion in the presence of
a mean scalar gradient has been studied by [15], who
show that the pdf then develops exponential tails. This
provides therefore a good rational for an initialisation
of our cascade model by an exponential, leading then
to solutions close to gamma pdf.
In a steady regime
sustained by a scalar gradient, the index f would then
depends on the ratio of the cascade eﬀect to the spatial
ﬂuxes, instead of time.

Gamma pdf have been also proposed as a ﬁt of density
increments at meter scale in the ocean [16]. Such distri-
butions have been reproduced in numerical computations
of internal wave breaking in a stably stratiﬁed ﬂuid [17].
This was modeled as the eﬀect of random steps in density
due to mixing processes. However, such steps are not ob-
served. Our approach could provide another justiﬁcation.
Indeed, a simple hypothesis of statistical equilibrium in
the gravity ﬁeld leads to an exponential pdf depending on
density σ and vertical height z. This would provide the
Gamma pdf through the self-convolution process. How-
ever the link between the statistics of this coarse-grained
concentration at scale l and those of vertical density in-
crements at scale l would need to be claridied.

To conclude, the main result of this letter is the con-
tinuous process (2) that accounts for the temporal evolu-

tion of the coarse-grained scalar pdf : the probe of width
l “sees” structures coming from larger and larger scales,
. The ef-
which implies the self-convolution of the pdf.
ﬁciency of the ﬂuid motion to drive the scalar pdf to a
form given by the central limit theorem depends of the
rate of strain s(t). It does not take into account inter-

mittency by assuming that s(t) is homogeneous in space.
Spatial gradients could in some cases be the main raison
of non-gaussianity of the scalar distribution. In that re-
spect, a fuller study using this result in the context of
statistical mechanics of the mixing of a stably stratiﬁed
ﬂuid is in preparation and will be reported elsewhere.

4

[1] B. I. Shraiman, E. D. Siggia, Nature 405, 639 (2000).
[2] Y Cheng, V.M. Canuto, A Howard , J. Atmos. Sci. (in

press) (2005).

[3] S.B. Pope, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 11 (1985).
[4] R. Robert, J. Sommeria, J. Fluid Mech. 229, 291 (1991).
[5] J. Miller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2137 (1990).
[6] R. Robert, J. Sommeria, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2776

[7] E. Kazantsev, J. Sommeria, J. Verron, J. Phys. Oceanogr.

66, 2984 (1991).

[8] H. Brands, S.R. Maassen, H.J.H. Clercx, Phys. Rev. E

(1992).

[9] G. K. Batchelor, J. Fluid Mech. 5, 113 (1959).
[10] G. Lapeyre, P. Klein, B. L. Hua, Phys. Fluids 11, 3729

(1992).

28, 1017 (1998).

60, 2864 (1999).

(1999).

[11] W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its
Applications (J. Wiley and Sons, New York, 1971).
[12] G. Falkovich, K. Gawedsky, M. Vergassola, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 73, 913 (2001).

[13] V. Eswaran, S.B. Pope, Phys. Fluids 31, 506 (1988).
[14] E. Villermaux, J. Duplat, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 184501

(2003).

[15] A. Pumir, B. Shraiman, E. D. Siggia, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[16] R. Pinkel, S. Anderson, J. Phys. Oceanogr. 22, 773

[17] P. Bouruet-Aubertot, J. Sommeria, B. Le Cann, C.R.

Koudella , Deep-Sea Res. II 51, 2919 (2004).

