6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Shear displacement induced ﬂow
channelization in a single fracture.

H. Auradou1 G. Drazer2,3 A. Boschan1,4 J.P. Hulin1 J. Koplik2

1Laboratoire Fluide, Automatique et Syst`emes Thermiques, UMR 7608, Universit´e
Paris 6 and 11, Bˆatiment 502, Campus Paris Sud Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex,
France
2Benjamin Levich Institute and Department of Physics, City College of the City
University of New York, New York, NY 10031.
3 Dept. Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, The Whiting School of Engineering
Johns Hopkins University, 218 Maryland Hall, Baltimore, MD 21218-2681
4Grupo de Medios Porosos, Facultad de Ingenieria, Paseo Colon 850, 1063
Buenos-Aires, Argentina.

Abstract

The eﬀect on the transport properties of fractures of a relative shear displacement
~u of rough walls with complementary self-aﬃne surfaces has been studied experi-
mentally and numerically. The shear displacement ~u induces an anisotropy of the
aperture ﬁeld with a correlation length scaling as u and signiﬁcantly larger in the
direction perpendicular to ~u. This reﬂects the appearance of long range channels
perpendicular to ~u resulting in a higher eﬀective permeability for ﬂow in the direc-
tion perpendicular to the shear. Miscible displacements fronts in such fractures are
observed experimentally to display a self aﬃne geometry of characteristic exponent
directly related to that of the rough wall surfaces. A simple model based on the
channelization of the aperture ﬁeld allows to reproduces the front geometry when
the mean ﬂow is parallel to the channels created by the shear displacement.

Key words:

1 Introduction

The geothermal reservoir of Soultz-sous-Forˆets, like most geological systems,
contains fracture networks providing preferential paths for ﬂuid ﬂow and iden-
tifying these paths is crucial in geothermal applications. More precisely, the
number of hydraulically connected fractures and their spatial distribution are
key factors in determining the rate at which hot water can be produced or

Preprint submitted to geothermics

21 February 2014

ﬂuids can be re-injected into the system (Genter et al, 1997; Dezayes et al,
2004). Transport in these systems can be stimulated by the massive injection
of water at high ﬂow rates which is commonly used to increase the overall
transmissivity : both borehole and microseismic observations have demon-
strated that the relative shearing of the fracture walls is a key factor in this
enhancement (Genter et al, 1997; Evans et al, 2005). Another important is-
sue is the inﬂuence of the shear on the transport of suspended particles and
dissolved species.

The present work analyzes the inﬂuence of shear displacements of the fracture
walls on the pore space structure and, therefore, on the transport properties.
The case of fractures with a self-aﬃne geometry is speciﬁcally investigated
: this statistical model describes indeed successfully a broad variety of frac-
tured materials (see Bouchaud (2003) for a review). This model which will
be described in more detail in section 3 accounts also well for the long range
correlations in the topography of such surfaces.

An important factor in these processes is the anisotropy of the permeability
ﬁeld induced by the shear displacement of the fracture walls : the permeability
is highest for ﬂow perpendicular to the shear displacement vector ~u and low-
est along it (Gentier et al., 1997; Yeo et al., 1998). This anisotropy has been
suggested by Auradou et al (2005) to be associated to the appearance, in the
aperture ﬁeld, of ridges perpendicular to ~u. These ridges partly inhibit ﬂow
parallel to ~u while they create long preferential ﬂow channels connected in
series in the perpendicular direction : this leads to model the pore space as
long parallel channels extending over the length of the fracture. In the present
work, the validity of this simple description of the void space will be conﬁrmed
by a detailed study of the geostatistical characteristics of the aperture ﬁeld.
It will be shown that both the anisotropy of the aperture ﬁeld and the pres-
ence of large scale surface structures spanning the whole surface are needed
to account for the anisotropy.

These analysis will then be extended to the spreading of a tracer advected by
the ﬂow. This process is largely determined by the structure of the ﬂow ﬁeld
which would, at ﬁrst, seem to be very complex. However, both experimental
studies (Auradou et al, 2001) and numerical simulations (Drazer et al, 2004)
suggest that, for shear displacements ~u small compared to the fracture size and
for ﬂow perpendicular to ~u, the ﬂow lines are mostly parallel to the mean ﬂow
the velocity ﬁeld remains correlated over distances of the order of the fracture
length. Finally, the correlation of the velocities of tracer particles advected in
the fracture will be shown to have also self-aﬃne characteristics, and a model
accounting for the geometry of miscible displacement fronts in such fractures
will be presented.

2

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the experimental fracture models. The model fracture
walls are complementary surfaces with the same roughness geometry and self-aﬃne
exponent ζ ∼ 0.8 as natural granite fractures. The model walls are shifted ver-
tically to determine the mean aperture and horizontally to model relative shear
displacements.

2 Experimental setup and numerical models

Both in the experiments and the numerical simulations, the fractures are mod-
eled as the gap between two complementary rough surfaces, as shown in Fig. 1.
Experimentally, these surfaces are transparent casts of granite or fracture sur-
faces that retain their self aﬃne geometry. The experimental setup allows us to
control both the normal distance and the lateral displacement between the two
facing wall surfaces (a detailed description has been given by Auradou et al
(2001, 2005) ). The normal distances investigated range from 500µm to 1 mm,
i.e. of the same order of magnitude as the mean aperture of fractures in the
Soultz Geothermal reservoir (Sausse, 2002). The lateral displacement mimics
a relative shear displacement of the walls and induces spatial variations of
the aperture. The magnitude of the shear displacements ranges from zero (no
shear conﬁguration) to a few millimeters when the lateral displacement brings
the opposite surfaces in contact. The shear displacement amplitudes are of the
same order of magnitude than those estimated by Evans et al (2005) after an
hydraulic stimulation. The resulting aperture ﬂuctuations are also similar to
those reported by Sausse (Sausse, 2002) for fractures in the Soultz reservoir.

The model fracture is ﬁtted inside a parallelepipedic basin : both are initially
carefully saturated with a transparent solution so that no air bubble gets
trapped inside the setup. The same solution, but dyed, is then injected through
a small borehole in the middle of the upper epoxy cast and pictures of the dye
invasion front are obtained at regular time intervals. Figure 2 displays a typical
invasion front geometry : its larger elongation in the direction perpendicular to
the shear reﬂects the inﬂuence of the permeability anisotropy discussed above.
Moreover, as discussed by Auradou et al (2005), the ratio of the elongations
of the front parallel and perpendicular to the shear is directly related to the

3

Fig. 2. a) Experimental pictures of the radial injection of a dyed ﬂuid into a fracture
saturated by a miscible, transparent one (picture size : 20 cm × 20 cm. b) Detail of
the invasion front.

ratio of the permeabilities along these two same directions.

As mentioned above, aperture variations due to the lateral displacement of the
fracture walls strongly perturb the ﬂow ﬁeld. The numerical simulation of the
above experiments requires therefore an accurate 3D description of the frac-
ture geometry and of the velocity ﬁeld : the lattice Boltzmann technique has
been selected for that purpose because it is well adapted to complex geome-
tries (Drazer and Koplik, 2000, 2002). A large cubic lattice (1024 × 1024 × 20
sites) is used to reproduce a model fracture of mean aperture 1 mm and area
51.2 × 51.2 mm (one fourth of the experimental area). Using these numerical
simulations, the variability of the results from one fracture to another has been
investigated and the permeabilities for ﬂow both parallel and perpendicular
to the shear direction have been determined (note that only their ratio can be
measured experimentally).

Figure 3 compares aperture ﬁelds obtained in numerical simulations and cor-
responding to relative displacements of the same complementary surfaces in
two directions at right angle. Permeabilities values computed in these two
cases for constant pressure gradients parallel and perpendicular to the shear
are listed in the caption. One observes the appearance of near continuous
streaks perpendicular to the shear displacement and marking preferential ﬂow
paths. The appearance of these paths is reﬂected in the diﬀerence between
the permeabilities K⊥ and Kk for ﬂow respectively parallel and perpendicular
to them. More precisely, the permeability K⊥ for ﬂow perpendicular to the
were displacement ~u increases with u while Kk decreases. These variations are
observed (Auradou et al, 2005) to be related to the permeability K0 for u = 0
and to the ratio S of the variance of the aperture ﬂuctuations, σa by the mean

4

Fig. 3. Numerical aperture ﬁelds obtained for a same magnitude of the shear dis-
placement ~u (u = 0.8 mm) along two diﬀerent perpendicular directions (arrows).
Upper images - aperture ﬁelds coded in grey levels. Lower images : binarized images
corresponding to a 1 mm threshold equal to the mean aperture (lower apertures ap-
pear in white). Left : S = 0.16, K⊥/K0 = 1.05 and Kk/K0 = 0.822 (S = normalized
variance of aperture ﬁeld, Kk and K⊥ : permeability values for ﬂow parallel and
perpendicular to the shear displacement ~u, K0 = permeability for u = 0.). Right :
S = 0.21, K⊥/K0 = 1.00 and Kk/K0 = 0.930.

aperture, a0 through the approximate equations :

K⊥
K0
Kk
K0

= 1 + 3AS2,

= 1 − 6BS2 + O(S4),

(1)

The two constants, A and B, depend on the speciﬁc statistical properties of
each individual fracture surfaces but satisfy the relations: A < 1 and B < 1 .

As stated above, the binarized aperture ﬁelds shown in Fig. 3 displays ridges
perpendicular to the dispacement ~u and extending over a large part of the
fracture length parallel to the ﬂow. This observation has been used as the
basic ingredient of a simple model in which the aperture ﬁeld is replaced by
a set of parallel channels, each of constant aperture and perpendicular to the
shear. This model captures the linear dependence of the permeabilities with
respect to S2 and gives a good estimate of the respective upper and lower
bounds of K⊥ and Kk (Zimmerman et al, 1991; Zimmerman and Bodvarsson,

5

1996; Auradou et al, 2005). These two limits correspond to A = 1 and B = 1
in Eq. (1). This simple model takes advantage of the fact that the correlation
lengths in the aperture ﬁeld are highly anisotropic and much smaller parallel
to ~u than perpendicular to it.

In addition to its global anisotropy, the experimental pictures displayed in Fig-
ure 2 show that the front between the transparent and dyed ﬂuids is locally
quite tortuous. More precisely, its geometry has been found experimentally
to be self-aﬃne with a characteristic exponent close to that of the roughness
of the fracture surfaces (Auradou et al, 2001). This result has been veriﬁed
numerically by Drazer et al (2004) for two values ζ = 0.8 and 0.5 of the char-
acteristic exponent ζ (Feder, 1988) of the fracture wall surfaces (note that ζ
has the same ”universal” value 0.8 for the basalt and granite surfaces mod-
eled in the present work and its inﬂuence could not therefore be investigated
experimentally).

The spatial correlation of the aperture and velocity ﬁelds in these fractures
will now be analyzed more quantitatively using standard geostatistical tools.
A model based on these caracteristics will then be discussed in section 4 and
shown to capture the key features of miscible displacement processes studied
experimentally and numerically.

3 Spatial correlation of the aperture ﬁeld

The following interpretations are realized on 2D maps with 770 × 760 pixels
measured experimentally on the epoxy surfaces by a mechanical proﬁlometer;
the spacing between pixels is 250 µm in both directions of the mean plane of
the fracture and the vertical resolution on the local height h(x, y) is 10 µm.
The statistical properties of the surface roughness have determined from these
maps and, as stated above, can be characterized in terms of a self-aﬃne geom-
etry. The main property of a self-aﬃne surface is that it remains statistically
unchanged under the transformation :

x → λx,
y → λy,
h(x, y) → λζh(x, y).

Where (x, y) are the coordinates in the mean surface plane, h(x, y) is the
local height of the surface and ζ is refered to as the Hurst, roughness, or self-
aﬃne exponent (Feder, 1988). For the experimental model fractures, one has
ζ = 0.75 ± 0.05 (Auradou et al, 2005), in agreement with published values
for granite surfaces (Bouchaud, 2003). In the simulations, the self-aﬃne sur-

6

faces are generated numerically (see Drazer and Koplik (2002) for a detailed
description of the method).

In the present work, we consider fractures made of complementary walls that
are separated both vertically in order to open the fracture and laterally in
order to mimic shear displacements (if any). Under such conditions, if a0 is
the mean aperture and ~u the relative shear displacement in the plane of the
fracture, the local aperture at a point ~r satisﬁes :

a(~r) = h(~r) − h(~r + ~u) + a0.

This equation allows to determine the aperture ﬁeld a(~r) for a given shift ~u
from the experimental surface proﬁle map h(~r). The correlations in the aper-
ture ﬁeld are characterized by the following correlation function, also called
semivariance (Kitanidis, 1997):

γ(~δ) = h(a(~r) − a(~r + ~δ))2i,

(2)

(3)

which measures the spatial correlation of the aperture ﬁeld between two points
separated by the 2D vector ~δ.

Combining Eqs. 2 and 3, one sees that the value of γ is determined by the
correlation between the heights of the surface at four points located at the
corners of a parallelogram of sides ~u and ~δ. The orientations of the lag ~δ
respectively parallel and perpendicular to the shear displacement ~u are of
special interest (in the following, they are respectively referred to as k and ⊥).

Figure 4 displays variations with δ of the semivariances γ⊥ and γk for aperture
ﬁelds computed from a same experimental surface proﬁle map h(~r) but for
diﬀerent shear displacements ~u. For small values of the lag ~δ, the apertures at
~r and ~r+~δ are very similar (high spatial correlation at short distances) and the
value of γ is low. As δ increases, so does γ because the correlation decreases. As
δ increases further to a value higher than the correlation length of the aperture
ﬁeld, the apertures at ~r and ~r + ~δ become uncorrelated; then, from Eq. (3),
γ⊥ and γk should reach a same constant saturation value equal to twice the
aperture variance σa = h(a(x, y) − a0)2i. The values of σa corresponding to the
diﬀerent shear amplitudes u are plotted as horizontal dashed lines on Fig. 4
: they represent indeed the limit of both γ⊥ and γk at high δ values. Also, as
previously shown by Auradou et al (2005), σa increases with the magnitude u
of the shear displacement : in the range of u values used in Fig. 4, one veriﬁes
experimentally that σa = Au2ζ with a best ﬁt corresponding to ζ = 0.75 and
A = 137000 mm2(1−ζ).

Even though the limits of γ⊥ and γk are the same at large δ values for a give

7

1,5e+05

2

]

m
m

[
 

 
γ

1e+05

50000

ζ
2

u

 
/
 

 
γ

1,25e+05

1e+05

75000

50000

25000

0

0

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

δ [mm]

Fig. 4. Semivariograms of aperture ﬁelds corresponding to shift amplitudes u equal
to : (0.25 mm, ◦), (0.5 mm,(cid:3)), (0.75 mm,✸), and (1 mm, ⋆). Dotted lines : γk
(correlation along the direction of ~u). Solid lines : γ⊥ (correlations in the direc-
tion perpendicular to ~u). Horizontal dashed lines correspond to twice the aperture
variance for the same u values.

2

4

6

8

10

δ / u

Fig. 5. Semivariograms of aperture ﬁelds normalized by Au2ζ (ζ = 0.75 and
A = 137000 mm2(1−ζ as function of the normalized lag δ/u. Shear amplitude u
values : (0.25 mm, ◦), (0.5 mm,(cid:3)), (0.75 mm,✸), and (1 mm, ⋆). Dotted lines : γk
(correlation along the direction of ~u). Solid lines : γ⊥ (correlations in the direction
perpendicular to ~u). Note that the horizontal range is narrower than in Fig. 4 so
that the overshoot eﬀect is not visible.

shear displacement u, the way in which this saturation is reached diﬀers very
much for the two semivariances due to the anisotropy of the aperture ﬁeld. The
semivariance γ⊥ for ~δ perpendicular to ~u never exceeds its saturation value
and reaches it in an overdamped way whereas γk (~δ parallel to ~u) displays an
overshoot reﬂecting a local anticorrelation. These diﬀerent behaviors result
directly from the large scale anisotropic structures observed above on Fig. 3.
Let us consider the aperture at two points separated by a small distance ~δ

8

perpendicular to the shear displacement (and therefore parallel to the length
of the structures) : they will most likely be both either above or below the
average aperture if they are inside a same large scale structure. Then, the
corresponding value of aperture semivariance will be less than σa. On the other
hand, two points with a separation ~δ parallel to ~u have a high probability to
correspond to diﬀerent structures of the binarized picture : some amount of
anti correlation can therefore be expected.

Let us now investigate the parameters determining the variation of γ in the
transition regime. For that purpose, we have seeked to collapse the diﬀerent
curves of Fig.4 onto master curves. In Fig. 5, γ⊥ and γk are normalized by
Au2ζ which represents their limit at large values of δ while, for the horizontal
scale, δ/u is a natural reduced coordinate (see Plourabou´e et al. (1995)). These
two normalizations allow indeed to collapse in Fig. 5 the diﬀerent variations
into two independent master curves, corresponding to the two orientations of
~δ with respect to ~u. This demonstrates, that, in all cases, the characteristic
distance over which the aperture ﬁeld gets decorrelated is proportional to the
shift u : in addition, the ratio of this distance by u is signiﬁcantly larger for
δ perpendicular to the shear than parallel to it. While this latter result will
remain valid, the actual values of both distances may vary signiﬁcantly from
one sample to another.

Fig. 5 also shows that, for small lag values δ/u ≪ 1), the semivariograms
increase linearly with δ/u (γ/uζ ∝ δ/u). This indicates that the random ﬁeld
is not as smooth as in the case of a Gaussian covariance function for which
γ ∝ δ2.

At large distances δ ≫ u, the semivariance γ still displays large ﬂuctuations
with excursions above and below the asymptotic value σa : these are visible in
Fig. 6 that represents the normalized deviations (γ −¯γ)/¯γ of γ from its average
value ¯γ over all distances δ > 15 mm. It is observed that the ﬂuctuations
coincide provided δ is used as the horizontal scale (and not the normalized
lag δ/u as in Fig. 5). This suggests that these variations reﬂect the large scale
underlying structures displayed in Fig. 3 and that their location is independent
on the magnitude u of the shear displacement (these ﬂuctuations will however
by very variable from a sample to another). The variation of the amplitude
of the ﬂuctuations with u is however non trivial : the normalized deviations
(γ − ¯γ)/¯γ had to be divided by uζ to obtain the collapse of Fig. 6. This
indicates that there is some inﬂuence of the local self-aﬃne structure on these
ﬂuctuations; if they were only due to the large scale channels, the normalized
deviations would be proportional to u.

9

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

20

30

40

50

60

70

20

30

50

60

70

40
δ [mm]

Fig. 6. Variations of (γk/¯γk − 1) (top) and (γ⊥/¯γ⊥ − 1) (bottom) normalized by
uζ (ζ = 0.75) as a function of δ. Shear amplitudes u : (0.25 mm, ◦), (0.5 mm,(cid:3)),
(0.75mm,✸), and (1 mm, ⋆).

4 Correlation between fracture aperture ﬁelds and ﬂuid displace-

ment fronts

This section is devoted to the geometry of the front of a ﬂuid displacing
another, miscible, one (or equivalently to the dispersion of a tracer) in a
single fracture. Several mechanisms contribute to the spreading of the front
(or of the tracer). These include molecular diﬀusion, Taylor dispersion re-
lated to the velocity proﬁle in the fracture gap and geometrical dispersion
due to velocity variations between ﬂow lines in the mean fracture plane (see
Drazer and Koplik (2002) and Drazer et al (2004) for a discussion of the con-
tribution of the above mentioned mechanisms to tracer dispersion).

Here, we shall take only into account the last mechanism : this allows us to
assume a two-dimensional ﬂow ﬁeld v(x, y) obtained by averaging the three-
dimensional velocities over the gap of the fracture with v(x, y) = hv(x, y, z)iz.
The pressure gradient inducing the ﬂow and the resulting global mean velocity
are parallel to the axis x and the front (or the tracer) is initially located at
the inlet of the fracture on a line parallel to the axis y. In the following, we
analyze the development of the front (or the tracer line) with time, assuming
that its various points move at the local ﬂow velocity, and we present a simple
analytical model accounting for its geometry.

This model is based on the results discussed above, namely that the aperture
ﬁeld is structured into channels perpendicular to the shear displacement ~u. For

10

1,1

1

0,9

1,2

1

0,8

0,6

1,1

1

0,9

0

10

20

30

40

50

Fig. 7. Compared normalized front proﬁles x(y,t)
¯x(t) (circles) and normalized apertures
a(y)2
(solid lines) as a function of the distance y. across the ﬂow. Top and middle
ha2(y)iy
graphs : ﬂow normal to shear displacement ~u with u = 0.2 mm and u = 0.6 mm.
Bottom graph : Flow parallel to ~u for u = 0.6 mm (the y scale of the solid line has
been ampliﬁed by a factor 10. For all graphs, the fracture aperture is a0 = 1 mm
and its size is 51 mm × 51 mm.

a mean ﬂow parallel to these channels, the tracer particles follow paths that are
only weakly tortuous; also, the variations of their velocity along these paths are
small compared to the velocity contrasts between the diﬀerent channels. Under
these assumptions, the velocity of a particle located at a distance y measured
perpendicular to the mean velocity satisﬁes : ~v(x, y) ≈ v(y)~nx, where ~nx is
a unit vector parallel to the mean ﬂow. Note also that there are no contact
points between the walls of the fractures we have used : this avoids to take
into account the large tortuosity of the ﬂow lines in their vicinity. For each
channel the velocity ~v(y) is related to the pressure gradient dP/dx by Darcy’s
equation :

~v(y) = −

a2(y)
12µ

dP
dx

~nx,

(4)

in which a(y) is the equivalent (or hydraulic) aperture of the channel. Then,
particles starting at diﬀerent distances y at the inlet move at diﬀerent veloc-
ities, v(y), and their distance x from the inlet at time t after the injection
satisﬁes x(t) = v(y) t; the mean front position moves then at the average ve-
locity with ¯x(t) = hv(y)iy t. Combining the previous relation with Eq. (4) we

11

obtain:

x(y, t)
¯x(t)

=

a2(y)
ha2(y)iy

.

(5)

Finally, previous studies have shown that, for relatively small aperture ﬂuctua-
tions, the hydraulic aperture is well approximated by the geometrical aperture
(Zimmerman et al, 1991; Brown , 1987) : this suggests that a(y) can be ap-
proximated by the average of the local apertures along the direction x with
a(y) = ha(x, y)ix.

The validity of this assumption has been tested by comparing the shape of the
front x(y, t) determined from simulations using the lattice Boltzmann method
to the variations of the square a2(y) of the eﬀective aperture. For that purpose,
the normalized displacements x(y, t)/¯x(t) at a time t parallel to the mean ﬂow
of particles released initially at x = 0 are plotted in Fig. 7 as a function of
the distance y together with the normalized square of the aperture averaged
parallel to the ﬂow : a2(y)/ha2(y)iy. When the mean ﬂow is perpendicular to
the shear displacement ~u, the variations with y of the normalized position of
the particles and of the normalized square aperture are very similar both for
u = 0.2mm and u = 0.6mm (top and middle curves). The small diﬀerences
may be due in part to the eﬀect of viscous entrainment between adjacent ﬂow
channels due to viscous diﬀusion. On the contrary, when the mean ﬂow is
parallel to ~u (bottom curves), there is very little correlation between the two
curves and the amplitudes of the variations are very diﬀerent (note that the
curve corresponding to a2(y)/ha2(y)iy has been magniﬁed by a factor of 10.

These strong diﬀerences reﬂect and conﬁrm the anisotropy of the aperture
ﬁeld induced by the shear displacement ~u : the assumptions underlying the
above model and, particularly, Eq. 5 are indeed only valid if the ﬂow ﬁeld
can be described as parallel channels with a length of the order of that of
the fracture. For a mean ﬂow perpendicular to ~u, this model represents a
good approximation : the aperture of the ﬂow channels displays long range
correlations and particles are convected along each channel with a weakly
ﬂuctuating velocity. Note that, in this case, the global width of the front
parallel to x increases linearly with time while, for dispersive processes it
increases from the square root of time. This diﬀerence results from the fact
that the correlation length of the velocity of ﬂuid particles is of the order of
the total path length through the fracture; a dispersive regime can only be
reached if the correlation length is much smaller. For ﬂow parallel to ~u, the
ﬂow lines are more tortuous and velocity ﬂuctuations are enhanced : the model
does not account any more for the geometry of the front and its width parallel
to the mean ﬂow is in addition reduced.

Further informations are obtained by performing Fourier transforms of the

12

x = 0.2 mm

0

)
)
f
(
P
(

g
o
l

0
1

-5

-10

1

1.5

2

log10(f)

2.5

Fig. 8. Log-log plot of the power spectra P (f ) of the deviations of the front dis-
placement x(y, t) (dashed line) and of the squared eﬀective aperture a2(y) (con-
tinuous line) as a function of the spatial frequency f = L/x (shear displacement
u = 0.2 mm, mean aperture a0 = 1 mm, fracture size L = 51.2 mm). The curves
are shifted vertically relative to each other for convenience.

deviations of both the displacement x(y, t) of the front and the square a2(y)
of the estimated eﬀective aperture from their mean values (the mean ﬂow is
perpendicular to the shear displacement ~u). The resulting power spectra are
displayed in Fig. 8 and, as could be expected from the qualitative analysis of
the curves of Fig. 7, both spectra are similar up to frequencies f of the order
of f = L/u. In fact, for wavelengths smaller that the shear displacement u,
only a2(y) displays self-aﬃne properties.

5 Discussion and Conclusions

The experiments and numerical simulations realized in the framework of the
present program have revealed new features of ﬂow and transport in rough
fractures which may be of importance the modelization of fractured ﬁeld reser-
voirs, such as those encountered at the Soultz site. We have speciﬁcally studied
the inﬂuence of a relative shear displacement of complementary wall surfaces
on the aperture ﬁeld as well as on ﬂow and transport between them. This is
particularly relevant to geothermal reservoirs where ﬂuid injections frequently
induce relative displacements of the fracture walls. In agreement with many
experimental results, the rough fracture walls have been assumed to display a
self-aﬃne geometry.

First, we have shown that the relative shear displacements ~u induce an anisotropy
of the ﬂow ﬁeld which reduces permeability for ﬂow parallel to ~u and enhances

13

it in the perpendicular direction; this may account in part for the permeabil-
ity enhancement in some sheared zones of the reservoirs. These variations are
well predicted by assuming the appearance in the aperture ﬁeld of large ridges
perpendicular to the shear and extending over the full length of the fracture
: these ridges act as parallel channels enhancing ﬂow parallel to them and
reducing transverse velocity ﬂuctuations. This anisotropy has been conﬁrmed
quantitatively by computing semivariograms of the aperture ﬁelds : these dis-
play a correlation length proportional to the shear displacement ~u for a given
orientation but signiﬁcantly larger perpendicular to ~u than parallel to it.

A second important result is the strong correlation between the roughness of
the fracture walls and the geometry of the displacement fronts, particularly for
ﬂow perpendicular to ~u. In particular, the displacement front has a self-aﬃne
geometry characterized by the same exponent as that characterizing the frac-
ture walls. Also, for a mean ﬂow perpendicular to ~u, the front width is found
to increase linearly with distance : this reﬂects a channelization parallel the
mean ﬂow, resultinb in weak velocity ﬂuctuations along the paths of the ﬂuid
particles. Another important consequence is the fact that the front geometry
can be estimated accurately in this case from the variations of the square of
the aperture averaged parallel to the mean ﬂow.

These results raise a number of questions that will have to be considered in
future studies. First, one may expect the spatial correlations of the velocity
ﬁeld to decay eventually, leading to a normal Gaussian dispersion process at
long distances. This has not been observed in our experimental or numerical
systems and we have currently no estimate of the corresponding correlation
length. Also, the channeling eﬀect might result in a motion of some ﬂuid
particles at a velocity substantially faster than the average ﬂow velocity, at
least in transient regimes of duration shorter than the time necessary to sample
the ﬂow variations inside the fracture. This eﬀect may have a strong inﬂuence
on the thermal exchange between the rock and the ﬂuid, or on the transport
of species in dissolution-deposition processes encountered, for instance, on the
Soultz site. In the case of a channelized ﬂow, for instance, the variability of
the residence times in the various ﬂow channels may result in temperature
inhomogeneities in the outﬂowing ﬂuid.

6 Acknowledgments

We are indebted to G. Chauvin and R. Pidoux for their assistance in the
realization of the experimental set-up. Computer resources were provided by
the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center. HA and JPH are
supported by the CNRS and ANDRA through the EHDRA (European Hot
Dry Rock Association) and PNRH programs. GD and JK were supported by

14

the Geosciences Program of the Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences (US Depart-
ment of Energy), and by a PSC-CUNY grant. This work was facilitated by a
CNRS-NSF Collaborative Research Grant and by the PICS CNRS n 2178.

References

Auradou, H., Drazer, G., Hulin, J.P. and Koplik, J., 2005, Permeability
anisotropy induced by the shear displacement of rough fracture walls, Water
Resour. Res., 41, W09423, doi:10.1029/2005WR003938.

Auradou, H., Hulin ,J.P., Roux, S., 2001, Experimental study of miscible dis-
placement fronts in rough self-aﬃne fractures, Phys. Rev. E, 63, 066306.
Bouchaud, E., 2003, The morphology of fracture surfaces: A tool for under-
standing crack propagation in complex materials, Surface Review And Let-
ters, 10, 797–814.

Brown, S.R., 1987, Fluid ﬂow rough joints: The eﬀect of surface roughness, J.

geophys. Res., 92, 1337–1347.

Dezayes, Ch., Genter, A., and Gentier, S., 2004, Fracture network of the
EGS Geothermal Reservoir at Soultz-sous-Forets (Rhine Graben, France),
Geothermal Ressources Council Transaction, 28, 213–218.

Drazer, G., and J. Koplik (2000), Permeability of self-aﬃne rough fractures,

Drazer, G., and J. Koplik (2002), Transport in rough self-aﬃne fractures, Phys.

Phys. Rev. E, 62, 8076–8085.

Rev. E, 66, 026303.

Drazer, G., H. Auradou, J. Koplik, and J. P. Hulin (2004), Self-aﬃne fronts
in self-aﬃne fractures: Large and small-scale structure, Phys. Rev. Lett., 92,
014501.

Evans, K., Moriya, H., Niitsuma, H., Jones, R.H., Phillips, W.S., Genter, A.,
Sausse, J., Jung, R., and Baria, R., 2005, Microseismicity and permeability
enhancement of hydrogeologic structures during massive ﬂuid injections into
granite at 3km depth at Soultz H.D.R. site, Geophys. J. Int., 160, 388–412.
Feder, J., 1988. Fractals, Physics of Solids and Liquids, Plenum Press, New

Genter, A., Castaing, C., Dezayes, Ch., Tenzer, H., Traineau, H., and Villemin,
T., 1997, Comparative analysis of direct (core) and indirect (borehole imag-
ing tools) collection of fracture data in the Hot Dry Rock Soultz reservoir
(France), Journal of Geophysical Research, 102, B7, 15,419–15,431.

Gentier, S., E. Lamontagne, G. Archambault, and J. Riss (1997), Anisotropy
of ﬂow in a fracture undergoing shear and its relationship to the direction
of shearing and injection pressure, Int. J. Rock Mech. & Min. Sci., 34 (3-4),
412.

Kitanidis, P.K., 1997, Introduction to geostatistics, Cambridge University

York.

Press.

Kumar, G.S., Ghassemi, A., 2005. Numerical modeling of non-isothermal

15

quartz dissolution/precipitation in a coupled fracture matrix system,
Geothermics, 34, 411–439.

Olsson, W. A., and S. R. Brown (1993), Hydromechanical response of a frac-
ture undergoing compression and shear, Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. &
Geomech. Abs., 30 (7), 845–851.

Plourabou´e, F., P. Kurowski, J. P. Hulin, S. Roux, and J. Schmittbuhl (1995),

Aperture of rough cracks, Phys. Rev. E, 51 (3), 1675–1685.

Sausse, J., 2002, Hydromechanical properties and alteration of natural fracture
surfaces in the Soultz granite (Bas-Rhin,France), Tectonophysics, 348, 169–
185.

Yeo, I. W., M. H. De Freitas, and R. W. Zimmerman (1998), Eﬀect of shear
displacement on the aperture and permeability of a rock fracture, Int. J.
Rock Mech. & Min. Sci., 35 (8), 1051–1070.

Zimmerman, R. W., and Bodvarsson G.S., 1996, Hydraulic conductivity of

rock fractures, Transp. Porous Media, 23, 1–30.

Zimmerman, R.W., Kumar, S. and Bodvarsson, G.S., 1991, Lubriﬁcation the-
ory analysis of the permeability of rough-walled fractures, Int. J. Rock,
Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., 28, 4, 325–331.

16

