Liquid Transport Due to Light Scattering

Robert D. Schroll,1 R´egis Wunenburger,2 Alexis Casner,2, ∗ Wendy W. Zhang,1 and Jean-Pierre Delville2
1Physics Department and the James Franck Institute,
The University of Chicago, 929 E. 57th St., Chicago, Illinois 60637
2Centre de Physique Mol´eculaire Optique et Hertzienne, Universit´e Bordeaux I,
351 cours de la Lib´eration, 33405 Talence Cedex, France
(Dated: June 7, 2006)

Using experiments and theory, we show that light scattering by inhomogeneities in the index of
refraction of a ﬂuid can drive a large-scale ﬂow. The experiment uses a near-critical, phase-separated
liquid, which experiences large ﬂuctuations in its index of refraction. A laser beam traversing the
liquid produces a large-scale deformation of the interface and can cause a liquid jet to form. We
demonstrate that the deformation is produced by a scattering-induced ﬂow by obtaining an excellent
agreement between the measured deformations and those calculated assuming this mechanism.

the broad hump. These structures are instead the result
of a large-scale ﬂow powered by light scattering. Fig-
ure 2 illustrates how a broad hump can be created when

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A photon exchanges momentum with its surroundings.
Light-scattering techniques use this eﬀect to probe the
structure of materials. Much of what we know about the
mesoscopic structures in colloidal suspensions, emulsions,
and near-critical ﬂuids have been revealed by light scat-
tering [1, 2, 3, 4]. More recently, many researchers have
explored how the intense light beam generated by a laser
can accelerate and trap micron-sized particles [5, 6]. Ap-
plications range from laser tweezers [7, 8, 9] to particle
sorting in microﬂuidic channels [10, 11, 12]. However one
consequence of scattering has received little attention.
Since a liquid ﬂows readily, the momentum transferred
by light scattering in a structured ﬂuid can produce a
ﬂow along the light propagation direction.

In this Letter, we examine one example of a struc-
tured ﬂuid, a phase-separated liquid near a second order
phase transition, and show that a strong ﬂow is produced
by light-scattering oﬀ density ﬂuctuations in the liquid.
This ﬂow is measured indirectly via the deformations it
produces on the very soft, near-critical liquid interface.

Figure 1 shows the two diﬀerent types of deformation
observed. When the laser shines downwards onto the in-
terface, so that the beam travels from the phase with the
higher refractive index to the phase with the lower re-
fractive index, a long, thin jet of the upper-layer liquid
forms along the beam axis and intrudes deep into the
lower ﬂuid [Fig. 1(a)] [13]. Sporadically, the end of the
jet sheds droplets. For modest laser powers, the shedding
is regular in time and allows us to measure the volume
ﬂux, which is typically several tens of cubic microns per
second. When the laser shines upwards, the interface re-
mains unbroken even at high power. Instead, a downward
tether forms on the interface due to radiation pressure
eﬀects [14]. Away from the centerline, the interface also
deﬂects upwards, forming a hump whose lateral length-
scale is much larger than the beam width [Fig. 1(b)].

Previous works have analyzed how the diﬀerence be-
tween the refractive indices of the two liquid phases re-
sults in a radiation pressure which deforms the inter-
face [13, 15]. While this mechanism explains the beam-
sized deformations, it cannot explain either the jet or

FIG. 1:
Interface deformations. (a) When the laser shines
downwards, the upper ﬂuid (with the larger refractive in-
dex) forms a jet intruding into the lower layer. (∆T = 6 K,
ω0 = 3.47 µm, and P = 490 mW) (b) When the laser shines
upwards, the interface forms a downwards tether along the
centerline and an upward, broad hump away from the cen-
terline. (∆T = 1.5 K, ω0 = 4.8 µm, and P as indicated) The
arrows show the direction of propagation of the laser.

2

×

×

10

40 mm3). Optical forcing is provided by a linearly
(2
polarized TEM00 continuous Ar+ laser, with a vacuum
wavelength of λ = 5145 ˚A and a beam power P < 2 W.
The beam has a Gaussian proﬁle with width ω0, varying
from 3 µm to 15 µm. More details about the experiment
can be found in [15].

We can construct a simple argument for how u0, the
strength of the light-induced ﬂow, depends on the light
intensity. The momentum per unit volume transferred
from the laser beam into the liquid via scattering is pro-
portional to the beam intensity I. Therefore the body
force Fv is also proportional to I. This body force acts
as a pressure gradient along the beam axis. Since the
dimensions of the cell are small, the induced ﬂow is vis-
cous. To estimate the viscous resistance, we use the beam
size ω0 as a characteristic lengthscale of the light-induced
2
ﬂow. Balancing Fv against viscous resistance µ u0/ω0
then yields

u0

∝

Iω0

2/µ

P/µ.

∝

(1)

This argument predicts, counter-intuitively, that the ﬂow
strength has no dependence on the beam intensity.
It
only depends on the beam power. If this is true, then
the interface deformation created by the ﬂow should also
have no dependence on the light intensity. Figure 3 shows
two sets of measured hump proﬁles. Each set is taken
at a ﬁxed beam power, with the diﬀerent proﬁles corre-
sponding to diﬀerent beam sizes. Remarkably, consistent
with the prediction (1), the hump shape away from the
center remains the same for diﬀerent beam widths when
the power is held constant. In contrast, the downward-
pointing tether at the center of the hump, previously
shown to be created by radiation pressure, varies with
the beam width.

To prove that the broad hump observed is evidence of
a light-induced ﬂow, we explicitly calculate the shape of
the interface deformation as a function of P and ∆T . We
ﬁrst derive an expression for the force produced by the
light scattering and then solve for the recirculating ﬂow
ﬁeld in the lower layer. Finally, the interface deformation
is obtained by balancing the viscous stresses from this
ﬂow against surface tension and buoyancy.

Each scattering oﬀ a density ﬂuctuation transfers mo-
mentum to the ﬂuid. Summing the individual contribu-
tions from all ﬂuctuations in a unit volume gives the body
force:

Fv = D χT I,

(2)

8

where D describes the interaction of the light with the
density ﬂuctuations and is given by π3
T kBT α−4
λ4
3 α3 + 2α2 + 2α
2α2 + 2α + 1
(cid:1)
. Here,
×
2(2πnξ−/λ)2 and n = √ǫ is the index of refraction.
α
(cid:2)
(cid:0)
≡
This result comes from a calculation analogous to the
turbidity calculation by Puglielli and Ford [17, 18].
It
assumes single scattering, which is justiﬁed by the large

n
Φ ∂ǫ
∂Φ
c
(cid:0)
ln (1 + 2α)
(cid:3)

−

(cid:1)

2

FIG. 2: Toroidal recirculation produced in the lower layer
when the laser shines from below.
(The height and radial
extent of the hump are greatly exaggerated.) The dotted box
indicates the area seen in the photographs.

the interface is illuminated from below. Light-scattering
produces an upwards body force on the portion of the
liquid illuminated. This results in an upwards ﬂow along
the beam axis. This ﬂow couples viscously with liquid
throughout the entire layer, thereby creating a large-
scale recirculation in the lower layer. Viscous stresses
from the recirculation deform the interface and produce
a hump whose lateral extent scales with the size of the
toroidal recirculation and not with the size of the laser
beam. What happens when the interface is illuminated
from above is more subtle. We can understand the trans-
port of liquid inside the jet as a result of the light-induced
ﬂow. However, the complex interaction of light propaga-
tion, radiation pressure, light-induced ﬂow, and surface
tension eﬀects that determine the shape of the jet is out-
side the scope of this work.

The rest of paper is organized as follows: We ﬁrst give
some details about the experiment. Scaling arguments
then suggest that the strength of the ﬂow generated by
light-scattering is insensitive to the light intensity but de-
pends only on the total laser power. Consistent with this
prediction, the same hump shape is obtained in the ex-
periment with diﬀerent light intensities if the total power
is held ﬁxed. Next, we calculate the hump shape as a
function of the laser power and ﬁnd good agreement be-
tween the calculated and the measured shapes. Similarly,
the measured and the estimate volume ﬂux within the jet
also agree.

≈

The ﬂuid used in the experiments is a water-in-oil mi-
cellar ﬂuid at a critical composition. Above the critical
35 ◦C, the ﬂuid separates into two im-
temperature Tc
miscible phases with diﬀerent micelle volume density Φ,
in a second-order phase transition [16]. Near the critical
temperature, many physical properties scale like power
Tc. For our purpose, the most im-
laws in ∆T
portant scaling behavior is the divergence of the osmotic
∆T −1.24. The correlation length
compressibility, χT
ξ−
∆T −0.63, which sets the size of the scatterers, is
typically hundreds of Angstroms. The very weak absorp-
10−4 cm−1)
tion of light at the laser frequency (αth = 3
ensures that thermal eﬀects are negligible. The ﬂuid
is enclosed in a thermally controlled fused quartz cell

×

≡

∝

−

∝

T

40

30

20

10

0

)

m
µ
(
 
h

−10

−50

0
r (µm)

50

FIG. 3: Hump proﬁles for P = 592 mW (upper proﬁles) and
for 296 mW (lower proﬁles). ω0 = 4.8 µm (black dots), 5.3 µm,
6.3 µm, 7.5 µm, 8.9 µm, 11.7 µm, and 15.3 µm (lightest gray
dots) and ∆T = 1.5 K for all proﬁles. Away from the beam
axis, all of the proﬁles fall onto the same shape, demonstrating
that only the laser power, and not the light intensity, aﬀects
the large-scale hump shape.

turbidity length, and that, since ξ−
act as Rayleigh scatterers.

≪

λ, the ﬂuctuations

Two simpliﬁcations aid our calculation of the large-
scale recirculating ﬂow. First, the beam size is much
smaller than the lateral extent of the hump, and hence
the size of the recirculation. Therefore the light scatter-
ing inﬂuences the recirculation primarily by setting the
size of the upwards velocity along the centerline. Second,
the interface is essentially ﬂat on the scale of the recir-
culation. Thus, a good approximation of the ﬂow ﬁeld
can be obtained by solving the viscous Stokes equation
for a liquid layer driven into motion by a pressure gradi-
ent along the centerline and conﬁned in a cylindrical cell
with solid walls. For simplicity, free-stress boundary con-
ditions are prescribed at the ﬂat top and bottom surface
of the liquid layer. Choosing values for the layer depth
and cell radius consistent with the experiment allows us
to reproduce the dimensions of the recirculation. To illus-
trate the solution obtained, we plot the vertical velocity
uz(r) at the mid-plane of the liquid layer in Fig. 4. Con-
sistent with Fig. 2, there is a strong upwards ﬂow near
the centerline and a weaker downward ﬂow at larger r.
Requiring that centerline velocity at the mid-plane of the
recirculation equals u0, the strength of the light-induced
ﬂow, determines the strength of the recirculation. Equa-
tions (1) and (2) give

u0 = Fv ω0

2/µ = C DχT P/µ,

(3)

where C is an undetermined numerical prefactor depen-

3

z

u

0

0

0.1

0.3

0.4

0.2
r/r
0

FIG. 4: Calculated vertical velocity uz at the mid-plane of
the ﬂuid layer. The velocity scale will be determined by
matching with the measured proﬁles. The layer aspect ra-
tio (depth/radius = L/r0) is 1/5.

dent on details of how the O(ω0) light-induced ﬂow cou-
ples viscously with the large-scale recirculation. The ve-
locity scale DχT P/µ is roughly millimeters per second
for experimental conditions.

Finally, we calculate the deformation of the interface
due to the viscous stresses exerted by the recirculation in
the lower layer. Because the capillary lengthscale ℓc goes
to 0 near Tc, buoyancy is as important as surface tension
in resisting the deformation. The steady-state interface
h(r) is therefore given by

2γκ(r) + ∆ρgh(r) = σzz

C

g(r, r0/L),

(4)

DχT P
L

≡

where κ(r) is the mean curvature of the interface and σzz
is the normal viscous stress exerted on the upper surface
by the recirculation. To display the various dependencies
of σzz, we have rewritten it in terms of a dimensional
stress and two dimensionless quantities, the constant C
and the function g(r, r0/L) describing how the stress de-
cays away from the centerline. The boundary condition
at the wall of cylindrical cell is h(r) = 0. Near the cen-
terline, the interface develops a downward tether due to
radiation pressure. We account for this O(ω0) tether by
imposing the boundary condition dh/dr = 0 at r = ω0,
which mimics the existence of a circular rim.

Numerical solutions of (4) at diﬀerent laser powers are
displayed in Fig. 5, together with experimentally mea-
sured interface proﬁles at the same laser powers. Values
of the material parameters and beam size used in the cal-
culation are taken from the experiment. The value of the
unknown constant C is ﬁxed at 1.3 by requiring that the
maximum height of the calculated shape equals the mea-
sured shape at P = 592 mW [19]. This is the only ﬁtting
adjustment we have made between the calculation and
the measurement. The agreement between the measured
and the calculated interface shapes is excellent. Compar-
isons at larger ∆T for a range of powers produced good
agreement as well, although the smaller size of the hump
at larger ∆T makes detailed comparisons more diﬃcult.
This good agreement also shows that theormocapillary
eﬀects, used to drive drop motion in previous studies [20],

)

m
µ
(
 
h

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

4

have mesoscopic spatial variation in the refractive index,
such as occurs in colloidal suspensions [21] and emulsions.
This ability to control liquid ﬂow dynamically in three di-
mension via light, without pre-fabricated channels, opens
a new avenue for microﬂuidic devices.

The authors thank B. Issenmann for providing experi-
mental data on the jet. This work was supported by a Na-
tional Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
(RDS), NSF MRSEC DMR-0213745, and the Centre Na-
tional de la Recherche Scientiﬁque and Conseil R´egional
d’Aquitaine.

∗ Present address: Commissariat

l’Energie Atomique,
Direction des Applications Militaires, BP 12, 91680
Bruy`eres-le-Chˆatel, France

[1] B. J. Ackerson, C. M. Sorensen, R. C. Mockler, and W. J.

O’Sullivan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, 1371 (1975).

[2] D. J. Pine, D. A. Weitz, P. M. Chaikin, and E. Her-

bolzheimer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1134 (1988).

[3] B. J. Berne and R. Pecora, Dynamic Light Scattering

(Dover Publications, 2000).

[4] W. van Megen and S. M. Underwood, Phys. Rev. E 47,

[5] A. Ashkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 4853 (1997).
[6] J. Xu, J. Drelich, and E. M. Nadgorny, Langmuir 20,

[7] A. Terray, J. Oakey, and D. W. M. Marr, Science 296,

248 (1993).

1021 (2004).

1841 (2002).

[8] D. G. Grier, Nature 424, 810 (2003).
[9] J. Enger, M. Goks¨or, K. Ramser, P. Hagberg, and

D. Hanstorp, Lab. Chip 4, 196 (2004).

[10] M. P. MacDonald, G. C. Spalding, and K. Dholakia, Na-

ture 426, 421 (2003).

[11] M. Ozkan, M. Wang, C. Ozkan, R. Flynn, A. Birkbeck,
and S. Esener, Biomed. Microdevices 5, 61 (2003).
[12] S. Neale, M. P. MacDonald, K. Dholakia, and T. F.

Krauss, Nature Materials 4, 530 (2005).

[13] A. Casner and J.-P. Delville, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 144503

[14] A. Casner, J.-P. Delville, and I. Brevik, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

[15] A. Casner and J.-P. Delville, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 054503

B 20, 2355 (2003).

(2001).

[16] Although the ﬂuid is a quaternary mixture, the phase
transition belongs to the (d = 3, n = 1) universality class
of the Ising model [E. Freysz, E. Laﬀon, J.-P. Delville,
and A. Ducasse, Phys. Rev. E 49, 2141 (1994)].

[17] V. G. Puglielli and N. C. Ford, Jr., Phys. Rev. Lett. 25,

143 (1970).

[18] L. S. Ornstein and F. Zernike, Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad.

Wetensch. 17, 793 (1914).

[19] While our model problem assumes no coupling between
the ﬂows in the lower layer and the upper layer, a sig-
niﬁcant coupling aﬀects primarily the value of C, and
therefore not aﬀect our conclusions.

[20] N. Garnier, R. O. Grigoriev, and M. F. Schatz, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 91, 054501 (2003).

[21] S. Mitani and K. Sakai, Faraday Discuss. 129, 141

(2005).

−50

0
r (µm)

50

FIG. 5: The calculated (solid line) and experimental (dots)
hump proﬁle for ∆T = 1.5 K, ω0 = 4.8 µm. From bottom to
top, P = 88.8, 177.6, 296.0, 414.4, and 592.0 mW.

are not responsible for the ﬂow-induced deformation ob-
served here.

We next consider the liquid transport inside the jet.
While the complexity of the pattern of light propagation
at the interface prevents a detailed comparison between
the calculation and the measurements, it is possible to
obtain a rough estimate of the transport ﬂux due to the
light-induced ﬂow. Since the jet radius rj is observed
to increases weakly with the beam power and is always
less than the beam size ω0, we assume simply that the
2),
power of the light trapped inside the jet is 2P (rj
a fraction of the incident beam power. Given the beam
power inside the jet and (3), the transport ﬂux is

2/ω0

The agreement with the measured volume ﬂux is reason-
able. For example, an experiment with P = 473.6 mW at
∆T = 4 K and ω0 = 5.08 µm yields a jet with roughly 1
µm radius and measured volume ﬂux of 110 µm3/s. The
estimate (5) gives 310 µm3/s.

In conclusion, we have used a combination of experi-
ment and theory to demonstrate that light-scattering can
produce a signiﬁcant ﬂow in a structured ﬂuid. In the ex-
periment, we measure the large-scale interface deforma-
tion and the liquid transport produced by illumination
of an intense laser. To show that the deformation is a re-
sult of light-induced ﬂow, we compare interface deforma-
tions calculated based on the light-scattering mechanism
against measured deformations. Excellent agreements
are found between the calculated and the measured defor-
mations. Such light-induced ﬂows exist whenever ﬂuids

Q = u0 π rj

2 = 2π C

DχT P

µ (cid:18)

4

rj
ω0

2 (cid:19)

.

(5)

(2003).

