6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Dynamics of a Flexible Loop in a Quasi-2D Flow

Sunghwan Jung1, Kathleen Mareck1, Michael J. Shelley1, and Jun Zhang2,1
1Applied Mathematics Laboratory, Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
New York University, 251 Mercer Street, New York, New York 10012, USA
2Department of Physics, New York University, 4 Washington Place, New York, New York 10003, USA
(Dated: February 15, 2014)

We study the behavior of an elastic loop embedded in a ﬂowing soap ﬁlm. This deformable loop
is wetted into the ﬁlm and is held ﬁxed at a single point against the oncoming ﬂow. We interpret
this system as a two-dimensional ﬂexible body interacting in a two-dimensional ﬂow. This coupled
ﬂuid-structure system shows bistability, with both stationary and oscillatory states. In its stationary
state, the loop remains essentially motionless and its wake is a von K´arm´an vortex street. In its
oscillatory state, the loop sheds two vortex dipoles, or more complicated vortical structures, within
each oscillation period. We ﬁnd that the oscillation frequency of the loop is linearly proportional
to the ﬂow velocity, and that the measured Strouhal numbers can be separated based on wake
structure.

PACS numbers: 47.32.ck, 47.54.De, 47.20.-k

The wake ﬂow behind a rigid obstacle is a central ob-
ject of study in ﬂuid mechanics. When the oncoming ﬂow
velocity exceeds a threshold, vortices are shed behind the
obstacle [1]. A typical wake is composed of successive ed-
dies of alternating sign – the “von K´arm´an vortex street”
– and is observed over a wide range of ﬂow velocities and
body shapes [2, 3]. The frequency of vortex shedding (f )
is determined by the ﬂow velocity (V ) and the object size
(d), whose relation is captured by the near constancy of
the Strouhal number, St = d f /V [3].

The dynamics of a rigid object which moves freely in
the direction perpendicular to the ﬂow is of interest in
many industrial and biological applications [4, 5, 6]. Lat-
eral motion of an object can be induced by interaction
with the ﬂow and is often called the vortex-induced vi-
bration (VIV). At low ﬂow velocities, the body starts
to oscillate sideways with small amplitude (less than 0.4
times body diameter). Its associated wake structure is
again a von K´arm´an vortex street. However, further in-
crease of ﬂow velocity causes the obstacle to oscillate in
phase with the vortex shedding, and as a result, a series
of dipoles are shed instead [7, 8].

Settling bodies or rising bubbles, where the balance of
gravitational and drag forces set the velocity, also exhibit
transitions as they interact with their wakes. For ex-
ample, a slowly settling sedimenting sphere falls straight
downwards [9] but above a certain sedimentation velocity,
the sphere’s motion becomes periodic and its trajectory
a spiral or zigzag [10]. A deformable object, such as a
droplet or bubble, can behave similarly even as its shape
now changes [11, 12].

Finally, studies have shown the instability (and bista-
bility) of slender deformable bodies to lateral oscilla-
tions in quasi-2D soap-ﬁlm ﬂows [13], and of heavy de-
formable sheets to lateral oscillations in fast 3D ﬂows
[14, 15, 16, 17]. In these cases, the system corresponds
to the ﬂapping of a ﬂag in a stiﬀ breeze.

In this work, we introduce a deformable closed body

into a fast ﬂowing soap-ﬁlm. Flowing soap ﬁlm provides
a practical template upon which to study the dynamics
of a nearly 2D ﬂow [18, 19]. The experimental setup has
been introduced earlier [13, 18, 19, 20]. Two thin ny-
lon wires (0.3 mm in diameter) separate at a nozzle (0.5
mm inner diameter) attached to the bottom of a reser-
voir. The reservoir contains soapy water maintained at
a ﬁxed pressure head, thus ﬁxing the ﬂux. A stopcock
regulates the ﬂow rate through the nozzle. The nylon
wires extend downwards to a collection box 2.4 m be-
low. Driven by gravity, the soap ﬁlm ﬂows downwards.
Owing to air drag, a terminal velocity is reached approx-
imately 60 cm below the nozzle with a velocity proﬁle
near the center close to being uniform (velocity diﬀer-
ences are within 20 % of the mean, over 60 % of the span
about the midline). From optical interference patterns,
the ﬁlm thickness is found to vary smoothly across the
ﬁlm by about 15 % of its average thickness.

We use a thin rubber loop (0.2 mm thick) as the de-
formable structure. The loop wets into the soap-ﬁlm and
is supported from its inner side against the ﬂow. Six loops
of diﬀerent circumferences (5–7.5 cm) are used. We ﬁnd
that for regimes studied here, the loop appears to un-
dergo only bending deformations, and not stretching or
compression, as its length shows no measurable increase
or decrease. Currently, we do not understand what bal-
ance of eﬀects sets the enclosed area of the loop, which is
an important constraint on the possible dynamics. How-
ever, we do ﬁnd that, once experimental conditions are
ﬁxed, and the loop is in a ﬁxed state of dynamics, the
5 % for
enclosed area changes very little in time (e.g.
a 5 cm loop). However, between diﬀerent states or con-
ditions, the enclosed area can vary by factors of two or
three.

∼

A laser Doppler velocimeter (LDV; Model LDP-100,
TSI Inc.)
is used to record the upstream velocity V .
Micron-sized particles (TiO2) are seeded into the ﬂow for
LDV measurements. Flow structures are visualized using

2

FIG. 2: (a) At 2.2 m/s ﬂow velocity, eight snapshots of a 5 cm
loop and its centroid are shown. The oscillation period of the
oscillating loop is 52 ms. The snapshots of the ﬂexible loop are
presented as solid loops at 6 ms intervals and the trajectory
of the centroid of the loop with 2 ms intervals. The loops are
sequentially numbered.
(b) Wake structure when the loop
centroid is at the far left. The loop starts to shed a counter-
clockwise vortex. The wake structure is schematically shown
in (c).

kinematic viscosity (ν) of soap ﬁlm is approximately 0.04
cm2/s. The frequency of vortex shedding (fs) varies from
20 to 50 Hz. Based on these characteristic numbers, we
estimate the Reynolds number (Re) and Strouhal number
(Sts) for the system to be

Re =

5, 000 , Sts =

0.2 ,

(1)

V D

ν ∼

Dfs
V ∼

where the subscript s stands for vortex shedding, since
the Strouhal number is calculated based on the vortical
structure of the wake. Figure 1a shows the deforming
body and its vortical wake using a 5 cm loop and ﬂow
velocity of 2.2 m/s. As can be seen, vortices of alternating
sign are successively produced.

In the co-existing oscillatory state, shown in Fig. 1b
at the same parameters as above, the loop now oscillates
periodically in the horizontal direction, and the vortical
wake behind it is quite diﬀerent. For low ﬂow velocity,
two dipole pairs are shed during each oscillation period.
Such a wake structure is also observed behind oscillating
cylinders and is referred to as the 2P mode [8].

Figure 2a shows both the position of the loop at several
time-points during one period of oscillation, and the path
taken by its centroid. During the oscillation, the loop
continuously changes its shape, and its centroid moves
along a ﬁgure-eight trajectory (Fig. 2a). This ﬁgure-eight
shape is due to the fact that the frequency of oscillation in
the stream-wise direction is twice that in the transverse
direction. This has been observed in the motions of a
ﬂapping ﬂag [13] and VIV systems [5, 21]. Also, the loop
oscillates in phase with that vortex shedding (Fig. 2b and

FIG. 1: Flow structures behind a 5 cm loop at 2.2 m/s ﬂow ve-
locity. The coupled ﬂuid-structure system shows bistability:
(a) the stationary state; the loop remains essentially motion-
less and its wake is a von K´arm´an vortex street. The loop
is deformed by the ﬂow into a teardrop shape. (b) the os-
cillatory state; the loop sheds two vortex dipoles within each
oscillation period.

interference patterns from monochromatic illumination
(low-pressure sodium lamps operating at wavelength 585
nm). The movies of the wake ﬂow together with the loop
are recorded using a high speed camera at 1000 frames
per second.

The interaction between the loop and the ﬂow is quite
complicated.
In our experiments, we observe bistable
states, one stationary and another oscillatory (see Fig. 1a
and b), that co-exist over a range of ﬂow velocities. At
least in the conditions considered here, we do not observe
spontaneous transitions between these two states. How-
ever, a transition from the stationary to the oscillatory
state can be induced by externally perturbing the loop,
or by abruptly changing the ﬂow velocity.

In the stationary state, the loop behaves as a rigid
hoop and has a teardrop shape with higher curvature
on the top than on the sides (Fig. 1a). A characteristic
length scale (D) of the loop, its width in the ﬁlm, is 1 cm.
The ﬂow velocity (V ) varies from 150 to 250 m/s and the

3

△

), 5.5 cm (

FIG. 3: Frequency of an oscillating loop (floop) versus rescaled
velocity (V √δ/a√L). We test over 6 diﬀerent loop lengths (5
), 6 cm (✄), 6.5 cm (✸), 7 cm ((cid:3)), and
cm (
7.5 cm (
)). The open symbols are in the oscillatory state
and the closed ones are in the stationary state. The frequency
of the oscillating loop is linearly proportional to the rescaled
velocity.

(cid:13)

▽

c). When the loop is at far right (or left), a clockwise
turning (or counter-clockwise) vortex is shed.

By using loops of several diﬀerent lengths, we ﬁnd a lin-
ear relation between the oscillation frequency of the loop
(floop) and a rescaled velocity V √δ/a√L (see Fig. 3),
where δ is the ﬁlm thickness, a the thickness of the loop,
and L the loop length. Our results from loops of diﬀer-
ent lengths and diﬀering ﬂow velocities all collapse onto
a single line with slope of about 0.27. This oﬀset of this
aﬃne relation suggests a bifurcation to oscillation at a
ﬁnite ﬂow velocity; linear extrapolation to floop = 0 sug-
gests a critical rescaled velocity of about 20, which is
unfortunately beyond the reach of this experiment.

To better understand the relation between oscillation
frequency and ﬂow velocity, we propose a simple model
for the oscillations of an elongated loop with longitudi-
nal length Ll driven by a “lift force” in the direction
perpendicular to the stream. The lift force (F ) is taken
as proportional to ρV 2Llδ where ρ is the density of ﬂuid,
V the ﬂuid velocity. Hence, F = (1/2)CLρV 2Llδ, where
CL is a lift coeﬃcient. Typically, Ll is proportional to
the loop circumference, L. At an angle θ inclined to the
ﬂow stream, CL is proportional to sin θ [22]. For small
θ, sin θ
xcm/ycm where (xcm , ycm is the center of mass
(centroid) location. Therefore, we approximate the lift
(1/2)ρV 2Llδxcm/ycm, where ¨xcm
force as F = m¨xcm ≈
is the acceleration in the transverse direction and m is
the total body mass. In this experiment, the mass of the
(wetted) loop is much greater than that of the enclosed

∼

FIG. 4: Strouhal number of the loop (StL) versus the ﬂow
velocity (V ) for diﬀerent loop lengths (5 cm (
),
6 cm (✄), 6.5 cm (✸), 7 cm ((cid:3)), and 7.5 cm (
)). Open
symbols are 2P mode and closed ones are ﬂag-like modes. The
Strouhal numbers of the two modes are well separated, and
the Strouhal numbers of 2P modes are close to 0.2 whereas
those of ﬂag-like modes are above 0.25.

), 5.5 cm (

(cid:13)

△

▽

ﬂuid. Hence, we assume that the total body mass (m)
is proportional to ρLLa2 where ρL is the density of the
loop. Also, the y-component of the centroid, ycm, and the
length Ll are assumed to be proportional to the length of
the loop if the body is elongated due to the ﬂow. With
the trivial solution for the x-component of centroid as
xcm = Ceiωt, we obtain an expression for the oscillation
V √δ/a√L. This is consis-
frequency: ω = 2πfloop ∝
tent with our observations and underlies our rescaling of
the data in Fig. 3. Put diﬀerently, this is simply the
oscillation frequency of a hanging pendulum where the
gravitational force is replaced by a drag force.

As the ﬂow velocity increases, a more complicated
mode in the oscillatory state can be observed (left panel
in Fig. 4). In this case, the loop sheds more than four vor-
tices over a single period of oscillation. We refer to this
wake structure as a ﬂag-like mode. We use this terminol-
ogy because the wake now resembles more that behind a
ﬂapping ﬂag (see [13]), and because the body itself looks
elongated and ”ﬂag-like”. This is because the enclosed
area is now smaller in relation to L2 than for the body
in the 2P mode. To characterize the loop oscillation and
the wake structure, we again deﬁne a Strouhal number,
now using the oscillation frequency of the loop itself, or
StL = Afloop/V where A is the outer amplitude of oscil-
lation as indicated in Fig. 4. The corresponding Strouhal
numbers for 2P modes and for ﬂag-like modes are shown

0
S
/
S

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.6

L
/
A

0.4

4

tionship can be explained by a simple model based on the
lift force of an inclined airfoil. With small loop lengths
and low ﬂow velocity, a 2P wake mode (with pairs of shed
vortices) is observed and has constant Strouhal number
0.2. At longer loop lengths and higher ﬂow velocity, a

∼
ﬂag-like mode appears with higher Strouhal number (
≥
0.25). This separation in Strouhal numbers is a result
of abrupt changes in enclosed loop area and oscillation
amplitude.

This work is supported by DOE Grant No. DE-

FG0200ER25053.

[1] D. J. Tritton, Physical Fluid Dynamics (Van Nostrand,

[2] M. V. Dyke, An album of ﬂuid motion (Parabolic Press,

Stanford, 1982), 1st ed.

[3] C. H. K. Williamson, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 28, 477

(1996).

[4] C. H. K. Williamson and R. Govardhan, Annu. Rev.

Fluid Mech. 36, 413 (2004).

[5] T. Sarpkaya, J. Fluids Struct. 19, 389 (2004).
[6] J. C. Liao, D. N. Beal, G. V. Lauder, and M. S. Tri-

antafyllou, Science 302, 1566 (2003).

[7] R. Govardhan and C. H. K. Williamson, J. Fluid Mech.

[8] D. Brika, and A. Laneville, J. Fluid Mech. 250, 481

420, 85 (2000).

(1993).

(1992).

659 (2000).

[9] I. Nakamura, Phys. Fluids 19, 5 (1976).
[10] D. G. Karamanev and L. N. Nikolov, AIChE J. 38, 1843

[11] J. Magnaudet and I. Eames, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 32,

[12] P. C. Duineveld, J. Fluid Mech. 292, 325 (1995).
[13] J. Zhang, S. Childress, A. Libchaber, and M. Shelley,

[14] M. Shelley, N. Vandenberghe, and J. Zhang, Phy. Rev.

Nature 408, 835 (2000).

Lett. 94, 094302 (2005).

[15] Y. Watanabe, S. Suzuki, M. Sugihara, and Y. Sueoka, J.

Fluids Struct. 16, 529 (2002).

[16] L. Huang, J. Fluids Struct. 9, 127 (1995).
[17] S. Taneda, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 24, 392 (1968).
[18] Y. Couder, J. M. Chomaz, and M. Rabaud, Physica D

37, 384 (1989).

[19] M. A. Rutgers, X.-L. Wu, and W. B. Daniel, Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 72, 3025 (2001).

[20] S. Alben, M. Shelley, and J. Zhang, Nature 420, 479

[21] W.-J. Kim and N. C. Perkins, J. Fluids Struct. 16, 229

(2002).

(2002).

[22] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifschitz, Fluid Mechanics,
Course of Theoretical Physics Vol. 6 (Pergamon Press,
Oxford, 1987), 2nd ed.

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

2.2

2.4

2.6

2

1.8
V (cm/s)

1977), 1st ed.

2
FIG. 5: Enclosed area (normalized by L
/4π) and amplitude
(normalized by L) of the oscillating loop for 6 cm loop. Area
and amplitude abruptly change as the wake structure tran-
sits from 2P modes (open symbols) to ﬂag-like modes (closed
symbols). As the velocity increases further, the amplitude
decreases due to the large drag force.

in Fig. 4. The 2P mode yields StL approximately 0.2 and
the ﬂag-like modes yield values above 0.25.

This separation in the respective Strouhal numbers is
caused by a discontinuous change of the amplitude A
from the 2P mode to the ﬂag-like mode. Figure 5 shows
the simultaneous transitions of enclosed area (S) and am-
plitude (A) of the oscillating loop. At high ﬂow velocity,
the streamwise extension of the loop increases due to the
higher drag, and this presumably causes the observed
relative decrease in enclosed area in the ﬂag-like mode.
Due to its now higher aspect ratio, the loop’s amplitude
increases (compare left and right panels in Fig. 4). The
causes of this abrupt change in enclosed loop area and os-
cillation amplitude remains an open question. Following
this abrupt change, the frequency of vortex shedding also
increases preumably due to the higher aspect ratio. Un-
like the 2P mode, the oscillation of the loop and vortex
shedding are not in-phase, and the wake becomes more
complicated.

We have reported on the dynamics of a ﬂexible body as
it interacts with an impinging high-speed ﬂow. We ﬁnd
that the loop can have co-existing stable states. In the
oscillatory state, the loop oscillation frequency is linearly
proportional to the ﬂow velocity and inversely propor-
tional to the square root of the loop length. This rela-

