6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Vorticity dynamics in a turbulent vortex: A study using acoustic interferometry

R. Labb´e,1 C. Baudet,2 and G. Bustamante1
1Laboratorio de Turbulencia, Departamento de F´isica, Facultad de Ciencia,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile. Casilla 307, Correo 2, Santiago, Chile
2Laboratoire des Ecoulements geophysiques et Industriels, UMR 5519 CNRS/UJF/INPG.
1025, Rue de la Piscine, 38041 Grenoble, France
(Dated: 21 June 2005; Revised 09 June 2006)

We investigate the vorticity dynamics in a turbulent vortex using scattering of acoustic waves.
Two ultrasonic beams are adjusted to probe simultaneously two spatial scales in a given volume of
the ﬂow, thus allowing a dual channel recording of the dynamics of coherent vorticity structures.
Our results show that this allows to measure the average energy transfer time between diﬀerent
spatial length scales, and that such transfer goes faster at smaller scales.

PACS numbers: 47.32.Cc 43.58.+z 47.27.Jv

Much of the investigation in turbulence has been de-
voted to the understanding of the mechanisms underly-
ing the energy transfer through the turbulent cascade, a
concept introduced by Richardson in 1922 [1]. A good
deal of theoretical and numerical work has been dedi-
cated to study shell models, which include the essential
features expected in a turbulent cascade, but without
some of the complications inherent to the Navier-Stokes
equations. Though these models retain some of the dy-
namics of the motion equations, they handle the velocity
ﬁeld as a scalar. Thus the price payed is a complete loss
of ﬂow geometry [2]. Another approach is the study of
random multiplicative cascade models, which adequately
mimic the statistics of the local energy dissipation rate
ǫ at diﬀerent ﬂow scales, and the intermittency of small
scales observed in a large number of experimental results.
Although much progress was done, many issues related
to the statistics of energy transfer, energy dissipation and
small scale intermittency in turbulent ﬂows still remain
without satisfactory answers. In particular, the dynamics
of the energy transfer through the turbulent cascade has
been only recently addressed in some theoretical works
[3, 4], but this aspect of turbulent ﬂows is still lacking
experimental studies speciﬁcally addressing it.

In this letter, we report preliminary results obtained
in the case of a vortex embedded in a turbulent ﬂow pro-
duced in air by two coaxial centrifugal fans, each facing
the other and rotating at ﬁxed angular velocities. This
so-called von K´arm´an ﬂow has been used in a number of
experiments in turbulence [5]. When the fans rotate in
the same direction with identical speeds, a strong vortex
is produced between them [6]. The advantage of this con-
ﬁguration is that in a small volume we obtain an intense
and well-deﬁned coherent vorticity structure, surrounded
by a fully turbulent background. Details of this setup are
given in a previous work [7]. The parameters used in this
case are: diameter of fans: D = 30 cm, height of vanes:
h = 2.2 cm, distance between disks: H = 30 cm, rota-
tion speed: f = 30 Hz, and diameter of central holes:
d = 2.5 cm. The fans were driven by two DC motors,

powered by independent constant voltage sources allow-
ing to keep the disk rotation within 1% of the desired
speed. Local measurements of the airﬂow speed were
performed with a Dantec Streamline 90N10 frame hous-
ing a Constant Temperature Anemometer which drives a
5 µm diameter and 2 mm length platinum wire probe. A
Streamline 90H02 Flow Unit was used to calibrate it. To
produce and detect the sound waves, four circular Sell
type electrostatic transducers [9] were used, each having
an active surface diameter of 14 cm. Two B&K model
2713 power ampliﬁers drove the emitters. The receivers
used custom made charge ampliﬁers, whose output were
connected to two Stanford Research model SR830 lock-in
ampliﬁers (LIA) through 2nd order high-pass RC ﬁlters
having cut-oﬀ frequencies of 7.5 kHz. The sine-wave out-
put of each LIA internal generator was used as signal
source for the corresponding emitter. The LIA output
signals, comprising in-phase and quadrature components,
were low-pass ﬁltered by an IOTech Filter-488 8th order
elliptic ﬁlter bank, using a cutoﬀ frequency of 4 kHz. The
resulting signal was digitized at 12.5 kS/s with a 16-bit
resolution National Instruments AT-MIO-16X multifunc-
tion board, installed into a personal computer. A total
of 220 points per signal channel was collected in each of
77 data sets.

Fig. 1 (top) shows the device that produced the ﬂow,
along with the four circular ultrasonic transducers, and
the hot-wire probe. The transducers were arranged
to perform measurements using an interferometric con-
ﬁguration, described in detail in a previous work [8].
The scattering angles were θ1 = 40◦ and θ2 = 60◦.
The magnitude of the scattering wave-vectors, qscatt
=
/2)/c = |k′ − k|, i = 1, 2, were adjusted
4πν0,i sin(θscatt
independently for each channel through their correspond-
ing frequencies ν0,i. We acquired three sets of data, set-
ting ν0,1 = 20 kHz, 40 kHz, and 60 kHz; while ν0,2 took
some 25 values in the interval [16, 90] kHz in each case.
Notice that each probed scattering wave-vector, related
to the z -component of the vorticity distribution, can be
set arbitrarily close (even identical) to the other. Fig. 1

i

i

2

FIG. 1: Top: Partial view of the experimental setup. Bottom:
a schematic drawing of the experimental setup (see text).

(bottom) displays a schematic upper view of the lower
disk, hot-wire probe and ultrasonic transducers, along
with distances and angles. This arrangement is symmet-
ric with respect to the vertical plane AA. Also displayed
is a schematic diagram of the measuring chain. Fig. 2
(top) is a sketch of the volume probed by the ultrasonic
beams, showing the relationships between scattering vec-
tors and wave-vectors in the case of exact inter-channel
tuning (same scattering wave-vector). As mentioned in
previous works [6, 7], the vortex performs a slow pre-
cession motion around the axis of rotation of the fans.
Even so, it remains inside the measurement volume, as
shown in ﬁg. 2. A horizontal cut of the measurement
volume is displayed as a shaded rhombus, the heavier
shaded circle indicating the position of the vortex core.
Air speed measurements with the probe wire aligned ver-
tically, and located at about 2 cm of the disks’s rotation
axis and some 10 cm above the lower disk, give the sam-
ple record displayed in ﬁg. 2 (bottom). The nearly peri-
odic precession of the vortex is visible as a pattern with
sharp dips —sometimes enlarged or doubled by ﬂuctu-
ations due to the turbulent background, each time the
center of the vortex is close or coincides with the hot
wire location. These events are signaled by arrows in
ﬁg. 2, the time interval between single events being about
1 s. Accordingly, the spectrum displayed in ﬁg. 3 (top)
has a rather wide peak located at f0 ≈ 1 Hz. The Tay-
lor hypothesis is not met by this ﬂow, but this spec-
trum gives an idea of the energy contents at diﬀerent
scales. At higher frequencies (smaller scales), it meets
only approximately the k−5/3 K41 law (represented by
the straight line) in the inertial range, due to the pres-
ence of the vortex in the bulk of the ﬂow. In fact, we
observe three regions, A, B, and C, where the spectrum
looks self-similar, but with diﬀerent slopes. As we will

FIG. 2: Top: Diagram showing the relationship between
wave-vectors, the volume probed by the ultrasonic beams
(shaded region) and the size of the disks. The dark circle
represents a cut of the vortex core. Bottom: A sample of
the anemometer signal. Arrows signal events of minimal air
speed, the vortex core being close to the hot wire probe there.
The inset displays the velocity proﬁle of a non turbulent vor-
tex, which helps in recognizing the vortex core in the turbu-
lent signal.

see later, this could be related to the inﬂuence of the
ﬂow anisotropy on the dynamics of the energy transfer
through the turbulent cascade. The acoustic signals are
delivered by the LIAs as low frequency complex voltages,
which are images of the spatial Fourier modes Ωz(qj, t)
of the ﬂow vorticity, probed at well-deﬁned wave vectors
qj = 4πν0,j sin(θj/2)/c, j = 1, 2. Typical spectra of these
signals are displayed in ﬁg. 3 (bottom). The wide central
peak, due to the intense coherent vorticity of the vortex,
lies between two side bands produced by the background
ﬂow. There is a close correspondence between the low fre-
quency region of the velocity spectrum (up to 50 Hz) and
the central region of the vorticity spectrum. The same
is true for the high frequency region (> 200 Hz) of the
spectra, both exhibiting a slowly decaying roll-oﬀ, with a
slope close to −5/3 related to the background turbulence
of the ﬂow.

Now we address the separation of

the coherent
Fol-
structure and the background turbulent ﬂow.
lowing ref.
[8], we compute the coherence between
two spatial Fourier modes of the vorticity, Ωz(q1, t)
and Ωz(q2, t). The coherence function, C(q1, q2, ν) =
hΩz(q1, ν)Ω∗
z(q2, ν)i/ph|Ωz(q1, ν)|2ih|Ωz(q2, ν)|2i, where
ν is a frequency shift associated to the Fourier transform
in time of Ωz(qi, t), is a statistical estimator that allows
to evidence phase stationarity (coherence) between
distinct Fourier modes. Fig. 4 (top) is a plot of the co-
herence between two scattering channels tuned to probe
the same scale of the vorticity distribution (q1 = q2). A
central peak with a high level of coherence (0.9, being 1
the maximum expected value; the value of 0.9 should be

3

FIG. 3: Top: Power spectral density of the signal displayed
in ﬁg. 2. Three almost linear regions are labeled A, B, and
C (see text), with slopes αA,B,C . The straight line represents
the Kolmogorov spectrum, with slope αK = −1.66. Bottom:
Individual spectra of the signals delivered by the lock-in am-
pliﬁers. The spectrum corresponding to the scattering angle
of 60 degrees decreases slightly faster with the frequency shift.
Scattered waves having the same central frequency of the in-
cident beam have no frequency shift.

ascribed to incoherent noise) reveals that both channels
are detecting the same coherent structure. This was
veriﬁed “turning oﬀ” the vortex by rotating the disks
in opposite directions at the same angular speed.
In
this case only a turbulent shear layer remains, and the
plot of the coherence function displays only the side
bands. By stacking plots of coherence for a sequence of
values of q1, it is possible to build surfaces of coherence
relating events at diﬀerent ﬂow scales, as functions of
∆q = q2 − q1 and the frequency shift ν, as shown in ﬁg. 4.
We can interpret them in as eddies at given scales draw-
ing its energy from decaying structures at larger scales,
in the frame of the Richardson’s turbulent cascade. As
these surfaces represent a time average of the whole
story, we perform a time cross-correlation analysis to
conﬁrm this interpretation. This is done by computing
the cross-correlation χ(q1, ∆q, ∆t) = h|Ωz(q1, t)||Ωz(q1 +
∆q, t + ∆t)|i/ph|Ωz(q1, t)|2ih|Ωz(q1 + ∆q, t + ∆t)|2i,
were |Ωz(qi, t)| is a measure of the strength of a structure
with vorticity Ωz(qi, t). The function χ(q1, ∆q, ∆t) will
have a peak at ∆t = τ (τ = time lag), indicating the
presence of a vorticity pattern at the scale l1 = 2π/q1
in time t that appears at the scale l2 = 2π/q2 a time
t + τ later. The peak amplitude is a measure of how
well the pattern is preserved from one scale to the other,
a value of one meaning a perfect preservation. Fig. 5
shows three straight lines resulting from ﬁts to the time
lags calculated from such cross-correlation analysis, each
corresponding to one of the coherence surfaces shown
in ﬁg. 4. The time lags found here are consistent with
those given in reference [8]. We have τ ∼ 1 ms for

FIG. 4: Top: coherence plot of signals detected simultane-
ously by both receivers. The wide peak centered at zero fre-
quency shift is due to the vortex. Bottom: Three coherence
surfaces are shown, obtained by detuning one of the emit-
ters by a frequency corresponding to a shift ∆q in the wave
number.

∆q = 8 cm−1, and the transfer rates of ﬁg. 7 (c) in
reference [8] are similar [10].

Our main result is the experimental observation of ac-
celeration in the energy transfer in turbulence, evidenced
by the systematic change in the trend of the data in ﬁg.
5 when the magnitude of the reference wave-vector q1 is
changed. The slopes of the ﬁtted straight lines decrease
with increasing q1. The scattering of the points is an
indication of the intrinsic variability of the energy trans-
fer time through the turbulent cascade (R2 ≥ 0.6 in all
cases). The following argument helps to understand the
trend change: the time lag measured between the wave
numbers q1 and q2 = q1 + ∆q can be seen as the average
transfer time of the energy contained in a scale corre-
sponding to q1 to a smaller scale corresponding to q2.
Thus, the slope δτ /δq (we drop ∆’s from now on) of the
straight lines can be related to the inverse of the average
transfer rate of energy in the k -space, in a neighborhood
of the reference scale corresponding to the wave number
q1 [11]. This decrease in slope with increasing q1 reveals
that the average transfer time of the energy decreases
when the involved scales are smaller. In other words, tak-
ing δq/δτ as the average transit speed (in the k -space)
of structures starting at the wave number q1 and ending
at the wave number q2, we conclude that such speed is
larger at larger q’s (or smaller scales). This is consistent
with a remark made in a previous numerical work [3]. A
rather crude explanation of this result follows: if E(q) is
the spectral density of energy per unit mass —averaged in
time, and we think of δq/δτ as being an ordinary deriva-
tive, then E(q)δq/δτ is the average energy ﬂux density in
k -space. But this is the average dissipation rate per unit
mass ǫ. Thus, E(q)δq/δτ = ǫ, and δτ /δq = E(q)/ǫ. As
E(q) decreases with increasing q, so does δτ /δq. Notice
that in this picture, the energy attached to a given eddy
is transported towards larger wave numbers merely by

− 2

−2/3
0

K = 3

2 CK ǫ−1/3q

reduction of its spatial scale (in directions perpendicular
to its vorticity) due to stretching by the velocity ﬁeld of
larger eddies. We can illustrate our view in the frame of
K41 theory [1]: we have E(q) = CKǫ2/3q−5/3, where CK
is the Kolmogorov constant. Thus, for homogeneous and
isotropic turbulence, δτ /δq = CKǫ−1/3q−5/3, which is of
course a decreasing quantity. By rearranging terms, we
have q−5/3δq = (ǫ1/3/CK)δt, which by integration yields
−2/3
3 ǫ1/3t/CK)−3/2. This is the itinerary of
q(t) = (q
0
the average magnitude q in a homogeneous and isotropic
turbulent ﬂow in which the mean dissipation rate per unit
mass is ǫ. The scale l0 = 2π/q0, corresponding to t = 0,
can take any value within the inertial range. Notice that
q(t) diverges in a ﬁnite time t0
, corre-
sponding to the average time taken by the energy at the
scale l0 to cascade down to l = 0+ (q → ∞), in a ﬂuid
with vanishing viscosity —in the frame of K41 theory.
Putting CK ≈ 0.5, ǫ ∼ 102 W/kg, estimated from the
power injected to the ﬂow (≈ 70 W) and the volume of
moving air (∼ 0.5 m3) and, for instance, q0 ≈ 3 × 102
m−1, corresponding to the largest scale measured with
our acoustic method, we get t0
K ∼ 4 ms. This is on
the order of characteristic times in ﬁg. 5, showing that
transfer times in homogeneous turbulence do not diﬀer
too much from those in our ﬂow. Thus, our reasoning
shows that the trend observed in ﬁg. 5 can be understood
in terms of “classical” homogeneous and isotropic tur-
bulence. In non-homogenous, non-isotropic turbulence,
as in the present experiment, the behavior of δτ /δq can
be estimated from the experimental spectrum shown in
ﬁg. 3, where the Kolmogorov spectrum is plotted as a
straight line, for comparison. In the large scales region
(A), δτ /δq decreases faster than in K41 turbulence, the
cascade acceleration being larger. In the small scales re-
gion (C), δτ /δq tends to reach the Kolmogorov slope,
but the acceleration is slightly smaller than in K41. Re-
gion (B), in which the cascade acceleration reaches its
minimum, is a transition zone from a non-isotropic ﬂow
at large scales, where vorticity is mainly parallel to the
z -axis, to a more isotropic small-scale ﬂow. In all three
regions the spectrum seems to be self-similar, with dif-
ferent scaling exponents. Of course, being this one a
ﬁrst experimental result revealing the accelerated nature
of energy transfer through the turbulent cascade, more
work will be necessary to state our conclusions on more
solid ground. We recall that we are measuring only the
z -component of the vorticity and the modulus of the ve-
locity component normal to the z -axis.
It should be
necessary to simultaneously measure at least one more
component of the vorticity. Additionally, the conditions
of validity for the Taylor hypothesis are not meet in these
hot-wire measurements —a ﬂying probe would be much
better to study this ﬂow. At any rate, in the large-scale
range the vorticity in our ﬂow is mainly parallel to the z -
axis. Thus, eddies in the large scale region have mostly

4

FIG. 5: Time lags corresponding to the coherence sur-
faces of ﬁg.
4. Circles (squares, rhombi) corresponds to
q1 = 3.79 (7.58, 11.4) cm−1, and the straight lines are lin-
ear ﬁts to the measured points with correlation coeﬃcient
R2
= 0.60 (0.75, 0.66). On the right side, the symbol corre-
sponding to each ﬁt is displayed. The slopes decrease with
increasing q1.

parallel vorticities, and the vortex stretching is largely
inhibited there, slowing down the energy transfer. At
smaller scales, where a more isotropic ﬂow exists, vortex
stretching is reestablished, giving faster energy ﬂux rates.
Thus, in-between the acceleration should be greater than
in the isotropic case. This could explain in part our re-
sults. To conclude, we remark that our reasoning suggest
that cascade acceleration may be a necessary but not suf-
ﬁcient condition for small scale intermittency.

Financial support for this work was provided by
FONDECYT, under projects #1990169, #7990057 and
#1040291.

[1] U. Frisch, Turbulence: the Legacy of A. N. Kolmogorov,

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995)
[2] L. Biferale, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 35, 441 (2003)
[3] E. L´evˆeque and C. R. Koudella, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,

4033 (2001).

[4] Roberto Benzi, Luca Biferale, and Mauro Sbragaglia

Phys. Rev. E 71, 065302(R) (2005).

[5] For example,

experimental results in conﬁned von
K´arm´an ﬂows are given in J.-F. Pinton, P. C. W.
Holdsworth, and R. Labb´e, Phys. Rev. E 60, R2452
(1999); P. Odier, J.-F. Pinton, and S. Fauve, Phys. Rev.
E 58, 7397 (1998); O. Cadot, Y. Couder, A. Daerr, S.
Douady, and A. Tsinober Phys. Rev. E 56, 427 (1997);
O. Cadot, S. Douady, and Y. Couder, Phys. Fluids 7, 630
(1995); J. Maurer, P. Tabeling, and G Zocchi, Europhys.
Lett. 26, 31 (1994); S. Douady, Y. Couder, and M. E.
Brachet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 983 (1991).

[6] R. Labb´e, J.-F. Pinton, and S. Fauve, Phys. Fluids 8,

[7] R. Labb´e and J.-F. Pinton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1413

[8] C. Baudet, O. Michel, and W. J. Williams, Physica D

914 (1996).

(1998).

128, 1 (1999).

[9] D. Anke, Acustica 30, 30 (1974).
[10] We have not dropped 2π factors here in the magnitude
of scattering vectors, which explain the diﬀerence in ∆q
scales in the aforementioned ﬁgures.

[11] This is like measuring the advection of a magnitude in
the Fourier space. Of course, here the “advection” mech-

5

anism lies in the dynamics of the turbulent velocity ﬁeld
in the direct space. The idea of measuring a wind in the
Fourier space by looking simultaneouly at two diﬀerent
scales was proposed by S. Fauve in 1990.

