6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Splashing of liquids: interplay of surrounding gas and surface roughness

Lei Xu, Loreto Barcos, and Sidney R. Nagel
The James Franck Institute and Department of Physics
The University of Chicago
929 East 57th St., Chicago, Illinois 60637
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We investigate two parameters, gas pressure and substrate roughness, that control the dynamics
of splashing when a liquid drop hits a dry solid surface. We associate each of the two distinct forms
of splash reported in the literature with one of these parameters: corona splashing is caused by
instabilities produced by the pressure of the surrounding gas; prompt splashing is due to surface
roughness. The size distribution of ejected droplets reveals the length scales of the underlying
droplet-creation process in both cases.

PACS numbers: 47.20.Cq, 47.20.Ma, 47.40.Nm, 47.55.Dz

It may seem self-evident that a rapidly moving liquid
drop colliding with a dry solid substrate should splash
and break up into thousands of tiny droplets.
It is,
therefore, surprising that simply removing the gas sur-
rounding the drop can completely inhibit splashing when
the substrate is smooth[1]. This unexpected observation
emphasizes that startling discoveries can still be made
even in common everyday phenomena, especially when
they rely on the poorly understood instabilities associ-
ated with non-linear, free-surface ﬂuid ﬂows. Moreover,
such a discovery can have important industrial applica-
tions wherever drops are manipulated for example in ink-
jet printing[2], surface coating[3], combustion of liquid
fuel[4], and spray drying[5].

Although the presence of gas is demonstrably impor-
tant, there are other parameters which play a signiﬁcant
role in creating a splash. Since Worthington, investiga-
tors have studied the roles of impact velocity, liquid sur-
face tension, viscosity and substrate roughness[6, 7, 8, 9].
It is natural to ask whether surrounding gas is still im-
portant for splashing on a rough surface. Although it is
well known that there are two distinct types of splash-
ing: “corona” and “prompt”[10] there has been no fun-
damental understanding of the diﬀerence between them.
A corona splash occurs on a smooth substrate, where a
symmetric crown is ﬁrst formed and subsequently disin-
tegrates into a spray of droplets. Prompt splashes occur
on rough surfaces without corona formation, and droplets
are ejected at the advancing contact line between the liq-
uid and substrate. In this paper we focus on how splashes
are produced by the interplay of gas pressure and sur-
face roughness. Our results elucidate the diﬀerent mech-
anisms responsible for corona and prompt splashing.

In our experiments, ethanol drops were released from
a stationary nozzle at a height 95 cm above a substrate
laid horizontally inside a transparent vacuum chamber.
Drops with a reproducible diameter, D = 3.4 ± 0.1 mm,
were created using a syringe pump (medfusion 2010 ),
from a nuzzle of diameter 3.0 mm. The pressure in the
chamber, P , could be varied between 1 kPa and 100 kPa

(atmospheric pressure). The subsequent splash was pho-
tographed by a Phantom V7 high-speed video camera at
47, 000 frames per second. The impact speed of the drop,
4.3 ± 0.1m/s, was determined by analyzing the drop po-
sition in subsequent frames of each movie. The substrate
roughness was varied. Rough substrates(microcut-paper-
discs r(cid:13), Buehler Ltd.) are high quality sandpapers uni-
formly coated with closely packed particles. The rough-
ness, Ra, is deﬁned as the average diameter of the par-
ticles which varied between 3µm and 78µm [11]. Clean
glass microscope slides were used for smooth substrates.
Ethanol wets our substrates and does not rebound after
hitting the surface [12].

Fig. 1 shows splashing on substrates with diﬀerent
roughness. In each panel the top row is at low pressure,
P = 13kPa, and the bottom row is at atmospheric pres-
sure, P = 100kPa. Fig. 1a shows for a smooth surface
that at low pressure there is only a liquid ﬁlm expanding
smoothly on the substrate with no splashing and that
there is a corona splash at atmospheric pressure. This
shows unambiguously that air causes corona splashing.
Fig. 1b shows that at low P when the roughness Ra
is increased to 5µm, there are two regimes: there is an
early stage with prompt splashing which is followed by
a peaceful regime where no splashing occurs. At atmo-
spheric pressure, there is a single regime throughout the
expansion that resembles corona splashing except that it
is not as symmetric as when the surface is completely
smooth. Thus, for roughness Ra = 5µm , there is a clear
diﬀerence as the gas pressure, P , is varied, showing that
air is still important. For large roughness, Ra = 78µm,
we see typical prompt splashing during the entire expand-
ing process for both low and high pressures. In this case,
roughness dominates the air eﬀect. Thus there are two
contributions to splashing: a corona part caused by air
and a prompt part caused by surface roughness. As Ra
is increased at atmospheric pressure, there is a transition
from a corona splash to a prompt splash.

Our previous study [1] showed that corona splashing
is caused by the compressibility of air. Here we focus

2

ness is too small or the spreading ﬁlm is too thick then no
splash will be created. However, d varies with time. Ini-
tially it is molecularly thin and increases in thickness dur-
ing expansion as liquid is added to the ﬁlm from the drop.
When the ﬁlm becomes too thick to be perturbed by the
roughness, splashing stops. This explains why an early
stage with splashing is followed by a late quiescent stage.
We found the movie frames where the splashing stops,
and measured the liquid ﬁlm thickness, d, at that point.
For the case of small roughness(Ra = 5µm), d ∼ 50µm.
Thus we propose the prompt splashing criteria:

Ra ∼ 0.1d

(1)

When Ra >> 0.1d, splashing will occur. This crite-
ria also explains why splashing always happens for large
roughness (78µm), since Ra >> 0.1d is always satisﬁed.
We have also measured the size distribution of ejected
droplets during splashing on both smooth and rough sub-
strates. The droplet sizes are likely to retain an imprint
of the droplet creation process and thus provide a clue to
the mechanism initiating the interfacial instability.

We measure the size of splashing droplets by adding
a small amount of ink to our working liquid, ethanol, at
the volume ratio 1:6 (ink:ethanol). The amount of ink
is small so that it does not aﬀect the splashing proper-
ties which we have checked repeatedly with high-speed
video. We surround the impact point on the substrate
with a cylinder rolled from a sheet of white paper. Af-
ter splashing, the droplets hit the surrounding cylinder
leaving ink spots residues. With careful calibration, we
convert the sizes of the ink spots to the sizes of the ejected
droplets. By checking the shape of a stain, we can ascer-
tain whether that spot was caused by a single ejectile or
by two separate drops that landed in overlapping loca-
tions. Our calibrations work well for drops with radius
larger than r = 50µm. Below that value, our resolution
is not adequate to obtain a reliable distribution function.
We analyze only the distribution above r = 50µm.

Fig. 2 shows the results of splashing on a smooth sur-
face at three pressures, 100kP a, 87kP a and 80kP a, all in
the high pressure regime. Inset shows that the ink spots
for one splash are randomly distributed on the white pa-
per. Main panel shows the number of droplets, N , versus
droplet radius, r, for the three pressures. To obtain good
statistics, each distribution is an average over ten exper-
iments taken under the same conditions. From the plot
we see at large r an exponential distribution over most
of the range:

N ∼ Exp(−r/r0)

(2)

where r0 is the characteristic decay length. (Similar re-
sults are found in the very diﬀerent process of ligament
breakup[14].) From Fig. 2, we ﬁnd r0 = 20µm (at

FIG. 1: Photographs of splashing as a function of gas pressure
and surface roughness. The left and right columns are 0.2ms
and 0.5ms from the time of impact. For each value of surface
roughness, the top panel is at a low pressure, P = 13kP a and
the bottom panel is at atmospheric pressure, P = 100kP a.
(a) Splash on a smooth substrate which is a clean microscope
slide. (b) Splash on a substrate with roughness Ra = 5µm.
(c) Splash on a substrate with roughness Ra = 78µm.

on prompt splashing. We can study pure prompt splash-
ing by working at low-pressure where the eﬀect of air
is negligible[13] and all splashing is caused by rough-
ness. As we vary the roughness, Ra, we see (low pressure
rows of Fig. 1b and c ) an evolution in behavior:
for
Ra = 5µm, a little splashing is produced only at the be-
ginning and for large roughness(Ra = 78µm), splashing
is produced throughout the expansion.

We propose that prompt splashing is caused by the
expanding liquid ﬁlm becoming destabilized by surface
roughness. The results suggest that the liquid ﬁlm can
become destabilized only if the roughness is not too much
smaller than the ﬁlm thickness, d; if the surface rough-

3

FIG. 2: Size distribution of ejected droplets in a corona splash
at high pressure. Inset is a reproduction of the sheet of pa-
per with the ink spots showing that the ejected droplets hit
the paper in a random way over a large area. Main panel
shows the number of drops at a ﬁxed size per impact, N (r),
versus drop radius, r, for a corona splash at three pressures:
P = 100kPa (•), P = 87kPa (⋄), and P = 80kPa (×). The
exponential ﬁtting functions are: — , exp(-r/0.020); --- ,
exp(-r/0.017); and –·– , exp(-r/0.014).

100kP a), 17µm (at 87kP a) and 14µm (at 80kP a). These
values are comparable to the corona thickness which we
measured from the movies to be between 20 and 40µm.
This suggests that r0 is determined by the thickness
of the corona. This is consistent with r0 decreasing as
we lower the pressure since lower pressure leads to less
splashing and therefore a thinner corona. It’s remarkable
that the size-distribution data can distinguish thickness
diﬀerence as small as 3µm, which is far below the reso-
lution of our high-speed photography.

At the threshold pressure, Fig. 3 shows there is a com-
pletely diﬀerent distribution of droplet sizes. Fig. 3(a)
shows there is no corona and that discrete droplets are
ejected from the liquid disc expanding on the substrate
which has periodic undulations along its rim. The ink
spots shown in Fig. 3(b) inset have the striking feature
that they fall in a horizontal line, indicating the same
angle between their trajectories and substrate. In addi-
tion, we see that the spots are essentially equally spaced.
Shown in Fig. 3(b) main panel, the Fourier transform
of the lateral positions of the spots produces a well de-
ﬁned peak indicating this spatial order. Moreover the
spot sizes are much more uniform than those seen at
high pressures in Fig. 2. The Fig. 3(c) plots N (r) at
pressures close to PT . The sharp peak at r0 = 0.11 mm

FIG. 3: A splash just above the threshold pressure, PT . (a)
Images of a drop splashing show the ejection of droplets and
the undulations in the expanding rim. The times shown are
measured with respect to the time of impact. (b) Inset is a
reproduction of the sheet of paper showing that the ink spots
hit the paper in a well-deﬁned horizontal line. Main panel
shows the Fourier transform of the lateral positions of the
spots in inset. There is a peak that indicates a well-deﬁned
spacing between the ejected drops at PT . (c) The number
of drops at ﬁxed sizes, N (r), is plotted versus drop radius,
r, at pressures slightly higher than PT : P = 34kPa(•), P=
37 kPa(◦) and P = 39kPa(×). The solid line is a Gaussian
ﬁt centered at r0 = 0.11mm. The peak in N (r) shows that
the average size of the drops is approximately the size of the
undulations at the rim of the expanding ﬁlm.

indicates that most droplets are about the size of the rim
undulations. Again we see the characteristic length scale
of the process, the undulation size, appearing in the size
distribution data.

We have also applied the ink-spot technique to ﬁnd
the distribution of ejected droplet sizes for splashing on
rough substrates. These measurements were performed
at low pressure so that the eﬀect of the surrounding gas is
negligible. Therefore these distributions are due solely to
prompt splashing. Fig.4a shows N (r) for several values
of roughness, Ra. The straight lines in the ﬁgure indicate

4

splashing:
surrounding gas is responsible for corona
splashing and surface roughness is responsible for prompt
splashing. This explains the long-standing puzzle about
why there are two distinct types of splashes. We have
also found that there are characteristic lengths in the
distribution of ejected drops. This is in contrast to shat-
tering in a solid which shows a power-law distribution
of sizes of the shattered fragments[15, 16, 17]. In those
systems there is no characteristic length scale. The char-
acteristic lengths we ﬁnd in our splashing experiments
reveal the microscopic length scales associated with the
droplet creation process. Our results provide a means for
controlling the sizes of ejected droplets in a splash.

We wish to thank Qiti Guo, David Qu´er´e, Mathilde
Callies-Reyssat, Priyanka Jindal, and Wendy Zhang for
helpful discussions. This work was supported by MR-
SEC DMR-0213745 and NSF DMR-0352777, L. X. was
supported by Grainger Fellowship.

[1] L. Xu, W. W. Zhang and S. R. Nagel, Phys. Rev. Lett.

94, 184505 (2005).

[2] J.L. Zable, IBM J. Res. Develop. 21, 315 (1977).
[3] S. Sampath, X. Y. Jiang, J. Matejicek, A. C. Leger and

A. Vardelle, Mater. Sci. Eng. A 272, 181 (1999).

[4] K.R. Koederitz, M.R. Evers, G.B. Wilkinson and J.A.

Drallmeier, Int. J. Engine Research 3, 37 (2002).

[5] F.V. Shaw, Ceramic Bulletin 69, 1484 (1990).
[6] A.M. Worthington, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 25, 261 (1876-

[7] C. Mundo, M. Sommerfeld and C. Tropea, Int. J. Multi-

phase Flow 21, 151 (1995).

[8] K. Range and F. Feuillebois, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 203,

1877).

16 (1998).

[9] N. Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra, and J. Mostaghimi, J.

Fluid Mech. 510, 353 (2004).

[10] R. Rioboo, M. Marengo and C. Tropea, Atomization and

Sprays 11, 155 (2001).

[11] Under a microscope, we found ﬂuctuations in the particle
sizes, and that gives us the roughness error bars in Fig.4.
[12] D. Richard, C. Clanet and D. Qu´er´e, Nature 417, 811

(2002).

[13] Our previous experiment on smooth surface[1] showed
that there is a threshold pressure for splashing, below
which splashing will not occur. Here all experiments were
done at pressures much lower than that threshold pres-
sure, so that the eﬀect of air is negligible.

[14] E. Villermaux, P. Marmottant and J. Duplat, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 92, 074501 (2004).

[15] L. Oddershede, P. Dimon and J. Bohr, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[16] A. Meibom and I. Balslev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2492

[17] Emily S.C. Ching, S.L. Lui and Ke-Qing Xia, Phys. A

71, 3107 (1993).

(1996).

287, 83 (2000).

FIG. 4: The distribution of ejected drops in a prompt splash
on rough substrates. (a) N (r) versus r for splashes on sub-
strates with three values of roughness: Ra = 16µm((cid:4)),
Ra = 5µm(N), and Ra = 3µm(◦). The exponential ﬁtting
functions are: — , Exp(-r/0.023); --- , Exp(-r/0.006); and
–·– , Exp(-r/0.004). (b) The decay constant, r0, of the ex-
ponential decay in N (r), as a function of substrate roughness
Ra. For small values of roughness, the decay constant is ap-
proximately linear in the roughness. At large roughness, the
decay constant saturates.

that at large r, N (r) decays exponentially. Fig.4b shows
that the slope of these lines, which is the decay length,
r0, increases with increasing Ra. At small Ra, the decay
length is close to the value of the roughness: r0 ≈ Ra.
At large roughness, this relationship breaks down as r0
appears to saturate at a constant value.

We can understand this behavior with our prompt
splashing criteria, Eq. 1. When the roughness is small,
the drop will stop splashing at the ﬁlm thickness de-
termined by Ra. This sets the correlation between the
droplet decay length and roughness, r0 ≈ Ra. However,
when the roughness is too large, the drop never stops
splashing, and r0 can only increase up to the maximum
thickness of the expanding liquid ﬁlm. Fig.4(b) shows it
saturating at about 40µm, which is approximately the
thickness of the liquid ﬁlm at its terminal position.

In this paper, we discovered two mechanisms for

