6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
1
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Elasti turbulene in von Karman swirling (cid:29)ow between two disks.

Department of Mathematis, University of British Columbia, V6T1Z2 BC, Canada

Teodor Burghelea

Department of Physial Servies, Weizmann Institute of Siene, Rehovot, 76100 Israel

Enrio Segre

Department of Physis of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Siene, Rehovot, 76100 Israel

Vitor Steinberg

(Dated: 4th Deember 2013)

We disuss the role of elasti stress in the statistial properties of elasti turbulene, realized by

the (cid:29)ow of a polymer solution between two disks. The dynamis of the elasti stress are analogous

to those of a small sale fast dynamo in magnetohydrodynamis, and to those of the turbulent

advetion of a passive salar in the Bathelor regime. Both systems are theoretially studied in

literature, and this analogy is exploited to explain the statistial properties, the (cid:29)ow struture,

and the saling observed experimentally. The following features of elasti turbulene are on(cid:28)rmed

experimentally and presented in this paper:

(i) the rms of the vortiity (and that of veloity gradients) saturates in the bulk of the elasti

turbulent (cid:29)ow, leading to the saturation of the elasti stress.

(ii) the rms of the veloity gradients (and thus the elasti stress) grows linearly with W i in the

boundary layer, near the driving disk. The rms of the veloity gradients in the boundary layer is

one to two orders of magnitude larger than in the bulk.

(iii) the PDFs of the injeted power at either onstant angular speed or torque show skewness

and exponential tails, whih both indiate intermittent statistial behavior. Also the PDFs of the

normalized aelerations, whih an be related to the statistis of veloity gradients via the Taylor

hypothesis, exhibit well-pronouned exponential tails.

(iv) a new length sale, i.e the thikness of the boundary layer, as measured from the pro(cid:28)le of the

rms of the veloity gradient, is found to be relevant for the boundary layer of the elasti stresses.

The veloity boundary layer just re(cid:29)ets some of the features of the boundary layer of the elasti

stresses (rms of the veloity gradients). This measured length sale is muh smaller than the vessel

size.

(v) the saling of the struture funtions of the vortiity, veloity gradients, and injeted power is

found to be the same as that of a passive salar adveted by an elasti turbulent veloity (cid:28)eld.

PACS numbers: 83.50.-v, 47.27.-i,47.50.+d

Contents

I. Introdution

2

II. Hydrodynamial theory of elasti turbulene

4

A. Hydrodynamial desription of dilute polymer solution (cid:29)ows

4

B. Polymer extension in random (cid:29)ows

5

C. Elasti instability and its experimental investigation

6

D. Theory of the elasti turbulene and role of the elasti stress

8

III. Experimental

9

A. Experimental set-up and proedure.

9

B. Rheometri properties of polymer solutions

11

C. Experimental observation of elasti instability in von Karman swirling (cid:29)ow

11

IV. Properties of elasti turbulene

13

A. Power (cid:29)utuations and statistis of the injeted power

13

B. Flow struture and statistial properties of the veloity (cid:28)eld

14

C. Veloity and veloity gradient pro(cid:28)les and the boundary layer problem

23

D. Disussion: role of the elasti stresses in elasti turbulene in a (cid:28)nite size ell.

26

V. Conlusions

29

Aknowledgments

29

Referenes

29

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

Long polymer moleules added to a (cid:29)uid make it elasti and apable to store stresses that depend on the history of

deformation, thereby giving the medium a memory [1℄. As was reently demonstrated, elasti stress an overome the

dissipation aused by relaxating polymer moleules, and an ause ompliated and irregular motion in urvilinear

shear (cid:29)ows [2, 3℄. The disovery of elasti turbulene, a random (cid:29)ow in dilute polymer solutions at arbitrary low

Reynolds numbers, Re, alls for quantitative studies of all aspets of the phenomenon, both experimentally and

theoretially.

Although the notion of turbulene itself is widely used in sienti(cid:28) and tehnial literature, there is no ommonly

aepted de(cid:28)nition. Turbulent (cid:29)ow is usually identi(cid:28)ed by its main features. Turbulene implies (cid:29)uid motion in a

broad range of temporal and spatial sales, so that many degrees of freedom are exited in the system. There are no

intrinsi harateristi sales of time and spae in the (cid:29)ow, exept for those restriting the exited temporal and spatial

domains from above and below. Turbulent (cid:29)ow is also usually aompanied by a signi(cid:28)ant inrease in momentum

and mass transfer. That is, (cid:29)ow resistane and rate of mixing in a turbulent (cid:29)ow beome muh higher than those

would be in an imaginary laminar (cid:29)ow with the same Reynolds number.

Random (cid:29)ows of dilute polymer solutions too, ause a sharp growth in (cid:29)ow resistane, exhibit an algebrai deay

of veloity power spetra over a wide range of sales, and provide a way for e(cid:27)etive mixing [2, 3, 4℄. These properties

are analogous to those of hydrodynami turbulene. Suh formal similarities give a reason for alling suh (cid:29)ows

"elasti turbulene". However, the similarities do not imply that the physial mehanism that underlies the two kinds

of random motion is the same. Indeed, in ontrast with inertial turbulene at high Re, whih ours due to large

Reynolds stresses [5℄, large elasti stress is the main soure of non-linearity and the ause of elasti turbulene in low

Re (cid:29)ows of polymer solutions [6℄. One an suggest that in a random (cid:29)ow driven by elastiity, the elasti stress tensor
τp should be the ob jet of primary importane and interest, and that it may be appropriate to view elasti turbulene
as turbulene of the τp (cid:28)eld. It would then be more relevant and instrutive to explore the spatial struture and

the temporal distribution of this (cid:28)eld, but, unfortunately, urrently no experimental tehnique allows a diret loal

measurement of it in a turbulent (cid:29)ow. On the other hand, properties of the τp (cid:28)eld in a boundary layer an be

inferred from measurements of injeted power, whereas its loal properties an be evaluated from measurements of

spatial and temporal distributions of veloity gradients.

In this regard, we would like to point out the deep similarity between elasti turbulene and the small-sale turbulent

magneto-dynamo disussed theoretially by [7℄, that will be further lari(cid:28)ed in the next Setion. Both the small-sale

magneto-dynamo [8℄ as well as elasti turbulene arise when the (cid:29)ow is three-dimensional, random in time and

spatially smooth. Analogously to elasti turbulene, the small-sale magneto-dynamo exhibits a visosity-dominated,

low Re turbulene that is muh faster than the large-sale one. The small-sale turbulent dynamo is produed by the

random strething of nearly frozen-in magneti (cid:28)eld lines by the ambient veloity (cid:28)eld, whih is random and spatially

smooth, with a growth rate of the order of the inverse visous eddy-turnover time. The strething of the magneti (cid:28)eld

ampli(cid:28)es exponentially the (cid:28)eld strength, at the rate of turbulent strething, and produes dynamially signi(cid:28)ant

(cid:28)elds before the large-sale (cid:28)elds an grow appreiably [8℄. The advetion of the (cid:28)eld then spreads the magneti

energy over a sub-visous range of sales and piles it up at the resistive sale. Below that sale, di(cid:27)usion dominates

and auses an exponential deay of the energy. This fast dynamo mehanism, due to strething and folding, generates

magneti (cid:28)eld lines whih remain straight and fairly well-aligned. Similarly, passive salar mixing in the Bathelor

regime gives rise to the so-alled ollinear anomaly [9℄ (see further for details). The fundamental di(cid:27)erene between

the fast small-sale magneto-dynamo and the elasti turbulene lies in what happens when the small-sale magneti

(cid:28)eld beomes su(cid:30)iently strong for the Lorentz fore to reat bak on the (cid:29)ow. The di(cid:27)erent dissipation mehanism

in the two systems leads to a di(cid:27)erent saturation mehanism. In the latter system, saturation is reahed when the

dynamo strething that produes the feedbak on the veloity (cid:28)eld and the homogeneous linear damping balane,

whereas this balane is missing in the former ase.

The mirosopi phenomenon responsible for the marosopi elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow of dilute polymer solutions

is the so-alled oil-streth transition, disussed originally by Lumley [10℄ and then elaborated by de Gennes [11℄.

The essene of the oil-streth transition is as follows: all the polymer moleules are normally, in absene of a (cid:29)ow

gradient, oiled into ompat and nearly spherial tangles with radii muh smaller than the total polymer length.

In the presene of random (cid:29)ow gradients, the polymer moleules are deformed into ellipsoid-like tangles. The mean

3

deformation is moderate as long as the strething rate of the (cid:29)ow is smaller than the inverse polymer relaxation time.

When the strething rate exeeds the inverse polymer relaxation time, most of the moleules are strongly strethed

to sizes up to the order of the total polymer length, sine strething is limited only by non-linear e(cid:27)ets and bak

reation of the (cid:29)ow. There is an abrupt hange in the polymer onformation ourring at large strething rates,

alled the oil-streth transition. The transition has remarkable marosopi onsequenes. While in the oiled state

the in(cid:29)uene of polymers on the (cid:29)ow is negligible and the polymer solutions an be treated as Newtonian (cid:29)uids

(without memory), in the strethed state polymers produe an essential feedbak on the (cid:29)ow, and the properties of

the solution beome strongly non-Newtonian. Let us stress that the oil-streth transition an our even at small

Reynolds numbers or at low level of hydrodynami nonlinearity. The elastiity of the polymers itself (whih manifests

itself above the oil-streth transition) is a soure of nonlinearity. This explains how a haoti state, whih requires a

high level of nonlinearity, an arise even at low Re in elasti turbulene.

Another important harateristi of the elasti turbulene regime to be investigated is the saling of the veloity

(cid:28)eld. The power spetrum of veloity (cid:29)utuations measured in the experiments [2, 3℄ shows a power-law behavior f −δ
with δ > 3, where f is the frequeny. Sine the power spetrum deays strongly with the frequeny (and thus with

the wave number), the (cid:29)utuations of the veloity and of the veloity gradients are both determined by the integral

sale, i.e. the size of the vessel. This explains why elasti turbulene is essentially a smooth random (cid:29)ow, dominated

by the strong nonlinear interation of few large-sale modes. A theoretial explanation of the power veloity spetrum

was provided by Fouxon and Lebedev [7, 12℄. The spetrum k−δ

with δ > 3 implies that elasti turbulene (cid:29)ow an

be assimilated to a Bathelor regime (cid:29)ow, i.e. a temporally random and spatially smooth (cid:29)ow [13℄. This type of a

random (cid:29)ow appears in hydrodynami turbulene below the dissipation sale.

In a spatially smooth (cid:29)ow, veloity di(cid:27)erenes are proportional to distanes between two (cid:29)uid partiles. As a

result, partiles separate or approah exponentially in time. The statistis of strething and ontration of the (cid:29)uid

element an be desribed by the formalism of dynamial systems, using the notion of Lyapunov exponents that are

the exponential rates of divergene. The number of the Lyapunov exponents is equal to spae dimensionality, and

they are ordered in suh a way that the (cid:28)rst Lyapunov exponent is the largest and desribes the separation rate of

two (cid:29)uid partiles. Based on the Lagrangian approah, the so-alled ollinear anomaly was predited ((cid:28)rst, within

the Kraihnan model and then for the general ase): a spatially smooth (cid:29)ow loally preserves straight lines [9℄. This

anomaly, translated into the spatial distribution of the passive salar, suggests that parallel strips are the ma jor

strutural elements in the Bathelor regime. The ollinear anomaly is also the soure of strong intermitteny and

of the absene of sale invariane observed at sales larger than the foring sale [9℄. This simple yet fundamental

feature was observed experimentally for a passive salar in elasti turbulene [2, 4, 14℄.

Suh a Bathelor (cid:29)ow is therefore an e(cid:30)ient mixer due to the exponential divergene of Lagrangian tra jetories.

This property was diretly on(cid:28)rmed experimentally in urvilinear hannel (cid:29)ows of polymer solutions, where elasti

turbulene was exited [4, 14℄. The passive salar (dye) mixing had there an exponential harater along the hannel.

Additionally, the Lagrangian tehnique was used (a) to predit the exponential tails of the passive salar distribution

funtion in the steady regime, as was later on(cid:28)rmed experimentally and numerially; (b) to aount for a omplex

interplay between Lagrangian strething and di(cid:27)usion, thus showing that the PDF of the salar dissipation (cid:28)eld

has a strethed-exponential tail [15℄; () to explain strong intermitteny in the salar deay problem [16, 17℄, where

the deay rate is exponential in time and the exponent saturates to a onstant for high-order moments. While the

experiment [4℄ on(cid:28)rmed the exponent saturation, it ontradited some other onlusions of the theory developed

for in(cid:28)nite domains [16, 17℄. This observation motivated theorists to develop a new (and muh-needed) theory of

mixing in (cid:28)nite vessels [18℄. This theory explained that long-time properties of salar deay are determined by the

stagnation regions of the (cid:29)ow, in partiular boundary layers. A nontrivial dependene of the deay rate on di(cid:27)usivity

was predited, as remarkably on(cid:28)rmed by the experiment on mixing in elasti turbulene [14℄. These experimental

disoveries and subsequent theoretial developments show the need to readjust the thinking in fundamental (cid:29)uid

mehanis (that mixing of highly visous (cid:29)uids is di(cid:30)ult) but also open up a whole new world of pratial appliations.

Elasti turbulene gives the possibility to dramatially inrease mixing rates (and, orrespondingly, rates of hemial

reations) of polymer melts in industrial reators and in small-sale (cid:29)ows (via apillaries, for instane). Indeed, to

mix (cid:29)uids e(cid:27)etively one needs irregular motion, whih brings into near ontat distant portions of the (cid:29)uids. This

method of mixing begins to (cid:28)nd appliations in miro(cid:29)uidis and biophysis [19℄. It is likely that Nature itself uses

the trik of small-sale mixing by elasti turbulene. Biologial disoveries and appliations along this diretion are

likely to follow.

In this paper we present experimental results onerning statistis of the injeted power and statistis and struture

of the veloity (cid:28)eld in an elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow, in its bulk as well as near a wall. By using the analogy between passive

salar advetion in the Bathelor regime and advetion of elasti stresses in elasti turbulene, we try to eluidate

the role of the latter, partiularly in onnetion with the intermitteny and skewness of the injeted power statistis,

with the statistis and saturation of rms of vortiity (veloity gradients) in the bulk, and with various properties of

the veloity pro(cid:28)le in the elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow regime, suh as saling and properties of the boundary layer.

Our experimental program addresses the following questions:

(i) Does elasti stress saturate in the bulk as predited theoretially, and what is the saturation value?

(ii) What is the mehanism for pumping energy from the driven plate into the bulk?

(iii) What is the probability distribution of the elasti stresses?

(iv) What is the veloity pro(cid:28)le in the ell, and does an analog of a boundary layer exist?

(v) If the boundary layer exists, whih length sale haraterizes its thikness, and what is the nature of this sale?

(vi) Are there similarities in the statistial and saling behavior with the problem of turbulent advetion of a passive

salar?

The paper is organized as follows. We start the next setion presenting a hydrodynami desription of dilute polymer

solution (cid:29)ows and derive non-dimensional parameters to haraterize the (cid:29)ows that follow from the equations. The

variation of one of these ontrol parameters, responsible for the elasti properties of a (cid:29)uid, an lead to elasti

instability in the swirling (cid:29)ow between two disks, distinguished by the presene of urvilinear tra jetories. The

strething of polymer moleules, leading eventually to the oil-streth transition, is further disussed in setion II B.

The theoretial riterion for the elasti instability in di(cid:27)erent (cid:29)ows, together with its experimental veri(cid:28)ation, are

disussed in setion II C. How this instability is responsible for the senario dubbed elasti turbulene is addressed in

setion II D. The experimental measurement tehniques used to haraterize the (cid:29)ow are presented in setion III A, and

to omplete the basis, the rheometri properties of polymer solutions used are given in setion III B, while previous

experimental observations of elasti instability in the von Karman (cid:29)ow are summarized in setion III C and ompared

to our (cid:28)ndings. In setion IV we give a omplete aount of the results of the measurements. Di(cid:27)erent aspets of

the (cid:29)ow are investigated with di(cid:27)erent tehniques: we onentrate on the statistis of global power (cid:29)utuations in

setion IV A; on the topology of the (cid:29)ow below and above transition and its relation with the observed statistis

in IV B; on pro(cid:28)les of veloity and veloity gradients, and the emergene of boundary layers in setion IV C. All the

new experimental fats are summarized and disussed in in setion IV D, where the role of elasti stress, a reent

theory of elasti turbulene, and omparative onsiderations about elasti versus hydrodynami turbulene are made.

Finally, in setion V the results are summarized and onlusions are drawn.

II. HYDRODYNAMICAL THEORY OF ELASTIC TURBULENCE

A. Hydrodynamial desription of dilute polymer solution (cid:29)ows

Solutions of (cid:29)exible high moleular weight polymers are visoelasti liquids, and di(cid:27)er from Newtonian (cid:29)uids in

many aspets [1℄. The most striking elasti property of polymer solutions is, probably, the dependene of mehanial

stresses on the history of the (cid:29)ow. The stresses do not immediately beome zero when the (cid:29)uid motion stops, but

rather deay with some harateristi relaxation time, λ, whih an be well above a seond. When a polymer solution
is su(cid:30)iently diluted, its stress tensor τ an be divided into two parts, τ = τs + τp . The (cid:28)rst term, τs , is de(cid:28)ned by
the visosity of the Newtonian solvent ηs and by the rate of strain in the (cid:29)ow, τs = ηs[∇ · V + (∇ · V)T ]. The elasti
stress tensor, τp , is due to the polymer moleules, whih are strethed in the (cid:29)ow, and depends on the history of the

(cid:29)ow. The equation of motion for a dilute polymer solution has the form [1℄

∂V
∂t

+ (V · ∇)V = −

∇p
ρ

+

ηs
ρ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

∇2V +

∇ · τs
ρ

,

where p is the pressure and ρ is the density of the (cid:29)uid. One an see that τp enters the equation of motion linearly.
The equation has a non-linear term, (V · ∇)V, whih is inertial in its nature. The Reynolds number Re de(cid:28)nes
the ratio of this non-linear term to the visous dissipative term, ν∇2V. Therefore the degree of non-linearity of
the equation of motion an still be de(cid:28)ned, even for a polymer solution, by the Reynolds number, Re = V Lρ/ηs .
Turbulene in (cid:29)uids at high Re is a paradigm for strongly nonlinear phenomena in spatially extended systems [5, 20℄.
The simplest model inorporating the elasti nature of the polymer stress tensor, τp , is a Maxwell type onstitutive

equation [1℄ with a single relaxation time, λ,

τp + λ

= ηp[∇·V + (∇·V)T ] .

Dτp
Dt

4

(1)

(2)

5

(3)

Here Dτp/Dt is the material time derivative of the polymer stress, and ηp = η − ηs is the polymer ontribution to
the total visosity η . An appropriate expression for the time derivative Dτp/Dt has to take into aount that the

stress is arried by (cid:29)uid elements, whih move, rotate and deform in the (cid:29)ow. The translational motion implies an

advetion term (V · ∇)τp , while the rotation and deformation of the (cid:29)uid partiles leads to ontributions like (∇ · V)τp
or τp(∇ · V) [1℄. Therefore, some nonlinear terms, in whih τp is oupled to V, appear in the onstitutive relation
along with terms linear in them. A simple model equation for Dτp/Dt, whih is ommonly used for desription of

dilute polymer solutions, is the upper onveted time derivative,

Dτp
Dt

=

∂τp
∂t

+ (V · ∇)τp − τp(V · ∇) − (∇ · V)T τp .

The equations (2,3) together with the expression for τs onstitute the Oldroyd-B rheologial model of polymer solu-
tions [1℄. One an see that the nonlinear terms in the onstitutive equation (Eqs. (2,3)) are all of the order λ(V /L)τp .
The ratio of those non-linear terms to the linear relaxation term, τp , that represents dissipation, is given by a dimen-
sionless expression λ(V /L), alled the Weissenberg number, W i, and expresses the ratio of the relaxation time to the
harateristi (cid:29)ow time. The relaxation term τp is somewhat analogous to the dissipation term in the Navier-Stokes

equation.

One an expet mehanial properties of the polymer solutions to beome notably nonlinear at su(cid:30)iently large

Weissenberg numbers. Indeed, quite a few e(cid:27)ets originating from the nonlinear polymer stresses have been known for

a long time [1℄. In the simple shear (cid:29)ow of a polymer solution, there is a di(cid:27)erene between normal stresses along the

diretion of the (cid:29)ow and along the diretion of veloity gradient. At low shear rates, the (cid:28)rst normal stress di(cid:27)erene,

N1 , is proportional to the square of the shear rate. For urvilinear (cid:29)ow lines, this gives rise to a volume fore ating

on the liquid in the diretion of the urvature, alled the (cid:16)hoop stress(cid:17). Therefore, if a rotating rod is inserted in

an open vessel with a highly elasti polymer solution, the liquid starts to limb up on the rod, instead of being

pushed outwards by the entrifugal fore. This phenomenon is known as (cid:16)rod limbing(cid:17), or (cid:16)Weissenberg e(cid:27)et(cid:17) [1℄.

Furthermore, in a purely elongational (cid:29)ow the resistane of a polymer solution depends on the rate of extension in a

strongly nonlinear way. There is a sharp growth in the elasti stresses when the rate of extension exeeds 1/λ, that
is at W i > 1. As a result, the apparent visosity of a dilute polymer solution in elongational (cid:29)ow an inrease by up

to three orders of magnitude [21℄. Both the Weissenberg e(cid:27)et and the growth of the extensional (cid:29)ow resistane were

most learly observed in visous polymer solutions and in (cid:29)ows with quite low Re, when nonlinear inertial e(cid:27)ets are

insigni(cid:28)ant [1℄.

If there are two potential soures of nonlinearity in the hydrodynami equations for a dilute polymer solution

(Eqs. (1,3)), inertial and elasti, a natural question arises: how is the hydrodynamial stability of a (cid:29)ow a(cid:27)eted by

eah nonlinear ontribution? With respet to the values of two non-dimensional parameters, Re and W i, four ases
an be onsidered in visoelasti hydrodynamis. If both Re and W i are smaller than unity, the (cid:29)ow is steady and
laminar. Then in the limit of negligible W i and su(cid:30)iently large Re, the (cid:29)ow loses its stability only beause of the

inertial nonlinearity, whih is muh larger than the visous dissipation, and it evolves into the regime of inertial or

hydrodynami turbulene of a Newtonian (cid:29)uid. This remains true as long as the relaxation time λ is su(cid:30)iently small
and the value of W i remains negligible even at the large loal veloity gradients appearing in turbulent (cid:29)ow. The
ase of both large Re and W i is ommonly realized in the hydrodynami turbulene of (cid:29)uids with small additions of

long polymer moleules. In suh situation the most striking e(cid:27)et observed is that of turbulent drag redution. The

last and less disussed ase is that of large W i and negligibly small Re, and is the sub jet of this paper.

At (cid:28)rst, it is not trivial to realize that some kind of turbulent (cid:29)ow, driven solely by the nonlinear elasti stresses,

may exist in the absene of any signi(cid:28)ant inertial e(cid:27)ets, at low Re. An important step in this diretion was made

about a deade and a half ago, when purely elasti instabilities were experimentally identi(cid:28)ed in the rotational (cid:29)ow

between two plates [22℄ and in the Couette-Taylor (CT) (cid:29)ow between two ylinders [23℄.

B. Polymer extension in random (cid:29)ows

Reently Lumley's theory [10℄ was revised, and a quantitative theory of the oil-streth transition of a polymer

moleule in a 3D random (cid:29)ow was developed [24, 25℄. The dynamis of a polymer moleule are indeed sensitive to the

motion of the (cid:29)uid at the dissipation sale, where the veloity (cid:28)eld is spatially smooth and random in time. On this

sale, polymer strething is determined solely by the veloity gradient tensor, ∇iVj , whih varies randomly in time
and spae: ∂tRi = Rj∇jVi − Ri/λ(R) + ζi . Here Ri are the end-to-end vetor and R is the end-to-end distane for the
strethed polymer moleule, respetively; λ(R) is the polymer relaxation time, whih is R-dependent, and ζi is the
thermal noise. At R ≪ Rmax , where Rmax is the maximum end-to-end strethed polymer length, the linear regime
of polymer relaxation is haraterized by the polymer relaxation time λrel = λ( ˙γ = 0). For moleules signi(cid:28)antly

more elongated than in the oiled state one an use, e.g., the FENE model with λ(R) = λ( ˙γ = 0)(1 − R2/R2
max) [1℄.
In a 3D random (cid:29)ow, ∇iVj has always an eigenvalue with a positive real part, so that there exists a diretion with

a pure elongation (cid:29)ow [26℄. The diretion and the rate of the elongation (cid:29)ow hange randomly, as the (cid:29)uid element

rotates and moves along the Lagrangian tra jetory. If ∇iVj remains orrelated within (cid:28)nite time intervals, the overall

statistially averaged strething of the (cid:29)uid element will inrease exponentially fast in time. The rate of the strething

is determined by the maximal Lyapunov exponent, α, of the turbulent (cid:29)ow, whih is the average logarithmi rate of
separation of two initially lose tra jetories. The value of α is usually of the order of the rms of the (cid:29)utuations of

6

the veloity gradient,

.

rms

∂Vi
∂rj (cid:17)

(cid:16)

≡

∂Vi
∂rj (cid:17)

(cid:16)

1/2

2

rms

λ

∂Vi
∂rj (cid:17)

(cid:16)

The strething of a polymer moleule follows the deformation of the (cid:29)uid element surrounding it. As a result, the

statistis of polymer elongations in a random smooth (cid:29)ow depends ritially on the value of λ · α (or equivalently

), whih plays the role of a loal Weissenberg number for a random (cid:29)ow, W i′

. Aording to the theory [10,

24℄, the polymer moleules should beome greatly strethed, if the ondition λ·α > 1 is satis(cid:28)ed. Thus, the oil-streth
transition is de(cid:28)ned by the relation λcr · α = 1, similarly to that in an elongation (cid:29)ow with the strain rate α [11℄. A

somewhat surprising onlusion of the theory is that a generi random (cid:29)ow is, in average, an extensional (cid:29)ow in every

point, with the rate of extension ˙ε = α and unlimited Henky strain. A dramati extension of the (cid:29)exible polymer

moleules in the turbulent (cid:29)ow environment, inferred here from bulk measurements of the (cid:29)ow resistane, has been

reently on(cid:28)rmed by the diret visualization of individual polymer moleules in a random (cid:29)ow [27℄.

An appropriate way of desribing the oil-streth transition employs the probability distribution funtion (PDF)

of polymer elongations. Below the oil-streth transition, the distribution is peaked near the equilibrium tangle size,

determined by thermal (cid:29)utuations. Above the oil-streth transition, the distribution of polymer sizes is hanged,

and beomes peaked at an extension of the order of the total polymer length. The position of the peak is determined

by an interplay between the strething rate, the polymer nonlinearity, and the feedbak of the polymers on the

(cid:29)ow. In a random (cid:29)ow, the distribution has an extended (power law) tail related to strething events that overome

polymer relaxation, ausing an essential extension of the polymer moleule. The harateristis of the PDF tails and

their relation to the Lagrangian (cid:29)ow dynamis were theoretially examined in the work by Balkovsky, Fouxon, and

Lebedev [24℄. Aording to their reent theory, the tail of PDF of moleular extensions is desribed by the power law

−β−1
, where β ∼ (λ−1 − α) in the viinity of the transition. A positive β orresponds to the ma jority of the
P (Ri) ∼ R
i
polymer moleules being non-strethed. On the ontrary, at β < 0 a signi(cid:28)ant fration of the moleules is strongly

strethed, and their size is limited by the feedbak reation of the polymers on the (cid:29)ow [24℄ and by the non-linearity

of the moleular elastiity [25℄. Thus, the ondition β = 0 an be interpreted too as the riterion for the oil-streth

transition in turbulent (cid:29)ows [24℄.

To verify this theoretial piture, experimental studies of polymer strething in a 3D random (cid:29)ow between two

rotating disks were onduted in maro- and miro-setups [6, 27℄. It was experimentally shown that elasti turbulene

as a marosopi phenomenon is tied to the oil-streth transition of polymer moleules that ours on a mirosopi

level [27℄. In the mirosopi experiment [27℄, the size distribution of DNA moleules in the elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow

was diretly measured by optial visualization methods. The validity of the riterion for the oil-streth transition

was quantitatively veri(cid:28)ed in the experiment by the analysis of both the veloity (cid:28)eld in the Lagrangian frame (via

statistis of the Lyapunov exponents, whih de(cid:28)nes the average α), and of statistis of single moleule strething in

the same (cid:29)ow [27℄. A good agreement between theory and experiment was found, both onerning the shape of the

polymer size distribution and the funtional form of its tails.

C. Elasti instability and its experimental investigation

During the past deade, the purely elasti instabilities in visoelasti (cid:29)uids have been the sub jet of many theoretial

and experimental studies, whih are partially reviewed in Ref. [28, 29℄. Purely elasti instabilities of visoelasti

(cid:29)ows our at W i of order unity and vanishingly small Re. As a result of the instability, seondary vortex (cid:29)ows are

developed [23℄, and the (cid:29)ow resistane inreases [22℄. The analysis on(cid:28)rmed that the nonlinear mehanial properties

of the polymer solution an indeed lead to a (cid:29)ow instability, for whih a simple mehanism was proposed. After the

pioneering work by Larson, Muller and Shaqfeh [23, 30℄, purely elasti instabilities were also found in other shear

(cid:29)ows with urvilinear streamlines. Those inluded the (cid:29)ow between a rotating one and a plate and the Taylor-Dean

(cid:29)ow [28, 29℄. The original mehanism proposed in Ref. [30℄ was veri(cid:28)ed experimentally in Ref. [31℄. The original

theoretial analysis of Ref. [30℄ was re(cid:28)ned, and more elaborate experiments were arried out. A few new mehanisms

of (cid:29)ow instability driven by nonlinear elasti stresses were suggested for those geometries.

The most thorough and detailed studies were onduted on the Couette-Taylor (CT) (cid:29)ow between two oaxial

ylinders.

In spite of the fat that instabilities in visoelasti (cid:29)uids were studied for deades, the purely elasti

7

(4)

instability in CT (cid:29)ow was (cid:28)rst investigated both experimentally and theoretially rather reently [23, 30℄. The

mehanism of the elasti instability in the CT system suggested in Ref. [30℄ is based on the Oldroyd-B model. The

primary (cid:29)ow in the CT system with the inner ylinder rotating (Couette (cid:29)ow) is a pure shear (cid:29)ow in the rθ-plane
that generates a normal stress di(cid:27)erene N1 ≡ τθθ − τrr = 2ηpλ( ˙γrθ)2
and a radial fore N1/r per unit volume. Here
r, θ are the ylindrial oordinates in the plane perpendiular to the ylinder axis, τθθ and τrr are the omponents of
the polymer stress tensor τp , and ˙γrθ is the only non-zero omponent of the rate-of-strain tensor, ˙γ . A seondary (cid:29)ow
in the CT (cid:29)ow inludes regions of elongational (cid:29)ow in the r-diretion with ˙ǫ ≡ ∂vr/∂r 6= 0. The radial extensional
(cid:29)ow strethes the polymer maromoleular oils in the r-diretion, though it is a small perturbation on top of the

azimuthal strething produed by the primary shear (cid:29)ow. However, when strethed in the radial diretion, the

maromoleular oils beome more suseptible to the basi shear (cid:29)ow. The oupling between the radial and shear

(cid:29)ow leads to further inrease of shear stresses. Thus, it results in further strething of the polymer in the θ-diretion

that generates an additional normal stress di(cid:27)erene. So, the elasti instability mehanism is based on the oupling

between the perturbative radial elongation (cid:29)ow and the strong azimuthal shear (cid:29)ow, whih results in a radial fore.

The latter reinfores the radial (cid:29)ow. As pointed out in Ref. [31℄, this transition an be only a (cid:28)nite amplitude ((cid:28)rst

order) transition. The orresponding riterion of the instability is

K ≡

ηp
ηs

d
R1

W i2 = O(1).

Here d and R1 are the gap and the inner ylinder radius, respetively. The Weissenberg number is de(cid:28)ned here
as W i = λΩR/d, where Ω is angular veloity of the rotating inner ylinder. (It was termed as the Deborah number
in some of the original texts [30, 31, 32℄). The elasti instability ours when the parameter K exeeds a ertain
threshold value [30℄. This riterion is valid at su(cid:30)iently small values of the polymer visosity ratio, ηp/ηs , and in
the limit of small gap ratio d/R1 . A more general expression is given in Ref. [30℄. When both ratios are (cid:28)xed, the
elasti instability is de(cid:28)ned only by the ritial Weissenberg number W ic .

As was suggested in Ref. [32℄, where the CT (cid:29)ow was disussed, there is some analogy between (cid:29)ow transitions

driven by elastiity and by inertia. The inertially driven Taylor instability ours at onstant Taylor number [5, 20℄,

T a = d

R1 Re2

, while the elasti instability is ontrolled by the parameter K of Eq. (4) [30, 31℄. For the visoelasti ase,

the Weissenberg number appears to be analogous to the Reynolds number. The geometri parameter determining

urvature, d/R1 , enters the expressions for both T a and K . Sales of time and veloity for the purely elasti (cid:29)ow
transition are given by λ and d/λ, respetively. As it was shown in Ref. [32℄ they are analogous to tvd , the visous
di(cid:27)usion time de(cid:28)ned as tvd = d2/ν , and to d/tvd , whih provide harateristi sales of time and veloity for the

inertially driven (cid:29)ow transitions.

Beyond the analogy, there are important di(cid:27)erenes between the (cid:29)ow transitions driven by inertia and by elastiity.

It is an experimental fat that any laminar (cid:29)ow of a Newtonian (cid:29)uid beomes unstable at su(cid:30)iently high Re,

and all high Reynolds number (cid:29)ows are turbulent. That inludes retilinear shear (cid:29)ows, suh as the Poiseuille (cid:29)ow

in a irular pipe, and the plane Couette (cid:29)ow, whih are known to be linearly stable at any Re.

In ontrast to

it, purely elasti (cid:29)ow instabilities in shear (cid:29)ows have been observed so far only in systems with urvilinear stream

lines. All these instabilities are supposed to be driven by the hoop stress, whih originates from the normal stress

di(cid:27)erenes. Reently, the authors of Ref. [33℄ presented theoretial arguments and numerial evidene for nonlinear

instability in visoelasti plane Couette (cid:29)ow. This theory is waiting its experimental veri(cid:28)ation and still remains

quite ontroversial.

The di(cid:27)erene between the inertial and elasti instabilities originates, of ourse, from the distint governing equa-

tions. There are, however, some purely pratial fators that an explain rather well the lak of observations of

purely elasti (cid:29)ow transitions in retilinear shear (cid:29)ows. Inertial instabilities in retilinear shear (cid:29)ows of Newtonian

(cid:29)uids our at quite high Reynolds numbers. These are typially about two orders of magnitude higher than Re at

whih urvilinear shear (cid:29)ows with large gap ratios beome unstable. A priori, one may suggest that retilinear and

urvilinear shear (cid:29)ows would have a similar relation between W i at thresholds of the purely elasti (cid:29)ow instabilities
as well. The problem is that, while it is rather easy to generate high Re (cid:29)ows with Newtonian (cid:29)uids of low visosity, it
is usually impossible to reah the orresponding high values of W i in shear (cid:29)ows of elasti polymer solutions. That is,

there are always rather severe pratial limitations restriting nonlinearity in elasti polymer stresses in shear (cid:29)ows,

suh as rapid polymer degradation at high W i.

A purely elasti instability, apparently due to a similar mehanism, also ours in other rotational shear (cid:29)ows,

namely onentri one-and-plate and plate-and-plate geometries, whih are ommon geometrial on(cid:28)gurations for

rheologial tests. In these ases the seondary (cid:29)ow is also driven by a "hoop stress" and by the oupling between the

primary shear (cid:29)ow and seondary elongation (cid:29)ow in the axial diretion. Historially, a transition in the rheologial

measurement was (cid:28)rst observed experimentally in these geometries [22℄, and Magda and Larson suggested that it

had to be asribed to an elasti (cid:29)ow instability. Complete sets of numerial and experimental studies of the elasti

instability in these (cid:29)ows for small aspet ratio vessels were arried on in Ref. [34, 35, 36℄. Due to the more ompliated

(cid:29)ow struture than in CT (cid:29)ow, no analyti expression for the stability riterion is available in either ase. However,

some features ommon for all rotational shear (cid:29)ows an be pointed out. For all systems with a small aspet ratio, the

threshold of the elasti instability depends on the aspet ratio that is de(cid:28)ned di(cid:27)erently in eah ase. The instability

riterion also depends on the visosity ratio, though the funtional form of this dependene was found only in the CT

(cid:29)ow. In all systems, the most unstable mode is non-axisymmetri and osillatory and the transition is disontinuous

or of the (cid:28)rst order (inverse bifuration).

D. Theory of the elasti turbulene and role of the elasti stress

Let us onsider now the limiting ase of W i ≫ 1 and Re ≪ 1. Along with the apparent similarity in phenomenology

of both elasti and inertial turbulene, there are also many very important distintions. One similarity is re(cid:29)eted

by the fat that the Weissenberg number, whih ats as the ontrol parameter in elasti turbulene, depends on the

system size and on the (cid:29)uid visosity, like the Reynolds number in hydrodynami turbulene. Indeed, the saling of

the main harateristis of the elasti turbulene with the system size, (cid:29)uid veloity, and visosity is distintly di(cid:27)erent

from hydrodynami turbulene. For instane, it has been shown that with enough elastiity, one an exite turbulent

motion at arbitrary low veloities and in arbitrarily small vessels [2, 3℄. An obvious reason for the di(cid:27)erene in salings

in the two senarios is that the physial mehanisms whih underlie the two kinds of turbulent motion are themselves

di(cid:27)erent. As it is well known, the high (cid:29)ow resistane in inertial turbulene is due to large Reynolds stresses. The

Reynolds stress tensor is de(cid:28)ned as the average value of ρ hViVj i, where Vi and Vj are di(cid:27)erent omponents of the
(cid:29)ow veloity. In the ase of elasti turbulene, the Reynolds stresses are quite small, sine Re is low. It follows that
the high (cid:29)ow resistane in elasti turbulene an only be due to the large elasti stresses, τp [6℄.

As we have already pointed out, the statistial properties of a turbulent elasti (cid:29)ow and the inrease in the

ontribution of the elasti stresses to the (cid:29)ow resistane, are assoiated with the signi(cid:28)ant polymer strething in

the random (cid:29)ow. To support this theoretial idea, some experimental studies of polymer strething in a 3D random

(cid:29)ow between two plates were onduted in maro- and miro-setups [6, 27℄. The (cid:28)rst experiment was performed in

a swirling (cid:29)ow set-up with the high aspet ratio R/d = 1, where R = 30 mm, using a very visous solvent with
ηs = 1.36 Pa·s to suppress inertia [6℄. By experimental analysis and estimates of the ontributions of the Reynolds,

visous, and elasti stresses to the shear stress at the upper plate, we found that the Reynolds stress aounts for

less than 0.1% of the whole stresses, and that the visous stress is rather onstant. So, as a result of a seondary

random 3D (cid:29)ow superimposed on an applied primary shear (cid:29)ow between two plates, the polymer ontribution to the

shear stress inreases as muh as 170 times. If one assumes a linear elastiity of the (cid:29)ow-strethed polymer moleules

(polyarylamide, in this ase), then the elasti stress auses an extension by 13 times [6℄.

The moleular theory of polymer dynamis tells that τp is proportional to the polymer onentration, n, and to the
average polymer onformation tensor, τp,ij ∼ n hRiRji [1℄. Then, a signi(cid:28)ant inrease in the ontribution of τp to

the (cid:29)ow resistane in the elasti turbulene is assoiated, on a mirosopi level, with signi(cid:28)ant polymer strething

in a random (cid:29)ow [10, 24, 25℄.

The ruial theoretial step towards the desription of elasti turbulene relates the dynamis of τp to the dynamis
of a vetor (cid:28)eld with a linear damping [7, 12, 37℄. The elasti stress tensor an be written as uniaxial, i.e. τik = BiBk ,
if the ontribution of thermal (cid:29)utuations and polymer nonlinearity to τp an be negleted [12℄. Then, one an write
an equation for Bi in a form whih is similar to the equation for magneti (cid:28)eld in magneto-hydrodynamis (MHD) [7℄.

Thus, in the ase of a visoelasti (cid:29)ow, one gets:

∂tB + (V · ∇)B = (B·∇)V − B/λ.

The di(cid:27)erene with MHD lies only in the relaxation term that replaes the di(cid:27)usion term. As already mentioned in

the Introdution, elasti turbulene is analogous to a fast small-sale visosity-dominated magneto-dynamo, whih

realizes a sort of low Reynolds number Bathelor regime of turbulene. The latter results from the random strething

of the (nearly) frozen-in magneti (cid:28)eld lines by an adveting random (cid:29)ow. Numerial simulations of the former show

features very similar to those observed in elasti turbulene [8℄. Eq. (5), omplemented by the equation of motion,

written for Re ≪ 1 as

∇P = ρ(B·∇)B + η∇V,

and by appropriate boundary onditions, reveals the elasti instability at W i = W ic > 1 [30, 31℄, where W i = ˙γλ
and ˙γ is the shear rate. At W i > W ic the instability eventually results in haoti, statistially stationary dynamis.

Aording to Ref. [12℄, a statistially steady state ours due to the bak reation of strethed polymers (or the elasti

stresses in Eq.(6)) on the veloity (cid:28)eld, whih leads to a saturation of τp even for linear relaxation. On the other

8

(5)

(6)

9

(7)

hand, the veloity gradients beome smaller with dereasing sale. This means that large-sale (cid:29)utuations (of the

vessel size) are dominant in the (cid:29)ow, and the dynamis are determined by a non-linear interation of modes on sales

of the order of the system size. Assuming that visous and relaxation dissipative terms in Eqs. (5) and (6) are of

the same order, one gets that the veloity gradients on the small sale, being (cid:28)xed by the stationarity onditions for

statistis, are of the order of λ−1

[12℄. So, the elasti stress an be estimated as

τp = B2 ∼ (η/ρ)∇iVj ∼

η/ρ
λ

.

The (cid:29)utuating veloity vetor and the stress tensor (cid:28)eld (or B) an both be deomposed into large, V and B , and
small, v and B′
power-like deaying spetrum for the elasti stress, whih in spherial representation looks like hB′
where δ > 3.

ji ∼ F (k) ∼ k−δ
j = ∇ivj ) is the passive (cid:28)eld in the problem. The

It is lear that the (cid:28)eld B′

i (and so (cid:28)eld B′

iB′

iB′

, sale omponents. The analysis of the equations for the small-sale (cid:29)utuations of both (cid:28)elds leads to a

,

mehanism of strething and folding of the elasti stress (cid:28)eld by a random adveting (cid:29)ow, with the key dynamo e(cid:27)et

and homogeneous attenuation of the stress (cid:28)eld [37℄, is rather general. It leads to the power-law spetrum for small-

sale (cid:29)utuations of B′

in a haoti (cid:29)ow, and is diretly related to the lassial Bathelor regime of mixing [26℄, where

a passive salar is adveted by a (cid:29)ow whih is spatially smooth and random in time. A linear relation between the

small-sale (cid:29)utuations of the (cid:28)elds B′
whih, in spherial representation looks again like E(k) ∼ k−δ
values δ = 3.3 ÷ 3.6 [2, 3, 38, 39℄. Sine the veloity spetrum deays faster than k−3

and v allows one to establish the power-law spetrum of for the veloity too,
, where δ > 3. This agrees well with the experimental

, the powers of both the veloity

and of the veloity gradients are determined essentially by the vessel size; therefore elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow is spatially

smooth, strongly orrelated on the global sale, and random in time. That is also the main feature of the Bathelor

regime, in whih smoothness in spae and randomness in time (cid:29)ow are observed below the dissipative sale [26℄.

We would like to emphasize that hydrodynami turbulene instead exhibits spatially rough (cid:29)ow on all sales above

the visous ut-o(cid:27), and annot be approximated by a linear veloity (cid:28)eld. Moreover, in ontrast to hydrodynami

inertial turbulene, the algebrai deay of the power spetrum in elasti turbulene is not related to the energy asade

nor to any onservation law, sine the main energy dissipation ours at the largest sales. The mehanism leading

to the algebrai power spetra for the elasti stress and the veloity in this ase is related to the advetion and linear

deay aompanied by strething of the (cid:29)uid element arrying the elasti stress. The fast deay of the (cid:29)utuation

power spetrum with k implies a veloity (cid:28)eld, where the main ontribution to deformation and stirring (strething

and folding) at all sales omes from a randomly (cid:29)utuating (cid:29)ow (cid:28)eld at the largest sale of the system. The suggested

mehanism for the generation of small sale (high k) (cid:29)utuations in the elasti stress is the advetion of the (cid:29)uid

(whih arries the stress) by this (cid:29)utuating large sale veloity (cid:28)eld. The theory onsiders the elasti stress tensor

being passively adveted in a random veloity (cid:28)eld, just as the passively adveted vetor B′

in the magneti dynamo

theory [7℄.

The smoothness of the veloity (cid:28)eld in elasti turbulene was experimentally tested by investigating the shape of

the ross-orrelation funtions of the veloity (cid:28)eld [13℄. It was found there that the seond order spatial derivative

of the veloity (cid:28)eld is roughly an order of magnitude smaller than the (cid:28)rst one. Thus, a linear veloity (cid:28)eld (loally

uniform rate of strain) is a good loal approximation for the veloity (cid:28)eld in elasti turbulene [13℄.

III. EXPERIMENTAL

A. Experimental set-up and proedure.

The experiments were onduted in the apparatus shematially shown in Fig.1. It onsists of a stationary ylindrial

ontainer C, with radius Rc , mounted on the basis of a ommerial rheometer (AR-1000 from TA Instruments) and
a rotating disk D, with radius Rd , mounted onentrially on the shaft of the rheometer.

In order to hek the

sensitivity of the results with respet to the geometrial aspet ratio and to explore a broad range of Weissenberg

numbers, two versions of this setup were used: the (cid:28)rst had Rc = 2.2cm, Rd = 2cm and height d = 1cm, and the
seond had Rc = 4.9cm, Rd = 4.7cm and d = 1cm. The two setups will be further referred to as setup 1 and setup
2. The ylinder C was (cid:28)lled with (cid:29)uid just up to the disk, whose lower side only was wet.

In order to provide

thermal stabilization, the whole rheometer was plaed in a thermally isolated box with through (cid:29)ow of temperature

ontrolled air. The rheometer mehanism allowed preise ontrol (within 0.5%) of the angular veloity Ω of the disk,
and simultaneous measurements of the applied torque T (Ω-foring mode), or onversely (cid:21) ontrol (within 0.5%) of T
and measurements of Ω (T -foring mode). The average shear stress at the upper plate, τw , was alulated using the
equation T = τw

d). (The integration is arried over the upper plate surfae).

rdS , that gave τw ≡ 3T /(2πR3

R

10

Figure 1: Overview of the swirling (cid:29)ow apparatus: C-(cid:29)uid ontainer, D-rotating disk, AR-1000-rheometer, CO-ylindrial

optis, L-laser, M-plane mirror, CCD-digital amera, P-LDV probe, BSA-burst spetrum analyzer, PMT-photomultiplier.

for setup 1, and about 84µN · m · s2

The moment of inertia of the shaft of the rheometer was Is ≈ 14µN · m · s2

and that of the upper plate, Id , was
about 61µN · m · s2
for setup 2. The auray of the angular speed measurements
in onstant torque mode is about 2% and the auray of the torque measurements in the onstant speed mode is
about 1%. One has to point out here that the small rate of the (cid:29)utuations of the angular veloity is not a su(cid:30)ient
riterion to have a onstant speed foring. In the Ω-mode, for instane, (Is + Id) ∂Ω
the typial values of torque, T .

∂t should also be muh smaller than

To obtain a detailed haraterization of both the spatial struture and the temporal evolution of the (cid:29)ow-(cid:28)elds, three

di(cid:27)erent experimental tehniques have been alternatively used: partile image veloimetry (PIV), partile traking

veloimetry (PTV) and laser Doppler veloimetry (LDV). The up C was mahined from a single piee of optially

lear perspex, to allow side and bottom view. The up had a irular inner and a square outer horizontal ross-setion

(i.e. (cid:29)at sides) in order to insure a distortion free illumination, and was attahed to the rheometer base in suh a way

that view from below was possible through a mirror M, tilted by 45◦
. As (cid:29)ow traers, we have used 10µm (cid:29)uoresent
partiles for the PIV and PTV measurements, and 1µm latex beads for the LDV measurements. For PIV and PTV
the system was illuminated laterally by a thin (30µm in the enter of the set-up and about 130µm at the edges of

the set-up) laser sheet through the transparent walls of the (cid:29)uid ontainer at the middle distane between the plates.

The laser sheet was generated by passing a laser beam delivered by a 300mW argon-ion laser, L, through a blok of

two rossed ylindrial lenses, CO, mounted in a telesopi arrangement. The mirror M was used to relay images of

the (cid:29)ow to a CCD amera (PixelFly digital amera from PCO). The amera was equipped with a regular video lens

and mounted horizontally near the rheometer (Fig.1). Images were aquired with 12 bit quantization and resolution

of 640 × 512 pixels at up to 25 frame/se and 1280 × 1024 at up to 12.5 frame/se.

The main tool for the investigation of the (cid:29)ow was the digital PIV tehnique. We aquired series of up to 2000

pairs of (cid:29)ow images with the amera. A ustom development of the amera ontrol software allowed us to adjust the

time delay between onseutive PIV images in relation to the loal (cid:29)ow veloity (in order to keep the mean partile

displaement in the range 5 − 15 pixels). Corresponding to low values of the angular veloity of the upper disk (up to
about 0.4rad/s) the time delay was 540ms and then, gradually dereased down to 40ms. The total data aquisition
time was always longer than the Eulerian orrelation times of the veloity (about 24 times in the fully developed

random regime). Time series of veloity (cid:28)elds were obtained by a multi-pass PIV algorithm [13℄. The auray of

the method was arefully heked by running test experiments with the solvent, in the same range of mean partile

displaements and at similar illumination onditions. Although the instrumental error inreases more or less linearly

with the mean partile displaement, it never exeeded 5% of the mean displaement. The spatial resolution of the
PIV veloity measurements was 0.57mm in setup 1 and 0.89mm in setup 2. By post-proessing the veloity (cid:28)elds,

we obtained the pro(cid:28)les of the veloity omponents, (cid:28)elds of (cid:29)utuations of eah veloity omponent, spatial spetra

11

of the veloity (cid:29)utuations, veloity gradients and their (cid:29)utuations, struture funtions of gradients, and Eulerian

veloity orrelation funtions. The spae-time measurements together with simultaneous global measurements of the

(cid:29)ow resistane provided a rather omplete desription of the di(cid:27)erent (cid:29)ow regimes as a funtion of W i [38, 39, 40℄.

We also examined Lagrangian properties of the (cid:29)ow [41℄. In order to hek the onsisteny of the PIV approah

(partiularly when Lagrangian tra jetories were measured), (cid:29)ow (cid:28)elds have been alternatively investigated with the

PTV tehnique. The (cid:28)rst step of the PTV approah is the aurate partile identi(cid:28)ation in eah (cid:29)ow image, by

orrelation with prototypial partile shapes, whih an be either extrated from (cid:29)ow images, or de(cid:28)ned manually.

Then, tra jetories are reonstruted by joining suessive positions of the same partile on subsequent images. This

has been done by a searh algorithm based on an initial "guess" of the mean (cid:29)ow line.

Although the PIV and PTV tools are very suitable for the investigation of the spatial properties of the (cid:29)ow,

they provide a limited time resolution and statistis. In order to overome this limitation, the LDV tehnique has

alternatively been used. With the LDV tehnique, time series of the (cid:29)uid veloity are measured in a relatively small

volume (typially 100µm × 50µm × 50µm). The setup allowed measurements of one omponent of the veloity by

LDV with two rossing and frequeny shifted beams. By appropriate positioning and orientation of the beam rossing

region, an azimuthal (longitudinal) veloity omponent, Vθ , ould be measured at di(cid:27)erent r and z . Here (r, θ, z) are

the standard ylindrial oordinates. A ommerial LDV system from Dante Dynamis In. was used. Two laser

beams delivered by a probe (P in Fig. 1) are aligned to ross eah other at an angle of θ = 10◦

at some point in the

(cid:29)ow. The light sattered in the bakward diretion by the (cid:29)ow traers present in the (cid:29)ow is olleted by the probe P

and delivered to a photomultiplier, PMT, via a (cid:28)ber opti light guide. The PMT signal is proessed by a real time

burst spetrum analyzer, BSA. The loal (cid:29)ow veloity is proportional to the Doppler shift of the signal. The error

validated veloity data are stored on a omputer via a GPIB line.

Our experiments need to be lassi(cid:28)ed aording to meaningful values of the non-dimensional ontrol parameters Re
and W i, whih depend among the rest on a global shear rate. In a swirling (cid:29)ow between two plates, the shear rate

is quite inhomogeneous over the (cid:29)uid bulk, even when the (cid:29)ow is laminar. Therefore, the hoie of a representative

shear rate beomes somewhat arbitrary. We deided to onsider the simple expression ΩR/d as a harateristi shear
rate, and to de(cid:28)ne the Weissenberg number as W i = λΩR/d. The Reynolds number was de(cid:28)ned as Re = ΩRdρ/η .

B. Rheometri properties of polymer solutions

The polymer used was polyarylamide, PAAm (from Polysienes In.), with a moleular weight Mw = 1.8×107Da,
as used in Ref. [2, 3, 4℄. Our preparation reipe was as follows: (cid:28)rst we dissolved 0.9 g of PAAm powder and 3 g of
NaCl into 275 ml of deionized water by gentle shaking. NaCl was added to (cid:28)x the ioni ontents. Next the solution was
mixed for 3 hours in a ommerial mixer with a propeller at a moderate speed. The rationale for this step is to ause

a ontrolled mehanial degradation of the longest PAAm moleules, in order to "ut" the tail of the moleular weight

distribution of the broadly dispersed PAAm sample. In a solution with a broad distribution of polymer moleular

weights the heaviest moleules, whih are most vulnerable to mehanial degradation, bring the ma jor ontribution

to the solution elastiity, but may break in the ourse of the experiment. This an lead to inonsisteny of the

experimental results. We found empirially that the proedure of pre-degradation in the mixer leads to substantial

redution of degradation during the experiments and to substantial improvement of their onsisteny [3℄. Finally, 9
g of isopropanol was added to the solution (to preserve it from aging) and water was added up to 300 g. The (cid:28)nal
onentrations of PAAm, NaCl and isopropanol in the stok solution were 3000 ppm, 1% and 3%, respetively. This
master solution was used to prepare 80ppm PAAm solution in a Newtonian solvent. The Newtonian solvent was about
65% saharose in water [3℄.

The rheologial properties of the solvent and the polymer solution were measured with two di(cid:27)erent rheometers:

the AR-1000 from TA Instruments around whih the omplete experimental setup was built, and a Vilasti 3 from

Vilasti Sienti(cid:28). The visosity of the solvent was found to be ηs = 114mP a · s at 22oC , and that of the solution
η = 138mP a · s at a shear rate of 2s−1
. The polymer relaxation time λ was measured in osillatory tests at di(cid:27)erent
shear rates, with ˙γ ranging from 0.4s−1
. In the limit of ˙γ → 0 the relaxation time was λ(0) = 4.7 s. The
solution showed a lear "shear thinning" as a funtion of the shear rate with the saling λ ∼ ˙γ−δ
, where δ ≃ 0.3,

to 3.6s−1

similar to what was found earlier for polymer solutions with lower moleular weight PAAm samples [31℄.

C. Experimental observation of elasti instability in von Karman swirling (cid:29)ow

The funtional dependene of the elasti instability threshold on the aspet ratio, ǫ ≡ d/Rc , in a (cid:29)ow between two

plates was (cid:28)rst obtained in the experiment by Magda and Larson [22℄. They found an inverse dependene of the

ritial shear rate ˙γc , or of the ritial Weissenberg number, W ic = ˙γcλ, on the aspet ratio, i.e. W ic ∝ ǫ−1

. The

12

experiment was onduted in the range of low values of ǫ between 0.024 and 0.16. In the later experiments similar
results were obtained in the same range of ǫ by MKinley and ollaborators [34, 35, 36℄. These results were found in
reasonable agreement with numerial alulations. However, these numerial results presented in W ic − ǫ oordinates
an be (cid:28)tted by W ic ∝ ǫ−0.470±0.006
and 1, in odds with the the above mentioned
dependene W ic ∝ ǫ−1

in a wide range of ǫ between 10−3

.

We have investigated experimentally the dependene of the onset of the elasti instability on the aspet ratio of

our setup. By modifying both the radius of the ontainer, Rc , and the distane between plates, d, the aspet ratio ǫ
was varied by about 10 times for a rather wide range of ǫ, between 0.091 and 0.882. The onset values of the angular
veloity, Ωc , were obtained from the dependene of the averaged torque on the angular veloity of the disk (Fig. 2).

By linear approximation of this dependene on both sides of the transition point, the latter an be determined within

reasonable error bars (see Fig. 2a). The Reynolds number orresponding to the onset of the elasti instability, Rec ,

was of the order of unity in both setups, suggesting that the transition is of purely elasti nature. The results of these

measurements together with other parameters are presented in Table I.

Rc(cm) d(cm)

ǫ Ωc(rad/s) ˙γc(s−1) λ( ˙γ)c(s) Wic Rec δWic

1.7

1

0.59

0.64

1.09

4.485

4.9 1.03 1.28

1.7

1.5

0.88

0.51

0.58

5.42

3.13 1.23 1.16

2.2

1

0.45

0.82

1.8

3.85

6.95 1.72 1.19

2.2

0.5

0.23

0.85

3.74

3.1

11.6 0.89 2.45

2.2

0.2

0.091

0.88

9.68

2.33

22.54 0.37 4.94

4.7

0.5

0.106

0.45

4.23

2.98

12.62 1.0

4.6

4.7

1

0.213

0.5

2.35

3.56

8.37 2.24 1.33

4.7

1.5

0.32

0.4

1.25

4.3

5.39 2.7 1.29

Table I: Onset values of the relevant physial quantities orresponding to the primary elasti instability

We remark that the values of the ritial Weissenberg number as a funtion of the aspet ratio obtained from our

experimental results agree fairly well with the linear stability analysis presented in [34, 35, 36℄, as shown in Fig.2b.

On the other hand, the (cid:28)t to the theoretial funtional dependene in a wide range of ǫ between 10−3
W ic ∝ ǫ−0.47

, is quite di(cid:27)erent from that obtained from the experimental data: W ic ∝ ǫ−0.79±0.16

and 1, namely

. This disrepany

an be attributed to the larger aspet ratios experimentally studied by us.

Figure 2: Dependene of the onset of the primary elasti instability on the geometri aspet ratio: (a) Torque as a funtion

of angular veloity for the aspet ratio ǫ = 0.88. The full lines are linear (cid:28)ts. The arrow indiates the onset of the primary

elasti instability. (b) Critial Weissenberg number for the onset of the elasti instability as a funtion of the aspet ratio. The

symbols are (olor online): (blak) squares(cid:21)Rc = 4.7cm, (red) irles(cid:21)Rc = 2.2cm, (yellow) triangles(cid:21)Rc = 1.7cm. The full line
. The dashed line is the (cid:28)t to the numerial result from [34℄, W ic = 0.62 + 5.42ǫ−0.47
is a linear (cid:28)t to the data, W ic = 0.51ǫ−0.79

.

13

Figure 3: (a) Dependene of the saled average power, P /P lam , on the ontrol parameter W i: squares-inreasing W i, irles-
dereasing W i. The full line is a guide for the eye, with slope W i0.49
P
set-up 2 in Ω foring mode.

lam on W i: squares-inreasing W i, irles-dereasing W i. The full line is a power law, W i3.2

/P

rms

rms

. (b) Dependene of the saled rms of the power (cid:29)utuations,

. Data were olleted in

IV. PROPERTIES OF ELASTIC TURBULENCE

A. Power (cid:29)utuations and statistis of the injeted power

One of the main features of the transition to elasti turbulene is the substantial growth of the (cid:29)ow resistane

above the onset of the instability [2, 3℄. In the ase of a von Karman swirling (cid:29)ow, a measure of the (cid:29)ow resistane

is either the power PΩ needed to spin the upper disk at onstant angular speed Ω, or the power PT needed to spin
the upper disk with onstant torque T applied to the shaft of the rheometer. The injeted power is de(cid:28)ned in any
ase as P = T · Ω. In our experiments, due to the smallness of Re < 16, the inertial ontribution was always low.

The dependenies of the redued average injeted power,

wide range of the ontrol parameter W i in the Ω mode are presented in Fig. 3. Here Plam and P rms

lam are the injeted

¯P /Plam and of the rms of its (cid:29)utuations, P rms/P rms

lam , in a

power and its (cid:29)utuations before the onset of the elasti instability.

The data presented in Fig. 3 reveal three distint (cid:29)ow regimes. For low values of the ontrol parameter W i, the
redued injeted power is equal to unity. At W i ≃ W ic , a primary elasti instability ours, resulting in a sharp

inrease of the injeted power and of the rms of its (cid:29)utuations. A further inrease of the ontrol parameter auses

the (cid:29)ow to evolve towards a saling regime, where both the redued average and rms of (cid:29)utuations of the injeted

power sale algebraially with W i (Fig. 3):

¯P /Plam ∝ W i0.49±0.05

and P rms/P rms

lam ∝ W i3.2±0.3

.

The (cid:29)utuations of the injeted power were measured for di(cid:27)erent W i in the elasti turbulene regime in two modes:
Ω-foring is presented in Fig. 4 and T -foring is presented in Fig. 5. For eah value of W i the statistis of the power
(cid:29)utuations was olleted on 180000 data points evenly sampled in time (∆t ≈ 38ms). The time series of the injeted
power at di(cid:27)erent W i for both modes are presented in both (cid:28)gures. In order to avoid mehanial degradation of the

the polymer solution during the long data aquisition times, separate experiments were onduted for eah value of

the ontrol parameter. The loal (in time) average values of the injeted power did not hange signi(cid:28)antly during the

total data aquisition times, suggesting that no ma jor degradation ourred. For low values of the ontrol parameter

in the laminar regime, (W i < W ic ), the power (cid:29)utuations are only due to the instrumental noise. In the elasti

turbulene regime, the PDFs of the power (cid:29)utuations strongly deviate from Gaussian distributions for both foring

modes. The PDFs in the Ω-foring mode have a left side skewness, while in the T -foring mode -a right side skewness.

Sine the (cid:29)utuations of the injeted power re(cid:29)et (cid:29)utuations of the elasti stress averaged over the upper plate, one

an onlude that the statistis of the elasti stress too must strongly deviate from Gaussian, whih is a signature

of intermitteny. The PDFs of the redued power (cid:29)utuations ollapse on a single urve when normalized by their

maximum value (see Fig. 6). Both the dependeny on W i of

¯P /Prms (Fig. 3), and the skewness of the PDF in elasti

turbulene suggest an analogy with similar behavior in hydrodynami turbulene, though the reasons for the e(cid:27)ets

are entirely di(cid:27)erent [42, 43℄.

We further examined the statistis of rare and short time sale events (spikes) in the injeted power series; namely

we tried to quantify the harateristi width of the spikes and the harateristi time between them. To arry out this

analysis, the following proedure was applied. First, all loal minima and maxima were deteted in eah time series.

Then only those minima (in the ase of onstant Ω foring) and those maxima (in the ase of onstant T foring) that
ontribute to the skewness of the orresponding PDFs, are seleted, i.e. those peaks whih are larger than 2P rms
The values of the average time τs between two spikes, normalized by the relaxation time, are presented in Fig. 7(a),
as funtion of W i in both Ω and T modes.

.

14

Figure 4: (a) Time series (partially shown) of the injeted power in onstant Ω foring regime, for di(cid:27)erent W i. The labels
are: (1)-W i = 5, (2)-W i = 19, (3)-W i = 24, (4)-W i = 31.5, (5)-W i = 40. (b) PDF's of the power (cid:29)utuations inΩ-foring
regime for di(cid:27)erent W i. The symbols are (olor online): squares (orange)-W i = 5, left triangles (blak)-W i = 19, up triangles
(red) -W i = 24, diamonds (green)-W i = 31.5, irles (blue)-W i = 40. Data were olleted in setup 2.

Figure 5: (a) Time series (partially shown) of the injeted power in onstant T foring regime for di(cid:27)erent W i. The labels
are: (1)-W i = 5, (2)-W i = 17, (3)-W i = 25, (4)-W i = 34, (5)-W i = 46. (b) PDF's of the power (cid:29)utuations in T -foring
regime for di(cid:27)erent W i. The symbols (olor online) are: down triangles (blue)-W i = 5, up triangles (green)-W i = 17, irles
(red)-W i = 25, diamonds (orange)-W i = 34, squares (blak)-W i = 46. Data were olleted in setup 2.

We performed a similar analysis on the time series of the loal azimuthal veloity measured by the LDV tehnique,

suh as those shown in the following in Fig. 17. The values of the the average time between two spikes, normalized

by the relaxation time, are presented in Fig. 7(b) as funtion of W i. We observe that the spikes in the loal veloity

signal our about three time less frequently than those in the injeted power series. This results in poor statistis

and larger satter, partiularly for low values of W i, but on the other hand is onsistent with the fat that the rare

events in the power time series are atually a result of spae averaging (over the entire volume of the (cid:29)ow ell) of

individual rare events in loal veloity time series.

We also omputed the mean width of the spikes determined by the proedure desribed above. The entral part

of eah spike was (cid:28)tted by a Gaussian funtion, and all the (cid:28)t widths c for a given W i were averaged together. The
results for the spikes in the series of injeted power in the Ω-mode are shown in Fig. 8.

B. Flow struture and statistial properties of the veloity (cid:28)eld

PIV and LDV tehniques have been used in the past in various experiments and setups [3, 13, 38, 39, 40℄ to

haraterize the struture of the (cid:29)ow (cid:28)eld, to obtain veloity pro(cid:28)les and to infer and visualize the topology of the

elasti von Karman (cid:29)ow. The visual haraterization of the (cid:29)ow struture in a regime of elasti turbulene has been

initially obtained from a few snapshots of the (cid:29)ow, by seeding it with light re(cid:29)eting (cid:29)akes (1% of Kallirosope

liquid) [3℄. Already suh qualitative visualization revealed the presene of a big persistent toroidal vortex, whih had

the dimension of the whole setup. The average (cid:29)ow veloity along the radial diretion was measured by LDV in a few

points, and the results were quite well ompatible with the presene of the big vortial struture [3℄.

With PIV we obtained a more omplete and quantitative haraterization of the global (cid:29)ow struture and of its

dynamis. Some instantaneous vetor (cid:28)elds of the horizontal omponents of the veloity, as well as the average of

15

Figure 6: (a) saled PDFs of the injeted power in onstant Ω foring regime for di(cid:27)erent W i. (b) saled PDFs of the power
(cid:29)utuations in onstant T foring regime for di(cid:27)erent W i. The symbols (olor online) are: down triangles (blue)-W i = 5, up
triangles (green)-W i = 17, irles (red)-W i = 25, diamonds (light blue)-W i = 34, squares (blak)-W i = 46.

Figure 7: (a) Normalized spike periodiity, τs/λ, in time series of the injeted power vs. W i: irles-onstant Ω mode, squares-
onstant T mode. (b) Normalized spike periodiity, τs/λ, in time series of the azimuthal veloity vs. W i. Data were olleted
at r = 2Rc/3, z = d/2 in setup 2.

2000 instantaneous (cid:28)elds taken for several values of W i at a middle distane between the plates in the setup 1 are

presented in Figs. 9 and 10. The upper row of Fig. 9 shows the instantaneous vetor (cid:28)elds at three inreasing values of

W i, while the lower row presents averaged vetor (cid:28)eld at the same W i. One an easily identify the ore of the toroidal

vortex that appears in all images above the threshold of the instability, and a spiral vortex that additionally ours

in the elasti turbulene regime. These (cid:29)ow strutures and their reorganization an be also observed in separate

presentations of the averaged azimuthal and radial omponents, and rms of (cid:29)utuations of the azimuthal veloity

omponent of the veloity (cid:28)eld at the same W i (see in Fig. 10,11). Below the elasti instability the pro(cid:28)le of the
average azimuthal veloity, Vθ , exhibits a linear inrease along the radius with a slope Ω−1
rigid body rotation (see the inset in Fig. 12a), while there is no motion in the radial diretion, Vr ≈ 0 (Fig. 12b).

whih orresponds to a

Above the onset of the instability one an learly see the reation of the ore of the toroidal vortex at the ell enter,

and the restruturing of the radial motion [38, 39, 40℄.

Large toroidal vortexes driven by the hoop stress are atually quite well known to appear in swirling (cid:29)ows of elasti

(cid:29)uids [1, 44℄. The inhomogeneity of the shear rate pro(cid:28)le in the primary laminar (cid:29)ow has long been reognized as

their ommon origin. In our system this vortex (cid:28)rst arises as a stationary struture at low shear rates, and leads to

some inrease in (cid:29)ow resistane even before the elasti instability [3℄. Therefore, one onludes that the transition to

elasti turbulene in the swirling (cid:29)ow between two plates is mediated by this vortex. The toroidal vortex is providing

a smooth, large sale veloity (cid:28)eld (see lower panels in Fig. 9), whih is randomly (cid:29)utuating in time (upper panels

in Fig. 9), and in whih the (cid:29)uid and the embedded stress tensor are haotially adveted. This type of advetion

an reate variations of stress in a range of smaller sales, whih may ause small sale (cid:29)uid motion [7, 12℄. This is

16

Figure 8: (a) Normalized average spike width, cav/λ, vs W i. (b) Normalized rms of the spike width, crms/λ, vs W i. Data were
olleted in onstant Ω mode.

Figure 9: Instantaneous (upper row) and time averaged (lower row) veloity (cid:28)elds for di(cid:27)erent values of W i: (a) W i = 2.48,
(b) W i = 9.88, () W i = 18.96. The data were olleted in setup 1 at middle distane between plates.

analogous to the generation of small sale variations of salar onentration in haoti mixing by large (cid:29)utuating

Above the instability threshold, the large sale toroidal vortex is also responsible for the ring-shaped topology of the

vortexes.

(cid:29)utuation (cid:28)eld of the azimuthal veloity, V rms

1/2

≡ V 2
θ

θ

(Fig. 11). The veloity (cid:29)utuations in the laminar regime

are only due to instrumental noise (panel (a) in Fig. 11). The average radial veloity hanges its sign at about a half

of the radius (see Fig. 12b). At higher values of W i, the toroidal vortex fores the transition to elasti turbulene.

This is aompanied by a seond reorganization of the (cid:29)ow struture, with the appearane of a (cid:29)utuating spiral

vortex (Figs. 9,10) and takes part in the saling regime of P , Prms (see Fig. 3). Movie animations of the veloity (cid:28)elds

evidene that this seondary (cid:29)utuating vortex is arried around and (cid:16)rides(cid:17) on top of the primary vortial (cid:29)ow. At

the same time the irular symmetry of V rms
is broken into a dipolar one (see Fig. 11). The radial pro(cid:28)les of Vθ and
Vr also hange drastially. The strutural transitions in the (cid:29)ow are also re(cid:29)eted in the average radial gradients of
the azimuthal veloity and in the average vortiity (cid:28)eld, as presented in Fig. 13 for various values of W i.

θ

Another way to haraterize a turbulent (cid:29)ow is to display the radial pro(cid:28)les (averaged over the azimuthal oordinate)

17

Figure 10: Distribution of the radial veloity (left olumn) and the azimuthal veloity omponents (right olumn) for di(cid:27)erent

values of W i: (a) W i = 2.48, (b) W i = 9.88, () W i = 18.96. The data were olleted in setup 1 at middle distane between

plates.

Figure 11: Fields of (cid:29)utuations of the azimuthal veloity at di(cid:27)erent W i: (a) W i = 8.32, (b) W i = 9.88, () W i = 11.1, (d)
W i = 12.72, (e) W i = 13.83, (f ) W i = 17, (g) W i = 19. The data were olleted in the setup 1 at middle distane between

plates.

of the turbulent intensity, de(cid:28)ned as It = V rms
at several values of W i (see Fig. 14) [40℄. The veloity (cid:29)utuations
in the laminar regime our only due to instrumental errors. Above the elasti transition It inreases sharply but
remains rather uniform on the level between 20 and 30% in a peripheral region for the radius ratios, r/RC , between
0.2 and 1. In the regime of elasti turbulene It further inreases, and its dependene on W i, presented in the inset
in Fig. 14, exhibits the power-law saling, It ∼ W i0.49±0.06

θ
Vθ

[38, 39℄.

The PIV measurement of time dependent veloity (cid:28)elds allowed us to alulate the average veloity gradients

and vertial vortiity, and rms of their respetive (cid:29)utuations, without involving the Taylor hypothesis that an be

questionable for a smooth random (cid:29)ow [13, 38℄. The typial radial distribution of the veloity gradients and of

vortiity, averaged spatially over the azimuthal oordinate and temporally over 2000 images is rather uniform in the
bulk for all W i, but inreases sharply near the wall (see Fig. 15(a)), while the rms of the veloity gradients and

18

Figure 12: (a) Pro(cid:28)les of the average azimuthal veloity, Vθ , for several values of W i. The inset shows a typial laminar pro(cid:28)le
of the azimuthal veloity omponent. (b)Pro(cid:28)les of the average radial veloity, Vr , for several values of W i. The labels are:
(1)-W i = 2.48, (2)-W i = 4.41, (3)-W i = 11.1, (4)-W i = 15, (5)-W i = 18. Data were olleted in set-up 1 at middle distane

between plates.

Figure 13: Average vertial omponent of the vortiity, ωz , at di(cid:27)erent W i: (a) W i = 8.32, (b) W i = 9.88, () W i = 11.1, (d)
W i = 12.72, (e) W i = 13.83, (f ) W i = 17, (g) W i = 19. Data were olleted in setup 1 at middle distane between plates.

The gridded pattern visible in panels (a), (b) is an artifat of ombined peak loking and numerial di(cid:27)erentiation e(cid:27)ets and

should be disregarded.

vortiity gradually inreases with the radius (Fig. 16(a)). The dependene of the average vertial vortiity on W i is
displayed in Fig. 15(b). At higher values of W i one (cid:28)nds a gradual growth of the vortiity both in the bulk and near
the wall. On the other hand, the plot in Fig. 16(b) shows the W i dependene of the rms of the vortiity, ωrms , saled
by λ, at several loations along a radius in the bulk. The saled rms of the vortiity saturates in the elasti turbulene
regime at a W i between 12 and 35, that is onsistent with the reent theoretial predition. Similar behavior is

shown by all the omponents of the veloity gradient, and is onsistent with the theoretial preditions, though the

saturation value ωrms

z

· λ ≈ 2 is higher than expeted [7, 12℄. The latter means probably that the nonlinearity of the

polymer elastiity also ontributes to the saturation of the elasti stress [24, 25℄ (see further disussion of this issue).

Time series of azimuthal veloity obtained from LDV measurements for several values of W i are displayed in
Fig. 17(a). As W i inreases, the veloity signal beomes inreasingly intermittent. PDFs of the normalized azimuthal
veloity, (Vθ − V av

, are shown in Fig. 17(b). The right side skewness of the PDFs is due to the rare events

θ )/V rms
θ

(spikes) whih intermittently our in the veloity signal (Fig. 17(a)), whih are probably related to the dynamis of

the randomly (cid:29)utuating spiral vortex previously disussed.

In order to understand better the struture of the (cid:29)ow in the regime of elasti turbulene, we have studied the

19

Figure 14: Turbulene intensity versus the redued radial oordinate at di(cid:27)erent W i: diamonds-W i = 31.56, squares- W i =
27.73, irles-W i = 23.67, up triangles-W i = 19.29, down triangles-W i = 15.48, stars-W i = 7.54, half (cid:28)lled triangles-W i = 2.82.
The inset shows the dependene of the turbulene intensity on W i at r/Rc = 0.85 obtained from LDV measurements. The full
line is a power law (cid:28)t, It ∝ W i0.49±0.06

. The arrow indiates the onset of the elasti instability. The data were olleted in

setup 2.

Figure 15: (a) Pro(cid:28)les of the vortiity hωzi averaged spatially in the azimuthal diretion and temporally over 2000 images, for
di(cid:27)erent W i. The labels are: (1)-W i = 2.82, (2)-W i = 5.4, (3)-W i = 10, (4)-W i = 14.48, (5)-W i = 17.43, (6)-W i = 19.29,
(7)-W i = 26.13, (8)-W i = 27.73, (9)-W i = 32.3, (10)-W i = 34.5. (b) Dependene of the average vortiity on W i at
di(cid:27)erent radial positions r/Rc ,: left triangles-0.1, down triangles-0.2, squares-0.33, up triangles-0.4, stars-0.5, irles-0.66, right
triangles-0.7, half (cid:28)lled squares-0.8, half (cid:28)lled irles-0.9. The arrow marks the onset of the elasti instability. The data were
olleted in setup 2.

dependene of the statistis of the azimuthal veloity on the radial oordinate, for a (cid:28)xed value of W i = 36.1 and a
given vertial oordinate, z = d/2. As illustrated in Fig. 18(a), in the entral (r = 0) and peripheral (r = 15Rc/16)
(cid:29)ow regions, the veloity signal shows no signi(cid:28)ant intermitteny, whereas around r = Rc/2 it is strongly intermittent.

The radial dependene of the level of intermitteny re(cid:29)ets the presene of the randomly (cid:29)utuating spiral vortex

(where, probably, r = Rc/2 orresponds to the arm of the spiral). This behavior is also re(cid:29)eted in the PDFs of the

normalized azimuthal veloity presented in Fig. 18(b): near the enter and the vertial wall of the ell, the distributions

are symmetri and single peaked whereas around r = Rc/2 they beome strongly skewed and doubly peaked.

Fig. 19 shows PDFs of the normalized aelerations as alulated from the temporal LDV measurements, (Y (t) −
av . We note that all the data for several values of W i ollapse on a single urve

Yav)/Yrms , where Y (t) ≡ dV (t)

dt V −1

remarkably well, and that moreover the PDFs show lear exponential tails.

The PIV data allow us also to alulate various orrelation and struture funtions of veloity, veloity gradients,

and vortiity. Their salings an give information on the degree of deviation from a Gaussian random (cid:28)eld, a standard

20

Figure 16: (a) Pro(cid:28)les of the rms of the (cid:29)utuations of the vortiity, ωrms
, at di(cid:27)erent W i. The labels are: (1)-W i = 2.82,
(2)-W i = 5.4, (3)-W i = 10, (4)-W i = 14.8, (5)-W i = 17.43, (6)-W i = 19.29, (7)-W i = 26.3, (8)-W i = 26.3, (9)-W i = 27.73,
(10)-W i = 32.3, (b) Dependene of the saled rms of the vortiity, ωrms · λ, on W i at di(cid:27)erent radial positions r/Rc : full
squares, 0.2; open squares, 0.33; full irles, 0.4; open irles, 0.5; diamonds, 0.66. The data were olleted in setup 2.

z

Figure 17: (a) Time series of azimuthal veloities, Vθ , for several values of W i. (b) PDFs of normalized azimuthal veloities
for various W i: squares-19.6, irles-21.7, up triangles-24.5, down triangles-27, diamonds-29.6, left triangles-33.2. Data were
olleted in setup 2, at z = d/2 and r = 2Rc/3.

way in hydrodynamis to quantify intermitteny and to ompare it with the orresponding saling in known ases.

The spatial power spetra of the veloity were obtained from PIV data by averaging 2000 instantaneous spatial

spetra. Although the (cid:28)nite spatial resolution of PIV, whih limits the aessible range of wave numbers, leads to

an arti(cid:28)ial ut-o(cid:27) at k ∼ 3000m−1

, a power law deay k−δ

with δ ≃ 3.5 is learly observed (Fig. 20) [38, 39℄. This

deay is onsistent with the saling obtained earlier for the veloity power spetra in the frequeny domain [2, 3, 39℄.

The large value of the exponent δ implies that the power of (cid:29)utuations deays very quikly as the size of eddies

dereases. The main ontribution to the (cid:29)utuations of both the veloity and the veloity gradients is therefore due

to the largest eddies, and the power of the latter should sale as k−(δ−2)

.

The agreement between the veloity spetra measured at a single point in frequeny domain [2, 3℄ and the spetra

measured diretly in k-domain [38, 39℄ deserves a brief disussion. Following Lumley [10℄, the relation between the
spatial spetrum P (k) and the frequeny spetrum P (f ) an be written as

P (k) = V · P (f ) −

I 2
t
2

·

d2

k2P (k)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
dk2

+ O

,

I 4
t
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(8)

21

Figure 18: (a) Time series of azimuthal veloities, Vθ , for W i = 36.1 at several radial positions, r . (b) PDFs of the normal-
ized azimuthal veloity, for W i = 36.1, at several radial positions r : squares-0,irles-Rc/8,up triangles-Rc/2,down triangles-
3Rc/4,diamonds-7Rc/8, left triangles-15Rc/16. The data were olleted in setup 2, at z = d/2.

Figure 19: PDFs of normalized aelerations for various W i: full irles-14; open irles-16.2; full squares-19.8; open squares-
22.3; up-triangles-26.3; down-triangles-30.7; diamonds-38.9. The data were olleted in setup 2 at z = d/2 and r = 2Rc/3.

where It = V rms
/Vθ , V rms
azimuthal veloity, respetively. If P (k) ∝ kδ2

≡ V 2
θ

θ

θ

t

1/2

and P (f ) ∝ f δ1

and Vθ are the rms of (cid:29)utuations of the azimuthal veloity and the average

, the equation above leads to:

δ2 − δ1 ∝

log

2
t

1 + I
h

2 · δ2 · (δ2 + 2)
i
log(k)

.

(9)

If one plugs into the last equation δ2 ≈ −3.5, the di(cid:27)erene between the exponents is (for k ≈ 1000m−1
δ2 − δ1 ≈ 0.1. Thus, the experimental resolution does not allow us to observe the di(cid:27)erene in the saling exponents

) as small as

for the spatial and temporal spetra [38℄.

Next, let us fous on the typial spatial and temporal orrelation sales in elasti turbulene. A typial sale, at

whih elasti stress is orrelated an be estimated as L = 2π
k P (k)dk . In our setup and in the elasti
turbulene regime, one gets L ≃ 5.9 m, i.e. on the order of the ell size. The Eulerian orrelation time is de(cid:28)ned
as τc =
presents the normalized τc/λ as a funtion of W i at some radial positions in the ell. The orrelation time drops

C(t)dt, where C(t) = V (T )V (T + t)/ (V rms)2

t C(t)dt/

P (k)dk/

R

R

is the Eulerian orrelation funtion. Figure 21

R

R

22

Figure 20: Power spetra of the (cid:29)utuations of the azimuthal veloity omponent at di(cid:27)erent W i: irles-W i = 4.41, up
triangles-W i = 5.72, down triangles-W i = 8.32, left triangles W i = 11.1, right triangles-W i = 12.7, hexagons-W i = 13.8,
diamonds-W i = 16, half (cid:28)lled squares-W i = 18, empty irles-W i = 19. The solid line is the power law k−3.5
olleted in setup 1.

. The data were

Figure 21: Saled Eulerian orrelation times of the azimuthal veloity omponent as funtion of W i: squares-setup 1, irles-
setup 2.

signi(cid:28)antly in the transition region and then saturates in the elasti turbulene regime, as the rms of the vortiity

(and veloity gradients) (cid:29)utuations do. The related saturation of both the Lyapunov exponents of the Lagrangian

tra jetories, already reported [41℄, and the redued veloity orrelation time, τc/λ, shown in Fig. 21 (in the same
range of W i) just reinfores the observation. We point out that the inverse saturated value of orrelation time is of
the order of the saturated value of ωrms

and λ−1

, as predited by theory [7, 12℄.

z

Using the PIV data one an also alulate the struture funtions of the veloity gradients, de(cid:28)ned as

Sp(r) =

∂Vθ(r0 + r)
∂r

−

∂Vθ(r0)
∂r

p

and shown in Fig. 22. As for inertial turbulene, we an look for a saling in the spatial range orresponding to the

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
power law deay of the veloity spetra (Fig. 20) in the form: Sp(r) = rζp
exponent, ζp/ζ4 , on the order of the struture funtions, p, is presented in the inset of Fig. 22 for all (cid:29)ow parameters
mentioned above. For omparison, the struture funtions of the vortiity, of the injeted power at onstant Ω, PΩ ,
and onstant torque, PT , were also alulated, and the results of the analysis for the normalized saling exponent

(cid:28)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:29)r0

. The dependene of the normalized saling

(10)

were also plotted in the inset of Fig. 22. All these dependenies are rather lose to that obtained for a passive salar

in elasti turbulene, presented on the same plot and based on our published data [14, 38℄; all of them deviate from

23

Figure 22: Struture funtions of the veloity gradients of order p up to 6 as a funtion of the saled radius. Inset: normalized
saling exponent vs. p for: injeted power PΩ - full irles; injeted power PT - open irles; passive salar- full squares; vortiity-

open squares; veloity gradient- up-triangles.

a linear dependene that is harateristi of a Gaussian distribution [45℄.

It is worth to make here some remarks about the appliability of the Taylor hypothesis to (cid:29)ows whih are spatially

smooth random in time, suh as is elasti turbulene, whih we have studied experimentally in more detail in [13℄.

On one hand, the omparison of the power spetra of the veloity in frequeny and wave number domain suggests

that the Taylor hypothesis is appliable at least in regions lose to the wall. On the other hand, from Fig. 14 one an

learn that in the entral (cid:29)ow region, at r/Rc < 0.2, the rms of the veloity (cid:29)utuations beomes muh larger that

the mean veloity, fat whih is normally thought to violate the assumptions of the hypothesis. By detailed analysis

of ross-orrelations as well as of the struture funtions of the veloity (cid:29)utuations, it was indeed shown in [13℄ that

strong veloity (cid:29)utuations near the ell enter prevent, and (cid:29)ow smoothness and lak of sale separations lose to

the boundaries limit the quantitative appliability of the Taylor hypothesis. However, this de(cid:28)ieny an be orreted

by a proper hoie of the advetion veloity, so that a orreted Taylor hypothesis is appliable to most parts of this

haoti (cid:29)ow.

C. Veloity and veloity gradient pro(cid:28)les and the boundary layer problem

To learn more about the (cid:29)ow (cid:28)eld generated by elasti turbulene, we investigated in detail the struture of

horizontal and vertial veloity boundary layers for di(cid:27)erent values of W i and (cid:29)uid visosity. The vertial pro(cid:28)le of
the azimuthal veloity, Vθ , in the laminar (cid:29)ow of the pure solvent is nearly a straight line [3, 39℄. The transition
to elasti turbulene (cid:29)ow signi(cid:28)antly hanges the distribution of V av
plate and a low shear region near the middle of the gap (at z/d = 0.5). Suh a distribution of V av
average veloity pro(cid:28)les in usual high Re turbulene. In Fig. 23 we present the average azimuthal veloity pro(cid:28)les
measured by LDV in a vertial plane at r = 3Rc/4 of the setup 2 with d = 2m height in 65% of saharose solution
˜Vθ(z/d) = V av
. In Fig. 24 the same data for di(cid:27)erent Ω
are ollapsed on a single urve, after subtration the z -dependene of the average veloity in the bulk for eah urve,

θ , produing a high shear layer near the upper

θ (z/d)/V up

θ

θ

and normalized by the veloity value at the disk,

is reminisent of

that is

, where

is obtained from a linear (cid:28)t of the data points.

˜V ∗
θ (z/d) = ˜Vθ(z/d) − ˜Vθ(1/2) − z

d

∂ ˜Vθ (z/d)
∂(z/d)

∂ ˜Vθ (z/d)
∂(z/d)

Similar veloity pro(cid:28)les were also obtained with polymer solutions with saharose ontent redued to 60% and 50%.

We de(cid:28)ned the boundary layer width w as the intersetion absissa of the linear (cid:28)ts for the bulk and near-the-wall
parts of the veloity pro(cid:28)le. It is lear from the plot that w is independent of Ω for eah solution and is seen to depend
only on the solution visosity, whereas we obtained the (cid:28)t w ∝ η0.26±0.05
azimuthal veloity are small near the upper plate, reah a maximum at z/d ≃ 0.1, and start to derease at larger z .
Again, suh distribution of V rms
along z is reminisent of the veloity (cid:29)utuations in the boundary layer of turbulent
(cid:29)ows of a Newtonian (cid:29)uid [5, 20℄. An example of the pro(cid:28)le of the rms of the azimuthal veloity V rms
various Ω in the setup 2 with height d = 1m, is shown in Fig. 25. Well-de(cid:28)ned peaks appear at the same position,
whih does not depend on Ω, and math the boundary layer thikness w found with the previous analysis of the

θ

θ

(upper inset of Fig. 24). Flutuations of the

, obtained at

1/2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

average veloity pro(cid:28)les, and displayed in Fig. 24.

24

Figure 23: Vertial pro(cid:28)le of the average azimuthal veloity, normalized by its maximum value at the disk, measured by LDV

in setup 2, with d = 2m, in a vertial plane at r = 3Rc/4, in a 65% saharose polymer solution, for several values of Ω:
full squares (blak)-5s−1
, diamonds (yan)-2s−1
left-triangles (magenta)-1.5s−1

, down-triangles (blue)-2.5s−1

, up-triangles (green)-3s−1

, irles (red)-4s−1

.

,

Figure 24: Compensated vertial pro(cid:28)le of the average azimuthal veloity

irles-4s−1
vs. solution visosity; the solid line is the (cid:28)t w ∝ η0.26±0.05

; down-triangles-2.5s−1

; up-triangles-3s−1

; diamonds-2s−1

θ (see text), for several values of Ω: full squares-5s−1
˜V ∗
. Inset: boundary layer thikness w

; open squares-1.5s−1

;

. Data measured in the same setup as data of Fig. 23.

We also measured by PIV radial pro(cid:28)les of both the azimuthal and the radial veloity in a horizontal plane at

z = d/2 in the viinity of the vertial wall of the ell, shown in Fig. 26(a,b). As shown in Fig. 26a, the azimuthal
veloity omponent Vθ an be (cid:28)tted by a linear funtion in the viinity of the wall. This agrees with the requirements of

inompressibility, boundary ondition for the veloity and smoothness of the veloity (cid:28)eld, as pointed out in Ref. [46℄.

In the regime of elasti turbulene the slopes of the linear (cid:28)t funtions inrease monotonially with W i (see the

inset in Fig. 26a). Using the (cid:28)ts one an determine the width of the vertial (lose to the exterior ylindrial wall)

boundary layer, wθ , of the azimuthal veloity.

As shown in Fig. 27, the width of the vertial boundary layer, wθ , dereases abruptly above the onset of elasti
instability and saturates in the regime of elasti turbulene, for large values of W i. Unfortunately the limited auray

of measurements of the radial veloity omponent near the wall (note that radial veloities are about two orders of

25

Figure 25: Pro(cid:28)le of the rms of the azimuthal veloity measured by LDV in a vertial plane at r = 3Rc/4, in setup 2 with
d = 1m height, in 65% of saharose solution, for several values of Ω: full squares-6rad/s, full irles-5.5rad/s, full up triangles-
5rad/s, full down triangles-5.5rad/s, empty squares-4rad/s, empty irles-3.7rad/s, empty up triangles-3.5rad/s, empty down
triangles- 3rad/s, full hexagons-2.5rad/s, empty hexagons-2rad/s.

Figure 26: Near-wall pro(cid:28)les of the veloity in a horizontal plane at z = d/2, for various values of W i in setup 2, with 65%
saharose polymer solution. (a) Radial pro(cid:28)les of the tangential veloity omponent Vθ . The full lines are linear (cid:28)t funtions.
The inset shows the dependene of the slope of the linear (cid:28)t funtions, s, on W i. (b) Radial pro(cid:28)les of the radial veloity
omponent Vr . The symbols are: full squares-W i = 2.4, full up triangles-W i = 4, full diamonds-W i = 5.9, full right triangles-
W i = 7, full stars-W i = 10.6, empty irles-W i = 16.6, empty squares-W i = 20.3, empty up triangles-W i = 23.8, empty
diamonds-W i = 23.8, empty right triangles-W i = 30.2.

magnitude smaller than the azimuthal ones) did not allow us to assess beyond doubt the funtional behavior of the

radial pro(cid:28)les of radial veloity omponent near wall, presented in Fig. 26b.

In order to improve the spatial resolution of the veloity (cid:28)eld measurements near the wall, and partiularly to resolve

the horizontal boundary layer by looking at the rms of the radial gradient of the azimuthal veloity, (∂Vθ/∂r)rms
the (cid:28)eld of view of the PIV measurements was redued down to 10mm in the radial diretion. The radial pro(cid:28)les
of (∂Vθ/∂r)rms
norm near the wall for various values of W i in the elasti turbulene regime are shown in Fig. 28. As in

,

the ase of the average veloity in the vertial plane (Fig. 24), the bulk part of the radial dependene (cid:28)tted by a line

was subtrated for eah urve. Well-de(cid:28)ned peaks, positioned independently of W i, an easily identi(cid:28)ed inside the
veloity boundary layer. We would like to point out that the value of (∂Vθ/∂r)rms

at the maximum exeeds up to

two orders of magnitude its bulk value (see Fig. 16(b)).

The same data were also used to determine the average value of (∂Vθ/∂r)rms

in the boundary layer. The latter was

26

Figure 27: Dependene of the width of the vertial boundary layer, wθ (de(cid:28)ned via the width of the linear part of the near wall
P IV pro(cid:28)les of the tangential veloity omponent) on W i. Data were olleted in setup 2.

Figure 28: Normalized radial pro(cid:28)les of rms of the azimuthal veloity gradients, (∂Vθ/∂r)rms
norm in the viinity of the vertial
wall, for various values of W i (olor online): full squares-W i = 10.6, empty squares-W i = 12.4, full up triangles-W i = 16.5,
empty up triangles-W i = 18.1, full irles-W i = 20.3, full left triangles-W i = 22, empty irles-W i = 23.8, empty left triangles-
W i = 25.4, full right triangles-W i = 27, empty right triangles-W i = 28.6, stars-W i = 30.2. Data were olleted using PIV in
setup 2 with a 65% saharose polymer solution, in a horizontal plane at z = d/2.

obtained from widths of distributions of the slopes of the radial dependene of the azimuthal veloity in the boundary

layer region, for eah value of W i. These average values of (∂Vθ/∂r)rms
the setup 2 with ell height d = 1m are shown in Fig. 29 as funtion of W i. A lear inrease of ( ∂Vθ
the boundary layer, in ontrast to its saturation value in the bulk, ( ∂Vθ
W i (see further disussion).

saled by λ, in the vertial boundary layer of
∂r )rms · λ ≫ 1 in
∂r )rms · λ ≈ 2, was found in the same range of

D. Disussion: role of the elasti stresses in elasti turbulene in a (cid:28)nite size ell.

Let us summarize our di(cid:27)erent experimental observations, disuss some of their impliations, and delineate a

omprehensive piture of the phenomenon alled elasti turbulene.

27

Figure 29: Saled rms of the veloity gradients in the boundary layer vs W i. The arrow indiates the onset of the primary

elasti instability.

(i) The rms of the vortiity (and that of veloity gradients) saturates in the bulk of the elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow,

leading to the saturation of the elasti stress. The saturation of ωrms at high values of W i in the elasti turbulene

regime, observed in the data in Fig. 16, gives us the possibility to test whih of the two theoretial mehanisms is

responsible for it: either the feedbak reation of polymer moleules on the (cid:29)ow [24℄ or the nonlinearity of polymer

elastiity [25℄. The loal Weissenberg number an be estimated from Fig. 16 as W i′ = ωrms · λ ≃ 2, whih exeeds

the unit value predited by the model with feedbak of linear moleule elastiity, disussed by [7, 12℄. We onlude

that the nonlinearity of the polymer elastiity may also ontribute to the saturation of the elasti stresses [25℄. The

saturation of the elasti stress in the bulk also naturally explains the power-law behavior of the average injeted

power,

¯P
¯Plam

∼ W i0.49

, seen in the plot in Fig. 3. Indeed, the injeted power is proportional to the torque, P = T · Ω.

The latter is just the shear stress averaged over the upper plate, and its growth above the instability threshold ours

solely due to the elasti stress, τp , [6℄. In the elasti turbulene regime, however, the theory predits τp ∼ η/λ. On
the other hand, it was found that, due to shear thinning of the solution used, λ ∼ Ω−0.3

. Thus, the theoretially

¯Plam , should be solely due to the elasti

expeted growth of the mean injeted power with respet to its laminar value,

stress and have the following power-law saling:

whih is rather lose to the saling we observed

¯P
¯Plam

∼ τp ∼ W i0.43

experimentally.

Next, we made three main observations (ii)-(iv) below, whih extend further the formal similarity with hydro-

dynami turbulene, despite the distintively di(cid:27)erent underlying mehanism for intermitteny. Our (cid:28)ndings in the

statistis and struture of the veloity (cid:28)eld have to be related to the (cid:28)nite size of the experimental vessel, whereas

the urrent theory desribes elasti turbulene in an unbounded domain [7, 12℄. One an expet to (cid:28)nd new e(cid:27)ets in

statistial and saling behavior, similar to those reently studied both theoretially and experimentally for a passive

salar adveted by a smooth random (cid:29)ows in bounded geometries [18℄, suh as that in a hannel onsidered by [14℄.

As was already pointed out in the Introdution, there is a deep analogy in the statistial behavior of elasti

turbulene, of the fast magneto-dynamo, and for the passive salar dispersion in the Bathelor regime. As was shown

in Setion II D, the elastially driven random (cid:29)ow an be onsidered as turbulene of the elasti stress (cid:28)eld; all its

statistial properties an be explained by the interplay of (a) strething and folding of (cid:29)uid elements arrying elasti

stresses on Lagrangian tra jetories in the Bathelor regime, (b) dynamo e(cid:27)et leading to the saturation of stresses

in the bulk (cid:29)ow, and () homogeneous linear damping of the stress. Thus, sine the dynamis of the elasti stress

tensor an be redued to the dynamis of the vetor (cid:28)eld B, this senario is very lose to that found in the fast

magneto-dynamo exept that () is replaed by the di(cid:27)usive dissipation of the magneti (cid:28)eld. On the other hand,

the passive salar problem di(cid:27)ers from elasti turbulene (besides the fat that in this ase a vetor is replaed by a

salar) in the item (b), sine in the former the feedbak reation on the (cid:29)ow is absent. However, in spite of the fat

that there is no exat similarity between these three problems, the main ingredient (a) gives a basis for the similarity

in statistial and saling behavior of these systems. Taking into aount the similarity, we an extend it to statistial

properties of elasti turbulene in a (cid:28)nite size vessel.

(ii) The rms of the veloity gradients

, and thus the elasti stress, grows linearly with W i in

rms

or ωrms

∂Vθ
∂r

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

the boundary layer (see Fig. 29), near the driving disk. The rms of the veloity gradients saturates in the bulk (see

28

Fig. 16). Moreover, the values in the boundary layer are one to two orders of magnitude larger than in the bulk. All

this implies that a boundary layer is formed, with an exess of the elasti stress is onentrated in it.

(iii) The PDFs of the injeted power δPΩ/P rms

Ω , at either onstant angular speed or torque, show skewness and

exponential tails, whih both indiate intermittent statistial behavior. Also the PDFs of the normalized aelera-

tions, whih an be related to the statistis of veloity gradients via the Taylor hypothesis, exhibit well pronouned

exponential tails. We an math this fats and the emergene of the boundary layer with the following senario: the

foring from the moving boundary (the upper disk) produes an aumulation of the elasti stress in the boundary

layer due to a onstant (cid:29)ux of momentum from the upper boundary. Elasti stress is intermittently injeted into

the bulk by random release events. Whenever that happens, the power on the disk dereases. Constant build-up

and sudden release would thus explain the skewness of the PDF toward small values of the injeted power, while

intermitteny would be the origin of the observed exponential tails. The exponential tails in the PDF of the veloity

gradients and aelerations (Fig. 17-19) an be also explained in the same way, exept that for them the symmetry of

the PDF is preserved due to injetions from both the upper and lower boundary layers.

However, the most surprising and striking feature of elasti turbulene observed is (iv), the presene of a veloity

boundary layer and the emergene of a new length sale. Sine elasti turbulene is a turbulene of an elasti stress

(cid:28)eld, one an expet primarily the appearane of a boundary layer in the elasti stress (cid:28)eld. We observe in addition

the presene of a veloity boundary layer, whih just re(cid:29)ets some of the features of the boundary layer of the elasti

stresses (rms of the veloity gradients). The measured thikness of the veloity boundary layer is muh smaller than

the vessel size. To argument further on it, we note that the piture presented in point (iii) is in lose analogy with

the turbulent advetion of a passive salar in the Bathelor regime in a (cid:28)nite hannel (cid:29)ow, where the exess of traer

from the boundary layer is intermittently injeted into the bulk [14, 18℄. There the boundary layer for a passive salar

(mixing boundary layer) results from zero boundary onditions for the (cid:29)ow veloity omponents along and towards

the wall. This leads to less e(cid:27)etive advetion of the passive salar near the wall, ausing an aumulation in the

near-wall region, and thus a boundary layer in whih the statistis of the salar is di(cid:27)erent than that in the bulk (cid:29)ow.

In the ase of the passive salar, the mixing boundary layer and the new length sale appear due to the existene

of a small parameter, the inverse Pelet number, P e−1 = (D/V rmsL) ≪ 1, where D is the di(cid:27)usion onstant, and
L is the vessel size. Then, as predited theoretially [18℄ and on(cid:28)rmed experimentally [14℄, the mixing boundary
layer width is found to sale as w ∝ P e−1/4 ∝ D1/4

. Intermittent ejetion of the traer into the bulk, analogous to

the intermittent injetion of elasti stresses in elasti turbulene, redues the e(cid:27)etiveness of mixing, inreases the

mixing length, and auses stronger (power-law) dependene of the mixing length on P e than in an unbounded vessel

(in whih dependene should be logarithmi).

Carrying on the analogy with the passive salar problem, one an suggest that also here a small parameter of the

problem de(cid:28)nes a new length sale. Sine di(cid:27)usion does not play any signi(cid:28)ant role in elasti turbulene, we suggest

that

rms

N ≡

∂Vθ
∂r (cid:19)

(cid:18)

bulk (cid:30)(cid:18)

∂Vθ
∂r (cid:19)

rms

b.l.

≪ 1

(11)

an be onsidered as the relevant small parameter. This non-uniform distribution of the elasti stresses should result

in, and be diretly related to, a non-uniform distribution of polymer strething: the polymer moleules should be

strethed onsiderably more in the boundary layer than in the bulk. We have veri(cid:28)ed this predition in a separate

experiment on a single moleule in a random (cid:29)ow [47℄. Thus, the width of the boundary layer for the elasti stress,

based on these onsiderations and on the experimental observations, sales like w/L ∝ N µη1/4
, with µ an exponent
to be determined. While it is appealing to note that the exponent of η (Fig. 24) is the same as that of 1/P e in

the previous ase, we are not really able to justify it theoretially. On one hand, in ontrast with the passive salar

problem, where dissipation due to di(cid:27)usion introdues the natural length sale, elasti stresses in elasti turbulene

are dissipated via linear damping with the polymer relaxation time, λ. Sine λ ∝ η , η has good reason to appear in
the saling relation for w, but we annot guess a value of its exponent. On the other hand, the suggested saling has a

the suggested saling law bears a dependene on Ω via
w is independent of it. These two issues need to be addressed by a forthoming theory.

rms
bulk saturates in the regime of well developed elasti turbulene (Fig. 16b),
(cid:1)

rms
b.l. (see Fig. 29), whereas we found experimentally that
(cid:1)

∂Vθ
∂r

∂Vθ
∂r

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

serious (cid:29)aw: while we have seen that

Finally, (v), the saling of the struture funtions of the vortiity, veloity gradients, and injeted power is found

to be the same of that of a passive salar adveted by an elasti turbulent veloity (cid:28)eld (see subsetion IV B), fat

whih further reinfores the analogy in the statistis and saling of the passive salar and of the elasti stresses due

to advetion by a smooth random (cid:29)ow.

V. CONCLUSIONS

29

The main message of this study is a surprising similarity in saling, statistis, and struture of both the elasti

stresses and the passive salar in elasti turbulene in a (cid:28)nite size vessel, in spite of the important di(cid:27)erene in the

dynamo e(cid:27)et.

veloity power spetra deays as P ∼ k−3.3
as k−1.3

First of all, we have on(cid:28)rmed that the (cid:29)ow is smooth and essentially dominated by large sale strutures: the

(see Se. IV B). As explained in Se. II D, the main ontribution to the (cid:29)utuations of the veloity gradients

, whih suggests that the power of (cid:29)utuations of veloity gradients sales

and of the veloity di(cid:27)erenes at all sales omes from the largest eddies, having dimensions of the whole system (the

gap between plates). This onlusion has an immediate impliation for the mixing in the (cid:29)ow: it should result in the

same type of patterns and in the same statistis observed in a randomly varying in time (cid:29)ow with a linear veloity

(cid:28)eld (loally uniform rate of strain), V(r, t) = V0(t) + ∂V(t)
∂r
elasti turbulene [13℄ (r is the position vetor).

· (r − r(0)), whih approximates well the veloity (cid:28)eld in

Looking at more detail into the loal properties of the veloity (cid:28)eld, we have evidened a saturation of the rms

of the vortiity (or veloity gradients), whih should lead to the saturation of the elasti stresses in the bulk. This

agrees with theoretial preditions, save the fat that the saturation level found is about twie than what theoretially

predited [7, 12℄. The disrepany an be attributed to nonlinear polymer elastiity [25℄. The observed saturation is

however remarkably onsistent with the saling of the averaged injeted power with W i.

The presene of a boundary layer for stress and veloity was also evidened and haraterized: the rms of the

veloity gradients (and therefore the elasti stresses) grow linearly with W i within it, and exeed the orresponding

value in the bulk by one-two orders of magnitude, suggesting that the elasti stresses are aumulated near the wall

and are intermittently injeted into the bulk. The view is on(cid:28)rmed by the properties of the PDFs of the injeted

power and by the exponential tails of PDFs of the normalized aelerations. This leads to a model for the dynamis

of elasti turbulene, in whih elasti stress is introdued into the (cid:29)uid by the driving boundary, aumulates in the

boundary layer and is intermittently injeted into the bulk of the (cid:29)ow. The situation is entirely similar to the trapping

of a passive salar in the mixing boundary layer in a (cid:28)nite size vessel, and to its intermittent injetion into the bulk.

The non-uniform distribution of the elasti stresses, whih auses non-uniform polymer strething is urrently veri(cid:28)ed

experimentally [47℄.

Universality and saling of the boundary layer thikness are also investigated. The emergene of a relevant sale for

it, based on properties measured from the veloity pro(cid:28)le, is the most unexpeted and striking result, sine aording

to the theory of elasti turbulene in unbounded domains, there would be no other length sale besides the dissipation

length or the vessel size. The measured boundary layer is muh thinner than the vessel size, and the saling of its

width w with η was found experimentally. A small parameter, whih is related to the polymer extension ratio in the

bulk and in the boundary layer, was identi(cid:28)ed in this problem.

Finally, the similarity between elasti turbulene and Bathelor regime advetion of passive salar is reinfored by

the salings of struture funtions of the vortiity, veloity gradients, and injeted power, whih were found to be the

same as that for a passive salar adveted in a veloity (cid:28)eld produed by elasti turbulene.

The experimental results presented all for further development in the theory of elasti turbulene in a ontainer of

(cid:28)nite size. Partiular attention should be devoted to what auses the saling of the boundary layer width, the saling

of struture funtions and rms of the injeted power, and the saturation level of the elasti stresses in the bulk (cid:29)ow.

Aknowledgments

We thank M. Chertkov and V. Lebedev for numerous disussions and suggestions. This work was supported by

the grants of Israel Siene Foundation, Binational US-Israel Foundation, and by the Minerva Center for Nonlinear

Physis of Complex Systems.

[1℄ R. B. Bird, C. F. Curtiss, R. C. Armstrong, and O. Hassager, Dynamis of Polymeri Liquids, (John Wiley, NY), 1987.

[2℄ A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, "Elasti turbulene in a polymer solution (cid:29)ow", Nature 405, 53 (2000).

[3℄ A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, "Elasti turbulene in urvilinear (cid:29)ows of polymer solutions", New J. Phys. 6, 29 (2004).

[4℄ A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, "E(cid:30)ient mixing at low Reynolds numbers using polymer additives", Nature 410, 905

(2001).

[5℄ L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mehanis, (Pergamon Press, Oxford), 1987.

30

[6℄ A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, "Strething of polymers in a random three-dimensional (cid:29)ow", Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 934

(2001).

[7℄ A. Fouxon and V. Lebedev, "Spetra of turbulene in dilute polymer solutions", Phys. Fluids 15, 2060 (2003).

[8℄ A. Shekohihin et al., "Simulations of the small-sale turbulent dynamo", Astrophys. J. 612, 276 (2004).

[9℄ M. Chertkov, G. Falkovih, I. Kolokolov, V. Lebedev, "Statistis of a passive salar adveted by a large-sale two-

dimensional veloity (cid:28)eld: Analyti solution", Phys. Rev. E 51, 5609 (1995).

[10℄ J. Lumley, "On the solution of equations desribing small sale deformations", Symp. Math. 9, 315 (1972).

[11℄ P. G. de Gennes, "Coil-streth transition of dilute (cid:29)exible polymers under ultrahigh veloity gradients", J. Chem. Phys.

[12℄ E. Balkovsky, A. Fouxon, and V. Lebedev, "Turbulene of polymer solutions", Phys. Rev. E 64, 056301 (2001).

[13℄ T. Burghelea, E. Segre, and V. Steinberg, "Validity of the Taylor hypothesis in a random spatially smooth (cid:29)ow", Phys.

60, 5030(cid:21)5042 (1974).

Fluids, 17, 103101 (2005).

[14℄ T. Burghelea, E. Segre, and V. Steinberg, "Mixing by polymers: Experimental test of deay regime of mixing", Phys. Rev.

Lett. 92, 164501 (2004); T. Burghelea, E. Segre, I. Bar-Joseph, A. Groisman, and V. Steinberg, "Chaoti (cid:29)ow and e(cid:30)ient

mixing in a mirohannel with a polymer solution", Phys. Rev. E 69, 066305 (2004).

[15℄ M. Chertkov, G. Falkovih and I. Kolokolov, Phys. Rev. Lett. "Intermittent dissipation of a passive salar in turbulene",

79, 2121 (1998).

[16℄ E. Balkovsky and A. Fouxon, "Universal long-time properties of Lagrangian statistis in the Bathelor regime and their

appliation to the passive salar problem", Phys. Rev. E 60, 4164 (1999).

[17℄ D.T. Son, "Turbulent deay of a passive salar in the Bathelor limit: Exat results from a quantum-mehanial approah"

Phys. Rev. E 59, 3811 (1999).

[18℄ M. Chertkov and V. Lebedev, "Deay of salar turbulene revisited" Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 034501 (2003).

[19℄ V. Steinberg and A. Groisman, Devie and Method for Mixing Substanes, US Patent No. 6,632,014 B2, Ot. 14, 2003.

[20℄ D. J. Tritton, Physial Fluid Dynamis, (Clarendon Press, Oxford), 1988.

[21℄ V. Tirtaatmadja and T. Sridhar, "A (cid:28)lament strething devie for measurement of extensional visosity", J. Rheology 37,

[22℄ J. J. Magda, and R. G. Larson, "A transition ourring in ideal elasti liquids during shear (cid:29)ow", J. Non-Newtonian Fluid

1081(cid:21)1102 (1993).

Meh. 30, 1(cid:21)19 (1988).

499(cid:21)503 (1989).

(1959).

Europhys. Lett. 71, 221 (2005).

Fluids 10, 2451 (1998).

573 (1990).

(1998).

[23℄ S. J. Muller, R. G. Larson, and E. S. G. Shaqfeh, "A purely elasti transition in Taylor-Couette (cid:29)ow", Rheol. Ata 28,

[24℄ E. Balkovsky, A. Fouxon, and V. Lebedev, "Turbulent dynamis of polymer solutions", Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4765 (2000).

[25℄ M. Chertkov, "Polymer strething by turbulene", Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4761 (2000).

[26℄ G.K. Bathelor, "Small sale variation of onveted quantities like temperature in turbulent (cid:29)uid", J. Fluid Meh. 5, 113

[27℄ S. Gerashhenko, C. Chevallard, and V. Steinberg, "Single polymer dynamis: oil-streth transition in a random (cid:29)ow",

[28℄ R. G. Larson, "Instabilities in visoelasti (cid:29)ows", Rheol. Ata 31, 213(cid:21)263 (1992).

[29℄ E. S. G. Shaqfeh, "Purely elasti instabilities in visometri (cid:29)ows", Annu. Rev. Fluid Meh. 28, 129(cid:21)185 (1996).

[30℄ R. G. Larson, E. S. G. Shaqfeh, and S. J. Muller, "A purely elasti instability in Taylor-Couette (cid:29)ow", J. Fluid Meh. 218,

[31℄ A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, "Mehanism of elasti instability in Couette (cid:29)ow of polymer solutions: Experiment", Phys.

[32℄ A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, "Elasti versus inertial instability in a polymer solution (cid:29)ow" Europhys. Lett. 43, 165(cid:21)170

[33℄ A. Morozov and Wim van Saarlos, "Subritial (cid:28)nite-amplitude solutions for plane Couette (cid:29)ow of visoelasti (cid:29)uids",

[34℄ A. Öztekin, R. A. Brown, "Instability of a visoelasti (cid:29)uid between rotating parallel disks: analysis for the Oldroyd-B

Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 024501 (2005).

(cid:29)uid", J. Fluid Meh. 255, 473(cid:21)502 (1993).

[35℄ G. H. MKinley, J. A. Byars, R. A. Brown, and R. C. Armstrong, "Observations on the elasti instability in one-and-plate

and parallel-plate (cid:29)ows of a polyisobutylene Boger (cid:29)uid", J. Non-Newtonian Fluid Meh. 40, 201(cid:21)229 (1991).

[36℄ J. A. Byars, A. Öztekin, R. A. Brown, and G. H. MKinley, "Spiral instabilities in the (cid:29)ow of highly elasti (cid:29)uids between

[37℄ M. Chertkov, "On how a joint interation of two innoent partners (smooth advetion and linear damping) produes a

rotating parallel disks",J. Fluid Meh. 271, 173(cid:21)197 (1994).

strong intermitteny", Phys. Fluids 10, 3017 (1998).

[38℄ T. Burghelea, "Elasti turbulene and mixing in a dilute polymer solution", PhD thesis, Weizmann Institute of Siene,

[39℄ V. Steinberg, "Elasti Turbulene in Visoelasti Flows" in Handbook of Experimental Fluid Dynamis, Ch. C2.3, Springer

Rehovot, Israel, (2005), unpublished.

Verlag (2005).

Phys.Rev. Lett. 96, 214502 (2006).

[40℄ T. Burghelea, E. Segre, and V. Steinberg, "Role of elasti stress in the statistial and saling properties of elasti turbulene"

[41℄ T. Burghelea, E. Segre, and V. Steinberg, "Statistis of partile pair separations in the elasti turbulent (cid:29)ow of a dilute

[42℄ N. Mordant, J.-P. Pinton, and F. Chilla, "Charaterization of turbulene in a losed (cid:29)ow", J. Phys. II Frane 7, 1729(cid:21)1742

polymer solution", Europhys. Lett. 68, 529 (2004).

(1997).

[43℄ J. H. Titon and O. Cadot, "The statistis of power injeted in a losed turbulent (cid:29)ow: Constant torque foring versus

onstant veloity foring", Phys. Fluids 15, 625(cid:21)640 (2003).

[44℄ J. R. Stokes, L. J. W. Graham, N. J. Lawson, and D. V. Boger, "Swirling (cid:29)ow of visoelasti (cid:29)uids", J. Fluid Meh. 429,

67(cid:21)153 (2001).

[45℄ B.I. Shraiman and E.D. Siggia, "Salar turbulene", Nature 405, 639(cid:21)646 (2000).

[46℄ V. V. Lebedev, K. S. Turitsyn, "Passive salar evolution in peripheral regions", Phys. Rev. E, 69, 036301 (2004).

[47℄ S. Gerashhenko and V. Steinberg, unpublished.

31

