6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

WATER RESOURCES RESEARCH, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

Miscible displacement fronts of shear thinning ﬂuids inside
rough fractures.

A. Boschan1,2, H. Auradou,1 I. Ippolito,2 R. Chertcoﬀ,2 and J.P. Hulin1

Abstract. The miscible displacement of a shear-thinning ﬂuid by another of same rhe-
ological properties is studied experimentally in a transparent fracture by an optical tech-
nique imaging relative concentration distributions. The fracture walls have complemen-
tary self-aﬃne geometries and are shifted laterally in the direction perpendicular to the
mean ﬂow velocity U : the ﬂow ﬁeld is strongly channelized and macro dispersion con-
trols the front structure for P´eclet numbers above a few units. The global front width
increases then linearly with time and reﬂects the velocity distribution between the dif-
ferent channels. In contrast, at the local scale, front spreading is similar to Taylor dis-
persion between plane parallel surfaces. Both dispersion mechanisms depend strongly on
the ﬂuid rheology which shifts from Newtonian to shear-thinning when the ﬂow rate in-
creases. In the latter domain, increasing the concentration enhances the global front width
but reduces both Taylor dispersion (due to the ﬂattening of the velocity proﬁle in the
gap of the fracture) and the size of medium scale front structures.

1. Introduction

The transport of dissolved species in fractured formations
is of primary importance in a large number of groundwater
systems : predicting the migration rate and the dispersion
of contaminants from a source inside or at the surface of a
fractured rock is then relevant to many ﬁelds such as waste
storage and water management (National Research Council
[1996]; Adler and Thovert [1999]; Berkowitz [2002]).

In the present work, these phenomena are studied exper-
imentally by analyzing relative concentration distributions
during the displacement of a transparent ﬂuid by a miscible
dyed one inside a model transparent rough fracture. A key
characteristic of these fractures is the self-aﬃne geometry of
their wall surfaces : it reproduces the multiscale geometri-
cal characteristics of many faults and “fresh” fractures. For
such surfaces, the variance ∆h2 =< (h(~r + ~∆r)
h(~r))2 >
of the local height h(x, y) of the surface with respect to a
reference plane veriﬁes :

−

∆h
l

= (

∆r
l

)ζ,

(1)

in which (x, y) are coordinates in the plane of the fracture,
ζ is the self-aﬃne exponent, l the topothesy (i.e. the length
scale at which the slope ∆h/∆r is of the order of 1).

In this work, the rough fracture walls have complemen-
tary geometries : they are separated by a small distance
normal to their mean plane and shifted laterally relative
to each other. This shear displacement induces local aper-
ture variations : experimental and numerical investigations
demonstrate that, in this case, preferential ﬂow paths dom-
inantly perpendicular to the shear appear (Gentier et al.

1Laboratoire Fluides, Automatique et Syst`emes

Thermiques, UMR No. 7608, CNRS, Universit´e Paris 6 and
11, Bˆatiment 502, Universit´e Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex,
France.

2Grupo de Medios Porosos, Facultad de Ingenieri´a,

Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paseo Col´on 850, 1063
Buenos-Aires, Argentina.

Copyright 2013 by the American Geophysical Union.
0043-1397 /13/$9.00

[1997]; Yeo et al. [1998]; Auradou et al. [2005]). These paths
strongly inﬂuence ﬂuid transport (Neretnieks et al [1982];
Tsang and Tsang [1987]; Brown et al
[1998]; Becker and
Shapiro [2000]), particularly when the mean ﬂow is, as here,
parallel to these channels.

The objective of the present paper is to study the in-
ﬂuence of the structures of the aperture ﬁeld on the dis-
placement front of a transparent ﬂuid by a dyed miscible
one. For that purpose, the displacement process is studied
at diﬀerent length scales in order to identify the diﬀerent
front spreading mechanisms. Practically, the displacement
front is analyzed in regions of interest of variable widths W
perpendicular to the ﬂow.
If W is smaller than the local
fracture aperture, the front spreading will be dispersive and
controlled by local mechanisms; for large W values of the
order of transverse size of the fracture (100 times the aper-
ture) the front structure is controlled, on the contrary, by
preferential ﬂow paths. Additional informations on these
mechanisms will be obtained from the inﬂuence of the ﬂow
velocity and of the rheology of the ﬂuids.

2. Dispersion and front spreading in rough
fractures

Previous studies by Ippolito et al. [1993]; Roux et al.
[1998]; Adler and Thovert
[1999]; Detwiler et al. [2000]
described mixing in fractures by a Gaussian convection-
dispersion equation. They suggested that the dispersion co-
eﬃcient is the sum of the contributions of geometrical and
Taylor dispersion. The latter results from the local advec-
tion velocity gradient between the walls of the fracture : its
inﬂuence is balanced by molecular diﬀusion across the gap.
There results a macroscopic Fickian dispersion parallel to
the ﬂow (Taylor [1951]; Aris [1958]) characterized by the
coeﬃcient :

D
Dm

= τ + f P e2,

(2)

where Dm is the molecular diﬀusion coeﬃcient, the P´eclet
number P e = U a0/Dm represents the relative inﬂuence of
the velocity gradients and molecular diﬀusion, U the average
ﬂow velocity in the whole fracture, a the gap thickness, τ the
tortuosity of the void space reducing the rate of longitudinal
molecular diﬀusion (Bear [1972]; Drazer and Koplik [2002]);
for ﬂat parallel plates and a Newtonian ﬂuid, f = 1/210.

1

X - 2

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

3. Experimental set-up and procedure

3.1. Model fractures and ﬂuid injection set-up

Geometrical dispersion reﬂects the disorder of the veloc-
ity ﬁeld in the fracture plane and may be signiﬁcant in
rough fractures. Theoretical investigations by Roux et al.
[1998] suggest that this geometrical mechanism is impor-
tant at intermediate P e values; at lower (resp. higher)
P´eclet numbers, molecular diﬀusion (resp. Taylor disper-
sion) are dominant. Scaling arguments allow in addition to
estimate P´eclet numbers corresponding to the limits of these
domains : they depend on the mean, the variance and the
correlation length of the aperture ﬁeld. Such predictions are
supported by experimental investigations on model fractures
with a relatively weak disorder of the aperture ﬁeld (Ippolito
et al. [1993, 1994]; Adler and Thovert [1999]; Detwiler et al.
[2000]).

In natural fractures, however, experimental (Neretnieks
et al [1982]; Brown et al [1998]; Becker and Shapiro [2000])
and numerical (Drazer et al. [2004]) studies indicate that
mass transport is strongly inﬂuenced by large scale prefer-
ential ﬂow channels parallel to the mean velocity. Anoma-
lous dispersion is then expected as in the analogous case of
porous media with strata of diﬀerent permeabilities (Math-
eron and de Marsily [1980]). As pointed out by (Roux
et al. [1998]), similar eﬀects are expected in fracture if the
ﬂow velocities vary more slowly along a streamline than per-
pendicular to it. Then, large distorsions of the displace-
ment front (Drazer et al. [2004]) may appear and grow lin-
early with time. Moreover, in highly distorted parts of the
front, transverse concentration gradients appear and induce
a transverse tracer ﬂux that further enhances dispersion.

Another important parameter inﬂuencing miscible dis-
placements is the rheology of the ﬂowing ﬂuids (relevant,
for instance, to enhanced oil recovery using polymer solu-
tions (Bird, Armstrong and Hassager [1987]). Non linear
rheological properties modify indeed the ﬂow velocity ﬁeld
and, more speciﬁcally, the ﬂow velocity contrasts (Shah and
Yortsos [1995]; Fadili et al. [2002]).
In the case of shear-
thinning ﬂuids in simple geometries like tubes or parallel
plates, the ﬂow proﬁle is no longer parabolic but ﬂattens in
the center part of the ﬂow channels where the shear rate is
lowest : this decreases the dispersion coeﬃcient (compared
to the Newtonian case) but the square law variation of the
dispersion coeﬃcient with the Peclet number is still satisﬁed.
For instance, when the viscosity µ varies with the shear rate
˙γn−1, Eq. 2 remains valid
˙γ following a power law : µ
but f is a function of n (Vartuli et al. [1995]).

∝

In heterogeneous media, on the contrary, numerical inves-
tigations suggest that the ﬂow of shear thinning ﬂuids gets
concentrated in a smaller number of preferential ﬂow paths
than for Newtonian ones (Shah and Yortsos [1995]; Fadili
et al. [2002]): the macrodispersion reﬂecting large scale dis-
torsions of the displacement front is then increased (even
though the local dispersion due to the ﬂow proﬁle in indi-
vidual channels is still reduced). Finally, in this work and
in contrast with oil recovery, the polymer concentration in
the injected and displaced ﬂuids is the same : we investi-
gate only its inﬂuence on the transport of a passive solute.
The inﬂuence of the shear thinning properties is studied by
running experiments with diﬀerent polymer concentrations.

Figure 1. Schematic view of the experimental setup.

Model fractures used in the present work are made of
two complementary transparent rough self-aﬃne surfaces
clamped together. A self-aﬃne surface is ﬁrst generated nu-
merically using the mid-point algorithm (Feder [1988]) with
a self-aﬃne exponent ζ equal to the value 0.8 measured for
many materials, including granite (Bouchaud [2003]). Then,
the surfaces are carved by a computer controlled milling
machine into a parallelepipedic plexiglas block. The ﬁnal
steps of the machining require an hemispherical tool with
a 600 µm diameter. The eﬀective size of the surface is 171
by 85 mm and the diﬀerence in height between the lowest
and highest points of the surface is 19.2 mm while the mean
square deviation of the height is 3 mm. The two surfaces
are exactly complementary but for a 0.33 mm relative shift
parallel to their length; they are bounded on their larger
sides by 10 mm wide borders rising slightly above the sur-
faces. The geometries of these borders is chosen so that they
match perfectly and act as spacers leaving an average mean
distance a0 = 0.75 mm between the surfaces when the blocks
are clamped together. In all cases, the gap between the sur-
faces is large enough so that the two walls do not touch :
both the mean aperture a0 and the relative displacement are
the same in all experiments.

The fracture assembly is positioned vertically (Fig. 1)
with the two vertical sides (corresponding to the borders)
sealed while the two others are open. The upper side of
the model is connected to a syringe pump sucking the ﬂuids
upwards out of the fracture. The lower horizontal side is
dipped into a reservoir which may be moved up and down.
The fracture is ﬁrst saturated by sucking ﬂuid out of the
lower reservoir into the model. Then, the original ﬂuid is
replaced by the other after lowering the reservoir before
raising it again and starting the displacement experiment
by pumping ﬂuid at the top of the model. This procedure
avoids unwanted intrusions while replacing a ﬂuid by the
other and allows to purge completely the lower reservoir; a
perfectly straight front between the injected and displaced
ﬂuids is obtained in this way at the onset of the experiment.

3.2. Fluid preparation and characteristics

In all experiments, the injected and displaced ﬂuids are
identical water-scleroglucan solutions but for a small amount
of Water Blue dye (Handbook of dyes [2002]) added to one of
the solutions at a concentration c0 = 0.3g/l. N aCl is added
to the other solution to keep both densities equal. The dye
has been chosen such that it has no physico-chemical in-
teraction with the model walls and can be considered as a

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

X - 3

passive tracer. The molecular diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the dye
10−10 m2.s−1 is determined independently from
Dm
Taylor dispersion measurements in a capillary tube.

6.5

≃

×

The rheological properties of the scleroglucan solutions
have been characterized using a Contraves LS30 Couette
−1.
rheometer in range of shear rates 0.016 s
The rheological properties of the solutions have been veriﬁed
to be constant with time within experimental error (over a
time lapse of 3 days) and to be identical for the dyed and
transparent solutions (for a same polymer concentrations).
The variation of the viscosity η with ˙γ is well ﬁtted by the
classical Carreau formula :

87 s

−1

≤

≤

˙γ

η =

η0
η∞
−
(1 + ( ˙γ
˙γ0 )2)

1−n
2

+ η∞.

(3)

The values of these rheological parameters for the poly-
mer solutions used in the present work are listed in Ta-
ble 1. η∞ is taken equal to the value of the solvent vis-
−3 P a.s for water) since its determination would
cosity (10
require measurements beyond the experimental range lim-
ited to ˙γ = 87 s
˙γ0 corresponds to a crossover
between two regimes. For ˙γ < ˙γ0, the viscosity η tends
to η0, and the ﬂuid behaves as a newtonian ﬂuid. On the
other hand, for ˙γ > ˙γ0, η decreases following a power law
˙γ(n−1). Note that, due to the small volume fraction of
µ
polymer, the molecular diﬀusion coeﬃcient keeps the same
value as in pure water.

−1. In Eq.(3),

∝

Table 1. Rheological parameters of scleroglucan solutions
used in the ﬂow experiments.

Polymer Conc.
ppm
500
1000

n

η0
mP a.s
0.38 ± 0.04 0.077 ± 0.018
410 ± 33
0.26 ± 0.02 0.026 ± 0.004 4490 ± 342

˙γ0
s−1

3.3. Optical relative concentration measurements

The ﬂow rate is kept constant during each experiment
and ranges between 0.01 and 1 ml/min. The total duration
of the experiments in order to obtain a complete saturation
of the fracture by the invading ﬂuid varies between 20 min
and 33 hours. The transparent fracture is back illuminated
by a light panel : about 100 images of the distribution of
light transmitted through the fracture are recorded at con-
stant intervals during the ﬂuid displacement using a Roper
Coolsnap HQ digital camera with a high, 12 bits, dynamic
range. Reference images are recorded both before the exper-
iments and after the full saturation by the displacing ﬂuid
in order to have images corresponding to the fracture fully
saturated with both the transparent and the dyed ﬂuid.

The local relative concentration of the displacing ﬂuid
(averaged over the fracture aperture) is determined from
these images by the following procedure. First, the ab-
sorbance A(x, y, t) of light by the dye on an image obtained
at the time t is computed by the relation :

A(x, y, t) = ln(

It(x, y)
I(x, y, t)

)

(4)

in which It(x, y) and I(x, y, t) are the transmitted light in-
tensities (in grey levels) measured for a pixel of coordinates
(x, y) respectively when the fracture is saturated with trans-
parent ﬂuid and at time t. When the fracture is saturated
with the dyed ﬂuid (c(x, y) = c0), the transmitted light in-
tensity is I0(x, y) so that the adsorbance A0(x, y) is :

The relation between the local concentration c(x, y, t) (av-

eraged over the local fracture aperture), the dye concentra-

tion c0 in the dyed ﬂuid and the absorbances A and A0

has been determined independently from calibration pic-

tures realized with the fracture saturated with dyed solu-

±

tions of concentrations c increasing from 0.1 to 0.5 g/l. The

ratio A(x, y)/A0(x, y) is found experimentally to be con-

stant within

3% over the picture area :

for more preci-

sion, the ratio < A >x,y / < A0 >x,y of the averages is

therefore used to determine the calibration curve. Due to
non linear adsorbance (Detwiler et al. [2000]), the relation

c/c0 =< A >x,y / < A0 >x,y predicted by Beer-Lambert’s

law is not valid. The variation of c/c0 with < A > / < A0 >

follows however accurately the polynomial relation :

c
c0

A
A0

= b1

+ b2(

)2 + b3(

A
A0

(6)

with b1 = 0.186

0.023, b2 = 0.0087

0.04 and b3 =

0.108

0.021. Practically, Eq. 6 is applied to all pixels (x, y)

±

in the pictures recorded during the experiment in order to

±

obtain c(x, y, t)/c0. An instantaneous relative concentration

map obtained in this way is displayed in Fig. 2.

A
A0

)3

±

Figure 2. Experimental relative concentration ﬁeld ob-
tained with a 1000 ppm polymer concentration for a mean
front displacement of half the fracture length. Grey lev-
els represent values of the ratio c(x, y, t)/c0. Size of
70 mm; only a part of the ac-
ﬁeld of view : 81 mm
tual image is shown. Solid line :
front proﬁle xf (y, t)
as deﬁned in section 6.1; white dots are pixels where
c(x, y, t)/c0 = 0.5

0.03.

×

±

In the following, c0 is omitted and c(x,y,t) refers to the
local relative concentration at a given time (still averaged as

above over the fracture aperture).

4. Local concentration variations

As already pointed above, transport in the fracture re-

sults from the combination of front spreading due to large

scale ﬂow velocity variations and of mixing due to local dis-

persion mechanisms and concentration gradients. In order

to identify these diﬀerent processes, a local analysis is ﬁrst

A0(x, y) = ln(

It(x, y)
I0(x, y)

)

(5)

performed.

X - 4

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

same as in the reverse conﬁguration : there is therefore no
eﬀect of small residual density contrasts..

Figure 3. Time variation of the relative concentration
c(x, y, t) for x = 20 mm and y = 36 mm for 1000 ppm
polymer solutions. Mean ﬂow velocity U = 0.014mm/s
(P e = 150). Solid line : ﬁt by Eq.7 with t(x, y) = 1212 s
and D(x, y) = 0.315 mm2/s.

For each pixel (x, y), the variation c(x, y, t) with time of
the local relative concentration of the dyed ﬂuid has been
determined; as can be seen in Fig. 3, it is well ﬁtted by the
following solution of the convection-dispersion equation cor-
responding to the stepwise concentration variations induced
experimentally :

c(x, y) =

(1 + erf

1
2

t(x, y)
t
−
q4 D(x,y)

U 2

t

)

(7)

In Eq. 7, U is the mean velocity, D(x, y) is the local disper-
sion coeﬃcient and t(x, y) the mean transit time. Note that,
if the injected ﬂuid is the transparent one, the + sign should
be replaced by a - in Eq. 7. Both D(x, y) and t(x, y) are
deﬁned locally and may depend on the measurement point.
In the following, the variations of these quantities are an-
alyzed : on the one hand, the spatial variations of t(x, y)
reveal the channelized structure of the ﬂow that leads to
macrodispersion. On the other hand, D(x, y) reﬂects local
mixing processes taking place on each ﬂow line.

5. Local dispersive mixing

x

≤

≤

In this section, the variation of D(x, y) is studied as a
function of the distance x from the inlet and of the ﬂuid
velocity and rheology. The probability distribution of the
local values of D(x, y) determined for all pixels at a same
distance x for a given experiment is displayed in Fig. 4a in
125mm);
a grey level scale as a function of x (45
Fig. 4b shows the two extreme distributions corresponding
to x = 45 (solid line) and 125 mm. One observes that the
mean value D of the distributions increases only by 20% be-
tween x = 45 and 125 mm. x (D will just be refered to as D
in the following and the deviations of the local values will be
characterized by the width ∆D of P (D) at mid-height which
increases also slowly with distance). The drift of D may be
due to slow variations of the mean aperture and ﬂow veloc-
ity. It may also reﬂect an increased dispersion in distorted
regions of the front : there, dye diﬀuses across the ﬂow lines
which contributes to broaden the front. The slow variation
of the mean value of D with x together with the good ﬁt
displayed in Fig. 3, demonstrate that the Fickian dispersion
model describes well the local spreading of the front during
all the experiment . The symmetry of the process is ﬁnally
checked by realizing the same experiments with the trans-
parent solution displacing the dyed one. The distributions
of the dispersion coeﬃcients for given values of x are the

Figure 4. Probability distribution P (D, x) of the dis-
persion coeﬃcient for a dyed solution displacing a trans-
parent one : mean ﬂow velocity U = 0.014 mm/s (P e =
150), polymer concentration 1000 ppm). - (a) Grey lev-
els correspond to the value of the probability P(D) at the
corresponding values of D and x - (b) Distributions P (D)
respectively for x = 45 (solid line) and 125 mm (dashed
line).

The dependence of the local dispersion on the ﬂow veloc-
ity U for the 500 ppm and 1000 ppm solutions is displayed
in ﬁgure 5 where D is plotted as a function of the P´eclet
number P e deﬁned above. The same variation trends are
followed for both solutions : for low P e values the disper-
sion coeﬃcient tends towards a constant close to 1, while at
high P e, D increases as the square of P e. These variations
are similar to the predictions of Eq. 2 (solid, dotted and
dashed lines) also plotted in ﬁgure 5 for a newtonian ﬂuid
˙γn−1
and two power law shear thinning ﬂuids for which µ
(n is taken equal to the values listed in Tab. 1 and the
value of f in Eq.2 is computed from Eq. 4 in Boschan et al
[2003]). The overall agreement observed implies that Tay-
lor dispersion is indeed the dominant mechanism controlling
local dispersion.

∝

In a more detailed analysis, one must however take into
account the fact that, for real ﬂuids, the viscosity does not
diverge at low shear rates but becomes constant (Newtonian
plateau viscosity) for ˙γ < ˙γ0. In a Poiseuille Newtonian ﬂow
between two parallel ﬂat plates, the shear rate is maximum
at the wall with ˙γ = 6U/a. It follows that the transition
value ˙γ0 is reached for U = Uc = a ˙γ0/6. Using the val-
ues of
˙γ0 in Tab.1, the velocities Uc (resp. P´eclet numbers
P ec) corresponding to the 500 ppm and 1000 ppm solutions
are 0.01 mm/s and 0.003 mm/s (resp. P ec = 11 and 4).
Below P ec, the dispersion coeﬃcient should be the same as
for a Newtonian ﬂuid; above P ec, its variation should pro-
gressively merge with that predicted for power law ﬂuids.
This crossover is clearly observed in Fig.5 : for P e < 30,
values of D obtained with the 500 ppm and 1000 ppm solu-
tions co¨ıncide with the predictions for Newtonian ﬂuids. At
high P´eclet numbers, data points corresponding to the two
solutions get separated and the values of D become close to
the predictions for power law ﬂuids with the corresponding
values of n.

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

X - 5

set of independent parallel channels where the eﬀective ﬂow

velocity U (y) depends only on the transverse coordinate.

Figure 5. Variation of normalized dispersion coeﬃcient
D/Dm with P e = U a0/Dm.
Insert : variation of the
dispersivity ld = D/U . Solid, dotted and dashed lines :
predictions from Eq. 2 respectively for n = 1 (Newtonian
ﬂuid), n = 0.38 and n = 0.26 (shear thinning solutions
with respective 500 ppm and 1000 ppm polymer concen-
trations).

It is often convenient to replace the dispersion coeﬃ-
cient D by the dispersivity ld = D/U to identify more
easily the inﬂuence of spatial heterogeneities of the ﬂow
ﬁeld. For Taylor like dispersion verifying Eq.2 and for a
Newtonian ﬂuid, the dispersivity has a minimum equal to
ld = 2a/√210
0.0095a for P e = √210
14.5. The insert
of Fig.5 displays the variation of the dispersivity with P e :
its minimum value corresponds well to the theoretical pre-
diction for Newtonian ﬂuids (solid line). This conﬁrms that,
in this range of P´eclet numbers, the two polymer solutions
behave like Newtonian ﬂuids.

≈

≃

These results demonstrate that the local dispersion
D(x, y) in the rough model fracture is mainly due to the
ﬂow proﬁle in the gap between the walls and similar to that
between ﬂat parallel plates. This is likely due to two prop-
erties of the ﬂow ﬁeld : ﬁrst, as for parallel plates, ﬂow
lines initially located in the center of the gap remain there
during their full path through the fracture and, similarly,
those located close to a wall only move away from it through
molecular diﬀusion. Also, the orientation of the local ﬂow
velocity is always close to that of the mean ﬂow as will be
seen below. In the next section, we discuss on the contrary
macrodispersion due to variations in the plane of the frac-
ture of the local velocities (averaged this time over the gap).

Figure 6. Greyscale map of the normalized local
transit time t(x, y)U/x. Flow is from left to right.
Dark (resp. light) regions correspond to locations where
t(x, y)U/x < 1 (resp. t(x, y)U/x > 1). Mean ﬂow veloc-
ity U = 0.014 mm/s (P e = 150), polymer concentration
1000 ppm).

The validity of this assumption is tested in Fig. 6 in
which the values of the normalized transit time t(x, y)U/x

are represented as grey levels at all points (x, y) inside the
ﬁeld of view; t(x, y) is the local eﬀective transit time deter-

mined by ﬁtting the curve of Fig. 3 corresponding to point

(x, y) by solutions of Eq. 7. Dark (resp. light) pixels mark
points where t(x, y)U/x is respectively higher (resp. lower)

than 1 : dark and light streaks globally parallel to x are

clearly visible and extend over the full length of the model

fractures. These streaks correspond to slow (resp. fast) ﬂow

paths and their orientation deviates only slightly from x :

this is in agreement with the above simple model of paral-

lel ﬂow paths with diﬀerent velocities remaining correlated

along the full path length.

Another important feature of the maps of Fig.

6 is

that they allow to determine an instantaneous front pro-

ﬁle xf (y, t) at a given time t :

in the following, it will be

deﬁned as the set of all points for which t(x, y) = t. In our

experiments this proﬁle was very similar to the isoconcen-

tration line c(x, y, t)/c0 = 0.5 (as can be seen in Fig. 2). In

the following, the macrodispersion process will be directly

characterized by the variations of these front proﬁles with

time without analyzing extensively the concentration maps.

6. Macrodispersion in the model fractures

6.2. Global front dynamics

6.1. Flow structure and mean front proﬁle

As pointed above, the complementary rough walls of the
fracture model are translated relative to each other in the
direction y perpendicular to the mean ﬂow (along the x axis)
: in this conﬁguration, large scale channels parallel to x ap-
pear (Gentier et al. [1997]; Drazer et al. [2004]; Auradou
et al. [2005]) with only weak variations of the ﬂow velocity
along their length (Auradou et al. [2006]). In the following,
we use a simple model in which the fracture is described as a

Fig.7 displays several front proﬁles obtained at diﬀerent

times by this procedure. As expected, the proﬁle is initially

quite ﬂat but large structures appear and grow with time.

A key feature is the fact that similar structures are observed

on all fronts : it is only their size parallel to the mean ﬂow

that increases with time. This conﬁrms the large correlation

length parallel to x of the high and low velocity regions and,

therefore, the ﬂow channelization already assumed above.

X - 6

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

fracture (a well known result for stratiﬁed media with neg-

ligible exchange between layers).

For both Newtonian (η = cst.) and power law (η

∝
ﬂuids the relative velocity ﬂuctuations δU
U are expected
to be constant with U : σ(t)/x(t) should therefore be in-
dependent of the ﬂow rate Q. The variations of σ(t)/x(t)

∝

˙γn−1)

with the normalized velocity U/Uc for the two polymer so-

lutions used in our experiments are displayed in Fig.8 (Uc

is the cross-over velocity between the Newtonian and shear

thinning behaviours introduced in section. 5), The values of
σ(t)/x(t) are averages over several time intervals (error bars
indicate ﬂuctuations with time). For U < Uc, σ(t)/x(t)

retains a constant value close to 0.05 independent of the

polymer concentration which likely corresponds to a New-
tonian behaviour. For U > Uc, σ(t)/x(t) increases faster

with U for the more concentrated (1000 ppm) solution. The

normalized widths should reach a new limit at higher ﬂow

rates (U

Uc) : theoretical values for the two solutions are

≫

indicated as horizontal lines.

More precisely, the shear rate ˙γ is always zero in the mid-

dle of the gap of the fracture and highest at the walls. If the

shear rate at the wall is larger than the transition value ˙γ0

(see section 5), there are two domains in the velocity pro-

ﬁle : the ﬂuid rheology is Newtonian in the central part of

the fracture and non Newtonian near the walls (Gabbanelli

et al. [2005]). When the ﬂow rate Q increases, the fraction

of the ﬂow section where ﬂow is Newtonian shrinks while

the fraction where it is non Newtonian expands : for a shear

thinning ﬂuid with a power law characteristic (n < 1), the

average velocity in a given ﬂow channel (the integral of the

velocity proﬁle over the fracture gap) increases faster with
p1/n) than for New-
the longitudinal pressure gradient (as

∇
p). This enhances velocity contrasts be-

tonian ﬂuids (as

∇

tween channels of diﬀerent apertures (assuming that they

are subject to similar pressure gradients) and ﬁnally in-

creases the front width compared to the Newtonian case.

These eﬀects get larger as the concentration increases from

500 to 1000 ppm both because the exponent n decreases and

because the transition shear rate ˙γc is smaller (Tab. 1).

This lower value of ˙γc for the 1000 ppm solution does in-

deed increas the fraction of the ﬂow section where the ﬂuid

rheology is shear thinning.

Figure 7. Front proﬁles xf (y, t) at times t = 6.5, 8, 9.5,
11 and 12.5 min for a 1000 ppm polymer solution and
U = 0.014 mm/s (P e = 150) The mean ﬂow velocity is
oriented from the bottom to the top of the ﬁgure).

In such cases, as pointed out by Drazer et al. [2004], the
size of the structures of the front, and therefore its global
width σ(t) should increase linearly with distance (and time).
In the following, the width σ(t) is deﬁned by σ2(t) =<
< xf (y, t) >y)2 >y in which < xf (y, t) >y is
(xf (y, t)
the mean distance of the front from the inlet at time t :
as shown in the insert of Fig.8, σ(t) increases as expected
linearly with time.

−

Figure 8. Variation in Log linear coordinates of the
relative front width σ(t)/x(t) with the normalized mean
velocity U/Uc; crossover velocity Uc = 0.01 mm/s (resp.
0.003 mm/s) for ((cid:3)) : 500 ppm (resp.
) 1000 ppm)
solutions. Solid, dotted and dashed horizontal lines :
predicted values respectively for a Newtonian ﬂuid and
power law ﬂuids with same index n as the 500 ppm and
1000 ppm solutions.
Insert : variation of σ(t) (mm)
with the distance x for a 1000 ppm solution. Diamonds
:U = 0.0056 mm/s (P e = 60), Crosses :U = 0.056 mm/s
(P e = 600). Dashed line : linear regression.

◦

(

Since the mean distance < xf (y, t) >y also increases lin-
early with time, the ratio σ(t)/ < xf (y, t) >y remains con-
stant and may therefore be used to characterize the magni-
tude of the macrodispersion. In the framework of the simple
model assuming parallel independent channels with diﬀerent
ﬂow velocities, σ(t) and < xf (y, t) > are respectively of the
order of δU t and U t where δU the root mean square of the
velocity variations between the diﬀerent channels. There-
fore, the ratio σ(t)/ < xf (y, t) >y corresponds to the rel-
ative magnitude δU/U of the velocity contrasts inside the

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

X - 7

6.3. Front geometry

stance, a larger extension parallel to the mean ﬂow for the
500 ppm solution.

Figure 9. Front geometries for a mean distance from
the inlet equal to half the fracture length. Solid (resp.
dashed) lines : 1000 ppm (resp. 500ppm) solutions. Top
(resp. bottom) curves : U = 0.3 mm/s i.e. P e = 3000
(resp. U = 0.003 mm/s i.e. P e = 30). The two sets of
curves have been shifted to allow for easier comparisons.
Insert : close up of the upper curves (U = 0.3 mm/s i.e.
P e = 3000).

In the previous section, the overall front width has been

shown to depend on the global ﬂow rate and on the ﬂuid

rheology; their inﬂuence on the detailed front structure will

now be analyzed. Figure 9 compares front geometries ob-

served for the two solutions used in the experiments at

the lowest (resp. highest) mean velocities investigated :

U = 0.003 mm/s (resp. 0.3 mm/s). The lower velocity is

below Uc and the rheology of both ﬂuids is therefore New-

tonian. The polymer concentration plays then a minor part

and the front geometries are very similar (lower curves). In

addition, at this mean velocity, the P´eclet number is

3

and therefore lower than the value P e

14.5 (see section 5)

corresponding to the crossover between Taylor dispersion

≃

and longitudinal molecular diﬀusion. As a result, trans-

port at the local scale is controlled by molecular diﬀusion

which smears out the eﬀect of local velocity ﬂuctuations and

≈

smoothens the front geometry.

The higher velocity U = 0.3 mm/s (upper curves) is well

above Uc : the global front width increases then with the

polymer concentration (see section 6.2), as can be seen for

the two upper curves in Fig.9. However, at smaller length

scales, the geometrical characteristics of the front and their

dependence on the ﬂuid rheology are more complex. Geo-

metrical features of lateral size below 10 mm have, for in-

Figure 10. Variation of the ratio ∆y(∆x)/∆x as a func-
tion of log10(∆x) for the same fronts as in Fig. 9 with
◦
(resp. (cid:3)) : 1000 ppm (resp. 500 ppm) polymer solutions.
Symbols with no lines : U = 0.003 mm/s (P e = 30) and
with dotted lines : U = 0.3 mm/s (P e = 3000). Insert
: variation of log10(∆y/∆xζf ) as a function of log10(∆x)
(ζf has been chosen equal to 0.8 in order to provide the
best ﬁt with a power law at large ∆x values).

Previous theoretical,experimental and numerical studies
of displacement fronts between sheared complementary self-
aﬃne walls indicate that their geometry is also self-aﬃne
(over a ﬁnite range of length scales) with the same charac-
teristic exponent ζ as the fracture walls (Roux et al. [1998];
Drazer et al. [2004]; Auradou et al. [2001]). Such self-aﬃne
proﬁles y(x) may be characterized quantitatively from the
ymin of y(x) in a window of width
maximum variation ymax
∆x (ymax and ymin are the maximum and minimum values
of y(x) in this window). In this ”min-max” method, the av-
erage ∆y(∆x) of the values of ymax
ymin is computed for
all locations of the window inside the proﬁle and the process
is repeated for the diﬀerent values of ∆x. For a self-aﬃne
curve of characteristic roughness exponent ζf , one has, for
instance, ∆y
f (ζf = 1 corresponds to a Euclidian
curve).

∆xζ

∝

−

−

This result is veriﬁed in the insert of Fig.10 where the
ratio ∆y/∆xζf is plotted as a function of ∆x in log-log co-
ordinates for ζf = 0.8 : ∆y/∆xζf is indeed observed to
remain constant over a broad range of variation of ∆x (see
insert of Fig. 10). The lower boundary of this self aﬃne
domain increases slightly with the polymer concenration
from
5 mm (1000 ppm) and depends
1). For ∆x
weakly on the ﬂow velocity (provided P e
below this cross over length, the slope of the curves is close
to 0.2, reﬂecting an Euclidean geometry with ∆y

3 mm (500 ppm) to

∆x.

≫

≈

≈

In order to analyse the inﬂuence of the ﬂuid properties
and of the ﬂow velocity U on these results, the variation of
the ratio ∆y/∆x with ∆x is displayed in Fig. 10 for the two
polymer solutions and for two diﬀerent values of U (U < Uc
and U > Uc). ∆y has been normalised by the window width
∆x to reduce the amplitude of the global variations of ∆y
and make more visible the diﬀerences between the curves.

For the lowest velocity U , the curves are similar for both
polymer concentrations (as expected for a Newtonian rheol-
ogy). The ratio ∆y/∆x increases with U , reﬂecting a higher
amplitude of the geometrical features of the front at all
length scales : in addition to this global trend, the variation
of ∆y with ∆x depends however signiﬁcantly on the polymer
concentration. For U > Uc (upper curves in Fig. 10), fea-
tures of the front with large transverse sizes ∆x are of larger

∝

X - 8

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

≈

amplitude ∆y for the more concentrated solution (as noted
above); on the contrary, smaller features corresponding to
low ∆x values are more developed for the less concentrated
solution (this is qualitatively visible on Fig. 9). The two
curves cross each other for ∆x
4 mm. This attenuation of
small scale features of the front for the more concentrated so-
lution may reﬂect an enhancement of the transverse diﬀusion
of the ﬂuid momentum due to its higher viscosity (in other
words, drag forces between parallel layers of ﬂuid moving at
diﬀerent velocities become larger). This smoothens out both
the local velocity gradients and the associated small features
of the front but does not inﬂuence large scale velocity varia-
tions. These are due to eﬀective aperture contrasts between
between parallel channels : their inﬂuence is ampliﬁed when
the exponent n decreases for higher polymer concentrations,
resulting in a larger global front width parallel to the ﬂow.

7. Discussion and conclusion

Studying miscible displacement processes by an optical
method in a transparent model fracture has revealed impor-
tant characteristics of ﬂow and transport in rough fractures
: these results may be applicable to ﬂuid displacements and
transport in fractured reservoirs. A major feature of this
approach is the possible simultaneous analysis of both local
mixing and global front spreading due to large scale hetero-
geneities : the diﬀerent transport mechanisms may in par-
ticular be characterized by maps of the local transit time
from the inlet and of the local dispersion coeﬃcient.

The multiple length scales features of natural fractures
have been reproduced by assuming rough walls of comple-
mentary self-aﬃne geometries and with a relative displace-
ment parallel to their mean plane (this models the eﬀect of
shear during fracturing). In the present experiments, this
relative displacement was perpendicular to the mean ﬂow :
this induced a channelization of the ﬂow ﬁeld with small ve-
locity variations along the ﬂow lines and larger ones across
them. Large macrodispersion eﬀects are observed in such a
geometry : in the present experiments, the front width in-
creases linearly with distance from the inlet and its structure
reﬂects closely the velocity variations between the diﬀerent
parallel channels.

In contrast, front spreading at the local scale remains dif-
fusive : moreover, the corresponding dispersion coeﬃcient
is close to that estimated for Taylor dispersion in an Hele-
Shaw cell with plane walls separated by a distance of the
order of the main aperture of the fracture. This value may
however be locally increased by transverse diﬀusion in highly
distorted regions of the fronts where they get locally parallel
to the mean ﬂow.

These ﬂuid displacements are strongly inﬂuenced by the
rheology of the ﬂowing ﬂuids so that additional informa-
tions can be obtained by varying the polymer concentration
and/or the shear rate. At low shear-rates (below a tran-
sition value ˙γ0), the polymer solutions used in the present
work behave like Newtonian ﬂuids and their concentration
has no eﬀect at low mean velocities (U < Uc). At higher
shear rates (U > Uc), the shear thinning eﬀects become sig-
niﬁcant : they increase with the polymer concentration but
may be very diﬀerent depending on the scale of observation.
The global width ∆x of the front parallel to the mean ﬂow
gets larger at larger polymer concentrations while, in con-
trast, smaller geometrical features of the front are reduced.
In addition, for U > Uc, polymer also inﬂuence at the lo-
cal scale the Taylor-like dispersion due to the ﬂattening of
the ﬂow proﬁle between the fracture walls. Such rheological
eﬀects may strongly inﬂuence the eﬃciency of enhanced oil
and waste recovery processes.

Such results raise a number of questions to be answered
in future work. First, one may expect the spatial correla-
tions of the velocity to decay with distance, leading ﬁnally
to normal Fickian dispersion. The present samples were not

long enough to allow for the observation of this transition
: it may however be more easily observable for models de-
signed so that ﬂow is parallel to the relative shear of the
complementary fracture surfaces (in this case, the correla-
tion length should be smaller). Another important issue is
the inﬂuence of contact area on the transport process : one
may expect in this case the development of low velocity re-
gions leading to anomalous dispersion curves.

Acknowledgments. We are indebted to G. Chauvin and R.
Pidoux for their assistance in the realization of the experimen-
tal set-up and to C. Allain for her cooperation and advice. HA
and JPH are funded by the EHDRA (European Hot Dry Rock
Association) in the frame work of the STREP Pilot plan pro-
gram SES6-CT-2003-502706) and by the CNRS-PNRH program.
This work was also supported by a CNRS-Conicet Collaborative
Research Grant (PICS n◦ 2178) and by the ECOS Sud program
n◦ A03E02.

References

Adler, P. M., and J.-F. Thovert (1999), Fractures and Frac-
ture Networks, kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands.

Aris, R. (1956), On the dispersion of a solute particle in a ﬂuid
moving through a tube, Proceedings of the Royal Society. Lon-
don. Series A., 235, 67–77.

Auradou, H., J. P. Hulin, and S. Roux (2001), Experimental study
of miscible displacement fronts in rough self-aﬃne fractures,
Phys. Rev. E, 63, 066306.

Auradou, H., G. Drazer, J. P. Hulin, and J. Koplik (2005),
Permeability anisotropy induced by a shear displacement of
rough fractured walls, Water Resour. Res., 40, W09423,
doi:10.1029/2005WR003938.

Auradou, H., G. Drazer, A. Boschan, J. P. Hulin, and J.
Koplik (2006), Shear displacement induced channelization
in a single fracture, submitted to Geothermics, available
http://fr.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603058.

Bear, J. (1972), Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media., American

Elsevier, New York. 764p.

Berkowitz B. (2002), Characterizing ﬂow and transport in frac-
tured geological media : a review, Advances in water resources,
25, 861-884.

Boschan A., V.J. Charette, S. Gabbanelli, I. Ippolito and R.
Chertcoﬀ (2003), Tracer dispersion of non-newtonian ﬂuids in
a Hele-Shaw cell, Physica A, 327, 49–53.

Becker, M. and A. Shapiro (2000), Tracer transport in fractured
crystalline rock: Evidence of nondiﬀusive breakthrough tail-
ing, Water Resour. Res., 36, 1677–1686.

Bird R.B., R.C Armstrong and O. Hassager (1987), Dynamics of

polymeric liquids, vol 1, 2nd editions, Wiley, New-York.

Bouchaud, E. (2003), The morphology of fracture surfaces: A
tool for understanding crack propagation in complex materi-
als, Surface Review And Letters, 10, 797–814.

Brown S., A. Caprihan and R. Hardy, Experimental observation
of ﬂuid ﬂow channels in a single fracture, J. Geophys. Res.,
103, 5125–5132.

Detwiler R., H. Rajaram, and R. J. Glass (2000), Solute transport
in variable aperture fractures: An investigation of the relative
importance of Taylor dispersion and macrodispersion, Water
Resour. Res., 36, 1611–1625.

Drazer, G., and J. Koplik (2002), Transport in rough self-aﬃne

fractures, Phys. Rev. E, 66, 026303.

Drazer, G., H. Auradou, J. Koplik, and J. P. Hulin (2004),
Self-aﬃne fronts in self-aﬃne fractures: Large and small-scale
structure, Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 014501.

Fadili A., P. Tardyand A. Pearson (2002), A 3D ﬁltration law
for power-law ﬂuids in heterogeneous porous media, J. Non-
Newtonian Fluid Mech., 106, 121–146.

Feder, J. (1988), Fractals, Physics of Solids and Liquids, Plenum

Press, New York.

Gabbanelli S., G. Drazer and J. Koplik (2005), Lattice-Boltzmann
method for non-newtonian (power law) ﬂuids, Phys. Rev. E,
72, 046312.

BOSCHAN ET AL.: MISCIBLE FLUID DISPLACEMENTS INSIDE ROUGH FRACTURES

X - 9

Gentier, S., E. Lamontagne, G. Archambault, and J. Riss (1997),
Anisotropy of ﬂow in a fracture undergoing shear and its re-
lationship to the direction of shearing and injection pressure,
Int. J. Rock Mech. & Min. Sci., 34 (3-4), 412.

Horobin, R.W. and J.A Kiernan (Eds) (2002), Conn’s Biological
Stains: A Handbook of Dyes, Stains and Fluorochromes for
Use in Biology and Medicine, BIOS Scientiﬁc Publishers Ltd.
Ippolito, I., E.J. Hinch, G. Daccord, and J.P. Hulin (1993), Tracer
dispersion in 2-D fractures with ﬂat and rough walls in a radial
ﬂow geometry, Phys. Fluids A, 5,(8), 1952–1961.

Ippolito, I., G. Daccord, E.J. Hinch and J.P. Hulin (1994), Echo
tracer dispersion in model fractures with a rectangular geom-
etry, J. Contaminant Hydrology, 16,(8), 1952–1961.

Matheron G. and G. de Marsily, (1980), Is transport in porous
media always diﬀusive? A counterexample, Water Resour.
Res, 16, 901–917.

NAS Committee on Fracture Characterization and Fluid Flow
(1996), Rock Fractures and Fluid Flow: Contemporary Under-
standing and Applications, National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, D.C.

Neretnieks, I., T. Eriksen, and P. Tahtinen (1982), Tracer move-
ment in a single ﬁssure in granite rock: Some experimental

results and their interpretation, Water Resour. Res., 18, 849–
858.

Roux, S., F. Plourabou´e, and J. P. Hulin (1998), Tracer disper-
sion in rough open cracks, Transport In Porous Media, 32,
97–116.

Shah C.B. and Y.C. Yortsos, (1995), Aspects of ﬂow of power-law
ﬂuids in pourous media, AIChE Journal, vol.41 (5), 1099–1112.
Taylor, G.I. (1953), Dispersion of soluble matter in solvent ﬂow-
ing slowly through a tube Proceedings of the Royal Society.
London. Series A., 219, 186-203.

Tsang Y. W., and C.F. Tsang (1987), Channel model of ﬂow
through fractured media, Water Resour. Res., vol.23 (3), 467–
479.

Vartuli, M., J-P. Hulin and G. Daccord (1995), Taylor disper-
sion in a polymer solution ﬂowing in a capillary tube, AIChE
Journal, vol.41 (7), 1622–1628.

Yeo, I. W., M. H. De Freitas, and R. W. Zimmerman (1998),
Eﬀect of shear displacement on the aperture and permeabil-
ity of a rock fracture, Int. J. Rock Mech. & Min. Sci., 35 (8),
1051–1070.

