6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The ﬂow generated by an active olfactory system of the
red swamp crayﬁsh

P. Denissenko1,∗, S. Lukaschuk1, T. Breithaupt2

1 Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, University of Hull, HU6 7RX, UK
2 Department of Biology, University of Hull, HU6 7RX, UK

September 27, 2013

Abstract

Crayﬁsh are nocturnal animals that mainly rely on chemoreception to locate their
food. Individuals inhabiting still water use fan organs to generate a ﬂow which carries
odour molecules to their receptors. We have carried out visualization and PIV mea-
surements of the ﬂow around a crayﬁsh and designed a model that produces a similar
ﬂow pattern.

Key words: Chemical Sensing, Crayﬁsh, Biomimetics

1 Introduction

Animals depend on information from the environment in order to adjust their behaviour in
time and space. Vital information about the presence and location of food is provided by
chemical stimuli released from distant sources. In contrast to visual and acoustic stimuli,
chemicals are dispersed relatively slowly by molecular diﬀusion and ambient ﬂow. Molecular
diﬀusion is more relevant for the orientation of microscopic organism [1] while larger aquatic
animals when searching for food rely on the information from macroscopic odour plumes.
These plumes form under the inﬂuence of advection of chemical substances downstream of
the odour source and the turbulent diﬀusion of the substance [2].

Animals can orientate to an odour source by following the mean direction of the ﬂow
carrying the odour molecules (odour-gated rheotaxis) and by evaluating details of the turbu-
lent odour plumes [3, 4]. Lobsters, crabs and crayﬁsh have been shown to navigate towards
odour sources using a combination of these strategies [5, 6, 7, 8].

∗Corresponding author. E-mail address: P.Denissenko@hull.ac.uk

1

Figure 1: (A) Location of fan organs and major chemoreceptors (antennules) of crayﬁsh.
The fan organs are multisegmental ﬂagellae (exopodite) of the mouthparts (maxilliped) and
are feathered distally (B). During the power stroke (B; SEM picture) the feathered hairs are
extended. During the recovery stroke (C; SEM picture) the feathered hairs are folded in.
White bars in SEM pictures are to scale (1 mm). Reprinted from [14] with permission of
Biological Bulletin.

Orientation under still water conditions, such as in ponds, lakes, caves, or marine habitats
during slack tide, is less studied. In aquatic environments with little or no ambient water
movement, the ﬂow created by an animal itself could help in odour acquisition and orienta-
tion. Understanding the active olfactory mechanisms of crayﬁsh inhabiting stagnant waters
requires consideration of the ﬂow patterns created by animal fan organs and transport of
odour stimulus to chemoreceptors. This knowledge can potentially be applied in the design
of a ”robot searching for chemical sources”.

Crustaceans are well known for their ability to create directed water currents by pumping
and fanning appendages [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Diﬀerent appendages can create distinct currents.
For example gill currents ventilate the gills, abdominal swimmeret currents aid in locomotion
while currents created by the fan organs have been fan organs have been suggested to be
used for odour acquisition and chemical signalling [14]. The fan organs of a crayﬁsh consist
of the exopodites of the three bilateral maxillipeds located below mouth and antennule as
shown in Fig.1. They are located below the major chemoreceptors, the ﬁrst pair of antennae
(antennules, Fig.1). The fan organs can be used for chemical communication when crayﬁsh
generate a frontal jet [15] or for odour acquisition when crayﬁsh draw water towards the
head region [14].

Previous studies have focused on the activity of the fan organs during odour assessment,
but the general ﬂow structure has not been investigated. Here we quantify the ﬂow generated
by the fan organs of the Red Swamp crayﬁsh Procambarus clarkii. This species lives in
rice ﬁelds and other stagnant water bodies and therefore might utilize the active olfactory
mechanism for odour acquisition.

Crustaceans are used as models for the development of autonomous robots searching for
chemical sources [17, 18, 19]. Such robots can be used in conditions inaccessible to humans

2

Figure 2: Experimental setup. A crayﬁsh is suspended above the treadmill TM. A Lasersheet
is generated by a laser L. The PIV camera is set to a position C1(C2) and the lasersheet
is aligned along the plane LS1(LS2) to measure the 2-dimensional velocity ﬁeld in horizon-
tal(vertical) planes. The camera VC is set for monitoring the crayﬁsh fanning activity.

for detecting chemical leaks. Active generation of ﬂow might facilitate such robots detecting
chemical sources in still ﬂuids.

We performed ﬂow visualization and then took Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) mea-
surements of the velocity ﬁeld around live crayﬁsh. Subsequently we could recreate the ﬂow
patterns and suggest a hydrodynamic mechanism of crayﬁsh active odour acquisition. We
reproduced a ﬂow pattern similar to that generated by an individual crayﬁsh using a triple
nozzle assembly with a closed-loop ﬂow imitating the eﬀect of crayﬁsh fanning. Such a model
can be used as a prototype in design of robots searching for chemical sources.

2 Experiments with live crayﬁsh

Flow visualization and PIV measurements were conducted for ﬁve adult animals: one female
and four males of 7 to 8 cm body length. Crayﬁsh were ﬁxed with a holder glued to its
back in a large aquarium (60 × 60 × 120cm) as shown in Fig. 2. The activity of the fan
organs and position of the antennules were monitored by a video camera (VC). Crayﬁsh were
suspended above a freely rotating treadmill (TM) to reduce restriction by enhancing walking
movements. For the PIV measurements, the animal was blindfolded by black tape to mini-
mize visual disturbances induced by the laser light or by movements of the experimenter (a
potential predator). The animal’s claws were removed by inducing autotomy. this prevented

3

Figure 3: Ink visualization of the jets generated by the crayﬁsh fan organs. Bilateral jets
directed at 25◦ and 40◦ upwards (A), horizontally (B). Unilateral jet directed horizontally
(C).

4

laser sheet shadowing and ﬂow disturbance. Animals were left to acclimatise to the holding
position for at least 30 minutes We found that when exhibiting searching behaviour the
crayﬁsh uses its fan organs to create one or two narrow jets (Fig.3) directed from crosswise
to 45◦ upwards and 45◦ backwards. While steadily waving its fan organs, the animal scans
the incoming ﬂow for chemical stimulus by lowering the outer antennules in front of the fan
organs and performing ﬂicking movements.

To measure velocity ﬁeld of the inﬂow around the crayﬁsh we used a two-dimensional PIV
system by Dantec Dynamics (Denmark) as shown in Fig.2. A two-dimensional horizontal
velocity ﬁeld was provided by a laser sheet directed horizontally (LS1) and a PIV camera
(C1) aligned vertically. Both the PIV camera C1 (12-bit Hi-Sense CCD camera 1280 x 1024
pixel) and the PIV laser L (New Wave Solo Double-pulse Nd YAG laser) were ﬁxed on a
moving frame attached to the vertical translational stage which permitted the measurements
of the velocity ﬁeld to be taken at various vertical distances from the bottom. A transparent
well was mounted in front of the C1 camera to eliminate optical distortion due to ripples on
the water surface and to avoid misalignment introduced by the vertical movement of the PIV
system. To measure the velocity ﬁeld in a vertical plane, a crayﬁsh plane of symmetry, the
laser sheet was aligned vertically (LS2) and the camera was set horizontally (C2). We used
silvered hollow glass spheres of diameter 10µm and density 1.03 g/cm3 as seeding particles
for the PIV.

The PIV system was set to ﬁring at a rate of 1 frame per second. Only data from the
ﬁrst 30 seconds of each experiment was analysed; following this period the animal often
stopped moving and ceased waving its fan organs reacting to the laser pulse. The typical
ﬂow ﬁelds in horizontal and vertical planes averaged over 30 images are shown in Fig.4. As
expected, the ﬂow outside the jets converges towards the fan organs. The ﬂow in the jets is
less regular and has a velocity of an order of magnitude higher than that in the inﬂow. Flow
measurement within the jets was not attempted as changes in jet direction would require
re-alignment of the laser sheet and cameras.

3 Mechanical model

In order to verify the potential ﬂow generating mechanism involved in chemoreception of
crayﬁsh we designed a pump-nozzle assembly with one inlet and two outlets (Fig.5). This
assembly simulated the gross ﬂow of the fan organs when considered as a generator of a
water jet(s) preserving the amount of water involved in the motion. Together with the jets
produced by the fanning activity, a ﬂow appears to replace the ﬂuid forming the jets, and
the ﬂuid entrained by the jets. This was modelled by placing nozzles producing the jets
and a sink close to each other. Pumping water from the sink to the output nozzles provides
conservation of the total volume of the ﬂuid which is the case for the crayﬁsh fan organs.

The ﬂow through the nozzle assembly was adjusted to make the magnitude of velocity
generated by the model similar to that observed in experiments with live animals. A typical
ﬂow patterns generated by the model with horizontally directed jets originating at the po-
sition of the crayﬁsh fan organs is shown in Fig.6. Horizontal velocity near the axis of the

5

Figure 4: Velocity ﬁeld measured with PIV. A typical negative PIV image with the imposed
horizontal velocity ﬁeld measured (A) at the level of crayﬁsh fan organs with the lasersheet
aligned as LS1 in Fig.2 and (B) in the animal plane of symmetry with the lasersheet aligned
as LS2 in Fig.2. Note that the antennules holding the chemo-sensitive aesthetasc-hairs are
lowered to sample the incoming ﬂow. Reference vectors correspond to a velocity of 1 cm/s.

6

Figure 5: Assembly of one inlet and two outlets mimics the ﬂow created by the crayﬁsh fan
organs. Ink visualization of the ﬂow created by an animal with the imposed scheme of the
ﬂow and a drawing of the model with the imposed scheme of the ﬂow.

system is plotted against the distance x from the jets’ origin (a point located between the fan
organs or, respectively, between the nozzles) in Fig.8. The horizontal velocity is somewhat
inversely proportional to the distance from fan organs i.e.

V ∼ V0

x0
x

(1)

(2)

where V0 is the ﬂuid velocity at a distance x0 from the fan organs. To estimate the time
required for the ﬂuid element (odour patch) located at a distance L from the fan organs to
reach the crayﬁsh antennules we integrated the inverse velocity by the distance:

T ∼

L

1
V

Z
0

dx =

Z
0

L

1
V0

x
x0

dx =

L2
2V0x0

Assuming the velocity V0 = 6 mm/s at the distance of x0 = 10 mm from fan organs (as in
Fig.8) we can infer that an odour stimulus located 100 mm from the crayﬁsh will reach it in
approximately 80 s. The duration increases quadratically with L, becoming approximately
5 min for the distance of 200 mm and more than 10 min for the distance of 300 mm.

As a step towards constructing a robot searching for chemical sources we have measured
the ﬂow around the model suspended far from ﬁsh-tank boundaries with the jets of equal
strength aligned at an angle to each other and the jets of diﬀerent strength aligned in
opposite directions. Measurements showed that the ﬂow ﬁeld forms in several seconds after
switching on the pump and then remains constant for up to a minute when the large-scale
ﬂow starts to form in the ﬁsh-tank. We have averaged the ﬂow ﬁeld obtained from 80 frames
acquired from 10 to 30 seconds after the pump is switched on and then use MATLAB to
plot the streamlines. The ﬂow ﬁeld shown in Fig.7 demonstrates the possibility to change
the direction of the inﬂow by altering the jets’ strength.

7

Figure 6: Horizontal velocity ﬁeld generated by the model. The inﬂow induced by by the
two jets directed at 45◦ upwards as in Fig.3a (a) and the two horizontal jets as in Fig.3b (b).
Reference vector on the bottom left corresponds to velocity of 1 cm/s.

8

Figure 7: Streamlines and the velocity ﬁeld created by the two-outlets-and-an-inlet model
suspended far from boundaries when the jets are similar (top) and when the right jet is
stronger (bottom). Fluid velocity within the jets is not resolved. Scale in centimetres.

9

Figure 8: Absolute value of ﬂuid velocity vs. distance from vertical plane drawn through
the crayﬁsh fan organs and perpendicular to the crayﬁsh plane of symmetry. Bold line
corresponds to the ﬂow created by an animal (average over 5 middle rows of velocity vec-
tors in Fig.4a), thin lines corresponds the ﬂow created by the model (Fig.6a and Fig.6b
correspondingly). Dashed line corresponds to the dependence V ∝ 1/x.

4 Discussion

The aquatic chemical cues can propagate through molecular diﬀusion, may be advected by
mean (or bulk) ﬂow, and spread by the turbulent diﬀusion at high Reynolds numbers. In
water, the rate of diﬀusion is ineﬃcient at providing olfactory information at the distances
larger than few millimetres [16, 4]. To locate an odour source, macroscopic animals like cray-
ﬁsh either need to actively move or wait for water currents to carry chemical information to
the olfactory receptors. We have demonstrated a mechanism that crayﬁsh inhabiting stag-
nant waters can utilize to assess odour stimuli in the environment. The crayﬁsh uses its fan
organs to generate the jets (Fig.3) which in turn induce the ﬂow that carries odour towards
its chemoreceptors (Fig.4). We have performed a series of PIV measurements with the live
animals and then with a model mimicking their fanning activity to reveal a unique feature
of the crayﬁsh olfactory system. The animal does not utilize the primary ﬂow structure it
creates (the jets and the sink ﬂow converging to the jets’ origin) but instead relies on the
secondary ﬂow induced by the entrainment of the ﬂuid by the jets.

The crucial fact revealed by the PIV measurements is the surprisingly slow decrease of

10

the inﬂow with the distance from fan organs (1) derived from Fig.8. Indeed, if the inﬂow
was created by suction at the point of the jets’ origin, the fan organs, one would expect it
to be spherically symmetric. In that case the ﬂow velocity would decrease as inverse square
of the distance from the fan organs. In that the time T for the odour to reach the crayﬁsh
chemoreceptors (2) would be proportional to the 3rd power of the distance L to the odour
source. This would increase the time an odour molecule takes to travel from a distance of
100 mm to the receptor from 80 s to 5000 s, which is beyond the biologically relevant time
scale. Here the key feature of inducing the secondary ﬂow by creating the jets plays its role.
Together with the suction at the jets’ origin, water entrainment by the jets themselves occurs.
This leads to the axial rather than spherical symmetry of the ﬂow ﬁeld, hence to a slower
velocity decay with distance and as a result a longer range of odour attraction. Assuming
that the velocity decreases in accordance with equation (1), maximum biologically relevant
time (minutes) required for the odour to reach the crayﬁsh receptors corresponds to the
distance of approximately 100 mm. This distance is of the same order as the jets’ length, i.e.
the length where the assumption of ﬂow axial symmetry may be valid. Experiments where
a model mimicked the jets created by crayﬁsh (Fig.5) showed the ﬂow decay with distance
from the animal depended on the angle of jets to the horizontal. In particular, Fig.8 shows
that the ﬂow induced by the jets directed 45◦ upwards as in Fig.3a decays slower than that
induced by horizontal jets as in Fig.3b which can be explained by a formation of so-called
”reﬂection” of the jets in the bottom of the tank.

After detecting the presence of stimulus an animal needs to deﬁne the direction to its
source. While in presence of ambient ﬂow the direction to the odour source is somewhere
upstream, this cue is absent in still water. To locate an odour source, an animal can compare
intensity of the odour at diﬀerent locations while navigating through the plume. However,
this movement would disturb water and thus destroy the pattern of odour patches formed
around the source. Active movement as a method of locating an odour source can also be
problematic as it increases predation risk when performed in unsheltered habitat and can be
energetically expensive because of some objects transparent to the ﬂow e.g. algal stalks. The
crayﬁsh solve these diﬃculties scanning the environment by varying jets direction and/or
intensity and therefore varying the direction of the inﬂow. The study of how a crayﬁsh
manipulates the jets requires behavioural experiments in natural conditions. Meanwhile,
experiments with the model presented in Fig.7 showed that by generating jets of diﬀerent
strength the direction of the inﬂow coming to the jets’ origin (and therefore to the location
of crayﬁsh chemoreceptors) may be varied in the range ±30◦ whilst keeping the streamlines
almost parallel, i.e. whilst retaining the ﬂuid velocity being proportional to inverse distance
from the jets origin. Looking at the top plot in Fig.4 we may speculate that it is possible
to deﬁne direction to the source by placing the sensitive antennules to diﬀerent parts of the
inﬂow. Although this method can be used in the biomimetic robots, it is not clear whether
the animal can utilize this because of the ﬁnite size of its chemoreceptors.

11

5 Summary

In still water, an individual crayﬁsh is able to induce ﬂow which allows it, being virtually
motionless, to sense and deﬁne the direction to an odour source at a distance of the order
of 100 mm within a few minutes. To do so, a crayﬁsh uses its fan organs to produce one or
two water jets (Fig.3). By performing the PIV measurements of ﬂow velocity we have shown
that the jets entrain the surrounding ﬂuid inducing the water inﬂow which carries the odour
stimulus towards the crayﬁsh olfactory organs located at the antennules (Fig.4). We have
designed an assembly of nozzles which mimicks the ﬂow created by the crayﬁsh fan organs.
We have shown that the secondary ﬂow induced by the assembly is similar to that induced
by live animals. By varying the strength and direction of jets we have also demonstrated
the possibility of scan the surrounding environment for sources of chemical stimuli.

This work provides a rationale for constructing the biomimetic robots which orientate to
chemical sources by drawing the odour towards the chemical sensor. To do so, instead of
creating a suction, an autonomous robot should create a system of jets entraining the ﬂuid,
thus inducing a ﬂow that carries odour molecules to the chemical detectors. The range of
odour acquisition of such a robot is deﬁned by the length of the jets and can signiﬁcantly
exceed the device’s own dimensions. This is particularly useful when the area of interest is
obstructed by objects transparent to the ﬂow such as nets and plants in both aquatic and
terrestrial environments.

Acknowledgements: We would like to acknowledge ﬁnancial support of this study by the

Hull Environmental Research Institute to T.B. and S.L. and a NERC fellowship
NER/I/S/2000/01411 to T.B.

References

[1] N. Blackburn, T. Fenchel, and J. Mitchell, Science 282 (1998) 2254.

[2] E. Balkovsky, B.I. Shraiman, PNAS 99(20) (2000) 12589.

[3] N.J. Vickers Biol. Bull. 198 (2000) 203.

[4] M.J. Weissburg Biol. Bull. 198 (2001) 188.

[5] J. Atema, Biol. Bull. 191 (1996) 129.

[6] P.A. Moore and J.L. Grills Animal Behaviour 58 (1999) 953.

[7] M.J. Weissburg and C.D. Derby J. Compar. Phys. A 176 (1995) 513.

[8] F.W. Grasso, J.A. Basil. Curr Opin Neurobiol 12 (2002) 721.

[9] J. Herberholz and B. Schmitz Biol. Bull. 201 (2001) 6.

[10] J. Atema, Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 39 (1985) 386.

12

[11] T.W. Budd, J.C. Lewis and M.L. Tracey Crustaceana Supplement 5 (1979) 131.

[12] M. Burrows and A.O.D. Willows Compar. Biochem. Phys. 31 (1969) 121.

[13] F. Brock Zeitschrift fur Morphologie und Okologie der Tiere 6 (1926) 415.

[14] T. Breithaupt Biol. Bull. 200 (2001) 150.

[15] T. Breithaupt and P. Eger J. Exp. Biol. 205 (2002) 1221.

[16] D.B. Dusenbery. Sensory Ecology. New York: W.H.Freeman and Co. (1992)

[17] F.W. Grasso. Biol. Bull. 200 (2001) 160.

[18] J. Ayers. Arthropod. Struct. Dev. 33 (2004) 347.

[19] H. Ishida, H. Tanaka, H. Taniguchi, T. Moriizumi. Auton. Robot. 20, (2006) 231.

13

