6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Inﬂuence of the disorder on tracer dispersion in a ﬂow channel

V. J. Charette 1, E. Evangelista 1, R. Chertcoﬀ 1, H. Auradou 2, J. P. Hulin 2 and I. Ippolito 1
1Grupo de Medios Porosos, Facultad de Ingenier´ia, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Paseo Col´on 850, 1063 Buenos Aires, Argentina. and
2Laboratoire Fluides, Automatique et Syst`emes Thermiques,
UMR No. 7608, CNRS, Universit´es Paris 6 and 11,
Bˆatiment 502, Campus Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France.
(Dated: January 12, 2014)

Tracer dispersion is studied experimentally in periodic or disordered arrays of beads in a capillary
tube. Dispersion is measured from light absorption variations near the outlet following a steplike
injection of dye at the inlet. Visualizations using dye and pure glycerol are also performed in similar
geometries. Taylor dispersion is dominant both in an empty tube and for a periodic array of beads:
the dispersivity ld increases with the P´eclet number P e respectively as P e and P e0.82 and is larger
by a factor of 8 in the second case.
In a disordered packing of smaller beads (1/3 of the tube
diameter) geometrical dispersion associated to the disorder of the ﬂow ﬁeld is dominant with a
constant value of ld reached at high P´eclet numbers. The minimum dispersivity is slightly higher
than in homogeneous nonconsolidated packings of small grains, likely due heterogeneities resulting
from wall eﬀects. In a disordered packing with the same beads as in the periodic conﬁguration, ld
is up to 20 times lower than in the latter and varies as P e
with α = 0.5 or = 0.69 (depending on
the ﬂuid viscosity). A simple model accounting for this latter result is suggested.

α

PACS numbers: 47.56.+r,05.60.Cd

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Objectives of the paper

Understanding mass and solute transfer in porous and
fractured media is relevant to many ﬁelds of science and
engineering due to their applications in domains such as
waste managament and hydrology [1, 2, 3, 4]. A partic-
ularly sensitive method for characterizing mass transfer
and detecting ﬂow heterogeneities is the dispersion of a
tracer in a ﬂow of ﬂuid through these media.

In homogeneous 3D porous media, the variation in
the ﬂow direction x of the concentration C of passive
tracer is often observed to satisfy at a macroscopic scale
(a few pore sizes) the classical convection-diﬀusion equa-
tion [1]:

∂C
∂t

+ U

= Dk

∂C
∂x

∂2C
∂x2

(1)

Here, U is the ﬂow velocity and Dk is the dispersion co-
eﬃcient measured in the ﬂow direction and which char-
acterizes the longitudinal spreading of the tracers during
their transport.
In porous media, the dispersion coeﬃcient is observed
to be velocity dependent [3]. At a low velocity, molec-
ular diﬀusion predominates and the dispersion coeﬃ-
cient is close to the molecular diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dm.
When the velocity increases, diﬀerent regimes are ob-
served and non trivial relations such as power law vari-
ations of the dispersion coeﬃcient with the velocity are
reported [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The objective of the present
paper is to report dispersion experiments on well con-
trolled models consisting of beads placed inside a long
capillary. Diﬀerent ordered and disordered bead layouts

are considered and a rich variety of dispersion behaviors
is observed.

B. Key dispersion mechanisms

Two physical mechanisms cause the dispersion of pas-
sive tracers: molecular diﬀusion across and along stream-
lines and advection. Advection refers to tracer transport
In order to compare
by the motion of the host ﬂuid.
both mechanisms, it is useful to deﬁne the P´eclet num-
ber: P e = U d/Dm where d is a characteristic length
scale. In this work, d is either the bead or the tube di-
ameter (the latter is used when the ﬂow tube does not
contain any beads).

In porous media, the void structure is complex, re-
sulting in tortuous streamlines along which the velocity
may greatly ﬂuctuate. In randomly packed beads, for in-
stance, current tubes often get split so that the ﬂuid may
ﬂow around a bead; this results in variations of both the
magnitude and the direction of the local velocity [11, 12].
With respect to the average ﬂow, tracers therefore per-
form a random walk between pores characterized by the
duration t ∼ d/U of single steps where d is the bead
diameter. Using this description, one expects a longitu-
dinal dispersion coeﬃcient Dk/Dm ∼ d2/Dmt ∼ P e and
a dispersivity, ld = Dk/U , constant and corresponding to
the correlation length of the velocity ﬁeld. Yet, regions of
slow moving ﬂuid, such as boundary layers, may also play
a signiﬁcant part and lead to logarithmic corrections [13].
In some speciﬁc conﬁgurations such as ﬂow in a
in a periodic square array of
capillary tube [14, 15],
beads [9, 16] or in a fracture [5, 6, 7], the velocity ﬁeld has
long range correlations. In such media, the ﬂow velocity
diﬀerence between the walls bounding the open space and

its center stretches the tracer front and creates concen-
tration gradients: The latter are balanced by molecular
In such a case, the typ-
diﬀusion across the gradient.
ical time for the decorrelation of the tracer velocity is
: t ∼ d2/Dm i.e.
the characteristic time of molecular
diﬀusion across the streamlines and the dispersion coef-
ﬁcient scales like Dk/Dm ∝ P e2. This regime is often
called Taylor dispersion and, for ﬂow in a capillary tube
of inner diameter D, one ﬁnds [15]:

where P e = U D/Dm. Equivalently, one can write :

beads.

Dk
Dm

= 1 +

P e2
192

,

ld
d

=

1
P e

+

P e
192

.

(2)

(3)

While periodic 3D porous media are very diﬃcult to re-
alize experimentally (even using perfectly monodisperse
beads), the transition from Taylor to geometrical disper-
sion could be demonstrated numerically on 2D networks
of increasing disorder [10].

Yet, some experiments on geological materials, either
at the lab or ﬁeld scales, display non Fickian charac-
teristics.
In these situations, the breakthrough curves
observed are characterized by tails at long times. This
eﬀect may be explain either by the presence of hetero-
geneities at the scale of the sample or by the trapping of
solute in microscopic dead ends or stagnant pores.

In this work, dispersion experiments in bead pack-
ings of varying degrees of disorder are reported. De-
pending on the structure of the packings, a variety of
dispersion regimes is observed ranging from geometrical
to Taylor dispersion and including intermediate regimes
and non Fickian dispersion. From these experiments, the
tube/bead diameter ratio appears as a key control pa-
rameter of the dispersion regime.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP AND
PROCEDURE

The experimental model used in this work closely re-
sembles that used by Baudet and coworkers [17]. In this
latter work, tracer dispersion was measured in a long
capillary tube ﬁlled with monodisperse beads and with a
tube/particle diameter ratio of the order of 1.25. The lay-
out of the beads was either periodic or disordered. The
ﬁrst conﬁguration was achieved by adding one by one
beads in an horizontal capillary tube. Finally, one ends
up with a line of beads, each of them being in contact
with its two neighbors and with the tube wall. The sec-
ond layout is obtained by tilting the capillary tubes while
ﬁlling them. The beads fall then on top of each other and
slide often sideways, resulting in a denser packing. The
ﬁnal packing is random and beads are added in the tube
until it is entirely ﬁlled.
In this work, the inner diameter of the capillary tube

2

is D = 3.1 ± 0.1 mm, its length is 1500 mm and well
calibrated stainless steel spheres of diameter d are used.
Beads of diameter d = 2.54 ± 0.02 mm were chosen in
order to reproduce the conﬁguration used by Baudet et
al [17]. In addition to these two bead packs, two more
conﬁgurations were used (see Fig. 1). The ﬁrst one uses
the same tube but empty. In the last one, the diameter of
the beads is d = 1±0.01 mm, i.e. three time smaller than
the tube diameter, leading to a larger tube-to-particle ra-
tio. In order to clarify the present paper, the following
convention is used :

• (E) Empty channel : the capillary tube is devoid of

• (O) Ordered channel : the tube contains a periodic

line of beads touching each other.

• (DI) Disordered channel I : the beads are still
touching each other but build up a disordered ar-
ray. The tube/bead diameter ratio is 1.22.

• (DII) Disordered channel II : the arrangement is
of the same type as (DI) but the diameter of the
beads is smaller d = 1 ± 0.01 mm. The tube/bead
diameter ratio is 3.1.

In conﬁgurations (O) and (DI), the diameter of the
spheres is slightly smaller than the tube diameter (d =
2.54 ± 0.02 mm). In conﬁguration (DII), the diameter
of the beads is three times smaller than that of the tube
(d = 1 ± 0.01 mm) Originally, one end of the capillary

FIG. 1: Flow geometries used in the experiments. From top
to bottom : Empty Channel - Ordered Channel - Disordered
Channel I - Disordered Channel II.

tube is connected to a syringe pump allowing to estab-
lish a stationary ﬂow of the transparent ﬂuid through the
channel: A valve allows to switch the injection to a dyed
solution of identical properties. Fluid ﬂowing out of the
other end of the tube is weighed by computer controlled
scales, allowing to measure the ﬂow rate throughout the
experiment.

The ﬂuids used are solutions of either 10% or 70% of
glycerol in water and their dynamic viscosities µ are re-
spectively 1.3 × 10−3 Pa.s and 23 × 10−3 Pa.s (at 20oC).
Water Blue dye at a concentration of 0.05 g/l is added
to one of the solutions: It has been selected because it
is chemically stable and does not modify the rheologi-
cal properties of the solution. The molecular diﬀusion
coeﬃcient Dm of the dye was determined through inde-
pendent Taylor dispersion measurements performed in a
vertical teﬂon capillary tube. One obtains in this way
Dm = 6.5 10−4 mm2/s for the 10% glycerol solution;
for the 70% solution, the value Dm = 3.25 10−5 mm2/s
is deduced from the value for the ﬁrst solution by the
Stokes-Einstein relation [18]. In the present experiments,
the P´eclet number ranges from 50 to 104 for the 10%
glycerol solution but reaches 1.4 × 105 for 70% glycerol
solutions. In all the studies the Reynolds number is less
than 1 except for the empty tube where Re can reach
10: Under such conditions, the ﬂow can be considered as
stationary [11].

In this work, the variation of the tracer concentra-
tion at the outlet with time, known as the breakthrough
curve, is determined from light absorption by the dye.
The measurement is realized over a square window of size
0.3 mm2 located at 1450 mm from the injection, close to
the outlet and immediately downstream of the last bead
of the bed. In order to reduce optical distorsion induced
by the tube curvature, the measurement section is en-
closed within a transparent plexiglas cell with ﬂat paral-
lel walls. The cell is originally ﬁlled with glycerol, a ﬂuid
with a refractive index close to that of the tube. The
section of the tube inside this cell is inserted between a
light panel and a 4096 gray levels CCD camera (Roper
Coolsnap CF). The set-up is illuminated by a ﬂuorescent
tube placed on the opposite side from the camera and
excited at a high frequency to reduce ﬂuctuations. For
each experiment, 2000 images are recorded by a com-
puter connected to the camera at time intervals ranging
from 1 to 30 sec depending on the ﬂow rate. Dye concen-
tration values are determined quantitatively using cal-
ibration measurements realized independently with the
experimental tube saturated with dye solutions of dif-
ferent known concentrations. Finally, drifts of the light
intensity are measured in a region of interest outside the
tube; these measurements are then used during the anal-
ysis of the images to compensate for the eﬀect of these
variations on the transmitted light intensity in the exper-
imental section.

Using this experimental procedure, breakthrough
curves were measured for diﬀerent ﬂow velocities and for
diﬀerent bead layouts. The results of these global mea-
surements are given and discussed in section III. More-
over, in order to improve interpretations of the break-
through curves, visualizations realized independently at
a local scale in a similar conﬁguration were carried out.
In these latter experiments, a transparent tube of D =
8 mm inner diameter is ﬁlled with glass beads of diame-
ters 6, 3 or 2 mm. These beads were chosen so that the

3

corresponding tube/bead diameter ratio is respectively
1.33, 2.67 and 4, close to the values used in the disper-
sion experiment. Originally, the model is saturated with
glycerol (viscosity ≃ 1 Pa.s) which is displaced by the
same ﬂuid but dyed. Using a ﬂuid with such a high vis-
cosity (and therefore a low diﬀusion coeﬃcient) allows to
observe and separate clearly the various ﬂow paths at low
Reynolds numbers inside the sample.

Before describing in detail the various dispersive
regimes observed for the diﬀerent bead layouts, the next
section describes the methods used to determine the dis-
persion coeﬃcients from the breakthrough curves.

A. Analysis of experimental curves

Figure 2 displays a typical breakthrough curve ob-
tained after a stepwise injection of the dyed ﬂuid; asym-
metrical curves were also obtained and their analyzis
will be discussed later. Under such initial conditions
and if the concentration satisﬁes the classical convection-
diﬀusion equation given by Eq. (1), the concentration
variation at the outlet is given by:

C(L, t)
C0

1
2

=

(1 − erf

L − U t
p4Dkt

).

(4)

Where, C0 is the dye concentration in the displacing ﬂuid,
L the distance between the measurement section and the
injection point, Dk is the longitudinal dispersion coeﬃ-
cient, U is the mean ﬂow velocity. The ﬁgure (2) shows
the ﬁt of the breakthrough curve by the function given
by Eq. (4) where the only adjustable parameter is Dk.
The two curves are almost undistinguishable, indicating
that the dispersion process is Fickian and that the clas-
sical convection-diﬀusion equation (1) is satisﬁed. Yet,

FIG. 2: Continuous line : typical tracer variation concen-
tration as a function of time for a type DI− array and for
P e = 930 (continuous line).- Dotted line : curve ﬁtted with a
variation from Eq. (4.)

such perfect ﬁts were not always observed. For instance,
in the O conﬁguration and for fairly high velocities U ,
one observes at long times, as can be seen on Fig. 3, a

”tail” eﬀect : it corresponds to an exponential relaxation
of the concentration towards a limiting value with a typ-
ical time of the order of L/U . Such breakthrough curves
are better ﬁtted by solutions of the classical Coats-Smith
capacitive model [19] which uses four ﬁtting parameters:
t = L/U , Dk, f and tf . The two last parameters cor-
respond to the amplitude and the characteristic time of
the exponential variation in the ”tail” at long times. By
combining these parameters, one obtains an asymptotic
dispersion coeﬃcient Dkas :

Dkas
Dm

=

Dk
Dm

+ (1 − f )2U 2tf ,

(5)

Dkas represents the value of the dispersion coeﬃcient
that would be measured for channels with the same local
structure, but long enough so that a Gaussian dispersion
regime is reached and Eq. (1) becomes valid. Note that
the Coats-Smith model is only used here as a mathemat-
ical way of obtaining the value of Dkas; the fact that the
experimental curves are well ﬁtted by the model does not
mean that its underlying assumptions are valid (namely
the existence of a zero ﬂow zone with an exponential ex-
change with the mean ﬂow). In the following, the disper-
sivity ld is taken equal to Dkas/U only for experiments
in the O conﬁguration, in the other conﬁgurations, Dk is
obtained by ﬁtting the experimental curves to Eq. (4).

FIG. 3: Continuous line : experimental dye concentration
variation as a function of time for an ordered O−type array
of 2.54 mm diameter beads and for P e = 1000. Dotted lines
: Gaussian and Coats-Smith ﬁts.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Figure 4 displays variations of the dispersivity ld as a
function of the P´eclet number measured for the diﬀerent
channel conﬁgurations used in the present work. Note
that all the experiments were carried out twice: First,
the dyed ﬂuid was injected to displace the clear solution
ﬂowing initially in the model at the same ﬂow rate. After
the model has been completeley saturated with the dyed
ﬂuid, it is displaced in a second experiment by the clear
ﬂuid, still at the same ﬂow rate. The dispersion coeﬃ-

cient was found to be identical in the two experiments,
implying that no instabilities modiﬁed the ﬂow.

4

FIG. 4: Variation of the dispersivity ld as a function of the
P´eclet number: (△) DII−array; (◦, •) DI− array respectively
for solutions of 10% and 70% glycerol in water; ((cid:4)) E− array;
((cid:3)) O− array (in this latter case ld = Dkas/U ).

A. Empty tube (E−Channel)

In the case of an empty tube, all the experimental
dispersion curves are well adjusted by the concentration
variation given by Eq. (4). The corresponding disper-
sivities ld, as plotted in Figure 4, increase linearly with
P e reﬂecting, as expected from Eq. (3), a dominant in-
ﬂuence of Taylor dispersion. One sees from Eq. (3) that
the value of ld is related to the tube diameter; a linear
regression of the data gives indeed an eﬀective value of
the tube diameter : aef f ≃ 3 ± 0.2 mm.

B. Ordered array of beads (O−Channel)

Dispersivity ld values for the ordered array of beads
plotted in Figure 4 were obtained with the Coats-Smith
model. For P e ≤ 2500, ld varies with P e following a
power law : ld ∼ aef f P eα (straight line in log-log coor-
dinates). From a regression over the experimental data,
one obtains aef f ≃ 0.6 mm and α = 0.85 ± 0.2: This
value is compatible with a Taylor dispersion mechanism
for which α = 1.

One can indeed expect that, in this channel, ﬂuid
particles follow streamlines determined by the periodic
structure of the bed of beads: Therefore, as in capil-
lary tubes, tracer can only move from a streamline to
another through molecular diﬀusion (See Fig. 5). An im-
portant feature is the fact that the experimental values
of ld which vary from 40 mm to 400 mm are about 8
times larger than for the empty capillary tube at a same
mean ﬂow velocity. This cannot be explained by the par-
tial ﬁlling up of the ﬂow channel by the beads. On the
opposite, since these reduce the eﬀective aperture of the
ﬂow channels, ld should drop oﬀ following Eq.(3) which
is not observed.

Direct visualizations realized in a similar periodic ge-
ometry (Figure 5), although with larger beads, help un-
derstand these results: Pure glycerol is used in these ex-
periments to visualize clearly the boundaries between ﬂu-
ids by removing the inﬂuence of molecular diﬀusion. In

FIG. 5: Miscible displacement of pure by dyed glycerol in an
ordered array of beads inside a capillary tube : (a) side view
(b) top view (bead diameter : d = 6 mm; tube diameter :
D = 8 mm)

this ﬁgure, one observes that the dyed ﬂuid displays a
tongue like structure and wraps around the beads. This
shape shows that the streamlines are mostly oriented in
the ﬂow direction with tiny undulations induced by the
beads. Another important point is that the dyed ﬂuid
does not ﬂow in the narrow space between the beads:
Mass transfert between the two regions can thus only oc-
cur through molecular diﬀusion. This explains the long
tail observed in the breakthrough curves. Finally, the
tongue-like structure reveals the strong velocity contrast
between the ﬂuid ﬂow on the side of the beads and above
them. The velocity gradient stretches the tracer fronts
resulting in a concentration gradient which, in turn, gets
smoothed by a transverse diﬀusive ﬂux.
All ingredients of a Taylor like dispersion regime are thus
present. Yet, because of the beads, the diﬀusive ﬂux is
more tortuous than in an empty capillary tube: Tracer
has to ﬂow around the beads to reach the outlet of the
tube. The time needed to homogenize the tracer concen-
tration in the tube section is thus longer, resulting in a
higher dispersivity.

At the highest ﬂow velocities, the variation of ld lev-
els oﬀ and it starts to decrease. A possible explanation
is the fact that, in this range of P e values, the Reynolds
number becomes higher than 1 (Re > 5): recirculation
ﬂows may then develop and induce a more eﬃcient trans-
verse mixing than molecular diﬀusion. This may account
for the decreasing value of ld at high P´eclet numbers.

C. Disordered array of small beads (DII−array)

For a disordered array of 1 mm diameter beads inside
the tube, the dispersivity ld increases slowly as a function
of P e before reaching a constant value of the order of
3 mm for P e & 600. This constant limiting value of ld
implies that geometrical dispersion associated with the
random velocity variations from one pore to the next
is dominant. Also, in such geometries, the correlation

5

length of the velocities of ﬂuid particles along their path
is too short for Taylor dispersion to have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence. Dispersion characteristics of such arrays are
then comparable to those of non consolidated packings
of monodisperse grains: In this latter case, the minimum
value of ld is lower than the grain size (typ. 0.6 − 0.7 dg)
and is reached for P´eclet numbers (based on the grain
size) of the order of 10 [20].
In Fig. 4, the value of ld
for a similar P´eclet number (P e = 30 when based on the
tube diameter) is ld = 2 mm or about twice the bead
diameter. This result also suggests that boundary layers
have a weaker inﬂuence on dispersion than predicted by
some theories [13] since no increase of ld as LogP e is
observed.

FIG. 6: Miscible displacements of pure glycerol by dyed
glycerol saturating disordered glass beads packings inside a
D = 8 mm diameter capillary tube. Bead diameter : (a)
d = 2 mm - (b) d = 3 mm. The tube/particle diameter ratio
is respectively 4 and 2.66.

Visualizations realized with d = 2 and 3 mm beads
inside a D = 8 mm diameter tube (Figs 6a-b) help under-
stand these results. Figure 6a demonstrates clearly the
many divisions of the front of injected ﬂuid after mov-
ing through several pores and the rather uniform dis-
tribution of the invading ﬂuid across the ﬂow section :
for the less viscous ﬂuids used in our dispersion experi-
ments, transverse molecular diﬀusion would mix quickly
these thin ﬁlaments with the surrounding ﬂuid, leading
to the Gaussian dispersion observed for the DII− array.

For the lower value 2.66 of the ratio d/D the shape of
the dye streaks changes very much as shown on Figure 6b.
In this particular case, ﬂow is strongly channelized in the
center of the column; this indicates, that for some (low)
values of the ratio d/D, pathological structures of the
ﬂow ﬁeld may appear. The dispersion measurements re-
ported in the present section were performed with a col-
umn for which d/D was intermediate between the two
values in Figs. 6a-b. Since no channelization of the ﬂow
was observed visually during the measurement, the geo-
metrical dispersion observed corresponds most likely to
the type of ﬂow structure shown in Fig.6a. In the next
section, tracer dispersion is investigated for still smaller
values of d/D.

D. Disordered array of large beads (DI−array)

In this case, the beads have the same diameter as in
the periodic O− channel (i.e. d = 2.54 mm), but the
packing is now disordered (See Fig. 1). The experiments
were performed using the two water-glycerol solutions
containing either 10% or 70% of glycerol in weight. As for
the DII array and in contrast with the ordered one, all
breakthrough curves are well adjusted by Eq. (4) allowing
for the determination of Dk for the various ﬂow condi-
tions. The Figure 4 shows the dispersivity ld = Dk/U
as a function of the P´eclet number for the two solutions
used in the experiments.
Clearly, the dispersivity ld and P e have a power law rela-
tionship. Fitting the variation of ld with P e to aef f P eα
gives respectively for the 10% and 70% glycerol solutions
α = 0.52 ± 0.01, aef f ≃ 0.2 mm and α = 0.69 ± 0.04,
aef f ≃ 0.04 mm. One observes that aef f and α are only
slightly diﬀerent for the two solutions despite a ratio of
20 between the viscosities. One notices that the values
of ld for a given P´eclet number are much lower for the
disordered array than for the periodic one (by a factor
of 15 (resp. 40 at low (resp. high) P e values). Also, at
low P´eclet numbers, ld becomes of the order of the bead
size and gets close to the dispersivity observed for the
DII array.

An important feature is the fact that the exponent α
characterizing the variation of ld with P e is of the order
of 0.5 (for the 10% solution) and of 0.69 for the other one
(at slightly higher P´eclet numbers). These exponents are
intermediate between the values 0.82±0.2 for the periodic
array and 1 for the empty tube and the value 0 (constant
ld) for the disordered packing of smaller beads: This im-
plies that the dispersion mechanism is intermediate be-
tween Taylor and geometrical dispersion corresponding
respectively to the ﬁrst and second cases. This result
was also observed by Baudet et al [17] but remained un-
explained.
As in the previous sections, visualization on a larger sys-
tem with the same d/D ratio help understand the disper-
sion mechanisms. The visualizations of Figure 7a-b show
that the dyed ﬂuid is mostly split into two streaks located
near the walls. This channelization results from the in-
crease of the porosity near the walls [22]; moreover, the
low value of the tube/bead diameter ratio (of the order
of 1) breaks the angular isotropy of the porous struc-
ture and concentrates the ﬂow paths in a few (here 2)
channels. Magnico [12] estimated that, at low Reynolds
numbers, a ﬂuid layer of thickness of the order of d/4 ap-
pears, inside which ﬂuid ﬂow is purely longitudinal and
tangential with no radial component. At ﬁrst, one ex-
pects therefore radial exchange between the dye streaks,
clearly visible on Figure 7a, and the remaining pore space
to be mostly diﬀusional. Yet, as can be seen of the Fig-
ure 7b structural heterogenety resulting from misplaced
beads split the streaks into ﬁlaments parallel to the mean
ﬂow [11]; the number of ﬁlaments increases then along
the ﬂow path and their size decreases. These ﬁlaments

6

persist over distances signiﬁcantly larger than the bead
diameter so that molecular diﬀusion may spread the ﬁla-
ments over transverse distances of the order of their size.
This gives rise to Taylor-like dispersion so that the global
dispersion results from the combined inﬂuences of geo-
metrical and Taylor dispersions. Such an inﬂuence of the
ﬂow channelization on dispersion was recently reported
by Bruderer et al [10] in 2D networks.

FIG. 7: Views at diﬀerent times of the miscible displacement
front of pure by dyed glycerol in a disordered channel: the
diameter of the beads is d = 6 mm and the diameter of the
tube D = 8 mm. The tube-to-particle ratio is 1.33.

E. Qualitative model of diﬀerent power law
variations

A qualitative argument helps understand how one can
reach such power law variations of ld ∝ P eα (0 < α < 1)
under the combined inﬂuence of the disorder of the ﬂow
ﬁeld and of transverse molecular diﬀusion. Assume that
the front gets divided into streaks of width ax decreasing
with the distance x parallel to the ﬂow as ax ∼ d1+βx−β
(the d term allows to have the right dimensionality for
the equation). By generalizing the Taylor argument, the
transition to diﬀusive spreading should occur when the
transverse molecular diﬀusion time τdif f across the dis-
tance ax is of the order of the mean transit time L/U
with :

τdif f ∼

a2
x
Dm

∼

x
U

Replacing ax by its expression provides the distance at
which the transition should take place :

xtrans ∼ d(

)1/(1+2β) ∼ dP e1/(1+2β)

(7)

U d
Dm

With, as usual, P e = U d/Dm. As in Taylor disper-
sion, xtrans, represents the characteristic decorrelation
distance of the velocity of tracer particles and we assume
therefore that Dk ∼ U xtrans leading to

or

Dkef f ∼ U dP e1/(1+2β)

Dkef f
Dm

∼ P e

2+2β
1+2β

(6)

(8)

(9)

For β = 0 (no geometrical variation of the ﬁlament
width with distance), one retrieves Taylor dispersion with
DkT aylor ∼ a2U 2/Dm and for β = ∞ (fast decorrela-
tion), one obtains geometrical dispersion with Dkgeom ∼
dU (the exponent α deﬁned previously should then be
related to β by α = 1/(1 + 2β) In the present case, the
experimental result Dk ∝ P e3/2 implies that β = 1/2.
Therefore, the experimental observations on DI− may
be accounted for by assuming a combination of the inﬂu-
ences of transverse molecular diﬀusion and of the geomet-
rical disorder of the packing with, for the latter, a rate of
division of the ﬂuid streaks intermediate between those
observed in a packing of small beads and in a capillary
tube.

IV. CONCLUSION

To conclude, despite its simple structure (a long tube
ﬁlled up with beads), the experimental system studied
in the present work displayed a broad variety dispersion
regimes. Both the layout of the beads and the ratio
of their diameter to that of the tube were shown to
inﬂuence very much the dispersion characteristics.
First, Taylor dispersion is observed for a periodic bead
array inside a tube of slightly larger diameter than the
beads,
like in the empty tube but with an increased
dispersion coeﬃcient. With the same beads inside
the same tube, but packed in a disordered array, the
dispersivity ld is very strongly reduced and the exponent
α characterizing the variation of ld with P e decreases

7

from almost 1 to 0.5. This variation reﬂects the reduced
persistence length of ﬂuid streaks as they move along
the tube (this length remains however much larger than
the bead diameter). A simple model assuming a power
law reduction of the width of the streaks of dye with
distance allows to reproduce this variation of ld with
P e. When the ratio of the tube and particle diameters
is increased by using beads of smaller diameter, the
dispersion coeﬃcient varies with the P´eclet number as
Dk ∝ P e for P e > 600. This reﬂects a geometrical
dispersion regime with a short persistence of the dye
streaks controlled by the local pore geometry and a weak
inﬂuence of diﬀusion in the boundary layers.
More observations of the ﬂow and concentration ﬁelds
at the local scale (using for instance matched index
ﬂuids) are needed to explain quantitatively these results.
The increase of the dispersivity for the periodic array
compared to the empty tube and the decorrelation of the
motions of the ﬂuid particles in the disordered arrays for
small tube/particle diameter ratios are two particularly
important issues.

Acknowledgments

We thank J. Koplik and G. Drazer for very helpful
comments and discussions. This work was supported by
UBA-IN 029, CNRS-Conicet International Cooperation
Program (PICS N ◦ 2178) and by the ECOS Sud program
N ◦ A03E02.

[1] J. Bear, Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media, Dover

[11] T. H. Wegner, A. J. Karabelas and T. J. Hanratty, Chem.

Publications, New York (1988).

Eng. Sci. 26, 59 (1971).

[2] F.A.L. Dullien, Porous media, ﬂuid transport and pore
structure, 2nd ed., Academic Press, New York (1991).
[3] J. Bear, C.-F. Tsang and G. de Marsilly eds., Flow and
Contaminant Transport in Fractured Rock, Acad. Press
(1993).

[4] M. Sahimi Flow and Transport in Porous Media and
Fractured Rocks : From Classical Methods to Modern Ap-
proaches, John Wiley and Sons (2005).

[12] P. Magnico, Chem. Eng. Sci. 58, 5005 (2003).
[13] D.L. Koch and J.F. Brady, J. Fluid Mech. 154, 399

(1985).

[14] G. I. Taylor, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 219, 186 (1953).
[15] R. Aris, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 235, 67 (1956).
[16] J. Salles, J.-F. Thovert, R. Delannay, L. Prevors, J.-L.
Auriault and P.M. Adler, Phys. Fluids A 5, 2348 (1993).
[17] C. Baudet, R. Chertcoﬀ and J-P. Hulin, C. R. Acad. Sci.

[5] I. Ippolito, G. Daccord, E.J. Hinch and J.P. Hulin, J.

Paris, II, 305, 20 (1987).

Contaminant Hydrology 16, 87 (1994).

[6] R.L. Detwiler, H. Rajaram and R.J. Glass, Water. Re-

sour. Res. 36, 1611 (2000).

[7] A. Boschan, H. Auradou,I. Ippolito, R. Chertcoﬀ, and
J.P. Hulin submitted to Water Resour. Res. (2006).
[8] J.D. Seymour and P.T. Callaghan, AIChE J. 43, 2096

[9] R. S. Maier, D. M. Kroll, R. S. Bernard, S. E. Howington,
J. F. Peters and H. T. Davis, Physics of Fluids 12 2065
(2000).

[10] C. Bruderer and Y. Bernab´e, Water Resour. Res. 37, 897

(1997).

(2001).

[18] W.B. Russel, D.A. Saville, and W.R. Schowalter, Col-
loidal Dispersions Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK, Chapter 3 (1995).

[19] K. H. Coats and B. D. Smith, Soc. Pet. Eng. J. Trans.

[20] N-W. Han, J. Bhakta and R.G. Carbonell, AIChE 31,

AIME 231, 73 (1964).

277 (1985);

[21] D.L. Koch, R.G. Cox, H. Brenner, and J.F. Brady, J.

Fluid Mech. 200, 173 (1989).

[22] G. E. Mueller, Powder Technology 72, 269 (1992).

