6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Heat to electricity thermoacoustic-magnetohydrodynamic
conversion

A. A. Castrej´on-Pita♮ and G. Huelsz
Centro de Investigaci´on en Energ´ia, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico,
Ap. P. 34, 62580, Temixco Morelos, M´exico

12/10/2006

Abstract

In this work, a new concept for the conversion of heat
into electricity is presented. The conversion is based
on the combined eﬀects of a thermoacoustic prime
mover coupled with a magnetohydrodynamic gener-
ator, using diﬀerent working ﬂuids in each process.
The results of preliminary experiments are also pre-
sented.

1

Introduction

1 Heat to electricity transducers are devices of enor-
mous importance in modern society. Most of them
use an intermediate step in which thermal energy
is converted into some kind of mechanical energy
that can be used to generate electricity. Since the
beginning of the development of thermoacoustic en-
gines, there have been some proposals for the use of
thermoacoustic prime movers coupled with magne-
tohydrodynamic transducers to generate electricity.
These devices can potentially be used as solar en-
ergy to electricity converters and, depending on their
eﬃciency and cost, could be an alternative to pho-
tovoltaic cells. Also, due to its simplicity and the
absence of moving rigid components, thermoacous-
tic electricity generation can conveniently be used in
space applications.

1♮ Present address: Clarendon Laboratory, University of

Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, United Kingdom.

A thermoacoustic prime mover is a device that con-
verts thermal energy into mechanical energy in the
form of acoustic waves. The thermoacoustic eﬀect
arises due to the thermodynamic interaction between
a compressible ﬂuid and solid surfaces that possesses
a suitable axial temperature gradient. Depending on
the form of the resonator and the location of the tem-
perature gradient, the thermoacoustic prime mover
can generate a standing-wave or a traveling-wave. An
extensive review of the thermoacoustic principles in
the context of engines can be found in [1]. A magne-
tohydrodynamic (MHD) transducer uses the motion
of an electrically conducting ﬂuid under an applied
magnetic ﬁeld to convert the ﬂuid mechanical energy
into electricity. The relative motion of the ﬂuid and
the applied ﬁeld induces an electric current in the di-
rection transversal to both the ﬂuid motion and the
ﬁeld, that can be extracted through electrodes suit-
ably located in the device. MHD electrical generators
have been widely investigated and many interesting
designs have been proposed [2, 3].

Previously, two alternative ways to use thermoa-
coustic oscillations to produce alternating electrical
In the ﬁrst one, the
current have been proposed.
device is composed by a thermoacoustic prime mover
and a magnetohydrodynamic transducer ([4] and [5]).
It uses an electrically conducting liquid as the work-
ing ﬂuid for both energy conversion processes. The
disadvantage of this type of heat to electricity trans-
ducer is that high pressures (of the order of 150 atmo-
spheres) for the liquid inside the resonator are needed

1

drives an oscillatory motion of an electrolyte inside
the U-tube. In the bottom of the U-tube a conven-
tional MHD Faraday generator is located. It consists
of a duct of square cross-section where two perma-
nent magnets are placed in opposite electrically insu-
lated walls in such a way that the resulting magnetic
ﬁeld is perpendicular to the oscillatory motion of the
electrolyte. Two electrodes are located at the other
pair of walls in the region where the magnetic ﬁeld
is more intense. The geometry of the transducer is
shown in ﬁgure (1). The oscillatory motion of the
electrolyte under the magnetic ﬁeld generates an al-
ternate electric potential diﬀerence at the electrodes.
In this way, it is possible to extract electrical power
from the generator when a load is connected to the
electrodes through an external circuit.

in order to generate the acoustic oscillations. In the
second alternative, the oscillatory pressure wave in a
gas generated by the thermoacoustic eﬀect is used to
drive an electrically conducting piston in the presence
of a magnetic ﬁeld to generate electric power [6].

In this paper, a third alternative for the use of
thermoacoustic oscillations to produce electricity is
presented.

2 Description of the concept

The alternative proposed in this work is similar to the
ﬁrst one, it uses a thermoacoustic prime mover and a
magnetohydrodynamic transducer. The originality of
this new concept consists in the use of two working
ﬂuids separated by gravity, a gas for the thermoa-
coustic prime mover and an electrically conducting
liquid for the magnetohydrodynamic transducer.

The heat to electricity transducer is composed of a
thermoacoustic prime mover, a U-tube partially ﬁlled
with the liquid and a MHD Faraday generator. The
thermoacoustic prime mover and the liquid in U-tube
form a coupled oscillators system. In the bottom of
the U-tube a conventional MHD Faraday generator
is located. The oscillatory motion of the electrically
conducting liquid under the magnetic ﬁeld generates
an alternate electric potential diﬀerence at the elec-
trodes. In this way, it is possible to extract electrical
power from the generator when a load is connected
to the electrodes through an external circuit.

3 Preliminary experiments

To specify the concept a simple device is constructed.
The thermoacoustic prime mover resonator is a
Helmholtz one[7], ﬁlled with air. The Helmholtz res-
onator is formed by a spherical cavity and a straight
tube which is connected to an U-shaped tube. The
lowermost section of the sphere of the resonator is
surrounded by an electrical resistance that generates
a temperature axial gradient on the tube near their
upper part. When the imposed temperature gradient
is appropriate, a thermoacoustic wave is generated in
the air inside the Helmholtz resonator which, in turn,

Figure 1:
thermoacoustic-MHD transducer.

Sketch of

the heat

to electricity

The sphere and the tubes used in the experiments
(except for the lower part of the U-tube) are made
of soda-lime glass with a wall thickness of 1.5 mm.
The diameter of the sphere is 38 mm and the inter-
nal diameter of the tubes is 5 mm. The poor thermal
conductivity of the glass helps to generates a large
enough temperature axial gradient in the tube near
the heated zone. The temperature of the external
wall of the heated zone (Th) is monitored with a ther-
mocouple. The lower part of the U-tube is a plastic

2

frequency.

duct of external rectangular cross section of 8.00 mm
×7.76 mm and a wall thickness of 0.7 mm. The to-
tal length of the tubes L = Lh + Lu + Lo is 35 cm,
where Lh is the length of a thermoacoustic tube, Lu
is the length of the liquid column in the U-tube, and
Lo is the length of the open tube ﬁlled with air. The
electrolyte used for this preliminary test is a satu-
rated sodium bicarbonate aqueous solution (electri-
cal conductivity of 6.4Ω−1m−1). Neodyum magnets
of circular cylinder shape, 19 mm in diameter, 10 mm
height, with a maximum magnetic ﬁeld strength of
0.3 Tesla at the center of the circular face, were used.
The electrodes are made of copper plates of 6 mm
long and 4 mm high placed on lateral walls inside
the tube. The distance between electrodes (d) is 6
mm. Thin wires welded to the electrodes go through
small holes drilled on the plastic duct wall so that
an external circuit can be connected. The potential
diﬀerence between the two electrodes was real-time
measured with an oscilloscope and digitalized by an
HP 3709 data acquisition system. The axial oscilla-
tory velocity of the electrolyte, at the center of one
of the vertical tubes, was measured using a DAN-
TEC laser Doppler anemometer (LDA). The magni-
tude of the frequency spectrum was obtained using
Lomb normalized periodograms [8].

With a ﬁxed temperature Th = 350oC, the length
of the liquid column was varied to obtain the maxi-
mum liquid column oscillation. LDA measurements
conﬁrmed that maximum oscillation, obtained for a
Lh = 14 cm, and lu = 11 cm, was achieved when
the oscillation frequency 5.3 ± 0.1 Hz is close to the
thermoacoustic optimum frequency ∼ 7 Hz, given by
the diameter of the tube [1]. The experimental re-
sults reported in the following are obtained for this
lengths relation, all this experiments were made for
open circuit conditions.

As an example of the LDA measurement results,
the axial oscillatory velocity of the electrolyte (u) and
its frequency spectrum and Th = 510oC, Tc = 30oC
conditions are shown in ﬁgures 2 and 3. From them,
the amplitude of the oscillatory velocity and the fre-
quency are obtained, being ua = 0.848 ± 0.005 m/s
and f0 = 5.6 ± 0.1 Hz respectively, the second fre-
quency is 3f0 = 16.8 ± 0.1 Hz and its magnitude is
less than 20% of the magnitude of the fundamental

Figure 2: Axial oscillatory velocity of the electrolyte
(u), for T h = 510oC.

The amplitude of the axial velocity (ua) of the elec-
trolyte as a function of the temperature Th presents
hysteresis, as shown in ﬁgure 4. The upper branch is
a monotonously increasing function of the tempera-
ture. The frequency of oscillation lightly depends on
Th, from 5.2 ± 0.1 Hz for Th = 180oC to 5.6 ± 0.1 Hz
for Th = 510oC.

In ﬁgure 5 the root mean square voltage (Vrms)
produced by the device as a function of the root
mean square velocity of the electrolyte (urms) is
shown; the symbols correspond to experimental re-
sults and the dashed line corresponds to a linear ﬁt
Vrms = 0.00006 + 0.0020urms. The theoretical curve
Vrms = Bdurms = 0.0018urms is presented as a solid
line [9].

It is possible to extract electrical power from the
generator when a load is connected to the electrodes
through an external circuit. Since the voltage gener-
ated by this simple device is so small, measurements
of the extracted electrical power as function of the
external load were not performed. A more sophisti-
cated design using two thermoacoustic prime movers
connected through the U-tube and optimized ﬂuids
and geometry is expected to produced a much higher

3

Figure 3: Frequency spectrum of the axial oscillatory
velocity of the electrolyte (u), for T h = 510oC.

Figure 4: Amplitude of the axial velocity (ua) of the
electrolyte as a function of the temperature T h.

voltage and consequently, a better overall eﬃciency.

crease.

4 Conclusions

A new concept of a heat to electrical power trans-
ducer based on the concurrent action of a thermoa-
coustically produced compressible wave and a mag-
netohydrodynamic transducer, that uses two ﬂuids, a
gas for the thermoacoustic prime mover and an elec-
trical conductor liquid for the magnetohydrodynamic
transducer is presented. In principle, this device can
be used to generate electricity from a heat source as
long as the system is in the presence of gravity or a
centrifugal force. The concept is demonstrated with a
simple device, but a more sophisticated design using
two thermoacoustic prime movers connected through
the U-tube and optimized ﬂuids and geometry, is ex-
pected to have a much higher overall eﬃciency. Spe-
cially, if the natural frequency of the thermoacoustic
prime movers and of the liquid column are commen-
surable, ideally the same, the oscillation frequency of
the coupled system would be optimized. This optimal
coupling would lead to larger oscillation amplitudes,
and therefore, the eﬃciency of the device would in-

5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the CONACyT U41347-
F project. The authors wish to thank Eduardo
Ramos and Sergio Cuevas for their comments, and
Margarita Miranda and Guillermo Hern´andez for
their technical support.

References

[1] Swift G.W. 2002 Thermoacoustics: A unifying
prespective for some engines and refrigerators
(Acoustical Society of America, Sewickley, PA).

[2] Branover H. and Unger Y. 1993 Metallurgical
technologies, energy conversion, and magnetohy-
drodynamic ﬂows. Progress in Astronautics and
Aeronautics Volume 148.

[3] Branover H. and Unger Y. 1998 Progress in ﬂuid
ﬂow research:
turbulence and applied MHD.
Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics Vol-
ume 182.

4

Figure 5: Root mean square voltage (Vrms) in open
circuit conditions produced by the device as a func-
tion of the root mean square velocity of the elec-
trolyte (urms). Symbols are experimental results, the
dashed line is the linear ﬁt to them, the solid line rep-
resents theoretical prediction.

[4] Swift G.W. 1988 A liquid-metal magnetohydro-
dynamic acoustic transducer, J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 83, 350-361.

[5] Ovando, G., Huelsz, G., Ramos, E., and Cuevas,
S. 2005 Eﬀect of a magnetic ﬁeld on the linear
stability of a thermoacoustic oscillation. J. Non
Equilibrium Thermodynamics, 30, No 2, 137-
149.

[6] Backhaus S., Tward E. and Petach M. 2004
Traveling-wave thermoacousctic electric genera-
tor Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, No 6, 1085-1087.

[7] Temkin S. 2001 Elements of acoustics (Acous-
tical Society of America, American Institute of
Physics, Sewickley, PA).

[8] Press W H, Teukolsky S A, Vetterling W T, and
Flannery B P, 2002 Numerical Recipes in C++
(Cambridge Univestity Press, New York).

[9] Rosa R.J. 1987 Magnetohydrodynamic energy

conversion (Hemisfphere, New York).

5

