A novel shear ﬂow instability triggered by a chemical reaction in

the absence of inertia

Teodor Burghelea,∗ Kerstin Wielage-Burchard, Ian Frigaard,† and James J. Feng‡

Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia,

1984 Mathematics Road, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada

D. Mark Martinez

Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,

University of British Columbia, 2216 Main Mall,

Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada.

(Dated: today)

Abstract

We present an experimental investigation of a novel low Reynolds number shear ﬂow instability

triggered by a chemical reaction. An acid-base reaction taking place at the interface between a

Newtonian ﬂuid and Carbopol-940 solution leads to a strong viscosity stratiﬁcation, which locally

destabilizes the ﬂow. Our experimental observations are made in the context of a miscible dis-

placement ﬂow, for which the ﬂow instability promotes local mixing and subsequently improves

the displacement eﬃciency. The experimental study is complemented by a simpliﬁed normal mode

analysis to shed light on the origin of the instability.

PACS numbers: 47.20.-k Flow instabilities,47.50.-d Non-Newtonian ﬂuid ﬂows ,47.57.Ng Polymers and poly-

mer solutions,47.70.Fw Chemically reactive ﬂows

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Corresponding author
†Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of British Columbia, 2054-6250 Applied Science Lane,

Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
‡Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, 2216 Main Mall,

Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada.

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Designing a method to locally control the hydrodynamic stability of a shear ﬂow is of

importance in many practical and laboratory applications. In the absence of inertia, non-

equilibrium hydrodynamical systems may lose stability if a relevant physical ﬁeld becomes

stratiﬁed. To help illustrate this point, convective motion may be induced in a thin static

layer of ﬂuid when heated from below [1] or gravity induced density stratiﬁcation may sustain

internal gravity waves, [2]. An alternative method of locally destabilizing low Reynolds

number (Re) shear ﬂow would be to induce signiﬁcant changes in the local ﬂuid rheology.

Although ﬂows with a strongly stratiﬁed viscosity have been proved to be theoretically

unstable, [3] this situation has never been demonstrated experimentally. With ﬂows of

simple Newtonian ﬂuids, it is diﬃcult to vary the viscosity locally to induce an instability.

With complex (or structured) ﬂuids ,however, the situation is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent: the

rheology is strongly coupled to the molecular scale organization of the ﬂuid. This opens a

new possibility of locally controlling the viscosity by inducing local changes in the molecular

structure via a chemical reaction. The advantage of such method is that a chemical reaction

may be controlled by either mass transfer or by local heating or cooling. In this paper we

show experimentally that a displacement ﬂow of two miscible liquids may be destabilized

by local changes in the ﬂuid rheology triggered by an acid-base reaction at their interface.

Miscible displacements have been studied in depth within the context of Hele-Shaw and

porous media displacement instabilities, initially motivated by a desire to better understand

oil reservoir recovery issues, e.g. [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], and this science is now well developed.

In the Navier-Stokes setting, miscible displacements through small ducts have been studied

both experimentally and numerically, [10, 11, 12, 13]. For the large P´eclet number (Pe)

regime, depending on the viscosity ratio m, quasi-steady viscous ﬁngers may form and prop-

agate with a sharp displacement front that is retained over long timescales. The eﬃciency

of the displacement (deﬁned as the amount of ﬂuid removed from the pipe walls) may be

either measured or estimated using computation or asymptotic methods, see e.g. [13, 14].

In the case that the ﬁngers remain stable, the residual wall layers thin at a rate that is sig-

niﬁcantly slower than the mean ﬂow and the eﬃciency of the displacement is < 1. Although

asymptotically the eﬃciency may approach 1 as t → ∞, for various practical reasons one

might not want to wait.

2

To improve the displacement eﬃciency, one method would be to trigger a ﬂow instability,

such that the perturbed interface disturbs the residual wall layers. At large Re, multi-layer

ﬂows of viscous ﬂuids are usually unstable, but linear interfacial instabilities are also found

for quite low Re. Dating from the late 1960’s, there are a number of studies involving both

immiscible and miscible ﬂuids, e.g. [15, 16]. An extensive review can be found in the text

[17], and the physical mechanisms governing short and long wavelength instabilities have

been explained by [18, 19]. These studies generally refer to the situation where there is a

jump in the viscosity at the interface between two ﬂuids. If the change in viscosity is instead

gradual, e.g. due to a diﬀuse interfacial region, then the stability characteristics appear to

mimic those of the system with the viscosity jump, see [3].

In porous media, non-monotone viscosity variations are known to cause linear instabil-

ity of planar displacements, see [5, 20, 21], as can be predicted by classical mobility ratio

arguments. Here however, we are in the Navier-Stokes regime and consider primarily shear

ﬂows. Also we have sharp localized change in viscosity, which is hard to achieve in “sim-

ple” ﬂuids, where viscosity is often related to slowly varying concentration or temperature,

i.e. due to molecular structure of the ﬂuid. For complex (or structured) ﬂuids the vis-

cosity depends strongly on the microscopic structure.

In the case of polymer solutions,

the microscopic structure of the ﬂuid can be locally modiﬁed by either mechanical means

(e.g. shear-thinning, [22]) or chemical means, by locally modifying the chemical bonds be-

tween neighboring polymer molecules.

In recent years there have been a number of studies of systems with coupled chemi-

cal reactions and ﬂuid ﬂow, so it is natural to examine the relation to this literature. In

the ﬁrst place even without ﬂuid ﬂow, spatially traveling waves can be observed in chem-

ically excitable media governed by coupled reaction-diﬀusion systems, see e.g. the review

[23]. These fronts may frequently destabilize linearly. There is often coupling between the

reactions, and hence a mechanism of feedback, and sometimes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in

the reaction rate constants. Slightly simpler systems involve single species auto-catalytic

reactions, which mathematically admit traveling (chemical) wave solutions. Systems in

which the auto-catalytic reaction results in a signiﬁcant density change have been studied

intensively. The base traveling chemical wave is coupled with a Rayleigh-Taylor problem.

There are consequently a wide range of stable and unstable situations to be studied, and

even more once a base ﬂuid velocity is considered. A selection of the many works includes

3

[24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31]. Of closer relation to our work is the sequence of papers,

[32, 33, 34, 35], which have considered a concentration dependent viscosity in the context of

miscible porous media displacements. Although interesting and a useful guide in method-

ology, direct relevance of these many papers to our study is in fact limited. Our system is

not auto-catalytic, there are no buoyancy eﬀects and the displacement ﬂow is not a gradient

ﬂow.

A.

Industrial motivation

The motivation for our study comes from the construction of oil and gas wells. Since the

early 1990’s there has been an increasing number of wells that are constructed with long

horizontal sections. The worlds longest extended reach wells have horizontal sections in the

10 − 15 km range, but these are exceptional. More routinely, wells are built with horizontal

extensions of up to ∼ 7 km. One of the key barriers in constructing longer wells comes from

simple hydraulic friction. In a vertical well, both the pore pressure of reservoir ﬂuids and the

fracture pressure of the reservoir rock increase with depth, approximately linearly. Judicious

choice of ﬂuid density and circulating ﬂow rates keeps the wellbore pressure inside the so-

called “pore-frac envelope”, i.e. the region where the porous rock does not fracture. In a

horizontal well section, the pore-frac envelope is unchanged with length along the well, but

the frictional pressure increases with length, leading to eventual breaching of the envelope

[36, 37, 38].

There is a consequent interest in methods and ﬂuids that control the frictional pressure

in some way. Two operations where this is important are drilling and cementing. In the

cementing process, [39], it is necessary to displace the drilling mud with a spacer ﬂuid and

then with a cement slurry. As the section is horizontal, density diﬀerences between the ﬂuids

lead to stratiﬁcation and should be avoided. Instead the focus is on controlling the rheology

of the ﬂuids and the displacement ﬂow itself. The idea behind the reactive instability that

we are studying is explained by the following simple calculation.

Suppose simplistically that we have Newtonian ﬂuids, a circular pipe of radius ˆR and that
we wish to displace at mean speed ˆU0. If ∆ˆpe is the diﬀerence between pore and fracture

4

limits, then we are restricted to a length-viscosity combination:

8

ˆLˆη ˆU0
ˆR2

< ∆ˆpe.

ˆL <

ˆR2∆ˆpe
8mˆηd ˆU0

.

Normally, we will need to select the viscosity of the spacer ﬂuid, ˆηs > mˆηd, where m > 1

and ˆηd is the viscosity of the in-situ ﬂuid, e.g. drilling mud, so that

Suppose instead we are able to pump a spacer ﬂuid of viscosity ˆηs ≤ ˆηd, that reacts with the

in-situ ﬂuid to cause a local instability. If the instability causes eﬀective mixing across the

pipe after the ﬂuid has traveled k radii, we may model this process by a radial diﬀusivity
ˆDr ∼ ( ˆR ˆU0)/k. Provided k ≪ ˆL/ ˆR, we have an eﬀective Taylor dispersion process in

which the mixed zone diﬀuses axially along the pipe, relative to the mean ﬂow. This axial
diﬀusion of the mixed region is governed by a dispersion coeﬃcient of order ∼ kDT ( ˆR ˆU0),

where DT = 1/48 is the Taylor dispersion coeﬃcient for a pipe. After traveling a distance
ˆL, the mixed zone will have dispersed axially a distance

If the reacted mixture has viscosity (a + 1)ˆηs, where a ≥ 0, then the frictional pressure drop

along the pipe can be limited by

and the pipe length restriction is

ˆLmix ∼

kDT ˆR ˆL
i
h

1/2

.

∆ˆpe > 8

ˆηs ˆU0
ˆR2 (cid:16)

ˆL + a ˆLmix

,

(cid:17)

ˆL <

ˆR2∆ˆpe
8ˆηs ˆU0(1 + a[kDT ˆR/ ˆL]1/2)

.

mˆηd
ˆηs(1 + a[kDT ˆR/ ˆL]1/2)

> 1.

Therefore, for a given pore-frac limit, we may increase the length of the well that may be

eﬀectively displaced provided that:

Over lengths suﬃciently long that a[kDT ˆR/ ˆL]1/2 ≪ 1, we achieve a length increase by a

modest factor mˆηd/ˆηs.

Even modest increases in length may have a large impact, both economically and envi-

ronmentally. In modern oﬀshore drilling, one vertical well drilled down from the seabed may

5

(1)

(2)

(3)

act as the stem for many lateral horizontal branches, extending radially outwards. Thus,
increases in the length of horizontal branches correspond to (length)2 increases in the area

of reservoir that may be reached and contribute to a reduction in the number of wellheads

required. This reduces the cost of the ﬁeld development reduces the environmental foot-

print, lessens risks of leakage of reservoir ﬂuids and eventually makes for an easier well

abandonment.

B. Organization

Our paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the experimental setup, the mea-

surement techniques and the rheology of our ﬂuids. Experimental results are presented in

§III. Section IV introduces a simple hydrodynamic stability model that gives insight into

the instabilities we observe. The paper closes with a brief discussion of our ﬁndings and a

discussion on future theoretical and experimental studies.

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENTS

A. Experimental apparatus and techniques

All experiments were conducted in the apparatus illustrated schematically in Fig. 1. It
consists of a horizontal ﬂow channel FC with circular cross section of radius ˆR = 5.5 mm and
length ˆL = 1.2 m, immersed in a water ﬁlled glass container GC to ensure distortion-free

ﬂow illumination and imaging. The system was illuminated by a thin laser sheet passing

horizontally through the transparent walls of both the glass container and the ﬂow channel,

at the middle vertical position. The laser sheet has a thickness of approximately 50 µm in

the center of the set-up and about 160 µm near the walls of the channel. It was generated

by passing a laser beam delivered by a 150 mW solid state laser, L, through a block of two

crossed cylindrical lenses, CO, mounted in a telescopic arrangement.

The ﬂow was imaged from the top (Fig. 1) with a charge coupled device camera, CCD,

equipped with a 35 mm photographic lens. The images were digitized with 8 bit quantization

and 640 × 760 pixels resolution (which accounts for 130 µm). The size of the imaged area
was thus 1.4 × 1.4 cm2.

6

The ﬂow in the channel was induced by a syringe pump SP actuated by a precise stepping

motor, M1 (from CBV L, Vancouver) and controlled by computer via a serial port. The

inﬂow mean velocity was controlled with an accuracy better than 100 µm/s. In order to

monitor the evolution of the ﬂuid interface downstream, the CCD and the cylindrical optics

block, CO, were mounted on a linear translational stage parallel to the ﬂow channel (TS

in Fig. 1). The stage was actuated by a stepping motor M1 and controlled by computer

via a serial port. The typical conﬁguration of ﬂuids during the horizontal displacement

experiments is schematically illustrated in the inset of Fig. 1.

The stability of the interface between ﬂuids was investigated using either Laser Induced

Fluorescence (LIF ), or Digital Particle Image Velocimetry (DP IV ). The image acquisition

software was developed in-house and allowed us to adjust the time delay between successive

frames in relation to the local ﬂow velocity (in order to keep the mean particle displacement

in the range 5 − 30 pixels). For low values of the ﬂow velocity the time delay was 66 ms. For

higher ﬂow speeds, the delay was decreased to 16 ms. The ﬂuids were seeded with either a

small amount (approx. 160 ppm) of 20 µm Polyamide spheres (from Dantec Inc.) for DP IV

measurements, or with ﬂuorescein sodium salt (Sigma Aldrich) for the LIF measurements.

Time series of the velocity ﬁelds were obtained by a multi-pass DP IV algorithm [40]. The

spatial resolution was 167 µm. The accuracy of the method has been carefully checked by

running test measurements for low Reynolds number Poiseuille ﬂows with Newtonian ﬂuids

and comparing then with the analytical solution.

In addition to these techniques, we have developed a third visualization method to mea-

sure the local pH in the ﬂow ﬁeld. We do so by using a pH sensitive colored dye, Bromoth-

ymol Blue (Sigma Aldrich). The local value of the pH near the interface was assessed by

measurements of the color distribution in the ﬁeld of view. With this we are able to estimate

the local rheological properties.

B. Fluid properties

We have used the same base ﬂuids for all our experiments, with various adjustments to the

levels of acid and base used in each ﬂuid to examine diﬀerent regimes. The displacing ﬂuid,

Fluid 1, was a 65% aqueous sucrose solution. The pH of this ﬂuid was varied between 7 and 11

by titration with diﬀerent amounts of NaOH ranging from 150 parts per million (ppm) and

7

300 ppm. The displaced ﬂuid, Fluid 2, was a mixture of a 5% (wt) Carbopol 940 (C-940)

solution and a 65% (wt) sucrose solution in deionized water. C-940 is generally referred to

as a weak polyacrylic acid and dissociates in solution. The pH of this solution is typically

between two and three. During our experiments, neutralization of C-940 molecules present

in Fluid 2 occurs locally, in the vicinity of the interface,through contact with Fluid 1.

The pH of the ﬂuids were measured with a thermally corrected digital pH meter (Topac

Instruments) with 1.5% accuracy. The rheological properties of both ﬂuids 1 and 2 were

measured with a stress controlled rotational rheometer: CV OR acquired from Bohlin In-

struments (Malvern Inc., www.malvern.co.uk). Example ﬂow curves at 22◦C of Fluid 1,

Fluid 2 (at pH ≈ 3) and Fluid 2 (at pH ≈ 7), are presented in Fig. 2. As shown, the

viscosity of Fluid 1 is independent of shear rate. With Fluid 2 at a pH ≈ 3.2, the viscosity
is also approximately constant. As a guide, at a shear rate of 2 s−1 we have viscosities

ˆη1 = 114 mPas and ˆη2 = 138 mPas, for ﬂuids 1 and 2 respectively. As the pH is increased

the rheology of Fluid 2 changes dramatically (see Fig. 2). A detailed study of the coupling

between the pH, the molecular structure and the rheological properties of C-940 has been

recently reported in [41].

In order to quantify the dependence of the rheological properties of Fluid 2 on the pH,

several batches have been prepared at diﬀerent pH values, and the rheological tests have been
conducted. The pH dependence of the shear viscosity of ﬂuid 2 at rate of strain ˙γ = 2 s−1,

is shown in Fig. 3a. In the range of pH shown, the shear viscosity increases monotonically,

up to a value nearly two orders of magnitude larger than the non-neutralized value. The pH

dependence of the measured yield stress of Fluid 2 is shown in Fig. 3b. A further increase of

the pH (data not shown in Fig. 3) results in destruction of the gel structure, which causes

both viscosity and yield stress to drop to their initial low pH values.

C. Experimental procedure

Our displacement experiments were conducted as follows. First, the alignment of the laser

sheet and focus of the camera is carefully checked at several locations downstream. Second,

the valves V1, V2 are open and the channel is initially ﬁlled with Fluid 2. Next, we close

valve V1, open valve V3 and start to drive the syringe pump at very low speeds for several

tens of seconds. This procedure allows us to eliminate any air bubbles generated during the

8

ﬁlling of the ﬂow channel. Finally, we close valve V2 and open valves V1 , and set the ﬂuids

in motion by operating the syringe pump at the desired speed. The ﬂow images were usually

acquired halfway down length of the pipe, though in some of the experiments the camera and

the laser sheet were moved at constant speed along the ﬂow channel. Approximately 1000

ﬂow images were acquired both before the entrance of the ﬂuid interface in the measuring

window and after. Details of the experimental conditions tested are given in Table I.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We propose to control the stability of an interface between a Newtonian and a C-940

solution by inducing changes in the local ﬂuid rheology via an acid-base reaction, which

depends on the free charge mismatch across the interface,and the pH of each ﬂuid. With

1% NaOH, the saccharose solution (Fluid 1) has a pH around 11. When in contact with

Fluid 2 at pH ≈ 3, neutralization occurs near the interface resulting in a thin layer of high

viscosity ﬂuid, see Fig. 2. The high viscosity interfacial layer apparently undergoes a self-

sustained hydrodynamic instability that results in local mixing of the two ﬂuids. Below we

will present a full description of this reactive instability and displacement. For comparison,

we have conducted 2 experimental test sequences (at varying ﬂow rates) in which there is

no reaction, see Table I series 1 and 2. In addition we have performed a number of reactive

experiments, see series 3 in Table I. In total, we performed 5 experiments in this series.

A. Control experiments

The ﬁrst control sequence concerns the two base ﬂuids without reaction. We have seen

in Fig. 2 that the viscosity of Fluid 2 at pH ≈ 3 is largely constant and governed by

that of the underlying saccharose solution. We therefore conduct a control displacement

of Fluid 1, a 65% saccharose solution, by Fluid 2, a 66% saccharose solution. The ﬂow

rates are chosen so that Re < 1 in all cases, and often Re ≪ 1. Both ﬂuids are at neutral

pH. The displacing ﬂuid is mildly more viscous, but not suﬃciently so to ensure a good

displacement, (ˆη1 = 114 mPas and ˆη2 = 138 mPas) as illustrated in Figure 4. The interface

develops into a long ﬁnger that stretches progressively along the pipe. At no time do

we observe any interfacial instability, and the interface remains sharp, i.e. the length of the

9

tube is insuﬃcient for molecular diﬀusion to have any signiﬁcant eﬀect. Qualitatively similar

results for miscible Newtonian displacements can be found in [10].

The second control sequence also concerns displacement of the two ﬂuids at neutral

pH, i.e. without chemical reaction, but Fluid 2 has a much larger viscosity (ˆη2 ≈ 20 Pas at
˙γ = 1 s−1) and a signiﬁcant yield stress (ˆσy ≈ 6.6 Pa). The viscosity of Fluid 1 is unchanged.

Similar ﬂows have been studied experimentally before in slightly larger tubes [42, 43]. As

commented in [42], some care is needed in choosing the displacing ﬂow rate, since at low

ﬂow rates the displacing ﬂuid eﬀectively fractures through the elastic gel, leaving a rough

edge. For low ﬂow rates we also observed a slightly granular interfacial texture and also

some asymmetry of the ﬁnger. The slight asymmetry of the ﬁnger visible in Fig. 5 could be

due to the non-symmetric entrance condition (the interface between ﬂuids enters the ﬂow

channel via a T shaped junction, as shown in Fig. 1) which is preserved at all later times

due to the signiﬁcant yield stress of Fluid 2. Alternatively the asymmetry may relate to

a transition between solid-like and ﬂuid-like behavior. We do not attempt to explain this

further.

Sample images of an experiment in this sequence are shown in Fig. 5. The C-940 solution

yields in the center of the pipe, where there is a two-dimensional ﬂow, but the stresses are

not suﬃcient to make it yield at the wall. Consequently a static residual wall layer is left in

the tube as a ﬁnger of Fluid 1 penetrates steadily along the pipe. The shape of the nose of

the ﬁnger is quite rounded and the wall layers have apparently constant thickness.

Over the duration of the experiment, there is no evidence of any interfacial instability.

These results are qualitatively similar to those of [42, 43], where C-940 solutions are displaced

by glycerol solutions. The reason that there is no interfacial instability here is because the

residual layers of C-940 solution are in fact fully static and unyielded. Such ﬂows have

been studied in some detail, theoretically and computationally [44, 45, 46, 47], and are

well understood. Even with a non-zero ﬂow rate of C-940 solution, stable regimes may be

predicted and found experimentally, see [48, 49].

The two control sequences establish that without a chemical reaction and accompanying

local rheology change, these displacement ﬂows are stable. In other words, having a change

in bulk rheology of the two ﬂuids at an interface can result in instability but does not for

the systems we study.

10

B. Chemically reactive unstable ﬂows

The ﬂow behavior was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control experiments in the reactive

case, when the C-940 solution at pH = 3 was displaced by a saccharose solution at pH = 11,

at diﬀerent ﬂow rates. The initial interface penetrates in a sharp spike as before, but this is

destabilized and the ﬁnger rapidly widens to nearly ﬁll the pipe. A complex secondary ﬂow

develops at the interface between ﬂuids. The ﬂow seems to be dominated by large vortices

advected by the ﬂow, with a typical size of the order of the pipe radius. Typical images are

shown in Fig. 6.

As the front of the ﬁnger passes, the secondary ﬂow instabilities persist along the sides

of the ﬁnger. The secondary ﬂow provides a feedback mechanism for the instability by

bringing into contact new un-reacted ﬂuid elements and taking away reacted highly viscous

ﬂuid. The initial pass of the ﬁnger front does not remove all the ﬂuid 2 from the walls.

However, the secondary ﬂows result in a fairly rapid erosion of the residual layers. After

the initial instability, small parcels of Fluid 2 pulled into the Fluid 1 stream react to form

gelled solid regions that are advected along with the ﬂuid. Close observation of video images

reveals that some of these parcels appear to be in rigid motion, see e.g. Fig. 6e & f.

More detailed information on the structure of velocity ﬁeld is obtained from DP IV

images. We display in Fig. 7a & b two instantaneous velocity ﬁelds measured during a

chemically reactive displacement experiment at roughly the midpoint of the ﬂuid channel

downstream. Before the entrance of the displacement front into the ﬁeld of view, the ﬂow

is similar to Hagen-Poiseuille ﬂow, see Fig. 7a. The velocity proﬁle is parabolic and there

is no secondary ﬂuid motion in a direction orthogonal to the mean ﬂow. Analysis of time

series of velocity ﬁelds (data not shown here) has shown that the time ﬂuctuations are only

due to instrumental noise, which accounts for less than 5% of the mean ﬂow velocity. The

structure of the ﬂow ﬁeld changes drastically after the passage of the displacement front

through the ﬁeld of view. As one can clearly see in Fig. 7b, the ﬂuid motion follows a

wavy-spiral pattern, with an apparent periodicity in the axial direction of roughly the tube

diameter. The velocity ﬁeld is now unstable and characterized by a rather strong radial

component. Quasi-periodic entrance of slowly moving ﬂow regions in the ﬁeld of view can

be associated with the passage of fully gelled solid parcels of ﬂuid 2 illustrated in Fig. 6e &f

and discussed above.

11

Finally, we are able to conﬁrm that the mixing process is locally eﬀective and that the

pH varies over some intermediate range in the displacement region. To do this we image

unstable ﬂows doped with pH sensitive colored dye, as shown below in Fig. 8. Since the

pH-dependence of the ﬂuid rheology has been characterized, in principle we could use the

DP IV images together with the data in Fig. 8 to construct local deviatoric stress ﬁelds.

This technique however still requires some work.

C. Displacement eﬃciency

A more quantitative assessment of the displacement eﬃciency is obtained by processing

LIF images to give an indication of the evolution in time of the ﬁnger width at a ﬁxed

position along channel, roughly 50 cm from the entrance. In each experiment a long time-

series of images (∼ 2000) is acquired, starting long before the entrance of the displacement

front into the ﬁeld of view and ending long after its passage. In these experiments ﬂuid 2

contained Polyamide spheres and ﬂuid 1 a small amount of ﬂuorescein (see section II C).

The images prior to the entrance of the ﬁnger in the ﬁeld of view are passed to the DP IV

algorithm to obtain a time series of velocity ﬁelds. The time average of these images also

provides a background image that is used to compensate for non uniform illumination of each

image in the sequence. The ﬂuorescent images of the displacement front/ﬁnger are digitally

processed to extract the width (measured along the radial direction) of the ﬁnger. Each

image is ﬁrst converted to a binary image, and the edge of the interface is detected using the

Sobel algorithm with a ﬁxed brightness threshold. Spurious edge identiﬁcations, i.e. objects

of the order of several pixels that are identiﬁed due to brightness inhomogeneities, are

carefully removed using a morphological ﬁlter. Finally, the width of the ﬁnger is quantiﬁed

from the width of the ﬁnger contour.

During reactive experiments, the instantaneous shapes of the ﬁnger are usually non-

symmetric in both azimuthal and radial directions. However statistically, (considered as

an ensemble average over several positions of the ﬁnger), the symmetry does not seem to

break. Thus, the ﬁnger width measurement can be interpreted as a volumetric measure of

the displacement eﬃciency, although we prefer to display time series of the width. In Fig. 9

we display the time dependence of the width of the ﬁnger for several values of ﬂow rate.

For diﬀerent ﬂow rates the time until the displacement front enters the ﬁeld of view will

12

be diﬀerent. This residence time has been subtracted and the time (on the horizontal axis)
is then scaled with the advection timescale, ˆR/ ˆU0. The ﬁnger width is normalized by the
diameter of the pipe, ˆd = 2 ˆR.

Fig. 9a shows the normalized width of the ﬁnger, W/ ˆd, for the experiments in control
sequence 1, where two Newtonian ﬂuids are displaced. For each ﬂow rate, W/ ˆd saturates at

values smaller than unity, indicating that in all cases ﬂuid 2 was only partially displaced.

Qualitatively similar results are given in [10]. Fig. 9b shows analogous results for the reactive

displacements at diﬀerent ﬂow rates. The interfacial instability clearly results in an eﬃcient
mass transport in the cross ﬂow direction. For each ﬂow rate, W/ ˆd saturates at values

very close to unity. Observe that the initial points on the time series are noisy, followed

by a rapid increase to near saturation, then slow approach to unity as the wall layers are

consumed by the secondary ﬂows/instability. The initial noisy part of the curves corresponds

to destabilization of the initial interfacial spike.

In comparing these two ﬁgures, recall that the time axis has been shifted to correspond

to the initial appearance of ﬂuid 1. In the case of the unstable displacements, this is harder

to determine precisely due to the destabilized wispy spike. Once the bulk of the displacing

ﬁnger arrives, the rapid increase to near the saturation values is similar in both cases. The

wider spread of the curves in Fig. 9b is due to the early arrival of the initial spike and slower

erosion of the ﬁnal wall layer. In terms of a volumetric measure of eﬃciency, the reactive

displacement leaves . 5% of the displaced ﬂuid volume, and this appears to be insensitive

to the ﬂow rate. The stable Newtonian displacements leave between 20% and 60% of the

displaced ﬂuid in the pipe, with strong dependence on the ﬂow rate.

The key observations of Fig. 9b is that all the eﬃciency curves (time shifted for arrival)
have similar shape and that the time scales with ˆR/ ˆU0. In terms of an averaged volumetric
concentration of displaced ﬂuid, say ¯C(ˆx, ˆt) = (W/ ˆd)2, this suggests a functional form:

¯C(ˆx, ˆt) = ¯C(ˆx − ˆU0ˆt, ˆt ˆU0/ ˆR),

and the sigmoid shape is reminiscent of axial dispersion in a moving frame of reference.
If this dispersion is governed by an axial diﬀusivity ˆDa, the timescale for the spreading is
ˆt ∼ ˆR2/ ˆDa. Thus, the collapse of our data with respect to the time variable ˆR/ ˆU0, suggests

the scaling law

ˆDa ∼ ˆR ˆU0,

13

which infers a similar scaling law for a transverse diﬀusivity of mixing, ˆDr, see §I A.

Even if redrawn volumetrically, the curves in Fig. 9b are not symmetric about the mid-

concentration. Additionally, close inspection reveals small diﬀerences between the curves for

diﬀerent ﬂow rates. These suggest that, although axial dispersion may provide a reasonable
leading order model, the dispersion coeﬃcient will vary nonlinearly with respect to ¯C and

have other weak dependencies. This is in fact physically obvious: the mechanism governing
the initial instability of the wispy spike ( ¯C ∼ 0) is clearly quite diﬀerent to that governing
erosion/break up of the residual wall layer of C-940 ( ¯C ∼ 1).

IV. HYDRODYNAMIC INSTABILITIES DRIVEN BY VISCOSITY GRADIENTS

We would like to understand better the origin of the instabilities that develop into sec-

ondary ﬂows such as those in Fig. 6. Development of a complete stability analysis of the

reaction-diﬀusion system coupled to the hydrodynamics is a formidable task, and perhaps

unnecessary. One obstacle is that the reaction kinetics are not fully quantiﬁed. Another

obstacle is to fully understand the coupling between the reaction and the hydrodynamics.

This analysis is however underway and we hope to report the results later. For now, we oﬀer

some insights via analysis of a simpler toy problem.

First, we note that the chemical reaction occurs on a time scale ˆtch which is much shorter

than the hydrodynamic time scales of the problem. This is supported by the estimation

below.

Following ref.

[50], the characteristic time scale at which the chemical reaction occurs

is roughly ˆtch ≈ 10−9s.
In our experiments, the characteristic hydrodynamic times are
the diﬀusion time, ˆtD = ˆR2/ ˆD, the advection time, ˆta = ˆR/ ˆU0, and the viscous time,
ˆtv = ˆρ ˆR2/ˆη0. If one considers ˆD ≈ 4.2·10−12 m2/s (which is roughly the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of
ﬂuorescein in our solutions) and ˆU0 ≈ 5 mm/s (which corresponds to half of our experimental
range), one can estimate ˆtD ≈ 7.2 · 106 s, ˆta ≈ 1.1 s and ˆtv ≈ 0.3 s. The numerical estimates
above show a clear separation of time scales in our problem: ˆtch ≪ ˆtv < ˆta ≪ ˆtD. In view of

this, it is reasonable to assume that the fast reaction instantaneously establishes an initial

concentration proﬁle when two ﬂuids come into contact. This ”reaction front” is a diﬀuse

layer of reacted ﬂuid separating the two bulk ﬂuids, within which the pH is approximately

neutral and the viscosity is consequently elevated. In the following we will investigate the

14

hydrodynamic stability of such a viscosity proﬁle.

This process is on the slow scale of ta. Note that the reaction is not auto-catalytic. Unless

there is convective motion that brings fresh un-reacted ﬂuids into contact, the reaction

front broadens diﬀusively. No self-sustaining traveling chemical waves arise. In addition,

unlike the many ”chemical reaction plus buoyancy” studied referenced in §I, our ﬂuids have

matching densities that are unchanged by the reaction. Consequently, there is no momentum

source resulting from the reaction. Therefore, the direct eﬀect of the continual reaction is to

create a source term in the advection-diﬀusion equation for the concentration. Indirectly this

modiﬁes the viscosity proﬁle. For simplicity, however, we will ignore the eﬀects of continual

reaction, and focus on the fate of the initial, chemically created, concentration and viscosity

proﬁles.

Furthermore we ignore the pipe geometry [55], and consider instead a symmetric plane
Poiseuille ﬂow in a channel of width 2 ˆR along which ﬂuid is pumped at mean speed ˆU0. The

ﬂuid is assumed to have a concentration dependent viscosity ˆη(c) that consists of a base

viscosity ˆη0 that is augmented (by a factor a) over some ﬁnite range of concentrations, ∆c0,

close to a ﬁxed concentration value c = c0. For example, one such function would be:

ˆη(c) = ˆη0

1 + a cos4
(cid:20)

π(c − c0)

(cid:18)

2∆c0 (cid:19)(cid:21)

,

which is depicted in Fig. 10a. Ignoring the reaction, the concentration satisﬁes an advection-

diﬀusion equation and the ﬂuid ﬂow satisﬁes the Navier-Stokes equations. There exists a

steady base ﬂow in which the concentration varies linearly across the channel. The increased

viscosity tends to ﬂatten the base Poiseuille velocity proﬁle within the diﬀuse layer, see

e.g. Fig. 10b.

We consider the linear stability of this base ﬂow, using classical methods. The stability
problem is governed by the Reynolds number Re = (ˆρ ˆR ˆU0)/ˆη0 . 1, the Schmidt number,
Sc = ˆη0/(ˆρ ˆD) ∈ [104, 106], the initial concentration proﬁle C0, the layer thickness and posi-

tion, ∆c0 & c0, and the amplitude a of the viscosity jump. Introducing the non-dimensional

variables

ˆt
ˆtv
the growth or decay of a linear mode (f (y), c(y))eiαx+σt is governed by the following eigen-

, U =

ˆη
ˆη0

ˆx
ˆR

ˆy
ˆR

x =

y =

η =

t =

,

,

,

ˆU
ˆU0

15

value problem:

f =

L1f + L2f + L3c

σ

D2 − α2
(cid:0)

1
Re

(cid:1)
σc = iαRe

(cid:16)

(DC0)f − Uc

+

1
Sc

D2 − α2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

c

(cid:17)

(4)

(5)

where D = d/dy, η = η(C0), C0 = 1 − y, and

L1 := −iα

(cid:16)
L2 := (D2η)

L3 := D2

U(D2 − α2) − (D2U)

D2 + α2
(cid:0)
∂η
∂C0

DU

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:17)
+ 2(Dη)D
(cid:0)
∂η
DU
∂C0

(cid:1)
I + 2D

(cid:18)

D2 − α2

+ η

(cid:1)
D +

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

D2 − α2
(cid:0)
∂η
∂C0

DU

(cid:19)

(cid:1)
(D2 + α2)

We discretize the equations using Chebyschev polynomials and determine the maximal

growth rates σR as a function of wave number α (and the other dimensionless parameters),

in the standard way, see e.g. [51]. Examples of the results are shown below.

A. Results

Typically in our experiments we have Re . 1, so that we are far below the range for

inertia-driven shear instabilities.

If a = 0, the viscosity is constant so that equation (4)

decouples and reduces to the classical Orr-Sommerfeld equation, which is stable at low Re.

Equation (5) then gives only stable modes with σR < 0 decreasing quadratically with α. As

the amplitude a increases, unstable modes are found over an increasing range of α, including

the long wave limit α = 0, with diﬀusion stabilizing the short wavelengths. Figure 11 shows

typical examples of the growth rate σR vs α, for a range of diﬀerent a, at two diﬀerent values

of Sc.

The long wave limit α → 0 tends to give the largest growth rates, but these modes will

not be excited in a developing ﬁnger-like displacement. Unstable wave numbers are found

up to a critical wave number αc, which varies with a and ∆c0, increasing mildly with a. A

possible physical interpretation of the (x-independent) long wavelength instability is simply

that a diﬀerent base ﬂow may exist and be somehow more stable. In order to compare with
the experimental results, note that the wave numbers are scaled with ˆR−1 and the growth
rates with the inverse viscous timescale, ˆtv, (which is ≈ 0.3 s for our experiments). Thus, we
can see from Fig. 11 that wavelengths ∼ ˆR are certainly excited at viscosity ampliﬁcations

16

a = 100. The growth rates are very rapid and we would therefore not expect to see linear

modal eﬀects.

A complete exploration of the parameter space of this problem does not seem worthwhile

and is not easy numerically. Although we typically have large Sc, the limit Sc → ∞ results

in loss of the diﬀusive terms in the concentration equation and it is these that stabilize the

short wavelengths. The other limits of large a and small ∆c0 will obviously eventually cause

problems for the Chebyschev expansion, and would be better investigated analytically, as

would the large and small wave number limits.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this study we have presented experimental evidence of an inertial free shear ﬂow

instability caused by changes in the local ﬂuid rheology. We have focused on low Re number

displacement ﬂows in an horizontal pipe. An acid-base type chemical reaction occurs near

the interface between ﬂuids and results in molecular reorganization of the Carbopol-940 (C-

940) polymer. The main result of this molecular reorganization is the formation of a stiﬀ

gel, characterized by a large viscosity and a signiﬁcant yield stress.

In order to test the eﬀect of these rheological changes on the hydrodynamic stability of

the ﬂow, we have carried out two control experimental sequences, see Table I series 1 and

2. In neither of the control experiments was a ﬂow instability observed. If both ﬂuids were

Newtonian (ﬁrst control sequence), the displacement ﬂow was dominated by a long ﬁnger of

ﬂuid 1 penetrating into ﬂuid 2, Fig. 4. The ﬂow was stable and the second ﬂuid was never

completely removed from the channel walls, Fig. 9a. If the displaced ﬂuid was a yield stress

ﬂuid, the ﬂow remained stable at all times, (second control sequence), see Fig. 5.

The behavior was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the reactive case. The interface between the

ﬂuids becomes unstable and mixes across the entire channel. The ﬂow ﬁelds are unsteady

and characterized by a strong secondary motion in a direction orthogonal to the mean ﬂow

direction, Fig. 7b. The relevance of our experimental ﬁndings is threefold.

1. First, the coupling between chemical reaction and a strong non-monotonic local change

in the ﬂuid rheology is novel. For simple ﬂuids, viscosity variations can be caused by

temperature or concentration gradients, but these tend to be gradual and monotone.

Use of complex ﬂuids allows one to localize the change in viscosity and produce non-

17

monotone eﬀects.

The instability mechanism we have described in this paper is not restricted to interfa-

cial ﬂows, where acid-base type chemical reactions take place at the interface between

two ﬂuids via transport of unbalanced charges across the interface. Similar chemical

reactions, which result in signiﬁcant changes in the ﬂuid rheology, may be triggered in

a non invasive way, e.g. by exposing ﬂuid parcels to either electromagnetic radiation

or heat waves which will locally initiate a polymerization reaction. For example, there

exist numerous polymeric materials (epoxies) widely used in photo lithography, whose

viscosity increases dramatically (up to solidiﬁcation, depending on the chemical nature

of the polymer and the exposure conditions) upon exposure to monochromatic elec-

tromagnetic radiation. Also, liquid silicone elastomers may display a similar behavior

(they turn from viscous liquid state to solid elastic) when locally heated. This obser-

vation, together with an instability mechanism similar to the one illustrated in this

paper, may open new possibilities of externally controlling the hydrodynamic stability

of inertia free shear ﬂows.

2. Secondly, we have demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in the displacement eﬃciency

for reactive displacements. This has an impact on process applications such as these

described in §I A, and this was the initial motivation for our study.

3. Thirdly, we have demonstrated a new mechanism for low Re mixing that does not

require large inertial energies. This in itself opens up many interesting avenues for

practical applications, e.g. mixing in micro-ﬂuidic ﬂows. Indeed, eﬃcient mixing in the

absence of inertia requires an additional mechanism than molecular diﬀusion (which

is the least eﬃcient). Several micro mixing techniques have been proposed during

the past half decade, all based on diﬀerent mechanisms of generating secondary ﬂows

(steady or random in time). One of these techniques is based on the recently discovered

elastic turbulence [52], which is a random (in time) and complex dynamic ﬂow state

in dilute solutions of linear ﬂexible polymers. As shown in [53, 54], elastic turbulence

can be successfully employed in eﬃciently mixing viscous ﬂuids in the absence of

inertia. Although the ﬂow conﬁguration we used in this study is not a typical mixing

conﬁguration, based on the data presented in Figs. 6, and 8, one can suggest that

the instability discussed in this paper could be alternatively used as a low Re mixing

18

Our hydrodynamic stability study is minimalist and we have presented only brief results.

However, the simple toy model shows that long wavelength instabilities do result from non-

monotonic viscosity variations of the magnitude that we have and in the correct range of

Re and Sc. A more detailed study of these reactive displacements is underway.

method.

Acknowledgments

Financial support for this research was provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering

Research Council of Canada through strategic project grant 306682. This project is also

supported by Schlumberger Oilﬁeld Services and Trican Well Service Ltd. We are grateful

to Rastislav Seﬀer (CBV L, Vancouver) for valuable help and advice on the customization

of stepping motor controllers and software.

[1] H. B´enard, “Les tourbillons cellulaires dans une nappe liquide,” Rev. G´en. Sci. pures et appl.

11, 1261 (1900).

[2] L. Landau and E. Lifschitz, Fluid Mechanics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1987).

[3] P. Ern, F. Charru, and P. Luchini, “Stability analysis of a shear ﬂow with strongly stratiﬁed

[4] C. Tan and G. Homsy, “Stability of miscible displacements in porous media: Rectilinear ﬂow,”

viscosity,” J. Fluid Mech. 496, 295 (2003).

Phys. Fluids 29, 3549 (1986).

[5] F. Hickernell and Y. C. Yortsos, “Linear stability of miscible displacement processes in porous

media in the absence of dispersion,” Stud. Appl. Math. 74, 93 (1986).

[6] S. Chang and J. Slattery, “A linear stability analysis for miscible displacements,” Trans. Porous

[7] Y. C. Yortsos, “Stability of displacement processes in porous media in radial ﬂow geometries.”

Media 1, 179 (1986).

Phys. Fluids 30, 2928 (1987).

[8] C. Tan and G. Homsy, “Simulation of nonlinear viscous ﬁngering viscous ﬁngering in miscible

displacement,” Phys. Fluids 31, 1330 (1988).

19

[9] Y. C. Yortsos and M. Zeybek, “Dispersion driven instability in miscible displacement in porous

[10] P. Petitjeans and T. Maxworthy, “Miscible displacements in capillary tubes. Part 1. Experi-

media.” Phys. Fluids 31, 3511 (1988).

ments,” J. Fluid Mech. 326, 37 (1996).

[11] C.-Y. Chen and E. Meiburg, “Miscible displacements in capillary tubes. Part 2. Numerical

simulations,” J. Fluid Mech. 326, 81 (1996).

[12] N. Rakotomalala, D. Salin, and P. Watzky, “Miscible displacement between two parallel plates:

BGK lattice gas simulations.” J. Fluid Mech. 338, 277 (1997).

[13] Z. Yang and Y. C. Yortsos, “Asymptotic solutions of miscible displacements in geometries of

large aspect ratio,” Phys. Fluids 9, 286 (1997).

[14] E. Lajeunesse, J. Martin, N. Rakotomalala, D. Salin, and Y. Yortsos, “Miscible displacement

in a Hele Shaw cell at high rates,” J. Fluid Mech. 398, 299 (1999).

[15] C.-S. Yih, “Instability due to viscosity stratiﬁcation,” J. Fluid Mech. 27, 337 (1967).

[16] C. Hickox, “Instability due to viscosity and density stratiﬁcation in axisymmetric pipe ﬂow,”

[17] D. Joseph and Y. Renardy, Fundamentals of Two-Fluid Dynamics. (Interdisciplinary Applied

Phys. Fluids 14, 251 (1971).

Mathematics, Springer, 1993).

[18] E. Hinch, “A note on the mechanism of the instability at the interface between two shearing

ﬂuids,” J. Fluid Mech. 114, 463 (1984).

[19] F. Charru and E. Hinch, “”phase diagram” of interfacial instabilities in a two-layer Couette

ﬂow and mechanism of the long wave instability,” J. Fluid Mech. 414, 195 (2000).

[20] E. Chikhliwala, A. Huang, and Y. C. Yortsos, “Numerical study of the linear stability of

immiscible displacement in porous media,” Trans. Porous Media 3, 257 (1988).

[21] O. Manickam and G. Homsy, “Stability of miscible displacements in porous media with non-

monotonic viscosity proﬁles,” Phys. Fluids 5, 1356 (1993).

[22] R. B. Bird, C. F. Curtiss, R. C. Armstrong, and O. Hassager, Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids,

[23] J. Tyson and J. Keener, “Singular perturbation theory of travelling waves in excitable media

vol. 2 (John Wiley, NY, 1987).

(a review),” Physica D 32, 327 (1988).

[24] J. A. Pojman and I. R. Epstein, “Convective eﬀects on chemical waves. 1.: Mechanisms and

stability criteria,” J. Phys. Chem. 94, 4966 (1990).

20

[25] B. Edwards, J. Wilder, and S. K., “Onset of convective for autocatalytic reaction fronts:

Laterally unbounded systems,” Phys. Rev. A 43, 749 (1991).

[26] D. Vasquez, B. Edwards, and J. Wilder, “Onset of convective for autocatalytic reaction fronts:

Laterally bounded systems,” Phys. Rev. A 43, 6694 (1991).

[27] D. Vasquez, J. Littley, J. Wilder, and B. Edwards, “Convection in chemical waves,”

Phys. Rev. E 51, 280 (1994).

[28] B. Edwards, “Poiseuille advection of chemical reaction fronts,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002).

[29] D. Vasquez and A. De Wit, “Dispersion relations for the convective instability of an acidity

front in Hele-Shaw cells,” J. Chem. Phys. 121 (2001).

[30] J. D’Hernoncourt, A. Zebib, and A. De Wit, “Reaction driven convection around a stably

stratiﬁed chemical front,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006).

[31] D. Lima, A. D’Onfrio, and A. De Wit, “Nonlinear ﬁngering dynamics of reaction-diﬀusion

fronts: Self-similar scaling and inﬂuence of diﬀerential diﬀusion,” J. Chem. Phys. 124 (2006).

[32] A. De Wit and G. Homsy, “Viscous ﬁngering in periodically heterogeneous porous media. I.

Formulation and linear instability,” J. Chem. Phys. 107, 9609 (1997).

[33] A. De Wit and G. Homsy, “Viscous ﬁngering in periodically heterogeneous porous media. II.

Numerical simulations,” J. Chem. Phys. 107, 9619 (1997).

[34] A. De Wit and G. Homsy, “Nonlinear interactions of chemical reactions and viscous ﬁngering

in porous media,” Phys. Fluids 11, 949 (1999).

[35] A. De Wit and G. Homsy, “Viscous ﬁngering in reaction-diﬀusion systems,” J. Chem. Phys.

110, 8663 (1999).

[36] A. Bourgoyne, K. Millheim, and M. Chenever, Applied Drilling Engineering Textbook , vol. 2

of ISBN: 1-55563-001-4 (Society of Petroleum Engineers).

[37] Pore Pressure and Fracture Gradients Reprint No.49 , ISBN: 1-55563-081-2 (Society of

Petroleum Engineers, 1999).

[38] Horizontal Wells Reprint No.47 , ISBN: 1-55563-076-6 (Society of Petroleum Engineers, 1998).

[39] E. B. Nelson, Well Cementing (Schlumberger Educational Services., 1990).

[40] F. Scarano and M. L. Rhiethmuller, “Advances in iterative multigrid PIV image processing,”

Exp. Fluids 29 (2001).

[41] F. K. Oppong, L. Rubatat, B. Frisken, A. Bailey, and J. de Bruyn, “Microrheology and

structure of a yield-stress polymer gel.” Phys. Rev. E 73, 041405 (2006).

21

[42] G. C., “Etude de la stabilit´e de ﬁlms liquides sur les parois d’une conduite verticale lors de

l’ecoulement de ﬂuides miscibles non-newtoniens.” (2001), these de l’Universite Pierre et Marie

[43] C. Gabard and J.-P. Hulin, “Miscible displacements of non-Newtonian ﬂuids in a vertical

Curie (PhD thesis), Orsay, France.

tube,” Eur. Phys. J. E 11, 231 (2003).

[44] M. Allouche, I. Frigaard, and G. Sona, “Static wall layers in the displacement of two visco-

plastic ﬂuids in a plane channel,” J. Fluid Mech. 424, 243 (2000).

[45] I. Frigaard, S. O., and S. G., “Uniqueness and non-uniqueness in the steady displacement of

two viscoplastic ﬂuids,” ZAMM 81, 99 (2001).

[46] I. Frigaard, “Super-stable parallel ﬂows of multiple visco-plastic ﬂuids,” J. Non-Newtonian

[47] I. Frigaard, L. S., and S. O., “Variational methods and maximal residual wall layers,” J. Fluid

Fluid Mech. 100, 49 (2001).

Mech. 483, 37 (2003).

[48] M. Moyers-Gonzalez, I. A. Frigaard, and C. Nouar, “Nonlinear stability of a visco-plastically

lubricated viscous shear ﬂow,” J. Fluid Mech. 506, 117 (2004).

[49] C. Huen, I. Frigaard, and D. Martinez, “Experimental studies of multi-layer ﬂows using a

viscoplastic lubricant,” J. Non-Newtonian Fluid Mech. in press (2006).

[50] P. W. Atkins and J. W. Locke, Physical Chemistry (Oxford University Press, 2002).

[51] P. J. Schmid and D. S. Henningson, Stability and Transition in Shear Flows, vol. 142 of Applied

[52] A. Groismann and V. Steinberg, “Elastic turbulence in a polymer solution ﬂow,” Nature 405,

Mathematical Sciences (Springer, 2001).

53 (2000).

additives,” Nature 410, 905 (2001).

[53] A. Groisman and V. Steinberg, “Eﬃcient mixing at low Reynolds numbers using polymer

[54] T. Burghelea, E. Segre, I. Bar-Joseph, A. Groisman, and V. Steinberg, “Chaotic ﬂow and

eﬃcient mixing in a microchannel with a polymer solution.” Phys. Rev. E 69, 066305 (2004).

[55] Although the onset of linear shear instabilities is diﬀerent in pipe and plane channel geome-

tries, onset of interfacial instability is similar, and the plane channel is simpler to deal with

mathematically. Here we study low Re ﬂows for which the non-interfacial modes are assumed

stable.

22

Figures

FIG. 1: Schematic view of the experimental apparatus: FC-ﬂow channel, GC-glass container,

L-solid state laser, CO-cylindrical optics, LS-laser sheet, CCD -camera, M1,2-stepping motors,

V1,2,3-valves, TS-horizontal translational stage, SP-syringe pump. The lower inset illustrates

schematically the ﬂow conﬁguration: the full curve represents the interface between ﬂuids, the

dotted lines indicate the reacting region and the horizontal arrows point the mean ﬂow direction.

 

10

1

)
s

 

a
P

(

^

0.1

0.01

1

10

^

-1

(s

)

 

23

FIG. 2: Shear rate dependence of the viscosities of the ﬂuids: (◦) displaced ﬂuid 2 with pH ≈ 3,

((cid:3)) displacing Fluid 1 , (△) displaced Fluid 2 with pH ≈ 7.

FIG. 3: Dependence of the rheological properties of ﬂuid 2 on pH: (a) viscosity measured at

˙γ = 2s−1 (b) yield stress.

FIG. 4: Example ﬂuorescent images of the interface in an experiment from control sequence 1: (a-

b) Fluid 1 - 65% saccharose solution, Fluid 2 - 66% saccharose solution, ﬂow rate ˆQ = 0.145 ml/s.

The two images are separated in time by 5 s.

24

FIG. 5: Example images of the interface in an experiment from control sequence 2 ( ˆQ = 0.08 ml/s).

Fluid 1 has been doped with ﬂuorescein for visualization of the ﬂuids interface.

25

FIG. 6: (a-d) Fluorescent images of the interface in a reactive displacement: Fluid 1 - 65% saccha-

rose solution, Fluid 2 - 0.1% C-940 in 66% saccharose solution. (e-f) Fluorescent ﬂow images long

after the entrance of the unstable interface in the ﬁeld of view; the images are separated in time

by approximately 5 s. The dotted lines highlight gelled structures tumbling downstream.

26

FIG. 7: Instantaneous velocity ﬁelds for a chemically reactive displacement experiment, Re ≈

0.15: (a) before entrance of the ﬁnger in the ﬁeld of view (b) after the entrance of the ﬁnger in the

ﬁeld of view. The false color maps represent the magnitude of the velocity. In order to enhance

the clarity, we only plot half of the vectors and re-scale the length of the arrows.

FIG. 8: Iso pH regions near the interface: yellow (region 1)-pH ≈ 3, green (region 2)-pH ≈ 7,

blue (region 3)-pH ≈ 11.

27

FIG. 9: (a) Normalized width of the tip versus the normalized displacement distance, ˆU0ˆt/ ˆR, for

several values of the ﬂow rate: ((cid:4)) ˆQ = 0.063 ml/s, (•) ˆQ = 0.145 ml/s, (N) ˆQ = 0.19 ml/s, (◭)

ˆQ = 0.3 ml/s. The experiments belong to Control sequence 1 (see table I). (b) Normalized width

of the tip versus the normalized displacement distance, ˆU0ˆt/ ˆR, for several values of the ﬂow rate:

(◭) ˆQ = 0.13 ml/s, ((cid:4)) ˆQ = 0.18 ml/s, (H) ˆQ = 0.2 ml/s, (•) ˆQ = 0.31 ml/s, (◮) ˆQ = 0.47 ml/s.

The experiments belong to the Reactive sequence (see Table I).

 

 

(a)

1.50

(b)

 

 

0

/

^

^

100

80

60

40

20

0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

y

y

FIG. 10: Example basic viscosity and velocity proﬁles for c0 = 0.5, ∆c0 = 0.1 and a = 100: (a)

Normalized base viscosity proﬁle. (b) Normalized base velocity proﬁle.

0

/

U
U

^

^

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

28

FIG. 11: Example results: σR vs α for the base ﬂow of Fig. 10 with the viscosity amplitudes
(N) a = 100 ((cid:4)) a = 5 and (•) a = 20: (a) Sc = 104. In the inset we display the dependence of

the critical wave number, αc, on the amplitude a; (b) Sc = 106.

Tables

Fluid 1

Composition:

65 % saccharose

Fluid 2

Composition:

66 % saccharose

Exp.

ˆη1 = 114 mPas

Sequence

pH

Re

C-940 (%) pH

Re

ˆη2 (Pas) ˆQ (ml/s) Stab.

Control 1

Control 2

7

7

0.03 − 0.18

0.02 − 0.3

0.03 − 0.15

0.138

0.06 − 0.3

7 (0.1 − 1.5) · 10−03

20

0.03 − 0.4

S

S

Reactive 7.7 − 11.5 0.07 − 0.2

0.05 − 0.3

0.144

0.1 − 0.5 U

0

0.1

0.1

7

3

TABLE I: The experiments and the corresponding ﬂuids properties. For each ﬂuid, Re was calcu-

lated using the DP IV measured mean ﬂow velocity, the corresponding viscosity coeﬃcients and

the densities ρ1 ≃ ρ2 ∼ 1285 kg/m3. The ﬂow rate ˆQ has been estimated via the DP IV measured

mean ﬂow velocity. In the last column of the table, the symbols S, U stand for stable and unstable,

respectively.

29

