6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A constitutive model for volume-based
descriptions of gas ﬂows

S. Kokou Dadzie and Jason M. Reese ∗

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Strathclyde,

Glasgow G1 1XJ, UK

Abstract

We derive the pressure tensor and the heat ﬂux to accompany the new macroscopic
conservation equations that we developed in a volume-based kinetic framework for
gas ﬂows [1]. This kinetic description allows for expansion or compression of a ﬂuid
element, and is characterized by a ﬂux of volume that conventional modelling does
not account for. A new convective form of transport arises from this new approach,
which is due purely to macroscopic expansion or compression. It supplements the
conventional transport processes, which are transport due purely to mass motion
(classical convective transport) and transport due purely to random motion (dif-
fusive transport). In addition, we show that the thermodynamic parameters of the
ﬂuid (temperature and pressure) appear with new non-equilibrium contributions
that depend on density variations in the gas. Our new model may be useful for de-
scribing gas ﬂows that display non-local-thermodynamic-equilibrium (rareﬁed gas
ﬂows), ﬂows with relatively large variations of macroscopic properties, and/or highly
compressible ﬂuids and ﬂows.

Key words: gas kinetic theory, Boltzmann equation, compressible ﬂuids and ﬂows,
non-isothermal ﬂows, microﬂows, Navier-Stokes equations, rareﬁed gas dynamics,
constitutive relations

1 Introduction

The conventional ﬂuid mechanics description is the set of three Navier-Stokes
equations, which can be retrieved from the kinetic theory of rareﬁed gases
using, for example, a perturbation method (known as the Chapman-Enskog

∗ Corresponding author.

Email addresses: kokou.dadzie@strath.ac.uk (S. Kokou Dadzie),

jason.reese@strath.ac.uk (Jason M. Reese).

Preprint submitted to arXiv

20 November 2013

expansion) truncated at ﬁrst order [2,3]. The validity of the Navier-Stokes set
of equations is predicated on small deviations from thermodynamic equilib-
rium, which can be interpreted physically as relatively slow and low amplitude
variations of macroscopic variables within the ﬂows. Describing ﬂows beyond
the broad range of applicability of the Navier-Stokes model (such as hypersonic
ﬂows, or micro or nano scale gas ﬂows) remains an active area of investigation
[4,5,6,7,8].

An intuitive way of constructing hydrodynamic models beyond the range of ap-
plicability of Navier-Stokes is high-order development of the Chapman-Enskog
expansion. These are the Burnet and Super-Burnet equations. However, these
high-order expansions have various and well-known physical inconsistencies,
including frame-dependent diﬀusive ﬂuxes [9], violation of the second law of
thermodynamics [10], and other instabilities [11]. Various ways of overcoming
these inconsistencies have been proposed [12,13].

In a previous paper [1], we discussed the representation of ﬂuids and ﬂows
from both the gas kinetic and the classical ﬂuid mechanical viewpoints. We
introduced a kinetic representation of dilute gases based on volume variations.
The fundamental change introduced in our new model was that, while gases are
physically represented by particles undergoing random motions and collisions,
the free volume around each gaseous molecule should be taken into account
in their microscopic modeling, and that this free microscopic volume around
each particle is linked to macroscopic variables such as the density of the
ﬂuid. We modiﬁed Boltzmann’s original kinetic equation, which is a simple
balance of the number of particles, to account for the microscopic free volume
around particles. We therefore arrived at a new set of macroscopic conservation
equations. In addition, two diﬀerent macroscopic velocities, leading to two
diﬀerent deﬁnitions of kinetic peculiar velocities, were distinguished: the mass-
velocity (which is the velocity of the centre of mass of an element of ﬂuid), and
the volume-velocity (which allows for expansion/compression in the motion of
a ﬂuid element).

The aim of the present paper is to build on this new volume-based description
by developing ﬁrst-order constitutive relations for the pressure tensor and heat
ﬂux to accompany it.

This paper is structured as follows:

Section 2 summarises our new volume-based kinetic approach.

In section 3, an unconventional convective form of transport arising from our
new kinetic approach is presented. This convective transport is due purely to
macroscopic expansion/compression, and supplements the two conventional
transport processes, namely a transport due purely to mass motion (the clas-
sical convective transport) and a transport due to random motion (without

2

any bulk motions, and which is called diﬀusive transport).

In section 4 we derive new constitutive relations. This derivation is mainly
based on the identiﬁcation of diﬀusive ﬂuxes as convective ﬂuxes in our new
framework. We argue that actual diﬀusive ﬂuxes are those due purely to parti-
cle random motions, so they should be ﬂuxes from which not only mass motion
but also macroscopic expansion/compression motion contributions should be
removed. A complete new set of hydrodynamic equations is then proposed.

In section 5, we analyse the new quantities involved in our proposed hydrody-
namic model. We show that the ﬂux of volume, which is normally a convec-
tive ﬂux, behaves also like a diﬀusive ﬂux. Finally, the new thermodynamic
parameters generated by our model are compared with the thermodynamic
parameters of the classical description.

(Notation: In this paper, the square of the modulus of a vector Z we denote
by Z 2.)

2 A volume-based kinetic description of gas ﬂows

In the kinetic theory of simple monatomic gases, the gaseous particles are
only characterized (at any time t) by their position, X, and velocity, ξ. In
order to describe situations sensitive to variations of macroscopic parame-
ters, especially density, we introduced the microscopic free volume, v, around
each gaseous particle into the set of microscopic parameters characterizing the
molecules [1]. A distribution function f (t, X, ξ, v) is then a probability num-
ber density of particles which, at a given time t, are located in the vicinity
of position X, have their velocities in the vicinity of velocity ξ, and have an
assigned microscopic volume in the vicinity of volume v.

As the dynamics of the gaseous particles is described through their point-
masses, the kinetic equation describing the evolution of f (t, X, ξ, v) is the
following Boltzmann-like equation:

∂f
∂t

+ (ξ · ∇)f + (F · ∇ξ)f + W

=

(f ∗f ∗

1 − f f1)σξrdωdξ1,

(1)

∂f
∂v

Z Z

in which the term on the right-hand-side is the classical Boltzmann collision
integral; f = f (t, X, ξ, v) and f1 = f (t, X, ξ1, v1) refer to post-collision parti-
cles, f ∗ = f (t, X, ξ∗, v∗) and f ∗
1) refer to pre-collision particles,
ξr = ξ − ξ1 is the particle relative velocity, σ the collision diﬀerential cross
section, dω an element of solid angle, and ∇ξ denotes the formal operator
∇ξ = ∂/∂ξx + ∂/∂ξy + ∂/∂ξz. On the left-hand-side appears a new term in-
volving W , which arises from the introduction of the new variable v into the

1 = f (t, X, ξ∗

1, v∗

3

distribution function. This term represents the internal rate of change of vol-
ume occupied by the gas [1]. In the following we will suppose no body force,
i.e. F = 0 (although situations of non-vanishing body force can be easily
integrated into the description).

2.1 The macroscopic parameters of the gas

The macroscopic parameters according to our modiﬁed distribution function
f (t, X, ξ, v) are deﬁned as follows:

• The local number-density of the molecules is given by

n(t, X) =

f (t, X, ξ, v)dvdξ .

(2)

+∞

+∞

−∞

Z

0
Z

This number density refers to the ﬁxed observer’s reference frame with co-
ordinate elements (X1, X2, X3), in which any motion and dynamics are de-
scribed.

• The local mean value, ¯Q(t, X), of any property Q can be deﬁned by,

n(t, X) ¯Q(t, X) =

+∞

+∞

0
Z
For example, the local mean microscopic volume, ¯v(t, X), around each gaseous
particle is given by,

Z

−∞

Qf (t, X, ξ, v)dvdξ .

(3)

n(t, X)¯v(t, X) =

vf (t, X, ξ, v)dvdξ .

(4)

+∞

+∞

−∞

Z

0
Z

• From this mean value of the microscopic volume, a local mean value of the

mass-density in the vicinity of position X is deﬁned through:

¯ρ(t, X) =

n(t, X)M
n(t, X)¯v(t, X)

=

M
¯v(t, X)

,

(5)

where M is the molecular mass.

It may be noted that in gas ﬂows where the molecules can be assumed always
uniformly dispersed (locally), the mean value of the microscopic volumes, ¯v,
is simply given by dX/(ndX) = 1/n, regardless of deﬁnition (4). In this case
the deﬁnition of density, equation (5), becomes ¯ρ = Mn. However, we are
interested here in general situations where these restrictions on the volume
occupied by a group of particles are relaxed; this is in order to get more
eﬃcient descriptions of ﬂows with density variations. While the density Mn
can be regarded as the density of a gas without density variations, the actual
mass-density of the general gas (i.e. the mass divided by the actual volume
occupied by the gas) is given by ¯ρ in equation (5).

4

Two mean velocities can be deﬁned. First, the local mean mass-velocity,
Um(t, X), is given through

Mn(t, X)Um(t, X) =

Mξf (t, X, ξ, v)dξdv.

A local mean volume-velocity, Uv(t, X), can also be deﬁned:

¯v(t, X)n(t, X)Uv(t, X) =

vξf (t, X, ξ, v)dξdv.

Z Z

Z Z

While Um(t, X) is purely the velocity of the centre of mass of a “ﬂuid particle”
(or an element of ﬂuid) around X, the velocity Uv(t, X) takes into account
any expansion or compression velocity of this ﬂuid particle. This is because
the weighting element in equation (7), which is a volume, is a microscopically
changing property in contrast to the mass in equation (6).

From these two local mean velocities, two peculiar velocities can therefore be
introduced. The usual mass-velocity deﬁnition of peculiar velocity is

But another peculiar velocity may be given through the volume-velocity, i.e.

C = ξ − Um .

C ′ = ξ − Uv .

2.2 A new set of macroscopic conservation equations

Multiplying the modiﬁed kinetic equation (1) by the four microscopic quanti-
ties v, M, (Mξ), (Mξ2) and then integrating over dv and dξ, we obtained the
following set of macroscopic conservation equations:

Continuity

Mass-density

Momentum

Energy

Dn
Dt

= −n∇ · Um ,

D ¯ρ
Dt

=

¯ρ2
M (cid:20)

1
n

∇ · [Jv] − W

,

(cid:21)

n

DUm
Dt

= −∇ · P,

n

D
Dt (cid:20)

1
2

U 2

m + ein

(cid:21)

= −∇ · [P · Um] − ∇ · q .

where the material derivative D/Dt ≡ ∂/∂t + Um · ∇.

5

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

In this set of equations Jv, P, ein and q simply denote the following quantities:

Jv =

vCf dvdξ ,

Z Z

Pij =

CiCjf dvdξ ,

nein =

C 2f dξdv ,

q =

C 2Cf dξdv .

Z Z
1
2 Z Z

1
2 Z Z

It is important to note that these quantities, which are all written with the
peculiar velocity C based on the mass-velocity Um, are simply quantities ap-
pearing through the rational mathematical derivation of the macroscopic equa-
tions. They are not yet shown to be the same as the pressure tensor, heat ﬂux,
or internal energy in the ﬂuid. In particular, the presence here of C in equations
(15) to (17) is due to the deﬁnition within equation (6) and to the Boltzmann
integral collision which vanishes when (Mξ) and (Mξ2) are introduced in the
integral forms of equation (1).

Our new set of macroscopic conservation equations contains four equations
instead of the usual three. Equation (10) simply ensures the conservation of
mass. It involves a number-density, n, which should be regarded as accounting
only for the number of particles, and the mass-velocity, Um. On the other hand,
equation (11) gives the evolution of the actual density ¯ρ as a thermodynamic
parameter of the ﬂuid which varies with the volume occupied by the ﬂuid.

3 An unusual convective transport driven by a ﬂux of volume

Using the deﬁnitions of the mean velocities and peculiar velocities, equations
(6) to (9), the following identities can be easily proved:

C ′f dξdv = −n(Uv − Um) ,

vC ′f dξdv = 0 ,

Z Z

Z Z

and

So equation (14) may be re-written:

n¯vUv =

vUmf dξdv +

vCf dξdv .

Z Z

Z Z

Jv = n¯v (Uv − Um) .

In equation (20), Jv is characterizing a macroscopic motion deﬁned by (Uv −
Um), given that Um and Uv are both macroscopic velocities by deﬁnition. The
ﬂux Jv therefore acts like a convective ﬂux in which the convected element is
the volume transported at the macroscopic velocity (Uv − Um).

6

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

)a  

)b  

mU  

mU  

vJ  

Fig. 1. Schematic of ﬂuid element mass velocity, Um, and volume velocity, Uv; a)
the macroscopic motion of a ﬂuid element in a ﬂuid without density variations, b)
macroscopic motion in a ﬂuid with density variations, Uv = Um + 1/(n¯v)Jv. Each
of the volumes contain the same number of molecules.

 

This unconventional macroscopic motion represented by Jv corresponds to a
macroscopic change of volume of a “ﬂuid particle” in hydrodynamic descrip-
tions. A ﬂuid particle is not a simple point-mass, but a volume element; this
is illustrated in Figure 1. If δV represents the macroscopic change of volume
of a ﬂuid element over time δt, then an approximate expansion/compression
speed is given by, k (n¯v)−1Jv k≈ δ(V 1/3)/δt , where k . k denotes the modulus
of a vector. The velocity Jv is oriented in the direction from high density to
low density in the case of an expansion, and vice versa for compression.

The macroscopic motion characterized by the ﬂux Jv aﬀects the classical in-
terpretation of “convective ﬂuxes”. In our volume-based description, the term
“convective ﬂux” should include the macroscopic motion deﬁned through the
ﬂux Jv, as well as the traditional centre of mass velocity Um.

4 Constitutive relations in our volume-based description

In this section we identify the various ﬂuxes to be associated with the pressure
tensor and heat ﬂux, and the expression of internal heat energy. Then we derive
constitutive relations for these various quantities, and for the ﬂux Jv.

7

4.1 An expression for the ﬂux of volume

Let us regard the microscopic volume, v, as a property attached to the molecules
in a gas that has no macroscopic motion (or macroscopic expansion or com-
pression). Then equation (14), as it stands, represents a diﬀusive ﬂux in which
the microscopic element undergoing diﬀusion is v. By a diﬀusive ﬂux we un-
derstand a ﬂux due purely to the random motions of the particle, without any
form of bulk motion. In this case, following phenomenological laws of diﬀusion
[14], we may expect the diﬀusive volume ﬂux to have the form

or, equivalently, by using equation (5),

Jv = −κv ∇¯v ,

Jv =

∇¯ρ ,

κv ¯v
¯ρ

(21)

(22)

where we will call κv the “volume diﬀusion coeﬃcient”.

On the other hand, we showed in the previous section that the ﬂux Jv phys-
ically characterizes the macroscopic motion displayed in equation (20). Any
ﬂux which is given by this macroscopic motion should be taken as a convective
ﬂux. So, the diﬀusive-like expression for Jv in equation (21) may be interpreted
as a “ﬁctitious” diﬀusion of volume. However, we resolve this dual nature of
Jv by explicitly proving in section 5 of this paper that, in fact, in addition to
deﬁning a new convective transport, Jv corresponds to a particular diﬀusion
of mass. That it has both a convective and a diﬀusive nature justiﬁes equation
(22).

4.2 The pressure tensor, heat ﬂux and internal energy

Classical kinetic theory attributes the pressure tensor and heat ﬂux to ﬂuxes
deriving from the peculiar velocity [2,3]. It is also generally understood that
any macroscopic motion is deﬁned only by the mass-motion, Um. So purely
random components of the partitioning motion would then be justiﬁably de-
ﬁned by the peculiar velocity C through equation (8). The concept of pure
macroscopic expansion/compression motions, as pointed out in section 3, does
not exist.

In the conceptual framework of hydrodynamics (and kinetic theory), a diﬀu-
sive ﬂux should be a purely internal ﬂux of momentum or energy in which
contributions due to any macroscopic motions are removed. This requirement
is not satisﬁed by the three quantities deﬁned in equations (15) to (17). The
macroscopic motion that arises from equation (20), and then the convective

8

contributions due to Jv, are still inherent in ﬂuxes expressed using the peculiar
velocity C.

However, all macroscopic motions — including macroscopic expansion and
compression of a ﬂuid element — are removed from the peculiar velocity C ′
deﬁned in equation (9) because this equation can be re-written, using equation
(20), as

1
n¯v
Furthermore, equations (8), (9) and (20) yield

C ′ = ξ − Um −

Jv .

C − C ′ = Uv − Um =

1
n¯v

Jv .

We could therefore express the ﬂuxes q and P, and the quantity ein from
equations (15) to (17), which are simply quantities deﬁned with the peculiar
velocity C, using the following decomposition:

C = C ′ + (C − C ′) = C ′ + (Uv − Um) .

Then P(t, X) from equation (15) with equation (25) becomes

Pij = P′

ij − n

1

(n¯v)2 (JvJv)ij ,

where JvJv ≡ (JvJv)ij is the second order tensor obtained by the product of
the coordinate components of vector Jv, i.e. (JvJv)ij = (Jv)i(Jv)j, and P′ is
the actual momentum ﬂux tensor

P′

ij(t, X) =

iC ′
C ′

jf dvdξ .

Z Z
A scalar pressure p′ can then be introduced through the sum of the three
diagonal terms of P′:

3p′ = MP′

ii .

From equations (16) and (25) ein becomes

where the actual internal energy e′

in is given as

A temperature T ′ can also then be deﬁned:

ein = e′

in −

1
2(n¯v)2 J2
v ,

ne′

in =

1
2 Z Z

C ′2f dξdv .

3
2

kT ′ = Me′

in ,

9

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

and using equations (28), (30) and (31) we obtain

p′ = nkT ′ .

(32)

Using equation (25), the ﬂux q, deﬁned in equation (17), is re-written

q(t, X) =

[C ′ + (Uv − Um)]

2

C ′f dξdv +(Uv −Um)

C 2f dξdv . (33)

1
2 Z Z

1
2 Z Z

Then equations (18), (24) and (29) yield

q = q′ +

P′ · Jv −

1
n¯v

1
2¯v

1
(n¯v)2 J2

vJv +

1
¯v  

e′
in −

1
2(n¯v)2 J2

v

!

Jv ,

which can be written

q = q′ +

P′ · Jv +

1
n¯v

1
¯v  

e′
in −

1
(n¯v)2 J2

v

!

Jv ,

where the actual energy ﬂux vector, q′ ≡ q′(t, X), is given by

q′ =

1
2 Z Z

C ′2C ′f dξdv .

(34)

(35)

(36)

The ﬂuxes q′ and P′, and the quantity e′
in, appear as new internal quantities
with contributions due to any bulk motions removed. The “actual” diﬀusive
ﬂuxes, by which we mean those with any kind of convective ﬂuxes removed
(including those described in section 3), are the new quantities P′ for the
momentum and q′ for the energy. In other words, diﬀusive ﬂuxes in our volume-
based kinetic description are those expressed using the peculiar velocity C ′,
in accordance with equation (23), and not the ﬂuxes appearing in equations
(15) to (17) .

Equation (29) describes the total internal energy of a ﬂuid particle, ein, as
being composed of a “heat energy”, e′
in, and an elastic energy component
driven by Jv. If we imagine a ﬂuid particle (containing a certain amount of
mass) moving from a high density region to a low density region in the ﬂuid,
this will cause a dilatation of the ﬂuid particle if the quantity of mass in the
ﬂuid particle is not allowed to change. Particles may move out of or into a
ﬂuid particle, but the amount of mass should remain the same, cf. Figure 1.
According to the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, the ﬂuid particle heat energy
must exclude any kind of potential energy. In equation (29) the term in Jv is
a kind of potential energy because it is related to the density gradient, and so
represents the dilatation work done by the ﬂuid particle in the ﬂuid by density
variations. So the actual heat energy should correspond to e′

in, not ein.

10

The process we have just described does not exist within classical ﬂuid me-
chanics, where the total internal energy of the ﬂuid particle is associated only
with the heat energy which is directly related to the temperature. For a moving
and expanding or contracting ﬂuid particle, the classical ﬂuid mechanics deﬁ-
nition of internal energy does not agree with the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics
conception of heat energy as it combines a potential energy of the ﬂuid particle
with its actual heat energy. We show below that our distinction of the heat
energy of the ﬂuid may become sensitive in some extreme ﬂow conﬁgurations
(e.g. rareﬁed gas ﬂows under high temperature or density gradients).

4.3 Constitutive model and the ﬁnal set of hydrodynamic equations

As the ﬂuxes due purely to random molecular motions in our kinetic volume-
based description correspond to q′ and P′, it follows from phenomenological
laws of diﬀusion that these ﬂuxes may be modelled at ﬁrst order by linear
constitutive relations. These relations are the classical Newtonian law for the
stress tensor within the pressure tensor, P′, and Fourier’s law for the heat
ﬂux, q′. The corresponding temperature and pressure in the ﬂuid are then T ′
and p′, respectively.

As a result, we obtain a set of hydrodynamic equations given by the four
macroscopic equations closed by equations (26), (29) and (35), in which:

∂Uvi
∂Xj

+

∂Uvj
∂Xi !

− η′ ∂Uvk
∂Xk

δij ,

(37)

MP′

ij = p′δij − µ′
 
h∇T ′ ,
∇¯ρ ,

Mq′ = −κ′
κv ¯v
¯ρ

Jv =

with µ′ a dynamic viscosity, κ′
h a heat conductivity, η′ a bulk viscosity, κv a
volume diﬀusion coeﬃcient, all to be determined in this volume-based frame-
work.

The macroscopic motion which deﬁnes the momentum ﬂux P′ as a diﬀusive
ﬂux is Uv. It follows that the phenomenological law of diﬀusion used to express
P′ should be applied with a gradient taken over Uv, as we write in equations
(37). So momentum diﬀusion is not generated by the gradient of the mass-
velocity Um alone, but by the dilatation motion (Uv − Um).

In the Appendix to this paper, we comment further on the expression of the
stress-tensor in equations (37) and compare it to the common ﬂuid mechanics
stress tensor that involves only the mass-velocity Um.

11

The complete set of new hydrodynamic equations is rewritten below, for con-
venience:

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

Continuity

Dn
Dt

= −n∇ · Um ,

Mass-density

D ¯ρ
Dt

=

¯ρ2
M (cid:20)

1
n

∇ · [Jv] − W

,

(cid:21)

Momentum

n

DUm
Dt

= −∇ ·

P′ −
(cid:18)

1
n¯v2 JvJv

,

(cid:19)

Energy

n

D
Dt (cid:20)

1
2

m + e′
U 2

in −

=

1
2(n¯v)2 J2
#
P′ −
−∇ ·

v

−∇ ·

(cid:20)(cid:18)
q′ +
"

1
n¯v2 JvJv
(cid:19)
1
P′ · Jv +
n¯v

· Um

(cid:21)
1
e′
in −
¯v  

1
(n¯v)2 J2

v

Jv

!

#

.

These equations are solved for ﬁve unknown ﬂuid macroscopic parameters:
the number-density, n, the mass-density (which involves the actual volume
occupied by the gaseous particles), ¯ρ, the mass-velocity, Um, the pressure,
in (or, equivalently, the temperature, T ′). The
p′, and the internal energy, e′
equation set is then closed by the constitutive model equations (37), and
Me′

in = (3/2)kT ′ , p′ = nkT ′ and Uv = Um + (n¯v)−1Jv.

It is important to note that in the momentum equation (40), the macroscopic
velocity on the left-hand-side is the mass-velocity, Um, while on the right-hand-
side, according to equations (37), appears the volume velocity, Uv. The modi-
ﬁcations introduced by our new hydrodynamic description, when compared to
the usual Navier-Stokes set of equations, recall the recent phenomenological
modiﬁcations of Brenner [15]. That is to say, replacement of the mass velocity
by the volume velocity in (only) the stress tensor, and the contribution to the
heat ﬂux of the work done by any variation of volume.

In addition to Brenner’s original modiﬁcations, second order terms due to the
volume ﬂux appear in both the momentum and the energy equations. Another
diﬀerence between our model and Brenner’s is our distinction between the
real mass-density of the ﬂuid, which we denote ¯ρ, and the mass-density of an
equivalent incompressible ﬂuid, which is Mn in our notation.

12

In contrast to classical kinetic theory, equation (32) is no longer an equation
of state, as n does not encompass the real volume of an element of ﬂuid. This
equation will become a perfect gas equation of state only in the equilibrium
situation, where Mn becomes ¯ρ, i.e. if no density variation occurs. Variations
of the density with the ﬂuid macroscopic parameters are described through
equation (39), which is therefore functioning like an equation of state.

An expression suggested for W in our previous paper [1], leads to the following
re-writing of the density equation (39):

1
¯ρ

D ¯ρ
Dt

=

¯ρ
Mn

∇·[Jv]−α

DT ′
Dt

 

+

1
n¯v

Jv · ∇T ′

Dp′
Dt

+

1
n¯v

+χ

!

 

Jv · ∇p′

, (42)

!

in which we may take α ≈ 1/T ′ and χ ≈ 1/p′. It can be seen that when the ﬂux
Jv vanishes, e.g. in the case of a (local) thermodynamic equilibrium, equation
(42) is of the form of the classical perfect gas equation of state. However,
strictly speaking, the type of equation of state which should be displayed by
the density equation for a vanishing ﬂux of volume depends on how the rate
of change of volume, W , is described in the kinetic description [1].

In equations (38), (40) and (41), the presence of the number density n (or the
apparently constant density Mn) on the left-hand-side, is founded by a “mass-
based integration” during the derivation of the conservation equations [1]. This
is interpreted as following a ﬁxed amount of mass when writing conservations
of mass, momentum and energy. This is consistent with the material derivative
appearing in all the left-hand-sides of these equations. The evolution of the
domain occupied by the ﬁxed amount of mass is contained in an equation of
volume — that is our equation of mass-density that functions like an equation
of state.

Finally, it can be easily seen that our new hydrodynamic model becomes the
Navier-Stokes set of equations when there is no mass-density variation, i.e.
when Jv = 0.

5 Analysis of the new hydrodynamic parameters

5.1 The ﬂux of volume as a diﬀusion of the mass-density

Here we show that Jv refers also to a particular mass diﬀusion process that
justiﬁes the expression for it which we hypothesised in equation (22).

In our new volume-based kinetic description, all diﬀusive ﬂuxes have any
bulk motion removed, including the expansion/compression motion deﬁned

13

by (Uv − Um). These diﬀusive ﬂuxes are therefore associated with the peculiar
velocity C ′ given in equation (23). Let us consider the following diﬀusive ﬂux,

J¯ρ =

¯ρC ′f dvdξ =

MC ′f dvdξ .

(43)

Z Z

1
¯v Z Z

According to the deﬁnition of diﬀusive ﬂuxes, the ﬂux J¯ρ corresponds to a
diﬀusive ﬂux of mass; strictly speaking, the element undergoing diﬀusion in
this equation is the mass-density ¯ρ.

Using the deﬁnitions of the mean velocities, equations (6) and (7), with the
deﬁnition of the peculiar velocity C ′ in equation (9), it can be shown that

J¯ρ = −¯ρn(Uv − Um) .

On the other hand, from equation (24) we have

Combining equations (44) and (45), we obtain

Uv − Um =

Jv .

1
n¯v

1
¯v

1
¯ρ

J¯ρ = −

Jv .

J¯ρ = −κm∇¯ρ ,

Jv =

∇¯ρ ,

κm¯v
¯ρ

Equation (46) is a symmetrical relation between the ﬂux of volume, Jv, and
the diﬀusive ﬂux J¯ρ.

As J¯ρ is a diﬀusive ﬂux, according to equation (43), we can apply the phe-
nomenological laws of diﬀusion:

where κm is the mass diﬀusion coeﬃcient (strictly speaking, the mass-density
diﬀusion coeﬃcient). From equation (46) we then obtain,

which is the same as the expression for Jv written in equation (22), but with
the volume diﬀusion coeﬃcient equal to the mass diﬀusion coeﬃcient.

In equation (43) or (47), we see that the property of the ﬂuid concerned in
this diﬀusion is strictly the mass-density. In other words, this diﬀusion process
acts to smooth out density inhomogeneities in a ﬂow. This diﬀusion process
should not be confused with self-diﬀusion, which is normally considered as
a diﬀusion of matter through itself (in equilibrium). Self-diﬀusion occurs in
homogeneous matter, with zero mass-density gradients, where one can imagine
certain marked particles moving through similar but unmarked particles [3].

14

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

Considering the mass-density as a “concentration of mass within the volume”,
i.e. a mass divided by the volume of ﬂuid, this diﬀusion process could be
describes as “diﬀusion of mass through the volume of ﬂuid”. Or, from the
symmetrical relation (46), “diﬀusion of the ﬂuid volume through the mass”. If
we consider a gas at rest in which a density gradient is maintained, then this
diﬀusion process may be regarded as a constant ﬂux of volume imposed in the
domain, or an apparent movement of the mass. On the other hand, if imposed
density gradient is suddenly relaxed, then this diﬀusion corresponds to actual
movement of mass from the high mass-density regions to low mass-density
regions.

Finally, regarding an element of ﬂuid, any diﬀusive ﬂux is measured in a
reference frame that moves not only with the mass velocity but also undergoes
expansion or compression with the element of ﬂuid. In this global reference
frame, the expansion or compression motion itself always looks like a diﬀusion
of the mass-density. This is consistent with the expansion or compression
associated with the ﬂux Jv in earlier sections of this paper. The coeﬃcients
κm and κv, which have the dimension of (length)2/time, resemble expansion
or compression coeﬃcients, rather than purely diﬀusion coeﬃcients.

5.2 Non-equilibrium thermodynamic parameters

We now show that the scalars T ′ and p′ deﬁned in our volume-based description
correspond to the gas thermodynamic parameters in non-equilibrium condi-
tions. They coincide with the conventional scalars, T and p, only in equilibrium
conditions.

We introduce temporarily a scalar, T , which is related to the total internal
energy, ein, in a similar way to equation (31), and a scalar p related to the
sum of the three diagonal terms of the total momentum ﬂux tensor P, in a
similar way to equation (28), i.e.,

3
2

kT = Mein ,

(49)

and

3p = MPii .
(50)
The quantities p and T would be the pressure and temperature if the pressure
tensor and heat ﬂux were, as in classical kinetic theory, connected to the
ﬂuxes deﬁned with peculiar velocity C, disregarding the convective transport
involved by the ﬂux Jv.

It can be shown in a similar way to that outlined previously, that p satisﬁes

p = nkT .

(51)

15

In addition, we obtain from equation (26)

3p = MP′

ii − Mn

1

(n¯v)2 (JvJv)ii ,

which leads to

and so, from equations (32) and (51),

p′ = p +

¯ρ
3n¯v

J2
v ,

T ′ = T +

¯ρ
3kn2¯v

J2
v .

(52)

(53)

(54)

It appears, therefore, that the pressure and temperature deﬁned within our
new framework are diﬀerent from the conventional equilibrium scalars through
equations (53) and (54). The diﬀerence may be attributed to the contribution
of mass-density variations to the pressure and the temperature within the
ﬂuid, which in turn may be regarded as non-equilibrium contributions to the
pressure and temperature. The term “non-equilibrium” associated with T ′
and p′ refers to the explicit contribution of an additional ﬂux due to density
variations in their respective expressions, when compared with the expressions
for T and p.

An expansion of gas during which the gas is allowed neither to exchange heat
with its surrounding nor to do external work is called “free expansion”, and
is an irreversible process. As the gas has to expand into its allowed volume,
work is done internally. Such an internal process within a gas subject to density
variations is predicted with our new internal energy equation (30): while the
i is constant (i.e. while the non-equilibrium temperature T ′
internal energy e′
is a constant), internal work can be done through Jv. This work done within
the gas contributes to changes in the thermal agitation of the particles, i.e.
changes in T . Moreover, in equations (53) and (54) the work term due to
Jv is similar to the classical thermodynamic work [pressure × volume], but
expressed in terms of density variations, and the work done is transferred to
the gaseous particle agitation instead of into an external work. So, the new
contributions of Jv to temperature and pressure resemble a “free expansion”
heating in which the volume variation is given by the local density gradient.

If the contribution of Jv is disregarded and the thermal agitation temperature
of the particles is taken as the thermodynamic parameter and then related
directly to the internal energy of the particle, as in equation (??) — in other
words, if we take the classical ﬂuid mechanics viewpoint — then constant
internal energy implies constant temperature of the gas: the free expansion
eﬀect should not exist. However, temperature variations due to free expansion
are well known and experimentally demonstrated.

16

A stationary gas under uniform mechanical (not necessarily free) expansion
or contraction has Um = 0, so Jv = n¯vUv. Then equations (53) and (54) yield

and

p′ = p +

Mn
3

U 2

v ,

T ′ = T +

M
3k

U 2

v .

(55)

(56)

This means the total pressure of the gas during this expansion or compres-
sion, when compared with the pressure within the same gas under equilibrium,
should be augmented by a contribution depending on the square of the ex-
pansion speed. This additional pressure is a type of dynamic pressure (i.e. the
pressure given by ¯ρU 2
m/2), where the velocity involved is an expansion velocity
instead of the mass-velocity. Likewise, the actual temperature of the ﬂuid is
not simply given by the heat energy corresponding to its internal energy but
is supplemented by the work done during expansion or contraction.

It is the case that the diﬀerences appearing in equations (53) and (54) between
the standard and the new deﬁnitions of the thermodynamics properties, will
be negligible for most ordinary ﬂows.

Two examples will help illustrate the new non-equilibrium thermodynamic
parameters. Let us ﬁrst consider a mechanical compression (or an expansion
against a piston) of argon gas. The molecular mass of argon is M = 6.63 ×
10−26 kg and the Boltzmann constant is k = 1.38 × 10−23 J/K. At a piston
compression speed equivalent to Uv = 50 m/s, the diﬀerence in temperature
due to the work term in equation (56) is 4.0 K.

Let us now consider a shock wave in a rareﬁed gas ﬂow, within which a rapid
variation of temperature (at constant pressure) exists over a distance of the
order of a molecular mean free path, λm, which is of the same order of magni-
tude as the characteristic length deﬁned by the density gradient. In this case,
in equation (54) the expansion/compression speed may be approximated by
k (n¯v)−1Jv k≈ λm/τv where τv is the characteristic time of diﬀusion of volume
(or mass-density). Accordingly, the temperature diﬀerence in equation (54) is

∆T = T ′ − T ≡

M
3k  

λm
τv !

2

.

(57)

If we compare the diﬀusion time τv to the diﬀusion time for energy, then the
ratio λm/τv is close to the thermal speed and we have (λm/τv)2 ≈ 3kT /M.
Consequently, ∆T ≈ T , i.e. the same order of magnitude as the thermal
speed temperature (the temperature commonly identiﬁed with the ﬂow). This
diﬀerence is similar to some of the temperature diﬀerences observed in high
speed rareﬁed gas ﬂows during space vehicle re-entry, for which the classical

17

theory of surface temperature jump is known to have serious shortcomings
[16].

5.3 Interpretation of the new convective transport

The two elementary transport processes admitted so far within ﬂuids are:
the diﬀusion attributed to purely random motion of the mass-particles, and
transport due to the mass-motion or ﬂow. The additional transport process
due to macroscopic expansion or compression that we posit in this paper could
be understood as follows.

To an observer in a ﬁxed reference frame, a ﬂuid could be observed to transport
energy, mass, or momentum from one point to another by simply undergoing
expansion or compression. Evidently this cannot be classiﬁed as a pure diﬀu-
sion process, because the whole ﬂuid should be at rest. It cannot also be clearly
identiﬁed with classical convective transport due to the mass-motion, which is
physically the ﬂowing of the ﬂuid. This unclassiﬁed transport process involves
the evolution of the domain of the ﬂuid — it is due to the change in volume
of the ﬂuid. It is a transport process with characteristics of both elementary
diﬀusion and convective transport, but distinctively diﬀerent from each; it is
similar to what is described in reference [17] as a “volume transport”.

6 Conclusions

In our previous paper [1] we reconsidered the representation of ﬂuids and intro-
duced a new volume-based kinetic approach for gases. The set of macroscopic
conservation equations derived from this approach comprises four equations
rather than the usual three. An evolution equation purely of the mass-density
is added to the set of three conservation equations. We therefore distinguished
between conservation of mass, which becomes a conservation of number of
particles, and the variation of the mass-density as a thermodynamic parame-
ter to account for any variation in the volume occupied by an element of ﬂuid.
We also distinguished between compressibility arising from ﬂuid accelerations
and compressibility arising simply from the physical properties of ﬂuids.

In this present article we have proposed constitutive relations for the pressure
tensor and the heat ﬂux to accompany our volume-based macroscopic con-
servation equations. An unconventional convective form of transport leads us
to re-classify the diﬀusive and convective ﬂuxes. This extra convective mode
of transport can be viewed as a local macroscopic expansion or compression
motion of the ﬂuid characterized by a ﬂux of volume that classical modelling

18

does not account for.

As a result, we have obtained a hydrodynamic model in which the contri-
butions due to a ﬂux of volume appear in the momentum and energy equa-
tions. Furthermore, the thermodynamic parameters of the ﬂuid (temperature
and pressure) appear with non-equilibrium contributions depending on density
variations.

We propose that our model would show most departure from conventional ﬂuid
mechanics in micro ﬂow cases, where compressibility eﬀects are signiﬁcant in
spite of the low Mach number. It could also be tested on ﬂows which feature
large density and temperature variations, such as shock waves. Future work
should also include:

• investigating the boundary conditions to accompany our new set of equa-

tions;

• analysis of higher-order heat ﬂux and pressure tensor derivations within
our new kinetic approach — some classical expressions for these (such as
the Burnett equations) suﬀer from reference frame dependence, but in our
model the volume occupied by the molecules is treated separately from the
ﬁxed reference volume element. This could mitigate some of these problems
and would, at least, yield interesting new Burnett-like expressions.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Howard Brenner of MIT (USA), Gilbert
M´eolans of the Universit´e de Provence (France), and Chris Greenshields and
Colin McInnes of Strathclyde University (UK) for useful discussions. This
work is funded in the UK by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council under grant EP/D007488/1, and through a Philip Leverhulme Prize
for JMR from the Leverhulme Trust. JMR would also like to thank the Master
and Fellows (in particular, Prof Bill Fitzgerald) of Christ’s College, Cambridge,
for their support and hospitality during a sabbatical year when this work was
completed.

References

[1] S. K. Dadzie, J. M. Reese, C. R. McInnes, A volume-based description of
gas ﬂows with localised mass-density variations, arXiv:physics/0611206 Fluid
Mechanics.

19

[2] C. Cercignani, Mathematical Methods in Kinetic Theory, 2nd Edition, Plenum

Press, New York, 1990.

[3] S. Chapman, T. Cowling, The Mathematical Theory of Non-Uniform Gases,

3rd Edition, Cambridge Mathematical Library, 1970.

[4] D. A. Lockerby, J. M. Reese, M. A. Gallis, The usefulness of higher-order
constitutive relations for describing the Knudsen layer, Physics of Fluids 17
(2005) 100609.

[5] J. M. Reese, M. A. Gallis, D. A. Lockerby, New directions in ﬂuid dynamics: non-
equilibrium aerodynamic and microsystem ﬂows, Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London A 361 (2003) 2967–2988.

[6] T. Koga, A proposal for fundamental equations of dynamics of gases under high

stress, Journal of Chemical Physics 22 (10) (1954) 1633–1646.

[7] H. Struchtrup, Macroscopic Transport Equations for Rareﬁed Gas Flows:

Approximation Methods in Kinetic Theory, Springer, 2005.

[8] R. S. Myong, A generalized hydrodynamic computational model for rareﬁed
and microscale diatomic gas ﬂows, Journal of Computational Physics 195 (2)
(2004) 655–676.

[9] L. C. Woods, Frame-indiﬀerent kinetic theory, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 136

(1983) 423–433.

[10] K. A. Comeaux, D. R. Chapman, R. W.MacCormack, Analysis of the Burnett
equations based on the second law of thermodynamics, AIAA Paper-1995-415.

[11] A. Bobylev, The Chapman-Enskog and Grad methods for solving the

Boltzmann equation, Soviet Physics Doklady 262 (1) (1982) 71–75.

[12] S. Jin, M. Slemrod, Regularization of the Burnett equations via relaxation,

Journal of Statistical Physics 103 (5-6) (2001) 1009–1033.

[13] R. K. K. Agarwal, K.-Y. Yun, R. Balakrishnan, Beyond Navier-Stokes: Burnett
equations for ﬂows in the continuum-transition regime, Physics of Fluids 13 (10)
(2001) 3061–3085.

[14] E. Nelson, Dynamical Theories of Brownian Motion, Princeton University Press,

Princeton, 2001.

[15] H. Brenner, Navier-Stokes revisited, Physica A 349 (1-2) (2005) 60–132.

[16] R. N. Gupta, C. D. Scott, Comment on corrective term in wall slip equations
for Knudsen layer, AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer 10 (1)
(1996) 190–191.

[17] H. Brenner, Kinematics of volume transport, Physica A 349 (1-2) (2005) 11–59.

[18] L. E. Malvern, Introduction to the Mechanics of a Continuous Medium,

Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1969.

20

A The classical view of pressure tensor and heat ﬂux

In classical kinetic theory, macroscopic expansion or compression is not in-
volved in the ﬂow description. It is understood that any macroscopic motion
is deﬁned only by the mass-motion, Um, and so purely random motion would
be deﬁned by the peculiar velocity C in equation (8). In this conceptual frame
the pressure tensor is given by P and the heat ﬂux by q [2,3]. Then, in ac-
cordance with diﬀusion theory, these quantities are modelled by the following
standard constitutive relations:

MPij = pδij − µ

 
Mq = −κh∇T ,

∂Umi
∂Xj

+

∂Umj
∂Xi !

− η

∂Umk
∂Xk

δij ,

(A.1)

with µ the dynamic viscosity, κh the heat conductivity, η the bulk viscosity
[3]. The stress tensor in equations (A.1) is evidently written with the velocity
Um, as the macroscopic motion associated with the peculiar velocity C is the
mass velocity.

In fact, the stress tensor appearing in equations (A.1) does not account for
all types of deformations within the ﬂuid. This is because Um misses any
expansion/compression of a ﬂuid element. Strictly speaking, this stress tensor
accounts only for the “deformation of the mass-velocity”; it does not account
for all the deformations of a ﬂuid element due purely to the changes in the
ﬂuid physical properties, e.g. deformation due to heating and due to density
changes.

It has long been recognized that the deformation involved in equations (A.1)
takes place at constant temperature and infers negligible eﬀects from the elas-
tic nature of ﬂuids [18]. It cannot, therefore, eﬃciently describe ﬂows in which
thermo-elastic eﬀects are not negligible. Recently, Brenner used experimental
results of thermophoretic motion to suggest replacing the velocity in the ex-
pression of the stress tensor by another velocity that includes these missing
deformations [15]. A similar remark can be made for the heat ﬂux expressed
in equations (A.1) which also appears to miss eﬀects due to the elastic aspect
of ﬂuids.

The parts missing from the current ﬂuid description appear to arise from the
treatment of elements such as a “ﬂuid particle” and a “control volume of
ﬂuid” in the derivation of the ﬂuid mechanics set of equations. A ﬂuid particle
should not be treated as a simple mass-point in which only the mass and the
mass-velocity are investigated: its volume, and changes in volume, should be
taken into account in the description.

21

Unlike the classical description, the new stress tensor obtained in our volume-
based kinetic approach encompasses the elastic nature of the gaseous ﬂuid,
and allows for thermo-elastic deformations in the ﬂuid.

22

