6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Molecular conﬁgurations in a droplet detachment process of a complex liquid

R.Sattler1, A. Kityk1,2 and C. Wagner1∗
1 Experimentalphysik, Universit¨at des Saarlandes, Postfach 151150, 66041 Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
2 Institute for Computer Science, Technical University of Czestochowa, Armii Krajowej 17, PL 42-200 Czestochowa, Poland
∗ c.wagner at mx.uni-saarland.de

We studied the microscopic polymer conformations in the
droplet detachment process of an elastic semi-dilute poly-
electrolytic Xanthan solution by measuring the instantaneous
birefringence. As in earlier studies, we observe the suppres-
sion of the ﬁnite time singularity of the pinch-oﬀ process and
the occurrence of an elastic ﬁlament. Our microscopic mea-
surements reveal that the relatively stiﬀ Xanthan molecules
are already signiﬁcantly pre-stretched to about 90 % of their
ﬁnal extension at the moment the ﬁlament appears. At later
stages of the detachment process, we ﬁnd evidence of a con-
centration enhancement due to the elongational ﬂow.

83.80.Rs, 47.55.D-, 47.20.Gv, 47.20.D-

II. SAMPLE CHARACTERIZATION

The polymeric system of our study, Xanthan (Sigma-
Aldrich), was chosen because of
its high optical
anisotropy. The molecular weight of t our polymer m
is vaguely speciﬁed by the distributor with “m = 2 × 106
amu or more“. Xanthan shows a pronounced shear thin-
ning and biological digestibility and, for both reasons, it
is widely used in the food, pharmaceutical, oil, and cos-
metic industries. The ordered molecule exists in solution
as a semi rigid helix with a persistence length of 120 nm.
It undergoes a conformational transition to a disordered
ﬂexible coil only above a temperature of 50◦C [8,9].

I. INTRODUCTION

 

The addition of a tiny amount of polymer to a simple
liquid alters the dynamics of a droplet detachment pro-
cess dramatically. Instead of the ﬁnite time singularity of
the minimum neck diameter [1], a cylindrical ﬁlament is
formed and the shrinking dynamics can be slowed down
by several decades [2–5]. Despite the technological rele-
vance of the droplet forming process of complex liquids
that reaches from plotting of DNA-microarrays to food
processing, only little is known on the underlying physi-
cal mechanisms. Besides the complexity of the problem
and the lack of a universally applicable constitutive equa-
tion for complex liquids, there exist no microscopic data
on the molecular conformation in such a ﬂow. It is the
goal of this study to close this gap.

Earlier experimental studies on the droplet detachment
process of complex liquids were limited to the analysis
of macroscopic quantities like the determination of the
shape of the thinning ﬁlament. These can be compared
with theoretical analysis on capillary break-up based on
phenomenological polymer models like e.g. the Oldryd-B
or models that follow from kinetic theory like FENE-P
[6]. But for a true comparison with microscopic models,
the dynamics of the polymers on the molecular level must
be measured. Birefringence is a typical tool for such in-
vestigations [7], and we use a high speed set-up capable of
capturing dynamics on the time scale of milliseconds to
study both the microscopic conformation and the macro-
scopic ﬂow response in the elastic thread simultaneously.

10

 500ppm     60

ppm          mPas

 1000ppm   15

 1000ppm   60

 2000ppm   60

 glycerine  60

 glycerine  15

 

)
s
a
P

(
 
y
t
i
s
o
c
s
v

i

1

0,1

0,01

0,1

1

10

100

1000

shear rate (1/s)

FIG. 1. Stationary viscosities from shear rate and stress
controlled measurements. Not all experiments and data
points are shown. The lines are approximations by the Car-
reau model.

Our sample solutions were prepared with weight con-
centrations cp in the semi-dilute regime from 250ppm <
cp < 2000ppm, mostly dissolved in 80/20 weight%
glycerol-water as a solvent with a viscosity of ηsolv =
60mP as. We also used diﬀerent glycerol-water weight
ratios resulting in solvent viscosities down to ηsolv =
2mP as only to allow for a better determination of the
molecular weight of our sample by ﬁtting our extensional
rheological data. The polymer concentrations where cho-
sen to obtain a suﬃciently high birefringence but still to
be signiﬁcantly below concentrations at which sponta-
neous lyotropic ordering is expected in equilibrium (cp >

1

August 7, 2013

2

5000ppm) [8]. Standard rheological measurements, using
a cone plate geometry on a standard Rheometer (Haake
Mars, Thermo Electron, Germany) were performed to
characterize the shear thinning behavior (ﬁg. 1) of our
samples. Stationary experiments controlling either shear
rate or tension were repeated several times for several
samples in a cone plate geometry with an angle of 0.5◦
and a diameter of 60mm. Depending on the experimental
deviations an average of between 6 and 10 measurements
is shown. The solutions show a pronounced shear thin-
ning, as to be expected for relatively stiﬀ molecules ap-
proaching a stationary value slightly enhanced compared
to the pure Newtonian solvent according to the poly-
mer concentration. The data have been approximated
using the Carreau model [11] and the results are in rea-
sonable agreement with ref. [10] if one takes our higher
solvent viscosities into account. The characteristic relax-
ation times of the ﬁts range from about 10s for 500ppm
and 20s for 1000ppm to about 50s for the 2000ppm solu-
tion. These time scales give a measure for the rotational
diﬀusion time of our molecules and must be compared
with the elongational rates in our droplet experiments.

For the later discussion of our elongational viscosity
measurements we would like especially to point out that
the 1000 ppm samples with diﬀerent solvent viscosities
show similar zero shear rate viscosities, and the diﬀer-
ences only become obvious at high shear rates.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The experimental setup is sketched in ﬁg. 2A. The
polymer solutions are quasistatically driven through a
nozzle of d = 2mm diameter by a syringe pump. At a
distance of D = 7cm below the nozzle, a plate is mounted
in order to omit gravitational eﬀects, and to stabilize
the ﬁlament against air currents. All measurements have
been performed at room temperature (25◦C). The re-
tardation δ is measured using an optical train consisting
of an 18mW HeNe Laser (JDS Uniphase), a Polarizer P,
a Photo Elastic Modulator PEM (Hinds Instruments),
the sample liquid, an Analyzer A, a bright ﬁeld lens sys-
tem L1 and L2, and a photo diode PD connected to two
Lock-Ins (Stanford Research). The polarizer is ﬁxed at
an angle of 45◦ relative to the photo elastic modulator
which allows for a Lock-In technique for the detection of
the retardation signal. The bright ﬁeld lens system (ﬁg.
2B) in front of the detector prevents any light that has
not crossed the ﬁlament (ﬁg. 3)) from reaching the detec-
tor by blocking the parallel components with a mask M
in the focal point of lens L1. The lens L2 collects the light
that is diﬀused by the cylindrical ﬁlament into the detec-
tor [12]. To calculate the birefringence ∆n = δh(t)/(2πλ)
(with λ = 633nm as the HeNe laser wavelength) from the
retardation signal the instantaneous thickness h(t) of the
ﬁlament must be known. The thinning process of the ﬁla-

ment diameter h(t) is measured at 500 frames per second
with a high speed CCD-camera (encore mac PCI 1000S)
that is placed perpendicular to the optical train. The
camera is equipped with a 2 times magniﬁcation objec-
tive and the image capturing is synchronized to the data
collection of the two Lock-Ins. From ﬁg. 3 it becomes
obvious that, for geometric reasons, it is impossible to
measure birefringence before the droplet has completely
passed the light beam and the temporal exponentially
thinning ﬁlament is present. This is the moment when
our measurements start.

P

A

L1

L2

M

PD

He-Ne  (

nm)

Liquid

   PEM-90

A)

   PEM

Reference

Controller

Lock-In-Amplifier

Lock-In-Amplifier

IN

GPIB

IN

GPIB

L1

L2

M

PD

B)

planation.

FIG. 2. The experimental setup. See text for further ex-

FIG. 3. Photographs of the droplet detachment process of a
2000 ppm Xanthane solution (ηsolv=60mPas) taken every 0.1s
indicating, schematically, the laser beam positioned close to
the neck and in a region as cylindrical as possible throughout
the measurement.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. Macroscopic measurements

Diﬀerent regimes can be distinguished analysing the
temporal behavior of the neck diameter h(t) in the
droplet detachment process of a polymer solution. First,
it follows an exponential law that is well described by the
Rayleigh instability of Newtonian liquids [13,14]. Then it
might pass into the self similar regimes that describe the

August 7, 2013

3

break-up of Newtonian liquids [15] until the polymers in-
tervene the ﬂow abruptly and a ﬁlament is formed which,
again, thins very slowly and exponentially with time [16].

the high resistance of the polymers to elongational ﬂow
and this resistance is macroscopically quantiﬁed by the
elongational viscosity ηe. The same form of equation 1
has been used to ﬁt data from extensional rheology mea-
surements (both capillary break up and ﬁlament stretch-
ing devices [17]). Its physical meaning is that ﬁrst the
polymer molecules are uncoiled by the ﬂow and the dy-
namic is governed purely by elastic eﬀects. Once the
polymers are stretched, a steady state is reached which
leads to the linear dynamic. From h(t) one can calcu-
late the corresponding elongational rates ˙ǫ = ∂th(t)/h(t).
These have to be compared with characteristic relaxation
times. The microscopic polymer rotational diﬀusion has
been estimated by the time constants from the standard
rheological measurements to be at least λ > 10s and the
appropriate ratio is given by the Weissenberg number
which is always found to be very large W i = λ ˙ǫ > 100 in
our experiments. This means that the polymer molecules
in the droplet detachment process do not experience a
force ﬁeld that is comparable to the Brownian forces
and time scales, but are aﬀected by a violent ﬂow and
stretched and oriented in a deterministic manner. Never-
theless, the elongational rates and the Weissenberg num-
bers are practically constant in the regime of exponential
thinning. They diverge, though, when the linear thinning
behavior sets in.

The h(t) data can also be used directly to calculate the
apparent elongational viscosity by equating the capillary
pressure with the elastic stresses [3,4,17]:

ηe(t) =

2σ
˙ǫh(t)

(2)

This approach is a simpliﬁcation because it neglects
gravitational or nonlinear elastic eﬀects, but it is com-
monly used to extract the elongational viscosity from
capillary break up experiments. A common quantity rep-
resenting the stress- and stretching history of the ﬂuid,
and thereby the polymers, is the Henky strain given by
ζ = R ˙ǫdt. The corresponding elongational viscosity data
in ﬁg. 5 ﬁrst show an exponential increase of the ap-
parent elongational viscosity followed by a steady state
value for strains ζ ≥ 1.5. The observation of the plateau
value at strains that much smaller compared to earlier
work [4,17,18] is a consequence of the relative stiﬀness of
the Xanthan molecule and the pre-stretching before the
occurrence of the ﬁlament. This is also indicated by the
elevated elongational viscosity at ζ = 0. If the ﬁlament
would start to be formed with the polymers at rest one
would expect the elongational viscosity to grow from the
Newtonian value of the so called Trouton ratio ηe/ηs = 3.
When ηe reaches the plateau value the thinning dynamic
becomes linear and the elongational rate ˙ǫ diverges, in-
dicating that ηe is independent of the elongational rate
as predicted by rigid rod models as well as elastic models
for W i >> 1 [19]. The measured elongational viscosi-

FIG. 4. Filament diameter h(t) for diﬀerent polymer con-
centrations and solvent viscosities. The parameters refer to
eq. 1. Not all data points are shown.

FIG. 5. The apparent elongational viscosity for the same

set of data as in ﬁg. 4

Figure 4 shows the ﬁlament thickness h(t) extracted
from the video images that start at the moment when
the ﬁlament is formed. More viscous solvents or higher
polymer concentrations lead to a slower dynamic that
diﬀers by more than an order of magnitude. However,
at ﬁrst all runs show the same exponential thinning be-
havior, followed by a linear regime, and the data can be
approximated by the expression

h(t) = exp(−t/τ ) − bt + yo.

(1)

The formation of the cylindrical ﬁlament occurs due to

August 7, 2013

4

ties are in reasonable agreement with data from studies
with opposing nozzles [20], ﬁber spinning devices [21], or
values obtained by analyzing contraction ﬂow [22]

For our birefringence study we needed an estimate for
the molecular weight of our sample and we used Batche-
lors formula [?] for the elongational viscosity of semidi-
luted rigid rods to ﬁt our data. Fluorescence microscopy
studies on DNA show that at steady state for Henky
strains ζ ≥ 1.5 the molecules are extended to a maxi-
mum hydrodynamic length ℓ that is more than 80% of
their contour length [23], and the relatively stiﬀ Xanthan
molecules are mostly well approximated as rigid rods. In
order to allow for a robust ﬁtting procedure for the deter-
mination of the two free parameters molecular weight m
and polymer length ℓ we varied both the polymer concen-
tration and the solvent viscosity. As expected we found
the elongational viscosity to always be proportional to
the solvent viscosity (see ﬁg. 5). With our two indepen-
dent sets of data, we performed the ﬁt with Batchelors
formula for semidiluted solutions of rigid rods (ﬁg. 6)

ηe = 3ηsolv +

2

3 ηsolvΦ(ℓ/d)2
ln(2ℓ/d) − ln(1 + 2pΦ/πℓ/d) − 1.5 (3)

Φ is the particle volume fraction and, for the width of
the polymer, we took the literature value of d = 2nm.
The ﬁt yields ℓ = 4.5µm and m = 2.5 Mamu. This ratio
of molecular weight and length is in very good agreement
with e.g. the results from a contraction ﬂow study by
[22], but diﬀers by a factor of two from values obtained
by light scattering [20]. The number of Kuhn steps of
our sample is about 40, a value that is 10 times smaller
than that of λ-DNA which has been used in a previous
study where no steady state of the elongational viscosity
had been observed [18].

FIG. 6. The elongational viscosity for diﬀerent solvent vis-
cosities (squares) and polymer concentrations (circles). The
continuous and the dashed lines show the theoretical values
according to Batchelors formula for semidiluted rigid rods.

B. Birefringence measurements

We can now turn to the microscopic study of the con-
formation of the macromolecules by means of the bire-
fringence measurements. An elaborate introduction in
optical ﬂow rheometry is given in [7]. In our unidirec-
tional stretching geometry with the ﬂow along the di-
rection of gravity, we can assume transverse isotropy for
polarizability and segmental order of the single units of
the macromolecules. Therefore, the birefringence signal
∆N is proportional to the segmental order of the poly-
mers and to their concentration

∆N =

∆α0cpNa

< 3 cos2 θ − 1 >

(4)

2π
nm

1
2

where n is the average refractive index, Na the Avo-
gadro number and θ the orientation angle of the poly-
mer segments to the direction of extension. By knowl-
edge of the maximum birefringence signal ∆Nmax at
maximum extension and alignment of the polymers,
the mean fractional extension of our polymers is then
x/ℓ = p(2∆N/∆Nmax + 1)/3 because, on a microscopic
scale, a variety of diﬀerent conﬁgurations will certainly
be present [23].

The negligence of diﬀerent conﬁguration types like,
e.g., dumbbell or hairpin, leads to a certain overestimate
of the fractional extension and our calculation looses its
accuracy for coiled states. The correctness of the formula
improves, though, increasing degree of orientational or-
der and is a good approximation for large fractional ex-
tensions of the stretched polymers.

To test the reliability of our method we performed sev-
eral runs at diﬀerent polymer concentrations, and the
birefringence signal was always roughly proportional to
7b). The robustness and se-
the concentration (ﬁg.
lectivity of our method becomes clear if one compares
the data of the solution with 500ppm of polymer and
ηsolvent = 60mP as with the solution with 1000ppm of
polymer and ηsolvent = 15mP as. Both data sets prac-
tically lead to the same ﬂow (ﬁg. 4) but, exceeding the
capabilities of simple extensional rheometry, the birefrin-
gence signal is sensitive to the diﬀerences in concentra-
tion. This shows how important the microscopic mea-
surements are if one wants to qualify theoretical predic-
tions that are based on kinetic models.

The measurements of the birefringence in our setup
are restricted to the time tc after the ﬁlament is formed
because optical abberations make it impossible to mea-
sure it at earlier stages of the pinching process. Even if
the origin of the Hencky strain is not inﬂuenced much

August 7, 2013

5

by this limitation, as most of the strain is accumu-
lated at the ﬁnal stages of the experiment, our data
reveal that the polymers have a signiﬁcant (ﬂow and
strain) history when our measurements start. Assum-
ing that the polymers are completely stretched when
elastic eﬀects are no longer observable for ζ ≥ 1.5, we
can calculate the maximum birefringence per polymer
concentration ∆Nmax/cp = 8 × 10−2g−1cm3. This is
comparable to the value for fully elongated λ DNA of
∆Nmax/cp = 5.1 × 10−2g−1cm3 [24], but a decade larger
than values obtained for Xanthan in shear ﬂow [25] and
in transient electric birefringence measurements [26].

The corresponding maximum birefringence of the cp ≤
1000ppm solutions is only 30% larger than at ζ = 0.
This would correspond to a fractional polymer exten-
sion x/ℓ = 0.9 at ζ = 0, indicating that stiﬀ polymers
like Xanthan are almost completely aligned and stretched
when the ﬁlament occurs. The uncoiling process in the
range 0 < ζ < 1.5 correlates with an elastic, exponential
ﬁlament thinning dynamic and a monotonic increase of
the birefringence signal.

FIG. 7. a) The instantaneous birefringence versus the
elapsed time. The arrows indicate a Hencky strain of ζ = 1.5
b) the instantaneous birefringence versus the Hencky strain.
The vertical line indicates the ζ = 1.5 position, the dashed
lines are linear ﬁts with slopes indicated by the numbers.
Symbols are as in ﬁg. 1.

However, instead of a plateau value at the ﬁnal stage
of the experiment, we observe a divergence in the bire-
fringence signal (ﬁg. 7a). The divergence is very repro-
ducible and takes place at stages of the ﬁlament thinning
process when the ﬁlament diameter is still large enough
to render the analysis unambiguous. The divergence of
the birefringence signal comes along with a divergence in
the elongational rate ˙ǫ that follows from the linear shrink-
ing of the ﬁlament. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that, the bire-
fringence signal continues to increase with constant slope
from ζ = 1.5 to ζ = 6 if plotted against the strain. Only
for the cp ≥ 1500ppm solutions did we observe a steeper
slope in the birefringence signal for ζ < 1.5, presumably
because of the stronger entanglement of the polymers.

While the polymers should be completely uncoiled in
the linear thinning regime, additional physical mecha-
nisms, that we will discuss in the following, have to be
considered. We do see three diﬀerent possible scenar-
ios: ﬁrst an eﬀect of the polydispersity of the molecu-
lar weight distribution of our sample. But the observed
large Wi should lead to a complete stretching of smaller
molecules at even smaller strains. Second an overstretch-
ing of the molecule by the strong ﬂow that would aﬀect
the conﬁgurations of the molecular bonds. Third a con-
centration enhancement by drainage or evaporation of
the solvent. This picture is supported by the observation
that, eventually, the ﬁlament might not break at the ﬁnal
stages of the thinning process but leave a very thin poly-
mer (< 10µm) ﬁber between the nozzle and the ground
plate. Then a conﬁguration called beads on a string oc-
curs via an instability of the surface of the cylindrical
ﬁlament [27].

V. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we have presented the ﬁrst measure-
ments on the molecular conﬁgurations of semi-rigid Xan-
than molecules in a droplet detachment process of a com-
plex liquid. We ﬁnd that stiﬀ molecules like Xanthan are
highly oriented and stretched by the ﬂow, even before the
abrupt transition from the Newtonian self similar shrink-
ing law to the exponential behavior of the elastic ﬁlament.
Furthermore, we do observe a further increase of the bire-
fringence signal after the saturation of elastic eﬀects and
the stretching of the polymers. We discussed diﬀerent
possible reasons for this phenomenon and ﬁnd that a con-
centration enhancement is most likely to be the pertinent
eﬀect, but we cannot exclude the possibility that changes

August 7, 2013

6

in the intramolecular bond conﬁgurations caused by the
violent ﬂow aﬀect the birefringence signal too.

[1] For a review see: J. Eggers, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 865

(1997).

[2] M. Goldin, J. Yerushalmi, R. Pfeﬀer, and R. Shinnar, J.

[3] A.V. Bazilevskii, V.M. Entov, and A.N. Rozhkov, Sov.

Fluid. Mech. 38, 689 (1969).

Phys. Dokl. 26, 333 (1981).

[4] Y. Amarouchene, D. Bonn, J. Meunier, and H. Kellay,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3558 (2001).

[5] L.B. Smolka, and A. Belmonte, J. Non Newt. Mech. 137,

103 (2006)

[6] J. Li, and M.A. Fontelos, Phys. Fluids 15, 922 (2003).
[7] G.G. Fuller, ”Optical rheometry of complex ﬂuids”, Ox-

ford University Press (1995).

[8] G.H. Koenderink, S. Sacanna, D.G.A.L. Aarts, and A.P.
Philipse, Phys. Rev. E 69, 021804 (2004) and references
therein.

[9] G. Holzwarth, and E.B. Prestridge, Science 197 758
(1977). W.E. Rochefort, and S. Middleman, J. Rheol. 31
337 (1987).

[10] F.V. Lopez, L. Pauchard, M. Rosen, and, M. Rabaud J.

Non Newt. Fluid Mech. 103, 123-139 (2002).

[11] R.I. Tanner, ”Engineering Rheology”, OxfordScience

[12] W. H. Talbot, and J.D. Goddard, Rheol. Acta 18

[13] A. Rothert, R. Richter , and I. Rehberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.

(1985).

505(1979).

87, 084501 (1901).

[14] C.Wagner, Y.Amarouchene, Daniel Bonn, and J. Eggers,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 164504 (2005).

[15] J.Eggers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3458 (1993).
[16] V.M. Entov, and A.L. Yarin, Fluid. Dyn. 19, 21 (1984).
[17] S.L. Anna, and G.H. McKinley, J. Rheol. 45, 115 (2000).
[18] C. Wagner, P. Doyle, Y. Amarouchene, and D. Bonn Eur.

Phys. Lett 64, 823 (2003).

[19] Bird, Curtiss, Armstrongv and Hassager ”Dynamics of

polymeric liquids”, J. Wiley (1987).

[20] G.G. Fuller , C.A. Cathey , B. Hubbard, and B.E. Ze-

browski, J. Rheol. 31, 235 (1987).

[21] M. Khagram , R.K. Gupta and T. Sridhar J. Rheol. 29

[22] A. Mongruel, and B. Cloitre , J. Non Newt. Fluid Mech.

191 (1985).

110, 27 (2002).

[23] T.T. Perkins, D.E. Smith, and S. Chu, Science 276,
2016 (1997). D.E. Smith, and S. Chu, Science 281, 1335
(1998).

[24] G. Maret, and G. Weill, Biopolymers 22, 2727 (1983).
[25] N.P. Yevlamppieva, G.M., Pavlov and E.I. Rjumtsev, Int.

J. Biol. Macromolecules 26, 295 (1999).

[26] V.J. Morris, K. lAnson, and C. Turner, Int. J. Biol.

Macromolecules 4, 362 (1982).

[27] M.S.N. Oliveira and, G.H McKinley, Phys. Fluids ( 17,

071794 (2005).

