6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The structure of shock waves as a test of
Brenner’s modiﬁcations to the Navier-Stokes
equations

Christopher J. Greenshields and Jason M. Reese ∗
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Strathclyde,

Glasgow G1 1XJ, UK

Abstract

Brenner has recently proposed modiﬁcations to the Navier-Stokes equations that are
based on theoretical arguments but supported only by experiments having a fairly
limited range [1,2]. These modiﬁcations relate to a diﬀusion of ﬂuid volume that
would be signiﬁcant for ﬂows with high density gradients. So the viscous structure
of shock waves in gases should provide an excellent test case for this new model. In
this paper we detail the shock structure problem and propose exponents for the gas
viscosity-temperature relation based on empirical viscosity data that is independent
of shock experiments. We then simulate shocks in the range Mach 1.0–12.0 using
the Navier-Stokes equations, both with and without Brenner’s modiﬁcations. Initial
simulations showed Brenner’s modiﬁcations display unphysical behaviour when the
coeﬃcient of volume diﬀusion exceeds the kinematic viscosity. Our subsequent anal-
yses attribute this behaviour to both an instability to temporal disturbances and a
spurious phase velocity-frequency relationship. On equating the volume diﬀusivity
to the kinematic viscosity, however, we ﬁnd the results with Brenner’s modiﬁca-
tions are signiﬁcantly better than those of the standard Navier-Stokes equations,
and broadly similar to those from the family of extended hydrodynamic models that
includes the Burnett equations. Brenner’s modiﬁcations add only two terms to the
Navier-Stokes equations, and the numerical implementation is much simpler than
conventional extended hydrodynamic models, particularly in respect of boundary
conditions. We recommend further investigation and testing on a number of diﬀerent
benchmark non-equilibrium ﬂow cases.

Key words: shock structure, transition-continuum regime, non-equilibrium ﬂuid
dynamics, volume velocity, rareﬁed ﬂows

∗ Corresponding author.

Email addresses: chris.greenshields@strath.ac.uk (Christopher J.

Greenshields), jason.reese@strath.ac.uk (Jason M. Reese).

Preprint submitted to arXiv

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

The generally-accepted parameter which indicates the extent to which a local
region of ﬂowing gas is in thermodynamic equilibrium is the Knudsen number:

Kn =

λ
L ∝

Ma
Re

,

(1)

|

u
|

u
|

where λ is the mean free path of the gas molecules, L is a characteristic length
/c with u the ﬂow
of the ﬂow system, the Mach number of the ﬂow Ma =
L/µ
velocity and c the speed of sound, and the Reynolds number Re = ρ
|
with ρ the mass density and µ the dynamic viscosity. (For high Re ﬂows
over solid bodies, the characteristic length scale is the boundary layer thick-
ness, and the denominator on the right hand side of eq. (1) is √Re [3].) As
Kn increases, the departure of the gas from local thermodynamic equilib-
rium increases, and the notion of the gas as a continuum-equilibrium ﬂuid be-
comes less valid. The range of use of the continuum-equilibrium assumption is
therefore clearly limited, with the applicability of the classical Navier-Stokes-
Fourier equations (with standard no-slip boundary conditions) conﬁned to
cases where Kn . 0.01, typically. Extended, or modiﬁed, hydrodynamics at-
tempts to extend the range of applicability of the continuum-equilibrium ﬂuid
model into the so-called ‘intermediate-Kn’ (or ‘transition-continuum’) regime
where 0.01 . Kn . 1.

Howard Brenner of MIT recently proposed modiﬁcations to the Navier-Stokes-
Fourier equations for ﬂows with appreciable density gradients [1]. His theoret-
ical developments and experimental validations are centred on slow moving
ﬂows where variations in density are primarily caused by variations in tem-
perature rather than pressure. Of particular interest to Brenner is the motion
of particles due to thermal gradients, called ‘thermophoresis’, which provides
good, yet fairly limited, supporting evidence for his work. This range of evi-
dence should be broadened, particularly since his work challenges the funda-
mentals of conventional ﬂuid dynamics and so demands rigorous validation.
It is therefore of particular interest to see whether his modiﬁcations to the
classical Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations improve their predictive capabilities
for intermediate-Kn ﬂows.

In this paper, we investigate the application of Brenner’s modiﬁed Navier-
Stokes equations to the shock structure problem. This is a validation case
used previously [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20] for several pro-
posed extended hydrodynamic models, such as the Burnett equations. Bren-
ner’s modiﬁed equations can be considered an extended hydrodynamic model,
and their relationship to established models is discussed towards the end of
this paper. In order to be concise and avoid ambiguity, for the remainder of
this paper we shall use the expression “Navier-Stokes” to refer to the classi-

2

cal Navier-Stokes-Fourier equation set, and adopt the term “Brenner-Navier-
Stokes” to refer to Brenner’s modiﬁed version of these.

2 The shock structure problem

The shock structure problem concerns the spatial variation in ﬂuid ﬂow prop-
erties across a stationary, planar, one-dimensional shock in a monatomic gas.
We deﬁne the ﬂow as moving at a speed u in the positive x-direction, with
the shock located at x = 0; the upstream conditions at x =
are su-
per/hypersonic and denoted by a subscript ‘1’, downstream conditions at
x = +
are denoted by a subscript ‘2’. While shocks are often modelled
as discontinuities, their physical properties in fact vary continuously from
their upstream to their downstream levels over a characteristic distance of
a few mean free paths because the relaxation times for heat and momentum
transport are ﬁnite. The ﬂow in this shock layer is far from being in local
0.3 i.e. very much within
thermodynamic equilibrium, typically Kn = 0.2
the intermediate-Kn regime.

−∞

∞

∼

Since the Navier-Stokes equations perform poorly at these Kn, the shock
structure problem is particularly apposite for testing extended hydrodynamic
models. The problem possesses certain features that make it attractive for
numerical investigation, particularly if hydrodynamic models with high-order
derivatives are used:

(1) there are no solid boundaries to consider;
(2) the upstream and downstream boundary conditions are clearly deﬁned
through the Rankine-Hugoniot relations, with all gradients of ﬂow quan-
tities tending to zero far upstream and downstream of the shock;

(3) the problem is one-dimensional and steady.

A monatomic gas possesses no modes of vibration or rotation, cannot dis-
sociate, and only ionizes at the highest temperatures, so its thermodynamic
behaviour is generally much simpler than that of polyatomic gases. It is for
this reason that monatomic gases have generally been preferred as the test
gas in shock structure experiments and analysis. Resulting data have histori-
cally been presented in normalised form and the lack of access to the raw data
presents an opportunity for us to specify the test problem in a nondimension-
alised form that reduces the pre- and post-processing eﬀort 1 :

It is convenient to set the upstream temperature T1 = 1 because, for a given

•

1 In what follows, the use of a power law viscosity model, described in section 3.1,
is anticipated.

3

µ1, the coeﬃcient of proportionality A is then independent of the exponent
of s in the power law relation of eq. (7). For simplicity we then choose A = 1
and, hence, µ1 = 1.
It is useful to set c1 = 1 so that the upstream ﬂow speed u1 relates directly
to the upstream Mach number Ma1. The ratio of speciﬁc heats, γ, is 5/3 for
monatomic gases, so the gas constant R = c2/(γT ) = 3/5 in our adopted
nondimensionalised set of units.
The ﬁnal parameters can be set so that a unit length corresponds to the
upstream Maxwellian mean free path:

•

•

λM 1 =

16
5√2πγ

µ1c1
p1

.

where p1 is the upstream pressure. For this test case 16/5√2πγ = 0.99
so λM 1 ≈
almost exactly to λM 1.

1,
µ1c1/p1. By setting p1 = 1, the unit length then corresponds

≈

All normal gradients of p and T are speciﬁed as zero at the solution domain
boundary far downstream. The shock is maintained stationary and ﬁxed within
the domain by application of the Rankine-Hugoniot velocity relation at the
downstream boundary, which for our case is

u2
u1

=

1
4

(cid:16)

1 + 3Ma−2
1

.

(cid:17)

The case is initialised with a step change in ﬁelds from upstream to down-
stream at x = 0. To minimise the time required to reach a steady-state solu-
tion, the downstream pressure and temperature are initialised using Rankine-
Hugoniot relations for pressure and temperature, which for our case are:

p2
p1

=

1
4

5Ma2

1 −

1

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

and

T2
T1

=

p2
p1

u2
u1

.

The initial and boundary conditions for the actual solution variables, described
in section 4 below, are simply derived from those for p, T and u, e.g. initial and
boundary conditions for ρ are calculated from p and T using the perfect gas
law, p = ρRT . When we include the second derivative of ρ through application
of eqn. (14), below, we specify additionally that the normal gradient of the
gradient of ρ is zero.

(2)

(3)

(4)

3 The viscosity-temperature relation

One of the main uncertainties in the physical modelling of the shock structure
problem is the relation between µ and T . This is unfortunate because the

4

µ(T ) relation has an appreciable eﬀect on the proﬁle of a simulated shock
— in the extreme case of assuming a constant µ, results of simulations are
very poor. It could even be argued that the Navier-Stokes equations could be
made to work for the shock structure problem simply by adjusting the µ(T )
relation until experimental shock proﬁles are reproduced. The value of the
shock structure problem as a good test for hydrodynamic models therefore
relies on establishing a good µ(T ) relation from reliable experimental sources,
preferably independent of shock data. We therefore review sources to establish
µ(T ) relations for a range of monatomic gases, from which argon is chosen for
our test problem.

3.1 The power law relation

The viscosity of a perfect rareﬁed gas is deﬁned through

µ = τ1p

τ1nT =

τ0nT,

∝

5
4

(5)

where n is the gas molecular number density, τ1 is the collision interval for
momentum transport, and τ0 is the collision interval for hard-sphere molecules.
That the viscosity given in eq. (5) is, in fact, purely dependent on temperature
and not mass density, arises from the nature of the intermolecular force law
which determines how molecules interact in collision with each other. For
reasons of simplicity, this force is often modelled, for a given species of molecule
at a particular temperature, as varying with distance from the molecular centre
as an inverse power law with coeﬃcient ν. In a collision, molecules approach
each other with a relative speed g and slow to a stop a distance d from each
other when their kinetic energy is transformed to potential energy in the force
d−ν+1. With translational temperature a function of the square
ﬁeld, i.e. g2
of the molecular velocity, it is then clear that the eﬀective molecular diameter,
T −1/(ν−1). The collisional relaxation time τ0 is then the mean free path
d
∝
n−1d−2), divided by the mean molecular velocity (
(

T 1/2) so that

∝

∝

T −1/2d−2 = T s−1,

where

s =

+

nτ0 ∝

Equations (5) and (6) yield the well-known relation

∝
1
2

2

−

ν

.

1

T s

µ

∝

or

µ = AT s,

where A is a constant of proportionality. There are two theoretical limiting
, s = 1/2 corresponds to hard-
cases for the intermolecular force law: ν =
sphere molecules; ν = 5, s = 1 corresponds to so-called Maxwellian molecules.
Real molecules generally have a value of ν ranging from about 5 to around 15.

∞

(6)

(7)

5

3.2 Experimental data for monatomic gases

Increasing the value of the exponent s in eq. (7) in a shock structure calculation
introduces more dissipation, particularly at the high-temperature, downstream
side of the shock. This additional dissipation acts to smooth out the shock
layer, increasing its thickness and, in particular, lengthening the downstream
“tail” in the ﬂow property proﬁles.

Therefore, in order to test any hydrodynamic model it is important to set the
exponent s independently of the shock structure problem under investigation.
In 1972, Maitland and Smith [21] critically assessed the viscosities of a number
of gases, obtained from several diﬀerent sources using a variety of techniques,
such as the capillary ﬂow method, oscillating disc and rotating cylinder meth-
ods, and observations of the retardation of an oil drop in free-fall through a
gas. For the monatomic gases argon, helium and xenon they produced vis-
cosity data which they estimated to be accurate to 1.5% in the temperature
range 80–2000K. That upper limit of 2000K is the downstream temperature
of a shock of Mach 4.3 propagating into a room-temperature gas; hence these
viscosity data are applicable to shocks of Ma

4.3.

≤

In 1958, Amdur and Mason [22] estimated the intermolecular potential at
higher temperatures from observations of the scattering of high-velocity molec-
ular beams, and produced tables of the viscosity of gases at temperatures up to
15000K, corresponding to a shock of Mach 12.5. It is not known how accurate
these data are; Amdur and Mason estimated that at the higher temperatures
the error in viscosity could be as much as 10%.

We have used these data to estimate the value of s (and hence ν) in eq. (6) for
diﬀerent temperature ranges. We have ﬁtted curves of the power law in eq. (7)
by minimising the error in viscosity for the two sets of experimental data.
More details of this process can be found in [13], but the experimental data
and best-ﬁt curves for three common monatomic gases are shown in ﬁgs. 1
and 2, and the corresponding exponents s and ν are given in Table 1.

The coeﬃcient ν is itself a function of temperature because at higher tempera-
tures molecules with more energy can penetrate each others’ force-ﬁelds more
eﬀectively. Therefore, due to the diﬀerences in temperature range and exper-
imental techniques reported in the Maitland & Smith and Amdur & Mason
papers, we have considered two ranges of temperature or, equivalently, shock
Mach number: up to Mach 4.3, and up to Mach 12.5. (It should be noted that
the power-law ﬁt is not very good for the high temperature data, which is
itself of unknown accuracy, therefore the µ(T ) obtained must be treated with
caution.)

In the more limited temperature range of 3500–8500K, Aeschliman and Cam-

6

bel [23] obtained values for argon viscosity to an accuracy of 12% which can
be represented to within 1% error by a viscosity-temperature exponent of
s = 0.74. This value compares well with our value of s = 0.76 in Table 1 for
temperatures in the range 2000–15000K.

Correlations between direct simulation Monte-Carlo (DSMC) simulations and
experimental shock density proﬁles can also provide data for the exponent s,
particularly at high temperatures [5,6,7,8,9,11,17]. While it is clearly prefer-
able in our study of the shock structure problem to use data that are inde-
pendent of the problem itself, it is worth noting that each of these published
papers produces a value of ν that falls within a range 9
11, correspond-
ing to 0.70
0.75. The value s = 0.72 of Alsmeyer [9] is often quoted,
e.g. recent results of simulations using this value of s agreed with experiment
within an estimated uncertainty of 5% for temperatures above 2000K [17].

≤

≤

≤

≤

ν

s

In our present study, three values of the exponent s for argon are therefore
used:

•
•
•

s = 0.68, which is our best-ﬁt for shock Mach numbers up to 4.3;
s = 0.76, our best-ﬁt up to Mach 12.5; and
s = 0.72, which is the mean of our best-ﬁt values, as well as the commonly
used value of Alsmeyer [9] that falls in the middle of the range of values
from DSMC correlations with shock density proﬁles. As this is the mean
value, it is used as the ‘control’ in our study.

We focus on the power-law form of µ(T ) in this paper in order to discern
eﬀects on shock structure due to diﬀerent constitutive models for momentum
and energy diﬀusion rather than due to the presumed relationship between
gas properties. However, we recognise that there are other models available
for µ(T ), e.g. Sutherland’s Law, that are generally equivalent to adding a
weak attractive component to the intermolecular force — which is physically
more realistic. In our simple power-law model, this attractive force would
manifest itself as an exponent s that decreases as temperature increases, which
is generally reported (see, e.g., [24]). It is interesting to note, however, that
our present analysis of experimental data does not appear to bear this out:
in the case of xenon in Table 1, s decreases with increasing temperature, but
with argon and helium the exponent increases with temperature.

4 Brenner’s modiﬁcation to the Navier-Stokes equations

Brenner presents his modiﬁcation to the Navier-Stokes equations as a change
in Newton’s viscosity law. Before arriving at that discussion, we ﬁrst express
the standard governing equations in an Eulerian frame of reference as

7

(8)

(9)

(11)

Conservation of mass

Conservation of momentum

∂ρ
∂t

+

• (umρ) = 0,

∇

∂m
∂t

∇

+

• (umm) +

• P = 0,

∇

Conservation of total energy

∂E
∂t

∇

+

• (umE) +

• je +

• (P • um) = 0,

(10)

∇

∇

where um is the mass velocity, the momentum density m = ρum, the total
2/2) with e the speciﬁc internal energy, je
energy density E = ρ(e +
is the diﬀusive ﬂux density of internal energy, and P is the diﬀusive ﬂux
density of momentum — the familiar stress tensor — deﬁned here as positive
in compression: P = pI + T, where T is the viscous stress tensor and I the
unit tensor.

um|

|

Based on this sign convention, the constitutive model for a Newtonian ﬂuid
relates T to the rate of deformation tensor, D, by µ and the bulk viscosity κ:

T =

◦

2µ

D

κ tr(D)I,

−

−
u)T

1
2

u

≡ ∇

for a velocity u, i.e. the overbar indicates
where D
the symmetric part of a tensor. The deviatoric component of the deformation
is

∇
h
1
3 tr(D)I.

u + (

D

D

∇

≡

i

◦

≡

−

In this constitutive model, eq. (11), it is generally considered that u is the
mass velocity um that, in the mass continuity equation, relates to a convec-
tive ﬂux of mass dS • ρum at an element of surface area dS, or that in the
Boltzmann equation represents the statistical mean value velocity. However,
this assumption has recently been questioned by Brenner [1,2] who postulated
that the velocity appearing in Newton’s viscosity law should instead be the
volume velocity uv, so named since it relates to the ﬂux of volume rather than
mass.

The distinction between mass and volume ﬂux is perhaps best explained by
considering a single species ﬂuid at a molecular level. The mass ﬂux through
dS is the product of the molecular mass and the number of molecules passing
through dS in one second. There is no net mass ﬂux due to random motions
of molecules; at a continuum level, there is no diﬀusive ﬂux of mass, only the
convective ﬂux already deﬁned.

To understand volume ﬂux we can consider attributing to each molecule lo-
cally a microscopic portion of the volume of ﬂuid. The molecular volume is

8

transported with the molecule but will change depending on the mass den-
sity of its surroundings, e.g. the microscopic volume shrinks as the molecule
moves into a denser region. A convective ﬂux of volume is associated with bulk
motion of the molecular volumes, and is equivalent to the ratio of convective
mass ﬂux to mass density, i.e. dS • um. If the ﬂuid density varies across dS,
as a molecule passes through dS there is a change in its associated volume,
thus a net ﬂux of volume. Random motions can therefore produce a net ﬂux
of volume, so that there exists a diﬀusive ﬂux of volume in regions of non-zero
density gradient. The volume ﬂux dS • uv therefore represents the total ﬂux
of volume, comprising the convective ﬂux dS • um and a diﬀusive ﬂux dS • jv,
where jv is the diﬀusive volume ﬂux density, such that

For a single component ﬂuid undergoing heat transfer, Brenner proposed a
constitutive equation for jv:

uv = um + jv.

jv = αv

1
ρ∇

ρ,

(12)

(13)

where αv is termed the ‘volume diﬀusivity’ [1]. Exactly how αv should be quan-
tiﬁed for a given ﬂuid state is an open question. Brenner relates αv directly
to well-known diﬀusivity coeﬃcients under some limited conditions; in partic-
ular, for single component ﬂuids undergoing heat transfer, αv is the same as
the thermal diﬀusivity α = k/ρcp, where k is the thermal conductivity and cp
is the speciﬁc heat capacity at constant pressure.

While the distinction between volume and mass velocities has been made,
the question remains of why the velocity appearing in Newton’s viscosity law
should be the volume velocity rather than mass velocity. Brenner’s justiﬁca-
tion is based on limited evidence (e.g. comparison of analytical solutions with
thermophoresis experiments). A lack of theoretical physical argument could
therefore lay the hypothesis open to some criticism. However, some support
for it can be found within the phenomenological GENERIC theory presented
by ¨Ottinger [25]. First, he demonstrates that the GENERIC formulation ar-
rives at the standard Navier-Stokes equations when the terms associated with
mass density in the friction matrix are identically zero. Then, by including
non-zero terms associated with mass density in the friction matrix, a revised
set of governing equations is derived that includes two velocities, similar to um
and uv deﬁned through eqs. (12) and (13). What emerges is that the standard
governing equations have historically ignored mass diﬀusivity on the basis that
the diﬀusive mass ﬂux is zero, while forgetting that there are associated mo-
mentum and energy ﬂuxes that may not be zero. GENERIC includes these
momentum and energy ﬂuxes, both of which are entropy producing, making
the process of mass diﬀusion irreversible. The ability of mass diﬀusion to pro-
duce entropy is, according to ¨Ottinger, something that is missing from the

9

conventional Navier-Stokes equations.

Brenner’s modiﬁcation, essentially eq. (12), can be incorporated into the sys-
tem of governing ﬂuid equations either by recasting the equations using uv
as the convective velocity instead of um, or by using uv in the constitutive
equation for Newton’s viscosity law. The former approach has been adopted
elsewhere [25,26] but here we choose the latter simply so that the Brenner
modiﬁcation appears more clearly as a new extended hydrodynamic model,
rather than a radical change to the governing equations themselves.

For a monatomic gas, κ = 0. Combining eqs. (11), (12) and (13) yields a
modiﬁed expression for the viscous stress:

T =

µ

−

(cid:20)∇

um + (

um)T

∇

2
3∇

−

• um

(cid:21) −

2µ

∇ (

α
ρ ∇

ρ

.

)

(14)

◦

The Brenner approach requires the transport of energy to be similarly modiﬁed
through consideration of the diﬀusion of internal energy. It is usually assumed
that the diﬀusion of internal energy consists solely of heat diﬀusion, so that
the diﬀusive internal energy ﬂux density, ju, is considered synonymous with
diﬀusive heat transfer, q =
T , according to Fourier’s law. However, the
presence of a diﬀusive volume ﬂux, of ﬂux density jv, enables energy to be
pjv.
transported across a surface by diﬀusive work transfer of an amount
The diﬀusive internal energy ﬂux density is therefore given by:

∇

−

−

k

which, following our argument above, can be re-written in the form:

je = q

pjv,

−

je =

k

T

−

∇

−

αv

p
ρ∇

ρ.

(15)

(16)

Equations (14) with (16) comprise Brenner’s modiﬁcations to the classical
Navier-Stokes-Fourier equations [1,2]. We should note that this new ﬂuid
model has yet to receive either independent theoretical justiﬁcation or experi-
mental conﬁrmation. As with any new hypothesis or model it is also subject to
reﬁnement and re-casting into diﬀerent forms. However, we use it in this paper
in the form presented in [1,2], without prejudice, to provide an indication of
its current utility and limitations.

5 Numerical solution of the governing equations

Our numerical shock structure solver is developed using the open source Field
Operation and Manipulation (OpenFOAM) software [27]. Written in C++,

10

OpenFOAM uses ﬁnite volume (FV) numerics to solve systems of partial diﬀer-
ential equations ascribed on any 3-dimensional unstructured mesh of polygonal
cells. All solvers developed within OpenFOAM are therefore 3-dimensional,
but can be used for 1- or 2-dimensional problems by the application of par-
ticular conditions on boundaries lying in the plane of the direction(s) of no
interest.

Fluid ﬂow solvers in OpenFOAM are generally developed within an implicit,
pressure-velocity, iterative solution framework. The solver we developed for
this work ﬁrst solves eqs. (8), (9) and (10) for ρ, m and E respectively. The
equations are treated in a segregated manner: for each equation, terms includ-
ing the solution variable are, wherever possible, treated implicitly, with other
terms treated explicitly. All equations include convection of transported vari-
ables that require a consistent, conservative set of ﬂuxes of um. After solving
the sequence of segregated equations for ρ, m and E, an iterative PISO-style
method [28] solves an equation for pressure p, derived from the perfect gas
law, and eqs. (8) and (9), to produce conservative ﬂuxes of m from which the
ﬂuxes of um are derived. Finally, m is also corrected from its new ﬂuxes and
ρ is corrected from the new solution of p according to the perfect gas law,
before moving forward to the next time step and returning to the sequence of
equations for ρ, m and E.

Our FV discretisation maintains a compact computational molecule for the
orthogonal component of the Laplacian terms, which corresponds to Rhie and
Chow interpolation [29] in the pressure equation. Both the transported ﬁelds
in convection terms and the ﬂuxes in m are interpolated using limiters from
the MUSCL total variation diminishing (TVD) scheme [30,31] with identical
limiters used in all convection terms (for ρ, m and E) to maintain numerical
consistency. The temporal derivative is discretised using a two-time-level Euler
implicit scheme.

We calculated shocks of Mach 1.2, 1.7, 2.2, 2.84, 3.4, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11
in order to provide a reasonable distribution of solution points for subsequent
comparison with results from experiment. Mach 2.84 was speciﬁcally chosen
to coincide with shock proﬁle data communicated to us privately [32]. Simi-
larly, Mach 8 was chosen to coincide with the published shock proﬁle data of
Steinhilper [7], and Mach 9 coincides with a published proﬁle of Alsmeyer [9].

A solution domain of 33λM 1 was used in all simulations — wide enough to
contain the entire shock structure comfortably. Our initial results were ob-
tained using the Navier-Stokes equations with the control viscosity exponent
s = 0.72. The results for ρ and T converged on a mesh of 800 cells to within
1% of the solution extrapolated to an inﬁnitely small mesh size. The results we
present in this paper were produced with a mesh of 2000 cells, corresponding
0.017λM 1. Numerical solutions were executed until they
to a mesh size of

∼

11

converged to steady-state, at which point the residuals of all equations had
fallen 5 orders of magnitude from their initial level.

6 Volume diﬀusivity

6.1 Unphysical behaviour when αv ≡

α

We followed our initial Navier-Stokes simulations with preliminary simulations
using the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations. These simply used a volume diﬀu-
α, which was Brenner’s original suggestion (discussed in section 4
sivity αv ≡
above). However, our simulations do not reach a converged solution with de-
creasing cell (or mesh) size: at the upstream edge of the temperature proﬁle a
small undershoot develops at a cell size of 0.06λM 1 that increases in magni-
tude with decreasing cell size. The problem is present in proﬁles of all solution
variables but is best illustrated in a plot of Mach number, as shown in ﬁg. 3. At
best, the level of overshoot at the smallest cell sizes seems unphysical; worse
is that the overshoot may tend to inﬁnity as the mesh is further reﬁned.

There is little doubt that the overshoot in Mach number is a consequence
of Brenner’s modiﬁcation. In subsequent tests we were able to attribute the
presence of the overshoot to the additional term in the momentum ﬂux, but
not to the additional term in the energy ﬂux. We therefore postulate that
the overshoot might be caused by an inappropriately large volume diﬀusivity,
particularly since it exceeds the diﬀusivity associated with the remaining terms
in the model, the kinematic viscosity ν = µ/ρ, by a factor α⋆ = αv/ν = Pr−1 =
1.5.

Our search for an alternative value of αv began by relating the physical pro-
cess of volume diﬀusion more closely to mass diﬀusion, rather than thermal
diﬀusion. However, the process of diﬀusion of mass within a single compo-
nent ﬂuid, or self-diﬀusion, occurs at a similar rate to thermal diﬀusion, with
theoretical self-diﬀusivity coeﬃcients Dm of 1.200ν for hard-sphere molecules
and 1.534ν for Maxwellian molecules [33]. The unphysical overshoot in Mach
number remains for both values of self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient. The overshoot is
less pronounced when using the lower value but is still increasing with de-
screasing cell size even at the smallest cell sizes we tested ( 0.008λM 1). Again,
the amount of overshoot is unphysical and may tend to inﬁnity as the mesh
is further reﬁned. Only when we reduce the volume diﬀusivity coeﬃcient to
αv = ν (i.e. when we set α⋆ = 1) does the overshoot disappear.

12

6.2 Investigation of the unphysical behaviour

It is known that some forms of extended hydrodynamic equations are unsta-
ble in time to periodic spatial disturbances with wavelengths shorter than a
critical length that is typically of the order of one mean free path [12]. Such
instabilities appear in numerical simulations when the mesh is suﬃciently ﬁne
to resolve wavelengths shorter than the critical length, i.e. when the numer-
ical cell length is below this critical length. The appearance of an overshoot
below a critical level of mesh reﬁnement in our simulations may indicate a
similar instability, although the overshoot does appear at a particularly short
cell length and the solutions do converge to a steady state and so do not ‘blow
up’ in time.

Similarly, some forms of extended hydrodynamic equations, which may be sta-
ble in time, are actually unstable in space to periodic temporal disturbances
[34,19,20]. Again, it is unclear that such an instability would produce the
overshoot behaviour we witnessed in our preliminary calculations. Neverthe-
less, here we undertake both temporal and spatial stability analyses of the
Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations in order to investigate the source of unphys-
ical behaviour.

Following the procedures described in [12,34] the governing equations from
section 4 are ﬁrst linearised in 1-dimension to produce the following non-
dimensionalised perturbation equations:

∂φ
∂t′ +

0

1

0










1

0

2
3

0

1

0










∂φ
∂x′ +

∂
∂x′

0
σ′
3q′

2











= 0,

(17)

where t′ and x′ are nondimensionalised time and distance, respectively, φ =
ρ′ u′ T ′
T is the vector of nondimensionalised density, ﬂow speed and tem-
{
perature, and σ′ and q′ are nondimensionalised momentum and heat ﬂuxes
respectively. From eqs. (14) and (16), these momentum and energy ﬂuxes are,
respectively,

}

and

We assume a solution to eq. (17) of the form

σ′ =

q′ =

4
3

4
3

∂u′
∂x′ −
∂T ′
∂x′ −

α⋆ ∂2ρ′
∂x′2 ,
α⋆ ∂ρ′
∂x′ .

15
4

−

−

φ = ˜φ exp

i(ωt′

{

kx′)

,

}

−

13

where ˜φ is the amplitude of the wave, ω is its frequency and k its propagation

(18)

(19)

(20)

constant. Equations (17) to (20) can be combined to produce a set of linear
algebraic equations of the form

for which non-trivial solutions require

(ω, k) ˜φ = 0,

A

det[

(ω, k)] = 0.

A

(21)

(22)

For the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations, eq. (22) yields the following charac-
teristic equation:

6iω3 + 23k2ω2

[10k2 + (20 + 8α⋆)k4]iω

[(15

4α⋆)k4 + 20α⋆k6] = 0. (23)

−

−

−

If a disturbance in space is considered as an initial-value problem, k is real
and ω = ωr + iωi is complex. The form of eq. (20) indicates that stability
then requires ωi ≥
0. If a disturbance in time is considered as a problem of
signalling from the boundary, ω is real and k = kr + iki is complex. For a wave
travelling in the positive x direction, kr > 0, and stability then requires that
ki < 0. For a wave travelling in the negative x direction, the converse is true:
kr < 0 and stability requires ki > 0.

≤

k <

We examine temporal stability by solving eq. (23) numerically for ω for values
. Trajectories of ω are plotted in the complex plane
of k in the range 0
in ﬁg. 4. Two sets of trajectories are plotted: those for αv ≡
α (corresponding
to α⋆ = Pr−1 = 1.5) and those for αv ≡
ν (for which α⋆ = 1.0). In both
cases the trajectories all lie within the region ωi ≥
0, indicating stability for
all k. This conﬁrms, as expected, that the observed overshoot is not caused
by temporal instability.

∞

We then turn to examine spatial stability by solving eq. (23) numerically for
k for values of ω in the range 0
. Trajectories of k are plotted in
ω <
∞
ν the
the complex plane in ﬁg. 5 for both αv ≡
α. When αv ≡
ν and αv ≡
α,
trajectories do not violate the stability condition. However, when αv ≡
0.55,
the inset graph shows one trajectory start from ω = 0, kr = 0 at ki ≈
kr > 0, ki > 0
, and exit into the stable region
enter the unstable region
0.56. Thus, the stability
by crossing the kr = 0 axis at ki ≈
kr < 0, ki > 0
{
condition is clearly violated for small ω.

≤

{

}

}

Subsequently we examined trajectories for a number of diﬀerent α⋆ and we
found that the equations are unstable for α⋆ & 1.45, which suggests a potential
problem for some intuitive choices of αv, such as α and Dm. However, this
result does not really explain the cause of the overshoot in Mach number,
since the overshoot only disappears when α⋆ falls to unity, i.e. considerably
lower than 1.45.

14

Unphysical behaviour can also be observed by examining the phase velocity:

vph =

ω
kr(ω)

.

(24)

Figure 6 shows the phase velocity, normalised by the speed of sound in the
nondimensionalised form in the perturbation equations (c0 = √γ), for α⋆ = 1.0
and α⋆ = 1.2. For both α⋆, results for mode 1 are superimposed and correspond
to the propagation of sound. The mode 2 results correspond to the diﬀusive
transport of heat and results for both α⋆ are very similar. However, there is
a marked diﬀerence between results for the two cases for mode 3, relating to
higher-order diﬀusive transport. The α⋆ = 1.0 results are similar to those of
other extended hydrodynamic models, e.g. the super-Burnett equations [34],
beginning at a moderate speed, vph/c0 = 2.34 at ω = 0, before increasing
steadily with increasing ω. The α⋆ = 1.2 results are, however, unusual: the
phase velocity at ω = 0, i.e. vph/c0 = 3.99, is high in comparison to other
hydrodynamic models [34]. The phase velocity also decreases initially with
increasing ω, before passing through a minimum and increasing thereafter.
The high initial phase velocity seems anomalous, and rises to extraordinary
levels for higher α⋆, e.g. if α⋆ = 1.5, vph/c0 = 190.1 at ω = 0. The initial
decrease in phase velocity with increasing ω may allow low frequency waves
upstream of the shock to overtake slower, higher frequency waves within the
shock, creating counter-dispersion at the upstream end of the shock. The initial
decrease in phase velocity disappears only when α⋆ falls below
1.11, a level
quite close to that at which we ﬁnd the unphysical overshoot disappears.

∼

To summarise, our results show unphysical behaviour for the Brenner-Navier-
Stokes equations when α⋆ = 1.5. A spatial stability test conﬁrms the equations
are unstable to temporal disturbances when α⋆ & 1.45. Plots of phase velocity
raise further questions about the physical nature of the solutions when α⋆ &
α and
1.11. Taken together, this casts doubt both on Brenner’s proposed αv ≡
Dm. The overshoot in Mach number
on the apparently natural choice of αv ≡
disappears when α⋆ = 1.0, i.e. αv ≡
ν. We therefore adopt this model for αv
in the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations for the remainder of this paper.

7 Results and comparison with experiment

7.1 Shock proﬁles

We prefer, where possible, to compare results with actual experiments rather
than DSMC simulations, since the latter requires certain assumptions relating
to the form of the intermolecular force law. We therefore ﬁrst make comparison

15

with actual measured data for the variation of density through the shock layer
[7,32,9].

Figure 7 shows the normalised variation of density and temperature, ρ⋆ and
T ⋆ respectively, through an argon gas shock of Mach 2.84 calculated using
the Navier-Stokes and Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations with s = 0.72. The
experimental density proﬁle [32] is also shown. It is clear that the shock layer
predicted by the conventional Navier-Stokes equations is too thin, whereas
the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations produce good agreement with the exper-
imental data. The main region of disparity is upstream of the shock layer (left
hand side in the ﬁgure) where the experimental data trails out and is ﬂatter
than the prediction.

Similarly, ﬁg. 8 shows the predicted proﬁles for a Mach 8.0 shock compared
with experimental density data [7]. Again, the Navier-Stokes equations pro-
duce a shock proﬁle which is too thin when compared with experiment. How-
ever, the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations produce excellent agreement in the
central and downstream shock regions (ρ⋆ > 0.2), only in the upstream region
is the predicted proﬁle sharper than the experimental data shows — just as
in the Mach 2.84 case.

Figure 9 shows results for a Mach 9.0 shock [9]. In this case our observations
are very similar to those we make about the Mach 8.0 shock proﬁle, above;
this ﬁgure is included here for completeness.

7.2 Inverse density thickness

Apart from direct comparison of calculated and experimental shock proﬁles,
there are other shock parameters for which experimental and/or independent
numerical data is available. The principal parameter is the non-dimensional
shock inverse density thickness, deﬁned as:

L−1

ρ =

λM 1
ρ2 −

|max.
ρ
ρ1 |∇

(25)

In the absence of an a priori characteristic length scale in an unconﬁned ﬂow,
the deﬁnition of Kn requires a characteristic dimension of a ﬂow structure, in
this case the actual thickness of the shock layer itself. Therefore L−1
ρ has the
interesting feature that it represents Kn for the shock structure case 2 .

Alsmeyer [9] reported the most comprehensive collection of experimental shock

2 While this identiﬁcation then indicates, as we see below, that shocks generally
have such a high overall Kn that any hydrodynamic model should fail, we can still
assess extended hydrodynamic equations for their usefulness as engineering models.

16

∼

data, comprising previously-published work as well as his own new results.
Figure 10 shows L−1
for argon shocks up to Mach 11, with experimental data
ρ
collated from a number of sources [7,9,32]. The Navier-Stokes equations, with
s = 0.72, predict shocks of approximately half the measured thicknesses over
the entire Mach number range. As L−1
indicates Kn, this poor agreement is
ρ
0.2 – 0.25 over most of this Mach
expected because we can see that Kn
number range, so the Navier-Stokes equations are beyond their eﬀective range
of application. However, the results from the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations
closely match experiment, with moderate sensitivity to the choice of viscosity-
temperature exponent: using 0.72 (the control value) and 0.76 (our best-ﬁt
value for temperatures equivalent to shocks up to Mach 12.5), the results fall
within the limits of experimental scatter; using s = 0.68, the results stray
slightly outside the scatter of experimental data just before they reach the
exponent’s limit of applicability at Mach 4.3. With the results for 0.72 at the
higher end of the experimental scatter, and results for 0.76 at the lower end,
we estimate that an exponent of s
0.74 would produce the best agreement
with the experimental results.

≈

7.3 Density asymmetry quotient

Agreement of predicted and experimental shock inverse density thicknesses is
not the only measure of the success of a new model. As L−1
ρ depends on the
density gradient at the proﬁle midpoint alone, it does not express anything
about the overall shape of the proﬁle. If L−1
is used as the sole parameter to
ρ
describe the shock it could be concluded that the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equa-
tions tested here, and many other models previously published, have excellent
predictive capability. However, the shock proﬁles in ﬁgs. 7 and 8 show there
are diﬀerences between simulation and experiment, in particular relating to
the ﬂatter region upstream of the proﬁle that is observed experimentally.

Therefore, a second parameter which should be used to describe the shock
proﬁle, and for which experimental data is available, is the density asymmetry
quotient Qρ. This is a measure of how skewed the shock density proﬁle is
relative to its midpoint. It is deﬁned for a 1-dimensional proﬁle of normalised
density, ρ⋆, centred at ρ⋆ = 0.5 on x = 0, as

0
−∞ ρ⋆(x) dx

.

ρ⋆(x)] dx

Qρ =

∞
0 [1
R
R

−
A symmetric shock would consequently have Qρ = 1, but real shock waves
are not completely symmetrical about their midpoint. First, their ‘bulk’ form
is generally skewed somewhat towards the downstream. Then, the aforemen-
tioned ﬂattened, diﬀusive region, that extends upstream of the shock proﬁle,
tends to increase Qρ. Figure 11 shows experimental data compiled by Alsmeyer

(26)

17

[9] in which Qρ increases fairly linearly from
unity at around Mach 2.3, to
responds to Qρ ≈
increase in Qρ, of up to 0.25 at Mach 9.

0.9 at around Mach 1.5, through
1.15 at Mach 9. The bulk form therefore cor-
0.9 and the upstream ﬂattened region accounts for a further

∼

∼

Results from the Navier-Stokes equations do not agree well with experimental
data: the bulk form is skewed towards the upstream side so that Qρ > 1
even at the lowest Mach numbers and the skewness further increases with
Mach number (apparently by sharpening of the proﬁle downstream rather
1.03
than ﬂattening upstream) so that by Mach 4, Qρ ≈
from experiment.

1.4, compared to

∼

We ﬁnd the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations predict the bulk form of the
0.9 at low Mach numbers. As discussed
proﬁle very well, predicting Qρ ≈
in section 7.1, it does not capture the ﬂattened region upstream and so the
departure from experimental data increases with Mach number.

7.4 Temperature-density separation

The ﬁnal shock structure parameter is the temperature-density separation,
δT ρ, measured between the midpoints of the respective normalised proﬁles. In
a shock, the density rises from its upstream value to its downstream value
behind the temperature, due to the ﬁnite relaxation times for momentum and
energy transport; a good hydrodynamic model should resolve this spatial lag
accurately. However, experimental data for this parameter is scarce due to the
diﬃculty in measuring temperature proﬁles, so independent DSMC data [11]
is usually taken for comparison.

Figure 12 shows the temperature and density proﬁles for a Mach 11 shock
calculated using DSMC [11], and the Navier-Stokes and the Brenner-Navier-
Stokes models. As in our earlier comparisons in section 7.1, the Brenner-
Navier-Stokes equations produce proﬁles that are much sharper in the up-
stream region of the shock than those from DSMC results.

Figure 13 compares DSMC data for δT ρ over a range of shock Mach numbers
with results from our simulations. The DSMC data show an increase in δT ρ
2.9λM 1 at Mach 8. The Navier-Stokes and
from
Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations increasingly under-predict δT ρ with increas-
ing Mach number, although the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations generally
perform a little better over the Mach number range.

1.5λM 1 at Mach 1.5 to

∼

∼

18

7.5 Very strong shocks

The inverse density thickness of extremely strong shocks is a useful additional
comparison for any proposed hydrodynamic model. Narasimha and Das [10]
examined the solution of the Boltzmann equation for an inﬁnitely strong shock
(a more recent treatment is in [15]), modelling the upstream ﬂow as a molec-
) = n1δ(u1),
ular beam with a distribution function of the form f (x =
where δ is the Kronecker delta function. The shock layer may then be treated
as a device for converting this beam function into a downstream Maxwellian
distribution function. The distribution function in the shock layer can be ex-
pressed as a linear combination of the two extremal distribution functions, a
method similar to the bimodal method of [4].

−∞

Using an expansion parameter that measures the departure of the distribution
function in the shock wave from that outlined in the previous paragraph, an
inﬁnite series of ordinary diﬀerential equations is obtained for the shock thick-
ness. This series rapidly converges, and a solution of the ﬁrst seven equations
of the set yields a predicted shock thickness of 6.7λM 2 (which is written in
terms of the downstream Maxwellian mean free path version of eq. 2). When
this is converted into the L−1
ρ of eq. (25), the inverse density thickness for a
shock with a downstream λM 2 equivalent to that for a shock of Mach 100 is
predicted to be 0.076.

Our calculations for shocks of Mach 100 give L−1
ρ = 0.156 for the Navier-
Stokes equations with s = 0.72. The results with the Brenner-Navier-Stokes
equations are L−1
ρ = 0.091 for s = 0.72, and L−1
ρ = 0.066 for s = 0.76. These
values for L−1
straddle the solution from the molecular beam analysis. Further
ρ
simulations with successive adjustments to s gave a precise match in L−1
for
ρ
s = 0.742, which is in agreement with the exponent estimated in section 7.2
to produce the best agreement with experiment over the range Mach 1–11.

8 Discussion and conclusions

The Navier-Stokes equations are robust and accurate over a wide range of Kn
— surprisingly so, given some of the relatively narrow axioms on which they
depend (i.e. the continuum-ﬂuid and local-equilibrium requirements). Such a
good ﬂuids engineering model is diﬃcult to relinquish, even when ﬂow systems
well beyond its range of applicability are considered [35]. However, it is clear
from the results in section 7 that the Navier-Stokes equations fail in nearly
every respect in predicting correct shock structures above about Mach 2 (or,
equivalently, for intermediate-Kn ﬂows).

19

While it is important not to draw strong conclusions based on just one test
case, our results are generally encouraging for the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equa-
tions. This modiﬁed model is signiﬁcantly better at reproducing the trends in
the experimental and DSMC data, and in the case of the inverse density thick-
ness delivers an excellent match. It is only the more detailed features of the
shock proﬁle that Brenner’s model seems unable to reproduce.

First, it does not predict the ﬂattened upstream region, as discussed in sec-
tion 7.3. In this regard, a major advantage of DSMC as a technique for simulat-
ing intermediate-Kn ﬂows in general is its ability to produce non-Maxwellian
velocity distributions, that may also diﬀer in directions parallel and perpen-
dicular to the ﬂow. It is not clear that hydrodynamic models will be able
to properly incorporate this physics, and certainly the problems the Brenner-
Navier-Stokes equations have in capturing the upstream shock region properly
is related to the fact that in this region the velocity distribution function is a
non-Maxwellian combination of fast, cold upstream molecules and slower, hot
molecules that have diﬀused from downstream regions.

The second feature is also related to this distribution function problem: bi-
modal methods (see, e.g., [15]) for a hard-sphere gas predict a downstream
temperature overshoot of around 1%, which is conﬁrmed by careful DSMC
simulations. There are no downstream overshoots predicted in any of the
Brenner-Navier-Stokes shock simulations.

While some of these features can be obtained using certain extended hydro-
dynamic models that are formally O(Kn2) (see, e.g., [11,13]), this is at a
cost: there are known problems of physical stability, and the numerical im-
plementation is diﬃcult due to the large number of additional non-linear and
high order derivatives. The Brenner modiﬁcation does not suﬀer so much from
these problems, having only a single additional term in each of the momentum
and energy conservation equations. That the adoption of these terms provides
a substantial improvement in predicted results raises the question of whether
this model can compensate, in part at least, for increased non-local-equilibrium
in the gas, or whether this agreement is coincidental.

Brenner proposed his modiﬁcations partly to understand how some eﬀects that
are traditionally thought of as becoming important only in a ﬂow approach-
ing the intermediate-Kn range, e.g. slip at solid bounding surfaces, can be
encompassed in a model which still retains its essential O(Kn) character [1,2].
He shows that the form (if not the exact coeﬃcients, except for a particular
molecular model) of two particular terms that appear in the Burnett consti-
tutive model for T are in fact encompassed by the additional term in ρ in his
modiﬁed Newtonian T of eqn. (14). While all the stress terms in the Burnett
equations are formally O(Kn2), under some circumstances these two terms can
be of similar magnitude to those of O(Kn) i.e. the same order of accuracy as

20

the Navier-Stokes equations. If the issue of the correct model for the volume
diﬀusivity, αv, can be resolved then the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations may
provide a simple alternative to the family of extended hydrodynamic models
that includes those of Burnett, Grad, etc., producing reasonably accurate so-
lutions of intermediate-Kn ﬂows at a modest computational cost. While it is
known that the classical Burnett equations do not satisfy the second law of
thermodynamics, truncated or extended forms of the equations can be con-
structed that do [11,12,13]. The fact that the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations
are less prone to both numerical instability and unphysical solution may indi-
cate that thermodynamic consistency is less of a problem with these equations
than with more complex extended hydrodynamics models.

We recognise that it is not reasonable to rely on one benchmark case to de-
cide the value of the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations, or any other extended
hydrodynamic model (or its associated boundary conditions). Equation (1)
indicates there are three distinct categories of near-equilibrium ﬂows:

A. Ma = O(1), Re
B. Ma
C. Ma

→
→
ﬂows.

→ ∞

→ ∞

, typical of super- and hypersonic ﬂows;

0, Re = O(1), typical of ﬂows in micro- or nano-systems;
0, Re

, typical of incompressible turbulent boundary layer

As Kn vanishes more quickly for ﬂows in category C than in categories A and
B, departures from local equilibrium in category C ﬂows are not as signiﬁcant
as in categories A and B ﬂows. This paper has addressed a category A ﬂow
in which the boundary conditions are not in doubt, but benchmark cases
for models of intermediate-Kn ﬂows generally require additional boundary
conditions, usually at solid surfaces, the speciﬁcation of which is one of the
outstanding problems in hydrodynamic approaches to rareﬁed gas dynamics.
Setting aside the boundary condition problem, however, we can propose a
number of benchmark cases in categories A and B that any new hydrodynamic
model for rareﬁed ﬂows should be tested against:

•

•

•

•

•
•

∞

ρ );

the shock structure problem, as outlined in this paper (including compar-
isons of Qρ, δT ρ and the thickness of Ma =
shocks, in addition to the
usual comparison with L−1
the nonlinearity of the thermal and momentum Knudsen layers (the region
O(λ) close to solid surfaces);
the ‘Knudsen paradox’ in Poiseuille ﬂow, i.e. the minimum in the mass ﬂow
rate at around Kn
drag coeﬃcients and heat transfer in: ﬂow around a sphere, ﬂow around a
cylinder and Couette ﬂow;
variation of skin friction on cones in supersonic ﬂow;
base pressures on cone-cylinder conﬁgurations in supersonic ﬂow as the
Knudsen layer extends far into the wake region;

1, as well as bimodality in the temperature proﬁle;

≈

21

thermophoresis, i.e. the force on particles suspended in a rareﬁed gas be-
tween two parallel plates of diﬀerent temperature;
dispersion and absorption of ultrasonic sound waves.

•

•

This list is neither exclusive nor comprehensive; we are sure that other good
benchmark cases could be added to it. The caveat is that in most cases ex-
perimental data is extremely sparse and unreliable, and unfortunately much
reliance still needs to be placed on comparison with independent DSMC or
other molecular dynamics simulations as ‘experimental analogues’.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Steve Daley of Dstl Farnborough (UK), Howard Bren-
ner of MIT (USA), Henry Weller of OpenCFD Ltd. (UK), Duncan Lockerby of
Warwick University (UK), and Kokou Dadzie of the University of Strathclyde
(UK) for useful discussions. We also thank the referees of this paper for their
very helpful comments. This work is funded in the UK by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council under grant GR/T05028/01, and through
a Philip Leverhulme Prize for JMR from the Leverhulme Trust.

References

[1] H. Brenner, Kinematics of volume transport, Physica A 349 (2005) 11.

[2] H. Brenner, Navier-Stokes revisited, Physica A 349 (2005) 60.

[3] S. A. Schaaf, P. L. Chambr´e, Flow of rareﬁed gases, Princeton University Press,

USA, 1961.

[4] C. Muckenfuss, Some aspects of shock structure according to the bimodal model,

Physics of Fluids 5 (1962) 1325.

[5] G. A. Bird, Aspects of the structure of strong shock waves, Physics of Fluids

13 (1970) 1172.

[6] B. T. Barcelo, Electron beam measurements of the shock wave structure: Part 1,
Determination of the interaction potential of the noble gases from shock wave
structure experiments, Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology, USA
(1971).

[7] E. A. Steinhilper, Electron beam measurements of the shock wave structure:
intermolecular potentials from shock structure

Part 1, The inference of
experiments, Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology, USA (1972).

22

[8] B. Sturtevant, E. A. Steinhilper, Intermolecular potentials from shock structure,
in: 8th International Symposium on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics, 1986, p. 159.

[9] H. Alsmeyer, Density proﬁles in argon and nitrogen shock waves measured by
the absorption of an electron beam, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 74 (1976) 497.

[10] R. Narasimha, P. Das, The inﬁnitely strong shock, in: V. Boﬃ, C. Cercignani
(Eds.), 15th International Symposium on Rareﬁed Gas Dynamics, B. G.
Teubner, Stuttgart, Germany, 1986, pp. 293–307.

[11] F. E. Lumpkin, D. R. Chapman, Accuracy of the Burnett equations for

hypersonic real gas ﬂows, AIAA Paper 91-0771 (1991).

[12] X. Zhong, R. W. MacCormack, D. R. Chapman, Stabilisation of the Burnett
equations and application to high-altitude hypersonic ﬂows, AIAA Paper 91-
0770 (1991).

[13] J. M. Reese, On the structure of shock waves in monatomic rareﬁed gases, Ph.D.

thesis, Oxford University, UK (1993).

[14] C. D. Levermore, W. J. Morokoﬀ, The Gaussian moment closure for gas

dynamics, SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics 59 (1998) 72.

[15] C. Cercignani, A. Frezzotti, P. Grosﬁls, The structure of an inﬁnitely strong

shock wave, Physics of Fluids 11 (1999) 2757.

[16] R. S. Myong, A computational method for Eu’s generalized hydrodynamic
equations of rareﬁed and microscale gas, Journal of Computational Physics
168 (2001) 47.

[17] M. N. Macrossan, C. R. Lilley, Viscosity of argon at temperatures > 2000 K

from measured shock thickness, Physics of Fluids 15 (2003) 3452.

[18] K. Xu, L. Tang, Nonequilibrium Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook model for nitrogen

shock structure, Journal of Computational Physics 16 (2004) 3824.

[19] M. Torrilhon, H. Struchtrup, Regularized 13–moment equations: shock structure
calculations and comparison to Burnett models, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 513
(2004) 171.

[20] H. Struchtrup, Macroscopic transport equations for rareﬁed gas ﬂows, Springer,

Heidelberg, Germany, 2005.

[21] G. C. Maitland, E. B. Smith, Critical reassessment of viscosities of 11 common

gases, Journal of Chemical Engineering Data 17 (1972) 150.

[22] I. Amdur, E. A. Mason, Properties of gases at very high temperatures, Physics

of Fluids 1 (1958) 370.

[23] D. P. Aeschliman, A. B. Cambel, Properties of gases at very high temperatures,

Physics of Fluids 13 (1970) 2466.

[24] S. Chapman, T. G. Cowling, The mathematical theory of non-uniform gases,

3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1970.

23

[25] H. C. ¨Ottinger, Beyond equilibrium thermodynamics, John Wiley and Sons,

Hoboken, USA, 2005.

[26] A. Bardow, H. C. ¨Ottinger, Consequences of the Brenner modiﬁcation to the
Navier-Stokes equations for dynamic light scattering, preprint submitted to
Elsevier Science.

[27] http://www.openfoam.org.

[28] R. I. Issa, Solution of the implicitly discretised ﬂuid ﬂow equations by operator-

splitting, Journal of Computational Physics 62 (1986) 40–65.

[29] C. M. Rhie, W. L. Chow, A numerical study of the turbulent ﬂow past an
isolated airfoil with trailing edge separation, AIAA-82-0998, AIAA/ASME 3rd
Joint Thermophysics, Fluids, Plasma and Heat Transfer Conference, St. Louis,
Missouri (1982).

[30] B. van Leer, Towards the ultimate conservative diﬀerence scheme: V, A second-
order sequel to Godunov’s method, Journal of Computational Physics 32 (1979)
101–136.

[31] C. Hirsch, Numerical computation of internal and external ﬂows, Vol. 2, John

Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK, 1990.

[32] P. Torecki, Z. Walenta, Private communication, Polish Academy of Sciences,

Warsaw, Poland (1993).

[33] E. H. Kennard, Kinetic theory of gases, McGraw-Hill, New York, USA, 1938.

[34] H. Struchtrup, M. Torrilhon, Regularization of Grad’s 13 moment equations:

Derivation and linear analysis, Physics of Fluids 15 (2003) 2668.

[35] H. Herwig, O. Hausner, Critical view on “new results in micro-ﬂuid mechanics”:
an example, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 935.

24

Tables

Argon

Helium

Xenon

Applicable range

s

ν

s

ν

s

ν

up to Mach 4.3

0.68

12.0

0.71

10.7

0.77

8.5

Mach 4.4–12.5

0.76

8.8

0.83

7.2

0.72

10.3

Table 1
Collated experimental values of s and ν for argon, helium and xenon gases.

25

Argon, s = 0.68
Helium, s = 0.71
Xenon, s = 0.77

Figures

100

]
s

a
P

6
−
0
1
[

µ

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

c
i
m
a
n
y
D

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

400

800

1200

1600

2000

Temperature, T [K]

Fig. 1. Experimental viscosity versus temperature data for intermediate tempera-
tures for argon, helium and xenon, ﬁtted to a power-law: µ

T s.

∝

26

Argon, s = 0.76
Helium, s = 0.83
Xenon, s = 0.72

1000

100

]
s

a
P

6
−
0
1
[

µ

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

c
i
m
a
n
y
D

10

100

r
e
b
m
u
n

h
c
a
M

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1000

10000

Temperature, T [K]

Fig. 2. Experimental viscosity versus temperature data for high temperatures for
argon, helium and xenon, ﬁtted to a power-law: µ

T s.

∝

Solution asymptote as
cell size
→

0

0.008λ

Decreasing cell size

0.083λ

Cell sizes: 0.083λ, 0.056λ, 0.033λ, 0.021λ, 0.014λ, 0.008λ

-2

-1
0
1
Distance through shock [λM 1]

2

Fig. 3. Mach number proﬁles for decreasing cell sizes, assuming αv ≡

α.

27

-10

-5

0
Frequency dispersion, ωr

5

10

Fig. 4. Temporal stability of Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations (arrows indicate di-
rection of increasing k; grey shaded area indicates region of instability).

(α⋆ = 1.0)
ν
α (α⋆ = 1.5)

αv ≡
αv ≡

(α⋆ = 1.0)
ν
α (α⋆ = 1.5)

αv ≡
αv ≡

0.60

0.56
-

2

-0.004

0

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

i

ω

,

n
o
i
t
a
u
n
e
t
t
a

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

i

k

,
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
a
u
n
e
t
t
A

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-3

-2

2

3

-1

0
Wave number, kr

1

Fig. 5. Spatial stability of Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations (arrows indicate direc-
tion of increasing ω; grey shaded areas indicate regions of instability).

28

α⋆ = 1.0
α⋆ = 1.2

mode 3

mode 1

mode 2

0

1

2

3

Frequency ω

Fig. 6. Normalised phase velocity for the Brenner-Navier-Stokes equations.

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
Experiment

T ⋆

ρ⋆

0
c
/
h
p
v

,
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

e
s
a
h
p

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

⋆
T

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

,
⋆
ρ

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-6

-5

-4

-1

-2

-3
0
3
Distance through shock [λM 1]

2

1

4

5

6

Fig. 7. Simulated and experimental proﬁles of a Mach 2.84 stationary shock;
s = 0.72.

29

-6

-5

-4

-1

-2

3
0
-3
Distance through shock [λM 1]

2

1

4

5

6

Fig. 8. Simulated and experimental proﬁles of a Mach 8.0 stationary shock; s = 0.72.

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
Experiment
T ⋆

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
Experiment
T ⋆

ρ⋆

ρ⋆

⋆
T

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

,
⋆
ρ

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

⋆
T

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

,
⋆
ρ

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-6

-5

-4

-1

-2

-3
0
3
Distance through shock [λM 1]

2

1

4

5

6

Fig. 9. Simulated and experimental proﬁles of a Mach 9.0 stationary shock; s = 0.72.

30

1
−
ρ
L

,
s
s
e
n
k
c
i
h
t

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

e
s
r
e
v
n
I

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

ρ

Q

,
t
n
e
i
t
o
u
q

y
r
t
e
m
m
y
s
A

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

s =
0.68

0.72
0.76

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
Experiment

Mach number

Fig. 10. Simulated and experimental inverse density thickness (L−1
shock Mach number; for various values of the exponent s.

ρ ) data, versus

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
Experiment

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mach number

Fig. 11. Simulated and experimental asymmetry quotient (Qρ) data, versus shock
Mach number; s = 0.72.

31

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
DSMC

T ⋆

ρ⋆

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

⋆
T

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

,
⋆
ρ

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

]
1
M
λ

[

ρ
T
δ

,
n
o
i
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

y
t
i
s
n
e
d
-
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

-10

-8

-4

-6
Distance through shock [λM 1]

-2

0

2

4

Fig. 12. Simulated and DSMC proﬁles of a Mach 11 stationary shock; s = 0.72.

Brenner-Navier-Stokes
Navier-Stokes
DSMC

1.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mach number

Fig. 13. Simulated and independent DSMC temperature-density separation (δT ρ)
data, versus Mach number; s = 0.72.

32

