6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pore scale mixing and macroscopic solute dispersion regimes in polymer ﬂows inside
2D model networks.

Maria Veronica D’Angelo1,2,∗ Harold Auradou1,† Catherine Allain1, and Jean-Pierre Hulin1‡
1Laboratoire Fluides, Automatique et Syst`emes Thermiques,
UMR 7608, Universit´es Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6 et Paris-Sud,
Bˆatiment 502, Campus Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France
2Grupo de Medios Porosos, Facultad de Ingenieria,
Paseo Colon 850, 1063, Buenos Aires, Argentina
(Dated: January 13, 2014)

A change of solute dispersion regime with the ﬂow velocity has been studied both at the macro-
scopic and pore scales in a transparent array of capillary channels using an optical technique allowing
for simultaneous local and global concentration mappings. Two solutions of diﬀerent polymer con-
centrations (500 and 1000 ppm) have been used at diﬀerent P´eclet numbers. At the macroscopic
for P e ≤ 10, the dispersivity ld is
scale, the displacement front displays a diﬀusive spreading:
constant with P e and increases with the polymer concentration; for P e > 10, ld increases as P e1.35
and is similar for the two concentrations. At the local scale, a time lag between the saturations of
channels parallel and perpendicular to the mean ﬂow has been observed and studied as a function
of the ﬂow rate. These local measurements suggest that the change of dispersion regime is related
to variations of the degree of mixing at the junctions. For P e ≤ 10, complete mixing leads to
pure geometrical dispersion enhanced for shear thinning ﬂuids; for P e > 10 weaker mixing results
in higher correlation lengths along ﬂow paths parallel to the mean ﬂow and in a combination of
geometrical and Taylor dispersion.

PACS numbers: 47.55.Mh, 7.25.Jn, 05.60+w

I.

INTRODUCTION

The problem of solute transport in porous media is
relevant to many environmental, water supply and in-
dustrial processes [1, 2]. In addition, tracer dispersion is
a useful tool to analyse porous media heterogeneities [3].
Solute dispersion is often measured by monitoring solute
concentration variations at the outlet of the sample fol-
lowing a pulse or step-like injection at the inlet: Under-
standing fully the dispersion mechanisms requires how-
ever informations on the local concentration distribution
and on local mixing at the pore scale. These goals can be
reached by using NMR-Imaging, CAT-Scan or acoustical
techniques [4] : however, such techniques are either costly
or have a limited resolution. In addition, they often put
strong constraints on the characteristics of the ﬂuid pairs.
We have chosen instead in the present work to use a 2D
transparent square network of ducts of random widths
allowing for easy visualizations of mixing and transport
processes at the local scale. Similar systems were previ-
ously used successfully to investigate two phase ﬂows [5]
and miscible displacements of Newtonian ﬂuids [6].
The key feature of the present experiments is to com-
bine macroscopic and local scale measurements to esti-
mate the inﬂuence of pore scale processes on dispersion.
For this purpose, dye is used as a solute and high res-
olution maps of the relative concentration distribution

are obtained through calibrated light absorption mea-
surements. This allows one to determine quantitatively
the global dispersion coeﬃcient D and the dispersivity
ld while measuring simultaneously the time lag between
the invasion of channels parallel and transverse to the
mean ﬂow. Further informations are also obtained from
the complex geometry of an isoconcentration line.
This approach have allowed us to observe a change of
dispersion regime for a P´eclet number of the order of 10
while the local measurements suggest interpretations in
terms of variations of the degree of mixing at the junc-
tions. This conﬁrms previous suggestions [7, 8] on the
inﬂuence of mixing at the pore scale on macroscopic dis-
persion.
Another feature of our experiments is the use of shear
thinning polymer solutions of the type encountered in
many industrial processes in petroleum, chemical and
civil engineering [9]. In addition to these practical appli-
cations, previous measurements at the laboratory scale
on glass bead packings have shown [10, 11] a signiﬁcant
enhancement of tracer dispersion compared to the New-
tonian case. This enhancement depends on the polymer
concentration and will represent a useful additional input
for our interpretations.

II. DISPERSION MECHANISMS IN 3D
POROUS MEDIA AND 2D NETWORKS

∗Electronic address: vdangelo@ﬁ.uba.ar
†Electronic address: auradou@fast.u-psud.fr
‡Electronic address: hulin@fast.u-psud.fr

In homogeneous 3D porous media, the macroscopic
concentration C of a tracer (i.e. averaged over a rep-
resentative elementary volume) satisﬁes the convection-

diﬀusion equation :

∂C(x, t)
∂t

= U

∂C(x, t)
∂x

+ D

∂2C(x, t)
∂x2

(1)

where D is the longitudinal dispersion coeﬃcient, U the
mean velocity of the ﬂuid (parallel to x) and C is as-
sumed to be constant in a section of the sample normal
to U. In the following, equation (1) is shown to be also
valid for the transparent model used in the present work.
The value of D is determined by two main physical mech-
anisms : molecular diﬀusion and advection by the com-
plex velocity ﬁeld inside the medium (the local ﬂow veloc-
ity varies both inside individual ﬂow channels and from
one channel to another). The relative order of magni-
tude of these two eﬀects is characterized by the P´eclet
number: P e = U a/2 Dm (Dm is the molecular diﬀusion
coeﬃcient and a a characteristic length of the medium,
here the average channel width).
Various dispersion regimes are observed in usual porous
media [1]. At very low P´eclet numbers (P e < 1), molec-
ular diﬀusion is dominant and smoothes out local con-
centration variations.
At higher P e values, the distribution of the channel
widths induces short range variations of the magnitude
and the direction of the local velocity. One can then
consider that tracer particles experience a random walk
inside the pore volume with a velocity varying both in
magnitude and direction relative to the mean ﬂow veloc-
ity U. The typical length l of the channels represents
the length of the steps and their characteristic duration
τ is τ ≈ l/U . A classical feature of random walks is that
the corresponding diﬀusion coeﬃcient (here equal to D)
satisﬁes D ∝ l2/τ = U l. The proportionality constant
depends both on the disorder of the medium and on the
rheology of the ﬂuid. In this so-called geometrical disper-
sion, the coeﬃcient D should then be proportional to U .
The 2D networks of interest in the present work have
several speciﬁc features and D should be very much in-
ﬂuenced by the redistribution of the incoming tracer be-
tween the channels leaving a junction. This redistribu-
tion strongly depends on the local structure of the ﬂow
ﬁeld and on the P´eclet number [12, 13]. At low P e val-
ues, the transit time through a junction is large enough
for tracer to cross streamlines by molecular diﬀusion and
one may assume a perfect mixing.
In the other limit
P e >> 1, molecular diﬀusion is negligible: the path of
the tracer particles coincides with the ﬂow lines and is
determined by the ﬂow ﬁeld in the junctions and by the
location of the particles in the ﬂow section.
In the case of 2D networks with small variations of the
channel apertures, the ﬂow ﬁeld is close to that in a pe-
riodic square channel with a mean ﬂow parallel to one
of the axis: the major part of the ﬂow is localized in
longitudinal channels parallel to the axis where the ve-
locity is high while that in transverse channels is small.
Tracer particles remain then inside sequences of chan-
nels parallel to the mean ﬂow for a long distance without
moving sideways. Taylor-like dispersion [14, 15] similar

2

to that encountered in capillary tubes, between parallel
plates or inside periodic structures may then develop: it
corresponds to a balance between (a) spreading due to
velocity gradients between the centers of the ﬂow chan-
nels and their walls and (b) molecular diﬀusion across
the ﬂow lines. The increased dispersion in 2D periodic
networks when ﬂow is parallel to one of the axis [7] may
for instance result from a combination of geometrical and
Taylor dispersion.
Another issue of the present work is the inﬂuence of the
shear-thinning properties of the ﬂuids. They may inﬂu-
ence the dispersion process in diﬀerent ways: on the one
hand, when the viscosity µ decreases with the shear rate
˙γ, the velocity proﬁle in individual channels becomes ﬂat
in the center of the channel. In simple geometries like
capillary tubes, the corresponding Taylor dispersion co-
eﬃcient D is then lower than for a Newtonian ﬂuid al-
though one has still D ∝ P e2 [16]. On the other hand,
numerical investigations suggest that the ﬂow of shear
thinning ﬂuids is localized in a smaller number of ﬂow
paths than for Newtonian ﬂuids [17, 18]. As a result,
geometrical dispersion reﬂecting the distribution of the
local velocities should increase as is indeed observed ex-
perimentally [10, 11]. A key point is here the inﬂuence of
the ﬂuid rheology on tracer mixing at the intersections
between channels: to our knowledge, no previous experi-
mental or numerical work has dealt with this issue which
is an important point.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP AND
PROCEDURE

A. Experimental models and injection set-up

The model porous medium is a two dimensional square
network of channels of random aperture: these models
have been realized by casting a transparent resin on a
photographically etched mold as described in ref. [5]. The
model contains a square network of 140 × 140 channels
with an individual length equal to l = 0.67 mm and a
depth of 0.5 mm; the width follows a discrete, log-normal
distribution with 7 values between 0.1 and 0.6 mm (the
average width is ¯a = 0.33 and its standard deviation
σ(a) = 0.11 mm). The mesh size of the network is
equal to 1 mm. The overall size of the model is 150 ×
140 mm and the two facing lateral sides are sealed. On
the two others, the channels are directly connected to the
outside. The total pore volume is close to 6.09×103 mm3.
Following the deﬁnition of Bruderer et al [19], the degree
of heterogeneity of the network can be caracterized by
the normalized standard deviation σ(a)/¯a. In the present
work : σ(a)/¯a ≃ 0.33.

3

In Eq.(2),

that η∞ = 10−3 Pa.s (the value for the solvent i.e. wa-
ter).
˙γ0 corresponds to a crossover between
˙γ < ˙γ0, the viscosity
two regimes. On the one hand,
η tends towards η0, and the ﬂuid displays a Newtonian
behavior (”Newtonian plateau” regime). On the other
hand, for ˙γ ≫ ˙γ0, the eﬀective viscosity decreases with
the shear rate following the power law η ∝ ˙γ(n−1) (n = 1
for a Newtonian ﬂuid.) It should ﬁnally be noted that
the high eﬀective viscosity of these solutions at low shear
rates avoids the appearance of buoyancy induced insta-
bilities at low shear rates and helps stabilize the ﬂuid
displacement.

Polymer Conc.
ppm

n

˙γ0
s−1

η0
mP a.s

FIG. 1: Experimental setup for miscible displacement mea-
surements in 2D micromodels.

500
1000

0.38 ± 0.04 0.077 ± 0.018 410 ± 33
0.26 ± 0.02 0.026 ± 0.004 4500 ± 340

B. Fluid preparation and characterization

TABLE I: Rheological parameters of scleroglucan solutions
used in the ﬂow experiments.

The ﬂuids used in the experiments are shear thinning
water-polymer solutions. The shear thinning ﬂuids are
solutions of 500 to 1000 ppm of high molecular weight
scleroglucan in high purity water (Millipore - Milli-Q
grade). Scleroglucan (Sanoﬁ Bioindustries, France) is a
polysaccharide with a semi rigid molecule (persistence
length ≃ 180 × 10−9 m); it has been selected because
it is electrically neutral and its characteristics are there-
fore independent of the ion (and dye) concentration. All
solutions are protected from bacterial contamination by
adding 0.2 g/l of N aN3.
In all experiments, the in-
jected and displaced ﬂuids are identical except for a small
amount of Water Blue dye which is added to one of the
solutions at a concentration of 200 ppm by weight to al-
low for optical concentration measurements.
The molecular diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the dye is deter-
mined independently in pure water by means of Tay-
lor dispersion measurements performed separately in a
capillary tube (the measured value of Dm was close to
6.5 × 10−4 mm2.s−1.)
The rheological properties of the scleroglucan solutions
have been characterized using a Contraves LS30 Couette
rheometer with shear rates ˙γ ranging from 0.016 s−1 up
to 87 s−1. The rheological properties of the solutions have
been veriﬁed to be constant with time within experimen-
tal error (over a time lapse of 3 days) and identical for
dyed and transparent solutions with the same polymer
concentrations. The variation of the eﬀective viscosity η
with ˙γ was then adjusted by a Carreau function :

η =

1
(1 + ( ˙γ
˙γ0 )2)

1−n
2

(η0 − η∞) + η∞.

(2)

C. Fluid injection and ﬂow visualization

The model is placed vertically with its open sides hori-
zontal : the upper side is ﬁtted with a leak tight adapter
allowing one to suck ﬂuid upwards. The lower open side
is initially slightly dipped into a bath of one of the liq-
uids and is saturated with this ﬂuid by pumping it slowly
upwards. After switching oﬀ the pump, the bath can
be lowered until it does not touch any more the model
(Fig. 1). The bath is then completely emptied, reﬁlled
with the other ﬂuid and raised to its initial position. Fi-
nally, the ﬁrst ﬂuid is sucked upwards at the upper end
of the model by the syringe pump. This allows one to
obtain a front of the displacing ﬂuid which is initially
perfectly straight. The lower bath rests upon computer
controlled electronic scales for monitoring the amount of
ﬂuid which has entered the model. The ﬂow rates used
in the experiments correspond to mean front velocities
between 0.005 and 2.5 mm.s−1.
The model is illuminated from the back by an electronic
light panel and images are acquired by a 12 bits, high
stability, digital camera with a 1030 × 1300 pixels reso-
lution and then recorded by a computer. The pixel size
is 0.14 mm or 0.4 times the mean width of the chan-
nels: this allows one to discriminate between the vari-
ous regions of the pore space. Typically 100 images are
recorded for each experimental run at time intervals from
2.5 to 700 s.

The values of these diﬀerent rheological parameters for
the polymer solutions used in the present work are listed
in Table I; determining η∞ would have required values
of ˙γ outside the measurement range so that we assume

The images are then translated into maps of the rela-
tive concentration using the following procedure. First,
a calibration curve is obtained from images of the model

D.

Image analysis procedure

4

saturated with 7 solutions of increasing dye concentra-
tion C starting from zero up to the concentration used
in the experiments. The logarithm Ln(I(C)/Io) of the
transmissivity is then plotted as a function of C; I(C)
and Io are averages of the light intensity over the model
and correspond respectively to dye concentrations equal
to C and 0. Due to the non linear absorbance eﬀect [20],
a better ﬁt is obtained with a third order polynomial
variation of Ln(I(C)/Io) with C than with the linear
dependence corresponding to Lambert’s law. This cali-
bration is performed every time the locations of the light
source and of the models are signiﬁcantly changed.
For all experiments, reference images are recorded both
with the micromodel initially saturated with the dis-
placed ﬂuid and, at long times, when it is fully saturated
with the injected one. After the ﬂuid displacement has
been performed, the local concentrations are determined
pixel by pixel for each image by means of the calibra-
tion curve. This operation is performed only on pixels
belonging to channels; non ﬂowing domains are not con-
sidered. Finally, maps of the local relative concentration
of the two ﬂuids are obtained by normalizing the local
concentration between its values in the initial and ﬁnal
images.

FIG. 2: Relative concentration maps for experiments us-
ing water-scleroglucan solutions of respective concentrations
500 ppm (a,b) and 1000 ppm (c,d) for ﬂow rate values
Q = 0.075 ml/mn (b,d) and Q = 1.5 ml/mn (a,c). Grey
levels code used in the ﬁgure : darkest shade = pure dis-
placed ﬂuid, intermediate - pure displacing ﬂuid - lightest =
intermediate concentrations

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

B. Quantitative dispersion measurement procedure

A. Qualitative observations of miscible
displacements

Figure 2 compares displacement experiments realized
at a same ﬂow velocity for the two water-scleroglucan
solutions. For a given solution, narrow structures of the
front with a lateral extent of a few channel widths appear
when the velocity increases and reﬂect local high or low
velocity zones. For a same ﬂow rate, images obtained
with the two solutions are qualitatively similar: the size
parallel to the ﬂow of medium scale front structures (with
a width of the order of one tenth that of the model) is
however larger for the more concentrated solution both
at low and high velocities.
The stability of the displacement with respect to buoy-
ancy driven instabilities has also been veriﬁed by com-
paring experiments using the same pair of ﬂuids and ex-
changing the injected and the displaced ﬂuid [11]: no
quantitative diﬀerence was measured between the two
conﬁguraton and no ﬁngering instabilities appeared in
the unstable conﬁguration.
While ﬂuid displacement images provide informations on
the front geometry down to a fraction of the channel size,
we shall see next that they also allow to determine macro-
scopic parameters characterizing the process.

Quantitatively, the global displacement process is ana-
lyzed from the variations with time and distance parallel
to the ﬂow of a macroscopic concentration C(x, t): C
is the average over an interval ∆y perpendicular to the
ﬂow of the local relative concentration C for individual
pixels located inside the pore volume. The width ∆y is
large enough to average out local ﬂuctuations and small
enough avoid the inﬂuence of the side walls: C was found
to be independent of ∆y within experimental error when
these conditions are veriﬁed. Also, it will be seen below
that the results are hardly diﬀerent when ∆y corresponds
to only one channel.

Figure 3 displays a typical variation of C with time.
For step-like initial concentration variations correspond-
ing to our experiments, the solution of the convection-
dispersion equation (1) is:

C =

1 − erf

1
2





t − t
q4 D
U 2 t





(3)

As seen in Figure 3, a very good ﬁt of the experimental
data with this solution (continuous line) is obtained by
adjusting the two parameters of the equation, namely the
mean transit time t and the ratio D/U 2 (= ∆t2/2t where
∆t2 is the centered second moment)
Figure 4 displays the variation of the mean transit time

FIG. 3: Normalized concentration variation C(x, t) as a func-
tion of time for a displacement experiment using a 500 ppm
polymer solution with Q = 3.75 ml/mn. C: averaging inter-
val ∆y ≃ 35 mm located in the central part of the model.
Distance from inlet: x = 80 mm. Continuous line : ﬁt by
Eq. (3).

5

FIG. 5: Variation of D with the distance X for dyed ﬂuid
displacing clear ﬂuid (Polymer concentration : 500 ppm, Q =
3.75 ml/min, P e = 317.) - Inset : a close-up at the scale of 4
channels.

curves have been obtained for dyed ﬂuid displacing clear
ﬂuid, comparison experiments have been realized with
clear ﬂuid displacingg dyed ﬂuid; no systematic diﬀer-
ence between the two sets of data was observed, conﬁrm-
ing that there are no buoyancy driven instabilities.
The oscillations of t and D as X varies are closely re-
lated to mixing at the junctions and to the exchange of
tracers between the transverse channels and the rest of
the ﬂow (a quantitative analyzis will be presented in sec-
tion IV D.)
The above analysis has been performed for all experi-
ments realized with both polymer concentrations. In the
following section, variations with P e of the dispersion
coeﬃcient D measured in this way are discussed

FIG. 4: Variation of t with the distance X (polymer concen-
tration : 500ppm, Q = 3.75ml/min, P e = 317) for dyed ﬂuid
displacing clear ﬂuid. Dashed line : clear ﬂuid displacing dyed
ﬂuid. Inset : close-up at the scale of 4 channels. Dashed line:
linear regression of the variation of t with X.

t with the distance X from the inlet: t increases overall
linearly with distance, indicating that the mean velocity
U is constant and can be determined by a linear regres-
sion of the data. The inset (magniﬁed view of the curve)
shows that t(X) oscillates about the mean trend (dotted
line) corresponding to the linear regression. These pe-
riodic variations are directly related to the structure of
the network and will be discussed in section IV D. Some
similar features are observed on the variation of the dis-
persion coeﬃcient D plotted in ﬁgure 5 as a function of
the distance X from the injection (D is computed from
the value of D/U 2 given by the ﬁt with U equal to X/t.)
This time, D(X) is globally constant with X; like t, it
displays periodic oscillations related to the structure of
the network which will be discussed below. While these

C. Flow velocity dependence of dispersion
coeﬃcient

The variations with the P´eclet number P e of the dis-
persion coeﬃcient D determined as explained in the pre-
vious section are displayed in the inset of ﬁgure 6. For
both polymer concentrations, D always increases with
P e but two diﬀerent variation regimes are visible.
For P e ≥ 10, values of D corresponding to the two poly-
mer concentrations fall on top of each other and increase
like D ∼ P eβ with β ≃ 1.35. This is in good agreement
with numerical simulations [19] realized for a similar ge-
ometry and degree of heterogeneity (as characterized by
σ(a)/¯a = 0.33) and for which a power law variation
with an exponent of the order of 1.3 is also obtained. The
value signiﬁcantly higher than 1 of this exponent cannot
be accounted for solely by geometrical dispersion (which
would give a value of 1) even if a logarithmic correction
factor such that D ∝ P e LogP e is introduced [21]. A
likely hypothesis is that this variation reﬂects a crossover
from geometrical dispersion (D ∝ P e) to Taylor disper-

6

ﬂuence on longitudinal dispersion of molecular diﬀusion
is negligible: It has however a strong indirect inﬂuence
at the lower P´eclet numbers investigated (P e . 10). The
transit time of the tracer inside the junctions or individ-
ual ﬂow channels is then large enough so that molecular
diﬀusion across the ﬂow lines is signiﬁcant : this inﬂu-
ences strongly the redistribution of the incoming tracer
between channels leaving each junction [12]. In the next
section, we show that, in addition to the determination
of macroscopic parameters like U , D (or ld), the concen-
tration maps allow to investigate mixing processes at the
pore scale or even below.

D. Tracer exchange dynamics between transverse
and longitudinal channels.

The variations with the distance X from the inlet of
both the mean transit time t(X) (Fig. 4) and the dis-
persion coeﬃcient D(X) (Fig. 5) display periodic oscil-
lations about respectively an increasing linear trend and
a constant value. In the following, the oscillations of D
will be characterized quantitatively by the diﬀerence be-
tween D(X) and its mean value; the variations of t(X)
will be characterized by its diﬀerence with the linear re-
gression ligne over all data points reﬂecting the mean
front velocity U . At a given distance X the time cor-
responding to this regression is equal to X/U . The dif-
ference t(X) − X/U is negative when the line located at
the distance X from the inlet, and over which C(X, t)
is computed, contains only longitudinal channels paral-
lel to the ﬂow; it is positive when the line contains both
transverse channels and junctions. Regarding D(X), it
is also lower than the mean value when the line X = cst.
contains only longitudinal channels and higher when it
contains both longitudinal and transverse channels. The
variations of t(X) reﬂect the diﬀerent inﬂuence of longi-
tudinal and transverse channels on transport. As already
discussed in section II, in a weakly disordered square net-
work like the present one, most convective ﬂux is local-
ized inside the longitudinal channels (parallel to the mean
ﬂow). The mean velocity inside them is then signiﬁcantly
higher than in the transverse channels and they get satu-
rated faster with the displacing ﬂuid. There is therefore
a time lag between the saturation of the transverse and
longitudinal channels at a same distance X from the inlet
which explains the oscillations of t(X) in Figure 4.
Moreover, the respective amplitudes of the successive
minimas and maximas of t(X) − X/U are found to be
almost constant from one to the other. In the following,
the time lags will therefore be characterized by the re-
specting averages δtl and δtjt over all minimal and max-
imal values of t(X) − X/U .
In the limit of a perfect mixing at the junctions (P e <
10), ﬂuid particles do not retain the memory of their
past trajectory (ie whether they got previously trapped
inside slow transverse channels). Therefore the time lag
for X = cst lines containing transverse channels should

FIG. 6: Variation of the dispersivity ld (mm) with the
P´eclet number for experiments with water-polymer solutions
: ((cid:3)),((cid:4)) : 500 ppm concentration - (◦), (•) 1000 ppm. Open
(resp. grey) symbols : averaging interval : 35 (resp. 0.4)
mesh sizes - Inset : variation of normalized dispersion coeﬃ-
cient D/Dm as function of the P´eclet number for two polymer
concentration (same symbols as in main graph). Solid line :
power law ﬁt for P e > 10 (exponent 1.35 ± 0.03).

sion (D ∝ P e2): in that range of P´eclet numbers, both
mechanisms would then contribute to the dispersion pro-
cess.
For P e < 10, on the contrary, values of D obtained for
the 1000 ppm polymer solution are higher than those
obtained with the 500 ppm one. The variation of D
with P e in that range has been studied more precisely
by plotting the dispersivity ld = D/U in the main graph
of ﬁgure 6. The value of ld is approximately constant for
P e < 10 for both polymer concentrations and is larger
for the 1000 pmm solution (ld = 1.71 mm) than for the
500 ppm one (ld = 0.8 mm). This implies that, in this
range of P´eclet numbers, the geometrical mechanism con-
trols dispersion and that the corresponding dispersivity
increases with the shear thinning character of the ﬂuid
(at higher P e values, ld is, in contrast, almost identical
for the two solutions).
The values plotted in ﬁgure 6 have been obtained by
averaging the concentration C over 35 channels in the
direction perpendicular to the mean ﬂow.
In order to
estimate the inﬂuence of the heterogeneities of the net-
work, we performed an analysis in which the concentra-
tion C is only averaged over ∆y = 4 pixels (or about
0.55 mesh sizes of the lattice): the coordinates y of these
measurement lines are chosen so that all pixels are inside
longitudinal channels or junctions and the dispersivity is
determined as above.
These values of ld are represented as grey symbols in ﬁg-
ure 6 and are only slightly lower than those obtained for
∆y = 35 mm. This shows that there are no large scale
heterogeneities of the network, such as high or low per-
meability channels of width signiﬁcantly larger than the
mesh size which would increase the dispersivity.
Since all data points correspond to P e ≥ 1, the direct in-

reﬂect directly the residence time in an individual (slow)
transverse channel, weighted by the volume fraction cor-
responding to these channels. As long as P e ≫ 1 and
molecular diﬀusion is negligible, the residence time in a
given channel will be inversely proportional to the local
velocity; the latter is, in turn, proportional to the mean
velocity U as long as (as in the present case) the Reynolds
number is low enough and the linear Stokes equation is
approximately applicable. As a result, the local velocity
in a channel is proportional to the mean velocity U and
the time lag δtjt > 0 should vary as 1/U (for similar rea-
sons δtl < 0 should also vary as 1/U ). Figure 7 displays
the variations of δtjt and δtl with 1/U for the two poly-
mer solutions investigated : in both cases, the variation
is indeed linear for 1/U ≥ 40 s.mm−1 (corresponding to
P e ≤ 6).

For 1/U < 40 (P e > 6), δtjt (resp.

δtl) is higher

7

ties of the ﬂuid : the eﬀective viscosity of the solutions
increases much more with the polymer concentration in
slow transverse channels (where the shear rate is low)
than in fast longitudinal ones : as a result, the contrast
between the velocities (and therefore the residence times)
in the longitudinal and transverse channels is enhanced,
leading to the observed increase of |δtjt| and |δtl|. This
enhancement of velocity contrasts for shear thinning ﬂu-
ids is discussed in more detail in section V.
At the opposite limit of low velocities such that P e < 1
(1/U ≥ 250 s×mm−1), longitudinal diﬀusive transfer be-
comes signiﬁcant. The increase of the residence times
with 1/U is then limited by molecular diﬀusion to a value
of the order of a few l2/Dm (∼ 1000s): the variations of
δtjt and δtl should then level oﬀ at high 1/U values. The
lowest values of P e are however still too high in our ex-
periments to observe this eﬀect.
These results suggest therefore that the type of local ob-
servations reported here provide important informations
on mixing processes at the pore scale. As pointed out
recently [7, 8], these processes may, in turn, inﬂuence
strongly mass transfer at the macroscopic scale. In a sim-
ilar perspective, we shall now investigate the dependence
of the geometry of the iso concentration fronts on the
ﬂow velocity and the polymer concentration. We shall
also discuss their relation to local mixing in the pores.

E. Geometry of tracer displacement fronts

FIG. 7: Variation of δtl (ﬁlled symbols) and δtjt (open sym-
bols) with 1/P e. ((cid:3), (cid:4)): experiments realized with 500 ppm
polymer solutions, (◦, •): 1000 ppm. Dashed lines are guides
for the eyes.

(resp. lower) than the values extrapolated from the lin-
ear trend for 1/U ≥ 40 : the transition is observed at the
same mean velocity for the two solutions. This increase
of the absolute values of the time lags reﬂects very likely
the breakdown of the assumption of perfect mixing at
junctions or inside individual channels : at high P´eclet
numbers, a solute particle may indeed ﬂow through sev-
eral junctions and channels without moving across ﬂow
lines through transverse molecular diﬀusion. If the lat-
tice is weakly disordered, the solute may then remain for
a longer time inside a sequence of longitudinal high veloc-
ity channels than in the case of a perfect mixing at the
junctions : the corresponding value of δtl will then be
lower. Similarly a solute particle may remained trapped
for a longer time. in slow zones than if mixing was more
eﬀective at the junctions so that δtjt is increased.
Although the transition between the above two regimes
takes place at the same P´eclet number for both solutions,
the absolute amplitude of the variations of δtjt and δtl
with 1/U is signiﬁcantly larger for the 1000 ppm one.
This is direct consequence of the shear thinning proper-

FIG. 8:
Isoconcentration fronts at a mean velocity U =
0.005 mm/s (P e = 1.3) for polymer solutions of concentra-
tions 1000 ppm (upper curve) and 500 ppm (lower curve).
Mean distance of tracer from inlet : 0.5 × L (L = model
length). Flow is upward on the ﬁgure. Front widths :
σ = 4.5 mm (1000 ppm) and σ = 2.6 mm (500 ppm).

In the present experiments, the pixel size in the concen-
tration maps is 0.4 times the mean channel width. This
allows for a study of the tracer distribution in the mixing
zone at length scales varying from the size of the network
down to a fraction of the pore size. For practical reasons,
we shall not use the full spatial concentration distribution
in the following analysis : we chose instead to character-
ize its spatial heterogeneity by the isoconcentration lines

8

FIG. 9:
Isoconcentration fronts for a mean velocity U =
0.125 mm/s (P e = 32) for polymer solutions of concentrations
1000 ppm (upper curve) and 500 ppm (lower curve). Mean
distance of tracer from inlet : 0.5 × L (L = model length).
Flow is upward on the ﬁgure. Front widths σ = 6.1 mm
(1000 ppm) and σ = 4.6 mm (500 ppm).

c = 0.5, which are assumed to reﬂect the displacement
front geometry: examples of such fronts determined by a
thresholding procedure are displayed in ﬁgures 8 and 9
for P´eclet numbers P e respectively equal to 1.3 and 32.
The width of the front parallel to the mean ﬂow is larger
for the more concentrated solution and it increases with
the P´eclet number. Also, at high P e values, large spikes
are visible while the front is relatively smooth at lower
In spite of these diﬀerences, the main geomet-
ones.
rical features of the front are similar:
large peaks and
troughs are generally located at the same points for dif-
ferent ﬂow velocities and polymer concentrations. This
conﬁrms that irregularities of the front structure are as-
sociated to deterministic features of the velocity ﬁeld and
not to uncontrolled imperfections of the injection.
Quantitatively, the eﬀective width of the front parallel
to the ﬂow is characterized in the following by the stan-
dard deviation σ(¯x) of the distance x of its points from
the inlet: σ(¯x) satisﬁes σ(¯x) =< (¯x − x(y))2 >1/2 in
which ¯x is the mean value of x. In ﬁgures 8 and 9, ¯x is
equal to half the length of the model and the values of
σ corresponding to the curves displayed are listed in the
captions. Figure 10 displays the variation of σ as a func-
tion of the mean ﬂow velocity U for ¯x = L/2. For both
solutions, the width σ increases logarithmically with U :
the value of σ is larger for the 1000 ppm solution while
the slope of its variation with U in ﬁgure 10 is slightly
lower.
The values of σ are diﬀerent for the two solutions be-
cause the eﬀective viscosity decreases faster with the ve-
locity gradients for the 1000 ppm solution than for the
500 ppm one. The ratio between the eﬀective viscosities,
and therefore the velocities in the longitudinal and trans-

FIG. 10: Eﬀective front width σ as a function of the mean
front velocity U (mm/s) for a mean distance ¯x = 0.5 × L and
polymer concentrations equal to 1000 ppm (◦) and 500 ppm
((cid:3)). Solid (resp. dotted) lines : ﬁt of the experimental data
for a 1000 ppm (resp. 500 ppm) polymer solution by equation
σ = a + b log(U ) with a = 6.9 ± 0.1 and b = 0.4 ± 0.05 (resp.
a = 6.2 ± 0.2 and b = 0.5 ± 0.1.

verse channels is therefore higher and the front width
which is directly related to this ratio increases.
The second major feature of the above results at high
velocities is the large amplitude of the peaks and troughs
observed on the front while they are smaller and narrower
at lower velocities. This, too, may be explained by the re-
duced tracer mixing at junctions at high P´eclet numbers
(section IV D) : solute remaining for a long distance in-
side longitudinal, high velocity, channels will contribute
to the spikes while that moving through a sequence of
slow lateral channels will contribute to the troughs. At
lower P´eclet numbers, mixing is more eﬃcient and solute
particules sample more eﬀectively the velocity distribu-
tion: this reduces the dispersion of the transit times and,
therefore the amplitude of the peaks and troughs.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The local analysis of the transit times and of the front
geometry have therefore provided important informa-
tions on mixing inside junctions and ﬂow channels and on
its dependence on the P´eclet number. This information
greatly helps one to interprete the macroscopic dispersiv-
ity measurements of section IV B. Some of the features
observed are speciﬁc to 2D systems while others can oc-
cur in usual 3D media.
At low P´eclet numbers (typically P e ≤ 10), the dis-
persivity ld remains constant with P e and is lower for
the 500 ppm polymer solution than for the 1000 ppm
one.
In sections IV D and IV E, we have seen that, in
this regime, transverse mixing in junctions and channels
is very eﬀective so that the correlation length of the mo-
tion of solute particles is of the order of the length l of
individual channels. As a result, this motion may be

described as a sequence of random steps of varying dura-
tions and directions inside the medium; this is the geo-
metrical dispersion regime discussed in section II and for
which D ∝ P e (ld = cst.).
In this regime, the factor of two diﬀerence of the dis-
persivities for 500 and 1000 ppm solutions is likely due
to enhanced velocity contrasts between the fast and slow
ﬂow regions. It is known, for instance [17], that the mean
ﬂow velocity inside a cylindrical channel under a given
pressure gradient varies as the square of the radius a for
a Newtonian ﬂuid and as a1+ 1
n for a shear thinning ﬂuid
verifying equation (2). Let us assume that the pressure
gradient between the ends of ﬂow channels in parallel is
constant. If σ(a) ≪ ¯a, the standard deviation δU of the
mean velocities in the diﬀerent channels should scale like
:

δU
U

∼

1 + n
n

σ(a)
¯a

,

(4)

(5)

where σ(a)/¯a is the normalized standard deviation of the
channel aperture (see section III A). Still using the same
simplistic approach, the typical standard deviation δt of
the transit time along a channel of length l = 0.67 mm
should be l/δU . Estimating the dispersion coeﬃcient D
from the relation D ∼ l2/δt provides the order of magni-
tude of the dispersivity :

ld ∼

n + 1
n

σa
a

l

Since n decreases with the polymer concentration, ld
should therefore increase for a ﬁxed aperture ﬂuctuation
σ(a)/a. Using in equation (5) the values of l, σ(a)/a
and n corresponding to the present experiments (table I)
leads to ld ≃ 0.7 mm and 1 mm respectively for the
500 ppm and 1000 ppm solutions. These estimations
are close to the experimental values ld = 0.8 mm and
1.7 mm reported in section IV C for the same solutions
(ﬁgure 6). The diﬀerence may be due to the assumption
of identical pressure gradients on diﬀerent parallel chan-
nels used to obtain equations 4 and 5.
At higher P´eclet numbers P e > 10, ld is no longer con-
stant but increases with P e. This reﬂects the transition
towards a second dispersion regime in which mixing is less
eﬀective. One must then take into account the stretching
of dye parallel to the ﬂow by local velocity gradients in
the ﬂow section (dye moves slower in the vicinity of the
walls than in the center of the channels). This stretch-
ing eﬀect, is balanced by transverse molecular diﬀusion,
resulting a Taylor-like dispersion mechanism (section II).
This eﬀect is made signiﬁcant by the increase with P e
of the correlation length of dye transport along chains of
ﬂow channels parallel to the mean ﬂow discussed above
in sections IV D and IV E.
The eﬀect of the local velocity gradients is also enhanced
by the speciﬁc topology of 2D micromodels. The upper
and lower walls are indeed continuous and some ﬂow lines
remain close to them over their full length: as in Taylor
dispersion, slow solute particles near these walls may only

9

move away from them through molecular diﬀusion. Simi-
larly, fast moving particles half way between the walls can
only reach them through transverse molecular diﬀusion.
The large correlation length of these velocity contrasts
also results in Taylor-like dispersion eﬀects.
Yet, the inﬂuence of the disorder of the medium cannot
be completely neglected (since some tracer always moves
into lower velocity transverse channels): the global dis-
persion results therefore from the combined eﬀects of ge-
ometrical and Taylor dispersion. As a result, the macro-
scopic dispersion coeﬃcient D follows in this regime a
power law D ∝ P eβ of the P´eclet number with an ex-
ponent β ≃ 1.3 intermediate between the values 1 and
2 corresponding respectively to Taylor and geometrical
dispersion.
Regarding the inﬂuence of the shear thinning properties,
increasing the polymer concentration enhances velocity
contrasts between diﬀerent ﬂow channels while it ﬂat-
tens the velocity proﬁle in individual channels. The ﬁrst
eﬀect increases geometrical dispersion and is indeed ob-
served at low P´eclet numbers. The second reduces Taylor
dispersion : this explains why, at higher P e values, the
values of ld for the two polymer solutions are similar when
the inﬂuence of Taylor dispersion is large.
To conclude, the dispersion measurements reported in
the present work for transparent micromodels provide
signiﬁcant novel informations on the inﬂuence of the ﬂow
velocity and ﬂuid rheology on miscible displacements in
porous media. Quantitative high resolution optical mea-
surements have allowed for thorough studies over a broad
range of length scales: it has in particular been possible
in the same experiment both to determine macroscopic
parameters such as the eﬀective dispersivity and to anal-
yse at the pore scale the dynamics of concentration vari-
ations.
In particular, the local analysis of the time lag between
the invasions of longitudinal and transverse channels of
the model has allowed us to relate the transition between
two dispersion regimes for P e ≃ 10 to variations of mix-
ing in channel junctions. The variations of small scale
structures of the displacement front with the P´eclet num-
ber and the polymer concentration also provides informa-
tions on the spatial correlation of transport at the local
scale.
In the future, investigation of these eﬀects at still higher
resolutions should allow for detailed direct studies of mix-
ing and ﬂow patterns right inside individual ﬂow channels
and their junctions.

Acknowledgments

We thank C. Zarcone and the ”Institut de M´ecanique
des Fluides de Toulouse” for realizing and providing
us with the micromodel used in these experiments and
G. Chauvin and R. Pidoux for realizing the experimen-
tal set-up. This work has been realized in the frame-
work of the ECOS Sud program A03-E02 and of a

CNRS-CONICET Franco-Argentinian ”Programme In-

ternational de Cooperation Scientiﬁque” (PICS no2178).

10

[1] J. Bear, “Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media”, El-

sevier Publishing Co., New York (1972).

[2] F.A.L. Dullien, “Porous Media, Fluid Transport and
Pore Structure”, 2nd edition, Academic Press, New
York (1991).

[3] E. Charlaix, J.P. Hulin, C. Leroy and C. Zarcone.
“Experimental study of tracer dispersion in ﬂow
through two-dimensional networks of etched capil-
laries.” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 21, 1727 (1988).
[4] P.Z. Wong, Ed. “Methods in the physics of porous
media.”, Experimental methods in the physical sci-
ences 35, Academic Press, London (1999).

[5] R. Lenormand, C. Zarcone and A. Sarr. “Mechanism
of the displacement of one ﬂuid by another in a net-
work of capillary ducts,” J. Fluid Mech. 135, 337
(1983).

[6] A. Birovljev, K. J. M˚aløy, J. Feder, and T. Jøssang.
“Scaling structure of tracer dispersion fronts in
porous media.” Phys. Rev. E 49, 5431 (1994).

[7] D. Grubert. Eﬀective dispersivities

for a two-
dimensional periodic fracture network by a continu-
ous time random walk analysis of single-intersection
simulations. Water Resour. Res. 37, 41 (2001).
[8] Y. Park, J.R. de Dreuzy, K. Lee and B. Berkowitz.
“Transport and intersection mixing in random frac-
ture networks with power law length distributions.”
Water Resour. Res. 37, 2493 (2001).

[9] K.S. Sorbie, P.J. Cliﬀord and E.R.W. Jones, “The
rheology of pseudoplastic ﬂuids in porous media us-
ing network modeling.” J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 130,
508 (1989).

[10] A. Paterson, A. D’Onofrio, C. Allain, J.P. Hulin,
M. Rosen and C. Gauthier. “Tracer dispersion in a
polymer solution ﬂowing through a double porosity
porous medium.” J. Phys. II France 6, 1639 (1996).
[11] M.A. Freytes, A. d’Onofrio, M. Rosen, C. Allain,
J.P. Hulin. “Gravity driven instabilities in miscible
non Newtonian ﬂuid displacements in porous me-
dia.” Physica A 290, 286 (2001).

[12] V.V. Mourzenko, F. Youseﬁan, B. Kolbah, J.F.
Thovert and P.M. and Adler, “Solute transport at
fracture intersections.” Water Resour. Res. 38, 1000
(2002).

[13] B. Berkowitz, C. Naumann and L. Smith, “Mass
transfert at fracture intersections: An evaluation
of mixing models.” Water Resour. Res. 30, 1765
(1994).

[14] G.I. Taylor, “Dispersion of soluble matter in solvent
ﬂowing slowly through a tube.” Proc. R. Soc. London
A 219, 186 (1953).

[15] R. Aris, “On the dispersion of a solute in a ﬂuid
ﬂowing through a tube.” Proc. R. Soc. London A
253, 67 (1956).

[16] M. Vartuli, J.P. Hulin and G. Daccord, “Taylor dis-
per sion in a polymer solution ﬂowing in a capillary
tube.” AIChE J. 41, 1622 (1995).

[17] C.B. Shah and Y.C. Yortsos, “Aspects of ﬂow of
power-law ﬂuids in porous media.” AIChE J. 41,
1099 (1995).

[18] A. Fadili, P. Tardyand and A. Pearson, “A 3D ﬁltra-
tion law for power-law ﬂuids in heterogeneous porous
media.” J. Non-Newtonian Fluid Mech. 106, 121
(2002).

[19] C. Bruderer and Y. Bernab´e, “Network modeling
of dispersion: Transition from Taylor dispersion in
homogeneous networks to mechanical dispersion in
very heterogeneous ones.” Water Resour. Res. 37,
897 (2001).

[20] R.L. Detwiler, H. Rajaram and R.J. Glass, “Solute
transport in variable-aperture fractures: An investi-
gation of the relative importance of Taylor dispersion
and macrodispersion.” Water Resour. Res. 36, 1611
(2000).

[21] de Arcangelis L., J. Koplik, D. Redner and D. Wilkinson,
Hydrodynamic dispersion in network of porous media,
Phys. Rev. Lett., (1986) 57, 996–999.

