The phase-locked mean impulse response
of a turbulent channel ﬂow

Paolo Luchini
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Meccanica Universit`a di Salerno
84084 Fisciano (SA), Italy

Maurizio Quadrio and Simone Zuccher
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Aerospaziale del Politecnico di Milano
via La Masa, 34 - 20156 Milano, Italy

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We describe the ﬁrst DNS-based measurement of the complete mean response of a turbulent
channel ﬂow to small external disturbances. Space-time impulsive perturbations are applied at one
channel wall, and the linear response describes their mean eﬀect on the ﬂow ﬁeld as a function of
spatial and temporal separations. The turbulent response is shown to diﬀer from the response a
laminar ﬂow with the turbulent mean velocity proﬁle as base ﬂow.

Even though a turbulent ﬂow is a nonlinear phe-
nomenon, a linear response (either in the frequency or
the time domain) can be deﬁned for it if perturbations
are small enough. We discuss in this paper the linear re-
sponse of the velocity vector in the whole ﬂow ﬁeld and
in time to small external perturbations applied at one
wall. The vectorial nature of wall perturbations makes
the response a tensorial quantity, that we denote with
Hij to indicate the i-th component of the response to
an impulsive wall forcing in the j-th direction. Wall-
based forcing is particularly meaningful if the response
has to be used in the context of turbulent ﬂow control,
which is the background of the present study: applying
the required control at the wall is indeed the easiest con-
ﬁguration in a realistic ﬂow-control setup. In view of the
ﬂow-control possibilities oﬀered by modern MEMS tech-
nology, the linear response function can help considerably
in controller design, by answering such a basic question
as which eﬀects are to be felt here and now if a wall
actuator has been moved there and a given time ago.

The important role of linear processes in the self-
sustaining (non-linear) turbulence cycle which takes
place near the wall has been recently emphasized1. Lin-
ear control has already proven itself succesful in turbu-
lent ﬂows2. Bewley and coworkers are among the most
active groups in the ﬁeld of linear optimal controller de-
sign for turbulent ﬂows3,4,5. They employ Kalman ﬁlters
and matrix Riccati equations, which require the state
equations of the system to be known. The (mean) state
equations are not available, however, for a turbulent ﬂow,
and must be replaced by a linearized laminar model; in
addition, the ”system noise” is treated as white noise by
their control design method, and the available informa-
tion about the actual turbulence statistics does not enter
the model. Hence these results, encouraging as they are,
build on an essentially linearized laminar analysis. Re-
placing the parabolic Poiseuille velocity proﬁle with the
turbulent mean proﬁle, as done by H¨ogberg, Bewley and
Henningson4, certainly improves the eﬀectiveness of the
controller, but the (mean) eﬀects of turbulent mixing,
which we aim at describing via the response function,

still remained unaccessible to controller designers. The
laminar linearized response has been recently illustrated
with full detail6. The diﬀerences between this laminar re-
sponse and the mean input/output response of an actual
turbulent ﬂow will be discussed further down here.

Unfortunately, the obvious deﬁnition of an instanta-
neous linear response is not as useful as might be hoped
in the context of turbulence: such response is bound to
exhibit temporal divergence, owing to the chaotic nature
of the ﬂow. A mean response can however be given a
precise meaning and measured, either experimentally or
numerically. One paper which pioneered the approach is
that by Hussain & Reynolds7, where the response was
experimentally measured in the frequency domain at a
given separation and for a few frequencies.

A few years ago, Quadrio & Luchini8 proposed a
method to compute the linear impulse response function
of a wall-bounded fully-developed turbulent channel ﬂow
to perturbations applied at one wall. Following that suc-
cesful proof-of-principle, we proceed here to describe and
characterize the complete response function tensor, mea-
sured through a set of purposefully carried out Direct Nu-
merical Simulations (DNS) of a turbulent channel ﬂow.
The impact that the availability of such response function
will have in the ﬁeld of turbulence control is the subject
of ongoing work, and it has been preliminarly addressed
by Luchini, Quadrio & Bewley9, who have been able to
demonstrate a controller based on Wiener ﬁltering and
the present response function.

Let us consider an indeﬁnite plane channel, bounded
by two walls parallel to the homogeneous directions x1
(streamwise) and x3 (spanwise) and located at x2 = 0
and x2 = 2h. The velocity components are u1, u2 and
u3. To deﬁne an impulse response tensor, we input to
the system an inﬁnitesimal wall velocity perturbation
wj(x1, x3, t) ≡ uj(x1, 0, x3, t) given by:

wj (x1, x3, t) = ǫjδ(x1)δ(x3)δ(t),

j = 1, 2, 3

(1)

with δ denoting Dirac’s delta function. The output to be
measured is the mean eﬀect of this perturbation on the
velocity ﬁeld throughout the channel at all subsequent

2

w1
w2
w3

1.3

1.25

1.2

1.15

1.1

0

,
f

C

/

f

C

1.05

1

0.95

0.9

0

times. The impulse-response tensor Hij so obtained re-
lates the mean linear response of the turbulent ﬂow to a
generic input wj via the convolution:

ui(x1, x2, x3, t) =

′
′
Hij(x1 − x
1, x2, x3 − x
3, t − t

′

′
′
)wj (x1, x3, t)dx
1dx
3dt

′

Z

(2)

Since turbulence ﬂuctuations are large compared to the
amplitude ǫj of the external perturbation, which must be
small enough for the response to be linear and the rela-
tion (2) to be valid, the deﬁnition of H cannot be of
direct use for its actual measurement. However, an en-
semble average can be used conceptually to deﬁne the
mean response over repeated applications of the impul-
sive forcing.

Our ﬁrst attempt to calculating H has been similar to
that employed by Hussain & Reynolds7, i.e. working in
the frequency domain: a DNS of a turbulent channel ﬂow
is performed, where the boundary condition is:

wj(x1, x3, t) = ǫj sin(k1x1) sin(k3x3) sin(ωt),

j = 1, 2, 3.

Once a suitably small12 amplitude ǫj is chosen (which
in general depends on the forced component), and fre-
quency ω and wavenumbers k1 and k3 are given, a phase-
locked average allows the deterministic eﬀect of the per-
turbation to be separated from the turbulent noise with
reasonable values of the signal-to-noise ratio S/N. How-
ever this numerical experiment only yields the response
function in a single point of the 3d space (k1, k3, ω),
and we soon realized that the repetition of the computa-
tion for a number of frequencies and wavenumbers large
enough to yield a reasonably complete characterization
of Hij would have been impractical.

Then we turned our attention to the direct use of (1) as
boundary condition, with a suitably small amplitude ǫj:
from a computational viewpoint, the ensemble average
can be replaced by an average over periodic repetitions
well separated in time, and the complete response func-
tion is obtained at once. We again realized early that this
too was going to be an unaﬀordable simulation: whereas
impulsive forcing provides in one shot the same amount of
information as many sinusoidal simulations, it does so at
the expense of larger nonlinear eﬀects. The correspond-
ingly smaller allowed ǫj implies a smaller S/N ratio, and
the averaging time required to bring S/N within reason-
able limits becomes unaﬀordably long.

We eventually realized that the best of both worlds
could be obtained by resorting to statistical correlation
as a method for measuring the impulsive response. It is
well known from signal theory that, when a white noise
(i.e. a delta-correlated signal) is passed through a linear
system, the correlation between input and output is pro-
portional to the impulse response of the system. We thus
adopted an indipendently generated random signal as our
wall forcing, and obtained at once the whole space-time

0.001

0.002

0.004

0.005

0.006

0.003
ε

FIG. 1: (Color online) Eﬀect of the white-noise power spectral
densities ǫj on the mean friction coeﬃcient Cf , for diﬀerent
components of the wall random forcing wj . Cf,0 is the fric-
tion coeﬃcient of the reference ﬂow with no-slip boundary
conditions.

dependence of the impulse response by computing such
a correlation.

In our method a DNS is performed with a zero mean
white-noise signal (the output of a random-number gen-
erator) as boundary condition and the space-time corre-
lation between this boundary condition (input) and the
whole ﬂow ﬁeld (output) is accumulated. Since the ap-
plied random signal is uncorrelated to the turbulent ﬂuc-
tuations, the latter will be averaged out just as in phase-
locking, and the deterministic response will progressively
emerge while the simulation runs. Moreover, the forc-
ing power is uniformly distributed over time and space,
as opposed to what occurs in impulsive forcing, and the
amplitude can be as large as with sinusoidal forcing.

The numerical simulations are carried out with our
DNS pseudo-spectral solver, whose characteristics have
been described elsewhere10. Of particular relevance here
is the ability of the code to run in parallel with high ef-
ﬁciency. The Reynolds number is Reτ = 180 based on
the friction velocity and half the channel width. The
domain size is Lx = 4πh and Lz = 4.2h, so that 192
and 128 Fourier modes (before dealiasing) in the stream-
wise and spanwise directions respectively, as well as 128
point in the wall-normal direction, are required to match
the commonly employed spatial resolution11. Peculiar to
the present simulations is the extremely long integration
time, about 105 viscous time units, required to extract
the deterministic response from the turbulent noise. This
time interval is more than one order-of-magnitude larger
than what is typically employed to obtain converged low-
order statistics of the turbulent ﬂow. The correlation is
computed from products in spectral space whenever pos-
sible; its full y behavior, as well as 81 time separations
from t+ = 0 to t+ = 64 are recorded. To minimize disk
space requirements, a slightly reduced set of 64 stream-
wise and 84 spanwise Fourier modes is analysed.

A key step towards the measurement of Hij is the

3

h
/
z

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

100

)

2
1

(

H
S
B
A
X
A
M

10-1

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

)

2

ε
/

2
1

(

H
S
B
A
X
A
M

ε
2=0.001
ε
2=0.0005
ε
2=0.00025
ε
2=0.000125

0

0

0.1

0.2
x2/h

0.3

0.4

-2

-1

1

2

3

0
x/h

FIG. 2: (Color online) Variation with x2/h of the absolute-
value maximum of H12/ǫ2 in wall-parallel planes. The ﬁgure
refers to H12 at t+ = 30.

FIG. 3: (Color online) Streamwise derivative ∂1ϕ at x2/h =
0.1 (shaded contours) of the kinetic potential, given by
Eqn.(3), compared to H12 at t = 0 (line contours). Levels
at ± 0.02%, 0.01%, 0.005% and 0.0025% of the maximum.

choice of the amplitude ǫj of the white noise applied at
the wall, which must be empirically determined based
on the requirement that it may yield a linear response.
A preliminary estimate can be obtained by observing
whether or not the forcing alters the time-mean value
of the wall friction. This is shown in ﬁg.1: starting from
the largest ǫj for which (separately for each forcing com-
ponent) numerical stability is preserved, we progressively
halve the amplitude, and observe how the modiﬁcations
of the mean friction induced by the non-homogeneous
boundary condition becomes negligible:
this happens
only for the smallest values of ǫj included in the ﬁgure.
An actual linearity check is shown in ﬁg.2, where for
a time delay of t+ = 30 the maximum absolute value of
H12/ǫ2 in wall-parallel planes is plotted as a function of
x2/h. Linearity requires the curves at diﬀerent ǫ2 to over-
lap. This is the case for the two smallest values of ǫ2, at
least in the region of maximum response. At larger x2/h
the curves do not collapse anymore but this is expected,
since the background noise overwhelms the deterministic
part of the response and the noise level is diﬀerent for the
various simulations (run for the same averaging time).

Having assessed linearity, and before turning to illus-
trate the spatio-temporal behavior of Hij , we devote a
last preliminary consideration to the response at t = 0.
The impulse response to w2 includes a potential compo-
nent, that can be computed analytically by solving the
Laplace equation for the kinetic potential ϕ(x1, x2, x3)
between two indeﬁnite plane walls. The wall-normal
derivative ∂2ϕ has boundary condition ∂2ϕ(x1, 0, x3) =
δ(x1)δ(x3). After Fourier-transforming, the problem sep-
arates into one-dimensional problems for each pair of
wavenumbers k1 and k3. Its analytical solution reads:

ϕ(x2) =

Cosh(κ(2 − x2))
κSinh(2κ)

(3)

where κ2 = k2

b
1 + k2
3.

In ﬁg.3 the analytical solution (3), represented in phys-
ical space, is compared with H12 measured in the tur-

laminar
pseudo-turbulent
turbulent

0

10

20

40

50

60

30

t+

FIG. 4: (Color online) Decay rate of the absolute maximum
value of H12: comparison between the full turbulent response,
the laminar response based on the turbulent mean proﬁle, and
the laminar response based on the Poiseuille parabolic proﬁle.

bulent ﬂow via the correlation method and shown at
t = 0: a substantially good quantitative agreement can
be remarked, except for the lowest contour levels, where
the residual noise becomes apparent in the turbulent re-
sponse. Despite the singular nature of the potential com-
ponent of the response, which manifests itself in a spike in
the numerically measured correlation, this singular com-
ponent is faithfully reproduced by our DNS, in which a
delta-correlated boundary condition is used for w2, and
the correlation between this boundary condition and the
whole velocity ﬁeld is accumulated over time.

We now move on to consider the spatio-temporal struc-
ture of the full tensor Hij . We shall try to emphasize the
diﬀerences between the computed turbulent response and
the ’laminar’ response employed until now in feedback
ﬂow-control optimization. To be precise, two kinds of
linearized response have been previously considered by
other authors: the solution of linearized Navier–Stokes
equations about Poiseuille ﬂow and the same solution ob-

4

nar response. More importantly, both laminar responses
– and in particular the one with the mean turbulent pro-
ﬁle – present side regions of positive u1, that are absent
in the turbulent one, except for very short time delays.
From the diﬀerences between the true turbulent and the
pseudo-turbulent responses one is thus led to conclude
that a possibility exists for further improvements in con-
trol eﬀectiveness, if the additional information embodied
in the true linear response can be exploited.

A comparative glance at all 9 components of Hij (ﬁg.6)
reveals that they are of signiﬁcantly diﬀerent magnitude.
The components Hi1 turn out to be relatively small, ap-
proximately 10 times smaller than the others. This par-
allels a similar observation6 made for the laminar case.
H2j, i.e. the wall-normal component of the response to
any forcing, decays much faster than the other compo-
nents. From a qualitative viewpoint, it thus appears that
the largest eﬀect with wall-based forcing can be obtained

FIG. 6: The nine components of Hij . Top: H1j; middle:
H2j; bottom: H3j . Isosurfaces of Hi1 (left) at ± 0.02 % of
the maximum; isosurfaces of Hi2 (middle) and Hi3 (right)
at ± 0.2% of the maximum. Negative values in light gray
(enhanced online).

with u2 or u3 actuation at the wall, and mostly u1 and
u3 perturbations are introduced into the ﬂow. This qual-
itative statement is made quantitative by the knowledge
of the response tensor.

FIG. 5: Side-by-side comparison of H12 for the laminar re-
sponse (top), the pseudo-turbulent response (middle) and the
full turbulent reponse (bottom). Isosurfaces at ± 0.7 % of the
maximum, negative values in light gray (enhanced online).

tained by using the actual turbulent mean velocity proﬁle
as base ﬂow. This latter pseudo-turbulent response ac-
counts for the mean turbulent proﬁle but not for turbu-
lent mixing. While the two responses with the turbulent
mean proﬁle should be identical at t = 0 and similar at
very short time delays, they can be expected to progres-
sively diverge later owing to this diﬀerence. That this
is indeed the case can be appraised from ﬁg.4, which re-
ports the temporal decay of the maximum absolute value
of H12, the most frequently used component of Hij, in
the whole volume: the true turbulent response clearly
presents a faster decay rate. From the same ﬁgure it
can be appreciated how the laminar response is diﬀer-
ent from its companions even at t = 0, and remains
markedly diﬀerent from the pseudo-laminar one for the
considered time interval, thus explaining the control per-
formance improvement observed in above cited papers
upon switching from laminar to pseudo-laminar response.
By observing the three responses in 3d (see ﬁg.5), other
diﬀerences can be noticed. In all cases H12 presents an
elongated region of near-wall negative u1, but quantita-
tive diﬀerences are considerable. At t+ = 30, this region
turns out to be much longer and narrower for the lami-

1 J. Kim and J. Lim. A linear process in wall-bounded tur-

bulent ﬂows. Phys. Fluids, 12(8):1885–1888, 2000.

2 J. Kim. Control of turbulent boundary layers. Phys. Fluids,

15(5):1093–1105, 2003.

3 T. Bewley. Flow Control: New Challenges for a New Re-

naissance. Prog. Aerosp. Sci., 37:21–58, 2001.

4 M. H¨ogberg, T.R. Bewley, and D. Henningson. Relaminar-
ization of Reτ = 100 turbulence using gain scheduling and
linear state-feedback control. Phys. Fluids, 15(11):3572–
3575, 2003.

5 M. H¨ogberg and D. Henningson. Linear optimal control
applied to instabilities in spatially developing boundary
layers. J. Fluid Mech., 470:151–179, 2002.

6 M. R. Jovanovi´c and B. Bamieh. Componentwise energy
ampliﬁcation in channel ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 534:145–
183, 2005.

7 A.K.M.F. Hussain and W.C. Reynolds. The mechanics of
an organized wave in turbulent shear ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech.,
41(2):241–258, 1970.

8 M. Quadrio and P. Luchini. The linear response of a turbu-
lent channel ﬂow. In Proc. IX European Turbulence Conf.,
Southampton (UK), July 2-5., pages 715–718, 2002.

9 P. Luchini, M. Quadrio, and T. Bewley. An optimal feed-
back controller for the reduction of turbulent energy in
3D plane-duct ﬂow. In APS Meeting, Chicago, IL (US),
November 20-22, 2005.

10 P. Luchini and M. Quadrio. A low-cost parallel implemen-
tation of direct numerical simulation of wall turbulence. J.
Comp. Phys., 211(2):551–571, 2006.

11 R. Moser, J. Kim, and N.N. Mansour. Direct numerical
simulation of turbulent channel ﬂow up to Reθ = 590.
Phys. Fluids, 11(4):943–945, 1999.

12 Being limited to small control amplitudes is a reasonable
hypothesis, as long as control is aimed at turbulent drag

reduction

5

