6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Structure of the Wake of a Magnetic Obstacle

E. V. Votyakov1,2¶, Yu. Kolesnikov1, O. Andreev1, E. Zienicke2, A. Thess1
1Fakult¨at Maschinenbau, Technische Universit¨at Ilmenau,
2Institut f¨ur Physik, Technische Universit¨at Ilmenau, PF 100565, 98684 Ilmenau, Germany

We use a combination of numerical simulations and experiments to elucidate the structure of the
ﬂow of an electrically conducting ﬂuid past a localized magnetic ﬁeld, called magnetic obstacle.
We demonstrate that the stationary ﬂow pattern is considerably more complex than in the wake
behind an ordinary body. The steady ﬂow is shown to undergo two bifurcations (rather than one)
and to involve up to six (rather than just two) vortices. We ﬁnd that the ﬁrst bifurcation leads to
the formation of a pair of vortices within the region of magnetic ﬁeld that we call inner magnetic
vortices, whereas a second bifurcation gives rise to a pair of attached vortices that are linked to the
inner vortices by connecting vortices.

PACS numbers: 41.20.Cv, 47.65.-d, 47.80.Cb, 47.90.+a

When a liquid metal moves relative to a localized mag-
netic ﬁeld - a magnetic obstacle - the induced eddy
currents produce a Lorentz force that creates vorticity.
Whereas the ﬂow patterns around a mechanical obstacle,
such as the cylinder shown in Fig. 1, are well documented
[1], the structure of the wake of a magnetic obstacle is
poorly understood even in the seemingly simple steady
state. In the present Letter we demonstrate, in contrast
to widespread common belief, that the ﬁrst bifurcation in
the ﬂow past a magnetic obstacle leads to the formation
of a vortex-pair inside rather than behind the magnetic
ﬁeld and that the formation of attached vortices, the ana-
log to Fig. 1b, is the result of a second bifurcation giving
rise to a remarkably complex six-vortex pattern.

Understanding the wake of a magnetic obstacle, whose
prototype is shown in Fig.2, is of considerable funda-
mental and practical interest. On the fundamental side
[2, 3, 4, 5], a magnetic obstacle represents a system
with a rich variety of dynamical states whose behavior
is governed by two parameters, the Reynolds number
Re = u0H/ν (where u0 is velocity, H is the characteris-

tic linear size, and ν the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid)
and the magnetic interaction parameter N = σHB2
0 /ρu0
(where σ is the electric conductivity of the ﬂuid, ρ its
density and B0 the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld) [2].
On the practical side, spatially localized magnetic ﬁelds
enjoy a variety of industrial applications [6] exempliﬁed
by electromagnetic stirring, electromagnetic brake, and
non-contact ﬂow measurement [7].

The analogy between the hydrodynamical obstacle and
the magnetic obstacle has been exploited from the begin-
nings of Magnetohydrodynamics. From this analogy the
appearance of attached vortices was conjectured as an in-
evitable consequence, see discussion and references in [5],
although up to now the reverse ﬂow induced by a local
magnetic ﬁeld has been never observed experimentally.
The earliest 2D numerical calculations [8] demonstrated
a reverse ﬂow, but experiments, designed in a special
way to show this [9], have not conﬁrmed the numerical
results. Most recent 2D numerical simulation by Cuevas
et. al. [10] declared as well the analogy between the vor-
tices past the magnetic obstacle and a solid body.

x

u

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

 

 

a

b

5

x

c

d

−5

0

10

15

20

FIG. 1: Streamlines of the steady ﬂow around a solid cylin-
der and corresponding streamwise velocity along the center-
line: (a) without vortices and (b) with attached vortices. No-
tice, the region of attached vortices corresponds to negative
streamwise velocity.

FIG. 2: (color) Magnetic obstacle (insertion) and streamwise
velocity along the centerline from 3D numerical simulation
(a − c) and experiment (d): N=4, Re=100 (a), N=11.25,
Re=100 (b), N=11.25, Re=400 (c), N=11.25, Re=2000 (d).
Dashed vertical lines mark borders of the magnetic obstacle.

 a: N=4, Re=100

 c: N=11.25, Re=400

2

y

0

y

0

−5

0

10

15

20

−5

0

10

15

20

 b: N=11.25, Re=100

 d: exp, N=11.25, Re=2000

y

0

y

0

5

−5

5

−5

5

x

5

x

5

−5

5

−5

5

x

5

x

−5

0

10

15

20

−5

0

10

15

20

FIG. 3: (color). Flow streamlines in the middle plane corresponding to proﬁles of Fig. 2 involving inner (red b − d), connecting
(green c, d), and attached (magenta c, d) vortices. Dashed lines mark borders of the magnetic obstacle.

As we shall show below, the foresaid analogy is partly
true. For the ﬁrst time we derive a complete physical in-
terpretation of new possible magnetohydrodynamic ﬂow
patterns and illustrate them by both 3D numerical sim-
ulations and physical experiments.

Let us recall that interaction parameter N represents
the ratio of the Lorentz forces to the inertial forces and
Reynolds number Re is the ratio of inertial and viscous
forces. From this we derive that (i) the higher N the
stronger is the braking Lorentz force inside the obsta-
cle and (ii) the larger Re the more pronounced is the
stagnant region behind the obstacle. Now we analyze
all possible dependencies of streamwise velocity along
the centerline (centerline curves), Fig.2, analogously as
it is shown in Fig. 1. Figure 3 illustrates these center-
line curves by ﬂow patterns obtained from 3D numerical
simulation and physical experiment. It is obvious to con-
clude that streamwise velocity inside the magnetic obsta-
cle is positive for small N (curve a) and might be negative
when N is higher than a critical value N m
(curves b − d).
c
Past the obstacle the ﬂow structure is analogous to that
of a solid cylinder shown in Fig. 1: at low Re the velocity
is positive (curves a, b), and it might be negative when
Re is larger Rec(N ) (curves c, d).

It is a signal for a reverse ﬂow when a centerline curve
becomes negative. Therefore, we deduce that in the most
developed case there must be a pair of vortices inside the
obstacle, which we call inner magnetic vortices and show
by red color in Fig. 3(b−d), and a pair of hydrodynamical
attached vortices past the obstacle marked by magenta
color in Fig. 3(c, d).

The inner vortices and the attached vortices show the

FIG. 4: (color) Topology of the ﬂow involving inner (red), con-
necting (green), and attached (magenta) vortices, bold dashed
lines mark borders of magnetic obstacle. Cross-marked are
ﬁxpoints, black lines are heteroclinic orbits.

same direction of rotation determined by the main ﬂow
movement. This means that a continuous ﬂow only can
exist, if the pair of inner vortices and the pair of attached
vortices are connected by contra-rotating connecting vor-
tices shown by green color in Fig. 3(c, d). These connect-
ing vortices correspond to a local maximum of centerline
curves in Fig. 2 at x ≈ 2.5. The resulting ﬂow structure
of Fig. 3(c, d) becomes clear from Fig. 4, where the 2D
ﬂow structure in the middle plane is organized around six
hyperbolic ﬁxpoints and their corresponding heteroclinic
invariant manifolds. As can be derived from nonlinear
topological dynamics [11] no other two-dimensional vol-
ume conserving and continuous diﬀerentiable ﬂow struc-
ture is possible, in which two pairs of vortices with the
same sense of rotation can coexist. The inner and con-
necting vortices with the surrounding invariant manifolds
replace the rigid body of Fig. 1, i.e. together form the
”obstacle” behind which attached vortices appear.

The ﬂow inside the obstacle is mainly dependent on
interaction parameter N which is inverse proportional to
velocity. Therefore, starting from a stable ﬂow without
vortices, inner vortices and then the six-vortex pattern
involving attached vortices appear by decreasing the ﬂow
rate. This is a paradoxical behavior being in contrast
to ordinary hydrodynamics where attached vortices from
the stable ﬂow always appear at increasing ﬂow rate.

To conﬁrm the foresaid theoretical ﬁnding experiments
have been performed. The measured centerline, curve
d in Fig. 2, agrees very well with simulated results in
the region of the magnets. Behind the magnets there is
a discrepancy which is obviously explained by the fact
that experimental Re = 2000 is essentially larger than
in 3D simulation. However, the experimental ﬂow struc-
ture shown in Fig. 3(d) is qualitatively the same as in
Fig. 3(c). Therefore, the found six-vortex pattern is sta-
ble even at Re = 2000. At enough high Re numbers the
whole picture will be completely dynamical and develop
vortex breakdown.

Direct quantitative comparison between experiment
and simulation is not possible due to the following rea-
sons. First, inlet ﬂow is laminar in simulations and tur-
bulent in experiments. Second, high experimental Hart-
mann number is diﬃcult to handle in a proper 3D simu-
lation since Hartmann layers must be ﬁnely resolved on
the bottom and top walls. For qualitative comparison
these factors are not important, since Re number plays
no role for the core ﬂow [12] and turbulent pulsations are
suppressed by magnetic ﬁeld [13].

Let us now shortly describe some technical issues. The
governing equations which were solved in the present 3D
simulation to obtain Fig. 2, 3 are composed of Navier-
Stokes plus Maxwell equations for moving medium and
Ohm’s law. Induced magnetic ﬁeld is assumed to be in-
ﬁnitely small compared to an external magnetic ﬁeld [3].
Then, these equations are the following:

∂u
∂t

+ (u · ∇)u = −∇p +

△u + N (j × B),
j = −∇φ + u × B, ∇ · u = 0, △φ = ∇ · (u × B),

1
Re

where u is velocity, B is external magnetic ﬁeld, j is elec-
tric current density, p is pressure, φ is electric potential.
The above equations were solved by an own self-made
3D solver for the same rectangular duct as in the exper-
iments. Technical numerical details are given in [12].

The experimental data presented in Fig. 2, 3 were
measured by one of the authors, O.A., with the Ul-
trasonic Doppler Velocimeter DOP2000, on the exper-
imental setup described in details in [13]. This setup
is represented by the Ga-In-Sn eutectic alloy ﬂowing
in the rectangular duct with sizes (Length × Width ×
Height)=2(Lx × Ly × H)=(50 × 10 × 2). The mag-
nets were assembled in a yoke and with horizontal sizes
(Length × Width)=2(Mx × My)=(3 × 4) and distance
between the poles h = 3. All numbers are in centime-
ters. Magnetic ﬁeld strength measured in the center of
the magnetic gap is B0 = 0.4T.

3

Re and N mentioned through the paper are deﬁned
with the parameters H, u0 and B0 equal to half-height
of the duct, the mean ﬂow velocity, and ﬁeld intensity
measured in the center of the magnetic gap, correspond-
ingly.

External magnetic ﬁeld was modelled as a ﬁeld from
two permanent magnets occupying a space Ω = {|x| ≤
Mx, |y| ≤ My, |z| >= h}, then B(r) = ∇ RΩ Bd(r, r′)dr′,
where Bd(r, r′) = ∂z′ (1/|r − r′|) is a ﬁeld created by a
single magnetic dipole. After algebraic calculations [14]
one obtains:

Bγ(x, y, z) = X

ijk Fγ(x − iMx, y − jMy, z − kh),

i,j,k=±1

where γ = x, y, z are for the magnetic ﬁeld compo-
nents, Fx(x, y, z) = tanh−1 y
r , Fy(x, y, z) = tanh−1 x
r ,
Fz(x, y, z) = tan−1 zr
xy , and r = (x2 + y2 + z2)−1/2. Such
an analytic approach is rather precise, as was tested by
comparing the calculated magnetic ﬁeld with the ﬁeld
measured experimentally.

Let us now turn to ﬁnal results presented as stability
diagrams in Fig. 5. They summarize the ﬂow behav-
ior around the magnetic obstacle dependent on the three
parameters Re, N and κ, where κ = My/Ly is the con-
strainment ratio between the lateral size of the magnet,
2My, and the width of the channel, 2Ly. The foresaid
simulated and experimental results correspond to a con-
strainment ratio of κ = 0.4.

In Fig.5(a) the constrainment factor is varied for the
given Reynolds number Re = 100. The less is κ, the less
is the inﬂuence of side walls on the ﬂow. The case of κ →
0 corresponds to a free ﬂow. The larger is κ, the more
spanwise uniform is the braking Lorentz force. Therefore,
in order to induce inner vortices at larger κ it is necessary
to apply a larger critical interaction parameter N m
c as one
can see in Fig. 5(a). At κ ≤ 0.5 the critical value of N m
c
is of the same order of magnitude, N m
c ≈ 6, and after
κ ≈ 0.8 rapidly increases up to N m
c ≈ 110 at κ = 1. We
believe that it is impossible to provoke magnetic vortices
at high κ corresponding to spanwise uniform magnetic
ﬁeld. This probably explains why inner magnetic vortices
have not been observed in earlier experiments.

At small constrainment ratio (κ ≪ 1) and ﬁxed Mx the
magnetic obstacle becomes very slim (magnetic blade)
compared to the channel width. Then, attached vortices
are not formed because of well streamlined shape of the
blade, while the magnetic vortices are originated as be-
fore. Now, these magnetic vortices are elongated along
side walls of the magnetic blade and are expanded in
spanwise direction if interaction parameter N increases.
Finally we present in Fig. 5(b) the stability diagram for
κ = 0.4. It shows, derived from a series of 3D simulation
and experiments, bifurcation lines N m
c (Re)
separating the existence regions of ﬂow without vortices
(I), with inner vortices (II), and ﬂow including inner mag-
netic vortices, connecting vortices and attached vortices
(III). To depict the borders between regions I-III we have
calculated several foothold points given in Fig. 5(b) by

c (Re) and N h

4

(a)

(b)

FIG. 5: (color). (a): Stability of inner magnetic vortices in dependence on constrainment κ and interaction parameter N at
ﬁxed Re = 100. (b): Global stability diagram giving the existence regions of all three ﬂow types described in this Letter in
dependence on (Re, N ) at ﬁxed κ = 0.4.

ﬁlled symbols. The open triangle symbol at Re = 4700
was obtained experimentally. Bifurcation points were de-
rived by monitoring the ﬁrst (for inner) respective second
(for attached vortices) minimum on centerline curves as
shown in Fig. 2. These minima must be exactly equal to
zero at the bifurcation between two ﬂow patterns. The
ﬁrst bifurcation takes place slightly above N ≈ 5 and is
almost independent of Re. If the magnetic vortices are
present, a minimum Reynolds number, Rem
c , is necessary
for the second bifurcation to the appearance of attached
vortices analogously to ordinary hydrodynamics. Since
we have never observed attached vortices in the simula-
tion with Re = 100 and N ≤ 36, Rem
is given near 100.
c
A series of experiments at various Re resulted in a critical
value of Rec ≈ 4700 for inner vortices which corresponds
to N m

c ≈ 5 ﬁtting well to the numerical values.

In summary, new phenomena are discovered for con-
ducting liquid ﬂowing through a magnetic obstacle. One
is the appearance of stable inner vortices inside the
obstacle at magnetic interaction parameter N ≥ N m
c .
The other is a new six-vortex ﬂow pattern appearing at
N ≥ N h
c (Re). This pattern is composed of three pairs
of vortices: inner, connecting, and attached. All the vor-
tices are found both in 3D numerical simulation and in
physical experiments.

Acknowledgment The authors express their gratitude
for ﬁnancial support from the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft under grants Th 479 and ZI 667. Many of the
simulations were carried out at the John von Neumann
Institute (NIC) located in the Research Center J¨ulich.
We would like also to mention fruitful discussions with
Thomas Boeck and Christian Karcher.

[2] J. A. Shercliﬀ, The theory of electromagnetic ﬂow-

[10] S. Cuevas, S. Smolentsev, and M. Abdou, J. Fluid Mech

[¶] E-mail: evgeny.votyakov@tu-ilmenau.de
[1] R. Feynman, R. Leighton, and M. Sands, Lectures on

physics. Vol II (Addison-Wesley, 1964).

measurement (Cambridge University Press, 1962).

[3] P. H. Roberts, An introduction to Magnetohydrodynamics

(Longmans, Green, New York, 1967).

[4] P. A. Davidson, An introduction to Magnetohydrodynam-

ics (Cambridge University Press, 2001).

[5] R. Moreau, Magnetohydrodynamics (Kluwer, 1990).
[6] P. Davidson, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 31, 273

(1999).

Lett. 96, 164501 (2006).

[8] Y. M. Gelfgat, D. E. Peterson, and E. V. Shcherbinin,

Magnetohydrodynamics 14, 55 (1978).

[9] Y. M. Gelfgat and S. V. Olshanskii, Magnetohydrody-

namics 14, 151 (1978).

553, 227 (2006).

[11] J. Guckenheimer and P. Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations,
Dynamical Systems and Bifurcations of Vector Fields
(Springer Verlag, New York, 1983).

[12] E. V. Votyakov and E. Zienicke, Fluid Dynamics and

Materials Processing (Accepted for publication).

[13] O. Andreev, Y. Kolesnikov, and A. Thess, Phys. Fluids

18, 065108 (2006).

arbitary magnetic ﬁelds, in preparation.

[7] A. Thess, E. V. Votyakov, and Y. Kolesnikov, Phys. Rev.

[14] E. V. Votyakov, A simple analytical approach to deﬁne

