7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

1

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns
in Plane Couette Flow

By D W I G H T B A R K L E Y1
A N D L A U R E T T E S. T U C K E R M A N2
1Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
www.maths.warwick.ac.uk/∼barkley
barkley@maths.warwick.ac.uk
2 LIMSI-CNRS, BP 133, 91403 Orsay, France
www.limsi.fr/Individu/laurette
laurette@limsi.fr

(Received ?? and in revised form ??)

A turbulent-laminar banded pattern in plane Couette ﬂow is studied numerically. This
pattern is statistically steady, is oriented obliquely to the streamwise direction, and has
a very large wavelength relative to the gap. The mean ﬂow, averaged in time and in
the homogeneous direction, is analysed. The ﬂow in the quasi-laminar region is not
the linear Couette proﬁle, but results from a non-trivial balance between advection and
diﬀusion. This force balance yields a ﬁrst approximation to the relationship between
the Reynolds number, angle, and wavelength of the pattern. Remarkably, the variation
of the mean ﬂow along the pattern wavevector is found to be almost exactly harmonic:
the ﬂow can be represented via only three cross-channel proﬁles as U(x, y, z) ≈ U0(y) +
Uc(y) cos(kz) + Us(y) sin(kz). A model is formulated which relates the cross-channel
proﬁles of the mean ﬂow and of the Reynolds stress. Regimes computed for a full range
of angle and Reynolds number in a tilted rectangular periodic computational domain
are presented. Observations of regular turbulent-laminar patterns in other shear ﬂows –
Taylor-Couette, rotor-stator, and plane Poiseuille – are compared.

1. Introduction

Pattern formation is associated with the spontaneous breaking of spatial symmetry.
Many of the most famous and well-studied examples of pattern formation come from ﬂuid
dynamics. Among these are the convection rolls which spontaneously form in a uniform
layer of ﬂuid heated from below and the Taylor cells which form between concentric
rotating cylinders. In these cases continuous translational symmetries are broken by the
cellular ﬂows beyond critical values of the control parameter – the Rayleigh number or
Taylor number.

A fundamentally new type of pattern has been discovered in large-aspect-ratio shear
ﬂows in recent years by researchers at GIT-Saclay (Prigent & Dauchot, 2000; Prigent et al.,
2002, 2003; Prigent & Dauchot, 2005; Bottin et al., 1998). Figure 1 shows an example
from plane Couette experiments performed by these researchers. One sees a remarkable
spatially-periodic pattern composed of distinct regions of turbulent and laminar ﬂow.
The pattern itself is essentially stationary. The pattern wavelength is large compared
with the gap between the plates and its wavevector is oriented obliquely to the streamwise
direction.

2

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 1. Photograph of a turbulent-laminar pattern in plane Couette ﬂow from the Saclay
experiment. Light regions correspond to turbulent ﬂow and dark regions to laminar ﬂow. The
striped pattern of alternating laminar and turbulent ﬂow forms with a wavevector k oblique
to the streamwise direction. The wavelength is approximately 40 times the half-gap between
the moving walls. The lateral dimensions are 770 by 340 half-gaps and the Reynolds number is
Re = 385. Figure reproduced with permission from Prigent et al.

The pattern emerges spontaneously from featureless turbulence as the Reynolds num-
ber is decreased. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 2 with time series from our numerical simula-
tions of plane Couette ﬂow for decreasing Reynolds number (conventionally deﬁned based
on half the velocity diﬀerence between the plates and half the gap). At Reynolds number
500, the ﬂow is uniformly turbulent. Following a decrease in the Reynolds number below
400 (speciﬁcally 350 in ﬁgure 2) the ﬂow organises into three regions of relatively laminar
ﬂow and three regions of more strongly turbulent ﬂow. While the ﬂuid in the turbulent
regions is very dynamic, the pattern is essentially steady.

Shear ﬂows exhibiting regular coexisting turbulent and laminar regions have a been
known for many years. In the mid 1960’s, a state known as spiral turbulence was discov-
ered (Coles, 1965; van Atta, 1966; Coles & van Atta, 1966) in counter-rotating Taylor-
Couette ﬂow. Consisting of a turbulent and a laminar region, each with a spiral shape,
spiral turbulence was further studied in the 1980s (Andereck, Liu & Swinney, 1986;
Hegseth, Andereck, Hayot & Pomeau, 1989). Experiments by the Saclay researchers
(Prigent & Dauchot, 2000; Prigent et al., 2002, 2003; Prigent & Dauchot, 2005) in a very
large aspect-ratio Taylor-Couette system have shown that the turbulent and laminar re-
gions in fact form a periodic pattern, of which the original observations of Coles and van
Atta comprised only one wavelength. Analogues of these states occur in other shear ﬂows
as well. Cros & Le Gal (2002) discovered large-scale turbulent spirals in the shear ﬂow
between a stationary and a rotating disk. Tsukahara, Seki, Kawamura & Tochio (2005)
observed oblique turbulent-laminar bands in plane Poiseuille ﬂow. A uniﬁed Reynolds
number based on the shear and the half-gap can be deﬁned for these diﬀerent ﬂows
(Prigent et al., 2003) and is described in the Appendix. When converted to compara-
ble quantities in this way, the Reynolds-number thresholds, wavelengths, and angles are
similar for all of these turbulent patterned ﬂows. The patterns are always found near the
minimum Reynolds numbers for which turbulence can exist in the ﬂow.

In this paper we present a detailed analysis of these turbulent-laminar patterns. We
will focus on a single case – the periodic pattern at Reynolds number 350. From computer
simulations, we obtain the ﬂow and identify the symmetries of the patterned state. We
consider in detail the force balance responsible for maintaining the pattern. From the
symmetries and harmonic content we are able to reduce the description to six ordinary-
diﬀerential equations which very accurately describe the patterned mean ﬂow.

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

3

Figure 2. Space-time plot from numerical simulations of plane Couette ﬂow showing the
spontaneous formation of a turbulent-laminar pattern at Re = 350. The kinetic energy in the
mid-plane is sampled at 32 equally spaced points along an oblique cut (in the direction of pattern
wavevector) through three wavelengths of the pattern. At time zero, Re = 500 and the ﬂow is
uniformly turbulent. Over about 3000 time units Re is decreased in steps to 350, and then held
constant.

2. Preliminaries

2.1. Geometry

The unusual but key feature of our study of turbulent-laminar patterns is the use of
simulation domains aligned with the pattern wavevector and thus tilted relative to the
streamwise-spanwise directions of the ﬂow. Figure 3 illustrates this and deﬁnes our co-
ordinate system. In ﬁgure 3(a) a simulation domain is shown as it would appear relative
to an experiment, ﬁgure 1, in which the streamwise direction (deﬁned by the direction of
plate motion) is horizontal. The near (upper) plate moves to the right and the far (lower)
plate to the left in the ﬁgure. As we have discussed in detail (Barkley & Tuckerman,
2005a,b), simulating the ﬂow in a tilted geometry has advantages in reducing computa-
tional expense and in facilitating the study of pattern orientation and wavelength selec-
tion. The important point for the present study is that the coordinates are aligned to
the patterns. The z direction is parallel to the pattern wavevector while the x direction
is perpendicular to the wavevector (compare ﬁgure 3(a) with ﬁgure 1).

Figures 3(b) and (c) show the simulation domain as it will be oriented in this paper. In
this orientation the streamwise direction is tilted at angle θ (here 24◦) to the x direction.
This choice of angle is guided by the experimental results and by our previous simula-
tions. (In past publications (Barkley & Tuckerman, 2005a,b) we have used un-primed
x − z coordinates for those aligned along spanwise-streamwise directions and primes for
coordinates tilted with the simulation domain. Here we focus exclusively on coordinates
ﬁxed to the simulation domain and so for convenience denote them without primes.) In
these tilted coordinates, the streamwise direction is

ex cos θ + ez sin θ ≡ αex + βez

(2.1)

where

α ≡ cos θ = cos(24◦) = 0.913,

β ≡ sin θ = sin(24◦) = 0.407.

(2.2)

We take Lx = 10, for the reasons explained in Jim´enez & Moin (1991); Hamilton et al.
(1995); Waleﬀe (2003); Barkley & Tuckerman (2005a,b). Essentially, Lx sin θ must be
near 4 in order to contain one pair of streaks or spanwise vortices, which are necessary to
the maintenance of low Reynolds number wall-bounded turbulence. Although our simu-
lations are in a three-dimensional domain, we will average the results in the homogeneous

4

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 3. Computational domain oriented at angle θ to the streamwise-spanwise directions.
The z direction is aligned to the pattern wavevector while the x direction is perpendicular to
the pattern wavevector. The turbulent region is represented schematically by hatching. (a)
Domain oriented with streamwise velocity horizontal, as in ﬁgure 1. (b) Domain oriented with
z horizontal, as it will be represented in this paper. In (a), (b) the near (upper) plate moves in
the streamwise direction; the far (lower) plate in the opposite direction. (c) View between the
plates.

x direction, as will be explained in section 2.3. For most purposes it is suﬃcient to view
the ﬂow in the z − y coordinates illustrated in ﬁgure 3(c). The midplane between the
plates corresponds to y = 0.

The length Lz of our computational domain is guided by the experimental results and
by our previous simulations. One of the distinctive features of the turbulent-laminar
patterns is their long wavelength relative to the gap between the plates. A standard
choice for length units in plane Couette ﬂow is the half-gap between the plates. In the
simulation with Lz = 120 and θ = 24◦ shown in ﬁgure 2, a pattern of wavelength 40
emerged spontaneously from uniform turbulence when the Reynolds number was lowered
to Re = 350. For this reason, the simulations we will describe below are conducted with
Lz = λz = 40. The corresponding wavenumber is

k ≡

= 0.157.

2π
40

This large wavelength, or small wavenumber, expresses the fact that the pattern wave-
length in z is far greater than the cross-channel dimension.

The ﬂow is governed by the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations

2.2. Equations and Numerics

∂u
∂t

= −(u · ∇)u − ∇p +

∇2u in Ω,

1
Re

0 = ∇ · u in Ω,

where u(x, t) is the velocity ﬁeld and p(x, t) is the static pressure. Without loss of
generality the density is taken to be one. The equations have been nondimensionalized
by the plate speed and the half gap between the plates. Ω is the tilted computational
domain discussed in the previous section.

No-slip boundary conditions are imposed at the plates and periodic boundary condi-

(2.3)

(2.4a)

(2.4b)

(2.5a)

(2.5b)
(2.5c)

(2.6)

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

5

tions are imposed in the lateral directions. In our coordinates the conditions are

u(x, y = ±1, z) = ±(ex cos θ + ez sin θ)
u(x + Lx, y, z) = u(x, y, z)
u(x, y, z + Lz) = u(x, y, z).

Linear Couette ﬂow uL is a solution to (2.4)–(2.5), which is stable for all Re and

satisﬁes

In our tilted coordinate system,

∇2uL = (uL · ∇)uL = 0

uL = y(ex cos θ + ez sin θ) = y(αex + βez) = uLex + wLez

(2.7)

The Navier-Stokes equations (2.4) with boundary conditions (2.5) are simulated using
the spectral-element (x-y) – Fourier (z) code Prism (Henderson & Karniadakis, 1995).
We use a spatial resolution consistent with previous studies (Hamilton et al., 1995;
Waleﬀe, 2003). Speciﬁcally, for a domain with dimensions Lx = 10 and Ly = 2, we
use a computational grid with 10 elements in the x direction and 5 elements in the y
direction. Within each element, we use 8th order polynomial expansions for the primitive
variables. In the z direction, a Fourier representation is used and the code is parallelized
over the Fourier modes. Our domain with Lz = 40 is discretized with 512 Fourier modes
or gridpoints. Thus the total spatial resolution we use for the Lx × Ly × Lz = 10 × 2 × 40
domain can be expressed as Nx ×Ny ×Nz = 81×41×512 = 1.7×106 modes or gridpoints.

2.3. Dataset and averaging

The focus of this paper is the mean ﬁeld calculated from the simulation illustrated by the
spatio-temporal diagram in ﬁgure 4(a). The velocity ﬁeld in the portion of the domain
shows high-frequency and high-amplitude ﬂuctuations, while the ﬂow in the right portion
is basically quiescent. We will call the ﬂow on the left turbulent, even though it could
be argued that it is not fully developped turbulence. We will call the ﬂow on the right
laminar, even though occasional small ﬂuctuations can be seen in this region.

The turbulent-laminar pattern subsists during the entire simulation of 14 × 103 time
units. However the pattern undergoes short-scale “jiggling”, seen particularly at the
edges of the turbulent regions, and longer-scale drifting or wandering in the periodic
z direction. We seek to describe the ﬁeld which results from smoothing the turbulent
ﬂuctuations, but for which drifting is minimal, by averaging over an appropriate time
interval. The desired averaging time interval represents a compromise between the short
and long timescales. We have chosen to average the ﬂow in ﬁgure 4(a) over the shaded
time interval [t, t + T ] = [6000, 8000], during which the pattern is approximately station-
ary.

The time-averaged ﬂow is homogeneous in x-direction. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 4(b)
where we plot one of the velocity components time-averaged ﬂow over the interval
[6000, 8000]. Cuts at diﬀerent x locations show that there is essentially no variation
in the x-direction. All other quantities are similarly independent of x. It is therefore
appropriate to consider mean ﬂows as averages over the x direction as well as over the
time.

(2.8a)

(2.8b)

(2.9a)

(2.9b)

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)

6

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

We deﬁne mean ﬂows as

hui(y, z) ≡

u(x, y, z, t) dxdt

hpi(y, z) ≡

p(x, y, z, t) dxdt.

1
T

1
T

1
Lx Z
1
Lx Z

t

t

t+T

Lx

t+T

Lx

0
Z

0
Z

The mean ﬁelds obey the averaged Navier-Stokes equations

0 = − (hui · ∇) hui − h(˜u · ∇) ˜ui − ∇hpi +
0 = ∇ · hui,

1
Re

∇2hui

where

˜u ≡ u − hui

is the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld and hi denotes x-t average. The mean ﬁelds are subject to the
same boundary conditions as equations (2.4). We denote the Reynolds-stress force from
the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld in equations (2.9) by F:

F ≡ −h(˜u · ∇) ˜ui = −∇ · h˜u˜ui,

We shall focus almost exclusively on the diﬀerence between the mean ﬂow and linear
Couette ﬂow, for which we introduce the notation

U ≡ hui − uL,

as well as P ≡ hpi.

Letting the components of U be denoted by (U, V, W ) and the components of F be
denoted by (F U , F V , F W ), then the averaged Navier-Stokes equations for the deviation
from linear Couette ﬂow in component form become

0 = − (V ∂y + (W + βy) ∂z) (U + αy)

+

(∂2

y + ∂2

z )U + F U

(2.13a)

0 = − (V ∂y + (W + βy) ∂z) V

− ∂yP +

(∂2

y + ∂2

z )V + F V

(2.13b)

0 = − (V ∂y + (W + βy) ∂z) (W + βy) − ∂zP +

(∂2

y + ∂2

z )W + F W (2.13c)

1
Re
1
Re
1
Re

U is required to satisfy homogeneous boundary conditions at the plates

0 = ∂yV + ∂zW.

U(y = ±1, z) = 0

(2.13d )

(2.14)

and periodic boundary conditions in z.

A system of this type, with three components depending on two coordinates, is some-
times called 2.5 dimensional. The transverse, or out-of-plane ﬂow U (y, z) appears only in
the ﬁrst equation and is eﬀectively a passive scalar advected by the in-plane ﬂow (V, W )
and driven by the Reynolds-stress force F U . The in-plane ﬂow can be expressed in terms
of a streamfunction Ψ where

V ey + W ez = ex × ∇Ψ = −∂zΨey + ∂yΨez.

(2.15)

We shall use both (U, V, W )(y, z) and (U, Ψ)(y, z) to describe the mean ﬂows.

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

7

Figure 4. (a) Timeseries of a turbulent-laminar pattern. Shown is the kinetic energy E = u·u/2
along the line x = y = 0 at 32 equally spaced points in z for 0 6 t 6 14000. The interval
(b) Time-averaged velocity at ﬁve x
[6000,8000] used for time averaging is shown in grey.
T R dt(u − uL),
locations illustrating the x-independence of the time-averaged ﬂow. Plotted is 1
the average x component of velocity with linear Couette ﬂow subtracted, averaged over the
interval [6000,8000] indicated in (a). Color range from blue to red: [–0.4, 0.4].

Figure 5. U (y, z): transverse component of mean ﬂow. Ψ(y, z): streamfunction of in-plane
mean ﬂow. A long cell extends from one laminar-turbulent boundary to the other. Gradients
In the laminar region at the center,
of Ψ are much larger in y than in z, i.e. |W | ≫ |V |.
W, V ≈ 0. Eturb(y, z): mean turbulent kinetic energy h˜u · ˜ui/2. There is a phase diﬀerence of
λz/4 = 10 between extrema of Eturb and of U . P (y, z): mean pressure ﬁeld. Pressure gradients
are primarily in the y direction and within the turbulent region. Color ranges for each ﬁeld from
blue to red: U [–0.4, 0.4], Ψ [0, 0.09], Eturb [0, 0.4], P [0, 0.007] .

3. Results

We present a characterisation of the turbulent-laminar pattern at Re = 350. We
describe in detail the mean ﬂow, its symmetries, and the dominant force balances within
the ﬂow. Our goal here is not to consider closures for averaged Navier-Stokes equations
(2.13). We will make no attempt to model the turbulence, i.e. to relate the Reynolds-
stress tensor h˜u˜ui to the mean ﬂow U. Instead we use fully resolved (three-dimensional,

8

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

time-dependent) numerical simulations of the turbulent ﬂow to measure both the mean
ﬁeld U and Reynolds-stress force F. From these we extract the structure of these ﬁelds
and the dominant force balances at play in sustaining turbulent-laminar patterns.

3.1. Mean ﬂow

The mean ﬂow is visualised in ﬁgure 5 via the transverse, out-of-plane ﬂow U (y, z) and
the in-plane streamfunction Ψ(y, z). Recall [equation (2.12)] that these ﬁelds are the
deviations of the mean ﬂow from linear Couette ﬂow uL. The mean turbulent kinetic
energy

(3.1)

h˜u · ˜ui

Eturb ≡

1
2
serves to clearly identify the turbulent region. In these and subsequent plots, the middle
of the laminar region is positioned at the centre of the ﬁgure and the turbulent region at
the periodic boundaries of the computational domain. In ﬁgure 5 (but not in subsequent
ﬁgures), plots are extended in the z-direction one quarter-period beyond each periodic
boundary to help visualise the ﬂow in the turbulent region. The pattern wavelength is
λz = 40, so that z = 30 and z = −10 describe the same point, as do z = −30 and z = 10.
The mean ﬂow can be described as follows. U is strongest in the turbulent-laminar
transition regions. In the transition region to the left of centre (z = −10) in ﬁgure 5,
U is negative and primarily in the upper half of the channel. To the right of centre
(z = 10), U is positive and is seen primarily in the lower half of the channel. Comparison
with turbulent kinetic energy shows that the transverse mean ﬂow U is out of phase
with respect to the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld ˜u by λz/4. This has been seen experimentally by
Coles & van Atta (1966) and Prigent et al. (2002, 2003, 2005).

The in-plane ﬂow Ψ in ﬁgure 5 has a large-aspect ratio cellular structure consisting of
alternating elliptical and hyperbolic points. The ﬂow around the elliptical points, located
in the centre of the turbulent regions, rotates in a counter-clockwise sense, opposing linear
Couette ﬂow. In the vicinity of the hyperbolic points, centred in the laminar regions, the
in-plane deviation from linear Couette ﬂow is very weak (W and V nearly zero).

Figure 6 shows y-proﬁles at four key points equally spaced along the pattern: centre
of the laminar region, turbulent-laminar transition region, centre of the turbulent region,
and the other turbulent-laminar transition region. While the V proﬁle is plotted, its
variation is very small on the scale of U and W and can essentially be used to indicate
the axis. Figure 7 shows proﬁles for the full mean ﬂow hui = U + uL containing the
linear Couette proﬁle.

The U proﬁles in ﬁgure 7 are S-shaped, of the type found in turbulent Couette ﬂow.
This is to be expected in the turbulent region, even at these low Reynolds numbers.
However, it is very surprising that the U proﬁle in the laminar region is also of this form.
In the laminar region, local Reynolds stresses are absent (see ﬁgure 5) and so cannot
be responsible for maintaining the S-shaped velocity proﬁle in the laminar regions. The
other prominent features in ﬁgures 6 and 7 are the asymmetric proﬁles at the transition
regions.

The relationship between the mean ﬂow ﬁeld and the regions of turbulence can be seen
in ﬁgure 8. Here the ﬂow is shown in the standard orientations. In each view, greyscale
indicates the size of the turbulent energy and the arrows show the mean ﬂow within the
plane. In the top two views, the ﬂow is shown in the streamwise-spanwise planes located
at y = 0.725 and at y = −0.725. The next view shows the ﬂow between the plates, i.e.in a
streamwise-cross-channel plane, and the last shows an enlargement of one of the laminar-
turbulent transition regions. Note that the length Lz = 40 of our tilted computational

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

9

Figure 6. Mean ﬂow proﬁles in y at four equally spaced locations in z. From left to right: centre
of the laminar region (z = 0), laminar-turbulent boundary (z = 10), centre of the turbulent
region (z = 20) and turbulent-laminar boundary (z = −10). Components U (blue, solid), V
(green, dotted), W (red, dashed) of deviation from linear Couette ﬂow uL.
In the laminar
region, W ≈ 0, indicating no deviation from uL. V is very small throughout.

Figure 7. Same as in ﬁgure 6, but with laminar Couette ﬂow uL included.

domain corresponds to a streamwise length of Lz/ sin θ = 40/.407 = 98.3 ≈ 100 and to a
spanwise length of Lz/ cos θ = 43.78.

The ﬂow in ﬁgure 8 can be compared with the mean ﬂow reported by Coles & van Atta
(1966) in experiments on turbulent spirals in Taylor-Coutte ﬂow. Coles and van Atta
measured the mean ﬂow near the midgap between the rotating cylinders and noted an
asymmetry between the mean ﬂow into and out of turbulent regions. They found that
the mean ﬂow into turbulent regions was almost perpendicular to the turbulent-laminar
interface whereas ﬂow out of the turbulent region was almost parallel to the turbulent-
laminar interface. We also observe a striking asymmetry between the mean ﬂow into and
out of the turbulent regions. The orientation of our mean ﬂow does not agree in detail
with that of Coles and van Atta, but this is most likely due to the fact that Coles and van
Atta considered circular Taylor-Couette ﬂow and measured the ﬂow near the mid-gap.
Referring to ﬁgures 5 and 6 one sees that the mid-plane (y = 0) is not the ideal plane
on which to obverve the mean ﬂow since its structure is most pronounced between the
midplane and the upper or lower walls.

Before considering the symmetries and force balances in detail, it is instructive to
consider the dominant force balance just at the centre of the laminar region. Recall that
one of the more interesting features of the mean ﬂow is that the U proﬁle appears very
similar to a turbulent proﬁle, even in the absence of turbulence in the laminar region.
Here the balance is dominated by advection and viscous diﬀusion, as shown in ﬁgure 9.

10

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 8. Mean velocity components seen in three planes with standard orientation for Couette
ﬂow. The turbulent regions are shaded. Top: velocity components in the streamwise-spanwise
plane at y = 0.725 (upper part of the channel). Middle: same except y = −0.725 (lower part
of the channel). Bottom: ﬂow in a constant spanwise cut. The mean velocity is shown in the
enlarged region.

Equation (2.13a) for ﬂow in the x-direction is

0 = − (V ∂y + (W + βy)∂z) (U + αy) +

(∂2

y + ∂2

z )U + F U .

(3.2)

1
Re

Variations in y dominate variations in z, i.e. the usual boundary-layer approximation
y + ∂2
y U holds; see, e.g. Pope (2000). Indeed, approximating the y dependence

(∂2
of U by the functional form sin(πy) suggested by ﬁgure 6, we have

z )U ≃ ∂2

O

∂2
y U
∂2
z U !

 

=

π2
k2 =

π2

(2π/40)2 = 400

This is conﬁrmed by the second panel of ﬁgure 9. In the centre of the laminar region F U ,
V , and W are all negligible, so that −βy∂zU dominates the advective terms, as shown
in the third panel of ﬁgure 9. Thus the balance between advection and viscosity in the
laminar region is

This equation is appealingly simple and yet leads immediately to some interesting

β y ∂zU ≈

1
Re

∂2
y U.

(3.3)

(3.4)

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

11

Figure 9. Balance of forces in the center of the laminar region. Left: Forces in the U direc-
tion. Advective terms (blue, solid), viscous terms (red, dashed), Reynolds-stress terms (green,
dotted). Middle: Viscous terms in the U direction. (1/Re) ∂2
yU (red, dashed) dominates dom-
inates (1/Re) ∂2
z U (green, dotted). Right: Advective terms in the U direction. Curves show
−β y ∂zU (blue, solid) −W ∂zU (black, dash-dot), −αV (green, dotted), −V ∂yU (red, dashed).
Right-most: Advective terms in the W direction (for later reference). Curves show −β y ∂zW
(blue, solid) −W ∂zW (black, dash-dot), −βV (green, dotted), −V ∂yW (red, dashed).

conclusions. The ﬁrst is that a non-zero tilt angle θ is necessary to maintain the S-
shaped U proﬁle in the laminar region, since otherwise β = sin θ = 0 and U could be at
most linear in y and would in fact be zero, due to the homogeneous boundary conditions
(2.14). The second conclusion follows from consideration of y parity. The multiplication
by y on the left-hand-side reverses y-parity, while the second derivative operator on the
right-hand-side preserves y parity. The conclusion is that U should be decomposed into
odd and even components in y and equation (3.4) should actually be understood as two
equations coupling the two components. Speciﬁcally, as can be seen in ﬁgure 6, U is odd
in y in the centre of the laminar region, yet ∂zU must be even for equation (3.4) to hold.
The remainder of the paper is devoted to formalising, demonstrating and extending

this basic idea.

3.2. Symmetry and Fourier modes

We now consider in depth the symmetry properties of the ﬂow. We start with the
symmetries of the system before averaging, that is, the Navier-Stokes equations (2.4)
and boundary conditions (2.5). The system has translation symmetry in x and z as well
as centrosymmetry under combined reﬂection in x, y and z:

κxyz(u, v, w)(x, y, z) ≡ (−u, −v, −w)(x0 − x, −y, z0 − z)

(3.5)

where the origin x0, z0 can be chosen arbitrarily. Linear Couette ﬂow uL possesses all
the system symmetries, as does the mean ﬂow at Reynolds numbers for which turbulence
is statistically homogeneous in x and z.

Note that in the absence of tilt (θ = 0), the system possesses two reﬂection symmetries.
These can be taken to be κxyz and reﬂection in the spanwise direction. For the tilted
domain (at angles other than multiples of 90◦), the only reﬂection symmetry is κxyz. This
can be seen in ﬁgure 3(a): for general tilt angles θ, spanwise reﬂection does not preserve
the domain, i.e. does not leave the periodic boundaries in place. The experimental
system shown in ﬁgure 1 possesses spanwise reﬂection symmetry and hence bands can be
observed in the either of the two symmetrically related angles, the choice is dictated by
factor such as initial conditions. By design, our tiled computational domain precludes
the symmetry-related pattern given by spanwise reﬂection.

The transition to the turbulent-laminar patterned state breaks symmetry. Speciﬁcally,
both the mean ﬂow and the Reynolds-stress force break z-translation symmetry but break

12

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

z even

z odd

y even

0.03% 25.48%

y odd

74.48% 0.01%

Table 1. Energy R dx R dy R dz |U|2/2 of deviation from Couette ﬂow contained in modes
with diﬀerent symmetries in y and z. Modes with centrosymmetry (opposite parity in y and z)
contain 74.48%+25.48%=99.96% of the total energy. Reﬂection in z is about the centre of the
laminar region.

neither x-translation symmetry nor centrosymmetry. The spatial phase of the pattern in
z is arbitrary, but given a phase there are two values of z0, separated by half a period,
for which the ﬂow is invariant under κxyz, as is typical for a circle pitchfork bifurcation
(Crawford & Knobloch, 1991). As can be seen in ﬁgure 5, the values of z0 about which
the patterns are centrosymmetric are the centres of the laminar (z0 = 0) and of the
turbulent (z0 = ±20) regions.

The centrosymmetry operator for our averaged ﬁelds U, which depend only on y and

z, is

(3.6)
κyz(U, V, W )(y, z) ≡ (−U, −V, −W )(−y, z0 − z)
Since the Reynolds-stress force (F U , F V , F W ) is centrosymmetric in the case we consider,
then the averaged equations (2.13) for the mean ﬁeld have centrosymmetry.

We formalise this further as follows. Any x-independent ﬁeld g can be decomposed

into even and odd functions of y and z as

g(y, z) = goo(y, z) + goe(y, z) + geo(y, z) + gee(y, z)

(3.7)

where, for example, goe is odd in y and even in z − z0. Applying the operator in (3.6) to
(3.7), we obtain

κyzg(y, z) = −goo(−y, z0 − z) − goe(−y, z0 − z) − geo(−y, z0 − z) − gee(−y, z0 − z)

= −goo(y, z) + goe(y, z) + geo(y, z) − gee(y, z)

For the ﬁeld g to be centrosymmetric requires κyzg = g, so that in fact

g(y, z) = goe(y, z) + geo(y, z)

(3.8)

(3.9)

Table 1, as well as ﬁgure 5, shows that this is indeed the case for U; it holds for F as
well.

We now Fourier transform in z to further decompose the mean velocity and the
Reynolds-stress force. We ﬁnd that the z-wavenumbers 0 and ±k have contributions
to U which are an order of magnitude higher than the remaining wavenumber combina-
tions. See table 2. The deviation from the z average is thus almost exactly trigonometric,
with almost no higher harmonic content. The dominance of these terms in the Fourier
series means that U and F can be represented by only three functions of y, namely:

g(x, y, z) = g0(y) + gc(y) cos(kz) + gs(y) sin(kz)

(3.10)

which is a special case of (3.9), with the ﬁrst two terms of (3.10) coinciding with goe(y, z)
and the last to geo. Thus, g0 and gc are odd functions of y, while gs is even. The

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

13

z even (cosine)

z odd (sine)

z wavenumber

0

k

> 2k

k

> 2k

y even

25.2% 0.3%

y odd

69.7%

4.7% 0.1%

Table 2. Energy contained in z Fourier modes. Modes retained (in boxes) are U0(y),
Uc(y) cos(kz) and Us(y) sin(kz). These contain 69.7%+4.7%+25.2%=99.6% of the total
energy.

Figure 10. Fourier decomposition of mean velocity. U component (blue, solid), V component
(green, dotted), W component (red, dashed). Wc ≈ −W0, corresponding to the fact that W
shows no deviation from the linear in the laminar region.

ﬁelds thus consist of a z-independent component g0 and two components which vary
trigonometrically and out of phase with one another, gc dominating in the laminar and
turbulent regions and gs dominating in the boundaries between them. Moreover, gs
dominates in the bulk, since g0 and gc are odd in y and thus zero in the channel centre.

g = g0(y) + gc(y)
g = g0(y) + gs(y)
g = g0(y) − gc(y)
g = g0(y) − gs(y)

z = 0 :
z = λz/4 = 10 :
z = λz/2 = 20 :
z = 3λz/4 = 30 :

Centre of laminar region

Laminar-turbulent boundary
Centre of turbulent region

Turbulent-laminar boundary

(3.11a)

(3.11b)
(3.11c)

(3.11d )

Figure 10 shows the three trigonometric components, each a function of y, obtained
by Fourier transforming U , V , and W . Figure 11 shows U , V and W as functions of z at
locations in the upper and lower channel and compares them with the values obtained
from the trigonometric formula (3.10) using the functions shown in ﬁgure 10. Figures 12,
13 and 14 depict U (y, z), Ψ(y, z) and F U (y, z) with their trigonometric decompositions.
Each of these ﬁgures uses only the three scalar functions of y, ﬁgure 10, to reproduce the
corresponding two-dimensional ﬁeld. As shown by equation (2.15), the streamfunction
Ψ of a centrosymmetric ﬁeld has symmetry opposite to that of the velocity components,
i.e. it is composed of functions of the same parity in y and z.

Figures 15 and 16 show the three Reynolds-stress forces and their Fourier decompo-

14

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 11. Mean ﬂow as a function of z at y = 0.725 (lower curves) and y = −0.725 (upper
curves). U (blue, solid), V (green, dotted), W (red, dashed). Dots show values calculated from
trigonometric formula (3.10).

sitions. Each component obeys Fc ≈ −F0, a necessary condition for F to vanish at
the centre of the laminar region, as shown by equation (3.11a) and also illustrated in
ﬁgure 14. More precisely,

c = −1.09F U
F U
0 ,

c = −1.22F V
F V
0 ,

c = −1.16F W
F W
0

In addition,

as is typical for turbulent channel ﬂows; see, e.g. Pope (2000).

F ≈ −∂yh˜u˜vi.

(3.12)

(3.13)

3.3. Force balance for U
We now turn to understanding the balance of forces responsible for maintaining the
mean ﬂow proﬁles. We focus primarily on U , both because it is the component of largest
amplitude and also because it appears only in equation (2.13a): U is subject to Reynolds-
stress and viscous forces, and is advected by (V, W ) but is not self-advected. We begin
by showing the balance of forces in the U direction as a function of z at locations in the
upper and lower channel in ﬁgure 17. One can again see the centrosymmetry of each
of the forces, i.e. invariance under the combined operations of reﬂection in y and z and
change of sign. The Reynolds-stress force disappears at the center of the laminar region
and the advective and viscous forces exactly counterbalance, as emphasized in the ﬁgures
on the right. Figure 18 shows another view of this balance, displaying the forces as a
function of y at four locations in z. As previously stated, ∇2U is dominated by ∂2
y U and
F U by −∂yh˜u˜vi. In ﬁgure 19, we show the Fourier-space analogue of ﬁgure 18.

We now turn to the more complex advective forces, whose Fourier decompositions are
shown in ﬁgure 20. The cos(0z) component of the advective force is small but non-zero.
Because this term results from the product of trigonometric functions, it also provides
a measure of the generation of higher harmonics, a point which we will explore further
in section 3.5. The advective cos(kz) term is well approximated by the contribution
from advection by wL = βy. The advective sin(kz) term is dominated near the walls by
advection by wL, but in the bulk by advection by V . Properties of the cos(kz) and sin(kz)
modes echo their physical space counterparts: the advective term is well approximated
by advection by wL in the laminar region, as was shown in ﬁgure 9, while the advective
forces in the laminar-turbulent boundaries combine advection by wL near the walls and
by V in the bulk.

We illustrate these conclusions via schematic visualizations of the dynamics of U . Fig-
ure 21 illustrates the dynamics in the laminar and turbulent regions. The dynamics in the

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

15

Figure 12. Mean velocity U and its trigonometric decomposition. Because the magnitude of
the ﬁelds vary, diﬀerent color scales are chosen to emphasize qualitative features. U (−0.2, 0.2),
U0 (−0.2, 0.2), Uc (−0.05, 0.05), Us (−0.154, 0.154).

Figure 13. Mean streamfunction Ψ(y, z) for deviation of in-plane ﬂow from linear Couette ﬂow
and its trigonometric decomposition. Color scale is Ψ (0, 0.09), Ψ0 (0, 0.046), Ψc (−0.042, 0.042),
Ψs (−0.008, 0.008).

Figure 14. Reynolds-stress force F U and its trigonometric decomposition. Color scale is

F U (−0.017, 0.017), F U

0 (−0.0085, 0.0085), F U

c (−0.0085, 0.0085), F U

s (−0.0085, 0.0085).

laminar region are essentially described by the simple balance between viscous diﬀusion
of U proﬁles and advection by linear Couette ﬂow in z, given by equation (3.4). Viscous
diﬀusion tends to reduce curvature, but the proﬁles have greater curvature upstream
(to the left for the upper channel, to the right for the lower channel). Hence advection
replenishes the curvature damped by viscosity. However, this trend towards greater cur-
vature upstream cannot continue indeﬁnitely, since the pattern is periodic in z. Hence
eventually a maximum is reached (at a turbulent-laminar boundary), beyond which the
curvature decreases upstream. Thus, in the turbulent region, advection and diﬀusion act
together to decrease curvature and must both be counter-balanced by turbulent forcing.
These features are essentially described by the cos(0z) = 1 and cos(kz) modes. Figure 22

16

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 15. Reynolds-stress force F = −h(˜u · ∇)˜ui as a function of y. Curves show F U (blue,
solid), F V (green, dotted) and F W (red, dashed).

Figure 16. Fourier decomposition of Reynolds-stress force. F U components (blue, solid), F V
components (green, dotted), F W components (red, dashed). Fc ≈ −F0, as required for the
vanishing of F at z = 0.

illustrates the dynamics in the turbulent-laminar boundaries. These dynamics include
advection by V in the bulk, leading to the U > 0 (U < 0) patch in the lower right (upper
left) of ﬁgure 12 and are described by the sin(kz) mode.

3.4. Force balance for W and V

Figure 23 shows the balance of forces in the W direction and ﬁgure 24 its analogue in
Fourier space. This balance resembles that in the U direction shown in ﬁgures 18 and 19.
In physical space (compare the leftmost panels of ﬁgures 23 and 18), the main diﬀerence
is that the advective and viscous forces are both small in the laminar region, in keeping
with the fact that W ≈ 0. The pressure gradient ∂zP is far smaller than the other forces
throughout (see below). In Fourier space (compare the middle panels of ﬁgures 24 and
19), the main diﬀerence with the U balance is that the relative importance of the viscous
and advective forces in the cos(kz) balance is reversed from that in the case of U : for
W , the viscous component is larger than the advective component, which is especially
small in the bulk. The decomposition of the advective terms (ﬁgure 25) shows that, as is
the case for U , the advective cos(kz) term is well approximated by the contribution from
advection by wL = βy, whereas all four advective components contribute to the sin(kz)
term.

The balance of forces in the V direction is entirely diﬀerent. The dominant balance in

this equation is:

0 = −∂yP + F V
as shown in ﬁgure 26. This is typical for turbulent channel ﬂows; see, e.g. (Pope, 2000).

(3.14)

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

17

Figure 17. Mean forces in U direction as a function of z at y = ±0.725 for turbulent-laminar
pattern at Re = 350. Advective −(U · ∇)U (blue, solid), viscous ∇2U (red, dashed), and
turbulent −h(˜u · ∇)˜ui (green, dotted) forces. In the laminar region (z ≈ 0), the Reynolds-stress
force vanishes and the viscous and advective forces are equal and opposite to one another. In
ﬁgures on right, enlarged around the laminar region, ∇2U and +(U·∇)U are shown to emphasize
equality between viscous and advective forces.

This balance between the mean pressure gradient P and the Reynolds-stress force F V
does not constrain or provide information about any of the velocity components. Since

F V = −∇ · h˜u˜vi ≈ −∂yh˜v2i

(3.15)

we in fact have

P ≈ −h˜v2i
up to a small z-dependent correction. Figure 5 shows the pressure ﬁeld P calculated from
(3.16) and suggests that its y dependence can be approximated by the functional form
cos(πy/2). This leads to an estimate of the relative importance of the pressure gradients
in the y and z directions:

(3.16)

while our data shows

∂yP
∂zP

O

(cid:18)

=

π/2
k

≈ 10

(∂yP )max
(∂zP )max

0.012
0.0017

= 7.05

(cid:19)

=

The same estimate applies to the relative magnitudes of V and W , using the stream-
function shown in ﬁgure 5:

while the actual ratio of maximum values is

O

= O

W
V

∂yΨ
∂zΨ

=

π/2
2π/40

= 10

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Wmax
Vmax

=

0.15
0.013

= 11.

(3.17)

(3.18)

(3.19)

(3.20)

18

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 18. Balance of forces in the U direction. Curves show advective force (blue, solid),
viscous force (red, dashed) and Reynolds-stress force (green, dotted). In the laminar region,
the Reynolds-stress force is negligible and the advective and viscous forces counter-balance one
another.

Figure 19. Balance of forces in the U direction, decomposed into modes. Curves show ad-
vective (blue, solid), viscous (red, dashed) and Reynolds-stress (green, dotted) forces. Mode 1:
Reynolds-stress and viscous forces approximately counterbalance each other. cos(kz): advection
is larger than viscous force, which is especially small in the bulk.

Figure 20. Advective terms in the U direction, decomposed into modes. Curves show −βy∂zU
(black, solid) −W ∂zU (blue, dash-dot), −αV (green, dotted), −V ∂yU (red, dashed). The 1
mode is generated by the product −kWcUs/2; a second harmonic of the same small size is also
generated. The cos(kz) mode is dominated by −β y k Us. The sin(kz) term is dominated by
β y k Uc near the boundaries and by −Vs∂y(U0 + αy) in the bulk.

3.5. Model equations

We now derive a system of ordinary diﬀerential equations by substituting the trigonomet-
ric form (3.10) into the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (2.13). The drawback
in this procedure is the usual one, namely that this form is not preserved by multiplica-
tion. However, Table 2 shows that higher harmonics contribute very little to U.

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

19

Figure 21. Schematic depiction of the dynamics of U near the centres of the laminar and of
the turbulent regions. The cross-channel direction is exaggerated. Shown are U (proﬁles) and
W +βy (arrows). Viscous diﬀusion tends to diminish both peaks of the proﬁle. In laminar region
surrounding z = 0, the peaks in the upper half-channel increase in amplitude with decreasing z;
advection towards positive z (upper arrow) replenishes these peaks, maintaining U . Conversely,
the peaks in the lower half-channel increase with z; advection towards negative z (lower arrow)
replenishes these peaks. That is, the sign of −(W + βy) ∂zU is opposite to that of ∂2
yU in both
the upper and lower parts of the laminar region.
In the turbulent region around z = ±20,
the size of the upper (lower) peak decreases to the left (right) and so advection, like viscous
diﬀusion, acts instead to diminish the peaks. U is maintained by the Reynolds-stress force, which
counterbalances both. The eﬀect is to modulate the amplitude of the U proﬁles periodically in
z.

Figure 22. Schematic depiction of the dynamics of U near the turbulent-laminar boundaries.
The cross-channel direction is exaggerated. Shown are U + αy (proﬁles), and (V, W + βy)
(arrows). Near the upper and lower walls, the U + αy proﬁles are advected towards increas-
ing/decreasing z by W + βy. In the bulk, advection by V is signiﬁcant. At z ≈ 10, V advects
downwards the right-moving ﬂuid in the upper portion of the channel. At z ≈ −10, V advects
upwards the left-moving ﬂuid in the lower portion of the channel. The eﬀect is to tilt the U = 0
boundary periodically in z.

We expand the advective term as:

((U + uL) · ∇)

(U + uL) = (V ∂y + (W + βy) ∂z)(U + αyex + βyez)

= (Vc cos(kz) + Vs sin(kz))(U′
s sin(kz) + αex + βez)
+ (W0 + βy + Wc cos(kz) + Ws sin(kz))(−k Uc sin(kz) + k Us cos(kz))

c cos(kz) + U′

0 + U′

(Vc U′

1
=
2
+ (Vc(U′
+ (Vs(U′
1
2

+

(Vc U′

s + k (Wc Us − Ws Uc))

c + Vs U′
0 + αex + βez) + k (W0 + βy)Us) cos(kz)
0 + αex + βez) − k (W0 + βy)Uc) sin(kz)
c − Vs U′

s + k (Wc Us + Ws Uc)) cos(2kz),

(3.21a)

(3.21b)

(3.21c)

(3.21d )

where primes denote y diﬀerentiation. We neglect the second harmonic term (3.21d),

20

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 23. Balance of forces in the W direction. Curves show advective term (blue, solid),
viscous force (red, dashed) and Reynolds-stress force (green, dotted). In the laminar region,
W ≈ 0 and each of the forces is negligible. In the turbulent region, the viscous and Reynold-
s-stress forces counter-balance one another. In the laminar-turbulent boundaries, the advective,
viscous and Reynolds-stress forces all play a role.

Figure 24. Balance of forces in the W direction, decomposed into modes. Curves show
advective term (blue, solid), viscous term (red, dashed) and turbulent forcing term (green,
dotted).

Figure 25. Advective terms in the W direction, decomposed into modes. Curves show −βy∂zW
(black, solid) −W ∂zW (blue, dash-dot), −βV (green, dotted), −V ∂yW (red, dashed). The
cos(kz) mode is dominated by −β y k Ws. The sin(kz) term is dominated by β y k Wc near the
boundaries and by −Vs∂y(W0 + βy) in the bulk.

and will discuss the accuracy of this approximation below. We now rewrite the U and
W components of the averaged momentum equations, neglecting the z-derivatives ∂2
z U ,
∂2
z W and ∂zP , as justiﬁed by equations (3.3) and (3.17):

0 = − (V ∂y + (W + βy) ∂z) (U + αy) +

0 = − (V ∂y + (W + βy) ∂z) (W + βy) +

1
Re
1
Re

∂2
y U + F U

∂2
y W + F W

(3.22a)

(3.22b)

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

21

Figure 26. Forces in the V direction. Reynolds-stress force F V (red, dashed) is counterbalanced
by pressure gradient −∂yP (blue, solid). Both are zero in the laminar region. Advective and
viscous forces (green, dotted) are negligible throughout.

Substituting (3.21a)–(3.21c) in (3.22) and separating terms in cos(0z) = 1, cos(kz) and
sin(kz), we obtain

(3.23a)

(3.23b)

(3.23c)

(3.23d )

(3.23e)

(3.23f )

(3.24a)
(3.24b)

(3.24c)

(3.25a)
(3.25b)

[VcU ′

c + VsU ′

s + k(WcUs − WsUc)] +

U ′′

0 + F U
0

0 = −

1
2
0 = −Vc(U ′

1
Re
c + F U
c

U ′′

1
Re
1
Re
0 + F W
0

0 + α) − k (W0 + βy)Us +

0 = −Vs(U

′
0 + α) + k (W0 + βy)Uc +

U

′′
s + F U
s

[VcW ′

0 = −

1
2
0 = −Vc(W ′

c + VsW ′

s] +

1
Re

W ′′

0 + β) − k (W0 + βy)Ws +

W ′′

c + F W
c

0 = −Vs(W ′

0 + β) + k (W0 + βy)Wc +

W ′′

s + F W
s

1
Re
1
Re

where the Fourier modes of V and W are related via those of the streamfunction Ψ of
(2.15):

V0 = 0
Vc = −kΨs
Vs = kΨc

′
W0 = Ψ
0
Wc = Ψ′
c
Ws = Ψ′
s

and where homogeneous boundary conditions are imposed:

0 = U0 = Uc = Us
0 = W0 = Wc = Ws

at y = ±1

at y = ±1

0 , F U

c , F U

s , F W

System (3.23) with boundary conditions (3.25) is composed of six ordinary diﬀerential
equations coupling the six scalar functions U0, Uc, Us, Ψ0, Ψc, Ψs of y, with six turbulent
forces F U

0 , F W

c , F W
s .

We have solved (3.23)–(3.25) numerically, using as inputs F U and F W obtained from
our full simulations, i.e. the F modes shown in ﬁgure 16. The resulting solutions are
shown in ﬁgure 27. For comparison, we reproduce from ﬁgure 10 the mean velocity
ﬁelds, in Fourier representation, from our full simulations (DNS). The ODE solutions are
virtually indistinguishable from the mean ﬁelds from DNS. Only in the sine component
of U can the ODE solutions be distiguished (and only very slightly) from the DNS
results. From the proﬁles in ﬁgure 27, the full mean ﬁelds could be constructed as in

22

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 27. Comparison between mean velocities (in Fourier representation) from full DNS and
ODE models. Top row: Curves show U (blue, solid) and W (red, dashed) from DNS. Dots
show solution to the full ODE model (3.23), essentially indistinguishable from the solid curves.
Bottom row: Curves again show U (blue, solid) and W (red, dashed) from DNS. Dots show
solution to simpliﬁed ODE model (3.26). The agreement with DNS is very good, though there
are small diﬀerences particularly in the U component.

ﬁgures 12 and 13. Thus, while the ODE model requires input of the Reynolds-stress force
terms, F U and F W , it demonstrates the simplicity of the force balance responsible for
generating the patterned ﬂow when viewed in the Fourier representation. Considering
higher harmonics would be straightforward, but would serve little purpose.

We can go in the other direction and attempt to simplify system (3.23). The approxi-
mate equalities F U
[see equation (3.12)], necessary for F to vanish
at the center of the laminar region, can be imposed exactly, reducing the number of tur-
bulent forcing input functions to four. The terms arising from the advective forces can be
reduced by making approximations justiﬁed from ﬁgures 20 and 25. The nonlinear terms

c ≈ −F W
0

c ≈ −F U

0 , F W

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

23

in (3.23a) and (3.23d) can be neglected. The advective terms in (3.23b) and (3.23e) can
be approximated by −k β y Us and −k β y Ws. Making these approximations, we obtain:

0 = −Vs(U ′

0 + α) + k(W0 + βy)Uc +

U ′′

s + F U
s

0 =

1
Re

U ′′

0 + F U
0

0 = −k β y Us +

1
Re

U ′′

c − F U
0

0 =

1
Re

W ′′

0 + F W
0

0 = −k β y Ws +

1
Re

W

′′
c − F W
0

1
Re

1
Re

(3.26a)

(3.26b)

(3.26c)

(3.26d )

(3.26e)

(3.26f )

0 = −Vs(W ′

0 + β) + k(W0 + βy)Wc +

W ′′

s + F W
s

The solutions to this simpliﬁed ODE model are also presented in ﬁgure 27. There is
quite good agreement with full DNS results, thus demonstrating that the dominant force
balance is captured by this very simple system of ODEs. We stress that the only nonlin-
earities in this model are in equations (3.26c) and (3.26f). This reﬂects the complexity
of the dynamics in the turbulent-laminar boundaries regions (and the simplicity of the
dynamics in the centre of the turbulent and laminar regions.)

From the simpliﬁed ODE model we can obtain the approximate equation satisﬁed at

the centre of the laminar region by adding equations (3.26a) and (3.26b):

1
Re
This is a restatement in terms of Fourier components of the balance described by equation
(3.4) and ﬁgure 9.

(U0 + Uc)′′.

k β y Us =

(3.27)

4. Discussion

We have presented an analysis of a particular turbulent-laminar pattern obtained in
simulations of large-aspect-ratio plane Couette ﬂow. We have focused on a single example
so as to understand in quantitative detail the structure of these unusual ﬂows. The
key ﬁndings obtained in our study are as follows. First we ﬁnd that in the (quasi-)
laminar ﬂow region the velocity proﬁles are not simply those of linear Couette ﬂow.
Instead a non-trivial ﬂow is maintained in the laminar regions by a balance between
viscous diﬀusion and nonlinear advection. Next we have considered the symmetries
of the ﬂow. When the pattern forms, the time-averaged ﬂow breaks the translation
symmetry but not centrosymmetry. The patterned state is centrosymmetric about the
centre of the laminar region and about the center of the turbulent region. Next we
have considered a spatial Fourier decomposition of the mean ﬂow in the direction of the
pattern wavevector. From this we ﬁnd that the lateral structure of the pattern is almost
completely harmonic, i.e. composed of a constant and single harmonic. Thus the pattern
description can be reduced to just three cross-channel functions for each ﬁeld, in that
U(x, y, z) ≈ U0(y) + Uc(y) cos(kz) + Us(y) sin(kz). The absence of higher harmonics
suggests that the pattern is near the threshold, in some sense, of a linear instability of
a uniform turbulent state. Such an instability would be governed by a linear equation
with coeﬃcients which are constant in z, whose solutions are necessarily trigonometric
in z.

24

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

From our analysis of the turbulent-laminar pattern, in particular its Fourier decompo-
sition, we derive a model which reproduces the patterned ﬂow. The model is derived from
the averaged Navier-Stokes equations with the following assumptions. The crucial as-
sumption, which is strongly supported by our numerical computations, is that the mean
ﬂow can be expressed in terms of just three horizontal modes. Eﬀectively the generation
of higher harmonics via nonlinear terms in the Navier-Stokes equations is negligible in
the mean ﬂow. The model is then further simpliﬁed because viscous diﬀusion is dom-
inated by cross-channel diﬀusion – the standard boundary-layer approximation – and
because pressure variation is negligible along the pattern wavevector. We take as input
to the model the Reynolds-stress forces measured from computations. Assuming that
the Reynolds stresses exactly vanish in the centre of the laminar regions, the number of
inputs to the model is just four cross-channel functions. The result is a system of six
simple ordinary diﬀerential equations which depend on four forcing functions. The model
equations accurately reproduce the mean ﬂow from full direct numerical simulations.

A number of other researchers have attempted to reduce the description of turbulent
or transitional plane Couette ﬂow by various means. At these low Reynolds numbers,
there is no doubt that fully resolved direct numerical simulation is feasible and gives
accurate results. The purpose of formulating a reduced description is therefore to yield
understanding. We now comment on the diﬀerences between the approaches used by
other authors and our reduction.

In parallel with their experiments, Prigent et al. (2002; 2003) considered a pair of cou-
pled Ginzburg-Landau (GL) equations with additive noise as a model for the transition
from uniform turbulence to turbulent-laminar banded patterns via noisy (intermittent)
patterns. These equations describe the variation in time and spanwise coordinate of the
amplitudes A± of two sets of laminar bands at opposite tilt angles. These laminar bands
modulate the uniform turbulence in competition with one another. Each equation sepa-
rately has one reﬂection symmetry which corresponds physically to the centrosymmetry
κyz (equation (3.6)) of a banded pattern. The coupled GL equations possess a second
reﬂection symmetry, corresponding physically to a spanwise reﬂection, which takes the
amplitude A+ to A− and vice versa. By design, this symmetry is not present in our nu-
merical computations. Prigent et al. used their experimental results to ﬁt the parameters
in the GL equation and then compared simulations of the equations with experimental
results. Steady patterns in the resulting GL equations have only one non-zero amplitude
and this amplitude possesses the reﬂection symmetry corresponding to κyz. Hence, the
steady patterns in these simulations have exactly the symmetries of the patterns we have
considered.

An important class of models aims at reproducing dynamics of streamwise vortices and
streaks in plane Couette turbulence by using a small number of ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions (ODEs). These equations describe the time-evolution of amplitudes of modes with
ﬁxed spatial dependence. Waleﬀe (1997), guided by the discovery of the self-sustaining
process (SSP) in direct numerical simulations (Hamilton et al., 1995), derived a system
of eight ODEs, whose variables represent amplitudes of the key ingredients of the SSP,
namely longitudinal vortices, streaks, and streak waviness. This model was later also
studied and extended by Dauchot & Vioujard (2000) and by Moehlis, Faisst & Eckhardt
(2004).

Two other Galerkin projection procedures have been used to derive ODE models.
The most energetic streamwise-independent modes in a principle orthogonal composi-
tion has been used as a basis for a 13-equation model (Moehlis, Smith & Holmes, 2002)
exhibiting heteroclinic cycles; when streamwise-dependent modes are added, the result-
ing 31-equation model (Smith, Moehlis & Holmes, 2005) reproduces elements of the SSP

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

25

cycle. Eckhardt and co-workers (Schmiegel & Eckhardt, 1997; Eckhardt & Mersmann,
1999) have proposed a Fourier space truncation of the Navier-Stokes equations in all three
spatial directions leading to a 19-equation model. They calculated turbulent lifetimes
and saddle-node bifurcations giving rise to new steady states in this model.

Manneville and co-workers (Manneville & Locher, 2000; Lagha & Manneville, 2006)
have proposed a drastic Galerkin truncation in the cross-channel direction y, retaining one
or two trigonometric (for free-slip boundary conditions) or polynomial (for rigid boundary
conditions) basis functions, but fully resolving both lateral directions. Simulating the
resulting PDEs using a Fourier basis, they have been able to study phenomena such as
the statistics of lifetimes of turbulent spots in domains with very large lateral dimensions.
The reduction we have presented diﬀers from the aforementioned studies in several
respects. Most importantly, we do not describe any time-dependent behaviour. We
consider here neither turbulent-laminar patterns which are themselves dynamic (as in
Prigent et al.), nor do we consider the dynamics of streaks and vortices within the tur-
bulence, nor do we consider the transient dynamics of turbulence.
Instead we focus
on the spatially periodic mean ﬂow of steady turbulent-laminar patterns. While the
turbulent portions of patterns are dynamic, containing streaks and streamwise vortices,
these are on a ﬁne scale relative to spatial scales of interest here. Our model description
follows directly from an analysis of full numerical simulations (not from any a priori
assumptions, physical or phenomenological), that show that all averaged velocity com-
ponents and forces, including the Reynolds stress force, are almost exactly trigonometric
in the direction of the pattern wavevector. It follows directly that the steady Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes equations can be reduced to 6 ODEs for cross-channel proﬁles of
the Fourier modes.

One of the more signiﬁcant aspects of this work is the consideration of the force balance
in just the laminar region. This balance is expressed by simple equations either in
physical space, equation (3.4), or in Fourier space, equation (3.27). These equations are
particularly interesting because they do not contain the Reynolds stresses, as these are
negligable in the laminar region, and hence their implications can be understood without
the need for closure assumptions.

As noted in §3.1, equation (3.4) implies that a non-zero tilt angle is necessary to
maintain the S-shaped U proﬁle in the laminar region. If the patterns were not tilted, the
ﬂow would necessarily be laminar Couette ﬂow in the centre of the laminar regions where
the turbulence vanishes. We can also derive implications for the relationship between
Reynolds number, tilt angle and wavelength of the patterns from equation (3.4), which
we rewrite as:

Re sin θ
λ

=

(U0 + Uc)′′
2π y Us

(4.1)

Except where y Us ≈ 0, the function on the right-hand-side is indeed approximately
constant across the channel, between about 2.8 and 3.6. The value of Re sin θ/λ used in
our simulations is 350 sin(24◦)/40 = 3.56.

We may obtain a qualitative understanding of this constant as follows; see ﬁgure 28
(left). Observe that in the center of the laminar region, the functional form of U = U0+Uc
is like sin(πy). Hence its second y derivative can be approximated by multiplication by
−π2, or equivalently (U0 + Uc)′′/(−π2) ≈ U0 + Uc. We also ﬁnd that the odd function
−2 y Us is close to U0 + Uc and is in fact almost indistinguishable from (U0 + Uc)′′/(−π2).
This implies that the right-hand-side of equation (4.1) is nearly constant across the

26

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Figure 28. Left: Comparison of proﬁles of U0 + Uc (solid), (U0 + Uc)′′/(−π2) (dashed) and
−2 y Us (points). The proﬁle of (U0 + Uc)′′/(−π2) is close to U0 + Uc, in accordance with
the approximate functional form (U0 + Uc) ∼ sin(πy). Note that (U0 + Uc)′′/(−π2) is almost
indistinguishable from −2 y Us, showing that (U0 + Uc)′′/(2π y Us) is near π over the entire
channel.
Right: Plot of Re sin θ/λ as a function of Re for the experimentally observed patterns of Prigent
et al. (2003, 2005). The open triangle shows Re sin θ/λ = 3.56 for the case studied numerically
in this paper.

channel and equal to π, leading to:

Re sin θ
λ

≈ π

(4.2)

We believe that equation (4.2) provides a good ﬁrst approximation for the relation-
ship between Re, λ, and θ. Figure 28 (right) shows a plot of Re sin θ/λ as a function
It can be seen that this
of Re from the experimental data of Prigent et al. (2003).
combination of quantities is approximately constant with a value near π. The range of
values of the individual factors Re, θ, and λ can be seen in table 3. In prior studies
(Barkley & Tuckerman, 2005a,b), we have studied a large range of Reynolds numbers
and tilt angles in a domain of length Lz = 120. In this domain, the wavelength of a
periodic pattern is less constrained, though it must be a divisor of 120. Figure 29 shows
the observed states as a function of Re and θ. Equation (4.2) captures the correct order
of magnitude of Re sin θ/λ; speciﬁcally 1.8 . Re sin θ/λ . 5. Moreover, in ﬁgure 29 one
sees that for ﬁxed Re, λ increases with increasing θ, as (4.2) predicts.

Equation (4.2) does not hold in detail, however. Most notably, ﬁgure 29 shows that
when Re is decreased at ﬁxed θ, the wavelength λ increases rather than decreases as one
would expect from (4.2). We believe that the force balance (3.4) holds for all patterns
which possess a laminar region free of turbulence, but that the additional approximations
made in deriving the simple relationship (4.2) do not hold over the full range of conditions
considered in ﬁgure 29. In particular, the right-hand-side of (4.1) depends implicitly on
Re, θ, and λ via the dependence of U0, Uc, and Us on these quantities. The approximate
functional relationships between U0, Uc and Us that we have observed in our simulations
and on which we have relied in deriving (4.2) may not hold for other parameter values.
Finer adjustments must come from another mechanism.

The main issue not addressed in our study is closure. We have not attempted to relate
the forcing of the mean ﬂow due to Reynolds stresses back to the mean ﬂow itself. In
the future we will report on studies employing closure models.

We thank F. Daviaud, O. Dauchot, P. Le Gal, P. Manneville and A. Prigent for helpful
comments. The simulations analyzed in this work were performed on the IBM Power

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

27

Figure 29. Patterns as a function of Reynolds number Re and θ in a computational domain
of size Lx × Ly × Lz = (4/ sin θ) × 2 × 120. Turbulent-laminar patterns with wavelength λ = 40
(×), λ = 60 (•), λ = 120 (∗). Uniform turbulence ((cid:4)), intermittent turbulence (⊠), laminar
Couette ﬂow ((cid:3)). Wavelengths in computations are constrained to be divisors of 120. Numbers
are wavelengths of experimentally observed patterns of Prigent et al. (2003, 2005).

PC

TC

RS

PP

Re

λstream

λspan

λz

θ

340

110

83

60
37◦

395

110

52

46
25◦

340

145

70

63
26◦

415

95

35

33
20◦

303

71

24

23
19◦

438

106

36

34
19◦

357

103

45

41
24◦

Table 3. Turbulent-laminar banded patterns in plane Couette (PC), Taylor-Couette (TC),
rotor-stator (RS), and plane Poiseuille (PP) ﬂow. Parameters reported in Prigent et al. (2003);
Cros & Le Gal (2002); Tsukahara et al. (2005) are converted to a uniform Reynolds number
based on the average shear and half-gap, as described in the Appendix. The two columns
correspond to the values at the minimum and maximum Reynolds number reported.

4 of the IDRIS-CNRS supercomputing center as part of project 1119. This work was
supported in part by a CNRS-Royal Society grant.

Appendix. Turbulent-laminar bands in other shear ﬂows

Turbulent-laminar banded patterns have been observed in a number of shear ﬂows:
plane Couette (PC) ﬂow, Taylor-Couette (TC) ﬂow, rotor-stator (RS) ﬂow (torsional
Couette ﬂow; the ﬂow between diﬀerentially rotating disks) and plane Poiseuille (PP)

28

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

ﬂow (channel ﬂow). Comparisons between these ﬂows are impeded by the fact that
diﬀerent conventions are used to non-dimensionalise each of them.

In order to compare their observations in Taylor-Couette ﬂow with those in plane
Couette ﬂow, Prigent, Gregoire, Chat´e & Dauchot (2003) generalise the Reynolds num-
ber used in plane Couette ﬂow U = y/h by considering it as based on the shear and the
half-gap:

ReP C =

(ShearPC) (half-gap)2
ν

=

U

h h2
ν

=

U h
ν

(A 1)

For ﬂows whose shear is not constant, the average shear is used. We also convert stream-
wise and spanwise wavelengths to total wavelength and angle of the pattern wavevector
via

tan(θ) =

λz = λspan cos(θ)

(A 2)

λspan
λstream

Table 3 presents the Reynolds numbers, wavelengths, and angles for which turbulent-
laminar patterns have been observed experimentally or numerically. The subsections
which follow explain how Table 3 was obtained from the data in Prigent et al. (2003);
Cros & Le Gal (2002); Tsukahara et al. (2005).

A.1. Taylor-Couette ﬂow

For Taylor-Couette ﬂow between diﬀerentially rotating cylinders, the azimuthal and axial
directions correspond to the streamwise and spanwise directions of plane Couette ﬂow.
For cylinders of radius ri and ro, rotating at angular velocities ωi and ωo with 2h ≡ ro −ri
and η ≡ ri/ro, the shear averaged over the gap is

leading to the Reynolds number:

hShearTCi =

riωi − ηroωo
(1 + η)h

ReTC ≡

riωi − ηroωo
(1 + η)h

h2
ν

≈

Rei − Reo
4ν

where the last approximate equality corresponds to exact counter-rotation (ωo = −ωi)
and the narrow gap limit (η → 1), and Ri, Ro are the conventionally deﬁned inner
and outer Reynolds numbers, e.g. Rei ≡ 2hriωi/ν. The wavelengths and Reynolds
numbers observed in Taylor-Couette and plane Couette ﬂow are compared in Figure 5
of Prigent et al. (2003).

The laminar proﬁle for torsional Couette ﬂow between a rotating and a stationary disk
(rotor-stator ﬂow) is

A.2. Torsional Couette ﬂow

and the Reynolds number based on axial shear and half-gap is

For m spirals, the azimuthal wavelength in units of the half-gap is

u = eθ

ω r z
h

ReRS =

ωr
h

h2
4ν

=

ωrh
4ν

λRS
stream =

2πr
mh/2

=

4πr
mh

(A 3)

(A 4)

(A 5)

(A 6)

(A 7)

Mean Flow of Turbulent-Laminar Patterns

29

Turbulent spiral patterns which are rather regular occur for a range of angular velocities
and radii. In their ﬁgures 12, 16 and 18, Cros & Le Gal (2002) focus particularly on the
radius and gap:

r = 0.8 × 140 mm = 11.2 cm

h = 0.22 cm

(A 8)

The highest and lowest rotation rates for which turbulent spirals are seen are

ω = 68 rev/min = 7.12 rad/sec
ω = 47 rev/min = 4.92 rad/sec

(A 9a)
(A 9b)
Substituting (A 8)-(A 9) and the viscosity ν = 10−2 cm2/sec of water into (A 6)-(A 7)
leads to the values shown in Table 3. The pitch angle of the spirals remains approximately
constant at 19◦. We use (A 2) to calculate λspan and λz, neglecting the variation in radius.

with m = 6
with m = 9

A.3. Plane Poiseuille ﬂow
Figure 14 of Tsukahara, Seki, Kawamura & Tochio (2005) shows a visualisation from a
direct numerical simulation of plane Poiseuille (PP) ﬂow in a channel with domain and
Reynolds number

Lstream × Ly × Lspan = 51.2 δ × 2 δ × 22.5 δ

Rec ≡

= 1430

(A 10)

ucδ
ν

where uc is the centerline velocity. The domain contains a single wavelength of an oblique
turbulent-laminar banded pattern oriented at θ = 24◦ to the streamwise direction. (Both
the wavelength and the angle are dictated by the computational domain.) Following
Waleﬀe (2003), we view the Poiseuille proﬁle in the half-channel [−δ, 0], over which the
shear has one sign, as comparable to the Couette proﬁle in the channel [−h, h], and thus
take δ/2 as the unit of length, rather than δ. The shear is obtained by averaging over
[−δ, 0]:

hShearPPi =

du
dy

=

uc
δ

(cid:28)

(cid:29)

(A 11)

For the Reynolds number based on the average shear and half-gap, we obtain

RePP =

hShearPPi (half-gap)2
ν

=

uc
δ

δ2
4

ν

=

ucδ
4ν

=

Rec
4ν

=

1430
4

= 357.5

(A 12)

References
Andereck, C. D., Liu, S. S. & Swinney, H. L. 1986 Flow regimes in a circular
Couette system with independently rotating cylinders. J. Fluid Mech. 164, 155–183.
van Atta, C. W. 1966 Exploratory measurements in spiral turbulence. J. Fluid Mech.

25, 495–512.

Barkley, D. & Tuckerman, L. S. 2005a Computational study of turbulent laminar

patterns in Couette ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 014502.

Barkley, D. & Tuckerman, L. S. 2005b Turbulent-laminar patterns in plane Couette
ﬂow. In IUTAM Symposium on Laminar-Turbulent Transition and Finite Amplitude
Solutions (ed. T. Mullin & R. Kerswell), pp. 107–127. Dordecht: Springer.

Bottin, S., Daviaud, F., Manneville, P. & Dauchot, O. 1998 Discontinuous
transition to spatiotemporal intermittency in plane Couette ﬂow. Europhys. Lett. 43,
171–176.

Coles, D. 1965 Transition in circular Couette ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech. 21, 385–425.
Coles, D. & van Atta, C. W. 1966 Progress report on a digital experiment in spiral

turbulence. AIAA J. 4, 1969–1971.

30

D. Barkley and L. S. Tuckerman

Crawford, J. & Knobloch, E. 1991 Symmetry and symmetry-breaking bifurcations

in ﬂuid dynamics. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 23, 341–387.

Cros, A. & Le Gal, P. 2002 Spatiotemporal intermittency in the torsional Couette

ﬂow between a rotating and a stationary disk. Phys. Fluids 14 (11), 3755–3765.

Dauchot, O. & Vioujard, N. 2000 Phase space analysis of a dynamical model for
the subcritical transition to turbulence in plane Couette ﬂow. Eur. Phys. J. B 14,
377–381.

Eckhardt, B. & Mersmann, A. 1999 Transition to turbulence in a shear ﬂow. Phys.

Rev. E 60, 509–517.

Hamilton, J. M., Kim, J. & Waleffe, F. 1995 Regeneration mechanisms of near-wall

turbulence structures. J. Fluid Mech. 287, 317–348.

Hegseth, J. J., Andereck, C. D., Hayot, F. & Pomeau, Y. 1989 Spiral turbulence

and phase dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (3), 257–260.

Henderson, R. D. & Karniadakis, G. E. 1995 Unstructured spectral element meth-

ods for simulation of turbulent ﬂows. J. Comput. Phys. 122 (2), 191–217.

Jim´enez, J. & Moin, P. 1991 The minimal ﬂow unit in near-wall turbulence. J. Fluid

Lagha, M. & Manneville, P. 2006 On the modeling of transitional plane Couette

Manneville, P. & Locher, F. 2000 A model for transitional plane Couette ﬂow. C.R.

Moehlis, J., Faisst, H. & Eckhardt, B. 2004 A low-dimensional model for turbulent

Mech. 225, 213–240.

ﬂow. Eur. Phys. J. B to appear.

Acad. Sci. Paris II b 328, 159–164.

shear ﬂows. NJP 6, 56.

Moehlis, J., Smith, T. & Holmes, P. 2002 Models for turbulent plane Couette ﬂow

using the proper orthogonal decomposition. PF 14, 2493–2507.

Pope, S. 2000 Turbulent Flows. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Prigent, A. & Dauchot, O. 2000 ’Barber pole turbulence’ in large aspect ratio Taylor-

Couette ﬂow. arXiv:cond-mat/00009241 .

Prigent, A. & Dauchot, O. 2005 Transition to versus from turbulence in subcritical
Couette ﬂows. In IUTAM Symposium on Laminar-Turbulent Transition and Finite
Amplitude Solutions (ed. T. Mullin & R. Kerswell), pp. 193–217. Dordecht: Springer.
Prigent, A., Gregoire, G., Chat´e, H. & Dauchot, O. 2003 Long-wavelength

modulation of turbulent shear ﬂows. Physica D174 (1-4), 100–113.

Prigent, A., Gregoire, G., Chat´e, H., Dauchot, O. & van Saarloos, W. 2002
Large-scale ﬁnite-wavelength modulation within turbulent shear ﬂows. Phys. Rev. Lett.
89 (1), 014501.

Schmiegel, A. & Eckhardt, B. 1997 Fractal stability border in plane Couette ﬂow.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (26), 5250.

Smith, T., Moehlis, J. & Holmes, P. 2005 Low-dimensional models for turbulent

plane Couette ﬂow in a minimal ﬂow unit. J. Fluid Mech. 538, 71–110.

Tsukahara, T., Seki, Y., Kawamura, H. & Tochio, D. 2005 DNS of turbulent
channel ﬂow at very low Reynolds numbers. In Proc. 4th Int. Symp. on Turbulence
and Shear Flow Phenomena, pp. 935–940.

Waleffe, F. 1997 On a self-sustaining process in shear ﬂows. Phys. Fluids 9 (6), 883–

Waleffe, F. 2003 Homotopy of exact coherent structures in plane shear ﬂows. Phys.

900.

Fluids 15 (6), 1517–1534.

