7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experiments in Fluids manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Pierre Lancien ·

´Eric Lajeunesse · Franc¸ois M´etivier ·

Near-wall velocity measurements by Particle-Shadow-Tracking

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

Abstract We report a new method to measure the velocity
of a ﬂuid in the vicinity of a wall. The method, that we call
Particle-Shadow Tracking (PST), simply consists in seed-
ing the ﬂuid with a small number of ﬁne tracer particles of
density close to that of the ﬂuid. The position of each par-
ticle and of its shadow on the wall are then tracked simul-
taneously, allowing one to accurately determine the distance
separating tracers from the wall and therefore to extract the
velocity ﬁeld. We present an application of the method to the
determination of the velocity proﬁle inside a laminar density
current ﬂowing along an inclined plane.

Keywords Velocity proﬁle · PIV

1 Introduction

Measuring the velocity of a ﬂuid in the vicinity of a wall is
relevant to a great number of fundamental and applied inves-
tigations such as understanding the structure and dynamics
of boundary layers (8; 2; 3). In practice, such measurements
are difﬁcult as they require to achieve a high accuracy on
both the velocity and the distance to the wall, the proxim-
ity of which makes unfortunately difﬁcult to reach. Optical
methods such as Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) or laser
anemometry usually fail to meet these two criteria when op-
erating too close to a wall and are therefore inappropriate for
such measurements (1; 7).

In this paper, we present a new and simple experimental
technique developed to perform local measurement of the
velocity ﬁeld of a ﬂuid near a wall. This method, that we
call Particle-Shadow Tracking (PST), consists in seeding the
ﬂuid with a very low number of ﬁne tracer particles of den-
sity close to that of the ﬂuid. Simultaneous tracking of each
particle and its shadow on the wall allows us to accurately

P. Lancien · E. Lajeunesse · F. Metivier
Laboratoire de Dynamique des Fluides G´eologiques
Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris
4, Place Jussieu
75252 Paris cedex 05, France

determine the distance separating tracers from the wall and
therefore to extract the velocity ﬁeld.

The paper is organized as follows. The technique is pre-
sented and discussed in section 2. Section 3 describes an ap-
plication of the method to the measurement of the velocity
proﬁle of a laminar density current ﬂowing along an incline
plane. We then make some brief suggestions about how the
technique may be further developed and conclude.

2 The PST method

For the sake of simplicity, we will illustrate the PST method
in the case of a ﬂuid ﬂowing above a inclined wall as sche-
med on ﬁgure 1. The x and y axes are oriented respectively
along and transverse to the ﬂow direction. The z axis is nor-
mal to the wall. The ﬂuid of density r and viscosity h
is
seeded with a small number of ﬁne tracer particles of diam-
eter D. Ideally the best is to use neutrally buoyant particles,
that is of density r p = r . In practice, a perfect density match-
ing is difﬁcult to achieve. But, as discussed hereafter, the use
of tracer particles of density slightly larger than that of the
ﬂuid can be a plus for the method.

A punctual light source enlightens the wall under a small
incidence angle a
. A camera oriented perpendicularly to the
plane is used to acquire digitized images of the wall at reg-
ular time intervals. The images are then processed to extract
the lateral coordinates (xp,yp) of each particle and (xs, ys) of
the shadow it projects on the wall (see ﬁg. 1). The third co-
ordinate zp of the particle is then deduced from the distance
d separating the particle from its shadow:
zp = tan a d ≈ a d

(1)

Measurement of xp(t), yp(t) and zp(t) at regular time
intervals therefore allows us to determine the velocity ﬁeld
along the particle trajectory:

u(xp, yp, zp) =

xp(t + d t) − xp(t)
d t

(2)

where d t is the time step separating the acquisition of two
successive frames. The complete velocity proﬁle u(x, y, z,t)

2

Fig. 1 Schematic of the PST method

 

 

is extracted by repeating these measurements on a large num-
ber of particles whose trajectories cover the whole area of
interest.

In terms of accuracy, it follows from equations (1) and

(2) that:
D zp = a R
R
d t

D u = 2

where R is the spatial resolution of the image (i.e. the pixel
size).

As for all velocimetry method based on seed particles, an
important issue is to ensure that particles move at the same
velocity than the ﬂuid. In the limit of small particle Reynolds
number, the difference between ﬂuid and particle velocity is
given by (1):

|v − u| =

r pD2 | ˙v|
36h

where v is the velocity of the particle, u that of the ﬂuid and
˙v is the typical particle acceleration. If the ﬂow is steady
and quasi-parallel, it follows from the above equation that v
is very close to u. For a non steady ﬂow, the effect of slip
needs to be evaluated from the above equation in order to
estimate the accuracy of the velocity measurement.

In practice, Particle-Shadow tracking forces velocity mea-
surements to remain concentrated below a maximum dis-
tance to the wall for two reasons. First of all, both the parti-
cle and its shadow have to be present simultaneously inside
the zone imaged by the camera. It follows from equation (1)
that the largest wall-particle distance that can be detected is
of the order of:
z1 ≈ S.a
(6)
where S is the typical length of the zone imaged by the cam-
era.

The second limiting factor is illustrated on ﬁgure 1. In
practice, a light source is not punctual. As a result, the sha-
dow cone generated by a particle A extends up to a point B,
beyond which only penumbra remains. If B is located above
the wall, the shadow poorly contrasts on the wall so that it
cannot be detected. Distance AB can be estimated by:

(3)

(4)

(5)

where D is the particle diameter. da ≈ W /L is the source
angular diameter, where W is the light source diameter and
L is the distance separating the light source from the mea-
surement point. From ﬁgure 1 it follows that the shadow is
not detectable anymore as soon as the distance of the particle
to the wall is larger than:

z2 ≈ D

a
da =

Da L
W

′ (1).

Although receding the light source reduces da
and increases
z2, the counterpart is a loss of luminosity degrading the sig-
nal to noise ratio during treatment. Another alternative is to
use a collimated light source instead of a punctual one. In
that latter case, z2 depends on the parallelism uncertainties
da

′ of the collimated light: z2 ≈ Da /da
A key point of the method is to determine the shadow as-
sociated to a given particle. This can become difﬁcult when
the number of particles visible on a frame is too large. A
simple way to address this problem is to use tracer particles
of density slightly larger than that of the ﬂuid so that they
slowly settle. When a settling particle reaches the wall, it
coincides with its shadow allowing us to identify it without
any ambiguity. The particle and its shadow are then tracked
by playing the movie backwards. This however introduces a
third maximum distance to the wall as the particle must re-
main in the ﬁeld of the camera until it reaches the wall. The
time necessary for the particle to settle from a height h is:

t =

h
Vs

f =

hU
Vs

where the settling velocity Vs = (r p − r ).g.D2/18h
is esti-
mated from the Stokes velocity (Lamb 1945). The horizontal
distance covered by the tracers during this time is of order:

where U is the typical ﬂow velocity. The particle must re-
main in the ﬁeld of the camera until its settling, which im-
poses f < S and determines a third boundary for the proﬁle
height of the order of:

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

kABk ≈

D

da

(7)

z3 ≈

SVs
U

3

)

m
m

(
 
t
h
g
e
H

i

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

)

m
m

(
 
t
h
g
e
H

i

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

Brine tank
(ρ)

Video camera

(Q)

Density current 
Density current 

Fresh water

θ

Light

Fig. 2 Setup for the density current experiment

From the above discussion, it follows that the maximum
wall-distance zmax which can be explored by PST is given by
the minimum between z1, z2 and possibly z3. For z > zmax,
PST fails and the velocity proﬁle has to be measured using
classical techniques such as PIV.

3 Application

We ﬁrst developed the PST method in order to measure the
velocity proﬁle of a dense current running out on a slope
(5; 6). We were particularly interested in the proﬁle in the
immediate vicinity of the wall as our goal was to measure
the shear stress applied on the latter by the current. We will
therefore illustrate PST for this particular application. The
corresponding experimental setup is sketched on ﬁgure 2. It
consists of a 100cm × 50cm incline, immersed in a 200cm ×
50cm × 50cm ﬂume ﬁlled with fresh water. The ﬂow is gen-
erated by injecting a brine of density r b larger than that of
fresh water at a constant ﬂow rate Q from the top of the
ramp. The resulting gravity current is laminar, steady and
varies slowly along the x axis (5; 6).

Our camera deﬁnition is 700 × 570 pixels, the width of
the imaged zone is S = 7cm and the spatial resolution of
the camera is R = 100m m/pixel. The acquisition rate is 25
frames s−1 corresponding to d t = 40ms. The experimental
plane is enlightened with a projector under an incidence an-
gle a = 20◦. The angular diameter of the lamp is da ≈ 0.4◦.
The tracers are ﬁne plastic particles (Rilsan) with a char-
acteristic size of 30m m. Their density r p = 1080Kg.m−3 is
slightly larger than that of the brine. As a result, they slowly
settle so that one particle allows us to explore a wide range
of z. Note that, as our ﬂow is steady and varies slowly along
the x axis, tracking only one particle is enough to establish
the velocity proﬁle u(z).

Equations (6), (8) and (11) lead to: z1 ≈ 10mm, z2 ≈
1.5mm and z3 ≈ 5mm. In this experimental conﬁguration, the
maximum wall-distance zmax which can be explored by PST
is set by the size of the light source which forbids to measure
velocity above zmax = z2 ≈ 1.5mm. Figure 3 shows typical
velocity measurements obtained by applying PST to 5 dif-
ferent particles located in the same area. All data collapse
on the same velocity proﬁle u(z). The ﬂow that we consider

5

10

15

20

25

30

Velocity (mm/s)

Fig. 3 Near-wall velocity proﬁle of the density current, measured 0.3m
downslope of the entrance with PST. Each symbol correspond to a dif-
ferent particle. r = 1025Kg.m−3,Q = 0.95mL.s−1, q = 16◦.

5

10

15

20

Velocity (mm/s)

25

30

Fig. 4 Complete velocity proﬁle. PST data from ﬁgure 3 (dots) are
completed using classical side-view particle tracking (crosses).

in this section is laminar and stationary. By performing sev-
eral repeated measurements and performing slide averages
of the data, we were able to establish the velocity proﬁle
with an accuracy of 0.3mm.s−1 and a vertical resolution of
30m m (that is inferior to the pixel size) up to a maximum
distance zmax ≈ 1.5mm.

Above z ≈ 1.5mm, the velocity proﬁle was measured with
a more classical particle tracking technique using side-views
of the ﬂow acquired by a camera placed on the side of the
tank. The lower and upper part of the resulting velocity pro-
ﬁle are perfectly consistent and overlap in the vicinity of
z ≈ 1.5mm, as visible on ﬁgure 4. To our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst measurement of a complete velocity proﬁle obtained
for laminar density current experiments.

4

4 Conclusion

We have described a new method to measure near-wall ve-
locity proﬁles. This so-called Particle-Shadow Tracking me-
thod (PST) consists in seeding the ﬂuid with a very low num-
ber of ﬁne tracer particles. Tracking simultaneously both the
particles and their shadow permits to measure the velocity
proﬁle in the direction transverse to the wall. As illustrated
through an example, this new method is cheap, simple and
accurate. Measurements are however restricted in a layer at
the wall of thickness which mainly depends on light con-
ditions, ﬂow velocity and particles size and density. Deter-
mination of the velocity proﬁle out of this layer have to be
performed using more classical techniques such as PIV. PST
should be therefore considered as a complementary method
particularly adapted to the investigation of boundary layers.
Using two light sources with two different incidence an-
gles, a small one and a large one, might improve PST method
by extending the thickness of the measurement layer. In fact,
each particle would therefore project two different shadows
on the wall. When possible, the particle-wall distance would
be calculated from the most distant shadow. When the latter
is not in the ﬁeld of view, particle-wall distance would be
calculated from the nearest shadow. It would thus be possi-
ble to increase the thickness of the measurement layer with-
out degrading the vertical resolution.

Our motivation to develop the PST method was indeed
to measure the velocity proﬁle inside a laminar density cur-
rent. Therefore we did not apply the method to a turbulent
ﬂow. In principles, PST (that is simultaneous tracking of the
position of a particle and its shadow) should work in a turbu-
lent ﬂow. Of course, in practice, applying the PST technique
to a turbulent ﬂow would be more difﬁcult: a higher frame
rate is needed and the size and density of the particles need
to be adapted to prevent slip effects.

References

1. Adrian RJ (1991) Particle imaging techniques for experimental

ﬂuid mechanics. Ann Rev Fluid Mech 23:261-304

2. Alfredsson HP, Johansson AV, Haritonidis JH, Eckelmann H (1988)
The ﬂuctuating wall-shear stress and the velocity ﬁeld in the viscous
sublayer. Phys Fluids 31:1026-1033

3. Buschmann MH, Gad-El-Hak M (2003) Debate concerning the
mean-velocity proﬁle of a turbulent boundary layer. AIAA Journal
41:565-572

4. Lamb SH (1945) Hydrodynamics, 6th ed. New York. Dover:599
5. Lancien P, M´etivier F, Lajeunesse E, Cacas MC (2005) Veloc-
ity structure of the gravity current in submarine channels exper-
iments. 4th IAHR Symposium on River Coastal and Estuarine
Morphodynamics:527-533

6. Lancien P, M´etivier F, Lajeunesse E (2005) Simulating submarine
channels in ﬂume experiments. Physicalia Magazine 27:377-384
7. Somandepalli VSR, Mungal MG (2004) A Novel Technique to Im-
prove Near Wall Resolution in PIV using Cylindrical Lenses. 12th
International Symposium on Applications of Laser Techniques to
Fluid Mechanics

8. Townsend AA (1976) The Structure of Turbulent Shear Flow. Cam-

bridge University Press

