P D Mininni1, D C Montgomery2, and L Turner3
1 National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, CO 80307,
USA
2 Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA
3 Dept. of Astronomy, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
E-mail: mininni@ucar.edu

7 Hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic
0
0
computations inside a rotating sphere
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract. Numerical solutions of the incompressible magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
equations are reported for the interior of a rotating, perfectly-conducting, rigid
spherical shell that is insulator-coated on the inside. A previously-reported spectral
method is used which relies on a Galerkin expansion in Chandrasekhar-Kendall vector
eigenfunctions of the curl. The new ingredient in this set of computations is the rigid
rotation of the sphere. After a few purely hydrodynamic examples are sampled (spin
down, Ekman pumping, inertial waves), attention is focused on selective decay and
the MHD dynamo problem. In dynamo runs, prescribed mechanical forcing excites a
persistent velocity ﬁeld, usually turbulent at modest Reynolds numbers, which in turn
ampliﬁes a small seed magnetic ﬁeld that is introduced. A wide variety of dynamo
activity is observed, all at unit magnetic Prandtl number. The code lacks the resolution
to probe high Reynolds numbers, but nevertheless interesting dynamo regimes turn out
to be plentiful in those parts of parameter space in which the code is accurate. The
key control parameters seem to be mechanical and magnetic Reynolds numbers, the
Rossby and Ekman numbers (which in our computations are varied mostly by varying
the rate of rotation of the sphere) and the amount of mechanical helicity injected.
Magnetic energy levels and magnetic dipole behavior are exhibited which ﬂuctuate
strongly on a time scale of a few eddy turnover times. These seem to stabilize as the
rotation rate is increased until the limit of the code resolution is reached.

PACS numbers: 47.11.-j, 47.11.Kb, 91.25.Cw, 95.30.Qd

Submitted to: New J. Phys.

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

2

1. Introduction

In a previous paper, a spectral method for computing incompressible ﬂuid and
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) behavior inside a sphere was introduced (Ref.
[1],
hereafter referred to as “MM”). The emphasis in MM was on accurate computation
of global ﬂow patterns throughout the full sphere (including the origin) with special
attention to the computation of dynamo action, whereby the kinetic energy of
a turbulent conducting ﬂuid may give rise to macroscopic magnetic ﬁelds. The
computations were limited to moderate Reynolds numbers, with boundary conditions
in which the normal components of the velocity ﬁeld, magnetic ﬁeld, vorticity, and
electric current density were required to vanish at a rigid, spherical, insulator-lined,
perfectly-conducting shell, and the three components of the velocity and magnetic ﬁeld
were regular at the origin. The feature previously lacking that we wish to explore in the
present paper is that of uniform rotation of the sphere. We postpone to the future the
investigation of insulating spherical shells which permit the magnetic ﬁeld to penetrate
into a non-conducting region outside [2], though we remark later on some considerations
relevant to this modiﬁcation.

In Section 2, we formulate the equations to be solved for a uniform-density
conducting ﬂuid inside a sphere in a familiar set of dimensionless (“Alfvenic”) units.
We refer to MM for background and such of the details as remain unchanged. The
main changes reported here are: (1) the introduction of a Coriolis term in the equation
of motion (the centrifugal term may be absorbed in the pressure for incompressible
ﬂow); and (2) the velocity ﬁeld v (instead of the vorticity ω) and magnetic ﬁeld B
are expanded in orthonormal Chandrasekhar-Kendall (“C-K”) vector eigenfunctions of
the curl [3, 4, 5, 6, 1]. The physical situation being simulated is again a perfectly
conducting, mechanically impenetrable sphere coated on the inside with a thin layer of
insulator, but now viewed from a coordinate system that is regarded as rigidly rotating
with the bounding spherical shell. Unsurprisingly, the dynamical phenomena resulting
are markedly diﬀerent from, and richer than, they were in the case without rotation.

Section 3 describes the results of some purely hydrodynamic runs (the code may
be readily converted into a Navier-Stokes code by simply deleting the terms associated
with the magnetic ﬁeld). Included are examples [7, 8] of: (i) spin down, or decay of
relatively rotating kinetic energy due to the action of viscosity; (ii) Ekman pumping
with ﬂow patterns that result from rotating boundaries; (iii) internal waves, three-
dimensional relatives of meteorological Rossby waves, that depend on the stabilization
introduced by rotation for their oscillatory features; and (iv) some mechanically-forced
runs with a ﬁnite angle between the symmetry axis of the forcing and the axis of rotation.
This fourth case results in columnar vortices due to the eﬀect of rotation [8, 9] (note
convection is absent in our present formulation).

Section 4 proceeds to a consideration of the MHD case with an emphasis on selective
decay and the kinds of dynamo behavior we have been able to resolve. The spectral
method we use involves inherently less resolution than some other methods in use, and

(1)

(2)

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

3

we have been careful to study parameter regimes only where we can resolve the relevant
length scales. Selective decay is observed to be somewhat arrested as the rotation rate
is increased. A pleasant surprise has been the wide variety of dynamo behavior we have
been able to resolve without the need to reach parameter regimes regarded as realistic for
planetary dynamos [10, 11, 9, 12, 13, 2]. In the summary, Section 5, we describe brieﬂy
some plans we have for improving the resolution of the code by some pseudo-spectral
modiﬁcations and some intended future diversiﬁcation of the boundary conditions.

2. Computational method

We begin from the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) equation of motion in a rotating
coordinate frame [14, 2],

∂v
∂t

= v × ω + j × B − ∇

P +

− 2Ω × v + ν∇2v + f,

v2
2 !

 

and the MHD induction equation,
∂B
∂t

= ∇ × (v × B) + η∇2B.

In the dimensionless Alfvenic units [1], v is the vector velocity ﬁeld, B is the magnetic
induction, ω = ∇ × v is the vorticity, and j = ∇ × B is the electric current density.
The generalized pressure is P. The dimensionless viscosity, which, in the dimensionless
variables, can be interpreted as the reciprocal of a mechanical Reynolds number, is ν,
and the magnetic diﬀusivity, which can be interpreted as the reciprocal of a magnetic
Reynolds number, is η. The vector ﬁeld f is a solenoidal, externally-applied forcing
ﬁeld which is intended to mimic the presence of mechanical sources of excitation
of v. Equations (1) and (2) are to be supplemented by the requirements that the
divergences of both v and B must vanish everywhere. Dropping equation (2) and the
terms in equation (1) containing j and B leaves the forced Navier-Stokes equation, and
dropping f leaves the unforced version of Navier-Stokes. Ω is the (constant) rotation
speed of the coordinate system, understood to be attached to a rotating spherical shell
that constitutes the boundary and is both mechanically impenetrable and perfectly
conducting, with a thin layer of insulator on the inside surface.

The non-trivial boundary conditions imposed are that the normal components of
v, B, j, and ω shall all vanish at the radius of a unit sphere centered at the origin. The
three components of the ﬁelds v and B are also required to be regular at the origin.
The vanishing of the normal components of v and ω at the surface of the unit sphere
are implied by, but do not imply, no-slip boundary conditions at that radius. Going
further with an attempt to implement fully a set of no-slip boundary conditions raises
unresolved paradoxes with respect to the pressure determination which we prefer not
to confront here (see Refs.
[15, 16, 1] for a discussion of these), believing that their
seriousness and intractability require consideration in the context of simpler situations
than the present one.

4

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

The spectral technique implemented involves expanding v and B in terms of C-K

functions (deﬁned below):

v(r, t) =

ξv
qlm(t) Jqlm(r),

and

B(r, t) =

ξB
qlm(t) Jqlm(r).

Xqlm

Xqlm

The C-K functions [3, 4, 5, 6, 1] Ji are deﬁned by

Ji = λ∇ × rψi + ∇ × (∇ × rψi) ,

(5)
where we work with a set of spherical orthonormal unit vectors (ˆr, ˆθ, ˆφ) and the scalar
function ψi is a solution of the Helmholtz equation, (∇2 + λ2)ψi = 0. The explicit form
of ψi is

ψi(r, θ, φ) = Cql jl(|λql|r)Ylm(θ, φ),

where jl(|λql|r) is a spherical Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind which vanishes at r = 1
and Ylm(θ, φ) is a spherical harmonic in the polar angle θ and the azimuthal angle φ.
The subindex i is a shorthand notation for the three indices (q, l, m), where q indexes
the successive values of λ that make jl vanish at r = 1 for each value of l; q = 1, 2, 3, . . .
corresponds to the positive values of λ, and q = −1, −2, −3, . . . indexes the negative
values; ﬁnally l = 1, 2, 3, . . . and m runs in integer steps from −l to +l. The vectors Ji
satisfy

∇ × Ji = λiJi,

and with the proper normalization constants are an orthonormal set that has been shown
to be complete [6]. The integral relation expressing the orthogonality of the Ji is:

where the asterisk denotes complex conjugate, and with the normalization constants
given by:

Jqlm · J∗

q′,l′,m′dV = δq,q′δl,l′δm,m′,

Z

Cql = |λql jl+1(|λql|)|−1

[l(l + 1)]−1/2

.

The scheme for solving equations (1) and (2) is conceptually simple. We substitute
the expansions (3) and (4) into equations (1) and (2), utilize the fact that the Ji are
eigenfunctions of the curl, and then take inner products one at a time with the individual
Ji. Their orthogonality enables us to pick oﬀ expressions for the time derivatives of the
time dependent expansion coeﬃcients ξv
i and ξB
i , and equations (1) and (2) are thereby
converted into a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations for the expansion coeﬃcients.
These appear as
∂ξv
i
∂t

j − νλ2

i + ξf
i ,

k − ξB

Ω · Oi

j ξv
ξv

j ξB
k

Ai
jk

(10)

i ξv

+ 2

=

Xj,k

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Xj

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

5

Figure 1. (a) Time histories of the decay of mechanical energy for four hydrodynamic
runs (H1 to H4) with identical initial velocity ﬁelds but diﬀerent rotation rates Ω. (b)
Decay rates vs. the square root of Ω for the same four runs.

(11)

(12)

(13)

and

∂ξB
i
∂t

=

Xj,k

Bi

jkξv

j ξB

k − ηλ2

i ξB
i ,

with the coupling coeﬃcients deﬁned as
jk = λiI i
jk = λkI i

Bi

jk,

Ai

jk,

I i
jk =

J∗
i · Jj × JkdV, Oi

j =

J∗
i × JjdV.

Z

Z

The inﬁnite set of ordinary diﬀerential equations is truncated at some level above
maximum values of |q| and l, in the usual manner of a Galerkin approximation [17].
The evaluation of equations (10) and (11) and the storage of the resulting arrays of
coupling coeﬃcients in tables, are the most demanding numerical tasks of the problem.
Once available, they do not have to be recomputed, and provide a method for verifying
the ideal quadratic conservation laws with high accuracy [1]. Also, since the method
is purely spectral and ﬁelds are only computed in real space for visualization purposes,
there is no numerical singularity in the center of the sphere.

The main drawback of the scheme, as with any wholly spectral one, is that the
convolution sums in equations (10) and (11) grow rapidly with increasing maximum
|q| and l, and limit the resolution when compared to pseudospectral
values of
computations utilizing fast transforms (in practice, a resolution of max{|q|} = max{l} =
9 was used in all the runs). This limits us to modest Reynolds numbers (all our
computations reported here have limited themselves to resolvable Reynolds numbers).
Future plans include pseudospectral modiﬁcations to the evaluation of at least the
angular parts of the nonlinear terms in equations (1) and (2), as will be mentioned
again in the ﬁnal summary (Section 5).

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

6

Figure 2. (a) Enstrophy for runs H1 to H4 as a function of time (same labels as in
Figure 1). (b) Energy spectra at t = 1 for the same runs, and (c) energy spectra at
t = 6. In all cases, solid lines are for Ω = 0, dotted lines for Ω = 1, dashed lines for
Ω = 4, and dash-dotted lines for Ω = 10.

3. Hydrodynamic examples

Some neutral-ﬂuid eﬀects (good introductions to all of which may be found in Refs.
[7, 8]) are treated ﬁrst before proceeding to MHD. It is worth noticing here that although
our boundary conditions are implied by, but do not imply no-slip velocities, several
qualitative and some quantitative agreements are observed with previous experiments
and theory. First we study simple problems in which initially relatively rotating ﬂuids
adjust themselves to rigid rotation with the spherical shell. We study these decays as
functions of the rotation rate Ω. The prediction [7] is that the decay of the non-rigid body
components should be exponential, with a decay rate that varies as Ω1/2. Figure 1(a)
shows the time histories of the decay of mechanical energy for four runs with identical
initial velocity ﬁelds limited to a few random low mode numbers (large spatial scales).
The runs are delineated as runs H1, H2, H3, and H4. Speciﬁcally, we have as initial
conditions a random superposition of modes with |q| = 1, 2, l = 1, 2, and all allowed
values of m, with viscosity ν = 0.01 and values of Ω of 0, 1, 4, and 10 respectively. Each
curve is approximately exponential, and when they are ﬁtted with exponentials, the
decay rates plotted vs. the square root of Ω appear as in Figure 1(b), and are adjudged
to be in satisfactory agreement with theory [7]. The nonlinearities excite smaller spatial
scales, and the decay process is progressively enhanced by increasing the rotation rate.
A second feature of rotating spherical ﬂows observed in our code is the development
of Ekman-like layers and the action of Ekman pumping [7, 8] (see also [18] for a
detailed study in rotating spherical shells). The ﬂow patterns are characterized by
the development of interior vortical ﬂows with some symmetries, and thin layers that
separate the large vortices and also lie along the wall boundary layers. These have a
1/2
K R, where R = 1 is the radius of the
characteristic thickness of the order of δ ∼ E

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

7

Figure 3. Above: Mechanical energy density and velocity ﬁeld lines in run E1, at
t = 0 (left) and at t = 6 (right). Below: idem for run E2. For convenience, energies
and ﬁeld lines are always shown in pairs, with energy densities on the left and ﬁeld
lines on the right. The ﬁeld lines change color according to the distance integrated
from the initial point, from red to yellow, blue, and magenta. The red, green, and
blue arrows indicate respectively the x, y, and z axis. Ω is in the z direction. In both
cases, the energy density is symmetric with respect to the equator, while the ﬂow itself
is antisymmetric in run E1 (above).

sphere, and the Ekman number is EK = νΩ−1L−2, with L a characteristic scale of
the ﬂow. The ability of the code to compute these layers is limited by its resolution.
Realistic values of the Ekman number are, for planetary core regimes [14, 9, 2], beyond
our range. In all the runs presented here we will limit ourselves to cases where δ can be
properly resolved with the number of modes used in the simulations. The presence of the
Ekman layers is concomitant with the development of smaller spatial scales and hence
of more rapid dissipation. Figure 2 illustrates this fact. Figure 2(a) is the integrated
squared vorticity, or enstrophy, for the four runs whose decay has just been seen to be
exponential. The largest rotation rate corresponds to the curve with the highest early
peak in enstrophy spectrum, the second highest with the second largest, and so on.
Figure 2(b) shows the energy spectra at t = 1 for the four runs and Figure 2(c) shows
the same energy spectra at t = 6.
In every case, the ﬂatter spectra, and hence the
shorter wavelength dominances, correspond to the higher values of Ω. This is the result
of the formation of a thinner boundary layer as Ω is increased.

The range of Ekman layer behavior we have been able to observe is very wide. We
show in Figure 3 the results of two simulations (labeled E1 and E2) with initially random
axisymmetric (m = 0) velocity ﬁelds which are purely azimuthal. For both runs, the

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

8

Figure 4. Equatorial cross section of the velocity ﬁeld for an inertial wave in the
rotating sphere. The reference frame is ﬁxed to the sphere. Ω is in the z direction.
The axial velocity is indicated by the colors, while the radial and azimuthal velocities
are indicated by the arrows. For this mode, the frequency is ̟ ≈ 49.

initial velocity is proportional to the diﬀerence between Jq,l,0 and J−q,l,0, which has only
an azimuthal component. For run E1, q = 1 and l = 1, and for run E2, q = 1 and l = 2.
Both runs have ν = 0.01 and Ω = 10. The time evolution of the runs is similar to the
evolution displayed in Figures 1 and 2. However, the axisymmetric initial conditions in
runs E1 and E2 make visualization of ﬂow patters easier. Figure 3 shows the initial and
late-time ﬂow patterns for these runs, using the VAPOR graphics package [19] that will
be repeatedly used throughout this paper for graphical demonstrations. The rotation
generates poloidal components of the velocity ﬁeld fast, and at late times diﬀerent
patterns are observed depending on the initial value of l. In run E1, at late times the
ﬂow displays a poloidal circulation on top of the initial toroidal ﬁeld: the ﬂow is directed
towards the center of the sphere along the axis of rotation, and a return ﬂow is observed
in both hemispheres close to the wall. In other words, the ﬂow can be described as the
superposition of a toroidal diﬀerential rotation and a poloidal meridional circulation.
This circulation is radially outward in the meridional plane, directed towards the poles
close to the wall, and redirected toward the equatorial plane again as the ﬂow gets close
to the poles. Both hemispheres show the same pattern. In run E2 the pattern is more

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

9

Figure 5. (a) Magnetic energy EM (solid line), kinetic energy EV (dotted line), and
magnetic helicity HM (dashed line) in the selective decay run S1. (b) Same quantities
for run S2. The two power laws are indicated in the ﬁgures only as a reference.

complex, and vertical velocities are observed in the vicinity of the axis of rotation, while
high and at intermediate latitudes a poloidal circulation is generated.

As a third hydrodynamic test of the code we demonstrate inertial wave motion
in the small-amplitude limit. Equations (10) and (11) can be linearized in powers
of a small departure from a uniform rotation velocity; then solutions can be sought
which vary with time as ei̟t. The resulting linear homogeneous algebraic system can
be solved in a Galerkin approximation by expanding the velocity and vorticity in the
C-K functions. An anti-Hermitian matrix results whose eigenfunctions can be found
numerically and whose corresponding eigenvalues i̟ may be computed numerically in
the process. Then any one of the oscillatory modes can be loaded numerically into the
ideal version of the code and run with the overall amplitudes chosen to be very small.
The time evolution is accurately predicted by the computation of the single modes,
which are standing waves. Figure 4 shows four equatorial cross-sections of the sphere at
diﬀerent times with the axial velocity indicated by the color codes, and the radial and
azimuthal velocities indicated by arrows (Ω = 10 in this run). The times are chosen to
be one quarter-period apart. The oscillation frequency ̟ for the particular mode shown
as obtained from the eigenvalue problem is in good agreement with the results obtained
from the fully non-linear code (̟ ≈ 49).

In forced hydrodynamic simulations in the presence of strong rotation, we also
observe the development of columnar structures in the ﬂow, aligned with the axis of
rotation. The discussion of these simulations will be left for the next section, where the
connection between these columns and dynamo action will be considered.

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

10

Figure 6. Relative helicity HM /EM in selective decay runs S1 (solid) and S2 (dashed).

4. MHD and the dynamo

4.1. Selective decay in the sphere

Before passing to a discussion of the mechanically driven spherical dynamo, we present
ﬁrst the results of two tests of three-dimensional MHD “selective decay” as aﬀected by
the presence of rotation. Selective decay is a familiar turbulent decay process, usually
incompressible, long studied in periodic geometry [20, 21, 22], wherein one ideal invariant
is cascaded to short wavelengths and dissipated while another remains locked into long
wavelengths and is approximately conserved. The phenomenon, closely connected with
inverse cascade processes for driven systems, leads toward a state in which the ratio
of the two ideal invariants involved is minimized and which therefore is accessible to
variational methods.
In 3D MHD, a quantity that may be preferentially dissipated
is the total energy E = EV + EM (kinetic plus magnetic) while magnetic helicity
HM may be approximately conserved. Under other circumstances, energy may be
dissipated while cross helicity K is approximately conserved, leading to the phenomenon
of “dynamic alignment,” [23, 24, 25] in which the velocity ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁelds are
highly correlated. The deﬁnitions of HM and K are

HM =

A · BdV,

K =

u · BdV,

1
2 Z

1
2 Z

µ =

r × j dV .

1
2 Z

where A is the vector potential whose curl is B, and the integrals run over the entire
volume of the ﬂuid. What we are interested in demonstrating here is the eﬀect that
rotation has on the development of the selective decay of total energy relative to
magnetic helicity inside a sphere.
It will be useful for these and other purposes, to
have a deﬁnition of the magnetic dipole moment:

(14)

(15)

(16)

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

11

Figure 7. (a) Trace of the dipole moment on the surface of the unit sphere (above)
and amplitude of the dipole moment as a function of time (below) for the selective
decay run S1. (b) Same quantities for run S2.

which is seen to be readily expressible in terms of the expansion coeﬃcients for B [1].
The initially excited modes for the two runs we will present (“S1” and “S2”) are
those for q = ±3, l = 3, and all possible values of m. The initial values chosen for the
expansion coeﬃcients are:

±3,3,0 = −u0, ξv
ξv
10
6

ξB
3,3,0 =

±3,3,0<m≤3 = u0(1 + i),
10
6

3,3,0<m≤3 =

−3,3,0 = b0, ξB
ξB

ξB
−3,3,0<m≤3 = b0(1 − i),

(17)

(18)

with u0 and b0 chosen so that at t = 0, the magnetic and kinetic energies are
EM = EV ≈ 0.5, K = 0, and HM ≈ 0.034. Some helicity cancellation occurs because
of the two signs of λ (or q). As a comparison, note that for the q = 3, l = 3 mode
alone, HM /EM is no more than about 0.072 (this is the maximum value of |HM /EM |
if only modes with |q| = 3, l = 3, and one sign of λ are excited). In both runs, the
magnetic diﬀusivity and kinematic viscosity are ν = η = 0.006; the Reynolds numbers
are Re ≈ Rm ≈ 170, based on the radius of the sphere. The two runs diﬀer by the values
of Ω chosen, which are 2 and 12, respectively. These mean that the Rossby and Ekman
numbers of the two runs are, respectively, RO = U(ΩR)−1 = 0.5, EK = 0.003 for S1 and
RO = 0.083, EK = 0.0005 for S2. The decay of magnetic energy, kinetic energy, and
magnetic helicity for Runs S1 and S2 are shown in Figure 5. The behavior in Run S1
is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the non-rotating case [1]. Note that in both runs, the
kinetic energy at late times is negligible, and that magnetic and kinetic energies decay
faster than the magnetic helicity. However, the decay of all these quantities in S2 seems
to be faster than in S1.

The relative helicity, HM /EM , is shown for Runs S1 and S2 in Figure 6. It will be
seen that the increased rate of rotation in S2 has somewhat arrested the selective decay,

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

12

Figure 8. Above: kinetic energy density and velocity ﬁeld lines (left) and magnetic
energy density and magnetic ﬁeld lines (right) in the initial conditions of selective
decay runs S1 and S2. Middle: same ﬁelds at t = 14 in run S1. Below: same ﬁelds at
t = 14 in run S2. Colors and labels are as in Figure 3.

for reasons not totally understood. It may be that the rotation has resulted in suﬃcient
two-dimensionalization of the ﬂow [7, 8, 9] that the inherently three dimensional nature
of the selective decay has been compromised. But from Figure 6 it can also be seen
that the ratio of HM to EM has approached reasonably closely to its maximal value of
min−1{|λql|} ≈ 0.22 (the maximum value of |HM /EM | when only modes with |q| = 1,
l = 1, and one sign of λ are excited). The maximal value would indicate a total
disappearance of the non-rotational kinetic energy (i.e., a rigid rotation), and all the
magnetic energy in the largest-scale modes (smallest |λ|) allowed by the boundary
conditions: a magnetized, “frozen” condition.

The behavior of the dipole moment for the two runs is shown in Figure 7. The solid
lines are the traces of the projected direction of the dipole moment on the surface of
the sphere as functions of the time, and the orientation is such that the axis of rotation
points upward.
In the lower parts of these two ﬁgures, the magnitude of the dipole
moment is plotted vs. time. In both cases, it will be seen that the dipole’s orientation
initially wanders erratically near its initial position, and ﬁnally ends at a “mid-latitude”

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

13

Table 1. Dynamo runs: q and l give the scales where mechanical energy is injected by
the forcing, Ω is the rotation rate, and ν and η are respectively the kinematic viscosity
and magnetic diﬀusivity. “Helical” indicates whether the forcing injects mechanical
helicity, and “Axisym.” indicates whether the forcing is axisymmetric. α is the angle
between Ω and the z-axis (the axis of symmetry in axisymmetric forcings). Finally,
RO, EK, and Re are respectively the Rossby, Ekman, and Reynolds numbers, all based
on the radius of the sphere. A resolution of max{|q|} = max{l} = 9 was used in all
the runs.

Runs

l Ω

Helical Axisym. α

RO

q

1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

ν = η
2 × 10−3 No
2 × 10−3 No
2 × 10−3 No
2 × 10−3 No
2 × 10−3 No
4 × 10−3 No
4 × 10−3 No
2 × 10−3 No
4 × 10−3 No
4 × 10−3 No
4 × 10−3 Yes
4 × 10−3 Yes

1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

2
2
2
4
8
8
16
8
16
16
16
16

D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
D7
D8
D9
D10
D11
D12

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

30◦
30◦
30◦
30◦
30◦
30◦
30◦
30◦
20◦
0◦
0◦
90◦

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.25
0.125
0.125
0.0625
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125

EK
1 × 10−3
1 × 10−3
1 × 10−3
5 × 10−4
2.5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
2.5 × 10−4
2.5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4

Re

500
500
500
500
500
250
250
500
250
250
250
250

direction not far from where it began. This was something of a surprise to us, since
we had expected it to line up with the axis of rotation or at least close to it. Figure 8
shows VAPOR plots with the energy densities, velocity and magnetic ﬁeld line structure
for the initial conditions in Runs S1 and S2, as well as the late stages of both runs
(t = 14) when the selective decay process has saturated and all the nonlinear terms are
small, preventing any further evolution of the system except for dissipation. For strong
rotation (run S2), the velocity ﬁeld is quasi-two dimensional and develops column-like
structures at late times, while the magnetic ﬁeld is highly anisotropic (although the
dipole moment is not aligned with the axis of rotation). Note magnetic ﬁeld lines in
this case are aligned with the z axis (the axis of rotation), and velocity ﬁeld lines are
mostly toroidal. Actually, the ratio |vφ/vz| at t = 14 averaged over the whole volume
for this run at t = 14 is ≈ 13.

4.2. Dynamos

We turn now to the case of the forced spherical dynamo computations, in which speciﬁed
non-zero forcing functions f are added to the right hand side of equation (1) or (10) to
provide a persistently-active, non-decaying velocity ﬁeld. After a purely hydrodynamic
run to reach a statistically steady state, very small magnetic ﬁelds are introduced to
see if the velocity ﬁelds will cause them to amplify, and attention focuses on questions
like the orientation of the resulting magnetic dipole moment relative to the axis of
rotation and the dipole moment’s magnitude. We are also interested in the kinetic and

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

14

Figure 9. Left: kinetic energy density and velocity ﬁeld lines at late times in run D1,
when the dynamo has saturated. Right: magnetic energy density and magnetic ﬁeld
lines at the same time. Colors and labels are as in Figure 3.

magnetic energy spectra that result, and how the eponymous dimensionless numbers of
the rotating ﬂuid (Reynolds, magnetic Reynolds, Rossby, Ekman) inﬂuence the magnetic
quantities. These appear to be essential control parameters of the problem. The range
of possibilities is clearly very wide, and we have not begun to explore the entire space
of possible parameters. Rather, we content ourselves with showing samples of diﬀerent
behavior that have emerged for diﬀerent combinations that lead to regimes which the
code will resolve satisfactorily. Our eﬀorts should not be compared with explorations
of the space of parameters in realistic geodynamo simulations (see e.g. [26]) but rather
as an extension of dynamo simulations of incompressible MHD ﬂows (often done using
periodic boundary conditions [27, 28, 29, 30]) to include the eﬀect of boundaries and
rotation.

Several of the forcing functions used in the runs we will display are axisymmetric,
but their axes of symmetry are not aligned with the axis of rotation. The resulting
overall asymmetry quickly excites all the available retained modes, to some degree. The
general form of the axisymmetric forcing function used is

f =

ξf
q,l,0 (AJq,l,0 − BJ−q,l,0) .

Xql

(19)

For any value of A and B, this superposition of C-K functions gives an axisymmetric
forcing f. For A = B = 1, there will be no net helicity involved in the forcing (the
curl of f is perpendicular to f), and the only non-vanishing component of velocity
that is forced is the φ component (the azimuthal component with respect to the axis
of symmetry of the forcing, the z axis). This forcing can be considered as a simple
diﬀerential rotation, where the number of nodes in vφ(r, θ) is controlled by the values
of q and l. The axis of rotation is typically oriented at some speciﬁed angle α (often
30◦) to the forcing function’s axis of symmetry (the polar axis, in spherical coordinates).
Thus the rotational motion and the forcing have no shared symmetry, and the resulting
mechanical motion is totally asymmetrical.

Non-axisymmetric forcing functions are obtained by superposing C-K modes with

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

15

Figure 10. Left: kinetic (dashed black line) and magnetic (solid blue line) energy as
a function of time in run D1. Right: cosine of the angle between Ω and µ in the same
run.

m 6= 0, i.e.

f =

ξf
qlmJqlm,

(20)

Xqlm
qlm = ξf
−q,l,m the forcing is non-helical. In any other case the curl of f has a

and when ξf
projection into f, and the forcing injects mechanical helicity into the ﬂow.

In an eﬀort to systematize the runs we have done and the reasons we have done
them, we have assembled the important parameters for the dynamo runs (labeled D1
through D12) in Table 1. Listed in Table 1 are: the q and l values where the forcing
was concentrated (determining its characteristic length scale); the rigid rotation rate;
the kinematic viscosity (reciprocal Reynolds number, if the kinetic energy is close to
unity) and magnetic diﬀusivity (this study is restricted to the magnetic Prandtl number
PM = ν/η = 1 case); an indication of whether the forcing was axisymmetric or not; the
angle between the axis of rotation and the axis of symmetry of the forcing, when the
forcing function has an internal symmetry; the Rossby and Ekman numbers of the ﬂow
into which the seed magnetic ﬁeld is introduced; and whether or not the forcing injected
net mechanical helicity.

It is perhaps worthwhile to say a word about the motivation for the progression
of runs shown in Table 1. The ﬁrst remark is that it seems to be relatively easy to
excite a dynamo and generate a dipole moment, but relatively diﬃcult to generate one
that behaves according to our predispositions and hopes: a dipole moment with some
alignment with the axis of rotation, and that reverses periodically or randomly with
long times between reversals (compared with the turbulent turnover time). We have
found wild oscillations in both magnitude and direction that seem to decrease with
decreasing Rossby and Ekman numbers. Since the Reynolds numbers are limited by the
resolution, the principal means of decreasing both the Rossby and Ekman numbers is by
increasing the rotation rate Ω. This, however, eventually decreases the thickness of the
boundary layer below the resolution of the code, and beyond that point, the accuracy
of the computations becomes suspect. The lowest Rossby and Ekman numbers that

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

16

Figure 11. (a) Magnetic energy in dynamo runs D1 (solid), D2 (dotted), D3 (dashed),
D4 (dash-dotted) and D5 (dash-triple dotted). (b) Magnetic energy spectrum for the
same runs at late times, after non-linear saturation of the dynamo takes place. The
arrows on top indicate the scale where mechanical energy is injected in each run; from
left to right: D1, D2, and D3-D5. The magnetic energy spectrum corresponding to
Run D1 has been multiplied by a factor of 100.

appear in the entries of Table 1 represent those below which the resolution limitations
are encountered. It will be seen below that as we progress toward them, the dipolar
behavior looks gradually more like what we might expect, the dipole moment gets
stronger and more aligned with the axis of rotation, and the time between reversals gets
larger.

We begin by showing some results for a weak dynamo situation, Run D1, where
the magnetic energy EM remains always much smaller than the kinetic energy EV . In
the forcing function (19), the driven modes have q = l = 1, A = B = 1, ν = η = 0.002,
α = 30◦, and Ω = 2. The amplitude of the forced modes is |ξf
q,l,0| = 0.4. The two
Reynolds numbers, Re and Rm, based on the measured r.m.s. velocity before the
magnetic seed is introduced and the radius of the sphere, are both about 500. The
Rossby number is RO = 0.5, and the Ekman number also based on the radius of the
sphere is EK = 1 × 10−3. Figure 9 shows the streamlines of the ﬂow, magnetic ﬁeld
lines, and the energy densities at late times, once the dipole is established (t ≈ 80). In
the steady state, the magnetic dipole moment |µ| is of the order of 0.001 and the ratio
of magnetic to kinetic energies is EM /EV ≈ 0.0005. The magnetic energy rises to a
characteristic value and oscillates somewhat irregularly as shown in Figure 10, while the
cosine of γ (the angle between the axis of rotation and the orientation of µ) oscillates
with roughly the same periodicity (see also Figure 10) with almost a 180◦ variation in
some cases, and with an average orientation almost perpendicular to Ω. In this weak
case D1, the hydrodynamic ﬂow remains laminar, stable, and almost time independent.
The global evolution of the system is similar to what we will show in the remaining
runs. Once the magnetic ﬁeld is introduced at t = 0, and if Rm is large enough,
the magnetic ﬁeld is ampliﬁed exponentially (this stage is often called the “kinematic
dynamo” regime) until the Lorentz force modiﬁes the ﬂow and non-linear saturation is

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

17

Figure 12. Left: (a) Trace of the dipole moment on the surface of the unit sphere
(above), amplitude of the dipole moment (middle), and cosine of the angle between
the dipole moment and the axis of rotation as a function of time, for run D3. (b) Same
quantities for run D5. (c) Same quantities for run D7.

reached. At late times, an MHD state is reached in which magnetic energy is sustained
against Ohmic dissipation by dynamo action.
In run D1, the ﬂow is reminiscent of
the hydrodynamic ﬂow previously described in Figure 3. Although the forcing is
axisymmetric and purely toroidal, rotation generates a poloidal circulation and as a
result the ﬂow points outwards in the equatorial plane, and inwards along the axis
of rotation. Each hemisphere has mechanical helicity of opposite signs, while the net
mechanical helicity of the system ﬂuctuates around zero. The magnetic ﬁeld seems to
be sustained by an α-Ω mechanism, where the diﬀerential rotation is sustained by the
mechanical forcing and the α-eﬀect is given by the Ekman-like circulation. Magnetic
energy is concentrated in the center of the sphere, where the ﬂow has a stagnation point.
A considerably stronger dynamo than D1 is represented in Run D2, where in the
excitation function (19) we choose q = l = 2 and |ξf
q,l,0| = 1.1. Again, A = B = 1,
ν = η = 0.002, and Ω = 2. The magnetic moment rises from zero, and attains a typical
magnitude of |µ| ≈ 0.5, about 100 times larger than in D1. The Reynolds numbers are
Re = Rm ≈ 500, and the ratio of magnetic to kinetic energy oscillates around 0.15. The
cosine of γ (the angle between µ and Ω) oscillates wildly in time, and the orientation
of the dipole shows no preferred direction. The only diﬀerence between run D1 and D2
is the change in the forcing scale, and the result seems to indicate a separation of scales
between the forcing and the largest scale in the system helps the dynamo, as indicated
by the larger ratio EM /EV in run D2, and as also reported before in simulations with
periodic boundary conditions [28, 31, 32]. In all these runs, the largest available scale is
ﬁxed and given by the inverse of the smallest |λ| (corresponding to λ±1,1) and determined
by the radius of the sphere (R = 1), while the separation between this scale and the
forcing scale is controlled by the values of q and l in the forcing function (see Table 1).

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

18

Figure 13. Magnetic energy in dynamo runs D1 (solid), D2 (dotted), D3 (dashed), D5
(dash-dotted) and D7 (dash-triple dotted). Note the intermittent growth of magnetic
energy at early times in Run D7.

The largest the values of |q| and l, the smallest the scale where mechanical energy is
injected.

Several runs were done (see e.g. the runs D1 to D5 in Table 1) in which the forcing
was gradually moved to smaller scales (from q = l = 1 in D1 to q = l = 3 in D3), and
in which the rotation rate was progressively increased (from Ω = 2 in runs D1-D3 to
Ω = 8 in D5). As these changes were made, the amplitude of the forced modes |ξf
q,l,m| in
equation (19) had to be increased in order to reach a statistically steady state with r.m.s.
velocities of order one before the magnetic ﬁeld was introduced (their amplitudes were
0.4, 1.1, 1.6, 2.2, and 3.6, from run D1 to D5). The reason for this can be understood
as follows: the Coriolis force in equation (1) acts as a restoring force that opposes the
growth of perturbations. This is also the reason why this system can sustain waves, as
was shown in Section 3. In all these runs, A, B, ν, η, and the angle of inclination α
were kept the same. As will be seen from Table 1, all the forcing was non-helical.

All ﬁve runs are considered to have been able to resolve the Ekman layers that
developed, but they would likely not have been resolved at higher values of Ω. Figure 11
shows the general trend resulting from the smaller scale forcing and increased rotation.
Figure 11(a) shows a logarithmic-linear plot of the total magnetic energy versus time for
runs D1 to D5. The ﬁve runs showed increasingly large growth rate, a higher saturation
level of EM /EV , and increasing |µ|. In Run D5, the ultimate ratio of EM to EV was
about 0.4 and |µ| was close to unity. Figure 11(b) shows magnetic energy spectra for
runs D1 to D5, with decreasing Rossby number RO (based on the radius of the sphere)
of 0.5 (runs D1 to D3), 0.25 (D4), and 0.125 (D5). It will be seen that there develops a
small excess of magnetic energy in scales larger than the forcing scale with decreasing
Rossby numbers. Note the development of a “bump” in the magnetic energy spectrum
at λ ≈ 9 in runs D4 and D5.

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

19

Figure 14. Above: kinetic energy density and velocity ﬁeld lines at late times in Run
D5 (left), and magnetic energy density and magnetic ﬁeld ﬁles at the same time for the
same run. Below: same quantities for Run D7. Note the development of anisotropies
in the presence of large Ω in this run.

A second trend is indicated in Figure 12: namely the orientation of the dipole
moment onto the axis of rotation seems less erratic with decreasing Rossby and Ekman
numbers. That is, there are more eddy turnover times (in units of R/U) between the
near reversals as RO and EK are decreased, and the projection of the dipole moment
on the unit sphere gets more localized around the two “poles” deﬁned by the axis of
rotation. We borrow here the term “reversal” from the palaeomagnetic record, where
during a reversal the orientation of the dipole moment changes about 180◦ and its
amplitude decreases, in opposition to an “excursion” in which the direction and the
orientation of the dipole moment changes in a short period of time without resulting in
a full reversal [33].

To verify this behavior, in Runs D6, D7, and D8 we successively decreased RO and
EK while keeping the other parameters constant. At the present resolution, we could
not decrease the values of RO and EK below the values for run D8 while keeping the
boundary layer well resolved. In geodynamo simulations, a similar eﬀect was reported,
and it was noted that the behavior of the dipole moment was controlled by the amplitude
of the Rossby number, independently of the values of the Ekman and Rayleigh numbers
[26].

Figure 12 shows the trace of the dipole moment µ on the surface of the unit sphere,
its amplitude, and the cosine of the angle between µ and Ω for runs D3, D5, and D7.
While in Run D3 the trace of µ ﬁlls the entire surface of the sphere, as RO and EK

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

20

Figure 15. Kinetic energy density (left), velocity ﬁeld lines (middle), and view from
top of the kinetic energy density superposed with velocity ﬁeld lines (right) in run D10,
before magnetic energy is introduced. Note the columnar structures in the velocity ﬁeld
aligned along Ω (in the z direction).

are decreased µ seems to ﬂuctuate around two regions in opposite sides of the sphere.
These regions get more localized with decreasing RO and EK. Also, the time between
excursions of µ outside these regions gets larger, as shown by cos(γ). In Run D7, after a
transient that ﬁnishes at t ≈ 80, cos(γ) stays at 1 or −1 for ≈ 20 turnover times before
changing sign rapidly. It is also worth noticing that as RO and EK decrease, the time it
takes the system to develop a dipole moment of order one gets larger (see the evolution
of |µ| at early times in Figure 12). This is also observed in the time evolution of the
magnetic energy (see Figure 13). Instead of having an exponential growth of EM at early
times as in Runs D1 to D5, Runs D6 to D8 show a more intermittent behavior: magnetic
energy grows in rapid “bursts” and stays around that value until a new burst increases
the magnetic energy again. In Run D7, this process saturates around t ≈ 80 and no
further change in the average value of EM is observed. It is possible that the slow-down
during the kinematic dynamo regime is a consequence of a quasi-two-dimensionalization
of the ﬂow by the high rotation rate; this remains to be investigated fully.

Figure 14 shows visualizations of energy densities and ﬁeld lines at late times in
Runs D5 and D7. The development of anisotropies in the velocity and magnetic ﬁelds
can be observed in run D7, which has the highest rotation rate attained of Ω = 16.
Indeed, as Ω is increased the velocity ﬁeld shows a tendency to develop columns, with
mechanical energy concentrated in cylindrical structures aligned along Ω and with a
larger component of vφ than of vz. The velocity ﬁeld in these column is helical, although
in general the total mechanical helicity of the ﬂow ﬂuctuates in time around zero. These
structures are observed before the magnetic ﬁeld is introduced (although they persist
as the magnetic energy grows) and seem to be the result of the Taylor-Proudman eﬀect
(see e.g. [34, 35]). It is a trend observed through runs D5 to D10 (see Figure 15 for an
example).

Run D9 experiments with lowering the angle between the forcing’s axis of symmetry

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

21

Figure 16. (a) Trace of the dipole moment on the surface of the unit sphere (above)
and amplitude of the dipole moment as a function of time (below) for Run D11. (b)
Same quantities for run D12.

and the axis of rotation to α = 20◦, and the dipole becomes more diﬃcult to excite (as
evidenced by a smaller growth rate in the kinematic dynamo regime). Indeed, dynamo
action could not be excited below 15◦ for the values of Reynolds numbers explored, as
the resulting driven ﬂow approaches axisymmetry.

Run D10 is actually part of a set of experiments (Runs D10 to D12; again,
see Table 1) with forcing functions that are non-axisymmetric, and which may also
inject mechanical helicity (Runs D11 and D12). Run D10, having no net mechanical
helicity, shows no big diﬀerences in the evolution of global quantities from the previously
discussed runs. The dipole develops but its orientation wanders randomly, with some
preferred orientation perpendicular to Ω. In this case, axisymmetry is broken by the
forcing directly instead of by a non-zero angle between an axisymmetry forcing and the
axis of rotation.

Runs D11 and D12 have non-axisymmetric forcing that injects mechanical helicity.

The forcing for these runs is given by equation (20) with coeﬃcients

ξf
3,3,0 = 5ξf

−3,3,0 = F0, ξf

3,3,0<m≤3 = 5ξf

−3,3,0<m≤3 = F0(1 + i),

(21)

with F0 = 1.7. In the presence of net helicity, dynamo excitation suddenly becomes
much easier (as evidenced by a much larger growth rate of magnetic energy during the
kinematic regime), and the ultimate saturation occurs at EM /EV ≈ 2: more magnetic
than kinetic, with magnetic helicity, having sign opposite that of the mechanical helicity

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

22

Figure 17. Kinetic energy density and velocity ﬁeld lines (left), and magnetic energy
density and magnetic ﬁeld lines (right) at the same time in the saturated state of run
D12. The axes are aligned as in Figure 16.

inversely cascading to the large scales. As a result, the system is dominated by a helical
magnetic ﬁeld at the largest available scale.

An interesting qualitative argument from mean ﬁeld theory [36, 37] (which assumes
large scale separations and often some form of periodic boundary conditions, as do all
“α-eﬀect” calculations) can be seen to anticipate this result as follows. From mean ﬁeld
theory , the induction equation for the mean magnetic ﬁeld B (assuming there is no
mean ﬂow U) is

Here, α is proportional to minus the kinetic helicity of the ﬂow [36, 38, 37], and β is a
turbulent magnetic diﬀusivity. Dotting equation (22) with the mean vector potential A
(such as B = ∇ × A) and integrating over volume, an equation for the evolution of the
mean magnetic helicity HM is obtained,

∂B
∂t

= α∇ × B + β∇2B.

dHM
dt

= αEM + β∇2HJ,

(22)

(23)

where EM is the mean magnetic energy and HJ is the mean current helicity. As a
result, if magnetic diﬀusion is neglected, the dynamo process injects into the mean
(large) scales magnetic helicity of opposite sign than the kinetic helicity, and in the
small scales magnetic helicity of the same sign. This eﬀect has been observed before
in numerical dynamo simulations with periodic boundary conditions [28, 31]. The
large scale magnetic helicity then inverse-cascades to the largest available scale in the
system, while the small scale magnetic helicity is transferred to smaller scales where it
is dissipated [39]. As a result, at late times the system is dominated by a large scale
magnetic ﬁeld with magnetic helicity of opposite sign to that of the kinetic helicity
injected by the forcing.

As seen in Figure 16, the dipolar orientation in D11 seems to have a preference for
being perpendicular to Ω. For run D12, whose forcing function diﬀers in its orientation
to Ω by 90◦, the dipole orientation seems to remain in a single hemisphere (see Figure

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

23

16) and its tip precesses about Ω. Figure 17 shows energy density and ﬁeld lines in
the saturated steady state of run D12. The axes are aligned as in Figure 16. As is
often the case with helical ﬂows, the geometry of the ﬂow is more complex than in the
non-helical runs. These runs in which a net sign of mechanical helicity is sustained
by the mechanical forcing were continued for several thousands turnover times, and no
reversals of the dipole moment were observed. The dipole moment seems to ﬂuctuate
around a preferred orientation with only short excursions of the dipole to the opposite
hemisphere.

5. Discussion and future directions

By solving the mechanically-forced MHD equations inside a rotating conducting
spherical boundary, we have found that a bewilderingly wide variety of dynamo behavior
is possible for a magnetic Prandtl number of unity. The behavior is sensitive to
mechanical and magnetic Reynolds numbers, to rotation rate, and more indirectly to
It is also sensitive to the geometry and strength of the forcing
the Ekman number.
functions and their relation to the axis of rotation. We have only begun to explore this
multidimensional parameter space. Note we have not made much eﬀort to tailor the
forcing functions we have chosen to model what the mechanical ﬂows in planetary cores
or stellar convective regions might be. Rather, we have been exploring dynamo behavior
in the abstract, and feel somewhat overwhelmed by the variety of dynamo behavior that
has been found. In this light, our attempt should be consider as an extension of dynamo
simulations in periodic boundary conditions [27, 28, 31, 40, 29, 30] to consider the eﬀect
of boundaries and rotation, and not be compared with explorations of the space of
parameters in realistic geodynamo simulations [10, 9, 13, 2, 26].

What has become clear is that the wholly spectral methods we are using, while
accurate, do not scale well into the parameter regimes of planetary and astrophysical
dynamos, which involve many orders of magnitude between the largest length scales
in the ﬂows and the Ekman or dissipation scales that also play a role in the process.
This limitation aﬄicts all numerical attempts to explore planetary and stellar dynamos,
particularly in view of the low magnetic Prandtl numbers that are expected to prevail
there, in simulations [29, 30], and in liquid-sodium experiments [41, 42, 43, 44, 45]. But
the rapid multiplication of the number of terms to compute in the convolution sums
in equations (10) and (11) provides a rather intractable limitation on eﬀorts to use our
code without modiﬁcation at higher Reynolds numbers than the few hundred we have
explored here. What seems to be called for is an exploration of the possibilities of
using fast transforms (for spherical harmonics [46, 47] and possibly for spherical Bessel
functions [48, 49])to turn the code into a pseudospectral one in which the nonlinear
terms are computed in conﬁguration space rather than spectral space, as is commonly
done for rectangular periodic boundary conditions [17] which would increase available
resolution by many orders of magnitude. Our future investigations will explore this
possibility.

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

24

[2]).

We also intend to replace the conducting boundary by an insulating but
mechanically-impenetrable one that will permit protrusion of the magnetic ﬁeld into
It may be that forcing the
the vacuum region surrounding the shell (see e.g.
magnetic ﬁeld lines to return to the interior each time they get near the shell that is
now playing a dynamical role in what we are seeing would be diﬀerent in the case of an
insulating shell. This raises some conceptual diﬃculties, since the problem of matching
MHD ﬁelds on to vacuum electromagnetic ones has not been thoroughly solved. For
example, one approximation that has been used has been to match magnetic ﬁelds at
a spherical surface to magnetostatic ones outside, which involve a magnetic ﬁeld that
is derivable from a scalar potential and for which there is no electric ﬁeld. However,
Maxwell’s equations tell us that the tangential electric ﬁeld must be continuous at any
interface, and there is no reason why this tangential electric ﬁeld should vanish or even
be “small” immediately inside an insulating boundary of a conducting magnetoﬂuid.
The magnetostatic approximation may be the best we can do, but it would be desirable
to have more justiﬁcation for it than we presently have.

Finally, we need to devote attention to the geometry and strength of the forcing
functions that are being employed and to study the eﬀect of diﬀerent forcing functions
in dynamo action. Mechanical processes, convective and otherwise, are believed to
power the dynamo in cases of geophysical or astrophysical interest. In the simulations
discussed, we have no explanation, for example, why the “columns” or columnar vortices
aligned along Ω form in the velocity ﬁeld in runs toward the end of Table 1. It is clear the
physical eﬀect that is triggering their formation is the rotation alone, perhaps through
a two-dimensionalization of the ﬂow via the Taylor-Proudman eﬀect [34, 35, 8]. This
is a diﬀerent process than the conventional explanation for the formation of columns
in planetary interiors, which involves both thermal convection and rotation [50], since
thermal convection is completely absent in our incompressible MHD formulation.

Computer time was provided by NCAR. NSF grants CMG-0327888 at NCAR, ATM-
0327533 at Dartmouth, and AST-0507760 at Cornell supported this work in part and
are gratefully acknowledged.

Acknowledgments

References

Fluids, 18:116602, 2006.

ﬁeld. Rev. Geophys., 40:1–53, 2002.

1957.

[1] P. D. Mininni and D. C. Montgomery. Magnetohydrodynamic activity inside a sphere. Phys.

[2] M. Kono and P. H. Roberts. Recent geodynamo simulations and observations of the geomagnetic

[3] S. Chandrasekhar and P. C. Kendall. On force-free magnetic ﬁelds. Astrophys. J., 126:457–460,

[4] D. C. Montgomery, L. Turner, and G. Vahala. Three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic

turbulence in cylindrical geometry. Phys. Fluids, 21:757–764, 1978.

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

25

[5] L. Turner. Statistical mechanics of a bounded, ideal magnetoﬂuid. Ann. Phys. (NY), 149:58–161,

1983.

[6] J. Cantarella, D. DeTurck, H. Gluck, and M. Teytel. The spectrum of the curl operator on

spherically symmetric domains. Phys. Plasmas, 7:2766–2775, 2000.

[7] H. P. Greenspan. The theory of rotating ﬂuids. Cambridge Univ. Press., Cambridge, 1968.
[8] D. J. Acheson. Elementary ﬂuid dynamics. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990.
[9] K. Zhang and G. Schubert. Magnetohydrodynamics in rapidly rotating spherical systems. Annu.

Rev. Fluid Mech., 32:409–443, 2000.

[10] G. A. Glatzmaier and P. H. Roberts. A three-dimensional self-consistent computer simulation of

a geomagnetic ﬁeld reversal. Nature, 377:203–209, 1995.

[11] G. A. Glatzmaier and P. H. Roberts. Rotation and magnetism of earth’s inner core. Science,

274:1887–1891, 1996.

[12] U. R. Christensen, J. Aubert, P. Cardin, E. Dormy, S. Gibbons, G. A. Glatzmaier, E. Grote,
Y. Honkura, C. Jones, M. Kono, M. Matsushima, A. Sakuraba, F. Takahashi, A. Tilgner,
J. Wicht, and K. Zhang. A numerical dynamo benchmark. Phys. of the Earth and Plan. Int.,
128:25–34, 2001.

[13] P. H. Roberts and G. A. Glatzmaier. The geodynamo, past, present and future. Geophys.

[14] H. K. Moﬀatt. Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically conducting ﬂuids. Cambridge Univ. Press,

Astrophys. Fluid Dyn., 94:47–84, 2001.

Cambridge, 1978.

[15] B. T. Kress and D. C. Montgomery. Pressure determinations for incompressible ﬂuids and

magnetoﬂuids. J. Plasma Phys., 64:371–377, 2000.

[16] G. Gallavotti. Foundations of ﬂuid dynamics. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2002. pp. 83–87 ﬀ.
[17] C. Canuto, Y. Hussaini, A. Quarteroni, and T. Zang. Spectral methods in ﬂuid dynamics. Springer

Verlag, New York, 1988.

[18] E. Dormy, P. Cardin, and D. Jault. MHD ﬂow in a slightly diﬀerentially rotating spherical shell,
with conducting inner core, in a dipolar magnetic ﬁeld. Phys. of the Earth and Plan. Int.,
160:15–30, 1998.

[19] J. Clyne and M. Rast. A prototype discovery environment for analyzing and visualizing terascale
turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow simulations. In R. F. Erbacher, J. C. Roberts, M. T. Grohn, and K. Borner,
editors, Visualization and data analysis 2005, pages 284–294, Bellingham, Wash., 2005. SPIE.
http://www.vapor.ucar.edu.

[20] W. H. Matthaeus and D. Montgomery. Selective decay hypothesis at high mechanical and magnetic

reynolds numbers. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 357:203–222, 1980.

[21] A. C. Ting, W. H. Matthaeus, and D. Montgomery. Turbulent relaxation processes in

magnetohydrodynamics. Phys. Fluids, 29:3261–3274, 1986.

[22] R. Kinney, J. C. McWilliams, and T. Tajima. Coherent structures and turbulent cascades in two-
dimensional incompressible magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. Phys. Plasmas, 2:3623–3639,
1995.

[23] R. Grappin, A. Pouquet, and J. L´eorat. Dependence on correlation of MHD turbulence spectra.

Astron. Astrophys., 126:51–56, 1983.

[24] A. Pouquet, M. Meneguzzi, , and U. Frisch. The growth of correlations in MHD turbulence. Phys.

Rev. A, 33:4266–4276, 1986.
[25] S. Ghosh, W. H. Matthaeus,

, and D. C. Montgomery. The evolution of cross helicity in
driven/dissipative two-dimensional magnetohydrodynamics. Phys. Fluids, 31:2171–2184, 1988.
[26] U. R. Christensen and J. Aubert. Scaling properties of convection-driven dynamos in rotating

spherical shells. Geophys. J. Int., 166:97–114, 2006.

[27] M. Meneguzzi, U. Frisch, and A. Pouquet. Helical and nonhelical turbulent dynamos. Phys. Rev.

Lett., 47:1060–1064, 1981.

[28] A. Brandenburg. The inverse cascade and nonlinear alpha-eﬀect in simulations of isotropic helical

hydromagnetic turbulence. Astrophys. J., 550:824–840, 2001.

Hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics inside a rotating sphere

26

[29] Y. Ponty, P. D. Mininni, D. C. Montgomery, J.-F. Pinton, H. Politano, and A. Pouquet. Numerical

study of dynamo action at low magnetic prandtl numbers. Phys. Rev. Lett., 94:164502, 2005.

[30] P. D. Mininni and D. C. Montgomery. Low magnetic prandtl number dynamos with helical forcing.

Phys. Rev. E, 72:056320, 2005.

[31] D. O. G´omez and P. D. Mininni. Direct numerical simulations of helical dynamo action: MHD

and beyond. Nonlin. Proc. Geophys., 11:619–629, Dic 2004.

[32] P. D. Mininni, D. O. G´omez, and S. M. Mahajan. Direct simulations of helical Hall-MHD

turbulence and dynamo action. ApJ, 619:1019–1027, 2005.

[33] J.-P. Valet, L. Meynadier, and Y. Guyodo. Geomagnetic dipole strength and reversal rate over

the past two million years. Nature, 435:802–805, 2005.

[34] G. I. Taylor. Experiments on the motion of solid bodies in rotating ﬂuids. Proc. Roy. Soc. A,

104:213–218, 1923.

717, 1972.

[35] P. A. Davies. Experiments on taylor columns in rotating stratiﬁed ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 54:691–

[36] M. Steenbeck, F. Krause, and K.-H. R¨adler. Berechnung der mittleren Lorentz-Feldstaerke v × b
fuer ein elektrisch leitendendes Medium in turbulenter, durch Coriolis-Kraefte beeinﬂußter
Bewegung. Z. Naturforsch., 21a:369–376, 1966.

[37] F. Krause and K.-H. Raedler. Mean-ﬁeld magnetohydrodynamics and dynamo theory. Pergamon

[38] A. Pouquet, U. Frisch, and J. L´eorat. Strong MHD helical turbulence and the nonlinear dynamo

[39] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet. On the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity.

[40] A. Brandenburg and K. Subramanian. Astrophysical magnetic ﬁelds and nonlinear dynamo theory.

Press, New York, 1980.

eﬀect. J. Fluid Mech., 77:321–354, 1976.

Astrophys. J., 640:335–343, 2006.

Phys. Rep., 417:1–209, 2005.

[41] A. Gailitis, O. Lielausis, E. Platacis, S. Dement’ev, A. Cifersons, G. Gerbeth, T. Gundrum,
F. Stefani, M. Christen, and G. Will. Magnetic ﬁeld saturation in the riga dynamo experiment.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 86:003024, 2001.

[42] R. Steiglitz and U. M¨uller. Experimental demonstration of a homogeneous two-scale dynamo.

Phys. Fluids, 13:561–564, 2001.

[43] F. P´etr´elis, M. Bourgoin, L. Mari´e, J. Burguete, A. Chiﬀaudel, F. Daviaud, S. Fauve, P. Odier,
and J.-F. Pinton. Nonlinear magnetic induction by helical motion in a liquid sodium turbulent
ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90:174501, 2003.

[44] D. R. Sisan, W. L. Shew, and D. P. Lathrop. Lorentz force eﬀects in magneto-turbulence. Phys.

Earth Plan. Int., 135:137–159, 2003.

[45] E. J. Spence, M. D. Nornberg, C. M. Jacobson, R. D. Kendrick, and C. B. Forest. Observation of

a turbulence-induced large scale magnetic ﬁeld. Phys. Rev. Lett., 96:055002, 2006.

[46] J. R. Driscoll and D. M. Healy Jr. Computing Fourier transforms and convolutions on the 2-sphere.

[47] M. Mohlenkamp. A fast transform for spherical harmonics. J. of Fourier Analysis and Appl.,

Adv. Applied Math., 15:202–250, 1994.

5:159–184, 1999.

[48] O. A. Sharafeddin, H. F. Bowen, D. J. Kouri, and D. K. Hoﬀman. Numerical evaluation of

spherical Bessel transforms via fast Fourier transforms. J. Comp. Phys., 100:294–296, 1992.

[49] M. J. Cree and P. J. Bones. Algorithms to numerically evaluate the Hankel transform. Computers

Math. Applic., 26:1–12, 1993.

[50] F. H. Busse. Thermal instabilities in rapidly rotating systems. J. Fluid Mech., 44:441–460, 1970.

