7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Liquid drop splashing on smooth, rough and textured surfaces

Lei Xu∗
Department of Physics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Splashing occurs when a liquid drop hits a dry solid surface at high velocity. This paper reports
experimental studies of how the splash depends on the roughness and the texture of the surfaces
as well as the viscosity of the liquid. For smooth surfaces, there is a “corona” splash caused by
the presence of air surrounding the drop. There are several regimes that occur as the velocity and
liquid viscosity are varied. There is also a “prompt” splash that depends on the roughness and
texture of the surfaces. A measurement of the size distribution of the ejected droplets is sensitive
to the surface roughness. For a textured surface in which pillars are arranged in a square lattice,
experiment shows that the splashing has a four-fold symmetry. The splash occurs predominantly
along the diagonal directions. In this geometry, two factors aﬀect splashing the most: the pillar
height and spacing between pillars.

PACS numbers: 47.20.Cq, 47.20.Ma, 47.40.Nm, 47.55.D-

I. Introduction

When a liquid drop hits a solid surface,

it often
splashes and breaks into thousands of smaller droplets.
Splashing is an excellent example of a singular breakup
phenomenon with an underlying instability that is still
not properly understood. As illustration, it was only
recently discovered that the surrounding air pressure
is an important parameter for creating a splash on
a smooth dry substrate so that the splash can be
completely suppressed in a low pressure environment
[1]. Splashing is also broadly important in industry with
applications in ink-jet printing[2], combustion of liquid
fuel[3], spray drying[4] and surface coating[5].

There are two distinct types of splashing[6]: “corona”
and “prompt”. Corona splashing occurs on smooth sur-
faces, where a symmetric corona is ﬁrst formed, and
droplets are ejected from the expanding corona; prompt
splashing takes place on rough surfaces, where there is no
corona, and droplets are created at the spreading contact
line. Fig. 1 shows photographs of the two cases. A pre-
vious study proposed to explain this diﬀerence: corona
splashing is caused by the eﬀects of the air surrounding
the drop and prompt splashing is caused by the eﬀects of
surface roughness [7].

Splashing has been studied since the time of Worthing-
ton in 1867 [8]. Since then, there have been many ex-
perimental studies which have attempted to ﬁnd a cri-
terion for when splashing would occur. Notably, Mundo
et al [9] established an empirical relationship for the no-
splashing to splashing transition that depended on the
surface roughness, Ra, the velocity of impact, V0, the
surface tension of the ﬂuid, σ, the diameter of the drop,
D, the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid, µ, and the density
Re1/4 = Kc[Ra],
of the ﬂuid, ρ. They found that: W e1/2

·

∗Present address: Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA. Electronic address: xuleixu@deas.harvard.edu

FIG. 1: Corona splash and prompt splash. The photo-
graph on the left is a corona splash on a smooth dry sur-
face. Droplets are created from a symmetric corona. In the
photograph on the right, a prompt splash occurs on a rough
dry surface. In this case there is no corona and droplets are
ejected from the advancing contact line.

where W e and Re are Weber number and Reynolds num-
ber respectively: W e = ρDV 2
0 /σ, Re = ρDV0/µ. Kc is
a constant and that depends on surface roughness Ra.
50. When K < Kc
Splashing will occur when K > Kc ∼
no splashing will occur. Wu[10] and Range et al [11] in-
vestigated the dependence of splashing on the Ohnesorge
number, Oh = µ/√Dσρ. They studied the Oh << 1
case , where they could neglect the eﬀects of viscosity,
logbRa, where
and obtained the relationship: W ec = a
a and b are ﬁtting parameters. When W e > W ec, they
saw a splash. Note that neither of these relationships
take into account the eﬀects of the gas surrounding the
liquid during the splash.

·

Some researchers also investigated the ﬁngering insta-
bility at the rim of the expanding liquid disc. Allen[12]
proposed that the Rayleigh-Taylor instability caused the
ﬁngering. Bhola et al [13] and Mehdizadeh et al [14] ob-
tained reasonable agreement between this theory and
their experiments. Thoroddsen et al [15] experimentally
studied the ﬁngers and proposed that the instability is
caused by the presence of air trapped under the liquid
drop.

This paper reports on experiments both for corona
splashing on smooth dry surfaces and for prompt splash-
ing on rough and textured dry substrates. For corona

splashing, there are several regimes that depend on the
velocity of impact and the ﬂuid viscosity. Undulations
around the rim of the spreading ﬂuid are measured as a
function of the air pressure on the smooth dry surfaces.
There is a sharp jump in the number of undulations
at the threshold pressure. For prompt splashing, both
random roughness and roughness created by regular
textured surface were studied. For a textured surface
consisting of a regular array of pillars, the dependence
of splashing on the vertical pillar height, lateral pillar
size and pillar spacing was studied independently.

II. Corona splash on smooth surface

Previous experiment has

the sur-
rounding air is crucial for corona splashing on a smooth
dry surface [1]: The rows of Fig.
2 show images of
splash at diﬀerent background air pressures for a drop
of ethanol hitting a glass substrate. Surprisingly, as the

shown that

2

pressure is lowered, fewer droplets are ejected; under low
enough pressure no droplets emerge at all after impact.
At a threshold pressure, PT , the splash just begins to be
formed as is shown in the second row of the ﬁgure.

The threshold pressure, PT , as a function of impact
velocity, V0, is shown in the main panel of Fig. 3. The
curve is not monotonic. In the high velocity region above
a characteristic velocity, V ∗, PT decreases as the impact
velocity is raised. This is what we might naively ex-
pect. However, in the region V0 < V ∗, the curve is non-
monotonic. This non-monotonicity indicates two diﬀer-
ent regimes at low and high velocities. Further experi-
ments show that V ∗ varies with liquid viscosity and drop
size [16].

Experiments have also revealed that when the sur-
rounding gas is heavier (for example, using Kr and SF6)
and with larger liquid viscosity it is easier to create a
splash. We compared two stresses[1]: the destabilizing
stress from air, ΣG, and the stabilizing stress from sur-
face tension, ΣL, and found:

ΣG/ΣL =

γMGP

(1)

DV0
4kBT

√νL
σ

r

p

Here γ is the adiabatic constant of the gas, MG is the
gas molecular weight, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is
the temperature, D is the diameter of the drop, νL is
the kinematic viscosity of liquid, and σ is the surface
tension. A heavier gas or a larger liquid viscosity will
increase the ratio, ΣG/ΣL. The ratio of these two stresses
was found to be approximately constant for velocities

±

±

FIG. 2: Photographs of a liquid drop hitting a smooth dry
0.1 mm diameter alcohol drop hits a smooth
substrate. A 3.4
glass substrate with impact velocity V0 = 3.74
0.02 m/s at
diﬀerent background air pressures. Each row shows the drop
at two times, 0.276 ms and 0.552 ms after impact. In the top
row, P = 100 kPa (atmospheric pressure), the drop splashes.
In the second row, at the threshold pressure, PT = 38.4 kPa,
the drop emits only a few droplets, traveling at a small angle
with respect to the surface.
In the third row, at P = 30.0
kPa, there is no splashing but there are undulations at the
rim. In the fourth row, at P = 17.2 kPa, there is no splashing
and no apparent undulations in the rim of the drop. Taken
from [1].

∗

FIG. 3: Threshold pressure versus impact velocity and the
collapse of data. Main panel shows PT vs. V0 in air. The
curve is nonmonotonic: seemingly two distinct regimes are
. The inset plots ΣG/ΣL versus
separated by a velocity, V
V0 at threshold pressure PT , in the region V0 > V ∗, for gases
of diﬀerent molecular weight, MG: He(MHe = 4), air(Mair =
29), Kr(MKr = 84), SF6(MSF6 = 146) and for liquids of diﬀer-
ent viscosity, νL: Methanol(νM eth = 0.68cSt), Ethanol(νEtoh
= 1.36cSt), 2-Propanol(ν2−P ro = 2.60cSt). At threshold pres-
sure, all ΣG/ΣL collapse approximately onto a constant value,
0.45. Taken from [1].

above V ∗ at threshold pressure. This is shown in the
inset to Fig. 3 where ΣG/ΣL at threshold pressure PT
is plotted for gases of diﬀerent molecular weights(4
∼
2.6
146 Dalton), liquids of diﬀerent viscosities (0.68
∼
cSt) and diﬀerent impact velocities (2.5
7 m/s). At
threshold pressure, in the regime V > V ∗, ΣG/ΣL = 0.45
so that Eq.1 successfully collapses all the data without
any ﬁtting parameter.

∼

The prediction of Eq.1 that increasing the liquid vis-
cosity leads to a lowering of the threshold pressure was
veriﬁed by the data in Fig. 3 which spanned the range
0.68cSt < νL < 2.60cSt. Nevertheless this result is coun-
terintuitive from our experience with high viscosity liq-
uids and calls for more experiments covering a broader
range of viscosity. By using silicone oils of diﬀerent
molecular weights, the liquid viscosity could be varied

3

∼

∼

by more than one order of magnitude, while keeping a
0.95g/cm3) and surface
very similar mass density (0.82
21mN/m). Fig. 4 shows photographs of
tension(17.4
a relatively viscous (5 cSt) silicone oil drop hitting a dry
glass substrate under diﬀerent pressures of air. Again, we
ﬁnd that the splash decreases as the air pressure is de-
creased, and that no splash occurs when the background
pressure is low enough. But one diﬀerence between Fig.4
and Fig.2 is that splashing occurs at a much later time
when the viscosity is large. This is most obvious if one
compares the second rows. Clearly one eﬀect of viscosity
is to delay the splashing time, as we might have expected.
Fig.5 shows the threshold pressure, PT , vs. liquid vis-
0.1 mm diameter drops hitting the
cosity, νL, for 3.1
substrate with an impact velocity V0 = 4.03
0.05 m/s.
The upper curve shows, as before, the splashing thresh-
old pressure, PT , where splashing is ﬁrst detected. The
lower curve shows the threshold pressure, PT −bump, for
where an undulation in the expanding sheet of liquid is
ﬁrst observed. PT −bump is deﬁned as the lowest pressure
at which undulations (or bumps) ﬁrst show up, and be-
low which no undulations can be seen. Both threshold
pressures ﬁrst decrease then increase with increasing vis-
cosity. This indicates two diﬀerent regimes. At low νL,
as the viscosity is increased, the threshold pressure to
create a splash decreases. Thus viscosity helps to pro-
duce splash, as predicted by Eq.1. The solid line is the

±

±

±

FIG. 4: Splash of a viscous drop(νL = 5cSt). A 3.1
0.1
mm diameter silicone oil drop hits a smooth glass substrate
0.05 m/s under diﬀerent air
at impact velocity V0 = 4.03
±
pressures. Each row shows the drop at two times: 0.735 ms
and 2.478 ms after impact. In the top row, at P = 100 kPa,
there is a pronounced splash. In the second row, at threshold
pressure, PT = 36.0 kPa, the drop just starts to splash. In
the third row, at P = 30.7 kPa, there is no splash but there
are undulations in the thickness of the rim.
In the fourth
row, P = 26.7 kPa, there is no splashing and no apparent
undulations in the rim. The general property that less air
leads to less splashing is similar to the low viscosity case shown
in Fig. 2. However, at high viscosity splashing occurs at a
later time (2.478 ms for the second row) than it does for low
viscosity (0.552 ms for Fig.2 the second row).

◦

FIG. 5: Threshold pressures versus viscosity. Except for the
point at the smallest viscosity, which is for methanol, the ﬂu-
ids were silicone oils with diﬀerent molecular weights. Two
curves are shown: (i) the splash threshold pressure, PT (
),
for a splash to appear and (ii) the bump threshold pressure,
PT −bump(
), where the bump at the leading edge ﬁrst ap-
pears. The curves are both non-monotonic. At low viscosity,
the threshold pressures decrease with increasing νL whereas
at high viscosity, they increase with νL. The solid line is the
curve predicted by Eq.1: PT
1/√νL. The curve ﬁts the
∼
small viscosity regime very well, but does not capture at all
the trend at high νL. In these experiments, the impact veloc-
ity and drop diameter are kept ﬁxed at V0 = 4.03
0.05 m/s,
D = 3.1

0.1 mm.

±

•

±

scaling relation derived from Eq.1, which agrees well with
the small νL data. However, the prediction starts to de-
viate at higher viscosity where the threshold pressures
increase with νL. In this regime, the higher the viscosity,
the higher the pressure of air needed to create a splash
and viscosity suppresses splashing.

Why there are two diﬀerent behaviors? We think
that for the low νL regime, the expanding liquid ﬁlm
is stabilized mainly by surface tension so that viscosity
√νLt. Thus a larger
only aﬀects the ﬁlm thickness: d
νL causes a thicker ﬁlm which is easier to destabilize.
But for the high νL regime, viscous drag is important
and helps to stabilize the spreading drop.

∼

III. Number of undulations versus pressure

Researchers have extensively studied the ﬁnger-
ing instability that occurs as a splash is created
[12, 13, 14, 15]. “Fingers” mean long protrusions at the
rim of the expanding liquid ﬁlm. In our experiment, we
also observed undulations around the rim as shown in
the inset to Fig.6. Here, a feature similar to “ﬁngering”
is observed. However in this case, the undulations
do not extend very far out from the rim.
In order to
prevent possible confusion, we call them “undulations”
or “bumps”. Previous studies have focused on the
number of ﬁngers as a function of impact velocity and
surface roughness. Here we concentrate on the behavior
and number of the bumps as the air pressure is varied.

FIG. 6: Number of bumps as a function of air pressure. Inset
is a bottom-view photograph showing the undulations. The
number of undulations shown in the main panel, Nbump, is
counted from such images. There is a sudden change in Nbump
around PT −bump = 29 kPa. At that pressure Nbump jumps
from 0 to a ﬁnite value and stays constant above that pressure.

In Fig.6 we show Nbump at diﬀerent pressures. We
determine the number of undulations, Nbump,
from
pictures such as the one shown in the inset. At all
pressures, Nbump is measured at the same ﬁxed radius
of expansion where the undulations are most clear. The
main panel shows that at threshold pressure PT −bump,

4

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Nbump jumps from zero to a ﬁnite value, and stays con-
stant for higher pressures. The absence of undulations
at low pressure suggests that no instability can grow
below PT −bump. The apparent pressure independence
of Nbump above PT −bump could be due to the narrow
pressure range we are able to measure: above a certain
pressure the entire expanding ﬁlm is lifted into air.

IV. Discussion on instability mechanism

What is the mechanism for destabilizing the system
and causing the occurrence of a splash on a smooth sur-
face? What is the instability that eventually produces a
splash? This question is still under debate. One prevail-
ing theory ﬁrst proposed by Allen[12], is that it is due to
the Rayleigh-Taylor instability[17]. This is an instabil-
ity occurring at the interface of two ﬂuids with diﬀerent
densities, when the acceleration, a, points from the light
ﬂuid, ρ1, towards the heavy ﬂuid, ρ2. Linear instabil-
ity theory predicts an exponential growth in amplitude,
A
Exp(ct), with growth rate c. The wavenumber, km,
and the growth rate, cm, of the fastest growing mode are
predicted to be[18]:

∼

km =

r

a(ρ2

ρ1)

−
3σ

cm =

2akm(ρ2

ρ1)

−

3(ρ2 + ρ1)

s

Here the light ﬂuid is the surrounding air and the heavy
ﬂuid is the expanding liquid. The expanding disc de-
celerates so that the direction of a satisﬁes the require-
ment for the Rayleigh-Taylor instability. However, since
ρ2 >> ρ1, Eqs.2 and 3 do not vary appreciably with air
pressure. Therefore splashing should not vary with air
pressure if it were caused by Rayleigh-Taylor instability.
This is inconsistent with our experiment.

Another interface instability, the Kelvin-Helmholtz in-
stability, can take place when there is velocity jump at
the interface. For inviscid ﬂuids and ρ2 >> ρ1, the
wavenumber and the growth rate of the fastest growing
mode are: [19, 20, 21]:

km =

ρ1u2
σ

2
3

cm = kmu

ρ1
3ρ2

r

With u the relative velocity between two ﬂuids at the
DV0/4t is the velocity of the
interface. In our case, u
expanding liquid ﬁlm. The Kelvin-Helmholtz instability
p
strongly depends on the density of the lighter ﬂuid, ρ1,

∼

(6)

(7)

(8)

and thus may be relevant to our experiment. However,
our previous results[1] indicate that compressibility of air
is important. This suggests that we should replace the
Bernoulli term ρ1u2 in Eq.4 with ρ1CGu, with CG =
γkBT /MG the speed of sound in the surrounding gas.

p

km =

2
3

ρ1CGu
σ

=

2
3

P
σ

γMG
kBT r

DV0
4t

r

The characteristic length in the expanding liquid ﬁlm
is the ﬁlm thickness, d. This suggests that the instability
might be able to grow if:

km ∼

1/d

Since we also have d

√νLt, from Eq.6 and Eq.7, we

∼
obtain as a criterion for the instability to grow:

γMGP

DV0
4kBT

√νL

1

σ ∼

r

p

The left hand side is exactly ΣG/ΣL in Eq.1. In the
low viscosity regime, our experiment gives ΣG/ΣL = 0.45
for the splashing threshold which is consistent with the
criterion in Eq.8. This suggests the possibility the
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability may be the underlying
instability mechanism for corona splashing.

V. Prompt splash on rough surface

A completely diﬀerent type of splash, the prompt
splash, occurs on rough surfaces. By systematically
varying the degree of surface roughness and the air
pressure, we discovered two diﬀerent mechanisms for
the two kinds of splashes: surrounding air is responsible
for the corona splash discussed above and surface
roughness is responsible for the prompt splash[7]. Under
ordinary conditions (atmospheric pressure and non-zero
roughness), a splash is a mixture of both contributions.
By working under low pressure with a negligible amount
of air, we are able to study pure prompt splashing.

Since a prompt splash is caused by surface roughness,
it may retain information about surface roughness in the
distribution of sizes of the ejected droplets. We ﬁnd
that this is the case. We mix a small amount of ink
into our ethanol and then collect the ejected droplets
on a sheet of white paper. We then obtained the sizes
of ejected droplets by measuring the size and darkness
of the stains left on the paper. Our previous study[7]
shows that the number of droplets, N , decays exponen-
tially with their radius, r: N (r)
r/r0)(see inset
of Fig. 9(b)). This indicates the existence of a charac-
teristic decay length, r0.

Exp(

∼

−

The decay length, r0, correlates with roughness of the
surface, Ra[7]. At small Ra, we have the relationship
r0
Ra; but for large roughness, this breaks down as
r0 saturates at a constant value. We can understand

≈

5

∼

this behavior in the following manner. After impact,
the thickness of expanding ﬁlm, d, grows continuously
from being molecularly thin just after the impact,
to approximately 40
50µm at the end of the ﬁlm
expansion. When the surface roughness is small, d can
grow to be much larger than Ra. At the beginning, when
d is small, the ﬁlm is thinner than Ra and continues
to eject droplets until the ﬁlm becomes much thicker
than the surface roughness. After d grows to be larger
than Ra, the roughness is too small to destabilize the
liquid ﬁlm and produce a splash. Thus the distribution
of ejected droplets reﬂects the surface roughness Ra and
we ﬁnd r0
Ra. However, when the roughness is large,
d can never grow to be greater than Ra. Consequently,
r0 can only grow to the maximum size of d at its ﬁnal
thickness. This is consistent with the decay constant,
r0, saturating around 40µm, which is roughly the ﬁlm
thickness at the end of expansion.

≈

VI. Prompt splash on textured surface

The last section showed that roughness has a
strong eﬀect on prompt splash. To understand this
dependence in more detail and to understand how
surface properties aﬀect splashing, we study splashing

FIG. 7: Prompt splashing on a textured surface. (a)Top row
shows a side view of prompt splashing on a textured surface.
Bottom row shows a bottom view of prompt splashing on a
textured surface. There is a clear four-fold symmetry in the
splash which is predominantly in the diagonal directions of the
square lattice created by the pillars. (b) Making a textured
surface with UV-lithography technique. Left cartoon shows
the UV-lithography process. The right picture shows a typical
textured surface under the microscope. We deﬁne the pillar
height as h, lateral pillar size as l and spacing between pillars
as s. For this particular substrate, h = 18µm, l = s = 60µm.

on a well-deﬁned textured surface of regular patterns.

The textured surface is made with UV-lithography:
We ﬁrst spin coat UV epoxy (SU8-2000, MicroChem
Corp.) onto a clean glass microscope slide. We then cover
the slide with a mask of pre-designed pattern (square
blocks in a square lattice) and expose the slide to UV
light. After development, the UV epoxy ﬁlm which is di-
rectly under the transparent part of the mask will harden
and the rest of it can be rinsed away, resulting in a struc-
ture on the substrate of square pillars arranged in a 2D
square lattice as shown in Fig. 7b. There are three im-
portant quantities relating to our splash experiments in
this textured surface: (1) the vertical pillar height, h, (2)
the lateral pillar size, l, and (3) the lateral spacing be-
tween pillars, s. By changing the spin speed, we can vary
pillar height, h; by designing diﬀerent mask patterns, we
can vary both l and s independently. Thus we can vary
every aspect of the structure.

±

±

Fig. 7(a) shows photographs of a prompt splash on
a textured surface under low air pressure. The impact
velocity is 4.3
0.1m/s, and the drop diameter is D =
3.4
0.1mm. The top row shows a side view of the splash.
It has a similar look as the prompt splash on an ordinary
rough surface. However, the bottom view shown in the
second row reveals a very striking feature: the splashing
occurs with four fold symmetry. The droplets are ejected
predominantly along the diagonal directions of the square
lattice. Fig. 7(b) shows the process of UV-lithography
and a picture of textured surface under a microscope.

−

∼

exp(

We can now vary the proﬁles of the surface and de-
termine their eﬀect on the splash and the ejected droplet
distribution. Again we use the ink spot technique to mea-
sure the size distribution of droplets, as mentioned in last
section. In the ﬁrst set of experiments we ﬁrst keep lat-
eral size constant at l = s = 60µm, and vary the vertical
height of the pillars, h. Fig. 8(a) shows the number of
droplets, N , versus their radius, r. Similar to the case
with random roughness, we ﬁnd an exponential decay at
large r, N (r)
r/r0), with a characteristic decay
length, r0, that varies with h. Fig. 8(b) shows that r0
varies with h in a nonmonotonic manner. For small h, r0
increases with, and has a value comparable to, h. This
indicates that r0 is determined by h. However, when h
is greater than 18µm, the opposite trend occurs: r0 de-
creases as h increases. Fig.8(c) shows the sum of the
areas created by all of the ink spots, Atot, as a function
of h. Atot is a quantity that indicates the total amount of
ejected droplets. Fig.8(b) and (c) have the same shape,
indicating that r0 and Atot are strongly correlated. The
decreasing trend for large h implies that larger roughness
leads to less splashing. When h is greater than 60µm,
there is no splash at all.

These results are counterintuitive. We suspect they are
caused by the way in which the impacting liquid drop can
ﬂow between the channels set up by the pillar structure.
At small pillar heights, the liquid in the drop can eas-
ily reach the bottom of the canyon between the pillars
and can then expand along the bottom surface. During

6

∼

−

Exp(

FIG. 8: Decay length and total splash area versus pillar
height. (a) The number of ejected droplets, N , as a function
of droplet radius, r, for three pillar heights, h. The lateral di-
mensions are kept ﬁxed at l = s = 60µm. The straight lines
are an exponential ﬁt to the large r tail of the distribution:
–), 0.0098mm (—
N
r/r0), with r0 = 0.0017mm (–
) and 0.005mm (---) for h= 6µm(N), h = 30µm(
·
), and h
= 54µm((cid:3)) respectively. Note that r0 does not vary mono-
tonically with h. (b) The exponential decay length, r0, versus
pillar height, h. r0 ﬁrst increases then decreases as h increases.
(c) The total ink spot area, Atot, as a function of h, for the
same set of experiments shown in (b). The curve in (c) has a
similar shape as (b) indicating that Atot and r0 are strongly
correlated.

•

expansion, the liquid ﬁlm is destabilized by the pillars,
producing droplets with a size related to the pillar height,
h. This produces a positive correlation between r0 and
h for h < 18µm. However, as h increases, it is increas-

≈

ingly diﬃcult for the impacting drop to reach the bottom
surface. In this case, we suspect that much of the drop
expands on top of the pillars, rather than between them.
Once h
60µm, that is when the height is about the
same size as the lateral dimensions l and s, the situation
resembles a drop expanding on a ﬂat surface with many
holes rather than pillars. Here all the obstructions are
underneath the liquid ﬁlm and make only a small pertur-
bation to its expansion. Because the impacting drop can
only penetrate a ﬁnite depth below the pillar top, it does
not know how far away it is from the bottom surface.
This suggests that the amount of splashing should satu-
rate as the pillar height is increased. We do not have a
good explanation of the surprising fact that the splashing
can be completely eliminated if the pillars are suﬃciently
tall.

To some extent, this is similar to the Cassie state of
a drop on a superhydrophobic rough surface studied by
Qu´er´e et al [22, 23], where a water drop can sit on top of
air trapped in the rough proﬁle of the substrate. However
we note that their case is static whereas ours is proba-
bly driven by the fast dynamics of the expanding drop.
Moreover in the case studied by Qu´er´e et al the air plays
an important role in supporting the weight of the drop.
In our situation air has been pumped out of the system.
To understand the eﬀect of the lateral dimension on the
splashing, we make substrates of diﬀerent l and s, while
keeping h ﬁxed. Fig. 9(a) main panel shows N versus r
r/r0),
with an exponential ﬁtting function, N
for diﬀerent lateral sizes. Fig. 9(b) plots r0 as a function
of lateral pillar size l and spacing s. As l and s are varied
we keep l = s, and h = 10µm. Fig. 9(c) shows the total
l and s. Atot has the same dependence
area, Atot, vs.
on l and s as does r0. Both quantities increase with
lateral size in most of our range, then decrease at the end.
This means that increasing the lateral dimensions will
enhance splashing for small l and s. When the pillars are
too sparse, splashing becomes less pronounced suggesting
that it is more diﬃcult to destabilize the liquid ﬁlm. We
should also note that r0 is always much smaller than l
and s, while much closer to the pillar height h = 10µm.
This indicates that h is more important in determining
r0 than are l and s.

Exp(

−

∼

A comparison of a textured surface with a random
roughness surface is shown in the inset of Fig.9(a). Both
curves decay exponentially, but random roughness curve
(upper curve) has a much larger r0. This is surpris-
ing because both curves have similar roughness (l =
s = 20µm, h = 10µm for the textured surface and
Ra = 16µm for the case of random roughness). We can
understand this qualitatively using the data shown in
1
Fig.8(b). There we see r0 starts to decrease at h
3 l.
Thus here at h = 10µm = 1
2 l, it is already diﬃcult for
the drop to reach the bottom of the substrate and get
destabilized. However, the random roughness is made
by particles coated on surface. This substrate never re-
sembles a ﬂat surface with many holes. Therefore the
random roughness surface makes a much larger splash

≈

7

−

∼

Exp(

FIG. 9: Decay length and total splash area versus lateral
size of the pillars.
(a) N as a function of r for three lat-
eral sizes. The pillar height h is ﬁxed at h = 10µm. The
straight lines are an exponential ﬁt to the large r tail of the
distribution: N
–),
r/r0), with r0 = 0.0014mm (–
0.010mm (—) and 0.0061mm (---) for l = s = 20µm(N),
·
), and l = s = 100µm((cid:3)) respectively.
l = s = 80µm(
•
Note that r0 does not vary monotonically with l and s. In-
set compares the distribution for a textured surface with
l = s = 20µm, h = 10µm(N) with a sample with comparable
random roughness Ra = 16µm(
). The random roughness
creates a much larger splash. (b) r0 is plotted versus l and s.
r0 ﬁrst increases then decreases with l and s. (c) Atot versus
l and s. Again we see a similar shape as in (b).

◦

with a larger r0.

Fig. 9 demonstrates that r0 changes as we vary l and s
together. One further question is whether this is caused
by a change in l or a change in s or in both? We can check

8

FIG. 11: Eﬀect of pillars on suppressing corona splashing.
All experiments are done at atmospheric pressure, with V0 =
4.3m/s and D = 3.4mm. (a) A corona splash on a smooth
surface. (b) Splashing is completely suppressed on a surface
consisting of pillars with l = s = 60µm and h = 125µm. We
can tune the amount of splashing by varying the pillar height
even under atmospheric pressure.

creating pillars with intermediate heights. These results
suggest that the pillars form channels through which the
air can escape so that the importance of the air for creat-
ing the splash is minimized. This discovery demonstrates
another way in which one can suppress splashing. More-
over, it has the advantage that this suppression can be
achieved without decreasing the gas pressure.

VII. Conclusion

This paper systematically studied the splashing of liq-
uid drops on various dry solid surfaces. This study cor-
roborates that there are two mechanisms corresponding
to the two kinds of splashes. Air causes the corona splash
on smooth dry surfaces and substrate roughness causes
the prompt splash. For the corona splash, we discovered
several regimes. At high impact velocity, there are two
regimes as the viscosity of the liquid is varied. We also
studied the ﬁnger instability as function of air pressure
and ﬁnd a jump in the number of bumps. We suspect that
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability coupled with the compress-
ibility of air, is a possible mechanism for the splashing
instability. This mechanism agrees well with our experi-
mental data.

In order to examine the eﬀect of surface roughness,
we studied splashing on textured surfaces consisting of
square pillars arranged in a square lattice. We found
that the dimensions of the pillars strongly aﬀect splash-
ing. Here the pillar height, h, is found to be the most
important factor determining characteristic decay length,
r0. We discovered that the splash preserves the symme-
try of substrate. This shows that the splash direction
can be controlled. We also ﬁnd that corona splash un-
der atmospheric pressure can be suppressed by making
tall pillars on surface. This provide another way to re-
duce splash even under normal pressure. Since splashing
is involved in many industrial processes[2, 3, 4, 5], these
discoveries could have important practical applications.

×

), and spacing between pillars, s(

FIG. 10: Eﬀect on splash characteristics of varying l as com-
pared to the eﬀect of varying s. (a) We independently vary
), to
lateral pillar size , l(
compare their eﬀect. Two lines are guides to the eye for l (--
-) and s (—). Pillar height is kept ﬁxed at h = 10µm. When
l is varied, s = 60µm is held ﬁxed; when s is varied, l = 60µm
is held ﬁxed. The comparison shows that r0 changes with s
but not l. (b) A plot of the total area, Atot, as a function of l
or s, for the same experiment as in (a). It produces the same
trend as in (a).

◦

this by varying l and s independently. Fig. 10 shows the
result. The diﬀerent symbols are for varying l and s
separately while leaving all other conditions unchanged.
Apparently increasing the spacing between pillars, s, en-
hances r0 and Atot while l has a much smaller eﬀect on
the splashing behavior.

The fact that increasing s enhances splashing helps to
explain why we see splashing in the diagonal directions in
Fig. 7a. Along the diagonal, the distance between pillars
is the greatest. Because s is largest in those directions,
splashing preferentially occurs in those directions.

The textured substrate not only aﬀects the prompt
splashing caused by surface roughness, it also changes
the behavior of corona splashing caused by the surround-
ing air. Fig. 11(a) shows a typical corona splash on a
smooth surface at atmospheric pressure, while Fig. 11(b)
shows, at the same pressure, no splash at all on a textured
surface consisting of tall pillars.
In both experiments
the drop hits the substrate at the same impact velocity.
Diﬀerent amounts of splashing can also be achieved by

Acknowledgement The author is particularly in-
debted to Sidney R. Nagel and Wendy W. Zhang for their
suggestions and help on this work. L.X. is also grateful
to Qiti Guo, Jingshi Hu, David Qu´er´e, Mathilde Callies-

Reyssat and Ling-Nan Zou for helpful discussions. This
work was supported by MRSEC DMR-0213745 and NSF
DMR-0352777. L.X. was supported by Grainger Fellow-
ship.

9

[1] L. Xu, W. W. Zhang and S. R. Nagel, Phys. Rev. Lett.

94, 184505 (2005).

[2] J.L. Zable, IBM J. Res. Develop. 21, 315 (1977).
[3] K.R. Koederitz, M.R. Evers, G.B. Wilkinson and J.A.

Drallmeier, Int. J. Engine Research 3, 37 (2002).

[4] F.V. Shaw, Ceramic Bulletin 69, 1484 (1990).
[5] S. Sampath, X. Y. Jiang, J. Matejicek, A. C. Leger and

A. Vardelle, Mater. Sci. Eng. A 272, 181 (1999).

[12] R. F. Allen, J. Coll. Int. Sci. 51, 350 (1975).
[13] R. Bhola and S. Chandra, J. Mater. Sci. 34, 4883 (1999).
[14] N. Z. Mehdizadeh, S. Chandra and J. Mostaghimi, J.

Fluid Mech. 510, 353 (2004).

[15] S. T. Thoroddsen and J. Sakakibara, Phys. Fluids 10,

1359 (1998).

[16] P. Jindal, L. Xu and S. R. Nagel, to be published.
[17] G. I. Taylor, Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. A 201, 192

[6] R. Rioboo, M. Marengo and C. Tropea, Atomization and

(1950).

Sprays 11, 155 (2001).

[7] L.

Xu,

L.

Barcos

and

S.

R.

Nagel,

[18] D. H. Sharp, Physica D 12, 3 (1984).
[19] D. J. Acheson, Elementary Fluid Dynamics (Oxford Uni-

arxiv.org/abs/physics/0608079 (2006).

versity Press 1990).

[8] A.M. Worthington, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 25, 261 (1876-

[20] P. Marmottant and E. Villermaux, J. Fluid Mech. 498,

[9] C. Mundo, M. Sommerfeld and C. Tropea, Int. J. Multi-

phase Flow 21, 151 (1995)

[10] Z. N. Wu, ”Mod´elisation et calcul implicite multidomaine
d’´ecoulements diphasiques gaz-gouttelettes.” Ph.D. The-
sis, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 1992.
[11] K. Range and F. Feuillebois, J. Coll. Int. Sci. 203, 16

1877).

(1998).

73 (2004).

[21] S. S. Yoon, R. A. Jepsen, and T. J. O’Hern, ”Experimen-
tal Investigation on Splashing and Fingerlike Instability
of Large Water Droplets”, ILASS-AMERICAS 2005.
[22] A. Lafuma and D. Qu´er´e, Nature Mater. 2, 457 (2003).
[23] M. Callies and D. Qu´er´e, Soft Matter 1, 55 (2005).

