Controlling the direction and amount of a splash with textured surface

Lei Xu and Sidney R. Nagel
The James Franck Institute and Department of Physics
The University of Chicago
929 East 57th St., Chicago, Illinois 60637
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Because splashing is such a violent process, one might naively expect that neither the direction
of droplet emission nor the amount of ejected material can be controlled with any precision. Even
though it is observed countless times in the course of a day, drop splashing is highly non-intuitive[1]:
for example, it is surprising that the surrounding air pressure determines whether a drop will splash
when hitting a smooth surface[2]. Here we describe a discovery with signiﬁcant practical ramiﬁca-
tions: the direction, as well as the number, of the ejected droplets can be controlled by the texture
of a surface.

7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Splashing of a liquid drop after hitting a solid sur-
face is crucial in many industrial applications such as
inkjet printing[3], surface coating[4], combustion of liq-
uid fuel[5] and spray drying[6]. Precise manipulation of
the direction in which ejected droplets emerge from the
point of impact as well as of the number and total vol-
ume of the ejecta is highly desirable. We ﬁnd that all of
these parameters can be controlled by using a substrate
with a well-deﬁned texture.

Using UV-lithography techniques, we create a sub-
strate consisting of a square lattice of square pillars as
shown in Fig. 1a. The three parameters, (i) vertical pil-
lar height, h, (ii) lateral pillar side, l, and (iii) spacing
between pillars, s, can be varied independently. Fig.1b
shows bottom-view photographs of a 3.4mm diameter
drop after colliding with this substrate at 4.3m/s in a
low-pressure environment of 13kP a. The liquid is a mix-
ture of ethanol with ink so that the splash is clearly visi-
ble. There is a striking feature: the splashes have 4-fold-
symmetry. They emerge predominantly in the diagonal
directions of the underlying lattice where the distance
between pillars is the largest. This is consistent with
data[7] showing that in this regime of pillar dimensions,
splashing is suppressed by a higher pillar density.

There are two distinct components to a splash: the
corona splash caused by air[2] and the prompt splash
caused by surface roughness[8]. By working at low pres-
sure, as in Fig. 1b, air eﬀects are minimized so that
there is no corona splash. In this case only the surface-
roughness induced prompt splash remains. Fig. 1c shows
another series of photographs of drop splashing with the
same initial conditions as in Fig. 1b except that the
background air is at atmospheric pressure, 100kP a. Here
both the air and the surface roughness contribute to pro-
ducing a splash. We see a larger splash but with the
same 4-fold-symmetry seen in Fig. 1b. This indicates
that even though air is present, the splash directions are
still controlled by the substrate texture.

The surface texture not only controls the direction of
the droplets ejected by a splash, but it also aﬀects the
splash magnitude. To show this eﬀect, we did a series
of experiments at atmospheric pressure with ﬁxed lateral
pillar dimensions: l = s = 60µm, while varying the pillar

FIG. 1: Splash on a textured surface. (a), Textured surface
manufactured by UV-lithography. The left cartoon shows the
lithography process. The photograph at right is a top view
of the textured surface. Each square is a pillar with height
h = 18µm; the lateral pillar size, l, is the same as the pillar
spacing, s:
(b), A splash at low pressure,
13kP a. There is a clear 4-fold-symmetry, predominantly in
diagonal directions of the lattice. (c), A splash at atmospheric
pressure, 100kP a. The amount of splash increases with air
pressure, but the 4-fold-symmetry is preserved.

l = s = 60µm.

height, h. The impact velocity was kept at V0 = 4.3m/s.
Fig. 2a shows a symmetric corona splash on a smooth
surface (h = 0µm). The photographs in Fig. 2b show
that for small h (h = 5µm), there is a large splash. This
splash is not as symmetric as the smooth case. Fig. 2c
shows that as we increase the height to h = 54µm (a value
close to l and s), the splash amount is greatly reduced.
Finally, Fig. 2d shows that further increasing the height

to h = 125µm completely suppresses all splashing.

2

Why do tall pillars suppress splashing? Tall pillars
can form channels through which air can easily escape
without interfering with the liquid motion. This can
minimize the eﬀects of air that would otherwise create a
corona splash. However, it is much less clear why tall pil-
lars would also reduce the contributions from the prompt
component of the splash. This result suggests that the
drop feels little disturbance during its expansion on top
of the tall pillar surfaces. This could resemble the drops
ﬂoating on top of the super-hydrophobic surfaces studied
by Qu´er´e et al [9, 10].

Thus texture can control both the direction and mag-
nitude of a splash. Since splashing is involved in many
industrial processes, these discoveries should have impor-
tant applications.

We wish to thank Qiti Guo, Jingshi Hu, David Qu´er´e,
Mathilde Callies-Reyssat, and Wendy Zhang for helpful
discussions. This work was supported by MRSEC DMR-
0213745 and NSF DMR-0352777, L. X. was supported
by Grainger Fellowship.

FIG. 2: Splashing on surfaces with diﬀerent pillar heights
under atmospheric air pressure. In all images, the lateral pil-
lar dimensions were ﬁxed at l = s = 60µm. (a) A symmetric
corona splash on a smooth surface (h = 0µm).
(b) When
h = 5µm, the splash is a mixture of a corona and a prompt
component. The ejected droplets are not as symmetrically
distributed as in (a). (c) As we increase h to about the same
size as l and s, h = 54µm, there is a dramatic decrease in the
magnitude of the splash. (d) When h is further increased to
h = 125µm, the splash is completely suppressed.

[1] D. Qu´er´e, “ Impact on Everest, ” Nature 435, 1168

(2005).

[2] L. Xu, W. W. Zhang and S. R. Nagel, “ Drop splashing
on a dry smooth surface, ” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 184505
(2005).

[3] J.L. Zable, “ Splatter During Ink Jet Printing, ” IBM J.

Res. Develop. 21, 315 (1977).

[4] S. Sampath, X. Y. Jiang, J. Matejicek, A. C. Leger and
A. Vardelle, “ Substrate temperature eﬀects on splat for-
mation, microstructure development and properties of
plasma sprayed coatings Part I: Case study for partially
stabilized zirconia, ” Mater. Sci. Eng. A 272, 181 (1999).
[5] K. R. Koederitz, M. R. Evers, G. B. Wilkinson and J.A.
Drallmeier, “ Break-up of liquid fuel ﬁlms from the sur-

faces of the intake port and valve in port-fuel-injected
engines, ” Int. J. Engine Research 3, 37 (2002).

[6] F. V. Shaw, “ Spray-drying: A traditional process for ad-
vanced applications, ” Ceramic Bulletin 69, 1484 (1990).

[7] L. Xu, to be published.
[8] L. Xu, L. Barcos and S. R. Nagel, “ Splashing of liq-
interplay of surrounding gas and surface rough-

uids:
ness,” arxiv.org/abs/physics/0608079 (2006).

[9] D. Richard, C. Clanet, and D. Qu´er´e, “ Contact time of

a bouncing drop, ” Nature 417, 811 (2002).

[10] A. Lafuma and D. Qu´er´e, “ Superhydrophobic states, ”

Nature Mater. 2, 457 (2003).

