An instrumented tracer for Lagrangian measurements in

Rayleigh-B´enard convection

Woodrow L. Shew, Yoann Gasteuil, Mathieu Gibert, Pascal Metz & Jean-Fran¸cois Pinton
Laboratoire de Physique de l’ ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Lyon, CNRS UMR5672,

46 all´ee d’Italie F-69007 Lyon, France

Abstract

We have developed novel instrumentation for making Lagrangian measurements of temperature

in diverse ﬂuid ﬂows. A small neutrally buoyant capsule is equipped with on-board electronics

which measure temperature and transmit the data via a wireless radio frequency link to a desktop

computer. The device has 80 dB dynamic range, resolving milli-Kelvin changes in temperature

with up to 100 ms sampling time. The capabilities of these “smart particles” are demonstrated

in turbulent thermal convection in water. We measure temperature variations as the particle is

advected by the convective motion, and analyse its statistics. Additional use of cameras allow us

to track the particle position and to report here the ﬁrst direct measurement of Lagrangian heat

ﬂux transfer in Rayleigh-B´enard convection. The device shows promise for opening new research

in a broad variety of ﬂuid systems.

PACS numbers: 47.80.-v (Instrumentation for ﬂuid ﬂows); 44.27.+g (Convective heat transfer)

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Scalar mixing in turbulent ﬂows plays a crucial role in uncountable natural, medical,

and industrial systems: spread of pollutants by wind and water; oceanic and atmospheric

thermal convection; the life cycles of plankton; mixing in combustion engines and chemical

reactors. A natural approach to understanding these examples is to measure the trajectories

of the pollutant molecules, warm ﬂuid elements, planktonic organisms, and chemical species,

respectively, as well as the properties of the ﬂow along these trajectories. This Lagrangian

approach to turbulent mixing has been advanced signiﬁcantly with numerical and theoretical

models [1], but experimental works are rare due to the diﬃculties in (1) distinguishing the

identity of a ﬂuid particle along its trajectory, and (2) making measurements along these

paths . A few recent experimental studies have successfully performed resolved measure-

ments of the trajectories of small solid tracer particles in turbulence [2, 3, 4, 5]. Atmospheric

research groups [6] and oceanographers routinely employ meter-sized Lagrangian ﬂoats to

study large scale ﬂows [7]. Lagrangian probes have a distinct advantage over Eulerian probes

which record at ﬁxed positions in the ﬂow: the measurements provide information about

local physical processes as experienced by the ﬂuid particle.

With the aim of measuring Lagrangian scalar quantities in well-controlled laboratory

ﬂows, we have developed a miniature, wireless, neutrally-buoyant instrument, dubbed a

smart particle. We present temperature measurements obtained with this device in turbu-

lent thermal convection. Similar instruments have been used in medical applications [8],

but to our knowledge we report the ﬁrst such measurement device in the context of ﬂuid

dynamics. Simultaneous measurements of temperature and position have been made before

in convection experiments, most recently by tracking optically the motion of microspheres

containing thermochromic liquid crystal (TLC) [9]. The shape evolution of thermal plumes

very close to the thermal and hydrodynamic boundary layers was quantiﬁed, but this method

is not capable of tracking individual particles over large distances. Our smart particle mea-

surements complement those of TLC particles by vastly improving temperature and time

resolution as well as allowing observation of very long particle trajectories, though the smart

particles are too large to investigate the ﬂow in the boundary layers.

2

II. DEVICE DETAILS

The details of the instrument are describe in the following ﬁve subsections. First we

present a block diagram and general description of the whole system. Then, the radio

frequency (RF) data transfer is described in detail. Next, we focus on the power management

system. We then discuss the measurement and processing of temperature data and end with

details about the position measurement technique.

A. Overview

The smart particle consists of a D = 21 mm diameter capsule containing temperature

instrumentation, an RF emitter, a battery, and an on-oﬀ switch – illustrated in Figs. 1(a,b).

A resistance controlled oscillator is used to create a square wave whose frequency depends

on the temperature of several thermistors. This square wave is used directly to modulate

the amplitude of the radio wave generated by the RF emitter. The entire mobile circuit is

powered with a coin cell battery and may be put in a low power standby mode using an

externally applied magnetic ﬁeld.

The stationary parts of the system include an antenna, an RF receiver, 2 RF ampliﬁers,

a high speed data acquisition system, and a desktop computer running Labview (Fig. 1a).

The broad-band radio frequency ampliﬁers increase the voltage amplitude of the signal by

a factor of 26 dB. The receiver is carefully tuned to demodulate the signal produced by the

emitter. The receiver outputs a square wave identical to that generated by the resistance

controlled oscillator. The frequency of this square wave, and hence temperature, is recovered

on-the-ﬂy using a Labview algorithm. In addition, the particle trajectory is recorded with a

digital video camera, resulting in synchronous measurements of the position and temperature

of the particle as it is carried about by the ﬂuid.

B. RF data link

The radio frequency emitter is a MAX7044 (from Maxim Integrated Products), which

employs on-oﬀ keying (OOK) amplitude modulation. The RF carrier frequency is 315 MHz.

The MAX7044 expects a digital modulating signal with a baud rate from 0 to 100 kHz. We

implement an 8 mm diameter, 8-turn coil emitter antenna with about 200 nH inductance

3

and 4 Ω resistance. We use a split-capacitor impedance matching network to maximize

the eﬃciency since the MAX7044 is optimized for a 125 Ω antenna. The emitter draws an

average of 5 mA and requires 2.1-3.6 V from the battery in normal operation. The emitter

consumes 10 to 100 times more power than any of the other on-board components.

On the receiving end we use the MAX1473 superheterodyne receiver, which demodulates

OOK data and is designed to work with the MAX7044. The receiving antenna is a 315 MHz

1/4 wave whip (Linx Technologies, Inc., ANT-315-CW-HD). Between the antenna and the

receiver are two low noise ampliﬁers each with a gain of 13 dB at 315 MHz (MAX2640).

C. Power management

The size of the instrumentation capsule is minimized so that it capable of probing as

small a spatial scale as possible. The component of the system which limits the size of

the capsule most is the battery. It is a CR1616 lithium coin cell (Panasonic), which is 16

mm in diameter and 1.6 mm thick. This battery can supply the necessary power for about

3 hours. The circuit is also equipped with a magnetic ﬁeld triggered switch so that the

instrumentation may be turned oﬀ when we are not ready to acquire data. The switch is

composed of a TLE4913 low power hall switch (Inﬁneon Technologies) and a NL17SZ74

single D ﬂip-ﬂop (ON Seminconductor). The hall switch outputs a high logic level when in

the presence of a suﬃciently large magnetic ﬁeld. Feeding this output into the CP pin of the
ﬂip-ﬂop while D is connected to ¯Q we have a “push-button” switch, which is operable with a

hand-held permanent magnet from a distance of several centimeters. When the switch is in

the “oﬀ” position, the circuit consumes less than 100 µA. The hall switch and the ﬂip-ﬂop

respectively require 2.4-5.5 V and 1.65-5.5 V from the battery.

D. Temperature detection

The system measures the spatially averaged temperature around the smart particle

body. This is accomplished using four thermistors to set the frequency of a LMC555

timer/oscillator (National Semiconductor) operating in astable mode. The thermistors pro-

trude from the capsule wall by about 0.5 mm and are spaced evenly around its middle.

The LMC555 outputs a square wave at logic levels with a period 1/f = (R1 + R2 + 2R3 +

4

2R4)C/1.44, where Ri are the resistances of the four thermistors, and C is 47 pF. We employ

0.8 mm, 230 kΩ thermistors (Epcos B57540G0234) with a response time of about 0.06 s in

water, which is faster than the fastest temperature time scales of the ﬂow we study. In the
range of temperature 26 − 34 ◦C, the frequency of the square wave is in the range 22 − 26
kHz; the sensitivity is 513 Hz/◦C. The relationship between temperature and frequency is

linear within 2 percent. The LMC555 requires about 100 µA at a supply voltage between

1.5 and 12 V.

The RF receiver recovers the square wave signal, which is then recorded with a high-speed,

14 bit, analog-to-digital converter (ADC) (National Instruments 5621 in a PXI system).

Running on a desktop PC, Labview is used to control the data acquisition. The frequency

of the demodulated square wave is computed on-the-ﬂy using a standard Labview library.

Each measurement of frequency is computed from 100 ms of the square wave, i.e. about

3000 periods, sampled by the ADC at 10 MHz. The resulting measurement resolution is
about ±2 Hz, which is ±4 mK when converted to temperature. The sampling rate is about

10 Hz. With maximum ﬂow velocities in the range 1-2 cm/s and a particle size of 21 mm,

we are oversampling the dynamics by a factor of order 10.

E. Position measurement

In order to measure the smart particle position, we use a standard webcam, interfaced

with a desktop computer. A uniform well-illuminated image background is achieved with a

back-lit sheet of frosted glass. We use Matlab scripts to control the camera and process the

video data. First, each video frame is converted into a 2D binary array, using an adaptive

threshold. Then, the particle position is extracted using an image recognition algorithm.
The eﬀective sample frequency is around 5 Hz. The resolution of the camera is 640 × 480

pixels, so that the particle position is determined with 0.1 mm precision.

III. MEASUREMENTS IN RAYLEIGH-B´ENARD CONVECTION

A. Convection apparatus

Our experimental setup, shown in ﬁgure 1c, is a traditional rectangular Rayleigh-B´enard
cell with height H = 40 cm and section 40 cm × 10 cm. The ﬂuid is water and the walls of

5

the vessel are 25 mm thick PMMA. The upper plate of the cell is temperature regulated by

a chilled water bath. The bottom plate is heated by 5 resistors, regularly spaced. Complete

experimental details can be found in [10].

In the results reported here, the power input is P = 230 W, and the upper plate is
regulated to Tup = 19◦C, corresponding to a temperature diﬀerence between the top and
bottom plates of ∆T = 20.3◦C. As a result, the Rayleigh number is

Ra =

gβ∆T H 3
νκ

= 3.07 × 1010,

(1)

where g is acceleration due to gravity, β = 2.95 × 10−4 K−1 is the thermal expansion
coeﬃcient of water and ν = 8.17 × 10−7m2s−1, κ = 1.48 × 10−7m2s−1 its viscosity and
thermal diﬀusivity (values are given for a mean temperature equal to 29.1◦C). The Nusselt
number, measured as the total heat ﬂux normalized by κ∆T /L, is Nu = 167.9 ± 0.2. Under

these conditions, the convective regime is fully turbulent [10, 13] and the mean ﬂow is a

steady, system-sized, single convection roll with a rotation period of about 100 s. The
2HNu−1 ∼ 1.2 mm and that
characteristic thickness of the thermal boundary layer is ℓT ∼ 1
of the hydrodynamic boundary layer is ℓU ∼ ℓT (ν/κ)1/3 ∼ 2 mm. Thus, the particle is too

large to penetrate the boundary layers.

B. Temperature measurement

The particle and ﬂuid density are carefully matched. This is achieved by initially adjusting
the particle mass to within 1 percent of ρf πD3/6, where ρf is the density of water. Then, to

obtain neutral buoyancy within 0.05 percent, ρf is ﬁnely adjusted by the addition of small

amounts (about 1000 ppm) of pure glycerol, which has a density 20 percent greater than

water. The particle is inevitably slightly lighter than the cool ﬂuid near the upper plate

and slightly heavier than the warm ﬂuid near the bottom plate. Nonetheless, the particle

explores all regions of the vessel without a clear bias as can be seen in ﬁgure 2b.

We show in ﬁgure 3a, a time series of the temperature θ(t) recorded by the particle,

during the trajectory shown in ﬁgures 2b,c. Apparent in the time series is a nearly periodic,

large amplitude ﬂuctuation, which reﬂects the particle’s entrainment in the mean ﬂow. This

periodicity, as well as the smaller amplitude turbulent ﬂuctuations are made more clear in

the power spectrum shown in ﬁgure 3b. The spectrum also reveals a range of time scales,

6

corresponding to frequencies 0.016 < f < 0.230 Hz, which is consistent with a self-similar
˜θ2 ∼ f −α scaling, with an exponent α close to -2. This feature is in sharp contrast with the

Eulerian temperature spectrum obtained when the particle is constrained to remain at ﬁxed
location in space. In that case, we have veriﬁed that the spectrum shows an f −7/5 scaling

range. This value is in agreement with other experimental Eulerian studies of convection

(e.g. [11]), provided the frequency spectrum be interpreted as a spectrum in space, which is

plausible considering the persistent mean ﬂow (i.e. Taylor’s hypothesis). Bolgiano-Obhukov
scaling also leads to a k−7/5 wavenumber spectrum for temperature variations in real space.

By contrast, the spectral behavior found here for the moving particle is reminiscent of

velocity data for Lagrangian tracers in turbulent ﬂows. Indeed when ﬂuid turbulence is fully

developed, a well-established feature of Lagrangian dynamics and Kolmogorov’s theory is
that the Lagrangian velocity spectrum should have an f −2 inertial range [3, 12] – as we

have veriﬁed also veriﬁed here from our independent measurement of the particle position.
The upper cut-oﬀ frequency apparent in ﬁgure 3b around (∼ 0.3 Hz) corresponds to the

characteristic time of motion of the particle across a distance equal to its diameter D:
the mean speed of the large scale roll being ≈ 1.6 cms−1. This is also in agreement with

Lagrangian measurements made using density matched tracers: the velocity spectrum was

found to follow the expected Lagrangian behavior up to a frequency set be the particle’s

size and the ﬂow characteristic velocity scale [3]. These interpretations are consistent with

qualitative observations using Schlieren visualization, which reveal that temperature plumes

of size D or larger fully entrain the smart particle, while smaller plumes do so only partially.

Finally, as shown in ﬁgure 3c, the histogram of temperature is non-Gaussian. The non-

Gaussian character of the PDF is in agreement with Eulerian measurements using ﬁxed

temperature probes [13]. Other recent experimental studies have also shown that the distri-

bution of intense temperature plumes in the form of mushrooms has non Gaussian tails [9].

We note that the asymmetry of the PDF is probably due to imperfect density matching

between the ﬂuid and the particle, so that it tends to stay slightly longer near the bottom

plate.

7

C. Heat ﬂux measurement

With the assumption that the particle may indeed act as a Lagrangian tracer in the

convective ﬂow, it is natural and interesting to discuss the heat carried by the ﬂow in terms

of the temperature measured by the particle. To this end, we deﬁne an instantaneous

Lagrangian Nusselt number as:

L
κ∆T
where θ′(t) = θ(t) − θ is the particle temperature variation from its time averaged tempera-

θ′(t) · vz(t) ,

NuL(t) = 1 +

(2)

ture θ, and vz(t) its vertical velocity. Integrating this quantity over all the ﬂuid particles in

any horizontal plane recovers the traditional Nusselt number.

The time series of NuL is shown in ﬁgure 4a. Comparing this time series with the tra-

jectory in ﬁgure 2(c), we see that the heat transfer intermittently spikes to very large values

often as the particle moves away from the end plates and mixes with ﬂuid at intermediate

heights in the vessel. The power spectrum in ﬁgure 4b shows that the periodicity of the

large scale convection roll is diminished and strong ﬂuctuations occur over a broader range
of (slow) scales. The spectrum shows a fast, f −4 decrease in the same frequency range that
the temperature showed f −2. As discussed in the previous section, this scaling is consistent
2 ∼ ˜θ2˜v2 ∼ f −4.
with our understanding of velocity spectra (˜v2 ∼ f −2) resulting in
The PDF of NuL, ﬁgure 4c is skewed toward positive values, as expected because coherent

˜NuL

convective motion are associated with either hot ﬂuid rising or cold ﬂuid sinking, so that
in each case θ′ · vz > 0. The much less probable events with θ′ · vz < 0 correspond, for

instance, to the rise of the particle when it is colder than its environment. This is unlikely

but not impossible as the particle may be trapped in the swirls of a turbulent plume (e.g.

the ﬂow in the “cap” of the mushroom shaped plume is opposite the ﬂow in the “stem”).

The most probable value of the PDF is zero, indicating the particle spends a large amount

of time at the mean ﬂuid temperature in the bulk of the cell. The mean value, NuL, is

more surprising: at 335.4 it is roughly twice the global, Eulerian, Nusselt value computed

from power input and velocity diﬀerences. Such an increased mean may be due to the fact

that the particle does not sample the ﬂow uniformly, but may instead get more advection

from intense thermal plumes. The dramatically non-Gaussian form of the PDF as well as

scale-by-scale statistics of the local ﬂux requires further study. This analysis will be reported

elsewhere.

8

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We report on new instrumentation for making ﬂuid mechanics measurements in the ref-

erence frame of particles passively advected by ﬂow motion. These smart particles show

promise for a fresh perspective in turbulence research as well as two phase ﬂows. The rapid

development of MEMS and microﬂuidic components, which may be incorporated in a smart

particle, opens a diverse range of potential applications including granular ﬂows and reacting

ﬂows in chemical and biological systems.

We demonstrate the capabilities of smart particles in the simple case of Lagrangian

temperature measurements in thermal convection. We report several original ﬁndings. First,
we observe f −2 power law scaling behavior for the temperature spectrum, which suggests

the temperature acts as a passive scalar advected by fully developed, Kolmogorov-like,

turbulence. This result supports the hypothesis that outside the boundary layers, where

buoyancy sets the ﬂuid into motion, the temperature is passively mixed in the turbulent

bulk. (e.g.

[14, 15, 16]). Strong temporal intermittency in Lagrangian heat transport is

revealed in the extremely heavy-tailed probability distribution functions, while the fact

that the mean Lagrangian heat transport is much higher than the Eulerian average suggests

strong spatial inhomogeneity as well. Further and deeper investigations of these features

will be presented soon elsewhere.

Acknowledgements

The authors have had fruitful discussions with Francesca Chill´a and Bernard Castaing. This

work has been supported by C.N.R.S. and Emergence Contract No. 2005-12 from the French

Rhˆone-Alpes Region.

[1] G. Falkovich, K. Gawedzki, M. Vergassola, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 913 (2001)

[2] S. Ott, J. Mann, J. Fluid Mech., 422 207 (2000)

[3] N. Mordant et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87(21), 214501, (2001)

N. Mordant, P. Metz, O. Michel, J.-F. Pinton, Rev. Sci. Instr. 76 025105 (2005)

[4] La Porta A.L., et al., Nature, 409, 1017, (2001)

H. Xu et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 024503 (2006)

9

M. Bourgoin, N. T. Ouellette, H. Xu, J. Berg & E. Bodenschatz, Science 311, 835 (2006).

[5] B. Luthi, A. Tsinober, W. Kinzelbach, J. Fluid Mech. 528, 87 (2005)

[6] F. Giﬀord, it Month. Weather Rev. 83(12), 293 (1955) S. Hanna, J. Appl. Meteo. 20, 242

(1981)

[7] R.-C. Lien, E.A. D’Asaro, G.T. Dairiki, J. Fluid Mech. 362, 177 (1998)

[8] S. Mackay, B. Jacobson, Nature 179, 1239 (1957)

R. H. Colson et al. Biotelem. Pat. Mon. 8, 213 (1981).

[9] Q. Zhou, C. Sun, K.-Q. Xia, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 074501 (2007)

[10] F Chill´a et al., Nouvo Cimento 15, 1229 (1993).

M. Gibert et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 084501 (2006).

[11] J. A. Glazier, T. Segawa, A. Naert and M. Sano, Nature 398, 307 (1999)

X. Z. Wu, L. Kadanoﬀ, A. Libchaber, and M. Sano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2140 (1990).

[12] P.K. Yeung, An. Rev. Fluid Mech. 34, 115 (2002)

N. Mordant, E. L´evˆeque, J.-F. Pinton, New J. Phys. 6, 116 (2004)

L. Biferale at al. Phys. Fluids 17, 021701 (2005)

[13] B. Castaing et al., J. Fluid Mech. 204, 1 (1989).

[14] S. Sun, Q. Zhou, K.-Q. Xia, Phys. Rev. Lett 97, 144504 (2006).

[15] B. I. Shraiman and E. D. Siggia, Phys. Rev. A 42, 3650 (1990).

[16] B. Castaing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3209 (1990).

10

FIG. 1: (a) Block diagram of measurement system. (b) Photo of the smart particle before closing

the capsule.

11

FIG. 2: (a) Cartoon of the convection ﬂow. The black disc represents the smart particle. (b,c)

Trajectory of the particle with temperature (b) and heat ﬂux (c) encoded in the color.

12

FIG. 3: Temperature measurements: (a) time series for the trajectory in ﬁgure 2(a). The mean

temperature is 27.887 degC and the standard deviation is 0.451 degC; (b) corresponding power

spectrum; (c) Temperature probability density function (circles), compared to a Gaussian (solid

line).

13

FIG. 4: Heat ﬂux measurements: (a) time series of N uL(t) for the trajectory in ﬁgure 2(a); (b)

corresponding power spectrum; (c) Probability density function.

14

