7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Velocity contrasts enhancement for shear
thinning solutions ﬂowing in a rough fracture

H. Auradou a,b A. Boschan a,b R. Chertcoﬀ a S. Gabbanelli a
J.P. Hulin b I. Ippolito a

aGrupo de Medios Porosos, Facultad de Ingenier´ıa, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Paseo Col´on 850, Argentine.
bLaboratoire Fluides, Automatique et Syst`emes Thermiques, UMR 7608,
Universit´es Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6 et Paris-Sud, Bˆatiment 502, Campus
Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France

Abstract

Flow and transport are studied in transparent model fractures with rough comple-
mentary self-aﬃne walls with a relative shear displacement ~u. The aperture ﬁeld
is shown to display long range correlations perpendicular to ~u: for ﬂow in that
direction, the width and geometry of the front of a dyed shear-thinning polymer
solution displacing a transparent one have been studied as a function of the ﬂuid
rheology and ﬂow rate. The front width increases linearly with distance indicating
a convection of the ﬂuids with a low transverse mixing between the ﬂow paths. The
width also increases with the ﬂow-rate as the ﬂuid rheology shifts from Newtonian
at low shear rates ˙γ towards a shear thinning behaviour at higher ˙γ values. The
width also increases with the polymer concentration at high ﬂow-rates. These re-
sults demonstrate the enhancement of the ﬂow velocity contrasts between diﬀerent
ﬂow channels for shear thinning ﬂuids. The relative widths at low and high ˙γ val-
ues for diﬀerent polymer concentrations are well predicted by an analytical model
considering the fracture as a set of parallel ducts of constant hydraulic apertures.
The overall geometry of the experimental front geometry is also predicted by the
theoretical model from the aperture map.

Key words:

1 Introduction

Transport and ﬂow in porous media and fractured rocks are encountered in
many engineering ﬁelds [1] and complex ﬂuids such as polymer gels or surfac-
tants are often involved. Applications include enhanced oil recovery (EOR),

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Received: date / Revised version: date

drilling muds and heavy oil recovery. In EOR, for instance, polymer ﬂood-
ing reduce viscosity driven instabilities (a polymer solution is injected in the
reservoir and followed by a water ﬂood). When these complex ﬂuids have shear
thinning properties, experimental ﬂow measurements (see [2]) display speciﬁc
features such as permeability enhancements (or reductions of the eﬀective vis-
cosity) compared to the case of Newtonian ﬂuids.
These eﬀects may be strongly inﬂuenced by fractures which are frequently
encountered in many reservoirs and generally display a broad range of charac-
teristic length scales. While it is customary to visualize the fractures as parallel
plates separated by a constant distance [3], this representation is rarely accu-
rate: fracture wall surfaces are indeed rough and do not perfectly match [4].
This creates voids of various size resulting in spatial heterogeneities of the ﬂow
ﬁeld [5,6].
The objective of the present work is to analyze experimentally and analytically
these velocity contrasts for shear thinning solutions ﬂowing in transparent
models of single fractures with rough walls and to determine their dependence
on the ﬂuid rheology and on the ﬂow velocity. The experiments have been re-
alized in a conﬁguration in which ﬂow is strongly channelized as is frequently
the case in actual fractures [1]: this will be shown to allow for analytic pre-
dictions of the relation between the ﬂow distribution and the apertures and,
also, of their dependence on the rheological characteristics of the ﬂuids used
in the experiments.
We have sought particularly in this work to reproduce the roughness of natural
fractured rocks which is characterized by a broad distribution of the charac-
teristic length scales [9]. More precisely, these surfaces can often be considered
as self-aﬃne [10], this means that they remain statistically invariant under the
scaling transformation:

h(λx, λy) = λζh(x, y),

(1)

where h(x, y) is the surface height and ζ is the roughness or self-aﬃne ex-
ponent. For most materials including granite, ζ is close to 0.8 [11] but it is
close to 0.5 for materials such as sandstone and sintered glass beads [12,13].
Many experiments suggest that ζ is independent on the orientation of proﬁles
measured on the surface with respect to the direction of crack propagation (a
slight anisotropy has however been recently observed experimentally on some
materials [14]).
The rough surfaces used in the present work are transparent milled plexiglas
plates with an isotropic self-aﬃne geometry of characteristic exponent ζ = 0.8:
they allow for optical ﬂow observations by means of dyed ﬂuids (practically,
a transparent solution is displaced by a dyed one and the geometry of the
front is determined by image analysis). For each fracture, two such comple-
mentary surfaces are realized and match perfectly when brought in contact: in
the model, both a spacing normal to the mean fracture surface and a relative
lateral shift ~u are introduced in order to create a mismatch and to obtain a
variable aperture ﬁeld [15].

2

While the surfaces are isotropic, previous laboratory measurements and nu-
merical investigations [7,16,17,18,19] show that the lateral shift introduces an
anisotropy of the permeability which is highest in the direction perpendicular
to ~u. More precisely, ﬂow channels perpendicular to ~u and with a length sim-
ilar to the model appear as shown in a previous work [8]. As a result, for ﬂow
perpendicular to ~u, the overall geometry of the displacement front of a ﬂuid
by another of same rheological properties is well reproduced by modelling the
fracture as a set of parallel ducts with an hydraulic aperture constant along
the ﬂow [8]: the present work deals exclusively with this conﬁguration.

The ﬂuids used here display at low shear rates ˙γ a“plateau” domain in which
they behave as Newtonian ﬂuids of constant viscosity µ while, at higher shear
rates, µ decreases with ˙γ following a power law. Comparing the velocity con-
trasts between the diﬀerent ﬂow paths in the two regimes allows one therefore
to estimate the inﬂuence of the rheology since the velocity contrasts should be
enhanced in the shear thinning case. Finally, an analytical model predicting
the inﬂuence of this Newtonian “plateau” on the dependence of the velocity
contrasts on ˙γ will be derived and compared to experimental observations.

2 Experimental procedure

2.1 Characteristics of the model fracture

The model fracture is made of two complementary rough self-aﬃne surfaces
without contact points: both surfaces are obtained from a transparent mate-
rial by means of a milling machine and their size is 85 mm × 170 mm. A
detailed description of the procedure is given in [7]: a self-aﬃne surface h(x, y)
is ﬁrst generated numerically using the mid-point algorithm [20] with a self-
aﬃne exponent ζ = 0.8 as observed in many materials [11]. A second surface,
complementary from the ﬁrst one, is generated and then shifted numerically
parallel to its mean plane by 0.33 mm. The milling tool is computer controlled
and a complex tortuous path may be imposed to obtain the self-aﬃne geom-
etry. Moreover, the borders of two parallel sides of the surfaces rise above the
rough surface: they are designed so that, when they are clamped against the
matching border of the other surface, there is a void space in the remaining
areas. The mean planes of the facing surfaces are parallel outside these borders
with a mean distance: ¯a = 0.77 mm.
The local aperture a(x, y) at a location (x, y) in the fracture plane may be
predicted from the mathematical surface h(x, y) by the relation:

a(x, y) = h(x, y) − h(x, y + u) + ¯a,

(2)

3

where u is the lateral shift. Figure 1 shows the aperture ﬁeld of the fracture

Fig. 1. Upper ﬁgure, gray scale representation of the aperture ﬁeld. Field of view:
85 mm × 171 mm. Aperture ﬁeld - mean value: ¯a = ha(x, y)i(x,y) = 0.77 mm;
and the aperture ﬂuctuation: σa = h(a(x, y) − ¯a)2i1/2
(x,y) = 0.1 mm. Shift amplitude:
u = 0.33 mm (oriented vertically on ﬁgure). In the present work, ﬂow is parallel
to x direction (horizontal on the ﬁgure). Lower image: binarized aperture ﬁeld with
a threshold value equal to the mean aperture (0.77 mm).

considered in this work: the binarized image (lower part of Fig.1) displays a
clear anisotropy and a large correlation length perpendicular to the shift ~u.
Quantitatively, this eﬀect may be characterized by the following correlation
function, also called semivariance [21]:

γ(~δ) = h(a(~r) − a(~r + ~δ))2i,

(3)

measuring the spatial correlation of the aperture ﬁeld between two points sep-
arated by a lag vector ~δ. Orientations of ~δ perpendicular (x − direction) and

4

parallel (y − direction) to the shift are of special interest. Figure 2 displays

a as a function of lag distance ||~δ|| (mm)
Fig. 2. Semivariograms normalized by 2σ2
for the aperture ﬁeld displayed in Fig.1. Dotted line: correlation along the direction
y of the shear. Solid line: correlation along the perpendicular direction x (parallel
to the ﬂow in the rest of the paper).

variations of the semivariance in both directions. When the lag modulus ||~δ||
is larger than the correlation length of the aperture ﬁeld, one expects γ to
a = ha(x, y) − ¯ai2 is the variance
a, where σ2
reach a constant value equal to 2σ2
of the aperture. The semivariance γ reaches this limit, but in a very diﬀerent
way for the two orientations of ~δ. In the direction y parallel to the shift, γ
a for ||~δ|| > 8 mm.
becomes of the order of (and sometimes larger than) 2σ2
In the perpendicular direction x, γ never exceeds the saturation value and
slowly increases towards it: these diﬀerences reﬂect the large scale anisotropic
structure of the aperture ﬁeld. Semivariograms have been computed on surface
maps of epoxy casts of a fractured granite sample in a previous work [8] and
display similar features: moreover, normalized curves γ/(2σ2
a) corresponding
to diﬀerent values of u displayed a universal variation as a function of the
normalized lag δ/u. This suggests that results obtained in the present work
might be extrapolated to other values of u.
Finally it should be noted that the ratio S of the standard deviation of the
aperture σa to the mean aperture ¯a is only of 0.13 (Fig. 1). This implies,
as discussed by [22], that the fracture can be considered as ”hydraulically”
smooth with relatively small velocity contrasts between and along ﬂow lines.
This keeps the trajectories of the preferential ﬂow channels relatively straight

5

and simpliﬁes subsequent analysis.

2.2 Experimental set-up and procedures

The plexiglas model fracture is held vertically in a ﬁxed position between a
light panel and a 12 bits digital CCD camera with a high stability and dynam-
ical range. Flow is induced by sucking a dyed solution from the top side while
the lower side is slightly dipped into a bath containing a clear ﬂuid. An ap-
propriate calibration, described in reference [7], allows one to obtain from all
pictures of each experiment the corresponding concentration map c(x, y, t).
Here, we focus on the geometry of the iso concentration front c/c0 = 0.5
which is determined by thresholding the concentration maps and which de-
pends strongly on the ﬂow heterogeneity.

2.3 Rheological characteristics of shear-thinning soltions

Fig. 3. Variation of the eﬀective viscosity µ of the polymer solutions as a function
of the shear rate ˙γ for two water-polymer solutions of diﬀerent concentrations: 500
ppm ((cid:3)) and 1000 ppm (◦). Dashed lines: Carreau functions corresponding to the
sets of parameters of Table 1; continuous lines: truncated power law approximation.

6

In this work, we used shear thinning polymer solutions, more speciﬁcally
water-scleroglucan solutions; they have been characterized using a Contraves
LS30 Couette rheometer for shear rates ˙γ ranging from 0.016 s−1 up to 87
s−1. Two diﬀerent polymer concentrations equal to 500 ppm and 1000 ppm
have been used. The rheological properties of the dyed and transparent solu-
tions have been veriﬁed to be constant with time within experimental error
over 3 days; the variation of the eﬀective viscosity µ as a function of the shear
rate ˙γ is displayed in Figure 3. The variation of µ with ˙γ is well adjusted by
a Carreau function:

µ =

1
(1 + ( ˙γ
˙γ0 )2)

1−n
2

(µ0 − µ∞) + µ∞.

(4)

The values of the corresponding rheological parameters for the polymer solu-
tions characterized in the present work are listed in Table 1. µ∞ is too low to
be determined within the available range of shear rates ( ˙γ ≤ 87 s−1) and it has
been taken equal to the viscosity of the solvent (i.e. water). In Eq.(4),
˙γ0 cor-
responds to a crossover between two behaviors. On the one hand, for ˙γ < ˙γ0,
the viscosity µ tends towards the limiting value µ0, and the ﬂuid behaves as a
Newtonian ﬂuid. On the other hand, if ˙γ > ˙γ0, the viscosity follows a power law
variation reﬂecting its shear thinning characteristics with µ ∝ ˙γ(n−1). For each

Polymer Conc.

n

˙γ0
s−1

µ0

mP a.s

0.26 ± 0.02

0.026 ± 0.004

4490 ± 342

0.38 ± 0.04

0.077 ± 0.018

410 ± 33

Table 1
Rheological parameters of schleroglucan solutions used in the ﬂow experiments.

experiment, the ﬂow rate is kept constant at a value between 0.01 ml/min and
5 ml/min (corresponding mean ﬂow velocities: 0.0003 ≤ v ≤ 0.14 mm.s−1).
Under such conditions the typical shear rate ˙γ ≃ v/a ranges between 4.10−4
s−1 and 0.18 s−1. The latter value is far below the shear rate corresponding to
the second Newtonian plateau (µ = µ∞) and this limit will not be considered
in this work. On the contrary, the lowest values of the typical shear rate are
much lower than ˙γ0: the Newtonian “plateau” in the rheological curves may
therefore have a crucial inﬂuence of the ﬂow properties.

In order to obtain an analytical expression accounting for the eﬀect of the
ﬂuid rheology on the velocity ﬂuctuations, the rheological law of the ﬂuids is
approximated in section 4 by a truncated power law.

When ˙γ < ˙γ0, the viscosity µ( ˙γ) is considered as constant and equal to µ0;
for ˙γ > ˙γ0, µ( ˙γ) is assumed to follow a power law µ( ˙γ) = m ˙γn−1 in which

ppm

1000

500

7

m = µ0/ ˙γ0

n−1. The parameters n, ˙γ0 and µ0 are obtained from Tab.1.

3 Flow velocity dependence of front geometry

Two important features of the displacement front have been observed: (a) its
geometry depends on the ﬂow rate Q, and (b) its width parallel to the ﬂow
increases linearly with the distance from the injection side. The ﬁrst point
is illustrated by Figure 4 in which two fronts measured are compared during
ﬂuid displacements at two diﬀerent ﬂow rates, but for a same polymer con-
centration (1000 ppm): the front width parallel to the ﬂow direction is clearly
larger at the highest ﬂow rate.
The broadening of the front may be characterized quantitatively from the vari-
ation of the mean square front width, σx(t) = h(x(t) − ¯x(t))2i1/2, as a function
of the mean distance ¯x(t) of the front from the injection side (Figure 5). For
all values of Q, σx(t) increases linearly with ¯x(t). In the next section, this will
be shown to result directly from the underlying channelized structure of the
aperture ﬁeld. The width of the front after a transit time t corresponds then
directly to the product t∆v where ∆v is the velocity diﬀerence between the
diﬀerent channels (the transverse exchange between channels is too small to
allow one to reach a diﬀusive spreading regime).
At all distances, the width σx(t) increases with the ﬂow rate Q but with a
particularly sharp variation between Q = 0.1 ml/min and Q = 0.5 ml/min.
It will be seen that, at this transition ﬂow-rate, the shear rate at the fracture
˙γ0 (the threshold value above which the ﬂuids
walls becomes of the order of
display shear thinning characteristics).

4 Modelization

4.1 Flow between parallel plates with a constant gap

We compute the ﬂow of the polymer solutions between parallel plates using
the same approach as in reference [23]. The relation between the longitudinal
pressure drop and the velocity proﬁle in the gap is obtained by using the trun-
cated power law model discussed in section 2.3. The ﬂow ﬁeld is unidirectional
and parallel to x so that vx(z) is the only non zero velocity component. The
strain rate is given by: ˙γ(z) = dvx/dz.
At low pressure gradients, the ﬂuids behave like a Newtonian ﬂuid with a

8

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. Displacement fronts at two diﬀerent ﬂow rates. (a) Q = 1 ml/min
(¯v/vc ≃ 100); (b) Q = 0.1 ml/min (¯v/vc ≃ 10). Polymer concentration: 1000 ppm.
Vertical mean ﬂow. Front width perpendicular to mean ﬂow: 85 mm. Front exten-
sion along the ﬂow: 53 mm (top curve), 34 mm (bottom curve). Mean distance of
the front from the inlet equal to half the fracture length.

9

15

σx(t)

10

5

0
50

100

x (mm)

150

Fig. 5. Variation of the mean front width σx(t) = h(x(t) − ¯x(t))2i1/2 as a function
of the mean distance ¯x(t) from the inlet side of the model. Polymer concentration:
1000 ppm. Flow rates: Q = (△)2.0,(+) 0.5, (◦) 0.1, (✷) 0.02 ml/min.

constant viscosity µ0 and the resulting velocity proﬁle is parabolic and sym-
metrical between the walls. Then, the shear rate is zero half way between the
fracture walls and reaches a maximum at their surface where ˙γ = 6v/a (a is
the distance between the plates). This value of ˙γ is proportional to the mean
ﬂow velocity or, equivalently, to the pressure drop.
As the ﬂow rate keeps increasing, ˙γ becomes larger than ˙γ0 and the non New-
tonian characteristics of the ﬂuid modify the velocity proﬁle. The mean ﬂow
velocity vc corresponding to the transition between the two regimes satisﬁes:
vc = a ˙γ0/6 and the corresponding pressure gradient is: ∇Pc = 2µ0 ˙γ0/a.
As v increases above vc, the layer where the shear rate is higher than ˙γ0 be-
comes thicker and the velocity proﬁle vx(z) is no longer parabolic: the full ex-
pression may be derived analytically and is given in Eq. (5) of reference [23].
The mean velocity, v, can then be computed by integrating vx(z) over the
fracture gap, leading to:

v =

a2
12(2n + 1)µ0

∇P.

(1 − n)(
(cid:20)

∇P
∇Pc

)−3 + 3n(

∇P
∇Pc

1−n
n

)

.

(cid:21)

(5)

We consider now the case of shear thinning ﬂuids such that n > 0 and
(1 − n)/n > −1. Then, the leading term in Eq.(5) is (∇P/∇Pc)(1−n)/n and,

10

therefore, when ∇P >> ∇Pc, Eq. (5) becomes:

v ≃

a2
12  

∇P
µef f !

1
n

,

(6)

where µef f = µ0 (2 ˙γ0/a)1−n ((2n + 1)/3n)n. This is similar to the generalized
version of Darcy’s law often applied to the ﬂow of non Newtonian and, more
speciﬁcally, to power law ﬂuids in porous media [24,26,27].

4.2 Flow in rough fractures

In this part, we focus on the variations of the velocity in the plane (x, y) of the
fracture and we assume therefore a two-dimensional ﬂow ﬁeld ~v(x, y) equal to
the average of the ﬂuid velocity proﬁle over the gap with ~v(x, y) = h~v(x, y, z)iz.
The development with time of the front (represented by the iso concentration
lines c/c0 = 0.5) will now be analyzed by assuming that its points move at the
local ﬂow velocity ~v(x, y) and an analytical model predicting the global front
width will be developed.
This model is based on the results of a previous work [8] demonstrating that,
in such systems, the aperture ﬁeld is structured into channels perpendicular to
the lateral shift ~u of the surfaces. For a mean ﬂow parallel to these channels, the
paths of the tracer particles have a weak tortuosity; also, the velocity variations
along these paths are small compared to the velocity contrasts between the
diﬀerent channels. Under these assumptions, the velocity of a particle located
at a distance y, perpendicular to the mean velocity, satisﬁes:

~v(x, y) ≈ v(y) ~ex,

(7)

where ~ex is the unit vector parallel to the mean ﬂow. Note also that, in the
geometry discussed in this section, there are no contact points between the
walls of the fractures: this avoids to take into account the large tortuosity of
the ﬂow lines in their vicinity.
If the ﬂuid is Newtonian with a constant viscosity, then, for each channel, the
velocity is related to the pressure gradient ∇P by relation (6) with n = 1;
a is now an equivalent (or hydraulic) aperture associated to each channel
and noted a(y) and the equation represents the classical linear equivalent of
Darcy’s law for fractures. Previous studies have shown that, for relatively small
aperture ﬂuctuations, this hydraulic aperture is well approximated by the ge-
ometrical aperture [5,22]: this suggests that a(y)2 can be taken equal to the
mean of the average of the square of the local apertures along the direction
x i.e. a(y)2 = ha(x, y)2ix. The validity of this assumption has been tested
numerically previously for a similar geometry [8] in the case of a Newtonian
ﬂuid: these simulations used the lattice Boltzmann method to determine the

11

2D front geometry at all times: except for ﬁne scale details, the proﬁle x(y, t)
of the distance of the front from the inlet at a given time t follows very closely
the variations of a(y)2.
For a power law ﬂuid such that n < 1, the velocity satisﬁes the non linear
generalized relation (6). We seek now to generalize to this case the relation
between the front geometry and the aperture variation established for the
Newtonian ﬂuids: the aperture ﬁeld is still assumed to be strongly correlated
in the ﬂow direction, allowing one to consider the fracture as a set of parallel
ducts.
We consider particles starting at t = 0 from the inlet of the model at diﬀer-
ent transverse distances y and moving at diﬀerent velocities v(y). Then the
distance x of the particles from the inlet at time t after the injection satisﬁes
x(y, t) = v(y)t so that the mean distance of the front from the inlet side is
¯x(t) = hv(y)iyt = ¯vt and:

Moreover, the mean square deviation σx(t) = h(x(y, t) − ¯x)2i1/2 should satisfy:
σx(t) = σvt where σv is the mean square deviation of the velocities in individual
channels from their mean value ¯v. Combining the previous relations leads to:

x(y, t)
¯x(t)

=

v(y)
¯v

.

σx(t)
¯x(t)

=

σv
¯v

.

This equation shows that there is a direct relation between the front geome-
try and the variations of the velocity from one channel to another: for power
law ﬂuids, the latter are related to the variations of the hydraulic aperture by
Eq. (6). In order to estimate these variations, we introduce a modiﬁed reduced
aperture deviation Sh deﬁned as the ratio between the standard deviation of
the hydraulic aperture a(y) to its mean. The parameter Sh is equivalent to
the reduced aperture deviation S deﬁned in section 2.1 but the geometrical
aperture is replaced by the hydraulic one. Here, we are interested in weakly
ﬂuctuating systems, i.e. for which both S and Sh are small compared to one.
In addition, the hydraulic aperture a(y) is observed to follow a Gaussian dis-
tribution. Moreover, Eq. (6) shows that, for a given pressure gradient ∇P ,
v scales as an+1/n : together with the above assumptions, this leads to the
following relation between the reduced velocity ﬂuctuations σv/¯v and Sh:

Combining Eqs. (9) and (10), leads to:

σv
¯v

=

n + 1
n

Sh.

σx(t)
¯x(t)

=

n + 1
n

Sh.

12

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

5 Quantitative comparison between the experiments and the model

In the present experiments, the polymer solutions are expected to behave like
Newtonian ﬂuids as long as the shear rate ˙γ is everywhere lower than the
critical value ˙γ0 (see Table 1). As the ﬂow rate increases, the critical shear
rate ˙γ0 is ﬁrst reached at the wall of the fracture where ˙γ is highest. If the
fracture is modeled as two parallel plates separated by the mean aperture ¯a,
then ˙γ = ˙γ0 at the walls when the mean ﬂow velocity is vc = ¯a ˙γ0/6. Above
this velocity, the shear thinning properties of the ﬂuids inﬂuence the ﬂow and
enhance the velocity ﬂuctuations.

0.1
σv = σx
 v      x

0.08

0.06

0.04

n=0.26

n=0.38

n=1.0

0

10

100

v/vc

1000

Fig. 6. Experimental variation of the ratio σv/¯v = σx/¯x in the model fracture
(Sh ≃ 0.02) as a function of the normalized mean velocity ¯v/vc for shear thinning
solutions of concentrations 1000 ppm (◦) and 500 ppm (✷). Horizontal dotted lines:
theoretical values of σv/¯v computed from Eq.(11) for a Newtonian ﬂuid (n = 1)
and for 500 ppm (resp. 1000 ppm) polymer solutions (n = 0.38, resp. 0.26). Solid
and dashed lines: variations of σv/¯v a as function of ¯v/vc computed by integrating
Eq. (5.)

Fig. 6 displays the experimental variations of the normalized velocity ﬂuctu-
ations (equal to the normalized front width σx(t)/¯x(t)) as a function of the
reduced velocity ¯v/vc for both polymer solutions. The values predicted by
Eq. (11) for a Newtonian ﬂuid (n = 1) and for power law ﬂuids with the same
index as the two solutions are also plotted.
For ¯v/vc < 1 the experimental values are similar for both solutions and close
to the theoretical prediction for n = 1 (horizontal dashed line). For ¯v/vc ≫ 1,
σx(t)/¯x tends toward values of the order of those predicted by Eq. (11) and
increasing with the polymer concentration.

13

Eq. (11) provides therefore a good estimate of the velocity ﬂuctuation inside
the fracture both for low, i.e. ¯v/vc < 1, and high ﬂow rates corresponding
to ¯v/vc >> 1. The increase of σx(t)/¯x between the Newtonian and shear
thinning regimes and also, at high velocities, with the polymer concentration
conﬁrms the enhancement of the velocity contrasts between the channels for
shear-thinning ﬂuids.
Between the limiting values ¯v/vc < 1 and ¯v/vc ≫ 1, ﬂuid velocity variations
within the fracture may be estimated by applying Eq.(5) in each channel (as-
sumed to be of constant hydraulic aperture): this equation takes into account
the coexistence in the fracture gap of layers where the ﬂuid has Newtonian and
non Newtonian properties. The normalized velocity ﬂuctuations σv/¯v obtained
by these computation are displayed in Fig.6 for the two polymer concentra-
tions together with the experimental variations of the normalized front width
σx(t)/¯x(t).
In agreement with the theoretical curves, σx(t)/¯x(t) starts to increase when
the velocity ¯v becomes larger than vc (¯v/vc > 1) for both polymer solutions.
However, although the limiting value for ¯v/vc ≫ 1 is the same as predicted,
the increase of σx(t)/¯x(t) above vc is slower than expected: actually, the the-
oretical predictions represent an upper bound for the observations.
This diﬀerence may be due in part to the use of a simpliﬁed version of the
rheological curve displaying a transition sharper than the actual one between
the Newtonian and shear thinning regimes. Also, the aperture of the parallel
channels introduced in the model is assumed to be constant: this also leads
to a transition between the Newtonian and power law regimes which is faster
than the actual one.
A step further in the interpretation is the comparison of the experimental
shape of the fronts with that estimated from the channel model. In section 4.2,
the normalized distance x(y, t)/¯x(t) of the front from the inlet has been pre-
dicted to be equal to v(y)/¯v (see Eq. 8). An experimental front proﬁle normal-
ized in this way is plotted in Fig. 7 as a function of the transverse distance y
together with the variation of the theoretical normalized velocity v(y)/¯v. The
velocity v(y) is estimated from Eq. 6 in which the aperture a is replaced by
the mean value a(y) deﬁned in section 4.2.
The most remarkable observation is the fact that both the experimental and
theoretical fronts have not only the same width but also nearly the same ge-
ometry. These results are very similar to those of numerical simulations for
Newtonian ﬂuids [8]: they demonstrate the validity of the generalization in
Eq. (6) of the Newtonian model. Fine scale details predicted by the theoreti-
cal model are however not observed in the experimental front: this diﬀerence
may be due in part to viscous drag forces between parallel layers of ﬂuid mov-
ing at diﬀerent velocities in the fracture plane. These forces may smoothen the
local velocity gradients and rub out small scale features of the front without
changing the large scale velocity variations: this results in a bumpy front with
a typical width of the structures of the order of 10 mm. This latter value is
of the order of the correlation length in the direction perpendicular to the

14

channels.

x(y,t)
x(t)

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

20

40

60

y [mm]

80

Fig. 7. Thick solid line: Experimental normalized front proﬁle x(y, t)/¯x(t) as a func-
tion of the transverse distance y (mm) for ¯v/vc = 200 for a 1000 ppm shear thinning
polymer solution. Dotted line: theoretical variation of the normalized velocity v(y)/¯v
in the parallel ﬂow channel model. The front is displayed just before the displacing
ﬂuid starts to ﬂow out of the fracture. Dashed lines: characteristic deviations of the
distance x(y) from its mean value ¯x.

6 Discussion and conclusions

In the present work the enhancement of velocity ﬂuctuations for shear thin-
ning ﬂuids has been studied in a single fracture with rough, self-aﬃne walls.
The two wall surfaces are perfectly matched and are positioned with both a
normal and a lateral shift. This results in an anisotropic aperture ﬁeld well
characterized quantitatively by the semivariograms of the aperture both in
the direction of the shift and perpendicular to it. The characteristics of these
semivariograms are in agreement with previous experimental measurements
on granite samples [8]. Parallel to the shift, the aperture ﬁeld is correlated
over a distance of the order of 10 mm above which the value of the normal-
ized semivariograms is of the order of 1. In the other direction, the correlation
subsists over the full fracture length.
This observation has allowed us to model the fracture as a set of parallel ducts

15

perpendicular to the shift and with an hydraulic aperture constant along their
length. These assumptions lead to speciﬁc predictions on the dependence of
the width and of the geometry of the front on the velocity of the ﬂuid and its
rheology: these predictions deal with the case of a mean ﬂow parallel to the
channels which was the conﬁguration used in the present experiments. This
model generalizes a previous one developed for Newtonian ﬂuids and which
has been validated by numerical simulations [8].
The variation of the front width with the velocity could ﬁrst be predicted. At
low ﬂow rates, the viscosity of the solutions is constant (Newtonian “plateau”)
but non Newtonian eﬀects become important for faster ﬂows: this results in
an increase of the velocity ﬂuctuations -and of the front width. This variation
occurs when the shear rate at the fracture wall becomes larger ˙γ0, i.e. the
shear rate corresponding to the crossover between the Newtonian plateau and
˙γ0 is reached for a mean ﬂow velocity vc = a ˙γ0/6. At
the power law regimes:
still higher ﬂow velocities of the order of 100 × vc, both the normalized veloc-
ity ﬂuctuations and the normalized front width reach a new constant value
with a good agreement between the experimental results and the theoretical
expectations.
These results validate the prediction of an enhancement of velocity contrasts
for shear thinning channelized ﬂows in fractures. The experimental increase of
the front width with the mean velocity v right above the threshold value vc is
however slower than the predictions. The origin of this discrepancy might be
investigated by a more reﬁned theory taking into account the full rheological
characteristics of the ﬂuid and aperture variations along the ﬂow.
The theoretical model also allows to reproduce well the experimental front
geometry for length scales larger than 10 mm which represents the correlation
length of the aperture ﬁeld in the direction perpendicular to the ﬂow channels.
Future work should investigate the inﬂuence of transverse velocity gradients
on the shape of the front for diﬀerent types of ﬂuids.
The results obtained in the present work demonstrate therefore clearly that
approaches developed to analyze channelized Newtonian ﬂows in fractures can
be generalized to non Newtonian ﬂuids and allow to predict, for instance, the
variation of the velocity contrasts with the rheology.
Numerical studies in 2D networks [26,27] had similarly shown that the ﬂow of
shear thinning ﬂuids is localized in a smaller number of preferential paths than
for Newtonian ones. It has been suggested that these eﬀects might account for
the permeability enhancement for such ﬂuids mentioned in the introduction:
the results obtained in the present paper may therefore be usefully applicable
to the numerical simulation of non Newtonian ﬂows in fracture networks.
A number of questions remain however open and need to be considered in
future studies. First, the present experiments have been realized with a mean
ﬂow parallel to the channels created by the relative shift of the wall surfaces.
It will be important to compare these results with the case of ﬂow perpen-
dicular to these channels: velocity ﬂuctuations in the directions parallel and
perpendicular to the ﬂow should then be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from those in

16

the present experiments. Eq. 5 should, for instance, be modiﬁed. Also, the
present experiments deal with relatively short path lengths such that trans-
verse exchange between channels may be considered as negligible: the results
obtained may therefore be diﬀerent for longer path lengths. It is also possible
that the spatial correlation of the velocity ﬁeld will eventually decay at very
long distances although this has not been observed in our experimental model.

7 Acknowledgements

We are indebted to G. Chauvin and R. Pidoux for their assistance in the
realization of the experimental setup. This work was funded by E.E.C. through
the STREP Pilot plant program SES6-CI-2003-502706 and by the CNRS-
PNRH program. This research was also supported by a CNRS-CONICET
Collaborative Research Grant (PICS CNRS 2178), by the ECOS A03-E02
program and by the I029 UBACyT programs.

References

[1] N. R. Council

(Ed.), Rock fractures and ﬂuid ﬂow: Contemporary
Understanding and Applications, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,
1996.

[2] C. Perrin, P. Tardy, K. Sorbie, J. Crawshaw, Experimental and modeling study
of newtonian and non-newtonian ﬂuid ﬂow in pore network micromodels, J.
Colloid Interface Sci., 295 (2006) 542.

[3] J. Bodin, F. Delay, G. de Marsily, Solute transport in a single fracture
with negligible matrix permeability: 1. fundamental mechanisms, Hydrogeology
Journal, 11 (2003) 418.

[4] B. Vickers, S. Neuman, M. Sully, D. Evans, Reconstruction and geostatistical
analysis of multiscale fracture apertures in a large block of welded tuﬀ, Geophys.
res. Lett., 19 (1992) 1029.

[5] S. Brown, Fluid ﬂow through rock joints: the eﬀect of surface roughness, J.

Geophys. Res., 92 (1987) 1337.

[6] Y. Tsang, C. Tsang, Flow channeling in a single fracture as a two-dimensional
strongly heterogeneous permeable medium, Water Resour. Res., 25 (1989) 2076.

[7] A. Boschan, H. Auradou,

Ippolito, R. Chertcoﬀ, J. Hulin, Miscible
displacement fronts of shear thinning ﬂuids inside rough fractures., to be
published in Water Resour. Res., (2007).

I.

17

[8] H. Auradou, G. Drazer, A. Boschan, J. P. Hulin, J. Koplik, Flow channeling in
a single fracture induced by shear displacement, (2006), Geothermics, 35 (2006)
576.

[9] C. Poon, R. Sayles, T. Jones, Surface measurement and fractal characterization

of naturally fractured rocks, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 25 (1992) 1269.

[10] B. Mandelbrot, Self-aﬃne fractals and fractal dimension, Physica Scripta, 32

(1985) 257.

[11] E. Bouchaud, The morphology of fracture surfaces: A tool for understanding
crack propagation in complex materials, Surface Review and Letters 10 (2003)
797.

[12] J. M. Boﬀa, C. Allain, J. P. Hulin, Experimental analysis of fracture rugosity
in granular and compact rocks, Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys., 2 (1998) 281.

[13] L. Ponson, H. Auradou, P. Vie, J.-P. Hulin, Low self-aﬃne exponents of fracture

surfaces of glass ceramics, Phys. Rev. Lett., 97 (2006) 125501.

[14] L. Ponson, D. Bonamy, H. Auradou, G. Mourot, S. Morel, E. Bouchaud,
C. Guillot, J. Hulin, Anisotropic self-aﬃne properties of experimental fracture
surfaces, Int. J. Frac., 140 (2006) 27.

[15] S. R. Brown, R. L. Kranz, B. P. Bonner, Correlation between the surfaces of

natural rock joints, Geophys. Res. Lett., 13 (13) (1986) 1430.

[16] S. Gentier, E. Lamontagne, G. Archambault, J. Riss, Anisotropy of ﬂow in a
fracture undergoing shear and its relationship to the direction of shearing and
injection pressure, Int. J. Rock Mech. & Min. Sci., 34 (1997) 412.

[17] I. Yeo, M. D. Freitas, R. Zimmerman, Eﬀect of shear displacement on the
aperture and permeability of a rock fracture, Int. J. Rock Mech. & Min. Sci.,
35(1998) 1051.

[18] G. Drazer, H. Auradou, J. Koplik, J. P. Hulin, Self-aﬃne fronts in self-aﬃne
fractures: Large and small-scale structure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) 014501.

[19] H. Auradou, G. Drazer, J. P. Hulin, J. Koplik, Permeability anisotropy induced
by a shear displacement of rough fractured walls, Water Resour. Res., 40 (2005)
W09423.

[20] R. Voss, Fundamental algorithms in computer graphics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

(1985) 805.

[21] P. Kitanidis, Introduction to Geostatistics: Applications in Hydrogeology,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (UK) (1997).

[22] R. Zimmerman, S. Kumar, G. Bodvarsson, Lubriﬁcation theory analysis of the
permeability of rough-walled fractures, Int J. Rock Mech Min. Sci. Geomech
Abstr. 28 (1991) 325.

[23] S. Gabbanelli, G. Drazer, J. Koplik, Lattice Boltzmann method for non-

Newtonian (power-law) ﬂuids, Phys. Rev E. 72 (2005) 046312.

18

[24] M. Balhoﬀ, K. Thompson, A macroscopic model for shear-thinning ﬂow in
packed beds based on network modeling, Chemical Engineering Science, 61
(2006) 698.

[25] X. Lopez, P.H. Valvatne, M.J. Blunt, Predictive network modeling of single-
phase non-Newtonian ﬂow in porous media, J. Coll. Int. Sci., 264 (2003) 256.

[26] C. Shah, Y. Yortsos, Aspects of ﬂow of power law ﬂuids in porous media, AIChE

Journal, 41 (1995) 1099.

[27] A. Fadili, P. Tardy, A. Pearson, A 3d ﬁltration law for power-law ﬂuids in
heterogeneous porous media, J. Non-Newtonian Fluid Mech., 106 (2002) 121.

19

