7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sailing, Swimming and Pumping at low
Reynolds numbers

J. E. Avron and O. Raz
Department of Physics
Technion, 32000 Haifa, Israel

February 21, 2014

Abstract

We derive equations relating sailing, swimming and pumping at
low Reynolds numbers. The relations are general and hold for arbi-
trary three dimensional swimmers in receptacles with arbitrary geom-
etry. Our main result is the additivity of power: Ps = Pp + Pg where
s, p, g stand for swimming, pumping and gliding. We show that, in
general, optimal pumps and optimal swimmers have diﬀerent geome-
tries and the corresponding eﬃciencies are related by duality. Finally,
we show Purcell three linked swimmer is an example of a swimmer
that would not pump.

A bolted swimmer is a pump and a towed, frozen swimmer, is a glider.
Here we shall derive relations among pumping, swimming and gliding that
hold at low Reynolds numbers. It is a pleasant surprise that there are simple
and general relations between swimming and gliding in three dimensions
because in two dimensions, although it is possible to swim it is impossible
to glide: The ratio of towing force to velocity diverges in the limit of small
velocities (Stokes paradox). We shall then discuss optimal swimming and
pumping and show that the corresponding notions are related by duality.

We shall ﬁrst derive an elementary,

linear relation between the 6 di-
mensional force-torque vector, Fp = (Fp, Np) which keeps a pump anchored
with ﬁxed position and orientation, and the 6 dimensional velocity–angular-
velocity vector, Vs = (Vs, ωs) associated with the corresponding autonomous

1

swimmer. The relation is

Fp = −M Vs, M =

K C
C t Ω (cid:19)

(cid:18)

and it holds for all times (Fp, M and Vs are time dependent quantities). M
is a 6 × 6 matrix of linear-transport coeﬃcients of the corresponding glider:

namely, the corresponding rigid body, moving at (generalized) velocity Vg
under the action of the (generalized) force Fg. The matrix M depends on
the geometry of the body. It is a positive matrix of the form [8]:

Fg = M Vg,

M =

K C
C t Ω (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(1)

(2)

(3)

where K, C, and Ω are 3 ×3 real matrices. Note that linear response, Eq. (2),
holds in three dimensions but fails in two dimensions [12].

The equation implies that one can determine the velocity of an autonomous
swimmer by measuring the force and torque needed to keep it in place. In
fact, it is a common practice to study tethered micro-swimmers whose posi-
tion is ﬁxed, for experimental and practical reasons [18, 11, 20].

The proof of Eq. (1) is, as we shall see, elementary. It uses the linearity

of the Stokes equations and the no-slip boundary conditions.

Before turning to the proof, let us brieﬂy discuss the gauge issue in this
problem [19]. A glider is a rigid body undergoing an Euclidean motion under
the action of an external force. There is no canonical way to decompose a
general Euclidean motion into a translation and a rotation [13]: This requires
choosing a ﬁducial point in the body to ﬁx the translation. Since the center
of mass is not a natural notion at low Reynolds number, there appears to be
no natural choice of a ﬁducial point in a glider. The relation we derive hold
provided we pick as ﬁducial point the point where the pump is anchored. To
associate a Euclidean motion with a deformable body one needs, in addition,
a ﬁducial frame to determine the rotation. We pick the frame as the ﬁxed
frame of the anchored pump. The point and frame then serve as a gauge
ﬁxing in our problem [19].

Let ∂Σ denote the surface of the device. We shall denote by v vector ﬁelds
on ∂Σ. Any such vector ﬁeld can be decomposed into a deformation and a
rigid body motion as follows: Any rigid motion is of the form vg = V + ω ×x.

2

Pick V to be the velocity of a ﬁducial point and ω the rotation of the ﬁducial
frame. The deformation ﬁeld is then, by deﬁnition, what remains when the
rigid motion is subtracted from the given ﬁeld v.

Now, decompose vs the velocity ﬁeld on the surface of a swimmer, to
a deformation and rigid-motion as above. The deformation ﬁeld can be
identiﬁed with the velocity ﬁeld at the surface of the corresponding pump
vp. This is because the pump is anchored with the ﬁducial frame that neither
moves nor rotates. The remaining rigid motion vg is then naturally identiﬁed
with the velocity ﬁeld on the surface of the glider. The three vector ﬁelds
are then related by

vs = vp + vg, vg = Vs + ωs × x

(4)

where Vs is (by deﬁnition) the swimming velocity and ωs the velocity of
rotation.

Each of the three velocity ﬁelds on ∂Σ, (plus the no-slip zero boundary
conditions on the surface of the container, if there is one,) uniquely determine
the corresponding velocity ﬁeld and pressure (v, p) throughout the ﬂuid. Let

πij = ν(∂ivj + ∂jvi) − pδij

(5)

be the stress tensor [12], where vj are components of the velocity ﬁeld and ν
the kinematic viscosity.

By the linearity of the Stokes, ∂jπij = 0, and incompressibility equation,
∂jvj = 0, it is clear that vs = vg + vp and ps = pg + pp and then by Eq. (5),
also πs = πp + πg. Since Fi =
∂Σ πijdSj is the force acting on the device we
get that the three force vectors are also linearly related: Fs = Fp + Fg, and
similarly for the torques. This is summarized by the force-torque identity
Fs = Fp + Fg. Since the force and torque on an autonomous Stokes swimmer
vanish, Eq. (1) follows from Eq. (2).

R

Eq. (1) has the following consequences:

• Micro-Pumping and Micro-Stirring is geometric: The momentum and
Fpdt, is indepen-
angular momentum transfer in a cycle of a pump,
dent of its (time) parametrization. In particular, it is independent of
how fast the pump runs. This is because swimming is geometric [17, 19]
and the matrix M is a function of the pumping cycle, but not of its
parametrization.

R

3

• Scallop theorem for pumps: One can not swim at low Reynolds numbers
with self-retracing strokes. This is known as the “Scallop theorem”
[17]. An analog for pumps states that there is neither momentum nor
angular momentum transfer in a pumping cycle that is self-retracing.
This can be seen from the fact that Vs dt is balanced by −Vs dt when
the path is retraced, and this remains true for MVs dt.

• Simple Stokes swimmers [1, 7], and Purcell swimmer in particular [17],
have the property that the instantaneous velocity Vs changes sign dur-
ing the swimming stroke, (without averaging to zero). Since M changes
the weighting along the path this suggests that there are swimmers that
do not pump and pumps that do not swim, (although, by Eq. (1), at any
ﬁxed time, the force Fp required to hold a swimmer with non-vanishing
velocity Vs is not zero). We shall describe examples below.

We shall now derive an equation relating the power expenditure of swim-
mers, pumps and gliders. This equation is again elementary and general. It
follows from Lorentz reciprocity for Stokes ﬂows, which is an analog of the
Rayleigh-Carson reciprocity in antenna theory [4]. Lorentz reciprocity says
j, π′
that if (vj, πjk) and (v′
jk) are the velocity and stress ﬁelds for two solutions
of the Stokes equations in the domain Σ then [8]:

v′
i πij dSj =

vi π′

ij dSj

Z∂Σ

Z∂Σ

(6)

This relation is a direct consequence of the Stokes and incompressibility
equations.

For the problem at hand, we may take ∂Σ to be the surface of our device
(since the velocity ﬁelds vanish on the rest of the boundary associated with
the container). The area element dS is chosen normal to the surface and
pointing into the ﬂuid.

Now apply the Lorentz reciprocity to a pump and a swimmer velocity

ﬁelds and use Eq. (4) on both sides to rewrite Eq. (6) as:

(vs − Vs − ωs × x) πs dSj =

(vp + Vs + ωs × x) πp dSj

Z∂Σ

Z∂Σ

∂Σ πijdSj is the force acting on the device and P = −
∂Σ viπijdSj is
Since
the power dissipated into the ﬂuid the equation takes the form
R
R

− Ps − Vs · Fs = −Pp + Vs · Fp

(7)

4

where Ps is the power invested by the swimmer and Pp the power invested
by the pump. Since the force and torque on the swimmer vanish, Fs = 0, we
get, using Eq. (1) a linear relation between the powers:

Ps − Pp = −Vs · Fp = Vs · MVs = Pg ≥ 0

(8)

Pg is the power needed to tow the glider. Since both pumping and towing re-
quire positive power, at any moment swimming is more costly than pumping
or dragging.

We would also like to compare the energy dissipation of the same device
as a swimmer, a pump and a glider over one shape cycle. However, the energy
dissipation is diﬀerent for diﬀerent time parametrization. If we ﬁx the cycle
time to be T , and compare the energy dissipation of the three, we get:

Es ≥ Ep + Eg

(9)

where Es (Ep) is the minimum over diﬀerent time parametrization of the
device’s energy dissipation in the case of a swimmer (pump), and Eg is the
energy dissipation of the devise frozen in the shape having minimum energy
dissipation and towed in the swimmer average velocity.

Eq. (1) and Eq. (8) have a analogs for non-autonomous rigid swimmers. A
helix rotating by the action of an external torque is an example [6]. Strictly,
this case lies outside the framework discussed above because the swimmer is
not autonomous (there is external torque on the swimmer) and rigid (there
is no deformation). Nevertheless,
it is a case that is very easy to treat
separately. From Eq. (2) applied to the helix twice, once as swimmer and
once as a pump we get the analog of Eq. (1):

Fp = Cω = −KVs

(10)

The analog of Eq. (8) follows immediately from the deﬁnition of the power
P = −F · V and Eq. (2) again:

Ps − Pp = −Fs · Vs + Fp · Vp = −Vs · Fp = Pg

(11)

It follows from this that the diﬀerence in power between a swimmer and a
pump is minimized, for given swimming velocity, if the swimming direction
coincides with the smallest eigenvalue of K which is the direction of optimal
gliding.

5

The helix is an interesting example to consider because it can be used to
show that the geometry of an optimal pump and an optimal swimmer are
diﬀerent, in general. This requires the computation of M and its dependence
on the geometry–the pitch angle θ–of the helix. Such computations are nor-
mally hard, however, for a thin helix the slender-body theory of Cox [5], does
most of the hard work for us. Cox theory has the small parameter (log κ)−1
where κ is typically the ratio of the (large) radius of curvature of the slender
body, r in the case of a helix, to its (small) diameter. To leading order in
(log κ)−1 the local force ﬁeld on the body is ﬁxed by the local velocity ﬁeld:

dF (x) = k(t(t · v) − 2v)dx,

k =

(12)

2πν
ln κ

t(x) is a unit tangent vector to the slender-body at x and v(x) the velocity
of the point x of the body. This result may be interpreted as the statement
that each line element has twice the resistance in the transverse direction
than the resistance in the longitudinal direction, and that the motion of one
line element does not aﬀect the force on another element (to leading order).
Consider a helix of radius r, pitch angle θ and total length ℓ. The helix

is described by the parameterized curve

(r cos φ, r sin φ, t sin θ),

, φ = t cos θ,

t ∈ [0, ℓ]

(13)

Suppose the helix is being rotated at frequency ω about its axis. Substituting
the velocity ﬁeld of a rotating helix, with an unknown swimming velocity in
the z-direction, into Eq. (12), and setting the total force in the z-direction
to zero, ﬁxes the swimming velocity. Dotting the force with the velocity and
integrating gives the power. This slightly tedious calculation gives for the
swimming velocity (along the axis) and the power of swimming:

Vs
ωr

=

sin 2θ
3 + cos 2θ

,

Ps
kℓω2r2 =

4
3 + cos 2θ

Similarly, for the pumping force and power one ﬁnds

Fp
kℓωr

= sin θ cos θ,

Pp
kℓω2r2 = 1 + sin2 θ

Combining the two we get from Eq. (11)

1 −

=

=

Pp
Ps

sin2 2θ
8

Pg
Ps

6

(14)

(15)

(16)

Eq. (14) and (15) have the following consequences for optimizing pumps and
swimmers:

• Given ωr, the velocity Vs is maximized at pitch angle θ = 54.74◦.

• Given ωr, the pumping force Fp is maximized at θ = 45◦.

Several notions of eﬃciency of swimming have been proposed [2, 19, 14,
10, 16]. Consider optimizing the pitch angle θ and rotation frequency ω so
that the swimming velocity is maximized for a given power. Namely

max
θ,ω

{Vs | Ps = const}

(17)

and similarly for pumping, except that Fp replaces Vs and Pp replaces Ps. A
trite calculation shows that this is equivalent to optimizing V 2
p /Pp
with respect to θ. (These ratios are independent of ω and so invariant under
scaling time). One then ﬁnds:

s /Ps and F 2

• The eﬃciency of swimming, V 2

s /Ps, is optimized at θ = 49.9◦. The
eﬃciency is proportional to (kℓ)−1 which favors small swimmers in less
viscous media, as one physically expects.

• The eﬃciency of pumping, F 2

p /Pp, is optimized at θ = 42.9◦. The
eﬃciency is proportional to (kℓ) which favors big pumps at more viscous
media. Micro-pumps are perforce ineﬃcient.

There is a somewhat unrelated, yet insightful fact that one learns from
the above computation. As stressed by Purcell [17] the world of low Reynolds
numbers often deﬁes common intuition. The helix is an example. The naive
intuition is that at very high viscosity a helix moves rather like a cork-screw.
This is actually never the case, no matter how large ν is. In fact, the ratio
of velocities of a helix to a cork-screw is independent of ν and by Eq. (14)

Vs
ωr sin θ

=

cos θ
1 + cos2 θ

≤ 1
2

(18)

A helix needs at least two turns to advance the distance of its threads.

We now conclude with examples of swimmers that would not pump. Pur-
cell three-link swimmer [10] is an archetypical low Reynolds number swim-
mer. It was invented by Purcell to show that low Reynolds number hydro-
dynamics is far from our common intuition: It is essentially impossible to

7

θ

1

θ
2

Figure 1: A Purcell three linked swimmer, made of three slender bodies,
swims to leading order in the slender order parameter log κ. However, it does
not pump to leading order in log κ. The bolt eﬀectively splits the device into
two independent wind-shield wipers each of which is self retracing.

predict on the basis of intuition alone, which way a Purcell swimmer will
swim [10]. It is amusing that this swimmer can also be used to show that
the naive intuition that bolting a swimmer necessarily gives a pump can fail.
Indeed, if the Purcell swimmer is made of three slender bodies then it will
not pump, at least not to leading order in Cox slender body theory. Bolting
the swimmer as shown in the ﬁgure splits it into two wind-shield wipers. It
is evident from Eq. (12) that the force ﬁelds on each wiper is independent
of the motion of the other wiper to leading order in Cox theory. Since each
wiper is self-retracing, the force it applies integrates to zero on a closed cycle.
Hence, the bolted Purcell swimmer delivers no momentum to ﬂuid to leading
order in k. (There may be a residual non-zero force of order k/ log κ.)

Similarly, one can construct pumps that will not swim. This is the case
if the swimmer and the swimming stroke is right-left symmetric, say a Push-
mepullyou [1], so the swimmer will not move right or left by symmetry.
However, bolting it in a way that breaks the right-left symmetry can lead to
a pumping stroke that will transfer momentum to the ﬂuid.

To summarize, we gave formulas, Eq. (1), Eq. (8), Eq. (10) Eq. (11), that
translate information from pumps to information about the corresponding
swimmer, and vice versa. We investigated the geometry of optimal pumps
and swimmers for helices and showed that the notions of eﬃciency for pumps
and swimmers are related duality: Small swimmers and large pumps are
better.

8

\protect\vrule width0pt\protect\href{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reciprocity_(

Acknowledgment We thank A. Leshansky and O. Kenneth for discus-
sions and the ISF for support.

References

[1] J. E. Avron ,O. Kenneth and D. H. Oaknin , Pushmepullyou: an eﬃcient

micro-swimmer, New Journal of Physics, 7, 234-242, (2005),

[2] J. E. Avron ,O. Gat, O. Kenneth, Optimal Swimming at Low Reynolds

Numbers, Phys. Rev. let., 93, (Nov. 2004),

[3] Nicholas Darnton, Linda Turner, Kenneth Breuer, and Howard C. Berg,
Moving Fluid with Bacterial Carpets, Biophysical Journal ,Volume 86,
4, 18631870, Mach 2004,

[4] J. R. Carson. A generalization of reciprocal theorem, Bell System Tech-

nical Journal 3 (3), 393-399 (1924); see also

[5] R.G. Cox. The motion of long slender bodies in a viscous ﬂuid part 1.
general theory, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 44(4):791–810, December
1970.

[6] Dreyfus R., Baudry J., Roper M. L., Fermigier M., Stone H. A., Bibette

J. Microscopic artiﬁcial swimmer, Nature 436, 862-865 (2005)

[7] R. Golestanian andA. Najaﬁ Simple swimmer at low Reynolds number:

Three linked sphere, Phys. Rev. E 69, 062901-062905, (2004)

[8] J. Happel and H. Brenner. Low Reynolds number hydrodynamics, Kluwer,

second edition, 1963.

[9] G. A. de Araujo and J. Koiller, Self-Propulsion of N-Hinged ’Animals’ at
Low Reynolds Number, QUALITATIVE THEORY OF DYNAMICAL
SYSTEMS, 58 139-167, (2004).

[10] S. A. Koehler L. E. Becker and H. A. Stone. On self-propulsion of
micromachines at low Reynolds number: Purcell’s three-link swimmer,
J. of Fluid Mechnics, 490:15–35, 2003.

9

[11] G. Kosa, M. Shoham, M. Zaaroor, Propulsion of a Swimming Micro

Medical Robot, Robotics and Automation, 2005.

[12] L. D. Landau and I. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics, Pergamon, 1959.

[13] L. D. Landau and I. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics, Butterworth and Heine-

mann, 1981.

[14] J. Lighthill, Mathematical Bioﬂuid-dynamics, Society of Industrial and

Applied Mathematics, 1975.

[15] M.R. Maxey D. Liu and G.E. Karniadakis. Modeling and optimization
of colloidal micro-pumps. J. Micromech. Microeng., 14:567–575, 2004.

[16] R. Montgomery, A. Cherman, Joaquin Delgado, F. Duda,K. Ehlers, J.
Koiller Low Reynolds number swimming in two dimensions, Hamiltonian
systems and celestial mechanics (Patzcuaro, 1998)’ , 32–62, World Sci.
Monogr. Ser. Math., 6, World Sci. Publishing, River Edge, NJ, 2000..

[17] M. E. Purcell. Life at low Reynolds number, American Journal of

Physics, 45(1):3–11, January 1977.

[18] C. Yeung S. Chattopadhyay, R. Moldovan and X. L. Wu. Swimming
eﬃciency of bacterium escherichia coli, PNAS, 103(13):13712–13717,
September 2006.

[19] F. Wilczek and A. Shapere. Geometry of self-propulsion at low Reynolds

number, J. of Fluid Mechanics, 198:557–585, 1989.

[20] Tony S. Yu, Eric Lauga, and A. E. Hosoi, Experimental Investiga-
tions of Elastic Tail Propulsion at Low Reynolds Number, arXiv:cond-
mat/0606527 v1 20 Jun 2006

10

