7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Superstability of Surface Nanobubbles

Bram M. Borkent1,2, Stephan M. Dammer1,2, Holger Sch¨onherr2,3, G. Julius Vancso2,3, and Detlef Lohse1,2
University of Twente, Faculty of Science and Technology,
P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
1Physics of Fluids Group,
2MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology,
3Materials Science and Technology of Polymers Group
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Shock wave induced cavitation experiments and atomic force microscopy measurements of ﬂat
polyamide and hydrophobized silicon surfaces immersed in water are performed. It is shown that
surface nanobubbles, present on these surfaces, do not act as nucleation sites for cavitation bubbles,
in contrast to the expectation. This implies that surface nanobubbles are not just stable under
ambient conditions but also under enormous reduction of the liquid pressure down to −6MPa. We
denote this feature as superstability.

PACS numbers: 47.55.dp, 68.37.Ps, 68.08.-p

In recent years, numerous experiments revealed the
existence of nanoscopic soft domains at the liquid-solid
interface, see [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and refer-
ences therein. Most experiments employ atomic force
microscopy (AFM) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], but other tech-
niques [9, 10] have been used as well. The most consistent
interpretation of these experiments is that the soft do-
mains, which resemble spherical caps with heights of the
order of 10 nm and diameters of the order of 100 nm, are
so-called surface nanobubbles, i.e., nanoscale gas bubbles
located at the liquid-solid interface. This claim is, for
instance, supported by the fact that nanobubbles can be
merged by the tip of an AFM to form a larger bubble [2],
or by the fact that they disappear upon degassing of the
liquid [6, 7, 9], or by the gas concentration dependence
of their density [8].

Surface nanobubbles are puzzling objects. First, they
should not exist: according to the experimental data
these bubbles have a radius of curvature R of the order
of 100 nm, and therefore (due to a large Laplace pressure
inside of the bubbles) they should dissolve on timescales
far below a second [11, 12]. In marked contrast the ex-
periments show that nanobubbles are stable for hours.
Second, they are potential candidates to explain var-
ious phenomena associated with the liquid-solid inter-
face, such as liquid slippage at walls [13, 14, 15] or the
anomalous attraction of hydrophobic surfaces [1] in wa-
ter. In addition, heterogeneous cavitation usually starts
from gaseous nuclei at solid surfaces (see [16] and ref-
erences therein), and surface nanobubbles are suggested
as potential inception sites [7, 17, 18]. However, apart
from convincing experimental evidence for the existence
and stability of nanobubbles, still little is known. For
instance, why are they apparently stable or how do they
react to environmental changes?

In this Letter it is shown that surface nanobubbles,
contrary to the expectation, do not act as nucleation sites
for shock wave induced cavitation on surfaces, where a

large tensile stress is created in the water. Hence, yet an-
other puzzle is added to the nanobubble paradox: They
are not only stable under ambient conditions but also
under enormous reduction of the water pressure down to
6MPa. We denote this phenomenon as superstability.

−

≈ −

To demonstrate the superstability of nanobubbles
we combine cavitation experiments and AFM measure-
ments. More precisely, cavitation experiments (similar
to [18, 19, 20]) with diﬀerent hydrophobic substrates sub-
merged in water are performed: a shock wave generates a
large tensile stress (
6 MPa) in the water which leads
to cavitation of bubbles at the substrates. The size of
the cavitation bubbles is of the order of several hundred
µm. Thus, though the bubbles originate from smaller
nuclei, they can be visualized by optical means. In addi-
tion, AFM-measurements of the same substrates in water
at ambient conditions are performed to proof and quan-
tify the existence of stable nanobubbles on these sub-
strates. Combining the cavitation and AFM experiments
allows to study the relation between cavitation activity
and nanobubbles. An analogous strategy has been used
previously [20] to perfectly correlate the appearance of
surface bubbles in cavitation experiments to the existence
of gas-ﬁlled microcavities (i.e., microbubbles) of diame-
ter of 2
4 µm which had been etched into the surface. Is
there a similar connection between cavitation on smooth
unstructured surfaces and surface nanobubbles?

−

In other words: to what extent must the liquid pressure
pL be reduced to grow a nanoscale bubble to a visible size
(i.e., above microns)? A ﬁrst estimate is obtained from
the criterion that unstable growth of a bubble occurs
when pL falls below the critical pressure pc
pB,
with the ambient static pressure p0 and the Blake thresh-
old pB [22, 23]. The hemispherical dynamics of a sur-
face bubble under rapid decrease of the liquid pressure
is close to that of a free bubble with the same radius
of curvature [19]. Therefore, though surface nanobub-
bles are spherical caps rather than free spherical bubbles,

L = p0

−

)
a
P
M

(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

8

6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

52

53

54

55
time (µs)

56

57

58

FIG. 1:
Pressure signal from the shock wave generator
recorded inside of the protective ﬂask with the ﬁbre optic
probe hydrophone close to the surface of the chip. The line
depicts the low pass ﬁltered signal averaged over ﬁve record-
ings. Triggering the shock wave generator corresponds to time
t = 0.

one may obtain a reasonable estimate by the assump-
tion of a spherical bubble. Assuming a nanoscale bubble
with radius R = 100 nm and p0 = 1 atm one arrives at
pc
0.55 MPa which is exceeded in the experiments by
L ≈ −
more than an order of magnitude, see Fig. 1. Moreover,
we solved the Rayleigh-Plesset equation [22, 23] (which
describes the dynamics of a spherical bubble under varia-
tions of the liquid pressure) numerically for a gas bubble
with the measured liquid pressure reduction as driving
force. This calculation yields that bubbles down to a
radius of curvature R = 10 nm should grow to visible
bubbles during the experiments. Hence, theoretically it
should be no problem to nucleate a surface nanobubble
to visible size, but is this reﬂected in the experiments?

The setup for the cavitation experiments is similar to
that used in [18, 19, 20]. A shock wave generator gener-
ates a pressure signal in the water, consisting of a high
pressure front followed by a large tensile stress, see Fig. 1.
The substrate of interest is processed and handled in-
side a ﬁltered ﬂow bench and placed inside of a sterile
ﬂask ﬁlled with pure water (Milli-Q Synthesis A10, Mil-
lipore), ensuring cleanroom conditions throughout the
experiment. The ﬂask is placed inside the water tank
such that the shock wave is focussed onto the substrate.
The pressure signal at this position is recorded with a
ﬁbre optic probe hydrophone. The cavitation event is
photographed by a CCD camera through a long-distance
microscope. The major diﬀerence between the present
setup and that of [18, 19, 20] is the maintenance of clean-
room conditions by use of the protective ﬂask. Compared
to Fig. 2 of Ref. [18] less than 1% cavitation activity on
the surface is observed when cleanroom conditions are
preserved, indicating that contaminations play a domi-
nant role for cavitation experiments under ambient lab
conditions.

2

−

The AFM data are acquired on a VEECO/Digital
Instruments (DI) multimode AFM equipped with a
NanoScope IIIa controller (DI, Santa Barbara, CA) in
tapping mode in water using a DI liquid cell and V-
shaped Si3N4 cantilevers (Nanoprobes, DI). The data
shown for case D) are obtained after mounting the sam-
ple into the AFM while keeping the sample surface cov-
ered by water at all times, as described previously [21].
Corresponding to diﬀerent kinds of substrates and/or
diﬀerent procedures of substrate preparation, we present
results associated with four diﬀerent kinds of probes, la-
beled A)
D). Probes A) and B) use smooth polyamide
surfaces as solid substrate. Polyamide is heated and
molded between silicon and atomically smooth mica. The
mica is removed when the polyamide is cooled down to
room temperature, leaving a relatively smooth polyamide
surface with a root mean square (rms) roughness of
1 µm2) and a static
3.5 nm (measured by AFM on 1
contact angle of 80◦. Besides large smooth areas of many
mm2 the production process also creates several micro-
scopic cracks in the surface. In case A) these polyamide
surfaces are used in the experiments without further
treatment.
In case B) the substrate is ﬁrst covered
by ethanol which is then ﬂushed away by water. This
ethanol-water exchange has been reported to induce the
formation of surface nanobubbles, see [5, 8] and refer-
ences therein. Besides the explanation suggested in [5] we
note that also the exothermic mixing [24] of ethanol and
water might induce the formation of nanobubbles, since
a temperature increase favors the formation of nanobub-
bles [8]. In the cavitation experiments a drop of ethanol
is placed on the substrate such that it is completely cov-
ered by ethanol before it is submerged in water. Then
the substrate is moved inside the protective ﬂask for a
minute to replace the miscible ethanol by water [25]. In
the AFM experiment for case B) a liquid cell is used.

×

×

Probes C) and D) use pieces of smooth hydropho-
bized silicon as the substrate. A Si(100) wafer is diced
1 cm2) which are immersed for 15 min-
into chips (1
utes in a (5:1) Piranha cleaning mixture. Hereafter,
the chips are hydrophobized by chemical vapor deposi-
tion of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perﬂuorodecyldimethylchlorosilane
0.36 nm (mea-
(PFDCS) [18], yielding a rms value of
sured by AFM on 1
2.6 nm
(measured by ellipsometry), and an advancing contact
100◦. Note that the silane-ﬁlm is not able to
angle
move; it is a stable self-assembled monolayer covalently
bonded to the underlying substrate. Before immersion in
water the probes are rinsed with ethanol and blown dry
with argon gas [18]. Case D) additionally applies the ex
situ ethanol-water exchange as described above.

1 µm2), a coating thickness

≈

≈

×

≈

In each of the cases A)

C) substrates of the respec-
tive type are produced in an identical manner. One sub-
strate is used in the cavitation experiments and one in the
AFM measurements. Note that we checked that the ob-
served cavitation activity and nanobubble density were

−

reproducible among substrates of the same kind. Fur-
thermore, in case D) the same substrate is used in both
experiments. After the cavitation experiment (exposure
to a single shock wave) the substrate is transported in
water to the AFM, where it is mounted without expo-
sure to air, whereafter the water-solid interface is imaged
as it appears after the cavitation experiments.

−

−

≈ −

Do substrates with a high nanobubble density show a
large cavitation activity? Fig. 2 illustrates the experi-
mental results. The left panel shows typical recordings
D). The
of the cavitation experiments for the cases A)
right panel shows the corresponding AFM-measurements
of the substrate surfaces immersed in water. Though the
substrates have relatively large contact angles and the
6 MPa during the ex-
water pressure drops down to
periments there is hardly any cavitation on the smooth
substrates A)
D). Note that the cavitation bubbles
in A) originate exclusively from microscopic cracks in
the surface, as can be seen in Fig. 2A). Applying the
ethanol-water exchange, these microcracks do not lead to
surface cavitation, see Fig. 2B). Contrary to the cavita-
tion experiments, the AFM measurements show that all
substrates are densely covered by surface nanobubbles,
with number densities between 10 and 80 bubbles per
µm2. The sizes range from 3 to 40 nm in height and 60
to 300 nm in diameter. Several standard tests were per-
formed (not shown) to ensure that the structures seen in
the AFM images are indeed surface nanobubbles. Force-
volume measurements [1, 3, 5] and tip manipulation of
the bubbles [2] are in accordance with previous studies.
Furthermore, nanobubbles are not present when the sub-
strates are immersed in ethanol, in agreement with [8].
Successive cycles of ethanol-water and water-ethanol ex-
change resulted in pictures without (in ethanol) and with
nanobubbles (in water). Finally, when degassed ethanol
is exchanged by degassed water, nanobubbles are not in-
duced.

Thus the combination of the cavitation and the AFM
experiments yields the remarkable result that the surface
nanobubbles do not cavitate, in spite of the enormous
tensile stress they are exposed to. This contradicts the
expectation that the experimental pressure signal should
be able to cavitate bubbles with an initial radius of cur-
vature down to 8 nm. Case D) explicitly shows that
nanobubbles are still present after the cavitation exper-
iments, and that there is no cavitation activity at the
surface induced by the shockwave. While it is already
puzzling that surface nanobubbles are stable under am-
bient conditions, it is even more puzzling that they still
exist after the passage of a shock wave with a large tensile
6 MPa. We denote this as supersta-
stress down to
bility.

≈ −

One may wonder what actually is happening with the
surface nanobubbles when the shock wave is passing by.
With the present technology it is impossible to AFM-
image the nanobubbles (which takes order of minutes)

3

during the shock wave passage (which is order of µs).
Therefore, evidence can only be indirect.

One may also question whether the nanobubbles sur-

vive the compression wave (with typical time scale τ
≈
1µs so that the nanobubbles respond quasi-statically).
During the compression phase, gas may diﬀuse into the
neighboring liquid around the bubble. With a typical
10−9m2/s we get as typical
diﬀusion constant of D
≈
diﬀusion length scale √τ D
100nm. Hence the liquid
≈
close to the remaining void (100nm) will become super-
saturated with gas. However, during the negative pres-
sure phase, i.e., during the expansion of the bubble, all
this gas will be recollected by the bubble, as has been
shown in ref. [26] (for micrometer bubbles).

In summary, it is demonstrated that in standard shock
wave induced cavitation experiments surface nanobub-
bles do not act as nucleation sites. Cavitation bub-
bles originate from contaminations or from microscopic
structures such as microcracks or microcrevices [19, 20],
rather than from surface nanobubbles which densely pop-
ulate the immersed substrates. This implies that surface
nanobubbles are unexpectedly stable under large tensile
stresses.

We thank Szczepan Zapotoczny for his contribution,
K. A. Morch for discussions, and acknowledge ﬁnancial
support from STW (NanoNed Program), DFG (Grant
No. DA969/1-1)), the MESA+ Institute, and CW-NWO
(vernieuwingsimpuls program for H.S.).

[1] J. W. G. Tyrrell and P. Attard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,

176104 (2001).

[2] A. C. Simonsen, P. L. Hansen, and B. Kl¨osgen, J. Colloid

Interface Sci. 273, 291 (2004).

[3] M. Holmberg et al., Langmuir 19, 10510 (2003).
[4] A. Agrawal et al., Nano Lett. 5, 1751 (2005).
[5] X. H. Zhang, N. Maeda, and V. S. J. Craig, Langmuir

22, 5025 (2006).

[6] L. Zhang et al., Langmuir 22, 8109 (2006).
[7] X. H. Zhang et al., Langmuir 22, 9238 (2006).
[8] S. Yang et al., submitted.
[9] M. Switkes and J. W. Ruberti, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 4759

[10] R. Steitz et al., Langmuir 19, 2409 (2003).
[11] P. S. Epstein and M. S. Plesset, J. Chem. Phys. 18, 1505

[12] S. Ljunggren and J. C. Eriksson, Colloids Surf. A 129,

[13] E. Lauga and M. P. Brenner, Phys. Rev. E 70, 026311

(2004).

(1950).

151 (1997).

(2004).

[14] E. Lauga, M. P. Brenner, and H. A. Stone, in Handbook
of Experimental Fluid Dynamics, edited by C. Tropea,
J. Foss, and A. Yarin (Springer, New York 2005).
[15] C. Neto et al., Rep. Prog. Phys. 68, 2859 (2005).
[16] A.

Prosperetti,

Atchley
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 86, 1065 (1989).

and

A.

A.

[17] M. Holmberg et al., in: Fifth International Symposium

on Cavitation (2003).

[18] N. Bremond, M. Arora, C. D. Ohl and D. Lohse, J.

Phys.: Condens. Matter 17, S3603 (2005).

[19] N. Bremond, M. Arora, C. D. Ohl and D. Lohse, Phys.

Fluids. 18, 121505 (2006).

[20] N. Bremond, M. Arora, C. D. Ohl and D. Lohse,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 224501 (2006).

[21] K. Morigaki et al., Langmuir 19, 6994 (2003).
[22] C. E. Brennen, Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics (Oxford

University Press, New York, 1995).

[23] T. G. Leighton, The Acoustic Bubble (Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, Cambridge, 1994).

4

[24] Rodd’s chemistry of carbon compounds, 2nd edition, vol
1, part B, edited by S. Coﬀey (Elsevier, Amsterdam,
1965).

[25] We veriﬁed that our ex situ ethanol-water exchange gen-
erates surface nanobubbles, by placing the processed sub-
strate in the AFM while keeping water on its surface.
Then the substrate was AFM-scanned and many surface
nanobubbles (> 10 per µm2) were observed.

[26] S. Hilgenfeldt, D. Lohse, and M. P. Brenner, Phys. Fluids

8, 2808 (1996).

5

FIG. 2:
(color online) Cavitation activity (left), and corresponding nanobubble density (right) imaged by AFM (topography
images) for various probes. The length scales given in A) also refer to B), C), and D). – A) and B): polyamide substrates,
B) after ethanol-water exchange (see text). C) and D): hydrophobized silicon substrates, D) after ethanol-water exchange.
Scanning velocities for the cases A) − D) are 46, 20, 10, and 40 µm/s respectively. There is hardly any cavitation though
the substrates are densely covered by surface nanobubbles. Note that the cavitation bubbles in A) emerge exclusively from
microscopic cracks in the surface, whereas the whole substrate is covered by nanobubbles. The cavitation bubbles in C)
presumably originate from surface contaminations. In D) it is explicitly shown that the nanobubbles are still stably present
after the cavitation experiments.

