Scaling behavior in Spiral Defect Chaos.

Kapilanjan Krishan
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697-4575
(Dated: 9 March, 2007)

We ﬁnd the evolution toward power-law scaling in the distribution of roll lengths and nearest-
neighbor distributions in a weakly turbulent regime of Rayleigh-Benard convection, known as spiral
defect chaos. The state has a bounded domain of wave vectors in Fourier space attributed to the ﬂow
being highly conﬁned to two dimensions. Our results indicates the existence of power-law scaling in
the unconstrained horizontal dimension. The techniques described are broadly applicable to other
pattern forming systems as well.

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

The patterns exhibited by spatially extended systems
reﬂect the underlying dynamics. In non-equilibrium sys-
tems, complex patterns emerge at a macroscopic scale
as a result of local nonlinearities [1]. Relating the dy-
namics from the microscopic scale of nonlinearities to the
macroscopic patterns observed remains challenging. It is
therefore important to develop generally applicable char-
acterizations of a system that can capture the dynamics
across a multiple scales in a robust and consistent way.
The emergence of patterns represents the delineation
of the system into regions with diﬀerent physical charac-
teristics. For instance, the domain structure of a mate-
rial distinguishes between regions of diﬀering orientation.
The diﬀerent regions may be considered as the diﬀerent
components comprising the pattern.
In ﬂuid systems,
these structures are often in the form of variations in
local velocities during the ﬂow. For example, a charac-
teristic of turbulent ﬂows is the formation of eddies at a
multitude of scales, in contrast, laminar ﬂows have a well
deﬁned length scale associated with them [2, 3].

The ﬂow of a ﬂuid in highly constrained geometries is
dominated by the conﬁning boundaries. The reduction
in size of a system often results in the suppression of tur-
bulence through an eﬀective reduction of the Reynolds
number associated with the ﬂow [3]. While this reduc-
tion in size can be imposed along a single spatial dimen-
sion without aﬀecting the other spatial dimensions, the
inﬂuence on the resulting ﬂow is not easily extracted.

In this letter, we extract power-law scalings associ-
ated with patterns representing ﬂuid ﬂow in Spiral De-
fect Chaos, a weakly turbulent state of Rayleigh-Benard
convection [4, 5, 6, 7].
In this ﬂow, the vertical di-
mension of the ﬂow is highly constrained in comparison
to the horizontal dimension. The convective instability
is coincident with the formation of roll like structures
with a wavelength on the order of the depth of the con-
vective cell [3, 8]. The system has received much at-
tention as it shows unexpected chaotic behavior that is
bistable with at values of system parameters correspond-
ing to the ﬂow being stable and stationary [9, 10, 11].
A number of characterizations of the state have been
made emphasising local instabilities, wave-vector frus-

FIG. 1: A typical image of the convective state exhibiting
spiral defect chaos(at ǫ = 2.63) as visualized using shadowg-
raphy. The convective ﬂuid is bounded horizontally in a circu-
lar domain with radius 3.8cm and vertically extends to about
0.69mm

tration and mean ﬂows that may be linked with defect
nucleation [12, 13, 14, 15, 16].

We use two characterizations of the state that reveal
length scales that are associated with the structure of
the ﬂow in spiral defect chaos. The important diﬀer-
ence with earlier characterizations is that these measures
reveal underlying power-law scalings in real space not
identiﬁable with the distributions of the Fourier power
spectrum. In the ﬁrst characterization, we determine the
scaling of the area of distinct convection roll structures.
In the second characterization, we reduce the patterns
exhibited by the system to a graph. This parameterizes
the system through number of nearest-neighbors of each
distinct roll.

Our experiments use compressed carbon di-oxide as
the convective ﬂuid. The gas is held in a convection cell
bounded below by a 1cm thick gold plated aluminium
mirror and above by a 2cm thick transparent sapphire
crystal. The lateral boundaries comprise of stacks of ﬁl-
ter paper 0.069cm thick that also act as a spacer between

the upper and lower boundaries. The ﬁlter paper has a
3.8cm diameter circular hole in the center within which
the convection is visualized. The aluminium mirror has a
resistive thin ﬁlm heater attached to it on the bottom and
rests on high precision screws that may be turned to align
the mirror. The mirror is levelled with respect to the sap-
phire window using laser interferometry. Chilled water at
a controlled temperature is circulated over the top of the
sapphire window to maintain its temperature. In addi-
tion, thermistors embedded in the side of the aluminium
mirror as well as close to the sapphire plate are used to
monitor the temperature gradient across the convective
layer. The setup in contained within an aluminium canis-
ter pressurized to 30atm with CO2 gas using an external
pressurized cylinder. Computer control of the thin ﬁlm
heater is used to set the temperature diﬀerence, T , be-
tween the top and bottom boundary of the convective
cell to within 10mK of the desired value. Our experi-
mental setup is similar to that used earlier by Rogers et.
al. [17, 18].

At a critical temperature diﬀerence across the ﬂuid,
T = Tc, the onset of convection occurs resulting in the
formation of roll like structures. These rolls represent the
transport of ﬂuid vertically across the cell when thermal
expansion induced buoyancy in the ﬂuid overcomes dis-
sipation due to viscosity and thermal conduction [3, 8].
The visualization of the convective rolls is done using
shadowgraphy [19, 20]. This technique utilizes the varia-
tion in the refractive index between hot and cold regions
of the gas to focus light diﬀerently. Light from a bright
halogen lamp is passed through a pinhole and collimated
using a concave lens. After passing through the convec-
tive layer, the spatial variation in light intensity is cap-
tured using a CCD array. The image is indicative of the
changes in the refractive index of the light as it passes
through the ﬂuid. In our setup, bright and dark regions
represent hotter upﬂows and cooler downﬂows.

We set our experiment at diﬀerent values of ǫ(= (T −
Tc)/Tc), and hold the temperature for over one hour to
let transients dynamics die out. A sequence of 8000 im-
ages acquired at 11Hz are used in our data analysis. The
total time the dynamics of the system is captured is many
times the vertical thermal diﬀusion time (about 2 seconds
in our system). The response of system falls qualitatively
low, 0 ≤ ǫ ≤ 0.5, where the
into three regimes [4, 21]:
convective rolls are stationary states of the system, in-
termediate values of 0.5 ≤ ǫ ≤ 1.5 result in the onset of
time dependence and weak turbulence, and at 1.5 ≤ ǫ,
the system shows prominent time-dependent behavior.

A background image of the ﬂuid ﬂow prior to the on-
set of convection is subtracted from every image to re-
move stationary optical inhomogeneities that may be as-
sociated with irregularities in the optical path(such as
scratches in the mirror etc.). These diﬀerence images
are Fourier ﬁltered to eliminate the inﬂuence of high fre-
quency noise associated with the CCD array as well as

2

FIG. 2: In ﬁgure (a), a set of convection rolls representing
the dark areas of ﬁgure 1 are indicated by dark regions of a
binary image. As an example of a distinct component of this
ﬂow, one of the rolls that is singly connected is shaded in gray.
In ﬁgure (b), the complementary ﬂow is shown, representing
the bright areas in ﬁgure 1. In addition, the gray component
is added for visual eﬀect, while also indicating its nearest
neighbors in color.

low frequency variations associated with nonuniform il-
lumination. The intensity proﬁle of the resultant image
is representative of the structure of the convective rolls.
The image is thresholded at the median value of intensity
to yield a binary image. This choice of a threshold segre-
gates the convective region into equal areas representing
hot upﬂows and cold downﬂows to be consistent with the
conservation of mass.

The segregation of the ﬂow into two distinct compo-
nents as depicted by the binary image(ﬁgure 2) provides
the basis for our characterizations. As illustrated in ﬁg-
ure 2a, each distinct bright(dark) roll is completely sur-
rounded by dark(bright) rolls, or the boundary of the
convective cell. In the ﬁrst characterization, we simply
look at the area of distinct bright or dark rolls as a frac-
tion of the total convective area. A histogram of the
number of distinct rolls at a given area fraction divided
by the total number of distinct rolls vs their relative area
at a given value of ǫ is plotted in ﬁgure 3. Since the con-
vective rolls have a well deﬁned average width, the area of
the rolls is well approximated by a constant scalar multi-
ple of the length of the roll. The convective rolls may be
looked upon as primarily one dimensional curves within
the circular convective region.

When ǫ ≥ 1.5, a power-law scaling of the roll areas to
number of rolls emerges. However, prior to the occur-
rence of this scaling, we note two distinct scalings occur

-1

10

-2

10

10

-1

10

-2

10

-3

10

-1

10

-2

10

-3

10

s

l
l

o
r
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

 
l

a
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

-3

(c)

(b)

(a)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.01

0.1

1

Fractional area of a roll

FIG. 3: The area of convective rolls scale as a power-law with
the number of rolls. The slope in the plot (a) for both upﬂows
and downﬂows is close to −1.8. For comparison, in plot(b),
the curves are split into regions of slopes approximately −0.35
and −3.6 at ǫ = 0.87. Upward pointing triangles refer to
bright regions, and downward pointing triangles to dark re-
gions of the binary images captured.

based on the area fraction of the rolls as seen in ﬁgure 3.
The kink in these plots occur at an area corresponding
to that of a roll with length equal to the diameter of the
convective region. There is a sharp drop in the number
of rolls that have a length greater than the diameter of
the convection cell. This is because the rolls are without
much curvature at lower values of ǫ. At higher values of ǫ,
the roll curvature increases, with an associated increase
in the number of rolls with a larger area. The distinction
between the distributions for upﬂows and downﬂows sug-
gests that the ﬂow is non-Boussinesq in nature [7, 22, 23].
The asymmetry between upﬂows and downﬂows increases
with an increase in ǫ. We ﬁnd the system to be composed
of a higher number of dark rather than bright rolls.

A further topological characterization may be made
by considering the binary image of the ﬂow as a bipar-
tite graph. In order to do this, we consider the number
of distinct bright(dark) rolls each distinct dark(bright)
roll shares an interface with. Figure 2b illustrates this
measurement by indicating the nearest neighbors of a
single convective roll in the ﬂow(indicated in gray). In
our binary image, bright(dark) regions are surrounded
by dark(bright) regions with the only exceptions being at
the boundaries. We count of the number of nearest neigh-
bors every dark(bright) region has that is bright(dark). A
set of numbers representing the number of nearest neigh-
bors for each distinct dark/bright region is thus gener-
ated at a constant value of ǫ. We normalize this set so
their sum is unity to compute the probability of hav-
ing a given number of nearest neighbors. This is ploted
against the number of nearest neighbors for a convec-

3

tive roll as shown in ﬁgure 4. The probability of having
a given number of neighbors scales as a power-law with
the number of nearest neighbors. We see no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between upﬂows and downﬂows in the scaling
of the number of nearest-neighbors. This measurement
is therefore insensitive to the breaking of the Boussinesq
symmetry in contrast to the results presented in ﬁgure 3.
Figure 4 shows the scalings for bright regions of ﬁgure 2a
and the results for the dark regions do not show signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0

10

-1

10

-2

10

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

-3

10

1

10

Number of nearest neighbors

FIG. 4: The scaling of the number of nearest neighbors with
increasing temperature gradient across the system. At high
values of ǫ, the system evolves to show a power-law scaling.
The slope at the highest value of ǫ shown above is −2.9

The probability of having only one neighbor is ﬁnite for
rolls that are at the boundary, or are completely encircled
by a diﬀerent roll. We note the general trend in ﬁgure 4
for the number of rolls with two nearest-neighbors to de-
crease with increasing ǫ. In the simple geometries of par-
allel rolls and concentric circles, the number of nearest-
neighbors is two. In single spiral formations, the number
of nearest neighbors would be one, there being only a sin-
gle bright roll and a single dark roll. When more complex
patterns emerge, they can often be broken down into spa-
tially localized regions with simple geometries [24]. The
present characterization develops a general technique to
make global characterizations of the system based on the
nearest-neighbor distributions within the ﬂow.

The experimental characterization we have used relies
on a small image series at each value of ǫ. It has been
shown that the state of spiral defect chaos exhibits tran-
sitions between straight-roll states and curved roll states
that are time dependent. This was done by observing
the evolution of the system over a period of a month,
keeping ǫ ﬁxed [11]. The importance of our study lies in
extracting global measures that reveal an underlying scal-
ing behavior for the various patterns exhibited. A more

accurate parameterization of this scaling with ǫ would
involve averaging over very large experimental data sets.
Our current data suﬃces to demonstrate the existence of
power-law behavior.

While the lengths of rolls show a sharp kink that is
associated with the system size, there is no feature cor-
responding to this in the nearest-neighbor distributions.
The scalings of the area of the system are metric de-
pendent, and correspondingly show an associated length
scale of the system size. The nearest-neighbor distribu-
tions however are metric independent and a purely topo-
logical measure. The two measures are related as they
determine the packing of upﬂows and downﬂows in the
system. A larger packing fraction of the rolls translates
to an increase in the number of rolls. The increase in the
number of distinct rolls with an increase in ǫ has been
reported earlier [22, 23].

The techniques presented allow for connecting dynam-
ical phenomenon at various scales. Most models of ﬂuid
systems rely on the Navier-stokes equation, which de-
scribes the microscopic dynamics of the system. While
the solutions to diﬀerential equations have been vali-
dated many times in comparison with experiments, it
remains challenging to predict the large-scale structure
of the ﬂuid ﬂow in a turbulent regime. Recently topolog-
ical techniques have been used to model and character-
ize systems without reference to the microscopic dynam-
ics. The present study develops characterizations that
should oﬀer insightful comparisons with other systems
characterized using similar measures. In particular the
evolution to power-law scaling has been of considerable
interest [25, 26, 27].

While developing numerical models, one is not always
able to match the initial conditions or exact boundary in-
ﬂuences that occur in experiments. The techniques out-
lined in this paper could also be used to quantify global
statistical measures as a tool to compare experimental
and numerical results. The measures described here pro-
vide average properties of the state of the system that
complement other metrics currently in use [28]. Compar-
isons based on topological measures have the advantage
of being scale-independent.

In spiral defect chaos, the extreme conﬁnement of the
ﬂuid between the top and bottom plates primarily deter-
mines the wave-number exhibited by the system. This
shows up as ﬁnite and bounded distribution of power in
Fourier space, corresponding to the wavelength of the
convective rolls. We ﬁnd that while the wave-vectors are
constrained, the length scales of the rolls and topologi-
cal measures characterizing the nearest-neighbor distri-
butions have power-law distributions.

The author would like to thank M. Gameiro, K. Mis-
chaikow, N. Przulj and J. Scheel for useful discussions. In
addition, the author is grateful to M. F. Schatz in whose
laboratory the experiments were carried out.

4

[1] M. C. Cross and P. C. Hohenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65,

851 (1993).

[2] E. M. Lifshitz and L. D. Landau, Fluid Mechanics, Sec-
ond Edition: Volume 6 (Course of Theoretical Physics)
(Butterworth-Heinemann, 1987), ISBN 0750627670.
[3] P. Manneville, Dissipative Structures and Weak Turbu-
lence (Perspectives in Physics) (Elsevier, 1990), ISBN
0124692605.

[4] V. Croquette, Contemporary Physics 30, 113 (1989).
[5] S. W. Morris, E. Bodenschatz, D. S. Cannell, and

G. Ahlers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2026 (1993).

[6] W. Decker, W. Pesch, and A. Weber, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[7] S. Madruga and H. Riecke, Phys. Rev. E 75, 026210

73, 648 (1994).

(2007).

[8] S. Chandrasekhar, Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic
Stability (International Series of Monographs on Physics
(Oxford, England)) (Dover Publications, 1981), ISBN
978-0486640716.

[9] M. Assenheimer and V. Steinberg, Nature 367, 345

[10] K. M. S. Bajaj, D. S. Cannell, and G. Ahlers, Phys. Rev.

(1994).

E 55, R4869 (1997).

[11] R. V. Cakmur, D. A. Egolf, B. B. Plapp, and E. Boden-

schatz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1853 (1997).

[12] K.-H. Chiam, M. R. Paul, M. C. Cross, and H. S. Green-

side, Phys. Rev. E 67, 056206 (2003).

[13] D. A. Egolf, I. V. Melnikov, and E. Bodenschatz, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 80, 3228 (1998).

[14] M. C. Cross and Y. Tu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 834 (1995).
[15] W. P. David A. Egolf, Ilarion V. Melnikov and R. E.

Ecke, Nature 404, 733 (2000).

[16] J. Liu and G. Ahlers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3126 (1996).
[17] J. L. Rogers, M. F. Schatz, J. L. Bougie, and J. B. Swift,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 87 (2000).

[18] J. L. Rogers, M. F. Schatz, O. Brausch, and W. Pesch,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4281 (2000).

[19] J. R. de Bruyn, E. Bodenschatz, S. W. Morris, S. P.
Trainoﬀ, Y. Hu, D. S. Cannell, and G. Ahlers, Review of
Scientiﬁc Instruments 67, 2043 (1996).

[20] G. S. Settles, Schlieren and Shadowgraph Techniques

(Springer, 2006), ISBN 978-3540661559.

[21] B. B. Plapp, Spiral pattern formation in Rayleigh-Benard
convection, PhD. Thesis (Cornell University, 1997).
[22] K. Krishan, Characterizations of spatio-temporal complex
systems, PhD. Thesis (Georgia Institute of Technology,
2005).

[23] M. F. Gameiro, Topological analysis of patterns, PhD.

Thesis (Georgia Institute of Technology, 2005).

[24] R. E. Ecke, Y. Hu, R. Mainieri, and G. Ahlers, Science

269, 1704 (1995).

[25] D. J. Watts and S. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[26] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, SIGCOMM

[27] U. Stelzl, U. Worm, M. Lalowski, C. Haenig, F. H. Brem-
beck, H. Goehler, M. Stroedicke, M. Zenkner, A. Schoen-
herr, S. Koeppen, et al., Cell 122, 957 (2003).

[28] J. D. Scheel and M. C. Cross, Phys. Rev. E 72, 056315

(1999).

(2005).

