Department of Physics and McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences

Washington University, St. Louis, Mo. 63130

Jets from Collapsing Bubbles

J. I. Katz

katz@wuphys.wustl.edu

Abstract

When an asymmetric bubble collapses it generally produces a well deﬁned high velocity

jet. This is remarkable because one might expect such a collapse to produce a complex

or chaotic ﬂow rather than an ordered one.

I present a dimensional argument for the

ubiquity of jets from collapsing bubbles, and model the aspherical collapse of a bubble

with pieces of Rayleigh’s solution for spherical collapse and its cylindrical analogue. This

model explains the ubiquity of jet formation in aspherical collapse, and predicts the shape

and velocity proﬁle of the resulting jet. These predictions may be tested in the laboratory

or by numerical calculation. An application to solid spall is suggested.

6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
8
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. Introduction

The aspherical collapse of a bubble or void in a liquid produces a fast liquid jet1−3.

This phenomenon is remarkably robust. It occurs for axially symmetric collapse of a single

bubble near a solid wall or free surface. It occurs in at least some of the bubbles produced

in turbulent cavitating ﬂow, but it is apparently unknown whether it occurs in all such

bubbles, or what initial conditions are required.

Jet production is of great technological importance. Jets are the means by which

cavitation damages nearby solid surfaces2,4. Fast jets are deliberately produced by shaped

charges5, and are remarkably insensitive to their geometry. Jets launch droplets from the

sea surface6, producing marine salt aerosols. Jets are also responsible for the sensitization

of explosives by microscopic bubbles7−8.

There are a number of elegant analytic theories of jet production 9−11. Numerical

calculations of axisymmetric aspherical collapse12−15 readily show jet formation. How-

ever successful these theories and calculations, they do not explain the robustness of the

phenomenon and the applicability of these somewhat idealized results to the bubbles en-

countered in practice: jets form from the collapse of bubbles which cannot be expected

to be symmetric, and despite the best eﬀorts of engineers to prevent them. A qualitative

model of jet formation might help understand why it is so ubiquitous.

A simple analytic solution is possible for the collapse of a spheroidal bubble. Laplace’s

equation for the velocity potential ψ separates in spheroidal coordinates16 (either prolate

or oblate) (u, v, θ). A spheroidal bubble is characterized by ψ = ψ(u). It is readily seen by

explicit diﬀerentiation that its aspect ratio does not change during its collapse, so that if

it remains spheroidal it will not produce a jet. More generally, no bubble which possesses

inversion symmetry will produce a jet, because any jet would stagnate against its mirror

image jet upon convergence. In fact, inversion symmetry may be broken by the presence

of a nearby wall or free surface, or by the growth of small perturbations, and initially

spherical or ellipsoidal bubbles do produce jets, as is seen in the numerical calculations.

2

II. Why Jets

A dimensional argument can be made for the ubiquity of jet formation. Suppose the

collapsing bubble is initially approximately spherical, so that at each point on its surface the

two radii of curvature are comparable to each other and have roughly the same magnitude

everywhere on the surface. Then only one quantity with the dimensions of length (the

approximate initial radius) is deﬁned. The only other independent dimensional quantity

is a velocity c ≡ (P/ρ)1/2, where ρ is the liquid density and P the pressure at inﬁnity.

If viscosity and surface tension are neglected and the bubble contains no uncondensable

gas there are also no characteristic dimensionless numbers. For some geometries (spheres

and spheroids, for example) void collapse will be self-similar, maintaining the shape of the

bubble.

At a speciﬁed elapsed time t a new length scale ct is deﬁned which is characteristic of

that time, but not of the collapse process as a whole. If the bubble shape is to undergo

a qualitative change (such as the formation of a jet) its description would require at least

one additional characteristic length r′(t), typically a radius of curvature. If r′(t) is time-

dependent it may be constructed from ct. However, it is not possible to deﬁne an additional

constant r′

0 which is characteristic of the process as a whole (rather than a speciﬁc time),

because the initial conditions do not contain enough information; a limiting, ﬁnal or time-

independent radius of curvature would be an example of such a forbidden parameter.

A spherical vacuum bubble satisﬁes this condition by collapsing to a point, rather

than reversing its collapse at a ﬁnite radius r′

0. If a collapsing void has an asymmetry or

a dimple or pimple on its wall and does not preserve its proportions, the asymmetry must

either decay or sharpen until the ﬂow becomes singular and a cusp forms. For this reason

a growing asymmetry will generally lead to a jet which develops singular conditions at its

tip. This argument for jet formation also applies to bubbles near walls or other bubbles

(usually the source of asymmetry), if all the initial characteristic lengths are comparable

to the collapsing bubble’s initial radius.

3

III. Model

I suggest the following model of jet production: If the two principal radii of curvature of

a bubble are nearly equal, aspherical collapse is locally approximated by spherical collapse,

as described by a modiﬁed version17 of Rayleigh’s classic theory18, while if the principal

radii of curvature are very diﬀerent it is locally approximated by cylindrical collapse.

Collapse of a ﬁnite angular range of a cylinder produces a sheet jet (as in a linear shaped

charge5) rather than the linear jet produced by axially symmetric collapse of an entire

cylinder13.

symmetry.

In this elementary model the diﬀerence between spherical (or cylindrical) collapse

and that of an aspherical bubble is that in the aspherical case diﬀerent portions of the

surface converge to the center at diﬀerent times. Instead of meeting an oppositely directed

convergent ﬂow from the other side, and stagnating against it in a central pressure peak (as

happens in inversion-symmetric collapse), in the asymmetric case the ﬂuid which converges

ﬁrst forms a ﬂuid jet which then penetrates the unconverged ﬂuid approaching from the

opposite side. Jets are likely to be produced by the collapse of any bubble without inversion

This model is applicable not only to bubbles and to voids in explosives, but also

to hemispherical shaped charges.

It is not applicable to conical shaped charges, which

are not locally spherical, and whose convergence is not even locally cylindrical at their

apices; a cone deﬁnes no quantities with the dimensions of length, and contains a geometric

singularity in its initial state.

In the frequently encountered case of a bubble near a plane solid boundary or free

surface the collapse is azimuthally symmetric about the surface normal, and the spherical

solution is applicable to the fastest-collapsing portion of the bubble. The Rayleigh solution

for the velocity ﬁeld surrounding a spherical void, which has collapsed from an initial radius

4

R0 to a radius R, is

v(r) =

2
3

P
ρ

(cid:20)

(cid:0)

R3

0 − R3

R

(cid:21)

(cid:1)

1/2

−2 ≡

r

C3
r2

(r ≥ R),

(1)

where here P is the diﬀerence between the pressure at inﬁnity and the pressure in the void.

In the limit R/R0 → 0, C3 → [2P R3

0R/(3ρ)]1/2. The distribution of mass in a spherical

cap of solid angle Ω with respect to speciﬁc kinetic energy E ≡ ρv2/2 is then

dM
dE

=

Ω
211/4

ρ7/4C3/2
3
E 7/4

E ≤

(cid:18)

ρC2
3
2R4 (cid:19)

.

(2)

Performing the integral

E(M ) dM ∼ E 1/4 demonstrates that the kinetic energy is weakly

concentrated in the ﬂuid with the greatest speciﬁc kinetic energy; that is, at the tip of the

R

jet.

During collapse of a cap spherical convergence is assumed (otherwise (1) and (2) would

not be applicable), but after convergence this can no longer be the case. I assume that the

ﬂuid then forms a parallel jet, with the distribution of speed and kinetic energy given by

(1) and (2). This is not required by any conservation law, even for a perfect ﬂuid, but is the

simplest possible assumption. It is plausible for a cap of small Ω because the convergent

velocities are nearly parallel and are readily collimated, and because in a narrow jet the

zero pressure boundary condition along its sides ensures that any longitudinal pressure

gradient and acceleration are small.

It is necessary to introduce an upper cutoﬀ Emax on E (or, equivalently, a lower
cutoﬀ Rmin = (P/3Emax)1/3 R0 on R), because otherwise all the kinetic energy would

appear in an inﬁnitesimal mass of ﬂuid. This cutoﬀ may be the consequence of the onset

of compressibility (surface tension and viscosity are readily veriﬁed to be negligible in

the converged ﬂow if they were negligible in the original bubble) or a breakdown in the

geometric assumptions. The resulting value

C3 =

2
ρ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

1/2

2/3

P R3
0
3 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

−1/6
max

E

5

(3)

is fortunately only weakly dependent on Emax; the limiting speed vmax ≡ (2Emax/ρ)1/2.

For water, plausible values (assuming compressibility is the limiting mechanism) are

Emax ∼ 2 × 1010 erg/cm3 and vmax ∼ 2 × 105 cm/sec; Rmin ∼ 0.026R0 if P = 1 bar.

The high velocity tip of the jet may be diﬃcult to observe, because it is eroded by residual

gas in the bubble and by more slowly converging ﬂuid on the opposite side of the bubble.

As the jet propagates it stretches. If its convergence occurs instantaneously and at

one point then its radius s at a distance ℓ from that point at a time t after convergence is

s =

Ω
2π (cid:19)

1/2 C3/4
3
ℓ5/4

t3/4

(cid:18)

(ℓ < vmaxt),

(4)

which is obtained by changing variables in (2) from E to v and using ℓ = vt; the jet

terminates at ℓ ∼ vmaxt. This form is easier to test against laboratory data than (2)

because it is easier to measure the shape of a bounding surface than a ﬂuid velocity.

In the case of cylindrical symmetry the solution analogous to (1) for the velocity ﬁeld

v(r) =

P
ρ

(cid:20)

(R2
0 − R2)
ln(R∞/R) (cid:21)

1/2

−1 ≡

r

C2
r

(r ≥ R),

(5)

where R∞ is an upper cutoﬀ (set by the system size) on the range of the velocity ﬁeld. In

the limit R/R0 → 0, C2 → {P R2

0/[ρ ln(R∞/R)]}1/2. The distribution of mass with respect

is

to E is

dM
dE

=

θ
4

ρ2C2
2
E 2

E ≤

(cid:18)

ρC2
2
2R2 (cid:19)

,

where θ is the arc of the collapsing portion of a cylinder. The integral

E(M ) dM ∼ ln E,

so that kinetic energy is evenly distributed per decade across the speciﬁc energy spectrum.

R

An upper cutoﬀ Emax and a lower cutoﬀ Rmin are again required as R → 0. The thickness

h of a collapsed sheet is found, in analogy to (4),

(6)

(7)

Collapsing bubbles whose rate of convergence is intermediate between cylindrical and

spherical in their region of fastest collapse may perhaps be parametrized by solutions of

h = θ

(ℓ < vmaxt).

C2
2 t2
ℓ3

6

non-integer dimension n. The velocity ﬁeld is

v(r) =

2(n − 2)
n

P
ρ

(cid:20)

(Rn

0 − Rn)Rn−2

r1−n ≡

1/2

(cid:21)

Cn
rn−1

(r ≥ R).

(8)

The resulting mass distribution in the limit R/R0 → 0 is

dM
dE

∝

ρ
E (cid:17)

(cid:16)

(3n−2)/(2n−2)

Cn/(n−1)

n

E ≤

(cid:18)

ρC2
n
2R2(n−1) (cid:19)

,

(9)

where the constant of proportionality includes the contributing fraction of the n-sphere.

The shape of the jet’s cross-section depends on the details of convergence, but with the

previous assumptions its cross-sectional area A is

A ∝

tn/(n−1)
ℓ(2n−1)/(n−1)

(ℓ < vmaxt).

(10)

This may be ﬁtted to empirical data or to numerical calculation to determine an eﬀective

dimension n of the convergent ﬂow.

IV. Discussion

The models of jets discussed in this paper can be tested by comparison to computed

jets and to experiment. The most general form is (10), which introduces the non-integer

dimensionality parameter n, but which reduces to the spherical results (1)–(4) for n = 3

and to the cylindrical results (5)–(7) for n = 2.

A related problem is the production of microscopic particulate spall upon shock re-

ﬂection from a solid surface, at tensile loads insuﬃcient to disrupt the bulk. This is related

to ﬂuid jet formation, because both processes involve concentration of energy. Solid spall

is a more complicated phenomenon because it involves materials with ﬁnite strength, a

variety of heterogeneities in the bulk and at the surface, and (usually) anisotropy. It is un-

clear whether spall is produced by elastic stress concentration at corners (surface scratches,

cracks, grain boundaries, etc.), followed by brittle fracture, or by plastic ﬂow convergence

and jetting at surface scratches and cracks. The latter process would resemble jet forma-

tion upon the collapse of a bubble, with the curved solid surface taking the place of the

7

bubble surface. The plastic ﬂow and brittle fracture hypotheses may be distinguished by

microscopic examination of the surfaces of spall fragments. It might also be informative

to do experiments on spall from shocked liquid surfaces and amorphous substances, which

may be prepared without surface imperfections or heterogeneities in the bulk.

I thank K. Case and F. J. Dyson for discussions and the Oﬃce of Naval Research,

DARPA and NSF AST 94-16904 for support.

8

References

1. M. Van Dyke, Album of Fluid Motion (Parabolic Press, Stanford, Cal., 1982).

2. F. R. Young, Cavitation (McGraw-Hill, London, 1989).

3. R. H. Cole, Underwater Explosions (Princeton U. Press, Princeton, 1948).

4. J. R. Blake and D. C. Gibson, “Cavitation bubbles near boundaries” Ann. Rev. Fluid

5. W. P. Walters and J. A. Zukas, Fundamentals of Shaped Charges (Wiley, New York,

Mech. 19, 99–123 (1987).

1989).

6. D. C. Blanchard and A. H. Woodcock, “The production, concentration and vertical

distribution of the sea-salt aerosol” Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 338, 330–347 (1980).

7. C. Matzner, Physics Today 46(4), 90 (1993).

8. M. M. Chaudhri, Physics Today 45(7), 15 (1992); 46(4), 90 (1993).

9. M. S. Longuet-Higgins, “Bubbles, breaking waves and hyperbolic jets at a free surface”

J. Fluid Mech. 127, 103–121 (1983).

10. M. S. Longuet-Higgins, “Inertial shocks in surface waves and collapsing bubbles” Proc.

IUTAM Symp. on Bubble Dynamics and Interface Phenomena, Birmingham, England

11. M. S. Longuet-Higgins and H. Oguz, “Critical microjets in collapsing cavities” J. Fluid

Mech. 290, 183–201 (1995).

12. M. S. Plesset and R. B. Chapman, “Collapse of an initially spherical vapour cavity in

the neighbourhood of a solid boundary” J. Fluid Mech. 47, 283–290 (1971).

13. O. V. Voinov and V. V. Voinov, “On the process of collapse of a cavitation bubble

near a wall and the formation of a cumulative jet” Sov. Phys. Dokl. 21, 133–135

(1993).

(1976).

14. J. R. Blake, B. B. Taib and G. Doherty, “Transient cavities near boundaries. Part 1.

Rigid boundary” J. Fluid Mech. 170, 479–497 (1987).

9

15. J. R. Blake, B. B. Taib and G. Doherty, “Transient cavities near boundaries. Part 2.

Free surface” J. Fluid Mech. 181, 197–212 (1987).

16. F. B. Hildebrand, Advanced Calculus for Engineers (Prentice-Hall, New York, 1949).

17. W. V. Pinczewski, “The formation and growth of bubbles at a submerged oriﬁce”

Chem. Eng. Sci. 36, 405–411 (1981).

18. H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics 6th ed. (Dover, New York, 1945).

10

