7
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
0
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonuniqueness and Turbulence

Mark A. Peterson
Physics Department, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley MA 01075 USA
(October 9, 1997)

The possibility is considered that turbulence is described by diﬀerential equations for which
uniqueness fails maximally, at least in some limit. The inviscid Burgers equation, in the context
of Onsager’s suggestion that turbulence should be described by a negative absolute temperature, is
such a limit. In this picture, the onset of turbulence coincides with the proliferation of singularities
which characterizes the failure of uniqueness.

I. NONUNIQUENESS

The existence and uniqueness of solutions to the dif-
ferential equations of physics is seldom an issue. The
very fact that these equations describe physical reality
seems to argue that their solutions must exist and be
unique. Textbook examples of nonuniqueness, for exam-
ple Clairaut’s equation (Ref. [1], p. 94), seem like ex-
ceptional cases, which would not arise in physics in any
case.

There is, however, a system of diﬀerential equations,
arising as a limiting case of a much studied physical prob-
lem, in which uniqueness fails for every solution at every
time. The system is singular Laplacian growth [2], [3].
One might call this behavior “maximally nonunique.” It
is so diﬀerent from the usual behavior of diﬀerential equa-
tions that it hardly seems like a diﬀerential system at all.
The way it occurs is the following: the theory of singular
Laplacian growth describes the motions of certain singu-
larities of a conformal map, which are all located on the
unit circle in the complex plane. They move on the circle,
but they can also “split,” introducing new singularities,
at any time. This behavior, which does not sound very re-
markable, essentially implies the maximal nonuniqueness
property. In Ref. [3] the term “fragile” was suggested for
such a system, because its distinguishing feature is that
its singularities can break apart.

It is natural to ask if other physical systems might re-
duce to a fragile system in some limit, and if the fragile
property manifests itself in the behavior of the system.
Turbulence is certainly a candidate to be a fragile sys-
tem: like Laplacian growth, turbulence is a phenomenon
in which a diﬀerential equation has unexpectedly com-
plex solutions. In this paper I argue that turbulence is
a system that has a fragile (maximally nonunique) limit-
ing case. The limiting case is the Burgers equation. (On
rather diﬀerent grounds a resemblance between the prob-
lems of turbulence and Laplacian growth has been noted
by Hastings and Levitov [4]).

II. INVISCID BURGERS EQUATION

The Burgers equation [5], [6]

1

∂u
∂t

+ u

= ν

∂u
∂x

∂2u
∂x2

(1)

has played a shifting role in the problem of turbulence.
It was ﬁrst introduced as a one-dimensional zero pressure
version of the Navier-Stokes equation (with ν the viscos-
ity) in the hope that it might exhibit in its solutions some
of the complexity of turbulence. By the Hopf-Cole trick,
though, it was found to be equivalent to a linear diﬀusion
equation, so that the initial value problem could be solved
explicitly: one can write a formula for the solution! That
is surely too simple to be turbulent. Attention was thus
focussed on the only case which still seemed promising,
the ν → 0 limit, the inviscid Burgers equation, which is
a conservation law for u. In this limit the solution may
develop discontinuities (“shocks”). The distribution of
shocks, and their development in time, for random ini-
tial data, is a problem called Burgers turbulence.

The reason that one should think of this as a ν → 0
limit, and not simply as a ν = 0 version of the equa-
tion, is that for ν = 0 the solution is ambiguous. To be
sure, the solution of the inviscid equation is immediate by
the method of characteristics: u is constant along lines
dx/dt = u (hence straight lines in the x-t plane). But
if the characteristics cross, which they certainly will do
in the case of random initial data u(x, 0), then one has
multiple determinations of u(x, t), as in Fig. 1. The res-
olution of this diﬃculty is to take the formula for u(x, t)
in case ν > 0, which is unambiguous, and let ν approach
zero. The result is as shown in Fig. 2: a discontinuity
forms at a deﬁnite location, separating one determina-
tion of u from another. The same procedure shows that
shocks interact in a deﬁnite manner, coalescing as shown
in Fig. 3 when one overtakes or collides with another.

The rules for how these discontinuities form and inter-
act were known long ago in the theory of compressible gas
dynamics, where they are called the Rankine-Hugoniot
jump conditions (see Ref. [1], pp. 488-90, Ref. [6], p.
596). They are justiﬁed by appeal to the second law of
thermodynamics: while u is conserved, entropy must in-
crease in the shock. That is what the argument with
ν > 0 also does: we resolve the ambiguity in the inviscid
Burgers equation by putting in a dissipative term with
the right sign. The second law of thermodynamics says
mechanical energy should be dissipated in the shock, and
not created. It is this condition which leads to the inter-
action rule illustrated in Fig. 3.

III. NEGATIVE TEMPERATURE

IV. INTERPRETATION

Now recall the suggestion of Onsager, as emphasized
by Alexandre Chorin, among others, that a statistical
theory of the turbulent steady state should be charac-
terized by a negative temperature (see Ref. [7], chapter
4). What is meant is that there is a Maxwell-Boltzmann
probability distribution

P ∼ e

−E/kT

(2)

which,
instead of giving more weight to the low en-
ergy microstates in the ensemble description of the
macrostate, as is usual, gives more weight to high energy
(This statistical “temperature” of turbu-
microstates.
lence has nothing to do with usual thermodynamic tem-
perature, which is only weakly coupled to the mechanical
degrees of freedom of interest.) Let us accept this idea for
the moment. The second law says that entropy should in-
crease, or perhaps better, in this more general situation,
that information should be lost, in irreversible processes.
Stated in terms of the free energy

F = E − T S

(3)

(and remembering T < 0) this says that free energy
should increase in the approach to the steady state. This
is opposite to what is usual. Putting Onsager’s idea to-
gether with the ideas of Burgers turbulence thus requires
that mechanical energy should be created in the shock
rather than dissipated. We see that the limit in the in-
viscid Burgers equation should be ν → 0−, i.e., we should
imagine the viscosity approaching zero through negative
values, from below.

The inviscid Burger’s equation does not contain tem-
perature or ν explicitly, of course, but the rules for how
the shocks form and interact are now diﬀerent. The fol-
lowing argument gives the simple idea which is at the
heart of this paper. We do not try to give it an elaborate
justiﬁcation, since, like many simple ideas, it may con-
tain some truth even if the arguments are wrong. The
argument is that there is a symmetry of the (general)
Burgers equation,

ν → −ν,

t → −t,

x → −x.

(4)

We can convert the ν < 0 inviscid Burgers equation into
the familiar ν > 0 inviscid Burgers equation by revers-
ing the signs of x and t, i.e., reﬂecting graphs like Fig.
3 through the origin. The result is Fig. 4, in which a
single shock has spontaneously split into two, with no
reference to initial conditions. This is the fragile prop-
erty. If shocks can split at any time, as indicated, then
the solutions to the diﬀerential equation are maximally
nonunique.

Our aim in the previous section was to show that the
equations which describe ﬂuid ﬂow, the Navier-Stokes
equations, become maximally nonunique, or “fragile,” in
some limit. This limit is rather far removed from physi-
cal reality, however. One naturally wonders how, if at all,
the nonuniqueness property might manifest itself in a real
system. The example of Laplacian growth encourages
one to think that real processes would not completely
obscure the underlying “fragile” processes [3].

The system we have imagined is characterized by two
temperatures: a “superhot” negative temperature, which
describes the ensemble of microscopic entities which
make up the turbulent state, and the usual tempera-
ture, which describes the ensemble at the molecular level.
These two ensembles interact only weakly, it has been ar-
gued, but, again by the second law of thermodynamics,
to the extent that they interact, there must be a ﬂow
of energy from the ﬁrst to the second, from the turbu-
lent ensemble to the molecular ensemble. This picture
is reminiscent of the Kolmogorov cascade idea (Ref. [7],
chapter 3), and suggests identifying the turbulent ensem-
ble with the “energy range,” (a hypothetical range in k
space containing most of the energy), and the molecu-
lar ensemble with the “dissipation range,” (a range in k
space, disjoint from the energy range, in which dissipa-
tion is important), i.e., assigning a temperature gradient
to the Kolmogorov picture, with negative temperature at
small k and positive temperature at large k. It is in the
energy range, then, at small k, that the fragile processes
of nonuniqueness would occur.

These processes extract mechanical energy from the
negative temperature “bath,” and this energy must ulti-
mately derive from the forces maintaining the turbulence.
Thus the onset of fragile processes would appear, on the
macroscopic scale, as an increase in resistance to these
applied forces. At a more microscopic level it would be
the onset of nonuniqueness, allowing splitting and pro-
liferation of microscopic entities as in Fig. 4. At a still
more microscopic level, corresponding to the dissipation
range, the usual picture would apply, and one would have
dissipative processes like Fig. 3. In this view turbulence
is the visible manifestation of nonuniqueness on the in-
termediate scale of the energy range, and the work done
by external forces goes directly into the proliferation of
singularities at that scale, and only indirectly into dissi-
pation.

In terms of modelling turbulence, it suggests that the
proliferative processes of the energy range, which are still
hypothetical, may be like the dissipative processes of the
dissipation range, but time reversed (and on a larger
length scale). In this way the abstract picture suggested
here might persist in a more realistic dynamics.

The issue of nonuniqueness may also be relevant to
CFD modelling of turbulence. The algorithms of dif-
ferential equation solvers are not set up for equations

2

which do not have unique solutions. Experience with
Laplacian growth conﬁrms that proximity to a nonunique
model may indicate trouble for conventional numerical
solutions.

[1] R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methods of Mathematical

Physics, vol 2 (Interscience Publishers, 1962).
[2] M.A. Peterson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 284 (1989).
[3] M.A. Peterson, cond-mat/9710046.
[4] M.B. Hastings and L.S. Levitov, cond-mat/9607021.
[5] J.M. Burgers, The Nonlinear Diﬀusion Equation, (Riedel,

Dordrecht, 1974).
Strang,

[6] G.

Introduction to Applied Mathematics,

(Wellesley-Cambridge Press, Wellesley MA, 1986).

[7] A.J. Chorin, Vorticity and Turbulence, (Springer, 1994).

3

t

t

4

x

x

u=1

u=0

FIG. 1. The ν = 0 Burgers equation with initial data u = 1 for x < 0 and u = 0 for x ≥ 0 determines u(x,t) to be 1 where

the characteristics have slope 1 and 0 where they are vertical. In t ≥ x ≥ 0 this determination is ambiguous.

u=1

u=0

FIG. 2. The ν → 0 limit of the ν > 0 Burgers equation removes the ambiguity of Fig. 1. A shock develops between the two

regions.

u=1

u=0

u=-2

FIG. 3. The ν → 0 limit of the ν > 0 Burgers equation determines how shocks interact: they coalesce, with dissipation of

energy.

x

x

FIG. 4.

It is suggested that the ν → 0 limit of the ν < 0 Burgers equation should be understood as the time reversal of the
usual inviscid Burgers equation. This is Fig. 3 upside-down. It shows a shock splitting at an arbitrary time. This mechanism,
if it actually occurs, makes the time evolution of the Burgers equation nonunique at every time, i.e. maximally nonunique.

t

t

5

