8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Trapping by Radiometric Flow

William L. Clarke
Department of Physics, University of California at Santa Cruz
wlclarke@cats.ucsc.edu

Abstract. Micron sized, neutral, non-dielectric particles immersed in
a viscous ﬂuid such as an ideal gas can be trapped in the focal plane
of a Gaussian beam. A particle can absorb energy from such a beam
with a large radial intensity gradient, resulting in substantial temperature
gradients and a radiometric torque which cause it to spin rapidly about
an axis perpendicular to the ﬂux of radiant energy. The particles are
also observed to orbit about the optical axis. Here we investigate the
fundamental physics of this system, the Radiometric Particle Trap, and
discuss its force laws using gas-kinetic theory.

1. Phenomenology

Figure 1. is a high resolution optical micrograph of a submicron sized, spinning
particle orbiting around the optical axis of a focused laser beam. In fact, the
particle is trapped in a stable orbit in the focal plane of the beam by an inter-
action between the particle’s spin moment and the large radial optical intensity
gradient characteristic of a focused, Gaussian coherent light source.

Figure 1.
mersed in 1/2 atm. nitrogen. (1/500 sec at 1000x).

Graphite particle in orbit about the optical axis, im-

1

The particles are contained in a glass cylinder at the focus of a Gaussian
beam, and immersed in nitrogen gas at approximately 1/2 atm. The particles
are observed to drop out of the beam when the cylinder is pumped down to
approximately 0.1 atm. Hence, the mechanism of trapping is distinct from the
mechanism of Ashkin [1], and Chu [2], involving a gradient force on optically
transparent, dielectric particles, which obtains in a vacuum. Rather, the photo-
graph above shows a spinning graphite particle which is trapped by radiometric
ﬂow [3], a ﬂuid dynamical regime which depends on the large temperature gradi-
ents induced on the particle by the absorption of optical energy from the beam.
The surface temperature gradients induced on the particle by the beam cause
radiometric forces which drive the system. We note that the radiometric forces
are completely due to the non-equilibrium condition of the hot gas around the
particle.

The next photograph shows three spinning, graphite particles. The direc-
tion of the beam is left to right; the circular orbit of each particle lies in a plane
normal to the optical axis. It is seen that the spin axis of each particle is approx-
imately along the direction of its orbit. The particles are heated unevenly, since
the part of a particle closer to the optical axis will absorb more radiant energy
than the part further from the axis, and also the side of the particle closest to
the source of the beam (ie the front of the particle) will absorb more energy
than the back. This uneven absorption of optical energy induces a radiometric
moment on each particle which causes it to spin.

Figure 2.
Three distinct carbon particles spinning on axes approx-
imately parallel to their orbital motion. The optical axis is from left
to right, and each particle is orbiting in a plane normal to the optical
axis. (1/1500 sec at 2200x)

Furthermore, additional temperature gradients are induced along the par-
ticle spin axis which causes it to orbit. The spinning particles exhibit a dynamic
chirality k(t) which couples the spin degree of freedom to the orbital motion.
We have deduced the radiometric force laws which cause the particles to spin and

2

orbit from the stready solution of radiometric ﬂow for an ellipsoid (See Section
2). Indeed, a well-deﬁned, small dimensional dynamical system may be derived
from these force laws which can be put on the computer, and integrated. We
ﬁnd that the simulated system admits limit cycle solutions which are periodic
and stable. The existence of limit cycle solutions in the simulations veriﬁes the
stability criterion which was derived from pure analysis [4]. We conclude that
the existence of spinning, orbiting particles trapped in a Gaussian beam is a
nonlinear mode of a radiometric-mechanical system of particles immersed in a
viscous ﬂuid.

Figure 3. shows a simulation of a 1 micron particle, initially at a distance of
8 microns from the optical axis of a focused Gaussian beam with spot diameter
5 microns. The particle has zero initial spin angular velocity ω0, and zero initial
orbital angular velocity Ω0. The large intensity gradient of the beam immedi-
ately induces a large radiometric moment on the particle, causing it to spin, and
orbit the optical axis.

Figure 3.

is attached, due to formatting diﬃculties

The particle spirals into a limit cycle [5]. In fact any particle within approxi-
mately 3 times the beam spot radius will spiral into the same steady, stable orbit.
That is, the limit cycle attractor is the asymptotic orbit for all such particles,
for any reasonable initial spin and orbital angular velocities.

The next photograph (Figure 4) shows multiple clouds of graphite particles
which are trapped near the focal plane. It is observed that the clouds repel each
other, yet yet appear to be electrostatically neutral. This can be seen by the
observed null eﬀect of electrostatically charged probes brought into the vicinity
of the orbiting clouds.

High resolution image of carbon particles immersed in
Figure 4.
0.5 atm of argon. Orbiting particles form multiple mutually repulsive
discrete groups. The beam spot radius σ ≈ 5 microns.

3

We ﬁnd that the clouds of particles are pushed towards the focal plane by
longitudinal forces which act along the optical axis. These are also radiometric
forces which arise from the fact that the surfaces of constant optical intensity of
a Gaussian beam are in fact hyperboloids [6], so that the spin axis of the orbit
ing particles has a longitudinal component. The temperature gradient along this
spin axis drives the particles towards the focal plane, where they form a linear
array of stable, mutually repulsive clouds.

We therefore claim that the dynamics of multiple clouds of spinning, orbit-
ing particles can be accurately described by a system that assumes a non-local
interaction between the clouds. We note that for a 100 mW beam and 5 mi-
cron spot radius, the particles will spin at approximately 100,000 rad/s, and the
particle will orbit with an orbital angular velocity of approximately 3000 rad/s.
The motion of the ”bare” particle will then induce a toroidal vortex ring in the
ﬂuid around the orbiting particle. It is known that such vortex rings repel [7]
by the laws of ﬂuid potential ﬂow. Thus we explain the existence of multiple
trapped clouds of particles by the laws of vortex motion. We have derived an N-
body force law which describes the interaction of N toroidal clouds of particles,
trapped along the optical axis near the focal plane [8].

2. Theory

The theory of this complex physical system must depend on the basic laws
of radiometric ﬂow. We follow Maxwell [9], who in 1880 derived the correct
equations of motion and boundary conditions for ﬂuid ﬂow around objects with
large temperature gradients. We have essentially followed his derivation using
more modern notation, and we ﬁnd that we can give a rigorous deﬁnition of the
regime of radiometric ﬂow at low Reynolds number, where the Prandtl number
Pr = 1, the particle size is of order the mean free path λ of the immersing gas,
which is moreover considered to be incompressible, with no sources or sinks of
heat except at the boundaries.

We ﬁnd that that the ﬂow is identical to Navier-Stokes ﬂow with the non-

standard (radiometric) boundary condition:

(1)
(2)

~v = ~vslip(∇T ) at the boundaries
~vslip(∇T ) is a linear function of ∇T at the boundaries.

where

Maxwell’s derivation of this regime depends on the Chapman-Enskog [10]
approximation of the velocity distribution of the gas just outside the particle,
which is in fact non-Maxwellian, ie in a state of non-equilibrium. This non-
equilibrium distribution is parameterized by 20 expansion coeﬃcients, which
may be expressed in measurable quantities, such as the gas density, temperature,
etc. Solutions to the equations of motion with the correct radiometric boundary
conditions have allowed us to calculate the stress tensor of the immersing gas
at the particle surface, and therefore the radiometric forces and moments on
a sphere, ellipsoid of revolution, and also for a circular ﬂat plate, which is a
degenerate case of the ellipsoid [11].

For example, we may calculate the radiometric ﬂow outside a circular plate

normal to the z-axis, with the pure quadrupole temperature distribution

4

(3)
(4)

T = T(v, φ) = T0 + (δTQ)[ 1/2 + G2(v, φ))]
where
G2(v, φ) = (1/8) (3 cos2(v) - 1) + (3/4) sin(2v) cos(φ)

+ (3/8) sin2(v) cos(2φ)

This is the leading term of the surface temperature variation of an ellipsoidal
particle irradiated by a beam with a radial intensity gradient ∇I. The induced
quadrupole moment δTQ is given by

(5)

δTQ = (1/4) a2 ∇I / kp

where kp is the thermal conductivity of the particle.
The derivation of the exact velocity ﬁeld around the plate requires the use
of ellipsoidal coordinates, and is long and tedious. However, we are able to use
the solution to calculate the stress tensor in these coordinates, and therefore the
net radiometric moment on a circular plate of radius a

(6)

~M = ˆy [ 9π ρν2 a γ′ (δTQ/T) ]

where γ′

is a geometrical factor of order unity, and where we have assumed
that the optical axis is in the ˆz direction. The kinematic viscosity ν = η / ρ.
We ﬁnd that the spin axis of the particle is perpendicular to the ﬂow of radiant
energy of the beam. This radiometric moment then causes the particle to spin
with an angular velocity ω ∝ γ′ (δTQ/T).

Similarly, we may calculate the radiometric force on a circular plate with a

dipole temperature variation. The result is

(7)

~F = ˆφ k(t) [ 6π ρν2 γ (δTD/T) ]

The induced dipole moment δTD is proportional to ∇I, and there is a small
temperature diﬀerential along the spin axis which is proportional to k(t) δTD
in the ˆφ direction. This is the orbital radiometric force which drives the particle
against the orbital viscous drag. The dynamical chirality factor k(t) arises from
the angular inertia of the spinning particle, and its law of transformation under
rotations [12].

With these solutions, which are exact dipole and quadrupole solutions of
the equations of motion for steady ﬂow at low Reynolds number, we are able to
build a analytical model of the radiometric particle trap dynamical system, ie
we use the exact expressions for the steady radiometric forces and moments as
the force laws which are incorporated into a low dimensional mechanical system
which captures the essential dynamics of orbiting, spinning particles trapped by
the beam.

The main result of the analysis is the derivation of the so-called spin-gradient
central force which holds the particle in its orbit [13]. This force arises as a
coupling of the particle spin angular velocity to the motion of its c.m. due to
the temperature variation of the kinematic viscosity ν ∝ T 3/2. We ﬁnd

5

(8)

~Fs.g. = - ˆr (λ/a) [ 12π ρν2 γ′ (δTQ/T) γ (δTD/T) ] ∝ ω ∇I

The typical magnitude of the central acceleration is approximately 50 m/s2
≈ 5 g, suﬃcient to support the particles in a gravitational ﬁeld. The combination
of the radiometric moment, orbital force, and spin-gradient trapping force results
in steady, stable, and approximately circular orbits.

The derivation of these force laws can be considered to be semi-rigorous,
consistent with the underlying gas-kinetic theory, and dimensionally consistent
with the regime of radiometric ﬂow. We ﬁnd that we can pin down all the
geometrical coeﬃcients and other factors of order unity, resulting in a dynamical
system which depends on no free parameters, ie every factor of order unity is
accounted for.

3. Conclusions

We have discussed the existence of a steady, stable periodic mode of motion of the
system of micron sized particles immersed in a viscous ﬂuid, trapped in the focal
plane of a Gaussian beam. The fundamental force laws may be derived from
ﬁrst principles, ie gas-kinetic theory and oﬀer an explanation of the observed
phenomena. This is one of the few methods of trapping non-dielectric particles
(such as metallic contaminants) and may ﬁnd important applications in the ﬁeld
of ultra-clean gas ﬂows.

The system is driven by radiometric forces which arise from the non-Maxwel-
lian distribution of the gas molecules near the surface of the immersed particles
caused by the large temperature gradients induced by the beam. Because the
Gaussian beam proﬁle falls oﬀ so abruptly, the particle surface temperature
variation contains a large quadrupole component which causes it to spin. The
angular inertia of the spinning particle then results in a small coupling of the
particle spin angular momentum into the orbital direction, which sustains its
motion against the orbital viscous drag. Finally, the eﬀect of the radial inten-
sity gradient coupled with the particle spin produces an asymmetry of forces in
the - ˆr direction which causes the spin-gradient central force. We have given
quantitative estimates for these forces and moments.

Furthermore, the particle trap theory makes qualitative as well as quanti-
tative predictions. It is non-obvious why the particles are caused to orbit, since
a Gaussian beam has rotational symmetry around the optical axis. The sim-
ulations show that any particle with an inﬁnitesimally small intrinsic chirality
k0 will result in the spin of the particle being coupled into an orbital motion.
We conjecture that even a small helical component of radiation pressure arising
from an inﬁnitesimally small admixture of a Laguerre-Gaussian (helical) mode
[14] would provide such an inﬁnitesimal intrinsic chirality. Special holograms are
available to generate such modes [15], so that a small intrinsic chirality could
be generated with either sense, which should result in clockwise or counter-
clockwise orbits. The system thus exhibits ”dynamical symmetry breaking” of
the rotational symmetry of the Gaussian beam.

6

References

[1] Ashkin,A. Acceleration and Trapping of Particles by Radiation Pressure.
Phys . Rev. Letters 24:156-159 (1970)
[2] Chu, S. Laser Trapping of Neutral Particles. Sci. Am. 266:49-54 (1992)
[3] Rosenblatt, Philip, Phys. Rev. Vol. 10, 385 (1946)
[4] Clarke, W.L. The Dynamics of Light and Matter in a Fluid, Inaugural Dis-
sertion, University of Caifornia at Santa Cruz (1998), page 119
Postscript version available at ftp://198.123.17.116/pub/
[5] J. Thompson, H. Stewart, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, Wiley, 1986
[6] See Reference 4, page 123
[7] Faber, Fluid Mechanics for Physicists
[8] See Reference 5, page 131
[9] J.C. Maxwell, Phil. Trans. 170, 231 (1880)
[10] D.Enskog, Inaugural Dissertation, Uppsala, (1917)
[11] See Reference 5, Chapters 7 and 8.
[12] See Reference 5, page 117
[13] See Reference 5, page 114
[14] H.He, M.E.J.Friese, N.R.Heckenberg, and H.Rubinsztein-Dunlop. Direct
observation of transfer of angular momentum to absorptive particles from a
laser beam with a phase singularity. Phys.Rev.Lett, 75(5):826–829, 1995.
[15] L.Allen, M.W.Beijersbergen, R.J.C.Speeuw, and J.P.Woerdman. Orbital
angular momentum of light and the transformation of Laguerre-Gaussian laser
modes. Phy. Rev. A, 45(11):8185–8189, 1992.

7

"Figure 3"

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

