INTERFACIAL TENSION IN WATER AT SOLID SURFACES∗

N.A. Mortensen, A. K¨uhle and K.A. Mørch†
Department of Physics, Bldg. 307, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark

A model for the formation of cavitation nuclei in liquids has recently been presented with ba-
sis in interfacial liquid tension at non-planar solid surfaces of concave form. In the present paper
investigations of water-solid interfaces by atomic force microscopy are reported to illuminate exper-
imentally eﬀects of interfacial liquid tension. The results support that such tension occurs and that
voids develop at solid-liquid interfaces.

NOMENCLATURE

x,y coordinates on specimen surface in scan direction

and perpendicular to this direction
coordinate along surface normal

z
p0 equilibrium pressure
R0 mean radius of surface corrugation
T
Z0 amplitude of surface corrugation

tensile strength of liquid

measurements of tensile strength T of tap water vs. in-
creasing equilibrium pressure p0 by Strasberg [5] can be
simulated from assuming that solid particles in tap water
have shallow corrugations of sinusoidal cross section, ax-
ially symmetric around their bottom and of mean radius
R0 < 2 µm and with relative amplitude Z0/R0 = 0.3,
and small, relatively deeper ones with R0 = 0.2 µm,
Z0/R0 = 1, FIG. 1.

I. INTRODUCTION

In cavitation research the formation and stabilization
of cavitation nuclei has always been an intriguing prob-
lem which has made calculations of cavitation inception
highly problematic. Subcritical gas cavities in water are
inherently unstable and go into solution [1] or they drift
to surfaces due to buoyancy. Therefore, stabilization
must take place at liquid- solid interfaces. A model was
proposed by Harvey et al. [2]. Though able to explain
some of the experimental results of inception research,
and during half a century the only reasonably realistic
model, it is insuﬃcient. A new model was proposed by
Mørch [3], and recently it has been improved to allow
quantitative calculations [4]. According to this model in-
terfacial tension in the liquid adjacent to solid surfaces
opens the possibility of detachment of the liquid, i.e. void
formation, at surface elements of concave form. At suf-
ﬁciently high curvature the voids may develop sponta-
neously, but at moderate and low curvatures the content
of gas being in solution in the liquid and reaching the
interface by diﬀusion is important for breaking liquid-
solid bonds which are strained by the interfacial tension
in the liquid. It is predicted that a void grows until the
contact line between detached liquid and liquid still in
contact with the solid reaches the locus of balance be-
tween the tensile stress due to interfacial liquid tension
and the pressure in the bulk of liquid. It seems possible
to explain qualitatively the most signiﬁcant results of ex-
perimental research from this model. Quantitatively the

FIG. 1. Comparison between Strasberg’s measurements
(∇) of the tensile strength T of tap water vs. pressure p0
[5] and calculations from [4] based on large, shallow corruga-
tions and smaller, relatively deeper ones (solid lines).

The interfacial tension present at the interface of two
substances in contact is normally given as a single quan-
tity. However, as the solid-liquid interfaces we consider
are not planar it is suitable to split this interface tension
into two components, one for the liquid, A1, and one for
the solid, A2, to obtain information of the inﬂuence of
curvature on the liquid-solid bonding. In FIG. 2 the bal-
ance of forces is shown at a solid-liquid-vapour contact
point. In addition to the interface tension forces A1, A2,
B and C at the three interfaces this balance demands
also an adhesion force D (van der Waals’ force) between
the liquid and the solid perpendicular to the solid sur-
face. These forces give the contact angle of the liquid-
vapour interface. In water where hydrogen bonds domi-

9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
1
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Published in proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Cavitation, vol. 1, p87-90 (1998).
†Corresponding author. E-mail: K.A.Morch@fysik.dtu.dk

1

nate the intermolecular forces an appreciable interfacial
liquid tension (A1) is to be expected adjacent to solid
surfaces as a result of a stabilized interfacial liquid struc-
ture. Experimentally eﬀects of an orderly structured wa-
ter layer have been measured near a mica surface [6] and
by computer simulations it has been shown that at plat-
inum surfaces the interfacial layer of water has an essen-
tially ice-like solid structure [7]. These results support
the hypothesis that water generally exhibits a more or
less stabilized structure at solid surfaces. The interfacial
liquid tension expected to result from this structure is
the crucial parameter in the model of void formation [4]
and thus for the formation of cavitation nuclei in liquids.
It is the object of the present paper to verify its existence
experimentally.

FIG. 2. Balance of interfacial forces at a solid-liquid-vapour
contact point. A1 - interfacial liquid tension at liquid-solid in-
terface, A2 - interfacial solid tension at liquid-solid interface,
B - liquid-vapour interface tension, C - solid-vapour interface
tension, D - adhesive force.

II. EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUE AND
RESULTS

Experimental techniques available for investigating the
local interfacial tension in the liquid adjacent to a solid
surface are very few - at present only atomic force mi-
croscopy (AFM) seems available [8]. This technique is
basically used to give information of the surface topog-
raphy of a solid object, and resolution to atomic scale is
available for crystallographically planar surfaces. How-
ever, it can be used also for local force spectroscopy. In
AFM a pointed tip, usually of pyramidal form and of
height and base dimensions 5 − 10 µm and with a tip ra-
dius of curvature 10 − 50 nm, which is mounted close to
the free end of a thin cantilever of length about 300 µm,
is approached to the surface which is to be investigated.
When the distance between the tip apex and the surface
becomes suﬃciently small interatomic forces between the
tip and the object attract the tip, and the cantilever is
bent. This is detected by the deﬂection of a laser beam
being reﬂected from the cantilever surface opposite to the
tip. The deﬂection is a measure of the force on the tip.
If the tip is approached further to the surface contact
is achieved and the resulting force shifts into repulsion.
This so-called contact mode is the one generally used for

topographic investigations. Here a suitable repulsive de-
ﬂection is chosen and the tip is scanned in the x- and
y- directions across the specimen while its height z is
regulated by a feedback circuit to maintain the deﬂec-
tion chosen, independent of surface corrugations. Thus
the voltage in the feedback circuit is a measure of the
topographic changes.

In the force spectroscopy mode the tip is stationary in
the x- and y-directions, and the tip deﬂection is measured
while the cantilever base is moved along the z-axis at
constant speed towards the specimen until a suitable re-
pulsive deﬂection is achieved, then its motion is reversed.
These investigations can be made in vacuum, in gas, and
in (optically transparent) liquid. In vacuum only inter-
atomic forces between tip and specimen (van der Waals’
forces) aﬀect the deﬂection. In gas (usually atmospheric
air) also forces between molecules adsorbed to the sur-
faces are important. In particular water molecules form-
ing adsorbed water layers on the tip and specimen sur-
faces are important because surface tension forces cause
strong attraction when these layers get in contact. The
surface tension forces and the van der Waals’ forces result
in a transient ”snap-in” of the tip at approch just before
contact is obtained. At operation in liquids it is gener-
ally assumed that snap-in is absent because the liquid
is taken to have bulk structure right to the liquid-solid
interface. The present results indicate that this is not
correct.

For the experiments a TopoMetrix TMX 2000 Explorer
AFM was used with V-shaped Si3N4 cantilevers of nomi-
nal spring constant 0.03 N/m and tip radius of curvature
about 50 nm.

FIG. 3. Stainless steel specimen with central air-ﬁlled bore,
submerged in water. A submerged AFM tip and cantilever are
positioned above the water-air interface.

The interfaces to be considered here are distilled water-
air interfaces which were approached from the liquid
space, i.e. with the tip and cantilever fully submerged,
and diamond polished stainless steel surfaces submerged
in distilled water, and an air-gold interface. The setup
with cantilever and tip submerged in water is shown in
FIG. 3. At suitable air pressure in the central bore of the
specimen a stable water-air interface of form as a spher-
ical segment is created at the top of the bore, and it
can be approached with the tip and cantilever fully sub-
merged in water. At lateral translation of the specimen
the water-stainless steel interface can be investigated.

2

approach as well as the snap-out at the subsequent re-
traction depend strongly on the location. Very often the
sn ap-in is quite small, just a few nm, and at retraction
the tip sticks to the solid surface until the cantilever base
has retracted about 100 nm corresponding to an attrac-
tive force of 3 nN. Then the tip escapes from the speci-
men surface, but it does not return to the non-deﬂected
condition until the cantilever base has moved another
100 nm during which the tip relaxes in two steps, FIG.
6, found in repeated cases. This may be related to the
quantized adhesion reported in [9], though in the present
case the changes occur at a much larger scale.

In other cases a very large snap-in occurs reproducibly,
as shown in FIG. 7, where the snap-in is about 58 nm,
and at retraction the tip remains in contact until the can-
tilever base has moved about 400 nm. Then the cantilever
returns to non- deﬂected condition in a single jump.

The interpretation we give to these results is as follows:
at locations on the specimen surface where the liquid is
in direct contact with the solid surface there is an orderly
structured liquid layer of thickness about 1 nm adjacent
to the solid, and when the tip with its own orderly struc-
tured interface layer of liquid, also of thickness about
1 nm, approaches the solid surface these interface layers
merge and set up an attractive force on the tip, which in

a)

b)

FIG. 5. a) Top view of the topography of a stainless steel
surface as recorded when submerged in water and observed in
oblique light. Top-bottom distance 500 nm. b) Cross section
along x = 10 µm.

3

FIG. 4. a) Initial, non-equilibrium interaction between the
orderly structured interfacial layers of water at the AFM tip
and a water-air interface. b) Later stage, at which the wa-
ter-air interface has moved up along the tip surface while the
tip itself is pulled down.

When the tip approaches the water-air interface from
the liquid space and get in contact with the interfacial
water it is strongly attracted to the interface and crashes
through it in a violent snap-in. The process is inter-
preted to result from the interaction of the orderly struc-
tured liquid at the water-air interface with that at the
water-tip interface. The initial interaction results in an
increased order in the zone of liquid around the tip apex,
and an attractive, but unbalanced force between the tip
and the water air-interface is set up by the interfacial liq-
uid tension in the structured zone, FIG. 4a. A balance is
then obtained by local elevation of the water-air interface
and bending of the cantilever. As a consequence the tip
breaks through the interface, FIG. 4b. With the soft can-
tilever used in the present experiments balance was not
achieved until the interface reached the cantilever itself.
It was not possible to record the event as the dynamical
range of the microscope (±7 µm) was greatly exceeded.
When subsequently the specimen was moved laterally
to allow investigation of the water-stainless steel inter-
face the topography of an area on the steel surface could
be recorded as shown in FIG. 5a. A cross section along
a single line, x = 10 µm, is shown in FIG. 5b. The sur-
face appears slightly wavy with localized micro-hills in
the 30 − 100 nm range.

By force spectroscopy it is found that the snap-in at

-16.8 nA

-22.0 nA

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
d

 
r
e
v
e
l
i
t
n
a
c

-32.3 nA

-7.0 nA

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
d
 
r
e
v
e
l
i
t
n
a
c

-15.7 nA

-24.3 nA

-33.0 nA

10 nA deflection ~ 120 nm deflection

approach

-27.1 nA

retraction

5 nm

-163 nm

-332 nm

z-distance

FIG. 6. Force spectroscopy on a water-stainless steel inter-
face in a case of small snap-in, but with notable eﬀects of
interfacial tension at snap-out.

approach

1 nA deflection ~ 10 nm deflection

retraction

5 nm

-163 nm

-332 nm

-500 nm

z-distance

out of recording range

FIG. 7. Force spectroscopy on a water-stainless steel
interface
snap-in (FIG.5a:
of
(x, y) ≈ (10 µm, 10 µm)). A large retraction of the cantilever
base occurs before snap-out.

showing

large

case

a

combination with the van der Waals’ forces between tip
and sample, being of range typically about a few nanome-
ter [10], result in a tip snap-in of less than 10 nm, as actu-
ally apparent from FIG. 6. When the snap-in brings the
tip in contact with the solid surface the van der Waals’
forces are strongly enhanced. Therefore, a larger force is
required to withdraw the tip from contact. This is also
evident from FIG. 6 where retraction of the cantilever
base over a distance of about 100 nm is demanded to set
up the force needed for the tip to escape the surface it-
self. However, it appears that a bending force on the
cantilever remains. We suppose this is a consequence of
a nanovoid being formed between the tip apex and the
sample when contact between the two solid surfaces is
broken. The surface tension at the double curved liquid-
vapour interface which connects the tip and sample and
bounds the void prevents that liquid ﬂows into the gap
and at the same time it establishes an attractive force
between tip and sample. Therefore, the tip is not totally
free of interaction with the specimen until the distance

4

becomes so large that the void collapses. This appears
to happen after a further 100 nm withdrawal, though in
steps. The intermediate jumps may be related to dis-
continuous changes of the loci of contact of the liquid
surface to the tip and sample surfaces. Apparently this
takes place when the force imposed by the bent cantilever
exceeds about 1 − 2 nN.

In cases of a signiﬁcant snap-in, as in FIG. 7, the
event cannot be attributed to neither contact between
the structured interfacial liquid at the tip and specimen
surfaces nor to the van der Waals’ forces, as these do
not extend beyond at most 10 nm. In liquid the range of
the van der Waals’ forces is actually reduced compared
to their range in air [11]. However, if a stable interfa-
cial void has grown on the specimen surface due to the
local characteristic features of this surface, as modelled
in [4], the tip meets a water-gas interface during the ap-
proach. As described above such an interface attracts the
tip strongly and makes it penetrate deeply, i.e.
in the
present case it penetrates until tip-solid contact prevents
further penetration, and a signiﬁcant repulsive force be-
tween tip and specimen surface may then occur. This in-
terpretation is supported by the large retraction distance
of 400 nm, corresponding to an attractive force of 12 nN,
observed before snap-out occurs, and the tip now escapes
the solid surface as well as the supposed surface-attached
void in a single large jump. This force considerably ex-
ceeds the van der Waals’ forces on the tip, which must be
smaller than the 3 nN found from FIG. 6. Thus it reveals
strong interfacial forces in the liquid adjacent to a water
steel interface.

It is of interest to compare the above results from stain-
less steel surfaces submerged in water with observations
in air of a solid surface which does not adsorb water. In
such a case the water adsorbed to the tip is of no signiﬁ-
cance as water is not attracted to the non-adsorbing solid
surface. Gold does not adsorb water to any signiﬁcant
extent, and in FIG. 8 force spectroscopy on an air-gold
interface is shown. The snap-in is about 9 nm, and it
can be ascribed to van der Waals’ forces which are un-
screened due to the absence of water on the gold surface.
At retraction the snap-out occurs in a single jump after
43 nm withdrawal of the cantilever base, corresponding
to van der Waal’s forces of only 1.3 nN.

If we compare the force spectroscopy of the submerged
stain- less steel surface in contact with water, FIG. 6,
with that of the air-gold interface, we notice that at the
submerged water- stainless steel interface the van der
Waals’ forces are notably weaker at snap in, probably
due to the screening eﬀect of water. At snap out how-
ever, the upper limit of the van der Waals’ forces can
be estimated from the air-gold experiment, and they are
clearly insuﬃcient to explain the force needed for the ﬁrst
snap-out. Therefore, by the ﬁrst snap-out in FIG. 6 al-
ready a major part of the attractive force can be ascribed
to liquid interfacial tension.

5.0 nA

−2.7 nA

−10.3 nA

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
d
 
r
e
v
e
l
i
t
n
a
c

23 nA deflection ~ 110 nm deflection

approach

retraction

−18.0 nA

10 nm

−60 nm

−130 nm

−200 nm

z−distance

FIG. 8. Force spectroscopy on an air-gold interface.

III. CONCLUSION

AFM force spectroscopy investigations at solid as well
as gaseous interfaces with water, probed from the liquid
space, reveal characteristic attractive forces which can
only be attributed to liquid tension in the interfacial wa-
ter. This brings experimental support to the model of
void formation at liquid- solid interfaces [4] in which the
interfacial liquid tension is a basic assumption. Further,
the presence of interfacial voids is actually experimentally
supported. Such voids are sources of cavity formation
when single-phase liquids are exposed to tensile stress.

[1] Epstein P.S., Plesset M.S., 1950, J. Chem. Phys.,

18:1505- 1509.

[2] Harvey E.N., Barnes D.K., McElroy W.D.,Peace D.C.,
Cooper K.W., 1944, J. Cell. Comp. Physiol., 24:1-22.
[3] Mørch K.A., 1992, ”A molecular approach to cavitation
inception”. 2´e me Journees CAVITATION, Paris, France,
March 1992.

[4] Mørch K.A., 1997, ”Void formation at water-solid inter-
faces due to interfacial liquid tension”. Submitted to J.
Fluid Mech.

[5] Strasberg M., 1959, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 31: 163-176.
[6] Israelachvili J.N., Pashley R.M., 1983, Nature, 306: 249-

250.

[7] Xia X., Perera L., Essmann U., Berkowitz M.L., 1995,

Surface Science, 335:401-415.

[8] G¨u ntherodt H.J., Wiesendanger R., 1992 & 1993, Scan-
ning Tunneling Microscopy II & III, Springer Verlag.
[9] Hoh J.H., Cleveland J.P., Prater C.P., Revel J.-P.,
Hansma P.K., 1992, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114: 4917-4918.
[10] Sørensen, A.H., 1997, ”Scanning Probe Microscopy
Investigations of Landed Clusters and Electrostatic
Forces”, Ph.D. Thesis, Institute of Physics, Tech. Univ.
Denmark.

[11] Israelachvili J.N., 1992, Intermolecular & Surface Forces,

Academic Press.

5

