9
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
7
2
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
5
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental study of Taylor’s hypothesis in a turbulent soap ﬁlm

Andrew Belmonte∗, Brian Martin, and Walter I. Goldburg
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, U. S. A.

An experimental study of Taylor’s hypothesis in a quasi-two-dimensional turbulent soap
ﬁlm is presented. A two probe laser Doppler velocimeter enables a non-intrusive simultane-
ous measurement of the velocity at spatially separated points. The breakdown of Taylor’s
hypothesis is quantiﬁed using the cross correlation between two points displaced in both
space and time; correlation is better than 90% for scales less than the integral scale. A
quantitative study of the decorrelation beyond the integral scale is presented, including an
analysis of the failure of Taylor’s hypothesis using techniques from predictability studies
of turbulent ﬂows. Our results are compared with similar studies of 3D turbulence.

PACS Number(s): 47.27.Gs, 68.15.+e, 03.40.Gc

REVISED VERSION
(February 21, 2014)

I. INTRODUCTION

In a 1938 paper on the statistics of turbulence, G. I. Taylor presented an assumption
from which he could infer the spatial structure of a turbulent velocity ﬁeld from a single
point measurement of its temporal ﬂuctuation [1]. This assumption, known as Taylor’s
hypothesis or the frozen turbulence assumption, relies on the existence of a large mean ﬂow
which translates the ﬂuctuations past the stationary probe in a time short compared to
the evolution time of the turbulence. The experimental measurements treated by Taylor
were made on the turbulence generated behind a stationary grid in a wind tunnel, and his
hypothesis has become a standard technique employed in similar experiments which inform
our current views on turbulence (see for example Refs. [2], [3], and [4]). The importance of
this hypothesis stems from the fact that most turbulence theories are framed in terms of the
spatial structure of the velocity ﬁeld [2,5].

In practical terms, the limits of Taylor’s hypothesis are determined by how large the
mean velocity must be relative to the ﬂuctuations. Recently Yakhot [6] has pointed out
that the corrections to Taylor’s hypothesis could well be of the same order as corrections
to the standard model of turbulence, Kolmogorov’s 1941 theory [7,8]. There is at present,
however, no ﬁrm theoretical derivation of the hypothesis, and thus no fashion to evaluate
its reliability, calculate higher order corrections, or predict in what way it will break down.

∗Present address: Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802, USA.

1

A few theoretical discussions do exist [9–11], and a promising direction has recently been
taken by Hayot & Jayaprakash for the Burgers equation [12]. The treatment by Lumley
in particular oﬀers corrections to statistical measures of spatial gradients for non-negligible
velocity ﬂuctuations [10]. Still a general theoretical framework is lacking.

Experimentally there have been many studies of Taylor’s hypothesis, all of which have
treated three dimensional (3D) turbulence; we give a brief overview in Section II. Our
experiments, however, are performed on the quasi-two dimensional ﬂow of a soap ﬁlm. Two-
dimensional (2D) ﬂuid ﬂows occur in many physical situations, mostly due to the eﬀects of
rotation or stratiﬁcation in the atmosphere and ocean [13]. Turbulence in 2D is diﬀerent
from 3D in several ways, largely due to the absence of vortex stretching in 2D [14]. This
means that the squared vorticity (called enstrophy) becomes a nearly-conserved quantity
in 2D, like the energy, and thus two cascades are expected: a direct cascade of enstrophy
to smaller scales, and an inverse cascade of energy to larger scales [15]; for decaying 2D
turbulence the inverse cascade is apparently absent [14,16]. Although Taylor’s hypothesis is
also an important assumption in the study of 2D turbulence, to our knowledge it has never
been tested, nor is it clear that the hypothesis should do relatively better or worse than in
3D.

It may be helpful at this point to discuss the essential diﬀerences between 2D and 3D
turbulence in order to better relate the present measurements to prior three dimensional
tests of the Taylor hypothesis. In three dimensions the vorticity vector ω(x, y, z, t) can point
in any direction, but in 2D it is restricted to be perpendicular to the x, y plane of the ﬂow.
This fact alone assures that in inviscid ﬂows, the enstrophy Ω = 1
2 < ω2 > is a constant of
the motion, in addition to kinetic energy conservation K = 1
2 < v2 > (the angular brackets
designate an appropriate average). From the Navier-Stokes equation it follows that in 2D,
vorticity cannot be ampliﬁed (or attenuated except by viscous damping) by a velocity ﬁeld
gradient. The existence of vortex stretching in 3D is intimately related to the energy cascade
from large scales to small, with the process controlled by the rate ǫ at which kinetic energy
is injected at large scales.

In 2D, one expects that energy injected at intermediate scale, rinj will be transferred to
larger scales [14,17] and dissipated at the boundaries of the system. This inverse cascade
process is not expected to be local in k-space. For scales r < rinj, the small-scale velocity
ﬂuctuations < |δv(r)| >, which carry little of the energy, are expected to cascade down to
the dissipative scale under the control of the enstrophy injection rate β ≡ ∂Ω/∂t (the energy
injection rate ǫ plays the corresponding role in the 2D inverse cascade).

It seems reasonable that the absence of vortex stretching in 2D will increase the likelihood
of a velocity ﬂuctuation being transported intact to a distant downstream point, thereby
enhancing the validity of Taylor’s hypothesis over 3D turbulence. Taylor’s hypothesis can
also fail when a local ﬂuctuation is transported laterally into the ﬂow path between adjacent
points separated by the distance ∆x = U0∆t. For purely geometrical reasons, this would
seem to be a less likely occurence in 2D than in 3D, so that the frozen turbulence relation
δv(∆x) = δv(U0t) should presumably hold out to larger values of ∆x. It is harder for us
to assess the impact of 2D nonlocality on the validity of the Taylor hypothesis in 2D as
compared to 3D.

Our experiment uses a laser Doppler velocimeter (LDV) with two probes to nonintrusively
examine Taylor’s hypothesis in a turbulent soap ﬁlm. We diﬀerentiate between two diﬀerent

2

aspects of the hypothesis. By Taylor’s hypothesis of coherence we mean the assertion that
the velocity ﬁeld is unchanged as it is advected downstream: that v(x, t) is identical to
v(x + ∆x, t + τ0), where τ0 = ∆x/U0, with U0 being the mean velocity and ∆x the distance
between the two points [1]. For a clear illustration of this, glance ahead to Figure 9. This
coherence hypothesis is unquestionably an approximation and must fail as ∆x becomes large;
here we quantify this failure, and relate it to the predictability problem for turbulent ﬂows.
We measure the breakdown of the coherence hypothesis via the correlation between two
points in the ﬂow, displaced in both position and time [18–23]. We ﬁnd nevertheless that
the expectation value of the lowest six moments of the longitudinal velocity diﬀerence is
unaﬀected by the loss of coherence. Thus time correlation statistics of velocity ﬂuctuations
appear to be the same as spatial ones; we will refer to this as Taylor’s statistical hypothesis,
which is implied by the coherence hypothesis, but does not actually require it.

II. PREVIOUS STUDIES OF TAYLOR’S HYPOTHESIS

Taylor’s hypothesis has been exposed to many experimental tests in three dimensional
turbulence, and we do not intend to give an exhaustive survey here. These experimental
studies can be divided into two broad categories, concerned with either correlations over
ﬁnite distances [18–23], or local spatial derivatives used in turbulent dissipation estimates
[24–27].
It has long been appreciated that the validity of Taylor’s frozen turbulence as-
sumption requires the smallness of the turbulent intensity It, deﬁned as the ratio of rms
velocity ﬂuctuations to the mean ﬂow speed U0. Additionally, the mean shear rate and
the viscous damping must be small in the range of spatial scales ∆x being probed. In this
section we give a sampling of the sort of work which has been done in 3D; a more detailed
discussion of studies with which we directly compare our results is given in Section V. The
reader is referred to introductory reviews in two recent articles [26,27], which are somewhat
complementary to what is given here.

To test the application of Taylor’s hypothesis to velocity correlations over ﬁnite dis-
tances, one approach is to compare measurements made at a single observation point with
measurements made at points displaced downstream. The ﬁrst such tests were made in
a wind tunnel by Favre, Gaviglio, & Dumas [18,19]. The measurements were performed
within the turbulent boundary layer of a plate at various It up to 15%. They found that
Taylor’s statistical hypothesis is valid for measurements of the velocity correlation function
R(∆x, τ ) = hv1(x1, t)v2(x1 + ∆x, t − τ )i made not too close to the plate. Fisher & Davies
[20] made careful measurements of the velocity correlation function R(∆x, τ ) in a jet. They
found that the relation τ = ∆x/U0 was not well satisﬁed in the mixing region, where It is
typically ∼ 20%. These authors observed, as have many others, that the functional form of
R changes with increasing ∆x, and that this function is not very sharply peaked, as it would
be if Taylor’s coherence hypothesis were satisﬁed. Comte-Bellot & Corrsin [22] measured
R(∆x, τ ) for grid-generated turbulence in a wind tunnel, where both It and the mean shear
rates are rather small. Though downstream decay causes the maximum value of R vs. τ to
decrease with increasing ∆x, the correlation functions could still be collapsed onto the same
functional form.

One of the fundamental eﬀects of turbulence is its enhancement of dissipation, and mea-
surements of this require knowledge of spatial derivatives. Using Taylor’s hypothesis allows

3

the time deriative of a single point measurement to be related to spatial derivatives, the
simplest relation being ∂φ/∂x = U0∂φ/∂t, where φ could be a passive scalar concentration,
temperature, a velocity component, or a product of velocity components. Kailasneth, Sreeni-
vasan, & Saylor [25] studied a variety of turbulent systems and tested Taylor’s hypothesis
using a ﬂuorescent dye in a jet, the heated wake of a cylinder, and the atmospheric boundary
layer. They were interested in the probability density function of these scalars, and found
that Taylor’s statistical hypothesis worked well for conditional probability densities of the
scalar ﬂuctuations. Mi & Antonia [26] used a heated jet of air, with a turbulent intensity of
about 26 %, to verify diﬀerent theoretical relations between spatial and temporal derivatives
of temperature, corrected for ﬁnite turbulent intensities. Dahm & Southerland [27] compared
2D spatial and spatio-temporal gradient ﬁelds of ﬂuorescent dye in a water jet using a fast
photodiode array. They found that Taylor’s coherence hypothesis was only approximately
veriﬁed for these ﬁelds. Piomelli, Balint, & Wallace [24] studied Taylor’s hypothesis for
various velocity derivatives and compared hot wire measurements, large eddy simulations,
and direct numerical simulations of the Navier-Stokes equation for wall-bounded ﬂows. Tay-
lor’s hypothesis was found to be in accord with the calculations and measurements made
suﬃciently far from the wall, where the mean shear is not excessive. In our experiments we
have not treated the application of Taylor’s hypothesis to gradients.

All hot wire measurements are suﬃciently intrusive that one must compensate or oth-
erwise adjust for the perturbations produced by the wake of the upstream probe on the
velocity measured at the downstream probe. Cenedese et al. [23] avoided this problem by
making velocity measurements with a Laser Doppler system. Only for small ∆x did their
correlation measurements satisfy Taylor’s hypothesis very well, though admittedly It was
rather high (13%). We discuss their results in more detail in Section V.

In the present experiment, Laser Doppler velocimetry is also used to measure R(∆x, τ ), so
that there is no perturbation on the downstream probe. In contrast to the studies discussed
above, however, we examine Taylor’s hypothesis in a quasi-2D system, a ﬂowing soap ﬁlm;
we have also studied the eﬀects on the higher order moments of velocity diﬀerences. Before
presenting our results, we discuss in some detail our experimental system.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The use of soap ﬁlms as convenient systems for the experimental study of 2D hydrody-
namics began with the pioneering work of Couder and coworkers [28–30] and Gharib and
Derango [31]. Our measurements are performed using a ﬂowing soap ﬁlm apparatus devel-
oped at the University of Pittsburgh by Kellay, Wu, & Goldburg [32], and Rutgers, Wu, &
Goldburg [33,34]; we are using the latest version of this system, built by Rutgers. In our
setup, a thin soap ﬁlm several µm thick is allowed to fall between two taut plastic wires
from an upper reservoir into a lower one, see Figure 7. The channel width is W = 6.2 cm
over a distance of 120 cm, where the measurements are performed. Quasi-two-dimensional
turbulence is generated behind a comb (tooth diameter 1 mm and spacing M = 3.8 mm)
which perforates the ﬁlm at a ﬁxed height. The typical transit time between comb and lower
reservoir is the order of a second.

The turbulence generated in such a soap ﬁlm decays downstream from the grid, exhibiting
many aspects which agree with theories of 2D turbulence [29–32,35,36], though there are also

4

some diﬀerences. It therefore seems worthwhile to evaluate the experimental situation to
date. Because the lateral dimensions of soap ﬁlms are many orders of magnitude larger than
their thickness, there would seem to be no doubt that the vorticity can indeed be regarded
as a scalar quantity, so that vortex stretching is absent [5]. This would be a key requirement
for the occurence two-dimensional turbulence in soap ﬁlms.
In addition, to be able to
compare with theoretical and numerical results concerning incompressible turbulence, the
two-dimensional compressibility of the ﬁlm should be zero. This condition is clearly not fully
met, since ﬂuctuations in ﬁlm thickness are visible to the eye through optical interference
of light reﬂected from the front and back faces of the ﬁlm [30,31,36]. There are, however,
recent experiments in which the two dimensional divergence D2 = ∇2 ˙v(x, y) was measured
by particle imaging velocimetery [44]. In a set-up very similar to that used here, D2 was
measured to be 10-15% of the rms vorticity near the comb. Note also that because the
velocity of peristaltic waves in a soap ﬁlm is orders of magnitude larger than the turbulent
velocity ﬂuctuations [30], it is expected that the ﬁlm may be regarded as incompressible
from the point of view of this study.

Another mitigating factor to the two-dimensionality of soap ﬁlm ﬂow is the friction
between the ﬁlm and the surrounding air. In a set of experiments in which the ﬁlm was
placed in a partial vacuum where the air pressure 3 % of the atmospheric value, it was found
that the energy spectrum E(k) decayed for a decade in k as E(k) ∝ k−ζ, with ζ = 3.3± 0.3.
This exponent had the same value in both the partial vacuum and at atmospheric pressure.
The main eﬀect of the reduced pressure was to magnify the magnitude of E(k) near the
comb [35]. These measurements also showed that the total kinetic energy initially decayed
downstream, but ultimately leveled oﬀ at a suﬃcient distance below the comb, which is
expected theoretically at very high Reynolds numbers [16]. If the levelling oﬀ distance is
called x∗ and the corresponding time t∗ = x∗/U0, then all measurements reported in this
paper were made at values of t < t∗, i.e. at distances from the comb too close for the levelling
oﬀ to have occurred.

In most (but not all) measurements of decaying turbulence in a soap ﬁlm, only the en-
strophy cascade is observed, i.e. the inverse energy cascade (E(k) ∼ k−5/3) is not. Recently
an experiment was performed in which turbulence was forced by an array of teeth parallel
to the direction of ﬂow [36]. There one ﬁnds evidence of both the inverse cascades (k−5/3)
and the inverse cascade spectrum, where k−3.

We use a commercial LDV system [37] to measure the ﬁlm velocity ﬂuctuations [38,39].
The soap solution (water and 2% commercial detergent by volume) is seeded with 1 µm
polystyrene spheres at a volume fraction of about 10−4, and the data rate ranges from 1
to 8 kHz. At a distance x = 8 cm below the comb, the mean and RMS velocities were
typically U0 = 180 cm/s and vRM S ≡ hv′2i1/2 = 24 cm/s in the longitudinal (streamwise)
direction, where v′ ≡ v − U0. The turbulent intensity in these experiments was It ≃ 0.14.
This is the quantity which is assumed in Taylor’s hypothesis to be small [1,9], and we have
explicitly chosen for our study a value of It which is not very small. The Reynolds number
for the channel is ReW ≡ U0W/ν ≃ 11, 000, and for the comb ReM ≡ U0M/ν ≃ 700. The
viscosity of a ﬂowing soap ﬁlm is not a well established quantity; here we use ν = 0.1 cm2/s
as measured in a 2D Couette viscometer by Martin & Wu [40]. Deviations from two-
dimensionality caused by air friction [34] appear not to aﬀect the turbulence for the scales
of interest here [35].

5

In order to test Taylor’s hypothesis, two LDV heads are used at spatially separated
points. Figure 1 shows the arrangement, with the downward (ﬂow) direction deﬁned as the
x direction. One head (labeled “LDV 1”) is kept ﬁxed at x1 = 8 cm below the comb, while
a second head (“LDV 2”) is placed at various points ranging from x2 = 4 to 30 cm below
the comb. The two probes are arranged to be directly in line with each other, so that the
lower probe measures the same part of the ﬂow as the upper one, with a delay given by the
transit time between them.

Because the LDV only measures velocity when there is a scatterer in its measuring
volume, the two probes do not in general measure velocity simultaneously. Therefore some
binning or “simultaneity window” ∆t is needed to perform statistical comparisons: two
measurements are treated as simultaneous if they occur within ∆t of one another. Here we
use binning windows from ∆t = 25 µs to 200 µs, corresponding to frequencies 1/∆t from
5 to 40 kHz, which are higher than the largest observed frequency in the velocity power
spectrum. All measurements reported here are insensitive to small changes in ∆t.

One of the diﬃculties in examining the validity of Taylor’s hypothesis in decaying tur-
bulence is that the “small parameter” It is not constant, but decreases downstream as the
turbulence decays. In Fig. 8a we plot our turbulent intensity as a function of distance from
the comb. Thus, although we measure the correlation of velocity ﬂuctuations relative to
x1 = 8 cm, where It ≃ 0.14, the actual turbulent intensity aﬀecting the velocity ﬁeld down-
stream is always less than 0.14. This would seem to signiﬁcantly complicate the matter.

How does the turbulence decay in our system? A standard result from 3D decaying grid
turbulence is that the inverse square of the turbulent intensity depends on the distance from
the grid as: I −2
t = A(x/M − B)β, where the dimensionless constants are typically found to
be A ∼ 130 - 150 and B ∼ 3 - 20 for β = 1 [41], or A ∼ 20 and B ∼ 3.5 for β = 1.25 [22];
note that B is the eﬀective position of the origin for this scaling in units of M. Assuming
that β = 1.25 means that I −1.6
should be a linear function of x/M; however we ﬁnd that by
taking I −1.1
we get the best linear plot vs. x/M, as shown in Fig. 8b. The line corresponds
to

t

t

1
I 2
t

= 0.2

1.8

,

x
M (cid:19)

(cid:18)

with B = 0 for our ﬁt, which means that the virtual origin is located at the position of the
grid itself. Note that we do not measure far enough downstream [35] to see any evidence of
the kinetic energy saturation as the turbulence decays downstream (It ∼ constant).

IV. RESULTS

A. Testing Taylor’s Coherence Hypothesis

Figure 9 shows the velocity ﬂuctuations measured by two probes with ∆x = 0.5 cm. For
this small separation, Taylor’s hypothesis is clearly a good estimate: the two velocity traces
are nearly identical except for a small shift in time, which should correspond to the transit
time across the spatial separation ∆x. To test whether the velocity trace is translated spa-
tially without evolving dynamically, we measure the cross-correlation C12(τ, ∆x, x1) between
the two probes:

6

C12(τ, ∆x, x1) ≡

hv1(x1, t)v2(x1 + ∆x, t − τ )i
v1RM S × v2RM S

.

(1)

Here v1(x1, t) and v2(x2, t) are the two velocities measured by the probes, viRM S are the RMS
velocity ﬂuctuations, ∆x ≡ x2 − x1, and the brackets hi denote a time average. Note that
C12 is a function not only of delay time τ and separation ∆x, but of the absolute location of
the ﬁrst probe x1. This last dependence comes from the fact that the turbulence is decaying.
In this study we ﬁx x1 = 8 cm, and ignore this dependence.

Figure 10 shows C12(τ, ∆x) vs. τ for several diﬀerent separations ∆x. As expected, there

is a well-deﬁned maximum correlation

C M AX
12

(∆x) ≡ C12(τM AX, ∆x)

12

at a particular value of the delay time τM AX(∆x). Taylor’s coherence hypothesis requires
that C M AX
(∆x) be close to 1, and τM AX (∆x) be equal to the transit time ∆x/U0. Figure 11
shows τM AX as a function of ∆x/U0, in agreement with the line drawn for τM AX = ∆x/U0
[42]. As predicted by Taylor’s hypothesis, the slope of this line is unity. The small deviations
are due to errors in our measurement of ∆x.

12

In Figure 12 we plot the maximum correlation C M AX

(∆x). As one would expect, the
correlation decreases as ∆x increases, though we have not found any simple functional
form to ﬁt to this decrease, nor is there to our knowledge any predicted form. The loss of
correlation is due to the dynamic evolution of the velocity ﬂuctuations and sets a limit to
Taylor’s hypothesis, which we quantify by deﬁning an “evolution length” δe as the separation
for which the correlation drops to 50%. For our experiment we ﬁnd δe ≃ 7 cm, corresponding
to an evolution time τe = δe/U0 ≃ 40 ms. This length is much larger than the relevant lengths
of the turbulent velocity ﬁeld, as we show next.

B. Testing Taylor’s Statistical Hypothesis

The statistical study of turbulence is framed in terms of velocity correlation functions,
structure functions, and energy spectra; here we focus on the structure function. The
longitudinal velocity diﬀerence between two points separated by a distance r is written as

δv(r, t) ≡ (v(x1 + r, t) − v(x1, t)) · ˆr,

where the unit vector ˆr is in the downward direction of the ﬂow. The nth order structure
function is deﬁned as:

Sn(r) ≡ h(δv(r, t))ni.

In Figure 13 we show the structure functions S2(r), S4(r), and S6(r), calculated from single
point velocity measurements using Taylor’s hypothesis: r = U0τ (solid circles). We also
plot direct spatial measurements of these structure functions made using two probes (open
squares). This is a direct conﬁrmation of Taylor’s statistical hypothesis, which is one of the
central results of our study. Note that S2(r) shows a scaling region of about a decade where
S2(r) ∝ r1.6, in good agreement with other experiments on turbulent soap ﬁlms [43,44]. We
also ﬁnd approximately that S4(r) ∝ r2.9 and S6(r) ∝ r4.0, as shown in the ﬁgure. The third
moment S3(r) has been treated in detail elsewhere [43].

7

Some comment must be made on the observed values of the exponents, which are so
diﬀerent from Sn(r) ∝ rn, the theoretical expectation for the enstrophy cascade in 2D
turbulence [16,15].
It is well known that in 3D turbulence the scaling law exponents of
the nth order structure functions deviate from their expected value of n/3 as n gets large
[45]. This systematic diﬀerence is attributed to the intermittency of the ﬂuctuations [5].
However, the third order structure function must scale as S3(r) ∼ r even with intermittency,
as can be derived directly from the Navier-Stokes equations [5]. An equivalent derivation
for 2D turbulence would not be relevant to the third moment in the enstrophy cascade
range discussed here. In fact S3 is observed to be approximately zero in this range (and
is positive for large r) [43]. This observation suggests to us that the scaling exponents of
the enstrophy range are more sensitive to intermittency than in 3D turbulence. Evidence of
intermittency, indicated by non-Gaussian velocity ﬂuctuations, has been reported previously
for our experiment [43].

For r > 1 cm, the Sn(r) saturate to constant values, which for S2(r) is equal to 2v2
RM S.
This occurs roughly at the integral or outer scale [2], which characterizes the largest scales
on which the velocity is correlated. The integral scale ℓ0 is deﬁned as

∞

ℓ0 ≡

Z
0

b(r)dr/v2

RM S,

(2)

where b(r) is the velocity correlation function:

b(r) ≡ hv′(x, t)v′(x + r, t)i = v2

RM S −

S2(r).

1
2

At x1 = 8 cm we ﬁnd ℓ0 = 0.6 cm, which is much less than the evolution length δe = 7 cm.
Thus for the turbulence in our soap ﬁlm, Taylor’s hypothesis is justiﬁed: the two signals are
correlated better than 90% for scales r < ℓ0 (see Figs. 12 and 13).

C. Detailed Study of the Velocity Decorrelation

There are in general two reasons for the breakdown of Taylor’s hypothesis: the entrance
of new structures into the line of travel, introducing new ﬂuctuations into the signal, and
the evolution of the velocity ﬁeld itself. In Figure 14 we show an overlay of the velocity
measured at x1 = 8.0 cm vs. t, and the velocity measured at x2 = 10.0 cm vs. t − τM AX
(∆x = 2 cm). For a perfect correlation (C M AX
= 1) the two curves would fall on top of each
other. The arrows indicate ﬂuctuations which have either appeared or disappeared during
In eﬀect this means that information is being
the transit time between the two probes.
generated, and this “new information” is partially responsible for the velocity decorrelation
(Fig. 5).

12

To explore the details of this process, we measure the coherence spectrum Cs(f ) of
the ﬂuctuations at x1 and x2 [46]. If Taylor’s hypothesis of coherence were justiﬁed, then
v1 ≡ v(x1, t) would be identical to v2 ≡ v(x2, t − τM AX). If ˆv1(f ) is the complex Fourier
transform of v1, then the standard power spectrum is Ps1(f ) = hˆv1(f )ˆv∗
1(f )i, where ˆv∗ is the
complex conjugate of ˆv. The coherence spectrum is
2(f ) + ˆv∗
Ps1(f ) × Ps2(f )

hˆv1(f )ˆv∗

1(f )ˆv2(f )i

Cs(f ) ≡

(3)

1
2

,

q

8

normalized so that Cs = 1.0 for frequencies where the two time series are coherent. A
measurement of Cs(f ) with increasing probe separation shows which modes in the turbulent
spectrum persist longer and which evolve faster.

Consider ﬁrst the velocity power spectrum at a single point, shown as the thin line in
Figure 15. This spectrum, according to the standard picture of 2D decaying turbulence
[15,16], should have a power law dependence Ps(f ) ∼ f −α in the enstrophy cascade range,
with α = 3. In an earlier soap ﬁlm experiment [35], this exponent was found to be measurably
larger than 3; here in we ﬁnd α = 3.6 ± 0.2. We compare this to the coherence spectrum,
which we expect to be nearly equal to 1.0 for small separations. The coherence spectrum
for ∆x = 0.2 cm is also shown in Figure 15 (thick line). We see that Cs(f ) is indeed close
to unity over most of the frequency range in which the power spectrum appears. However,
the coherence drops below Cs ∼ 0.9 at f ∼ 300 Hz, around the middle of the range where
Ps(f ) ∼ f −α, and for f ∼ 850 Hz, where the power spectrum is reaching the noise ﬂoor in
our measurement, Cs ∼ 0.2. Thus already at ∆x = 0.2 cm it appears that the high frequency
components are the most rapidly evolving. In contrast, for the 2D enstrophy cascade it is
expected that the ‘eddy turnover time’ is independent of size [14]; the observed falloﬀ in
Cs(f ) may indicate viscous dissipation eﬀects.

The coherence spectra at ﬁve increasing separations ∆x are shown in Figure 16, as a
linear-log plot. In each case we see decorrelation at higher frequencies (smaller scales), while
the low frequency part remains at a constant value which decreases as ∆x increases. This
constant correlation is approximately equal to C M AX
(∆x), which means that the overall
coherence of the velocity ﬁeld is determined mainly by the low frequency components. The
high frequency decorrelation also moves to lower frequencies as ∆x increases. To see whether
the whole shape of the Cs(f ) follows the decay of C M AX
(∆x), we normalize the coherence
spectra as Cs(f )/C M AX
in Figure 17. The curves do not lie entirely on top of each other,
indicating that the cutoﬀ at high frequencies follows a diﬀerent evolution than C M AX
. The
cutoﬀ shape is well described as Cs(f ) ∼ log(1/f ), shown as the straight lines drawn through
the data. This advancing cutoﬀ is reminescent of the loss of predictability in the spectra of
atmospheric turbulence simulations [14,47].

12

12

12

12

12

. By taking the intersection of the logarithmic ﬁt with the line Cs(f ) = C M AX

At larger separations (∆x > 12 cm), we ﬁnd that the spectral position of this cutoﬀ no
longer moves to lower frequencies as ∆x increases. In Figure 18 we superpose the coherence
spectra for ∆x from 12 to 22 cm, normalized by C M AX
(∆x). The curves lie reasonably on top
of each other, which means that the entire coherence spectrum follows the overall decrease
of C M AX
(∆x)
12
in Figs. 17 and 18, we use the frequency fd of the intersection to characterize the position of
the spectral cutoﬀ [14]. We plot this frequency in Figure 19. Up to ∆x ≃ 12 cm, the advance
of fd to lower frequencies is consistent with the scaling fd ∼ ∆x−1/2, which is slower than
that seen for wavenumber cutoﬀ in 2D numerical simulations of atmospheric predictability
[14,47]. For ∆x > 12 cm, fd reaches a constant value of about 30 Hz, corresponding to a
length of 6 cm, which is the size of our system (the channel width W = 6 cm).

12

D. Turbulent Predictability and Taylor’s Hypothesis

The failure of Taylor’s hypothesis in our experiment is closely related to the question of
predictability in 2D turbulence [47–49]. The general study of predictability in turbulence

9

(see for example [14,50,51]) is of particular importance to the weather prediction problem
[52]. Here we brieﬂy show how our analysis parallels this general framework. Note that here
we are comparing a developing turbulent velocity with its initial state, whereas studies of
predictability treat the diverging evolution of two nearly identical initial states. Nonetheless
there are several similarities between the two.

Following M´etais & Lesieur, we ﬁrst deﬁne the time series of the velocity diﬀerence, or

error time series [47], which for our experiment is written

∆v(∆x, t) ≡ v1(x1, t) − v2(x1 + ∆x, t − τM AX).

(4)

For a perfectly correlated signal this time series would be identically zero. We deﬁne the
diﬀerence energy ∆E(∆x) = h(∆v(∆x, t))2i, which is the second moment of ∆v and thus
a kinetic energy associated with the diﬀerence series; it is analogous to the error energy in
predictability studies [47,54]. In Figure 20 we plot a dimensionless ∆E, namely

∆E(∆x)
1RM S + v2
v2
as a function of the decay time ∆x/U0. The function ρ is deﬁned to increase from 0 to
1 as ∆x increases, and acts as a sort of distance function between the two velocities. By
comparing Eqs. 1 and 5, one sees that ρ and C12 are simply related.

ρ(∆x) ≡

2RM S

(5)

,

The inset to Fig. 20 shows an enlargement of ρ(∆x/U0) near ∆x/U0 = 0. There is no
clear linear portion in the plot which would correspond to an exponential error increase. In
the study of turbulent predictability an exponential error growth is used to deﬁne a sort
of Lyapunov exponent [53], with the error energy serving as a metric for evaluating the
distance between co-evolving turbulent states. The data shown in Fig. 20 are in fact better
described by a power law ρ ∼ (∆x/U0)1/2, as shown in Fig. 21. This apparent square root
dependence should be interpreted only as a power law dependence: the actual value of the
exponent depends on the choice of metric function, Eq. 5. Since an exponential growth of
the error energy depends on the linearization of an underlying equation for ρ, Fig. 21 may
indicate the presence of higher order terms, similar to the quadratic saturation term used
by Lorenz to ﬁt error growth in an iterated map [55].

The predictability time Tp is a standard measure of the time beyond which one can no
longer project the state of a turbulent system [47,51]. The exact deﬁnition of such a time
is somewhat arbitrary, though it is usually much larger than the large scale eddy turnover
time for the turbulent ﬂow [47]. We can characterize the long time growth of ρ(τ ) by
quantifying how long the velocity v2 remains similar to v1. The predictability time used
by M´etais & Lesieur was deﬁned by ρ(Tp) = 0.5 [47]; we deﬁne an evolution time Te such
that ρ(Te) = 0.5, and ﬁnd that Te ≃ 25 ms. This is of the same order as our decorrelation
time τe ≃ 40 ms given by C M AX
(Fig. 12), a result which is not surprising given that the
two functions are related. The analogy between the loss of predictability and the failure of
Taylor’s hypothesis is in fact rooted in a common cause: the loss of velocity coherence due
to turbulence. Whether any implications can be drawn from this connection remains to be
seen.

12

V. DISCUSSION

10

A. Comparison with 3D Measurements

We have measured the breakdown of Taylor’s hypothesis for decaying turbulence in a
ﬂowing soap ﬁlm and shown that the hypothesis is a valid assumption for statistical mea-
surements of the turbulence (the structure functions). How do our measurements compare
to similar experimental studies of 3D decaying turbulence? Of the six studies which to
our knowledge provide information comparable to Fig. 12 [18–23] we will examine three in
detail [21–23]. Two of these studies used hot wire anemometry [21,22], and thus additional
techniques were required to compensate for the wake of the upstream probe. Champagne
et al. [21] used a ‘grid’ made of 12 parallel channels (spacing M ′ = 2.54 cm) in a wind
tunnel with a mean speed of 12 m/s, and ReM ′ = 21,000. Cross-correlation measurements
started at x1 = 259 cm, where It ≃ 0.018 and ℓ0 ≃ 4.2 cm. Comte-Bellot & Corrsin [22]
made measurements behind a standard grid (M = 5.08 cm) in a wind tunnel with ReM =
34,000. The two hot-wire cross correlation measurements were made starting at x1 = 210
cm, where It ≃ 0.022 and ℓ0 ≃ 1.1 cm. Cenedese et al. [23] used a nonintrusive laser Doppler
anemometer similar to our LDV (see [39]), but did not use a standard grid; the turbulence
was produced by a combination of a honeycomb and the channel walls. Their measurements
were made in a water channel (height h = 2 cm) starting at x1 = 14 cm, where It ≃ 0.13
and ℓ0 ≃ 1.0 cm. Their Reynolds numbers were also signiﬁcantly lower: Reh = 4,800.

Are there any diﬀerences between Taylor’s hypothesis in our approximately two-
dimensional soap ﬁlm and in these 3D experiments? We address this question by plotting
C M AX
(∆x) from these three studies along with our measurements in Figure 22. The inde-
12
pendent variable in this plot is ∆x in units of the integral scale ℓ0. One might expect the
decorrelation to occur more slowly in the soap ﬁlm due to the absense of vortex stretching.
However, as the turbulent intensity in our experiment is high (It = 0.14) compared to the
two wind tunnel experiments (It ∼ 0.02), our data should be directly compared only to that
of Cenedese et al. (It = 0.13). In this case we see that indeed the correlation in our soap
ﬁlm extends to much larger values of ∆x/ℓ0 than in their 3D experiment. Note that C M AX
from the wind tunnel experiments also extends to much larger values of ∆x/ℓ0 than the
data of Cenedese et al, probably due to the fact that their turbulent intensities are much
lower. More deﬁnitive conclusions would come from a single experiment (in 2D or 3D) which
measures C M AX

(∆x) for several diﬀerent It.

12

12

B. Detailed Shape of the Cross Correlation C12(τ )

As of yet there is no rigorous underpinning to Taylor’s hypothesis which would allow
for the calculation of higher order corrections to velocity correlations, though an intriguing
suggestion was implemented in [56]. To provide detailed information for some future theory,
we focus on the shape of the cross-correlation function C12(τ, ∆x) around τM AX . This shape
is by deﬁnition (Eq. 1) the average convolution of a velocity ﬂuctuation taken with itself
a time τM AX later.
In Figure 23 we show as an example C12(τ ) for ∆x = 4 cm, along
with a Gaussian distribution centered on τM AX. We ﬁnd that the shape is always nearly
Gaussian, with a slight skewness around τM AX consistently towards the positive. The width
of the Gaussian does not broaden as ∆x increases, though the maximum does decrease as
shown in Figure 24. Thus the development of the cross-correlation cannot be treated as a

11

diﬀusion-like process, for which the width would increase as the maximum decreases. The
small positive skewness is also not strongly dependent on ∆x.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper we focused on the breakdown of Taylor’s coherence hypothesis in a turbulent
soap ﬁlm, a quasi-2D experimental system. We have shown that for the lower order moments
the statistical hypothesis works well, even when the actual cross correlation between the
two probes is low. As the relevant length scale of this decorrelation is much larger than the
integral scale of the turbulence (δe >> ℓ0), this phenomenon is outside the region usually
considered by most studies: it is the turbulence beyond the scaling range. Yet this evolution
contains untapped information, as we have indicated. The failure of Taylor’s hypothesis
may thus shed light on deeper problems in turbulence.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank M. Rivera and X. L. Wu for beneﬁcial and insightful discussions,
and H. Kellay, M. A. Rutgers, R. Cressman, and the referees for helpful comments on the
manuscript. This work was supported by NASA and the National Science Foundation.

12

REFERENCES

[1] G. I. Taylor, “The spectrum of turbulence”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 164, 476 (1938).
[2] A. S. Monin and A. M. Yaglom, Statistical Fluid Mechanics, (MIT Press, Cambridge,

1975), Vol. 2.

[3] A. Arneodo et al., “Structure functions in turbulence, in various ﬂow conﬁgurations, at
Reynolds number between 30 and 5000, using extended self-similarity”, Europhys. Lett.
34, 411 (1996).

[4] K. R. Sreenivasan and R. A. Antonia, “The phenomenology of small-scale turbulence”,

Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 29, 435 (1997).

[5] U. Frisch, Turbulence, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).
[6] V. Yakhot, “On the relation between two-point and two-time correlation ﬂuctuations
in strong turbulence”, preprint (1996); “Experiments on strong turbulence: do we re-
ally measure what we say we measure?”, in Flow at Ultra-High Reynolds and Rayleigh
Numbers: A Status Report, R. J. Donnelly and K. R. Sreenivasan, eds. (Springer, New
York, 1998).

[7] A. N. Kolmogorov, “The local structure of turbulence in an incompressible ﬂuid for very
large Reynolds numbers”, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 30, 301 (1941), reprinted in Proc.
Roy. Soc. London A 434, (1991).

[8] A. N. Kolmogorov, “Energy dissipation in locally isotropic turbulence”, Dokl. Akad.

Nauk. SSSR 32, 16 (1941), reprinted in Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 434, (1991).

[9] C. C. Lin, “On Taylor’s hypothesis and the acceleration terms in the Navier-Stokes

equations”, Quart. Appl. Math. 10, 295 (1953).

[10] J. L. Lumley, “Interpretation of time spectra measured in high-intensity shear ﬂows”,

[11] H. Tennekes, “Eulerian and Lagrangian time microscales in isotropic turbulence”, J.

[12] F. Hayot and C. Jayaprakash, “Dynamical structure factors in models of turbulence”,

Phys. Fluids 8, 1056 (1965).

Fluid Mech. 67, 561 (1975).

Phys. Rev. E 57, 4867 (1998).

[13] R. Salmon, Lectures in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, (Oxford, New York, 1998).
[14] M. Lesieur, Turbulence in Fluids, (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1990), 2nd

[15] R. Kraichnan, “Inertial ranges in two-dimensional turbulence”, Phys. Fluids 10, 1417

edition.

(1967).

[16] G. K. Batchelor, “Computation of the energy spectrum in homogeneous two-dimensional

turbulence”, Phys. Fluids Suppl. II, 233 (1969).

[17] R. H. Kraichnan and D. Montgomery, Rep. Prog. Phys. 43, 547 (1980).
[18] A. J. Favre, J. J. Gaviglio, and R. Dumas, “Space-time correlations and spectra in a

turbulent boundary layer”, J. Fluid Mech. 2, 313 (1957).

[19] A. J. Favre, J. J. Gaviglio, and R. Dumas, “Further space-time correlations of velocity

in a turbulent boundary layer”, J. Fluid Mech. 3, 344 (1958).

[20] M. J. Fisher and P. O. A. L. Davies, “Correlation measurements in a non-frozen pattern

of turbulence”, J. Fluid Mech. 18, 97 (1964).

[21] F. H. Champagne, V. G. Harris, and S. Corrsin, “Experiments on nearly homogeneous

turbulent shear ﬂow”, J. Fluid Mech. 41, 81 (1970).

13

[22] G. Comte-Bellot and S. Corrsin, “Simple Eulerian time correlation of full- and narrow-
band velocity signals in grid-generated, ‘isotropic’ turbulence”, J. Fluid Mech. 48, 273
(1971).

[23] A. Cenedese, G. P. Romano, and F. Di Felice, “Experimental testing of Taylor’s hy-

pothesis by L. D. A. in highly turbulent ﬂow”, Exp. in Fluids 11, 351 (1991).

[24] U. Piomelli, J.-L. Balint, and J. M. Wallace, “On the validity of Taylor’s hypothesis for

wall-bounded ﬂows”, Phys. Fluids A 1, 609 (1989).

[25] P. Kailasnath, K. R. Sreenivasan, and J. R. Saylor, “Conditional scalar dissipation rates

in turbulent wakes, jets, and boundary layers”, Phys. Fluids A 5, 3207 (1993).

[26] J. Mi and R. A. Antonia, “Corrections to Taylor’s hypothesis in a turbulent circular

jet”, Phys. Fluids 6, 1548 (1994).

[27] W. J. A. Dahm and K. B. Southerland, “Experimental assessment of Taylor’s hypothesis
and its applicability to dissipation estimates in turbulent ﬂows”, Phys. Fluids 9, 2101
(1997).

[28] Y. Couder, “The observation of a shear ﬂow instability in a rotating system with a soap

membrane”, J. Physique Lett. 42, 429 (1981).

[29] Y. Couder, “Two-dimensional grid turbulence in a thin liquid ﬁlm”, J. Physique Lett.

[30] Y. Couder, J.-M. Chomaz, and M. Rabaud, “On the hydrodynamics of soap ﬁlms”,

45, 353 (1984).

Physica D 37, 384 (1989).

[31] M. Gharib and P. Derango, “A liquid ﬁlm (soap ﬁlm) tunnel to study two-dimensional

laminar and turbulent shear ﬂows”, Physica D 37, 406 (1989).

[32] H. Kellay, X. L. Wu, and W. I. Goldburg, “Experiments with turbulent soap ﬁlms”,

[33] W. I. Goldburg, M. A. Rutgers, and X. L. Wu, “Experiments on turbulence in soap

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3975 (1995).

ﬁlms”, Physica A 239, 340 (1997).

[34] M. A. Rutgers, X. L. Wu, R. Bagavatula, A. A. Peterson, and W. I. Goldburg, “Two-
dimensional velocity proﬁles and laminar boundary layers in ﬂowing soap ﬁlms”, Phys.
Fluids 8, 2847 (1997).

[35] B. Martin, X. L. Wu, W. I. Goldburg, and M. A. Rutgers, “Spectra of decaying turbu-

lence in a soap ﬁlm”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3964 (1998).

[36] M. A. Rutgers, “Forced 2D turbulence: experimental evidence of simultaneous inverse

energy and forward enstrophy cascades”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2244 (1998).

[37] We are using two 9253-120 ﬁberoptic LDV probes, a Colorlink 9230, and an IFA 655

correlator from TSI Inc, P. O. Box 64204, St. Paul, MN 55164 USA.

[38] F. Durst, A. Melling, and J. H. Whitelaw, Principles and Practice of Laser-Doppler

Anemometry, (Academic Press, New York, 1981), 2nd edition.

[39] P. Buchhave, W. K. George, and J. Lumley, “The measurement of turbulence with the

laser-Doppler anemometer”, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 11, 443 (1979).

[40] B. Martin and X. L. Wu, “Shear ﬂow in a two-dimensional Couette cell: A technique for
measuring the viscosity of free-standing liquid ﬁlms”, Rev. Sci. Instr. 66, 5603 (1995).
[41] G. K. Batchelor and A. A. Townsend, “Decay of isotropic turbulence in the initial

period”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 193, 539 (1948).

[42] For these calculations we recalculate U0 for each ∆x as the average of hv1(x1, t)i and

hv2(x2, t)i.

14

[43] A. Belmonte, W. I. Goldburg, H. Kellay, M. A. Rutgers, B. Martin, and X. L. Wu,
“Velocity ﬂuctuations in a turbulent soap ﬁlm: The third moment in two dimensions”,
Phys. Fluids 11, 1196 (1999).

[44] M. Rivera, P. Vorobieﬀ, and R. E. Ecke, “Turbulence in ﬂowing soap ﬁlms: Velocity,

vorticity, and thickness ﬁelds”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1417 (1998).

[45] F. Anselmet, Y. Gagne, E. Hopﬁnger, and R. Antonia, J. Fluid Mech. 140, 63 (1984).
[46] G. M. Jenkins and D. G. Watts, Spectral Analysis and its Applications, (Holden-Day,

San Francisco, 1968), Chapter 8.

[47] O. M´etais and M. Lesieur, “Statistical predictability of decaying turbulence”, J. Atmos.

[48] C. E. Leith, “Atmospheric predictability and two-dimensional turbulence”, J. Atmos.

[49] S. Kida, M. Yamada, and K. Ohkitani, “Error growth in a decaying two-dimensional

turbulence”, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 59, 90 (1990).

[50] C. E. Leith and R. H. Kraichnan, “Predictability of turbulent ﬂows”, J. Atmos. Sci.

Sci. 43, 857 (1986).

Sci. 28, 145 (1971).

29, 1041 (1972).

[51] E. Aurell, G. Boﬀetta, A. Crisanti, G. Paladin, and A. Vulpiani, “Growth of nonin-

ﬁnitesimal perturbuations in turbulence”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1262 (1996).

[52] Turbulence and Predictability in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics and Climate Dynamics,

M. Ghil, R. Benzi, and G. Parisi, eds. (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985).

[53] J.-P. Eckmann and D. Ruelle, “Ergodic theory of chaos and strange attractors”, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 57, 617 (1985).

[54] G. Boﬀetta, A. Celani, A. Crisanti, and A. Vulpiani, “Predictability in two-dimensional

decaying turbulence”, Phys. Fluids 9, 724 (1997).

[55] E. N. Lorenz, “The growth of errors in prediction”, in Ref. [52].
[56] J.-F. Pinton and R. Labb´e, “Correction to the Taylor hypothesis in swirling ﬂows”, J.

de Physique II (France) 4, 1461 (1994).

15

FIGURES

FIG. 1. A diagram of the experimental setup: A) upper soap reservoir; B) hooks which hold
plastic wires between which soap ﬁlm ﬂows; C) comb behind which turbulence is generated in the
ﬁlm; D) lower soap reservoir. The two LDV probes which measure the velocity in the ﬁlm are
labeled 1 and 2. Downstream distances are labeled as referred to in the text.

FIG. 2. The decay of the turbulent intensity It behind the comb in our soap ﬁlm: a) It vs. down-
−1.1
vs. x/M . The straight line is a linear ﬁt (see
t

stream distance x; b) the same data plotted as I
text).

FIG. 3. Simultaneous traces of the velocity vs. time at x1 = 8.0 cm and x2 = 8.5 cm behind

the comb.

labeled).

FIG. 4. The cross correlation C12(τ, ∆x) vs. delay time τ for several diﬀerent values of ∆x (as

FIG. 5. The delay time τM AX for the maximum of the cross correlations in Fig. 10 vs. the

transit time ∆x/U0. The solid line corresponds to τM AX = ∆x/U0.

FIG. 6. The maximum value of the cross correlations in Fig. 10, C M AX

12

vs. the downstream

separation ∆x. The arrow shows the evolution length δe ≃ 7 cm (see text).

FIG. 7. A diagram of the experimental setup: A) upper soap reservoir; B) hooks which hold
plastic wires between which soap ﬁlm ﬂows; C) comb behind which turbulence is generated in the
ﬁlm; D) lower soap reservoir. The two LDV probes which measure the velocity in the ﬁlm are
labeled 1 and 2. Downstream distances are labeled as referred to in the text.

FIG. 8. The decay of the turbulent intensity It behind the comb in our soap ﬁlm: a) It vs. down-
−1.1
vs. x/M . The straight line is a linear ﬁt (see
t

stream distance x; b) the same data plotted as I
text).

16

FIG. 9. Simultaneous traces of the velocity vs. time at x1 = 8.0 cm and x2 = 8.5 cm behind

FIG. 10. The cross correlation C12(τ, ∆x) vs. delay time τ for several diﬀerent values of ∆x

the comb.

(as labeled).

FIG. 11. The delay time τM AX for the maximum of the cross correlations in Fig. 10 vs. the

transit time ∆x/U0. The solid line corresponds to τM AX = ∆x/U0.

FIG. 12. The maximum value of the cross correlations in Fig. 10, C M AX

12

vs. the downstream

separation ∆x. The arrow shows the evolution length δe ≃ 7 cm (see text).

FIG. 13. Experimental check of Taylor’s “statistical hypothesis”: a) second order structure
function S2(r) taken at x = 8 cm using Taylor’s hypothesis; b) fourth order structure function
S4(r); c) sixth order structure function S6(r). The open squares are direct spatial measurements
made using two probes, and the lines correspond to the ﬁtted scalings described in the text.

FIG. 14. Overlay of the velocity measured at x1 = 8.0 cm vs. t, and the velocity measured at
x1 = 10.0 cm vs. t − τM AX. The arrows indicate ﬂuctuation spikes which have either appeared or
disappeared during the transit between the two probes.

FIG. 15. A comparison of the coherence spectrum (Eq. 3) for ∆x = 0.2 cm, and the power
spectrum taken at x1 = 8 cm. The line is a ﬁt to the power law Ps1(f ) ∼ f −α with α = 3.6 ± 0.2.

FIG. 16. Coherence spectra for several values of ∆x as a linear-log plot of f .

FIG. 17. Coherence spectra as in Fig. 16 normalized by the maximum cross correlation C M AX
from Fig. 12. The straight lines through the high frequency part of the coherence spectra corre-
sponds to a logarithmic decay law Cs(f ) ∼ log(1/f ).

12

17

FIG. 18. Coherence spectra for several large values of ∆x as a linear-log plot of f , normalized

by the maximum cross correlation C M AX

12

from Fig. 12.

FIG. 19. The frequency scale fd characterizing the logarithmic decay Cs(f ) ∼ log(1/f ) (lines

in Fig. 17) vs. the separation ∆x. The straight line represents the scaling law fd ∼ ∆x−1/2.

FIG. 20. The normalized error energy ρ(∆x/U0) as a function of time ∆x/U0 past the reference
point x1, shown as a log-linear plot. The arrow indicates the evolution time Te as deﬁned in the
text. Inset: an expanded view near the origin.

FIG. 21. A log-log plot of ρ(∆x/U0) as a function of downstream time ∆x/U0. The straight

line corresponds to a power law dependence (∆x/U0)1/2 (see the text).

FIG. 22. A replot of C M AX

from Fig. 12 as a function of probe separation ∆x normalized
by the integral scale ℓ0. Also shown for comparison are 3D results from Ref. [21], Ref. [22], and
Ref. [23]

12

FIG. 23. Gaussian ﬁt to the shape of C12(τ ) at ∆x = 4 cm.

FIG. 24. An overlay of several C12(τ ) at various ∆x (as shown), plotted vs. τ − τM AX.

18

