9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
4
 
 
]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New Features in Non-coalescense of Tangent Liquid Bulks

Sanli E. Faez ∗
Sharif University of Technology
Young Scholars Club

Abstract

We had observed a couple of new phenomena in
which, two liquid bulks in contact with each other
do not coalesce. The main reason seems to be the
motion of the surface in the place of contact, which
forms an air ﬁlm between the bulk boundaries. The
surface velocities is also estimated and showed to be
near each other and also near the surface velosities
in the similar phenomena reported before.

1

Introdution

When two drops of one liquid come in contact, they
simply coalesce and form a single drop. This is to
minimize the free surface of the liquid, and accord-
ingly minimize the surface potential energy caused
by surface tension[1]. But can we set the circum-
stances such that the two tangent drops do not coa-
lesce, even though externally pushing them toward
each other? The answer is yes, and this is the main
point of discussion in this article.

We have recently found a class of eﬀects in which
two liquid bulks of the same material touch each
other, but do not coalesce. In all cases there is even
an additional force pushing the bulks toward each
other.

These phenomena can be divided into two cate-
gories. The ﬁrst category is the ﬂoating of a liquid
drop on the free surface of the same liquid. This
free surface is, sometimes, the ﬂat surface of the
liquid in a container and sometimes the surface of
another drop. This phenomenon had been seen be-
fore in two diﬀerent cases; we have observed a third
case.

In the ﬁrst case a traveling water droplet ﬂoats
on the surface of the water, till it is moving faster
than some critical velocity [2, 6].

The second case is completely diﬀerent in appear-
ance: Two liquid drops of the same kind but with
diﬀerent temperatures are pushed to each other but
do not coalesce [3], because the tempreture gradi-
ant causes a surface tension gradient, which leads

∗Email:Sanli@aban.ysc.ac.ir

to the formation of a ﬁlm of air between the drop
surfaces [5].

The third case, is the ﬂoating of a droplet of wa-
ter on the surface of water (ﬁg 1). This droplet
is standing still with respect to the container, but
there is a wave on the surface of the water which
causes the non-coalescance[4].

The second category is mainly based on the cur-
rents on surface of a liquid. The main point is that
two currents, which may have slightly or completely
diﬀerent directions, collide with each other. Under
some circumstances, instead of combining, the cur-
rents repel each other just like the collision of two
solid balls; see ﬁg 2.

In the following, we will introduce the eﬀects in
some detail and describe some observations on the
phenomena.

2 The Phenomena

2.1 Floating of droplets over the os-

cillating surface of water

This phenomenon can simply be seen in a cylin-
derical plastic bottle. of about 30cm in height and
10 cm in diameter. If you pour water in the bot-
tle for about three-forths of the bottle’s volume,
and then strike the bottle repeatedly with your ﬁn-
ger, a little below the surface of the water, you will
see some droplets of diﬀerent diameters (1-3mm).
These droplets come from the walls, go to the cen-
ter and stay there still for some seconds. They only
ﬂoat if you continue striking, and sink immediately
if the surface stops oscillating. You can improve the
number and life time of the drops up to minutes by
changing the period of striking. More success will
be gained by a little more practice. These are not
air bubbles. They are much brighter, and if you
blow at the surface, they move much easier and
faster than bubbles. You can see that their but-
tom is placed below the water surface, while in the
case of bubbles they are completely over the sur-
face. This shows that they are much heavier than
air. What else can they be but just water?

If you make more ﬂoating drops they will come
together, and sometimes make big colonies of about

1

ﬁfty in number (ﬁg 3). This colonization can be ex-
plained easily if we mention that each droplet de-
forms the surface of the water around it like a hole.
If two droplets get near each other they slide toward
each other and make a unique deeper hole that lets
the droplets go down more. If you stop hitting the
bottle, the drops coalesce into each other as time
passes, and form bigger and bigger droplets, up to
diameters of about 8mm, till they all sink. In these
colonies, you can see the rainbow if you watch care-
fully.

2.2 Repulsion of two colliding water

currents

If we bring two narrow cylindrical currents of wa-
ter (about 3mm in diameter)slowly in contact with
each other, sometimes instead of combining into one
current, they just repel each other (ﬁg 2), like the
case of collision between too hard bodies. This state
is stable for minutes, and it becomes more stable if
we ﬁx the initial conditions of the currents more
precisely. We have dyed one stream of water and
observed that the streams do not combine at all.

Each current deforms slightly before the point of
collision, so we can see some kind of wave on the sur-
face of the currents. After the collision point, the
shape of water changes its form completely. We see
that the cross section of the current starts chang-
ing its shape from circular to elliptical and vicev-
ersa, periodically, if we travel along the length of the
ﬂow. This is commonly expected because the circu-
lar cross section is just the case of lowest potential
and with any change in the initial cross section we
must expect oscillation of the shape.

This phenomenon is not only for cylindrical cur-
rents. It is seen in the case of other kinds of colli-
sion, for example a droplet that hits the surface of
the water in a close angle and then jumps up from
it. In another experiment we tested this for colli-
sion between a cylindrical current and a plain one.
(See ﬁg 4).

To make the plain current, we used the scatter-
ing of a falling current of water from the surface of
a spoon. You might have experienced this, espe-
cially if you are not an expert in washing dishes .
In this case again, you can see some kind of defor-
mation just like the case where both currents were
cylindrical.

3 The Experiments

3.1 Floating Droplets

The experiments with the droplets ﬁrst began with
the simple setup just described in the previous part.

The ﬁrst step was to make some machine that would
do work of a human. This machine made the work
much easier so that we could ﬁx the frequency of
the strikes, and change it to any number we wanted.
The most important result of this experiment was
that there is a set of distinct frequencies that let
droplets ﬂoat more, both in number and lifetime,
and there is a diﬀerent set of frequencies in which
droplets are created much more than other frequen-
cies. These two diﬀerent sets showed that creation
and ﬂoating of the droplets are two completely dis-
tinct eﬀects. We can simply ﬂoat drops from an ex-
ternal source; for example a faucet. The size of the
initial drops (before combining with other drops)
depends mainly on the wave spreads around the
plastic bottle, that is, the sound of strike. The re-
sult: Drops made from bass strikes are bigger than
drops made from treble one.

A very strange observation was that adding a lit-
tle detergent to water allows the drops to construct
and to ﬂoat more. This behavior might be caused
by the special form of detergent molocules, with two
deﬀerent ends.

The second step was to change the shape of the
container. We chose a square one, so that we can
analyse the wave spreading over the surface, eas-
ier. The main change was the set of frequencies.
Floating of drops was just like before.

Next, we tried to analyze the movements inside
the drop. We used ink, since we could easily inject
it to the drop (ﬁg 5).

In this way we can even make the drops bigger or
smaller by injecting water into them, or sucking out
of them. The result was that the velocities in the
drop are very small in compare with the velocities
on the free surface, because the ink defuses much
slower in the drop than the surface of the water.
It means that the water in the drop is somehow
motionless. The ink in the drops can not be spread
to the below water until the hole body of drop sinks
(coalesces). This is just like the two ﬂows mentioned
in the previous part.

Other experiments that have been done are:

1. If we look from below the surface, we’ll see the
bright surface of drops, this shows that there is
something else with diﬀerent refraction coeﬃ-
cient from water between the two water layers,
(otherwise, we couldn’t see the layer) and what
else can it be but air.

2. We can separate one drop from others, by en-
closing it with a ring. This ring do not allow
the drop to travel freely over the surface and
also preserves it from others to come in contact
with. By this trick we can improve the lifetime
of drops very much.

2

3. We can make the air pressure higher and see
a great improve in the number and lifetime of
the drops. The experiment is done in a closed
plastic bottle of cola, which had been shaked
before the experiment began, and in result had
a high pressure inside. We can easily decrease
the pressure and see the phenomenon vanishes.

4. Some drops do not sink at once. These drops
loose their mass, and make a smaller ﬂoating
drop. This can be repeated two or three times.
An existing explanation is that this is due to
the existance of impurities on the free surface
of water, [6]. If the impurities are larger than
the air gap between the two layer, and because
water wets the impurities, a bridge between
the bodies form that transfers water from the
droplet to the free surface. Sometimes the ﬂow
caused by this transferation shoots the impu-
rity out and we gain a new smaller ﬂoating
droplet. The main point here is wetting qual-
ity of water. We know that in a non-wetting
liquid, for example mercury, the impurities on
the surface, do not let the drops to coalesce.

3.2 Colliding Flows

In the previous section we mentioned how we can
see this eﬀect. here we bring some other exper-
iments related to the phenomenon. Experiments
show that, if the velocity of the current is less than,
or more than some critical values, this phenomenon
can hardly be seen. The lower limit is, roughly,
few centimeters per second, but we couldn’t found
any ﬁxed value, because it depended hardly on the
circumstances. We can just say that there is some
lower limit. There is also an upper limit for the ve-
locities, about few hundred centimeters per second,
though it is not very sharp limit. In fact, the eﬀect
can be seen even in higher velocities, but it becomes
very sensitive and you should ﬁx the initial condi-
tions much more precisely, to obtain a mentionable
stability lifetime.

In all the related cases, we see that there are some
kind of movements in the surface of liquid bulks. So
we can agree with the idea that water drags air be-
tween the two layers, and the ﬁlm of air prevents
two surfaces from reaching each other and coales-
ceing. Though not expected, dimensional analysis
shows that the order of the velocities, in all the four
cases, are the same.

4 Dimensional Analysis

most important parameter is the surface velocity of
two neighbor layers. we call this velocity vs. In the
second place we can put the force, f , pushing two
bulks towards each other. We can then estimate the
thickness, t ,of the air layer and the pressure that
it can support before it ruins.

4.1 Surface velocities

For the traveling droplets described in the intro-
duction, we can take the drop speed as the surface
velocity in the contact point. As described in the
article[2] the drops are produced from a jet that
throws them in a 45 degree initial angle, And the
drops hit the surface just at their maximum height.
Because of the speciﬁc initial projection, the hori-
zontal speed equals the initial vertical speed. This
means

vs = v0x = v0y = (2gh)1/2
where h is the maximum height of the drops tra-
jectory. If we take h = .05m, the estimated answer
is

vs = 1m/s

.

The next experiment is non-coalescense of two
drops with diﬀerent temperatures. For this part we
should ﬁrst estimate another parameter, the veloc-
ity correlation length, lc, caused by viscosity. We es-
timate it by pure dimensional analysis. as we know
the most useful dimensionless number in this kinds
of problems is the Reynolds Number. We also know
that this number in cases - for example a rigid body
in a ﬂow - can be calculated as ρv/ηl, where ρ, η and
v are density, viscosity and velocity of the ﬂowing
liquid, and l is a parameter with length dimension,
related to the size and shape of the rigid body. So
we can take η/ρv as, lc.

=

· dT
dx

Now we go back to calculation of vs. We know
that here the cause of surface motion is the tem-
perature gradient that causes gradient of surface
tension. We can write
dσ
dx

dσ
dT
Here σ and T are surface tension and temperature.
If we calculate the net force on a surface diﬀerential
area we ﬁnd that ∆f = w∆xdσ/dx, where w is the
width, and ∆x is the length of the element. Now
we consider that this force should move the volume
w∆xt. Here t is the typical thickness of the moving
layer, and we put lc in its place. So we can write a
simple Newton Equation and obtain that

as =

dσ
dx

1
ρlc

If we want to compare this new eﬀects with the
eﬀects that was [2, 5] we should ﬁrst estimate some
parameters of those experiment. As said before, the

and as is the surface acceleration. If we take the
diameter of the drop d, as an estimate for the length

3

For the drops with temperature diﬀerence, the

maximum force reported is about 100µN .

And for the repel of currents, we can easily es-
timate the strike. As we know f = dp/dt. In the
present situation we should use the Newton equa-
tion in the horizontal direction, so we can write f =
d(mvx)/dt. By considering a hard collision we can
rewrite the equation like this: f = 2vx dm/dt. With
another rough estimate we can write dm
dt = ρSvy
where S is the cross section of the currents. This
gives the last equation:

fm = ρ

2
d

vxvy

π
4

where d is the diameter and (vx, vy) is the speed of
current just at the point of collision. This time the
answer for the limit is about 400µN .

Another time we see a good agreement between
the parameters of diﬀerent eﬀects, and we can pick
another step forward to the experimental evidence
of the unique physics lying behind these phenom-
ena.

I specially thank A. Shariati for his grateful help
in preparing the article and P. Forughi and S.
Siavoshi for their help in the observations. I also
thank M.R. Ejtehadi and N. Rivier for helpful com-
ments. I’m grateful to M. Hafezi and M. Sedighi for
recording the experiments and preparing the pictures
with patience.

References

[1] For a recent review, see: J. Eggers, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 69, 865, (1997).

[2] C. L. Stong, Scientiﬁc American, Aug 1973, p.

104.

[3] R. Monti, R. Savino, Proceeding of the Work-
shop ”Foams And Capillary ﬂow”, 5-6 March
1999, Leuven(Belgium).

[4] My friend ”Peyman Khorsand” showed it to

me for the ﬁrst time.

[5] P. Dell’Aversana and G. P. Nietzel, Physics To-

day Jan 1998, p. 38.

in which the surface material accelerates, and also
put the quantity of lc in its place, we ﬁnd that

Solving the equation for vs and putting in place of
dσ/dx we ﬁnd the last equation:

vs = (

dσ
dx

vsd
η

)1/2

vs = (

dσ
dT

)

∆T
η

On the basis of data given in [5] we take the pa-
rameters like this: η = 5 ∗ 10−3kg/ms, ∆T = 10K
and dσ/dT = 5 ∗ 10−4m/s2K. The result estimates
that

vs = 1m/s

. The result is strangely like the previous case. This
is a good win for the idea that this eﬀects has the
same physics. And also courages us to continue this
analysis for the other phenomena.

For the other ﬂoating drops reported in this arti-
cle we can easily estimate vs if we take the oscilla-
tion of water a gravity wave with small amplitude.
The answer is vs = (A/λ)(2πgλ)1/2. Where λ is
the wavelength and A is the amplitude. By taking
λ = 2mm and (A/λ) = .5 we obtain,

vs = .2m/s

Again a near answer to the two previous.

And at last for colliding currents. Because the
motion of each current is a simple free fall, we can
take vx << vy. And so vs = vy = (2gH)1/2. Where
H is the vertical distance between the falling point
of water and the collision point. Again we take
H = .05m and another time we ﬁnd

vs = 1m/s

Quite satisfying. We should mention here that the
surface velocities in which each of these phenomena
is seen is not a single value and varries in some
range, but here, by a rough estimate, we showed
that this variations is near the same point for all of
them. And this is the ﬁrst step for experimentally
showing the uniqueness of the cause.

Bulks

As the second step we compare the forces, fm, ex-
erted on the bodies to push the bulks to eachother -
In addition to surface tension that noramlly causes
the bulks to coalesce. For the case of drops the only
force is gravity. If we estimate it for the heaviest
ﬂoating drops, with about 6mm diameter, we ﬁnd
the numerical result: fm = 300µN .

4

4.2 The Force Between The Tangent

[6] O. Reynolds, Chem. News 44, 211 (1881).

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908006v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908006v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908006v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908006v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9908006v1

