0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
5
1

 

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
2
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Soliton electro-optic eﬀects in paraelectrics

Fondazione Ugo Bordoni, Via B. Castiglione 59, 00142 Roma, Italy, and INFM, Unita’ di Roma I, Italy

Eugenio DelRe and Mario Tamburrini

Applied Physics Department, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel

(February 2, 2008)

Aharon J. Agranat

The combination of charge separation induced by the formation of a single photorefractive screen-
ing soliton and an applied external bias ﬁeld in a paraelectric is shown to lead to a family of useful
electro-optic guiding patterns and properties.

Apart from their inherent interest as peculiar prod-
ucts of nonlinearity, spatial solitons hold the promise of
allowing viable optical steering in bulk environments [1]
[2]. Photorefractive screening solitons diﬀer from other
known manifestations of spatial self-trapping for their
peculiar ease of observation and versatility [3], and re-
cent experiments in photorefractive strontium-barium-
niobate (SBN) and potassium-niobate (KNbO3) have
demonstrated two conceptual applications of their guid-
ing properties.
In the ﬁrst case, a tunable directional
coupler was realized making use of two independent slab-
solitons [4]; in the second, self-induced phase-matching
was observed to enhance second-harmonic-generation [5].
Although results suggest a means of obtaining all-optical
functionality, actual implementation is hampered by the
generally slow nonlinear response [6], that can be ”ac-
celerated” only at the expense of stringent intensity re-
quirements [7]. In contrast, non-dynamic guiding struc-
tures have been observed by ﬁxing a screening soliton
[8], or in relation to the observation of spontaneous self-
trapping during a structural crystal phase-transition [9].
One possible method of obtaining acceptable dynam-
ics is to make directly use of the electro-optic proper-
ties of the ferroelectrics involved, in combination with
the internal photorefractive space charge ﬁeld deposited
by the soliton. Since photorefractive charge-activation
is wavelength dependent, one can induce charge sep-
aration in soliton-like structures at one active wave-
length (typically visible), and then read the electro-
optic index modulation at a diﬀerent, nonphotorefrac-
tive, wavelength (typically infrared) [10] [11]. For non-
centrosymmetric samples (such as the above mentioned
crystals) that typically host screening soliton formation,
the electro-optic index of refraction modulation is pro-
portional to the static crystal polarization P, and thus
to the electric ﬁeld (linear electro-optic eﬀect). For
these, no electro-optic modulation eﬀects are possible:
for whatever value of external constant electric ﬁeld Eext,
the original soliton supporting guiding pattern remains
unchanged.
In centrosymmetrics, such as photorefrac-
tive potassium-lithium-tantalate-niobate (KLTN), soli-

tons are supported by the quadratic electro-optic eﬀect
[12] [13] [14] [15]. In this case, the ”nonlinear” combina-
tion of the internal photorefractive ﬁeld with an external
electric ﬁeld can give rise to new and useful soliton-based
electro-optic phenomena, which we here study for the
ﬁrst time.

The basic mechanism leading to screening soliton for-
mation is the following: a highly diﬀracting optical beam
ionizes impurities hosted in the lattice of an electro-optic
crystal. An externally applied electric ﬁeld makes these
mobile charges drift to less illuminated regions, forming
a double layer that renders the resultant electric ﬁeld in
the illuminated region lower. For an appropriate electro-
optic sample, this leads to a self-lensing and soliton prop-
agation, when beam diﬀraction is exactly compensated.
For slab solitons, i.e. those self-trapped beams that orig-
inate from a beam that linearly diﬀracts only in one
transverse dimension (x), for a given soliton intensity
full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) ∆x, a given ratio be-
tween the soliton peak intensity and the (generally arti-
ﬁcial) background illumination, u2
0 = Ipeak/Ib (intensity
ratio), solitons form for a particular value of applied ex-
ternal biasing ﬁeld E. The soliton-supporting electric
ﬁeld E is expressed by E=(V/L)(1+I(x)/Ib)−1, where V
is the external applied voltage, L is the distance between
the crystal electrodes (thus E=V/L), and I(x) is the soli-
ton optical intensity conﬁned in the x transverse dimen-
sion [12]. This electric ﬁeld, a result of a complex non-
linear light-matter interaction, is present even when the
generating optical ﬁeld is blocked, and the sample is illu-
minated with a nonphotorefractively active light. Charge
separation is smeared out only by slow recombination, as-
sociated with dark conductivity, characterized by consid-
erably long decay times. The nonphotorefractively active
illumination, although not leading to any further evolu-
tion in the internal charge ﬁeld, will feel the index in-
homogeneity due to the quadratic electro-optic response
0(ǫr-1)2E2,
described by the relation ∆n =-(1/2) n3 gef f ǫ2
where n is the crystal index of refraction, gef f is the ef-
fective electro-optic coeﬃcient for a given scalar conﬁgu-
ration, ǫ0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, and ǫr is the

1

relative dielectric constant. The actual electric ﬁeld in
the crystal is now E=(V/L)(1+I(x)/Ib)−1-(V/L)+Eext,
where Eext (in general 6= E) is the externally applied
electric ﬁeld after the nonlinear processes have occurred
(the ”read-out” ﬁeld). The index pattern induced is

∆n = −∆n0(cid:18)

1

1 + I(x)/Ib

− 1 +

Eext

V /L(cid:19)2

,

(1)

what follows all read/write experiments are at λ=514nm,
∼=20. By changing the value of the ap-
with Iread/Iwrite
plied readout voltage, Vext, we can explore the optical
potential described by Eq.(1), through the variable η.
Beam distribution is investigated by imaging the facets
of the sample onto a CCD camera by means of a second
lens placed after the sample (along the z direction).

0(ǫr-1)2(V/L)2.

where ∆n0 =(1/2) n3gef f ǫ2
In Fig.(1)
we show two families of induced index patterns associ-
ated with two solitons at diﬀerent saturation levels. In
Fig.(1a) a 7µm FWHM soliton at λ=514 nm wavelength
(∆n0 ≃5.4×10−4, for n=2.45) with an intensity ratio
u2
0=4, leads to three characteristic pattern regimes: for
η =Eext/(V /L) ≃1, the soliton supporting potential is
formed. For η ≃0, an antiguiding hump appears, whereas
for intermediate values of η, a twin-waveguide potential
forms. Analogous results can be predicted for a strongly
saturated regime shown in Fig.(1b), where a 11µm soli-
ton is formed for u2

0 ≃22.

FIG. 1. Predicted electro-optic index patterns resulting
from the soliton deposited space-charge ﬁeld, for u0 = 2 (a)
and u0 = 4.7 (b).

Experiments are carried out with an apparatus that
[14]. An en-
is well documented in literature [13]
larged TEM00 Gaussian beam from a CW Argon-ion
laser operating at λ =514nm, is focused be means of
an f=150mm cylindrical lens onto the input facet of an
3.7(x) × 4.6(y) × 2.4(z) mm sample of zero-cut paraelectric
KLTN, at T=20 ◦C (with a critical temperature Tc=11
◦C), giving rise to an approximately one-dimensional x-
polarized Gaussian beam of ∆x∼=11 µm (”soliton” beam),
and the entire crystal is illuminated with a second, ho-
mogeneous beam (”background” beam) from the same
laser, polarized along the y axis. Both the focused and
the plane-wave beams copropagate along the z-direction.
The constant voltage V is applied along the crystal x
direction, the crystal itself being doped with Vanadium
and Copper impurities, and photorefractively active at
the laser wavelength. Guiding patterns can be investi-
gated either by illuminating the crystal with an infrared
beam (as mentioned above), or simply by using the same
soliton-forming wavelength, but at a lower intensity, since
photorefractive temporal dynamics are proportional to
beam intensity. Here we use this read-out method, and in

FIG. 2. Soliton formation:

an input 11µm beam (a)
diﬀracts to 24 µm in linear propagation (V=0) (b) and
self-traps for Vexp=1.33 kV at T=20◦C, for u0 ≃4.7.

In Fig.(2) the observation of a single photorefractive
screening soliton is shown. The 11µm soliton is observed
∼= 22 at Vexp=1.33 kV, an-
with an intensity ratio u2
0
nulling linear diﬀraction to 24 µm . Soliton formation
takes approximately 3 min, for an Ipeak ≃1.8 kW/m2
(Ib ≃80 W/m2), measured directly before the sample,
thus meaning that erasure during readout would take, at
the very least, about 1 hr (i.e. longer than the duration of
any one of our experiments). Had we used an IR read-out
beam, decay would be halted indeﬁnetly. Given the sam-
ple gef f =0.12m4C−2, ǫr ≃9000, ∆n0 ≃ 6.9×10−4, the
expected value for soliton formation would be Vth ≃1.27
kV.

FIG. 3. Output light distribution of the read-out beam.
For η=0-0.3 the beam is scattered. For η=0.45 the twin beam
structure forms, whereas for η=1 the original guiding pattern
emerges.

In Fig.(3) we show the same region of the crystal in-
vested by the less intense (but otherwise identical to the
soliton generating) ”read” beam at various values of η.
For η=1 the output beam is identical to the soliton (apart

2

from the actual intensity). For low values of η (η <0.4)
the index pattern given by Eq.(1) is antiguiding, and the
output beam is scattered and split into two diﬀracting
beams (beam ”bursting”, see Fig.(1b)). As η is increased,
the defocusing is weakened and for η ≈ 0.45 the sam-
ple gives rise to a beam-splitting on the twin-waveguide
structure formed by the two-hump potential, as shown in
Fig.(1). The distance between the two beams is ≈ 20µm.
As opposed to previous defocusing, in this case light is
exciting a guided mode.

FIG. 4. Electro-optic switching. The output light distribu-
tion of the read beam (a) for η=0.45, the side-guided beam,
when the crystal is shifted sideways of 10 µ m (b), the output
in the same condition, but with η=0.8 (c).

Next we shift the crystal with respect to the optical
beam in the x direction, so as to launch it directly into
one of the twin-guides for intermediate values of η. For
an η= 0.45, shifting the crystal by 10µm, the beam is
guided by the side hump, as shown in Fig.(4b). In this
forward guiding condition, we change η to η=0.8. The
potential commutes from a double-hump twin-waveguide
to a single guiding pattern (see Fig.1). The optical beam
is redirected as shown in Fig.(4c).

It is therefore possible to realize, by means of the
formation of a single photorefractive centrosymmetric
screening soliton, three qualitatively diﬀerent optical cir-
cuits: a single waveguide, a double waveguide beam-
splitter, and an antiguiding beam-stopper. If the crys-
tal is shifted so as to launch the guided beam into one
of the twin-guides, it is possible to deviate the beam,
maintaining its strong conﬁnement, realizing an electro-
optic switch. Had we used a longer sample, launching the
beam in a twin-waveguide leads to a tunable directional
coupler, as shown in Fig.(5).

The observed phenomena represent an important step
in the achievement of viable soliton based components in
two major aspects. The ﬁrst is that the observed phe-
nomenology occurs with the formation of a single soliton,
that is only used to deposit a pattern of charge displace-
ment (a peculiar volume hologram), whereas switching
from one regime to the other occurs only through the
change of the applied electric ﬁeld. Thus switching dy-
namics are only limited by capacity charging times, as
all other electro-optic devices. Secondly, whereas screen-
ing soliton formation requires a constant applied external
ﬁeld, during read-out, the use of independent electrodes
can allow the formation of composite circuitry in cascade,
all from a single soliton.

FIG. 5. Predicted evolution of an ≈ 7µm beam: top view of
read-out in an 8mm sample for η=0.2 (beam deﬂection and
diﬀraction) (left), one beat directional coupling for η =0.4
from right hump to left hump (center), and mode beating for
η =0.8 (≈ 2mm mode beat).

The work of E.D. and M.T. was carried out in the
framework of an agreement between Fondazione Ugo Bor-
doni and the Italian Communications Administration.
Research carried out by A.J.A. is supported by a grant
from the Ministry of Science of the State of Israel.

[1] G.I. Stegeman and M. Segev, Science 286, 1518 (1999).
[2] M. Segev and M. Stegeman, Phys. Today 51, 42 (1998).
[3] B. Crosignani, P. Di Porto, M. Segev, G. Salamo, and A.

Yariv, Riv. Nuovo Cimento 21, 1 (6) (1998).

[4] S. Lan, E. DelRe, Z. Chen, M. Shih, and M. Segev, Opt.

Lett. 24, 475 (1999).

[5] S. Lan, M. Shih, G. Mizell, J. A. Giordmaine, Z. Chen,
C. Anastassiou, J. Martin, and M. Segev, Opt. Lett. 24,
1145 (1999).

[6] L. Solymar, D. J. Webb, and A. Grunnet-Jepsen, The
physics and applications of photorefractive materials
(Clarendon Press, Oxford 1996).

[7] K. Kos, G. Salamo, and M. Segev, Opt. Lett. 23, 1001

(1998).

[8] M. Klotz, H. Meng, G. J. Salamo, M. Segev, and S. R.

Montgomery, Opt. Lett. 24, 77 (1999).

[9] E. DelRe, M. Tamburrini, M. Segev, R. Della Pergola,

and A. J. Agranat, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1954 (1999).

[10] M. Shih, Z. Chen, M. Mitchell, M. Segev, H. Lee, R.
S.Feigelson, and J. P. Wilde, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14,
3091 (1997).

[11] For linear schemes based on screening see A. Bekker, A.
Ped’el, N. K. Berger, M. Horowitz, and B. Fisher , Appl.
Phys. Lett. 72, 3121 (1998) and Ph. Dittrich, G. Mon-
temezzani, P. Bernasconi, and P. Gunter, Opt. Lett. 24,
1508 (1999).

[12] M. Segev and A. J. Agranat, Opt. Lett. 22, 1299 (1997).
[13] E. DelRe, B. Crosignani, M. Tamburrini, M. Segev, M.
Mitchell, E. Refaeli, and A. J. Agranat, Opt. Lett. 23,
421 (1998).

[14] E. DelRe, M. Tamburrini, M. Segev, E. Refaeli, and A.

J. Agranat, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 16 (1998).

[15] A.J. Agranat, R. Hofmeister, and A. Yariv, Opt. Lett.

17, 713 (1992).

3

