0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
2

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
9
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ultrahigh sensitivity of slow–light gyroscope

1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9SS, Scotland

2Physics Department, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Lindstedtsv¨agen 24, S-10044 Stockholm, Sweden

U. Leonhardt1,2 and P. Piwnicki2

Slow light generated by Electromagnetically Induced Transparency is extremely susceptible with
respect to Doppler detuning. Consequently, slow–light gyroscopes should have ultrahigh sensitivity.

42.50.Gy

In recent experiments [1] light has been slowed down
dramatically to just a few meters per second. Traveling
at this incredibly low speed, light is sensitive enough to
serve in detections of subtle motion eﬀects such as the
optical Aharonov–Bohm eﬀect of quantum ﬂuids [2]. A
moving medium is able to drag light, and this dragging
phenomenon gives rise to the sensitivity with respect to
motion. Analyzed more carefully [2–5], a moving medium
appears as an eﬀective change of the space–time metric
(as an eﬀective gravitational ﬁeld). When the medium
outruns the light traveling inside, suitable ﬂows may ap-
pear as optical black holes [2]. Apart from detecting
quantum ﬂows and from creating artiﬁcial black holes,
is there a practical application for the incredible motion
sensitivity of slow light?

Optical gyroscopes are regularly employed to sense mo-
tion. What would be the advantage of a slow–light gyro-
scope? How do passive dielectric gyroscopes work? Imag-
ine for simplicity a solid block of uniform dielectric ma-
terial that is rotating at angular velocity Ω0. (In a real
ﬁber–gyroscope light travels in a multitude of coils, for
enhancing the eﬀect.) We assign cylindrical coordinates
to the block where the z direction coincides with the ro-
tation axis. First, assume an essentially non–dispersive
material such as glass that is characterized by the re-
fractive index n. In this material, light experiences the
space–time metric [3]

ds2 =

c2dt2
n2 + 2α Ω0 r dt dϕ − dr2

− r2 dϕ2

− dz 2

(1)

in the limit of low rotation velocities Ω0 r compared with
the speed of light in vacuum, c. Fresnel’s dragging coef-
ﬁcient,

α = 1 −

1
n2 ,

(2)

quantiﬁes the degree to which light is forced to move
along with the medium. Clearly, α vanishes in the ab-
sence of a medium (n = 1) and α approaches unity in the
limit of a very strong medium (n → ∞). Now, imagine
that the block of dielectric material is at rest and instead
of the medium the laboratory frame is rotating at angu-
lar velocity Ω. We obtain from the space–time metric of
light in the medium frame,

ds2 =

c2dt2

n2

− dr2

− r2 dϕ′2

− dz 2 ,

(3)

the metric in the rotating laboratory frame by the simple
transformation

ϕ′ = ϕ − Ω t .

(4)

To leading order in Ωr/c the transformed metric (3) co-
incides with the metric (1) of light in the rotating block
if we put

Ω = α Ω0 .

(5)

A rotating dielectric and a dielectric in a rotating frame
are practically equivalent, yet they appear to rotate at
diﬀerent angular velocities. Fresnel’s dragging coeﬃcient
(2) quantiﬁes the ratio between the actual and the ap-
parent angular velocity of the rotating dielectric body, Ω0
and Ω, respectively. The coeﬃcient α characterizes the
degree to which light follows the actual rotation and, con-
sequently, the degree to which rotation can be detected
by optical interference.

Slow light [1] has been generated using Electromag-
netically Induced Transparency (EIT) [6]. EIT takes ad-
vantage of a quantum–interference eﬀect in multi–level
atoms, bought about by dressing the atoms with the light
of an appropriate auxiliary beam. A probe beam at reso-
nance frequency can travel though the EIT medium that
would be totally opaque without the assistance of the
auxiliary light. Exactly on resonance a continuous probe
wave travels at a phase velocity of c, i.e. the medium
has a refractive index of unity. On the other hand, the
EIT resonance is very sharp and is ultrasensitive with
respect to frequency detuning. An EIT medium is thus
extremely dispersive and, in turn, short light pulses hav-
ing an extended spectrum travel at a very low group ve-
locity vg. Another aspect of the extreme dispersion of an
EIT medium is the ultrasensitivity with respect to the
Doppler detuning due to motion.

So, what happens if we replace the rotating block of
non–dispersive material by an EIT medium of extreme
dispersion? How large is the dragging coeﬃcient? Let us
determine the space–time line element,

ds2 = gµνdxµdxν

,

dxµ = (c dt, dx) ,

(6)

i.e. the covariant metric tensor gµν. For this we invert the
contravariant metric of slow light [2], gµν, to lowest order
in the ratio between the medium velocity and the velocity

1

of light, c. In the limit of slow rotations, the line element
turns out to have the same structure as the metric (1) of
non–dispersive media with, however, a refractive index
of unity and a modiﬁed dragging coeﬃcient of

and P. R. Hemmer, Opt. Lett. 22, 1138 (1997); K.
Ichimura, K. Yamamoto, and N. Gemma, Phys. Rev. A
58, 4116 (1998).

[8] M. Artoni, G. C. La Rocca, and F. Bassani, Europhys.

α =

c
vg

− 1 .

Lett. 49, 445 (2000).

(7)

Compared with passive dielectric gyroscopes, a slow light
gyroscope operated with light of a modest group velocity
of kilometers per second increases the rotation sensitiv-
ity by ﬁve orders of magnitude, and an ambitious group
velocity of meters per second amounts to a fantastic im-
provement by eight orders of magnitude. Of course, for
this one would need to create slow light in a solid block of
material in order to attach the gyroscope to the rotating
body one is interested in. Solid–state media tend to de-
stroy the quantum–interference conditions of EIT much
more rapidly than gases or Bose–Einstein condensates [1].
However, ﬁrst demonstrations of EIT in solids have been
already reported [7] and an interesting proposal of EIT in
semiconducters has been recently published [8]. It would
be desirable to demonstrate unambiguously slow light in
solids, stimulated perhaps by the potential advantage of
slow light gyroscopes: ultrahigh motion sensitivity.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Malcolm Dunn and Stig Stenholm
for valuable discussions. U.L. gratefully acknowledges
the support of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
and of the G¨oran Gustafsson Stiftelse.

[1] L. V. Hau, S. E. Harris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi,
Nature 397, 594 (1999); M. M. Kash, V. A. Sautenkov,
A. S. Zibrov, L. Hollberg, H. Welch, M. D. Lukin, Y. Ros-
tovsev, E. S. Fry, and M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
5229 (1999); D. Budiker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester,
and V. V. Yashchuk, ibid. 83, 1767 (1999).

[2] U. Leonhardt and P. Piwnicki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 822

(2000).

[3] U. Leonhardt and P. Piwnicki, Phys. Rev. A 60, 4301

(1999).

[4] W. Gordon, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 72, 421 (1923).
[5] Pham Mau Quan, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 242, 465
(1956); Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 1,
54 (1957/58).

[6] P. L. Knight, B. Stoicheﬀ, and D. Walls (eds.), Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 355, 2215 (1997); S. E. Har-
ris, Phys. Today 50(7), 36 (1997); M. O. Scully and M.
Zubairy, Quantum Optics (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1997).

[7] Y. Zhao, C. Wu, B.-S. Ham, M. K. Kim, and E. Awad,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 641 (1997); B.-S. Ham, M. S. Shariar,

2

