0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

8

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
2
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Stable oscillating nonlinear beams in square-wave-biased-photorefractives

Giorgio Maria Tosi-Beleﬃ, Marco Presi, Claudio Palma, Danilo Boschi and Eugenio DelRe

Fondazione Ugo Bordoni, Via B. Castiglione 59, 00142 Rome, Italy

Istituto Nazionale Fisica della Materia, Unita’ di Roma 1, 00100 Rome, Italy

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita’ Roma Tre, 00146 Rome, Italy

Applied Physics Department, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel

(February 2, 2008)

Aharon J. Agranat

We demonstrate experimentally that in a centrosymmetric paraelectric non-stationary boundary
conditions can dynamically halt the intrinsic instability of quasi-steady-state photorefractive self-
trapping, driving beam evolution into a stable oscillating two-soliton-state conﬁguration.

The propagation of light in a photorefractive crystal
gives rise to intense beam self-action that, in its most
generic manifestation, causes fanning and anisotropic
scattering [1]. The application of an external bias ﬁeld to
the crystal can drastically change this behaviour, and al-
low spatial self-trapping and soliton formation: the non-
diﬀracting propagation of micron-sized optical beams [2].
In a biased system this occurs only in a transient regime,
for a ﬁnite time window, and the resulting nonlinear
waves are called quasi-steady-state-solitons [3]. By in-
creasing the natural dark conductivity, this regime can
be made stable, giving rise to steady-state screening soli-
tons [4].

In this paper we investigate, for the ﬁrst time, a fun-
damentally diﬀerent stabilization process connected to
beam behaviour in a non-stationary external bias ﬁeld [5].
In particular, we study beam evolution in the presence
of an alternating ﬁeld in centrosymmetric potassium-
lithium-tantalate-niobate (KLTN) [6], a material known
to support a rich variety of nonlinear beam phenomena
[7] [8] [9] [10].

Results indicate that, for appropriate conditions, the
beam self-trapping process, that leads to transient quasi-
steady-state solitons for stationary conditions, can be
driven into a stable self-trapped regime, formed by an
alternating oscillation between two beam trajectories, in
the absence of enhanced dark conductivity. This phe-
nomenon, in our understanding, is made possible by the
fact that single optical trajectories, corresponding to the
two alternate states of the bias ﬁeld, non-coincident due
to asymmetric diﬀusion-seeded bending and electro-optic
read-out eﬀects, engender the simultaneous formation,
through the quadratic electro-optic response of the crys-
tal in the paraelectric phase, of two trapping index pat-
terns, that form two back-to-back specular double layers
of charge that halt runaways charge buildup.

Experiments are carried out in samples of zero-cut cen-
trosymmetric photorefractive KLTN, a composite per-
ovskite doped with Copper and Vanadium impurities,
with a set-up that is similar to those generally used in
photorefractive soliton studies [7] [8], apart from the ab-

sence of background illumination and the use of an alter-
nating external voltage source. The sample temperature
is kept at a given value T by means of a stabilized current
controlled Peltier-junction. A λ=514nm continuous-wave
TEM00 beam, from an argon-ion laser, is ﬁrst expanded
and then focused onto the input facet of the sample, and
launched along the crystal principal axis z. Focusing is
obtained either with a cylindrical y-oriented lens, giv-
ing rise to a one-dimensional beam conﬁned in the x
transverse direction, for investigation of slab-solitons, or
a spherical lens for full two-transverse-dimensional (i.e.
x and y) investigation of needle-solitons. The electrodes
are deposited on the x facets and the source can provide
a square-voltage wave-form of variable peak-to-peak am-
plitude Vsq and period Tsq. Beam dynamics are observed
by means of a top-view and a transverse CCD camera.

The main qualitative phenomenology observed is con-
tained in Fig.(1), where the two-branch oscillation along
the x-axis is shown. The laser beam is focused by means
of an f=150mm cylindrical lens onto the input facet of a
3.7(x)x4.7(y)x2.4(z) mm sample, giving rise to an approx-
imately one-dimensional (transverse dimension x) funda-
mental Gaussian beam diﬀracting in the x direction, as
the beam evolves along z. The input beam has a full-
width-half-maximum (FWHM) of ≃ 5 µm, and diﬀracts
to 44 µm after propagating 2.4 mm in the sample (n≃
2.4) (see Fig.(1(a)-(b)). The beam has a peak intensity
Ip ≃ 3kW/m2, whereas no background illumination is
implemented.
In these conditions, but with a station-
ary bias, quasi-steady-state self-trapping is observed af-
ter a response time τ1 ≃ 3min, for an external voltage
on the x electrodes of V=380V. In the oscillating conﬁg-
uration of Fig.(1(c)-(d)), the external square-wave bias
voltage has a peak to peak amplitude Vsq=760V with a
period Tsq= 10 s (i.e., Tsq ≪ τ1), the crystal being kept
at T=18◦C (thus having a relative dielectric constant of
ǫr ≈ 11·103). As the external oscillation occurs, the beam
undergoes spatial conﬁnement in one direction towards
one electrode (Fig.(1c)), and then in the other, towards
the opposite electrode (along the transverse x direction)
(Fig.(1d)), oscillating between two distinct optical tra-

1

jectories. The remarkable result is that this stable oscil-
lating regime, which has a buildup transient τ2 ≃ 15 min
considerably longer than τ1, continues indeﬁnetly, and is
thus a stable oscillation in which the beam is continuously
conﬁned, but in two distinct alternating trajectories. The
switching time τsw ≪ Tsq is associated with the crystal
charging time. Apart from this very short interval τsw,
not of photorefractive nature, the beam is continuously
trapped. The distance between the two trapped beams at
the output is ∆x≃ 30 µm.

for very rapid dynamics, i.e., for beam intensities such
that Tsq/τ1 ≫ 1 , single branch evolution is allowed to
reach quasi-steady-state destabilization and the steady
oscillating situation is not observed.
In this case, the
beam undergoes a distinctive swinging evolution mim-
icking the two-state self-trapping of the previous case, as
shown in Fig.(3). During one ﬁeld oscillation, the beam
ﬁrst undergoes self-trapping, deﬂected in one direction
(Fig.(3b)), decays (see Fig.(3a)), diﬀracting in the for-
ward z direction, and then forms a second transient soli-
ton in the opposite direction (Fig.(3c)), decays again in
the z direction, and so forth. Thus, in this case, no sta-
ble self-trapped oscillating conﬁguration is reached, since
most of the time the beam is diﬀracting (Tsq ≫ τ1). Note
that the swinging motion is a direct consequence of the
residual charge displacement of the previous state, and is
much more pronounced than single beam self-bending ob-
served in stationary conditions (∆x≃30µm as compared
to ∆x≃5µm of conventional self-bending observed).

FIG. 1. Stable two-state oscillation of a slab-soliton beam
subject to a square-wave bias. (a) Normalized input inten-
sity proﬁle; (b) Output intensity proﬁle after 2.4mm linear
propagation in the crystal; (c-d) Output intensity self-trapped
proﬁles of the two alternating states.

An analogous phenomenology is observed for two-
dimensional diﬀracting beams, and is shown in Fig.(2),
in a second 2.2(x)x2.2(y)x6.4(z) sample of KLTN, kept at
T=26◦C (ǫr ≈ 6.5·103). Note that the needle conﬁne-
ment extends over approximately 25 diﬀraction lengths.
As opposed to screening soliton phenomena, we found
no strict existence condition associated with the electro-
optic response (i.e., Vsq and crystal T), much like stan-
dard quasi-steady-state self-trapping experiments [3].
The only observable diﬀerence in the ﬁnal oscillating
state that depends appreciably on changes in the electro-
optic response is the divergence angle of the two trajecto-
ries, that gives rise, at the output, to a diﬀerent value of
∆x. We found that a stronger static polarization induces
a stronger divergence.

On the other hand, we observed a distinct dependence
of beam evolution on the time scales involved, suggest-
ing that the main underlying mechanism is strongly con-
nected to the temporal oscillations in the boundary con-
ditions. We thus carried out experiments changing the
nonlinear time constant, connected to beam peak inten-
sity Ip, keeping all other parameters unaltered. Thus,
we essentially vary the ratio Tsq/τ1, since τ1 is approx-
imately proportional to Ip. For slow enough dynamics
i.e., for Tsq/τ1 ≪ 1, the steady oscillating state is al-
ways reached (at least for the investigated cases), whereas

FIG. 2. Stable two-state oscillation of a needle-soliton
beam subject to a square-wave of peak to peak amplitude
Vsq=700V, of period Tsq=10s.
(a) Input intensity 6 µm
FWHM distribution; (b) Output intensity 150 µm distri-
bution after 6.4mm linear propagation in the crystal; (c-d)
Output intensity self-trapped proﬁles of the two alternating
states.

We shall limit our discussion to slab-solitons, since un-
derstanding of even basic needle soliton phenomenology
is still unclear [11]. Concerning the formation of the two-
state oscillation, we note that, although in a purely drift-
like conﬁguration free photoexcited charge under the in-
ﬂuence of a zero average square-wave alternate ﬁeld Esq,
with Tsq ≪ τ1, cannot give rise to any space-charge sepa-
ration, asymmetric charge diﬀusion components can seed
two intensity distributions I+ and I−, corresponding to
the two alternate states of external ﬁeld, that separate
during propagation along the z axis, and thus allows a
non-zero photorefractive response [12]. The ﬁnal state is
a product of beam charge separation during one electric
ﬁeld polarity, combined with electro-holographic eﬀects
during the opposite polarity phase [13].

2

after the space-charge ﬁeld has reached a steady-state.

FIG. 4. Break-down of the two-state formation process.
Output intensity distribution (conditions of Fig.(1)).
(a)
Initial output diﬀraction for V=0; (b) Quasi-steady-state
self-trapping for V=V+; (c) Read-out intensity for V=0 (after
soliton formation); (d) Read-out intensity for V=V−; (e,f,g,h)
specular results starting from V=V−.

The work of E.D. and M.P. was carried out in the
framework of an agreement between Fondazione Ugo Bor-
doni and the Italian Communications Administration.
Research carried out by A.J.A. is supported by a grant
from the Ministry of Science of the State of Israel. We
thank Luigi Piccari for useful discussions.

[1] L. Solymar, D. J. Webb, and A. Grunnet-Jepsen, The
physics and applications of photorefractive materials
(Clarendon Press, Oxford 1996).

[2] M. Segev and M. Stegeman, Phys. Today 51, 42 (1998);
G.I. Stegeman and M. Segev, Science 286, 1518 (1999).
[3] G.C. Duree, J.L. Shultz, G.J. Salamo, M. Segev, A.
Yariv, B. Crosignani, P. Di Porto, E.J. Sharp, and R.R.
Neurgaonkar, Phys.Rev.Lett. 71, 533 (1993).

[4] M. Segev, G. Valley, B. Crosignani, P. Di Porto,
and A. Yariv, Phys.Rev.Lett. 73, 3211 (1994); D.N.
Christodoulides and M.I. Carvalho, J.Opt.Soc.Am.B 12,
1628 (1995).

[5] In linear conﬁgurations see, e.g., A. Grunnet-Jepsen,
C.H. Kwak, and L. Solymar, Opt.Lett. 19, 1299 (1994).
[6] A.J. Agranat, R. Hofmeister, and A. Yariv, Opt. Lett.

17, 713 (1992).

[7] E. DelRe, B. Crosignani, M. Tamburrini, M. Segev, M.
Mitchell, E. Refaeli, and A.J. Agranat, Opt.Lett. 23, 421
(1998).

[8] E. DelRe, M. Tamburrini, M. Segev, E. Refaeli, and A.J.

Agranat, Appl.Phys.Lett. 73, 16 (1998).

[9] B. Crosignani, A. Degasperis, E. DelRe, P. Di Porto, and

A.J. Agranat, Phys.Rev.Lett. 82, 1664 (1999).

[10] E. DelRe, M. Tamburrini, M. Segev, R. Della Pergola,

and A.J. Agranat, Phys.Rev.Lett. 83, 1954 (1999).

[11] S. Gatz and J. Herrmann, Opt.Lett. 23, 1176 (1998); M.

Saﬀman, A.A. Zozulya, Opt.Lett. 23, 1579 (1998).

[12] M. Carvalho, S. Singh, D. Christodoulides , Opt.Comm.

120, 311 (1995).

[13] E. DelRe, M. Tamburrini and Aharon J. Agranat,

Opt.Lett. 25, 963 (2000)

3

FIG. 3. Soliton swinging: Slab-beam transient dynamics
for a τ1 ≃2s and Tsq=10s in a 6.4mm long sample of KLTN,
with a Vsq, sample T=27◦C. (a) Top view (y direction) of
the diﬀracting beam, with a 6µm input FWHM, and lin-
ear diﬀracting 120µm output; (b)-(c) Two opposite transient
self-trapped states.

To break down the process, consider the formation of
a single quasi-steady-state soliton with a constant volt-
age V=V+ (equal to the positive value of the alternating
ﬁeld in the oscillating case)(see Fig.(4a-b)). If we halt
beam evolution (attenuating the propagating beam in-
tensity) before the transient trapped regime has decayed
(i.e., for t< τ1), and put V=0, we observe an increased
beam diﬀraction at the output, a signature of the resid-
ual defocusing pattern (Fig.(4c)). The diﬀraction is fur-
thermore slightly asymmetric, as a consequence of the
diﬀusion component in charge separation. If we invert
the applied electric ﬁeld (i.e. V=V− ≡-V+), the defo-
cusing pattern is enhanced, and most of the light is di-
verted to a limited region strongly shifted with respect to
the input beam (Fig.(4d)). A wholly specular behaviour
is observed when the quasi-steady-state soliton is orig-
inally formed with a constant V=V− (Fig.(4e,f,g, and
h)). In the actual alternating ﬁeld case, since we start
from a zero charge separation, and do not allow the sys-
tem to evolve, if not only partially, during each oscillation
(Tsq ≪ τ1), the ﬁnal charge separation and index pattern
will be a symmetric hybrid combination of the two self-
trapped and two deﬂected beams (see Fig.(4b,d,f,and h)),
whereas the actual beam trajectory will switch, following
the oscillation of the external ﬁeld. Note that, during
the entire oscillation, the beam continuously maintains
its conﬁnement, apart from the small transient τsw.

Concerning the stability of the nondiﬀracting pattern,
in absence of artiﬁcial dark illumination we note that
in our case charge separation is intrinsically symmetric.
Mobile electrons are forced to drift towards the central
region between the two trajectories, forming a potential
barrier to further charge separation and saturation, eﬀec-
tively freezing the space-charge structure. The switching,
in this case, is only of electro-optic nature, and occurs
as a consequence of the electro-holographic read-out of
the asymmetric index components in the initial stages of
propagation (where the two trajectories are superposed),

