0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

5
2

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
7
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

About nondegenerative four photon mixing gain

spectroscopy of the SF6 molecules.

V.A.Kuz’menko

Troitsk Institute of Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142092, Russian Federation.

Abstract

Infrared-infrared double resonance measurements of the ν3 absorption
band of SF6 using a CO2 TEA laser radiation have been carried out. The
results obtained in the present and in some earlier works are discussed
taking into account existence of a wide component of lines, nondegen-
erative four photon mixing (NFPM) and time invariance violation in the
photon-molecule interactions. It is proposed to use the NFPM eﬀect in in-
vestigations of the shape of the optical transition in polyatomic molecules
and especially for evaluation of the homogeneous width of the wide com-
ponent of lines. The need and problems of experimental study of existing
eﬀects of the T-invariance violation in optics are discussed.

PACS number: 42.65.-k, 33.70.-w, 33.80.-b

Introduction
Studies of the IR-IR double resonance in SF6 were widely carried out in 70’s
with a purpose to clarify the mechanism of the IR multiple photon excitation (IR
MPE) of the polyatomic molecules. Large experimental material was obtained
in this area in the subsequent years [1,2]. Also, a substantial progress was
achieved in understanding the underlying physical processes. All this demands
to reexamine the old experiments, as they contain interesting and important
information.

A very strong bleaching in SF6 was observed in the work [3]. This bleaching
was destroyed by molecular collisions at characteristic rate of pτ = 48ns mbar.
An eﬀect of the direct multiphoton absorption of the pump laser radiation by
molecules was proposed as a candidate for explanation of this bleaching. On
the contrary, in works [4,5] a hypothesis was proposed of existence of some wide
component in the absorption line of the polyatomic molecules. If the natural
width of this wide component greater, than anharmonicity of vibrations, the
IR MPE can occur in a natural way. Later, this idea was proved experimen-
tally, when the far wings in the absorption band of polyatomic molecules were
found [6], which were independent on the gas pressure. The intensities of these
lorentzian-like band wings well coordinate with the saturation data of molecular
absorption at low pressure, with the data of depletion of rotational levels in the
SF6 molecules [7,8] and with the data on the SF6 absorption of laser radiation
in the molecular beam conditions [9].
Integrated intensity of this wide com-
ponent can be rather easily estimated from the saturated spectrum data. But
the natural width can be measured correctly only in the molecular beam condi-
tions, where rotational temperature is extremely low. Therefore, development

1

of methods for measuring this width in the room temperature cell conditions is
of great interest.

Experiments on the IR-IR double resonance provide such an opportunity.
The bleaching, observed in work [3], is very similar to the coherent eﬀect of
NFPM. In the latter case, redistribution of energy between a powerful pump
beam and a weak probe beam takes place. It is well known, that such a pro-
cess proceeds in SF6 very eﬀectively (up to depletion of the pump beam) as
a superradiation in the case of degenerative four photon mixing (DFPM) in a
somewhat speciﬁc conditions (a short cell and high SF6 pressure) [10]. As in
the case of the coherent Raman gain spectroscopy [11,12], spectral dependence
of the NFPM eﬃciency contains information about the shape of the optical
transition. The peculiarity of this case is that the NFPM eﬀect occurs within
a very wide optical transition. Thus, the spectral width of the bleaching eﬀect
characterizes the homogeneous width of the optical transition.

The purpose of the current work was to repeat the experiments of work
[3], to perform some more detailed study of the spectral characteristics of the
bleaching eﬀect, to discuss the role of the NFPM and to propose to use it
for determination of the widths of line wings of polyatomic molecules in the
condition of cell experiments at room temperature. However, in the present
experiments any nondegenerative bleaching was absent.

Experiment
The experimental set-up is shown in Fig.1. The main diﬀerence from work
[3] was that a separate mirror (3) with R=-2m was used for focusing the laser
radiation in the copper waveguide absorption cell (ø10mm and length 110cm).
The probe laser radiation passed through the hole ø8mm in the mirror (4)
without focusing and was registered by an integrated calorimeter 2. Such an
experimental set-up allows to work without a monochromator and to measure
absorption of the probe laser radiation in the case of coinciding frequencies of
the pump and the probe lasers. The diﬀerence in divergences of the scattered
pump radiation and that of the probe laser is so great, that total energy of
pump radiation, registered by the calorimeter 2 at the distance ∼ 1m from the
mirror (4) is < 10µj and does not prevent to measure the energy of the probe
pulse.

The resonator of the probe laser was formed by a rather ﬂat mirror (R=-50m)
and a diﬀraction grating. Its radiation was characterized by small divergence
and good uniformity of the beam. Nitrogen free gas mixture was used. Multi-
mode laser pulse had a full width about 100ns at half maximum without any
”tail” and consisted of chaotic spikes.

The pump laser had an unstable resonator and two very old BaF2 coated
NaCl windows.
In the far ﬁeld region, where it was focused, radiation was
very non-uniform and had a typical speckle-structure. With small contents of
nitrogen in the gas mixture, the multimode pulse consisted of a spike about
100ns FWHM and a ”tail” about 3µs full length, that contained about 20% of
the total pulse energy. Directions of polarization of both laser beams coincided.
Temporal characteristics were measured by means of a photon-drag detector
and an oscilloscope (not shown in the ﬁgure).

2

The measurements were carried out at pressures 1,5 Torr SF6 for the P10—
P14 and R10—R20 lines, 1,0 Torr for line P16 and 0,4 Torr SF6 for lines P18—
P30.

Experimental results
The results of the IR-IR double resonance experiments are presented in Fig.2.
The pump laser was tuned in the P16 line. Similar results were obtained when
the pump laser was tuned in the P20 line. Incident pump laser ﬂuence in the
waveguide was 250mj/cm2. Energy ﬂuence of the probe laser radiation was
7mj/cm2. The latter was decreased down to 1mj/cm2 in some experiments
without any changes in the results.
In the whole range of testing (including
the R10—R20 area) only increase in absorption of the probe laser radiation was
observed.

Some bleaching eﬀect was observed only when both lasers were working on
the same line. Apparent mutual inﬂuence of the lasers was observed in this
case. Were the pulses of both lasers synchronized, energy of the probe laser
pulse decreased by ∼ 10%, and its beam pattern became non-uniform. The
distance between two lasers was about 10m in this case, so that only scattered
pump laser radiation could get into the resonator of the probe laser.

Also, a set of experiments was carried out in which the same laser radiation
was used both for pumping and for probing. Again, the bleaching eﬀect was
found in this case. An open square in Fig.2 corresponds to the case, when the
probe laser was used, and the full square illustrates the case of using only the
pump laser radiation.

Discussion
IR-IR double resonance was studied in numerous works [3,13-17]. These
experiments frequently gave contradictory results, and it was diﬃcult to give
satisfactory explanations to these contradictions. At present, however, the sit-
uation has substantially cleared up.

A wide component with Lorentzian FWHM ∼ 150GHz exists in the spec-
trum of narrow absorption lines of SF6 molecule [6]. Its integral intensity for
the 1 ← 0 transition of the ν3 band contains only ∼ 0, 2% of the integral inten-
sity of this optical transition. However, absorption of the powerful pump laser
radiation takes place just through this component. The weaker probe radiation
can be absorbed mainly through the narrow or through the wide component of
the line. Thus, the results of probing can be diﬀerent. All experiments on the
IR-IR double resonance in SF6 can be conditionally broken into three classes:
(1) when the probing occurs through the narrow component of lines, (2) when
the probing occurs through the wide component of lines and (3) an intermediate
case.

In the work [13] very weak probe radiation of the CW CO2 laser with inten-
sity ∼ 1mW/cm2 was used. Both induced transmissions in the P8—P22 region
of the probe laser frequencies and induced absorption in the red side were ob-
served. Saturation of the narrow component of lines was absent in this case.
The main cause of the observed eﬀects was an anharmonic shift of the optical
transitions of the excited molecules.

It is surprising, but experiments with megawatt intensity and picosecond

3

timescale probe pulse laser radiation belong to the same class [14]. In this case
laser radiation has large spectral width (∼ 1cm−1). Therefore, any saturation
of the narrow component of lines is again absent, and the results of these ex-
periments coincide practically with those of work [13].

CW CO2 probe laser radiation with intensity about 0, 1 − 0, 5W/cm2 was
used in works [15-17]. These experiments belong to the intermediate class. Here
we can see appearance of appreciable saturation of the narrow component of
lines. Also, absorption through the wide component of lines begins to play some
role. This role depends on exact tuning of the probe laser radiation frequency:
is it set-up on a strong rotational line or between lines. Thus, in the area P8-P22
both induced transmission and induced absorption can be observed.

A speciﬁc eﬀect of short-time induced absorption in the course of the pump
pulse was observed in work [16]. One should keep in mind, that planes of
polarization of the probe and the pump laser radiation were orthogonal in this
experiment. A coherent polarization eﬀect could take place in this case, that is
due to the population transfer between degenerated levels. Phenomena of this
kind are studied in the atomic polarization spectroscopy [18], and they are out
of scope of the present paper.

Experiments of the present paper belong to the next class, when probing
occurs mainly through the wide component of lines. Average probe laser in-
tensity was 10 − 70kW/cm2. Saturation of the narrow component of lines was
much stronger in this case. The role of the wide component in absorption of the
probing radiation became essential.

In this case, besides the anharmonic shift, an eﬀect of sharp growth of inte-
gral intensity of the wide component in the region of low lying vibrational levels
should be taken into account. This eﬀect manifests itself through a strong
temperature dependence of the IR MPE process [9,19]. In some range of the ex-
perimental conditions this eﬀect becomes decisive, and then induced absorption
of the probe laser radiation can be observed in all spectral intervals.

To the same class of experiments the works [9,20] belong. In the work [9]
the experiments were carried out in the molecular beam conditions. Along with
rather high intensity of the probe laser radiation (∼ 10kW/cm2), these exper-
imental conditions were characterized by ultralow (∼ 50K) rotational temper-
ature [21]. A number of rotational lines were very low, and the probe laser
radiation interacted practically with the wide component of lines only. The
obtained results were similar to those of the present work. One should keep in
mind, however, that experiments of work [9] were carried out with rather hot
gas (T = 5000K).

A special case is work [3], where, as we believe, a coherent NFPM eﬀect was
observed. The ﬁrst argument for such a conclusion is unusually strong eﬀect of
collisions. Even elastic collisions can destroy coherency. The second argument
is ampliﬁcation in the region R12-R20, that clearly indicates the combination
ν2 + ν6 band can contribute to this process. In this case the phase-matched
radiation must exist in the region near 915cm−1, and it is better to search for it
in the direct beams without waveguide. And the third argument is that in our
experiments, which were carried out in rather similar conditions, the character-

4

istic bleaching was absent. This fact can be due to rather poor coherency of the
pump beam in our case. It is known, that eﬃciency of the DFPM eﬀect is ex-
tremely sensitive to the divergence and uniformity of the laser beam [10,22,23].
In the works [15-17] the NFPM eﬀect might be absent as a result of low intensity
of probe radiation, and in the experiments with molecular beam [9] its absence
could be a consequence of low density and small size of the interaction zone.

Is the bleaching eﬀect, observed in our work, when both lasers radiate on
the same line, a result of four photon mixing? Absence of such an eﬀect in the
molecular beam conditions ( [9], Fig.3, without exact adjusting) is an indirect
argument for the positive answer.
In this case, the NFPM eﬀect can be a
consequence of a very small diﬀerence in the frequencies of the pump and probe
radiation.

Thus, detailed experimental studies of occurrence of the NFPM eﬀect in SF6
are of undoubted interest. They can give information about the shape of optical
transitions, and not only about the forward transitions, but maybe about the
backward ones.

Why one needs the NFPM eﬀect to present within the wide and homogeneous
optical transition? Here we are concerning a very important and interesting
question about the time invariance violation in the photon-atom and photon-
molecule interactions. Basing on the considerations of symmetry, the theorists
assume the existence of the T-invariance violation eﬀects in optics for a long
time. It is not known, however, in which part of optics and in which form could
these eﬀects exist. For many years the scientists try to ﬁnd them in the form of
the so-called electrical dipole moment (EDM) [24]. The EDM is not found till
now.

General situation, however, is that the whole nonlinear optics based on or
connected with T-invariance violation. The principle of T-invariance vio-
lation is obviously a quantum analog of the nonlinear susceptibility
principle. Most of the nonlinear eﬀects in optics can be explained from the
quantum point of view on the basis of the T-invariance violation principle. The
eﬀect of T-invariance violation usually manifests itself only in an indirect way,
for example, as a population transfer eﬀect at sweeping the resonance condi-
tions [25]. Usually, experimenters cannot control the natural width and the
cross-section of optical transitions in such a way to be able to compare these
parameters for the forward and backward processes.

Maybe a unique exception for this day is the wide component of lines. It
is a unique physical object that is characterized by an unusual combination
of properties: a huge homogeneous width of transition is combined with long
lifetime of the excited state. This allows to divorce in time and in space the
process of laser excitation and that of monitoring the exited states of molecules
[9]. These experiments yield fantastic results: the width of the backward optical
transition proves to be more than ﬁve orders of magnitude less than that of the
forward one, the cross-section of the backward transition being more, than four
orders of magnitudes greater, than that of the forward one [26]. These exper-
iments provide a direct and full experimental proof of existence of the strong
T-invariance violation in the photon-molecule interactions. For more detailed

5

experimental study of the T-invariance violation eﬀect we need to reanimate
and straightforwardly continue experiments of work [9] (ﬁg.5, 6).

In principle, experiments of this type can be carried out in the cell conditions
also. It is possible to study the dependence of absorption of the probe radiation
on the angle between the probe and the pump beams. We expect to see a
transition from direct stimulated deexcitation of molecules to the four photon
mixing eﬀect, which can reach a superradiation regime in optimum conditions
[10,22]. We hope to prolong such experiments in future using the straight crossed
beams without waveguide. It would be useful, if the same studies were conducted
somewhere else.

The author is grateful to Dr. V.S.Mezhevov for equipping us with a pump

laser and to Dr. A.P.Dyad’kin for discussions.

References

[1] W.Fuss and K.L.Kompa, Prog.Quant.Electr. 7, 117 (1981).

[2] Laser Spectroscopy of Highly Vibrationally Excited Molecules,

ed.

V.S.Letokhov, Adam Hilger, Bristol (1989).

[3] W.Fuss and J.Hartmann, J.Chem.Phys. 70, 5468 (1979).

[4] V.Yu.Baranov, A.P.Dyad’kin and V.A.Kuz’menko Kvantovaya Elektron.

(Moscow) 15, 732 (1988).

[5] V.A.Kuz’menko Preprint of the Institute of Atomic Energy 4886/12,

Moscow (1989).

[6] V.A.Kuz’menko,E-print,aps1998dec29 002, http://publish.aps.org/eprint/

[7] V.M.Apatin, V.M.Krivtsun, G.N.Makarov,

I.Pak and M.V.Sotnikov,

Opt.Commun.47, 251 (1983).

[8] Yu.A.Kuritsyn, G.N.Makarov, I.Pak and M.V.Sotnikov, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz.

94, 65 (1988).

[9] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[10] L.T.Bolotskikh, V.G.Popkov, A.K.Popov and V.M.Shalaev, Kvantovaya
Elektron.(Moscow)13, 942 (1986), Sov.J.Quantum. Electron. 16, 616
(1986).

[11] A.Owyoung, IEEE J.Quant.Electr. 14, 192 (1978).

[12] Y.R.Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,

(1984).

[13] V.N.Bagratashvili, V.S.Doljikov and V.S.Letokhov, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 76,

18 (1979).

6

[14] R.C.Sharp, E.Yablonovitch and N.Bloembergen, J.Chem.Phys. 74, 5357

(1981).

[15] S.S.Alimpiev, V.N.Bagratashvili, N.V.Karlov, V.S.Letokhov, V.V.Lobko,
A.A.Makarov, B.G.Sartakov and E.M.Khokhlov, JETP Lett. 25, 547
(1977).

[16] T.F.Deutsch and S.R.J.Brueck, Chem.Phys.Lett. 54, 258 (1978).

[17] T.F.Deutsch and S.R.J.Brueck, J.Chem.Phys. 70, 2063 (1979).

[18] D.Budker,

D.F.Kimball,

Phys.Rev.Lett.
1767
http://publish.aps.org/eprint/

83,

S.M.Rochester
(1999),

E-print,

and

V.V.Yashchuk,
aps1999may12 006,

[19] W.Tsay, C.Riley and D.O.Ham, J.Chem.Phys. 70, 3558 (1979).

[20] V.N.Lokhman, A.N.Petin, E.A.Ryabov and V.S.Letokhov, J.Phys.Chem.

A, 103, 11293 (1999).

[21] A.Linskens, S.L.Hekkert and J.Reuss, Infrared Phys. 32, 259 (1991).

[22] V.Yu.Baranov, A.P.Dyad’kin and O.V.Shpilyun, Kvantovaya Elektron.

(Moscow) 15, 2355 (1988), Sov.J.Quantum.Electron. 18, 1475 1988.

[23] V.A.Kuz’menko Unpublished results.

[24] I.B.Khriplovich

and

Violation Without
Strangeness, Springer, (1998), I.B.Khriplovich, E-print, hep-ph/9906533,
http://xxx.lanl.gov/

S.K.Lamorcaux,

CP

[25] V.A.Kuz’menko,E-print,aps1999sep30 002, http://publish.aps.org/eprint/

[26] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, hep-ph/0002084, http://xxx.lanl.gov/

7

cal.1

NaCl

Abs. cell

1

2

4

3

cal.2

Shield

Probe laser

Pump laser

Fig.1. Experimental set-up. 1,2- flat mirror. 3- focusing mirror. 4- flat mirror with the hole.

4

3
2

1

 cm 2

10 -18

1

0,1

32 30 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10

8

laser line 

Fig. 2. Measured absorption cross-section versus  probe laser line.

Different points were determined at different times befor and after the
onset of the pump laser spike. 1) -1m s, 2) 0m s, 3) +1m s, 4) +2m s.

s
s
