0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
5

 

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Phase-coherent frequency measurement of the Ca intercombination line at 657 nm

with a Kerr-lens mode-locked femtosecond laser

J. Stenger, T. Binnewies, G. Wilpers, F. Riehle and H. R. Telle

Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Bundesallee 100, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany

Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, 700 Mountain Ave, Murray Hill, New Jersey 070974, USA

J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler and A. J. Stentz

(February 2, 2008)

657 nm.

The frequency of this state–of–the–art standard has al-
ready been measured with a conventional harmonic fre-
quency chain [12,13], and the frequency value of νCa =
455 986 240 494 150 Hz has been recommended by the
CIPM for the ’Practical realization of the deﬁnition of
the metre (1997)’ [1] with a relative standard uncertainty
of 6 × 10−13. The present experiments allow for the ﬁrst
time the comparison of two conceptually diﬀerent phase–
coherent optical frequency measurements, the conven-
tional type operating in absolute–frequency domain and
the novel type operating in diﬀerence–frequency domain.
This comparison is performed without the need for inter-
mediate transportable standards.

Two of the three required measurements mentioned
above, the pulse repetition rate frep and the multiple in-
teger factor, are straightforward to carry out. The mea-
surement of the carrier–envelope oﬀset frequency νceo,
which arises from the relative velocity of the carrier phase
and the pulse envelope, is a more demanding task. Sev-
eral more or less complex schemes, depending on the
comb span available, have been proposed for the mea-
surement of νceo [10]. The simplest concept requires an
octave span of the frequency comb which is not directly
available from our laser. Thus, the available span has
to be expanded, e. g. by external self–phase–modulation
(SPM). Microstructure air–silica ﬁbers, which allow for
tailoring the group velocity dispersion (GVD) properties
[2] are highly suited for SPM of moderate peak power
pulses available from mode–locked laser oscillators since
they provide both lateral and temporal conﬁnement of
the pulses over long interaction lengths.
If the octave
span is achieved, then the νceo measurement can be ac-
complished by second–harmonic generation (SHG) of the
spectral lines in the low–frequency wing of the comb.
Whereas the of the comb lines are shifted by νceo with
respect to the origin, their harmonics are shifted by
2νceo. Thus, the beat notes between these harmonics
and the corresponding high–frequency–wing lines of the
comb show the desired component at νceo.

The frequency of the Calcium 3P1—1S0 intercombination
line at 657 nm is phase–coherently measured in terms of the
output of a primary cesium frequency standard using an opti-
cal frequency comb generator comprising a sub–10 fs Kerr-lens
mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser and an external microstructure
ﬁber for self–phase–modulation. The measured frequency of
νCa = 455 986 240 494 276 Hz agrees within its relative un-
certainty of 4 × 10−13 with the values previously measured
with a conceptually diﬀerent harmonic frequency chain and
with the value recommended for the realization of the SI unit
of length.

So far, the use of optical frequency standards for the
realization of basic units, e. g. of time and length, was
hampered by the diﬃculties of measuring their high fre-
quencies. As a result, the most precise frequency values
recommended by the Comit´e International des Poids et
Measures (CIPM) are based on very few frequency mea-
surements [1]. Recent progress in femtosecond pulse gen-
eration and the advent of microstructure optical ﬁbers
[2–4], however, have substantially facilitated such opti-
cal frequency measurements. These schemes [5–7] start
with the highly periodic pulse train of a Kerr–lens mode–
locked laser which corresponds in the to a comb–like fre-
quency spectrum of equidistant lines. The spectral span
of this comb reﬂects the duration of an individual pulse
while the spacing between the lines is determined by
the pulse repetition frequency. It has been shown, that
the fast, spectrally far–reaching Kerr–lens mode–locking
mechanism enforces a tight coupling [8] of the optical
phases of the individual lines. As a result, the frequency
of any of these lines is given by an integer multiple of
the pulse repetition frequency frep and a frequency νceo
[9–11] which accounts for the oﬀset of the entire comb
with respect to the frequency origin.
If these quanti-
ties are known, the unknown frequency of any external
optical signal can be precisely determined by counting
the frequency of the beat–note between this signal and a
suitable comb line. In this Letter, we report the ﬁrst ap-
plication of this method to phase–coherent measurements
of the frequency of an optical Ca frequency standard op-
erating on the 1S0—3P1 intercombination transition at

1

The actuator of this servo loop is a double piezo device
(PZT1A and B) which tilts the output coupler where the
spectral components are laterally displaced by the intra–
cavity double prism GVD compensator. Tilting of the
output coupler predominantally modiﬁes the resonator
round–trip group delay [9] which, in turn, determines
frep.
iii) The frequency fCa of the beat note between the ra-
diation from the Ca–standard (at optical frequency νCa)
and the nearest comb mode was both measured and long–
term stabilized. For this purpose, the output of the Ca
standard was combined with the emission from the out-
put of the microstructure ﬁber, which was ﬁltered by
an interference ﬁlter. The beat note was detected by
a Si PIN photo diode.
Its output signal with a typi-
cal S/N–ratio of 30 dB (BW = 100 kHz) was ﬁltered by
a phase–lock–loop tracking oscillator (PLL) and subse-
quently counted by a totalizing counter. The beat sig-
nal frequency was kept within the hold–in range of the
PLL by an additional servo loop controlling the length of
the Ti:Sapphire–laser resonator with the help of a piezo
transducer (PZT2). The error signal of this slow loop was
generated by a frequency–to–voltage–converter (FVC)
which monitored the output frequency of the PLL. Un-
wanted cross–talk between the frep and fCa servo loops
was minimized by adjustment of the lever point of the
frep–tilting actuator to the lateral position of the red
comb components at 657 nm. This was accomplished by
choosing appropriate gain values (of opposite sign) for
the piezo transducers PZT1A and B.
iv) The frequency νceo was measured, as mentioned
above, by external self–phase modulation in the mi-
crostructure ﬁber and subsequent second–harmonic gen-
eration in a nonlinear optical crystal. The infrared por-
tion of the ﬁber output around 1070 nm was frequency
doubled with a non–critically phase–matched, 10 mm
long LiB3O5 (LBO) crystal, which was heated to about
140 ◦C in order to fulﬁll the type-I phase–matching con-
dition for this wavelength. The beat note between the re-
sulting green SHG signal and the green output of the ﬁber
was detected by a photo multiplier (PM) after spectral
and spatial ﬁltering both ﬁelds with a single mode ﬁber
and a 600 l/mm grating, respectively. The PM output
signal with a S/N ratio of up to 40 dB(BW = 100 kHz)
was ﬁltered with a second tracking oscillator and counted
by a second totalizing counter. Both counters were syn-
chronously gated by the same 1 Hz clock signal derived
from the 100 MHz hydrogen maser signal.

The optical Ca frequency standard has been described
elsewhere [13,15], and only the relevant details shall be
given here. This standard is operated in a diﬀerent build-
ing and is linked to the Ti:Sapphire laser by a 150 m long
polarization–preserving single–mode ﬁber. Two indepen-
dent systems are available, producing clouds of between
106 and 107 ballistic Ca atoms which are released from
magneto–optical traps (MOT 1 and MOT 2). Each trap

FIG. 1. Schematic of the experimental set-up. The fre-
quency comb generator consists of the Ti:Sapphire femtosec-
ond laser and the microstructure ﬁber.
SESAM denotes
the semiconductor saturable absorber mirror, and PZT piezo
transducers. Whereas the repetition rate is phase locked to
the hydrogen maser, fCa and νceo are counted. LBO denotes
the LiB3O5–frequency doubling crystal, PD photo detectors,
PM photomultiplier, PLL phase–locked loop tracking oscilla-
tor, and FVC a frequency–to–voltage converter, respectively.

As depicted in Fig. 1, our measurement set–up consists
of four parts: the frequency comb generator (i), detectors
and electronics for servo control and/or data acquisition
of the pulse repetition frequency (ii), of the beat note
between the laser and Ca–standard radiation (iii) and of
the carrier–envelope–oﬀset frequency (iv).

i) The Kerr-lens mode-locked (KLM) Ti:Sapphire laser
is similar to that described in [14]. The laser gener-
ates pulses with a duration of ∼ 10 fs, a repetition rate
frep = 100 MHz, an average power of 120 mW and a
spectrum centered at 790 nm. The group velocity disper-
sion (GVD) of its cavity is controlled by double–chirped
mirrors and an intracavity fused silica prism pair. A
similar external prism pair (not shown in Fig. 1) is used
for pulse recompression. Approximately 30 mW of the
laser output is coupled into a 10 cm long piece of mi-
crostructure ﬁber with a core diameter of 1.7 µm and a
zero–GVD wavelength of 780 nm [2]. The output spec-
trum of the ﬁber was measured to cover the range from
520 nm to 1100 nm, while the comb structure with dis-
tinct lines spaced by 100 MHz is expected to be preserved
even in the extreme wings of the SPM–broadened spec-
trum. This was conﬁrmed by measurement of the fringe–
visibility (after appropriate optical ﬁltering) at the out-
put of a two beam interferometer with 100 MHz fringe
spacing yielding a 100 % visibility throughout the entire
comb.
ii) The repetition frequency of the laser was detected
with a fast Si PIN photo diode yielding a 100 MHz signal
with a S/N–ratio of 140 dB (BW = 1 Hz). It was phase–
locked to the 100 MHz output signal of a hydrogen maser
which was controlled by the PTB primary Cs standards.

2

is loaded for 15 ms. Then the trapping lasers at 423 nm
and the magnetic quadrupole ﬁelds are switched oﬀ, and
a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld of 0.23 mT is switched on
for spectral separation of the Zeeman components. At
the same time the cloud starts to expand and to fall down
due to its thermal velocity (T ∼= 3 mK) and gravity, re-
spectively. After a settling time for the magnetic ﬁeld
of 0.2 ms the atoms are interrogated by pulses from a
frequency–stabilized dye laser. For the frequency mea-
surements MOT 1 was employed, in which the low veloc-
ity atoms are directly captured from a thermal beam by
three mutually perpendicular counterpropagating beams
with two diﬀerent frequencies. The atoms were excited
in a time–domain analogue of the optical Ramsey excita-
tion by two pulses separated by 216.4 µs followed by two
pulses with the same separation from a counterpropagat-
ing beam [15]. The frequency of the interrogating laser
ﬁeld was stabilized to the central fringe (FWHM of the
fringes 1.16 kHz) of the interference structure that occurs
when the ﬂuorescence of the excited atoms is measured
as function of the laser frequency. The uncertainty of
the frequency of the Ca optical frequency standard dur-
ing both measurement series was estimated to 53 Hz. A
more detailed uncertainty budget is given in [15]. Sev-
eral tests have been performed to check the validity of
this estimate. By reversing the temporal order of the
excitation pulses a shift of a few Hertz was determined.
The frequency of the laser stabilized to atoms of MOT 1
was compared with its frequency when stabilized to a
second MOT 2. Here, the atoms of an eﬀusive beam
are decelerated in a Zeeman slower and these slow atoms
are deﬂected and directed towards the magneto–optical
trap [16]. The frequency diﬀerence measured when the
laser was stabilized alternatively to atoms from MOT 1
and MOT 2 by three pulses of a standing wave was
12 ± 15 Hz. An additional laser ﬁeld at 672 nm was used
in MOT 1 to repump the atoms which are lost via the 1D2
state [17]. The magnetic ﬁeld of 0.23 mT caused a second
order Zeeman shift of the Ca frequency of +3.1 Hz.

νCa−

1σ [Hz]

νCa(CIP M ) [Hz]

Series A
Series B
Series A+B
Previous Meas. [15]
CIPM recomm. [1]

100
148
126
-20
0

328
132
180
113
270

relative 1σ
uncertainty
7.2 × 10−13
2.9 × 10−13
4.0 × 10−13
2.5 × 10−13
6.0 × 10−13

TABLE I. The diﬀerences of the measured Ca 3P1 — 1S0
transition frequencies in respect to the value recommended
by CIPM and the absolute and relative uncertainties. Series
A and B refer to the frequency comb generator and previous
measurement refers to the harmonic chain.

Two measurement series were carried out on diﬀerent
days with a total measurement time of 3000 and 4200 s,
respectively. On these days the frequency deviation of the
hydrogen maser and the Cs clock resulted in deviations of
the measured Ca frequency of +26 Hz and 24 Hz, respec-
tively. The deviations of the corrected measured mean
values from the CIPM–recommended value of νCa(CIP M)
= 455 986 240 494 150 Hz are listed in Tab. 1 together
with the corresponding relative 1σ uncertainties, which
comprise the estimated relative frequency uncertainties
of the standards and those of the frequency measure-
ments. The values of the previous measurement [13] us-
ing the harmonic frequency chain and the CIPM values
[1] are shown for comparison.

FIG. 2. The Allan standard deviation of measurement se-
ries B is plotted versus the averaging time τ together with
the frequency instabilities of the Ca standard and the hydro-
gen maser. The inset shows the distribution of the measured
values of series B (averaging time = 1 s, bin-width = 1 kHz,
σ = 5.75 kHz).

Fig. 2 shows the Allan standard deviation of the data
of series B together with the corresponding frequency in-
stabilities of the Ca standard [18] and those of the hy-
drogen maser [19]. The inset of Fig. 2 shows a histogram
of the data of series B (1 s averages) with respect to the
CIPM–recommended frequency. The center frequency of
the ﬁtted Gaussian of νCa(CIP M) + 46 Hz agrees within
the uncertainty with the mean value of series B. The in-
stability of the frequency measurement process is about
one order of magnitude larger than the frequency insta-
bility of the Ca standard and of the hydrogen maser.
So far, the measurements are still limited by the non–
optimum detection of the frequency ﬂuctuations of the
Ti:Sapphire laser. Substantial improvement of the mea-

3

[14] D. H. Sutter et al.; Opt. Lett. 24, 631 (1999).
[15] F. Riehle et al.; in Proceedings of the 1999 Joint Meet-
ing of the European Frequency and Time Forum and
The IEEE International Frequency Control Symposium
(EFTF co/Soci´et´e Francaise des Microtechiques et de
Chronom´etrie (SFMC), Besancon, France) p. 700 (1999).
[16] T. Kisters, K. Zeiske, F. Riehle, and J. Helmcke; Appl.

Phys. B 59, 89 (1994).

[17] C. W. Oates, F. Bondu, R. W. Fox, and L. Hollberg; Eur.

Phys. J. D 7, 449 (1999).

[18] F. Riehle et al.; in Trapped Charged Particles and Fun-
damental Physics, edited by D. H. E. Dubin and D.
Schneider (American Institute of Physics, Woodbury,
New York, 1999), pp. 348–356.

[19] A. Bauch; Time–Unit–Section of

the Physikalisch–
Technische Bundesanstalt, Braunschweig, Germany, pri-
vate communication (2000).

[20] K. R. Vogel et al.; submitted to Opt. Lett. (2000).

surement process can be expected if the instantaneous
residual phase error between frep and the hydrogen maser
reference signal is simultaneously measured, i.e. at a high
harmonic of frep.

To conclude, the frequency of an optical frequency
standard based on the Calcium 3P1—1S0 intercombina-
tion transition at 657 nm has been measured in terms
of the output of a primary cesium frequency standard
using a novel type of optical frequency chain. Accu-
rate frequency measurements of this optical standard
are of particular importance since it represents one of
the realizations of the unit of length with lowest uncer-
tainty. Furthermore, the optical frequency of the Ca
standard is used as a reference for highly accurate fre-
quency measurements of other optical or ultraviolet tran-
sitions [20]. The frequency value presented in this Letter
agrees within its relative uncertainty with the CIPM–
recommended value, which is based on a measurement
with a harmonic frequency chain. The agreement justiﬁes
the conﬁdence in the data obtained from both measure-
ment schemes. The advantages of the novel scheme em-
ployed here, such as the substantially reduced complexity
and the accurately known, dense grid of reference fre-
quencies throughout the visible and near infrared range,
allows a variety of new applications including the real-
ization of optical clocks or ultra–precise measurements
in fundamental physics.

We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through SFB 407, ex-
perimental assistance by B. Lipphardt and H. Schnatz,
and help for the set–up of the Ti:Sapphire laser by
G. Steinmeyer and U. Keller.

[1] T. J. Quinn, Metrologia 36, 211 (1999).
[2] J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, and A. J. Stentz; Opt. Lett.

25, 25 (2000).

[3] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. J. Russell, and D. M.

Atkin; Opt. Lett. 21, 1547 (1996).

[4] N. G. R. Broderick, T. M. Monro, P. J. Bennett, and

D. J. Richardson; Opt. Lett. 24, 1395 (1999).

[5] A. Apolonski et al.; Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 740 (2000).
[6] S. A. Diddams et al.; Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102 (2000).
[7] M. Niering et al.; Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000).
[8] T. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, and T. W. H¨ansch;

Opt. Lett. 24, 881 (1999).

[9] J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, and T. W. H¨ansch;

Opt. Commun. 172, 59 (1999).

[10] H. R. Telle et al.; Appl. Phys. B 69, 327 (1999).
[11] D. J. Jones, S. A. Diddams, and J. K. Ranka; Science

288, 635 (2000).

[12] H. Schnatz et al.; Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 18 (1996).
[13] F. Riehle et al.; IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. IM 48, 613

(1999).

4

