0
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observation of emission from chaotic lasing modes in deformed microspheres:
displacement by the stable orbit modes

Seongsik Chang∗, Jens U. N¨ockel†, Richard K. Chang∗, and A. Douglas Stone∗
∗ Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520
† Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme,Dresden, Germany D-01187
(February 2, 2008)

By combining detailed imaging measurements at diﬀer-
ent tilt angles with simulations of ray emission from prolate
deformed lasing micro-droplets, we conclude that the prob-
ability density for the lasing modes in a three-dimensional
dielectric microcavity must reside in the chaotic region of the
ray phase space. In particular, maximum emission from such
chaotic lasing modes is not from tangent rays emerging from
the highest curvature part of the rim. The laser emission is
observed and calculated to be non-tangent and displaced from
the highest curvature due to the presence of stable orbits. In
this Letter we present the ﬁrst experimental evidence for this
phenomenon of “dynamical eclipsing”.

42.55.Sa,05.45.Mt,42.15.-i,42.25.-p

Both the Schr¨odinger equation and the wave equation
of optics share the property that their short wavelength
limit corresponds to a Hamiltonian dynamics: classical
Newtonian mechanics in the former case and ray-optics
in the latter. When that dynamics is non-integrable, re-
lating properties of the wave solutions to the classical
dynamics is very diﬃcult and has been an area of in-
tense study under the rubric quantum/wave chaos [1]. Of
particular interest recently is the generic non-integrable
case of a mixed phase space in which chaotic and regu-
lar regions coexist. It was noted [2–6] by several of the
authors that an interesting problem in optics, the reso-
nance and emission properties of deformed spherical and
cylindrical dielectric resonators, was just such a problem
in wave chaos theory with a mixed phase space, with res-
onant modes corresponding to both regular and chaotic
regions of phase space. It was predicted [3,5,6] that in
a substantial parameter range deformed micro-cylinder
and micro-spherical lasers would actually lase on a cer-
tain type of chaotic mode which we refer to as “chaotic
whispering gallery modes” (CWGMs). In this Letter, we
report for the ﬁrst time laser emission patterns unique
to the CWGM of deformed micro-droplet lasers. The
laser emission from CWGMs is found to be non-tangent
and its emission location is displaced from the points of
highest curvature where most of the laser emission from
regular whispering gallery modes occurs.

Whispering gallery modes (WGMs) are solutions of the
wave equation which classically correspond to rays circu-
lating around the boundary reﬂecting at high angle of
incidence; in the dielectric resonator such modes have

long lifetimes due to quasi-total internal reﬂection at the
If angular momentum is conserved,
curved boundary.
then a metastable well is formed by the centrifugal bar-
rier and the dielectric/air interface; quasi-bound states
within this well decay only by tunneling (evanescent leak-
age) [7]. If the dielectric is deformed, angular momentum
is no longer conserved and such a state may emit “over
the barrier“ by refraction, a “classically allowed“ pro-
cess. Light emission via refraction is non-tangent to the
interface, whereas that via tunneling is always tangen-
tial. Our observation of spatially displaced non-tangent
laser emission is a signature of new types of lasing modes
in this system unique to the deformed case.

A CWGM is a solution of the wave equation corre-
sponding to an ensemble of rays in a chaotic region of
phase space; and the lifetime of such modes is, for large
enough deformation, limited by refractive escape [6]. For
a deformed cylindrical resonator, such a mode obtained
by exact numerical solution of the wave equation, is de-
picted in Fig. 1(a). Superimposed on a surface of sec-
tion (SOS) of the phase space for ray motion, we show
the Husimi function of the mode [8], which is a pro-
jection of the exact wave solution for a resonant mode
onto this SOS. As can be seen in Fig. 1(a), the mode
is localized away from the critical angle for total inter-
nal reﬂection, χc, but its tail leaks downwards to χc in a
highly anisotropic fashion, leading to directional emis-
sion [4,6] [see the inset of Fig 1(a)]. Previous work
analyzed anisotropic emission patterns from deformed
lasing droplets [3] and dye jets [4] and found results
consistent with, but not unique to, lasing from chaotic
modes. Rather recently, deformed cylindrical semicon-
ductor lasers [9] were found to exhibit highly directional
and high-power output, but feedback was provided by a
mode associated with a non-chaotic “bow-tie“ orbit.

The main problem with interpreting observations from
microlasers with deformed resonators is that highly direc-
tional emission may also be obtained with non-chaotic
ray dynamics such as an elliptically-deformed cylinder
It is thus desirable to ﬁnd a distinct
[see Fig. 1(b)].
signature of lasing from chaotic modes. One such sig-
nature [4,6] is illustrated by the SOS in Figs. 1(a) and
1(b). In the SOS of Fig. 1(a), the islands which repre-
sent orbits near stable periodic paths prevent the entry
of ray ﬂux from the chaotic regions (neglecting weak tun-
neling eﬀects). This eﬀect can displace the rays of such
a chaotic mode from the points of highest curvature at

1

FIG. 2. A schematic of experimental setup for taking im-
ages of lasing micro-droplets at various inclination angles
(θD). (L1, L2: camera lenses; F1, F2: color ﬁlters; M1, M2:
mirrors; BS: beam splitter). Color ﬁlters were used to block
scattered pump laser light. Focused pumping with < 5 µm
beam diameter was used for the experiment. Images (I-1 and
I-2) of prolate droplet (b/a = 1.3) at θD = 140◦ are shown for
three diﬀerent locations of the focused pump beam; (i) equa-
torial rim, (ii) 45◦ above the equator, and (iii) north pole.

sion directions and locations on the spheroid. The lasing
microdroplets are viewed at various polar angles (θD) by
using a CCD camera. 2D imaging is essential to deter-
mine the emission locations, which cannot be provided by
a single-photodiode experiment. The experimental setup
is shown in Fig. 2 where the polar plane is deﬁned to
be the Y-Z plane. Variation of the polar angle θD of the
imaging direction is achieved by ﬁxing the camera, but
tilting the droplet generator about the pump laser direc-
tion (X-axis), which preserves the same (non-uniform)
pumping condition at all tilt angles. Simultaneous im-
ages were taken in two directions: (I-1) along the X-axis
and (I-2) along the (-Y)-axis, which were then brought
side by side with a beam splitter (BS) to the single CCD
camera. While the shape and the tilt of the droplets were
monitored by (I-1), the desired lasing images at various
values of θD are obtained from (I-2).

We only present data for prolate droplets, for which
the longest axis goes through the poles; similar eﬀects
are seen in oblate droplets but are not presented here
due to space limitations. Taking the long axis as the
z-axis, rotational symmetry implies that ray orbits can
be classiﬁed by the conserved z-component of the angu-
lar momentum, Lz [3]. The near-polar orbits of interest
correspond to Lz ≈ 0, since they correspond to motion
in a plane passing near or through the z-axis. Experi-
mentally, lasing in a particular Lz-mode can be excited
by aiming a tightly focused pump laser beam along the
droplet rim as shown in Fig 2, which subsequently en-
ters the droplet with χ ≈ χc and ﬁxes Lz to a value of
r sin θ sin χc, where r(θ) is the distance from the droplet
center to the surface (Lz in these units is equal to the

FIG. 1.

Husimi plots (red: high intensity, white: no
weight) superimposed onto classical surfaces of section for
the ray dynamics inside 2D deformed dielectric cavities with
(a) CWGM at ka = 52.85 in
refractive index n = 1.36.
a quadrupolar cavity parametrized by r(θ) = 1 + ǫ cos 2θ
with ǫ = 0.113. (b) WGM at ka = 52.04 in an ellipse with
b/a = 1.27. Insets: the corresponding wave functions in real
space. (c) Sketch of quasi-periodic four-bounce orbits (green)
and a chaotic orbit (red) inside the quadrupolar cavity of (a).

which generically high emission would be expected to oc-
cur. We refer to the scenario of Fig.1(a) as dynamical
eclipsing. This displacement of the chaotic mode rays
also has a dramatic eﬀect on the laser emission pattern,
which can be determined experimentally by taking im-
ages of the microcavity at various angles.

The identical ray dynamics underlying Fig. 1(a) for
a two-dimensional (2D) microstructure also occurs in a
plane that cuts an axisymmetric quadrupole-deformed
droplet from pole to pole through a meridian (polar
plane). Such droplets made of ethanol (refractive in-
dex, n = 1.36) containing laser dye are ejected from
the vibrating oriﬁce of a Berglund-Liu droplet genera-
tor [10], oscillating in shape [3]. The dominant multi-
pole components of this hydrodynamic oscillation [11] are
quadrupolar and octupolar with damping time constants
τ = 213 µsec for the quadrupole and τ = 39 µsec for
the octupole. For times t > 100 µsec during which the
experiments were performed, the shape deformation is
essentially purely quadrupolar, and is uniquely parame-
terized by the aspect ratio, b/a, where b and a are the
semimajor and -minor axes. A particular b/a can be se-
lected by observing the droplets stroboscopically at the
proper phase of their shape oscillation.

To detect dynamical eclipsing in the polar plane of such
deformed droplets it is necessary to measure both emis-

2

distance of closest approach of the rays to the z axis [3]).
Because Lz of such a pump beam is conserved after en-
tering the droplet, this input beam generates the highest
gain for lasing modes with the same Lz. For example
(see Fig. 2), when pumped at the equatorial rim, lasing
occurs in modes with Lz ≈ a sin χc in which rays are
conﬁned to the equatorial plane; when pumped tangen-
tially near θ = 45◦, lasing occurs in Lz ≈ 0.5 a modes for
which rays precess [12] around the z-axis due to non-zero
torque exerted on the rays at each bounce. In the the
Lz = 0.5 a case, the lasing mode is still regular and rays
encounter highest curvature near the highest (θ = 45◦) or
lowest (θ = 135◦) latitudes of the orbits and thus escape
tangentially through tunneling at these points [13].

In order to demonstrate dynamical eclipsing, near-
polar modes (Lz ≈ 0) are excited with a focused pump
beam aimed at the north pole. In this case the ray motion
is that of an eﬀective 2D cavity of aspect ratio b/a ≈ 1.3
formed by the intersection of the droplet with the po-
lar plane, and is identical to the parameters used in Fig.
1(a). No laser emission is observed in I-1, but intense
laser emission is observed from the bottom of I-2 (see
Fig.2). Such an emission pattern indicates that main las-
ing emission does not occur from the highest curvature
points (north pole or south pole), but away from these
points, consistent with the prediction of dynamical eclips-
ing in Fig 1(a). To explain this in more detail, note ﬁrst
that there exists a four-bounce stable diamond-shaped
orbit for rays in the polar plane [Fig. 1(c)], which can
support stable resonant modes; however these modes do
not provide suﬃcient feedback for lasing because of the
large refractive leakage near the pole. Speciﬁcally, the
round-trip loss for the four-bounce orbit is 4.6, which is
signiﬁcantly greater than the estimated maximum round-
trip gain of 0.9 for 5 × 10−4M Rhodamine B dye solu-
tion in ethanol. However, chaotic orbits launched with
χ ≫ χc can undergo multiple (more than 100) reﬂec-
tions before they reach χc. Therefore, the leakage loss
of a CWGM is much less than the round-trip gain, and
consequently, lasing can occur with feedback provided by
chaotic modes. However, the non-lasing four-bounce sta-
ble diamond orbits displace the laser emission location of
the CWGMs [see Fig. 1(a), (c)]. Regular WGMs with
χ ≈ 90◦ still exist for Lz ≈ 0 and lase for this deforma-
tion; however their leakage rate is much smaller than the
absorption rate. The fact that the north and south pole
is dark indicates the emission from such regular WGM is
at least two orders of magnitude weaker than that from
dynamically eclipsed CWGM for Lz ≈ 0.

Figure 3 shows additional results consistent with this
interpretation of dynamical eclipsing of CWGMs; in this
case an unfocused beam was used to excite all the possi-
ble Lz-modes. For the experimental images at θD = 90◦,
the bright regions along the droplet rim are due to a su-
perposition of laser emission from precessing modes at
diﬀerent Lz. The abrupt disappearance of emission at

3

FIG. 3. (a) Experimental lasing images (I-1 and I-2) of
broadly-pumped (beam diameter: > 100 µm) prolate droplets
(b/a = 1.29) are shown for θD = 90◦, 122◦, and 146◦ (pump
laser was vertically polarized and f/16 lens was used). Cor-
responding calculated lasing images (I-2) at θD = 90◦, 120◦,
and 150◦ are shown for quadrupole (b) and elliptic (c) de-
formations.
In the simulation, equally mixed TE and TM
polarizations were used to calculate Fresnel coeﬃcients for
the emerging laser rays.

the rim near the two poles indicates the absence [3] of
such regular precessing modes with χ ≈ χc near Lz = 0.
A very diﬀerent emission pattern is seen in I-2 at tilt
angles of θD = 122◦ and 146◦; here we see substantial
emission in the plane bisecting the poles of the droplet
along the imaging direction; such emission can only come
from Lz ≈ 0 orbits. Moreover the fact that the Lz ≈ 0
emission is not seen at θD = 90◦ insures that the emis-
sion does not come from the poles (the points of highest
curvature), but displaced from the two poles in a manner
consistent with the dynamical eclipsing scenario.

Ray simulations of refractive emission for the unfo-
cused pumping case were performed for the quadrupole
shape [Fig. 3(b)] and ellipsoid [Fig. 3(c)]. Uniformly
distributed rays in θ and Lz were launched with initial
χ greater than χc. The lasing condition was imposed in
the ray simulations by including only orbits which have
pathlength (before refractive escape) greater than 1/g,
where the gain is estimated to be g ≈ 45 cm−1. Ray
escape was determined by Snell’s law and the relevant
Fresnel coeﬃcients at each reﬂection. Note that in the
quadrupole simulations, there is strong emission near the
bottom center of the image at θD = 146◦ and no emission
at the poles of the image at θD = 90◦, in good qualita-
tive agreement with the experiments [14].
In contrast,
the ellipsoid simulation shows that most of the refractive
emission occurs at θD = 90◦, and essentially no emis-
sion is found at θD = 146◦ in distinct contrast with our
experimental results. This result provides crucial sup-
port for our interpretation of the images as arising from
dynamical eclipsing. The ray motion in the ellipsoid is
completely regular, with no chaotic regions and no four-
bounce stable islands [see Fig. 1(b)]; hence dynamical

the ellipse [see the inset of Fig. 1(b)].
In Fig. 4(b),
lasing images at θD = 142◦ are shown for various b/a;
1.07, 1.20, and 1.29. For b/a = 1.07, the entire rim of
the droplet up to the poles is bright in I-1, while no laser
emission is recorded in I-2 [note the similarity to the el-
lipsoid simulations in Fig. 3(c)]. Thus we ﬁnd a range of
intermediate deformations with highly anisotropic emis-
sion, but no dynamical eclipsing, which is then turned on
by increasing b/a.
In summary,

laser emission from a quadrupole-
deformed spherical microcavity is observed to be partially
non-tangent and displaced from the highest curvature re-
gions. This provides for the ﬁrst time conclusive evidence
of lasing supported by chaotic whispering gallery modes.
These modes are displaced from the high curvature points
by stable high-loss modes, an eﬀect known as dynamical
eclipsing. The unique angular dependence of the lasing
images is in good agreement with simulated images of
lasing quadrupolar droplets with chaotic ray dynamics.
We would like to acknowledge the partial support of

NSF (Grant PHY-9612200).

[1] M. C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Me-

chanics (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990).

[2] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R. K. Chang,

Opt. Lett. 19, 1693 (1994).

[3] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone, and

R. K. Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett.75, 2682 (1995).

[4] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, G. Chen, H. Grossman, and

R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett.21, 1609 (1996).

[5] J. U. N¨ockel, and A. D. Stone, Chapter 11, in Optical
Processes in Microcavities, edited by R. K. Chang, and
A. J. Campillo (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996).
[6] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[7] B. R. Johnson, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A10, 343 (1993).
[8] P. LeBoeuf and M. Saraceno, J. Phys. A Mah. Gen. 23,

1745 (1990).

[9] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, E. E. Narimanov, J. U. N¨ockel,
A. D. Stone, J. Faist, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, Science
280, 1556 (1998).

[10] R. N. Berglund and B. Y. H. Liu, Envir. Sci. Technol. 7,

[11] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics

(Dover, New York, 1945)

147 (1973).

pp. 473-475.

[12] J. C. Swindal, D. H. Leach, R. K. Chang, and K. Young,

[13] S. Chang, N. B. Rex, and R. K. Chang, to be published

Opt. Lett.18, 191 (1993).

in J. Opt. Soc. Am. B.

[14] Because the ray simulations do not include tunneling,
they cannot account for the bright rims in the experi-
mental images at θD = 90◦.

FIG. 4.

(a) Images of broadly-pumped lasing prolate
droplets ( b/a = 1.29) at θD = 142◦ with various f-numbers
(f/16, f/8, f/4/, and f/2). Because the solid angle of light
acceptance is proportional to ≈ 1/(f /#)
, the color intensity
scale for each f/# is adjusted accordingly. The depth of ﬁeld
[∝ (f /#)
] for each f/# is shown relative to the droplet size.
The imaging direction is on the right of the droplet. (b) Las-
ing images of broadly-pumped prolate droplets with various
aspect ratios. Dynamical eclipsing is not present for small
deformation (b/a = 1.07).

2

2

eclipsing does not occur and one ﬁnds only tangent emis-
sion from the poles [Fig. 1(b), inset].

To further conﬁrm that the emission seen at large
tilt angles is non-tangent and hence refractive as we ex-
pect from CWGMs, we have varied the depth of ﬁeld,
df /#, and the acceptance angle (f-number) of the imag-
ing system. In Fig 4(a), images are shown with various
df /#’s for a lasing prolate droplets with b/a = 1.29 at
θD = 142◦. The f-number of the camera lens was changed
from f/2 (df /2 = 10 mm, 14% of the droplet size along
the imaging axis) to f/16 (df /16 = 600µm, covering the
whole droplet). While the bright emission is sharply im-
aged at the bottom center of the image with f/16, f/8,
and f/4, the corresponding emission is blurred with f/2.
From this we conclude that this laser emission is emitted
from outside of the region deﬁned by df /2. If such emis-
sion propagates parallel to the imaging axis, the emitted
rays are non-tangent. For the f/16 image, the emission
direction is restricted to within 2◦ from the imaging axis.
Laser emission from the displaced location implied by the
df /# analysis above is non-tangent by as much as 10◦ -
30◦. Therefore, dynamically eclipsed rays from CWGM
are non-tangent up to 30◦, which indicates refraction is
the major escape mechanism.

Further conﬁrmation comes from the aspect-ratio de-
pendence of the patterns [Fig. 4(b)]. For moderate de-
formations the islands become too small to generate dy-
namical eclipsing, and the expected emission from the
polar orbits is tangential to the poles as in the case for

4

