1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chirality and helicity in terms of
topological spin and topological torsion

R. M. Kiehn
University of Houston
rkiehn2352@aol.com

Abstract: In this article the concept of enantiomorphism is de-
veloped in terms of topological, rather than geometrical, con-
cepts. Chirality is to be associated with enantiomorphic pairs
which induce Optical Activity, while Helicity is to be associated
enantiomorphic pairs which induce a Faraday eﬀect. Experimen-
tally, the existence of enantiomorphic pairs is associated with the
lack of a center of symmetry, which is also serves as a necessary
condition for Optical Activity. However, Faraday eﬀects may or
may not require a lack of a center of symmetry. The two species
of enantiomorphic pairs are distinct, as the rotation of the plane
of polarization by Optical Activity is a reciprocal phenomenon,
while rotation of the plane of polarization by the Faraday eﬀect
is a non-reciprocal phenomenon. From a topological viewpoint,
Maxwell’s electrodynamics indicates that the concept of Chirality
is to be associated with a third rank tensor density of Topological
Spin induced by the interaction of the 4 vector potentials {A, φ }
and the ﬁeld excitations (D, H). The distinct concept of Helicity
is to be associated with the third rank tensor ﬁeld of Topological
Torsion induced by the interaction of the 4 vector potentials and
ﬁeld intensities (E, B).

1 Introduction

It is a remarkable result of experimental chemistry, recognized by Pasteur
and others, that there can exist enantiomorphic pairs of states of chemical
systems that cannot be smoothly mapped into one another, starting from
the identity. From a geometrical perspective, right handed quartz and left
handed quartz are systems with apparent equivalent energies, yet with de-
If
cidedly diﬀerent behavior when interacting with electromagnetic ﬁelds.

1

fact, the rotation of the plane of optical polarization is often used as a tool to
distinguish the enantiomorphic isotopes. However, the issue is deeper than
that of geometry. There exist topologically equivalent isotopes that cannot
be smoothly mapped into one another starting from the identity. Geo-
metrical properties are those subsets of topological properties that depend
upon size and shape. However, herein, the category of interest is that subset
of topological properties which do not depend upon the geometrical issues
of size and shape, and yet are to be associated with enantiomorphic pairs.
These distinct topological isotopes (enantiomers) are of diﬀerent size and
shape and are connected by homeomorphisms, but they are not smoothly
connected to one another by a map about the identity. The properties and
existence of such topological enantiomers is the theme of this article. For
example, a right handed Moebius band is topologically equivalent to a left
handed Moebius band, but possibly of diﬀerent size and distorted shape.
The homeomorphism between the two topological isotopes consists of more
than one step: the right handed Moebius band can be transformed into a left
handed Moebius band by ﬁrst cutting the band, applying a 360 degree twist,
and then reconnecting the cut ends such that points that were initially near
to one another remain near to one another. Such a combination of processes
is not C2 smooth but can be continuous in the topological sense.

The objective of this article is to examine those special features of electro-
magnetic systems that can exhibit topological enantiomers, and to determine
how such enantiomers can be created. As all chemical systems are special
examples of electromagnetic interactions, the methods to be developed are
useful to the understanding of the more constrained (geometrical) features
of chemical enantiomorphism. A remarkable, but little appreciated, fact is
that the electromagnetic ﬁeld itself has certain properties that exhibit the
topological enantiomorphism mentioned above. Hence a study of these elec-
tromagnetic properties (deﬁned below as topological torsion and topological
spin) delivers a necessary foundation for the existence, control and modiﬁ-
cation of the geometric properties of enantiomorphism displayed in modern
chemistry.

In modern steriochemistry, Optical Activity and Faraday Rotation have
a dominant experimental role. Optical Activity and Faraday Rotation have
many similarities, yet they are distinct, diﬀerent, electromagnetic phenom-
ena. A necessary, but not suﬃcient, condition for Optical Activity in crys-
talline structures is the lack of a center of symmetry. This lack of a center of
symmetry is often used as the basis for deﬁning ”chirality”, and, conversely,

2

chirality is often associated with Optical Activity. However, according to
Post [1], there exist 3 crystal classes without a center of symmetry (crys-
tal classes 26,27,29) that do not support Optical Activity, hence a lack of
a center of symmetry is not suﬃcient condition for Optical Activity. Note
that Optically Active media have the capability of ”rotating” the plane of
polarization, as linearly polarized light passes through the media, a practical
eﬀect used by the wine grower to estimate the sugar content in his grapes.

Similar rotation of the plane of polarization occurs when linearly polarized
light passes through Faraday media. However, Faraday eﬀects can exist both
in crystalline structures that have a center of symmetry and in crystalline
structures that do not have a center of symmetry. Post reports that there
are 9 crystalline structures that support both optical Activity and Faraday
rotation. What are the intrinsic diﬀerences between Optical Activity and
In his book ”Formal Structure of Electromagnetics”,
Faraday Rotation?
E. J. Post [1] clearly delineates the diﬀerences between Optical Activity and
Faraday rotation, and demonstrates solutions to Maxwell’s equations for both
eﬀects. The crucial result is that Optical Activity is reciprocal and Faraday
Rotation is not.

In short, the lack of a center of symmetry, the rotation of the plane of
polarization, and the existence of enantiomorphic pairs, are necessary but not
suﬃcient properties to deﬁne the concept of chirality. There exist two species
of phenomena that exhibit the three properties stated above, one species is
”reciprocal” and deﬁnes Chirality, and the other species is ”non-reciprocal”
and deﬁnes Helicity. These diﬀerences between Chirality and Helicity deserve
attention, clariﬁcation, and exploitation. Such is the purpose of this article.

1.1

Transverse Inbound and Outbound Waves

First consider a complex four vector potential solution to the vector wave
equation which propagates as a transverse wave in the ±z direction with a
phase θ = ±kz ∓ ωt. There are 4 possibilities: The E ﬁeld rotates about the
z axis in a Right Handed manner as viewed by an observer looking towards
the positive z direction, or it rotates in a Left Handed manner. Outbound
θ = kz − ωt and Inbound θ = −kz − ωt waves are to be distinguished as
ORH, OLH, IRH, and ILH..

3

ORH =

ei(kz−ωt)

IRH =

ei(−kz−ωt)

OLH =

ei(kz−ωt)

I LH =

ei(−kz−ωt)

(1)

(2)

1
i +
1
−i +

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1
i +
1
−i +

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

For media with the symmetries of the Lorentz vacuum, the phase velocities
v = ω/k are the same for all four modes. Addition or subtraction of ORH and
OLH produces a Linearly polarized state outbound. Addition or subtraction
of IRH and ILH produces a Linearly polarized state inbound.

Next, recall the experimental diﬀerences between Optical Activity and

Faraday Rotation:

1.1.1

Optical Activity

Consider an optically active ﬂuid (sugar in water) in a cylindrical tube of
length L. For Optical Activity, there are also two distinct phase velocities,
ω/k1 and ω/k2. Outbound Right Handed (ORH) circularly polarized light
propagates with a phase speed equal to the phase speed of Inbound Left
Handed (ILH) circularly polarized light. Outbound Left Handed (OLH)
polarized light propagates with a phase velocity diﬀerent from the phase
velocity of Outbound Right Handed polarized light (ORH), but with the
same speed as that of Inbound Right Handed (IRH) polarized light.
In
summary,

Optical Activity Phase Velocity, VORH = VILH 6= VOLH = VIRH

(3)

The wave solutions for optical activity are of the format:

1
i +
1
−i +

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

ORH =

exp i(k1z − ωt)

exp i(−k2z − ωt)

(4)

OLH =

exp i(k2z − ωt)

exp i(−k1z − ωt)

The addition of |ORHi + |OLHi produces a Linearly Polarized state
propagating outbound, whose plane of polarization rotates. When the

IRH =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
ILH =
(cid:12)

1
i +
1
−i +

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

4

two inbound states are added, |IRHi + |ILHi , a linearly polarized state
is achieved, and its plane of polarization also rotates but in the opposite
direction as the outbound rotation.
In other words, the round trip (out-
bound+reﬂection+inbound) motion causes the plane of polarization to re-
turn to its initial value. This result deﬁnes what is meant by a reciprocal
eﬀect. If the plane of polarization of the original linearly polarized light beam
suﬀers a rotation in the amount of θ degrees as it traverses the Optically Ac-
tive media, when reﬂected in a mirror, the plane of polarization suﬀers an
negative rotation of θ degrees, as the light beam traverses the media in the
reverse direction. The plane of polarization returns to its original state after
(The sense of Right Handed and Left Handed polarization
the round trip.
is determined by an observer looking away from himself.)

1.2

Faraday Rotation

Consider a gas of He-Ne in a cylindrical tube of length L. Surround the tube
with a coil of wire that will produce a coaxial magnetic ﬁeld that partially
aligns the spins of the gas atoms. For such Faraday media, there are two
distinct phase velocities, ω/k1 and ω/k2. Outbound Right Handed (ORH)
circularly polarized light propagates with a phase speed equal to the phase
speed of Inbound Right Handed (IRH) circularly polarized light. Outbound
Left Handed (OLH) polarized light propagates with a phase velocity diﬀerent
from the phase velocity of Outbound Right Handed polarized light (ORH),
but with the same speed as that of Inbound Left Handed (ILH) polarized
light.

In summary,

Faraday Eﬀect Phase Velocity, VORH = VIRH 6= VOLH = VILH

(5)

The wave solutions for the Faraday eﬀect are of the format:

|ORHi =

exp i(k1z − ωt)

exp i(−k1z − ωt)

(6)

|OLHi =

exp i(k2z − ωt)

exp i(−k2z − ωt)

The formulas represent circularly polarized waves. The addition of |RHOi+
|LHOi produces a Linearly Polarized state propagating outbound, whose

1
i +
1
−i +

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

|IRHi =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
|ILHi =
(cid:12)

1
i +
1
−i +

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

5

plane of polarization rotates. When the two inbound states are added,
|RHIi + |LHIi , a linearly polarized state is achieved, and its plane of polar-
ization also rotates in the same direction as the outbound rotation.
In other
words, the round trip (outbound+reﬂection+inbound) motion does not cause
the plane of polarization to return to its initial value. This result deﬁnes
what is meant by a non-reciprocal eﬀect.
If the plane of polarization of the
original linearly polarized light beam suﬀers a rotation in the amount of θ
degrees as it traverses the Faraday media, when reﬂected in a mirror, the
plane of polarization suﬀers an additional rotation of θ degrees, as the light
beam traverses the media in the reverse direction. The plane of polarization
does not return to its original state, but instead ratchets by 2θ degrees upon
completing the round trip.
(The sense of Right Handed and Left Handed
polarization is determined by an observer looking away from himself.)

1.3 Polar and Axial vectors

Following Schouten [2], Post points out that Faraday Rotation is ”generated”
by a ”W vector”, while Optical Activity is generated by a ”vector”. Under
certain constraints, the W vector plays the role of an ”Axial” vector, while
the ”vector” becomes a ”polar” vector. Upon reﬂection, a polar vector
changes its sense (determined by the arrow head). Point your ﬁnger into a
mirror. The image points back at you. The sense of the image is opposite
to the sense of the object. For polar vectors with a line of action parallel to
the mirror surface, the opposite result is obtained. The sense of the image
is the same as the sense of the object. Note the diﬀerences of orthogonal
and parallel reﬂections.

A reﬂected axial vector does not change its sense if the line of action
is orthogonal to the mirror. Curl you ﬁngers and align your thumb in a
direction orthogonal to the mirror.
It does not matter whether the thumb
points into or away from the mirror. The sense of the ”axial vector” is
determined by the curl of the ﬁngers. The sense of the reﬂected image is the
same as the sense of the object. The opposite eﬀect occurs when the line
of action of the axial vector is parallel to the reﬂection surface. The sense,
as determined by the curl of the ﬁngers, is opposite to that of the reﬂected
image.

The magnetic ﬁeld B and the angular velocity Ω are examples of spatial
”W vectors”. On the other hand, the D ﬁeld is a spatial ”polar vector”

6

in the sense used by Post. The anti-symmetric spatial components of the
covariant ﬁeld intensity tensor 2-form, F = dA, are formed by the spatial
”W vector” ﬁeld B. The anti-symmetric spatial components of the tensor
density, N-2 form, G, where J = dG, are formed by the spatial ”polar vector”
ﬁeld D. These facts yield a clue for distinguishing Faraday Rotation and
Optical Activity on topological grounds. As will be shown below, Faraday
Rotation is to be associated with the concept of Topological Torsion, and
Optical Activity is to be associated with the concept of Topological Spin.

2 Topological Formulation of Maxwell’s Equa-

tions.

2.1

Exterior Diﬀerential Systems

It is known that Maxwell’s system of PDE’s (without constitutive constraints)
can be expressed as an exterior diﬀerential system [3] on a variety of indepen-
dent variables. Exterior diﬀerential systems impose topological constraints
on a diﬀerential variety. For the Maxwell electromagnetic system on a do-
main {x,y,z,t} the two topological constraints have been called the Postulate
[4]. These two
of Potentials, and the Postulate of Conserved Currents.
topological constraints lead to the system of Partial Diﬀerential Equations,
known as Maxwell’s equations, for any coordinate system so constrained.
No metric, no connection, nor other restraints of a geometrical nature are
required on the 4 dimensional diﬀerential variety of independent variables,
typically written as {x, y, z, t}.

Postulate of Potentials (an exact 2-form)

F − dA = 0 (7)

Postulate of Conserved Currents (an exact 3-form)

J − dG = 0

(8)

The method of exterior diﬀerential systems insures that the description
is not only diﬀeomorphically invariant in form (natural covariance of form
with respect to all invertible smooth coordinate transformations), but also
the description is functionally well deﬁned with respect to maps which are C2
continuous, but not necessarily invertible. This statement implies that those

7

exterior diﬀerential forms which are deﬁned on a ﬁnal state variety can be
”pulled back” in a functionally well deﬁned manner to an initial state variety,
even though the map from initial to ﬁnal state of coordinate variables is NOT
a diﬀeomorphic coordinate transformation. The inverse mapping need not
exist. This result is truly a remarkable property of Maxwell electrodynamics,
for it permits the analysis of certain irreversible electrodynamic processes
without the use of statistics. The ”push forward” process is not functionally
well deﬁned when the inverse map does not exist, a fact that demonstrates
that topological evolution induces an ”arrow of time” [5].

2.2

Constitutive Constraints

In practical applications, it is possible to impose constraints on the Maxwell
system in the form of constitutive relations between the thermodynamically
conjugate variables of ﬁeld intensity (E, B) and ﬁeld excitations (D, H).
Post has demonstrated that the constitutive tensor (density) has many of
the properties of the Riemann tensor [6]. These constraints are NOT nec-
essarily equivalent to the Riemann tensor generated by a Riemannian metric
imposed upon the variety {x, y, z, t}.
In many circumstances the equiva-
lence classes of such constitutive constraints can be put into correspondence
with the geometrical symmetries of the 32 crystal classes that are used to
discriminate between the many diﬀerent observed physical structures. As
mentioned above, a complex 6x6 constitutive constraint has been used by
Post to delineate between Optical Activity, Faraday Phenomena, Birefrin-
gence and Fresnel-Fizeau motion induced eﬀects in electromagnetic signal
propagation. The complex constitutive tensor cannot be deduced from a
real metric tensor. However it would appear that the constitutive tensor
has a constructive deﬁnition in terms of a non-symmetric connection.

Indeed, the work of Post, who subsumed a complex constitutive tensor,
has been extended [7] to demonstrate the existence of
irreducible ”quater-
nion” solutions to the Maxwell system. Quaternion waves cannot be rep-
resented by complex functions, which are the usual choice for describing
electromagnetic signals. Complex wave solutions generate a 4th order char-
acteristic polynomial for the phase speed which is doubly degenerate. The
wave speeds have only two distinct magnitudes depending upon direction
and polarization. For cases where a center of symmetry is not available,
and yet the medium supports both Optical Activity and Faraday rotation,
the wave solutions can NOT be expressed as complex functions, but can be

8

written as quaternions. The resulting 4th order characteristic polynomial
for the wave speeds is not degenerate and has four distinct root magnitudes.
The results indicate that the phase propagation speed of light is diﬀerent for
each direction of propagation and for each mode of polarization. The theory
has been used to explain the experimental results measured in dual polarized
ring laser apparatus.

In contrast, in a medium with the Lorentz symmetries, the characteristic
polynomial is 4-fold degenerate; e.g., all polarizations and all directions have
the same propagation speed. The result leads to the ubiquitous statement
that the speed of light is the same for all observers, which is incorrect for me-
dia that do not have the Lorentz symmetries. For Birefringent, or Optically
Active, or Faraday media, the characteristic polynomial for phase velocity is
doubly degenerate, implying a relationship exists between for the 4 modes of
propagation. There exist only two distinct phase velocity magnitudes. The
correlation speeds for direction and polarization pairs have been presented
above. Faraday rotation and Optical Activity have diﬀerent propagation
direction-polarization handedness correlations. The Faraday rotation is not
reciprocal; the rotation induced by Optical Activity is reciprocal.

2.3 Topological Three Forms

The classic formalism of electromagnetism is a consequence of a system of
two fundamental topological constraints as deﬁned above on a domain of four
independent variables. The theory requires the existence of two fundamental
exterior diﬀerential forms, {A, G}, where the postulates permit the construc-
tion of the diﬀerential ideal {A, F = dA, G, J = dG}. This system of diﬀer-
ential forms may be prolonged (by construction all possible exterior products)
to yield the Pfaﬀ sequence of forms: {A, F, G, J, AˆG, AˆF, AˆG, F ˆF, F ˆG, AˆJ, GˆG}.
On a domain of four independent variables, the complete Pfaﬀ sequence con-
tains three 3-forms: the classic 3-form of charge current density, J, and the
(apparently novel to many researchers) 3-forms of Spin Current density,
AˆG,[9] and Topological Torsion-Helicity, AˆF [10].

The 3-form of Charge Current density

J = dG

The 3-form of Topological Spin density

S = AˆG

The 3-form of Topological Torsion

T = AˆF

(9)

(10)

(11)

9

In most elementary descriptions of electromagnetic theory, the 3-forms of
Spin and Torsion are ignored.
By direct evaluation of the exterior prod-
uct, and on a domain of 4 independent variables, each 3-form will have 4
components that can be symbolized (in engineering format) by the 4-vector
arrays

Spin − Current : S4 = [A × H + Dφ, A ◦ D] ≡ [S,σ],

(12)

and

T orsion − vector : T4 = [E × A + Bφ, A ◦ B] ≡ [T,h],

(13)

which are to be compared with the four construction components of the
charge current 4-vector density:

Ch arg e − Current : J4 = [J, ρ].

(14)

2.4

Topological Invariants

The closed integral of each of the three 3-forms is a deformation invariant
(hence a topological property) if the selected 3-form is closed in an exterior
derivative sense (dJ = 0, dS = 0, dT = 0 respectively).
For example,
for any 3-form, J, such that dJ = 0, the Lie derivative of the closed inte-
gral relative to an arbitrary process path denoted by βV is given by the
expression,

LβV

(J) =

{i(βV )d(J)+d(i(βV )(J)} =

{0+d(i(βV )(AˆG)} = 0.

closed
RRR

closed
RRR

closed
RRR

(15)
The zero result is interpreted by the statement ”the closed integral is a defor-
mation invariant” for the process can be deformed by any non-zero function
β(x, y, z, t), and the integral is unchanged.

As the charge current 3-form, J, is closed by construction, (dJ = ddG = 0)
it follows that its closed integral is always a deformation invariant. The result
leads to another ubiquitous statement known in electromagnetic theory as
the ”Conservation of electric charge”. It is not equivalent to the quantization
of charge. The additional topological constraints of closure imply that the
By direct
exterior derivative of each of the three forms is empty (zero).

10

computation, such a constraint of diﬀerential closure leads to the Poincare
invariants for the electromagnetic system.

P oincare 1 = d(AˆG) = F ˆG − AˆJ

= {div3(A × H + Dφ) + ∂(A ◦ D)/∂t}dxˆdyˆdzˆdt
= {(B ◦ H − D ◦ E) − (A ◦ J − ρφ)}dxˆdyˆdzˆdt

(16)

P oincare 2 = d(AˆF ) = F ˆF

= {div3(E × A + Bφ) + ∂(A ◦ B)/∂t}dxˆdyˆdzˆdt
= {−2E ◦ B}dxˆdyˆdzˆdt

(17)

For a (vacuum) state, with J = 0, zero values of the Poincare invari-
ants require that the magnetic energy density is equal to the electric energy
density (1/2B ◦ H = 1/2D ◦ E), and, respectively, that the electric ﬁeld is
orthogonal to the magnetic ﬁeld (E ◦ B = 0). Note that these constraints
often are used as elementary textbook deﬁnitions of what is meant by elec-
tromagnetic waves. The possible values of the topological quantities, as
deRham period integrals [11], form rational ratios and topological quantum
numbers. These quantum numbers should NOT be considered as topolog-
ical ”charge”. Electromagnetic (topological) charge is related to the two
dimensional closed integrals of G, not the three dimensional closed integrals
described above.

2.5

Field Momentum, Propagation direction, and the

4-Vector Potential

The 4 vector potential A4 = [A, φ] is diﬀerent from the 4 dimensional
propagation vector k4 = [k, ω];
in many cases the two vectors are not
In the language of diﬀerential
even proportional (although they can be).
forms, it must be recognized that there is a diﬀerence between the 1-form,
A = Axdx+Aydy +Azdz −φdt, and the 1-form, k = kxdx+kydy +kzdz −ωdt.
k. The propagation 1-form k is de-
The integral of k deﬁnes the phase θ =
ﬁned from the equations that generate the singular solutions [7] to Maxwell’s
equations:

R

kˆF = 0,

and kˆG = 0.

(18)

11

Note that these equations for singular solutions are derived from the 3-forms
kˆF and kˆG constrained to be zero. The 3-form kˆF is not necessarily the
same as the 3-form, AˆF. Similarly, the 3-form kˆG is not necessarily the
same as the 3-form, AˆG. These singular solutions are always transverse in
a geometrical sense that the wave 3 vector k is in the direction of the ﬁeld
momentum, D × B. Both the D vector and the B vector are orthogonal to
the wave vector, k, that generates singular solutions.

The 1-forms, k, that satisfy the equations

Associated 1-forms k {kˆF = 0, kˆG = 0}

(19)

are deﬁned as the ”associated” 1-forms relative to F and G. The 1-forms,
k, that satisfy the equations

Extremal 1-forms k {kˆdF = 0, kˆdG = 0}

(20)

are deﬁned as ”extremal” 1-forms relative to F and G. 1-forms such that

characteristic 1-forms k {kˆF = 0, kˆG = 0, kˆdF = 0, kˆdG = 0}, (21)

are deﬁned as the ”characteristic” 1-forms, k. These 1-forms k are dual to
the associated, extremal, and characteristic vector ﬁelds, V , which satisfy
the equations

Associated vector ﬁelds V {i(V )A = 0, i(V )G = 0}

(22)

Extremal vector ﬁelds V

{i(V )dA = 0, i(V )dG = 0},

(23)

or

or

Characteristic vector ﬁelds V for A {i(V )A = 0,
i(V )G = 0,
Characteristic vector ﬁelds V for G

i(V )dA = 0,(24)
i(V )dG = 0},(25)

respectively.

The concepts of Spin Current and the Torsion vector have been utilized
hardly at all in applications of classical electromagnetic theory. Just as the
vanishing of the 3-form of charge current, J = 0, deﬁnes the topological do-
main called the vacuum, the vanishing of the two other 3-forms will reﬁne
the fundamental topology of the Maxwell system. Such constraints permit

12

a deﬁnition of transversality to be made on topological (rather than geomet-
If both AˆG and AˆF vanish, the vacuum state supports
rical) grounds.
topologically transverse modes only (TTEM). Examples lead to the conjec-
ture that TTEM modes do not transmit power, a conjecture that has been
veriﬁed when the concept of geometric transversality (TEM) and topologi-
cal transversality (TTEM) coincide. A topologically transverse magnetic
(TTM) mode corresponds to the topological constraint that AˆF = 0. A
topologically transverse electric mode (TTE) corresponds to the topological
constraint that AˆG = 0. Examples, both novel and well-known, of vac-
uum solutions to the electromagnetic system which satisfy (and which do
not satisfy) these topological constraints are given [12]. The ideas should
be of interest to those working in the ﬁeld of Fiber Optics. Recall that clas-
sic waveguide solutions which are geometrically and topologically transverse
(TEM≡TTEM) do not transmit power [13]. However, in [12] an example
vacuum wave solution is given which is geometrically transverse (the ﬁelds
are orthogonal to the ﬁeld momentum and the wave vector), and yet the geo-
metrically transverse wave transmits power at a constant rate: the example
wave is not topologically transverse as AˆF 6= 0.

2.6 Connections for Right handed vs Left handed evo-

lution

In spaces (such as Finsler spaces) which may or may not be Riemannian, the
topological concept of diﬀerential neighborhoods that are linearly connected
that
implies the existence, over the domain, of a matrix of functions
will linearly map 1-forms (linear combinations of diﬀerentials |ωa(q, dq)i) into
1-forms (linear combinations of diﬀerentials

a (qb)
F k
h

σk(q, dq)

).

i

F k
a (qb)
h

i

◦ |ωa(q, dq)i ⇒

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

E
σk(q, dq)

.

E

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(26)

The map between diﬀerentials is linear, but the matrix elements are not
domain constants (non-linearity is built in). The columns of the matrix
of functions forms a matrix of basis vectors over the domain which may be
used to express any tensorial properties. The matrix of basis vectors deﬁnes
what Cartan called the Repere Mobile, or the moving frame, for its values
change as a point p moves along some curve in the domain.
If the mapping
of 1-forms is integrable,

13

a (qb)
F k
h

i

dxk
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

E

integrable basis :

◦ |dqai ⇒

,

implies xk = f k(qb) (27)

then there exist functions whose diﬀerentials are exact, and the mapping is
said to be holonomic. Often it is presumed that the functional mapping
exists (and as such is called a coordinate transformation under certain ad-
ditional constraints) and the Frame matrix is deduced by the diﬀerential
operations to produce the Jacobian matrix of the transformation. However,
there are other ways to impose or deduce a Frame matrix on a domain.

The fundamental question of a connection is related to the diﬀerential
neighborhood properties of the Frame matrix. As the Frame matrix, by
deﬁnition of its domain, has a non-zero determinant, then it admits an in-
verse matrix, and by diﬀerential and algebraic processes the (right Cartan)
connection matrix [CR] (or the left Cartan matrix [CL]) can be constructed:

d [F ] = − [F ] ◦ [dG] ◦ [F ]
= − [CL] ◦ [F ]
= + [F ] ◦ [CR] .

(28)

The matrix elements of [CR] and [CL] are diﬀerential 1-forms. These matrix
elements do not necessarily vanish nor are they necessarily equal.
It is to
be noted that the left and the right Cartan matrices are (anti-) similarity
transforms of one another.

The reason that there are two distinct methods for constructing the linear
mapping is based upon the fact that a matrix, whose determinant is non
- zero, always has two representations, a left handed and a right handed
representation. The two representations always consist of either a (right
handed) product of a unitary matrix times a Hermitean matrix, or the (left
handed) product of a Hermitean matrix times a unitary matrix. Only if
the original matrix is ”normal” ( such that the product of itself times its
Hermitian conjugate is equal to the product of its Hermitian conjugate times
itself) will the right and left handed product representations be degenerately
the same [8]. It is this handedness property of topological neighborhoods that
captures the features of electromagnetic charge distributions of molecules and
crystals that exhibit enantiomorphic states.

In the electromagnetic situation, the constitutive map is often considered
to be (within a factor) a linear mapping between two six dimensional vector

14

spaces. As such the constitutive map can have both a right or a left handed
representation, implying that there are two topologically equivalent states
that are not smoothly equivalent about the identity.

In the geometric situation, the matrix elements of frame matrix,

,
are not constants. The two mechanisms (right and left handed) for neigh-
i
borhood expressions imply that the connection is not generated from a sym-
In short, the
metric metric. Such connections are said to admit torsion.
concept of an aﬃne connection is more general than the Hermitian (sym-
metric) connection oﬀered by the Christoﬀel symbols ( which are generated
from a metric). Any domain which is parallelizable will support a linear
connection of diﬀerentials.

a (qb)
F k
h

3 Acknowledgments

This work was presented at the International Symposium on Chirality, ISCD
12 — Chirality 2000, Chamonix, France

4 References

[1] Post, E. J., (1997), ”Formal Structure of Electromagnetics”, Dover p 166.
[2] Schouten, J. A., (1954), ”Tensor Analysis for Physicists”, Dover p.32
[3] Bryant, R.L.,Chern, S.S., Gardner, R.B.,Goldschmidt, H.L., and Grif-

ﬁths, P. A., (1991), ”Exterior Diﬀerential Systems”, Springer Verlag.

[4] Kiehn, R. M., (1998), http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/classice.pdf
[5] Kiehn, R. M., (1976), ”Retrodictive Determinism”, Int. J. of Eng.

Sci. 14, p. 749

Ibid, Post, p. 188

[6]
[7] Kiehn, R. M., Kiehn, G. P., and Roberds, R. B. (1991) ”Parity and
Time-reversal Symmetry Breaking, Singular Solutions”, Phys Rev A, 43, p.
5665

[8] Turnbull, H. W. and Aitken, A. C., (1961) ”An Introduction to the

Theory of Canonical Matrices”, Dover, p194.

[9] Kiehn, R. M. (1977) ”Periods on manfolds, quantization and gauge”,

J. of Math Phys 18, no. 4, p. 614

15

[10] Kiehn, R. M., (1990) ”Topological Torsion, Pfaﬀ Dimension and Co-
herent Structures”, in: H. K. Moﬀatt and T. S. Tsinober eds, Topological
Fluid Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 449-458 .

[11] deRham,G. (1960) ”Varietes Diﬀerentiables”, Hermann, Paris
[12] Kiehn, R. M., ”Torsion and Spin as topological coherent structures

in a plasma” (1998), http://www22.pair.com/csdc/pdf/plasma.pdf

....(1999) ” Topological evolution of classical electromagnetic ﬁelds and
the photon” in ”The Photon and Poincare Group”,Valeri V. Dvoeglazov
(Ed.). Nova Science Publishers, NY ,ISBN 1-56072-718-7.

[13] See http://www.elec.qmw.ac.uk/staﬃnfo/mark/mot

16

