The coherent radiation of the ordered or crystalline electron beam is inves-
tigated. For the ﬁrst time it is shown that crystallization conditions for charged
particles beams diﬀers from those of plasma. Crystallization conditions for
charged relativistic bunches are found and shown that this conditions satisﬁes
in some existing linacs.The coherence undulator radiation of crystalline beams
in the XUV region are considered.Necessary conditions of coherency are found.
The inﬂuence of deviations from mean distance on the radiation coherency is
considered.

1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Coherence Radiation of the Crystalline Beam

L.A.Gevorgian,R.V. Tumanian

13 feb 2001

1

Introduction

The importance of tunable and powerful sources of the coherent radiation on
XUV wavelenghts is cause in recent years few projects of FEL [1, 2]. This
FEL’s operating in the SASE mode, i.e. starting from noise in the initial
electron beam longitudinal density distribution. This evolution determines the
undulatory length needed to reach saturation practically very long (about
hundred meters). The needed power of laser radiation is possible to obtain in
other way. In last two decades very important experimental [9, 10]and
theoretical [?] results are achieved in investigations of the ordered bunches or
crystalline beams.The possibility of such new and interesting state of matter is
become real in the storage rings of charged particles and as we show below in
linear accelerators with high density beams. The case of real storage ring
lattice was considered in [15]. The crystalline or ordered beams have of course
many interesting and important properties and applications.Few properties
and one very important application is considered in this paper. It is clear that
particles of dense bunches are arranged in the certain orders.In these ordered
bunches particles are complete transverse planes,which are same spacing in the
longitudinal direction.The conditions and properties of such ordering are
considering in the next section of this paper.Such bunches are radiate coherent
at the wavelengths integer times smaller than inter plane distances, as shown
in the section 3.This radiation calls super radiant regime of FEL radiation [?]
or coherent spontaneous emission CSE.As shown in above references it is
possible in two cases.First,for short bunches and second for modulated
bunches. The super radiant regime because of self bunching of the beam in the
FEL is considered by Bonifacio [6, 7]. In diﬀerence from above references
where is considered the coherency of long wavelength radiation (the
wavelength much more than mean distance between bunch electrons), in this
report is considered the coherent radiation of the bunch when the radiation
wavelength is about or less than distance between particles. In this case it is
important the discreteness of beam and correlations between beam particles
positions,because of strong Coulomb interaction of the beam particles.

2

2 Ordered or Crystalline beams

The requirement of bunch uniformity assumes that electrons of bunch with
density n are replaced on the same mean distance ¯a = n−1/3 from each
other.Such replacement is possible only when each three particles are compose
equilateral triangle as result of strong correlation between particles
positions.This is connected with approximately hexagonal structure of the
disordered medium [8] at most probable.Each particle in such medium have 14
nearest neighbors,but numerical calculations show that the mean number of
nearest neighbors is about 15 with mean deviation 10 percents. For medium
with long distance inter particle interaction such as beam or bunch the
triangle apices are the equilibrium points of the particles positions.The
particles which are not replaced in his equilibrium points are oscillate around
his equilibrium point with frequency Ω = N ωp,where ωp = p4πe2n/mc
plasma frequency ,and amplitude equal to deviation from equilibrium point.It
is well known that properties of any medium are depend on dimension less
parameter Γ,which is the ratio of the depth of the interparticle potential well
and medium temperature. For neutral and one component plasma (OCP)
because of Debay screening inter particle potential is about pure two particle
Coulomb potential e2/¯a [14].The numerical Molecular Dynamics (MD)
calculations show that for Γ ≥ 172 OCP is crystallize with body centered cube
(bcc) lattice [13].Detailed MD calculations [11] for ﬁnite full charged Coulomb
systems with number of particles about thousand was show that in this case
crystallization take place at low values of Γ,but this result is not explained
theoretically.We show in this report that for full charged Coulomb systems the
potential well of each particle is about N0 (number of particles in the one
transverse plane) times deeper than pure two particle Coulomb potential.
After expanding of the full force between particles with charge e and ﬁxed
distance R moving along longitudinal z direction with velocity v = βc

Fz =

F⊥ =

e2
R2

(1 − β2)cosθ
(1 − β2(sinθ)2)3/2
e2
(1 − β2)sinθ
R2
(1 − β2sin2θ)3/2

where θ-angle between R and z directions, around equilibrium points of the
bcc lattice,one can ﬁnd that potential wells in the longitudinal and transverse
directions are

Uk = U0

U⊥ = U0

N0
4γ2 sl
λl
γ
4
λt

st

,

,

sl = X

1
n3

st = X

n1
1 + n2

2)2

(n2

where U0 = e2/λl bare Coulomb potential,N0 -number of particles on each
transverse plane.The sum in the sl is carrying out over number of transverse

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

planes,and the sum in the st over particles of one plane.Here is assumed that
self mean space charge forces of the bunch are compensated by external
restoring forces [11, 12]. Such deepening of the potential well in the bunches in
comparison with known potential well in the OCP is mean that crystallization
or ordering of bunch is possible at comparable higher temperatures than of
OCP.Notice, that transverse ordering is more diﬃcult than longitudinal
ordering, because of small tranverse well.So,we can neglect the transverse
potential and consider the bunch as consisting of transverse planes with
spacing, but particles on this planes are replaced randomly. Particles of the
bunch in this longitudinal potential well is oscillate with frequency

Ω2 =

U
2mλ2

where λ -mean interparticle distance in correspondence direction, m is eﬀective
mass of bunch particle equal to mγ3 for linacs and mγ3/(1 − αγ2) for cyclic
accelerators. The case of real storage ring lattice was considered in [15]. If the
crystallization time which equal few oscillation periods lc = c/Ω much less
than period of betatron oscillations of the accelerator the bunch becomes
ordered.The electron bunch with λ about 1 nm, and γ = 104 (SLAC)have lc is
about 5m and shorter than betatron oscillation wavelength.The calculations
show that beam of the SLAC in the Final Focus have Γ about few hundreds
which is means that bunch may be crystallized.

3 Coherence Radiation of the Bunch

Radiation of the ensemble of N electrons moving along identical trajectories
but with arbitrary spatial displacement may be written in the form [3]

I = iN F

(5)

where i-intensity of single electron radiation,N-number of the electrons in the
bunch,F-factor of coherency of the bunch and may be written in the follow
form [3]

F =

1

N X ei~k ~rj X e−i~k ~rj

The position of the j-th electron ~rj may be written as a sum of transverse and
longitudinal parts ~rj = ~rj tr + zj. For longitudinal waves the transverse part of
the F is equal to N 2
radiation [3]. For Nz planes with Nr electrons on each plane the coherency
factor is may be written in the following form

r . This is right because of transverse coherency of the

F =

N 2
N X eikj˜a
r

X e−ikj˜a

4

where P -means sum over planes in longitudinal direction. It is not diﬃcult
to obtain that

F = N 2
r

2
sin

Nzx
2
x
sin

and when the value x = k˜a is approach to nπ (resonance condition) the
coherency factor is becomes N 2. This consideration is true for bunch with step
function for longitudinal density distribution (for homogeneous beam). Now
consider the inﬂuence of ﬂuctuations or deviations of the particles positions
from hexagonal model above on the coherence short wave length radiation of
the bunch.Let us assume that particle is on the mean distance, but not in the
z-direction. In this case the particle position is ﬂuctuated on the value ˜aθ2/2,
and if xθ2/4 ≪ 1 we may neglect this ﬂuctuation.Notice, that in important
practical cases this condition is satisﬁed. It is not satisﬁed only for very short
radiation when x ≫ 1. The second source of ﬂuctuations from our model is
possible when the particle is replaced on the z-direction but not in the
distance a. In this case F multiplied by the factor e−k
, where b- the
dispersion of the ﬂuctuation. It is clear that if b/λ ≪ 1, this ﬂuctuations not
disturb the radiation coherency.Executed numerical calculations show that
ﬂuctuations about ten times smaller than inter particle distance a. This show
that radiation of the wavelengths few times shorter than interparticle distance
is availably too.Notice,that such full coherent radiation is much powerful than
any other radiation regime in the same conditions.

2
b

2

4 Conclusions

So,in this paper are ﬁnd the crystallization or ordering conditions of dense
bunches or beams,which may be satisﬁed much easier than those for OCP.This
very exotic and interesting station of the matter can be obtained at existing
linac beams.This possibility is very important for attaining crystalline state of
the beams as well as for many other applications of new state of matter.We
show that ordered bunches can radiate coherently ,i.e. much powerful than
spontaneous one or SASE. In dependence of beam energy and density this
radiation may have wavelength at XUV region also.

References

[1] Pellegrini,C. et. al., Nucl.Inst. and Methods, 341(1994)326

[2] J. Rossbach,Nucl.Instr.and Methods,A 393(1997)86

[3] Korkhmazian,N.A. et.al.,Zh.Tekh.Fiz.47(1977)1583,

Gevorgian,L.A.,Zhevago,N.K.,Sov.Phys.Dokl.,27(1982)946, in Russian

[4] Y.Pinhasi,A.Gover,Nucl.Instr. and Methods, A393(1997)343

5

[5] A.Gover et. al.,Phys.Rev.Lett.,72(1994)1192

[6] R.Bonifacio,B.W.J.McNeil,P.Pierini,Phys.Rev.A40(1989)4467

[7] R.Bonifacio,C.Maroli,N.Piovella,Optics Comm.,68(1988)369

[8] J.M.Ziman,’Models of disorder’,Cambridge University Press,1979

[9] E.N.Dementiev,N.S.Dikansky,A.S.Medvedko,V.V.Parkhomchuk, and

D.V.Pestrikov,Zh.Tekh.Fiz.50(1980)1717[Sov.Phys.Tech.Phys.25(1980)1001].

[10] A.V.Aleksandrov et al.,Europhys.lett.18(1992)151; M.Steck et al.,Electron

Cooling at ESR,Workshop on Crystalline Beams and Related
Issues,Erice,Sicily,11-21 nov.1995,eds. D.M. Maletic and
A.V.Ruggiero(World Scientiﬁc).

[11] J.P.Schiﬀer and P.Kienle,Z.Phys.A321(1985)181; A.Rahman and

J.P.Schiﬀer,Phys.Rev.Lett.57(1986)1133;
J.P.Schiﬀer,Phys.Rev.Lett.61(1988)1843

[12] A.G.Ruggiero,Proceedings of the PAC93,p.3530

[13] W.L.Slattery,G.D.Dooley,andH.E.deWitt,Phys.rev.A21(1980)2087

[14] S.Ichimaru,H.Iyetomi,and S.Tanaka,Phys.Rep.149(1987)93

[15] X.-P.Li,A.M.Sessler,and J.Wei,in Proceedings of the EPAC’04,p.1379.
J.Wei,H.Okamoto,and A.M.Sessler,Phys.Rev.Lett.,80(1998)2606.

6

