1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the physical nature of the photon mixing processes
in nonlinear optics.
V.A.Kuz’menko

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.
E-mail: kuzmenko@triniti.ru

Abstract

The physical nature of the photon mixing and photon echo pro-
cesses is discussed on the basis of inequality of the forward and back-
ward optical transitions.

PACS number: 42.50.-p

Wave (photon) mixing processes of diﬀerent kind play an important role
Interaction of light with substance can be described
in nonlinear optics.
both from the wave point of view and from that of the quantum insight into
the nature of light. It has happen historically, that the so-called semiclas-
sical theory has got the greatest development [1,2]. The fact of quantum
absorption and emission of light is recognized here, but all description of the
dynamics of optical transitions is performed from the pure wave position of
the so-called rotating wave model.

The basic problems in this theory arise when one attempts to explain
the physical nature of the processes underlying the observable eﬀects. Most
brightly, this diﬃculty manifests itself in the case of the population transfer
eﬀect at sweeping of resonance conditions [3]. The theory well describes the
dynamics of this eﬀect, but fails to explain its physical nature. A similar
situation exists with a photon echo eﬀect in the gas phase. The theory very
well explains the principle of a photon echo, and well describes its dynamics,
but can not explain the speciﬁc physical mechanism of the process [1]. An
attempt to draw the Doppler eﬀect to this explanation demonstrates only
the inconsistency of the Bloch model in explanation of the particular nature
of the photon echo.

In the framework of wave approximation, the reason of laser stimulated
wave mixing processes is generally believed to be due to the so-called non-
linear susceptibility. If the corresponding factor of nonlinear susceptibility is
great enough, the wave mixing can occur. If this factor is equal to zero, the
wave mixing is absent. Also, a restriction on the lowest order wave mixing
process exists, that is connected with the symmetry of the process. Namely,

1

the factor of nonlinear susceptibility χ2 is nonzero only in a medium without
center of inversion [4].

The purpose of the present report is to discuss an opportunity of pho-
ton mixing explanation from the position of pure quantum approximation. A
good theoretical basis exists for this approach, as the Dirac equation predicts
time invariance violation in electromagnetic interactions [5]. For many years,
however, a generally accepted opinion exists, that electromagnetic interac-
tions proceed with T-invariance preservation [6]. Obviously, this is a mistake.
This point of view does not have any experimental proof. On the contrary,
the opposite point of view (here we mean the T-invariance violation) has a
direct and complete experimental proof for the case of the photon interac-
tion with molecules [7]. The experiments show, that although the integral
cross-sections of absorption and stimulated emission of photons by atoms and
molecules are, obviously, identical (the Einstein coeﬃcients are equal), the
diﬀerence in spectral widths and cross-sections of the forward and backward
optical transitions can reach several orders of magnitude. The principle of
inequality of the forward and backward optical transitions is quite suﬃcient
for explanation of most nonlinear eﬀects from the pure quantum point of
view without using any wave approximation.

In the quantum approach, the physical reason of eﬃcient photon mixing
is probable ultra high cross-section of the backward optical transition to the
initial state. The ”initial state” concept must include, probably, not only
a set of quantum numbers, but also the orientation of molecules in space
and the phase of vibration motion. Fig. 1a shows a general four photon
mixing scheme. Three laser beams, adjusted in the resonance with 0 → 1,
1 → 2 and 2 → 3 transitions, interact with molecules. As a result of the
population transfer, directed superradiation on the 3 → 0 transition appears,
which transfers molecules precisely to the initial state. A little more complex
scheme is submitted in Fig. 1b. Here the directed superradiation arises at
ﬁrst on the 2 → 3 transition, for which level 3 is an initial state. Then
directed superradiation on the 3 → 0 transition should appear, for which 0
level is an initial state. In this case we have a combined variant of four and
six photon mixing.

The selection rules can be deduced from the existence of the photon spin.
It is impossible to return a molecule precisely to the initial quantum state
using odd number of photons. On the contrary, even number of photons
allows this to be done. Therefore, only four, six, and eight photon mixing
processes are possible in gases and liquids. In the solid state, the rotation of
molecules is absent. A crystal lattice allows to eliminate the problem of the
photon’s spin. Therefore, in the crystals the three- and ﬁve- photon mixing
processes are also observed.

2

What type of approximation (the wave or the quantum one) is more
acceptable for description of the photon (wave) mixing eﬀects in nonlin-
ear optics? From our point of view, the quantum approximation is more
preferable, especially in the cases of using the short delayed pulses of laser
radiation. Temporary delay between pulses badly coordinates to the princi-
ples of nonlinear susceptibility and wave mixing. On the contrary, quantum
approximation well admits using the delayed laser pulses. It only imposes
certain restrictions on the sequence of interactions of molecules with laser
pulses. Population of quantum levels must be transferred consistently and
the whole mixing process should return molecules to the initial state. The de-
lay between laser pulses allows to study dynamics of the ground and various
excited states of molecules [8,9].

There are many experiments in the literature, which are rather similar in
arrangement to that shown in Fig. 1, but simpler in implementation. Some-
times these experiments are related to the concept of the photon echo. The
physical mechanism of the classical photon echo in the gas phase can be
shown to be a result of degenerative four photon mixing in a three-level sys-
tem, if one takes the photon’s spin into consideration. The photon’s spin can
play a role of the ”Maxwell’s demon” [1]. The basic scheme of this process
is given in the Fig. 2. The photon (1) of the ﬁrst laser pulse excites the
molecule and passes to it a rotation moment, connected with the photon’s
spin. Now a process of rotation dephasing of molecules, connected with het-
erogeneity of rotational spectrum, begins. This process has been studied in
the beautiful experimental work [10]. (It is necessary to note, that the probe
pulse in this work stimulated a backward Raman optical transition). The
inhomogeneity of the absorption spectrum is connected with the hyperﬁne
splitting due to higher order interactions like the centrifugal distortion, the
electronic spin-spin splitting, and others. For typical time of the photon echo
in the gas phase ∼ 1µs [11] it makes the rotational dephasing of molecules
quite signiﬁcant.

At time τ the second laser pulse starts. Two photons (2 and 3) are con-
nected with the second laser pulse (for the case of the two-pulse echo). The
second photon deexcites molecule and also compensates the rotation moment
of the ﬁrst photon. The absorption of the third photon is accompanied by
transfer of the rotation moment to the opposite direction. After that the
process of rotation rephasing begins, which is ﬁnished to the time 2τ by di-
rected superradiation of the photon echo pulse (photon 4), which returns the
molecule precisely to the initial state. Existence of the so-called line wings
[12] in the absorption spectrum of polyatomic molecules (like SF6 and BCl3)
allows to eliminate the problem of exact resonance of narrow laser radiation
with absorption lines of molecules. Thus, inhomogeneity of the absorption

3

spectrum, connected with the Doppler eﬀect, has no relation neither to the
rotation rephasing, nor to the photon echo eﬀect. This simple quantum
model predicts also, that the main phase-match direction of the photon echo
superradiation (ke = k1 − k2 + k2 = k1) must be collinear with the beam of
the ﬁrst pulse. On the contrast, the phase-match direction (ke = −k1 + 2k2)
is impossible for the real photon echo, since the sign ”minus” of vector k1
corresponds to stimulated emission of a photon.

If the second laser pulse split on two pulses, we obtain the so-called stim-
ulated photon echo variant [13,14]. Here a photon of the ﬁrst laser pulse
excites molecules and gives a rise to the rotation dephasing process. The
second laser pulse transfers molecules to the ground state and stops the ro-
tation dephasing process. The delay between the second and the third laser
pulses allows to study the dynamics of the ground state. The third laser pulse
again excites the molecules and initiates the process of their rotation rephas-
ing, which is ﬁnished by directed superradiation of a photon echo pulse. In
this case, the delay between the third laser pulse and the photon echo pulse
is equal to that between the ﬁrst two laser pulses.

The experimental studies of the dynamics of molecules in the liquid phase
[15-18] are usually associated with stimulated photon echo. Such an associ-
ation for these experiments is not successful. Photon echo is only a special
case of the four-photon mixing. The main reason of the photon echo is laser-
induced rephasing process of the rotation motion. If the dephasing is not
so great, there is no need neither in the rotation rephasing, nor in the pho-
ton echo. In the general case, only rotational and vibrational alignment of
molecules is required. In the gas phase, the rotational alignment of molecules
occurs by their free rotation [10].
In the liquid phase the librational mo-
tion plays the role of rotation. Therefore the duration of a superradiation
pulse in four photon mixing in the liquids characterizes mainly the period
of librational alignment of molecules (if the lifetime of excited molecules is
suﬃciently long).

The so-called peak shift is measured in these works as one of the most im-
portant experimental parameters. This peak shift is related to some abstract
correlation function [15]. However, the eﬀect of peak shift can be given an
alternative pure physical explanation. When the third laser pulse coincides
in time with the second one, the shift of pulses characterizes, probably, most
optimal conditions for population transfer in the system, which leads to ap-
pearance of the directed superradiation. Here we have a rather general and
interesting example of the so-called eﬀect of a counterintuitive sequence of
interactions of molecules with laser pulses. The most eﬀective superradiation
(the population transfer) takes place when radiation of the ﬁrst (in time) laser
pulse interacts with molecules exited by radiation of the second laser pulse

4

(some overlapping of laser pulses should, certainly, take place). This eﬀect
was described long ago in the works on the dynamics of population transfer in
atoms and molecules in the gas phase under inﬂuence of nanosecond pulses
of laser radiation [19,20]. For the photon mixing process of this kind the
phase-matched direction for superradiation (k = k2 − k1 + k2 = 2k2 − k1)
can well be realized. It follows from the notes above, that the maximal value
of the measured peak shift is determined mainly by the shape and width of
the used laser pulses.

The delay of the third pulse destroys optimum conditions for the popula-
tion transfer and results in the sharp and substantial reduction in intensity of
superradiation and measured value of the peak shift in liquid [15]. Probably,
this is a consequence of librational and vibrational dephasing. The temper-
ature dependence of the peak shift in solid samples is especially interesting
here [21]. May be this dependence characterizes some speciﬁc characteristics
of librational motion.

The optimal experimental conditions are, obviously, diﬀerent for residual
superradiation. A dephasing degree of molecules, which are prepared in the
ground state by the ﬁrst two laser pulses, can be more substantial. This
dephasing can be due to the fact, that the molecules stay diﬀerent time in
the exited state. The inertia moments of molecules in the ground and excited
states can be essentially diﬀerent (especially in the case of electronic excita-
tion). The least dephasing in the ground state occurs when the molecules
spend minimal and equal time in the excited state. This condition can be
implemented, when the ﬁrst and the second pulses practically coincide in
time.

So, from the given point of view the dependence of the peak shift on the
delay of the third laser pulse, and on the temperature, as well as the shape of
the superradiation pulse, characterize mainly the dynamics of the libration
motion of molecules. Experiments, similar to work [10], but conducted in a
liquid phase, could also give important information on the dynamics of libra-
tional alignment. The possible role of rotation rephasing and the existence
of a real stimulated photon echo in the liquid phase require further study
and discussion.

The principle of inequality of the forward and backward optical transitions
is suitable not only for explanation of the physical nature of photon mixing
and photon echo eﬀects. It allows to explain easily and in the natural way
such eﬀects, as population transfer at sweeping the resonance conditions
[3], ampliﬁcation without inversion [22], coherent population trapping [23],
electromagnetically induced transparency [24], and others.

Thus, two approaches can be considered for description of the dynamics
of optical transitions, the wave approximation and the quantum one. The

5

wave approximation has a 50-year’s old history [2], advanced mathematical
tools, and some problems with physical interpretation. The quantum approx-
imation has a good theoretical base (the Dirac equation), simple and clear
physical sense, and suﬃcient proofs. The quantum approximation requires
experimental study of the basic parameters of the backward optical transi-
tions and creation of the mathematical tools for description of the eﬀects in
nonlinear optics.

References

[1] L.Allen and J.H.Eberly, Optical Resonance and Two-Level Atoms, John

Wiley and Sons, New York, (1975).

[2] J.D.Macomber, The Dynamics of Spectroscopic Transitions, John Wiley

and Sons, New York, (1976).

[3] R.L.Shoemaker, in Laser and Coherence Spectroscopy, ed. J.I.Steinfeld,

N.Y., Plenum, p.197 (1978).

[4] N.Bloembergen, in Nonlinear Spectroscopy, ed. N.Bloembergen- Ams-

terdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., (1977).

[5] W.M.Jin, E-print, quant-ph/0001029, http://xxx.lanl.gov/

[6] V.B.Berestetsky, E.M.Lifshits and L.P.Pitaevsky, Relativistic Quantum

Theory, part 1, Nauka, Moscow, p.66, (1968), in Russian.

[7] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, hep-ph/0002084, http://xxx.lanl.gov/

[8] M.Schmitt, G.Knopp, A.Materny and W.Kiefer, J.Phys.Chem. A 102,

4059 (1998).

[9] A.Vierheilig, T.Chen, P.Waltner, W.Kiefer, A.Materny and A.H.Zewail,

Chem.Phys.Lett. 312, 349 (1999).

[10] M.Morgen, W.Price, L.Hunziker, P.Ludowise, M.Blackwell and Y.Chen,

Chem.Phys.Lett. 209, 1 (1993).

[11] S.S.Alimpiev and N.V.Karlov, ZhETF 63, 482 (1972).

[12] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, aps1998dec29 002,

http://publish.aps.org/eprint/

6

[13] J.B.W.Morsink, W.H.Hesselink and D.A.Wiersma, Chem.Phys.Lett. 64,

[14] T.Mossberg, A.Flusber, R.Kachru and S.R.Hartmann, Phys.Rev.Lett.

[15] T.Joo, Y.Jia, J.Y.Yu, M.J.Lang and G.R.Fleming, J.Chem.Phys. 104,

[16] W.P.Boeij, M.S.Pshenichnikov and D.A.Wiersma, J.Phys.Chem. 100,

[17] Q.H.Xu, G.D.Scoles, M.Yang and G.R.Fleming, J.Phys.Chem. A 103,

[18] P.Hamm, M.Lim and R.M.Hochstrasser, Phys.Rev.Lett. 81, 5326

[19] U.Gaubatz, P.Rudecki, S.Schiemann and K.Bergmann, J.Chem.Phys.

[20] S.Schiemann, A.Kuhn, S.Steuerwald and K.Bergmann, Phys.Rev.Lett.

[21] S.De

Silvestri,

A.M.Weiner,
Chem.Phys.Lett. 112, 195 (1984).

J.G.Fujimoto

and

E.P.Ippen,

[22] M.O.Scully, Quantum Opt. 6, 203 (1994).

[23] S.Brandt, A.Nagel, R.Wynands and D.Meschede, Phys. Rev. A 56,

[24] A.Kasapi, M.Jain, G.Y.Yin and S.E.Harris, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2447

1 (1979).

42, 1665 (1979).

6089 (1996).

11806 (1996).

10348 (1999).

(1998).

92, 5363 (1990).

71, 3637 (1993).

R1063 (1997).

(1995).

7

D

(cid:22)

E

(cid:22)

(cid:20)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:19)

(cid:21)

(cid:19)

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:3)$(cid:3)SRVVLEOH(cid:3)JHQHUDO(cid:3)SKRWRQ(cid:3)PL[LQJ(cid:3)VFKHPHV(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)(cid:3)D
JDV(cid:3)RU(cid:3)OLTXLG(cid:3)SKDVH(cid:17)

P(cid:3) (cid:3)-

(cid:3)(cid:20)

(cid:19)

(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:20)

(cid:3)¢
-(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:3)9

(cid:23)

(cid:22)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

-(cid:3) (cid:3)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:3)9

)LJ(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)7KH(cid:3)EDVLF(cid:3)VFKHPH(cid:3)RI(cid:3)SKRWRQ(cid:3)HFKR(cid:3)SURFHVV(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)D
JDV(cid:3)SKDVH(cid:17)

-
¢
