1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Superluminal Localized Waves of Electromagnetic
Field in Vacuo

Peeter Saari
Institute of Physics, University of Tartu,
Riia 142, Tartu 51014, Estonia

July 23, 2013

Abstract

Presented is an overview of electromagnetic versions of the so-called
X-type waves intensively studied since their invention in early 1990.-ies
in ultrasonics. These waves may be extremely localized both laterally
and longitudinally and – what has been considered as most startling –
propagate superluminally without apparent spread. Spotlighted are the
issues of the relativistic causality, variety of mathematical description and
possibilities of practical applications of the waves.

PACS numbers: 42.25.Bs, 03.40.Kf, 42.65.Re, 41.20.Jb.
TO BE PUBLISHED IN Proceedings of the conference ”Time’s Arrows,
Quantum Measurements and Superluminal Behaviour” (Naples, October 2-6,
2000) by the Italian NCR.

1 Introduction

More often than not some physical truths, as they gain general acceptance, en-
ter textbooks and become stock rules, loose their exact content for the majority
of the physics community. Moreover, in this way superﬁcially understood rules
may turn to superﬂuous taboos inhibiting to study new phenomena. For ex-
ample, conviction that ”uniformly moving charge does not radiate” caused a
considerable delay in discovering and understanding the Cherenkov eﬀect. By
the way, even the reﬁned statement ”uniformly moving charge does not radiate
in vacuum” is not exact as it excludes the so-called transition radiation known
an half of century only, despite it is a purely classical eﬀect of macroscopic
electrodynamics.

In this paper we give an overview of electromagnetic versions of the so-
called X-type waves intensively studied since 1990.-ies [1]-[13]. The results
obtained have encountered such taboo-fashioned attitudes sometimes. Indeed,
these waves, or more exactly – wavepackets, may be extremely localized both lat-
erally and longitudinally and, what is most startling, propagate superluminally

1

without apparent diﬀraction or spread as yet. Furthermore, they are solutions -
although exotic - of linear wave equations and, hence, have nothing to do with
solitons or other localization phenomena known in contemporary nonlinear sci-
ence. Instead, study of these solutions has in a sense reincarnated some almost
forgotten ideas and ﬁndings of mathematical physics of the previous turn of
the century. X-type waves belong to phenomena where a naive superluminality
taboo ”group velocity cannot exceed the speed of light in vacuum” is broken. In
this respect they fall into the same category as plane waves in dispersive reso-
nant media and the evanescent waves, propagation of which (photon tunneling)
has provoked much interest since publication of papers [14],[15],[16] .Therefore
it is not surprising that tunneling of X waves in frustrated internal reﬂection
has been treated in a recent theoretical paper [17] .

Indeed, studies conducted in diﬀerent subﬁelds of physics, which are dealing
with superluminal movements, are interfering and merging fruitfully. A convinc-
ing proof of this trend is the given Conference and the collection of its papers
in hand.

This is why in this paper we spotlight just superluminality of the X waves,
which is now an experimentally veriﬁed fact [8],[9],[13], but which should not
be considered as their most interesting attribute in general. Their name was
coined within theoretical ultrasonics by the authors of the paper [1] which initi-
ated an intensive study of the X waves, particularly due to outlooks of applica-
tion in medical ultrasonic imaging. Possible superluminality of electromagnetic
localized waves was touched by the authors of Ref. [2] – who had derived the
waves under name ”slingshot pulses” independently from the paper [1] – and be-
came the focus of growing interest thanks to E .Recami (see [10] and references
therein), who pointed out physically deeply meaningful resemblance between the
shape of the X waves and that of the tachyon [18]. The paper [18] was published
in times of great activity in theoretical study of these hypothetical superlumi-
nal particles. To these years belongs paper [19] where a double-cone-shaped
”electromagnetic tachyon” as a result of light reﬂection by a conical mirror was
considered. This a quarter-of-century-old paper seems to be the very pioneering
work on X-waves, though this and the subsequent papers of the same author
have been practically unknown and only very recently were rediscovered for the
X wave community (see references in the review [11]). Last but not least, if one
asked what was the very ﬁrst sort of superluminal waves implemented in physics,
the answer would be – realistic plane waves. Indeed, as it is well known, the
most simple physically feasible realization of a plane wave beam is the Gaussian
beam with its bounded cross-section and, correspondingly, a ﬁnite energy ﬂux.
However, much less is known that due to the Gouy phase shift the group veloc-
ity in the waist region of the Gaussian beam is slightly superluminal, what one
can readily check on the analytical expressions for the beam (see also Ref. [20]).
For all the reasons mentioned, in this paper we present – after an introduction
of the physical nature of the X-type waves (Section 2) - quite in detail a new
representation of the localized waves (Section 3). This representation – what
we believe is a new and useful addition into the theory of X-type waves – in a
sense generalizes the Huygens principle into superluminal domain and directly

2

relies on superluminality of focal behavior of any type of free-space waves, which
manifests itself in the Gouy phase shift. The startling superluminality issues
are brieﬂy discussed in the last Section.

Figures showing 3-dimensional plots have been included for a vivid compre-
hension of the spatio-temporal shape of the waves, however, only few of the
animations showed in the oral presentation had sense to be reproduced here in
the static black-and-white form. The bibliography is far from being complete,
but hopefully a number of related references can be found in other papers of
the issue in hand.

2 Physical nature of X-type waves

In order to make the physical nature of the X-type superluminal localized waves
better comprehensible, we ﬁrst discuss a simple representation of them as a
result of interference between plane wave pulses.

Fig.1. X-type scalar wave formed by scalar plane wave pulses containing three
cosinusoidal cycles. The propagation direction (along the axis z ) is indi-
cated by arrow. As linear gray-scale plots in a plane of the propagation
axis and at a ﬁxed instant, shown are (a) the ﬁeld of the wave (real part if
the plane waves are given as analytic signals) and (b) its amplitude (mod-
ulus). Note that the central bullet-like part of the wave would stand out
even more sharply against the sidelobes if one plotted the the distribution
of the intensity (modulus squared) of the wave.

With reference to Fig.1(a) let us consider a pair of plane wave bursts pos-
sessing identical temporal dependences and the wave vectors in the plane y = 0.
Their propagation directions given by unit vectors n/= [sin θ, 0, cos θ] and
n\= [− sin θ, 0, cos θ] are tilted under angle θ with respect to the axis z. In
spatio-temporal regions where the pulses do not overlap their ﬁeld is given sim-
ply by the burst proﬁle as ΨP (η − ct), where η is the spatial coordinate along

3

the direction n/ or n\, respectively. In the overlap region , if we introduce the
radius vector of a ﬁeld point r = [x, y, z] the ﬁeld is given by superposition

ΨP (r n/ − ct) + ΨP (r n\ − ct) = ΨP (x sin θ + z cos θ − ct) +
+ ΨP (−x sin θ + z cos θ − ct) ,

(1)

which is nothing but the well-known two-wave-interference pattern with dou-
bled amplitudes. Altogether, the superposition of the pulse pair – as two
branches \and / form the letter X – makes up an X-shaped propagation-invariant
interference pattern moving along the axis z with speed v = c/ cos θ which is
both the phase and the group velocity of the wave ﬁeld in the direction of the
propagation axis z. This speed is superluminal in a similar way as one gets a
faster-than-light movement of a bright stripe on a screen when a plane wave
light pulse is falling at the angle θ onto the screen plane. Let us stress that
here we need not to deal with the vagueness of the physical meaning inherent
to the group velocity in general – simply the whole spatial distribution of the
ﬁeld moves rigidly with v because the time enters into the Eq.(1) only together
with the coordinate z through the propagation variable zt = z − vt.

Further let us superimpose axisymmetrically all such pairs of waves whose
propagation directions form a cone around the axis z with the top angle 2θ, in
other words, let the pair of the unit vectors be n/= [sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ]
and n\= [sin θ cos (φ + π) , sin θ sin (φ + π) , cos θ], where the angle φ runs from
0 to 180 degrees. As a result, we get an X-type supeluminal localized wave in
the following simple representation

π

0
Z

2π

0
Z

ΨX (ρ, zt) =

dφ

ΨP

rtn/

+ ΨP

rtn\

=

dφ ΨP

rtn/

,

(2)

(cid:2)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:3)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

where rt = [ρ cos ϕ, ρ sin ϕ, zt] is the radius vector of a ﬁeld point in the co-
propagating frame and cylindrical coordinates (ρ, ϕ, z) have been introduced for
we restrict ourselves in this paper to axisymmetric or so-called zeroth-order X-
type waves only. Hence, according to Eq.(2) the ﬁeld is built up from interfering
pairs of identical bursts of plane waves. Fig.1 gives an example in which the
plane wave proﬁle ΨP contains three cycles.

The less extended the proﬁle ΨP , the better the separation and resolution of
the branches of the X-shaped ﬁeld. In the superposition the points of completely
constructive interference lie on the z axis, where the highly localized energy
”bullet” arises in the center, while the intensity falls oﬀ as ρ−1 along the branches
and much faster in all other directions (note that in contrast with Fig.1(a)
in the case of interference of only two waves the on-axis and oﬀ-axis maxima
must be of equal strength). The optical carrier manifests itself as one or more
(depending on the number of cycles in the pulse) halo toroids which are nothing
but residues of the concentric cylinders of intensity characteristic of the Bessel
beam. That is why we use the term ’Bessel-X pulse’ (or wave) to draw a
distinction from carrierless X waves. By making use of an integral representation
π
of the zeroth-order Bessel function J0 (v) = π−1
0 cos [v cos (φ − ϕ)] dφ , where
R

4

ϕ is an arbitrary angle, and by reversing the mathematical procedure described
in Ref. [9], we get the common representation of X-type waves as superposition
of monochromatic cylindrical modes (Bessel beams) of diﬀerent wavenumber
k = ω/c

ΨX (ρ, z, t) =

dk S(k) J0 (ρk sin θ) exp [i (zk cos θ − ωt)] ,

(3)

∞

0
Z

where S(k) denotes the Fourier spectrum of the proﬁle ΨP . Again, the Eq.(3)
gives for both the phase and the group velocities (along the axis z – in the direc-
tion of the propagation of the packet of the cylindrical waves) the superluminal
value v = c/ cos θ.

3 X-waves as wakewaves

Although the representation Eq.(2) of the X-type waves as built up from two-
plane-wave-pulse interference patterns constitutes an easily comprehensible ap-
proach to the superluminality issues, it may turn out to be counter-intuitive
for symmetry considerations as will be shown below. In this section we deve-
lope another representation introduced in Ref.
[21], which is, in a sense, a
generalization of the Huygens principle into superluminal domain and allows
ﬁguratively to describe formation of superluminal localized waves.

As known in electrodynamics, the D’Alambert (source-free) wave equation
possesses a particular solution D0, which is spherically symmetric and can be
expressed through retarded and advanced Green functions of the equation, G(+)
and G(−), respectively, as

D0 = c−2

G(+) − G(−)

=

[δ(R − ct) − δ(R + ct)] ,

(4)

1
4πRc

h

i

where R is the distance from the origin and δ is the Dirac delta function. Thus,
the function D0 represents a spherical delta-pulse-shaped wave, ﬁrst (at negative
times t) converging to the origin (the right term) and then (at positive times t)
diverging from it. The minus sign between the two terms, which results from the
requirement that a source-free ﬁeld cannot have a singular point R = +0, is of
crucial importance as it assures vanishing of the function at t = 0. This change
of the sign when the wave goes through the collapsed stage at the focus is also
responsible for the 90 degrees phase factor associated with the Huygens-Fresnel-
Kirchhoﬀ principle and for the Gouy phase shift peculiar to all focused waves.
From Eq.(4), using the common procedure one can calculate Li´enard-Wiechert
potentials for a moving point charge q ﬂying, e.g. with a constant velocity v
along axis z. However, as D0 includes not only the retarded Green function
but also the advanced one and therefore what is moving has to be considered
as a source coupled with a sink at the same point. For such a Huygens-type
source there is no restriction v ≤ c and for superluminal velocity v/c > 1

5

we obtain axisymmetric scalar and vector potentials (in CGS units, Lorentz
gauge) Φ(ρ, z, t) and A(ρ, z, t) = Φ(ρ, z, t)v/c, where ρ is the radial distance of
the ﬁeld point from the axis z, the velocity vector is v =[0, 0, v], and

Φ(ρ, z, t) =

2q

Θ

−(z − vt) − ρ

v2/c2 − 1

−

(z − vt)2 + ρ2(1 − v2/c2) 


h
−Θ

(z − vt) − ρ

p

i
v2/c2 − 1

p

h



p

i

,



(5)


where Θ(x) denotes the Heaviside step function. Here for the sake of simplicity
we do not calculate the electromagnetic ﬁeld vectors E and H (or B), neither will
we consider dipole sources and sinks required for obtaining non-axisymmetric
ﬁelds. We will restrict ourselves to scalar ﬁelds obtained as superpositions of
the potential given by the Eq.(5). The ﬁrst of the two terms in the Eq.(5)
gives an electromagnetic Mach cone of the superluminally ﬂying charge q. In
other words – it represents nothing but a shock wave emitted by a superluminal
electron in vacuum, mathematical expression for which was found by Sommer-
feld three decades earlier than Tamm and Frank worked out the theory of the
Cherenkov eﬀect, but which was forgotten as an unphysical result after the spe-
cial theory of relativity appeared [22]. The second term in the Eq.(5) describes
a leading and reversed Mach cone collapsing into the superluminal sink coupled
with the source and thus feeding the latter. Hence, the particular solution to
the wave equation which is given by the Eq.(5) represents a double-cone-shaped
pulse propagating rigidly and superluminally along the axis z. In other words
– it represents an X-type wave as put together from (i) the cone of incoming
waves collapsing into the sink, thereby generating a superluminal Huygens-type
point source and from (ii) wakewave-type radiation cone of the source. Let it be
recalled that the ﬁeld given by the Eq.(5) had been found for δ-like spatial distri-
bution of the charge. That is why the ﬁeld diverges on the surface of the double
v2/c2 − 1
cone or on any of its X-shaped generatrices given by (z − vt) = ± ρ
and the ﬁeld can be considered as an elementary one constituting a base for
constructing various X-type waves through appropriate linear superpositions.
Hence, any axisymmetric X-type wave could be correlated to its speciﬁc (con-
tinuous and time-dependent) distribution ρ = δ(x)δ(y)λ(z, t) of the ”charge” (or
the sink-and-source) with linear density λ(z, t) on the propagation axis, while
the superluminal speed of the wave corresponds to the velocity v of propagation
of that distribution along the axis, i.e. λ(z, t) = λ(z − vt).

p

Let us introduce a superluminal version of the Lorentz transformation co-
v2/c2 − 1 = cot θ, where θ is the Axicon angle considered
eﬃcient γ = 1/
earlier and let us ﬁrst choose the ”charge” distribution λ(z − vt) = λ(zt) as a
Lorentzian. In this case the ﬁeld potential is given as convolution of Eq.(5) with
the normalized distribution, which can be evaluated using Fourier and Laplace
transform tables:

p

6

Φ(ρ, zt) ⊗

1
π

∆
t + ∆2 = −q
z2

2
π

r

Im

1

,

(6)

 

(∆ − izt)2 + ρ2/γ2 !

where ∆ is the HWHM of the distribution and zt = z − vt is, as in the preceding
section, the axial variable in the co-propagating frame. The resulting potential
shown in Fig.2 (a) moves rigidly along the axis z (from left to right in Fig.2)
with the same superluminal speed v > c. The plot (a) depicts qualitatively also
the elementary potential as far as the divergences of the Eq.(5) are smoothed
out in the Eq.(6).

p

   (a)  
Im U(

)

   (b)  
Re U(

)

Fig.2. Dependence on the longitudinal coordinate zt = z − vt (increasing from
the left to the right) and a lateral one x = ±ρ of the imaginary (a) and real
(b) parts of the ﬁeld of the simplest X-wave. The velocity v = 1.005c and,
correspondingly, the superluminality parameter γ = 10. Distance between

7

grid lines on the basal plane is 4∆ along the axis zt and 20∆ along the
lateral axis, the unit being the half-width ∆.

We see that an unipolar and even ”charge” distribution gives an odd and
bipolar potential, as expected, while the symmetry of the plot diﬀers from what
might be expected from superimposing two plane wave pulses under the tilt
angle 2θ. Indeed, in the latter case the plane waves are depicted by each of
the two diagonal branches (\and /) of the X-shaped plot and therefore the
proﬁle of the potential on a given branch has to retain its sign and shape if one
moves from one side of the central interference region to another side along the
same branch. Disappearance of the latter kind of symmetry, which can be most
distinctly followed in the case of bipolar single-cycle pulses – just the case of
Fig.2 a – is due to mutual interference of all the plane wave pairs forming the
cone as φ runs from 0 to π .

Secondly, let us take the ”charge” distribution as a dispersion curve with
the same width parameter ∆ , i.e. as the Hilbert transform of the Lorentzian.
Again, using Fourier and Laplace transform tables, we readily obtain:

Φ(ρ, zt) ⊗

1
π

zt
t + ∆2 = q
z2

2
π

Re

r

1

.

(7)

 

(∆ − izt)2 + ρ2/γ2 !

The potential of the Eq.(7) depicted in Fig.2 (b) is – with accuracy of a real
constant multiplier – nothing but the well-known zeroth-order unipolar X wave,
ﬁrst introduced in Ref. [1] and studied in a number of papers afterwards. Hence,
we have demonstrated here how the real and imaginary part of the simplest X-
wave solution

p

ΦX0 (ρ, zt) ∝

1
(∆ − izt)2 + ρ2/γ2

(8)

p

of the free-space wave equation can be represented as ﬁelds generated by cor-
responding ”sink-and-source charge” distributions moving superluminally along
the propagation axis. The procedure how to ﬁnd for a given axisymmetric X-
type wave its ”generator charge distribution” is readily derived from a closer
inspection of the Eq.(5). Namely, on the axis z, i. e. for ρ = 0, the Eq.(5) consti-
tutes the Hilbert transform kernel for the convolution. Therefore, the ”charge”
distribution can be readily found as the Hilbert image of the on-axis proﬁle of
the potential and vice versa.

Hence, we have obtained a ﬁgurative representation in which the superlu-
minal waves can be classiﬁed via the distribution and other properties of the
Huygens-type sources propagating superluminally along the axis and thus gen-
erating the wave ﬁeld [24]. Such representation – which may be named as
Sommerfeld representation to acknowledge his unfortunate result of 1904 – has
been generalized to nonaxisymmetric and vector ﬁelds and applied by us to
various known localized waves [23].

8

   (a)  
Re U(

)

(cid:190)   (b)  
U

Fig.3. The longitudinal-lateral dependences of the real part (a) and the mod-
ulus (b) of the ﬁeld of the Bessel-X wave. The parameters v and γ are
the same as in Fig.2. The new parameter of the wave – the wavelength
λ = 2π/kz of the optical carrier being the unit, the distance between grid
lines on the basal plane is 1λ along the axis zt and 5λ along the lateral
axis, while the half-width ∆ = λ/2. For visible light pulses λ is in sub-
micrometer range, which means that the period of the cycle as well as full
duration of the pulse on the propagation axis are as short as a couple of
femtoseconds.

For example, in optical domain one has to deal with the so-called Bessel-X
wave [3]-[9], which is a band-limited and oscillatory version of the X wave. It is
obvious that for the Bessel-X wave the ”charge” distribution contains oscillations
corresponding to the optical carrier of the pulse. Bandwidth (FWHM) equal
to ( or narrower than) the carrier frequency roughly corresponds to 2-3 ( or
more) distinguishable oscillation cycles of the ﬁeld as well as of the ”charge”
along the propagation axis. Fortunately, few-cycle light pulses are aﬀordable in

9

ﬁ
contemporary femtosecond laser optics. On the other hand, if the number of the
oscillations in the Bessel-X wave pulse (on the axis z ) is of the order n ≃ 10, the
X-branching occurs too far from the propagation axis, i.e.
in the outer region
where the ﬁeld practically vanishes and, with further increase of n, the ﬁeld
becomes just a truncated Bessel beam. The analytic expression for a Bessel-X
wave depends on speciﬁc choice of the oscillatory function or, equivalently, of
the Fourier spectrum of the pulse on the axis z. One way to obtain a Bessel-
X wave possessing approximately n oscillations is to take a derivative of the
order m = n2 from the Eq.(8) with respect to zt (or z or t), which according
to Eqs.(6),(7) is equivalent to taking the same derivative from the distribution
function. The mth temporal derivative of the common X wave can be expressed
in closed form through the associated Legendre polynoms [5]. Another way is
to use the following expression, which for n & 3 approximates well the ﬁeld of
the Bessel-X wave with a near-Gaussian spectrum [3],[6]

ΦBX0 (ρ, zt) ∝

Z(zt) exp

−

z2
t + ρ2/γ2

· J0 [Z(zt) kzρ/γ] · exp(ikzzt) ,

1
∆2

(cid:0)

(cid:20)

p

(cid:21)
(cid:1)

(9)

where complex-valued function Z(zt) = 1 + i · zt/kz∆2 makes the argument of
the Bessel function also complex .The longitudinal wavenumber kz = k cos θ =
(ω/c) cos θ together with the half-width ∆ (at 1/e-amplitude level on the axis
z) are the parameters of the pulse. Again, dependence on z, t through the single
propagation variable zt = z − vt indicates the propagation-invariance of the
wave ﬁeld shown in Fig.3.

4 Application prospects of the X-type waves

Limited aperture of practically realizable X-type waves causes an abrupt decay
of the interference structure of the wave after ﬂying rigidly over a certain dis-
tance. However, the depth of invariant propagation of the central spot of the
v2/c2 − 1 larger
wave can be made substantial – by the factor cot θ = γ = 1/
than the aperture diameter. Such type of electromagnetic pulses, enabling di-
rected, laterally and temporally concentrated and nonspreading propagation of
wavepacket energy through space-time have a number of potential applications
in various areas of science and technology. Let us brieﬂy consider some results
obtained along this line.

p

Any ultrashort laser pulse propagating in a dispersive medium – even in air
– suﬀers from a temporal spread, which is a well-known obstacle in femtosecond
optics. For the Bessel-X wave with its composite nature, however, there exists
a possibility to suppress the broadening caused by the group-velocity disper-
sion [3],[7]. Namely, the dispersion of the angle θ, which is to a certain extent
inherent in any Bessel-X wave generator, can be played against the dispersion

10

of the medium with the aim of their mutual compensation. The idea has been
veriﬁed in an experimental setup with the lateral dimension and the width of
the temporal autocorrelation function of the Bessel-X wave pulses, respectively,
of the order of 20 microns and 200 fs [8]. Thus, an application of optical X-type
waves has been worked out – a method of designing femtosecond pulsed light
ﬁelds that maintain their strong (sub-millimeter range) longitudinal and lateral
localization in the course of superluminal propagation into a considerable depth
of a given dispersive medium.

Optical Bessel-X waves allow to accomplish a sort of diﬀraction-free trans-
mission of arbitrary 2-dimensional images [3],[6]. Despite its highly localized
”diﬀraction-free” bright central spot, the zeroth-order monochromatic Bessel
beam behaves poorly in a role of point-spread function in 2-D imaging. The
reason is that its intensity decays too slowly with lateral distance, i.e. as ∼ ρ−1.
On the contrary, the Bessel-X wave is oﬀering a loop hole to overcome the
problem. Despite the time-averaged intensity of the Bessel-X wave possesses
the same slow radial decay ∼ ρ−1 due to the asymptotic behavior along the
X-branches, an instantaneous intensity has the strong Gaussian localization in
lateral cross-section at the maximum of the pulse and therefore it might serve as
a point-spread function with well-constrained support but also with an extraor-
dinary capability to maintain the image focused without any spread over large
propagation depths. By developing further this approach it is possible to build
a speciﬁc communication system [25]. Ideas of using the waves in high-energy
physics for particle acceleration – one of such was proposed already two decades
ago [26] – are not much developed as yet.

It is obvious that for a majority of possible applications the spread-free
central spot is the most attractive peculiarity of the X-type waves. The better
the faster the intensity decay along lateral directions and X-branches is. In this
respect a new type of X waves – recently discovered Focused X wave [12] – seems
to be rather promising.

As one can see in Fig.4. and by inspecting an analytical expression for the

wave

ΦF X0 (ρ, z, t) =

exp [ik0γ [iR(ρ, zt) + (v/c)z − ct]] ,

(10)

∆ exp(k0γ∆)
R(ρ, zt)

q

where R(ρ, zt) =

[∆ + izt]2 + (ρ /γ)2 and k0 is a parameter of carrier
wavenumber type, the wave is very well localized indeed. However, like luminal
localized waves called Focus Wave Modes [2],[12], for this wave propagation-
invariant is the intensity only, while the wave ﬁeld itself changes during propaga-
tion in an oscillatory manner due to the last phase factor exp [ik0γ [(v/c)z − ct]]
in the Eq.(10), which has another z, t-dependence than through the propaga-
tion variable zt = z − vt. An animated version of Fig.4(a), made for the oral
presentation of the paper, shows that the oscillatory modulation moves in the
direction −z, i.e. opposite to the pulse propagation.

11

   (a)  
Re U(

)

(cid:190)   (b)  
U

Fig.4. The longitudinal-lateral dependences of the real part (a) and the modu-
lus (b) of the ﬁeld of the Focused X wave. The parameters v = 1.01c and
γ = 7. Distance between grid lines on the basal plane is 4∆ along both
axes. λ = 2π/k0 = 0.4∆.

To our best knowledge, the superluminal Focused X wave has not realized
experimentally yet, but probably the approach worked out for luminal Focus
Wave Modes recently [27] may help to accomplish that.

5 Discussion and conclusions

Let us make ﬁnally some remarks on the intriguing superluminality issues of the
X-type wave pulses. Indeed, while phase velocities greater than c are well known
in various ﬁelds of physics, a superluminal group velocity more often than not is
considered as a taboo, because at ﬁrst glance it seems to be at variance with the
special theory of relativity, particularly, with the relativistic causality. However,

12

ﬁ
since the beginning of the previous century – starting from Sommerfeld’s works
on plane-wave pulse propagation in dispersive media and precursors appearing
in this process – it is known that group velocity need not to be a physically
profound quantity and by no means should be confused with signal propagation
velocity. But in case of X-type waves not only the group velocity exceeds c but
the pulse as whole propagates rigidly faster than c.

A diversity of interpretations concerning this startling but experimentally
veriﬁed fact [9],[13] can be encountered. On the one end of the scale are
claims, based on a sophisticated mathematical consideration, that the relativis-
tic causality is violated in case of these pulses [11]. A recent paper [28] devoted
to this issue proves, however, that the causality is not violated globally in the
case of the X-type waves, but still the author admits a possibility of noncausal
signalling locally.

On the opposite end of the scale are statements insisting that the pulse is
not a real one but simply an interference pattern rebuilt at every point of its
propagation axis from truly real plane wave constituents travelling at a slight
tilt with respect to the axis. Such argumentation is not wrong but brings us
nowhere. Of course, there is a similarity between superluminality of the X wave
and a faster-than-light movement of the cutting point in the scissors eﬀect or
of a bright stripe on a screen when a plane wave light pulse is falling at the
angle θ onto the screen plane. But in the central highest-energy part of the X
wave there is nothing moving at the tilt angle. The phase planes are perpendic-
ular to the axis and the whole ﬁeld moves rigidly along the axis. The Pointing
vector lays also along the axis, however, the energy ﬂux is not superluminal.
Hence, to consider the X waves as something inferior compared to ”real” pulses
is not sound. Similar logic would bring one to a conclusion that femtosecond
pulses emitted by a mode-locked laser are not real but ”simply an interference”
between the continuous-wave laser modes.
In other words, one would ignore
the superposition principle of linear ﬁelds, which implies reversible relation be-
tween ”resultant” and ”constituent” ﬁelds and does not make any of possible
orthogonal basis inferior than others. Moreover, even plane waves, as far as they
are truly real ones, suﬀer from a certain superluminality. Indeed, as it is well
known, the most simple physically feasible realization of a plane wave beam is
the Gaussian beam with its constrained cross-section and, correspondingly, a
ﬁnite energy ﬂux. However, one can readily check on the analytical expressions
for the beam (see also Ref. [20]) that due to the Gouy phase shift the group
velocity in the waist region of the Gaussian beam is slightly superluminal.

We are convinced that the X-type waves are not – and cannot be – at vari-
ance with the special theory of relativity since they are derived as solutions to
the D’Alambert wave equation and corresponding electromagnetic vector ﬁelds
are solutions to the Maxwell equations. The relativistic causality has been in-
herently built into them as it was demonstrated also in the present paper, when
we developed the Sommerfeld representation basing upon the relativistically
invariant retarded and advanced Green functions. An analysis of local evolu-
tion and propagation of a ”signal mark” made, e. g. by a shutter onto the
X wave is not a simple task due to diﬀractive changes in the ﬁeld behind the

13

”mark”. Therefore conclusions concerning the local causality may remain ob-
scured. However, a rather straightforward geometrical analysis in the case of
inﬁnitely wideband X wave (with the width parameter ∆ → 0 ) shows that the
wave cannot carry any causal signal between two points along its propagation
axis. So, we arrive at conclusion that the X-type waves constitute one exam-
ple of ”allowed” but nontrivial superluminal movements. As a matter of fact
– although perhaps it is not widely known – superluminal movements allowed
by the relativistic causality have been studied since the middle of the previous
century (see references in [22]). For example, the reﬂection of a light pulse
on a metallic planar surface could be treated as 2-dimensional Cherenkov-Mach
radiation of a supeluminal current induced on the surface. In the same vain, the
representation of the X waves as generated by the Huygens-type sources might
be developed further, vis. we could place a real wire along the propagation axis
and treat the outgoing cone of the wave as a result of cylindrical reﬂection of
(or of radiation by the superluminal current in the wire induced by) the leading
collapsing cone of the wave.

In conclusion, superluminal movement of individual material particles is not
allowed but excitations in an ensemble may propagate with any speed, however,
if the speed exceeds c they cannot transmit any physical signal. Last two decades
have made it profoundly clear how promising and fruitful is studying of the
superluminal phenomena instead of considering them as a sort of trivialities or
taboos. We have in mind here not only the localized waves or photon tunneling
or propagation in inverted resonant media, etc., but also – or even ﬁrst of all
– the implementation and application of entangled states of Einstein-Podolsky-
Rozen pairs of particles in quantum telecommunication and computing.

This research was supported by the Estonian Science Foundation Grant
No.3386. The author is very grateful to the organizers of this exceptionally
interesting Conference in warm atmosphere of Naples.

References

39, 19 (1992).

10, 75 (1993).

[1] J. Lu and J. F. Greenleaf, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control

[2] R. W. Ziolkowski, I. M. Besieris, and A. M. Shaarawi, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A

[3] P. Saari, in Ultrafast Processes in Spectroscopy (Edited by O. Svelto, S. De

Silvestri, and G. Denardo), Plenum, p.151 (1996).

[4] J. Fagerholm, A. T. Friberg, J. Huttunen, D. P. Morgan, and M. M. Salo-

maa, Phys. Rev. E, 54, 4347 (1996).

[5] A T. Friberg, J. Fagerholm, and M M. Salomaa, Opt. Commun. 136, 207,

(1997).

[6] P. Saari, H. S˜onajalg, Laser Physics, 7, 32 (1997).

14

[7] H. S˜onajalg, P. Saari, Optics Lett., 21, 1162 (1996).

[8] H. S˜onajalg, M. R¨atsep, and P. Saari, Opt. Lett. 22, 310 (1997).

[9] P. Saari, K. Reivelt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 4135 (1997).

[10] E. Recami, Physica A, 252, 586 (1998)

[11] W. A. Rodriguez and J. Y. Lu, Found. Phys, 27, 435 (1997).

[12] Almost complete list of all publications on the localized ﬁelds is given
in a review article by I. Besieris, M. Abdel-Rahman, A. Shaarawi, and
A. Chatzipetros, Progr. in Electromagn. Research, 19, 1 (1998).

[13] D. Mugnai, A. Ranfagni, and R. Ruggeri, Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 4830 (2000).

[14] A. Enders and G. Nimtz, Phys. Rev. B, 47, 9605 (1993), Phys. Rev. E, 48,

[15] A. Ranfagni, P.Fabeni, G. P. Pazzi, and D. Mugnai, Phys. Rev. E, 48, 1453

632 (1993).

(1993).

[16] A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat, R. Y. Chiao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 71, 708 (1993).

[17] A. M. Shaarawi and I. M. Besieris, Phys. Rev. E, 62, 7415 (2000).

[18] E .Recami, Rivista Nuovo Cimento, 9, 1 (1986).

[19] M. I. Faingold, in Einsteinovski Sbornik (in Russian), Nauka, Moscow,

p.276 (1976).

[20] Z. L. Horv´ath and Zs. Bor, Phys. Rev. E, 60, 2337 (1999).

[21] P.Saari, in: Ultrafast Phenomena XI (Edited by T. Elsaesser, J. G. Fuji-

moto, D. A. Wiersma, and W. Zinth), Springer, p. 121 (1998).

[22] V. L. Ginsburg, in Progress in Optics (Edited by E. Wolf), 32, 267 (1993)
and references therein, where A. Sommerfeld’s pioneering but forgotten
publication in G¨ottinger Nachrichten (1904) is considered.

[23] P. Saari (to be published).

[24] Mathematical procedures of derivation of wave ﬁelds as if they are gen-
erated by sources from complex locations (i.e. a coordinate is formally
made a complex number) are well known in the theory of the Gaussian
beams already as well as in treating the localized waves. For example, in
the Ref.[2] an expression for the zeroth-order X wave had been obtained
as Li´enard-Wiechert potentials of an electron moving along the complex
z axis displaced from real space, but this comparatively formal approach
remained undeveloped.

[25] J. Lu and S. He, Opt. Comm., 161, 187 (1999).

15

[26] M. I. Faingold, J. Technical Phys. (in Russian), 50, 915 (1980).

[27] K. Reivelt and P. Saari, JOSA, 17, 1785 (2000).

[28] A. M. Shaarawi and I. M. Besieris, J. Phys. A: Math.Gen., 33, 7255 (2000).

16

