1
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
0
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
4
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Synchronization and multi-mode dynamics of mutually coupled semiconductor lasers

Claudio R. Mirasso1,2, Miroslav Kolesik1,3, Marcelo Matus1, J.K. White4, and Jerome V. Moloney1
1 Arizona Center for Mathematical Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721.
2 Departament de F´ısica, Universitat de les Illes Balears, E-07071 Palma de Mallorca, Spain
3 Institute of Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
4 Nortel Networks, High Performance Optical Solutions, 3500 Carling Ave. Ottawa ON K2H 8E9, Canada.

Abstract: Dynamics of coupled semiconductor lasers is investigated by numerical simulations.
A realistic laser simulation engine is used to study the synchronization and dynamical regime in two
mutually coupled Fabry-Perot and/or DFB lasers. Both, single- and multi-mode operation regimes
are studied with emphasis on the role of the multiple laser-cavity modes. Our ﬁndings indicate that
the two laser synchronize within each laser-cavity mode, while the synchronization across diﬀerent
cavity modes is signiﬁcantly weaker.

Synchronization between coupled nonlinear oscillators has recently attracted attention of many researchers. A rich
palette of behaviors has been observed in a wide variety of systems including, among others, population dynamics,
coupled neurons, and lasers [1–5]. The interest in the synchronization between chaotic semiconductor lasers has been
motivated by its potential for practical applications for example in communication systems using chaos to camouﬂage
In most of the cases the coupling between the subsystems includes a delay that
the transmitted messages [6,7].
accounts for the time the information takes to travel from on subsystem to the other. This delay introduces additional
degrees of freedom to the system and leads to a qualitative diﬀerent dynamics. The eﬀect of the delay between two
mutually coupled semiconductor lasers has been studied recently [4,8] in a regime of long delays and moderate
injection couplings. A spontaneous symmetry breaking was observed together with a retarded synchronization of
chaotic regimes between the two subsystems. Similar studies, but with weak couplings and short delay times, have
demonstrated localized synchronization of relaxation oscillations [12].

A semiconductor laser model, described by partial diﬀerential equations and including parabolic gain model, was
used for the ﬁrst time in ref. [5] to study feedback eﬀects. In the latter paper, it was shown that weak external feedback
can promote multi-longitudinal mode instabilities in an otherwise nominally single mode semiconductor laser, a fact
that was also observed experimentally [9]. Moreover, in ref. [5] it is found that when two identical semiconductor lasers
subjected to optical feedback are coupled unidirectionally, the same individual laser cavity mode could synchronize to
its counterpart eventhough the others modes might be out of synchronization. Despite the relevance that multimode
behaviour may have in some cases, majority of numerical simulations have been carried out with the rate equations
model that assumes a single laser-cavity mode operation and neglect spatial dependencies. Although the agreement
between the rate-equation based models and experimental observations is very good in general, questions concerning
the role of the multi-mode laser operation arise [9]. Though it is possible to extend the Lang-Kobayashi-type models
to multi-mode systems [10], we feel that the underlying approximations are diﬃcult to control and prefer a more
direct approach. The present work aims at further understanding of the multi-mode behavior in mutually coupled
lasers by numerical simulations that are free of the usual rate-equation model approximations. To this end, we use a
laser simulator with a full spatial and temporal resolution [11]. The simulation engine allows us to perform realistic
numerical experiments on systems consisting of various types of semiconductor lasers as well as passive cavities and
coupling between the subsystems.

We consider two identical devices, which will be either pairs of Fabry-Perot or DFB lasers. We pump both lasers
with the same injection current very close to their solitary threshold. The distance between the two lasers is set to
1.2 m, or equivalently a ﬂight time for the light of τ ∼ 4 ns. A neutral density ﬁlter reduces the coupling between
the lasers, which we ﬁx to a value of 6% of transmission. For the Fabry-Perot laser we consider devices of 250 µm
length and 4 µm width with natural, as-cleaved, facet reﬂectivities. In the case of DFB lasers, we use slightly longer
devices (400 µm) with simple Bragg gratings, i.e. without grating phase inserts, with a coupling coeﬃcient of 5000
m−1 and zero reﬂectivity at the facets. Though such devices exhibit two symmetric grating supported modes, due
to the asymmetry induced by the coupling with the counterpart laser, one of the modes is greatly suppressed. We
choose the parameters of both types of lasers such that they operate with carrier densities at which the active layer
exhibits the alpha factor around 3.

The simulational model includes full many-body microscopic gain and refractive index and correctly accounts for
gain dispersion in a broad frequency band. The ﬂexibility of the simulator allows us to consider both Fabry-Perot
type and DFB type of lasers without any restrictions of their modal properties. The simulator also accounts for both
mutual injection and feedback coming from the front facet of the counterparting laser. Moreover, the simulator also
allows us to check situations in which the optical feedback has negligible eﬀects, as reported in [4], [12], but we can

1

anticipate that the results do not qualitatively change. Under these conditions we approach as much as possible the
situation reported in recent experiments [4], [12].

The main features we observe in the simulations with the Fabry-Perot laser twins can be summarized as follow:

1. We observe a LFF behavior, characterized by a sudden drop of the total intensity, similar to the one reported in
refs. [4], [8]. This behavior resembles the well known LFF regime that appears in the case of a laser subjected
to optical feedback (see for example [13] and references therein). However, we have observed that this regime
persists even when we exclude feedback eﬀects from the facet of the other laser, which is an indication that
mutual injection alone may induce this kind of instabilities.

2. We observe a well deﬁned leader-laggard dynamics, as reported experimentally and numerically with a rate
equation model [4], [8], where the role of the leader and laggard changes randomly from one dropout to the
other.

3. We observe a high degree of synchronization between the total output power of both lasers when one of the
outputs is shifted with respect to the other by a time τ , τ being the time it takes the light to ﬂy from one laser
to the other.

4. We only observe signiﬁcant degree of synchronization if one of the series is shifted with respect to the other by

an integer, but odd, multiple of τ .

In Figure 1 we show the typical time traces of the total output power and the optical spectra of both lasers, the
latter being averaged over a whole LFF cycle. In panel a) the output power of both laser exhibit the LFF features that
we have already mentioned. As expected, fast irregular pulsations, in the GHz range, develop within these slow LFF
cycle. In panel b) it can be seen that the lasers operate in a multi-mode regime. Despite this complicated dynamics,
the spectra of both lasers are so similar to each other that it is very diﬃcult to distinguish them. This is an indication
of synchronization between the two lasers. However, these spectra do not tell us much about the dynamical evolution
of the individual longitudinal modes. To gain insight into this problem we concentrate on the dynamics that take
place within the diﬀerent longitudinal modes of the FP lasers. To resolve the modes, we use a Fabry-Perot ﬁlter with
a FHWHM bandwidth of 10 GHz that allows us to isolate each individual longitudinal laser-cavity mode. In Figure 2
we plot the temporal evolution of one of the main mode’s power for both lasers for a time interval that corresponds to
the range ∼ 100 - 200 ns of panel a) of Figure 1. When one of the series is shifted by τ a well-synchronized dynamics
can be observed.

To characterize quantitatively the degree of synchronization between the diﬀerent longitudinal modes of the two

lasers, we compute the cross correlation function between the same longitudinal mode of the two lasers, deﬁned as:

Si(∆t) =

< δP i
p< (δP i

2(t − ∆t) >

1(t)δP i
1(t))2 >< (δP i

2(t))2 >

1(t) and P i

where P i
2(t) represent the output power of the i-th longitudinal mode of each laser. Figure 3 shows the
cross correlation function between the total power, the power of one of the main modes (located at ∼ -200 GHz in
ﬁgure 1 b)) and the power of one side mode (in this case the one located at ∼ -600 GHz in ﬁgure 1 b)). In all the
cases we observe maxima of the cross correlation function at ±τ . In addition, we also observe correlation, although
smaller, at ±3τ , ±5τ , etc. On the other hand, when computing the cross correlation function between diﬀerent
longitudinal laser-cavity modes, we observe almost no correlation as can be seen in Fig. 3, panel d) for the mode
located at ∼ -200 GHz in one laser and the one located at ∼ -70 GHz in the other laser. This fact indicates that
the synchronization takes place only between the same longitudinal modes of the two lasers while the correlation
between diﬀerent longitudinal modes is rather weak. The fact that the same longitudinal mode of the diﬀerent lasers
synchronize was also observed in a system of two unidirectionally coupled semiconductor lasers [5].

As in the experiments and previous numerical simulations [4], [8] we also observe synchronization at sub-nanosecond
time scale. However, the quality of the synchronization depends on the bandwidth of the detector. In Figure 4 we
plot the correlation coeﬃcient, or the value of the cross correlation function calculated at a time τ , vs. the bandwidth
of the detector for both the main mode (dashed line) and the total intensity (solid line). The synchronization is
better for the individual longitudinal modes than for the total intensity and it extends almost over the whole range of
detection without loosing its quality. The partial loss of synchronization in the slower-detector regime is due to the
fact that the actual wave forms emitted by the lasers consist of trains of rather short pulses that are blurred when
the detector response time is longer than the typical pulse duration. On the other hand, the synchronization gets
worse for very fast detector as well. This is because of the lack of synchronization between diﬀerent laser-cavity modes
and by interference eﬀects between them. As can be noted in the ﬁgure, the detection bandwidth for the isolated

2

longitudinal mode is restricted to frequencies up to 10 GHz due to of the previous optical ﬁltering process. In any
case, it is important to remark that a a high degree of synchronization is obtained for a wide detection bandwidth.

Finally, we considered a similar situation that we have already discussed but the lasers are now two DFB lasers.
They are placed at the same distance and pumped close to threshold. The observed behavior of the output power
is qualitatively similar to the one showed in Figure 1 a). However, we observe in the optical spectra that the lasers
operate mainly in one longitudinal mode and only one side mode carries a small fraction of power. As in the FP case,
the spectra of both lasers are very similar to each other, indicating a high degree of synchronization. After ﬁltering
the longitudinal modes we compute again the cross correlation function. In Figure 5 we plot this function for the
two modes and for the total power. As expected, there are only small diﬀerences between the cross correlation of the
total power and the one of the main longitudinal mode. But it can be also seen that the side modes synchronize to its
counterpart at the same time shift ±τ , ±3τ , etc. as the total power or the main mode power do. This again indicates
that the synchronization takes place at the same mode of the diﬀerent lasers.

The important diﬀerence from the Fabry-Perot system case is that with the DFB lasers we can identify the laser
mode that is responsible for the LFF behavior. Moreover, we can directly check if the other mode, the suppressed
one, plays any role in the destabilization process. In Fig. 6 we plot, for comparison, the time-dependent modal powers
during two consecutive dropouts. It is important to point out that for the time traces we have a time resolution of ∼
0.1 ps. It can be clearly seen that the side mode typically exhibits measurable power only after a power dropout of the
main mode develops. After the main mode recovers, the side-mode power steadily decreases until the next dropout,
increasing the side-mode suppression ratio to several orders of magnitude. That is a strong indication that the side
mode is actually not important for the LFF behavior and does not play any role in triggering the power dropouts. By
the same token, it is also a strong indication that the single-mode models actually do capture the essential physics of
the phenomenon.

In conclusion we have carried out a study of the dynamics of two distant, mutually coupled semiconductor lasers.
To describe the lasers we have used a laser simulator with full spatial and temporal resolution that captures correctly
the dynamics of both, Fabry-Perot and DFB lasers and includes a realistic model for the active medium. We have
observed synchronization between the two output powers when one of the series is shifted with respect to the other
by a time τ corresponding to the external cavity length. By ﬁltering individual laser-cavity modes we have observed
that this synchronization takes place between the the same individual longitudinal mode of the two lasers. On the
other hand, the degree of synchronization between diﬀerent laser-cavity modes turns out to be much smaller. As a
consequence, the quality of the synchronization is better for the individual longitudinal modes than for the total power.
We have also studied coupled DFB lasers to compare a multi-mode regime with an essentially single-mode situation.
Our ﬁndings indicate that the dynamics responsible for the LFF behavior and the output power synchronization takes
place within a single laser-cavity mode. Moreover, we have also observed that the suppressed mode does not play any
role in triggering the LFF.

This work was funded by Spanish MCyT under projects TIC99-0645-C05-02 and BFM2000-1108, by DGES under
project PB97-0141-C02-01 and also by AFOSR grant no. F4962-00-1-0002 and AFOSR DURIP grant no. F4962-00-
1-0190. M.K. was partly supported by the GASR grant VEGA 2/7174/20.

[1] S.H. Strogatz and I. Stewart, Sci.Am. 269, 68 (1993).
[2] U. Ernst, K. Pawelzik, and T. Geisel, Phys.Rev.Lett. 74, 1570 (1995).
[3] R. Roy and K.S. Thornburg, Jr., Phys.Rev.Lett. 72, 2009 (1994); T. Sugawara, M. Tachikawa, T. Tsukamoto, and T.
Shimizu, Phys.Rev.Lett. 72, 3502 (1994); K. Otsuka, R. Kawai, S.L. Hwong, J.Y. Ko, and J.L. Chern, Phys.Rev.Lett. 84,
3049 (2000).

[4] T. Heil, I. Fischer, W. Elssser, J. Mulet and C.R. Mirasso, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 795 (2001).
[5] J.K. White, and J.V. Moloney, Phys. rev. A 59, 2422 (1999).
[6] G.D. VanWiggeren and R. Roy, Science 279, 1198 (1998); C.R. Mirasso, P. Colet, and P. Garcia-Fernandez, IEEE Pho-

ton.Tech.Lett 8, 299 (1996); J.P. Goedgebuer, L. Larger, and H. Porte, Phys.Rev.Lett. 80, 2249 (1998).

[7] I. Fischer, Y. Liu, and P. Davis, Phys.Rev. A 62, 011801(R) (2000).
[8] J. Mulet, C. Mirraso, T. Heil, and I. Fisher, Physics and simulation of optoelectronic devices IX, SPIE Proc., to be

published.

[9] G. Vaschenko, M. Guidici, J.J. Rocca, C.S. Menoni, J.R. Tredicce, and S. Balle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5536 (1998).

[10] E.A. Viktorov, and P. Mandel Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3157 (2000); J. K. White, “Communication with chaotic semiconductor

lasers”, Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Arizona (1999).

3

[11] M. Kolesik, and J.V. Moloney, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. , to be published.
[12] A. Hohl, A. Gavrielides, T. Erneux, and V. Kovanis, Phys.Rev.Lett. 78, 4745 (1997); A. Hohl, A. Gavrielides, T. Erneux,

and V. Kovanis. Phys. Rev. Lett. A 59, 3941 (1999).

[13] G. H. M. van Tartwijk and D. Lenstra, Quantum Semiclass. Opt. 7, 87 (1995).

4

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1- Output intensity (with a detection bandwidth of 0.5 GHz) of the two coupled Fabry-Perot lasers (a), and
their time-averaged optical spectra (b).

Figure 2- Synchronization of the output powers in the most-intense laser-cavity mode for both lasers. One of the
outputs (showed in dashed line) is delayed by the external cavity trip time τ .

Figure 3- Cross-correlation function of the output powers of the Fabry-Perot laser twins in the a) total output, b)
most intense laser-cavity mode, and c) one of the weak side modes. Panel d) shows the cross-correlation between
diﬀerent laser cavity modes, with no signiﬁcant synchronization present.

Figure 4- Correlation coeﬃcient as a function of the detector bandwidth. The full curve (and star symbols) corresponds
to the total output power, while the dashed line (and diamond symbols), that lasts until 10 GHz, shows the result for
a single, ﬁltered laser-cavity mode.

Figure 5- Cross-correlation function of the output powers of the two coupled DFB lasers. Panels a) and b) show
the total output powers and the main mode correlations, respectively. Panel c) shows the cross-correlation functions
between the side-modes of the two lasers.

Figure 6- Output power of the dominant mode (upper curve) and of the side mode (lower curve) of one of the DFB
laser.

5

