1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Linearisation of optical eﬀects at low light levels.

Jacques. Moret-Bailly ∗

July 24, 2013

Abstract

As a light beam is produced by an ampliﬁcation of modes of the zero
point ﬁeld in its source, this ﬁeld cannot be distinguished; consequently
a nonlinear optical eﬀect is a function of the total ﬁeld. However, we
generally prefer to use a conventional ﬁeld which excludes the zero point
ﬁeld; for a low conventional ﬁeld, the total ﬁeld may be developed to the
ﬁrst order, so that the eﬀect appears linear.

This nearly trivial remark allows a correct computation of the signal
of a photocell used for photon counting and shows that the ”impulsive
stimulated Raman scattering” (ISRS), a nonlinear, without threshold ef-
fect, which shifts the frequencies, becomes linear at low light levels, so
that the shifted spectra are not distorted.

Comme un faisceau de lumire rsulte d’une ampliﬁcation de modes du
champ du point zro par sa source, le champ du point zro ne peut tre
distingu ; en consquence, un eﬀet optique non- linaire est une fonction
du champ total. En prenant la dﬁnition usuelle du champ qui exclut le
champ du point zro, pour un champ usuel faible le champ total peut tre
dvelopp au premier ordre, de sorte que l’eﬀet devient linaire.

Cette remarque quasiment triviale permet, en particulier, de rendre
compte correctement de la dtection de la lumire d’un photorcepteur en
”comptage de photons”, et de montrer que la diﬀusion Raman impulsion-
nelle stimule, eﬀet quadratique sans seuil, se transforme, bas niveau en
un eﬀet linaire qui fait glisser les frquences spectrales sans distordre les
spectres.

pacs42.25Bs, 42.50Gy

1 Introduction

Introduced by quantum electrodynamics, the zero point electromagnetic ﬁeld
appears as a strange physical concept. The transformation of the ﬁrst (wrong)
Planck’s law into the second [1, 2] sets its value hν/2, but not its nature.
∗Laboratoire de physique, Universit de Bourgogne, BP 47870, F-21078 Dijon cedex, France.

email : jmb@jupiter.u-bourgogne.fr

1

Stochastic electrodynamics [3] describes the zero point ﬁeld, renamed ”stochas-
tic ﬁeld” as an ordinary ﬁeld, but the strongest (although qualitative) interpre-
tation, is provided by the old classical theory : The electric ﬁeld radiated by
an oscillating electric dipole is known; if there is no external ﬁeld, the dipole
is a source; but if it is merged in an external ﬁeld of the same frequency, with
convenient polarisations and phases, it partly cancels the external electromag-
netic ﬁeld, decreasing the electromagnetic energy : the dipole is a receiver ; as
a large part of the ﬁelds is not cancelled, the dipole not only absorbs a part of
the incident ﬁeld, it scatters it. Thus, the absorption of the ﬁeld emitted by a
dipole requiring an inﬁnite number of dipoles, it exists a stochastic unabsorbed,
scattered ﬁeld. This description shows that the zero point ﬁeld is an ordinary
ﬁeld. The measure of the Einstein coeﬃcients A and B for the spontaneous and
stimulated emissions shows that the spontaneous emission is exactly induced by
the zero point ﬁeld. Thus the ﬁeld in a light beam is a zero point ﬁeld ampliﬁed
by a source, and it is artiﬁcial to distinguish in it a zero point ﬁeld and the
remainder, the ﬁeld radiated spontaneously in the old theory (thereafter the
conventional ﬁeld). Thus the conventional ﬁeld has no physical existence, it
must not appear in the formula describing an optical eﬀect.

2 Absorption and detection

Usually, we write that the intensity absorbed or detected by a photocell is
proportional to the square of the amplitude of the conventional electric ﬁeld,
this square being considered proportional to the ﬂux of electromagnetic energy.
This supposes that there is no coherence between the conventional ﬁeld and the
stochastic ﬁeld, an assumption which is false. How can we write that in the dark
there is no absorption while the stochastic intensity hits a photoelectric cell ? A
solution is supposing that there is an equilibrium between the absorbed stochas-
tic ﬁeld and a reemission. Remark that in cold, good photocells it remains a
signal which seems produced by the long and powerful enough ﬂuctuations of
the stochastic ﬁeld. E0 being the amplitude in a mode of the stochastic ﬁeld
and βE0 the ﬁeld resulting of an ampliﬁcation of this mode by a source, the net
available energy on a receiver is (βE0)2 − E2

0 + ((β − 1)E0)2.

0 = 2(β − 1)E2

If β is nearly one, the second term may be neglected ; for a given optical con-
ﬁguration, the time- average of the stochastic amplitude E2
0 = |E0|2 is constant,
so that the detected signal is proportional to the amplitude of the conventional
ﬁeld. On the contrary, for a high conventional ﬁeld, the usual rule is got.

This result is experimentally veriﬁed by the fourth order interference exper-
iments with photon counting (see, for instance, [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]). The result of
these experiments is easily got qualitatively using the classical rules [9], but the
contrast of the computed fringes is lower than shown by the experiments. In the
simplest experiment [5] two small photoelectric cells are put in the interference
fringes produced by two point sources; the interferences are not visible because
they depend on the fast changing diﬀerence of phase φ of the sources. The
sources are weak; the signal is the correlation of the counts of the cells.

2

Distinguishing the photoelectric cells by an index j equal to 1 or 2, set δj
the diﬀerence of paths for the light received by the cells. The amplitude of
the conventional ﬁeld received by a cell is proportional to cos(πδj /λ + φ/2),
so that, assuming the linearity, the probability of a simultaneous detection is
proportional to

cos(

+

) cos(

+

).

πδ1
λ

φ
2

πδ2
λ

φ
2

(1)

The mean value of this probability got by an integration over φ is zero for
δ1 − δ2 = λ/2, so that the visibility has the right value 1. Assuming the usual
response of the cells proportional to the square of the conventional ﬁeld, the
visibility would have the wrong value 1/2.

3 Low level ”Impulsive Stimulated Raman Scat-

tering” (ISRS).

It is not a simple
ISRS, known since 1968 [10] is now commonly used [11].
Raman scattering, but a parametric eﬀect, combination of two space-coherent
Raman scattering, so that the state of the interacting molecules is not changed.
ISRS is obtained using ultrashort light pulses, that is ”pulses shorter than all
relevant time constants” [12], usually femtosecond laser pulses. In a gas, the
relevant time constants are:

i) the collisional time : the collisions destroy the coherence of the excitation

of the molecules.

ii) the period which corresponds to the virtual Raman transition : the scat-
tered light interferes with the exciting light into a frequency-shifted single beam
so that the time-coherence of the output beams is not broken by the dispersion
and the eﬀect is strong.

ISRS is generally performed using at least a strong pump laser beam so that
it is nonlinear, the frequency shift depends on the intensity of the beam. But
it has no threshold : a direct study [13, 14] shows what happens if the pump
beams are usual incoherent light beams, made of relatively long, weak pulses
: the eﬀect becomes linear so that the relative frequency shift ∆ν/ν depends
slightly on a dispersion, not the intensity. The coherence preserves the wave-
fronts; thus there is no blur either in the images or in the spectra, just as by a
Doppler frequency shift. Thought the coherence of the eﬀect called ”Incoherent
Light Coherent Raman Scattering” (ILCRS) makes it strong, it requires so low
pressures that it seems impossible to perform it in the labs. The Universe,
however provides good experimental conditions : the paths may be long, a
lot of mono- or poly-atomic molecules have hyperﬁne structures providing the
low energy Raman transitions : atoms perturbated by Zeeman eﬀect near the
quasars, H+
2 molecules in the clouds detected by the forbidden nuclear spin
transition of H2 at 0.2m. . .

A part of the redshifts attributed to Doppler (or expansion) eﬀect is surely
provided by ILCRS able to transfer energy from high frequencies to isotropic

3

thermal radiation (2.7K). Near bright stars, this transfer may be similar to a
transfer by heated dust.

4 Conclusion

The nonlinear light-matter interactions without threshold become linear using
weak light beams. In two examples, this trivial property provides an interesting
expansion of well known eﬀects; it explains many other eﬀects, for instance the
computation of the sub-Poissonian statistics in photon counting [15] is easier
than the quantum computation [16] in particular in an intermediate case where
the light ﬂux is too large.

References

[1] Planck, M., 1911, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges, 13, 138

[2] Nernst, W., 1916, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges, 18, 83

[3] Marshall, T. W. & E. Santos, 1989, Phys. Rev. A 39, 6271

[4] Clauser J. F. , Horne M. A. , Shimony A. & Holt R. A. , 1969, Phys. Rev.

Lett. ,23, 880

[5] Gosh R. & Mandel L. , 1987, Phys. Rev. Lett. ,59, 1903

[6] Ou Z. Y. & Mandel L. , 1988, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 61, 54

[7] Ou Z. Y. & Mandel L. , 1990, J. Opt. Soc. Am. , 7, 2127

[8] Kiess T. E. , Shih Y. H. , Sergienko A. V. & Alley C. O. , 1993, Phys. Rev.

Lett. , 71, 3893

[9] Moret-Bailly J. , 1994, J. Optics, 25, 263

[10] Yan Y.-X., Gamble E. B. Jr. & Nelson K. A. , 1985, J. Chem Phys. 83,

5391

[11] Nelson K. A. & Fayer M. D., 1980, J. Chem. Phys 72, 5202

[12] Lamb, G. L. Jr., 1971, Rev. Mod.Phys 43 , 99

[13] Moret-Bailly J. 1998, Quantum and Semiclassical Optics 10, L35

[14] Moret-Bailly J. 2001, J. Quantit. Spectr. & Radiative Ttransfer 68, 575

[15] Short R. & Mandel L. 1983, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 384

[16] Glauber R. J. 1966. in Physics of Quantum Electronics, Kelley P. L. et al.

ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 788

4

