A possible scenario for volumetric display through nanoparticle
suspensions

Enrique Canessa
The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy

Abstract

We discuss on the potential of suspensions of gold nanoparticles with variable re-

fractive index for the possible physical realization of in-relief virtual dynamic display of

plane images. A reasoning approach for a vision system to display in real-time volumet-

ric moving images is proposed based on well-known properties of optical media, namely

the anomalous dispersion of light on certain transparent media and the virtual image

formed by a refracting transparent surface. The system relies on creating mechanisms

to modify the refractive index of in-relief virtual dynamical display (iVDD) bulbs that

ideally would contain a suspension of gold nanoparticles each and that might be ordered

in an array ﬁlling up a whole screen.

1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

In this work we present an approach for a vision system based on suspensions of gold

nanoparticles with variable refractive index that could allow to depict in real-time and

in- relief two-dimensional 2D (i.e., planar or ﬂat) virtual images such as light rays that

do not converge to the image point but appear to emanate from that point that could

be in movement.

To perceive, recognize and gauge with our brain the depth of a 3D picture, nature

provides us with two images of the same scene (the so-called stereopsis process [1, 2, 3, 4]).

The amount of depth perceived also depends on the binocular disparity between the two

eyes views. The wider the separation, the greater the apparent depth is. By moving our

head and looking around objects, we change our view and judge depths of objects at

diﬀerent distances from our eyes (the parallax phenomenon). The brain also uses the so-

called accommodation of blurred images to gauge depth from the muscular contraction

of the lens surface of the eyes.

Besides the input signals from the two eyes, the brain also uses other cues in the

determination of depth. These include the cues that artists rely on to convey a feeling of

depth in 2D paintings. Artists convey the roundedness of an object by varying color or

indicating the diﬀerent light intensities on diﬀerent surfaces (e.g., shadows). Flat, static

pictures can also take on some depth by variations in the sharpness of distant objects

(e.g., perspective) or by the interposition (i.e., occlusion) of objects.

Separate images to each eye can also present a binocular disparity and hence a

3D view to the observer (e.g., as seen by binoculars). To this end, the stereoscope

presents two diﬀerent pictures to each eye whose viewing appears in depth due to their

diﬀerences. This old-technique has been used, e.g., in Astronomy to notice changes in the

stars positions. Other attempts for achieving static 3D displays are in-relief posters and

maps, multiple-layer postal cards, etching monographs, embossed image art, sculptures,

holograms (to record and store 3D visual information to be re-displayed under proper

2

illumination), etc.

The shape-from-shading (also known as photoclinometry) is a method used to view

planar images in 3D by mathematically relating image intensities and brightness [5].

Other mathematical techniques make it also possible to reconstruct from 2D projections

and get a full 3D picture [6].

Alternative techniques to visually fathom the depths of the world in movement

around us have been also explored. These include the 3D-like Cinevision with added ex-

ternal eﬀects and objects (e.g., perfume, dummies and quakes superimposed), the virtual

reality (with simulated virtual touch) and 3D computer vision [7] (based on perspective

and light intensity changes and motion sensors). Related work on the 3D display using

non-linear optics can be found in [8].

Motivated by all this ﬁrestorm of ongoing activity on the search of techniques for

giving the impression of reality (depth) and hopes for subsequent realistic displays, we

focus next in the possible vision system based on suspensions of gold nanoparticles

with variable refractive index. To achieve an enhanced depth by the in-relief virtual

dynamical display (iVDD) of plane images, it is necessary to consider ﬁrst two physics

phenomena as seen in nature and described by geometrical optics (apparent depth) and

nonlinear optics (anomalous refraction index.

Images of objects inmersed in a medium with refraction index n1 are formed by the

refraction of rays at a, say, spherical surface with radius R of a transparent material

with a diﬀerent n2 [2]. By applying Snell’s law to the refracted rays and after a simple

geometrical construction, it can be shown that n1

R , where p is object distance
and q is image distance from the spherical surface. For a ﬂat surface, one approximates

p + n2

q = n2−n1

R to inﬁnite hence for small angles

q ≈ −(n2/n1)p .

(1)

3

When the sign of q is opposite to that of p, the location of the virtual image is on the

same side of the surface as the object.

It is well-kwown that the refractive index (or index of refraction), characteristic

of a substance, varies with light.

If n changes we then deduce from Eq.(1) that the

position of a virtual image might move as a function of the frequency of radiation λ.

The nonlinearity of the refractive index versus λ in certain optical media as well as the

connection between dispersion and absorption has been known for many years [9]. (For

details of the treatment of dispersion according to quantum theory and classical Lorentz

electron theory see, e.g., [4, 10, 11, 12, 13]).

Absorption involves the exitation by radiation of an electron from its lowest energy

state to a higher energy state by the incident light wave (quantum conﬁnement). Usually

not all of the absorbed energy is re-radiated, remaining as heat in the absorbing material.

In quantum theory, absorption is associated with transitions between quantized energy

levels. Whereas according to classical theory, this phenomenon is identiﬁed with the

steady oscillation of a charge in an orbit reacting to radiation. Each electron oscillator

has a resonance frequency and, near resonance, the damping oscillator produces the

broadening of the amplitude response.

The refraction or bending of a ray of light that passes through a medium is the result

of the diminished transmission rate of the wavefronts in the medium. The velocity

of light propagation in the medium varies considerably with wavelength ω hence the

refractive index n varies with the wavelength of the incident light. When ω approaches

the wavelengths of strong absorption bands of the medium, n undergoes sharp changes

around resonant frequencies λR.

This anomalous behavior of n was ﬁrst observed in electrically excited rariﬁed gases

some time ago (see reviews in [14, 15]). Since then, there has been a continuing interest

in investigating the exceptionally high values of the refractive index near resonance lines

4

by laser excitation in bulk semiconductors [16, 17] and Sodium vapor [18] to mention a

few. Experiments in air and diatomic gases show that the resonant wavelengths lie in

the ultraviolet (i.e., shorter than the visible wavelengths). The characteristic damping

times for the resonances are usually compared with the incident light intensity pulses

used.

Variations in density ρ (due to, e.g., compressibility) [13], in small temperature gradi-

ents [19] and in angle of light incidence [20] also produce changes in optical refractivity.

Though such changes are not suﬃcient to produce appreciable percentage of excited

states (and produce the so-called ‘negative dispersion’ eﬀect).

Within classical electromagnetic theory, n is represented as a complex, frequency

dependent quantity [10, 13].

It can be shown that n(ω) = Reqǫ(ω), where ǫ is the

dielectric permittivity of the medium, and the absorption coeﬃcient is given by δ(ω) =
−2(ω/c)Imqǫ(ω).

There is also a close relation between dispersion and absorption. For a Lorentzian

oscillator, the extreme values of n occur at a frequency at which δ has half its maximum

value and it can be approximated by [13]

(n − 1)extreme ≈ no − 1 ± δmax
2

,

(2)

where no − 1 is the reduced refractivity due to diﬀerent electron oscillators per molecule.

It is important to mention that measurements of nonlinear refraction at room tem-
perature and upon (∼picosecond) excitations by a laser pulse have also been reported in

porous-glass nanocomposite materials [21, 22] and transparent dielectrics materials [23]

owing to their potential applications for improving the performance of photonic devices.

On the theoretical side, the electronic properties of these particles with diameters of few

up to ten nanometers and embedded in a dielectric have been studied in [24, 25].

A large amount of work has also been devoted to the study of quantum size eﬀects

5

in suspensions of submicron size colloidal particles [25]. However, it has been only in

recent years that the ultrafast nonlinear response of metal colloids to light has been

measured (whose diameters are much smaller than the optical wavelength) [26, 27, 28].

These fascinating nanoparticle systems, which are neither quite microscopic nor quite

macroscopic [25], are of our interest for the iVDD implementation and the possible 3D

display of visible plane surfaces.

Experimental results using a single beam technique [29], show that the non-linearity

is ultra-fast with response time shorter than, e.g., the 28 ps pulse duration of the laser
used. The absorption spectrum of gold nanoparticles having mean diameter of ≈ 20 nm
displays a maximum at a frequency of ≈ 525 nm. Particles larger in size have a red-

shifted plasmon maximum [30]. Copper nanoparticles in 2-ethoxyethanol and water

shows distinct absorbtion peaks at 572 and 582 nm, respectively [31].

The optical response of rod-shaped gold nanoparticles in solutions, with diﬀerent

aspect ratios, is also of interest in the visible [32].

It has been observed that their

absorption spectral features consist of a dominant surface plasma attributed to the col-

lective dipole oscillation. corresponding to the longitudinal resonance. Its characteristic

frequency shifts to the red when increasing the anisotropic shape of the nanorods. As

with the nanoparticles in suspension, data from human photoreceptors in the retina

shows that the wavelength of maximum absorbance of the sensitive receptor cells known
as cones lies also in the range 534 − 564 nm [33].

As anticipated the initial stages of image processing in nature consist of fairly simple,

usually local, transformations of the array of (refracted light) intensity values in the

image [1].

Inspired by these observations, in what follows, we introduce the iVDD

system for the image ﬁlter that might produce the sensation of depth under normal

viewing conditions without the use of external glasses or special sensors.

An input signal (such as a TV signal comming from an antenna) could be simulta-

6

neously displayed in two receiver sets. A radiation-sensitive detector photodiode that

converts light into an electrical signal, placed in front of one of the TV screens, could

be used for the voltage analysis of the time-varying imagery in real time. The photo-

diode could send a voltage signal to a selective switch. The switch could possess two

diﬀerent (or a discrete set of) output states of emitted light that could radiate the iVDD

bulb in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum in which the moving images

containing 2D information transmitted by a second receiver set might cross.

Following reported experimental data, if frequencies at or near resonance λR can

be used to radiate the iVDD bulb, suﬃcient excitation of energy states would produce

a nonlinear n of the suspension. Since the refractive index of the iVDD bulb (ﬁlled

with the nanoparticles) would change abruptly then one can deduce from Eq.(1) that

the position of a virtual image should move (back or forward) as a function of the

frequency (greater or smaller than λR). The incident wavelengths should be near (and

not equal to) the wavelength at which the nano gold colloidal suspension has a maximum

absorption. So little should be transmitted or reﬂected of the incident light in a similar

way to ﬂuorescent-tube discharge lamps where the incident UV light excites a ﬂuorescent

coating on the internal surface of a bulb.

A coherent laser light could be activated by the voltage signals coming from the pho-

todiode. The required high-frequency radiation could be produced by, e.g., a Nd:YAG
laser (λ ≈ 530 nm) providing 30 ps pulses at a repetition rate of 10 Hz [26]. (For visible
light, one requires frequencies of the order of 3 106GHz: since λ = c/ω ≈ 3 108/100 10−9

cycles per seconds. The use of Incandescent and ﬂuorescent lights might also emit light

in this frequency range. Besides, acoustic-optic modulation might alter the refractive

index as observed in recent experiments in optical ﬁbers [34, 35].

Because the refractivity should vary sharply over the proﬁle of a spectral line due

to the smallness of the particles inside the iVDD bulb, the propagation of the two

7

wavelengths of light through the iVDD bulb will cause the position of a virtual image

formed in the iVDD bulb to move as a function of the frequency of radiation according

to refraction phenomena. This eﬀect would allow to simulate spatial information out of

the planar images. By using reported experimental data for the absorbance spectra of

gold particles in suspension, we carry out a crude estimation for the extreme value of

n given in Eq.(2) and found that the virtual image would have (maximum, minimum)
depths of about ±15% from the receiver screen distance.

Thus, our simple system involves the generation of light excitation as emitted, e.g.

from a TV screen. This radiation could be used to alter the refractive index of a stable

inhomogeneous nanoparticle dispersion which generates an in-relief virtual dynamical

viewpoint and allows to gain depth control by the light-frequency ﬁltering. Due to the

fast-response time of the non-linear dispersion, motion changes should appear as in TV

and cinema motion which consists of a permanent stream of frame pictures. The electron

beam ﬁred out of a gun inside a TV set hits a phosphor-coated screen to draw a picture

at a rate of 30 times every second.

In principle to transfer the full screen information one could think of an array of

iVDD bulbs ﬁlling up the screen area. Each screen pixel to be seen in-relief should be

in correspondence (and be representable) with the 2D full screen. The viewer would see

a virtual image which might appear as a relief image of the original full-screen object.

The present system needs to be compatible with TV broadcast standards and stan-

dard home TV receivers, including the new digital TV broadcasting which allows to

improve the overall quality of the picture (overcoming the problems of ghosting and

compressing the signal) [36, 37]. If we consider a (black and white) rectangular com-

puter screen (roughly 25cm diagonal) having an array of 640 by 480 pixels, then one

would need about 307,200 iVDD bulbs to cover out all the screen.

Of course, the present ideas are only speculation as there are many technical problems

8

to consider in practice. A few of these are discussed next for completeness.

To the best of the Author’s knowledge there does not exist a similar proposal for

a possible iVDD system described in the literature (combining both nonlinear optics

phenomena and simple laws of geometrics optics as used here), or a similar product

available in the market, or a similar claim in the USA patents database [38].

Although certain signiﬁcant properties of optical media have long been studied by

specialists, the techniques and instruments which could make them observable (e.g.,

precision and sensitivity of measurements) have been only available in recent years.

These include small, high-tech lasers (with low power requirements, low phase noise and

superior frequency stability). The high light frequencies needed for the iVDD system are

not yet achieved by commercial Voltage Controlled Oscillators (VCOs) which are widely

used for wireless communications. These are available in radio frequencies spanning 100

MHz to 3 GHz with supply voltages ranging from 3 to 12 Volts and operative over a

wide range of temperatures. Tiny Crystal Clock Oscillators allowing fast delivery of

many frequencies are only available in this range. All this technology is developing.

Put more precisely, it is only now possible that these thoughts for a 3D virtual

dynamic image could become feasible. To have a suitable experimental test platform,

the system relies on creating reliable mechanisms to modify the iVDD bulbs’s refractive

index displaying the recent observed non-linear optics properties of small metal particles

in suspensions which could be ordered in an array to ﬁll up a whole screen.

In theory the present vision system for displaying in real-time and in-relief 2D mov-

ing images should overcome the following problems: One should search for the best

transparent material for the iVDD bulb container of the nanoparticles in suspensions

(made of lens; glass bounded by smooth ”curved” surfaces). One should identify which

thin optical elements to use to reduce aberration (if any will appear). It would be nec-

essary to control the size distribution as well as the stability of the gold nanoparticles in

9

suspension against agglomeration (percolation) and sedimentation. It is well-kwon that

grafted polymers represent an interesting alternative means to obtain a solid matrix and

control interparticle separation. Gold-graft copolymer composites could then be used to

characterize the distribution and spatial arrangement of the nanoparticles. One should

avoid using photorefractive materials -the subclass of nonlinear optics materials in which

light emerging from such substances does not necessary have its frequency proportional

to the incoming light. It is necessary to investigate the characteristic frequencies (lead-

ing to transition on the visible) of the optical transparent media to be used. One should

identify the optimal visual angle and the possible range of vision. The iVDD should be

isolated from vibration. Small vibrational disturbances on the iVDD bulbs might cause

the outgoing laser transmission beam to deviate from the desired pointing angle. One

should quantify the iVDD (fast) response times to control and avoid superimposition

of images. One should avoid to have images magniﬁed upright (M=image height/object

height). One should avoid double refraction (through birefringent substrates) in optically

anisotropic media. One should identify if there is any absorbed energy not re-radiated,

remaining as heat in the absorbing material.

To conclude we would like also to mention that laser-induced holographics TV, (i.e.,

moving holographic videos with a wide-angle display of 3D dynamic images) is being

developed by the MIT’s Media Laboratory whose usage is expected by the year 2020 [39].

Our iVDD system could diﬀer from Holographics TV by the following. In principle, the

iVDD system could display ”mezzo” relievo images only and not a full volumetric, 3D

display as in holographics TV. It could display in-relievo images over a reduced angle-

range vision -holographic video display is capable of rendering full-color 25x25x25mm

images with a 15o view-zone at rates over 20 frames per second. The iVDD system could

contain less information than holograms and could also require a Laser source. However,

it might require simpler manipulation as it could be easy to attach to present TV or

Computer screens.

10

In order to get visual eﬀects that might look like the real things one could try the

iVDD. It could be a reasonable, cost-eﬀective alternative to holographic TV because the

costs of large optics necessary for holographics TV could be reduced to acceptable levels.

Our iVDD system could also be compatible with display media other than TV, e.g., in-

relief Computer and, probably, Cinema screens. Many practical applications can be

anticipated including the entertainment and cultural business. The iVDD system could

help to medical imaging in real time, robotics, design, etc as well as to preserve realistic

vision of extincted species and/or rare objects of which only photographic records exit.

It has been said that virtual images cannot be displayed on a screen (see, e.g., Ref.[2]).

However, a reasoning approach indicates that there could be a way for achieving this

optical phenomenon on a large screen made of an array of tiny Virtual Dynamical Display

(iVDD) bulbs containing gold nanoparticle suspensions. One could also think of the two

diﬀerent input images to be displayed in two separated planes and that the resulting

image disparity would be suﬃcient to create a steroscopic view to cross the iVDD bulbs.

11

References

(1983).

1996.

[1] O.J. Braddick and A.C. Sleigh Editors, in Springer Series in Information Sciences,

Vol 11, Physical and Biological Processing of Images, Springer-Verlang, Berlin,

[2] R.A. Serway, in Physics for Scientists & Engineers, Saunders College Publishing,

[3] D.S. Falk, D.R. Brill and D.G. Stork, in Seeing the Light: Optics in Nature, Pho-

tography, Color, Vision, and Holography, Harper & Row Publishers, New York,

Chapter 8, 1986.

[4] M. Born and E. Wolf, in Principles of Optics, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1975.

[5] B.K.P. Horn, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 8, 201 (1977).

[6] R. Gordon, G.T. Herman and S.A. Johnson, Sci. Am. 233, 56 (1975).

[7] E.A. Bretz, IEEE Spectrum, page 42, January 1998.

[8] E.A. Downing, L. Hesselink, R.M. MacFarlane, A Solid-State Three-Dimensional

Volumetric Display, Conference Proceedings of the Lasers and Electro-Optics Soci-
ety, Annual Meeting, 8, 6 (1994).

[9] see, e.g., Encyclopedia of Physics, S.P. Parker Ed., Mc-Graw Hill Book Company,

Ney York, page 12, (1988).

[10] S.A. Akhmanov and S.Yu. Nikitin, in Physics Optics, Clarendon Press, Oxford,

[11] G.C. Baldwin, in An Introduction to Nonlinear Optics, Plenum Press, New York,

1997.

1969.

12

[12] F. Zernike and J.E. Midwinter, in Applied Nonlinear Optics, John Wiley & Sons,

New York, 1973.

[13] D. Bershader,

in Modern Optics Methods in Gas Dynamic Research, Ed. D.S.

Dosanjh, Plenum Press, New-York, page 65, 1971.

[14] S.A. Korﬀ and G. Breit, Rev. Mod. Phys 4, 41 (1933).

[15] R. Landenburg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 5, 243 (1933).

[16] N. Peyghambarian and S.W. Koch, in Springer Series in Electronics and Photonics,

Vol 30, Nonlinear Photonics, H.M. Gibbs, G. Khitrova and N. Peyghambarian Eds.,

[17] D. Ricard, P. Roussignol, F. Hache and Ch. Flytzanis, phys. stat. sol 159, 275

Springer-Verlang, (1990).

(1990).

[18] E. K¨ugler and D. Bershader, Exp. Fluids 1, 51 (1983).

[19] H. Fiedler, K. Nottmeyer, P.P. Wegener and S. Raghu, Exp. Fluids 3, 145 (1985)

[20] D.K. Lynch and W. Livingston, in Color and Light in Nature, Cambridge Univ.

Press, 1995.

[21] R.J. Gehr, G.L. Fisher and R.W. Boyd, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14, 2310 (1997).

[22] K. Uchida et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 11, 1236 (1994).

[23] M. Sheik-Bahae et al., IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 26, 760 (1990).

[24] F. Starrost et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3316 (1998).

[25] J.A.A.J. Perenboom, P. Wyder and F. Meier, Phys. Rep. 78, 173 (1981).

[26] M.J. Bloemer, J.W. Haus and P.R. Ashley, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 7, 790 (1990).

13

[27] A.W. Olsen and Z.H. Kafaﬁ, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 113, 7758 (1998).

[28] S.C. Mehendale, S.R. Mishra, M. Laghate, T.S. Dhami and K.C. Rustagi, Opt.

Comm. 133, 273 (1997).

[29] M. Sheik-Bahae et al., IEEE J. Quantum Elec. 26, 760 (1990).

[30] T.S. Ahmadi, S.L. Logunov and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 8053 (1996).

[31] H.H. Huang et al., Langmuir 13, 172 (1997).

[32] Y.-Y. Yu, S.-S. Chang, C.-L. Lee and C.R.C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem 101, 6661

[33] J.K. Bowmaker and H.J.A. Dartnall, J. Physiology 298, 501 (1980).

[34] T. Kato, Y. Suetsugu and M. Nishimura, Opt. Lett. 20, 2279 (1995).

[35] P.D. Townsend, A.J. Poustie, P.J. Hardman and K.J. Blow, Opt. Lett. 21, 334

(1997).

(1996).

[36] J. Moroney, Global Commun. Interactive’97 Edition, p91.

[37] U. Reimers, Phys. World, p.39, April 1996.

[38] As of this date, an extensive on-line search was carried out by the Author using

the IBM Web server at http://www.patents.ibm.com To mention the most rele-

vant, a method and apparatus for (i) creating an illusion of depth when viewing

through special eyeglasses moving pictures projected in a plane surface has the US

Patent number 5434613, and for (ii) producing a stereoscopic TV image giving

the illusion of 3D depth has the US Patent number 4567513 (further references

are given therein). 3D display has also been achieved using special projectors (see,

e.g., US Patent numbers and titles: 3674921-Three dimensional television system,

14

5448287-Spatial video display system, 566831-Three dimensional display, 5714997-

Virtual reality television system and 529323-Apparatus and method for producing

3D-dimensional images).

[39] S. Bains, New Scientist, Vol.155, page 28, July 1997.

15

