1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observation of Scarred Modes in Asymmetrically Deformed Microcylinder Lasers

Sang-Bum Lee, Jai-Hyung Lee, and Joon-Sung Chang
Condensed Matter Research Institute, School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea

Hee-Jong Moon
Department of Optical Engineering, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, Korea

Sang Wook Kim and Kyungwon An
Center for Macroscopic Quantum-Field Lasers, Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
Taejon 305-701,Korea
(July 22, 2013)

We report observation of lasing in the scarred modes in an
asymmetrically deformed microcavity made of liquid jet. The
observed scarred modes correspond to morphology-dependent
resonance of radial mode order 3 with their Q values in the
range of 106. Emission directionality is also observed, corre-
sponding to a hexagonal unstable periodic orbit.

PACS number(s): 05.45.Mt, 42.55.Sa

The morphology-dependent resonance (MDR) modes,
also known as whispering gallery modes, in a sphere or
a cylinder can support ultrahigh cavity quality factor Q
in the optical region due to repetitive total reﬂections
In recent years cir-
of light at the circular boundary.
cular microcavity lasers with microdroplets, microcylin-
ders, and microdisks have been widely investigated for
the purpose of developing ultra-eﬃcient optical devices
utilizing such ultrahigh Q as well as the gain enhance-
ment originating from the cavity quantum electrodynam-
ics [1,2]. In addition, deformed microcavities have drawn
much interest due to their output emission directional-
ity, which can be practically important in designing ef-
ﬁcient microlasers and light-emitting diodes. N¨ockel et
al. have studied the eﬀects of deformation with a ray-
optics model [3–5] along with the wave equation analysis
[6] in an asymmetric cavity of 2D quadrupolar deforma-
tion described by the equation r(φ) = a(1 + η cos 2φ)
with a the undeformed radius, η the deformation param-
eter and φ the polar angle. In their study deformation-
induced Q spoiling was predicted along with dynamical
localization and chaos-assisted tunneling. Gmachl et al.
demonstrated emission directionality and enhancement
in emission power in a highly deformed semiconductor
microcavity [7]. The emission directionality in this case
came from the so-called bow-tie shape orbits of ray, which
correspond to the stable resonance islands in the Hamil-
tonian dynamics.

The bow-tie modes, however, cannot exist in cavities of
low index of refraction (< 2) such as optical ﬁber or cylin-
drical dye jets. For these cavities of low index of refrac-
tion, neither stable resonance islands nor stable periodic
orbits exit in ray optics model. Any directional emission

would come from the chaotic MDR modes [5,6] without
real mode structures in the lasing spectrum. Even in
these cavities, however, a dense set of unstable periodic
orbits (UPO’s) are still embedded in the chaotic orbits.
Although UPO’s are found with zero probability in the
classical dynamics, in quantum mechanics they manifest
themselves in the eigenstates of the system. There exist
extra and unexpected concentrations, so-called scars, of
eigenstate density near UPO’s.

The existence of the scar in general was discussed in
both linear [8–10] and nonlinear semiclassical theories
[11]. Experimentally it has been shown in a quantum well
in a high magnetic ﬁeld [12] and Sinai-billiard-shaped mi-
crowave cavities [13]. So far, no experimental evidence
exists for the existence of scars in optical microcavities. If
scarred modes can exist in a deformed microcavity, they
could also give rise to emission directionality with mode-
like structures in the emission spectrum. Furthermore,
the Q values of these modes are expected to be still very
high, although degraded from their original ultrahigh val-
ues, since the scarred mode corresponds to a ray which
undergoes total reﬂections in its dynamics. The bow-tie
mode, on the other hand, corresponds to a ray simulta-
neously reﬂecting and refracting oﬀ the cavity boundary,
and thus its Q tends to degrade severely.

In this Letter we report the ﬁrst observation of the las-
ing in the scarred modes in an asymmetrically deformed
microcylinder. The observed scarred modes correspond
to MDR of mode order 3 with their Q values as high
as 2 × 106, which is 100 times larger than the Q value
expected from the refractive escape of the chaotic MDR
modes [5,6]. From the directionality of the emission, we
found that the scarred modes correspond to a hexagonal
UPO.

Our experimental setup, similar to that of Ref. [14], is
shown in Figure 1. The basic idea of the experiment is as
follows. A liquid jet containing ﬂuorescent dye molecules
is laterally forced so that a 2D microcavity with vari-
able quadrupole deformation is created. By adjusting
the lateral force we can control the degree of deforma-
tion accurately. The cavity is optically pumped that any
persisting MDR modes with low loss would undergo laser
oscillations. From the lasing spectrum, we can get infor-

1

mation on the Q values and the mode orders of the lasing
MDR’s.

In details, we used a liquid jet (a ∼ 14µm), directed
upward, from a glass oriﬁce. The liquid in the jet was
ethanol doped with Rhodamine B (RhB) at the con-
centration of 1 × 10−4 M/L (refractive index n=1.361).
The jet stream was illuminated by a Q-switched Nd:YAG
pump laser (532 nm, 10 ns) perpendicularly at the posi-
tion of 3 mm from the oriﬁce. The polarization of pump
laser was parallel to the stream direction, correspond-
ing to TM polarization. Argon gas through a glass tube
of 1.0 mm diameter was blown normal to the jet and
at the same time perpendicularly to the incident pump
laser. The distance between the tip of the tube and the
jet was 2 mm. The diﬀraction patterns of the pump
beam created by the jet were projected on a screen and
the images were recorded on a CCD camera. From the
diﬀraction patterns we could ﬁnd the deformation pa-
rameter η, which is deﬁned as η ≡ 1 − b/a, where 2b is
the length of the minor axis of the deformed jet. The
spectrum of MDR lasing light emitted in the same direc-
tion as the gas ﬂow was measured with a spectrometer
equipped with a photo-diode array (PDA) on the image
plane of the spectrometer.

Figure 2 shows the typical MDR lasing spectra emitted
from the deformed jet for various η values. When the
argon gas was not blown to the jet (η= 0), two groups of
repeated MDR peaks appeared with one centered around
608 nm and the other spread over the 620-645 nm range
as shown in Fig. 2(a). The MDR modes in a cylinder
are characterized by the mode number or the angular
momentum index l, the mode order or the radial index ν,
and the polarization (TE or TM). From the polarization
analysis we found that all of these peaks were TM modes.
Based on the ﬁtting described below we also found that
the mode orders are ν = 5 for the MDR group around
608 nm and ν = 4 for the other group around 620-645
nm, respectively.

−1
leak + Q

The absorption quality factor of the gain medium,
is deﬁned as Qabs ≡ 2πn/λα, where α is the
Qabs,
absorption coeﬃcient and n the refractive index of the
dye solution. We found that Qabs = 5 × 106, 5 × 107,
at 608 nm and 630 nm, respectively, from the absorp-
tion measurement. Output coupling eﬃciency or mode
visibility is characterized by the ratio Q/Qleak, where
−1
abs)−1 is the total quality factor, and
Q ≡ (Q
Qleak, corresponding to overall cavity leakage loss, is de-
−1
−1
def)−1. Here Q0 rep-
ﬁned as Qleak ≡ (Q
surf + Q
resents the cavity leakage of an ideal undeformed cavity,
calculated from the Lorentz-Mie theory using only the
real part of m [15]. It depends weakly on the mode num-
−1
ber l and strongly on the mode order ν. The term Q
surf
represents the loss induced by microscopic surface im-
−1
perfection such as surface scattering. The last term Q
def
represents the leakage induced by the cavity deforma-
tion alone. For η=0, this term vanishes. Since MDR’s
of ν = 4, 5, 6 have Q0 ∼ 109, 107, 105, respectively, and
since the MDR group centered around 608 nm can be

−1
0 + Q

ﬁtted with Qleak of 2 × 106 as discussed below, this group
must be of ν=5 mode order with Q degradation possibly
by surface imperfection. Since Q/Qleak for ν=5 modes
is of order of unity, the corresponding peaks appeared
strongly in Fig. 2(a), while ν=4 modes appeared weak
due to their small mode visibility (Qleak > 108).

As the deformation parameter η increased, individual
MDR peaks shifted to red. This red shift is mainly due to
the increase in the cavity perimeter in the deformation
preserving the cross sectional area of the jet, requiring
the wavelength of MDR to increase accordingly [6]. The
cross sectional area of the jet increased slightly in the
actual experiment due to the drag force exerted by the
argon gas ﬂow. We could, however, subtract out the con-
tribution from the area increase by measuring the amount
of the red shift at the position where the jet returned to
a round shape, well above (∼ 3 mm) the deformed re-
gion on the jet, with and without the argon ﬂow. The
diﬀerence between these two measurements is the con-
tribution from the area increase. Figure 3(a) shows the
amount of red shift measured in this way versus the defor-
mation parameter η, which were independently measured
from the diﬀraction data. The experimental results are
in good agreement with the theoretical curve, with no
ﬁtting parameter, assuming the quadrupole deformation
preserving the cross sectional area. Based on this agree-
ment we can assure that our estimates on η in Fig. 2 are
fairly good.

As η increased, both the ν=5 and ν=4 mode groups
shifted to blue. Such blue shifts of MDR groups are as-
sociated with Q spoiling, as observed in the dye-doped
microdroplets by Lin et al. [2]. When the cavity Q is
high enough, the main loss in the lasing comes from the
gain-medium absorption, and thus the lasing occurs at
the wavelength where the absorption is weak, i.e., at the
red. One the other hand, when Q is degraded severely,
the cavity loss accounts for the major loss in the lasing,
and thus the lasing occurs where the emission is strong,
i.e., at the blue. Therefore, by monitoring the blue shifts
of MDR groups, one can quantify the Q spoiling caused
by the cavity deformation. In Fig. 2, as η increased be-
yond 4.7%, ν=5 modes disappeared completely while the
ν=4 mode group showed continuous blue shift until η
reached 8.8%. The ν=4 mode group disappeared com-
pletely when η=10.5%, and instead the mode group cor-
responding to ν = 3 newly appeared and showed contin-
uous blue shift as η increased further.

In order to quantify such mode-order-dependent Q-
spoiling in an asymmetrically deformed microcavity, we
consider a dye laser model adapted for our experimen-
tal conﬁguration [16]. Let N0 and N1 be the number
densities of dye molecules in the ground and in the ﬁrst
excited electronic singlet state, respectively. The total
number of molecules per unit volume is Nt = N0 + N1.
The threshold condition can be written as

N1σe(λ) ≥ 2πn/λQleak + N0σa(λ) ,

(1)

where σe(λ) and σa(λ) are the emission and the absorp-

2

tion cross section of the dye molecule, respectively. Eq.
(1) leads to the minimum fraction γ(λ) of molecules for
laser oscillation as

γ(λ) =

N1
Nt

=

2πn/(λNtQleak) + σa(λ)
σe(λ) + σa(λ)

.

(2)

Fog a given Qleak, γ(λ) curve has a minimum. From
the center wavelength of a group of MDR peaks of the
same mode order, we can ﬁnd Qleak associated with this
MDR group. Figure 3(b) summarizes the results of ﬁt-
ting, showing the ﬁtting Qleak value of each mode-order
group at various η values. Our results clearly demon-
strate that the Q spoiling strongly depends on the mode
orders: The MDR’s of the lower mode order are the more
robust to cavity deformation. Since the MDR of low
mode order have relatively large initial incident angle in
the ray optics model, more deformation is required in
order to make the ray associated with the mode escape
refractively. It should be pointed out, however, that no
resonance modes can exist for η > 12% according to the
ray optics model (see Fig. 4(b)). Our result for η ∼
14.3% as shown Fig. 2(i) can be explained only by the
wave nature of MDR, i.e., the scars.

To illustrate the ray dynamics in a deformed cavity,
we present the ray motion in phase space using Poincare
surface of section with Birkoﬀ coordinates, in which ev-
ery time a ray collides with the cavity boundary both
the azimuthal angle φ, at which it hits, and its angle of
incidence χ with respect to the boundary are recorded.
Figure 4(b) shows the Poincare surface of section (PSOS)
with η = 14%, where it is shown that no stable island
exists except the bifurcated period-4 island on which the
ray escapes refractively after a few collisions.

The wave nature of MDR in a asymmetrically de-
formed cavity can be seen in the plane wave scattering
problem for the same geometry as that of our experi-
mental setup [15,17]. We calculated the scarred mode
as shown in Fig. 5(a). The concentrated intensities of
the ﬁeld, resembling that of whispering gallery modes,
are clearly seen near the boundary. For comparison the
non-resonant case is also given in Fig. 5(b), where the
enhanced intensities near the boundary are no longer rec-
ognized except for the common diﬀracted waves of the in-
cident plane wave. We emphasize that no stable periodic
orbit in ray dynamics can exist at this high deformation
as shown in Fig. 4(b).

The existence of the scarred MDR modes was also in-
vestigated in the far-ﬁeld distribution of our deformed
microlaser in the direction to which the emission spectra
were taken in Fig. 1. The result is shown in Fig. 6. For
small η the central region of the distribution is enhanced,
which can be ascribed to the chaotic refractive emission
of high order MDR’s from the highest curvature points at
φ = 0◦ and 180◦ [5,6]. For intermediate deformations, the
distribution has two peaks around ±10◦, indicating the
major portion of emission comes from the points where
the curvature is not highest (φ ∼ 10◦, 170◦), possibly due

to the dynamical eclipsing [18]. Such emission pattern is
impossible for an ellipse, for which the maximal emis-
sion has to occur at the highest curvature points, φ = 0◦
and 180◦. For higher deformation, η >10%, two new
peaks appear around ±24◦ while the peaks around ±10◦
fade out. These peaks exhibit the mode-like spectrum
as shown in Fig. 2, corresponding to MDR’s of ν = 3.
In Fig. 4(a) we show the PSOS with η =10%, in which
the dotted line is the adiabatic curve [6] for ν = 3 mode,
representing the ray dynamics of ν = 3 mode in the ray
optics picture, corresponds to a hexagonal orbit described
by the period-6 resonance island at η = 10%. Since the
ray on this resonance island is totally reﬂected oﬀ the
boundary, the emission can be caused only by the evanes-
cent leakage at the corners of the hexagon, resulting in
the observed emission angles. Although at η = 14% this
hexagonal orbit loses its stability completely in the ray
optics picture, it can survive as a scarred mode with well-
deﬁned mode spacing in the spectrum and with emission
directionality as seen in our experiment.

In summary, we investigated the lasing characteris-
tics of asymmetrically deformed liquid jet and observed
mode-order-dependent Q spoiling of MDR modes. We
could clearly identify persistent lasing modes with emis-
sion directionality for large deformation (η > 12%) be-
yond which the ray optics model does not allow any res-
onance modes. Our results can be explained by the scar,
the wave natures of the unstable periodic orbits in chaotic
ray dynamics. On practical side, the present work pro-
vides a foundation for Q-tailoring and optimal deforma-
tion of ultrahigh-Q microcavities for stronger and more
directional light-emitting optoelectronic devices.

This work is supported by Creative Research Initia-
tives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.

[1] A. J. Campillo, J. D. Eversole, and H.-B. Lin, Phys. Rev.

[2] H.-B. Lin, J. D. Eversole, and A. J. Campillo, J. Opt.

Lett. 67, 437 (1991).

Soc. Am B9, 43 (1992).

19, 1693 (1994).

[3] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett.

[4] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone, and R. K.

Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2682 (1995).

[5] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, G. Chen, H. Grossman, and

R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett. 21, 1609 (1996).

[6] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[7] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, E. E. Narimanov, J. U. N¨ockel,
A. D. Stone, G. J. Faist, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho,
Science 280, 1493 (1998).

[8] E. J. Heller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 1515 (1984).
[9] E. B. Bogomolny, Physica D 31, 169 (1988).
[10] M. V. Berry, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 243, 219

(1989).

3

[11] L. Kaplan and E. J. Heller, Ann. Phys. 264, 171 (1998).
[12] P. B. Wilkinson, T. M. Fromhold, L. Eavas, F. W.
Sheard, N. Miura, and T. Takamasu, Nature 380, 608
(1996).

[13] S. Sridhar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 785 (1991).
[14] H. J. Moon, K. H. Ko, Y. C. Noh, G. H. Kim, J. H. Lee,

and J. S. Chang, Opt. Lett. 22, 1739 (1997).

[15] P. W. Barber and S. C. Hill, “Light Scattering by Parti-
cles : Computational Methods” (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-
pore, 1990).

[16] H. J. Moon, Y-T. Chough, and K. An, Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 3161 (2000).

[17] E. E. Narimanov, G. Hackenbroich, P. Jacquod, and A.

D. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4991 (1999).

[18] S. S. Chang, J. U. N¨ockel, R. K. Chang, and A. D. Stone,

J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 17, 1828 (2000).

FIG. 1. Experimental setup for deforming a liquid jet by

lateral gas ﬂow.

FIG. 2. Spectrum of MDR lasing for various η.

FIG. 3. (a) Correlation between the amount of red shift
of individual MDR modes and the deformation parameter η.
(b)Degradation of Qleak as a function of η.

FIG. 4. Poincare surface of section for (a) η = 10% and (b)

η = 14%.

FIG. 5. Calculated wave function for (a) resonant (2πa/λ=
45.055) and (b) non-resonant (2πa/λ= 45.000) cases. A plane
wave is incident from the left.

FIG. 6. Emission directionality seen in the far-ﬁeld distri-

bution.

4

This figure "fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0106031v1

This figure "fig2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0106031v1

This figure "fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0106031v1

This figure "fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0106031v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0106031v1

This figure "fig6.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0106031v1

