1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kerr-lens mode-locked lasers as transfer oscillators for optical frequency
measurements

Harald R. Telle, Burghard Lipphardt and J¨orn Stenger

Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Bundesallee 100, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany

We introduce a novel concept for optical frequency measurement and division
which employs a Kerr-lens mode-locked laser as a transfer oscillator whose
noise properties do not enter the measurement process. We experimentally
demonstrate, that this method opens up the route to phase-link signals with
arbitrary frequencies in the optical or microwave range while their frequency
stability is preserved.

PACS numbers: 42.62.Eh, 06.20.Fn, 06.30.Ft

1. Introduction

Continuous-wave mode-locked lasers emit a periodic
train of short pulses. The spectrum of this emission cor-
responds to a comb of distinct lines with well-deﬁned
spacing if the mode-coupling mechanism is suﬃciently
strong and fast. It has been shown that the non-resonant,
electronic Kerr-lens mode-locking (KLM) process can
satisfy this requirement [1], making such lasers highly
suited for optical frequency measurements [2], [3], [4].
The frequency of any line of the spectral comb emit-
ted by such a KLM laser is given by an integer order
number m, the pulse repetition frequency frep and a so
called carrier-envelope oﬀset-frequency νceo, which ac-
counts for the oﬀset of the entire comb with respect to
the frequency zero:

νm = νceo + mfrep .

(1)

When all three quantities are known, any unknown
external optical frequency νx within the span of the
comb can be absolutely measured by detection of its
beat-note frequency ∆x with a suitable comb line.

Absolute frequency measurement means that frep
is measured and expressed in terms of SI-Hertz. This
primary unit is realized by a Cs-clock controlled radio
frequency (rf) source, which is a H-maser generating a
standard frequency of 100 MHz in our case. Thus, no
frequency measurement can be better in fractional fre-
quency instability than that of the rf-reference. How-
ever, optical frequencies are measured in many cases
with respect to an optical reference frequency by mea-

surement of their frequency diﬀerence [1]. Then, only
a fraction of the H-maser noise enters the measurement
process, given by the ratio between the frequency dif-
ference and the absolute frequency.

The limitation due to the H-maser noise can be over-
come by measurement of frequency ratios rather than
frequency diﬀerences whenever oscillators with better
noise properties than the H-maser are to be compared.
A frequency ratio is unitless, i.e. there is no need to re-
fer to the unit Hertz, and thus the frequency noise prop-
erties of the oscillators involved can be preserved when
building the ratio. We will demonstrate below, that,
in fact, optical frequency ratios can be measured with
much smaller instabilities than that of the H-maser.

An important issue for such measurements is the
frequency noise of the KLM laser due to technical per-
turbations. Conventional approaches [5] attempt to sta-
bilize both the group and phase delay of the laser res-
onator by piezo transducers. However, as a result of the
ﬁnite response time of these elements, the servo band-
width of such servo loops is typically not suﬃcient to
reduce the frequency noise of the beat-note ∆x to a
level below the noise of the optical signal at νx. For
the same reason, it is very diﬃcult to reduce the frac-
tional frequency noise of frep to levels below that of the
microwave reference, at least at high Fourier frequen-
cies. As a consequence, the short-term instability of
those measurements is limited by the mode-locked laser
and long averaging times are required for measurements
with low uncertainties.

1

Our novel approach completely diﬀers in handling
the technical frequency ﬂuctuations of the KLM laser.
We generalize the transfer oscillator concept [6], which
relates signals with integer frequency ratios, to signals
with rational frequency ratios. Here, the laser is only
slowly frequency stabilized while all beat-notes are phase-
tracked with fast phase-locked loops (PLL) and online
processed with analog electronics. Thus, we are not
any more limited by the inertia of the mirror transduc-
ers but can make use of the large signal-to-noise ratios
of our beat notes which allow for wide servo bandwidths
and thus small residual error signals. As a result, the
additive noise of the measurement process becomes sub-
stantially smaller than the frequency noise of the sig-
nals involved and can be neglected. This novel con-
cept, which compensates the noise of the mode-locked
laser will be named transfer concept in the following. It
will be applied to the measurement of frequency ratios
between various frequency standards: a diode laser at
871 nm, a Nd:YAG laser at 1064 nm, a dye laser oper-
ating at 657 nm and a 100 MHz reference signal from a
H-maser.

2. Elastic tape picture and transfer concept

We integrate Eqn. (1) to relate the instantaneous

phases of all signals,

ϕm(t) = ϕceo(t) + mϕrep(t) + φ(m),

(2)

where ϕm, ϕceo, and ϕrep denote the instantaneous
phase angles of νm, νceo, and νrep, respectively. The
integration constant φ(m) accounts for the dispersion
properties of the optical components involved. It is as-
sumed to be constant or only slowly time-varying. This
ansatz is motivated by the fact, that the fast electronic
Kerr eﬀect in KLM lasers tightly couples almost in-
stantaneously all modes of the comb. In other words,
any individual mode is injection-locked by a strong in-
put signal resulting from the superimposed modulation
side-bands of the other modes. Thus, one expects that
the quantum-limited carrier frequency noise is deter-
mined by almost the total laser power, similar to the
Schawlow-Townes limit of a single frequency laser. In
this sense, the KLM laser oscillation can be considered
as one spectrally extended super-mode. Given the va-
lidity of Eqn. (2), frequency ﬂuctuations of this super-
mode resulting from technical perturbations can be ex-
pressed by various pairs of orthogonal components, e.g.

laser resonator while the ratio of both quantities
remains constant and

B. ﬂuctuations of the diﬀerence of these quantities
while one of them, e.g. the phase delay, is held
constant.

This behaviour can be visualized as an elastic tape
labelled with a scale of equidistant spectral lines which
is randomly stretched while it is held ﬁxed at a charac-
teristic point νf ix on the frequency scale. This ﬁxed fre-
quency characterizes the speciﬁc type of technical noise.
In case A νf ix = 0 whereas νf ix is found in the opti-
cal carrier frequency region, νf ix = νcar, in case B. For
acoustic vibrations of resonator mirrors, as an example,
we ﬁnd a fractional change of the phase delay τp:

,

=

=

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(3)

∆τp
τp (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

∆z
z + npzm (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

∆νcar
νcar (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
where z is the cavity length, zm the length of the gain
(cid:12)
medium and np its phase-index of refraction. The re-
fractive index of the air and possible other intra-cavity
elements have been neglected in Eqn. (3). The cor-
responding expression for the fractional change of the
group delay τg reads

∆τg
τg (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
The ﬁxed point frequency is found
(cid:12)

∆frep
frep (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

∆z
z + ngzm (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

=

=

.

νf ix = νcar

1
(cid:18)

−

∆νcar/νcar
∆frep/frep (cid:19) ≈

νcar(np

ng)

−

For the parameters of our laser, we obtain

νf ix

50 GHz

(mirror vibration).

(6)

≈ −

This frequency is small compared to the carrier fre-
quency of a few hundred THz. Thus, cavity length
ﬂuctuations represent case A to good approximation.
As a consequence the comb oﬀset frequency νceo, which
is by deﬁnition a frequency close to zero, is only weakly
aﬀected by such ﬂuctuations. Fixed point frequencies
of other types of ﬂuctuations can be estimated in a sim-
ilar manner. For example, temperature changes of the
gain medium lead to a change of its physical length, a
change of the phase index and a diﬀerent change of the
group index. We estimate a ﬁxed point frequency of

(4)

zm
z

.

(5)

A. common mode ﬂuctuations, i.e. ﬂuctuations of
the mean of the group- and phase delay of the

20 THz.

νf ix
(temperature variation of gain medium)

≈

(7)

2

for the parameters of our laser.

As another speciﬁc perturbation, tilting of the cav-
ity mirror behind the double-prism arrangement [7], is
of particular interest. The cavity length is not aﬀected
for a speciﬁc carrier frequency but owing to the lateral
spectral spread of the laser mode at this position, the
group delay is strongly changed by such tilting. This
type of ﬂuctuation corresponds to case B. It can be used
to actively control νceo, whereas cavity length control is
suited to stabilize the optical carrier frequency. It fol-
lows from the elastic tape picture, that technical noise
contributions from the frequency comb are completely
known if the phase angles of two distinct comb lines are
monitored as a function of time. Two candidates which
naturally come to mind are νceo and an arbitrary line
at νm within the span of the comb. The latter has to
be measured with respect to a stable optical reference
frequency at νx, i. e. by measurement of the beat-
note frequency ∆x(t) = νx
νm(t). We will assume
that the signal-to-noise ratios of both the ∆x and νceo
beat-notes are suﬃcient to yield an rms-phase error of
< 0.1 radians within a bandwidth which is suﬃcient
to track technical ﬂuctuations of ∆x and νceo. Cycle-
slipping can be excluded under such conditions. Then,
both ϕm and ϕceo are unambiguously known and so are
the instantaneous phase angles of all other comb lines,
according to Eqn. (2). This feed-forward technique for
phase angles is the key element of the transfer concept.
In the following, we present two applications of this
method.

−

3. Linking optical and microwave frequencies

The ﬁrst application deals with the frequency mod-
ulation (FM) noise analysis of a microwave signal if an
optical signal with frequency νx is available which shows
superior FM noise properties. The scheme is shown in
Fig. 1. Here, three input signals are detected by photo
diodes:

Figure 1: Linking microwave and optical frequencies:
signal processing scheme.

yield a beat note of their second harmonics with the
lines at the high frequency comb wing. All comb lines
contain one νceo according to Eqn. (1) but the second
harmonics contain two νceo. Thus, the beat note oscil-
lates at νceo providing the desired input signal. If all
three signals are available, one has to select an order
number mx which can be separated into three factors,
each of the order of 102 : mx = m1
m3. This
can be accomplished choosing a proper value of frep.
Then, the frequency fLO of the microwave local oscil-
lator (LO) is mixed with a harmonic m1 of the pulse
repetition frequency as detected by a photo diode to
yield an rf-signal at frequency fLO
m1frep. This fre-
quency is further multiplied by a factor of m2 with the
help of a harmonic PLL yielding

m2

×

×

−

νA = m2fLO

m1m2frep .

−
In a second channel, the sum frequency of νceo and
∆x is divided by m3. This leads to a signal at frequency

(8)

i. the beat note ∆x between the external signal at

νx and the nearest comb line,

νB =

(νceo + ∆x) .

(9)

1
m3

ii. the pulse repetition frequency frep, and

iii. the carrier-envelope-oﬀset frequency νceo.

Subtracting both frequencies with the help of a mixer,

as shown in Fig.1, results in

The detection of νceo requires one or more additional
nonlinear processes [8]. The simplest case is applicable
if the comb covers a frequency ratio of more than a fac-
tor of two, i.e. one octave. Then, the comb lines at
the low frequency comb wing are frequency doubled to

νC = νA

νB = m2fLO

m1m2frep +

−

(cid:19)
(10)
However, the elastic tape formula (1) predicts for

− (cid:18)

.

νceo + ∆x
m3

the expression in the bracket

3

m1m2frep +

νceo + ∆x
m3

=

1
m3

νx ,

and thus

νC = m2fLO

νx
m3

.

−

(11)

(12)

Note that the signal at νC is independent of the
noise properties of the KLM laser, i.e. the laser acts
as a true transfer oscillator, bridging a frequency ratio
of fLO/νx. Since the phase angles of all signals are
processed according to Eqn. (2), νC can be considered
as the frequency of the beat-note between the m2th
harmonic of fLO and the m3th sub-harmonic of νx.

4. Linking two optical frequencies

The second application of the transfer concept deals
with the FM-noise measurement of an optical signal
with frequency νy if an optical reference is available
which has superior noise properties but oscillates at a
very diﬀerent frequency νz, as shown in Fig. 2. As be-

Figure 2: Linking two optical frequencies: signal pro-
cessing scheme. The frequency divider is optional.

fore, we apply the elastic tape picture, which leads to

νy = myfrep + νceo + ∆y

(13)

and

νz = mzfrep + νceo + ∆z .

(14)

The beat signal at ∆y is mixed with the νceo-beat

signal which leads to

4

νA = νceo + ∆y

(15)

if we neglect the optional frequency divider for the mo-
ment. The sum frequency of ∆z and νceo, on the other
is processed with a direct-digital-synthesis IC
hand,
(DDS). Such a device is capable of generating an output
signal from an input clock signal with a frequency ratio
given by a long digital tuning word while the input-to-
output frequency agility is preserved. The latency time
of these devices, i.e. the time required to set a new tun-
ing word, is not a problem in our case, since the tuning
word is chosen once and then held ﬁxed. The DDS nu-
merically approximates the ratio of two integers my/mz
by j/2n, where j is an integer and n the bit-length of
the tuning word. As discussed below, the resulting er-
ror is negligible for n = 32 bit or 48 bit in our case,
where the integers my and mz are of the order of 106.
As a result of this signal processing, one obtains

νB =

(νceo + ∆z) .

(16)

my
mz

Generating the diﬀerence frequency between both sig-
nals as before and using Eqns. (13) and (14), we ﬁnd

νC = νA

νB = νy

−

my
mz

−

νz ,

(17)

which is again independent of the properties of the KLM
laser. Since the phase angles of all signals are processed
according to Eqn. (2) as above, νC can be considered
as the frequency of the beat-note between νy and νz as
projected to the vicinity of νy.

5. Experimental

The setup of our Kerr-lens mode-locked Ti:Sapphire-
laser is similar to [9], employing a combination of prisms
and double chirped mirrors for compensation of group
velocity dispersion. A similar, external prism pair is
used for pulse re-compression. The pulse duration is
< 20 fs (FWHM) while the output spectrum typically
spans 70 THz (FWHM), centred at about 790 nm. The
pulse repetition frequency is about 100 MHz. Approx-
imately 30 mW of the laser output is coupled into a
10 cm long piece of air-silica microstructure (MS) ﬁber
with a core diameter of 1.7 µm and a zero-GVD wave-
length of 780 nm [10]. The output spectrum of the
ﬁber extends from about 500 nm to about 1100 nm.
The carrier-envelope-oﬀset frequency νceo is measured
by second-harmonic-generation of the comb’s infrared
portion around 1070 nm in a nonlinear-optical crys-
tal (LBO). The beat-note between the resulting green

SHG signal and the green output of the MS ﬁber is de-
tected by a photo multiplier (PM) after spectral and
spatial ﬁltering both ﬁelds with a single mode ﬁber and
a 600 l/mm grating, respectively.

As frequency references in the optical range, we use

three diﬀerent signals,

i) the sub-harmonic at 344 179 449 MHz (871 nm) of
the output of a single Yb+-ion frequency standard
[11],

ii) the output of a Nd:Yag laser at 281 606 335 MHz
(1064 nm) which is frequency-stabilized via sat-
urated absorption of its second harmonic in I2
vapour, and

iii) the output of a dye-laser that is frequency-stabilized
to the Ca intercombination line at 455 986 240 MHz
(657 nm) [12].

All three frequencies have been previously measured
with respect to a Cs atomic clock [2], [3], [13], [14], [15].
However, these absolute values are not important for
the purpose of this paper, which aims to demonstrate a
novel measurement and synthesis principle. The sources
of the signals at 344 THz, 281 THz and 455 THz will
be referred to as Yb-, Iodine- an Ca-standard in the
following (index Yb, Iod and Ca).

×

×

×

96

m2

The Yb-standard was employed both for the micro-
wave-to-optical and the optical-to-optical link. The pulse
repetition frequency of the laser was set to a value
close to 100 MHz which resulted in a mode number
mY b = 3 441 024 for the mode closest to νY b. As dis-
cussed above, this number must be divisible by 3 fac-
tors of the order of 102 such as mY b = m1
×
348 = 3 441 024. The pulse repeti-
m3 = 103
tion frequency was measured with a fast InGaAs photo
diode (PD) at 10.3 GHz, i.e. at a harmonic order of
m1 = 103. For the sake of dynamic range of the PD we
restricted the number of detected harmonic orders to
a few using optical pre-ﬁltering in a Fabry-Perot inter-
ferometer with a free spectral range of about 10.3 GHz
(10 mm thick fused silica etalon). The output signal of
the microwave PD was down-converted with the help
of a double-balanced mixer and a microwave synthe-
sizer (LO) controlled by a 100 MHz standard frequency
from a H-maser. The LO frequency at fLO
10.3 GHz
was tuned to yield a down-converted signal of about
500 kHz. This frequency was multiplied by a factor of
m2 = 96 with the help of a harmonic PLL. Hence, its
output signal at f1
48 MHz carried the frequency
noise of the (m1m2)th harmonic of the pulse repetition

≈

≈

5

≈

≈

≈

frequency and that of the H-maser as multiplied to a
virtual frequency of m2fLO
989 GHz. As described
above, the frequency noise of the pulse repetition fre-
quency can independently be deduced from νceo and
∆Y b. Both signals were pre-ﬁltered with PLLs with a
servo bandwidth of > 1 MHz. As a result of choice of
signs, the sum frequency of both (
70 MHz) carried the
desired information. This signal was frequency divided
200 kHz which
by m3 = 348 leading to a signal at νB
carried the noise of the (mY b/m3)th harmonic of the
pulse repetition frequency and that of the Yb standard
989 THz.
as divided to a virtual frequency of νY b/m3
Since m1m2 = mY b/m3, the noise of the pulse rep-
etition frequency was exactly the same in both paths
and cancelled out if the frequency diﬀerence between
νA and νB was generated with the help of the last
mixer, as shown in Fig. 1, thus realising the trans-
fer principle. As mentioned above, the output of this
mixer at νC = νB
47.8 MHz can be con-
sidered as the beat-note between the H-maser signal
as multiplied to 989 GHz and the output of the Yb
standard, as divided by 348 to 989 GHz. The signal
at νC was down-converted to about 40 Hz with the
help of an rf-synthesizer and a mixer, analog-to-digital
converted, digitally recorded and subsequently Fourier-
transformed.

νB

≈

−

≈

A spectrum of such a 120 s long record is shown in
Fig. 3. One ﬁnds a 40 mHz wide carrier on top of a much
broader line which can not be seen in Fig. 3. Note that
this line with a sub-Hertz width was generated from two
signals whose frequencies ﬂuctuated by many kHz which
demonstrates the eﬀect of the transfer concept. The
control bandwidth of the harmonic PLL was set to a
few tens of kHz. This resulted, together with the second
order characteristic of its loop ﬁlter, to a loop gain of >
100 dB in the Fourier frequency range shown in Fig. 3.
The loop gains were even higher (> 130 dB) for the
PLLs which phase-tracked the signals at νceo and ∆Y b.
Thus, the sum of the residual servo errors, i.e. the total
error of the frequency transfer process, was negligible
and Fig. 3 can be considered to represent the true line
shape of the H-maser harmonic at 989 GHz since the
frequency noise of the Yb signal was also negligible as
shown below.

The shape of the spectrum, a narrow line on top
of a broad pedestal, was expected from the phase-noise
speciﬁcations of the H-maser. This broad pedestal be-
comes dominant and submerges the narrow carrier, if
the H-maser signal is further frequency multiplied, e.g.
to the optical range. Thus, the short-term instability of

. How-

der of one, which can not be generated by a DDS chip
according to the sampling theory, we used an additional
division factor of kIod = 8 in both signal paths in Fig. 2.
The divider in the Yb-signal path was a conventional
TTL divider while in the other path the DDS tuning
word was corrected for this value. The DDS (AD9851)
was programmed within the resolution of its 32 bit
tuning word to generate an output frequency fout =
fin. This was 8.4 mHz lower than the
0.152775079245
required value (mY b/mIod)/8 = 0.152775079357
ever, multiplication of this amount by 8 and division by
10−16 which is
344 THz leads to an relative error of 2
negligible compared to other uncertainties. However,
for future applications which might require higher pre-
cision, this error can be reduced by at least 4 orders
of magnitude with a proper correction or with a DDS
with 48 bit tuning word.

· · ·

×

·

The output of the last mixer in Fig. 2, which was
equivalent to the beat signal between the Iodine- and
Yb- signals at a virtual frequency of 344/8 THz =43 THz,
was down-converted to the kHz range, analog-to-digital
converted and digitally recorded. The Fourier trans-
form of a typical 30 s record is shown in Fig 4. One
ﬁnds a 11.5 Hz wide line on top of a pedestal of white
additive noise. As in Fig. 3, the PLL’s bandwidths of
> 1 MHz ensured a negligible residual servo error. Thus,
Fig. 4 shows the true power spectrum of a non-integer
sub-harmonic of the Iodine signal at 43 THz since the
contribution of the Yb signal to the spectrum was not
signiﬁcant, as discussed below.

Figure 4: FFT-spectrum of the beat note between sub-
harmonics of the outputs of an I2 and an Yb+ frequency
standard taken at a frequency of 43 THz.

6

Figure 3: Beat-note spectrum between a harmonic of
the H-maser signal and a sub-harmonic of the output
of the optical Yb+ frequency standard taken at a fre-
quency of 989 GHz. The circles represent the beat-note
of the signals of two H-maser as extrapolated to the
same frequency.

a frequency ratio measurement between a H-maser and
a quiet optical frequency standard, such as our Yb- or
Iodine standards, is expected to be limited by the H-
maser noise.

For comparison, the open circles in Fig. 3 show the
corresponding beat note spectrum of the outputs of two
H-maser as multiplied to a frequency of 989 GHz. It
was calculated from a 1000 s record of readings of the
timing jitter between 10 MHz standard frequencies gen-
erated by both masers. The close agreement with the
Yb/H-beat at 989 GHz demonstrates that the frequency
multiplication process by a factor of 106 performed by
the KLM laser does not deteriorate the H-maser noise
properties at Fourier frequencies below 0.1 Hz.

In the following, we describe a second application of
the transfer concept, the measurement of an optical fre-
quency ratio. Here, an additional photo diode was used
to detect the beat-note at ∆Iod (
44 MHz) between
the comb line with order number mIod = 2 815 433
and the output of the Iodine-standard. As mentioned
above, the sum frequency ∆Iod + νceo was processed by
the DDS after pre-ﬁltering both signals with fast PLL
tracking oscillators (bandwidth > 1 MHz) . Since the
required multiplication factor mY b/mIod was of the or-

≈

short averaging times. This is demonstrated in Fig. 6.
The dashed curve shows the sqare root of the Allan

Finally, we describe a third frequency ratio mea-
surement employing the Yb- and Ca-standards. The
mode order of comb line nearest to the Ca frequency was
mCa = 4 558 841 while mY b = 3 441 024 during all ex-
periments. Here, the Ca frequency was down-converted
as opposed to the experiment described above, in which
the Iodine-frequency of 281 THz was up-converted to
mY b = 344 THz. For this reason, the pre-division fac-
tor could be reduced to kCa = 4. Consequently, the
output of the last mixer in Fig. 2 corresponded to the
beat-note between the Yb and Ca signals at a frequency
of 344/4 THz = 86 THz. The spectrum in Fig. 5, how-

Figure 6: Allan standard deviation of three frequency
ratio measurements: Yb-standard/H-maser, Iodine-
standard/H-maser and Yb-/Iodine-standard. Note that
the instability of the optical frequency ratio measure-
ment is substantially smaller than that of the H-maser
for averaging times below 10 s.

·

variance σy(τ ) (SRAV) of our H-maser. The data of
the frequency measurements of the Iodine and the Yb-
standard with respect to this H-maser are shown as tri-
angles and squares, respectively. The SRAV of the Yb-
laser qualitatively follows that of the H-maser, which
limits the measurement for averaging times from 1 to
100 s. The SRAV of the Iodine -signal is larger than
that of the H-maser for τ > 20 s.
In fact, frequency
comparisons of two of such Iodine standards showed a
10−14 in this range and thus larger
SRAV of about 2
than of the H-maser. The SRAV of a frequency ra-
tio measurement of two optical standards, on the other
hand, is not limited by H-maser noise, as shown by
circles in Fig. 6. The data depicted by solid circles
have been derived from the Yb/Iodine beat signal as
obtained from the last mixer in Fig. 2 whereas the open
circles have been calculated from νceo, ∆Y b, and ∆Iod
as counted by totalizing counters (1 s averages). Both
data sets reasonably agree in the overlapping range be-
tween 1 and 8 s. The SRAV values of this frequency
ratio measurement are substantially smaller than the
H-maser frequency instability for τ < 10 s. The 1/√τ -
dependency of this SRAV function indicates a white

Figure 5: Spectrum of the beat-note between the out-
puts of an Yb+ and Ca optical frequency standard taken
with a conventional rf-spectrum analyzer. Resolution
bandwidth 300 Hz, center frequency 6.234 MHz.

−

ever, shows the 4th harmonic of this signal as generated
by a frequency-quadrupling PLL. Thus, it represent the
beat-note at the Yb-frequency which means that the
frequency transfer was carried out over a frequency gap
of (455
344) THz = 111 THz. The width of 1300 Hz
found in Fig. 5 was mainly due to low-frequency jitter
of the Ca frequency while the line width of the Yb-
signal was much smaller. This was proved by resolving
a 30 Hz wide resonance line at its second harmonic [3].
As mentioned above, the frequency noise of the beat-
note between the Yb- and Iodine-signals is substan-
tially smaller than that of the H-Maser, at least at
Fourier frequencies f > 0.1 Hz. Thus, a frequency
ratio measurement of these two optical signals can be
carried out with smaller instabilites than that of an
Yb/H-maser frequency ratio measurement, at least for

7

[4] M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov,
Th. Udem, M. Weitz, T. W. H¨nsch, P. Lemonde,
G. Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Laurant, C. Salomon,
and A. Clairon; Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 5496 (2000).

[5] D. J. Jones, S. A. Diddams, J. K. Ranka, A.
Stentz, R. S. Windeler, J. L. Hall, and S. T. Cun-
diﬀ; Science 288, 635 (2000).

[6] G. Kramer, B. Lipphardt, and C. O. Weiss, Proc.
1992 Frequ. Contr. Symp., 39 (1992), IEEE Cat.
No. 92CH3083-3.

[7] J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T.W.

H¨ansch; Opt. Comm. 172 59 (1999).

[8] H.R. Telle, G. Steinmeyer, A.E. Dunlop, J. Stenger,
D. H. Sutter, and U. Keller; Appl. Phys. B69 327
(1999).

[9] D. H. Sutter, G. Steinmeyer, L. Gallmann, N. Ma-
tuschek, F. Morier-Genoud, U. Keller, V. Scheuer,
G. Angelow, and T. Tschudi; Opt. Lett. 24 631
(1999).

[10] J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, and A. J. Stentz;

Opt. Lett. 25 25 (2000).

[11] Chr. Tamm, D. Engelke, V. B¨uhner; Phys. Rev.

A61 053405 (2000).

[12] F. Riehle, H. Schnatz, B. Lipphardt, G. Zinner,
Instr.

T. Trebst, and J. Helmcke; IEEE Trans.
Meas. IM48 613 (1999).

[13] A.Y. Nevsky , R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, Th.
Udem, T.W. H¨ansch, J. von Zanthier, H. Walther,
H. Schnatz, F. Riehle, P.V. Pokasov, M.N. Skvort-
sov, and S.N. Bagayev; Opt. Comn. 192 263
(2001).

[14] J. Stenger, T. Binnewies, G. Wilpers, F. Riehle,
H. R. Telle, J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, A. J.
Stentz; Phys. Rev. A. 63 021802(R) (2001).

[15] H. Schnatz, B. Lipphardt, J. Helmcke, F. Riehle,

and G. Zinner; Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 18 (1996).

≈

≈

150 Hz2/Hz at 344 THz
frequency noise level of Sν
which would result in a spectral line width of δν =
πSν
500 Hz (FWHM) in good agreement with the
direct beat-note measurement as shown in Fig. 4. From
11.5 Hz at (344/8=43) THz one calculates δν =
δν
82
730 Hz at 344 THz under the assump-
tion of white frequency noise. This indicates, that the
Yb/Iodine-frequency ratio measurement in Fig. 6 was
limited by noise of the Iodine-standard whereas contri-
butions from the Yb-signal were negligible due to its
narrow line width of < 30 Hz.

≈
11.5Hz
·

≈

6. Conclusion

We have demonstrated a novel concept for frequency
measurement and synthesis which is capable of phase-
coherently linking signals from very diﬀerent spectral
regions in the optical and microwave ranges without
introducing additional noise. We have carried out fre-
quency ratio measurements between optical frequencies
with short-term instabilities superior to that of a mi-
crowave reference. Since the measurement uncertainties
were clearly limited by the noise properties of the fre-
quency standards, one may expect an even lower limita-
tion due to noise contributions of the KLM laser if bet-
ter optical frequency standards become available. The
transfer concept opens up new perspectives for future
ultra-high precision applications, e.g. measurement of
time variations of fundamental constants as soon as ap-
propriate optical frequency standards are available.

We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through SFB407
and contributions by Andreas Bauch, Tomas Binnewies,
Nils Haverkamp, Ursula Keller, Harald Schnatz, G¨unter
Steinmeyer, Christian Tamm, and Guido Wilpers in dif-
ferent stages of the experiments. We are also indebted
to Robert Windeler of Lucent Technologies for provid-
ing us with the microstructure ﬁber.

6. References

[1] T. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, and T. W.

H¨ansch; Opt. Lett. 24 881 (1999).

[2] T. Udem, S. A. Diddams, K. R. Vogel, C. W.
Oates, E. A. Curtis, W. D. Lee, W. M. Itano, R.
E. Drullinger, J. C. Bergquist, and L. Hollberg;
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 4996 (2001).

[3] J. Stenger, Chr. Tamm, N. Haverkamp, S. Wey-
ers, and H. R. Telle; Opt. Lett., in press (2001).

8

