1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

First Lasing of Volume FEL (VFEL) at
Wavelength Range λ ∼ 4 − 6 mm ⋆

V. Baryshevsky, K. Batrakov, A. Gurinovich, I. Ilienko,
A. Lobko,V.Moroz, P.Sofronov, V. Stolyarsky

22050, Bobruyskaya 11, Minsk, Belarus, Research Institute of Nucler Problem,
Belorussian State University

Abstract

First lasing of volume free electron laser (VFEL) is described. The generating system
consists of two metal diﬀraction grating with diﬀerent spatial periods. The ﬁrst
grating creates the conditions for Smith Purcell emission mechanism. The second
grating provides the distributed feedback for emitted wave. The length of diﬀraction
grating is 10 cm. Electron beam pulse with a time duration τ ∼ 10 ms has a
sinusoidal form with the amplitude varied from 1 to 10 kV. The measured microwave
power reached the value of about 3-4 W in mm wavelength range. The generation
stops at threshold current value. When the current tends to the threshold value, the
region of generation tends to a narrow band near to 5 kV. At higher current values
the radiation appears in electron energy range 5 - 7.5 KeV.

Key words: Volume Free Electron Laser (VFEL), Volume Distributed Feedback
(VDFB), diﬀraction grating, Smith-Purcell, electron beam instability
PACS: 41.60.C, 41.75.F, H, 42.79.D

1 Introduction

The most essential feature of FEL and other types of generators is a
feedback, which is formed by a system of mirrors, or distributed feedback based
on diﬀraction in spatially periodic medium, when wave vectors of transmitted
and reﬂected waves are colinear. The distinction of volume FEL (VFEL) is
non-one-dimensional multi-wave volume distributed feedback (VDFB). VDFB
performs two basic functions simultaneously:
⋆

This work is carried out with ﬁnancial support of private joint-stock company

BelTechExport, Belarus

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

1) it provides more eﬀective interaction of an electromagnetic wave with an
electron beam due to new dispersion law;
2) it forms volume distributed mirror retaining radiation in interaction region.

It is well known that each radiative system is deﬁned by its eigenmodes
and by the so-called dispersion equation, which in the case of small perturba-
tions (linear regime) describes possible types of waves in system and relation
between frequency and wave number of system eigenmodes. Thorough analy-
sis of properties of FEL dispersion equation is done in [1]. It is shown there
that
1. dispersion equation for FEL in collective regime coincides with that for
conventional travelling wave tube ampliﬁer (TWTA) [2];
2. FEL gain (increment of electron beam instability) is proportional to ρ1/3,
where ρ is the electron beam density.

For the ﬁrst time the possibility of essential change of instability of an
electron beam moving in a spatially periodic medium was indicated in [3]. In
this paper the dispersion equations are obtained and investigated for condi-
tions of multi-wave diﬀraction. It is shown that there is a new law of electron
beam instability in the points of diﬀraction roots degeneration. The ampli-
ﬁcation and generation gain of electromagnetic wave are sharply changed in
these points. In [3] this statement is derived from the fact that the instability
increment in the point with s-times degeneration is proportional to ρ1/(3+s)
(here ρ is the electron beam density and it is supposed that the point in which
s roots coincide is the point with (s-1)-times degeneration). This increment
diﬀers from the relevant increment for one-wave system which is proportional
to ρ1/3. This result is also valid for electron beam which moves in vacuum
close to the surface of spacially periodic medium [4] (or in a vacuum slot
made inside a periodic medium). Explicit expressions for dependence of start-
ing current j on interaction length L are obtained in degeneration points
[5]: jstart ∼ 1/{(kL)3(kχτ L)2s}. The advantages of VFEL are exhibited in
wide spectral range from microwaves to X-rays [5–7]. In [7] the experimen-
tal simulation of electrodynamic processes in the volume diﬀraction grating
was performed for a millimeter wavelength range. The possibility of obtaining
of extremely high Q-factor for a system with two strongly coupled waves is
experimentally conﬁrmed.

In the present work the ﬁrst lasing of VFEL in millimeter wavelength
range is reported. The main parts of VFEL are two ﬂat diﬀraction gratings
with diﬀerent spatial periods. The ﬁrst diﬀraction grating is used for radiation
generation due to Smith-Purcell radiating mechanism [8]. The second grat-
ing provides distributed feedback using Bragg dynamical diﬀraction [9], the
grooves of diﬀraction grating are oriented at the nonzero angle to the direction
of electron beam velocity. It should be noted, that generation in nonrelativistic
TWT devices in similar conditions is impossible at single harmonic, since the

2

wavelength of emitted radiation considerably exceeds period of TWT spiral
(or corrugation period). Lasing of considered VFEL type for the ﬁrst time was
described in [10], where the theoretical model of its operation was presented.

2 Experimental setup and results

Block-scheme of the experimental setup is illustrated in ﬁg.1.

Fig. 1. Block scheme of experimental setup for studing of VFEL generation.

Volume resonator is the basic functional part of VFEL (see Fig.2). In
considered setup it is formed by two diﬀraction gratings with diﬀerent periods
and two smooth side walls. Cross section of the resonator is rectangular and
constant along all its length. But the distance between diﬀraction gratings
can be varied in diﬀerent experiments. Radiation is output from the resonator
through end-wall.

The interaction of the ﬁrst diﬀraction grating (exciting grating) with the
electron beam arouses generation of Smith-Purcell radiation. The second (res-
onant) grating provides distributed feedback of generated radiation with elec-
tron beam. The distance between grooved surface of exciting grating and elec-
tron beam can be varied during experiment that allows to encrease eﬃciency
of generation process. Rotation of resonant diﬀraction grating provides the

3

Fig. 2. Block scheme of experimental setup for studing of VFEL generation.

possibility to change radiation frequency by varying the orientation of grat-
ing grooves with respect to electron beam velocity. Mechanical tuning of the
radiation frequency is also provided by the adjustment of distance between
gratings.

The sheet electron beam emitted by the thermal cathode (tungsten labi-
lized by barium or calcium iridate) is formed in cylindrical Peirce gun. It is
guided in the VFEL resonator by the magnetic ﬁeld ∼ 3 KGs. Electrons are
emitted in pulsed regime (unipolar pulse with sinusoidal shape and pulse du-
ration ∼ 10 ms) in sequence of two or three voltage pulses (voltage amplitude
can vary from 1 to 10 KeV).

Generated radiation is output through a radiotransparent window (plex-
iglas) to a radiation detector (thermistor detector M5-50 or power meter M3-
22A) with a bandwidth of detected radiation 54-78 GHz.

Control and measurement system provides output of registed data to PC

display. Also the following parameters are recorded on a hard disk drive:

• Cathode voltage;
• Total electron beam current;
• Current in a guiding magnetic system windings;
• Grating current;
• Power of microwave radiation.

The generation of microwave radiation was detected at electron energy
≥ 5 KeV in millimeter wavelength range (λ ∼ 4 − 6 mm). Parameters of
resonator are: the length of resonator is 100 mm;
the period of the exciting diﬀraction grating is 0.67 mm;
the period of the resonant diﬀraction grating is 3 mm.
The detected pulse power of generated radiation was about 3 - 4 W. Taking
into account the fact, that only the part of the electron beam with cross size
δ ∼ λu
4πc < 0.1 mm interacts eﬀectively with electromagnetic wave the eﬃciency
of ”working” part of a beam can be evaluated as ∼ 10%. The oscillogram of
VFEL lasing is shown in ﬁg. 3.

4

Fig. 3. The oscillogram of VFEL lasing.

The continuous generation of radiation was observed for electron beam
currents higher than 35 mA . To deﬁne the threshold conditions the beam
current was changed by the varying of the cathode heating voltage. Thresh-
old conditions of generation are illustrated in ﬁg.4, where the dependence of
grating current and emitted microwave radiation on cathode heating voltage
is shown. The decreasing of heat voltage from 178 V to 158 V does not cause
the decreasing of the grating current because of saturation mechanisn due to
Child-Langmuir law. But at Uheat ≤ 156V the grating current decreases. It is
clear from ﬁg. 4 that reduction of the current leads to decreasing of radiation
power. And the peaks on radiation power curve concentrates near electron
beam energy ∼ 5 keV when the grating current tends to the threshold value.
The peaks on radiation curve appears at minimum value of grating current
∼ 35 mA. The lasing starts from voltage ∼ 5 kV . This value is deﬁned by the
diﬀraction gratings period. As a result at the electron beam energy ∼ 5 kV
the mode with the highest Q-factor is excited. For this reason when the grat-
ing current tends to the threshold value, the region of generation tends to a
narrow band near to 5 kV . At higher current values the radiation appears
in electron energy range 5 - 7.5 KeV that demonstrates the excitation of the
other modes with smaller Q-factor, for which the working current exceeds the
starting that.

References

[1] A.Gover, Z. Livni Optics Communications 26 (1978), 375;

[2] J.R.Pierci. Travelling wave tubes (Van Nostrand, Princeton 1950);

5

Fig. 4. The oscillograms of dependence of VFEL lasing on the cathode heating
voltage.

[3] V.G.Baryshevsky, I.D.Feranchuk, Phys.Lett. 102A 1984 141.

[4] V.G.Baryshevsky, Doklady Akademii Nauk USSR 299 1988 19.

[5] V.G.Baryshevsky, K.G.Batrakov, I.Ya. Dubovskaya Journ.Phys D.24 1991 1250.

[6] V.G.Baryshevsky, NIM 445A 2000 281.

[7] V.G.Baryshevsky,

K.G.Batrakov,

I.Ya.

Dubovskaya,

V.A.Karpovich,

V.M.Rodionova, NIM 393A 1997 71-75.

[8] Smith S.L., Purcell E.M., Phys. Rev. 1953 91 1069.

6

[9] Shih-Lin Chang, Multiple Diﬀraction of X-Rays in Crystals (Springer-Verlag,

1984).

[10] V.G.Baryshevsky, K.G.Batrakov, V.I.Stolyarsky Proc. of the 21 International

FEL Conference 1999 II-37.

7

