1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ultra-precise measurement of optical frequency ratios

J¨orn Stenger, Harald Schnatz, Christian Tamm and Harald R. Telle
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Bundesallee 100, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany
(February 20, 2014)

We developed a novel technique for frequency measurement and synthesis, based on the operation of
a femtosecond comb generator as transfer oscillator. The technique can be used to measure frequency
ratios of any optical signals throughout the visible and near-infrared part of the spectrum. Relative
−18 for averaging times of 100 s are possible. Using a Nd:YAG laser in combination
uncertainties of 10
with a nonlinear crystal we measured the frequency ratio of the second harmonic νSH at 532 nm to
the fundamental ν0 at 1064 nm, νSH/ν0 = 2.000 000 000 000 000 001 × (1 ± 7 × 10

−19).

The development of optical frequency comb genera-
tors based on Kerr-lens mode-locked femtosecond lasers
[1,2] has enormously stimulated the ﬁeld of optical fre-
quency synthesis and metrology. Using this technique,
the absolute frequencies of a number of narrow transi-
tions in cold atoms or single stored ions such as H, Ca,
Yb+ or Hg+ have been measured by phase-coherently
linking those signals to primary cesium-clock controlled
hydrogen masers [3–6]. The measurement uncertainties
approached those of the hydrogen masers, indicating that
neither the optical frequency standards nor the frequency
combs themselves were limiting parts of the setups.

Any absolute frequency measurement is ﬁnally limited
by the frequency stability of the device realizing the unit
of Hertz, such as a radio or microwave reference like the
hydrogen maser. A possibility to overcome this limita-
tion is the measurement of optical frequency ratios, which
are unitless. Thus, frequency ratios for oscillators with
better stability than that of the radio or microwave ref-
erence can be determined with smaller uncertainty than
the absolute frequencies if a technique is available to re-
alize the frequency ratio without introducing additional
noise.

Such a technique is the transfer oscillator concept,
which has been realized with a harmonic frequency chain
[7]. However, the measured frequency ratios were re-
stricted to small integer numbers. In this Letter, we de-
scribe a novel technique based on the operation of a fem-
tosecond frequency comb generator as transfer oscillator.
Our technique has the capability of generating arbitrary
ratios of any optical frequencies throughout the visible
and near-infrared part of the spectrum, while ﬂuctua-
tions of the comb modes do not enter the measurement
but cancel out.

We demonstrate the superior short-term instability by
two measurements: ﬁrst, we measured the frequency ra-
tio of signals from a single-Yb+-ion frequency standard
[8] and from an I2-frequency-stabilized Nd:YAG laser [9].
Second, we used the Nd:YAG laser and measured the fre-
quency ratio of the second harmonic at 532 nm to its fun-
damental at 1064 nm, thereby testing how accurately the

2:1 frequency ratio is realized by second harmonic gener-
ation. We demonstrate the capability of our technique of
frequency-ratio measurements with relative uncertainty
better than 10−18.

Kerr-lens mode-locked femtosecond lasers emit a peri-
odic train of short pulses. The spectrum of this emission
corresponds to a comb of distinct modes, that are ex-
actly equally spaced due to the strong and fast Kerr-lens
mode-coupling mechanism [1]. Any external signal with
frequency νi within the comb spectrum can be related to
a suited comb mode by detection of the beat-note fre-
quency ∆i,

νi(t) = νceo(t) + mifrep(t) + ∆i(t) .

(1)

Here, mi denotes the integer order number of the comb
mode selected for the beat note, frep the pulse repetition
rate, and νceo a so called carrier-envelope oﬀset-frequency
that accounts for the oﬀset of the entire comb with re-
spect to the frequency zero. For absolute frequency mea-
surements all detected frequencies, νceo, frep, and ∆i, are
referred to a microwave-reference frequency fR, which
may be generated by a primary clock.

The task of optical frequency metrology in general is
the establishment of a phase-coherent link between two
or more external frequencies fR, ν1, ν2, . . ., while the ex-
cess noise contributions from parameters of the frequency
link, such as the femtosecond comb’s parameters νceo and
frep, are kept as small as possible. Conventional ap-
proaches [10] aim to reduce ﬂuctuations of νceo and frep
by stabilization of both the group and phase delay of the
laser resonator, e.g. with the help of piezo transducers.
However, as a result of the ﬁnite response time of these
elements, the servo bandwidth of such servo loops is gen-
erally not suﬃcient to reduce the frequency noise of the
beat-notes ∆i to that of the optical signals at νi. The sta-
bility of frep is particularly demanding, since according
to eq. (1) this quantity is multiplied by the mode number
mi, which is of the order of 106. As a consequence, the
short-term instability of such frequency measurements is
limited by noise from the microwave reference imposed
on the frequency comb.

1

Our novel approach completely diﬀers in handling the
technical frequency contributions. We synthesize one ra-
dio frequency signal containing all necessary information
from the external optical signals. This radio frequency is
independent of νceo and frep and is thus immune against
noise contributions from the femtosecond laser. The fre-
quency νceo cancels out in real-time signal processing and
the detection of frep is not required at all.

FIG. 1. Linking two optical frequencies with a femtosecond

frequency: real-time signal processing scheme.

The setup is sketched in Fig. 1. Three signals are de-
tected: νceo and two beat signals of two external fre-
quency standards with modes of the femtosecond fre-
quency comb, ∆1 and ∆2. The sum frequency of ∆1
and νceo is generated with a mixer. The sum frequency
of ∆2 and νceo is additionally processed with a direct-
digital-synthesis IC (DDS). Such a device generates an
output signal from an input signal with a frequency ra-
tio given by a long digital tuning word. It numerically
approximates the ratio of the two integers m1 and m2 by
j/2n, where j is an integer and n the bit-length of the
tuning word. The resulting possible error is negligible for
commercially available n = 48 bit devices. As a result of
this signal processing, one obtains

νA = νceo + ∆1

and

νB = (νceo + ∆2)

m1
m2

.

Generating the diﬀerence frequency of both signals

with the help of a mixer, we ﬁnd using eq. (1)

νC = νA − νB = ν1 − ν2

m1
m2

.

This frequency νC is a measure for the (small) devi-
ation of the optical signal’s frequency ratio ν1/ν2 from
m1/m2. Since νC ≪ ν1, ν2, the requirements on the ra-
dio frequency reference are in general not demanding,
i.e. it is not necessary to refer νC to a cesium-clock con-
trolled hydrogen maser. Alternatively, νC can be referred
to one of the optical frequency standards with the help
of the detection of the repetition rate frep. In this case,
a self-referenced measurement system is established, in-
dependent of the realization of the unit Hertz.

2

The frequency νC carries the full information of the
ﬂuctuations of the ratio ν1/ν2, but it is independent of
it is inde-
the properties of the femtosecond laser, i.e.
pendent of both the frequency ﬂuctuations of νceo and
the repetition rate frep. The complete cancellation of all
femtosecond comb parameters realizes the transfer prin-
ciple. Essential requirement is that eq. (1) holds for the
instantaneous phase angles. Technically, the cancellation
requires a suﬃciently fast detection of the optical signals,
but no active stabilization like in the conventional ap-
proach mentioned above. This requirement can be easily
fulﬁlled using fast photodetectos given the typical Fourier
frequency range of the noise of νceo and the beat signals
∆1 and ∆2.

The femtosecond frequency comb is generated by our
Kerr-lens mode-locked Ti:Sapphire-laser which similar to
that described in [11]. Pulse duration and repetition rate
are < 15 fs (FWHM) and 100 MHz, respectively. Ap-
proximately 30 mW of the laser output is coupled into a
10 cm long piece of air-silica microstructure (MS) ﬁber
[12], leading to an output spectrum that extends from
about 500 nm to about 1100 nm. The carrier-envelope-
oﬀset frequency νceo is measured via the beat note of a
few ten thousand frequency-doubled infrared comb lines
at 1080 nm with fundamental lines at 540 nm. The beat
notes of the external optical signals with comb modes are
detected with fast PIN photo diodes. Some more techni-
cal details related to the setup and the signal processing
scheme in Fig. 1 can be found in ref. [13].

For the two frequency ratio measurements we chose two
frequency standards generating three diﬀerent reference
frequencies:

i) the sub-harmonic of

the output of a single-
ytterbium-ion frequency standard [8] at νY b =
344 179 449 MHz (871 nm),

ii) the single-frequency output of a Nd:YAG laser at
ν0 = 281 606 335 MHz (1064 nm), that was fre-
quency stabilized to an iodine transition, and

iii) the second harmonic of the Nd:YAG laser’s emis-
sion at νSH = 563 212 670 MHz (532 nm), gener-
ated by a periodically-poled KTP crystal.

Both the frequency νY b [6] and ν0 [14] were previously
measured with respect to a primary cesium atomic clock.
In the ﬁrst experiment we measured the ratio between
νY b and ν0. With respect to Fig. 1, the beat note of νY b
with a comb mode was ∆1 and that of ν0 was ∆2. We
obtained

νY b
ν0

= 1.636 392 399 378 × (1 ± 3 × 10

−12).

The uncertainty was dominated by the reproducibility

of the iodine-stabilized Nd:YAG laser.

The Allan standard deviation is shown in Fig. 2
(squares). The data for short averaging times (open

squares) were derived from the signal νc (in Fig. 1). For
long averaging times, the real-time processing is not nec-
essarily required. Instead, the frequency ratio can be cal-
culated oﬄine from averaged values (e.g. 1 s) of νceo, ∆1
and ∆2 (solid squares in Fig. 2). Both data sets agree in
the overlapping range between 1 and 8 s.

surement (circles). Indeed, the instability is more than
two orders of magnitude smaller than for the νY b/ν0 mea-
surement, for which already high quality oscillators were
used, and it surpasses even the performance of state-
of-the-art optical oscillators [16] substantially. The ob-
served stability can be explained by the estimated ﬂuc-
tuations of the length diﬀerence between the beam paths
of the two optical signals. Thus one might expect an
even better stability when path length ﬂuctuations are
technically suppressed.

FIG. 2. Measured Allan standard deviation of two fre-
quency-ratio measurements using the Yb+ and Nd:YAG refer-
ence frequencies (squares) and the second harmonic and fun-
damental of a Nd:YAG laser (circles). The frequency insta-
bility of a typical microwave reference (hydrogen maser) is
included for comparison (dashed line).

Similar uncertainty levels have been obtained by di-
rect comparison of two Nd:YAG lasers, indicating a lim-
itation of our measurement by the Nd:YAG laser. We
concluded that the stability of the reference signal pair
was not good enough to investigate any possible noise
contribution from the femtosecond comb. Therefore we
used in the second experiment the signal ν0 and its second
harmonic νSH that was generated in a nonlinear crystal.
The frequency-doubling process enabled the generation
of a pair of reference frequencies with completely corre-
lated ﬂuctuations, leading to a ﬁxed frequency ratio 2:1
even for the shortest averaging times. With respect to
Fig. 1, the beat note of νSH with a comb mode was ∆1
and that of ν0 was ∆2. The DDS was replaced by a
frequency doubler.

The experimental result for the frequency ratio of the
second harmonic and the fundamental from the Nd:YAG
laser is

νSH
ν0

= 2.000 000 000 000 000 001 × (1 ± 7 × 10

−19).

This measurement sets a new limit on the relative er-
ror of the 1:2 ratio of the frequency doubling process in
a nonlinear crystal of smaller than 10−18. This limit is
more than ﬁve orders of magnitude below previous ex-
perimental limits [15].

Fig. 2 shows the Allan standard deviation for the mea-

3

FIG. 3. Typical relative phase excursions of νC (see Fig. 1),
representing the processed second harmonic and fundamental
of the Nd:YAG laser. In order to avoid base-band detection,
the frequencies νA and νB were frequency shifted leading to
an average value of 25 Hz (arbitrarily chosen) of νC.

A typical phase record as derived from the signal νC
in Fig. 1 is shown in Fig. 3. The phase excursions were
smaller than 1 rad for periods of minutes. From such
phase records we obtained by fast Fourier transform a
line width of 9 mHz, as shown in Fig. 4. It should be
noted that this line was derived from beat notes ∆1 and
∆2 with common mode frequency excursions as wide as
MHz.

FIG. 4. Spectrum of νC , calculated from the phase excur-
sions in Fig. 3 by fast Fourier transform. A 900 s data string
was used for the calculation.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel concept
for frequency measurement and synthesis, based on the
operation of a femtosecond comb generator as transfer
oscillator, which does not introduce additional noise. It
allows to exploit the superior short-term stability of op-
tical frequency standards by the measurement of fre-
quency ratios. Indeed, the transfer principle using a fem-
tosecond comb is not limited to optical frequencies, but
can also be applied to radio and microwave frequencies
[13]. The capability of such high precision measurements
opens up new horizons in spectroscopy as soon as ap-
propriate reference signals from optical transitions can
be realized with suﬃcient frequency stability. Interest-
ing questions are eﬀects such as QED-corrections, iso-
tope shifts or relativistic corrections to absolute transi-
tion frequencies [17]. Related to the expanding universe,
a variation of fundamental constants such as the coupling
strengths of electromagnetic, weak or strong interaction
is expected. These constants are indeed accessible with
optical spectroscopy [18]. Relative frequency measure-
ments of optical transitions with diﬀerent scaling in the
ﬁnestructure constant α are sensitive to temporal changes
of the electromagnetic coupling strength. Comparison
of hyperﬁne splitting provides an additional sensitivity
to changes of the strong interaction strength. So far,
laboratory experiments have set limits on the variations
of about 10−14 yr−1. Our frequency-ratio measurement
technique, which is capable of linking optical signals with
an uncertainty of 10−18 in 100 s, may be part of substan-
tially improved experiments.

We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through SFB 407, ex-
perimental assistance by N. Haverkamp and B. Lipphardt
and help for the set–up of the femtosecond laser by
G. Steinmeyer and U. Keller. We are also indebted to R.
Windeler of Lucent Technologies for providing us with
the microstructure ﬁber.

A. Curtis, W. D. Lee, W. M. Itano, R. E. Drullinger, J.
C. Bergquist, and L. Hollberg; Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4996
(2001).

[6] J. Stenger, Chr. Tamm, N. Haverkamp, S. Weyers, and
H. R. Telle; to be published in Opt. Lett. 26, (2001).
[7] G. Kramer, B. Lipphardt, and U. H¨ubner; Proc. of
the 1999 Joint Meeting of the EFTF and the IEEE In-
tern. Freq. Control Symp., Besan¸con, IEEE Catalog No.
99CH36313 (1999).

[8] Chr. Tamm, D. Engelke, V. B¨uhner; Phys. Rev. A61,

[9] P. Cordiale, G. Galzerano, H. Schnatz; Metrologia 37,

053405 (2000).

177 (2000).

[10] D. J. Jones, S. A. Diddams, J. K. Ranka, A. Stentz, R.
S. Windeler, J. L. Hall, and S. T. Cundiﬀ; Science 288,
635 (2000).

[11] D. H. Sutter, G. Steinmeyer, L. Gallmann, N. Matuschek,
F. Morier-Genoud, U. Keller, V. Scheuer, G. Angelow,
and T. Tschudi; Opt. Lett. 24, 631 (1999).

[12] J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, and A. J. Stentz; Opt. Lett.

25, 25 (2000).

(2001).

[13] H. R. Telle, B. Lipphardt, and J. Stenger; submitted

[14] A.Y. Nevsky , R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, Th. Udem,
T.W. H¨ansch, J. von Zanthier, H. Walther, H. Schnatz,
F. Riehle, P.V. Pokasov, M.N. Skvortsov, and S.N.
Bagayev; Opt. Comn. 192, 263 (2001).

[15] R. Wynands, O. Coste, C. Rembe, and D. Meschede;

Opt. Lett. 20, 1095 (1995).

[16] C.W. Oates, E.A. Curtis, L. Hollberg; Opt. Lett. 25,

[17] M.I. Eides, H. Grotch, V.A. Shelyuto; Phys. Rept. 342,

1603 (2000).

63 (2001).

[18] J. D. Prestage, R. L. Tjoelker, and L. Maleki; Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74, 3511 (1995), V. A. Dzuba, V. V. Flambaum,
and J. K. Webb; Phys. Rev. A59, 230 (1999), V. A.
Dzuba and V. V. Flambaum; Phys. Rev. A61, 034502
(2000), S. G. Karshenboim; Can. J. Phys. 78, 639 (2000).

[1] T. Udem, J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, and T. W. H¨ansch,

Opt. Lett. 24, 881 (1999).

[2] S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, S. T. Cundiﬀ, J. L.
Hall, J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, R. Holtzwarth, T.
Udem, and T. W. H¨ansch; Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102
(2000).

[3] M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov,
Th. Udem, M. Weitz, T. W. H¨ansch, P. Lemonde, G.
Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Laurant, C. Salomon, and A.
Clairon; Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000).

[4] J. Stenger, T. Binnewies, G. Wilpers, F. Riehle, H. R.
Telle, J. K. Ranka, R. S. Windeler, A. J. Stentz; Phys.
Rev. A. 63, 021802(R) (2001).

[5] T. Udem, S. A. Diddams, K. R. Vogel, C. W. Oates, E.

4

