1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
0
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Zettawatt-Exawatt Lasers and Their Applications in
Ultrastrong-Field Physics: High Energy Front

T. Tajima
Lawrence Livermore National Lab., Univ. of California, Livermore, CA 94550
and
Institute for Fusion Studies, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712
and

G. Mourou
Center for Ultrafast Optical Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Abstract

Since its birth, the laser has been extraordinarily eﬀective in the study

and applications of laser-matter interaction at the atomic and molecular level

and in the nonlinear optics of the bound electron. In its early life, the laser

was associated with the physics of electron volts and of the chemical bond.

Over the past ﬁfteen years, however, we have seen a surge in our ability to

produce high intensities, ﬁve to six orders of magnitude higher than was pos-

sible before. At these intensities, particles, electrons and protons, acquire

kinetic energy in the mega-electron-volt range through interaction with in-

tense laser ﬁelds. This opens a new age for the laser, the age of nonlinear

relativistic optics coupling even with nuclear physics. We suggest a path to

reach an extremely high-intensity level 1026−28 W/cm2 in the coming decade,

much beyond the current and near future intensity regime 1023 W/cm2, tak-

ing advantage of the megajoule laser facilities. Such a laser at extreme high

intensity could accelerate particles to frontiers of high energy, tera-electron-

volt and peta-electron-volt, and would become a tool of fundamental physics

encompassing particle physics, gravitational physics, nonlinear ﬁeld theory,

1

ultrahigh-pressure physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. We focus our atten-

tion on high-energy applications in particular and the possibility of merged

reinforcement of high-energy physics and ultraintense laser.

2

I. INTRODUCTION

Over the past ﬁfteen years, we have seen a revolution in laser intensities [1]. This

revolution stemmed from the technique of chirped pulse ampliﬁcation (CPA), combined

with recent progress in short-pulse generation and superior-energy-storage materials like

Ti:sapphire, Nd:glass, and Yb:glass. The success of this technique was due to its general

concept, which ﬁts small, university-type, tabletop-size systems as well as large existing laser

chains built for laser fusion in national laboratories like CEA-Limeil in France, Lawrence

Livermore National Lab. (LLNL), Los Alamos National Lab., and Naval Research Lab. in

the U.S.; Rutherford in the UK, Max Born Institute in Germany, and the Institute of Laser

Engineering in Osaka, Japan. A record peak power of petawatt (PW = 1015 W) has been

produced at LLNL. CPA lasers have given access to a regime of intensities that was not

accessible before, opening up a fundamentally new physical domain [2]. The large leap in

intensities that we have experienced recently is illustrated in Fig. 1. This ﬁgure displays

the focused intensities delivered over the years by tabletop systems. After a rapid increase

in the 1960s with the invention of lasers, followed by the demonstration of Q-switching and

mode-locking, the power of lasers stagnated due to the inability to amplify ultrashort pulses

without causing unwanted nonlinear eﬀects in the optical components. This diﬃculty was

removed with the introduction of the technique of chirped pulse ampliﬁcation, which took

the power of tabletop lasers from the gigawatt to the terawatt — a jump of three to four

orders of magnitude. This technique was ﬁrst used with conventional laser ampliﬁers and

more recently extended to Optical Parametric Chirped Pulse Ampliﬁers (OPCPA) [3]. A

number of laboratories are presently equipped with CPA ultrashort-pulsed terawatt lasers

such as Laboratoire Optique Applique in France, University of Lund in Sweden, Max-Planck

Institute in Garching, Jena University, and the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute in

Kansai. The CPA-enabled short-pulse generation has advanced to the single-cycle regime [4].

The peak power in the 1990s reached 100 TW, demonstrated at JAERI Kansai. More

recently, deformable mirrors have been incorporated into CPA, making it possible with low

3

f# parabola to focus the laser power on a 1 µ m spot size [5]. Present systems deliver

focused intensities in the 1020 W/cm2 range. In the near future, CPA systems will be able to

produce intensities of the order of 1022 W/cm2. As indicated in Fig. 1, we will see a leveling

oﬀ of laser intensity for tabletop-size systems at 1023 W/cm2. This limit [1] is imposed, as

we will explain later, by the saturation ﬂuence - energy per unit area — of the amplifying

medium and the damage threshold of the optical elements. In a well-conceived CPA system

the saturation ﬂuence is of the order but less than the damage threshold. Once this limit

is reached, we will have accomplished a leap in intensities of eight orders of magnitude and

the only way to increase the focused intensity further will be by increasing the beam size,

leaving the following questions to be answered: How could we go higher in intensity? And

how much higher?

Because the highest intensities will rely on the largest pump available, we explore if it

could be technically feasible to build a large scale CPA (OPCPA) pumped by a megajoule

system of the type of the NIF (National Ignition Facility) in the U.S. and the LMJ (Laser

Megajoule) in France. Power in the zetta (1021) watt range could be produced, yielding a fo-

cused intensity of 1028 W/cm2. These intensities well beyond the current intensity accessible

will open up a new physical regime.

II. THE THEORETICAL INTENSITY LIMIT

In a CPA system the maximum energy per pulse obtainable is limited (1) by the damage

threshold Fd of the stretched pulse — of the order of a few nanoseconds, and (2) by the

saturation ﬂuence Fsat = hν/σ of the ampliﬁer. Here h is the Planck constant, ν is the laser

frequency, and σ the cross-section of the lasing transition at the lasing frequency ν, Fsat

corresponds to the energy per unit area, necessary to decrease the population inversion by

a factor of two, in a time shorter than the excited state lifetime, Tf . For stretched pulses of

the order of a nanosecond, Fd is of the order of 20 J/cm2 and Fsat = 1 J/cm2 for Ti:sapphire.

For Yb:glass, Fsat = 40 J/cm2 — signiﬁcantly greater than the damage threshold of most

4

optical components. In that regard, high-damage-threshold materials need to be developed

in order to take full advantage of the excellent energy storage capability of this material. The

minimum pulse duration τp is imposed by the Heisenberg uncertainty relation ∆νaτp = 1/π,

where ∆νa is the transition bandwidth for a homogeneously broadened bandwidth. The

maximum power per unit area is, therefore, given by

While the maximum focusable intensity Ith will be obtained when this power is focused on

a spot size limited by the laser wavelength λ, leading to the expression

Pth = π

∆νa.

hν
σ

Ith = π

hν3
σ ·

∆νa
c2 .

(1)

(2)

This intensity limit is represented in Fig. 1.

A. The zettawatt system

Although a zettawatt system could be built using Yb:glass, with the advantages of being

relatively compact due to the high Fsat of this material and being diode pumpable, much

development work needs to be accomplished to reach this intensity level with this material.

The proposed systems described below have been stimulated by the construction , both

in France and in the U.S, of lasers delivering a few megajoules of energy as well as the

availability of large telescope technology (10m diameter) and deformable mirrors.

Let us recall that the NIF and LMJ systems will deliver 2 MJ at 350 nm, i.e., the third

harmonic of 1060 nm in 3 ns. The energy at 530 nm, for a long pulse of 10-20 ns, could

be as high as 5 MJ. This energy could be used to pump a CPA-type system to produce

of the order of 1 MJ of energy in 10 fs on a spot size of 1 µ m [5]. Such a system will

have a power of the order 1020 W or 100 exawatts with an intensity of 1028 W/cm2. To

produce these phenomenal characteristics, we have two alternatives. The ﬁrst one would

be to use this large pump energy to drive an OPCPA system. This elegant technique [3]

has been demonstrated to the joule level at 800 fs level a few years ago by I. Ross et al.

5

from Rutherford [6] and is being implemented in the same laboratory to the 10 PW, 30 fs

level. It has the advantage that it could use KDP as the nonlinear medium. KDP has been

produced in large dimensions at a relatively low cost for the NIF and LMJ programs. The

working ﬂuence on the crystal will be 1 J/cm2, leading to a beam diameter of around 10 m2

to accommodate the whole pump energy. This technique has the potential to produce a

10-fs pulse or shorter, but needs to be demonstrated at least at the joule level. The second

approach, though more conservative, will be to drive a CPA Ti:sapphire, a well-established

technology. The ampliﬁer will be composed of a large matrix of Ti:sapphire rods. The

size of the matrix will be dictated by the saturation ﬂuence Fsat = 1 J/cm2, corresponding

to a 10 m diameter beam. The ampliﬁer could be composed of 2500, 20

20 cm pieces,

×

each 2 cm in length. Each piece will have to be segmented in order to avoid the transverse

ampliﬁed spontaneous emission. Ti:sapphire of 20

20 cm has already been grown [10]. In

×

both schemes the beams can be focused by a large parabola. The dielectric coating used

for the parabola will have a damage threshold of 1 J/cm2 (for short pulses) [7,8], imposing

a parabola size of 10 m in diameter. This parabola will have the same diameter as the

Keck telescope. The phase front will be interferometrically controlled by an active matrix

of deformable mirrors. The grating compressor could be made out of meter-size gratings

assembled interferometrically in a matrix geometry. The size of the grating for a megajoule

short-pulse system will be also of the order of 10 m in diameter, dictated by a damage

threshold of 1 J/cm2 (such a damage threshold has just been reported [9]). Each large

grating will be composed of 100 of 1 m2-size gratings.

Note that although large, the number of optical components involved will be small,

compared to a MJ system calling for 4500 laser slabs, 800 large KDP frequency converter

crystals, and 500 gratings of meter-size. An alternative method using a plasma has been

suggested [10], but will lead to the same output energy limited by the pump. In addition

the beam must go through a plasma, which is highly undesirable.

6

B. The exawatt laser system

If a zettawatt laser, although feasible, could seem too grandiose at this time, an exawatt

system on the other hand,which would produce 10 kJ in 10 fs, i.e., 1025 W/cm2, could be

readily constructed. Only one percent or 30 kJ of the NIF/LMJ energy would be necessary.

The beam size will be of the order of one meter in diameter. The amplifying method will

be composed of a matrix of 25 Ti:sapphire 20

20 cm2 crystals [10] and two gratings of

×

meter-size. The segmented telescope will have a one-meter aperture. The wave front will be

corrected by a large deformable mirror.

In the following we explore a few examples of applications of such intense lasers that

may enable new ways to investigate fundamental physics.

III. FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS: APPLICATIONS OF ZETTAWATT AND
EXAWATT LASERS

The major signpost of contemporary high-ﬁeld science is the entry into the relativistic

regime, which is characterized by the quivering momentum of electrons in the laser ﬁelds

reaching the speed of light times the electron rest mass. This ﬁeld is reached when the

laser intensity is on the order of 1018 W/cm2 for a typical optical frequency of the laser

we mentioned above. When the laser ﬁeld is much less than this, free electrons behave

harmonically to the ﬁeld’s optical oscillations. Although these oscillations of electrons are

still important enough to couple with various collective motions of free electrons, there is

small orbital nonlinearity associated with the quivering motion in this regime. For bound

electrons in atoms or molecules the quivering motion in the laser ﬁelds is once again, by and

large, a perturbation on their orbital motion. This perturbation is enough to cause various

interesting phenomena in the non-relativistic regime. There is such a wealth of phenomena

known in this regime that it is hard to list them brieﬂy, but they include the multi-photon

process of ionization, that of transitions, Raman and Brillouin scatterings, and various

optical nonlinearities [11] arising from the material’s response.

In the relativistic regime

7

with the intensity above 1018 W/cm2, in addition to the above phenomena, there emerge

new classes of eﬀects largely arising from the relativistic nonlinearities of electrons in the

high ﬁeld.

cross-section

The ﬁeld intensity in this regime means that the electron momentum in the light is

typically eE0ω0, which becomes of the order of and exceeds m0c, where ω0 is the laser

angular frequency, E0 the laser electric ﬁeld, and m0 the electron rest mass. When the

electron momentum exceeds m0c, the electronic orbit ceases to be harmonic and linear. It

becomes a ﬁgure-8 motion, including higher-harmonic components. The photon pressure is

exerted individually on an electron by the electron-photon collision through the Thomson

σT =

8π
3 ·

e4
m2
0c4 ≈

7

·

10−25 cm2.

When the ﬂux of laser at the intensity entering the relativistic regime is shone on an electron

(with Lorentz factor γ), this causes a force on it

When the laser intensity is I = 1026 W/cm2, the force acting on an electron is 10−2

10−1 erg/cm. Or the acceleration acting on an electron (originally) at rest is

where m0 is the rest mass. [In contrast to this, the Schwinger acceleration is

at which an electron gains energy by m0c2 over the Compton length λC = ¯h/m0c, and the pair

creation becomes prevalent.] A large ﬂux of photons bombarding an electron causes such high

acceleration through collisions between photons and electrons (Compton collisions). Such

acceleration may be called the Eddington acceleration, as Eddington introduced the stellar

luminosity at which the gravitational pull is balanced by this photon collisional acceleration

(the Eddington luminosity).

8

F =

σT
γ

E2
0
4π

.

ae =

f
m0 ∼

1025−26 cm/s2,

aS = 2

1031 cm/s2,

·

(3)

(4)

∼

(5)

(6)

The Eddington acceleration may be likened to the acceleration of water molecules near

the surface of water in a lake when there is a breeze passing over the water surface. The

collisional viscosity created by collisions between water molecules and wind molecules gives

rise to a water ﬂow. However, we also observe that when the breeze gets stronger or be-

comes a gale, the water surface is no longer smooth and acquires ripples or waves. Such

ripples facilitate an increase in the eﬀective viscosity of water for the wind, so that the wind

momentum is anomalously eﬀectively transported to water molecules with a much faster

rate through the Kelvin- Helmholtz instability at the interface of the two ﬂuids. What

happens in the case of strong photon ﬂux (“wind”) in a plasma? Just like the strong wind

on the water surface, the strong photon ﬂux is capable of creating plasma waves, which in

turn causes enhanced viscosity and thus anomalous momentum transport from photons to

electrons of the plasma. This latter process is through a collective interaction. The plasma

wakeﬁeld excitation [12] is typical of this, in which plasma waves generated in this process

are accentuated, and new processes of collective interaction emerge.

In this ultraintense

regime, electrons may be accelerated not only through the electrostatic ﬁeld that is set up

by the ponderomotive force of the laser, but also directly by the ponderomotive force itself

to very high energies. If we apply this laser at the resonance absorption at high densities

near the compressed laser fusion target, on the other hand, much of the laser energy may be

converted into relatively low-energy copious electrons, which could constitute a new alter-

native to the fast ignition fusion. The acceleration of heavier particles (protons and other

nuclei) to relativistic energies will become possible, too. Either by direct baryon accelera-

tion by this, or other process, (it will take a variety of experimental realizations such as a

target irradiation, cluster irradiation, converging imploding shells, etc), we will access the

nuclear regime of matter reminiscent of the early epoch of the Big Bang (see Fig. 1). The

production of extremely high energy or copious gamma rays will happened. The extreme

high photon pressure (which already exceeds Gbar in the presently available intense lasers)

may be ﬁnally directly utilized to directly compress matter in this ultrarelativistic regime,

9

because baryons, too, become relativistic. If so, unprecedented densities of matter may be

created. The combination of extreme intensity lasers and high-energy particle beams that

can be created by the conventional high-energy physics accelerator will further multiply our

ability to expand our frontier horizon. This will be the merging point of high-energy physics

and high-ﬁeld science. In the following, we list several examples of exciting new frontiers

of fundamental physics that may be explored by this regime of intensities. In many of the

applications we discuss, in this high-intensity regime the interaction length between the laser

and matter is expected to be extended beyond the Rayleigh length, as the relativistic mass

eﬀect of electrons sets the self-focusing threshold at 1010(ω/ωp)2 W [13].

A. Particle acceleration

The pulse or self-modulation of a photon wavepacket with suﬃcient intensity induces a

longitudinal electric ﬁeld (in the x-direction, as part of plasma oscillations) as

Ex ∼ s

ne
n18

a2
0

(GeV/cm),

(a0

1),

≤

where n18 = 1018/cm3 and ne is the electron density, a0 = eE0/m0ω0c the normalized vector

potential of the laser, which is sometimes called the quivering velocity normalized to c (or

quivering momentum normalized to m0c). The energy gain over the interaction length lx is

When a0 exceeds unity (ultrarelativistic; I

1018 W/cm2), the pressure of the photon

≥
wavepacket becomes so large that nearly all electrons are evacuated from the laser packet [14].

The photons plow through the plasma with electrons piling up in front of the pulse (“snow

plow” of electrons), yielding the snow plow acceleration [15] with momentum gain of electrons

∆ε

∼ s

ne
n18

a2
0ℓx (GeV).

px =

1
4

E2
0
nec

=

E2
nem0c2 a2
c
0,

where Ec = m0ω0c/e. Here the laser pulse is assumed to have fully interacted with the

plasma.

If the pulse quickly diﬀracts before the full interaction, say over the Rayleigh

length, px is simply proportional to E0.

10

(7)

(8)

(9)

Now let us imagine, for the moment, that the laser has only half the period (unipolar) [16]

or subcyclic [17]. In this case the energy (or momentum) gain is

m0c2a2
0.

∆ε

∼

(10)

Since the Lawson-Woodward theorem [18] prohibits any overall acceleration for fully oscilla-

tory (i.e., usual) electromagnetic waves in vacuum in inﬁnite space, the above energy gain is

compensated for by decelerating phase. There are, however, many instances that break the

theorem requirements. For example, it may be possible in this extreme relativistic regime

that electrons are accelerated to very high energy, immediately reaching the speed of light

and becoming in phase with the photon over a suﬃciently long distance, so that by the time

they become dephased, the EM wave may decay away for some reason, such as by radiative

decay or pump depletion to the acceleration. If this happens, the above energy gain (or a

portion of it) may be preserved. In extreme high-intensity regimes such eﬀects will become

signiﬁcant. If the laser spreads over the Rayleigh length, the energy gain is proportional to

a0. The transverse momentum gain (py) is always proportional to a0. In a broad general

way we can say that the interaction between the laser and electrons becomes more coherent,

as the laser intensity increases because the laser and electrons move more coherently over

greater distance. This is the signature of the acceleration by the ponderomotive potential

of photon ﬁelds in ultra-relativistic intensity regimes.

Thus it is possible to see electrons at energies of up to

100 TeV at the laser inten-

∼

sity of 1026 W/cm2 and even up to

10 PeV at 1028 W/cm2. The accelerating gradient is

∼

200 TeV/cm and 2 PeV/cm, respectively. Note that such energies (100 TeV and 10 PeV)

if collided, correspond to 1019 eV and 1023 eV for ﬁxed target experiments. These energies

rival or exceed those of the highest energy cosmic rays, which are observed up to 3

1020 eV.

×

Of course, it is not easy to attain correspondingly high luminosity for collisions at such high

energies. Even though the exploration of particle physics at pb may not be within reach, we

may use such particles in pursuit of (other) fundamental physics at the energy frontier. We

might recall that Anderson ﬁrst discovered mesons in cosmic rays, followed by more detailed

11

studies of those particles in cyclotrons and other accelerators. Perhaps the present way-out

parameters in the energy frontier may herald some new phenomena. One such example may

be the test of Lorentz invariance [19] in extreme high energies. For such a test, unlike the

detection of new particles with pb cross-section, the luminosity requirement may be much

relaxed.

When we irradiate an extremely relativistic laser pulse (I

1026 W/cm2) on a thin ﬁlm

∼

1 µ m) of a metal at a tight spot of (1 µ m)2 followed by a microhole in a metallic slab

(>
∼
over more than one cm, we hypothesize that the laser pulse picks up metallic electrons from

the ﬁlm and continues to propagate through the microhole, as it remains focused. If this

proves to be the case, the amount of electrons that are to be accelerated by this pulse is in

the ballpark of

Ne ∼

neAlb ∼

3

1010,

where we assumed ne ∼
such a large pickup, the pump depletion due to the energy transfer to electrons is signiﬁcant.

·
1024 cm−3, area A = (1 µ m)2, the bunch length lb ∼

10−6 cm. In

3

·

(11)

In fact, it may play a fundamental role in this acceleration to turn the electromagnetic energy

into particle kinetic energy without returning to the decelerating phase, providing one way

to break the Lawson-Woodward theorem’s constraint, as we mentioned earlier. If we take

1/10 of the above electrons to gain 10 TeV and if we focus electrons (and positrons) down

to 10−6 cm (or 10−7 cm) at focus (the collision point), the luminosity of the colliding events

is of the order of

luminosity scenario [20].

= 1031 f /cm2/s, (or 1033f ),

L

(12)

where f is the collision repetition rate. Nakajima has considered a similar but more daring

One special case of laser energy conversion into electrons is through the resonance ab-

sorption at the critical density. The concept of fast ignition in laser-driven inertial fusion [21]

B. Fast Ignition Fusion

12

calls for laser beam of

10 psec duration at the intensity exceeding 1020 W/cm2 to be ab-

sorbed at the critical density (

1021

1022/cm3), creating a beam of electrons in the several

∼

−

MeV range. The idea is to separate the roles of laser into two functions: one to compress the

fuel with least amount of entropy increase so that the fusion fuel is compressed to a highest

density with least amount of laser energy, and the other is to heat the fuel to the thermonu-

clear ignition temperature (

10 KeV) when the main compression is achieved. The latter

∼

step may be carried out according to Tabak et al. by the appropriate range of energetic (sev-

eral MeV) electrons that are transported from the crust of the target (< 1022/cm3) to the

surface of the fuel (at

1026/cm3) at the pulse duration of

10 ps. In order for electrons

∼

to trigger the fusion ignition, the condition

∼

∼

ρR <
∼

0.5

g
cm2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(13)

has to be fulﬁlled [21]. Here ρ is the density of the compressed fuel and R the electron

range and thus approximately the size of the fuel at compression. Although this idea is

potentially capable of reducing the necessary laser energy by almost an order of magnitude

or increasing the fusion gain by an order of magnitude at the same laser energy, there

remains a considerable uncertainty in the eﬃciency of energy conversion from short-pulse

(10ps) laser to electron beam to the compressed fuel and in the stability and reliability of

electron beam. For example, laser and electron beam have to propagate through the over

dense plasma, through which ﬁlamentation and kinking instabilities are found to arise. In

order to cope with this problem, the ignitor laser is further split into the hole boring one

and energy deliverer.

We suggest that an alternative method of fast ignition by much shorter-pulse laser may be

possible. In this, although the total amount of energy necessary to be delivered is unchanged

(50

100 kJ), we shorten the pulse length to 10fs so that the local laser intensity reaches

∼

of the order of 1025 W/cm2. Since the resonance frequency reduces inversely proportional

to √ne, the resonance density becomes in the order of 1025/cm3, a very close proximity

of the fully compressed fuel. This way we may be avoiding the diﬃcult and long energy

13

transport of electron beam from the density region of < 1022/cm2 to 1026/cm3. With the

recent success of improved target design with a conic aperture for fast ignitor laser beam

access [22], our ultrafast approach may be further bolstered as a direct energy delivery

vehicle. It remains to be seen, however, how much fraction of the laser energy is consumed

due to the pump depletion [23] while it interacts with the surrounding plasma. It also needs

to be investigated what kind of electron energy spectrum is generated in the ultra-intense

laser beam. The mission of the electron energy conversion in fast ignition is orthogonal to

the previous Subsec. 3A of super-high energy electron generation. The production of a small

fraction of extremely high-energy electrons is tolerated, as long as the majority of energy is

in several MeV electrons.

C. Baryon acceleration

Many thought it diﬃcult to accelerate protons and heavier particles by light, as massless

light propagates at the speed of light, while protons are massive and nonrelativistic —

until last year, when the Petawatt Laser experiment [24] and other experiments [25–27]

showed that protons have been accelerated much beyond a mega-electron-volt. The observed

transverse emittance is about 0.5 mm mrad, while the longitudinal one is about MeV-

psec [28]. These early experiments already rival or even surpass those of the conventional

ion sources in some of crucial parameters. The main mechanism of laser proton acceleration

in the above experiments is due to the space charge set up by energetic electrons that are

driven forward away from the back surface of the target slab. The energy of protons is

thus dependent on that of electrons. Bulanov and others showed [29] in simulation that

at a laser intensity of I = 1023 W/cm2, protons are accelerated beyond a giga-electron-

volt. If this process of proton acceleration scales with the intensity (as the electron energy

does), we may be able to see 100 GeV protons and 10 TeV at I = 1026 and 1028 W/cm2,

respectively. However, it may also be possible that this process is now due directly to the

photon pressure beyond the intensity regime of I = 1024 W/cm2. The energy expected

14

through this mechanism is about the same as that through the space charge mechanism.

It is not clear how much energy will be in protons.

In the Petawatt Laser experi-

ment, about 10% of laser energy (300 J) was converted into proton energy — 30 J (beyond

1 MeV) [24]. If we take this conversion eﬃciency in the extreme relativistic laser intensity,

then more than 1 kJ of proton energy is expected for the case of intensity 1026 W/cm2. If

we further take a ﬂat energy spectrum, approximately 1011 protons are accelerated beyond

10 GeV in this intensity regime. If we can generate the solitary accelerating structure, such

energy may exceed 100 GeV. If we can converge these in a colliding pair of beams at focus,

the luminosity of colliding hadrons is

= 1034 f , if we focus on 10 nm. The expected

number of nuclear events is on the order of 109 per shot.

L

Such an intense, relativistic, compact proton source has a number of fascinating appli-

cations. It may be applicable to ion radiography, fast ignition of fusion, etc., among many

others. An additional application is pion (or muon) and neutrino beam generation. With

suﬃciently relativistic proton energies the emittance of created pions can be suﬃciently

small. If so, they may be promptly accelerated pions to suﬃciently high energies before the

space charge eﬀect expands the beam emittance and before they die out. In this the prompt

acceleration and its compactness are important, both of which are the forte of the laser

accelerations in an application. Protons beyond a certain energy (several hundred MeV) in

matter induce through the nuclear strong interaction the creation of pions, which in turn

decay into muons and neutrinos in a matter of 20 ns, if nonrelativistic, propagating mere

6 m at most: π

µ + ν. With the conventional accelerating gradient of, say, 20MeV/m

→

over this distance of 6m, we can increase the pion energy by 120MeV, which will increase the

lifetime of pions but not by an order of magnitude. On the other hand, the laser acceleration

with its far-greater gradient would increase the energy and lifetime of pions far more than

this (and also reduce the emission cone angle). This would contribute to a further smaller

emittance, which in turn contributes to higher energy, lower emittance muons and neutrinos.

15

D. Gamma ray emission

The emission of gamma rays from the intense laser is expected. Although the well-known

bremsstrahlung x-rays (and gamma rays) by electrons through the collision with nuclei are

expected to remain important, the Larmor radiation is the most intense in the extreme

relativistic regime among all radiation mechanisms through the interaction with matter (in

this case free electrons) with power

PL =

rem0cω2

0a2
0.

8
3 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(14)

Gamma rays (whose energy peaks at ¯hωL ∼
are accelerated forward. In addition, gamma rays of nuclear origin are also expected. As

a3
0¯hω0) may be forward directed as electrons

discussed in Subsec. 3A, accelerated electrons with extremely large Lorentz factor created

by laser may be easily converted into extreme high-energy gamma rays (polarization may

be preserved if desired).

When an intense laser is directed at a high-energy electron beam, the well-known energy

enhancement of laser photon happens by the factor γ2 or up to the electron energy itself

(where γ is the Lorentz factor of the head-on colliding electron beam) through Compton

scattering. Utilizing this, high-energy electron (or positron) colliders may be converted into

a γ-γ collider [32]. The idea of a γ-γ collider is an example of the cooperative employment

of two separate technologies (the indigeneous high-energy physics and the high-ﬁeld science)

to enhance the overall goal.

Gamma rays in the γ-γ collider mode or with an enormous energy as discussed in Sub-

sec. 3A (with another laser, for example) may be employed to test the Lorentz invari-

ance [19,31]. For example, if Lorentz invariance is violated, the event number of e−e+ pair

creation is suppressed.

16

E. Superhot matter

Kishimoto and Tajima [33] have shown that an intense laser pulse may be nearly totally

absorbed by only several layers of atomic clusters. When the excursion length of electrons

exceeds the size of clusters, electron orbits become chaotic upon their removal from the

original site of the cluster, due to the cluster polarization. The chaos sets in within a few

femtoseconds, thus making the absorption of the laser ultrafast. Further, upon removal of

electrons, ions of the cluster Coulomb-explode, gaining a large fraction of electron energy.

If we arrange matter in such a way as to absorb nearly all laser energy over the thickness of

a few microns on a (1 µ m)2 spot, the average energy per particle is approximately 100 GeV

and 104 GeV, at I = 1026 and 1028 W/cm2, respectively. Such superhot matter is expected to

generate copious positrons through the Breit-Wheeler process and perhaps other nonlinear

quantum electrodynamic (QED) processes [34]. Probably the amount of positrons generated

will not be less than 109 (see also in Subsec. 3F).

A large number of nuclear excitations are expected.

In fact, in the Petawatt Laser

experiment [35] nuclear transmutations through generated gamma rays have been observed.

Since the electron energy is much greater than the typical nuclear excitation energy, copious

reactions are expected. The nuclear reactivity Ye is estimated [36] as

Ye = 1.5

1012 nineστpℓ
ni0ne0σ0τ0ℓ0

·

η.

(15)

Here ni and ne are the ion and electron densities, σ, the reaction cross-section, τp and

ℓ are the interaction time and length, and η is the fraction of reaction electrons. The

numbers in the denominator are the normalizing numbers with typical parameters as follows:

1022/cm3, ne0 = 1024, σ0 = 1 µ b, τ0 = 10−12 s, ℓ0 = 10−3. If we take ℓ

1 cm,

∼

1 mb, we obtain 1014 > Ye > 1010. For example, the element of Hf is excited at

ni0 = 5

·
η = 0.5, σ

∼
energy around 1 MeV.

Even if a heavy metal is irradiated, the energy per nucleon exceeds 1 GeV. Thus by

irradiating the target from both ends, it may be possible to cause colliding heavy nuclei.

The possible nuclear events we expect are

17

Nn = n2

i cσV τp ∼

107

(16)

where V is the interaction volume taken as 10−8 cm3. We expect about 107 events per laser

shot of nuclear events, which may include such a process as quark-gluon plasma formation.

The presumed transition temperature from nucleon state to deconﬁned quark-gluon plasma

state is

∼
at luminosity of 2

·

200 MeV. The relativistic heavy ion collider (RHIC) delivers 109 ion beams (Au)

1026/cm2/s, yielding a few events of quark-gluon plasma per second.

F. Super-high pressure

The photon pressure at the extreme relativistic regime is immense: 30 Pbars (= 3

·
1010 Mbars) and 3 Ebars, at 1026 and 1028 W/cm2, respectively. With such extraordinarily

high pressure, one may be able to access entirely new regimes of highly-pressurized matter

states. The current method of achieving the highest pressure and compressed states is to

ablate exterior matter outward by laser in order to drive interior matter inward by the

reaction momentum. This way, gradual (nearly) isentropic compression to a density 103

higher than the solid density can be achieved with the laser whose pulse is longer than

a nanosecond. The laser light, as well as hot electrons, is absorbed before the interior

matter; the formation of a strong shock, which is detrimental to compression, is avoided.

However, the superstrong pressure in the extreme high-ﬁeld regime, as well as another set

of parameters that come with it, invites us to think about and explore radically diﬀerent

ways than the ablative method to create ultrahigh compressed states. This may allow us to

access densities far greater than 1026/cm3.

G. Nonlinear QED and horizon physics

At the intensity 1028 W/cm2, the electric ﬁeld is only an order of magnitude less than

the Schwinger ﬁeld as discussed below. At this ﬁeld, ﬂuctuations in vacuum are polarized

by laser to yield copious pairs of real electron and positron. In collider physics a similar

phenomenon happens when the so-called Υ parameter reaches unity. In reality, even below

18

the Schwinger ﬁeld, the exponential tail of these ﬂuctuations begins to cause copious pair

productions.

Though pair production has been demonstrated at SLAC (E144-experiment) [37] by the

interaction of γ-ray with an intense laser at intensities in the range of 1018 W/cm2, the

direct production of pairs by a high-intensity laser from vacuum remains elusive. The rule

of thumb for threshold of pair production derives from the simple argument that it is the

ﬁeld necessary for a virtual electron to gain an energy 2m0c2 during its lifetime δt, imposed

by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle δt = ¯h/m0c2, the energy gain length, cδt is the

Compton length ¯λc. Hence, the breakdown ﬁeld ES, the Schwinger ﬁeld, is ES = m0c2/e¯λc

where ¯λc = 0.386 pm ES = 2

1016 V/cm. (The laser ﬁeld ES is related to the laser intensity

·

Iℓ by E2

S = Z0IS where Z0 is the vacuum impedance. For Z0 = 377 Ω, we ﬁnd a value of

IS = 1030 W/cm2).

This approach gives an estimate for the threshold for pair creation and do not provide the

number of pairs that could be created for a given intensity. The probability of spontaneous

production of pair creation per unit time per unit volume by Schwinger [38] is

w =

1
π2

α
δt

1
¯λ3
c (cid:18)

E
ES (cid:19)

1
n2 exp

nπ

(cid:18)−

ES
E (cid:19)

,

2 ∞

Xn=1
where α is the ﬁne structure constant. The number of pairs N for a given laser ﬁeld is

(17)

(18)

where V is the focal volume. For V = 10−12 cm3 and τp = 10 fs, we ﬁnd the generation of

1024 pairs at the Schwinger intensity IS. It is interesting to note that the intensity to create

a single pair is still the gargantuan intensity of 1027 W/cm2. However, as indicated earlier

(in Subsec. 3E), the presence of matter such as nuclei or electrons reduces this ﬁeld by a

considerable amount.

The interaction of intense laser with high-energy electrons will enhance some of the pa-

rameters even further. For example, counterstreaming electron beam and laser can produce

copious polarized (high-quality) positrons. This can serve as a polarized positron source for

N = V τpw

19

one thing. In an extreme ﬁeld regime, on the other hand, the laser ﬁeld is enhanced by the

Lorentz factor of the electron beam, so that the eﬀective ﬁeld from the electron frame may

far exceed the Schwinger value. If this ﬁeld is exceeded by much more than these orders

of magnitude, direct production of other particles such as muons out of “vacuum” may be

observed.

In addition to the test of nonlinear ﬁelds, we are able to explore what may be called

‘horizon physics.’ According to Einstein’s equivalence principle, a particle that is accelerated

feels gravity in the opposite direction of the acceleration. The acceleration due to the electric

ﬁeld of the laser at this intensity is huge: ae ∼
1028 W/cm2, respectively. An observer at rest (or in an inertial frame of reference) sees the

1030 and 1031 cm/s2, at I = 1026 and

horizon at inﬁnity if there is no gravitation. On the other hand, an observer near a black

hole sees the horizon at a ﬁnite distance where the gravitation diverges. Equivalently, an

observer who is being accelerated (feeling immense equivalent gravity) now also sees the

horizon at a ﬁnite distance. Any particle (“observer” — a wave function) that has a ﬁnite

extent has one side of its wave function leaking out of the horizon. The Unruh radiation is

emitted when this happens [39]. Unruh radiation is a sister to the Hawking radiation [40].

The Unruh temperature

which is about 104 eV and 105 eV, for I = 1026 and 1028 W/cm2, respectively. The radiative

power of Unruh radiation increases in proportion to a3

0 (or I 3/2), in contrast to the Larmor

radiation power of a2

0 [41]

where re is the electron classical radius. Since in the extreme relativistic regime the radiation

is dominated by Larmor radiation, the Unruh signal has to compete with the Larmor with

the ratio of powers

kTU =

¯hae
2πc

PU =

12
π

re¯h
c

0ω2
a3
0,

PU
PL

=

¯hω0
m0c2 a0.

20

(19)

(20)

(21)

At this regime, the Unruh is down only by a few orders of magnitude, and it has been

suggested to circumvent the noise to observe the Unruh signal by exploiting polarization,

etc. [41]. This PU yields 104 eV/s and 107 eV/s, for I = 1026 and 1028 W/cm2, respectively.

The shrinkage of the distance to the horizon by the violent acceleration allows us to probe

other aspects of gravitational physics. For example, Arkani-Hamed et al. [42] suggested

that extra dimensions of the quantum gravity may have manifestations in a relatively low

extra dimension (n) in this four-dimensional world. The distance over which this may be

manifested is

The distance to the horizon created by the intense laser acceleration of an electron

1030/n−17 cm.

rn ∼

d =

=

c2
ae

λ
2π

1
a0

,

(22)

(23)

could exceed the above distance Eq. (22) if n is less than or equal to 4.

Zetta- and exawatt-lasers will allow us a glimpse into some of the most energetic and

enigmatic phenomena of astrophysics such as GRB’s, and their associated eﬀects on EHECR,

the ﬁnal energy frontier in the Universe (‘Extreme Universe’ in the highest energy and from

the cosmological distance). We marvel at such fascinating possibilities of exploring funda-

mental physics that are enabled by the extreme high-ﬁeld science developments by zetta and

exawatt lasers, even though we have just barely scratched the surface so far on this subject.

It is also noted that this laser could bring many frontiers of contemporary physics, i.e. parti-

cle physics, nuclear physics, gravitational physics, nonlinear ﬁeld theory, ultrahigh pressure

physics, relativistic plasma and atomic physics, astrophysics, and cosmology together. Be-

cause of such signiﬁcant potential scientiﬁc impacts, though it amounts to nontrivial eﬀorts

and developments, it seems worthy of further and more serious consideration of this extreme

high-ﬁeld science.

21

We appreciated the comment by Prof. R. Siemann on polarized positron sources and by

Profs. N. Fisch, M. Key, and P. Mulser on fast ignition. This work was supported in part

by the U.S. Dept. of Energy Contracts DE-FG03-96ER-54346, W-7405-Eng. 48, and in part

by the National Science Foundation Grant No. STC PHY 8920108.

22

REFERENCES

[1] D. Strickland and G. Mourou, Opt. Comm 56, 219 (1985).

[2] G. A. Mourou, C. P. J. Barty, and M. D. Perry, Physics Today, January 1998.

[3] A. Dubeis et al., Opt. Comm. 88, 437 (1992).

[4] U. Morgner, F. X. K¨atner, S. H. Cho, Y. Chen, A. H. Haus, J. G. Fujimoto, and E. P.

Ippen, Opt. Lett. 24, 411 (1999).

[5] F. Druon, G. Cheriaux, J. Faure, J. Nees, M. Nantel, A. Maksimchuk and G. Mourou,

Opt. Lett. 23, 1043-1045 (1998); O. Albert, H. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Chang, and G. Mourou,

Opt. Lett. 125, 1125 (2000).

[6] I.N. Ross, et al., Opt. Comm. 144, 125 (1997).

[7] D. Du, X. Liu, G. Korn, J. Squier, and G. Mourou, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 3071 (1994).

[8] B. Stuart, M. Feit, A. Rubenckik, B. Shore, and M. Perry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2248

(1995).

[9] A. Migus, Private Communications.

[10] M. Felt, Private Communications.

[11] N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics, (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1965).

[12] T. Tajima and J. M .Dawson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 267 (1979).

[13] P. Sprangle, C. M. Tang, and E. Esarey, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 15, 145 (1987); D.

C. Barnes, T. Kurki-Suonio, and T. Tajima, ibid. 15, 154 (1987).

[14] M. Ashour-Abdalla, J. N. LeBoeuf, T. Tajima, J. M. Dawson, and C. F. Kennel, Phys.

Rev. A 23, 1906 (1981).

[15] T. Tajima, Laser Part. Beams 3, 351 (1985).

[16] W. Scheid and H. Hora, Laser Part. Beams 7, 315 (1989).

[17] B. Rau,T. Tajima, and H. Hojo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3310 (1997).

[18] J.D. Lawson, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-26, 4217 (1979); P.M. Woodward, J. IEE 93,

Part III A, 1554 (1947).

[19] H. Sato and T. Tati, Prog. Theor. Phys. 47, 1788 (1972).

[20] K. Nakajima, this Proceedings (2001).

[21] M. Tabak, et al., Phys. Plasmas 1, 1626 (1994).

[22] R. Kodama, et al., Nature 412, 798 (2001).

23

[23] W. Horton and T. Tajima, Phys. Rev. A 34, 4110 (1986).

[24] M. Key, et al., in First Int’l. Conf. Inertial Fusion Sci. Appl. (Bordeaux, France 1999).

[25] A. Maksimchuk, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4108 (2000).

[26] E. L. Clark, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1654 (2000).

[27] R.A. Snavely, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. (2000).

[28] M. Roth, et al., to be published in Varenna Proceedings, eds.‘G. Mourou, T. Tajima,

and M. Lontano (American Institute of Physics, New York, 2001).

[29] T. Zh. Esirkepov, T.V. Liseikina, F. Califano, N. M. Naumova, V. A. Vshirkov, F.

Pegoraro, S. V. Bulanov, JETP Lett. 70, 82 (1999); also A. Pukhov et al. in Max-

Planck, Y. Ueshima et al. in JAERI, S. Wilks et al. in LLNL, among other groups, have

shown similar results.

[30] J. K. Koga et al., to be published in Varenna Proceedings, ibid.

[31] I. Ginzburn, G. Kolkin, V. Serbe, and V. Telnov, JETP Lett. 34, 491 (1982).

[32] S. Coleman and S.L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. D 59, 116008 (1999).

[33] Y. Kishimoto and T. Tajima, in High Field Science, eds. T. Tajima, K. Mima, and H.

Baldis, (Kluwer, NY, 2000) p. 83.

[34] T. Taguchi and K. Mima, ibid., p. 163.

[35] T. E. Cowan et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 903 (2000).

[36] T. Udagawa, private communication (1996).

[37] C. Bula, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3116 (1996).

[38] J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951).

[39] W. Unruh, Phys. Rev. D. 14, 870 (1976).

[40] S. W. Hawking, Nature (London) 248, 30 (1974).

[41] P.S. Chen and T. Tajima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 256 (1999).

[42] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 586 (2000).

24

FIGURE CAPTION

FIG. 1. Laser-focused intensity vs. years for table-top systems.This system shows the dra-

matic increase in intensities experienced over the past few years. The ﬁgure shows

also that the maximum intensity for table-top systems will be reached in few years.

For the systems we propose, the laser intensity will far exceed these values.

25

This figure "Zettawatt.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0111091v1

