1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The zero point ﬁeld in low light level experiments.

Jacques Moret-Bailly ∗

January 13, 2014

Abstract

The existence of the zero point electromagnetic ﬁeld in the dark is a
trivial property of classical electromagnetism. Splitting the total, genuine
electromagnetic ﬁeld into the sum of a conventional ﬁeld and a zero point
ﬁeld is physically meaningless. If a receiver attenuates the genuine ﬁeld
down to a zero conventional ﬁeld, it remains a zero point ﬁeld having the
coherence and the phase of the conventional ﬁeld, and vice-versa for the
ampliﬁcation of the zero point ﬁeld by a source.

Nonlinear optical eﬀects must be written using the genuine ﬁeld, so
that at low light levels they become linear in relation to the conventional
ﬁeld. The result of the interpretation of all observations, even at low
light levels, is exactly the same in quantum electrodynamics and in the
semi-classical theory.

The zero point ﬁeld is stochastic only far from the sources and the
receivers; elsewhere, it is shaped by matter, it may be studied through
ﬁelds visible before an absorption or after an ampliﬁcation.

Two examples are given : the computation of fourth order interferences
and the use of the impulsive stimulated Raman scattering with ordinary
incoherent light in astrophysics.

pacs42.25Bs, 42.50Gy

1 Introduction.

The electromagnetic ﬁeld radiated by an oscillating dipole, studied by Hertz in
the nineteenth century, gives a particular solution of Maxwell’s equations with a
singular point at the origin. A linear development of this solution using solutions
regular at the origin requires an inﬁnite number of solutions. More physically,
adding the solution for the dipole and another solution, the total energy may
be higher, equal or lower than in the second solution, that is the dipole emits,
refracts or absorbs energy; the last case corresponds to a partial cancellation
of the exciting ﬁeld by the ﬁeld emitted by the dipole; this superposition of
waves shows that while an oscillating dipole refracts or absorbs a part of the
∗Laboratoire de physique, Universit de Bourgogne, BP 47870, F-21078 Dijon cedex, France.

email : Jacques.Moret-Bailly@u-bourgogne.fr

1

energy radiated by an other dipole, it diﬀracts a large fraction of this energy.
Both demonstrations show that, in a semi-classical theory, the absorption by
atoms of the light emitted by other atoms is slow, it remains a residual ﬁeld
named now the zero point ﬁeld. While the existence of this ﬁeld is trivial, the
computation of the mean value of its intensity hν/2 per monochromatic mode,
by Planck and Nernst [1, 2], was diﬃcult.

The oscillating dipole is a particular system of moving charges; any moving
electron radiates a ﬁeld, but if it belongs to a stationary system, in the average,
it does not radiate energy: Sommerfeld’s electron does not fall on the proton,
but the ﬂuctuations of its perturbations by the zero point ﬁeld produce the
Lamb shift [3].

The building of the zero point ﬁeld shows that it is an ordinary ﬁeld; thus
it may be ampliﬁed by a source; the starts of the laser pulses show that a
spontaneous emission is exactly the ampliﬁcation of the zero point ﬁeld.

In this paper we qualify the electromagnetic ﬁeld as follows :
-”genuine” for the total electromagnetic ﬁeld;
”zero point” for the ﬁeld which remains after the largest, coherent, physically

possible absorption of the genuine ﬁeld;

”conventional” for the genuine minus the zero point;
”stochastic” for a stochastic zero point ﬁeld.

For a long time, the sensitivity of the detectors of light was bad so that
the zero point ﬁeld is neglected in the conventional classical electrodynamics;
in modern optics, the ”genuine ﬁeld” ˆE is the sum of the ”conventional ﬁeld”
E and the zero point ﬁeld E0; consequently the sensitivity of the photosensors
is revisited in section 2. A consequence is the correct classical computation of
fourth order interferences in section 3.

The semiclassical emission or absorption is modelled by an excitation of a
mono- or polyatomic molecule by an electromagnetic ﬁeld up to a barrier be-
tween the two involved relative minimums of potential W1 and W2; if the initial
and ﬁnal states are stationary |W2 − W1| = hν 1 . But our macroscopic experi-
ments usually use nearly plane modes while the molecules emit light generally
through dipoles or quadrupoles. Quantum mechanics transforms the geometry
of the waves using the ”reduction of the wave packet”. Section 4 gives the
classical reduction of the wave packet.

”Stochastic electrodynamics” is often used to avoid confusing the genuine
with the conventional classical electrodynamics. Section 5 shows that this name
is not very convenient because while the zero point ﬁeld is stochastic far from the
sources and the absorbers, this ﬁeld is shaped by the sources and the absorbers.
The semi-classical theory is often preferred to quantum electrodynamics in
nonlinear optics because it appears simpler and more concrete. The equiva-
lence of the results provided by both theories, showed by Marshall & Santos
[4] disappears only if the zero point ﬁeld is neglected. As an example, section

1As a monochromatic function is physically meaningless, we should write R

e(ν)dν
ν

= h,

with |W2 − W1| = R e(ν)dν

2

6 describes a light matter interaction whole ignorance by the astrophysicists
seems a consequence of the diﬃcult use of quantum electrodynamics, while the
right classical electrodynamics leads easily to a result which could avoid to look
for astonishing objects in the universe.

2 Absorption and detection.

Usually, we write that the intensity absorbed or detected by a photocell is
proportional to the square of the amplitude of the conventional electric ﬁeld,
this square being proportional to the conventional ﬂux of electromagnetic energy.
This supposes that there is no coherence between the conventional ﬁeld and the
zero point ﬁeld, an assumption which is false because a spontaneous emission is
an ampliﬁcation of a mode of the zero point ﬁeld (see section 4). The equations
of absorption must fulﬁl two conditions: i) be written using only genuine ﬁelds
(which may be zero point ﬁelds); ii) preserve the zero point ﬁeld in the average.
As a zero point ﬁeld included in the genuine ﬁeld is absorbed, an equivalent ﬁeld
must be reemitted (or the genuine ﬁeld is attenuated down to the zero point
ﬁeld). Remark that in the dark, cold, good photocells generate a noise signal
which seems produced by the ﬂuctuations of the zero point ﬁeld.
The net available energy on a receiver is proportional to

ˆE2 − E2

0 = (βE0)2 − E2

0 = 2(β − 1)E2

0 + ((β − 1)E0)2.

(1)

Usually E2
0 is neglected, the usual rule is got; on the contrary, supposing that β
is nearly one, ((β − 1)E0)2 may be neglected; for a given optical conﬁguration,
the time- average of the zero point amplitude is constant, so that the detected
signal is proportional to (β − 1)E0 that is to the amplitude of the conventional
ﬁeld, with E0 as reference of phase. With an incoherent source, the phase factor
ﬂuctuates: without a sophisticated detection nothing appears.

3 Fourth order interferences.

A sophisticated detection is performed in the fourth order interference experi-
ments with photon counting: two elementary measurements are done while the
phase is constant (see, for instance, [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]). The result of these experi-
ments is easily got qualitatively using the classical rules [10], but the contrast of
the computed fringes is lower than shown by the experiments. In the simplest
experiment [6] two small photoelectric cells are put in the interference fringes
produced by two point sources; the interferences are not visible because they
depend on the fast changing diﬀerence of phase φ of the modes of the zero point
ﬁeld ampliﬁed by the sources. The sources are weak; the signal is the correlation
of the counts of the cells.

Distinguishing the photoelectric cells by an index j equal to 1 or 2, set δj
the diﬀerence of paths for the light received by the cells. The amplitude of
the conventional ﬁeld received by a cell is proportional to cos(πδj /λ + φ/2),

3

so that, assuming the linearity in the conventional ﬁeld, the probability of a
simultaneous detection is proportional to

cos(

+

) cos(

+

).

πδ1
λ

φ
2

πδ2
λ

φ
2

(2)

The mean value of this probability got by an integration over φ is zero for
δ1 − δ2 = λ/2, so that the visibility has the right value 1. Assuming the usual
response of the cells proportional to the square of the conventional ﬁeld, the
visibility would have the wrong value 1/2 [11].

4 Classical reduction of the wave packet.

The reduction of the wave packet breaks the symmetry of the waves, transform-
ing, in particular, a local wave into a beam, for instance a dipolar wave into a
plane wave.

The polarisation of a transparent matter by a light beam may be observed
by a variation of the energy levels, or detecting Kerr eﬀect,...Thus the beginning
of a pulse of light must transfer energy to matter, and this energy is recovered
in its tail (except for a small incoherent Rayleigh scattering). Thus, in the tail,
the ﬁeld is ampliﬁed, although there is no transition, no inversion of population,
the polarisation mixing only slightly the initial state of the molecules with other
states. This power of ampliﬁcation applies not only to the exciting mode, so that
many modes, usually initially at the zero point, are ampliﬁed, later reabsorbed
in the medium : there is an dynamical equilibrium between the exciting ﬁeld,
the other modes and the polarisation of the molecules. The modes which are
excited are dipolar or quadrupolar, they radiate far only the small incoherent
Rayleigh ﬁeld : they may be qualiﬁed ”local”. On the contrary, the interactions
of the light pulse are strong because they are coherent.

As the local modes are ampliﬁed, the strongest and longest ﬂuctuations of
their ﬁeld may be able to excite molecules up to a barrier, such that an absorb-
ing transition occurs; the mean energy of the local ﬁeld, then of the molecules is
decreased, the ampliﬁcation tail of the pulse is decreased, the medium has ab-
sorbed the light. In a laser, a similar process explains the coherent ampliﬁcation
by incoherently pumped molecules.

5 Is the zero point ﬁeld stochastic ?

Whichever their far or close origin, the electromagnetic ﬁelds are mixed, so that
splitting the electromagnetic ﬁeld into the zero point ﬁeld and the conventional
ﬁeld is physically meaningless; this splitting is an anticipation of the interaction
of the ﬁeld with a receiver able to extract from the mode all available energy.
A pure, stochastic zero point ﬁeld exists only far from sources, in the dark,
coming from many far incoherent sources. On the contrary, the ﬁeld emitted by
a molecule which radiates or absorbs energy is, near the molecule, mostly the

4

ﬁeld of an oscillating dipole or quadrupole; even if an absorption re-establishes
the mean value of the zero point ﬁeld, the ﬁeld is shaped by the molecule
near it, not stochastic. Using the results of the previous section, this property
extends to the modes of collimated beams; if a sheet of dark glass reduces the
conventional intensity of a beam to zero, the phase of the beam remains written
in the remaining zero point ﬁeld.

A macroscopic consequence of the structuring of the zero point ﬁeld by
matter is observed in the Casimir eﬀect [12]: long wavelengths are rejected from
inside two parallel plates, so that a lower pressure of radiation attracts the
plates.

The emission of a ﬁeld during the absorption of a quantum of energy is not
instantaneous; during this emission and a short time after it, the probability for
an extraordinarily strong and long ﬂuctuation of the ﬁeld is lowered, so that a
sub-poissonian photon statistic appears; neglecting the space-time structuring
of the ﬁeld leads to a poissonian statistic [13, 14].

Squeezing is also an elementary observation of a non-stochastic zero point

ﬁeld.

6 Low level ”Impulsive Stimulated Raman Scat-

tering” (ISRS).

Quantum electrodynamics leads to consider the photon not only as an amount of
energy but as a particle too; although this last concept is sometimes considered
as dangerous and rejected [15], this concept led the astrophysicists to reject light-
matter interactions as an alternative to the Doppler eﬀect to explain observed
redshifts of far objects. It is a rejection of coherent interactions.

ISRS, known since 1968 [16] is now commonly used [17, 18].

It is not a
simple Raman scattering, but a parametric eﬀect, combination of two space-
coherent Raman scattering, so that the state of the interacting molecules is not
changed. The hot 2 exciting beam and its scattered beams interfere into a single
frequency, redshifted, beam; the cold beam is blueshifted.

ISRS is obtained using ultrashort light pulses, that is ”pulses shorter than
all relevant time constants” [19], usually femtosecond laser pulses. As it has no
intensity threshold it works with the light pulses which make the ordinary inco-
herent light. The relevant time constants in a gas may be adapted to incoherent
light :

i) to avoid that the collisions destroy the coherence of the excitation of the

molecules, the pressure must be very low;

ii) to obtain an interference of the scattered and incident lights into a single
frequency light, the period which corresponds to the virtual Raman transition
must be larger than the length of the impulsions. The molecules must have
transitions in the radiofrequencies, generally hyperﬁne transitions.

2The temperature of a spectral line is deduced from Planck’s laws

5

Decreasing the intensity of the beams down to a value for which ˆE is not
much higher than E0, the Raman scattered conventional amplitude A propor-
tional to the intensity writes

A ∝ ˆE2 − E2

0 = (βE0)2 − E2

0 = 2(β − 1)E2

0 + ((β − 1)E0)2.

(3)

The last term may be neglected, the ﬁrst, proportional to the incident amplitude,
represents the usual spontaneous coherent Raman amplitude; the interference
reduces the incident and scattered wave vectors into a single wave vector, so
that the scattered light is not on a cone as in usual laser coherent Raman
experiments.

The Universe, provides good experimental conditions for a confusion of this
interaction with a Doppler eﬀect: the paths are long and the pressures often low,
a lot of mono- or polyatomic molecules, perturbed by Zeeman eﬀect which are
observed have hyperﬁne structures. The absorption spectra of the molecules
which are destroyed at their ﬁrst collision, H+
2 for instance cannot be seen
because the redshift of their absorption spectra widens, thus weakens, their
lines.

Similarly, all optical eﬀects become linear at low light levels.

7 Conclusion.

The zero point ﬁeld, often, improperly, qualiﬁed ”stochastic” is a trivial com-
ponent of the genuine classical electromagnetic ﬁeld. An artiﬁcial subtraction
of this ﬁeld leads to the conventional classical electromagnetism, breaking the
equivalence of the classical and quantum electrodynamics.

Many authors tried to demonstrate that the semi-classical theory is not
correct at low light levels; their demonstrations use the conventional classical
electrodynamics which is an approximation of the genuine classical electrody-
namics; this approximation fails at low light levels.

Quantum and classical electrodynamics have their speciﬁc advantages : Quan-
tum electrodynamics provides ready to use properties or postulates, but a com-
mon improper use of some of its concepts, the photon for instance, leads to
wrong conclusions [15]; classical electrodynamics is more intuitive, but it re-
quires often more complicated demonstrations. It is so common and useful to
use both theories than some physicists think that the zero point ﬁeld is intro-
duced by quantum electrodynamics !

The teachers should replace unnecessarily approximate rules, for instance

the ﬁrst Planck’s law, by the rigorous rules.

References

[1] Planck, M., 1911, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges, 13, 138

[2] Nernst, W., 1916, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges, 18, 83

6

[3] Power, E. A., 1966, Am. J. Phys. 34 516

[4] Marshall, T. W. & E. Santos, 1988 Found. Phys, 18 185; 1989, Phys. Rev.

A 39, 6271

Lett. ,23, 880

[5] Clauser J. F. , Horne M. A. , Shimony A. & Holt R. A. , 1969, Phys. Rev.

[6] Gosh R. & Mandel L. , 1987, Phys. Rev. Lett. ,59, 1903

[7] Ou Z. Y. & Mandel L. , 1988, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 61, 54

[8] Ou Z. Y. & Mandel L. , 1990, J. Opt. Soc. Am. , 7, 2127

[9] Kiess T. E. , Shih Y. H. , Sergienko A. V. & Alley C. O. , 1993, Phys. Rev.

Lett. , 71, 3893

[10] Moret-Bailly J. , 1994, J. Optics, 25, 263

[11] Mandel L, 1983, Phys. Rev. 28, 929

[12] Casimir, H. B. G., 1948, Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wet., 51, 793

[13] Short R. & Mandel L. 1983, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 384

[14] Glauber R. J. 1966. in Physics of Quantum Electronics, Kelley P. L. et al.

ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 788

[15] Lamb W. E. Jr., 1995, Appl. Phys., B60, 77

[16] Giordmaine, J. A. , M. A. Duguay & J. W.Hansen, 1968, IEEE J. Quantum

[17] Yan Y.-X., Gamble E. B. Jr. & Nelson K. A. , 1985, J. Chem Phys. 83,

Electron., 4, 252

5391

[18] Nelson K. A. & Fayer M. D., 1980, J. Chem. Phys 72, 5202

[19] Lamb, G. L. Jr., 1971, Rev. Mod.Phys 43 , 99

[20] Moret-Bailly J. 1998, Quantum and Semiclassical Optics 10, L35

[21] Moret-Bailly J. 2001, J. Quantit. Spectr. & Radiative Ttransfer 68, 575

7

