2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The zero point ﬁeld and the reduction of the
wave packet in semiclassical electrodynamics.

Jacques Moret-Bailly ∗

February 21, 2014

Abstract

In the classical theory, an electromagnetic ﬁeld obeying Maxwell’s
equations cannot be absorbed quickly by matter, so that it remains a
zero point ﬁeld. Splitting the total, genuine electromagnetic ﬁeld into the
sum of a conventional ﬁeld and a zero point ﬁeld is physically meaningless
until a receiver attenuates the genuine ﬁeld down to the zero point ﬁeld,
or studying the ampliﬁcation of the zero point ﬁeld by a source.

In classical optics all optical eﬀects must be written using the genuine
ﬁeld, so that at low light levels the nonlinear eﬀects become linear in
relation to the conventional ﬁeld. The result of the interpretation of all
observations, even at low light levels, is exactly the same in quantum
electrodynamics and in the semi- classical theory.

The zero point ﬁeld is stochastic only far from the sources and the
receivers; elsewhere, it is shaped by matter, it may be studied through
ﬁelds visible before an absorption or after an ampliﬁcation.

A classical study of the “reduction of the wave packet”extends the
domain of equivalence of the classical and quantum zero point ﬁeld; using
both interpretations of this ﬁeld makes the results more reliable, because
the traps are diﬀerent.

pacs42.25Bs, 42.50Gy

1 Introduction.

Many physicists think that the zero point ﬁeld is introduced by quantum elec-
trodynamics (QED); historically, its knowledge is anterior to QED, and the
computation of its mean amplitude by Planck [1] and Nernst [2] allowed the
identiﬁcation of the energy of the optical modes with the energy of quantum
harmonic oscillators, which is the starting point of QED.

The interpretation of the zero point ﬁeld is, however, fundamentally diﬀerent
in the classical theory and in QED: in the classical theory, the electromagnetic
ﬁeld is, in all points, a physical quantity and any solution of Maxwell’s equations
∗Laboratoire de physique, Universit de Bourgogne, BP 47870, F-21078 Dijon cedex, France.

email : Jacques.Moret-Bailly@u-bourgogne.fr

1

represents precisely an optical mode; in QED, the electromagnetic ﬁeld is a
mathematical tool substituted to the wave function of the photon, and the
postulate “reduction of the wave packet”changes the mode corresponding to a
photon, thus the electromagnetic ﬁeld. This fundamental diﬀerence is generally
not clearly set, even in the best books (Milonni [3]).

For a practical use, a confusion between the quantum and classical zero point
ﬁelds is not important because as long as the reduction of the wave packet is
not used, the equations are exactly the same; this similitude was well studied
by Marshall and Santos [4] and previous authors; our aim is seeking after an
extension of their work to other optical problems, ﬁnding, in particular, a clas-
sical equivalent to the reduction of the wave packet, so that it becomes possible
to use either interpretation in all problems.

The choice between the classical and QED interpretations depends on the
spirit of the physicist. Using the interpretations of both the classical (or semi-
classical) and quantum electromagnetic theories increases the reliability of the
explanations, each theory having its speciﬁc advantages and traps; QED intro-
duces more compact computations, more results use it; classical electrodynamics
requires more complicated computations, but it seems next to the experiments;
as QED is more used than the classical theory, its traps appear more in the
literature :

Confusing the two interpretations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, thus using
wrongly the postulate “reduction of the wave packet”, the best specialists of
the quantum theory tried to discourage Townes from discovering the maser [5].
To avoid such errors Lamb and al. [6, 7] propose to reject the photon; in despite
of their aﬃrmation, is seems a de facto rejection of quantum electrodynamics.
For some physicists QED is useless in high ﬁeld experiments: “The subtle
interplay between real and imaginary parts of the complex linear and nonlinear
susceptibilities follows quite naturally from the semiclassical treatment. How
can this information be obtained from a theory in which the ﬁelds are quantiﬁed
? [...] The semiclassical theory which is used in this monograph will describe
all situations correctly in a much simpler fashion”(Bloembergen [8]).

To describe correctly the semiclassical theory, we qualify the electromagnetic

ﬁeld as follows :

noted

E;
b

-“genuine”for the total electromagnetic ﬁeld, with the genuine electric ﬁeld

“zero point”for the ﬁeld which remains after the largest, coherent, physically

possible absorption of the genuine ﬁeld; notation: E0;

“conventional”for the genuine minus the zero point; as it is the commonly

considered ﬁeld, the conventional electric ﬁeld will be simply written E;

“stochastic”for a stochastic zero point ﬁeld.

Section 2 reminds the origin and properties of the classical ﬁelds, in partic-

ular the zero point ﬁelds.

the electromagnetic ﬁeld.

Section 3 gives the correct relation between the signal of a photoreceiver and

2

Section 4 applies the result of section 3 to the computation of the fourth

Section 5 proposes a classical equivalent of the postulate “reduction of the

order interferences.

wave packet”.

2 Recall of the properties of the classical elec-

tromagnetic ﬁeld.

As Maxwell’s equations are linear in the vacuum, a linear combination of modes
is a solution; with given limiting conditions, complete sets of modes allow to
develop any mode. The energy of a mode is ﬁnite if its time and space ex-
tensions are limited; supposing that the mode is alone in the space, its energy
is: W = R w(ν)dν where w(ν) is the energy 1
2 R (ǫ0E2 + µ0H 2)dv relative to
the ﬁelds whose frequencies are between ν and ν + dν, at any instant. The
usual normalisation is such that R w(ν)dν
ν = h. Two modes are orthogonal if the
energy of their sum is the sum of their energies.

A punctual source of electromagnetic ﬁeld in a point O is generally devel-
oped linearly using the derivatives of the three-dimensional Dirac’s distribution
δO; for instance, the Oz oriented dipole of a molecule is proportional to the
distribution ∂zδO. The ﬁelds radiated by these multipoles at the point source
O are mathematically singular in O, physically it is an approximation. These
ﬁelds are often, improperly qualiﬁed “strictly spherical”although they are not
invariant by a rotation around any axis Ou; the reason is that the ﬁelds on two
spheres of centre O have the same dependence on the Euler angles while it is
not the case for a beam focussed in O which diﬀracts.

A multipole emits a spherical ﬁeld S+

−
O obtained
O and absorbs the ﬁeld S
−
by a time-inversion. Subtracting the problems, we get SO = S+
O and
a cancellation of the multipoles; it is the problem of a strictly spherical wave
propagating through its punctual focus. This equivalence simpliﬁes the demon-
strations; studying a long pulse of light after its emission by a multipole, we
may suppose that the pulse was not emitted by the dipole, but produced by the
evolution of −S

O − S

−
O into S+
O .

The ﬁeld SO is absorbed if it is completely cancelled by an opposite ﬁeld;
this opposite ﬁeld cannot be a linear combination of a ﬁnite number of ﬁelds
SA, SB, SC... equivalent to dipoles placed in points A, B, C... diﬀerent of O,
because these ﬁelds are regular in O. Thus the absorption of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld radiated by a point source requires an inﬁnity of point absorbers, the residual
ﬁeld constitutes the zero point ﬁeld. The building of the zero point ﬁeld shows
that it is an ordinary ﬁeld.

This computation shows that far from sources, the zero point ﬁeld E0 is gen-
erated by a large number of sources supposed incoherent, so that it is stochastic,
it is characterised by its mean amplitude. If an atom emits a photon (that is, in
the classical theory, a wave corresponding to an energy hν), the radiated ﬁeld,
large near the atom, is not immediately compensated by propagation, diﬀusion

3

or absorption; thus the ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld are shaped by next or coherent
sources, so that “stochastic”is not a sure property of the zero point ﬁeld.

A macroscopic consequence of the structuring of the zero point ﬁeld by
matter is observed in the Casimir eﬀect [9]: long wavelengths are rejected from
inside two parallel plates, so that a lower pressure of radiation attracts the
plates.

Following Einstein, the stimulated ampliﬁcation of a mode by a source de-
pends only on the amplitude of the true, genuine incident ﬁeld
E; the con-
b
E − E0 is a purely mathematical object, it has no
ventional, usual ﬁeld E =
b
physical, individual existence.

Remark that the ﬁeld radiated by a dipole is the same for an emission, a
refraction or an absorption; in the last case the dipolar ﬁeld cancels a part of an
external ﬁeld; the equality of Einstein’s B coeﬃcients for stimulated emission
and absorption (demonstrated by thermodynamics) appears natural. The ab-
sorption of light is considered now as a decrease of the energy in a mode down to
the zero point energy, the emission is an ampliﬁcation of the energy in a mode;
thus all systems are connected at least by the zero point ﬁeld, even in classical
physics isolated systems do not exist.

The oscillating dipole is a particular system of moving charges; any moving
electron radiates a ﬁeld, but if it belongs to a stationary system the interference
of the radiated ﬁeld with the zero point ﬁeld does not change the energy of this
last ﬁeld, in the average. Sommerfeld’s electron does not fall on the proton, but
the ﬂuctuations of its interaction with the zero point ﬁeld produce the Lamb
shift [10, 3].

Remark that the existence of the zero point ﬁeld depends on the emission of
an electromagnetic ﬁeld by charged particles; if the charged particles are unable
to emit a very high frequency wave, there is no zero point for high frequencies,
no UV divergence.

Planck’s constant h connects the density of zero point energy in the universe

to microphysics; is h a cosmological or a microphysical constant?

Objections to the previous mathematical descriptions may be set:
The dipoles introduced in spectroscopy are not punctual; but their dimen-
sions are supposed small in comparison with their distances, so that the conclu-
sion remains approximately valid: the absorption of the ﬁeld radiated by a small
source requires a lot of small absorbers, a long time during which it remains a
part of the ﬁeld radiated by the dipole.

3 Absorption and detection.

The signal of a photoelectric cell cannot be a function of the conventional ﬁeld E
which has no physical existence; for a long time, the sensitivity of the detectors
of light was bad so that the zero point ﬁeld could be neglected and the genuine
ﬁeld

E could be replaced by the conventional ﬁeld
b

A light receiver is excited by an attenuation of the energy of a mode from a
value higher than hν/2 to nearly hν/2. Generally this is possible if the mode

4

was ampliﬁed by a source, but in the dark, cold, good photocells generate a
noise signal which seems produced by the particularly large ﬂuctuations of the
zero point ﬁeld.

The net available energy on a receiver is proportional to the diﬀerence be-

tween the input and output energies in the exciting mode:

E2 − E2
b

0 = (βE0)2 − E2

0 = 2(β − 1)E2

0 + ((β − 1)E0)2.

(1)

Usually E2
0 is much smaller than (βE0)2, it is neglected, the usual rule is got; on
the contrary, supposing that β is nearly one, ((β − 1)E0)2 may be neglected; for
a given optical conﬁguration, the time- average of the zero point amplitude is
constant, so that the detected signal is proportional to (β − 1)E0 that is to the
amplitude of the conventional ﬁeld, with the phase of E0. With an incoherent
source, the phase factor ﬂuctuates: without a sophisticated detection nothing
appears.

The classical emission or absorption is modelled by an excitation of a mono-
or polyatomic molecule by an electromagnetic ﬁeld up to a barrier between the
two involved relative minimums of potential u1 and u2; if the initial and ﬁnal
states are stationary |u2 − u1| = hν . But our macroscopic experiments usually
use nearly plane modes while the molecules emit light generally through dipoles
or quadrupoles. Quantum mechanics transforms the geometry of the waves
using the “reduction of the wave packet”. Section 5 gives the classical reduction
of the wave packet.

4 Fourth order interferences.

A sophisticated detection is performed in the fourth order interference experi-
ments with photon counting: two elementary measurements are done while the
phase is constant (see, for instance, [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]). The result of these
experiments is easily got qualitatively using the conventional rules [16], but the
contrast of the computed fringes is lower than shown by the experiments. In the
simplest experiment [12] two small photoelectric cells are put in the interference
fringes produced by two point sources; the interferences are not visible because
they depend on the fast changing diﬀerence of phase φ of the modes of the zero
point ﬁeld ampliﬁed by the sources. The sources are weak; the signal is the
correlation of the counts of the cells.

Distinguishing the photoelectric cells by an index j equal to 1 or 2, set δj
the diﬀerence of paths for the light received by the cells. The amplitude of
the conventional ﬁeld received by a cell is proportional to cos(πδj /λ + φ/2),
so that, assuming the linearity in the conventional ﬁeld, the probability of a
simultaneous detection is proportional to

cos(

+

) cos(

+

).

πδ1
λ

φ
2

πδ2
λ

φ
2

(2)

The mean value of this probability got by an integration over φ is zero for
δ1 − δ2 = λ/2, so that the visibility has the right value 1. Assuming the usual

5

response of the cells proportional to the square of the conventional ﬁeld, the
visibility would have the wrong value 1/2 [17]. Equation 2 may be found directly
computing the interference of the zero point modes ampliﬁed by the sources.

5 Classical reduction of the wave packet.

The reduction of the wave packet breaks the symmetry of the waves, transform-
ing, in particular, a local wave into a beam, for instance a spherical dipolar wave
into a plane wave.

The polarisation of a transparent matter by a light beam may be observed
by a variation of the energy levels, or detecting Kerr eﬀect,...Thus the beginning
of a pulse of light must transfer energy to matter, and this energy is recovered
in the tail of the pulse (except for a small incoherent Rayleigh scattering). In
the tail, the ﬁeld is ampliﬁed, although there is no transition, no inversion of
population, the polarisation mixing only slightly the initial state of the molecules
with other states. This power of ampliﬁcation applies not only to the exciting
mode, so that many modes, usually initially at the zero point, are ampliﬁed,
later reabsorbed in the medium : there is an dynamical equilibrium between
the exciting ﬁeld, the other modes and the polarisation of the molecules. The
modes which are excited are dipolar or quadrupolar, they radiate far only the
small incoherent Rayleigh ﬁeld : they may be qualiﬁed “local”. On the contrary,
the interactions with the light pulse are strong because they are coherent.

As the local modes are ampliﬁed, the strongest and longest ﬂuctuations
of their ﬁeld may be able to excite molecules up to a barrier, such that an
absorbing transition occurs; the mean energy of the local ﬁeld, then of the
molecules, is decreased, the ampliﬁcation of the tail of the pulse is decreased,
the medium has absorbed the light. In a laser, a similar process explains the
coherent ampliﬁcation by incoherently pumped molecules.

The emission of a ﬁeld during the absorption of a quantum of energy is not
instantaneous; during this emission and a short time after it, the probability for
a strong and long ﬂuctuation of the ﬁeld is lowered, so that a sub-poissonian
photon statistic appears; neglecting the space-time structuring of the ﬁeld leads
to the poissonian statistic [18, 19].

6 Low level “Impulsive Stimulated Raman Scat-

tering”(ISRS).

Quantum electrodynamics leads to consider the photon not only as an amount of
energy but as a particle too; although this last concept is sometimes considered
as dangerous and rejected [6], this concept led the astrophysicists to reject light-
matter interactions as an alternative to the Doppler eﬀect to explain observed
redshifts of far objects. It is a rejection of coherent interactions.

ISRS, known since 1968 [20] is now commonly used [21, 22].

It is not a
simple Raman scattering, but a parametric eﬀect, combination of two space-

6

coherent Raman scatterings, so that the state of the interacting molecules is not
changed. The hot 1 exciting beam and its scattered beams interfere into a single
frequency, redshifted, beam; the cold beam is blueshifted.

ISRS is obtained using ultrashort light pulses, that is “pulses shorter than
all relevant time constants”[23], usually femtosecond laser pulses. As it has no
intensity threshold it works with the light pulses which make the ordinary inco-
herent light. The relevant time constants in a gas may be adapted to incoherent
light :

i) to avoid that the collisions destroy the coherence of the excitation of the

molecules during the pulses, the pressure must be very low;

ii) to obtain an interference of the scattered and incident lights into a single
frequency light, the period which corresponds to the virtual Raman transition
must be larger than the length of the impulsions. The molecules must have
transitions in the radiofrequencies, generally hyperﬁne transitions.

Using powerful pulses, ISRS is nonlinear, the genuine amplitude of the scat-
tered light is proportional to the square of the exciting genuine amplitude. De-
E is not much
creasing the intensity of the beams down to a value for which
b
higher than E0, the Raman scattered conventional amplitude A writes

A ∝

E2 − E2
b

0 = (βE0)2 − E2

0 = 2(β − 1)E2

0 + ((β − 1)E0)2.

(3)

The last term may be neglected, the ﬁrst, proportional to the incident amplitude,
represents the usual spontaneous coherent Raman amplitude; using wide beams
the scattered light is not diﬀracted on a cone as in usual laser coherent Raman
experiments. As the phase shift between the incident and scattered frequencies
is low during a pulse, these frequencies interfere into a single frequency shifted
in proportion of the amplitudes. The Universe, provides good experimental
conditions for a confusion of this interaction with a Doppler eﬀect: the paths
are long and the pressures often low, a lot of observed polyatomic molecules or
atoms perturbed by Zeeman eﬀect have hyperﬁne structures. The absorption
spectra of the molecules which are destroyed at their ﬁrst collision, H+
2 for
instance cannot be seen because the redshift simultaneous with the absorption
of their spectra widens, thus weakens, their lines.

Similarly, all optical eﬀects without intensity threshold become linear at low

light levels.

7 Conclusion.

The electromagnetic ﬁelds, in particular the zero point ﬁeld, often, improp-
erly qualiﬁed “stochastic”, obeys the same equations in quantum and classical
theories. Both, very diﬀerent interpretations, are useful, having their speciﬁc
advantages : Quantum electrodynamics provides ready to use properties or
postulates, but a common improper use of some of its concepts, the photon

1The temperature of a spectral line is deduced from Planck’s laws

7

for instance, leads to wrong conclusions [6]; classical electrodynamics is more
intuitive, but it requires often more complicated demonstrations.

An isolated system cannot exist in classical optics because the electromag-
netic ﬁelds expand everywhere, although they are ampliﬁed or attenuated by
matter. Is Planck’s constant which measures the mean amplitude of the zero
point ﬁeld cosmological or microphysical?

The teachers should point the approximation made neglecting the zero point
ﬁeld and replace unnecessarily approximate rules, for instance the ﬁrst Planck’s
law, by the rigorous rules.

References

[1] Planck, M., 1911, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges, 13, 138

[2] Nernst, W., 1916, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges, 18, 83

[3] Milonni P. W. The quantum vacuum Academic Press (1992)

[4] Marshall, T. W. & E. Santos, 1988 Found. Phys, 18 185; 1989, Phys. Rev.

A 39, 6271

[5] Townes C. H. , 1999, Opto & laser Europe 69 20.

[6] Lamb W. E. Jr., 1995, Appl. Phys., B60, 77

[7] Lamb W. E. Jr., W. P. Schleich, M. O. Scully, C. H. Townes, 1999, Rev.

Mod. Phys., 71, S263

[8] Bloembergen N 1982 in Nonlinear optics Benjamin, New York, 2-8.

[9] Casimir, H. B. G., 1948, Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wet., 51, 793

[10] Power, E. A., 1966, Am. J. Phys. 34 516

[11] Clauser J. F. , Horne M. A. , Shimony A. & Holt R. A. , 1969, Phys. Rev.

Lett. ,23, 880

[12] Gosh R. & Mandel L. , 1987, Phys. Rev. Lett. ,59, 1903

[13] Ou Z. Y. & Mandel L. , 1988, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 61, 54

[14] Ou Z. Y. & Mandel L. , 1990, J. Opt. Soc. Am. , 7, 2127

[15] Kiess T. E. , Shih Y. H. , Sergienko A. V. & Alley C. O. , 1993, Phys. Rev.

Lett. , 71, 3893

[16] Moret-Bailly J. , 1994, J. Optics, 25, 263

[17] Mandel L, 1983, Phys. Rev. 28, 929

[18] Short R. & Mandel L. 1983, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 384

8

[19] Glauber R. J. 1966. in Physics of Quantum Electronics, Kelley P. L. et al.

ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 788

[20] Giordmaine, J. A. , M. A. Duguay & J. W.Hansen, 1968, IEEE J. Quantum

[21] Yan Y.-X., Gamble E. B. Jr. & Nelson K. A. , 1985, J. Chem Phys. 83,

Electron., 4, 252

5391

[22] Nelson K. A. & Fayer M. D., 1980, J. Chem. Phys 72, 5202

[23] Lamb, G. L. Jr., 1971, Rev. Mod.Phys 43 , 99

[24] Moret-Bailly J. 1998, Quantum and Semiclassical Optics 10, L35

[25] Moret-Bailly J. 2001, J. Quantit. Spectr. & Radiative Ttransfer 68, 575

9

