2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CHAOTIC LIGHT: A THEORY OF ASYMMETRIC RESONANT
CAVITIES

JENS U. N ¨OCKEL1 AND A. DOUGLAS STONE
Department of Applied Physics and Physics, Yale University
P. O. Box 8284, New Haven Connecticut 06520-8284 2

ABSTRACT
Spherical and cylindrical dielectric cavities support high Q whispering gallery modes
due to total internal reﬂection of the trapped light. When such a cavity is deformed
smoothly the ray dynamics of these modes becomes chaotic in a manner determined
by the KAM theory of classical hamiltonian dynamics. The universal properties of
the ray dynamics predicted by KAM theory allow a general understanding of the
whispering gallery modes of such asymmetric resonant cavities (ARCs). This theory
combined with simulations of the non-linear map describing the ray motion provides
the basis for a ray-optics model of the Q-spoiling of these whispering gallery modes
for large deformations (greater than 1% of the radius). The model predicts a sharp
onset as a function of deformation for signiﬁcant Q-spoiling of these modes and
highly directional emission above this threshold. Solution of the wave equation for
typical whispering gallery modes conﬁrms the qualitative behavior predicted by the
ray-optics model even when the cavity is only a few times the resonant wavelength.
The model explains for the ﬁrst time the lasing intensity proﬁle of highly deformed
lasing droplets.

1Current address: Department of Physics, University of Oregon, 1371 E 13th Avenue, Eugene,

2 Published in Optical Processes in Microcavities, edited by R.K.Chang and A.J.Campillo (World

OR 97403

Scientiﬁc Publishers, 1996)

1.

Introduction

1.1. The Asymmetric Resonant Cavity (ARC)

Optical processes in microcavities are currently under intensive study [1] with several
goals: to design novel microlasers [2, 3, 4] and other optical devices [5], to study
non-linear optical eﬀects [6], and to investigate the interaction of atoms with single
cavity modes [7]. The cavities employed in these investigations can be divided into
two categories: Fabry-Perot type cavities of various designs, and dielectric cavities
(spheres or cylinders) in which the surface of the dielectric conﬁnes certain modes of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld by total internal reﬂection. In the dielectric cavities these
high-Q modes are the “whispering gallery” (WG) modes in which light rays circulate
just inside dielectric surface, propagating almost tangent to it [8]. The research
described below pertains exclusively to the whispering gallery modes of dielectric
cavities. For obvious geometric reasons such high-Q modes are only possible when at
least one cross-section of the cavity is bounded by a convex curve (i.e. a curve which
has positive curvature everywhere) as is the case for a cylinder and a sphere. However
we are not primarily concerned here with the WG modes of ideal dielectric spheres or
cylinders but instead with the WG modes of a new class of resonant cavities which are
created by deformations of these ideal symmetric dielectric cavities. The deformations
considered can be quite large, ranging from 1-50% of the undeformed radius; the
crucial assumption is that they maintain the convexity of the cavities. While the WG
modes of a spherical or cylindrical cavity can be treated analytically and the eﬀect of
small deformations included by perturbation theory [9], the deformations we consider
are so large that the modes of the deformed cavities are not perturbatively related
to those of the ideal cavity. Hence we shall refer to the class of deformed cavities we
study as asymmetric resonant cavities (ARCs) since their properties are not derivable
from those of the symmetric cavities (in any simple manner). Because the modes of
ARCs are not simply related to those of symmetric cavities it is not immediately
obvious that high-Q WG modes still exist in such structures; however we will show
below that general principles of non-linear dynamics imply that under rather general
conditions such modes exist if the cavity surface remains convex.

1.2. ARCs and Quantum Chaos

Because ARCs strongly violate at least one spatial symmetry of the undeformed cav-
ity, the wave equation describing their modes or resonances is not separable in at
least two of the three spatial dimensions and the solutions are not any of the familiar
special functions of mathematical physics [10]. Instead the wave equation can only
be solved numerically, e.g. by the T-matrix method [11] or by wavefunction matching
techniques [12] of the type we use in subsection 7.2 below. It is for this reason that one
does not ﬁnd the properties of such cavities described in advanced optics textbooks or
even in the research literature. Furthermore, brute force solution of the wave equation

for a few modes in a given geometry usually does not yield much physical insight into
the general properties of ARCs. However the properties of wave-equations with re-
duced or zero spatial symmetry have been extensively studied during the past decade
in another context, the attempt to understand the quantum mechanics of systems
which have either partially or fully chaotic classical dynamics. This ﬁeld of inquiry is
widely referred to by the unfortunate descriptor “quantum chaos”, although it is now
generally agreed that there exists no quantum analogue of the exponential sensitivity
to initial conditions which is the hallmark of classical chaos. Considerable insight into
such problems has been obtained using both semiclassical and statistical arguments.
The semiclassical theory pioneered by Gutzwiller [13] diﬀers substantially from the
familiar Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization due to the chaotic nature of the classical or-
bits in such systems. The main applications of these ideas have been in atomic and
solid-state physics (see for example Ref. 14) where detailed quantitative agreement
between theory and experiment has been achieved in a number of cases. In each case
the theoretical work has begun from an understanding of the chaotic classical me-
chanics. In perhaps the best-studied system, the hydrogen atom subjected to intense
microwave radiation, many of the puzzling features of the variation of the ionization
threshold with frequency and intensity can be understood on a wholly classical basis,
by locating the transition point to (global) classical chaos [15]. The theory we develop
below is similar to this work in spirit, although substantially diﬀerent in detail [16].
In particular, in the present work we deal with a time-independent energy-conserving
dynamical system whose transition to chaos is described by the Kolmogorov-Arnol’d-
Moser (KAM) theory of non-linear dynamics. Although it is not an exaggeration to
term this theory one of the highest achievements of modern mathematical physics,
it has had very few direct applications to experimental systems; we believe that this
fact should lend interest to the experimental study of ARCs. The essential idea of
the KAM theory and its application to ARCs will be explained in detail in section 3
below.

1.3. Applications of ARCs

Before beginning the description of the theory of ARCs let us mention the possible
practical applications such resonators may have in optics or optoelectronics. Dielectric
microspheres or microdisks already provide compact high-Q resonators which may be
useful as spectral ﬁlters or as components in microcavity lasers. Based on the work
to be presented below [17] we can propose three further advantages that ARCs may
provide:

1. The ability to tune the Q-value and resonant frequency of the cavity by appro-

priate deformations.

micro-cavity laser.

2. If this can be done in situ, then the possibility of designing a Q-switched ARC

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 1:
Ray trajectories for circle (a), and quadrupole-deformed circle (b)
parametrized by r(φ) = 1 + ǫ cos 2φ in polar coordinates for ǫ = 0.08 corresponding
to an 8% fractional deformation, or an eccentricity e = 0.56. Rays are launched from
the boundary at the same φ and angle of incidence sin χ0 = 0.7 in both cases; ray
escape by refraction only occurs in case (b).

3. The ability to couple a high-Q WG mode out of the cavity with strong direc-

tionality.

The third item is perhaps of most importance since the lack of intrinsic directionality
in microdisk lasers has been recognized as a major barrier to their development for
applications [18]. If ARCs can combine the advantages of microdisk or microsphere
cavities with the directional emission found in Fabry-Perot resonators it will become
possible to develop useful microlasers which can take full advantage of the reduction
of the lasing threshold which arises as the number of cavity modes overlapping the
gain region is decreased [1]. The current generation of semiconductor microlasers
(the Vertical Cavity Surface-Emitting Laser) does not gain much of this advantage
due to the fact that the lasing modes are only two-dimensionally conﬁned. Of course
obtaining a large threshold reduction requires a microcavity whose dimensions are
comparable to the wavelength of light and the ray-optics model which will take up
the bulk of this article does not apply when the wavelength approaches the cavity
size. Nonetheless we have solid numerical evidence that the qualitative behavior
predicted by the ray-optics model and in particular the directionality of emission are
still present in this limit. For all these reasons we believe that ARCs represent a new
class of cavity resonators whose properties and usefulness need to be explored in a
series of controlled experiments on a well-characterized realization. As a ﬁrst step we
have recently applied the theory to explain the lasing intensity proﬁle of deformed
lasing droplets [19] (see section 8), but much more work is needed and appropriate
solid ARCs need to be designed and studied.

2. Physical Origin of Q-spoiling in ARCs

2.1. EM/QM Analogy

As noted in the introduction, problems in quantum chaos are often studied with
semiclassical methods. The analogue of the classical limit in quantum mechanics is
the ray-optics limit (λ
0) of the (Maxwell) wave equation and so we begin by
considering the ray optics of a deformed cavity. For simplicity consider an inﬁnite
dielectric cylinder of radius R. In Fig. 1(a) we show the ray motion corresponding

→

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 2: Eﬀective potential picture for whispering gallery resonances; kmin =
m/(nR) and kmax = m/R.

to a typical WG mode of a perfect cylinder in the (x-y) plane perpendicular to its
axis. Note that as the ray circulates it always collides with the surface of the cylinder
at the same angle of incidence; this is clear geometrically, but may also be regarded
as a consequence of the conservation of the z-component of angular momentum in a
rotationally symmetric potential. Therefore, if such a ray is trapped by total internal
reﬂection at its initial bounce, it will remain trapped forever within the strict ray-
optics approximation. Of course even if we ignore for the moment absorption or
microscopic imperfections in the dielectric which may limit the lifetime, it is well-
known that such resonances do have a ﬁnite lifetime due to evanescent leakage. This
may be seen clearly by invoking the similarity between the wave equation in quantum
If we assume an index of refraction n = 1
mechanics and electromagnetism [20].
outside the scatterer and n > 1 but constant inside the dielectric, then in each of
these regions the wave equation for the electric ﬁeld has the form

2E + (k2

n2k2)E = k2E

(1)

− ∇

−
where k = ωc is the wavevector of the light in vacuum. Even though the matching
conditions for E at the interface of the dielectric can be very diﬀerent from the
quantum mechanical ones for the wave function (depending on the polarization),
n2(r))k2 as the analogue of a potential. One
one can still consider VEM (r) = (1
sees therefore that the dielectric body acts like an attractive potential well for the
scattering of EM radiation, and in general an attractive well does not give rise to
very sharp resonances. However the occurence of sharp resonances for a cylindrical
dielectric can be understood by noting that if one separates the wave equation in
cylindrical coordinates (ρ, φ, z) then the equation for the radial variation of the electric
ﬁeld contains an eﬀective potential Vef f (ρ) = VEM (ρ) + m2/ρ2 where m is an integer
representing the conserved Lz in the system. Hence the eﬀective potential is the sum
of the attractive well due to the dielectric and the repulsive Lz angular momentum
barrier, see Fig. 2. For wavevectors satisfying

−

m/(nR) < k < m/R

(2)

there exists a “classically allowed” region inside the dielectric separated by the angular
momentum barrier from the outside region where propagation is also allowed. Thus
sharp resonances are found in this interval of wavevector for this angular momentum
channel; their width in the ideal system is determined by the “tunneling” (evanescent
leakage) through the angular momentum barrier.

2.2. Classical Escape and Ray Chaos

However this point of view makes it clear that these sharp resonances arise only due
to conservation of Lz. In the same wavevector interval there exist broad resonances
corresponding to lower Lz; a perturbation which destroys the rotational symmetry
of the dielectric will mix these sharp resonances with this broad continuum and ul-
timately spoil their Q. The necessary mixing is not easily calculated perturbatively
because the high-Q WG modes are separated in space from the lower Q modes and
a weak perturbation will just mix diﬀerent WG modes and not spoil their Q. There-
fore it is useful to consider the question from the point of view of ray optics.
In
Fig. 1(b) we show the ray dynamics corresponding to a cylindrical dielectric with a
8% quadrupolar deformation in the plane perpendicular to its axis. The same initial
angle of incidence sin χ0 is used as in Fig. 1(a) but in this case, due to the deformation,
the angle of incidence sin χ is not conserved and ﬂuctuates from bounce to bounce.
This raises the simple question: will the angle of incidence ﬂuctuate enough after a
large number of bounces so that sin χ will become smaller than sin χc = 1/n, allowing
the ray to escape refractively according to Snell’s law? If so, then intuitively one
expects the Q of the corresponding WG resonances to be spoiled; if not there should
still exist high-Q WG resonances at this deformation. Since a typical WG mode of
the type shown in Fig. 1(a) will have a measured Q value > 108 for a 10µm diameter
cross-section this implies roughly 106 collisions occur (at optical wavelengths) before
escape. Therefore this “classical” Q-spoiling mechanism will become relevant if es-
cape occurs in less than one million bounces; i.e. we are concerned here with the very
long-time asymptotics of the ray motion. How can we determine when such classical
Q-spoiling occurs?

The ray motion in the undeformed cylinder (Fig. 1(a)) is obviously conﬁned by
a circular caustic curve (a caustic curve is a curve which the ray touches at tangency
once between each bounce). The presence of this caustic constrains the ﬂuctuations
in sin χ (to be zero in this case). We will see shortly that for small deformations a
dense set of caustics still exists and puts a bound on the ﬂuctuations in sin χ which is
suﬃcient to prevent classical escape. The existence of caustic curves is characteristic
of systems which have integrable (regular) dynamics or are weakly perturbed from
integrability. The disappearance or “breaking” of these caustics is the hallmark of
the hamiltonian transition to chaos for a free point mass bouncing specularly in a
hardwalled cavity (in chaos theory such systems are referred to as “billiards” and when
treated quantum-mechanically as “quantum billiards”). The ray dynamics problem
of interest here is identical to such a billiard problem except for the possibility of
refractive escape for suﬃciently small values of sin χ (we neglect evanescent leakage
henceforth unless otherwise stated). For our problem the breaking of the caustics
removes the bound on the ﬂuctuations in sin χ and allows the classical escape process
and Q-spoiling of the WG modes. Hence in order to understand when and how this
classical Q-spoiling occurs one must look to the theory of the hamiltonian transition
to chaos, which is based on KAM theory [21]. The speciﬁc results on the breaking of

caustics in convex billiards which are relevant here are due to Lazutkin [22].

3. The Hamiltonian Transition to Chaos

3.1.

Integrable and Chaotic Hamiltonians

{

{

{

{

Ji}

) = H ′(

ai, Ji}

ai, Ji}

such that the new hamiltonian H ′(

Before explaining the implications of KAM theory for our problem, we brieﬂy review
the concepts of integrability and chaos in hamiltonian systems [23]. A hamiltonian
) is integrable if there exists a canonical change of variables to action-angle
H(
qi, pi}
coordinates
), i.e. the
energy only depends on the action variables Ji and not on the angles ai. For generic
hamiltonians such a transformation does not exist; it is only for systems with a high
degree of symmetry that such a change of variables can be found (unfortunately
these systems represent almost all of the examples treated in textbooks, so they
appear more common than they are). However if such a transformation exists then
it immediately follows from hamilton’s equations that all the Ji are constants of
motion (∂H/∂ai = 0), and that the angles vary linearly with time (modulo 2π) with a
frequency ωi = ∂H/∂Ji. If we specialize to the two-dimensional case (which will apply
to all the examples treated in this chapter), the phase-space of the motion is four-
dimensional, with motion conﬁned to three-dimensional surfaces of constant energy.
However if the motion is integrable, then in fact any given phase-space trajectory
lies on a two-dimensional subspace of the constant-energy surface speciﬁed by the
conserved values of J1, J2. Since the angle variables are periodic, this subspace has
the topology of a torus and the phase-space trajectory winds around this torus with
a1 = a1(0) + ω1t, a2 = a2(0) + ω2t.
If we deﬁne the winding number of a given
torus as W = ω1/ω2 then the motion diﬀers depending on whether W is a rational
or irrational number. If W = p/q (p, q integer) then each trajectory on that torus
will close on itself after pq windings and we have an inﬁnite family of periodic orbits
on that torus, no one of which covers densely the entire torus. On the other hand,
if W
= p/q the orbit will never close on itself and each orbit will cover the entire
torus quasi-periodically. Thus for the integrable system phase-space is divided up
into nested rational and irrational tori corresponding to these two cases. We will see
that for the relevant integrable billiards each irrational torus deﬁnes a caustic curve.
Independent of whether the motion is on a rational or irrational torus, if the
system is integrable this motion is not ergodic, i.e. a typical phase-space trajectory
does not visit all regions of the constant energy surface with equal density as t
,
→ ∞
because each trajectory lives on a 2D subspace of this 3D surface. Now suppose an
additional term is added to the hamiltonian which breaks its symmetry and destroys
its integrability. It turns out that for suﬃciently large perturbations in many cases
there are no approximate conservation laws and typical trajectories starting anywhere
in phase-space explore the entire 3D constant energy surface ergodically. Moreover
any two trajectories corresponding to nearby initial conditions separate from one

6
Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 3:
integrable deformed counterparts.

Integrable shapes (left) in two and three dimensions and their non-

another exponentially in time (up to some time scale). This situation is referred
to as hard chaos. However KAM proved that for suﬃciently weak non-integrable
perturbations there still exists some remnant of the conservation laws present in
the integrable limit and in particular that there exist many families of trajectories
conﬁned to a 2D subspace of phase-space (which thus are obviously not ergodic). It
is best to explain this point in detail in the context of several examples relevant to
ARCs.

3.2. KAM billiards

For the application to ARCs we wish to consider two-dimensional or three-dimensional
families of billiards which are generated by deformations of circles or spheres, see
Fig. 3) (the 2D case will describe cylindrical dielectrics with deformed cross-section,
the z-motion being decoupled).
In each case the size of the deformation will be
speciﬁed by a continuous parameter which gives a circle or sphere when set equal to
zero. We call these KAM billiards because increasing the shape parameter from zero
generates a KAM/Lazutkin transition in the dynamics. It is simplest to specify these
billiards by giving the radius as a function of the relevant angle (φ in the 2D case, θ in
the 3D case (where we will focus on the systems with azimuthal symmetry). We can
think of each such deformation as being a sum of multipole distortions, the simplest
being the dipole and quadrupole distortions, which in 2D take the form:

r(φ) =

(1 + ǫ cos φ)

(dipole)

r(φ) =

(1 + ǫ cos 2φ)

(quadrupole)

(3)

(4)

1

1 + ǫ2/2
1

q

1 + ǫ2/2

q

The deformation parameter here is the constant ǫ multiplying the dipole or quadrupole
term (the prefactors insure that the area remains constant and equal to π). The
dipole billiard was ﬁrst introduced by Robnik in order to study the quantum KAM
transition [24]. Note that the dipolar distortion, to leading order in ǫ, corresponds to
a translation of the center of mass of the billiard which does not change its internal ray
dynamics; when expanded around its new center of mass the distortion is primarily
quadrupolar but without the four-fold symmetry of the quadrupole billiard. Since
the dipole (Robnik) billiard becomes non-convex at smaller fractional deformations
it shows a higher degree of chaos (for the same deformation) than the quadrupole

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 4: Deﬁnition of the coordinates for the Poincar´e section of 2D billiards.

In contrast, it is known [25] that an exactly elliptical deformation of the
billiard.
circular billiard does not generate chaotic dynamics at all: there still exists a constant
of motion, not the angular momentum with respect to the center, but rather the
product of the angular momenta with respect to the two foci, so the motion is still
integrable. We may use the ellipse as a “control” shape to test the importance of
chaos in the behavior of deformed cavities. Finally, axially symmetric deformations
of the sphere can also be expressed in terms of a 3D multipole expansion of Legendre
polynomials Pl(cos θ) (an example is illustrated in Fig. 3); this type of description
will be used to model deformed liquid droplets in section 8 below.

To compare the diﬀerent 2D shapes, we introduce the eccentricity in analogy

to the ellipse,

e

≡

q

r2
max −

r2
min/rmax,

(5)

where rmax and rmin are the extremal radii measured from the center of mass. The
ﬁgures in the following sections will use this parametrization whereas we will ﬁnd it
helpful in the discussion to specify the fractional deformations in percent.

3.3. The Poincar´e Surface of Section

Given the shape of the billiard and the specular reﬂection assumption, following the
trajectory of speciﬁc rays is a simple exercise in geometry. However it is not always
straightforward to detect structure in the phase-space motion simply by looking at
the real-space trajectory. On the other hand the actual phase space trajectory typ-
ically occurs on a high-dimensional manifold which is diﬃcult to visualize. Thus it
is standard in non-linear dynamics to observe the phase-space motion by imaging
the particle/ray every time it passes through a speciﬁed plane in phase-space; the
resulting plot is called a Poincar´e surface of section (SOS). For billiards it is simplest
to choose the SOS to correspond to the boundary, with coordinates corresponding to
the angular position φ around the boundary (since the billiards are convex there is
only one boundary point for each angle), and the tangential component of momentum
at the bounce point which is proportional to sin χ, the angle of incidence (see Fig. 4).
There exists a non-linear (twist) [23] map Tǫ which maps the vector (φn, sin χn) at the
nth bounce to (φn+1, sin χn+1) at the next bounce. For the case of 2D billiards this
map is typically deﬁned implicitly by the roots of a third, fourth or ﬁfth order poly-
nomial. For every trajectory the coordinates (φ, sin χ) are plotted at each bounce (up
to some number of bounces, e.g. 1000) giving a series of points in a 2D SOS plot (see
Fig. 5); whether or not these points form a connected curve depends on the nature of
the phase-space motion. It is usual to plot many trajectories in a single SOS in order

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 5: Poincar´e surfaces of section for the circle (a) as well as quadrupolar de-
formations with eccentricities e = 0.51 (b) and e = 0.63 (c). Vertical and horizontal
two-bounce orbits in (a), shown as crosses and stars, are depicted in the schematic be-
low the SOS. Shown to the right of each SOS are trajectories starting at sin χ0 = 0.7
in all cases.
In the schematics below (b), trajectories close to the horizontal and
vertical diametric orbits are plotted (each below its bounce position in the SOS).

to image fully any phase-space structure which will prevent a single trajectory from
visiting all regions. Initially we will neglect the possibility of ray escape in discussing
the SOS.

The series of SOS’s shown in Fig. 5 for the case of the quadrupole billiard as
the deformation is increased clearly illustrates the content and implications of the
KAM/Lazutkin theory. For zero deformation the SOS has two types of structures,
solid horizontal lines and sets of discrete points arrayed on a horizontal line (we have
denoted these sets of points by large symbols in the ﬁgure in order to make them more
visible, but each corresponds to a single pair of bounce coordinates (φ, sin χ)). Each
solid line is the image of one quasiperiodic trajectory with irrational winding number,
since these trajectories never close after many bounces they have visited the entire
boundary (all values of φ) and they yield a full line in the SOS. Note from the real-
space picture of these orbits that such an orbit does generate a (circular) caustic. The
trajectories which generate discrete sets of points in the SOS are the periodic orbits
with rational winding number. The simplest of these are the two-bounce diametral
orbits, two of which are denoted by plus and asterisk signs in Fig. 5(a). There are
an inﬁnite family of such orbits created by rotation of any one; each of these orbits
are marginally stable, which means that nearby (non-periodic) orbits neither oscillate
around the periodic orbit nor diverge from it exponentially. One such periodic orbit
does not trace out a caustic curve but simply generates an inscribed polygon of the
circle (e.g. a square for the 4-bounce orbit denoted by the squares).

Fig. 5(b) shows the SOS for the quadrupole billiard with ǫ = .065 corre-
sponding to a 6.5% fractional deformation; in this case the vertical diameter has been
shortened and the horizontal one stretched. Now there are three types of structures in
the SOS: closed curves which do not span the SOS (islands), grainy (chaotic) regions
which are two-dimensional and have no apparent structure, and curves which span
the SOS roughly horizontally (although they are no longer straight horizontal lines).
The islands arise from periodic orbits which have been stabilized by the deformation.
Stability in this context means that nearby orbits oscillate around the central peri-
odic orbits. For example, since the vertical diameter has been shortened the vertical
two-bounce orbit is now stable (this corresponds to the well-known fact in resonator
theory that two confocal spherical mirrors separated by less than twice their radii of

curvature are stable). Thus we see islands corresponding to nearby oscillatory orbits
around the two-bounce vertical periodic orbit [the pluses in Fig. 5(a)].

In contrast, the stretching of the horizontal diameter has destabilized the two-
bounce horizontal periodic orbit; nearby orbits diverge from it exponentially (see
inset) and give rise to a 2D chaotic layer in the SOS. The fact that this layer is two-
dimensional is important; no longer are single trajectories conﬁned to points or lines
on the SOS. This is the beginning of chaos, with exponential divergence of nearby
trajectories and single trajectories exploring a ﬁnite fraction of the entire phase-space.
Note that both the islands and the chaotic layers appear near periodic orbits of the
unperturbed system; trajectories in that neighborhood are not perturbatively related
to those of the undeformed billiard (a problem which was discovered by Poincar´e in
1899 [26]). However, as noted above, there still exist full 1D curves spanning the
SOS in the deformed case. These correspond to the (deformed) quasi-periodic orbits,
which still trace out only a one-dimensional curve in the SOS which is only deformed
from the unperturbed straight line. Thus these orbits are not ergodic and do not
explore a ﬁnite fraction of the constant-energy surface. KAM theory proves that for
suﬃciently weak perturbations such quasi-periodic orbits still exist. These unbroken
“KAM curves” partition phase-space so that a chaotic trajectory above a given curve
in the SOS can never jump below that curve. For example in Fig. 5(b) one sees
an unbroken KAM curve with a minimum of sin χ = 0.5 and a maximum value of
sin χ
0.65; no ray starting with sin χ0 > 0.65 can reach values of sin χ < 0.5 so for an
index of refraction n = 2 (sin χc = 1/n = 0.5) no classical escape is possible for a large
set of WG orbits. Thus the unbroken KAM curves constrain the “diﬀusive” motion in
the chaotic regions to lie in layers bounded by two KAM curves. Associated with each
such “KAM curve” in the SOS is a caustic in the real-space motion which prevents
rays from penetrating into the interior of the cavity, as seen in the inset. Lazutkin
[22] proved that for any 2D convex cavity with a suﬃciently smooth boundary such
caustics exist, although as the cavity is very deformed from the circle these caustics
only persist very near the boundary and may not constrain the relevant rays.

≈

Fig. 5(c) shows the SOS for slightly higher deformation, ǫ = 0.1. The increased
deformation has increased the degree of chaos in the motion and now unbroken KAM
curves exist only very near the boundary (sin χ > 0.9); the bulk of the SOS is spanned
by a chaotic region. A ray starting with 0.7 < sin χ0 < 0.9 will typically be in this
chaotic region and will diﬀuse to any value of sin χ < 0.9 over some time scale. If as
above sin χc = 0.5 then such a ray will escape according to Snell’s law (an example
is shown in the inset). A SOS for ǫ > 1/5 (for which the quadrupole is non-convex)
would show no KAM curves or islands, only a uniform sea of chaos covering the entire
SOS.

4. Ray Optics Model for Q-spoiling of ARCs

4.1. Classical Q factor

The qualitative behavior of the ray dynamics of ARCs depicted in Fig. 5 is universal
for all such smooth deformations of the circle (this is guaranteed by Lazutkin’s the-
orem). That is why it is possible to ﬁnd general physical principles that apply to all
ARCs. What implications does this picture have for the whispering gallery modes of
ARCs?

First, intuitively one associates WG modes with rays starting at sin χ0 close
to unity (i.e. rays moving almost tangent to the boundary). Whereas conventional
geometric optics treatments for nonresonant scattering [27] start out with an inci-
dent beam, our method deals exclusively with rays escaping from inside the cavity.
This will allow predictions about intrinsic properties of the resonant state that do
not depend on the input coupling, such as resonance lifetime and directional lasing
emission.
In the eikonal approximation for the modes of a dielectric cylinder (see
subsection 7.1) it is possible to associate an ensemble of rays having a ﬁxed value
of sin χ with a mode of angular momentum index m and wavevector nk (within the
dielectric) by the relation:

.

sin χ =

m
nkR
For the deformed cylinder no such simple relation exists (this is a key issue in
the semiclassical quantization of chaotic systems [13]), but as a rough starting point
for a ray-optics model of ARCs we will use Eq. (6) to connect the ray dynamics to the
modal properties of ARCs. We have checked that our main conclusions are insensitive
to this assumption. With this assumption we can deﬁne a ray-optics procedure for
estimating the Q-factor of ARCs.

(6)

Assign an index m to the ARC mode which evolves by continuous deformation
from the mode with angular momentum m and wavevector k in the undeformed
cylinder.

Associate this ARC mode with an ensemble of rays which is uniformly distributed
in φ but has starting angle of incidence chosen by the eikonal rule: sin χ0 =
m/nkR.

Propagate this ray ensemble forward in time and compute the mean classical
escape rate τ −1, where the classical escape probability is zero for sin χ > 1/n
and unity for sin χ < 1/n.

Deﬁne the quality factor associated with this ray ensemble as Q = ckτ .

•

•

•

•

4.2. Qualitative Predictions

Our conjecture is that for dielectric ARCs with nkR
1 the “classical” approxima-
tion for the Q-factor of mode m is a good means for estimating the actual width of

≫

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 6: Escape rate for the dipole and the quadrupole with refractive index n = 2
and starting condition sin χ0 = 0.8. The escape rate is proportional to 1/Q. The plot
assumes nkR = 100; to convert to other size parameters, multiply the vertical scale
by 100/(nkR).

the resonance of index m for deformations that are too large to be treated pertur-
batively. The universal phase-space evolution described above allows one to make
certain qualitative predictions about the behavior of this classical Q-factor with in-
creasing deformation:

1. For modes corresponding to a given sin χ0 > sin χc, Q will be inﬁnite (the escape
rate will be zero) up to some threshold deformation ǫc at which the last KAM
curve intervening between sin χ0 and sin χc breaks. (In fact there will be some
large but ﬁnite Q due to tunneling which we neglect).

2. For deformations ǫ > ǫc the Q of these modes will be ﬁnite and decreasing as

ǫc)−α where the exponent α is in the range 2.5 < α < 3.5.

(ǫ

−

3. Once classical escape becomes possible the emission from these modes is highly
directional and occurs (in the near ﬁeld) only at the points where the regions
of chaos in the SOS connect sin χ0 to sin χc.

The ﬁrst prediction follows clearly from the discussion in subsection 3.3; the second
and third will be justiﬁed in more detail below.

5. Threshold Behavior and Power Law

Numerical evaluation of the classical approximation for Q for any simple model of
2D ARCs is straightforward; it just requires simulations of the same type used to
generate the SOS’s in Fig. 5, except here we only start ray trajectories at the value
of sin χ0 of interest and escape is allowed at a chosen sin χc. The mean inverse length
L−1 of the escaping trajectories is then computed and used to evaluate Q = nkL.
Representative results for the dipole and quadrupole ARCs are shown in Fig. 6. As
predicted, Q−1 = 0 up to a threshold deformation (3% for the dipole, 7% for the
quadrupole) and then rises steeply. Note the threshold is not universal and is lower
for the dipole ARC because of its stronger chaos compared to the quadrupole ARC
for the same eccentricity.

In Fig. 7 we plot the data in Fig. 6 on a log scale vs. the log of the distance
from threshold. As predicted these give a nice power law with an exponent α which is
3.5. Brieﬂy, the origin of this power law variation
non-universal but in the range 2.5

−

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 7: Power-law behavior of the escape rates in the previous ﬁgure, above the
respective threshold deformations. Asterisks and dashed line are the data and linear
ﬁt for the dipole, squares and solid line refer to the quadrupole. The law 1/Q
(e

∝
ec)α is seen to hold, where αd = 2.6 for the dipole and αq = 3 for the quadrupole.

−

of Q from threshold is the following. In the relevant cases just below threshold there
is one last KAM curve which blocks the phase-space ﬂux from reaching the critical
angle. As this last intervening KAM curve breaks with increasing deformation it
leaves behind a “sticky” region in phase-space known as a cantorus[23] (because it
has the properties of a Cantor set). The slow traversal of this cantorus is the rate
limiting step in the classical escape process. Therefore the dependence of Q on the
distance from threshold is determined by the mean phase-space ﬂux through such a
cantorus. This problem has been studied in detail and it is well-established that this
ǫc)α with α in the range noted [28]. Space limitations do not allow us
ﬂux varies as (ǫ
to reproduce those arguments here. However we note that the appearance of a power-
law here is not surprising as the breaking of KAM tori constitutes a kind of critical
phenomenon in phase-space, with the scale-invariance associated with second-order
transitions [29].

−

6. Ray Directionality

As noted above, we expect the ray escape from ARCs to be directional leading to di-
rectional emission from deformed WG modes. Figure 8 shows the directional emission
from the quadrupole ARC, obtained from a ray bundle started along sin χ0 = 0.83
and escaping at sin χc. The simulation was performed for two diﬀerent indices of re-
fraction corresponding to sin χc = 0.5 and sin χc = 0.65. The histograms in the ﬁgure
are obtained by sorting the escaping rays into bins according to the angle φ at which
they escape; this should represent the near-ﬁeld intensity distribution. The inset de-
picts the expected far-ﬁeld intensity pattern taking into account the refraction of the
escaping rays. The near-ﬁeld histogram in both cases shows no escape whatsoever
outside two very narrow regions around φ = 0 and φ = π. The very high degree of
directionality found in these simulations is initially somewhat surprising and deserves
further study. To our knowledge, escape directionality has not been studied in the
theory of phase space transport in Hamiltonian systems described brieﬂy in section
3 because the systems previously considered were closed; although somewhat related
issues have been studied in the context of chaotic classical scattering [30].

At the most general level the occurence of preferential escape directions and
their location can be understood by simple curvature arguments. Rays total internally
reﬂected from a point of high curvature are unlikely to escape at the next bounce since

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 8: Directionality for the quadrupole at deformation e = 0.58. The histograms
shows the probability distribution of escape positions φ, assuming sin χc = 0.5 (solid)
and sin χc = 0.65 (hollow). The inset gives the resulting far-ﬁeld directionality for
sin χc = 0.5, taking into account refraction on exit from the dielectric. The starting
condition is sin χ0 = 0.83.

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 9: Partial surface of section, only for sin χ above the critical line for escape
(sin χc = 0.5, shown dashed). The shape is the same as in Fig. 8. The heavy line
with arrows is the tangent invariant curve of a corresponding ellipse superimposed on
the quadrupole SOS (see subsection 6.2).

this will likely occur at a point of lower curvature and sin χ will have increased. Since
the converse is not true, rays are more likely to escape in the regions of high curvature.
In the quadrupole these regions are near φ = 0, π corresponding to the emission peaks
in Fig. 8. However we shall see that such arguments alone cannot account for the
narrowness of the peaks, their detailed structure, and their persistence in the far-ﬁeld
(as shown in the inset to Fig. 8). For example, for sin χc = 0.65 there is no ray escape
precisely at φ = 0, π, the points of maximum curvature.

First let us address the far-ﬁeld behavior. Even if all rays escape very near
φ = 0, π the emission pattern in the far-ﬁeld need not be highly directional since they
might escape with very diﬀerent angles of incidence. This does not occur since the
phase space diﬀusion in the sin χ direction is slow; rays approach the critical angle
in small steps and escape very near sin χc, leading to almost tangential emission (see
Fig. 5(c)). Therefore the far-ﬁeld ray pattern is just as directional as the near-ﬁeld
escape histogram, but is simply rotated by π/2 (again, see inset to Fig. 8).

6.1. Ergodic model

As a ﬁrst step to understanding the escape directionality distribution we formulate a
simple model which should correctly represent the short-time ray dynamics near the
critical angle. In Fig. 9 we show the SOS corresponding to the escape histogram in
Fig. 8 with the islands of stability shown, but the chaotic region left empty. One sees
that there is a relatively large chaotic region developed around sin χc. Since motion
in the chaotic region is ergodic (on that region) this suggests that as a starting point
we can assume that the rays in the ensemble starting near sin χ0 will after some time
ﬁll the chaotic region above sin χc approximately uniformly. To test this notion we
see if the observed directionality can be reproduced by starting with a homogeneous
distribution of starting conditions above sin χc and iterating the map one step (allow

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 10: Escape directionality for sin χ0 = 0.85 and e = 0.58 The broad solid
histogram is predicted by the simple ergodic model, the dotted line results from the
modiﬁed ergodic model (see text). The heavy line is obtained from the invariant
curve model. The full ray simulation leads to the most sharply peaked distribution
(solid line).

each ray to collide once more with the boundary). The probability density P (φ)
for escape in an interval dφ will then just be proportional to the area of the SOS
mapped in one step from above to below sin χc and into the interval dφ. We call this
set of assumptions the ergodic model for directionality. In order to recover the full
sin χc
symmetry of the billiard shape, we have to repeat this with an ensemble below
(i.e. reversed starting momenta) and add the outcomes. The resulting approximation
for the distribution P (φ) is shown in Fig. 10.

−

Although the ergodic approximation overlaps well with the peaks in the true
escape probability density, the P (φ) it predicts is clearly much broader than the exact
ray-tracing distribution. Since the ergodic model includes the short-time eﬀects of
the varying curvature around the boundary, this indicates that the directionality of
escape from ARCs is not simply obtained from a knowledge of curvature. Obviously
the assumption of a uniform distribution of rays ﬁlling phase-space above sin χc has
missed some essential part of the physics. What has been missed is that even in the
chaotic component there is a deﬁnite ﬂow pattern in phase-space for short times. This
ﬂow pattern is close to the KAM curves of the ellipse (which is integrable and has
KAM curves at all deformations). Examples of such KAM curves are given in Figs. 9
and 11 where representative trajectories of the quadrupole billiard are found to follow
them closely. Since for short times motion is along those curves most of the escape
occurs near where these curves intersect the critical line at sin χc. Due to this ﬂow
pattern, many initial conditions (above sin χc) which lead to escape in the ergodic
model can only be reached if the previous reﬂection occurred with sin χ < sin χc,
implying that the ray would already have escaped before getting to the assumed
starting point in phase space. One can begin to take this into account within an
extended ergodic model by assuming zero occupation probability for initial conditions
above sin χc which upon one-step iteration backwards are below sin χc (and uniform
probability for all other initial conditions). Fig. 10 shows that this extension of the
ergodic model signiﬁcantly improves the predicted P (φ) as compared to the true
distribution.

The advantage of the ergodic model is that only one or (in the extended
version) two mapping steps need be considered. For the simple version it is then
possible to express P (φ) in terms of the one-step map. The exact one-step map is
not usually known in simple analytic form for KAM billiards, but we have been able

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 11: Flow of three trajectories for the quadrupole at e = 0.57, followed for
200 bounces each. The solid lines are the superimposed invariant curves of an ellipse
with the same eccentricity.

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 12: Illustration of the areas A and ¯A which end up below or come from above
sin χc, respectively, in one mapping step.

≡

to develop reasonable approximate analytic expressions in certain cases [31]. If we
sin χ, the map can be described by the two functions ¯φ(φ, p), ¯p(φ, p),
abbreviate p
giving the new position and momentum as a function of the old variables. The map
( ¯φ, ¯p) is unity.
is area-preserving, i.e. the Jacobian of the transformation (φ, p)
One can alternatively specify the map by considering the old momentum and the
new position as given so that the dependent variables are φ( ¯φ, p) and ¯p( ¯φ, p). The
diﬀerential probability of obtaining φ′ after one mapping step applied to a homogenous
starting distribution with p > pc is

→

P1(φ′) =

dφ dp δ(φ′

¯φ(φ, p)),

−

1
A

|

| ZA

where A is only the region above pc that gets mapped below pc ,
is its area, and
¯φ is the new position after one reﬂection. The image of A under the map, ¯A, has the
due to area preservation. These regions are shown in Fig. 12.
same area
We make a transformation of variables in the integral from φ, p to ¯φ, ¯p, yielding

¯A
|

A
|

A
|

=

|

|

|

P1(φ′) =

d ¯φ d¯p δ(φ′

¯φ)

−

1
¯A

|

| Z¯A

1
¯A
|

1
¯A
|

|

|

≡

=

max[ ¯p(φ′)]

d¯p

Zmin[ ¯p(φ′)]

(max[ ¯p(φ′)]

min[ ¯p(φ′)]) .

−

Here, min[ ¯p(φ′)] denotes the smallest ¯p within ¯A at the ﬁnal angle ¯φ = φ′, analogously
max[ ¯p(φ′)]. The boundary of ¯A is formed by the two curves ( ¯φ, pc) and ( ¯φ, ¯p( ¯φ, pc)).
In our case, ¯p( ¯φ, pc) is a unique function of ¯φ, and as a result max[¯p(φ′)] = pc,
min[ ¯p(φ′)] = ¯p(φ′, pc). We therefore have the simple result that

P1(φ′) =

1

| ¯A| (pc −
0

(cid:26)

¯p(φ′, pc))

for pc > ¯p(φ′, pc)
otherwise.

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

−

The distribution in Fig. 10 is obtained by forming the symmetrized function P (φ′) =
[P1(φ′) + P1(

φ′)]/2 .

∈

−

−
B.

p(φ,

For the extended ergodic model, we need the function p(φ, ¯p). Then the lobes
of (φ, p(φ, pc)) above pc delimit the region A. To decide whether a given (φ, p)
A
would have come from the region p < pc in the previous reﬂection, we simply invert
the momentum p and ask whether the forward mapping yields a new momentum ¯p
smaller in magnitude than pc. This is true for a region B bounded above pc by the
curve (φ,
pc)). The modiﬁed starting domain for the ergodic model is then
A′ = A

\
Whereas reasonable agreement with the near-ﬁeld directionality of the full
simulation can be obtained in the extended ergodic model, we do not expect correct
results for the far-ﬁeld which is seen in Fig. 8 to display the same degree of direction-
ality. Since the ergodic models yield a ﬁnal distribution of escaping trajectories that
scatters widely in sin χ (see ¯A in Fig. 12), any near-ﬁeld directionality will be spread
out after refraction is taken into account. We thus need to understand why in fact
only sin χ

sin χc occurs upon escape.

≈

6.2. Tangent Invariant Curve Model

The ergodic models discussed above have limited validity because they do not take
fully into account the detailed structure of phase-space motion. That is the existence
of a dominant ﬂow pattern over many bounces and the persistence of stable islands
and unstable periodic orbits (which repel phase-space ﬂux). If there is a stable island
which is intersected by the critical line sin χc then no classical escape can occur in
the interval of φ within the island. For example, for the particular shape giving
0.65, φ = 0, π.
the SOS of Fig. 9 there exists two large islands centered at sin χ
These islands completely block escape at the points of highest curvature φ = 0, π,
giving the surprising peak-splitting shown for this case in Fig. 8. The ergodic model
on the other hand would ﬁnd escape at those points from starting rays which could
never have gotten into the island in the ﬁrst place. The blocking of ray escape
by remaining stable islands is a major eﬀect in the lasing droplets which we study
in section 8. There are also interesting eﬀects in the directionality associated with
unstable ﬁxed points, but we cannot discuss them in detail here. These eﬀects arise
from stable and unstable periodic orbits and are less universal since diﬀerent ARCs
will have substantially diﬀerent important orbits; however they can be understood on
an individual basis if one is interested in a particular ARC.

≈

Nonetheless there is still one further universal feature which relates to the
directionality distribution of all ARCs which have a large quadrupolar component
to their deformation. As noted above, the ellipse, which is integrable, is for small
deformations primarily a quadrupolar deformation of the circle. Therefore all ARCs
with a large quadrupolar component generate short-time ray dynamics close to the
invariant curves of the ellipse as shown in Fig. 11. The existence of chaos in these

ARCs allows motion perpendicular to these curves which would be forbidden in the
ellipse, but for reasonable deformations this motion is rather slow. Thus, even when
the SOS looks rather structureless and chaotic in the vicinity of sin χc one ﬁnds as
shown in Fig. 11 that the ray dynamics over hundreds of bounces follows the nearest
invariant curve (IC) of the ellipse. Thus a reasonable representation of the motion
is slow diﬀusion between these ICs until the IC which is tangent to the critical line
is reached and then rapid escape near the points of tangency of this IC (which we
call the tangent IC). This explains why most escaping rays do so at sin χ
sin χc.
This description will only be good if sin χ0 is separated from sin χc by more than the
width of the IC in sin χ, but this is typically the case for the WG modes of interest
to us here. This picture of the phase-space motion can be tested by comparing
P (φ) for our standard starting conditions to the P (φ) obtained by starting a uniform
distribution of points on the tangent IC. In the latter case of course almost all the
rays escape after a few tens of reﬂections, whereas many thousands are required in
our ray-optics model. One ﬁnds that the tangent IC starting conditions reproduce
the ray-optics P (φ) with remarkable accuracy (see Fig. 10). This ﬁnding has strong
implications. First it implies that the directionality distribution of emission from the
WG modes of ARCs is a short-time property, insensitive to the many thousands of
reﬂections needed to reach the vicinity of the tangent IC. Therefore the directionality
distribution is approximately independent of the initial conditions over a wide range
of WG trajectories. This strongly suggests that all deformed WG modes will tend
towards the universal directionality distribution determined by the tangent IC at a
given index of refraction. If this is the case then the directions of highest emission
from ARCs will be independent of the particular resonant mode excited, a property
which should be quite important for applications, e.g. in a multi-mode laser.

≈

7. Wave Properties of ARCs

7.1. Eikonal Theory for Undeformed Case

The ray optics model which we have developed in the previous sections relies on an
eikonal (semiclassical) prescription introduced in subsection 4.1 to relate the mode
indices of a WG resonance to the initial sin χ of a ray ensemble. Unfortunately,
because the semiclasical quantization of a mixed phase-space is still an open problem
[32], we only have such a rule for the undeformed case; we now explain the origin of this
rule. Since normally the WG resonances are very narrow even in the deformed case a
good starting point should be the spectrum of the isolated cavity (i.e. with perfectly
reﬂecting walls). The actual resonances in the leaky dielectric are frequency-shifted
with respect to the isolated modes but the resulting corrections to sin χ0 become
negligible for large kR. The WG modes have been quantized semiclassically [33] for
circular or elliptical cylinders, and for spheres. The method employed in that work
can be also be applied to deformed cavities as long as the ray dynamics still exhibits

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 13:
(a) Integration path leading to Eq. (14), shown as the jagged solid line
around the caustic C (dotted). Wavefronts of SCB (dotted arcs) are perpendicular to
all the rays (dashed straight lines) between C and the boundary B. The continuation
of the rays through C would not be normal to the wavefronts shown, but instead to
their mirror images. (b) Exact resonance positions (dots) for the circular cylinder.
The heavy line belongs to m = kR. The inset to (b) shows the scattered intensity
from a plane wave into the angle element at 50◦ from the beam axis, in the size
parameter interval delimited in the main ﬁgure by horizontal dashed lines. The index
of refraction is n = 2.

a dense set of caustics, as shown in Fig. 13(a), however we do not attempt such an
extension here. The eikonal approximation attaches to each ray a set of wavefronts;
to describe the phase of these wavefronts we need to ﬁnd the eikonal S(r) such that
S gives the ray direction at all points r. Assume a dense set of caustics of the ray
∇
motion exist, that is closed curves which the ray touches at tangency once between
each reﬂection from the boundary. There are two rays going through every r in the
region between caustic (C) and boundary (B), namely one coming from C to B and
one reﬂected from B toward C. The eikonal expression for the electric ﬁeld is a sum
of two wavefronts,

E(r) = ABC(r) einkSBC (r) + ACB(r) einkSCB(r).

(12)

When following a ray between two reﬂections from B, we move ﬁrst perpendicular to
the surfaces of SBC = c (c = const), until we reach the caustic. Then we get from
C back to B with the wave fronts SCB = c. In Fig. 13(a) only one half of this ray
path is depicted for a number of starting points. In both halves of the ray path, the
value of the phase c increases by the length l traveled along the ray between B and
C, because for any two points r1 and r2

c(r2) = c(r1) +

S(r)dr.

(13)

r2

∇

Zr1

Using the latter relation, one obtains the desired quantization condition by following
an alternative integration path that always runs perpendicular to the wave fronts of,
say, SCB and in addition forms a closed loop: Starting at r1 we can move on the
wavefront to the caustic without accumulating any phase in (13). We then follow a
ray for an inﬁnitesimally small length to a neighboring wavefront of SCB and move
back to the caustic along this new wavefront, see Fig. 13(a). Repeating this procedure,
one eventually encircles the caustic without ever crossing it, accruing a total phase
equal to LC, the length of the caustic, before reaching the end point r2 = r1. In order

for the function E(r) in Eq. (12) to be single valued at r1, this phase diﬀerence must
give unity when put in the exponential, i.e. we require

nkLC = 2πm (m = 0,

1,

2, . . .).

±

±

For a circular domain of radius R, the length of the caustic is related to the classical
angle of incidence χ by LC = 2πR sin χ. Combining these results, we arrive at

which is the semiclassical expression we have used above. It can be seen that the
integer m is precisely the angular momentum quantum number of quantum mechanics
if we recall that the angular momentum of the photon at each bounce from the
boundary is M = r
(¯hnk) = R¯hnk sin χ = m¯h. Note also that a large number of
resonances – those with approximately the same ratio m/kR = n sin χ – are described
by the same classical ray dynamics. Equation (15) can now be inserted into the
condition for total internal reﬂection, 1 > sin χ > 1/n, to obtain

×

sin χ =

m
nkR

,

n >

> 1.

m
kR

(14)

(15)

(16)

This is identical to the condition given in Eq. 2, and agrees well with numerical solu-
tions of the wave equation for the undeformed case. This is illustrated in Fig. 13(b)
and (c); the only sharp resonances observed in the open cavity are those satisfying
kR < m. Figure 13(c) shows the resonances in a window of kR = 10 . . . 12. Compar-
ing with Fig. 13(b) where the same window is indicated by the two horizontal dashed
lines, we see that the three narrowest resonances correspond to the three points with
largest m/(kR); and in general, the larger m/kR, the narrower the resonance.

The standard eikonal approximation does not allow us to calculate the width
in the open cavity which is a tunneling eﬀect. However it is possible to develop a
WKB-type approximation for the small tunneling width in the limit of large kR but
at constant m/kR [34]:

δk =

1
2

1

n2

1

−

exp[

(2m

1)(α

tanhα)],

−

−

−

(17)

−

≡

1
q

(kR)2/m2 is a constant between zero and one if we consider
where tanhα
only rays of a ﬁxed sin χ (similar expressions are known for the Mie resonances of
spherical dielectrics [20]). As we go to higher kR and m, the width is seen to decrease
exponentially. In order to understand the Q of ARC resonances we now ask how this
narrow width changes as the cylinder is deformed.

7.2. Exact solutions for the deformed cylinder

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 14: Exact results for resonance positions and widths in the dipole as a function
of deformation e. Left column: azimuthal mode index m = 20, radial node number
nr = 0; right column: m = 34, nr = 1 (indices refer to e = 0). Top : resonance
positions; bottom: resonance widths (logarithmic scale). The solid lines are the
widths as calculated from ray-optics simulation.

7.2.1. Resonance widths

In the inset to Fig. 13 it was assumed that a plane wave is incident normal to the cylin-
der. To solve this scattering problem, one uses polar coordinates r, φ and performs a
partial wave analysis, decomposing the incoming plane wave into

eikx =

i)meimφJm(kr).

(18)

∞

(

−

m=−∞
X

Then one can solve the resulting decoupled radial equations for each m. These equa-
tions are obtained by imposing the matching conditions for the ﬁelds at the dielectric
interface, noting that the ﬁeld inside must be a superposition of Bessel functions
Jm(nkr), whereas the outgoing scattered wave consists of Hankel functions H (1)
m (kr).
One can now try to satisfy the same matching conditions for the inside and outgoing
waves alone, leaving out the incident wave. This is possible only at discrete complex
iκ [κ > 0 if we assume a time dependence e−iωt in
values of the wavenumber, k
the wave equation], and the corresponding solutions are the quasibound states of the
cavity. For symmetric cavities and perturbative deformations their role in microcav-
ity optics has been studied in detail previously (see for example Ref. 9. Resonances
of width κ occur at wavenumber k when a quasibound state exists close to the real
axis at k

iκ.

−

When the rotational symmetry is broken, the matching equations for diﬀerent
m become coupled so that we have to solve a progressively larger system of simulta-
neous equations for the coeﬃcients of the Jm(nkr) inside and H (1)
m (kr) outside of the
cavity. However the resulting quasibound state solutions evolve continuously out of
those for the unperturbed cylinder as the deformation increases. This simpliﬁes the
search for resonances in the complex plane because we can start at the known quasi-
bound state positions of the circular cylinder and then follow each solution as it moves
through the complex plane when we change the shape. Representative results for the
real positions and widths of WG resonances ar shown in Fig. 14. The size parameters
kR we have studied at this point are not large enough to expect the resonances to be
accurately described by the ray-optics model; nonetheless the ﬁgure shows clearly a
threshold behavior in the resonance width as expected from the classical model. The
width remains small and almost constant up to a critical deformation, beyond which

−

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 15: Comparison of exact wave results for dipole (crosses), quadrupole (as-
terisks) and ellipse (circles). The resonance considered is m = 20, nr = 0 (in the
undeformed case). The arrows indicate the classical thresholds for dipole (D) and
quadrupole (Q).

a rapid broadening is found. One also sees that above the classical threshold the ray-
optics model appears to give order-of-magnitude agreement with the width (note that
there are no free parameters in this comparison). However for the resonances treated
in Fig. 14 this broadening begins before the classical Q-spoiling threshold deformation
is reached and has an approximately exponential dependence on the distance from
threshold (and not the power-law predicted by the ray-optics model). We attribute
this behavior to tunneling eﬀects which will always be important near threshold be-
cause rays approach closely the critical angle. This would explain both the reduction
of the threshold deformation and the exponential-like behavior (note that Eq. (17)
predicts exponential variation of the width with sin χ in the undeformed case).

∼

−

10

Clearly at these values of kR tunneling and interference corrections to the ray-
optics model must be included. Such corrections then lead us into the true subject
matter of quantum or wave chaos, and much more work needs to be done to reach a
full semiclassical understanding of mixed phase-space quantum systems. Nonetheless
we expect that as kR increases these non-classical eﬀects will become weaker and
the ray-optics predictions will be more closely obeyed. For example, in the droplets
studied in section 8, kR is at least an order of magnitude larger than in Fig. 14.
The results of Fig. 14 do however raise the question of whether at the moderate size
parameters kR
25 investigated the classical mechanics of the cavity is relevant
at all to the Q of its WG resonances. In order to answer this question we compare in
Fig. 15 the resonance widths of the three diﬀerent types of cylindrical deformations
introduced so far: elliptical (which is integrable), quadrupolar which exhibits a KAM
transition to chaos, and the dipolar (Robnik) deformation which at equal fractional
deformation exhibits more chaos than the quadrupole, as discussed in section 3. In
all three cases a sort of threshold behavior is seen with initial exponential broadening
above threshold. However the slope of this broadening diﬀers substantially in the
three cases with the most chaotic dipole ARC showing the most rapid broadening,
the less chaotic quadrupole ARC having an intermediate slope, and the non-chaotic
elliptical ARC showing the slowest broadening. At an eccentricity of 0.5 the dipole
and elliptical WG modes corresponding to the same undeformed resonance diﬀer in
width by almost two orders of magnitude! This suggests that the rapid breakup of
caustics which occurs in the dipole ARC and does not occur at all in the elliptical
ARC has an important inﬂuence on the Q value of their resonances even at these
moderate wavevectors.

7.2.2. Wave directionality

To test the predictions of section 6 for the directionality of emission from a deformed
cavity, we have to choose the proper boundary conditions in the wave equation cor-
responding to the situation of a uniform ray ensemble starting inside the dielectric
and then escaping. This emission process diﬀers from a scattering experiment which
requires an incoming wave to excite the resonance. The directionality pattern in a
scattering experiment will depend on the form of the incident wave both because
of interference with the outgoing wave, and because the incident wave may couple
preferentially to diﬀerent senses of circulation of the rays. These eﬀects are absent
in emission, so a unique directionality proﬁle will be observed that depends only on
the quasibound state itself and should be approximately described by our ray optics
model if the size parameter is suﬃciently large.

If the resonant state is at the complex frequency ω

iκ), then the
corresponding solution of the time dependent wave equation decays at a rate γ since
it has the form E(r, t) = E(r) e−iωt e−γt where γ > 0. But as a function of r, the
outgoing waves in fact exhibit exponential growth because

c(k

iγ

≡

−

−

H (1)

m (x)

2
πx

≈ s

ei(x−mπ/2−π/4)

(19)

(20)

for large values of x = (k
retardation eﬀect: the ﬁeld at r
it originated a time ∆t
cavity was larger by a factor e−γ∆t. This is equivalent to eκr.

iκ)r. The physical reason for this growth with eκr is a
R has propagated away from the cavity where
r/c in the past – but at that earlier time the ﬁeld at the

≫

−

≈

As can be seen from Eq. (19), all the Hankel functions in the outgoing wave
depend on r through the same factor
R). Pulling
out this common dependence, the ﬁeld of the quasibound state factorizes into radial
and angular functions,

πx ei(k−iκ)r in the far-ﬁeld (r

≫

q

2

E(r) =

ei(k−iκ)r E(φ).

2
πx

s

This means that the directionality at large distances becomes independent of r, being
contained solely in E(φ). We choose r in this far-ﬁeld region and plot the square
of the electric ﬁeld (which is proportional to the intensity) as a function of φ to
obtain the wave directionality. Figure 16 shows the intensity proﬁle for a resonance
of the quadrupole and compares it to the classical directionality histogram for the
corresponding ray ensemble. One sees quite reasonable agreement between the full
widths of the intensity maxima in the two approaches. The wave intensity distribution
is modulated by interference eﬀects which are neglected in the pure ray-optics model
(but which should be present in a semiclassical treatment). Moreover the wave-
intensity envelope does not show the peak splitting found in the ray-optics calculation.
It will be interesting to see if resonances at larger kR corresponding to the same sin χ
begin to show this peak splitting in their envelope.

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 16: Far-ﬁeld directionality of light emitted from the quadrupole-deformed
cylinder, assuming a refractive index n = 2 and sin χ0 = 0.83. The far-ﬁeld intensity
is plotted as a function of direction at e = 0.58. The upper curve represents the
ray-optics result; the lower curve (oﬀset for clarity) is obtained from exact numerical
solution of the wave equation (same resonance as in previous ﬁgure).

8. Thresholds and Intensity Distribution in Lasing

Droplets

In this section we apply the ray-optics model for ARCs to the description of the WG
modes of deformed liquid droplets and give an explanation for the observed anisotropy
of lasing emission from droplets, shown in Fig. 17 [19]. In this experiment a stream of
30µm is created
ethanol droplets containing Rhodamine-B dye with average radius
at the vibrating oriﬁce of a Berglund-Liu generator [35]. At the oriﬁce the droplets are
highly non-spherical and as they fall they undergo damped oscillations between oblate
and prolate conﬁgurations (Fig. 17) driven by excess surface tension until they relax
to highly spherical shape far downstream. The period of the shape oscillations is of
order 50 µs, which is far longer than the lifetime of the WG resonances of
10 ns [36].
Thus we may treat the diﬀerent phases of the droplet oscillation as static examples
of oblate, spherical or prolate microcavity lasers and analyze the angular emission
intensity in terms of the theory of ARCs. Previously we have focused on cylindrical
ARCs deformed perpendicular to their axes; here we apply the ray-optics model
to dielectric spheres deformed so as to preserve azimuthal symmetry (the deformed
droplets retain this symmetry as well as reﬂection symmetry through the equator to
a good approximation).

≈

≈

As seen in Fig. 17, laser emission is fairly isotropic in the sphere, but gets
suppressed near the poles of both the oblate and prolate droplets. Furthermore, the
oblate shape is brightest around the equator whereas the prolate shape of the same
deformation (ratio of long to short axes) emits most strongly from regions around
45◦. These observations are stable over a range of prolate and oblate shapes
θ
(exceeding a certain degree of deformation) and are independent of the direction of
the optical pumping. It is important to note that the three total-energy images are
normalized individually with white referring to the maximum emission, which is of
diﬀerent magnitude in each shape.

30◦

≈

−

Since axial symmetry is preserved for the droplets their instantaneous shape
can be speciﬁed in spherical coordinates by rb(θ), independent of azimuthal angle φ.
The damping is weakest for the low multipole components of the oscillation, so we
include only the Legendre polynomials P0(cos θ), P2(cos θ), P4(cos θ) in an expansion
of the shape. Odd orders do not appear because of the approximate symmetry rb(θ) =

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 17: Shadow graphs (a) and simultaneous total-energy images (b) of three
lasing droplets falling in air taken at diﬀerent phases of oscillation: prolate (top),
spherical (middle) and oblate (bottom). Light regions in (b) indicate lasing.

θ) noted above. The particular shapes we use to model this behavior more

rb(
realistically are

−

r(θ) = 1 + ǫ

cos2 θ +

cos4 θ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

3
2

for prolate deformations; an oblate shape with the same axis ratio [equal to (5/2)ǫ]
is obtained by replacing cos θ with sin θ.

The ray dynamics analysis is facilitated by the axial symmetry of the droplets
which implies (in the language of particle trajectories) that the z component of angu-
lar momentum, Lz, is conserved. At any given Lz and total energy E, the equations
of motion thus have only two degrees of freedom, just as in the deformed cylinder.
This becomes explicit in cylindrical coordinates ρ, φ, z where one has

(21)

(22)

E =

m ( ˙ρ2 + ˙z2) +

1
2

L2
z
2mρ2 .

Let us look at the dynamics projected into the 2D (ρ, z) coordinate system.
Each specular reﬂection causes a discontinuous change in ˙ρ and ˙z; however the angular
velocity ˙φ remains unchanged because the normal to the surface of an axisymmetric
cavity is always perpendicular to the φ direction. Thus a 3D specular reﬂection simply
reverses the normal component of the 2D projected velocity ( ˙ρ, ˙z) and reﬂections are
also specular in the projected coordinates. Reﬂections occur whenever the trajectory
ρ(z) intersects the boundary curve ρb(z). Between reﬂections the particle motion is
free, ˙z = const, and Eq. (22) can be integrated to ﬁnd ρ(t). It can be shown that ρ2(z)
describes a parabola whose vertex is the point of closest approach to the z-axis and
whose intersections with the squared boundary curve ρ2
b(z) are the collision points.
The curved trajectories in the z-ρ-plane between specular bounces [see the inset to
Fig. 18(a)] are to be contrasted with the straight paths in conventional 2D billiards
where the centrifugal potential L2
z/(2mρ2) is absent. For this reason we call this new
class of systems centrifugal billiards.

To discuss the resulting dynamics we introduce dimensionless variables in

Eq. (22) by setting E = 1/2 and m = 1. Then one has

1 = ˙ρ2 + ˙z2 +

L2
z
ρ2

(23)

Lz ≤

ρb(zmax) if the maximum distance from the z-axis is ρb(zmax). To
where 0
simplify notation we assume that the droplets have their widest transverse cross-
section in the equatorial plane, i.e. zmax = 0. Again the escape condition is simply

≤

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 18: Poincare surfaces of section for prolate droplets with deformation of
ǫ = 0.2 for Lz = 0.735 (a), Lz = 0.6 (b), Lz = 0.45 (c) and Lz = 0 (d). The dash-
dotted line denotes the critical line for escape, sin χc = 1/n = .735 corresponding
to the experimental value of n = 1.36 for the refractive index of the droplets in
Fig. 17. Inset in (a) shows the droplet shape in the z - ρ plane and special (periodic)
trajectories for Lz = 0.735 (solid line) and Lz = 0.2 (dashed line).

sin χ < sin χc, where sin χ is the angle of incidence with respect to the surface normal
z-plane,
n at the reﬂection point. This is not the same as the normal angle in the ρ
as can be seen by considering a trajectory reﬂecting entirely in the equatorial plane
z-plane will be zero. In our
at nonzero sin χ; its apparent angle of incidence in the ρ
units cos χ = n
v/
2E/m = 1. The
z-plane is then given by cos χρz = cos χ/√ ˙ρ2 + ˙z2. It is convenient
angle in the ρ
in the plotting of Poincar´e sections to use as variables the polar angle θ and the 3D
sin χ at each reﬂection since in these coordinates the escape condition is still satisﬁed
along a horizontal straight line.

= nρ ˙ρ + nz ˙z since the total velocity is v =

·
−

−

−

q

v

|

|

≥

At nonzero Lz certain regions of the SOS are forbidden due to the Lz angular
momentum barrier (e.g. a ray reaching the pole (θ = 0) must have Lz = 0). For the
Lz/ρb(z(θ)), where
allowed bounce coordinates θ, sin χ one ﬁnds the inequality sin χ
z(θ) = rb(θ) sin θ; this relation delimits the empty spaces in the SOS’s of Fig. 18(a-
d) which were made for a prolate shape of ﬁxed deformation (ǫ = 0.2) and varying
values of Lz. Before discussing ray escape in the deformed droplets it is important
to note that as we proceed from higher to lower Lz in Fig. 18(a-d) in addition to
the excluded regions of the SOS decreasing (because the angular momentum barrier
becomes weaker) the degree of chaos grows rapidly. There is actually no visible chaos
in Fig. 18(a) and a mostly chaotic SOS for Lz = 0 (Fig. 18(d)) for a droplet of ﬁxed
deformation. The reason for this is that high Lz trajectories are conﬁned near the
equator and a cross-section of the droplet at the equator is perfectly circular, i.e.
high Lz orbits see an eﬀective deformation which is much weaker than polar orbits
(Lz = 0) which travel in the most deformed cross-section of the droplet. The eﬀective
deformation varies approximately as ǫef f = ǫ
b(0) and tends to zero at the
maximum allowed value of Lz. Thus as long as ǫ is large enough to induce classical
Q-spoiling for the Lz = 0 orbits of interest, by looking at diﬀerent Lz values for a
ﬁxed deformation one can study the classical Q-spoiling transition in a single ARC.
We have illustrated this situation in Fig. 18(a-d).

z/ρ2

L2

−

q

1

Note that there is an absolute minimum allowed sin χ

sin χm which occurs
at the equator (θ = π/2) where ρb is maximal (i.e., sin χm = Lz/ρb(0)). This implies
that classical ray escape is entirely forbidden due to the angular momentum barrier
ρb(0) sin χc; such a case is shown in Fig. 18(a). As just noted these
for values of Lz ≥

≡

high Lz modes are conﬁned to orbits near the plane of the equator [see also the inset
to Fig. 18(a)]; since classical escape is forbidden for these modes we always expect
to ﬁnd high-Q WG modes in the equatorial region of axially-symmetric deformed
microspheres. Since this follows simply from Lz conservation it will be true in both
the oblate and prolate shapes.

Proceeding now to lower Lz in Fig. 18(b) we see that the angular momentum
barrier has weakened enough that the allowed region of the SOS passes through sin χc
and rays with this value of Lz can escape. However as before WG modes will be
0.9 in this case. These rays are unable
associated with rays starting at large sin χ
to reach sin χc due to remaining KAM curves just as we saw earlier in our discussion
of dielectric cylinders. Therefore we expect high Q WG modes for this value of Lz as
well. This situation persists all the way to Lz = 0 for deformations less than roughly
5% of the radius, so we expect little Q-spoiling and approximately isotropic emission
for smaller deformations than this.

≈

However for the 50% deformation used in Fig. 18(a-d) reducing Lz a little
more causes the appearance of regions of chaos which extend from high sin χ across
sin χc allowing classical Q-spoiling of the WG modes. We expect all modes with
Lz less than this value to have their Q rapidly degraded. As the Q of these modes
decreases it will fall below the threshold Q-value to support lasing and these modes
will go dark. But these low Lz modes are the only ones which can emit from the polar
regions because of the angular momentum barrier for the high Lz modes. Therefore
our model explains naturally why the polar regions are dark while the droplet still
lases. The low Lz modes which could emit from the poles have too low Q to lase
and the high Q modes which support lasing are conﬁned away from the polar regions.
This argument holds for both the oblate and prolate deformations in agreement with
observations.

We are left with the question of why the emission proﬁles are nonetheless
so diﬀerent in prolate versus oblate shapes. To answer this question we must look
at where the stable islands which block chaotic escape occur for the two types of
deformations. The prolate shape corresponds to a stretching of the droplet in the
vertical direction and a compression in the equatorial plane. Because it is compressed
in the equatorial plane there exists a large stable island at θ = π/2 corresponding to
the two-bounce diametral orbit of the type we discussed in the 2D case in subsection
3.3. This island appears (distorted due to the Lz barrier) clearly in Fig. 18(c,d).
As discussed above in subsection 6.2, a stable island intersecting the critical line
will prevent the classical escape in the corresponding directions; thus in the case of
Fig. 18(c) escape is blocked over an interval in polar angle centered at the equator.

In the oblate droplet the situation is reversed. The polar diameter is com-
pressed and the equatorial diameter is stretched and the stable two-bounce orbit (if
it is still stable) would appear at θ = 0, π. But for most Lz the island around this
orbit is unreachable and it has little eﬀect on the dynamics. In Fig. 19(a) and (b) the
SOS for the prolatee and oblate shapes are compared at equal deformation and equal

Figures available from author’s website.

Figure 19: Prolate (a) and oblate (b) droplet SOS’s at ǫ = 0.2 and Lz/ρb(0) = 0.3. As
in the previous Figure, the dash-dotted lines indicate sin χc. The escape directionality
is shown in (c) for the prolate (ﬁlled histogram) and oblate (white) shape.

ratio Lz/ρb(0). Indeed in the SOS for the oblate shape the regular island centered on
θ = π/2 and sin χm is absent because equatorial orbits with low sin χ are now unsta-
ble. One sees no eﬀect of the stable islands at θ = 0, π due to the angular momentum
barrier. There is still an island near the critical line at θ = 0 and sin χ = 0.6 for
z plane) as well as
this particular Lz, but its origin (a three-bounce orbit in the ρ
its eﬀect are quite diﬀerent from the prolate shape. In fact, all downward-diﬀusing
trajectories ﬁrst cross sin χc in the vicinity of this island because phase-space ﬂow (see
subsection 6.2) roughly follows a V-shaped curve connecting the three islands located
0.5) and sin χ = 0.6 (θ = 0). Hence escape is concentrated
at sin χ = 0.825 (θ =
in the equatorial region. This remains true even if the island actually intersects the
critical line (as is the case for higher Lz), thus blocking escape right at θ = 0 – in
that case escape still occurs very close to the island.

±

−

Our explanation for the diﬀering intensity proﬁles is as follows. First, it is
reasonable to assume that all modes for which classical escape is completely forbidden
will lase. As Lz decreases and classical escape begins to occur there will exist modes
which are lower Q, but still high enough Q to lase. These modes will have highly
directional emission in the polar angle (they will of course emit uniformly in the
azimuthal angle). In the prolate case as Lz decreases the ﬁrst regions of chaos which
connect the WG orbits to the critical line do so only in small intervals around θ = 30◦
and θ = 150◦ (see Figs. 18(c) and 19(a)). These values of Lz will correspond to the
lower Q lasing modes just discussed and will thus emit in small bright bands around
In contrast, in the oblate droplets phase space ﬂow curves touch
these latitudes.
the critical line near the equator (see Fig. 19(b)) and the lower Q lasing modes will
emit around θ = 0. However the total lasing intensity will be due to all the lasing
modes and there will typically also be many high Lz modes of higher Q which can
emit at the equator through the same processes as in the undeformed droplet. But
unlike the undeformed case, these modes are competing with lower Q lasing modes
corresponding to lower Lz which therefore have higher gain and capture more of the
pump energy. Since more of the pump energy goes into these highly anisotropic modes
whose emission pattern diﬀers strongly between the prolate and oblate shapes, these
shapes show essentially the intensity proﬁles predicted by the ray-optics model for
the intermediate values of Lz corresponding to slow classical escape and therefore low
but above-threshold Q values.

To produce a numerical simulation of the cumulative directionality of all the
lasing modes with classical escape, we consider ensembles of starting conditions ho-

[sin χc, 1] and Lz/ρ(0)

mogenously distributed in φ as in section 6. If the average Q of an ensemble starting
at some sin χ0 is above the lasing threshold, we record the resulting escape direction-
ality; otherwise we discard that particular ray bundle. Repeating this for uniformly
[0, 1], one obtains Fig. 19(c). It can be seen
spaced sin χ0 ∈
that maximum emission occurs near the equator for the oblate shape, and around 30◦
away from the poles in the prolate droplet. The emission peak of the oblate droplet
is split because of the island shown in Fig. 19(b), but this structure is not seen in
Fig. 17. Nevertheless, the ray theory is clearly able to account for the overall location
of the emission maxima seen experimentally. The discrepancies in ﬁne structure may
be resolvable by modifying the parametrization in Eq. (21) which we chose to model
the shape. More experiments are required to check if the above splitting does indeed
occur in droplets at diﬀerent oscillation stages.

∈

9. Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter we have begun to develop a theory of a new class of asymmetric
resonant cavities (ARCs). A large class of deformations of dielectric spheres or cylin-
ders were shown to lead to resonators with similar properties. This universality can
be understood in terms of partially chaotic ray dynamics described by KAM theory
which we have incorporated into a ray-optics model for the whispering gallery modes
of ARCs. The Q of these modes decreases sharply at a threshold deformation and
above this deformation the emission is very directional. The theory provides a natu-
ral explanation for the anisotropic lasing intensity proﬁle of deformed lasing droplets.
Systematic experimental investigation of ARCs has just begun, and only for the case
of lasing droplets; further experiments are of paramount importance at this point.
ARCs may provide tests and practical applications for ideas from KAM theory and
quantum chaos. We have proposed a number of potential applications of ARCs which
we conjecture may combine the advantages of microsphere and microdisk cavities with
the directional properties of Fabry-Perot cavities. The feasibility of these applications
cannot be judged unless signiﬁcant eﬀort is put into the experimental study of solid
ARCs.

10. Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge the major contribution of Attila Mekis to the section
on lasing droplets and ray directionality, as well as valuable discussions with Henrik
Bruus and Dima Shepelyansky. We have also beneﬁted greatly from close contact
and collaboration with Richard Chang and his experimental group, particularly Gang
Chen. This work was partially supported by the NSF under grant no. DMR-9215065.

References

[1] Y. Yamamoto and R.E. Slusher, Physics Today 46, 66 (1993).

[2] S. L. Mcall et al. , Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 289 (1992).

[3] R.E. Slusher et al. , Appl. Phys. Lett. 63, 1310 (1993).

[4] M. Kuwata-Gonokami et al. , QELS Technical Digest ’95, Paper QThL5, Poly-
mer microdisk and microcylinder lasers; M. Kuwata-Gonokami et al., preprint.

[5] A. Serpeng¨uzel, S. Arnold and G. Griﬀel, Opt. Lett. 20, 654 (1995), and refer-

ences therein.

[6] S. C. Hill and R. K. Chang in Proceedings of the 5th International Topsøe
Summer School on Nonlinear Optics (Aalborg, Denmark), O. Keller, ed. (Nova
Science Publishers, New York, 1992)

[7] L. Collot V. Lefevre-Seguin, M. Raimond and S. Haroche, Europhys. Lett. 23,

327 (1993).

[8] The term whispering gallery mode has been adopted in optics because of the
similarity of these modes to analogous modes in acoustics which were ﬁrst un-
derstood by Lord Rayleigh. These modes have high-energy density only in a
small annulus at the perimeter of the cavity and scatter very little so that in
an acoustic cavity (e.g. St. Paul’s cathedral) it is possible to whisper and be
heard clearly at the opposite side of the cavity, but not in its center. In the
context of the optical study of microdroplets these modes are often referred to
as “morphology-dependent resonances” (MDR’s). In this chapter we shall use
the term whispering gallery mode to refer to all such modes.

[9] E. S. C. Ching, P. T. Leung, K. Young, Chapter 1 of this volume.

[10] The only relevant exception is the case of elliptical deformations (discussed in
subsection 3.2) which may be treated analytically, see [C. Yeh, J. Math. Phys. 4,
65 (1963)] but which is not typical because the ray dynamics remains integrable
for all deformations.

[11] P. Barber and C. Yeh, Appl. Opt. 14, 2864 (1975)

[12] D. R. Wilton and R. Mittra, IEEE Trans. Ant. Propagation AP-20, 310 (1972)

[13] M. C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer, New

York 1990)

[14] H. U. Baranger, R. A. Jalabert and A. D. Stone, CHAOS, 3, 665 (1993).

[15] G. Casati, B. V. Chirikov,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2437 (1986)

I. Guarneri and D. L. Shepelyanski,

[16] It is amusing to note an analogy between the microwave ionization of hydrogen
and our current topic. The dielectric microspheres which trap a long-lived pho-
ton are sometimes referred to as “photonic atoms”; thus one could say we are
studying the classical “ionization” of the photonic atom due to a perturbation
of its shape.

[17] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone and R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett. 19, 1693 (1994).

[18] A. F. Levi et al. , Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 561 (1993)

[19] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone and R. K. Chang, to be published

in Phys. Rev. Lett.

[20] B. R. Johnson, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 10, 343 (1993).

[21] A. N. Kolmogorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 98, 527 (1954); J. Moser,
Nachr. Akad. Wiss. G¨ottingen, Math. Phys. Kl. , 1 (1962); V. I. Arnol’d, Rus-
sian Math. Surveys 18, 9 (1963); see the discussions in Ref. 23 and [A. M. Ozorio
de Almeida, Hamiltonian Systems: Chaos and Quantization (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1988)].

[22] V. F. Lazutkin, Math. USSR Izvestija 7, 185 (1973)

[23] L.E. Reichl, The Transition to Chaos, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992)

[24] M. Robnik, J. Phys. A 16, 3971 (1983); M. Robnik, J. Phys. A 17, 1049 (1983).

[25] M. V. Berry, Eur. J. Phys. 2, 91 (1981)

[26] H. Poincar´e, Les M´ethodes Nouvelles de la M´echanique C´eleste Tome III,

(Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1899)

[27] D. Q. Chowdhury, P. W. Barber and S. C. Hill, Appl. Opt. 31 3518 (1992)

[28] L.P. Kadanoﬀ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, (1981); D. Bensimon and L. P. Kadanoﬀ,
Physica D 13, 82 (1984); R. S. MacKay, J. D. Meiss, I. C. Percival, Physica D
13, 55 (1984); R. S. MacKay, J. D. Meiss, I. C. Percival, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52,
697 (1984) (1984).

[29] L.P. Kadanoﬀ, J. Stat. Phys. 27, 631 (1981)

[30] See the articles in the focus issue on “Chaotic Scattering”, CHAOS 3 (1993).

[31] J. U. N¨ockel, A. Mekis and A. D. Stone, unpublished

[32] O. Bohigas, S. Tomsovic and D. Ullmo, Phys. Rep. 223, 43 (1993)

[33] J. B. Keller and S. I. Rubinov, Ann. Phys. 9, 24 (1960)

[34] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, unpublished

[35] S. X. Qian, J. B. Snow, H. M. Tzeng, and R. K. Chang, Science 231, 486

(1986).

[36] J. Z. Zhang, D. H. Leach and R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett. 13, 270 (1988)

