Martina Hentschel and Jens U. N¨ockel1
Published in Quantum Optics of Small Structures, edited by D.Lenstra, T.D.Visser
and K.A.H.van Leeuwen (Edita KNAW, Amsterdam, 2000)

The sequential-reﬂection model in
deformed dielectric cavities

The stationary states of a microlaser are related to
the decaying quasibound states of the correspond-
ing passive cavity. These are interpreted classically
as originating from sequential escape attempts of
an ensemble of rays obeying a curvature-corrected
Fresnel formula. Polarization-dependent predic-
tions of this model, and its limitations for stable
orbits in partially chaotic systems are discussed.

As a mechanism for achieving mode conﬁnement, waveguiding by total inter-
nal reﬂection is ubiquitous in optics. However, in dielectric microresonators
where three-dimensionally conﬁned mode volumes are desired, there is al-
ways leakage because the ray picture, in which Fresnel’s formulas describe
the outcoupling, acquires corrections. Leaky modes corresponding to clas-
sically conﬁned rays can be found, e.g., in optical ﬁbers as “spiral” modes
(Poon), or in latterally structured cylindrical VCSELs (Ahn) as well as in
microdisk lasers (McCall). The classically forbidden loss in such modes is
analogous to tunneling through an eﬀective potential barrier (Johnson).

The highest Q is achieved for modes which semiclassically correspond to
rays almost at grazing incidence. Resonators with a circular cross section
are a particularly simple realization of this requirement, because they ex-
hibit whispering-gallery (WG) modes characterized by high intensity in an
annular region near the surface. However, even Lord Rayleigh who ﬁrst de-
scribed the acoustic analog that gave the phenomenon its name, concluded
(Strutt) that it requires only an everywhere positive curvature, not neces-
sarily rotational symmetry. A rigorous proof of this is diﬃcult because in
the short-wavelength limit, this “clinging” of waves to the walls has to carry
over to the ray picture, in which a generic oval cavity exhibits a transition
1Current address: Department of Physics, University of Oregon, 1371 E 13th Avenue,

Eugene, OR 97403

2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

to chaos (Lazutkin; N¨ockel, 1996a). Notwithstanding, this problem is funda-
mental to microresonator design (N¨ockel, 1997a), because the availability of
high-Q modes is the foremost selection criterium in an otherwise unbounded
space of potential resonator shapes (Angelow). Chaos can in fact make WG
modes more useful, and moreover create other types of modes with desirable
properties, such as the bowtie pattern whose confocal geometry points the
way toward the strong-coupling regime in combination with focused emission
(Gmachl, Morin).

The robustness of whispering-gallery type intensity patterns in the modes
of convex resonators extends even to nonlinear media (Harayama). However,
in that case the distinction to the widely studied phenomenon of vortex
formation (Weiss) becomes washed out: a WG mode is also a vortex with
a phase singularity at points of vanishing intensity; for a circular resonator
where the ﬁeld is proportional to a Bessel function Jm(kr) ≈ rm near the
center r = 0, the vorticity is simply the angular momentum quantum number
m. Therefore, since our aim is to address the fundamental aspect of the shape
dependence of high-Q modes in microresonators, we focus here on linear
media where ampliﬁcation is taken into account by a negative imaginary
part of the refractive index ˜n.

The model considered here can be derived from a homogenous cylinder
by deforming its cross section and considering only propagation transverse
to its axis. In this case, TE and TM polarization are decoupled and one has
to consider only a scalar wave equation

∇2ψ + ˜n2k2 ψ = 0,

(1)

assuming a steady state time dependence so that k is real. Here, ˜n ≡ n − i n′
inside the resonator and ˜n = 1 outside, giving rise to an exterior and interior
ﬁeld, ψext and ψint, both of which are connected by the proper matching
conditions at the dielectric interface, depending on polarization. For TM
modes, ψ denotes the electric ﬁeld, which is parallel to the cylinder axis. In
this case one ﬁnds that ψ and its normal derivative are continuous at the
interface, in analogy to quantum mechanics.

The system is open because it radiates energy into the environment via
its modal losses. This openness increases as n → 1, and the closed-resonator
limit is approached for n → ∞. This can be understood from Fresnel’s
formulas which imply total internal reﬂection for all angles of incidence χ
satisfying sin χ > 1/n ≡ sin χc (χc is the critical angle). Equation (1) can be

recast as

∇2ψ + n2˜k2 ψ = 0,
(2)
where n is the real part of ˜n as deﬁned above, and ˜k ≡ k−i k n′/n is a complex
wavenumber inside the cavity but reduces to ˜k = k outside. If instead of this
we also had ˜k = k − i k n′/n outside, the solutions of Eq. (2) would be the
quasibound states of the passive resonator, as they arise when one assumes a
decaying time dependence ∝ exp[−ick t − γ t], where γ = ck n′/n.

For a quasibound (or metastable) state, the ﬁeld at distances larger than
≈ c/(2γ) from the cavity grows exponentially due to retardation, but within
this physical range ψext vanishes as γ → 0, so that one can write ψext(r) ≈
γζ(r). If one expands the dependence of ψint and ζ on γ in a Taylor series,
then to linear order the γ-dependence of ζ, but not that of ψint, can be
dropped in the full solution. Therefore, the stationary state of the active
medium and the metastable decaying state are identical to ﬁrst order in γ
within an area of order γ−2.

This approximate equivalence establishes a connection to the study of
S-matrix poles from which quasibound states arise, see (Schomerus), and to
dissipation in quantum mechanics (Prigogine, Braun). The recent resurgence
of interest in these problems is motivated to a signiﬁcant extent by our lack
of understanding of the quantum-to-classical transition, in particular in the
presence of classical chaos. Precisely this constellation is also present in Eq.
(2) when one considers its short-wavelength limit for the generic case of a
deformed cavity.

In the context of laser resonators, there are three main diﬀerences to
previous work on open quantum systems: ﬁrstly, we are interested in the
properties of individual states of an open system, as opposed to a statistical
ensemble; see also (Casati). Secondly, an important quantity that can be
studied for such individual states is their emission directionality, which in
other open systems of chemical or nuclear physics is averaged out. Finally,
the classical limits of quantum mechanics with smooth potentials and optics
with discontinuous refractive indices are qualitatively diﬀerent (Kohler): the
ﬁrst yields deterministic Hamiltonian mechanics; the second leads to the
probabilistic Fresnel formulas which moreover depend on polarization.

In principle, Eq. (2) can be solved numerically to ﬁnd the discrete com-
plex ˜k and the corresponding modes. One approach is based on the Rayleigh
hypothesis (van den Berg, Barton) which in our implementation for quasi-
bound states (N¨ockel, 1996a) assumes that the ﬁelds can be expanded in

cylinder functions as

ψint(r, φ) =

Am Jm(kr) eim φ,

(3)

ψext(r, φ) =

Bm H (1)

m (kr) eim φ.

Xm

Xm

where a polar coordinate system with suitably chosen origin is used. These
expansions always work inside some circle of convergence for ψint and out-
side some other circle for ψext, and for a large range of resonator shapes both
convergence domains contain the dielectric interface where the matching con-
ditions are imposed to obtain equations for the unknown coeﬃcients Am and
Bm.

Computational cost can be high here, especially at short wavelengths, and
hence a semiclassical approximation can lead to simpliﬁcations while preserv-
ing physical insight. The ray picture is a cornerstone of classical optics, but
its value in the study of open resonators only unfolds when the ray dynam-
ics is studied in phase space (N¨ockel, 1994, 1996a, 1996b; Mekis), because
Fresnel’s formulas determine escape probabilities according to the angle of
incidence χ, not the position of impact. One can make use of the physical
information contained in this picture in two ways: Either one starts from
Eq. (2) and takes a short-wavelength limit (Narimanov); or alternatively,
one starts from the classical dynamics and makes classical approximations
that allow one to impose simple quantization conditions and thus make the
connection to the resonator modes (N¨ockel, 1997a). The question whether
these diﬀerent routes meet “in the middle” is not straightforward because
the problem of semiclassical quantization in a generic deformed resonator is
not completely solved as yet, owing to the coexistence of both regular and
chaotic motion in their classical phase space.

Among the advantages of the ray-based approach (N¨ockel, 1997a) are its
ﬂexibility and computational ease. However, in order for the prescription
outlined in Ref. (N¨ockel, 1997a) to correctly describe the limiting case of a
circular cylinder, one must include the tunneling which in the circle is the only
loss mechanism. This can be done in the ray picture with a curvature- and
wavelength dependent “rounding” of Fresnel’s formulas which the simulation
uses at each reﬂection along a ray path. The idea used in (N¨ockel, 1997a)
was to interpret the resonance widths of a circular cylinder in terms of a
“sequential-tunneling” ansatz: if the intensity of a quasibound state decays
as exp[−2γ t], this can be interpreted in the ray picture as the result of

ν sequential escape attempts with reﬂection probability p0, where ν is the
number of reﬂections the ray undergoes during the time t. In a circle of radius
R, a trajectory characterized by the angle of incidence χ has ν = ct/(nL)
reﬂections during t (c/n is the speed of light in the passive medium and
L = 2R cos χ is the geometric path length between reﬂections). Therefore,
one expects a decay law ∝ pν
0 = exp[ct ln p0/(nL)]. Comparison with the
wave result yields

p0 = exp(−2 nLγ/c)
An analytic approximation for γ in the circle with TM polarization has been
derived in (N¨ockel, 1997b),

(4)

γ ≈ − c
2nR

n − 1
n + 1 (cid:21)

×

ln

(cid:20)

2
m(kR) + Y 2

.

m(kR)]

π kR [J 2

Using the semiclassical expression

m = nkR sin χ

for the angular momentum (N¨ockel, 1996a), one then obtains the reﬂecticity
in terms of purely classical variables, p0(kR, sin χ). It reduces to Fresnel’s
formula in the limit of large radius of curvature R, and by construction re-
produces the width of a mode in the circle if applied locally at each reﬂection
in our classical ray model. The latter does not hold uniformly for a similar
correction derived in (Snyder).

From the classical limit, it follows that there exists an upper bound on reso-
nance widths for dielectric cavities with stepped index proﬁles and “quantum-
mechanical” continuity conditions on ψ, because the reﬂectivity p0, (for po-
larization perpendicular to the plane of incidence), is bounded away from
zero. This minimum p0,min will limit the width of resonances in a cavity of
characteristic size l to γmax = −c ln p0,min/(2nl). Smooth index proﬁles can
also appear discontinuous on the scale of the wavelength but are eventually
resolved as k → ∞, allowing arbitrarily small reﬂectivities at perpendicular
incidence.

However, extending these arguments to TE polarization where the electric
ﬁeld is in the plane of incidence, we furthermore conclude that a similar up-
per bound on the widths does not exist even for sharp interfaces. The reason
is that Fresnel’s formula yields zero reﬂectivity at the Brewster angle χB at

(5)

(6)

sin χB = (1 + n2)−1/2. The normal derivative of ψ (which now represents the
magnetic ﬁeld) exhibits a jump proportional to n2 at the dielectric interface
– reminding us that this is a situation unique to optics. These general con-
siderations have important implications for microresonator design especially
at the large n typical for semicondutors, because in that case sin χB → 1/n,
i.e., the “hole” in the reﬂectivity for TE polarization approaches χc for total
internal reﬂection from below. Taking tunneling due to ﬁnite curvature into
account as in Eq. (4), the rounded Fresnel formula then exhibits reduced
reﬂectivity even for incidence somewhat above χc. One can approximately
obtain the TE widths of the circle from γ = −c Im[σ]/(nR),

σ ≈ arctan[

n

(n − 1/n)

]

(7)

H (1)
m−1(kR)
H (1)
m (kR)

− m
kR



−1



This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where refractive index and kR are chosen close
to those of Ref. (Gmachl). The reason is that the quantum-cascade mate-
rial used there emits preferentially TM polarization, whereas the pioneering
MQW microdisk lasers with sub-micron thickness permit guiding in the ver-
tical direction only for TE modes [cf. McCall (1992); there, TE/TM must
be interchanged to get from the slab-waveguide to our cylinder convention].
It is thus important to ascertain whether the identical oval lateral design of
the quantum-cascade lasers in Ref. (Gmachl) would also permit a microdisk
laser to operate in TE polarization.

The lasing mode in Fig. 3D of (Gmachl) was identiﬁed as a bowtie-shaped
pattern corresponding to a periodic ray path with angle of incidence given
by sin χ ≈ 1/n, i.e., directly at the critical angle. That this mode provides
high Q can be seen by comparing to γ in Fig. 1: assuming that the width γB
of a bowtie mode results from the sequential application of p0 as determined
for the circle, the argument leading to Eq. (4) implies that γB ≈ γ L/l where
L/l ≈ 1.13 is the ratio of the classical path lengths between reﬂections in
the WG orbit and bowtie, respectively. One sees that the TM line intersects
the critical angle (corresponding to m = kR) at a much smaller width than
the TE curve, and this Q-spoiling due to Brewster transmission is borne
out by the actual TE resonances as well. This leads to the prediction that
conventional microdisk lasers with a shape designed to yield a bowtie pattern
just at χc as in Fig. 3D of (Gmachl) will not lase.

These ray arguments are known to yield large deviations from the true res-
onance widths when the modes under consideration are quantized on stable

TE, exact

TE, Eq.(7)

TM, Eq.(5)

m=kR
(cid:223) (cid:13)
sinc =1/n

c
/
R

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

10

20

40

50

60

30
m

Figure 1: Exact resonance widths of a circle (radius R, refractive index
n = 3.29) at 35 < kR < 35.5 versus angular momentum m. Dashed line
indicates χc in Fresnel’s law, using Eq. (6). Also shown are the TM widths.
The Brewster angle is at m ≈ 34 and causes a peak in the TE widths.

phase-space domains in a partially chaotic system, cf. Ref. (N¨ockel, 1997a)
where this was attributed to chaos-assisted tunneling. The latter yields en-
hanced outcoupling and hence the true widths are underestimated by the
sequential ray picture. Therefore, the above Q-spoiling for TE modes is
not counteracted by a correction of this nature. The prediction of an upper
bound for TM widths is also not aﬀected by chaos-assisted tunneling because
it cannot be faster than the fastest classical process, which in turn is limited
by p0 at sin χ = 0. Beyond this, however, quantitative widths for stable-orbit
modes in mixed phase spaces are not provided by the ray model.

The disagreement is illustrated in Fig. 2 for a bowtie mode similar to the
ones studied in (Narimanov), as a function of n, but at a deformation of ǫ =
0.16 [deﬁned as in (Gmachl)] and nkR ≈ 119.8. Since nk is the wavenumber
inside the resonator, it should remain approximately independent of n as
long as the outcoupling can be taken into account in the form of a boundary
Indeed, for the
phase shift intermediate between Dirichlet and Neumann.
state shown in Fig. 2, the change in nkR in the plotted range of n is only
≈ 0.2. The length scale R here is the radius of curvature at the points of
reﬂection. At small n where χc is larger than the angle of incidence of the
bowtie, escape is classically allowed in Fresnel’s formula and hence curvature
corrections are unimportant. At n > 3, the tunneling correction in Eq. (5)
does improve on the classical Fresnel prediction (γ = 0) but clearly still

g
)
 
c
/
R

(
g
o
L

0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Bowtie reflects at
the critical angle

Fresnel

exact

3

TM

3.5
n

4

Figure 2: Width of a TM bowtie mode vs. refractive index, from numerical
and ray calculations.

underestimates the true width. As tunneling in general is deﬁnable only
with respect to a classical expectation, we could again label the discrepancy
as chaos-assisted tunneling. However, a semiclassical theory starting from
Eq. (2) which reproduces the exact behavior in Fig. 2 very well (Narimanov)
can shed more light on the physics of the phenomenon.

References:
Ahn, J. C., 1999et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 536
Angelow, G., 1996, F. Laeri, T. Tschudi, Opt. Lett. 21, 1324
Barton, J. P., 1997, Appl. Opt. 36, 1312
Braun, D., 1999, P. L. Braun and F. Haake, Physica D 131, 265
Casati, G., 1997, G. Maspero and D. L. Shepelyanski, Phys. Rev. E 56,

R6233

Casati, G., 1999, G. Maspero and D. L. Shepelyanski, Physica D 131, 311
Gmachl, C., 1998et al., Science 280, 1556
Harayama, T., 1999, P. Davis and K. S. Ikeda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3803
Johnson, B. R., 1993, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 10, 343
Kohler, A., 1998, R. Bl¨umel, Ann. Phys. 267, 249
Lazutkin, V. F., 1993, KAM Theory and Semiclassical Approximations to

Eigenfunctions, (Springer, New York)

g
g
McCall, S. L., 1992, A. F. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. J. Pearton and R. A. Logan,

Mekis, A., 1995, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone and R. K. Chang,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 289

Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2682

Morin, S. E., 1994, C. C. Yu and T. W. Mossberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1489
Narimanov, E. E., 1999, G. Hackenbroich, P. Jaquod and A. Douglas Stone,

cond-mat/9907109

N¨ockel, J. U., 1994, A. D. Stone and R. K. Chang, Optics Letters 19, 1693
N¨ockel, J. U., 1996a , and A. D. Stone, in: Optical Processes in Microcavi-
ties, edited by R. K. Chang and A. J. Campillo (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore)

N¨ockel, J. U., 1996b, A.D.Stone, G.Chen, H. Grossman and R. K. Chang,

Opt. Lett. 21, 1609

N¨ockel, J. U., 1997a, A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45
N¨ockel, J. U., 1997b, Dissertation, Yale University
Patra, M., 1999, H. Schomerus, C. W. J. Beenakker, cond-mat/9905019
Poon, A. W., 1998, R. K. Chang and J. A. Lock, Opt. Lett. 23, 1105
Prigogine, I., 1992, Phys. Rep. 219, 93
Snyder, A. W., 1975, J.D.Love, IEEE Trans. MTT-23, 134
Strutt, J. W., 1945, and Baron Rayleigh, The Theory of Sound, Vol.II

Weiss, C. O., et al., Appl. Phys. B 68, 151 (1999)
van den Berg, P. M., 1979, J.T.Fokkema, IEEE Trans. Anten. Propag. AP-

(Dover, New York)

27, 577

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme, N¨othnitzer Str.
01187 Dresden, Germany

38,

