2
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fourier Synthesization of Optical Pulses and “Polar” Light

V. S. Zapasskii and E. B. Alexandrov

All-Russia Research Center “Vavilov State Optical Institute”, St. Petersburg, 199034 Russia

It is shown that the direct Fourier synthesization of light beams allows

one to create polarity-asymmetric waves, which are able, in the process of

nonlinear interaction with a medium, to break its inversion symmetry. As

a result, these ”polar” waves may show the eﬀect of optical rectiﬁcation in

nonlinear centrosymmetric media by generating light-induced dc electric po-

larization. At the same time, the waves of this type, due to their unusual

symmetry properties, can be used for detecting the direction and sign of a dc

electric ﬁeld applied to the medium. The prospects of application of polar

waves to data recording and processing are discussed.

I. INTRODUCTION

The problem of generation of ultrashort light pulses has drawn considerable attention

in recent years. This attention is a result of unprecedented (subfemtosecond) temporal res-

olution and giant intensities achieved with their use, a potential possibility to signiﬁcantly

increase the data transmission and processing rates, and the unexpected successes in appli-

cation of comb spectra of ultrashort light pulses in metrology of optical frequencies (see, e.g.,

the review [1]). Since almost all existing methods for producing ultrashort pulses involve

generation of equidistant pulse trains, the generated emission is also described by a discrete

set of equidistant harmonics in the spectral representation.

In practice, this is achieved

either due to proper spectral characteristics of the emitting system, e.g., an equidistant

cavity-mode structure in laser mode locking [2], or due to a natural temporal periodicity of

the physical process, as, e.g., in the well-known experiments on generation of comb spectra

under high-power photoexcitation of noble gas atoms [3,4].

1

To address the problem of shortening the light pulse duration, Hansch proposed in 1990

an idea of a direct synthesization of a wave with the necessary ﬁeld proﬁle from a corre-

sponding set of Fourier harmonics [5]. Indeed, a train of ultrashort pulses may be obtained

by superposing several harmonics (ω0, 2ω0, 3ω0, ...nω0), with the highest of them (nω0) con-

trolling the pulse duration and the lowest (ω0) controlling the repetition rate. The “light”

pulses synthesized in this way are close in shape to a half-cycle of the highest harmonic.

The phases of the light beams being combined are supposed to be suﬃciently well deﬁned,

with the phases of diﬀerent harmonics synchronized due to their common origin from the

same master oscillator or due to phase-locking of diﬀerent oscillators (as in [5]).

Figure 1 shows as an illustration the ﬁeld proﬁle of two hypothetical waves synthesized

from 30 harmonics of the CO2 laser (wave b only from odd harmonics). The highest harmonic

corresponds to the wavelength

0.35 µm. The pulses thus obtained are shorter than 1 fs

and are spaced in time by

Implementation of such waves is an interesting and

∼
35 fs.

∼

diﬃcult (as far as we know, so far unsolved) technical problem. In this paper, however, we

want to call attention to simple and unusual properties of the synthesized waves which may

be easily revealed even with a minimal number of harmonics and may be interesting both

from the cognitive and practical points of view.

II. POLAR LIGHT WAVES AND THEIR PROPERTIES

The two waves shown in Fig. 1 diﬀer qualitatively from each other.

In one of them

(Fig. 1a) all the pulses are unipolar, while in the other (Fig. 1b), they are bipolar. The

latter wave, in spite of the unusual shape of the oscillations, still holds the main symmetry

of a conventional monochromatic wave with respect to sign reversal of the ﬁeld in each

half-cycle.In the ﬁrst (”unipolar”) wave, the polar symmetry of the oscillations is broken.

It is evident that in the processes of linear interaction between the light and a medium for

which the superposition principle is obeyed the ”unipolarity” of the wave cannot be revealed

because this property is distinguished only by a certain phase matching of the constituent

2

harmonics. However, in the processes of a nonlinear interaction, the wave of this type may

show unique properties which are absent in its constituent harmonics.

First of all, to describe adequately the physical asymmetry of the unipolar wave ﬁeld, the

polarization vector of the wave should become polar. It means that to describe polarization

state of a linearly-polarized wave one would have to specify not only the azimuth of the

polarization plane but also the direction of its “polarity” (say, “up” or “down”). Two

beams with “parallel” and “anti-parallel” polarizations are two physically distinguishable

situations.

In particular, such beams will interfere diﬀerently with each other. Figure 2

shows, as an example, a possible shape of the polar wave synthesized from six harmonics (the

wave analyzed in [5]) and the proﬁle of the interference pattern for the two waves of this kind

with parallel and anti-parallel polarizations. As is seen from the ﬁgure, these two proﬁles are

essentially diﬀerent and, in particular, completely destructive interference is possible only

for the interfering beams with antiparallel polarizations. The interference pattern of this

kind makes it possible to examine visually the peculiar proﬁle of the synthesized wave. Note,

however, that such an observation should be implemented with an appropriate broad-band

detector (e.g., an IR viewer), capable of detecting all spectral harmonics of the interfering

waves.

The most important property of the polar waves, in our opinion, is their ability to induce,

in a centrosymmetric nonlinear medium, static electric polarization or dc electric current,

i.e., to induce a perturbation with the symmetry of polar vector (see, e.g., [6]). It is easy to

show that a result of combining the nonlinear polarizability of a centrosymmetric medium

(P = αE + βE3 + . . .) with the polar asymmetry of the wave E is that the integral of

the polarization P over a period becomes nonzero. For noncentrosymmetric media (with

quadratic nonlinearity), the eﬀect of this kind is known as optical rectiﬁcation [7]. In the

case under consideration, the inversion symmetry of the problem is lifted by the light wave

itself. For a polar wave, the direction of the induced dipole vector will depend on the azimuth

of the plane of polarization of the wave and will be evidently inverted upon rotation of the

polarization plane through 180o. Such a linearly polarized wave is capable of bringing into

3

the medium an electric dipole moment exactly like a circularly polarized wave is capable

of bringing into the medium a magnetic moment. Unlike other methods of light-induced

charge separation in centrosymmetric media (as, e.g., in the photorefractive eﬀect [8], where

the polar vector that lifts the inversion symmetry is the gradient of the optical excitation

density), the use of polar waves allows one, in essence, to locally create, in the illuminated

spot, an eﬀective electric ﬁeld with the magnitude and direction controlled by the intensity

and polarization of the light beam and thus to polarize the medium in this area.

It seems evident that the polarization induced with polar light can be detected (read out)

using the same kind of light. In other words, properties of a polarized medium (again, in

the nonlinear regime of interaction) will be diﬀerent for the beams with opposite directions

of the polarization vectors. Therefore, the polar wave that probes the polarized medium

is capable of detecting the sigh of its polarization or the sign of the electric ﬁeld applied

to the medium. It may be easily shown also that a usual monochromatic light wave after

passing through a polarized medium (e.g., placed in an external electric ﬁeld) acquires a

”polarity”, with the sign of this polarity (i.e., the type of phase matching of the harmonics)

being determined by the sign of polarization of the medium, which can thus be detected.

We will consider these issues in a more rigorous way elsewhere.

It should be emphasized that to obtain such polar light there is no need to combine a

great number of harmonics and to design exotic waves like those presented in Fig. 1. Figure 3

shows proﬁles of the polar waves synthesized from two and three harmonics. As is seen, even

for two harmonics, the ﬁeld amplitudes of opposite polarities may diﬀer by a factor of two.

Therefore, it may be expected that even the simplest combinations of two harmonics will be

fairly eﬃcient for observation of the above eﬀects. Moreover, one precedent of observation

of the eﬀect of this kind, when the polar wave was formed and revealed in the same medium,

is known. This is optical frequency doubling in a glass optical ﬁber [9], where the action of

two coherent harmonics of laser light polarized the medium within the regions of the order

of the phase-matching length and, thus, allowed the normally forbidden second harmonic

generation.

4

III. NUMERICAL ESTIMATES

Synthesized polar light waves provide fundamentally new possibilities for perturbing

and probing nonlinear media. The possibility to locally polarize the medium with a light

beam and to subsequently read-out this polarization is very attractive from the viewpoint of

practical application of polar light, e.g., for data recording and processing. This approach,

however, has a disadvantage: the medium can distinguish polarity of the wave only when

the process of interaction is nonlinear. Note that this relates not only to data recording

(which is inevitably nonlinear), but also to read-out. For this reason, it is evident that

application of polar light for light-induced polarization of the medium or for diagnostics of

such a polarization may become eﬃcient, either in the case of high cubic nonlinearity of the

medium, or in the case of suﬃciently high sensitivity of the measurements. Let us consider

this point in more detail.

As for media with high cubic nonlinearity, one may rely on further progress in the area

of synthesis of new nonlinear materials based on polymers with conjugated bonds where

signiﬁcant successes have been achieved in recent years (see, e.g., [10,11]). As can be easily

shown, the strength of the electric ﬁeld E0 produced in the medium with cubic susceptibility

χ(3) by a coherent superposition of two harmonics with approximately equal amplitudes

E is given, to within an order of magnitude, by E0 ∼
nonlinearities achieved nowadays in polymers with conjugated bonds, χ(3)

χ(3)E3. Using the scale of cubic

10−10 CGSE

∼

(see, e.g., [12]), one can estimate that the amplitudes of the light wave harmonics needed

to create in the medium an eﬀective dc ﬁeld of about 100 V/cm will lie in the range of 103

CGSE. This corresponds to the light power density of about 109 W/cm2 or

10 W through

∼

an area of 1 µm2. It should be borne in mind, however, that we made this estimate for

the most unfavorable case of superposition of two harmonics, when the achievable polarity

of the wave (which may be speciﬁed by the ratio of amplitudes of the ﬁeld vector in two

opposite directions) is the smallest. With increasing number of harmonics and increasing

polar asymmetry of the wave, the above estimate will become much more favorable. It is

5

possible also that considerable improvement may be obtained by using semiconductors and

quantum-conﬁned heterostructures with giant nonlinear susceptibilities (see, e.g., [13]). For

these cases, however, the relevant estimates require a more serious analysis of the mechanism

of polarizability of the medium in a bichromatic ﬁeld.

As applied to the problem of detecting the electric polarization of the medium with

the polar-light waves, the situation appears much more attractive. The point is that the

spectral composition of polar light which has passed through a polarized (by an external

electric ﬁeld) nonlinear mediumproves to be diﬀerent for the cases of parallel and antiparallel

orientations of the light and medium polarization vectors. For simplicity, we will again

consider superposition of only two harmonics. From the viewpoint of the measurement

technique, the most interesting point is that the amplitudes of these two harmonics appear to

be odd functions of the beam polarity. In other, more exact, words, when the sign of polarity

of each of the beams is inverted, the amplitude increment of each harmonic also changes its

sign. Beam polarity, in turn, may be easily modulated by transmitting the beam through

a medium with a modulated (e.g., by an applied ﬁeld) refractive index. Due to dispersion

of the medium, the diﬀerence between its refractive indices for the two frequencies spaced

by one octave (ω and 2ω) will also be modulated and, for a properly chosen modulation

amplitude and thickness of the medium, the beam polarity will appear to be modulated

as well. As a result, as noted above, the amplitudes of the constituent harmonics of the

light beam that has passed through the polarized medium under study will be modulated.

It is important that in an experiment of this kind, when the beam is modulated in such a

delicate fashion, the sensitivity of measurements may easily reach its shot-noise limit. As

can be shown for this case, relative modulation of the fundamental harmonic, will be given

by the factor 6χ(3)E0 E/χ(1), where χ(1) and χ(3) are the linear and cubic susceptibilities of

the medium, respectively, E0 is the dc ﬁeld applied to the medium, and E is the ﬁeld of

the light wave. Now, to estimate the limiting sensitivity of such a technique, we have to

compare this value with photocurrent ﬂuctuations of the detector, which registers the same

light with the amplitude E. As a result, the equation that connects the strength of the

6

applied dc electric ﬁeld with the ﬁeld amplitude of the polar wave capable of detecting the

corresponding polarization of the medium will have the form .

6χ(3)E0 E/χ(1)

2

·

∼

10−11/(E

√S)

·

Here S is the beam cross section in the medium.

If we again take cubic susceptibility

χ(3)

10−10 CGSE and the dc ﬁeld applied to the medium equal to 30 CGSE (

10 kV/cm),

∼

∼

it appears that this polarization of the medium can be detected, e.g., in a 3-mW light beam

with a cross section of 1 mm2 (the power density 0.3 W/cm2) or in a 3-µW light beam

with a cross section of 1 µm2 (300 W/cm2). As before, sensitivity may be further increased

by increasing the number of harmonics that form the polar light beam. It is noteworthy

that in the above experiment with detection of polarization of the medium, modulation

of the light beam polarity can be replaced by modulation of the sign of the ﬁeld applied

to the medium. Of course, the result will be the same. However, the possibility of such

an observation indicates that with polar Light, a centrosymmetric medium could exhibit a

linear electrooptic eﬀect.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we call attention to the fact that polar waves which may be easily synthe-

sized from a few Fourier harmonics of a fundamental frequency may produce, in a nonlinear

medium, a perturbation with the symmetry of a polar vector (as, e.g., the electric ﬁeld or

current). The action of such light beams upon a nonlinear medium is equivalent to local

application of an electric ﬁeld to the illuminated spot. In our opinion, this eﬀect is primarily

interesting from the point of view of symmetry, as a way to control and determine the sign of

the polar vector using a probe light beam. The estimates made above show that the method

of diagnostics of polarization of the medium using polar light may be fairly eﬃcient even

for a medium with a small cubic nonlinearity. The authors gratefully acknowledge useful

discussions with S.G. Przhibel’skii.

7

[1] T. Brabec and F. Krausz, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2000, v. 72, p. 545.

[2] A.M.Weiner, J.P.Heritage, and E.M.Kirschner, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1988, v. 5, p. 1563.

[3] P.B.Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, v. 71, p. 1994.

[4] K.C. Kulander, K.J.Schafer, and J.L.Krause, in Super Intense Laser-Atom Physics, NATO

ASI Ser. B, v. 316, ed. By B.Piraux et al. (Plenum, New York, 1993).

[5] T.W.Hansch, Opt. Commun., 1990, v. 80, p. 71.

[6] J.Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals, 1964

[7] P.N.Butcher and D.Cotter, The Elements of Nonlinear Optics, Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1990.

[8] P.Yeh, Introduction to Photorefractive Nonlinear Optics, John Wiley, New York, 1993.

[9] U. Osterberg and W. Margulis, Opt. Lett., 1986, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 516-518.

[10] J.Zyss, Molecular Nonlinear Optics: Materials, Physics and Devices, Boston, Acad. Press,

1993.

[11] H.S. Nalwa, Adv. Mater., 1993, v. 5, p. 341.

[12] V.W. Van Stryland and M. Sheik-Bahae, in Characterization Techniques and Tabulation for

Organic Nonlinear Optical Materials, New York - Basel - Hong Kong, 1998, p. 655.

[13] R.Fischer and R Muller, Kvant. Elektron., 1989, v. 16, p. 1723.

8

FIG. 1. The ﬁeld proﬁles of two hypothetical waves synthesized from 30 harmonics of the CO2

laser radiation (λ = 10.6µm); a - unipolar wave and b - bipolar wave. The wave b is formed only

from odd harmonics of the fundamental frequency.

9

FIG. 2. The ﬁeld proﬁle of the wave synthesized from six Fourier harmonics (a) and the pattern

of interference of two such waves with parallel (b) and antiparallel (c) polarizations.

FIG. 3. The ﬁeld proﬁle of the polar waves synthesized from two (a) and three (b) harmonics.

10

