2
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
0
5
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Near-ﬁeld to far-ﬁeld transition of photonic
crystal ﬁbers: symmetries and interference
phenomena

Niels Asger Mortensen & Jacob Riis Folkenberg

Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark

nam@crystal-ﬁbre.com
http://www.crystal-ﬁbre.com

Abstract:

The transition from the near to the far ﬁeld of the fundamental mode
radiating out of a photonic crystal ﬁber is investigated experimentally
and theoretically. It is observed that the hexagonal shape of the near
ﬁeld rotates two times by π/6 when moving into the far ﬁeld, and
eventually six satellites form around a nearly gaussian far-ﬁeld pattern.
A semi-empirical model is proposed, based on describing the near ﬁeld
as a sum of seven gaussian distributions, which qualitatively explains
all the observed phenomena and quantitatively predicts the relative
intensity of the six satellites in the far ﬁeld.

c(cid:13) 2008 Optical Society of America
OCIS codes: (060.2430) Fibers, single-mode; (230.3990) Microstructure devices;
(000.4430) Numerical approximation and analysis

References and links

1. Opt. Express 9, 674–779 (2001), http://www.opticsexpress.org/issue.cfm?issue id=124.
2. J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 3, S103–S207 (2001).
3. J. C. Knight and P. S. J. Russell, “Applied optics: New ways to guide light,” Science 296, 276–277

(2002).

4. J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. J. Russell, and D. M. Atkin, “All-silica single-mode optical ﬁber

with photonic crystal cladding,” Opt. Lett. 21, 1547–1549 (1996).

5. J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. J. Russell, and D. M. Atkin, “All-silica single-mode optical ﬁber

with photonic crystal cladding: errata,” Opt. Lett. 22, 484–485 (1997).

6. J. C. Knight, J. Broeng, T. A. Birks, and P. S. J. Russell, “Photonic band gap guidance in optical

ﬁbers,” Science 282, 1476–1478 (1998).

7. R. F. Cregan, B. J. Mangan, J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. J. Russell, P. J. Roberts, and D. C.
Allan, “Single-mode photonic band gap guidance of light in air,” Science 285, 1537–1539 (1999).
8. T. A. Birks, J. C. Knight, and P. S. J. Russell, “Endlessly single mode photonic crystal ﬁbre,”

Opt. Lett. 22, 961–963 (1997).

9. J. Broeng, D. Mogilevstev, S. E. Barkou, and A. Bjarklev, “Photonic crystal ﬁbers: A new class

of optical waveguides,” Opt. Fiber Technol. 5, 305–330 (1999).

10. S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos,
equations

for Maxwell’s
http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OPEX-8-3-173.

in a planewave basis,” Opt. Express 8,

“Block-iterative

frequency-domain methods
(2000),
173–190

11. A. K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Introduction to Fiber Optics (Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-

12. A. K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Optical Electronics (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,

sity Press, 1998).

1989).

1 Introduction

Photonic crystal ﬁbers (PCF) are a new class of optical ﬁbers which has revealed many
surprising phenomena and also holds a big promise for future applications (see e.g. [1, 2,

Fig. 1. Schematic of a single-mode PCF (z < 0) with an end-facet from where light
is radiated into free space (z > 0).

3]). These PCFs are made from pure silica with a cladding consisting of a regular lattice
of air-holes running along the ﬁber axis. Depending on the arrangement of the air-holes
the guiding of light can be provided by either modiﬁed total internal reﬂection [4, 5] or
by the photonic band-gap eﬀect [6, 7] and PCFs can even be endlessly single-mode [8]
because of the wavelength dependence of the cladding index. For the basic operation we
refer to the review of Broeng et al. [9].

Understanding the shape and radiation pattern, as illustrated in Fig. 1, of the mode
in the endlessly single-mode PCF is very important. E.g. in tests and applications this
is essential for estimations of coupling eﬃciencies and for determining the mode ﬁeld
diameter from the far-ﬁeld distribution. Furthermore, it is fundamentally the simplest
structure with a hexagonal cladding, and hence the understanding of this structure will
be a natural basis for understanding the modes of more sophisticated PCF structures.
In this paper we present a semi-empirical model which is capable of explaining both
the near and far-ﬁeld distribution of the mode, but most importantly also accounts
for the ﬁne structure in the transition from the near to the far ﬁeld. The simplicity of
the model allows for a phenomenological interpretation of the shapes of the near and
far-ﬁeld patterns.

2 Experiments

The measurements reported are for a PCF with a triangular air-hole lattice with pitch
of Λ ≃ 3.5 µm and air holes of diameter d/Λ ≃ 0.5. The measurements reported here
were performed at a free-space wavelength of λ = 635 nm, where the light is guided in
a single mode in the silica core of the ﬁber formed by a “missing” air hole. In panel a
of Fig. 2 a micro-graph of the ﬁber structure can be seen.

The near-ﬁeld distribution was measured using a microscope objective to magnify
the mode onto a Si-based CCD camera. In Fig. 2b the intensity distribution is shown
at focus. By translating the ﬁber away from the focal plane, the intensity distribution
may be imaged at diﬀerent distances between the near and the far ﬁeld. This is shown
in panels b to h in Fig. 2. As expected the mode at focus has a hexagonal shape, that
extends in the six regions between the inner holes and is sharply conﬁned at the six silica-
hole interfaces. However, when the image is defocused, the shape at ﬁrst transforms into
a nearly circular shape (panel c) followed by a hexagonal shape rotated by an angle of
π/6 with respect to the focus (panel d). After this the shape again becomes close to
circular (panel e) , and ﬁnally transforms into the original hexagonal orientation (panel

Fig. 2. Experimentally observed near-ﬁeld intensity distributions for a PCF with
Λ ≃ 3.5 µm and d/Λ ≃ 0.5 (micro-graph in panel a) at a free-space wavelength
λ = 635 nm. The distance from the end-facet varies from z = 0 to z ∼ 10 µm
(panels b to f). At a further distance the six low-intensity satellite spots develop
(panels g and h, logarithmic scale).

f) with six satellites emerging from the distribution (panels g and h). It is noted that
the orientation of the satellites is rotated by π/6 with respect to the six inner holes
surrounding the core. In Fig. 3 (right) the intensity distribution in the far-ﬁeld limit
is shown (several centimeters from the ﬁber end-facet), obtained using a commercial
far-ﬁeld proﬁler. Here, the satellites have fully developed and as shown in the cross
sectional plot in Fig. 3 (left) the peak intensities of the satellites are more than two
orders of magnitude lower than the main peak. Hence, a reasonably accurate analysis
of the far ﬁeld may be performed considering only the main peak.

Apart from being a fascinating and intriguing evolution of the mode shape from the
near to the far ﬁeld, it is important to be aware of these transitions in any application

Fig. 3. Experimentally observed far-ﬁeld intensity distribution showing an overall
gaussian proﬁle with six additional low-intensity satellite spots along one of the two
principal directions (line 2). Angles are given in radians.

Fig. 4. Panel a shows the experimentally observed near-ﬁeld intensity along the two
principal directions 1 and 2 (see insert of panel b). Panel b shows the numerically
calculated intensity distribution in a corresponding ideal PCF with the solid lines
showing the intensity along the principal directions and the diﬀerence. The blue
and red dashed lines show gaussian ﬁts to I2 and I2 − I1 and the dashed green line
shows their diﬀerence.

that involves imaging of the modes. E.g. for estimations of the mode ﬁeld diameter
and eﬀective area based on near-ﬁeld analysis, it is important to focus the mode cor-
rectly, and the positions corresponding to panel b and panel d in Fig. 2 may easily be
confused. They both show the hexagonal shape and have only slightly diﬀerent mode
sizes. Hence, as a measurement procedure for determining the mode ﬁeld diameter, a
direct measurement of the near ﬁeld may be even more tricky than it is for “standard
technology ﬁbers” with circular symmetry.

In panel a of Fig. 4 two cross-sections of the measured near-ﬁeld distribution are
shown, one taken along a line passing through opposite hole centers (1) and the second
taken along a line passing between the holes (2) (rotated by an angle π/6 with respect
to the ﬁrst). It is noted that a gaussian distribution is a signiﬁcantly better ﬁt to the
intensity along line (2), motivating a simple interpretation of the mode shape : the mode
is a circular gaussian distribution from which a narrow distribution localized at each of
the centers of the six inner holes is subtracted. This simple interpretation is theoretically
modeled in the following.

3 Theory

In order to simulate the radiated ﬁeld we start from the fully-vectorial ﬁelds in the
single-mode all-dielectric PCF

H(x, y, z) = h(x, y) e±iβ(ω)z,
(1)
where h(x, y) and β(ω) are the transverse ﬁelds and the propagation constant, respec-
tively. These we calculate numerically by a fully-vectorial plane-wave method [10].

Substantial insight in the physics of the radiation problem can be gained by ex-
panding h(x, y) in gaussians. Introducing the notation s = (x, y) and using that the
components of h(x, y) can be chosen either real or imaginary we consider

I(s) = |h(s)|2 = (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

X
j

Aj u(s − sj, wj)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

, u(s, w) = exp(−s2/w2).

(2)

For the radiation into free space this gives a linear combination of expanding gaussian
beams and this is a well-studied problem, see e.g. [11, 12]. Neglecting the small back-
scattering from the end-facet, the gaussian u(s, w) at ﬁnite z > 0 transforms as

Fig. 5. Near-ﬁeld intensity distribution calculated from Eq. (5) with values of wh,
wc, and γ determined from the intensity in the PCF obtained by a fully-vectorial
calculation, see Fig. 4. The distance varies from z = 0 to z = 8Λ (panels a to
i) in steps of ∆z = Λ (see also animation with ∆z = Λ/4, http://www.crystal-
ﬁbre.com/technology/movie.gif, 3 Mbyte).

u(s, w) −→ u(s, z, w) = (cid:16)1 − i 2z

kw2 (cid:17)

exp h − ik(cid:16)z + s

2R(z) (cid:17) − s

W 2(z) i,

2

2

(3)

−1

where R(z) = z(1 + k2w4/4z2) and W (z) = w(1 + 4z2/k2w4)1/2. In the following we
consider a particular simple linear combination in the PCF;

6

2

X
j=1

I(s) = A2

u(s − sj, wh)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

u(s, wc) − γ
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
where sj = Rc × (cos j2π
6 ) with (Λ/Rc)sj being the center position of the six
6 , sin j2π
air holes nearest to the core. Here, Rc ∼ Λ (the radius of the silica core), wc ∼ Λ (the
mode-ﬁeld radius), and wh ∼ d/2 (the radius of the air holes). The ﬁrst term gives the
over-all gaussian intensity proﬁle of the mode and with γ ∼ u(Rc, wc) the additional six
terms of opposite sign suppress the intensity at the six air-holes nearest to the core. For
ﬁnite z > 0 the intensity transforms as

(4)

,

Fig. 6. Far-ﬁeld intensity distribution (z = 1000Λ ≫ λ) corresponding to the near
ﬁeld in Fig. 5. The intensity distribution has an overall gaussian proﬁle with six
additional low-intensity satellite spots along one of the two principal directions
(line 2).

I(s) −→ I(s, z) = A2

u(s, z, wc) − γ
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

6

X
j=1

u(s − sj, z, wh)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

.

(5)

In panel b of Fig. 4 we show an example of the intensity distribution in an ideal PCF
with Λ = 3.5 µm and d/Λ = 0.5 at λ = 635 nm corresponding to experimental situation.
For the dielectric function we have used ε = 1 for the air holes and for the silica we
have used ε = (1.4572)2 = 2.123 based on the Sellmeier formula. While Eq. (5) may
seem too simplistic the good ﬁts to gaussians strongly justify it and as we shall see it
reproduces the physics observed experimentally.

In Fig. 5 we show the corresponding near ﬁeld based on Eq. (5). The proﬁle at the
end-facet (panel a) ﬁrst transforms into a close-to-circular proﬁle (panel c) followed by
a hexagonal shape rotated by π/6 (panels d to f), a close-to-circular proﬁle (panel g),
and ﬁnally a hexagonal shape (panels h and i) with the same orientation as at the end-
facet (panel a). Comparing with Fig. 2 this is qualitatively in excellent agreement with
the experimental observations. The fact that the fully coherent scattering description
qualitatively reproduces the experimentally observed π/6 rotation gives strong indica-
tions of its nature; it is a phenomena caused by an interference between the diﬀerent
gaussian elements used in the decomposition of the fundamental mode in the PCF. In
Fig. 6 we show the corresponding intensity distribution in the far-ﬁeld limit which is
in a very good agreement with the experiments, see Fig. 3. It is seen that the satellites
are reproduced and are in fact oriented in the same way as in the experiment. Moreover
the relative intensities between the satellites and the main peak in Fig. 6 (left) are very
similar to the ones in Fig. 3 (left).

Finally, for ﬁbers where the air holes modify the overall gaussian proﬁle suﬃciently
(not shown) we ﬁnd indication of additional higher-order spots further away from the
center of the intensity distribution which can also be seen experimentally.

4 Conclusion

The evolution of the mode shape of a PCF with a triangular cladding has been inves-
tigated in the transition from the near to the far ﬁeld. When moving away from the
near ﬁeld at the focus of the ﬁber end-facet, it has been observed that the hexagonal
orientation is rotated two times by π/6 after which six satellites emerge in the radia-
tion pattern. In the far-ﬁeld limit the satellites remain in the pattern, having a relative
peak intensity more than two orders of magnitude less than the main peak and with
an orientation rotated by π/6 relative to the six inner holes around the ﬁber core. All
these observations have been reproduced theoretically, by approximating the near-ﬁeld
distribution by a main gaussian peak from which six narrow gaussians located near the
center of the six inner holes have been subtracted. From the simulations it is concluded
that the changes of shape in the radiation pattern are caused by an interference between
the diﬀerent gaussian elements used in the decomposition of the fundamental mode in
the PCF.

The results presented here are very important for understanding and analysing the
behavior of the mode in many optical systems based on photonic crystal ﬁbers – es-
pecially those involving imaging and focusing the mode. Furthermore, the successful
idea of decomposing the near ﬁeld of the mode into seven localized distributions can
be adapted in future work aimed at a simple quantitative description of the near and
far-ﬁeld distributions, particularly for relating the measured far ﬁeld to the physical
structure around the ﬁber core that inﬂuences the near ﬁeld. The latter is very in-
teresting in the ﬁeld of ﬁber measurement procedures, since the far-ﬁeld analysis of
conventional optical ﬁbers cannot directly be adapted to PCFs because of the lack of
cylindrical symmetry.

Acknowledgments

We thank J. Riishede and T. P. Hansen (COM, Technical University of Denmark),
P. M. W. Skovgaard and J. Broeng (Crystal Fibre A/S) for technical assistance and
useful discussions.

