Microfabrication of Three-Dimensional Structures in Polymer and Glass by
Femtosecond Pulses∗

Saulius Juodkazis,† Toshiaki Kondo, Vygantas Mizeikis, Shigeki Matsuo, and Hiroaki Misawa
Core Research for Evolution Science & Technology (CREST),
Japan Science & Technology Corporation (JST), The University of Tokushima,
2-1 Minamijyosanjima, Tokushima 770-8506, Japan

Egidijus Vanagas and Igor Kudryashov
Tokyo Instruments Inc., 6-18-14 Nishikasai, Edogawa-ku, Tokyo 134-0088, Japan
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We report three-dimensional laser microfabrication, which enables microstructuring of materials
on the scale of 0.2 − 1 µm. The two diﬀerent types of microfabrication demonstrated and discussed
in this work are based on holographic recording, and light-induced damage in transparent dielectric
materials. Both techniques use nonlinear optical excitation of materials by ultrashort laser pulses
(duration < 1 ps).

I.

INTRODUCTION

Technology used for the production of semiconductor microchips will soon enable industry-grade fabrication with
smallest feature size of 100 nm. The new blue-laser DVD format, agreed upon in February 2002, will feature up
to 27 GBytes of memory on one side of a single 12-cm disc, nearly six times the capacity of current 4.7 GBytes
disks. However, these are the achievements of 2D microfabrication. Developing technologies of 3D fabrication which
would enable to achieve minimum feature size of 0.1 − 1 µm is still a challenge, and attracts increasing interest.
Tools for manipulation, handling, and fabrication on this scale are important for the future of microfabrication and
microassembling techniques. The interest is also prompted by the biocompatibility issues, since the most crucial
processes in living organisms occur on the length scale of 0.1 − 1 µm. The early works on 3D patterning were focused
on the formation of ordered “optical matter” structures composed of microspheres1 suspended in liquid solutions.
The ordering was accomplished via the force exerted on the microspheres by periodical multi-beam light interference
ﬁeld1. Recently, we reported on fabrication of 3D structures in resist2 by using diﬀractive beam splitter and objective
lens focusing, which were used to create a periodic pattern. 3D fabrication was achieved via one-photon absorption
at 400 nm in the resist.

In this work we report a fabrication via two-photon absorption of 800 nm irradiation in resist. Such approach may

2
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
5
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

FIG. 1: Light intensity distribution corresponding to simple cubic (SC)(a), body-centered cubic (BCC)(b), and face centered
cubic (FCC)(c) lattices generated by four interfering beams. The coordinates are given in the units normalized to the wavelength
λ.

2

FIG. 2: (a) Laser beam arrangement in holographic fabrication experiments. The beams used in experiments and calculations
with three beam interference are indicated by the ﬁlled circles. (b) calculated pattern of the light intensity distribution in the
XY-plane for the intensities which exceed the threshold intensity for photoresist modiﬁcation by the factor of 1.5. (c) calculated
3D light intensity distribution in the beam intersection. Dimensions of all images are 2λ × 2λ × 2λ along the XY Z directions.
All incident beams have equal intensity of 1 and phase 0. The angle θ = 69◦ was taken for calculations.

FIG. 3: (a) The geometry of holographic fabrication with four beams. (b-d) Light intensity distribution in the XY-, XZ, and
YZ-planes, respectively. The conditions are the same as in Fig. 2. (e) 3D light intensity distribution at the beam intersection.
The constant intensity surface was chosen to be at 6.5, which corresponds to unconnected structure.

be particularly useful for the fabrication of photonic crystals (PhC). It can be shown that any 3D Bravais lattice can
be generated by the interference of four non-coplanar beams3. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 which shows calculated
light intensity distributions having cubic lattice symmetry. In addition to such holographic recording, we also report
3D microstructuring by direct laser writing 4. This method is based on the light-induced damaging of materials. High
irradiance laser pulses, tightly focused by high numerical aperture (NA) optics, induce permanent damage inside the
bulk of optically transparent dielectrics; the size of the damaged region is usually smaller than 1 µm owing to the tight
focusing and nonlinear nature of the material excitation. The prove of a principle for Tbits/cm3 memory fabrication
is demonstrated.

II. EXPERIMENTAL

Holographic recording experiments were carried out using 150 fs duration pulses derived from a Ti:sapphire laser
at the fundamental 800 nm wavelength. Multiple coherent beams were obtained from a single beam by using a
diﬀractive beam splitter. For the direct laser writing, ampliﬁed pulses of fundamental wavelength from the same laser
were used. Beam focusing was achieved by N A > 1 microscope objective lens. More details concerning the setup
can be found elsewhere2,4,5. We have used commercial SU-8 photoresist (sensitive at 400 nm wavelength) for the
holographic recording, and fused silica (transparent at 800 nm wavelength) for the direct laser writing experiments.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Holographic recording

Prior to describing the experimental results, it is helpful to demonstrate theoretically the possibilities to obtain
diﬀerent 3D as well as 2D light interference patterns by using various numbers of plane waves with certain amplitude

3

FIG. 4: (a) SEM image of the structure fabricated by four beam holographic technique (beams 2,3,4, and 5 shown in Fig. 2(a)
were used). The exposure time at 1 kHz repetition rate was 120 s. The focusing of beams corresponded to an θ = 42◦ angle
with Z-axis. Scale bar is 2 µm. (b-d) Simulated transmission spectra of the 2D photonic crystal shown in (a). TE and TM
denote two orthogonal linear polarizations of the electromagnetic waves, with TE being parallel to the rods/cylinders. The
propagation direction labeled h10i is along the sides of the primitive square cell, while h11i is along its diagonals.

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 µm 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

FIG. 5: Readout of a “bit” pattern recorded in the volume of silica at 10 µm depth by 150 fs pulses of 800 nm wavelength.
Readout wavelength was 488 nm. The distance between adjacent bits was 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 µm for (a), (b), (c), respectively.

and phase. The simplest 2D structures can be fabricated by the three side beams (the central beams blocked) as shown
in Fig. 2(a). The developed structure should be self-supporting, i.e., consist of well connected regions. An example
of such structure is shown in Fig. 2(b), where the rod-like high intensity regions are joined into the self-supporting
structure at the light intensity threshold of 1.5. For the PhC applications it may be important to control the volume
fraction of the unexposed photoresist, later to be removed in the development process. This can be achieved by
adjusting the exposure. When the central beam is turned on, 3D interference patterns may result as illustrated in
Fig. 3).

Image of the 2D pillar structure fabricated by the holographic technique is shown in Fig. 4(a). The recording
wavelength used was 800 nm, at which two-photon absorption was required for the photomodiﬁcation of the pho-
toresist. The thickness of the photoresist ﬁlm was 4 µm. High sample quality and periodicity is evident from the
ﬁgure. In such structure spatial modulation of the dielectric constant may result in the formation of photonic bands,
and therefore it is potentially applicable as a PhC. There is a growing interest in developing novel techniques of the
PhC fabrication6, and the holographic approach described above is potentially interesting in this respect. Simulated
transmission spectra of the 2D PhC are shown in Fig. 4(b-d) for diﬀerent directions of the light propagation, and
diﬀerent r/a ratios between the column radius r and the lattice period a. Even if the refractive index contrast in
the photoresist-air PhC structures is too low for the formation of photonic bandgaps, they can serve as templates for
in-ﬁlling by other materials with higher refractive index.

Figure 5 demonstrates optical readout of the 3D pattern recorded by femtosecond laser pulses of the fundamental
wavelength in fused silica. Every bit was recorded in a single shot. The diﬀraction-limited spot radius (radius of Ist

B. Direct laser writing

Airy disk) during the pattern recording was about 349 nm (Rayleigh criterion of resolution), whereas in the readout
it was about 0.61λr/N A = 213 nm for λr = 488 nm and N A = 1.4. Since the recording involved nonlinear absorption
processes, the recorded “bits” were considerably smaller than the focal spot (diameter) of 697 nm of the recording
pulse. Due to this circumstance, 3D optical recording is possible with bit dimensions < 0.2 µm, and astonishingly
high information density of BitV olume−1 = 1/(0.23 µm3) = 125 Tbits/cm3 can be expected (1 Tbit= 1012 bits).

4

We have demonstrated holographic recording of 3D structures by interference patterns of multiple ultrashort laser
pulses and direct laser writing by tightly focused laser pulses. Typical feature size achieved by these techniques can
be easily decreased below the diﬀractive limit (≈ λ) owing to nonlinear mechanisms involved in the photmodiﬁcation
process. We have demonstrated direct laser writing in silica with information density of about 100 Tbits/cm3.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Acknowledgments

This work was in part supported by the Satellite Venture Business Laboratory of the University of Tokushima.

∗ This is a proceedings paper of bi-lateral Conf. (Republics of China & Lithuania) on Optoelectronics and Magnetic Materials,

Taipei, May 25-26, 2002.

† Corresponding author.

S.J., V.M, and E.V. also, at Institute of Materials Science and Applied Research, Vilnius University, Saul˙etekio 10, 2040
Vilnius, Lithuania; Electronic address: saulius@eco.tokushima-u.ac.jp. (fax: (+81) 88 656 7598)

1 M. M. Burns, J.-M. Fournier, and J. A. Golovchenko, Science 249, 749 (1990).
2 T. Kondo, S. Matsuo, S. Juodkazis, and H. Misawa, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79(6), 725 (2001).
3 L. Z. Cai, X. L. Yang, and Y. R. Wang, Opt. Lett. (2002. in press).
4 M. Miwa, S. Juodkazis, T. Kawakami, S. Matsuo, and H. Misawa, Appl. Phys. A 73, 561 (2001).
5 M. Watanabe, H. Sun, S. Juodkazis, T. Takahashi, S. Matsuo, Y. Suzuki, J. Nishii, and H. Misawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.

6 V. Mizeikis, S. Juodkazis, A. Marcinkevicius, S. Matsuo, and H. Misawa, J. Photochem. and Photobiol. C: Photochemistry

37(12B), L1527 (1998).

Reviews 2, 35 (2001).

