2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
1
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Alternative explanation of the nature of line clumps
V.A.Kuz’menko

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

Abstract

It is assumed, that the clumps of lines do not connected with states
mixing and IVR, but they are the result of breaking (destruction) of the
process of averaging of momentum of inertia of molecules during the vi-
bration motion of atoms. Rough estimates of the widths of clumps of lines
in absorption spectra of some acetylenic derivatives were made with this
model. Obtained results are in a satisfactory agreement with the available
experimental data. This idea allows also in principle to explain the origin
of intensive wings of lines, the existence of which was discussed earlier.

PACS number: 33.70.-w

It is known that single lines in the absorption infrared spectrum of poly-
atomic molecules can split into a clump (a cluster) of closely spaced narrow
lines [1]. It is supposed that this results from mixing of the states. Recently
the structure of line clumps for various molecules has been studied rather in-
tensively [2]. On the basis of these data the time of intramolecular vibrational
relaxation (IVR) is calculated.

The Doppler width of individual lines in a clump is determined only by
the potentialities of the experimental technique in use and it can equal several
MHz. This corresponds to the lifetime of the probed states equal to several
dozens nanoseconds. At the same time, from the analysis of the structure of line
clumps a conclusion is drawn that the IVR duration is, for example, about 200
ps. No weighty arguments are available which could eliminate this contradiction.
Moreover, except a not very good correlation between the densities of lines in a
clump and the state densities of a molecule no other reliable data are available to
prove that clumps are formed as a result of mixing of states rather than of some
other reasons. Previously such proofs were not necessary. This explanation was
considered as evident and having no alternative.

The purpose of the present note is to suggest such alternative explanation of
the nature of line clumps which is associated neither with mixing of the states
nor with IVR. Spectroscopy allows high precision (<0.01% ) determination of
the inertia moment of a molecule. But this is an averaged inertia moment, be-
cause of an inertia moment of molecule change during a vibrational motion of
atoms in the range
5% . Thus, we have a reliably established experimental
fact: averaging of the inertia moment of molecule takes place during the vibra-
tion period of their atoms. If one supposes that the mechanism of averaging the
inertia moment can suﬀer periodic short–time breaking (destruction) by various
vibrational modes then instead of one narrow line in the spectrum we should get
something very similar to a clump of lines. The distribution of the lines inside
the clump can be expected to be rather chaotic. And the width of the clump of

∼

1

lines is apparently determined by the maximum amplitude of the variation of
the molecule inertia moment under atom vibrations.

Clump widths in accordance with the present model can be roughly evaluated
using the available data on the amplitude of atom vibrations for various chemical
bonds [3]. If one takes into account that in the expression for the molecule inertia
moment we have the square interatomic distance (R) and that the amplitude of
atoms vibrations (∆R) is relatively small the expression for the width of clumps
(∆)can be written as:

(1)

R +∆R

2

∆ = 2B

1

4B

∆R
R

−

R (cid:19)

i ≈

h(cid:18)
where B is the rotational constant of the molecule.
In Table 1 the results of the appropriate calculations for the width of line
clumps for some acetylenic derivatives are presented. For lighter molecules
(propyne and 1-butyne) the C-H bond parameters were used as a model for
calculation, whereas for CF3CCH and SF5CCH molecules the parameters of
C–F and S–F bonds, respectively, were used. One should keep in mind that
the data on the vibration amplitude used in Table 1 were taken from Ref.[3]
and they characterize the mean square vibration amplitude. For the width of
the line clumps the total vibration amplitude is, apparently, more important.
√2
Therefore, the calculation results presented in Table 1 can be considered
times underestimated.

∼

Table 1. Evaluation of the clump widths of the acetylenic C-H
stretch vibration in some acetylenic derivatives.

Molecule

Ba
(cm−1)

Rb
( ˙A)

∆R
( ˙A)

∆c
calc
(cm−1)

∆d
exp
(cm−1)

CH3CCH

0.284

1.08

0.078

0.082

CH3CH2CCH

0.144

1.08

0.078

0.042

0.10

0.06

∼

∼

CF3CCH

0.0957

1.33

0.045

0.013

0.02–0.08

SF5CCH

0.0579

1.58

0.042

0.0062

0.002–0.008

a– the values of the rotational constant B were taken from Ref.[4-7].
b– the values of interatomic distances were taken from Ref.[8].
c– results of calculations by the formula (1)
d– the values of the clump widths were taken from Ref.[5-7,9].

2

Thus, it is seen from Table 1 that the results of even a rather rough eval-
uation of the clump widths within the framework of the present model agree
satisfactorily with the experimental results.

Along with clumps of lines in the spectra of polyatomic molecules purely
Lorentzian line contours [10] of comparable width are also observed. The authors
of the works usually do not see any principal diﬀerences between them. In our
opinion, the purely Lorentzian contour actually characterizes the IVR process.
Therefore, it cannot have a ﬁne inner structure and, in fact, has nothing in
common with line clumps. It is interesting that in Ref.[6] one can observe a
gradual transition from a clumps of lines to the purely Lorentzian contour: this
occurs in this case at the growing number of the rotational transition.

Investigation of the structure of line clumps does not yield now rich infor-
mation. On the one hand, now only rather trivial information can be obtained
from the clump widths. But on the other hand, it is diﬃcult to understand as
yet how to interpret deﬁnitely the data on the density of lines in a clump. In our
opinion, it is much more interesting to study the wings of absorption lines for
polyatomic molecules. Quite reliable experimental proofs are available to show
that narrow absorption lines of polyatomic molecules have wide and intensive
Lorentzian wings of unknown nature [11]. Namely the breaking (destruction) of
the averaging process of the inertia moment of the molecules can, in principle,
be responsible for both: the appearance of clumps and the intensive line wings.
The very moment of breaking (destruction) can be considered as some short-life
state of the molecule, which should be corresponded with some wide component
in the line spectrum.

A suﬃciently reliable measurement of the intensity and of the width of the
line wings can easily be performed in a molecular beam by the technique avail-
able. Molecular beam with a cryogenic bolometer is ideally suitable for the
study of line wings [12]. Narrow and powerful laser radiation interacts mainly
with the line wings. Low rotational temperature in the beam results in that the
width of the absorption band is comparable with or less than that of the line
wings. Therefore, for precise determination of the width of the line wings it is
not necessary to investigate very far wings of the absorption bands. The sensi-
tivity of the apparatus can easily be calibrated using large polyatomic molecules
like as hexaﬂuoroacetone. Upon calibration, such an instrument can be used for
measuring the intensity and the width of the line wings for most polyatomic
molecules. This information is important for the solution of such spectroscopic
problems as infrared multiphoton excitation of molecules, infrared laser disso-
ciation of dimers and clusters, the nature of far wings in absorption bands of
molecules in the gaseous phase, the line widths for molecule absorption in liq-
uids, etc.
It is quite possible, that the Earth’s climate is depended on such
intense line wings [13,14].

References

3

[1] B.J.Van der Meer, H.Th.Jonkman and J.Kommandeur, Laser Chem. 2, 77

[2] K.K.Lehmann, G.Scoles and B.H.Pate, Ann.Rev.Phys.Chem. 45, 241

[3] S.J.Cyvin, ”Molecular vibrations and mean square amplitudes”. Oslo,

[4] E.R.Th.Kerstel, K.K.Lehmann, B.H.Pate and G.Scoles, J.Chem.Phys. 100,

(1983).

(1994).

(1968).

2588 (1994).

[5] A.Mcllroy and D.J.Nesbitt, J.Chem.Phys. 92, 2229 (1990).

[6] B.H.Pate, K.K.Lehmann and G.Scoles, J.Chem.Phys. 95, 3891 (1991).

[7] M.Becucci, J.E.Gambogi, J.H.Timmermans, K.K.Lehmann, G.Scoles,

G.L.Gard and R.Winter, Chem.Phys. 187, 11 (1994).

[8] L.Sutton,(Ed.); ”Tables of

interatomic distances and conﬁguration in

molecules and ions”, London, (1958).

[9] J.Gambogi, E.R.Th.Kerstel, K.K.Lehmann and G.Scoles, J.Chem.Phys.

100, 2612 (1994).

[10] E.R.Th.Kerstel, K.K.Lehmann, T.F.Mentel, B.H.Pate and G.Scoles,

J.Phys.Chem. 95, 8282 (1991).

[11] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0204003.

[12] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[13] P.Varanasi, J.Quant.Spectrosc.Radiat.Transfer 40, 169 (1988).

[14] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0205071.

4

