2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
1
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Real-time determination of free energy and losses in optical absorbing media

C. Broadbent,1 G. Hovhannisyan,2 J. Peatross,1 M. Clayton,3 and S. Glasgow2
1Department of Physics, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 84601
2Department of Mathematics, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah 84601
3Department of Mathematics, Penn State University,
University Park, State College, Pennsylvania 16802
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We introduce notions of free energy and loss in linear, absorbing dielectric media which are relevant
to the regime in which the macroscopic Maxwell equations are themselves relevant. As such we solve
a problem eluded to by Landau and Lifshitz [1] in 1958, and later considered explicitly by Barash
and Ginzburg [2], and Oughtsun and Sherman [3]. As such we provide physically-relevant real-time
notions of ”energy” and ”loss” in all analogous linear dissipative systems.

PACS numbers:
Keywords:

In a previous publication we showed that in many in-
stances fast and slow light [4, 5, 6] is a manifestation of
a dielectric interacting diﬀerently with the early parts of
an electromagnetic pulse than with its later parts [7]. For
example, slow light in a passive linear dielectric typically
corresponds to energy in the leading part of the pulse be-
ing preferentially stored by the medium and then being
largely returned to the pulse’s (backward) tail. Quanti-
fying the extent to which this process is possible was a
primary motivation for this work.

Application of the principles presented in this letter
will in no-wise supersede the group velocity description
of such phenomena. The present development compli-
ments other such analysis by attaching precise notions of
reversibility and irreversibility to the medium’s storage of
the pulse energy. As such it also solves a long outstand-
ing problem regarding the real-time meaning of ”energy”
and ”loss” in linear dissipative systems.

From Poynting’s energy conservation theorem (Eq. 1)
the total energy density in a dielectric at time t, u(t), is
the sum (Eq. 2) of the ﬁeld energy uf ield(t) (Eq. 3) and
the medium-ﬁeld interaction energy uint.(t) (Eq. 4):

∇ · S +

= 0

∂u
∂t

u(t) = uf ield(t) + uint.(t)

uf ield(t) =

+

H 2
2

uint.(t) =

E(τ ) ˙P (τ ) dτ.

E2
2
t

Z
−∞

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Here we restrict to isotropic, temporally dispersive me-
dia in which a scalar analysis suﬃces, and in which one
may safely suppress reference to the spatial coordinate
x. In addition we restrict to linear media. Consequently
we restrict to the case in which the medium’s response to
an applied ﬁeld E is completely determined by a scalar,

point-wise deﬁned susceptibility χ = χ(ω, x). For a ba-
sic discussion of properties of the medium-ﬁeld interac-
tion energy uint.(t) in anisotropic media, see [8]. Since
uint.(t) quantiﬁes the net work the ﬁeld has done against
the polarized medium in the course of creating the cur-
rent system state, in the following we will also call uint.(t)
the (medium) internal energy. In the sequel, notions of
work done, and the ability to do work in the future, will
become pivotal in establishing an unambiguous, dynam-
ically relevant notion of energy allocation in dielectric
media.

Landau and Lifshitz interpreted uint.(+∞) as the en-
ergy that is eventually lost to and dissipated by the
medium over the course of the medium-ﬁeld interac-
tion [1]. This asymptotic quantity only depends on the
medium susceptibility χ and the evolution of the elec-
tric ﬁeld E, not on the particulars of any microscopic
model giving rise to χ. This suggests the possibility
of establishing a real-time, model independent notion of
loss. Barash and Ginsburg considered this question [2].
They concluded, however, that a real-time determina-
tion of losses is impossible without a microscopic model,
i.e. that a knowledge of the macroscopic susceptibility
χ is insuﬃcient. Having concluded that a model inde-
pendent notion of loss is meaningless, they calculated (a
certain notion of) loss for speciﬁc models. In particular
they generalized the work of Loudon [9] concerning sin-
gle Lorentz oscillator media by making a straightforward
extension of his notion of losses to multiple Lorentz oscil-
lators. Loudon’s and, so, Barash and Ginsburg’s notion
of losses amounts to identifying those terms in (a certain
expression of) the internal energy which explicitly de-
pend on phenomenological damping parameters. More
convincingly, their determination of the ”energy” in the
medium amounts to summing the kinetic and potential
energies of the individual oscillators. We call this notion
of energy the polarization energy, upolarization(t).

We initially followed a certain extension of this rea-
soning. We hoped to establish a unique map from an

(a)(cid:13)

k1a

a1

(b)(cid:13)

m 1a

m 2a

a1

a2

1(cid:13)/(cid:13)

k1a

1(cid:13)/(cid:13)

k2a

k2a

a2

(c)(cid:13)

k
1
b

1
b

k
2
b

2

b

3b

m

3
b

5.

4.

3.

2.

1.

y
g
r
e
n
E

(d)(cid:13)

m 1b

b1

1(cid:13)/(cid:13)

k1b

X

2
b

X 3
b

2

b

1(cid:13)/(cid:13)
k
2
b

3m
b

3b

m 1
a

e-

X

1
a
e- m 2
2X
a

a

m
1
b
e-

1X
b

 (cid:13)

FIG. 1: Macroscopic equivalent spring-mass systems for a
double Lorentz oscillator and their LRC circuit analogs. (a)
The two oscillator representation. (b) The LRC circuit analog
(d) The
(c) The coupled oscillator representation.
of (a).
circuit analog of (c).

arbitrary susceptibility χ(ω) to an oscillator representa-
tion, which in turn would establish a unique (polariza-
tion) energy, as well as losses via Loudon’s identiﬁcation
procedure. Unfortunately, we found that generically a
susceptibility can be mapped to many diﬀerent micro-
scopic models. This property is perfectly analogous to
the one by which it is possible for distinct LRC circuits
to yield identical impedances. However, we then con-
jectured that all such equivalent representations might
yield identical values for the polarization energy. Unsur-
prisingly, one ﬁnds that this is not the case dynamically.
(Although asymptotically all such representations must
obviously agree: upolarization(+∞) = 0, and the losses
are given, then, by uint(+∞), which, as mentioned, is
completely determined by χ.)

pn/(ω2

n=1,2 ω2

a double Lorentz oscillator

Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate this ambiguity. Given
susceptibility χ(ω) =
n − iγnω − ω2) we examine two diﬀerent
microscopic models for the same susceptibility. The ﬁrst
P
model χa(ω), is given by the explicit structure of χ(ω)
as just written. It corresponds to two diﬀerent masses of
equal charge on two diﬀerent springs, each spring hav-
ing diﬀerent restoring and damping parameters. The
total polarization is given by the net displacement of
both charged masses from their equilibrium positions:
P = X1a + X2a = χaE. See FIG. 1(a).

We use the tangency algorithm [10], a transfer func-
tion preserving algorithm intended for model reduction in
LRC circuits, to construct the second microscopic model

2

0.
-0.5

0.

0.5

1.

1.5

2.

Time

FIG. 2: The instantaneous losses of a two oscillator (long
dash), and a coupled oscillator (short dash) model of a double
Lorentz oscillator susceptibility responding to an instigating
delta function E-ﬁeld at time t = 0. The interaction energy
uint.[E](t) (solid), and the irreversible energy uirrev.(t) (dot-
dash) are also shown.

χb(ω). Mechanically this model corresponds to coupled
oscillators. See FIG. 1(c). The susceptibility for this
microscopic model is given in Eq. (5) (where we have
mapped ω to is for convenience). In this model the total
polarization is given by the displacement of the charged
mass from its equilibrium position P = X1b = χbE. It
can be shown that the coeﬃcients knb , γnb, mnb can be
found such that χa(ω) = χb(ω) for all frequencies ω.

χb(s) =

1
k1b + γ1b s + m1b s2 +

1
+γ2b

k2b

1
s + 1
γ3b

s + 1
m3b

s2

(5)

t

By inserting the two representations into the internal
−∞ E(τ ) ˙P (τ ) dτ one can ﬁnd the ki-
energy uint(t) =
R
netic and potential energies associated with each rep-
resentation. This polarization energy, the energy reck-
oned instantaneously via the motion and position of the
masses, will be shown to be representation dependent.
To demonstrate this, we calculate the ”microscopic” en-
ergetics associated with the response of these macroscop-
ically equivalent systems to an impulse. That is we excite
the two media, with susceptibility models χa and χb, via
a delta function E-ﬁeld at time t = 0, and then plot the
losses for each representation. We assign values to the
parameters of the two oscillator, χa representation (the
plasma frequencies, resonant frequencies, and damping
coeﬃcients), and then ﬁnd parameters for the coupled os-
cillators’, χb representation such that the representations
are macroscopically equivalent. Figure 2 shows the evolu-
tion of the losses for the diﬀerent representations, these
losses determined in the sense of Loudon, Barash and
Ginzburg. The corresponding diﬀerences between the in-
ternal energy imparted to the media by the delta func-
tion E-ﬁeld (as shown by the piecewise constant curve
in ﬁgure 2) and the plotted losses gives the polarization
energies for the two representations.

The qualitative features of Figure 2 can be understood
intuitively: the delta excitation of the medium instan-

g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
g
(cid:13)
taneously creates the polarization energies, which, then,
decrease as the systems dissipate these energies. How-
ever, as clearly seen in the ﬁgures, the polarization en-
ergies for each microscopic representation diﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly. Thus the polarization energy does in fact depend
on the microscopic model ascribed to the susceptibility
χ(ω). Of course, since Barash and Ginzburg speciﬁed no
underlying macroscopic physical principle in their deter-
mination of ”energy”, this result is just a consequence
of their (lack of a) deﬁnition of energy. Consequently,
we will argue that a model-dependent (e.g. polarization)
energy is irrelevant, both from the point of view of the
relevant physical principles that should be required of a
viable macroscopic description, as well as from that of the
practical considerations of the energy storage and return
process mentioned at the beginning of this article.

Before establishing relevant macroscopic principles of
energy allocation, we highlight the connection between
mechanical and electrical oscillators and the ambiguities
associated with representation in the context of the lat-
ter. The perfect analogy between electrical LRC circuits
and linear passive dielectric media (where polarization
P , susceptibility χ and E-ﬁeld E , translate to charge Q,
derivative of admittance ∂tA, and electromotive force E,
respectively), allows one to reinterpret the polarization
energy evolutions implied in Fig. 2 as the evolutions of
the energies contained in the dispersive elements (induc-
tors and capacitors) of admittance-equivalent circuits. In
the case of electrical circuits, the plotted losses corre-
spond to the losses in the dissipative elements of the two
circuits, i.e. the losses through the resistors. This time
we interpret the discrepancies in these curves as indicat-
ing that diﬀerent LRC circuits with the same admittance
can, temporarily, lose energy to their resistors at diﬀerent
rates. Figures 1(b)and (d) give LRC circuits correspond-
ing to the mechanical models shown in Figures 1(a) and
(c), respectively.

From the discussion above, one concludes that the po-
larization energy and the associated losses depend intrin-
sically upon the speciﬁc microscopic model giving rise to
the susceptibility χ. However, these allocations cannot
be relevant macroscopically: for example, within the phe-
nomenological framework in which χ is introduced, the
spatial and temporal evolution of the various ﬁelds de-
pend only upon this particular piece of information, not
upon its various representations.
In this circumstance
in which the system dynamics is completely determined
by some piece of information (e.g. χ), to say that some
other piece of information is important in order to es-
tablish some particular notion of energy allocation is to
admit that that notion of energy allocation is irrelevant
to those all-ready speciﬁed dynamics. We establish a no-
tion of energy allocation that is determined uniquely by
χ and, so, is relevant to system dynamics. In particular
it provides a precise notion of the maximum possibility
for the ﬁeld to recover energy from the medium in, for

3

(6)

example, the borrow-return process mentioned at the be-
ginning of this article.

In this article, we introduce the irreversible energy den-
sity uirrev.(t). At any given time t, it is deﬁned to be the
infemum of all possible [LL] asymptotic losses uint.(+∞),
this extrema being realized over all possible future evo-
lutions of the electric ﬁeld E, holding its past evolution
ﬁxed. Temporarily using notation emphasizing that the
internal energy at time t depends not only on this time,
but also on the history of the instigating electric ﬁeld E
up until that time, one writes

uirrev.[E](t) = uirrev.[E−

uint.[E−

t + E+

t ](+∞).

t ](t) := inf
E+
t

Here E−

t denotes the electric ﬁeld time series E(τ ) with
its t-future (τ > t) eliminated. Similarly, E+
t denotes an
appended electric ﬁeld time series E(τ ) with its t-past
(τ < t) eliminated. For a passive dielectric, this infemum
exists and, so, is unique [11]. In particular, and is shown
later in Eq.
(9), it does not depend upon an explicit
representation for χ.

Almost tautologically, from deﬁnition (6), it follows
that uirrev.(t) can never decrease as time increases. Thus,
at any given time t, it quantiﬁes a component of the
medium internal energy uint.(t) that will, under all cir-
cumstances, remain in and be dissipated by the medium.
That is it speciﬁes a component of the medium inter-
nal energy that cannot under any circumstances be re-
turned to the ﬁeld. Moreover, since it is deﬁned in terms
of an infemum, i.e. a greatest lower bound, all notions
of loss greater than this value are too pessimistic: at
any given time t, there always exists a future medium-
ﬁeld interaction creating less eventual energy loss to the
medium than any value greater than that speciﬁed by
uirrev.(t). This is true regardless of how small this overes-
timation is. Consequently, within the phenomenological,
macroscopic framework in which χ dictates the system
dynamics, this quantity uniquely records the energetic
irreversibility generated within this dissipative system.

In Fig. 2 the dot-dashed curve speciﬁes the irreversible
energy for the case considered, obviously valid for ei-
ther of the two χ-equivalent physical systems. Note
that in the ﬁgure it is never exceeded by the losses in
the sense of Loudon, Barash and Ginzburg. Indeed one
can prove that this relationship must hold between the
macroscopically relevant irreversible energy and any no-
tion of loss speciﬁed microscopically. Equivalently one
determines that energy (the ability to do work) speci-
ﬁed macroscopically cannot exceed any such microscopic
notion. Further, one concludes that the former is almost
always strictly less than the latter because of incoherence
among the system’s microscopic, energy containing ele-
ments. The former statement (the one regarding losses)
can be obtained by repeated application of the following

theorem: (As in the monotonicity of uirrev.(t), the theo-
rem follows almost tautologically from the deﬁnition.)

uirrev.[E; χ1 + χ2](t) ≥ uirrev.[E; χ1](t) + uirrev.[E; χ2](t),

(7)

with strict inequality holding almost always for non-
trivial χ1 and χ2. Eq.
(7) demonstrates that in ”ad-
ditive” processes (i.e. generating media mixtures), ir-
reversibility is generated. By repeated (additive) sub-
divisions of a macroscopically relevant susceptibility χ
into pieces χi, one may obtain microscopic representa-
tions of the medium response. If the elements are ”sim-
ple” enough (to be quantiﬁed later) uirrev.[E; χi] will be
equivalent to the parameter-dependent notion of loss sug-
gested by Loudon, and Ginzburg and Barash. Indeed the
notion of loss and energy speciﬁed by Loudon happen to
agree with the macroscopically/phenomenologically rele-
vant notion herein introduced in the cases he considered–
single Lorentz oscillator media.
[This is not the case
for (competing) multiple oscillator media considered by
Barash and Ginzburg, as demonstrated by ﬁgure 2.]

The diﬀerence between the current internal energy and
the current irreversible energy gives the reversible energy
urev.(t):

urev.(t) := uint.(t) − uirrev.(t).

(8)

The reversible energy gives the least upper bound on
the amount of energy that the medium can relinquish af-
ter time t: any amount greater than this value, no mat-
ter how small the discrepancy, overestimates the ability
of the medium’s microscopic, energy-containing compo-
nents, say, to organize themselves and do useful, macro-
scopic work. Obviously the diﬀerence between the (piece-
wise constant) internal energy plotted in Fig. 2, and the
dot-dashed curve in that ﬁgure, gives this dynamical no-
tion of the possibility for the medium to do work (against
the ﬁeld) for the example considered.

Using Eq.

(4), one immediately shows that uint.(t)
is constant after the electric ﬁeld ceases. From deﬁni-
tion (8), and the theorem regarding the monotonicity
of uirrev.(t), it follows that urev.(t) can never increase
after such time, i.e. after the electric ﬁeld quits subsi-
dizing its existence by doing work against the polarized
medium. We will show that urev.(t) is never negative.
Consequently, one sees that when the system becomes
energetically closed, the reversible energy behaves like a
dynamical system free energy (density), equivalently like
a system Lyapunov function (density). For this reason,
and for the microscopic consideration mentioned, in par-
ticular the entropy-generation-like statement embodied
in Eq. (7), we will also designate the reversible energy as
the (medium-ﬁeld) free energy.

We ﬁnish with a formula demonstrating how the
macroscopic loss (and so the free energy (via 8)), can

4

be calculated. (In particular how the irreversible energy
plotted in ﬁgure (2) can be generated.) This formula is
obtained by applying a variational principle to the deﬁni-
tion (6), and solving the resulting Riemann-Hilbert prob-
lem. One ﬁnds that, for passive, causal dielectrics,

uirrev.[E](t) =

where

λ
2π

Z
−∞

t

+∞

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
Z
(cid:12)
−∞
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

−iωχ(ω)Eτ (ω)
φ+(ω)

2

dτ(9)

e−iωτ dω(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

λ = lim
ω→∞

Im[χ(ω)]
ω |χ(ω)|2 ,

φ+(ω) = lim
ǫ→0+

exp 

+∞

−1
2πi

Z
−∞



log Im[χ(ω′
)]
λω′|χ(ω′)|2
ω′ − (ω + iǫ)

dω′



(10)

Here we introduce the instantaneous spectrum at time
t, Et(ω). It is the Fourier transform of E−
t (see the lines
following deﬁnition (6)). We also introduce the medium
complexity factor φ+(ω). Its deviation from unity gives
a measure of the eﬀective macroscopic/phenomenological
incoherence of possible microscopic, energy containing el-
ements. Media for which φ+(ω) is identically unity we
call simple media, the rest we call complex. In the case
that the susceptibility χ corresponds to a single Lorentz
oscillator medium, as in the case considered by Loudon,
φ+(ω) is identically one, and Eq. (9) reduces to

uirrev.[E](t) = λ

˙P 2(τ ) dτ

(11)

t

Z
−∞

where, then, λ is determined in terms of the phenomeno-
logical damping parameter γ and the eﬀective plasma
frequency ωp:

λ = γ/ω2
p.

(12)

In such case, then, and as claimed by Loudon, the rel-
evant losses correspond to the frictional losses generated
by the single Lorentz oscillator.

SUMMARY

We have introduced notions of free energy and losses
relevant to the macroscopic behavior of passive, linear
dielectric media. These notions are relevant in the same
regime in which the macroscopic Maxwell equations are
themselves relevant, i.e. in the regime in which that the-
ory speciﬁes all measurable dynamics. In particular, the
macroscopic theory introduced is relevant to the regimes
in which the macroscopic, energy barrow-return process

5

describes the production of slow and fast light in pas-
sive, linear, temporally dispersive media. Further com-
munications will describe the precise evolutions of the
ideal medium-ﬁeld interactions giving rise to maximum
energy recovery, i.e. those ”recovery” ﬁelds suggested by
the variational deﬁnition (6). The nature of the analogy
of such recovery ﬁelds in dissipative media with reversible
processes in the thermodynamic setting will be analyzed.
Finally, the nonintuitive evolution of the medium-ﬁeld in-
teraction on such recovery ﬁelds in complex media will
be exposed, e.g. the failure of monotonicity in the evo-
lution of the internal energy to its minimum value, even
on ideal recovery ﬁelds, and the identiﬁcation of such as
a measure of the level of macroscopic disorder created by
the existence of many, competing degrees of freedom.

Conversations with Kurt Oughstun, Joseph Eberly, Pe-
ter Milonni, Aephraim Steinberg, Raymond Chiao, and
Michael Fleischhauer are gratefully acknowledged. This
research was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. PHY99-07949.

pp. 274-332.

[2] Yu S. Barash and V. L. Ginzburg, Usp. Fiz. Nauk 118,
523-530 (1976). [English trans.: Sov. Phys.-Usp. 19,263-
270 (1976)].

[3] K. E. Oughstun and G. C. Sherman, Electromag-
netic Pulse Propagation in Causal Dielectrics, (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1994), pp. 14-31.

[4] C. G. B. Garrett and D. E. McCumber, Phys. Rev. A 1,

305-313 (1970).

[5] S. Chu and S. Wong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 738-741 (1982).
[6] L. P. Hau, S. E. Haris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi,

Nature 397, 594-598 (1999).

[7] J. Peatross, M. Ware, and S. Glasgow, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

A 18, 1719-1725 (2001).

[8] S. Glasgow, M. Ware, and J. Peatross, Phys. Rev. E 64,

046610 (2001).

[9] R. Loudon, J. Phys. A. 3, 233-245 (1970).
[10] S. Glasgow, M. Meilstrup, M. Clayton, G. Hovhannisyan,

and C. Broadbent, (unpublished).

[11] C. Broadbent, G. Hovhannisyan, M. Clayton, J.
Peatross, and S. Glasgow, AMEREM 2002 Conference
Proceedings, (accepted for publication).

[1] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of
Continuous Media, 2nd ed. (Pergamon, New York, 1984),

