2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Polarization analysis of propagating surface
plasmons in a subwavelength hole array

E. Altewischer, M.P. van Exter, and J.P. Woerdman
Leiden University, Huygens Laboratory, P.O. Box 9504,
2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands

We present angle- and polarization-resolved measurements of the optical transmission

of a subwavelength hole array. These results give a (far-ﬁeld) visualization of the

corresponding (near-ﬁeld) propagation of the excited surface plasmons and allow for

a simple analysis of their polarization properties.

February 2, 2008

Metal ﬁlms perforated with a periodic array of subwave-
length holes have recently been shown to exhibit a much
larger optical transmission than expected.1 The rea-
son for this is the presence of surface plasmons (SPs)
on the metal interfaces, which couple to freely propa-
gating light via the 2D-grating of the hole array. The
incident light gets through because it ﬁrst excites SPs
on the front side of the metal layer, which then couple
through the holes to SPs on the back side, and which
ﬁnally reradiate in the form of light. Since its original
discovery,1 this phenomenon has been studied in many
theoretical and experimental papers.2–6 An aspect that
has been underexposed up to now is the role of polar-
ization in the transmission process. SPs are combined
optical-electronic excitations that comprise a (longitudi-
nal) electric ﬁeld aligned with their propagation direc-
tion, which also determines their coupling to the (input
and output) optical ﬁeld. In this letter we address exper-
imentally the polarization properties of the transmission,
both by varying the polarization of the light incident on
the hole array and by analyzing the polarization of the
output light.

Our experiment diﬀers from near-ﬁeld microscopy
studies on SPs7–10 performed so far. These experiments
can map the optical ﬁeld on a subwavelength scale, but
have only been performed for smooth ﬁlms7, 9, 10 or ﬁlms
with isolated holes.8 We have speciﬁcally studied the
propagation and polarization of SPs on a metal layer
with an array of holes, in which multiple interference of

the SPs scattered from the holes is important, as this
gives rise to SP-bandstructure. Moreover, we use the
much simpler (polarization- and angle-resolved) analysis
of the optical far-ﬁeld from which this information can
be easily extracted.

The sample that we have studied is a 1 mm × 1 mm
hole array in a 200 nm thick gold layer, which is attached
to a 0.5 mm glass substrate by a 2 nm titanium bond-
ing layer. The metal layer is perforated with a square
grid of 200 nm diameter holes spaced with a 700 nm lat-
tice constant. A typical transmission spectrum for nor-
mal incidence on the hole array is shown in Fig. 1. The
peak transmission of the most prominent resonance, 6%
at 810 nm, is much larger than the value of 0.56% ex-
pected from “classical” theory.11 (This same resonance
was recently used by us in an entanglement experiment.6)

The in-plane momentum of the SPs is supplied by the
projected component of the incident optical wave mo-
mentum and a lattice component that is taken from the
hole array.3 Usually, when the surrounding media are
not the same (air and glass, in our case), the observed
transmission resonances are assumed to be dominated by
SPs excited on either one or the other surface. On the
basis of this simple model, we associate the 810 nm res-
onance with the four degenerate (±1, ±1) modes on the
metal-glass interface (for normal incidence). Here we use
the notation (Nx, Ny) to label the SP resonance in terms
of the lattice momentum needed for excitation, where

1

Figure 1: Wavelength-dependent transmission of the hole
array used in the experiment, for unpolarized, normally
incident (white) light.

the excited SPs propagate in the corresponding direction
along the metal surface.

The transmission spectrum depends on the angle of
incidence, via the momentum of the excited SPs. A mea-
surement of this angle dependence was used by Ghaemi
to determine SP dispersion curves3 (i.e.
their
et al.
bandstructure); they measured the transmission spec-
trum over a large wavelength range for a set of ﬁxed
angles of incidence (for two orthogonal polarizations).
(Elsewhere, we have reported such a measurement for our
array6). In contrast, in this Letter we use a ﬁxed wave-
length and monitor the transmission at this single wave-
length as a function of the two far-ﬁeld angles (θx, θy) by
using a CCD. This setup allows for a simple analysis of
the polarization aspects of the transmission. For normal
incidence (plane wave) these are trivial: the polarizations
of input and output are the same, at least for a square
array, as ours. This is because the incident light excites
a frequency-degenerate set of SPs, each having a well de-
ﬁned polarization, which (vector) sum up to ’neutral’ due
to the square symmetry of the array. For instance, the
set (±N, 0), which is x-polarized, is frequency degener-
ate with the set (0, ±N ), which is y-polarized. For non-
normal incidence this frequency degeneracy disappears
and the polarization properties become anisotropic. As
an aside, note that this would happen also upon going
from a square to a rectangular array, but then even for
normal incidence.

To be able to observe SP propagation, the SPs have
to be excited locally with an incident beam of light of suf-
ﬁciently small dimensions, i.e. of the order of or smaller
than the SP propagation length. Therefore, we have mea-
sured the far ﬁeld of the transmitted light of the hole ar-
ray by putting it in the focus of a telescope, consisting of

2

Figure 2: Far-ﬁeld transmission of the hole array, at a
wavelength of 810 nm (17.6◦ × 17.6◦ solid angle) as mea-
sured with a CCD. The input polarization (white arrows)
was set at a 0◦, b 90◦, c 45◦, d −45◦. The color scales
used are diﬀerent for each picture.

a confocal conﬁguration of two lenses with 15 mm focal
length each. The entrance pupil was set by a 6 mm-
diaphragm and was illuminated by a linearly polarized
laser beam generated by an 810 nm wavelength Ti:Sapph-
laser. We estimate the spot diameter at the focal plane
as ≈ 2 − 3 µm. The orientation of the input polarization
was set with a halfwave-plate. A relay lens (10 cm focal
length) was used to make a one-to-one image of the out-
put telescope-lens on a CCD (Apogee), which therefore
recorded the far-ﬁeld of the array. In all images inter-
ference rings of equal inclination were visible. They re-
sult from the glass substrate acting as a Fabry-Perot and
producing interference for the plane-wave components at
diﬀerent angles present in the focus.

Fig. 2 shows the measured far-ﬁeld of the (±1, ±1)
mode at a wavelength of 810 nm. Each of the four pic-
tures was obtained for a diﬀerent linear input polariza-
tion, (a) 0◦, (b) 90◦, (c) 45◦ and (d) −45◦, indicated by
arrows in the pictures. The throughput intensity is mea-
sured without any further polarization analysis. These
pictures visualize the nature of the dominant SP reso-
nances that are addressed at 810 nm. The prominent di-

Figure 3: Schematic representation of the near-ﬁeld at
the backside of the hole array for 810 nm light. In the
far-ﬁeld, narrow and wide dimensions are interchanged
due to Fourier relations, but the polarization directions
remain unchanged. The incident optical electric ﬁeld,
polarized at 90◦ (dashed arrow), is decomposed into four
resonant SPs (solid contour lines). These SPs propagate
along, and are polarized at, ±45◦ (solid arrows). The
shaded overlap region is polarization isotropic, thus po-
larized along the incident ﬁeld.

agonal ”lobes” are consistent with the (±1, ±1) labelling.
For incident light polarized along 0◦ (or 90◦) the lobes on
both the diagonals are excited. For +45◦ input polariza-
tion angle only the lobes along one of the diagonals are
excited (c), for −45◦ the complementary ones (d). This
shows that the incident optical electric ﬁeld is decom-
posed into components along the four resonant modes,
thereby exciting either one or both diagonals depend-
ing on the incident polarization angle. This is displayed
schematically in Fig. 3 for incident light of 90◦ polar-
ization angle, where the incident ﬁeld (dashed arrow) is
decomposed into two equal components along the modes
lying on the diagonals (solid arrows).

Based on Fourier relations, a compact far-ﬁeld in a
certain direction corresponds to a wide near-ﬁeld in that
direction, as could occur due to SP propagation. This
is evident in Fig. 2c, where an input polarization of 45◦
gives a compact ﬁeld in the same direction, whereas the
orthogonal direction is wide. A typical value of this com-
pact width is 4.1◦, which Fourier relates, assuming a
Lorentzian far-ﬁeld proﬁle, to an estimated propagation
length in the near-ﬁeld of 4.3µm (FWHM). This value
is much smaller than the literature value of 40 µm (at
800 nm) for a smooth gold surface,12 probably due to
radiative decay induced by the hole patterning.

In a second experiment, the polarization of the
810 nm mode was analyzed by putting a polarizer behind
the hole array. Fig. 4a and b show the measured far-ﬁelds

Figure 4: Polarization analyzed far-ﬁeld transmission of
the hole array (at 810 nm), with a polarizer in front of
the CCD, oriented at a 45◦ and b 0◦ (red arrows). The
input polarization is 90◦ (white arrows).

for an input polarization of 90◦ (white broken arrows),
thereby exciting both +45◦ and -45◦ modes equally (see
also Fig. 3).
In the ﬁrst picture (a) the analyzing po-
larizer was set at +45◦ (red arrows). For this polariza-
tion, only the lobes corresponding to the (1,1) and (-1,-
1) modes are visible. This shows that these modes are
polarized at +45◦ and, at the same time, that the or-
thogonal (invisible) (-1,1) and (1,-1) modes are polarized
at −45◦ (for which the polarizer is at blocking angle).
In both cases, the polarization is in the same direction
as the SP propagation direction, as expected. The sec-
ond picture (Fig. 4b), made for analyzing polarizer at 0◦
(blocking angle to input polarization), shows no inten-
sity in the central overlap region (corresponding to the
telescope axis), whereas the outward lobes (correspond-
ing to oﬀ-axis) do have intensity. This is consistent with
the central spot being polarization isotropic, correspond-
ing to the shaded region in Fig. 3, where both orthogo-
nal polarization-components are present and overlapping
due to the ﬁnite width of the lobes (indicated by the
solid contour lines). On the other hand, the outward
lobes (outside the shaded region in Fig. 3) each have a
unique polarization (indicated by arrows), because they
are purely single-mode (i.e. non-overlapping). They be-
have quite similar to polarizers, as they transmit only
the polarization component of the incident light aligned
with their axis (at ±45◦).
In the situation of Fig. 4b,
where the hole array is eﬀectively placed between two
orthogonal polarizers (at 0◦ and 90◦), this means that
the ”lobe-polarizers” (at ±45◦) are expected to transmit
1/4 of the incident intensity, due to simple projection
arguments.

A closer look at Fig. 2a and b reveals that they are not

3

perfectly 4-fold symmetric, but have some 2-fold symme-
try admixed (a and b are not fully identical, which should
be the case for 4-fold symmetry). This slight symmetry
breaking is not visible for the ”pure” lobes in Fig. 2c and
d, which are intrinsically 2-fold symmetric. Fig. 4 shows
again slight symmetry breaking, namely in the transmis-
sion values of the 4 outward lobes: oﬀ-axis, i.e.
in the
lobes, typical transmissions for 0◦-input polarization are
35% (±5%) for 0◦-output polarizer, and 15% (±5%) for
90◦-output polarizer. Note that these transmissions are
normalized to the maximum (center) value in Fig. 4a.
These values diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the expected 25%,
based on the assumption that the transmission process
is mediated by the (±1, ±1) modes only. All the above
observations demonstrate that, for certain details, it is
too simple to consider only a single set of SPs living
on one side of the array, i.e. only the (±1, ±1) metal-
glass modes. Theoretically, one expects some inﬂuence
of the (±1, 0) and (0, ±1) modes on the air-metal side (at
≈ 750 nm), as they are the nearest resonance. The ad-
mixture of these modes would be consistent with the ob-
served 2-fold symmetry in the modal patterns in Fig. 2a
and b and in the modal transmission values in Fig. 4b.

On the basis of the SP assisted transmission-model,
one expects that transmission resonances at diﬀerent
wavelengths have diﬀerent far-ﬁeld patterns and polar-
ization properties. We have conﬁrmed this by prelimi-
nary far-ﬁeld measurements for the resonance at 750 nm.
For this wavelength the patterns are more complicated
than those for the (±1, ±1) modes, which is related to
the more complex dispersion curves at this wavelength;
at the 750 nm resonance the modes of diﬀerent (Nx, Ny)
at diﬀerent angles of incidence lie closer together than
at the 810 nm resonance, and thereby have a stronger
inﬂuence on the far-ﬁeld patterns. However, the 750 nm
resonance does show horizontal and vertical lobes, con-
ﬁrming the expected (±1,0) and (0,±1) nature of the SPs
at this frequency. Elsewhere, we will present a more de-
tailed study of our work, including the 750 nm resonance.
In conclusion, we have shown that polarization depen-
dent measurements of the far-ﬁeld are useful to analyze
the optical properties of metal hole arrays; the polar-
ization plays an important role, as it is related to SP
propagation. In a way, SP modes act as polarizers that
pass only the polarization component that is aligned with
their propagation directions. Our measurements show
that the gross features of the transmission can be ad-
equately explained by a ”single-mode” SP model. The
limitations of this simple model show up, however, indi-
cating that more modes have to be taken into account

for a realistic theoretical description of the transmission
process.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the Stichting voor
Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie (FOM); partial
support is due to the European Union under the
IST-ATESIT contract. We thank A. van Zuuk and E.
van der Drift at the Delft Institute of Micro-Electronics
and Sub-micron Technology (DIMES) in Delft, The
Netherlands, for the production of the hole arrays.

References

[1] T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio &

P.A. Wolﬀ. Nature 391, 667 (1998).

[2] L. Martin-Moreno, F.J. Garcia-Vidal, H.J. Lezec,
K.M. Pellerin, T. Thio, J.B. Pendry & T.W. Ebbe-
sen. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1114 (2001).

[3] H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, D.E. Grupp, T.W. Ebbesen

& H.J. Lezec. Phys. Rev. B 58, 6779 (1998).

[4] D.E. Grupp, H.J. Lezec, T.W. Ebbesen, K.M. Pel-
lerin & T. Thio. Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 1569 (2000).

[5] L. Salomon, F. Grillot, A.V. Zayats & F. de Fornel.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1110 (2001).

[6] E. Altewischer, M.P. van Exter & J.P. Woerdman.

Nature 418, 304 (2002).

[7] P. Dawson, B.A.F. Puygranier & J-P. Goudonnet.

Phys. Rev. B 63, 205410 (2001).

[8] C. S¨onnichsen, A.C. Duch, G. Steininger, M. Koch,
G. von Plessen & J. Feldmann. Appl. Phys. Lett.
76, 140 (2000).

[9] B. Hecht, H. Bielefeldt, L. Novotny, Y. Inouye & D.

W. Pohl. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1889 (1996).

[10] F.I. Baida, D. van Labeke, A. Bouhelier, T. Huser
& D. W. Pohl. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 18, 1552 (2001).

[11] H.A. Bethe. Phys. Rev. 66, 163 (1944).

[12] H. Raether Surface Plasmons (Springer, Berlin,

1988).

4

