Microwave measurements of the photonic bandgap

in a two-dimensional photonic crystal slab

J. M. Hickmann,∗ D. Solli, C. F. McCormick, R. Plambeck,† and R. Y. Chiao

Department of Physics; University of California; Berkeley, CA 94720-7300.

Abstract

We have measured the photonic bandgap in the transmission of microwaves through a two-

dimensional photonic crystal slab. The structure was constructed by cementing acrylic rods in a

hexagonal closed-packed array to form rectangular stacks. We ﬁnd a bandgap centered at approx-

imately 11 GHz, whose depth, width and center frequency vary with the number of layers in the

slab, angle of incidence and microwave polarization.

2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Also at Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Federal de Alagoas, Cidade Universit´aria, 57072-970, Macei´o,

AL, Brazil.
†Also at Astronomy Department; University of California; Berkeley, CA 94720-3411.

1

There has been much recent interest in photonic bandgap materials [1], especially in

two-dimensional (2D) periodic dielectric structures, also known as photonic crystal slabs [2].

These structures oﬀer the possibility of guiding light along their extended (non-periodic)

dimension and are much more easily constructed than full three-dimensional (3D) photonic

crystals.

region [9].

Micro-machined photonic bandgap crystals have been both fabricated and experimentally

characterized [3]. Several authors have performed theoretical calculations of bandgaps in

these materials [4, 5], as well as experimental studies of the transmission through a 2D

photonic crystal slab at a wavelength of 1.55 nm [7]. In addition, applications of these and

other similar kinds of photonic crystals to microwave mirrors, substrates for planar antennas,

and photonic crystal heterostructures, have already been proposed and studied [8]. A one-

dimensional photonic crystal bandgap has also recently been observed in the radio-frequency

In the visible and near-infrared part of the spectrum, there has been much recent progress

in the fabrication of 2D “photonic crystal ﬁbers” [10]. One type of these optical ﬁbers consists

of 2D hexagonal-close-packed glass structures, fabricated by stretching out a macroscopic

hexagonal lattice of heated, hollow glass cylinders into a microscopic glass structure of the

same geometry. These structures can also be constructed with a central “defect,” such as a

hexagonal central hole consisting of seven nearest-neighbor hollow cylinders removed from

the center of the structure. The resulting hexagonally shaped central hole can serve as a

waveguide for electromagnetic radiation, since the surrounding periodic dielectric structure

(cladding) possesses a photonic bandgap. Inside the cladding structure only evanescent wave

solutions should be able to propagate transversely to the central axis of the structure.

As a ﬁrst step towards the study of the properties of these 2D optical waveguide struc-

tures, we have performed some measurements of an analogous dielectric structure in the

microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Since Maxwell’s equations are scal-

able, it should be possible to directly apply the results obtained in the microwave region to

structures designed for diﬀerent wavelengths, such as the visible and near infrared. There

are at least two signiﬁcant reasons for conducting these studies with microwave-scale struc-

tures. First, their large scale allows relatively easy fabrication and characterization. Second,

without any scaling, these low-loss periodic dielectric structures could be relevant for elec-

tron beam devices at microwave and millimeter wavelengths (e.g., travelling-wave tubes and

2

backward-wave oscillators). This is especially signiﬁcant since electron beams could interact

strongly with electromagnetic waves at these wavelengths when they co-propagate either

longitudinally down a central hole, or transversely across the top surface of these periodic

dielectric structures[11]. One possible future application of hollow-core photonic crystal

ﬁbers is the acceleration of relativistic electrons to high energies using short-duration laser

pulses co-propagating along with a relativistic electron beam inside the ﬁber. The results of

our measurements should be directly relevant to the design of these kinds of electron beam

devices[12].

Theoretical calculations of the bandgap structure of periodic holes in a hexagonal array

have been carried out by Johnson et al[5, 6]. The structure used in our experiment is similar

to the one considered in these calculations, except for the presence of small, triangular,

interstitial holes between each trio of adjacent acrylic rods, which we believe are negligible

for the determination of the bandgap. The Johnson calculations show that for a lattice

constant a, hole diameter d = 0.9a, and slab thickness 0.6a, the bandgap should be located at
νbg ≈ 0.4c/a. For our system this implies νbg ≈ 10 GHz. Based on optical ﬁber experiments

[10], we expect that a photonic bandgap should be present in our structure around 12 GHz.

In Fig. 1 we show a schematic of the experimental apparatus used for the microwave

transmission measurements. The photonic crystal slab was constructed by stacking to-

gether acrylic pipes (23 cm long, 1/2 inch outer diameter, 3/8 inch inner diameter) in a

hexagonal lattice, resulting in a structure with an air-ﬁlling fraction of approximately 0.60.

The pipes were then glued together at their surfaces of contact using a standard acrylic

cementing solvent. The dielectric constant of acrylic (polymethyl-methacrylate) at 10 GHz

is 2.59[13]. The microwaves were generated by a commercial microwave network analyzer

(Agilent 8722ES) connected to a microwave transmitter horn. The analyzer was swept from

8 to 14 GHz in 15 MHz increments. The slab and receiver horn were placed 1.6 m away

in a box measuring 60 cm on a side, with microwave-absorbing walls. Microwaves entered
the box through a 14 cm × 17 cm rectangular aperture. These dimmensions were chosen to

minimize diﬀraction eﬀects through the aperture without allowing leakage around the slab.

We normalized transmission measurements by removing the slab and measuring the total

microwave signal at the receiving horn. With the slab removed and the rectangular aperture

closed, the microwave signal at the receiver is suppressed by more than 45 dB, indicating

good shielding by the box.

3

In Fig. 2 we show the normalized microwave transmission as a function of frequency for

various numbers of photonic crystal slab layers. For the case in which the electric ﬁeld is

perpendicular to the dielectric rods [transverse magnetic or (TM)], there is a clear bandgap

centered at 11 GHz whose depth increases with the number of layers. The bandgap is about

1.5 GHz wide and its width and center frequency appears to be independent of layer number.

Note that the minimum transmission value is above our background transmission, indicating

that these measurements are above the noise. For the case of the electric ﬁeld parallel to
the rods [transverse electric or (TE)], we ﬁnd a narrower (≈ 1 GHz), shallower bandgap

centered at 10.5 GHz. To quantify the bandgap depth, we average the transmission value

for each slab layer number, in a frequency window from 10.5 GHz to 11.5 GHz in the TM

case and 10.25 GHz to 10.75 GHz in the TE case. Fitting the results to an exponential

decay, we ﬁnd a 1/e power decay length of 5.2 layers and 8.1 layers, respectively.

We have also taken transmission measurements at various angles of incidence, using a

20-layered slab. The results are shown in Fig. 3 for a plane of incidence perpendicular to the

dielectric rods (i.e. no wave-vector component perpendicular to the plane of periodicity).

As was previously seen in Fig. 2, the conﬁguration TM bandgap is deeper and wider than

the TE bandgap. The angle data show that for both polarizations a larger angle of incidence

shifts the bandgap to higher frequencies. Using the -15 dB points as a reference, a higher

angle of incidence produces a narrower bandgap in the TE case but not in the TM case.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the existence of a photonic bandgap in a 2D hexag-

onal photonic crystal slab. Its depth depends on the number of layers, with an exponential

decay of transmission on the order of several layers. We have also measured the dependence

of transmission on the angle of incidence and polarization of the incoming radiation, ﬁnding

that the bandgap persists at high angles but is shifted and in certain cases narrowed.

This work was supported by ARO.

4

[1] E. Yablonovich and T. J. Gmitter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1950 (1989).

[2] See for example C. Reese, C. Becher, A. Imamoglu, E. Hu, B. D. Gerardot, and P. M. Petroﬀ,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 2279 (2001).

[3] E. ¨Ozbay, in Photonic Band Gap Materials, C. M. Souloulis, ed. (Kluwer, Amsterdam, 1996),

[4] T. A. Birks, P. J. Roberts, P. St. J. Russel, D. M. Atkin and T. J. Shepherd, Electronics Lett.

[5] S. G. Johnson, J. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopoulos, and L. A. Kodziejski, Phys. Rev.

[6] S. Foteinopoulou, A. Rosenberg, M M. Sigalas, and C. M. Soukoulis, J. Appl. Phys. 89, 824

p. 41.

31, 1941 (1995).

B 60, 5751 (1999).

(2001).

[7] E. Chow, S. Y. Lin, S. G. Johnson, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopoulos, J. R. Wendt, G. A.

Vawter, W. Zubrzycki, H. Hou, and A. Alleman, Nature 407, 983 (2000).

[8] E. R. Brown, O. B. McMahon, C. D. Parker, C. Dill III, K. Agi, and K. J. Malloy in Photonic

Band Gap Materials, C.M. Souloulis, ed. (Kluwer, Amsterdam, 1996), p. 355.

[9] A. Hach´e and L. Poirier, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 518 (2002).

[10] R. F. Cregan, B. J. Mangan, J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. St. J. Russell, P. J. Roberts, D. C.

Allan, Science 285,1537. (1999).

[11] J. M. Hickmann, R. Y. Chiao, Nonlinear Guided Waves and Their Applications, OSA Tech-

nical Digest (Optical Society of America, Washington, 2001), paper MC12.

[12] R. Y. Chiao, D. Solli, J. M. Hickmann, in Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics, edited by P.

Chen (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2002), p. 290.

[13] AIP Handbook, 3rd ed., edited by D. E. Gray (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1972), p. 5-132.

5

fig1.eps

FIG. 1: Experimental setup for measuring the photonic bandgap of the photonic crystal slab.

6

FIG. 2: Microwave transmission versus frequency for electric ﬁeld (a) perpendicular (TM) and (b)

parallel (TE) to the dielectric rods, for various numbers of slab layers. The inset shows the average

transmission versus number of slab layers in a frequency window from (a) 10.5 GHz to 11.5 GHz

and (b) 10.25 GHz to 10.75 GHz.

fig2.eps

7

FIG. 3: Microwave transmission versus frequency for several angles. (a) Electric ﬁeld perpendicular

to rods (TM). (b) Electric ﬁeld parallel to rods (TE).

fig3.eps

8

