2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum chaos in optical systems: The annular billiard

Martina Hentschel1∗ and Klaus Richter2
1 Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme, N¨othnitzer Str. 38, 01187 Dresden, Germany
2 Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Regensburg, 93040 Regensburg, Germany
(February 2, 2008)

We study the dielectric annular billiard as a quantum chaotic model of a micro-optical resonator.
It diﬀers from conventional billiards with hard-wall boundary conditions in that it is partially open
and composed of two dielectric media with diﬀerent refractive indices. The interplay of reﬂection
and transmission at the diﬀerent interfaces gives rise to rich dynamics of classical light rays and
to a variety of wave phenomena. We study the ray propagation in terms of Poincar´e surfaces of
section and complement it with full numerical solutions of the corresponding wave equations. We
introduce and develop an S-matrix approach to open optical cavities which proves very suitable
for the identiﬁcation of resonances of intermediate width that will be most important in future
applications like optical communication devices. We show that the Husimi representation is a useful
tool in characterizing resonances and establish the ray-wave correspondence in real and phase space.
While the simple ray picture provides a good qualitative description of certain system classes, only
the wave description reveals the quantitative details.

PACS numbers: 05.45.Mt, 03.65.Sq, 42.25.-p, 42.60.Da

I. INTRODUCTION

Billiard systems of many kinds have proven to be very
fruitful model systems in the ﬁeld of quantum chaos.
The methods of investigation are well established both
for the classical dynamics and for the quantum mechani-
cal behaviour, with semiclassical methods describing the
transition from quantum to classical properties. With
the growing interest in quantum chaos and in meso-
scopic physics, new systems have entered the stage, in-
cluding systems exhibiting chaos of classical waves such
as (macroscopic) microwave billiards [1,2], acoustic res-
onators [3] as well as deformed microcavities [5–10] which
can operate as microlasers [11,12]. To describe these
(two-dimensional) systems one can exploit the analogy
between the stationary Schr¨odinger equation and the
Helmholtz equation for (classical) waves [13]. Quantum
chaotic experiments using microwave cavities or other
classical waves (e.g., acoustic or water waves) are based
on this mathematical equivalence, see [14] for a review.
Most of the investigated systems are hard-wall billiards.
However, for the class of optical, or dielectric, model sys-
tems the billiard boundary manifests itself by a change in
the index of refraction allowing for reﬂection and trans-
mission of light. The limit of closed systems is ap-
proached as the diﬀerence in the refractive indices reaches
inﬁnity.

We emphasize that the openness of optical systems ex-
tents the set of interesting questions with respect to those
for closed billiards. In this paper we suggest a further
extension of the class of open optical cavities by consid-
ering two regions with diﬀerent refractive indices inside
the cavity, which leads to an additional refractive inter-
face between the two dielectrics inside the resonator. The
interplay between refraction inside the billiard and par-
tial reﬂection at the outer billiard boundary gives rise to

1

a variety of phenomena in the classical ray dynamics and
correspondingly in the wave description of such systems.
The model we study is the annular billiard shown in
It consists of a small disk of radius R2 placed
Fig. 1.
inside a larger disk of radius R1 with a displacement
δ of the disk centres. This system is well-known from
quantum and wave mechanical studies of the hard-wall
conﬁguration [15–17] with non-vanishing wave-functions
only in the annular region. It carries features of a ray-
splitting system [18] when each disk is characterized by a
(stepwise constant) potential (unlike the situation we will
discuss here, see Sec. II B). Here we consider disks char-
acterized by indices of refraction, n1 and n2, respectively,
with the index of the environment ﬁxed at n0 = 1 [19].
We will study billiard materials with ni > 1 such that
conﬁnement by total internal reﬂection is possible. Then
methods well-known from the description of classical dy-
namical systems, such as the use of Poincar´e’s surfaces
of section, can be employed to describe the ray dynam-
ics. Note that whispering gallery modes in the dielectric
annular billiard with a metallic inner disk have been dis-
cussed in Ref. [20]. A detailed study of periodic orbits
in a speciﬁc hard-wall conﬁguration, together with the
expected consequences on the electromagnetic scattering
problem was performed in Ref. [21].

The above-mentioned correspondence between the
Helmholtz and Schr¨odinger equation is established by
means of an eﬀective potential [22] that depends not only
on position and the respective index of refraction n, but
also on the energy. Changes in the refractive index give
rise to steps in the eﬀective potential which allows for
a quantum-mechanical interpretation (e.g., quasibound
states, tunneling escape). We will discuss this point in
the next section when we contrast optical systems gov-
erned by Maxwell’s equation with quantum mechanical
problems obeying the Schr¨odinger equation. Also, we

FIG. 1. (a) Geometry and notations of the dielectric annu-
lar billiard. (b) Example of a resonant wave function excited
by a plane wave with wave number k = 6.251 incident from
the left (R1 = 1, R2 = 0.6, δ = 0.22, n1 = 3, n2 = 6). Dark
regions denote high electric ﬁeld intensity.

will see how the two possible polarization directions af-
fect the Maxwell-Schr¨odinger correspondence and which
quantity takes the role of ¯h: Maxwell’s equations are, of
course, not aware of the existence of ¯h.

The further outline of the paper is as follows: In Sec. II
we introduce the ray and wave optics notion for the sim-
ple system of the dielectric disk that arises from the annu-
lar system upon removal of the inner obstacle (n1 = n2,
or R2 = 0). We describe the methods used for the study
of the annular billiard in the subsequent sections; namely
the adaptation of the Poincar´e surface of section method,
well-known from classical mechanics, to optical systems,
the exact solution of the Maxwell equation (leading to
an eﬀective Schr¨odinger equation), and the S-matrix ap-
proach. Whereas the ﬁrst approach is based on the ray
picture, the latter two clearly fully include the wave na-
ture of light. We employ these methods for the annu-
lar billiard in Sec. III, where we introduce methods to
study the ray dynamics in optical compound systems and
apply, for the ﬁrst time to our knowledge, an S-matrix
formalism to optical billiards. The expected ray-wave,
or classical-quantum, correspondence is established in
Sec. IV and investigated from various viewpoints, includ-
ing both real space and phase space arguments. However,
several features in the behaviour of waves require im-
provements of the simple ray model as we will illustrate
and explain with typical examples.
In our conclusion,
Sec. V, we discuss the possibility of an experimental re-
alization of the annular system with the currently avail-
able dielectric materials. The successes of the ray-picture
illuminated here and elsewhere [5,6,10,12,23] suggest the
ray-based design of micro-optical cavities for, e.g., future
communication technologies.

II. THE DIELECTRIC DISK

In this section we introduce the methods, techniques,
and notations used later in the discussion of the annu-
lar billiard. We present the ray and wave picture for the
description of optical (or dielectric) systems using the
simple example of a dielectric disk, which provides all
the ingredients to deal with the annular billiard (apart
from a coordinate transformation, see below). We start
with the ray optics approach and show how methods
well established in classical dynamics can be adopted
to optical systems.
In the wave description we distin-
guish between an approach to the resonant states of the
(naturally) open optical system by complex wave vectors
based on Maxwell’s equations on the one hand, and by
real wave vectors arising in an S-matrix approach on the
other hand.

A. Ray Optics: Classical billiards with total internal
reﬂection

Within ray optics, the zero-wavelength limit of wave
optics, light is described by a ray that follows a straight
line through a medium, very similar to the dynamics of
a point mass. Let us assume a light ray, or plane wave,
incident under an angle χ1 with respect to the normal of
a dielectric boundary where the refractive index changes
from n1 to n2. At the interface, the ray is i) specularly re-
ﬂected under an angle χ2 = χ1 ≡ χ, with a polarization-
dependent [24] probability RTM/TE, see Fig. 2(b). The
remaining part, T TM/TE = 1 − RTM/TE, is ii) transmit-
ted into the other medium under an output angle η given
by Snell’s law, sin η = (n1/n2) sin χ ≡ n sin χ. In the last
identity we have employed the scaling properties of the
system that allow one to ﬁx one of the refractive indices,
(e.g. that of the environment) to unity without loss of
generality.

Snell’s law cannot be fulﬁlled to yield real η for any
angle of incidence χ if n > 1 (n1 > n2, respectively).
Total internal reﬂection occurs if sin χ ≥ sin χc ≡ 1/n
where we introduced the critical angle χc. For angles of
incidence above the critical angle, light is conﬁned by to-
tal internal reﬂection with zero transmission and behaves
like a classical point particle, Fig. 2(a). Therefore, real
and phase space methods from classical mechanics (such
as ray tracing or the Poincar´e surface of section tech-
nique), prove to be very useful if they are complemented
by the optical property of refraction: The Poincar´e sur-
face of section (SOS) method works exact (except for the
exponentially small tunneling losses) as long as we are
in the regime of total internal reﬂection. However, for
−1/n < sin χ < 1/n, light can escape so that the in-
tensity remaining inside the disk is diminishing. This
fact has to be taken into account when discussing the

2

FIG. 2. Comparison of ray and wave picture for a di-
electric disk of refractive index n. The upper panels il-
lustrate the two possibilities of (a) total internal reﬂection,
sin χ ≥ sin χc = 1/n, when the ray dynamics is equal to that
of a classical point particle in a closed system, and (b) ray re-
fraction when, due to partial transmission, the light intensity
inside the disk decreases with time. In (c) the intensity of the
electric ﬁeld (see Sec. II B, higher intensity in darker regions)
for a quasibound state (nkR = 11.428 − 0.254i) of the dielec-
tric disk (n = 3) is shown. For comparison, an eigenstate of
the closed disk (nkR = 9.761, vanishing intensity outside the
disk) is given in the lower left sector (both are for transverse
magnetic ﬁeld, TM polarization).

FIG. 3. Poincar´e surface of section for the annular billiard
with R1 = 1, R2 = 0.6, and δ = 0.01. The horizontal axis
is the polar angle φ, the vertical axis, sin χ, is proportional
to the angular momentum in z-direction (perpendicular to
the system plane). Although the displacement of the inner
disk is rather small, it has major impact on trajectories that
explore the region sin χ < R2 + δ. Other trajectories are not
inﬂuenced and identical to those of a single dielectric disk,
see e.g.
the two upper-most examples on the right. The
initial angular momentum of the trajectories shown is positiv
(sin χ > 0). Nonetheless regions where sin χ < 0 are explored,
implying a change in the sense of rotation as, e.g., in the
lower-most trajectory on the right. The critical angle for total
internal reﬂection is marked on the left indicating that the two
lower-most trajectories are not conﬁned.

Poincar´e SOS for optical systems. Figure 3 shows an ex-
ample of a Poincar´e SOS for a hard-wall annular system
with slightly eccentric inner disk (δ = 0.01). The critical
value sin χ = 1/n is marked by an arrow.

Probing the phase space structure of a rotational in-
variant system like a disk in terms of a Poincar´e SOS
gives a uniform structure as shown in the upper part of
Fig. 3. Although this is a Poincar´e SOS for an annu-
lar system [25] with a slightly eccentric inner disk (see
Sec. IV), it is identical to that for a disk for trajecto-
ries that do not hit the inner disk, i.e. sin χ > R2 + δ
(R1 = 1). The straight horizontal lines directly express
the conservation of angular momentum, that is, conser-
vation of sin χ, and the corresponding trajectories are
referred to as whispering gallery (WG) orbits.

The reﬂection and transmission probabilities, RTM/TE
and T TM/TE, are provided by Fresnel’s laws [26]. A plane
electromagnetic wave incident on a planar dielectric in-
terface with angle of incidence χ is reﬂected with the
polarization-dependent probabilities

RTM =

sin2(χ − η)
sin2(χ + η)

, RTE =

tan2(χ − η)
tan2(χ + η)

,

(1)

where TM (TE) denotes transverse polarization of the
magnetic (electric) ﬁeld at the interface, and η =
arcsin(n sin χ) is the direction of the refracted beam ac-
cording to Snell’s law.

B. Wave Picture: From Maxwell to Schr¨odinger

Before we turn to the more complicated annular bil-
liard in Sec. III, we assume an inﬁnite dielectric cylinder
of radius R and refractive index n embedded in vacuum
with refractive index n0 = 1. We will call k the wave
number outside the cylinder and, analogously, nk is the
wave number inside. The solution of Maxwell’s equa-
tions for the vortices of the electromagnetic ﬁeld [26] is
given, e.g., in Refs. [4,22], and leads to an equation for
the electric (magnetic) ﬁeld that is similar to the conven-
tional Schr¨odinger equation. The vector character of the
ﬁelds implies, however, that one has to distinguish two
possible polarization directions with diﬀering boundary
conditions. The situation where the electric (magnetic)
ﬁeld is parallel to the cylinder (z-) axis is called TM
(TE) polarization, with the magnetic (electric) ﬁeld be-
ing thus transverse. Using the rotational invariance of

3

the system, separation in cylindrical variables (assuming
a φ-dependence eimφ, and a z-dependence eikz z) eventu-
ally leads to an eﬀective Schr¨odinger equation [27] for the
radial component of the electric ﬁeld,

d2
dr2 +

1
r

d
dr

−

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

E(r) + Veﬀ (r)E(r) = k2E(r),

(2)

where we introduced the eﬀective potential

Veﬀ (r) = k2(1 − n2) + m2/r2 + k2
z .

(3)

The ﬁrst term reveals immediately that dielectric regions
with n > 1 correspond to an attractive well in the quan-
tum analogy, and that a potential structure is determined
by the change of the refractive indices for diﬀerent re-
gions. Note, however, the energy-dependent prefactor –
a far-reaching diﬀerence in comparison to quantum me-
chanics. The other two terms in Eq. (3) arise from the
conservation of the angular momentum (characterized by
the quantum number m), and express the conservation
of the linear momentum along the cylinder axis (acting
as an oﬀset in energy), respectively.

In the following we will consider a dielectric disk (that
is, we choose a particular cross sectional plane of the
cylinder to obtain an eﬀective system), and set kz to zero
corresponding to a wave in the x-y plane. Approaching
the disk from the outside (r > R, n0 = 1) there is only
the angular momentum contribution to the eﬀective po-
tential Veﬀ , Eq. (3). At r = R, there is a discontinu-
ity in Veﬀ that is proportional to 1 − n2, reﬂecting the
non-continuous change in the refractive index. It reaches
from k2
Inside the
disk the angular momentum contribution, now shifted
by k2
min, again determines the behaviour (see also
Fig. 9 at values r/R1 > R2/R1 ).

max = m2/R2 to k2

min = m2/(n R)2.

max − k2

The form of the potential suggests an interpretation in
the spirit of quantum mechanics with metastable states
in the potential well that decay by tunneling escape, and
indeed this turns out to be the quantum-mechanical ver-
sion of conﬁnement by total internal reﬂection [4,22]. To
this end we employ a semiclassical quantization condi-
tion for the z-component of the quantum mechanical and
classical angular momentum, m¯h = n¯hRe(kR) sin χ. We
ﬁnd

sin χ =

m
nRe(kR)

(4)

as relation between the angle of incidence as ray picture
quantity, and the wave number and angular momentum
of a resonance.

Another correspondence between ray and wave quan-
tities exists between the (polarization-dependent) Fres-
nel reﬂection coeﬃcient RTM/TE and the imaginary part
of the wave number that describes the decay of a reso-
nant state. In fact one can deduce a reﬂection coeﬃcient
RTM/TE

of the disk [28],

d

RTM/TE

d

= exp[4n Im(kR) cos χ] .

(5)

We wish to point out that there exist deviations between
the Fresnel values RTM/TE and RTM/TE
when the wave-
length becomes comparable to the system size, in partic-
ular around the critical angle. This can be understood
within a semiclassical picture based on the Goos-H¨anchen
eﬀect [29,30].

d

The general solutions of the radial Schr¨odinger equa-
tion (2) are Bessel and Neumann functions, Jm(kir) and
Ym(kir) of order m, where ki is the wave number in the
respective medium. Since physics requires a ﬁnite value
of the wave function at the disk center, the solution inside
the disk can consist of Bessel functions only. Outside the
dielectric we assume an outgoing wave function, namely
a Hankel function H (1)
m of the ﬁrst kind, in accordance
with our picture of a decaying state. The resonant states
are obtained by matching the wave ﬁeld ∝ Jm(nkr)eimφ
inside the disk at r = R to the wave ﬁeld ∝ H (1)
m (kr)eimφ
outside the disk according to the polarization dependent
matching conditions deduced from Maxwell’s equations.
The resonant states are solutions of
′

Jm(nkR) H (1)
m

(kR) = P J

′
m(nkR) H (1)

m (kR) ,

(6)

where P = n (1/n) for TM (TE) polarization (primes
denote derivatives with respect to the full arguments nkr
and kr, respectively).

One example of a quasibound state as solution of the
optically open system is shown in Fig. 2(c) and compared
to a solution of the closed disk. The shift in the wave pat-
terns is clearly visible. Owing to the symmetry of the sys-
tem we ﬁnd a characteristic (quantum-mechanical) node
structure that is directly related to the quantum numbers
m (there are 2m azimuthal nodal points), and ρ counting
the radial nodes (hence m = 3, ρ = 2 in the example).

At this point a further discussion concerning the ap-
pearance of ¯h in optical systems is convenient. Em-
ploying the quantum-classical correspondence, one ex-
pects ¯h to be related to the reciprocal wave number,
¯h ∼ 1/k, because ¯h → 0 in the classical (here the ray)
limit k → ∞. This relation is indeed obtained when
we compare Eq. (2), divided by k2 (thereby removing
the energy-dependence of the eﬀective potential), with
Schr¨odinger’s equation, and identify 1/k with ¯h.

C. S-Matrix approach to the dielectric disk

The main idea when considering a scattering problem
is to probe the response of the system to incoming (test)
waves, and to extract system properties like resonance
positions and widths from the scattered wave. Physically,
this method is formulated for real wave vectors.

Here we want to investigate the scattering properties of
the dielectric disk for electromagnetic waves in the frame-
work of S-matrix theory [31–33]. One possible choice for

4

the incident test waves are, of course, plane waves. For
our rotational invariant disk of ﬁnite dimension, however,
incident waves that allow for angular momentum classiﬁ-
cation are much more convenient: Then we need to take
into consideration only waves with impact parameter of
the order of the system dimension or smaller. The Han-
kel functions H (2)
m of the second kind possess the desired
properties.

Again, we consider a dielectric disk of radius R and
refractive index n and denote the vacuum wave number
by k. According to Maxwell’s equations and the discus-
sion in the previous Sec. II B we write the wave function
Ψscatt
m outside that is excited by an incident wave of an-
gular momentum m as

Ψscatt

m (kr) = H (2)

m (kr)eimφ +

SmlH (1)

l

(kr)eilφ .

∞

Xl=−∞

l

Here, Sml is the amplitude for an incident wave H (2)
m to
be scattered into H (1)
. The scattering amplitudes are
comprised in the S-matrix. It follows from ﬂux conserva-
tion that S has to be unitary, a property that we will use
subsequently. Starting with a general situation in which
S can have entries everywhere, symmetry requirements
will reduce the number of independent matrix elements.
For the dielectric disk, the scattered wave has to obey
angular momentum conservation and will, therefore, be
a Hankel function of the same order m as the incoming
Hankel function. Hence the scattering matrix is diago-
nal. In the general case where angular momentum is not
conserved (as, for example, for a deformed disk or the
annular geometry that we will consider in all following
sections), scattering will occur into all possible angular
momenta l.

Employing the matching conditions (cf. Sec. II B) for
TM polarization, we obtain from the requirement of con-
tinuity of the wave function (or the electric ﬁeld) and
their derivative eventually the matrix elements Smm′ :

Smm′ = −

′

′

H (2)
m
H (1)
m

′
m(nkr)

(kr) − n J
(kr) − n J ′

Jm(nkr) H (2)
Jm(nkr) H (1)

m(nkr)

m (kr)

m (kr)

δmm′ .

(7)

The general idea for identifying resonances is that a
probing wave with resonance energy will interact longer
with the system than a wave with “non-ﬁtting” energy.
This can be quantiﬁed in terms of the Wigner delay time
τ W (Ek) [34] that is the derivative of the total phase θ of
the determinant of the S-matrix, detS=eiθ, with respect
to energy Ek = k2,

τ W (Ek) =

dθ(Ek)
dEk

.

In the following, we will use the wave-number based

delay time

τ (k) ≡ 4π k τ W (k2)

(9)

in order to identify resonances as depicted in Fig. 4(a).
The solid line shows the result for a dielectric disk with
n=3. Families of whispering gallery modes (WGMs) are
identiﬁed upon increasing the wave number and can be
labelled by the quantum number m that counts the az-
imuthal nodes (2m). The decrease in peak width, accom-
panied by an increase in height, that is observed with
increasing m corresponds to an increase of the angle of
incidence, Eq. (4), and improved conﬁnement by total
internal reﬂection.

Note the relation between the (total) phase θ(Ek) of
the S-matrix and the so-called resonance counting func-
tion: N (Ek) = θ(Ek)/2π, cf. [31]. The idea is that a
resonance is encountered whenever the phase θ of det S
increases by 2π upon increasing the energy Ek.

In the following we will use the function τ (k) to de-
termine the resonances.
Isolated resonances appear as
(Lorentzian) peaks in τ (k), see Fig. 4(a), above a small
background.
Information about the imaginary part of
the resonance is now encoded in the height and width
of the Lorentzian resonance peaks [32]. We point out
that the resolution of very broad and extremely narrow
resonances might be diﬃcult, because they are either in-
cluded in the background or not captured using a ﬁnite
numerical grid interval. However, resonances with a wide
range of widths are easily identiﬁed, in particular all res-
onances that are of interest for microlaser applications
are found within the S-matrix approach [35].

The area under the curve τ (k) is proportional to the
number of states with wave numbers smaller than k
In the case of stepwise potentials such as re-
[31,33].
alized in ray-splitting billiards, simple Weyl formulas for
the smooth part of the density of states were derived for
a number of geometries [18]. The application of these
results to optical systems where ray splitting is realized
by refraction and transmission at refractive index bound-
aries is tempting. However, here we work with an energy
dependent eﬀective potential, in contrast to the situation
studied in [18] where only a (stepwise) spatial dependence
of the potential was assumed. Consequently, a general-
ization of the formulas derived in [18] would be required
if one is interested in an analytical expression for the
smooth part of the density of states, which is, however,
not the subject of this work.

III. ANNULAR BILLIARD IN THE RAY AND
WAVE PICTURE

(8)

In this section we adopt the ray and wave methods
explained above to the general case of the dielectric an-
nular billiard. We will denote the three diﬀerent regions,
namely the environment (refractive index n0), the an-
nular region (n1), and the inner disk (n2) by the in-

5

FIG. 4. (a) Resonances in the concentric annular billiard
(R1 = 1, R2 = 0.6, n1 = 3), corresponding to the ﬁrst family
of whispering gallery modes. The annular systems n2 = 2
(dotted) and n2 = 4 (dashed) are compared with the ho-
mogeneous disk n2 = 3. Note the systematic deviation of
the resonance position to larger (smaller) wave numbers for
n2 = 2 (n2 = 4) that decreases with increasing angular mo-
mentum quantum number m since the inner disk becomes
less important. In the inset, we compare the positions and
widths of the 4th resonance (m = 4) in the delay time with
the respective complex wave numbers according to Eq. (10).
We ﬁnd excellent agreement with the numerically exact val-
ues k0 = 2.0108 − 0.0041i (n2 = 4), k0 = 2.0753 − 0.0063i
(n2 = 3), and k0 = 2.1035 − 0.0075i (n2 = 2). Note the
existence of additional resonances for n2 = 4, some of them
marked by arrows from below and illustrated in the ray and
wave picture in (b). They are due to the double-well structure
of the eﬀective potential and referred to as “double WGMs”,
see text.

dices 0, 1, and 2, respectively. The corresponding wave
numbers are k0, k1, and k2. Due to the scaling proper-
ties we ﬁx n0 ≡ 1 and one of the geometry parameters
R1, R2, δ; we choose R1 ≡ 1. Given a set of parameters
(n0 ≡ 1, n1, n2), the same results hold for the scaled set
(
n0,
n0,
if the geometry is not changed. In turn, ﬁxing the di-
electric constants, the parameter sets (R1 ≡ 1, R2, δ)
e
e
e
and (
R1) are equivalent when
δ = δ
k →

n0) for wave numbers

R2 = R2

n2 = n2

n1 = n1

k = k/

R1,

n0,

e

e

e

e

R1.

e

e

e

R1,
k = k/
e

e

e

e

FIG. 5. Poincar´e SOS taken at the outer boundary for the
hard-wall annular billiard (R2 = 0.6, δ = 0.22). Trajecto-
ries are bounded to the annular region, no optical properties
of the system are yet included. Typical regular and chaotic
trajectories are shown both in real and phase space.

A. Ray optics and refractive billiard

The rotational invariance of the circular billiard dis-
cussed in Sec. II can be broken either by deformation (as
in [12]) or by placing oﬀ-centered opaque obstacles inside
the disk, leading to the hard-wall annular billiard. Start-
ing from the concentric situation, the system stays close
to integrable due to the existence of adiabatic invariants
for not too big eccentricities, see Fig. 3. However, in
general the phase space of the annular billiard is mixed,
with regular islands placed in the chaotic sea as shown
in Fig. 5.

For optical systems, both the outer and inner bound-
ary become permeable. Leakage at the outer boundary
occurs for −1/n < sin χ < 1/n. In the simplest qualita-
tive picture, starting with the hard-wall system, we will
assume those rays to leave the cavity (thus simplifying
Fresnel’s laws (1) to a stepwise function). The corre-
sponding trajectories are assumed to not exist in an op-
tical cavity. If one is interested in how the intensity of a
certain trajectory decreases, Fresnel’s laws can easily be
taken into account accurately, leading to the model of a
Fresnel billiard [5,23,36].

However, the description of the refractively opened in-
ner boundary turns out to be rather complicated. There,
all rays remain in the billiard, causing a tremendous
increase of the number of rays upon partial reﬂection.
Another crucial diﬀerence is that now new trajectories

6

FIG. 6. Poincar´e SOS taken at the outer boundary for the
refractive billiard with n0 = 1, n1 = 3, n2 = 1 and the same
geometry as in Fig. 5. The hard-wall condition of Fig. 5 is kept
at the outer boundary, but replaced at the inner one by the
condition of total internal reﬂection. If it is not fulﬁlled the
ray will penetrate the inner disk, giving rise to a restructured
phase space and new regular orbits as the one on the lower
right.

FIG. 7. Poincar´e SOS for the refractive billiard with
n0 = 1, n1 = 3, n2 = 6 and the same geometry as in Fig. 5.
Rays in the annulus that hit the inner boundary will pene-
trate it. Note the existence of whispering gallery modes in the
inner disk (conﬁned by total internal reﬂection) not visible in
this SOS.

arise, namely those crossing the inner disk. We model
this situation by introducing the model of the “refractive
billiard”: Whenever total internal reﬂection is violated
at the inner boundary, the ray enters the inner disk ac-
cording to Snell’s law with full intensity, such that now
ray splitting occurs. Otherwise, the ray is specularly re-
ﬂected and stays in the annulus. This corresponds again
to a stepwise simpliﬁcation of Fresnel’s laws. Note that
the hard-wall billiard is in fact a realization of constant
reﬂection coeﬃcient RTM/TE = 1. The real situation
is found in between the stepwise and constant approxi-
mations and, depending on the refractive indices chosen,
results from both limits are needed in order to under-
stand the resonant modes found in the wave picture, see
Sec. IV.

We complete our refractive-billiard model by ﬁrst as-
suming specular reﬂection at the outer boundary, and
discuss outer-boundary losses subsequently as outlined
above. Results are shown in Figs. 6 and 7 for the same
geometry as in Fig. 5 [37], and two diﬀerent combina-
tions of refractive indices. In Fig. 6, the annular index
n1 is highest, allowing for total internal reﬂection at both
boundaries. In the limit n1 → ∞ we would recover the
phase space of the hard-wall billiard, Fig. 5. For moder-
ate n1 = 3 (n0 = n2 = 1) as in Fig. 6 we are, however,
away from this limit: most of the regular trajectories of
the hard-wall system are gone and, in turn, new regular
orbits passing through the inner disk appear.

The situation changes once more for n0 < n1 < n2,
because then total internal reﬂection at the inner bound-
ary is never possible (again, we base our discussion on
rays entering from the annulus), and all rays hitting the
inner boundary will enter. Furthermore, they will leave
the inner disk upon the next reﬂection according to the
principle of reversibility of the light path. Note, however,
that conﬁnement by total internal reﬂection in the inner

disk is well possible. From our discussion in Sec. II we
know that these orbits will and can only be whispering
gallery modes (WGMs). To anticipate results of the next
section, those modes do exist and leave their signature
as very sharp peaks in the delay time.

In Fig. 7 an example of the phase space is given, show-
ing yet another structure owing to the change in the re-
fractive indices. For the regular orbits shown at the right,
we expect only the upper one to survive the (optical)
opening of the outer boundary as long as n0/n1 ≥ 3.2.
The lower orbit hits the outer boundary perpendicular
(χ = 0) at least in some points, and can therefore only
be conﬁned by hard walls.

B. Wave picture: Maxwell’s equations and S-matrix
approach

Generalizing the wave picture approaches presented in
Sec. II for the dielectric disk to the annular billiard re-
quires essentially to consider another, oﬀ-centered circu-
lar boundary at which the matching conditions resulting
from Maxwell’s equations have to be fulﬁlled as well. An
eccentric inclusion lowers the rotational symmetry of the
system to axial reﬂection invariance about the symmetry
axis of the system. Consequently, angular momentum is
not conserved, and the S-matrix of the compound system
cannot be diagonal in the general case.

Maxwell’s equations can be solved analytically in the
concentric case (R2 > 0), and resonant states with com-
plex wave number are obtained as zeros of the expression

′

n1Jm(k2R2)H (1)
m
′
(k1R2)H (1)

H (2)
m

(k0R1) ×
m (k1R1) − H (1)
m

×

′

h
1Jm(k2R2)H (1)
− n2
′
×

H (2)
m

(k1R2)H (1)
m

m (k0R1) ×
′

(k1R1) − H (1)
m

(k1R2)H (2)
m

′

(10)

(k1R2)H (2)

m (k1R1)
i

′

(k1R1)
i

h

7

An inner disk of lower refractive implies neﬀ < n1 and a
larger spacing between the resonances. This is easily un-
derstood when considering an eigenvalue nk =const. of
the (closed) dielectric disk. Obtaining the same constant
value for a smaller n requires a higher k. In contrast, an
inner disk of higher refractive index reduces the spacing
between the resonances. This eﬀect is strongest for res-
onances of high radial quantum number ρ and small an-
gular momentum quantum number m, since they rather
extend to the inner regions of the disk or the annular
billiard. (In terms of the ray picture, they correspond to
smaller angles of incidence, leading to the same conclu-
sion.) Accordingly, the eﬀect reduces for increasing m
and eventually vanishes if the inner disk is not seen any
more [38]. In Fig. 4(a) resonances are marked by arrows
that exist only if the refractive index of the inner disk is
highest. One corresponding wave pattern, together with
a ray analogue, is shown in Fig. 4(b). It reveals that the
“double WGM” structure results from a star-like trajec-
tory.

In Fig. 8 we consider the same refractive indices (i.e.
n1 = 3, n2 = 4) and shift now the inner disk oﬀ the
centre. The “double WGMs” (again marked by arrows)
are aﬀected in a way diﬀerent from the “conventional”
WGMs. First of all, the systematic shift of the latter
can again be understood in terms of the eﬀective refrac-
tive index. The impact of an oﬀ-centered (inner) disk
is enhanced because in the constricted region it acts like
a concentric disk with larger radius Reﬀ
2 > R2. Note
that the resonances marked by arrows in Fig. 8 change
their character from “double WGMs” in the concentric
and slightly eccentric cases to “generalized” WGMs sim-
ilar to the one shown in the right panel of Fig. 9 if the
symmetry breaking caused by the oﬀ-centered inner disk
becomes too strong.

IV. RAY-WAVE-CORRESPONDENCE FOR THE
ANNULAR BILLIARD

In the previous sections we already referred to the ray-
wave correspondence in optical systems and gave several
examples which were mainly based on WG modes, and
the concentric annular billiard. In this section, we ﬁrst
continue with WGMs and show how they can be speciﬁ-
cally inﬂuenced by choosing appropriate materials. How-
ever, ray-wave correspondence holds for far more inter-
esting trajectories, and we will give illustrative examples
how closed-billiard trajectories are recovered in the open
system using real and phase space portraits.

n1 = 3, R2 = 0.6

n2 = 4, δ = 0
n2 = 4, δ = 0.1
n2 = 4, δ = 0.3

400

200

τ
 
e
m

i
t
 
y
a
e
D

l

0

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Wave number k0

FIG. 8. Resonance peaks for increasing displacement δ in
comparison with the concentric case (dotted) for n2 > n1.
Here, whispering gallery modes of the outer disk are shifted
to the left due to an increase of the eﬀective refractive index.
However, other modes are aﬀected in a diﬀerent way, as for
example the resonances marked by arrows.

′

×

− n2J

′
m(k2R2)H (1)
m
H (2)
m (k1R2)H (1)
h
′
m(k2R2)H (1)
+ n1n2J
m (k1R2)H (1)
m

×

′

(k0R1) ×
m (k1R1) − H (1)

m (k1R2)H (2)

m (k0R1) ×

m (k1R1)
i

′

h

H (2)

(k1R1) − H (1)

(k1R1)
i
for TM polarized light. Note that Eq. (10) reduces to
Eq. (6) for n1 = n2 when the annular billiard is reduced
to a disk.

m (k1R2)H (2)
m

In order to investigate the eccentric case, we focus on
the S-matrix method. The derivation of the S-matrix
for the eccentric annular billiard is outlined in the ap-
pendix. As discussed in Sec. II the information on reso-
nance position and width is contained both in the com-
plex wave vector that solves the resonance equation de-
duced from Maxwell’s equations and in the delay-time
plot τ (k). This is illustrated in the inset of Fig. 4(a)
where the resonance positions and widths found from
τ (k) are compared with the numerically exact solutions
of Eq. (10) for concentric geometries. The delay-time plot
in Fig. 4(a) reveals a systematic deviation of the ﬁrst few
resonance positions to the right (left), if the refractive
index of the inner disk is lower (higher) than that in the
annulus. However, the deviation from the concentric case
is rather small. It suggests that the low-lying resonances
in the (concentric) annular geometry are very similar to
the WGMs of the dielectric disk and mainly localized at
the outer boundary. However, the resonant wave func-
tion does experience the change of the refractive index in
the inner disk as indicated by the shift of the resonance
position. The direction of the shift is most easily seen
when thinking in terms of an eﬀective refractive index
neﬀ ,

neﬀ

def=

1 −

(cid:18)

R2
2
R2

1 (cid:19)

R2
2
R2
1

n1 +

n2 .

(11)

8

B. Towards closed systems

Varying the refractive index of an optical system allows
one to describe the transition between closed and open,
optical, systems as mentioned earlier. To illustrate this
fact we increase the refractive index of the annular region
that we assume to be embedded in vacuum (n0 = n2 = 1,
wave vector k0 = k2). The length spectrum, or Fourier
transform, of the delay time τ (k0) is shown in Fig. 10(a)
for refractive indices n1 = 3 and n1 = 6 (dashed and full
line, respectively). The Fourier analysis is performed in
the spirit of trace formulas that provide a semiclassical
interpretation of quantum-mechanical results in terms of
classical periodic orbits for quantum billiards. The quan-
titative extension of this approach to optical systems will
require further discussion. Here, we are only interested
in a qualitative interpretation.

We have divided the optical length that results from
the Fourier transformation by n1 in order to compare
both spectra in terms of geometrical lengths L. The peaks
in both spectra are rather broad and correspond roughly
to the circumference of the bigger disk (and higher har-
monics) which indeed is a typical trajectory length in
this geometry not only for WGMs, but also for the tra-
jectory examples shown Figs. 5 and 11 (trajectory parts
in the inner disk will contribute a length that has to be
corrected by a factor n2/n1). However, the length spec-
trum for n1 = 6 shows an additional peak (marked by the
arrow) at higher L. A ray trajectory of suitable length
is shown in Fig. 10(b). The Poincar´e ﬁngerprint of this
orbit, see Fig. 5, possesses regular islands at sin χ = 0,
where in the simplest interpretation refractive escape will
occur, independent on the refractive index! That modes
of this type are found for suﬃciently large n1, indicates
that we have to reﬁne our interpretation. For example,
we can discuss the Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcient R⊥ at
normal incidence, R⊥ = (n0 − n1)2/(n0 + n1)2 that in-
creases as n1 is increased, reaching the value one in the
limit n1 → ∞, in accordance with the picture of complete
internal reﬂection. This explains the observed behaviour
and we present more examples of “sophisticated” ray-
wave, or classical-quantum, correspondence in the next
paragraph.

C. Correspondence in real and phase space

In Fig. 11(a) we show a typical delay-time plot τ (k0)
for the annular billiard with the same geometry as before
and refractive indices n1 = 3, n2 = 6. We investigate
low-lying resonances that show a characteristic grouping
of four resonances (marked by A, B, C, D) over several
periods. The corresponding wave patterns, together with
suggestions for ray analogues, are shown in Fig. 11(b) for
each resonance. We have mainly chosen regular orbits as

FIG. 9. Eﬀective potential for the annular billiard for two
diﬀerent sets of refractive indices (n0=1). In the lower panels
corresponding examples of ray trajectories (left) and wave
functions (right) are shown. The similarity of these reso-
nances to whispering gallery modes suggest their classiﬁcation
as “generalized” WGMs.

A. Classes of whispering gallery modes in annular
systems

In Sec. II we introduced the concept of the eﬀective po-
tential as a wave-picture method when we established the
analogy between Helmholtz and Schr¨odinger equations.
The generalization of this concept to the annular billiard
is straightforward and (in the concentric case) essentially
given by the superposition of two disks, see Eq. (3). The
result is schematically shown in Fig. 9. Again, we have
to distinguish two cases: In Fig. 9(a), the refractive in-
dex n1 in the annulus is highest, whereas in Fig. 9(b) the
optical density increases towards the inner disk. Con-
sequently, in the ﬁrst case, Fig. 9(a), the potential well
coincides with the annular region: Rays in between the
two disks can be totally reﬂected at either boundary as
illustrated in the lower panels.

The situation is diﬀerent when the refractive index n2
of the inner disk is highest [Fig. 9(b)]. The well extends
now beyond the inner boundary to values r < R2 indi-
cating that the inner disk may support annular WGMs in
the constricted region, see the lower panels. This is con-
sistent with the ray picture interpretation stating that
each ray in the annulus that hits the inner boundary will
enter the inner disk. However, because of the double-well
structure of the eﬀective potential this case is even richer:
There are modes that mainly live in one of the two wells,
corresponding to WGMs of the inner and outer disk, re-
spectively. The height of the separating barriers depends
on the wave number, the quantum number m, the ge-
ometry, and in particular on the ratio of the refractive
indices that can be used to tune the height of the barrier
(note that at the same time the depths of the minima are
changed).

9

(i.e., the same letter) indeed diﬀer by one in the number
of nodes [39]. Note that the ray representatives stem from
both the hard-wall and the refractive billiard simulation,
see Figs. 5 and 7.

In Fig. 11(c) we computed the Husimi

function
[16,20,40] for each of the wave functions [41], and marked
the rays by crosses in the corresponding Poincar´e SOS
such that we can directly compare the phase space pre-
sentations of waves and rays. The coincidence between
regular islands and high-probability regions (dark) of the
Husimi function appears satisfying on ﬁrst sight. How-
ever, closer inspection reveals diﬀerences in the details.
For example, Husimi “islands” are shifted away from reg-
ular islands as in the case of resonance D, with the cor-
responding real space modiﬁcations [Fig. 11(b)] clearly
visible as well. One possible explanation might be pro-
vided by the Goos-H¨anchen eﬀect that causes a lateral
shift of the reﬂected ray for angles of incidence around
and greater than the critical angle [29,30], thereby eﬀec-
tively changing the angle of incidence. Furthermore, we
point out that the ray trajectory for resonance D is known
from the hard-wall system. The qualitative similarity to
the corresponding resonant wave pattern is remarkable,
and one might think of the diﬀerences as in order to meet
the new interference requirements caused by the optical
opening of the inner disk. This gives yet another exam-
ple of the predictive power of the simple ray model when
only the qualitative character of the resonances is of inter-
est and importance. On the other hand, it proves to be
essential to consult wave methods when one is interested
in details.

V. CONCLUSIONS

To conclude, we have investigated the ray and wave
properties of composite optical systems by applying
methods known from the classical and quantum theory
of mixed dynamical systems. Using the optical annu-
lar billiard as an example, we have shown this concept
to be very fruitful. This means in particular that al-
ready the simple ray model provides a good qualitative
understanding of the system properties, even for small
wave numbers below nkR ≈ 30. However, care must
be taken when quantitative results are required, or the
classical (ray) phase space is directly translated into ex-
pected wave patterns: We ﬁnd regular orbits associated
with regular islands in phase space to be the dominant
class of resonant wave patterns, and suppression of wave
functions hosted by the chaotic part of the phase space.
The dependence of this behaviour on the size of the wave
number (i.e. 1/¯h) remains an interesting topic for future
work.

One remark is due concerning the refractive indices em-
ployed in the calculations. The index n = 3 often used
here is higher than that of water (1.33) or glass (around

FIG. 10. (a) Fourier transform of the delay time τ (k0) for
the annular billiard geometry R2 = 0.6, δ = 0.22 and two re-
fractive index combinations, n0 = n2 = 1, n1 = 3 (dashed
line), and n1 = 6 (full line). The appearance of a new peak at
larger geometric length is clearly visible. A suitable (quasi-)
periodic orbit candidate together with a resonant state is
shown in (b).

FIG. 11. (a) Delay time τ (k0) for the annular billiard ge-
ometry as in Figs. 5 and 10 and n1 = 3, n2 = 6. The structure
is dominated by groups of four resonances labelled A, B, C,
D. The resonance at k0 ≈ 6.251 is the one shown in Fig. 1(b).
The four resonances of the second group (6.6 < k0 < 6.9) are
shown in (b) together with a ray trajectory representative. In
part (c), rays (crosses) and waves (intensity plot, high inten-
sity in dark regions) are compared in phase space in terms of
their Poincar´e and Husimi representation, respectively.

candidates because of the regular structure of the delay-
time plot. Neighbouring resonances of the same kind

10

1.5 up to 1.8) but is easily reached in semiconductor com-
pounds where typically n = 3.3. An index n = 6 seems
to be presently out of reach, which, however, does not
aﬀect the conclusions drawn here.

Summerizing, ray picture results may serve as a guide
in the investigation of wave properties of optical systems,
even away from the ray limit k → ∞. For the annular
billiard as an example of a compound cavity system we
demonstrated that the dominant resonant wave patterns
can be seen as originating from the regular orbits of both
the hard-wall and the refractive billiard. This knowl-
edge can be more generally used, e.g., in the construc-
tion of microlasers with designed properties. Knowing
the potential reﬂection points and high-intensity regions
of modes from simple ray-based considerations allows one
to design microcavities with custemized properties. Pre-
dictions can be made concerning, e.g., the eﬀective cou-
pling between and into cavities or how to eﬃciently pump
lasing systems. In turn, one can think of cavity shapes
designed according to the technical requirements. The
application of the ray-wave correspondence in sophisti-
cated optical (compound) systems therefore may provide
a powerful tool for future optical communication tech-
nologies.

Optical cavities represent interesting model systems for
quantum-chaos motivated studies. We successfully ap-
plied the S-matrix approach to gain spectral information,
and qualitatively discussed its periodic-orbit interpreta-
tion [43]. The development of quantitative semiclassical
theories in the spirit of the Weyl and the trace formu-
las remains an open subject, in particular for compound
systems consisting of more than one region with ﬁxed
refractive index like the annular billiard.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank J. U. N¨ockel for an introduction into the
subject of optical cavities and acknowledge many use-
ful discussions with T. Dittrich, S. Fishman, G. Hacken-
broich, J. U. N¨ockel, H. Schomerus, H. Schanz, R. Schu-
bert, P. Schlagheck, U. Smilansky, and J. Wiersig. M. H.
thanks U. Smilansky for his hospitality at the Weizmann
Institute.

APPENDIX A: S-MATRIX FOR THE ANNULAR
BILLIARD

We will generalize the ideas developed in Sec. II C to
the dielectric annular billiard in order to determine the
S-matrix for the eccentric annular billiard. This problem
can be divided into the scattering problem at the outer
boundary (between refractive indices n0 and n1) and that
at the inner boundary (between indices n1 and n2). Al-
though the scattering at a dielectric disk was solved in

χ

r’

φ’ = φ + χ

r

φ

δ

FIG. 12. Addition theorem for Bessel functions.

Sec. II C, the situation we are confronted with here is
more complicated: the two disks lay one in the other,
and their centres will in general not coincide.

We will begin with the scattering problem at the inner
boundary and express the S-matrix Si of the dielectric
disk with respect to a coordinate system with origin dis-
placed from the centre of the inner disk. This implies
that Si is not diagonal. From Sec. II C we already know
the (diagonal) S-matrix Sic of the inner disk in primed
coordinates (see Fig. 1), Eq. (7). We will now derive the
relation between Sic and Si.

To this end we write the ansatz for the wave function
in the annulus in primed coordinates, ~r′ = ~r − ~δ, with ~δ
being the vector from the centre of the large disk to the
centre of the smaller disk, as

Ψ1c(~r − ~δ) =

(k1|~r − ~δ|)eilφ

ac
l

H (2)
l
h

∞

Xl=−∞

∞

+

ll H (2)
Sic

l′ (k1|~r − ~δ|)eil

′

φ

,

(A1)

#

Xl′=−∞
where the coeﬃcients ac
l are to be chosen to yield the
desired kind of incident wave. We use the addition theo-
rem for Bessel functions Zm ∈ {Jm, Ym, H (1)
m } [42]
to relate the arguments wr to wr′ (w is a constant factor,
and we assumeR2 > δ), see Fig. 12,

m , H (2)

Zm(wr

′

)eimφ =

Jk(wδ)Zm+k(wr)ei(m+k)φ . (A2)

∞

Xk=−∞

Inserting this into Eq. (A1), we obtain the expression

∞

∞

Ψ1 =

e

ac
l

H (2)
h

Xl=−∞
Xk=−∞
×Jk(k1δ) ei(l+k)φ

l+k(k1r) + Sic

ll H (1)

×

l+k(k1r)
i

(A3)

for the wave function in the annulus, now expressed with
respect to the centre of the larger disk, i.e., in unprimed
coordinates. We specify the coeﬃcients ac
l by the re-
quirement that the amplitude of an incident wave with

11

angular momentum m shall be normalized to one in un-
primed coordinates,

Ψ1(~r) =

al

Ψ

−
l (k1~r) +

∞

∞

Xl=−∞
Xk=−∞
With µ ≡ l + k, and
choosing

P

l H (2)
ac

l+k(k1r)Jk(k1δ)ei(l+k)φ ≡ H (2)

m (k1r)eimφ.

k Jm−(µ−k)Jk = δmµ we ﬁnd that

mac

l = Jm−l(k1δ) ∀ l

(A4)

provides a suitable set of coeﬃcients for a given m. Ac-
cordingly, we write

∞

∞

Ψ1 =

e

Xµ,k=−∞ h

m=−∞ (
X
+Jm−(µ−k)(k1δ)Sic

δmµH (2)

µ (k1r)eiµφ

(µ−k)(µ−k)Jk(k1δ)H (1)

µ (k1r)eiµφ

∞

i
µ (k1r)eiµφ

mµH (1)
Si

)

)

µ=−∞
X

H (2)

m (k1r)eimφ +

∞

≡

m=−∞ (
X

where we have read oﬀ the scattering matrix Si of the
inner disk with respect to the centre of the outer disk,

Si

mµ

def=

Jm−(µ−k)(k1δ)Sic

(µ−k)(µ−k)Jk(k1δ) .

(A5)

∞

Xk=∞

The structure of this equation suggests a notation in
terms of a transformation matrix U , namely Si =
U −1SicU , that describes the change in the origin of the
−1
l′l = Jl−l′ .
coordinate system. We ﬁnd Ul′l = Jl′−l and U
The scattering matrix Si allows us to describe the scat-
tering at an oﬀ-centred disk, and we can now formulate
the scattering problem of the annular billiard in the spirit
of Sec. II C. Accordingly, we start with an ansatz for the
wave function Ψ0 outside the annular system (|~r| > R1,
using polar coordinates) of the form

Ψ0(~r) =

Ψ0

M (~r)

∞

XM=−∞

∞

−
M (k0~r) +

=

Ψ
XM=−∞ "

∞

XM ′=−∞

SMM ′ Ψ+

M ′ (k0~r)
#

,

where we have introduced the scattering matrix S of the
(compound) system and the deﬁnitions

−

Ψ
Ψ+

M (k0~r) = H (2)
M (k0~r) = H (1)

M (k0r)eiMφ ,
M (k0r)eiMφ ,

(A6)

(A7)

for incoming and outgoing waves outside the disk. Note
that we have used the freedom in ﬁxing one of the am-
plitudes.

Similarly, we write for the wave function Ψ1 in the

annular region

12

∞

Xl=−∞

"

∞

Xl′=−∞

ll′ Ψ+
Si

l′ (k1~r)
#

, (A8)

with the amplitudes al, the abbreviations as in Eqs. (A6,
A7), and Si from Eq. (A5).

Now, we determine S from the matching conditions,
introduce the notation of capital letters for functions of
argument k0r, and reserve lower case characters for the
argument k1r. Given an incident wave of angular mo-
mentum M , wave function matching for each angular
momentum L of the scattered waves yields

H (2)

M eiMφδML + SMLH (1)

L eiLφ
∞

= a(M)

L h(2)

L eiLφ +

a(M)
l

lLh(1)
Si

L eiLφ ,

Xl=−∞
where the amplitudes a(M)
are coeﬃcients associated
with an incoming function of angular momentum M ,
namely H (2)
M . Since this has to hold for all M , and at
ﬁxed M for all L, we write this as a matrix equation

j

h(M)H (2)| + hS(M)|H (1) = ha(M)|

h(2) + Sih(1)

, (A9)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

l

lj = h(1,2)

where Si is a matrix, h(2) and h(1) are diagonal matri-
ces, h(1,2)
δlj, and we adopt the bra-notation for
quantities that, at ﬁxed M , are transposed vectors and
gain matrix character once M is varied. With this no-
tation we immediately write the matching condition for
the derivatives as

k0

h(M)H (2)

| + hS(M)|H (1)

′

′

(cid:16)

= ha(M)|k1

h(2)

′

(cid:17)
+ Sih(1)

′

.

(cid:16)
From Eq. (A9) we ﬁnd after substituting F ≡ h(2) +
Sih(1) that

(cid:17)

ha(M)| =

h(M)H (2)| + hS(M)|H (1)

−1 .

F

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Introducing furthermore F ′ = h′(2) + Sih′(1) and W =
F −1F ′, we write the S-matrix solution of the problem as

S =

k1 H (2) W − k0 H

′(2)

k0 H

′(1) − k1 H (1) W

−1

.

(cid:16)

(cid:17) (cid:16)
This last equation allows us to apply the Wigner-delay-
time approach to resonances, cf. Sec. II C, and we used
this method to study resonances of the optical annular
billiard, cf. Secs. III and IV.

(cid:17)

We complete the discussion here with some comments
on the wave functions. We have not yet given the wave
function in the inner disk. The ansatz is a sum over
Bessel functions,

Ψ2c(~r′) =

bc
l Jl(k2r

′

′

)eilφ

,

∞

Xl=−∞

where we adopted primed coordinates for convenience.
The coeﬃcients bl are found from matching with the wave
function in the annulus at the inner boundary. To this
end we have to rewrite the annular wave function (A8)
in terms of primed coordinates by applying the addition
theorem (A2) for Bessel functions. After straightforward
algebra we ﬁnd

Ψ1c(~r′) =

∞

ac
l

H (2)
l
h

Xl=−∞

(k1r

′

) + Sic

ll H (1)

l

′

(k1r

)

′

eilφ

,

i

where the coeﬃcients ac

l are related to the al by ac

l =

∞
l′=−∞ al′ Jl′−l.
Another remark is in order concerning the validity of
P
the addition-theorem-based expansion of the Bessel func-
tion when changing between primed and unprimed co-
ordinates. Expansion of the annular wave function in
primed coordinates fails near the outer boundary where
|~r′| > R1 − R2 − δ. Similarly, expanding the annular
wave function in unprimed coordinates does not work
near the inner boundary where |~r| < R2 + δ. The rea-
son for this behaviour is that angular momentum is not
conserved in the eccentric annular billiard, and the ex-
pansion breaks down at radii where waves explore this
symmetry-breaking region because the corresponding in-
terface boundaries are hit.

∗

Present address: Department of Physics, Duke Univer-
sity, Box 90305, Durham, NC 27708-0305

[1] H. J. St¨ockmann and J. Stein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2215

(1990).

[2] H.-D. Gr¨af et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1296 (1992); H. Alt

et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1026 (1996).

[3] A. Andersen et al., Phys. Rev. E 63, 066204 (2001).
[4] J. U. N¨ockel, PhD Thesis, Yale University, 1997.
[5] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[6] J. A. Lock et al., Appl. Optics 37, 1527 (1998).
[7] P. B. Wilkinson et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5466 (2001).
[8] S.-B. Lee et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 033903 (2002).
[9] V. Doya et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 014102 (2002).
[10] S. Chang et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 17, 1828 (2000).
[11] S. A. Backes et al., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 16, 3817

(1998).

[12] C. Gmachl et al., Science 280, 1556 (1998).
[13] J. D. Jackson: Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley &

[14] H.-J. St¨ockmann: Quantum Chaos (Cambridge Univer-

Sons, New York, 1975).

sity Press, 1999).

[15] O. Bohigas, D. Boos´e, R. Egydio de Carvalho, and

V. Marvulle, Nucl. Phys. A560, 197 (1993).

[16] S. D. Frischat and E. Doron, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3661

(1995); Phys. Rev. E 57, 1421 (1998).

[17] C. Dembowski et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 867 (2000).

13

[18] A. Kohler and R. Bl¨umel, Ann. Phys. 267, 249 (1998);

Phys. Lett. A238, 271 (1998).

[19] For such open annular billiards questions concerning the
doublet-splitting addressed in [15,16] are not of relevance
because the splitting it masked by resonance broadening.
[20] G. Hackenbroich and J.-U. N¨ockel, Europhys. Lett. 39,

371 (1997).

[21] G. Gouesbet, S. Meunier-Guttin-Cluzel, and G. Gr´ehan,

Opt. Comm. 201, 223 (2002).

[22] J.U. N¨ockel and A.D. Stone, in: Optical Processes in Mi-
crocavities (Editors: R.K. Chang, A.J. Campillo), World
Scientiﬁc Publishers (1996).

[23] M. Hentschel and M. Vojta, Opt. Lett. 26, 1764 (2001).
[24] The vector character of light requires to distinguish be-
tween two polarizations. In our planar systems, either the
transverse magnetic (TM) or electric (TE) ﬁeld can lie
in the system plane.

[25] G. Gouesbet, S. Meunier-Guttin-Cluzel, and G. Gr´ehan,

Phys. Rev. E 65, 016212 (2001).

[26] S. G. Lipson, H. Lispon, and D. S. Tannhauser: Optical

Physics (Cambridge University Press, 1995).

[27] The ﬁrst derivative in the ﬁrst term can be eliminated by

a substitution ξ = ln(kr).

[28] M. Hentschel and J. U. N¨ockel,

in: Quantum Optics
of Small Structures (Editors: D. Lenstra, T. D. Visser,
and K. A. H. van Leeuwen), Edita KNAW (2000);
arXiv:physics/0203064.

[29] M. Hentschel and H. Schomerus, Phys. Rev. E 65, 045603

R (2002).

[30] F. Goos and H. H¨anchen, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 1, 333
(1947); H. M. Lai, F. C. Cheng, and W. K. Tang, J.
Opt. Soc. Am. A 3, 550 (1986); H. K. V. Lotsch, Optik
(Stuttgart) 32, 116 (1970), 189 (1970), 299 (1971), 553
(1971).

[31] E. Doron and U. Smilansky, Nonlinearity 5, 1055 (1992).
[32] J. R. Taylor: Scattering Theory (Robert E. Krieger Pub-

lishing Company, Malabar/Florida, 1983).

[33] U. Smilansky in: Mesoscopic Quantum Physics, Les
Houches, Session LXI 1994 (Editors: E. Akkermans,
G. Montambaux, J. L. Pichard, and J. Zinn-Justin).
[34] R. G. Newton: Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles
(Springer, New York, 1982); Y. V. Fyodorov and H.-
J. Sommers, J. Math. Phys. 38, 1918 (1997).

[35] For microlaser operation, resonances of

intermediate
width are of particular interest: For too broad reso-
nances leakage ceases the crossing of the lasing thresh-
old, whereas very narrow resonances will fail to provide
suﬃcient output power.

[36] M. V. Berry, Eur. J. Phys. 2, 91 (1981).
[37] The geometry parameters mainly studied here were cho-
sen because of the particularly interesting phase space
structure. Generalization of the results to other geome-
tries is straightforward.

[38] This applies to the families of WGMs with small ρ and

depends on the size of the inner disk.

[39] Having in mind the ratio of regular to chaotic regions in
the corresponding Poincar´e SOS, Fig. 5, regular modes
appear to be over-represented for the (small) wave num-
bers considered here. One might even argue that smaller
regular islands cannot be resolved. However, similar ef-
fects have been observed before, see, e.g., R. Ketzme-

rick, L. Hufnagel, F. Steinbach, and M. Weiss, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 85, 1214 (2000).

[40] B. Crespi, G. Perez, and S.-J. Chang, Phys. Rev. E 47,
986 (11993); A. M. Ozorio de Almeida: Hamiltonian Sys-
tems: Chaos and Quantization (Cambridge University
Press, 1998).

[41] We used the expressions valid for a refractive index
boundary, see M. Hentschel, H. Schomerus, R. Schubert,
submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.; R. Schubert, in prepara-
tion.

[42] I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik: Table of integrals, se-
ries, and products (Editor: A. Jeﬀrey), Academic Press,
San Diego (1994).

[43] M. Hentschel, PhD Thesis, Technical University of Dres-

den, 2001.

14

