2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analogies between light optics and
charged-particle optics

Sameen Ahmed KHAN

khan@ﬁs.unam.mx,

rohelakhan@yahoo.com

http://www.pd.infn.it/∼khan/
http://www.imsc.ernet.in/∼jagan/khan-cv.html
Centro de Ciencias F´isicas,
Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico (UNAM)
Apartado Postal 48-3, Cuernavaca 62251, Morelos,
M´EXICO

Abstract

The close analogy between geometrical optics and the classical the-
ories of charged-particle beam optics have been known for a very long
time. In recent years, quantum theories of charged-particle beam op-
tics have been presented with the very expected feature of wavelength-
dependent eﬀects. With the current development of non-traditional
prescriptions of Helmholtz and Maxwell optics respectively, accompa-
nied with the wavelength-dependent eﬀects, it is seen that the analogy
between the two systems persists. A brief account of the various pre-
scriptions and the parallel of the analogies is presented.

1 Introduction

Historically, variational principles have played a fundamental role in the evo-
lution of mathematical models in classical physics, and many equations can
be derived by using them. Here the relevant examples are Fermat’s princi-
ple in optics and Maupertuis’ principle in mechanics. The beginning of the
analogy between geometrical optics and mechanics is usually attributed to
Descartes (1637), but actually it can traced back to Ibn Al-Haitham Alhazen
(0965-1037) [1]. The analogy between the trajectory of material particles in
potential ﬁelds and the path of light rays in media with continuously variable

1

refractive index was formalized by Hamilton in 1833. This Hamiltonian anal-
ogy lead to the development of electron optics in 1920s, when Busch derived
the focusing action and a lens-like action of the axially symmetric magnetic
ﬁeld using the methodology of geometrical optics. Around the same time
Louis de Broglie associated his now famous wavelength to moving particles.
Schr¨odinger extended the analogy by passing from geometrical optics to wave
optics through his wave equation incorporating the de Broglie wavelength.
This analogy played a fundamental role in the early development of quan-
tum mechanics. The analogy, on the other hand, lead to the development
of practical electron optics and one of the early inventions was the electron
microscope by Ernst Ruska. A detailed account of Hamilton’s analogy is
available in [2]-[4].

Until very recently, it was possible to see this analogy only between the
geometrical-optic and classical prescriptions of electron optics. The reasons
being that, the quantum theories of charged-particle beam optics have been
under development only for about a decade [5]-[13] with the very expected
feature of wavelength-dependent eﬀects, which have no analogue in the tra-
ditional descriptions of light beam optics. With the current development of
the non-traditional prescriptions of Helmholtz optics [14, 15] and the ma-
trix formulation of Maxwell optics [16]-[20], accompanied with wavelength-
dependent eﬀects, it is seen that the analogy between the two systems per-
sists. The non-traditional prescription of Helmholtz optics is in close anal-
ogy with the quantum theory of charged-particle beam optics based on the
Klein-Gordon equation. The matrix formulation of Maxwell optics is in close
analogy with the quantum theory of charged-particle beam optics based on
the Dirac equation. This analogy is summarized in the table of Hamiltoni-
ans. In this short note it is diﬃcult to present the derivation of the various
Hamiltonians which are available in the references. We shall brieﬂy consider
an outline of the quantum prescriptions and the non-traditional prescriptions
respectively. A complete coverage to the new ﬁeld of Quantum Aspects of
Beam Physics (QABP), can be found in the proceedings of the series of
meetings under the same name [21].

2

2 Quantum Formalism

The classical treatment of charged-particle beam optics has been extremely
successful in the designing and working of numerous optical devices, from
electron microscopes to very large particle accelerators. It is natural, however
to look for a prescription based on the quantum theory, since any physical
system is quantum mechanical at the fundamental level! Such a prescription
is sure to explain the grand success of the classical theories and may also help
get a deeper understanding and to lead to better designing of charged-particle
beam devices.

The starting point to obtain a quantum prescription of charged particle
beam optics is to build a theory based on the basic equations of quantum
mechanics (Schr¨odinger, Klein-Gordon, Dirac) appropriate to the situation
under study. In order to analyze the evolution of the beam parameters of
the various individual beam optical elements (quadrupoles, bending mag-
nets, · · ·) along the optic axis of the system, the ﬁrst step is to start with
the basic time-dependent equations of quantum mechanics and then obtain
an equation of the form

∂
∂s

i¯h

(1)

ψ (x, y; s) =

H (x, y; s) ψ (x, y; s) ,
c
where (x, y; s) constitute a curvilinear coordinate system, adapted to the
geometry of the system. Eq. (1) is the basic equation in the quantum for-
malism, called as the beam-optical equation; H and ψ as the beam-optical
Hamiltonian and the beam wavefunction respectively. The second step re-
quires obtaining a relationship between any relevant observable {hOi(s)} at
the transverse-plane at s and the observable {hOi(sin)} at the transverse
plane at sin, where sin is some input reference point. This is achieved by the
integration of the beam-optical equation in (1)

ψ (x, y; s) =

U (s, sin) ψ (x, y; sin) ,
b

(2)

which gives the required transfer maps

hOi (sin) −→ hOi (s) = hψ (x, y; s) |O| ψ (x, y; s)i ,

U †O
= Dψ (x, y; sin) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) b
The two-step algorithm stated above gives an over-simpliﬁed picture of
the quantum formalism. There are several crucial points to be noted. The

ψ (x, y; sin)E .

U (cid:12)
(cid:12)
b
(cid:12)

(3)

3

ﬁrst step in the algorithm of obtaining the beam-optical equation is not to
be treated as a mere transformation which eliminates t in preference to a
variable s along the optic axis. A clever set of transforms are required which
not only eliminate the variable t in preference to s but also give us the s-
dependent equation which has a close physical and mathematical analogy
with the original t-dependent equation of standard time-dependent quantum
mechanics. The imposition of this stringent requirement on the construc-
tion of the beam-optical equation ensures the execution of the second-step of
the algorithm. The beam-optical equation is such that all the required rich
machinery of quantum mechanics becomes applicable to the computation of
the transfer maps that characterize the optical system. This describes the
essential scheme of obtaining the quantum formalism. The rest is mostly
mathematical detail which is inbuilt in the powerful algebraic machinery
of the algorithm, accompanied with some reasonable assumptions and ap-
proximations dictated by the physical considerations. The nature of these
approximations can be best summarized in the optical terminology as a sys-
tematic procedure of expanding the beam optical Hamiltonian in a power
π⊥/p0|, where p0 is the design (or average) momentum of beam
series of |
π⊥
particles moving predominantly along the direction of the optic axis and
b
is the small transverse kinetic momentum. The leading order approxima-
b
π⊥/p0| ≪ 1, constitutes the paraxial or ideal behaviour and
tion along with |
higher order terms in the expansion give rise to the nonlinear or aberrating
b
behaviour. It is seen that the paraxial and aberrating behaviour get modiﬁed
by the quantum contributions which are in powers of the de Broglie wave-
length (¯λ0 = ¯h/p0). The classical limit of the quantum formalism reproduces
the well known Lie algebraic formalism of charged-particle beam optics [22].

3 Light Optics: Non-Traditional Prescrip-

tions

The traditional scalar wave theory of optics (including aberrations to all or-
ders) is based on the beam-optical Hamiltonian derived by using Fermat’s
principle. This approach is purely geometrical and works adequately in
the scalar regime. The other approach is based on the square-root of the
Helmholtz operator, which is derived from the Maxwell equations [22]. This

4

approach works to all orders and the resulting expansion is no diﬀerent from
the one obtained using the geometrical approach of Fermat’s principle. As for
the polarization: a systematic procedure for the passage from scalar to vector
wave optics to handle paraxial beam propagation problems, completely tak-
ing into account the way in which the Maxwell equations couple the spatial
variation and polarization of light waves, has been formulated by analyzing
the basic Poincar´e invariance of the system, and this procedure has been
successfully used to clarify several issues in Maxwell optics [23]-[26].

In the above approaches, the beam-optics and the polarization are studied
separately, using very diﬀerent machineries. The derivation of the Helmholtz
equation from the Maxwell equations is an approximation as one neglects the
spatial and temporal derivatives of the permittivity and permeability of the
medium. Any prescription based on the Helmholtz equation is bound to be an
approximation, irrespective of how good it may be in certain situations. It is
very natural to look for a prescription based fully on the Maxwell equations,
which is sure to provide a deeper understanding of beam-optics and light
polarization in a uniﬁed manner.

The two-step algorithm used in the construction of the quantum theories
of charged-particle beam optics is very much applicable in light optics! But
there are some very signiﬁcant conceptual diﬀerences to be borne in mind.
When going beyond Fermat’s principle the whole of optics is completely
governed by the Maxwell equations, and there are no other equations, unlike
in quantum mechanics, where there are separate equations for, spin-1/2,
spin-1, · · ·.

Maxwell’s equations are linear (in time and space derivatives) but cou-
pled in the ﬁelds. The decoupling leads to the Helmholtz equation which is
quadratic in derivatives. In the speciﬁc context of beam optics, purely from
a calculational point of view, the starting equations are the Helmholtz equa-
tion governing scalar optics and for a more accurate prescription one uses
the full set of Maxwell equations, leading to vector optics. In the context of
the two-step algorithm, the Helmholtz equation and the Maxwell equations
in a matrix representation can be treated as the ‘basic’ equations, analogue
of the basic equations of quantum mechanics. This works perfectly ﬁne from
a calculational point of view in the scheme of the algorithm we have.

Exploiting the similarity between the Helmholtz wave equation and the
Klein-Gordon equation, the former is linearized using the Feshbach-Villars
procedure used for the linearization of the Klein-Gordon equation. Then the

5

Foldy-Wouthuysen iterative diagonalization technique is applied to obtain
a Hamiltonian description for a system with varying refractive index. This
technique is an alternative to the conventional method of series expansion of
the radical. Besides reproducing all the traditional quasiparaxial terms, this
method leads to additional terms, which are dependent on the wavelength,
in the optical Hamiltonian. This is the non-traditional prescription of scalar
optics.

The Maxwell equations are cast into an exact matrix form taking into
account the spatial and temporal variations of the permittivity and perme-
ability. The derived representation using 8 × 8 matrices has a close algebraic
analogy with the Dirac equation, enabling the use of the rich machinery
of the Dirac electron theory. The beam optical Hamiltonian derived from
this representation reproduces the Hamiltonians obtained in the traditional
prescription along with wavelength-dependent matrix terms, which we have
named as the polarization terms. These polarization terms are very similar
to the spin terms in the Dirac electron theory and the spin-precession terms
in the beam-optical version of the Thomas-BMT equation [10]. The matrix
formulation provides a uniﬁed treatment of beam optics and light polariza-
tion. Some well known results of light polarization are obtained as a paraxial
limit of the matrix formulation [23]-[26]. The traditional beam optics is com-
pletely obtained from our approach in the limit of small wavelength, –λ −→ 0,
which we call as the traditional limit of our formalisms. This is analogous to
the classical limit obtained by taking ¯h −→ 0, in the quantum prescriptions.
From the Hamiltonians in the Table we make the following observations:
The classical/traditional Hamiltonians of particle/light optics are modiﬁed
by wavelength-dependent contributions in the quantum/non-traditional pre-
scriptions respectively. The algebraic forms of these modiﬁcations in each
row is very similar. This should not come as a big surprise. The starting
equations have one-to-one algebraic correspondence: Helmholtz ↔ Klein-
Gordon; Matrix form of Maxwell ↔ Dirac equation. Lastly, the de Broglie
wavelength, –λ0, and –λ have an analogous status, and the classical/traditional
limit is obtained by taking –λ0 −→ 0 and –λ −→ 0 respectively. The parallel
of the analogies between the two systems is sure to provide us with more
insights.

6

4 Hamiltonians in Diﬀerent Prescriptions

The following are the Hamiltonians, in the diﬀerent prescriptions of light beam op-
H0 ,p are the paraxial
tics and charged-particle beam optics for magnetic systems.
b
Hamiltonians, with lowest order wavelength-dependent contributions.

Light Beam Optics

Charged-Particle Beam Op-
tics

Fermat’s Principle

Maupertuis’ Principle

H = −

n2(r) − p2
(cid:8)

⊥(cid:9)

1/2

H = −

0 − π2
p2
(cid:8)

⊥(cid:9)

1/2 − qAz

Non-Traditional Helmholtz

Klein-Gordon Formalism

Maxwell, Matrix

Dirac Formalism

H0 ,p =
p2
−n(r) + 1
b
⊥
2n0
− i–λ
b
p2
⊥, ∂
∂z n(r)i
16n3
b

0 h

H0 ,p =
−n(r) + 1
b
2n0
− i–λβΣ · u
–λ2w2β
+ 1
2n0

p2
⊥
b

H0 ,p =
π2
−p0 − qAz + 1
b
⊥
2p0
b
π2
π2
+ i¯h
⊥ , ∂
16p4
⊥i
∂z
b
b

0 h

H0 ,p =
−p0 − qAz + 1
b
2p0
− ¯h
+ i ¯h

π2
⊥
b
2p0 {µγΣ⊥ · B⊥ + (q + µ) ΣzBz}
m0c ǫBz

Notation
Refractive Index, n(r) = c
Resistance, h(r) =
u(r) = − 1
∇h(r)
w(r) = 1
Σ and β are the Dirac matrices.

p
∇n(r)

µ(r)/ǫ(r)

2n(r)

2h(r)

p

ǫ(r)µ(r)

p⊥ − qA⊥
b

π⊥ =
µa anomalous magnetic moment.
b
ǫa anomalous electric moment.
µ = 2m0µa/¯h ,
ǫ = 2m0ǫa/¯h
γ = E/m0c2

7

References

[1] D. Ambrosini, A. Ponticiello, G. Schirripa Spagnolo, R. Borghi and F.
Gori, Bouncing light beams and the Hamiltonian analogy, Eur.
J. Phys., 18 284-289 (1997).

[2] P. W. Hawkes and E. Kasper, Principles of Electron Optics, Vols. I and
II (Academic Press, London, 1989); P. W. Hawkes and E. Kasper, Prin-
ciples of Electron Optics Vol.3: Wave Optics (Academic Press, London
and San Diego, 1994).

[3] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press,

United Kingdom) 7th edition (1999).

[4] G. W. Forbes, Hamilton’s Optics: Characterizing Ray Mapping
and Opening a Link to Waves, Optics & Photonics News, 12 (11),
34-38 (November 2001).

[5] R. Jagannathan, R. Simon, E. C. G. Sudarshan and N. Mukunda,
Quantum theory of magnetic electron lenses based on the Dirac
equation, Phys. Lett. A 134, 457-464 (1989).

[6] R. Jagannathan, Dirac equation and electron optics, in Dirac and
Feynman - Pioneers in Quantum Mechanics, Ed. R. Dutt and A. K. Ray
(Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1993) 75-82.

[7] R. Jagannathan, Quantum theory of electron lenses based on the

Dirac equation, Phys. Rev. A 42, 6674-6689 (1990).

[8] S. A. Khan and R. Jagannathan, On the quantum mechanics of
charged particle beam transport through magnetic lenses, Phys.
Rev. E 51, 2510-2515 (March 1995).

[9] R. Jagannathan and S. A. Khan, Quantum theory of the optics of
charged particles, Advances in Imaging and Electron Physics Vol. 97,
Ed. P. W. Hawkes (Academic Press, San Diego, 1996) 257-358.

[10] M. Conte, R. Jagannathan, S. A. Khan and M. Pusterla, Beam optics
of the Dirac particle with anomalous magnetic moment, Particle
Accelerators 56 (1996) 99-126.

8

[11] S. A. Khan, Quantum Theory of Charged-Particle Beam Optics, Ph.D

Thesis, University of Madras (Chennai, India, 1997).

[12] R. Jagannathan and S. A. Khan, Quantum mechanics of accelerator
optics, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 13, 21-27 (April 1997).
(ICFA: International Committee for Future Accelerators).

[13] Ramaswamy Jagannathan and Sameen Ahmed Khan, Quantum the-
ory of charged-particle beam optics, E-Prints: physics/9803042;
physics/0101060; physics/9809032; physics/9904063; physics/0112085;
physics/0112086.

[14] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Ramaswamy Jagannathan and Rajiah Simon,
Foldy-Wouthuysen transformation and a quasiparaxial approx-
imation scheme for the scalar wave theory of light beams, 14
pages, e-print: physics/0209082, (communicated).

[15] Sameen Ahmed Khan, An alternate way to obtain the aber-
e-print:

ration expansion in Helmholtz Optics, 40 pages,
physics/02010001.

[16] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Maxwell Optics: I. An exact matrix rep-
resentation of the Maxwell equations in a medium, 10 pages,
e-print: physics/0205083.

[17] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Maxwell Optics: II. An Exact Formalism,

23 pages, e-print: physics/0205084.

[18] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Maxwell Optics: III. Applications, 13 pages,

e-print: physics/0205085.

[19] R. Jagannathan et al, Maxwell Optics: IV. Polarization, e-print:

physics/02?????, (in preparation).

[20] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Wavelength-Dependent Eﬀects in Maxwell

Optics, 58 pages, e-print: physics/0210027.

[21] Proceedings of the 15th Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop on
Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics, (04-09 January 1998, Monterrey,
California USA), Editor: Pisin Chen, (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,

9

1999), http://www.slac.stanford.edu/grp/ara/qabp/qabp.html;
Proceedings of the 18th Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop
on Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics (15-20 October 2000, Capri,
Italy), Editor: Pisin Chen, (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, May 2002),
http://qabp2k.sa.infn.it/;
Workshop Reports: ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 16, 22-25 (April
1998); ibid 23 13-14 (December 2000);
Joint 28th ICFA Advanced Beam Dynamics & Advanced & Novel on
Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics (7-11 January 2003, Hiroshima Uni-
versity, Japan), http://home.hiroshima-u.ac.jp/ogata/qabp/home.html.

[22] See, e.g., the following and references therein: Lie Methods in Optics,
Lecture notes in physics No. 250, and Lecture notes in physics No. 352,
(Springer Verlag, 1986 and 1988).

[23] N. Mukunda, R. Simon, and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Paraxial-wave op-
tics and relativistic front description. I. The scalar theory, Phys.
Rev. A 28 2921-2932 (November 1983); N. Mukunda, R. Simon, and
E. C. G. Sudarshan, Paraxial-wave optics and relativistic front
description. II. The vector theory, Phys. Rev. A 28 2933-2942
(November 1983).

[24] N. Mukunda, R. Simon, and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Fourier optics for
the Maxwell ﬁeld: formalism and applications, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A 2(3) 416-426 (1985).

[25] R. Simon, E. C. G. Sudarshan and N. Mukunda, Gaussian-Maxwell

beams, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 3(4) 536-5?? (1986).

[26] R. Simon, E. C. G. Sudarshan and N. Mukunda, Cross polarization

in laser beams, Appl. Optics 26(9), 1589-1593 (01 May 1987).

10

