2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the physical nature of the electromagnetic induced
transparency eﬀect.

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

V.A.Kuz’menko

Abstract

The origin of the electromagnetic induced transparency (EIT) eﬀect is
explained not as the vanish of atom-ﬁeld interaction, but as the growing
of stimulated emission process due to the eﬃcient four- photon mixing,
which allows the atom to return in the initial state. We point out the
importance of creation the new mathematical model for description the
dynamics of optical transitions, which should be based on the concept of
the time invariance violation in electromagnetic interactions.

PACS number: 42.50Gy, 42.50.Hz

The Bloch equations had been proposed in 1946 for description the nuclear
magnetic resonance eﬀect [1]. Now there are the basis for description the dy-
namics of optical transitions [2]. The mathematical model well describes the
physical phenomena, but a great diﬃculties appear, when anyone wants to un-
derstand the physical sense of this descriptions. The rapid adiabatic passage
(RAP) eﬀect is the most simple and fundamental example of such phenomena.
When the resonance radiation interacts with the two-level system, the so-called
periodical Rabi oscillations of the level population take place. In this case the
situation is quite symmetrical. But if the sweeping of resonance conditions ap-
pears (for example, the frequency of radiation is changed), the full population
transfer from the initial level to the opposite one takes place. The theory well
describes this eﬀect, but it does not give physical explanation [3]. This is the
surprising situation: the mathematical description exists more than ﬁfty years,
but any physical explanation of eﬀect is absent till now.

This situation is not an accidental case. It is impossible to explain the origin
of RAP eﬀect, if we suppose the equality of forward and reversed transitions.
The restriction to equality of integral cross-section of the transitions (equality of
the Einstein coeﬃcients) is suﬃcient for explanation the Rabi oscillations. The
physical explanation of RAP eﬀect is possible only if we suppose some inequality
between the forward and reversed transitions (in the spectral width, or in the
diﬀerential cross-section). So, the existence of RAP eﬀect is the indirect proof
of such inequality.

Moreover, the number years we have quite direct and complete experimental
proof of inequality of forward and reversed transitions. This proof is connected
with the existence of the so-called wide component of line in absorption spectrum
of polyatomic molecules [4]. This physical object has unusual properties: the
large spectral width of optical transition (∼ 150GHz) is combined with the

1

long lifetime of the molecule excited states. Its allow to measure separately the
parameters of forward and reversed transitions. The measured spectral width of
the reversed transition was less than 1 MHz ([5] Fig.5). So, the ratio of spectral
width of forward and reversed transitions in this case exceeds ﬁve orders of
magnitude. Accordingly, the cross-section of reversed transition was found to
be orders of magnitude greater, than for the forward one [6]. Such result is a
good base for explanation the origin of the eﬀects in nonlinear optics [7].

The goal of this note is to propose the physical explanation of EIT and
related eﬀects (self-induced transparency [8], optical pulse compression in a
resonant absorber [9], etc.). The usual explanation of EIT eﬀect is based on
the conceptions of coherency and interference. There are rather indistinct and
vague concepts. It is supposed, that ”the eﬀect of EIT is due to the existence
of a coherent superposition of quantum states which does not participate in the
atom-ﬁeld interaction (”dark” state) because of a quantum interference of the
excitation paths” [10].

In contrast, the present explanation turns our attention on a stimulated emis-
sion process. Absorption of energy is a diﬀerence between processes of excitation
and deexcitation of atoms due to stimulated emission. In terms of ultranarrow
width of the reversed optical transition the stimulated emission process may
have the diﬃculty due to the uncontrolled sweeping of resonance conditions (for
example, as the result of the ac Stark shift of atom levels in the laser ﬁeld [11]).
Such diﬃculty can be overcome through the four-photon mixing process, which
is strongly facilitated by the presence of powerful resonance radiation on the
coupling transition of the lambda-coupling scheme. As the result, the regenera-
tion of the probe laser radiation takes place and the atom returns in the initial
state.

The published experimental results suﬃciently clearly show both the dy-
namics of the probe laser ﬁeld regeneration [12-14] and the existence of the ex-
tremely eﬃcient four-photon mixing process in this conditions [10,15-17]. The
light ”stopping” eﬀect in such experiments does not have, of course, any connec-
tion with the speed of photons in the low presure gas mixture. The delay time
of the probe laser pulse is the result of the multiple stage of four-photon mixing
process and characterizes the build up time of the superﬂuorescence emission
[12].

All processes, which can destroy the four-photon mixing, should lead to
growing the absorption of the probe beam. For example, the additional driving
ﬁeld gives the so-called double dark resonance [18]. In this case only six- photon
mixing can return atom in the initial state. So, this process is less eﬃcient,
than a four-photon mixing. When the probe laser deturn from the resonance in
lambda-type coupling scheme, the growing of absorption is observed ([12] Fig.1).
In this case we obviously have the variant of the stimulated Raman population
transfer [19].

Extremely high eﬃciency of a four-photon mixing processes in nonlinear
optics can be explained as the result of some ”memory” of atoms and molecules
about the initial state and their aspiration to return back. This ”memory” is
connected with the inequality of the forward and reversed optical transitions. In

2

other words, this is the result of the time invariance violation in electromagnetic
interactions [20].
In spite of common opinion the inequality of forward and
reversed transitions is widespread in the optics. There is the base of most
phenomena in the nonlinear optics. But it usually manifests itself only in an
indirect way, because of the direct and independent measurements of the forward
and reversed transitions have some diﬃculties.

It is important to create the new mathematical model (alternative to the
Bloch equations) for adequate description the dynamics of optical transitions.
This model should be based on the concept of time invariance violation in elec-
tromagnetic interactions [21]. The descriptions of physical phenomena with
such mathematical model will have much more straightforward and clear phys-
ical sense, than the present day theory descriptions.

References

[1] F.Bloch, Phys.Rev. 70, 460 (1946).

[2] L.Allen, J.H.Eberly ”Optical Resonance and Two-Level Atoms” John Wi-

ley and Sons, (1975).

[3] R.L.Shoemaker, in ”Laser and Coherence Spectroscopy” ed. J.I.Steinfeld,

N.Y., Plenum, p.197, (1978).

[4] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0204003.

[5] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte, J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[6] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, hep-ph/0002084.

[7] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0102038.

[8] K.W.Smith, L.Allen, Opt.Commun. 8, 166 (1973).

[9] H.M.Gibbs, R.E.Slusher, Appl.Phys.Lett. 18, 505 (1971).

[10] A.F.Huss,

N.Peer,

R.Lammegger,

E.A.Korsunsky,

L.Windholz,

Phys.Rev.A 63, 013802 (2000).

[11] E.A.Korsunsky, T.Halfmann, J.P.Marangos, K.Bergmann, E- print, quant-

ph/0209161.

[12] A.Kasapi, M.Jain, G.Y.Yin, S.E.Harris, Phys.Rev.Lett. 74, 2447 (1995).

[13] M.Kozuma, D.Akamatsu, L.Deng, E.W.Hagley, M.G.Payne, E- print,

quant-ph/0205158.

[14] D.F.Phillips, A.Fleischhauer, A.Mair, R.L.Walsworth, M.D.Lukin,

Phys.Rev.Lett. 86, 783 (2001).

3

[15] M.M.Kash, V.A.Sautenkov, A.S.Zibrov,

L.Hollberg, G.R.Welch,
M.D.Lukin, Yu.Rostovtsev, E.S.Fry, M.O.Scully, Phys.Rev.Lett. 82,
5229 (1999).

[16] V.M.Entin, I.I.Ryabtsev, A.E.Boguslavskii, I.M.Beterov, JETP Letters 71,

175 (2000).

(2002).

[17] A.S.Zibrov, A.V.Matsko, O.Kocharovskaya, Y.V.Rostovtsev, G.R.Welch,

M.O.Scully, Phys.Rev.Lett. 88, 103601 (2002).

[18] C.Y.Ye, A.S.Zibrov, Yu.V.Rostovtsev, M.O.Scully, Phys.Rev.A 65, 043805

[19] N.V.Vitanov,

M.Fleischhauer,

B.W.Shore,

K.Bergmann,

Adv.At.Mol.Opt.Phys. 46, 55 (2001).

[20] A.Bohm, ”Quantum Mechanics: Foundation and Applications”, Springer-

Verlag, (1986).

[21] M.Xiaochun, E-print, physics/0210112.

4

