3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optics of Nanostructured Fractal Silver Colloids

1S.V. Karpov∗, 1A.L. Bas’ko, 1,3A.K. Popov, 2V.V. Slabko
and 3Thomas F. George†

1L.V. Kirenskii Institute of Physics, Siberian Division,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Krasnoyarsk, 660036, Russia
2Engineering-Physical Department,
Krasnoyarsk State Technical University, 660028, Russia
3Oﬃce of the Chancellor/ Departments of Chemistry
and Physics & Astronomy,
University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point,
Stevens Point, WI 54481-3897, USA

A chapter in Recent Research Developments in Optics, vol. 2,

Research Signpost, Trivandrum, India, 2002

Dated: May 14, 2002

Abstract

Based on the theory of the optical properties of fractal clusters, which is an
operator-based modiﬁcation of the coupled-dipole method, an alternate solution is
proposed for the problem of adequately describing the evolution of optical spectra
of any polydisperse silver colloid with particles falling within the range of most
characteristic sizes (5 − 30 nm). This is the range over which the results of the ap-
plication of the well-known methods of classical electrodynamics, including the Mie
theory, disagree with experimental data. The eﬀect of variation of the parameters of
such media on optical spectra is studied by a numerical simulation, which accounts
for particle electrodynamic dipole-dipole interactions. Indeed, such interactions are
shown to be a key factor in determining the broadening of the sol absorption spec-
tra during the course of fractal aggregation. A quantitative explanation is given for
the reasons for the appearance of individual speciﬁc features in the contours of the
spectral absorption of diﬀerent types of silver colloids.

KEYWORDS: colloid, fractal metal nanoaggregates, optical extinction spectra,

laser-induced aggregation and photomodiﬁcation, electrodynamics in nanoscale

PACS: 61.46.+w , 78.67.-n

∗e-mail: karpov@iph.krasn.ru
†e-mail: tgeorge@uwsp.edu

Contents

1

INTRODUCTION

GREGATES

2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF THE GROWTH OF FRACTAL AG-

3

SIMULATION OF OPTICAL SPECTRA OF FRACTAL AGGRE-

GATES
3.1 Basic equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Dipole polarizability of a two-level system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Polarizability with account for the frequency dependence of the permittiv-

ity of a material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

9
4.1 Pair interactions
9
4.2 Speciﬁc features of the absorption spectra of silver colloids . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2.1 Preparation of Ag colloids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2.2 Evolution of the spectra of silver hydrosols during spontaneous ag-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

gregation of the disperse phase

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

4.2.3 Evolution of the spectra of silver hydrosols during photostimulated

aggregation of the disperse phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3 Main factors determining optics of sol in the theory of OPFC . . . . . . . . 18
4.4 Analysis of calculated spectral dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5 Spectral determination of the aggregation degree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

2

5

6
6
8

8

33

34

5 CONCLUSION

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

1

INTRODUCTION

Since the famous Faraday’s tractates became available over a century ago, the question
about the origin of the intense color of sols containing small noble metal particles has
long been one of the most complex and still unsolved problems in the ﬁelds of colloid
chemistry and the optics of dispersion media. The interest is motivated by the fact
that optical spectra provide information about the most practically important physical
characteristics of sols, such as the particle size and thickness of the adsorption layer. The
spectra enable one to monitor the changes of the electronic structure of small particles
when a transition from the bulk materials to clusters occurs. On the one hand, the color
of such sols is explained by the true light absorption by the particles and is also aﬀected
by light scattering. For low-concentrated sols, the role of the latter factor is insigniﬁcant;
however, despite this fact, all basic regularities associated with the dramatic changes in
color are also observed in these sols [1].

2

The most widespread viewpoint about this problem, beginning with the well-known
work by Mie [2], is based on the idea of the spectral selectivity of scattering and absorption,
which is governed by the particle size. According to this work, variations in the optical
spectra of noble metal colloids are associated with the dependence of the position of the
maximum of absorption (scattering) band (λr) on particle size, and the appearance of
the long-wavelength wing in the absorption spectrum seems to have resulted from an
arbitrary increase in the initial size of the particles in solution [2–6]. The restrictions
imposed on the treatment of this eﬀect within the framework of these representations
were mainly reduced to the condition of preserving the spherical shape of the particles.
It is this concept that is described in most current textbooks on colloid chemistry (see,
for example, [7]).

The Mie theory is most often used to interpret the optical spectra of metal sols,
although in this case, the achievement of agreement between calculated and experimental
spectra requires the existence of particles in a sol to fall within too wide a range of their
sizes ([8] and references therein). Here, the maximal particle size far exceeds the values
characteristic of typical metal colloids. The large discrepancy with the experiment was
explained mainly by the nonsphericity of real particles and the size dependence of the
refractive index of metals [3]. Accounting for size eﬀects in [5] made it possible to predict
a larger (compared with [4, 6]) broadening of the absorption spectra of silver colloids in
terms of the Mie theory. However, the existence of excessively large (100 nm and above)
particles in these systems was still recognized.

The most serious discrepancies between interpretations based on the Mie theory were
mentioned in our observations of the evolution of absorption spectra of various silver
hydrosols containing spherical particles with a diameter of about 2Ri = 5 − 25 nm [1],
where in one of these sols, particles sizes were varied, whereas in another they were kept
constant. Despite this, the spectral changes in hydrosols were similar in both cases. The
same discrepancies were mentioned in [9].
In this work, the statistical function of the
particle size distribution in gold and silver hydrosols was carefully monitored with the
help of an electron microscope over the course of sharp broadening of absorption spectra
and, correspondingly, of the variations in sol color. It was demonstrated [9] that, in this
process, the particle size distribution restricted by the range 2Ri = 5 − 25 nm remains
virtually unchanged. This implies that, in this work, the role of the variation in particle
size can be considered insigniﬁcant.
In this connection, it is reasonable to cite data
[10] stating that, for aerosol sediments of silver particles, the wavelength of the surface
plasmon λr is practically independent of Ri over the range 2Ri = 3 − 25 nm. This is also
supported by the data reported in [6], which shows that, over the range 2Ri = 5 − 30
nm, the calculated shift of the resonant wavelength ∆λr(2Ri) is only 15 nm, whereas the
experimentally observed shift in aggregating silver hydrosols, having the aforementioned
particle sizes, is above 400 nm.

The dependence of λr on Ri over the range of smaller particle sizes 2Ri < 5 nm
was demonstrated in [5, 6, 11]; moreover, for some particle sizes, this dependence can
be reversed. However, the absolute values of the ∆λr(2Ri) shifts are also small. The
problem of the size dependence of the frequency of resonant absorption is reviewed in
detail in [9, 10]. In general, the authors of these reviews note that many theoretical and
experimental results often contradict each other, thus conﬁrming that adequate theories

3

are still absent in this ﬁeld of research.

In the background of the unresolved controversies regarding the optics of dispersion
media, a new approach to describe optical properties of colloids has been initiated by Sha-
laev, Stockman, Markel, et al. [12, 13]. In these works, the theory of optical properties of
fractal clusters (OPFC) is provided, which accounts exactly for particle electrodynamic
interactions. In accordance with this theory, the main reason for the broadening of spec-
tra of colloids is the particle aggregation. Precisely the same conclusion on the role of
aggregation was drawn as far back as a half of century ago by a number of researchers (for
example, see [14]). The same viewpoint is shared by the authors of the aforementioned
work [9], and only the absence of a theoretical basis did not allow them to provide a
substantial explanation of the results obtained. This idea is favored in a number of recent
publications, in particular in [15, 16].

The appearance of optical coupling of the particles in the aggregated sols is most pro-
nounced at the Fr¨olich frequency, associated with the lowest-order surface mode. Over
recent decades, considerable progress has been made in the development of theoretical
models of optical absorption by the aggregated sols based on the exact solution of the
electrodynamical problem associated with coupled spherical particles [17–22]. However,
because the exact solution of the problem is diﬃcult to ﬁnd, a more simple method of cou-
pled dipoles [23–26] is often used based on the approximation of the particles by discrete
interacting dipoles [27–29]. Note that basic model concepts about the outlined methods
were formulated by De Voe ([30, 31]) and employed for calculations of the polarizabilities
of the molecular aggregates. A very eﬀective operator approach to the method of coupled
dipoles was developed by Shalaev, Stockman and Markel [13, 32] (see also the review in
[33] and references therein). These authors were the ﬁrst to apply the method of coupled
dipoles to the colloid metal sol aggregates. The principal importance of accounting for the
fractal geometry of these aggregates was revealed, and various models and approximations
were developed including an exact theory of the optical properties of fractal clusters. The
application of this method to silver colloids enabled an increased of the accuracy of the
description of their spectra to a level not achievable with alternative methods.

It is known that particle aggregation in colloids is accompanied by the formation of
fractal structures, which are assembled from the main portion of the initially-isolated
particles in the process of sol evolution (see [1]). Only the fractal approach to describing
sol properties made it possible to gain new insight into well-known facts not restricted just
to the optical properties of fractal nanostructures (for example, see [32, 33]). In particular,
it was conﬁrmed [12, 13, 32, 33] that some features of the strong inﬂuence of neighboring
particles are observed in the spectra of any particles comprising fractal aggregates (or
fractal clusters). This leads to a noticeable shift in the frequency of the intrinsic optical
resonance of particles (ωr). The reason for the shift of resonant frequencies is associated
with the dipole-dipole interaction between the light-induced (oscillating) dipole moments
of each particle and the particles of the surrounding medium (with a dominating eﬀect of
the nearest particle). Since fractal objects do not possess translational invariance, they
cannot transmit travelling waves. For this reason, optical dipole excitations in fractals
tend to be localized in single particles, which is why diﬀerent parts of a fractal (diﬀerent
particles) absorb light independently. This feature is responsible for the light-induced
modiﬁcation of fractal aggregates discovered in [34]. In approximating the pair interaction

4

of particles, which allows us to explain clearly the essence of the theory of OPFC, the
value of the frequency shift of intrinsic resonance of the ith particle under the eﬀect of the
jth particle (without exact account for the total contribution of the far-spaced particles)
is inversely proportional to the third power of the distance between their geometrical
centers (∆ωr ∝ R−3
ij ). We emphasize that it is precisely the interparticle distance that is
the crucial parameter in the theory of OPFC.

In the present work, it will be shown that all the observed speciﬁc features of the
adsorption spectra of silver colloids, as well as the reasons for the appearance of the long-
wavelength wing, can be adequately explained in terms of the theory of OPFC, where the
unique correlation between the structural and optical properties of fractal aggregates is
expressed. The applicability of this approach, in addition to the aforementioned condition
of the preservation of the spherical shape by the particles, is also restricted by the smallest
admissible diameter 2Ri, because this value (2Ri < 2 − 4 nm) begins to determine the
homogeneous width of the spectrum of the surface plasmon Γi due to relaxation eﬀects
at the particle surface [10, 11, 35]:

Γi = Γbulk + vf /Ri,

(1.1)

where Γbulk, is the relaxation constant of free electrons for a bulk silver specimen, and vf is
the Fermi velocity. In this case, the vf /Ri term can become larger than Γbulk. Evidently,
Γi should be, at least by several times, smaller than the width of the visible part of the
spectrum Γv, because at Γi/Γv > 0.5 − 1 no visually registered spectral changes related
to the aggregation in sols with such small particles can be observed, and the sols will
preserve their gray color.

The purpose of this of this work is to carry out a detailed quantitative analysis of
the eﬀect of dipole-dipole interactions of the particles on the absorption spectrum of
the colloids during the course of their aggregation into fractal structures. The analysis
is performed through a numerical solution of the equations of the OPFC theory for a
polydisperse ensemble of the coagulating particles.

2 MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF THE GROWTH

OF FRACTAL AGGREGATES

In this work, to generate fractal aggregates, we used a 3-D model of cluster-cluster ag-
gregation with the probability of irreversible coagulation of particles upon their collisions
equal to 1. This condition decreases the counting time, with no eﬀect on the value of
the fractal dimension. As a rule, the total number of particles did not exceed 50 (this
restriction was determined by the calculation time of the optical spectra). At the initial
time, particles whose sizes fall within the range of 5 − 25 nm were uniformly distributed
over the space with volume L3 (L = 200 nm) with an arbitrary selection of the direction
of motion. The values of the initial velocities corresponded to the Maxwell distribution.
A mean free path corresponding to the time of motion with no collision was introduced
for each particle. Upon the collision and coagulation of particles, their intrinsic kinetic
energy is transformed into the kinetic energy of translational and rotational motion of an
aggregate. Under the regime of Brownian aggregation, the mass centers of the assembling

5

aggregates move along broken linear trajectories. Two models of aggregation (sponta-
neous Brownian aggregation of electrically neutral particles and Coulombic aggregation
of initially-charged particles with bipolar charge values of ±25 e, where e is the electron
charge) were studied in this work. The existence of a particle charge is associated with
the mechanism of mutual charging in a system [36]. In the case of mutual charging, the
aggregation occurs due to both the short-range van der Waals interaction (Ew ∝ r−6),
whose radius is determined by the condition Ew > kT , and to the long-range Coulombic
interaction (Ec ∝ r−1 ).

The developed algorithm also allows us to calculate various characteristics of the form-
ing aggregates, i.e., fractal dimension and degree of aggregation of a medium determined
by the broadening of an absorption spectrum [37]; to study the kinetics of aggregation as
a function of the viscosity of a dispersion medium, the value of the particle charge and
its sign, as well as of the characteristics of the incident light; to perform calculations with
various functions of the particle size distribution (FPSD); and to change the position and
width of the intrinsic particle resonance, particle bulk concentration, etc.

The value of the bipolar charges (±25 e) of the particles was determined by the
condition of the excess of Coulombic interaction energy between particles separated by a
mean distance (typical of a real hydrosol) over the energy of thermal motion (kT ). The
calculated values of the fractal dimension of an aggregate for two regimes of aggregation
are equal to D = 1.78 for Brownian aggregation and D = 1.65 for Coulombic aggregation,
which is attributed to the diﬀerences in the kinetics of the aggregate growth. The half-
time of aggregation [7, 37] in the ﬁrst case was 20 − 25 times higher than in the second
case.

3

SIMULATION OF OPTICAL SPECTRA OF FRAC-
TAL AGGREGATES

3.1 Basic equations

Unlike the works employed the binary approximation, the algorithm developed in this
work is based on the complete set of equations of the theory of OPFC [13], where the
authors considered the fractal composed of N particles (with dipole-dipole interactions
at optical frequencies) polarized by the external ﬁeld E(0)
and located at points ri. Then
the dipole moments d induced on diﬀerent particles obey the system of equations

i

diα = χ0E(0)

iα − χ0 X
β

X
j=1,j6=i

N

δαβ − 3n(ij)

α n(ij)

β

djβ,

r3
ij

(3.1)

where i, j = 1, 2, 3...N, α, β = {x, y, z}, χ0 is the dipole polarizability of a single particle,
rij = ri − rj, and n(ij) = rij/rij. If the sizes of the fractal aggregates are much smaller
than the wavelength of an incident beam, the external ﬁeld E(0)
at the location of the
ith particle can be considered as uniform and independent of i. In this case, the dipole
moment induced on the ith particle is expressed via the corresponding linear polarizability

i

6

χ(i)
αβ in the following form:

diα = X
β
The problem consists in determining χ(i)

χ(i)
αβE(0)

β

αβ, because its imaginary part uniquely deter-
mines the light absorption by the ith particle. As seen from (3.2), for this purpose it is
necessary to ﬁnd diα that solves the system of (3.1) with respect to this parameter. The
solution to this system is performed in a matrix form. To this end, it is necessary to
introduce the matrix W with elements

hiα|W |jβi =

, i 6= j;

hiα|W |iβi = 0.

δαβ − 3n(ij)

α n(ij)

β

r3
ij

This matrix acts in the 3N-dimensional space of the vectors d and, E(0) with components
diα and E(0)
iα . Upon introducing the new complex variable z with real and imaginary parts
−X and −δ,

the main system of (3.1) acquires the following form:

z ≡ −(X + iδ) = χ−1
0 ,

(z + W )d = E(0).

Because the matrix W is symmetrical, it is reduced to the diagonal form via an orthogonal
transformation,

UW U T = diag (wn),

UU T = 1,

where diag (wn) is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues of wn, and U is the matrix whose
columns are the components of the eigenvectors of W (the superscript T denotes a trans-
position).

The dipole moment d is determined with the help of (3.5) as

W = U T diag (wn)U,
z + W = U T diag (z + wn)U,
(z + W )−1 = U T diag (z + wn)−1U,

and with allowance for (3.4) we obtain

d = U T diag (z + wn)−1UE(0).

Thus, expressing the desired values of diα via the eigenvalues of wn, and components of
the corresponding intrinsic vectors U n

iα, we ﬁnd

N

3N

diα = X
β

X
j=1

X
n=1

U n

iαU n

jβ(z + wn)−1E(0)
jβ .

Comparing (3.8) and (3.2), we obtain the expression χ(i)
αβ

χ(i)
αβ =

N

3N

X
j=1

X
n=1

iαU n
U n

jβ(z + wn)−1,

7

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

where U n
iα and wn are the eigenvalues of the vector and matrix W , respectively. The
linear polarizability of the particle in an aggregate averaged over the particle number N
χ(i)
is equal to χαβ = N −1
αβ. Using symmetry with respect to rotations and the averaging
over the entire aggregate orientations, the polarizability tensor is reduced to the following
scalar:

P
i

χ =

χαα =

1
3

X
α

1
3N

N

N

3N

X
α

X
i=1

X
j=1

X
n=1

iαU n
U n

jα(z + wn)−1.

(3.10)

Because the eigenvalues of wn, and components of the eigenvectors U n
iα have real values,
z becomes the only complex number in this expression. Substituting (3.3) into (3.10), we
obtain the following expression for the function Im χ describing the absorption spectrum
of the fractal aggregate:

Im χ(X) =

1
3N

N

N

3N

X
α

X
i=1

X
j=1

X
n=1

iαU n
U n
jα

δ
(−X + wn)2 + δ2 .

(3.11)

3.2 Dipole polarizability of a two-level system

If a particle has its resonance at a frequency ωr, then for a dipole moment of the transi-
tion d12 and relaxation rate (homogeneous halfwidth) Γ, in the simplest case of a single
resonance, the dipole polarizability of a particle can be described by the expression [12, 32]

where Ω is the detuning of resonance, and ¯h is Plank’s constant. Comparing (3.12) and
(3.3) yields expressions for X and δ as

χ0 =

|d12|2
¯h(Ω + iΓ)

,

X =

¯hΩ
|d12|2 ,

δ =

¯hΓ
|d12|2 .

(3.12)

(3.13)

Here, X has the meaning of relative frequency detuning, and δ determines the resonance
width and amplitude. The expressions of (3.13) allow one, at a ﬁxed value of d12, to obtain
the functional dependence Im χ(X), and hence the absorption spectrum of an arbitrary
aggregate with particle pair interactions at various values of its fractal dimension under
conditions of linear response to the external ﬁeld.

3.3 Polarizability with account for the frequency dependence of

the permittivity of a material

The dipole polarizability of a sphere with radius Rn corrected for the irradiation reaction
can be described in greater detail by the expression reported in [32, 33] with allowance for
the spectral dependence of the optical constants of a material comprised by the particles,

χ0 = R3
n

(ǫ − ǫh)
ǫ + 2ǫh − i(2/3)(kRn)3(ǫ − ǫh)

,

(3.14)

8

where ǫ = ǫ′ + iǫ′′ is the permittivity of the material (in this case, silver), ǫ is the per-
mittivity of a disperse medium (water in the case of hydrosols, where ǫh =1.78 in the
spectral region from 200 to 1000 nm), and k is the wavenumber. Expressions for param-
eters δ = Im χ−1
introduced into formulas (3.3) are represented in the
following forms:

0 and X = Re χ−1
0

The permittivity of metal introduced into these expressions can be described by the Drude
formula,

δ =

n ǫ′′ǫh

3R−3
|ǫ − ǫh|2 + 2k3/3,
3ǫh(ǫ′ − ǫh)
|ǫ − ǫh|2

n [1 +

].

X = −R−3

ǫ = ǫ0 −

ω2
p
ω(ω + iΓ)

,

(3.15)

(3.16)

(3.17)

where ǫ0 accounts for the integral contribution to the permittivity of interband transitions,
and ωp is the plasma frequency.

4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

4.1 Pair interactions

In order to demonstrate the eﬀect of the dipole-dipole interactions of the particles, Fig. 1
shows a set of curves calculated with the aid of the developed algorithm, which describes
the main regularities of the evolution of the absorption spectrum of a pair of approaching
particles as a function of the interparticle distance over the range Rij = 10 − 18 nm (the
initial spectrum corresponds to the surface plasmon in silver hydrosols). As has been
shown in particular in [13], the eﬀect of a neighbor particle is manifested in the splitting
of a characteristic single resonance ωr (curve 11) of an initially isolated single particle
low-frequency ωl and high-frequency ωh, with the
and in the appearance of two peaks:
ratio of their frequency shifts with respect to ωr equal approximately to 1/2. As seen
from Fig. 1, at an interparticle distance exceeding 20 nm, spectral changes associated
with pair interactions virtually vanish. At distances of less than 10 nm, the low-frequency
peak approaches the long-wavelength boundary of the optical range and, upon further
decrease in Rij, falls outside the limits of this boundary. As Rij decreases, a broadening
of the low-frequency peak is also observed.

In the presented set of curves, attention should be paid to a rather large spectral
shift of a low-frequency peak observed over the relatively-narrow range of variation in
interparticle distances. We emphasize that the least possible values of these distances,
Rmin

ij = Ri + Rj, are limited by the sizes of the contacting particles, 2Ri and 2Rj.

The fact observed in this approach, that the value of the frequency shift of the resonant
absorption of interacting particles is much more sensitive to the variation in their sizes,
is worth special mention. This is explained by the higher power of such a dependence.
For example, in the theory of OPFC (pair approximation), the value of the resonant shift
of contacting particles is equal to ∆ωr ∝ (Ri + Rj)−3, whereas the Mie theory results,
according to data reported in [5, 6] for silver sols, show an almost linear dependence of

9

Figure 1: Absorption spectra of pairs of particles (with a single identical resonance)
determined by their dipole-dipole interactions as a function of the distance Rij between
the particles: (1) 10, (2) 11, (3) 12, (4) 13, (5) 14, (6) 15, (7)16, (8) 17, (9) 18, and (10)
19 nm. Curve 11 corresponds to the initial spectrum of single non-interacting particles.

the value of the frequency shift of the spectral maximum of absorption on particle size
(at least over the size range 2Ri = 20 − 100 nm). In addition, an increase in the particle
size leads, according to the theories of OPFC and Mie, to opposite spectral eﬀects.

During the course of aggregate growth, the diversity of variants of the spatial environ-
ment of each speciﬁc particle increases, and the relative fraction of the particles brought
into most intimate contact rises. This event is accompanied by a gradual increase in the
extension of the long-wavelength wing of the spectrum.

The appearance of the short-wavelength wing of the spectrum of the fractal aggregate
with a twice narrower bandwidth (at a frequency scale) is attributed to the appearance
of a high-frequency peak for the interacting pairs (Fig. 1). However, the precise experi-
mental registration of the shortwavelength broadening attributed to the surface plasmon
of silver hydrosols is somewhat complicated due to the superposition of the band wing
of interband absorption within the range λ < 350 nm and partial light absorption by a
dispersion medium in some sols. Hence, the fractal as a system composed of N particles is
an ensemble of N high-Q resonators (coupled dipoles) corresponding to optical resonances
of approaching particles with randomly-distributed eigenfrequencies (ωr)i = ωr − (∆ωr)i.
Within the framework of this concept, the fractal aggregate can also be considered as a
statistical set of arbitrarily-oriented pairs of interacting particles diﬀering in their posi-
tions with respect to each other. In this case, the probability of existence of arbitrary pairs
of particles with the relative interparticle distance Rij in a fractal obeys the correlation
function g(Rij) = (D/4π)R−3
0 (Rij/R0)D−3. The scaling form of the dependence of the
number of particles N in a fractal falling within the sphere of radius Rc is N = (Rc/R0)D,

10

where R0 is a constant corresponding to the characteristic distance between the near-
est particles (scaling length unit), and D is the fractal (Hausdorﬀ) dimension. Indeed,
these regularities distinguishing fractal objects from disordered systems are responsible
for the appearance of qualitatively-new fractal physical properties (for an explanation and
references see, for example, [1, 33]).

The reﬁned variant of the theory of OPFC, where the eﬀect of the exact resonance
positions of both the nearest particles (pair approximation) and all other fractal particles
are taken into account, was discussed in [13] (see also the review in [18]. The eﬀect of other
particles was only accounted for in the pair approximation with the aid of the Lorentz ﬁeld
[12]. The inhomogeneous character of spectrum broadening, as well as other postulates

Figure 2: Transmission spectra (upper) and spectral dependence of the diﬀerence in
absorption (lower) of the nonirradiated (curve 1) and irradiated (τlas ≃ 30 ps, W =
2 × 10−3 J/cm2) samples (the silver aggregates are ﬁxed in gelatin). (a) λ = 540 nm;
curves 2, 3, 4, 5 correspond to 1, 20, 80, 230 pulses; (b) λ = 641 nm; curves 2 and 3
correspond to 20 and 120 pulses, respectfully, and curve 4 to 120 pulses at W = 8 × 10−3
J/cm2.

of the theory of OPFC, have been experimentally conﬁrmed in [1, 33, 34, 38, 39]. The
photomodiﬁcation of fractal aggregates under the inﬂuence of strong laser radiation proves
the inhomogeneous broadening of their absorption spectra. Let us consider this eﬀect on
the linear optical properties of fractal aggregates. Figures 2(a-b) show the transmission
and absorption spectra of aggregates before and after irradiation by a series of strong laser
pulses (λ = 540 nm, τ = 30 sec). One can see that in the latter case, dips appear near the
laser wavelength. The dip width is close to the absorption linewidth of separate particles
in a non-aggregated hydrosol and is only a small fraction of the aggregate absorption
band, i.e., the photomodiﬁcation is selective over the wavelength. With the increasing
number of pulses or growing pulse power, the dip becomes deeper and broader. Note

11

that a dip was also burnt around λ = 641 nm with the radiation obtained by stimulated
Raman scattering in acetone. Selective modiﬁcation of the absorption spectrum of the
light in aggregates is observed only at identical polarizations of the light and the laser
radiation. For orthogonal polarization of the probe beam, no dip is observed in the
absorption spectrum. An increase in the energy density of the laser beam leads to lower
spectral and polarization selectivity.

It has been found that dip burning is a threshold eﬀect in the laser pulse energy. For
ultrashort light pulses, a dip in the absorption spectrum of the aggregates ﬁxed in gelatin
was observed at W ≥ 1.5 MJ/cm2 (λ = 540 nm). At τ = 10 ns, in order to detect the
dip, somewhat higher energies were requited compared to τ = 30 ps. The spectral width
of the dip increased with the pulse duration growing from 30 ps to 10 ns.

The results obtained support the basic outcomes of the OPFA theory. The optical
response of fractals, despite the long-range dipole-dipole interaction, is of local character,
which allows local modiﬁcation of the aggregate.

At a ﬁxed detuning from the resonance of an isolated particle, the radiation selects only
those particles for which the detuning is compensated by the shift due to the dipole-dipole
interaction. Moreover, the linearly-polarized light ”chooses” quite a deﬁnite geometrical
conﬁguration of mutual positions of the pairs of particles. This allows, at a ﬁxed laser
frequency, to detect two independent absorption dips, corresponding to orthogonal polar-
izations.

At the energy density W = 1.5 × 10−3 J/cm2 and the particle concentration N0 ≃ 1012
cm−3, according to estimations, each ”resonant” particle of the aggregate (with a protein
adsorption layer) absorbs about 3×105 photons per pulse, which corresponds to an energy
suﬃcient to evaporate a silver particle of 10 nm radius. The area of energy localization
depends on the pulse duration and, at τ ≃ 30 ps, corresponds to the size of one particle,
whereas for τ ≃ 10 ns it includes already several particles. This accounts for the high
energy requirements at τ ≃ 10 ns and for the partial loss of selectivity.

It should be noted that the width and shape of the dip depend on the manner in
which aggregates are prepared, the solvent medium and, in some cases, on the time inter-
val between irradiation and spectral measurements [39]. The last dependence indicates
relaxation of the structure of photomodiﬁed aggregates. A record of ﬁve spectral dips in
the visible and near-IR ranges within the long-wavelength wing of an aggregated Ag sol
irradiated with tunable nanosecond laser radiation was reported in [40]. The properties
of the burnt spectral holes (the color of the irradiated spot) in the samples of the poly-
mer ﬁlms contained silver fractal aggregates, which we investigated, remain very stable
already over 12 − 14 years (that promising for dense information recording). Figure 3
(a,b) displays various experimental schemes (a) and temporal behavior of the photomod-
iﬁcation process induced by laser pulses λ = 540 nm, τ = 30 ps at diﬀerent values of the
pulse intensities (b) [41]. These dependencies have been obtained by the four-wave mixing
(optical phase conjugation) technique through a delay of the probe pulse. Simultaneous
pulses 1 and 2 [Fig. 3(a)] cause photomodiﬁcation of the Ag fractal aggregates in a hy-
drosol cell. A delay of the probe pulse 3, which length is about 1 cm, is controlled by the
shift of the mirror. It scatters on the optical grating produced in such a way inside the
Ag sol, and generated signal 4 is recorded vs time delay of the probe pulse 3 with respect
to the photomodiﬁcation-stimulating pulses 1 and 2. Plot 1 corresponds to a relatively

12

Figure 3: Various schemes of optical phase-conjugation experiments with the aggregated
silver hydrosol (a) and the temporal behavior of the photomodiﬁcation process in the
ﬁeld of laser pulses (b). Plots 1 - 4 display the energy of the generated signal 4 vs time
delay of the probe pulse 3 with respect to the overlapping nearly equally intense 30-ps
pulses 1 and 2 which produce optical grating in the sol. The delay is controlled by the
shift of the mirror. The plots 1, 2, 3 and 4 are obtained at intensities of the pulse 2 of
2.75 × 108,

8.25 × 108 and 109 W/cm2, correspondingly.

6.92 × 108,

low intensity of the stimulating waves. It displays instant electronic response, which then
decays. The plots 2, 3 and 4 are obtained at higher pulse intensities. They reveal strong
contribution of the grating produced through the photomodiﬁcation and display the dy-
namics and the delay of this process. Here we see that the higher the intensity, the faster
is the process of photomodiﬁcation.

A negligible role of the thermal processes was proved through change of the grating
period, which is proportional to 1/sin(α/2) [Fig. 3 (a)]. The angle α was 5o in the scheme
1a and 160o in the scheme 2(a). The estimates and direct measurements revealed that
the time interval, required for the formation of the thermal grating, is longer than 200 ps.
Investigation of polarization eﬀects conﬁrmed these conclusions (see scheme 3(a), where
polarization of waves 1 and 2 are orthogonal).

4.2 Speciﬁc features of the absorption spectra of silver colloids

4.2.1 Preparation of Ag colloids

Diﬀerent methods were used to prepare colloids (hydrosols):

1. The boronhydride method described in [9, 39] proceeds as follow. 1−3 mg of sodium
boronhydride is dissolved in 20 ml of cooled bidistilled water, and 5 ml of such water is used
to dissolve 2 mg of silver nitrate. Then the silver nitrate solution is quickly added to the

13

test tube with sodium boronhydride solution, and the mixture is intensively shaken. The
resultant colloid is yellow-colored. The extinction spectrum of a fresh hydrosol has a peak
at λ = 410 − 420 nm with FWHM in the range 60 − 80 nm in various measurement. The
resonant width is larger than that of isolated particles. In particular, this is believed to
be due to dispersion in the size and shape of the particles leading to small inhomogeneous
broadening of the extinction spectra of non-aggregated hydrosols.

2. The second utilized method is based on the use of collargol [1, 39], which a mixture
of silver with proteins that stabilize hydrosols (C-hydrosol). 1 ml of collargol dissolved
in 10 ml of bidistilled water yielded an orange-brown solution, in its extinction spectrum
a peak was observed at λ = 420 nm, broadened towards to the long-wavelength wing.
The broadening is believed to be caused by the silver particles combining with protein
molecules to form a complex wherein particles are spaced at distances comparable or
somewhat larger than their diameters (10 − 15 nm). Stabilized isolated particles, showing
no changes in the absorption spectra within a month period, were prepared by heating of
the collargol solution with a small addition of sodium nitrate. Aggregation of the hydrosol
obtained was initiated by adding 0.1 NaOH solution in the proportion 1:10. In 1 - 2 weeks
the hydrosol became dark-red, and its spectrum displayed a high long-wavelength wing.
3. The third method is based on the reduction of silver by ethyl alcohol. The colloid
prepared according to this method is called A-hydrosol. The preparation of 100 ml of
an A-hydrosol requires 0.4 g of AgNO3 and 0.3 g of PVP. The reduction of silver was
conducted by heating this A-hydrosol in a solution consisting of 20 ml of H2O and 80
ml of C2H5OH for 20 min in the range 348 − 353 K. Partial aggregation of the solution
during its heating depended on the heating time, which varied over the range 3 − 50 min.

4.2.2 Evolution of the spectra of silver hydrosols during spontaneous aggre-

gation of the disperse phase

Silver sols can be considered as a convenient model system where the eﬀect of various
factors on the position and shape of each single resonance can be easily monitored, thanks
to the presence of the isolated and relatively-narrow band of plasmon absorption centered
at λpl in the optical range. Figure 4 illustrates the typical absorption spectra of various
silver hydrosols, which comprise both isolated spherical particles (the average size of
the metallic core is 2Ri = 14 − 16 nm) and particles combined into fractal aggregates.
Procedures for the preparation of hydrosols are described above (see also [1, 9]). A typical
feature of the spectral curves of the majority of strongly-aggregated surfactant/polymer-
containing silver colloids (see, e.g., Fig. 4, curve 4 and Fig. 5, curve 1) is the presence
of two maxima in the optical spectral range [1, 9, 42]. The ﬁrst spectral maximum
corresponds to the surface plasmon of isolated and weakly-interacting particles when
their number is the largest. Its amplitude reduces with an increase in the degree of sol
aggregation due to a decrease in the relative fraction of such particles (Fig. 4, curves 2
- 4). We believe that the origin of the second maximum fundamentally diﬀers from that
of the ﬁrst maximum. A possible explanation of the origin of the second low-energy peak
in the absorption spectra of silver sols is reviewed in [10]. This problem was also touched
upon in [9, 43], where it was suggested that the second maximum is associated with the
Raman excitation band. The origin of this maximum, explained by the excitation of

14

Figure 4: Typical absorption spectra of silver hydrosols and their evolution in the process
of aggregation: (1) initial aggregation stage; (2-4) hydrosol prepared on the basis of
collargol at various stages of aggregation; and (5) hydrosol prepared by the procedure
[9, 39, 43] using NaBH4. Curves 4 and 5 correspond to the developed stage of hydrosol
aggregation.

the collective transverse waves in the ensemble of particles, has been studied within the
framework of the Maxwell-Garnett theory [44]. However, this viewpoint contradicts the
fact that fractal aggregates forming in a colloid cannot transmit travelling waves due to
the violation of the condition of translational invariance in fractal structures.

In general, we believe that the explanations represented in basic publications devoted
to this problem are often conﬁned to the framework of qualitative hypotheses, and the
proposed theoretical models in many cases contradict experimental facts. Meanwhile, the
appearance of an additional low-frequency maximum in the absorption spectrum of an
aggregating sol and the gradual shift of this maximum within the background of forming
a long-wavelength wing give rise to sharp changes in color; this situation is discussed in
detail in [1]. We also note that the appearance of a low-energy maximum in the absorption
spectra in some cases is observed not only in hydrosols, but also in silver aerosols deposited
onto the substrate [10].

4.2.3 Evolution of the spectra of silver hydrosols during photostimulated

aggregation of the disperse phase

In darkness, the colloid looses it stability very slowly (over a period ranging from a
few weeks to a few months) due to random Brownian collisions of particles and low
coagulation eﬃciency of such collisions. However, the aggregation stability of the colloid
drops abruptly under the action of UV or visible radiation. As reported in [41], we
observed photoinduced formation of fractal aggregates under the action of the radiation

15

Figure 5: Changes in the absorption spectra of Ag C-hydrosol during aggregation. The
colors of the solutions are: (K) yellow; (1) dense purple blue; (2) dense brown; (3) brownish
red; (4) yellow; (5) dark orange; (6) red.

of certain lasers or nonmonochromatic (or quasimonochromatic) radiation on hydrosols.
This eﬀect is also accompanied by considerable broadening of absorption spectra. The
diﬀerence between the absorption spectra of spontaneously formed and photostimulated
aggregate is negligible at low light intensities [1] (cf. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6).

It appears only under irradiation by the pulsed lasers and grows with the increase of

the intensity of the stimulating light (Fig. 7).

Figure 7 depicts the absorption spectra of silver hydrosols modiﬁed by laser radiation.
The hydrosols were exposed to radiation continuously scanning the solution surface of
1 × 4 cm in a quartz cuvette (cell) 0.2-cm thick. Curve 2 demonstrates the changes
in the spectrum that occurred upon irradiation by an argon laser. The spectrum shows
signs of the starting stage of aggregation. Curve 3 shows changes in the absorption spec-
trum that occurred after exposure to the pulsed radiation of a ruby laser (λ = 694 nm).
Apart from the changes representing the general trend (such as the formation of a long-
wavelength wing), the spectrum also displays a feature associated with the considerable
decrease of absorption in the area of 694 nm (in the range 550 − 750 nm). This decrease
is clearly visible in the diﬀerence spectrum (curve 5a). The reason for such a decrease in
absorption is that the formation of fractal aggregates (FAs) and the occurrence of an inho-
mogeneous wing of the spectrum create conditions for the subsequent spectrally-selective
photodestruction of the FAs (near the wavelength of the laser radiation). We note that
the photomodiﬁcation of FAs takes place only when the radiation energy density exceeds
the threshold value. A similar trend is observed in hydrosols exposed to radiation of the
second harmonic of a neodymium laser (λ = 540 nm). Curve 4 represents the spectrum
of the original hydrosol in the intermediate stage of aggregation (unlike curve 1). Curve 5

16

Figure 6: Changes in the absorption spectrum of Ag A-hydrosol occurring in darkness
after preliminary exposure to light with the wavelength λ = 500 nm, intensity I = 3
mW/cm2 and exposure time of 10 hours. The time between the changes corresponding
to curves 1 and 2 was 6 days. The time between the changes corresponding to curves 2
and 3 was 8 days. The colors of the solutions are: (1) red; (2) dark red; and (3) greenish
brown.

demonstrates the changes in the absorption spectrum that occurred after irradiation with
the laser pulses. Aside from the formation of a long-wavelength wing, the spectrum seems
to develop a dip in the vicinity of the wavelength of the laser radiation (540 nm). Such
spectral consequence of two processes – photoaggregation and photomodiﬁcation. We
note that a considerable increase of the threshold radiation dose results in deterioration
of the spectral selectivity of irradiation and in a wider dip, as can be seen, for example, in
curve 3. Special attention should be paid to curve 6, which demonstrates spectral changes
with signs of aggregation. These changes are brought about by the action of the pulsed
radiation of an excimer (XeCl) laser on the colloid. Curve 6 in Fig. 7 does not have a
second maximum unlike curve 6 in Fig. 5, which represents the spectral changes caused
by low-intensity radiation. This diﬀerence is most probably associated with the photo-
modiﬁcation of FAs. The hole (dip) burnt in the absorption spectral range λ > λpl, while
λlas > λpl, gives rise to a corresponding dip in the range λ < λpl, and vice versa in the
case where λlas < λpl. According to the theory in [13], the short-wavelength spectral dip
is twice as far from ωpl (on the frequency scale), compared to that in the long-wavelength
wing of the absorption spectrum. This fact, along with the relationship between λlas,
and λpl, brings us to the conclusion that the hole burnt by the eximer laser in the range
λ > λpl falls within spectral range of the long-wavelength absorption maximum (second
maximum on curve 6).

It should be noted that exposure of the solution to the radiation of a neodymium

17

Figure 7: Changes in the absorption spectra of a Ag hydrosol caused by laser radiation: (1)
initial spectrum of a non-aggregated hydrosol; (2) changes in the spectrum after exposure
of the solution to the radiation of an argon laser (λ = 514.5 nm, intensity 50 mW/cm2,
exposure time of 2 hours); (3) changes in the spectrum after irradiation of the solution
with 15 pulses of a ruby laser (λ = 694 nm, W = 3 J/cm2, τ = 30 ns); (4) initial spectrum
of a Ag hydrosol before its exposure to the radiation of an YAlO3 : Nd laser; (5) changes
in the spectrum after irradiation with 20 pulses of the second harmonic of an YAlO3: Nd
laser (λ = 540 nm, W = 1.5 mJ/cm2, τ = 30 ps); and (6) changes in the spectrum after
irradiation with 250 pulses of an excimer (XeCl) laser (λ = 308 nm, W = 90 mJ/cm2, τ
= 30 ns); (3a, 5a, 6a) diﬀerential spectra of the hydrosols (with respect to curve 4). The
values of εmax(λpl) for curves 3, 5, and 6 are diﬀerent because of diﬀerent radiation doses
(for explanations, see the text).

laser with the wavelength λ = 1.08 µm causes no spectral changes. This fact can also be
explained within the suggested model of the phenomenon, because the wavelength of this
laser radiation lies beyond the red threshold of photoaggregation, which is believed to be
of a photoemissive nature [37, 38].

4.3 Main factors determining optics of sol in the theory of OPFC

In this work, speciﬁc features of the absorption spectra of silver sols and their diﬀerences
within the framework of the theory of OPFC are explained based on a concept which
elaborates the approach proposed in [1]. The essence of this idea is as follows. In gen-
eral, any real sol is a polydisperse system characterized by the function of particle size
distribution (FPSD) f (2Ri), which has a clearly-pronounced maximum and is described
by the asymmetric dependence resembling a Poisson distribution. This means that the
most probable particle size 2Rm exists in a system that has real colloidal properties (for

18

example, see [9]). In this sense, the monodisperse system can be considered as a speciﬁc
(with the narrowest FPSD) system, although this case is physically meaningless.

Correspondingly, the presence of a prevailing, statistically-sampled size 2Rm leads to
the fact that, over the course of aggregate growth, the most probable distances between
contacting particles become those which arise in the pairs with particle size 2Rm (see the
explanation in Sec. 4.4). In turn, the appearance of an excess number of contacting pairs
with the most probable interparticle distance should aﬀect the optical spectra. This is
related to the fact that these pairs correspond, on average, to the prevailing value of the
frequency resonant shifts (∆ωm)i; the latter circumstance is responsible for an increase in
absorption over some limited part of the long-wavelength wing of an aggregate spectrum.
Within the framework of the pair approximation (with no allowance for the exact total
contribution of distant particles), the relative position of the second maximum ω2 in the
absorption spectrum is determined by the relations

ω2 ∝ ωr − (∆ωm)i;

(∆ωm)i ∝ (2Rm)−3
ij ,

(4.1)

where ωr is the resonant frequency of noninteracting particles. However, in this case,
it should be kept in mind that, in surfactant/polymer-containing sols, the least possible
distances between the particle geometrical centers 2(Rm)ij are determined both by the
size of the particle metallic core and the thickness L of their adsorption layers as a
whole, including the polymer component, which provides for the appearance of a sterical
factor of stability [45]. As is seen from microimages of fractal aggregates of diﬀerent-type
silver hydrosols [42], the polymer component of the adsorption layer markedly aﬀects the
packing of particles in aggregates. In the case of identical L values for all the particles,
the probability of the appearance of the pairs of contacting particles with interparticle
distance 2(Rm0)ij = 2(Rm + L)ij (with allowance for the deformation of the external part
of their adsorption layers) in the optical spectrum of the aggregated hydrosol should be the
largest. In addition, the case should also be considered when the thickness of adsorption
layers on particles of various sizes can be diﬀerent. Under certain conditions, an L(Ri)
dependence can appear. Moreover, taking into account diﬀerences in the composition of
the dispersion medium and the type of stabilizer molecules, various types of colloids can
be characterized by the strictly individual pattern of this function. As will be shown
further, this can be one of the very reasons for the diﬀerences in the adsorption spectra
of some silver hydrosols (with account for diﬀerences in the FPSD for the metallic core)
represented, for example, in [1, 42].

The reason for the diﬀerences in the adsorptivity of particles (including the adsorp-
tiviity with respect to surfactant or polymer molecules) can be related, in particular, to
the presence of the defects (vacancies) of a crystalline lattice at the real particle surface.
This leads to the appearance of local regions with a nonequilibrium value of the electric
potential at the particle surface and, consequently, to the selectivity of various parts of
the surface with respect to the electrostatic interaction with molecules of the adsorption
layer. Therefore, in the process of adsorption, only those parts of a particle surface that
are located near the vacancies being the adsorption sites are ﬁrst occupied [46, 47]. The
adsorptivity of a particle as a whole will depend on the surface density of vacancies, includ-
ing those that arise in the process of self-induced adsorption [46]. As was demonstrated
in this work, the number of such vacancies can surpass the number of equilibrium surface

19

vacancies by many orders of magnitude. The dependence of vacancy concentration on
the particle size Cv(Ri), which rises exponentially with a decrease in Ri, was revealed in
[46] for small particles. Given what has been said above, the most probable distances be-
tween pairs of particles in aggregates will generally correspond to the maximum of FPSD,
F max(Ri) = F (Rm0), where F (Ri) = f (Ri)L(Ri). It is this function that will aﬀect the
most probable values of the frequency shifts which, within the framework of the binary
model with allowance for known constraints of this approximation, are described by the
expression

(∆ωm0)i ∝ (2Rm0)−3
ij .

(4.2)

However, the problem of the eﬀect of the surfactant/polymer-component of the adsorption
layer on the pattern of particle packing in fractal aggregates, and hence on the spectral
features of these aggregates, can be solved by experimental studies of the thickness of ad-
sorption layers using electron microscopy. In this case, a number of complexities related
to the preparation of microscopic samples can arise. This will require special techniques,
because the dehydration of surfactant/polymer molecules can be accompanied by a vari-
ation in molecular volumes and, correspondingly, by a decrease in the initial thickness of
an adsorption layer in the vacuum chamber of an electron microscope.

Hence, in accordance with the above discussion, one can state that, in the forma-
tion of the contour of the long-wavelength wing of the absorption spectrum, two factors
are manifested: (1) on the one hand, spatial disordering and local anisotropy of fractal
aggregates, which takes place in any type of sol, irrespective of the pattern of the distri-
bution function, and generally speciﬁes a monotonic decay of absorption with increasing
in wavelength; and, (2) on the other hand, the existence of a dominating particle size in
a real polydisperse colloid. The introduction of FPSD with a selected maximum into the
equations of the theory of OPFC leads to a violation of the monotonicity in the bound-
aries of the long-wavelength wing of the absorption spectrum of a fractal aggregate. To
solve this problem, it is necessary only to determine the conditions which, in a certain size
range, can result (via the mediated eﬀect on the aggregate structure) in the appearance of
an additional low-frequency maximum in the absorption spectrum of a fractal aggregate,
provided that the dominant particle size in some types of metal sols is taken into account.

4.4 Analysis of calculated spectral dependencies

While calculating the absorption spectra of fractal aggregates, we took into account the
results of [32], where important reﬁnement was introduced into the theory of OPFC for
the calculation of linear optical spectra. This reﬁnement is related to the allowance for
the real particle sizes, and accordingly, to the anisotropic ﬁelds of oscillating dipoles
induced on interacting particles. According to this work, the value of spectral broadening
observed in real fractal aggregates should correspond to shorter interparticle distances
than the least possible distances conﬁned to the condition of sphere contact. This implies
that, to adequately describe the spectrum of real fractal aggregate consisting of contacting
particles, it is necessary to assume that the particle size used in the calculations should
be smaller than the experimental size by the correction coeﬃcient whose average value
is equal to K ≈ 1.65 (by the data of various authors).
In this case, the account for

20

this correction is nothing other than the procedure of renormalization drawing together
calculated spectra with a given value of particle sizes and experimental dependencies.

Figure 8: Simulation of 3-D coagulation in the ensemble of 50 monodisperse silver par-
ticles with a diameter of 20 nm (upper) and the calculated corresponding evolution of
spectral dependencies of the imaginary part of their linear optical susceptibility (absorp-
tion spectra)(lower).

Figure 8 illustrates the results of calculations of the wavelength dependence of the
imaginary part of the linear optical susceptibility of an aggregating particle ensemble
corresponding to its absorption spectrum (for the case of a monodisperse sol). Hereafter,
we adhere to the terminology introduced in [13] where Im χ(ω) appears as an absorption
spectrum. (The absorption cross-section diﬀers from this value only by a trivial factor
of 4πk.) Figure 8 shows the regularities of the spectrum evolution at various stages
of particle aggregation (curves 1-4). The formation of the second spectral maximum is
already observed at the intermediate stages of aggregation. When comparing this set of
curves with the experimental results (Fig. 4), attention should be given to the obvious
qualitative similarity of these dependencies.

Figure 9 represents the absorption spectra of fractal aggregates formed from particles of
identical sizes. In the obtained set of curves, the spectrum pattern is studied as a function
of particle size. These sizes correspond to the following minimal values of distances
between the nearest particles: Rij = 11, 12, 13, 14 nm. With allowance for the coeﬃcient
K, this corresponds to the particle sizes of 2Rm = 18.2, 20, 21.6, 23.1 nm. As seen from the
ﬁgures, in accordance with the expressions (4.1) and (4.2), clear correlation between the
value of 2Rm, and the position of the long-wavelength spectral maximum ω2 is observed.

21

Figure 9: Variations in the absorption spectra of fractal aggregates formed from monodis-
perse particles as a function of their sizes (2Rm): (1) 18.2, (2) 19.8, (3) 21.6, (4) 23.1
nm.

Hence, the smaller the particle size, the stronger the secondary maximum is shifted. A
gradual decrease in its contrast is also observed. The following important fact should be
if the dominant particle size in an aggregate becomes smaller than 15 − 18
mentioned:
nm, the secondary maximum completely shifts beyond the boundary of the optical range
If the characteristic particle
and has no further signiﬁcant inﬂuence on colloid color.
size exceeds 25 − 30 nm, the position of a secondary maximum appears to be too close
to the principal maximum (λr) and gradually vanishes into the background of the long-
wavelength wing of the principal spectral maximum with an increase in particle size. In
this case, color changes can only be attributed, as in the case of 2Rm < 15 − 18 nm,
to a monotonic rise in the absorption in the region of the long-wavelength wing. Note,
however, that results shown in Fig. 9 are only valid for ideal monodisperse colloids, which
is physically an unreal case. However, this does not mean that particles with the sizes
larger than 30 nm do not contribute to the spectrum broadening. A contribution can also
be made by larger particles if they comprise interacting pairs including small particles.
However, the distance between the particle centers of such a pair should fall within the
range of Rij shown in Fig. 1 (with account for the factor K), although it is evident
that the number of such pairs, and hence their spectral contribution, is insigniﬁcant
compared to the particles of dominant size. Thus, the fundamentally important result of
these calculations is the fact that the revealed speciﬁc features of absorption spectra of
aggregated colloids can only be exhibited within a rather narrow range of particle sizes.
Figure 10 shows the results of the calculations of absorption spectra of aggregates
formed for various values of the homogeneous width (∆λ) of the absorption spectrum of
comprising particles. These results solve the problem of why there is a decrease in the
contrast of the secondary maximum in the spectrum. As is seen from these dependencies,
statistical oscillations appear in the spectrum of fractal aggregates at ∆λ values of up to
50 nm (below minimal values observed in the experiment). These oscillations disappear
at ∆λ = 90 − 100 nm. Values of the spectral width of the surface plasmon of silver
hydrosols with zero-degree aggregation [37] not larger than 90 nm were observed in [42].
However, the ∆λ values can be slightly larger in some hydrosols. This can be related,
ﬁrstly, to spectral broadening due to the presence of a some fraction of small particles
with large values of homogeneous width (see formula (1.1)) and, secondly, to the presence

22

Figure 10: Absorption spectra of silver fractal aggregates at various values of the ho-
mogeneous width of absorption spectrum (∆λ) attributed to the particles comprising an
aggregate: (1) 50, (2) 80, (3) 100, (4) 120, and (5) 150 nm.

of microscopic aggregates composed of several particles that already exhibit the eﬀect of
spectral broadening resulting from their interaction. In addition, a certain polydispersity
of the sol, even in the range of small particles, can be one of the reasons for the presence of
a slight dispersion of the ”resonant” frequency ωr [5, 6] and, hence, of some inhomogeneous
spectral broadening due to the existence of the weak ωr(Ri) dependence in this range.
Finally, it is necessary to take also into account some nonsphericity of a small particle
fraction, which can result in the shift of resonances depending on the particle shape [5, 6].
Note that the presence of oscillations in the obtained spectral dependences at ∆λ = 80 nm,
varying in the range of experimental values of the homogeneous width of an absorption
spectrum for some types of silver colloids [42], can also be explained by the restriction
imposed in the calculations for the number of particles being 50 in a fractal aggregate.
As a result, the number of statistical averagings seems to be insuﬃcient for calculating
the spectral curve with a narrow homogeneous bandwidth.

Studies of the absorption spectra of polydisperse ensembles of particles with the FPSD
close to a real distribution [9] are of the most practical interest in this work. Figure
11a demonstrates absorption spectra of a polydisperse ensemble of particles (∆λ = 100
nm) with various types of FPSD. As was demonstrated in preliminary calculations, the
spectral dependence turned out to be extremely sensitive to the form of FPSD. Therefore,
we passed from the monodisperse to polydisperse cases in two stages. At the ﬁrst stage,
to the particles of a speciﬁed size (2Rm = 21 nm) whose aggregate spectral position of
secondary maximum corresponds to the experimental data (λ2 = 600 − 620 nm), larger
particles were gradually added, which eventually provides for the similarity of this wing
of FPSD with the F (2Ri) [9] of a real sol. As seen from the set of curves obtained, the

23

Figure 11: Absorption spectra of fractal aggregates of a polydisperse ensemble of particles
with the homogeneous absorption spectrum of an isolated single particle ∆λ = 100 nm
but for diﬀerent distributions of the particles over their sizes. (a) The variation in the
distribution is performed by adding larger particles to particles of the same size of 2Ri
= 21 nm (N is the number of particles). (b) A polydisperse sol is prepared by adding
smaller particles to a monodisperse system with 2Ri = 21 nm. (c) A polydisperse sol
is prepared by adding smaller particles to a polydisperse sol containing larger particles,
corresponding to the statistical distribution in the initial polidisperse sol in the case 5
depicted in part (a) above. The plot (c) displays the conservation of the contrast of the
secondary maximum in a spectrum, which is combined with a signiﬁcant shift of this
maximum to the long-wavelength range.

common general feature is the shift of the secondary maximum to the principal one upon
the addition of larger particles to the system.

However, the largest sensitivity of the absorption spectra to the variation in FPSD
while passing to polydisperse systems is observed for the appearance of small particles in
a system. Figure 11b represents the set of curves obtained upon the gradual addition of
smaller particles to a monodisperse system (2Rm = 21 nm), providing for the monotonic

24

decay of the FPSD wing. As seen from these results, the regularity is exhibited in the
shift of the secondary maximum to the long-wavelength range and in a decrease in its
contrast. The latter is due to the broadening of the low-frequency spectral peak (Fig.
1) with a decrease in the distance between the pair of interacting particles brought into
contact. In turn, a decrease in the interparticle distance is explained by a corresponding
decrease in particle sizes.

Finally, Fig. 11c demonstrates the set of curves obtained upon adding small particles
to a polydisperse sol containing only large particles (FPSD corresponds to case 5 in Fig.
11a when the condition of the preservation of the contrast of the secondary maximum
in a spectrum is accompanied by the largest shift of a maximum to the long-wavelength
range). As seen from Fig. 11c, the gradual addition of small particles to the system leads
to the shift of the secondary maximum to the long-wavelength range and simultaneously
to a decrease in its contrast. We see that curve 4 best corresponds to the experimental
results. Note the asymmetric pattern of FPSD corresponding to some deﬁciency of small
particles, which also correlates with the experimental data [9]. In the spectrum of the
fractal aggregate obtained for asymmetric FPSD (Fig. 11c, case 5), the contrast of the
secondary maximum falls sharply. A common tendency is that the appearance of an
excess number of small particles in an ensemble results in the gradual disappearance of
the secondary maximum in the spectrum; in this case, the long-wavelength wing of the
absorption spectrum of such colloids is described by a smooth monotonic dependence.

Hence, results of these calculations are important, because the long-wavelength maxi-
mum can be most clearly pronounced at the least possible width of FPSD. Evidently, the
greater the FPSD width, especially with an excess of small particles, the more blurred the
secondary maximum becomes. This feature can explain the absence of the secondary long-
wavelength maximum in the absorption spectra of silver hydrosols prepared by reducing
silver nitrate with NaBH4 (Fig. 4, curve 5) [9, 43]. The absence of a surfactant/polymer
component in the adsorption layer composed of particles of these silver colloids stabilized
by electrostatic interactions results in the average eﬀective particle size and, correspond-
ingly, average interparticle distances in aggregates becoming smaller than in the aggregates
of collargol-based colloidal silver [1, 42], even if the FPSDs of these colloids with respect
to metallic core are similar.

Figure 12 shows calculated dependences of absorption spectra of polydisperse fractal
aggregates (with identical FPSD proﬁles) on the position of the maximum of this function.
As seen from this ﬁgure, the common tendency is manifested in the shift of the secondary
maximum into the long-wavelength range upon the displacement of the FPSD maximum
towards smaller sizes, which is also attributed to the prevailing contribution of small
particles. It is of some interest to compare these results with the data shown in Fig. 9
for a similar dependence for monodisperse sols. As seen from comparing these ﬁgures,
the colloid polydispersity results in that spectral dependences, whose secondary maximum
positions are similar, are already observed at the values of the FPSD maxima that slightly
exceed the corresponding sizes of particles comprising monodisperse fractal aggregates.

Figure 13 demonstrates the evolution of an absorption spectrum of a polydisperse
ensemble of particles with the FPSD pattern maximally close to the real one (2Rm = 23.1
nm). A comparison with Fig. 10 representing analogous dependences, however for a
monodisperse ensemble of particles (2Rm = 20 nm), reveals their qualitative similarity.

25

Figure 12: Dependence of the absorption spectra of fractal aggregates of polydisperse
silver sols, having identical size-distribution proﬁles, on the position of the distribution
maximum, 2Rm: (1) 16.5, (2) 18.2, (3) 19.8, (4) 21.5, (5) 23.1, (6) 24.8, (7) 26.4, (8) 28
nm.

Figure 13: Absorption spectrum of a polydisperse ensemble of silver particles with maxi-
mum size-distribution at Rm = 23.1 nm (corresponding to the case 5 in Fig. 12). Curves
1 - 4 display the spectrum evolution at various stages of the aggregation process (cf. Figs.
4 and 8).

In this work, we attempted to ﬁnd out why the principal maximum in the absorption
spectra of some strongly-aggregated real colloids is close (or almost coincides) to this
maximum (Fig. 4), whereas the results of calculations indicate a certain shift towards a

26

long-wavelength range. It was shown in this work, one of the reasons for this situation
can be the presence of some amount of isolated particles, which are not included within
fractal aggregates.

Figure 14: Variation in the absorption spectra of an ensemble containing fractal aggregates
and an additional small fraction f of free isolated particles as a function of the value of
this fraction: (1) spectrum of isolated particles. (2 - 6) spectra of the fractal aggregate
composed of 50 particles in the presence of free particles at f = 1/10, 1/12.5, 1/17, 1/25,
1/50, respectively.

Figure 14 demonstrates the variation in absorption spectra of a particle ensemble
containing fractal aggregates and an additional small fraction of isolated particles as a
function of the value of this fraction. As shown from the presented set of curves, the
spectrum of such an ensemble becomes very sensitive to the presence of even a small
amount of free particles. The addition of 1/50 to 1/10 parts of free particles (in relation
to the number of particles comprising a fractal aggregate) leads to a gradual shift of
the principal spectral maximum towards the long-wavelength range. This fact underlines
the resemblance of these curves to the experimental dependencies. However, a gradual
reduction in the contrast of a secondary maximum is observed in this case.

Spectral dependencies obtained in this work, along with data on the FPSD [9] and the
absorption spectra of aggregated silver colloids, present a unique opportunity to quanti-
tatively compare current experimental data with the results of calculations performed by
the proposed procedure.

Figure 15 shows the absorption spectra of real silver colloids with corresponding FPSD
[9], and the results of calculations of these spectra based on the theory of OPFC with
the FPSD are closest to those reported in [9] (2Rm = 16 − 17 nm). As is seen from
the comparison of these data, the most similar pattern of spectra, when the position
of a low-energy maximum coincides with its experimental value, is accomplished for the
FPSD with particle sizes somewhat larger (2Rm ≈ 21 nm) than those reported in [9]. The
revealed diﬀerence is explained by the fact that, during the study of the FPSD, Heard
et al.
[9] only took into account the size of the metallic core of particles. Meanwhile,
the polar surfactant was used to increase the aggregation stability of colloids to some
extent. We believe that, to explain the discrepancy between these results, we should take

27

Figure 15: Observed and calculated absorption spectra of silver hydrosols. (a) Observed
absorption spectra at (1) the initial and (2) developed stages of aggregation [9] and corre-
sponding size-distribution function; (b) Based on the general theory of OPFC, calculated
absorption spectra for the size-distribution function similar to that reported in [9]. In the
case of (a), Di is the diameter of the metallic core of the particles.

into account the speculations reported in Sec. 4.2 and, in particular, expression (4.2).
Hence, the discrepancy indicated can be explained by the fact that the adsorption layer
of this colloid contains a surfactant. This should result in an increase in the eﬀective
size of particles comprising the aggregates, in a slight variation in the FPSD pattern
reported in this work and, hence, in the average distances between the nearest particles
and, consequently, in the spectrum patterns. Let us take advantage of the data on the
thickness L of the adsorption layers of the particles of aggregated sols of some preparations
of colloidal silver [42], as well as on the microimages of fractal aggregates [9, 42], in order
to estimate L by the value of the spacings between the nearest particles in the aggregate.
On average, these values are equal to 24 nm (with no correction for the dehydration
of surfactant/polymer molecules). This implies that the particle diameter used in the
calculations should be increased by at least 2 − 4 nm (without accounting for the L(2Ri)
function).

All the calculated dependencies of the absorption spectra mentioned above (Figs. 1, 8-

28

15) were obtained within the framework of a two-level model describing the particle dipole
polarizability [see formula (3.12)]. Figure 14 shows the set of curves of the absorption
spectra of aggregated colloids, which was obtained using a full-length expression for the
dipole polarizability with allowance for the spectral dependence of the permittivity of
the particles comprising the matter and the permittivity of the dispersion medium. This
dependence was accounted for within the framework of the Drude model [see formulae
(3.14-3.17)]. This allows us to estimate the role of this factor in the formation of the
absorption contour of an aggregating colloid. The values of speciﬁc parameters of these
formulas can be taken, for example, from [32, 33]: ǫ0 =6 and ¯hωp = 9.1 eV (λp = 136.1
nm). However, the value of the damping constant (Γ) used in our calculations corresponds
to the experimental value of the spectral width of plasmon resonance at the half-height
(∆λ = 100 nm) in collargol-based non-aggregated Ag hydrosols. Calculations of the
spectra within the framework of a two-level model were performed for the same value of
Γ. Variations in this parameter lead to results similar to those represented in Fig. 10.
While performing the calculations represented in Fig. 16, we used the same pattern of

Figure 16: Absorption spectra of fractal aggregates simulated by using the expression for
the particle dipole polarizability, which accounts for the spectral dependence of a metal
permittivity (the approximation of the Drude model). The size distribution corresponds
to 2Rm of (1) 18.2, (2) 23.1, (3) 26.4 nm (see the similar curves 2, 5, and 7 in Fig. 12),
and (4) spectrum of isolated particles.

FPSD, as for the plots shown in Fig. 12 (with a two-level model). When comparing
the set of curves, we observed the resemblance and conservation of the main spectral
features in the optical range. The appearance of a secondary maximum in these spectra
also conﬁrms the version of its statistical origin, and it further explains why this feature
cannot account for the spectral behavior of the optical constants of silver, because only
monotonic variations in these parameters are observed in the optical range [48]. The
results obtained verify the use of the approximation of a two-level model to describe the
particle dipole polarizability during the calculations of the absorption spectra of silver
colloids. This approximation allows us to successfully monitor the evolution of sol spectra,
with an account for the contribution of only one selected resonance in the absence of other

29

close resonances, which is directly applicable to silver sols in view of their spectral features.
A further increase in the accuracy of the calculations of the optical spectra of colloids
and their ﬁt to experimental results is determined by the account for such factors as
the contribution of the inter-band transitions to the dipole polarizability of particles, the
real spectral dependence of optical constants for the comprising particles and their size
dependence, the real thickness of the adsorption layers L(Ri), as well as for scattering
eﬀects and for some other factors. It is worth noting that the possibility of applying the
theory of OPFC to interpret absorption spectra of silver hydrosols is mentioned in [42].
Note also that the spectral regularities revealed in this work are virtually independent
of the mechanism of aggregation and the presence of an electric charge on the particles.
The average values of the fractal dimension of generated aggregates, for which the calcu-
lations of optical spectra were performed, fall within the range 1.65 − 1.78, and thus only
slightly aﬀect the pattern of the spectral contour. The spectral regularities are indepen-
dent of the number of aggregating particles that was found when increasing this number
by tenfold.

4.5 Spectral determination of the aggregation degree

Here we employ the concept that the structural and optical properties of fractal aggregates
correlate strongly. Hence, we can propose a new method for determining the aggregation
state of the colloids. It can be widely used as an indirect express-method for monitoring
of the aggregation state.

To describe quantitatively the degree of aggregation for silver hydrosol on the basis
of the pattern of its absorption spectrum ε(λ) (Fig. 17), we introduce the following
parameter (hereafter called the degree of aggregation): A = Ap/A0, where Ap = ∆S/ε0.
Here ∆S is diﬀerence of the areas below the absorption proﬁles for aggregated and non-
aggregated sols in that part of the long-wavelength range where the ﬁrst exceeds the
second, and ε0 is absorption coeﬃcient in the range of unshifted plasmon resonance for
the aggregated colloid. The latter parameter is introduced into the formula in order to
account for a possible decrease in the concentration of the dispersed phase of a colloid
due to the partial deposition of the latter onto the vessel walls. This eﬀect may cause
no change in the shape of the spectral curve, and its magnitude may vary for diﬀerent
samples. The parameter A0 is the normalizing factor, which is equal to the degree of
hydrosol aggregation immediately before or after precipitation when the phases separated
are subjected to forced stirring. This factor is equal to the maximal possible value of Ap
for the particular type of hydrosol considered (Fig. 17, curve 3, which corresponds to
the maximal degree of aggregation). Normalization to A0 is required in order to bring
the value of A closer to unity for the media with strong aggregation. In addition, such
normalization makes the mentioned deﬁnition of the degree of aggregation, to a certain
degree, universal with respect to diﬀerent types of hydrosols.

Practically, calculations can be done with the aid of equation, Ap = P

n
i=1 ∆εi/nε0,
where n is the number of points selected to break the λ-axis into equidistant segments
in the region where the absorption of the aggregated medium (curve 2) exceeds the ab-
sorption of the medium containing the isolated particles (curve 1); ∆εi is the diﬀerence
between the absorption coeﬃcients for curves 1 and 2 at the ith point (i = 1, 2, ... n);

30

and ε0 is the absorption coeﬃcient for curve 2 in the region of the unshifted plasmon res-
onance. Evidently, A is calculated with an accuracy depending on the selected number of

Figure 17: Speciﬁc features of the absorption spectra ε(λ) of silver hydrosols at a speciﬁc
degree of aggregation A: (1) A = 0 - hydrosol with isolated particles; (2) A = 0.8 -
intermediate stage of aggregation when a signiﬁcant fraction of particles is combined into
fractal aggregates; and (3) A = 1 - all the particles are combined into fractal aggregates.

points n. In fact, we propose to deﬁne A as the diﬀerence between the deﬁnite integrals
taken over the functions describing curves 2 and 1 at approximately λ > 440 nm.
In
particular, the value of A corresponding to curve 2 (Fig. 17) is equal to 0.8 at n = 8. The
correctness of the method proposed to determine the degree of aggregation A from the
spectral broadening can be veriﬁed by the numerical simulation of particle aggregation
under random-walk conditions while simultaneously calculating the optical spectra of the
forming aggregates on the basis of the equations from Section 3 and using these spectra
for evaluating A. With this, one can perform a comparative analysis of the time variations
of various parameters characterizing the degree of aggregation in the system of particles.
Such parameters can be introduced in diﬀerent ways. In particular, the kinetic theory by
Smoluchowski implies that the degree of aggregation is a quantity inversely proportional
to the total number of all the particles that appear in the coagulated system (ν−1
)(see,
e.g., [7]).

0

The parameter ν0 accounts for both the isolate particles and associations of two or
more particles. It is related to the initial number of isolated particles ν by the expression
ν0 = ν/(1 + t/t0), where t0 is the time required for ν0 to decrease to the value ν/2.
The ν−1
0 ∝ t dependence corresponding to this expression holds in the time interval
0 < t < t0 during spontaneous Brownian aggregation of the particles. This result was
repeatedly supported by experiments. Hence, if our approach to use the spectral data for
determining the degree of aggregation is correct, then both the parameters A(t) and ν−1
0 (t)
should identically describe the aggregation kinetics, and the product Aν0 should remain
constant during aggregation in the time interval 0 < t < t0 (at A ≥ 0.1). Figure 18a
represents the time dependence of the Aν0 product. This dependence was calculated by
the 3-D simulation of spontaneous Brownian aggregation of ﬁfty particles, whose optical
and geometrical properties corresponded to the particles of the silver hydrosols examined.

31

Figure 18: Time dependence of (a) the degree of aggregation (according to the spectral
data) multiplied by the total number of all particles in the system (including the composite
ones) Aν0 for the process of spontaneous aggregation of 50 particles in the time period
restricted by the condition 50 > ν0 > 25 (numerical simulation) and (b) the degree of
aggregation A at 50 > ν0 > 1 (the same model)

We see that, within the statistical scatter, the value of Aν0 is constant at 0 < t < t0. This
fact supports the correctness of our method of determining the degree of aggregation and
indicates that the parameter mentioned describes adequately the state of the dispersed
phase of the colloid. According to Fig. 18b, the A(t) dependence (which describes the
aggregation kinetics by the simplest model of Brownian motion) is almost linear in the
time interval 0 < t < t0. However, the aggregation rate then decreases with time due
to the formation of large aggregates and the decrease in their mobility (this eﬀect may
disagree with the experimental results because all physical factors are ignored in this
model except for the kinetic one).

Of course, the proposed deﬁnition of the degree of aggregation is somewhat arbitrary,
and one must account for the speciﬁc features of diﬀerent types of colloids in each par-
ticular case. Note that the parameter A reﬂects not only the fraction of isolated particles
forming the fractal aggregates, but also the particle packing density in these aggregates,
which depends on the speciﬁc features of the structure of the adsorption layer on particles

32

and is individually determined for each particular type of sol. We should also note that
the approach proposed to describe the degree of aggregation is valid only for the disperse
systems in which absorption prevails to a large degree over scattering.

5 CONCLUSION

The main results of the work are summarized as follows.

1.

It is shown that the eﬀect of the particle size on the optical spectra of unsta-
ble aggregating silver colloids is much more pronounced according the theory of optical
properties of the fractal clusters (OPFC) than in the Mie theory with an account for the
diﬀerences in the physical mechanisms of this eﬀect. The application of the Mie theory
leads to qualitative discrepancies between the calculated dependences and experimental
data in the range of small particle sizes. The main spectral changes that are observed
in typical silver colloids are explained by the theory of OPFC, even without an account
for the eﬀects predicted by the Mie theory. The eﬀect of dispersion of the particle size
within the interval 5 − 30 nm on the optical properties of the polydisperse sols, which is
the subject of the Mie theory, is not that considerable. Indeed, the calculated shift of the
resonance wavelength ∆λr(2Ri) within the size interval 2Ri = 5 − 30 nm makes up only
15 nm, whereas the shift detected in the aggregated silver hydrosol, with such particle
sizes, is larger than 400 nm.

2. An adequate description of the evolution of the optical absorption spectra of typical
aggregating Ag sols, with the aggregating particle sizes in the range of 5 − 30 nm, is not
possible without account for their dipole-dipole interaction. This is the main origin of the
considerable spectral broadening, especially for the colloidal structures with the fractal
geometry. Indeed, the distance between geometrical centers of the nearest particles inside
the aggregates is the parameter of the crucial importance for the OPFC theory. The main
reason for the signiﬁcant broadening of the absorption spectra of typical silver colloids
(particle size 5 − 30 nm) is the assembling of particles of the dispersed phase into fractal
aggregates. There exists a clear and strong correlation between the degree of particle
aggregation and the aggregate structure on the one hand and the shape of optical spectra
on the other hand.

3. The shape of the absorption spectrum of the sole in the developed stage of aggrega-
tion is strongly dependent on the distribution of the aggregate-comprising particles over
their sizes. Indeed, individual features of absorption spectra of various silver colloids are
explained by the diﬀerences in the form of this function, with account for both the sizes
of the metallic core of particles and the thickness of the ionic and polymer component of
their adsorption layers.

4. According to the OPFC theory, the aggregation of Ag particles into fractal struc-
tures gives rise to a giant broadening of the long-wavelength wing of the absorption spectra
which may become commensurable with the magnitude of the resonant frequency itself.
Corresponding shifts of the resonance are attributed to a relatively narrow range of the
distances between the particles, while minimum possible magnitudes of these distances,
rmin
ij = Ri + Rj, are determined by the sizes of the aggregating particles, 2Ri and 2Rj.
The OPFC theory predicts a strong (power) dependence of the frequency shift on the in-
verse particle size, i.e., ∆ωr ∝ (Ri + Rj)−3, whereas the Mie theory predicts a near-linear

33

dependence on this size for the Ag sols (at least in the size interval 2Ri = 20 − 100 nm,
with no signiﬁcant deviation from this dependence in the interval 5 − 20 nm). Therefore,
the Mie theory predicts a qualitatively diﬀerent (inverse) dependence as compared with
the OPFC theory.

5. The appearance of an additional maximum in the long-wavelength wing of the
absorption spectra of some colloids occurring at the stage of developed aggregation has
no relationship to the displayed and exhibition of collective optical resonance of a speciﬁc
nature, which is unrelated to the excitation of the surface plasmon. The appearance
of this maximum is attributed to the existence of the statistically-dominating values of
geometrical parameters in an ensemble: particle size 2Rm and distances (Ri +Rj) between
contacting neighbor particles in aggregates corresponding to this size. This results in an
increase in the spectral density of the surface plasmon resonances within a certain range
of wavelengths. In this case, this spectral feature is exhibited in sols with a suﬃciently
narrow (5 − 25 nm) range of eﬀective particle sizes.

6. The position and shape of the secondary maximum in the absorption spectrum
are determined by the value of the dominant distances between neighboring particles in
aggregates, which depend on 2Rm. The lower the degree of sol polydispersity, the higher is
the contrast of the secondary spectral maximum. The contrast of this maximum decreases
with the increase of the homogeneous absorption spectral width by the isolated particles.
Furthermore, even a small (1/50 − 1/10) fraction of non-aggregated particles decreases
the contrast.

7. The absence of two maxima in the absorption spectra of some silver colloids can be
explained by the presence of an excess number of small particles in a colloid (with account
for the thickness of their adsorption layer) and its strong polydispersity, thus resulting in
a sharp decrease in the contrast of the secondary spectral maximum.

8.

In general, two factors play an important role in the formation of the long-
wavelength absorption spectral wing: fractal geometry of the aggregates, which determines
the monotonic decrease of absorption with increase of wavelength, and the existence of
the dominant particle size in the polydisperse mixture of the aggregate-comprising par-
ticles, which leads to breaking such monotonic dependence and to the appearance of the
additional spectral maximum.

9. The concepts presented in this work remain valid not only for silver colloids, but can
also be extended to colloids of other metals, including gold, with an account for spectral
dependencies of its optical constants.

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to V. P. Safonov and V. M. Shalaev for useful discussions related
with this research. AKP and TFG thank the U. S. National Research Council - Na-
tional Academy of Sciences for support of this research in part through the International
Collaboration in Basic Science and Engineering program.

34

References

199.

[1] Karpov S.V., Popov A.K., Slabko V.V., et al., Colloid J., 1995, vol. 57, no. 2, p.

[2] Mie G., Ann. Phys., 1908, vol. 25, p. 377.

[3] van de Hulst, H.C., Light Scattering by Small Particles, New York: Wiley, 1957.
Translated under the title Rasseyanie sveta malymi chastitsami, Moscow: Inostran-
naya Literatura, 1961.

[4] Wiegel E., Z.Phys. 1954. vol. 136, p.642.

[5] Skillman D.C. and Berry C.R., J. Opt. Soc. Am. 1973, vol. 63, no. 6, p. 707.

[6] Skillman D.C. and Berry C.R., J. Chem. Phys., 1968, vol. 48. no. 7, p. 3297; Kreibig

U. and Fragstein C.V., Z. Phys., 1969, vol. 224, no. 4, p. 307.

[7] Voyutskii S.S., Textbook of Colloid Chemistry (Kurs kolloidnoi khimii), Moscow:

Khimiya, 1976.

[8] Bohren C.F. and Huﬀman, D.R., Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Par-
ticles, New York: Wiley, 1983. Translated under the title Pogloshchenie i rasseyanie
sveta malymi chastitsami, Moscow: Mir, 1986.

[9] Heard S.M., Griezer F., Barrachlough C.G., and Sanders J.V., J. Colloid. Interface

Sci.. 1983, vol. 93, no. 2, p. 545.

[10] Petrov Yu.L, Clusters and Small Particles (Klastery i malye chastitsy), Moscow:

Nauka, 1986.

[11] Xu M. and Digham M.J., J. Chem. Phys. 1992. vol. 96, no. 5. p. 3370.

[12] Shalaev V.M. and Stockman M.I., Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 1987, vol. 94. p. 107 [Sov.

Phys. JETP 1987, vol. 67, p. 287].

[13] Markel V.A., Muratov L.S., and Stockman M.I., Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 1990, vol.
92, p. 819 [Sov. Phys. JETP 1990, vol. 71, p. 455]; Markel V.A., Muratov L.S.,
Stockman M.I., and George T.F., Phys. Rev. B, 1991, vol. 43, p. 8183.

[14] Zsigmondy R., Kolloidchemie: ein Lehrbuch, Leipzig: O. Spamer, 1925. Translated

under the title Kolloidnava khimiya, Kiev: UNIS, 1931.

[15] Taleb A., Petit C., and Pileni M.P., J. Phys. Chem. B. 1998. vol. 102. no. 12. p.

no. 45, p. 9139.

2214.

p.391.

[16] Lu A.H., Lu G.H., Kessinsjer A.M., and Foss C.A., J. Phys. Chem., 1997, vol. 101,

[17] Bruning J.H. and Lo Y.T., IEEE Trans. Antennas Propog. 1971, vol. AP-19, p. 378,

35

[18] Borgese F., Denti P., Toscano G. and Sindoni O.I., Appl. Opt., 1979. vol. 18. no. 1,

p. 116.

[19] Gerardy J.M. and Ausloos M., Phys. Rev. B., 1982. vol. 25, no. 6. p. 4204.

[20] Mackowski D.W., J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1994, vol. 11, no. 11. p. 2851.

[21] Fuller K., J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1994, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 3251.

[22] Xu Y.-L., Appl. Opt., 1995, vol. 34. no. 21, p. 4573.

[23] Purcell E.M. and Pennypacker C.R., Astrophys. J., 1973, vol. 186, no. 2, p.795.

[24] Ravey J.-C., J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1974, vol. 46, p.139.

[25] Jones A.R., Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A., 1979, vol. 366, p. 111.

[26] Chiapetta P., J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 1980, vol. 13, p. 2101.

[27] Draine B.T., Astrophys. J., 1988, vol. 333, no. 2, p.848.

[28] Draine B.T. and Flatau P.J., J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1994, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 1491.

[29] Lumme K. and Rahola J., Astrophys. J., 1994, vol. 425, p. 653.

[30] De Voe H., J. Chem. Phys., 1964, vol. 41, no. 1, p. 393.

[31] De Voe H., J. Chem. Phys., 1965, vol. 43, no. 9, p. 3199.

[32] Markel V.A., Shalaev V.M., Stechel E.V., et al., Phys. Rev. B., 1996, vol. 53, no.
5, p. 2425; Shalaev V.M., Poliakov E.Y., and Markel V.A., Phys. Rev. B, 1996, vol.
53. no. 5, p. 2437.

[33] Shalaev V.M., Phys. Rep., 1996, vol. 272, p. 61.

[34] Karpov S.V., Popov A.K., Rautian S.G., et al., JETP Lett., 1988, vol. 47, p. 243.

[35] Halperin W.P., Rev. Mod. Phys., 1986, vol. 58, no. 3, p. 533.

[36] Nagaev E.L., Usp. Fiz. Nauk, 1992, vol. 162, no. 9, p. 49.

[37] Karpov S.V., Bas’ko A.L., Koshelev S.V., et al., Colloid J., 1997, vol. 59, no. 6, p.

765.

[38] Karpov S.V., Popov A.K., and Slabko V.V., Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 1997, vol.

66, no. 2, p. 97 [JETP Lett., 1997, vol. 66, no. 2. p.106].

[39] Butenko A.V., Danilova Yu.E., Karpov S.V., et al., Z. Phys. D, 1990, vol. 17, p.283.

[40] Safonov V.P., Shalaev V.M., Markel V.A., Danilova Yu.E., Lepeshkin N.N., Kim

W., and Armstrong R.L., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, vol. 80, no. 5, p. 1102.

36

[41] Karpov S.V., Popov A.K., and Slabko V.V., Izv. RAN (physics), 1996, vol. 60, p.

43.

[42] Danilova Ye.E. and Safonov V.P., Fractal Review in the Natural and Applied Sci-
ences: Proceedings of the Third IFIP Working Conference on Fractals in the Natural
and Applied Sciences, Marseille, 1995, Chapman and Hall, London, 1995, p. 102;
Safonov V.P. and Danilova Yu.E. in Spectral Line Shapes: 12th International Con-
ference on Spectral Line Shapes, Toronto, AIP Conf. Proc., 1994, vol. 8, p. 363.

[43] Creighton J.A., Blatchford C.G., and Albrecht M.G., Trans. Faraday Soc., 1979,

vol. 75, p. 790.

[44] Marton J.P. and Jordan B.D., Phys. Rev. B, 1977, vol. 15, no. 4. p. 1719.

[45] Barykinskii G.M. and Tuzikov F.V., Serebro v meditsine, biologii i tekhnike (Silver
in Medicine, Biology, and Technology), Novosibirsk: Inst. Klinicheskoi Immunologii,
Sib. Otd., Ross. Akad. Med. Nauk, 1996, vol. 5, p. 136.

[46] Gorchakov V.I. and Nagaev E.L., Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR., 1986, vol. 286, no. 27,

p. 339.

vol. 258, no. 4, p. 858.

[47] Lidorenko N.S., Chizhik S.P., Gladkikh N.T., et al. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1981,

[48] Johnson P.B. and Christy R.W., Phys. Rev. B, 1972, vol. 6, no. 12, p. 4370.

37

