3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Novel Photonic Material for Designing Arbitrarily Shaped Waveguides in Two
Dimensions

submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.

Hiroshi Miyazaki,∗ Masashi Hase1, Hideki T. Miyazaki1, Yoichi Kurokawa, and Norio Shinya1
Department of Applied Physics, Tohoku University, Aoba,
Aramaki-aza, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, 980-8579, Japan
National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, 305-0047, Japan
(Dated: December 8, 2013)

1

We investigate numerically optical properties of novel two-dimensional photonic materials where
parallel dielectric rods are randomly placed with the restriction that the distance between rods is
larger than a certain value. A large complete photonic gap (PG) is found when rods have suﬃcient
density and dielectric contrast. Our result shows that neither long-range nor short-range order is
an essential prerequisite to the formation of PGs. A universal principle is proposed for designing
arbitrarily shaped waveguides, where waveguides are fenced with side walls of periodic rods and
surrounded by the novel photonic materials. We observe highly eﬃcient transmission of light for
various waveguides. Due to structural uniformity, the novel photonic materials are best suited for
ﬁlling up the outer region of waveguides of arbitrary shape and dimension comparable with the
wavelength.

PACS numbers: 42.70.Qs, 42.25.Dd, 71.55.Jv

Downsizing is an everlasting dream of researchers in
engineering ﬁeld. Researchers in the ﬁeld of optics are
hoping to ﬁnd a way to fabricate all-optic integrated
circuits by using optical elements comparable with the
wavelength. In fact, realization of miniature-sized optical
waveguides should soon be possible due to the discovery
of photonic crystals (PhCs) [1, 2]. Because of the peri-
odicity of a dielectric constant, PhCs can be designed to
have complete photonic gaps (PGs), range of frequencies
for which light in any direction cannot propagate within
the PhCs. We can steer light through the waveguides
made of PhCs having complete PGs. On the other hand,
the shapes of waveguides should be structurally commen-
surate with the periodicity of the host PhC. This severely
obstructs the realization of arbitrarily shaped waveguides
whose dimension is comparable with the wavelength.

Let us take two-dimensional waveguides of a PhC
composed of periodic dielectric rods, for example. The
waveguides are usually formed by removing rods along a
line. Therefore, they are composed of a set of segments.
Waveguides of 90◦ or 60◦ bends can be easily obtained
from PhCs of square or triangular lattices. For a bend
of an arbitrary angle, however, they become zigzag in
shape and excess scattering occurs at the junctions of
segments. Successive scattering signiﬁcantly reduces the
transmittance of waveguides composed of many branches
and bends. Arbitrarily shaped waveguides, therefore, re-
quire photonic materials of maximum structurally uni-
formity in addition to the complete PGs. In this Letter,
we propose novel photonic materials in which parallel
dielectric rods are randomly placed in a certain region
provided that the distance between the centers of rods is

∗Electronic address: hmiyazak@olive.apph.tohoku.ac.jp

larger than a certain value Dmin:

|Ri − Rj| ≥ Dmin,

(1)

where Ri and Rj are the positions of i-th and j-th rod
center. We call this new photonic material as uniformly
distributed photonic scatterers (UDPS). It is noted that
UDPS have neither long-range nor short-range order.
Nevertheless, we show numerically that UDPS can have
complete PGs if rods have suﬃcient density and dielec-
tric contrast. We also propose a new concept to fab-
ricate arbitrarily shaped waveguides, i. e., we fence the
waveguides with side walls of periodic rods and ﬁll up the
outer region with UDPS. We observe clear propagation
of waveguide modes with large transmittance.

Two examples of UDPS are shown in Figs. 1a and
1b composed of N = 100 and N = 200 rods of radius
a, respectively. Here, we put Dmin = 4.0a. As the ﬁg-
ures show, the distribution of rods becomes more uniform
with increase in rod density. Transmittance of UDPS is
calculated by assuming the incidence of the plane electric
ﬁeld of wavelength λ from the upper side of Fig. 1a or
1b. Incident light is scattered multiply by each rod. This
scattering is treated analytically by solving the Maxwell
equation[3]. The solution gives the distribution of elec-
tric ﬁeld and energy ﬂow (Poynting vector). From the
average energy ﬂow at line L in Fig. 1a or 1b, we cal-
culate the transmittance T normalized by that without
rods. T is a function of normalized frequency Ω = 2πa/λ
(known as size parameter) and becomes very small in the
PG region. In some cases, T exceeds unity because of the
diﬀraction due to the ﬁnite size of UDPS.

Figure 1c shows values of T for UDPS of N = 100,
150, and 200 when the electric ﬁeld E is parallel to the
In all the ﬁgures of this Letter,
rod axis (TM mode).
we ﬁx the dielectric constant of rods at ε = 12 which
corresponds to that of Si at 1.55 µm used world-wide in
optical communications. We found no PG for UDPS of

N = 100 though there were two split dips at Ω = 0.35.
For UDPS of N = 150, we observed a PG of ∆Ω/Ωc =
30%, where Ωc and ∆Ω are the central frequency and
width of the PG, respectively. Here, we deﬁne PG to
be the frequency range continuously below T = 0.01.
This PG, however, is incomplete in that there appear
spiky peaks in the gap region. At these spiky peaks we
found an intrusion of energy ﬂow through cracks (non-
uniform regions) of UDPS. When N becomes 200, PG
grows up to 37% with the suppression of spiky peaks. It
was also veriﬁed that this PG is isotropic and therefore
complete. We also calculated T of UDPS for various ε
with common values of Dmin = 4.0a and area fraction of
rods f = 0.138, and found PG for ε ≥ 5. The presence of
PGs was also conﬁrmed by results of ﬁnite diﬀerence time
domain (FDTD) calculation. Note that the rod radius
becomes 0.11 µm if we correspond Ωc of N = 200 to
λ = 1.55µm. This size can be prepared relatively easily
using recently developed microfabrication technique.

The actual fabrication process inevitably involves cer-
tain ﬂuctuation in rod position ∆x and radius ∆a.
It
is natural to expect from the construction rule of UDPS
that the PG is unaﬀected by ∆x. In contrast, the eﬀect
of ∆a should be investigated. We have also plotted in
Fig. 1c the transmittance of UDPS with ∆a/a = ±20%.
It was conﬁrmed that PG of ∆Ω/Ωc = 30% can survive
such large ﬂuctuation. This means that the PG of UDPS
is also considerably robust against radius ﬂuctuation.

We have observed in Fig. 1 that an increase in rod den-
sity enlarges the PG width. We therefore examined a case
of much higher density. Figure 2a shows one example of
UDPS of Dmin = 2.1a, which includes no radius ﬂuctua-
tion. Two examples of radial distribution functions g(r)
are plotted in Fig. 2b for Dmin = 2.1a, where r is the
distance between rod centers. For uniform distribution in
two dimensions, g(r) is proportional to r without show-
ing any peak. Distributions in Fig. 2b are very similar
to the uniform case. Nevertheless, we ﬁnd three distinct
PGs at Ωc=0.54, 0.93 and 1.34 for the TM mode in Fig.
2c. It is remarkable that the UDPS have such wide PGs
of higher frequencies. If one uses the third PG, rod ra-
dius of 0.33µm is required to utilize λ = 1.55µm. This
facilitates the fabrication signiﬁcantly. We also ﬁnd a PG
of TE mode (E ⊥ rod axis) at Ωc = 0.68.

Before discussing the origin of PGs in UDPS, let us use
UDPS for various waveguides. For this purpose we plot
in Fig. 3 the average transmittance T over ﬁve conﬁgu-
rations of UDPS for three cases of sample thickness with
common Dmin. We can see that PG appears even for
very thin UDPS containing three or four rods along the
direction of light. This indicates that UDPS have wide
applicability to build up waveguides of arbitrary shape
and size comparable with the wavelength.

To make best use of this property, we ﬁrst decide the
shape of a waveguide. It can be twisty, as shown in Fig.
4, to enable maximum ﬂexibility in designing. Waveg-
uides are separated by side walls from the surrounding
medium. To avoid excess scattering from the side walls,

2

they are chosen to be made of periodic rods in a line.
Then, we ﬁll up the outer region with UDPS. It is noted
that UDPS are the best materials for the surrounding
optical medium. PhCs are not suitable for this purpose
because their periodicity conﬂicts with that of side walls.
This mismatch causes non-uniformity of rod density, re-
sulting in excess scattering. This is also the case not only
for quasi-periodic PhCs [4] but also for photonic materi-
als having short-range order [5].

In the waveguides shown below, the density of UDPS
is the same as that in Fig. 1b (N = 200) and radius ﬂuc-
tuation of ∆a/a = ±20% is introduced. Thus, they have
a common PG of 0.366 ≤ Ω ≤ 0.494 shown by the shaded
region in each transmittance. We assume that the TM
mode is incident from the upper side. Figure 4a shows
the distribution of electric ﬁeld intensity in a waveguide
of 90◦ bend. Rods are shown by open circles. The inten-
sity increases from blue to red. Energy ﬂow is shown by
white arrows. Corresponding frequency is indicated by
the arrow in the transmittance in Fig. 4b which shows
relatively large values over a wide range within PG. We
can clearly observe the propagation mode of large trans-
mittance comparable with that of waveguides made of
PhCs. We also found no appreciable change in transmit-
tance for a smaller value of ∆a. Therefore, waveguides of
UDPS have a wide tolerance for the fabrication process.
UDPS are not limited to waveguides composed of seg-
ments. They can also be used for twisty waveguides
whose curvatures are comparable with λ. Figure 4c shows
such an example composed of two quarter circles. The
distribution of electric ﬁeld intensity and energy ﬂow are
shown at the frequency noted by the arrow in the trans-
mittance in Fig. 4d. The rod density and incident light
are the same as those in Fig. 4a. As can be seen in the ﬁg-
ure, the electric ﬁeld ﬂows smoothly downward through
the sample. While the corresponding value of T is not
large (0.739), it can be increased by optimization.

Let us discuss the origin of PGs in UDPS. In a study
concerning eﬀects of disorder on PG, it was found that
there are two kinds of PG, one that is easily smeared
out by disorder and the one that is very robust against
disorder [6]. The former PGs are formed by the coher-
ent interference of scattered waves from periodic rods like
Bragg diﬀraction in X-rays. The latter are formed by the
bonding and anti-bonding states of Mie resonance states
within each rod, similar to the electronic bandgaps in
semiconductors. Since the latter are formed by local in-
teraction, they are not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the ﬂuc-
tuations in position and radius. As a matter of fact, an
isolated dielectric rod of ε = 12 has Mie resonance at
Ω=0.23, 0.66, 1.06, 1.14 and 1.44 for the TM mode and
Ω=0.66, 1.05 and 1.40 for the TE mode. It is likely that
the PG of UDPS is a result of interaction of these modes.
This is also evidenced by the appearance of PG in Fig. 3
for very thin UDPS which is easily understood from the
formation of bonding and anti-bonding states by local
arrangement of rods. An important diﬀerence, however,
exists between electrons and photons in that resonance

3

wavefunctions of photons are not localized exponentially.
Rather, they decay in inverse power and have a long-
range nature. This long-range nature is responsible for
the formation of PGs in UDPS that does not require even
a short-range order.

One might think that UDPS is deeply related with two-
dimensional disordered systems which are used to investi-
gate Anderson localization of light[7]. Let us discuss this
point. In three dimensions, Anderson localization takes
place only when the disorder is strong enough to satisfy
the Ioﬀe-Regel criterion. In contrast, even a very small
amount of disorder is suﬃcient in one and two dimen-
sions to invoke Anderson localization. We have evaluated
the localization length ℓloc in various UDPS samples of
common Dmin = 4.0a and diﬀerent sample thickness ℓ.
We assume the form T = T0 exp(−ℓ/ℓloc), and found
that within the PG region ℓloc is roughly 2a comparable
with the surface distance ℓsurf between nearest neighbor
rods. Note generally that ℓloc ≥ ℓmf p ≥ ℓsurf (usually
ℓloc ≫ ℓmf p), where ℓmf p is the mean free path. There-
fore, it would not be appropriate to conclude that An-
derson localization can explain the observed localization
length within the PGs. In fact, PGs have not been de-
tected in two-dimensional disordered systems which show
localization of light [8]. On the other hand, ℓloc above
PGs is estimated to be 30a − 40a comparable with the
sample thickness. The eﬀect of localization is usually ob-
vious when ℓloc is comparable with or less than the sam-
ple thickness ℓ. Therefore, the thickness dependence of

T outside PG reﬂects the eﬀect of Anderson localization.

There are numerous studies concerning the eﬀect of
disorder such as randomness of radii, positions or di-
electric constants of rods on the PGs [9] and waveguides
made of PhCs [10]. PGs are observed when disorder is
not so strong, but they are obviously vestiges of PGs of
the underlying lattices. In contrast, there is no underly-
ing lattice for UDPS and no peak is observed in radial
distribution functions g(r) as shown in Fig. 2b. The
discovery of UDPS has three important contributions.
Firstly, it gives a conceptual breakthrough of the com-
mon belief that either periodicity or short-range order
is indispensable for the existence of PGs. Secondly, it
enables us to fabricate very easily the wavelength-sized
optical waveguides. Lastly, it unveils a new and powerful
role of well-controlled randomness which can drastically
change the optical feature of photonic materials. There
has been no study, to the authors’ knowledge, to recog-
nize such an active role of randomness in photonic mate-
rials. Future researches of air-hole type UDPS to make
use of TE modes and better design policy to increase
uniformity are needed for further development of UDPS.

This research was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Sci-
entiﬁc Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science, and Technology. One of the authors (H.
M.) expresses his sincere thanks to R. Ohkawa for his con-
tinuous encouragement. We are grateful to K. Ohtaka for
valuable discussions.

[1] J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve, S. Fan, Nature
386, 143 (1997); A. Mekis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,
3787 (1996).

[2] S.-Y. Lin, E. Chow, V. Hietala, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D.

Joannopoulos, Science 282, 274 (1998).

[3] H. A. Yousif, S. Kohler, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 5, 1085

[4] Y. S. Chan, C. T. Chan, Z. Y. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80,

(1988).

956 (1998).

[5] C. Jin, X. Meng, B. Cheng, Z. Li, D. Zhang, Phys. Rev.

B 63, 195107 (2001).

[6] E. Lidorikis, M. M. Sigalas, E. N. Economou, C. M. Souk-

oulis, Phys. Rev. B 61, 13458 (2000).

[7] S. John, in Scattering and localization of classical waves
in random media. P. Sheng, Eds (World Scientiﬁc, Sin-
gapore, 1990), pp. 1-96.

[8] I. Freund, M. Rosenbluh, R. Berkovits, and M. Kaveh,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1214 (1988); R. Dalichaouch, J. P.
Armstrong, S. Schultz, P. M. Platzman, and S. L. Mc-
Call, Nature 354, 53 (1991); M. Rusek and A. Orlowski,
Phys. Rev. E 51, R2763 (1995); M. Rusek, A. Orlowski,
and J. Mostowski, Phys. Rev. E 56, 4892 (1997).

[9] M. M. Sigalas, C. M. Soukoulis, C. -T. Chan, D. Turner,
Phys. Rev. B 53, 8340 (1996); H.-Y. Ryu, J.-K. Hwang,
and Y.-H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 59, 5463 (1999); Z.-Y. Li, X.

Zhang, and Z.-Q. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 61, 15738 (2000);
A. A. Asatryan et al., Phys. Rev. E 60, 6118 (1999); A.
A. Asatryan et al., Phys. Rev. E 62, 5711 (2000).

FIG. 1: Top view of distributions of rods under the condition
Dmin = 4.0a in (a), (b) and Transmittance T in (c). Circles
show rods of radius a and ε = 12 in the rectangular region of
width W = 84.6a and height H = 53.6a within the vacuum.
Total number N and area fraction f of rods are N = 100
and f = 0.069 in (a) and N = 200 and f = 0.138 in (b). The
electric ﬁeld parallel to the rod axis (TM mode) of wavelength
λ is incident from the upper side of (a) or (b). T is calculated
as a function of Ω = 2πa/λ by averaging the energy ﬂow at
line L in (a) or (b). Values of T for three cases of N =100,
150 and 200 are shown in (c). We also plot T for UDPS
with N =200 and radius ﬂuctuation of ∆a/a = ±20%. Each
value of T is the average of 5 diﬀerent conﬁgurations. Central
frequency and width of PG for N =150 are Ωc = 0.398 and
∆Ω = 0.119, respectively. For N =200, Ωc = 0.431 and ∆Ω =
Introduction of ∆a/a = ±20% only reduces ∆Ω to
0.159.
∆Ω = 0.128.

[10] M. Bayindir et al., Phys. Rev. B 64, 195113 (2001).

4

FIG. 2:
(a) Top view of the distribution of rods, (b) two
examples of radial distribution function g(r) and (c) T for
Dmin = 2.1a. Here, N = 200, W = 37.5a and H = 33.3a
(area fraction f = 0.503). No radius ﬂuctuation is introduced.
Horizontal and vertical axes of (b) are the distance r between
rod centers in units of a and its frequency g(r), respectively.
Two spectra indicated by α and β in (c) are transmittance of
the TM mode corresponding to α and β in (b), and the lowest
one is the average transmittance over ﬁve conﬁgurations for
the TE mode (E ⊥ rod axis). Gaps of TM and TE modes
are respectively given by 0.50 ≤ Ω ≤ 0.58, 0.87 ≤ Ω ≤ 0.98,
1.28 ≤ Ω ≤ 1.39 and 0.67 ≤ Ω ≤ 0.69.

FIG. 3: Transmittance T of thin UDPS as a function of
sample thickness ℓ. Rod density and incident light are the
same as in Fig. 1b. No radius ﬂuctuation is introduced. We
show in the inset one example of thin UDPS with ℓ = 20a
deﬁned by outer dotted lines. From this UDPS, two thinner
UDPS are cut out at horizontal lines indicated by α or β,
whose thickness is ℓ = 6.7a or 13.3a. Rods on the cutting
line are included when their centers are above the line. T
of each UDPS is calculated by averaging the energy ﬂow at
line L of width 5.7a and 2.9a below each cutting line. Each
value of T is the average over ﬁve diﬀerent conﬁgurations.
Central frequency and width of PG for ℓ = 13.3a and 20a are
respectively given as Ωc = 0.424, ∆Ω = 0.113 and Ωc = 0.429,
∆Ω = 0.146.

FIG. 4:
(Color). Distributions of electric ﬁeld intensity and
energy ﬂow in various waveguides made of UDPS. Field inten-
sity increases from blue to red, and energy ﬂow is indicated
by the white arrows. Chosen frequencies in (a) and (c) are
shown respectively by the black arrow in (b) and (d) which
show transmittance T obtained at line L. The shaded region
◦
is the PG. A waveguide (a) has 9.5a width and bends by 90
with N = 229, W = 72.0a and H = 81.3a. A waveguide (c)
is composed of two quarter circles with N = 238, W = 106.7a
and H = 53.3a. Outer and inner radii of the circles are ar-
bitrarily chosen as 31.4a and 21.9a, respectively. Maximum
ﬁeld intensity in units of incident light is 15.5 in (a) and 11.9
in (c). In all the cases, density of rods of UDPS is the same
as that in Fig. 1b and radius ﬂuctuation ∆a/a = ±20% is
introduced. Dielectric constant of rods and incident light are
the same as those in Fig. 1.

This figure "PRL_Miyazaki_Fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0301080v1

This figure "PRL_Miyazaki_Fig2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0301080v1

This figure "PRL_Miyazaki_Fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0301080v1

This figure "PRL_Miyazaki_Fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0301080v1

