3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Magnetoelectric Jones Dichroism in Atoms

D. Budker1, 2 and J. E. Stalnaker1, 2
1Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-7300
2Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

The authors suggest that atomic experiments measuring the interference between magnetic-dipole
and electric-ﬁeld-induced electric-dipole transition amplitudes may provide a valuable system to
study magnetoelectric Jones eﬀects.

PACS numbers: 42.25.Lc,32.60.+i

A recent Physical Review Letter [1] reported the ﬁrst
observation of magnetoelectric Jones birefringence in liq-
uids (see also Ref. [2]). This observation helped to clarify
some of the long-standing theoretical confusion surround-
ing Jones birefringence and the associated Jones dichro-
ism (collectively known as Jones eﬀects) [3, 4, 5]. The
interest in further understanding these eﬀects has led to
continued eﬀorts to ﬁnd experimental systems which may
exhibit Jones eﬀects. These include the possibility of ob-
serving the eﬀects through beam divergence in uniaxial
crystals [6] and possible observation in the quantum vac-
uum [7]. Here we point out that Jones dichroism can be
studied in atomic systems under much less severe exper-
imental requirements. In addition, these atomic systems
are more amenable to theoretical analysis than the more
complicated condensed matter systems that have been
studied to date. The simplicity of these systems may
help to expand our understanding of the manifestation
of the Jones eﬀects in more complicated systems. We
also point out that our recent experiment [8] measuring
interference between magnetic-dipole and electric-ﬁeld-
induced electric-dipole transition amplitudes in atomic
ytterbium constitutes a measurement of Jones dichroism
in a simple atomic system.

The development of the Jones matrix calculus for de-
scribing the propagation of light led to the prediction of
two distinct types of linear birefringence and dichroism
[9]. The two types of the eﬀects diﬀer in the orientation of
the birefringent and dichroic axes. The Jones formalism
revealed that certain uniaxial media may exhibit bire-
fringence and dichroism along axes which are at ±45◦
relative to the anisotropy axis. Birefringent and dichroic
eﬀects of this type are known as Jones eﬀects. They are
distinct from the familiar birefringence and dichroism,
which have axes parallel and perpendicular to the axis of
anisotropy.

There has been theoretical discussion concerning the
requirements of the media which may exhibit the Jones
eﬀects and what transition moments must be accounted
In Ref. [5], it was
for in order to describe it [3, 4, 5].
shown that the Jones eﬀect may be induced in isotropic
media by the application of parallel electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds. If the direction of light propagation is per-

pendicular to the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, the Jones
birefringence is given by

∆nJ ≡ n+45◦ − n−45◦ ,

(1)

where n±45◦ is the real part of the index of refraction
for light polarized at ±45◦ relative to the electric and
magnetic ﬁelds. Similarly, there is also an induced Jones
dichroism

∆ΓJ ≡ Γ+45◦ − Γ−45◦ ,

(2)

where Γ±45◦ is the corresponding rate of absorption.

The Jones eﬀects only occur in materials which exhibit
the more familiar birefringence and dichroism. In addi-
tion, the Jones eﬀects are predicted to be signiﬁcantly
smaller than the usual birefringence and dichroism. Con-
sequently, magnetoelectric Jones birefringence has been
observed only recently in molecular liquids under extreme
experimental conditions [1, 2].

To our knowledge, the observation of Jones dichroism
has not been reported as such. Here we point out that
Stark-interference experiments [10] which utilize paral-
lel electric and magnetic ﬁelds provide a simple atomic
system which may exhibit Jones dichroism. Our recent
experiment [8] measuring a highly forbidden magnetic-
dipole transition amplitude in atomic ytterbium using
this technique constitutes such a system and our results
can be interpreted as an observation of magnetoelectric
Jones dichroism.

In the experiment [8], we studied a highly forbidden
transition between states of the same parity. In the ab-
sence of external ﬁelds the transition occurs only through
a weak magnetic-dipole amplitude (≈ 10−4 µB). By ap-
plying a static electric ﬁeld, an electric-dipole amplitude
is induced through mixing of opposite-parity states. An
atomic beam of ytterbium was excited with resonant laser
light propagating perpendicularly to parallel electric and
magnetic ﬁelds. The excitation light was polarized at an
angle θ relative to the external ﬁelds. For the transition
studied in our experiment (between a ground state with
total angular momentum equal to zero and an excited
state with total angular momentum equal to one), the
electric ﬁeld, E, induces an electric-dipole transition am-
plitude to the M ′
J magnetic sublevel of the excited state

given by [10]

A(E1St) = i β (E × ˆε)M ′

,

J

(3)

where ˆε is the direction of the polarization of the laser
light, (E × ˆε)M ′
J spherical component of the
vector, and β is the vector transition polarizability. The
magnetic-dipole transition amplitude is given by

J is the M ′

2

which is the predicted dependence of the magnetoelectric
Jones eﬀects on E and B [5].
z
z

B
B

E
E

q
q

e
e

A(M 1) = µ(ˆk × ˆε)M ′
J ,

(4)

k
k

y
y

where ˆk is the direction of propagation of the excitation
light and µ is the magnetic dipole matrix element be-
tween the ground state and any of the M ′
J magnetic sub-
levels of the excited state. The transition rate is therefore

x
x

Γ ∝ |A(E1St) + A(M 1)|2

∝ |A(E1St)|2 + 2Re(cid:2)A(E1St)A(M 1)

∗

(cid:3) + |A(M 1)|2.
(5)

[8], the interference term is of
As is discussed in Ref.
opposite sign for the M ′
J = +1 and M ′
J = −1 magnetic
sublevels. It is therefore necessary to apply a magnetic
ﬁeld to resolve the diﬀerent sublevels in order to observe
the interference term. The interference term is propor-
tional to the rotational invariant

[(E × ˆε) × (ˆk × ˆε)] · ˆB.

(6)

We isolated the interference term by changing the ex-
ternal electric and magnetic ﬁelds and the polarization
angle. Due to the weakness of the forbidden transition
studied, we determined the transition rate by observing
ﬂuorescence in a decay branch of the excited state rather
than detecting absorption.

To see how this experiment exhibits Jones dichroism
we consider a slightly more general case where we deﬁne
the z axis to be along the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld,
B = B ˆz, and deﬁne the x axis so that the electric ﬁeld
lies in the x-z plane, E = Ex ˆx + Ez ˆz. We assume that
the light propagation is perpendicular to both ﬁelds, k =
k ˆy and that the light is linearly polarized at an angle θ
relative to the magnetic ﬁeld, ˆε = sinθ ˆx + cosθ ˆz (Fig.
1). The |A(E1St)|2 and |A(M 1)|2 terms in Eqn.
(5)
are independent of the angle of polarization while the
interference term changes with θ. Using expression (6) it
is easily shown that the diﬀerence in transition rates for
±θ which is given by

FIG. 1: Orientation of external ﬁelds.

In our experiment the observed Jones dichroism is sig-
niﬁcantly smaller (≈ 5 × 10−3 at the electric ﬁelds used
in the experiment) than the normal dichroism, which, as
can be seen from Eqn.(3), only gives absorption for light
with polarization perpendicular to E. However, this type
of Jones dichroism could be made signiﬁcantly larger by
using an allowed magnetic-dipole transition. Finally, we
point out that Jones birefringence can also be studied in
Stark-interference experiments of this sort using interfer-
ometric techniques.

The authors acknowledge helpful discussions with D.
F. Kimball, A.-T. Nguyen, and A. O. Sushkov. This
work has been supported by NSF, ONR, and the Miller
Institute for Basic Research in Science.

[1] T. Roth and G. L. J. A. Rikken, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

[2] G. L. J. A. Rikken and T. Roth, Physica B 294-295, 1

[3] H. J. Ross, B. S. Sherborne, and G. E. Stedman, J. Phys.

4478 (2001).

(2001).

B, 22, 459 (1989).

[4] N. B. Baranova, Yu. V. Bogdanov, and B. Ya. Zel’dovich,

Sov. Phys. Usp. 20, 870 (1977).

[5] E. B. Graham and R. E. Raab, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A,

390, 73 (1983).

[6] M. Izdebski, W. Kucharczyk, and R. E. Raab, J. Opt.

Soc. Am. A 18, 1393 (2001).

[7] G. L. J. A. Rikken and C. Rizzo, Phys. Rev. A 63, 012107

(2000).

Γ+θ − Γ−θ ∝ Ez sinθ cosθ.

The factor Ez in Eqn. (7) shows that

ΓJ ∝ E · ˆB,

[8] J. E. Stalnaker, D. Budker, D. P. DeMille, S. J. Freed-
man, and V. V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. A 66, 031403
(2002).

[9] R. Clark Jones, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 38, 671 (1948).
[10] M. A. Bouchiat and C. Bouchiat, J. Phys (Paris) 35, 899

(1974); Ibid. 36, 493 (1975).

(7)

(8)

