3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Extreme Outages due to Polarization Mode Dispersion:
Periodic and Quasi-Periodic Compensation Strategies.

Vladimir Chernyaka, Michael Chertkovb, Igor Kolokolovb,c,d, and Vladimir Lebedevb,c
aCorning Inc., SP-DV-02-8, Corning, NY 14831, USA;
bTheoretical Division, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA;
cLandau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Moscow, Kosygina 2, 117334, Russia;
dBudker Institute of Nuclear Physics, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
(Dated: March 16, 2008)

Eﬀect of birefringent disorder on the Bit Error Rate (BER) in an optical ﬁber system subject to
ampliﬁer noise may lead to extreme outages, related to anomalously large values of BER. We analyze
the Probability Distribution Function (PDF) of BER for various strategies of Polarization Mode
Dispersion (PMD) compensation. A compensation method capable of more eﬃcient suppression
of the extreme outages, and thus of an essential enhancement of the ﬁber system performance, is
proposed.

PACS numbers: 42.81.Gs, 78.55.Qr, 05.40.-a

Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD) is an essential
impairment for modern optical ﬁber systems [1, 2, 3] so
that the issue of dynamical PMD compensation became
an important subject in modern communication technol-
ogy [4, 5, 6, 7]. Another impairment that cannot be re-
duced/compensated and thus should also be considered
in any estimation of a ﬁber system performance, is the
noise leftover after ampliﬁcation [8]. BER calculated for
a given birefringent disorder by means of averaging over
the ampliﬁer noise statistics constitutes an appropriate
object to characterize joint eﬀect of the two impairments.
In two preceding letters [9, 10] we have demonstrated
that the probability of extreme outages (values of BER
much higher than typical) is essentially larger than one
could expect from naive Gaussian estimates singling out
eﬀects of either of the two impairments. The natural
object of interest is the PDF of BER and, speciﬁcally,
the PDF tail corresponding to anomalously large BER.
In [9] we developed a consistent theoretical approach to
calculating this tail. The case when no compensation is
applied and also the eﬀect of the simplest “setting the
clock” compensation on the PDF tail suppression have
been discussed in [9]. Then our investigation was ex-
tended to study eﬀect of the standard ﬁrst- and higher-
order compensations on extreme outages [10].
In the
present letter we propose a compensation scheme which
appears to be more eﬃcient in reducing the extreme out-
ages compared to the traditional high-order compensa-
tion scheme with the same number of compensating de-
grees of freedom.

We consider the so-called return-to-zero (RZ) modu-
lation format, when optical pulses are well separated in
time t, and thus can be analyzed as individual objects.
We represent the intensity of a pulse, measured at the
output of the line as

I =

dt G(t) |KΨ (Z, t)|2 ,

(1)

Z

where G(t) is a convolution of the electrical (current) ﬁl-
ter function with the sampling window function. The
two-component complex ﬁeld Ψ (Z, t) describes the out-
put optical signal (the components correspond to two
polarizations of the signal). The linear operator K in Eq.
(1) stands for optical ﬁltering and it may also account for
a compensation. The compensation part of the linear op-
erator, Kc, is applied ﬁrst, i.e. before ﬁltering described
by Kf , thus K = Kf Kc.
Ideally, I takes two distinct
values depending on if the information slot is vacant or
ﬁlled. However, the impairments enforce deviations of
I from those ﬁxed values. If the output signal intensity
exceeds the decision level I0, then “1” is associated with
the slot, otherwise the slot is labeled by “0”. Sometimes
the information is lost, i.e. the initial “1” is detected as
“0” at the output or vise versa. The BER is the probabil-
ity of such events (for given birefringent disorder in the
ﬁber). BER must be extremely small to guarantee suc-
It has been demonstrated
cessful system performance.
in [9] that anomalously high BER originates solely from
the “1 → 0” events. We denote the probability of such
events by B and study its sensitivity to the disorder.

We discuss here the linear regime. Then the out-
put signal Ψ (Z, t) consists of two contributions: ϕ, re-
lated to a noiseless evolution of the initial pulse, and the
noise-induced part φ. We consider either the case of dis-
tributed ampliﬁcation or lumped ampliﬁcation with the
ﬁber length Z essentially exceeding the inter-ampliﬁer
separation (span length) ls. φ appears to be a zero mean
Gaussian variable, completely characterized by

∗
β(Z, t2)i = DξZδαβδ(t1 − t2),
hφα(Z, t1)φ

(2)

which is insensitive to particular realizations of bire-
friengent disorder and chromatic dispersion in the ﬁber
[9]. The factor Dξ = ρ(ω0)l−1
characterizes the noise
s
strength, with ρ being the ampliﬁed spontaneous emis-
sion (ASE) spectral density at the carrier frequency ω0.

The noise-independent contribution is governed by

c
1

2

3

4

c
2

c
3

∂zϕ − ˆm(z)∂tϕ − id(z)∂2

t ϕ = 0,

(3)

where z is coordinate along the ﬁber, d is chromatic dis-
persion and ˆm is the birefringence matrix. The matrix
can be represented as ˆm = hj ˆσj , where hj is a real three-
component ﬁeld and ˆσj are the Pauli matrices. Averaging
over many states of the birefriengent disorder, any given
ﬁber is going through over time or averaging over the
states of birefringence of diﬀerent ﬁbers, one ﬁnds that
hj(z) is a zero mean Gaussian ﬁeld described by

hhi(z1)hj(z2)i = Dmδij δ(z1 − z2),

(4)

Dm being the disorder strength. If the birefringent dis-
Z
order is weak then the integral H =
0 dz h(z) coincides
with the PMD vector. Thus 3DmZ measures the mean
R
square average value of the PMD vector.

In an operable communication system, typical damage
caused by disorder and noise must be small. The weak-
ness of the noise allows saddle-point evaluation of the
noise averages. One ﬁnds that, typically, B ﬂuctuates
about B0, which is the zero-disorder (hj = 0) value of B.
A convenient auxiliary object is Γ = (DξZ) ln(B/B0),
which depends on the birefringent disorder, the shape
of the initial signal and the details of the compensation
and detection procedures, however, it is insensitive to the
noise. Since the noise is weak, even small disorder can
generate strong increase in the value of B. This is why
a perturbative (with respect to h) calculation of Γ gives
the most essential part of the PDF of B. If no compensa-
tion is applied, one gets Γ ∝ H3, where it is assumed that
the initial signal is linearly polarized along (1, 0). In the
simplest case of the “setting the clock” compensation one
arrives at Γ ∝ H 2
2 . That leads to the power-like tail
of the PDF of B [9]. Higher-order compensation leads
to Γ ∼ H k, where k is an integer, exceeding by one the
compensation degree if no additional cancellations occur.
Then one gets the following asymptotic expression (tail)
for the PDF of B, S(B) [10]:

1 + H 2

ln S ∼ −µk(DmZ)

−1[DξZ ln(B/B0)]2/k,

(5)

where µk is a dimensional coeﬃcient. Therefore, as antic-
ipated, compensation suppresses the PDF tail. One also
ﬁnds that the reduction of the outage probability (de-
1
ﬁned as O =
B∗ dB S(B), where B∗ is some ﬁxed value
taken to be much larger than B0) is, actually, mild.
R

The main purpose of this letter is to demonstrate ex-
istence of more eﬀective (than standard) compensation
strategies with the same number of compensation de-
grees of freedom. As a ﬁrst example consider the fol-
lowing “periodic” scheme. One divides the optical line
into N sections, each of the length l = Z/N , and ap-
ply the ﬁrst-order compensation at the end of each sec-
tion (as schematically shown on the upper part of Fig.

2

c
4

Output

1

Input

Input

Periodic setup

   Quasiperiodic setup

1

2

3

4

Output

4

c

3

c

2

c

1

c

FIG. 1: Cartoon scheme of ﬁber-line elements installation cor-
respondent to the periodic and quasi-periodic compensation
strategies.

1, where “c” denote compensation sections). Then the
noise-independent part of the compensated signal for this
“periodic compensation” strategy is determined by

Kcϕ = exp(iη∂2

t )K1N ˆUN . . . K11 ˆU1Ψ0(t) ,

ˆUn = T exp

dz hj(z)ˆσj∂t

,

(6)

(7)

nl

nl

(n−1)l

"Z

"

(n−1)l

Z

#

#

K1n = exp

−

dz hj(z)ˆσj∂t

,

(8)

Z
where Ψ0(t) is the input signal proﬁle, η =
0 dz d(z) is
the integral chromatic dispersion, and the ordered prod-
R
uct on the rhs of Eq. (6) is taken over all the N sections
(T exp is the standard notation for the so-called ordered
exponential). The exponential factors K1n represent the
ﬁrst-order compensation at the end of the n-th section.
This “periodic” compensation is not very convenient as
it requires installation of compensating elements at many
diﬀerent places along the ﬁber. However, one can natu-
rally modify this scheme and have the same compensat-
ing elements inserted subsequently but all at once at the
ﬁber output as it is shown at the lower part of the scheme
in Fig. 1. If the disorder proﬁle hj is known (technically
such end-point measurements are possible through the
anti-Stokes refraction technique [11]) one can have an
end-point, but multiple, compensation as Kc =
K1n,
leading to the following “quasi-periodic” modiﬁcation of
Eq. (6):

Q

Kcϕ = exp(iη∂2

t )K11 . . . K1N ˆUN . . . ˆU1Ψ0(t) .

(9)

The natural idea behind this “quasi-periodic” compensa-
tion is obvious: to construct (in the compensating part)
the best possible approximation (with the given number
of the compensating degrees of freedom) for the inverse
of the ordered exponential ˆUN . . . ˆU1.

Note that the (quasi)periodic compensation does not
inﬂuence the noise-dependent part of the signal, i.e. Kcφ
has the same correlation function (2) as φ. Therefore,
one arrives at the same expression ln(B/B0) = Γ/(DξZ),
with a new h-dependent factor Γ. Furthermore, in the

region of our main interest Γ can be analyzed perturba-
tively, just as in [9, 10]. Expanding the factors in Eq. (6)
up to the second order and making use of Eqs. (1,2) one
derives:

N

′
Γ ≈ µ
2

nl
dz

z
dz

′

an

n=1Z
X

an

Z

[h1(z)h2(z

) − h2(z)h1(z

)], (10)

′

′

where an = (n − 1)l. Here, the coeﬃcient µ′
2 is related to
the output signal chirp produced by an initial chirp and
a nonzero integral chromatic dispersion η. As follows
from Eq. (9), the same expression (10) is obtained in the
second order for the quasi-periodic case. Substituting Eq.
(10) into the expression for B and evaluating the PDF
of B, with the Gaussian statistics of h described by Eq.
(4), leads to the following expression for the tail of the
PDF of B:

S(B) dB ∼

Bα
0 dB
B1+α ,

α =

N πDξ
2|µ′
2|Dm

.

(11)

Eq. (11) holds for ln(B/B0) ≫ µ′
2Dm/Dξ. The param-
eter α in Eq. (11) contains an additional factor N com-
pared to the expression for the ﬁrst order end-point com-
pensation derived in [10], i.e. the (quasi)periodic com-
pensation makes the tail of S(B) steeper. It is instructive
to compare the outage probability for the periodic case
with the case of higher-order end-point compensation de-
scribed by Eq. (5). One ﬁnds that for compensation of
higher order, i.e. when N ∼ µ′
2 ln(B∗/B0)/(DξZ), the
(quasi)periodic scheme becomes more eﬃcient than the
straight N -th order compensation scheme. If there is no
chirp in the output signal then µ′
2 = 0, and the leading
term in the expansion of Γ in h is of the third order. Ad-
ditional ﬁltering eﬀorts can be made to enforce the output
pulse symmetry under the t → −t transformation, thus
removing the third-order term. Then the leading term in
Γ will be of the fourth order in h. Finally, even better
compensation can be achieved if the standard high-order
compensation approach and the (quasi)periodic ones are
combined, i.e. if in the periodic (quasi-periodic) setting,
considered above, one uses higher-order compensation in-
stead of the ﬁrst order one. Formally, this hybrid case
means that the ﬁrst-order compensation operators K1n
in Eqs. (6,9) should be substituted by higher-order com-
pensation operators Kcn. In the hybrid periodic case Γ
an dz h|k, and, since h
can be written as a sum of Γn ∝ |
is short-correlated, diﬀerent Γn, related to diﬀerent sec-
R
tions, are statistically independent. That leads to the
following expression for the PDF tail

ln

ln S(B) ∼ −µkN 2(k−1)/k [DξZ ln(B/B0)]2/k

.

(12)

DmZ

valid at DξZ ln(B/B0) ≫ N 1−k/2(DmZ/µk)k/2.

Note, that an important technical step, leading to our
major results in Eqs. (11,12), was a perturbative with re-
spect to h evaluation of Γ. Besides, in the periodic case

3

Γ is a direct sum of each section contribution Γn, thus
this perturbative treatment applies separately to each Γn,
and it only requires a weakness of the PMD eﬀect at each
section, i.e. Dml = DmZ/N ≪ t2
0, where t0 is the sig-
nal width. Therefore, one ﬁnds that even an optical line
with not really operable (without compensation) charac-
teristics (DmZ >
0) can still be used for transmission if
N is suﬃciently large. Moreover, this observation on the
applicability of Eqs. (11,12) also extends to the quasi-
periodic case, in the sense that Eqs. (11,12) provide an
upper bound for the PDF of BER. This is because the
quasi-periodic (vs periodic) character of compensation
results in an additional, oscillatory with h, suppression
of Γn which is especially large for sections strongly sepa-
rated from their compensating counter-sections.

∼ t2

To conclude, in this letter we have proposed a (quasi)
periodic compensation scheme which appears to be a
strong alternative to the standard higher-order compen-
sations. The eﬀectiveness of the scheme has been demon-
strated. Even though technical implementation of this
procedure needs an expensive equipment, we anticipate
that if this compensation technique is implemented the
reduction in the probability of extreme outages will guar-
antee an essential overall beneﬁt.

We are thankful to I. Gabitov for numerous valuable
discussions. We also wish to acknowledge the support of
LDRD ER on “Statistical Physics of Fiber Optics Com-
munications” at LANL.

[1] C. D. Poole and J. A. Nagel, in Optical Fiber Telecommu-
nications, eds. I. P. Kaminow and T. L. Koch, Academic
San Diego, Vol. IIIA, pp. 114, (1997).

[2] F. Heismann, ECOC’98 Digest 2, 51 (1998).
[3] J. P. Gordon and H. Kogelnik, PNAS 97, 4541 (2000).
[4] T. Ono, S. Yamazaki, H. Shimizu, and H. Emura, J. Ligt-

ware Technol. 12, 891 (1994).

[5] F. Heismann, D. Fishman, and D. Wilson,
ECOC98, Madrid, Spain, 1998, pp. 529-530.

in Proc.

[6] L. Moller and H. Kogelnik, in PROC. ECOC99, 1999,

pp. 64-65

[7] H. B¨ulow, F. Buchali, W. Baumert, R. Ballentin, and T.

Wehren, Electron. Lett. 36, 163 (2000).

[8] E. Desurvire, “Erbium-Doped Fiber Ampliﬁers”, John

Wiley & Sons, 1994.

[9] V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov,

I. Kolokolov, and V.
Lebedev, “Extreme Outages due to Polarization Mode
Eﬀects of Optical ﬁlter and “setting
Dispersion:
the clock” compensation”, Submitted to Opt. Lett.,
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0303013.

[10] V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, I. Kolokolov, and V. Lebedev,
“Extreme Outages due to Polarization Mode Dispersion:
First- and Higher- Order Compensations”, Submitted to
Opt. Lett., http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0303014.
[11] B. Huttner, B, Gisin, and N. Gisin, Journal of lightware

technology 17, 1843 (1999).

