3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A compact, multi-pixel parametric light
source

Stefano Minardi a Arunas Varanaviˇcus b Algis Piskarskas b
Paolo Di Trapani c

aInstituto de Cinecias Fotonicas, c/Jordi Girona, 29 - NEXUS II, E-08034
Barcelona, Spain
bDepartment of Quantum Electronics, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 9, LT-2040
Vilnius, Lithuania
cIstituto Nazionale Fisica della Materia and Department of Sciences, University of
Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, I-22100 Como, Italy

Abstract

The features of a compact, single pass, multi-pixel optical parametric generator are
discussed. Several hundreds of independent high spatial-quality tunable ultrashort
pulses were produced by pumping a bulk lithium triborate crystal with an array
of tightly focussed intense beams. The array of beams was produced by shining a
microlenses array with a large pump beam. Overall conversion eﬃciency to signal
and idler up to 30% of the pump beam has been reported. Shot-to-shot energy
ﬂuctuation down to 3% was achieved for the generated radiation.

Key words: Optical parametic generator; microlenses array; spatial solitons;

1 Introduction

Microlens arrays have found host of applications in linear optics, mainly re-
lated to the wavefront proﬁle reconstruction problem (1). However, the poten-
tial in nonlinear optics of microlens arrays has not been fully exploited yet.
To date, microlens arrays were employed to obtain three-dimensional images
of biological samples in a multiphoton excitation microscope(2; 3). More re-
cently, a nonlinear all-optical switch based on the Talbot eﬀect and the spatial
soliton(4) excitation process was implemented with a lenslet array (5).

Here we show how a microlens array can be employed successfully in com-
bination with a quadratic nonlinear crystal to get a compact, high-quality,

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

24 May 2011

ultrashort, parametric light source. In the design of pulsed optical parametric
generators (OPG), one of the problems to solve is that of achieving simulta-
neously good energy stability and high beam-quality. Actually, while the ﬁrst
feature is achieved in the regime of gain saturation, the latter is obtained in the
conditions of linear ampliﬁcation. To avoid the problem, the usual approach
is that of implementing several stages of spatial ﬁltering and ampliﬁcation in
the OPG, which makes the device rather complex. A possible way to overcome
these limitations and improve spatial quality while preserving the energy sta-
bility in OPGs is to exploit the features of the parametric spatial soliton (6),
for which the beam quality is ensured thanks to the occurence of a suitbale
spatial mode-loking eﬀect (6; 7). In fact, spatial solitons exhibit excellent beam
quality (diﬀraction limit (6)) in all the trapped wavelengths while their energy
content is directly proportional to that of the input pump(8). However, due
to the ﬁnite damage threshold of nonlinear materials, the energy that can be
converted into solitons is quite small, of the order of few hundreds of nJ/ps. To
increase the overall energy conversion, a multi-pump (multi-pixel) scheme has
been tested (9) in conditions where the single pump beam is able to excite a
spatial soliton. The conversion eﬃciency of the device was however limited to
a few percent, mainly because of the losses caused by amplitude-modulation
mask that we used for the multi-pump beam generation.

In the present work, we show that a dramatic improvement of the conversion
eﬃciency in the multi-pixel OPG (MPOPG) is possible by using a phase mask
(i.e. a microlens array), instead of an amplitude one, to multiplex the input
pump beam. We show that our MPOPG is able to achieve high level and
stable energy conversion while preserving locally high spatial quality all over
the tuning range. We mention that the tunability and the spectral features
of the parametrically generated spatial solitons, of paramount importance for
the application, have never been presented before.

The paper is structured as follows. In the ﬁrst section, we describe the ex-
perimental set-up and report on the spatial features of the output radiation,
providing evidence of the formation of parametric spatial solitons. In the next
section, we discuss how the tuning conditions aﬀect the soliton pattern and
explain why the localization of the pump beam seems to disappear, while
the signal ﬁeld retains the soliton-like features. Another section is devoted
to the features of the entire source as a whole. Issues like the net conversion
eﬃciency, energy ﬂuctuation and the spectral features are addressed. Finally,
conclusions are drawn together with a proposal for a possible exploitation of
the multipixel source as a practical device.

2

Fig. 1. Sketch of the experimental set-up. In the inlet, a picture of the microlenses
array. The second harmonic of our ampliﬁed laser source is regulated by means of
a λ/2 plate combined with a linear polarizer.

2 Spatial features of an array of solitons

The experimental setup, depicted in Fig. 1, is based on a microlens array
that devides an intense high-frequency pump beam into a matrix of focused
beams impinging on a quadratic nonlinear crystal. The pump is a collimated
gaussian beam of 3 mm 1/e2 radius from a frequency doubled Nd:glass pulsed
laser source (TWINKLE, Light Conversion Ldt., delivering 1 ps pulses at the
wavelength of 527.5 nm). The central part of the beam was selected by means
of a 2.5 mm round aperture placed short before the microlens array. Such cut
beam contains about 20% of the total energy and provides a quasi ﬂattop
beam proﬁle. The fused silica microlens array (WaveFrontSciences Inc., see
inlet in Fig.1) is composed by a square-lattice matrix of 83x102 microlenses.
The focal length of each lens is 4.6 mm. The pitch of the array is of 108 µm
while the measured spot diameter in the focal plane is of about 15µm FWHM.

The focal plane of the microlens array is imaged on the input face of a 15-
mm-long lithium triborate crystal (LBO) by means of a 2-lens telescope of
magniﬁcation 1. This has been necessary since the oven containing the crystal
has rather long edges that forbid to mount the array directly in front of the
crystal. A single-lens imaging-system placed behind the nonlinear crystal is
used to reconstruct on a CCD camera the beam proﬁle at the exit face of the
crystal.

In the experiments, the crystal temperature was tuned from 108◦C (a condition
that has already been proven to be the best for the excitation of parametric

3

Fig. 2. Fluence proﬁles of a small area of: a) The exciting pump array at the
LBO crystal entrance (λ = 527.5 nm); b) the trapped pump at the output face
(T=122◦C, λs = 790 nm); and c) the signal wave proﬁle at the degenerate phase
matching condition (T=164◦ C, λs = 1055 nm). Transverse proﬁle sections referring
to the cursor position are plotted on the side of each ﬁgure, for a more quantitave
estimation of the actual beam shape. The center of the cursor in ﬁgures a), b) and
c) correspond to the same optical axis. In Fig. d) a saturated image of the signal
(conditions as in c)) to show that the background level of the pattern is extremely
low.
spatial solitons from quantum noise ﬂuctuations (10)) up to 164◦C, which cor-
responds to the degenerate case. In this interval, the generated signal central
wavelength ranged continuously from λs = 730 nm to λs = 1055 nm. In the
temperture region close to the edge of the tuning (from 108◦C to 125◦C), nar-
row, mutually-trapped beams of high spatial-quality appear in both the pump
and signal ﬁelds (Fig. 2.b, for the pump beam, see also (9)), as the input pump
intensity is raised above the level of 0.8 GW/cm2 (measured before the mi-
crolens array). The same high quality of the signal is maintained up to the
degeneracy point (see Fig. 2.c).The position of each beam corresponds to that
of the input pump pixels (Fig. 2.a), projected on the output face along the
propagation direction of the pump radiation, this being a typical signature of
the achievement of the spatial soliton regime (9; 11). As expected, the contrast
of the pattern is much higher in the signal than in the pump ﬁeld, an eﬀect
related to the exponential trend of the parametric ampliﬁcation. Saturared
images of the signal beam show that the background level is in fact negligible
(Fig. 2.d).

The main advantage of using a microlens array is that they allows for an
eﬃcient multiplexing of the pump beam, therefore arrays made-up of several
hundreds of spatial solitons could be easily excited with a single laser pulse (see
Fig. 3). Each soliton of the array has been already proved to be independent
from its neighbours (9; 11), therefore arbitary patterns of solitons might be
easily excited by allowing only selected microlenses to shine on the nonlinear
crystal.

The overall conversion eﬃciency of the system (energy of the parametric ra-
diation/input pump energy) has been greatly improved respect to the scheme
employing an amplitude-transmission mask (9). Conversion eﬃciencies up to
32% have been measured. This is actually a high ﬁgure, if one considers that
it was achieved with a single-pass scheme. Notice that our scheme, besides be-

4

Fig. 3. A large area shot of the output signal radiation. Inhomogeneities are evident,
mainly connected with defects on microlenses array and crystal surfaces. Experi-
mental conditions: crystal temperature = 164◦C, pump intensity = 0.8 GW/cm2
(before lenslet array), emitted signal wavelength = 1055 nm

ing extremely compact, does not introduce any relevant loss into the system.
More details on the conversion eﬃciency issue are given in section 4.

As for the uniformity of the array pattern, Fig. 3 shows that it is quite satisfac-
tory. The statistic carried out over 221 pixels shows that the rms ﬂuctuation
of the peak intensity over the frame is ± 24% around the mean value. The ob-
served inhomogeneities could be easily related to defects on the lenslet array,
defects of the crystal and to spatial inhomogeneity of the pump beam before
the lenslet array. The last one is the most detrimental for the homogeneity,
if no ﬂat-top beams were available to shine on the microlens array. However,
special schemes as that described in (12) might be exploited to enhance the
pixel-to-pixel uniformity of the input pump.

For what concerns the single pixel energy content, from the peak intensity of
the incoming pump it can be estimated that each lenslet collects at its maxi-
mum about 0.6µJ in case of pump well within the saturation range. Allowing
a 30% conversion eﬃciency, each pixel carries about 0.2µJ of signal and idler
radiation.

5

3 Parametric spatial solitons and wavelength tuning

An essential feature of a parametric light source is the tunability, therefore
the further step of our investigation has been a careful characterization of the
parametric emission over the same tuning range of the LBO crystal.

As mentioned, well contrasted arrays of beams like in Fig. 2.c were observed
to be the typical output of the source in all the tuning range, although the
single beam diameter was observed to increase as the degeneracy condition
was approached (from 20 to 30 µm FWHM). Interestingly, this feature is
not apparently preserved for the high-frequency pump ﬁeld. In fact, while for
temperatures below 125◦C (corresponding to λs = 805 nm) a nice array of
self-trapped beams is still observed, no clear signature of spatial trapping of
the pump ﬁeld could be detected in conditions closer to degeneracy.

This puzzling observation has been recently explained in the frame of a space-
time model of the parametric interaction (13). With pulsed light, only the cen-
tral part of the exciting pulse can form a self-trapped, almost non-diﬀracting
beam (14). The tails of the pulse are too weak to initiate the self-focusing pro-
cess and therefore contribute to the linerly diﬀracting background. However,
the mean intensity of the self trapped part of the pump pulse becomes smaller
and smaller as the degeneracy tuning condition is approached. Therefore, on
time integrated pictures of the pulse, the self-trapped component of the pump
pulse seems to vanish into the linearly diﬀracting background. On the con-
trary, the intensity of the self-trapped signal (idler) beam increases, so that
apparently the soliton survives only in the signal and idler ﬁelds. The reason
of this behaviour is linked to the parametric ampliﬁcation bandwidth of the
nonlinear crystal and on the dynamics of the ampliﬁcation of noisy ﬁelds. This
carries some analogy with recent studies on the 3D space-time modulational
instability and focus wave modes generation in parametric systems (15; 16).

Let us point out that this eﬀect has however no relevant impact on the op-
eration of the soliton array as a parametric light source. In fact, the most
important feature is that the signal ﬁeld output is still structured as a reg-
ular and well contrasted array of beams of high spatial quality. Moreover,
the observed color unbalance actually contributes to achieve high conversion
eﬃciencies ﬁgures.

4 Global features of the source

Having described the local features of the parametric light source, we turn
now our attention to the global features of the generator, such as the total

6

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

y
c
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
e
 
n
o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

0
0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Pump peak intensity [GW/cm2]

Fig. 4. Overall conversion eﬃcieny at degeneracy as a function of the input pump
intensity.

conversion eﬃciency, the average energy ﬂuctuation, and the spectral features.

In ﬁgures 4 and 5 the conversion eﬃciency and the energy rms ﬂuctuation of
the overall generated radiation at degeneracy (T = 164◦C) are plotted as a
function of the input peak intensity. These parameters are to be considered
an average value over the whole output, since they were measured by simply
collecting the output down-converted radiation (the pump was rejected by
means of a dielectric mirror) on a large area pyroelectric energy meter. The
graph shows that raising the pump intensity above 0.8 GW/cm2 (measured
before the microlens array), the conversion eﬃciency shows a tendency to
saturate towards a limit of 35%. Notice that we could not fully enter the
saturation regime with the available power. The maximum achieved conversion
eﬃciency is slightly above 30%. In the same saturation regime, the shot-to-
shot energy ﬂuctuations were observed to drop down to an asimptotic limit
of about 3%, which is less than two times that of the input pump energy
(measured to be 1.7%, as illustrated in Figure 5). Similar trends and ﬁgures for
the energy conversion and the energy ﬂuctation were observed over the whole
tuning range of the crystal, therefore conﬁrming our scheme as a promising
prototype of a novel parametric light source.

A spectrograph was employed to analyze the output signal radiation spectra.
Fig. 6 shows a selection of spectra averaged over 15 shots and taken at diﬀer-
ent tuning conditions. As expected from the dispersive properties of our type
I LBO crystal, the spectra get very broad on approaching degeneracy, their
FWHM bandwitdh ranging from 20 nm, at the very edge of the tuning (see
Fig. 6.a, left spike) to about one hundred nm close to degeneracy (Fig. 6.c).
Single-shot measurements reveal that the spectra are deeply modulated, their
actual pattern changing form laser-shot to laser-shot. These data suggest that

7

60

50

40

30

20

10

]

%

[
 
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
c
u
l
f
 
l
a
n
g
i

S

0
0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Pump peak intensity [GW/cm2]

Fig. 5. Rms ﬂuctuation of the emitted parametric radiation as a function of the
input pump intensity, for the same operating conditions as in Fig. 4 (see also text).

Fig. 6. Spectra of the signal radiation for diﬀerent tuning conditions of the LBO
crystal. a) T=108◦C; b) T=129◦C; c) T=159◦C. The enlargement of the spectral
bandwidth is evident, as the degeneracy condition is approached.

the coherence time of the output parametric radiation could be quite low. Con-
sistently, space-time simulation of the system revealed that the signal (pump,
idler) pulse should exhibit a rugged temporal proﬁle, with details in the few fs
scale (13). This low temporal coherence, that might be considered detrimental
in some application, can turn into an advantage for such applications where
intense, incoherent light is needed (see also next section). We point out that
extremely high intensities could be achieved instantaneously inside the signal
pulse (in the order of several hundreds of GW/cm2), a non common feature
among the incoherent light sources. Moreover, the excellent spatial quality of
the signal beams let us forsee a high focusability of such beams, that might
provide even higher peak intensities.

In case narrow-band, long coherence-time parametric radiation is needed, the
scheme has to be implemented with a narrow bandwidth seed injection at the
signal (idler) wavelength. Measurements (data not shown) prove that close to

8

degeneracy the bandwidth of the signal can be as narrow as 4-6 nm, in case
a weak, seed is injected (of energy about 1000 times smaller than that of the
pump) in the crystal with the intense pump beam.

5 Conclusions and perspectives

In conclusion, we have shown that a microlens array can be succesfully em-
ployed to multiplex an intense pump beam and excite a large array of para-
metric spatial solitons in a quadratic nonlinear material. We investigated the
spatial and the temporal properties of the emitted signal radiation and showed
that the radiation can be tuned easily without aﬀecting signiﬁcantly its spatial
quality.

From the data reported above, it is evident that the multi-beam pumping
couples stability and high conversion eﬃciency ﬁgures with high spatial qual-
ity of the output radiation. These characteristics are not easily obtained in
conventional OPGs, which need several passes and spatial ﬁltering to obtain
high spatial-quality output. The main advantage of the proposed scheme is
its intrinsic compactness, which opens new persectives in the development of
OPGs whose dimensions are in the order of few cubic centimeters.

For what concerns the spectral quality of the output radiation, the ampliﬁca-
tion bandwidth of the parametric process in the single pass scheme is quite
large (several tens of nm), therefore the output radiation is expected to feature
coherence times in the few fs range. This quality makes the MPOPG a unique
source of intense temporally (quasi) incoherent but spatially highly coherent,
with an average power-per-pixel (about MW) orders of magnitude higher than
any currently available broadband tabletop source (17; 18). Notice that the
high spatial quality of each beamlet composing the array can be exploited to
obtain even more focused beams and therefore extremely high peak intensities
(tens of TW/cm2).

On the contrary, higly temporal coherent radiation could be easily produced
by the source by merely adding a single seeding pass to the ampliﬁcation
scheme(10). Moreover, the intrinsic multicannel structure of the MPOPG
could be exploited to build-up an extremely ﬂexible all-optically reconﬁgurable
light source. For instance, patterns of parametric solitons might be excited by
letting the pump mix with a spatially modulated seeding beam (19; 5), while
a frequency dispersed seeding might be useful to excite an array in which each
pixel has a diﬀerent central wavelength. This last scheme could be useful, for
instance, in spectroscopic measurements (linear and nonlinear) of spatially
extended or patterned chemical/biological samples.

9

All authors aknowledge Instituto Nazionale per la Fisica della Materia, MIUR
(COFIN01 and FIRB01), the Department of Sciences of the University of
Insubria (“Young reserchers project”) and the European Commission (CE-
BIOLA contract ICA1-CT-2000-70027) for ﬁnancial support. All the authors
are thankful to G. Arrighi and G. Blasi for helping in the arrangement of the
experiments.

References

[1] G. Y. Yoon, T. Jitsuno, M. Nakatsuka, and S. Nakai Appl.Opt. 35 (1996)

188-192.
J. Bewersdorf, R. Pick, and S.W. Hell, Opt.Lett. 23 (1998) 655-657.
[2]
[3] K. Fujita, O. Nakamura, T. Kaneko, M. Oyamada, T. Takamatsu, and

S. Kawata Opt. Comm. 174 (2000) 7-12.

[4] G.I. Stegeman and M. Segev Science 286 (1999) 1518-1523.
[5]

S. Minardi, G. Arrighi, P. Di Trapani, A. Varanaviˇcius, and A. Piskarskas
Opt.Lett. 27 (2002) 2097-2099.
P. Di Trapani, G. Valiulis, W. Chinaglia, and A. Andreoni, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 80 (1998) 265-268.
P. Di Trapani, A. Berˇzanskis, S. Minardi, S. Sapone, and W. Chinaglia
Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 5133-5136.
L. Torner, J. P. Torres, D. Artigas, D. Mihalache, and D. Mazilu, Opt.
Comm. 164 (1999) 153-159.
S. Minardi, S. Sapone, W. Chinaglia, P. Di Trapani, and A. Berˇzanskis,
Opt. Lett. 25 (2000) 326-328.

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] P. Di Trapani, and W. Chinaglia Opt. Lett. 23 (1998) 1653-1655.
[11] A. Bramati, W. Chinaglia, S. Minardi, and P. Di Trapani, Opt. Lett.

[12] N. Streibl, U. N¨olscher, J. Jahns, and S. Walker Appl. Opt. 30 (1991)

26, (2001) 1409-1411.

2739-2742.

[13] S. Minardi, G. Blasi, P. Di Trapani, A. Varanaviˇcius, G. Valiulis, A.

Berˇzanskis, and A. Piskarskas submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.

[14] C. Simos, V. Couderc, and A. Barth´el´emy IEEE Phot. and Tech. Lett.

14 (2002) 636-638.

[15] S. Trillo, C. Conti, P. Di Trapani, O. Jedrkiewicz, J. Trull, G. Valiulis,

G. Bellanca Opt. Lett. 27 (2002) 1451-1453.

[16] S. Orlov, A. Piskarskas, and A. Stabinis Opt. Lett. 27 (2002) 2103-2105.
[17] For an introduction to white light emitting diodes see for example:
http://www.micro.magnet.fsu.edu/primer/lightandcolor/ledsintro.html
[18] P.A. Champert, S.V. Popov, and J.R. Taylor Opt. Lett. 27 (2002) 122-

124.

[19] W. Chinaglia, S. Minardi, S. Sapone, G. Coppo, P. Di Trapani, A.
Verˇzanskis, G. Valiulis, and K. Staliunas NLGW’99 Technical Digest,

10

OSA, (1999) paper WA6.

11

