3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental observation of fractal modes in unstable optical resonators

J.A. Loaiza,∗ E. R. Eliel, and J. P. Woerdman
Huygens Laboratorium, Universiteit Leiden, P.O. Box 9504,
2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands†

We use a spatially resolved cavity ring-down technique to show that the 2D eigenmode of an
it looks the same at diﬀerent length scales. In
unstable optical cavity has a fractal pattern, i.e.
agreement with theory, we ﬁnd that this pattern has the maximum conceivable roughness, i.e., its
fractal dimension is 3.01
0.04. This insight in the nature of unstable cavity eigenmodes may lead
to better understanding of wave dynamics in open systems, for both light and matter waves.

±

PACS numbers: 5.45.df,42.60.Da,47.53.+n

Conventional lasers are based upon stable optical cav-
ities in which the light rays that bounce between the
two mirrors are trapped forever and leakage around the
mirror edges is negligible. In wave-optics language this
picture of bouncing rays corresponds to the well known
Hermite-Gaussian eigenmodes[1]. In contrast, in an un-
stable cavity (UC), consisting for instance of two convex
mirrors that face each other, the combination of the cur-
vatures of the mirrors and their separation is such that
the bouncing rays run away from the axis towards the
mirror edges and ultimately escape; the escape rate is
determined by the magniﬁcation M of the system. The
associated eigenmodes ﬁll the entire volume of the cav-
ity; this has the advantage of optimum energy extraction
if an active medium is placed inside the cavity to re-
alize a laser. Another advantage of an unstable-cavity
laser is that discrimination against higher-order trans-
verse modes is much better than for a stable-cavity laser;
perfect single-mode oscillation is very easily achieved[1].
These advantages have been known since the early days
of laser physics[2], whereas other surprising properties of
the UC laser have emerged more recently.
In particu-
lar we refer here to the much debated phenomenon of
UC excess quantum noise[3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and the predic-
tion that their transverse eigenmodes are fractals[8, 9],
i.e., they are invariant under magniﬁcation[10]. While
the former eﬀect has been experimentally demonstrated,
the latter is still being pursued. What we report here is
the ﬁrst experimental observation of the fractal nature of
UC eigenmodes in the optical regime; these results may
stimulate extension to matter waves.

On an intuitive level the origin of the fractality is
rooted in two arguments: (i) an unstable cavity has a
round-trip magniﬁcation M > 1. (ii) The cavity eigen-
mode must, by deﬁnition, be invariant upon round-trip
propagation. The combination of arguments (i) and (ii)
implies that an UC eigenmode must be self-similar (i.e.
fractal). This line of reasoning must, however, be handled
with care since the concept of magniﬁcation has its ori-
gin in ray-optics, whereas an eigenmode is a wave-optics
concept[11]; moreover, these arguments do not lead to
predictions for the fractal dimension.

The starting point to describe the mode structure of
an UC is the so-called Virtual Source (VS) method, orig-
inally developed by Horwitz[12] and Southwell[13] . In
the VS method a two-mirror UC is unfolded to create a
corridor of virtual images of the conﬁning aperture (e.g.
the smallest of the two mirrors). A plane wave is injected
at the far end of the corridor and the eigenmode is formed
by superposition of the diﬀracted patterns produced by
the sequence of virtual apertures. This superposition (i.e.
the eigenmode) contains thus rich spatial structure that
depends on the shape of the conﬁning aperture.

Very recently, Berry and co-workers formulated an an-
alytical theory for fractal eigenmodes[14, 15] and excess
quantum noise[16], by introducing further approxima-
tions to the VS method. This is an important devel-
opment since it carries the notion of a fractal pattern
beyond that of a phenomenological description, yielding
insight and allowing predictions; fractality then presents
a convenient test of the theory as a whole. Speciﬁ-
cally, the theory predicts that in the asymptotic limit
NF → ∞, the fractal dimension D of the fundamental
eigenmode is 3 for a wide variety of polygon-shaped con-
ﬁning apertures[14] (e.g. a triangle). Here NF ≡ a2/λL
is the Fresnel number, where a is the (linear) size of the
aperture, L is the length of the cavity and λ is the wave-
length of light. This prediction is very surprising since
it implies that the 2D transverse intensity proﬁle, when
viewed as a mountain landscape, has the maximum topo-
logically allowed roughness. Contrary to what might be
expected, diﬀraction does not smooth out this proﬁle; in
fact, diﬀraction is the cause of the phenomenon.

We stress that experimental veriﬁcation of this predic-
tion is essential, since the validity of the theory may be
questioned at various levels. First, all theoretical eﬀorts
so far, be it numerical or analytical, are based upon stan-
dard diﬀraction theory; this is an inherently approximate
theory that derives its simplicity (as compared to solving
Maxwell’s equations) from using inconsistent boundary
conditions[17]. Although this is hardly ever a problem
in practical cases, questions remain when dealing with
an unusual problem such as the UC. On top of this, the
VS method is a not a straightforward implementation of

2

Here we report results for triangular and hexagonal aper-
tures whose typical Fresnel numbers (NF = a2/λL) range
around 90, with a taken as the radius of the polygon’s
inscribed circle, typically around 6 mm. The oscillatory
behaviour of the cavity round-trip propagator is charac-
terized by means of the parameter A ≡ 2πM F [30], where
F ≡ NF /2g2, g2 = 1 − L/R2, and R2 is the radius of cur-
vature of the front mirror[12] . In the present case the
parameter A takes on values around 500. The conﬁning
aperture is 1-1 imaged on the photocatode of a single-
photon sensitive camera, whose exposure time (≈ 2 ns)
is shorter than the round-trip time of the cavity (≈ 3 ns).
Light from a 75 mW laser diode (Sharp LT024MD0) at
λ=786.3 nm is injected into the cavity through one of its
mirrors after ﬁrst being spectrally ﬁltered by means of a
monochromator having a 0.3 nm wide transmission win-
dow (Fig.1). Due to the low ﬁnesse of the UC we do not
need to tune our laser to one of its resonances. The ex-
periment consists of rapidly switching-oﬀ the diode laser,
and after a short delay, making an exposure by trigger-
ing the photocathode and intensiﬁer of the single-photon
sensitive camera(Princeton Instruments Pi-Max). Many
subsequent exposures are superimposed on the camera
until the signal-to-noise ratio of the acquired image is
suﬃciently large, followed by read-out of the camera. For
the longest delay of our experiment (≈ 30 ns) we have to
accumulate typically 105 exposures to arrive at a spatial
pattern with suﬃcient detail.

Experimentally, we ﬁnd that for our conﬁguration (Fig.
1), the shape of the intra-cavity intensity distribution sta-
bilizes after approximately 7 round-trips. A typical result
of a 2D intensity image, together with its 3D representa-
tion, is shown in Fig. 2. The 2D picture shows, with fas-
cinating detail, the high-degree of symmetry and struc-
tural self-similarity of the intensity pattern, while the
corresponding 3D landscape emphasizes its very abrupt
topography. It is worth mentioning that Mandelbrot[10]
associates fractal dimensions up to 2.4 to earthy looking
landscapes; therefore we expect a higher fractal dimen-
sion for the weird landscape shown in Fig. 2.

We use the Fourier-transform method to evaluate the
fractal dimension of the intensity proﬁle since this allows
a direct comparison with the analytical theory[14, 15].
The method is based on the fact that the power spectrum
of a fractal function f (x) follows a power law P (k) ≈ k−b,
and that the phase of its Fourier components is random;
the fractal dimension D can be obtained from the expo-
nent b by using the relation[20, 21] 2D = 5 − b. It does
not matter whether we take for f (x) the optical inten-
sity or the ﬁeld amplitude, both choices lead to the same
value of D[22].

We follow this procedure for 1D cuts of a typical
asymptotical intensity proﬁle. Fig. 3a shows a 1D cut
taken 9 roundtrips time after laser shut-down, while Fig.
3b shows its spatial power spectrum. This spectrum
shows many ”spikes” due to the discrete nature of the

FIG. 1: Schematic diagram of our experiment. Light from
a diode laser is ﬁltered by a monochromator and excites the
cavity. We use a convex-concave unstable cavity of length
L = 50 cm and round-trip magniﬁcation M = 1.68. The
metallic polygonal aperture is located near the exit mirror,
and is mounted on a 2-axis translation stage for purposes of
alignment. A Mylar ﬁlm can be placed in the beam path, in
order create a new input distribution for the cavity.

diﬀraction theory but a paraxial model that combines
some elements of diﬀraction theory in an ad hoc fashion.
Finally, the adaptation of the VS method by Berry et
al. uses additional assumptions in order to arrive at an
analytical result: the asymptotic limit NF → ∞ must ap-
ply and multiple edge reﬂections as well as corner-point
diﬀraction are neglected.

In the experiment we study the lowest-loss eigenmode
of an empty unstable cavity in order to avoid the com-
plications associated with a gain medium. As we do not
know how to selectively excite this fundamental mode,
we let the cavity do the selection process. Brieﬂy, we use
a variant of the cavity-ring-down technique originally de-
veloped for molecular spectroscopy[18, 19]. We inject
laser light with an arbitrary transverse proﬁle into the
cavity (we do not need to mode match the input beam to
our cavity), rapidly switch-oﬀ the laser, and then record
the spatial proﬁle of the light emitted by the cavity after
a certain ring-down time[28].

Because we work with an unstable cavity, the round-
trip losses are high, in our case of the order of a factor of
2 per round-trip. This is in stark contrast with the usual
situation encountered in cavity ring-down spectroscopy
where the round-trip losses are exceedingly small. Con-
sequently, the time scale of our experiment is of the order
of nanoseconds, instead of microseconds. Since we are
speciﬁcally interested in details of the spatial distribu-
tion of the light transpiring through the cavity mirrors,
we use a camera instead of an integrating detector.
We use a positive branch unstable cavity (Fig.
1)
consisting of a front convex mirror[29] (eﬀective radius
of curvature R2 = −4 m), and a back concave mirror
(R1 = 10 m), separated by a distance of 50 cm. Both
mirrors have a reﬂectivity coeﬃcient of 0.9. The conﬁn-
ing aperture is positioned near the back mirror; it con-
sists of a regular-polygon shaped hole in a metal sheet.

3

FIG. 2: 3D landscape (bottom) and 2D (top) snapshot of
the measured intracavity intensity distribution of the funda-
mental eigenmode of an unstable cavity (M =1.68, NF =90),
taken 7 round-trips after the start of the decay. The camera
has 512

512 pixels, and a dynamical range of 16 bits.

×

virtual sources; these have been smoothed by averaging
over bands of logarithmically constant length[23]. Appar-
ently the power spectrum is described by two power-law
contributions dominating at low and high spatial frequen-
cies, respectively. Yates and New[23] have shown that
the higher the order of a UC eigenmode, the steeper the
power law of its spatial power spectrum is. This leads
us to associate the low spatial-frequency range in Fig.
3b with residual light in higher-order modes. The high-
frequency contribution is then associated with the funda-
mental eigenmode; a ﬁt of the latter contribution yields
Dcut = 2.01 ± 0.04 for the fundamental mode. The frac-
tal dimension D of the 2D landscape follows directly from
this value, since D = Dcut + 1, yielding D ≈ 3, in excel-
lent agreement with theory[14]. This value of the fractal
dimension implies that the intensity landscape has the
maximum allowed roughness. The inset in Fig. 3b shows
that the Fourier components of the 1D cut have indeed
random phases, as required for a fractal curve.

To ascertain that our cavity ring-down method in-
deed selects a single cavity mode, we have investigated
whether the observed asymptotical spatial pattern is sen-
sitive to changes in the initial conditions, i.e., to the spa-
tial pattern of the injected light. To do so, we have in-
troduced a piece of Mylar ﬁlm as diﬀuser between the
monochromator and the cavity, thereby creating a to-
tally diﬀerent distribution of input phase and amplitude.

intensity pattern taken 9
FIG. 3: Analysis of a fractal
roundtrips after the start of the decay. Frame (a) shows a
typical 1D cut through the triangular pattern, while frame (b)
shows the corresponding normalized spatial power spectrum.
The thin dashed line shows the power coeﬃcients of frame
(a), the diamonds indicate the average power over bands of
logarithmically constant length, equal to √2. The straight
dashed line represents a ﬁt to the low-frequency data, while
the solid line shows a ﬁt to the high-frequency data; the latter
ﬁt corresponds to the fundamental mode and yields a slope
b=0.98, i.e. a fractal dimension Dcut=2.01. The inset shows
the phase (normalised to π) of the Fourier transform compo-
nents.

Figure 4 shows, for a hexagonal aperture inside the UC,
the initial and asymptotic proﬁles of the intensity distri-
bution using a narrow injection beam, and a beam that
has been diﬀused by the thin Mylar ﬁlm before entering
the cavity. The asymptotical spatial patterns are very
similar, implying that they correspond to a single mode.
Our experimental validation of the analytical theory of
eigenmodes of UC’s[14, 15, 16] allows its use in a broader
context. This is important since UC lasers play an im-
portant role in laser physics; in particular microlasers.
The reason is that microlasers (e.g. semiconductor lasers)
must be eﬃcient, which implies that the gain must be lo-
calized, e.g., to a λ-sized transverse dimension; pumping
outside this region is a waste. Because of the gain lo-
calization there is gain guiding in addition to the index
guiding that is used to realize the λ-sized optical conﬁne-
ment in the ﬁrst place. The (unavoidable) combination
of gain and index guiding leads to a cavity that is ef-
fectively slightly unstable, i.e., transversely open to the
outside world; and this increases the quantum noise of the

4

(1979).

(1998).

(2000).

[6] A. M. van der Lee, N. J. van Druten, M. P. van Exter,
J. P. Woerdman, J.-P. Poizat, and P. Grangier, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 85, 4711 (2000).

[7] K. Petermann, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-15, 566

[8] G. P. Karman and J. P. Woerdman, Opt. Lett. 23, 1909

[9] G. P. Karman, G. S. McDonald, G. H. C. New, and J. P.

Woerdman, Nature 402, 138 (1999).

[10] B. B. Mandelbrot, The fractal geometry of nature (Free-

man, New York, 1982).

[11] J. Courtial and M. J. Padgett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5320

[12] P. Horwitz, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 63, 1528 (1973).
[13] W. H. Southwell, Opt. Lett. 6, 487 (1981).
[14] M. V. Berry, Opt. Commun. 200, 321 (2001).
[15] M. V. Berry, C. Storm, and W. van Saarloos, Opt. Com-

mun. 197, 393 (2001).

[16] M. V. Berry, J. Mod. Opt. 50, 63 (2003).
[17] J. J. Stamnes, Waves in focal regions (Adam Hilger, Bris-

[18] A. O’Keefe and D. A. G. Deacon, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 59,

tol, 1986).

2544 (1988).

[19] E. Olivier, D. Chauvat, A. L. Floch, and F. Bretenaker,

Opt. Lett. 24, 22 (1999).

[20] K. Falconer, Fratal geometry: mathematical foundations

and applications (John Wiley, Chichester, 1990).

[21] M. V. Berry and Z. V. Lewis, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A

[22] M. V. Berry, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29, 6617 (1996).
[23] M. A. Yates and G. H. C. New, Opt. Commun. 208, 377

370, 459 (1980).

(2002).

[24] V. Milner, J. L. Hanssen, W. C. Campbell, and M. G.

Raizen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1514 (2001).

[25] N. Friedman, A. Kaplan, D. Carasso, and N. Davidson,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1518 (2001).

[26] J. S. Hersch, M. R.Haggerty, and E. J. Heller, Phys. Rev.

E 62, 4873 (2000).

[27] J. A. Katine, M. A. Eriksson, A. S. Adourian, R. M.
Westervelt, J. D. Edwards, A. Lupu-Sax, E. J. Heller,
K. L. Campman, and A. C. Gossard, Phys. Rev. Lett.
79, 4806 (1997).

[28] Of dominant concern is the light emitted by the diode
laser after it has been nominally turned oﬀ (’afterglow’),
for instance due to the recombination of remaining charge
carriers in the p-n junction. This is important because the
intracavity intensity of the UC has been reduced by many
orders of magnitude by the time that the pattern stabi-
lizes. Obviously, one requires any light unintentionally
injected in the cavity at that time to be even weaker. As
a result of careful optimization of the experimental pa-
rameters we obtain on/oﬀ ratios of the injected light up
to 108

[29] For the convex mirror we use a concave mirror (radius of
curvature 6) on a glass substrate (n = 1.5) in a reversed
way.

[30] Note that A = 2πNcoll, where Ncoll is the so called col-
limated Fresnel number [1]; note also that Berry et al.
[14, 15] give an expression for A tailored to the case of a
confocal UC.

FIG. 4: Frames (a) and (b) show the initial distribution of
light injected into the cavity without and with a thin sheet of
Mylar as a diﬀuser, respectively; frames (c) and (d) show the
corresponding pictures taken after 7 round trips.

device [6]. A better insight in the nature of UC eigen-
modes may lead to device architectures that minimize
this excess noise.

Finally, the issues discussed in this Letter can also be
extended to UC’s (or open systems in general) for matter
waves. As demonstrated recently, spherical mirrors for
atoms can be made[24, 25] so that an atom-optics based
UC is within reach. In fact, an UC for electron waves
has already been demonstrated, as a mesoscopic device
based upon a 2D electron gas; the unstable nature of
this UC determines the conductance of a quantum point
contact placed inside[26, 27]. It remains to be seen what
the consequences of ”fractal matter waves” are for the
operation of such devices.

This work is part of the research program of the ’Sticht-
ing voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie’ (FOM).

∗ Electronic address: javier@molphys.leidenuniv.nl@
† URL: http://www.molphys.leidenuniv.nl/qo/index.html

[1] A. E. Siegman, Lasers (University Science, Mill Valley,

USA, 1986).

[2] A. E. Siegman, Appl. Opt. 13, 353 (1974).
[3] Y. J. Cheng, C. G. Fanning, and A. E. Siegman, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 77, 627 (1996).

[4] M. A. van Eijkelenborg, ˚A. M. Lindberg, M. S. Thijssen,
and J. P. Woerdman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4314 (1996).

[5] G. H. C. New, J. Mod. Opt. 42, 799 (1995).

