3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Red solitons: evidence of spatio–temporal instability in χ(2) spatial-soliton dynamics

Stefano Minardi,∗ Giovanni Blasi, and Paolo Di Trapani
INFM and Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Fisice e Matematiche,
Universit`a dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, I-22100 Como, Italy

Arunas Varanaviˇcius, Gintaras Valiulis, Audrius Berˇzanskis, and Algis Piskarskas
Department of Quantum Electronics, Vilnius University,
9 Sauletekio, building 3, LT-2040 Vilnius, Lithuania
(Dated: January 9, 2014)

In χ(2) three-wave mixing, the noise-seeded spatio–temporal modulational instability has a dra-
matic impact on the spatial-soliton dynamics, leading to the counterintuitive observation of a soliton
with no apparent participation of the high-frequency ﬁeld in the process.

Optical spatial solitons [1] are ideally monochromatic
light beams whose linear diﬀractive spreading is compen-
sated by a suitable non-linear phase shift. In χ(2) three-
wave mixing, multi-color solitary beams are sustained by
energy exchange among the three waves, whose phase-
velocity and wavefront-curvature mismatch give rise to
an intensity-dependent phase accumulation [2]. Since
their ﬁrst observation in a second-harmonic generation
(SHG) scheme [3], χ(2) spatial solitons have been in-
vestigated in a number of diﬀerent experimental condi-
tions, i.e., in up and down conversion, in bulk, wave-
guides and periodically-poled crystals, with gaussian and
vortex-type pumps; their unique steering, addressing and
switching properties have been studied in great detail for
potential applications in all-optical interconnects (see ref-
erence [4] for an updated review on the topic).

With the exception of two recent experiments, where
fairly short pulses and long samples were used [5, 6],
all the above mentioned phenomenology has been inves-
tigated in conditions in which material chromatic dis-
persion was assumed to play a negligible role. How-
ever, no matter how long the input pulses are (i.e., how
narrow the input pulse spectra are), one should expect
appreciable frequency broadening to occur, due the ef-
fect of the noise-seeded modulational instability (MI)
In the spatial domain, sizeable MI impact has al-
[7].
ready been shown to cause spatial ﬁlamentation of the
SHG-generated temporal soliton, for operation just above
threshold [8]. By analogy, one would expect temporal
pulse fragmentation to aﬀect the spatial-soliton regime.
This process is, however, diﬃcult to detect directly since
it would require ultra-high temporal resolution in single-
shot acquisition mode.

In this paper we present the ﬁrst evidence for the eﬀect
of noise-seeded spatio–temporal (ST) MI on χ(2) spatial-
soliton dynamics, which we predict to cause a temporal
breakup on the 10-fs scale. We claim ST MI to be the
mechanism that explains our counter-intuitive observa-
tion of a spatial soliton for which self-trapping only oc-
curs between the low-frequency waves (e.g., the signal
and idler), with no apparent participation of the high-

frequency wave (e.g., the pump). This is the reason we
use the term “red soliton” to indicate such a process even
though, strictly speaking, no solitons are formed.

Our ﬁrst experiment was performed in the regime of
optical parametric ampliﬁcation (OPA) of the vacuum-
state ﬂuctuations, with the usual scheme assumed to lead
to spatial-soliton formation [9]: a pump pulse (527 nm,
1.3 ps, 32 µm spot FWHM) was launched on the input
face of a 15 mm-long lithium triborate (LBO) crystal,
operated in non-critical, type-I phase matching. For the
given pump frequency (Ωp), we tuned the signal and idler
frequencies (Ωs and Ωi) by changing the crystal temper-
ature. Since the chromatic dispersion (i.e., the group-
velocity mismatch GVM and the group-velocity disper-
sion GVD) experiences large changes with the tuning pa-
rameter Ω = Ωs/Ωp, the setup allowed easy monitoring
of the eﬀects of dispersion on the non-linear dynamics.
We should mention that here that the GVM and GVD
lengths are respectively 2–4 and 102–103 times larger
than the crystal length, across the whole tuning range.

Two diﬀerent diagnostics were realized. The ﬁrst is
a traditional, CCD-based, beam-proﬁle detection, which
allowed recording of the ﬂuence distribution of the pump
and signal waves at the crystal output face. Note that
the idler was not recorded, its photon energy being too
low for the silicon detector. The second setup provided
three-dimensional (i.e., ST) mapping of the pump inten-
sity proﬁle, taken at the same crystal-output plane. The
scheme is based on an ultrafast non-linear gating tech-
nique [10] realized by mixing the unknown wave packet
(WP) with a 200-fs plane pulse generated by nonlinear
compression of a portion of the same pump-laser pulse.
The achieved temporal resolution is here of 200 fs.

Figure 1 shows the ﬂuence proﬁles along the beam
diameter of the pump (full line) and of the signal ﬁeld
(dashed line) just above threshold for soliton formation.
Figure 1a refers to a crystal temperature T = 115◦ (which
corresponds to Ω = 0.684 and λs = 770 nm), close to the
edge of the tuning curve; Fig. 1b refers to T = 140◦ (and
thus Ω = 0.620 and λs = 850), i.e. much closer to degen-
eracy. By looking at the result in Fig. 1a, one would rea-

(cid:58)

/(cid:58)
s

=0.684
p

(cid:58)

=0.620
/(cid:58)
p
s

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
e
c
n
e
u
l
F

4

3

2

1

0

-50

0
X [(cid:80)m]

50

-50

0
X [(cid:80)m]

50

FIG. 1: Transverse ﬂuence distribution for the output sig-
nal and pump beams for OPA excitation and two diﬀerent
frequency-tuning conditions (a and b), with the same pump-
pulse energy, Ep = 2.1 µJ.

sonably aﬃrm that spatial solitons are formed. In fact,
mutually trapped pump and signal beams of comparable
peak ﬂuence appear. The pump FWHM beam diame-
ter (15 µm) is ﬁve times smaller than the value obtained
in the linear propagation regime.
In contrast, Fig. 1b
contains quite a puzzling result. In fact, while the sig-
nal keeps its narrow size, the focused pump beam al-
most disappears into the weak background ﬁeld. The
background proﬁle perfectly matches the pump-beam
pedestal in Fig. 1a. Note the growth of the signal peak
ﬂuence from Fig. 1a to 1b, its value being 20 times larger
than that of the pump in the second case. By taking
a crystal of twice the length we obtained very similar
phenomenology, the diameters of the output self-focused
beams being only 30% larger than in the previous case.
A deeper insight into this rather counterintuitive ob-
servation is given by the results presented in Fig. 2 (left),
where the experimental ST intensity distribution of the
pump WP is plotted for two diﬀerent Ω. The results
show that: (i) the trailing edge of the pulse (about 200 fs)
does not experience spatial trapping owing to its low in-
put intensity. This portion accounts for the pedestal and
diﬀracted background in Figs. 1a and 1b respectively.
Note the slight temporal asymmetry of the entire ST dis-
tribution, caused by GVM. (ii) The central and leading
portions, in contrast, always give rise to a spatially self-
trapped proﬁle.
Its peak intensity, however, decreases
dramatically as the tuning condition approaches degener-
acy, which explains why the trapping seems to disappear
in the time-integrated proﬁles. Time-resolved measure-
ments closer to degeneracy were prevented by the low
sensitivity of our CCD video trigger.

In order to provide a more accurate description of the
underlying process, we performed high-resolution (4-fs
step) numerical experiments by solving the three-wave
parametric equations [4] within the framework of a 3D+1,
ST model with radial symmetry and temporal dispersion
up to third order. Figure 2 (center) shows the calculated
pump proﬁles for conditions identical to those in Fig. 2
(left). Here the resolution of the numerical-data presen-

2

tation is reduced to 200 fs in order to match the resolu-
tion of the experimental diagnostic. The excellent agree-
ment between experiment and calculation proves that the
key features of the observed phenomenon are determined
by the χ(2) process only.
Importantly, the full resolu-
tion plots, presented in Fig. 2 (right), indicate the occur-
rence of a temporal breakup on the 10 fs scale (the cor-
responding autocorrelation shows a 25 fs FWHM peak).
The same structure occurs on the signal and idler waves,
which appear spatially and temporally self-trapped with
the pump. As to the dependence on Ω, the idler behaves
in the same way as the signal wave.

Evidence for the fundamental role played by the di-
mensionality in the non-linear process is given by the
plots in Fig. 3, where results of the experiment, of the
spatio–temporal, spatial and temporal models are com-
pared. The results indicate that while the ST model de-
scribes the experiment fairly well, both the monochro-
matic and plane-wave approximations completely fail to
reproduce the large variation of the ﬂuence ratio with the
tuning parameter, giving an almost constant value (about
unity) over the entire tuning range. This unequivocally
proves that the red solitons appear as a genuine ST ef-
fect. Note that, since the temporal dynamics occurs on a
time scale much shorter than that of the pulse envelope,
one should not expect any appreciable eﬀect of the input-
pulse duration on the observed phenomenology. Direct
numerical test with 5 ps long pulses did not produce any
detectable deviation from the results shown in Fig. 3.

Our claim is that the red solitons appear as a conse-
quence of the ST MI. In justifying this, we should ﬁrst
note that no theory is yet available concerning the in-
stability of an intense, CW and focused pump beam.
Therefore we must rely, in ﬁrst approximation, on the
predictions valid for the CW and plane-wave regime. In
this case, quantum-noise parametric ampliﬁcation has al-
ready been shown to appear as a branch of the MI pro-
cess [11]. When the ST features of the noise are ac-
counted for, one should not expect spatial and temporal
breakup to occur as independent processes. In fact, via
the phase-matching constraint, the parametric gain (or,
equivalently, the MI) couples space and time by estab-
lishing angular dispersion and X-shaped ST spectra in
the ampliﬁed modes [12]. We expect that the same key
action of the gain should play a role in our experiment
as well.
In fact, we detected appreciable angular dis-
persion in the generated signal wave. Moreover, even if
the temporal breakup in Fig. 2 (right) appears similar to
what might be expected by a purely temporal MI, the
numerical results in Fig. 3 indicate that the imbalance
(i.e. Fp/Fs ≪ 1) is not retrievable as long as spatial and
temporal processes are considered independently.

In order to provide an explanation of the observed con-
nection between dimensionality, imbalance and depen-
dence on Ω we focus attention on the dramatic increase
of the down-conversion bandwidth close to degeneracy,

3

FIG. 2: Spatio-temporal intensity maps of the output pump-wave packet for OPA excitation and two diﬀerent frequency-tuning
conditions (top and bottom); left: experimental data; center: smoothed numerical data; right: high resolution numerical data.
All data refer to the same input-pulse energy.

which should cause a down-conversion rate much larger
than that for up-conversion and thus the imbalance to ap-
pear. Note that a correlation between bandwidths and
imbalance must be expected as long as the signal and
idler ﬁeld are not correlated. In fact, in case of phase-
conjugated ﬁelds, the expected drop in up-conversion ef-
ﬁciency induced by the ﬁltering action of the narrow up-
conversion bandwidth no longer occurs, mutual cancela-
tion of the opposite chirps taking place without losses
in the sum-frequency process [13]. This consideration
explains why the 1D temporal model fails in retrieving
the imbalance. In fact, a phase conjugation between sig-
nal and idler is established by the down conversion pro-
cess. However, in the real 3D space, this conjugation is
quenched very rapidly owing to the fast phase accumu-
lation caused by diﬀraction and angular dispersion [14].
In contrast, in the plane-wave approximation, it becomes
unrealistically robust, due to the weaker eﬀect of GVD.
With the aim of verifying the generality of the pro-
cess we performed a second experiment, where the spatial
solitons are excited via SHG. The measurements, based
on time-integrated detection only, were performed by fo-
cusing down to a 45 µm spot (FWHM) a ﬁrst-harmonic

(FH) pulse (1.5 ps, 1055 nm) on the input face of a
30 mm long LBO crystal, operated in non-critical, type-I
phase matching. By changing the crystal temperature we
tuned the phase mismatch parameter, ∆k = 2kFH − kSH,
while keeping the frequency tuning ﬁxed at degeneracy
(Ω = 0.5). The results in terms of the ratio between the
energy contents, EFH/ESH, at threshold (both FH and
SH beams trapped) are presented in Fig. 4, the ∆k < 0
region being limited close to phase matching by a rapid
increase of the threshold with |∆k|. The few points, how-
ever, are suﬃcient to highlight the large discrepancy oc-
curring for ∆k < 0 between experiment and the CW-
model, which predicts solitons with the opposite imbal-
ance with respect to that measured.

The fact that the CW model fails for negative, and not
for positive, phase mismatch must be related to the dom-
inant SH content expected in this parameter region, as
long as spectral broadening does not occur (see Fig. 4, full
line). Due to this, the dynamics that follows the SH gen-
eration must resemble that of the OPA-excitation, where
only the pump was launched at the input. To this end
we mention that, for ∆k ≤ 0, a slight input-energy re-
duction caused the quenching of the trapping only in the

1

s

F
/

F

p

0.1

H
S
E
H
F
E

/

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
-15

0.63

0.65

0.67

0.71

0.73

0.69
/W

p

s

FIG. 3: Frequency-tuning dependence of the pump-to-signal
(peak) ﬂuence ratio, Fp/Fs, for OPA excitation. Squares: ex-
perimental; Triangles: 3D+1 spatio–temporal model; Circles:
2D+1 spatial model; Stars: 1D+1 temporal model. Fluences
from the 3D+1 model are calculated by temporal integration.
All data refer to the same input (peak) intensity.

-10

-5

5

10

15

0
D k [cm-1]

FIG. 4: Phase-mismatch dependence of the ratio between the
output FH and SH energies (experimental: balls), or intensi-
ties (CW model: stars), integrated within the FWHM diam-
eter. All data are at taken at threshold.

SH wave; this means an identical red-soliton phenomenol-
ogy as described for the OPA case. In comparing the two
excitation schemes, we expect that for the SHG case clas-
sical noise should also contribute to the process. As to
the impact of the self-phase modulation, we mention that
preliminary 3D+1 calculations performed in the absence
of noise failed in retrieving the imbalance. A second pe-
culiarity of the SHG excitation is that it leads to a true
instability of the solitary regime, a spatial soliton being
expected in the absence of MI. Again, since no theory has
yet been developed for the MI of a bulk solitary beam, we
must rely on the study of the MI of the FH+SH plane-
and-monochromatic eigenmode for disclosing the mecha-
nism of the ST interplay. Indeed, in this case too the MI
has been shown to lead to the spontaneous formation of

4

angular dispersion, its gain curve having an X-type pro-
ﬁle in the ST frequency domain [15].

In conclusion, we have shown that conventional, time-
integrated, beam-proﬁle measurements reveal the oc-
currence of a χ(2) spatial soliton for which only the
low-frequency signal and idler waves appear to be self-
trapped. The implementation of a spatio–temporal, 3D
mapping, technique has revealed that also the high-
frequency pump is trapped, but with an unexpectedly
weak intensity. Numerical calculations have highlighted
the occurrence of a temporal break up of all the three
ﬁelds on a 10 fs scale. Moreover, they have shown that
dispersion, diﬀraction and noise are all necessary ele-
ments for describing the process. Relying upon recent
studies on the spatio–temporal instability of the plane
and monochromatic wave in OPA and SHG, we propose
an interpretation of the process as the manifestation of
a noise-seeded spatio–temporal modulational instability
on the χ(2) spatial-soliton dynamics.

The authors wish to acknowledge the technical assis-
tance of G. Tamosauskas and D. Mikalauskas, discussions
with S. Trillo and C. Conti, and support of the MIUR
(Coﬁn01/FIRB02), UNESCO UVO-ROSTE (875.586.2),
EC CEBIOLA (ICA1-CT-2000-70027) contracts.

∗

Permanent address: Institute of Photonic Sciences, Jordi
Girona 29, NEXUS II, E-08034 Barcelona, Spain

[1] S. Trillo and W.E. Torruellas, eds., Spatial Solitons

[2] G.I. Stegeman, D. Hagan and L. Torner, Opt. and Quant.

(Springer, Berlin, 2001).

El. 28, 1691 (1996).

[3] W.E. Torruellas, Z. Wang, D.J. Hagan, E.W. VanStry-
land, G.I. Stegeman, L. Torner and C.R. Menyuk, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 74, 5036 (1995).

[4] A.V. Buryak, P. Di Trapani, D. Skryabin and S. Trillo,

Phys. Rep. 370, 63 (2002).

[5] G. Valiulis, J. Kilius, O. Jedrkiewicz, A. Bramati, S. Mi-
nardi, C. Conti, S. Trillo, A. Piskarskas and P. Di Tra-
pani, OSA Trends in Optics and Photonics 57, QELS
2001 Technical Digest, postconf. edition, pap. QPD10-1.
[6] P. Pioger, V. Couderc, L. Lefort, A. Barthelemy, F. Ba-
ronio, C. De Angelis, Y. Min, V. Quiring and W. Sohler,
Opt. Lett. 27, 2182 (2002).

[7] S. Trillo and P. Ferro, Opt. Lett. 20, 438 (1995).
[8] X. Liu, K. Beckwitt and F. Wise, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

1871 (2000).

[9] P. Di Trapani, G. Valiulis, W. Chinaglia and A. An-

dreoni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 265 (1998).

[10] F. Devaux and E. Lantz, Opt. Comm. 118, 25 (1995).
[11] T.A.B. Kennedy and S. Trillo, Phys. Rev. A54, 4396

[12] S. Orlov, A. Piskarskas and A. Stabinis, Opt. Lett. 27,

(1996).

2103 (2002).

[13] F. Raoult, A.C.L. Boscheron, D. Husson, C. Sauteret,
A. Modena, V. Malka, F. Dorchies and A. Migus, Opt.
Lett. 23 1117 (1998)

[14] O.E. Martinez, Opt. Commun., 59, 229 (1986).

W
[15] S. Trillo, C. Conti, P. Di Trapani, O. Jedrkiewicz,
J. Trull, G. Valiulis and G. Bellanca, Opt. Lett. 27, 1451

(2002).

5

