3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The focus of light –

linear polarization breaks the rotational symmetry of the focal spot

RALF DORN, SUSANNE QUABIS and GERD LEUCHS
Zentrum f¨ur Moderne Optik, Universit¨at Erlangen–N¨urnberg,
D–91058 Erlangen, Germany
e–mails: dorn@kerr.physik.uni-erlangen.de; quabis@physik.uni-erlangen.de;
leuchs@physik.uni-erlangen.de

Abstract:

We experimentally demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that a linearly polarized beam is fo-
cussed to an asymmetric spot when using a high–numerical aperture focussing system.
This asymmetry was predicted by Richards and Wolf [Proc. R. Soc. London A 253, 358
(1959)] and can only be measured when a polarization insensitive sensor is placed in the
focal region. We used a specially modiﬁed photodiode in a knife edge type set up to
obtain highly resolved images of the total electric energy density distribution at the fo-
cus. The results are in good agreement with the predictions of a vectorial focussing theory.

The ability to control and focus light is at the heart of the interdisciplinary ﬁeld
of optics and for many applications an exact knowledge of the structure of the focal
ﬁeld is required. Many areas in optical sciences make use of a tightly focussed light
beam such as confocal microscopy [1] and optical data storage [2]. A highly concentrated
and well matched ﬁeld is also a necessary requirement for coupling to small quantum
systems [3] and applying light forces to microscopic particles [4]. In the regime of strong
focussing the widely used scalar theories are inadequate to describe the focal ﬁeld. A
vectorial focussing theory is required instead. In the concrete example of a beam which
is linearly polarized along the y–axis, the rays propagating in the xz- and in the yz-plane,
respectively, contribute diﬀerently to the focal ﬁeld (see ﬁgures 1(a),(b)). This has two
closely related consequences. The eﬀective numerical aperture in the yz-plane is reduced
and the focal spot is elongated in the direction of polarization of the input beam because
the rays that propagate in this plane do not add up perfectly at the focus. Associated with
this elongation, ﬁeld components in directions orthogonal to the direction of polarization
of the input beam arise. These eﬀects are neglected in scalar descriptions [5], which
therefore do not predict the correct spot shape and size.
All aspects of the ﬁeld distribution of a tightly focussed linearly polarized light beam have
been studied in theory taking into account the vector properties of the ﬁeld [6, 7, 8, 9]. The
theoretical calculations predict pronounced deviations from the results of the scalar theory.
Nevertheless, a major part of the intensity1 is still predicted to be contained in a ﬁeld
1In the following, intensity always refers to electric energy density, which is the part of the ﬁeld energy

that couples to standard photodetectors and photosensitive materials.

1

Figure 1: Plane wave model for focussing a beam which is linearly polarized parallel to the
y–axis. Cross sections for two planes which contain the optical axis, (a) perpendicular and
(b) parallel to the direction of polarization, show that the contribution to the total ﬁeld of
the rays propagating under a large angle to the optical axis is weaker in (b). Calculated
intensity patterns for the three orthogonal ﬁeld components (c–e) and total intensity
distribution (f). The direction of polarization is indicated by arrows. (Calculations for
NA=0.9, Gaussian input beam with a diameter (1/e2) of 94% of the diameter of the
entrance pupil of the objective.

component with an almost circular intensity distribution, which is polarized parallel to the
direction of polarization of the incident beam (see ﬁgure 1 (c)). The remaining intensity
appears in the two other mutually orthogonal ﬁeld components. The orthogonal transverse
component is calculated to show a four leaf clover shaped distribution (see ﬁgure 1 (d)) and
does not contribute substantially to the shape of the focal ﬁeld due to its minute intensity.
On the other hand, the intensity contained in a longitudinal z–component is calculated to
contribute 16% to the total intensity (for a numerical aperture of 0.9 and for homogeneous
illumination). The calculated pattern of the intensity distribution of this component
shows maxima away from the optical axis in the direction of the incident polarization
(see ﬁgure 1 (e)). This causes the asymmetry of the total ﬁeld (see ﬁgure 1 (f)). When
annular apertures are used for focussing, the relative strength of this longitudinal ﬁeld
and therefore the asymmetry is predicted to be enhanced [10].

On the experimental side several studies of the focal intensity distribution have been
reported. Using a CCD-camera Karman et al.
[11] achieved a large dynamic range of
5 orders of magnitude for the intensity. They focussed with a low numerical aperture,

2

NA=0.01, for which polarization eﬀects are too small to be detectable. The results were
in excellent agreement with the predictions of the scalar theory. For the observation of
polarization eﬀects it is not only important to focus the light with a high numerical aper-
ture but also to detect light with an equally high eﬀective numerical aperture. Firester et
al. [12] moved a knife edge through a strongly focussed beam (with numerical apertures
up to 0.95). They observed only a small solid angle of the transmitted light because the
detector was not in direct contact with the knife edge. Therefore they did not observe
any asymmetry. Instead of the knife edge, one can also move a Ronchi ruling through the
beam but in this case there is an additional requirement: one has to make a priori as-
sumptions about the shape of the intensity distribution for the evaluation [13]. Collecting
the light with a ﬁbre tip typically provides the necessary high numerical detection aper-
ture [14]. However, the metal coating around the tip introduces a signiﬁcant polarization
dependence [15]. Another option is to scan small sub-wavelength beads through the focus
and observe the scattered and reﬂected light [16, 17]. This technique, however, does also
not readily disclose the focal intensity distribution in an unambiguous way. The detected
signal depends on the emission characteristics of the bead [18] which in turn depends
on the direction of the exciting ﬁeld. This direction varies largely in the case of high
numerical aperture focussing. If the detection solid angle is not exactly equal to 2π or 4π,
the overall detection eﬃciency will depend on the direction of the ﬁeld exciting the bead.
Therefore, one again has to make a priori assumptions about the measured distribution
of the vectorial electric ﬁeld E. Instead of isotropic beads, which do not have a preferred
axis, one can also use individual oriented molecules the excitation of which depends sen-
sitively on the direction of polarization of the incoming light. This property was used
to determine the orientation of molecules on a surface [19]. Single molecules oriented in
three diﬀerent mutually orthogonal directions could be used to scan the intensity distri-
bution of all three polarization directions separately. However, a quantitative comparison
of the three patterns remains diﬃcult as the correct relative scaling for the composition
of the total intensity pattern requires the exact knowledge of the polarization–dependent
sensitivity of the detection system. An independent measurement which relates the po-
sition integrated intensities of diﬀerent polarization components has been obtained only
for the two transverse components [20]. To summarize the state of the art, individual
aspects of the eﬀects of strong focussing have been measured in several experiments, but
none of them has measured the asymmetry of the polarization integrated total intensity
distribution in the focal spot.

We present here the ﬁrst direct experimental measurement of the total intensity dis-
tribution summing all three polarization components. We verify the elongated shape of
the total intensity distribution due to the presence of all three mutually orthogonal ﬁeld
components. The results of our measurements are in agreement with the results of the
vectorial focussing theory [6, 7].

To measure the intensity distribution in the focus we use an experimental set up which
is based on the knife-edge method. In this set up the transmitted light is detected in the

3

immediate vicinity of the knife edge. Thus the eﬀects of diﬀraction and propagation of
the beam are minimized. Our sensor is a specially designed p-i-n photodiode that is
moved transversely in the focal plane using a piezo driven table operating in closed loop
mode with a step width of 10nm to ensure high lateral resolution [21]. Parts of the light
sensitive area are covered by a sharp edged opaque pad that plays the role of the knife
edge. The photocurrent of the diode is proportional to the electric ﬁeld intensity (∝ |E|2)
that is incident on the light sensitive area, which depends on the fraction of the beam
blocked by the opaque structure. A more detailed description of the photodiode is given
in the appendix. The data were taken with a laser intensity noise <0.6% and the signal
noise was reduced to <0.3% by normalizing to the signal of the monitor diode. At each
position of the edge the photocurrent is averaged for up to 100ms which further reduces
the signal noise to <0.1%. For every scan of the edge the signal is corrected for oﬀsets
when the beam is completely blocked by the opaque structure and is normalized to one
when the whole beam hits the light sensitive area. The diﬀerentiation of the signal with
respect to the detector position yields the line integrals of the intensity distribution in one
transverse direction, parallel to the edge. This is equivalent to the projection of the 2D
intensity distribution on to a line perpendicular to the edge. The curves are diﬀerentiated
with the Savitzky-Golay algorithm [22] using ﬁve adjacent points.

Figure 2: Experimental set up to measure the focal intensity distribution. MO: Leica
plan–apo 100x, 0.9, OD: optical diode, HWP: half–wave plate, TL: telescope lenses, PH:
pinhole, FL: focussing lens, NCFPI: non–confocal Fabry–Perot interferometer, CL: col-
limating lens, AS: aperture stop, M: four mirrors for polarization insensitive deﬂection
(details not shown), MD: monitor diode, PD: photo diode partially covered with gold–zinc
alloy

To provide a linearly polarized and well deﬁned input ﬁeld, a helium neon laser beam
(λ=632.8nm) is sent through a non–confocal Fabry–Perot interferometer operating as a
mode cleaner. The transmitted beam is collimated to a TEM00-mode with a beam radius
of ωG=1.7mm (see ﬁgure 2). Using a half-wave plate, the direction of polarization was
rotated with respect to the edge. There was no signiﬁcant beam displacement due to the
rotation of the half-wave plate, documented by the fact that the maximum displacement

4

of the peak positions in the sensor plane is below 20nm. Measurements for 18 diﬀerent
orientations of the polarization relative to the edge were performed to reconstruct the
intensity distribution in the focal plane using the Radon back transformation [23]. For
measurements with an annular aperture, a stop is placed directly in front of the microscope
objective to block the inner part of the input beam. The stop is a glass substrate coated
with an opaque disc (di=2.0mm). The diameter of the entrance pupil of the microscope
objective is 3.6mm.

In ﬁgure 3(a) and (b) we present distributions of the focal intensity for a linearly
polarized beam that was focussed without and with annular apertures respectively. The
distributions were reconstructed from the experimental data and both show the elongation
of the focus. It is clearly visible that the elongation of the focus increases when an annular
aperture is inserted. Figures 3 (a) and (b) show cross sections through the reconstructed
distributions. The focal spot size is reduced from 0.40λ2 (theory: 0.37λ2) without annular
aperture to 0.35λ2 (theory: 0.28λ2) with annular aperture. This is mainly due to a reduc-
tion of the width of the proﬁle in the direction perpendicular to the initial polarization. In
this direction the increase of the sidelobes due to the annular aperture is most pronounced.

Figure 3: (a)Reconstructed intensity distribution in the focal plane for a linearly polarized
input ﬁeld without annular apperture. The contour line at half the maximum value (thick
black line) is shown rotated by 90◦ (dashed line). The spot is elongated in the direction
of polarization (indicated by the arrow). Using an annular aperture (b) the elongation
increases.

The asymmetry is even more obvious if one goes back to the input data for the tomographic
reconstruction i.e.
the initial line integrals of the intensity distribution (see ﬁgures 4
(c)and (d)). Parallel to the direction of polarization the distribution is broader than in
the orthogonal direction.

It is remarkable that the measured and the theoretical proﬁles are in good agreement
even in the shapes of the slopes. The measured height ratios of these projections of 0.83

5

(theory: 0.79) without and 0.73 (theory: 0.74) with annular aperture are close to the
theoretical values.

Figure 4: Cross sections through the reconstructed intensity distributions (a,b) along a line
parallel (solid circles) and perpendicular (open squares) to the direction of polarization.
Values for the measured FWHM are provided together with theoretical values in brackets.
(c,d) Measured projections of the intensity distribution on to a line parallel (solid circles)
and perpendicular (open squares) to the direction of polarization. (a,c) without and (b,d)
with annular aperture. Solid lines: theoretical curves

Also note, that we carefully checked that the elongation of the focus is not an artefact
caused by any residual polarization dependent interaction with the edge. The experi-
mental evidence is that the elongation completely vanishes when the eﬀective numerical
aperture of the microscope objective (Leica, Plan Apo, 100x, 0.9) is reduced stepwise to
0.27 by restricting the diameter do of the input beam by using an aperture stop (ﬁgure 5).
The observed deviation between theory and experiment, 5% for the measured data and
up to 20% for the deduced focal area, may be attributed to residual imperfections of the
set-up each causing deviations at the percentage level. Firstly, the Debye-approximation
used to obtain the theoretical curves neglects diﬀraction at the aperture rim. Second,
the objective is man made; in addition to radially dependent Fresnel-losses, there may
be stress-induced birefringence and deviations from the perfect surface geometry. Third,

6

Figure 5: Peak height of the projected intensity distributions vs. eﬀective numerical aper-
ture. Solid squares: projections on to a line perpendicular to the direction of polarization,
open circles: projections on to a line parallel to the direction of polarization along with
theoretical curves (solid lines). An input ﬁeld with a homogeneous intensity distribu-
tion was used. Note that the polarization anisotropy appears only for high numerical
apertures.

similar arguments hold for the overall beam geometry and the detector. The positioning
precision e.g. of the annular aperture with respect to the objective is about 50µm. Fourth,
the Radon back transformation requires perfectly centered data. A centering error of 10−3
causes already changes of about 10−2 for the spot area. Fifth, the diﬀerentiation of the
signal is sensitive to beam instabilities. The mechanical stability of the set up has been
improved until the position ﬂuctuation of the focal spot was below 1nm. We estimate
that the eﬀect of all these imperfections of the set up and of the theory can well explain
the observed discrepancy.

Line integrals of the intensity distribution were measured also for diﬀerent defocus
positions (see ﬁgure 6). This yields a cross section of the propagating beam containing
the optical axis. The observed asymmetry with respect to the focal plane is caused by
minute deviations of the wavefront [24] introduced by the microscope objective which are
at the limit of a state-of-the-art production process. For the comparison of the experi-
mental results with numerical calculations we considered spherical aberrations and found
the best agreement for a wavefront with an rms error of 0.0075λ, which is in excellent
agreement with the manufacturer‘s speciﬁcations [25] conveyed to us after the measure-
ment. Note, that the projections in ﬁgure 6 are distinctly diﬀerent for the two planes
parallel and perpendicular to the initial polarization. Also note, that the eﬀect of these
aberrations was observed in the defocus series. According to theory it does not inﬂuence

7

the focal size and shape in a measurable way.

Figure 6: Projections of the intensity distribution for a linearly polarized input beam.
Measured (a,c) and calculated (b,d) projections on to planes which contain the optical
axis which are parallel (a,b) and perpendicular (c,d) to the direction of linear polarization.
A spherical aberration (0.0075λ rms) of the wavefront was assumed in the calculations.

In summary, we report the ﬁrst reconstruction of the elongated focus caused by polar-
ization eﬀects. The set up is also sensitive enough to detect quantitatively the eﬀect of
the minute spherical aberrations introduced by the focussing microscope objective. The
longitudinal ﬁeld component showing up in the focal plane may help to improve the spec-
troscopic investigation of the 3D orientation of a single molecule near a surface [26, 27]
and evidence for the existence of the longitudinal ﬁeld component has already been re-
ported [19]. The good agreement between the measured and calculated intensity proﬁles
we report here allows one also to quantitatively infer the appearance of a longitudinal
ﬁeld component.

Acknowledgements:

We are grateful to W. Vollrath from Leica Microsystems for his support. We thank
G. D¨ohler for the fabrication of the p-i-n–diode. We appreciate helpful discussions with
Z. Hradil, H. J. Kimble and P. Leiderer.

8

Appendix:

The photodiode used in our experiment is a p-i-n AlGaAs diode that consists of a GaAs
substrate, an n-doped layer of AlGaAs, a layer of intrinsic GaAs, a p-doped layer of
AlGaAs and a p-doped GaAs cover layer (seen from the substrate to the surface). The
cover layer 10nm thick is necessary to protect the AlGaAs from corrosion. During the
fabrication process, care must be taken not to damage this layer. For a diode that
showed scratches that were up to 30nm deep as measured by an AFM, the photocurrent
showed unacceptably large ﬂuctuations when the focussed spot was scanned over the
active surface. The diode used in the experiment showed a surface roughness of below
3nm rms and the corresponding ﬂuctuations were below 0.1% (peak-to-valley). The active
surface of the device is 200µm × 260µm wide and is surrounded by rectangular contact
pads to tap the photocurrent which each have a size of 200µm × 120µm.

Figure 7: Schematic distribution of the photo current (b) and its derivative (a) with
respect to the position of the focal spot relative to a grating structure (c) placed on the
photodiode. The distance between the extrema before and behind one bar of the grating
in (a) depends on the direction of polarization of the incident beam relative to the grating.
dS denotes this distance for a polarization perpendicular (solid line) to the bars and dP
the distance for a polarization parallel (◦) to the bars.

The opaque material that forms the knife edge plays an important role. To allow for a
thin layer the opaque structure should show a small transmission and therefore preferably
be made of metal. However, for a metallic edge material, one would typically expect
a polarization dependent interaction with the light ﬁeld. For several edge materials we
observed that the position of the strongest increase of the photocurrent depends on the
direction of the polarization of the input ﬁeld with respect to the edge when scanning the
edge relative to the focus. To characterize this polarization dependent shift we determined

9

the ”duty-cycle” of the signal measured for diﬀerent grating structures on the active
surface. Each grating was measured twice once with the polarization of the input ﬁeld
being parallel and perpendicular to the grating. The diﬀerence in the ”duty cycle” for the
two directions of polarization of the input ﬁeld allows one to infer the relative lateral shift
of the two transverse ﬁeld components in the focal plane (see ﬁgure 7). This procedure
has the advantage that it does not require any absolute position measurements.

The shift was determined for diﬀerent edge materials, gold and diﬀerent gold-zinc
alloys. It turned out that this shift depends on the zinc-concentration of the edge material
(see ﬁgure 8).

Figure 8: Measured diﬀerence (dS−dP ) of the interval between the extrema in the line
integrated projections. This diﬀerence is caused by the polarization dependent interaction
with the edge as a function of the zinc concentration. A least square ﬁt (dashed line) was
used to ﬁnd the optimum zinc concentration (about 20%).

We found no signiﬁcant relative shift for a zinc concentration of about 20%. Therefore,
all measurements presented in the main part of the paper were performed using the edge
material with the optimized concentration and a thickness of about . 200nm, resulting
in a transmission below 1%. For the chosen alloy a good agreement with the results pre-
dicted by theory was observed. All other materials which were tested so far were excluded
as well behaved edge materials. It is worth noting that for the well behaved edge that
caused a minimal diﬀerential shift between the x and y polarization component (see ﬁgure
8) we also did not observe any signiﬁcant shift for the z-component. Here x and y refer
to the two transverse components and z to the longitudinal polarization component. x
is parallel to the edge whereas y and z are perpendicular to the edge. The mechanism
that for some materials leads to a displacement of individual ﬁeld components is not yet
completely clariﬁed. A possible mechanism under study is the excitation of surface plas-
mons. However, we want to stress that the above mentioned test gives phenomenological
evidence that the diode with the well behaved edge material is suitable to perform the
described measurements of the asymmetry of the focus.

10

References

[1] Wilson, T., 1990, Confocal Microscopy (London: Academic Press)

[2] Ichimura, I., Hayashi, S., and Kino, G. S., 1997, Appl. Optics, 36, 4339

[3] van Enk, S. J., and Kimble, H. J., 2000, Phys. Rev. A, 61, 051802(R)

[4] Maia Neta, P. A., and Nussenzveig, H. M., 2000, Europhys. Lett., 50, 702

[5] Sales, T. R. M., 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81, 3844

[6] Richards, B., and Wolf, E., 1959, Proc. R. Soc. London A, 253, 358

[7] Stamnes, J. J., 1986, Waves in focal regions (Bristol: Adam Hilger)

[8] Kant, R., 1993, J. Mod. Optics, 40, 337

[9] Sheppard, C. J. R., and T¨or¨ok, P., 1997, J. Mod. Optics, 44, 803

[10] Sheppard, C. J. R., 2001, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 18, 1579

[11] Karman, G. P., van Duijl, A., Beijersbergen, M. W., and Woerdman, J. P., 1997,

Appl. Opt., 36, 8091

[12] Firester, A. H., Heller, M. E., and Sheng, P., 1977, Appl. Opt., 16, 1971

[13] Cohen, D. K., Little, B., and Luecke, F. S., 1984, Appl. Opt., 23, 637

[14] Toledo–Crow, R., Rogers, J. K., Seiferth, F., and Vaez–Iravani, M., 1995, Ultrami-

croscopy, 57, 293

[15] Rhodes, S. K., Nugent, K. A., and Roberts, A., 2002, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 19, 1689

[16] Schneider, M. B., and Webb, W. W., 1981, Appl. Opt., 20, 1382

[17] Juˇskaitis, R., and Wilson, T., 1998, J. of Microscopy 189, 8

[18] Wilson, T., Juˇskaitis, R., and Higdon, P., 1997, Opt. Comm., 141, 298

[19] Sick, B., Hecht, B., and Novotny, L., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 4482

[20] Hell, S. W., and Bahlmann, K., 2000, Appl. Phys. Lett., 77, 612

[21] Quabis, S., Dorn, R., Eberler, M., Gl¨ockl, O., and Leuchs, G., 2001, Appl. Phys. B,

72, 109

11

[22] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes

in C (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994)

[23] Rowland, S. W., 1979, Computer Implementation of Image Reconstruction Formulas.
In Image Reconstruction from Projections, edited by G. T. Herman (Berlin: Springer),
pp. 9-78

[24] Sheppard, C. J. R., 1997, Optik, 105, 29

[25] The amount of spherical aberration introduced by the objective used was determined
to 0.0087λ (rms)@544nm corresponding to 0.0075λ (rms)@632.8nm. (Inferferometric
measurement of the manufacturer.) Dr. W. Vollrath, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar,
Germany, 2001, Personal communication.

[26] Macklin, J. J., Trautman, J. J., Harris, T. D., and Brus, L. E., 1996, Science, 272,

255

[27] Empedocles, S. A., Neuhauser, R., and Bawendi, M. G., 1999, Nature, 399, 126

12

