3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exo-interferometric Phase Determination of X rays

Wolfgang Sturhahn,∗ Caroline L’abb´e, and Thomas S. Toellner
Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439
(Dated: November 24, 2013)

The time-dependent phase change of x rays after transmission through a sample has been deter-
mined experimentally. We used an x-ray interferometer with a reference sample containing sharp
nuclear resonances to prepare a phase-controlled x-ray beam. A sample with similar resonances was
placed in the beam but outside of the interferometer; hence our use of the term “exo-interferometric.”
We show that the phase change of the x rays due to the sample can be uniquely determined from
the time-dependent transmitted intensities. The energy response of the sample was reconstructed
from the phase and the intensity data with a resolution of 23 neV.

PACS numbers: 42.87.Bg, 42.25.Hz, 76.80.+y, 78.70.Ck

Particle scattering, particularly of photons, is one of
the most widely used tools in science. The measured
quantity is usually the particle ﬂux or the intensity. The
phase of the particle ﬁeld, or more precisely the phase
change of the ﬁeld during the scattering process, goes
undetected by the intensity measurement. The related
loss of information is known as the “phase problem” in
various areas of research.

Methods of phase determination are commonly based
on creating two or more indistinguishable paths for the
particle where at least one path does not include the sam-
ple. The resulting interference pattern is then accessible
Interferometric techniques
by intensity measurements.
with x rays [1, 2, 3], light [4], neutrons [5], or atoms
[6] have been developed in this context. Results usually
depend on details in the detected interference pattern,
and measurements become exceedingly diﬃcult for short
wavelengths. In the x-ray regime, thermal and mechani-
cal stability of the interferometer (IFM) are crucial, and
the spatial limitations on a sample in close proximity to
sensitive components of the IFM can be problematic for
experimental work. Here we discuss an x-ray interfero-
metric method that avoids this problem.

The typical x-ray IFM works with sample and reference
placed in spatially separate paths inside the IFM. This
allows the comparison of phase changes to the photon
ﬁeld caused by sample and reference. Besides potential
stability problems, interference is not achieved if the di-
rection of the x rays is changed by a scattering process
in the sample. The spatial separation of x-ray IFM and
sample for phase measurements would be highly desir-
able but to our knowledge has not been demonstrated
In this paper, we present measurements of
previously.
phase changes caused by a sample placed outside the
IFM, i.e., after recombination of the beam paths. We
use the term “exo-interferometry” to emphasize this fact.
Exo-interferometry permits us to analyze phase changes
of x rays that were transmitted, reﬂected, or diﬀracted
by a sample material. Our approach is based on recent
theoretical work [7] on time-dependent phase determina-
tion using an x-ray IFM. For experimental veriﬁcation,

we used a coherent nuclear resonant scattering process
[8], which produces a signal that is suﬃciently delayed to
be observable by x-ray detectors. Previous experiments
on nuclear resonant interferometry [9, 10] placed samples
inside the IFM and did not attempt to obtain the time-
dependent phase. The principles of exo-interferometric
phase determination are elucidated next.

The addition of ﬁeld amplitudes in the IFM allows the
production of a time-dependent ﬁeld with a phase that
can be manipulated in a controlled way. Consider a very
short x-ray pulse described by δ(t) that is incident on a
triple-Laue IFM similar to the schematic shown in Fig. 1.
If we place a reference material with response function
R(t) in one of the paths of the IFM and apply an addi-
tional phase shift α between the two paths, the exit ﬁeld
will be roughly proportional to exp[iα] δ(t) + R(t). It will
be useful to introduce the delayed response explicitly. Let
R(t) = r0δ(t)+ R′(t), where R′(t) is the delayed response
that vanishes for “early” times t < τ after arrival of the
x-ray pulse. The ﬁeld amplitude after the IFM is then
given by

(r0 + e

iα) δ(t) + R

′

(t) .

(1)

At early times, modulus and phase of the ﬁeld are con-
trolled by the phase shift α, whereas at later times the
components of the ﬁeld are unaﬀected. The basic idea
of exo-interferometric phase determination is now to mix
ﬁeld components with diﬀerent time coordinates simply
by scattering the x-ray ﬁeld described by Eq. (1) oﬀ a
sample. The degree of mixing will depend on the proper-
ties of the sample and on the adjustable value of α. If the
response of the sample material is prompt, i.e., propor-
tional to δ(t), mixing does not occur – a delayed response
is required. Assume the transmission through a sample
with response function S(t) = s0δ(t) + S′(t) with delayed
part S′(t). The expression for the ﬁeld amplitude after
the sample contains three terms

iα) δ(t) +

′

s0R

s0(r0 + e

(t) + (r0 + e

(t) .
(2)
The ﬁrst term describes conventional x-ray interferome-
try. The second term is reminiscent of the coherent su-

+ R

(t)

∗S

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

′

iα) S

′

′

LLL
}

2

S

P

R

D

FIG. 1: Experimental setup. The incident SR is split at the
ﬁrst face of the triple-Laue IFM (LLL). The reference, R, is
placed in the lower beam path. A rotatable 0.5-mm-thick,
polished Be platelet works as a phase retarder, P. The sam-
ple, S, is kept spatially separate from the IFM, except in the
control experiment, where it is placed next to the reference
but in the upper beam path. The avalanche photodiode de-
tector, D, provides time-resolved spectra.

perposition of delayed reference and sample response that
is observed when placing the sample inside the IFM. The
last term is a convolution integral that also gives a de-
layed contribution. A similar expression, but all terms
with α being absent, has been used to describe “time-
domain interferometry” [11, 12].

The previous arguments lead to the following conclu-
sions about the feasibility of exo-interferometric experi-
ments. Reference and sample must produce time-delayed
responses, and the convolution of the responses should
be negligible, i.e., either the spectra of R′ and S′ have a
small overlap or the response is suﬃciently weak. There
must be a time scale τ that clearly separates “early” and
“delayed.” However, the time scale does not enter quan-
titatively – it is mostly determined by experimental cir-
cumstances. The response time of an x-ray IFM using
single crystals with low-order Bragg or Laue reﬂections is
of the order 10−15 s. In the present experiment, the x-ray
pulses incident on the IFM had a longitudinal coherence
time of about 0.3 ps corresponding to an energy band-
width of 2 meV. In addition, the average length of the
synchrotron radiation (SR) pulse, 70 ps, and the time res-
olution of the x-ray detector, 1 ns, have to be considered.
Mainly caused by detector resolution, the time scale τ
is placed in the nanosecond regime. The time scale for
the nuclear-resonant response of sample and reference is
determined by the lifetime of the nuclear excited state,
which is 141 ns for the 14.4125 keV nuclear level of the
57Fe isotope used here.

Experiments were performed at sector 3 of the Ad-
vanced Photon Source. The storage ring was ﬁlled with
23 electron bunches producing about 6.2·106 x-ray pulses
per second. The SR was monochromatized to about
2 meV bandwidth to avoid overload of the detector sys-
tem while maintaining the spectral brightness of the x
rays around the nuclear transition energy. After reduc-
tion of the beam size to 0.3×0.3 mm2, the photon ﬂux
was 109 ph/s and about 3·107 ph/s after the triple-Laue

FIG. 2: Time spectra (a),(b) and phase angle (c) for the
control case, i.e., the sample mounted inside the IFM. The
time spectra (a) correspond to phase-retarder settings of π,
−π/2, 0, and π/2 (top to bottom). The time spectrum (b)
is the response of the sample only, i.e., the reference-beam
path was blocked. The solid line is a ﬁt to the data. The
time-dependent phase angle was either extracted directly from
spectra (a) using Eq. (3), (symbols), or calculated with pa-
rameters obtained from the ﬁt of (b) and an isomeric shift of
1Γ, (line).

IFM. A schematic of the experimental setup is shown
in Fig. 1. Three situations were realized : the sample is
placed outside the IFM and magnetized collinear with the
linear polarization of the SR, as before but magnetized
perpendicular to polarization and propagation direction
of the SR, the sample is mounted inside the IFM and
magnetized parallel to the polarization direction of the
SR. In all cases, the reference was a 1.1-µm-thick foil of
stainless steel (Fe0.55Cr0.25Ni0.2) that was 95 % enriched
in the 57Fe isotope. The sample outside the IFM was
a 2.5-µm-thick iron foil that was 53 % enriched in the
57Fe isotope. The control measurements with sample in-
side the IFM used a 2.2-µm-thick iron foil that was 95 %
enriched in the 57Fe isotope. Very good knowledge of
the time response of magnetized iron and stainless steel
motivated this choice.

For each experimental situation, we measured six time

3

tion of well-deﬁned hyperﬁne interaction parameters of
the chosen iron foil.

If the sample is placed outside the IFM, Eq. (2) is ap-
plied, and, if one neglects the convolution integral, the
relative phase results from Eq. (3) with the replacement
ξ = I(0) − I(π) − 4f IS. The last term is composed of
the time spectrum of the sample, IS, and a factor f that
accounts for absorption in the reference and IFM imper-
fections. f is the product of IFM visibility, 0.45 in this
case, and intensity ratio of the individual IFM paths.
We determined experimentally f = 0.504. Fig. 3 shows
the time-dependent intensities and phases for the two di-
rections of magnetization with the sample outside the
IFM. In Figs. 2 and 3, one notices overshoots at phase
jumps, i.e., at sign changes of the transmitted electric
ﬁeld associated with zero intensity. In those minima, the
measurement is most sensitive to eﬀects of the detector
resolution and potentially other systematic errors. How-
ever, the resulting phase errors are associated with very
small ﬁeld amplitudes, which reduces their signiﬁcance.

FIG. 3: Time-dependent intensities (a) and phase angles (b)
for the sample mounted outside the IFM and magnetized per-
pendicular, A, or parallel, B, to the polarization of the SR.
The solid lines are ﬁts to the intensity data. The phase an-
gles were either extracted directly from spectra using Eq. (3)
as explained in the text, (symbols), or calculated with param-
eters obtained from the ﬁts of (a) and an isomeric shift of 1Γ,
(line).

spectra : the phase retarder adjusted to α = 0, π, ±π/2,
and either IFM path blocked. The spectra were col-
lected in back-to-back sequences of 10 min/spectrum to
minimize systematical errors caused by potential beam
instabilities and temperature drifts. Temperature vari-
ations during the experiment were less than 150 mK.
For the control case, the relative phase change of the
x-rays by the sample is calculated from the four inter-
ference spectra I(α) without speciﬁc knowledge about
the IFM imperfections. With ξ = I(0) − I(π) and
η = I(π/2) − I(−π/2), we obtain from ref. [7] for the
time-dependent phase angle

iφ =

e

ξ + iη
ξ2 + η2

.

p

The time spectra for the diﬀerent phase-retarder settings,
the time spectrum of the sample alone, and the derived
phase angle, φ, are shown in Fig. 2. A standard evalu-
ation code, Conuss [13], was used to ﬁt the spectrum
of the sample. The excellent agreement supports the no-

(3)

the

FIG. 4:
exo-
Reconstructed energy spectra for
interferometric case and sample magnetized perpendicular,
A, or parallel, B, to the polarization of the SR, and the con-
trol case with sample inside IFM and magnetized parallel,
C. The solid lines are ﬁts to the average spectra (circles).
Spectra from individual sequences are shown as shaded dots.
The energy scale is given in units of the nuclear level width
Γ=4.66 neV.

The determination of the time-dependent phase as
described in the previous section did not require speciﬁc
knowledge of reference or sample. The phase angle to-
gether with the measured intensities of the sample alone,
as displayed in Figs. 2 and 3, permits us to reconstruct
the energy response ˜S(E) of the sample by Fourier trans-
formation

˜S(E) =

IS(t) e

iφ(t)e

iEt/¯h dt .

(4)

Z p

In this expression, IS(t) is the time spectrum of the sam-
ple, shown in Figs. 2(b) and 3(a), and φ(t) is the phase
angle determined earlier and shown in Figs. 2(c) and 3(b).
˜S(E) was calculated for each sequence of data (about 1h
In Fig. 4, we show the reconstructed
collection time).
energy spectra | ˜S(E)|2 for each data sequence, the av-
erage of all data sequences, and the calculated energy
spectra. The oscillation pattern in the time spectra and
the separation of the resonances in the energy spectra
are dominated by the magnetic ﬁeld at the 57Fe nu-
clei. The results for magnetic ﬁeld values agree within
0.03 % for the control case and within 0.2 % and 0.7 %
for the exo-interferometric situations A and B. In addi-
tion, the reconstructed energy spectra contain a small
but noticeable overall shift, the so-called isomeric shift.
One obtains 1.037(6) Γ for the control case, in agree-
ment with the literature value of 0.9(2) Γ [14]. The exo-
interferometric situations A and B give 1.05(2) Γ and
0.67(2) Γ for the same quantity. The values are given
in units of Γ=4.66 neV, the width of the nuclear-excited
state. In our measurement, we used an avalanche photo-
diode detector with about 1 ns resolution, which results
in an accessible energy range in the reconstructed spec-
trum of about 140 Γ=0.66 µeV. The energy resolution is
related to the observed duration of the time-delayed sig-
nal [7]. Here the time duration of 116 ns was determined
by the operating mode of the Advanced Photon Source
and detector dead time. It leads to an energy resolution
of 23 neV. The additional broadening of the resonances
in Fig. 4 is caused by thickness-related self-absorption ef-
fects in the samples. The agreement of calculation and
reconstructed spectra is generally very good even though
Fig. 4 shows deviations, which appear to be stronger for
the exo-interferometric cases. Also for the control case,
a slight asymmetry in the spectrum can be observed.
Possible explanations include inhomogeneity in sample
or reference and non random imperfections of the IFM.
At present, we have no conclusive explanation for these
small but noticeable eﬀects. In situation B, our neglect of
the convolution term in Eq. (2), which amounts to an ap-
proximation in the process of phase determination, leads
to larger deviations of, e.g., the measured isomeric shift.
A glance at Fig. 4 B shows that two resonances of the
sample are rather close to the origin of the energy scale,
which marks the position of the single resonance of the
stainless-steel reference. The overlap of the energy spec-

4

tra leads to a stronger contribution of the convolution
term than in situation A, and its neglect causes a larger
distortion in the reconstructed energy spectra.

Exo-interferometry has been introduced as spectro-
scopic use of an x-ray IFM with distinct advantages in
sample utilization. The ideas of exo-interferometry are
general, but potential applications need to use techni-
cally available time scales, which are essentially given by
the best time resolution of x-ray detectors. At present,
streak cameras provide ps resolution, which could make
a meV-energy range accessible with µeV resolution. The
presented data have unambigously demonstrated that
time-dependent phase changes in x-ray ﬁelds can be mea-
sured with samples positioned inside or outside an x-ray
IFM. To demonstrate the principle, our studies were con-
ducted in transmission geometry. But, in contrast to
conventional x-ray interferometry, crystal diﬀraction or
surface reﬂection could be investigated as well. For ex-
ample, in pump-probe time-resolved x-ray diﬀraction ex-
periments [15], exo-interferometric phase determination
may become a very useful tool. It also becomes possible
to manipulate the x-ray beam between IFM and sample,
e.g., by focusing or polarization control.

We want to thank J. Zhao for valuable support during
beamline operations. This work was supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, Oﬃce
of Science, under Contract No. W-31-109-Eng-38.

Electronic address: sturhahn@anl.gov

∗
[1] U. Bonse and M. Hart, Appl.Phys.Lett. 6, 155 (1965); 7,

99 (1965); Z.Physik 188, 154 (1965)

[2] U. Bonse and W. Graeﬀ, in X-ray Optics edited by H.-
J. Queisser (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977), pp.93-143
[3] K. Hirano, A. Momose, Phys.Rev.Lett. 76, 3735 (1996)
[4] P. Hariharan and D. Malacara, Selected Papers on Inter-
ference, Interferometry, and Interferometric Metrology
(SPIE Optical Engineering Press, Bellingham, WA, 1995)
[5] H. Rauch and S.A. Werner, Neutron Interferometry :
Lessons in Experimental Quantum Mechanics (Oxford
University Press, New York, 2000)

[6] P.R. Berman, Atom Interferometry (Academic Press, San

Diego, CA, 1997)

[7] W. Sturhahn, Phys.Rev. B 63, 094105 (2001)
[8] E. Gerdau and H. de Waard, eds., Nuclear Resonant Scat-
tering of Synchrotron Radiation, Hyperﬁne Int. 123-125,
(1999/2000)

[9] Y. Hasegawa et al., Phys.Rev. B 50, 17748 (1994)
[10] K. Izumi et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 34, 4258 (1995)
[11] A.Q.R. Baron et al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 79, 2823 (1997)
[12] G.V. Smirnov, V.G. Kohn, W. Petry, Phys.Rev. B 63,

144303 (2001)

[13] W. Sturhahn, Hyperﬁne

(2000);
W. Sturhahn and E. Gerdau, Phys.Rev. B 49, 9285
(1994)

Int.

149

[14] J. Stevens, ed., M¨ossbauer Data Index (Plenum Press,

125,

New York, 1974)

[15] D.A. Reis et al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 86, 3072 (2001)

