Europhysics Letters

PREPRINT

3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A schlieren method for ultra-low angle light scattering
measurements

Doriano Brogioli, Alberto Vailati and Marzio Giglio
Dipartimento di Fisica and Istituto Nazionale per la Fisica della Materia - Universit`a
degli Studi di Milano, via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy

PACS. 42.25.Fx – Diﬀraction and scattering.
PACS. 42.79.Mt – Schlieren devices.

Abstract. – We describe a self calibrating optical technique that allows to perform absolute
measurements of scattering cross sections for the light scattered at extremely small angles.
Very good performances are obtained by using a very simple optical layout similar to that
used for the schlieren method, a technique traditionally used for mapping local refraction index
changes. The scattered intensity distribution is recovered by a statistical analysis of the random
interference of the light scattered in a half-plane of the scattering wave vectors and the main
transmitted beam. High quality data can be obtained by proper statistical accumulation of
scattered intensity frames, and the static stray light contributions can be eliminated rigorously.
The potentialities of the method are tested in a scattering experiment from non equilibrium
ﬂuctuations during a free diﬀusion experiment. Contributions of light scattered from length
scales as long as Λ = 1 mm can be accurately determined.

Low angle static light scattering is a powerful tool to investigate the long wavelength
ﬂuctuations that appear in a great variety of important phenomena, like phase transitions
and nucleation processes [1, 2], aggregation of colloidal systems [3, 4], and non equilibrium
systems [5]. As the typical length scale Λ increases, the angular range of interest δΘ = λ/Λ
becomes smaller, and this creates unsormountable diﬃculties stemming from the cramped
solid angle of collection for the scattered light, tighter angular deﬁnition for the scattering
angle, ever increasing diﬃculty with stray light that is preferentially scattered at smaller
angles, and ﬁnally main beam diﬀraction spilling that also piles up at the low angle scattering
end.

In this letter we describe a new technique that allows to overcome most of the above
mentioned diﬃculties and can be pushed to arbitrary small angles. This technique relies on
a detection scheme totally diﬀerent from the traditional angle-resolved scattering method [6],
and based on an optical setup similar to schlieren imaging technique, traditionally used to
map refraction index modulations [7].

The technique belongs to a family of scattering measurement techniques recently intro-
duced, Near Field Scattering (NFS) [8, 9, 10]. These techniques allow to measure scattered
intensity distributions from the statistical analysis of the intensity modulations due to the
random interference of the scattered waves in the near ﬁeld. In Heterodyne NFS (HNFS) [10],
the scattered light is mixed with the transmitted beam that acts as a reference beam. The
c(cid:13) EDP Sciences

2

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

CCD

Blade

PC

f

z

x

y

Cell

Laser beam

Fig. 1 – The overall instrumental setup. A collimated laser beam is sent through the cell containing
two miscible liquids. A lens images a plane inside the cell onto a CCD detector. The transmitted
beam is focused by the lens, and the blade cuts half of its waist.

scattered intensity distribution is then obtained from the two dimensional power spectrum of
the heterodyne signal falling onto a two dimensional multielement sensor (a CCD). Indeed, as
we will stress later on, for small scattering angles the HNFS becomes a Shadowgraphy tech-
nique [11, 12, 13, 14]. For transparent samples the transfer function has a wide, pronounced
zero around q = 0 (as well as multiple zeros at higher scattering wavevectors), and this numbs
away the sensitivity where it is mostly sought, namely at extremely small scattering angles.
We will show that one of the prominent features of Schlieren-like Near Field Scattering (SNFS)
is that its transfer function is ﬂat, irrespective of the investigated wave vector range. We will
show that the physical source for the shadow zeros is thus destroyed, and the HNFS method
can be restored to arbitrarily small scattering wave vectors.

To show the potentiality of the method, we have applied SNFS to the investigation of
non-equilibrium ﬂuctuations arising in a free diﬀusion process in ordinary binary mixtures [5].
Nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations scatter light within a very narrow wavevector range in the forward
direction, and the scattered intensity decay at large scattering wave vectors follows a simple,
steep power law behaviour. Therefore non equilibrium ﬂuctuations are an almost ideal test
sample to ascertain both the linearity of the response and the q vector range of the method.
Although SALS has been eﬀectively used to investigate the nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations in
near critical binary mixures, attempts to use SALS to investigate the ﬂuctuations during free
diﬀusion in ordinary binary liquid mixtures showed that the scattered light is dominated by
spurious contributions, due to the main beam diﬀraction spilling and to the divergence of
stray light at small scattering angles. On the contrary, shadowgraph has been succesfully
used to perform these measurements [13,14]. Unfortunately, shadowgraph sensitivity vanishes
for small wave vectors, and also exhibits multiple zeroes at higher wave vectors. By contrast,
we will show that SNFS transfer function is a constant as a function of scattering wave vector,
and it signiﬁcantly extends the wave vector range of SALS, shadowgraph and NFS techniques.
SNFS allows a rigorous subtraction of stray light, without any blank measurement; being a
heterodyne technique, it measures the ﬁeld amplitude, thus providing a wider dynamic range
with respect to intensity measurements; also being a self referencing method, it allows the
determination of absolute diﬀerential scattering cross sections.

The optical layout of the system is shown in ﬁg. 1. The output of a 10 mW He-Ne laser

D. Brogioli et al.: Schlieren method for light scattering

3

is spatially ﬁltered and collimated, so to obtain a 2 cm-diameter beam at 1/e2, and sent
through the sample. Let us call k0 the wave vector of the main beam; the goal is to measure
Is (Q), the intensity of the light scattered at wave vector ks, as a function of the transferred
momentum Q = ks − k0. A lens with focal length f = 10 cm images a plane inside the
sample onto a CCD detector with a magniﬁcation about 1 (the exact location of the plane
is immaterial); the images are made of 512 × 512 pixels, and are digitized with a dynamic
range of 8 bits. The transmitted beam is focused by the lens, and its 3 µm-diameter waist is
located between the lens and the CCD detector. A blade mounted on an x,z micropositioner
is placed perpendicular to the optical axis, so that its edge is in the beam waist. The position
of the blade along the optical axis is carefully adjusted so that the blade does not produce
diﬀraction fringes when it crosses the beam. Due to the high sensitivity of the instrument,
care has to be taken to avoid even faint airborne disturbancies. Therefore the entire beam
path has been shielded with cardboard tubing.

The coordinate system we will use in the following is deﬁned so that the z axis is the
optical axis, and the y axis is perpendicular to the edge of the blade. Every beam scattered
with a negative component of ks along the y axis is focused onto the blade, and thus removed.
Since the scattered ﬁeld is weak compared to the transmitted beam, the intensity I (x, y) is
the sum of the strong transmitted beam I0 and of the small heterodyne term δI (x, y), due to
the interference between the transmitted and the scattered beams; homodyne terms arising
from the interference between the scattered beams can be neglected.

The intensity ﬂuctuation δI (x, y) can be decomposed in its Fourier components, with am-
plitude δI (qx, qy). A modulation with wave vector q = [qx, qy] is generated by the interference
of the transmitted beam with the scattered three-dimensional plane wave with wave vector
ks (q) = [qx, qy, kz] and amplitude δE (qx, qy, kz), and therefore δI (qx, qy) ∝ δE (qx, qy, kz).
In practice, we evaluate the power spectrum SδI (q), the mean square value of δI (qx, qy). This
gives the mean intensity of the wave with amplitude δE (qx, qy, kz), that is Is (Q):

SδI (q) = Is [Q (q)] ,

where Q (q) = ks (q) − k0. Consequently, the scattered intensity can be evaluated by measur-
ing the 2-dimensional power spectrum. Since elastic scattering is considered, kz is determined
by the condition |[qx, qy, kz]| = k, with k = |k0|. We can thus easily evaluate the transferred
wave vector Q (q) = ks (q) − k0:

Q =

qx, qy, k

1 −

1 −

"

(

r

q
k

2

.

)#

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

If the schlieren blade is removed, both the waves with wave vector k+

s (q) = [qx, qy, kz] and
k−
s (q) = [−qx, −qy, kz] generate fringes with wave vector [qx, qy]. This leads to the shadow-
graph method, where the power spectrum of the image, SδI (q), shows deep modulations, and
even vanishes for some values of q [11,12]. This is due to the fact that the modulations, gener-
ated by the interference of the waves scattered at symmetric angles with the main beam, sum
up in counterphase. This eﬀect is always present at small wave vectors also for the heterodyne
NFS [10]. In SNFS the zeroes are eliminated.

In order to fully appreciate the potentialities of the method we must remind that NFS
techniques are based on the fact that each point of the CCD sensor is hit by light scattered
at each scattering angle. This imposes some constraints on the transverse dimension d of the
scattering volume and its distance Z from the sensor. In the actual setup of ﬁg. 1, Z represents
the distance of the sample from the plane, close to the sample, which is imaged by the lens onto

(1)

(2)

4

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

s and k−

the CCD detector. Each point of the sensor collects light scattered at angles ϑ < ϑmax, where
ϑmax = d/Z. The condition Z ≤ d/ϑmax represents the Near Field Condition (NFC) [8,9,10].
In principle a close distance between the sample and the sensor guarantees the access to
a wide range of scattering angles without having to use samples with large spatial extension.
However, as we will show shortly, this condition cannot be met for all the NFS techniques,
while for SNFS the distance Z can be pushed to zero. When Z = 0 the sample is imaged
onto the CCD detector. Indeed, other NFS techniques impose a requirement on the minimal
distance between cell and sensor. As an example, in the HNFS technique this is due to the fact
that waves scattered at wave vectors k+
s generate fringes with the same spacing when
they interfere with the transmitted beam onto the sensor. When Z = 0, the phase diﬀerence
of the two waves is π, irrespective of the wavevector. Therefore, the superposition of the two
interference pattern shifted by π gives rise to a ﬂat intensity distribution at Z = 0. In order
for the fringes to become visible one can either block one of the scattered waves, as in the
schlieren technique described in this letter, or let the beam propagate, so that a Z dependent
phase shift is introduced. This second solution gives rise to the shadowgraph technique, where
the contrast of the fringes is modulated by the distance Z [11, 12]. When Z is large enough
to guarantee that the waves scattered at k+
s come from non-overlapping regions of
the sample, the contrast of fringes ceases to depend on Z and q, because the phase diﬀerence
between the scattered waves becomes random. This occurs when the diﬀraction aperture of
the sensor Zλ/L onto the sample becomes larger than the sensor size L, Z > L2/λ [10]. This
condition is not required by the SNFS technique, where arbitrarily small distances and sample
sizes can be used, provided that the NFC is satisﬁed. This shows the great potentialities of
SNFS, where by using distances of the order of a few millimeters, a very compact instrument
can be obtained. Such a small setup could be very useful in many applications where size is
an issue, such as experiments under microgravity conditions, medical apparatus, and in-situ
monitoring in general.

s and k−

We turn now to the non equilibrium ﬂuctuations data. Non equilibrium ﬂuctuations have
been investigated by diﬀerent experimental techniques, and the results so far seem to con-
ﬁrm the theoretical expectations (see ref. [15]). The ﬂuctuations arise whenever there is a
macroscopic gradient across the system. A simple way to build up a concentration gradient
is to carefully layer two miscible liquids one on top of the other, as it is customarily done in
a classic free diﬀusion experiment.

Let us brieﬂy remind the theoretical expectations for the scattered intensity distribution
from a layer of concentration gradient ∇c. The power spectra show a fast q−4 power law
decay at long wave vectors, and a saturation at a constant value at small wave vectors. The
coupling of velocity ﬂuctuations with concentration ﬂuctuations accounts for the q−4 decay
of the power spectrum at the longer wave vectors. Gravity is responsible for the damping of
small wave vector ﬂuctuations.

The roll-oﬀ wave vector qro where the transition occurs is:

where g is the gravitational acceleration, ν is the kinematic viscosity, D the is the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient and ∇c is the largest concentration gradient along the cell at time t.

For wavevectors smaller than qro, the scattered intensity saturates to

qro (t) =

βg∇c (t)
νD

(cid:20)

1/4

,

(cid:21)

Is (q → 0)
I0

=

KBT
8π2ρβg

k4

∂n
∂c

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

2

∆c,

(3)

(4)

D. Brogioli et al.: Schlieren method for light scattering

5

Fig. 2 – Image of the non-equilibrium concentration ﬂuctuations during the free diﬀusion of urea in
water. The image was recorded 10 minutes after the start of the diﬀusion process. The side of the
image is 4 mm in real space.

where ρ is the mass density, β = ρ−1 (∂ρ/∂c)p,T is the solutal expansion coeﬃcient and I0 is
the intensity of the main beam.

The measurements have been taken on a water-urea sample, the same system used in
ref [13, 14], where a shadowgraph technique was used. We report in ﬁg. 2 a schlieren image
of the ﬂuctuations and in ﬁg. 3 the power spectra obtained at diﬀerent times during the
free diﬀusion process.
Each curve was obtained by taking the average over typically a
hundred images taken over two hundred seconds, and static stray light was accounted for by

t = 300s
t = 1200s
t = 4800s

)

1
-

d
a
r
e
t
s
(
 

I
/
)
q
(

0

s

I

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

104

q (m-1)

105

Fig. 3 – Relative scattered intensity due to the non-equilibrium ﬂuctuations in the free diﬀusion
process.

6

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

subtracting from each image the average intensity, as done for the heterodyne method [10].
The potentiality of the method can be best appreciated by comparing the curves in ﬁg. 3
with the ones shown in ﬁg. 3 of ref. [13] and obtained with a shadowgraph method. The
improvement is very obvious. The wave vector range for the shadowgraph data is well below
a decade, while for the schlieren data it covers a factor of forty between qmin and qmax. The
shorter range for the shadowgraph method is the result of the conﬁnement between the low-q
wide instrumental zero, and the tight sequence of zeros at larger wave vectors. No such a
limitation exists for the schlieren method where the instrumental transfer function is ﬂat. In
spite of the moderate dynamic range (two decades), the shadowgraph data appear noisy. At
variance, as it can be easily appreciated from ﬁg. 3, the schlieren data show little noise over
a range of almost one thousand in the scattered intensity. Incidentally, this method proﬁts
on the huge number of pixels, leading to a statistical accuracy well beyond the intrinsic 8-bit
dynamic range of the frame grabber. The overall improved quality of the data permits a fairly
good estimate of the roll-oﬀ wave vector. As time goes on, the concentration gradient ∇c
decreases as t−1/2, and, consequently, qro ∝ t−1/8. Consistently with this, when the time t is
increased by 16 times from the ﬁrst measurement to the last, qro is reduced by about a factor
1.4 ≈ 161/8.

Finally eq. (1) can be used to calculate with no adjustable parameters the absolute value of
the scattered intensity at q = 0, as from eq. (4). An arrow in ﬁg. 3 indicate the no adjustable
parameter estimate for I (q → 0). As it can be noticed, the agreement is very good.

In conclusion, we feel that the schlieren method described in the present work could be
of great interest in performing extremely low angle light scattering experiments that are of
interest for large scale aggregation processes, nucleation and growth phenomena on length
scales that will merge very naturally into regimes that traditionally are covered by more
classical methods, like interferometry. The compactness of the layout may prove an asset
for tight space requiremens like microgravity setups, where the larger size objects can be
conveniently investigated without disturbing sedimentation processes.

This work has been partially supported by the Italian Space Agency (ASI).

∗ ∗ ∗

REFERENCES

Press, Oxford, 1971.

[1] H. E. Stanley. Introduction to phase transitions and critical phenomena. Oxford University

[2] Cyril Domb. The critical point. Taylor & Francis, London, 1996.
[3] M. Y. Lin, D. A. Lindsay, H. M.and Weitz, R. C. Ball, R. Klein, and P. A. Meakin. Universality

of fractal aggregates as probed by light scattering. Proc. R. Soc. London A, 423:71–87, 1989.

[4] Daniela Asnaghi, Marina Carpineti, Marzio Giglio, and Alberto Vailati. Small angle light scat-
tering studies concerning aggregation processes. Curr. Opin. Colloid In., 2(3):246–250, June
1997.

[5] A. Vailati and M. Giglio. Giant ﬂuctuations in diﬀusion processes. Nature, 390:262–265, 1997.
[6] Doriano Brogioli. Near Field Speckles. PhD thesis, Universit`a degli Studi di Cagliari, 2001.

available at http://lxmi.mi.infn.it/labgiglio/NFS PhD/.

[7] J. W. Goodman. Introduction to Fourier Optics. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1968.
[8] Marzio Giglio, Marina Carpineti, and Alberto Vailati. Space intensity correlations in the near
ﬁeld of the scattered light: A direct measurement of the density correlation function g (r). Phys.
Rev. Lett., 85(7):1416–1419, August 2000.

D. Brogioli et al.: Schlieren method for light scattering

7

[9] Marzio Giglio, Marina Carpineti, Alberto Vailati, and Doriano Brogioli. Near-ﬁeld intensity

correlations of scattered light. Appl. Opt., 40(24):4036–4040, August 2001.

[10] Doriano Brogioli, Alberto Vailati, and Marzio Giglio. Heterodyne near-ﬁeld scattering. Appl.

Phys. Lett., 81(22):4109–4111, November 2002.

[11] M. Wu, G. Ahlers, and D. S. Cannell. Phys. Rev. Lett., 75:1743, 1995.
[12] J. R. de Bruyn, E. Bodenschatz, S. W. Morris, S. P. Trainoﬀ, Y. Hu, D. S. Cannell, and

G. Ahlers. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 67:2043, 1996.

[13] D. Brogioli, A. Vailati, and M. Giglio. Universal behaviour of nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations in

free diﬀusion processes. Phys. Rev. E, 61:R1–R4, January 2000.

[14] D. Brogioli, A. Vailati, and M. Giglio. Giant ﬂuctuations in diﬀusion processes. J. Phys.,

12:39–46, February 2000.

[15] W. B. Li, P. N. Segr`e, R. W. Gammon, and J. V. Sengers. Small-angle Rayleigh scattering from
nonequilibrium ﬂuctuations in liquids and liquid mixtures. Physica A, 204:399–436, 1994.

