3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Wigner distribution transformations in
high-order systems

Jos´e B. Almeida
Universidade do Minho, Physics Department, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
Vasudevan Lakshminarayanan
University of Missouri - St. Louis, School of Optometry

and Department of Physics and Astronomy, St. Louis, MO 63121, USA

Abstract

By combining the deﬁnition of the Wigner distribution function
(WDF) and the matrix method of optical system modeling, we can
evaluate the transformation of the former in centered systems with
great complexity. The eﬀect of stops and lens diameter are also con-
sidered and are shown to be responsible for non-linear clipping of the
resulting WDF in the case of coherent illumination and non-linear
modulation of the WDF when the illumination is incoherent. As an
example, the study of a single lens imaging systems illustrates the
applicability of the method.

1 Introduction

The Wigner distribution function (WDF) provides a convenient way to de-
scribe an optical signal in space and spatial frequency [1, 2, 3]. The prop-
agation of an optical signal through ﬁrst-order optical systems is well de-
scribed by the WDF transformations [3, 4, 5], allowing the reconstruction
of the propagated signal. Real optical systems are not ﬁrst order and the
use of the WDF for optical system design presumes the ability to predict
how it is transformed by systems with aberrations. Almeida [6] proposed a
method to determine the aberration coeﬃcients for optical systems using ma-
trix methods and calculated the necessary coeﬃcients for 7th-order modeling

1

of centered systems based on spherical surfaces The extension of the matrix
method to cylindrical surfaces has also been proposed [9]. Based on the fact
that the WDF lies between Fourier and geometric optics, we show that geo-
metric optics matrix coeﬃcients can be used to predict WDF transformations
and hence can play an important role in optical system design.

2 Transformation of the WDF

The Wigner distribution function (WDF) of a scalar, time harmonic, and
coherent ﬁeld distribution ϕ(q, z) can be deﬁned at any arbitrary z = const.
plane in terms of either the ﬁeld distribution or its Fourier transform ϕ(p) =

ϕ(q) exp(−ikqT p)dq [4, 2]:

R

W (q, p) =

ϕ

q +

q −

exp

q′
2 !

ϕ∗

 

p′
2 !

ϕ

p +

 

q′
2 !

ϕ∗

p −

 

p′
2 !

dq′

−ikq′T p
(cid:17)
ikqT p′

exp

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

dp′ ,

Z
k2
4π2

 

Z

=

where q is the position vector, p the vector of the conjugate momenta, k =
2π/λ and ∗ indicates complex conjugate. In the present work we will be using
mainly quasi-homogeneous light, in which case the WDF can be deﬁned as
[1, 3]

W (q, p) = i(q)s(p),

where i(q) is a non-negative function which we call the intensity and s(p)
is the Fourier transform of the positional power spectrum s(q) and is also
non-negative.

If the position coordinates are x, y, z and the ray direction cosines are

u, v, w, the position and conjugate momenta vectors are given by

q =

p = n

 

,

x
y !
u
v !

 

,

where n is the refractive index of the optical medium.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

2

We will assume that the optical system is characterized by a transfer map
between the initial phase space coordinates, qi, pi and the ﬁnal ones, qf , pf .
If M represents the transfer map:

qf
pf

= M

 

!

 

qi
pi

.

!

We will also write expressions like qf = Mqi or xf = Mxi to represent the
dependencies of each of the ﬁnal coordinates on the original ones.

The transfer map can always be inverted; a simple physical argument is
suﬃcient to prove it: The transfer map is the relationship between the ray
coordinates on the input plane (pi, qi) and the corresponding coordinates
on the output plane (pf , qf ); if two rays share the same coordinates on the
output plane they are the same ray and so it is always possible to map the
output onto the input. This type of reasoning is valid within the scope of
geometrical optics, which corresponds to the conditions for existence of a
transfer map.

Having established that the map can be inverted the WDF transformation

is governed by the equation

W f (qf , pf ) = |h(qf , pf )|W i(M−1qf , M−1pf ),

where the factor |h(qf , pf )| accounts for the energy conservation between
input and output and is the ratio between the elementary hypervolume in
input phase space and the corresponding mapped hypervolume in output
phase space:

|h(qf , pf )| =

|h(qf , pf )| =

2

ni
nf !

 

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1
|J|

.

dxidyiduidvi
dxf dyf duf dvf (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

;

if J is the jacobian of the map transformation we can write [7]

Eq. (7) is of special interest when the transfer map can be expressed in
closed form, which is the case if matrices are used [8, 9, 6]. In this situation
the output coordinates are expressed as polynomials in the input coordinates
or vice-versa. Almeida [6] showed that this method can be extended to any
desired degree of approximation, at least for centered systems, and published

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

3

the coeﬃcients for the 7th-order matrices of systems based on spherical sur-
faces.

There are two methods of map inversion in matrix optics. The ﬁrst one is
a straightforward matrix inversion and can be used in many cases; the second
one, applicable in all circumstances, consists in reversing the optical system
and recalculating all the matrix coeﬃcients. We can thus ﬁnd M, M−1 and
J for any centered optical system, no matter how complex. There remains a
question about the aperture stops which is dealt with below.

In order to model a system with matrices we start by deﬁning a gener-
alized ray of complex coordinates Qi = xi + jyi and P i = n(ui + jvi); this
ray is described by the 40-element monomials vector Qi&, built according
to the rules explained by Kondo et al.
If the ray is
subjected to a transformation described by matrix M, then the output ray
has coordinates (Qf , P f ) and is represented by the monomials vector Qf &,
such that:

[8] and Almeida [6].

Qf & = MQi&.

(10)

For an axis symmetric optical system, in the 7th-order, matrix M will
result from a product of 40 × 40 square matrices with real elements. Each
matrix in the product describes a speciﬁc ray transformation. The elementary
transformations can be classiﬁed into four diﬀerent categories:

Translation: A straight ray path.

Surface refraction: Change in ray orientation governed by Snell’s law.

Forward oﬀset: Ray path between the surface vertex plane and the sur-

face.

Reverse oﬀset: Ray path from the surface back to the vertex plane, along

the refracted ray direction.

The ray itself is described by a 40-element vector comprising the mono-
mials of the complex position and conjugate momenta coordinates that have
non-zero coeﬃcients; the ﬁrst two elements of this vector are just the complex
coordinates (Q, P ).

4

Considering Eq. (10) the mapping equation (6) takes the form

(11)
(12)
(13)

(14)

Qf = PQ(Qi, Qi∗, P i, P i∗);
P f = PP (Qi, Qi∗, P i, P i∗);
Qi = P −1
P i = P −1

Q (Qf , Qf ∗, P f , P f ∗);
P (Qf , Qf ∗, P f , P f ∗).
Q , P −1

The symbols PQ, PP , P −1
P mean polynomial expressions of the variables
in parenthesis. Eqs. (13) and (14) can now be used to evaluate Eq. (9) ﬁrst
and then Eq. (7).

3 Stops and pupils

Any system analysis is incomplete without consideration of the eﬀect of the
various stops along the optical path; this analysis cannot be incorporated
in the matrix description and deserves special treatment. Paraxial theory
tells us [10] that we can ﬁnd one most limiting stop whose images in object
and image space are known by entrance and exit pupils, respectively. The
theory goes that the entrance pupil establishes the width of the beam entering
the system while the ﬁeld angle is established by the second most limiting
stop imaged onto object space; the images of the same stops in image space
set corresponding limits to the rays leaving the system. It is not necessary
to leave paraxial theory to ﬁnd that these concepts are insuﬃcient for the
complete description of the beam constraints within the system and we are
led to the concept of vignetting.

Moving from the paraxial approximation to high-order the problem in-
creases in complexity and even the concepts of entrance and exit pupil loose
signiﬁcance in view of the high aberrations present when an internal stop is
imaged to either object or image space [11]. Ray tracing software usually
avoids the problem by imposing restrictions as the rays cross each stop’s
plane [12].

In order to tackle the problem in phase space, we will deﬁne scene as an
optical ﬁeld distribution that spans −∞ < |q| < +∞ in space coordinates
and −n < |p| < n in conjugate momenta. A scene cannot contain com-
ponents with |p| ≥ n because these components originate evanescent waves
that are considered faded out [13, 14]. What the paraxial theory says is that
the entrance pupil clips the scene in p coordinates, while the second most

5

limiting stop is responsible for clipping in q coordinates. If only the merid-
ional plane is considered, to reduce the dimensions to 2, the stops create
a parallelogram area in phase space, with two sides parallel to the p axis,
where the WDF is non-zero. Vignetting must be seen as a departure from
that form, meaning that, for the extreme values of q, the angular spread of
the rays may be diﬀerent from the central one.

In order to understand the stop eﬀects on the WDF we consider it as a

modulator, in which case the following relation applies [15]:

k2
4π2

Z

W f (q, p) =

W m(q, p − p′)W i(q, p′)dp′,

(15)

where W m(q, p) is the WDF of the modulating function m(q). Eq. (15) rep-
resents a two-dimensional convolution of the Wigner distribution functions
W m(q, p) and W i(q, p) with respect to the frequency variables and a mere
multiplication with respect to the space variables.

A stop is a special kind of modulator. In coherent illumination the stop
has a modulating function that equals unity within the stop area and is zero
elsewhere. Furthermore, as we are usually dealing with stops that are very
large compared to the wavelength, Eq. (15) results in clipping of the local
WDF in the space domain:

W f (q, p) = W i(q, p),
W f (q, p) = 0,

within the stop,
elsewhere.

In incoherent illumination the stop modulating function is the auto-correlation
function of the stop transmittance function [10, 13]. If as before the stop di-
mensions are large compared to the wavelength, Eq. (15) can be written

W f (q, p) = W i(q, p)S(q),
W f (q, p) = 0,

within the stop,
elsewhere.

The stop auto-correlation function is deﬁned by

S(q) =

S(q + q′)S(q)dq′.

Z

The translation of the stop modulation onto an equivalent eﬀect of the
original scene’s WDF depends on the sort of transformations the latter has
incurred up to that point. When the signal encounters the ﬁrst stop in
the system the only transformation that the WDF has suﬀered is a spatial

6

(16)

(17)

(18)

shearing, which is linear in the paraxial approximation and non-linear if
wide angles are considered [14]. If the distance from the scene to the stop
is large the angle subtended by the stop will be virtually independent from
the position coordinates on the scene and the stop eﬀect will be virtually
equivalent to a clipping or modulation on the spatial frequency domain. This
is what an entrance pupil is supposed to do and so we state that an entrance
pupil is a concept valid in the paraxial approximation, when the scene is very
far from the optical system.

The eﬀect of further stops along the system is more diﬃcult to under-
stand. Let us assume that we are dealing with small angles, such that parax-
ial approximation is indeed applicable, that we have converted the existing
stops to their equivalents in object space and let us consider just the two most
signiﬁcant ones. The problem has been reduced to free-space propagation,
characterized by linear shearing of the WDF.

Fig. 1 illustrates the situation described above; object point P1 is an
axis point and obviously stop S2 is the entrance pupil, responsible for the
limitation on the rays that enter the system. According to general practice,
we would deﬁne the ﬁeld limits as the points on the rays that pass on the
edges of the stop S1 and the center of the entrance pupil; point P2 is one such
point. Naturally, stop S1 also introduces limitations on the rays that enter
the system, besides its prime function as ﬁeld limiter; this eﬀect is known as
vignetting.

The eﬀect in phase space is illustrated in Fig. 2 where a similar situation
is depicted. Fig. 2 a) shows the eﬀect of the entrance pupil on the local
WDF with a clipping to its own width. The ﬁeld pupil, stop S1, produces
its clipping on the WDF back-propagated from the entrance pupil, as shown
in Fig. 2 b), and the resulting double-clipped WDF is back-propagated to
the scene plane, as shown in Fig. 2 c). The resulting parallelogram shape
is the representation in phase space of the signal that can, in fact, enter
the system; it is clear that for a point on the axis, q = 0, the stop S2 is
responsible for determining the admittance angle, while stop S1 is, to a great
extent, responsible for determining the dominion of q, which is exactly what
we call ﬁeld. The vignetting eﬀect is visible for extreme values of q, for which
stop S2 no longer determines completely the admittance angle.

The extension of the above procedures to a general mapping situation,
outside the paraxial approximation, must be done carefully.
In the next
section we study a complete mapping situation, illustrating both the WDF
transformations and stop consideration.

7

4 Example

The case below was chosen not for its particular applicability but for its
ability to demonstrate and highlight the possibilities opened by the matrix
mapping and WDF used together.

We will consider a simple imaging system composed of a single convex
lens and a ﬁeld stop on the image plane. The lens was chosen to produce a
high degree of aberrations, so that the non-linear eﬀects are clearly visible.
The lens is plano-convex, with the ﬂat surface facing the image plane, and
has a refractive index of 1.56; the convex surface has a radius of 6.5 × 10−2 m
and the central thickness is 2.0 × 10−2 m. The lens and ﬁeld stop diameters
will be decided later on, upon examination of the aberrations present in the
image.

Eqs. (11 to 14) were established for the system in consideration using the
method outlined by Almeida [6] using Mathematica [16]. The same software
package was also used for all the further calculations. The analysis was
carried out on a meridional plane, so the detection of aberration eﬀects such
as astigmatism is out of the question. The input scene was deﬁned according
to Eq. (3) in terms of its WDF as:

W i(q, p) = 1 + sin

4πq
l

,

(19)

where l is a parameter used to control the detail on the scene; all the graphics
were plotted with l = 5 × 10−2 m.

The input scene was located at 13.7 × 10−2 m, so that the image was
formed at 5 × 10−2 m. Fig. 3 shows the input scene in phase space and the
output WDF. The input appears as a series of light and dark bands, showing
the independence of the corresponding WDF on the p coordinate, character-
istic of spatially incoherent light, a special case of quasi-homogeneous light
[1, 3]. The output shows the same bands, reduced in width due to a magni-
ﬁcation factor lower than unity and distorted by aberrations. A qualitative
analysis of the aberrations is indeed interesting.

The S-shape of the bands results from spherical aberration of various
orders, with predominance of the third-order. The reduced width of the
bands for higher values of q is characteristic of barrel distortion; this so high
that the signal does not exist above |q| > 0.5, except for the eﬀect of spherical
aberration. This is similar to a ﬁsh-eye objective. Field curvature is clearly
visible as tilting of the central portion of the bands for high |q|. Coma results
in an asymmetry of the S-shape.

8

Clearly we have performed a mapping with an inﬁnite diameter lens,
which only works mathematically. Considering the radius and width of the
curved surface, we have established a lens diameter of 4 × 10−2 m. The
lens diameter was given to a stop located on the vertex plane and the edges
of this stop were mapped forward, through the lens and free-space, to the
image plane, and backward to the input scene plane. The maps of the lens
diameter stop are superimposed on the corresponding WDFs as dashed lines.
We decided to use a ﬁeld stop on the image plane, in order to limit the image
to an area of low aberration; a diameter of 4 × 10−2 m was also chosen for
this stop. The ﬁeld stop was mapped onto the input scene plane and is
shown as a solid line superimposed on both ﬁgures. If we were dealing with
coherent light the area of both WDFs common to the zones deﬁned by the
two stops would be the area relevant for the image formation; in fact, to put
it correctly, the image WDF should have been made equal to zero outside
that area.

For a one-dimensional stop Eq. (18) becomes [13]

|q|
2d

S(q) = 1 −

, → |q| ≤ 2d,

S(q) = 0, → |q| > 2d.,

(20)

where d is the half-width of the stop. So, in incoherent illumination, rather
than clipping the local WDF, the stop produces a gradual transition from
full intensity to zero with twice the width of the stop. When propagated
to either the image or the object planes this transition manifests itself as a
gradual transition of the WDF from the full mapped value to zero guided
but not delimited by the stops’ traces, see Fig. 4.

5 System analysis

Although not presented in this paper, it would be possible to extract a lot of
information about the system from the image WDF modulated by the stops.
The ﬁeld distribution would be obtainable directly from an integration of the
image WDF in the variable p; the integration limits would be established by
maps of stops twice the width of real the stops. It is clear that, within the
region delimited by the ﬁeld stop, there is a reasonable reproduction of the
original scene.

9

The point spread function for an input point q0 could be evaluated con-
sidering a diﬀerent input scene, such as W i(q, p) = δ(q − q0), and again
integrating the output WDF in p. The MTF could also be evaluated using
the same scene but performing the integration in q.

6 Conclusions

The authors presented a method to evaluate the WDF transformations of
an optical signal that passes through a system, in the context of geometrical
optics. Using matrices it is possible to model centered systems up to any
desired order of approximation; the authors have shown that the same matrix
method can be used for the evaluation of the WDF transformations.

The eﬀect of stops and lens diameter could also be accounted for leading
to the deﬁnition of clipping traces on both the input and output WDF and
to the outline of methods to evaluate the resulting ﬁeld distribution, point
spread function and MTF.

7 Acknowledgements

J. B. Almeida wishes to acknowledge the fruitful discussions with P. Andr´es,
W. Furlan and G. Saavedra at the University of Valencia.

On the occasion of his retirement, this paper is dedicated to Professor
K Srinivasa Rao in celebration of his long productive career in theoretical
physics.

10

References

[1] M. J. Bastiaans, “The Wigner Distribution Function Applied to Optical

Signals and Systems,” Opt. Commun. 25, 26–30 (1978).

[2] D. Dragoman, “The Wigner Distribution Function in Optics and Opto-
electronics,” in Progress in Optics, E. Wolf, ed., (Elsevier, Amsterdam,
1997), Vol. 37, Chap. 1, pp. 1–56.

[3] M. J. Bastiaans, “Application of the Wigner Distribution Function in
Optics,” In The Wigner Distribution - Theory and Applications in Signal
Processing, W. Mecklenbr¨auker and F. Hlawatsch, eds., pp. 375–426
(Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1997).

[4] M. J. Bastiaans, “The Wigner Distribution Function and Hamilton’s
Characteristics of a Geometric-Optical System,” Opt. Commun. 30,
321–326 (1979).

[5] M. J. Bastiaans, “Second-Order Moments of the Wigner Distribution
Function in First-Order Optical Systems,” Optik 88, 163–168 (1991).

[6] J. B. Almeida, “General Method for the Determination of Matrix Coef-
ﬁcients for High Order Optical System Modeling,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
16, 596–601 (1999).

[7] K. Riley, M. P. Hobson, and S. J. Bence, Mathematical Methods for
Physics and Engineering (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.
K., 1998).

[8] M. Kondo and Y. Takeuchi, “Matrix Method for Nonlinear Transforma-
tion and its Application to an Optical Lens System,” J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A 13, 71–89 (1996).

[9] V. Lakshminarayanan and S. Varadharajan, “Expressions for Aberration
Coeﬃcients Using Nonlinear Transforms,” Optom. Vis. Sci. 74, 676–686
(1997).

[10] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 6th. ed. (Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1997).

11

[11] J. B. Almeida and V. Lakshminarayanan, “Position and Shape Depen-
dence of the Eye’s Entrance Pupil on Eccentricity Angle,” In ICO XVIII,
18th Congress of the International Commission of Optics, Proc. SPIE
3749, 631–632 (S. Francisco, USA, 1999).

[12] “Oslo LT – Version 5,”, Sinclair Optics, Inc., 1995, optics design soft-

[13] J. W. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics (McGraw-Hill, New

ware.

York, 1968).

[14] J. B. Almeida and V. Lakshminarayanan, ”Wide Angle Near-Field
Diﬀraction and Wigner Distribution”, Submitted to Opt. Lett. (unpub-
lished).

[15] M. J. Bastiaans and P. G. van de Mortel, “Wigner Distribution of a

Circular Aperture,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 13, 1699–1703 (1996).

[16] “Mathematica 4.0,”, Wolfram Research, Inc., 1999.

12

Figure 1: The eﬀect of stops on propagation angles. S2 is the entrance pupil
and object point P2 is on the edge of the ﬁeld.

13

Figure 2: Eﬀect of stops in phase space. a) Clipping at the entrance pupil,
b) the WDF is back-propagated from the entrance pupil to the ﬁeld pupil
and clipped, c) back-propagation to the scene plane.

a)

c)

b)

14

Figure 3: Transformation of the Wigner distribution function through a lens;
a) input distribution, b) output distribution. Both ﬁgures show the clipping
eﬀect of the lens diameter (dashed line) and the ﬁeld stop (solid line).

p

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.04 -0.02

0.02

0.04

-0.04 -0.02

0.02

0.04

0
qHmL

b)

0
qHmL

a)

p

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

15

Figure 4: The Wigner distribution function on the image plane shows the
eﬀect of stops. With incoherent illumination the stops don’t clip the distri-
bution but apply a smoothing from the center of the stop to twice the stop
width.

p

0

0.6

0.4

0.2

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.04 -0.02

0.02

0.04

0
qHmL

16

