3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
1
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spontaneous emission of a small source of light.

Jacques Moret-Bailly ∗

August 10, 2013

The English of this paper must be corrected.

Abstract

The usual computation of the spontaneous emission uses a mixture of
classical and quantum postulates. A purely classical computation shows
that a source of electromagnetic ﬁeld absorbs light in the eigenmode it is
able to emit. Thus in an excitation by an other mode, the component of
this mode on the eigenmode is absorbed, while the remainder is scattered.
This loss of energy does not apply to the zero point ﬁeld which has its
regular energy in the eigenmode, so that the zero point ﬁeld seems more
eﬀective than the other ﬁelds for the stimulation of light emission.

1 Introduction.

The spontaneous emission may be considered as an ampliﬁcation of the zero
point ﬁeld [1]. However it seems that the zero point ﬁeld is twice more eﬀective
than the ordinary ﬁelds [2, 3, 4].

The starting point of this conclusion is the classical computation of the rate
at which an oscillating dipole absorbs energy from a plane wave through its
electric ﬁeld, and diﬀracts a fraction of this energy [5].

The radiation reaction provides the energy necessary to double the sponta-
neous excitation of a source due to the zero point ﬁeld; but this computation
fails because in the ampliﬁcation of a beam of light (hot, i.e. T > 0 in Planck’s
law) the zero point ﬁeld is not a data of the problem.

The origin of the radiation reaction is the interaction between the charges
and the electromagnetic ﬁeld they produce, leading to Abraham-Lorentz [6]
or Ford-O’Connell [7] formula. The computations require a model of source,
including implicit or explicit Poincar´e stresses.

Avoiding the choice of a model of source, using only Maxwell’s equations
in the vacuum thanks to Schwarzschild-Fokker’s trick, reduces the precision of
a theory, but allows to ﬁx the limits of all possible computations: It will be
∗Laboratoire de physique, Universit´e de Bourgogne, BP 47870, F-21078 Dijon cedex,

France. email : Jacques.Moret-Bailly@u-bourgogne.fr

1

supposed only that a small source made of charges radiates an electromagnetic
ﬁeld which obeys Maxwell’s equations.

Section 2 recalls the theory of the modes of an electromagnetic ﬁeld in the

vacuum.

with sources.

Section 3 shows how the Schwarzschild-Fokker’s trick allows to use the modes

Section 4 shows that a source can absorb the whole energy of the eigenmode
it is able to emit, while its excitation by an other mode requires a projection on
the eigenmode which reduces the excitation.

The following classical computation starts the demonstration at the begin-
ning, Maxwell’s equations. The electromagnetic ﬁeld will be generally simply
named “ﬁeld”, and represented by its electric ﬁeld, the magnetic part being
implied.

2 Mathematical modes of the electromagnetic

ﬁeld in the vacuum.

In the vacuum, without sources, Helmoltz’s equation for the electric ﬁeld E,
which may be deduced from Maxwell’s equations reduces to:

2E −

∇

1
c2

∂2E
∂t2 = 0

In the whole space, or in a region limited by perfectly conducting walls, this
equation is linear, so that its solutions named “modes” build a vector space.

As there is nether sources, nor loss of energy, the energy W of an electro-

magnetic ﬁeld may be computed at any time by the following integration:

W = (1/2)

[ǫ0E2 + µ0H2]dV

Z

In Physics, the result must be ﬁnite, so that plane waves are necessarily approx-
imations.

The energy of the sum of two modes is generally not the sum of the energies
of each; else, the modes are orthogonal. To avoid confusions, the energy of a
mode supposed alone in the universe will be named “energy of the bare mode” or
“bare energy”; next section will show that bare energies do not exist in physics.
If the energy of a bare mode is ﬁnite, the mode may be normalised multi-
plying E and H by a constant such that, if e(ν)dν is the energy of the mode
between ν and ν + dν,

(1)

(2)

(3)

Thus orthonormal, or at least orthogonal reference frames may be built in

the space of the modes.

e(ν)dν
hν

Z

= 1.

2

Remark that introducing a new electromagnetic ﬁeld into an existing electro-
magnetic ﬁeld does not necessarily increase the energy; in particular, introducing
a ﬁeld exactly opposite to an existing ﬁeld cancels all, so that the energy falls
to zero, it is the absorption of the initial ﬁeld.

3 Schwarzschild-Fokker’s trick.

These authors replace charges by convenient ﬁelds which provide the same ﬁeld
without the charges.

A source supposed invariant by a time inversion (for instance a temporary
dipole) radiates an emission ﬁeld named “retardated eigenﬁeld” of the source.
Adding this solution of nonlinear Maxwell’s equations and its Charge-Time in-
verse (absorption eigenﬁeld or “advanced ﬁeld”), the charges making the source
cancel, so that we obtain a solution of the linear Maxwell’s equations. The
advanced ﬁeld is a ﬁeld converging to the virtual source; used to replace a real
source in a mathematical representation, it has generally no physical existence,
while approximate realisations may be tried1.

Most usual sources (electron, atoms, molecules) are small in comparison with
their distances, so that the electromagnetic ﬁeld that they radiate is large close
to them, small close to other sources. Using the trick, the absorption of the ﬁeld
radiated by a source, close to the source, requires the sum of a lot of small ﬁelds
radiated by other sources, so that it requires a lot of time; meanwhile it remains
a ﬁeld. As this may be applied to all sources, it exists a residual ﬁeld which is,
at least, the ﬁeld which remains in the dark, at 0 Kelvin. It is an absolutely
normal ﬁeld.

Far from sources, this ﬁeld is stochastic, but it may be ampliﬁed by sources,
leaving its pure stochastic nature2. From the building of electromagnetic ﬁelds
by ampliﬁcation of existing ﬁelds, it appears that it is physically meaningless
to split the ﬁeld E of a mode into a zero point part Z and the remainder: Z
can only be obtained by an attenuation of E by an absorber, so that E − Z is a
diﬀerence of ﬁelds existing in two diﬀerent points. The ﬂux of energy available
in an absorber such as a photocell is proportional to the diﬀerence between the
square of the incident ﬁeld E and the square of the emergent ﬁeld Z. The ﬁrst
approximation which neglects the zero point ﬁeld fails in the detection of low
ﬁelds, in particular in photon counting experiments.

The mean value of the energy of a ﬁeld in a monochromatic mode is given

by the second Planck’s law:

Wν = hν

1
exp(hν/kT ) − 1

+

1
2 i

h

(4)

It is a mean energy, subject to ﬂuctuations.

1In laser fusion experiments for instance.
2For this reason, we prefer “zero point ﬁeld” to “stochastic ﬁeld”.

3

4 Excitation of a source: spontaneous and stim-

ulated emissions.

The spontaneous emission is considered as an ampliﬁcation of the energy of a
mode, an absorption as a reduction of this energy, possibly down to the zero
point energy. If the source is a molecule whose classical eigenstates are mini-
mums of potential, a transition is possible if the molecule gets enough energy
to reach the threshold between two minimums by an absorption, at Planck’s
frequency. If the threshold is very low, as in a photocell, the ﬂuctuations of the
zero point ﬁeld are suﬃcient to provide the needed energy.

In classical electromagnetism, the absorption of an electromagnetic ﬁeld is
its cancellation by an opposite ﬁeld; using Schwarzschild-Fokker’s trick, a source
is replaced by a ﬁeld and the cancellation of ﬁelds may be studied at any time.
All electromagnetic ﬁelds may be decomposed on a set of orthogonal modes
including the eigenmode of the source. All modes orthogonal to the eigenmode
cannot exchange energy with the source (replaced by the advanced ﬁeld), so
that the source can only be excited by the component of ﬁelds on this mode.

It is physically impossible to build a “spherical”3 wave to excite a point
source. The exciting waves are, in the practice, nearly plane waves. The fraction
of the wave which corresponds to the projection of the vector representing the
eigenmode of the source on the vector representing the plane wave is absorbed;
the remainder is scattered. The decomposition of the ﬁeld radiated by the
multipolar sources into plane waves is well known; one of the plane waves of
the decomposition subtracts from the plane exciting wave, the other provide
scattered waves. In the general case, the scattered fraction is low if the source
has the properties of a good antenna.

The trick cannot be used to compute the energy, the energy must be de-
duced from all ﬁelds; this deduction is generally easy, at least at inﬁnity, in a
Fraunhofer computation: Set aiE (i = 0, 1, . . .) the amplitudes of the orthogonal
plane waves resulting from the decomposition of the ﬁeld radiated by a source
excited by a wave of amplitude E, and a0 the coeﬃcient corresponding to the
mode of the exciting wave. The input energy is proportional to E2, the output
to E2(|(1 + a0)|2 + Σi>0|ai|2). The scattered energy is WS ∝ E2Σi>0|ai|2, while
the total absorbed energy is WT ∝ E2(2|a0| cos φ + |a0|2) where φ is the dif-
ference of the phases between the exciting wave and the wave scattered in the
same mode; the energy eﬀectively absorbed by the source, which provides its
excitation is WE = WT − WS.

The ratio ρ = WE/WT is between 0 and 1, the last case corresponding to a

well adapted antenna.

Studying the spontaneous emission, it is generally obtained that the zero
point ﬁeld is two times more eﬀective than an “ordinary ﬁeld”. The reason is
that this ordinary ﬁeld is the increase of the zero point ﬁeld in a plane mode
3We use improperly “spherical” for the ﬁeld emitted or absorbed by a point source such
as a dipole while it is not invariant by all rotations around an axis which crosses the source.

4

ampliﬁed by the exciting source. Remark that the factor 2 requires a model
of source, and the introduction the radiation reaction; the hypothesis are the
object of a lot of discussions [5].

5 Conclusion.

The present computation of the spontaneous emission as an ampliﬁcation of the
zero point ﬁeld does not apply to quantum electrodynamics which requires a
free change of the mode of a photon through the “reduction of the wave packet”,
to allow, for instance, an EPR experiment.

The ﬁeld which excites a molecule, stimulating an emission, is in a mode
that the molecule is able to absorb, that is in the eigenmode of absorption for
the transition. The plane mode generally used to excite a molecule, must be
projected on the eigenmode while the regular zero point ﬁeld, which is in the
eigenmode of absorption, does not require a projection.

Thus the classical theory explains that an ordinary ﬁeld is less eﬀective than
the zero point ﬁeld to stimulate an emission, while quantum electrodynamics
does not.

References

[1] V. S. Weisskopf, Nov. 1981, Physics Today, 69.

[2] V. L. Ginzburg, 1983, Sov. Phys. Usp., 26, 713.

[3] P. W. Milonni, 1984, Am. J. Phys., 52, 340.

[4] P. W. Milonni, 1994, The Quantum vacuum, Academic Press, New York,

Chapter 3.2

[5] P. W. Milonni, , ibid. , Chapter 5, Appendices A and D.

[6] H. A. Lorentz, 1915, Theory of electrons, repub. Jacques Gabay (Paris 1992).

[7] G. W. Ford & R. F. O’Connell, 1991, Phys. Rev. Lett. A, 157, 217.

5

