3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Imaging without lenses

S. Marchesini,1, ∗ H. He,2 H. N. Chapman,1 S. P. Hau-Riege,1
A. Noy,1 M. R. Howells,2 U. Weierstall,3 and J. C. H. Spence3
1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Ave., Livermore, CA 94550-9234, USA
2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd, Berkeley CA 94720, USA
3Arizona State University, Department of Physics, Tempe AZ 85287-1504, USA
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

A solution to the inversion problem of scattering would oﬀer aberration-free diﬀraction-limited
3D images without the resolution and depth-of-ﬁeld limitations of lens-based tomographic systems.
Powerful algorithms are increasingly being used to act as lenses to form such images. Current image
reconstruction methods, however, require the knowledge of the shape of the object and the low
spatial frequencies unavoidably lost in experiments. Diﬀractive imaging has thus previously been
used to increase the resolution of images obtained by other means. We demonstrate experimentally
here a new inversion method, which reconstructs the image of the object without the need for any
such prior knowledge.

The inversion problem of coherent scattering - the re-
construction of a single-scattering potential from mea-
surements of scattered intensity in the far-ﬁeld - has oc-
cupied physicists for over a century, and arises in ﬁelds
as varied as optics, astronomy, X-ray crystallography,
medical tomographic imaging, holography, electron mi-
croscopy and particle scattering generally. A solution
to this problem would oﬀer diﬀraction-limited images of
non-periodic objects without the use or need for a lens.
The possibility of solving the X-ray phase problem for an
isolated object was ﬁrst suggested by Sayre [1] in 1952,
who pointed out that Bragg diﬀraction in crystals un-
dersamples the diﬀracted intensities [2, 3, 4]. The Bragg
limitation on sampling is lifted for non-periodic objects,
which allow ﬁner sampling of the diﬀraction pattern. An
iterative phase-retrieval method, capable of phasing ad-
equately sampled diﬀracted intensity ﬁrst appeared in
1972 [5]), followed by important theoretical advances due
to Fiddy, Bates and others—see [6] for a review. The iter-
ative algorithm was greatly improved through the intro-
duction of feedback and compact support (The support
is the boundary of the object) by Fienup around 1982
with the hybrid input-output (HIO) algorithm [7], which
allowed inversions of optical data [8, 9]. A signiﬁcant
breakthrough occurred in 1999 with the reconstruction
by Miao and coworkers of a two-dimensional non-periodic
X-ray image at 0.075 µm resolution from diﬀraction data
and a low-resolution image of the object [10]. Subse-
quent work has produced nano-crystal images at sub-
micron resolution using hard X-rays [11], and striking
tomographic images at higher resolution [12], using zone-
plate X-ray images to provide the low-resolution data.
Images have also been obtained by inversion of exper-
imental coherent electron diﬀraction patterns [13], and
further laser-light images [14]. In one proposed applica-
tion, atomic-resolution images might be obtained by the
inversion of X-ray pulses diﬀracted from single molecules
[15]. More generally, the possibility of using particles
with low radiation damage has stimulated a burst of re-

cent activity [16].

The iterative algorithms, such as the HIO algorithm,
iterate between real and reciprocal space, applying var-
ious a priori constraints in each domain. In diﬀraction
space, the modulus squared of the diﬀracted waveﬁeld is
set equal to the measured diﬀraction intensities, whereas
in real space the transmission function of the object is set
to zero outside the known boundary of the object (the
support). Other constraints, which have been used, in-
clude the known sign of the scattering function and the
various symmetries of the scatterer. These constraints
may be classiﬁed as convex or non-convex, and the theory
of Bregman projections can be used to understand their
convergence properties [6]. In theory, and conﬁrmed by
simulation, the support mask need not trace the exact
boundary of the object (loose support), and zero (trans-
parent) regions of the object inside the support may con-
verge to their correct value without being forced by the
mask. However, in practice, a less than perfect estimate
of the support often prevents the reconstruction of the
correct image [17]) –see also below. Eﬀorts to obtain the
support function of the object from the support of the
experimentally accessible autocorrelation function have
been proposed for special classes of objects using elegant
geometrical methods [18]). Methods for inverting Patter-
son maps to charge densities for crystals and non-periodic
objects are reviewed in Buerger [19]). Up until now, no
images have been reconstructed from experimental x-ray
diﬀraction patterns of arbitrary objects without a lower-
resolution image provided by an optic.

In this article we eliminate the need for this secondary
image and demonstrate ultrahigh resolution imaging
without the need for a lens. The object support func-
tion is determined together with the object itself, without
additional spatial information. The procedure builds on
the HIO algorithm, in which constraints are iteratively
applied in real and reciprocal space, and a feedback pa-
rameter is used in real space to damp the application of
the support constraint. Feedback allows this algorithm

to emerge from local minima of the invariant error met-
ric and thus avoid stagnation. The uniqueness of solu-
tions found by this method has been studied in detail
[20] (Rare ambiguous solutions have been found in two-
dimensions in cases where the spectrum is factorable).
Our innovation is the simple but powerful use of the cur-
rent estimate of the object to determine the support con-
straint. The ﬁrst estimate of the support is the support
of the autocorrelation function [19]. Although this esti-
mate is far from accurate, it is continually updated by
thresholding the intensity of a blurred version of the cur-
rent estimate of the object under reconstruction. Thresh-
olding traces the boundary of the object at a given in-
tensity contour. The blurring acts to smooth out noise,
and provides a form of regularization. In turn, through
the normal behavior of the HIO algorithm, the improved
support constraint gives rise to yet a better estimate of
the object. We ﬁnd that this method is very stable, and
converges to the correct support and object for both sim-
ulated and experimental x-ray diﬀraction data. The al-
gorithm also successfully reconstructs complex objects
(those that cause large variations in the phase of the exit
waveﬁeld in two dimensions), which hitherto have been
experimentally diﬃcult to reconstruct [8, 9, 13]. This
opens up the possibility of image reconstruction from mi-
crodiﬀraction patterns, where the illumination is tightly
focused on the object.

Details of the algorithm are as follows. We start from
the autocorrelation function of the object. This real-
space map, obtained by Fourier transforming the diﬀrac-
tion pattern, displays all ”interatomic” vectors, with
peaks for all vectors between isolated objects, shifted to
a common origin.
It contains many more peaks than
the object, and, even for an acentric object, possesses a
center of inversion symmetry. Since the object must ﬁt
within the autocorrelation function, our ﬁrst estimate of
the support is a mask obtained from this function us-
ing a contour at the 4% intensity level. Both the cor-
rect object density and its centro-symmetric inversion ﬁt
within this initially centric mask, however inversion sym-
metry is progressively lost as the algorithm converges.
We then apply the HIO algorithm with feedback parame-
ter β = 0.9 and the real space support given by the calcu-
lated mask. We obtain the part of the diﬀraction pattern
covered by a central beamstop from the transform of the
current estimate of the object. Low frequency compo-
nents are treated as free parameters. Every 20 iterations
we convolve the reconstructed image (the absolute value
of the reconstructed waveﬁeld) with a Gaussian of width
σ (FWHM = 2.3548 σ ) to ﬁnd the new support mask.
The mask is then obtained by applying a threshold at
20% of its maximum. The width σ is set to 3 pixels
in the ﬁrst iteration, and reduced by 1% every 20 iter-
ations down to a minimum of 1.5 pixels. Similarities of
the original Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm with the ”sol-
vent ﬂattening” method suggest that this method could

2

be extended to crystallography.

We have tested the method using two-dimensional ex-
perimental data as well as two- and three-dimensional
sets of simulated data. The experimental soft X-ray
transmission diﬀraction pattern from two clusters of gold
balls of 50±5 nm diameter deposited on a silicon nitride
window was recorded at the Advanced Light Source at
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, using soft x-rays soft
x-rays with a wavelength of 2.1 nm [21, 22]. In Figure 1
we present the experimental diﬀraction pattern and the
sequence of images produced by the algorithm as it con-
verges. As shown in the ﬁrst step, the algorithm starts
with a support mask with perfect inversion symmetry.
After a few iterations the symmetry is broken. First, one
of the three regions of the mask disappears, and then the
support envelope shrinks progressively around the gold
ball objects. Finally, a stable solution showing excellent
agreement with a scanning electron microscope image of
the same object is obtained. The solution also agrees well
with a previous reconstruction by a diﬀerent method [21].
Note that we would not expect a perfect match between
the electron and x-ray images, since image formation pro-
cesses are diﬀerent for electrons and x-rays. Repeated
computational trials have all shown the same degree of
convergence to the correct image or its centro-symmetric
inversion. Although after a few hundred iterations the
algorithm always converged to the correct image (inde-
pendent of the initial random choice of phases), as it-
erations were carried further both the support and the
image show arbitrary displacements due to the transla-
tional invariance of the solution.

To further assess the validity of the algorithm we have
tested it on several sets of simulated diﬀraction patterns
from gold spheres and gray-scale images. The simula-
tions all include noise and the loss of data due to a central
beam-stop. They show that the algorithm is successful
to the same degree as the standard HIO algorithm with
tight support. As examples, we include in Figure 2 the
reconstructions of: a grayscale image; a 3D cluster of
gold balls (ball diameter of 50±5 nm); and a complex
object illuminated by a focused beam. The greyscale im-
age demonstrates that the algorithm does not require any
”atomicity” constraint provided by the gold balls. The
particular 3D cluster was chosen to have a small number
of balls for visualization purposes - the algorithm also
works with a much larger number of balls. The third ex-
ample is of particular interest since it is well known that
the reconstruction of complex objects is much more diﬃ-
cult than real objects, but is possible using either disjoint,
precisely known or specially shaped supports [14, 17].
Complex objects arise in optics and X-ray diﬀraction in
two-dimensions when large phase-shifts occur within the
eikonal approximation, or if that approximation fails, in
the presence of spatially dependant absorption eﬀects,
and in the presence of multiple scattering. The question
arises as to whether our new method provides a suﬃ-

3

Image reconstruction from an experimental X-ray diﬀraction pattern. (a) X-ray diﬀraction pattern of a sample of 50
FIG. 1:
nm colloidal gold particles, recorded at a wavelength of 2 nm. (b) to (e) shows a sequence of images produced by the algorithm
as it converges. Number of iterations: 1 (b), 20 (c), 100 (d), 1000 (e). The reconstruction progresses from the autocorrelation
function in (b) to an image in (e) with a steady improvement of the support boundary (shown at bottom of each frame).
For comparison a SEM micrograph of the object is shown in (f). The scale bar length is 300 nm and the resolution of our
reconstructed image is about 20 nm.

a constant random phase shift between 0 and 2π. The
cluster is singled-out from neighbouring ones by a focused
beam. A perfect match between object and reconstruc-
tion is again observed if one takes into account the trans-
lation and constant phase invariance in the solution. The
result is signiﬁcant because it relaxes the requirement for
plane-wave illumination. The generality of the technique
is thus increased because now the focused probe can be
used to isolate objects in the image ﬁeld.

We have compared the behaviour of our algorithm to
that of the HIO algorithm. The HIO algorithm requires
the support a priori, and as is well known the error in the
reconstruction decreases as the support becomes tighter
and closer to the actual boundary of the object. This is
illustrated in Fig. 3, which shows plots of the reconstruc-
tion error, as a function of Poisson noise in the diﬀraction
intensities, for the HIO algorithm with support masks of
various degrees of accuracy. The masks for these cases
were calculated by convolving the object by Gaussians
of various widths (0.5, 5, and 25 pixels) and threshold-
ing at 5% level from the maximum. This corresponds
to knowing the shape of the object to a given resolu-
tion. It is seen that even for low noise, HIO can achieve
a reasonable reconstruction only if the support mask is
set to the boundary known at essentially the same res-
olution to which we are reconstructing the object. The
reconstruction error for our algorithm (which does not
require a priori knowledge of the support) is also plot-
ted in Figure 3. We expect that the noise level at which
our algorithm fails to reconstruct occurs when the noise
in real space becomes larger than the threshold used to
update the support. At this noise level the estimate of
the support will be inﬂuenced by the noise, and the al-
gorithm will be unable to converge to the correct bound-

FIG. 2: Image reconstructions from simulated diﬀraction pat-
terns of a gray-scale image (top row), a 3-D cluster of gold
balls (center row) and a complex object illuminated with a
complex focussed probe (bottom row).
In each row (a) is
the recovered object, (b) the recovered support and (c) the
original image. The greyscale image demonstrates that the
algorithm does not depend on any ”atomicity” constraint pro-
vided by the gold balls. For the complex object the real part
is shown, blue is negative, red/yellow is positive.

ciently tight support, especially for objects fragmented
into separated parts, to allow the inversion of complex
objects. Figure 2 (bottom) shows the reconstruction of
a cluster of gold balls where each ball is multiplied by

ary. This suggests that the optimum threshold setting
depends on the noise level in the data, and we will only
be able to reconstruct those parts of the object where
the contrast is above the noise. As the support used in
the HIO algorithm becomes looser, we observe our algo-
rithm to be much superior, even in the presence of noise.
This is because our algorithm always improves upon the
support and so makes optimal use of the available in-
formation. The only prior knowledge needed is that the
object possesses compact support (i.e.
is isolated), so
that oversampling diﬀraction conditions can be guaran-
teed experimentally, and that the contrast of the object
is above the noise. By comparison with earlier methods
(15), no knowledge of the shape of the object is required.
There are few adjustable parameters in our algorithm;
namely, support resolution, support threshold, and feed-
back parameter. Additional constraints can be added to
strengthen convergence, such as atomicity, positivity and
histogram matching [23, 24].

4

rent depth-of-ﬁeld limitation of zone-plate based tomog-
raphy. The use of focused illumination will allow users
to select either one or two-part objects (which may be
complex) from a ﬁeld. The conditions of beam energy
and monochromatization used in these preliminary ex-
periments are far from optimum for diﬀractive imaging
and can be greatly improved to reduce recording times by
more than two orders of magnitude. We expect this new
microscopy to ﬁnd many applications. Since dose scales
inversely as the fourth power of resolution, existing mea-
surements of damage against resolution can be used to
show that statistically signiﬁcant images of single cells
should be obtainable by this method at 10 nm resolution
in the 0.5-10 µm thickness range under cryomicroscopy
Imaging by harder coherent X-rays of in-
conditions.
organic nanostructures (such as mesoporous materials,
aerosols and catalysts) at perhaps 2 nm resolution can
be expected. Atomic-resolution diﬀractive imaging by
coherent electron nanodiﬀraction has now been demon-
strated [25]. The imaging of dynamical systems, imaging
with new radiations for which no lenses exist, and single
molecule imaging with X-ray free-electron laser pulses re-
main to be explored.

We acknowledge stimulating discussions with Abra-
ham Sz¨oke. This work was performed under the auspices
of the U.S. Department of Energy by the Lawrence Liver-
more National Laboratory under Contract No. W-7405-
ENG-48 and the Director, Oﬃce of Energy Research, Of-
ﬁce of Basics Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences Divi-
sion of the U. S. Department of Energy, under Contract
No. DE-AC03-76SF00098. SM acknowledges funding
from the National Science Foundation. The Center for
Biophotonics, an NSF Science and Technology Center, is
managed by the University of California, Davis, under
Cooperative Agreement No. PHY0120999.

FIG. 3: Reconstruction error of the new algorithm and the
HIO algorithm for a complex object as a function of noise in
the diﬀraction intensities. In the HIO algorithm increasingly
looser supports (support 1-4) are used : support 1, 2 and 3 are
obtained by thresholding the original image after convolving
with a Gaussian of 0.5, 5 and 25 pixels width. Support 4 is
obtained from the autocorrelation. The HIO algorithm with
perfect support (support1) works well even for high noise lev-
els whereas it always fails with loose supports (supports 3,4).
The new algorithm (shrinking support) is superior to the HIO
with limited knowledge of the support shape (support 3,4) if
the noise level is not too high.

The combination of an apparatus to measure large-
angle diﬀraction patterns with our new method of
data analysis forms a new type of diﬀraction-limited,
aberration-free tomographic microscopy. The absence
of ineﬃcient optical elements makes more eﬃcient use
of damaging radiation, while the reconstruction from a
three-dimensional diﬀraction data set will avoid the cur-

∗

Correspondence and requests for materials should be ad-
dressed to S. Marchesini: smarchesini@llnl.gov

[1] D. Sayre, Acta Crystallogr. 5, 843 (1952).
[2] Finer sampling of intensities is needed to satisfy Shan-
non’s theorem (and hence solve the phase problem) since
the autocorrelation function of the molecule acts as a
bandlimit.

[3] D. Sayre, (1980). In: Image processing and coherence in
Physics. Springer Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 112. Eds.
(M. Schlenker et al. (1980)) vol. 229.

[4] D. Sayre, H. N. Chapman, J. Miao, Acta Crystallogr.

A54, 232-239 (1998).

[5] R. Gerchberg, W. Saxton, Optik 35, 237 (1972).
[6] H. Stark, Image Recovery: Theory and applications.

(Academic Press, New York, 1987).
[7] J. R. Fienup, Appl. Opt, 21, 2758 (1982).
[8] J. N. Cederquist, J. R. Fienup, J. C. Marron, R. G. Pax-

man, Opt. Lett. 13, 619. (1988).

[9] Y. Kamura, S. Komatsu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37, 6018

5

(1998).

[18] J. R. Fienup, T. R. Crimmins, W. Holsztynski, J. Opt.

[10] J. Miao, C. Charalambous, J. Kirz and D. Sayre, Nature,

Soc. Am. 72, 610 (1982).

400, 342 (1999).
[11] I. K. Robinson,

I. A. Vartanyants, G. J.Williams,
M. A. Pfeifer, J. A. Pitney, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 195505
(2001).

[12] J. Miao, T. Ishikawa, E. H. Johnson, B. Lai, K. O. Hodg-

son, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 088303. (2002).

[13] U. Weierstall, et al. Ultramicroscopy 90, 171 (2002).
[14] J. C. H. Spence, U. Weierstall, M. R. Howells, Philos.

Trans. R. Soc. London 360, 875 (2002).

[15] . R. Neutze, R. Wouts, D. van der Spoel, E. Weckert and

J. Hajdu, Nature 406, 752 (2000).

[19] M. J. Buerger, Vector space, and its application in
crystal-structure investigation. New York, Wiley (1959).
[20] J. H. Seldin, J. R. Fienup, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 7, 412

(1990).

[21] H. He, et al. Acta Crystallogr. A59, 143 (2003).
[22] H. He et al. Phys. Rev. B 67 174114 (2003).
[23] V. Elser, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 20, 40 (2003).
[24] Our adjustment of the support provides precisely what
the histogram constraint needs: a continually updated
estimate of the count of pixels of low object density.
[25] J. M. Zuo, I. Vartanyants, M. Gao, R. Zhang, L. A. Na-

[16] J. C. H. Spence, M. R. Howells, L. D. Marks, and J.

gahara, Science 300, 1419 (2003).

Miao, Ultramicroscopy 90, 1 (2001).

[17] J. R. Fienup, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4, 118 (1987).

