Reduced micro-deformation attenuation in
large-mode area photonic crystal ﬁbers for visible applications

Martin D. Nielsen
Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark
Research Center COM, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark

Niels Asger Mortensen and Jacob Riis Folkenberg
Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We consider large-mode area photonic crystal ﬁbers for visible applications where micro-
deformation induced attenuation becomes a potential problem when the eﬀective area Aeﬀ is suf-
ﬁciently large compared to λ
. We argue how a slight increase in ﬁber diameter D can be used
in screening the high-frequency components of the micro-deformation spectrum mechanically and
we conﬁrm this experimentally for both 15 µm and 20 µm core ﬁbers. For typical bending-radii
(R ∼ 16 cm) the operating band-width increases by ∼ 3 − 400 nm to the low-wavelength side.

2

3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In all-silica photonic crystal ﬁbers (PCFs) guidance of
light is provided by an arrangement of air-holes running
along the full length of the ﬁber. Typically, the air-holes
of diameter d are arranged in a triangular lattice with a
pitch Λ of the same length scale as the free-space wave-
length λ. The core can either be a solid silica-core (see
Fig. 1) with total-internal reﬂection guidance[1] or an
air-core with photonic-bandgap guidance.[2] For recent
reviews we refer to Ref. 3 and references therein.

Though the air-core PCFs probably have the most ex-
traordinary guidance mechanism, the silica-core PCFs
also have remarkable properties such as their endlessly
single-mode nature[4] leading to in principle unlimited
large eﬀective areas.[5] These properties are often greatly
desired for high-power delivery and this makes PCFs ob-
vious candidates for many of these applications. For the
single-mode PCFs there is of course a tail of the coin
common to the physics in standard-ﬁber technology; as
the eﬀective area Aeﬀ is increased the mode becomes
increasingly susceptible to longitudinal ﬁber variations,
micro-deformations, and macro-bending.[6] However, de-
spite this the PCF technology has a clear advantage be-
cause of the endlessly single-mode properties and the rel-
ative ease by which small eﬀective core-cladding index
steps ∆neﬀ can be realized through control of d and Λ.
In standard ﬁbers the latter is diﬃcult since extremely
small well-controlled doping-levels are required to achieve
∆neﬀ ≪ 10−3.

Even though the general physics is that ∆neﬀ decreases
if Aeﬀ is increased there is still room for improvement
by optimal choice of the micro-structured cladding and
the core-shape and size. Recently we demonstrated an
improved large-mode area (LMA) design with a three-rod
core[7] instead of the usual one-rod core.[1] Compared to
the one-rod design this new LMA-PCF oﬀers a larger
∆neﬀ for the same Aeﬀ or vice versa in the λ ≪ Λ limit.
The general view has been that the operation of LMA-
PCFs is limited by macro-bending loss,[5, 8, 9] but push-
ing the technology to still larger eﬀective areas limita-
tions can be set by e.g micro-bending deformations as

well.[6] Micro-bending deformations may be caused by
external perturbations as studied recently,[10] but even
when there is no external perturbations there may still
be residual micro-deformations caused by frozen-in me-
chanical stress in e.g. the coating material. In the situa-
tion where performance is not limited by macro-bending
it is obvious to look into properties of the screening of
micro-bending deformations. Recently, results for the at-
tenuation of a PCF with a 15 µm core diameter and an
outer diameter of D = 125 µm were reported.[6] In the
visible regime the performance of this PCF was clearly
found to suﬀer from micro-deformation induced attenua-
tion. In this Letter we suggest a simple way of screening
the eﬀect of micro-deformations and demonstrate a con-
siderable reduction of the loss-level in LMA PCFs for
visible applications. We emphasize that the actual loss-
level arises from competing eﬀects[6] and once the eﬀect
of micro-bending has been suppressed below the macro-
bending induced attenuation-level the operation of the

FIG. 1: Optical micrograph of cross-section of a PCF with
a triangular arrangement of air holes (dark regions) and a
15 µm silica core. The outer diameter is D ≃ 175 µm and the
air holes are of diameter d/Λ ≃ 0.44 with a pitch Λ ≃ 10 µm.

ﬁber may of course still be limited by macro-bending at-
tenuation.

The Fourier spectrum of naturally occurring micro-
bending deformations will typically be quite broad-band
although sharp distinct features may also be realized e.g.
for periodic deformations.[10] In either case the high-
frequency components of the externally applied defor-
mation spectrum do not aﬀect the optical waveguide,
because of the stiﬀness of the ﬁber.
In other words it
is practically impossible to deform the ﬁber on a length
scale comparable to or shorter than the ﬁber diameter. In
terms of the eﬀective index step micro-deformations will
be screened if ∆neﬀ > ∆nmicro. For a simple ﬁber-model
it can be shown that [11]

∆nmicro = (λ/πD)(Ec/πEf )1/4

(1)

where D is the ﬁber diameter, Ec is the Young’s modulus
of the coating, and Ef is the eﬀective Young’s modulus
of the air-silica composite material. In this work we focus
on the D-dependence, but changing the screening by use
of coating with more advanced mechanical properties is
an alternative direction.

From Eq. (1) it is obvious that the ∆nmicro ∝ 1/D
property can be used as a simple way to screen micro-
deformations. In the optical ﬁber-community it is a long-
standing tradition and standard to use D ≃ 125 µm, but
as we will demonstrate there is a clear advantage of in-
creasing the diameter of LMA-PCFs (for e.g. visible ap-
plications) similarly to what is often done for standard
technology specialty ﬁbers, see e.g. Ref. 12.

Using numbers for silica and typical polymer coatings
Eq. (1) suggest that ∆nmicro ∼ 0.1 × λ/D. For typical
ﬁber diameters and wavelengths this gives numbers which
in order of magnitude only diﬀer slightly from typical
mode-spacings.[10] For the PCFs we are going to com-
pare we have two versions with D = 125 µm and 175 µm,
respectively, but with otherwise similar dielectric cross-
sections in terms of core-size, pitch, and air-hole diame-
ter. Though the change in diameter may seem like a mod-
est change it has an important eﬀect on ∆nmicro which is
lowered by ∼ 30 % and for the PCFs studied in this work
we shall see that this change is enough to bring the PCF
from the ∆neﬀ < ∆nmicro regime to the ∆neﬀ > ∆nmicro
regime. For PCFs ∆neﬀ decreases when the wavelength
decreases (the opposite to the case in standard ﬁbers)
and thus micro-bending loss will increase with decreas-
ing wavelength.

In Fig. 2 we show the experimentally observed spectral
attenuation for two endlessly single-mode PCFs with a
core diameter 2Λ − d of 15 µm and with an air-hole di-
ameter d/Λ ∼ 0.44, i.e. close to the theoretical endlessly
single-mode limit.[13] The ﬁbers are drawn from simi-
lar preforms fabricated by the stack-and-pull method,[1]
but diﬀerent thicknesses of the over-cladding were used
for the two drawings. This results in two ﬁbers with
similar micro-structures, but with the diﬀerent values of
D as mentioned above. The ﬁbers have 5 and 7 rings

2

FIG. 2: Spectral attenuation for two PCFs both with a 15 µm
core diameter characterized on a spool of 8 cm radius. The
solid line shows results for an outer diameters of D = 125 µm,
the dotted line is for D = 175 µm, and the dashed line indi-
cates the fundamental attenuation limit set by Rayleigh scat-
tering.

of air holes, respectively, but since λ ≪ Λ this has no
importance in terms of leakage loss[14] and thus the dif-
ferent thicknesses of over-cladding does not inﬂuence the
optical properties of guided modes. The two ﬁbers were
both found to be single-mode (in both the visible and the
near-infrared regimes) and they have similar mode-ﬁeld
diameters (∼ 12 µm) and otherwise only diﬀer in their
mechanical properties. For each of the ﬁbers the attenu-
ation was characterized with the cut-back technique us-
ing a ﬁber length of > 100 m on a spool of radius 8 cm,
a white-light source, and an optical spectrum analyzer.
Comparing the two curves in Fig. 2 the eﬀect of a larger
outer diameter D is seen to be quite dramatic and for
the PCF with the largest diameter the spectral depen-
dence has a typical Rayleigh dependence though there
is a wavelength independent oﬀset compared to the ul-
timate Rayleigh limit which is indicated by the dashed
line. This indicates the absence of both macro-bending
and micro-deformation induced attenuation. The slightly
higher loss of the D = 175 µm for λ & 1100 nm originates
in contamination.

In Fig. 3 we consider two PCFs with a 20 µm core di-
ameter and d/Λ ∼ 0.44 and compare two versions; one
with D = 125 µm where the eﬀect of micro-deformations
is pronounced and one with 230 µm where the eﬀect of the
deformation is screened. The ﬁbers have 3 and 7 rings of
air-holes, respectively, but we emphasize that this diﬀer-
ence has no importance in terms of leakage loss since λ ≪
Λ.[14] Again the version with a larger outer diameter has
a signiﬁcant lower attenuation-level (compare panels A
and B). By changing the macro-bending radius (see panel
B) we actually ﬁnd evidence that the eﬀect of micro-
deformations is fully screened even 200 nm below the O-H

3

attenuation peak at λ ∼ 1.24 µm and that macro-bending
limitations become more apparent. For the PCF with the
smallest outer diameter the attenuation-level caused by
micro-deformations is too high to make macro-bending
a limiting eﬀect (see panel A) whereas we for the large-
diameter version observe a clear bend-edge which as ex-
pected shifts toward longer wavelengths when decreasing
the bend-radius. In panel A the attenuation is actually
seen to be higher on the 16 cm spool further indicating
that micro-deformation is the limiting factor. The diﬀer-
ence is caused by diﬀerent spooling-conditions, e.g. the
tension or the physical surface-topography of the spool.

In conclusion we have shown how micro-deformation
induced loss in LMA-PCFs may be suppressed by a slight
increase in ﬁber diameter D compared to the standard
of D ∼ 125 µm. The suppression can be understood as a
simple mechanical screening of the high-frequency com-
ponents of the micro-deformation spectrum. For a PCF
with a 20 µm core we have demonstrated a signiﬁcant
reduction of the loss-level by going from D ≃ 125 µm
to D ≃ 230 µm. For a bend-radius R ≃ 16 cm this im-
proved PCF guides light with a loss-level not exceeding
∼ 20 dB/km down to λ ∼ 650 nm where macro-bending
attenuations sets in. We believe the present ﬁndings have
important implications for the perspectives of utilizing
LMA-PCFs for high-power delivery in the visible regime
and for use of the PCF technology in ﬁber-laser applica-
tions.

FIG. 3: Spectral attenuation for diﬀerent macro-bending for
two PCFs with a 20 µm core diameter.
In panels A and B
the outer diameter of the PCF is D = 125 µm and 230 µm,
respectively.

M. D. Nielsen acknowledges ﬁnancial support by the
Danish Academy of Technical Sciences. M. D. Nielsen’s
e-mail address is mdn@crystal-ﬁbre.com.

[1] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. J. Russell, and D. M.

[8] J. C. Baggett, T. M. Monro, K. Furusawa, and D. J.

Atkin, Opt. Lett. 21, 1547 (1996).

Richardson, Opt. Lett. 26, 1045 (2001).

[2] R. F. Cregan, B. J. Mangan, J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks,
P. S. J. Russell, P. J. Roberts, and D. C. Allan, Science
285, 1537 (1999).

[3] P. Russell, Science 299, 358 (2003).
[4] T. A. Birks, J. C. Knight, and P. S. J. Russell, Opt. Lett.

[9] T. Sørensen, J. Broeng, A. Bjarklev, E. Knudsen, and

S. E. B. Libori, Electron. Lett. 37, 287 (2001).

[10] M. D. Nielsen, G. Vienne, J. R. Folkenberg, and A.

Bjarklev, Opt. Lett. 28, 236 (2003).

[11] A. Bjarklev and S. B. Andreasen, Electron. Lett. 25, 417

22, 961 (1997).

[5] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, R. F. Cregan, P. S. J. Russell,
and J.-P. De Sandro, Electron. Lett. 34, 1347 (1998).
[6] N. A. Mortensen and J. R. Folkenberg, J. Opt. A: Pure

Appl. Opt. 5, 163 (2003).

[7] N. A. Mortensen, M. D. Nielsen, J. R. Folkenberg, A. Pe-
tersson, and H. R. Simonsen, Opt. Lett. 28, 393 (2003).

(1989).

[12] M. E. Fermann, Opt. Lett. 23, 52 (1998).
[13] B. T. Kuhlmey, R. C. McPhedran, and C. M. de Sterke,

Opt. Lett. 27, 1684 (2002).

[14] T. P. White, R. C. McPhedran, C. M. de Sterke, L. C.
Botton, and M. J. Steel, Opt. Lett. 26, 1660 (2001).

