3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A CONJUGATION SYMMETRY IN LINEAR ELECTROMAGNETISM,

IN EXTENSION OF MATERIALS WITH NEGATIVE REAL PERMITTIVITY

AND PERMEABILITY SCALARS

Akhlesh Lakhtakia

CATMAS — Computational & Theoretical Materials Sciences Group

Department of Engineering Science & Mechanics

212 Earth & Engineering Sciences Building

Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802–6812

ABSTRACT: If all space is occupied by a linear bianisotropic material — whether homoge-

neous or not — then the concurrent replacements of the permittivity and the impermeability

tensors by the negatives of their respective complex conjugates and of the magnetoelectric

tensors by their respective complex conjugates (in the Boys–Post representation) imply the

conjugation of both E and H, in the absence of externally impressed sources. This conjugation

symmetry in linear electromagnetism has observable consequences when the linear bianisotropic

material occupies a bounded region.

Keywords: bianisotropy; conjugate invariance; conjugation symmetry; negative permittivity;

negative permeability; reﬂection; transmission

1. INTRODUCTION

The modest aim of this communication is to present a conjugation symmetry of frequency–

domain electromagnetic ﬁelds in linear, nonhomogeneous, bianisotropic materials. This symme-

try emerged as a generalization of a result obtained initially for linear, homogeneous, isotropic,

dielectric–magnetic materials with negative real permittivity and permeability scalars [1]–[4].
Nominally, such a material possesses a relative permittivity scalar ǫr = ǫ′
permeability scalar µr = µ′
r < 0 and µ′
ǫ′

r < 0 in some spectral regime; accordingly, the phase velocity vector and the

r , both dependent on the angular frequency ω, such that both

r and a relative

r + iµ′′

r + iǫ′′

1

time–averaged Poynting vector are oppositely directed in that spectral regime [4].1 Originally

conceived more than 35 years ago [1], these materials were artiﬁcially realized quite recently [2].

During an investigation of changes in frequency–domain electromagnetic ﬁelds when the trans-

formation {ǫ′

r → −ǫ′

r, µ′

r → −µ′

r} is eﬀected on the isotropic dielectric–magnetic material oc-

cupying a source–free region, a more general conjugation symmetry in linear electromagnetism

began to take shape. The following sections of this communication report the development of

that symmetry.

2. CONJUGATE INVARIANCE OF MAXWELL POSTULATES

The frequency–domain Maxwell postulates may be written as

∇ • D(r, ω) = ρe(r, ω)

∇ • B(r, ω) = ρm(r, ω)

∇ × E(r, ω) = iωB(r, ω) − J m(r, ω)

∇ × H(r, ω) = −iωD(r, ω) + J e(r, ω)

,






{E → E∗, H → H ∗, D → −D∗, B → −B∗,

J e → J ∗

e, J m → J ∗

m, ρe → −ρ∗

e, ρm → −ρ∗

m} ,

(1)

(2)

in the presence of externally impressed sources of the electric and magnetic types. These four

postulates are collectively invariant with respect to the transformation

where the asterisk denotes the complex conjugate. This statement of conjugate invariance may

be veriﬁed by direct substitution of (2) in (1).

The conjugate invariance of the Maxwell postulates not only underlies a similarly invariant

Beltrami form of electromagnetism [6], but also permits the existence of a conjugation symmetry

in linear electromagnetism.

1

The condition for the phase velocity and the time–averaged Poynting vectors to be oppositely directed is

r) (|µr| − µ′

(|ǫr| − ǫ′
r) > ǫ′′
time–dependence having been assumed here, ǫ′′

r µ′′

r , which permits — more generally — ǫ′

r and/or µ′

r to be negative [5]. An exp(−ωt)

r > 0 and µ′′

r > 0 at all ω > 0 for all passive materials.

2

3. CONJUGATE INVARIANCE AND LINEAR BIANISOTROPY

There are two widely used sets of frequency–domain constitutive relations for linear bian-

isotropic materials [7]. Both are considered as follows:

• Boys–Post constitutive relations. The Boys–Post constitutive relations of a linear, nonho-

mogeneous, bianisotropic material can be stated as

D(r, ω) = ǫ(r, ω) • E(r, ω) + α(r, ω) • B(r, ω)

H(r, ω) = β(r, ω) • E(r, ω) + χ(r, ω) • B(r, ω)

,






subject to the constraint Trace nα − βo ≡ 0. Whereas ǫ is the permittivity tensor and χ
is the impermeability tensor, both α and β are magnetoelectric tensors.

The transformation

nǫ → −ǫ∗, χ → −χ∗, α → α∗, β → β∗

o

of constitutive tensors then entails the transformation

{E → E∗, H → H ∗, D → −D∗, B → −B∗

}

of the electromagnetic ﬁelds — in conformity with (2) expressing the conjugate invariance

of the Maxwell postulates.

• Tellegen constitutive relations. The Tellegen constitutive relations of a linear, nonhomo-

geneous, bianisotropic material can be stated as

D(r, ω) = ˆǫ(r, ω) • E(r, ω) + ξ(r, ω) • H(r, ω)

B(r, ω) = ζ(r, ω) • E(r, ω) + µ(r, ω) • H(r, ω)

,






subject to the constraint Trace nµ−1 • (ξ + ζ)o ≡ 0. Here, ˆǫ is the permittivity tensor, µ
is the permeability tensor, and both ξ and ζ are magnetoelectric tensors.

The transformation

nˆǫ → −ˆǫ∗, µ → −µ∗, ξ → −ξ∗, ζ → −ζ ∗

o

3

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

of constitutive tensors then also entails the ﬁeld transformation (5) in conformity with the

conjugate invariance of the Maxwell postulates.

Because the frequency–domain constitutive relations of the Boys–Post and the Tellegen types are

inter–translatable, the constitutive–tensor transformations (4) and (7) are actually equivalent.

4. CONJUGATION SYMMETRY IN LINEAR ELECTROMAGNETISM

The deductions in Section 3 permit the enunciation of the following conjugation symmetry:

If all space were to be occupied by a linear bianisotropic material — whether homogeneous or

not — then a change of the constitutive tensors as per (4) would imply the conjugation of both

E(r, ω) and H(r, ω), in the absence of externally impressed sources. If such sources are present,

then the conjuagtion symmetry is expressed jointly by (2) and (4).

The eﬀect of the transformation (4) would be observable even if the linear bianisotropic mate-

rial were to be conﬁned to a bounded region. For instance, imagine a slab of inﬁnite transverse

extent and uniform thickness, separating two vacuous half–spaces; the slab is made of a lin-

ear, isotropic, dielectric–magnetic material; and a linearly polarized, propagating, plane wave

is incident on the slab. If the real parts of the permittivity and the permeability scalars of the

slab were to change sign simultaneously, then the reﬂection and the transmission coeﬃcients

would have to be replaced by their respective complex conjugates [8]. The same conclusion

holds if the slab were to be piecewise uniform in the thickness direction. The complex con-

jugation of reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients would essentially hold even if the slab were

to be bianisotropic and plane–stratiﬁed, but a dependence on the polar angle of the incidence

wavevector would also appear — as demonstrated elsewhere for chiral ferrosmectic slabs [9].

However, the conjugation of the reﬂection and the transmission coeﬃcients would not hold on

reversal of the signs of the real parts of the permittivity and permeability scalars of an isotropic,

plane–stratiﬁed, dielectric–magnetic slab, if the incident plane wave were to evanescent.

The conclusions stated in the foregoing paragraph were obtained both by direct calculation

and by application of the conjugation symmetry enunciated at the beginning of this section. The

latter procedure is, of course, very simple; and it demonstrates the importance of the proﬀered

4

symmetry in quickly determining the observable consequences of employing newly emerging

materials (such as isotropic dielectric–magnetic materials with negative real permittivity and

permeabilty scalars, and their anisotropic counterparts) for various applications.

References

[1] V.S. Veselago, The electrodynamics of substances with simultaneously negative values of ǫ

and µ, Sov Phys Usp 10 (1968) 509–514.

[2] R.A. Shelby, D.R. Smith and S. Schultz, Experimental veriﬁcation of a negative index of

refraction, Science 292 (2001) 77–79.

[3] C.G. Parazzoli, R.B. Greegor, K. Li, B.E.C. Koltenbah and M. Tanielian, Experimental

veriﬁcation and simulation of negative index of refraction using Snell’s law, Phys Rev Lett

90 (2003) 107401.

56 (2002) 407–410.

[4] A. Lakhtakia, M.W. McCall and W.S. Weiglhofer, Brief overview of recent developments

on negative phase–velocity mediums (alias left–handed materials), Arch Elektron ¨Ubertrag

[5] M.W. McCall, A. Lakhtakia and W.S. Weiglhofer, The negative index of refraction de-

mystiﬁed, Eur J Phys 23 (2002) 353–359.

[6] A. Lakhtakia and W.S. Weiglhofer, Covariances and invariances of the Beltrami–Maxwell

postulates, IEE Proc SMT 142 (1995) 262–266.

[7] W.S. Weiglhofer, A ﬂavour of constitutive relations: The linear regime, In: S. Zouhdi,

A. Sihvola and M. Arsalane (eds), Advances in electromagnetics of complex media and

metamaterials, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2003.

[8] A. Lakhtakia, On planewave remittances and Goos–H¨anchen shifts of planar slabs with

negative real permittivity and permeability, Electromagnetics 23 (2003) 71–75.

[9] A. Lakhtakia, Handedness reversal of circular Bragg phenomenon due to negative real

permittivity and permeability, Optics Express 11 (2003) 716–722.

5

