Alternatives to the Markovian Model for the

Tubulent Refractive Index in Lightwave

Propagation.

Dar´ıo G. P´erez and Luciano Zunino

Centro de Investigaciones ´Opticas (CIOp), CC. 124 Correo Central, La Plata 1900,

Argentina.

We discuss in this letter the markovian model and its limitations when

applied to model the turbulent refractive index in lightwave propagation.

Not being aware are these limitations usually leads to severe mistakes as we

will point out here. It is widely known the index is a passive scalar ﬁeld;

moreover, with our actual knowledge about these quantities we will propose

an alternative stochastic process to the markovian model.

2014 Optical

c
(cid:13)

Society of America

OCIS codes: 000.5490, 010.1300, 010.7060.

Whenever a light beam propagates through the turbulent atmosphere, it exper-

iments deﬂections due to ﬂuctuations in the refractive index. As a result of phase

changes, the beam suﬀers displacements perpendicular to the original direction of

propagation. This phenomenon is known as beam wandering, beam steering or spot

dancing. The wandering is usually characterized in terms of the variance of its dis-

placements. Several authors have experimentally and theoretically treated this prob-

lem, or the equivalent problem of angular ﬂuctuations, using diﬀerent approaches.

1

3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The earliest works approached the problem of beam wandering from within the

Geometric Optics. Chernov1 treated the ray-light propagation in a random medium

as a continuous Markov process. This assumption enabled him to formulate a Fokker-

Planck equation. Later, Beckman2 used the ray equation to calculate the wander of a

single ray. Both authors obtained similar formulas for the variance of the displacement,

Var(∆x), observed after the light has propagated a distance L. These formulas diﬀer

in a numerical factor, but the power-law

Var(∆x)

L3

∝

(1)

is found in both.

However, the authors introduced an arbitrary Gaussian covariance function for

the refractive index which is not physically plausible; also, these techniques do not

include the eﬀects of a ﬁnite beam diameter. Chiba3 tried to overcome these limita-

tions. He assumed that changes of the refractive index over small scales have almost

no eﬀect on the motion of the beam centroid. Using a Kolmogorov-like structure

function he also found a power-law dependence as in Eq. (1).

On the other hand, whenever the width of the beam is smaller than the tur-

bulence inner scale the Ray Optics approximation is enough. These beams known

as thin-beam were studied by Consortini and O’Donnell.4 Following the Beckmann’s

work, they analized experimentally and theoretically the dependence of thin-beam

displacements with the propagation distance. They also showed, in the case of small

ﬂuctuations, that the transverse displacement variance follows a third-power law de-

pendence on the path length independently of the turbulence spectrum used. In an-

2

other work, Consortini et al.5 investigated experimentally, for laboratory-generated

turbulence, the dependence of beam variance on propagation length in the case of

strong turbulence. They found a rough estimate of the third-power law dependence.

Churnside and Lataitis6 developed an analytic expression for the beam wander-

ing variance using a geometric optics formulation applied to a ﬁnite, uniform beam

propagating through weak refractive turbulence by the Kolmogorov spectrum. Eﬀects

of beam size are considered so that the results are valid for any initial beam curva-

ture. Tofsted7 extended this formalism by using a modiﬁed von Karman spectrum of

refractive index to account for ﬁnite outer scale. All of them obtained a third-power

law for the displacement variance.

It must be stressed here that all the previous works are limited by the Geometric

Optics approximation (see Ref. 8, p. 120). That is,

√Lλ,

l0

≫

where L is the path length, λ the wavelength and l0 the dimension of the inner scale.

Andreev and Gelfer9 calculated the variance of the angular displacement of the

center of gravity of the ﬂuctuating intensity of a gaussian beam by using the extended

Huygens-Fresnel principle. In this work the beam size eﬀects are not considered. They

obtained that the beam angular wandering is proportional to the path length, L, in

accordance with the above results.

Klyatskin and Kon10 described the propagation of light considering a scalar

parabolic equation and assuming a markovian model approximation for the atmo-

spheric refractive index, ǫ(ρ; z). When using the markovian model the covariance

3

function R obtained from the original structure function for the index is replaced by

an eﬀective one:

E[ ǫ(ρ; z)ǫ(ρ′; z′)] = δ(z

z′)A(ρ

ρ′),

−

−

(2)

where A is a diﬀerentiable function deﬁned by A(ρ) =

R R(ρ, z) dz. This means
R

that the values of the index in the region z > z′ do not aﬀect those at the point

(ρ′, z′). This property known as “dynamical causality” (see Ref. 11, p. 214) comes from

the martingale12 property of the markovian model. Using this approximation they

derived an equation for the angular beam wandering. They also found a dependence

proportional to L. Years later, Mironov and Nosov13 used the Markov approximation

to show that there exists a saturation for the angular beam wandering. That is, after

some characteristic lenght—associated to the outer scale—it becomes independent of

the path length. This phenomenon is due to the introduction of memory through the

covariance of the intensity.

Tatarsk˘ı and Zavorotny11 derived the conditions of validity for the Markov ap-

proximation. They found that it is applicable if all the characteristic dimensions

arising from the wave propagation problem are small compared to the path length.

As Ostoja-Starzewski explained14 an intuitive justiﬁcation for the Markov property

is that the ray-light on a long distance behaves as if it has suﬀered many independent

refractions. Then, this approach holds only for long paths.

Most of the past and present research in turbulent lightwave propagation, we have

seen, is based directly or indirectly on the markovian model. The indirect use of the

approximation is made through the assumption that the index itself is homogeneous—

4

stationary in the statistical sense. This hardly holds for a passive scalar like the

refractive index. As was stated by Tatarsk˘ı (see Ref. 8, p. 19): “... it is a very rough

approximation to regard [the scalar ﬁeld] as homogeneous... .” Actually, studies in

passive scalar turbulence15, 16 shows that the gradient of the mean scalar ﬁeld is the

source of anisotropies deep inside the turbulence. Nevertheless, the assumption of an

homogeneous refractive index should be acceptable under the conditon of long path

given by Tatarsk˘ı and Zavorotny.

VI.3.3 in Ref. 17, p. 407) such that,

Given an homogeneous gaussian process there exists some h(ρ; z) (Theorem

ǫ(ρ; z) =

h(ρ; z

s) ˙B1/2(s) ds =

h(ρ; z

s) dB1/2(s),

∞

Z
0

−

∞

Z

0

−

for the white noise ˙B1/2(z)—understood as the derivative of the Brownian motion,

B1/2(z). When the kernel function h is square integrable the refractive index is a

martingale, and therefore markovian. A well-behaved kernel is achieved for a suﬃcient

regular Spectral Function Φ(ρ; λ); that is,

Φ(ρ; λ) is a square integrable function

for all ρ.

p

The markovian model, Eq. (2), is a special extension to the above. The book of

Leland18 exaustively depicts it. Obviously, this model transfers all the discontinuities

to the z-axis. The process associated to this covariance belongs to the class of cylin-

drical Browninan motion:19 an inﬁnite dimensional Brownian motion. That is, linear

mapping white noises with values in a Hilbert space

to some probability space,

H

i. e., ǫ = L( ˙B1/2). We can analize this processes coordinate by coordinate,

F (ρ, z; s) ˙B1/2(s) ds,

ZR

5

(3)

where F is continuously diﬀerentiable in ρ. Therefore, the derivatives
R

(for i = 1, 2) are well-deﬁned. Their covariance is

R Fxi(ρ, z; s)dB1/2

s

E

(cid:20)(cid:18)ZR

Fxi(ρ, z; s)dB1/2

s (cid:19)(cid:18)ZR

Fx′

i(ρ′, z′; s)dB1/2

s (cid:19)(cid:21)

i(ρ′, z′; s′) ds′,
Fxi(ρ, z; s′)F ∗
x′

=

ZR

we used the property E(dB1/2

s dB1/2

s′ ) = δ(s

s′) ds for the white noise. Now, diﬀer-

−

entiating the covariance of the ‘coordinate’, Eq. (3), by ∂xi∂x′

i we ﬁnd

∂xi∂x′

i

E

(cid:20)(cid:18)ZR

F (ρ, z; s)dB1/2

s (cid:19)(cid:18)ZR

F (ρ′, z′; s′)dB1/2
s′

=

(cid:19)(cid:21)

i(ρ′, z′; s) ds.
Fxi(ρ, z; s)F ∗
x′

ZR

Henceforth, the covariance operator commutes with the derivative coordinate to co-

ordinate. Finally, this property is extended to the whole markovian process

∂xi∂x′

i

E[ǫ(ρ; z) ǫ(ρ′; z′)] = E
(cid:2)

∂xiǫ(ρ; z) ∂x′

iǫ(ρ′; z′)

.

(4)

(cid:3)

This property is commonly used in turbulent optics regardless its original nature.

That is, the original covariance, Eq. (2), is neglected. As example we can cite the

works2, 3, 4 in Geometric Optics. These, after some calculation, usually end up with an

equation of the form

L

L

∆x

∝ Z

0 Z

0

∂ǫ
∂xi

dz dz′,

(5)

where L is the traveled distance and ∆x is the displacement of the spot on the screen.

Afterwards, its covariance is evaluated. It is fairly common among these works to

proceed to commutate the average with the derivatives. Nevertheless, there are no

arguments given justifying such procedure. The commutative property, Eq. (4), holds

6

for the markovian approximation but it is likely not applicable in other situations.

In particular, the existence of the above derivative should be proved. For example,

isotropic scalar ﬁelds could lead to derivatives proportional to a white noise; thus, to

a non-diﬀerentiable process for which the commutative property does not hold.

Finally, we observe the markovian model of the refractive index is proportional to

L1/2, then the integral of its derivative, Eq. (5), behaves as L1

1
2 . The covariance of the

displacements will grow proportional to L3. This is characteristic of the markovian

approximation.

Recently, it was shown that fractional Brownian motion processes (fBm) with

Hurst parameter H 20 could be used to describe the turbulent refractive index21 to

model ray-light propagation. This family of Gaussian processes matches the require-

ments for passive scalar ﬁelds; that is, they are Gaussian, have stationary increments,

and obey the Kolgomorov-Obukhov-Corrsin’s Structure Function—the extension to

passive scalars of the well-known Kolmogorov Structure Function. Moreover, the fBm

processes have memory:22 They have long-memory for 1/2 < H < 1, have no-memory

when H = 1/2, and short-memory in the case 0 < H < 1/2. It was veriﬁed,23 through

Wavelet Analysis of experimental data, that the wandering of a laser beam presents

memory—for short trayectories. This is in accordance with the fBm model presented

above. Otherwise, the markovian approximation is memoryless therefore it can not

represent the behavior of the refractive index in all the spatial scales. Under these

circumstances the fBm is a good candidate to replace and extend the markovian

model.

D. G. Perez’s e-mail address is dariop@ciop.unlp.edu.ar. L. Zunino’s e-mail ad-

7

dress is lucianoz@ciop.unlp.edu.ar. L. Z. thanks the Consejo Nacional de Investiga-

ciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas (CONICET, Argentina) for research fellowship.

References

York, 1960.

1. L. A. Chernov. Wave propagation in a Random Medium. McGraw-Hill, New

2. P. Beckman. Signal degeneration in laser beams propagated through a turbulent

atmosphere. Radio Sci. J. Res. (NBS/USNC-URSI), 69D(4):629–640, April 1965.

3. T. Chiba. Spot dancing of the laser beam propagated through the turbulent

atmosphere. Appl. Opt., 10(11):2456–2461, 1971.

4. A. Consortini and K. O’Donnell. Beam wandering thin parallel beams through

atmospheric turbulence. Waves in Random Media, 3:S11–S28, 1991.

5. A. Consortini, G. Fusco, F. Rigal, A. Agabi, and Y. Y. Sun. Experimental veriﬁca-

tion of thin-beam wandering dependence on distance in strong indoor turbulence.

Waves in Random Media, 7:521–529, 1997.

6. J. Churnside and R. Lataitis. Wander of an optical beam in the turbulent atmo-

sphere. Appl. Opt., 29(7):926–930, 1990.

7. D. H. Tofsted. Outer-scale eﬀects on beam-wander and angle-of-arrival variance.

8. V. I. Tatarsk˘ı. Wave Propagation in a Turbulent Medium. Mc Graw-Hill, New

Appl. Opt., 31(27):5865–5870, 1992.

York, 1961.

9. G. A. Andreev and E. I. Gelfer. Angular random walks of the center of gravity

of the cross section of a diverging light beam. Radiophys. Quantum Electron.,

8

14:1145–1147, 1971.

10. V. I. Klyatskin and A. I. Kon. On the displacement of spatially-bounded light

beams in a turbulent medium in the markovian-random process approximation.

Radiophys. Quantum Electron., 15:1056–1061, 1972.

11. V. I. Tatarsk˘ı and V. U. Zavorotny. Strong ﬂuctuations in light propagation in

a randomly inhomogeneous medium.

In Progress in Optics, volume 18, pages

205–256. North-Holland, Amsterdan, 1980.

12. Formally, a markovian process Xt is such that the conditional probability P(

)

·|·

for a given event B does not depend on the past of the process, i. e., if s > t then

B

it is P

Xs ∈
(cid:0)
of all past events.

Ft
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:1)

= P

Xs ∈
(cid:0)

B

Xt
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:1)

for

Ft = σ

{

ω : Xt′ such that t′

t
}

≤

the set

13. V. L. Mironov and V. V. Nosov. On the theory of spatially limited light beam dis-

placements in a randomly inhomogeneous medium. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 67(8):1073–

14. M. Ostoja-Starzewski. On geometric acoustic in random, locally anisotropic me-

dia. Contiuum Mech. Thermodyn., 13:131–134, 2001.

15. W. D. McComb. The Physics of Fluid Turbulence. Oxford University Press, New

16. T. Elperin, N. Kleeorin, and I. Rogachevsk˘ı. Isotropic and anisotropic spectra of

passive scalar ﬂuctuations in turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett., 53(4):3431–

1080, 1977.

York, 1991.

3441, 1996.

17. A. N. Shiryayev. Probability, volume 35 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics.

9

Springer-Verlag, New York, 1984.

18. R. P. Leland. Stochastic models for laser propagation in atmospheric turbulence.

In Lectures Notes in Control and Information Sciences, volume 133. Springer-

19. G. Da Prato and J. Zabczyk. Stochastic equations in inﬁnite dimensions.

In

Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press,

20. For 0 < H < 1 the fractional Brownian motion is scalar-invariant: BH(αs) d=

αHBH(s), for any α, where d= means both share the same probability law. Usu-

ally scalar-invariant processes are called self-similar if they have stationary in-

Verlag, 1989.

Cambridge, 1992.

crements.

21. D. G. P´erez. The fractional brownian motion property of the turbulent refractive

within geometric optics. arXiv:physics/0306183 (to be submitted), 2003.

22. J. Beran. Statistics for long-memory processes. In Monographs on Statistics and

Applied Probability, volume 61. Chapman & Hall, 1994.

23. Luciano Zunino, Dar´ıo G. P´erez, Osvaldo A. Rosso, and Mario Garavaglia. Char-

acterization of the laser propagation through turbulent media by quantiﬁers based

on wavelet transform. arXiv:nlin.CD/0303027 (submitted to Fractals), 2003.

10

