3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Three dimensional imaging of short pulses

Marco A.C. Potenza a Stefano Minardi b Jose Trull c†
Gianni Blasi c Domenico Salerno c Paolo Di Trapani c
Arunas Varanaviˇcius d Algis Piskarskas d

aDepartment of Physics ”Aldo Pontremoli”, University of Milan and
Istituto Nazionale Fisica della Materia, Via Celoria 16, I-20133 Milano, Italy
bInstituto di Ciencias Fotonicas c/Jordi Girona, 29 - NEXUS II E-08034
Barcelona, Spain
cIstitito Nazionale Fisica della Materia, Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche,
Fisiche, Matematiche, Universit`a dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, I-22100 Como,
Italy
dDepartment of Quantum Electronics, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 9, building
III, LT-2040 Vilnius, Lithuania

Abstract

We exploit a slightly noncollinear second-harmonic cross-correlation scheme to
map the 3D space-time intensity distribution of an unknown complex-shaped ultra-
short optical pulse. We show the capability of the technique to reconstruct both the
amplitude and the phase of the ﬁeld through the coherence of the nonlinear interac-
tion down to a resolution of 10 µm in space and 200 fs in time. This implies that the
concept of second-harmonic holography can be employed down to the sub-ps time
scale, and used to discuss the features of the technique in terms of the reconstructed
ﬁelds.

Key words: Holography; Non-linear optics; Cross-correlation of ultrashort pulses;

1 Introduction

The study of ultrafast phenomena has been a major scientiﬁc priority during
last decades covering diﬀerent topics such as the study of radiation-matter
interactions (1), transient response of molecules and atoms (2), coherent con-
trol of chemical reactions (3) or communication and information technology
(4). The growth of this ﬁeld relies upon the development of sources of fem-
tosecond radiation and of appropriate techniques able to provide time domain

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

information in the femtosecond scale. However, during the interaction of short
optical pulses with a nonlinear medium, diﬀerent mechanisms can lead to its
reshaping into complex spatio-temporal structures with non-trivial light dis-
tribution (5). As a consequence, their complete characterization requires a
method capable of acquiring a snap-shot of their intensity distribution in the
whole 3-dimensional (3D; x, y, t − z/c) comoving frame.

Most of the available methods for pulse diagnostic provide information of the
WP characteristics in a space of reduced dimensionality. The use of frequency
resolved autocorrelation techniques (i.e. FROG, SPIDER) allows for the re-
covery of the temporal intensity and phase proﬁle of a given pulse but assumes
uniform transverse spatial distribution (6; 7). On the contrary, the character-
ization of transversally localized beams often relies upon the optical imaging
onto CCD cameras, therefore the temporal information is lost because of their
integration times unavoidably larger than the optical pulse duration. Recently,
a space-time characterization method based on extended SPIDER technique
has been developed capable of resolving electric ﬁeld characteristics in time
and along one spatial coordinate (8). A quite direct way of obtaining spatio-
temporal intensity proﬁles of a WP is to perform measurements with a streak
camera, which allows a temporal resolution up to fractions of ps (9). This
technique allowed the investigation of the dynamics of the breakup along the
pulse envelope of a large elliptical beam propagating into a saturable Kerr
nonlinear medium (10; 11). However, also in this case, the space-time maps
are intrinsically two dimensional (1 spatial + temporal dimensions).

A diﬀerent approach to the problem considers the retrieval of the pulse shape
through an all-optical processing by means of spatially resolved detection sys-
tems combined with gating techniques. The principle of the method is that of
characterizing with spatial resolution an optical ﬁeld that is proportional to
the product EO(x, t)ER(x, t), where EO(x, t) is the object to be measured and
ER(x, t) is a suitable reference pulse. Since the product is diﬀerent from zero
only on the intersection of the support of both ﬁelds 1 , by translating the refer-
ence with respect to the object, we get the possibility of recording information
from diﬀerent parts of the object. Among the linear time gating techniques,
light–in–ﬂight holographic recording has been the ﬁrst technique which per-
mitted the recording of dynamically evolving light ﬁelds during propagation
(12; 13; 14). Recently, this technique has been adapted to study the propaga-
tion of a 3 ps long pulse in linear media (15). Linear probing techniques were
also exploited in order to obtain time resolved imaging, like the probing of the
birefringence properties of plasma by means of a delayed, spatially-extended

1 Rigorously, the support of a function is the set of points where its value is diﬀerent
from zero. For realistic optical ﬁelds that have exponentially decaying tails we can
deﬁne a “practical” support, deﬁned as the set of points in the space-time in which
the ﬁeld amplitude is larger than 1/e times the peak value.

2

100 fs pulses to investigate the dynamics of laser pulse focusing in air (16).

Nonlinear processes have been employed since long ago to resolve in time the
evolution of ultrafast phenomena. Among them, the quadratic nonlinearity
has been proved to be particularly versatile due to the fact that it provides
easily terms containing the product of two optical ﬁelds. Recently, a type II
degenerate parametric ampliﬁcation scheme has been employed to obtain time
resolved 2D images of a ps-pulse hitting a diﬀusing screen with 35 ps resolution
(17), thus yielding a 3D imaging. The same technique was later used to image
an object embedded in a thick diﬀusing sample (18). Althought our setup is
actually an improved version of that described in (18), we point out that our
conceptual approach is diﬀerent from the study of the propagation of a wave
front. In fact, in our case the propagation variable is ﬁxed.

Our goal in this article is to demonstrate the potentiality of the optical gating
technique to acquire a high resolution space-time map of short, focused WPs
in their comoving reference frame. Furthermore, we devise the capability of
the technique to reconstruct both the amplitude and the phase of the WP
thanks to the coherence of the nonlinear interaction. We propose a method
that is based on quadratic type I interaction in a sum-frequency generation
scheme either by a non-collinear second harmonic generation or by a collinear
sum-frequency scheme. The latter has been used in (19). Here we discuss the
ﬁrst option, showing that if the interaction angle between the two interacting
ﬁelds is small enough, then a reliable space-time map of the object pulse can be
obtained. This can be achieved if the duration of the gate is much smaller than
that of the object to be imaged. A holographic interpretation of the method
permits to gain insight into the process of up-conversion of the space-time
slices of the object into the SF ﬁeld, and to prove that the coherence of the
SF process is able to reconstruct the wavefront in both amplitude and phase.
Our results conﬁrm this possibility. The theoretical discussion of the method
is followed by section 3, where we present the set-up and the experimentally
reconstructed space-time intensity proﬁles of a parametric spatial soliton ex-
cited by a 1 ps light pulse. For our setting, we estimate a mapping resolution
of 200 fs in time and about 10µm in space. The features of the technique are
presented in section 4, pointing out the limitations that may arise and dis-
cussing the possible implementations in each case. In the last section the main
conclusions are presented.

2 Description of the technique: intensity and ﬁeld reconstruction

In this section we explicitly show how a non-collinear sum-frequency (SF)
scheme can be exploited to get high resolution space-time intensity maps of
an unknown light wave packet with a space-time structure (object wave). The

3

recovery of a 3D intensity map is obtained by means of a short reference pulse
which provides a time gating inside a nonlinear (NL) crystal, and generates
a SF signal containing the information about a set of 2D slices of the object
obtained by changing the reference delay. We ﬁrst discuss the case for the re-
construction of the object intensity proﬁle, and then we show how the intrinsic
coherence of the SF process allows in fact for a truly holographic recording of
the unknown object.

2.1 3D Intensity proﬁle mapping

Let us denote the object ( ¯EO) and reference ( ¯ER) wave packets as follows:

(1)
(2)

(3)

¯EO = EO(x, y, z, t)ei[ω1t−kz(ω1)z−kx(ω1)x] + c.c.
¯ER = ER(x, y, z, t)ei[ω2t−kz(ω2)z+kx(ω2)x] + c.c.

where the complex functions EO(x, y, t, z) and ER(x, y, t, z) are the slowly
varying envelopes of two waves with frequencies ω1 and ω2. Note that in this
form the equations describe two wavepackets propagating in the positive z
direction and colliding at an angle θ = 2 arctan(kx/kz) in the x − z plane
(here k =
z = 2π/λ0). For a SF generation process occurring inside a
quadratic nonlinear crystal, the polarization source giving rise to the SF can
be written as:

x + k2
k2

q

PSF ∝ 2EOERei[ω3t−kz(ω3)z] + c.c.

where the phase and energy matching conditions kz(ω3) = kz(ω1) + kz(ω2),
kx(ω1) = −kx(ω2) and ω3 = ω1 + ω2 have been used. The SF ﬁeld propagates
along z direction and has a slowly varying envelope function that we will indi-
cate by ESF (x, y, t, z). Now we introduce the following assumptions: 1) small
depletion of both the EO and ER ﬁelds; 2) negligible diﬀraction and dispersion
within the crystal; 3) equal group velocities of the object, reference and sum-
frequency pulses, namely uO, uR and uSF , that is uO = uR = uSF = u. Note
that all these assumptions approximatively hold as long as the thickness of the
crystal ∆z is small compared to the characteristic lenghts of the system (non-
linear length, dispersion and diﬀraction lengths, pulse walkoﬀ length). These
assumptions allow to ﬁnd a travelling reference frame for all the propagating
pulses by introducing the retarded time τ = t−z/u. The general partial diﬀer-
ential equations describing the interaction process then reduces to an ordinay
diﬀerential equation for the envelope ESF . If we also introduce a time delay
τi on the reference wavefront, the equation takes the form:

dESF (x, y, τ, z)
dz

= i2σEO(x, y, τ, z)ER(x, y, τ − τi, z)

(4)

4

where σ is the nonlinear coupling term. The last equation is readily integrated
and, if the mixing crystal is placed at position z0, it reads:

ESF (x, y, τ, z0) = iσ2EO(x, y, τ, z0)ER(x, y, τ − τi, z0)∆z

(5)

A deeper discussion about the meaning of this expression will be given in the
following subsection. Here we just point out how the intensity proﬁle of the
SF ﬁeld can be used to retrieve the 3D intensity map of the object. More
precisely, for a given lag time τi, the spatially dependent SF ﬂuence proﬁle
(the CCD signal) S(x, y, τi, z0) recorded just at the exit face of the mixing
crystal is given by:

S(x, y, τi, z0) ≃ (σ∆z)2

|EO(x, y, τ, z0)|2|ER(x, y, τ − τi, z0)|2dτ

(6)

+∞

Z
−∞

This expression provides the convolution between the intensity proﬁles of the
object and reference wave packets, lagged in time by τi, and shows that the
signal recorded by a CCD sensor is a linear function of the intensity of both the
object and reference wavepackets. In the particular case in which the reference
wave is spatially homogeneous in the transverse x − y plane, and temporally
much shorter than the object, we can write expression 6 in the following form:

S(x, y, τi, z0) ∝ (σ∆z)2|ER|2IO(x, y, τi, z0)

(7)

where IO = |EO|2.

By imposing a set of delays (τi, i = 1...n) to the reference WP with respect to
the object, a reliable 3D reconstruction of the WP structure can be achieved
by the collection of the n images S(x, y, τi, z0). By changing the plane z0, the
temporal evolution of the WP can also be obtained.

Notice that the model described above does not take into account the disper-
sion of the mixing crystal. Therefore, the model as it is predicts no limits for
the resolution of the map as long as arbitrary short reference pulses are avail-
able. Actually the real mixing crystal has a ﬁnite bandwidth that limits the
spatiotemporal resolution of the obtainable maps. Therefore a careful evalua-
tion of the dispersion characteristics of the mixing crystal have to be gauged
as ultrashort pulses are either investigated or used as a reference. More details
are discussed in section 4.

5

2.2 3D ﬁeld reconstruction

The method described above is not limited to the intensity reconstruction,
but can be also implemented for the ﬁeld reconstruction as can be stated
from equation 5. This point can also be explained in terms of a holographic
description of the process, thus bringing to a deeper understanding of the
imaging reconstruction process.

As stated in (20; 23; 24), for a plane wave reference the generated wavefront
through the NL interaction behaves as a conventional hologram recorded at
frequency ω and illuminated with a radiation at 2ω. As a consequence, the
position, scale, resolution and all the other properties of transformation of the
reconstructed image can be predicted by means of the ordinary laws of holog-
raphy. This hologram is recorded and reconstructed at a time, and exists only
when light propagates inside the crystal. Yet we also point out that we obtain
the 3D map of our pulse by collecting a set of independent 2D holograms
by slicing the object pulse at diﬀerent delays. Nevertheless, according to the
holographic properties of the SF process, the slicing can be done with the mix-
ing crystal at any z from the real object to be recovered and the information
recorded is enough to reconstruct the slice.

In order to clarify this point, let’s assume to perform an experiment in which
we reconstruct a slice of an object WP (Fig 1.a). At any distance z (Fig 1.b)
the reconstructed WP will correspond to the propagated version of the one
at z0. Let us consider the case when the object WP has a bandwidth small
enough with respect to the SF bandwidth that our simpliﬁed model applies,
the pulse does not have appreciable angular dispersion 2 and the spatial and
the temporal evolution can be separated. Under these assumptions, any slice
recorded in the confocal conﬁguration (see Fig. 1.a) could also be reconstructed
when the mixing crystal is displaced at position z and the ﬁeld to be converted
is the propagated one. This is possible by exploiting the holographic properties,
provided that the detecting system is set to reconstruct the virtual image of
the slice. This image is placed at a distance 2z far from the mixing crystal
(see Fig. 1.c), its transverse size being identical to that of the object (see (23),
and also note that we are working in the degenerate case, ω1 = ω2).

The possibility to recover the intensity proﬁle of a virtual image comes from
the complete wavefront (ﬁeld) reconstruction arising from the SF process co-
herence and contained in Eq. 4) 3 .

2 In the case of angular dispersion, the diﬀraction drives an eﬀective group velocity
dispersion also in the vacuum, then the spatial evolution cannot be separated from
the temporal one (see for example (21), (22))
3 We suggest for example the possibility to use an interferometric or heterodyne
device in order to obtain a complete charaterization of the ﬁeld. By measuring the

6

Propagation direction of the object

z

2z

(a)

NL crystal

object

reference
pulse

(b)

(c)

virtual
image

zo

zo+z

Fig. 1. Three reconstruction schemes of a slice obtained from an object WP. In a)
the slice is reconstructed as a real image (confocal conﬁguration); in b) the slice is
reconstructed after the object propagated a distance z; in c) the slice corresponding
to the one imaged in b) is used to reconstruct the virtual image of the one imaged
in a).

This important property also allows to get intensity maps with a wider dy-
namical range. For example, in the cases when the object is so intense so that
the undepleted pump approximation does not hold, we can get the WP proﬁle
by displacing the NL crystal to a plane where the intensity is reduced and
then recover the intensity proﬁle at the desired plane z0 by suitably moving
the imaging system (Fig 1.c)).

3 Experimental results

We prepared several experiments in order to prove the possibility to recover 3D
maps of short WPs and to show their holographic properties.The experimental
set-up is sketched in Fig. 2.

The 1 ps pulses of a Nd:glass laser source (TWINKLE, Light Conversion,
wavelength 1055 nm) are splitted on two lines by means of a beam splitter.
In the ﬁrst line, the laser pulse is frequency doubled in a KDP crystal and

ﬁeld instead of the intensity, a remarkable increment of the dynamical range is also
possible.

7

UV imaging system

BBO

Telescope 4x

f=+500 mm

LBO

CCD

Telescope 3x

UV
filter

Delay
line

TWINKLE
(1ps, 1055 nm)

Compressor

Green
filters

KDP

Fig. 2. A sketch of the experimental set-up used to retrieve the space–time intensity
proﬁles.

focused on a 15mm-long litium triborate (LBO) crystal. For pulses about 1
µJ in energy , spatial solitons are formed in this crystal because of the optical
parametric generation process (26). The gaussian temporal proﬁle causes the
spatial soliton to be formed only in the central part of the pulses where the
intensity is higher (27). This leads to a non-trivial space-time structure in
the output pump wave packet (28), which we will consider as the object.
Furthermore, the object has been magniﬁed 4 times by means of a two-lens
telescope imaging the LBO exit face into the NL mixing crystal ( a 100 µm
thick, β barium borate crystal, BBO). The beam expansion has been necessary
to: i) reduce the beam intensity and therefore fulﬁll the undepleted mixing
requirement; ii) to avoid information loss related to the ﬁnite spatial resolution
of the mixing process. In the second line, a 200-fs reference pulse is produced at
the wavelength of 527.5 nm by means of a second-harmonic pulse compressor
(29) and expanded 3 times by means of a telescope. Both lines are recombined
in the thin BBO crystal, cut and oriented to generate the non-collinear SF
from the object and reference beams. An external incidence angle of ∼ 6.5◦
between the propagation directions has been chosen. The delay between the
two pulses can be varied by means of a suitable delay line placed on the
reference pulse line. The non-collinear SF radiation is spatially selected by an
aperture, then selected in frequency by means of coloured ﬁlters and the plane
of the BBO is imaged onto the CCD sensor (PULNIX TM6CN). Finally, both
the BBO crystal and the imaging system could move independently on a rail

8

)

m

(m
 
e
t
a
n
i
d
r
o
o
c
 
x

150

100

50

0

-50

-100

-150

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

-800 -600 -400 -200

200

400

600

0
t  (fs)

x

y

t

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. a) Isointensity map of the object pulse as reconstructed from experimental
data. The rendering has been performed with the Linux-based program GOPEN-
MOL. b) A contour map of the (x, τ ) section of the same pulse.

along the optical axis.

At ﬁrst we focused the object inside the BBO crystal and adjusted the position
of the imaging system as in Fig. 1.a). By recording the spatial proﬁle of the
SF radiation as a function of the reference pulse time lag (steps of ∆τi = 66.6
fs has been used, where ∆τi = τi − τi−1), we have retrieved the 3D isointensity
maps of the object pulse at the exit face of the LBO crystal.

Fig. 3.a shows three diﬀerent intensity levels of the pulse in the (x, y, τ ) space,
while the corresponding contour plot of the (x, τ ) plane section is depicted
in Fig. 3.b. The space-time maps clearly show that the pulse is formed by a
spatially focused structure followed by a diﬀracted tail. The accuracy of this
reconstruction has been successfully tested by comparing the experimental
plots with the results of a 3D-numerical simulation of the formation process
of the object pulse (see (28)).

In order to check for the validity of the holographic interpretation in this
process, we have reconstructed the same WP of Figure 3 by moving the NL
crystal a distance z far from the previous position and by scanning the position
of the imaging system (CCD+lens) along the SF propagation direction in
order to ﬁnd out the position of the (virtual) reconstructed image. First we
ﬁxed the time lag between the object and the reference and selected a slice
of the object corresponding to a narrow focused spot of ∼ 40µm in diameter
inside the BBO crystal (corresponding to case a) in Fig. 1). Furthermore, the
displacements z of the BBO crystal have been chosen large enough to ensure
that the propagated wavefronts had lost the transverse structure. As a rough
estimate, for the focused part of the object, the Rayleigh range is about 7 mm
long, while we spanned distances from -15 mm to 15 mm. In Fig. 4, data show
the position of the virtual image against the position of the real object from

9

τ

x

y

40

20

0

-20

]

m
m

[
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

 
e
g
a
m

I

-40

-20

τ

x

y

20

-10

0
Object position [mm]

10

Fig. 4. The positions of the virtual images reconstructed as described in Fig. 1 c) for
several positions of the real object with respect to the BBO crystal. The two inserts
show the real image (z = 0, above left) and the virtual image as reconstructed after
the maximum propagation distance (15 mm, bottom right). All the distances are
measured with respect to the position of the BBO crystal (positive values, image
plane positions beyond the crystal in the direction of the beam propagation). The
points ﬁt a straight line with a slope of about 2, as expected from holography.

the crystal (see Fig. 1.c)), showing a remarkable ﬁt to a straight line which
slope is close to the value of 2, according to what discussed in the precedent
section. The error bars shown in the ﬁgure indicate the estimated uncertainties
in the reconstructed image plane position, measured by scanning the whole
Rayleigh range and by extracting the position of the central point. In the same
ﬁgure the two insets show two isointensity maps recovered for the case when
the imaging system is focusing directly the BBO plane (z=0) and when the
BBO crystal has been moved a distance z=15 mm (the maximum propagation
distance we imposed to the BBO). The agreement between the two intensity
proﬁles proves the reliability of our method to work with virtual images in
recovering 2D slices of WPs like those we used here.

In order to verify that we have always been operating in the undepleted regime,
we have measured the dependence of the generated SF ﬁeld as a function
of the object-pulse energy at z = 0. The results are presented in Fig. 5,
where the peak ﬂuence (as registered from the CCD images) is plotted vs
the transmission of the neutral-density ﬁlters that attenuate the object. The
costant slope conﬁrms the absence of any saturation in the SF process. Data
also indicate that a slight overestimate of the background has been done during

10

250

200

150

100

50

]
.

u
.
a
[
 
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 

D
C
C

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Filter transmission

Fig. 5. : The intensity measured by the CCD (arbitrary units) plotted against the
transmission of the ﬁlters used to reduce the object intensity. The linear behaviour
of Eq. 6 conﬁrms that the measurements were performed in the undepleted–ﬁeld
regime.

the proﬁle acquisition (zero SF ﬁeld is found for 15 % ﬁlter transmission).

4 Features of the technique

In the previous sections we have proved that the described technique is able to
perform the 3D mapping of objects similar to those we used for our measure-
ments. Anyway, one can expect that in general the reliability of the technique
to recover the slices could be aﬀected by particular eﬀects dealing with the
interaction geometry, the mixing crystal, and the features of the interacting
pulses, in particular for broad-band, ultra-short and chirped pulses. Therefore
we discuss here three main features of our technique, namely, the duplication
bandwidth of the mixing crystal, the interaction angle and the reference pulse
shape, that bring to devise some possible limitations to the ﬁdelity of the
technique.

4.1 Space-time resolution

As we brieﬂy mentioned above, the interaction model we describe does not
take into account the actual ﬁnite bandwidth of the mixing crystal, limiting
the spatiotemporal resolution of the maps. In fact, in our experiment the BBO

11

crystal has been chosen thin enough that the converted bandwidth was large
compared to the object one.

As a matter of fact, the spatio–temporal resolution of the slices is dictated
by the maximum range of angles and frequencies over which the conversion
is eﬀective (for very broad–band objects the angular blurring that could arise
from the phase matching condition should be considered). The key parameter
here is the maximum phase mismatch between the fundamental and the SF
waves at which the conversion eﬃciency vanishes, ∆kmax. On the basis of the
existing literature (30), we have estimated the maximum bandwidth converted
by the crystal as the FWHM of the eﬃciency curve, yielding to a temporal
bandwidth of about 630 cm−1 and an angular bandwidth of about 510 cm−1.
By considering only the angles for which the conversion eﬃciency is higher
than 1/e of the maximum value (31), we obtain the remarkable resolution of
details approximately 10 µm in size (100 lines/mm). We can notice that the
holographic interpretation of the wavefront reconstruction leads to an easy
description of the imaging process. Furthermore, our optical system could be
used in principle to achieve a microscopy of ultrashort objects shorter than
the one we used here (19), although the limit of very shot WP is detrimental
for the holographic reconstruction of the phases.

4.2 Interaction angle

A point to be discussed concerns the inﬂuence of the noncollinear geometry and
pulse chirp on the reconstruction of the hologram. In principle the holographic
interpretation is strictly valid for collinear geometry only (when k2 = 2k1)
(23). Although this condition is not strictly fulﬁlled in our experiment, we
have maintained the interaction angle small enough to make this disturbance
negligible. However, a temporal chirp in the object pulse could give rise to
a spatial phase distortion of the SF wavefront (32). Although this does not
aﬀect the results obtained with the confocal conﬁguration (see Fig. 1.a), it
could distort the maps obtained in the holographic one (Fig. 1.c). We expect
that this eﬀect is really rampant only when complicated ultrashort pulses with
strong chirp are considered, or large interaction angle are employed. We are
conﬁdent that our system was operated far from this limit, since, as we checked
from the data, our experimental holograhic maps do not show any appreciable
enhancement of the astigmatism.

As it is well known, the non-collinear SF scheme is largely used to get single-
shot autocorrelation traces of ultrashort pulses (33). In fact, because of the
geometry of the interaction, it is easy to show that the time of the interaction
between the object and reference pulses depends on the transverse coordinate
of the intersecting planes (see (2, pag. 426-428)). Therefore, if the interact-

12

 
e
t
a
n
i
d
r
o
o
c
 
e
s
r
e
v
s
n
a
r
T

]

m

[m

100

50

0

-50

-100

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
t  [ps]

100

50

0

 

-50

-100

Fig. 6. Space time map obtained with an external angle of 16 deg between the
reference and object pulse directions of propagation. The dashed line represents the
map skewing as calculated from equation 8.

ing angle is large, we expect that distortions of the spatial proﬁle along this
direction could aﬀect the space-time maps. However, it turns out that in the
confocal conﬁguration (i.e. as in Fig. 1.a) the eﬀect of the interaction angle is
merely that of skewing the intensity map, so that the actual time-axis of the
object pulse is not parallel to that measured on the delay line. This is evident
in the map depicted in Fig. 6, obtained with an external crossing angle of
∼ 16◦.

In the paraxial approximation, the slope of the object-pulse time-axis on the
space-time map is given by:

tan β =

sin

c
n

γ
2

(8)

where γ is the angle between the propagation directions of the object and the
reference wavepackets inside the crystal, and n is the refractive index of the
medium. It is easy to recognize this formula as the calibration relation of the
non-collinear, single-shot intensity autocorrelator (33; 2).

13

4.3 Reference pulse shape

Finally the last point to be discussed concerns the shape of the reference pulse.
In our experiments it was only slightly aﬀected by the presence of satellites
because of the generation via the pulse compressor (29), the amplitude of these
structures being small enough to be considered negligible to our aim. Actu-
ally, the recovered intensity proﬁle of the object would be distorted in case
the reference pulse has a structure more complicated than the single peak en-
velope, as Eq. 6 clearly points out. This suggests that a careful measurement
of the reference shape (for example carried out by means of an autocorrela-
tion technique) can be used to retrieve the real intensity proﬁle by means of
a deconvolution procedure. We point out, however, that any deconvolution
unavoidably introduces an extra spurious noise which could degrade the ﬁnal
quality of the mapping (34)).

5 Conclusions

We have shown that the 3D intensity maps of optical WPs with a com-
plex space-time structure can be retrived by an optical gating technique. The
method allows the reconstruction of the WP in its comoving reference frame
and, by exploiting the holographic properties of a slightly non-collinear de-
generate, sum-frequency process, we have shown that a complete amplitude
and phase reconstruction is actually obtained. The maps are obtained by suit-
ably imaging the second harmonic radiation obtained by cross-correlating an
object pulse with a much shorter plane wave-packet delayed in time. The
holographic properties of the generated radiation have been carefully tested
experimentally, and the distorsions of the intensity maps introduced by the
non-collinear geometry have been discussed in detail. Finally, theoretical con-
siderations point out that the ultimate resolution of our set-up is in the order
of 100 lines/mm in space, and of a few fs in time. However, the choice of the
reference pulse limits the actual time resolution to about 200 fs.

We forsee that the developed technique will beneﬁt all the ﬁelds where a
space-time mapping of light pulses is relevant, such as the investigations on
the reshaping of ultrashort pulses propagating in non-linear materials (10;
11; 5; 28; 19). Moreover, the holographic features of the technique might be
exploited to fully reconstruct the ﬁeld of an object pulse and its evolution
during the propagation.

This work was partially supported by MIUR (COFIN01 and FIRB01), the Eu-
ropean Commission EC-CEBIOLA project (ICA1-CT-2000-70027) and DGI
BFM2002-04369-C04-03 (Spain). The work of J.T. is supported by a postdoc-

14

toral grant from Ministerio de Educacion Cultura y Deporte (Spain).

† Permanent address, Department of Physics and Nuclear Engineering, Uni-
versitat Polit´ecnica Catalunya, 08222 Terrassa, Spain.

References

[1] Y. Silberberg, Nature 414(2001)494-495
[2]

J. C. Diels, W. Rudolph, Ultrashort laser pulse phenomena, Academic
Press, 1989
T. Baumert, M. Grosser, R. Thalweiser, G. Gerber, Phys. Rev. Lett
67(1991)3753-3756

[3]

[4] A. Hasegawa and Y. Kodama, Solitons in optical communications, Clar-

enton Press, Oxford 1995

[5] G. Valiulis, J. Kilius, O. Jedrkiewicz, A. Bramati, S. Minardi, C. Conti,
S. Trillo, A. Piskarkas, and P. Di Trapani OSA Trends in Optics and
Photonics 57, QELS 2001 Technical Digest, postconference edition, pap.
QPD10-1
R. Trebino et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68(1997)3277-3295
[6]
C. Iaconis, I.A. Walmsley, Opt. Lett. 23(1998)792-794
[7]
C. Dorrer, E. M. Kosik and I. A. Walmsley, Opt. Lett. 27(2002)548-550
[8]
[9] K. Ogawa, T. Katsuyama, H. Nakamura, Appl. Phys Lett. 53 (1988)

1077-1079

[10] C. Cambournac, H. Maillote, E. Lantz, J. M. Dudley, M. Chauvet, J.

Opt. Soc. Am. B 19 (2002) 574-585

[11] E. Lantz, C. Cambournac, H. Maillote, Opt. Exp. 10 (2002)942-948
[12] D. I. Staselko, Y. N. Denisyuk, A. G. Smirnov, Opt. Spectrosc. 26 (1969)

[13] N. Abramson, Appl. Opt. 22 (1983)215-232
[14] S. G. Pettersson, H. Bergstrom, N. Abramson, Appl. Opt. 28 (1989)

[15] T. Kubota, Opt. Lett. 27 (2002) 815-817
[16] M. Fujimoto, S. Aoshima, M. Hosoda, Y. Tsuchiya, Opt. Lett. 24 (1999)

[17] F. Devaux, E. Lantz, Opt. Comm. 118 (1995) 25-27
[18] G. Le Tolguenec, F. Devaux, E. Lantz, Opt. Lett. 24 (1999)1047-1049
[19] J. Trull, et al., in preparation
[20] Y. N. Denisyuk, A. Andreoni, M. A. C. Potenza, Opt. Spectr. 89 (2000)

413-420

766-770

850-52

476-483

[21] H. Sonajalg, P. Saari, Opt. Lett. 21 (1996) 1162-1164
[22] Zozyula, Diddams, Opt. Exp. 4(9) (1999)336-343
[23] Y. N. Denisyuk, A. Andreoni, M. Bondani, M. A. C. Potenza, Opt. Lett.

25 (2000) 890-892

15

[24] D.I. Stasel’ko, Yu. N. Denisyuk, V. N. Sizov, Opt. Spectrosc. 93

[25] J. W. Goodman Introduction to Fourier Optics, McGraw-Hill (1996)
[26] P. Di Trapani, G. Valiulis, W. Chinaglia, and A. Anderoni Phys. Rev.

[27] C. Simos, V. Couderc and A. Barthelemy, IEEE Photon and Technology

(2002)457-468

Lett. 80 (1998) 265-268

Lett. 14 (2002) 636-638

[28] S. Minardi, G. Blasi, P. Di Trapani, G. Valiulis, A. Berˇzanskis,
submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.,

A. Varanaviˇcius, A. Piskarskas
arXiv/physics/0304030

[29] A. Dubietis, G. Valiulis, R. Danielius and A. Piskarskas, Pure and Appl.

[30]

Opt. 7 (1998)271-279
see for example V.G. Dmitriev, G.G. Gurzadyan, D.N. Nikogosyan,
Handbook of nonlinear optical crystal, Springer-Verlag, Berlin 1991
(chapter 2)

[31] F. Devaux and F. Lantz, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 12 (1995)2245-2252
[32] R. Danielius, A. Stabinis, G. Valiulis and A. Varanaviˇcius Opt. Comm.

[33] R.N. Gyuzalian, S.B. Sogomonian, and Z. Gy. Horvath Opt. Comm. 29

[34] See for example P.A. Jansson Ed., Deconvolution, Academic Press inc.,

105 (1994) 67-72

(1979) 239-242

Orlando 1984

16

