3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Directional tunneling escape from nearly spherical optical resonators

Scott Lacey, Hailin Wang, David H. Foster and Jens U. N¨ockel∗
Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403
(Dated: 07/17/2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 033902 (2003))

We report the surprising observation of directional tunneling escape from nearly spherical fused
silica optical resonators, in which most of the phase space is ﬁlled with non-chaotic regular trajec-
tories. Experimental and theoretical studies of the dependence of the far-ﬁeld emission pattern on
both the degree of deformation and the excitation condition show that non-perturbative phase space
structures in the internal ray dynamics profoundly aﬀect tunneling leakage of the whispering gallery
modes.

Electromagnetic ﬁelds in a uniform dielectric sphere
can be calculated in much the same way as quan-
tum mechanical wave functions in a spherically sym-
metric potential. The sphere exhibits whispering-gallery
(WG) modes, which are long-lived resonances with elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds conﬁned near the surface [1]. For
small deviations from the spherical shape, ǫ ≡ (Rmax −
Rmin)/(Rmax + Rmin) ≪ 1 (where Rmax, Rmin are the
maximal and minimal radii), perturbative treatments [2]
are routinely employed to infer deformation parameters
from the splitting of azimuthal degeneracy of the WG
modes [3]. Certain strongly non-spherical resonators, on
the other hand, can be analyzed with methods from quan-
tum chaos such as random-matrix theory or periodic-
orbit expansions [4]. Many generic resonator shapes,
however, fall into a transition regime in which none of
these known methods apply globally. When entering this
regime from the perturbative side, calculations may en-
counter singularities and undeﬁned limits [5]. Experi-
mental studies in this regime can thus provide insight
into how nature resolves the competition between per-
turbative and non-perturbative physics, here with the
resonator shape as a control parameter.

In this paper we present studies of far-ﬁeld emission
patterns and resonance lifetimes of deformed fused-silica
microspheres. The experimental and theoretical studies
of the dependence of the far-ﬁeld emission pattern on
both the degree of deformation and the excitation con-
dition show that highly directional tunneling escape can
occur in microspheres with small deformation (ǫ ≈ 1%)
and with a large size parameter (kR = 2πR/λ ≈ 785,
where λ ≈ 800nm, R ≈ 100µm). These results are com-
pletely unexpected in the ray optics limit or in the earlier
perturbative wave treatment with ǫ as a small parame-
ter. The observed emission pattern shows that on one
hand, the ray model breaks down in predicting the es-
cape mechanism of WG modes for resonators with small
deformation. On the other hand, the nonperturbative
phase space structures predicted by the ray model can
profoundly aﬀect tunneling leakage of the WG modes.
Even at extremely small deformation, nonperturbative
phase space structures still persist and are directly re-
sponsible for directional tunneling escape. This intri-
cate interplay between ray and wave dynamics provides

essential physical insights into properties of weakly de-
formed WG resonators, especially, for those in which the
phase space is ﬁlled with non-chaotic regular trajecto-
ries. Directional emission patterns have previously been
observed in more strongly deformed resonators where a
signiﬁcant fraction of the internal rays shows chaotic mo-
tion [6].

Deformed microspheres were formed by melting to-
gether two spheres of similar sizes. The individual
spheres were fabricated by melting an optical ﬁber tip
with a focused CO2 laser beam. The spheres were
brought into contact and heated until surface tension pro-
duced a completely convex surface. By carefully control-
ling the temperature of the glass using the CO2 laser, it
was possible to repeatedly reduce the degree of deforma-
tion. For reference, we deﬁne the elongated axis of the re-
sulting prolate spheroid, which also connects the centers
of the two original spheres, to be the x-axis. The z-axis
is deﬁned by the remaining ﬁber stem, which breaks the
rotational symmetry about the x-axis, making the de-
formed microsphere completely non-axisymmetric. The
stem was held by a ﬁber chuck for easy manipulation of
the sphere. Images of these deformed microspheres taken
from three orthogonal directions have been shown in an
earlier study [7].

To investigate emission properties and resonance life-
times of the deformed microspheres, we use frustrated
total internal reﬂection at the surface of a prism with
refractive index n = 1.7 to launch individual traveling-
wave WG modes near the x-y plane of the spheroid (Fig.
1a inset) [8]. The initial angle of incidence χ0 with which
the WG modes are launched in the microsphere can be
controlled by adjusting the angle of incidence ψ in the
prism.

WG mode spectra were obtained by measuring the
far-ﬁeld emission intensity as a function of the excita-
tion wavelength. Since the stem holding the resonator
is a strong leakage pathway, the observed long-lived WG
modes must have internal ﬁeld patterns that do not over-
lap with the stem region. This is made possible by the
fact that the resonator is slightly ﬂattened in the z di-
rection (along the stem axis). Experiments as well as
ray simulations show that this deformation stabilizes the
rays in the vicinity of the x-y plane. Our direction-

2

the sphere image in Fig. 1 (a), this far-ﬁeld emission di-
rection corresponds to light escaping tangential from the
region at φ = −45◦ on the surface of the microsphere,
shown by the solid arrow in the sphere image. A much
smaller peak (5% of the large peak height) in the far-
ﬁeld emission pattern was observed at φ = 135◦, corre-
sponding to light escaping from the region at φ = 45◦ on
the microsphere surface (dotted arrow). As the deforma-
tion was reduced, the far-ﬁeld emission peak at φ = 135◦
grew to about one quarter of the φ = 45◦-peak height in
Fig. 1 (b). In Fig. 1 (c), the two peaks reached nearly
equal intensity. The bright emission spots at φ = ±45◦
on the resonator surface can be viewed directly with a
CCD camera. For reference, we call the pattern in Fig.
1 (a) asymmetric and the pattern in Fig. 1 (c) symmet-
ric (around φ = 90◦). Figures 1 (e)-(g) also show that as
the deformation was reduced, the Q-factor of the relevant
WG modes increased by nearly four orders of magnitude.
The measurements discussed thus far were performed
with input condition χ0 ≈ 90◦ (sin χ0 ≈ 1). Figure 1
(d) shows the far-ﬁeld emission pattern from the same
microsphere as Fig. 1 (c) but with light launched at
sin χ0 ≈ 0.8. The emission pattern is nearly identical to
Fig 1 (c) where sin χ0 ≈ 1, although the corresponding
Q-factor is nearly two orders of magnitude smaller [Figs.
1 (g) and (h)].

The observed emission patterns in Fig. 1 (a)-(d) dis-
agree with the intuitive expectation that WG modes in
an oval resonator should preferentially emit tangential to
the points of highest curvature, into the far-ﬁeld direc-
tion φ = ±90◦. This is what one obtains when modeling
our spheroids as triaxial ellipsoids, whose internal ray
dynamics exhibits no chaos [9], independently of the axis
ratios.

The observed emission pattern of the most deformed
microsphere, Fig. 1 (a), is well explained by a ray model.
The peak at φ = 45◦ can be attributed to an eﬀect
known as dynamical eclipsing [6].
In the ray model, a
WG mode corresponds to light rays trapped close to the
perimeter of the dielectric resonator by total internal re-
ﬂection, which prevents light escape unless a critical angle
χc ≡ arcsin 1/n = 43.6◦ is reached, where n = 1.45 is the
refractive index of the fused silica. At small but ﬁnite
ǫ, any oval can be approximated by the ﬁrst terms of
a multipole expansion, which after proper choice of ori-
gin is quadrupolar. In this limit, a stable 4-bounce orbit
shaped like a diamond forms with its sharp vertices at the
highest-curvature points of the resonator with an angle of
incidence χ4 ≈ 45◦ [inset to Fig. 1 (d)]. This creates “is-
lands of stability” in phase space [4]: rays launched near
the diamond orbit will retain similar reﬂection points and
angles even if they do not close onto themselves after four
bounces. At the deformation used in Fig. 1 (a), most of
the phase space supporting the WG mode in question
is chaotic. However, chaotic rays cannot penetrate the
4-bounce islands; this means chaotic WG rays are pre-

FIG. 1: (a)-(d): Far-ﬁeld emission patterns of WG modes.
Insets: bottom view of the resonators showing the progression
of shapes in the x-y cross-section, from which we determine
ǫ = 6.7% (a), ǫ = 2.2% (b), and ǫ = 1.2% (c,d). WG modes
were launched at sin χ0 ≈ 1 in (a)-(c), and at sin χ0 ≈ 0.8
in (d); χ is the internal angle of incidence with respect to
the surface normal. (e)-(h): the spectra corresponding to the
modes in (a)-(d), from which we deduce the Q-factors. Inset
to (d): stable (solid) and unstable (dashed) 4-bounce orbits
in a quadrupole at ǫ = 1.2%.

ality measurements correspondingly were performed in
this plane. By scanning the detector while keeping the
resonator ﬁxed, we recorded WG mode spectra at var-
ious angles, φ (from the x-axis), to construct the far-
ﬁeld emission pattern at a given microsphere deforma-
tion ǫ. The microsphere was then reheated to reduce ǫ
and the far-ﬁeld emission pattern was measured again,
leading to the evolution shown in Figure 1. The exci-
tation beam is s-polarized, and the detection scheme is
polarization-insensitive. The far-ﬁeld emission patterns
are independent of the polarization of the excitation laser
beam. Spheroids with similar ǫ exhibit qualitatively the
same behavior in terms of mode spectra, Q-factors, and
emission patterns.

Beginning with a strongly deformed microsphere, the
emission was observed to have a strong peak at φ = 45◦
in the far ﬁeld [see Fig. 1 (a)]. Since clockwise traveling
waves were excited, as indicated by the white arrow in

vented from refractively escaping at the points of highest
curvature, because χ4 ≈ χc. Instead, as trajectories ﬂow
around the islands in one direction, refractive escape oc-
curs near φ = −45◦ on the resonator surface. From this
circulation around the islands, asymmetric far-ﬁeld emis-
sion patterns result as a hallmark of refractive escape.
This is what we observe in Fig. 1 (a).

This ray mechanism was originally proposed and tested
for eﬀectively 2D systems where islands of stability
and chaotic regions are mutually exclusive.
In our 3D
spheroids, the same diamond-shaped stable orbit exists
in or near the x-y plane, and refractively escaping rays in
its vicinity have lifetimes that correspond to ≤ 10 round
trips in the resonator, translating to a Q-factor near 104.
During this time, a given ray can be considered as mov-
ing in a cross-sectional plane that may be inclined and
slowly precessing around the z-axis. The variation of
cross-sectional shape, ∆ǫ, probed by such rays causes no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the size of the 4-bounce islands
[10]. Therefore, rays in the 3D resonator behave as in
a corresponding ﬁxed 2D resonator during a relatively
short time preceding an escape event, and in particular
show dynamical eclipsing.

However, refractive escape ceases to be the dominant
leakage mechanism at the very small deformation used
in Figs. 1 (c) and (d), since in this case chaotic diﬀu-
sion is no longer eﬀective and the stable diamond orbit
itself also becomes fully conﬁned by total internal reﬂec-
tion. Those classical rays that do escape refractively,
moreover, are not able to produce the symmetric emis-
sion patterns observed in Figs. 1 (c) and (d) [11]. Hence,
the emission process in these cases is governed by evanes-
cent escape, i.e. a tunnel coupling between internal and
radiation ﬁelds.

Tunneling is the only decay mechanism in an ideal
sphere where each WG mode in the plane of excitation
corresponds to a unique azimuthal angular momentum
number m with respect to the z-axis, which is semiclas-
sically related to χ0 by sin χ0 = m/(nkR), using the fact
that the modes of interest remain close to the x-y plane
and hence have total angular momentum l ≈ m. At
kR ≫ 1, the tunneling escape rate is negligible when
sin χ0 ≈ 1 but accelerates exponentially as sin χ0 ap-
In a deformed microsphere, the an-
proaches sin χc.
gle of incidence χ varies as a well-deﬁned function of φ
provided it covers an angular momentum range where
chaos is neglibible [12]. A circulating ray with varying
χ(φ) > χc will then escape with exponentially strong se-
lectivity near the minima of χ(φ).

The emission locations and directions observed in the
experiment indicate that the minima of χ(φ) lie near the
corners of the unstable rectangular 4-bounce orbit [inset
to Fig. 1 (d)]. We determined from ray tracing that this
only occurs near but above χc. Thus, the symmetric far-
ﬁeld patterns in Figs. 1 (c) and (d) are a tunneling probe
for the minima of the ray-optical χ(φ) in the vicinity of

3

the critical angle χc. To further corroborate this inter-
pretation, recall that the emission patterns as shown in
Figs. 1 (c) and (d) are insensitive to the initial angle
of incidence, χ0, as they should be if the detected light
originates near sin χ ≈ sin χc. The question remains how
the light coupled into the resonator is able to reduce its
angular momentum from a high value corresponding to
sin χ0 to the much lower sin χc. Our observation shows
that such a dynamical process is present in the spheroid,
but does not unambiguously reveal its mechanism. A
possible mechanism is Arnol’d diﬀusion, a phase-space
transport process that crucially depends on the fact that
the resonators are in fact three-dimensional [7], with no
axial symmetry. Even without resolving this question,
we can nevertheless conclude that the phase space re-
gion near sin χc is responsible for the observed emission
patterns.

Our initial assumption of a 2D model for the emission
process, justiﬁed by the approximate 2D nature of the
3D ray trajectories for intermediate times as discussed
earlier, is therefore consistent with the fact that no long-
time properties of the internal ray dynamics are needed
to explain the emission directions. With the same justi-
ﬁcation, we also performed numerical wave calculations
by modeling the shape felt by modes in the x-y plane
as the cross section of a quadrupolar cylinder. Figures 2
(a) and (b) plot the intensity patterns of two WG modes
under traveling-wave excitation [12, 13]. The calculation
assumes s-polarized light and uses size parameters near
kR ≈ 113 [14].

The emission patterns in Figs. 2 (a) and (b) agree qual-
itatively with the asymmetric and the symmetric emis-
sion patterns shown in Figs. 1 (b) and (d), respectively.
To understand the physical mechanism for the emission
in Fig. 2 (b), we plot in Fig. 2 (c) the distribution
of angular momentum numbers for the WG mode in (b).
Figure 2 (c) shows negligible overlap with the window for
refractive escape below the critical angle χc (correspond-
ing to a critical angular momentum mc = kR ≈ 113).
This indicates that the emission from this mode is due
to tunneling escape. By comparison, both refractive and
tunneling escape contribute to the emission in Fig. 2 (a),
with the refractive escape playing a dominant role.

The peak splitting of width ∆m ≈ 4 in Fig. 2 (c) is
a straightforward consequence of the oval deformation:
as the wave circulates around the resonator with varying
radius between Rmin and Rmax, its angular momentum
oscillates but has high probabitity of being near its ex-
trema, given by the extrema of m ≈ r(φ)nkR sin χ(φ)
over the surface. The fact that the minima of χ(φ) do
not occur at φ = 0◦, 180◦ on the surface is due to the 4-
bounce island structure in the vicinity of sin χ = sin 45◦.
For comparison, Fig. 2 (c) also shows the distribu-
tion of angular momentum number of an ultra-high Q
WG mode with emission directionality as expected for
the ellipse [see Fig. 2 (d)]. The mode is conﬁned at a

4

four bounces.

Whether any non-perturbative structure in the ray dy-
namics can be resolved by the wave ﬁeld, depends on kR
[16]: a directionality measurement will be able to distin-
guish the peaks at φ = 90◦ ± 45◦ if the conjugate angular
momentum m satisﬁes the uncertainty relation ∆φ ∆m ≥
1/2 with ∆φ ≈ π/4. This implies ∆m > 2/π ≈ 1, which
in our spheroids translates to a ﬂuctuating angle of in-
cidence of ∆ sin χ = ∆m/(nkR) ≈ 10−3. Even the least
deformed resonator (ǫ ≈ 1%) exceeded this estimated
resolution threshold signiﬁcantly.

It is truly remarkable that this intricate interplay be-
tween ray and wave dynamics for which chaos plays no
dominant role, can be exploited to engineer WG modes
that can feature both high-Q and highly directional emis-
sion. This makes WG resonators with small deformation
highly promising for a variety of applications [17, 18],
such as microlasers, nonlinear optics, and quantum in-
formation processing.

This work was supported in part by NSF under grants

No. DMR9733230 and No. DMR0201784.

∗

Electronic
URL: http://oco.uoregon.edu

address:

noeckel@uoregon.edu;

[1] L.G.Guimar˜aes and H.M.Nussenzveig, J. Mod. Opt. 41,
625 (1994); G. Roll and G. Schweiger, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A
17, 1301 (2000).

[2] S. Ng, P. Leung, and K. Lee, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 19, 154

(2002); and references therein.

[3] W. von Klitzing et al., Opt. Lett. 26, 166 (2001).
[4] H.-J. St¨ockmann, Quantum Chaos, An Introduction

(Cambridge University Press, 1999).

[5] M. V. Berry, Phys. Today 55 (May), No. 5, p. 10 (2002).
[6] S. Chang et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 17, 1828 (2000).
[7] S. Lacey and H. L. Wang, Opt. Lett. 26, 1943 (2001).
[8] The measurement was performed with a tunable diode

laser (New Focus).

[9] H. Waalkens,

J. Wiersig,

Ann. Phys. 276, 64 (1999).
[10] S. S. Chang, N. B. Rex,

J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16, 1224 (1999).

and H. R. Dullin,

and R. K. Chang,

[11] Even at small deformation, the separatrix region we are
probing is created by the homoclinic tangle of the un-
stable, rectangle-shaped periodic orbit shown dashed in
the inset to Fig. 1 (d), and this tangle exhibits an asym-
metry which will produce asymmetric emission whenever
the escape is predominantly ray-based.

[12] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[13] I. Braun et al., Appl. Phys. B 70, 335 (2000).
[14] We have performed the same calculations at wave num-
bers kR ≈ 70, and close to the current limits of our nu-
merical technique at kR ≈ 200. All these results are con-
sistent with the ones presented in Fig. 2, showing that
the phase-space structure causing the observed emission
is already fully resolved in Fig. 2. Extrapolating to the
experiment (Fig. 1) at kR ≈ 785, we expect no further
changes within the angular resolution of the detector ap-

FIG. 2: Top: Intensity pattern of WG modes with parameters
kR = 112.063, ǫ = 6.5% (a) and kR = 112.452, ǫ = 3.4% (b).
The Q-factors are 4 × 104 (a) and 2 × 105 (b), and the overall
directionality agrees with that in Fig. 1 (b) and (d), respec-
tively. The values of ǫ diﬀer from Fig. 1 because the simu-
lation approximates the unknown details of the experimental
shape by a pure quadrupole [12]. Bottom: solid histogram
in (c) shows the angular-momentum distribution of the mode
in (b). A very high-Q WG mode at the same deformation
(c, dashed), with kR = 113.229 and Q = 3 × 1014 radiates
◦
predominantly into φ = 90
, as shown in the far-ﬁeld pattern
(d).

high m, corresponding to sin χ0 ≈ 0.91. Note that here
the tunneling loss is negligible compared with scattering
or absorption loss of the material that limits the actual
Q-factor of fused silica microspheres to of order 109 [15].
The two modes in Fig. 2 (c) have practically no overlap in
angular momentum space. The qualitative diﬀerence in
the far-ﬁeld patterns of these two modes further conﬁrms
that the mode shown in Fig. 1 (c), which was excited at
sin χ0 ≈ 1, is not conﬁned to sin χ0 ≈ 1.

In essence, our experiment exploits the peculiar fea-
ture that for fused silica the critical angle lies near the
phase-space islands corresponding to the stable 4-bounce
orbit. These islands are the dominant structure in the
WG region and persist even at small ǫ where most of the
phase space is ﬁlled with non-chaotic, “regular” trajecto-
ries. The island formation is a non-perturbative conse-
quence of the breakdown of conservation laws [9], which
qualitatively distinguishes the generic quadrupolar shape
from an ideal ellipse even though the two shapes dif-
fer only to second order in ǫ. The emission character-
istics of a silica spheroid in the seemingly trivial small-ǫ
regime will continue to be strongly aﬀected by ray pat-
terns that wrap around the perimeter in approximately

paratus.

[15] M. L. Gorodetsky, A. A. Savchenko, and V. S. Ilchenko,

Opt. Lett. 21, 453 (1996).

[16] R. E. Prange, R. Narevich and O. Zaitsev, Phys. Rev. E

59, 1694 (1999)

[17] S. M. Spillane, T. J. Kippenberg and K. J. Vahala, Na-

ture 415, 621 (2002); and references therein.

[18] D. K. Armani, T. J. Kippenberg, S. M. Spillane and

K. J. Vahala, Nature 421, 925 (2003)

5

