Note on transformation to general curvilinear
coordinates for Maxwell’s curl equations

D M Shyroki

Department of Theoretical Physics, Belarusian State University,
Fr. Skaryna Avenue 4, 220080 Mensk, Belarus

E-mail: shyroki@tut.by

Abstract. Maxwell’s curl equations are formulated in curvilinear non-orthogonal
coordinates in three dimensions in a manner that enables to preserve conventional
Cartesian mesh for the ﬁnite-diﬀerence schemes by means of mere redeﬁnition of the
permittivity and permeability coeﬃcients. It is highlighted that in the previous works
on this subject (Ward and Pendry 1996 J. Modern Opt. 43 773; 1998 Phys. Rev. B
58 7252) inaccurate transformation to curvilinear coordinates, rooted in questionable
transformation laws assigned to electric and magnetic ﬁeld vectors, led to physical
In this note the amended equations are presented,
dubiety of the ﬁnal formulae.
capable of being easily adopted for the accurate ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD)
modelling of electromagnetic propagation and scattering problems in complicated
geometries within the existing computational codes.

PACS numbers: 03.50.De, 02.70.Bf

3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Note on transformation to general curvilinear coordinates for Maxwell’s. . .

2

1. Introduction

Maxwell’s equations span a long life of nearly one and a half century, yet it often
remains a real challenge to the theorist to solve, say, the problem of light scattering
from a complex surface or propagation in state-of-the-art photonic band-gap material.
To tackle all those numerous problems, a vast array of numerical methods have been
developed, in particular the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) technique [1, 2] called
otherwise the order-N method [3] due to its linear scaling with the size of the system. In
its framework, the problem is formulated as an initial value problem leaned on discretized
Maxwell’s curl equations which can be integrated numerically.

The FDTD algorithm was originally given by Yee [4] in rectangular Cartesian
coordinates, i.e., on the cube mesh of points constituting the computational space.
Meanwhile, many objects of interest have curved surfaces which are purely represented
in a rectilinear mesh. Furthermore, severe problems associated with a uniform mesh arise
when the refractive index varies strongly within the structure, for example in metallo-
dielectric components. To circumvent these shortcomings, Holland [5] attempted
to formulate the FDTD algorithm in general curvilinear coordinates, but extreme
complexity of curvilinear mesh that “exacts a toll in computer time” [6] and makes
erecting a system of discretized equations “a programmer’s nightmare” [7] restrained
the practical usage of Holland’s result. Even in a two-dimensional case [6, 8], the
awkwardness of the formulae leaves one beyond any hope to qualitatively analyse the
equations.

Fortunately, a few years ago Ward and Pendry [7, 9] noticed that considerable
simpliﬁcation of programming eﬀorts can be achieved since transformation to curvilinear
coordinates can be regarded as redeﬁning the permittivity and permeability coeﬃcients,
ǫ and µ, so that the well-developed algorithm of computing on a rectangular mesh can
be translated almost verbatim to the case of a non-uniform mesh, provided the mesh
structure “encoded” in the eﬀective ǫ and µ. This idea, being no doubt a really fruitful
and natural one, was implemented afterwards in a computer program for calculating
photonic band structures, Green’s functions and transmission–reﬂection coeﬃcients [10].
An agreement with alternative numerical computations on orthogonal mesh and with
plane-wave expansion method was believed conﬁdently good if not perfect.

However, one relevant inaccuracy in the cited works has been left out of sight:
in Maxwellian electrodynamics, the electric and magnetic ﬁelds and displacements E,
B, D, and H can be treated as vectors only with respect to pure rotations in three-
dimensional (3-D) Euclidean space, but care should be taken when transforming to 3-D
Riemannian space referenced to arbitrary curvilinear coordinate system. Meanwhile,
Ward and Pendry in a manner of early Holland’s misconstruction grounded upon the
highly questionable representation of aﬃne-invariant Maxwell’s equations and in fact
came to a physically dubious formulation of ﬁnal analytic results. The scope of this
note is to clarify the origin of that misconception and present the amended formalism
aimed to facilitate the non-orthogonal curvilinear FDTD technique.

Note on transformation to general curvilinear coordinates for Maxwell’s. . .

3

2. Maxwell’s equations in non-orthogonal curvilinear coordinates

The sound theoretical basis for any problem within the scope of classical electrodynamics
is constituted by Maxwell’s equations. They describe electromagnetic ﬁeld as a uniﬁed
quantity invariant with respect to Lorentz group, i.e., rotations in Minkowski space,
and hence their utmost consistent formulation involves four-dimensional electromagnetic
ﬁeld and ﬂux tensors. However, if the medium in the laboratory frame is at rest, it is
often found convenient to decompose Maxwell’s equations into fully vectorial system for
three-dimensional quantities E, B, D, and H, written in cgs units as

∇ × E = −

∇ · B = 0,

∇ × H =

+

4πρv,

∇ · D = 4πρ,

,

∂B
1
c
∂t
∂D
∂t

1
c

1
c

where ρ is the charge density, v is the charge velocity, c is the vacuum speed of light.
The accompanying constitutive relations are

D = ǫE,

B = µH.

Naturally the above equations are expected to be coordinate-free, that is preserving the
formal structure in any coordinate system, under any spatial coordinate transformation.
A principal point to be understood here is that, scholarly speaking, E, B, D, and H
are vectors with respect to rotations in three-dimensional Euclidean space referenced
to rectangular Cartesian system only. Even the point reﬂection is known to brake the
seeming symmetry between, say, E and B vectors in free-space counterparts of equations
(1), (2), since under r → −r operation we have E → −E for electric “polar” vector
versus B → B for magnetic “pseudovector.” Another example on the surface is r → ar
conversion: in contrast with “true” vectors, E should transform like E → a−1E to keep
the work of electromagnetic force δA = eE · dr invariant.

The vague ideas of “pseudoquantities” etc. ﬁnd an elegant and comprehensible
mathematical conceptualization in the framework of conventional tensor calculus. To
be speciﬁc, for more than half a century the aﬃne-invariant form of Maxwell’s equations
(1), (2) is known in both research [11] and textbook [12] literature:

2∂[α E β] =

∂[α B βγ] = 0,

∂α ˆH αβ = −

−

4π ˆρvβ,

∂α ˆDα = 4π ˆρ.

,

1
c
1
c

∂Bαβ
∂t
∂ ˆDβ
∂t

1
c

Here Eα is covariant vector, Bαβ = B[αβ]
is
contravariant bivector-density, and ˆDα is contravariant vector-density; the square
brackets denote alternation in a usual manner: ⋆[αβ] = 1
2!(⋆αβ − ⋆βα), etc. Note that
despite of someone’s contradictory claims [13], the above equations are actually metric-
free; all the metric information is hidden in constitutive relations (see [12, ch 6])

is covariant bivector, ˆH αβ = ˆH [αβ]

ˆDα = −ǫ g

1
2 gαβEβ,

Bαβ = µ g

2 gαγgβδ ˆH γδ,

− 1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Note on transformation to general curvilinear coordinates for Maxwell’s. . .

4

where gαβ is the metric tensor of Riemannian space referenced to the right-handed
coordinate system xα; α, β, γ, δ = 1, 2, 3; g = det(gαβ).

In FDTD method, only the curl equations are needed, provided the divergence

equations satisﬁed initially. Eliminating the ﬂux quantities via (6) yields

2∂[α E β] =

g

2 gαγgβδ

− 1

µ
c

∂ ˆH γδ
∂t

,

∂α ˆH αβ =

ǫ
c

g

1

2 gβγ ∂Eγ
∂t

for source-free region. Allowing for invariant correspondence between bivector-density
ˆH αβ and pseudovector Hγ [12], one can rewrite (7) as
µγδ
c

∂Hβ
∂xα eαβγ = −

∂Eβ
∂xα eαβγ =

∂Hδ
∂t

∂Eδ
∂t

ǫγδ
c

(8)

,

,

where eijk is the fully skew-symmetric Levi-Civita symbol, and in a manner of [7, 9] I
introduce the eﬀective permittivity and permeability quantities

ǫγδ = ǫg

2 gγδ,

1

µγδ = µg− 1

2 gγδ.

Thus obtained equations are isomorphous to Maxwell’s curl equations on a conventional
Cartesian mesh. To restore ﬁelds in Euclidean space referenced to Cartesian system
xi (designated by Roman indices in contrast with Greek ones reserved for curvilinear
coordinates), the transformation matrix ∂ixα should be used:

Ei ⊜ Ei =

∂xα
∂xi Eα,

H i ⊜ Hi ⊜ Hi =

∂xα
∂xi Hα.

The circle above the equality sign (⊜) means that this equality is not invariant but
holds in the given coordinate system. I also assume here that coordinate transformation
preserves the handedness of the system, which is likely to comprise all the practicable
cases of interest.

(7)

(9)

(10)

3. Comparison with Ward and Pendry

Formulae (8), (9), and (10) constitute the core of generalized non-orthogonal FDTD
method. In [7, 9] Ward and Pendry came to some principally similar results, but for the
eﬀective permittivity and permeability they obtained (in current notation and units)

′ǫγδ = ǫg

1

2 gγδ,

′µγδ = µg

1

2 gγδ.

(11)

2 in the formula for ǫ vs. − 1

Note that the powers of g are diﬀerent in (9), namely, 1
2 in
that for µ, while in (11) they are 1
2 both. This discrepancy is because Ward and Pendry
assumed with no argument the “symmetry between E and H ﬁelds” [7, p 777] which is
actually a questionable point when general coordinate transformations are considered.
The diﬀerence between the powers of g in (9) deﬁnitely seems to be more reasonable and
physically-intuitive due to the distinct diﬀerence between E and H ﬁelds as for their
transformation characteristics. Altogether I should remark that the discrepancy between
(9) and (11) vanishes when we consider the group of volume-preserving transformations,
e.g., introducing the skew lattice instead of orthogonal one, but is essential for the general
coordinate transformations with g 6= 1, especially in the case of magnetic media with
permeability µ comparable to or even exceeding the permittivity ǫ.

Note on transformation to general curvilinear coordinates for Maxwell’s. . .

5

4. Conclusion

The formulae by Ward and Pendry [7, 9] for the Maxwell’s curl equations in curvilinear
non-orthogonal coordinates are amended to allow for the marked diﬀerence between
electric and magnetic ﬁelds with respect to their transformation laws. The formulae
are considerably simple and can be easily adopted for an accurate non-orthogonal
FDTD modelling of electromagnetic propagation and scattering problems in complicated
geometries within the existing computational codes, since a mere cosmetic revision
is actually needed. The hitherto demonstrated agreement between numerical results
computed by Ward and Pendry and others may be accounted for two reasons: (i) special
character of coordinate systems used, namely those with aﬃne volume g = 1, and (ii)
prevailing impact of eﬀective ǫ over µ in dielectric media with high ǫ and unit µ.

I’d like to thank Dr A V Lavrinenko who acquainted me with Ward’s and Pendry’s
work, and Dr M N Polozov for a qualiﬁed check to the key ideas of this note.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] Taﬂove A 1995 Computational Electrodynamics: The Finite-Diﬀerence Time-Domain Method

[2] Kunz K S, Luebbers R J 1993 The Finite Diﬀerence Time Domain Method for Electro-Magnetics

[3] Chan C T, Yu Q L, Ho K M 1995 Order-N spectral method for electromagnetic waves Phys. Rev.

(Boston: Artech House)

(Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press)

B 51 16 635–42

[4] Yee K S 1966 Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems involving Maxwell’s equations

in isotropic media IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 14 302–7

[5] Holland R 1983 Finite diﬀerence solutions of Maxwell’s equations in generalized nonorthogonal

coordinates IEEE Trans. Nuc. Sci. 30 4589–91

[6] Fusco M 1990 FDTD algorithm in curvilinear coordinates IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 38

[7] Ward A J, Pendry J B 1996 Refraction and geometry in Maxwell’s equations J. Modern Opt. 43

76–89

773–93

[8] Qiu M, He S 2000 A nonorthogonal ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain method for computing the band
structure of a two-dimensional photonic crystal with dielectric and metallic inclusions J. Appl.
Phys. 87 8268–75

[9] Ward A J, Pendry J B 1998 Calculating photonic Green’s functions using a nonorthogonal ﬁnite-

diﬀerence time-domain method Phys. Rev. B 58 7252–9

[10] Ward A J, Pendry J B 2000 A program for calculating photonic band structures, Green’s functions
and transmission/reﬂection coeﬃcients using non-orthogonal FDTD method Comput. Phys.
Commun. 128 590–621

[11] Van Dantzig D 1934 Electromagnetism, independent of metrical geometry Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad.

v. Wet. 37 521–31

[12] Schouten J A 1951 Tensor Analysis for Physicists (Oxford: Clarendon)
[13] Teixeira F L 2001 Geometric aspects of the simplical discretization of Maxwell’s equations Progress

In Electromagnetic Research 32 171–88

