3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dramatic Shape Sensitivity of Directional Emission Patterns from Similarly Deformed
Cylindrical Polymer Lasers

Harald G. L. Schwefel, Nathan B. Rex, Hakan E. Tureci, Richard K. Chang and A. Douglas Stone
Yale University, Department of Applied Physics,
P.O. Box 208284, New Haven, CT 06520-8284, USA

Joseph Zyss
Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Cachan,
94235 Cachan, Cedex, France

Recent experiments on similarly shaped polymer micro-cavity lasers show a dramatic diﬀerence
in the far-ﬁeld emission patterns. We show for diﬀerent deformations of the ellipse, quadrupole
and hexadecapole that the large diﬀerences in the far-ﬁeld emission patterns is explained by the
diﬀering ray dynamics corresponding to each shape. Analyzing the diﬀerences in the appropriate
phase space for ray motion, it is shown that the diﬀering geometries of the unstable manifolds of
periodic orbits are the decisive factors in determining the far-ﬁeld pattern. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd
that strongly chaotic ray dynamics is compatible with highly directional emission in the far-ﬁeld.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Spherical, cylindrical and disk-shaped dielectric cavi-
ties have been of interest as compact, high-Q optical res-
onators to be used in micro-lasers and integrated optics
applications[5, 21]. The high-Q modes of such devices are
“whispering gallery modes” (WG) which circulate inside
the boundary conﬁned by total internal reﬂection. Due
to their intrinsic rotational symmetry such devices re-
quire additional symmetry-breaking elements to couple
in a directional manner and to optimize the Q-values for a
given application. Some time ago it was shown by N¨ockel,
Stone and Chang[11, 12, 13] that smooth deformations
of such spherically symmetric cavities (termed ARCs for
asymmetric resonant cavities) still have anisotropic WG
modes which now have intrinsically directional emission
and Q-values which were tunable by the degree of de-
formation introduced. The optical physics of such res-
onators is non-trivial and interesting because the ray
dynamics in such a case is partially chaotic and stan-
dard real-space ray-tracing is not helpful in analyzing
their properties.
Instead, phase space methods taken
from non-linear classical dynamics such as the surface-of-
section method (see below) allowed a much clearer pic-
ture of the physics, leading to qualitative predictions for
the high intensity emission directions from quadrupole-
deformed ARCs[6, 11, 13]. This phase space picture and
associated ray simulations were shown to agree semi-
quantitatively with exact numerical calculations of the
linear resonances of quadrupole ARCs[6, 11].

The essence of the N¨ockel-Stone ray model for ARCs
was that emission from deformed WG modes could be
viewed as refractive escape of rays which were initially
trapped by total internal reﬂection, but which, due to
their chaotic dynamics, could diﬀuse chaotically in an-
gle of incidence, χ, until they reach the critical angle,
sin χc = 1/n (n is the index of refraction of the res-
onator, assumed to be surrounded by air) and refracted
out. One might naively assume that such chaotic ray dy-

namics would generate a ﬂuctuating and pseudo-random
emission pattern, but in fact the ray motion follows a
dominant ﬂow pattern in the phase space favoring escape
at certain points on the boundary and in certain direc-
tions in the far-ﬁeld. Both numerical experiments and
later experimental measurements on ARC lasers found
highly directional emission patterns in the far-ﬁeld. For
the quadrupole and related ARCs it was argued that the
ﬂow pattern was approximately describable as rapid mo-
tion along adiabatic invariant curves (which could be cal-
culated from knowledge of the boundary shape) and slow
diﬀusion in the transverse direction. However major de-
viations from the ﬂow pattern would occur in the vicinity
of stable periodic ray orbits for reasons to be discussed
in detail below. As the shape of the adiabatic curves
and the location of stable and unstable periodic orbits
is quite sensitive to boundary shapes, this theory pre-
dicted a rather dramatic sensitivity of the emission pat-
terns from ARC micro-lasers to the shape of the bound-
ary. In the current work we explore a range of interesting
ARC shapes, both within and outside the range of earlier
theory. One of our goals is to test the earlier theoreti-
cal predictions experimentally for the ﬁrst time with a
controlled series of boundary shapes for polymer ARC
microlasers. The shapes we consider are quadrupole, el-
liptical and hexadecapole ARCs (see deﬁnitions, caption
of Fig. 1). We ﬁnd that; 1) There is a remarkable and re-
producible diﬀerence in the lasing emission patterns from
ARC lasers with very similar boundary shapes. 2) The
basic diﬀerence between chaotic (quadrupole) and non-
chaotic (elliptical) ARC emission patterns is in agree-
ment with the predictions of N¨ockel and Stone based
on the adiabatic model. 3) Nonetheless the persistence
of highly directional emission patterns for highly de-
formed quadrupolar ARCs is inconsistent with the adi-
abatic model and is a quite surprising experimental dis-
covery. 4) A new theoretical model is proposed which
attributes the high emission directions observed for the
chaotic shapes to the ﬂow pattern produced by the unsta-

ble manifolds of short periodic orbits; this ﬂow pattern
diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the adiabatic model. This model
is shown to explain both the persistence of narrow emis-
sion peaks in the quadrupole at high deformation and
the major shift in emission directionality at large defor-
mation for ARCs with hexadecapole deformation. It also
predicts that completely chaotic boundary shapes, such
as the stadium, can nonetheless exhibit highly directional
emission.

Further below (section IV) we will review the basic
ideas of mixed phase space, which describes systems with
a mixture of chaotic and regular dynamics. At that
point we will explain in detail the adiabatic model of
N¨ockel and Stone and how it fails to account for the emis-
sion data for the highest deformations of resonators with
mixed phase space. However we review here just a few
basic concepts to put the current experimental and theo-
retical work in perspective. At maximal radial deforma-
tions of order 15% from a reference circle the quadrupole
and hexadecapole resonators have primarily chaotic ray
dynamics and this implies that most initial conditions
corresponding to total internal reﬂection (TIR) belong to
ray trajectories which eventually will strike the bound-
ary below TIR and hence will escape rapidly by refrac-
tion. The prior model posited a correspondence between
a set of totally-internally-reﬂected initial conditions on
rays and WG modes of the deformed resonator. This
correspondence, based on adiabatic invariants, will be
described below. The correspondence is essentially ex-
act for the ellipse but is only a rough approximation for
the quadrupole. Once ray initial conditions are chosen,
the emission patterns can be calculated using straight-
forward ray simulations as described in[11, 13] and a
qualitative understanding of the emission patterns is pos-
sible based on properties of the phase-space ﬂow. Us-
ing this picture of phase space ﬂow, N¨ockel and Stone
predicted[6, 11, 13]; that quadrupole resonators with de-
formations in the range of 10-12% and index of refraction
n = 1.5 would emit very diﬀerently than elliptical res-
onators with the same major to minor axis ratio. (Sim-
ilarly, but less relevant here, they showed that a n = 2
quadrupole resonator of exactly the same shape would
emit diﬀerently from the n = 1.5 case). Speciﬁcally the
elliptical resonators would emit from the points of high-
est curvature on the boundary roughly in the tangent
direction (90◦) while the quadrupoles of the same index
would emit at roughly a 35◦ − 45◦ angle to the major and
minor axes. It was argued that the origin of this eﬀect
is the presence in the quadrupole of a stable four-bounce
periodic ray orbit which prevents emission from the high-
est curvature points in the tangent direction, an eﬀect
they termed “dynamical eclipsing”[11, 13]. This ﬁnding
was supported by numerical solutions of the linear wave
equation for the quasi-bound states and their far-ﬁeld
emission patterns. Mode selection and non-linear lasing
processes were not treated in the theory. A subsequent
experiment on lasing droplets by Chang et al.[6] was suc-
cessfully interpreted as strong evidence for such dynam-

2

FIG. 1: Cross-sectional shapes of micro-pillar resonators
studied: a) The quadrupole, deﬁned in polar coordinates
by R = R0(1 + ε cos 2φ), b) The ellipse, deﬁned by R =
R0(1 + ((1 + ε)4 − 1) sin2 φ)−1/2 and c) The Quadrupole-
Hexadecapole, deﬁned by R = R0(1 + ε(cos2 φ + 3
2 cos4 φ))
all at a deformation of ε = 0.12. Note that all shapes have
horizontal and vertical reﬂection symmetry and have been de-
ﬁned so that the same value of ε corresponds to approximately
the same major to minor axis ratio. χ (Fig. b) is the angle
of incidence of a ray with respect to the local normal. In a)
and c) we show short periodic orbits (“diamond, rectangle,
triangle”) relevant to the discussion below.

ically eclipsed lasing modes. However this experiment
was less direct than desirable for two reasons. First, the
droplet was a deformed sphere with many possible lasing
modes, most of which were not of the two-dimensional
type considered in references[11, 13]; it was argued, but
not experimentally shown, that the 2-d “chaotic” modes
dominated the lasing emission. Second, the droplet shape
deformation was not controlled and could not be manip-
ulated to turn the eﬀect on and oﬀ. Recently, Lacey
et al.[9] reported an experiment on nearly spherical res-
onators where they addressed the former but not latter
problem. The experiments reported here remedy both of
these shortcomings. First the lasers are deformed cylin-
ders and the lasing modes are truly two-dimensional.
Second we have fabricated the boundary shapes using
a mask to conform to the desired cross-sectional proﬁle.
Hence we can directly compare e.g. quadrupolar and el-
liptical ARC lasers and observe the presence or absence
of the dynamical eclipsing eﬀect over a range of deforma-
tions.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DATA

The experiments we report were performed on diﬀer-
ently shaped dye (DCM)-doped polymer (PMMA) sam-
ples that are fabricated on top of a spin-on-glass buﬀer
layer coated over a silicon substrate via a sequence of mi-
crolithography and O2 reactive ionic etching steps. The
eﬀective index of refraction of these microcavities is 1.49,
much lower than for earlier experiments performed us-
ing a similar set-up on GaN, where the index of refrac-
tion is n = 2.65[7, 17]. They are optically pumped by
a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser at λ = 532 nm incident
normal to the plane of the micropillar. Light emitted
from the laser is imaged through an aperture subtend-
ing a 5◦ angle and lens onto a ICCD camera which is

3

FIG. 2: Two-dimensional display of the experimental data showing in false color scale the emission intensity as a function of
sidewall angle φ (converted from ICCD images) and of the far-ﬁeld angle θ (camera angle). Columns from left to right represent
the quadrupole, ellipse and quadrupole-hexadecapole respectively. Insets show the cross-sectional shapes of the pillars in each
case (for deﬁnitions see Fig. 1). The graphs at the bottom show the far-ﬁeld patterns obtained by integration over φ for each
θ, normalized to unity in the direction of maximal intensity. The deformations are ε = 0.12, 0.16, 0.18, 0.20 (red, blue, black
and green respectively)

rotated by an angle θ in the far-ﬁeld from the major
axis. A bandpass ﬁlter restricts the imaged light to
the stimulated emission region of the spectrum. The
ICCD camera records an image of the intensity proﬁle
on the sidewall of the pillar as viewed from the angle
φ which is converted from pixels to angular position
φ.
In this paper we studied micro-cavities with ellip-
tic, quadrupolar and quadrupolar-hexadecapolar shape

of an average radius Ro = 100µm (see formulas in Fig. 1
caption). Each shape was analyzed at eccentricities of
ε = 0.12, 0.14, 0.16, 0.18 and 0.20.

In Fig. 2 we show the experimental results in a color
scaled ICCD image. The two angles are the sidewall an-
gle φ (for the horizontal coordinate) and the camera an-
gle θ (for the vertical coordinate). We omit the data for
ε = 0.14 deformation as it indicates no eﬀects not cap-

tured by the data at the other deformations. To obtain
the far-ﬁeld pattern with respect to θ we integrate the
image over all sidewall angles φ. The boundary image
ﬁeld is calculated by integrating over θ for each φ. As
insets we show the exact shape of each of the microcavi-
ties. Although the shapes appear very similar to the eye,
we ﬁnd dramatic diﬀerences in the far-ﬁeld emission pat-
terns, which in the case of the ellipse vs. the quadrupole,
persist over a wide range of deformations. Speciﬁcally,
the far-ﬁeld emission intensity for the quadrupole ex-
hibits a strong peak at θ = 34◦ − 40◦ which remains
rather narrow over the observed range of deformations.
Over the same range of deformation the boundary im-
age ﬁeld for the quadrupole changes substantially and
does not exhibit one localized point of emission. In con-
trast, the ellipse emits into the θ ∼ 90◦ direction in the
far-ﬁeld, but with a much broader angular intensity dis-
tribution, while the boundary image ﬁeld remains well-
localized around φ ∼ 0◦ (the point of highest curvature
in the imaged ﬁeld). For the quadrupole-hexadecapole
we see a far-ﬁeld directionality peak which shifts from
θ ∼ 90◦ to θ ∼ 30◦ and an almost constant boundary
image ﬁeld. Thus we see three qualitatively diﬀerent be-
haviors for the three shapes studied over the same range
of variation of the major to minor axis ratios.

Several diﬀerent samples with the same boundary
shape were measured in each case and conﬁrmed that
the basic features of this data set just described are re-
produced within each class (with small ﬂuctuations)[16].
This shows that the eﬀects measured are a property of
the boundary shape and not of uncontrollable aspects of
the fabricationprocess. Moreover the theoretical calcula-
tions, which we will present next, are based on uniform
dielectric rods with the ideal cross-sectional shape spec-
iﬁed by the mask; therefore the agreement of these cal-
culations with the measurements also conﬁrms that the
diﬀerences are due to controllable shape diﬀerences.

III. THEORETICAL CALCULATIONS

In Figs. 3-5 we compare the experimental results for
the far-ﬁeld emission patterns for the three shapes mea-
sured at ε = 0.12, 0.18 to two theoretical models, one
based on solutions of the wave equation and the other
based on simulations of ray escape. The agreement in
both cases is quite good. We brieﬂy summarize here the
two models used.

It is conventional in treating high-Q laser cavities to
approximate the lasing mode by the appropriate reso-
nant mode of the passive cavity (the cavity in the ab-
sence of pumping and gain)[18]. In the current case we
can model the passive cavity as a 2-d resonator because
the penetration depth of the pump laser is of the order
of µm and ampliﬁcation due to reﬂection from the side-
wall occurs primarily within the horizontal plane of the
resonator. The wave-equation for the time-harmonic so-
lutions in 2-d within the uniform dielectric reduces to

4

90

a)

1.0

90

b)

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

60

60

30

30

0

0

FIG. 3: Far-ﬁeld intensity for the quadrupole with ε = 0.12
(a) and 0.18 (b). The green curve is the experimental result,
blue the ray simulation and red a numerical solution of the
wave equation. The ray simulation was performed starting
with 6000 random initial conditions above the critical line and
then propagated into the far-ﬁeld in the manner described
in the text. The numerical solutions selected have kR0 =
49.0847 − 0.0379i with a Q = −2Re[kR0]/Im[kR0] = 2593.05
and kR0 = 49.5927−0.0679i with Q = −2Re[kR0]/Im[kR0] =
1460.72 for ε = 0.12 and 0.18 respectively.

the Helmholtz equation for the electric ﬁeld (TM modes)
and magnetic ﬁeld (TE modes) and we can solve the
Helmholtz equation by imposing Sommerfeld boundary
conditions (no incoming wave from inﬁnity). We use an
eﬃcient new numerical method developed for these sys-
tems described in ref.[20] The method yields a large set of
resonances over the entire range of Q-values; the real part
of the wavevector giving the resonance frequency and the
imaginary part giving its width. Experiments have indi-
cated that mode selection is complicated in these dielec-
tric resonators and that there is no simple rule relating
the observed lasing mode to the Q-value of the mode in
the passive cavity. Due to the low output coupling high
Q-modes are not necessarily the observed lasing modes
in the far-ﬁeld. Thus from the set of calculated reso-
nances we choose the resonance which coincides well with
the observed far-ﬁeld pattern and has a relatively high
Q = −2Re[k]/Im[k]. We also conﬁrmed that theoreti-
cal boundary image data[17] coincides well with the ex-
perimental results. Moreover in all cases discussed here,
there were many resonances which gave good agreement
with the data, indicating the existence of a robust class
of modes any of which could be the lasing mode.
In
Fig. 3-5 we as red line the numerical far-ﬁeld by calcu-
lating the asymptotic expansion of our wavefunction in

90

a)

1.0

90

a)

1.0

5

90

b)

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

60

60

30

30

0

0

90

b)

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

60

60

30

30

0

0

FIG. 4: Far-ﬁeld intensity for the ellipse with ε = 0.12 (a)
and 0.18 (b). Green, blue and red curves are experiment, ray
simulation and wave solution. The ray simulation was per-
formed starting with 6000 initial conditions spread over seven
caustics separated by ∆ sin χ = 0.02 below the critical caustic
(the caustic that just touches the critical line). The numerical
wave solutions shown correspond to kR0 = 49.1787 − 0.0028i
with Q = −2Re[kR0]/Im[kR0] = 17481.38 and kR0 =
49.2491 − 0.0110i with Q = −2Re[kR0]/Im[kR0] = 4488.20
for ε = 0.12 and 0.18 respectively.

the far-ﬁeld. Numerical limitations prevent us from per-
forming the calculations at the experimental values of
kR0 ∼ 1000 but the major features of the emission pat-
tern are not sensitive to kR0 over the range we can study
numerically. The ﬁnding (discussed next) that we can re-
produce these patterns from ray escape simulations also
suggests that the wavelength is not a relevant parameter
for the features we are studying. With a green line we
show the experimental results. We see that the numerical
calculations agree with the measured far-ﬁeld very well.

As just noted, the experiment is performed well into
the short-wavelength limit, and we are motivated to
develop ray-optical models for the emission, following
references[11, 13].
In the ray simulation an initial dis-
tribution of rays is assumed and each ray is given unit
initial amplitude. At each reﬂection on the boundary
the amplitude is reduced according to Fresnel formulas.
The outgoing amplitude is recorded in the direction de-
termined by Snell’s law and the reﬂected ray is followed
until its amplitude falls below 10−4. To compare to the
experimental data we collected the transmitted rays in
5◦ bins. A subtle issue in the calculations is the choice
of the initial ray distribution. In Figs. 3 and 5 we show
the far-ﬁeld distribution for a randomly chosen set of ini-

FIG. 5: Far-ﬁeld intensity for the quadrupole-hexadecapole
with ε = 0.12 (a) and 0.18 (b). Green, blue and red curves
are experiment, ray simulation and wave solution as described
in the caption to Fig. 3. The numerical wave solutions
shown correspond to kR0 = 50.5761 − 0.0024i with Q =
−2Re[kR0]/Im[kR0] = 42573.77 and kR0 = 49.5642 − 0.0092i
with Q = −2Re[kR0]/Im[kR0] = 10741.93 for ε = 0.12 and
0.18 respectively.

tial conditions above the critical angle; in the case of the
ellipse (Fig. 4) we chose initial conditions appropriate to
its integrable dynamics (see the discussion below). The
ray model is found to reproduce the main features of the
data quite well. In section V we show that the far-ﬁeld
emission pattern for chaotic shapes is insensitive to the
initial ray distribution over a wide range. Speciﬁcally,
in Fig. 10 below we compare the far-ﬁeld patterns for
diﬀerent possible initial distributions, conﬁrming the ap-
proximate independence of the patterns to this choice.

IV. NOVEL FEATURES OF THE DATA

In the previous section we showed that we can repro-
duce the experimental data with two diﬀerent theoretical
models. First, by solving the linear wave equation in the
dielectric and choosing an appropriate resonance; second,
by ray escape simulations. This gives us conﬁdence that
the major diﬀerences in the experimental emission pat-
terns are due to the diﬀerent shapes of the laser cavities.
The strong sensitivity of the emission patterns to small
diﬀerences in boundary shape is quite striking and is a
major result of this study. This sensitivity was predicted
in the earlier work of references[6, 11, 13] and was not
unexpected. However there are major aspects of the ex-

perimental data which are quite surprising even in the
light of the earlier work on ARCs. In particular, the per-
sistence of highly directional emission in the quadrupolar
shapes at quite high deformations was not predicted the-
oretically and was unexpected for reasons we will now
discuss. In order to understand the unexpected features
of the data and to develop principles to predict the emis-
sion patterns for untested boundary shapes we will re-
view and extend the phase space approach introduced
originally by N¨ockel and Stone.

To explain the basic concepts it is useful to begin by ne-
glecting the possibility of refraction out of the resonator.
The problem of ray motion in a resonator with perfectly
reﬂecting walls is equivalent to the billiard problem ﬁrst
posed by Birkhoﬀ[4] and since widely studied in the non-
linear dynamics community. The billiard problem is that
of a point mass moving freely in two dimensions within a
boundary of general shape deﬁned by perfectly (specular)
reﬂecting wall. In such a system classical mechanics is
reduced to a simple geometric construction, whose prop-
erties nonetheless turn out to be remarkably complex.
An important tool to study dynamical systems such as
billiards was devised by Poincar´e[14], the Poincar´e Sur-
face of Section (SOS). The SOS images the trajectories
in phase space instead of in real space. For even the sim-
plest non-trivial dynamical systems (two dimensions, one
degree of freedom) the phase space is four-dimensional,
however the SOS is a two-dimensional plot which is a
stroboscopic image of a set of trajectories as they cross
a certain hyper-plane in phase space. For billiards this
image is taken at each reﬂection from the boundary; the
coordinates of the SOS are the angular position (φ) and
the tangential momentum sin χ (scaled to unit total mo-
mentum) of each trajectory as it reﬂects from the bound-
ary (Fig. 1). The topology of the resulting plot gives us
critical information about the phase space ﬂow in the
particular billiard of interest.

When the motion is partially chaotic a real-space trace
of the trajectory is essentially useless, while the SOS can
reveal useful information. An example of this is shown
in Fig. 6A). Here we show a SOS for the quadrupole and
the ellipse with a deformation of ε = 0.072; we calculated
and plotted trajectories arising from ∼ 30 diﬀerent ini-
tial conditions and iterated them for 500 reﬂections. We
see that for the chaotic orbit Fig. 6A)(c) the real space
picture does not provide any useful information, whereas
the SOS shows us an underlying structure; speciﬁcally
that such a chaotic orbit nonetheless avoids large regions
of phase space in this case. This plot illustrates a typical
structure for a mixed phase space. Such a structure is
generic for all smooth deformations of a circular billiard
although the fraction of phase space which is covered
by chaotic motion increases with deformation. We will
not attempt to review the general properties of mixed
dynamical systems which are described by Kolmogorov-
Arnold-Moser (KAM)[2] theory and by other theorems
due to Poincar´e, Birkhoﬀ and Lazutkin. However a key to
understanding a given billiard is to study its periodic or-

6

bits. The “diamond” periodic orbit in Fig. 6A)(b) shows
up in the SOS as four points which are referred to as ﬁxed
points in the billiard map. For this deformation the di-
amond orbit is called stable as motion close to the ﬁxed
points is bounded in the vicinity of the ﬁxed points. Iter-
ation of a point close to a stable ﬁxed point will result in a
1-d set of points and is called quasi-periodic orbit as it ﬁlls
a 1-d curve densely. The set of all the points in the neigh-
borhood of a stable ﬁxed point that are quasi-periodic is
called an island. Another type of quasi-periodic motion
is shown in Fig. 6A)(a); in this case we have motion on a
“KAM” curve which is similar to the WG modes found in
the circle and is not associated with any stable periodic
orbit. The ﬁnal type of motion which occurs in a mixed
phase space is shown in Fig. 6A)(c). Here we show a
chaotic orbit which ﬁlls a two-dimensional region of the
SOS densely; hence this is a qualitatively diﬀerent type of
motion. Within this region nearby initial conditions will
separate exponentially in time.(until they are separated
by a distance of order the size of teh chaotic region). As
noted above, the existence of these three types of motion
is generic for smooth deformations of a circle and hence
for ARC resonators.

While the behavior of the quadrupole shown in
Fig. 6A) is generic there do exist special billiards that
exhibit the two extremes of dynamical behavior. One
limiting case is exempliﬁed by the ellipse billiard whose
SOS is shown in Fig. 6B). For the ellipse all orbits lie on
1-d curves in the SOS and there are no chaotic regions of
phase space. This type of system is called integrable and
has regular dynamics because there exists one constant
of motion for each degree of freedom. For the elliptical
billiard these constants are the energy and the product
of the angular momenta with respect to each focus (de-
generating to the angular momentum in the case of the
circular billiard)[3, 10]. The ellipse is the only convex de-
formation of a circular billiard which is integrable[15]. A
recent proof of this long standing conjecture was given
by Amiran[1]. At the opposite extreme is the Buni-
movich stadium billiard (see inset in Fig. 14) for which
it is proven that there exist no stable periodic orbits and
the entire phase space (except sets of measure zero) is
chaotic. We will study theoretically the emission from
stadium-shaped resonators in section VIII.

Due to its integrability, phase space ﬂow in the el-
lipse is particularly simple: every initial condition lies
on one of the invariant curves given by Eq. (1) below,
and the trajectory retraces this curve indeﬁnitely (see
Fig. 6B)). Curves which cross the entire SOS correspond
to real-space motion tangent to a confocal elliptical caus-
tic Fig. 6B)(a); curves which do not cross the entire SOS
represent motion tangent to a hyperbolic caustic in real
space Fig. 6B)(b).

Phase space ﬂow in mixed systems is much more com-
plex and is ergodic on each chaotic region. However a
key property of mixed dynamical systems is that the dif-
ferent dynamical structures in phase space are disjoint;
this implies that in two dimensions KAM curves and is-

7

FIG. 6: The Poincar´e surface of section for the quadrupole
A) and the ellipse B) with ε = 0.072. The schematics A)(a-
c) on right show three classes of orbits for the quadrupole,
A)(a) a quasi-periodic orbit on a KAM curve, A)(b) a stable
period-four orbit, (the ‘diamond’), and A)(c) a chaotic orbit.
Schematic B)(a, b) show the two types of orbits which exist
in the ellipse, the whispering gallery type, with an elliptical
caustic B)(a) and B)(b), the bouncing ball type, with a hy-
perbolic caustic.

FIG. 7: Comparison of the Poincar´e surface of section for
the quadrupole and the ellipse with ε = 0.12 showing mostly
chaotic behavior in the former case and completely regular
motion in the latter. The red line denotes sin χc = 1/n, the
critical value for total internal reﬂection; rays above that line
are trapped and those below escape rapidly by refraction. The
quadrupole still exhibits stable islands at φ = 0, π and sin χ =
sin χc which prevent escape at the points of highest curvature
in the tangent direction

lands divide phase space into regions which cannot be
connected by the chaotic orbits. This puts constraints
on phase space ﬂow despite the existence of chaos in a
signiﬁcant fraction of the phase space. For small defor-
mations (∼ 5%) most of phase space is covered by KAM
curves, the form of which can be estimated using an adi-
abatic approximation[11]. This approximation gives the
exact result for all deformations in the case of the ellipse;
it can be written in the following form:

sin χ(φ) =

1 + (S2 − 1)κ2/3(φ, ε)

(1)

q

where κ is the radius of curvature along the boundary and
S is a constant. Plotting this equation for diﬀerent values
of S, ε gives an SOS of the type shown in Fig. 6B). For
the mixed case, exempliﬁed by the quadrupole billiard in
Fig. 6A), Eq. (1) describes quite accurately the behavior
for values of sin χ near unity, but doesn’t work well at
lower sin χ where chaos is more prevalent.

Up to now the discussion has been based on the ideal
billiard, where a ray is trapped indeﬁnitely by perfectly
reﬂecting walls. N¨ockel and Stone realized that in this
short wavelength limit the dielectric resonator would be-
have very similar to the ideal billiard for angles of in-
cidence above sin χc = 1/n (i.e. the evanescent leakage
could be neglected), however for incidence below sin χc
rays would rapidly escape by refraction according to Fres-

nel’s law. If a correspondence could be made between a
set of initial conditions for rays and a set of solutions of
the wave equations (modes) then the emission pattern
could be calculated by propagating those rays forward
in time and allowing them to escape into the far-ﬁeld
according to Snell’s and Fresnel’s laws. For the case of
the ellipse there was an obvious correspondence between
a set of rays chosen on a given invariant curve of the
ellipse and a set of solutions. This correspondence can
be formalized using the eikonal method of Keller[8]. The
diﬃculty was in ﬁnding the correspondence in the chaotic
regions of phase space of generic shapes, for which there
exist no invariant curves.

In refs.[10, 11] a model was proposed based on an adi-
abatic theory to describe the ray-wave correspondence in
the generic case of mixed dynamics.
Initial conditions
on the adiabatic invariant curves, e.g. of the quadrupole
were chosen. Due to the presence of chaos in the true
dynamics, rays initially on such a curve would diﬀuse in
phase space until they escaped by refraction. The re-
sulting emission pattern can be calculated by ray simula-
tions of the type we have presented above. Moreover this
model led to qualitative predictions about the emission
patterns without doing any simulations. The adiabatic
invariant curves for the quadrupole have their minimum
values of sin χ at the points of highest curvature on the

boundary φ = 0, ±π, just as they do in the ellipse.
If
the diﬀusion in phase space is suﬃciently slow, emission
would be near these points of highest curvature and at
the critical angle, i.e. in the tangent direction, as in the
ellipse. This reasoning held as long as the escape points
sin χ = 1/n, φ = 0, ±π occurred in the chaotic region
and were reachable from the totally-internally-reﬂected
region of sin χ > 1/n. However for n = 1.5 and deforma-
tions around 10%, these points are enclosed by the stable
island corresponding to the four-bounce “diamond” orbit
and due to the disjoint nature of the dynamics, “chaotic”
Instead they will escape at
rays cannot escape there.
higher or lower values of φ leading to a large change in
the emission pattern from that of the ellipse with similar
minor-major axis ratio. This is the phenomenon termed
“dynamical eclipsing”, and it was predicted to occur for
the n = 1.5 quadrupole at ε ∼ 0.12 some time ago[11, 13].
Our experimental data conﬁrms this prediction for the
ε = 0.12 case. Fig. 7 contrasts the phase space for the
ellipse and the quadrupole for this deformation. The is-
land associated with the stable diamond orbit is smaller
than at ε = 0.072, but still present for the quadrupole;
there is no such island at any deformation for the ellipse.
Note that in the experimental data for the quadrupole at
ε = 0.12 we do not see a bright spot at the boundary at
φ = 0, consistent with the dynamical eclipsing model in
which the island structure forces the chaotic WG modes
to emit away from the point of highest curvature. In con-
trast the bright spot in the ellipse which emits to θ = 90◦
clearly is at φ = 0 for ε = 0.12. Thus the adiabatic model
of refs.[11, 13] does seem to provide a reasonable descrip-
tion of the data for ε = 0.12 and the observed dramatic
diﬀerence between the ellipse and quadrupole shapes is
as predicted.

The earlier work on ARCs did not look extensively at
deformations above ε = 0.12 for the case of low index
materials such as polymers. The belief was that the adi-
abatic model would become questionable at higher de-
formations as the phase space became more chaotic and
the ray motion departed from the adiabatic curves very
rapidly. A natural expectation was that due to increased
chaos the emission patterns in the far-ﬁeld would become
less directional and more pseudo-random. More specif-
ically, for the n = 1.5 quadrupole one ﬁnds that the
“diamond” orbit becomes unstable at ε ≈ 0.1369 (the
associated islands shrink to zero) and one would not ex-
pect highly directional emission at higher deformations
(see inset in Fig. 8). Thus a plausible extrapolation of
the adiabatic model suggests a steady broadening of the
quadrupole emission with deformation with at least some
signiﬁcant emission in the tangent (90◦) direction. Our
experimental data strongly contradicts this expectation,
as the observed emission patterns remain peaked around
35◦ and do not broaden at all up to ε = 0.20. A similar
analysis would show that the adiabatic theory provides
no qualitative explanation for the switch in the far-ﬁeld
directionality for the quadrupole-hexadecapole at high
deformations. Thus we are motivated to look for a model

8

FIG. 8: Poincar´e surface of section for the quadrupole with
ε = 0.18. The red line indicates the critical angle of incidence.
The green diamonds indicate the location of the ﬁxed points
of the (now) unstable “diamond” orbit and the blue squares
the ﬁxed points of the unstable rectangular orbit. In the inset
we show the trace of the monodromy (stability) matrix (see
Eq. 4) for the diamond orbit versus deformation. When the
magnitude of the trace of the monodromy matrix is larger
than two its eigenvalues become real, the periodic motion be-
comes unstable and the associated islands vanish. For the
diamond this happens at ε = 0.1369 (see dashed vertical line
in the inset) and the simple dynamical eclipsing picture of
Fig. 7 does not apply at larger deformations.

of the phase space ﬂow which can explain the persistence
in highly directional emission at high deformations where
almost all of the phase space is chaotic. This model will
be presented in the next section.

V. SHORT-TIME DYNAMICS AND UNSTABLE
MANIFOLDS

At high deformations chaotic diﬀusion is fast and rays
tend to escape rapidly even if they are initially well con-
ﬁned (i.e. far away from the critical angle). The adia-
batic model reviewed predicted at which regions on the
boundary rays are more likely to escape. How accurate is
this model as a description of the phase space ﬂow? One
easy thing to check is whether the short-term ﬂow pre-
serves the discrete symmetries of the system; the shape
of the adiabatic curves are determined by the shape of
the boundary, via its curvature (see Eq. 1) and thus must
preserve all the billiard symmetries (e.g. horizontal and
vertical reﬂection axes for the quadrupole). A straight-
forward ray simulation shown in Fig. 9 reveals that the
short-term dynamics typically breaks these symmetries.
We begin a set of rays on an adiabatic curve, which has
reﬂection symmetry around φ = 0, and after 50 itera-
tions the SOS density has developed a strong asymmetry
around the origin. Thus the ﬂow cannot be accurately
seen as simple diﬀusion between adiabatic curves. On
the other hand the resulting SOS density is very struc-

tured and does not look like a realization of independent
random walks. We shall see below that the boundaries of
the high density regions are set by the unstable manifolds
of a few short periodic orbits.

9

90

a)

1.0

90

b)

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

60

60

30

30

0

0

FIG. 9: Simulation of short-term ray dynamics for the
quadrupole with deformation ε = 0.12, shown in blue. The
three red curves are examples of adiabatic curves for the
quadrupole; the blue points are the result of iterating 8,000
starting rays for 50 bounces starting on the middle of the three
red curves. The blue points show a complex structure which
is asymmetric around the line φ = 0 in contrast to the SOS
and the adiabatic curves which have reﬂection symmetry.

Another indication that the emission patterns we ob-
serve are not closely linked to adiabatic curves is ob-
tained by looking at the dependence of the ray emission
directionality on initial conditions. The original work
of N¨ockel and Stone began the ray simulations with an
ensemble of rays uniformly distributed on the adiabatic
curves. This is obviously correct for the ellipse as one can
calculate resonances which cover uniformly the diﬀerent
invariant curves. However, as already noted, the ellipse
is special since chaotic diﬀusion is absent. In Fig. 10 we
compare ray emission patterns arising from three diﬀer-
ent choices of initial conditions in the quadrupole: uni-
form on the adiabatic curve (black dashes), initial con-
ditions localized on the unstable ﬁxed points associated
with the rectangular periodic orbit shown in Fig. 1 (ma-
genta dashes), and ﬁnally, initial conditions chosen ran-
domly above the critical angle for escape (blue). These
three quite diﬀerent choices all lead to similar far-ﬁeld in-
tensity patterns, in good agreement with the experimen-
tal measurements (green). More generally, we found that
the ray simulations are quite insensitive to the choice of
initial conditions, as long as a signiﬁcant fraction of the
(Ray bundles
rays are started within the chaotic sea.
only started in an island would obviously lead to diﬀer-
ent results.) We shall propose an explanation for this
insensitivity in the next section.

FIG. 10: Ray simulations of the far-ﬁeld emission patterns
for the quadrupole with ε = 0.12 (a), ε = 0.18 (b) with dif-
ferent types of initial conditions. The blue curve is the result
of choosing random initial conditions about the critical line
sin χ = 1/n, the black dashed curve is for initial conditions on
the adiabatic curve with minimum value at the critical line.
The magenta curve is for initial conditions localized around
the unstable ﬁxed point of the rectangle periodic orbit.
In
each of the ray simulations 6000 rays were started with unit
amplitude and the amplitude was reduced according to Fres-
nel’s law upon each reﬂection, with the refracted amplitude
“collected” in the far-ﬁeld. The green curve is the experimen-
tal result; clearly all three choices give similar results in good
agreement with experiment.

VI. UNSTABLE MANIFOLDS

By deﬁnition a non-linear system which is partially
chaotic, such as our billiards, generates ergodic and mix-
ing motion on a ﬁnite fraction of the phase space for long
times. It is convenient to analyze the dynamics in the
SOS and not in continuous time; in this case the dynam-
ics is described by a discrete map. One can get a good
idea of the short term dynamics of such a map in selected
regions of the SOS by linearizing it in the neighborhood
of unstable ﬁxed points of the billiard map (correspond-
ing to unstable periodic orbits in real space). If we take
the initial position and direction/momentum of one ray
at the boundary to be (s, u) = (φ, sin χ) we deﬁne the
map which projects the ray to the next position and di-
rection to be

′
T : (φ, sin χ) → (φ

′

, sin χ

).

A set of ﬁxed points of order N is deﬁned by

T N (φ, sin χ) = (φ, sin χ).

(2)

(3)

We can propagate an initial ray corresponding to a
small deviation from the ﬁxed point values by linearizing
the map around the ﬁxed point.

T (φ, sin χ) ∼ M (φ, sin χ)T =

′
∂s

(s,u)
∂s
′
(s,u)
∂s
∂u

′
∂u

(s,u)
∂s
′
(s,u)
∂u
∂u !

 

(φ, sin χ)T

(4)
The nature of the nearby motion can then be character-
ized by calculating the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of M .
For Hamiltonian ﬂows M is always an area-preserving
map, i.e. detM = 1. The matrix M is also known as the
monodromy, or stability matrix. The eigenvalues can be
either complex on the unit circle or purely real and recip-
rocal to each other. If the eigenvalues are complex, the
ﬁxed points are stable (elliptic) and nearby points oscil-
late around the ﬁxed points tracing an ellipse in the SOS.
In this case the long-time dynamics is determined by the
linearized map to a good approximation. In the case of
real eigenvalues there will be one eigenvalue with mod-
ulus larger than unity (unstable) and one with modulus
less than unity (stable) and there will be two correspond-
ing eigendirections (not usually orthogonal). In the sta-
ble direction, deviations relax exponentially towards the
ﬁxed points; in the unstable direction deviations grow
exponentially away from the ﬁxed points. Generic devia-
tions will have at least some component along the unsta-
ble directions and will also ﬂow out along the unstable
direction. Therefore, in a short time generic deviations
move out of the regime of validity of the linearized map
and begin to move erratically in the chaotic “sea”. Hence
the linearized map is not a good tool for predicting long
time dynamics in a chaotic region of phase space. How-
ever, in open billiards, rays will escape if they wander
away from the ﬁxed points into the part of the chaotic
sea which is below the critical angle for total internal
reﬂection. Therefore we ﬁnd the unstable eigenvectors
of the short periodic orbits useful in predicting ray es-
cape. For the short periodic orbits in our shapes it is
possible to calculate the matrix M giving the linearized
map around all of the short periodic orbits. Thus we can
calculate the eigendirections and determine the unstable
directions analytically.

Before we can explain the characteristic asymmetric
pattern found in Fig. 9, we need to introduce the more
general concept of the non-linear stable and unstable
manifolds of the ﬁxed points. Consider ﬁrst the stable
eigendirection deﬁned by the the stable eigenvector of the
monodromy matrix for a given ﬁxed point. This is a line
in the SOS passing through the ﬁxed point such that any
initial condition on that line will come arbitrarily close to
the ﬁxed point as t → ∞; similarly the unstable direction
is a line of initial conditions which approaches the ﬁxed
point arbitrarily closely as t → −∞. At a certain dis-
tance in phase space from the ﬁxed point the linearized
map no longer holds and a deviation exactly on the line
corresponding to the unstable eigenvector will not tend to
the ﬁxed point asymptotically; however nearby this line
there exist such points which form a generalized curve

10

known as the unstable manifold of the ﬁxed point. Each
unstable ﬁxed point has associated with it stable and un-
stable manifolds which coincide with the eigendirections
as one passes through the ﬁxed point. Note that for inte-
grable systems there is only one asymptotic manifold for
both past and future and it coincides exactly with the
invariant curves, which can be calculated analytically in
some cases (e.g. the ellipse). For the non-integrable case,
e.g. the quadrupole, we can only calculate the eigendi-
rections near the ﬁxed point analytically and must trace
out the full manifolds numerically. As the unstable man-
ifolds deviate further from the ﬁxed points, generically
they begin to have larger and larger oscillations. This is
necessary to preserve phase space area while at the same
time have exponential growth of deviations. This tan-
gling of the unstable manifolds has been used to devise
a mathematical proof of chaotic motion[19].

One can argue qualitatively that the unstable mani-
folds of the short periodic orbits ought to control the ray
escape dynamics at large deformations. The manifolds of
short periodic orbits are the least convoluted as they are
typically the least unstable; hence the unstable direction
is fairly linear over a large region in the SOS. A typical
ray will only make small excursions in phase space until it
approaches one of these manifolds and then it will rather
rapidly ﬂow along it.
If the direction leads across the
critical line for escape, that crossing point and the por-
tion just below will be highly favored as escape points
in phase space. We can check this qualitative argument
with a few simple numerical experiments.

In Fig. 11a) we show the results of a short time itera-
tion of a uniform random set of initial conditions above
the critical line in comparison to the unstable mani-
folds of the various relevant short periodic orbits. Note
that the diﬀerent unstable manifolds must ﬁt together
in a consistent manner and cannot cross one another; if
they did such a crossing point would deﬁne a ray which
asymptotically in the past approaches two diﬀerent sets
of ﬁxed points, which is not possible. Because of this
non-crossing property the unstable manifolds deﬁne just
a few major ﬂow directions in the SOS. We see clearly in
the simulation that the actual short-time ﬂow of random
points in the chaotic sea is controlled and approximately
bounded by these unstable manifolds. To further support
our statement that the general motion in phase space is
governed by the unstable manifolds of these short orbits,
in Fig. 11b) we propagated an arbitrary but localized set
of initial conditions and conﬁrmed that they are stretched
along and parallel to nearby unstable manifolds. Thus it
appears that for the highly deformed case the phase space
ﬂow of a generic ray is much better predicted by simply
plotting these manifolds.

As a conﬁrmation that these manifolds do control es-
cape we perform a further ray simulation for the “open”
billiard. We propagate, as before, an ensemble of rays
with a uniform random distribution above the critical
angle. As we have done in calculating the ray emission
pattern, we associate to every starting ray in the sur-

11

FIG. 11:
(a) Ray simulations of short-term dynamics for
random initial conditions above the critical line, propagated
for 10 iterations, plotted on the surface of section for the
quadrupole with ε = 0.18. The areas of the SOS covered are
delineated very accurately by the unstable manifolds of the
short periodic orbits which are indicated in the schematics
at right. These manifolds are overlaid in the ﬁgure with ap-
propriate color coding.
(b) Flow of phase space volume in
the surface of section of the quadrupole with ε = 0.18. A
localized but arbitrary cloud of initial conditions (red) is it-
erated six times to illustrate the ﬂow. The initial volume is
the circle at the far left, successive iterations are increasingly
stretched by the chaotic map. The stretching clearly follows
closely the unstable manifold of the rectangle orbit which we
have plotted in blue.

face of section an amplitude which decreases as the ray
propagates forward in time according to Fresnel’s law (if
the point falls below the critical line). Instead of follow-
ing the refracted amplitude into the far-ﬁeld, in this case
we plot the emitted amplitude onto the surface of sec-
tion, as shown in Fig. 12a). The emission amplitude is
almost completely comﬁned within the two downwards
“ﬁngers” created by the unstable manifold of the four-
bounce rectangular orbit. As noted earlier, the availabity
of the two-dimensional data obtained from the imaging
technique (see Fig. 2), gives us a unique ability to re-
construct the emitting part of the lasing mode both in
real space and momentum space directly from experi-
mental data.
It is therefore possible to check directly
this ray simulation in phase space against experimental
data. The intensity data is sorted into intensity pixels
according to both its sidewall location (the angle φ from
which emitted intensity originated) and its far-ﬁeld an-
gle, which by geometric considerations and Snell’s law

FIG. 12: a) Ray simulation of emission: emitted ray ampli-
tude (color scale) overlaid on the surface of section for the
quadrupole with ε = 0.18. b) Far-ﬁeld intensity from exper-
imental image data Fig. 2 projected in false color scale onto
the surface of section for the quadrupole with ε = 0.18. The
blue line is the unstable manifold of the periodic rectangle
◦
far-ﬁeld (see
orbit. In green we have the line of constant 34
the discussion in section VII). Absence of projected intensity
near φ = ±π in (b) is due to collection of experimental data
only in the ﬁrst quadrant.

can be converted to the internal angle of incidence sin χ.
Therefore we can project this data “back” onto the SOS
for emission.
In Fig. 12b) we show this projection for
the same deformation as in Fig. 12a); we ﬁnd remarkable
agreement between the projected data and the ray sim-
ulation. We note that this is a much more demanding
test of agreement between theory and experiment than
simply reproducing the experimental far-ﬁeld patterns.

VII. RAY DYNAMICAL EXPLANATION OF
THE EXPERIMENTAL DATA

In the last section we established that typical rays
above the critical angle escape by following closely the
unstable manifolds of the short periodic orbits. This
leads to a ray escape probability which is relatively local-
ized in the surface of section (Fig. 12a)). However despite
the non-random character of this escape, there is still a
signiﬁcant spread of angles of incidence for escape.
In
fact the spread of escape angle we see in Fig. 12 would
lead to an angular spread of nearly 80◦ in the far-ﬁeld
if all the escape occurred from the same point on the
boundary. However as we see from Fig. 12, the point of

12

90

a)

1.0

90

b)

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

60

60

30

30

0

0

2 ε

1

FIG. 13: Ray emission amplitude (color scale) overlaid on
the surface of section for the quadrupole-hexadecapole with
ε = 0.12 (a) and ε = 0.20 (b). Solid blue and magenta curves
are the unstable manifold of the diamond orbit (a) and of the
unstable rectangular orbit (b). In green and turquoise we plot
the line of constant emission in the 75◦ and 30◦ directions in
the far-ﬁeld.

escape and the angle of incidence are correlated and vary
together according to the shape of the unstable mani-
fold. Because the boundary is curved, diﬀerent angles of
incidence can lead to the same angular direction in the
far-ﬁeld. It is straightforward to calculate the curves of
constant far-ﬁeld for a given shape; for the quadruple at
ε = 0.18 and for the peak observed emission angle of 34◦
this curve is plotted in green in Fig. 12. The curve tends
to lie remarkably close to the unstable manifold. There-
fore we ﬁnd that the curvature of the boundary tends to
compensate almost completely for the dispersion in the
angle of incidence at escape.

As a further test of the explanatory power of plot-
ting the unstable manifolds, we can use this method to
explain the large shift in the far-ﬁeld directionality in
the quadrupole-hexadecapole (QHD) with deformation
shown in Fig. 2. The QHD shape is an interesting con-
trast to the quadrupole as the diamond and rectangle
periodic orbits interchange their roles. For the QHD at
small deformations the diamond orbit is unstable and
gives no islands whereas the rectangle is stable and gives
rather large islands at ε = 0.12 (see Fig. 13a)). Since
there is no island at the point of highest curvature for
this deformation the original adiabatic theory would pre-
dict emission from the point of highest curvature approx-
imately in the tangent (90◦) direction. We see in Fig. 5
that we indeed have such behavior experimentally. The

FIG. 14: Far-ﬁeld emission patterns for the stadium with
ε = 0.12 (a) and ε = 0.18 (b). The blue curve is the
ray simulation and the red a numerical solution of the wave
equation; no experimental data was taken for this shape.
The ray simulation was performed with random initial con-
ditions exactly as in Fig. 3. The numerical solutions were
for resonances with kR = 50.5401 − 0.0431i with Q =
−2Re[kR]/Im[kR] = 2342.71 and kR = 48.7988 − 0.1192i
with Q = −2Re[kR]/Im[kR] = 818.83 for ε = 0.12 and 0.18
respectively. The inset shows the shape of the stadium; it is
deﬁned (inset (b)) by two half circles with radius one and a
straight line segment of length 2ε.

same prediction would come from looking at the unstable
manifolds; in Fig. 13a) we ﬁnd the maximum ray escape
amplitude comes from near φ = 0 and is bounded by
the unstable manifold of the diamond orbit. The rele-
vant unstable manifolds rearrange as the deformation is
increased to ε = 0.20. The stable rectangle bifurcates
at ε ∼ 0.1115 into two stable, period four, “parallelo-
gram” orbits. As the deformation increases the islands
associated with these orbits move closer to φ = 0, and al-
though the islands themselves are quite small, they cause
the unstable manifolds of the diamond to become steeper
(as the ﬁxed point of the diamond orbit sits right between
the two period four islands). Due to this the other mani-
folds also become steeper and at ε = 0.20 Fig. 13b) shows
that the unstable manifold of the rectangular orbit dic-
tates the ﬂow of the escaping rays, which now are emitted
into the θ = 30◦ direction in the far-ﬁeld for essentially
the same reason as in the quadrupole. Thus the QHD
is a shape which behaves like the ellipse at low deforma-
tions and as the quadrupole at high deformations; this
can be attributed to the evolution in the geometry of its
unstable manifolds.

13

peak with the slope and position of the manifold of the
unstable rectangular orbit in the stadium, Fig. 15a). The
noticable shift between the ε = 0.12 and ε = 0.18 defor-
mation (see inset in Fig. 14) originates from the change
in the slope of the unstable manifold of the rectangu-
lar orbit, Fig. 15b). The discontinuities of slope in the
unstable manifolds of the periodic orbits in the stadium
result from its non-smooth boundary. These results indi-
cate clearly that a fully chaotic dielectric resonator can
nonetheless sustain highly directional lasing modes.
It
would be interesting to test this in future experiments.

IX. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have reported experimental data from polymer
micro-pillar lasers with diﬀerent deformations of the
cross-section from circular symmetry. The far-ﬁeld emis-
sion patterns were anisotropic and in most cases highly
directional. The anisotropy was stable and reproducible
and was dramatically diﬀerent for diﬀerent boundary
shapes of similar major to minor axis ratio. These dif-
ferences were reproduced by ray and wave solutions of
the ideal passive cavity. The diﬀerences in the emission
patterns were explained by reference to the diﬀerent dy-
namics of rays trapped within each resonator. The pos-
sibility of highly directional emission from quadrupole
resonators with partially chaotic ray dynamics was pre-
dicted earlier, but was found to be much more robust
in the experiment than previously suspected. The ear-
lier adiabatic model[11] could not explain this robustness
and a new model based on the geometry of unstable man-
ifolds was proposed and tested. It was able to explain the
current data and by extension predicts that fully chaotic
resonator shapes such as the stadium would also exhibit
highly directional emission.

Acknowledgment

We would like to thank Martina Hentschel for her ini-
tial contribution to the ray-tracing program. We also
would like to thank Grace Chern for numerous fruit-
ful discussions. NBR and RKC would like to acknowl-
edge the partial support to Yale University from AFOSR
(F33615-02-2-6066) and the DARPA SUVOS program
under SPAWAR Systems Center (Contract No, N66001-
02-8017). ADS would like to acknowledge support from
NSF grant DMR-0084501.

FIG. 15: Ray emission amplitude (color scale) overlaid on
the surface of section for the stadium with ε = 0.12 (a) and
ε = 0.18 (b). Solid blue curve is the unstable manifold of the
periodic rectangle orbit. The green curve is the line of con-
◦
stant 55
(b) emission direction into the far-ﬁeld.
The thick black lines mark the end of the circle segments of
the boundary and coincide with discontinuities in the mani-
folds.

◦
(a) and 48

VIII. DIRECTIONAL EMISSION FROM
COMPLETELY CHAOTIC RESONATORS

The existence of highly directional emission for the
highly deformed quadrupole (ε = 0.20) suggests that
the slow diﬀusion in phase space, characteristic of mixed
systems, is not essential to get this eﬀect. Therefore
we decided to study theoretically resonators for which
the corresponding billiard is completely chaotic and for
which there exist no stable periodic orbits at all. The
Bunimovich Stadium (see inset in Fig. 14), mentioned
above, was a natural choice due to its similarity to the
quadrupole. As before we did both ray escape simula-
tions and numerical solutions of the wave equation. In
Fig. 14 we show our predictions. We ﬁnd again highly di-
rectional emission with a peak direction (∼ 55◦) slightly
shifted from the quadrupole; the narrowness of the far-
ﬁeld peak in the stadium is comparable to that of the
far-ﬁeld peak in the quadrupole. We can associate this

[1] E. Y. Amiran, Integrable smooth planar billiards and

evolutes, New York J. Math., 3 (1997), pp. 32–47.

[2] V. I. Arnold, Mathematical methods of classical me-

chanics, Springer, New York, USA, 1989.

[3] M. V. Berry, Regularity and chaos in classical mechan-
ics, illustrated by three deformations of a circular billiard,
Eur. J. Phys., 2 (1981), pp. 91–102.

[4] G. D. Birkhoff, On the periodic motion of dynamical

systems, Acta Math., 50 (1927), pp. 359–379.

[5] R. K. Chang and A. K. Campillo, eds., Optical Pro-
cesses in Microcavities, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996.
[6] S. Chang, R. K. Chang, A. D. Stone, and J. U.
N¨ockel, Observation of emission from chaotic lasing
modes in deformed microspheres: displacement by the
stable-orbit modes, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B-Opt. Phys., 17
(2000), pp. 1828–1834.

[7] S. Chang, N. B. Rex, R. K. Chang, G. B. Chong,
and L. J. Guido, Stimulated emission and lasing in
whispering gallery modes of gan microdisk cavities (vol
75, pg 166, 1999), Appl. Phys. Lett., 75 (1999), pp. 3719–
3719.

[8] J. B. Keller, Asymptotic solution of eigenvalue prob-

lems, Ann. Phys., 9 (1960), pp. 24–75.

[9] S. Lacey, H. Wang, D. H. Foster, and J. U.
N¨ockel, Directional tunnel escape from nearly spherical
optical resonators, Phys. Rev. Lett., 91 (2003), p. 033902.
[10] J. U. N¨ockel, Resonances in nonintegrable open sys-

tems, PhD thesis, Yale University, 1997.

[11] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Ray and wave chaos in
asymmetric resonant optical cavities, Nature, 385 (1997),
pp. 45–47.

[12] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R. K. Chang, Q-
spoiling and directionality in deformed ring cavities, Opt.
Lett., 19 (1994), pp. 1693–1695.

14

[13] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, G. Chen, H. L. Gross-
man, and R. K. Chang, Directional emission from
asymmetric resonant cavities, Opt. Lett., 21 (1996),
pp. 1609–1611.

[14] H. Poincar´e, Les M´ethodes Nouvelles de la M´echanique

C´eleste, Gauthier-Villars, Paris, France, 1892.

[15] H. Poritsky, The billiard ball problem on a table with
convex boundary - an illustrative dynamical problem, An-
nals of Mathematics, 51 (1950), pp. 446 – 470.

[16] N. B. Rex, Regular and chaotic orbit Gallium Nitride
microcavity lasers, PhD thesis, Yale University, 2001.
[17] N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, H. G. L. Schwefel, R. K.
Chang, and A. D. Stone, Fresnel ﬁltering in lasing
emission from scarred modes of wave-chaotic optical res-
onators, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88 (2002), p. art. no. 094102,
physics/0105089.

[18] A. E. Siegman, Lasers, University Science Books, Mill

Valley, California, 1986.

[19] S. Smale, Diﬀerentiable dynamical systems, Bull. Amer.

Math. Soc., 73 (1967), pp. 747–817.

[20] H. E. Tureci, H. G. L. Schwefel, P. Jacrod, and
A. D. Stone, Modes of wave-chaotic dielectric res-
onators, unpublished, (2003)

[21] Y. Yamamoto and R. E. Slusher, Optical processes in

microcavities, Phys. Today, 46 (1993), pp. 66–73.

