Preprint of:
T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop and N. R. Heckenberg
“Calculation and optical measurement of laser trapping forces on non-spherical particles”
Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer 70, 627–637 (2001)

3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Calculation and optical measurement of laser
trapping forces on non-spherical particles

T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N. R. Heckenberg

Centre for Laser Science, Department of Physics,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia
timo@physics.uq.edu.au

Abstract

Optical trapping, where microscopic particles are trapped and manipulated by light is a powerful
and widespread technique, with the single-beam gradient trap (also known as optical tweezers) in
use for a large number of biological and other applications.

The forces and torques acting on a trapped particle result from the transfer of momentum and

angular momentum from the trapping beam to the particle.

Despite the apparent simplicity of a laser trap, with a single particle in a single beam, exact calcu-
lation of the optical forces and torques acting on particles is difﬁcult. Calculations can be performed
using approximate methods, but are only applicable within their ranges of validity, such as for par-
ticles much larger than, or much smaller than, the trapping wavelength, and for spherical isotropic
particles.

This leaves unfortunate gaps, since wavelength-scale particles are of great practical interest be-
cause they are readily and strongly trapped and are used to probe interesting microscopic and macro-
scopic phenomena, and non-spherical or anisotropic particles, biological, crystalline, or other, due to
their frequent occurance in nature, and the possibility of rotating such objects or controlling or sensing
their orientation.

The systematic application of electromagnetic scattering theory can provide a general theory of
laser trapping, and render results missing from existing theory. We present here calculations of force
and torque on a trapped particle obtained from this theory and discuss the possible applications,
including the optical measurement of the force and torque.

Keywords: light scattering; optical forces; optical tweezers; laser micromanipulation
PACS: 42.25Fx, 42.50Vk, 87.80Cc, 87.80Fe

1

Introduction

Optical trapping, which is the trapping and manipulation of microscopic particles by a focussed laser
beam or beams, is a widely used and powerful tool. The most common optical trap, the single-beam
gradient trap, commonly called optical tweezers, consists of a laser beam strongly focussed by a lens,
typically a high-numerical aperture microscope objective, with the same microscope being used to view
the trapped particles (see ﬁg. 1) [1]. The trapped particle is usually in a liquid medium, on a microscope
slide. Commonly used laser sources employed for trapping range from He-Ne lasers, through Ar ion
and semiconductor lasers to TiS and NdYAG lasers. Varying laser powers are used in a broad range of
applications of optical tweezers - from just a few milliwatts to hundreds of mW. For most of the lasers

1

used, when the beam is passed through the objective lens, the focal spot of the trapping beam is of the
order of a micron. The trapped objects can vary in size from hundreds of nanometres to hundreds of
microns.

microscope body

laser beam

high NA objective

trapped particle attracted

to beam focus
microscope slide
to hold specimen

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of a typical optical tweezers setup

Although simple trapping and manipulation are sufﬁcient for many applications, the use of optical
trapping for quantitative research into physical, chemical, and biological processes, typically using a
laser-trapped particle as a probe, requires accurate calculation of the optical forces and torques acting
within the trap. The approximate methods commonly used for such calculations may prove inadequate
for many applications [2]. An accurate quantitative theory of optical trapping not only allows such
calculations to be performed, but also greatly extends the usefulness of techniques such as optical force
and torque measurement and optical particle characterisation.

The concept of optical trapping is based on a gradient force causing small particles to be attracted
to regions of high intensity in a tightly focussed laser beam [3]. Other optical forces, due to absorption,
reﬂection, and scattering are termed scattering forces. Both the gradient and scattering forces result from
the transfer of momentum from the trapping beam to the particle. Optical torques can also be produced
by the transfer of angular momentum from the beam, which can result from birefringence, or particle
shape, or absorption of a beam carrying non-zero angular momentum [4–7].

Although the optical forces and torques within a trap result in a straightforward manner from the
change in momentum and angular momentum due to scattering processes, exact calculation is difﬁcult,
and a number of approximations are usually made. Approximate calculations use geometric optics for
large particles (radius a > 5λ), or assume that a small particle (a < λ/2) acts as a Rayleigh scatterer or a
point-like polarisable particle. This leaves a large range of particle sizes without adequate results; an un-
fortunate gap since particles of size comparable to the trapping wavelength are of great practical interest
because they can be readily and strongly trapped, and can be used to probe interesting microscopic and
mesoscopic phenomena. Reecnt theoretical efforts have individually eliminated some of the deﬁciencies
due to the various approximations used, but there still exists no general correct theory [8–11].

The lack of suitable theory is even more acute when non-spherical or anisoropic particles are con-
sidered. Non-spherical paricles are of particular interest due to their suitability for use as microscopic
probes, and their frequent occurence in nature, for example, biological structures and crystals are usu-
ally non-spherical, and are often anisotropic. The possibility of rotating or controlling the orientation
of such particles greatly extends the range of manipulation possible within an optical trap, introducing
new applications, such as, for example, the investigation of microscopic rotational dynamics [12].

These theoretical deﬁciencies can be overcome by considering the scattering processes responsible

2

for optical trapping. There exists a well-developed body of work on electromagentic scattering which
can be applied to laser trapping in order to determine the scattered ﬁelds, from which, in turn, the optical
forces and torques can be found.

There are some examples in the literature of attempts to develop a general theory of optical trapping.
These are typically restricted to a limited range of particle types and sizes. The systematic application of
scattering theory can eliminate these limitation, giving a general theory correct for all particles compo-
sitions, including transparent, conductive, absorbing, etc., all particle sizes and shapes, and for arbitrary
trapping ﬁelds.

2 Light scattering in an optical trap

An optical trap in most ways presents a simple electromagnetic scattering problem, with usually only
a single particle in a single orientation in the trap at any one time. The major problems are the rep-
resentation of the beam, and the possibility that the particle is such that calculations will be difﬁcult
even for a single particle. A number of the available techniques require that the trapping beam (i.e.
the incident ﬁeld) be represented as a plane wave spectrum or in terms of vector spherical wavefunc-
tions (VSWFs). The trapping beam is usually a strongly focussed (i.e. non-paraxial) Gaussian beam.
An immediate problem is that the standard representations of Gaussian beams do not actually satisfy
the Maxwell equations, leading to some difﬁculty in ﬁnding a plane wave or VSWF spectrum, though
satisfactory methods exist [13–15]. Additionally, the trapping beam cannot actually be Gaussian, but
will have been truncated at some point in the optical system. Non-Gaussian beams are also used for
trapping, for example, Laguerre-Gaussian “donut” beams [16].

We can note that while the existence of a wide variety of techniques for the calculation of scattering is
indicative of the lack of a universally superior method, each technique has its own particular advantages
and disadvantages, and we can ﬁnd a usable or even ideal method for any particular case. A brief survey
of commonly used methods follows, focussing on application to trapping problems. Computer codes
implementing many of these methods are available [17, 18].

In general, the solution of an electromagnetic scattering problem requires the solution of the Maxwell
equations. Some geometries yield relatively simple solutions, more general cases require direct numer-
ical solution of the Maxwell equations. The best known analytical method is Mie theory, restricted to
scattering by a homogeneous isotropic sphere illuminated by a plane wave. Extensions of Mie theory,
including the use of spheroidal expansions instead of spherical coordinates allow a broader, but still
very limited, range of applicability. In general, numerical methods must still be used to obtain the ﬁnal
solutions in these cases [19].

Closely related to Mie theory is a family of numerical techniques where the incident and scattered
ﬁelds are expressed in terms of VSWFs, and the expansion coefﬁcients of the scattered ﬁeld are found
by the boundary conditions at the surface of the scatterer. These methods include the point matching
method [20] and the T-matrix method [21,22]. The T-matrix method is widely used, computationally efﬁ-
cient for axisymmetric particles, and a number of computer codes implementing this technique are freely
available [17, 18, 23]. The T-matrix method is of particular interest, since, for a given scatterer and illu-
minating wavelength, the T-matrix only needs to be computed once, and can then be used for repeated
calculations. A surface integral over the particle must be computed, but in the case of a rotationally
symmetric particle, this integral reduces to one dimension [24].

These surface-based techniques are, in their simple forms, restricted to homogeneous particles, though
extensions to layered particles exist [25]. Other surface methods include the generalised multipole tech-
nique [27] and the method of moments [19, 20, 28].

If the scattering particle is such that techniques such as those above cannot be used, there are a
number of general techniques, in principle usable for any scattering problem. In general, these methods
are computationally intensive [19, 20].

3

Since the Maxwell equations are a set of differential equations, ﬁnite difference or ﬁnite element
methods can be used. The ﬁnite difference time domain method (FDTD) is widely used in computational
electromagnetics, and can be applied to scattering problems [26]. A discrete grid of points in space is
set up, and the ﬁelds at successive time steps are calculated. Since the discretisation in space must be
much smaller than the wavelength (≈ λ/20), and a correspondingly small time step must be used, only
a relatively small volume can be used for the calculation, so the boundary conditions at the edge of the
computational volume must be carefully chosen, and if the far-ﬁeld is desired, it must be found from
the near-ﬁeld via a suitable transformation. Finite element methods (FEM) can also be used, again using
spatial discretisation to obtain a numerical solution to the system of differential equations [29, 30]. Both
of these methods a conceptually simple, and can represent a particle of any shape or composition, but
are computationally intensive and require special care with the boundary conditions.

An alternative method is the disrete dipole approximation (DDA) where the particle itself is divided
into small volumes, each of which can be treated as a simple dipole with a polarisability depending on
the composition of the particle. An initial guess of the ﬁnal ﬁeld is iteratively improved until convergence
is obtained [31, 32]. Computer codes implementing DDA are publicly available [17, 18, 33].

We can note that the characterisation of a laser trap will require repeated calculations with the same
particle in different positions and orientations within the trap. Thus, the T-matrix method is attractive,
since the T-matrix need only be found once. The T-matrix method requires that the incident beam be rep-
resented in terms of VSWFs; this can be done directly, or via an intermediate plane wave expansion. The
need for repeated calculations makes the general methods (such as FDTD, FEM and DDA) less attractive
since the entire calculation must be repeated if the incident beam is changed. In these cases, the total cal-
culation required can be minimised by representing the trapping beam by a plane wave spectrum, and
calculating the scattering for the different angles of plane wave illumination. This represents no greater
computational effort than calculating the scattering for all orientations of the particle at a single location
within the trap, and gives results that can be used to ﬁnd the sccattering at all points and all orientations.

3 Calculation of forces

Once the scattering has been calculated, the resulting force and torque can be found from the ﬁeld, by
integrating around the particle. The momentum of an electromagnetic ﬁeld is given by [34]

and the angular momentum by

Pﬁeld = ǫ0 ZV

E × Bd3x

Lﬁeld = ǫ0 ZV

x × (E × B)d3x

If we have the far-ﬁeld scattered ﬁeld, which is an outgoing radiation ﬁeld, we can choose a spherical
surface for the integration, and the momentum and angular momentum ﬂuxes are normal to the surface.
Then, the ﬁeld can be represented by the electric ﬁeld alone, with two orthogonal components, with
complex amplitudes Eθ and Eφ, Eθ = Eθ ˆθ and Eφ = Eφ ˆφ, tangential to the surface of integration. The
rate of transfer of linear and angular momentum per unit area can be found using [12]

and

Pﬂux =

(EθE⋆

θ + EφE⋆

φ) ˆn

Lﬂux =

(EθE⋆
φ

− E⋆

θEφ) ˆn

ǫ0
2

icǫ0
2ω

4

where ˆn is the unit vector normal to the surface of integration. Equation (3) can be readily recognised

as the familiar result of the Poynting vector divided by c.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

From the conservation of momentum and angular momentum, the integrated momentum and angu-

lar momentum ﬂuxes give the force and torque acting on the trapped particle.

If the discrete dipole approximation (DDA) is used to calculate the scattering, the particle is repre-
sented by a number of dipoles, within a known ﬁeld (after the scattering calculations have been per-
formed). Therefore, the force and torque on each dipole can be found, giving the force and torque on the
entire particle, and incidentally, the stresses within the particle. This allows the force and torque to be
found without needing to integrate around the particle [35].

2. ﬁnd VSWF representation of beam at the desired position within the trap, for the desired

The basic methods can be summarised as:

• If the T-matrix method can be used:

1. calculate T-matrix

orientation

3. ﬁnd scattered ﬁeld (in terms of VSWFs)

4. integrate around particle

• If a general method must be used

4. integrate around particle

• If DDA is used

1. ﬁnd scattering at desired point

1. calculate plane wave scattering by the particle for all angles of incidence

2. ﬁnd plane wave spectrum of trapping beam at the desired position

3. ﬁnd the scattering for each spectral component, and combine to ﬁnd the total scattered ﬁeld

2. ﬁnd forces and torques on all dipoles, and combine to ﬁnd the total force

Some sample force calculations are presented in ﬁgure 2. The trapped particle is a glass prolate
spheroid (n = 1.5 + 0.02i), with a = b = 0.5µm and c = 1.0µm, trapped in water (n = 1.33) by a
Gaussian beam of free space wavelength 1064nm, focussed to a spot width of 1µm. The T-matrix code
developed by Mishchenko [23] was used to ﬁnd the T-matrix an amplitude matrix. The trapping beam
was decomposed into a plane wave spectrum consisting of 97 components. The size parameter of the
particle is 4.95. The wavelength and beam proﬁle and particle size, shape and composition were chosen
to best model the most typical situation occurring in the experimental realisation of the technique.

Figure 2 shows the forces exerted by the trapping beam, which is propagating from the left to the
right, focussed to a small spot in the centre. The magnitude of the force is proportional to the length of
the arrows, and the direction is the same as the direction of the arrows. The contours in the background
are equal-intensity contours for the trapping beam. The trapping beam intensity falls of with increasing
radial distance due to the narrow width of the beam. The intensity falls off axially due to the spreading
of the beam. The strong radial trapping forces are clearly visible, and it can be seen that the forces are
approximately normal to the intensity contours. Since the radial intensity gradient is so large, the radial
forces are the largest optical forces acting on the particle. In the regions of low intensity (at the top and
bottom of the middle of the graph), the forces are very small.

4 Optical measurement of forces and torques

The forces and torques acting on the trapped particle result from the scattering within the trap, and can
be calculated if the scattered ﬁelds are known. So far, we have considered techniques for the calculation

5

2

1.5

0.5

1

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

)

m
µ
(
 
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
 
l
a
d
a
R

i

−2

−3

−2

0

−1
Axial position (

1
µ m)

2

3

Figure 2: Optical force on spheroid

of the the scattered ﬁeld. In many cases, this will not be possible, for example, if our particle is a bio-
logical structure within a living cell, with unknown optical properties, or a particle with known optical
properties at an unknown position within the trap.

If the scattered radiation ﬁeld can be experimentally measured, equations (3) and (4) can be used to
ﬁnd the force and torque by integrating over a surface around the particle. In principle, the required
measurement of the scattered ﬁeld is possible, but the application of this will be limited by a number of
practical considerations, namely:

1. The normal method for measuring scattered light from trapped particles is to measure either the
back-scattered light [36], or the forward scattered light [37, 38]. Back-scattering measurements
usually record the total power received by the detector and do not give the directional resolution
required for measuring the scattered ﬁeld (which, in any case, would be virtually impossible to
do with any accuracy after the return passage of the back-scattered light through the microscope
optics). Forward scattering measurements usually use low resolution detectors, such as quadrant
detectors, and do not make use of all the possible measurable information. It is generally impos-
sible to collect all of the scattered light due to the spatial limitations imposed by a typical optical
tweezers setup. To collect more than the forward scattered light emergent from the bottom of the
trap will be very difﬁcult. The placement of the detector(s) is limited by the design of the laser trap.
Since the trapping cell, contained a microscope slide, will restrict collection of side-scattered light,
and the focussing lens (the objective) will restrict the collection of back-scattered light, the detector
must be placed below the trapping cell (see ﬁg. 3). Since the detector must be capable of spatial
resolution, and must be large enough to measure the forward-scattered light that passes through
the trapping cell, a CCD array is ideal.

A CCD array, by itself, is not sufﬁcient to measure the ﬁeld; only the intensity will be measured,
and it will still be necessary to measure the state of polarisation. This can be done by incorporating
a polariser acting as an analyser (see ﬁg. 4).

2. The bottom of the trap will reﬂect and refract the scattered light. Since the scattered light is initially

6

microscope objective

coverslip

trapping cell

microscope slide

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

CCD array

Figure 3: Optical trap with a CCD array to measure scattered light

trapped particle

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

microscope slide

rotatable polariser

detector − CCD array

Figure 4: Using a polariser and CCD array to measure the polarisation state of light scattered by a
trapped particle

◦

in a higher refractive index medium (the ﬂuid within the trapping cell and the glass microscope
slide), some of this light will be totally internally reﬂected, and will be unmeasurable (see ﬁg. 5).
For typical values of refractive index, the maximum scattering angle for which the light can be
measured is approximately 45
. Reﬂection can also occur at interfaces internal to the trapping cell,
although these will be smaller since the refractive index differences will be relatively small. The
reﬂections that do occur will depend on the polarisation of the light. If too much light is scattered
at large angles (and therefore unmeasurable), it will not be possible to accurately determine the
optical force. Being restricted to measuring forward-scattered light will also make it difﬁcult to
measure torques other than that acting about the beam axis. The partial reﬂection of light that exits
the trapping cell and is measured can, and in the interests of accuracy, should be compensated for.

polarisation dependent

reflection

total internal reflection

Figure 5: Total internal limits the maximum angle at which light can be scattered and still exit the trap-
ping cell

trapped particle

7

3. The resolution and size of the detector will limit the measurements.

The restriction of the measurable scattering to the forward-scattered light limits the applicability of
the technique. It remains useful, however, in the two cases of most interest, one case being organisms
and biological structures, the second probe particles.

Organisms and biological structures in a trap will typically have unknown optical properties, and
often have complex shapes. Thus, it will be necessary to measure the scattering since calculation will be
impossible. Since such particles are optically soft (with a relative refractive index m ≈ 1), very little light
will be scattered at large angles, and the majority of the scattered light can be measured, and the force
and torque acting on the particle determined with reasonable accuracy.

If the particle in the trap is not optically soft, with a large refractive index difference compared with
the surrounding medium, it will not be possible to collect enough of the scattered light to accurately
determine the force and torque in all cases. If, however, the particle in question is a probe particle of
known size, shape, and optical properties, but at an unknown position within the trap, the portion of
the scattered light that is measured can be used to determine what the total scattering pattern must
be. Thus, the position of the probe particle within the trap, and the optical force and torque acting on
it, can be determined. In this way, the external non-optical forces acting on the probe particle can be
determined [39].

A special case of the use of a trapped particle as a probe is the rotating probe particle, which can
be used to measure the viscosity of a ﬂuid, colloid, or suspension on a microscopic scale. The rotating
particle will typically be birefringent, and will remain in the centre of the trap. The change in polarisation
of the light on scattering will cause the particle to rotate. Both the optical torque acting on the particle
and its rotation speed can be measured [12].

5 Conclusion

Approaching laser trapping as a scattering problem allows the calculation of forces and torques using
electromagnetic scattering theory. Such calculations can be performed for all types of particles: transpar-
ent, abosorbing, conductive, reﬂective, anisotropic, complex shapes, etc. For particles for which efﬁcient
computational methods (such as the T-matrix method) can be used, calculations are fast and relatively
simple, and can be performed on readily available PCs.

This means that the gap in previous calculations, where no adequate results were available for parti-

cles comparable in size to the trapping wavelength, can be closed.

Optical measurement of forces and torques acting on particles within the trap can also be performed,
by measuring the scattered light. Apart from being free of the usual calibration difﬁculties for force
measurement in optical traps, it can be used where traditional force measurements are impossible, such
as measurement of the forces acting on structures within living cells.

Measurement of the scattered light from a known probe particle, coupled with calculation of the
scattering in different positions of the trap, allows measurement of the position of, and force acting on,
the probe particle. Thus, external non-optical forces can be determined. A special case of this, where the
probe is a rotating trapped particle, is particularly simple, and the rotation speed and optical torque can
be simultaneously measured.

References

[1] K. Svoboda and S. M. Block, Biological applications of optical forces, Annual Review of Biophysical

and Biomolecular Structure 23 (1994) 247–285.

[2] D. G. Grier, Optical tweezers in colloid and interface science, Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface

Science 2 (1997) 264–270.

8

[3] A. Ashkin, The pressure of laser light, Scientiﬁc American 226 (1972) 63–71.

[4] M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Alignment or spin-

ning of laser-trapped microscopic waveplates, Nature 394 (1998) 348–350.

[5] Z.-P. Luo, Y.-L. Sun and K.-N. An, An optical spin micromotor, Applied Physics Letters 76 (2000)

1779–1781.

[6] H. He, M. E. J. Friese, N. R. Heckenberg and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Direct observation of transfer
of angular momentum to absorptive particles from a laser beam with a phase singularity, Physical
Review Letters 75 (1995) 826–829.

[7] M. E. J. Friese, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, J. Enger and N. R. Heckenberg, Optical angular momentum

transfer to trapped absorbing particles, Physical Review A 54 (1996) 1593–1596.

[8] K. F. Ren, G. Gr´ehan and G. Gouesbet, Prediction of reverse radiation pressure by generalized

Lorenz-Mie theory, Applied Optics 35 (1996) 2702–2710.

[9] T. Wohland, A. Rosin and E. H. K. Stelzer, Theoretical determination of the inﬂuence of polarization

on forces exerted by optical tweezers, Optik 102 (1996) 181–190.

[10] Ø. Farsund and B. U. Felderhof, Force, torque, and absorbed energy for a body of arbitrary shape

and constitution in an electromagnetic radiation ﬁeld, Physica A 227 (1996) 108–130.

[11] P. A. Maia Neto and H. M. Nussenzveig, Theory of optical tweezers, Europhysics Letters 50 (2000)

702–708.

[12] T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Optical measurement of micro-

scopic torques, Journal of Modern Optics 48 (2001) 405–41.

[13] J. P. Barton and R. D. Alexander, Fifth-order corrected electromagnetic ﬁeld components for a fun-

damental Gaussian beam, Journal of Applied Physics 66 (1989) 2800–2802.

[14] A. Doicu and T. Wriedt, Plane wave spectrum of electromagnetic beams, Optics Communications 136

[15] G. Gouesbet, Scattering of shaped light beams and applications (Research Signpost, Trivandrum, India,

(1997) 114–124.

1999).

[16] N. R. Heckenberg, M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Mechanical effects

of optical vortices, in M. Vasnetsov (ed) Optical Vortices (Institute of Physics, Kiev, 1999)

[17] T. Wriedt, Electromagnetic scattering programs, http://www.t-matrix.de/

[18] P. J. Flatau, SCATTERLIB, http://atol.ucsd.edu/˜pﬂatau/scatlib/scatterlib.htm

[19] M. I. Mishchenko, L. D. Travis and J. W. Hovenier (eds.), Light scattering by nonspherical particles

(Academic Press, San Diego, 1999).

[20] T. Wriedt, A review of elastic light scattering theories, Particle and Particle Systems Characterization

15 (1998) 67–74.

[21] M. I. Mishchenko and L. D. Travis, Capabilities and limitations of a current FORTRAN implemen-
tation of the T-matrix method for randomly oriented rotationally symmetric scatterers, Journal of
Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer 60 (1998) 309–324.

9

[22] M. I. Mishchenko, L. D. Travis and A. Macke, T-matrix method and its applications, in M. I.
Mishchenko, L. D. Travis and J. W. Hovenier (eds.), Light scattering by nonspherical particles (Aca-
demic Press, San Diego, 1999).

[23] M. I. Mishchenko, L. D. Travis and D. W. Mackowski, T-matrix codes for computing electromagnetic

scattering by nonspherical and aggregated particles, http://www.giss.nasa.gov/˜crmim/

[24] L. Tsang, J. A. Kong and R. T. Shin, Theory of microwave remote sensing (John Wiley, New York, 1985).

[25] B. Peterson and S. Str ¨om, T-matrix formulation of electromagnetic scattering from multilayered

scatterers, Physical Review D 10 (1974) 2670–2684.

[26] A. Taﬂove, Computational electrodynamics - the ﬁnite difference time-domain method (Artech House,

[27] C. Hafner, The generalized multipole technique for computational electromagnetics (Artech House, Boston,

Boston, 1995).

1990).

[28] R. Bancroft, Understanding electromagnetic scattering using the moment method: a practical approach

(Artech House, Boston, 1996).

[29] J. L. Volakis, A. Chatterjee and L. C. Kempel, Finite element method for electromagnetics: antennas,

microwave circuits, and scattering applications (Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 1998).

[30] D. A. White, Numerical modeling of optical gradient traps using the vector ﬁnite element method,

Journal of Computational Physics 159 (2000) 13–37.

[31] B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, Discrete-dipole approximation for scattering calculations, Journal of the

Optical Society America A 11 (1994) 1491–1499.

[32] B. T. Draine, The discrete dipole approximation for light scattering by irregular targets, in M. I.
Mishchenko, L. D. Travis and J. W. Hovenier (eds.), Light scattering by nonspherical particles (Aca-
demic Press, San Diego, 1999).

[33] B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, DDSCAT.5a10, ftp://astro.princeton.edu/draine/scat/ddscat

[34] J. D. Jackson, Classical elctrodynamics (John Wiley, New York, 1999).

[35] A. G. Hoekstra, M. O. Frijlink and P. M. A. Sloot, Calculation of the radiation forces on each dipole
in the discrete dipole approximation, in G. Videen, Q. Fu and P. Chylek (eds.), Light Scattering by
Nonspherical Particles: Halifax Contributions (Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, USA, 2000).

[36] M. E. J. Friese, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, N. R. Heckenberg and E. W. Dearden, Determination of
the force constant of a single-beam gradient optical trap by measurement of backscatteredd light,
Applied Optics 35 (1996) 7112–7117.

[37] L. P. Ghislain andd W. W. Webb, Scanning-force microscope based on an optical trap, Optics Letters

18 (1993) 1678–1680.

[38] A. Pralle, M. Prummer, E.-L. Florin, E. H. K. Stelzer and J. K. H. H ¨orber, 3-D high resolution particle
tracking for optical tweezers by forward light scattering, Microscopy Research and Technique 44 (1999)
378–386.

[39] T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, N. R. Heckenberg and A. I. Bishop, Theory of optical force
and position measurement for an optically trapped probe particle, presented at AIP2000/AOS2000,
Adelaide, Australia (2000)

10

