3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mode-Field Radius of Photonic Crystal Fibers Expressed by the V –parameter

Martin Dybendal Nielsen
Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark
COM, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark

Niels Asger Mortensen and Jacob Riis Folkenberg
Crystal Fibre A/S, Blokken 84, DK-3460 Birkerød, Denmark

Anders Bjarklev
COM, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark

We numerically calculate the equivalent mode-ﬁeld radius of the fundamental mode in a photonic
crystal ﬁber (PCF) and show that this is a function of the V-parameter only and not the relative
hole size. This dependency is similar to what is found for graded-index standard ﬁbers and we
furthermore show that the relation for the PCF can be excellently approximated with the same
general mathematical expression. This is to our knowledge the ﬁrst semi-analytical description of
the mode-ﬁeld radius of a PCF.

Theoretical descriptions of Photonic Crystal Fibers
(PCFs) have traditionally been based on numerical meth-
ods such as the plane-wave expansion method,[1, 2] meth-
ods employing localized functions,[3, 4] or the multipole
method.[5, 6] A numerical approach is generally required
due to the complex dielectric cross section of the PCF
which makes analytical approaches very diﬃcult and re-
sults in the fact that no close-form analytical descrip-
tions of either propagation constants or mode ﬁelds are
available. In this Letter we investigate the relation be-
tween the equivalent mode-ﬁeld radius of the fundamen-
tal mode and a recently proposed formulation of the V –
parameter for a PCF.[7] We show that the mode-ﬁeld
radius is a function of the V –parameter only and provide
an empirical expression describing this relation having
the same mathematical form as known from the descrip-
tion of graded-index standard ﬁbers.[8]

The PCF analyzed in this work is an all-silica ﬁber
having a triangular arrangement of circular voids with di-
ameter d running along the full length of the ﬁber. The
voids are placed symmetrically around a central defect
which acts as the ﬁber core consisting of a solid silica re-
gion i.e. an omitted air hole. The air-hole matrix, which
has a lattice constant, Λ, functions as a cladding region
and the ﬁber structure is invariant in the longitudinal di-
rection. Such a ﬁber was ﬁrst proposed in[9] and it was
shown that it posses unique properties such as endlessly
single-mode operation.[10] The endlessly single-mode op-
eration is a consequence of the fact that the number of
guided modes is ﬁnite regardless of wavelength and that
the upper limit for this number decreases with the air-
ﬁlling fraction of the structure i.e. with the value of d/Λ.
Suﬃciently small air holes will cause the number of al-
lowed modes to equal two, namely the two degenerate
polarization states of the fundamental mode.[10]

In the case of graded-index standard ﬁbers, of which
the step-index ﬁber (SIF) can be considered a special
case, the V –parameter plays a central role in the descrip-
tion of the number of guided modes, the cut-oﬀ criterion

[11] as well as the mode-ﬁeld radius.[8] In attempt to ob-
tain an expression for a V -parameter adequate for PCFs,
approximations based on an equivalent SIF has gener-
ally been employed [10,12]. Although this approximation
contains the overall correct physics it fails to describe
the cut-oﬀ properties and has diﬃculty when it comes to
determining an appropriate equivalent core radius. Re-
cently, we proposed a deﬁnition of the V –parameter for
a PCF,[7] VPCF, rejecting the SIF approximation [See
Ref. 7 for a more detailed discussion on Eq. (1)]:

VPCF(λ) =

co(λ) − n2
n2

cl(λ)

(1)

2π
λ

Λ

q

In Eq. (1), λ is the free space wavelength and nco(λ)
and ncl(λ) are the eﬀective indices of the fundamen-
tal mode and the ﬁrst eigenmode in the perfect inﬁnite
cladding structure, respectively. The latter is often de-
noted the fundamental space-ﬁlling mode and can be in-
terpreted as the refractive index of the cladding material
in the absence of the core.[10] Using this deﬁnition it can
be showen that the condition for the higher-order mode
cut-oﬀ can be formulated as VPCF = π.[7] Both eﬀective
indices in Eq. (1) are strongly wavelength dependent and
can not be approximated by constants as in the case of
standard ﬁbers. It is due to the strong dispersion of the
eﬀective indices that the PCF can be attributed many
of its unique properties. In Fig. 1, VPCF calculated us-
ing the plane-wave expansion method[13] is plotted as
function of the normalized frequency, Λ/λ, for values of
d/Λ ranging from 0.30 to 0.70 in steps of 0.05. The hor-
izontal dashed line in the plot indicates VPCF = π and
thereby the single-mode boundary. Since the variation
of refractive index of silica, nsilica, over the transparent
wavelength region is in the order of a few %, the eﬀect of
material dispersion will only result in a small shift in the
eﬀective indices nco(λ) and ncl(λ). Furthermore, such a
perturbation will shift both further reducing the eﬀect on
VPCF. In the calculations we therefore used a ﬁxed value

2

In order to investigate a similar relation for the PCF,
we ﬁrst introduce an equivalent mode-ﬁeld radius of the
fundamental mode, wPCF, as the mode-ﬁeld radius of
the Gaussian distribution having the same eﬀective area,
Aeﬀ , as the fundamental mode itself, yielding the simple
relation Aeﬀ = πw2. The eﬀective area is calculated as

Aeﬀ =

dr⊥I(r⊥)
i

h Z

dr⊥I 2(r⊥)
i

h Z

2

−1

,

(3)

In Eq. (3), I(r⊥) is the transverse intensity distribu-
tion of the mode. Although the intensity distribution of
the fundamental mode in a PCF is not rotational sym-
metric but rather has the 6-fold symmetry of the tri-
angular cladding structure, a Gaussian approximation is
in fact very good and has previously been employed in
the description of various PCF properties.[14, 15, 16] By
numerical calculation of Aeﬀ as function of the normal-
ized wavelength, λ/Λ, the normalized mode-ﬁeld radius,
wPCF/Λ can be plotted as function of VPCF as shown
in Fig. 2. The normalization with Λ is chosen since Λ
is the natural length scale of the problem in the same
sense as the core radius, a, is for the graded-index ﬁber.
The plot in Fig. 2 represents data for d/Λ = 0.30 and
d/Λ = 0.70 indicated by open squares and circles, respec-
tively. The data points for these two calculations overlap
in the entire range where the value of VPCF overlap and
data for calculations having d/Λ = 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, 0.50,
0.55, 0.60, and 0.65 (not shown) fall on the same curve
indicating that wPCF/Λ is in fact a function of the VPCF
only. Also included in Fig. 2 is the corresponding curve
for the SIF (dashed line) showing wSIF/a as function of
VSIF calculated from Eq. (2).

The functional dependency of wPCF/Λ on VPCF is seen
to follow the same overall behavior as wSIF/a as function
of VSIF. For increasing values of VPCF, wPCF/Λ must
saturate at a constant value corresponding to the mini-
mum obtainable mode size whereas it grows dramatically
for suﬃciently small values of VPCF indicating that the
mode is weakly conﬁned to the core and begins to pene-
trate into the cladding region. This is in good agreement
with the fact that small values of VPCF are realized ei-
ther for small values of d/Λ or if the optical wavelength
is similar to the structural dimensions, λ ∼ Λ.

Due to the similar functional dependency of the mode-
ﬁeld radii on the respective V –parameters it is reasonable
to use the same ﬁtting function for the PCF as used for
graded-index standard ﬁbers. However, if assuming the
simplest case of a SIF it is not possible to obtain a good ﬁt
and the more general expression, for which g can assume
any positive value, was therefore employed. This results
in the parameters A = 0.7078, B = 0.2997, and C =
0.0037, respectively in the case for g = 8. The ﬁt based
on these parameters are plotted in Fig. 2 (solid line)
and is seen to be very good for small as well as for large
values of VPCF. The maximal deviation between values
predicted by the ﬁt and the data points is determined to
be less than 1%.

FIG. 1: Calculated VPCF (from Eq. 1) as function of the
normalized frequency, Λ/λ, for d/Λ equal to 0.30, 0.35, 0.40,
0.45, 0.50, 0.55, 0.60, 0.65, and 0.70 from bottom and up.
The dash line indicates the single-mode boundary, VPCF = π.

of nsilica = 1.444, thereby preserving the scale invariance
of Maxwell’s equations.

VPCF approaches a constant value, dependent on d/Λ
for increasing Λ/λ[10] and since the number of modes
generally increases with the V –parameter, the asymp-
totic behavior of VPCF is consistent with the end-
lessly single-mode property. In the framework of stan-
dard ﬁbers, the weak wavelength dependency of the V –
parameter will lead to a mode-ﬁeld radius which is also
only weakly dependent on the wavelength.

For a graded-index standard ﬁber, the index proﬁle
can be described by a power law in which case the shape
of the index proﬁle is governed by an exponent, g. For
g = 1 the index proﬁle is triangular, for g = 2 the pro-
ﬁle is parabolic, and in the limit of large values of g the
proﬁle approaches that of a SIF. For this type of ﬁber,
the mode ﬁeld is generally very close to a Gaussian dis-
tribution provided that the ﬁeld does not penetrate too
deeply into the cladding region. The agreement between
the actual mode and a Gaussian distribution has a weak
dependency on g and is a perfect match in the case of
a parabolic index proﬁle. The mode-ﬁeld radius, w, is a
function of the V –parameter and can be ﬁtted using the
expression:[8]

W
a

=

A
V 2/(2+g) +

B
V 3/2 +

C
V 6

(2)

A, B, and C, are ﬁtting parameters which are depen-
dent on the index proﬁle while a denotes the core radius.
In the case of a SIF the ﬁrst term in Eq. (2) is constant
and the values of A, B, and C are 0.65, 1.619, and 2.879,
respectively. The accuracy of the ﬁts provided by Eq.
(2) is better than 2% in the range 1.5 < V < 7 and the
relation is therefore extremely useful when designing and
working with SIFs or graded index ﬁbers in general.

3

can be learned from the curves in Fig. 2 on which the
higher-order mode cut-oﬀ are indicated at VPCF = π and
VSIF = 2.405, respectively. Whereas the cut-oﬀ for the
PCF is located at a point where the curve is relatively ﬂat
the SIF cut oﬀ is located where the curve is much steeper.
Also, VSIF depends on the wavelength as λ−1 further in-
creasing the wavelength dependency of the mode size in
the single-mode region of the SIF. For the PCF, not only
the mode-size dependence on VPCF close to cut oﬀ is week
but also the dependence of VPCF itself on λ provided that
Λ is a few times larger than λ or more (See Fig. 1). This
results in a mode-ﬁeld size which is essentially wavelength
independent for the PCF compared to the SIF.

In conclusion, we have shown that the recently pro-
posed expression for the V –parameter of a PCF uniquely
determines the normalized mode-ﬁeld radius. Further-
more, we have presented a simple analytical expression
describing this relation based on the same general expres-
sion used for graded-index standard ﬁbers and thereby
further closed the gap between standard ﬁbers and PCF
in terms of available tools describing their properties.

M.D. Nielsen acknowledges ﬁnancial support by the
Danish Academy of Technical Sciences. M.D. Nielsen’s
e-mail address is mdn@crystal-ﬁbre.com.

FIG. 2: Normalized mode-ﬁeld radius for the PCF, wPCF/Λ,
as function of VPCF for d/Λ = 0.30, (squares) and d/Λ = 0.70
(circles) along with a numerical ﬁt through these points (full
line). The corresponding expression for the normalized mode-
ﬁeld radius, wSIF/a for the SIF as function of VSIF is also
shown (dashed line). The two arrows indicate the higher-
order mode cut oﬀ of the SIF and PCF at VSIF = 2.405 and
VPCF = π, respectively.

An important diﬀerence between the PCF and the SIF

[3] D. Mogilevtsev, T. A. Birks, and P. St. J. Russel, Opt.

tron. Lett. 13, 139 (1977).

[1] J. Broeng, S. E. Barkou, A. Bjarklev, J. C. Knight, T. A.
Birks, and P. St. J. Russel, Opt. Commun. 156, 240
(1998).

[2] A. Ferrando, E. Silvestre, J. J. Miret, and P. Andr´es,

Opt. Lett. 24, 276 (1999).

Lett. 23, 1662 (1998).

[4] T. M. Monro, D. J. Richardson, N. G. R. Broderick, and
P. J. Bennett, J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 1093 (1999).
[5] T. P. White, B. T. Kuhlmey, R. C. McPhedran, D.
Maystre, G. Renversez, C. M. de Sterke, and L. C. Bot-
ten, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 19, 2322 (2002).

[6] B. T. Kuhlmey, T. P. White, G. Renversez, D. Maystre,
L. C. Botten, C. M. de Sterke, and R. C. McPhedran, J.
Opt. Soc. Am. B 19, 2331 (2002).

[7] N. A. Mortensen, J. R. Folkenberg, M. D. Nielsen, and

K. P. Hansen, Opt. Lett. 28, 1879 (2003).
[8] D. Marcuse, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 68, 103 (1978).

[9] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. St. J. Russel, and D. M.

Atkin, Opt. Lett. 21, 1547 (1996).

[10] T. A. Birks, J. C. Knight, and P. St. J. Russel, Opt. Lett.

22, 961 (1997).

[11] W. A. Gambling, D. N. Payne, and H. Matsumyra, Elec-

[12] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, and P. St. J. Russel, J. Opt.

Soc. Am. A 15, 748 (1998).

[13] S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Opt. Express 8,

[14] N. A. Mortensen and J. R. Folkenberg, Opt. Express 10,

173 (2001).

475 (2002).

[15] N. A. Mortensen, Opt. Express 10, 342 (2002).
[16] N. A. Mortensen, J. R. Folkenberg, P. M. W. Skovgaard,
and J. Broeng, IEEE Photonic. Tech. Lett. 14, 1094
(2002).

