3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
1
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NONDIFFRACTING OPTICAL BEAMS:
physical properties, experiments and applications

Zdenˇek Bouchal
Department of Optics, Palack´y University,
17. listopadu 50, 772 07 Olomouc,
Czech Republic

Abstract

The controversial term ”nondiﬀracting beam” was introduced into optics by Durnin in 1987.
Discussions related to that term revived interest in problems of the light diﬀraction and resulted in
an appearance of the new research direction of the classical optics dealing with the localized transfer
of electromagnetic energy. In the paper, the physical concept of the nondiﬀracting propagation is
presented and the basic properties of the nondiﬀracting beams are reviewed. Attention is also focused
to the experimental realization and to applications of the nondiﬀracting beams.

1

INTRODUCTION

Many phenomena observable in our everyday life indicate that light propagates rectilinearly. Recti-
linear propagation is one of the most apparent properties of light. It serves as an argument that light is
a stream of particles. However, some optical phenomena and experiments indicate that the law of recti-
linear propagation of light does not hold. They can be satisfactorily explained only on the assumption
that light is a wave. Historically, the diﬀraction eﬀects are associated with violation of the rectilinear
propagation of light. By Sommerfeld, diﬀraction is deﬁned as any deviation of light from rectilinear
propagation, not caused by reﬂection or refraction. The strong diﬀraction eﬀects appear if the transverse
dimensions of the beam of light are comparable to the wavelength. The diﬀraction phenomena are best
appreciable for long waves such as sound or water waves. In optics, the diﬀraction eﬀects are less appar-
ent. They are responsible for the beam divergence in the free propagation and for penetration of light into
the region of the geometric shadow. In the modern treatment, diﬀraction eﬀects are not connected with
light transmission through apertures and obstacles only. Diﬀraction is examined as a natural property of
waveﬁeld with the nonhomogeneous transverse intensity distribution. It commonly appears even if the
beam is transversally unbounded. The Gaussian beam is the best known example.

In optics, the nondiﬀracting propagation of the beam-like ﬁelds can be obtained in convenient media
such as waveguide or nonlinear materials. The beams then propagate as waveguide modes and spatial
solitons, respectively. In 1987, the term nondiﬀracting beam appeared also in relation to the propagation
in vacuo [1]. The nondiﬀracting beam was comprehended as the monochromatic optical ﬁeld whose
transverse intensity proﬁle remains unchanged in free-space propagation. In the original Durnin’s paper,
the beams were examined as exact solutions to the homogeneous Helmholtz equation. They were obtained
in the system of the cylindrical coordinates under restriction that their complex amplitude is separable as
the product of the functions R(r), Φ(ϕ) and Z(z) depending on the coordinates r, ϕ and z, respectively.
The transverse amplitude proﬁle of such beams can be described by the Bessel functions so that they
are usually called Bessel beams. Later, the more general types of nondiﬀracting beams were introduced
[2, 3, 4] and the properties by which they become diﬀerent from the common laser beams were examined.
Recently, the method enabling generation with the transverse intensity proﬁle which can be predetermined
and controlled has been proposed and examined [5]. The particular attention was focused on the analysis
of the admissible amplitude proﬁles of the nondiﬀracting beams and on their wavefront properties. The
nondiﬀracting beams originally analysed in the scalar approximation were generalized to the vectorial

1

electromagnetic beams exactly fulﬁlling the Maxwell equations [6, 7, 8, 9]. Propagation invariance of
the intensity proﬁle of the nondiﬀracting beams was explained as a result of the convenient composition
of the angular spectrum.
It composes the plane waves whose propagation vectors are placed on the
conical surface. Mathematically, such angular spectrum can be described by the Dirac delta function
δ(ν − ν0), where ν0 is the single radial spatial frequency representing the basic beam parameter. The
ideal nondiﬀracting beam then arises as an interference ﬁeld produced by the coherent superposition of
the plane waves whose relative phase diﬀerences remain unchanged in the free propagation. By that way,
the diﬀraction eﬀects can be overcome in free propagation of the source-free monochromatic waveﬁelds
or pulses. However, the ideal nondiﬀracting beams possessing the sharp δ-like angular spectrum carry
an inﬁnite energy. That is a reason, why the diﬀraction cannot be overcome in real situations, and
why the nondiﬀracting beams cannot be exactly realized. In experiments, only approximations known
as the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams can be obtained [10, 11]. An idea about properties of the realizable
beams with the ﬁnite energy can be simply obtained if the ideal nondiﬀracting beam is bounded by the
homogeneously transmitting aperture of ﬁnite dimensions or by the Gaussian aperture. The propagation
invariance of the transverse intensity proﬁle of the nondiﬀracting beam impinging on the aperture is
lost and the beam behind the aperture propagates with the diﬀractive divergence. Regardless of that
fact, there are important distinctions between propagation properties of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting and
the conventional, for example Gaussian beams. They are usually demonstrated in numerical simulations.
Recently, the distinct diﬀractive divergences of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting and the conventional beams have
been explained and interpreted by means of the uncertainty relations and demonstrated experimentally
[12].

Except of the fully eliminated diﬀractive divergence of the ideal nondiﬀracting beams and the
reduced diﬀractive spread of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams their further peculiar properties useful
for applications were explored. Attention was focused on the robustness of the beams manifested by their
resistance against amplitude and phase distortions.
It was shown that the ideal nondiﬀracting beam
disturbed by a nontransparent obstacle is able to regenerate its intensity proﬁle to the original form in
the free propagation behind the obstacle [13]. In [14], the eﬀect was described for both the nondiﬀracting
and the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams and veriﬁed by the simple experiment.

The coherent superposition of the nondiﬀracting modes resulting in the self-imaging eﬀect was
examined in [15, 16]. The eﬀect appears if the angular wavenumbers of the nondiﬀracting modes are
conveniently coupled. It represents the spatial analogy with the mode-locking realized in the temporal
domain. Due to the interference of the modes, the transverse intensity proﬁle of the beam reappears
periodically at the planes of the constructive interference and vanishes at the planes of the destructive
interference.

Recently, the self-imaging eﬀect was used for periodical self-reconstruction of the coherent light ﬁeld
with an arbitrary predetermined amplitude proﬁle. Theoretical description of the eﬀect was proposed for
both the monochromatic and the nonstationary waveﬁelds [17, 18, 19] and the experimental veriﬁcation
was realized applying the special Fourier ﬁlter used in the 4-f optical system [20]. The controllable 3D
spatial shaping of the coherent optical ﬁelds has also been proposed and examined. That methods enables
localization of the light energy into the small volume elements with the size comparable to the wavelength
[21].

During last decade an increasing attention has been given to the waveﬁelds possessing the line, spiral
or combined wavefront dislocations.
In optics, such ﬁelds are known as the optical vortices [22, 23].
Some types of nondiﬀracting beams can also belong to the class of optical vortices. The vortex beam
is characterized by the topological charge and its phase singularities and the helical wavefront can be
visualized by the interferometric methods. The wavefront helicity of the vortex beam is associated with
the spiral ﬂow of the electromagnetic energy. That property was successfully applied in experiments
testing the transfer of the angular momentum of the electromagnetic ﬁeld to the microparticles [24].
Recently, the eﬀect of the self-regeneration of the nondiﬀracting vortex beam appearing after interaction
with microparticles has been veriﬁed [25, 26].

The basic concept of the nondiﬀracting propagation has been developed for the fully coherent light.
Recently, attention has been focused also to an interesting task to join the problems of the variable-
coherence optics with the nondiﬀracting propagation of light beams. A general description of the partially
coherent propagation-invariant ﬁelds including the partially coherent nondiﬀracting beams has been
proposed in [27, 28]. Directionality of the partially-coherent Bessel-Gauss beams has been analysed on the

2

assumption that the beams are produced from a globally incoherent source [29]. Propagation properties of
the partially coherent pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams obtained by the incoherent superposition of identical
coherent beams whose propagation axes lie on a conical surface have been examined in [30]. Recently,
the nondiﬀracting beams with the controlled spatial coherence have been introduced and analyzed [31].

The ideal nondiﬀracting beams can be obtained as a superposition of the plane waves whose radial
angular frequencies are restricted by the Dirac delta function to the single value.
In the geometrical
interpretation, the propagation vectors of the plane wave components of the angular spectrum form the
conical surface. In optics, several experiments have been proposed to produce a good approximation of
the required composition of the angular spectrum. The original Durnin’s experimental demonstration
of the zero-order Bessel beam utilized an annular slit placed at the focal plane of the lens [32]. More
eﬃcient methods of generating the required conic wavefront based on the use of the computer-generated
holograms [33], the axicon [34, 35] or the programmable spatial light modulators [36] were also suggested.
Experimental realization of the nondiﬀracting Bessel beam due to the spherical aberration of the simple
lens [37] and by means of the two-element refracting system [38] has been successfully performed.
Experimental methods applicable to generation of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams were reviewed in [39].
Their applications have been proposed in the ﬁeld of acoustics, metrology and nonlinear optics [40, 41, 42].
Properties of the nondiﬀracting beams are perspective for the design of the electron accelerators [43] and
the optical tweezers [44].

2 COHERENT NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS

2.1 Concepts of nondiﬀracting propagation

The ideal monochromatic spatially coherent nondiﬀracting beam propagating along the z-axis is

comprehended as the mode-like ﬁeld whose complex amplitude can be written in the form

U (x, y, z, t) = u(x, y) exp[i(ωt − βz)],

where u describes the transverse amplitude proﬁle and ω and β are the angular frequency and the angular
wavenumber, respectively. The slowly varying amplitude u is then independent of the z-coordinate so
that the intensity of the beam I = U U ∗ is propagation invariant. The ﬁelds (1) are known as waveguide
modes or spatial solitons propagating in optical linear and nonlinear materials but Durnin’s original work
[1] has excited interest also in their free-space propagation. In that case, the complex amplitudes U must
fulﬁl the homogeneous wave equation. The temporally independent amplitude

then fulﬁls the Helmholtz equation

a(x, y, z) = u(x, y) exp(−iβz)

∇2 + k2

a(x, y, z) = 0,

where k = ω/c and c is the light velocity in vacuo. The mathematical description of the ideal
monochromatic nondiﬀracting beam can be based on the diﬀerential or on the integral formalism.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

2.1.1 Separable solutions to the Helmholtz equation

(1)

(2)

(3)

The spatial evolution of the complex amplitude a can be described by the transverse and the longi-
tudinal parts depending only on the transverse coordinates (x, y) and on the z-coordinate, respectively.
Though the homogeneous (source-free) Helmholtz equation can be separated in 11 coordinate systems,
the required separability into the transverse and the longitudinal parts is possible only in Cartesian, cir-
cular cylindrical, parabolic cylindrical, and elliptical cylindrical coordinates. The particular attention has
been focused on the circular cylindrical and the elliptical cylindrical coordinates for which the transverse
amplitude proﬁle u can be expressed by the known functions.

3

Circular cylindrical coordinates

The circular cylindrical coordinates (r, ϕ, z) are related to the Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) by
x = r cos ϕ, y = r sin ϕ and z = z where r ∈< 0, ∞) and ϕ ∈< 0, 2π >. The solutions of the Helmholtz
equation (3) then can be found only under restricting assumption that the amplitude u can be expressed
as a product of the functions R and Φ depending on the radial coordinates r and ϕ, respectively. In that
case, the complex amplitudes a are assumed to be of the form

The function Φ describing dependence of the transverse amplitude proﬁle of the beam must be periodical.
Usually we assume that it is of the form

a(r, ϕ, z) = R(r)Φ(ϕ) exp(−iβz).

Φ(ϕ) = exp(imϕ), m = 0, 1, 2, · · · .

Substituting (4) and (5) into the Helmholtz equation (3) we obtain the diﬀerential equation for the radial
function R. It is known as the Bessel equation

d2R(r)
dr2 +

1
r

dR(r)
dr

+ α2R(r)

1 −

m2
α2r2

(cid:19)

= 0,

(cid:18)

α2 = k2 − β2. Its general solution can be given as a linear combination of the m-th order Bessel functions
of the ﬁrst kind Jm and the m-th order Neumann functions Nm [45],

Rm(r) = µJm(αr) + νNm(αr),

where µ and ν are the weighing coeﬃcients. Usually, the Bessel functions of the ﬁrst kind are considered
as the only physical solutions. The reason why the Neumann functions are considered as the unphysical
solutions is that they possess singularities at the zero point if they are used separately. However, as has
been shown in [4], in combination with the Bessel functions of the ﬁrst kind, the Neumann functions have
a physical meaning. Two linear combinations yielding the m-th order Hankel functions are of particular
importance. The radial functions obtained as the solutions of the Bessel equation can be denoted as
Rj ≡ H j

m, j = 1, 2, where the Hankel functions H j

m are given as

H 1
H 2

m = Jm(αr) + iNm(αr),
m = Jm(αr) − iNm(αr).

They have simple interpretation for the zero-order Hankel function [4]. The real amplitude of the
rotationally symmetrical beam can be deﬁned as

where

where

Applying (8) and (9), the amplitude U can be rewritten to the form

U (r, z) =

H 1

0 (αr) + H 2

0 (αr)

exp[i(ωt − βz)].

U (r, z) =

[U (r, z) + U ∗(r, z)] ,

1
2

(cid:2)

1
2

1
2

h

U (r, z) =

1
0(r, z) + U

U

(cid:3)

,

2
0(r, z)
i

1
0(r, z) = J0(αr) cos(ωt − βz) + N0(αr) sin(ωt − βz),
2
0(r, z) = J0(αr) cos(ωt − βz) − N0(αr) sin(ωt − βz).

U

U

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

The real amplitude of the beam U is now expressed as a superposition of two travelling waves given by the
1
Hankel functions. The amplitude U
0 describes the rotationally symmetric outgoing wave travelling away
2
0 represents the incoming wave travelling towards the axis
from the axis (Fig. 1a) while the amplitude U
(Fig. 1b). In Fig. 1 the waves are illustrated for the time t such that exp(iωt) = 1. The singularity of the

4

included Neumann function can be interpreted as arising from the collapse of the incoming cylindrical
wave onto the beam axis which serves, simultaneously, as the source from which the outgoing wave
emanates. To satisfy boundary conditions at r = 0, each cylindrical wave must be the complex conjugate
of the other. In that case, the imaginary parts of the Hankel functions composing the Neumann functions
cancel out so that the total ﬁeld is the standing wave represented by the Bessel function (Fig. 1c).

Elliptical cylindrical coordinates

The system of elliptical cylindrical coordinates (ζ, η, z) can be deﬁned as x = h cosh ζ cos η, y =
h sinh ζ sin η and z = z, where ζ ∈< 0, ∞) and η ∈< 0, 2π), and 2h represents the distance between
the foci of an ellipse placed at the plane (x, y) of the Cartesian coordinate system [46]. Taking into
account the separation of the complex amplitude (2) and applying the elliptical cylindrical coordinates
the Helmholtz equation (3) can be rewritten to the form [51]

∂2u(ζ, η)

∂ζ2 +

∂2u(ζ, η)

∂η2 +

α2h2
2

(cosh 2ζ − cos 2η)u(ζ, η) = 0.

(15)

On the assumption that the complex amplitude u can be written as the product of the functions depending
only on the variables ζ and η, respectively, the Helmholtz equation (15) can be split into the Mathieu
diﬀerential equations. Application of their solutions to the description of the optical beams has been
proposed in [47]. In [48] the propagation properties of the zero-order Mathieu beam have been examined.
Its complex amplitude can be written in the form

U (ζ, η, z, t; q) = U0Ce0(ζ; q)ce0(η; q) exp[i(ωt − βz)],

(16)

where the parameter q = α2h2/4 carries information about the radial spatial frequency α/k inﬂuencing
the beam transverse size and the ellipticity of the coordinate system h. The beam possesses the highly
localized intensity distribution along the x-direction and the sharply peaked quasi-periodic structure
along the y-direction. The simple experimental set-up providing a good approximation of the zero-order
Mathieu beam was proposed in [49].

The separable solutions of the Helmholtz equation obtained applying the circular cylindrical and
the elliptical cylindrical coordinates represent only special examples of the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds whose
transverse intensity proﬁles can be described by the known functions. The more general nondiﬀracting
ﬁelds can be eﬀectively examined applying the integral formalism.

2.1.2 Integral form of the nondiﬀracting beam

In the integral form, the temporally independent amplitude of the general nondiﬀracting beam can

be conveniently expressed applying the circular cylindrical coordinates r ≡ (r, ϕ, z)

a(r) =

A(ψ)f (r, ψ)dψ,

(17)

ik
2π

π

−π

Z

f (r, ψ) = exp(−iβz) exp[iαr cos(ψ − ϕ)],

and A denotes an arbitrary periodical function. The parameter α can be interpreted by means of the
angular spectrum. The angular spectrum F is a function of the angular frequencies νx and νy and can be
obtained as the two-dimensional Fourier transformation of the amplitude a. Applying the radial angular
frequency ν deﬁned as νx = ν cos ψ and νy = ν sin ψ it can be expressed as

where

where

F (ν, ψ) = A(ψ)δ(ν − ν0),

ν0 =

α
2π

.

5

(18)

(19)

The peculiar propagation properties of the ideal nondiﬀracting beams appear as a consequence of the
composition of the angular spectrum. It contains only the single radial frequency ν0 so that the relative
phases of the plane wave components remain unchanged under propagation. In geometrical interpretation
the angular spectrum represents a coherent superposition of plane waves whose propagation vectors cover
the conical surface with the vertex angle 2θ0 = 2 arcsin(λν0), where λ denotes the wavelength. The
amplitudes and relative phases of the superposed plane waves can be arbitrary. They are described by
the function A. Due to that arbitrariness an inﬁnite number of the nondiﬀracting beams with diﬀerent
transverse intensity proﬁles can be obtained. The parameters α and β of the nondiﬀracting beam have a
simple geometrical interpretation. They represent projections of the propagation vectors of the plane wave
components of the angular spectrum to the transverse plane (x, y) and to the direction of propagation
coinciding with the z−axis, respectively. They can be expressed as α = k sin θ0 and β = k cos θ0.

2.2 Types of coherent nondiﬀracting beams

The coherent nondiﬀracting ﬁeld can be comprehended as the interference ﬁeld produced by the
interference of plane waves whose propagation vectors create the conical surface. Due to the interference
the total ﬁeld can possess an appreciable beam-like intensity peak so that it is often called the
nondiﬀracting beam. The condition (18) laid on the composition of its angular spectrum represents
necessary and suﬃcient condition of the nondiﬀracting propagation. The various intensity proﬁles of
the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds can be obtained by manipulations of the amplitudes and phases of the plane
wave components of the angular spectrum. Because an arbitrary azimuthal modulation of the angular
spectrum is admitted there exists an inﬁnite number of nondiﬀracting ﬁelds. Here, only best known
examples are reviewed.

2.2.1 Bessel beams

In the special case when the amplitudes of the plane wave components of the angular spectrum are
constant and their phases are azimuthally modulated by A(ψ) = A0 exp(imψ) the integral representation
(17) results in the Bessel nondiﬀracting beams. Their complex amplitude can be written in the form

U (r, ϕ, z, t) = A0Jm(αr) exp[i(ωt + mϕ − βz)],

where Jm is the m−th order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind. If the plane waves are coherently superposed
without azimuthal phase modulation (m = 0), we obtain the bright beam-like ﬁeld with the propagation-
invariant intensity proﬁle given by

(20)

(21)

I(r, z) = |A0|2J 2

0 (αr).

The radius of the central intensity spot r0 is given by the ﬁrst zero-point of the Bessel function J0 and
can be written as r0 = 2.4/α. In geometrical interpretation that relation means that the increase of
the vertex angle of the conical surface formed by the propagation vectors of the interfering plane waves
results in the reduction of the size of the intensity spot of the produced beam. The transverse intensity
proﬁle of the zero-order Bessel beam is illustrated in Fig. 2a.

2.2.2 Nondiﬀracting vortex beams

During last decade an increasing attention has been focused to the waveﬁelds possessing the line,
spiral or combined wavefront dislocations. Some types of nondiﬀracting beams belong to the class of
ﬁelds with the spiral wavefront dislocations. In optics such ﬁelds are known as optical vortices. If the
slowly varying complex amplitude u of the nondiﬀracting beam (1) is rewritten by means of the real
amplitude u0 and the phase Φ in the form

u(x, y) = u0(x, y) exp[iΦ(x, y)],

(22)

6

then the point where the phase dislocation appears can be identiﬁed by the nonzero value of the integral

∇Φ · dL,

IL

(23)

where the integration is performed along the closed line surrounding the examined point. The integral (23)
can result in the values 2πm, m = 1, 2, · · ·, where m represents the topological charge of the vortex ﬁeld.
At the singularity point the validity of the relations for real and imaginary parts ℜ(u) = 0 and ℑ(u) = 0
can be veriﬁed so that we speak about the dark optical vortices. The simplest type of the nondiﬀracting
vortex beam is the Bessel beam (20) represented by the ﬁrst- or higher-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst
kind. The intensity proﬁle of the ﬁrst-order Bessel beam is illustrated in Fig. 2b. The helical wavefronts
of the Bessel vortex beams are illustrated in Fig. 3a and 3b for the topological charges m = 1 and m = 2,
respectively. The wavefront dislocations of the optical vortices can be also identiﬁed experimentally
applying the interferometric methods. Interference of the optical vortex possessing the helical wavefront
with the spherical wave results in the typical spiral patterns. The numerical simulation for the optical
vortex with the topological charges m = 1 and m = 2 is illustrated in Fig. 4a and 4c. The pattern
obtained by interference of the optical vortex with the plane wave has the fork-like form. It is illustrated
in Fig. 4b and 4d for the topological charges of the vortex beam m = 1 and m = 2, respectively.

2.2.3 Mathieu beams

The Bessel beams are obtained if the angular spectrum (18) consists of the plane waves whose phases
are conveniently modulated and the real amplitudes remain unmodulated. On the contrary, a good
approximation to the zero-order Mathieu beams can be obtained if the relative phases of the plane wave
components are constant and their real amplitudes are modiﬁed by [48]

A(ψ) = exp

−

ν0 cos ψ

2

,

"

(cid:18)

w0 (cid:19)

#

(24)

where ν0 is given by (19) and w0 denotes the bandwidth of the Gaussian proﬁle at the plane of spatial
frequencies. The change of the parameter w0 results in the change of the form of the transverse intensity
proﬁle of the nondiﬀracting Mathieu beam.
In Fig. 5a and 5b the intensity spots are illustrated for
w0 = 4ν0 and w0 = 2ν0, respectively.

2.2.4 Caleidoscopic nondiﬀracting patterns

The function A used in (18) describes the amplitude and phase modulation of the angular spectrum
of the nondiﬀracting beam. Usually we assume that it is a continuous function of the azimuthal angle
ψ so that the nondiﬀracting beam is produced as the coherent superposition of the plane waves whose
propagation vectors continuously cover the conical surface. In a special case the nondiﬀracting ﬁeld can
be obtained as a discrete superposition of N plane waves. In that case the modiﬁcation of the angular
spectrum (18) can be expressed applying the Dirac delta-function

A(ψ) =

A0(ψ)δ(ψ − ψj),

(25)

where N is an integer. In that case the integration used in (17) is replaced by the summation and the
complex amplitude of the nondiﬀracting ﬁeld can be rewritten as

a(r, ϕ, z) =

exp(−iβz)

A0(ψj) exp[iαr cos(ψj − ϕ)].

(26)

ik
2π

N

j=1
X

N

j=1
X

7

The numerical simulation of the transverse intensity proﬁle of the nondiﬀracting beam is illustrated in
Fig. 6. The azimuthal angles ψj related to the interfering plane waves are chosen as

ψj = (j − 1)∆ψ,

(27)

where ∆ψ = 2π/N and A0 is assumed to be a constant. The intensity spots illustrated in Fig. 6a-d
are obtained for N = 5, 10, 15 and 30, respectively. If the number of interfering plane waves is even
N = 2N ′ and the angular spectrum is modiﬁed by the function possessing property A0(ψ) = A0(ψ + π)
the complex amplitude of the nondiﬀracting ﬁeld (26) can be alternatively expressed as a superposition
of the azimuthally rotating cosine gratings

a(r, ϕ, z) =

exp(−iβz)

A0(ψj) cos[αx cos(ψj) + αy sin(ψj)].

(28)

ik
π

′

N

j=1
X

The nondiﬀracting pattern Fig.6b obtained due to the interference of N = 10 plane waves possessing
the same amplitude and phase can also be created as a coherent superposition of N ′ = 5 cosine
gratings rotating in the azimuthal direction with the angular increment ∆ψ = π/N ′. The cosine grating
components and the transverse intensity pattern obtained by their superposition are illustrated in Fig.
7. The nondiﬀracting ﬁeld described by the integral (17) can also be interpreted as the superposition of
the cosine gratings. In that case the gratings are continuously rotating along the azimuthal angle [12].

3 PARTIALLY-COHERENT NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS

In the case of the fully coherent nondiﬀracting beam the azimuthal amplitude and phase modulation
of the angular spectrum is described by the deterministic function A. As has been shown its changes
can be used for the formation of the transverse intensity proﬁle of the beam. The partially-coherent
nondiﬀracting beam is still related to the angular spectrum (18) but the modulation function A is given
as a product of the deterministic amplitude Ad and the random amplitude Ar,

In that case the partially-coherent nondiﬀracting beam is described by the second-order cross-spectral
density function

A(ψ) = Ad(ψ)Ar(ψ).

W (r1, r2) =< a∗(r1)a(r2) >,

where rj ≡ (xj , yj, zj) is the position vector. Applying (17), (18) and (29) we obtain

W (r1, r2) =

γ(ψ1, ψ2)|Ar(ψ1)||Ar(ψ2)|A∗

d(ψ1)Ad(ψ2)

2

π

π

k
2π

−π Z
Z
× f ∗(r1, ψ1)f (r2, ψ2)dψ1dψ2,

−π

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where γ is the degree of angular correlation deﬁned as

γ(ψ1, ψ2) =

< A∗
r(ψ1)Ar(ψ2) >
|Ar(ψ1)||Ar(ψ2)|

,

and <> means ensemble average over ﬁeld realizations.
It describes the mutual correlation of the
plane wave components of the angular spectrum propagating with the propagation vectors k1 and k2.
The propagation vectors create the conical surface with the vertex angle θ0 so that their longitudinal
z−components are constant. The transverse x− and y−components depend on the azimuthal angle ψ.
The propagation vector kj then possesses components (|kj| sin θ0 cos ψj, |kj| sin θ0 sin ψj, |kj| cos θ0). The
simplest type of the partially-coherent nondiﬀracting ﬁeld is obtained if the plane wave components of
the angular spectrum are superposed incoherently so that γ is given by the Dirac delta function

γ(ψ1, ψ2) = δ(ψ1 − ψ2).

(33)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

8

If the deterministic function Ad modulates only the phase of the angular spectrum the cross-spectral
density function (31) becomes

W (r1, r2) = C exp[−iβ(z2 − z1)]J0(αρ),

(34)

where

ρ = [(x1 − x2)2 + (y1 − y2)2]1/2,

and C denotes the constant amplitude. The cross-spectral density function (34) describes the Bessel
correlated ﬁeld with the constant intensity and the sharply peaked transverse-spatial-correlation proﬁle
[27]. The more general partially-coherent nondiﬀracting ﬁelds are examined in [31]. They are obtained on
the assumption that the degree of angular correlation γ can be controlled. The controlled change of the
mutual correlation of the plane wave components of the angular spectrum oﬀers a possibility to change
the transverse intensity proﬁle of the beam to the desired form and to control the coherence properties
of the generated nondiﬀracting beam. The controlled change of γ can be realized experimentally in
the illumination chain using the pseudo-thermal spatially incoherent source such as the Gaussian Shell-
model source [50]. Analysis of that experimental set-up is presented in [31]. The change of the transverse
intensity proﬁle of the partially-coherent nondiﬀracting beam caused by the change of the degree of
angular correlation is illustrated in Fig. 8. The intensity spot in Fig. 8a is obtained for the coherent
superposition of the plane wave components (γ = 1). The intensity patterns in Figs. 8b, 8c and 8d are
obtained by the partially-coherent superposition of the plane waves. They are related to the functions
γ illustrated in Fig. 9 by the curves denoted as ’• • •’, ’ooo’, and ’−’, respectively. The coherent beam
with the intensity proﬁle in Fig. 8a represents the nondiﬀracting vortex of the Bessel type possessing the
topological charge m = 2. The beam is dark (axial intensity is equal to zero) and its wavefront has the
helical form. In the interference experiment using the spherical reference wave the phase singularity is
visualized by the spiral interference pattern in Fig. 10a. Due to the change of the spatial coherence the
beam becomes bright (axial intensity is nonzero) and the phase dislocation is removed. Thit is obvious
from Figs. 10b-d illustrating the vanishing spiral character of the interference pattern.

4 SPATIAL SHAPING OF NONDIFFRACTING FIELDS

The condition of nondiﬀracting beam propagation (18) puts restrictions only on the propagation
directions of the plane wave components of the angular spectrum. Their amplitudes and phases are
given by A(ψ) and can be arbitrary. The freedom of the amplitude and the phase modulation of the
angular spectrum can be applied to the control of the spatial shaping of the produced nondiﬀracting
patterns. In [5, 21], the azimuthal modulation of the form A(ψ) = t(ψ)a(ψ) is assumed. The function t
is used to control the shape of the created nondiﬀracting spot and a is applied to move it to the required
position at the transverse plane. Furthermore, the size of the nondiﬀracting spot can be changed by
the parameter α deﬁned by (19). The shift of the centre of the nondiﬀracting spot to the point with
coordinates ∆x and ∆y is achieved if the function a is of the form

a(ψ) = W (∆x, ∆y) exp[iα(∆x cos ψ + ∆y sin ψ)],

(35)

where W is the weighing function representing the amplitude of the nondiﬀracting spot at the position
(∆x, ∆y). The nondiﬀracting pattern whose transverse amplitude proﬁle is composed of the continuously
shifted nondiﬀracting spots is then described by the convolution

U (r) = exp[i(ωt − βz)]

W (∆x, ∆y)T (x − ∆x, y − ∆y)d∆xd∆y,

(36)

where

T (x − ∆x, y − ∆y) =

t(ψ) exp{−iα[(x − ∆x) cos ψ + (y − ∆y) sin ψ}dψ.

(37)

By the control of amplitudes, shapes, sizes and shifts of the nondiﬀracting spots we can create the total
If
ﬁeld whose transverse amplitude proﬁle approximates the form predetermined by the function W .

+∞

−∞

Z Z

2π

0
Z

9

the nondiﬀracting spots are superposed coherently the similarity between the predetermined and the
realized amplitude proﬁles is degraded by the interference eﬀects.
It can be signiﬁcantly improved if
the nondiﬀracting spots are mutually incoherent. In [5], the simple experimental implementation of the
controllable spatial shaping of the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds was proposed and realized for both the coherent
and incoherent light. The obtained results are shown in Figs. 11 and 12. In Fig. 11a, the predicted
transverse proﬁle deﬁned by W is illustrated. It has the form of the array composed of the separated point
sources. The transverse intensity proﬁles of the generated nondiﬀracting beams obtained with incoherent
and coherent light are shown in Figs. 11b and 11c, respectively.
In both cases the generated ﬁelds
are nondiﬀracting so that the intensity proﬁles do not change under propagation. The intensity proﬁles
illustrated in Figs. 11d and 11e are again obtained for incoherent and coherent light but the parameter
α is change in such a way that the size of the nondiﬀracting spots is reduced so that their resolution
is improved. As is obvious, the similarity between the required and generated intensity proﬁles is much
more better for incoherent light than for coherent one. In Fig. 12 the similar situation is illustrated for
the required proﬁle resembling the initials of Palack´y University. In that case, the transverse intensity
proﬁle is obtained as a continuous superposition of the nondiﬀracting spots.

5 VECTORIAL NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS

The detailed study of the nondiﬀracting beams including analysis of the polarization states and the
ﬂow of the electromagnetic energy requires the vectorial electromagnetic description. The problem is to
ﬁnd the monochromatic electromagnetic ﬁeld whose vector complex amplitudes exactly fulﬁl the Maxwell
equations and can be written in the form

E(x, y, z, t) = e(x, y) exp[i(ωt − βz)],
H(x, y, z, t) = h(x, y) exp[i(ωt − βz)],

where e and h are the propagation invariant amplitudes.
In [43] the special type of the vectorial
nondiﬀracting beams was introduced on the assumption that the longitudinal component of the electric
ﬁeld resembles the zero-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind. The model resulted in a radially polarized
beam whose radial electric ﬁeld corresponds to the ﬁrst-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind. In [8]
the representative theorem for the Helmholtz equation was applied to derive E and H from the scalar
complex amplitudes am exactly fulﬁlling the scalar Helmholtz equation. The vector complex amplitudes
then can be written as

where

E = −

(pmPm + qmQm) exp(iωt),

H = iξ

(pmQm + qmPm) exp(iωt),

m
X

m
X

Pm = −(s × ∇am),
1
Qm =
k

∇ × Pm,

p

and 1/ξ =
µ0/ǫ0 is the impedance of the vacuo. It can be shown that the vector amplitudes (40) and (41)
exactly fulﬁl the Maxwell equations and can be expressed in the form (38) and (39). They are constructed
from the base of the scalar nondiﬀracting beams. The complex amplitudes am represent the independent
scalar nondiﬀracting solutions to the Helmholtz equation obtained for the same angular wavenumber β.
In the vectorial solution they are applied with the weighing coeﬃcients pm and qm. The used symbols
ǫ, µ and s denote the permittivity, the permeability and an arbitrary constant vector, respectively. The
nondiﬀracting ﬁelds related to the single summation indices represent the nondiﬀracting modes. The
vector nondiﬀracting ﬁelds can then be constructed as the one- or multi-mode ﬁelds. Classiﬁcation and
analysis of their properties are presented in [52]. The special types of the vector nondiﬀracting beams
are obtained by an appropriate choice of the weighing coeﬃcients pm and qm and the constant vector s.
For example, the transversal electric (TE) ﬁeld follows from (40) and (41) used with pm 6= 0, qm = 0 and
s ≡ (0, 0, sz). The transversal magnetic (TM) ﬁeld is obtained with pm = 0, qm 6= 0 and s ≡ (0, 0, sz). If

10

(38)
(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

the complex amplitudes of the scalar nondiﬀracting beams am are represented by the Bessel functions the
vector nondiﬀracting beams possessing the azimuthal or the radial polarization can be obtained. In that
case, the vector complex amplitudes of the electric and the magnetic ﬁelds can be conveniently expressed
by the radial, azimuthal and longitudinal components E ≡ (Er, Eϕ, Ez) and H ≡ (Hr, Hϕ, Hz). The
nondiﬀracting TE beam possessing the azimuthal polarization of the electric ﬁeld can be described by
the vectors E ≡ (0, Eϕ, 0) and H ≡ (Hr, 0, Hz). Their components can be written as [8]

In the case of the TM beam the magnetic ﬁeld possesses the azimuthal polarization while the electric
ﬁeld is radially polarized. The components of the ﬁeld vectors can be expressed as

Er = 0,
Eϕ = −p0αJ1(αr) exp[i(ωt − βz)],
Ez = 0,

Hr = −p0αξ

J1(αr) exp[i(ωt − βz)],

Hϕ = 0,

Hz = ip0ξ

J0(αr) exp[i(ωt − βz)].

Er = −iq0α

J1(αr) exp[i(ωt − βz)],

Eϕ = 0,

Ez = −q0

J0(αr) exp[i(ωt − βz)],

Hr = 0,
Hϕ = iq0ξαJ1(αr) exp[i(ωt − βz)],
Hz = 0.

β
k

β
k

α2
k

α2
k

(43)
(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)
(54)

The azimuthally and the radially polarized ﬁelds can be considered as the linearly polarized ﬁelds with
the spatial change of the direction of oscillations. At each point of the transverse plane the ﬁeld vectors
are linearly polarized. For the radially polarized ﬁeld the direction of oscillations is given by the line
connecting that point with the center of the beam while the azimuthally polarized ﬁeld oscillates along
the direction orthogonal to that line. The TE nondiﬀracting beam with the azimuthal polarization of the
electric ﬁeld and the radially polarized magnetic ﬁeld is illustrated in Fig. 13. In Fig. 13a the magnitude
and the direction of the transverse component of the electric intensity E⊥ ≡ (Er, Eϕ) are illustrated
by the arrows at the separate points of the transverse plane. The radially polarized magnetic ﬁeld is
similarly illustrated in Fig. 13b.

6 PROPERTIES OF NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS

The nondiﬀracting beams exhibit interesting properties by which they diﬀer from the common
types of beams, for example Gaussian beams. Recently, an increasing attention was devoted to those
properties because they oﬀer many potential applications and their explanation can be important for
better understanding of the origin of the diﬀraction phenomena and of the nature of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld. Some of them are brieﬂy discussed.

6.1 Beam robustness

An important property of the nondiﬀracting beam is its resistance against amplitude and phase
distortions. The transverse intensity proﬁle of the nondiﬀracting beam disturbed by the nontransparent
obstacle regenerates during free-propagation behind that obstacle. The healing eﬀect causes that the
initial transverse intensity proﬁle is restored certain distance behind the obstacle. The eﬀect was explained
theoretically applying Babinet’s principle and veriﬁed experimentally [14]. The results of the experiment

11

are presented in Fig. 14. The nondiﬀracting beam with the transverse intensity proﬁle approximately
corresponding to the ﬁrst-order Bessel function J1 is disturbed by the nontransparent rectangular obstacle.
During free-propagation of the beam behind the obstacle its transverse intensity proﬁle regenerates. As
is obvious from Fig. 14, the initial Bessel-like proﬁle is restored with a very good ﬁdelity.

6.2 Beam energetics

In the framework of the Maxwell theory the energetics of the optical beams is characterized by the
density of the ﬂow of the electromagnetic energy denoted as the Poynting vector S and by the volume
density of the electromagnetic energy w. Both quantities are spatially and temporally dependent and are
mutually coupled in the energy conservation law. In nonconducting media it can be expressed by

In real situations the temporally averaged quantities < S > and < w > are of the particular importance.
For the monochromatic nondiﬀracting electromagnetic beam (38) and (39) they can be written as

∇ · S +

= 0.

∂w
∂t

< S > = e∗ × h + e × h∗,
< w > = ǫ(e∗ · e) + µ(h∗ · h).

∇· < S⊥ >= 0,

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

As the vector amplitudes e and h of the nondiﬀracting beams are independent of the z−coordinate, the
energy conservation law can be simpliﬁed to the form

where < S⊥ > denotes the transverse part of the Poynting vector. The transverse and the longitudinal
components of the Poynting vector fulﬁl relations < S⊥ > · z = 0 and Sk × z = 0, where z
is the unit vector coinciding with the z-axis. The Poynting vector providing the density of the
electromagnetic energy ﬂow can be obtained as the vector sum < S >=< S⊥ > + < Sk >. The
energy conservation law formulated for the nondiﬀracting beams (58) requires the zero divergence of the
transverse component of the Poynting vector but the transverse energy ﬂow itself can be nonzero. The fact
that the monochromatic nondiﬀracting beam whose transverse intensity proﬁle remains unchanged under
propagation can exhibit the nonzero energy ﬂow orthogonal to the direction of propagation is surprising. It
excited interest in the structure of the transverse component of the Poynting vector. Applying the system
of the circular cylindrical coordinates it can be decomposed into the radial and azimuthal components
< S⊥ >=< Sr > + < Sϕ >. It can be shown that for the one-mode nondiﬀracting beam the radial ﬂow
must be equal to zero and the transverse energy ﬂow can possess only azimuthal component. Due to
the superposition with the longitudinal component of the Poynting vector the total ﬂow has the helical
character. In a general case of the multi-mode nondiﬀracting beam the radial energy ﬂow can be nonzero
due to the interference of the modes. As is obvious from (58) the points of the transverse plane where
the transverse energy ﬂow has the constant magnitude lye on the closed lines. An exhaustive analysis of
the energetic properties of the vector nondiﬀracting beams is presented in [52].

6.3 Orbital angular momentum

The nondiﬀracting vortex beams carry the angular momentum which can be transferred to atoms
and microscopical particles. The mechanical consequence of that interaction is rotation of the particles.
The angular momentum has two components - the orbital angular momentum and the spin. The spin
depends on the polarization state of the beam and is equal to zero for the linear polarization. If the
beam interacts with particles, the spin causes rotation of the particles around their own axis. The orbital
angular momentum is a consequence of the spiral ﬂow of the electromagnetic energy and is typical for
beams with the helical wavefront. They are known as the vortex beams. Under interaction with the
particle, the orbital angular momentum causes its rotation around the center of the vortex nested in the
host beam.

12

J = r × p.

Jz =

(r × S)z
c2

.

jz =

Jz
w

,

The angular momentum J can be written as a vectorial product of the position vector r and the linear

momentum p,

If the beam propagates in vacuo with velocity c, p can be expressed by means of the Poynting vector as

S
c2 .
Assuming the beam propagating along the z-direction, its orbital angular momentum is given by the
z-component of J,

p =

(60)

Applying the circular cylindrical coordinates r, ϕ, z, we obtain

rSϕ
c2 ,
where Sϕ is the magnitude of the azimuthal component of the Poynting vector. Performing normalization
of the orbital angular momentum by the volume energy density,

Jz =

(62)

the quantity jz can be interpreted as a magnitude of the orbital angular momentum carried by the photon
of the beam.

The orbital angular momentum of the optical beam can be expressed by the Poynting vector
representing the density of the ﬂow of the electromagnetic energy.
In the exact vectorial theory, the
Poynting vector is given by the vectors of the electromagnetic ﬁeld (56) and fulﬁls the energy conservation
law (55). In the framework of the scalar approximation the optical beams are described by the scalar
complex amplitude U fulﬁlling the wave equation. By simple manipulations of the wave equation, the
relation resembling the form of the energy conservation law can be obtained

where

∇ · S′ +

= 0,

∂w′
∂t

∂U ∗
∂t

S′ = −

∇U

(cid:18)
w′ = ∇U · ∇U ∗ +

+ ∇U ∗ ∂U
∂t
2

,

(cid:19)

1
c2

∂U
∂t

.

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

The quantities S′ and w′ can be comprehended as approximations to the Poynting vector and the volume
energy density of the optical beam, respectively. The orbital angular momentum can then be simply
demonstrated on the case of the scalar monochromatic vortex beam.
If the vortex is nested at the
centrum of the nondiﬀracting host beam, its complex amplitude can be expressed by means of the
circular cylindrical coordinates as

U (r, ϕ, z, t) = a(r) exp[i(ωt + mϕ − βz)],

where m denotes the topological charge of the vortex and β is the angular wavenumber of the host
nondiﬀracting beam. If Sϕ used in (62) is replaced by its scalar approximation S′
ϕ following from (65),
we obtain

Scalar approximation to the volume energy density can be expressed as

(59)

(61)

(63)

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

(68)

(69)

Jz =

2mω|a|2
c2

.

w′ = 2β2|a|2.

13

The orbital angular momentum carried by the single photon of the monochromatic vortex beam with the
angular frequency ω is then given by

jz =

m
ω

.

(70)

The orbital angular momentum is proportional to the topological charge of the vortex beam and inversely
proportional to its angular frequency. It is a reason why the mechanical inﬂuence of the vortex is more
appreciable for the microwaves than for the optical waves.

One of the most important tasks in design of MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical Systems) is to ﬁnd
ways how to power machines that measure only microns across. The promising solution is to rotate them
by the blowing of ”the light wind”. It can be produced by the optical vortices carrying the orbital angular
momentum. In [25, 26], the simple model of the vortex beam interaction accompanied by the exchange of
the orbital angular momentum was proposed and analyzed. It was shown that both the phase topology
and the local distribution of the orbital angular momentum of the vortex nested in the nondiﬀracting host
beam can revive and regenerate to the initial form after interaction with the 2D object. In the simulation
model, the rotationally nonsymmetrical object takes the orbital angular momentum from the beam and
rotates. The healing of the spatial distribution of the orbital angular momentum after interaction is
illustrated in Fig. 15. It is accompanied by the self-regeneration of the phase topology of the vortex
beam. In Figs. 16a and 16b, the vortex helical wavefront of the initial beam is visualized by interference
with plane and spherical waves, respectively. After interaction with 2D object, the phase topology is
strongly disturbed but during free propagation revives to the initial form (Figs. 16c-16f).

6.4 Transversality of electric and magnetic ﬁeld

An ideal homogeneous monochromatic plane wave is the transversal electromagnetic (TEM) wave. Its
electric and magnetic ﬁelds oscillate at the transverse planes so that the projections of the vectors E and
H to the direction of propagation are equal to zero. For the free-space propagation that property follows
directly from the Maxwell equations ∇ · E = 0 and ∇ · H = 0. In real cases the wave is not homogeneous
(vectors E and H depend on the transverse coordinates) so that the electromagnetic transversality cannot
be exactly achieved. Nevertheless, the common beams, for example Gaussian beams, can be considered
to be nearly transversal with respect to the dominant propagation direction. That means that the
longitudinal component of the electric or magnetic vector of the beam is very small in comparison with
the transversal one. Applying the concept of the nondiﬀracting propagation we can prepare quite diﬀerent
situation when the longitudinal component of the electric or magnetic ﬁled is comparable to the transverse
component. That property is given by the structure of the spatial spectrum of the nondiﬀracting beam
and depends on the beam spot size. It was veriﬁed that the extremely strong longitudinal component
of the electric ﬁeld of the nondiﬀracting beam can be obtained only if the transverse dimensions of the
beam are comparable to the wavelength [8]. The beams with the strong longitudinal ﬁeld are important
for applications and were successfully applied to the design of the electron accelerators [43].

6.5 Self-imaging

The basic parameter of the scalar nondiﬀracting beam (1) is the angular wavenumber β. If we perform
the coherent superposition of two nondiﬀracting modes possessing the diﬀerent angular wavenumbers
Its transverse intensity proﬁle depends
β1 and β2, the produced beam is not propagation invariant.
on the z-coordinate and reappears periodically in the free-space propagation.
In dependence on the
propagation coordinate the beam axial intensity changes sinusoidally. Under convenient choice of the
angular wavenumbers that eﬀect can be realized also by the coherent superposition of m nondiﬀracting
beams. The eﬀect represents the spatial analog of the mode-locking realized in the temporal domain.
Due to the interference of the modes, the transverse intensity proﬁle of the beam reappears periodically
at the planes of the constructive interference and vanishes at the places of the destructive interference.
Its complex amplitude a then fulﬁls condition

a(x, y, z) = a(x, y, z + L),

(71)

14

where L is the longitudinal period. The beam axial intensity is signiﬁcantly nonzero only near the planes
of the constructive interference and vanishes elsewhere. The intensity distribution of the ﬁeld exhibiting
the self-imaging eﬀect is illustrated in Fig. 17. It can be obtained as the coherent superposition of the
nondiﬀracting modes whose angular wavenumbers are adapted to the chosen period L as

βm = 2mπ/L, m = 0, 1, 2, · · · , m < L/λ.

(72)

The width of the peaks of the axial intensity I(0, 0, z) can be decreased if the number of the superposed
modes is increased. The width of the transverse intensity proﬁle decreases with the increasing values
of the angular wavenumbers of the used nondiﬀracting modes. The general vectorial treatment of the
self-imaging eﬀect and its experimental veriﬁcation was presented in [16].

6.6 Self-reconstruction ability

The beams possessing the self-reconstruction ability belong to the class of ﬁelds exhibiting the
longitudinal propagation periodicity. The Talbot eﬀect and the self-imaging are also members of that class
of ﬁelds. To express their distinctions the exact deﬁnition of the self-reconstruction eﬀect is necessary. It
can be introduced applying the concept of the shape-invariant transformation. The spatial evolution of
the complex amplitude of the monochromatic ﬁeld fulﬁlling the Helmholtz equation can be expressed by
the integral operator Γ as

where a0 is the complex amplitude at the z = z0 plane. The shape-invariant transformation is achieved
if the complex amplitude can be written in the form

a(x, y, z) = Γa0(x, y, z0),

a(x, y, z) = a0(x, y, z0)Z(z0, z).

(73)

(74)

If the property (74) is required only for a pair of planes, it can be realized applying the imaging system.
Under certain conditions the shape-invariant property can also be achieved in the free-space propagation
of the beam behind the plane z = z0. The known examples are the nondiﬀracting propagation, the
Talbot eﬀect and the self-imaging. For the ideal nondiﬀracting beam the amplitude proﬁle a0 remains
propagation invariant. In the cases of the Talbot eﬀect and the self-imaging the initial proﬁle reappears
periodically so that (74) is fulﬁlled for z = z0 + mL, where L is the longitudinal period. The longitudinal
periodicity of the Talbot eﬀect requires the lateral periodicity whose period depends on L. In the case
of the self-imaging the amplitude proﬁles a0 can be nonperiodical but they cannot be chosen arbitrarily.
The fundamental diﬀerence of the self-reconstruction eﬀect in comparison with the self-imaging consists
in the fact that the amplitude proﬁle a0 to be periodically reconstructed can be predetermined. Taking
into account that property the self-reconstruction can be comprehended as the eﬀect by which the ﬁeld
with the predetermined transverse amplitude proﬁle a0 can be converted into the ﬁeld described by the
complex amplitude as possessing the following properties:

(a) the complex amplitude as is the exact solution to the Helmholtz equation,

(b) in the free-space propagation the transverse proﬁle of the ﬁeld as reappears periodically with the

longitudinal period L, as(x, y, z) = as(x, y, z + mL), m = 0, 1, 2, · · ·,

(c) at the planes of reconstruction z = z0 + mL the complex amplitude as approximates the

predetermined transverse amplitude proﬁle a0, as(x, y, z0 + mL) ≈ a0(x, y, z0).

The theoretical description of the self-reconstruction was proposed in [17], [52] and [53]. In practise, the
transformation of the signal ﬁeld with the predetermined amplitude proﬁle a0 into the ﬁeld exhibiting the
self-reconstruction ability can be performed applying the spatial ﬁltering in the 4-f optical system. The
used spatial ﬁlter is the amplitude mask consisting a set of concentric annular rings. After spatial ﬁltering
the initial ﬁeld is represented by the discrete superposition of the nondiﬀracting modes propagating with
the angular wavenumbers fulﬁlling condition of the self-imaging (72). Experimental veriﬁcation of the
eﬀect was presented in [20].

15

7 CONTROLLED 3D LIGHT BENDING

Recently, the concept of the spatial shaping of the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds and the self-imaging eﬀect
have been adopted to realize the controlled 3D light bending [21]. By that method the light can be
conﬁned in the volume elements whose transverse and longitudinal dimensions are comparable to the
wavelength. The transverse intensity proﬁle of the light ﬁeld is created as a coherent superposition of the
nondiﬀracting spots whose position, size and amplitude proﬁle can be controlled. By the spatial shaping
of the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds the single nondiﬀracting spots are centred at the required positions. By the 3D
light bending many nondiﬀracting spots possessing diﬀerent angular wavenumbers contribute at the same
position of the transverse plane. As the spots are superposed constructively at their centra, the resulting
spot is strongly peaked in comparison with the single one. By that way the predetermined transverse
amplitude proﬁle can be shaped with a high resolution. As the total ﬁeld is composed of the nondiﬀracting
modes with diﬀerent angular wavenumbers, it is not nondiﬀracting.
If the angular wavenumbers are
conveniently coupled, the self-imaging eﬀect is achieved. The required transverse amplitude proﬁles
then appear periodically along the propagation direction with the controllable period. If the number of
contributing modes with diﬀerent angular wavenumbers is suﬃciently large, the ﬁeld amplitude is strongly
peaked also along the direction of propagation. The intensity maxima then appear periodically at the
planes where the required transverse amplitude proﬁles are formed. By that way, the controllable 3D
light distribution can be produced. In Fig. 18, the comparison of the spatial shaping of the nondiﬀracting
ﬁeld and the 3D light bending is presented. The former case is illustrated in Fig. 18a. The required
intensity proﬁle is an array of 9 point sources. That proﬁle is replicated in the nondiﬀracting ﬁeld in
such a way that each source point of the array excites the nondiﬀracting spot placed at the position
depending on the position of the corresponding source. The obtained proﬁle remains invariant under
free-space propagation. In Fig. 18b, the 3D light bending is shown. In that case, the required proﬁle is
created in such a way that each point source of the array excites many nondiﬀracting modes localized
at the same position of the transverse plane. As they are superposed constructively, the resulting spot
is sharpened in comparison with the single mode spot so that the required proﬁle is replicated with a
very good ﬁdelity. Due to the self-imaging eﬀect, the transverse amplitude proﬁle is available only at the
planes placed periodically along the propagation direction. Between those planes it disappears due to the
destructive interference of the nondiﬀracting modes. Experimental implementation of both the spatial
shaping of nondiﬀracting ﬁelds and of the 3D light bending is proposed in [5, 21]. Applications of the 3D
light bending can be expected in the design of adaptable optical tweezers enabling 3D manipulation of
electrically neutral particles and atoms.

8 PSEUDO-NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS

The nondiﬀracting beams indicate that the diﬀraction eﬀects can be overcome if the propagation of
the source-free monochromatic ﬁeld described by the homogeneous Helmholtz equation is considered.
However, the ideal nondiﬀracting beams carry an inﬁnite energy and their transverse intensity proﬁle
remains unchanged from −∞ to +∞. This is a reason why the nondiﬀracting beams cannot be exactly
realized. In experiments only their approximations known as the nearly nondiﬀracting or the pseudo-
nondiﬀracting beams can be obtained. They possess the ﬁnite energy and their propagation properties can
be approximated by the properties of the nondiﬀracting beams transmitted through the aperture of ﬁnite
dimensions or through the Gaussian aperture [11]. The simplest type of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam
known as the Bessel-Gauss beam [10] can be obtained directly from the paraxial form of the Helmholtz
equation.

8.1 Bessel-Gauss beam

16

The pseudo-nondiﬀracting Bessel-Gauss beam represents the spatially modulated Gaussian beam. It
can be searched as the exact solution to the paraxial Helmholtz equation whose rotationally symmetrical
complex amplitude is assumed as

a(r, z) = R[g(z)r2] exp[iZ(z)]ag(r, z),

(75)

where ag is the complex amplitude of the conventional Gaussian beam and R, g and Z are in the meantime
unknown functions. Substituting (75) into the paraxial Helmholtz equation and applying the denotation
t2 = gr2 we can write
t2 d2R

1 − 2ik

R = 0,

(76)

− 2

t2
2g2

dg
dz

t2
g

2
w2 + i

k
Rg (cid:19)(cid:21)

+ t2 2k
g

dZ
dz

(cid:18)
where w is the bandwidth of the Gaussian beam and Rg denotes the radius of the curvature of its
wavefront. If the functions g and Z fulﬁl equations

(cid:20)

dt2 + t

dR
dt

i

k
2g

dg
dz

+

2
w2 + i

k
Rg
2k
g

= 0,

= 1,

R(t) = J0(t).

then (76) represents the special form of the Bessel equation. In the examined case, its solution is the
function R given by the Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind and zero order

Integrating (77) we obtain

ln|g| + C = i2 arctan(z/q0) − ln|z2 + q2
0|,

where q0 is the Rayleigh distance of the Gaussian beam. If the integration constant C is rewritten by
means of the new constant K

then the searched function g can be expressed as

C = −2ln|Kq0|,

g =

K 2
(1 − iz/q0)

2 .

If we substitute g into (78) the function Z is obtained after integration. Applying it the complex amplitude
of the Bessel-Gauss beam can be rewritten in the form

a(r, z) = J0

Kr
1 − iz/q0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

exp

i
(cid:20)

K 2q2
0
4k

2
kw2 + i

1
Rg (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(z − iq0)
(cid:21)

ag(r, z),

(83)

where ag is the complex amplitude of the Gaussian beam.

8.2 Comparison of pseudo-nondiﬀracting and ideal nondiﬀracting beams

The nondiﬀracting beams possess the sharp δ-like angular spectrum represented by a circle at the
Fourier plane. The basic parameter of the spectrum is the single radial frequency which can be related
to the radius of that circle. The radial frequency is inversely proportional to the transverse dimension of
the intensity proﬁle of the beam. Because the ideal nondiﬀracting beams transfer an inﬁnite energy, they
can be realized only approximately in experiments. They are usually called the pseudo-nondiﬀracting
beams. The simplest model of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam can be obtained if the nondiﬀracting
beam is transmitted through the aperture whose transparency is described by the Gaussian function.
The energy of the transmitted beam is then ﬁnite but its angular spectrum possesses the spread caused
by the aperture. As a result, the propagation invariance of the transverse intensity proﬁle is lost but the
fundamental diﬀerences between propagation properties of the conventional and the pseudo-nondiﬀracting
beams still exist. In [12] they were demonstrated on the composition of the angular spectra of both types
of beams. The main results of that analysis can be concluded as follows:

17

(77)

(78)

(79)

(80)

(81)

(82)

• The conventional beam with the spatial bandwidth 2∆r transmitted through the aperture with the
transverse dimension 2∆R possesses the angular spectrum with the uncertainty 2∆θ. If ∆R >> ∆r,
the spread of the angular spectrum depends on the transverse size 2∆r of the beam impinging on
the aperture. This dependence can be written as the uncertainty relation

(84)

(85)

∆r∆θ = const.

∆R∆θ = const.

• The pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam is obtained if the nondiﬀracting beam with the intensity spot size
2∆r is transmitted through the aperture with the transverse dimension 2∆R. If ∆R >> ∆r, the
spread of the angular spectrum of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam is given by the relation

The spread of the angular spectrum of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam depends only on ∆R. If
the size of the aperture 2∆R is constant, ∆θ remains unchanged even if the spot size 2∆r of the
beam impinging on the aperture decreases. This property represents the fundamental diﬀerence
It represents an essence of the
between the conventional and the pseudo-nondﬀracting beams.
pseudo-nondiﬀracting propagation. In this sense we can speak of the diﬀraction elimination. The
property (85) is graphically illustrated in Fig. 19. The transverse intensity proﬁles of the non-
diﬀracting beams impinging on the Gaussian aperture are illustrated in Fig. 19a and 19c. The
corresponding annular spectra are illustrated in Fig. 19b and 19d. As is obvious, the reduction of
the size of the intensity spot of the input beam changes only diameter of the annular ring but its
width important for the diﬀractive divergence of the beam remains unchanged.

For the constant intensity spot size of the impinging nondiﬀracting beam 2∆r, the spread of the
angular spectrum 2∆θ and also the diﬀractive divergence of the transmitted pseudo-nondiﬀracting
beam 2∆ϑ can be reduced if the window is enlarged. As the impinging nondiﬀracting beam falls
to zero in the transverse direction very slowly, the reduction of the diﬀractive spread is associated
with the increase of the energy consumption.

• The price payed for the reduction of the diﬀraction eﬀects is shortening of the longitudinal range

of the beam existence ∆z. It is given by the relation

For the constant size of the aperture 2∆R, the longitudinal range ∆z is shortened if the spot size
of the beam impinging on the window decreases.

∆z∆θ = const∆r.

(86)

9 EXPERIMENTS AND APPLICATIONS

The monochromatic coherent nondiﬀracting beam can be comprehended as an interference ﬁeld
produced by the superposition of plane waves whose propagation vectors form the conical surface. Such
interference ﬁeld can be realized in a good approximation by several methods (see [39] for a review).
The simple way how to generate the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam whose transverse amplitude proﬁle
resembles the zero-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind J0 was proposed by Durnin et al [56]. The used
experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. 20. In that experiment the spatially ﬁltered and expanded laser
beam illuminates the annular ring mask placed at the front focal plane of the lens. The mask serves as
a secondary source generating spherical waves. Each of them is transformed by the lens to the beam of
parallel rays propagating with the angle θ0 with respect to the optical axis. The beam-like interference
ﬁeld with the J0 transverse amplitude proﬁle appears in the interference region behind the lens where
the beams intersect. The spot size of the generated beam depends on the angle θ0. The radius of the
beam central spot r0 can be approximated by r0 ≈ λ/sinθ0. For angles close to π/2 the light tubes
with the size comparable to the wavelength can be obtained. The longitudinal distance L where the
beam is available without changes of its transverse intensity proﬁle depends on the angle θ0 and on the

18

size of the aperture of the Fourier lens. The distance where the beam of the given spot size propagates
without apparent changes of its intensity proﬁles can be controlled by the size of the lens aperture. The
pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam can be obtained even if an arbitrary amplitude and/or phase modulation is
applied at the plane of the annular mask. For example, the Bessel-like beams of higher-order can be
realized if the spiral phase plate is adjacent to the annular ring. Production of such phase plate is a
complicated technical problem. It can be successfully prepared applying the photolitographic techniques.
If the phase plate causes the azimuthal phase modulation given by exp(imϕ), the m-th order Bessel beam
is approximately generated. Its axial intensity is equal to zero so that the beam is dark and exhibits phase
properties of the optical vortices. The pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams can also be realized by the azimuthal
amplitude modulation of the annular ring mask. For example, it can be achieved if the annular mask is
illuminated by the one-dimensional strip pattern with the Gaussian proﬁle. The obtained beam represents
a good approximation of the Mathieu beam. The pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam can also be obtained as
an interference ﬁeld produced by the discrete superposition of plane waves. In that case the annular ring
mask is transparent only at the ﬁnite number of points. It can be simply realized by means of the auxiliary
amplitude mask. If the annular ring mask is illuminated by the source whose correlation properties can
be controlled the partially-coherent nondiﬀracting beams can be generated. In [31] their properties were
examined for the illumination realized applying the Gaussian Shell-model source. The self-imaging eﬀect
can be experimentally realized if the amplitude mask consisting of a set of annular rings with the required
diameters is used. The experimental veriﬁcation of that eﬀect was presented in [16]. Another possible
way how to obtain an interference ﬁeld of plane waves whose wave vectors form the conical surface is
based on the use of the refractive axicon illuminated by the collimate laser beam [37, 35]. An advantage
of that method is the high eﬃciency with which the power of the common laser beam can be converted
into the pseudo-nondiﬀracting form. In [57, 58] it was shown that the action of the annular mask or the
refractive axicon can be alternatively performed by the computer-generated axicon-type hologram. In that
way the beam approximating the zero-order Bessel beam was obtained with the relative high conversion
eﬃciency approaching 50% [59]. The dark higher-order Bessel beams were also successfully generated
by the holographic means [60, 61]. The simple but eﬃcient method providing a good approximation of
the zero-order Bessel beam can be realized applying the centrally obscured lens exhibiting the spherical
aberration [37]. In [38] a possibility to convert the Gaussian beam to the zero-order Bessel beam applying
the two-element refracting system was examined. In that method the conversion eﬃciency is good but
the system is hardly realizable because the optical elements with the aspheric surfaces are required. The
general pseudo-nondiﬀracting patterns useful for the optical interconnection applications were realized
by means of the magneto-optic spatial light modulators [62, 36]. The pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams can
be also generated directly at the laser resonator. The special resonator construction was proposed in [63].
Recently, the experiment enabling generation of the nondiﬀracting beams with the controllable spatial
coherence was proposed and realized [31]. It is based on the use of the pseudothermal , so called Gaussian
Shell-model source. In that case the optical scheme in Fig. 20 remains unchanged but the coherent laser
beam illuminating the annular ring is replaced by the source shown in Fig. 21. The coherent laser beam
is focused to the rotating diﬀuser where its phase is randomized. The beam spot created at the diﬀuser
serves as a spatially incoherent source illuminating the annular ring. During free propagation between
the diﬀuser and the annular mask the spatial coherence of the beam is increased so that the annular
ring is illuminated by the partially coherent light. Its coherence properties can be continuously changed
by the change of the beam spot at the rotating diﬀuser and described mathematically applying the Van
Cittert-Zernike theorem. The light illumination can be changed from fully incoherent to nearly fully
coherent. The change of the spatial coherence was applied to the optical set-up enabling generation of
the nondiﬀracting beams with the predetermined transverse intensity proﬁle [5]. The optical scheme is
shown in Fig. 22. The required amplitude proﬁle of the beam is predicted by the source array. The mask
is then illuminated by the light of the controllable spatial coherence. The required amplitude proﬁle
is then replicated as the nondiﬀracting pattern. The method works in such a way that each point of
the source array excites the nondiﬀracting spot whose size and form can be driven by the experiment
geometry. The position of the nondiﬀracting spot is deﬁned by the position of the source point. The
nondiﬀracting pattern is obtained as a superposition of the nondiﬀracting spots. The ﬁdelity of the
replication is highest if the nondiﬀracting modes are superposed incoherently.

The unique properties of the nondiﬀracting beams are useful for both the technical and physical
applications. The propagation invariance of their transverse intensity proﬁle is applicable in metrology
for scanning optical systems [41]. The nondiﬀracting beams are also suitable for large-scale straitness

19

measurement and other large size measurement [64] because are much less inﬂuenced by atmospheric
turbulence than other beams [65]. Attention was concentrated also to the imaging applications of the
nondiﬀracting beams. It was veriﬁed that the imaging realized with nondiﬀracting beams can provide an
extremely long focal dept. In [66], a kilometer-long imaging was proposed and examined. An increasing
attention is devoted to the nondiﬀracting beams for their applicability in nonlinear optics.
In [42],
it was shown that the nondiﬀracting Bessel beam can be viewed as a light beam with the tunable
wavelength. Due to that property, the phase-matched second-harmonic generation at angles usually not
suited for phase matching in a KDP crystal was performed. The application of the nondiﬀracting beams
to the third-harmonic generation [67] and to the ˇCerenkov second-harmonic generation in bulk optical
crystals was also proposed [68]. An eﬃcient conical emission of light in Raman scattering stimulated by
nondiﬀracting Bessel beam was examined in [69]. The Bessel pump beam was applied also to the design
of the distributed-feedback laser [70]. The nondiﬀracting beams were applied to increase the sensitivity
of the measurement of the nonlinear refractive index by the Z-scan method [71]. The radially polarized
nondiﬀracting beams possess the strong longitudinal component of the electric ﬁeld. That component can
accelerate the particles of the electron beam propagating nearly collinearly with the laser nondiﬀracting
beam [72]. Recently, the application of the nondiﬀracting beams signiﬁcantly improved the techniques for
manipulations of micrometer-sized particles. The self-reconstruction ability of the nondiﬀracting beam
enables to manipulate ensembles of particles simultaneously in multiple planes [73, 44]. The nondiﬀracting
vortex beams are perspective for the research focused to the transfer of the orbital angular momentum
to the particles. The obtained results are promising for realization of the light motors whose rotors can
be forced by the laser beam. The nondiﬀracting beams are also perspective for the atom guiding in their
optical potential [74].

10 CONCLUSIONS

In the paper, theoretical concepts, mathematical methods of description and numerical simulations
of the nondiﬀracting propagation were reviewed. The particular attention was focused to the physical
properties of nondifracting beams and to their physical applications such as 3D light synthesis, self-
imaging and self-healing eﬀects and the transfer of the orbital angular momentum to the material particles.
The experimental realization of nondiﬀracting beams and their technical aplications were also presented.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the projects LN00A015 and CEZ J14/98 of the Ministry of Education
of the Czech Republic and by EU grant under QIPC project IST-1999-13071 (QUICOV). Dr. J. Wagner
and prof. J. Peˇrina are acknowledged for experimental veriﬁcations of the theoretical results and for
lasting interest, furtherance and inspiration.

[4] S. Ch´avez-Cerda, G.S. McDonald, and G.H.C. New: 1996 Opt. Commun. 123 (1996) 225.

References

[1] J. Durnin: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4 (1987) 651.

[2] Z. Bouchal: 1993 J. Mod. Opt. 40 (1993) 1325.

[3] J. Rushin: J. Opt. soc. Am. A 11 (1994) 3224.

[5] Z. Bouchal: Opt. Lett. 15 (2002) 1.

[6] S.R. Mishra: Opt. Commun. 85 (1991) 159.

[7] J. Turunen, and A.T. Friberg: Pure Appl. Opt. 2 (1993) 51.

20

[8] Z. Bouchal, and M. Oliv´ık: J. Mod. Opt. 42 (1995) 1555.

[9] Z. Bouchal, J. Bajer, and M. Bertolotti: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 15 (1998) 2172.

[10] F. Gori, G. Guattari, and C. Padovani: Opt. Commun 64 (1987) 491.

[11] P.L. Overfelt, and C.S. Kenney: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8 (1991) 732.

[12] Z. Bouchal: Opt. Commun. 197 (2001) 23.

[13] R.P. MacDonald, S.A. Boothroyd, T. Okamoto, J. Chrostowski, and B.A. Syrett: Opt. Commun.

122 (1996) 169.

[14] Z. Bouchal, J. Wagner, and M. Chlup: Opt. Commun. 151 (1998) 207.

[15] P. Szwaykowski, and J. Ojeda-Castaneda: Opt. Commun. 83 (1991) 1.

[16] Z. Bouchal, R. Hor´ak, and J. Wagner: J. Mod. Opt. 43 (1996) 1905.

[17] Z. Bouchal, and J. Wagner: Opt. Commun. 176 (2000) 299.

[18] Z. Bouchal, and R. Hor´ak: J. Mod. Opt. 48 (2001) 333.

[19] Z. Bouchal, and M. Bertolotti: J. Mod. Opt. 47 (2000) 1455.

[20] J. Wagner, and Z. Bouchal: Opt. Commun. 176 (2000) 309.

[21] Z. Bouchal, and J. Kyvalsk´y: J. Mod. Opt. (2003) (submitted).

[22] G. Indebetow: J. Mod. Opt. 40 (1993) 73.

[23] I.V. Basistiy, M.S. Soskin, and M.V. Vasnetsov: Opt. Commun. 119 (1995) 604.

[24] W.L. Power, L. Allan, M. Babiker, and V.E. Lembessis: Phys. Rev. A 52 (1995) 52.

[25] Z. Bouchal: Opt. Commun. 210 (2002) 155.

[26] Z. Bouchal: Revival of the orbital angular momentum of the vortex beam after interaction with
nontransparent obstacle, In: Photonics Prague 02, Proc. Conf. Photonics, Prague (2002) (in print).

[27] J. Turunen, A. Vasara, and A.T. Friberg: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8 (1991) 282.

[28] A.T. Friberg, A. Vasara, and J. Turunen: Phys. Rev. A 43 (1991) 7079.

[29] M. Zahid, and M.S. Zubairy: Opt. Commun. 70 (1989) 361.

[30] A.V. Shchegrov, and E. Wolf: Opt. Lett. 25 (2000) 141.

[31] Z. Bouchal, and J. Peˇrina: J. Mod. Opt. 49 (2001) 1673.

[32] J. Durnin, J.J. Miceli, and J.H. Eberly: Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987) 1499.

[33] J. Turunen, A. Vasara, and A.T. Friberg: Appl. Opt. 27 (1988) 3959.

[34] G. Indebetouw: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 6 (1989) 150.

[35] G. Scott, and N. McArdle: Opt. Eng. 31 (1992) 2640.

[36] J. Davis, E. Carcole, and D.M. Cottrell: Appl. Opt. 35 (1996) 599.

[37] R.M. Herman, and T.A. Wiggins: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8 (1991) 932.

[38] K.M. Iftekharudim, A.A.S. Awwal, and M.A. Karim: Appl. Opt. 32 (1993) 2252.

[39] M.R. Lapointe: Opt. & Laser Techn. 24 (1992) 315.

[40] J. Lu, and J.F. Greenleaf: Acoust. Imag. 20 (1993) 331.

[41] R. Arimoto, C. Saloma, T. Tanaka, and S. Kawata: Appl. Opt. 31 (1992) 6653.

21

[42] T. Wulle, and S. Herminghaus: Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 1401.

[43] R.D. Romea, and W.D. Kimura: Phys. Rev. D 42 (1990) 1807.

[44] V. Garc´es-Ch´avez, D. McGloin, H. Melville, W. Sibbett, and K. Dholakia: Nature 419 (2002) 145.

[45] G. Arfken: Mathematical Methods for Physicists, Academic Press, San Diego 1985.

[46] I.S. Gradshteyn, and I.M. Ryzhik: Table of integrals, Series and Products, Academic Press, London

1994.

[47] G. Gouesbet, L. Mees, and G. Gr´ehan: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 15 (1998) 3028.

[48] J.C. Guti´errez-Vega, M.D. Iturbe-Castillo, and S. Ch´avez-Cerda: Opt. Lett. 25 (2000) 1493.

[49] J.C. Guti´erez-Vega, M.D. Iturbe-Castillo, G.A. Ram´ırez, E. Tepich´ın, R.M. Rodr´ıguez-Dagnino, S.

Ch´avez-Cerda, and G.H.C. New: Opt. Commun. 195 (2001) 35.

[50] L. Mandel, and E. Wolf: Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1995.

[51] J.A. Straton: Electromagnetic Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York 1941.

[52] R. Hor´ak, Z. Bouchal, and J. Bajer: Opt. Commun. 133 (1997) 315.

[53] J. Kyvalsk´y, and Z. Bouchal: Optik 6 (2001) 225.

[54] B. Haﬁzi, and P. Sprangle: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8 (1991) 705.

[55] Y. Ananev: Opt. Spectrosc. 64 (1988) 722.

[56] J. Durnin, J.J. Micely Jr., and J.H. Eberly: Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (1987) 1499.

[57] J. Turunen, A. Vasara, and A.T. Friberg: Appl. Opt. 27 (1988) 3959.

[58] A. Vasara, J. Turunen, and A.T. Friberg: J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 6 (1989) 1748.

[59] H.S. Lee, B.W. Steward, D. Will, and H. Fenichel: Appl. Phys. Lett. 59 (1991) 3096.

[60] H.S. Lee, B.W. Steward, K. Choi, and H. Fenichel: Phys. Rev. A 49 (1994) 4922.

[61] C. Paterson, and R. Smith: Opt. Commun. 124 (1996) 121.

[62] J.A. Davis, E. Carcole, and D.M. Cottrell: Appl. Opt. 35 (1996) 593.

[63] K. Uehara, and H. Kikuchi: Appl. Phys. B 48 (1989) 124.

[64] K. Wang, L. Zeng, and Ch. Yin: Opt. Commun. 216 (2003) 99.

[65] T. Aruga, S.W. Li, S. Yoshidako, M. Takabe, R.M. Li: Appl. Opt. 38 (1999) 3152.

[66] S.W. Li, and T. Aruga: In: Optics for Science and New Technology, SPIE Proc. 2778 (1996) 105.

[67] S.P. Tewari, H. Huang, and R.W. Boyd: Phys. Rev. A 54 (1996) 2314.

[68] M.K. Pandit, and F.P. Payne: Opt. Quantum Electron. 29 (1997) 35.

[69] L.Niggl, and M. Maier: Opt. Lett. 22 (1997) 910.

[70] S. Klewitz, F. Brinkmann, S. Herminghaus, and P. Leiderer: Appl. Opt. 34 (1995) 7670.

[71] S. Hughes, and J.M. Burzler: Phys. Rev. A 56 (1997) 56.

[72] S.C. Tidwell, D.H. Ford, and W.D. Kimura: Opt. Eng. 31 (1992) 1527.

[73] M. Hegner: Nature 419 (2002) 125.

[74] J. Arlt, T. Hitomi, and K. Dholakia: Appl. Phys. B 71 (2000) 549.

22

Figure captions

Fig. 1
The Bessel beam as a superposition of the travelling waves given by the Hankel functions. The outgoing
wave travelling away from the axis (a) and the incoming wave travelling towards the axis (b) create the
standing wave represented by the Bessel function (c).

Fig. 2
The transverse intensity proﬁles of the bright zero-order Bessel beam (a) and the dark ﬁrst-order Bessel
beam (b).

Fig. 3
The helical wavefronts of the nondiﬀracting vortex beams for the topological charge (a) m = 1 and (b)
m=2.

Fig. 4
Visualisation of the optical vortices. Interference of the optical vortex m = 1 with the spherical wave
results in spiral and fork-like interference patterns (a) and (b).
Interference of the vortex with the
topological charge m = 2 is in (c) and (d).

Fig. 5
The transverse intensity proﬁle of the Mathieu beams for parameters (a) w0 = 4ν0 and (b) w0 = 2ν0.

Fig. 6
The caleidoscopic nondiﬀracting patterns obtained as a discrete superposition of the ﬁnite number of
plane waves: (a) N = 5, (b) N = 10, (c) N = 15, and (d) N = 30.

Fig. 7
Illustration of the nondiﬀracting ﬁeld as a superposition of ﬁve cosine gratings with the same period and
various orientations.

Fig. 8
Nondiﬀracting beams with the variable spatial coherence. The fully coherent dark vortex beam (a) is
continuously changed to the bright nondiﬀracting beam (b)-(d) if the spatial coherence is decreased.

Fig. 9
Illustration of the degree of angular correlation of the plane waves creating the partially coherent
nondiﬀracting beam.

Fig. 10
Change of the vortex topology caused by the change of the spatial coherence. The vortex of the coherent
beam (a) vanishes if the spatial coherence is decreased (b)-(d).

Fig. 11
Spatial shaping of coherent and incoherent nondiﬀracting ﬁelds. The required intensity proﬁle (a) is
replicated in the nondiﬀracting beam created with incoherent light (b) and coherent light (c). In (d) and
(c) the parameter α of the nondiﬀracting spots is increased so that their size is reduced.

Fig. 12
The same as in Fig. 11 but for the continuous required intensity proﬁle.

Fig. 13
Illustration of the vectorial electromagnetic nondiﬀracting beams. The azimuthal polarization of the
electric ﬁeld (a) and the radially polarized magnetic ﬁeld (b). The short arrows illustrate the magnitude
and direction of the transverse components of the ﬁeld vectors at the separate points of the transverse
plane.

Fig. 14
Experimental veriﬁcation of the resistance of the nondiﬀracting beam against amplitude and phase
perturbations. The nondiﬀracting beam impinging on the nontransparent obstacle is fully revived during
free propagation behind the obstacle.

Fig. 15
Healing of the spatial distribution of the orbital angular momentum of the disturbed nondiﬀracting vortex
beam. The initial beam with the spatial distribution of the orbital angular momentum (a) interacts with

23

the complex object which takes the orbital angular momentum and rotates. After interaction the spatial
distribution of the beam orbital angular momentum is disturbed (b)-(c) but during free propagation is
revived to the nearly initial form (d).

Fig. 16
Healing of the vortex topology after interaction with the complex object accompanied by the exchange
of the orbital angular momentum.

Fig. 17
The self-imaging eﬀect obtained due to the coherent superposition of the nondiﬀracting modes. The
transverse intensity proﬁle appears periodically along the propagation direction z with the longitudinal
period controllable by the choice of the angular wavenumbers of the nondiﬀracting modes.

Fig. 18
Comparison of the controlable shaping of the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds (a) with the 3D light bending (b). By
the light bending the required transverse proﬁle appear only at the near vicinity of the planes placed
periodically along the propagation direction so that the light is conﬁned at 3 dimensions. By that method
the light can be localized in the volume elements with dimensions comparable to the wavelength.

Fig. 19
Illustration of spatial spectrum of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam. The pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam with
intensity proﬁle (a) possesses the spatial spectrum of the form (b). If the intensity proﬁle is rescaled
(c), the spread of the spatial spectrum (width of the ring) remains unchanged (d). On that behavior
the unique properties of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams are based and it cannot be achieved by the
conventional beams.

Fig. 20
Experimantal set-up enabling generation of the pseudo-nondiﬀracting beam.

Fig. 21
Gaussian Shall-model source used for generation of the partially coherent pseudo-nondiﬀracting beams.

Fig. 22
Optical set-up for generation of the nondiﬀracting ﬁelds with the predetermined intensity proﬁle.

24

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig12.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig13.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig14.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig15.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig16.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig17.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig18.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig19.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig20.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig21.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

This figure "fig22.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0309109v1

