3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Blending of nanoscale and microscale in uniform large–area

sculptured thin–ﬁlm architectures

Mark W. Horn, Matthew D. Pickett, Russell Messier and Akhlesh Lakhtakia1

Department of Engineering Science & Mechanics, Pennsylvania State University,

University Park, PA 16802–6812, USA

Abstract

The combination of large thickness (> 3 µm), large–area uniformity (75 mm diameter),

high growth rate (up to 0.4 µm/min) in assemblies of complex–shaped nanowires on

lithographically deﬁned patterns has been achieved for the ﬁrst time. The nanoscale and

the microscale have thus been blended together in sculptured thin ﬁlms with transverse

architectures. SiOx (x

2) nanowires were grown by electron–beam evaporation onto

≈

silicon substrates both with and without photoresist lines (1–D arrays) and checkerboard

(2–D arrays) patterns. Atomic self–shadowing due to oblique–angle deposition enables

the nanowires to grow continuously, to change direction abruptly, and to maintain con-

stant cross–sectional diameter. The selective growth of nanowire assemblies on the top

surfaces of both 1–D and 2–D arrays can be understood and predicted using simple

Keywords: nanofabrication, nanoscale pattern forming, sculptured thin ﬁlm, vacuum

geometrical shadowing equations.

PACS: 81.16.-c, 81.15.Ef, 81.16.Rf

deposition

1

Introduction

Raise the temperature and lower the pressure suﬃciently, and virtually any solid material

shall begin to evaporate. Condense the directional vapor on a substrate at a temperature
1Corresponding author. Tel: +1 814 863 4319; Fax: +1 814 865 9974; E–mail: AXL4@psu.edu

1

less than about a third of its melting point, and you will obtain a columnar thin ﬁlm

with column diameters on the order of tens of nanometers. The technology of columnar

thin ﬁlms (CTFs) was born in 1885, when Kundt collected the vapor from a solid on a

substrate held at an oblique angle to the incident, directed vapor ﬂux 1¸. Even before

the commercial advent of transmission electron microscopes (TEM) in the 1950s and

scanning electron microscopes (SEM) in the 1960s, it was known from optical experiments

that such ﬁlms are anisotropic 2¸ — not unlike crystals. However, unlike the anisotropy

of crystal structures, the anisotropy of CTFs is morphological: Self–shadowing at the

atomic level 3¸ leads to parallel columns growing towards the obliquely incident vapor

ﬂux, albeit at an angle to the average direction 4¸. TEMs and SEMs eventually provided

visual evidence of the nm–scale morphology of CTFs grown by oblique–angle deposition

5¸, thereby conﬁrming the optical analogy with crystals.

Also unlike crystals, the separated and slanted nanocolumns (currently termed nano-

wires) can be shaped during growth by substrate motion 6¸. Elementary experiments

were reported by (i) Young and Kowal in 1959 7¸ who rotated the substrate about an axis

passing normally through it, and (ii) Nieuwenhuizen and Haanstra in 1966 5¸ who altered

the substrate tilt with respect to the average direction of the incident vapor ﬂux once

during deposition. The products of these experiments were the precursors of sculptured

thin ﬁlms (STFs) developed during the last decade 6¸, chieﬂy for optical but also other

applications 8¸.

STFs are assemblies of parallel, shaped nanowires that can be fabricated by design

using physical vapor deposition techniques, such as thermal and arc evaporation, sputter-

ing, and pulsed laser ablation 4,8,9,10¸

. As the nanostructure comprises multimolecular

clusters of 3–5 nm diameter, rapid changes in the average direction of the incident va-

por ﬂux relative to the substrate lead to the growth of parallel nanowires of curvilinear

shapes. At infrared, visible and lower ultraviolet wavelengths, the assembly of nanowires

can be eﬀectively considered as a continuous anisotropic medium whose electromagnetic

response properties are inhomogeneous normal to the substrate 11¸ — which allows the

exploitation of commonplace design techniques for devices such as optical polarizers,

2

ﬁlters and sensors 8,9¸ .

The STFs fabricated thus far possess, for the most part, simple transverse archi-

tectures, as the constituent nanowires are randomly nucleated on the substrate. The

ﬁlm growth rates can also be low, depending on the deposition method employed, due

to the large oblique angles during deposition. Furthermore, the transverse area rarely

exceeds 1 cm

1 cm without signiﬁcant loss of transverse uniformity. These three fac-

×

tors have stymied the economic exploitation of STFs, despite the theoretical design and

experimental realization of many STF–based optical devices 8,9¸ . Fabrication of complex

STFs of large transverse area and at high deposition rates would increase the economic

attraction of STFs.

We present here a newly realized technique to economically grow thick, uniform,

large–area STFs with transverse architectures that blend the nanoscale and the mi-

croscale. Our work goes beyond initial work on patterned growth in thin ﬁlms 12¸ –14¸

in that we examine diﬀerent microscale architectures employing a range of feature sizes

and shapes with controlled depth and shape of topography, and have achieved this over

relatively large (75 mm dia) areas.

We have chosen to illustrate the growth of sculptured nanowire assemblies by exam-

ining the deposition of SiOx, a dielectric substance, on substrates photolithographically

patterned with posts, holes, and various densities of lines and spaces that were generated

using a deep ultraviolet (DUV) stepper. Although we have examined the deposition of

several materials (such as SnO2, Mo, Cr and Al) in addition to SiOx, for the sake of

brevity we only show examples of SiOx ﬁlms deposited at a single angle of vapor–ﬂux

incidence. We continue to investigate STFs grown at various oblique angles of vapor–ﬂux

incidence, deposition rates, and substrate rotational velocities in order to better under-

stand how the initial topography of the substrate aﬀects the growth and expansion of

nanowires.

3

2 Experimental

A 10–kW dual electron–gun evaporator was used to obliquely deposit material on either

ﬁxed or rotating substrates, as shown schematically in Fig. 1a and b. The system was
10−7 Torr. A 100–cc, 50–mm diameter crucible

cryopumped to a base pressure of 5

×

was charged with pellets of SiO2 before each deposition. Deposition rates were measured

using a quartz crystal monitor (QCM) held perpendicular to the vapor ﬂux. The mea-

sured deposition rate depends on the mass density of the vapor ﬂux, and is quite diﬀerent

from the ﬁlm growth rate deﬁned as the rate of increase of ﬁlm thickness. Deposition

rates from 54 to 480 nm/min were measured, while the ﬁlm growth rates varied between

100 and 1000 nm/min. Nanowire shapes were controlled via computer, and substrate

rotational velocities ranged from 0.5 to 36 rpm.

Figure 1: Schematic of the deposition system. (a) Side view; (b) Front view.

The throw distance to the center of the rotating substrate was 250 mm, and the

center of the wafer was nominally positioned directly above the center of the crucible;

see Fig. 1a. Unlike previous work, the electron beam in our system was rastered over

a large portion of the crucible, and the ﬂux produced more closely resembles a uniform

ﬂat source, analogous to a plane wave in electromagnetics textbooks 15¸ , than a point

source. Furthermore, the mean free path during deposition was much greater than the

source–to–substrate distance, leading to line–of–sight deposition. Thus, the arriving

vapor ﬂux is highly directed, thereby eliminating the need for collimation. For example,

we observed uniformity of thickness and morphology of complex sculptured nanowires

across the diameter of a 75 mm substrate. However, highly directed vapor ﬂux leads to

signiﬁcant local nonuniformity due to shadowing eﬀects for oblique incidence on non–

planar (i.e., patterned) substrates.

4

The substrates upon which the sculptured nanowire assemblies were deposited con-

sisted of a 1 cm

1 cm die of a silicon wafer patterned with a photoresist stack placed

×

on top of and near the outer edge of a 75 mm silicon wafer, as shown schematically in

Fig. 1b. The substrates were clipped into place on a rotating substrate holder driven by

an external stepper motor via a rotary vacuum feed–through. For all ﬁlms presented in
this paper, the vapor ﬂux was directed at an angle χv = 15◦ to the substrate plane.

The photoresist features shown throughout this paper were generated using a reso-

lution test mask and a DUV (248 nm) stepper. A Shipley UV5 photoresist was applied

to a 150 mm silicon wafer coated with a Shipley lift–oﬀ photoresist (LOR) layer. The

two–layer photoresist stack — used to facilitate selective removal of a deposited ﬁlm —

was then exposed, baked after exposure, and then developed to yield a wide variety of

1–D and 2–D features from 0.4 µm to hundreds of microns wide and 0.8 µm high with

nearly vertical sidewalls. After deposition, the ﬁlms were cleaved into smaller pieces and

were analyzed in cross–section using a LEO 1530 ﬁeld emission SEM (FESEM), usually

at voltages between 2 and 5 kV to minimize charging of the dielectric nanowires.

3 Results

Figures 2a and b are cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a two–section STF comprising

helical (chiral) nanowires and chevronic (nematic) nanowires grown sequentially, without

stopping the evaporation process. A ﬂat silicon wafer with no photoresist pattern was

used. The substrate revolution rate for the chiral section (with 3–D morphology) of the

STF was 4 rpm. The nematic section (with 2–D morphology) of the STF went through
75◦ with respect to the normal to
nine rapid changes of the substrate tilt (+75◦ to

−

the substrate), one change every 30 s. The deposition rate was ﬁxed at 120 nm/min.

The total height (i.e., thickness) of the ﬁlm, as measured using the SEM micrographs,

is approximately 4 µm. The total deposition time was 10 min, yielding an average

growth rate of 400 nm/min. Fig. 2a shows a total cross–section of the ﬁlm, whereas Fig.

2b shows a high magniﬁcation of the region where the ﬁlm abruptly, yet continuously,

5

transitions from the chiral section to the nematic section.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Cross–sectional SEM micrograph of a two–section STF comprising a ne-

matic section on top of a chiral section, grown without turning oﬀ the vapor ﬂux. The

ﬁlm was deposited on a ﬂat silicon (Si) substrate. (b) Highly magniﬁed view of the region

where the ﬁlm transitions from the 2 µm–high chiral section to the 1 µm-high nematic

section. Note the continuity between the helical and the chevronic nanowires.

Figures 3a and b are cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a two–section STF taken

at the center and edge, respectively, of a 75 mm substrate cleaved along its diameter.

This 2–section chiral STF was grown by varying the deposition rate while holding the

substrate rotational velocity ﬁxed at approximately 2 rpm. The deposition rate was

set at 54 nm/min for the ﬁrst section, and increased to about 300 nm/min for the

second section. The structure and density of the nanowires are very similar in both

micrographs, even though the center of the substrate must receive a relatively constant

vapor ﬂux during an entire revolution while the edge must experience some variation.

In our deposition chamber, if there was a large variation in deposition rate either from

the bottom to the top of the substrate or from the left to the right of the substrate

(see Fig. 1a), a signiﬁcant variation in the chiral morphology of the nanowires should be

expected. However, at least at the nanoscale, we see very little diﬀerence in the nanowire

assemblies deposited at the edge of a 75 mm rotating substrate with those grown at its

center, which is consistent with our assumption that the wide melt pool in the crucible

is acting more like a planar deposition source than a point source.

Figures 4a and b are cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a yet another diﬀerent STF

taken at the center and an edge, respectively, of a 75 mm dia silicon substrate. This

2–section ﬁlm was grown by ﬁxing the deposition rate at 120 nm/min and abruptly

6

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a two–section STF comprising two diﬀer-

ent chiral sections, grown on a ﬂat 75 mm dia silicon substrate without turning oﬀ the

vapor ﬂux. (a) Center of the substrate; (b) Edge of the substrate. The lower section

is 0.75 µm high, and the upper section is about 2.25 µm high. Note the uniformity in

morphology in ﬁlm growth over a large substrate.

changing the substrate rotation velocity from 1 to 36 rpm. Notice again the similarity in

morphology in the two diﬀerent cross–sections, conﬁrming the high degree of uniformity

of deposition across large areas. Also notice that, as the substrate rotational velocity

is increased, the helical shape of the individual nanowires is lost and larger diameter

nanocylinders grow orthogonal to the substrate surface.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a two–section STF comprising two diﬀer-

ent chiral sections, grown on a ﬂat 75 mm dia silicon substrate without turning oﬀ the

vapor ﬂux. (a) Center of the substrate; (b) Edge of the substrate. Note the uniformity

in morphology in ﬁlm growth over a large substrate.

Figure 5 is a cross–sectional SEM micrograph of a STF grown simultaneously with

the two–section STF of Fig. 2, except that the former was deposited on a photoresist–

patterned substrate. The micrograph in Fig. 5 shows the growth behavior at a single

1–D topographical step. The nanowire assembly in the left portion of Fig. 5 grew on

7

top of the 0.8–µm high photoresist and is morphologically similar to the STF of Fig. 2.

Likewise, the morphology of the nanowire assembly on the far right of Fig. 5, well away

from the step, is essentially the same. In all these cases there is no shadowing due to

the substrate; only self–shadowing occurs at the atomic level that leads to the growth

of individual nanowires. The ﬁlm that grows on the side of the photoresist step appears

much denser and devoid of distinct nanowires. However, zone 1 (see Fig. 5) shows

indications of layered, shadowed–growth during the 3–D chiral–section growth, and zone

4 displays oblique columnar shadowed-growth related to the 2–D nematic section. Zones

2 and 3, farther away from the shadowing ledge, have the appearance of chiral section.

The shadowing distance of a 0.8–µm high step is about 3 µm to the right of the step

(zone 2), followed by about a 1 µm transition region (zone 3) to the un-shadowed region

on the right of the micrograph.

Figure 5: Cross–sectional SEM micrograph of a two–section STF comprising a nematic

section on top of a chiral section, grown without turning oﬀ the vapor ﬂux. The ﬁlm was

deposited on a ﬂat silicon substrate with a 0.8–µm–high photoresist line.

The STF of Fig. 3 was also grown on a patterned–die substrate with 1.5–µm–wide

and 0.8–µm–high photoresist lines. Figures 6a and b provide cross–sectional SEM mi-

crographs of this ﬁlm. In Fig. 6a, we have focused on the morphology developed over a

single line. Shadowing by the 1–D topography is evident on both sides of the line. To

the left of the line, the shadowed–morphology zones are similar to those in Fig. 5. At a

distance far enough to the left of the line such that no shadowing occurs, the morphology

and thickness of the STF on the ﬂat Si substrate are the same as that grown on top of

the photoresist line. In the center of the micrograph, but still to the left of photoresist

line, the ﬁlm is noticeably thinner due to shadowing by the line, but it exhibits a similar

chiral morphology. Near the line, the shadow–related morphology can be divided into

8

several zones. Zone 1 is related to shadowed–growth on the lines sidewall, while zone

2 is shadowed–growth emanating from the Si substrate. The boundary between these

two zones appears to follow a power–law growth evolution that results from competition

between growths on the sidewall and the bottom surface 4¸. The boundary between zone

2 and the transition zone 3 (at about 4 µm from the left sidewall of the line) is less abrupt

than in Fig. 5 (where the upper section is of the nematic type in which the shadowing

eﬀects are more signiﬁcant, as discussed in the next section). The unshadowed–growth

at the left is almost 5.5 µm from the left sidewall of the line.

The very thin layer at the far right of the micrograph in Fig. 6a is shadow–related

growth onto an adjacent space between two photoresist lines with sidewall separation of

1.5 µm; see Fig. 6b. A thin but visible coating grew on the sidewalls and the bottom

of both 1.5–µm–wide spaces between adjacent photoresist lines. A lower magniﬁcation,

edge–on view of this ﬁlm is provided in Fig. 7a.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a two–section chiral STF deposited, on a

patterned–die Si substrate with 1.5–µm–wide and 0.8–µm–high photoresist lines, during

the same experiment as the ﬁlm presented in Fig. 3. Examples of shadow–controlled

morphology are shown: (a) at a sidewall, and (b) between adjacent lines.

Figures 7a–c are additional cross–sectional SEM micrographs of the same sample as

shown in Fig. 6, but taken edge–on at diﬀerent locations along a 1–D array of photoresist

lines. Fig. 7a focuses on growth on two sets of three lines. The lines and the spaces

between them are 1.5 µm in the left set, and 1.4 µm in the right set. A 3–µm–separation

between the two sets allows for shadow–growth comparisons for systematically varied

shadow geometries. The lower growth between the lines in a particular set is in contrast

to the higher growth between the two sets. Sets of lines with decreasing linewidths and

9

spacewidths are seen in Figs. 7b and c: going from left to right, the widths decrease

from 0.8 to 0.6 µm in Fig. 7b, and from 0.6 to 0.4 µm in Fig. 7. There is no observable

growth in the spaces of smaller widths, and very little growth on the sidewalls.

Figure 7: Cross–sectional SEM micrographs providing edge–on views (i.e., at 90◦ to the

substrate normal) of the same ﬁlm as in Fig. 6 for decreasing linewidths and spacewidths.

Larger separations of 3.5 µm (Fig. 7c) and 4.5 µm (Fig. 7b) can be seen between

adjacent sets of lines.

In these regions, growth on the bottom and on the sidewalls

increases in direct proportion to the sidewall–to–sidewall separation. Nanowire arrays

on the middle line of each set undergo an initial stage of lateral expansion, originating

at the photoresist corners and sidewalls, followed by a steady–state vertical growth.

The nanowire arrays on the middle lines maintain a nearly constant separation from

the respective outer lines for most of the 3.2–µm thickness of the ﬁlm, with only slight

rounding at the top edges. Also notice how this separation distance decreases with the

spacing between the photoresist lines.

Figures 8a–c are cross–sectional SEM micrographs of increasing magniﬁcation, show-

ing the same two–section ﬁlm described in Figs. 3, 6, and 7, except that this portion of the

ﬁlm was grown on a checkerboard pattern (2–D array) of photoresist. The checkerboard

dimensions are 1.5 µm

1.5 µm steps and wells. The chiral nanowires are selectively

×

deposited on top of the topographic features with no deposition occurring between the

features, which is evident from Fig. 8c. Thus, 2–D arrays of nanowire assemblies can be

deposited over large areas (Fig. 8a), with good uniformity (Fig. 8b), and with nearly

vertical sidewalls (Fig. 8c).

10

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: Cross–sectional SEM micrographs of a two–section chiral STF deposited on a

checkerboard pattern (2–D array) of photoresist.

4 Discussion

The combination of large thickness (> 3 µm), large–area uniformity (75 mm diameter),

high growth rate (up to 0.4 µm/min) STFs with complex nanowire shapes (Figs. 2–4) on

lithographically deﬁned patterns (Figs. 5–8) has been achieved for the ﬁrst time. Atomic
self–shadowing due to oblique–angle deposition (at 75◦ from the substrate normal, χv =
15◦) enables the nanowires to grow continuously, to change direction abruptly, and to

maintain constant cross–section, as seen in Fig. 2. By controlling the longer–range–

shadowing of the collimated, directed vapor ﬂux by the photoresist pattern geometries,

it has become possible to grow STFs selectively on the top surfaces of both 1–D lines

(Figs. 6 and 7) and 2–D checkerboard arrays (Fig. 8). The selectivity, as indicated

by growth on the sidewalls of the photoresist features and the bare bottom surfaces,

is directly related to the feature spacing which, in turn, is related to the geometrical

shadowing distances.

The various morphological features of the STFs emanating from the photoresist side-

walls and the bottom (silicon) surfaces, as noted and described in the last section, can

be understood in terms of simple geometrical shadowing. The shadowing distance ws of

(c)

11

a surface feature of sidewall height hsw due to an oblique angle ﬂux, as shown in Fig. 9,

is given by

ws = γshsw ,

(1)

where γs = 1/ tan χv is a geometrical factor and χv is the angle between the average

direction of the vapor ﬂux and the substrate plane. This equation has been applied

to atomic–level self–shadowing 4¸ and applies equally well to the sculptured nanowire
assemblies presented here. As χv = 15◦ and hsw = 0.8 µm for all ﬁlms in Figs. 2–8,

γs = 3.73. Therefore, the shadowing distance when the vapor direction is perpendicular

to the feature (e.g., photoresist line) is ws = 2.99 µm. This only describes shadowing of

the bottom surface perpendicularly adjacent to the sidewall of a 0.8 µm–high feature, as

in the case of 2–D nematic growth. If the separation of the features is less than ws, the

growth on the sidewall of an adjacent feature (see Fig. 9) will coat only a fraction δsw

of the sidewall from the top down; accordingly,

δsw =

wf
ws

,

(2)

where wf is the distance between the feature ledges. For small feature separations, as

studied here (see Figs. 7 and 8), δsw is much smaller than unity.

Figure 9: Schematic of a two–dimensional well between two adjacent photoresist lines,

and the geometry of shadowing.

With this simplistic model of shadowing behavior, it is possible to understand the

morphologies obtained in this study. In Fig. 5, for a single step where shadowing occurs

only from one direction, the width of zone 2 (deposition on the bottom surface) is about

3 µm which is close to the shadowing distance. The morphology at the bottom on the left

shows columns slanted upward to the right in the direction where the vapor is arriving

unshadowed. On the right side of zone 2, the columns becomes more vertical, likely the

result of shadowing from the faster growing ﬁlm on the far right that is growing un-

shadowed in all directions. The transition zone 3 appears to be related to the dynamic

12

shadowing eﬀects coupled with the change of deposition from multidirectional (chiral) to

bidirectional (chevronic) at which point the shadowing geometry is that shown in Fig.

9. Similar arguments can be made for understanding the morphology in Fig. 6a, though

the transition from the shadowed to unshadowed zones is more gradual, likely due to the

multidirectional growth during the complete ﬁlm deposition.

However, for many envisioned applications deposition will be desired only on the top

surface of a lithographically deﬁned pattern. This means that no vapor arrives at the

bottom surface, as in the case of nematic growth in the top section of the ﬁlm in Fig.

5, as well as for chiral growth on submicron–wide 1–D line arrays (Figs. 7b and 7c) and

1.5 µm

1.5 µm 2–D checkerboard arrays (Fig. 8). In general, the selectivity of growth

×

on the top surface versus growth on the sidewalls or bottom surfaces for diﬀerent pattern

geometries and deposition sequences can be predicted. For instance, if wf is increased

or hsw is decreased, a decrease in χv could be calculated for compensation.

The shadowing geometry gets more complicated when the vapor ﬂux is not temporally

unidirectional (inherent in the piecewise bidirectionality needed for growing chevronic

nanowires), but multidirectional (as for growing chiral nanowires).

In the latter case

as the substrate rotates relative to the average direction of the incident vapor ﬂux,

growth will occur down the spaces between adjacent photoresist lines casting an incident

vapor ﬂux that varies in angle and in position on the side–wall and bottom surface. For

substrate rotation at a constant angular velocity, as we undertook, the morphology of

the deposited ﬁlm will vary. More detailed mathematical descriptions and/or simulations

of this complex growth will be needed if deposition in the channels between features is

important. Furthermore, such a quantitative description will have to incorporate the

dynamic eﬀects of the advancing ﬁlm growth–front in all directions.

The experimental evidence in Fig. 7 shows that the growth at the bottom surfaces

between various 1–D arrays of photoresist lines (spaced 4.5, 3.5, 1.5, 1.4, 0.8, 0.6, 0.5,

and 0.4 µm apart) decreased from about 25% of the unshadowed thickness of the 4.5–

µm–spacing (Fig. 7b), to about 12% for the 1.5–µm–spacing (Fig. 7a), and to essentially

zero thickness for sidewall–to–sidewall separations of 0.8 µm and less (Figs. 7b and 7c).

13

For the 2–D checkerboard array with 1.5 µm

1.5 µm

0.8 µm shadowed wells (Fig. 8),

×
there is no visible growth on the bottom surface, since the largest value of ws is 1.5√2 µm

×

along the checkerboard diagonal direction, which leads to δsw = 0.71. Thus, the growth

will be just 71% of the sidewall growth in the worst case, with no growth predicted

on the bottom surface. The sidewall growth leads to initial expansion of the nanowire

assemblies (see Fig. 8c), followed by parallel, vertical growth, once the separation is

about 1 µm. As the separation changes, so does the shadowing geometry. Therefore, the

selectivity of growth on the pattern’s top surface will improve as wf is reduced and/or

χv is decreased.

5 Concluding Remarks

We have reported the fabrication of ﬁlms comprising assemblies of sculptured SiOx nano-

wires grown on lithographically patterned substrates, thereby incorporating transverse

architectures uniformly over large–area substrates in STF technology. The density and

morphology of the nanowire assemblies is dependent on the direction of the vapor ﬂux

and the local self–shadowing environment, according to straightforward geometrical con-

siderations. We have shown that chiral nanowires can be selectively grown on patterned

substrates. The spacing of the array where selective growth is achievable is determined

by the direction of the vapor ﬂux angle and the height of the initial (i.e., substrate)

topography. The ability to sculpture the nanowires out of any material which can eas-

ily be deposited by a physical vapor deposition technique — coupled with micro-and

macroscale 1– and 2–dimensional topographic substrates — opens a whole new realm

of photonic, ﬂuidic and sensor devices 8,9,10,11,17

¸

. Such applications include nanowire

assemblies for bionanotechnology 18, 19¸

, as well as for photonic bandgap engineering 20¸ .

Acknowledgement This work was supported in part by the Penn State Materials Research

Science and Engineering Center.

14

References

[1] Kundt A 1886 Ueber Doppelbrechung des Lichtes in Metallschichten, welche durch

Zerst¨auben einer Kathode hergestellt sind Ann. Phys. Chem. Lpz. 27 59

[2] Hodgkinson I J and Wu Q h 1998 Birefringent Thin Films and Polarizing Elements,

World Scientiﬁc, Singapore

[3] K¨onig H and Helwig G 1950 ¨Uber die Struktur schr¨ag aufgedampfter Schichten und

ihr Einﬂuß auf die Entwicklung submikroskopischer Oberﬂ¨achenrauhigkeiten Optik

6 111

Tech. Rev. 27 87

[4] Messier R, Venugopal V C and Sunal P D 2000 Origin and evolution of sculptured

thin ﬁlms J. Vac Sci. Technol. A 18 1538

[5] Nieuwenhuizen J M and Haanstra H B 1966 Microfractography of thin ﬁlms Philips

[6] Lakhtakia A and Messier R 1994 The key to a thin ﬁlm HBM: the Motohiro–Taga

interface Proceedings of Chiral ’94 (eds Mariotte F and Parneix J–P.), CEA/CESTA

& PIOM/ENSCPB, Bordeaux, France, 125

[7] Young N O and Kowal J 1959 Optically active ﬂuorite ﬁlms Nature 183 104

[8] Lakhtakia A 2002 Sculptured thin ﬁlms: accomplishments and emerging uses Mater.

[9] Hodgkinson I J and Wu Q h 2001 Inorganic chiral optical materials Adv. Mater. 13

[10] Suzuki M and Taga Y 2001 Integrated sculptured thin ﬁlms Jap. J. Appl. Phys. (Pt.

[11] Lakhtakia A et al 2001 Sculptured–thin–ﬁlm spectral holes for optical sensing of

ﬂuids Opt. Commun. 194 33

[12] Malac M et al 1999 Fabrication of submicrometer regular arrays of pillars and helices

J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 17 2671

15

Sci. Engg. C 19 427

889

2) 40 L358

[13] Malac M and Egerton R F 2001 Thin–ﬁlm regular–array structures with 10–100 nm

repeat distance Nanotechnology 12 11

[14] Dick B, Brett M J and Smy T 2003 Controlled growth of periodic pillars by glancing

angle deposition J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 21 23

[15] Chen H C 1983 Theory of Electromagnetic Waves, McGraw–Hill, New York, NY,

USA

1085

[16] Lakhtakia A and Messier R 2003 The past, the present, and the future of sculptured

thin ﬁlms Introduction to Complex Mediums for Electromagnetics and Optics (eds

Weiglhofer W S and Lakhtakia A), SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, USA, 447

[17] Kennedy S R et al 2002 Fabrication of tetragonal square spiral photonic crystals

Nano Lett. 2 59

[18] Wilkinson C D et al 2002 The use of materials patterned on a nano– and micro–

metric scale in cellular engineering Mater. Sci. Eng. C 19 263

[19] Cao H et al 2002 Gradient nanostructures for interfacing microﬂuidics and nanoﬂu-

idics Appl. Phys. Lett. 81 3058

[20] Pendry J B 1996 Calculating photonic band structure J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 8

16

