Preprint of:
Alexis I. Bishop, Timo A. Nieminen, Norman R. Heckenberg, and Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop,
“Optical application and measurement of torque on microparticles of isotropic nonabsorbing material”,
Physical Review A 68, 033802 (2003)

3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical application and measurement of torque on microparticles of isotropic
nonabsorbing material

Alexis I. Bishop, Timo A. Nieminen,∗ Norman R. Heckenberg, and Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop
Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia
(Dated: 10th April 2003)

We show how it is possible to controllably rotate or align microscopic particles of isotropic non-
absorbing material in a TEM00 Gaussian beam trap, with simultaneous measurement of the applied
torque using purely optical means. This is a simple and general method of rotation, requiring only
that the particle is elongated along one direction. Thus, this method can be used to rotate or align
a wide range of naturally occurring particles. The ability to measure the applied torque enables
the use of this method as a quantitative tool—the rotational equivalent of optical tweezers based
force measurement. As well as being of particular value for the rotation of biological specimens, this
method is also suitable for the development of optically-driven micromachines.

PACS numbers: 42.62.Be,42.62.Eh,42.25.Fx,42.25.Ja

I.

INTRODUCTION

Optical forces have been widely used to trap and ma-
nipulate microscopic particles for many years [1], with the
single beam gradient trap, also called optical tweezers,
being the most common type. Optical tweezers are used
for a wide variety of applications, including the trapping
and manipulation of biological specimens such as living
cells and organelles, the study of single molecules such
as DNA, and the measurement of piconewton forces and
nanometer displacements [2]. The optical forces acting to
trap the microparticle result from the transfer of momen-
tum from the trapping beam to the particle by absorption
or scattering. Since light can carry angular momentum
as well as (linear) momentum, transfer of angular mo-
mentum can be used to produce optical torque. This
introduces the possibility of true three-dimensional ma-
nipulation within laser traps—the ability to controllably
rotate or orient optically trapped microscopic particles
is a major advance in the manipulation possible within
a laser trap. This is of interest not only for simple ma-
nipulation, but also for the use of rotation as a tool to
probe microscopic properties of ﬂuids or biological speci-
mens [3], and the possibility of developing optically pow-
ered and controlled micromachines [4, 5].

A variety of methods of optical rotation have already
been proposed and tested. However, most methods either
degrade the performance of the trap, are overly com-
plex, or are of limited applicability since they require
special types of particles. We report the rotation of elon-
gated particles composed of isotropic nonabsorbing ma-

∗timo@physics.uq.edu.au

terial in a TEM00 Gaussian beam trap, using a plane
polarised beam to align the particle with the plane of
polarization, a rotating plane polarized beam to rotate
the particle at a controlled rate, or a circularly polarised
beam to rotate the particle with constant torque. Align-
ment to, and rotation by, plane polarized beams has re-
cently been reported by a number of groups [6, 7, 8, 9].
Our observation of rotation in circularly polarized beams
appears to be the ﬁrst report of this eﬀect. Because
this method of rotation places only weak restrictions on
the type of particle—it must be elongated along one or
more directions—it is applicable to a wide range of natu-
rally occurring particles, including biological specimens.
The use of a TEM00 Gaussian beam allows strong three-
dimensional trapping to be achieved.

We computationally model our experiments, using the
T -matrix method [10, 11, 12, 13] to calculate the scat-
tering of the trapping beam by the particle, and hence,
the optical force and torque. The T -matrix method uses
a full vector wave rigorous solution of the Maxwell equa-
tions. Our theoretical results unambiguously conﬁrm our
interpretation of our qualitative and quantitative exper-
imental results.

We also show that it is possible to measure the opti-
cal torque applied to the particle, using purely optical
means. Apart from being of interest for monitoring the
torque, it enables the use of this method as a quanti-
tative tool—the rotational equivalent of optical tweezers
based force measurement. This does not depend on any
knowledge of the physical properties of the particle or the
medium in the vicinity of the particle, and can be used
as a quantitative probe to determine physical properties
such as viscosity or elasticity.

II. OPTICAL ROTATION

III. A SIMPLE AND GENERAL METHOD FOR
OPTICAL ROTATION

2

A laser beam carries angular momentum in two dis-
tinct forms: spin angular momentum, associated with the
polarization of the beam, and orbital angular momentum,
associated with the spatial structure of the beam [14].
The spin angular momentum S varies from −¯h to ¯h per
photon, depending on the degree of circular polarization,
while the orbital angular momentum is essentially arbi-
trary, depending on the geometry and spatial and phase
structure of the beam. Well-deﬁned laser beam modes
typically carry an integer times ¯h per photon about the
beam axis.

Torque results from the scattering (including absorp-
tion) of light if either the orbital angular momentum
or the spin angular momentum is altered. This can be
achieved by absorption of energy from a beam carrying ei-
ther spin or orbital angular momentum, or both [15, 16],
or by change of spin angular momentum by birefringent
particles [17, 18], by the use of specially fabricated parti-
cles which function as optical “windmills” [5, 19, 20], or
by the use of asymmetric trapping beams [21, 22, 23, 24].

Methods using absorption have limited applicability
due to heating as a result of absorption of energy, and
methods depending on special types of particles can only
be used if suitable particles (birefringent or fabricated)
are avaliable. (We note in passing that the optical “wind-
mill” particles mentioned above are essentially micro-
scopic versions of the spiral phase holograms that can
be used to produce vortex beams [25].)

Shaped beam methods [21, 22, 23, 24] oﬀer much
greater ﬂexibility, but require more complicated trapping
apparatus, and can suﬀer from reduced axial trapping
due to spreading of the focal spot. Since these methods
depend on the spatial structure of the focal spot of the
trapping beam, the torque experienced by the particle is
due to the generation of orbital angular momentum—this
has important implications for the optical measurement
of the torque.

In principle, the applied torque can be measured
optically—the optical torque results from the change in
the spin or orbital angular momentum of the beam by
scattering. If the angular momentum carried by the in-
cident light is known (or measured), measurement of the
angular momentum of the scattered light gives the op-
tical torque directly in absolute terms without the need
for any calibration. Since the spin angular momentum
depends on the polarisation state of the light, which can
be readily and accurately measured, the spin component
of optical torque can be found simply [3]. While it is
possible in principle to measure the orbital angular mo-
mentum of light, no simple and accurate method of doing
so for an arbitrary optical ﬁeld has yet been reported; the
orbital component of optical torque must presently be re-
garded as unmeasurable without a great deal of eﬀort.

Previous methods for optical rotation are limited in
their applicability. It would be especially useful to be able
to rotate or align the largest possible range of naturally
occurring particles, including biological specimens (which
precludes the use of absorption due to the risk of ther-
mal damage), while still being able to trap them three-
dimensionally. Maintaining three-dimensional trapping
excludes methods that require spreading of the focal spot.
Such a method would be most useful if it can be simply
added to an existing optical tweezers setup.

Elongated dielectric particles tend to align with static
electric ﬁelds since elongated (or ﬂattened) particles have
diﬀerent dielectric polarisabilities along their long and
short axes [26]—in eﬀect, the particles act as if they
are birefringent. Alignment in optical ﬁelds due to this
form birefringence [27], resulting from the overall shape
of the particle and not its microscopic structure, has
already been used for the production of artiﬁcial non-
linear optical media [28], remote sensing of aerosols [29],
and the alignment of molecules [30]—the smallest possi-
ble elongated particles. This method has recently been
shown to be feasible for the rotation of optically trapped
microparticles [6, 7, 8, 9]. Thus, it appears that the
simplest scheme for the rotation and alignment of mi-
croscopic particles is to use a plane-polarised Gaussian
TEM00 beam. The only requirement is that the particle
be non-spherical—this is a technique of broad generality.
The method described above is simple to implement—
we insert either a half-wave waveplate to control the di-
rection of the plane of polarization of the trapping beam,
or a quarter-wave waveplate to produce a circularly po-
larized trapping beam (ﬁgure 1). The laser beam is ini-
tially plane polarized, and the optics in the beam path
are arranged so as to preserve this polarization, by ensur-
ing that the beam is purely s or p polarized at all mirrors,
until the waveplate is reached. Since this is not possible
for a beam plane polarized in an arbitrary plane, or circu-
larly polarized, the waveplate is best placed in the beam
path immediately in front of the objective. As the half-
wave waveplate is rotated through an angle, the plane of
polarization of the trapping beam rotates through twice
that angle. Otherwise, the optical tweezers apparatus we
used was a standard single-beam trap using a 1064 nm
beam focussed by an oil-immersion 100× objective of nu-
merical aperture 1.3. Beam powers of 10–100 mW were
used. The beam waist radius was typically about 0.8 µm.
Some of the non-spherical particles we manipulated
were glass rods (refractive index of 1.51 at 1064 nm), with
radii from 0.1–2 µm and lengths from 1 µm to over 10 µm,
dispersed in water (refractive index of 1.35 at 1064 nm).
These glass rods align along the beam axis when three-
dimensionally trapped. However, if the rods are trapped
very close to the microscope slide, with insuﬃcient space
in which to stand upright, they align with the plane of po-
larization of the trapping beam (ﬁgure 2). It has already

3

a circularly polarized beam would be expected to pro-
duce a torque that is independent of the orientation of
the particle perpendicular to the beam axis; it should be
possible to use this to rotate the particle at a constant
rate.

We produced a circularly polarized trapping beam by
replacing the half-wave plate before the objective by a
quarter-wave plate. We were then able to rotate the glass
rods in the circularly polarized beam, achieving rotation
rates of over 10 Hz. We conﬁrmed that the physical mech-
anism described above was responsible for the rotation
by measuring the polarization state of the transmitted
light. We also observed that the direction of rotation
could be reversed by changing the handedness of the cir-
cular polarization of the beam. The torque generated by
a circularly polarized beam is lower than that produced
by a plane-polarized beam, but the angle-independence
of the torque might make the method attractive for some
applications. This appears to be the ﬁrst report of this
eﬀect; the torque is small, and has not been previously
noted.

been shown that three-dimensionally trapped oblate par-
ticles will ﬁrst align with a long axis along the beam axis,
and will then rotate so that the remaining long axis aligns
with the plane of polarization [6, 7, 9]. We will show in
the next section that this behaviour agrees with theoret-
ical models.

In order to be able to produce steady rotation using
a plane-polarized beam, the half-wave waveplate con-
trolling the direction of the plane of polarization was
placed in a rotatable mount, and rotated by a friction
belt driven by a stepper motor. Rotation rates of up to
20 Hz were achieved, with the maximum speed limited by
the maximum rotation rate at which the waveplate could
be driven.

As we noted earlier, the torque that acts to align the
rods with the plane of polarization results from the trans-
fer of angular momentum from the beam to the rod. We
measured the polarization state of the transmitted light
(ﬁgure 1) and observed the presence of partial circular
polarization. We used the measurements of the polar-
ization state of the transmitted light to determine the
spin component of the optical torque. Measurements of
this type can be made for both rotating and stationary
particles. We discuss these results fully in the following
sections.

Since the elongated rods are eﬀectively birefringent
(form birefringence), they should not only change the
polarization state of a linearly polarized incident beam,
but also that of a circularly polarized beam. Therefore,

incident linearly
polarized laser beam

quarter or half
wave plate

circular or

linear polarization

objective

(a)

sample

(b)

condenser

quarter or half
wave plate

polarizing
beamsplitter

detectors

(c)

FIG. 1: Schematic diagram of optical tweezers setup showing
where a half-wave plate can be added for alignment control, or
a quarter-wave plate to produce a circularly polarized beam.
The waveplate in front of the beamsplitter and detectors can
be either a quarter-wave plate, to measure the polarization in
a circular basis, or a half-wave plate, to measure it in a linear
basis.

FIG. 2: Microscopic glass cylinders following rotating plane
of polarization of trapping beam. The lengths of the cylinders
are (a) 1.8 µm, (b) 2.6 µm, and (c) 5.5 µm. The frames are
0.04 s apart.

IV. THEORETICAL MODELLING

Optical forces and torque result from the conserva-
tion of momentum and angular momentum when a par-
ticle scatters light, changing the momentum or angu-
lar momentum. Therefore, if the scattering of the in-
cident beam by the glass rods can be calculated, the
optical force and torque acting on them can be calcu-
lated [31, 32, 33]. The glass rods that we wish to model
are simultaneously too large for the Rayleigh (ie small
particle) approximation to be valid, and too small for
the geometric optics approximation to be valid. There-
fore, a full electromagnetic wave scattering calculation is
needed. We calculate the scattered ﬁelds using the T -
matrix method [10, 11, 12, 13], in which the incident and
scattered ﬁelds are expanded in terms of vector spheri-
cal wavefunctions (VSWFs), which are also known as the
electric and magnetic multipole ﬁelds.

The T -matrix method is well-suited for optical force
and torque calculations since the T -matrix for a given
particle only needs to be calculated once [31, 32] for
a particular wavelength, and can then be used for any
incident beam of that wavelength. The mathematical
formulation of the T -matrix method is also physically
enlightening since the VSWFs are simultaneous eigen-
functions of the total angular momentum operator, with
eigenvalues [n(n+1)]1/2, and the z-component of angular
momentum operator, with eigenvalues m.

In our T -matrix calculations, the incoming and outgo-
ing ﬁelds are expanded in terms of incoming and outgoing
VSWFs:

Ein =

anmM(2)

nm(kr) + bnmN(2)

nm(kr), (1)

Eout =

pnmM(1)

nm(kr) + qnmN(1)

nm(kr). (2)

where the VSWFs are

M(1,2)

nm (kr) = Nnh(1,2)
(kr)

N(1,2)

nm (kr) =

n
h(1,2)
n
krNn

(kr)Cnm(θ, φ)

Pnm(θ, φ) + Nn ×

(3)

(4)

h(1,2)
n−1 (kr) −

 

(kr)

nh(1,2)
n
kr

!

Bnm(θ, φ)

n

where h(1,2)
(kr) are spherical Hankel functions of the ﬁrst
and second kind, Nn = [n(n + 1)]−1/2 are normalization
constants, and Bnm(θ, φ) = r∇Y m
n (θ, φ), Cnm(θ, φ) =
∇×(rY m
n (θ, φ)), and Pnm(θ, φ) = ˆrY m
n (θ, φ) are the vec-
tor spherical harmonics [10, 11, 13, 34], and Y m
n (θ, φ) are
normalized scalar spherical harmonics. The usual polar
spherical coordinates are used, where θ is the co-latitude
measured from the +z axis, and φ is the azimuth, mea-
sured from the +x axis towards the +y axis. We note
that our division of the ﬁelds into a purely incoming in-
cident ﬁeld and an outgoing scattered ﬁeld is unusual; it

∞

n

n=1
X
∞

m=−n
X
n

n=1
X

m=−n
X

4

(6)

(7)

is much more common to use an incident–scattered ﬁeld
formulation [12]. The two diﬀerent formulations are es-
sentially equivalent; our choice simpliﬁes the expressions
for optical force and torque. In practice, the ﬁeld expan-
sions and the T -matrix must be terminated at some ﬁnite
n = Nmax chosen so that the numerical results converge
with suﬃcient accuracy [12, 35, 36].

The expansion coeﬃcients of the incoming ﬁeld are
calculated using far-ﬁeld point-matching [35], and the
T -matrix is calculated by using a row-by-row point-
matching method, exploiting symmetry of the particle
when possible [12]. The expansion coeﬃcients of the out-
going (ie scattered) ﬁeld are found from the expansion
coeﬃcients of the incoming ﬁeld using the T -matrix:

p = Ta.

(5)

where a and p are vectors formed from the expansion
coeﬃcients of the incident wave (anm and bnm) and the
scattered wave (pnm and qnm).

The torque eﬃciency, or normalized torque, about the

z-axis acting on a rod is

∞

n

τz =

m ×

m=−n
X

n=1
X
(|anm|2 + |bnm|2 − |pnm|2 − |qnm|2)/P

in units of ¯h per photon, where

P =

|anm|2 + |bnm|2

∞

n

n=1
X

m=−n
X

is proportional to the incident power (omitting a unit
conversion factor which will depend on whether SI, Gaus-
sian, or other units are used). This torque includes con-
tributions from both spin and orbital components; the
normalized spin torque about the z-axis is given by [37]

σz =

1
P

∞

n

n=1
X

m=−n
X

m
n(n + 1)

×

(|anm|2 + |bnm|2 − |pnm|2 − |qnm|2)

−

2
n + 1
×Im(anmb⋆

(cid:20)

n(n + 2)(n − m + 1)(n + m + 1)
(2n + 1)(2n + 3)

n+1,m + bnma⋆

n+1,m

−pnmq⋆

n+1,m − qnmp⋆

n+1,m).

1
2

(cid:21)

(8)

The remainder of the torque is the orbital contribution.
The axial trapping eﬃciency Q is [37]

∞

n

Q =

2
P

m
n(n + 1)

Re(a⋆

nmbnm − p⋆

nmqnm)

m=−n
X

n=1
X
1
n + 1
×Re(anma⋆

−

(cid:20)

n(n + 2)(n − m + 1)(n + m + 1)
(2n + 1)(2n + 3)

n+1,m + bnmb⋆

n+1,m

−pnmp⋆

n+1,m − qnmq⋆

n+1,m)

1
2

(cid:21)

(9)

in units of ¯hk per photon.

quency, the spin torque acting on a particle is

We use the same formulae to calculate the x and y
components of the optical force and torque, using 90◦
rotations of the coordinate system [38]. It is also possible
to directly calucate the x and y components using similar,
but more complicated, formulae [33].

We note that the T -matrix is diagonal with respect to
m if the scatterer is rotationally symmetric about the z
axis [10, 12, 13]. Therefore, it can be seen from (6) that,
in the absence of absorption, no torque can be exerted on
a particle that is rotationally symmetric about the z axis.
A particle elongated along the x axis will couple incoming
and outgoing VSWFs with mout−min = 0, ±2, ±4, ... due
to the twofold rotational symmetry—this angular mo-
mentum coupling allows torque to be generated. If the in-
cident beam is plane polarized along the x axis, but oth-
erwise rotationally symmetric, the expansion coeﬃcients
are of the form [35, 39] an,±1 = an and bn,±1 = ±an.
In this case, due to the mirror symmetry about the x–z
plane, there can be no torque—the coupling is such that
|pn,−1| = |pn,+1| and |qn,−1| = |qn,+1|. If the plane of po-
larization of the beam is rotated by φ about the z axis,
the expansion coeﬃcients become an,±1 = exp(±imφ)an
and bn,±1 = ± exp(±imφ)an. This change in complex
6= |pn,+1| and
phase of the coeﬃcients allows |pn,−1|
|qn,−1| 6= |qn,+1| to result, with a consequent sinusoidal
dependence of the torque on the angle between the par-
ticle symmetry plane and the plane of polarization.

If the incident beam is left-circularly polarized, then
only an,+1 and bn,+1 are non-zero. Coupling to the
m = −1 VSWFs results in a torque; since the phase
shift due to rotation of the beam will aﬀect all incoming
(and therefore outgoing) coeﬃcients equally, the torque
is independent of the orientation of the particle in the
x–y plane.

V. QUANTITATIVE RESULTS

Our optical measurements of the spin contribution to
the torque, along with the theoretical methods described
in the previous section allow us to make a direct com-
parison of our experiment with theory. Our theoretical
calculations use direct measurements of the beam focal
spot size and the measured sizes of the glass rods; all
required quantities are known, with no need to match
theoretical curves to observations by curve-ﬁtting to de-
termine remaining free parameters.

Our general method of optical torque measurement has
been described previously [3]. For the case of a plane po-
larized incident beam, the incident angular momentum
ﬂux is zero. We use a quarter-wave plate and a po-
larizing beamsplitter to separate the two circularly po-
larized components, and measure the powers Pleft and
Pright of the left- and right-circularly polarized com-
ponents respectively.
If there is no particle present,
Pleft = Pright. Since the outgoing spin angular momen-
tum ﬂux is (Pleft − Pright)/ω, where ω is the optical fre-

i

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
 
e
u
q
r
o
t

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

−0.04
0

5

τLP = (Pright − Pleft)/ω.

(10)

In practice, we measure the diﬀerence between the signals
from the two photodetectors, so we have

τLP = ∆PRL/ω.

(11)

When we use a left-circularly polarized incident beam,
we could most accurately measure the polarization in a
linear basis. If the particle is rotating, this gives a sinu-
soidally varying signal from the photodetectors [3]. For
a stationary particle, a rotatable half-wave plate can be
used to obtain the maximum and minimum signals in
the photodetectors—equal to the maxima and minima of
the sinusoidal signal, which we will denote as Phigh and
Plow. Since the particle only changes the polarization by
a small amount, the handedness will not reverse. There-
fore, the torque is given by

τCP =

Phigh + Plow − 2(PhighPlow)1/2

/ω

(12)

or

h

τCP =

P − (P 2 − ∆P 2

HL)1/2

/ω

(13)

h

where P = Phigh + Plow is the total power and ∆PHL =
Phigh − Plow is the diﬀerence between the signals.

We observed that the torque acting on an elongated
particle in a plane polarized beam had the predicted si-
nusoidal dependence on the angle between the long axis
of the particle and plane of polarization of the beam.
This dependence is shown in ﬁgure 3.

i

i

50

100

150

200

angle (degrees)

FIG. 3: Torque eﬃciency (¯h/photon) vs angle between axis
of glass rod of radius 0.67 ± 0.03 µm and plane of polariza-
tion. Both experimental values obtained from polarization
measurements and numerical calculations using our T-matrix
model (solid line).

0.05

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

i

 

e
e
u
q
r
o

t

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

6

most of the orbital torque can be directly measured. A
small amount of orbital torque due to large-angle scatter-
ing is expected, but since light scattered at large angles
from the beam axis cannot be collected by the condenser,
this contribution to the torque is unmeasurable in our
experiment. Since the refractive index contrast is small,
only a small amount of light will be lost through large-
angle scattering. Smaller particles scatter the lower-order
multipole components of the beam more strongly; these
components are more convergent, resulting in a larger
proportion of torque due to orbital angular momentum.
Finally, we can compare our torque measurements
against the properties of the ﬂuid in which the rods ro-
tated (water), which is independent of our theoretical
predictions. The torque acting on a rod due to viscous
drag can be estimated [41]; for a rod of length 5.0 µm
and radius 0.34 µm, with a measured rotation rate of
7.8 Hz, the torque due to viscous drag is approximately
2.5 pN·µm ±30%, in close agreement with the optically
measured torque of 2.4 pN·µm (and the theoretically pre-
dicted torque of 2.0 pN·µm).

VI. DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY

We found that this method of rotation generated suf-
ﬁcient torque to be useful, with 150 pN·µm per watt
of trapping power being typical. Three-dimensionally
trapped ﬂattened particles simultaneously align with
both the beam axis and the plane of polarization of
plane-polarized light or rotate freely in circularly polar-
ized light. Elongated particles experience a torque about
the beam axis, and if they are unable to, or are pre-
vented from, aligning with the beam axis, can be rotated
or aligned by this torque. Elongated particles smaller
than the beam waist do not tend to align with the beam

0

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

radius (µm)

FIG. 5: Torque eﬃciency (¯h/photon) vs radius for glass rods
in a circularly polarized beam. Both experimental values ob-
tained from polarization measurements and numerical calcu-
lations using our T-matrix model (solid line) are shown.

0

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7
radius (µm)

0.8

0.9

FIG. 4: Torque eﬃciency (¯h/photon) vs radius for glass rods
in a plane polarized beam. The angle between the rod axis
◦
, giving the maximum
and the plane of polarization is 45
torque. Both experimental values obtained from polarization
measurements and numerical calculations using our T-matrix
model (solid line) are shown.

We measured the maximum torque, which occurs at
45◦, acting on rods of various sizes. We note close agree-
ment between the theoretical predictions and our exper-
imental observations, as shown in ﬁgure 4. The maxi-
mum torque versus radius occurs when the rod radius is
approximately equal to the beam waist radius. Smaller
rods do not intercept the entire beam, resulting in lower
torque, while larger rods appear more uniform to the
beam, again resulting in lower torque.

We also measured the spin component of the torque
produced by a circularly polarized incident beam; this
is shown in ﬁgure 5. This torque is signiﬁcantly smaller
than the torque produced by a plane polarized beam,
which is presumably the reason for it not having been
observed before. However, since the torque in this case is
independent of angle, it may prove to have useful practi-
cal applications.

In all of these cases, we note that the orbital compo-
nent of the total torque is very small—the total torque
can be accurately determined by measurement of the spin
component of the the torque. The fraction of the torque
due to the orbital component is shown in ﬁgure 6, with
the orbital torque contributing about 1–10% to the total
torque. We note that the orbital component of the torque
is partly due to the fact that a strongly focussed circularly
polarized beam carries orbital angular momentum as well
as spin [40]. Such an orbital component of total angular
momentum will be converted to spin angular momentum
as the light is recollimated by the condenser. Numerical
integration of the light collected by the condenser shows
that, within numerical error, all of the orbital torque is
due to the polarization of the beam, and is converted to
spin angular momentum by the condenser. Therefore,

0.015

0.01

0.005

i

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
 
e
u
q
r
o
t

7

Combined optical torque and orientation measurement
could prove to be a useful quantitative technique for bio-
logical applications. For example, the dependence on the
applied torque of the angular displacement of organelles
within living cells could be measured, giving informa-
tion about the mechanical properties of the anchoring
cytoskeleton. In addition, the optical torque can be used
to determine the optical properties of the organelle, yield-
ing information about its composition and structure.

axis, and the method is readily applicable for small par-
ticles. The modiﬁed tweezers apparatus can also be used
for rotating and aligning particles of birefringent mate-
rial, which generate much higher torques, extending the
usefulness of the modiﬁcation.

If a plane-polarized trapping beam is used, the trapped
particle can be aligned in a desired direction, or, using
some method to rotate the plane of polarization (we used
a motorised waveplate, but electro-optic methods could
also be used), rotated at a constant rate. If a circularly
polarized trapping beam is used, the trapped particle can
be rotated by a constant torque. Thus, our method of ro-
tation can be used for the production of either constant-
speed or constant-torque micromotors, as well as for the
manipulation of microscopic specimens.

The optical torque acting on the particle can be mea-
sured by optical means.
In principle, it is possible to
measure the total optical torque, but in practice, it is
far simpler to measure only the spin component of the
torque. Our calculations show that for a wide range of
particle shapes, sizes, and compositions, the resulting
torque is dominated by the contribution from spin an-
gular momentum, and a good degree of accuracy can be
obtained by measurement of the spin torque alone. The
calculated ratio of the spin and orbital contributions to
the torque can be used to obtain a good estimate of the
orbital torque, improving the accuracy of the measure-
ment. Since the spin torque approaches the total torque
for low refractive index contrast particles, such as most
biological specimens, the orbital torque will be unimpor-
tant for many cases. The orientation of the particle can
also be determined from the transmitted polarization.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

)

%

(
 
t

n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c
 
l
a
t
i
b
r
O

−2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7
radius (µm)

0.8

0.9

FIG. 6: Orbital contributions to torque. The fraction of
the torque due to transfer of orbital angular momentum to
glass rods of varying radii predicted by our T-matrix model
is shown. The orbital angular momentum of the transmitted
beam primarily results from the highly convergent/divergent
nature of the beam, and is converted to spin when the trans-
mitted light is collected by the condenser.

8

[1] A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, and S. Chu,

Opt. Lett. 11, 288 (1986).

Bryant, and K. Dholakia, Science 292, 912 (2001).
[22] S. Sato, M. Ishigure, and H. Inaba, Electron. Lett. 27,

[2] A. Ashkin, IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 6,

1831 (1991).

841 (2000).

[3] T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-
Dunlop, Journal of Modern Optics 48, 405 (2001).
[4] M. E. J. Friese, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, J. Gold, P. Hag-
berg, and D. Hanstorp, Applied Physics Letters 78, 547
(2001).

[5] P. Galajda and P. Ormos, Applied Physics Letters 78,

249 (2001).

[6] S. Bayoudh, Master’s thesis, Department of Physics, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia (1999).
[7] S. Bayoudh, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and
H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Journal of Modern Optics (in
press).

[8] K. D. Bonin, B. Kourmanov, and T. G. Walker, Opt.

Express 10, 984 (2002).

[9] P. Galajda and P. Ormos, Opt. Express 11, 446 (2003).
[10] M. I. Mishchenko, Journal of the Optical Society of

America A 8, 871 (1991).

[11] P. C. Waterman, Physical Review D 3, 825 (1971).
[12] T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N. R. Heck-
enberg, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 79-80,
1019 (2003).

[13] M. I. Mishchenko, J. W. Hovenier, and L. D. Travis, eds.,
Light scattering by nonspherical particles: theory, mea-
surements, and applications (Academic Press, San Diego,
2000).

[14] M. Padgett and L. Allen, Contemporary Physics 41, 275

(2000).

[15] N. B. Simpson, K. Dholakia, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett,

Opt. Lett. 22, 52 (1997).

[16] M. E. J. Friese, J. Enger, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and

[17] M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and
H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Nature 394, 348 (1998), erratum
in Nature, 395, 621 (1998).

[18] E. Higurashi, R. Sawada, and T. Ito, Physical Review E

59, 3676 (1999).

Letters 76, 1779 (2000).

[23] E. Santamato, A. Sasso, B. Piccirillo, and A. Vella, Opt.

Express 10, 871 (2002).

[24] A. T. O’Neil and M. J. Padgett, Opt. Lett. 27, 743

(2002).

[25] N. R. Heckenberg, R. McDuﬀ, C. P. Smith, and A. G.

White, Opt. Lett. 17, 221 (1992).

[26] R. C. Jones, Physical Review 68, 93 (1945).
[27] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1997), 6th ed.

[28] J. C. Kralik, B. E. Vugmeister, and M. S. Malcuit, Phys.

Rev. A 51, 1532 (1995).

[29] A. J. Palmer, Opt. Lett. 5, 54 (1980).
[30] H. Sakai, C. P. Safvan, J. J. Larsen, K. M. Hilligsœ,
K. Hald, and H. Stapelfeldt, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 10235
(1999).

[31] T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N. R. Heck-
enberg, Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radia-
tive Transfer 70, 627 (2001).

[32] T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, N. R. Hecken-
berg, and A. I. Bishop, Computer Physics Communica-
tions 142, 468 (2001).

[33] Ø. Farsund and B. U. Felderhof, Physica A 227, 108

(1996).

[34] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley,

New York, 1999), 3rd ed.

[35] T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N. R. Heck-
enberg, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 79-80,
1005 (2003).

[36] B. C. Brock, Sandia report SAND2000-2217-Revised,
Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mex-
ico, USA (2001).

Diﬀerential Equations Conf. 04, 37 (2000).

[38] C. H. Choi, J. Ivanic, M. S. Gordon, and K. Ruedenberg,

Journal of Chemical Physics 111, 8825 (1999).
[39] G. Gouesbet, Applied Optics 35, 1543 (1996).
[40] T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. R.

[41] M. M. Tirado and J. Garc´ıa de la Torre, J. Chem. Phys.

N. R. Heckenberg, Physical Review A 54, 1593 (1996).

[37] J. H. Crichton and P. L. Marston, Electronic Journal of

[19] Z.-P. Luo, Y.-L. Sun, and K.-N. An, Applied Physics

Rubinsztein-Dunlop (submitted for publication).

[20] H. Ukita and M. Kanehira, IEEE J. Select. Topics Quan-

73, 1986 (1980).

tum Electron. 8, 111 (2002).

[21] L. Paterson, M. P. MacDonald, J. Arlt, W. Sibbett, P. E.

