Diﬀraction-free subwavelength-beam optics

S. V. Kukhlevsky, M. Mechler

Institute of Physics, University of Pecs, Ifjusag u. 6, Pecs 7624, Hungary

Abstract

Diﬀraction is a fundamental property of light propagation. Owing to this phenomenon, light

diﬀracts out in all directions when it passes through a subwavelength slit. This imposes a funda-

mental limit on the transverse size of a light beam at a given distance from the aperture. We show

that a subwavelength-sized beam propagating without diﬀractive broadening can be produced in

free space by the constructive interference of multiple beams of a Fresnel source of the respective

high-refraction-index waveguide. Moreover, it is shown that such a source can be constructed not

only for continuous waves, but also for ultra-short (near single-cycle) pulses. The results theoret-

ically demonstrate the feasibility of completely dif f raction-f ree subwavelength-beam optics, for

both continuous waves and ultra-short pulses. The approach extends operation of the near-ﬁeld

subwavelength-beam optics, such as near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy and spectroscopy, to

the ”not-too-distant” ﬁeld regime (0.5 to about 10 wavelengths).

PACS numbers: 42.25.Fx - Diﬀraction and scattering. 42.65.Re - Ultrafast processes; optical pulse generation

and pulse compression. 07.79.Fc - Near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscopes.

3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Diﬀraction is one of the fundamental laws of physics. It aﬀects all classical and quantum

mechanical ﬁelds without exception. Owing to the law, it is impossible in quantum mechanics

to deﬁne at a given time both the position of a matter wave-packet and its direction to an

arbitrary degree of accuracy. Because of the diﬀraction phenomenon, light spreads out in all

directions after passing a slit smaller than its wavelength. The harder one tries to decrease

the beam transverse dimension by narrowing the slit, the more it broadens out. Similarly,

the beam width dramatically increases with increasing the distance from the slit. Thus, the

diﬀraction imposes a fundamental limit on the transverse dimension of a beam at a given

distance from an aperture and consequently limits the resolution capabilities and makes

harder the position requirements of subwavelength-beam optical devices, such as near-ﬁeld

scanning optical microscopes (NSOM) and spectroscopes (see, for example [1, 2, 3, 4]).

In order to completely avoid the diﬀractive broadening of a beam, generally speaking,

one can use the two main approaches. A light beam can be conﬁned to subwavelength

transverse dimensions by multiple total internal reﬂections at boundaries of a high-refractive-

index waveguide [5]. Unfortunately, the guided beam spreads out in all directions after

passing the waveguide output-aperture. Another approach uses ”diﬀraction-free” beams

[6, 7, 8, 9]. A diﬀraction-less beam, for instance a Bessel-type beam, propagates in free

space without diﬀractive broadening. Although, the diﬀraction-free beams, the widths of

which greatly exceed the wavelength, have been well understood and realized experimentally,

neither theoretical principle nor blueprint of the diﬀraction-free subwavelength-beam optics

has been presented up to now.

In the present article we show that a subwavelength-sized beam propagating without

diﬀractive broadening can be produced in free space by the constructive interference of mul-

tiple beams of a Fresnel source of the respective high-refraction-index waveguide. The results

theoretically demonstrate the feasibility of completely diﬀraction-free subwavelength-beam

optics, for both continuous waves and ultra-short pulses. The approach extends operation of

the near-ﬁeld subwavelength-beam optics to the ”not-too-distant” ﬁeld regime (0.5 to about

10 wavelengths).

2

II. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we show that the diﬀractive broadening of a subwavelength-sized beam

can be completely avoided. The approach involves a recently established relation between

the waveguide and free-space optics [10, 11]. Although, these areas of optics are usually

considered to be independent of each other, it was showed that the ﬁelds conﬁned by a high-

refractive-index waveguide, whose width exceeds the wavelength λ, could be reproduced in

free space by a Fresnel source of this waveguide. The basic concept of the Fresnel-waveguide

source of a diﬀraction-free beam is quite simple. The concept is demonstrated in Fig. 1 for

a plane-parallel guide having total-reﬂection walls. In the approach, the boundaries of the
waveguide are replaced by virtual sources [10]. The diﬀraction-free beam E′(x′, z, t) conﬁned
by the waveguide is supported in free space at points (x′, z) by the constructive interference
of multiple beams E′

n(x′, z, t) of a Fresnel source of the waveguide:

E′(x′, z, t) =

n(x′, z, t),
E′

M

X
n=−M

(1)

(2)

where the number 2M + 1 of the beams E′
from the source; n = 0,±1,±2,...,±M; z > 0 and |x′| < a. The beam E′

n(x′, z, t) depends on their widths at the distance z
n(x′, z, t) is emerged

from the n-th zone of the Fresnel source having the ﬁeld distribution

En(x, 0, t) = E0(xn, 0, t)exp(iπn),

which is obtained by the periodic (xn = x±2na) translation of the ﬁeld E0(x, 0, t) and the

πn-change of its phase; E0(x, 0, t) is the ﬁeld at the input aperture; z = 0 and |x| < a. Thus,
n(x′, z, t) is constructed by the periodic translation and the

n=−M E′

M

the Fresnel-waveguide P
phase change of the beam E′

0(x′, z, t) emerged from the waveguide aperture.

The above-described approach, which was originally developed by using the Helmholtz-

Kirchhoﬀ integral theorem [10], fails when the waveguide width 2a is close to the wave-

length λ.

It is surprising that in the general form of Eqs. 1 and 2, as it will be shown

below, the approach provides solution of the problem also in the case of subwavelength

waveguides (see, Figs. 2-4). Figure 2 presents the normalized energy ﬂux distribution
= (c/8π)Re( ~E× ~H ∗)z of a diﬀraction-less beam computed for the Fresnel source of a

Snorm
z

subwavelength (a = 0.05λ) waveguide, at the three distances z from the source. In the ﬁg-

ure the normalized ﬂux of a single beam, which was used in the construction of the Fresnel

3

source, is shown at z = 6a for comparison. The Fresnel waveguide E′(x′, z, t) was con-
0(x′, z, t) and the periodical change of its
structed by the translation of the single beam E′
0(x′, z, t) is formatted by transmission
phase (see, Eqs. 1, 2 and Fig. 1). The single beam E′

of a plane monochromatic wave through a subwavelength waveguide (thick slit) with per-
fectly conducting walls. The details of the computations of the electric ~E = (Ex, 0, Ez) and
magnetic ~H = (0, Hy, 0) ﬁeld distributions of the transmitted beam are presented in Refs.

[12, 13]. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) and the energy ﬂux of the diﬀraction-

less subwavelength beam versus the distance z from the Fresnel-waveguide source are shown

in Fig. 3, in comparison to that of the single beam produced by the slit. The results pre-

sented in Figs. 2 and 3 demonstrate theoretically the feasibility of completely diﬀraction-free

subwavelength-beam optics. Notice, that at the distance z = a, which is generally accepted

for practical near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy [12], FWHM of the diﬀraction-free beam

is about two times lower than that of the single beam. This should provide two-times increase

of the spatial resolution of the near-ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy and spectroscopy. Al-

though, the Fresnel-waveguide source producing a subwavelength diﬀraction-free continuous

wave is already an unexpected ﬁnding, an example presented in Fig. 4 demonstrates that

such a source can be constructed also for the ultra-short (near single-cycle) pulses. The

ﬁgure shows the computed electric ﬁeld Ex of the diﬀraction-free subwavelength pulse for-

matted by the Fresnel-waveguide source at the distance z = 3a. The pulse used for the

construction of the Fresnel waveguide is formatted by transmission of the femtosecond (near

single-cycle) pulse through the slit [13]. It should be noted that the diﬀraction-free pulse

(Fig. 4) is not in conﬂict with the recently established uncertainty relation between spatial

and temporal uncertainties of a wave-packet [14] because of the multiple-beam nature of

the Fresnel-waveguide source. The diﬀraction-free pulse is localized in space and time at

the expense of increasing the number of beams (pulses) that support the diﬀraction-free

wave-packet under its free-space propagation.

The results theoretically demonstrate the feasibility of completely dif f raction-f ree

subwavelength-beam optics, for both continuous waves and ultra-short pulses. The ap-

proach extends operation of the near-ﬁeld subwavelength-beam optics to the far-ﬁeld regime

(z > 0.5λ). Notice, in this connection, that the number of the Fresnel beams supporting

the diﬀraction-free beam increases and the beam intensity decreases with increasing the

distance z (see, Figs. 1-3). Therefore, the eﬀective operation of the optics is restricted to

4

the ”not-too-distant” ﬁeld region (0.5 to about 10 wavelengths). The optics could improve

spatial and temporal resolution capabilities and positioning requirements of the near-ﬁeld

scanning optical microscopy and spectroscopy. The approach could also be used for many

other subwavelength-photonic purposes, such as sensors, communications, optical switch-

ing devices and microsources. It should be noted that the method can be extended to the

3-dimensional beams. In this case, one could use the Fresnel sources of 3-dimensional sub-

wavelength waveguides [15]. The concept of the Fresnel sources of subwavelength waveguides

helps us to understand the studies [16, 17], which have demonstrated that a series of par-

allel grooves surrounding a nanometre-sized slit in a metal ﬁlm produces a micrometer-size

beam that spreads to an angle of only few degrees. Another relevant result is achievement

of about 20 percent reduction of far-ﬁeld diﬀraction by structured apertures [18]. The evi-

dent parallelism between mechanisms of the formation of a subwavelength waveguide in free

space by the Fresnel multiple-beam source and the enhancement of light transmission by

subwavelength aperture arrays [19] should also be noted. The presented theoretical principle

of the Fresnel-waveguide source of a diﬀraction-free subwavelength beam could be realized

experimentally using the techniques [16, 17, 18], the air and dielectric guide bends or the

hybrid hetero structures (for example, see the study [20] and references therein).

III. CONCLUSION

We have showed that a subwavelength-sized beam propagating without diﬀractive broad-

ening can be produced in free space by the constructive interference of multiple beams of a

Fresnel source of the respective high-refraction-index waveguide. The presented results the-

oretically demonstrate the feasibility of completely dif f raction-f ree subwavelength-beam

optics, for both continuous waves and ultra-short pulses. The approach extends operation of

the near-ﬁeld subwavelength-beam optics to the ”not-too-distant” ﬁeld regime (0.5 to about

10 wavelengths).

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Fifth Framework of the European Commission (Finan-

cial support from the EC for shared-cost RTD actions: research and technological develop-

5

ment projects, demonstration projects and combined projects. Contract NG6RD-CT-2001-

00602). The authors thank the Computing Services Centre, Faculty of Science, University

of Pecs, for providing computational resources.

[5] D. Marcuse, Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides (Academic Publishers, New York, 1974).

[1] L. Rayleigh, Philos. Mag. XLIV, 28 (1897).

[2] H.A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 66, 163 (1944).

[3] E.A. Ash, G. Nicholls, Nature 237, 510 (1972).

[4] E. Betzig, et al, Science 251, 1468 (1991).

[6] J.N. Brittingham, Appl. Phys. 54, 1179 (1983).

[7] R.W. Ziolkowski, J. Math. Phys. 26, 861 (1985).

[8] J. Durnin, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1499 (1987).

[9] F. Gori, et al, Opt. Commun. 64, 491 (1987).

[10] S.V. Kukhlevsky, Europhys. Lett. 54, 461 (2001).

[11] J. Canning, Opt. Commun. 207, 35 (2002).

[12] E. Betzig, A. Harootunian, A. Lewis, M. Isaacson, Appl. Opt. 25, 1890 (1986).

[13] S.V. Kukhlevsky, M. Mechler, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 5, 256 (2003).

[14] S.V. Kukhlevsky, G. Nyitray, Opt. Commun. 209, 377 (2003).

[15] S.V. Kukhlevsky, G. Nyitray, J. Mod. Opt. 50, 2043 (2003).

[16] H.J. Lezec, et al, Science 297, 820 (2002).

[17] L. Martin-Moreno, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 167401 (2003).

[18] A. Dogariu, et al, Opt. Commun. 220, 223 (2003).

[19] T.W. Ebbesen, et al., Nature 391, 667 (1998).

[20] A. Chutinan, S. John, O. Toader, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,123901 (2003).

6

Fresnel-waveguide
source

X

E’ (x’, z, t)

0

E’(x’, z, t)

Diffraction-less beam
(Fresnel waveguide)

Z

a

0

-a

E  (x, 0, t)

...

M

E  (x, 0, t)

2

1

0

E  (x, 0, t)

E  (x, 0, t)

E  (x, 0, t)
-1

E  (x, 0, t)

-2

...

E  (x, 0, t)
-M

FIG. 1: The construction of a Fresnel source for a plane-parallel waveguide having total-reﬂection

walls.

7

(x′) of a diﬀraction-free subwavelength
FIG. 2: The normalized energy ﬂux distribution Snorm
beam E′(x′, z, t) at diﬀerent distances z from the Fresnel source of the waveguide: A - a, B - 3a,
0(x′, z, t) used for construction of the source is produced by a
and CM ulti - 6a. A single beam E′

z

50-nm slit (waveguide) in a perfectly conducting screen of thickness b = 50nm. The normalized

energy ﬂux distribution CSingle of this beam is shown at z = 6a for comparison. The number

2M + 1 of used beams for A and B is 51, for CM ulti is 501; a = 0.05λ and λ = 500nm.

8

Full width at half maximum (FWHM)M ulti and energy ﬂux SM ulti

(x′ = 0, z) of a
FIG. 3:
diﬀraction-less subwavelength beam E′(x′, z, t) versus distance z from the Fresnel source of the
0(x′, z, t) used for construction of the source are
waveguide. The width and ﬂux of a single beam E′

z

shown for comparison. Here, the waveguide parameters are the same as indicated in Fig. 2. The

number 2M + 1 of used beams is 501; a = 0.05λ and λ = 500nm.

9

FIG. 4: The computed electric ﬁeld Ex of the diﬀraction-less femtosecond (near single-cycle) pulse
E′(x′, z, t) produced by the Fresnel source of the subwavelength waveguide at the distance z = 3a.
0(x′, z, t)
The parameters of the waveguide are the same as indicated in Fig. 2. A single pulse E′

used for construction of the source has the pulse length τ = 2f s and central wavelength of the

wave-packet λ0 = 500nm. The number of beams (pulses) is 2M + 1 = 18; a = 0.05λ0.

10

