3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physical origin of ”laser induced” molecule alignment eﬀect.

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

V.A.Kuz’menko

Abstract

The alternative to dynamic alignment explanation of experimental re-
sults on spatial-asymmetric dissociation of molecules in a laser ﬁeld is
proposed. The concept of geometrical alignment is suﬃcient for expla-
nation of these results. In this case the spatial anisotropy of interaction
of molecules with laser radiation is transferred from one ﬁeld to another
through the ordinary mechanism of nonlinear optical interactions. Thus
laser radiation does not create alignment, but only registers it. A physical
basis of such nonlinear processes is inequality of forward and reversed op-
tical transitions that corresponds to a concept of time invariance violation
in electromagnetic interactions. Directions of the further researches in the
ﬁeld of alignment spectroscopy are discussed.

PACS number: 42.50.Gy

Last years the impressing successes are achieved in the ﬁeld of control of
atoms motion with the help of laser radiation [1]. Laser radiation allows to keep
the atoms long time and to cool its up to ultra low temperature.

For molecules the situation is quit diﬀerent.

In the ﬁeld of keeping and
cooling of molecules by laser radiation only minimal successes are achieved [2].
Here the eﬀects, connected to orientation of molecules in space are usually stud-
ied. These eﬀects are divided into two types: passive (geometrical) and active
(dynamic) alignment [3]. The concept of geometrical alignment is connected
with the generally recognized opinion, that the probability of optical transition
depends on orientation of the molecule in space relative to the direction and
polarization of the laser beam [4]. How strong is this dependence? What is it
shape? Such information is absent for present day. However, it has a funda-
mental meaning. At the same time the opportunity to obtain such information
exists and will be discussed below.

The dynamic alignment eﬀect usually is connected with the assumption that
intense laser ﬁeld is capable to create the certain orientation of molecules in
space. It is supposed, that the dipole moment induced in a polarizable molecule
by the laser ﬁeld can hinder free rotation of molecules. Molecules appear in
the so-called pendular states, in which the molecular axis librates about the
electric ﬁeld vector. When the laser radiation is switched oﬀ, the molecules
continue free rotation [5, 6]. Such assumption seems fantastic. The situation
is interesting, because of any reliable experimental proofs of existence of the
dynamic alignment eﬀect are absent. At the same time this assumption is widely

1

In turn, these experimental
used for an explanation of experimental results.
results are used as the proofs of the existence of the eﬀect of dynamic alignment.
Some doubts in accuracy of such proof arose earlier [7]. The purpose of
the present article is to add the big piece of such doubts and to show, that
for explanation of experimental results there are enough conception about the
geometrical alignment which anisotropy can be transferred from one laser ﬁeld
to another by ordinary nonlinear interactions.

We shall consider in more detail typical experiment on dynamic alignment
of iodine molecules [8]. Cooled to low temperature in jet the iodine molecules
interact with the powerful nonresonant laser pulse with linear polarization. Si-
multaneously with it or later the molecules are dissociated by the second pow-
erful laser pulse. Then the fragments of molecules are ionized and their angular
distributions are studied. Thus without the ﬁrst laser ﬁeld the dissociation of
molecules is isotropic. However, when the ﬁrst laser pulse is present, the strong
spatial anisotropy of molecule dissociation is observed. The eﬀect is explained
as a result of the dynamic alignment of molecules and, in turn, it serves as the
proof of existence of dynamic alignment.

The alternative explanation assumes the lack of any dynamic alignment.
There exist only the dependence of optical transition probability from orien-
tation of molecules in space (geometric alignment eﬀect) and nonlinear optical
phenomena. Laser radiation does not create orientation of molecules, but only
registers it. The situation can be discussed in a popular now terms of optical
information storage [9-11]. Radiation of the ﬁrst laser writes down the informa-
tion and radiation of the second laser reads out this information. Reading of
the information occurs only at a certain orientation of the molecules in space,
which is set by a direction of the ﬁrst laser beam. Thus the eﬀect of geometrical
alignment is transferred from one laser ﬁeld to another.

The physical mechanism of process can be described as follows. Under action
of the ﬁrst laser ﬁeld the Raman transitions occur between various rotational
sublevels of ground state of iodine molecules (Fig.1). Thus the laser radia-
tion interacts most eﬀectively only with the molecules, which have appropriate
orientation in space. So, the eﬀect of geometric alignment takes place. The
essence of the explanation takes into consideration, that the spectroscopic prop-
erties of molecules, which participated in Raman transition, diﬀer from those for
molecules, which did not interact with laser radiation (usually similar problems
are discussed within the framework of the ”coherency” concept). The molecules
have property of memory about the initial state and aspiration to return in this
condition.

To get precisely in the initial state the molecule should have certain orienta-
tion in space concerning the direction of the second laser beam. Under action of
the second laser ﬁeld the reversed in the initial state Raman transition occurs.
The experiments show, that the cross-section of the reversed in the initial state
optical transition can considerably exceed cross-section of the forward optical
transition [12]. Therefore radiation of the second laser ﬁeld interacts mainly
with the molecules, which participated in forward optical transitions.
If the
quantum of the second laser ﬁeld is great enough, or a multiphoton process

2

takes place, the transition into the initial state is accompanied by dissociation
of grater or smaller part of molecules. Thus the eﬀect of geometric alignment
is transferred from one laser ﬁeld to another as a result of ordinary process of
four-photon mixing.

Representation about inequality of forward and reversed optical transitions
lays in a basis of the given alternative explanation of ”induced” anisotropy of
dissociation of molecules. The same representation underlies a physical expla-
nation of the majority nonlinear optical phenomena [12,13]. This representation
corresponds to a principle of time invariance violation in electromagnetic inter-
actions. Such conclusion is very strong, but it has a physical basis [14] and the
direct experimental proof [12]. Recently the new experimental data about T-
invariance violation in optics are received [15,16]. Authors believe that they ﬁnd
unambiguous experimental evidence of a time non-reversal interaction between
light and metallic planar chiral nanostructures.

One of the most important problems of experimental researches in optics is
independent measurement parameters of forward and reversed optical transi-
tions. It is an uneasy task [12]. The certain information on the given problem
can be received in the ﬁeld of discussed experiments on alignment spectroscopy.
We keep in mind a more detailed studying the transition of process from nonadi-
abatic to adiabatic mode. Under adiabatic regime the case is understood, when
the duration of the front and back edges of the ﬁrst laser pulse exceeds the
duration of the rotational period of molecules. In this case all molecules have
an opportunity to interact eﬀectively with laser radiation. The alignment eﬀect
is observed during action of the ﬁrst laser pulse, but is absent after its ending.
The physical essence of the phenomenon, probably, can be explained as follow:
the front edge of a laser pulse carries out the forward Raman transitions and the
low intensive back edge of a laser pulse carries out mainly the reversed Raman
transitions in the initial state. As a result the memory of molecules is deleted
and the ”coherency” disappears (in nonlinear optics the concept of inequality
of forward and reversed transitions is, obviously, a physical equivalent, base of
the concept of ”coherency”).

When the short laser pulse is used (much less than the duration of the
molecular rotational period), the nonadiabatic mode is realized. In this case
only small part of molecules, which have proper orientation in space, interacts
eﬀectively with laser radiation. These molecules can not return in the initial
state and the alignment eﬀect is observed for a long time as short periodic
revivals [17,18]. So, the detailed studying of eﬃciency of the back edge of the
pulse on suppression of alignment eﬀect can give certain information about ratio
of cross-sections of forward and reversed optical transitions.

The major direction of alignment spectroscopy should become experimental
studying of dependence of probability of optical transition from orientation of
molecules in space relative to the direction of a laser beam. The basic way
for getting of such information will consist in studying the consecutive optical
transitions in crossed laser beams. The simplest example of such transitions
is a Raman transition under action of two laser ﬁelds with diﬀerent frequency.
In work [19,20] the directions of two laser beams coincided and the authors

3

observed, that the character of spectrum was changed when the polarization
direction of second laser ﬁeld was rotated. The eﬀect was explained as the
result of dynamic alignment and creation of pendular states. Obviously, it is
wrong interpretation. We have two consecutive optical transitions. On the ﬁrst
transition the radiation of the ﬁrst laser selects molecules with the certain orien-
tation. That is the geometrical alignment takes place. Radiation of the second
laser induces transition in these already selected and oriented molecules. So,
the character of this transition should depend on the direction and polarization
of radiation of the second laser beam.

The next step should be experimental studying of optical transitions in
crossed laser beams. Dependence of eﬃciency of Raman transition on the an-
gle between the laser beams will give the information about the dependence of
probability of optical transition from orientation of molecules in space relative
to a direction of the laser beam. It is possible to use various optical schemes
on the basis of a four-photon mixing process. It is possible to try to receive
the information separately about forward and separately about reversed optical
transitions. It is an extensive work for many years.

In conclusion, the alternative explanation of the molecule dynamic align-
ment eﬀect is proposed.
It takes into account only the geometric alignment
eﬀect and nonlinear character of a molecule-ﬁeld interaction. A basis of nonlin-
ear character of such interactions is inequality of forward and reversed optical
transitions that corresponds to a principle of time invariance violation in elec-
tromagnetic interactions. Directions of the further researches in the ﬁeld of
alignment spectroscopy are discussed.

References

[1] H.J.Metcalf and P.van der Straten, Laser cooling and trapping, Springer-

Verlag, Berlin, (1999).

[2] H.Sakai, A.Tarasevitch, J.Danilov, H.Stapelfeldt, R.W.Yip, C.Ellert,

E.Constant, and P.B.Corkum, Phys.Rev.A 57, 2794 (1998).

[3] S.Banerjee, G.R.Kuman, and D.Mathur, Phys.Rev.A 60, R3369 (1999).

[4] R.C.Estler and R.N.Zare, J.Am.Chem.Soc. 100, 1323 (1978).

[5] B.Friedrich and D.Herschbach, Phys.Rev.Lett. 74, 4623 (1995).

[6] H.Stapelfeldt and T.Seideman, Rev.Mod.Phys. 75, 543 (2003).

[7] Ch.Ellert and P.B.Corkum, Phys.Rev.A 59, R3170 (1999).

[8] J.J.Larsen, H.Sakai, C.P.Safvan,
J.Chem.Phys. 111, 7774 (1999).

I.Wendt-Larsen, and H.Stapelfeldt,

[9] A.V.Matsko, Y.V.Rostovtsev, O.Kocharovskaya, A.S.Zibrov,

and

M.O.Scully, Phys.Rev.A, 64, 043809 (2001).

4

[10] D.F.Phillips, A.Fleischhauer, A.Mair, R.L.Walsworth, and M.D.Lukin,

Phys.Rev.Lett., 86, 783 (2001).

[11] H.Gao, M.Rosenberry, and H.Batelaan, Phys.Rev.A, 67, 053807 (2003).

[12] V.A.Kuzmenko, E-print, physics/0306148.

[13] M.Xiaochun, E-print, physics/0308037.

[14] J.S.M.Ginges and V.V.Flambaum, E-print, physics/0309054, p.49.

[15] A.Papakostas, A.Potts, D.M.Bagnall, S.L.Prosvirnin, H.J.Coles, and

N.I.Zheludev, Phys.Rev.Lett., 90, 107404 (2003).

[16] A.S.Schwanecke, A.Krasavin, D.M.Bagnall, A.Potts, A.V.Zayats, and

N.I.Zheludev, E-print, cond-mat/0307056.

[17] E.Peronne, M.D.Poulsen, Ch.Z.Bisgaard, H.Stapelfeldt, and T.Seideman,

Phys.Rev.Lett., 91, 043003 (2003).

[18] P.W.Dooley,

I.V.Litvinyuk,

K.F.Lee,

D.M.Rayner, M.Spanner,

D.M.Villeneuve, and P.B.Corkum, Phys.Rev.A, 68, 023406 (2003).

[19] W.Kim and P.M.Felker, J.Chem.Phys., 104, 1147 (1996).

[20] W.Kim and P.M.Felker, J.Chem.Phys., 107, 2193 (1997).

Fig.1 Four-photon mixing scheme for alternative explanation of molecule

alignment experiments.

5

