Investigation of Heterodiﬀusion in Molecular Crystals by the Method of Raman Eﬀect

M.A. Korshunov
∗
L.V. Kirensky Institute of Physics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Krasnoyarsk, 660036, Russia
(Dated: February 9, 2008)

Using a method of a Raman eﬀect of light the heterodiﬀusion in molecular crystals is investigated
by the example of p-dichlorobenzene in a p-dibromobenzene. The installation diagram and a proce-
dure of a determination of diﬀusivities using this method is given. Changes of diﬀusivities in a cut
of a crystal perpendicularly to a direction of diﬀusion are found. Obtained values of diﬀusivities are
in good agreement with those obtained by other methods.

3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 78.30.J, 78.30, 66.30.L, 61.72

Perspectives of use of organic crystals of a low symme-
try in the molecular electronics engineering for recording
and information processing are mentioned [1]. For read-
ing recorded information, it is possible to use the laser.
Molecular crystals have rather low melting point and
such exposure of crystals by a laser beam can lift temper-
ature of a sample close to melting point that will aﬀect
magniﬁcation of diﬀusion of molecules of impurity and
durability of recorded information. Therefore it is actual
to investigate diﬀusion in molecular crystals. As against
processes of diﬀusion in inorganic materials, diﬀusion in
molecular crystals has the singularities. The diﬃculties
originating at investigation of migration of molecules are
in particular connected with nonsphericity of molecules,
presence of orientation oscillations, deﬁciencies, etc., that
distinguishes them from inorganic systems.

In order to investigate the process of diﬀusion various
methods are used (chemical, metallographic and physi-
cal [2]) which majority at the quantitative investigation
of this process determines concentration of impurity in a
sample on diﬀerent depth after its ageing at ﬁxed tem-
perature for a long time. At that, the average value of
impurity concentration throughout the entire plane of a
crystal cut perpendicular to a direction of diﬀusion is
determined frequently. Similar methods were used and
at investigation of molecular crystals [3]. More precise
is the method the local X-ray spectral analysis used for
investigation of metals and alloys [4].

The purpose of the present work is to consider a pos-
sibility of use of the method of Raman Eﬀect of light
(RE) for investigation of impurity heterodiﬀusion in a
monocrystal, grown by Bridgman’s method.

By the method of a Raman Eﬀect it is possible to de-
termine concentration of impurity as along a direction
of diﬀusion as perpendicular to this direction, that en-
ables to investigate a heterodiﬀusion in molecular crys-
tals. Moreover, this method allows to judge by spec-
trums of the lattice and intramolecular oscillations about
a character of a disposition of impurity molecules among
molecules of the base crystal. In particular, from Raman
spectra one can determine whether the solid solution is
formed by the substitution (i), or interstitial (ii), or the
impurity molecules are concentrated at the boundaries

FIG. 1: The installation diagram for investigation of diﬀusion
in molecular crystals by the method of RE.

between the blocks of the single-crystal lattice (iii) or the
solid solution is the mechanical mixture of the substances
(iv).

The monocrystal placed in installation which diagram
is shown in ﬁgure 1. This installation allows to obtain a
spectrum of the RE from area on a surface of a crystal
irradiated with the focused laser beam.

The installation diagram in ﬁgure 1 consist of He-Ne
laser (1) which ray (2), transited through a prism, that
rotates it (3), and a lens (4), then focalized on a surface
of investigated sample (5). Radiation of a crystal (6),
transited through a diaphragm (7) and a lens (8), hits on
a slit of a spectrograph (9). By changing incidence angle
α of a laser beam on a sample in a point O the best ratio
signal/noise was found. Rotational on radius OA was
carried out by a system lens-prism (10). The sample was
on a table (11) which was moved by the micrometer screw
that allowed to carry out recording of spectrums while
moving a sample on small distances. The diaphragm (7)
is used for a cut of a laser ray reﬂected from a point O.
Because the diameter of a stain of laser beam can be
reduced on the surfaces of a crystal up to 2 µ (µ stands
for micrometer) this method allows to investigate con-

±

As subjects of inquiry the substances well

centration of components along a direction of diﬀusion.
investi-
gated by various methods have been chosen. As the
base monocrystal the p-dibromobenzene and as diﬀus-
ing impurity the p-dichlorobenzene has been chosen. A
p-dibromobenzene (measured melting point tm = 86.8
±
0.10 ◦C).
0.10 ◦C) and p-dichlorobenzene (tm = 53.0
P-dichlorobenzene (α-modiﬁcation) and isomorphous to
it p-dibromobenzene are investigated by optical, radio-
graphic and NQR methods [5, 6, 7]. Both substances are
crystallizes in space group P 21/a with two molecules in
a unit cell and forms a mixed crystals of substitution at
any concentrations of components (this could be deter-
mined as by the phase diagram, as by spectrums of the
RE [6]). Spectrums of the lattice oscillations are similar
to spectrums of components. Monocrystals are pellucid,
that allows obtaining Raman spectrums of high quality.
Before investigation of diﬀusion of p-dichlorobenzene
in a p-dibromobenzene, the monocrystals of solid solu-
tions of investigated substances have been grown and
spectrums of a Raman Eﬀect are obtained in the range
of the lattice and intramolecular oscillations (up to
400 cm−1). In present paper the concentration of com-
ponents was measured in molar unities.

−

−

C6H4Br2 and p

First, spectrums of standard samples with the given
relation p
C6H4Cl2 have been ob-
tained. There is well deﬁned line at frequency ν =
20.0 cm−1 in a spectrum of the lattice oscillations of a
p-dibromobenzene. In a spectrum of a mixed crystal the
frequency ν monotonically varies depending on concen-
tration of components. This dependence is presented in
work [8]. This allows determining of concentration of im-
purity (p-dichlorobenzene) in investigated solid solutions
by the value of frequency. The value of frequency was
determined with accuracy

0.2 cm−1.

If in a spectrum of the lattice oscillations there is sep-
arately located and well deﬁned line then in order to de-
termine concentration of impurity it is possible to use a
method described above. However, lines in a spectrum
are frequently so disposed that it is very diﬃcult to iso-
late the separately located line. Then the magnitude of
concentration of impurity can be determined on relative
intensity of the valent intramolecular oscillations. Ac-
cording to work [9], the line in a spectrum of the RE
C6H4Br2 with ν = 212.0 cm−1 matches to valence
p
Br, and a line with ν = 327.0 cm−1
vibration of C
in p
Cl.
C6H4Cl2 matches to valence vibration of C
In ﬁgure 2 spectrums of the intramolecular oscillations
400 cm−1) of p-
(in range of frequencies ν = 150
dibromobenzene (1), p-dichlorobenzene (2) and an inves-
tigated mixed crystal at 50 mol% of p-dichlorobenzene
(3) are presented.

−

−

−

−

−

Apparently, the spectrum of a mixed crystal is a super-
position of spectrums of the intramolecular oscillations
of components with account for their concentration. In
ﬁgure 3 the graph of dependence of relative intensity of

±

2

FIG. 2: Intramolecular oscillations spectrums of p−C6H4Br2
(1) and p − C6H4Cl2 (2) and mixed crystal, which has been
grown from these substances, at equimolar concentration (3),
in range of frequencies ν = 150 − 400 cm

−1.

FIG. 3: Dependence of relative intensity of a line with fre-
−1 on
quency of 327 cm
concentration of p − C6H4Cl2 in investigated mix-crystals.

−1 to a line with frequency of 212 cm

a line with frequency 327 cm−1 to a line with frequency
212 cm−1 from concentration of components is presented.
With use of these graphs it was possible to determine con-
centration of p-dichlorobenzene in a p-dibromobenzene.
In greater detail the method of determination of compo-
nents concentration in a mixed crystal with use of the
RE is described in work [8].

Then the monocrystal of a p-dibromobenzene by the
Bridgman’s method has been grown. The monocrystal

was grown in a glass tube with a diameter d = 1 cm and
with a length h = 1 cm with the drawn end in which
seated beforehand puriﬁed by a method of zone melting
a p-dibromobenzene. From a tube the air was pumped
out and the tube was soldered. The ampoule with sub-
stance was sinking from the hot to a cold zone of the
10−6 cm/s. The lapse rate
heater with velocity V = 8.3
·
of temperature of the heater was set by various coiling of
a heating coil and was dt/dl = 7.6 deg /cm. Monocrys-
tallinity of a sample was tested with use of a polarized-
light microscope. The parallelepiped was cut out from
7.0 cm3) and on one of which
this monocrystal (0.5
least edges the layer of p-dichlorobenzene with thickness
0.03 cm was applied. After that the sample was annealed
at temperature 50◦C during 360 hours.

0.5

×

×

To exclude surface eﬀects and to investigate diﬀusion
in depth of a sample from one of the edges the layer of
a sample by thickness 0.1 cm collateral to a direction of
diﬀusion has been cut oﬀ. The sample was put in in-
stallation, which diagram is presented in ﬁgure 1, and
the recording of spectrums was carried out. Spectrums
are obtained in three points located at 20 µ from bound-
ary parting p-dichlorobenzene and a p-dibromobenzene
along a direction of diﬀusion. At that the concentration
C of p-dichlorobenzene (determined using method de-
scribed above) is C20 = 35.0 mol%, C30 = 16.0 mol% and
C40 = 40.0 mol%, where lower index designates distance
in µ from boundary. Apparently, the used monocrystal
can be considered as semi-inﬁnite body (in comparison
with penetration depth of impurity during diﬀusion) and
consequently use the following relation for a determina-
tion of a diﬀusivity C = C0erf cZ, where Z = x/2√Dt
[10], C is the concentration of impurity located at x from
boundary, C0 is the initial concentration of impurity, t is
the time of annealing, D is the diﬀusivity.

±

It is found that the diﬀusivity is D20 = 1.76

0.02
10−12 cm2/s and average value is D = 1.746

±

·

0.02
·
10−12 cm2/s, D40 =

±

10−12 cm2/s, D30 = 1.75
1.73
0.02

0.02
±
·
10−12 cm2/s.
·

4

the

In ﬁgure

calculated dependence

of p-
dichlorobenzene concentration on depth of penetration
in a monocrystal of a p-dibromobenzene for the obtained
average value of diﬀusivity D is presented. Concentra-
tion was calculated with use of above-stated formulas.
) marks the experimental av-
In the ﬁgure the circles (
◦
eraged values of concentration. Evidently, experimental
values are in very good agreement with calculated con-
centrations.

Obtained values of diﬀusivity are in good agreement
with the data obtained on other molecular crystals by
other methods [11, 12]. In work [11] it is mentioned, that
magnitude of a diﬀusivity strongly depends on a degree of
clearing of substance, for example for naphthalene, from
10−10 to 10−14 cm2/s.

Then, using procedure given above, the diﬀusivity in
a sample perpendicularly to a direction of diﬀusion at

3

FIG. 4:
Dependence of relative concentration C/C0 of
p − C5H4Cl2 on depth of penetration in the p − C5H4Br2
monocrystal. Circles (◦) mark the experimental values of con-
centration.

FIG. 5: Changes of diﬀusivity on centerline of obtained
sample perpendicularly to a direction of diﬀusion at 20 µ
from boundary that parting p-dichlorobenzene and a p-
dibromobenzene.

about 20 µ from boundary was measured. With this pur-
pose on this distance the collateral layer of a crystal per-
pendicularly to a direction of diﬀusion has been cut oﬀ.
Spectrums are obtained in ﬁve points on centerline of this
sample perpendicularly to a direction of diﬀusion. The
values of diﬀusivities found from experiments are marked
by circles in ﬁgure 5. Evidently, to edges of a crystal these
values increase.

Thus, using a method of a Raman Eﬀect of light
and the above-stated procedure it is possible to carry
out investigations of a heterodiﬀusion in molecular crys-
tals. Values of diﬀusivities obtained in this paper are in

good agreement with given obtained by other methods
on molecular crystals.

∗ mkor@iph.krasn.ru
[1] Novie phisicheskie principy obrabotki informatcii [New
physical principles of optical
information processing
(USSR)], edited by S.A. Ahamanov and M.A. Vorontsov
(Nauka, Moscow, 1990)

[2] S.D. Hertsriken and I.A. Dekhtyar, in Diﬀusiya v met-
allah i splavah v tverdoy phase [Diﬀusion in metals and
alloys in solid state (USSR)], (Gosudarstvennoe izdatel-
stvo phys.-mat. Literatury, Moscow, 1960)

[3] J.N. Sherwood, Mol.Cryst.Liq.Cryst. 9, 37 (1986)
[4] K.P. Gurov, B.A. Kartashkin, Yu.E. Ugaste,

in
Vzaimnaya diﬀusiya v mogofaznyh metallicheskih sis-
temah [Mutual diﬀusion in multiphase metallic systems

4

(USSR)], (Nauka, Moscow, 1981)

[5] A.I. Kitaigorodskii,

in Organicheskaya kristallokhimiya
[Organic crystallochemistry (USSR)], (Izdatelstvo AN
SSSR, Moscow, 1955)

[6] V.F. Shabanov, V.P. Spiridonov, M.A. Korshunov, Zh.
Prikl. Spektrosk. [J. Appl. Spectrosc. (USSR)] 25, 698
(1976)

[7] V.S. Grechishkin, in Yadernyie kvadrupolnyie vzaimod-
eystviya v tverdyh telah [Nuclear quadruple interactions
in solids (USSR)], (Nauka, Moscow, 1973)

[8] M.A.

Korshunov,
Crystallogr.] 48, 531 (2003)

Kristallograﬁya

[Sov.Phys.-

[9] M. Suzuki, M. Ito, Spectrochim. Acta 25A, 1017 (1969)
[10] J.P. Stark, in Solid State Diﬀusion, (John Wiley & Sons,

New York, 1976)

[11] J.N. Sherwood, D.J. White, Phil. Mag. 15, 745 (1967)
[12] L. Bonpunt, A. Dautant, A. Loumaid, Y. Haget, Mol.

Cryst. Liq. Cryst. 137, 213 (1986)

