Preprint of:
M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop,
“Optical torque controlled by elliptical polarization”,
Optics Letters 23, 1–3 (1998)

Optical torque controlled by elliptical polarization

M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen,∗ N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop
Centre for Laser Science, Department of Physics,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia
(Dated: 4th August 1997)

We show theoretically and demonstrate experimentally that highly absorbing particles can be
trapped and manipulated in a single highly focused Gaussian beam. Our studies of the eﬀects of
polarized light on such particles show that they can be set into rotation by elliptically polarized
light and that both the sense and the speed of their rotation can be smoothly controlled.

PACS numbers: 42.62.Be,42.62.Eh,42.25.Fx,42.25.Ja

3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Over the past 20 years the use of light to manipu-
late microscopic particles has progressed from the more
complicated multiple-beam radiation pressure traps of
Ashkin [1] and Roosen and Imbert [2] to simpler single-
beam traps. The best known of these is the single-beam
gradient optical trap (so-called optical tweezers), which
can be used to manipulate transparent highindex mi-
croscopic particles, or low-index particles if a doughnut-
shaped beam is used [3]. This trap is three dimensional
in the sense that, as well as experiencing a radial force,
a particle experiences an axial force that draws it to-
ward the beam waist, allowing it to be levitated even by
a downward-propagating beam. The same experimen-
tal arrangement can be used to trap metallic particles
three dimensionally if they are small enough to behave
as dipoles [4], but larger reﬂective and absorbing parti-
cles experience too large a radiation pressure to be lev-
itated. However, these particles can be trapped radially
against a surface (i.e., a two-dimensional trap). Reﬂec-
tive metal particles have been trapped in this way with
a Gaussian beam [5], but trapping of micrometer-sized
absorbing particles has been limited to traps that use
laser beams with a central ﬁeld minimum, with a high-
intensity ring of light to conﬁne the particles to a dark
region in the center.

We show both theoretically and experimentally that
strongly absorbing particles can in fact be trapped and
manipulated by radiation pressure by use of a single
Gaussian beam. Moreover, using a Gaussian mode pro-
vides a unique opportunity to study the eﬀects of the
optical torque on absorbing particles that are due to po-
larization alone, in contrast to our previous work with an
LG03 doughnut mode [6, 7] and that of Simpson et al. [8]
where torque owing to orbital angular momentum was
also present. Our experiments show that absorbing par-
ticles trapped in a Gaussian beam are set into rotation

∗timo@physics.uq.edu.au

by elliptically polarized light and rotate in a direction
that depends on the handedness of the ellipticity. We
also show that particles experience a torque that is due
to elliptically polarized light which is proportional to the
angular momentum density of the beam.

Two-dimensional trapping of absorbing particles can
easily be understood in terms of
linear momentum
transfer. The force F experienced by a small area
dA of an absorbing particle can be determined from
the time-averaged Poynting vector S by F = (1/c)S ·
(−dA)(S/|S|), and the force on a particle can be obtained
by integration over its surface. Figure 1 shows the direc-
tion and magnitude of the Poynting vector above and be-
low the waist of a focused Gaussian beam. From this, we

FIG. 1: Linear momentum in a focussed Gaussian laser beam.
The direction and magnitude of the Poynting vector above
and below the beam waist are shown. As the beam is con-
verging, the Poynting vector has an inward radial component
at all points away from the beam axis, which permits two-
dimensional radial trapping of absorbing particles.

see that a particle positioned above the waist will expe-
rience a force that has a component both in the direction
of beam propagation and radially inward, so the parti-
cle is conﬁned to the center of the beam. Conversely, a
particle below the waist experiences a force in the prop-
agation direction and radially outward, expelling it from
the beam center. The radiation pressure force in the di-
rection of beam propagation can be countered by the nor-
mal reaction force of the surface on which the particle is
trapped. For a given radial trapping force, the unwanted
axial pressure will be greater for the Gaussian beam than
for a doughnut, increasing friction and causing trapping
to be less stable. However, particles trapped in this way
can be manipulated, even though these factors make the
Gaussian beam trap a little harder to use.

The optical torque from elliptically polarized light, ﬁrst
calculated in 1900 by Sadowsky [9], was considered too
small for experimental detection until Beth’s famous ex-
periment in 1936 [10], in which this tiny torque was mea-
sured in a complicated and diﬃcult experiment. With the
additional tools of the laser and the optical trap, it is now
possible to observe this torque acting on a microscopic
scale [7, 11] with relative ease, as the eﬀects are larger by
several orders of magnitude. Optical torque calculations
by Marston and Crichton [12], Chang and Lee [13], and
Barton et al. [14] indicate that the expected eﬀect of this
optical torque on an optically trapped particle is rotation
of the order of a few hertz.

To observe the mechanical eﬀects of circularly polar-
ized light, we introduced a λ/4 plate into an experimen-
tal setup based on an optical tweezers arrangement, as
shown in Fig. 2. The setup diﬀers from the usual optical
tweezers arrangement in that a laser beam is brought to a
focus below the specimen plane of a high-power objective
to facilitate trapping of absorbing particles. The absorp-
tive material used in these experiments is CuO powder
(irregularly shaped particles approximately 1–10 µm in
size; refractive index n = 2.63) dispersed in kerosene (re-
fractive index n = 1.442). The absorptivity of the CuO
particles that we used is not known; however, thin ﬁlms of
CuO (50 nm thickness) have been measured to transmit
only 30% of 1064 nm light [15], indicating that particles
of 1–10 µm thickness would be highly absorbing. A drop
of this mixture is placed between a microscope slide and
cover slip and then positioned in the specimen plane of a
100× high-N.A. oil-immersion objective. A linearly po-
larized, Gaussian beam (λ = 1064 nm), spatially ﬁltered
with single-mode optical ﬁber, ≈ 20 mW in power, is di-
rected into the back aperture of the objective and focused
to a diﬀraction-limited spot below the particle, which is
then optically trapped.

When circularly polarized light is absorbed by a par-
ticle, by conservation of angular momentum we expect
that the particle will gain mechanical angular momen-
tum and thus experience a torque. The torque τ act-
ing on a particle of radius r and absorptivity α trapped
on the axis of a beam of spot size w(z) is given by
τ = (ασzP/ω)(1 − exp{−2r2/w2(z)}), where P is the

2

FIG. 2: Experimental setup for optical trapping and micro-
manipulation of absorbing particles by use of a Gaussian laser
beam. The particles are trapped above the waist of the beam.
The quality of the beam is ensured to be Gaussian by optical
ﬁltering with a single-mode optical ﬁber.

beam power, w(z) is the beam width, ω is the angular
frequency of the light, and σz is the degree of circular
polarization, equal to ±1 for left- and right-circularly
polarized light, respectively, and 0 for plane-polarized
light. For a particle rotating with angular speed Ω in
a medium of viscosity η, the drag torque is given by
τD = −8πηr3Ω and the particle rotation rate will be
constant when these torques are equal. For example, a
CuO particle in kerosene [assumed to be at 100°C with
viscosity of 5.5 × 10−4 Ns/m2] absorbing 10% of a 20 mW
beam should rotate at 10 Hz in circularly polarized light,
either clockwise or anticlockwise about the beam axis,
depending on whether the light is left- or right-circularly
polarized. This estimate is in agreement with our ob-
served rotation rates of 1–25 Hz.

In our experiment we changed the beam polarization
from plane to circular through rotation of a λ/4 plate
while keeping a CuO particle trapped and observed that,
on rotation of the wave plate, the particle began to rotate
at a frequency of a few hertz. All the particles that we
tested rotated in the same direction, and, on rotation of
the λ/4 plate by 90°, all trapped particles changed direc-
tion and continued to rotate. Particles did not rotate in
plane-polarized light.

3

where θ is the angle between the fast axis of the λ/4 plate
and the electric ﬁeld of the plane polarized incident ﬁeld.
We can measure the rotation frequency of a trapped
CuO particle by using a small-area photodiode placed oﬀ
center of the image of the scattered light from the par-
ticle [7], as shown in Fig. 2. To quantify the eﬀects of
elliptically polarized light we rotated a λ/4 plate in incre-
ments of 5°from θ = −45°to θ = +45°, thus changing the
polarization stepwise from left to right circular. At each
position we measured the particle’s rotation frequency,
which we plot in Fig. 3 against the angle of the λ/4 plate.
Also plotted in Fig. 3 is a graph of fmax sin 2θ, which is
the calculated rotation frequency from Eq. (1), where
fmax is the frequency of rotation in circularly polarized
light. As can be seen from the graph, the experimental
data ﬁt the theoretical curve extremely well, conﬁrming
that the particle rotation is in fact a result of the torque
from elliptically polarized light. Once the rotation rate
for a particular particle in circularly polarized light is
known, we can control both its direction and rate of ro-
tation simply by rotation of a λ/4 plate.

We have shown that it is possible to trap and manipu-
late strongly absorbing microscopic particles two dimen-
sionally without the requirement for a doughnut beam,
production of which can present substantial complica-
tions within a conventional optical tweezers arrangement.
Our investigation of polarization eﬀects shows that ab-
sorbing particles can be rotated without the use of a he-
lical doughnut beam and that, by varying varying the
ellipticity and handedness of the trapping beam polar-
ization, we have continuous smooth control of the rota-
tion. This experiment provides a direct and easily set up
demonstration of the angular momentum of elliptically
polarized light.

FIG. 3: Particle rotation as a result of the torque from ellip-
tically polarized light. The rotation frequency for absorbing
particles trapped in a Gaussian beam is shown as a function
of θ, the angle between the fast axis of the λ/4 plate and the
plane of polarization of the incoming laser beam. The solid
curve represents the expected variation of rotation rate with
θ as calculated from Eq. (1).

The angular momentum density J is given by J =
(ǫ/2iω) R d3rE⋆ × E, where E is the electric ﬁeld am-
plitude vector [16]. For elliptically polarized light pro-
duced by passing plane-polarized light through a λ/4
plate, the electric ﬁeld vector can be written as E =
E0 cos θˆj + iE0 sin θˆk, giving

J = −

E2

0 sin 2θˆi,

ǫ
2ω

(1)

[1] A. Ashkin, Sci. Am. 226, 62 (1972).
[2] G. Roosen and C. Imbert, Opt. Commun. 26, 432 (1978).
[3] K. T. Gahagan and G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., Opt. Lett.

[4] K. Svoboda and S. M. Block, Opt. Lett. 19, 930 (1994).
[5] S. Sato, Y. Harada, and Y. Waseda, Opt. Lett. 19, 1807

21, 827 (1996).

(1994).

[6] H. He, M. E. J. Friese, N. R. Heckenberg, and H.
Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 826 (1995).
[7] M. E. J. Friese, J. Enger, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N.

R. Heckenberg, Phys. Rev. A 54, 1593 (1996).

[9] A. Sadowsky, Acta Comment. Imp. Universit. Jurievensis

Opt. Lett. 22, 52 (1997).

7, 1 (1899); 8, 1 (1900).

[10] R. A. Beth, Phys. Rev. 50, 115 (1936).
[11] T. Sugiura, S. Kawata, and S. Minami, J. Spectrosc. Soc.

Jpn. 11, 1342 (1990).

[12] P. L. Marston and J. H. Crichton, Phys. Rev. A 30, 2508

[13] S. Chang and S. S. Lee, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2, 1853

[14] J. P. Barton, D. R. Alexander, and S. A. Schaub, J. Appl.

Phys. 66, 4592 (1989).

[15] N. ¨Ozer and F. Tepehan, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells

(1984).

(1985).

30, 13 (1993).

(1994).

[8] N. B. Simpson, K. Dholakia, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett,

[16] S. M. Barnett and L. Allen, Opt. Commun. 110, 670

