pair in anisotropic nonlinear media

Abstract. We study propagation of a pair of oppositely charged and mutually
incoherent vortices in anisotropic nonlinear optical media. Mutual interactions retard
the delocalization of the vortex core observed for isolated vortices.

A. V. Mamaev†, M. Saﬀman‡, and A. A. Zozulya§
Institute for Problems in Mechanics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Prospekt
†
Vernadskogo 101, Moscow, 117526 Russia
Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, 1150 University Avenue, Madison,
‡
Wisconsin 53706, USA
Department of Physics, WPI, 100 Institute Road, Worcester, Massachusetts 01609,
§
USA

3 Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 42.65.-k,42.65.Sf,42.65.Tg

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media2

1. Introduction

Isotropic media with a repulsive nonlinearity support localized vortex solitons
characterized by a dislocation of the wavefront at the point where the ﬁeld amplitude
vanishes [1]. Vortex solitons have been observed in several types of defocusing nonlinear
media, including superﬂuids, superconductors, optical Kerr media and Bose Einstein
condensates. Stability of the solitons depends on the structure of the nonlinearity and
the dimensionality of the medium. Planar one-transverse dimensional [(1+1)D] solutions
are modulationally unstable in bulk, two-transverse dimensional [(2+1)D] media [2, 3, 4].
Kerr type optical media with a cubic, isotropic, and local nonlinearity support stable
(2+1)D vortex solitons [1, 5]. These vortex solitons have attracted considerable attention
theoretically[6] and have recently been studied in detail in atomic condensates[7]. A Kerr
type nonlinearity is, however, a simpliﬁed idealized model of a nonlinear response. The
bulk photorefractive nonlinear medium used in the experiments reported here exhibits a
nonlinearity that is both anisotropic and nonlocal. This leads to qualitative diﬀerences
in the spatial dynamics of vortex beams.

One of the most basic phenomena is the propagation of an isolated vortex of unit
topological charge. Such a vortex can form a stable soliton in isotropic defocusing
media[5]. Theory and experiments have shown that unit charged vortices become
delocalized when they propagate in photorefractive media[8, 9, 10]. The nonlinearity
in a photorefractive crystal with an externally applied electric ﬁeld, or photogalvanic
is anisotropic and nonlocal[11]. The nonlinearity induced by a localized,
response,
circular beam is roughly 3 times stronger along the direction of the applied ﬁeld than
in the perpendicular direction (we will refer to the direction of strongest nonlinearity as
the ˆz axis). Due to the anisotropy a vortex with an initially azimuthally symmetric core
proﬁle focuses perpendicular to ˆz, and stretches along ˆz, so that the major axis of the
core coincides with the direction of greatest material nonlinearity. Simultaneously the
elongated vortex starts to rotate due to its phase structure. The direction of rotation
is uniquely determined by the vortex charge; changing its sign changes the sign of the
rotation. Eventually the rotation is stopped by the anisotropy so that the major axis of
the vortex is aligned at some angle with respect to ˆz. The stretching, however, proceeds
unchecked so that the vortex becomes more and more delocalized. Both theory and
experiment show that delocalization of the vortex core is generic in anisotropic media,
and not dependent on a speciﬁc choice of parameters. The implication is that localized
optical vortex solutions and, in particular, vortex solitons of unit topological charge do
not exist in these media.

An additional hallmark of anisotropy is the nonlinear decay of a charge n vortex
into n unit charge vortices. The decay, although expected on energetic grounds, does
not occur in isotropic media where a high charge vortex is metastable[12], but was
observed using a photorefractive crystal as the nonlinear medium[13]. Upon breakup of
the input high-charge vortex the resulting charge-one vortices repel each other and form
an array aligned perpendicular to ˆz. The decay is driven by the intrinsic anisotropy of

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media3

the medium and takes place for any core proﬁle of the input vortex ﬁeld. The theory
developed in Ref. [13] suggests that the decay of high-charge vortices is possible in local
isotropic media provided some anisotropy is introduced in the problem via, e.g., initial
boundary conditions.

Given the instability of unit and high charge vortices in anisotropic media it is
natural to ask if there exist self-bound ﬁeld conﬁgurations that remain localized under
propagation in anisotropic media. Previous experiments[8] have demonstrated that the
eﬀects of anisotropy are considerably weakened for a counterrotating pair of vortices
with zero net topological charge. When such a pair is aligned perpendicular to ˆz, it
forms a bound state that translates parallel to ˆz, in a manner that is similar to the
translational motion of a counterrotating point vortex pair in ﬂuid dynamics[14]. The
translational motion may, however, be inconvenient in the context of optical processing
applications. Furthermore, the initial orientation of the pair is crucial for its subsequent
evolution. A pair aligned along ˆz annihilates due to diﬀraction.

In this paper we propose, and demonstrate experimentally a novel technique of
creating bound vortex structures in anisotropic media that are free of the above
mentioned limitations. The main idea is based on the fact that in the prevailing majority
of nonlinear media the material response is slow as compared to the frequency of the
optical ﬁeld, and therefore is a function of the time-averaged intensity of this ﬁeld. If
the light ﬁeld consists of several features separated by frequencies that are fast on the
time scale of the material response, the material response will be a function of the sum
of these features intensities, whereas the cross-terms oscillating at high frequencies can
be neglected. This fact has been known in photorefractive nonlinear optics and used
successfully for implementing several optical processing devices [15], as well as (1+1)D
solitary structures [16].

We propose to create a bound vortex pair consisting of two copropagating
counterrotating vortices sitting on top of each other that are mutually incoherent at the
time scales of the nonlinearity. This incoherence can be achieved either by separating
the carrier frequencies of the vortices by an amount that is larger than the inverse
relaxation time of the medium, or proﬁling time histories of the input vortex ﬁelds such
that their time overlap integrated over the relaxation time of the medium is zero. The
mutual incoherence of the vortex ﬁelds removes the translational motion due to the
linear coherence of the vortex pair. At the same time each of the vortices individually
tries to rotate in opposite directions which eﬀectively controls the anisotropy induced
stretching of a single vortex.

2. Theory

In the theoretical analysis we use the set of equations describing propagation of an
electromagnetic ﬁeld B(~r) in a photorefractive self-focusing or self-defocusing medium
as developed in [11, 17]. In our case the ﬁeld consists of two temporal features. For
deﬁniteness assume that these features are separated by a frequency shift Ω such that

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media4

Figure 1. Numerical results
showing output spatial intensity
distributions of a single vortex
for diﬀerent applied voltages.

Ωτ

1, where τ is the characteristic response time of the nonlinearity:

≫

B(~r, t) = [B+(~r, t) + B−(~r, t) exp(

iΩt)] exp(ikx

iωt) .

(1)

−

−

In the steady state the equations governing spatial evolution of the amplitudes B± take
the form

∂
∂x −
∂
∂x −

"

"

2

2

i
2 ∇
i
2 ∇

#

#

B+(~r) =

B+(~r) ,

B−(~r) =

B−(~r) ,

∂ϕ
∂z
∂ϕ
∂z

i
−

i
−

(2a)

(2b)

∂
∂z

(2c)

2ϕ +

ϕ

ln(1 +

B+

2 +

B−

2) =

ln(1 +

B+

2 +

B−

2) .

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

∇

∇

∇

∇

· ∇

ϕ(~r

Here

|
= ˆy(∂/∂y) + ˆz(∂/∂z) and ϕ is the dimensionless electrostatic potential induced
by the light with the boundary conditions
0. The dimensionless
coordinates (x, y, z) are related to the physical coordinates (x′, y′, z′) by the expressions
x = αx′ and (y, z) = √kα(y′, z′), where α = (1/2)kn2reﬀEext. Here k is the wave
number of light in the medium, n is the index of refraction, reﬀ is the eﬀective element
of the electro-optic tensor, and Eext is the amplitude of the external ﬁeld directed along
2 is measured
the z axis far from the beam. The normalized intensity I =
Id.
in units of saturation intensity Id, so that the physical beam intensity is given by I
The minus sign on the right hand side of Eqs. (2a,b) corresponds to a self-defocusing
nonlinearity.

→ ∞

2 +

B+

B−

→

×

)

|

|

|

|

Numerical solutions of Eqs. (2) describing nonlinear evolution of a single vortex
(B− = 0) for diﬀerent values of the applied voltage (nonlinearity) are shown in Fig. 1.

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media5

The numbers on the frames are the values of this voltage in volts. Superimposed on the
images are the equal intensity contour lines visualizing distortions of the vortex core for
diﬀerent values of the nonlinearity. The size of the frames is about 200 µm .

The input ﬁeld was taken to be

B+(x = 0, ~r) =

Iinr exp(

r2/d2

G + iθ)

q

−

where θ is the azimuthal angle, r = √y2 + z2 and dG is the diameter of the Gaussian
beam. The parameters of the calculation were the following: the wavelength λ =
0.63 µm, the refractive index n = 2.3, the length of the nonlinear medium l = 2 cm, the
eﬀective electrooptic coeﬃcient reﬀ = 130 pm/V, dG = 115 µm (135 µm Full Width at
Half Maximum) and Iin = 1.

The output intensity distribution in the absence of the nonlinearity is given by the
frame labeled 0 V and corresponds to an annular ring having approximately 79 µm
and 267 µm internal and external diameters, respectively. The frames corresponding
to nonzero nonlinearity demonstrate focusing of the vortex along ˆy and its stretching
along ˆz. Also clearly seen is the rotation and alignment of the vortex. This rotation is
charge-dependent and changes sign if the charge of the vortex is changed from plus to
minus one. The magnitude of all these eﬀects is directly proportional to the value of
the applied voltage.

Numerical solutions of Eqs.

(2) describing nonlinear evolution of the mutually
incoherent vortex pair for diﬀerent values of the applied voltage (nonlinearity) are shown
in Fig. 2. The input ﬁeld was taken to be

B±(x = 0, ~r) =

Iinr exp(

r2/d2
G

−

iθ)

±

q

All parameters were the same as in the case of a single vortex (Fig. 1). The parameter
Iin was again chosen such that the total maximum input intensity was equal to one
(the maximum intensity of each of the constituents of the pair was 0.5). Figure 2
demonstrates some considerable reduction in the magnitude of anisotropy eﬀects as
compared to the case of a single vortex (Fig.1). In particular, the degree of ellipticity
of the vortex core at high voltages is several times smaller in Fig. 2 than in Fig. 1.
The horizontal intensity dip appearing at high intensities on the Gaussian beam and
passing from left to right is several times smaller in Fig.2 than in Fig. 1. Figure 2 also
conﬁrms that the vortex pair remains stationary and does not translate with respect to
the Gaussian beam.

The above stability of the vortex pair is due to its phase structure. To prove
this point we have carried out numerical calculations for the input ﬁeld consisting of
two temporal features analogous to Eqs.
(4) and (1) but without azimuthal phase
dependence

B±(x = 0, ~r) =

Iinr exp(

r2/d2
G)

−

q

The ﬁeld (5) has an input intensity distribution that is identical to the above discussed
cases but lacks the topological phase structure present in the case of Eqs. (3) and (4).
Figure 3 shows results of the calculations. All parameters are the same as in Figs. 1

(3)

(4)

(5)

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media6

Figure 2. Numerical results
showing output spatial intensity
distributions of a vortex pair for
diﬀerent applied voltages.

and 2.
In sharp contrast to Figs. 1 and 2 the output distribution of the ﬁeld does
not contain any intensity zeros because of the diﬀraction. The output intensity for zero
applied voltage is a bright ring with a smaller local maximum in the center that is about
two times weaker than the ring. Increasing nonlinearity results in the transfer of energy
from the ring to the center of the beam and the appearance of two intensity minima
on the right and left. The intensity in these minima at the highest value of the applied
voltage (700 V) is about 0.2 of the maximum intensity in the center.

3. Experiment

The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 4. A 30 mW He-Ne laser beam (λ = 0.63 µm)
was passed through a variable beam splitter, and a system of lenses controlling the size of
the beam waist. Diﬀraction of the beam by a diﬀractive element with a fringe dislocation
created unit charge vortices of opposite signs in the ﬁrst order diﬀracted beams to either
side of the transmitted beam. One of the beams was phase modulated by reﬂection from
a mirror mounted on a piezo-electric transducer driven by a sawtooth voltage, such that
Ωτ
1. The beams were then recombined and directed into a photorefractive crystal of
SBN:60 doped with 0.002% by weight Ce. The beams propagated perpendicular to the
crystal ˆc-axis (= z axis), and were polarized along it. The crystal measured 19 mm along
the direction of propagation, and was 5 mm wide along the ˆc-axis. The experimentally
measured value of the relevant component of the electrooptic tensor was found to be
equal to r33 = 130 pm/V. A variable dc voltage was applied along the ˆc-axis to control
the value of the nonlinearity coeﬃcient. The crystal was illuminated by a source of

≫

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media7

Figure 3. Numerical results
showing output spatial intensity
distributions of a hole in the in-
tensity without phase structure.

Figure 4. Experimental setup.

incoherent white light to increase the level of the eﬀective saturation intensity. Images
of the beams at the output face of the crystal were recorded with a CCD camera.

Figure 5 presents experimental output intensity distributions of the light beam
with two embedded overlapping mutually incoherent vortices for diﬀerent values of the
applied voltage. The numbers on the frames give the applied voltage in volts. The size
of the frames is about 200 µm. The output intensity distribution in the frame with no
applied voltage corresponds to an annular ring with internal and external diameters of
about 80 and 260 µm, respectively. Increasing the voltage results in the focusing of the
vortex core and its stretching along the direction of the anisotropy which is clearly seen
on the last frame corresponding to the 700 V applied voltage. This stretching, however,
is much smaller than that for a single vortex for similar parameters. Experimental data
on the distortions of a single vortex are given in Ref. [8]. Comparison with the results of

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media8

Figure 5. Observed evolution of
two spatially-coinciding counter-
rotating vortices for applied volt-
ages of 0, 150, 350, and 700 V.

the theoretical description shows good quantitative agreement between the experiment
and the theory regarding the degree of ellipticity of the vortex core. Positions of intensity
lobes (maxima) on the Gaussian beam above and below the vortex core in the theoretical
Fig. 3 also are in agreement with those on the experimental Fig. 5.

4. Conclusions

In summary we presented an experimental and theoretical study of the propagation of
Incoherent coupling between the oppositely
a mutually incoherent pair of vortices.
rotating vortices creates a symmetric attractive potential that arrests the rapid
spreading and decay of an isolated vortex.

M. S. was supported by the A. P. Sloan Foundation. We are grateful to E. Eilertsen
and E. Rasmussen at Risø National Laboratory for preparation of the holographic mask.

References

858 ].

494].

[1] Ginzburg V L and Pitaevskii L P 1958 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 34 1240 [1958 Sov. Phys. JETP 34

[2] Zakharov V E and Rubenchik A M 1973 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 65 997 [1974 Sov. Phys. JETP 38

[3] Mamaev A V, Saﬀman M and Zozulya A A 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 2262 .
[4] Tikhonenko V, Christou J, Luther-Davies B and Kivshar Y S 1996 Opt. Lett. 21 1129 .
[5] Swartzlander G A, Jr. and Law C T 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 2503.
[6] Coullet P, Gil L, and Rocca F 1989 Opt. Commun. 73 403; McDonald G S, Syed K S and Firth W
J 1992 Opt. Commun. 94 469; Weiss C O 1992 Phys. Rep. 219 311; Yu S. Kivshar 1993 IEEE

Propagation of a mutually incoherent optical vortex pair in anisotropic nonlinear media9

J. Quantum Electron. 28 250 ; K Staliunas 1994 Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 4 1783 ; Ackemann
T, Kriege E and Lange W 1995 Opt. Commun. 115, 339.

[7] Lundh E, Pethick C J and Smith H 1998 Phys. Rev. A 58 4816 ; Denschlag J et al. 2000 Science
287 97 ; Madison K W et al. 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 806 ; Anderson B P et al. 2001 Phys.
Rev. Lett. 86 2926; Leanhardt A E et al. 2003 Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 140403 .

[8] Mamaev A V, Saﬀman M and Zozulya A A 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 4544.
[9] Saﬀman M and Zozulya A A 1998 Opt. Lett. 23 1579 .
[10] Mamaev A V, Saﬀman M and Zozulya A A 1997 Phys. Rev. A 56 R1713 .
[11] Zozulya A A and Anderson D Z 1995 Phys. Rev. A 51 1520 .
[12] Aranson I and Steinberg V 1996 Phys. Rev. B 53 75 .
[13] Mamaev A V, Saﬀman M and Zozulya A A 1997 Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 2108.
[14] Lamb H 1932 Hydrodynamics, sixth ed. (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge).
[15] Saﬀman M, Benkert C and Anderson D Z 1991 Opt. Lett. 16 1993 ; Saﬀman M, Montgomery D,

Zozulya A A and Anderson D Z 1994 Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 4 2077 .

[16] Chen Z, Segev M, Coskun, T H and Christodoulides D N 1996 Opt. Lett. 21 1436; Chen Z et al.

1996 Opt. Lett. 21 1821.

[17] Mamaev A V, Saﬀman M, Anderson D Z and Zozulya A A 1996 Phys. Rev. A 54 870.

