3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
1
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of:
D. K. Gramotnev and T. A. Nieminen,
“Extremely asymmetrical scattering of electromagnetic waves in gradually varying periodic arrays”,
Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics 1, 635–645 (1999)

Extremely asymmetrical scattering of electromagnetic waves
in gradually varying periodic arrays

D. K. Gramotnev and T. A. Nieminen
Centre for Medical and Health Physics, School of Physical Sciences,
Queensland University of Technology, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane Qld 4001, Australia
(Dated: 23rd December 1998)

This paper analyses theoretically and numerically the eﬀect of varying grating amplitude on the
extremely asymmetrical scattering (EAS) of bulk and guided optical modes in non-uniform strip-
like periodic Bragg arrays with stepwise and gradual variations in the grating amplitude across the
array. A recently developed new approach based on allowance for the diﬀractional divergence of the
scattered wave is used for this analysis. It is demonstrated that gradual variations in magnitude
of the grating amplitude may change the pattern of EAS noticeably but not radically. On the
other hand, phase variations in the grating may result in a radically new type of Bragg scattering—
double-resonant EAS (DEAS). In this case, a combination of two strong simultaneous resonances
(one with respect to frequency, and another with respect to the phase variation) is predicted to take
place in non-uniform arrays with a step-like phase and gradual magnitude variations of the grating
amplitude. The tolerances of EAS and DEAS to small gradual variations in the grating amplitude
are determined. The main features of these types of scattering in non-uniform arrays are explained
by the diﬀractional divergence of the scattered wave inside and outside the array.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Extremely asymmetrical scattering (EAS) of waves in
periodic arrays is a new type of Bragg scattering that is
realized when the scattered wave propagates parallel or
almost parallel to the boundary(ies) of a strip-like peri-
odic array [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. This type
of scattering is radically diﬀerent from the conventional
Bragg scattering in periodic arrays. For example, EAS is
characterized by a strong resonant increase of the scat-
tered wave amplitudes inside and outside the array; the
smaller the grating amplitude, the larger the amplitudes
of the scattered waves [2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
In addi-
tion, the incident and scattered waves inside the array
each split into three waves [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Two of
these scattered waves and two of the incident waves in-
side the array are evanescent waves which are localized
near the array boundaries [6, 7, 8]. The third scattered
wave is a plane wave propagating at a grazing angle into
the array [6, 7, 8].

Our recent publications [6, 7, 8] have demonstrated
that the physical reason for EAS is related to the diﬀrac-
tional divergence of the scattered wave inside and out-
side the array. A new powerful approach for sim-
ple analytical analysis of EAS, based on allowance for
this diﬀractional divergence, was introduced and justi-
ﬁed [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. In the case of bulk electromag-
netic waves, this approach was shown to give the same
coupled mode equations as the dynamic theory of scatter-
ing that was previously used for the theoretical analysis
of EAS [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8]. However, the dynamic the-

ory of scattering is not suitable for analysis of EAS of
guided and surface waves on account of extremely awk-
ward calculations involved, while the new approach is
readily applicable for all types of waves, including sur-
face and guided optical and acoustic modes [6, 7, 9, 10].

EAS has enormous potential for new important practi-
cal applications in the development of novel optical com-
munication devices (e.g. narrow-band optical ﬁlters, res-
onators, couplers, switches, lasers, etc), optical sensors
and measurement techniques. For example, the strong
resonant increase of the scattered wave amplitude during
EAS may result in high-quality EAS-based resonators
and high sensitivity of sensors and measurement tech-
niques. New non-collinear geometry of EAS can lead to
the development of highly tuneable optical and ultrasonic
devices, and may also result in an improved side-lobe
structure of ﬁltered signals. The possibility of concen-
tration of the scattered wave energy in narrowchannels
can be used for ampliﬁcation and lateral compression of
waves, as well as for eﬀective coupling of a planar waveg-
uide and a ﬁbre.

However, manufacturing EAS-based structures and de-
vices will inevitably be related with various imperfections
of periodic arrays. Because of the resonant character
of EAS, it is possible to expect that at least some of
these imperfections may be crucial for the experimen-
tal observation and practical use of this type of scat-
tering. Thus, a very important practical problem is to
investigate theoretically the eﬀect of array imperfections
on EAS, and determine the tolerance of the scattering.
In addition, non-uniform arrays are often manufactured

on purpose. For example, non-uniform chirped gratings
can eﬀectively compress pulses broadened due to dis-
persion of optical modes in a slab or optical ﬁbre [12]
(i.e. the dispersion can be compensated). Launching of
solitons into non-uniform nonlinear Bragg gratings can
be signiﬁcantly easier than for uniform nonlinear Bragg
gratings [13, 14]. The side-lobe structure of ﬁltered sig-
nals can be noticeably improved (suppressed) by using
non-uniform gratings with slowly varying grating ampli-
tude [15].

There are also two other special reasons for using
nonuniform arrays in the case of EAS. Firstly, edge eﬀects
at the array boundaries may result in noticeable undesir-
able energy losses in the scattered wave, caused by an ad-
ditional re-scattering of the scattered wave. These losses
may be noticeable because of the large amplitude of the
scattered wave propagating along the boundaries. Non-
uniform arrays with gradually increasing grating ampli-
tude can be used for a substantial reduction of this eﬀect.
Secondly, nonuniform arrays with varying grating ampli-
tude may result in a radically new type of EAS [10], as
well as cause concentration of the wave energy within
narrow channels inside the array [11]. In addition, non-
uniform arrays may result in a signiﬁcant reduction of
the relaxation time to steady-state EAS.

Therefore, EAS of bulk or guided opticalwaves has
been analysed for non-uniform arrays with step-like
variations of the grating amplitude [10, 11].
It was
demonstrated that a step-like variation in magnitude
of the grating amplitude may result in a noticeable re-
arrangement of the intensity distribution of the scattered
wave inside the array [11]. The sensitivity of EAS to
small uniform and non-uniform (step-like) variations in
the grating amplitude was also determined [11]. Step-
like phase variations in the grating inside the array were
shown to have a much stronger eﬀect on EAS than the
magnitude variations [10]. In thin arrays, they resulted
in a radically new type of EAS double-resonant extremely
asymmetrical scattering (DEAS) that is characterized by
a unique combination of two sharp simultaneous reso-
nances with respect to frequency and the phase variation
in the grating [10].

However, non-uniform arrays with step-like variations
of the grating amplitude will hardly reduce edge eﬀects
at the array boundaries. Moreover, the presence of ad-
ditional interfaces at which the step-like variations take
place must increase undesirable edge eﬀects and the re-
sultant energy losses. This is especially the case for
DEAS, where the scattered wave amplitude is exception-
ally large [10]. Step-like variations in the grating ampli-
tude will also hardly improve the side-lobe structure of
processed (ﬁltered) signals. Finally, manufacturing peri-
odic arrays usually results in imperfections characterized
by slow (but not step-like) variations in the grating am-
plitude (e.g. due to non-uniform etching, photolithogra-
phy, etc). However, EAS and DEAS in non-uniform ar-
rays with slow variations of the grating amplitude have
not been analysed previously, though such analysis is cru-

2

cial for successful development of new practical applica-
tions of these types of scattering.

Therefore, the aim of this paper is to analyse theoret-
ically and numerically the steady-state EAS and DEAS
of bulk and guided electromagnetic waves in non-uniform
periodic arrays with slowly varying grating amplitude.
Coupled wave equations describing EAS and DEAS in
arrays with slowly varying grating amplitude are derived.
The ﬁeld structure in the scattered waves is determined
inside and outside the array by means of numerical so-
lution of the coupled wave equations. The tolerance of
EAS and DEAS to small slow variations in the grating
amplitude (array imperfections) is also investigated the-
oretically. The results are compared with those obtained
for EAS and DEAS in uniform and non-uniform arrays
with step-like variations of the grating amplitude.

II. COUPLED WAVE EQUATIONS

The structure under investigation and the geometry of
scattering are presented in ﬁgure 1. An incident wave
is scattered in a strip-like periodic array of width L.
The period of the grating is assumed to be constant in
the whole array, while the grating amplitude can vary
in phase and/or in magnitude across the array, i.e.
in
the x-direction (ﬁgure 1). We will consider only stepwise
and/or slow (i.e. small at distances of the order of the
grating period) variations in the grating amplitude. In
this case, the grating amplitude can be assumed to be
locally constant at each point of the array, except for the
values of the x-coordinate at which the steplike variations
take place (at x = L1 in ﬁgure 1). The array is assumed
to be uniform along the y-axis, i.e. in the directions par-
allel to the array boundaries.

FIG. 1: Scheme for EAS in non-uniform strip-like periodic
Bragg arrays with varying grating amplitude and the total
array width equal to L.

In sections 2–5 we analyse EAS and DEAS of bulk TE
optical waves in periodic Bragg arrays represented by a

periodic variation of the dielectric permittivity:

ǫs = ǫ + ǫ1(x) exp(iq · r) + ǫ

∗
1(x) exp(−iq · r)

ǫs = ǫ

if 0 < x < L,
if x < 0, or x > L,

(1)

where the mean dielectric permittivity ǫ is the same in
all parts of the structure (inside and outside the array),
the amplitude of the grating ǫ1(x) is small:

|ǫ1(x)|/ǫ ≪ 1,

(2)

and q is the reciprocal lattice vector (|q| = 2π/Λ, where
Λ is the grating period). There is no dissipation of elec-
tromagnetic waves inside or outside the array, i.e. ǫ is
real and positive. The complex grating amplitude ǫ1(x)
varies in magnitude and/or phase within the array.

A plane TE electromagnetic wave (with the electric
ﬁeld parallel to the z-axis) is incident on the array at an
angle θ0 (measured counterclockwise from the x-axis—
ﬁgure 1). We assume that the Bragg condition is satisﬁed
precisely:

k1 − k0 = −q

(3)

where k0 is the wavevector of the incident wave, k1 is
parallel to the array boundaries (ﬁgure 1), |k1| = |k0| =
k0 = ωǫ1/2/c, ω is the angular frequency, and c is the
speed of light in vacuum.

If condition (2) is satisﬁed for all values of x, then
the amplitudes of the incident and scattered waves vary
slowly inside the array, i.e. their variations at distances
of about one wavelength are small as compared with the
values of these amplitudes. In this case the approxima-
tion of slowly varying amplitudes is valid and only two
waves—incident and scattered—need to be taken into ac-
count inside and outside the array:

E(x) = E0(x) exp{ik0xx + ik0yy − iωt}+

E1(x) exp{ik0y − iωt},

(4)

where E0(x) and E1(x) are the slowly varying amplitudes
of the electric ﬁeld in the incident and scattered waves,
respectively, k0x = k0 cos θ0, and k0y = k0 sin θ0.

It was shown previously [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] that in the
geometry of EAS, there are two opposing mechanisms de-
termining the behaviour of the scattered wave amplitude.
On the one hand, the scattered wave amplitude must in-
crease along the direction of its propagation (i.e. along
the y-axis) due to scattering of the incident wave inside
the array. On the other hand, the scatteredwave ampli-
tude must decrease along the y-axis due to a signiﬁcant
diﬀractional divergence of this wave [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
The steady-state EAS occurs when the increment in the
scattered wave amplitude caused by the scattering is
exactly compensated by the decrement caused by the
diﬀractional divergence [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. The new
approach for the theoretical analysis of EAS is based

3

on the separate determination of each of the two con-
tributions to the scattered wave amplitude. The cou-
pled wave equations describing the steady-state EAS
are then derived from the comparison of these contri-
butions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].

Here, we apply this approach to the considered case
of EAS and DEAS in non-uniform periodic arrays with
slowly varying grating amplitude. During the ﬁrst step,
we determine the contribution due to scattering, disre-
garding the diﬀractional divergence. In this case the am-
plitude of the scattered wave must increase along the
y-axis. If the amplitudes of the incident and scattered
waves vary slowly inside the array, then at any point in
the array, the incident wave amplitude and the grating
amplitude can be considered to be locally constant. Thus
the scatteringinduced increments in the amplitude of the
scattered wave along the direction of its propagation at
any point of the array are determined only by the local
values of the grating amplitude and the amplitude of the
incident wave, regardless of the type of Bragg scatter-
ing. Therefore, we can ﬁnd these increments by means of
the conventional dynamic theory of scattering in uniform
arrays.

The coupledwave equations in the conventional dy-
namic theory of scattering are well known [8, 12, 13, 14,
15]:

dE0/dx0 = iΓ1E1,
dE1/dx0 = iΓ0E0,

(5)
(6)

where Γ0 and Γ1 are the coupling coeﬃcients, and the
x0-axis is parallel to the reciprocal vector of the grating
(see ﬁgure 1). Equation (6) gives the scattering-induced
rate of changing the scattered wave amplitude along the
x0-axis. The rate of changing amplitude of the scattered
wave along the direction of its propagation can then be
obtained from equation (6) by means of the simple substi-
tution of dx0 = − cos(pi/2 − η + θ0)dy = − sin(η − θ0)dy:

∂E1
∂y

(cid:18)

(cid:19)scattering

= −iΓ0E0(x) sin(η − θ0).

(7)

where η is the angle (measured counterclockwise) be-
tween the positive x0-direction and the wavevector of the
incident wave (ﬁgure 1).

During the second step, we disregard the scattering
and consider only the diﬀractional divergence of the scat-
tered wave (beam). In this case, the rate of decreasing
amplitude of the scattered wave can be derived by substi-
tuting the entire scattered ﬁeld Esc = E1 exp(ik1y − iωt)
into the Helmholtz equation ∇2Esc + k2

1Esc = 0:

∂2
∂x2 E1 +

∂2
∂y2 E1 + 2ik

∂
∂y

E1 = 0.

(8)

Here, we can neglect the second-order derivative of the
slowly varying amplitude E1 with respect to y as com-
pared with the ﬁrst-order derivative. This gives us the

parabolic equation of diﬀraction

∂E1
∂y

(cid:18)

(cid:19)divergence

=

i
2k1

∂2E1
∂x2

(9)

There is no coupling between incident and scattered
waves outside the array, i.e. at x < 0 and x > L. There-
fore, the coupling coeﬃcients K0,1 are equal to zero out-
side the array, and the coupled wave equations (10) and
(12) take the form:

4

that determines the rate of decreasing scattered wave am-
plitude along the direction of its propagation due to the
diﬀractional divergence.

As has already been mentioned, in the steady-state
EAS, the contributions to the scattered wave amplitude,
caused by the scattering and diﬀractional divergence,
must exactly compensate each other. Therefore, the sum
of rates (7) and (9) must give zero. This condition results
in the following equation:

d2E1(x)

dx2 + K0E0(x) = 0,

(10)

where

K0 = −2k1Γ0 sin(η − θ0).

(11)

Note that in equations (8)–(11) we have deliberately
used k1 instead k0, even though k1 = k0 for bulk electro-
magnetic waves. This was done to make the presented
derivation valid for all types of waves, including surface
and guided modes, for which k1 may be not equal to k0
(e.g.
for scattering of TE modes guided by a slab into
TM modes of the same slab).

Equation (10) is one of the coupled wave equations
describing EAS (or DEAS) in a non-uniform periodic
array. The second equation is obtained from equation
(5). Recall that in the considered geometry of scatter-
ing (see ﬁgure 1), the incident wave amplitude must de-
pend only on the x-coordinate. Therefore, substituting
dx0 = dx1 cos η = dx cos η/ cos θ0 into equation (5) gives:

where

dE0(x)
dx

= iK1E1(x),

K1 = Γ1 cos η/ cos θ0.

(12)

(13)

Equations (10) and (12) are the complete set of coupled
wave equations for EAS (or DEAS) of electromagnetic
waves in a non-uniform periodic array with varying grat-
ing amplitude. As has already been mentioned above,
these coupled wave equations are valid for the description
of EAS and DEAS of all types of waves, including sur-
face and guided optical modes. The diﬀerence between,
for example, bulk and guided optical waves is only in dif-
ferent values of the coupling coeﬃcients Γ0 and Γ1. For
bulk electromagnetic waves [8]

Γ0 = −Γ

∗
1 = −ǫ

∗
1ω2/[2c2k0 cos η]

(14)

while for guided modes, these coeﬃcients are determined
using one of the conventional dynamic theories of scat-
tering for optical slab modes [12, 13, 14, 15] (see section
6 for more detail).

d2E1(x)/dx2 = 0;

dE0(x)/dx = 0.

(15)

One can easily see that the coupled wave equations
(10), (12) and (15) in the case of non-uniform arrays with
slowly varying grating amplitude appear to have exactly
the same form as for uniform arrays [6, 7, 8, 9]. However,
for non-uniform arrays, the coupling coeﬃcients K1 and
K0 in equations (10) and (12) are dependent on the x-
coordinate because the grating amplitude ǫ1 depends on
x. This results in substantial diﬃculties with analytical
solution of these equations. Therefore, in sections 3 and
4, we present results of numerical analysis of the coupled
wave equations (10) and (12) for periodic arrays with
several typical dependences of the grating amplitude on
the x-coordinate. The numerical method and boundary
conditions used are described in the appendix.

III. EAS IN NON-UNIFORM ARRAYS

In this section, we analyse numerically the eﬀect of
slowly varying grating amplitude on EAS of bulk TE elec-
tromagnetic waves in periodic Bragg arrays. The results
obtained for the non-uniform arrays are compared with
those for EAS in uniform arrays [8]. We also investi-
gate numerically the tolerance of EAS to small gradual
variations (imperfections) in the grating amplitude.

FIG. 2: Three diﬀerent proﬁles of the grating amplitude in-
side a periodic array: (i) constant grating amplitude (uniform
array), (ii) linearly varying grating amplitude (non-uniform
array), and (iii) sinusoidally varying grating amplitude (non-
uniform array). The mean grating amplitudes are the same.

For example, consider three diﬀerent types of depen-
dences of the grating amplitude on the x-coordinate in-
side the array—ﬁgures 2(i)–(iii). In ﬁgure 2(i), the grat-
ing amplitude is constant throughout the array, i.e. we
consider a uniform array of width L and the grating am-
plitude ǫ10. EAS in such arrays was investigated previ-
ously for bulk [8] and guided [6, 9] optical waves. Mathe-
matically, the proﬁle of the grating amplitude in such an

5

FIG. 3: The dependences of the relative scattered wave amplitudes on distance from the front array boundary inside the arrays
−3, ǫ = 5, θ0 = π/4, the wavelength in vacuum λ = 1 µm (the grating has a period of 0.58 µm and is inclined
with ǫ10 = 5 × 10
at the angle of π/8 to the front array boundary); (i) L = 12 µm, (ii) L = 20 µm, (iii) L = 40 µm, (iv) L = 80 µm. Curves (a):
uniform array with constant grating amplitude ǫ10—ﬁgure 2(i). Curves (b): non-uniform array with the linear dependence of
ǫ1(x)—ﬁgure 2(ii). Curves (c): non-uniform array with the sinusoidal dependence of ǫ1(x)—ﬁgure 2(iii).

array is given by the equations:

ǫ1(x) =

ǫ10
0

(

if 0 < x < L,
otherwise.

(16)

The second of the considered arrays is a non-uniform
array with a linear dependence of magnitude of the grat-
ing amplitude on the x-coordinate in such a way that the
grating amplitude is zero at the front and rear boundaries
of the array (ﬁgure 2(ii)):

4ǫ10x/L
if 0 < x < L/2,
4ǫ10(L − x)/L if L/2 < x < L,
0

otherwise.

ǫ1(x) = 


(17)



The gradient of changing grating amplitude in (17) is
chosen such that the mean grating amplitude in the non-
uniform array is the same as in the uniform array de-
scribed by equations (16). Thus the integral

must be the same for both the dependences presented
by equations (16) and (17). This condition is necessary,
because EAS is strongly dependent on the grating ampli-
tude [6, 7, 8, 9]. If, for example, ǫ1(x) increased gradually
from zero to ǫ10, the mean grating amplitude would be
noticeably smaller than that of the uniform array, result-
ing in a signiﬁcant increase in the scattered wave ampli-
tude.
If we assume that the mean grating amplitudes
are the same for the uniform and nonuniform arrays of
the same widths (i.e.
integral (18) is the same for both
the arrays), then we will be able to investigate only the
eﬀects of non-uniformity of the grating on EAS.

The third of the considered arrays is characterized by
sinusoidal variations of the grating amplitude so that the
grating amplitude is again zero at the front and rear array
boundaries (ﬁgure 2(iii)):

L

0
Z

ǫ1(x)dx

ǫ1(x) =

(

ǫ10[1 − cos(2πx/L)]
0

if 0 < x < L,
otherwise.

(19)

(18)

Here, the mean grating amplitude is again the same as for

arrays (16) and (17), i.e. integral (18) is the same for all
three dependences (16), (17) and (19). The relationship
between the maxima of the grating amplitudes in arrays
(16), (17) and (19) can be written as

max{ǫ1(x)}linear = max{ǫ1(x)}sinusoidal

= 2 max{ǫ1(x)}stepwise ≡ 2ǫ10.

(20)

The selection of non-uniform arrays in the form of (17)
and (19) is not arbitrary. Analysis of arrays with zero
grating amplitude at the front and rear boundaries (as for
arrays in ﬁgures 2(ii) and 2(iii)) is practically important
because such arrays may signiﬁcantly improve the side-
lobe structure of ﬁltered signals [15] and substantially
reduce unwanted edge eﬀects at the array boundaries.

Figure 3 presents the dependences of the scattered
wave amplitudes on the x-coordinate inside periodic ar-
rays (16), (17) and (19). It can be seen that for all array
widths, slowly varying grating amplitude does not in-
troduce radical changes in the pattern of scattering. It
can also be seen that the eﬀect of slowly varying grating
amplitude on amplitudes of the scattered waves is notice-
ably smaller for narrow arrays. For example, for arrays of
12 µm thickness (ﬁgure 3(i)), the diﬀerence between the
scattered wave amplitude E1 in the non-uniform array
with sinusoidal variation of the grating amplitude (19)
and the scattered wave amplitude in the uniform array
(16) is less than 0.4%. For linear dependence (17) this dif-
ference is even smaller (ﬁgure 3(i)). At the same time, it
can reach 10–15% in arrays of 40 µm width (ﬁgure 3(iii)),
and over 25% in arrays of 80 µm width (ﬁgure 3(iv)).

This can be explained by the diﬀractional divergence
of the scattered wave. In narrow arrays, the diﬀractional
divergence eﬀectively smooths out variations in the am-
plitude of the scattered wave, caused by diﬀerent values
of the grating amplitude. For such arrays, the scattered
wave amplitudes are determined (to a very good accu-
racy) by an average value of the grating amplitude (ﬁg-
ures 3(i) and (ii)). However, the diﬀractional divergence
is eﬀective only within a limited distance. This is be-
cause when the scattered wave spreads along the x-axis
(due to the diﬀractional divergence) from one part of the
array to another, it experiences rescattering in the grat-
ing. As a result, the wave can diverge along the x-axis
only until it is re-scattered by the grating, i.e.
it can
spread only within a ﬁnite distance (see also [10]). This
distance must increase with decreasing mean grating am-
plitude, because the eﬃciency of re-scattering decreases
with decreasing grating amplitude.
It should also in-
crease with increasing gradient dǫ1(x)/dx, because in this
case variations of the amplitude of the scattered wave
along the wavefront will increase, resulting in stronger
diﬀractional divergence. Typically, the distance through
which the scattered wave can spread inside the array be-
fore being re-scattered is about several γ−1 [10], where
γ = (K0K1)1/3.

In our examples (see equations (16), (17), (19) and ﬁg-
ures 2 and 3), the critical array width is about ∼ 3γ−1
av ,

6

where γav is the average value of γ in the considered ar-
rays. Therefore, if L < 3γ−1
av , then the scattered wave
amplitude is very well determined by the average value
of the grating amplitude inside the array (ﬁgures 3(i) and
3(ii)). If the array width L > 3γ−1
av , then the scattered
wave amplitudes inside a non-uniform array are signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀected by local values of the grating amplitude,
and the pattern of scattering diﬀers from that for the
uniform array with the average grating amplitude (ﬁg-
ures 3(iii) and 3(iv)).

So far, we have analysed non-uniform arrays with sig-
niﬁcant variations of the grating amplitude. Another
practically important problem is the eﬀect on EAS of
small grating imperfections, e.g. variations in the grat-
ing amplitude, which are inevitable during manufacture
of periodic arrays. Therefore, in this paper,we analyse
tolerance of EAS to small variations of the grating am-
plitude across the array (i.e. in the x-direction).

FIG. 4: Five diﬀerent proﬁles of the grating amplitude with
small variations inside a periodic array: (i) constant grating
amplitude ǫ10 (uniform array), (ii) linearly increasing grating
amplitude (non-uniform array), (iii) linearly decreasing grat-
ing amplitude (non-uniform array), (iv) sinusoidally varying
grating amplitude (non-uniform array), and (v) constant grat-
ing amplitude ǫ10 + ∆ǫ1 (uniform array).

Figure 4 presents three diﬀerent types of small and slow
variations of the grating amplitude on the x-coordinate
in an initially uniform periodic array. These are linearly
increasing (ﬁgure 4(ii)), decreasing (ﬁgure 4(iii)) and si-
nusoidal (ﬁgure 4(iv)) dependences of the grating am-
plitude with the minimum and maximum values of the
grating amplitude equal to ǫ10 and ǫ10+∆ǫ1, respectively,
where ∆ǫ1 ≪ ǫ10.

The results of the numerical analysis of the eﬀect of
small and slow variations of the grating amplitude on the
scattered wave amplitude inside the array are presented
in ﬁgures 5(i) and 5(ii) for ∆ǫ1 = ǫ10/10 = 5 × 10−4
for two diﬀerent array widths: (i) L = 12 µm, and (ii)
L = 20 µm.
It can be seen that curves (b) and (c) in
ﬁgure 5(i) coincide with each other. This again reﬂects

7

FIG. 5: The dependences of the relative scattered wave amplitudes on distance from the front array boundary inside the arrays
(ﬁgure 4) with ǫ10 = 5 × 10−3, ∆ǫ1 = ǫ10/10, ǫ = 5, θ0 = pi/4, the wavelength in vacuum λ = 1 µm (the grating has a
period of 0.58 µm and is inclined at an angle of π/8 to the front array boundary); (i) L = 12 µm, (ii) L = 20 µm. Curves
(a): uniform arrays with constant grating amplitude ǫ10—ﬁgure 4(i). Curves (b): non-uniform arrays with linearly increasing
ǫ1(x)—ﬁgure 4(ii). Curves (c): non-uniform arrays with linearly decreasing ǫ1(x)—ﬁgure 4(iii). Curves (d): non-uniform arrays
with sinusoidal dependence of ǫ1(x)—ﬁgure 4(iv). Curves (e): uniform arrays with constant grating amplitude ǫ10 +∆ǫ1—ﬁgure
4(v).

the fact that for narrow arrays, the speciﬁc dependence
of small gradual variations of the grating amplitude does
not aﬀect the scattered wave amplitudes that are depen-
dent only on the average values of the grating amplitude
in the array. Curve (d) in ﬁgure 5(i) diﬀers from curves
(b) and (c). However, this diﬀerence is related not with
the sinusoidal proﬁle of the dependence of the grating am-
plitude on the x-coordinate (ﬁgure 4(iv)), but with the
slightly diﬀerent value for the mean grating amplitude
in this array. If the mean grating amplitudes were the
same for all three arrays shown in ﬁgures 4(ii)–(iv), then
curves (b)–(d) in ﬁgure 5(i) would have been indistin-
guishable. Curves (a) and (e) correspond to the uniform
arrays with the grating amplitudes ǫ10 (ﬁgure 4(i)) and
ǫ10 + ∆ǫ1 (ﬁgure 4(v)), respectively.

Figure 5(ii) shows that as the array width increases,
the shape of the dependence of the grating amplitude on
the xcoordinate becomes signiﬁcant. For example, for the
array width of 20 µm, the scattered wave amplitudes are
slightly diﬀerent for arrays with increasing and decreas-
ing grating amplitude (ﬁgures 4(ii) and (iii))—see curves
(b) and (c) in ﬁgure 5(ii). If the array width is increased
to 40 or more µm (i.e. L > 3γ−1
av ), then the scattered
wave amplitude at any point inside the array is approx-
imately the same as it would have been in the uniform
array of the same width and with the grating amplitude
taken from the point of observation in the non-uniform
array. That is, the scatteredwave amplitudes are deter-
mined by local values of the grating amplitude. Note that
this statement is correct only for slow and small varia-
tions (imperfections) of the grating amplitude (ﬁgure 4).
It is not valid for arrays where the grating amplitude
tends to zero somewhere in the array or at its boundaries

(see ﬁgures 2 and 3). If the above statement was valid
for such arrays, this would have meant that the scattered
wave amplitude in parts of the array with ǫ1 → 0 must
increase to inﬁnity, and due to the diﬀractional diver-
gence, it must then be inﬁnite in all other parts of the
array, which is not possible.

Increase in ∆ǫ1 results in variations of the scattered
wave amplitudes that are to a very good approximation
directly proportional to ∆ǫ1. Therefore, the graphs in
ﬁgure 5 can be used for evaluation of the scattered wave
amplitudes for any other value of ∆ǫ1 ≪ ǫ1.

IV. DEAS IN ARRAYS WITH VARYING
GRATING AMPLITUDE

As has been seen from the analysis of the previous
section, magnitude variations of the grating amplitude
may result in noticeable, but not dramatic, changes in
the ﬁeld distribution inside the array. For narrow arrays,
such changes can even be neglected altogether. However,
if we consider phase variations in the grating, the situa-
tion may change very radically, and especially for narrow
arrays.

For example, consider three diﬀerent types of depen-
dences of the grating amplitude on the x-coordinate in-
side a non-uniform array—ﬁgures 6(i)–(iii).
In ﬁgure
6(i), the magnitude of the grating amplitude is constant
throughout the array, but the phase of the grating expe-
riences a stepwise variation φ ≈ 180◦ in the middle of the
array, i.e. the sign of the grating amplitude ǫ1(x) changes
when crossing the interface between the two sections of
the array at x = L1 = L/2—see ﬁgure 6(i) and ﬁgure 1.

8

grating amplitude in the array described by equations
(22) is the same as for the array described by equations
(21). That is,

L/2

L

L/2

|ǫ1(x)|dx =

|ǫ1(x)|dx = G,

(23)

0
Z

Z
where the constant G is the same for both the depen-
dences (21) and (22). The reasons for using this condi-
tion are the same as the reasons for integral (18) being
the same for the arrays with the grating amplitude given
by equations (16), (17), and (19).

The third of the considered arrays with a phase vari-
ation in the grating is presented in ﬁgure 6(iii).
It is
characterized by sinusoidal variations of magnitude of
the grating amplitude inside the joint arrays in such a
way that this magnitude is again zero at the boundaries
of the periodic array and at the interfaces x = L1 = L/2.
The phase of the grating is again constant inside each
of the joint arrays, but experiences a stepwise variation
φ ≈ 180◦ at x = L1 = L/2 (where the magnitude of
the grating amplitude is zero)—ﬁgure 6(iii). If the phase
variation φ is arbitrary, then such non-uniform arrays can
be described by the equations:

ǫ10[1 − cos(4πx/L)]
if 0 < x < L/2,
ǫ10eiφ{1 − cos[2π(2x/L)]} if L/2 < x < L,
0

otherwise.

ǫ1(x) = 


where condition (23) is again satisﬁed.



(24)

In all other parts of the array the phase of the grating is
not changing (ﬁgure 6(i)). Thus we have a non-uniform
array consisting of two joint uniform arrays with diﬀerent
phases of the gratings. In the general case with arbitrary
stepwise phase shift φ between the gratings in the joint
arrays, the dependence of the grating amplitude on the
x-coordinate is given by the equations:

ǫ10
ǫ1(x) = 
ǫ10 exp(iφ)

0

if 0 < x < L/2,
if L/2 < x < L,
otherwise.

(21)

If φ ≈ 180◦, then equations (21) give the dependence of
the grating amplitude presented in ﬁgure 6(i).



The second considered type of non-uniform arrays is
characterized by a linear dependence of magnitude of the
grating amplitude on the x-coordinate in such a way, that
the amplitude of the grating is zero at the front and rear
array boundaries, as well as at the interface x = L1 =
L/2 (ﬁgure 6(ii)). There is also a stepwise variation in
the phase of the non-uniform grating at x = L1 = L/2,
which is equal to φ ≈ 180◦. Thus we have two joint
non-uniform arrays with linearly varying magnitude of
the grating amplitude and constant phase of the grating
in each of the joint arrays (ﬁgure 6(ii)). If the stepwise
variation of the phase between the two joint arrays is
arbitrary, then the dependence of the grating amplitude
on the x-coordinate is given by

4ǫ10x/L
if 0 < x ≤ L/4,
4ǫ10(L/2 − x)/L
if L/4 < x ≤ L/2,
4ǫ10 exp(iφ)(x − L/2)/L if L/2 < x ≤ 3L/4,
4ǫ10 exp(iφ)(L − x)/L
0

if 3L/4 < x < L,
otherwise,

(22)
where the gradient of changing magnitude of the grating
amplitude is chosen so that the mean magnitude of the

ǫ1(x) =






FIG. 6: Three diﬀerent proﬁles of the grating amplitude with
a stepwise phase variation φ ≈ 180◦ at x = L/2: (i) con-
stant magnitude of the grating amplitude, (ii) linearly vary-
ing grating amplitude, and (iii) sinusoidally varying grating
amplitude.

FIG. 7: The dependences of the relative scattered wave am-
plitudes at the front boundary on the phase shift φ for the
non-uniform arrays described by equations (21), (22), (24)
−3, ǫ = 5, θ0 = π/4, L = 20 µm, and the
with ǫ10 = 5 × 10
wavelength in vacuum λ = 1 µm. Curve (a): non-uniform ar-
ray with constant magnitude of the grating amplitude. Curve
(b): non-uniform array with the linear dependence of ǫ1(x).
Curve (c): non-uniform array with the sinusoidal dependence
of ǫ1(x). Curve (d): uniform array with φ = 0.

9

FIG. 8: The dependences of the relative scattered wave amplitudes on distance from the front array boundary inside the
non-uniform arrays described by equations (21), (22), (24) with ǫ10 = 5 × 10−3, ǫ = 5, θ0 = π/4, the wavelength in vacuum
λ = 1 µm; (i) and (ii) L = 20 µm, (iii) L = 40 µm, (iv) L = 80 µm. Curves (a): non-uniform arrays with constant magnitude
◦
◦
. Curves (b): non-uniform
, (iv) φ = 157.6
of the grating amplitude (see equations (21)); (i) φ = 190.4
◦
◦
◦
. Curves
arrays with the linear dependence of ǫ1(x) (see equations (22)); (ii) φ = 194.7
, (iv) φ = 133.8
, (iii) φ = 182.5
◦
, (iv)
(c): non-uniform arrays with the sinusoidal dependence of ǫ1(x) (see equation (24)); (ii) φ = 195.9
φ = 129.4◦. Curves (d): uniform arrays with φ = 0 and constant grating amplitude ǫ1.

◦
, (iii) φ = 184.6

◦
, (iii) φ = 178.6

The dependences of the ratio of the amplitudes of the
scattered and incident waves at the front array boundary
on the phase shift φ in non-uniform arrays (21), (22) and
(24) with L = 20 µm and ǫ10 = 5 × 10−3 are presented
in ﬁgure 7 for bulk TE electromagnetic waves that are
incident onto the arrays at the angle θ0 = π/4. This
ﬁgure demonstrates that when the value of the phase
shift is relatively close to pi, then the amplitude of the
scattered wave at the front array boundary very strongly
(resonantly) increases as compared with the conventional
EAS (cf curves (a)–(c) with curve (d) in ﬁgure 7). Thus
we have two simultaneous resonances in the structure.
One of these resonances occurs at a resonant frequency
(wavelength) that is determined by the Bragg condition
(3). This resonant is obviously common for all types of
Bragg scattering. In the case of EAS, it results in a strong
increase of the scattered wave amplitude see curve (d) in

ﬁgure 7.

The second resonance takes place at an optimal (reso-
nant) phase shift in a non-uniform array. This resonance
occurs on the background of an already resonantly large
scattered wave amplitude that is typical for the conven-
tional EAS. As a result, the scattered wave amplitude
increases many times further as compared with the in-
cident wave amplitude (see curves (a)–(c) in ﬁgure 7).
This eﬀect was called DEAS [10].

Curve (a) in ﬁgure 7 corresponds to the non-uniform
array with the grating amplitude given by equations (21).
This is the case of DEAS that was analysed previously
in [10] for bulk electromagnetic waves. Curves (b) and
(c) demonstrate that similar strong DEAS also occurs in
non-uniform arrays with varying magnitude of the grat-
ing amplitude, e.g. in arrays with the grating amplitude
given by equations (22) and (24). It can be seen that the

maxima of the scattered wave amplitude at the front ar-
ray boundary are about 15% lower than for curve (a), and
resonant values of the phase variation are shifted to larger
values, i.e. to about 195◦ as compared with 190.4◦ for
the array with constant magnitude of the grating—curve
(a). This demonstrates that slowly increasing grating
amplitude may result in noticeable changes of resonant
values of φ as compared with DEAS in arrays with con-
stant magnitude of the grating amplitude. On the other
hand, curves (b) and (c) are very similar, and this indi-
cates that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in DEAS in
non-uniform arrays with linearly and sinusoidally vary-
ing grating amplitude. Thus DEAS proves to be fairly
insensitive to the particular proﬁle of the slowly varying
grating amplitude inside the array.

Physically, the diﬀerences between curves (a)–(c) in
ﬁgure 7 are related to the fact that if the grating ampli-
tude has the proﬁle described by equations (22) and (24)
(see also ﬁgures 6(ii) and 6(iii)), then the amplitude of
the grating near the middle of the array (where the phase
variation takes place) is very small, and it is smaller for
the sinusoidal dependence (24). Thus, the eﬃciency of
re-scattering in this area is low. However, this is the re-
gion near the interface with the phase variation, where
the diﬀractional divergence of the scattered wave and its
re-scattering in the array result in increasing the incident
wave amplitude, which in turn gives rise to larger scat-
tered wave amplitudes [10]. Therefore, the amplitude of
the scattered wave must be smaller in arrays with the
grating amplitude that decreases in the middle of the ar-
ray (i.e. near the interface with the phase variation in the
grating). Thus the resonance with respect to phase varia-
tion is broader and weaker for curves (b) and (c), than for
curve (a) in ﬁgure 7. Similarly, the resonance for curve
(c), corresponding to sinusoidal variations of the grating
amplitude, is slightly weaker and broader than that for
the linear dependence (curve (b)).

The dependences of the scattered wave amplitude on
the x-coordinate inside the non-uniform arrays (21), (22)
and (24) of diﬀerent widths are presented in ﬁgure 8.
Here, the values of the phase shift φ are chosen so that
to give maximal scattered wave amplitude at the inter-
face x = L/2 where the step-like phase variation occurs.
It can be seen that as the array width decreases from
40–20 µm, the scattered wave amplitude increases dra-
matically (more than ﬁve times). This feature is typical
of DEAS in arrays with constant and varying magnitude
of the grating amplitude (see also [10]). As can be seen
from ﬁgure 8, L = Lc ≈ 40 µm is a critical array width,
because strong DEAS takes place only if L < 40 µm.
This critical array width is the same for all the arrays
(21), (22) and (24), regardless of whether the magnitude
of the grating amplitude is varying or not. As has al-
ready been mentioned, the critical array width is deter-
mined by the distance within which the scattered wave
may spread along the x-axis before being re-scattered by
the grating [10]. The average grating amplitudes in ar-
rays (22) and (24) are the same as in array (21) (see

10

condition (23)), and therefore this distance is the same
for the analysed arrays.

If L > Lc (ﬁgure 8(iv)), then the amplitude of the
scattered wave at the front and rear boundaries of the
periodic arrays are approximately the same as in the
case of EAS in the uniform array, because the diﬀrac-
tional divergence of the scattered wave from the oppo-
site side of the array makes only negligible contribution
to the scattering. However, in the middle of the array
near the interface with the phase variation, we observe
noticeable maxima of the scattered wave amplitudes for
all three considered arrays. The width of these maxima
is the same and equal (as expected) to the critical array
width. The maximum corresponding to array (24) is the
smallest, while the maximum corresponding to the array
with constant magnitude of the grating amplitude is the
biggest ﬁgure 8(iv). This is again due to the fact that
the scattering near the interface x = L1 in arrays (22)
and (24) is impeded by the small grating amplitude.

FIG. 9: Five diﬀerent proﬁles of the grating amplitude inside
non-uniform periodic arrays. The grating amplitude has small
gradual magnitude variations, and a stepwise phase variation
◦
φ ≈ 180

at x = L/2.

The eﬀect of small and gradual linear and sinusoidal
variations of magnitude of the grating amplitude (ﬁgure
9) on DEAS is presented in ﬁgure 10 for ∆ǫ1 = ǫ10/10 =
5 × 10−4 and L = 20 µm. Note that unlike EAS in non-
uniform arrays with small variations of the grating am-
plitude (ﬁgure 5), DEAS appears to be more sensitive
to the particular shape of the dependence of ǫ1(x) on
x—cf curves (b) and (c) in ﬁgure 10. The sensitivity of
DEAS to small imperfections of the array is also notice-
ably stronger than for EAS (the diﬀerence between curves
(e) and (a) in ﬁgure 10 reaches up to ∼ 50%). This is
understandable because the resonance during DEAS is
noticeably sharper (due to the combination of the two si-

11

where d is the thickness of the guiding slab, ξ1(x) is
the varying grating amplitude (corrugation amplitude),
f (x0) is an arbitrary periodic function with a period
of 2π/q, with max{|f (x0)|} = 1, and a mean value of
zero. Dissipation is neglected and all media in contact
are isotropic.

For the approximation of slowly varying amplitudes to
be valid, the corrugation must be small as compared with
the grating period:

|ξ1|q/(2π) ≪ 1.

(26)

This inequality is similar to condition (2) for bulk waves.
If the corrugation is non-sinusoidal (the function f (x0)
is not a sine or cosine), it can be expanded into the
Fourier series

+∞

p=−∞
X

f (x0) =

fp exp(ipqxx+ipqyy) =

fp exp(ipqx0).

(27)
In this case, only two complex conjugate terms (similar
to equations (1)) satisfying the Bragg condition

+∞

p=−∞
X

k1 − k0 = −pq

(28)

must be taken into account. Here, q is the reciprocal
lattice vector of the grating, which is parallel to the x0-
axis—see ﬁgure 1.

The vectors k0 and k1 are the wavevectors of the inci-
dent and scattered guided modes. Note that in the case
of guided modes, |k0 = |k1| only for TEn–TEn or TMn–
TMn scattering (n is the order of the mode). If EAS is
related with polarization change (e.g. TEn–TMn scatter-
ing), or with change of the mode order (e.g. TEn–TEm
scattering with n 6= m), then |k0 6= |k1|. That is why
in equations (8)–(11) we used k1 even though for bulk
waves k1 is equal to k0.

Therefore, all the speculations, derivations and results
obtained in sections 3–5 are applicable for EAS and
DEAS of guided optical modes in periodic groove ar-
rays with varying corrugation amplitude if ǫ1(x), ǫ10, and
∆ǫ1 are replaced by ξ1p(x) = ξ1(x)fp, ξ10p = ξ10fp, and
∆ξ1p = ∆ξ1fp, respectively. For example, consider EAS
or DEAS of an incident zeroth order TE slab mode into
a scattered zeroth order TE slab mode in the structure:
vacuum—GaAs slab (with permittivity 12.25)—AlGaAs
substrate (with permittivity 10.24); a slab thickness of
d = 0.6 µm, angle of incidence θ0 = π/4, the wavelength
in vacuum λ = 1.5 µm, and the corrugation is assumed to
be sinusoidal, i.e. f (x0) = sin(ax0). If the corrugation
amplitude in this structure ξ1 is given by the equation
ξ1 = 3.8ǫ1 (µm), where ǫ1 is the grating amplitude used
in sections 3–5, then the coupling coeﬃcients K0 and K1
are the same as for the bulk TE waves in sections 3–5.
Therefore, all the graphs from these sections are valid
for the scattering of the guided slab modes in the above
structure with the same (as for bulk waves) array widths
see sections 3–5.

FIG. 10: The dependences of the relative scattered wave am-
plitudes at the front array boundary on the phase shift φ
for the non-uniform arrays presented in ﬁgure 9 with ǫ10 =
−3, ∆ǫ1 = ǫ10/10, ǫ = 5, θ0 = π/4, L = 20 µm, and the
5 × 10
wavelength in vacuum λ = 1 µm. Curves (a)–(e) correspond
to the non-uniform arrays represented by ﬁgures 9(i)–(v), re-
spectively.

multaneous resonances) than the resonance during EAS.

V. GUIDED ELECTROMAGNETIC MODES

It was mentioned in section 2 that equations (5)–(13)
and (15) are valid for all types of waves, including guided
optical modes. This is because the approach based on al-
lowance for the diﬀractional divergence of the scattered
wave, which led to the coupled wave equations (10) and
(12), is readily applicable for analysis of EAS of guided
modes in a slab with a periodically corrugated bound-
ary. However, in this case the coupling coeﬃcients Γ0
and Γ1 are no longer given by equations (14), but are
determined in one of the following modern theories of
mode coupling in corrugated optical waveguides: bound-
ary perturbation theory [16], mode matching theory [17],
local-normal-mode theory [18], or direct approximate so-
lution of the wave equation [19]. These theories are cor-
rect for any type of polarization (TE and TM) of slab
modes. Therefore, the results of this paper are also cor-
rect for any type of guided slab modes.

The geometry of EAS and DEAS of slab modes is again
presented by ﬁgure 1. In this case the plane of the ﬁg-
ure is the plane of a slab, and the periodic structure is
represented by a periodic corrugation of a slab boundary.
If we consider a non-uniform periodic groove array with
varying grating amplitude, then the corrugation is given
by the equations

d + ξ1(x)f (x0)
d

for 0 < x < L;
for x < 0 or x > L,

ξ =

(

(25)

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have analysed theoretically and nu-
merically the eﬀect of the grating amplitude, slowly vary-
ing across a non-uniform periodic array, on EAS and
DEAS of bulk and guided optical waves. The main fea-
tures of EAS in DEAS in such non-uniform arrays were
explained by the diﬀractional divergence of the scattered
wave.

In particular, it was shown that the pattern of EAS in
narrow arrays with gradually varying magnitude of the
grating amplitude is almost exactly the same as for the
uniform array with the same width and grating ampli-
tude equal to the average amplitude of the grating in the
nonuniform array. On the other hand, in thick arrays, the
eﬀect of gradual variations in the grating amplitude on
the scattered ﬁeld distribution was demonstrated to be
rather noticeable. At the same time, the main feature of
EAS—the strong resonant increase in the scattered wave
amplitude—is typical for all considered non-uniform ar-
rays. This will allow use of non-uniform periodic arrays
with gradually increasing grating amplitude for suppres-
sion of edge eﬀects that are expected to be unusually
strong during EAS, and for improving the side-lobe struc-
ture of the scattered signals.

The tolerance of EAS to small gradual variations (im-
perfections) in the grating amplitude inside the arrays
was determined. It was shown that EAS in narrow ar-
rays is sensitive only to variations of the mean value of
the grating amplitude, while the particular shape of the
dependence of the grating amplitude on distance from the
array boundaries does not matter. In contrast, in wide
arrays, the scattered wave amplitude has been demon-
strated to depend mainly on local values of the grating
amplitude.

It was also shown that DEAS which was previously
analysed in arrays with constant magnitude of the grat-
ing amplitude [10] also occurs in non-uniform arrays with
varying grating amplitude, though it appears to be more
sensitive to the particular proﬁle of the grating amplitude
than EAS. Two strong simultaneous resonances in DEAS
result in a much greater increase in the scattered wave
amplitude for the same amplitude of the grating than
during EAS. This is the reason why edge eﬀects must be
much more signiﬁcant for DEAS than for EAS, and the
use of arrays with gradually varying amplitude is even
more important in this case. The sensitivity of DEAS to
small grating imperfections was shown to be noticeably
stronger than that of EAS, which is related to the much
stronger resonance taking place during DEAS.

The approach for the analysis used in this paper, is
based on allowance for the diﬀractional divergence of the
scattered wave. Unlike the dynamic theory of scatter-
ing [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8] that is applicable only for the anal-
ysis of EAS of bulk electromagnetic waves, the approach
used is directly applicable for the analysis of EAS and
DEAS of all types of waves, including bulk, guided and
surface optical and acoustic waves in uniform and non-

12

uniform periodic Bragg arrays. Therefore, the obtained
results are also applicable to EAS and DEAS of Rayleigh
surface acoustic waves in periodic groove arrays. In this
case we only need to use in equations (11) and (13) the
appropriate coupling coeﬃcients Γ0 and Γ1 from the dy-
namic theory of scattering of Rayleigh waves in periodic
groove arrays [15].

The obtained results will be important for development
of new EAS- and DEAS-based structures and devices in
optical and acoustic signal-processing, communication,
instrumentation and sensor design.

The authors gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support

for this work from the Australian Research Council.

Acknowledgment

APPENDIX

The numerical solution of equations (10) and (12) was
carried out using the following boundary conditions at
the array boundaries:

E0|x=0 = E00,

(dE1/dx)x=0 = 0,
(dE1/dx)x=L = 0,

(A.1)

where E00 is the amplitude of the incident wave at x < 0.
The scattered wave outside the array is represented (sim-
ilarly to uniform arrays [6, 7, 8, 9] by two plane waves
propagating parallel to the array boundaries one on each
side of the array (these waves are the solutions to equa-
tions (15)). Their amplitudes, A1 for x < 0, and A2 for
x > L, are determined from two other conditions

A1 = E1|x=0+0, A2 = E1|x=L−0

(A.2)

that are actually independent of equations (A.1).

The condition |E0|x=L−0 = |E00|, representing the
energy conservation in the steady-state EAS, will be
satisﬁed automatically and we do not need to take it
into account (see also [6, 7, 8, 9]). Since we neglect
edge eﬀects at the array boundaries, the conditions im-
plying the continuity of the derivative dE0/dx across
these boundaries are not taken into account (this is
the usual approximation in modern theories of Bragg
scattering[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]). The
grating amplitude inside the array is assumed to vary ei-
ther slowly, or very quickly (stepwise variations). These
variations are taken into account in the function ǫ1(x) in
the coupling coeﬃcients K0,1. Therefore, we do not need
to take into account boundary conditions at interfaces
with step-wise variations in the grating amplitude inside
the array (ﬁgure 1).

For convenience, the coupled wave equations (10) and
(12) are rewritten as a set of three linear ﬁrst-order dif-

13

ferential equations:

dE0/dx − iK1(x)E1(x) = 0,
dE1/dx − E2(x) = 0,
dE2/dx + K0(x)E0(x) = 0.

where n = 2, 3, ..., N . Since the amplitudes E0 and E1
are constant outside the array, the points x1 and xN are
chosen to correspond to the front and rear boundaries
of the array, i.e. x1 = 0 and xN = L. Then boundary
conditions (A.1) can be written as:

(A.3)

This set of diﬀerential equations can be approximated
by a set of 3 × (N − 1) ﬁnite diﬀerence equations (FDEs)
on a set of N points {x1, x2, ..., xN }:

E0(xn) − E0(xn−1) +

[E0(xn) + E0(xn−1)]

× [iK1(xn)E1(xn) + iK1(xn−1)E1(xn−1)] = 0

E1(xn) − E1(xn−1) +

[E1(xn) + E1(xn−1)]

× [E2(xn) + E2(xn−1)] = 0,

E0(xn) − E0(xn−1) +

[E0(xn) + E0(xn−1)]

× [−K0(xn)E2(xn) − K0(xn−1)E2(xn−1)] = 0

(A.4)

xn − xn−1
4

xn − xn−1
4

xn − xn−1
4

E0(x1) = E00, E2(x1) = 0, E2(xN ) = 0.

(A.5)

form a

algebraic

equations with

(A.4) and (A.5)

set of 3N
Equations
linear
3N variables
E0(x1), E0(x2), ..., E0(xN ), E1(x1), E1(x2), ..., E1(xN ),
E2(x1), E2(x2), ..., E2(xN ), which was solved numerically
for diﬀerent proﬁles of varying grating amplitude inside
the array (see sections 3–5).

[1] Kishino S J. Phys. Soc. Japan 31, 1168 (1971)
[2] Kishino S, Noda A and Kohra K J. Phys. Soc. Japan 33,

(1999)

[3] Bedynska T Phys. Status Solidi a 19, 365 (1973)
[4] Bedynska T Phys. Status Solidi a 25, 405 (1974)
[5] Andreyev A V Sov. Phys. Usp. 28, 70 (1985) and refer-

158 (1972)

ences therein

4458 (1995)

(1989)

[12] Ouellette F Opt. Lett. 12, 847 (1987)
[13] de Sterke C M and Sipe J E Opt. Lett. 18, 269 (1993)
[14] Broderick N G R and de Sterke C M Phys. Rev. E 52,

[15] Gulyaev Yu V and Plesski V V Sov. Phys. Usp. 32, 51

[6] Bakhturin M P, Chernozatonskii L A and Gramotnev D

[16] Stegeman G I, Sarid D, Burke J J and Hall D G J. Opt.

K Appl. Opt. 34, 2692 (1995)

Soc. Am. 71, 1497 (1981)

[7] Gramotnev D K Phys. Lett. A 200, 184 (1995)
[8] Gramotnev D K J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 30, 2056 (1997)
[9] Gramotnev D K Opt. Lett. 22, 1053 (1997)
[10] Gramotnev D K and Pile D F P Phys. Lett. A 253, 309

[17] Popov E and Mashev L Opt. Acta 32, 265 (1985)
[18] Weller-Brophy L A and Hall D G J. Lightwave Technol.

6, 1069 (1988)

[19] Hall D G Opt. Lett. 15, 619 (1990)

(1999)

[11] Gramotnev D K and Pile D F P Appl. Opt. 38, 2440

