3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
1
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Depolarization induced by subwavelength metal hole arrays

C. Genet, E. Altewischer, M.P. van Exter and J.P. Woerdman
Huygens Laboratory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9504,
2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands

We present a symmetry-based theory of the depolarization induced by subwavelength metal hole
arrays. We derive the Mueller matrices of hole arrays with various symmetries (in particular square
and hexagonal) when illuminated by a ﬁnite-diameter (e.g. gaussian) beam. The depolarization is
due to a combination of two factors: (i) propagation of surface plasmons along the surface of the
array, (ii) a spread of wave vectors in the incident beam.

PACS numbers: 78.67.-n, 73.20.Mf, 42.25.Ja, 02.20.-a

The transmission of a metal ﬁlm perforated with a two-
dimensional periodic array of subwavelength holes is ex-
traordinary large due to the resonant excitation of surface
plasmons (SPs) [1]. Recently, the polarization properties
of this enhanced transmission have drawn considerable
attention [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. A particularly intriguing polar-
ization property is that illuminating the array by a fully
polarized beam at normal incidence leads to important
reduction of the degree of polarization in transmission,
corresponding to a strongly space-variant character of the
polarization state of the output beam [4]. This seems in
clear contrast with what could be guessed from general
symmetry arguments. For plane wave illumination, a pe-
riodic structure can theoretically only transform a pure
input state of polarization (SOP) to another pure out-
put SOP (see below). Thus, the observed depolarization
must be critically related to additional spatial degrees of
freedom of the system. This is exactly what excitation of
SPs can potentially yield since SPs propagate in distinct
directions related to the symmetry of the hole array.

The aim of this Letter is to provide a proper theo-
retical framework describing these depolarization eﬀects.
Formally, spatial symmetries of arrays within the context
of SP excitations must be confronted with photon polar-
ization SU(2) symmetry, a context where Mueller algebra
is the natural tool [8, 9]. The central issue of our work
is that implementations of symmetry operations have to
account for the fact that SPs are a source of eﬀective
spatial dispersion at the arrays interfaces but only so if
they are excited by a ﬁnite-diameter beam (e.g. a gaus-
sian beam). As we will discuss, it is the strong angular
dependence related to such a spatially dispersive trans-
mission that can lead to sizeable depolarization.

Any two-dimensional pattern can only match ﬁve pos-
sible lattices: the ﬁve 2D Bravais lattices [10]. In order
to complete such patterns into 2D crystal structures, a
primitive cell is associated with each lattice point. The
required symmetry compatibility of the primitive cell and
the Bravais lattice leads to the well-known seventeen 2D
point groups. Here we restrict ourselves to circular holes
on a Bravais lattice, in other words to the simplest prim-
itive cell with full symmetry. Therefore, the point group

symmetry of our arrays is reduced to the spatial symme-
try of the chosen Bravais lattice which is a Cnv group,
where n denotes rotations by 2π/n radians about the
origin (with n = 1, 2, 3, 4 or 6) and v refers to mirror
symmetries (if allowed).

The optical transmission of a given array under gen-
eral conditions of illumination is fully described by the
transmission matrix which relates, at a speciﬁc wave-
length λ, the transmitted ﬁeld Eout to the incoming ﬁeld
Ein. In the paraxial approximation used throughout this
Letter, far ﬁeld angles (θx, θy), collected in a 2-column
vector θ, deﬁne paraxial ﬁelds as two independent com-
plex numbers forming a spinor E = (E1, E2) in the cho-
sen (1, 2)-basis. The transmission matrix t (λ; θ) of the
zero-order diﬀracted beam in the far ﬁeld is therefore a
2 × 2 matrix

Eout (λ; θ) = t (λ; θ) Ein (λ; θ) .

(1)

From this input-output description, spatial symmetries of
the chosen array deﬁne orthogonal transformation ma-
trices B that leave the transmission matrix unchanged
via B†t (λ; θ) B = t (λ; Bθ). For the case of plane wave
illumination at arbitrary angle θ, spatial symmetry op-
erations therefore merely relate transmission matrix ele-
ments with various angular arguments. It is only when
one resorts to angularly integrated expressions, i.e. to
illumination by a rotationally symmetric beam (as for
instance a gaussian beam at normal incidence), that one
recovers simple symmetry-based relations between input
and output SOPs of a given beam.

Depolarization eﬀects are generally most eﬃciently
addressed when one resorts to the Stokes parameters
(S0, S1, S2, S3). These parameters, together with the use
of the associated Mueller algebra, deﬁne the natural the-
oretical habitat of polarization properties in connection
with symmetry arguments [8, 9]. The Stokes parame-
ters are real-valued and represent four intensity measure-
ments on a light beam: S0 = hIi corresponds to the total
intensity in the beam, as measured without any polariza-
tion selection, and S1 = hI0o − I90o i, S2 = hI45o − I−45o i,
S3 = hIσ+ − Iσ− i represent three balanced intensity mea-
surements where 0o, 90o and ±45o refer to orientations of

2

4 × 4 real-valued Mueller matrix M when assuming an
arbitrary input SOP with Π = 1. This matrix completely
describes all possible changes of this initially pure SOP
due to transmission through the array; it is directly re-
lated to the transmission matrix t appearing in Eq. (1).
The global structure of the M matrix can be derived after
we expand input and output Stokes vectors in terms of
SU(2) Pauli matrices generators (σ0, σ1, σ2, σ3). This ex-
pansion ﬁxes the SU(2) decomposition of Mueller matrix
components to

Mαβ =

(Pijkl(σα)ji(σβ )kl) ,

(2)

1
2

R

where we used summation over repeated indices. This
decomposition is based on the components Pijkl =
jl (λ; θ)E of the 4th-rank tensor P = ht ⊗ t⋆i,
Dtik (λ; θ) t⋆
the star symbol denoting complex conjugation and the
“circled-cross” symbol a tensorial product on t-matrices.
Symmetry properties of the Mueller matrix will result
from conjunction between spatial symmetries of the lat-
tice, as implemented at the level of the averaged P com-
ponents, and the SU(2) symmetry of Pauli matrices. We
assume a fully polarized input beam, i.e. Πin = 1 (see
below for a discussion of the general case), so that the
average is performed over the far ﬁeld angles present in
the input beam. More precisely, this average corresponds
to an intensity-weighted integration over the input angles
via h· · ·i ≡

dθ · · · I in (λ; θ).

The simple case of plane wave illumination of the ar-
ray at normal incidence only retains the θ = 0 value in
the averaging process. It is then straightforward to show
that for square (C4v) and hexagonal (C6v) spatial symme-
tries, both the transmission matrix and, as immediately
seen from Eq. (2), the Mueller matrix are proportional to
the identity matrix. So we ﬁnd, not surprisingly, perfect
polarization preservation for transmission through such
arrays. For rectangular (C2v) symmetry, the SOP may
change (corresponding to birefringence and/or dichro-
ism) but the degree of polarization is conserved. The
situation becomes fundamentally diﬀerent when the ar-
ray is illuminated with a ﬁnite-diameter beam and when,
at the same time, SPs are excited at the array interfaces.
Eq. (2) implies that these two aspects have to be com-
bined in the transmission process, as we explain now.

First, the ﬁnite-diameter of the incident beam corre-
sponds to a spread of incoming wave vectors which calls
for the averaging in the deﬁnition of the Stokes param-
eters and the P tensor. Second, SP excitations stick to
preferred propagation directions on the array interfaces
according to the well-known dispersion relation which re-
stricts the propagation of SP waves on the reciprocal lat-
tice of the array [11]. SP excitations are then possibly de-
localized beyond the excitation spot of the incident beam,
the condition being that the transverse coherence length
of the input beam at the surface of the array should be
smaller than the SP coherence length, which can among

o
/ − 45

FIG. 1: Cartoon-like representation of a hole array, chosen
illuminated by
here as a square array with circular holes,
a ﬁnite-diameter (gaussian) beam. The input beam, chosen
o
here as a pure horizontal (0
) SOP, excites SPs along the
principal diagonals of the array (note that the reciprocal lat-
tice coincides with the direct lattice). On the backside of
the array, the corresponding near ﬁeld pattern is shown with
SPs propagating and polarized along the +45o/ − 135o and
o
+135
lobes, onto which the input SOP can thus be
projected. The central region corresponding to the incident
beam remains polarization isotropic but when moving radially
outward, the input horizontal polarization is modiﬁed through
elliptically polarized states towards ±45o-linear polarizations
due to the longitudinal character of the SPs. As symbol-
ized in the ﬁgure, the output SOP becomes space-variant, the
variation in polarization states being parametrized by the far
ﬁeld angles θ = (θx, θy). This 2D far ﬁeld pattern is Fourier
related to the sketched near ﬁeld pattern with polarization
directions remaining unmodiﬁed. Therefore, the polarization
directions observed in the far ﬁeld, and more particularly at
large angles, are (maybe somewhat surprisingly) associated
with directions along which corresponding SPs do not propa-
gate, since a wide near ﬁeld corresponds to a narrow far ﬁeld.
The same general picture remains valid with an input circular
SOP. In this case, the input SOP passes through various el-
liptically polarized states to reach the linear SOPs along the
diagonals. Extension of this description to an hexagonal array
is straightforward.

a linear analyzer and σ+(σ−) to a right(left)-handed cir-
cular analyzer. The brackets h· · ·i stand for averaging
over the spread of the wave vectors of the beam, i.e. an
integration over the far ﬁeld angles (see Fig. 1). A simi-
lar integration in time has no eﬀect, as the range of input
frequencies is assumed to be much smaller than the SP
resonance structure. The degree of polarization Π of the
0]1/2. For unpo-
1 + S2
beam is given by Π = [(S2
larized light, S1, S2, S3 components are “averaged-out”
by the angular integration so that Π = 0. For a fully
polarized beam, Π = 1 whereas for partially polarized
light, 0 < Π < 1.

2 + S2

3)/S2

Collecting the Stokes parameters in a four-vector S =
(S0, S1, S2, S3), transformation by the array from input
to output Stokes vectors Sout = MSin is given by the

others be estimated from spectral widths of transmission
peaks associated to SP resonances [4]. Identiﬁable propa-
gation axes for SPs induce an eﬀective spatially dispersive
response of the illuminated array; this is analogous to the
occurence of spatial dispersion in crystal optics [12], the
hole array acting as a 2D crystal.

In this situation, a space-variant output SOP is read-
ily expected. Since the SPs are dominantly longitudinal
surface waves, the excited areas on the hole array ex-
tending beyond the excitation spot are mainly linearly
polarized along the axes of the reciprocal lattice assigned
to the excited SP mode. Polarization isotropy is found
only in the excitation spot itself whereas a progressive
modiﬁcation of the input polarization is involved in the
propagation of SPs, towards linear polarizations oriented
along axes of the reciprocal lattice. In the Fourier-related
far ﬁeld, as sketched in Fig. (1), the output SOP con-
tains therefore various angularly separated polarization
components, i.e.
it is (partly) depolarized. Most essen-
tial for our analysis is that, due to the far ﬁeld angle
dependence of the transmission matrix amplitudes tij,
symmetry operations of the chosen array must be car-
ried out within the angular integration, bringing forth
diﬀerent constraints on P for the case of a rotationally
symmetric beam versus a plane wave as input illumina-
tion.

More speciﬁcally, spatial symmetry operations are
easily analyzed by referring to the circular-state basis
(σ+, σ−). Mirror symmetry exchanges σ+ into σ− and
vice-versa and is directly related to complex conjugation.
Rotation simply corresponds to phase factors induced
on transformed elements. As a 4th-rank tensor, P fea-
tures in this basis a priori 16 independent components.
Mirror symmetry in combination with angular integra-
tion reduces this to 8 independent ones and moreover
implies that these 8 components are real-valued. Then,
four- and six-fold rotational invariance retain only 4 in-
dependent components for the former and 3 for the lat-
ter. Restricting the P tensor to these 4 and 3 compo-
nents, rotational symmetries together with mirror sym-
metry force the σα and σβ components to the tight δαβ
“selection-rule”. This entails that Mueller matrices for
square and hexagonal arrays must be diagonal, with the 4
on-diagonal elements given in the (x, y) laboratory frame
as

M0 =

M1 =

|txx|2 + |tyy|2 + |txy|2 + |tyx|2
(cid:10)
|txx|2 + |tyy|2 − |txy|2 − |tyx|2
(cid:10)

(cid:11)

(cid:11)

(cid:2)(cid:10)

(cid:2)(cid:10)

M2 = 2ℜ

txxt⋆
txxt⋆

yy + txyt⋆
yy − txyt⋆

M3 = 2ℜ

yx(cid:11)(cid:3)
yx(cid:11)(cid:3)
omitting λ and θ dependences.
In practice, the trans-
mission matrix components tij depend on the actual
structure of the chosen array,
in particular on the
dimensions of the holes and on the permittivity of the
metal used (real and imaginary parts). These param-

(3)

,

3

eters characterize in fact the SP modes on the array
interfaces; their quantitative evaluation (i.e.
beyond
symmetry aspects) requires extensive model calculations
that are outside the scope of this Letter. As special
cases, we ﬁnd that the Mueller matrix M is proportional
to the identity matrix both in the limit of zero hole size
and that of highly dissipative metal permittivity (for
e.g. Cr) where SPs cannot be excited.

The diagonal forms of the Mueller matrices for square
and hexagonal arrays immediately reveal that there is
no mixing of Stokes parameters so that the excitation
does not produce any new spatially averaged polariza-
tion in the transmitted beam. With no enpolarizing
capabilities [13], these arrays act as purely depolarizing
To each input Stokes parameter
optical elements.
i = (1, 3) is associated a given degree of polarization
Πout
i = Mi/M0 < 1, which depends on the opening
angle of the input beam. For an hexagonal array, the
reduction from 4 to 3 independent P components results
in 3 independent elements of the Mueller matrix with
M1 = M2. As a consequence, two input beams with
the diﬀerent pure SOPs Sin/Sin
0 = (1, ±1, 0, 0) and
Sin/Sin
0 = (1, 0, ±1, 0) will suﬀer the same amount of
depolarization in transmission. Due to the absence
of mixing of Stokes parameters, this can be measured
directly through standard crossed polarization analysis.
It is easy to show that such a direct measurement of
depolarization is no longer possible for a rectangular
array due to the loss of the simple diagonal structure
of the Mueller matrix when going to two-fold symmetry
[14].

ingredients:

In conclusion, we have reported a symmetry-based
theory of the optical polarization properties of nanofab-
ricated metal hole arrays in the presence of SPs excited
on the arrays interfaces by a ﬁnite-diameter beam. Our
(i) multi-plane
theory has two essential
wave illumination and (ii) spatial dispersion related
to SP excitations. The former corresponds to a far
ﬁeld angular integration performed at the level of P
components, and the latter implies that this integration
is done over transmission amplitudes depending actually
on far ﬁeld angles. A tensorial symmetry analysis shows
that such arrays induce depolarization in transmission,
a fundamental property which has not been addressed
before. We stress that our analysis is based on the
assumption of a fully polarized input SOP. If the input
beam itself is already partially depolarized, that is if
Πin < 1, the angular integration cannot be performed
separately on the Mueller matrix M and on the input
Stokes vector Sin, bringing additional complexity into
the problem. Additionally, and in view of the recent
discovery of SP-assisted polarization entanglement [2], it
would be very interesting to develop a quantum version
of our approach which could be based upon twin-photon
Stokes parameters [15].

As a further outlook, we have started a theoretical

and experimental extension of the present work to
depolarization eﬀects with non-circular holes. Also
quasiperiodic structures, such as 2D Penrose quasicrys-
tals [16], are of particular interest; there, the appearance
of
forbidden point group symmetries should lead to
unexpected depolarization behaviours.

This work has been supported by the Stichting voor
Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie (FOM) and by the
European Union under the IST - ATESIT contract.

[1] T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and

P.A. Wolﬀ, Nature 391, 667 (1998).

[2] E. Altewischer, M.P. van Exter, and J.P. Woerdman, Na-

ture 418, 304 (2002).

[3] E. Moreno, F.J. Garc´ıa-Vidal, D. Erni, J.I. Cirac, and L.

Mart´ın-Moreno, arXiv:quant-ph/0308075 (2003).

[4] E. Altewischer, M.P. van Exter, and J.P. Woerdman, J.

Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 1927 (2003).

[5] A. Papakostas, A. Potts, D.M. Bagnall, S.L. Prosvirnin,
H.J. Coles, and N.I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

4

107404 (2003).

[6] J. Elliott, I.I. Smolyaninov, N.I. Zheludev, and A.V. Za-

yats, arXiv:cond-mat/031059 (2003).

[7] M. Sarrazin and J.-P. Vigneron, arXiv:physics/0311015

(2003).

[8] R.W. Schmieder, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 59, 297 (1969).
[9] D.S. Kliger, J.W. Lewis, and C.E. Randall, Polarized
light in optics and spectroscopy (Academic Press, 1990).
[10] D.R. Lovett, Tensor properties of crystals (Institute of

Physics Publishing, 1989).

[11] H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, D.E. Grupp, T.W. Ebbesen, and

H.J. Lezec, Phys. Rev. B 58, 6779 (1998).

[12] L. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, and L.P. Pitaevskii, Landau
and Lifshitz Course of Theoretical Physics: Electrody-
namics in Continuous Media (Butterworth-Heinemann,
1980).

[13] S.-Y. Lu and R.A. Chipman, Optics Comm. 146, 11

[14] C. Genet, E. Altewischer, M.P. van Exter, and J.P. Wo-

erdman, in preparation.

[15] A.F. Abouraddy, A.V. Sergienko, B.E.A. Saleh, and M.C.

Teich, Optics Comm. 201, 93 (2002).

[16] P.J. Steinhardt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 14267

(1998).

(1996).

