Light Filaments Without Self Guiding

Audrius Dubietis,1 Eugenijus Gaiˇzauskas,1 Gintaras Tamoˇsauskas,1 and Paolo Di Trapani2
1 Department of Quantum Electronics, Vilnius University,
Sauletekio al. 9, LT-2040 Vilnius, Lithuania and
2 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica della Materia (INFM) and Department of Physics,
University of Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, IT-22100 Como, Italy

An examination of the propagation of intense 200 fs pulses in water reveals light ﬁlaments not
sustained by the balance between Kerr-induced self-focusing and plasma-induced defocusing. Their
appearance is interpreted as the consequence of a spontaneous reshaping of the wave packet form a
gaussian into a conical wave, driven by the requirement of maximum localization, minimum losses
and stationarity in the presence of non-linear absorption.

PACS numbers: 42.65.Tg, 42.65.Jx, 42.65.Wi, 42.65.Sf

3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Since its discovery by Braun et al. [1] in 1995, the
spontaneous ﬁlament formation accompanying intense
fs-pulse propagation in air has received rapidly increas-
ing attention, both for the generation of coherent, soft
X-rays [2], IR [3], as well as sub-terahertz [4] radiation,
and for remote sensing in the atmosphere [5]. More re-
cently research has been extended to the case of ﬁlament
formation in condensed matter: namely, in fused silica [6]
and water [7, 8], mainly in connection with fundamental
investigation in the soliton ﬁeld [9, 10]. In spite of the dif-
ferent power and length scales that the process exhibits,
two key features emerge, which are substantially the same
in all media investigated: (i) for powers well exceeding
the critical value for continuous-wave (CW) self-focusing,
a light ﬁlament appears and propagates in the absence
of diﬀraction or optical breakdown for several to many
diﬀraction lengths; and (ii) the ﬁlament only contains a
small fraction of the total beam power, limited by the so-
called “intensity clamping eﬀect” [11], while the residual
excess remains in the ﬁlament periphery with no appar-
ent trapping.

Two major approaches have been proposed for the
modeling, description and understanding of the under-
lying physics:
the ﬁrst interprets the ﬁlament as a
genuine soliton-like, self-guided beam, whose station-
arity is supported by the dynamical balance between
Kerr-induced self-focusing and plasma-induced defocus-
ing, where plasma formation is due to multi-photon ab-
sorption (MPA) [12]. In this scenario the role of the non-
trapped radiation is marginal. In fact, although compen-
sation of MPA-induced power losses by external radiation
has been addressed experimentally [13], this reﬁlling ef-
fect was only interpreted as perturbative, i.e., useful for
prolonging the ﬁlament life while not being structural
to its existence. The second approach, in contrast, only
considers the ﬁlament as an optical illusion related to the
use of time-integrated detection. The models, based on
moving focus [14] or dynamic spatial replenishment [15],
interpret the ﬁlament as continuously absorbed and re-
generated by subsequent focusing of diﬀerent temporal
slices of the pulse.

FIG. 1: Proﬁles of (a) clipped, (b) stopped and (c) free ﬁl-
aments for 20 mm< z < 40 mm. The input peak power is
Pp = 13 Pcr.

In this letter we demonstrate how, for the case inves-
tigated of 200 fs ﬁlaments in water, energy reﬁlling by
the surrounding radiation is so important that one can
by no means consider the ﬁlament in terms of a genuine,
self-guided beam. Our results indicate that ﬁlament re-
generation can well be described within the framework of
a purely spatial process, with the fake self-guided beam
as resulting from subsequent focusing of diﬀerent spa-

tial coronas of the beam. The key picture we propose
as a physical interpretation of the entire dynamics ad-
dresses the spontaneous transformation of a Gaussian
into a Bessel-type beam, driven by the requirements of
minimum (non-linear) losses, maximum stationarity and
maximum localization.

The criterion we adopted for distinguishing between a
true (e.g., self-guided) ﬁlament and a fake (e.g., strongly
reﬁlled) is based on the simple assumption that a gen-
uine ﬁlament should survive (for at least 2–3 diﬀraction
lengths) after transmission through a pinhole that re-
moves the non-trapped part of the radiation and trans-
mits most of the ﬁlament energy content. The Kerr
medium that we have chosen is water; with respect to
solid-state media, it has the key advantages of being free
from damage problems, of allowing easy and continuous
scanning of sample length, and of permitting the inser-
tion of pinholes along the beam path inside the non-linear
media; in comparison with air, water has much less tur-
bulence, which results in higher beam-pointing stability
and so allows the use of pinholes of comparable size to
the ﬁlament. We note that this was not the case for the
experiment in air quoted above [13], where a very large
(e.g., 1 mm) pinhole was used.

The experiment was performed by launching a 527 nm,
∼ 3 µJ, 200 fs, spatially ﬁltered beam with an approxi-
mately 0.1 mm FWHM waist located at the input facet
of a water-ﬁlled cuvette, and then monitoring the output-
beam ﬂuence proﬁle. The wave packet launched was
provided by an SHG-compressed, CPA Nd:glass laser
(TWINKLE, Light Conversion Ltd.), operated at a 33 Hz
repetition rate. The cuvette was made of 1 mm thick,
syringe-shaped quartz, which allowed continuous tuning
of the sample length in the range z = 5–40 mm. The out-
put beam was imaged onto a CCD camera (8-bit Pulnix
TM-6CN) by an f = +50 mm achromatic objective, with
8× magniﬁcation. The results highlighted the appear-
ance of a single ﬁlament with almost constant ∼ 20 µm
FWHM diameter in the z = 15–40 mm range investi-
gated.

Figure 1(a) shows the eﬀect of inserting a 55 µm-
diameter pinhole in the water cuvette at z = 20 mm.
The energy transmitted by the pinhole was 20% of the
total incident energy. Although the transmitted beam
attempted to focus after a short distance, (e.g., within
one diﬀraction length; see the plot at z = 22 mm), the
ﬁlament survived no further and we observed a rapid de-
cay with divergence ∼ 2× larger than that of a Gaussian
beam of the same FWHM diameter. It is necessary to
double check whether, in the absence of pinhole, the ﬁl-
ament survives just because it is strongly supported by
energy reﬁlling from the outside beam. To do this, we
also performed the complementary experiment, by block-
ing the central spike with the sole aid of a 55 µm beam
stopper, printed on a 100 µm-thick BK7 glass plate and
inserted into the beam path at z = 20 mm. As depicted in

2

Fig. 1(b), a central spike of the original dimensions reap-
peared at z = 25 mm, gaining power as it propagated.
The proﬁles measured in the case of “free-ﬁlament” prop-
agation are reported in Fig. 1(c) for comparison, in the
same z range. Note how the eﬀect of the beam stop-
per is barely detectable after only 20 mm of propagation.
These results unequivocally show that the observed ﬁla-
ment can by no means be described in terms of a soliton,
beam self-guiding eﬀect.

FIG. 2: Transient stage of the ﬁlament formation: (top) ex-
perimental, Pp = 17 Pcr; (bottom) numerical, P = 25 Pcr,
β(4) ≃ 2.0 × 10

−34 cm5/W3.

In what follows, we intend to demonstrate how the key
features of the ﬁlament-formation process may be inter-
preted as the eﬀect of spontaneous evolution of the input
wave-packet toward a non soliton-like, but still station-
ary, proﬁle, an hypothesis that has never before been
considered. In order to make the point clear, we propose
here the simplest possible model that fully supports such
a scenario, by adopting the quite severe CW approxima-
tion, though a priori exclusion of a possible contribution
of temporal or spatio-temporal (ST) eﬀects was not possi-
ble. In fact, the results shown in Fig. 1 are also compati-
ble with standard, moving-focus [14] or dynamic spatial-
replenishment [15] models (this can be understood by
noting that if diﬀerent temporal slices are focused at dif-
ferent planes, pinholes or stoppers could have diﬀerent ef-
fects on diﬀerent temporal portions of the wave-packet).
Indeed, close inspection of ST wave-packet proﬁles by
means of a high-resolution (20 fs) 3D-mapping technique
(in the case of input pulses shorter by a factor two) re-
vealed a dynamics that requires the full 3D model to be
described precisely [16]. However, such ST eﬀects, the
importance of which dramatically increases on shorten-
ing the pulses, are not necessary for ﬁlament formation.
From the experimental viewpoint, this claim is strongly
supported by the measurements with ﬁve times longer
pulses (we do not present the data here), whose dynam-
ics appeared to be very similar to the present case, espe-

cially in the asymptotic regime. Further support comes
a posteriori from the rather good matching achieved be-
tween experiment and CW calculations. As a second,
highly qualifying, approximation, we have neglected the
role of the plasma-defocusing eﬀect, thus avoiding the oc-
currence of any self-guiding regime. In so doing, we wish
to focus attention on the ﬁnal stage of the dynamics,
where plasma-induced eﬀects are supposed to play only
a minor role, seeking the occurrence of a “ﬁnal state”
that behaves as an “attractor” for the entire dynamics.
The only non-linear terms included in the model are,
therefore, those of self-focusing and MPA. Within the
framework of the paraxial approximation adopted, the
resulting CW, elliptical, modiﬁed non-linear Schr¨odinger
equation for the ﬁeld amplitude A reads:

∂A
∂z

=

i
2k (cid:18)

∂2A
∂x2 +

∂2A
∂y2 (cid:19)

+

iω0n2
c

β(K)
2

|A|2A −

|A|2K−2A,

(1)

where z is propagation distance, n2 = 2.7×10−16 cm2/W
is the non-linear refractive index, and β(K) is the MPA
coeﬃcient.
In our model we took K = 4 in order
to account for three-photon absorbtion (water band-gap
Wg = 6.5 eV, photon energy 2.4 eV) and, to a ﬁrst ap-
proximation, for further absorption due to the photo-
induced plasma. We veriﬁed that similar results are
also obtained with diﬀerent K. Owing to the over-
simpliﬁcation of our model, which does not allows for
ab initio evaluation of parameters, for the absorption co-
eﬃcient β(4) we took the value that better ﬁtted the ex-
perimental results (see the ﬁgure caption). The ﬁt led
to a slight dependence of β(4) on input beam power,
which may be understood as owing to the diﬀerent role
played by plasma absorption. We consider evolution of
a linearly polarized beam propagating with central fre-
quency ω0 and wave-number k = ω0n/c, with n = 1.334.
The resulting critical power for CW beam collapse is
Pcr = 3.77λ2/(8πnn2) = 1.15 MW. The input beam pro-
ﬁle was taken as Gaussian with a 0.12 mm diameter at
FWHM. Note the slightly larger diameter (and also larger
powers, see the ﬁgure captions) that had to be taken with
respect to the experiment, in order to compensate for a
slight overestimation of the losses by our model. Equa-
tion (1) was solved numerically by means of the FFT
Runge-Kutta split-step method.

A very surprising result is that our model, designed for
a qualitative description of the asymptotics, also turned
out to describe the very transient regime rather well,
where plasma is eventually supposed to play its major
role. Both the experimental and numerical results shown
in Fig. 2 indicate the occurrence of an appreciable ﬂat-
tening of the top-beam proﬁle in the ﬁrst 7 mm of prop-
agation (left column), which occurs in conjunction with
a slight beam self-focusing. Owing to the ﬂattop pro-
ﬁle, the major eﬀect of this self-focusing becomes that of

3

developing a sharp and rather intense ring peak on the
external border of the “mesa” (see the “volcano” pro-
ﬁle shown in the central column of the ﬁgure). Owing
to the Kerr non-linear response, this ring-like modula-
tion gives rise to a short, positive, toroidal lens, which
focuses the outside corona (the “skin”) of the beam and
leads the very intense spike to appear in the center (right
column in the ﬁgure). Owing to its very high intensity,
this spike leads to a very strong, though only local, MPA.
The persisting toroidal lens, however, keeps reﬁlling the
spike, thus establishing a quasi stationary regime (ﬁla-
ment), which remains as long as most of the beam power
is coupled to the central spike.

Figure 3(a) presents a comprehensive summary of
the measured and calculated dynamics, by plotting the
FWHM beam diameters in the entire (i.e., transient
plus quasi-stationary) range investigated. Both the free-

FIG. 3: (a) HWHM beam radius vs. z: experiment (full cir-
cles) and simulation (dashed line). Open circles and solid
line: the same in the case of a 55 µm pinhole only trans-
mitting the central spike. (b) Calculated transverse intensity
proﬁles for the clipped (left), free (center) and stopped (right)
ﬁlament case. Experiment: Pp = 13 Pcr. Numerical values:
P = 15 Pcr; β(4) ≃ 1.25 × 10

−34 cm5/W3.

ﬁlament and the 55 µm clipped ﬁlament are considered.
Note the rather impressive capability of our model in de-
scribing the apparent stationary-ﬁlament regime, in the
absence of any defocusing eﬀect. Note also how the model
predicts quenching of the ﬁlament, when the pinhole is in-
serted. For a more complete description of the dynamics,
the corresponding calculated transverse intensity proﬁles
vs. z are reported in Fig. 3(b). Note that here the case

of the 55 µm beam stopper is also depicted (right).

In order to elaborate the physical interpretation of the
entire dynamics, in Fig. 4(a) we plot the (measured and
calculated) peak ﬂuence Fp and intensity Ip, and the (cal-
culated only) fractional power losses dP/P vs. z. The

4

eﬀect) and non-linear losses, which continue to absorb
the generated spike. We interpret the entire dynamics as
the attempt of the wave-packet to readjust its shape, due
to the non-linear coupling, according to the requirements
of maximum localization, minimum losses and stationar-
ity. We predict the existence of an exact, inﬁnite-power,
Bessel-like stationary solution of the modiﬁed CW non-
linear Schr¨odinger equation in the presence of non-linear
losses.

The authors acknowledge assistance in numerical cal-
culations by A. Parola, M. Porras and A. Berzanskis, dis-
cussions with R. Danielius and A. Piskarskas, technical
support in the measurements by E. Ku˘cinskas and ﬁnan-
cial support by MIUR (Coﬁn01/FIRB01) and EC CEBI-
OLA (ICA1-CT-2000-70027) contracts.

FIG. 4: Calculated peak intensity Ip (solid line); measured
peak ﬂuences Fp (full circles); calculated fractional power
losses (dashed curve), for the same conditions as in Fig. 3.

results clearly indicate the occurrence of two diﬀerent
regimes:
for z < 12 mm, both Ip (Fp) and dP/P in-
crease due to the overall eﬀect of self-focusing and of
MPA. After that, however, while Ip (Fp) keeps a high
and almost constant value, a sharp drop of dP/P occurs.
Close inspection of the results in Fig. 3(b) indicates that
the beam has undergone an important transformation:
from a Gaussian to Bessel-like proﬁle, which has pre-
served appreciable localization (e.g., high Ip) and sta-
tionarity while minimizing the non-linear losses (MPA).
In fact, owing to the presence of ”cold”, slowly decay-
ing tails, which contain most of beam power, a conical
wave is provided with a large reservoir that can refuel the
”hot” central spike and so preserve stationarity, in spite
of the presence of non-linear losses.
If the robustness
of the Bessel proﬁle under Kerr-induced spatial phase
modulation is accounted for [17], one could foresee that
there might indeed exist a Bessel-like, inﬁnite-power, ex-
act stationary solution of Eq. (1) that behaves as strong
attractor for the entire non-linear beam transformation.
In conclusion, by clipping or stopping a light ﬁlament
while it propagates in water we have shown experimen-
tally that it does not behave as a self-guided wave packet,
being structurally sustained by a strong energy ﬂux from
the surrounding beam. The matching obtained between
the experimental results and those based on a CW model
that only accounts for self-focusing and non-linear losses
provides a strong indication that all the temporal eﬀects
as well as all those related to plasma-induced defocus-
ing are not essential to the occurrence of the apparent
guiding eﬀect. In contrast, the quasi-stationary ﬁlament
appears as the dynamical balance between sharp focusing
of the very external periphery of the beam (skin focusing

[1] A. Braun, G. Korn, X. Liu, D. Du, J. Squier, and

G. Mourou, Opt. Lett. 20, 73 (1995).

[2] H. R. Lange, A. Chiron, J. -F. Ripoche, A. Mysyrowicz,
P. Breger, and P. Agostini, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1611
(1998).

[3] J. Kasparian, R. Sauerbrey, D. Mondelain, S. Nieder-
meier, J. Yu, J. -P. Wolf, Y. B. Andr´e, M. Franco,
B. Prade, S. Tzortzakis, A. Mysyrowicz, M. Rodriguez,
H. Wille, L. W¨oste, Opt. Lett. 25, 1397 (2000).

[4] S. Tzortzakis, G. M´echain, G. Patalano, Y. B. Andr´e,
B. Prade, M. Franco, A. Mysyrowicz, J. -M. Munier,
M. Gheudin, G. Beaudin, and P. Encrenaz, Opt. Lett.
27, 1944 (2002).

[5] J. Kasparian, M. Rodriguez, G. M´ejean, J. Yu, E. Sal-
mon, H. Wille, R. Bourayou, S. Frey, Y. B. Andr´e,
A. Mysyrowicz, R. Sauerbrey, J. -P. Wolf, and L. W¨oste,
Science 301, 61 (2003).

[6] S. Tzortzakis, L. Sudrie, M. Franco, B. Prade, A. Mysy-
rowicz, A. Couairon, and L. Berg´e, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,
213902 (2001).

[7] W. Liu, O. Kosareva,

I. S. Golubtsov, A. Iwasaki,
A. Becker, V. P. Kandidov, and S. L. Chin, Appl. Phys.
B76, 215 (2003).

[8] A. Dubietis, G. Tamoˇsauskas, I. Diomin, and A. Varana-

viˇcius, Opt. Lett. 28, 1269 (2003).

[9] S. Henz and J. Herrmann, Phys. Rev. A59, 2528 (1999).
[10] L. Berg´e and A. Couairon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1003

(2001).

[11] W. Liu, S. Petit, A. Becker, N. Ak¨ozbek, C. M. Bowden,

and S. L. Chin, Opt. Commun. 202, 189 (2002).

[12] L. Berg´e and A. Couairon, Phys. Plasmas 7, 210 (2000).
[13] E. T. J. Nibbering, P. F. Curley, G. Grillon, B. S. Prade,
M. A. Franco, F. Salin, and A. Mysyrowicz, Opt. Lett.
21, 62 (1996).

[14] A. Brodeur, C. Y. Chien, F. A. Ilkov,S. L. Chin,
O. G. Kosareva, and V. P. Kandidov, Opt. Lett. 22, 304
(1997).

[15] M. Mlejnek, E. M. Wright, and J. V. Moloney, Opt. Lett.

23, 382 (1998).

[16] A. Matijoˇsius, R. Piskarskas, A. Dubietis, J. Trull, A.
Varanaviˇcius, A. Piskarskas, and P. Di Trapani, submit-
ted for publication.

[17] R. Butkus, R. Gadonas, J. Januˇsonis, A. Piskarskas,
K. Regelskis, V. Smilgeviˇcius, and A. Stabinis, Opt.

Commun. 206, 201 (2002).

5

