3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Guiding optical ﬂows by photonic crystal slabs made of dielectric cylinders

Liang-Shan Chen1, Chao-Hsien Kuo2, and Zhen Ye2∗
1Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, and 2Wave Phenomena Laboratory,
Department of Physics, National Central University, Chungli, Taiwan
(Dated: July 25, 2013)

We investigate the electromagnetic propagation in two-dimensional photonic crystals, formed
by parallel dielectric cylinders embedded a uniform medium. The frequency band structure is
computed using the standard plane-wave expansion method, while the propagation and scattering
of the electromagnetic waves are calculated by the multiple scattering theory. It is shown that within
partial bandgaps, the waves tend to bend away from the forbidden directions. Such a property may
render novel applications in manipulating optical ﬂows. In addition, the relevance with the imaging
by ﬂat photonic crystal slabs will also be discussed.

PACS numbers: 78.20.Ci, 42.30.Wb, 73.20.Mf, 78.66.Bz

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. THE SYSTEMS AND FORMULATION

When propagating through periodically structured media
such as photonic crystals (PCs), optical waves will be mod-
ulated with the periodicity. As a result, the dispersion of
waves will no longer behave as in a free space, and so called
frequency band structures appear. Under certain conditions,
waves may be prohibited from propagation in certain or all
directions, corresponding to partial and complete bandgaps
respectively. The photonic crystals revealing bandgaps are
called bandgap materials.

Photonic crystals and band gap materials have a broad
spectrum of applications, ranging from computing to digital
communication and from laser cavities to optical transistors1.
In fact, applications have
The possibilities are unlimited.
well gone beyond expectation, and are so far reaching that
a fruitful new ﬁeld called photonic crystals has come into
existence. Most updated information about the research of
photonic crystals and related materials can be found in the
comprehensive webpage2.

So far, most applications are associated with the properties
of the complete bandgaps of PCs. On one hand, the bandgaps
conﬁne optical propagation within certain frequency regimes.
On the other, when encountering the complete bands, opti-
cal waves can be guided into desired directions. For example,
one of the main applications of PCs is to control optical ﬂows,
so that they can be used for such as telecommunications. A
comprehensive survey of phonic crystal research can be re-
ferred to Refs.1,2,3,4,5. To our knowledge, however, there have
been very few attempts in the literature to explore possible
usage of partial bandgaps. In this paper, we wish to discuss
a previously undiscussed phenomenon associated with partial
bandgaps, that is, deﬂection of optical waves. That is, the
partial bandgap can collimate wave propagation into certain
directions. This property may allow for novel applications in
manipulating optical ﬂows.

The paper is organized as follows. The systems and the
theory will be outlined in the next section. The results and
discussion will be presented in Section III, followed by a short
summary.

The systems considered here are two dimensional photonic
crystals made of arrays of parallel dielectric cylinders placed
in a uniform medium, which we assume to be air. Such sys-
tems are common in both theoretical simulations or experi-
mental measurements of two dimensional PCs1,2. For brevity,
we only consider the E-polarized waves (TM mode), that is,
the electric ﬁeld is kept parallel to the cylinders. The follow-
ing parameters are used in the simulation. (1) The dielectric
constant of the cylinders is 14, and the cylinders are arranged
to form a square lattice. (2) The lattice constant is a and
the radius of the cylinders is 0.3a; in the computation, all
lengths are scaled by the lattice constant. (3) The unit for
the angular frequency is 2πc/a. After scaling, the systems
become dimensionless; thus the features discussed here would
be applicable to a wider range of situations.

While the frequency band structure in the systems can be
calculated by the plane-wave expansion method1, the propa-
gation and scattering of electromagnetic (EM) waves in such
systems can be studied by the standard multiple scattering
theory. The theory originated from the self-consistent idea
ﬁrst discussed by Foldy7, and then made maturity through
the signiﬁcant eﬀorts by Lax8, Waterman et al.9, and partic-
ularly by Twersky10.

The essence of the theory is summarized as follows. In re-
sponse to the incident wave from the source and the scattered
waves from other scatterers, each scatter will scatter waves re-
peatedly, and the scatterered waves can be expressed in terms
of a modal series of partial waves. When this scattered wave
serves as an incident wave to other scatterers, a set of coupled
equations can be formulated and computed rigorously. The
total wave at any spatial point is the summation of the direct
wave from the source and the scattered waves from all scat-
terers. The intensity of the wave is represented by the square
of the wave ﬁeld.

For the reader’s convenience we present brieﬂy the general
multiple scattering theory. Consider that N straight cylinders
of radius ai located at ~ri with i = 1, 2, ..., N to form an array.
A line source transmitting monochromatic waves is placed at
~rs. Here we take the standard approach with regard to the
source. That is, the transmission from the source is calcu-
lated from the multiple scattering theory, and assume that
the source is not aﬀected by the surroundings. If some other
sources such as a line of atoms are used, the reaction between
the source and the backscattered waves should be taken into

account.

The scattered wave from each cylinder is a response to the
total incident wave composed of the direct wave from the
source and the multiply scattered waves from other cylinders.
The ﬁnal wave reaching a receiver located at ~rr is the sum of
direct wave from the source and the scattered waves from all
the cylinders.

The scattered wave from the j-th cylinder can be written

as

ps(~r, ~rj) =

∞

Xn=−∞

iπAj

nH (1)

n (k

~r
|

~rj

)e
|

−

inφ~r− ~rj ,

(1)

where k is the wavenumber in the medium, H (1)
is the n-
n
th order Hankel function of ﬁrst kind, and φ~r− ~rj is the az-
imuthal angle of the vector ~r
~rj relative to the positive
x axis. The total incident wave around the i-th cylinder
(i = 1, 2, ..., N ; i
= j) is the summation of the direct inci-
dent wave from the source and the scattered waves from all
other scatterers, can be expressed as

−

pi
in(~r) =

∞

Xn=−∞

Bi

nJn(k

~r
|

−

~ri

)einφ~r− ~ri .
|

(2)

In this paper, p stands for the electrical ﬁeld in the TM mode
and the magnetic ﬁeld in the TE mode.

n and Bi

The coeﬃcients Ai

n can be solved by expressing the
= i, in terms of the modes
scattered wave ps(~r, ~rj), for each j
with respect to the i-th scatterer by the addition theorem
for Bessel function. Then the usual boundary conditions are
matched at the surface of each scattering cylinder. This leads
to

Bi

n = Si

n +

C j,i
n ,

N

Xj=1,j6=i

n = iπH (1)
Si

−n(k

~ri
|

)e−inφ~ri ,
|

(3)

(4)

C j,i

n =

∞

Xl=−∞

iπAj

l H (1)

l−n(k

~ri
|

~rj

)e
|

−

i(l−n)φ ~ri

− ~rj ,

(5)

nAi
n,
where τ i
n are the transfer matrices relating the properties of
the scatterers and the surrounding medium and are given as

n = iπτ i

Bi

(6)

τ i
n =

H (1)

n (kai)J ′
gihiJ ′

n(kai/hi)
n(kai)Jn(kai/hi)

−

gihiH (1)
n

(kai)Jn(kai/hi)
n(kai/hi)

Jn(kai)J ′

, (7)

′

−

hi =

1
√ǫi

,

and gi =

ǫi
for TE waves
1 for TM waves

,

(cid:26)

in which ǫi is the dielectric constant ratio between the i-th
scatterer and the surrounding medium.

The coeﬃcients Ai

n and Bj

Eq. (3). Once the coeﬃcients Ai
mitted wave at any spatial point is given by

n can then be inverted from
n are determined, the trans-

p(~r) = p0(~r) +

N

∞

Xi=1

Xn=−∞

iπAi

nH (1)

n (k

~r
|

−

~ri

)einφ~r− ~ri ,
|

(8)

where p0 is the ﬁeld when no scatterers are present. The
transmitted intensity ﬁeld is deﬁned as

p
|

2.
|

with

and

and

where

2

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The frequency band structure is plotted in Fig. 1, and the
qualitative features are similar to that obtained for a square
array of alumina rods in air. A complete band gap is shown
between frequencies of 0.22 and 0.28. Just below the complete
gap, there is a regime, sandwiched by two horizontal lines, of
partial band gap in which waves are not allowed to travel
along the ΓX or [10] direction. We will consider waves whose
frequency is within this partial bandgap.
In particular, we
choose the frequency to be 0.192.

Ez
|

First we consider the propagation of EM waves through
two rectangular slabs of arrays of dielectric cylinders. Fig-
ure 2 shows the images of the ﬁelds. The left panel shows
the real parts of the ﬁelds Ez, while the right panel presents
2. In (a1) and (a2), the
the images of the intensity ﬁelds
|
slab measures 14x45, and the slab is oriented such that the
[11] direction, i. e. the ΓM direction, is along the horizontal
level. The size of the slab in (b1) and (b2) is 10x45, and the
[11] direction is titled upwards and makes an angle of 22.5 de-
gree with respect to the horizontal direction. The frequency
is chosen at 0.192. A transmitting point source is placed at
2 lattice constant away from the left side of the slabs. The
detailed geometrical information can be referred to in Fig. 2.
A few observations can be drawn from Fig. 2. First, there
is a focused image across the slab in (a1) and (a2). Earlier,
this focused image was attributed to the eﬀect of negative
refraction6, inferred from the group velocity calculation.
If
this conjecture were valid, another focused image would be
expected inside the slab as well. Our result does not support
this conjecture. As seen from (a1) and (a2), there is no fo-
cused image inside the slab. Rather, the waves are mostly
conﬁned in a tunnel and travel to the other side of the slab,
then release to the free space. This is understandable, be-
cause the forbidden direction in (a1) and (a2) is along ΓX,
which makes an angle of 45 degree from the ΓM direction
that lies horizontally. The passing band in the ΓM direction
thus acts as a transportation carrier that moves the source
to the other side of the slab. The waves on the right hand
side of the slab look as if they were radiated by an image that
has been transported across the slab within a narrow guide.
Second, the waves tend to bend towards the ΓM direction, as
evidenced by Fig. 2 (b1) and (b2). Third, the decay of the
transported intensity along the travelling path is not obvious,
an indication of eﬃcient guided propagation.

The results in Fig. 2 are promising. They show that in
the presence of partial bandgaps and when incident upon a
slab of photonic crystals, waves tend to bend toward direc-
tions which are mostly away from forbidden directions. This
would indicate that partial bandgaps may be considered as a
candidate for guiding wave ﬂows. To verify this conjecture,
we have further explored the guiding phenomenon associated
with partial bandgaps.

In Fig. 3, we show the EM wave propagation through stacks
of photonic crystal slabs. Two setups are considered. In (a1)
and (a2), two slabs of dielectric cylinders are stacked together.
The ﬁrst (left) slab is oriented such that the [11] direction is
horizontal, while the second (right) slab is arranged to make
the [11] direction tilted upward, making 22.5 degree with re-
spect to the horizontal direction. The two slabs measure as
9x44 and 14x44 respectively. In (b1) and (b2), two slabs are
adjacently attached. The [11] direction is tilted upward by 10
degree for the ﬁrst (left) slab, while it is along the horizon-

6
6
tal direction in the second (right) slab. The sizes of the two
slabs are 8x40 and 10x40 respectively. In both situations (a)
and (b), the point source is placed at a distance of 1.5 away
the left side of the stacks. The purpose here is to show how
the light would travel when two adjacent slabs have diﬀerent
orientations.

Here it is clearly shown that the EM waves indeed always
tend to travel along the [11] direction. In the case of (b1) and
(b2), an image has been formed on the right hand side. Com-
pared to the source, the image is uplifted by a distance about
8 tan(π/18). In the cases considered here, the ﬁrst slabs (left)
serve as a collimating device, and then the collimated waves
will be guided by subsequent photonic crystal slabs. This
consideration can be extended to multiple consecutive slabs
so that the wave ﬂows can be guided into desired orientations,
making possible alternative ways of controlling optical ﬂows.
In Fig. 4, we consider two other situations of stacked pho-
tonic crystal slabs. The geometrical parameters are indicated
in the ﬁgure. Again, the waves tend to move along the [11] di-
rection. Here the amphoteric diﬀraction is observed. It draws
analogy with the amphoteric refraction observed when waves
propagate from an isotropic to an anisotropic medium11.

The results from Figs. 2, 3 and 4 clearly indicate that the
partial bandgaps can be indeed used as a guiding channel
for optical ﬂows.
It can be also inferred that the guided
transport is eﬃcient. We have carried out further simulations
against variations of frequencies, ﬁlling factors, and dielectric
constants, the results are quantitatively the same for waves
within partial bandgaps. The observation presented here has
also been conﬁrmed by FDTD simulations. The controlled
wave transport due to partial bandgaps of PCs should be
interpreted in terms of diﬀraction or scattering rather than
refraction; in fact, no refraction index can be determined for
the phenomenon.

3

An immediate question may thus arise: Why the waves of
frequencies within the partial bandgap tend to bend to partic-
ular directions? To answer this question, we have examined
the properties of the energy ﬂow of the eigenmodes which
correspond to the frequency bands. While details will be
published elsewhere, here we only outline our thoughts. The
usual approach mainly relies on the curvatures of frequency
bands to infer the energy ﬂow. As documented in Ref.12, an
d3r , where ~J ~K and
energy velocity is deﬁned as ~ve =
U ~K are the energy ﬂux and energy density of the eigenmodes,
It can be
and the integration is performed in a unit cell.
shown that thus deﬁned energy velocity equals the group ve-
~K ω( ~K). Therefore it is common to
locity obtained as ~vg =
calculate the group velocity to infer the energy velocity and
subsequently the energy ﬂows or refraction of waves. A few
questions, however, may arise with regard to this approach.
First, when the variation in the Bloch vector, i. e. δ ~K, is
small, the changes in ω, ~E ~K and ~H ~K should also be small.
Second, the variation operation should be exchangeable with
the partial diﬀerential operations. When these two condi-
tions fail, the energy velocity will become illy deﬁned. Third,

~J ~K
U ~K

1
V
1
V

∇

d

r

R

R

3

even if the two conditions hold, whether the net current ﬂow
through a unit cell really follows the direction of ~ve remains
unclear. We note here that the average ﬂux through a surface
~J, where ˆn is the unit normal
d~S
may be deﬁned as
vector of the surface S. Clearly, the volume averaged current
within a unit cell does not necessarily correspond to the actual
current ﬂow. We will publish veriﬁcations elsewhere.

= ˆn
S

~J
i

R

h

·

To avoid possible ambiguities, here we consider the energy
ﬂow based upon its genuine deﬁnition. One advantage of
this approach is that we are also able to examine the local
properties of energy ﬂows. By Bloch’s theorem, the eigen-
modes corresponding to the frequency bands of PCs can be
expressed as E ~K(~r) = ei ~K·~ru ~K (~r), where ~K is the Bloch vec-
tor, as the wave vector, and u ~K (~r) is a periodic function
with the periodicity of the lattice. When expressing E ~K (~r)
eiθ ~K (~r), the corresponding energy ﬂow is derived
as
E ~K(~r)
|
|
as ~J ~K (~r)
θ ~K (~r); clearly θ ~K combines the phase
∝ |
from the term ei ~K·~r and the phase from the function u ~K (~r).
To explore the characteristics of the partial bandgap, we have
computed the eigen-ﬁeld E ~K(~r) and also the energy ﬂow of
the eigenmodes. The results are shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 5(a)
shows that the energy eventually tends to ﬂow into the direc-
tion of ΓM , i. e. the [11] direction, while the Bloch vector
points to an angle of 22.5o that lies exactly between ΓX and
ΓM .

E ~K(~r)

2
|

∇

Although the above features are only investigated for the
ﬁrst partial bandgap in this paper, we have found that they
are also valid for other partial bandgaps. For example, we
have also considered the second partial bandgap which is lo-
cated between 0.283 and 0.325. All above features remain
quantitatively valid. Within this second gap, however, the
waves are collimated to travel along the [10] direction rather
than the [11] direction. In addition, we have also carried out
simulations for various slab sizes, all the features are the same,
thus excluding the boundaries as the possible cause.

IV. SUMMARY

We have considered EM wave propagation through slabs
of photonic crystals which are made of arrays of dielectric
cylinders. Properties of partial bandgaps are investigated. It
was shown that the partial bandgaps may act as a guiding
channel for wave propagation inside the photonic crystals.
Such a feature may lead to novel applications in manipulating
optical ﬂows.

Acknowledgments

The work received support from National Science Council,

National Central University, and Fudan University.

∗ Electronic address: zhen@phy.ncu.edu.tw
1 J. Joannopoulos, R. Meade, and J. Winn, Photonic Crys-
tals (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1995).

2 http://www.pbglink.com.

3 C. M. Soukoulis, Editor, Photonic Crystals and Light Lo-
calization in the 21st Century: Proceedings of the NATO
Advanced Study Institute on Photonic Crystals and Light
Localization, Limin Hersonissou, Crete, Greece, June 18-

30, 2000 (NATO Science Series. Series C: Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, 563), (Kluwer Academic Publish-
ers, New York, 2001)

4 A. Abidi and A. Scherer, Editors, Photonic Crystal Ma-
terials and Devices, (SPIE–The International Society for
Optical Engineering, New Yorl, 2003)

5 K. Sakoda, Optical Properties of Photonic Crystals,

(Springer Verlag, New York, 2001).

6 B. Gupta and Z. Ye, J. Appl. Phys. 94, 2173 (2003).
7 L. L. Foldy, Phys. Rev. 67, 107 (1945).
8 M. Lax, Rev. Mod. Phys. 23, 287 (1951).
9 P. C. Waterman and R. Truell, J. Math. Phys. (N.Y.) 2,

512 (1961).

10 V. Twersky, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 24, 42 (1951); ibid, J.

Math. Phys. (N.Y.) 3, 700 (1962).
11 H.-F. Yau, et al., cond-mat/0312125.
12 A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical waves in crystals, (John Wiley

& Sons, Inc., Taipei) (1984)

Figure Captions

Fig. 1 The band structure of a square lattice of dielectric
cylinders. The lattice constant is a and the radius of
the cylinders is 0.3a. ΓM and ΓX denote the [11] and
[10] directions respectively. A partial gap is between
the two horizontal lines.

Fig. 2 Imaging of the transmitted ﬁelds across two slabs of
dielectric cylinders. The black circles denote the cylin-
ders (for clarity, not all cylinders are plotted).

4

Fig. 3 Imaging of the intensity ﬁelds across two-consecutive
slabs of arrays of dielectric cylinders in two arrange-
ments. The left and right panels respectively plot the
real part of the ﬁeld and the intensity.

Fig. 4 Imaging of the intensity ﬁelds across two-consecutive
slabs of arrays of dielectric cylinders in two arrange-
ments. The left and right panels respectively plot the
real part of the ﬁeld and the intensity. Here is show the
amphoteric diﬀraction at the interfaces between two ad-
jacent slabs: (a) positive and (b) negative. In both (a)
and (b), the adjacent slabs measure as 10x50 and 12x50.

Fig. 5 Left panel: the ﬁeld pattern of eigenmodes. Right
panel: the energy ﬂow of the eigenmodes. The eigen-
modes along two directions are considered: (a) ~K =
(0.9π/a, 0.37π/a), i. e. along an angle of 22.5o exactly
between ΓX and ΓM directions; the corresponding fre-
quency is 0.185; (b) ~K = (0.7π/a, 0.7π/a), i. e. along
ΓM ; the corresponding frequency is 0.192. The direc-
tion of the Bloch vectors are denoted by the blue ar-
rows, while the red arrows denote the local energy ﬂow
including the direction and the magnitude. The circles
refer to the cylinders. Both frequencies in (a) and (b)
lie within the partial gap. Due to the periodicity, we
only plot the energy ﬂow within one unit cell. Note that
although the features shown by (a) also hold for other
Bloch vectors for which the corresponding frequencies
lie within the partial gap regime, we only plot here for
the case of 22.5o.

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0312126v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0312126v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0312126v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0312126v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0312126v1

