3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Wave-Optical Image Inversion: Focussed Beams and Eﬀects of the Gouy-Phase

Ole Steuernagel∗
Quantum Physics Group, Department of Computer Science,
University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, Hatﬁeld, AL10 9AB, UK
(Dated: January 21, 2014)

It is well known that ray-optics generally provides a good description of the behaviour of light
beams as long as the characteristic extensions of the beam are much larger than the wavelength of
the light. In the focal area of a focussed beam this condition is always violated. Here, we want
to illustrate how wave-optical interference phenomena in the focal area under the inﬂuence of the
Gouy-phase do nevertheless ’conspire’ to produce the behaviour of rays of beams far from the focus.
In particular image inversion about the focus is analyzed.

PACS numbers: 42.60.Jf Beam characteristics: proﬁle, intensity, and power; spatial pattern formation

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ray-optical description of optical image formation
is simple and satisfactory for many purposes. Indeed, in
the case where thin lens formulae apply and complica-
tions such as chromatic aberration can be neglected, the
description is so simple that it forms standard material
in basic physics education [1]. It is also well known that
in the limit of short wavelengths wave-optics reduces to
ray-optics [2]. Ray-optics therefore is an emergent theory
with limited applicability.

Generally, optics requires a wave description when the
characteristic length scales of a beam become compara-
ble to the wavelength of the light. So, even when the
thin lens formula appears to be applicable, the realm of
wave optics is necessarily entered in those areas where,
according to ray-optics, a focussed light beam’s transver-
in all fo-
sal extension shrinks down to a point, e.g.
cal areas of a conventional imaging apparatus. This is
of course well known: wave-optics limits the resolution
of ’point-images’ (pixels) through aperture dependent
point-spread functions [3]. In the case of sharp aperture
boundaries the point-spread function is typically an oscil-
latory function such as sin(αkx)/(αkx) for a thin slit or
the Airy-function Ai(αkx) for a circular aperture [1]; here
k = 2π/λ is the wavenumber of light with wavelength λ,
x the screen coordinate and α a geometric factor that de-
pends on details of the setup such as slit-width and dis-
tance to the screen. Because of the symmetrical setup of
most imaging systems, the associated point-spread func-
tions are often symmetrical.

In the present paper we want to study the features of
the building blocks of a photographic image, its pixels.
Note, that, depending on the coherence of the light used,
features of the object, and the point-spread function of
the imaging apparatus, these ”pixels” can be large and
complex. In the case of holograms the ”pixel” may even
comprise the entire image. Since a pixel is described by a
suitable mixture of coherent beams (of diﬀerent frequen-

∗Electronic address: ole@star.herts.ac.uk

cies, polarization, etc.) we will consider the underlying
fundamental building blocks: monochromatic, polarized,
coherent, focussed beams. Speciﬁcally, we consider fo-
cussed beams which,
in the far ﬁeld, have a strongly
modulated symmetric or a pronouncedly asymmetric in-
tensity distribution. This, ﬁrstly, allows us to investigate
the inversion of the intensity proﬁle about the midpoint
of the beam’s focus. Secondly, there are some such pro-
ﬁles that can be described by a superposition of only
two Hermite-Gaussian modes. This greatly simpliﬁes our
formal analysis and, yet, allows us to retain all relevant
features.

Typically, the coherent beams’ intensity proﬁles we
want to consider here have to be speciﬁcally designed
using image forming systems that contain diﬀractive op-
tical elements, see section III B below; but they share
their basic features with all beams employed in conven-
tional image formation.

Our analysis aims to explain the emergence of ray-
optical behaviour in the far ﬁeld of the focus, derived
from the underlying wave-optical behaviour in the fo-
cal region.
In the far-ﬁeld a focussed beam behaves
like a convergent/divergent set of straight light rays, in
the focus it shows interesting wave-optical interference
phenomena leading to transversal intensity redistribution
and thus inversion of the beam about its focal midpoint.

We will see that the focal interference eﬀects are gov-
erned by the Gouy-phase [4, 5]; it is diﬀerent for diﬀer-
ent modes, this leads to mode dispersion. For simplic-
ity, we will explicitly only consider single and two-mode
Hermite-Gaussian beams.

We will ﬁrst introduce the description of light beams
in terms of Hermite-Gaussian transverse electromagnetic
modes (TEM-modes) in section II. We will then consider
a speciﬁc two-mode example to illustrate the eﬀect of the
Gouy-phase on the focal beam intensity in section III.
Subsection III B sketches a possible experimental imple-
mentation to reproduce the beam proﬁles described here;
it is followed by the conclusion.

II. HERMITE-GAUSSIAN BEAMS:
TEM-MODES

In practical applications laser beams which are not too
tightly focussed are very important. The ideas presented
here are in principle applicable in more general cases,
e.g. for very tightly focussed beams or very general ﬁelds
created by intensity masks or holograms, using laser or
other light sources. But we will concentrate on quasi-
monochromatic beams in the paraxial approximation for
which the mode functions are given by simple closed
analytical expressions. The most commonly considered
are cylindrically symmetrical modes such as Laguerre-
Gaussian modes or those with grid symmetry, such as
Hermite-Gaussian modes [3, 4, 5, 6]. They are mathe-
matically equivalent since both form complete orthonor-
mal systems. For our description, we choose the Hermite-
Gaussian modes because they have grid-symmetry, are
the familiar wave-functions of the quantum-mechanical
harmonic oscillator, and allow for a simple representa-
tion of the eﬀects we want to consider.

The paraxial approximation to Maxwell’s equations
arises when one neglects the second derivative of the
mode functions ψmn with respect to the beam prop-
agation direction z and can simplify them consider-
ably [3, 4, 5, 6]. Then, possible solutions are the familiar
transverse electro-magnetic or TEMmn modes (of order
m and n) describing x-polarized beams propagating in
the z-direction with a vector potential A = (Ax, Ay, Az)
whose only non-zero component is Ax with [5]

Ax(r, t; k) = ψmn(r) ei(kz−ωt).

(2.1)

Here, the scalar function ψmn contains products of
Gaussians and Hermite-polynomials in the transversal
beam coordinates x and y [r = (x, y, z)],
the
familiar harmonic oscillator wave functions ϕm(ξ) =
ξ2/2)/p2mm!√π, (m = 0, 1, 2, . . .), and
Hm(ξ) exp(
various phase factors [3, 4, 5, 6]

i.e.

−

ψmn(r) =

e

×

ϕm(

w0
w(z)
ik
2R(z) (x2+y2) e

√2 x
w(z)

) ϕn(

√2 y
w(z)
−i(m+n+1)φ(z) .

)

The dispersion-relation of light in a homogenous medium
ω = ck was used; z is the longitudinal beam coordi-
nate, t is time and w0 = p2b/k = pλb/π is the rela-
tion that links the minimal beam diameter w0 with the
Rayleigh range b. The beam diameter at distance z from
the beam waist (z = 0) obeys w(z) = pw2
0(1 + z2/b2)
and for large z shows the expected amplitude decay
of a free wave
with a far-ﬁeld opening angle
∝
arctan(λ/(πw0)).

z
|

1/

|

The corresponding wave front curvature is described by
the radius R(z) = (z2 + b2)/z, and the longitudinal phase
shift (Gouy-phase [4, 5]) follows φ(z) = arctan(z/b), i.e.
varies most strongly at the beam’s focus. Note that the
Gouy-phase factor e−i(m+n+1)φ(z) depends on the order n

2

and m of the mode functions. Diﬀerent modes therefore
show relative dephasing, i.e. mode-dispersion, when light
passes through the focus.

The vector potential Ax of Equation (2.1), describ-
ing a beam travelling in the positive z-direction (k =
kˆz), yields an electric ﬁeld which is polarized in the x-
direction with a small contribution in the z-direction due
to the tilt of wave fronts oﬀ the beam axis [5]. Accord-
ing to Maxwell’s-equations in the paraxial approxima-
tion, i.e. neglecting transversal derivatives, we ﬁnd for
the electric ﬁeld vector [5] (ˆx, ˆy, ˆz are the unit-vectors
and

stands for real-part)

ℜ

E(r, t; k) =

[ˆx ω ψ(r) + ˆz ic

ℜ{

∂ψ(r)
∂x

]ei(kz−ωt)

. (2.3)

}

We will, from now on, omit the z-component of the elec-
tric ﬁeld (the oﬀ-axis tilt of the wavefronts [5]) and hence
only deal with the scalar approximation

(2.4)

E

Ex ˆx =

ωAx}

ˆx .

≈

ℜ{
Just like the paraxial approximation, the scalar approxi-
mation gets better the less focussed the beam (the larger
the beam waist w0) is.

Since the wave equation is linear and the harmonic
oscillator wave functions form a complete orthonormal
set for the transversal coordinates x and y, we are free to
combine the above solutions to generate many interesting
ﬁeld and intensity conﬁgurations [7]. This can, for exam-
ple, be done holographically [8, 9] and formally yields the
following multi-mode expression for the vector-potential

Ax(r, t; k) =

cmn ψmn(r) ei(kz−ωt).

(2.5)

∞

X
m,n=0

The coeﬃcients cmn can incorporate phase factors and
are thus generally complex. The associated instanta-
neous electrical intensity distribution is

I(r; t) =

E(r, t)2 =

ǫ0
2

ǫ0
2

ω2

Ax(r, t)
}

ℜ{

2.

(2.6)

(2.2)

Although we are free to implement a large variety of
transversal ﬁeld or intensity proﬁles at a speciﬁed beam-
axis location z [7], these initial conditions determine the
shape along the entire rest of the beam. The analysis of
the resulting overall beam behaviour is our next topic.

A. Gouy-phase for odd and even states

Expression (2.5) for Ax contains the Gouy-phase fac-
tor e−i(m+n)φ(z) which describes an eﬀective dispersion of
the various transversal beam components cmn with the
longitudinal beam parameter z. To illustrate its eﬀect,
consider an odd beam proﬁle, one that consists of a com-
bination of odd mode functions only. Let us pick out one
such mode ϕm(ξ) =
ξ), see equation (2.2), with
−
a mode index m = 2k + 1. The associated Gouy-phase,

ϕm(

−

3

Plot of

the intensity distribution I(x, 0, z; 0)
FIG. 1:
(arbitrary units) of a ﬁeld with TEM-mode structure
(ϕ4(√2x/w(z)) + ϕ5(√2x/w(z)))
ϕ0(√2y/w(z)) around the
beam focus (0, 0, 0); coordinates in units of λ, b = 10

·

3 λ.

z

−

when studying the transition from negative to positive
far ﬁeld region (
z), shows an increase by a factor
7→
−
e−imπ = e−iπ =
1, in other words, odd mode pro-
ﬁles suﬀer a Gouy-phase shift that ﬂips them over. Even
wave functions get shifted by e−i2kπ and do therefore not
change. Because of this relative dephasing between even
and odd modes the intensity distribution of the beam in
the far ﬁeld gets inverted about the focal midpoint (0,0,0)
upon the beam passing through the focus. On the level
of image pixels, we have found the wave-optical expla-
nation for the well known ray-optical fact that imaging
through a focus ﬂips the image.

±

The Gouy-phase φ(z) = arctan(z/b) saturates to the
values
π/2 when we move some 20 Rayleigh-lengths
longitudinally out of the focus and becomes constant.
The modes no longer disperse and the beam proﬁle does
not change any more. This explains the form invariance
of the beam’s cross-sectional intensity proﬁle and thus its
ray-like character in the far ﬁeld.

III. EXAMPLES: TWO-MODE PROFILES

To investigate the inﬂuence of the Gouy-phase on a
more general beam pattern, let us consider the follow-
ing, eﬀectively one-dimensional, two-mode superposition
in the x-direction (ϕ4(√2x/w(z)) + ǫϕ5(√2x/w(z)))
·
ϕ0(√2y/w(z)). Plotting its momentary electrical inten-
sity proﬁle I(x, 0, z; 0) of Eq. (2.6) in the (x, z) plane
we can study the inﬂuence of the Gouy-phase on the
transversal beam structure. With a zero phase diﬀer-
ence (ǫ = 1) we get a symmetric beam proﬁle in the far
ﬁeld and ﬁnd that there is little qualitative change of the
intensity distribution in the focus, see Fig. 1. Alterna-
tively, we choose a 90o phase diﬀerence (ǫ = i), this yields
an unsymmetric, one-sided intensity proﬁle, which ﬂips
over when the beam passes the focal area, see Fig. 2. For

FIG. 2: Top: plot of the intensity distribution I(x, 0, z; 0)
(arbitrary units) of a ﬁeld with TEM-mode structure
(ϕ4(√2x/w(z))+i ϕ5(√2x/w(z)))
ϕ0(√2y/w(z)) around the
beam focus (0, 0, 0); coordinates in units of λ, b = 10
Bottom: plot of the same intensity distribution as in Figure
above, zoomed out and time-averaged.

3 λ.

·

illustration, we have depicted strongly focussed beams
with a Rayleigh range of b = 10
3 λ. One can clearly see
the interference between modes 4 and 5 at work and how
it leads to the redistribution of the intensity from one
beam edge to the other thus inverting it about the focal
midpoint. For beams as strongly focussed as the ones de-
picted here, we can also detect a perceptible transversal
displacement of the beam maximum, see Fig. 2 Bottom.
This displacement eﬀect becomes the smaller the less fo-
cussed the beam though.

Not all focussed beams clearly display the interference
patterns studied here. An important exception are beams
with transverse Gaussian proﬁles. It is known from the
motion of Gaussian wave packets in harmonic oscillator
potentials (see next subsection) that they remain Gaus-
sian. Purely Gaussian beams do therefore not display
the eﬀects of the Gouy-phase as clearly as the examples
studied above.

4

behaves just like the corresponding time-evolution factor
ei(m+1/2+n+1/2)t of a two-dimensional harmonic oscilla-
tor evolving through half an oscillation period (remem-
ber, the Gouy-phase varies from
π/2 to π/2). To il-
lustrate this equivalence Fig. 3 displays the probability
density equivalent to the beam proﬁle shown in Fig. 2.

−

B. Possible Implementation

A possible technical implementation of the patterns
discussed here is sketched in Fig. 4. For further details on
experimental implementations using computer-generated
(or computer-addressed) holograms consult recent liter-
ature [8, 9].

IV. CONCLUSION

It is investigated how a focussed monochromatic beam
with transverse intensity modulation behaves in the fo-
cal area.
It is shown that that in the focal region fo-
cussed beams cannot be described by ray-optics. The
question how this can be reconciled with their ray-optical
behaviour in the far ﬁeld (far away from the focus) is
raised.
It is shown that in the focal region the vari-
ous beam modes disperse by the mode-dependent action
of the Gouy-phase. This leads to intricate interference
phenomena in the wave-optical description of the beam
which ’maps’ it through the focus such that it becomes
inverted about the focal midpoint and behaves like a ray
of light in the far ﬁeld.

This analysis can be viewed as the analysis for the
building blocks (pixels) of a photographic image; in this
sense image formation in ray-optics is explained in terms
of the underlying wave-optical behaviour.

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank Paul Kaye and Joseph U lanowski for
lively discussions and John Vaccaro for comments on the
manuscript.

FIG. 3: Evolution of the probability distribution P (x, t) of a
harmonic oscillator with wavefunction (ϕ4(x, t)+iϕ5(x, t)/√2
for half a period (t =
π/2...π/2; x in arbitrary units, t in
units of inverse oscillator frequency Ω

−1).

−

FIG. 4: Sketch of possible technical implementation using a
laser, two lenses L1 and L2 and a suitable hologram H. The
hologram modulation of the laser beam is mapped into the
focal region F . Formally, the transverse ﬁeld proﬁle in the
focus is the Fourier-transform of the hologram-pattern.

A. Equivalence with harmonic oscillator

If we neglect details such as the overall geometric cone
shape of the beam and the ﬁeld’s time-dependence, we
ﬁnd that the beam envelope behaves just like the proba-
bility density distribution of a quantum harmonic oscil-
lator. This is due to the fact that the harmonic oscillator
wave functions ϕm(ξ), see Eq. (2.2), describe the beam
cross-section and that the Gouy-phase factor ei(m+n+1)φ

[1] R. A. Serway, Physics for scientists and engineers, (Saun-
ders, New York, 1990); M. Alonso and E.J. Finn, Physics,
(Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1992).
[2] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics,

(Addison-Wesley,

[3] B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Photonics, (Wiley, New

[4] A. E. Siegman, Lasers, (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford,

Reading, 1981).

York, 1991).

1986).

[6] A. Yariv, Optical electronics, (Saunders, New York, 1991).
[7] We cannot implement every desired transversal ﬁeld pat-
tern since the employed monochromatic light only provides
resolution down to the Rayleigh-limit. Very high orders in
the expansions of Ax in Equation (2.5) are incompatible
with the paraxiality assumption, the resulting cut-oﬀ in
the expansion stops us from surpassing the Rayleigh-limit.
[8] M. Reicherter, T. Haist, E.U. Wagemann, H.J. Tiziani,

Opt. Lett. 24, 608 (1999).

[5] H. A. Haus, Electromagnetic Noise and Quantum Optical

[9] J. Arlt and M. J. Padgett, Opt. Lett. 25, 191 (2000).

Measurements, (Springer, Heidelberg, 2000).

