3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GRENOUILLE - Practical issues: a quick manual

A. Christian Silva
Department of Physics and Institute for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics,
University of Maryland College Park, College Park, Maryland 20742∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

This paper is the result of setting up GRENOUILLE in the Nonlinear Dynamics Laboratory at
the University of Maryland at College Park. With the experience acquired in the process of setting
up GRENOUILLE, this manual was compiled from literature and from hand-on experience to serve
as a quick guide, a step-by-step help to construct GRENOUILLE and to understand some of its
basic principles.

I.

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Frequency resolved optical gating (FROG) consists of an autocorrelator with its output going into a spectrometer
connected to a CCD camera [1, 2, 3, 4]. The CCD camera records a spectrogram called the FROG trace (Fig.5 - 3
dimensional graph with intensity as a function of time delay on the horizontal axis and wavelength on the vertical
axis). From this spectrogram, the full electric ﬁeld (intensity and phase) can be reconstructed with the aid of a
numerical interactive algorithm. The mathematical form of the FROG trace depends on the nonlinearity used to
generate it. For a second harmonic generating (SHG) crystal, the FROG trace is proportional to Equation (1), where
the proportionality constant is divided out when the results are presented.

IF ROG(ω, τ ) = |

2
dtE(t)E(t − τ )exp(iωt)|

∞

Z

−∞

GRENOUILLE (grading-eliminated no-nonsense observation of ultrafast incident laser light e-ﬁelds) is the simplest
SHG FROG device ever built [5]. A typical FROG device has a delay line, the nonlinear medium and a spectrometer.
GRENOUILLE replaces the delay line by a Fresnel biprism and combines the spectrometer and the nonlinear medium
into a thick SHG crystal. The thick nonlinear crystal works as a frequency ﬁlter due to the large group velocity
mismatch (GVM ≡ 1/vg(λ0/2) − 1/vg(λ0)) [5]. The working condition for the GRENOUILLE requires that GV M ×
L ≫ τt, where L is the confocal parameter (the length of the crystal can be used for order of magnitude calculations)
and τt the time duration of the pulse, that can be taken to be the full width at half maximum of the pulse being
measured. Group velocity dispersion (GVD ≡ 1/vg(λ0 − δλ/2) − 1/vg(λ0 + δλ/2)) can be avoided by imposing the
extra relation GV D × L ≪ τc, where τc is the pulse coherence time (approximately the reciprocal bandwidth, 1/∆f )
[5]. These two conditions are combined in Equations (2) and (3), where TBP stands for time bandwidth product.

GV D

≪

≪ GV M

τt
τc (cid:19)

(cid:18)

τt
L

GV M
GV D

≫ T BP =

τt
τc (cid:19)

(cid:18)

Consider a transform limited (TBP ∼ 1) input pulse with center wavelength of 800 nm and a FWHM of δλ = 10
nm. Consider also a 5 mm thick BBO crystal. Equation (2) results in inequality (4) which shows that the crystal is
appropriate for measuring the input beam [5].

GV D = 20f s/cm ≪ 200f s/cm ≪ GV M = 2000f s/nm

As a counter example, consider a pulse with TBP ∼ 10. Suppose that we have a bandwidth of the order of δλ ∼ 20
nm and hence a pulse time length of the order of 100 f s. Equation (2) is not satisﬁed for the 5 mm BBO crystal.
Table (1) presents a comparison for the case TBP ∼ 10 and center wavelength λc ∼ 800 nm.

∗Electronic address: silvaac@physics.umd.edu; URL: http://www.wam.umd.edu/~silvaac

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

2

FIG. 1: Grenouille’s experimental setup from a side view. The picture is not drawn to scale. Nonlinear crystal: BBO dimensions
5 × 10 × 10 mm. Fresnel biprism has an apex angle of 1680 and almost square base of 1 × 1 in. The camera used is a Pulnix
TM-72EX with a ﬁlter for the fundamental beam adapted to its opening.

δλ(nm) T BP × GV D(f s/cm) τp/L(f s/cm) GV M (f s/cm) Works?

20
10
5

330
200
113

200
400
800

2000
2000
2000

No
No
Might

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

GRENOUILLE simplest experimental setup is presented in Figure 1, where the vertical axis of a measured FROG
trace is automatically aligned to be wavelength and the horizontal axis, time delay. Folding mirrors can be included to
further reduce the ﬁnal size of the setup (the commercial GRENOUILLE is a small rectangular box of 5cm × 15cm ×
25cm)but that does not change the experimental set in any essential way.

The alignment has to closely achieve Figure 1 conﬁguration with the second harmonic going in the center of the
CCD camera and the fundamental beams being blocked by the slit. All the distances shown in Figure 1 are within 2
mm for an ideal FROG trace (It seems enough to use a ruler to measure these distances). It is ”easy” to get some
SHG ”trace”, the problem is to have a good quality trace and also to be sure what has been measured is indeed
a FROG trace. After the initial alignment, ﬁne adjustments to the imaging system as well as the position of the
input cylindrical lens have to be done. The distance between the input cylindrical lens and the crystal is found by
maximizing the intensity of the second harmonic beam after the crystal. The position as well as function of each
element in GRENOUILLE is now discussed.

A.

Input beam

The size of the input beam determines the range of wavelength and time delay seen in the FROG trace and

consequently limits the spectral range as well as time range of the pulse to be measured.

The spectrometer in traditional FROG apparatus is replaced by the thick non-linear crystal and by the size of the

input beam. The thick crystal determines the resolution and the input beam the range.

3

FIG. 2: Neglecting the polarization, this shows that although the crystal was cut for a certain wavelength (say 800nm, the
center beam with angle α)the beam coming with an angle β, close to α, will also phase match as long as the pulse has a
wavelength component that phase matches at β. If β is the most extreme angle in the range of angles of the input beam inside
the crystal that phase matches, the wavelength range of the setup is the wavelength that frequency doubles between α and
β. For this setup the polarization is perpendicular to the surface of the ﬁgure for the incoming beam and on the plane of the
ﬁgure for the SHG beams (blue and green beams in ﬁgure).

The range of angles covered by focusing the input beam inside the nonlinear crystal determines the wavelength
range that can be measured by GRENOUILLE. Figure 2 shows that only a small wavelength range is phase matched
at each angle (the smallness of wavelength range is determined by the crystal ﬁltering). This mechanism creates at
each angle α or β a small range of wavelength that is further mapped into the CCD camera.

Consider the GRENOUILLE constructed with a BBO crystal and designed to work with input beams from 10 mm
to 20 mm at a center wavelength of 810 nm. Beams with waist of about 10 mm have a range of angles inside a BBO
crystal of about 1.720. Phase matching angle for 810 nm is about 28.90, for 860 nm is about 27.30 [6, 7]. From these
values, the wavelength range with a 10 mm input beam is about 810 ± 25 nm.

The wavelength range increase of the GRENOUILLE can not be achieved by simply increasing the vertical size of
the input beam. The confocal parameter has to be considered, since it is the eﬀective length of the crystal. Bigger
input beam waist also implies smaller confocal parameter. Smaller confocal parameter might also imply violation of
Expression (2) , the fundamental condition for GRENOUILLE to work.

The delay line in traditional FROG traces is replaced by the horizontal beam waist and the Fresnel biprism. The
range of the time delay axis is given by the size of the horizontal beam waist crossed inside the crystal through the
action of the biprism (Fig. 3). The expression for the delay is just given by the size of the horizontal crossed trace
inside the crystal (D) and by the angle (θ) formed by the crossed beams (Eq. 5 ) [7, 8].

For an input beam size of 10 mm, BBO crystal, and a Fresnel biprism with apex angle 1680, the delay axis is

∆τ ≤ 2.3 ps.

∆τ =

D × sin θ
c

(5)

4

Side View

Crystal

D

SHG

m

In p ut B e a

FIG. 3: The eﬀect of the input cylindrical lens and the Fresnel biprism is to create two crossing strips of the input beam inside
the crystal. The width of these strips is responsible for the time delay in the FROG trace (blue beam).

B. Fresnel Biprism

The function of the Fresnel biprism [5] is to create from the input beam two beams that cross inside the nonlinear
crystal (Fig. 3). The position of the biprism between the focusing lens and the nonlinear crystal can be chosen to
adjust the range of the delay axis. The maximum delay axis for a given crystal is calculated with Equation 5 where
the input horizontal beam size plays a fundamental role discussed in the previous section.

The optimal size of the delay axis does not need to be the maximum delay size achievable with a given
GRENOUILLE setup. The required condition for the range of the delay axis is to include the majority of the
FROG trace. The FROG trace has to show all its intensities including its outer edges (horizontal outer edges may be
clipped for time delay axis that are not wide enough). The smallest delay axis range that shows the full FROG trace
is the optimum delay axis range. Smaller delay axis give better quality FROG traces since more of the fundamental
beam is concentrated on the area of the second harmonic conversion increasing the intensity of the trace.

For an input beam of 10 mm (horizontal waist), the distance between the BBO crystal and the Fresnel biprism
that maximizes the delay axis is about 100 mm. In practice, one can search for the best position by looking at the
FROG trace while moving the Fresnel biprism in between the crystal and the focusing lens.

The Fresnel biprism can be mounted on a ﬁxed optical mount. Rotation on the perpendicular plane of ﬁgure 1 or
tilt towards the nonlinear crystal or the focusing cylindrical lens is not needed, as long as the input focusing cylindrical
lens can be rotated on the plane perpendicular to the plane of ﬁgure 1. The rotation degree of freedom is critical for
the ﬁne adjustments on GRENOUILLE’s alignment. Rotating the input cylindrical lens, helps aligning the reﬂection
symmetry about the wavelength axis inherent in the GRENOUILLE FROG traces (SHG FROG trace is even with
respect to the delay).

C. Nonlinear Crystal

The Nonlinear crystal is chosen to meet the requirements given in Equations (2) and (3). The combination of the
input beam and nonlinear crystal is equivalent to a spectrometer where the resolution is determined by the nonlinear
crystal.

The second harmonic generated pulse intensity from a nonlinear crystal is given in the frequency space (ω) by
Equation (6), where L is the length of the crystal, ∆K the phase matching condition and GVM the group velocity
mismatch between the fundamental and the SHG beam [9]. The sinc2 (sinc = sinx/x) term limits the bandwidth for
the SHG pulse. The bandwidth becomes narrower with the increase of GVM and also narrower with the length (L)
increase of the crystal. Hence to increase ﬁltering, maximum GVM×L is a desired quality for the Nonlinear crystal,
which leads to the fundamental conditions for GRENOUILLE to work (Eqs. (2,3)).

5

(6)

S(ω) ∝ L

× sinc

(GV M × ω − ∆k)

2

2

(cid:20)

∞

L
2 (cid:21)

×

′

ξ

ω − ω

ξ

′

ω

′

dω

Z

∞

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

The bandwidth of the ﬁltering process is calculated using Sellmeier equations [6, 7] and depends on the confocal
parameter of the focused input beam inside the nonlinear crystal. Most of the SHG takes place along the confocal
parameter which then deﬁnes the eﬀective length of the crystal. The minimum bandwidth in a setup for a given
nonlinear crystal is achieved with a confocal parameter of the length of the crystal. A BBO crystal 5 mm long with
the input beam at 800 nm has the minimum bandwidth of about 2.5 nm. The bandwidth for a confocal parameter
of 2 mm is approximately 2.8 nm even though the crystal is still 5 mm long [5].

The most important point in aligning the nonlinear crystal is to set the principal plane on the vertical plane of the
table (for the set up of Figs. 1 and 2). The polarization of the incoming beam should be parallel to the line focus of the
incoming cylindrical lens. This will guarantee that the vertical axis is the wavelength axis. It is important to phrase
this point since one can always have SHG generation, even with the crystal at the wrong orientation. With the crystal
correctly set, one should see 3 SHG beams at the same height. The FROG trace is the center beam. Translating
the crystal on the plane perpendicular to the incoming beam might be helpful to avoid defects on the surface of the
crystal. Tilting and rotating the crystal helps on the alignment since phase matching is angle dependent.

D.

Imaging System

The function of the imaging system is to take the FROG trace generated by the nonlinear crystal and image it
on the surface of the CCD array. The combination spherical lens and cylindrical lens (Fig. 1) is assembled back to
back on a mount with rotational degree of freedom. These combination creates a vertical focus of f = 100 mm and
a horizontal focus of f = 50 mm.

The vertical direction of the imaging lens maps the wavelength dependent angle from the FROG trace onto the
surface of the CCD array as in Figure 4. The position on the camera (x) is a nearly linear relation of the wavelength
(λ).

Crystal

CCD

F

FA

FIG. 4: Side view of schematic representation of the equivalent lens on vertical axis of the imaging system for the setup of
ﬁgure 1. The represented lens is cylindrical and has a focus f =100 mm. The SHG beam coming from the nonlinear crystal
has wavelength as a function of angle λ(Ω). The imaging lens takes ∆ x = Const0 × ∆Ω = Const × ∆λ. Knowing the center
wavelength λ(Ω = 0) from an independent measurement, the wavelength along the x axis can be found. Note that the linear
relations between x and λ are only valid for small angles (Ω).

The time delay axis is collected by the horizontal direction of the imaging lenses and directed into the CCD camera.
In this set up (Fig.1 ), the size of the FROG trace along the time delay axis on the CCD array is equal to the one
produced by the crystal.

The position of the CCD camera is set to have the FROG trace in the center. The FROG algorithm needs as an
input parameter the center wavelength, which is half of the center wavelength of the pulse being measured only at
the center of FROG trace.

The resolution of the Frame grabber and CCD camera has to be higher if the FROG trace is more complex. For
simple traces (such as Gaussian pulses), having a FROG trace of size 64 × 64 pixels is enough to recover the correct
phase and intensity of the input pulse [8]. For this setup (Fig.(4)), the resolution used is 512 × 480 pixels.

The overall alignment of the GRENOUILLE has to achieve a time delay symmetrical FROG trace located at the

center of the frame grabber view area.

E. Calibration

The scale for the wavelength axis and time delay axis is found with the aide of an Etalon. The etalon also helps in
lifting the time direction ambiguity inherent in GRENOUILLE (SHG) FROG [3]. An air spaced etalon with spacing
d produces pulses separated by 2d/c in time, where c is the velocity of light in air. The resultant pulse trace has
features that can be used to calibrate both time and wavelength axis. The direction of time is also known since the
second pulse coming out of the etalon is always of lower intensity than the ﬁrst. Figure 5 shows a FROG trace after
an air spaced etalon with d = 50 µm. The features used to calibrate GRENOUILLE are the modulations both in
the horizontal and vertical axis. The modulations on the delay axis are separated by 2d/c. Measuring the number of
pixels separating the modulations gives the scale for the delay axis (2d/(c × #pixels)).

The vertical modulations are related to the horizontal modulations by ∆τ ∆f = 1. Using this relation to ﬁnd the
wavelength separation of the vertical modulations, one only needs to divide the wavelength separation by the number
of pixels.

Typical values for the set up of Figure 1 and for the trace in Figure 5 are, for the horizontal axis (time delay), 8

f s/pixel and for the vertical axis (wavelength) 0.14 nm/pixels.

Errors in the calibration induce errors in the recovered pulse. The size of the error in the recovered electric ﬁeld is
at least of the same size of the error in the calibration. An error of 20% in the time delay axis leads to an error of at
least 20% in the time width of the recovered electric ﬁeld. The exact inﬂuence of the error in the calibration depends
on the complexity of the pulse to be measured and generally is bigger for more complicated pulses [10].

III. FROG PULSE RETRIEVAL ALGORITHM

The ﬁnal goal of FROG is to determine the complex electric ﬁeld from the FROG trace. This is done with the aid
of a numerical algorithm that starts with an initial guess of the complex electric ﬁeld and iterates to the measured
electric ﬁeld. The algorithm assumes two constraints. The ﬁrst is the form of the electric ﬁeld generated by the
nonlinearity in use. For SHG, the electric ﬁeld is given by Equation (7). The second constraint is the experimentally
acquired FROG trace which is given by Eq.(8) or Eq.(1). Extra constrains are reported to create instabilities in the
algorithm (for instance overﬂow), including adding an independent measured spectrum as one of the constrains [4].

Esig(t, τ ) = E(t)E(t − τ )

IF ROG(ω, τ ) = |

2
dtEsig(t, τ )exp(iωt)|

∞

Z

−∞

The algorithm works as presented in Figure (6). The initial guess can be any electric ﬁeld, the outcome should
not depend on the initial guess, but the convergence time is minimized for clever guesses. The commercial code
(Femtosoft) gives 4 options for initial guesses but does not allow for external input.

Once the initial guess is chosen the algorithm enters into a loop. The steps in the loop depend on the details of
the algorithm. There are at least 8 diﬀerent algorithms that can be used [3, 11]. The most common can be found in
the commercial versions of the FROG algorithms (Femtosoft and MarkTech), they are: the Basic FROG (or Vanilla
FROG, ﬁrst algorithm created), Generalized Projections, Short-cut Generalized Projections,Projections Over-Step,
Intensity Constrained Basic FROG, Over-Correction Basic FROG and Multidimensional Minimization Technique [3].

6

(7)

(8)

7

FIG. 5: FROG trace from a train of pulses separated by multiples of 333.33 f s. Such FROG trace is produced by an air spaced
etalon in the path of a transform limited 810 nm Spectra-Physics Tsumami Ti:sapphire oscillator with pulse width of ∼ 190
f s. The horizontal axis is time delay and the vertical axis is wavelength.

The algorithm that has been reported as most robust and responsible for the success of FROG is Generalized
Projections [12]. Generalized Projection was shown to converge to the real pulse for all FROG traces where the other
algorithms fail. Generalized Projections works as follows. The ﬁrst step (step 1), Esig is constructed with Equation
(7) and then IF ROG is calculated with a fast Fourier transform (step 2).
In step 3 the calculated IF ROG has its
sig(t, τ ) is constructed by
magnitude replaced by the magnitude of the measured FROG trace (Eq.(9)). In step 4, E
taking the inverse Fourier transform. Until now all the steps are also true for the vanilla FROG algorithm. While the
Vanilla FROG takes step 5 only by integrating Esig(t, τ ) on τ to get back E(t), Generalized Projections takes step 5
by introducing distance minimization (Z) between E
sig(t, τ ) and E(t)E(t − τ ) to get E(t) back (Eq.(10)). Once the
Step 5 is complete, the cycle is reinitiated.

′

′

′

E

sig(t, τ ) =

Esig(t, τ )
|Esig(t, τ )|

× [IF ROG(ω, τ )]1/2

Z =

N

Xt,τ =1

′

|E

2
sig(t, τ ) − E(t)E(t − τ )|

(9)

(10)

8

FIG. 6: General diagram for the FROG algorithm adapted from [3] . For SHG FROG and GRENOUILLE the signal generation
is given in Eq.(7).The loop 1-5 continues until desired error level is reached.

G = [

1
N 2

N

Xω,τ =1

[IF ROG(ω, τ ) − |Esig(ω, τ )|2]2]1/2

(11)

The error in the pulse retrieval (G) is measured with the FROG error (Eq.(11)), where N is the grid size of the
FROG trace and |Esig(ω, τ )|2 is normalized to a pick value of unity before G is calculated [10]. The size of the FROG
error decreases after each loop and typical error values depend on the quality of the trace and on the size of the grid.
The program converges to the correct pulse for values of the error less than 10−4 for noise-free pulses (theoretical
traces). It is not uncommon to achieve errors less than 0.5% for good quality simple SHG traces 128 × 128 in size.

The quality of the traces and hence the minimum error (G) level achievable when using the FROG algorithm
depends on the noise level when recording the trace. For multiplicative noise (IF ROG−N oise = IF ROG × (1 + noise)),
G ∼ e × (T BP/N )1/2, where TBP is time-bandwidth product of the pulse, e is the error in the trace data points
where the trace is nonzero and N × N is the array size. For additive noise (IF ROG−N oise = IF ROG + noise) the error
is G ∼ e [3, 13].

Despite the success of Generalized Projections to ﬁnd the intensity and phase of a light pulse, this technique, as well
as any other technique, is not proven to converge for all pulses. The strategy adopted in the commercial programs, is
to combine several algorithms into the program and to switch between them during a run. The commercial Femtosoft
algorithm switches between strategy everytime the error does not decrease by 0.5%. This approach hopes to combine
the strength of all the strategies and eventually cover all the possible FROG traces found in nature.

A. Practical issues when using Femtosoft FROG pulse recovery program

If pulse to be recovered is not theoretical, noise ﬁltering is appropriate. It is customary to ﬁrst remove the lowest
pixel and then the edge of the data in the window after the trace has been imported into the program. This operation
should be done only once to avoid clipping the low intensity data.

After noise ﬁltering the data has to be extracted for the program to initiate its cycle. It is possible to extract only
a small window around the FROG trace avoiding the background noise by selecting with the mouse the desired area.
This will result into a smother recovered electric ﬁeld but the algorithm has a recently discovered bug. This operation
will rescale the wavelength axis incorrectly.

Acknowledgments

9

I thank Pat O’Shea and Mark Kimmel for the indispensable counsel of how to set up GRENOUILLE. In spe-
cial, I thank Pat O’Shea for detailed discussion on the basics of FROG and GRENOUILLE. I also thank Bhaskar
Khubchandani with direct help in setting up GRENOUILLE. Finally, I thank Prof. Rajarshi Roy for advice, guidance
and logistic support, without which this work would have not been possible.

[1] D.J. Kane and R. Trebino, Single-Shot Measurement of the Intensity and Phase of an Arbitrary Ultrashort Pulse By Using

Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating. Opt. Lett., 1993. 18(10): p. 823-825.

[2] R. Trebino and D.J. Kane, Using Phase Retrieval to Measure the Intensity and Phase of Ultrashort Pulses: Frequency-

Resolved Optical Gating. J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, 1993. 10(5): p. 1101-1111.

[3] Rick Trebino, Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating: The measurement of Ultrashort Laser Pulses, 1st ed.(Kluwer Academic

Publishers, New York NY, 2002).

[4] R. Trebino et al., Measuring Ultrashort Laser Pulses in the Time-Frequency Domain Using Frequency-Resolved Optical

Gating. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 1997. 68(9): p. 3277-3295.

[5] P. O’Shea, M. Kimmel, X. Gu, and R. Trebino, Highly simpliﬁed device for ultrashort-pulse measurement. Opt. Lett., 26,

[6] V.G. Dmitriev, G.G. Gurzadyan and D.N. Nikogosyan, Handbook of Nonlinear Optical Crystals, 3rd ed.(Springer, Berlin,

932 (2001).

1999).

[7] P. O’Shea, M. Kimmel,X. Gu and R. Trebino, Increased bandwidth in ultrashort-pulse measurement using an angle-dithered

nonlinear-optical crystal. Opt. Expr., 2001. 7(10).

[8] K.W. DeLong, D.N. Fittinghoﬀ, and R. Trebino, Practical Issues in Ultrashort-Laser-Pulse Measurement Using Frequency-

Resolved Optical Gating. IEEE J. Quant. Electron., 1996. 32(7): p. 1253-1264.

[9] J-C. Diels and W. Rudolph, Ultrashort Laser Pulse Phenomena, 1st ed.(Academic Press, San Diego CA, 1996).
[10] K.W.DeLong, et al., Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating With the Use of Second-Harmonic Generation. J. Opt. Soc. Amer.

B, 1994. 11(11): p. 2206-2215.

[11] D. J. Kane, Real-time measurement of ultrashort laser pulses using principal component generalized projections, IEEE

Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 4, 278-84 (1998).

[12] K.W. DeLong, et al., Pulse Retrieval in Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating Based on the Method of Generalized Projec-

tions. Optics Letters, 1994. 19(24): p. 2152-2154.

[13] D. N. Fittinghoﬀ, K. W. DeLong, R. Trebino, and C. L. Ladera, Noise sensitivity in frequency-resolved optical-gating

measurements of ultrashort pulses, Journal of the Optical Society of America B 12, 1955-1967 (1995).

