3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PREPRINT

Submitted for publication in Journal of Applied Physics (2003)

Mode mixing in asymmetric double trench photonic crystal waveguides

Yu. A. Vlasov,1, ∗ N. Moll,2 and S. J. McNab1
1IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
2IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory, S¨aumerstrasse 4, 8803 R¨uschlikon, Switzerland
(Dated: July 24, 2013)

We investigate both experimentally and theoretically the waveguiding properties of a novel double
trench waveguide where a conventional single-mode strip waveguide is embedded in a two dimen-
sional photonic crystal (PhC) slab formed in silicon on insulator (SOI) wafers. We demonstrate that
the bandwidth for relatively low-loss (50dB/cm) waveguiding is signiﬁcantly expanded to 250nm cov-
ering almost all the photonic band gap owing to nearly linear dispersion of the TE-like waveguiding
mode. The ﬂat transmission spectrum however is interrupted by numerous narrow stop bands. We
found that these stop bands can be attributed to anti-crossing between TE-like (positive parity)
and TM-like (negative parity) modes. This eﬀect is a direct result of the strong asymmetry of the
waveguides that have an upper cladding of air and lower cladding of oxide. To our knowledge this
is the ﬁrst demonstration of the eﬀects of cladding asymmetry on the transmission characteristics
of the PhC slab waveguides.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Two-dimensional slab-type silicon photonic crystals
(PhC) are seen as a possible platform for dense integra-
tion of photonic integrated circuits (IC) on a chip-scale
level1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9. Single-mode PhC waveguides are typ-
ically deﬁned by introducing a line defect in an otherwise
perfect periodic lattice, for example omitting one row of
holes creates the so-called W1 waveguide1,2,3,4,5,9. It has
been shown, however, that the resulting bandwidth of
the guided mode below the light line which is potentially
lossless is typically very small4, sometimes of the order of
only a few tens of nanometers5. At the same time group
velocity dispersion is large owing to lattice-induced dis-
tributed feedback along the propagation direction4. Re-
cently another waveguide design has attracted much at-
tention, where the conventional single-mode strip waveg-
uide is embedded into a PhC slab6 (also known as the
double-trench waveguide). It combines the best features
of PhC slabs, such as strong localization of the waveguid-
ing mode with the potential to suppress radiation losses
at bends, with a broad bandwidth and linear dispersion
characteristic of strip waveguides. Here we report quan-
titative transmission measurements of integrated optical
circuits containing this broad bandwidth double-trench
PhC waveguide fabricated on 200-mm SOI wafers.

II. DESIGN OF THE PHOTONIC IC WITH THE
DOUBLE-TRENCH PHC WAVEGUIDE

A. Design of the Double-trench PhC Waveguide

The novel design of the PhC waveguide formed by re-
placing the row of rods in a slab with a strip waveguide
was analyzed in Ref. 1. It has been shown that addition
of a PhC cladding to the strip waveguide does little to

disturb its almost linear group velocity dispersion. At
the same time the mode is guided by the photonic band
gap and correspondingly, radiation losses at sharp bends
might be signiﬁcantly suppressed. This idea has been
extended further6,7 to the case of a triangular lattice of
holes in high-refractive index slab which is believed to be
a more fabrication-friendly design. It has been proposed
to replace the line defect in a PhC slab with low-index
oxide7 or high-index strip waveguide6, thus producing
single-mode gap guiding with bandwidth spanning over
60% of the photonic band gap width. Consideration of
the truncation of the PhC lattice has been shown to be
important to eliminate the inﬂuence of surface states on
the waveguiding mode6,8.

For our study we adopted the design rules proposed in
Ref. 6, since it does not require additional lithographic
and oxide deposition steps as in Ref. 7, and at the same
time utilizes the lattice of holes which is more fabrica-
tion tolerant than silicon pillars lattice of Ref. 1. The
PhC lattice parameters were chosen to position the pho-
tonic band gap for TE-like (even) modes around 1500
nm wavelength. The hole diameter D was set to 306 nm
with a lattice constant a of 437 nm. For a silicon slab
thickness of 0.5a (220 nm) and a D/a ratio of 0.7, an
even-symmetry photonic band gap has a bandwidth of
about 30% of its central frequency, spanning from 1200
to 1600 nm, thus covering all the important telecommuni-
cations wavelengths. The core of the waveguide is formed
by omitting one row of holes in the PhC lattice in the Γ-
M direction and etching two parallel trenches to deﬁne
the strip waveguide in the center. The resulting double-
trench PhC waveguide is shown schematically in the inset
of Fig. 1. The width of the strip waveguide W embedded
in the PhC slab was chosen to be 0.6a (263 nm) designed
to optimally phase-match the photonic band gap of the
slab. The width of the trench Wa separating the strip
from the PhC cladding was chosen to be 0.8a (350 nm).

2

The band structure for the TM-like modes is more
complicated due to numerous slab modes folded at the BZ
boundary. Although the photonic gap is absent, the light
can still be guided mostly in the core of the waveguide due
to index guiding as for a conventional strip waveguide.
The corresponding fundamental mode is highlighted in
Fig. 1(b) by a thick dashed line.

B. Design of the Optical Integrated Circuit

One major obstacle in experimental studies of trans-
mission characteristics of PhC waveguides is the large
coupling loss, a result of poor geometrical overlap and
strong impedance mismatch between the optical modes
in the launching ﬁber and the SOI photonic waveguides.
Back-reﬂections at multiple poorly matched interfaces in
the optical circuit result in strong Fabry-Perot oscilla-
tions in the transmission spectra. As a result intrinsic
spectral features arising from the underlying photonic
band structure are hidden in this Fabry–Perot noise,
severely complicating the interpretation of experimen-
tal results. Recently we proposed and tested a solution
to this problem which is based on two-stage coupling
scheme5. First the light is coupled from the tapered
and microlensed ﬁber to a single-mode strip waveguide
via a spot-size converter based on an inverted taper de-
sign. Once the light is guided in the strip waveguide the
coupling into the PhC waveguide is performed via sim-
ple butt-coupling. This scheme proved to be eﬃcient for
W1 membrane-type PhC waveguides with back-reﬂection
losses on all interfaces not exceeding a few dB5. For
the double-trench PhC waveguide design considered here
coupling at the interface PhC/strip waveguide is already
close to optimal since optical mode in the strip waveguide
of the width W (263nm) is nearly phase-matched to the
gap-guided mode in the PhC6. An inverted taper ﬁber
coupler is not very eﬃcient, however, for coupling into
waveguide of such a small width. Hence we utilized the
spot-size converter with the same parameters as in Ref. 5
to couple the light ﬁrst from the ﬁber to the strip waveg-
uide of 465 nm width. This wide strip is then adiabat-
ically tapered down to a 260-nm-wide access waveguide
which is butt-coupled to the double-trench PhC waveg-
uide.

A loss ﬁgure for the double-trench PhC waveguides was
obtained from measurements of devices of ﬁxed length
(4.6 mm) but with varying lengths of the double-trench
PhC waveguides ranging from 100 µm to 2 mm (i.e. 228 to
4572 lattice periods). In order to compare the transmis-
sion characteristics of the double-trench PhC waveguide
with that of conventional strip waveguides the reference
optical circuit without a PhC waveguide was included in
each set. The reference consisted of a strip waveguide of
260 nm width and 700 µm in length in the central section,
which was adiabatically tapered to 465 nm wide access
strip waveguides on both sides with input and output
spot-size converters.

FIG. 1: Photonic band diagram of symmetric double-trench
waveguide for (a) TE-like and (b) TM-like bands. The dotted
lines represent the light line of the oxide cladding.
Inset:
Scheme of the double-trench PhC waveguide. The dashed line
in (b) shows the fundamental TM-like mode conﬁned mainly
in the strip waveguide. The silicon slab is surrounded by oxide
layers on top and bottom. The width of the strip waveguide
is W = 0.6 and the width of the trench separating it from the
PhC is Wa = 0.8. Artifact bands created because of artiﬁcial
periodic boundaries introduced by the super cell have been
omitted.

These parameters guarantee the truncation of the PhC
lattice which is required to push the unwanted surface
states out of the photonic bandgap6,8.

The photonic band structure of the resulting waveg-
uide calculated with the MIT Photonic Bands code10
is presented in Fig. 1. The following parameters were
used: W = 0.6a, Wa = 0.8a, slab thickness of 0.5a,
D = 0.7a, and dielectric permittivity of the slab and
oxide was taken as 12.13 and 2.1 respectively. To ob-
tain reliable results 16 rows of holes perpendicular to the
waveguide were included in the computational cell and
16 plane waves per lattice constant were used to compute
the band structure. Since the structure is assumed to be
symmetric with respect to the slab plane (oxide layers on
the top and on the bottom of the slab) the solutions are
separated into TE-like (even) and TM-like (odd) modes
presented in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b) respectively. The
TE-like mode shown in Fig. 1(a) is characterized by a
very broad bandwidth deﬁned by a light line cutoﬀ at
0.29c/a on the lower frequency side and the upper edge
of the photonic gap at 0.39c/a. The dispersion of the
TE-like mode resembles the linear dispersion of the con-
ventional strip waveguide of corresponding cross-section.
The major diﬀerence is appearance of the narrow stop
band at the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary at 0.32c/a,
where the TE-like mode folds. This stop band originates
from periodic perturbations along the waveguide length,
which are due to the PhC cladding.

3

FIG. 2: SEM images of the double-trench PhC waveguide at
diﬀerent magniﬁcations. The white bar is 20, 1 and 0.3 µm
for images (a), (b) and (c), respectively.

FIG. 3: Set of transmission spectra of double-trench PhC
waveguides of diﬀerent lengths for TE polarization. Spectra
are normalized on transmission through a reference circuit
with a 260 nm wide strip waveguide. Top inset: IR camera
image of the TE-mode proﬁle in 500-µm-long PhC waveguide.
White bar is 20 µm. Bottom inset: attenuation measured
at 1300 nm wavelength as a function of the PhC waveguide
length for 20 diﬀerent samples.

III. FABRICATION AND OPTICAL TESTING

B. Experimental Setup for Optical Testing

A. Fabrication

Devices were patterned on 200 mm silicon on insulator
(SOI) Unibond wafers manufactured by SOITEC. The
220-nm-thick Si was lightly p-doped with a resistivity of
∼10 Ωcm and a 2 µm buried oxide layer, which optically
isolates devices from the substrate. A 50-nm-thick ox-
ide deposited on the substrate acted as a hard mask for
subsequent etching.

The double-trench PhC waveguides, strip waveguides
and silicon tapers of the spot-size converters were deﬁned
in one step by electron beam lithography. The combined
length of the whole circuit with ﬁber couplers on both
ends was 4.6 mm. The resist pattern was transferred
to the oxide hard mask using CF4/CHF3/Ar chemistry.
The resist was then removed and the patterned oxide
mask transferred to the Si layer with a HBr-based etch.
Sidewall angles close to 90◦ were obtained and sidewall
roughness is estimated to be below 5 nm (see Fig. 2(c)).
A ﬁnal lithography step deﬁned the epoxy polymer for
the ﬁber coupler. Samples consisting of sets of 5 double-
trench PhC waveguides of diﬀerent lengths and a refer-
ence optical circuit each were then cleaved on both sides
to enable edge-coupling. Further details of the fabrica-
tion procedure are reported elsewhere5.

The light from a broadband ASE source was ﬁrst cou-
pled to a polarization maintaining (PM) ﬁber, directed
to a polarization controller and then coupled to the input
port of the Si device under test (DUT) via a tapered and
lensed PM ﬁber tip producing a spot with a beam waist
of 2.1 µm. After passing through the DUT the light from
the output port is collected by a tapered SM ﬁber with
a beam waist of 1.85 µm and the transmission spectrum
captured by an optical spectrum analyzer. The near-ﬁeld
proﬁles of the propagating mode shown in the inset of
Figs. 3 and 4 were acquired with an IR camera through
a 40X objective at the exit of a cleaved double-trench
PhC (500 µm long). The resulting image represents a
wavelength averaged ﬁeld distribution in the waveguide
as the source is a broadband LED. Further details of the
optical set-up are described elsewhere5.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. TE Transmission of a Double-trench PhC
Waveguide

The image in the top inset of Fig. 3 demonstrates that
the propagation is predominantly single-moded and al-
most all the light for TE polarization is conﬁned in the

4

broadens with increasing length of the double-trench
PhC waveguide consistent with the increased interaction
length. At longer wavelengths, around 1600 nm, several
resonances can be seen in the spectrum for the 100-µm-
long waveguide, which can be readily attributed to the
slab modes at the photonic band edge around 0.28c/a
(see Fig. 1(a)).

Besides features common to the spectra for all lengths
of the double-trench PhC waveguides, numerous strongly
attenuated dips appear in transmission spectra of long
devices. These dips divide the spectrum into sepa-
rate high transmission bands. Increasing the waveguide
length progressively lowers the average transmission in-
dicating increased scattering losses. These losses can be
measured by plotting transmission at the center of one of
the high transmission bands, at a wavelength of 1300 nm
for example as shown in the inset of Fig. 3. By ﬁtting
the length dependence the slope of 38±2 dB/cm is ob-
tained. However, since the length of the 465-nm-wide ac-
cess strip waveguide becomes correspondingly smaller as
the PhC waveguide length increases, this number should
be corrected by subtracting losses in strip waveguide as
explained in Ref. 5. Scattering losses of the TE-like mode
in 465 nm waveguide at 1300 nm wavelength were mea-
sured previously to be 12±1 dB/cm. The corrected loss
ﬁgure for the TE-like mode in the double-trench PhC
waveguide is therefore 50 dB/cm, which is among the
lowest reported for PhC waveguides.

The numerous dips at wavelengths of 1250, 1283, 1318,
1336, and 1414 nm, observed in the spectra of Fig. 3
cannot be assigned to the Fabry–Perot oscillations, since
their spectral positions do not change with the length of
the PhC waveguide. Rather these resemble the appear-
ance of narrow stop bands. Indeed, after subtraction of
scattering losses at the maximum of a nearby high trans-
mission band, it can be shown that the attenuation at
the center of a dip at 1318 nm, for example, increases
exponentially with the length with additional losses of
39±1 dB/cm. Simple estimate based on a coupled-wave
theory11 gives the width of a corresponding stop band of
only 8 × 10−5(c/a). Other dips exhibit nearly the same
attenuation and, correspondingly, could be assigned to
stop bands of analogous width. Explanation of these
ﬁndings and interpretation of the stop bands requires de-
tailed analysis of the photonic band structure, which will
be presented in Sect. V.

B. TM Transmission of a Double-trench PhC
Waveguide

The near-ﬁeld image of the TM-like mode shown in
the inset of Fig. 4 indicates that the waveguide is multi-
moded with some modes propagating in the photonic
crystal slab. However most of the light is still conﬁned in
the central strip which is characteristic of predominantly
single-mode propagation by the TM fundamental mode
(black dashed line in Fig. 6).

FIG. 4: Transmission spectra for double-trench PhC waveg-
uides of diﬀerent lengths for TM-polarized light. Spectra are
normalized on transmission through a reference circuit with a
260-nm-wide strip waveguide. Inset: IR camera image of the
TM-mode proﬁle in 500-µm-long PhC waveguide. The white
bar is 20 µm wide.

very center of the PhC waveguide with minimal intensity
in the photonic crystal itself.

The set of transmission spectra measured for the TE
polarization (electric ﬁeld in the slab plane) for the
double-trench PhC waveguides of diﬀerent lengths is pre-
sented in Fig. 3. The spectrum for the 100-µm-long de-
vice is characterized by a nearly ﬂat transmission curve.
The bandwidth of high transmission spans from 1200 nm
to the apparent cutoﬀ at 1445 nm and is interrupted only
by a small dip around 1370 nm. This broad bandwidth
transmission is exactly what is expected from the pho-
tonic band structure of Fig. 1(a). Indeed comparing the
band diagram and experimental spectra it is clearly seen
that the cutoﬀ is well described by the crossing of the
corresponding mode with the oxide light-line.

The attenuation dip at 1370 nm is only barely vis-
ible for the 100 µm length PhC spectrum, but domi-
nates for longer waveguides. This dip can be explained
by the narrow stop band due to the zone-folding of the
TE-like mode at k = 0.5. As expected, attenuation at
the center of the dip increases exponentially with the
length with losses of the order of 100 dB/cm. The width
of this stop band is a direct measure of the interaction
of the embedded strip waveguide and surrounding PhC
cladding and can be estimated from scalar coupled-wave
theory10. Attenuation of 100 dB/cm gives a coupling
constant of 0.002a−1, which results in a stop band width
of 2 × 10−4(c/a) . This number is close to 5 × 10−4(c/a)
obtained from full-vectorial 3D plane wave calculations
of Fig. 1(a). Experimentally the width of the stop band

TM transmission spectra for double-trench PhC
waveguides of diﬀerent lengths are shown in Fig. 4. The
TM spectrum for the 100-µm-long waveguide can be ex-
plained by referring to the photonic band diagram of Fig.
1(b). The sharp cutoﬀ visible at 1365 nm results from
the fundamental TM mode crossing the oxide lightline.
At longer wavelengths waveguiding is provided mainly by
slab modes in the PhC, however they do not contribute
signiﬁcantly to our transmission measurements as cou-
pling to the strip access waveguides is ineﬃcient. These
modes exhibit high reﬂectivity from the end facets of the
photonic crystal giving rise to visible Fabry–Perot oscil-
lations. The second cutoﬀ seen at 1465 nm is owing to
the cutoﬀ of the 465-nm-wide strip access waveguide.

Increasing the waveguide length results in more com-
plicated spectra with numerous strongly attenuated dips
appearing. As for the TE spectra, these dips can be as-
signed to narrow stop bands with nearly analogous width
of the order of 5–7×10−5(c/a) estimated from the attenu-
ation constant. The overall propagation losses of the TM
mode are much higher than TE as seen from pronounced
vertical shift of the spectra with increasing length. They
can be estimated by analogous measurements at 1300 nm
as 72 dB/cm. Since scattering losses in the access strip
waveguide of 465 nm width were measured for TM polar-
ization to be around 4 dB/cm, the corrected loss ﬁgure
of the TM mode is 76±5 dB/cm.

V.
INTERACTION OF TE- AND TM-LIKE
MODES IN ASYMMETRIC SOI PHC SLABS

The preceding analysis of the results presented in Figs.
3 and 4 imply that most of the spectral features (cut-
oﬀs and the stop band at BZ edge) in the transmission
spectra can be explained by the physical model of non-
interacting TE-like and TM-like bands of Fig. 1. The
same conclusion can be drawn from the analysis of near-
ﬁeld proﬁles for TE-like and TM-like modes seen in the
insets of Figs. 3 and 4. It is seen that the TE-mode is
predominantly conﬁned in the center of the waveguide
as is expected for the fundamental TE-like mode in the
embedded strip waveguide. However the simple physical
model of Fig. 1 fails to predict the appearance of numer-
ous narrow stop bands visible in transmission spectra of
long PhC waveguides. The observed phenomena can be
explained by taking into account the inherent asymme-
try of the SOI PhC structure. Indeed the experimentally
realized structure of Fig. 2 diﬀers from the design of Fig.
1 in one critical aspect—the SOI structure is not sym-
metric with respect to the slab plane. The silicon slab
sits on 2 µm of oxide while above it is surrounded by
air. The mode conﬁned in the slab, therefore, sees dif-
ferent refractive indices below and above the slab. For
symmetric PhC slabs the modes can be classiﬁed into
TE-like (even) and TM-like (odd) modes based on their
symmetry with respect to the z-plane which bisects the
slab. Even modes have an even z-component of magnetic

5

ﬁeld and odd modes an odd z-component of magnetic
ﬁeld and form two orthogonal bases. When a PhC slab
is asymmetric, as is the case for the SOI slab, the modes
can no longer be classiﬁed as purely even or odd modes.
The modes can still be classiﬁed according their parities
however, with respect to the z-plane. The parity of a
state is deﬁned as the expected value for a mirror op-
eration with respect to the z-plane. For truly even and
odd states the parity is +1 and −1, respectively, while all
other states have parity in between. Even-like states have
parities larger than zero and odd-like states smaller than
zero. Interaction between these modes of diﬀerent parity
is now allowed and can signiﬁcantly contribute to addi-
tional propagation losses. This problem was mentioned
in several reports1,9, however the eﬀect of asymmetry on
transmission characteristics and propagation losses was
not analyzed in detail.

A. Fitting of Transmission Spectra with a
Photonic Band Structure

We can argue that the numerous narrow stop bands
correspond to frequencies where the TE-like fundamen-
tal mode interacts with the TM-like slab modes at corre-
sponding crossing points on the band diagram. In order
to explain our experimental ﬁndings we performed exten-
sive photonic band structure calculations to explore the
parameter space to obtain the best ﬁt for the spectral
positions of the stop bands and cut-oﬀs. Five structural
parameters were explored for both TM and TE-like po-
larizations: slab thickness, hole diameter D, lattice con-
stant a, width of the trench Wa and width of the central
embedded strip W . Although these parameters can be
measured from SEM images, the accuracy of these mea-
surements typically lies within 3–5% and the photonic
band structure is very sensitive to such small variations.
For example a 5% change in the width of the embedded
strip waveguide W (∼13 nm) results in a 10% frequency
shift of the stop band due to BZ folding of the funda-
mental TE-like mode.
In addition to variations of the
structural parameters the refractive indices of the buried
oxide and of the silicon slab can easily diﬀer by a similar
amount from tabulated numbers due to diﬀerent process-
ing conditions. That ﬁnally deﬁnes a huge 7 parameter
phase space to explore. At the same time the accuracy of
the plane wave method strongly depends on the number
of plane waves per lattice constant. In order to resolve
for example a 5% diﬀerence in the width of the embed-
ded waveguide W , the number of plane waves per lat-
tice constant in this direction should be 16, which leads
to an error in computed eigenfrequencies of around 1%.
Increasing the number of plane waves to 32 results in a
large increase of the required computer memory and sim-
ulation time. Fortunately the ﬁtting of the dispersion of
the TE-like mode and TM-like slab modes can be sepa-
rated to some extent because the former is deﬁned mainly
by the thickness of the slab and the width of the strip

6

behavior with gradual change of the parity from nega-
tive to positive values for the states at the stop band
edges. This represents mode mixing of the TE-like and
TM-like modes. The width of the stop band can be mea-
sured as 3.4×10−4(c/a), which is roughly 2.5 times wider
than experimentally measured and is probably not com-
pletely resolved by ﬁnite mesh resolution in the calcu-
lations. The states at the stop band edges are mixed
states that correspond to conversion of the fundamental
predominantly TE-like mode into predominantly TM-like
slab modes. The latter being less conﬁned in the center
of the waveguide could not be coupled eﬃciently to the
output access strip waveguide. This eﬀect is the origin
of observed dips in the transmission spectra. Further
analysis of the Fig. 5 based on the same interpretation
allows weak resonances at frequencies 0.319, 0.321, and
0.325 (wavelength of 1394, 1386 and 1352 nm) also to be
assigned to anti-crossing regions.

For short waveguides the dips appear to be much
broader than for the 2mm long device. Such behavior
can be explained by the ﬁnite-size eﬀect that is well doc-
umented for photonic crystals. This length-dependent
broadening results in the possibility of conversion of
predominantly TE-like fundamental mode into TM-like
modes even at frequencies far away from the stop bands.
This eﬀect can be responsible for relatively high losses
encountered by the TE-like mode measured from Fig. 3
and is expected to apply to any asymmetric SOI photonic
crystal waveguides.

C. Mode Mixing in the Spectra for TM-polarized
Input

Figure 6 compares the experimental transmission spec-
trum for a 2-mm-long double-trench PhC waveguide with
a TM polarized input with the band diagram obtained
using the structural parameters resulting from the ﬁtting
as used in Fig. 5.

The stop band at 1328 nm can be assigned to the
zone-folding of the fundamental mode at the BZ edge
at frequency of 0.330c/a. Narrow stop bands visible at
frequencies of 0.325, 0.335 and 0.342c/a (wavelength of
1344, 1307 and 1284 nm) can be readily assigned to stop
bands due to interaction of the fundamental mode with
the slab modes in direct analogy to the interpretation of
the TE polarized spectra. Indeed for each of these fre-
quencies the small gap can be found in the fundamental
mode dispersion curve, which occurs due to anti-crossing
with the corresponding slab mode. This is illustrated in
the inset of Fig. 6, where a magniﬁed portion of the band
diagram is shown in the vicinity of the stop band around
0.342c/a.

FIG. 5: Top panel: transmission spectrum for TE polariza-
tion of the double-trench PhC waveguide of 2 mm length
normalized on transmission through a reference optical cir-
cuit. Bottom panel: projected photonic band structure of the
asymmetric double-trench PhC waveguide. Blue (red) circles
represent modes of positive (negative) parity. The size of the
circles corresponds to the magnitude of the parity. Open cir-
cles correspond to the light line in oxide substrate.
Inset:
Enlarged portion of the photonic band structure

waveguide W , while the latter is deﬁned predominantly
by the diameter of the holes D and lattice constant a.
This procedure is equivalent to simply overlapping the
band diagrams of Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) and shifting one
with respect to the other along the frequency axis.

The ﬁtting strategy we employed consisted of ﬁtting
the cutoﬀ and central zone-folding related dip in the TE
spectrum by adjusting the width W of the strip waveg-
uide, then changing the hole diameter D to ﬁnd the fre-
quencies of the anti-crossing, and ﬁnally comparing them
with experimental data. To ﬁne tune the ﬁt the remain-
ing structural parameters were scanned.

B. Positive and Negative Parity Mode Mixing in
the Spectra for TE-polarized Input

Figure 5 shows the ﬁtting of the transmission spectrum
of the waveguide of 2 mm length for the TE polarization
by photonic band structure calculations.

The narrow stop bands in the spectrum at frequen-
cies 0.335, 0.331, 0.328, and 0.313 (wavelength of 1318,
1336, 1352 and 1414 nm, respectively) can be traced
to the regions of crossing of the negative parity (TM-
like) slab-conﬁned modes and fundamental positive par-
ity (TE-like) mode. The inset in Fig. 5 is a blown-up
image of the phase space around one such region at a
frequency of 0.331c/a. It can be clearly seen that the in-
teraction between the modes results in the anti-crossing

VI. CONCLUSION

7

The novel design of the double-trench PhC waveguide
with a single-mode strip waveguide core is analyzed, fab-
ricated and optically characterized. The waveguiding of
the TE-polarized light is characterized by a large band-
width with relatively low-loss transmission (50 dB/cm).
However inherent asymmetry of the SOI-based double-
trench PhC structures induce weak coupling of the modes
of diﬀerent polarizations, which result in the appearance
of multiple narrow stop bands and additional attenu-
ation. Detailed interpretation of the spectral features
found in experimental transmission spectra is possible for
the ﬁrst time owing to data that compares closely to the
spectra obtained from photonic band structure calcula-
tions. While this analysis was performed on the double-
trench PhC waveguide, the eﬀects of cladding asymmetry
are equally relevant to other types of PhC waveguides.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Prof. Shanhui Fan (Stan-
ford University) for sending us his manuscript prior to
publication and fruitful discussions. The authors also
gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the MRL
staﬀ at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center and in
particular Ed Sikorski for his etch expertise.

FIG. 6: Top panel: transmission spectrum for TM polar-
ization of the double-trench PhC waveguide of 2 mm length
normalized on transmission through a reference optical cir-
cuit. Bottom panel: projected photonic band structure of the
asymmetric double-trench PhC waveguide. Blue (red) circles
represent modes of positive (negative) parity. The size of the
circles corresponds to the magnitude of the parity. Open black
circles correspond to the light line of the oxide substrate. In-
set: Enlarged portion of the photonic band structure.

Corresponding author; e-mail: yvlasov@us.ibm.com

∗
1 S. G. Johnson, P. R. Villeneuve, S. Fan, and J. D.

Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 62, 8212, 2000.

2 A. Chutinan and S. Noda, Phys. Rev. B 62, 4488, 2000.
3 M. Loncar, D. Nedeljkovic, T. Doll, J. Vuckovic, and A.

Scherer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 1937, 2000.

4 M. Notomi, K. Yamada, A. Shinya, J. Takahashi, C. Taka-
hashi, and I. Yokohama, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 253902, 2001.
5 S. J. McNab, N. Moll, and Yu. A. Vlasov, Optics Express,

11, 2927, 2003.

6 W. T. Lau, and S. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 3915, 2002.
7 T. Søndergaard and A. Lavrinenko, Optics Commun. 203,

8 S. McNab, N. Moll, and Y. Vlasov, preprint, 2003.
9 Min Qiu, Phys. Rev. B 66, 033103, 2002.
10 S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Optics Express 8,

11 H. Kogelnick and C.V. Shank, J. Appl. Phys. 43, 2328

263, 2002.

173, 2001.

(1972).

