Tunable Resonant Optical MicroCavities by Self-Assembled Templating

G.V. Prakash,1 L. Besombes,1 T. Kelf,1 P.N. Bartlett,2 M.E. Abdelsalam,2 and J.J. Baumberg1
1School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
1School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
(February 21, 2014)

Micron-scale optical cavities are produced using a combination of template sphere self-assembly
and electrochemical growth. Transmission measurements of the tunable microcavities show sharp
resonant modes with a Q-factor>300, and 25-fold local enhancement of light intensity. The presence
of transverse optical modes conﬁrms the lateral conﬁnement of photons. Calculations show sub-
micron mode volumes are feasible. The small mode volume of these microcavities promises to lead
to a wide range of applications in microlasers, atom optics, quantum information, biophotonics and
single molecule detection.

PACS numbers:42.15.-i,07.60.Ly,81.15.Pq,42.60.Da

4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The operation of every type of laser, as well as many
varieties of atomic traps and optical sensors, depend on
the formation of an optical cavity. The resonant optical
modes inside this cavity determine the spatial ﬁeld distri-
bution and spectral performance of the device. The most
common optical designs use spherical mirrors to form a
confocal cavity that is insensitive to misalignment and
conﬁnes the optical mode to the smallest lateral dimen-
sions. [1] The length of this cavity is on the order of the
radius of curvature of the mirrors. There has been much
interest in the problem of reducing the dimensions of such
cavities: planar microcavities have been widely used as
a way to control spontaneous emission and to enhance
the interaction of light with matter, as in quantum wells
[2] or quantum dots [3] but these structures only conﬁne
photons in one dimension. Conﬁnement in lateral di-
mensions such as in photonic crystals [4] or microcavity
mesas [5,6] can inhibit spontaneous emission altogether,
but involve complex and expensive fabrication strategies.
Here we present a simpler approach utilising confocal mi-
crocavities. While traditional lasers built from discrete
components use macroscopic spherical mirrors, so far mi-
crocavity lasers do not. Preliminary theoretical work on
the mode structure in parabolic dome [7] and spherical
cavities [8] highlight the promise of such 0D microcav-
ities, but conﬁrm that fabrication is nontrivial. Simi-
larly glass or polymer microspheres show high Q-factors
in whispering gallery modes but it is generally hard to
control them and to couple light into and out of them.
[9]

To construct cavities with the smallest possible mode
volume requires small radius-of-curvature mirrors. Using
our recently devised route to simple fabrication of such
spherical micro-mirrors, we demonstrate here the forma-
tion of stable microcavities on size-scales below 10 mi-
crons. Comparable vertical-cavity surface-emitting semi-
conductor lasers use planar mirror stacks integrated into
the layered semiconductor growth, and then require sen-
sitive lateral fabrication to produce small volume devices.
[5,10,11] Comparable whispering gallery modes in micro-

FIG. 1. (a) SEM and (b) optical micrograph of spheri-
cal micro-mirror of pore diameter 8µm, radius of curvature
R=5µm, in 2.5µm-thick Au on ITO. (c) Microcavity design.
(d) Microcavity transmission spectra collected through the
ﬁbre for increasing separation, L, of cavity mirrors (spectra
displaced vertically upwards, for each increase in cavity length
∼200nm).

spheres or micro-disks have larger mode volumes and
broadband tuning of the resonant cavity wavelengths is
a severe problem. By robustly embedding our spherical
micro-mirrors in thin metal ﬁlms, we obtain simple volt-
age tuning by piezo-electric translation of a top planar
mirror. We thus show that at length-scales approaching
the wavelength of light, the electric ﬁeld distribution in
such microcavities can be controlled by nanoscale tuning
of the mirror, and can still be interpreted using Gaussian
beam optics.

Until recently, making curved mirrors in the size range
required has been diﬃcult, but advances in electrochem-
istry and directed self-assembly of colloidal templates
now oﬀer a cheap and simple way to produce an ar-
ray of well-ordered spherical reﬂecting surfaces. [12] For
the purposes of constructing microcavities, we combine
spherical micro-mirrors of Au with radii R < 10µm em-

1

bedded in a thin ﬁlm, with a planar top Au mirror coated
on a cleaved single-mode optical ﬁbre. The guided mode
of the ﬁbre is then also used to eﬃciently couple light
out of the cavity. Brieﬂy, we use a template prepared
through sedimentation of a conﬁned colloidal solution of
latex spheres on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) coated sub-
strate electrode to leave a self-assembled arrangement.
Either close-packed arrays or isolated sphere templates
can be obtained by adjusting the sphere concentration
or by pre-patterning. The substrate is then placed in
an electrochemical cell with a solution of aqueous metal
complex ions which are deposited through reduction in
the interstitial spaces of the template. The resulting ﬁlm
thickness can be controlled precisely through measure-
ment of the total charge, yielding cavity shapes that
range from shallow dishes to nearly-complete spherical
voids. The latex spheres are removed by dissolving in
tetrahydrofuran, leaving a porous metallic ‘cast’ with the
ordering and size of the original template. Both electron
and optical microscopy (Figs.1a,b) give an indication of
the mirror quality, discussed elsewhere. [13]

By growing the micro-mirrors on semi-transparent sub-
strates, we take advantage of the negligibly thin Au coat-
ing at the base of the mirror in order to couple light
into the cavity. The results shown here use radius-of-
curvature mirrors, R=5 and 10µm grown up to a Au
thickness of around 2µm to form dish-like spherical re-
ﬂectors between 5µm and 15µm across. However we
have also successfully grown spherical reﬂectors down to
R=100nm radius-of-curvature. The upper cavity mirrors
are formed by evaporating a 28nm thick Au ﬁlm (80%
reﬂectivity at λ=750nm) on a perpendicularly-cleaved
stripped single-mode optical ﬁbre (SM660) of 100µm
outer diameter, which is mounted in an XYZ piezoelec-
tric (PZT) translation stage and aligned normally to the
micro-mirror ﬁlm (Fig.1c). A white-light source is fo-
cussed to a 10µm spot on the rear side of the micro-mirror
ﬁlm, and co-linear imaging allows us to back-illuminate
individual spherical mirrors. As the ﬁbre approaches the
ﬁlm, optimising the collected transmission signal brings
it into correct alignment with the micro-mirror, forming
the microcavity. The detected light emerging from the
ﬁbre is the product of the cavity transmission and the
coupling strength to the fundamental ﬁbre mode. Us-
ing the ﬁbre as the top mirror thus allows a self-aligned
detection geometry. We record the spectra by directly
coupling the output end of the ﬁbre to a 0.5m monochro-
mator and CCD of combined 0.05nm resolution.

Spectral characterisation of the optical transmission
through the device allows us to compare the microcavi-
ties with simple models based on Gaussian beam optics.
We also produce similar 28nm-thick plane Au reﬂectors
to directly compare our results to the plane-plane micro-
cavity geometry using the same top ﬁbre mirror. Typical
experimental results for the transmitted modes are seen
in Fig.1d, and are stable and reproducible, and similar

FIG. 2. Transmission spectra for cavity lengths, L ∼7.9µm,
R=10µm, for (a) plane (dashed) and confocal (solid) mi-
crocavities, and for (d) confocal microcavity with the ﬁ-
bre increasingly laterally shifted from the central axis
(Y =0,1,2µm). (b) Longitudinal cavity mode separation for
planar and confocal cavities, together with the prediction
from Gaussian optics (line). (c) Peak cavity transmission as
the cavity length increases.

in most well-formed spherical micro-reﬂectors. As ex-
pected, the spacing of longitudinal modes becomes closer
together as the cavity length increases. The absolute
transmission is only low here because the input coupling
through the sub-micron aperture is very small for the in-
cident incoherent white light source. Equivalent scans
on a plane mirror reveal similar longitudinal modes but
with a much lower ﬁnesse. A direct comparison between
the plane-plane mirrors (a ‘planar’ cavity) and plane-
spherical mirrors (termed ‘confocal’) is shown in Fig.2a
for a cavity length, L
7.9µm, with R=10µm. The gen-
eral formula for the resonant frequency, ωnpl, that pro-
duces zero net optical phase after one round trip is given
by [1]

∼

ωnpl =

πn

θAu + (2p + l + 1) tan

c
L {

−

−1

r

R

L }

(1)

L

−

where n, p, l are positive integers describing the longi-
tudinal, transverse radial and azimuthal mode numbers
of the resonance, the second term represents the phase
24◦
shift on reﬂection from the metal ﬁlm (θAu
is the non-ideal phase shift on reﬂection for Au at these
wavelengths), and the third term is the Gouy phase shift
arising from the range of propagation angles contained in
the Gaussian mode. From this paraxial approximation,
the separation of the longitudinal modes yields the cavity
length directly. Plotting the experimental and theoreti-
cal longitudinal mode splitting, ∆ωL, as a function of the

180◦

≃

−

2

cavity length derived from the calibration of the PZT Z
translation gives an excellent ﬁt for both types of cavity
(Fig.2c).

The diﬀerence between the planar and confocal mi-
crocavities becomes clearer when the transmission peak
heights and linewidths are compared. At cavity lengths
L < R=10µm, the ﬁnesse of the confocal microcavity ap-
proaches 10, while the quality-factor, Q > 300. On the
other hand, the ﬁnesse of the planar microcavity does
not exceed 4 due to the diﬀraction losses of the optical
modes. This improvement can be directly seen from the
peak transmission intensity vs. cavity length (Fig.2d),
which is strongly enhanced for mirror separations < R.

To prove that the spherical mirror is acting to localise
the optical modes in the transverse direction, the core
of the optical ﬁbre is laterally scanned in the XY-plane
across the top opening of the spherical micro-mirror at a
ﬁxed cavity length. Typical spectra are shown in Fig.2b,
and resolve a number of new optical modes. These modes
always appear on the short wavelength side of the original
longitudinal mode and thus can be identiﬁed as trans-
verse modes formed by the lateral optical conﬁnement
of the spherical micro-mirror. They are never seen in
plane-plane microcavities. To further study the spatial
dependence of the spectral transmission, we systemati-
cally collect spectra at diﬀerent X positions and plot the
resulting images. Scanning across the centre of the micro-
cavity (Fig.3a, Y =0) clearly shows the emergence of the
transverse modes away from the cavity axis. The higher
transverse modes dominate the spectra for scans across
a chord of the circular opening (Fig.3b, Y =2µm). Up
to 6 transverse modes with similar linewidths make up
each longitudinal mode. Scanning in the orthogonal di-
rection gives similar results, indicating a near-cylindrical
symmetry of the micro-resonator.

These results thus allow one to directly image the dif-
ferent spatial mode distributions inside the microcavity,
and show that the mode spectrum consists of discrete
frequencies. An emitter inside a planar microcavity can
always emit in some particular direction - equation (1)
is valid only for normal incidence, and at diﬀerent angles
of incidence the resonance frequency gradually shifts to
shorter wavelengths. In fundamental contrast to this be-
haviour, an emitter in the confocal microcavity does not
have this ﬂexibility and can only emit in the appropriate
ﬁeld mode, ωnpl. The transverse mode separation, ∆ωT ,
also decreases as the cavity length increases (Fig.3c), as
expected from diﬀerent values of (2p + l) in equation (1).
However the predicted separations (Fig.3c, lines) only ac-
count reasonably for the data if the radius-of-curvature,
Rf it, of the spherical micro-mirror is
45µm (as dis-
cussed below). Less pronounced transverse modes are
also seen in R=5µm microcavities, with similar trans-
verse splittings, ∆ωT =12meV at L=8µm. The trans-
verse spectral separation produces a corresponding lat-
eral mode spatial separation on the order of a few hun-

∼

FIG. 3. Transmission spectra vs.

lateral ﬁbre X position
(log scale over 1.5 decades) for (a) Y =0 and (b) Y =2µm,
around the spectral position of a single longitudinal mode
for the confocal cavity (with R=10µm) at a cavity length of
7.6µm. The white crosses in (a) are predicted positions of the
transverse modes collected by the ﬁbre core. (c) Transverse
mode separation vs. cavity length for Y =1µm. (d) Cavity
ﬁnesse vs. cavity length for planar (×) and confocal micro-
cavities with one (•) and two (◦, △) transverse modes.

dred nanometres, providing a potentially eﬀective way to
couple into speciﬁc cavity modes.

∼

The ﬁnesse of the diﬀerent spectral modes is shown in
Fig.3d as a function of the cavity length. Whereas the
ﬁnesse of the planar structure is
4, independent of the
spacing between the mirrors, the confocal microcavity
performs best at small cavity separations. The maximum
ﬁnesse of 15 is achieved for the lowest of the transverse
modes. This agrees well with the theoretical ﬁnesse of
π√r/(1
14, where r=0.8 is the product of the am-
plitude reﬂectivity coeﬃcients of the two mirrors. The
corresponding intensity concentrated within the cavity is
(1
25 times greater than that of the incident
light at the resonant wavelength. However, as the cav-
ity length increases beyond the mirror curvature R, the
ﬁnesse drops. This is due to the increasing diameter of
the transverse ﬁeld proﬁle on the spherical micro-mirror,
eventually leading to it being clipped when L > R.

r)−2

r)

∼

−

−

∼

In this cylindrically symmetric micro-resonator, the
ﬁeld modes in the paraxial approximation are given by
Laguerre-Gauss functions, [1] plotted in Fig.(4a) at the
position of the top ﬁbre mirror. This demonstrates how
the microcavity dimensions here are nearly optimal to
couple cavity modes into the lowest guided modes in the
ﬁbre. Higher order transverse modes have a larger diam-
eter on the cavity mirrors hence they suﬀer extra loss and
exhibit lower ﬁnesse, as seen in Fig.(3d). However asym-
metric modes possess a ﬁeld null on axis that is useful
for the optical trapping of dark ﬁeld species. [14]

To understand the expected spatial patterns collected
by the ﬁbre core (with its ﬁeld distribution also illus-
trated in Fig.4a), we convolve the cavity and ﬁbre modes
to calculate the mode overlap as a function of lateral
ﬁbre position. The higher transverse modes are gener-

3

(1µm)3. This shows that our templating scheme is suit-
able for sub-micron optical devices. For example, sub-
picosecond optical modulators using resonant cavity en-
hancement of nonlinearities require short cavity lifetimes
and hence short cavity lengths.

To summarise our key results, we have been able to fab-
ricate near-spherical micro-mirror optical cavities with
mode volumes below (5µm)3, a Q > 300 and ﬁnesse >10,
and an intensity enhancement >25. Both longitudinal
and transverse optical modes are observed, and can be
simply wavelength-tuned by PZT translation of the pla-
nar top mirror which also extracts light from the cav-
ity.
In addition, this top ﬁbre mirror can be replaced
by high-reﬂectivity multilayers supporting luminescent
nano-particles, such as semiconductor quantum dots, for
enhanced emission and microlasing. The new route this
opens for cavity enhancement of light-matter coupling
can be further developed by reducing still further the cav-
ity volume (we routinely produce sub-micron reﬂectors)
and improving the ﬁnesse (using Ag or multilayer dielec-
tric coatings), both now in progress. We note that metal
mirror cavities with similar ﬁnesse have already been
shown to be suﬃcient for attaining strong light-matter
coupling in organic chromaphores. [15] Our preliminary
measurements already suggest that these micro-mirror
cavities are useful for optical-dipole force trapping, for
enhanced collection of micro-photoluminescence from the
focal region, or for incorporation in experiments involv-
ing cold atom interactions on integrated chips.

We gratefully thank Ed Hinds and Tim Freegarde for
helpful discussions of resonator design, and Oliver Wright
and Dave Hanna for critical comments. We acknowl-
edge ﬁnancial support from JSPS, EPSRC GR/N37261,
GR/R54194, GR/S02662 and GR/N18598.

[1] A.E. Seigman, Lasers (University Science Books, Mill

Valley, Calif., 1986).

[2] G. Khitrova et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1591 (1999).
[3] H. Saito, K. Nishi, I. Ogura, S. Sugou, Y. Sugimoto,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 3140 (1996).

[4] E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
[5] J.M. Gerard et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 449 (1996).
[6] J.M. Gerard, B. Gayral, J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 2089

(1999).

[7] J. Nockel et al., Phys. Rev. E62, 8677 (2000).
[8] R.A. Abram, S. Brand, M.A. Kaliteevski, V.V. Nikolaev,

Phys. Stat. Sol. 183, 183 (2001).

[9] R. Jia, D-S. Jiang, P-H. Tan, B-Q Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett.

79, 153 (2001).

[10] J.L. Jewell et al., Electron. Lett. 25, 1123 (1989).
[11] K.L. Lear, E.D. Jones, MRS Bull. 27, 497 (2002).
[12] P.N. Bartlett, P.R. Birkin, M.A. Ghanem, Chem. Com-

mun., 1671 (2000).

[13] S. Coyle, G.V. Prakash, J.J. Baumberg, M. Abdelsalam,

P.N. Bartlett, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 767 (2003).
[14] M. P. MacDonald et al., Science 296, 1101 (2002).
[15] P.A. Hobson et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 3519 (2002).

FIG. 4. (a) Optical ﬁeld proﬁles for the ﬁbre and the ﬁrst
four Laguerre-Gauss modes of the R=10µm confocal cavity
with p=0. (b) Calculated ﬁeld distribution in a spherical con-
focal microcavity on resonance, R=880nm, L= 704nm.

ally not seen for on-axial alignment due to the averag-
ing of the oscillating electric ﬁeld by the larger extent
of the ﬁbre mode. This is even more pronounced in the
smaller (R <5µm) spherical microcavities which give cor-
respondingly smaller mode diameters. The calculated
lateral oﬀsets which optimise collection of the diﬀerent
transverse modes are plotted as white crosses in Fig.3a
for R=45µm, giving excellent agreement with the exper-
imental data. This concurs with the need for a larger
Rf it that is required to account for the transverse mode
spectral separation, and suggests that the spherical ge-
ometry of our micro-mirrors is imperfect. In fact, as is
visible on both the micrographs of Fig.1a,b and in scan-
ning force microscopy images (not shown), the central
portion of the micro-mirrors is completely ﬂat (R =
)
∞
where the electrochemical growth appears to be screened
under the template spheres. The area of the ﬂat region
is about 10% of the total mirror area, a ratio which re-
mains approximately the same for spherical mirrors of
radius down to 100nm. Thus an eﬀective cavity radius-
of-curvature determined by both the curved and ﬂat sec-
tions is appropriate for the theory, in accord with the
experimental results. More detailed calculations based
on realistic micro-mirror shapes cannot rely on the for-
malism for Gaussian mode propagation. However, the
close match between experimental and theoretical ﬁnesse
proves that this non-spherical mirror does not degrade
the phase front of the lowest cavity mode, and that the
mirror ﬂatness is not a serious problem.

≃

In 5µm radius-of-curvature cavities, the tight trans-
verse ﬁeld proﬁles (radius w) imply diﬀraction angles
θ
λ/πw > 0.50 radians in the cavity, leading to signif-
icant errors of order 5% in the paraxial approximation,
sin θ = θ. As the size of such cavities is further reduced,
these errors rapidly make conventional optical models in-
appropriate. Theoretical modelling to demonstrate the
size scaling of these microcavities should therefore be car-
ried out using a full solution of Maxwells’ equations in
these wavelength-scale geometries. The ultimate aim is
to create the smallest optical cavities (L
λ/2) with
the highest ﬁnesse. A typical electric ﬁeld distribution is
shown in Fig.4b for R=880nm, L=704nm, and λ=750nm
with metallic reﬂectors (of conductivity 200/Ωm hence
80% reﬂectivity), corresponding to a mode volume below

∼

4

