4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coherency is the ether of XXI century.

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

V.A.Kuz’menko

Abstract

The concept of coherent states in explanation of a nature of nonlin-
ear phenomena in optics will be inevitably replaced by the concept of
inequality of forward and reversed transitions.

PACS number: 42.50Gy, 42.50.Hz

The concept of ether exists for many centuries. But in the twentieth cen-
tury its necessity practically comes to the end and for most physicists this idea
remains only as a historical curious thing.

In substantial degree similar future, obviously, wait for the concept of co-
herency, which now widely used for explanation of nonlinear phenomena in
optics. Formerly such eﬀects usually are explained as a nonlinear response of
substance on high intensity laser radiation [1]. In fact this is not an explana-
tion, but only a certiﬁcation of result: if the substance has high nonlinear optical
susceptibility coeﬃcient of second, third or higher order, then the high inten-
sity laser radiation will give corresponding nonlinear eﬀect. The Maxwell-Bloch
equations or the rotating wave approximation is usually used for mathematical
description of nonlinear phenomena. This mathematical model in many cases
gives good description of nonlinear eﬀects, but it does not have clear physi-
cal sense and the physical origin of nonlinear phenomena should be explained
independently.

The concept of coherency now plays a main role in explanation of origin of
laser-driven nonlinear optical eﬀects. It is supposed, that laser radiation creates
a so-called coherent states. Those states have speciﬁc properties and can inter-
fere. As a result the nonlinear phenomena appear, like as coherent population
trapping [2], electromagnetically induced transparency [3], ampliﬁcation with-
out inversion [4,5], etc. Although it is not suﬃciently clear what is the nature
of coherent state and how its can interfere, such explanation looks likely. It is
assumed that collisions must destroy coherent states. And really the experi-
mentalists observe, that collisions destroy the discussed nonlinear eﬀects. As a
result, the concept of coherency become all pervasive in the ﬁeld of laser and
quantum optics [6].

However, a skilled theoretical analysis had discovered the inward defect in
the coherency concept [7,8]. It has been shown that the inability to measure
the absolute phase of an electromagnetic ﬁeld prohibits the existence of coher-
ent states.
In fact it means that the using of concept of coherent states for
explanation of nonlinear phenomena does not have physical sense. This result

1

is a shock for experimentalists. It robs and nothing gives in exchange for their
favorite toy. The experimentalists can not agree with such situation. They
exert strong pressure on theorists. As a result, some attempts to revise this
theoretical conclusion appear. The work [6] contains excellent description of
the situation as a whole and makes attempt to save the concept of coherent
states by searching the weak point in arguments of works [7,8].

The goal of this note is not to discuss the arguments. The goal is to point
out that we do not need to save the concept of coherent state. There exists
alternative concept, which better suit for explanation of nature of nonlinear
eﬀects. We keep in mind the concept of inequality of forward and reversed
optical transitions, which corresponds to concept of time invariance violation in
electromagnetic interactions [9].

The orthodox point of view claims, that the time invariance violation is
absent in electromagnetic interactions. This point of view does not have ex-
perimental proofs, but it has a long historical tradition [10]. In contrast, the
experimental proofs for the opposite point of view appear recently. First of
all this is an experimental study of forward and reversed transitions in optics.
Seemingly, it is very simple to test the invariance of a photon absorption pro-
cess: we should measure the parameters of photon absorption process (spectral
width and cross-section) and compare its with the measured parameters of the
reversed stimulated emission process. But really the situation is not so simple.
Both processes take place simultaneously. Furthermore, the spectral width of
laser radiation or optical transition are usually connected accordingly with the
pulse length and life time of excited states toward a spontaneous emission. All
this reasons make so entangled situation, that reliable measurement and com-
parison of the necessary parameters of forward and reversed processes become
perfectly problematic.

However, in one unique for present day case this problem is easily over-
came. This is the case of the so-called line wings in the absorption spectrum
of polyatomic molecules [9]. This physical object has unusual properties: long
lifetime of excited states toward a spontaneous emission is combined with ex-
tremely large homogeneous spectral width of optical transition.
In this case
simple pump-probe experiments in a molecular beam conditions clearly show,
that the spectral width for the reversed transition is in several order of magni-
tude smaller, than those for the forward transition, accordingly, the cross-section
of the reversed transition is in several order of magnitude grater, than the cross-
section of the forward transition [11].

For present day there is the ﬁrst and the most clear and reliable experimen-
tal proof of time invariance violation in optics. Other experimental proof was
obtained recently in the study of interaction between light and metallic planar
chiral nanostructures [12,13]. Besides that, the quite formal fresh sight analy-
sis of high order nonlinear phenomena in optics shows theirs violation of time
reversal symmetry [14].

Time invariance violation is very good foundation for explanation of phys-
ical origin of nonlinear eﬀects. Inequality of forward and reversed transitions
endows atoms and molecules the properties of memory about the initial state

2

and aspiration to return in this state. This properties look like very similar
to those properties of coherent states: the memory also must be destroyed by
collisions. This properties allow to give simple and clear explanation of physical
origin of most nonlinear phenomena [9,15].

So, we believe, that the concept of inequality of forward and reversed tran-
sitions will inevitably replace in nonlinear optics the concept of coherent states.
Because of:

1) it much better explain the nature of most nonlinear phenomena,
2) in contrast to the concept of coherent states, it has a real physical base

3) in contrast to the concept of coherent states, it has direct experimental

[16,17],

proofs [9,12,13].

There is possible other way also. Because of the myths (like as the ether
or the coherent states) have not usually a strict deﬁnition, we can preserve
the brand of the concept, but substitute for it contents. Coherent states can
be deﬁned as a speciﬁc states of atoms and molecules after forward optical
transitions. However, such variant may be inconvenient because of it makes
some mishmash for readers (such situation exists now in rather similar case
with the concept of the ”quasicontinuum” of vibration states of polyatomic
molecules [18]).

In conclusion, the orthodox point of view is very strong now. The experi-
mentalists are afraid to work in the new direction. They need to be aimed by
the theorists. But the theorists use their eﬀorts now for saving the hopeless
idea. So, dear colleagues, look around and let us begin to work in the right
direction at last.

References

[1] N.Bloembergen, in Nonlinear Spectroscopy, ed. N.Bloembergen- Amster-

dam: North-Holland Publishing Co., (1977).

[2] E.Arimondo, Prog.Opt. XXXV , 257 (1996).

[3] S.E.Harris, Phys,Today 50, 36 (1997).

[4] O.Kocharovskaya, Phys.Rep. 219, 175 (1992).

[5] M.O.Scully, Phys.Rep. 219, 191 (1992).

[6] K.Nemoto and S.L.Braunstein, E-print, quant-ph/0312108.

[7] K.Molmer, Phys.Rev.A, 55, 3195 (1997).

[8] T.Rudolph and B.C.Sanders, Phys.Rev.Lett.87, 077903 (2001).

[9] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0306148.

[10] A.Bohm and N.L.Harshman, E-print, quant-ph/9805063, p.2.

3

[11] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte, and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[12] A.Papakostas, A.Potts, D.M.Bagnall, S.L.Prosvirnin, H.J.Coles, and

N.I.Zheludev, Phys.Rev.Lett. 90, 107404 (2003).

[13] A.S.Schwanecke, A.Krasavin, D.M.Bagnall, A.Potts, A.Zayats, and

N.I.Zheludev, E-print, cond-mat/0307056.

[14] M.Xiaochun, E-print, physics/0308037.

[15] V.A.Kuzmenko, E-print, phesics/0310090.

[16] A.T.Holster, New J.Phys. 5, 130 (2003).

[17] J.S.M.Ginges and V.V.Flambaum, E-print, physics/0309054.

[18] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0204003.

4

