Fano-type interpretation of red shifts and red tails
in hole array transmission spectra

C. Genet, M.P. van Exter, and J.P. Woerdman
Leiden University, Huygens Laboratory, P.O.Box 9504,
2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
Optics Communications 225, 331 (2003)

We present a unifying point of view which allows to understand spectral features reported in
recent experiments with two-dimensional arrays of subwavelength holes in metal ﬁlms. We develop
a Fano analysis of the related scattering problem by distinguishing two interfering contributions
to the transmission process, namely a non-resonant contribution (direct scattering) and a resonant
contribution (surface plasmon excitation). The introduction of a coupling strength between these
two contributions naturally induces resonance shifts and asymmetry of proﬁles which satisfy simple
scaling relations. We also report an experiment to conﬁrm this analysis.

4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 78.20.Bh, 42.79.Dj, 73.20.Mf

The observation of extraordinary transmission of a
metal ﬁlm perforated with a two-dimensional periodic
array of subwavelength holes [1, 2] has been followed by
a considerable amount of theoretical work [3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
This work has not yet reached the maturity for a full
understanding of the precise mechanisms involved in this
transmission process. Important global characteristics of
the spectra have not yet been addressed satisfactorily:
we refer here to the fact that, in comparison with the
naive “band structure” of surface plasmons (see equa-
tion (2) below), resonances are red shifted and line shapes
are asymmetric [3, 4, 5]. In this paper, we will address
these issues by developing a unifying model along the
lines of the original Fano analysis of the autoionization
phenomenon in atomic physics [8] and by experimental
conﬁrmation of the essence of the model. We will show
that Fano’s treatment yields useful insight in the problem
of transmission of light through metallic hole arrays by
distinguishing two interfering contributions to the trans-
mission process, namely a non-resonant contribution and
a resonant one. The latter is associated with surface plas-
mon (SP) excitations at the interfaces of the hole array.
In order to simplify the physics, we allow for resonant SP
excitation at one of the interfaces of the hole array only.
This assumption is approximately valid for asymmetric
arrays, i.e. arrays sandwiched between two diﬀerent di-
electric media (such as air and glass) in which a SP mode
can be tuned into resonance on either the one or the other
interface, but not on both at the same time. Fabry-Perot
mediated coupling between two identical SP’s living on
separate interfaces [7] can induce extra eﬀects in the sym-
metric case which we will not consider.

The situation studied by Fano is one where the scat-
tering from an input state can take place either directly
towards a continuum of states (the scattered states) or
via a quasibound state, that is through some type of reso-
nant state, which is then coupled to the scattered states.
This process therefore deﬁnes two distinct types of scat-
tering channels: one open channel ψ1 referring only to

the continuum of states and one closed channel ψ2 with
the resonant state, coupled to the open channel, as sym-
bolized in ﬁgure 1a. A transition from the input state
straight to the open channel ψ1 will be called ‘direct’
or ‘non-resonant’ as opposed to the other transition path
that goes ﬁrst through the quasibound state of the closed
channel ψ2 before being scattered and is therefore named
‘resonant’. The transition amplitudes associated with
each path will interfere to deﬁne the total transition prob-

FIG. 1: a) Formal representation of the Fano model for cou-
pled channels. b) Physical picture of the scattering process
through the hole array directly (straight arrows) or via SP
excitation. The curved arrows inside the hole represent the
guided ﬁeld. The period of the array is denoted a0, its thick-
ness h and the radius of each hole r.

ability. This situation leads to typical asymmetric reso-
nance line shapes, named (accordingly) as Fano proﬁles.
We have to emphasize that Fano analysis only addresses
the global characteristics of the line shape of the spec-
trum through “structure parameters” but does not give
theoretical expressions for these parameters, until a de-
tailed model is deﬁned.

The process of transmission through metallic hole ar-
rays is fundamentally a wave optics problem for which, in
principle, a full electromagnetic approach could be given.
However, this situation is, at the same time, a scattering
problem which can be mapped onto a formal quantum

Hamiltonian problem, as soon as the various scattering
channels are identiﬁed. The scattering point of view re-
lates the transition amplitudes that are derived from the
Hamiltonian problem to the electromagnetic ﬁeld scat-
tering amplitudes.

To calculate the total transition probability, one has
to solve the coupled channel problem which is deﬁned by
the Hamiltonian

ˆH = ˆH1 + ˆH2 + ˆV .

(1)

The eigenstates of ˆH1 correspond to the continuum states
of channel ψ1 whereas ˆH2 has one discrete state corre-
sponding to the resonant state in channel ψ2. The two
channels are coupled via the coupling term ˆV . Starting
from an input state, the derivation of the eigenstates of
the full Hamiltonian ˆH will give us the transition am-
plitudes from the input state to the new eigenstates of
the coupled channel problem, taking into account the two
possible paths.

The ﬁrst path is non-resonant and simply related to the
direct scattering of the ﬁeld through the subwavelength
holes. This contribution will be referred to as Bethe’s
contribution, based on Bethe’s solution to the problem of
direct transmission of the electromagnetic ﬁeld through
an inﬁnitely thin ideal metal with subwavelength holes
[9]. We will simply adjust this solution to our situation
of holes drilled on a real metallic ﬁlm of ﬁnite thickness
through a best-ﬁt procedure, thus taking into account in
a eﬀective way the inﬂuence of these realistic conditions.
This non-resonant path will correspond to the ˆH1 Hamil-
tonian formally describing a one-dimensional scattering
problem, taken along the z direction, as shown in ﬁgure
1. Scattering states Ψp
E will be considered as eigenstates
of ˆH1, i.e.
E. They will be deﬁned ac-
cording to the direction p of the incident plane wave and
are given asymptotically far away from the grating. The
corresponding scattering amplitudes, related to Bethe’s
solution, can be gathered into a S-matrix SB, which is
symmetric (S†
B = SB) due to transmission reciprocity
property of the array. These states are non-resonant
states (deﬁned in the open channel) and belong as free
ﬁelds to a two-folded continuum: one transmission con-
tinuum and one reﬂection continuum. They are detected
as a background in the reﬂection and transmission spec-
tra. From the quantum point of view, these two continua,
speciﬁc of an electromagnetic scattering process, are dis-
tinguished by the quantum number p.

E = EΨp

ˆH1Ψp

The second path corresponds to a resonant contribu-
tion, related to the existence of discrete SP excitations at
the illuminated interface of the array. These excitations
will be considered as discrete eigenstates Ψsp of the ˆH2
hamiltonian, i.e. ˆH2Ψsp = EspΨsp. It is well known that
these excitations correspond to SP resonances deﬁned on
the periodic array by wavevector matching, making use
of the array momentum wavevector [10]. At normal inci-

2

(2)

dence, such resonances are, to ﬁrst order, given by com-
plex resonance frequencies

ˆωsp =

n2 + m2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

1

2 2πc

a0 r

ε1 + ε2
ε1ε2

,

where (n, m) are integers, a0 is the period of the ar-
ray and ε1 and ε2 are respectively the permittivities
of the adjacent medium and the metal. The negative
imaginary part of ˆωsp corresponds to the internal (non-
radiative) damping of surface plasmon on a smooth in-
terface. This damping represents the coupling between
the surface plasmon and metal absorption losses. The
real part of ˆωsp corresponds to the resonance frequencies.
In practice, transmission spectra of hole arrays peak at
frequencies that are typically 4% smaller than the value
given by the real part of equation (2). This discrepancy,
apparent in many experimental works [3, 4, 5], is well
known though basically not understood so far.

Due to the array periodicity, the incident ﬁeld can be
converted into a surface plasmon which will eventually be
scattered (reﬂected or transmitted) by reciprocally cou-
pling again with the array. This coupling between the
discrete resonance and the scattering states is formally
given by the ˆV operator (see also ﬁgure 1b) which de-
ﬁnes the radiative damping of plasmons at the surface
of the array, considering the two scattering continua: a
radiative transfer directly to free space (to the reﬂection
continuum) and a radiative transfer through the holes
(to the transmission continuum). One can give inter-
pretations for these radiative dampings but the key re-
sult of this paper relies only on the fundamental idea
of the coupling with these two radiative channels. Any
interpretation of this coupling, aiming at specifying the
mechanisms of the radiative transfers, will not question
this result; this is the inherent strength of a Fano-type
analysis.

Fano has solved the coupled channel problem giving
the normalized eigenstate ΦE of the full Hamiltonian ˆH
[8]. The coupling between the resonant state Ψsp (SP
excitation) and the scattering state Ψp
E,

Ψsp

ˆV

Ψp
E

= V p
E,

D

E

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(3)

is assumed hermitian. It introduces resonance shifts (∆)
and linewidths (Γ) whose expressions can be framed into
a Kramers-Kronig relation

ΓE =

2π
~

Xp

2
|V p
E|

, ∆E =

1
2π

P

Z

dE′ ΓE′

E − E′ .

(4)

The scattering dynamics of our system are fully con-
tained in the S-matrix element corresponding to the
global transmission amplitude

t ≡ hΦE |S| ii ,

(5)

with |ii denoting the input state, the left-incident ﬁeld.
This expression takes into account direct scattering from
the input state to the continuum of scattering states ψ1
(Bethe contribution), speciﬁed through the S-matrix SB,
as well as indirect scattering through the resonant state
of the closed channel ψ2. The expression for the S-matrix
element (5) takes the shape of a sum of interfering terms
from which the expression for the transmission coeﬃcient
(transition probability) immediately follows

2
T = |t|

2
= |tB|

2
[E − (Esp + ~∆) + ~δ]

2
[E − (Esp + ~∆)]

+ [~Γ/2]

2 ,

(6)

where E = ~ω. The δ parameter deﬁnes the ratio be-
tween the resonant transition amplitude and the direct
(background) transition amplitude [8]. This expression
for the global transmission coeﬃcient reveals the super-
position of the non-resonant ‘Bethe’ contribution, with
2
the transmission coeﬃcient |tB|
, and of the resonant
part, with a speciﬁc structure that turns out to be exactly
a Fano-type proﬁle when written in the natural variables
[8]

ǫ =

E − (Esp + ~∆)
~Γ/2

, q =

2δ
Γ

.

(7)

The dimensionless q parameter determines the asymme-
try of the proﬁle and its sign the corresponding blue
(q > 0) or red (q < 0) tail [11].

Our analysis shows that the line shapes are fully deter-
mined by 4 structure parameters: the resonance energy
Esp, identiﬁed here as the real part of ~ˆωsp, the linewidth
Γ, the resonance shift ∆ and the asymmetry q. The
linewidth Γ includes the plasmon damping terms, i.e. (i)
radiative damping, deﬁned by the coupling strength be-
tween the surface plasmon discrete state and the scatter-
ing states (reﬂection and transmission continua), and (ii)
non-radiative damping deﬁned by the imaginary part of
~ˆωsp. The non-radiative damping contribution is gener-
ally much weaker than the radiative one, so that the reso-
nance shift ∆, given by the Kramers-Kronig relation (4),
is essentially due to the additional radiation damping.
This shift can explain the discrepancy between expected
resonances (see equation (2)) and actual peak positions.
It deﬁnes therefore non-perturbatively the modiﬁed SP’s
dispersion relation when compared to the SP’s disper-
sion relation on a smooth interface, taking account of
the “dressed” character of the SP by coupling to free-ﬁeld
modes. Note that, even if it can easily be parametrized
in equations (6,7), our one-resonance Fano description
does not strictly allow for the inclusion of SP-SP scatter-
ing since this would involve more than one discrete state.
However, this contribution is of higher order in the limit
taken here of small holes as compared to the wavelength.
A full electromagnetic theory would deduce this new
dispersion relation from the deﬁnition of the S-matrix of
the whole scattering process and from the extraction of

3

its corresponding poles [12, 13]. The sign of the asym-
metry q can be read oﬀ directly from the tail of an ex-
perimental spectral proﬁle of an isolated SP resonance.
Finally, the line shapes of transmission proﬁles show a
characteristic dip at the particular point ǫ = −q corre-
sponding to a destructive interference eﬀect between the
two channels. This destructive interference eﬀect is con-
comitant to the so called Wood anomaly [14].

The deﬁnition of the structure parameters is directly
rooted in the introduction of the coupling between a non-
resonant and a resonant channel, as essentially shown by
the Kramers-Kronig relation (4). This relation provides
us with general relations between the damping and the
resonance shift. Although we have no explicit expressions
for the coupling strength V p
E between surface plasmons
and scattering states, we can argue generically how it de-
pends on the (ω, r, h) parameters.

With a simple interpretative model, it is easy to see
that the coupling strength is an increasing function of the
frequency ω. Towards the reﬂection continuum, the cou-
pling is directly deﬁned via the holes acting as Herz- or
Rayleigh-type dipole emitters induced by the longitudi-
nally polarized surface plasmon. Towards the transmis-
sion continuum, the (evanescent) coupling through the
holes is considered which is also an increasing function
of the frequency. This monotonic behaviour of the cou-
pling strength, that is of the linewidth Γ (see equation
(4)), implies, when inserted into this Kramers-Kronig re-
lation (4), that the resonance shift ∆ is negative, i.e. a
red shift, as noticed by several authors [3, 4, 5]. In fact,
the absence of a detailed description for the linewidth-
resonance shift ratio forces us to consider Γ as a free
parameter, including both the eﬀects of radiative damp-
ing (surface plasmons coupled to scattering states) and
non-radiative damping.

This coupling is also strengthened when, at ﬁxed fre-
quency, the hole radius is increased. This lowers the
cut-oﬀ frequency of the hole waveguide and actually in-
creases the coupling of surface plasmons towards scatter-
ing states of the reﬂection and transmission continua, as
the radiating dipoles get stronger. The linewidth is there-
fore predicted to be an increasing function of the hole
radius (∂rΓ > 0) and, at the same time, the red shift of
the resonance should be more pronounced (∂r |∆| > 0).
These variations have been observed experimentally [4].
If the thickness h of the array is increased, the cou-
pling towards the transmission continuum decreases. In
the hypothetic limit of inﬁnite thickness, only radiation
damping on the reﬂection interface remains. As h is in-
creased, the progressive disappearance of the radiative
channel through the holes, due to higher (non-radiative)
losses inside the waveguide, induces a narrowing of the
linewidth (∂hΓ < 0) and consequently a reduced red shift
(∂h |∆| < 0) of resonance. Two regimes of variation for
linewidths and resonance shifts can be understood from
the introduction of a typical thickness above which the

radiative coupling is mainly towards the reﬂection con-
tinuum. The variations ∂hΓ < 0 and ∂h |∆| < 0, along
with the existence of a critical thickness, are again in
agreement with recent measurements [15].

Figure 2 shows measurement transmission data from
one of our experiments, for the (1, 0) SP resonance on the
air-metal side of our array. This array is made of a 200
nm thick gold (Au) ﬁlm perforated with a square lattice
of 70 nm radius holes spaced with a 700 nm lattice period.
Our sample is asymmetric: the Au ﬁlm is evaporated on
a glass substrate with a 10 nm thick bonding layer of
titanium (Ti). Strong absorption in this bonding layer
prevents any surface plasmon from being excited on the
metal-glass interface and, as such, guarantees that only
one interface contributes, in agreement with the general
frame of our model. This proﬁle has a wavelength red
tail, i.e. q is negative [11]. We notice that the position of
the measured peak (at λ = 739 nm) is ∼ 4% red shifted
when compared to the position of the corresponding SP
resonance λsp = 712 nm naively expected from equation
(2) with a period of the array a0 = 700 nm.

FIG. 2: Experimental transmission spectrum of the air-metal
(1, 0) SP resonance, obtained with an Au ﬁlm of thickness
200 nm with a0 = 700 nm and r = 70 nm. The smooth
curve shows the ﬁtted Fano proﬁle (6) by adjusting freely
the natural variables of (7). The vertical dotted line marks
the position of the peak whereas the arrow shows the posi-
tion of the resonance given by equation (2). The horizontal
dotted line shows the Fano background level. Inset: Experi-
mental transmission spectrum for the same array, but now in
a ﬁlm only 100 nm thick. The former dotted “cross” has been
superimposed, emphasizing the background increase and the
dispersive line shape.

We attribute this shift to a negative ∆ parameter, as
to be expected from the above general arguments.
It
should be noticed that the various parameters of equa-
tion (6) are intertwined in their eﬀects on the line shape.
Shifts of SP resonances are determined for one part by
In
∆ and for the other part by the asymmetry itself.

4

natural units, the peak of the Fano proﬁle is centered on
ǫ = 1/q. A red tail asymmetry (q < 0) induces there-
fore an extra red shift, though small (less than 1%) when
compared to the red shift that is expected from ∆. On
the other hand, the non-resonant transmission coeﬃcient
2
scales as |tB|
, according to Bethe’s theory [9].
This deﬁnes a non-resonant background colored towards
the blue. The Fano peak will therefore be blue-shifted
when superposed on this background. This blue shift
can again be neglected when compared to the red shift
∆.

∼ (r/λ)

4

In ﬁgure 2, we have superposed a ﬁtting of the experi-
mental curve with a proﬁle deﬁned by equation (6) [16].
The ﬁtted parameters indicate a red shift of 4% deter-
mined by ∆ < 0 and a relative linewidth of about 3%,
that is of the order of the shift. The background is found
to be only about 0.2%, which is consistent with Bethe’s
calculations for this system. Below 710 nm, the tail of
the air-metal (1, 1) resonance is emerging.

As mentioned above, the value of the Fano asymmetry
q characterizes the ratio between the resonant transition
amplitude and the background transition amplitude. Our
experimental curve conﬁrms this scaling with an asym-
metry of the order of 4 which can also be deduced from
the ﬁtting parameters. As a check of the Fano descrip-
tion, we have reduced the Au ﬁlm thickness from 200 nm
to 100 nm with the same 10 nm thick Ti layer. With this
reduction, the ﬁlm thickness is only a few times the Au
skin depth allowing another direct leakage channel. This
should increase the non-resonant background contribu-
tion and thus lower the value of q. We have conﬁrmed
this experimentally: see the inset of ﬁgure 2 where the
background level is increased and the proﬁle of the reso-
nance gets close to a dispersive shape which corresponds
to a lower q value.

In conclusion, we have shown that a Fano analysis is a
unifying tool to understand hole array spectra since sim-
ple scaling laws can be inferred. Only one resonance has
been addressed in this paper and one should now extend
this work to the collection of SP excitations on the array,
i.e. to multichannel theory.

Note added in proof - During the process of publication
of this paper, we learned about the theoretical work of
Sarrazin el al.
[17] which shows important overlapping
with our. Nevertheless, we put here the emphasis on the
concept of coupled scattering channels in the context of
experimental spectra, in order to understand correspond-
ing lineshapes.

Acknowledgments - This work forms part of the pro-
gram of FOM; we would like to thank G. Nienhuis for
useful discussions.

[1] T.W. Ebbesen et al., Nature 391, 667 (1998)

[2] E. Altewischer et al., Nature 418, 304 (2002)
[3] H.F. Ghaemi et al., Phys. Rev. B 58, 6779 (1998)
[4] L. Salomon et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1110 (2001)
[5] A. Krishnan et al., Opt. Comm. 200, 1 (2001)
[6] E. Popov et al., Phys. Rev. B 62, 16 100 (2000)
[7] L. Mart´in-Moreno et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1114 (2001)
[8] U. Fano, Phys. Rev. 124, 1866 (1961)
[9] H.A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 66, 163 (1944)
[10] H. Raether, Surface Plasmons on Smooth and Rough Sur-

faces and on Gratings (Springer-Verlag, 1988)

[11] The transmission coeﬃcient is measured as a function
of the wavelength. A negative asymmetry qE < 0 for
frequency spectra immediately corresponds to a positive

5

asymmetry qλ > 0 for wavelength spectra.

[12] J.B. Pendry, and A. MacKinnon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69,

2772 (1992)

[13] W.L. Barnes et al., Phys. Rev. B 51, 11 164 (1995)
[14] A. Hessel, and A.A. Oliner, App. Opt. 4, 1275 (1965)
[15] A. Degiron et al., App. Phys. Lett. 81, 4327 (2002)
[16] The two wiggles seen around the dip of the proﬁle are
an experimental artefact due to non perfect alignment of
the incident beam and the normal axis of the array.
[17] M.Sarrazin, J.-P. Vigneron, and J.-M. Vigoureux, Phys.

Rev. B 67, 085415 (2003)

