4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

To appear in Optics Communications

Comment on “Geometric absorption of
electromagnetic angular momentum”, C.
Konz, G. Benford

Timo A. Nieminen

Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia

Abstract

The core theorem on which the above paper is centred—that a perfectly conducting
body of revolution absorbs no angular momentum from an axisymmetric electro-
magnetic wave ﬁeld—is in fact a special case of a more general result in electro-
magnetic scattering theory. In addition, the scaling of the eﬃciency of transfer of
angular momentum to an object with the wavelength and object size merits further
discussion. Finally, some comments are made on the choice of terminology and the
erroneous statement that a circularly polarized plane wave does not carry angular
momentum.

Key words: angular momentum, electromagnetic scattering
PACS: 41.20.Jb, 42.25.Bs, 42.25.Fx

1 Symmetry and the transfer of angular momentum

The authors of the above paper [1] state a theorem:

... a perfectly conducting body of revolution with a piecewise smooth sur-
face around the axis of symmetry (for instance a cone, a disk, a cylinder, or
a sphere) absorbs no angular momentum ~L from an axisymmetric electro-
magnetic wave ﬁeld.

This is in fact a special case of a more general result in electromagnetic scat-
tering theory, namely that a scatterer that is rotationally symmetric about the

Email address: timo@physics.uq.edu.au (Timo A. Nieminen).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

8 September 2013

z axis does not couple diﬀerent azimuthal modes [2], that is, it does not couple
modes of diﬀering angular momentum about the z axis. This being the case,
no angular momentum about the z axis will be transferred to a nonabsorbing
axisymmetric scatterer, regardless of the structure of the incident ﬁeld.

This result is weaker than the theorem stated by the Konz and Benford [1],
since only the z component of angular momentum is considered, but is more
general, applying to any nonabsorbing scatterer. To generalize Konz’s result
to dielectric scatterers, it is suﬃcient to consider symmetries of the incident
ﬁeld and the scatterer which lead to zero torque on the scatterer about other
axes. For example,

• mirror symmetry of the beam and scatterer about the xy plane
• mirror symmetry of the beam about any plane containing the z axis
• rotational symmetry of the beam about the z axis
• rotational point group symmetry of the beam about the z axis

all result in zero torque about the origin. Clearly, rotational symmetry of
the incident ﬁeld is not required. It is diﬃcult (and beyond the scope of this
comment) to exactly and completely state the conditions under which the
total torque about the origin will be zero. However, it should be noted that
only very special types of ﬁelds—radially and azimuthally polarized beams—
are in fact axisymmetric, if one considers the symmetry of the electric and
magnetic ﬁelds. Broader deﬁnitions of symmetry, considering the symmetry
of the Poynting vector, or the energy density, can be used, in which case, a
wider class of ﬁelds can be considered to be axisymmetric. Fields that fail to
satisfy any of these criteria can still produce zero torque—for example, higher
order Gaussian beams.

2 Scaling

As Konz and Benford state [1], the angular momentum of an electromagnetic
ﬁeld is typically on the order of ¯h per photon. In the case of a circularly
polarized beam, L = ±¯h per photon, so L = P/ω where P is the power,
and ω is the angular frequency. This clearly shows why, cetera paribus, lower
frequencies are more eﬃcient for exerting torque on scatterers.

However, another important consideration is the fraction of the beam inter-
cepted by the scatterer. The minimum width of a beam of given frequency is on
the order of the wavelength, so we can consider the minimum cross-sectional
area of the beam to be on the order of λ2. Thus, the irradiance I is

I ≈ P/λ2

(1)

2

(2)

(3)

(4)

and the power actually incident on the scatterer smaller than the beam is

Pinc ≈ P d2/λ2

Linc ≈ P d2/2πcλ

where d is the scatterer size. The angular momentum incident on the scatterer
will be on the order of

and it can be seen that greater eﬃciency results from the use of shorter wave-
lengths.

If the scatterer is larger than the beam, then the scatterer can interact with
the entire incident beam, and the angular momentum incident on the scatterer
will scale as

Linc ≈ P λ/2πc,

with greater eﬃciency at longer wavelengths. Accordingly, one would expect
maximally eﬃcient angular momentum transfer when the beam is focussed to
the maximum possible extent, with the wavelength chosen so that the beam
width is on the order of the particle size. This simple argument is also sup-
ported by rigorous electromagnetic calculations [3].

So, while electromagnetic angular momentum generally scales with 1/ω, the
transer of this angular momentum to a scatterer does not follow such simple
rules. Rather than lasers being unable to usefully spin objects, as claimed by
Konz and Benford [1] optical frequencies are in fact optimal for particles of
sizes comparable to optical wavelengths; particles typically rotated within laser
traps are of this size [3]. It can also be noted that since Konz and Benford [1]
used a beam several wavelengths wide, they could have obtained greater eﬃ-
ciency by using a longer wavelength combined with a more strongly focussed
beam, unless the increase in wavelength is accompanied by a suﬃcient change
in the electromagnetic properties of the material. Of course, the added com-
plication of a strongly focussed beam might well make this impractical.

3 Angular momentum of a circularly polarized plane wave

Konz and Bedford state that a “circularly polarized incoming wave ﬁeld which
is inﬁnitely extended and homogeneous does not carry angular momentum,
since the Poynting ﬂux is parallel to the wave vector.” While a naive calcula-
tion of the angular momentum density or ﬂux starting from ~r × ~S, where ~S is

3

the Poynting vector gives a result of zero [4], consideration of the interaction
between the ﬁeld and an absorbing or anisotropic medium shows that torque
is exerted on the medium [5,6,7,8,9]. This clearly demonstrates that the wave
has non-zero angular momentum.

While this issue is peripheral to the paper being commented on, recognition of
the fact that a circularly polarized plane wave does carry angular momentum
make the authors’ conclusion that the wedge “absorbs the negative angular
momentum Lx of the reﬂected wave ﬁeld” [1] unnecessary.

4 A comment on terminology

The terminology “geometric absorption” of angular momentum is perhaps
an unfortunate choice, as fundamentally similar processes will act to transfer
angular momentum to a scatterer regardless of the angular momentum content
of the incident ﬁeld. The authors introduce the awkward concept of absorption
of negative angular momentum from the scattered ﬁeld to account for the
angular momentum transfer to the scatterer in the case of an incident ﬁeld
with zero angular momentum; this, however, introduces the surprising concept
of absorbing some property of an outward-propagating ﬁeld. It would seem to
be better to use a term such as “geometric transfer” of angular momentum,
so as to eliminate any conceptual diﬃculty associated with the “absorption”
of a quantity equal to zero.

In addition, to describe negative “absorption” of angular momentum as “ra-
diation” of angular momentum invites confusion with work involving pure
radiation of angular momentum (with no incident ﬁeld present) [10].

References

[1] C. Konz, G. Benford, Opt. Commun. 226 (2003) 249–254.

[2] P.C. Waterman, Phys. Rev. D 3 (1971) 825–839.

[3] A.I. Bishop, T.A. Nieminen, N.R. Heckenberg, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Phys.

Rev. A 68 (2003) 033802.

[4] R.I. Khrapko, Am. J. Phys. 69 (2001) 405.

[5] J.H. Poynting, Proc. R. Soc. A 82 (1909) 560-567.

[6] R.A. Beth, Phys. Rev. 50 (1936) 115–125.

4

[7] R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton, M. Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics

Volume III. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1965, p. 17-10.

[8] L. Allen, M.J. Padgett, Am. J. Phys. 70 (2002) 567–568.

[9] V.B. Yurchenko, Am. J. Phys. 70 (2002) 568–569.

[10] F.S. Chute, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. 15 (1967), 585–587.

5

