4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Detection of Vacuum Birefringence with Intense Laser Pulses

Andre N. Luiten∗ and Jesse C. Petersen†
School of Physics, The University of Western Australia
Nedlands, Western Australia 6907, Australia
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We propose a novel technique that promises hope of being the ﬁrst to directly detect a polarization in the
quantum electrodynamic (QED) vacuum. The technique is based upon the use of ultra-short pulses of light
circulating in low dispersion optical resonators. We show that the technique circumvents the need for large-
scale liquid helium cooled magnets, and more importantly avoids the experimental pitfalls that plague existing
experiments that make use of these magnets. Likely improvements in the performance of optics and lasers would
result in the ability to observe vacuum polarization in an experiment of only a few hours duration.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Xa,12.20.Fv,42.62.Eh,42.25.Lc,41.20.Jb

It was predicted almost seventy years ago that virtual
positron-electron pairs in the quantum electrodynamic vac-
uum provide a means for interaction between photons [1, 2,
3, 4]. As yet this effect has not been observed directly in
any laboratory experiment although high energy scattering
experiments have shown indirect evidence of such interac-
tions [5, 6].
It is believed that these processes play an im-
portant role in extreme astrophysical environments [7].

−

The QED mediated interaction predicts scattering of real
photons from virtual photons in an electromagnetic ﬁeld as
well as direct photon-photon scattering mechanism.
For
achievable ﬁelds, the principal effect of these processes is a
polarization dependent change of the phase velocity of the in-
teracting photons, in other words, a laser beam propagating
through a region of strong electromagnetic ﬁeld will observe a
birefringent and refractive vacuum, in which both polarization
states have a phase velocity that differs from that in a ﬁeld-
free vacuum. For example, light traversing a transverse mag-
netic ﬁeld region will experience differing refractive indices
for polarization parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic
10−21
ﬁeld, with the birefringence being of the order of ∆n
for realistic laboratory magnetic ﬁelds (5

10 T).

∼

The conventional route to searching for such ﬁeld-induced
birefringence is to couple intense magnetic ﬁelds, produced
by superconducting coils, to an optical delay line or a Fabry-
P´erot resonator which forces the light to traverse the strong
ﬁeld many times [8, 9, 10, 11]. In contrast, here we propose a
novel method for the experimental detection of vacuum bire-
fringence which dispenses with the need for any large static
magnetic ﬁelds, and instead makes use of a combination of
frequency-stabilized mode-locked lasers [12, 13] and low dis-
persion optical resonators [14, 15]. We propose a search for
the vacuum birefringence induced by the extremely high ﬁelds
that exist within a focussed femtosecond duration pulse of
light. This technique holds the promise of improved sensitiv-
ity while using only room-temperature apparatus that is both
reliable and relatively inexpensive.

ℜthemanx2 1

2 To produce vacuum birefringence with an op-
tical ﬁeld, a linearly polarized ‘pump’ beam must interact with
a counter-propagating ‘detection’ beam. The refractive in-
dices of the vacuum for detection light polarized parallel and

perpendicular to the polarization of the pump beam are de-
noted as nk and n⊥, and given by [16, 17]:

nk = 1 +

n⊥ = 1 +

(1)

16
45

α2U
Ue

;

28
45

α2U
Ue

,

where α is the ﬁne structure constant, U is the energy density
in the optical ﬁeld and Ue = m4
1024 is the
Compton energy density of the electron (me is the electron
rest mass). From Eq. (1) we observe a birefringent vacuum of
magnitude:

ec5/~3

1.44

≈

×

∆n =

4
15

α2U
Ue

=

4
15

α2Iav
cUe

.

(2)

where Iav is the intensity of the pump ﬁeld. These expres-
sions are valid for inﬁnite plane waves, although they give a
birefringence of the correct order for laser beams when the
beams are well-collimated over the interaction region.

In this letter we propose the use of short pulses of intense
laser radiation to generate the high ﬁelds necessary to polar-
ize the vacuum. It is by this technique that one can generate
average ﬁeld intensities comparable with those produced by
superconducting magnets. As an extreme example, the peak
magnetic ﬁeld within a 1 J, 50 fs pulse that is focussed into 1
µm2 can be of the order of 105 T [11]. The high conﬁnement
of the optical ﬁeld means that while the peak ﬁelds are very
high, the total energy stored in the ﬁeld is much smaller than a
static magnetic ﬁeld that produces an equivalent birefringence
signal. The pulsed light technique thus has twin beneﬁts: it
eliminates large forces from the experiment, and also make
shielding of the detection apparatus from stray ﬁelds very sim-
ple. In existing searches for vacuum birefringence, spurious
signals arising from stray magnetic ﬁeld modifying the detec-
tion system components, or stray forces moving the detection
system components, are responsible for limiting the sensitiv-
ity [8, 10, 11, 18].

The obvious disadvantage of the pulsed approach is that
high intensity ﬁelds only persist for a short period of time in
any particular location, and over a very small volume. This re-
quires a detection technology with a high temporal and spatial
resolution so as not to average the signal away. We propose

a novel synchronous detection technique that satisﬁes both of
these requirements.

Our detection system is a modiﬁcation of a previously
reported technique which is capable of measuring birefrin-
gence with extremely high precision [19]. The basis of the
original technique is to frequency lock two continuous-wave
(cw), orthogonally-polarized lasers to the same longitudi-
nal mode of a resonator using the Pound-Drever-Hall tech-
nique [20, 21, 22]. Our proposal is to use a laser pulse stream
from a mode-locked laser rather than cw lasers to excite the
resonator. The advantages of this approach will become ap-
parent below, but we commence with a description of the cw
device as this is valid for both cases.

The fractional frequency difference between the two
orthogonally-polarized lasers is equal to the fractional differ-
ence in the optical length of the resonator as measured in the
two polarization states:

νk

ν⊥ −
ν0

=

l⊥

.

lk −
l0

(3)

(4)

where ν0 is the average frequency of the two modes and l0 is
the average length of the resonator. A path length difference
will arise from any birefringence in the cavity in addition to
that coming from any intrinsic birefringence of the cavity mir-
ror coatings [19]:

ν⊥ −

νk ∼

n⊥

nk −
n0

ν0 +

c
2n0L

δφ
2π

.

where c/(2n0L) is the longitudinal mode spacing of the res-
onant cavity, δφ is the difference in the reﬂection phase for
the two polarisations, and n0 is the average refractive index
νk, can
in the resonator. The laser frequency difference, ν⊥ −
be extracted by detecting the beat-note between the lasers and
measuring its frequency with a conventional high precision
frequency counter.

We note that cavity length ﬂuctuations that arise from vi-
bration or temperature ﬂuctuations will be common to both
polarizations and hence do not appear in the measured fre-
quency difference signal. This avoids the need for high qual-
ity vibration isolation or temperature control of the detection
resonator.

A number of previous experiments have shown that over a
certain frequency band it is feasible to suppress all technical
noise sources that afﬂict frequency locking systems [23, 24,
25]. In this case the residual frequency instability is limited
by the inherent quantum noise of the detected light itself (shot
noise). A simple estimate shows that this will limit the accu-
racy of each locked laser frequency to [19, 21]:

c

δshot

∼

2LF r

hν
Pdetτint

.

(5)

where h is Planck’s constant, ν is the laser frequency, Pdet is
the power falling on the feedback photodiode, τint is the inte-
gration time, and where we use an optical resonator of length
L with ﬁnesse F . An experiment using 800 nm laser light and

auxilliary
(pump) laser

dual polarization
frequency locking 
system  

2

a

x

z

(z)

C

L

FIG. 1: Measurement scheme for optically-induced birefringence.

a detected optical power of a few milliwatts allows stabiliza-
tion of the laser to 10−8 of the cavity bandwidth after 1 s of
integration time. For a measurement of the difference between
two mode frequencies, the expected sensitivity is equal to the
residual frequency instability of one laser multiplied by √2
(because a comparison is being made between two uncorre-
lated and equally noisy signals). Thus with 800 nm lasers we
get a fractional frequency (or length) sensitivity of:

δνrel

6

×

≈

10−19

1 s
τint (cid:18)

4 m
L (cid:19) (cid:18)

105
F (cid:19) r

5 mW
Pdet

r

(6)

In order to access this level of sensitivity we modulate the
expected vacuum birefringence effect so that the useful signal
falls in the shot-noise limited part of the sensitivity spectrum.
To generate vacuum birefringence we use an auxiliary lin-
early polarized ‘pump’ laser beam to interact with the two de-
tection beams. In order to exploit the polarization dependence
of the coupling between the pump and orthogonally-polarized
detection beams we align the pump ﬁeld polarisation with the
polarization of one of the detection beams. In order to max-
imize the interaction between the detection and pump beams
they need to be exactly counter-propagating and coaxial [16].
Unfortunately, coaxial pump and detection beams will overlap
on the resonator mirrors and it has been shown that a photo-
refractive interaction between the beams in the mirror coatings
can generate spurious birefringence signals [19]. Thus we use
a second optical resonator to enhance the power of the pump
beam, as illustrated in Fig. 1, which lies at an angle, θ, to the
axis of the detection resonator. The resonators are of identi-
cal length L, and the separation between the resonator axes
of x at the cavity mirrors of radius, a. The crossed cavity
design potentially leads to a limited interaction zone between
the pump and detection beams. A key suggestion of this let-
ter is that if both detection and pump beams are pulsed rather
than continuous-wave (cw) signals and are synchronized so
that the detection and pump pulses meet head on at C (see
Fig. 1) [26, 27], and in addition, each of the pulses is short
enough to completely pass through the other before the beam
axes begin to separate, then all of the light circulating in the
detection cavity will interact with all of the light circulating
in the pump cavity on every pass. Furthermore, the pulses
interact while the beams are tightly focussed, and therefore
where they are most intense. Mode-locked lasers have already
been frequency-locked to a resonator with relatively high pre-
cision [13], and low-dispersion cavities can allow even very
short pulses to be coupled into high-ﬁnesse resonators with

low power loss and relatively little broadening of the circulat-
ing pulse with respect to the input pulse [14, 15].

To determine the sensitivity of this approach we calculate
the the average intensity seen by a pulse circulating in the de-
tection cavity, which is equal to

Iav =

I(z) dz

(7)

1
L Z

L/2

−L/2

where I(z) is the intensity as a function of longitudinal posi-
tion in the cavity. When short pulses are used, it is only the
small region approximately half the pulse length either side
of the beam crossing point that contributes signiﬁcantly to the
above integral. If the separation, ρ(z), between the beam axes
remains signiﬁcantly less than the beam radii in the interac-
tion region, then the beams can be treated as approximately
coaxial when calculating Iav.

The minimum angle by which the beams must be skewed
is set by the mirror spacing, x, which is determined by the
size of the cavity mirrors. The mirror radius, a, is set by the
need for the mirrors to be larger than the laser spot radius
evaluated at the mirror position, w(L/2), by a factor α. The
value of α is determined by the extent to which aperture losses
can be tolerated for a particular application. In the limit of a
small beam waist size, w0, the spot size at the mirrors can be
calculated as x

αLλ/πw0.

Using these results we have shown elsewhere [28] that the

≈

beam waist has to obey the following inequality:

(8)

w0 & 10µm

1
2

τ
200 fs

r

1
2

α
4 (cid:17)

λ
800 nm(cid:19)

(cid:18)

1
2

.

(cid:16)
to ensure that the beams do not signiﬁcantly separate within
the interaction zone. In addition, under this same limit the
Rayleigh range of the interacting beams is signiﬁcantly longer
than the spatial extent of the pulses and thus the beams are also
essentially collimated in the interaction zone. Under these
conditions the detection beam sees all of the pump energy on
each pass through the interaction zone.

The circulating pump pulse energy, Epulse is determined
by the average input power Pav, the repetition rate, R, of the
input pulse train, resonator ﬁnesse F , and an efﬁciency factor,
kcav, which allows for imperfect mode matching, impedance
matching and dispersion related losses [15]:

Epulse = kcav

F
π

Pav
R

.

(9)

Since we wish the circulating pulse to be efﬁciently reinforced
on each pass by the incident pulse train, the free spectral range
of the cavity must be identical to the repetition rate of the laser,
R [14, 15]. In this case we ﬁnd, that:

2kcav log 2
(πw0)2 F Pav.
Combining the expressions above, we arrive at the follow-

(10)

Iav

≈

ing indicative numerical expression for Iav.

Iav

≈

F
52 x103

Pav
20 W

200 fs
τ

4
α

kcav
1

800 nm
λ

1.5

×

PW
m2 (11)

3

where we have made use of achievable experimental param-
eters. A ﬁnesse of 52 000 corresponds to a reﬂectance of
99.994% which is available in a custom low dispersion mir-
ror coating [29], that has sufﬁciently low dispersion to allow
200 fs incident laser pulses to be directly coupled into a cav-
ity with near-unity efﬁciency [14, 15]. A mode-locked laser
has been reported with a 200 fs duration output pulse and
20 W average power [30].Thus, using readily available equip-
ment it should be possible to construct a pump cavity which
gives a effective average intensity in the detection cavity of
1.5 PW/m2. Such high average intensity is only possible
because the arrangement of pulsed and counter-propagating
detection and pump beams circumvents the high divergence
that would normally afﬂict tightly focussed beams. In fact,
the pulsed beams show the same degree of interaction as cw
beams that were parallel and nondivergent throughout the cav-
ity, which is of course impossible for tightly focussed, non-
coaxial beams.

The optimal cavity length in a real experiment relies on con-
structing sufﬁciently large mirrors as implied by the beam size
calculation above. For a 3 m cavity with α = 4, the mirrors
would need to be 20 cm in diameter. Although this presents
a signiﬁcant challenge, it is not insurmountable, as demon-
strated by the recent construction of even larger diameter mir-
rors for gravitational wave interferometers [31].

A very important advantage of our particular approach is
the ability to modulate the effective strength of the interacting
ﬁelds without varying the energy load or distribution on the
mirror surfaces. This enables detection of the birefringence
signal in a frequency domain where there is minimal noise in-
terference without giving rise to spurious signals. We achieve
this effective power modulation by temporally delaying or ad-
vancing the pump pulse with respect to the detection pulse and
thus varying the degree of energy overlap at the crossing point
of the two cavities. The absence of modulation in the thermal
load on the mirrors eliminates many potential spurious effects
that could otherwise masquerade as the effect of interest. This
technique can be implemented as part of the control system
that synchronizes the detection and pump pulses [26, 27].

Various challenging technical issues must be addressed in
order to implement this experiment. For example, the pump
and detection beams must be synchronized so that the pulses
meet where their axes cross [26, 27]. This implies that the off-
set frequency and repetition rate of the pulse trains from the
lasers must be controlled so as to match the cavity resonance
frequencies and free spectral range of both resonators [13].
The ﬁnal hurdle to the detection of vacuum birefringence will
be the duration of the experiment observation time in order
to unambiguously detect the effect. We calculate these inte-
gration times by equating the expression for shot-noise lim-
ited measurement sensitivity in Eq. (6) and the expected vac-
uum birefringence signal in Eq. (2) and present them in Ta-
ble I. The ﬁrst two lines predict the performance available
using low dispersion mirrors: the ﬁrst line shows the capa-
bility of the best “off-the-shelf” commercially available low
dispersion mirrors while the second line shows the capability

F

τint

R, %
99.97 1.0×104 2.6 years
99.994 5.2×104 1.7 days
99.997 1.0×105 2.5 hours

TABLE I: Required integration times for the detection of vacuum
birefringence as a function of resonator mirror reﬂectivity and res-
onator ﬁnesse, F . The other experimental parameters are explained
in the text.

of the best custom built mirrors [29]. The ﬁnal line of the
table predicts that performance that could be achieved if low
dispersion mirrors were to have a reﬂectivity equal to that of
the best commercially-available super-mirrors.

The measurement time required to detect vacuum birefrin-
gence scales with the inverse fourth power of the ﬁnesse since
the ﬁnesse affects both the measurement sensitivity and the
average intensity in our proposal approach. Competing tech-
niques that rely on a macroscopic magnetic ﬁeld to create the
vacuum polarization have an integration period that decreases
as the square of the ﬁnesse of the detection cavity. If low dis-
persion mirrors could be improved to the point that 99.997%
reﬂectivity mirrors became available (only as good as exist-
ing super-mirrors) then the corresponding increase in ﬁnesse
would allow vacuum birefringence to be detected in just a few
hours. Any increases in available laser power would also re-
duce the required measurement time.

We have proposed a completely new approach to the exper-
imental detection of very low levels of ﬁeld-induced birefrin-
gence. The system is based on the intersection of two high-
ﬁnesse short-pulse resonant cavities, one of which pumps the
QED vacuum to produce the birefringence, while the other
detects this induced birefringence using highly sensitive fre-
quency metrology techniques. Current limits in mode-locked
laser technology and low-dispersion mirrors already allow de-
tection of the predicted vacuum nonlinearity with a measure-
ment period of just a few days. Readily forseeable advances
in laser output power and mirror coating technology should
reduce the required integration time for such an experiment to
just hours. This approach has eliminated many of the defects
that limit the performance of alternative techniques that use
superconducting magnet systems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the Australian Research Council (ARC) for ﬁnan-
cial support of this research. We acknowledge all members of

the Frequency Standards and Metrology Group which make it
such a pleasant and stimulating environment in which to work.

4

∗ Electronic address: andre@physics.uwa.edu.au
† Now with Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University,

Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.

[1] H. Euler, and K. Kochel, Naturwissenschaften , 23, 246 (1935).
[2] W. Heisenberg and H. Euler, Z. Phys. 38, 714 (1936).
[3] V. Weisskopf, Kong. Dans. Vid. Selsk. Math-fys. Medd. XIV,
6 (1936), reprinted in Quantum Electrodynamics, edited by J.
Schwinger (Dover, New York, 1958).
[4] J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951).
[5] R.R. Wilson, Phys. Rev. 90, 720 (1953).
[6] D.L. Burke et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1626 (1997).
[7] J.S. Heyl et al., J.Phys.A: Math. Gen. 30 6485 (1997).
[8] R. Cameron et al. Phys. Rev. D 47, 3707 (1993).
[9] D. Bakalov et al., Hyperﬁne Interactions 114, 103 (1998).
[10] S. Askenazy et al.,

in Quantum Electrodynamics and the
Physics of the Vacuum, edited by G Cantatore, (American In-
stitute of Physics, 2001), p. 115.

[11] S.A. Lee and W.M Fairbanks, in Laser Physics at the Limits,
edited by H Figger, D. Meschede, C Zimmermann, (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2002), p.189.

[12] S.A. Diddams et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102 (2000).
[13] R.J. Jones and J.-C. Diels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3288 (2001).
[14] R.J. Jones and J. Ye, Opt. Lett. 27, 1848 (2002)
[15] J.C. Petersen and A.N. Luiten, Optics Express 11, 2975(2003)
[16] E.B. Aleksandrov et al., Sov. Phys. JETP 62, 680 (1985).
[17] W. Becker, Laser and Particle Beams 9, 603 (1991).
[18] M. Bregant et al., in Review of Quantitative Nondestructive
Evalutation CP657, 22, (American Institute of Physics, 2003),
p. 635

[19] J.L.Hall et al., Phys. Rev. A 62, 013815 (2000).
[20] R.W.P. Drever et al., Appl. Phys. B 31, 97 (1983).
[21] E.D. Black, Am. J. Phys 69, 79, (2001).
[22] D. Hils and J.L Hall, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58, 1406 (1987).
[23] T. Day et al., IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 28, 1106 (1992).
[24] F. Bondu et al., Opt. Lett. 21, 582(1996).
[25] N. Uehara and K. Ueda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33, 1628 (1994)
[26] L.S. Ma et al., Phys. Rev. A, 64, 021802(R) (2001)
[27] D.J. Jones et al., Opt. Lett. 28, 813 (2003)
[28] A.N. Luiten and J. Petersen, Phys. Rev. A, (2003), submitted
[29] Layertec GmBH, Ernst-Abbe-Weg 1, D-99441, Melingen, Ger-
many (www.layertec.de) (private communication).

[30] F. Brunner et al., Opt. Lett. 27, 1162 (2002).
[31] C.J. Walsh et al., Appl. Opt. 38, 13, 2870 (1999).

