4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PRL

Self-Similar Evolution of Parabolic Pulses in a Laser

F. ¨O. Ilday, J. R. Buckley, and F. W. Wise
Department of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853.
(607)255-9956 (phone), (607)255-7658 (fax), ilday@ccmr.cornell.edu (e-mail)

W. G. Clark
Clark-MXR Inc., Dexter, MI 48130.

Self-similar propagation of ultrashort, parabolic pulses in a laser resonator is observed theoretically
and experimentally. This constitutes a new type of pulse-shaping in modelocked lasers: in contrast
to the well-known static (soliton-like) and breathing (dispersion-managed soliton) pulse evolutions,
asymptotic solutions to the nonlinear wave equation that governs pulse propagation in most of the
laser cavity are observed. Stable self-similar pulses exist with energies much greater than can be
tolerated in soliton-like pulse shaping, and this will have implications for practical lasers.

PACS numbers: 42.55.Wd, 42.65.Re, 42.65Sf, 42.65.Tg, 42.81.Dp, 05.45.Yv

Self-similarity is a recurring theme in the description
of many natural phenomena. The emergence of self-
similarity in complicated, nonlinear systems can be par-
ticularly informative about the internal dynamics: self-
similarity arises after the inﬂuences of initial conditions
have faded away, but the system is still far from its
ultimate state [1]. Furthermore, the presence of self-
similarity implies an inherent spatial and/or temporal or-
der that can be exploited in the mathematical treatment
of the governing equations. For example, reduction-of-
symmetry techniques eﬀectively reduce the dimensional-
ity of the system, [2] which facilitates analysis. In the
ﬁeld of nonlinear optics, a limited number of self-similar
phenomena have been reported. As examples, self-similar
behavior in stimulated Raman scattering [3] and the for-
mation of Cantor-set fractals in materials that support
spatial solitons [4] were investigated. The most pertinent
prior work is the theoretical demonstration of self-similar
propagation of short pulses of parabolic intensity proﬁle
in optical ﬁbers with normal group-velocity dispersion
(GVD) and strong nonlinearity [5]. Recently, this con-
cept has been extended to an optical ﬁber ampliﬁer. By
use of the technique of symmetry reduction, parabolic
pulses were shown to propagate self-similarly in the am-
pliﬁer, and the predicted evolution was veriﬁed exper-
imentally [6, 7]. Considering that the solutions of the
nonlinear Schrodinger equation that governs pulse prop-
agation in a ﬁber are well-known, it is remarkable that
the self-similar solutions were discovered only recently.

In addition to the scientiﬁc interest in self-similar pulse
propagation, there is practical motivation: the energy
of ultrashort optical pulses is generally limited by wave-
breaking, which is a consequence of excessive nonlinear-
ity. The limitation is particularly stringent in short-pulse
ﬁber devices, where small modes produce high intensities
and therefore large nonlinear phase shifts.
In contrast
to solitons, self-similar pulses can tolerate strong non-
linearity without wave-breaking. The presence of nor-
mal GVD tends to “linearize” the phase accumulated by
the pulse, which increases the spectral bandwidth but

does not destabilize the pulse [5]. Thus, the possibility
of achieving self-similar propagation in a laser is very at-
tractive.

However, experimental studies of self-similar optical
phenomena are generally restricted to the observation of
evolution over a limited number of characteristic prop-
agation lengths, due to practical limitations. Further-
more, we are not aware of any experimental observations
of asymptotic self-similar evolution in an optical system
with feedback, such as a laser. Asymptotic solutions of a
wave equation would appear to be incompatible with the
periodic boundary condition of a laser resonator.

Here we report numerical predictions of the existence
of stable pulses that indeed propagate self-similarly in
a laser cavity, along with clear experimental evidence of
self-similar (SS) pulses in a ﬁber laser. This regime of op-
eration constitutes a new type of pulse shaping in a mod-
elocked laser, qualitatively distinct from the well-known
soliton [8] and dispersion-managed soliton [9] regimes.
The main features of SS pulses in a laser will be pre-
sented, and the implications for practical devices will be
discussed brieﬂy.

Pulse formation in lasers that produce femtosecond-
duration pulses is dominated by the interplay between
dispersion and nonlinearity, in the form of soliton dy-
namics [10]. These pulses are not exact solitons, because
the laser cavity constitutes a dissipative system. Hence,
their basic features can be understood within the formal-
ism of a complex Ginzburg-Landau equation or related
formulations [11]. An eﬀective saturable absorber (SA)
is required for initiation of pulsed operation from intra-
cavity noise and subsequent stabilization of the pulse.

Soliton ﬁber lasers are limited to low pulse energies
(100 pJ or less) [8]. At higher energies, nonlinear ef-
fects cause wave-breaking [12], which leads to multiple-
pulsing (more than one pulse circulates in the cavity).
The pulse can tolerate only a small nonlinear phase shift
(ΦN L << π) within one round-trip before such insta-
bilities occur. Stretched-pulse ﬁber lasers consist of seg-
ments of anomalous and normal GVD [9]. These imple-

SMF

gain

SA

DDL

frequency chirp

2

FIG. 1: Top: schematic diagram of the main components of
the laser. SMF: single mode ﬁber, DDL: dispersive delay line,
SA: saturable absorber. Bottom: qualitative variation of the
frequency chirp in the cavity.

ment the concept of dispersion management (DM) [13],
and support the analog of DM solitons. DM solitons
can tolerate nonlinear phase shifts an order of magni-
tude larger than ordinary solitons, and the pulse energy
thus exceeds the soliton energy by the same factor.

Solitons are static solutions of a nonlinear wave equa-
tion, and DM solitons are breathing solutions. In con-
trast, pulses that propagate self-similarly are asymptotic
solutions to the governing equation. The evolution of
their properties (e.g., the pulse duration) is monotonic.
Such a solution cannot satisfy periodic boundary condi-
tions, and an additional mechanism is required to obtain
a stable solution in a cavity. Another issue must be ad-
dressed for SS propagation to occur in a laser:
in gen-
eral, pulses will evolve to ﬁll available gain bandwidth.
However, self-similar propagation of intense pulses is dis-
rupted if the pulse encounters a limitation to its spectral
bandwidth [14].

The following conceptual model for a ﬁber laser (il-
lustrated in Fig. 1) addresses these issues. A segment
of single-mode ﬁber (SMF) with normal GVD forms the
majority of the cavity. Ampliﬁcation is provided by the
minimum length of gain ﬁber required to provide ade-
quate gain. The pulse will experience negligible GVD
and nonlinearity during ampliﬁcation, which eﬀectively
decouples bandwidth ﬁltering from the nonlinear evolu-
tion in the SMF. The gain ﬁber is followed by a SA, which
also serves as the output coupler. The ﬁnal element is
a dispersive delay line (DDL) that provides anomalous
GVD with negligible nonlinearity. Chirp accumulated
in the desired SS propagation will be compensated by
the DDL. In the frequency domain, bandwidth gener-
ated in the nonlinear propagation will be ﬁltered by the
gain medium, to produce a self-consistent solution in the
resonator. The pulse evolution is illustrated by the plot
of frequency chirp versus cavity position (Fig. 1).

Numerical simulations of the model laser were em-
ployed to search for SS solutions, and to verify that such
solutions are global attractors and thus accessible from
intracavity noise. The parameters of the numerical model
correspond to the experimental setup, to be described be-

FIG. 2: Results of numerical simulations. (a) Output power
spectrum. (b) Temporal intensity proﬁle (solid curve), chirp
(dash-dotted curve) of the output pulse, and a parabolic ﬁt
(c) Equal-intensity
(dotted curve) to the intensity proﬁle.
contours of the pulse evolution within the SMF.

low. A segment of SMF 6 m in length is connected to a
20 cm-long gain ﬁber, and a grating pair is used for the
DDL. Propagation within each section is modeled with
an extended nonlinear Schrodinger equation

∂2
∂A(ξ, τ )
∂τ 2 A(ξ, τ ) =
∂ξ
A(ξ, τ ) + g(Epulse)A(ξ, τ ),

+ iβ2

2
iγ|A(ξ, τ )|

(1)

where A(ξ, τ ) is the envelope of the ﬁeld, ξ is the propa-
gation coordinate, τ is time scaled to the pulse duration,
β2 = 23f s2/mm is the GVD, and γ = 0.0047(W m)−1 is
the eﬀective coeﬃcient of cubic nonlinearity for the ﬁber
section. γ is set to zero in the DDL, which is adjusted
to achieve a desired total dispersion of the cavity. The
TR/2
−TR/2 |A(ξ, τ )|2dτ and
pulse energy is given by Epulse = R
TR ∼ 40 ns is the cavity roundtrip time. g(Epulse) is the
net gain, which is non-zero only for the ampliﬁer ﬁber.
The gain saturates with total energy according to

g(Epulse) =

g0
1 + Epulse/Esat

,

(2)

where g0 ∼ 30 dB is the small signal gain with an im-
plicit parabolic frequency dependence, and a bandwidth
of 45 nm is assumed. The eﬀective gain saturation en-
ergy, Esat, is determined by the pump power. The SA
is assumed to saturate monotonically, and is modeled
by a transfer function that describes its transmittance
T = 1 − l0/(1 + P (τ )/Psat), where l0 = 0.3 is the unsat-
urated loss, P (τ ) is the instantaneous pulse power and
Psat is the saturation power. The pulse amplitude is re-
duced by a factor of ∼ 10 after the SA to account for
other linear losses in the laser.

The simulations exhibit stable pulse formation over a
reasonably-wide range of parameters. A typical solution
obtained with βnet = 0.007 ps2, Psat = 15 kW, and
Esat = 4.0 nJ is shown in Fig. 2. The pulse energy is 15
nJ. The approximately-parabolic temporal proﬁle, nearly
linear chirp, shape of the power spectrum, and the varia-
tion of the intensity proﬁle are all signatures of SS pulse

3

FIG. 3: Calculated maximum pulse energy versus total dis-
persion for the self-similar (up-triangles) and stretched-pulse
(down-triangles) schemes. Inset: Intra-cavity stretching ratio
with respect to total dispersion for the self-similar scheme.
The lines are to guide the eye.

formation. For reference, the results are compared to a
laser that supports DM solitons. SS propagation does
not increase the maximum stable pulse energy when the
net GVD is anomalous (βnet <∼ 0). However, for increas-
ing βnet > 0 (normal GVD) the pulse energy diverges
dramatically (see Fig. 3). The stretching ratio for the
laser with SS evolution decreases exponentially at ﬁxed
pulse energy as the net GVD is increased (inset of Fig. 3).
Thus, the energy-scaling can be understood intuitively:
the (exponential) increase in pulse energy with increasing
GVD maintains a ﬁxed stretching ratio.

Encouraged by the simulation results, we constructed
a Yb:ﬁber laser with the parameters listed above. A
short (23 cm), highly-doped (23,600 ppm) Yb ﬁber de-
couples gain ﬁltering from nonlinear pulse shaping. The
linear anomalous-GVD segment is implemented with a
pair of diﬀraction gratings. Results obtained with βnet =
0.004 ps2 will be presented and are representative of those
obtained in the range βnet = 0.003 − 0.015 ps2. Mode-
locked operation is initiated and stabilized by nonlin-
ear polarization evolution (NPE) [15], and the output
is taken from the NPE rejection port. An output can
also be taken after the diﬀraction gratings, which allows
monitoring of the pulse that enters the ﬁber. The laser
mode-locks easily upon the adjustment of the wave-plates
that control the NPE. The experiments are performed at
low pulse energies (∼ 2 nJ, which corresponds to 60 mW
at a repetition rate of 30 MHz) to avoid over-driving NPE
and thus isolate the SS pulse-shaping.

The characteristics of the generated pulses are con-
sistent with SS evolution. The power spectrum exhibits
the unique shape that is predicted numerically: parabolic
near the peak, with a transition to a steep decay (Fig. 4
(a)).
In usual operation, the spectrum broadens by
∼ 20% on propagation through the ﬁber. Interestingly,

FIG. 4: Experimental results. (a) Power spectrum on semi-
log scale. Inset: spectrum on linear scale. (b) Intensity auto-
correlation of the chirped and the dechirped pulses.

we observe that the spectrum can be truncated (by an in-
tracavity ﬁlter) to approximately half its width, and will
regenerate itself on propagation through the ﬁber. The
pulse is extracted from the cavity where it is expected to
have maximum positive chirp. The intensity autocorre-
lation reveals that the pulse duration is ∼ 4.2 ps. After
dechirping the pulse with diﬀraction gratings external to
the cavity, the pulse duration is 130 fs (Fig. 4 (b)). The
dechirped pulse duration is close to the transform-limit,
which implies an approximately linear chirp on the gen-
erated pulse, as expected theoretically.

The magnitude of anomalous GVD required to dechirp
the output pulse is an important diagnostic of pulse
evolution in the laser. From the experimental value
(−0.170 ps2, approximately equal to that provided by
the intracavity gratings) we can conclude that the pulse
chirp is positive throughout the cavity, with a minimum
at the beginning of the SMF. We estimate a minimum
pulse duration of 250 fs. Thus, the overall stretching
ratio within the cavity is ∼ 17.

Finally, the measured shape of the chirped pulses gen-
erated by the laser further supports the self-similar na-
ture of the pulse evolution. The pulse shape was obtained
by cross-correlation with the dechirped pulse, which is
∼ 32 times narrower and thus a good approximation to
a delta-function. The pulse shape (Fig. 5) agrees well
with the numerical simulations and the parabolic inten-
sity proﬁle expected analytically. The small secondary
pulse is not predicted by the simulations. Qualitatively,
such structure is expected when the pulse is taken from
the NPE rejection port. The simulated results shown
above are for the pulse that continues to propagate in
the cavity, so this minor discrepancy is not surprising.

The pulse energy was intentionally limited as a control
on the experiments reported above. An important as-
pect of the self-similar regime is the prediction of stable
pulses with much higher energies than can be contained
in DM solitons. This prediction is based on the assumed
monotonically-saturating absorber. NPE is interferomet-
ric in nature and thus not monotonic, so it can be over-
driven (i.e., the transmission eventually decreases at high

4

as they propagate, while SS pulses are positively-chirped
throughout the cavity. Quantitative and detailed dis-
tinctions include the approximately parabolic temporal
proﬁle, which contrasts with the hyperbolic-secant soli-
ton solution and gaussian DM soliton, and the unique
spectral proﬁle of the SS pulse.

In this report we have focused on ﬁber lasers, which
perhaps provide the most natural environment for self-
similar pulses. However, the concept is more broadly
applicable. Initial simulations with parameters close to
those of existing Ti:sapphire lasers that produce ∼10-fs
pulses exhibit some of the features of self-similar propa-
gation (including increased pulse energy) when the net
GVD is normal.
Self-similar operation of solid-state
lasers extends the previously-observed operation with
normal GVD [17], where the pulse duration is nearly
static, to stretching ratios > 1. It is also reasonable to
expect that the conditions for SS pulse formation could
be met in semiconductor lasers.

In conclusion, we have observed self-similar pulse evo-
lution in a laser resonator. This new type of pulse for-
mation is qualitatively distinct from previously-identiﬁed
mode-locking techniques. Chirped pulses with parabolic
temporal (and spectral) proﬁles exist throughout most of
the laser cavity. The pulses can be dechirped to nearly
the Fourier-transform limit outside of the laser, so the
demonstration of self-similar pulse formation may have
major implications for short-pulse lasers. If overdriving
of the eﬀective saturable absorber can be avoided, pulse
energies one to two orders of magnitude larger than those
of existing ﬁber and solid-state lasers should be possible.

This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health under grant EB002019 and the Air Force Re-
search Laboratory under contract F29601-00-C-0049. J.
R. Buckley acknowledges the support of the National
Physical Science Consortium through a graduate research
fellowship.

FIG. 5: (a) Cross-correlation of the chirped and the dechirped
(b) Calculated intensity proﬁle. Parabolic (dashed
pulses.
(dotted curves) ﬁts are shown for compari-
curves) and sech
son.

2

intensity) and this may well limit the pulse energy. A
laser with lower repetition rate was constructed, so that
high-energy pulses were possible energetically given the
available pump power. With βnet = 0.003 ps2, stable
pulses with autocorrelation and spectrum similar to those
shown above are generated. The chirped-pulse energy is
10 nJ, which is 3 times the maximum obtained from a
DM-soliton laser [16]. More systematic studies of the
SS pulse energy are needed, but this initial result semi-
quantitatively agrees with the calculated value.

The experimental results conﬁrm the essential features
of the self-similar regime of laser operation, which can
be placed in context with prior lasers.
In contrast to
static soliton solutions and breathing DM solitons, the
nonlinear pulse evolution is monotonic, and the pulse is
dechirped by a linear process. DM solitons stretch and
compress twice per cavity round-trip, while SS pulses
stretch and compress once. True solitons are unchirped.
DM solitons acquire both negative and positive chirps

[1] G. I. Barenblatt, Scaling, Self-similarity, and Intermedi-
ate Asymptotics (Cambridge University, 1996), and P. L.
Sachdev, Self-similarity and Beyond: Exact Solutions of
Nonlinear Problems (CRC, New York 2000).

Opt. Lett. 18, 1080 (1993).

[10] H. A. Haus, J. G. Fujimoto, and E. P. Ippen, IEEE J.

Quantum Electron., 28, 2086 (1992).

[11] J. M. Soto-Crespo, and N. Akhmediev, Phys. Rev. E 66,

[2] For example, W. F. Ames, Nonlinear Partial Diﬀerential

066610 (2002), and references therein.

Equations (Academic, New York, 1967).

[12] D. Anderson, M. Desaix, M. Lisak, and M. L. Quiroga-

[3] C.R. Menyuk, D. Levi, and P. Winternitz, Phys. Rev.

Teixeiro, Opt. Lett. 9, 1358 (1992).

[4] M. Soljacic, M. Segev, and C.R. Menyuk, Phys. Rev. E

Lett. 69, 3048 (1992).

61, R1048 (2000).

[5] D. Anderson, M. Desaix, M. Karlsson, M. Lisak, and M.
L. Quiroga-Teixeiro, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 10, 1185 (1993).
[6] M. E. Fermann, V. I. Kruglov, B. C. Thomsen, J. M.
Dudley, and J. D. Harvey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 6010
(2000)

[7] V. I. Kruglov, A. C. Peacock, J. M. Dudley, and J. D.

Harvey, Opt. Lett. 25, 1753 (2000).

[8] I. N. Duling III, Electron. Lett. 27, 544 (1991).
[9] K. Tamura, E. P. Ippen, H. A. Haus, and L. E. Nelson,

[13] N. J. Smith, N. J. Doran, W. Forysiak, and F. M. Knox,

J. Lightwave Technol. 15, 1808 (1997).

[14] A. C. Peacock, R. J. Kruhlak, J. D. Harvey, and J. M.

Dudley, Opt. Comm. 206, 171 (2002).

[15] M. Hofer, M. E. Fermann, F. Harberl, M. H. Ober, and

A. J. Schmidt, Opt. Lett. 16, 502 (1991).

[16] L. E. Nelson, S. B. Fleischer, G. Lenz, and E. P. Ippen,

Opt. Lett. 21, 1759 (1996).

[17] B. Proctor, E. Westwig, and F. Wise, Opt. Lett. 18, 1654

(1993).

