4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Topological spin transport of photons: the optical Magnus Eﬀect and Berry Phase

K.Yu.Bliokh
Institute of Radio Astronomy, 4 Krasnoznamyonnaya st., Kharkov, 61002, Ukraine

Yu.P.Bliokh
Department of Physics, Technion, Haifa, 32000, Israel

The paper develops a modiﬁed geometrical optics (GO) of smoothly inhomogeneous isotropic
medium, which takes into account two topological phenomena: Berry phase and the optical Magnus
eﬀect. By using the analogy between a quasi-classical motion of a quantum particle with a spin and
GO of an electromagnetic wave in smoothly inhomogeneous media, we have introduced the stan-
dard gauge potential associated with the degeneracy in the wave momentum space. This potential
corresponds to the Dirac-monopole-like ﬁeld (Berry curvature), which causes the topological spin
(polarization) transport of photons. The deviations of waves of right-hand and left-hand helicity
occur in the opposite directions and orthogonally to the principal direction of motion. This produces
a spin current directed across the principal motion. The situation is similar to the anomalous Hall
eﬀect for electrons.
In addition, a simple scheme of the experiment allowing one to observe the
topological spin splitting of photons has been suggested.

PACS numbers: 41.20.Jb, 42.15.-i, 03.65.Vf, 05.60.-k

The ﬁrst consistent analysis of geometrical optics (GO)
asymptotic approximation for electromagnetic waves in
a smoothly inhomogeneous isotropic media was made in
a work by Rytov [1]. There he studied the GO in zero
−1
approximation in small parameter k
0 = c/ω (ω is the
wave frequency); also he gave a well-known law of ro-
tation of electromagnetic wave polarization plane, which
−1
corresponds to the ﬁrst approximation in k
0 . Geometri-
cal attributes of this law were described further in detail
by Vladimirskiy [2]. In the 1980s Berry [3] and his fol-
lowers showed that geometrical phases are a general fun-
damental attribute of dynamic systems, and the Rytov
Vladimirskiy polarization plane rotation is an example of
Berry phase (see [4] and references therein).

Another fundamental phenomenon that is not con-
tained in Rytov’s GO was discovered by Zel’dovich et
al.
in 1990 [5]. It was named “the optical Magnus ef-
fect” and consists in that waves of right and left circu-
lar polarization propagate in smoothly inhomogeneous
medium along diﬀerent trajectories. Experimentally this
phenomenon was conﬁrmed in waveguides in the mode
limit. The optical Magnus eﬀect required a theoreti-
cal justiﬁcation in the framework of the GO, and phe-
nomenological theory of this phenomenon was proposed
in [6], introducing some additional correction terms in
GO equations.

At the same time, recently a considerable attention has
been focused on a topological transport of quantum par-
ticles with a spin (see [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] and
references there). This problem is associated with the
concepts of the spin splitting and the spin pumping, and
various questions of spintronics. The topological spin
transport and Berry phase are two manifestations of the
common phenomenon, namely, the initiation of a gauge
potential (connection) and a curvature in the space where

the particle transport occurs [14]. This gauge potential
and the curvature aﬀect both the particle’s phase and its
motion, giving rise to an additional type of the trans-
port. Since Berry phase shows up in much the same way
in nonrelativistic quantum particles with a spin and pho-
tons (electromagnetic waves) [4], their topological trans-
port properties are bound to be similar. In this case, the
Berry phase corresponds to the Rytov law of polariza-
tion evolution, while the topological spin transport cor-
responds to the optical Magnus eﬀect.

Below we construct the modiﬁed GO theory, which cor-
responds exactly to the contemporary ideas of the topo-
logical spin transport of particles. In so doing, we use
the analogy between the quasi-classical motion of par-
ticles with a spin and the wave propagation in the GO
approximation. Within the limits of this correspondence,
we should replace the Planck constant ¯h with the GO pa-
−1
rameter k
0 , while discrete spin projections correspond
to discrete values of helicity, which can take the values
± for photons [15]. The latter corresponds to right-hand
and left-hand circular polarizations of waves. (It is pre-
cisely the circularly polarized waves that are the eigen-
modes in the ﬁrst approximation of GO [15, 16].) The
eﬀects considered (Berry phase and the Magnus optical
eﬀect) are automatically accounted for when one intro-
duces the gauge potential that corresponds to the spin 1
and the term degeneracy (the intersection of the disper-
sion curves) at the origin in the momentum space. It is
well known [3, 4, 9, 10, 13] that such gauge potential gives
rise to the force ﬁeld like the Dirac monopole ﬁeld in the
momentum space. In this case, two states of the photon
helicity (right-hand and left-hand circular polarizations)
correspond to two opposite charges in this ﬁeld, result-
ing in splitting of the wave trajectories. The obtained
results allow us to conclude that the optical Magnus ef-

fect is a manifestation of the topological spin transport
of photons.

As shown in Berry’s pioneer work [3], the gauge poten-
tials and ﬁelds appear during the transport of the particle
with a spin and are due to the presence of the degener-
acy points in the particle’s spectrum. In the generic case
of the term intersection, the universal expression can be
written in adiabatic (quasi-classical) approximation for a
ﬁeld tensor (Berry curvature) Fij :

Fij = mεijk

pk
p3 , or F = m

p
p3 .

(1)

Here p stands for a three-dimensional space, in which
the transport of the particle is considered (the generic
case for the points of degeneracy of Hermitian Hamil-
tonians corresponds precisely to the three-dimensional
space), the degeneracy point is assumed to be in the
origin of p-space, m is the projection of the particle’s
spin (the helicity for relativistic particles), and εijk is
the unit antisymmetric tensor. Since the p-space is a
three-dimensional one, we write Fij in the form of a pseu-
dovector F, Eq.(1).

Field (curvature) (1) corresponds to a certain gauge

potential (connection) A on the p-space:

F =

× A , or Fij =

∂
∂p

∂Aj
∂pi

−

∂Ai
∂pj

.

(2)

The ﬁeld F is invariant under gauge transformations of
potential, A → A+∂ψ/∂p, and all basic laws for measur-
able quantities should be expressed in terms of this ﬁeld.
If the coordinate or momentum space acts as the p-space,
the potential enters into the Hamiltonian and operates in
perfect analogy to an electromagnetic vector-potential in
the appropriate space [11, 13]. Thus the perfect analogy
is seen between ﬁeld (1) and the magnetic ﬁeld of the
Dirac monopole in the p-space. Now the eﬀective ’spin
charge’ m acts as the particle charge.

Let us apply these general statements to a photon or an
electromagnetic wave. Taking into account its dispersion
ω = ±kc (or E = ±pc, E and p are the photon energy
and momentum, respectively), we see that the point p =
k = 0 is the point of the term intersection. Hence the
gauge potential A appears in the momentum space of
the photon. This potential corresponds to ﬁeld (1) with
m = ±1 for right and left circularly polarized photons.

Let us write the Hamiltonian of an electromagnetic

wave in GO approximation [17]:

H(p, r) =

= 0 .

(3)

1
2

p2 − n2(r)
(cid:3)

(cid:2)

Here n(r) is the refractive index of the isotropic smoothly
−1
0 k is the di-
inhomogeneous medium, while p = k
mensionless momentum of the wave (k stands for the
wavevector). Note that all calculations are conducted in
−1
0 , that is, up to O
the ﬁrst approximation in k

−2
k
0
(cid:0)

.
(cid:1)

2

We must introduce into Hamiltonian (3) the mentioned
gauge vector-potential A operating in the momentum p-
space. As a result (compare with [11, 13]) we have for
circularly polarized waves:

1
2

p2 − n2

H(p, R) =

R − k
(cid:0)
Here we have switched from the usual coordinates r to
the generalized coordinates R,

= 0 .

(4)

(cid:1)(cid:3)

(cid:2)

−1
0 A(p)

r = R − k

−1
0 A ,

(5)

−1
and have accounted for the correspondence ¯h ↔ k
0 be-
tween the quasi-classical quantum mechanics and GO. By
expanding Eq.(4) in the Taylor series one can show that
it is physically equivalent to the Hamiltonian that has
been obtained in [16], and that follows immediately from
Maxwell equations. The problem in [16] is considered in
fact in the generalized coordinates R, since all proper-
ties are derived there from the wave phases, which are
determined just by generalized coordinates (see Eq.(9)).
In the generalized coordinates the Hamilton ray equa-
tions for Eq.(4) have the canonical form (such equa-
tions were studied in [16]). However, the ray equations
are more conveniently considered in the ordinary coor-
dinates r, Eq.(5). By using the analogy with a motion
of the charged particle in a magnetic ﬁeld, it is easily
understood that the presence of the vector-potential A
in Eq.(4) will produce a force analogous to the Lorentz
force with ﬁeld (1), (2) in a momentum space (see also
[7, 11, 13]). As a result we have

˙p = −

,

˙r =

−1
− k
0

(F × ˙p) ,

(6)

∂H
∂r

∂H
∂p

where the dot signiﬁes the diﬀerentiation with respect to
the parameter associated with the ray arc length. By
substituting Eq.(1) with m = ±1 and Eqs. (3)–(5) into
Eq.(6), we obtain

˙p =

∂n2
∂r

1
2

,

−1
˙r = p ∓ k
0

p
p3 × ˙p
(cid:19)

(cid:18)

.

(7)

These are the desired equations, which describe the
propagation trajectory of electromagnetic waves (pho-
tons) in the ﬁrst approximation of GO. The ﬁrst equa-
tion in (7) and the second equation without its last term,
corresponds to the well-known zero-order approximation
of GO (see [17]). The last term in the right-hand side
of the second equation in (7) determines the ﬁrst-order
−1
correction in k
and is of opposite signs for the waves
0
of right-hand and left-hand circular polarizations. It de-
scribes the Magnus optical eﬀect or the topological spin
transport of photons. We notice that this term causes
an additional displacement of photons of distinct helic-
ity in opposite directions normally to the ray. In other

words, the spin current of photons across the princi-
pal direction of their propagation arises. This situa-
tion is in complete agreement with the currently consid-
ered topological spin currents of quasi-classical particles
[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Besides, the term obtained
is quite similar to those describing the anomalous Hall
eﬀect in a two-dimensional electron gas [8, 9, 10]. This
analogy becomes all the more evident if one notes that the
anomalous Hall eﬀect is related to the spin-degeneration
(in a momentum space) of the terms described by the
spin-orbital interaction. At the same time, the Magnus
optical eﬀect also was associated with the spin-orbital
interaction in [6], and, as we have shown, is caused by
the presence of the point of degeneracy in a momentum
space. Consequently, the Magnus optical eﬀect may be
thought of as a manifestation of the anomalous Hall eﬀect
of photons [18].

The topological nature of trajectory splitting (7) im-
plies that it is dictated exclusively by a gauge poten-
tial (connection) and a ﬁeld (curvature), which are con-
nected with the degeneracy in the momentum space. As
a consequence, the magnitude of splitting for the rays of
left-hand and right-hand polarizations is determined by
a contour integral in the momentum space. Indeed, by
integrating the trajectory deviations, which are speciﬁed
by the last term of the second equation in (7), we obtain

−1
δr = ∓k
0

(p × ˙p)
p3

−1
ds = ∓k
0

(p × dp)
p3

,

(8)

Z
L

s

Z
0

where L is the contour in the p-space along which the
system moves. Hence the optical Magnus eﬀect is a topo-
logical nonlocal eﬀect as the Berry phase is.

The Rytov-Vladimirsky-Berry phase in the theory sug-
gested (Eqs.(4)–(7)) arises in perfect analogy to the Dirac
phase of a quantum particle in an electromagnetic po-
tential.
Indeed, the wave phase (eikonal) in GO is to
be expressed in terms of generalized coordinates, since
the action is a function of generalized coordinates. As
a result, by constructing the wave phase in terms of the
generalized coordinates R and passing on to the usual
coordinates r, we have

ϕ = −ωt + k0

pdR = −ωt + k0

pdr −

Adp . (9)

s

Z
0

s

Z
0

s

Z
0

Here we have used Eq.(5) and performed the integration
by parts; the term outside the integral is equal to zero
because Ap = 0 for the gauge potential in question. The
ﬁrst two terms and the third term in the right side of
Eq.(9) are the ordinary dynamic and geometric phases,
respectively. The geometric Berry phase in Eq.(9), being
given by a contour integral in the momentum p-space, is
equal for closed contours to a ﬂux of the ﬁeld F, Eq.(1),
through the surface spanned on this contour. Clearly

3

this phase is of opposite signs for the waves of right-
hand and left-hand circular polarizations. In the general
case of superposition of two polarizations, the geometric
phase leads to the Rytov law about the rotation of the
electromagnetic wave polarization plane [4].

From the second equation in (7) and equation (9) the
expressions for group and phase velocities of circularly
polarized waves follow immediately:

vg ≡ −

∂H
∂k

/

∂H
∂ω

=

c
n2 ˙r =

c
n (cid:20)

−1
l ∓ k
0

(p × ˙p)
p3

(cid:21)

,

(10)

vph ≡

∂ϕ/∂t
|∂ϕ/∂r|2

∂ϕ
∂r

=

c
n

l

(cid:20)

−1
1 + k
0

A ˙p
p (cid:21)

.

(11)

Here we have considered the medium as being dispersion-
free (n(ω) = const), took into account that p = n
(see Eqs.(3) and (4), and kept in mind that the geo-
metric phase in Eq.(9) is deﬁned over the solutions of
zero-order approximation (for details see [16]).
It fol-
lows from Eqs.(10) and (11) that the spin transport of
photons and the optical Magnus eﬀect correspond to the
diﬀerence in group velocities of the waves, whereas the
Berry phase corresponds to the diﬀerence in their phase
velocities. The group velocities diﬀer mainly in direction
(the corrections are directed across the ray), whereas the
phase velocities diﬀer in absolute value. The inequal-
ity of phase and group wave velocities results in a weak
anisotropy of the locally isotropic medium [16]. Evi-
dently the anisotropy results from the initiation of the
preferential direction, which is determined by the gradi-
ent of the inhomogeneity ˙p ∝ ∂n/∂r (see Eqs.(7)). Note
also that the values of the phase velocities are speciﬁed
by the gauge potential A and hence depend on the gauge
transformations. This fact does not also lead to contra-
dictions, as the phase velocity here (in contrast to the
phase) is not a measurable value.

It should be noted that when substituting ˙p from the
ﬁrst equation in (7) into the second one, we obtain the
ray equations in the form suggested by Zel’dovich and
Liberman in [6]. Meanwhile, there exist fundamental dif-
ferences between Ref.
[6] theory and the present work
along with paper [16]. First of all, attention may be
drawn to the diﬀerence in the Hamiltonian for the waves
in paper [6] and in formula (4) of our work. It is evident
that Ref.
[6] theory involves many excessive variables,
which complicate the problem. In essence, the wave po-
larization was treated there as an independent dynamical
variable with a continuous spectrum of values. At the
same time, it is shown in [16] that only the right-hand
and left-hand circularly polarized waves are the indepen-
dent eigen modes in the ﬁrst approximation of GO. This
is consistent with the quantization of photon helicity [15].
As a consequence of this fact, an arbitrary wave of mixed
polarization splits into two waves of right-hand and left-
hand circular polarizations when propagating through an

4

the optical Magnus eﬀect correspond to the diﬀerence in
directions of the group velocities of the oppositely polar-
ized waves, whereas the Berry phase is associated with
the diﬀerence in absolute values of their phase veloci-
ties [16]. In the context of the approach suggested the
theory is simple and clear and is in perfect agreement
with the previous direct derivations [16] following from
Maxwell equations. In addition, our theory describes a
novel eﬀect, namely, the splitting of a ray of mixed polar-
ization into two rays of right-hand and left-hand circu-
lar polarizations. The simple scheme of the experiment
for observing this phenomenon has also been suggested
(Fig.1b and [16]).

[1] S.M. Rytov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 18, 263 (1938).
[2] V.V. Vladimirskiy, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 31, 222

(1941).

[3] M.V. Berry, Proc. R. Soc. A 392, 45 (1984).
[4] A. Shapere and F. Wilczek (ed.), Geometric Phases in
Physics (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1989); S.I. Vinit-
skiy, V.L. Debrov, V.M. Dubovik, B.L. Markovski, and
Yu.P. Stepanovskiy, Uspekhi Fizicheskih Nauk 160, 6
(1990) [Sov. Phys. Usp. 33, 6 (1990)].

[5] A.V. Dooghin, N.D. Kundikova, V.S. Liberman, and
B.Ya. Zel’dovich, Phys. Rev. A, 45, 8204 (1992); B.Ya.
Zel’dovich and V.S. Liberman, Kvant. Elektron. 17, 493
(1990) [Sov. J. Quantum Electron. 20, 427 (1990)]; A.V.
Dooghin, B.Ya. Zel’dovich, N.D. Kudnikova, and V.S.
Liberman, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 53, 186 (1991)
[Sov. Phys. JETP Letters 53, 197 (1991)]; A.V. Dooghin,
B.Ya. Zel’dovich, N.D. Kudnikova, and V.S. Liberman,
Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 100, 1474 (1991) [Sov. Phys. JETP
73, 816 (1991)].

[6] V.S. Liberman and B.Ya. Zel’dovich, Phys. Rev. A 46,

5199 (1992).

[7] G. Sundaram and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. B 59, 14915 (1999).
[8] T. Jungwirth, Q. Niu, and A.H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 88, 207208 (2002).

[9] D. Culcer, A. MacDonald, and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. B 68,

045327 (2003).

[10] A.M. Dudarev, R.B. Diener, I. Carusotto, and Q. Niu,

cond-mat/0311356v1.

[11] S. Murakami, N. Nagaosa, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 301,

[12] B.A. Bernevig, J.P. Hu, E. Mukamel, and S.-C. Zhang,

1348 (2003).

cond-mat/0311024.

[13] F. Zhou, cond-mat/0311612.
[14] H.-Q. Zhou, S.Y. Cho, and R.H. McKenzie, Phys. Rev.

Lett 91, 186803 (2003).

[15] V.B. Berestetskiy, E.M. Lifshits, and L.P.Pitaevskiy Rel-
ativistic Quantum Theory, V.1 (Nauka, Moscow, 1968).

[16] K.Yu. Bliokh and Yu.P. Bliokh, physics/0402014.
[17] Yu.A. Kravtsov and Yu.I. Orlov, Geometrical Op-
tics of Inhomogeneous Medium (Nauka, Moscow, 1980;
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990).

[18] Note, that ordinary Hall eﬀect for photons in magnetic
ﬁeld also was discovered in recent works B.A. van Tigge-
len, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 422 (1995); G.L.J.A. Rikken
and B.A. van Tiggelen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 847 (1997);

FIG. 1: The trajectories of right-hand (+) and left-hand (-)
circularly polarized waves in circular waveguide. Fig.1a shows
the shifts of the rays relative to the trajectory of the zero
approximation (thick line) in the optical Magnus eﬀect for
the meridional ray [5] (view from the waveguide end). Fig.1b
shows the splitting of the linearly polarized ﬁnite ray into two
circularly polarized eigen rays and their subsequent transport
along the waveguide in opposite directions (angle view)

inhomogeneous medium. This phenomenon of wave split-
ting into two independent modes is absent in the paper
[6] (for example, according the theory in [6], the trajec-
tory of a linearly polarized wave remains unchanged),
but it is in complete agreement with the contemporary
conception of the topological spin transport of quantum
particles.

Two examples of spin (polarization) photon transport
and splitting are presented in Fig.1a and b. There we can
see the trajectories of right-hand and left-hand circularly
polarized waves in circular waveguides. Fig. 1a is associ-
ated with the optical Magnus eﬀect for the meridional ray
in a circular waveguide (see [5]), whereas Fig.1b shows
the splitting of the linearly polarized ﬁnite ray into two
rays of right-hand and left-hand polarizations and their
subsequent transport along the circular waveguide in op-
posite directions (see detailed description of these two
examples in [16]). The experiment presented in Fig.1b
can be performed in a cylindrical structure by exciting
an oriented ray associated with the mode of whispering
gallery. This experiment will enable one to observe for
the ﬁrst time the spin splitting of photons.

Let us summarize the main outcomes of our work. Ex-
clusively from both the topological considerations and
perfect analogy between GO and a quasi-classical motion
of quantum particles with a spin, we have constructed the
simple and clear scheme of the ﬁrst GO approximation
−1
in k
for electromagnetic waves. By introducing in a
0
momentum space the standard gauge potential, which is
connected with the point of term degeneracy at the ori-
gin, it is possible to describe such phenomena as the opti-
cal Magnus eﬀect [5, 6] and the Rytov-Vladimirsky-Berry
geometric phase [1, 2, 3, 4]. It becomes apparent that
the optical Magnus eﬀect is nothing but the topological
spin (polarization) transport of photons, which is simi-
lar to the anomalous Hall eﬀect for electrons [8, 9, 10].
It has been shown that the spin photon transport and

D. Lacoste, F. Donatini, S. Neveu, J.A. Serughetti, and
B.A. van Tiggelen, Phys. Rev. E 62, 3934 (2000).

5

