4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical microrheology using rotating laser-trapped particles

Alexis I. Bishop,∗ Timo A. Nieminen, Norman R. Heckenberg, and Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop
Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia

We demonstrate an optical system that can apply and accurately measure the torque exerted by
the trapping beam on a rotating birefringent probe particle. This allows the viscosity and surface
eﬀects within liquid media to be measured quantitatively on a micron-size scale using a trapped
rotating spherical probe particle. We use the system to measure the viscosity inside a prototype
cellular structure.

PACS numbers: 87.80.Cc,83.85.Cg,83.85.Ei

It is well known that light can transport and transfer
angular momentum as well as linear momentum [1]. In
recent years, this has been widely applied to rotate mi-
croparticles in optical tweezers. Such rotational micro-
manipulation has been achieved using absorbing parti-
cles [2, 3], birefringent particles [4, 5], specially fabricated
particles [6, 7], and non-spherical particles using linearly
polarized light [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] or non-axisymmetric
beams [14, 15]. Notably, particles rotated in rotationally
symmetric beams [4, 12] spin at a constant speed, indi-
cating that the optical torque driving the particle is bal-
anced by viscous drag due to the surrounding medium. It
has been noted that the optical torque can be measured
optically [16], allowing direct independent measurement
of the drag torque.

For a pure Gaussian beam that is circularly polarised,
each photon also has an angular momentum of ±¯h about
the beam axis, equivalent to an angular momentum ﬂux
of ±P/ω for the beam, where P is the power of an in-
cident beam, and ω is the angular frequency of the op-
tical ﬁeld, which can be transferred to an object that
absorbs the photon, or changes the polarization state [1].
The reaction torque on a transparent object that changes
the degree of circular polarization of the incident light is
given by [16]

τR = ∆σP/ω

(1)

where ∆σ is the change in circular polarisation. Thus,
by monitoring the change in circular polarization of light
passing through an object, the reaction torque on the
object is found. We exploit this simple principle as the
basis for an optically driven viscometer. The viscosity
of a liquid can be determined by measuring the torque
required to rotate a sphere immersed in the liquid at
a constant angular velocity—a concept we have imple-
mented at the micrometer scale using a system based on
optical tweezers. We have rotated birefringent spheres
of synthetically-grown vaterite that were trapped three-
dimensionally in a circularly polarized optical tweezers
trap and measured the frequency of rotation, and the
polarization change of light passing through the particle,
to determine the viscosity of the surrounding ﬂuid.

At least four distinct techniques have been used previ-
ously for microrheology: tracking the diﬀusion of tracer
particles [17, 18], tracking the rotational diﬀusion of disk-
shaped tracer particles [19], measurement of correlations
in the Brownian motion of two optically trapped probe
particles [20], and the measurement of viscous drag act-
ing on an optically trapped probe particle in linear mo-
tion [21]. The method we use here—direct optical mea-
surement of the rotation of a spherical probe particle in
a stationary position—allows highly localized measure-
ments to be made, since the probe particle does not move
in the surrounding medium, and, compared with the ro-
tational diﬀusion measurements by Cheng and Mason us-
ing microdisks [19], the use of spherical probe particles
greatly simpliﬁes the theoretical analysis of the ﬂuid ﬂow.
Also, since the probe particle is rotationally driven by the
optical trap, the rotation rate can be readily controlled.
The expression for the drag torque, τD, on a sphere
rotating in a ﬂuid for low Reynolds number ﬂows is well
known [22], and is given by

τD = 3πµa3Ω

(2)

where µ is the viscosity of the ﬂuid, a is the radius of the
sphere, and Ω is the angular frequency of the rotation.
Equating the expressions for torques τR and τD gives:
µ = ∆σP/(8πa3Ωω).

(3)

This equation suggests that the viscosity can be de-
termined using knowledge of only a few elementary
parameters—the power and the polarization change of
the incident beam passing through the particle, and the
size and rotation rate of the particle. The power, po-
larization state, and rotation rate can all be measured
optically.

A signiﬁcant obstacle to implementing this approach
has been obtaining spherical, transparent, birefringent
particles of suitable size for trapping (approximately 1–
10 µm in diameter). We have developed a novel tech-
nique to grow nearly perfectly spherical crystals of the
calcium carbonate mineral vaterite, which has similar
birefringence properties to calcite, within the required
size regime. The vaterite crystals are produced by precip-
itation upon the addition of potassium carbonate (0.1 M)

to a solution of calcium chloride (0.1 M) and magnesium
sulphate (0.02 M). The crystals form within a few min-
utes of mixing, and the typical mean size is found to be
3 µm with a spread of approximately ±1.5 µm. Details of
the properties and the synthesis of this material will be
reported elsewhere. Figure 1 shows both an optical im-
age and an electron micrograph of typical crystals used
for viscosity measurements.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (a) Optical microscope image of a typical vaterite
crystal used for viscosity measurements. (b) Scanning elec-
tron microscope image of a vaterite crystal.

A typical optical tweezers arrangement was used as the
basis for the experiment, which delivered approximately
300 mW of light at 1064 nm into a focal spot with a di-
ameter of around 0.85 µm using a 100× oil-immersion
objective of high numerical aperture (NA = 1.3). A λ/4
plate located immediately before the objective converts
the linearly polarized light from the laser into a circu-
larly polarized beam which is able to rotate birefringent
objects [4]. Light passing through the probe particle is
collected by an oil coupled condenser lens (NA = 1.4)
and then sent to a series of polarization measuring de-
vices. The degree of circular polarization remaining in
the beam is determined by passing it through a λ/4 plate
with the fast axis orientated at 45◦ to the axes of a po-
larizing beamsplitter cube. Photodiodes monitoring the
orthogonal outputs of the beamsplitter provide a mea-
sure of the degree of circular polarization remaining in
the beam, which allows the change in angular momen-
tum, and hence the torque applied to the particle to be
known. The photodiodes are calibrated such that they
provide a measure of the power at the trap focus. The
sum of the two signals gives the total trapping power,
and the diﬀerence between the signals gives the degree
of circular polarization of the beam measured in units of
power at the trap focus. The torque applied to the parti-
cle is determined by measuring the diﬀerence between the
initial degree of circular polarization of the beam in the
absence of the particle and the ﬁnal polarization, in ac-
cordance with equation (1). The frequency of rotation of
the particle can be accurately determined by monitoring
the transmitted light through a linear polarizer, as sug-
gested by Nieminen et al. [16]. A small amount of light

2

is diverted from the main beam and is passed through a
polarizing beamsplitter cube, and the forward direction
is monitored using a photodiode. The signal is modu-
lated at twice the rotation rate of the particle, and the
depth of the modulation is proportional to the amount
of linearly polarized light in the beam. If the particle is
thick enough to act as a λ/2 plate, then circularly po-
larized light passing through the particle is reversed in
handedness and the frequency of the rotation cannot be
measured as there is no linear component to the trans-
mitted light. However, as the particles are spherical and
are of similar diameter to the beam, the polarization at
diﬀerent radial distances from the rotation axis varies,
and there will almost always be some linear component
after transmission.

The calculated viscosity depends on the cube of the
radius of the particle, and thus it is important to deter-
mine the size of the particles accurately. The particles
used for viscosity measurements are in the range of 1.5 to
3.5 µm in diameter and consequently to obtain the vis-
cosity within 10% requires the diameter to be measured
with an accuracy on the order of 90 nm, and it was found
that obtaining an accurate measurement of the diame-
ter by direct visualization was problematic. The method
of measurement preferred by the authors is to put two
spheres of nearly identical size in contact, and measure
the distance between centres, which can be found ac-
curately due to the spherical symmetry. The diameter
is inferred using elementary geometry, and the error in
the measurement by this method is estimated as being
±40 nm. The degree of asphericity for typical particles
used for experimentation was estimated to be less than
3%.

The viscosity of water was measured using the system
described. A range of vaterite particles were suspended
in distilled water and trapped three dimensionally in a
sealed slide/coverslip cell, with a depth of 50 µm. Parti-
cles that are trapped begin to rotate immediately. How-
ever, the rotation may be stopped by aligning the λ/4
plate located before the objective so that the polariza-
tion is made linear. The size of the particles ranged from
1.5 to 3.5 µm in diameter, and rotation rates up to 400 Hz
(24000 rpm) were observed for powers up to 350 mW at
the trap focus. The Reynolds number of the ﬂuid ﬂow
around the rotating spheres is quite low, on the order of
1 × 10−3 for rotations up to 1000 Hz, and hence the ﬂow
is well within the creeping ﬂow regime required by (2).
The signals from the circular polarization and linear po-
larization monitoring photodiodes were recorded using a
16 bit analogue to digital converter sampling at 10 kHz
for a period of 5 seconds. Typical signals recorded dur-
ing an experiment are reproduced in ﬁgure 2. The strong
uniform modulation of the linear polarization signal (ﬁg-
ure 2(a)) shows that the particle rotates very uniformly,
taking a large fraction of the angular momentum carried
by the beam. Using a particle of diameter 2.41 µm, the

3

particle was measured for a sample of vaterite particles,
and was found to be within the range of 0.6% to 1.2%.
The reﬂection loss due to refractive index mismatches at
the particle surfaces is estimated as being approximately
0.6%.

viscosity was found to be µ = (9.6±0.9)×10−4Pa s, which
is in excellent agreement with the established value for
the viscosity of water at 23◦C of 9.325 × 10−4Pa s [23]. A
series of measurements was made with a range of diﬀerent
sized particles at a range of rotation rates and trapping
powers. The variation in viscosity over a range of powers
below 100 mW was found to be on the order of 0.7% us-
ing a single particle. The variation in inferred viscosity
using 11 particles, spanning a range of sizes, was approx-
imately 4.7%. The most signiﬁcant sources of error arise
from the calibration of the trapping power at the focus
of the trap (7%), the asphericity of the particles (3%),
resulting in a 6% error in the viscosity, and the uncer-
tainty in the measurement of the particle size (1.4%),
which contributes to a 4% error in the viscosity. The
total error for the viscosity measurement from all error
sources is estimated as being 10%.

FIG. 2: a. Signal recorded by the linear polarization mea-
surement apparatus during rotation of a vaterite crystal. The
frequency of rotation is (94.0 ± 0.7) Hz. b. Signal traces from
the circular polarization measurement apparatus during rota-
tion of a vaterite crystal. One photodiode records the amount
of lefthanded circularly polarized light remaining after pass-
ing through a particle, and the other photodiode measures
the residual amount of right-handed circularly polarized light.
The change in the circular polarization of the beam due to
passing through the particle is proportional to the torque ap-
plied to the particle.

The inferred viscosity was found to be independent of
rotation rate, although for trapping powers above ap-
proximately 100 mW, the viscosity was observed to de-
crease with increasing power. This is expected, due to
heating of the particle which results from the absorption
of light through the sample, and also heating of the sur-
rounding liquid due to absorption of the trapping beam
by water, which is on the order of 10 K per W at the
focus [24]. Figure 3 demonstrates the behaviour of the
measured viscosity as a function of the power at the trap-
ping focus. It was observed that higher trapping powers
could be used with smaller particles before the onset of
the decrease in viscosity, which is consistent with vol-
ume absorption eﬀects. The observed decrease in vis-
cosity with power was initially approximately linear and
was approximately 0.13% per mW, which is equivalent
to a temperature rise of around 0.06◦C per mW. The to-
tal power loss for the trapping beam passing through a

FIG. 3: Variation in viscosity with trapping power for a va-
terite crystal of diameter 2.41 µm. The viscosity is indepen-
dent of power for powers at the trap focus less than approx-
imately 100 mW. The decrease in viscosity with power is at-
tributed to heating of the probe particle due to absorption
within the particle, and also heating of the surrounding liq-
uid directly due to absorption of the trapping beam.

We have also demonstrated the ability to measure
the viscosity inside a small conﬁned region, such as a
cellular membrane. Hexane ﬁlled vesicles were formed
by emulsifying hexane, containing a small amount of
soy lecithin (1 g/l), with water containing a quantity of
vaterite spheres. Spherical membrane structures were
formed with diameters up to approximately 20 µm which
occasionally contained single vaterite crystals. The vis-
cosity inside a 16.7 µm diameter vesicle was measured
with a vaterite particle of diameter 3.00 µm, using the
same procedure as outlined earlier, and was found to
be (2.7 ± 0.5) × 10−4Pa s for powers less than 100 mW,
which is in good agreement with the established value of
viscosity for hexane at 23◦C of 3.07 × 10−4Pa s (extrap-
olated) [25]. This value is signiﬁcantly less than that of
water (9.325 × 10−4Pa s at 23◦C [23]. Figure 4 shows
the hexane ﬁlled vesicle with the vaterite probe particle
inside.

The presence of the vesicle wall aﬀects the size of the
region in which the viscosity can be accurately measured
due to boundary eﬀects.
In experiments that will be
reported in detail elsewhere, for a particle of approxi-
mately 3 µm in diameter, the true viscosity was found to
be measured provided the rotating particle was at least
one diameter away from the boundary. This result sug-

ology of liquid-based materials, such as colloids.

4

∗

A.I.Bishop@hw.ac.uk; Department of Physics, Heriot-
Watt University, Riccarton, Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, Scot-
land, United Kingdom

[1] R. A. Beth, Physical Review 50, 115 (1936).
[2] M. E. J. Friese, J. Enger, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and
N. R. Heckenberg, Physical Review A 54, 1593 (1996).
[3] M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and

H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Opt. Lett. 23, 1 (1998).

[4] M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and
H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Nature 394, 348 (1998), erratum
in Nature, 395, 621 (1998).

[5] E. Higurashi, R. Sawada, and T. Ito, Physical Review E

59, 3676 (1999).

[6] E. Higurashi, H. Ukita, H. Tanaka, and O. Ohguchi,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 2209 (1994).

[7] P. Galajda and P. Ormos, Applied Physics Letters 78,

[8] S. Bayoudh, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and
H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Journal of Modern Optics 50,
1581 (2003).

[9] K. D. Bonin, B. Kourmanov, and T. G. Walker, Opt.

Express 10, 984 (2002).

Express 10, 871 (2002).

Lett. 89, 108303 (2002).

[10] E. Santamato, A. Sasso, B. Piccirillo, and A. Vella, Opt.

[11] Z. Cheng, P. M. Chaikin, and T. G. Mason, Phys. Rev.

[12] A. I. Bishop, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and
H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Phys. Rev. A 68, 033802 (2003).
[13] P. Galajda and P. Ormos, Opt. Express 11, 446 (2003).
[14] L. Paterson, M. P. MacDonald, J. Arlt, W. Sibbett, P. E.
Bryant, and K. Dholakia, Science 292, 912 (2001).
[15] A. T. O’Neil and M. J. Padgett, Opt. Lett. 27, 743

(2002).

[16] T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-
Dunlop, Journal of Modern Optics 48, 405 (2001).
[17] D. T. Chen, E. R. Weeks, J. C. Crocker, M. F. Islam,
R. Verma, J. Gruber, A. J. Levine, T. C. Lubensky, and
A. G. Yodh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 108301 (2003).

[18] A. Mukhopadhyay and S. Granick, Current Opinion in

Colloid and Interface Science 6, 423 (2001).

[19] Z. Cheng and T. G. Mason, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 018304

[20] L. Starrs and P. Bartlett, Faraday Discuss. 123, 323

(2003).

(2003).

[21] B. K. Rafa l  Lugowski and Y. Kawata, Optics Communi-

cations 202, 1 (2002).

[22] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics,
vol. 6 of Course of Theoretical Physics (Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford, 1987), 2nd ed.

[23] CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 1974–1975

(CRC Press, 1974), 55th ed.

[24] Y. Liu, G. J. Sonek, M. W. Berns, and B. J. Tromberg,

Biophysical Journal 71, 2158 (1996).

[25] CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 2002–2003

(CRC Press, 2002), 83rd ed.

FIG. 4: Free vaterite crystal located inside a hexane-ﬁlled
lipid-walled vesicle of 16.7 µm in diameter. The vesicle wall
remains stationary during rotation of the probe crystal.

249 (2001).

gests that with a particle of this size, the viscosity may be
measured accurately within a spherical structure larger
than approximately 9 µm in diameter.

The most signiﬁcant contribution to the error in these
measurements is the uncertainty in accurately determin-
It was not
ing the diameter of the spherical particle.
found to be possible to drag a particle through the mem-
brane, and hence the method of size measurement using
two spheres in contact could not be used. The diameter
was instead directly estimated from an image recorded of
the sphere. The measured diameter depends crucially on
the focussing of the microscope system, and by observing
many systems of touching particles of similar size, the fo-
cus which corresponds to the correct measured diameter
was found and used for visualisation. The error in deter-
mining the diameter is estimated as being 5%, which is
the main contribution to the total measurement error of
19%.

It is feasible to produce smaller vaterite particles, and
the use of these would allow the viscosity to be probed
on an even smaller size scale—potentially probing vol-
umes with a capacity of a cubic micron. The ability
to functionalise the probe particle surface would enable
the selective attachment of the particles to various bi-
ological structures, which would allow the torsional re-
sponse of these structures to be investigated quantita-
tively. We note that the torque and angular deﬂection
can still be measured accurately in the absence of con-
tinuous rotation. The demonstrated ability to measure
viscosity within micron-sized volumes makes the system
developed here of great value for probing the microrhe-

