4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
1
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kerr eﬀect in liquid helium at temperatures below the superﬂuid transition

A. O. Sushkov,1, 2, ∗ E. Williams,1, † V. V. Yashchuk,1, ‡ D. Budker,1, 3, § and S. K. Lamoreaux2, ¶
1Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-7300
2Los Alamos National Laboratory, Physics Division 23,
University of California, M.S. H803, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545
3Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720
(Dated: February 15, 2014)

The electro-optical Kerr eﬀect in liquid helium at temperatures below the λ-point is investigated.
The Kerr constant of liquid helium is measured to be (1.43 ± 0.02(stat) ± 0.04(sys)) × 10−20 (cm/V)2
at T = 1.5 K. Within the experimental uncertainty, the Kerr constant is independent of temperature
in the range T = 1.5 K to 2.17 K, which implies that the Kerr constant of the superﬂuid component
of liquid helium is the same as that of normal liquid helium. Our result also indicates that pair
and higher correlations of He atoms in the liquid phase account for about 23% of the measured
Kerr constant. Liquid nitrogen was used to test the experimental set-up, the result for the liquid
nitrogen Kerr constant is (4.38±0.15)×10−18 (cm/V)2. The knowledge of the Kerr constant in these
media allows the Kerr eﬀect to be used as a non-contact technique for measuring the magnitude
and mapping out the distribution of electric ﬁelds inside these cryogenic insulants.

PACS numbers: 33.55.Fi, 78.20.Jq

The electro-optical Kerr eﬀect describes birefringence
induced in an initially isotropic medium by an externally
applied electric ﬁeld ~E [1, 2]. Linearly polarized light
propagating in such a medium experiences a diﬀerent in-
dex of refraction when its polarization is parallel to ~E
compared to the case when its polarization is perpen-
dicular to ~E. The diﬀerence between the two refractive
~E
indices is proportional to
|
∆n = n|| −

2:
|
n⊥ = KE2,

(1)

where K is the Kerr constant of the material. The Kerr
constant is directly related to the third-order non-linear
susceptibility.

∝

As far as we know the Kerr eﬀect has not been pre-
viously observed in liquid helium. However the value of
KLHe is of importance both from the fundamental and
the applied viewpoints. Kerr eﬀect measurements probe
the nature of the atom distribution and atomic collisions
in the medium under study. In the simplest approxima-
tion of non-interacting spherically symmetric atoms, the
Kerr constant is due to the hyperpolarizability γ of an
individual atom, and is proportional to the density of the
ργ. This is valid at low densities, and it
medium: K
is how the measurement of the Kerr eﬀect in helium gas
at room temperature gave γ = (44.2
0.8) atomic units
for the helium atom [4]. At higher densities, however,
the pair-polarizability anisotropy of the van der Waals
atomic complexes contributes to the Kerr constant as the
second Kerr virial coeﬃcient [5]. The second Kerr virial
coeﬃcient has never been detected for helium, although
it has been measured for the rare gases Ar, Kr, and Xe
[6]. At liquid densities the atoms are so close together
that polarizability anisotropies of two, three, and more
atoms all contribute to the Kerr constant. An interesting
question is whether the superﬂuidity of liquid helium has

±

any eﬀect on these many-body interactions and thus the
Kerr constant. Furthermore, in the neighborhood of the
helium λ-transition, anomalous light scattering due to
correlated ﬂuctuations in the order parameter has been
detected, see Ref.
[7] for a review. We pay particular
attention to the region around the λ-point, looking for
any anomalous behavior of the Kerr constant associated
with these ﬂuctuations.

From a more applied standpoint, the Kerr eﬀect can be
used as a non-contact way of measuring the magnitude
and the distribution of electric ﬁeld in systems where liq-
uid helium is used as the insulator, such as a supercon-
ducting power apparatus [8]. Speciﬁcally, we proposed
to use the Kerr eﬀect for monitoring and diagnostics of
the electric ﬁeld set-up in the new experiment measuring
the parity- and time-reversal - invariance violating dipole
moment of the neutron [9].

We have observed the Kerr eﬀect in liquid helium and
measured the liquid helium Kerr constant KLHe in the
temperature range 1.5 K to 2.17 K. The apparatus used
to accomplish this is shown in Fig. 1. We use a Janis
model DT SuperVariTemp pumped helium cryostat with
minimum operating temperature of 1.5 K. Optical access
is provided via fused quartz windows, the innermost win-
dows having the diameter of 1/2′′. The central sample
space of the cryostat, holding the liquid helium and the
high-voltage electrodes, is a vertical cylinder, 2′′ in di-
ameter. At the top of the cryostat, the sample space is
connected to a Stokes Pennwalt rotary vane pump via a
3/4′′-diameter pumping arm. Also at the top, there is
a connection to an MKS Baratron Type 220B pressure
gauge.

In addition, the LakeShore Silicon Diode temperature
sensor, model DT-470-CU-13-1.4L (resolution 0.1 K), is
mounted inside the sample space about 3 cm above the

sample space
filled with LHe

Janis
cryostat

1 mm
aperture

photo-elastic
modulator

photo-
diode

Analyzer

50 kHz
Ref In

Lock-in

Polarizer

high-voltage
electrodes

diode
laser

to
electrodes
+

-

High-voltage
power supplies

Digital Data
Acquisition
and Processing

0.5 Hz Ref Out

Lock-in

FIG. 1: A schematic top view of the experimental apparatus

light path. LakeShore model 321 controller, combined
with a wound heater mounted next to the temperature
sensor, allows rough temperature control during the ex-
periment. However we found that recording the helium
saturated vapor pressure with the MKS Baratron allows
a much more accurate measurement (resolution 0.01 K)
of the LHe temperature than the LakeShore temperature
sensor.

±

An electric ﬁeld is applied across two stainless steel
electrodes, held together by an acrylic ﬁxture, and sub-
merged in liquid helium. The electrodes are held verti-
cally, in line with the cryostat windows. Each electrode
has the following dimensions: length = 3.44 cm, height =
3.44 cm, width = 0.88 cm. The edges and corners of the
electrodes are rounded. The gap between the electrodes
0.001) cm at room tem-
is set to d(293 K) = (0.284
perature. On cooldown the gap shrinks due to thermal
contraction of the acrylic spacers. By illuminating the
gap with a broad light beam and observing the gap image
with a CCD camera, we measured the change in the gap
0.003 cm.
width during a cooldown: d(1.5 K) = 0.270
High voltage is generated by two Glassman power sup-
plies (model PS/EH20N05.0 and model PS/WG-30P10).
Positive voltage is applied to one of the electrodes, and
negative voltage is applied to the other. Electrical con-
tact between the electrodes and the power supplies is
made through two cryogenic high-voltage cables, run-
ning from the electrodes up through the cryostat sam-
ple space, to feed-throughs at the top of the cryostat.
Because of the E2-dependence of the Kerr eﬀect, it was
desirable to apply the maximum possible voltage to the
electrodes, while avoiding electrical breakdown in the re-
gion where the cables are in contact with helium gas,
whose pressure varied from one atmosphere down to zero.
The other challenge in the cable design was to minimize
the heat leak into the liquid helium. Therefore the con-

±

2

ducting portion of the cable was chosen to be a 316L
Carbon steel, 0.051′′-diameter wire. This was insulated
with three layers of Teﬂon heat shrink tubing, each layer
having 0.016′′ wall thickness. At the top of the cryostat
each wire is attached to the feed-through by a brass ball,
then a thick layer of curing silicone glue is spread over any
exposed conducting surface to provide insulation. Tests
with the sample space ﬁlled with liquid helium above the
λ-point (under excess pressure to suppress boiling) show
that our high-voltage system allows application to each
electrode of voltages up to 18 kV in magnitude. With the
electrodes separated by 0.27 cm, this corresponds to the
electric ﬁeld of 130 kV/cm. However, when the liquid
helium is at a temperature below the λ-point, electri-
cal breakdown at roughly 70 kV/cm occurs between the
electrodes. These observations are consistent with the
dielectric strength properties of liquid helium described
in the literature [8].

We use polarimetry techniques to detect the Kerr
eﬀect-induced birefringence in liquid helium given by Eq.
(1). The light beam is initially polarized at 45◦ to the
electric ﬁeld. After passing through the liquid helium its
polarization becomes elliptical, with ellipticity

ǫ =

KLHe Z

π
λ

πL
λ

E2dx =

KLHe(V /d)2.

(2)

±

Here λ is the wavelength of the light, V is the potential
diﬀerence between the electrodes, d is the gap, and the
integral over the path of the light beam (taking into ac-
count edge eﬀects) is replaced by the eﬀective electrode
length L, which depends on the dimensions of the elec-
trodes as well as their spacing. A 3-D numerical simula-
tion of the electric ﬁeld in our geometry yielded the value
of the eﬀective length: L = (3.20

0.05) cm.

To measure the ellipticity ǫ we use a modulation po-
larimeter (Fig. 1). The light source is a 785-nm Hitachi
HL7851G laser diode, powered by re-chargeable batter-
ies, the beam diameter is set to 1 mm by an iris, and
the light power in this beam is 3 mW. The polarime-
ter consists of a Wollaston prism polarizer, followed by a
Hinds model PEM-FS4 photo-elastic modulator, the sec-
ond Wollaston prism polarizer (analyzer), and the photo-
diode detector. The photo-elastic modulator operates at
the frequency of 50.2 kHz, the light phase modulation
amplitude is π/4 and the modulation axis is parallel to
the dark axis of the polarizer. The analyzer is nearly
crossed with the polarizer, it is oriented so that roughly
4% of the incident light is transmitted. This de-crossing
angle was chosen to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio.
The noise due to laser-intensity ﬂuctuations scales as the
square of the de-crossing angle, while the ellipticity signal
measured by the polarimeter scales linearly with the de-
crossing angle, allowing such optimization. The sample,
whose birefringence properties are measured, is situated
between the ﬁrst polarizer and the modulator. With this
polarimeter it is possible to simultaneously measure the

Voltage (kV)

0      2       4      6       8     10    12     14    16     18

3

)
d
a
r
o
r
c
i
m

(
 
y
t
i
c
i
t
p
i
l
l

E

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

ellipticity and the rotation introduced into the light po-
larization by the sample. The signal detected by the pho-
todiode contains harmonics of the modulator frequency
(50.2 kHz): the ﬁrst harmonic is proportional to the el-
lipticity, and the second harmonic is proportional to the
rotation. We measure the ellipticity, using a Stanford
Research Systems model SR844 Lock-in ampliﬁer to de-
tect the amplitude of the ﬁrst harmonic. To calibrate,
a quarter-wave plate in a precision rotation mount is in-
serted into the beam next to the sample, a one degree
rotation of the plate introduces one degree of ellipticity
into the light. The systematic error introduced by this
calibration method is 2%, due mostly to the uncertainty
in the retardation quality of the quarter-wave plate.

The empty polarimeter has an ellipticity noise of
10−7 rad/√Hz. However, when the cryostat is inserted,
the laser beam passes through six windows introducing
an oﬀset ellipticity, which varies depending on the po-
sition of the laser beam on the windows. The window-
induced ellipticity can be 0.2 rad or more, when the beam
passes near the center of the windows. We align the laser
beam so that it passes close to the edge of the inside
windows, this gives a minimum window-induced elliptic-
ity of roughly 0.02 rad. When the cryostat is operat-
ing at liquid helium temperatures, this oﬀset ellipticity
drifts within a range of about 10−4 rad over times of
hundreds of seconds. These drifts are caused by thermal
gradients in the window mounts leading to varying stress
applied to the window, and thus to drifting window bire-
fringence. To separate these drifts from the Kerr eﬀect -
induced ellipticity, the voltage applied to each electrode
is sinusoidally modulated at the frequency of 0.5 Hz (lim-
ited by the power supplies), and the Stanford Research
Systems SR830 lock-in (with the integration time set to
10 seconds) is used to pick up the ellipticity signal at the
modulation frequency.

The experimental set-up was tested by measuring the
Kerr constant of liquid nitrogen, which is more than two
orders of magnitude larger than that of liquid helium.
At T = 73 K our result for the liquid-nitrogen Kerr con-
10−18 (cm/V)2. This is
stant is: KLN2 = (4.38
0.15)
in agreement with the published value of KLN2 [10]. Ex-
perimental conditions were slightly diﬀerent in that work,
but re-scaling the density and temperature one obtains
10−18 (cm/V)2 from Ref. [10]
KLN2(T = 73 K) = 4.32
(no experimental error is given).

±

×

×

In liquid helium, as in liquid nitrogen, the Kerr eﬀect
was detected by measuring the light ellipticity ǫ as a func-
tion of the applied voltage V , their relationship is given
by Eq. (2). The experimental results at T = 1.5 K are
shown in Figure 2. A quadratic ﬁt gives the value of the
liquid-helium Kerr constant:

KLHe = (1.43

0.02(stat)

0.04(sys))

10−20(cm/V)2.

±

±
The systematic error is the combination of errors in the
electrode gap, the eﬀective electrode length, and the el-

×

0         10       20       30        40       50       60        70
Electric field (kV/cm)

FIG. 2: The Kerr eﬀect in liquid helium at T = 1.5 K: in-
duced ellipticity as a function of the electric ﬁeld between the
electrodes. Integration time for each point is 1000 s. Potential
diﬀerence between the electrodes is shown on the upper scale.
Larger electric ﬁelds were not applied because of breakdown
in liquid helium.

lipticity calibration method. The statistical error is due
to window-ellipticity drifts, and is determined by the in-
tegration time for each point.

×

±

±

0.02)

LHe = (1.10

It is interesting to compare this number with the Kerr
constant expected from the value of the helium atom
0.8) atomic units, de-
hyperpolarizability: γ = (44.2
duced from the measurement of the Kerr eﬀect in the
helium gas at room temperature [4]. The contribution of
the hyperpolarizability of the individual helium atoms
to the Kerr constant of the liquid at T = 1.5 K is
K (0)
10−20 (cm/V)2. There is an-
other, density-dependent, contribution to KLHe, due to
the polarizability anisotropy of van der Waals complexes
of two or more helium atoms in the external electric ﬁeld.
To our knowledge, this contribution has not been mea-
sured for an atomic liquid. Some theoretical calculations
have been performed, predicting that for liquid argon the
contribution due to van der Waals complexes is a factor of
9 greater than the hyperpolarizability contribution [11].
The conclusion from our experimental result for KLHe
is that in liquid helium the contribution due to van der
Waals complexes is a factor of 3 less than the hyperpolar-
izability contribution. We performed a naive estimate of
the pair-correlation eﬀect, using the pair polarizability
anisotropy of a He2 dimer in the dipole-induced-dipole
approximation, and obtained the right sign and order of
magnitude for the contribution to the liquid-helium Kerr
constant from the pair interactions between the helium
atoms.

The temperature dependence of the liquid-helium Kerr

)
2
)

/

V
m
c
(

0
2
-
0
1
 
(
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
c
 
r
r
e
K

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

0.1

0.0

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2.0

2.1

2.2

Temperature (K)

FIG. 3: The liquid helium Kerr constant in the temperature
range T = 1.5 K to T = 2.17 K. The electric ﬁeld between the
electrodes is 69 kV/cm, and the temperature is scanned up
or down. Each point on the graph is obtained by averaging
the Kerr eﬀect - induced ellipticity readings over the interval
of 0.1 K. The dashed line indicates the average over all the
points, which agrees with the value of KLHe given in the text.

constant was measured in the range starting at the min-
imum temperature achievable in the LakeShore cryostat,
T = 1.5 K, and up to the λ-point, T = 2.17 K. As seen
from Fig. 3, within the experimental error, the Kerr con-
stant does not depend on temperature in this range. This
is due, in part, to the fact that that the density of liquid
helium changes by only 0.7% in this temperature range
[12]. However it should also be noted that, in the two-
ﬂuid model, the fraction of the total density that is in the
superﬂuid component changes from zero at the λ-point
to about 90% at 1.5 K. The absence of temperature de-
pendence in Fig. 3 means that, within our experimental
accuracy, the Kerr constant of the superﬂuid component
of liquid helium is the same as that of the normal com-
ponent. Furthermore, no anomalous temperature depen-
dence in the vicinity of the λ-point could be seen during
the experiment.

No reliable data could be obtained for KLHe above
the λ-transition. There are several experimental diﬃcul-
ties encountered when trying to detect the Kerr eﬀect
in liquid helium above the superﬂuid transition. These
are mostly associated with its low thermal conductiv-
ity. Below the λ-point LHe is a nearly perfect thermal
conductor [13], therefore there is no thermal convection
or boiling, so the laser beam going through it is undis-
turbed. Normal liquid helium, however, is a very poor
10−4 W/cm
thermal conductor (κ
K). Even though,
·
to prevent boiling, we kept the pressure in the cryostat
sample space at 1.3 atm, while performing Kerr-eﬀect
measurements above the λ-point, the laser beam was still
signiﬁcantly distorted on its passage through LHe, mak-
ing the data unreliable. A possible explanation for this

≈

×

2

4

is as follows. Because of the low thermal conductivity
and viscosity, thermal gradients in normal liquid helium
create convection currents and density gradients, which
are responsible for the scattering and distortion of the
laser beam. In fact, this scattering is the basis for opti-
cal visualization techniques used for imaging convective
ﬂow patterns in liquid helium [14].

In conclusion, we have measured the Kerr constant

0.02(stat)

0.04(sys))

±

±

of liquid helium to be (1.43
×
10−20 (cm/V)2 at T = 1.5 K, and showed that, within
the experimental uncertainty, it has no temperature de-
pendence in the range T = 1.5 K to 2.17 K. The measured
value of KLHe indicates that in the liquid phase the po-
larizabilities of van der Waals complexes of He atoms ac-
count for approximately 23% of the experimentally mea-
sured Kerr constant. The absence of temperature de-
pendence suggests that, within the achieved precision,
superﬂuidity has no eﬀect on the Kerr constant of liquid
helium. Finally, the measurement of KLHe allows the
use of Kerr eﬀect as a non-intrusive technique for mea-
suring the magnitude and mapping out the distribution
of electric ﬁelds inside superﬂuid liquid helium.

The authors thank S. M. Rochester for help with nu-
merical calculations, O. P. Sushkov and J. Moore for use-
ful discussions, and J. C. Davis and R. E. Packard for
help with cryogenics. This research was supported by
a UCB-LANL CLE grant, the UC Berkeley Committee
on Research, and by the Los Alamos Directed Research
Grant 2001526DR.

∗ Electronic address: alex000@socrates.berkeley.edu
† Electronic address: ewilliam@uclink.berkeley.edu
‡ Electronic address: yashchuk@socrates.berkeley.edu
§ Electronic address: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu
¶ Electronic address: lamore@lanl.gov
[1] J. Kerr, Philosophical Magazine 50, 337 (1875).
[2] J. Kerr, Philosophical Magazine 50, 446 (1875).
[3] K. D. Bonin and M. A. Kadar-Kallen, International Jour-

nal of Modern Physics B 8, 3313 (1994).

[4] R. Tammer, K. Loblein, K. H. Peting, and W. Huttner,

Chemical Physics 168, 151 (1992).

[5] A. D. Buckingham and J. A. Pople, Proceedings of Phys-

ical Society A 68, 905 (1955).

[6] A. D. Buckingham and D. A. Dunmur, Transactions of

the Faraday Society 64, 1776 (1968).

[7] W. F. Vinen and D. L. Hurd, Advances in Physics 27,

533 (1978).

[8] J. Gerhold, Cryogenics 38, 1063 (1998).
[9] http://p25ext.lanl.gov/edm/edm.html.

[10] K. Imai, A. Kanematsu, M. Nawata, and M. Zahn,
in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Properties and Applications of Dielectric Materials (Cat.
No.91CH2937-1). IEEE. 1991 (1991), pp. 280–3 vol, 1.
New York, NY, USA. Tokyo, Japan. IEEE. IEE of Japan.
Waseda Univ. 8-12 July 1991.

[11] J. A. Brace and J. V. Champion, Journal of Physics C:

Solid State Physics 2, ser.2, 2408 (1969).

[12] K. R. Atkins, Liquid Helium (Cambridge University

[13] F. Pobell, Matter and Methods at Low Temperatures

Press, London, 1959).

(Springer, Berlin, 1996).

[14] A. L. Woodcraft, P. G. J. Lucas, R. G. Matley, and
W. Y. T. Wong, Journal of Low Temperature Physics
114, 109 (1999).

5

