APS/unknown

Interferometric diﬀerentiation between resonant Coherent

Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering and nonresonant four-wave-mixing

processes

Daniel L. Marks, Claudio Vinegoni, Jeremy S. Bredfeldt, and Stephen A. Boppart∗

Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology,

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,

405 N. Mathews, Urbana, IL 61801

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

A major impediment of using Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering to identify biological

molecules is that the illumination levels required to produce a measurable signal often also produce

signiﬁcant nonresonant background from the medium, especially from water, that is not speciﬁc to

the resonance being investigated. We present a method of using nonlinear interferometry to measure

the temporal shape of the anti-Stokes signal to diﬀerentiate which components are resonant and

nonresonant. This method is easily adaptable to most existing pulsed CARS illumination methods

and should allow for distinguishing resonant CARS when using higher energy pulses. By examining

the diﬀerences between signals produced by acetone and water, we show that the resonant and

nonresonant signals can be clearly diﬀerentiated.

4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The combination of microscopy and Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (CARS)

processes [1, 2, 3, 4] is a promising tool to study the composition of biological tissues at mi-

crometer scales. Like two-photon microscopy, CARS microscopy uses a nonlinear interaction

to produce a conﬁned point response in the medium. However, CARS utilizes endogenous

molecular resonances in the tissue and does not require exogenous dyes or markers to be

introduced. Because CARS consists of two stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) processes,

there is a quadratic dependence on the anti-Stokes produced by CARS on the density of

molecules with a target resonance. Frequently the anti-Stokes signal is small because the

desired target molecule is present at a low concentration. To compensate for this, higher

energy pulses are used. However, at suﬃciently high peak power a large non-resonant four-

wave-mixing component is generated. If the power of the anti-Stokes light is examined, one

can not distinguish the nonresonant signal from the desired resonant signal. We utilize in-

terferometry to distinguish the resonant CARS from the nonresonant background based on

the emission time by using the interferometric time gate to reject the early-emitted nonres-

onant signal. This is a simpliﬁcation of the Nonlinear Interferometric Vibrational Imaging

(NIVI) [5, 6] method proposed earlier that is more suited to integration with existing CARS

pump/Stokes pulse generation methods.

A typical CARS process consists of two SRS processes. A molecule is excited by two

overlapped pulses, a pump pulse of frequency ω1 and a Stokes pulse of frequency ω2 separated
by the resonance frequency Ω = ω1 − ω2. Some of this excitation is converted to anti-Stokes
radiation at frequency ω3 = 2ω1 − ω2 by mixing with the pump. The amount of anti-Stokes

radiation depends on the square of the intensity of the pump pulse and linearly with the

Stokes pulse. Often the intensities needed to produce a measurable CARS signal stimulate

other nonlinear nonresonant processes that do not depend on the presence of the target

molecule producing a non-negligible background signal, potentially causing an erroneous

concentration measurement. Distinguishing the processes that are resonant and therefore

speciﬁc to a target molecule and nonresonant processes is a signiﬁcant limitation when using

CARS at high pulse energies.

Other means of distinguishing resonant CARS from nonresonant signals have been ex-

plored. Because phase-matching in bulk media favors forward propagating anti-Stokes radia-

tion, more backreﬂected (epi-CARS) anti-Stokes is produced by smaller subwavelength sized

particles, and less so by the surrounding medium [7]. The production of resonant CARS can

2

be favored by careful preparation of the polarization and phase of the illumination [8], or

selected by polarization [9]. In addition, it is possible to use a delayed probe pulse from the

pump/Stokes pulse to measure the resonant excitation if the probe pulse is diﬀerentiated

spatially or spectrally from the pump pulse [10]. However, with the tight focusing required

and in the presence of highly scattering media, these methods may be less practical for

biological tissue.

To see how nonresonant signals and resonant CARS can be separated, consider that

nonresonant signals arise from four wave mixing processes mediated by virtual states. In

nonresonant four-wave-mixing, virtual states exist only where and when the pump and

Stokes pulses coincide, so that the anti-Stokes is only produced at the instant they are

overlapped. Resonant CARS is produced because a molecular vibrational, rotational, or

electronic state is excited by SRS. This excitation persists after the excitation pulse ends,

often for a picosecond or more. An analogous situation exists when comparing the beating

of a drum to the plucking of a guitar string. Like a guitar string, the vibration of a molecular

resonance decays slowly, while a drum beat ends quickly after the impulse is over. If pump

light continues to illuminate the molecule, the molecular excitation can be converted by

SRS to anti-Stokes radiation. Because the resonant excitation lasts much longer than the

nonresonant excitation, the anti-Stokes also lasts longer. Thus anti-Stokes radiation caused

by resonant CARS continues to be emitted later than the nonresonant signal. With properly

designed pulses, the resonant and nonresonant signals can be clearly separated.

Our approach is to prepare narrowband pump and Stokes pulses, but with the pump pulse

stretched out in time to be at least three times longer than the Stokes pulse. The shorter

Stokes pulse coincides with the leading edge of the pump pulse. A simulation of this is shown

in Fig. 1. When the overlapped pulses arrive, the molecule is excited by SRS. At the same

time, nonresonant four-wave-mixing is emitted, overlapped with the Stokes pulse. After the

Stokes pulse passes, so does the nonresonant signal. However, the molecule remains excited.

As the pump continues to arrive, the excitation is converted to anti-Stokes radiation by

SRS. This produces a resonant anti-Stokes signal similar to that shown in Fig. 1, which has

a resonant “tail” unlike the nonresonant anti-Stokes, which coincides with the Stokes alone.

By delaying a reference pulse at the anti-Stokes frequency until after the nonresonant signal

has passed, the reference can act as an interference gate to reject nonresonant components.

Interferometric time gating is commonly used to characterize the shape of ultrafast

3

Pump 
Amplitude

Stokes 
Amplitude

Resonant and 
Nonresonant
Signals

Nonresonant
Signal only

-400

-200

0

200

400

600

Time (fs)

FIG. 1: A simulation of the pulse combination used to diﬀerentiate between resonant and nonres-

onant signals. The pump/Stokes combination overlap to excite CARS, and the anti-Stokes would

appear similar to the shown waveform for resonant or nonresonant media.

pulses [11, 12]. These methods typically work by interfering a reference pulse with a known

electric ﬁeld amplitude with an unknown pulse to be characterized. If the reference pulse

is short in time compared to the unknown pulse, then interference between the two pulses

only occurs over the interval of the reference pulse. By delaying the two pulses relative to

each other, the cross-correlation of the two pulses is measured. A resonant CARS signal

has a much longer cross-correlation signal in time than a nonresonant signal. To obtain

the needed short reference pulse, nonresonant four-wave-mixing or other cascaded nonreso-

nant nonlinear processes stimulated by short pulses can be used. In particular, a reference

pulse delayed until after the nonresonant signal arrives at the photodetector prevents an

interference signal from being obtained from the nonresonant component.

To experimentally validate this idea, we used the setup of Fig. 2 to measure the in-

terferograms of anti-Stokes light produced by acetone and water. Acetone has a Raman
resonance at 2925 cm−1 corresponding to the C-H stretch, while water does not, containing

only hydrogen and oxygen. Water is of primary interest because it is a ubiquitous and

4

Regenerative 
Amplifier

808 nm
pump

Optical 
Parametric 
Amplifier

Delay

653 nm
signal

Delay

1056 nm 
idler/Stokes

Dove Prism

Bandpass
filter

CARS 
Sample

653 nm

anti-Stokes

Photo 
detector

FIG. 2: Schematic of optical setup used to measure interferogram of resonant and nonresonant

signals.

pernicious source of nonresonant signal in biological tissues. In the setup, a regenerative

ampliﬁer (RegA 9000, Coherent, Inc. Santa Clara, CA) emits pulses at 250 kHz repetition

rate with 808 nm center wavelength and 20 nm bandwidth. These pulses are used both as

the pump and also to seed a second-harmonic-generation optical parametric amplﬁer (OPA)

(OPA 9450, Coherent) which generates idler pulses with 1056 nm center wavelength and 20

nm bandwidth for use as a Stokes pulse. A 105 mm length BK7 glass Dove prism disperses

the pump pulse to approximately three times the length of the Stokes pulse. The pump

pulse is delayed to arrive at a dichroic beamsplitter at the same time as the Stokes pulse.

The pulses are overlapped and are focused into the sample by a 30 mm focal length lens,

which produces anti-Stokes radiation centered at 653 nm. The pump power at the sample

was 40 mW, while the Stokes was 2 mW, with suﬃcient peak power to produce abundant

resonant and nonresonant signals. At the same time, the signal pulse from the OPA, also

at 653 nm, is used as the reference pulse. Because the signal pulse is produced by cascaded

nonresonant χ(2) nonlinearities, it is short and nearly transform-limited. A Mach-Zehnder

interferometer is used to combine the reference pulse and the CARS signal. The signals are

attenuated by neutral density ﬁlters by many orders of magnitude before they are detected

by a photomultiplier tube. By scanning the relative delay between the two signals, their

interferometric cross-correlation was measured.

Fig. 3 shows the interferograms measured from acetone. As can clearly be seen, the

interferograms agree qualitatively with Fig. 1. The acetone, having a persistent resonance,

5

FIG. 3: Interferogram of four-wave-mixing in acetone at various vibrational excitation frequencies.

generates a resonant anti-Stokes “tail” with a length limited not by the lifetime of the

resonance but by the length of the pump pulse, because the pump is needed to produce

anti-Stokes radiation. As the pump/Stokes frequency diﬀerence is tuned away from the
resonance at 2925 cm−1, the resonant “tail” disappears. The tuning resolution is limited
by the broad Stokes bandwidth of approximately 150 cm−1, which is much wider than the

Raman susceptibility linewidth. On the other hand, Fig. 4 shows the interferogram from
water, which is completely nonresonant at 2925 cm−1. The resonant and nonresonant signals

are discernible interferometrically despite the fact that the excitation power used produced

enough CARS light to be clearly seen by the unaided eye scattered from white paper.

We have demonstrated a diﬀerence in the temporal evolution of anti-Stokes pulses pro-

duced by nonresonant and resonant four-wave-mixing processes. This approach utilizes

nonlinear interferometry and appropriate reference and excitation pulses to measure the tail

of resonant CARS. Such an approach will likely be very useful in CARS microscopy and

NIVI [5, 6] to eliminate the nonresonant background signal in addition to the other advan-

tanges that interferometric detection can provide such as heterodyne sensitivity and stray

light rejection.

6

FIG. 4: Interferogram of nonresonant four-wave-mixing in water.

ACKNOWLEGEMENTS

We acknowledge the scientiﬁc contributions and advice from Martin Gruebele, Dana

Dlott, Amy Wiedemann, and Barbara Kitchell from the University of Illinois at Urbana-

Champaign. This research was supported in part by the National Aeronautics and Space

Administration (NAS2-02057), the National Institutes of Health (National Cancer Institute),

and the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technlogy.

∗ Also in the Department of Bioengineering, the College of Engineering, and the College of

Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL 61801; boppart@uiuc.edu

[1] E. O. Potma, D. J. Jones, J.-X. Cheng, X. S. Xie, and J. Ye, Opt. Lett. 27, 1168 (2002).

[2] J.-X. Cheng, Y. K. Jia, G. Zheng, and X. S. Xie, Biophys. J. 83, 502 (2002).

[3] N. Dudovich, D. Oron, and Y. Silberberg, Nature 418, 512 (2002).

[4] M. D. Duncan, J. Reintjes, and T. J. Manuccia, Opt. Lett. 7, 350 (1982).

[5] D. L. Marks and S. A. Boppart, Phys. Rev. Lett. in press (2004).

[6] C. Vinegoni, J. S. Bredfeldt, D. L. Marks, and S. A. Boppart, Opt. Expr. 12, 331 (2004).

[7] A. Volkmer, J.-X. Cheng, and X. S. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 023901 (2001).

7

[8] D. Oron, N. Dudovich, and Y. Silberberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 213902 (2002).

[9] J.-X. Cheng, L. D. Book, and X. S. Xie, Opt. Lett. 96, 1341 (2001).

[10] E. Gershgoren, R. A. Bartels, J. T. Fourkas, R. Tobey, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn,

Opt. Lett. 28, 361 (2003).

[11] K. G. Purchase, D. J. Brady, and K. Wagner, Opt. Lett. 18, 2129 (1993).

[12] L. Lepetit, G. Cheriaux, and M. Joﬀre, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 12, 2467 (1995).

8

