Received 0 XXXXXXX 0000
Accepted 0 XXXXXXX 0000
Online 0 XXXXXXX 0000

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Phasing diffuse scattering. Application of the SIR2002
algorithm to the non-crystallographic phase problem.

research papers

B. Carrozzini,a G. L. Cascarano,a L. De Caro,a C. Giacovazzo,a* S. March-
esini,b H. N. Chapman,b H. He,c M. R. Howells,c J. S. Wu,d U. Weierstalld
and J. C. H. Spenced

aCampus Universitario, Via E. Orabona 4, 70125, Bari Italy, bLawrence Livermore Laboratory, 7000 East
Ave., Livermore, Ca 94550-9234, USA, cLawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd. Berkeley, Ca.,
94720, USA, and dDept. of Physics and Astronomy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Az. 85287-1504.

USA. Correspondence e-mail: Email: carmelo.giacovazzo@ic.cnr.it

A new phasing algorithm has been used to determine the phases of diffuse elastic
X-ray scattering from a non-periodic array of gold balls of 50 nm diameter. Two-
dimensional real-space images , showing the charge-density distribution of the
balls, have been reconstructed at 50 nm resolution from transmission diffraction
patterns recorded at 550 eV energy. The reconstructed image ﬁts well with scan-
ning electron microscope (SEM) image of the same sample. The algorithm, which
uses only the density modiﬁcation portion of the SIR2002 program, is compared
with the results obtained via the Gerchberg-Saxton-Fienup HIO algorithm. In this
way the relationship between density modiﬁcation in crystallography and the HIO
algorithm used in signal and image processing is elucidated.

1. Introduction

The phase problem for non-periodic objects (Stark, 1987) has
been studied by many different approaches, some of which have
recently demonstrated striking success with experimental data:

a. the Gerchberg-Saxton-Fienup HIO algorithm (Fienup,
1982, 1987; Miao et al., 1999, 2002, who refer the
method as oversampling; see also De Caro et al., 2002
who refer to it by using the concept of conﬁned struc-
ture);

b. techniques based on analyticity and complex zeros (Liao

et al., 1997);

2002 );

1998);

al., 2003).

c. the study of projections onto convex sets (Bauschke et al.,

d. the transport of intensity equations (Paganin & Nugent,

e. direct methods, for real and positive objects (Spence, et

However experimental implementation of the popular HIO al-
gorithm in the transmission geometry is complicated by loss
of low spatial frequencies at the beam-stop. To overcome this
problem, in the past the HIO oversampling method has been
used in combination with an independent low-resolution image
of the object (i.e. from SEM, X-ray zone-plate or optical im-
age) to provide the low spatial frequencies. More recently, the
development of the “Shrinkwrap” (Marchesini et al., 2003) and
other variants of the HIO algorithm have successfully treated
the missing data as adjustable parameters. Experimentally, the
preparation of the isolated object needed for HIO can be difﬁ-
cult; only recently the ﬁrst atomic resolution image of a carbon

nanotube has been reconstructed by HIO from a coherent trans-
mission electron diffraction pattern using nanotubes which span
holes in a carbon grid (Zuo et al., 2003).

In a recent paper (He et al., 2003) images of randomly placed
two-dimensional arrays of gold balls were reconstructed from
their soft X-ray transmission diffraction patterns by means of
the HIO algorithm. This algorithm is closely related to the elec-
tron density modiﬁcation procedure of X-ray crystallography,
and is able to: i) exploit the prior knowledge of the geometrical
form of a support with vanishing electron density (the support is
deﬁned as the region in which the object density is known to be
non-zero: it corresponds roughly to the boundary of the object);
ii) treat, via suitable constraints, the real and imaginary parts of
the object wavefunction (Miao et al., 1999). A necessary tool
for success was the use of either a mask based on supplementary
images provided by SEM techniques, or a subjective estimate of
the object boundary taken from the autocorrelation function. In
the “Shrinkwrap” method (Marchesini et al., 2003), a ﬁrst esti-
mate of the object support is obtained from the autocorrelation
function of the object, (which is known to be twice as large as
the object in any given direction), and this estimate is updated
iteratively. If the structure is constituted by one isolated ball
and two clusters (as in the case treated here) the autocorrelation
function includes an image of every cluster convoluted with the
single ball, and this may used as a trial support function. The
method is then similar to the heavy-atom method of X-ray crys-
tallography, or Fourier Transform Holography.

In a companion paper (Spence et al., 2003), direct methods
(DM) have been applied to a simulated diffraction pattern calcu-
lated from a structure of 28 gold balls. In that work the phasing
process was realized by the following steps. The simulated pat-
tern was divided by the Fourier transform f (h) of a single ball,
so obtaining a simulated normalized pattern (SNP). The struc-
ture factors, in turn, were also normalized, according to

1

research papers

Eh =

f j(h) exp (2πih · r j) /

f j(h)2

,

(1)

N

j=1
X

N





j=1
X

1/2





where N is the total number of balls. Then a modiﬁed version
of the SIR2002 program (Burla et al., 2003; a package orig-
inally dedicated to the crystal structure solution of small and
large molecules) was used to determine the positions of the balls
from the SNP. The procedure consisted of a tangent procedure
starting from random phases, followed by:

a. the EDM step, where new phase sets {ϕ} were estimated
by iteratively applying electron density modiﬁcation pro-
cedures, i.e., ρ → {ϕ} → ρ cycles;

b. the HAFR step, consisting of ρ → {ϕ} → ρ cycles, in
which balls were associated with electron density peaks;

c. Least squares cycles alternating with (2Fobs − Fcalc) map
calculations to reﬁne and complete the structural model.

Such an approach requires prior knowledge of the scatter-
ing factors of the balls and of their number N. However it does
not need prior knowledge of the geometry of the support with
vanishing electron density. When applied to the experimental
speckle pattern considered in this paper, such an algorithm did
not succeed, probably owing to unavoidable errors in the mea-
surements and in the model scattering function (the gold balls
do not exactly have the same radius).

This negative result has stimulated the search of a more gen-
eral phasing procedure, described in this paper, based on the
following general conditions:

a. no prior knowledge of the scattering factor of the gold

balls or of their number;

b. no use of any support, as masks based on the autocorre-

lation function or SEM images.

While a diffuse scattering pattern may be generated by a
complex transmission function in real space, the algorithm de-
scribed in this paper is restricted to real densities, such as the
charge density for X-rays, or the electrostatic potential for elec-
tron diffraction. Examples of complex objects include those de-
scribed by a complex refractive index with signiﬁcant spatial
variation in absorption, or multiple scattering effects in electron
or X-ray diffraction. We then assume that Friedel’s law holds,
and note that this constraint may hinder the precise reconstruc-
tion of the structure, if the imaginary component of the scatter-
ing is not negligible with respect to the real part.

2. Experimental

The experimental soft X-ray transmission diffraction pattern
from two clusters of gold balls of 50 ± 5 nm diameter deposited
on a silicon nitride window was recorded at the Advanced Light
Source at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, using soft x-rays
with a wavelength of 2.1 nm (He et al., 2003). The experiments
used the “pink” 588 eV (2.11 nm) photon beam at beam-line

2

9.0.1. Features of the beam line include: a 0.5 µm-thick, 750
µm-square Be window to separate the UHV beam line from the
low-vacuum sample environment; a monochromator consisting
of an off-axis segment of a zone plate and the diffraction exper-
iment itself ( Fig. A.). Samples were made by placing a droplet
of solution containing ‘gold conjugate’ colloidal gold balls on
a silicon nitride window (thickness 100 nm) and allowing it to
dry. The gold balls formed several single layered (2D) clusters
on the SiN membranes, as imaged by a ﬁeld-emission scanning
electron microscope (SEM).

The x-ray coherence length lc must be greater than the max-
imum path difference between any pair of interfering rays, i.e.
lc > wQ max where w is the width of the sample and Q max is the
maximum diffraction angle. For our geometry and wavelength,
Q max = 0.12 radians and the resolution limit is 8.4 nm. For the
5µm aperture (effectively the monochromator exit slit) shown in
Fig. A., the resolving power is about 500, the coherence length
is then 1µm and the maximum sample illumination area 8×8
µm2. Similarly the (spatial) coherence patch provided by the 5
µ m aperture is 10×10 µm2. Allowing for an empty (but still co-
herently illuminated) band around the sample, its allowed size
is thus < 4×4 µm2.

The periodic boundary conditions which are necessarily im-
posed in the DM approach are now considered. Correct sam-
pling of the diffraction-plane intensity avoids aliasing of the
autocorrelation function, and is given by Shannon’s sampling
theory. The Shannon interval for frequency-space sampling of
the intensity is 1/(2w)=D
/λz where z is the sample-to-detector
distance and D
is the detector-plane increment (a 25 µm CCD
pixel in our case). For our D and z values the Shannon theorem
also leads to a maximum sampling interval of 4 µm. This is the
correct sampling of the diffraction-plane intensity involving a
twofold oversampling in each direction of the diffraction-plane
wave complex amplitude.

In place of the atomic scattering factor required by DM, we
use the scattering distribution for a gold ball at 550 eV. The
semiangle Q
(see Fig. A.) subtended at the object by the ﬁrst
detector pixel beside the optic axis deﬁnes the lowest spatial fre-
quency 1/D = Q
/λ contributing to the reconstruction, and we
treat this pixel as the ﬁrst-order Bragg reﬂection - (1 0) Miller
indices - for a square two-dimensional unit cell with symme-
try P1. The use of SIR2000 imposes periodic continuation of
this cell. For the performed experiments, D = 9.147 µm. For
our 1025 × 1025 CCD, the highest order reﬂection is (512,512);
the real-space resolution for pixel (512,0) at the boundary is
D/512 = 17.8 nm, giving about four pixels per gold ball in
the reconstructed image. The width of the region illuminated
by the beam is about B = 5 µm, which is less than the co-
herence width of the beam. The diffraction pattern consists of
the Airy’s disk-like pattern from a single ball, crossed by ﬁner
“speckle” fringes due to interference between different balls.
The ﬁrst zero for a ball rather than a disk occurs at a semian-
gle 1.4 λ/d, which occurs at the reﬂection with pixel (Miller)
indices (256, 0). (The spacing D1 corresponding to the angle
1.4×λ/d is: D1=d/1.4=50/1.4=35.7 nm. As we have assumed
D=9.147 micron, the index is: D×1.4/50=256).

Figure A. shows a SEM image of a random set of gold balls
of 50nm diameter at 550 eV. Figure A. gives the corresponding
diffraction pattern, showing ﬁne speckle fringes modulating the
pattern expected from a sphere. The ﬁrst minimum of this pat-
tern occurs at a value of sinθ/λ = 1.4/d, where d is the diameter
of the ball (the factor 1.4 is replaced by 1.2 for a disk).

The number of the measured reﬂections (Friedel pairs in-
cluded) is 992061, for data resolution up to 126 ˚A, about one
quarter of the gold ball diameter; the number of measured
unique reﬂections (Friedel opposite merged) is REFL = 522517;
the number of unique reﬂections, not measured because of the
beam stop, is UREFL = 1365.

3. The new phasing procedure
The new procedure uses only the electron density modiﬁcation
subroutine of the SIR2002 software package. In real space, only
a small portion of pixels with the highest values (about 0.25 per-
cent) were selected as deﬁning the region inside the support for
the current estimate of the density function. In reciprocal space,
the phasing proceeded gradually from low-order reﬂections out-
ward. The modulus constraint was applied in each cycle. The
initial assignment of phases is random. We assume that:

a. the nature and the number of the scatterers are unknown
(consequently, their scattering factors are also unknown);

b. anomalous dispersion effects can be neglected. Accord-
ingly, only the set of unique reﬂections will be considered
in the calculations. Thus the intensities of the Friedel op-
posites are merged.

The above assumptions exclude most of the steps of the stan-
dard SIR2002 procedure: e.g., the normalization of the structure
factors , the tangent process, the HAFR reﬁnement cycles and
the least squares process (see section 1). Accordingly, the new
SIR2002 procedure consists only of cycles of electron density
modiﬁcation ρ → {ϕ} → ρ. The phasing process may be parti-
tioned into two steps.

STEP 1 - Because of their importance (see section 4), only
low resolution reﬂections are used initially in the phasing pro-
cess. A resolution threshold TRH is deﬁned, equal to 0.25 of
the experimental data resolution. The program starts by assign-
ing random phases to a very limited number (2500) of reﬂec-
tions. Then 60 macrocycles, each constituted by 9 microcycles
ρ → {ϕ} → ρ are performed. During a macrocycle the number
of phased reﬂections used in each hemicycle {ϕ} → ρ progres-
sively increases up to NREFTRH (this is the number of unique
reﬂections satisfying the threshold resolution TRH; in our case
NREFTRH= 52500). In each hemicycle ρ → {ϕ} the number
of grid points of the electron density map used for calculating
phases is 0.0025 of their total number (we select the grid values
with highest intensity).

At the end of each macrocycle the program estimates, in
the hemicycle ρ → {ϕ}, the intensities and the phases of the
UREFL reﬂections. The intensities are used as the observed
values in the next cycle, and are updated (together with the cal-
culated phases) at the end of every macrocycle (modulus con-
straint).

research papers

STEP 2 - The phasing process is extended to the full set of ex-
perimentally available reﬂections. The phase values obtained in
the STEP 1 for the low resolution reﬂections are used as pivots
in the phasing process: their new values (obtained at the end of
each macrocycle) are always combined with the values obtained
at the end of the STEP 1. By contrast , the UREFL reﬂections
are recalculated as in the STEP 1.

These steps deﬁne the relationship between the new proposed
algorithm and the classical HIO procedure. The new algorithm:

a. varies, from microcycle to microcycle, the number of

structure factors used in the calculation of ρ.

b. limits the number of grid points in the electron density
map, whose intensities are used to compute the phases.
This practice is not suggested by the fact that the balls
occupy a small part of the total area. Indeed a similar
procedure is used by the standard version of SIR2002 for
solving ab initio the crystal structure of the proteins, and
also of small molecules, which ﬁll more densely the unit
cell (only about 2% of the pixels are used for the elec-
tron density inversion). In the case of oversampling, the
percentage may be further reduced because the unit cell
contains a large empty region.

No information on the geometry of the support is used. This
is an advantage when such information is unknown or imper-
fectly deﬁned in the experiment.

4. Analysis of the diffraction data and of the results.

Two features of the experimental diffraction pattern are evident.
The ﬁrst one regards the average intensity hIi as a function of
the resolution d (calculated in ˚A), plotted in Fig. A.. We see that
the intensities of the low order beams are very intense in com-
parison with the high orders. The phasing process, therefore,
is expected to be dominated by the inner region of the pattern.
This is the reason why our phasing procedure tries ﬁrst: a) to
phase low frequency reﬂections, and then uses them as pivots in
a phase extension process; b) to estimate the number UREFL of
unobserved low frequency intensities. The subsequent estimates
of these beam-stop reﬂections play a crucial role in the success
of the procedure: without their use the phasing process may fail.
A similar observation was reported by Wu and Spence (2003)
that the intensities of low-resolution fractional reﬂections cal-
culated using a Hilbert transform formula was found to be im-
portant in performing phase extension.

The second feature that should be evidenced is that I(h, k) is
not perfectly symmetrical: signiﬁcant deviations from Friedel’s
law were noted. This may be due to three reasons:

a. Unavoidable parasitic scattering or absorption. For a well
designed experiment the effects of parasitic scattering
or absorption (border effects, silicon nitride absorption,
etc. . . ) should be minimized. The success of our phasing
process indicates that this is the case for our experiment.

3

research papers

b. Effects of anomalous scattering. If the balls are assumed
to be identical, the scattering amplitudes Fh,k and F−h,−k
should be equal, however the corresponding phases are
not constrained to reverse sign under index inversion
(Spence et al. , 2003). Since the radii of the balls satisfy
a non-delta distribution, and since the balls may be elas-
tically deformed, we may be expected that the equality
|Fh,k| = |F−h,−k| is not strictly obeyed. The deviations,
however, are expected to be small.

c. Incorrect identiﬁcation of the (0,0) pixel in the detector (

zero-pixel ) ;

Since the effects of a) are expected to be small, we can iden-

tify the zero-pixel as the one for which the value of

h,k (|F + − Fmed| + |F − − Fmed|)
h,k (F + + F −)

,

Rmerge =

P
is a minimum, where

P

Fmed =

F + + F −

/2 ,

(2)

(3)

(cid:0)
with F+ and F− to represent Fh,k and F−h,−k respectively.

(cid:1)

The application of eq. (2) to the experimental pattern shown
in Fig. A. did not suggest any origin shift. (We report in the Ap-
pendix A the results obtained when we applied eq. (2) to the
pattern shown in Fig. A.).

The deviation from Friedel’s law decreases at increasing val-
ues of sinθ/λ (see Fig. A.) where the value of Rmerge is plot-
ted against the resolution d ( ˚A). Such a trend does not comply
with the expected behaviour of the anomalous dispersion ef-
fects, which usually increase with sinθ/λ. This suggests that the
deviations from Friedel law are mainly due to unavoided para-
sitic scattering and to errors in measurements. (At high resolu-
tion, the diffraction intensities are particularly faint).

We now consider the results of our phasing algorithm. The
image resulting at the end of the phasing procedure(as shown
by the computer screen) is shown in Fig. A.: it is in good agree-
ment with the experimental SEM image shown in Fig. A. (apart
from a shift of origin).

We require now a quantitative measure of the efﬁciency of
our phasing approach, and of the accuracy of the calculated
model. Since we have ignored the scattering factors of the balls,
we cannot use standard crystallographic indicators as a mea-
sure of agreement between experiment and calculations (i.e.
the crystallographic residual between the observed and the scat-
tered intensities). To overcome this problem we treat the Fourier
coefﬁcients obtained by Fourier inversion of the ﬁnal, suitably
modiﬁed, electron density map as the “calculated” structure fac-
tors (Fcalc in the following). The ﬁnal map produced by SIR2002
is modiﬁed (before the Fourier inversion) as follows:

ρ(x, y) =

ρ(x, y)
0

(

if ρ(x, y) > hρi + nσ
otherwise.

(4)

hρi is the average value of the unmodiﬁed electron density map,
σ is its standard deviation. We show in Table 1 the residual

4

RES =

h,k(|Fobs − |Fcalc||)
h,k Fobs

,

P

(5)

for various values of n. It may be observed that:

P

a. the value of RES does not signiﬁcantly change when n
varies from 1 to 7. For any value of n, RES is signiﬁ-
cantly larger than the ﬁgures usually obtained for small
molecule crystals at the end of the structure reﬁnement
process. Our previous observations suggest that this is
probably due to experimental errors in the intensities
rather than to some intrinsic lack of convergence of the
phasing algorithm.

b. the electron density function is well separated into two
domains: the domain where the scattering balls are con-
ﬁned, and an empty region;

c. the reﬁnement process converged to a satisfactory model.

We have calculated, for the case n = 1, the value of RES
against resolution (a similar trend is obtained for other values
of n). We observe (see Fig. A.) that RES substantially increases
with sinθ/λ: this behaviour is partially expected since the high
angle intensities are weak, but some systematic errors may re-
main. Luckily the error is smaller for low angle intensities: they
drive the phasing process to convergence in spite of the large
residual at high angles.

In Fig. A. we show the map obtained by application of the
“Shrinkwrap” HIO algorithm, in which a support is obtained
from the autocorrelation function, and then it is improved dur-
ing HIO iterations. The map was calculated by assuming |Fh,k|
= (|Fh,k| + | F−h,−k|)/2 and, for the phases, we assume ϕ–h,−k=
- ϕh,k, ensuring a real object. The map correctly reveals the ball
positions, but shows a high background level. In Table 1 we
show the values of RES for various n, obtained by using the
HIO algorithm. The RES values are much higher than those
obtained by the map provided by SIR2002, owing to the fact
that the HIO reﬁnement process is unable to eliminate the large
number of false low intensity peaks.

Finally, it is useful to verify the efﬁciency of our algorithm
when the data resolution is low. We therefore stopped the phas-
ing procedure at the end of STEP 1, when we had phased
NREFTRH = 51193 observed reﬂections and UREFL = 1365
beam-stop reﬂections. The data resolution was limited to 500
˚A, comparable with the diameter of the balls. SIR2002 algo-
rithm again succeeded, and produced the map shown in Fig. A..
We note that:

a. the structural model is essentially correct;

b. the RES value is equal to 20, smaller than the value ob-

tained at the end of STEP 2.

This last result is of particular interest: it shows that over-
sampling in reciprocal space provides such a high amount of
information that the phase problem may be solved even in those
cases in which the data resolution is insufﬁcient for crystal
structure solution.

research papers

Liao, C., Fiddy, M. & Byrne, C. (1997). J. Opt. Soc. Am., 14, 3155-
3161.

Marchesini, S., He, H., Chapman, H., Hau-Riege, S., Noy, A., How-
ells, M., Weierstall, U. & Spence, J.C.H. (2003). Phys Rev., 68,
140101(R) [arXiv:physics.optics/0306174].

Miao, J., Charalambous, C., Kirz, J. & Sayre, D. (1999). Nature, 400,
342-344.

Miao, J., Ishikawa, T., Johnson, E.H., Lai, B. & Hodgson, K. (2002).
Phys. Rev. Lett., 89,1-4.

Paganin, D. & Nugent, K. (1988). Phys. Rev. Lett., 80, 2586 – 2589.

Spence J.C.H., Wu, J.S., Giacovazzo, C., Carrozzini, B., Cascarano,
G.L. & Padmore, H.A. (2003). Acta Cryst., A59, 255-261.

Stark, H.(1987). Image recovery: Theory and Applications. New
York: Academic Press.

Wu, J.S. & Spence, J.C.H. (2003). Acta Cryst. A59, 577-583.

Zuo, J.M., Vartanyants, I.A., Gao, M., Zhang, M. & Nagahara, L.A.
(2003). Science, 300, 1419.

Table 1
The RES values for various n values (see main text ) are shown when the mod-
iﬁed SIR2002 and the HIO algorithms are used (column 2 and 3, respectively).

n

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

SIR2002

HIO

23
23
23
23
24
25
27

44
46
44
40
40
41
43

This conclusion raises a further question: what degree of

oversampling is optimal for solution of the phase problem?

In the absence of noise, Shannon’s theorem indicates that the
Nyquist rate allows reconstruction of the diffraction pattern at
any angle (between samples) if the samples are independent. In
the presence of noise, however, higher degree of oversampling:
a) produces a high correlation between the intensities of neigh-
bouring pixels. Thus the total amount of information does not
increases linearly with the amount of oversampling; b) requires
small detector pixels, variable working distance, and/or large
supports. These conditions are not always easily satisﬁed: the
ﬁrst demands a high quality detector, and the second, high spa-
tial coherence in the incident beam; c) generates a very large
number of reﬂections (particularly for the three-dimensional
case), not easily manageable using current computer programs.

5. Conclusions
A new phasing algorithm, based on the density modiﬁcation
portion of the SIR2002 direct-methods crystallographic pro-
gram, has been applied to soft X-ray scattering from a non-
periodic object. The algorithm successfully reconstructs unob-
served phases from diffuse (continuous) measured scattering
amplitudes. As a result, images of a cluster of 50 nm diame-
ter gold balls have been reconstructed. The results provide an
interesting comparison with the HIO Fienup-Gerchberg-Saxton
algorithm, which operates on closely related principles. By con-
trast, however, no knowledge of the object boundary is assumed,
and the SIR2002 phasing proceeds as a steadily increasing func-
tion of spatial frequency.

Appendix A.

We have calculated Rmerge as a function of the index shift for
the pattern shown in Fig A.. This is obtained from a distribution
of gold balls such as that shown in Fig. A.. The function Rmerge
is shown in Fig. A.. The minimum value of the Rmerge occurs
by subtracting 3 to h and adding 2 to k. After the origin shift
the average discrepancy between Friedel amplitudes decreases
from 8.99% (obtained for unshifted data) to 6.33%. The shift
for which the minimum is obtained is clearly deﬁned.

Acknowledgements.
This work was supported by ARO award DAAD190010500

(JCHS PI) and by the National Council of Research (Italy).

References
Bautschke, H., Combettes, P.L. & Luke, D. R. (2002). J. Opt. Soc.
Am., 19, 1344-1345.

Burla, M.C., Camalli, M., Carrozzini, B., Cascarano, G.L., Giacov-
azzo, C., Polidori, G., Spagna, R. (2003). J. Appl. Cryst., 36, 1103.

De Caro, L., Giacovazzo, C. & Siliqi, D. (2002). Acta Cryst., A58,
415 - 423.

Fienup, J.R. (1982). Appl. Optics, 21, 2758-2769.

Fienup, J.R. (1987). J. Opt. Soc. Am., 4, 118-123.

He, H., Marchesini, S., Howells, M., Weierstall, U., Hembree, G. &
Spence, J.C.H. (2003). Acta Cryst., A59, 143-152.

Figure 1
Set up of the diffraction experiment.

5

research papers

Figure 5
Rmerge versus the resolution d (in ˚A).

Figure 2
SEM image of a random set of gold balls of 50 nm diameter at 550 eV.

Figure 3
Experimental soft X-ray transmission diffraction pattern from the 50nm diam-
eter gold balls shown in Fig.2. The X-ray wavelength is 2.5 nm.

Figure 6
Recovered charge density from non-periodic array of 50nm diameter gold balls,
using the modiﬁed SIR2002 program.

Figure 4
The average intensity hIi is plotted against the resolution d (in ˚A).

Figure 7
Value of RES for n = 1 versus d (in ˚A).

6

research papers

Figure 8
Recovered charge density from non-periodic array of 50nm diameter gold balls
using the HIO algorithm.

Figure 10
Experimental soft X-ray transmission diffraction pattern from the 50nm diam-
eter gold balls shown in Fig.A2. The X-ray wavelength is 2.5 nm.

Figure 11
SEM image of a random set of 28 gold balls of 50 nm diameter at 550 eV.

Figure 9
Recovered charge density from non-periodic array of 50 nm diameter gold
balls, using the modiﬁed SIR2002 program at the end of STEP 1.

Figure 12
Behaviour of Rmerge between Friedel opposites as a function of the index shift
for the gold ball structure shown in Fig. A.
7

