PREPRINT

Submitted for publication in Optics Letters (2004)

Observation of surface states in a truncated two-dimensional photonic crystal slab

Yurii A. Vlasov,1, ∗ Nikolaj Moll,2 and Sharee J. McNab1
1IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
2IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory, R¨uschlikon, Switzerland
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The eﬀect of lattice termination on the surface states in a two-dimensional truncated photonic
crystal slab is experimentally studied in a high index contrast silicon-on-insulator system. A single-
mode silicon strip waveguide that is separated from the photonic crystal by a trench of variable
width is used to evanescently couple to surface states in the surrounding lattice. It is demonstrated
that the dispersion of the surface states depends strongly on the speciﬁc termination of the lattice.

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Two-dimensional (2D) slab-type photonic crystals
(PhC) are viewed as a promising platform for dense in-
tegration of discrete optical components into a photonic
integrated circuit (PIC). In almost all of the optical de-
vices based on 2D PhCs the periodicity of the PhC lat-
tice is locally disrupted to give rise to localized states
useful for the required functionality. However there is
another general class of localized states in PhCs - surface
states localized at the interface between the PhC and
the surrounding media1, which can become increasingly
important for engineering dense PICs. As in any ﬁnite
periodic system, the surface states in the PhC originate
from the abrupt termination of the crystal’s periodicity2.
Coupling of the waveguide modes or cavity resonances to
surface states in improperly truncated PhC devices can
disrupt light propagation and compromise device perfor-
mance. Surface states can also aﬀect the impedance, for
example at the interface of a PhC waveguide and a strip
waveguide3 and therefore diﬀerent truncations of the lat-
tice could be applied to improve impedance matching to
reduce coupling losses. Beaming and focusing has also
been recently demonstrated4,5 by changing the termina-
tion of the PhC lattice and hence surface states.

In this paper we present experimental studies of surface
states in truncated 2D PhC slabs fabricated in silicon-
on-insulator (SOI) wafers. 200mm diameter SOI wafers
with 220nm thick silicon device layer on top of 2µm thick
buried oxide (BOX) layer were patterned with electron
beam lithography and processed on a standard CMOS
fabrication line as reported elsewhere6. PhCs with a tri-
angular lattice were deﬁned by etching a periodic array
of circular holes down to the BOX layer. The hole di-
ameter D was set to 306nm with a lattice constant a
of 437nm and a silicon slab thickness of 0.5a (220nm).
Double-trench (DT) PhC waveguides consisting of a con-
ventional strip waveguide embedded in a PhC lattice [7,
8], were explored as a model system for probing surface
states. The core of the waveguide is formed by omitting
one row of holes in the PhC lattice in the Γ-M direc-
tion and etching two parallel trenches to deﬁne the strip
waveguide in the center. The width of the strip waveg-
uide W embedded in the PhC slab was chosen to be 0.6a
(263nm). The double-trench design of the PhC waveg-

FIG. 1: Set of SEM images of the PhC DT waveguides with
diﬀerent trench width (Wa) varying from 0.8a to 1.6a (top to
bottom).

uide allows the coupling between the modes in the strip
and in the PhC to be varied by changing the width of the
trench Wa that separates the strip from the surrounding
PhC lattice. At the same time a diﬀerent Wa implies a
diﬀerent truncation of the nearby holes of the PhC lattice
as shown in Fig. 1, thus providing a tool to manipulate
surface states.

Surface states are optically probed by inspecting the
transmission through the DT PhC waveguide with diﬀer-
ent truncations of the PhC lattice adjacent to the waveg-
uide channel. A pair of strip access waveguides of the
same width W is used for coupling into and out of the

PhC waveguide. These narrow strip waveguides are adi-
abatically tapered to a wider access waveguide with a
ﬁnal width of 465nm. For eﬃcient coupling of light into
and out of the device-under-test (DUT) the access strip
waveguides were terminated by a pair of spot-size con-
verters based on an inverted taper design6. The light
from a broadband (1200-1700nm) LED source is cou-
pled to the DUT via a tapered and microlensed PM ﬁber
and, after transmission through the DUT, is collected
by a microlensed SM ﬁber and analyzed with an OSA.
Further details of the experimental set-up are reported
elsewhere6.

Transmission spectra for the TE polarization measured
on a series of devices are shown in Fig. 2 for diﬀer-
ent trench widths Wa. The spectrum for the trench
width of Wa=1.6a can be used as a reference since the
interaction with the PhC modes is negligible for such
a wide trench and the spectrum is almost identical to
that of the isolated strip waveguide. The spectrum is
characterized by a nearly ﬂat band transmission over a
broad range of frequencies with a long-wavelength cut-
oﬀ around 0.304c/a (wavelength of 1440nm). With the
decrease of the trench width, and correspondingly the
distance to the PhC, a narrow dip appears at 0.317c/a
(wavelength of 1385nm). This dip was previously iden-
tiﬁed as originating from a narrow stopband appearing
at the Brillouin-zone boundary8. The attenuation at the
center of this dip gradually increases from 2.5dB to 26dB
as the trench width is decreased from 1.4a to 0.8a, and
can be used as a measure of the magnitude of interaction
of the mode in the strip waveguide with the periodic PhC
lattice.

The spectrum for the trench width of 1.2a is drasti-
cally diﬀerent from all other spectra in the set. Two
new sharp bands with strong attenuation (over 18dB)
appear at frequencies 0.322c/a and 0.325c/a. According
to theoretical predictions in Ref.7, the surface termina-
tion, which corresponds to Wa =1.2a, is favorable for
moving the surface states to the center of the photonic
gap. Correspondingly these changes in the transmission
spectrum can be interpreted as coupling of the mode in
the strip waveguide to the surface states localized at the
PhC interface. This interpretation is also supported by
the analysis of the ﬁeld pattern of the waveguiding mode
shown in the inset of Fig. 2. The ﬁeld pattern of the prop-
agating mode was acquired with an IR camera through
a 40X objective at the exit of a cleaved 500µm long DT
PhC waveguide. The resulting image is a wavelength av-
eraged ﬁeld distribution in the waveguide as the source is
a broadband LED. Examination of the ﬁeld pattern re-
veals the dramatic change from a nearly Gaussian mode
conﬁned predominantly in the slab center for the properly
terminated waveguide (Wa=0.8a) to a broadened mode
that is delocalized over the whole slab owing to the exci-
tation of surface states when Wa=1.2a.

To further analyze the interaction of the waveguiding
mode with surface states, photonic band structures were
calculated9. Diﬀerent trench widths Wa and hence dif-

1500

1450

1400

1350

1300

Wavelength (nm)

 1.6

 1.4

 1.2

 1.0

 0.8

0

i

)
a
/
c
(
 
n
o
s
s
m
s
n
a
r
T

i

-10

-20

-30

-40

2

 

0.8a

1.2a

0.29

0.30

0.31

0.32

0.33

0.34

0.35

Frequency (c/a)

FIG. 2: Set of transmission spectra for TE-polarized light
through DT PhC waveguides with diﬀerent trench widths.
Spectra were measured with a resolution of 0.5nm on waveg-
uides 500µm long. The cyan, blue, black, green and red spec-
tra correspond to nominal trench widths of 1.6a, 1.4a, 1.2a,
1.0a, and 0.8a respectively. Spectra are shifted vertically with
respect to each other by 1dB for clarity. Inset: Field proﬁles
of the TE-mode in DT PhC waveguides with trench widths of
0.8a (top) and 1.2a (bottom).The width of the ﬁeld of view
corresponds to 20µm.

ferent termination of the PhC surface are examined. As
a reference the dispersion of the waveguiding mode for
trench width of 1.6a is shown in Fig. 3b by a dashed
black line. It is almost identical to the dispersion of the
corresponding isolated strip waveguide, which is close to
linear for most of the frequency range of interest. The
sharp cut-oﬀ seen around 1440nm in the spectrum for the
Wa =1.6a (green line in Fig. 3a), is consistent with the
mode crossing the light line set by the silica cladding at
0.304c/a.

The photonic band diagram for the PhC with the
trench width Wa=1.2a is shown by the magenta open
circles in Fig. reﬃg3b. It is almost identical to the pre-
vious case except for the appearance of two surface modes
which cross the fundamental mode at 0.327c/a. For com-
parison with the band diagrams the experimental trans-
mission spectra are presented in Fig. 3a for Wa=1.6a,
Wa=1.0a and two nominally designed Wa=1.2a but fab-
ricated with diﬀerent exposure conditions. The origin of
the sharp dips in the experimental spectra can be asso-
ciated with the crossing of the surface modes with the
guiding mode in the photonic band diagram. The sharp
dip in the experimental spectrum for Wa=1.2a (shown by

Wavelength (nm) 

1500 1450

1400

1350

1300

a

)

i

B
d
(
 
n
o
s
s
m
s
n
a
r
T

i

)
a

/

2
(
 
r
o
t
c
e
v
e
v
a
W

0

-10

-20

-30

0.50

0.40

0.35

b

0.45

 

1

2

1

 

2

 

 

 

0.29

0.30

0.31

0.32

0.33

0.34

Frequency (c/a)

FIG. 3: (a): Set of transmission spectra for TE-polarized light
for DT PhC waveguides with diﬀerent widths of the trench.
Spectra were measured with low resolution (5nm) on waveg-
uides 500µm long. The cyan, green, blue and black spectra
correspond to the samples with the trench width 1.6a, 1.0a,
and two diﬀerent nominally 1.2a, respectively. (b) Set of pho-
tonic band structures calculated for the TE-like modes for
the DT PhC waveguides with diﬀerent trench widths. Green,
blue, black, and magenta open circles shows dispersion of only
the surface modes for the trench width of 1.0a, 1.12a, 1.17a,
and 1.2a, respectively. The dashed black curve represents
the undisturbed dispersion of the PhC waveguide when sur-
face states are pushed out of the photonic gap (Wa=0.8a).
The thin solid black line represents the light line of the sil-
ica cladding layer. Right hand panel:
In-plane magnetic
ﬁeld proﬁles of the two surface-localized modes calculated for
Wa=1.12a for the reduced wavevector of 0.4 (numbered 1 and
2 and marked in the main ﬁgure by open black circles).

a black line in Fig. 3a appears at 0.323c/a, a frequency
slightly lower than the crossing point of 0.327c/a seen
in the band diagram. This roughly 3% diﬀerence could
reasonably be attributed to a 3% error in determination
of the lattice parameters of the experimental structure.
Indeed if a slightly smaller trench width of Wa=1.17a
is assumed the photonic band calculations show a cross-
ing at 0.323c/a (black open circles in Fig. 3b). The sharp
dips around 1400nm in the blue spectrum in Fig. 3a (also
a nominally Wa=1.2a device but with a lower exposure
dose) can be ﬁtted in an analogous way by the band dia-
gram for a trench width Wa=1.12a (blue open circles in
Fig. 3b). The transmission spectrum for a PhC with a

3

FIG. 4: Magniﬁed view of the photonic band diagram for the
TE-like modes for the DT PhC waveguides with the trench
width of 1.17a. Solid (dashed) lines correspond to bands of
even (odd) symmetry with respect to the xz plane bisecting
the slab along the waveguide direction.
Images 1-4 repre-
sent the in-plane time-averaged magnetic ﬁeld power density
calculated for corresponding wavevectors marked 1-4 in the
photonic band diagram.

nominal trench width of Wa=1.0a (green line in Fig. 3a
does not diﬀer considerably from the reference spectrum
for Wa=1.6a (cyan line in Fig. 3a). However close inspec-
tion reveals enhanced attenuation at frequencies below
the light line cut-oﬀ, where bands associated with surface
states cross the fundamental mode at around 0.295c/a.
Further insight into the coupling to surface states can
be provided by inspection of the magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles.
The right hand panel of Fig. 3 represents ﬁeld proﬁles for
the case of Wa=1.17a calculated for the reduced wavevec-
tor of 0.4 far from the crossing region. Two surface modes
form a pair of even and odd states with respect to the
xz plane bisecting the slab along the waveguide direc-
tion. The odd mode (point 1) can not be excited from
the input access strip waveguide and, correspondingly, it
crosses the strip-localized fundamental mode without in-
teraction and does not contribute to transmission. The
even mode (point 2) has the same symmetry as the fun-
damental mode in the strip and, correspondingly, they
can interact with each other at the crossing. This inter-
action can be further facilitated by the considerable ﬁeld
intensity of the even surface mode in the central strip
waveguide.

4

Figure 4, a magniﬁed portion of the band diagram
for Wa=1.17a around 0.323c/a, reveals classical anti-
crossing behavior. The time-averaged magnetic ﬁeld en-
ergy density proﬁles for the fundamental mode related
to the strip waveguide and the even surface mode are
presented on top of Fig. 4. It is seen that for frequen-
cies far away from the anti-crossing region (point 1) the
ﬁeld proﬁle is localized predominantly in the central strip.
At the anti-crossing of the strip-related mode and even
surface mode two mixed states are formed: one which
is mostly surface localized (point 2) and another mostly
strip-localized (point 4). A mini-stopband forms at the
anti-crossing resulting in strong attenuation of the trans-
mission spectrum.

The transmission dip has a pronounced doublet struc-
ture indicating a more complex interaction. It can be sug-
gested that the spectral shape of the transmission spec-
trum in the anti-crossing region is strongly aﬀected by
the eﬃciency of coupling from the access strip waveguide
to the DT PhC waveguide. It is seen that the edges of
the mini-stopband are formed by two states (points 2 and

3 in Fig. 4), which are predominantly surface-localized,
and, correspondingly, have poor coupling eﬃciency to the
access strip waveguides. Therefore attenuation can occur
even for frequencies beyond the boundaries of the mini-
stopband, with the spectral shape dependent on the way
in which the energy in the mode is redistributed between
states predominantly localized in the strip and the sur-
face.

In conclusion, the inﬂuence of surface termination on
the dispersion of surface states in truncated PhCs is ex-
perimentally demonstrated in a DT PhC waveguide sys-
tem. Using photonic band calculations it is shown that
sharp dips in the transmission spectra originate from cou-
pling to surface modes. It is demonstrated that depend-
ing on the exact location of the truncation with respect
to the unit cell of the PhC lattice the surface states can
either be positioned at the center of the photonic gap
where they interact strongly with the waveguiding mode
in the strip waveguide, or be pushed away from the gap
and do not contribute to transmission.

∗ Corresponding author; e-mail: yvlasov@us.ibm.com
1 W. M. Robertson, G. Arjavalingam, R. D. Meade, K. D.
Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, ”Observa-
tion of surface photons on periodic dielectric arrays”, Opt.
Lett. 18, 528 (1993).

2 D. Kossel, ”Analogies between thin-ﬁlm optics and electron
band theory of solids”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 56, 1434 (1966).
3 J. Ushida et al., ”Immittance matching for multidimen-
sional open-system photonic crystals”, Phys. Rev.B 68,
155115 (2003)

4 E. Moreno, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, and L. Martin-Moreno, ”En-
hanced transmission and beaming of light via photonic crys-
tal surface modes” Phys. Rev. B, 69, 121402 (R) (2004).
5 P. Kramper et al., ”Highly directional emission from pho-
tonic crystal waveguides of subwavelength width”, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 92, 113903 (2004).

6 S. J. McNab, N. Moll, and Yu. A. Vlasov, ”Ultra-low loss
photonic integrated circuit with membrane-type photonic
crystal waveguides”, Optics Express, 11, 2927, 2003.

7 W. T. Lau, and S. Fan, ”Creating large bandwidth line
defects by embedding dielectric waveguides into photonic
crystal slabs,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 3915, 2002.

8 Yu. A. Vlasov, N. Moll and S. J. McNab, ”Mode mixing
in asymmetric double-trench photonic crystal waveguides”,
Journ. Appl. Phys., 95, 4095 (2004).

9 S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, ”Block-iterative
frequency-domain methods for Maxwell’s equations in a
planewave basis,” Optics Express 8, 173, 2001.

