Optical ﬁber coupling to planar photonic crystal microcavities

Paul E. Barclay,∗ Kartik Srinivasan, and Oskar Painter
Department of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A technique is demonstrated which eﬃciently transfers light between a tapered standard single-
mode optical ﬁber and a resonant mode of a high-Q photonic crystal cavity with mode volume less
than a cubic wavelength in size. Cavity mode quality factors of 4.7 × 104 are measured, and a total
ﬁber-to-cavity coupling eﬃciency of 44% is demonstrated.

PACS numbers:

4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Recently it has been demonstrated that resonant mi-
crocavities formed in planar photonic crystals (PC) are
capable of not only conﬁning light to ultra-small optical
mode volumes[1], but can also be made of high enough
quality to enable photon cavity lifetimes capable of, for
instance, reaching strong-coupling with atomic Cs[2] or
In many of the
semiconductor quantum dots[1, 3, 4].
proposed applications of such PC cavities in quantum,
nonlinear, and integrated optics, the ability to eﬃciently
interface the PC cavities with external optics is also of
critical importance. In particular, using high-Q PC cav-
ities for chip based cavity-QED (cQED) [2] or in single-
photon sources [5], where photon collection is an impor-
tant measure of device performance [6], requires an ef-
ﬁcient coupling scheme to the sub-micron cavity mode.
The diﬃculty in optically accessing PC cavities is largely
a result of their ultra-small mode volumes and external
radiation pattern, which unlike micropost [7] and Fabry-
Perot [8] cavities, is not inherently suited to coupling
with conventional free-space or ﬁber optics. In this Let-
ter we present an optical ﬁber-based coupling technique,
and employ it to eﬃciently source and collect light from
the resonant modes of a high-Q PC cavity.

An illustration of the coupling scheme is shown in Fig.
1(a). Evanescent coupling between an optical ﬁber taper
[9] and a planar photonic crystal waveguide (PCWG) is
initially used to interface with the PC chip. Once on the
chip, light is guided to a PC cavity at the terminus of the
PCWG. This PC cavity-waveguide system was previously
studied in Refs. [10], where the fundamental (T E1) mode
of the PCWG (Fig. 1(c)) was designed to mode-match
1(b)).
with the fundamental (A2) cavity mode (Fig.
The mode-matched cavity acts as a mirror with high re-
ﬂectivity, ro(ω), except at the frequencies of the localized
cavity states, where light can resonantly tunnel between
the PCWG and the cavity. The reﬂected signal from the
PC cavity is ﬁnally recollected into the backward propa-
gating ﬁber taper mode. Previous measurements of the
optical ﬁber-PCWG evanescent coupler have shown that
near unity coupling eﬃciency (97%) over a bandwidth
of roughly 15 nm[11] is possible, and in an independent
study, the A2 mode of the graded square lattice PC cavity
was measured to have a Q-factor of 4 × 104 and a mode
localization consistent with an eﬀective mode volume of

FIG. 1: (a) Illustration of the ﬁber-PC cavity coupling pro-
cess. The dashed line is meant to represent the band-edge
frequency in the planar PC as a function of the position z
along the waveguide axis, with the shaded region representing
the bandwidth of the fundamental PCWG mode. Magnetic
ﬁeld proﬁle of (b) the high-Q PC cavity A2 mode, and (c) the
fundamental T E1 PCWG mode.

Veﬀ = 0.9(λ/n)3[1].
In this work we aim to study the
eﬃciency with which the PCWG can load the PC cavity
using this ﬁber-coupled approach.

As proposed in Ref. [12], the interaction between the
PC cavity and the external PCWG can be described by
two key parameters, the coupling parameter K and the
ideality factor I:

K ≡

I ≡

,

γe
0
o + Pi6=0 γe
γi
i
γe
0
Pi γe
i

,

(1)

(2)

where the cavity mode is characterized by its resonance
frequency ωo, its intrinsic photon loss rate (γi
o) in ab-
sence of the external PCWG, and its coupling rates to
the fundamental (T E1 mode) and higher order (includ-
ing radiating) modes of the external PCWG, γe
i>0,
respectively.
I and K describe the degree of “good”
loading (via the PCWG T E1 mode in this case) rela-

0 and γe

2

inside the resonant cavity is an important parameter,
one can write for the on-resonance internal stored energy
U = (1 − Ro(ωo))Qi+P Pi, where Pi is the input power
in the “good” loading channel. The maximum stored en-
ery in the resonator occurs at Kmax = I/(2 − I), giving
a peak stored energy Umax = I(Qi/ωo)Pi which scales
directly with I.

The integrated PC cavity-waveguide design employed
here has two important features which serve to maxi-
mize I: (i) the waveguide and cavity modes have sim-
ilar transverse ﬁeld proﬁles (see Figs. 1(b-c)) which al-
lows the cavity to be eﬃciently loaded end-on, and (ii)
the end-ﬁre PCWG-cavity geometry restricts the cav-
ity to a single dominant output channel, in contrast to
side-coupled geometries [4] in which the cavity radiates
equally into backward and forward propagating PCWG
modes (bounding K < 1 and I ≤ 0.5). The geome-
try in this PC cavity-waveguide system is analogous to
a Fabry-Perot cavity with a high reﬂectivity back mir-
ror and a lower reﬂectivity front mirror through which a
mode-matched input beam sources the cavity.

In this work, the PC cavity and PCWG devices were
fabricated in an optically thin layer (thickness 340 nm)
of silicon as described in Ref. [13]. As shown in Fig. 3, a
trench extending diagonally from the cavity was deﬁned
to allow direct cavity probing[1]. Also, for these devices
the loading of the PC cavity was set by the 9 periods of
air holes between the center of the PC cavity and the end
of the PCWG. A ﬁber-coupled swept wavelength (1565
- 1625 nm) laser source was used to measure the wave-
length dependent forward transmission ( ¯T ) through the
ﬁber taper. The reﬂected signal in the backward propa-
gating ﬁber taper mode ( ¯R) was also monitored in order
to study the reﬂective properties of the PC cavity.

With the ﬁber taper placed above and parallel the
PCWG, at phase-matching ¯T decreases resonantly as
power is coupled from the taper into the PCWG. Cou-
pling to the T E1 PCWG mode was veriﬁed by studying
its dispersive and spatial properties[13]. The frequency
of the A2 cavity mode was also independently determined
by probing the cavities directly with the ﬁber taper as de-
scribed in Ref. [1]. Two mechanisms were then employed
to bring the ﬁber taper-PCWG coupling bandwidth into
resonance with an A2 cavity mode. Coarse tuning was
obtained by adjusting, from sample to sample, the nomi-
nal hole size and longitudinal lattice constant (Λz) of the
PCWG. Fine tuning of the coupler’s center wavelength
over a 100 nm wavelength range was obtained by adjust-
ing the position, and hence diameter, of the ﬁber taper
region coupled to the PCWG.

Figure 3(a) shows the normalized reﬂected ﬁber sig-
nal, ¯R, for a taper diameter d ∼ 1 µm which aligns
the taper-PCWG coupler bandwidth with that of the
A2 PC cavity mode. This signal is normalized to the
taper transmission in absence of the PCWG, and since
light passes through the taper-PCWG coupler twice, is

FIG. 2: SEM image of an integrated PCWG-PC cavity sam-
ple. The PC cavity and PCWG have lattice constants Λ ∼ 430
nm, Λx ∼ 430 nm, and Λz ∼ 550 nm. The surrounding sili-
con material has been removed to form a diagonal trench and
isolated mesa structure to enable ﬁber taper probing.

tive to the total loading of the resonator, and the para-
sitic and intrinsic loss channels of the resonator, respec-
tively. On resonance, the fraction of the optical power re-
ﬂected by the cavity back into the PCWG mode is given
by, Ro(ωo) = (1 − K)2/(1 + K)2. The remaining (frac-
tional) optical power, 1 − Ro(ωo), is absorbed inside the
PC cavity or radiated into the parasitic output channels.
The measured reﬂection resonance linewidth is given by
the sum of the loss rates for all of the loss channels,
δω = γi
i . The quality factor of the PC cavity
mode due to intrinsic and parasitic loss (i.e., those loss
channels other than the “good” PCWG T E1 channel)
can then be determined from Ro(ωo) and δω,

o + Pi γe

Qi+P = 2QT

= QT (1 + K),

(3)

1
1 ± pRo(ωo)

where the total loaded quality factor is QT = ωo/δω,
and where the ± corresponds to under- and over- coupled
(K ≶ 1), respectively. On resonance, full power transfer
(critical coupling) from the “good” loading channel to
the resonant PC cavity mode occurs when K = 1.

Whereas K determines the amount of power dropped
by the resonator, the role of I is more subtle.
In the
case of an internal emitter, the collection eﬃciency (η0)
of emitted photons into the “good” loading channel is,

η0 =

γe
0
o + Pi γe
γi
i

=

1
1 + 1/K

.

(4)

The quality factor of the loaded resonant cavity mode
can be written in terms of K, I, and Qi as QT /Qi =
1 − K/(I(1 + K)) = 1 − η0/I. Thus, for a given col-
lection eﬃciency, to maximize the photon lifetime in
the cavity I should be maximized. For non-linear op-
tical phenomena, where the peak electric-ﬁeld strength

3

∆R seen in Fig. 3(c) is a result of interference between
the T E1 mode and higher-order PCWG modes which are
excited and collected by the taper, and is not a manifesta-
tion of improved coupling between the T E1 PCWG mode
and the A2 PC cavity mode.

From a Lorentzian ﬁt to the A2 cavity resonance dip,
the normalized on-resonance reﬂected power is estimated
to be Ro(ωo) = 0.40, corresponding to an undercoupled
K = 0.225, with a loaded quality factor of QT = 3.8×104.
Substituting these values into Eq. (3) gives for the cavity
mode quality factor due to parasitic loading and intrinsic
losses, Qi+P = 4.7 × 104. Previous measurements of sim-
ilar PC cavity devices without an external PCWG load
yielded intrinsic quality factors of 4 × 104 [1], strongly
indicating that the parasitic loading of the PC cavity by
the PCWG is minimal, and I ∼ 1 for this PC cavity-
waveguide system. The input power dependence of the
lineshape of the A2 PC cavity mode was also investi-
gated, with thermal bistability observed for input powers
as small as 1 mW. Further details of these measurements
will be reported elsewhere.

The eﬃciency of power transfer from the ﬁber taper
into the PC cavity is given by, ηin = ηwg∆R ≈ 44%,
which corresponds to the total percentage of photons in-
put to the ﬁber taper which are dropped by the PC-cavity
(the ﬁber taper itself typically has a loss of less than
10%). In the case of an internal emitter light source, the
eﬃciency of collection into the ﬁber taper for this PC cav-
ity system would be, ηout = ηwgη0 ≈ 13% (η0 ≈ 18%).
Previous measurements of near-ideal coupling between
the ﬁber taper and PCWG[11] indicate that by adjust-
ing the PCWG as described above, ηin and ηout can be
increased to 58% and 18%, respectively. More substan-
tially, adjustements in the coupling parameter K towards
over-coupling by decreasing the number of air-hole peri-
ods between the PC cavity and the PCWG can result in
signiﬁcant increases in ηin and ηout with minimal penalty
in loaded Q-factor for I ∼ 1.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated an optical ﬁber
coupling scheme to eﬃciently source and collect light
from high-Q ultra-small mode volume PC cavities. This
technique should be useful for future experiments in non-
linear optics and cQED, where eﬃcient optical interfacing
to planar PC cavities is important.

∗

Electronic address: pbarclay@caltech.edu

[1] K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, M. Borselli,

and
O. Painter, Submitted to PRL, available online at
http://arXiv.org/quant-ph/0309190 (2003).

[2] B. Lev, K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, O. Painter, and
H. Mabuchi, http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0402093, to
appear in Nanotechnology (2004).

[3] K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, O. Painter, J. Chen, A. X.
Cho, and C. Gmachl, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83(10), 1915

(a) Measured reﬂected taper signal as a function
FIG. 3:
of input wavelength (taper diameter d ∼ 1 µm, taper height
g = 0.80 µm). The sharp dip at λ ∼ 1589.7 nm, highlighted in
panel (b), corresponds to coupling to the A2 cavity mode. (c)
Maximum reﬂected signal (slightly detuned from the A2 res-
onance line), and resonance reﬂection contrast as a function
of taper height.

given by ¯R = η2
wgRo (note that both Ro and ηwg are fre-
quency dependent). In Figure 3(a), the peak in ¯R around
λ ∼ 1590 nm corresponds to the phase-matched point of
the ﬁber taper and the T E1 PCWG mode. From the
peak value of ¯Rmax = 0.53, a peak taper-PCWG cou-
pling eﬃciency of ηwg ∼ 73% is estimated (where the oﬀ-
resonant Ro is assumed to be unity). This value is lower
than the 97% obtained in previous work[11] due to cou-
pling to additional higher-order (normal to the Si slab)
PCWG modes which interfere with the coupling to the
fundamental T E1 PCWG mode for strong taper-PCWG
coupling. This can be avoided in future devices by in-
creasing the nominal PCWG hole size relative to that
in the PC-cavity or reducing the Si slab thickness, eﬀec-
tively freezing out the higher-order PCWG modes[13].

The sharp dip in reﬂection at λ ∼ 1589.7 nm, shown
in detail in Fig. 3(b), corresponds to resonant excita-
tion of the A2 PC cavity mode, as conﬁrmed by di-
rect ﬁber probing of the cavity. The other broad fea-
tures in ¯R correspond to weak Fabry-Perot eﬀects of
the PCWG. The reﬂected ﬁber taper signal as a func-
tion of taper-PCWG hap height, g,
is shown in Fig.
3(c). For g ≥ 0.8 µm, ¯Rmax increases with decreas-
ing g as the coupling from the ﬁber taper to the T E1
PCWG mode becomes stronger. The reﬂection contrast,
∆R = 1 − Ro(ωo) = ( ¯Rmax − ¯R(ωo))/ ¯Rmax, however,
remains constant since the PCWG-cavity interaction is
independent of the ﬁber taper to PCWG coupling. For
smaller taper-PCWG gap heights, g < 0.8 µm, ﬁber ta-
per coupling into higher order PCWG modes and radia-
tion modes becomes appreciable, and ¯Rmax decreases for
decreased taper height. The corresponding increase in

4

[4] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda, Nature

[9] J. Knight, G. Cheung, F. Jacques, and T. Birks, Opt.

(2003).

425, 944 (2003).

[5] J.-M. Gerard, Solid State Cavity-Quantum Electrody-
namics with Self-Assembled Quantum Dots (Springer-
Verlag, Germany, 2003), pp. 269–314.

[6] G. Brassard, N. Lutkenhaus, T. Mor, and B. Sanders,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(6), 1330 (2000).

[7] M. Pelton, C. Santori,

J. Vuckovic, B. Zhang,
G. Solomon, J. Plant, and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 299602 (2002).

[8] J. McKeever, A. Boca, A. D. Boozer, R. Miller, J. R.
Buck, A. Kuzmich, and H. J. Kimble, Science 303(5666),

1992 (2004).

Lett. 22(15), 1129 (1997).

Am. B 20(11), 2274 (2003).

[10] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, and O. Painter, J. Opt. Soc.

[11] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter,

Opt. Lett. 29(7), 697 (2004).

[12] S. M. Spillane, T. J. Kippenberg, O. J. Painter, and K. J.

Vahala, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91(4), 043902 (2003).

[13] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter,
To appear in Appl. Phys. Lett., available online at
http://arXiv.org/quant-ph/0308070 (2003).

