4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Noise-seeded spatio-temporal modulation instability in normal dispersion

D. Salerno,1,2 O. Jedrkiewicz,1 J. Trull,3 G. Valiulis,4, Antonio Picozzi5 and P. Di Trapani1
1 INFM e dipartimento di ﬁsica e matematica, Universit´a dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, Italy.
2Facolt´a of Scienze, Universit´a di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20132 Milano, Italy.
3Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya. Departament de Fisica i
Enginyeria Nuclear C/ Colom 1, 08222 Terrassa (Barcelona) Spain
4 Department of Quantum Electronics, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 9-2040 Vilnius, Lithuania.
5 CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique de la Matire Condense, Universit´e de Nice, France
(Dated: January 8, 2014)

In optical second harmonic generation with normal dispersion, the virtually inﬁnite bandwidth
of the unbounded, hyperbolic, modulational instability leads to quenching of spatial multi-soliton
formation and to the occurrence of a catastrophic spatio-temporal break-up when an extended beam
is let to interact with an extremely weak external noise with coherence time much shorter than that
of the pump.

PACS numbers:

The noise-seeded instability of extended wave pack-
ets (WP) in conservative evolutional non-linear systems
is a general and relevant phenomenon in wave physics,
whose main manifestations are the appearance of regu-
lar modulations, wave break up and, eventually, local-
ized or soliton-like substructures. The theory used for
the description and interpretation of the resulting rich
phenomenology is that of the modulational instability
(MI) of plane and monochromatic waves, extensively in-
troduced in the context of gravity waves in deep waters
[1] and applied for several diﬀerent systems including
plasmas [2], electric circuits [3], Bose-Einstein conden-
sate [4] and, of course, optics [5]. The usually addressed
MI signature is the preferential noise ampliﬁcation at
a given, intensity dependent, (spatial or temporal) fre-
quency, which causes regular modulation in the direct
space and side-bands in the spectral domain. This fea-
ture suitably describes the MI of both mono-dimensional
(1D) systems and of multi-dimensional ”elliptical” ones,
i.e. those supporting equi-sign linear phase modulation
in all the available dimensions. However, it is gener-
ally not adequate for ”hyperbolic” systems, where op-
posite signs occur for diﬀerent dimensions. The ellip-
tical is the most frequently encountered regime in case
of matter waves in isotropic media. The hyperbolic, in
contrast, is the typical case of optical WPs in normally
dispersive bulk media, diﬀraction and chromatic disper-
sion leading in this case to linear phase modulations with
opposite signs. Recently, dispersion-management tech-
niques based on use of periodic potentials [6] have made
the hyperbolic regime of great interest also for the Bose-
Einstein Condensate (BEC) waves.

As clearly pointed out in the ﬁrst theoretical analysis
of hyperbolic MI performed by Luther et Al. [7] for Kerr
non-linearity in optics, and also evident from the anal-
ysis of the X (2)-driven MI [8], the the key feature that
distinguishes the hyperbolic (normal) from the elliptic
(anomalous) instability regime is that the MI gain proﬁle
in the k-ω space is unbounded in the ﬁrst (and only in the

ﬁrst) case. Indeed, in the frame of the usually adopted
parabolic approximation for the material dispersion, we
should say that any ﬂuctuation with arbitrarily large spa-
tial and temporal frequency shift respect to the carrier
mode has to be ampliﬁed, provided that both shifts lye on
the suitable hyperbolic surface in the k-ω domain.

The unbounded feature of the hyperbolic MI rises two
relevant questions: (i) the ﬁrst one concerns the interpre-
tation of the number of studies reguarding spatial MI in
multi-dimensional systems. Indeed, following the ﬁrst ex-
perimental MI demonstration in (anomalous dispersive)
1D-temporal optical ﬁbers [9], a number of experiments
have been performed in multi-dimensional (i.e. in planar
wave guides or in bulk samples) normal-dispersion ma-
terials, addressing the 1D spatial break up of extended
beams driven by quadratic [10, 11] as well as cubic [12]
ultrafast non-linear response. Surprisingly enough, the
results were successfully interpreted in terms of the di-
rect spatial analogous of the temporal MI of above, as
if the temporal degree of freedom and so the hyperbolic
nature of the instability had not taken any part in the
process. (ii) The second question concerns the scenario
that one should expect when the system interacts with
a very broad band (i.e. virtually δ-correlated) noise. In
this case, in fact, the unbounded feature of the MI gain
should lead one to forecast a catastrophic break in the
ST domain (e.g. down to the numerical grid in calcu-
lations, in the quoted approximation), no matter how
weak the input noise is. We note that the possible oc-
currence of such catastrophic dynamics has never been
considered in the literature. In fact, hyperbolic MI has
been studied only for the case of bell-shaped, noise-free,
input wave packets, e.g. for investigating the impact of
ST self-phase-modulation (SPM) on ﬁlament formation,
pulse splitting and related phenomena [7]. To the best
of our knowledge, the role of the noise has been con-
sidered only in the context of 1D models. The aim of
this work is that of providing experimental evidence of
the genuine hyperbolic feature of the noise-seeded MI in

2

FIG. 1: Calculated space-time proﬁles (bottom ﬁgure) and corresponding integrated ﬂuence proﬁles (top ﬁgure) for the fun-
−1, in
damental harmonic propagated in a 50mm lithium triborate (LBO) crystal in regime of ∆k = 2k(ω0) − k(2ω0) = 5cm
absence of noise (a and d), and with two diﬀerent kinds of noise (b and e): 6nm and 25mrad of bandwidth, (c and f): 20nm
and 50mrad. The intensity level of noise is 1%. The input is a gaussian FH WP with 1ps FWHM duration, 600µm FWHM
beam width, and 40GW/cm
peak intensity. Calculations are performed in the frame of 1D (spatial) + 1D (temporal) + 1D
(propagation) model. Asymmetry in the temporal coordinate is due to group-velocity mismatch.

2

bulk, normally dispersive, optical systems. To this end
we performed experiments and calculations in which, for
the ﬁrst time to our knowledge, a controlled, broad-band
noise is injected together with the strong, (quasi) plane
and monochromatic pump into the system.

The particular system that we have chosen to investi-
gate is the same as in Ref.
[13], i.e. that of an optical
WP shaped as a large (with respect to diﬀraction), elon-
gated beam and long (with respect to dispersion) pulse
that propagates in a X (2) non-linear crystal tuned for
second harmonic (SH) generation close to phase match-
ing. For the chosen crystal (lithium triborate, LBO) and
wavelength (ﬁrst harmonic, FH, 1055nm) the chromatic
dispersion (see caption to Fig. 1 for details) is such that
one should expect MI to take place in the hyperbolic
regime [8]. We performed numerical calculations in the
frame of 2D+1 model integrating (via FFT, split step
and Runge Kutta algorithms, with up to 15fs 6µm grid
and 40µm step) the χ(2) coupled-wave equations for FH
and SH envelopes Ej(z, x, t)

∗

1 exp(−i∆kz) = 0,

ˆL(ω0) E1 + χE2E
ˆL(2ω0) E2 + iδV ∂tE2 + χE2
−1 ∂2

1 exp(i∆kz) = 0,
− (k′′(ω)/2)∂2

tt, k′′ is
where ˆL(ω) ≡ i∂z + (2k(ω))
the group-velocity dispersion (GVD), δV = k′(2ω0) −

xx

(1)

k′(ω0) weighs the group-velocity mismatch (GVM), and
∆k = 2k(ω0) − k(2ω0). Figure 1 gives the calculated
ﬂuence (e.g. energy density) proﬁle of the FH at the
output of a 50 mm crystal (top), together with the corre-
sponding spatio-temporal (ST) intensity maps (bottom).
Figs. 1a,d, which refer to noise-free input, show the oc-
currence of a regular, highly contrasted, spatial break up
of the beam into a spatial-soliton array, which appears as
the consequence of MI seeding by the deterministic wave-
envelope modulation (WEM [13]). When the ST noise is
injected, WEM and noise-seeded MI compete and the re-
sults are those shown in Fig. 1b,c, and Fig.1e,f, where
the input-noise bandwidth (BW) is increased (from left
to right) while keeping ﬁxed the noise intensity at 1%
of the level of the pump. See how the impact of the
noise dramatically increases on enlarging its BW, owing
to the unbounded instability. Note how the noise, instead
of deepening the spatial modulation (as it occurs in the
frame of the 1D+1 models [10]), quenches it almost com-
pletely. The reason is the appearance of a ”chaotic gas”
of localized ST structures (Fig. 1f), which gets washed
out by the temporal integration.

In order to verify if the outlined catastrophic behavior
is a genuine physical eﬀect or an artefact of the approx-
imations adopted we performed a SH-generation labo-

3

FIG. 2: Measured ﬂuence proﬁles (top ﬁgure) of FH WP recorded by a CCD camera at the output of the 50mm-LBO crystal,
and (bottom ﬁgure) corresponding beam proﬁles (note that the horizontal scales of images and proﬁles are not the same) in
conditions: (a) and (d), with no noise; (b) and (e) with noise intensity 0.01% of that of the pump; (c) and (f), with 0.1% of
2
noise. The noise spatial and temporal BWs were respectively of 60mrad and 100nm. The input pump intensity was 20GW/cm
.
.

ratory experiment in similar conditions to those which
Fig. 1 refers to. To this end we used a strongly elon-
gated (1000x70 µm), long (1ps) pump WP, as clean as
possible from any spatial or temporal substructure, pro-
vided by a CPA Nd:Glass laser (TWINKLE, Light Con-
version). Then we superimposed to the pump a weak,
broad-bandwidth, ST noise, of controllable intensity, gen-
erated on a separate channel by a broad-band quantum-
noise parametric ampliﬁer. For the noise generation we
used a 15mm LBO crystal pumped by the SH of (a por-
tion of) our pump pulse. Both pump and noise WPs
were launched synchronously into a 50 mm LBO crystal,
tuned for phase matched SH generation. The spatial and
temporal BWs of the noise ﬁeld at the input of the SH
generator were 100 nm and 60 rad, respectively. Fig. 2
(top) shows the ﬂuence distributions of the FH beam at
the crystal output facet as recorded by a CCD camera
and suitable imaging optics. The corresponding proﬁles
(along the long axis of the beam) are given in Fig. 2
(bottom) for a more quantitative description. The re-
sults in the left, center and right part of the ﬁgure refer
to average noise ﬂuence 0, 0.01% and 0.1% of that of the
pump, respectively, for a ﬁxed noise ST BW. The result-
ing scenario fully conﬁrms the model prediction. Indeed
the noise-induced quenching of the WEM-seeded spatial
MI takes place in the experiment for a lower noise level
than in calculations, which indicates that the accessible
BW is even larger than the computational BW used for
obtaining the Fig. 1c,f results.

The described, near-ﬁeld, measurements have the obvi-
ous limitation of conﬁrming the model prediction only on
the basis of a time-integrated eﬀect, the underlying ST
structure not being detectable by any technique. More-
over, both the numerical and the experimental results

that we have presented do not produce a direct evidence
of the hyperbolic nature of instability. In what follows,
in order to overcome these limitations, we illustrate the
complementary, far-ﬁeld analysis, concerning the charac-
terization of the angular spectra (AS) of the generated
ﬁeld. Figure 3a contains the calculated AS (i.e.
the
square modulus of the ﬁeld Fourier transform) of a FH
proﬁle analogous to that in Fig. 1f (see the caption for
details). The bright central spot corresponds to the spec-
trum of the input pulse while the surrounding structure
describes the ampliﬁed ﬂuctuations. Note the evident hy-
perbolic shape of the instability region, which coincides
with the region where the calculated MI-gain proﬁle is
the largest [8]. We veriﬁed that, no matter the size of the
Fourier space, the instability always reaches the border of
the spectral box (in case of large enough noise BW), thus
conﬁrming the unbounded nature of the MI process in
the frame of the adopted model. For the far-ﬁeld exper-
iment, we measured the FH AS by placing the entrance
slit of a large-numerical-aperture imaging spectrometer
at the focal plane of a positive lens. The detected AS in
the short-wavelength branch of the spectrum (the long-
wavelength one is not accessible due to sensitivity cut oﬀ
of the silicon CCD detector) is reported in Fig. 3c. The
detected portion of the AS (the radiation at large angles
was clipped by the very narrow aperture of our 3x3x50
mm3 LBO crystal) exhibits a good qualitative agreement
with calculations (see the zoom in ﬁg. 3b) and conﬁrms
the genuine hyperbolic feature of the instability process.

In conclusions, in regime of second-harmonic gener-
ation with normal dispersion, by superimposing on a
intense, clean, pump wave packet and a weak spatio-
temporal noise (with coherence time much shorter than

4

ﬂuctuations, which indeed provide the source of a virtu-
ally δ-correlated noise. We expect that quantum-noise
seeded hyperbolic instability should dominate not only
the X (2) parametric-ampliﬁcation regime (as evident, for
example, in ref.
[14] and also in the more recent ref.
[15]) but also the classical, unseeded, second-harmonic
generation process and, possibly, the Kerr regime too.
This might explain the ”spontaneous” quenching of spa-
tial break-up seen at high pumping in [11, 13]. Owing
to the unbounded nature of the instability, the robust-
ness of non-linear dynamics of normally dispersive media
with respect to the interaction with the quantum noise
represents therefore a crucial issue with deserves further
investigation.

The Authors acknowledge support from FIRB 2001
(Italy), DGICYT BFM2002-04369-C04-03 (Spain), con-
tracts.

[1] B. T. Benjamin J E Feir, The disintegration of wave
trains on deep water. J Fluid Mech, 27, 417-430 (1967).
[2] T. Kakutami and N. Sugimoto, Astrophysics and Space

[3] J. M. Bilbault, P. Marquie and B. Michaux, Phys. Rev.

Science, 159, 347 (1974).

E 51, 817 (1995).

[4] U. Al Khawaja, H. T. C. Stoof, R. G. Hulet, K. E.
Strecker and G. B. Partridge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 200404
(2002).

[5] V.I. Bespalov and V.I. Talanov, JETP Lett. 3, 307-310

(1966).

[6] D. Jaksch, C. Bruder, J. I. Cirac, C. W. Gardiner and P.

Zoller , Phys Rev. Lett. 81, 3108 (1998).

[7] G. G. Luther, A. C. Newell, and J. V. Moloney and E.

M. Wright, Opt. Lett. 19, 789 (1994).

[8] S. Trillo, C. Conti, P. Di Trapani. O. Jedrkiewicz, J.
Trull, G. Valiulis and G. Bellanca, Opt. Lett. 27, 1451
(2002);

[9] K. Tai, A. Hasegawa, and A. Tomita, Phys. Rev. Lett.

56, 135 (1986).

[10] R.A. Fuerst, D-M. Baboiu, B. Lawrence, W.E. Torruel-
las, G.I. Stegeman, S. Trillo and S. Wabnitz,Phys. Rev.
Lett. 78, 2756 (1997).

[11] H. Fang, R.Malendevich, R. Schiek, G. Stegeman, Opt.

Lett. 25, 1786 (2001).

[12] R. Malendevich, L. Jankovic, G. Stegeman and J. S.

Aitchison opt. lett. 26, 1879 (2001).

[13] D. Salerno, S. Minardi, J. Trull, A. Varanavicius, G. Ta-
mosauskas, G. Valiulis, A. Dubietis, D. Caironi, S. Trillo,
A. Piskarskas, and P. Di Trapani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
143905 (2003).

[14] F. Devaux and E. Lantz, Josa B 12, 2245 (1995).
[15] H. Zeng, J. Wu, H. Xu, K. Wu, E. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett.

92, 143903 (2004)

FIG. 3: a) Calculated angular spectra (AS) of the FH ﬁeld
for operating conditions as those in Fig. 1f, but for larger
input-noise BW (namely: 40nm and 50mrad); (b) Zoom of
(a) corresponding to the region of detection; (c) measured AS
of the radiation exiting the crystal; (d) measured AS of the
input noise. Grey colors refer to logarithmic scale.

that of the pump) we have shown that the noise-seeded
MI develops in the spatio-temporal domain. Due to the
unbounded feature of the instability, and so the large re-
sponse of the system to white noise, a noise as weak as
0.01% of the pump leads to quenching of the spatial de-
terministic beam break up and spatial-soliton formation
caused by wave envelope modulation (WEM). The analy-
sis of the results in the spectral domain outlined the gen-
uine hyperbolic feature of the instability, which couples
diﬀerent frequencies to diﬀerent angles. Because of this
coupling, the quenching of detectable spatial eﬀects can-
not be simply interpreted as the averaging of several in-
dependent spatial structures, occurring for diﬀerent time
slices of the wave packet. As pointed out in [11], the typ-
ical (amplitude and phase) ﬂuctuations that were trig-
gering the instability in previous experiments (without
external noise injection) were probably caused by laser-
beam, or optical-component or non-linear sample imper-
fections, thus leading to a ”frozen-noise” with the same
coherence time of the pump (that virtually coincides with
the pulse duration, all lasers operating close to the trans-
form limit). This might explain why the resulting in-
stability was so successfully described in the frame of
monochromatic models. Finally, we expect that the de-
scribed, hyperbolic instability should play a dramatic role
when the ﬁeld is strong enough to probe vacuum state

