4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Far-ﬁeld spectral characterization of conical emission and ﬁlamentation in Kerr media

Daniele Faccio,∗ Paolo Di Trapani, Stefano Minardi∗∗, and Alberto Bramati∗∗∗
INFM and Department of Physics & Mathematics,
University of Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, I-22100 Como, Italy

Francesca Bragheri, Carlo Liberale, and Vittorio Degiorgio
INFM and Department of Electronics, University of Pavia, Via Ferrata 1, I-27100 Pavia, Italy

Audrius Dubietis and Aidas Matijosius
Department of Quantum Electronics, Vilnius University,
Sauletekio Ave. 9, bldg. 3, LT-2040, Vilnius, Lithuania
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

By use of an imaging spectrometer we map the far-ﬁeld (θ − λ) spectra of 200 fs optical pulses
that have undergone beam collapse and ﬁlamentation in a Kerr medium. By studying the evolution
of the spectra with increasing input power and using a model based on stationary linear asymptotic
wave modes, we are able to trace a consistent model of optical beam collapse high-lighting the
interplay between conical emission, multiple pulse splitting and other eﬀects such as spatial chirp.

PACS numbers: 190.5940, 320.2250

I.

INTRODUCTION

Filamentation and,

in general, collapse, of high
power laser pulses in transparent media has attracted
signiﬁcant attention ever since its prediction [1, 2, 3]
and observation [4] and, due to the complexity of the
involved phenomena, continues to be a hotly debated
topic. There are many reasons for this interest ranging
from application possibilities such as localizing ultra-
short laser pulses over long propagation distances [5],
white-light laser sources for parametric ampliﬁcation [6]
or spectroscopy [7, 8] or the formal analogy with the
equations that describe nonlinear wave collapse in other
systems, such as Bose-Einstein condensates [9], that are
experimentally less accessible. Numerical investigation
of optical wave collapse is usually carried out starting
from the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation (NLSE) that
describes the spatial evolution of a beam considering
diﬀraction and a self-focusing term that originates from
the real part of the third-order medium Kerr nonlinearity
(n2). Such an equation predicts the formation of an
unstable 2D stationary solution, the so called Townes
proﬁle [3], that,
if perturbed, will either diﬀract or
undergo catastrophic collapse. However, ultra-short
laser pulses do not, in general, follow this behavior [10]:
the collapse is arrested by other eﬀects such as pulse
lengthening due to normal group-velocity dispersion
(GVD) or plasma defocusing and an apparently sta-
tionary propagation regime (ﬁlament) is reached. Thus
the NLSE may be accordingly modiﬁed to account for
space-time coupling and also for plasma generation and
defocusing. These modiﬁed equations have proved to
be able to describe many of the phenomena associated

∗Electronic address: daniele.faccio@uninsubria.it

with pulse ﬁlamentation such as conical emission (CE)
[11], super-continuum (SC) generation, pulse steepening
[12] and splitting [13]. One of the main features that
is emerging is the importance of space-time coupling.
Indeed, there exist regimes characterized simultaneously
by ultra-tight focusing and ultra-short pulse length in
which the nonlinearity couples the spatial and temporal
dynamics following an underlying geometry dictated by
the modulational instability (MI) gain proﬁle [11, 14]. In
such cases it is preferable to avoid space-time separation
and refer directly to the geometrical properties of the
space-time environment. A measure of the importance
of these new concepts is given,
for example, by the
discovery of nonlinear X-waves [15, 16, 17, 18], chaotic
spatio-temporal
fragmentation due to space-time MI
[19], red solitons [20], X-waves in pulse ﬁlamentation
[21] and stationary conical waves supported by nonlinear
losses [22]. The complexity of these issues requires
a careful examination of the experimental methods
employed, as space-time coupled phenomena should be
investigated with adequate instruments.
We note that the major part of laser physics diagnostics
is based on the separation of spatial and temporal eﬀects
leading, for example, to the widely used concepts of
carrier spatial and temporal frequencies, beam walk-oﬀ
and group velocity, diﬀraction and dispersion etc., i.e.
either purely spatial or purely temporal quantities.
This conceptual space-time division is also reﬂected in
the standard experimental characterization methods
also adopted for the study of beam ﬁlamentation. We
have on the one hand, near and far ﬁeld imaging that
give information on the spatial proﬁles but ignore
the temporal proﬁle. On the other hand, temporal
auto-correlation traces or frequency resolved optical
gating (FROG) give a precise measurement of the
temporal proﬁle at the medium output of the whole
(or a particular portion of the) ﬁlament [13, 23, 24],

thus losing any information regarding the (transverse)
space-dependent temporal proﬁle. The limitations of
FROG measurements have been partly overcome with
the so called SPIDER technique [25] that gives the
temporal proﬁle across one spatial dimension [26] and
by use of a particular 3D optical gating method [27, 28]
that provides the full spatio-temporal intensity proﬁle
of femtosecond pulses and has indeed allowed a full
dimensional
intensity space-time characterization of
ﬁlaments in water [29] and of X-waves in χ(2) media [28].
Although extremely powerful, this technique requires
the use of two separate, high power, synchronized laser
sources, the ﬁrst providing the pulse under investigation
and the second a pulse that must have an appreciably
shorter time duration in order to guarantee a high
(temporal) resolution. Moreover, this method is based
on a second-order nonlinear up-conversion process: due
to the large (spatial and temporal) bandwidths involved
it is necessary to resort to very thin (20 µm or less)
conversion crystals which in turn lead to low output
powers and the necessity to integrate over many pulses.
in-
Here we propose another possible experimental
(θ − λ)
vestigation tool, namely far-ﬁeld spectral
characterization, that may give readily accessible details
of the spatio-temporal pulse proﬁle in single shot acquisi-
tion. This method can be used as a general investigation
tool for phenomena that involve space-time coupling
and we show its application to pulse ﬁlamentation in
normally dispersive Kerr media. To the best of our
knowledge there are only a few papers in literature
that show the angular (θ − λ) spectra of Kerr-induced
ﬁlaments[10, 30, 31] without actually paying attention to
the details these may contain and certainly no systematic
study in this sense has been carried out before. The
data are tentatively explained with the aid of a simple
interpretation model, based on a linear description of
the stationary asymptotic light wave modes that act as
attractors during the pulse evolution [32].

II. SURVEY OF BEAM COLLAPSE AND
FILAMENTATION OF FS PULSES

In this work we have used a normally dispersive Kerr
medium with a ﬁxed total length and the only variable
parameter was the input pulse energy. Therefore, we
give here a brief overview of the expected pulse evolution
for increasing input energies based on the existing
literature.

For very low powers no self focusing (SF) occurs and
the beam behaves linearly. However, with increasing
power the threshold for catastrophic self-focusing is
reached and the beam will start to spatially contract. A
simple expression for the critical power for cw gaussian
beams is given by [33]

2

FIG. 1: Output beam diameter for varying input pulse en-
ergy. All measurements reported in this work were performed
in the energy interval 2-5.6 µJ where single ﬁlamentation was
observed.

Pcrit =

3.77λ2
8πn0n2

(1)

where the nonlinear refractive index is given as a func-
tion of the pulse intensity I by n = n0 + n2I.
If the
medium dispersion is also accounted for then, in gen-
eral, the threshold for SF will be higher for short pulses
than for longer ones due to the damping eﬀect of nor-
mal GVD and eq.
1 should be accordingly modiﬁed
[34, 35].
It has also been noted that the threshold for
SF coincides with that for spectral broadening [36], an-
other manifestation of the material nonlinearity in the
form of a rapidly time varying self phase modulation
(SPM). For powers just above Pcrit the beam will con-
tract spatially and the energy will move toward the back
of the pulse and will eventually lead to pulse steepening
and the formation of a shock wave at the trailing edge
[12, 37, 38]. The intensities reached by the pulse give rise
to eﬃcient CE while pulse steepening may explain the
observed higher conversion eﬃciencies for the anti-stokes
(blue-shifted) components [12]. As the power is further
increased (P ∼ 1.5 − 2 · Pcrit) the pulse will undergo tem-
poral splitting [37, 38] due to the eﬀect of normal GVD.
Even higher powers (P > 3·Pcrit) will lead to a pulse that
evolves by pushing the energy toward the leading edge
[37, 39, 40, 41]. The peak intensities have been shown
to be suﬃcient to excite a plasma with a large enough
concentration as to even compensate the Kerr induced
refractive index variation [36, 42]. The same plasma will
eventually reduce the peak intensity through absorption,
but for suﬃciently high powers multiple pulse reforma-
tion occurs with each new pulse rising from the trailing
background power [39, 40]. Along side an evident CE
it has been observed that a large part of the generated
spectrum is actually emitted along the pulse propagation
axis [43]. This has been explained by taking into account
a possible Kerr-lensing eﬀect induced by the pulse itself

[36] or possibly by the formation of an eﬀective waveg-
uide [44]. From this brief overview we can see that a
large number of phenomena are involved, some occurring
simultaneously while the presence of others depends on
the particular input conditions. In the following sections
we shall describe the experimental investigation method
and results that shed some new light on the details of the
ﬁlamentation process.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

We present data concerning ﬁlamentation in a 15 mm
long, type II, lithium triborate (LBO) crystal. Such crys-
tals are usually used for experiments involving the second
order (χ(2)) nonlinearity, however we rotated the crys-
tal so that all second order processes are severely phase-
mismatched (and thus negligible) whilst still maintain-
ing the pump pulse propagation axis perpendicular to
the input facet. The input laser pulse is delivered from
a frequency doubled, 10 Hz Nd:glass mode-locked and
regeneratively ampliﬁed system (Twinkle, Light Conver-
sion) and has 200 fs duration and 527 nm central wave-
length. Spatial ﬁltering of the pulse before entering the
sample is necessary to guarantee a uniform gaussian-like
proﬁle that will thus seed only one ﬁlament at a time (i.e.
no spatial break-up into multiple ﬁlaments is observed).
The beam has a FWHM of 5 mm diameter and is then
focused onto the LBO crystal with a 50 cm focal length
lens placed at 50.1 cm from the crystal entrance facet.
The angular spectra of the ﬁlament have been detected
by an imaging spectrometer (Oriel Instruments, 77250-
M with a 1200 l/mm grating) placed after the crystal.
The device reconstructs without distortion the entrance-
slit at the output plane (the slit image is not on a curved
surface, as would occur for conventional optics), with the
diﬀerent frequency components at diﬀerent lateral posi-
tions. By placing the entrance slit in the focal plane of
a focusing lens, the angular frequency distribution can
be detected in a single shot. The actual spectra are cap-
tured by placing a CCD camera in the monochromator
output imaging plane: the central regions require a very
high dynamical range 16 bit CDD camera (Andor EEV
40-11) in order to avoid saturation and loss of low-power
details whereas the outer regions were characterized us-
ing a higher spatial-resolution 8 bit camera (Pulnix TM-6
CN). Note that only the angular distribution in the slit
plane will be monitored, which is suﬃcient as long as the
axial symmetry of the process is preserved. In acquir-
ing the angular spectra it is very important to guarantee
the possibility of single shot acquisition.
In fact while
the envelope spectral shape gives the information on the
small-scale structure formed in the near ﬁeld, it will be
the ﬁne interference-fringe structure in the spectra what
reveals the extended feature in the space-time domain.
For example, a single X-wave, a couple, a train and even
a chaotic gas of X waves will all produce the same enve-
lope angular spectrum, while the diﬀerence between the

3

FIG. 2: Two examples of pulse-ﬁlamentation far-ﬁeld spectra
taken for two diﬀerent materials:
(a) in 15 mm of water,
P ∼ 2 · Pcrit and (b)in 15 mm of LBO, P ∼ 1 · Pcrit. (b)
was obtained from three separate images each one spanning a
diﬀerent wavelength range (420-510 nm, 510-540 nm, 540-650
nm)

possible realizations will appear only in the modulated
ﬁne structure of the spectrum. These ﬁne details will
ﬂuctuate slightly from shot to shot, owing to input-pulse
energy, duration and diameter ﬂuctuations.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In ﬁgure 1 we show the ﬁlament 1/e2 diameter against
input pulse energy. We see that as power increases the
beam diameter contracts until it reaches a “stationary”
value - we identify the lowest energy for which this
occurs as the corresponding critical threshold energy,
Eth. We therefore performed all our measurements in
the energy range for which stable single ﬁlamentation
occurs, i.e. from 2 µJ to 5.6 µJ. In order to illustrate that
the phenomenum under inspection is a general feature
of optical pulse propagation and is not particularly
related to the speciﬁc material, we show in ﬁgure 2 two
angular spectra, the ﬁrst obtained in water (ﬁg.2(a))
with E ∼ 2 · Eth and the second in LBO (Fig. 2(b)) with
E ∼ 1 · Eth. Fig. 2(b) was obtained from three separate
images each one spanning a diﬀerent wavelength range
(420-510 nm, 510-540 nm, 540-650 nm) so as to minimize
the eﬀects of “blooming” from the central high-intensity
region while still keeping signiﬁcant detail in the lower
intensity regions. Note also that very similar spectral
features have also been reported elsewhere relative to
ﬁlamentation of picosecond pulses in air [30]. Although
Fig.2(a) has fewer details due the large number (30) of
shots over which the proﬁle for water was integrated, the
spectra have in common a deﬁnite “X-like” pattern with
a strong on-axis emission. We obtained similar ﬁgures
also for fused silica.
We shall now look more closely at the angular spectra,
paying particular attention to the details.
In ﬁgures
3(a), (b) and (c) we show the angular spectra for input

4

literature [12, 36, 45]. Together with the low-angle
emission there is also a distinct “X” pattern, a signature
of CE with a much more pronounced extension of the
anti-Stokes component (∼ 0.9 fs−1 to be compared with
the ∼ 0.2 fs−1 of the Stokes part). All of the recorded
spectra show a surprisingly regular pattern for small θ.
This pattern is not so obvious in Fig. 3(a) so we have
included in the inset the Stokes spectrum for a diﬀerent
laser shot in which it is much clearer. The fringes are
centered at θ = 0 with parabolic-like dependence on
wavelength (similar features have also been observed
It is
in air with longer input pulse durations [30]).
interesting to note how the sign of the fringe curvature
inverts in passing from Ein = 2 µJ to Ein = 3 µJ and
then shows a further sovra-modulation for Ein = 4.8 µJ
(Fig. 3). We note that this behavior was found also in
other materials (e.g. water) and under diﬀerent focusing
conditions with the only diﬀerence being the actual
input energies at which the various modulation patterns
are observed.

V. DISCUSSION

Despite the large amount of data available in litera-
ture, to the best of our knowledge none of the numerical
simulations shown to date display a combination of the
main features we have measured. Namely, these are
the distinct X-arms, the strong and largely extended
axial emission, the periodic modulation of the axial
emission and, ﬁnally, the inversion of this modulation
pattern with increasing input power. Given this large
diﬀerence, we try to give an explanation of the spectra
by studying the properties of a linear superposition
of stationary states, with which we approximate the
istantaneous wave forms (into which the actual pulse
shape may be decomposed) inside the material. The
nature of the linear states will depend on the nature of
the associated spectral shape so that CE will be related
to an X-like wave [14] whereas AE may be simply related
to a gaussian-like spatio-temporal proﬁle. We underline
that the following discussion is not aimed at explaining
beam ﬁlamentation but rather at trying to justify the
experimental spectral
features starting from results
presented in literature.
We start by analyzing the spectrum for Ein = 2 µJ.
The input power is just above Pcrit so that during
propagation the pulse starts to collapse - in doing so a
strong CE is initiated and ﬁnally the energy is moved
to the trailing edge of the ﬁlament, as discussed above.
Therefore we may describe the overall pulse as an
X-wave (associated to the CE) and a trailing gaussian
proﬁle. The X wave is described following the recipe
given elsewhere [32] with the input parameters taken
as the material refractive index and dispersion relations
and the total bandwidth of the actually measured CE
(110 nm). The Gaussian proﬁle is chosen so that it

FIG. 3: Stokes component of the measured far-ﬁeld spectra.
(a) Input pulse energy Ein = 2 µJ: in the inset we show an-
other spectrum taken for a slightly smaller Ein that highlights
the modulation fringes. The total spectrum is showed in Fig
2. (b) Ein = 3 µJ: in the inset we show the total recorded
spectrum. (c) Ein = 4.8 µJ. Note the diﬀerent modulation
patterns in the three measurements.

energies Ein equal to 2, 3 and 4.8 µJ, respectively,
thus mapping the evolution of the pulse structure for
increasing powers. In all these ﬁgures we have focused
our attention on the Stokes part of the spectrum: the
complete recorded spectrum for Ein = 2 µJ is shown
in Fig. 2(b) and that for Ein = 3 µJ in the inset of
Fig. 3(b). We ﬁrst note the strong on-axis (i.e.
for
small transverse wave-vectors or angles) emission (AE)
that extends well both into the blue Stokes and red
anti-Stokes regions, characteristic of pulse ﬁlamentation
and subsequent continuum generation. If considered in
frequency rather than in wavelength, the anti-Stokes
components have a larger extension (∼ 0.9 fs−1) than
the Stokes components (∼ 0.7 fs−1), in agreement with

has a 1/e2 width equal to that measured (26 µm) and
a temporal bandwidth corresponding to the measured
AE bandwidth (230 nm). We note that all the results
described below do not actually depend on the particu-
lar function chosen to describe the gaussian-like proﬁle
and no substantial variations were observed using a
super-gaussian or hyperbolic-secant proﬁle with respect
to a simple gaussian form. Furthermore we may expect
a temporal delay between the two proﬁles and indeed
it is the interference between these two that gives rise
to the measured modulation patterns. However, we
If we take the above
are still missing an ingredient.
described pulses, and Fourier-transform the sum of these
so as to obtain the angular spectra we observe only
straight, vertically aligned interference fringes. In order
to explain the curvature of these we must also introduce
a transverse spatial chirp (i.e. a phase front curvature)
into the gaussian proﬁle.
It is well known that in the
presence of GVD and/or SPM the pulse may develop
It has also been noted that
a strong temporal chirp.
in the simultaneous presence of SPM and SF, the pulse
may also develop a strong frequency dependent mode
size (FDMS) [46], and a spatial chirp. In analogy with
a linear temporal chirp [48] we may write the complex
spatial amplitude as A(r) = exp[−(1 + jαr) · (r/σ)2]
were σ is the beam width and αr is the spatial chirp
parameter. Fig. 4(a) shows the (θ − λ) distribution
for an X wave and a spatially chirped gaussian pulse
with αr = −2 and temporally delayed by τ = −200 fs,
thus approximating the power build-up at the trailing
edge of the pulse expected for low input powers. The
absolute value of αr was chosen so as to match the
angular divergence of the AE and the sign so as to
match the measured fringe curvature direction. Indeed,
as can be seen the axial component shows a deﬁnite
curved fringe pattern in close agreement with that
shown in ﬁgure 3(a). A negative spatial chirp (i.e. a
defocusing phase-front curvature) could be due to a
delayed-plasma induced defocusing. However we note
that another picture is also possible and that is one in
which the spatial chirp has opposite sign (αr = +2)
and the gaussian pulse (shock wave) is in front of the
now trailing X-wave. Although a leading shock front
with a focusing wave-front is in fact compatible with a
strong SF regime, we believe the picture of a trialing
shock wave (at input powers near threshold) to be more
acceptable in the frame of the present literature.

Regarding the presence of a strong axial emission, the
scientiﬁc community is still lacking a widely accepted
theory although the most often used explanations involve
the formation of an eﬀective waveguide [44] induced by
the balance of plasma defocusing and SF or just from
the eﬀect of SF alone [36]. However SF is just the spatial
manifestation of SPM. The temporal analogue generates
new frequencies and, in the spirit of this paper, the two
should not be considered separately.
Indeed, it is the
spatio-temporal eﬀect of SPM that explains CE, so it
is not obvious why at a certain point of the pulse evo-

5

FIG. 4:
Calculated far-ﬁeld spectra of stationary linear
states. (a) a gaussian pulse with spatial chirp αs = −2 and
temporally delayed by +200 fs, with respect to an X-wave, (b)
two equal-intensity spatially chirped gaussian pulses tempo-
rally shifted with respect to an X-wave by -220 fs (αs = +2)
and +220 fs (αs = −2) and (c) three equal-intensity spatially
chirped gaussian pulses temporally shifted by -300 (αs = +2),
-200 (αs = +2) and +300 fs (αs = −2) with an X-wave in
t=0. All gaussian radial diameters are 25 µm at 1/e2.

lution SPM should split into separate spatial (SF) and
temporal (spectral broadening) phenomena. It could be
possible that nonlinear losses (NLL) play an important
role. Numerical simulations conﬁrm that in the presence
of NLL a high intensity pulse will develop a ﬂat top (as

also reported in literature [47]) and, correspondingly,
the spectral components generated via SPM will be
strongly limited. This should occur in both the spatial
and temporal coordinates. However there may exist
mechanisms which break the spatio-temporal symmetry,
such as Raman nonlinearity or plasma generation, which
in turn could force the wave collapse in the sole temporal
dimension, i.e. the formation of a temporal shock-wave
with a spatial ﬂat-top.
In this case we would observe
AE, an eﬃcient broadening of the temporal spectrum
with spatial wave-vectors aligned along the input pulse
propagation axis.
As for the spatial chirp, we note that the fringe pattern
for higher powers is qualitatively diﬀerent from that
observed near Pcrit.
Indeed not only is the curvature
inverted but the modulation is also much deeper and it
is not concentrated near the central carrier frequency
but rather becomes clearer at frequency shifts greater
than those obtained by CE. If we take into account
these features we realize that the interference is not due
to an interplay between a gaussian and an X proﬁle
but rather between two (or more) gaussian-like pulses.
Moreover, the chirp of the two pulses must have opposite
sign and similar absolute value if such sharp and deep
modulation patterns are to be explained. In Fig. 4(b)
we kept αr = −2 for the rear pulse and put αr = +2 for
the leading pulse. This condition gives us high contrast
fringes with the same measured curvature shown in ﬁg.
3(b).
The temporal delays of the two gaussian pulses in ﬁg.
4(b) where chosen so as to match the experimental
fringe frequency, so that τ = −220 and τ = 220 fs with
respect to a central X-wave. As already discussed, we
are to expect pulse splitting or dynamical replenishment
for these higher input energies. The actual position
of the X component does not induce any relevant
changes in the AE and we are not able to precisely
determine the temporal location of the CE. This may
be explained by noting that the total power contained
in the experimental spectrum related to CE part (after
the monocromator input slit) is always at least a factor
ten smaller than that due to AE, so that interference
between the two contributions is rather weak (see for
example the very low contrast interference fringes in ﬁgs.
3(a) and 4(a)). The total delay between the leading and
trailing pulses (440 fs) is surprisingly high if compared
to the 200 fs input pulse duration. Obviously GVD
is playing a major role and is indeed dominating the
temporal proﬁle evolution.
Figure 4(c) was obtained with three such gaussian
pulses with temporal delays τ = −400, −240, +400 and
α = +2, +2 and −2 respectively. Once again we were
not able to precisely position the X-wave as negligible
variations were observed. The agreement with the exper-
imental data (Fig. 3(c)) is very good and the model is
in agreement with other reported ﬁndings relative to the
formation of multiple peak re-formation for high enough
input energies [40, 49]. Furthermore, the temporal delay

6

between the pulses has increased to 800 fs, i.e. four times
the input pulse duration and indicates that for higher
powers the interplay between SPM, SC generation and
GVD is further enhanced, as expected. This delay is
extremely large if compared to the input pulse duration
however a further indication that this result is correct is
given by the multiple-shot autocorrelation trace shown
in ﬁg. 5 obtained by imaging the output crystal facet
onto the autocorrelation nonlinear crystal. The ﬁve
peaks in the trace show that with a similar average
pulse input energy we have multiple pulse splitting with
the formation of three daughter pulses and a temporal
separation of 600 fs between the leading and trailing
pulses.
So far we have purposely neglected temporal chirp
(αt) which is expected to be at least as important as
the spatial chirp. However AE does not seem to be
sensitive to this parameter.
Indeed, variations of αt
did not produce a signiﬁcant change in the numerical
AE fringe pattern but rather only a local reduction of
contrast, the position of which depends on the sign and
value of αt in the various linear components with which
the ﬁlament was modeled. We note though, that the
experimental spectra also show a modulation in the CE
in the form of a multiple “X-arm” splitting. In fact, by
slowly increasing the pulse input energy from below to
above threshold we never experimentally observed the
formation of a single X pattern - CE emission in our
experimental setup always seems to appear in the form
of multiple X-like patterns. This sheds some light on the
nature of the CE in the sense that it may be explained
by super-imposing multiple X pulses so that the number
of arms corresponds directly to the number of X pulses
and each X must be spectrally shifted with respect to
the others. This is physically feasible in the presence
of a single input pulse that undergoes sever temporal
chirping and then splits into multiple “X-pulses” (i.e.
daughter pulses that gives rise to CE) so that each of
these is centered on a diﬀerent carrier frequency. The
values for the spectral shift observed in our spectra vary
from 0.05 to 0.2 fs−1 with the higher values observed at
higher input energies.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion we have shown the possibility of recov-
ering detailed information regarding space-time coupled
phenomena from angular-spectral characterization. The
nature of the numerical model used to interpret the ex-
perimental measurements, based on a linear combination
of stationary states rather than on a full nonlinear evo-
lution simulation, allows only a qualitative guess at the
parameters involved. Nevertheless the simplicity of this
approach is very appealing and indeed, by using a com-
bination of linear states it is possible to understand if the
pulse has changed its spatio-temporal energy distribution

7

more precise information for example of the exact tem-
poral delay of the CE with respect to the AE sources.
Furthermore, the spatial chirp parameter may be deter-
mined precisely with the combination of an imaging spec-
trometer and a spatial shearing interferometer [50] and
shall be considered in future measurements. We further
underline that whereas the “X” part of the spectra are
numerically well reproduced in the frame of our simple
linear model in both the Stokes and anti-Stokes regions,
this is not true for the AE spectral components. The anti-
Stokes AE is rather confused and the (not always visible)
fringe pattern seems to show a fast modulation frequency
that is not compatible with the parameters that ﬁt the
Stokes region. This could indicate that the shock waves
that generate the blue and red shifts in the spectrum are
spatially distinct and have diﬀerent temporal delays.
Notwithstanding these shortcomings, the aim of this
work is to underline the importance of angular spectral
measurements that, together with other methods such as
FROG or 3D-mapping, may give a complete and exhaus-
tive characterization of nonlinear optical-wave collapse
phenomena.
∗∗ Present address,
Institut de Ci`encies Fot`oniques,
c/Jordi Girona 29, NEXUS II, E-08034 Barcelona, Spain.
∗∗∗ Present address, Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, Uni-
versit´e P. et M. Curie, Case74, 4, place Jussieu, F75252
Paris, France

FIG. 5: Autocorrelation trace of of the ouput pulse ﬁlament
clearly showing that the pulse has split into three sub-pulses
with a delay of 600 fs between the most external ones. Ein ∼ 4
µJ.

without actually experiencing splitting or if it has gone
through a single or even multiple pulse reformation. The
details of the spectra also reveal that the spatio-temporal
coupling manifests itself in a strong spatial chirp of the
ﬁlament. If the far-ﬁeld measurements were to be com-
pleted with a complete phase characterization we would
of course be able to reconstruct the full space-time pro-
ﬁle of the pulse through a Fourier transform - the lack of
this information is reﬂected in the diﬃculty in retrieving

[1] G. A. Askarjan, “Interaction of laser radiation with vi-

brating surfaces,” JETP, 42, 1672 (1962).

[2] W. Talanov,

Izv. Vysshikh Uchebn. Zavedenii, Ra-

dioﬁzika 7 (1964).

[3] R.Y.Chiao, E. Garmire, and C.H.Townes, “Self-trapping
of optical beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 479–482 (1964).

[4] M. Hercher, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 54, 563 (1964).
[5] A. Braun, G. Korn, X. Liu, D. Du, J. Squier, and
G.Mourou, “Self-channeling of high-paek-power fem-
tosecond laser pulses in air,” Opt. Lett. 20, 73–75 (1995).
[6] K. Wilson and V. Yakovlev, “Ultrafast rainbow: tunable
ultrashort pulses from a solid-state kilohertz system,” J.
Opt. Soc. B 14, 444–448 (1997).

[7] R. Alfano, The Supercontinuum Laser Source (Springer-

Verlag, New York, 1989).

[8] P. Rairoux, H. Schillinger, S. Niedermeier, M. Rodriguez,
F. Ronneberger, R. Sauerbrey, B.Stein, D. Waite, C. W.
nd H. Wille, L. W¨oste, and C.Ziener, “Remote sensing
of the atmosphere using ultrashort laser pulses,” Appl.
Phys. B 71, 573–580 (2000).

[9] P. Nozieres and D. Pines, The Theory of Quantum Liq-
uids, vol. II (Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, 1990).
[10] D.Strickland and P. Corkum, “Resistance of short pulses
to self-focusing,” J.Opt.Soc.Am.B 11, 492–497 (1994).
[11] G. Luther, A. Newell, J. Moloney, and E. Wright, “Short
pulse conical emission and spectral broadening in nor-
mally dispersive media,” Opt. Lett. 19, 789–791 (1994).
[12] A. Gaeta, “Catastrophic collapse of ultrashort pulses,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3582–3585 (2000).

[13] J. Ranka and A. Gaeta, “Breakdown of the slowly varying
envelope approximation in the self-focusing of ultra-short
pulses,” Opt. Lett. 23, 534–536 (1998).

[14] S. Trillo, C. Conti, P. D. Trapani, O. Jedrkiewicz,
J. Trull, G. Valiulis, and G. Bellanca, “Coloured coni-
cal emission via second-harmonic generation,” Opt. Lett.
27, 1451–1453 (2002).

[15] G. Valiulis, J. Kilius, O. Jedrkiewicz, A. Bramati, S. Mi-
nardi, C. Conti, S. Trillo, A. Piskarskas, and P. Di Tra-
pani, “Space-time nonlinear compression and three-
dimensional complex trapping in normal dispersion,”” in
OSA Trends in Optics and Photonics (TOPS) 57, Quan-
tum Electronics and Laser Science Conference (QELS
2001), Technical Digest, Post conference Edition (Optical
Society of America, Washington DC, 2001), pp. QPD10
-1-2.

[16] P. Di Trapani, G. Valiulis, A. Piskarskas, O. Jedrkiewicz,
J. Trull, C. Conti, and S. Trillo, “Spontaneously gen-
erated X-shaped light bullets,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
093 904–1 (2003).

[17] C. Conti, S. Trillo, P. Di Trapani, G. Valiulis,
A. Piskarskas, O. Jedrkiewicz, and J. Trull, “Nonlinear
electromagnetic X waves,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 170 406–
1 (2003).

[18] O. Jedrkiewicz, J. Trull, G. Valiulis, A. Piskarskas,
C. Conti, S. Trillo, and P. Di Trapani, “Nonlinear X
wavesin second harmonic generation: esperimental re-

sults,” Phys. Rev. E 68, 026 610–1 (2003).

Lett. 17, 172–174 (1992).

[19] D.Salerno, O. Jedrkiewicz, P. Di Trapani, J. Trull, and
G. Valiulis, “Impact of dimensionality on noise-seeded
modulational instability,” in Nonlinear guided waves and
their applications (2004), pp. WA–7.

[20] S. Minardi, J. Yu, G. Blasi, A. Varanaviˇcius, G. Valiulis,
A. Berˇzanskis, A. Piskarskas, and P. Di Trapani, “Red
solitons: evidence of spatiotemporal instability in χ(2)
spatial soliton dynamics,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 12 390–1
(2003).

[21] M. Kolesik, E. Wright, and J. Moloney, “Dynamic Non-
linear X-waves for Femtosecond Pulse Propagation in
Water,” Arxiv:Phys/0311021v1 (2003).

[22] A. Dubietis, E. Gaizauskas, G. Tamosauskas, and
P. Di Trapani, “Light ﬁlaments without self-channeling,”
accepted for publication in Phys. Rev. Lett. (2004).
[23] S. Diddams, H. Eaton, A. Zozulya, and T. Clement,
“Amplitude and phase measurements of
femtosecond
pulse splitting in nonlinear dispersive media,” Opt. Lett.
23, 379–381 (1998).

[24] A. Bernstein, J. Diels, T. Luk, T. Nelson, A. McPherson,
and S. Cameron, “Time resolved measurements of self
focusing pulses in air,” Opt. Lett. 28, 2354–2356 (2003).
[25] L. Gallmann, G. Steinmeyer, D. Sutter, T. Rupp, C. Ia-
conis, I. Walmsley, and U. Keller, “Spatially resolved am-
plitude and phase characterization of femtosecond optical
pulses,” Opt. Lett. 26, 96–98 (2001).

[26] C. Dorrer, E. Kosik, and I. Walmsley, “Direct space-time
characterization of the electric ﬁelds of ultrashort optical
pulses,” Opt. Lett. 27, 548–550 (2002).

[27] M. Potenza, S. Minardi, J. Trull, G. Blasi, D. Salerno,
A. Varanaviˇcius, A. Piskarskas, and P. Di Trapani,
“Three dimensional imaging of short pulses,” Opt. Com-
mun. 229, 381–390 (2004).

[28] J. Trull, O. Jedrkiewicz, P. D. Trapani, A. Matijosius,
A. Varanaviˇcius, G. Valiulis, R. Danielius, E. Kucinskas,
and A. Piskarskas, “Spatiotemporal three-dimensional
mapping of nonlinear X-waves,” Phys. Rev. E 69,
026 607–1 (2004).

[29] A. Matijosius, J. Trull, P. Di Trapani, A. Dubietis,
R. Piskarskas, A. Varanaviˇcius, and A. Piskarskas, “Non-
linear space-time dynamics of ultrashort wave packets in
water,” Opt. Lett. 29, 1123–1125 (2004).

[30] D. Mikalauskas, A. Dubietis, and R. Danielius, “Observa-
tion of light ﬁlaments induced in air by visible picosecond
laser pulses,” Appl. Phys. B 75, 899–902 (2002).
I. Diomin,

and
A. Varanaviˇcius, “Self-guided propagation of femtosec-
ond light pulses in water,” Opt. Lett. 28, 1269–1271
(2003).

[31] A. Dubietis, G. Tamoˇsauskas,

[32] M. Porras and P. D. Trapani, “Localized and station-
ary light wave modes in dispersive media,” Los Alamos
Arxive physics/0309084 (2003).

[33] J. Marburger, “Self-focusing:
Electron. 4, 35–110 (1975).

theory,” Progr. Quant,

[34] P. Chernev and V. Petrov, “Self-focusing of light pulses
in th presence of normal group-velocity dispersion,” Opt.

8

[35] G. Luther, J. Moloney, A. Newell, and E. Wright, “Self-
focusing threshold in normally dispersive media,” Opt.
Lett. 19, 862–864 (1994).

[36] A. Brodeur and S. Chin, “Ultrafast white light contin-
uum generation and self-focusing in transarent condensed
media,” J.Opt.Soc.Am.B 16, 637–650 (1999).

[37] A. Zozulya and S.A.Diddams, “Dynamics of self-focused
femtosecond laser pulses in the near and far ﬁelds,” Opt.
Expr. 4, 336–343 (1999).

[38] J. Rothenberg, “Space-time focusing:

breakdown of
the slowly varying envelope approximation in the self-
focusing of femtosecond pulses,” Opt. Lett. 17, 1340–
1342 (1992).

[39] M. Mlejnek, E. Wright, and J. Moloney, “Dynamic spa-
tial replenishment of femtosecond pulses propagating in
air,” Opt. Lett. 23, 382–384 (1998).

[40] M. Mlejnek, E. Wright, and J. Moloney, “Power depen-
dence of dynamic spatial replenishment of femtosecond
pulses propagating in air,” Opt. Expr. 4, 223–228 (1999).
[41] O. Kosareva, V. Kandidov, A. Brodeur, C. Chen, and
S. Chin, “Conical emission from laser-plasma interactions
in the ﬁlamentation of powerful ultrashort laser pulses in
air,” Opt. Lett. 22, 1332–1334 (1997).

[42] S. Tzortzakis, L. Sudrie, M. Franco, B.Prade, A. Mysy-
rowicz, A. Couairon, and L. Berg´e, “Self-guided propa-
gation of ultrashort IR laser pulses in fused silica,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 87, 3902–1 (2001).

[43] W. Smith, P. Liu, and N. Bloembergen, “Superbroaden-
ing in H2O and D2O by self focused picosecond pulses
from a YAlG:Nd laser,” Phys. Rev. A 15, 2396–2403
(1977).

[44] E. Nibbering, P. Curley, G. Grillon, B. Prade, M. Franco,
F.Salin, and A.Mysyrowicz, “Conical emission from self
guided femtosecond pulses in air,” Opt. Lett. 21, 62–64
(1996).

[45] W. Liu, O. Kosareva,

Iwasaki,
A. Becker, V. Kandidov, and S. Chin, “Femtosecond laser
pulse ﬁlamentation versus optical breakdown in H2O,”
Appl.Phys. B 76, 215–229 (2003).

I. Golubtsov, A.

[46] S. Cundiﬀ, W. Knox, E. Ippen, and H. Haus, “Frequency
dependent mode size in broadband Kerr-lens mode lock-
ing,” Opt. Lett. 21, 662–664 (1996).

[47] S. Polyakov, F. Yoshino, G. Stegeman, “Interplay be-
tween self-focusing and high-order multiphoton absorp-
tion,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 18, 1891–1895 (2001).

[48] S. Akhmanov, V. Vysloukh, and A. Chirkin, Optics
of Femtosecond Laser Pulses (American Institute of
Physics, New York, 1992).

[49] W. Liu, S. Chin, O. Kosareva,

I.S.Golubtsov, and
V. Kandidov, “Multiple refocusing of a femtosecond laser
pulse in a dispersive liquid (methanol),” Opt. Commun.
225, 193–209 (2003).

[50] C. Dorrer and I. Walmsley, “Simple linear tecnique for
the measurement of space-time coupling in ultrashort op-
tical pulses,” Opt. Lett. 27, 1947–1949 (2002).

