4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Anisotropy of x-ray scattering in aligned nanotube structures

A.V. Okotrub
SB RAS - Nikolaev Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, 630090
Novosibirsk, Russia

S.B. Dabagov∗
INFN - Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, I-00044 Frascati (RM),
Italy
and RAS - P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute, 119991 Moscow, Russia

A.G. Kudashev, A.V. Gusel’nikov, L.G. Bulusheva
SB RAS - Nikolaev Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, 630090
Novosibirsk, Russia

A. Grilli
INFN - Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, I-00044 Frascati (RM),
Italy

Eﬀects of orientational x-ray scattering have been experimentally examined in a ﬁlm of vertically
aligned multiwall carbon nanotubes (CNs). Additional contribution to the x-ray ﬂuorescence inten-
sity was revealed at angles close to the ﬁlm normal. Theoretical considerations suggest the intensity
enhancement to be caused by propagation of C Kα-radiation mainly along the channels of CNs.

One of the attractive features of CN morphology is a long inner channel [1], which, in particular, could be used
to handle x rays, neutrons and charged particle beams [2–5]. As well known, x rays and thermal neutrons can be
eﬀectively transported by a hollow part of microcapillaries, and that opens an opportunity for the creation of new
optical elements [6,7]. In addition to the high practical importance, capillaries have been shown to represent a ﬁne
tool for studying fundamental features of radiation scattering by a surface [8]. In microcapillaries the size of hollows
is much larger than the eﬀective wavelength of the radiation and the radiation dispersion can be described within the
framework of surface channeling. In case of CNs, the eﬀective wavelength of radiation becomes comparable with a
diameter of channels and instead of surface scattering eﬀects we deal with bulk features of radiation interaction with
a nanotube structure [9]. The aligned CNs are attractive for understanding the nature of radiation propagation and
scattering in the channels of extremely small diameters. The present work reports the ﬁrst experimental study of the
inﬂuence of nanotube alignment on the angular dependence of x-ray ﬂuorescence.

Obviously, measurements of x-ray scattering in an individual CN are just provisional and such type of experiments
could be ﬁrst performed for a bulk material consisting of the ordered nanotubes. Nowadays, a number of techniques
to produce the ﬁlms of oriented nanotubes have been developed. Mostly aligned multiwall CNs have been synthesized
using a zeolite-supported catalyst [10], the lithography technique [11,12], and mixtures of ferrocene and fullerene
or hydrocarbon compounds [13–15]. Both the nanotube structure and the character of its ordering are varied as a
function of the synthesis conditions.

As a starting point, a ﬁlm of vertically aligned nanotubes, grown on a Si substrate, was prepared by thermal
chemical vapor deposition of a ferrocene/fullerene mixture. The chemical vapor deposition apparatus consists of a gas
ﬂow reactor and a tubular furnace; the reactor is ﬁtted with a removable quartz tube. A ceramic boat with a mixture
of fullerene C60 and ferrocene Fe(C5H5)2, taken in the ratio of 1:1, was placed inside the tube beyond a Si 4×10 mm2
plate. The pyrolysis was performed in an argon ﬂow of atmospheric pressure at 950oC [16]. The material produced
was characterized by a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Figure 1 shows a SEM image of a CN layer. The mean
length of nanotubes coincides with the ﬁlm thickness of about 10 µm. The nanotubes are rather closely packed and
their density was estimated about 1000 pieces/µm2. A transmission electron microscope showed that the multiwall
CNs have from 5 up to 15 layers, the external diameter of ∼ 10 ÷ 20 nm and the inner channel diameter of ∼ 4.0
÷ 6.0 nm. From the SEM analysis it follows that the nanotubes are mostly ordered for an internal part of the ﬁlm.
In the beginning of the growth process the silicon surface with deposited iron particles (as the catalyst), provides the
alignment of CNs. An upper part of the ﬁlm (0.1 ÷ 0.2 µm thickness) is the most disoriented due, perhaps, to the
ﬁnal growing features, when the concentration of fullerenes is lower.

∗

Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed; electronic mail: dabagov@lnf.infn.it

1

The angular dependence of x-ray ﬂuorescence from nanotube ﬁlms was measured by means of a laboratory spec-
trometer. A scheme of the sample location within a spectrometer chamber is presented in Fig. 2. The operating
vacuum was 2×10−4 Pa. In order to change the angle α between the sample surface and the optical axis of spectrom-
eter from 60o to 100o, the sample of 8×2 mm2 was ﬁxed to the rotatable axis. Positions of the Cu anode of x-ray tube
and the entrance slit were ﬁxed. The angle between the radiation source, i.e. the anode surface of 6 mm width, and
the rotating axis was 20o. A gas proportional counter with methane pressure of 0.2×105 Pa was placed beyond the
slit. A counter window was made from polypropylene ﬁlm of 2 µm thickness. Maximal counter charge was ∼ 3000
impulses/sec. at anode voltage of 2.3 kV and current of 100 mA; the total intensity at maximum accounted ∼ 60000
impulses.

To reveal channeling eﬀect in CNs, x-ray ﬂuorescence from the aligned and randomly distributed nanotubes should
be compared. Random distribution of nanotubes was obtained by applying pressure to the nanostructure ﬁlm. The
complete disorientation of nanotubes with respect to the substrate surface was conﬁrmed by the SEM analysis. The
angular dependences of x-ray ﬂuorescence measured for the samples of ordered as well as chaotic nanotube distributions
are shown in Fig. 3 (curves 1 and 2, respectively). The count values were normalized by the maximum. The curves
show similar intensity dependence: increase at angles from 60o up to 85o and then decrease. The sample of aligned
CNs provides an additional contribution to the x-ray ﬂuorescence spectrum near 90o. For the sample of disordered
nanotubes the angular dependence will be deﬁned by geometrical parameters of the experimental layout and by
absorption of the exciting and ﬂuorescence beams. The measured intensity was ﬁtted by the following expression:
I = I0 sin α sin(110o − α) exp (cid:16)
(cid:17), where I0 is the initial radiation intensity, η is the cumulative factor
determined by the absorption. The formula takes also into account the change of the acceptance vs the angle α. This
dependence is shown by the curve 3 in Fig. 3, and it has a maximum at 82o. The simulated angular dependence for
x-ray ﬂuorescence has good agreement with the measured one for the disordered nanotube ﬁlm and shows absence of
peculiarities in the range of angles close to the normal.

− η cos(α−20o)
sin α

Figure 3 presents also the angular distribution of x-ray ﬂuorescence from the Si substrate (curve 4). Due to the
presence of a SiOx layer on the substrate surface, a ﬂuorescence spectrum is formed by the O Kα, Si Kα, Si Kβ and
Si L2,3 lines. As seen, the angular dependences for the substrate and nanotube ﬁlm are rather similar, while in the
case of clean substrate the integral intensity is 5 times less. The reason of low intensity can be due to comparative
low probability for Si ionization (ωion = 1.8 keV) by the bremsstrahlung of x-ray tube. This, in turn, leads to low
intensity of the both Si Kα and Kβ lines. Contribution of x-ray emission by oxygen could be comparable with the C
Kα spectra of CNs, however, its quantity is small. The Si L2,3 lines signal detected by the gas proportional counter is
very weak because of relatively large thickness of the counter window. The decrease in ﬂuorescence emission from the
substrate (curve 4) with respect to the x-ray emission in presence of the CN ﬁlm (curves 1 and 2) at scattering angles
less than 70o is due to the change in the absorption coeﬃcients for Si and C. Thus, even the substrate ﬂuorescence
contributes in the forming of the curves 1 and 2, its relative value is rather small, and we can neglect it.

A ﬁve-time enlarged diﬀerence between the curves 1 and 2 is given by the curve 5. The integral presented by the
curve 5 was estimated to be ∼ 0.4 % of the total ﬂuorescence intensity. Despite the large statistical spread, this
dependence obviously exhibits a maximum of ∼ 6o in width at 90o that based on ”a plato” of ∼ 20o in width. We
suppose that this feature is caused by the inﬂuence of CNs alignment on x-ray ﬂuorescence, and the maximum width
is mainly deﬁned by the deviation of CNs from a vertical alignment. X-ray ﬂuorescence from strongly bent CNs that
takes place near the ﬁlm surface, gives a broad diﬀuse halo. The distribution 5 is determined by the combination of
various mechanisms of radiation scattering in the nanotube ﬁlm. We shall try to evaluate contribution by the main
scattering factors in the total angular distribution of radiation behind the studied structures.

Mean angular deviation ∆θ of x-ray ﬂuorescence after traversing a CN ﬁlm can be estimated, paying attention to
the fact that, originally, x-ray ﬂuorescence is isotropic. Obviously, the width is deﬁned by coherent and incoherent
radiation scattering in the inner cavity and the walls of nanotubes (the latter can be considered as radiation diﬀraction
on a multilayer system) ∆θch, as well as by diﬀuse scattering in the space between separate nanotubes and incoherent
scattering by the structure imperfections ∆θd, i.e. ∆θ2 = ∆θ2
ch. In turn, the diﬀuse term depends on the
texture of nanotube layer and on the mean distance between the separate nanotubes or the bundles of nanotubes
tightly attached to each other, i.e. ∆θ2
p. Incoherent scattering due to the ﬁlm texture ∆θt is determined
by radiation absorption in the tube walls and by imperfections, while the second term ∆θp, which corresponds to the
free ﬂy-by (straight ray) propagation, can be easily evaluated from the geometrical structure parameters.

d = ∆θ2

d + ∆θ2

t + ∆θ2

Detailed examination of microscopic pictures of the samples allows the texture parameters to be deﬁned. Namely,
our analysis shows that for a ﬁlm thickness l ≈ 10 µm, the mean distance between the separate nanotubes or the
bundles of nanotubes is about a ≈ 100 nm. More than that, mean angular deviation in the angular orientation
for the nanotubes layer is in the range of 30o ÷ 50o that deﬁnes ∆θt. For the studied samples the term ∆θp ≃
a
l , corresponding to the straight ray propagation between the nanotube bundles, does not exceed a few mrads (.

2

1o). This eﬀect, so called “collimation eﬀect”, strongly depends on the depth of radiation source position; due to
the low density of the ﬁlm, any nanotube atom can be a source of x-ray ﬂuorescence [17]. As well known, the C
Kα-spectrum has an energy extended structure in the range of 275-284 eV close to the K-edge (≈ 285 eV), and the
coeﬃcient of absorption is rather low for the photons near the absorption edge [18]. Thus the eﬀect of collimation
will be suppressed. Moreover, we can conclude that diﬀusive part of radiation scattering in the nanotube ﬁlm forms
a wide background in the angular distribution of x-ray ﬂuorescence.

Now let us evaluate ∆θch that we deﬁned as a term describing radiation scattering inside aligned channels (nan-
otubes). In this case the problem becomes similar to the electromagnetic wave propagation in optical ﬁbers [19,20].
Following a general deﬁnition of scattering at channeling (see [21]), mean-square angle of radiation scattering in a

∝

ωmax

Rωmin

dω Nph(ω)

ω2

r0

R0

nanotube can be estimated by : ∆θ2
ch

dx Ne(x), where r0 is the internal radius of empty cylindrical

nanotube core, ω and Nph(ω) correspond to the emitted photon energy and the number of photons with energy ω,
Ne(x) is the electron density and x is the radial coordinate in the transverse nanotube cross-section [3,4]. Reducing
this expression results in ∆θch ≈ 3o ÷ 6o at the given values of ω0 max∼ 100-170 eV and r0∼ 2-3 nm. However,
this estimation is valid just for the proper channeling regime (an ideal case), when the eﬀects of dechanneling (when
x-ray beams leave nanotube channels) are suppressed. In the considered case we deal with multiwall bent nanotubes.
And ﬁrst, it is necessary to take into account dechanneling of photons due to the strong nanotube bending, at which
the requirements for x-ray channeling are violated .
Indeed, essential bending through the short distances causes
increasing the angles of radiation propagation with respect to the nanotube longitudinal axis, that results in fast
dechanneling of x rays. Thus, x-ray channeling takes place just in the rather straight parts of nanotubes. However,
these parts are governed by the ﬁlm texture. Due to that, the angular distribution formed by x rays at channeling
could be wide. Herewith, studying the SEM images by the Fourier analysis has shown that on the base of resolvable
nanotube disorientation, one can observe a sharp narrow (5o÷10o) peak for nanotubes normally directed [22].

What deserves special mention is the tunneling through the potential barrier that in our case is responsible for the
radiation leakage through the nanotube wall. In our samples, the thickness of walls ∆d varied in the limits of ∼ 3
÷ 7 nm, which is of the order of the transverse wavelength of radiation λ⊥ & 4.42 nm. Therefore, the probability
of tunneling , ∝ exp (cid:16)
λ⊥ (cid:17), is quite high. That’s probably why relative integrated power of the narrow peak in
the angular distribution of emerged radiation is very weak. Moreover, the tunneling process is accompanied by a
small-angle diﬀraction. Presence of a set of equidistant layers in the wall leads to the diﬀraction dispersion of x-ray
photons in such a manner that the ﬁrst diﬀraction maximum is practically observed at angles close to the scattering
angles under channeling (∼ 5o).

− ∆d

In our work we studied orientational eﬀects of x-radiation scattering in a layer of nanotubes. During measurements
of x-ray ﬂuorescence from a ﬁlm of aligned multiwall CNs, the intensity ampliﬁcation was revealed at angles close to
the normal. The width of a reﬂection curve is mainly deﬁned by the angular deviation in orientation of nanotubes.

Recent development of the technology of nanostructure manufacturing testiﬁes more and more to the opportunity
for cultivation of layers of aligned nanotubes. Thus, the question on the use of hollow nanostructure channels becomes
rather actual. It is obvious, that the quality of ﬁlm arrangement is still far from perfect in order to consider these
structures as objects with the stable allocated directions. However, since the discussed eﬀects can be observed on
micron distances due to extremely small channel sizes, already today, it is possible to start studying structural eﬀects
of radiation scattering in CNs.

[1] R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus, and M.S. Dresselhaus, Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes (Imperial College Press, London:

1998).

[2] V.V. Klimov, and V.S. Letokhov, Phys. Lett. A222, 424 (1996).
[3] G.V. Dedkov, Nucl. Instr. Meth. B143, 584 (1998).
[4] N.K. Zhevago, and V.I. Glebov, Phys. Lett. A250, 360 (1998).
[5] A. Kr¨uger, M. Ozawa, and F. Banhart, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 5056 (2003).
[6] M.A. Kumakhov, and F.F. Komarov, Phys. Rep. 191, 289 (1990).
[7] M.A. Kumakhov, Ed., Kumakhov Optics and Application (SPIE, Washington: 2000); Proc. of SPIE 4155, 1-150 (2000).
[8] G. Cappuccio, S.B. Dabagov, A. Piﬀeri, and C. Gramaccioni, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 2822 (2001).
[9] S.B. Dabagov, Physics Uspekhi 46, 1053 (2003).

3

[10] W.Z. Li, S.S. Xie, L.X. Qian, B.H. Chang, B.S. Zou, W.Y. Zhou, R.A. Zhao, and G. Wang, Science 274, 1701 (1996).
[11] J.I. Sohn, and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. A74, 287 (2002).
[12] M. Terrones, N. Grobert, J. P. Zhang, H. Terrones, J. Olivares, W.K. Hsu, J.P. Hare, A.K. Cheetham, H. Kroto, and

D.R.M. Walton, Chem. Phys. Letters 285, 299 (1998).

[13] M. Mayne, N. Grobert, M. Terrones, R. Kamalakaran, M. Ruhle, H.W. Kroto, and D.R.M. Walton, Chem. Phys. Letters

338, 101 (2001).

[14] N. Grobert, W.K. Hsu, Y.Q. Zhu, J.P. Hare, H.W. Kroto, D.R.M. Walton, M. Terrones, H. Terrones, Ph. Redlich, M.

Ruhle, R. Escudero, and F. Morales, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 3363 (1999).

[15] B.C. Satishkumar, A. Govindaraj, and C.R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Letters 307, 158 (1999).
[16] A.V. Okotrub, A.G. Kudashov, L.G. Bulusheva, A.V. Gusel’nikov, V.S. Danilovich, and O.G.Abrosimov, Proc. of X APAM
Topical Seminar and III Conference “Materials of Siberia”, “Nanoscience and technology” (2-6 June 2003, Novosibirsk,
Russia) p. 314.

[17] F.F. Komarov, M.A. Kumakhov, and N.K. Zhevago, 76(4), 119 (1983); N.K. Zhevago, private communication.
[18] B.L. Henke, E.M. Gullikson, and J.C. Davis, Atom. Data Nucl. Data Tables 54, 181 (1993).
[19] D. Gloge, Phys. Rep. 42, 1777 (1979).
[20] N.K. Zhevago, and V.I. Glebov, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A331, 592 (1993).
[21] S.B. Dabagov, Rad. Eﬀ. Def. Solids 25, 103 (1993).
[22] I. Kinloch, Ch. Singh, M. Nolte, Ch. Buche, K. Kozio, M. Shaﬀer, and A. Windle, Proc. of NanoteC03 “Nanotechnology

in Carbon and Related Materials” (27-30 August 2003, University of Sussex at Brighton, UK) p. 10.

4

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: SEM image of a CN layer grown on a Si substrate.
Figure 2: Scheme of sample (S) location in the x-ray tube relative to exciting (II) and ﬂuorescence beams (I).
Figure 3: Angular dependence of x-ray ﬂuorescence measured for the ﬁlm of aligned (curve 1) and randomly distributed
(curve 2) CNs. Curve 3 presents the ﬁtted angular dependence of x-ray ﬂuorescence. Curve 4 corresponds to the
angular distribution of x-ray ﬂuorescence of the clean Si substrate. The ﬁve-time multiplied diﬀerence between curves
1 and 2 is shown by curve 5.

5

This figure "f1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0406070v1

 

3

1

2

4

5

 

)
.
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

60

70

80

90

100

Angle (deg.)

