Ultraviolet photonic crystal laser

X. Wu, A. Yamilov, X. Liu, S. Li, V. P. Dravid, R. P. H. Chang and H. Cao∗
Material Research Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208

We fabricated two dimensional photonic crystal structures in zinc oxide ﬁlms with focused ion
beam etching. Lasing is realized in the near ultraviolet frequency at room temperature under optical
pumping. From the measurement of lasing frequency and spatial proﬁle of the lasing modes, as well
as the photonic band structure calculation, we conclude that lasing occurs in the strongly localized
defect modes near the edges of photonic band gap. These defect modes originate from the structure
disorder unintentionally introduced during the fabrication process.

PACS numbers: 42.55.Tv,78.66.Hf,42.55.Px,42.55.Zz

4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photonic crystal slabs (PhCS), i.e., two-dimensional
(2D) photonic crystals with ﬁnite vertical dimension,
have attracted much attention because of their potential
applications to various optoelectronic devices and circuits
[1]. Defect cavities in these photonic devices can have
high quality factor and small modal volume[2, 3, 4, 5].
The in-plane conﬁnement is achieved via Bragg scatter-
ing, while the index guiding prevents light leakage in the
perpendicular direction. Low-threshold lasing has been
realized in PhCS made of III-V semiconductors.[6, 7, 8, 9]
They operate in the near infrared frequencies. Ultravi-
olet (UV) photonic crystal laser, however, has not been
realized yet. This is because shorter wavelength requires
smaller feature size, which is technologically challenging
for commonly used wide band gap materials (e.g., GaN,
ZnO). On the other hand, the demand for blue and UV
compact laser sources has prompted enormous research
eﬀort into wide band gap semiconductors. Compared
with other wide band gap materials, ZnO has the advan-
tage of large exciton binding energy (∼ 60 meV), that
allows eﬃcient excitonic emission even at room temper-
ature.

In this letter, we realized, for the ﬁrst time, ZnO pho-
tonic crystal lasers operating in the near-UV frequency
at room temperature. We developed a procedure to fab-
ricate 2D periodic structures in ZnO ﬁlms with the fo-
cused ion beam (FIB) etching. Post thermal annealing is
employed to remove structural damage induced by FIB
etching. Lasing is achieved in the strongly localized de-
fect modes near the edges of photonic band gap by op-
tical pumping. To explain the experimental results, we
calculated the band structure of our samples using the
3D plane wave expansion method [10].

The 2D triangular lattice photonic crystal structure
is fabricated in ZnO. First, 200 nm thick ZnO ﬁlms
are grown on c-plane sapphire substrates by plasma en-
hanced MOCVD at 750o C. The selected area electron
diﬀraction pattern of the ﬁlm reveals that single crys-
talline ZnO is grown along the c-axis. Next, arrays of
cylindrical columns are removed in the ﬁlms by focused
Ga3+ ion beam etching at 30 KeV. FIB has been widely
used for maskless and resistless nano-scale patterning, it

FIG. 1: Top-view SEM of a triangular lattice ZnO photonic
crystal slab. The lattice constant a = 130 nm and air cylinder
radius r = 33 nm.

allows us to precisely control the position, size and den-
sity of air cylinders in the ZnO ﬁlms. However, due to
structural damage caused by FIB, the ZnO emission is
quenched. To remove the structural damage, we annealed
the patterned ﬁlms in O2 at 600oC for one hour. To over-
lap the ZnO gain spectrum with the photonic band gap,
the lattice constant a and the radius of the air cylinders
r are varied over a wide range. The resolution of our FIB
system limits the smallest step of length variation to 15
nm. The size of each pattern is about 8×8 µm with
roughly 4000 air cylinders. A top-view scanning electron
micrograph (SEM) of a part of one pattern is shown in
Fig. 1 (a=130 nm and r/a=0.25). Side view SEM (not
shown) reveals the air cylinders are etched through the
ZnO ﬁlm with nearly vertical walls.

The samples are optically pumped by the third har-
monics of a mode-locked Nd:YAG laser (355 nm, 10 Hz,
20 ps) at room temperature. A schematic sketch of the
experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. A 10× microscope

2

FIG. 2: Schematic of the setup of our optical measurement.
BS1 and BS2 are beam splitters, L1 is 10x objective lens, L2
is 20x objective lens.

objective lens (N.A.=0.25) is used to focus the pump
beam to a 4 µm spot on one pattern, and also collect the
emission from the pattern. Then the emitted light is fo-
cused by another lens into a UV ﬁber, which is connected
to a spectrometer with 0.13 nm spectral resolution. Since
the sapphire substrate is double-side polished and trans-
parent in both visible and UV frequencies, a 20× micro-
scope objective lens (N.A.=0.40) is placed at the back
side of the sample for simultaneous measurement of the
spatial distribution of emission intensity. The pump light
is blocked by a bandpass ﬁlter, while the image of lasing
mode proﬁle is projected by the objective lens onto a UV
sensitive CCD camera. The sample is also illuminated by
a white light source so that we can identify the position
of the lasing modes in the photonic lattice.

Among all fabricated patterns with lattice constant a
varying from 100 to 160 nm, lasing is realized only in
the structures of a = 115 nm and 130 nm. Fig. 3(a)
shows the spectrum of emission from a pattern of a =115
nm and r/a = 0.25. It has a single sharp peak at 387.7
nm. Fig. 3(b) plots the emission intensity integrated
over this peak as a function of the incident pump pulse
energy. The threshold behavior is clearly seen. Above
the threshold, the spectral width of this lasing peak is
only 0.24 nm. These data indicate that lasing oscillation
occurs in this structure. The near-ﬁeld image of this las-
ing mode is obtained simultaneously and shown in the
inset of Fig. 3(a). The white square marks the bound-
ary of the triangular lattice. The lasing mode is spa-
tially localized in a small region of ∼1.0 µm2 inside the
lattice. As we move the pump spot across the lattice,
the lasing modes change in both frequency and spatial
pattern. This behavior suggests that the lasing modes
are spatially localized defect states. They are formed
by the short range structural disorder[11], not “stacking
faults”[12], which perturb the long range periodicity. In
the SEM (Fig. 1), non-uniformity of the size and shape
of air cylinders is quite evident. Lasing is also observed
in the lattices of a=130 nm and r/a = 0.25. However,
the lasing modes have longer wavelength, and their lasing

FIG. 3: (a): Lasing spectrum of a ZnO photonic crystal with
a = 115 nm shows a single defect mode. The incident pump
pulse energy is 2.3 nJ. The inset is the near ﬁeld image of
this lasing mode. (b): Emission intensity of the defect mode
versus the incident pump pulse energy.

threshold is higher.

To understand our experimental results, we calculated
the photonic band structures using the three-dimensional
(3D) plane wave expansion method[10]. Our ZnO PhCS
is vertically asymmetric: with air on top and sapphire
substrate at bottom. To apply the plane wave expansion
method for photonic band calculation, we considered a
super unit cell that consists of air, ZnO photonic crystal
slab, sapphire substrate, ZnO photonic crystal slab and
air (see the inset of Fig. 4). The guided modes con-
ﬁned to the PhCS should lie inside the ZnO/substrate
light cone and the air/ZnO light cone. If the substrate
is thick enough, the guided modes in the two ZnO layers
are decoupled, the symmetric and antisymmetric (with
respect to the cell center plane – dashed line in the inset
of Fig. 4) modes should be degenerate in eigenfrequency.
This artiﬁcial degeneracy is used as the check of consis-
tency in our band structure calculations. In a symmetric

3

from 396 nm to 415 nm. For PhCS with a =115 nm and
r/a = 0.25, a narrower gap exists between 363 nm and
372 nm. At room temperature, the ZnO gain spectrum
is centered around 385 nm with a width of ∼ 12 nm.
Thus the calculated photonic band gaps for the above
structures do not exactly overlap with the gain spectrum.
However, the unavoidable imperfections in the structure
created during the fabrication will broaden the band gap
and make it shallower [18]. The spatially localized defect
modes are formed near the band edges. We believe the
lasing modes in our a = 115nm structure correspond to
the defect modes near the dielectric band edge (on the
lower frequency side of the band gap), while the lasing
modes in the a = 130nm structure are the defect modes
near the air band edge (on the higher frequency side of
the band gap). The lasing threshold of the former struc-
ture is lower than that of the latter, because the defect
modes at the dielectric band edge are concentrated inside
ZnO and experience more gain. For all other systems, ei-
ther there is no full band gap for TE-like modes or the
ZnO gain spectrum is far away from the gap. Hence the
lasing threshold is too high to be reached experimentally.
In summary, we demonstrated optically pumped ZnO
photonic crystal lasers. They operate in the near UV
frequency at room temperature. The lasing modes are
spatially localized defect states near the edge of photonic
band gap, that are formed by short range structural dis-
order unintentionally introduced during the fabrication
process. Further reduction of lasing threshold can be ob-
tained by ﬁne tuning of the structure parameters.

This work was supported by the National Science

Foundation under the grant no. ECS-0244457.

∗

Electronic address: h-cao@northwestern.edu

[1] C. M. Soukoulis, ed. “Photonic Crystals and Light Lo-
calization in the 21st Century” (Kluwer Academic, Dor-
drecht, 2001).

[2] S. G. Johnson, S. Fan, A. Mekis, and J. D. Joannopoulos,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 3388 (2001).

[3] J. Vuˇckovi`c, M. Lonˇcar, H. Mabuchi, and A, Scherer,

Phys. Rev. E 65, 016608 (2001).

[4] K. Srinivasan, and O. Painter, Opt. Express 10, 670

[5] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. Song, and S. Noda, Nature

(2002).

425, 944 (2003).

[6] O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D.
O’Brien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, Science 284, 1819
(1999).

[7] M. Imada, S. Noda, A. Chutinan, T. Tokuda, M. Murata,

and G. Sasaki, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 316 (1999).

[8] H. Benisty, C. Weisbuch, D. Labilloy, M. Rattier, C. J.
M. Smith, T. F. Krauss, R. M. De La Rue, R. Houdre,
U. Oesterle, C. Jouanin, and D. Cassagne, and D. Jang,
IEEE J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 2063 (1999).

[9] J. Hwang, H. Ryu, D. Song, I. Han, H. Song, H. Park,
Y. Lee, and D. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 2982 (2000).

FIG. 4: Calculated band structure of ZnO photonic crystal
slab with lattice constant a = 130 nm, air cylinder radius
r = 0.25a, and slab thickness t = 200 nm. The refractive
indices for ZnO and sapphire are 2.34 and 1.68. Dotted line
is light cone between ZnO slab and air, dashed line is light
cone between ZnO slab and sapphire substrate. Inset shows
the super unit cell used in our calculation, the dark strips are
ZnO photonic crystal slabs.

PhCS (i.e. the substrate is replaced by air), the modes
can be grouped into two classes: modes that have z-
component of the magnetic ﬁeld or electric ﬁeld symmet-
ric with respect to the center plane of the photonic layer.
The complete stop bands for the guided modes of each
class can exist independently[13]. Low lying modes of the
ﬁrst/second class are mainly transverse electric/magnetic
(TE/TM) polarized. The presence of the substrate re-
moves the symmetry[14]. For our ZnO samples, we cal-
culated the ﬁeld components of the ﬁrst ﬁve bands with
and without the sapphire substrate and found close re-
semblance in the spatial proﬁles of the corresponding
modes in the two cases. This is due to strong vertical
conﬁnement of the guided modes. Therefore, the modes
in the ZnO PhCS with the sapphire substrate can still be
classiﬁed as predominantly either TE-like or TM-like. It
is known that the polarization of ZnO exciton emission
is mostly perpendicular to the c-axis[15, 16]. Since the
c-axis of our ZnO ﬁlm is normal to the ﬁlm/substrate
interface, the emitted photons are coupled mainly into
TE-like modes, as we conﬁrmed experimentally from the
measurement of polarization of photoluminescence from
the side of an unpatterned ZnO ﬁlm. Therefore, we can
disregard the TM-like bands in the band structure calcu-
lation. For an appropriate choice of lattice parameters, a
complete photonic band gap exists between the ﬁrst two
TE-like bands[17]. Fig. 4 shows an example of the cal-
culated photonic band structures for a =130 nm and r/a
= 0.25. For this system there exist a photonic band gap

[10] S. G. Johnson, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Opt. Exp. 8, 173

[15] Y. S. Park, C. W. Litton, T. C. Collins, and D. C.

(2001).

[11] A. Yamilov and H. Cao, Phys. Rev. A 69, 031803 (2004).
[12] M. N. Shkunov et al, Synthetic Metals 116, 485 (2001);
M. N. Shkunov et al, Adv. Funct. Mater. 12, 21 (2002).
[13] S. G. Johnson, S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopou-
los, and L. A. Kolodziejski, Phys. Rev. B 60, 5751 (1999).
[14] E. Chow, S. Lin, S. G. Johnson, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D.
Joannopoulos, J. R. Wendt, G. A. Vawter, W. Zubrzycki,
H. Hou, and A. Alleman, Nature 407, 983 (2000).

Reynolds, Phys. Rev. 143 143 (1966).

[16] S. Jung, W. Park, H. Cheong, G. Yi, H. Jang, S. Hong,

and T. Joo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 1924 (2002).

[17] A. Yamilov, X. Wu, X. Liu, R. P. H. Chang and H. Cao,

unpublished.

[18] Y. A. Vlasov, M. A. Kaliteevski, and V. V. Nicolaev,

Phys. Rev. B 60, 1555 (1999).

4

