systems

, Andrey K. Sarychev2, Evgenii E.
§

Viktor A. Podolskiy1
Narimanov1 Vladimir M. Shalaev3
1 Electrical Engineering Dept., Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540
2 Ethertronics Inc., 9605 Scranton Road, Suite 850 San Diego, CA 92121
3 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 47907

4 Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
6
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract. We compare the optical response of isolated nanowires, double-wire
systems, and Π-structures, and show that their radiation is well described in terms
of their electric and magnetic dipole moments. We also show that both dielectric
permittivity and magnetic permeability can be negative at optical and near infrared
frequencies, and demonstrate the connection between the geometry of the system and
its resonance characteristics. We conclude that plasmonic nanowires can be employed
for developing novel negative-index materials. Finally, we demonstrate that it is
possible to construct a nanowire-based “transparent nanoresonator” with dramatically
enhanced intensity and metal concentration below 5%.

To whom correspondence should be addressed (vpodolsk@princeton.edu)

§

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

2

1. Introduction

The concept of light manipulation on the subwavelength scale is increasingly attractive
to researchers in optics, materials science, and chemistry[5, 6, 1]. Plasmonic materials,
strongly interacting with light are the exceptional candidates for the nano-photonic
devices. It has been shown that metal-dielectric ﬁlms can be used to eﬀectively conﬁne
the electromagnetic wave to a nanoscale, and transmit the localized signal [4, 5, 19].
Another class of nanoplasmonic devices based on metallic nanowires and nanowire pairs,
have been suggested to obtain light nano-conﬁnement, transmission, and even negative
refraction for optical and infrared frequencies [16, 14] due to resonance excitation of
electric and magnetic dipole moments. However, while the dipole contribution dominate
the forward and backward scattering of the nanowire systems, the presence of quadrupole
moment may substantially aﬀect their “side” scattering characteristics.

Here we address the electromagnetic response of the nanowire systems, and show
that it is indeed dominated by the dipole moments. We also demonstrate that the electric
and magnetic resonances correspond to a special kind of surface (plasmon polariton)
wave, and can be independently controlled using the combination of nanowires and Π-
structures[18]. Finally, we show that the nanowire composites may be used to build
a “broadband transparent nanoresonator”, achieving an average intensity enhancement
exceeding an order of magnitude, with a metal concentration less than 5%. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows:
in we ﬁrst brieﬂy describe the typical nanowire
geometry and the coupled dipole equations (CDEs), used in our simulations. We then
describe the resonant response of a single nanowire, nanowire pair and Π-structures.
Finally, we show the ﬁeld enhancement in the transparent nanowire composite.

2. Simulation of the nanowire response using CDEs

The typical radius of individual nanowires described in this manuscript b2 is much
smaller than the wavelength of the incident light λ, and is comparable with the skin-
depth of the material. The length of the wire 2b1, on the other hand, is comparable to the
wavelength (see Fig.1). The electromagnetic properties of such metallic nanostructures
are somewhat similar to the properties of scaled-down radio-antennas widely used in
telecommunications. However, the ﬁnite value of the dielectric constant of the metal
in the optical range and typically low aspect ratio lead to the fundamental diﬀerences
in the response of optical- and radio- antennas. These diﬀerences make the analytical
solution for the problem of electromagnetic response of nanowires hardly possible. Here
we use the well-known coupled-dipole approximation[2, 3, 14] to ﬁnd the response of
our system.

In this approach, a single nanowire is represented by an array of point dipoles
arranged at the sites of a cubic lattice. Each dipole is subjected to the ﬁeld of an
incident plane wave and to the ﬁeld of all other dipoles. Thus, the dipole moments of

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

3

Figure 1. A long nanowire represented by the array of point dipoles.

all dipoles are coupled through the following coupled-dipole equations (CDEs):

Einc +

di = α0 


N

Xj6=i

ˆG(ri −

,

rj)dj


where Einc represents the incident ﬁeld at the location of i-th dipole, ri, ˆG(ri −
rj)dj
represents the EM ﬁeld scattered by the dipole j at this point, and ˆG is a regular part
of the free-space dyadic Green function deﬁned as

Gαβ = k3[A(kr)δαβ + B(kr)rαrβ],
x−3] exp(ix),
A(x) = [x−1 + ix−2
3ix−2 + 3x−3] exp(ix),
B(x) = [

x−1

−

−

−

with ˆGd = Gαβdβ. The Greek indices represent the Cartesian components of vectors
and the summation over the repeated indices is implied.

The key parameter in CDEs is the polarizability of a monomer, α0, usually given
by Clausius-Mossotti relation (see, e.g. [7]) with the radiative correction introduced by
Draine [3]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

αLL = R3 ǫ

1
,
−
ǫ + 2
αLL

α0 =

1

−

i(2k3/3)αLL

,

where ǫ is the dielectric permittivity of the material and αLL is the Lorentz-Lorenz
polarizability without the radiation correction. The magnitude of this polarizability,
controlled by the parameter R serves as a ﬁtting parameter. It may be visualized as
a radius of an imaginary sphere, centered over the position of a point dipole. In our
simulations this parameter is determined by the condition that the system response in
the quasi-static limit should yield the correct depolarization factors, and is typically
varied in the range R = 0.59 ... 0.62 (in the units of the lattice size).

3. Radiation and resonance properties of metallic nanowires

The non-resonant scattering by a nanostructured system typically weakly aﬀects the
incident electromagnetic radiation, and can be eﬀectively treated by a variety of mostly
perturbative techniques (see, e.g. Ref. [7]). However, when the frequency of incident

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

4

light coincides with a resonant frequency of a nanostructure, the electromagnetic ﬁeld
distribution may be dominated by the scattered (radiated), and not the incident wave.
The scattered by a nanostructure ﬁeld can be expanded into the series of multipole
components. First term in such an expansion corresponds to electric dipole. Next two
terms correspond to magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole [7, 14].

Similarly to the well-known case of radio-antennas [7], the radiation properties
of an isolated nanowire are well-described by its dipole moment (Fig. 2). The induced
polarization in a substantially long and thin wire close to its ﬁrst resonance (2b1 = λp/2,
where λp is the wavelength of the plasmon polariton) can be represented by the following
relation [8]:

2
3

b2
1
b2
2

b1
b2 !

b1b2
h

/

dE =

2f (∆)Eǫm

1 + f (∆)ǫm
"

cos Ω
#
i
where the dimensionless frequency Ω is given by Ω2 = (b1k)2 ln(b1/b2)+ikb1
ln(1+b1/b2)
f (∆) = 1−i
is introduced to account for the skin eﬀect; the parameter
∆
∆ = b2√2πσmω/c represents the ratio of nanowire radius and the skin depth, and
σm is the bulk metal conductivity.

. The function

J1[(1+i)∆]
J0[(1+i)∆]

1 +

(5)

ln

 

,

The resonances in an isolated nanowire can be related to a resonant excitation
of a special kind of surface waves on the metal – air interface. These waves, which
exponentially decay away from the interface are also known as plasmon polaritons.
Although the excitation of the plasmon polariton with a plane electromagnetic wave
is impossible in the inﬁnite medium (see e.g. [15]), the plasmon waves have non-zero
resonance width in ﬁnite nanowires so they can eﬀectively couple to a plane wave. The
frequency of the polariton resonance is controlled by the nanowire material and length,
while the “width” of this resonance is related to the skin-depth and the radius of the
wire [14]. This eﬀect makes it possible to use a single metallic nanoantenna to conﬁne
and transmit the optical and infrared radiation on the nanoscale [16, 14].

The behavior of the plasmon modes changes substantially when two nanowires
positioned closely to each other, so that their plasmon modes can interact with each
other. When the electric ﬁeld of the incident plane wave is parallel to the wires, and the
magnetic ﬁeld to be perpendicular to the common plane of the two wires (see Fig.3),
two kinds of plasmon polariton waves of the diﬀerent symmetry can be excited.

The symmetric combination of the two polariton waves leads to the excitation of the
dipole moment in both wires. In this case, the electric ﬁeld of the incident plane wave
resonantly excites parallel currents in both nanowires. The anti-symmetric combination,
on the other hand, corresponds to the anti-parallel currents in the two wires (excited
by a magnetic ﬁeld component of the incident wave). These currents, together with the
displacement currents in between the wires, lead to a resonance magnetic moment in the
system. The shift between the resonance frequencies of electric and magnetic dipoles
is related to a coupling eﬃciency between the polariton modes in two wires, which in
turn is controlled by the distance between the wires. This eﬀect has a similar nature
to the splitting of the energy levels of the wavefunctions of diﬀerent symmetry in the

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

5

Figure 2.
(a) The comparison between the dipole moment found from numerical
simulations (dots) and calculated using Eq.5 (line). The moments are normalized
by unit volume.
(b) Far-ﬁeld intensity radiation pattern of a single nanowire in
(a) is obtained from numerical simulations (dots) and calculated by approximating
the antenna by a point dipole (solid line). The dimensions of the silver wire are
162

32nm. The far ﬁeld pattern is calculated for λ = 560nm.

32

×

×

double-well potential due to the tunneling coupling.

The eﬀect of the polariton modes interaction on resonance characteristics is clearly
seen when we compare the electric and magnetic response of the system of two parallel
nanowires and of Π-system of the same size, which is obtained by bringing one end of
the two wires into the electric contact [see Fig. 3(d)]. As it is explained above, the
electric resonant response of the system is governed by symmetric polariton mode. The
currents in the two nanowires in this case have essentially the same distribution, so they
are not aﬀected by the electric contact between wires. The magnetic response of the two
systems, on the other hand, is dramatically diﬀerent, since the presence of the electric
contact forces the connected points to have the same value of the potential, and makes
it the excitation of anti-symmetric polariton mode impossible.

Due to the presence of the electric contact, the magnetic resonances of the Π-
structure do not directly correspond to the electric resonances of the single nanowire.
It can be shown that Π-structure may have resonant magnetic response even when its
size is much smaller then the wavelength, so that no polariton modes can propagate
on the corresponding nanowire. The magnetic resonance in this case is similar to
electric plasmon resonance which occurs in all metallic nanoparticles. In the limit of
λ
b2 the magnetic resonance of the Π structure can be described by the
d
following expression [18]

b1 ≫

≫

≫

dH =

1
2
4 log(d/b2)/(b2
where g2
the geometry of the system.

H0b3

≈ −

1 log(d/b1)(kd)2 tan(gb1)
−
(gb1)3

gb1

,

(6)

2/ǫ). Note that this resonance frequency is deﬁned solely by

As a result of two-wire interaction, the scattering (far-ﬁeld) response of the coupled
wire systems and Π-structures, which deﬁnes the interaction between diﬀerent elements
in the macroscopic composite, is not described by a dipole moment alone. As it is shown

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

6

Figure 3.
(a) The dipole moment of the coupled nanowire system with dimensions
162 nm (antenna length) by 32 nm (antenna diameter) by 80 nm (distance between
antennas). (b) The magnetic dipole moment of the system in (a). (c) Far ﬁeld intensity
distribution of system in (a-b) calculated using exact numerical simulations (dots), by
approximating the system by point electric dipole (dashed line) and by approximating
the system by point electric and magnetic dipoles (solid line). The far ﬁeld pattern is
calculated for λ = 560nm. (d) Connecting the coupled nanowires in (a-b) into a Π-
structure drastically shifts the position of the magnetic resonance, leaving the dipole
moment of the system practically unchanged (not shown). The dots correspond to
numerical simulations, solid line corresponds to Eq.6. All moments are normalized by
the unit volume.

in Fig. 3, such systems have magnetic dipole moment comparable to their electric dipole
moment. Our numerical simulations clearly show that these systems are fully described
by two dipole moments, and have vanishing higher moments. This in turn leads to
highly-directional emission (scattering) properties of the double-wire systems. This fact
is illustrated in Fig.3, which shows excellent agreement between the far ﬁeld obtained by
numerical calculation and by approximating the system by point electric and magnetic
dipoles.

The electric and magnetic resonances can be used to produce extremely large local
ﬁelds, which may be beneﬁcial for a variety of spectroscopic, lithographic, and biological
applications as described in the next chapter.

However, one of the most promising applications of nanowire composites lies in
the area of materials with simultaneously negative dielectric permittivity and magnetic
permeability. Such media, originally considered by Veselago [13] was predicted to have
a negative refractive index and consequently exhibit a wide variety of surprising optical
phenomena. Among them are the reversed Snell’s law [9], Cherenkov radiation, and
Doppler Eﬀect. Due to its negative phase velocity such media are often referred to as

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

7

Figure 4.
(a) The average intensity enhancement over the parallel wire composite
(inset) clearly shows a separated-resonance structure, an implicit property of single
nanowire.
(b) The random nanowire percolation composite (inset) exhibits a
broadband intensity enhancement due to collective excitation of a large number
of diﬀerent resonant clusters. The intensity distribution over this composite for
λ = 800 nm is shown in (c). The size of individual wire in both composites is
600

20nm; surface concentration of metal is 4%.

20

×

×

“left-handed”, meaning that the wavevector and the vectors of electric and magnetic
ﬁelds form in such a material a left-handed trio in contrast to a conventional “right-
handed” case. One of the most promising phenomenon present in left-handed materials
is so-called “superlensing”, where a slab of a medium with ǫ = µ =
1 is used to obtain
an optically perfect image with subwavelength resolution in the far ﬁeld [11, 10].

−

As we showed above, the system of coupled nanoantennas exhibit resonance electric
and magnetic response. When the wavelength of an incident light is below the resonance
in the coupled nanowire system, the excited moments are directed in opposite to the
excitation ﬁeld (Fig.3). Such negative responses may be used to implement a left-handed
composite in the optical and near-infrared ranges[14, 16, 17, 18].

By changing the geometry of the system we can shift the resonances to any region

from the visible to near infrared frequency ranges [14, 16, 17].

4. Enhanced local ﬁelds in nanoantenna arrays

As it was mentioned above, the resonance coupling between the plane and polariton
waves in a single metallic nanowire opens a possibility to propagate the optical light
through the array of nano-antennas, using them as wires in all-optical computers and
telecommunication systems. It also opens the possibility of resonant light ampliﬁcation
on the nanoscale due to resonant excitation of polariton waves.

The local intensity in this case could exceed the intensity of the incident ﬁeld
by three or more orders of magnitude (Fig. 4). Such high local ﬁelds are beneﬁcial
for enhanced spectroscopy, lithography, absorption, nonlinear processes and all related
applications. Note that high local ﬁelds at the resonance are usually accompanied by
the narrow frequency band where the resonance exists [14]. The resonant frequency
itself is controlled by the length of the nanowire and its material.

While the area of the enhanced local ﬁeld is concentrated near the nanoantenna

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

8

surface, the collective resonance of several antennas can lead to the enhancement of
the average intensity in the antenna composite. The response of the equally separated
parallel nanowires resembles the behavior of an isolated antenna (Fig. 4 a), exhibiting
huge intensity enhancement in the narrow frequency ranges corresponding to the “eigen”
frequencies of the plasmon polariton waves in the individual wires.

The situation changes dramatically when the antennas are randomly deposited on
a dielectric substrate, and a surface metal concentration reaches the value when the
composite starts to conduct a DC current (known as the percolation threshold). At this
point the composite contains nanowire clusters of all possible sizes and conﬁgurations,
each having its own resonance frequency, and generating at this frequency high local
ﬁelds. The collective eﬀect of all the clusters leads to the extremely broadband intensity
enhancement, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). This eﬀect is similar to the broadband ﬁeld
excitation in a conventional percolation ﬁlm [4, 5]. However,
in contrast to the
percolation ﬁlm, where the percolation threshold concentration is ﬁxed and is equal
to 50%, the percolation threshold in a nanowire composite is inversely proportional to
the aspect ratio of the individual nanowires and can be made arbitrary small, making
it possible to fabricate a “transparent nanoresonator”. This system can be eﬀectively
used in the areas which require simultaneously high ﬁelds and optical transparency, e.g.
in stacked solar cells [20], transparent bio-sensors or optical lithography.

5. Conclusion

The unique resonant characteristics of metallic nanoantennas could be precisely
controlled by their geometry and material properties. The polariton resonance frequency
in such devices can be tuned to any given range from the optical to the mid-infrared.
Applications of plasmonic nanowire composites include narrow- and broadband nano-
resonators, photonics, and left-handed media.

This work was supported in part by NSF under ECS-0210445, DMR-0134736, and

DMR-0121814 grants
[1] S.D.M. Brown, P. Corio, A. Marucci, M.A. Pimenta, M.S. Dresselhaus, and G. Dresselhaus,
Phys.Rev.B 61,77347742 (2000); K.B. Shelimov, and M. Moskovits, Chemistry of Materials, 12,
250 (2000); J. Li, C. Papadopoulos, J.M. Xu, and M. Moskovits, Applied Physics Letters 75, 367
(1999)

[2] E.M.Purcell and C.R.Pennypacker, Astrophys.J. 405, 705 (1973)
[3] B.T.Draine, Astrophys.J. 333, 848 (1988)
[4] S.Ducourtieux, et al, Phys.Rev.B 64 165403 (2001)
[5] V. M. Shalaev (ed) “Optical Properties of Random Media”, Springer-Verlag (2002)
[6] M. Bertolotti, C.M. Bowden, and C. Sibilia (ed) “Nanoscale linear and nonlinear optics”,

AIP conf. proc. series 560 (2001) and references therein

[7] J.D. Jackson “Classical Electrodynamics”, J.Wiley&Sons, Inc (1999)
[8] A.N. Lagarkov and A.K. Sarychev, Phys.Rev.B 53, 10 (1996); D.P. Maknovskiy, L.V. Panina, D.J.

Mapps, and A.K. Sarychev, Phys.Rev.B 64, 165403 (2001)

[9] E. Cubukcu, K. Aydin, E. Ozbay, S. Foteinopoulou, C.M. Soukoulis, Nature, 423 604 (2003);
D.R. Smith, W.J. Padilla, D.C. Vier, S.C. Nemat-Nasser, S. Shultz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4184

Resonant light interaction with plasmonic nanowire systems

9

(2000); C. Parazzoli, R. Greegor, K. Li, et.al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 107401 (2003); G. Shvets,
Phys. Rev. B 67, 035109 (2003)

[10] E. Cubukcu, K. Aydin, E. Ozbay, S. Foterinopolou, C.M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 20 (2003);

P. V. Parimi, W. T. Lu, P. Vodo, S. Sridhar, Nature 426 404 (2003)

[11] J.B. Pendry, Negative Refraction Makes a Perfect Lens, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966 (2000); see also

[12]

[12] V.A. Podolskiy, E.E. Narimanov arXiv:physics/0403139; full version submitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.;
R. Merlin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84 1290 (2004); D.R. Smith, D. Schurig, M. Rosenbluth, et. al.,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 82 1506 (2003)

[13] V. G. Veselago, Sov. Phys. Usp. 10, 509 (1968).
[14] V. Podolskiy, A. Sarychev, V. Shalaev, Optics Express 11 735 (2003)
[15] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, L.P. Pitaevskii, “Electrodynamics of continuous media”, 2-nd edition,

Pergamon Press (2000)

Materials, 11, 65 (2002)

[16] V. A. Podolskiy, A. K. Sarychev, and V. M. Shalaev, Journal of Nonlinear Optical Physics and

[17] A.K. Sarychev, V.P.Drachev, Hsiao-Kuan Yuan, V.A. Podolskiy, V.M. Shalaev, “Optical Properties

of Metal nanowires”, SPIE Proceedings, v. 1, 5219-13, San Diego (2003)
[18] A.K. Sarychev, V.M. Shalaev, “Magnetic Plasmon Resonance”, in press
[19] A.K. Sarychev, V.A. Podolskiy, A.M. Dykhe, and V.M. Shalaev, IEEE J. of Quantum Electronics

38, 956-963 (2002).

[20] P. Peumans, A. Yakimov, S.R. Forrest, J.Appl.Phys. 93 3693 (2003)

