4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An optical ﬁber-based probe for photonic crystal microcavities

Kartik Srinivasan,∗ Paul E. Barclay, Matthew Borselli, and Oskar Painter
Department of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We review a novel method for characterizing both the spectral and spatial properties of resonant
cavities within two-dimensional photonic crystals (PCs). An optical ﬁber taper serves as an external
waveguide probe whose micron-scale ﬁeld is used to source and couple light from the cavity modes,
which appear as resonant features in the taper’s wavelength-dependent transmission spectrum when
it is placed within the cavity’s near ﬁeld. Studying the linewidth and depth of these resonances as a
function of the taper’s position with respect to the resonator produces quantitative measurements
of the quality factor (Q) and modal volume (Veﬀ) of the resonant cavity modes. Polarization
information about the cavity modes can be obtained by studying their depths of coupling when
the cavity is probed along diﬀerent axes by the taper. This ﬁber-based technique has been used to
measure Q ∼ 40, 000 and Veﬀ ∼ 0.9 cubic wavelengths in a graded square lattice PC microcavity
fabricated in silicon. The speed and versatility of this ﬁber-based probe is highlighted, and a
discussion of its applicability to other wavelength-scale resonant elements is given.

PACS numbers: 42.60.Da, 42.50.Pq, 42.70.Qs

I.

INTRODUCTION

The quality factor (Q) and modal volume (Veﬀ) of an
optical cavity quantify two of its most important prop-
erties, namely, the photon lifetime within the resonator
and the per photon electric ﬁeld strength, respectively. Q
and Veﬀ are central quantities in the study of a number
of optical processes within microcavities [1], such as co-
herent atom-photon coupling in cavity quantum electro-
dynamics (cQED) [2], nonlinear processes such as stimu-
lated Raman scattering [3], and enhanced radiative pro-
cesses in novel emitters [4, 5, 6, 7]. Microcavities within
two-dimensional photonic crystals [8, 9, 10, 11] are dis-
tinguished by their ultra-small Veﬀ values, approaching
the theoretical limit of a cubic half-wavelength in the
material ((λ/2n)3). When combined with recent im-
provements in fabrication and design that have led to
experimental demonstrations of Q factors well in excess
of 104 [11, 12, 13] and approaching 105 [14], these cavities
become particularly interesting for a number of experi-
ments, such as those involving strong coupling in cQED
[15], particularly in light of their inherent potential for
chip-based integration for future experiments in cQED
and quantum networks [16].

Measurements of PC microcavities are not necessar-
ily straightforward, however, in large part due to their
micron-scale Veﬀ values, which limit the ability to eﬀec-
tively couple to them from free-space or through prism-
based techniques, as can be done for larger microres-
onators such as Fabry-Perot cavities [2] and microspheres
[17]. This diﬃculty has generally extended to other types
of wavelength-scale cavities, such as small-diameter mi-

∗Electronic address: kartik@caltech.edu;

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publi-
cation. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may be no longer accessible.

crodisks [18, 19]. Typically, there have been two tech-
niques to probe Q factors in wavelength-scale cavities.
In the ﬁrst, the microcavities are fabricated in an ac-
tive emitter material (such as a quantum well or quan-
tum dot epitaxy), the cavities are optically pumped, and
the emitted resonance linewidth is studied sub-threshold,
near material transparency [10, 18, 20]. This technique
is limited both by diﬃculties in accurately establishing
the pump power at which transparency occurs and by
the necessity that the cavity contain embedded emitters.
In particular, the latter requirement limits the variety of
material systems in which the cavity can be fabricated
(silicon, for example, would not be an option) and is not
suitable for passive resonators in devices such as ﬁlters.
For such devices, a second technique, consisting of fab-
ricating an on-chip in-plane waveguide to couple to the
cavity, is often used [21, 22]. In this approach, the prob-
lem of coupling light into the cavity is shifted to that
of coupling light into the on-chip waveguide, a techni-
cally less challenging problem that can be done through
a number of end-ﬁre based approaches. A limitation of
this technique is that it lacks a certain amount of ﬂexibil-
ity due to the necessity of fabricating an in-plane waveg-
uide for each cavity on the chip. In addition, both this
approach and the latter method described above do not
provide a means to probe the Veﬀ of the cavity. To ad-
dress this, several researchers have begun to investigate
photonic crystal microresonators using near-ﬁeld scan-
ning optical microscopy (NSOM), taking advantage of
the sub-wavelength resolution that can be achieved in
such measurements to map the localization of the cavity
modes[23, 24].

Here, we present an alternate technique [12], which
employs an external waveguide to couple to the cavity,
where the external waveguide is a tapered optical ﬁber.
Tapered optical ﬁbers have been succesfully used in the
past to excite the resonances of larger sized microcavities,
such as silica microspheres [25, 26] and microtoroids [27],

and more recently, to excite the modes of a silicon-based
PC waveguide [28, 29]. In these implementations, phase-
matching between the mode of the taper and the travel-
ing wave mode of the resonator or the propagating mode
of the waveguide was critical in achieving highly eﬃcient
coupling [30, 31]; in the former case, phase matching oc-
curred primarily due to the silica-silica interface (same
material index) between the taper and the microsphere,
while in the latter, the dispersion of the PC waveguide
was engineered to compensate for the disparate mate-
rial indices (n=3.4 for silicon and n = 1.45 for silica) and
achieve a PC waveguide eﬀective index that matched that
of the taper.

To study wavelength-scale cavities, we no longer rely
on phase-matching, but rather just use the taper as a
convenient means to produce a micron-scale evanescent
ﬁeld for sourcing and out-coupling the micron-scale cav-
ity ﬁeld. Although such coupling might not be as eﬃcient
as phase-matched coupling, as we shall see, the power
transfer is more than adequate enough to probe many of
the important properties of the cavity. By using an exter-
nal waveguide as the coupling element, this method is in-
herently non-invasive, can be used to rapidly characterize
multiple devices on a chip, and as we shall discuss below,
the ability to vary the position of the taper with respect
to the cavity (not an option for microfabricated on-chip
waveguides) allows for quantitative investigation of not
only the Q factor but also Veﬀ. Furthermore, the resonant
coupling from the external waveguide is polarization se-
lective, providing additional information about the cavity
modes that is not easily obtainable through techniques
such as NSOM. Thus, in some respects, the versatility of
the ﬁber-based approach described here makes this tech-
nique an optical analog to electrical probes used to study
microelectronic devices.

The body of this paper is partitioned into two main sec-
tions. In Section II, we describe the basics of the probe
setup, while in Section III, measurements of fabricated
PC microcavities using this optical ﬁber taper probe are
presented.
In the concluding section (Section IV), we
summarize the key points of the paper and discuss fur-
ther applications of this method towards future studies
of wavelength-scale cavities.

II. THE OPTICAL FIBER TAPER PROBE
SETUP

The ﬁber tapers we use consist of a standard sin-
gle mode optical ﬁber (9 µm core diameter, 125 µm
cladding diameter) that has been simultaneously heated
and stretched down to a minimum diameter (d) on the
order of the wavelength of light (λ), so that for λ
1.6
µm as used in our experiments, d
1-2 µm. To form the
tapers used here, the heating mechanism is a hydrogen-
based torch [32], but other techniques such as use of a
CO2 laser have also been studied by other groups [33].
In a taper with a suitably adiabatic transition region,

∼

∼

2

5

−

the insertion loss through the taper can be quite low;
the tapers we typically fabricate have an insertion loss of
30 %. The taper is mounted onto an acrylate block
∼
in a u-shaped conﬁguration (Fig. 1(b)), and the block is
then fastened to a DC motor-controlled ˆz-axis stage with
50 nm step size resolution. The microcavity chip (to be
described in more detail below) is in turn mounted on a
DC motor-controlled ˆx
ˆy-axis stage with 50 nm step size
resolution; in this way, the ﬁber taper can be precisely
aligned to a microcavity. The taper-cavity interaction
region is imaged with a microscope onto a CCD camera.

−

FIG. 1: (a) Experimental measurement setup for probing op-
tical microcavities with ﬁber tapers. (b) Taper-cavity align-
ment setup (dashed boxed region in (a)). The ﬁber taper is
mounted in a u-shaped conﬁguration and attached to a ˆz-axis
stage with 50 nm resolution, while the underlying PC chip can
be positioned in the ˆx − ˆy plane with 50 nm resolution. The
ﬁber taper is spliced into the setup in (a), which allows for
measurement of its wavelength-dependent transmission spec-
trum. (c) Zoomed-in depiction of the taper-cavity interaction
region (dashed boxed region in (b)).

The mounted taper is fusion spliced into the measure-
ment setup (Fig. 1(a)) so that a ﬁber-coupled scanning
tunable laser with polarization-controlling paddle wheels
is connected to its input and an InGaAs photodetector
measures its output. The laser and photodetector out-
put are attached to a computer via GPIB interfaces, so
that the wavelength-dependent transmission of the taper
In addition, the motorized stages on
can be recorded.
which the taper and PC chip are mounted are also GPIB-
controlled, so that the taper transmission spectrum can
be monitored as a function of the taper’s position with
respect to the cavity. When the taper is laterally aligned
over the central region of the cavity and positioned ver-
tically within the cavity’s near-ﬁeld (typically < 1 µm),
the cavity modes appear as resonances within this trans-
mission spectrum. As we shall discuss in Section III,

measurements of the linewidth and depth of these reso-
nances as a function of the taper’s position with respect
to the cavity can give us quantitative estimates of the
cavity’s Q and Veﬀ.

In principle, the curvature of the looped taper shown
in Fig. 1(b) could be made large enough so that only
a small region of the ﬁber interacts with the PC chip,
and the taper could then be used to probe a full two-
dimensional (2D) array of cavities on a chip. For the
ﬁber tapers we have used, this region is typically around
10 mm in length, and is roughly equal to the length of
the tapered region of the ﬁber as deﬁned when the taper
is formed. Mounting the taper in this fashion naturally
keeps it under tension and prevents the taper position
from excessively ﬂuctuating due to environmental fac-
tors (such as ﬂuctuating air currents in the laboratory).
Using more tightly looped tapers requires either a reduc-
tion in the length of taper during its fabrication (while
still maintaing enough adiabaticity to keep losses low),
or some level of isolation from these environmental fac-
tors. One result of this relatively long 10 mm interac-
tion length is that testing of a 2D array is not feasible,
and linear (1D) arrays of devices are tested. In addition,
because coupling to the cavity requires the taper to be
positioned within a micron of the center region of cavity,
control of the tip and tilt of the sample with respect to
the taper is necessary; this is accomplished through use
of a goniometer stage mounted to the motor-controlled
ˆy sample stage. Finally, to prevent the taper from
ˆx
interacting with extraneous portions of the chip, the cav-
ities are isolated to a mesa stripe that is several microns
above the rest of the sample surface (Fig. 2); this step is
described in more detail in the following section.

−

III. MEASUREMENTS OF PC
MICROCAVITIES USING OPTICAL FIBER
TAPERS

∼

The particular PC microcavities we use in these ex-
periments follow the graded square lattice design (see
[34], and are predicted to
Fig. 3) developed in Ref.
sustain a mode (labeled A0
2, due to its fundamental na-
ture and symmetry properties) with a ﬁnite-diﬀerence
time-domain (FDTD) calculated Q factor on the order
(λ/n)3. To fabricate these undercut
of 105 with Veﬀ
devices in silicon-on-insulator wafers (SOI) while incor-
porating the isolation mesas mentioned above, the fol-
lowing processing steps are performed: (1) electron beam
lithography of the PC pattern and accompanying cutouts
for removal of additional material from the mesa, (2)
SF6/C4F8-based inductively-coupled plasma reactive ion
etching (ICP-RIE) through the silicon membrane layer,
(3) removal of the electron beam resist, (4) photolithog-
raphy to deﬁne a mesa stripe that intersects the electron
beam deﬁned cutouts, (5) removal of material surround-
ing the mesa (dry etching of the top silicon, underlying
oxide, and substrate silicon layers), (6) removal of the

3

FIG. 2: (a)-(b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images
of photonic crystal microcavity arrays fabricated in silicon-
on-insulator. The undercut PC microcavities are fabricated
in a linear array that is isolated from the rest of the chip by
several microns. The devices in (a) have additional material
removed along the ˆy-axis of the cavity, to allow for the ﬁber
optic taper to be aligned along that axis. The devices in (b)
have additional material removed along both the ˆx and ˆy axes,
to allow probing along either axis.

photoresist, and (7) wet etch (hydroﬂuoric acid) of the
underlying oxide layer to form a free-standing membrane.
Fig. 2 shows scanning electron microscope (SEM) images
of fully-processed devices; in addition to being isolated
to the mesa stripe, additional cutout material (deﬁned
in step (1) above) surrounding each cavity has been re-
moved to ensure that the taper interacts only with the
cavity. The thickness of the membrane layer in our SOI
samples is 340 nm, and prior to undercut, the underly-
ing oxide thickness is 2 µm. Fig. 3 shows a top view of
the nominal cavity design (Fig. 3(a)) and a fabricated
device (Fig. 3(c)). Within the linear array of devices,
we fabricate two or three diﬀerent lattice constants (on
the order of a=400 nm, so that a/λ
0.25 for λ=1600
nm, to be consistent with simulation results from Ref.
[34]), and for a given a, the average hole radius (¯r/a) is
varied. The combination of varying a and ¯r/a allows us
to easily tune the cavity resonances through the range of
our scanning tunable laser, λ=1565-1625 nm.

∼

The coupling between the tapered ﬁber waveguide and
the PC microcavity can be understood using, for exam-
ple, the coupling of modes in time approach as in Manola-
tou, et al.
[35]. The degree to which the taper mode
couples to the cavity mode is a function of the parameter
κ, which is approximately given by the ﬁeld overlap be-
tween the two modes over their interaction length. More
explicitly, for the taper aligned along the ˆy-axis of the

4

axis of the cavity, polarization selectivity can be realized.
For the devices in Figs. 2(a) and 4(a), this is not pos-
sible, as aligning the taper along the ˆx axis will couple
the taper to multiple cavities. However, by fabricating
the cavities at a 45◦ angle with respect to the isolation
mesa stripe, as in Fig. 2(b), the taper can be aligned
along either of the orthogonal cavity axes without cou-
pling to multiple devices. In Fig. 4(b)-(c), we show the
optical ﬁber taper aligned parallel to the ˆy and ˆx axes
of one of the cavities from Fig. 2(b). When the taper is
laterally aligned to the center of the cavity and brought
vertically close to it, we observe the cavity’s resonances.
As shown in Fig. 4(d), the coupling is polarization selec-
tive, so that those resonances with dominant cavity ﬁeld
component Ex couple most strongly when the taper is
aligned along the ˆy axis of the cavity (Fig. 4(b)), while
those with dominant cavity component Ey couple most
strongly when the taper is aligned along the cavity’s ˆx
axis (Fig. 4(c)). Thus, the shorter wavelength resonance
in Fig. 4(d) is more strongly polarized along the ˆy-axis,
while the longer wavelength resonance is more strongly
polarized along the ˆx-axis. The coupling depths of a few
percent are typical values, and were found to be adequate
to achieve a suﬃcient signal-to-noise ratio for all of the
measurements discussed in this work.

FIG. 4: (a) Optical micrograph image of a ﬁber taper aligned
along the ˆy-axis of one of the cavities from Fig. 2(a). (b)-(c)
Optical micrograph images of a ﬁber taper aligned along the
ˆy and ˆx axes, respectively, of one of the cavities from Fig.
2(b). (d) Normalized taper transmission when the taper is
∼ 350 nm above a PC cavity of the type shown in Fig. 2(b);
(top) Taper aligned along the cavity’s ˆy-axis (bottom) Taper
aligned along the cavity’s ˆx axis.

For future microcavity-enhanced experiments, the A0
2
mode of this graded square lattice microcavity is of par-

(a) Graded square lattice photonic crystal cavity
FIG. 3:
designed in Ref.
(b) Finite-diﬀerence time-domain
(FDTD) calculated mangetic ﬁeld amplitude in the center
of the slab for the A0
2 mode of interest (c) SEM image of a
fabricated device.

[34].

cavity, it is given by:

κ =

iωǫ0

L

−

4 Z
0

−iβydy

e

(n2

c)E∗
n2
c ·

−

Etdxdz+

(cid:18)Z Z
Ac

Z Z
At

(n2

t )E∗
n2
c ·

−

Etdxdz

,
(cid:19)

(1)

where ω is the resonant cavity mode frequency, ǫ0 is the
permitivitty of free space, β is the propagation constant
of the taper mode, n is the refractive index of the back-
ground air, nc (nt) is the refractive index proﬁle of the
cavity (taper), Ec (Et) is the electric ﬁeld vector of the
cavity (taper), L is the interaction length of the coupling,
and the integrals over Ac and At are two-dimensional in-
tegrals over the x-z cross-section within the cavity and
taper, respectively, for a given y value within the inter-
action length. From this formula, we see that κ is de-
pendent upon: (i) the magnitude of the overlap between
Ec and Et, (ii) the relative phase between Ec and Et,
and (iii) the degree to which Ec and Et share a common
direction of polarization.

Considering the latter point,

for the taper aligned
along the ˆy-axis of the cavity, as in Fig.
4(a), the
polarization-controlling paddle wheels are used to select
a linearly polarized state of the taper whose dominant
ﬁeld component is aligned along the ˆx-axis of the cavity.
Thus, modes which couple most strongly will have their
ˆx ﬁeld component overlap strongly with the ˆx component
of the taper ﬁeld. By aligning the taper along a diﬀerent

−

ticular interest, on account of its predicted ultra-small
Veﬀ and high Q factor. To experimentally locate a device
for which this mode appears within the scan range of the
laser we use (1565-1625 nm), we rely on the fact that it
is the fundamental (and hence lowest frequency) mode
within the region of ω
k space under consideration. In
particular, for a given lattice constant a, we begin testing
by examining the device with the largest ¯r/a. Typically,
the resonances of this device are at frequencies that are
above that covered by the laser scan range, and hence,
no resonances are observed in the taper’s transmission
spectrum. We then move on and test the next device in
the array, which has a slightly smaller ¯r/a and is thus
predicted to have lower frequency resonances than the
previous device. This process is continued until we ﬁnd
a device for which a resonance is seen in the transmis-
sion spectrum. The ﬁrst resonance which appears in the
transmission spectrum (measuring from lowest frequency
to highest frequency) is the A0
2 mode; this identiﬁcation
procedure relies on having only small changes in ¯r/a be-
tween successive devices in the array, so that the cavity
resonances can be smoothly tuned from frequencies above
the laser scan range to frequencies within the scan range.
However, this identiﬁcation of the A0
2 mode can be con-
ﬁrmed, both by comparing the measured resonance fre-
quency with that predicted from FDTD simulations us-
ing the SEM-measured hole sizes, and as discussed later,
by comparing the spatial localization of the cavity mode
with that predicted from simulations.

∼

[12].

1618.75 nm and γ

Having identiﬁed a device for which the A0

2 mode ap-
pears within the scan range of the laser, we next ex-
amine its Q factor and spatial localization (related to
Veﬀ). To demonstrate the techniques used, we rely upon
data orignally presented in Ref.
In the inset of
Fig. 5, we show a wavelength scan of the taper trans-
mission showing the resonance dip of the A0
2 mode for a
device within the array shown in Fig. 2(b), where the
vertical taper-cavity separation ∆z=650 nm. An initial
estimate of the Q of this resonance (centered at wave-
length λ0) is given by measuring its linewidth γ, with
Q = λ0/γ. For this device, λ0
∼
0.047 nm (where these values are determined by ﬁtting
the data to a Lorentzian curve), giving an estimate of
Q
34, 400. This Q is a lower bound for the cold-
cavity Q, due to the taper’s loading eﬀects on the cavity,
which cause its linewidth to broaden. Parasitic taper
loading eﬀects could include coupling to radiation modes
or higher-order taper modes. These loading eﬀects are
expected to diminish as ∆z is increased and the taper is
positioned further and further above the cavity, until a
regime is reached where the taper does not signiﬁcantly
aﬀect the cavity mode and γ does not change with in-
creasing ∆z. This asymptotic linewidth γ0 gives us our
best estimate for the cold-cavity Q[39]. For the current
device under consideration, the variation of γ with ∆z
is shown in Fig. 5. If this curve is ﬁt to a simple mo-
noexponential function, a cold-cavity linewidth γ0=0.041
nm is obtained, which is essentially identical to the di-

∼

5

rectly measured linewidth when ∆z & 800 nm, and cor-
39, 500. This measured
responds to a cold-cavity Q
0.263 correspond
Q and normalized frequency of a/λ0
relatively well with the FDTD-predicted Q
56, 000 and
a/λ0
0.266 for a device with hole radii similar to that
measured by the SEM for this device.

∼

∼

∼

∼

FIG. 5: Measured linewidth (blue dots) versus taper-cavity
gap (∆z) for the A0
2 mode (a/λ0 ∼ 0.263) in a sample with
a=425 nm. The solid red curve is a ﬁt to the experimen-
tal data. (inset) Normalized taper transmission versus wave-
length when the taper is 650 nm above the cavity surface.
Figure taken from Ref. [12].

As mentioned earlier, the extremely small volumes to
which light is conﬁned within PC microcavities is one
of their distinguishing advantages over other optical mi-
crocavities, and is of critical importance in many appli-
cations, as the per photon electric ﬁeld strength within
the cavity is proportional to 1/√Veﬀ. The ability to ex-
perimentally conﬁrm such tight spatial localization us-
ing the same probe that maps the spectral properties
(such as the Q) of the cavity modes is an important
demonstration of the versatility of the optical ﬁber ta-
per. Here, the same near-ﬁeld probe is used to both ex-
cite the PC cavity modes and to map their spatial proﬁle.
Other works employing evanescent coupling from eroded
monomode ﬁbers to excite silica microsphere whispering-
gallery modes have used a secondary ﬁber tip to collect
and map the mode proﬁles [36].

The spatial localization of the cavity mode is easily
probed by examining the depth of coupling between it
and the taper as the taper is laterally scanned above
the surface of the cavity. In the insets of Fig. 6(a)-(b),
we show the ﬁber taper aligned along the ˆy and ˆx axis
of the photonic crystal microcavity whose Q was mea-
40, 000. The position of the taper is varied
sured to be
along the ˆx and ˆy axes of the cavity, respectively, al-
lowing for measurements of the depth of coupling along
these two orthogonal cavity directions. The depth of the

∼

resonant transmission dip for the A0
2 cavity mode ver-
sus taper displacement is shown in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b),
respectively. These measurements show the mode to be
well-localized to a micron-scale central region of the cav-
ity, giving experimental conﬁrmation that the A0
2 mode
of this cavity is both high-Q and small Veﬀ. As might
be expected, they do not reveal the highly oscillatory
cavity near-ﬁeld, but instead an envelope of the ﬁeld,
due to the relatively broad taper ﬁeld proﬁle. To com-
pare this experimental data with FDTD calculations, we
consider a simple picture of waveguide-cavity coupling
[35], where the coupling coeﬃcient (κ) is approximated,
to save computation time, by taking the ﬁeld overlap
of the phase-matched Fourier components of the FDTD-
generated cavity ﬁeld with the analytically-determined
taper ﬁeld. The calculated resonant transmission depth
as a function of taper displacement is shown in Figs. 6(a)-
(b) as a solid line and agrees closely with the measured
data, providing further conﬁrmation that the mode stud-
ied is indeed the A0
2 mode of interest. Assuming that the
cavity mode is localized to the slab in the ˆz-direction (a
good assumption based upon measurements that show
the depth of coupling between the taper and cavity mode
decreases exponentially as the taper-cavity separation is
increased), the close correspondence between the mea-
sured and calculated in-plane localization indicates that
0.9(λc/n)3 for this high-Q mode, where this Veﬀ
Veﬀ
value was calculated through FDTD simulations which
take into account the SEM-measured hole radii for this
device.

∼

FIG. 6: Mode localization data for the cavity whose Q was
measured in Fig. 5. The measured normalized taper trans-
mission depth (black dots) is plotted as a function of taper
displacement along the (a) ˆx-axis and (b) ˆy-axis of the cavity.
The dashed line in (a)-(b) is a Gaussian ﬁt to the data while
the solid line is a numerically calculated coupling curve based
upon the FDTD-generated cavity ﬁeld and analytically deter-
mined fundamental ﬁber taper mode (taper diameter d ∼ 1.7
µm). Figure taken from Ref. [12].

Similar measurements of the higher-frequency resonant
modes of the PC microcavity indicate that they are more
delocalized in-plane in comparison to the A0
2 mode, and
sometimes contain multiple lobes within their coupling
curves, as one might expect for higher-order modes of
the cavity. As an example of this, we show in Fig. 7(a)-
(b) the depth of coupling to a higher order mode as a

6

function of the taper’s position along the ˆx and ˆy axis of
the cavity, respectively. The node that appears within
the coupling curve in Fig. 7(a) results from the cavity
and taper modes being precisely phased so that the inte-
gral determining κ in Equation 1 is zero, and is a result
of the measurement being sensitive to the ﬁelds within
the cavity and taper rather than their intensities.

FIG. 7: Mode localization data for a higher order mode of the
graded square lattice PC cavity. The measured normalized
taper transmission depth (black dots) is plotted as a function
of taper displacement along the (a) ˆx-axis and (b) ˆy-axis of
the cavity. The dashed line in (a) is a Hermite-Gaussian ﬁt
to the data and the dashed line in (b) is a Gaussian ﬁt to the
data.

∼

∼

∼

∼

∼

1.52, where n

1.7 µm (d/(λ0/n)

With the exception of such cases where there is phase
cancellation in κ, the resolution of the ﬁber taper probe is
limited by the transverse proﬁle of the taper mode. This
is the reason why the measured coupling curves give an
envelope of the cavity ﬁeld rather than displaying its os-
cillatory nature; in the measurements of Fig. 6, for exam-
ple, the calculated full-width at half-maximum (FWHM)
of the dominant taper ﬁeld component at the center of the
λ0, while the cavity mode oscillates on the
PC slab is
scale of a lattice constant a (Fig. 3(b)), and a/λ0
0.25.
The taper used in these measurements had a diameter
d
1.45 is the re-
fractive index of the silica taper), and intuitively, it might
be expected that better resolution could be achieved by
further reducing its diameter. However, for the relatively
λ0) with which we operate, we
small taper diameters (
note that the waveguiding properties of the taper begin
to degrade below some minimum diameter so that, even
if a smaller taper is used, it does not necessarily conﬁne
the mode any more tightly than a larger taper would.
To better illustrate this, in Fig. 8, we plot the calculated
normalized FWHM of the dominant taper ﬁeld compo-
nent at the center of the PC slab for varying normalized
taper diameter (d/(λ0/n)) and taper-PC slab separation
(∆z/λ0). As expected, the smallest FWHM
1.23(λ0/n)
occurs when ∆z/λ0=0, that is, when the taper is touch-
ing the slab[40]. We also see that reducing d/(λ0/n) be-
low some minimum value begins to broaden the FWHM.
Thus, for the spatial localization measurements, using
smaller tapers will not appreciably improve the resolution
of the measurement. Possibilities for future improvement
might consist of partially aperturing the taper ﬁeld (per-

∼

∼

haps through a metallic coating on the taper), or forming
the waveguide probe from a higher index material.

FIG. 8: Resolution of the ﬁber taper. Plot of the normalized
full-width at half-maximum (FWHM/(λ0/n)) of the domi-
nant taper electric ﬁeld component at the center of the PC
slab, as a function of normalized taper-slab gap (∆z/λ0) and
taper diameter (d/(λ0/n)). λ0 is the operating wavelength of
the taper (and the resonant frequency of the cavity mode),
and n ∼ 1.45 is its material refractive index.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In the preceding paragraphs, we described how an op-
tical ﬁber taper with a minimum diameter on the order
of a wavelength can be used as a probe of ultra-small,
wavelength-scale microcavities, where the particular cav-
ities we considered were the PC microcavities originally
studied in Ref. [12]. The ﬁber taper can be used to probe
both the spectral and spatial properties of the cavity’s
resonant modes, allowing for investigation of both modal
quality factors and spatial localizations, giving quanti-
tative estimates of Q and Veﬀ. As many microcavity-
enhanced processes scale as a function of both of these
parameters, being able to experimentally investigate each
of them is an important attribute of this probing tech-
nique. In addition, by aligning the taper along diﬀerent
directions above the cavity, polarization-sensitive infor-
mation may be obtained. Knowledge of a mode’s spectral
position, polarization, Q, and Veﬀ will in many cases be
enough to unambiguously determine the identity of the
mode in comparison to simulation or theoretical results.
Another important aspect of this technique is the speed
with which measurements can be made.
In particu-
lar, the critical alignment step required in this work
is making sure that the taper is not angled with re-
spect to the surface of the chip, to ensure that cou-
pling only occurs between the taper and the cavity, and

7

not some extraneous part of the chip. Once this is
done, and once the taper is aligned along the desired
axis of the cavity, all of the devices within an array
can be rapidly tested, and the spectral positions of reso-
nances in successive devices can be determined within
tens of seconds or faster. As an illustration of this,
a movie showing the testing of two adjacent PC cav-
ities has been made and is freely available on the in-
ternet (http://copilot.caltech.edu/research/PC cav.avi).
This ability to easily probe an array of devices on a chip
greatly speeds up the testing process and shortens the
turnaround time between device fabrication and mea-
surement. Furthermore the simplicity of the measure-
ment technique is another attractive feature; a single
ﬁber taper serves as both the excitation and collection
probe, and the taper is physically robust enough (will
not break) so that no active servo control of the taper
position is required to prevent it from touching the sam-
ple surface (in contrast to the more delicate probes used
in NSOM techniques [24]).

Finally, we note that the optical ﬁber taper probe can
be used to examine the spectral and spatial properties of
a number of wavelength-scale microcavities, and is not
limited to just PC microcavities. The suitability of the
ﬁber taper as a probe for a given microcavity will in large
part be determined by the overlap between the cavity
and taper ﬁelds; simply put, if that overlap is suﬃciently
large, an appreciable amount of power can be transferred
from the taper to the cavity even without phase-matching
(in general, phase-matching will not be achieved, because
of the index mismatch between the silica ﬁber taper and
the high refractive index semiconductors typically used
in wavelength-scale cavities). For the A0
2 PC microcav-
ity mode studied in this work, the depth of coupling is
typically limited to
10-20 %, and at maximum levels
of coupling, the cavity Q is degraded due to the taper
loading eﬀects seen in Fig. 5. However, due to the low-
loss nature of the optical ﬁber tapers (insertion losses
are routinely as low as 10 %), this is still a signiﬁcant
amount of coupling into the cavity, and from the mea-
surement standpoint, coupling levels of a few percent are
easily adequate to discern cavity resonances in the taper’s
transmission, and to then probe the Q and Veﬀ of the
cavity. For applications requiring highly eﬃcient power
transfer from the ﬁber into the cavity, other approaches
using an intermediate photonic crystal waveguide coupler
have been developed [37].

∼

As an example of the application of this probing
technique to other types of wavelength-scale microcav-
ities, ﬁber tapers have recently been used [38] to probe
the spectral and spatial properties of whispering gallery
modes in d < 10 µm diameter silicon microdisks. Due
to their large radiation-limited Q factors (> 1015), mea-
surement of the Q in fabricated microdisks is a simple
and elegant way to determine etch-induced and bulk ma-
terial losses within a given materials system, allowing
one to optimize an etching process to create the lowest
loss devices. Because the ﬁber taper measurement is a

and M.B. thanks the Moore Foundation, NPSC, and
HRL Laboratories for their graduate fellowship support.

8

passive measurement (light-emitting material is not re-
quired), this probing technique provides optical access to
materials systems, such as silicon, which otherwise could
only be accessed via end-ﬁre coupling to microfabricated
on-chip waveguides.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was partly supported by the Charles Lee
Powell Foundation. K.S. thanks the Hertz Foundation

[1] R. K. Chang and A. J. Campillo, Eds., Optical Processes
in Microcavities, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996.
[2] H. J. Kimble, “Strong Interactions of Single Atoms and
Photons in Cavity QED,” Physica Scripta, vol. T76, pp.
127–137, 1998.

[3] S. M. Spillane, T. J. Kippenberg, and K. J. Vahala,
“Ultralow-threshold Raman laser using spherical dielec-
tric microcavity,” Nature, vol. 415, pp. 621–623, Feb.
2002.

[4] E. M. Purcell, “Spontaneous emission probabilities at
radio frequencies,” Phys. Rev., vol. 69, pp. 681, 1946.
[5] J. M. G´erard, B. Sermage, B. Gayral, B. Legrand,
E. Costard, and V. Thierry-Mieg, “Enhanced sponta-
neous emission by quantum boxes in a monolithic optical
microcavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 81, no. 5, pp. 1110–
1113, Aug. 1998.

[6] P. Michler, A. Kiraz, C. Becher, W.V. Schoenfeld, P.M.
Petroﬀ, L. Zhang, E. Hu, and A. Imomoglu, “A Quantum
Dot Single-Photon Turnstile Device,” Science, vol. 290,
pp. 2282–2285, Dec. 2000.

[7] G.S. Solomon, M. Pelton, and Y. Yamamoto, “Single-
mode spontaneous emission from a single quantum dot
in a three-dimensional microcavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett.,
vol. 86, no. 17, pp. 3903–3906, 2001.

[8] O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Yariv, A. Scherer, J. D.
O’Brien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, “Two-Dimensional
Photonic Band-Gap Defect Mode Laser,” Science, vol.
284, pp. 1819–1824, June 1999.

[9] H.-Y. Ryu, S.-H. Kim, H.-G. Park, J.-K. Hwang, Y.-H.
Lee, and J.-S. Kim, “Square-lattice photonic band-gap
single-cell laser operating in the lowest-order whispering
gallery mode,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 80, no. 21, pp.
3883–3885, May 2002.

[10] K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, O. Painter, J. Chen, A. Y.
Cho, and C. Gmachl, “Experimental demonstration of a
high quality factor photonic crystal microcavity,” Appl.
Phys. Lett., vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1915–1917, Sept. 2003.

[11] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda, “High-Q
photonic nanocavity in a two-dimensional photonic crys-
tal,” Nature, vol. 425, pp. 944–947, Oct. 2003.

[12] K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, M. Borselli, and O. Painter,
“Optical ﬁber based measurement of an ultra-small
volume, high-Q photonic crystal microcavity,”
sub-
mitted for publication, Sept. 25, 2003 (available at
http://arxiv.org/quant-ph/abs/0309190).

[13] K.

Srinivasan,

and O. Painter,
“Fabrication-tolerant high quality factor photonic

P.E. Barclay,

crystal microcavities,” Opt. Express, vol. 12, no. 7, pp.
1458–1463, Apr. 2004.

[14] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda,
“Demonstration of ultrahigh-Q photonic nanocavity
based on Gaussian-like optical conﬁnement,” in Inter-
national Symposium on Photonic and Electromagnetic
Crystal Structures V, PECS-V, 2004, p. 81.

[15] B. Lev, K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, O. Painter,
“Feasibility of detecting sin-
cavities,”
bandgap
photonic
(available at

and H. Mabuchi,
gle
with
atoms
to appear in Nanotechnology,
2004,
http://arxiv.org/quant-ph/abs/0402093).

[16] H. Mabuchi and A. C. Doherty, “Cavity Quantum Elec-
trodynamics: Coherence in Context,” Science, vol. 298,
pp. 1372–1377, Nov. 2002.

[17] L. Collot, V. Lefevre-Seguin, M. Brune, J. M. Raimond,
and S. Haroche, “Very high-q whispering gallery mode
resonances observed on fused-silica microspheres,” Euro-
physics Letters, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 327–334, 1993.

[18] B. Gayral, J. M. G´erard, A. Lemaˆitre, C. Dupuis,
L. Manin, and J. L. Pelouard, “High-Q wet-etched GaAs
microdisks containing InAs quantum boxes,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 75, no. 13, pp. 1908–1910, Sept. 1999.

[19] P. Michler, A. Kiraz, L.D. Zhang, C. Becher, E. Hu, and
A. Imamoglu, “Laser emission from quantum dots in
microdisk structures,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 77, no. 2,
pp. 184–186, 2000.

[20] T. Yoshie, J. Vuˇckovi´c, A. Scherer, H. Chen, and
D. Deppe, “High quality two-dimensional photonic crys-
tal slab cavities,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 79, no. 26, pp.
4289–4291, Dec. 2001.

[21] B.E. Little, S.T. Chu, H.A. Haus, J. Foresi, and J.P.
Laine, “Microring resonator channel dropping ﬁlters,” J.
Lightwave Tech., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 998–1005, 1997.
[22] S. Noda, A. Chutinan, and M. Imada, “Trapping and
emission of photons by a single defect in a photonic
bandgap structure,” Nature, vol. 407, no. 6804, pp. 608–
610, Oct. 2000.

[23] K. Okamoto, M. Loncar, T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, Y.M.
Qiu, and P.Gogna,
“Near-ﬁeld scanning optical mi-
croscopy of photonic crystal nanocavities,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 82, no. 11, pp. 1676–1678, 2003.

[24] B. C. Buchler, P. Kramper, M. Kafesaki, C. M. Soukolis,
and V. Sandoghdar, “Near-Field Optical Investigations
of Photonic Crystal Microresonators,”
IEICE Trans.
Electron., vol. E87-C, no. 3, pp. 371–377, Mar. 2004.
[25] J.C. Knight, G. Cheung, F. Jacques, and T.A. Birks,

“Phase-matched excitation of whispering-gallery-mode
resonances by a ﬁber taper,” Opt. Lett., vol. 22, no.
15, pp. 1129–1131, Aug. 1997.

[26] M. Cai, O. Painter, and K.J. Vahala, “Observation of
critical coupling in a ﬁber taper to a silica-microsphere
whispering-gallery mode system,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol.
85, no. 1, pp. 74–77, July 2000.

[27] D. K. Armani, T. J. Kippenberg, S. M. Spillane, and K. J.
Vahala, “Ultra-high-Q toroid microcavity on a chip,”
Nature, vol. 421, pp. 925–928, Feb. 2003.

[29] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli,

[28] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter,
“Experimental demonstration of evanescent coupling
from optical ﬁbre tapers to photonic crystal waveguides,”
IEE Elec. Lett., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 842–844, May 2003.
and
O. Painter, “Probing the dispersive and spatial prop-
erties of planar photonic crystal waveguide modes via
highly eﬃcient coupling from optical ﬁber tapers,”
to appear in Appl. Phys. Lett., available online at
http://arXiv.org/quant-ph/0308070, Aug. 2003.

[30] S. M. Spillane, T. J. Kippenberg, O. J. Painter, and
K. J. Vahala, “Ideality in a Fiber-Taper-Coupled Mi-
croresonator System for Application to Cavity Quantum
Electrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 91, no. 4, pp.
043902, July 2003.

[31] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter,
“Eﬃcient input and output optical ﬁber coupling to a
photonic crystal waveguide,” Opt. Lett., vol. 29, no. 7,
pp. 697–699, Apr. 2004.

[32] T. A. Birks and Y. W. Li, “The shape of ﬁber tapers,” J.
Lightwave Tech., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 432–438, Apr. 1992.
[33] T. E. Dimmick, G. Kakarantzas, T. A. Birks, and P. St. J.
Russell, “Carbon dioxide laser fabrication of fused-ﬁber
couplers and taper,” Appl. Opt., vol. 38, no. 33, pp.
6845–6848, Nov. 1999.

[34] K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, “Momentum space design

9

of high-Q photonic crystal optical cavities,” Opt. Express,
vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 670–684, July 2002.

[35] C. Manolatou, M.J. Khan, Shanhui Fan, Pierre R. Vil-
leneuve, H.A. Haus, and J.D. Joannopoulos, “Coupling
of Modes Analysis of Resonant Channel Add-Drop Fil-
ters,” IEEE J. Quan. Elec., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1322–1331,
Sept. 1999.

[36] J.C. Knight, N. Dubreuil, V. Sandoghdar, J. Hare,
V. Lef`evre-Seguin, J. M. Raimond, and S. Haroche,
“Mapping whispering-gallery modes in microspheres with
a near-ﬁeld probe,” Opt. Lett., vol. 20, no. 14, pp. 1515–
1517, July 1995.

[37] P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, and O. Painter, “Opti-
cal ﬁber coupling to planar photonic crystal microcavi-
ties,” submitted for publication, May, 2004 (available at
http://www.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0405064).
[38] M. Borselli, K. Srinivasan, P.E. Barclay,

O. Painter,
and optical
mitted for publication,
http://www.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0406101).

and
“Rayleigh scattering, mode coupling,
sub-
2004 (available at

in silicon microdisks,”

June,

loss

[39] Note that some parasitic taper loading eﬀects may not di-
minish as a function of ∆z as rapidly as does the coupling
between the fundamental taper mode and cavity mode
of interest. This could prevent the measured linewidth γ
from reaching an asymptotic value as a function of ∆z.
In such cases, the best estimate of γ0 is the linewidth for
as large a ∆z as can be reliably measured.

[40] In practice, a non-zero ∆z, on the order of ∼ 250 nm
for λ0=1.6 µm, is preferable for doing spatial localiza-
tion measurements. This is due both to the relatively
large amount of insertion loss that occurs when the ta-
per touches the cavity, and also to allow the taper to be
freely moved above the cavity.

