2-d Microcavities: Theory and
Experiments ∗
Jens U. N¨ockel
Department of Physics
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1274
darkwing.uoregon.edu/~noeckel

Richard K. Chang
Department of Applied Physics
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520
http://www.eng.yale.edu/rkclab/home.htm

2nd February 2008

An overview is provided over the physics of dielectric microcavities with
non-paraxial mode structure; examples are microdroplets and edge-emitting
semiconductor microlasers. Particular attention is given to cavities in which
two spatial degrees of freedom are coupled via the boundary geometry. This
generally necessitates numerical computations to obtain the electromagnetic
cavity ﬁelds, and hence intuitive understanding becomes diﬃcult. How-
ever, as in paraxial optics, the ray picture shows explanatory and predictive
strength that can guide the design of microcavities. To understand the ray-
wave connection in such asymmetric resonant cavities, methods from chaotic
dynamics are required.

4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Contribution for Cavity-Enhanced Spectroscopies, edited by Roger D. van Zee and John P. Looney (a

volume of Experimental Methods in the Physical Sciences), Academic Press, San Diego, 2002

1

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Dielectric microcavities as high-quality resonators

3 Whispering-gallery modes

4 Scattering resonances and quasibound states

5 Cavity ring-down and light emission

6 Wigner delay time and the density of states

7 Lifetime versus linewidth in experiments

8 How many modes does a cavity support?

9 Cavities without chaos

10 Chaotic cavities

12 Uncertainty principle

13 Husimi projection

11 Phase space representation with Poincar´e sections

14 Constructive interference with chaotic rays

15 Chaotic whispering-gallery modes

16 Dynamical eclipsing

17 Conclusions

3

4

7

8

11

12

15

16

18

21

22

23

24

27

28

30

31

2

1 Introduction

Maxwell’s equations of electrodynamics exemplify how the beauty of a theory is captured
in the formal simplicity of its fundamental equations. Precisely for this reason, they also
illustrate that physical insight cannot be gleaned from the deﬁning equations of a theory
per se unless we understand how these equations are solved in practice. In optics, one
powerful approach to this challenge is the short-wavelength approximation leading to the
ray picture. Rays are the solutions to Fermat’s variational principle, which in particular
implies the laws of reﬂection and refraction at dielectric interfaces. As soon as one makes
the transition from wave physics to this classical domain, concepts such as “trajectory”,
“phase space” and “diﬀusion” become meaningful. In this chapter, special attention will
be devoted to the classical phenomenon of chaos in the ray dynamics of small optical
cavities, i.e., a sensitive dependence of the ray traces on initial conditions. The main
implication for the corresponding wave equation is that it cannot be reduced to a set
of mutually independent ordinary diﬀerential equations, e.g., by separation of variables.
Even when only a few degrees of freedom are present in the system, their coupling
then makes it impossible to label the wave solutions by a complete set of “quantum
numbers” (e.g., longitudinal and transverse mode numbers). Such a problem is called
non-integrable; this classiﬁcation is due to Poincar´e and applies both to rays and waves
[1]. Integrable systems are characterized by a complete set of “good quantum numbers”,
as will be illustrated in section 9

Microcavities can be broadly categorized into active (light emitting) and passive sys-
tems. In active devices, such as lasers, radiation is generated within the cavity medium,
without any incident radiation at the same frequency; the cavity provides feedback and
(in combination with a gain medium) sets the emission wavelength [2]. Some of the im-
portant properties that characterize a light emitting cavity are emission spectra, emission
directivity, output energy, noise properties and lasing thresholds. Examples for passive
systems are ﬁlters, multiplexers and other wavelength-selective optical components; their
functionality relies on coupling to waveguides or freely propagating waves in their vicin-
ity. To characterize and operate passive cavities, one is interested in transmission and
reﬂection coeﬃcients, i.e., in the resonator as a scatterer.

The two basic types of experiment, emission and scattering, for a given cavity geometry
are intimately connected because they both probe its mode structure. The concept of
modes in microcavities will be made more precise in section 8; as a working deﬁnition, let
us denote as modes all electromagnetic excitations of the cavity which show up as peak
structure in scattering or emission spectra and are caused by constructive interference
in the resonator.

Nonintegrable cavities introduce added freedom into the design of novel optical com-
ponents, especially when we apply results from the ﬁeld of quantum chaos, in which
modern quasiclassical methods are of central importance [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. The term
“quantum” in “quantum chaos” relates to the fact that cavity modes are discrete as
a consequence of the constructive interference requirement mentioned above; the term
“chaos” refers to a degree of complexity in the ray picture which renders inapplicable
all simple quantization schemes such as the paraxial method.

3

The optics problem we are addressing is not one of “quantum optics”, but of the
quantized (i.e., discrete) states of classical electrodynamics in spatially conﬁned media.
By quasiclassics, we therefore mean the short-wavelength treatment of the classical elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld. Confusion should be avoided between quasiclassics as deﬁned here,
and the semiclassical treatment of light in the matter-ﬁeld interaction, which couples
quantum particles to the electromagnetic ﬁeld via the classical (vector) potentials: how
we obtain the modes of a cavity (e.g., quasiclassically), should be distinguished from how
we use them (e.g., as a basis in quantum optical calculations). Our main emphasis in this
chapter will be on the “how” part of the problem, but the wealth of physics contained
in these modes themselves points to novel applications as well. Having made this clar-
iﬁcation, we henceforth use the term “semiclassics” synonymously with “quasiclassics”
as deﬁned above.

2 Dielectric microcavities as high-quality resonators

Many of the microcavities which are the subject of this chapter employ “mirrors” of a
simple but eﬃcient type: totally reﬂecting abrupt dielectric interfaces between a dielec-
tric body and a surrounding lower-index medium. Resonators occurring in nature, such
as droplets or microcrystals, use this mechanism to trap light. This allows us to draw
parallels between nature and a variety of technologically relevant resonator designs that
are based on the same conﬁnement principle. A recurring theme in numerous systems is
the combination of total internal reﬂection (TIR) with a special type of internal trajec-
tory that skips along the boundary close to grazing incidence: the “whispering-gallery”
(WG) phenomenon, named after an acoustic analogue in which sound propagates close
to the curved walls of a circular hall without being audible in its center [10, 11]. An
example for the use of the WG eﬀect in cavity ring-down spectroscopy is reported in
Ref. [12]. A WG cavity can provide the low loss needed to reduce noise and improve
resolution in the detection of trace species; the trace chemicals are located outside the
cavity and couple to the internal ﬁeld by frustrated total internal reﬂection, or evanescent
ﬁelds. In this section, we review Fresnel’s formulas before introducing the WG modes.
This provides the basis for sections 9 - 16

In the ray picture, the Fresnel reﬂectivity, RF resnel, of a dielectric interface depends
on the angle of incidence χ (which we measure with respect to the surface normal) and
relative refractive index n. In particular, RF resnel drops signiﬁcantly below the critical
angle for total internal reﬂection,

In the limit of normal incidence on a plane dielectric interface, the reﬂectivity becomes
independent of polarization,

(1)

(2)

χTIR ≡

arcsin

1
n

.

RF resnel =

n
1
−
n + 1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

.

4

If the electric ﬁeld is polarized perpendicular to the plane of incidence (we shall denote
this as transverse magnetic, TM, polarization), then Eq. (2) constitutes the lower bound
for the reﬂectivity. Hence, the limit of a closed cavity is approached with increasing
refractive index of the cavity. If, on the other hand, the electric ﬁeld lies in the plane of
incidence (TE polarization), then the reﬂectivity drops to zero at the Brewster angle,

χB = arcsin

1
√1 + n2

,

(3)

and thus the closed-cavity limit is never fully reached. Because χB < χTIR, the po-
larization does not aﬀect the trapping of light at incident angles χ > χTIR (to leading
order in frequency). In addition, because the wavelength λ does not enter the Fresnel
formulas, internal reﬂection can be classiﬁed as a “classical” phenomenon which can be
understood based on Fermat’s principle.

This should be contrasted with the intrinsic frequency dependence of Bragg reﬂection –
the other widespread mechanism for conﬁning light in dielectrics. From an engineering
point of view, Bragg reﬂectors are challenging to realize for lateral conﬁnement.
In
particular for low-index materials, high-reﬂectivity windows (stop bands) are direction-
and frequency dependent with narrow bandwidth. TIR, on the other hand, is broad-band
and technologically simple.

At higher orders of λ, wavelength-dependent corrections to Fresnel’s formulas do arise
because TIR is truly total only for a plane wave incident on an inﬁnite and ﬂat interface.
The latter does not hold for boundaries with ﬁnite curvature or even sharp corners, and
similarly in cases where the incident beam has curved wavefronts, as in a Gaussian beam
[13, 14, 15, 16]. The physical reason for radiation leakage in these situations is that light
penetrates the dielectric interface to some distance which depends exponentially on λ,
as in quantum-mechanical tunneling. This allows coupling to the radiation ﬁeld outside
the cavity [13, 14].

The analogy to quantum mechanics rests on the similarity between the Schr¨odinger

and the Helmholtz equation for the ﬁeld ψ,

2ψ + n2(r)k2ψ = 0

∇

(4)

to which Maxwell’s equations often reduce. Here, n(r) is the index proﬁle and k the free-
space wavenumber. The WGMs of a circular resonator are straightforward to calculate
exactly, because the Helmholtz equation separates in cylinder coordinates r, φ, z. The
circular cylinder and sphere are the two main representatives of this small class [7, 17]
of integrable dielectric scattering problems. The analytic solution, due to Lorentz and
Mie, of Maxwell’s vector wave equations for a dielectric sphere, has a long history [17,
18, 19, 20, 13, 14]). It ﬁnds application in a wide range of diﬀerent optical processes,
ranging from elastic scattering by droplets to nonlinear optics [25] and to cavity quantum
electrodynamics [21, 22, 23]. Similarly, dielectric cylinders are used, e.g., as models for
atmospheric ice particles [24] or edge-emitting microdisk and micropillar lasers [26, 27,
28]. Because of rotational symmetry, the ray motion in a sphere is always conﬁned to
a ﬁxed plane. By contrast, rays in a cylinder can spiral along the axis [29, 30], but the

5

1
p

(b/a)2. The length scale R

Figure 1: Light scattering spectra for a resonator in the shape of an ellipse with ec-
centricity e = 0.8, deﬁned in terms of the major and minor axes a, b as
√ab is used in our calculations to
e =
convert the wavenumber into the dimensionless “size parameter” kR. The in-
dex of refraction is n = 1.5 in (a) and n = 3 in (b), showing how the openness
of a dielectric cavity increases when n is reduced. The incoming plane wave
in (a) and (b) travels parallel to the major axis, and the scattered intensity is
detected at 90◦ from incidence.

−

≡

propagation becomes planar if the incident wave is aligned to be perpendicular to the
cylinder axis. Similar symmetry arguments make it possible to ﬁnd analytic solutions
in concentrically layered dielectrics or ring resonators [31, 32, 33].

Each time a degree of freedom can be separated due to symmetry, the eﬀective di-
mensionality of the remaining wave equation is reduced by one – in the above examples
one ﬁnally arrives at an ordinary (one dimensional) equation for the radial coordinate.
Even without symmetry properties such as in the sphere or cylinder, one often ﬁnds ap-
proximate treatments by which such a reduction from three to fewer dimensions can be
justiﬁed: in fact, in integrated optics, most functions are performed by planar optical de-
vices, for which the mode proﬁle in the vertical direction can be approximately separated
from the wave equation in the horizontal plane, leaving a two-dimensional problem. For
a discussion of methods exploiting this assumption (e.g. the eﬀective-index method),
the reader is referred to the literature [34].

One of the advantages of reducing the cavity problem to two degrees of freedom is
that polarizations can approximately be decoupled into TE and TM. The resulting wave
equations are then scalar, with the polarization information residing in the continuity
conditions imposed on the ﬁelds at dielectric interfaces. Therefore, the ﬁelds are formally
obtained as solutions of Eq. (4) in two dimensions. This scalar problem is the starting
In the absence of absorption or ampliﬁcation, the index n(r)
point for our analysis.
which deﬁnes our microcavity is real-valued, and approaches a constant (taken here as
n = 1 for air) outside some ﬁnite three-dimensional domain corresponding to the cavity.

6

Figure 2: Numerical solution of Maxwell’s equations for the internal and external inten-
sity of TM modes in an elliptic cylinder with a refractive index of n = 1.5
(a) and n = 3 (b), respectively (assuming n = 1 on the outside). The eccen-
tricity is e = 0.709 in both plots. The dimensionless wavenumber in (a) is
kR = 21.27636 at a resonance width of κR = 0.0085; the state in (b) is found
at kR = 20.69345 and has a width of κR = 0.05. The grayscale shows high
intensity as white.

3 Whispering-gallery modes

Figure 1 illustrates the formation of whispering-gallery modes (WGMs) for a dielectric
ellipse illuminated by a TM polarized plane wave. The wavenumber k is made dimen-
sionless by multiplying with the mean radius R of the two-dimensional shape. The sharp
features in the spectra of Fig. 1 are caused by modes which rely on Fresnel reﬂection.
This can be deduced from the fact that the spectrum becomes more crowded as the
refractive index is doubled from n = 1.5 (a) to n = 3 (b); the intuitive reasoning is that
a larger set of ray paths acquires high reﬂectivity as n increases. The more regularly
spaced peaks of Fig. 1 (a) can in fact be identiﬁed as WGMs: Light circumnavigates
the perimeter of the cavity in such a way as to insure TIR during a complete round-
trip, i.e., χ > χTIR at all encounters with the boundary. Consequently, long-lived cavity
modes can form by constructive interference. In the stability diagram of linear paraxial
resonator theory [2], a circular dielectric WG cavity could be classiﬁed as a confocal
resonator with closed but leaky mirrors. Gaussian-beam paraxial optics fails in circular
cavities because the beam parameters become undeﬁned in the confocal limit.

The Mie treatment of circular and spherical micro-objects may serve as starting points
for perturbative treatments of resonators whose shape deviates only slightly from rota-
tional symmetry [35], or when objects in the vicinity of the cavity exert a weak inﬂuence
[36]. Perturbation methods are among the most powerful tools of wave physics, but
one must be aware that there are phenomena outside their reach (most apparent when
energy denominators diverge). As a simple example, we return to the elliptical resonator
[37]. If we assume impenetrable boundaries (of Dirichlet type), it is a classic textbook
problem [38] to obtain the WGMs of the ellipse by applying perturbation theory to a
circular cavity. The weakness of this approach is revealed when we recall that the modes
can be found by an exact separation of variables and fall into two classes: WGMs and

7

beam-like “bouncing-ball” states; in Fig. 2 we illustrate these two classes with slightly
more complicated dielectric boundary conditions. Since bouncing-ball modes do not
exist in the circle, perturbative expansions for this type of modes can be expected to
become problematic, especially when attempting to describe how some modes of the
circle lose their WG character under a continuous shape deformation.

The wave solutions shown in Fig. 2 show ﬁeld intensity extending to the exterior of
the cavity because the dielectric interface is “leaky”. In general, such a calculation must
be performed numerically; we shall discuss the deﬁnition and emission properties of
these leaky modes further below, in section 4 For now, we are only concerned with the
internal intensity patterns. The reader will recognize a strong similarity between the
“bouncing-ball” mode and a higher-order transverse Gauss-Hermite beam; this arises
because the ray motion corresponding to this mode is a stable oscillation between the
ﬂat sides of the cavity. The analytic transverse form of the bouncing-ball beam in the
ellipse is however not a Gaussian, but a Mathieu function. The caption of Fig. 2 gives
the linewidth κ of the two types of modes, indicating that the WG resonance is almost
an order of magnitude narrower than the bouncing-ball mode, despite the twofold higher
refractive index used in Fig. 2 (b).

The ellipse has been chosen as an example because it is integrable in the limit of
no leakage. Other oval deformations of the circle do not have this simplifying property.
However, families of WG ray trajectories have been proven [39] to exist in any suﬃciently
smooth and oval enclosure, provided that its curvature is nowhere zero. This makes
WGMs a very robust phenomenon of general convex oval cavities. Before we discuss
in more detail the relation between the ray picture and the internal structure of the
resonator modes, we now turn to some general considerations on what allows us to
deﬁne the modes of an open cavity.

4 Scattering resonances and quasibound states

WGMs are not inﬁnitely long-lived even in an ideal dielectric cavity, as we saw in the
ﬁnite linewidths of Fig. 1. In fact, for a ﬁnite, three-dimensionally conﬁned dielectric
body, all solutions to Eq. (4) are extended to inﬁnity, forming a continuous spectrum. A
basis of eigenfunctions is given by the scattering states, consisting of an incoming wave
ψin that is elastically scattered by the dielectric microstructure of index n(r) into an
outgoing wave ψout. In the asymptotic region where n = 1, the relation between incoming
and outgoing waves is mediated by the scattering operator S, known from quantum
scattering theory [40], to which the electromagnetic resonator problem is conceptually
analogous. The S-matrix formalism has long been in use in microwave technology as
)
(
well as optics [41]: A matrix representation is obtained by deﬁning basis states
|
in which the asymptotic incoming (resp., outgoing) ﬁelds can be expanded; one has

µ

ν

i

i

|

ψscat = ψin + ψout,

µ

ψouti

|

h

=

ν

Sµν h

.

ψini

|

M

Xν=1

8

(5)

Here, S is a unitary matrix if the incoming and outgoing waves are normalized to carry
unit ﬂux, and if n(r) is real. The dimension M is the number of open scattering channels;
in the Fabry-Perot cavity there are two channels: both, the incident ﬁeld
and the
can be a plane wave either traveling on the left or on the right of
outgoing states
the cavity. In 2D and 3D, it is often useful to use angular momentum eigenstates as the
basis deﬁning the channels.

m
i

n
i

|

|

Only the properties of the index proﬁle, not of the particular incoming wave, enter S.
For a review of scattering theory see, e.g., [42]. As was seen in Fig. 1, the actual cavity
modes in this continuum of scattering states are revealed if we measure the scattering
of light as a function of wavenumber k. The amplitude of the scattered ﬁeld shows
resonant structure at discrete values of k which do not depend on the detailed spatial
form of the exciting ﬁeld ψin. These resonances are caused by poles of S in the complex
k plane, and are a characteristic of the microcavity itself. In Eq. (5), we note that a pole
of S admits nonvanishing ψout in the absence of any incoming waves, ψin = 0. In these
solutions at complex k, also known as the quasibound states, we have ﬁnally found a
proper deﬁnition of what we simply called “cavity modes” earlier.

A well-known example is the linear two-mirror (Fabry-Perot) cavity [2]. Its resonances
are easily obtained within physical optics by writing the transmission of an incident ray
as a geometric series over multiple round trips. In each round trip, the amplitude of
a ray in the cavity accrues a factor r1r2 exp(i n k ℓ + i φ1 + i φ2), where ℓ is the round-
trip path length. We have split the amplitude reﬂectivities at the individual reﬂections
ν = 1, 2 into modulus rν and phase φν. Attenuation comes from rν < 1 (ν = 1, 2 in the
two-mirror case). The refractive index n in the cavity is real, as stated below Eq. (4),
and the wave number k is measured in free space. The transmitted amplitude Ttotal is
obtained by summing this over all repetitions,

(6)

(7)

Ttotal = I

r1 r2 ei n k ℓ+i φ1+i φ2

σ

,

(cid:1)

∞

Xσ=1 (cid:0)

where the prefactor I is determined by the incident wave and the mirror transmittivities.
˜grt(˜ω), with the
This geometric series can be summed, leading to a denominator 1
round-trip “gain”

−

˜grt(˜ω) = ein˜ωℓ/c

rν eiφν .

Yν

≡

In our example, ν runs from 1 to 2. Whenever ˜grt comes close to 1, the resonator exhibits
a transmission peak. The equality ˜grt(˜ω) = 1 can be satisﬁed only if we admit complex
frequencies, ˜ω

ω + iγ, and choose for the imaginary part

γ =

c
ℓ Xν
On the real frequency axis, γ determines the resonance linewidth. Were we to look at the
complex-frequency solution directly and reinstate the time dependent factor exp(i ˜ωt)
that accompanied the original wave equation, the ﬁeld at every point in space would
γt). An interpretation of this can be given in the ray picture:
decay with a factor exp(

ln rν.

(8)

−

−

9

for a ray launched inside the cavity, the ﬁeld is attenuated by a factor r1 r2 in each round
trip; after time t, the number of round trips is ct/ℓ, leading to the exponential law

E(t) = ect ln(Πrν )/ℓ = e−γt.

(9)

Hence, each transmission peak is uniquely associated with a metastable, or quasibound
state, and the decay rate is determined by the reﬂectivities encountered during a round
trip.

Equation (9) straightforwardly justiﬁes the concept of a metastable state within the
ray picture. We introduced resonances as peaks in the transmitted ﬁeld, arising as near-
divergences of a geometric series over ray paths undergoing multiple reﬂections inside
the cavity. This is in fact just a special case of a very general quasiclassical approach
which has found widespread use in chemical physics [43] and other ﬁelds [44] since its
original introduction by Miller [6, 45]. It relates the S-matrix element between arbitrary
channels µ and ν of a multichannel scattering process to a sum over all possible ray
paths starting in channel ν and ending in µ:

Sµν =

p(σ)
µν exp

ik Φ(σ)

iα(σ)

,

(cid:0)

−

(cid:1)

Xσ q

(10)

where σ parameterizes the family of ray trajectories leading from incoming channel ν
to outgoing channel µ, just as in Eq. (6). α(σ) is a phase shift acquired by the rays
as they encounter caustics and interface reﬂections along their path. The phase shift
kΦ(σ) is the generalization of the dynamical phase k ℓ in the linear example, and p(σ)
µν is
the transition probability, corresponding to the product of reﬂection and transmission
coeﬃcients in our two-mirror example. For a cavity deﬁned by Fresnel reﬂection, p(σ)
µν
can to lowest approximation be determined purely within ray optics.

The virtue of Eq. (10) is that it points the way from geometric optics to wave optics
even in systems where the ray paths are not as easily enumerated as in the Fabry-Perot
cavity. The Fabry-Perot cavity discussed above is an example where Eq. (10) in fact
yields exact results, because only plane-wave propagation is involved. Although correc-
tions to this quasiclassical formula are necessary in more complicated cavity geometries,
Eq. (10) makes it plausible that ray considerations are a powerful tool for understanding
quasibound states in many open systems. In this spirit of ray-based scattering theory,
we can ask how to extract the quasibound states as poles of the physical-optics expression
Eq. (10). This means we want to generalize the logical transition (illustrated for the
Fabry-Perot cavity) from a transmission amplitude determined by Eq. (7) to an inter-
nal ray loop with attenuation given by Eq. (9). Thus, the original scattering problem
should be replaced by a Monte-Carlo simulation of a suitable ensemble of rays inside the
resonator, and the internal ray dynamics suﬀers dissipation owing to the openness of the
cavity. Several technical problems make it diﬃcult to carry out this idea in a general
cavity: the ﬁrst question is what would be the proper choice of initial conditions for a
ray ensemble in a two-dimensional cavity such as the ellipse of Fig. 2. The answer is
provided by quasiclassical quantization conditions that put some constraint on the ray
paths to be used in the ray calculation. Employing a strategy along these lines, it is

10

possible to predict not only the decay rate of a quasibound state as in Eq. (9), but also
the directionality of the emitted radiation [51]. This will be expounded in sections 11
and 14

5 Cavity ring-down and light emission

We now discuss the signiﬁcance of complex frequencies in Eqs. (4) and (5). This will
highlight the relation between quasibound states and the observable cavity response to
an external ﬁeld or pump signal, which is of particular interest in spectroscopy. In Eq.
(4), the wavenumber only appears in the form of a product n k, so that an imaginary part
in ˜k
˜ω/c can immediately be re-interpreted as part of a complex refractive
index ˜n at real k, setting

k + iκ

≡

≡

n ˜k

≡

n (k + iκ) = k (n + i nκ/k)

˜n k.

(11)

≡

The resulting Helmholtz equation has a real wavenumber, and thus describes the steady-
state wave solutions in an amplifying medium, because κ > 0: a plane wave would have
i˜nkx), which grows in the propagation direction. From Eq. (11)
the form exp(iωt
it follows that quasibound states appear naturally as approximate solutions for the
lasing modes of a microlaser with a homogeneous gain medium [52]. For a physical
understanding of lasers [53], the openness of the system as contained in the quasibound
state description is essential.

−

When a cavity is excited with a pulse, on the other hand, we are not looking for steady-
state solutions but for transients. As we noted below Eq. (9), quasibound states describe
such a decay process. These non-stationary states are exploited in many ﬁelds, e.g.
nuclear physics (where they are called “Gamov states”), and their properties are well-
known [54, 55]. One peculiar property that may cause confusion is that they formally
diverge in the far ﬁeld, as can be seen by noting that the outgoing wave in Eq. (5) obeys
the radiation boundary condition, which in the continuation to complex frequency reads

ei(˜ωt−˜kr)

ψout ∝

(r

).

→ ∞

This holds for any dimensionality if r is understood to be the radial coordinate, and
algebraic prefactors (which depend on the dimension of the solid angle element) are
not considered. At ﬁxed t, the imaginary part κ of ˜k causes exponential growth with
r. However, grouping together the exponential dependences on position and time, the
amplitude of the quasibound state is controlled by the factor

(12)

(13)

Clearly, this remains constant along the spacetime trajectory r = ct. The complex-
valuedness of ˜ω ˜k therefore has nothing unphysical, provided causality is taken into
account: within the ring-down time 1/ω of the cavity, the maximum distance to which
c/γ = 1/κ. In this
we can extend measurements of the radiated ﬁeld is of order R

∼

e−γt+γr/c.

11

range, r < R, the decaying pre-exponential factors dominate over the exponential r
dependence.

Equation (11) represents a level of approximation which does not take microscopic
properties of the light-emitting medium into account. However, it forms a starting point
which emphasizes the eﬀect of the resonator boundaries on the mode structure from the
outset; an eﬀect that becomes essential as the cavity size decreases.
If we allow the
polarization P, which in Maxwell’s wave equation eﬀects the coupling between matter
and ﬁeld, to become a function of position, and possibly acquire a nonlinear dependence
on the electric ﬁeld, then it turns out that the quasibound states of the homogeneous
medium, discussed above, are nevertheless a convenient basis in which to describe the
emission and mode coupling caused by P. To make this plausible, recall that any given
electromagnetic cavity ﬁeld can be expanded in an integral over the scattering states
ψscat of Eq. (5) as a function of k; these are the “modes of the universe” in the presence
of the cavity. To evaluate such an integral, one can extend the integration contour into
the complex plane and apply the residue theorem. The integral is then converted to a
sum over those k at which the integrand has a pole. But the poles of the scattering
states are just the poles of the S matrix, i.e. the quasibound states. For details of these
arguments, the reader should see Ref. [54]. The radiation from a source distribution d(r)
is obtained directly by summing up those quasibound states which lie in the spectral
interval of interest, weighted according to their overlap with the distribution d(r), and
with an energy denominator that makes sharp resonances contribute more strongly than
broad ones. In particular, for small cavities where the free spectral range is large and
the linewidths are small, the emission properties are determined by the spatial form and
temporal behavior of individual quasibound states.

6 Wigner delay time and the density of states

In spectroscopic applications, the quality Q and ﬁnesse F of a cavity are important
ﬁgures of merit. Conventionally, one deﬁnes

Q

≡

kr
κ

, F

FSR
κ

,

≡

(14)

where FSR is the free spectral range and kr is the wavenumber of the mode. To decide
whether the linewidth of an individual resonance, as given by Eq. (8), is narrow or broad,
we can choose as our yardstick the separation between neighboring modes. However, as
seen in Fig. 1 (b), this can become rather ambiguous if the spectrum is crowded. A free
spectral range is then hard to deﬁne, and should be replaced by a continuous function of
frequency: the spectral density, or density of states, ρ(k). If Q and F were independent
of k, then the total number of cavity modes with wavenumber less or equal to k would
be N(k) = k/FSR = Q/F . The density of states is the k-dependent generalization of
the inverse FSR:

N(k) =

ρ(k′) dk′.

(15)

k

Z
0

12

The structure of ρ(k) contains all the information about both Q(k) and F (k).

For a dielectric scatterer with sharp boundaries, there is in principle a clear distinc-
tion between “inside” and “outside”. An incoming wave propagates freely outside the
dielectric, but can be trapped inside for some time. Therefore, an incident wave pulse
emerges from the scatterer with a time delay, τD, compared to the time it takes in the
absence of the obstacle (S
1). The time delay is a continuous function of k, whereas
the resonance decay time 1/γ labels discrete poles of the S-matrix. To clarify the re-
lation between delay time and decay time, consider the simplest case of a one-channel
ikx+ iθ(k)]. Here,
scattering system, in which ψin ∝
θ is the scattering phase shift, which is related to the (unitary) S-matrix of Eq. (5) by

exp(iωt+ ikx) and ψout ∝

exp[iωt

≡

−

The outgoing wavepacket then has the Fourier decomposition

S(k) = exp[iθ(k)].

ψ(x, t) =

dk ξ(k) eik(ct−x)+iθ(k).

Z

We can look at this general expression in two instructive limiting cases: the magnitude
, could be assumed to be either sharply peaked or
of of the Fourier spectrum,
slowly-varying. Consider ﬁrst the case where
has a narrow peak at some central
wavenumber k0; the opposite limit will be treated in Eq. (27). Then the variation of θ
with k need only be retained to linear order, yielding

ξ(k)

ξ(k)

|

|

|

|

θ(k)

θ(k0) + (k

k0)

≈

−

dθ
dk0 ⇒

ψ(x, t)

const

≈

× Z

dk ξ(k) eik(ct−x+dθ/dk0).

(18)

If we denote by ψ0(x, t) the corresponding pulse for θ
the last equation means

≡

0, i.e. without scattering, then

ψ(x, t) = ψ0 (cid:18)

x, t +

1
c

dθ
dk0 (cid:19)

.

This shift in t is the Wigner-Smith delay time, τD(k) [56, 57]; it is a continuous function
of k. For or a general scattering system with M
1 channels, τD(k) is obtained by
adding the k - derivatives of all the phases θµ entering the M eigenvalues exp(iθµ) of the
S matrix:

≥

τD(k)

1
M c

≡

M

Xµ=1

∂θµ
∂k

=

Tr

i
c

dS†
dk

(cid:18)

=

S

(cid:19)

1
c

Im Tr

d
dk

(cid:18)

ln S(k)

.

(cid:19)

(20)

The last equality is a matrix identity; it contains a trace over all open channels µ =
1 . . . M. The logarithmic derivative can be executed immediately if one channel is reso-
nant: near a resonance frequency ωr = ckr one has
kr −

1/(k

(21)

iκ)

∝

−

S

with κ describing the linewidth, or the decay rate in Eq. (13) via γ = cκ. Then

(16)

(17)

(19)

(22)

τD(kr)

1
cκ

=

1
γ

,

≈

13

which means that the resonant time delay equals the resonance lifetime.

The spectral density of the open system is closely related to the delay time τD, as we
can understand from the following (non-rigorous) argument (for more stringent deriva-
c τD/n (n is the refractive index)
tions, see, e.g., [60]): τD deﬁnes a length scale Lτ ≡
which is the characteristic distance over which the wave will propagate inside the scat-
terer. If we interpret this as the eﬀective “cavity length”, then a mode should naively
be expected when an integer number of wavelengths ﬁts into this length, i.e.,

nk Lτ = 2 π ν + const,

(23)

(24)

(25)

where ν is an integer, and the constant takes into account phase shifts at interface
reﬂections or caustics. The number of modes that are contained in a small interval ∆k
around k is then given by the corresponding change ∆ν in the above equation, which to
lowest order in k is

Therefore, the spectral density is simply

∆ν =

Lτ n∆k.

1
2 π

ρ(k) =

∆ν
∆k

=

n
2 π

Lτ =

τD(k)

c
2 π

This, combined with Eq. (20), is the Krein-Friedel-Loyd formula for the density of states
in an open system, which re-appears almost invariably whenever linear response or time-
dependent perturbation theory in the presence of a continuous spectrum are considered
[58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65]. An important example is Fermi’s golden rule which relates
2 of the interaction and
electronic transition rates W to the squared matrix element
the density of states,

2π
~2 |
Based on this and Eq. (25), we can state that microcavities are able to enhance optical
transition rates, because at certain wavenumbers the light is trapped (i.e., delayed) in
the cavity for long times.

W (k) =

2ρ(k).

(26)

M

M

|

|

|

The density of states is one of the fundamental quantities that make small cavities
interesting, as was recognized long ago by Purcell [66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 85] who observed
that Eq. (26), when applied to the probability for spontaneous emission, can lead to an
enhancement of this atomic decay process compared to its rate in free space, by many
orders of magnitude. What we have seen here is that peaks in the spectral density
are associated with rapid variations in the S matrix, i.e., with the quasibound states
discussed in section 4. Small cavities also enable the opposite eﬀect, a suppression of
spontaneous emission when no cavity modes fall within the emission spectrum [68, 71,
72].

The limit of a well-deﬁned frequency in the wavepacket of Eq. (17) allowed us to
assume that the radiation interacts only with a single quasibound state, leading to the
C to be constant,
resonant delay time Eq. (22). On the other hand, if we take
the whole spectrum enters with equal weight. One could still make the assumption that

ξ(k)

| ≡

|

14

there is only a single isolated resonance in the spectrum; then one immediately arrives at
the well-known relation between Lorentzian lineshape and exponential resonance decay:
take the resonance to be at wavenumber kr (it is in fact always accompanied by a partner
kr, but we can ignore it at large enough frequencies); replacing exp(iθ) = S
state [35] at
in Eq. (17) by Eq. (21), what remains is the Fourier transform of a Lorentzian,

−

ψ(x, t) = C

dk

Z

1
kr −

iκ

k

−

eik(ct−x)

e−κ(ct−x)eikr(ct−x).

(27)

∝

This is a damped oscillation as a function of ct
x at frequency ωr = c kr with decay
constant γr = cκr. Comparing with Eq. (13), we have recovered the decay law of an
individual quasibound state in the ﬁeld envelope.

−

According to Eq. (27), if we could make a time-resolved measurement of the oscillating
electric ﬁeld in the outgoing wave, the resonance lifetime would show up in the decaying
envelope of the successive peaks of the rapidly oscillating ﬁeld. It is impractical to make
such a measurement at optical frequencies. However, recent advances have been able
to approach this limiting case of Eq. (17) by making the wavepackets into ultrashort
pulses, where correspondingly
becomes very broad. This will be discussed further
in the next section. The results of a real experiment are, however, modiﬁed from this
simple Lorentzian approximation because the scatterer in general supports more than
one distinct quasibound state. The Fourier transform in Eq. (17) consequently does not
yield a purely exponential envelope, except at long times when the decay is dominated
by the narrowest resonance [73].

c(k)

|

|

7 Lifetime versus linewidth in experiments

The two limiting cases of ξ(k) in the wavepacket Eq. (17) are just extremes of the
time-frequency uncertainty relation. Experiments on microcavities have been performed
both in the spectral and time domain. However, there has been only one report of
the temporal nature of an ultra-short optical wavepacket (100 fs pulse, 30 m short in
air) incident on a pendant-shaped, hanging droplet with an equatorial radius of 520 m
[74]. Such pulses are spectrally broad but have the intriguing property that their spatial
length is much shorter than the cavity size. Conceptually, the analogy to a well-deﬁned
particle trajectory suggests itself, and hence one looks for ballistic propagation in the
cavity.
In the experiment, wavepackets were observed to circulate inside the droplet
in the region where the the WGMs reside; such paths are characteristic of high-order
rainbows in that entry and exit of the light are separated by a large number of internal
reﬂections [19, 47].

The time-resolved measurement showed that coherent excitation of a large number of
WGMs allows propagation of a short wavepacket along the sphere’s equator for several
round trips without signiﬁcant decoherence, except for decrease in the wavepacket inten-
sity because of leakage of the WGMs. The novel aspect of the experiment that enabled
the time-resolved measurements was the use of two-color two-photon-excited Coumarin
510 dye molecules embedded in the liquid (ethylene glycol) that formed the pendant

15

droplet. The Coumarin ﬂuorescence (near 510 nm) appears when one wavepacket of λ1
and another wavepacket of λ2 spatially overlap. Thus, the Coumarin ﬂuorescence acts
as a correlator between wavepackets.

This time-resolved experiment was designed to answer the following questions: (1)
does the excitation wavepacket remain intact and ballistic after evanescent coupling
with WGMs? (2) after a few round trips, would dispersion cause the wavepacket to
broaden? and (3) can the cavity ring down time be observed for those wavepackets
that make several round trips? The answers were reached that the shape of excitation
wavepacket remained intact, the wavepacket was not broadened after a few round trips,
and that cavity ring down was observed for each round trip. This is an extension of the
single-mode ring-down determined by Eq. (27).

In particular in the context of cavity ring-down spectroscopy, the usefulness of time-
domain measurements is recognized [75]. There, one deals with very high Q-factors and
their modiﬁcation by the sample to be studied. Another application of temporal obser-
vation is encountered in microdroplets, where the optical feedback provided by WGMs
makes it possible to reach the threshold for stimulated Raman scattering (SRS). The
SRS spectrum consists of sharp peaks, commensurate with the higher Q WGMs located
within the Raman gain proﬁle. The highest Q value of the WGMs can be determined
either by resolving the narrowest linewidth ∆λ of the SRS peak or by measuring the
longest exponential decay of the SRS signal after the pump laser pulse is oﬀ. When
Q > 105, the decay time τ = Q/ω (where ω
1015 Hz for λ = 620 nm) becomes a
much easier quantity to measure directly because it is longer than 100 ps. Otherwise, the
spectral linewidth (∆λ = λ/Q) needs to be resolved better than 0.006 nm (for λ = 600
nm). Cavity decay lifetimes as long as 6.5 ns have been observed [76].

×

≈

3

8 How many modes does a cavity support?

Having deﬁned the density of modes for the open system in section 6, we can go one
step further and perform the the average ¯ρ(k) over some ﬁnite spectral interval ∆k.
The suitable choice for such an averaging interval should of course contain many spec-
tral peaks. Two relevant examples where an average spectral density is of use are the
Thomas-Fermi model of the atom [77] and Planck’s radiation law. The latter shall serve
as a motivation for some further discussion of the average ¯ρ(k) in the next section. For
a presentation of the subtleties involved in this procedure, cf. Refs. [78, 79]. For our
purposes, we simply remark that using Eq. (25) as a starting point, one way of arriving
at an averaged spectral density is to make the formal substitution k
k + iK. This
amounts to an artiﬁcial broadening of all resonances as a function of k to make them
overlap into a smoothed function; K then plays the role of the averaging interval [80].

→

In the limit of the closed cavity, the spectral density becomes a series of Dirac delta
functions as the resonance poles move onto the real k axis and become truly bound states.
The resonator then deﬁnes a Hermitian eigenvalue problem of the type we encounter in
all electromagnetics textbooks, and many fundamental properties of realistic cavities can
be understood within this lossless approximation. As a point in case, it is worth recalling

16

the problem of blackbody radiation. From a historical point of view, this thermodynamic
question was the nemesis of classical mechanics as the foundation of physics, because it
led to the postulate of discrete atomic energy levels. From a practical point of view, the
blackbody background can be a source of noise in spectroscopic measurements, and its
spectrum is modiﬁed by the presence or absence of a cavity.

From an electrodynamic point of view, the central nontrivial aspect of Planck’s problem
is that the average spectrum of the blackbody can be observed to be independent of
the cavity shape. The explanation of this universality rests on the average spectral
density of cavity modes, which is found to be independent of the resonator geometry to
leading order in frequency. Although it may be intuitively convincing that the shape
of the enclosure should become unimportant when its dimensions are large compared
to the wavelength [81], the actual proof requires a large measure of ingenuity.
In a
series of works beginning in 1913 [82], Weyl showed that for a closed, three-dimensional
electromagnetic resonator of volume V , the average spectral density as a function of
wavenumber k is (including polarization)

¯ρ3D
Weyl(k)

k2
π2 V

≈

(in 3D),

¯ρ2D
Weyl(k)

A (in 2D).

(28)

k
2 π

≈

The second equation applies when, as discussed above, the wave equation can be reduced
to scalar form and two degrees of freedom for a cavity of area A. The average number of
modes in an interval ∆k then is ¯ρWeyl(k) ∆k for large k. Geometric features other than
the volume enter in this quantity only as corrections with lower powers of the wavenum-
ber. These terms depend on the boundary conditions, surface area (or circumference)
and curvature, as well as on the topology of the cavity [83, 84].

As mentioned in the previous section, Eq. (26), microcavities can lead to enhanced
spontaneous emission because of their highly peaked density of electromagnetic modes.
Although Weyl’s formula is strictly valid only for short wavelengths, it nevertheless
allows us to estimate the limiting size for ultrasmall cavities that should be approached
if we want to observe such density-of-states eﬀects: note that Eq. (28) approaches a
“quantum limit” as the volume V approaches (λ/2)3 at ﬁxed wavelength λ: the number
of modes with wavenumber below k = 2π/λ is then

¯N 3D

Weyl(k) =

¯ρ3D
Weyl(k) dk

π
3 ≈

1,

≈

k

Z
0

(29)

which means that only a single mode remains in the cavity. In reality, the ultrasmall
size approached here is not necessarily the optimal choice, because it is hard to maintain
good quality for small cavities. One of the best ways to achieve both small size and long
lifetimes is by making use of WGMs in dielectric cavities.

The universality of Weyl’s spectral density is surprising if we look at it with the meth-
ods of the previous chapter: the analysis for stable resonators [86] shows that the number
of modes which can be obtained within the paraxial approximation depends strongly on
details of the cavity geometry. Recall the nature of the paraxial approximation; it is in

17

fact a short-wavelength approximation to Maxwell’s wave equations, in the sense that
the characteristic length scale (of the cavity or variations in the refractive-index proﬁle)
along the propagation direction must be large compared to the wavelength.
In that
framework, the geometric-optics picture is therefore the backbone on which the mode
structure of a cavity is built. However, paraxial modes appear only if stable, closed ray
patterns exist in the cavity. What makes Weyl’s formula nontrivial is that it does not
distinguish between a cavity in which such stable orbits are readily available (as was the
main subject of the previous chapter), and the extreme yet realizable case of a chaotic
cavity in which no stable paths can be found at all, see section 10.

Stability is a property of particular rays, not of a cavity as a whole. To understand
It also must be
all the modes of a generic cavity, one has to go beyond paraxiality.
realized that paraxial optics is itself a special case of a more general approximation
scheme, known as the parabolic-equation method [85, 87]. This name refers to the fact
that the resulting wave equation of Schr¨odinger type is mathematically classiﬁed as a
parabolic diﬀerential equation. This is mentioned here because at a more abstract level,
one can build approximations of paraxial type not only around rectilinear rays: e.g., for
WGMs, an envelope function ansatz in polar coordinates, Ψ(r, φ) = χ(r; φ) exp(
iβφ)
allows φ to become the “propagation direction”. The question of whether a mode can
be called paraxial or not then becomes dependent on the coordinate system one uses
(e.g., Cartesian vs. cylindrical). A more fundamental distinction by which the cavity as
a whole can be classiﬁed is that of integrability. Next, we discuss some examples for this
concept.

−

9 Cavities without chaos

One feature that can be observed in both Fig. 2 (a) and (b) is that the modes exhibit
caustics inside the dielectric, i.e. well-deﬁned curves of high intensity which in the ray
picture correspond to envelopes at which the rays are tangent. In the WGM, the caustic
is an ellipse confocal with the boundary; it can be parameterized by its eccentricity, ec. In
Fig. 2 (b), the caustic consists of two confocal hyperbola segments. Caustics separate the
classically allowed from the forbidden regions, in the sense of the WKB approximation.
In this section, we discuss some examples of how quasiclassical and exact solutions can
be obtained in non-chaotic but nontrivial cavities, if coupling to the exterior region is
neglected. In this closed limit, all ﬁelds can be written as real-valued functions obeying
standard boundary conditions (Dirichlet or Neumann).

Figure 3 (a) illustrates the WG caustics of an ellipse and their relation to the quasiclas-
sical quantization method of Einstein, Brillouin and Keller (EBK, the multidimensional
generalization of the WKB approximation) [88]: given a particular caustic of eccentricity
ec, we examine the ray segments that are tangent to it. For a ﬁxed sense of rotation,
there are exactly two distinct rays going through any given point r between the caustic
and the boundary – one traveling from the caustic toward the boundary and the other
vice versa. These two unique ray directions as a function of r deﬁne two vector ﬁelds,
which are called “ray congruences” [88] and are shown in the ﬁgure as a ﬂywheel of rays.

18

Figure 3: (a) In a WGM of the ellipse, the point r is visited by two wavefronts: one
carrying rays from the caustic to the boundary (top), and the other vice versa
(bottom); note that both have the same sense of rotation (indicated by the
arrow). A complete ray trajectory alternates between these two wavefronts
as it encounters boundary and caustic repeatedly. (b) A paraboloid (surface
of revolution generated by a parabola), closed by a mirror intersecting its
focal point. The focal length equals 3.25 λ. The azimuthal mode number is
m = 1; high intensity is shown in black. The corresponding rays (bottom)
come in families and generally do not close on themselves (bottom). (c) A
2D equilateral triangle cavity. The side length is 13.5 λ. The mode can be
constructed rigorously from a family of periodic ray orbits, one example of
which is shown.

They are furthermore normal to the phase fronts shown as curved grey lines. These are
the eikonals Φ1,2(r) appearing in the quasiclassical ansatz for the wave,

ψ(r) = A1(r) exp[

i k Φ1(r)] + A2(r) exp[

i k Φ2(r)]

(30)

−

−

We have suppressed the monochromatic time dependence exp(iωt). At least two terms
are necessary when there are two degrees of freedom; additional, symmetry-related terms
may be needed to make the wave ﬁeld real-valued. In the standard EBK quantization,
the amplitude functions A1,2 are assumed to be slowly varying, and one can achieve the
single-valuedness of the wave function only if the phase advance in the exponentials is
an integer multiple of 2 π for any closed loop in the planar cavity. This occurs only for
certain discrete combinations of the unknown parameters k (the wavenumber), and ec
(the eccentricity of the caustic). Hence, the semiclassical method quantizes not only
the wave parameter k of the modes, but also the classical parameter ec deﬁning the
corresponding ray trajectories.

A simple example is the circular resonator, a limiting case of Fig. 3 (a). The internal
caustic in that case is a concentric circle with radius Ri. By geometry, the rays corre-
sponding to that caustic have a ﬁxed angle of incidence given by sin χ = Ri/R, if R is the
cavity radius. Single-valuedness of the wave ﬁeld then requires that the phase advance
wavenumber) equals 2 π m, where
along a loop encircling the caustic (= circumference
m is an integer:

×

2π Ri nk = 2π m

sin χ =

(31)

m
nkR

,

⇒

19

×

~nk as
where n is the index of refraction. The meaning of m follows if we interpret p
the linear photon momentum, and recall the deﬁnition of classical angular momentum,
L = r
p. Then if r lies on the surface, the z component of L is Lz = R p sin χ,
which identiﬁes Lz = ~m by comparing with Eq. (31). One can thus call m an “angular
momentum quantum number”. In addition to this orbital angular momentum quanti-
zation, there is a radial single-valuedness condition which forces k to become discrete.
This yields a complete set of two quantum numbers for two degrees of freedom, and it
implies that χ in Eq. (31) becomes discretized as well – another way of understanding the
quantization of the caustic ec. For a basic discussion of the EBK method in rotationally
invariant, separable cavity geometries, cf. Ref. [89].

≡

One result of the EBK quantization is that the WGMs do not in general correspond to
closed ray orbits except in the limit when the internal caustic approaches the cavity sur-
face. The quantized caustics instead belong to a family of rays which encircle the perime-
ter quasi-periodically, coming arbitrarily close to any given point on the boundary after
a suﬃciently long path length. This generalizes to most other resonator problems: What
counts for the formation of modes is not that the associated rays close on themselves,
but only that the wave fronts, to which these rays are normal, interfere constructively.

Even in three-dimensional integrable cavities, the EBK method can yield highly ac-
curate results down to the lowest-frequency modes. As an example, we mention recent
work on a microlaser cavity with strong internal focusing properties, which consists of a
dome in the shape of a paraboloid, on top of a layered semiconductor [90], cf. Fig. 3 (b).
As in the ellipse, the exact solution for the mode shown for this plano-parabolic mirror
geometry bears some resemblance to the more familiar paraxial optics, in this case a
Gauss-Laguerre beam. However, just like the circular resonator, the parabolic dome has
no stable ray orbits, owing to the confocal condition. The modes can be found exactly
because the geometry allows separation of variables in parabolic cylinder coordinates.

The short-wavelength approximation can be made highly accurate (as in the parabolic
dome) or even exact (as in the Fabry-Perot cavity of section 4). As a nontrivial general-
ization of exact quantization based on rays, Fig. 3 (c) shows the equilateral triangle. All
its modes can be obtained by superimposing a ﬁnite number of suitably chosen plane
waves [10, 91, 85]. This is achieved by “unfolding” the cavity into an inﬁnite lattice cre-
ated by its mirror images. These examples show that ray optics, as the skeleton which
carries the wave ﬁelds, remains a useful tool far beyond the paraxial limit.

However, the reader may ask: what is the use for semiclassical methods in exactly
solvable problems such as the above systems? After all, semiclassics is simple in separable
systems! Beyond quantitative estimates, the value of quasiclassics is that the connection
between modes and rays can be carried over to deformations of the cavity shape where the
separability is destroyed. When this happens, eigenstates cannot be labeled uniquely by
global quantum numbers anymore. However, as Weyl’s formula teaches us, the absence
of good quantum numbers does not imply the absence of good modes. In order to classify
the latter, we shall attempt to label them according to the ray trajectories to which they
quasiclassically correspond.

20

Figure 4: The refractive index in (a-d) is n = 2.65.

(a) Position ˜k = k + iκ of
a quasibound state, parameterized by the quadrupolar shape deformation
1 + ǫ2/2. Here, ǫ is the fractional deformation from
r(φ) = R (1 + ǫ cos 2φ)/
the circle. Arrows show the location of the quasibound states shown in (b-d),
corresponding to ǫ = 0.114 (b), ǫ = 0.126 (c) and ǫ = 0.135 (d). The reso-
nance widths are κ R = 0.087, 0.069, 0.047 in (b), (c), (d). Thus, increasing
deformation leads to linewidth narrowing and more focused emission.

p

10 Chaotic cavities

Taken together, the discussions of stable resonators in the previous chapter [86] and of
integrable systems in the foregoing section provide the essentials of “conventional” res-
onator physics. However, in the inﬁnite space of possible cavity shapes, most geometries
are nonintegrable and hence display chaos in their ray dynamics, as mentioned in the
introduction to this chapter. To illustrate the transition to chaos, Fig. 4 shows the con-
tinuous evolution of an individual quasibound state as the shape of an oval resonator is
deformed. The cavity shape is a two-dimensional quadrupole of mean radius R. Now the
distinction between the mathematical ellipse and other oval shapes becomes important.
Although the diﬀerence between the shapes in Figs. 4 and 2 is barely discernible at small
ǫ, the quadrupole is not an integrable cavity and displays a far more intricate internal
mode structure. In particular, caustics become frayed, and nodal lines form ever more
complicated patterns as ǫ increases.

Given this complicated scenario, it is not immediately clear that ray considerations
can help at all in understanding the properties of states such as those in Fig. 4. However,
it turns out that quite the opposite is true: it is the added complexity of the internal ray
dynamics that can be identiﬁed as the cause of the more complex wave ﬁelds. We make
this somewhat provocative statement because the previous examples have proven the
success of using ray considerations as a scaﬀolding for constructing the cavity modes.
Unfortunately, there is so far no complete theoretical framework for the quasiclassical
quantization of partially chaotic systems; the EBK method, which in quantum mechanics
gives rise to the corrected Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rules [88], fails when the system
does not exhibit well-deﬁned caustics, as was already noted by Einstein [92].

However, it is worth following the quasiclassical route because there exists a vast
amount of knowledge about the classical part of the problem: chaotic ray dynamics
can help gain insights into the wave solutions that cannot be gleaned from numerical
computations alone. Ray optics can be formally mapped onto the classical mechanics of a
point particle; this allows us to leverage a rich body of work on chaotic classical mechanics

21

Figure 5: Poincar´e surfaces of section: at each reﬂection, record the position of impact
(parameterized by the polar angle φ) and angle of incidence χ, in a plot of
sin χ versus φ; repeat for several trajectories. (a) ellipse of eccentricity e = 0.8
(same shape as in Fig. 1); (b) quadrupole with ǫ = 0.135, as in Fig. 4 (d). In
(a), oscillatory paths between the ﬂat sides appear as closed loops, whereas
WG circulation creates curves that span all polar angles φ. While all rays in
(a) form caustics, the chaotic paths shown in (b) do not. Chaotic rays can
undergo WG circulation (bottom left) for long times before covering the whole
cavity in a quasi-random way (bottom right).

– a mature, though by no means complete ﬁeld [1, 5, 93, 94]. Hence, quasiclassics in
the presence of chaos is a challenging undertaking, but also a useful one because the
numerical costs for obtaining exact wave solutions in nonintegrable systems are so high.
As observed in section 7, pulses that excite many cavity modes can behave ballistically,
i.e. seem to follow well-deﬁned trajectories. The idea of the quasiclassical approach is
complementary to this: from the behavior of whole families of ray trajectories, we want
to extract the properties of individual cavity modes.

11 Phase space representation with Poincar´e sections

As the ellipse already taught us, diﬀerent types of ray motion can coexist in a single
In such cases, it is desirable to
resonator – e.g., WG and bouncing-ball trajectories.
know what combination of initial conditions for a ray will result in which type of motion.
Initial conditions can be speciﬁed by giving the position on the boundary at which a
ray is launched, and the angle χ it forms with the surface normal. The proper choice
of initial conditions was identiﬁed at the end of section 4 as a prerequisite in the quasi-
classical modeling of resonance decay. The present section introduces the tools necessary
for solving this problem.

Information on the possible types of ray motion, and how they are grouped in families,
is contained in the Poincar´e surface of section (SOS), cf. Fig. 5. It is a representation of
the classical phase space in the φ - sin χ plane, spanning all possible angles of incidence
and reﬂection positions along the boundary. The deﬁnition of χ in the center of Fig. 5
includes a sign, measured positive in the direction shown by the arrow from the outward

22

normal. This reﬂects the observation made below Eq. (31) that sin χ is proportional to
the z component of the instantaneous angular momentum at the reﬂection, and the sign
thus distinguishes the sense of rotation.

By combining the two variables φ and sin χ, dynamical structure can be revealed which
would remain hidden in a collection of real-space ray traces. Non-chaotic trajectories are
conﬁned by local or global conservation laws to one-dimensional lines, called invariant
curves. Almost all rays in the ellipse follow such curves, as seen in Fig. 5 (a), which shows
a clearcut division into oscillatory and rotational (WG) motion, cf. also Fig. 2. This is
analogous to the phase space of a physical pendulum [95]. The separatrix between the
two types of motion corresponds to a diametral ray orbit connecting the points φ = 0, π
on the boundary.

|

| →

sin χ

Rays launched on an invariant curve must remain on it for all subsequent reﬂections.
1 even in Fig. 5 (b); this is just the WG limit.
Such unbroken curves persist for
A lesser degree of robustness is observed for the oscillatory trajectories: they are sur-
rounded by elliptical “stable islands”, but a chaotic sea forms in-between, owing to the
fact that in Fig. 5 (b) the diametral separatrix orbit mentioned above is unstable, devel-
oping the sensitivity to small deviations in initial conditions which is typical for chaotic
behavior. Chaos develops preferentially around such separatrix orbits. The analogy to
a pendulum makes this plausible: there, the separatrix is the unstable equilibrium point
at which the pendulum balances upside down. Note that the diﬀerent types of motion
described here are mutually exclusive, i.e. chaotic orbits never cross over into the islands
of stability. This has the important eﬀect that chaotic motion is indirectly aﬀected by
the presence of stable structure in the SOS.

The central reason why the SOS is introduced in this chapter is that it allows us
to form a bridge between the discrete electromagnetic modes of the cavity and their
measurable emission characteristics. Emission means coupling to the environment and
hence appears as a dissipation mechanism in the internal cavity dynamics, as illustrated
in Eq. (9). Recalling section 2, the emission from a dielectric cavity is governed foremost
by Fresnel’s formulas, which give a wavelength-independent relation for the reﬂectivities
rν along any ray path, determined only by the local angle of incidence χν at reﬂection
ν; in the example of the Fabry-Perot cavity, nothing else is needed to determine the
decay rate γ of a cavity mode, cf. Eq. (8). Now we note that the SOS shows the angle
of incidence on the vertical axis, and hence the Fresnel coeﬃcient of any given reﬂection
can be read oﬀ with ease. In particular, the critical angle for TIR, Eq. (1), is represented
in the SOS as a horizontal line. When this line is crossed from above (in absolute value),
refractive escape becomes possible. The SOS then tells us which combinations of initial
conditions give rise to ray trajectories that eventually reach this classical escape window
in phase space.

12 Uncertainty principle

To complete the bridge between a cavity mode and its corresponding set of initial condi-
tions in the ray dynamics, we have to ﬁnd a way of projecting quasibound ﬁelds onto the

23

SOS. To this end, let us brieﬂy discuss some aspects of how mode ﬁelds can be measured.
Individual quasibound states can be studied in great detail in microlaser experiments
[96, 97, 16, 98], because one can make spatially and spectrally resolved images of the
emitter under various observation angles. As is evident from Fig. 4, the far-ﬁeld inten-
sity depends on the polar angle θ of the detector relative to some ﬁxed cross-sectional
axis of the object (say, the horizontal axis). Instead of simply measuring this far-ﬁeld
intensity, however, one can also ask from which points on the cavity surface the collected
light originated – i.e., an image of the emitter can be recreated with the help of a lens.
The dielectric will then exhibit bright spots at surface locations φ whose distribution in
the image may change as a function of observation angle θ. The two variables φ and θ
are conjugate to each other, because θ measures a propagation direction whereas φ is a
position coordinate of the cavity.

The conjugacy between φ and θ means that they are incompatible, in the sense that
they obey an uncertainty relation: the ﬁeld distribution as a function of φ in the image
can be deduced from the far-ﬁeld distribution in θ by a Fourier transformation, and
that is the function performed by the imaging lens. But quantities related by Fourier
transformation cannot simultaneously have arbitrarily sharp distributions. Physically,
in an image-ﬁeld measurement a large lens is needed to get good spatial (φ) resolution,
but this leaves a larger uncertainty about the direction θ in which the collected light
was traveling [98].

If we could plot the measured intensity as a function of both φ and θ, we could generate
a two-dimensional distribution similar to the SOS of the preceding ray analysis. In fact,
knowing the surface shape, it is only a matter of trigonometry and the law of refraction
to transform the pair (φ, θ) measured on the outside to (φ, χ) inside the cavity and
hence make the analogy complete. But if one has already calculated the wave ﬁeld of a
quasibound state, what is the advantage of representing it in this phase space rather than
in real space? The answer is that the real-space wave patterns often obscure information
about the correlations between the two conjugate variables (φ, sin χ). As mentioned
above, the SOS which plots these variables would allow us to understand whether a
given mode is allowed to emit refractively; and if so, we can furthermore determine
at what positions on the surface and in which directions the escape will preferentially
occur. This is determined by the joint distribution of (φν, sin χν) over all reﬂections ν
encountered by the rays corresponding to the given mode [51].

13 Husimi projection

To begin a phase space analysis, we now return to the question of how to extract cor-
relations between conjugate variables from a wave ﬁeld. This can be illustrated by
analogy with a musical score: any piece of music can be recorded by graphing the sound
amplitude as a function of time. On the other hand, musical notation instead plots a
sequence of sounds by simultaneously specifying their pitch and duration. These are
conjugate variables because monochromatic sounds require inﬁnite duration [99], but
their joint distribution is what makes the melody. The reason why musical scores can

24

be written unambiguously is that they apply to a short-wavelength regime in which the
frequency smearing by ﬁnite “pulse” duration goes to zero (in this sense, all music is
“classical”. . . ). In the same way that musical notes are adapted to our perception of mu-
sic, phase-space representations of optical wave ﬁelds project complex spatial patterns
onto classical variables relevant in measurements.

This reasoning is familiar from quantum optics as well: there, amplitude and phase of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld are conjugate variables, and their joint distribution is probed
in correlation experiments [100, 101]. A possible way of obtaining a phase-space repre-
sentation is the Husimi function, obtained by forming an overlap integral between the
relevant quantum state and a coherent state corresponding to a minimum-uncertainty
wavepacket in the space of photon number versus phase. Here, we want to extract the
same type of information about the joint distribution of the conjugate variables φ, sin χ
relevant to an optical imaging measurement on a cavity mode, as described above. By
projecting the electromagnetic ﬁeld onto the SOS, measurable correlations are revealed
which can be compared to the classical phase space structure. This is another realization
of a Husimi function; the examples mentioned above diﬀer essentially only in the actual
deﬁnition of the coherent state basis onto which the wave ﬁeld is projected [102].

Motivated by the above remarks on measurement of emission locations versus detector
direction, we now note that the coherent states with which the cavity modes should be
overlapped are in fact the Gaussian beams [2]. The fundamental Gaussian beam ψG has
the property of being a minimum-uncertainty wavepacket in the coordinate x transverse
to its propagation direction z, evolving according to the paraxial (Fresnel) approximation
in complete analogy with a Schr¨odinger wavepacket,

ψG(x, z) =

1
(2π)1/4

1

σ + i z
2kσ

q

exp

x2
4σ2 + 2iz/k (cid:21)

(cid:20)−

exp(ikz).

(32)

The “waist” of the beam at z = 0 is σ, and the angular beam spread is

∆θ = arctan

1
k σ (cid:19) ≈

1
k σ

.

(cid:18)

(33)

In the imaging setup, σ determines the spatial resolution. Only beams with angular
spread smaller than a maximum ∆θ are admitted by the aperture, and hence features
smaller than the corresponding σ are unresolved. Clearly, the uncertainty product σ ∆θ
vanishes for high wavenumbers.

We are concerned with the internal cavity, and thus do not want the deﬁnition to
contain the particular leakage mechanism (e.g., the law of refraction). Therefore, imagine
that our detector could be placed inside the cavity, close to its boundary. Given the
internal ﬁeld ψint of the mode, we then make a hypothetical measurement by forming
the overlap with a minimum-uncertainty wavepacket ψG of width σ, centered around a
certain value of φ and sin χ. The form of ψG is analogous to Eq. (32), but transformed
to polar coordinates because our position variable is an angle, φ. The radial coordinate
can be eliminated because we constrained our detector to lie on the cavity surface.

25

Figure 6: The Husimi projections of states (b) and (d) in Fig. 4 are shown in (a) and
(b), resp., as grayscale images (dark for high intensity) superimposed onto
the SOS. In (a), the ﬁeld is localized in the chaotic boundary layer of the
bouncing-ball island, with strong maxima on an unstable periodic orbit. Its
star shape is shown in the bottom center inset, displaying ray escape according
to Snell’s law is as thin arrows. In (b), the cavity is the same as in Fig. 5 (b),
but the SOS shows a diﬀerent set of ray trajectories, forming a homoclinic
tangle (interweaving black lines). The rightmost inset shows the unstable
periodic orbit from which the tangle emanates. Its invariant manifolds guide
<
the transport of phase-space density to the refractive escape window,
1/n

0.377 (dashed horizontal lines).

sin χ
|

|

≈

Although individual Gaussian wavepackets are not good solutions of the wave problem
inside the cavity, they are always an allowed (though overcomplete) basis in which the
ﬁeld can be expanded. This is all we require in order to obtain the desired, smoothed
phase space representation of ψint: The value of the overlap integral,

(34)

H(φ, sin χ)

ψint|

2 ,
ψGi|

≡ |h
as a function of φ and sin χ can (with some caveats) be interpreted as a phase space
density, and is the desired Husimi projection; the parameter σ in Eq. (32) should be
chosen so as to optimize the desired resolution in φ and sin χ, i.e., the “squeezing”
of the minimum-uncertainty wavepackets which probe ψint. Details on the deﬁnition,
properties and applications of Husimi functions on the ray phase space are found in
Refs.
[8, 103, 104, 105, 107, 97]. The price we pay for obtaining a quasi-probability
distribution is that Eq. (34) discards all phase information.

Figure 6 shows how the prescription Eq. (34) maps the mode of Fig. 4 (c) and (d)
onto the classical ray dynamics. Although the chaotic trajectories corresponding to (d)
show some accumulation near certain paths in real space, only the Husimi plot reveals
what combinations of φ and sin χ occur in the internal ﬁeld. This in turn determines at
what positions refractive ray escape is expected, and in which directions the light will
radiate.

26

14 Constructive interference with chaotic rays

In this section, we return to the “mystery of the missing modes” with which section 8
confronted us: Weyl’s density of states is asymptotically the same for all cavities of the
same volume, even if we cannot classify their modes according some numbering that
follows from integrability, or at least paraxiality. Figure 4 shows that a given mode does
not cease to exist as integrability is destroyed with increasing ǫ, but evolves smoothly
into a new and complex ﬁeld pattern with a well-deﬁned spectral peak that can even
become narrower with increasing chaos in the ray dynamics. As noted in section 10, the
“mystery” is how at large shape deformation the increasingly numerous chaotic rays,
which crisscross the cavity in a pseudo-random way and even diverge from each other,
can give rise to constructive interference, and hence to a resonant mode.

In section 9, the quasiclassical quantization approach led from the ray picture to the
wave ﬁelds. Now, we follow the opposite direction and use the Husimi projection of a
given cavity mode to perform a “dequantization” which leads to the ray picture. In this
way, the novel physics of chaotic modes can be described without much technical detail.
By superimposing the Husimi projection of a mode onto the SOS for the same defor-
mation, we can identify classical structures on which the mode is built. We have so far
encountered two types of structure, cf. the caption of Fig. 5: (I) invariant curves such
as those formed by WG rays, permitting EBK quantization as discussed in section 9;
(II) stable islands around periodic orbits, for which the paraxial approximation of the
previous chapter [86] can be used. In both cases, a ﬁnite (and usually small) number
of wavefronts suﬃces to achieve the constructive interference without which no cavity
mode can form. The mode shown in Fig. 6, on the other hand, overlaps with neither of
these non-chaotic phase-space components; it is a chaotic mode. One possible way to
understand that chaotic modes are possible at all, is to realize that even the chaotic sea
is not structureless.

The classical objects of crucial importance for an understanding of chaotic modes are
the unstable periodic orbits of the cavity. They give rise to a third type of invariant sets in
the ray dynamics: (III) stable and unstable manifolds. These are one-dimensional curves
which, like the structures (I) and (II), have the property that rays launched anywhere
on the manifold will always remain there. Along these manifolds, trajectories rapidly
approach or depart from a given periodic orbit, such as the one shown in Fig. 6 (b,
right inset). A non-periodic ray trajectory which moves along one of the corresponding
manifolds is displayed in the top center inset.

The stable and unstable manifolds form an intricate web, the “homoclinic tangle”,
which was already recognized by Poincar´e as the cause of severe diﬃculties in calculating
the dynamics [5]. Part of this tangle is shown in Fig. 6 (b), forming interweaving lobes
which play an important role in controlling the transport of phase-space density. A
discussion of this “turnstile” action and the relation to the stability of the orbits from
which the tangle originates is found, e.g., in Refs. [1, 108]). As the Husimi projection
in Fig. 6 (b) shows, the wave intensity is guided along the invariant manifolds of the
unstable periodic orbit [110], imparting a high degree of anisotropy onto the internal
intensity and on the emission directions.

27

Figure 7: A WGM in the quadrupole cavity at ǫ = 0.104, at dimensionless wavenumber
kR = 32.695 and width κR = 0.0025. The focused near-tangential emission
from the points of highest curvature is explained in the ray picture (b). The
ray-wave connection is illustrated in the Husimi plot (c), superimposed onto
the SOS (only sin χ > 0 is plotted to magnify details). The stable and unstable
manifolds of the rectangular periodic orbit funnel the rays downwards to the
escape condition along two narrow pathways. The resulting emission therefore
is not attributable to a single periodic orbit, but to a family of (generally
aperiodic) trajectories following the invariant manifolds shown here.

Particularly strong Husimi intensity is found at the reﬂection points of the periodic
orbit shown in the inset to Fig. 6 (b); this corresponds to the high-intensity ridges in the
real-space intensity of Fig. 4 (d). Such wavefunction scarring [109] is a surprising feature,
because a wave ﬁeld concentrated near the origin of the homoclinic tangle, i.e., at the
unstable periodic orbit itself, spatially appears similar to a sequence of Gaussian beams,
despite the fact that paraxial optics requires the underlying modes to be stable. Even if
we do not start from this paraxial point of view, but follow the historical developments
in quantum chaos, scars seem to run counter to the early conventional wisdom that
asserted chaotic modes should posses a random spatial distribution [108]. In a recent
study on lasing in a large, planar laser cavity with no stable ray orbits [111], laser
operation with focused emission was observed and explained by wave function scarring.
This phenomenon is of interest not only from the applied point of view, but also because
a complete understanding of the quasiclassical theory for modes corresponding to the
invariant manifolds of type (III) is as yet missing [112, 113].

15 Chaotic whispering-gallery modes

k/κ = 700,
The lifetime of the quasibound states in Fig. 4 (d) yields a Q-factor of Q
which is of the same order as that of a high-power microlaser [97] that was demonstrated
recently as an application of cavity design using the concepts introduced in section 11.
The bowtie-shaped mode encountered there was of paraxial type, centered around a
stable periodic ray orbit. If low lasing thresholds and hence higher Q-factors are desired,
we recall from Fig. 2 that WGMs are preferred. As shown in Fig. 7, WGMs in partially

≡

28

chaotic cavities display high Q and strongly anisotropic emission patterns. Comparing
the non-chaotic case of Fig. 2 (a) and the chaotic cavity of Fig. 7, we indeed ﬁnd stronger
focusing in the latter case.

Chaotic WGMs are among the few types of chaotic modes for which an approximate
quasiclassical description along the lines of section 9 is possible. They correspond to ray
trajectories which are part of the chaotic sea but circulate along the cavity perimeter
many times before exploring other phase-space regions, cf. Fig. 5 (b), bottom. There is
thus a separation of time scales between the fast WG circulation and a slow deviation
from WG behavior which inevitably ends in chaotic motion. This makes it possible to
use an adiabatic approximation [114] in which the “diﬀusion” away from WG motion is
neglected for times long enough to contain many round-trips of the ray.

As a consequence, one can formulate approximate quantization conditions for chaotic
WG modes by ignoring the chaotic dynamics [51], leading to equations of the EBK type,
Eq. (30). The approximate nature of this quantization can be recognized in Fig. 7 (a),
which diﬀers from the ellipse-shaped cavity of Fig. 2 (a) in the fact that a small but
nonvanishing ﬁeld persists in the cavity center. This indicates that there no longer is
a well-deﬁned caustic, as we required in section 9 Nevertheless, the Husimi distribution
(grayscale) in Fig. 7 (c) condenses approximately onto a one-dimensional curve (the
shape of which can be given analytically within the adiabatic approximation [51]), fol-
lowing the homoclinic tangle [the SOS in Fig. 7 (c) is vertically expanded compared to
Fig. 6 (b)]. The location of this adiabatic invariant curve is determined by the EBK
quantization; its minima are seen to approach the TIR condition.

As indicated in section 14, chaos does become important when the emission properties
of a chaotic WG mode are concerned. It is the deviation of the rays from the above
adiabatic assumption which allows an initially conﬁned ray to violate the total-internal
reﬂection condition after some time, and hence escape refractively, cf. Fig. 7 (b).
In
Fig. 7 (c), this escape results from wave intensity leaking across the TIR condition near
φ = 0, π. This can be reproduced within a ray simulation by launching an ensemble
of rays on the adiabatic invariant curve, and recording the distribution of classically
escaping rays.

This implements the program outlined at the end of section 4 The stochastic branching
of a ray trajectory into transmitted and reﬂected parts, also known as ray-splitting [48],
could be summed up as a geometric series in the Fabry-Perot example, Eq. (6). In the
oval cavity, Monte-Carlo simulations for large ensembles of incident rays are required
[51]. This ray approach has been applied in scattering problems along the lines of Eq.
(10) [49]; the value and applicability of ray considerations in scattering from chaotic
optical cavities was demonstrated in Ref. [50]. The diﬀerence to the quasibound-state
approach is that our incident rays are launched inside the cavity, not outside of it.

Because chaotic diﬀusion makes classical escape from WGMs possible in the ﬁrst
place, the ray approach in fact becomes more useful at large deformations where chaos
increases. That is just the regime where exact scattering calculations encounter diﬃ-
culties. Starting from the ray approach to emission directionality and decay rates, one
can then successively introduce corrections at higher orders in λ. In particular, in Ref.
[51], the openness of the system was taken into account in the semiclassical quantiza-

29

tion step by introducing additional phase shifts into the EBK equations. The reason is
that penetration into the outside region, as mentioned in section 2, creates an enlarged,
eﬀective cavity boundary which lengthens the ray path lengths. This “Goos-Haenchen
eﬀect” [15] is well-known from plane interfaces as well. The eﬀective cavity is actually of
slightly diﬀerent shape than the physical geometry. This has the consequence that even
the elliptic cavity of Fig. 2, which for impenetrable boundaries is integrable, becomes
non-integrable as a dielectric body [46, 47].

16 Dynamical eclipsing

→

In the λ
0 limit, the internal dynamics of the ellipse displays no chaos, cf. Fig. 5
(a). This makes it an important test case with which to compare whenever we want
to identify ﬁngerprints of chaos. The power of such comparisons has been illustrated
in an experiment on prolate, dye-doped lasing microdroplets [98]. The geometry of the
droplets was rotationally symmetric around the polar axis, which is also the major axis.
If one analyzes only the light propagating in a plane containing the two poles, then
the cavity is eﬀectively formed by the 2D axial cross section whose shape is an oval
of the type we have been discussing above, cf. Fig. 5. The experimental technique of
recording with a CCD camera an image of the micro-object at various observation angles
θ (measured with respect to the polar axis of a spheroidal droplet) reveals prominent
bright and dark regions along the cavity rim, from which the position and exit angle of
the laser emission can be extracted simultaneously.

As discussed in section 3, the lasing modes in low-index materials such as droplets
should be of WG-type. The experiment illustrates both the focusing property, as well
as the robustness of WGMs. When the lasing droplets are imaged from the side per-
pendicular to the polar axis (θ = 90◦), one thus expects emission directionality of the
type shown in Figs. 2 (a) or 7 (a), showing emission from the points of highest curvature
(i.e., the poles). However, neither case describes the observed emission correctly. The
droplets appeared dim at the poles instead of being brightest there.

This counter-intuitive phenomenon can be explained by the phase space structure
shown in Fig. 5 (b). An essential role is played by the small islands belonging to the
stable four-bounce diamond-shaped orbit depicted in the Figure. Its eﬀect is that WG
rays of the type shown below the SOS are prevented from reaching the high-curvature
points (Φ = 0, π) at angle of incidence sin χ = 0.65, because chaotic and stable motion
are mutually exclusive (cf. section 11). Now χTIR = arcsin 0.65 just happens to be the
critical angle for the droplet-air interface; hence, near-critical escape from the highest-
curvature points is ruled out for chaotically moving WG rays in the droplet. In Fig. 5
(b), it is impossible to see from the ray trace in real space that the combination φ = 0,
χ = χTIR will never occur. Likewise, this information is by no means obvious from
the wave equation itself Only the phase-space analysis using the SOS reveals the small
islands that cause this eﬀect, which has been called dynamical eclipsing. The emission
proﬁle is determined by the phase space structure in the vicinity of the emission line
sin χT IR, and therefore we do not detect dynamical eclipsing in the higher-index example

30

of Fig. 7. A glance at Fig. 5 (a) makes it clear that the eﬀect will never occur in the
ellipse, because the relevant islands do not exist there.

17 Conclusions

The subtle diﬀerence in shapes between ellipsoid and quadrupole raises the question:
How short does the wavelength have to be compared to the cavity dimensions, in order
to be able to resolve such diﬀerences in geometry? Clearly, the droplets are so large
compared to the optical wavelength (35 µm diameter for an equivalent-volume sphere)
that we are deep in the short-wavelength limit. What the above example teaches us
is that it is not the structure in real space that has to be resolved by the waves, but
the structure in phase space. The uncertainty principle will limit the size of the islands
that can have a noticeable eﬀect on the cavity mode structure, but the important thing
to realize is that small diﬀerences in cavity shape can lead to large diﬀerences in phase
space structure. As a result, the phase space eﬀects introduced in this chapter turn out
to be observable even in cavities that are not much larger than the wavelength. This is
an extension of the claim made for integrable systems in section 9, that quasiclassical
methods often extend all the way to the longest-wavelength modes.

Future work on nonintegrable dielectric cavities can proceed in various directions:
our understanding of the classical ray transport in partially chaotic systems has to be
explored further, and the systematic wave corrections to these ray ideas must be inves-
tigated. Two such corrections which are of particular importance in chaotic systems
are dynamical localization [114, 51, 115] and chaos-assisted tunneling [107]. Dynamical
localization is an interference eﬀect that suppresses decay rates below the value expected
from ray simulations as outlined in this chapter. It becomes more pronounced in smaller
cavities, and in fact helps maintain high Q-factors in the presence of chaotic ray dy-
namics. Localization arises in many areas of physics as a name for wave corrections
to a classical diﬀusion picture. In our case, the diﬀusion happens in the chaotic phase
space of the ray dynamics. Chaos-assisted tunneling, on the other hand, acts to enhance
radiation losses of non-chaotic WGMs at small deformations when chaos pervades only
the low-sin χ regions of the SOS. It also leads to a coupling between WG wavefronts
encircling the cavity in counterclockwise and clockwise sense of rotation, e.g., between
the extreme bottom and top of the SOS in Fig. 4 (a). In the ray picture, spontaneous
reversal of rotation direction is forbidden for WG trajectories on invariant curves; the
mechanism at work here is tunneling in phase space.

The phase space approach to microcavity electrodynamics provides a means of clas-
sifying the wide variety of modes in cavities where “good quantum numbers” do not
uniquely enumerate the spectrum. Semiclassical methods provide the connection be-
tween individual modes and manifolds in phase space, such as the caustics in section 9,
belonging to invariant curves in the SOS. Open questions remain about how to estab-
lish this connection in the general case when caustics are broken up by ray chaos. The
particularly important case of WGMs, however, is amenable to approximate treatments
which permit quantitative predictions. Many systems in which strong matter-ﬁeld cou-

31

pling enables quantum-electrodynamic studies, are actually large enough to be in the
quasiclassical regime: examples are semiconductor domes [90] (where the eﬀective wave-
length is shortened by a high refractive index), or silica microspheres (cf. Ref. [21, 23]
and citations therein) where atoms close to the dielectric interface interact evanescently
103. At all levels
with WGMs whose angular momentum according to Eq. (31) is m
of microcavity optics – quantum or classical, linear or nonlinear – the fundamental task
is to establish a modal basis, and the methods we sketched in this chapter accomplish
this in a way that provides physical insight.

∼

32

References

[1] Reichl, L. E. (1992). “The Transition to Chaos in Conservative Classical Systems:

Quantum Manifestations,” Springer-Verlag, New York

[2] Siegman, A. E. (1986). “Lasers,” University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA

[3] Gutzwiller, M. C. (1998). Resource Letter ICQM-1: The interplay between classical

and quantum mechanics. Am. J. Phys. 66, 304

[4] Heller, E. and Tomsovic, S. (1993). Post-modern quantum mechanics. Physics Today

[5] Gutzwiller, M. C. (1990). “Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics,” Springer

46, 38.

Verlag, New York.

[6] Child, M. S. (1991). “Quasiclassical Mechanics with Molecular Applications,”

Clarendon Press, Oxford.

[7] Brack, M., and Bhaduri, R. K. (1997). “Quasiclassical Physics,” Frontiers in Physics

96, Addison-Wesley, Reading, USA.

[8] Smilansky, U. (1995). In: “Proc. 1994 Les Houches Summer School LXI on Meso-
scopic Quantum Physics,” (E. Akkermans, G. Montambaux, J. L. Pichard and
J.Zinn-Justin, Ed.) p. 373. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

[9] St¨ockmann, H. J. (1999) “Quantum Chaos – an Introduction,” Cambridge Univer-

sity Press.

Publications, New York.

[10] Strutt, J. W., and Baron Rayleigh (1945). “The Theory of Sound,” Vol.II. Dover

[11] Anderson, J. S., and Bratos-Anderson, M. (2000). Acoustic coupling eﬀects in St.

Paul’s Cathedral, London. J. Sound Vibr. 236, 209.

[12] Pipino, A. C. R. (1999). Ultrasensitive surface spectroscopy with a miniature optical

resonator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3093.

[13] Johnson, B. R. (1993). Theory of morphology-dependent resonances: shape reso-

nances and width formulas. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 10, 343.

[14] N¨ockel, J. U., and Stone, A. D., In “ Optical Processes in Microcavities”,

(R. K. Chang and A. J. Campillo, Eds.). World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

[15] Snyder, A. W., and Love, J. D. (1991). “Optical Waveguide Theory,”. Chapman

and Hall, London.

[16] Braun, I., et al. (2000). Hexagonal microlasers based on organic dyes in nanoporous

crystals. Appl. Phys. B 70, 335.

33

[17] Kerker, M. (1969). “The Scattering of Light and Other Electromagnetic Radiation,”

Academic Press, New York.

[18] v.d.Hulst, H. C. (1957). “Light scattering by small particles,” Wiley, New York.

[19] Nussenzveig, H. M. (1969). High-frequency scattering by a transparent sphere. I.

Direct reﬂection and transmission. J. Math. Phys. 10, 82

[20] Barber, P. W. and Hill, S. C. (1990). “Light Scattering by Particles: Computational

Methods,” World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

[21] Sandoghdar, V., et al. (1996). Very-low threshold whispering-gallery microsphere

laser. Phys. Rev. A 54, R1777.

[22] Vernooy,D. W., et al. (1998). Cavity QED with high-Q whispering-gallery modes.

Phys. Rev. A 57, R2293.

spheres. New J. Phys. 2, 1.

[23] Kuritzki, G., et al. (2000). Control of atomic-state decay in cavities and micro-

[24] Schmitt, C. G., and Arnott, W. P. (1999). Infrared emission (500-2000 cm−1) of

laboratory ice clouds. J. Quant. Spectr. Rad. Trans. 63, 701

[25] Fields, M., Popp, J., and Chang, R. K. (2001). In “Progress in Optics,” (E. Wolf,

Ed.), p.1. Elsevier Science Publishers.

[26] Yamamoto, Y., Slusher, R. E. (1993). Optical processes in microcavities. Physics

Today 46, No. 6, 66.

[27] Chang, S. S. et al., (1999). Stimulated emission and lasing in whispering-gallery

modes of GaN microdisk cavities. Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 166.

[28] N¨ockel, J. U. (2001). Optical feedback and the coupling problem in semiconductor

microdisk lasers. submitted to physica status solidi.

[29] Roll, G., and Schweiger, G. (1998). Resonance shift of obliquely illuminated dielec-

tric cylinders: geometric-optics estimates. Appl. Opt. 37, 5628.

[30] Poon, A. W., Chang, R. K., and Lock, J. A. (1998). Morphology-dependent reso-
nances in an optical ﬁber: eﬀects of ﬁber tilt and focused Gaussian beam illumina-
tion. Opt. Lett. 23, 1105.

[31] Artemyev, M. V., Woggon, U. and Wannemacher, R. (2001). Photons conﬁned in

hollow microspheres. Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 1032.

[32] Mazumder, M. M., Hill, S. C., and P. W. Barber (1992). Morphology-dependent res-
onances in inhomogeneous spheres – comparison of the layered T-matrix method and
the time-dependent perturbation method. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 9, 1844; Chowdhury,
D. Q., Hill, S. C., and Barber, P. W. (1991). Morphology-dependent resonances in
radially inhomogeneous spheres, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 8, 1702

34

[33] Chin, M. K., et al. (1999). GaAs microcavity channel-dropping ﬁlter based on a

race-track resonator. IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 11, 1620.

[34] Benson, T. M., and Kendall, P. C. (1995). In “Methods for Modeling and Simulation
of Guided-Wave Optoelectronic Devices: Part I, PIER 10,” (W. P. Huang, Ed.).
EMW Publishing, Cambridge

[35] Lee, K. M., Leung, P. T., and Pang, K. M. (1998). Iterative perturbation scheme
for morphology-dependent resonances in dielectric spheres. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 15,
1383.

[36] Fan, X. D., et al. (2000). Coupling semiconductor nanocrystals to a fused-silica mi-
crosphere: a quantum-dot microcavity with extremely high Q-factors. Opt. Lett. 25,
1600.

[37] Waalkens, H., Wiersig, J., and Dullin, H. R. (1997). Elliptic quantum billiard.

[38] Landau, L. D., and Lifshitz, E. M. (1979). “Quantenmechanik,” Akademie-Verlag

Ann. Phys. 260, 50

Berlin.

[39] Lazutkin, V. F. (1993). “KAM Theory and quasiclassical Approximations to Eigen-

functions,” Springer, New York.

[40] Blatt, J. M., and Weisskopf, V. F. (1952). “Theoretical Nuclear Physics,” Wiley,

New York.

[41] Xu, Y., Lee, R. K., and Yariv, A. (2000). Scattering-theory analysis of waveguide-

resonator coupling. Phys. Rev. E 62, 7389.

[42] Taylor, J. R., (1972). “Scattering Theory,” Wiley, New York.

[43] Eckhardt, B. (1988). Irregular scattering. Physica D 33, 89.

[44] Bl¨umel, R., and Smilansky, U. (1988). Classically irregular scattering and its quan-

tum mechanical implications. Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 477.

[45] Miller, W. H. (1975). In “Advances in Chemical Physics” 30, 77. (K. P. Lawley,

Ed.) Wiley, New York.

[46] Yeh, C. (1963). Diﬀraction of waves by a penetrable ribbon. J. Math. Phys. 4, 65.

[47] Lock, J. A., et al. (1998). Ampliﬁcation of high-order rainbows of a cylinder with

an elliptical cross section. Appl. Opt. 37, 1527.

[48] Bl¨umel, R., et al. (1996). Ray splitting and quantum chaos. Phys. Rev. A 53, 3284.

[49] Tr¨ankle, E., and Riikonen, M. (2000). Elliptical halos, Bottlinger’s rings, and the

ice-plate snow-star transition. Appl. Opt. 35, 4871.

35

[50] Jensen, J. H. (1993). Chaotic scattering of

light by a dielectric cylinder.

J. Opt.Soc. Am. A 10, 1204.

resonators. Nature 385, 45

[51] N¨ockel, J. U., and Stone, A. D. (1997). Chaotic light: a theory of asymmetric cavity

[52] Hentschel, M., and N¨ockel, J. U. (2001). The sequential-reﬂection model in deformed
dielectric cavities. to be published in Proceedings of the Colloquium of the Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.

[53] Lamb, W. E., Schleich, W. P., Scully, M. O., and Townes, C. H. (1999). Laser

physics: quantum controversy in action. Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, S263

[54] Vaynsteyn, V. A. 1969). “Theory of Open Resonators and open Waveguides,” Golem

Press, Boulder; especially chapter 64.

[55] Moiseyev, N. (1998). Quantum theory of resonances: calculating energies, widths

and cross-sections by complex scaling. Phys. Rep. 302, 211.

[56] Smith, F. (1960). Lifetime matrix in collision theory. Phys. Rev. 118, 349.

[57] Fyodorov, J., and Sommers, H.-J. (1997). Statistics of resonance poles, phase shifts
and time delays in quantum chaotic scattering: random matrix approach for systems
with broken time-reversal invariance. J. Math. Phys. 38, 1918

[58] Thirring, W. (1979). “ Quantum Mechanics of Atoms and Molecules” 3. Springer,

New York.

[59] Friedel, J. (1958). Metallic alloys. Nuovo Cim. Ser. 10 Suppl. 7,287.

[60] Krein, M. G. (1962). Perturbation determinants and formula for traces of unitary

self-adjoint operators. Sov. Math.-Dokl. 3, 707.

[61] Loyd, P. (1967). Wave propagation through an assembly of spheres. II The density

of single-particle eigenstates. Proc. Phys. Soc. 90, 207.

[62] Loyd, P., and Smith, P. V. (1972). Multiple scattering theory in condensed materi-

als. Adv. Phys. 21, 69.

4661.

[63] Faulkner, J. S. (1977). Scattering theory and cluster calculations. J. Phys. C 10,

[64] Gaspard, P. 1993). In Proc. of the International School of Phys. “Enrico Fermi”,
Course CXIX, Varena (G. Casati, I. Guarneri and U. Smilansky , Eds.). North
Holland, Amsterdam.

[65] Wirzba, A., and Henseler, M. (1998). A direct link between the quantum-mechanical
and semiclassical determination of scattering resonances. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.
31, 2155.

36

[66] Purcell, E.M. (1946). Spontaneous emission probabilities at radio frequencies.

Phys. Rev. 69, 681.

[67] Heinzen, D. J., et al. (1987). Enhanced and inhibited spontaneous emission by

atoms in a confocal resonator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1320.

[68] Meschede, D., (1992). Radiating atoms in conﬁned space – from spontaneous emis-

sion to microlasers. Phys. Rep. 211, 201.

[69] Matinaga, F. M., et al. (1993). Low-threshold operation of hemispherical microcav-

ity single-quantum-well lasers at 4 K. Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 443.

[70] Brorson, S. D., and Skovgaard, P. M. W. (1996). In “ Optical Processes in Micro-
cavities,” (R. K. Chang and A. J. Campillo, Eds.) World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

[71] Hulet, R. G., Hilfer, E. S., and Kleppner, D. (1985). Inhibited spontaneous emission

by a Rydberg atom. Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2137.

[72] Yablonovic, E. (1987). Inhibited spontaneous emission in solid-state physics and

electronics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059.

[73] Dittes, F.-M., Harney, H. L., and M¨uller, A. (1992). Non-exponential decay of a

one-channel system. Phys. Rev. A 45, 701.

[74] Wolf, J.-P., et al. (2001). Ballistic trajectories of optical wavepackets within micro-

cavities. submitted to Opt. Lett.

[75] M¨urtz, M., Frech, B., and Urban, W. (1999). High-resolution cavity leak-out ab-

sorption spectroscopy in the 10 µm region. Appl. Phys. B 68, 243.

[76] Zhang, J.-Z., Leach, D. H., and Chang, R. K. (1988). Photon lifetime within a
droplets – temporal determination of elastic and stimulated Raman scattering.
Opt. Lett. 13, 270.

[77] Friedrich, H. (1991). “Theoretical Atomic Physics,” Springer Verlag, Berlin.

[78] Haake, F. (1992). “Quantum Signatures of Chaos,” Springer, Berlin.

[79] Kohler, A., and Bl¨umel, R. (1998). Weyl-formulas for quantum ray-splitting bil-

liards. Ann. Phys. 267, 249.

[80] Balian, R., and Bloch, C. (1970). Distribution of eigenvalues for the wave equation
in a ﬁnite domain. I. Three-dimensional problem with smooth boundary surface.
Ann. Phys. 60, 401.

[81] Yariv, A. (1975). “Quantum Electronics,” John Wiley, New York.

[82] Weyl, H. (1968). “Gesammelte Abhandlungen,” Springer Verlag, Berlin.

37

[83] Kac, M. (1966). Can one hear the shape of a drum? Am. Math. Monthly 73, 1.

[84] Eckhardt, B. (1988). Quantum mechanics of classically non-integrable systems.

Phys. Rep. 163, 205.

[85] Laeri, F., and N¨ockel, J. U. (2001). In “Handbook of Advanced Electronic and

Photonic Materials” (H. S. Nalwa, Ed.) Academic Press, San Diego.

[86] Siegman, A. E., previous chapter in this volume

[87] Babiˇc, V. M., and Buldyrev, V. S. (1972). “Short-Wavelength Diﬀraction Theory,”

Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Ann. Phys. 9, 24.

[88] Keller, J. B., and Rubinow, S. I. (1960). Asymptotic solution of eigenvalue problems.

[89] Roll, G., and Schweiger, G. (2000). Geometrical optics model of Mie resonances.

J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 16, 882.

[90] N¨ockel, J. U., et al. (2000). Mode structure and ray dynamics of a parabolic-dome

microcavity. Phys. Rev. E 62, 8677.

[91] Richens, P. J., and Berry, M. V. (1981). Pseudointegrable systems in classical and

quantum mechanics. Physica 2D, 495.

[92] Einstein, A.

(1917). Zum Quantensatz

von Sommerfeld und Epstein.

[93] Arnol’d, V. I. (1989). “ Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, “ Springer,

[94] Zaslavsky, G. M. (1999). Chaotic dynamics and the origin of statistical laws. Physics

[95] Goldstein, H. (1980). “Classical Mechanics,” 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

[96] Mekis, A., et al. (1995). Ray chaos and Q-spoiling in lasing droplets. Phys. Rev. Lett.

75, 2682.

[97] Gmachl, C., et al. (1998). High power directional emission from lasers with chaotic

resonators. Science 280, 1556.

[98] Chang, S. S., N¨ockel, J. U., Chang, R. K., and Stone, A. D. (2000). Observation of
emission from chaotic lasing modes in deformed microspheres: displacement by the
stable orbit modes. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 17, 1828.

[99] Bartelt, H. O., Brenner, K.-H., and Lohmann, A. W. (1980). The Wigner distribu-

tion function and its optical production. Opt. Commun. 32, 32.

Verh. Deut. Phys. Ges.

New York.

Today 52 No. 8, 39.

38

[100] Walls, D. F., and Milburn, G. J. (1994). “Quantum Optics,” Springer, Berlin.

[101] Raymer, M. G., Beck, M., and McAlister, D. F. (1994). Complex wave-ﬁeld recon-

struction using phase-space tomography. Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1137.

[102] LeBoeuf, P., and Saraceno, M. (1990). Eigenfunctions of non-integrable systems

in generalized phase-spaces. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 23, 1745.

[103] Crespi, B., Perez, G., and Chang, S.-J. (1993). Quantum Poincar´e sections for

two-dimensional billiards. Phys. Rev. E 47, 986.

[104] Tualle, J.-M., and Voros, A. (1995). Normal modes of billiards portraied in the

stellar (or nodal) representation. Chaos, Solit. Fract. 5, 1085.

[105] Frischat, S. D., and Doron, E. (1997). Quantum phase-space structures in classi-
cally mixed systems: a scattering approach. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 30, 3613.

[106] Klakow, D., and Smilansky, U. (1996). Wave functions, expectation values and
scars on Poincar´e sections – a scattering approach. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29,
3213.

[107] Hackenbroich, G., and N¨ockel, J. U. (1997). Dynamical tunneling in optical cavi-

ties. Europhys. Lett. 39, 371.

[108] Bohigas, O., Tomsovic, S., and Ullmo, D. (1993). Manifestation of classical phase
space structures in quantum mechanics. Phys. Rep. 223, 43, and references therein.

[109] Heller, E. (1984). Bound-state eigenfunctions of classically chaotic Hamiltonian

systems: scars of periodic orbits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 1515.

[110] Schweizer, W., Jans, W., and Uzer, T. (1998). Optimal localization of wavepackets

on invariant structures. Phys. Rev. B. 58, 1382.

[111] Fukushima, T., et al., (1998). Beam-propagation behavior in a quasi-stadium laser

diode. Optics Express 2, No. 2, p.21.

[112] Tomsovic, S., and Heller, E. (1993). Quasiclassical construction of chaotic eigen-

states. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1405.

[113] Kaplan, L. (1999). Scar and antiscar quantum eﬀects in open quantum systems.

Phys. Rev. E 59, 5325.

Scripta T 90, 263.

[114] N¨ockel, J. U. (2001). Angular momentum localization in oval billiards. Physica

[115] Starykh, O. A., et al. (2000). Signature of dynamical localization in the resonance
width distribution of wave-chaotic dielectric cavities. Phys. Rev. E 62, 2078.

39

