4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Adaptive Dispersion Compensation for Remote Fiber Delivery of NIR
Femtosecond Pulses

S.H. Lee, A.L. Cavalieri∗, D.M. Fritz, M. Myaing∗ and D.A. Reis

FOCUS Center and Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA
∗FOCUS Center and Applied Physics Program,The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA
shl@umich.edu

Abstract

We report on remote delivery of 25 pJ broadband near-
infrared femtosecond light pulses from a Ti:sapphire
laser through 150 meters of single-mode optical ﬁber.
Pulse distortion due to dispersion is overcome with pre-
compensation using adaptive pulse shaping techniques,
while nonlinearities are mitigated using an SF10 rod for
the ﬁnal stage of pulse compression. Near transform
limited pulse duration of 130 fs is measured after the
ﬁnal compression.

Introduction

Delivery of ultrafast laser pulses over long distances has
important applications for accelerator diagnostics and
pump-probe experiments performed at future XFEL’s
and next generation light sources[1, 2, 3]. Due to me-
chanical constraints and stability concerns, transmis-
sion of light through an optical ﬁber is a ﬂexible alter-
native to free space propagation. However, large ma-
terial dispersion and nonlinear eﬀects inside the ﬁber
core introduce technical challenges. Sub-picosecond
pulse transmission has been achieved over lengths in
excess of a kilometer. These optical links operate at
telecommunication wavelengths near the zero disper-
sion point (1.55 um) of standard single mode ﬁber us-
ing specialty dispersion compensating ﬁber (DCF)[4]
Recently, Chang et al.[5] used a spatial light mod-
ulator (SLM) in addition to the DCF to correct for
higher order dispersion. For Ti:Sapphire lasers operat-
ing at 800 nm,the eﬀects of dispersion are much more
severe and no DCF is readily available. Nonlinear re-
sponse of the ﬁber ultimately limits the pulse energy
and duration for these techniques. In particular, self
phase modulation can lead to spectral compression for
negatively chirped pulses used in pre-compensation[6].
With proper dispersion compensation, the result of this
nonlinearity is at best a longer, albeit transform lim-
ited, pulse duration [7, 8]. Clark et. al.[9] demon-
strated group velocity dispersion compensated 100 fs,

0.5 nJ pulses at 800 nm upon propagation through ∼1
m of ﬁber using a combination of temporal and spec-
tral compression. Their technique is scalable to longer
distances with additional elements for the compensa-
tion of higher order dispersion but relies on the ﬁber
nonlinearity; consequently, it is sensitive to the char-
acteristics of the input pulse.

In this letter, we demonstrate a novel technique for
the transport of femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser pulses
through 150 meters of standard single mode polar-
ization preserving optical ﬁber using adaptive pulse
shaping. We pre-compensate for the large group ve-
locity and higher order dispersion of the ﬁber so the
ﬁber transport serves to compress the pre-chirped in-
put pulse. At 800 nm wavelength, material dispersion
of the fused-silica core is expected to be the dominant
source of dispersion[10]. Both group velocity dispersion
(GVD) and third order dispserion (TOD) are signiﬁ-
cant for long distance propagation (360 fs2/cm and 280
fs3/cm respectively). However, adaptive pulse shaping
makes precise a priori knowledge of the dispersion ir-
relevant in our system. Relatively high pulse energies
can be accommodated while maintaining linear pulse
propagation by avoiding full compression in the optical
ﬁber. Final pulse compression is performed external to
the ﬁber, where the intensities are low, using a high
dispersion glass rod.

In our experiment, sub-50 fs optical pulses are gener-
ated by a Kerr-lens mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser at a
central wavelength of 800 nm and a 102MHz repetition
rate. The transport system comprises a series of disper-
sive elements designed to achieve zero net dispersion at
the output(see Figure 1). The ﬁrst element is a 1200
line/mm grating pair in a parallel geometry[11]. The
grating pair provides the negative GVD to compensate
for the positive GVD (normal dispersion) imparted by
the combination of the ﬁber and SF10 rod (approxi-
mately −5.4 × 106 fs2, or 16 ps/nm) but introduces
TOD with the same sign and comparable magnitude
to the ﬁber. The second element is an arbitrary pulse
shaper that is used to correct for uncompensated dis-
persion (TOD and higher, as well as any residual GVD

from misalignment of the grating pair). The third el-
ement is 150 m of single mode polarization preserving
optical ﬁber[13], used for pulse delivery and the major-
ity of the compression. Finally, the 25 cm long SF10
glass rod at the exit of the ﬁber compresses the pulses
further completing the transport system. A ∼1.5%
transmission eﬃciency was obtained through the sys-
tem yielding a pulse energy of 25 pJ for a 1.5nJ pulse
input, limited primarily by the grating eﬃciencies and
non-optimal coupling into the ﬁber.

Fourier plane of a 4f stretcher, the transmitted tempo-
ral pulse shape is altered by applying phase shifts to the
individual Fourier components of the pulse. Figure 2
shows a cross-correlation of the transmitted pulse when
the pulse shaper is not active. The TOD introduced by
both the optical ﬁber and gratings is clearly signiﬁcant.
To compensate for residual dispersion in the transport
system, we use a genetic algorithm (GA)[12] to search
for the optimum voltage combination applied across
the mask The strength of using this search algorithm
is that it does not require any calculation of dispersion.
Instead, voltages across the pixels are stored in an array
known as an “individual”, and the initial population of
individuals is generated at random. Transmitted pulses
are frequency doubled in a BBO crystal. The second
harmonic eﬃciency generation is used as a feedback
paramter for the genetic algorithm, and based on this
ﬁtness factor, a set of individuals is selected and used
for the generation of a new population for evaluation.
The feedback is valid so long as the conversion eﬃ-
ciency in the BBO is proportional to the intensity, and
thus inversely proportional to the pulse duration. The
genetic algorithm proceeds until a plateau is reached
in the ﬁtness. A solution is normally found after 300
iterations (∼30 minutes).

Figure 1: Experimental Setup. A femtosecond laser
pulse is sent through a sequence of dispersion com-
pensation elements before entering150 meters of single
mode optical ﬁber.

The order of the dispersive elements in our trans-
port system are critical since ultrafast pulses easily
reach intensities where contributions from nonlinear
phenomena become signiﬁcant, due to the small core
diameter of the ﬁber optic (5um)[10]. Nonlinear ef-
fects in the ﬁber transport are minimized by placing
the GVD compensation and the adaptive pulse shap-
ing scheme before the ﬁber input to pre-stretch the
pulse. Here, the peak laser intensity is at its lowest
value, but, increases as the material dispersion of the
ﬁber re-compresses the optical pulse. The pulses exit
the ﬁber slightly chirped (∼ 0.1 ps/nm) to keep the
peak intensity <∼ 1GW/cm2; the ﬁnal compression is
performed in the SF10 after the transverse beam size
is expanded to 5mm. An additional advantage of this
pre-compensation scheme is that spatial chirp, intro-
duced by the pulse shaping, is ﬁltered by the ﬁber.

The pulse shaper contains a liquid crystal mask spa-
tial light modulator (SLM) consisting of rectangular
pixels whose indices of refraction depend on the voltage
applied across them. Since the SLM is located in the

Figure 2: Cross-correlation between input pulse and
output pulse from the optical ﬁber after the group ve-
locity dispersion compensation. FWHM is limited to
600fs and eﬀect of third order dispersion is evident.

Figure 3 shows autocorrelation traces of the the
pulses transmitted through the ﬁber and SF10 before
and after running the GA. After the GA, the pulses
have been compressed to 130 fs assuming a near Gaus-
sian proﬁle. This result corresponds to better than 1.4
times the diﬀraction limit for a Gaussian pulse at a
bandwidth of 10 nm. Further compression of the out-
put pulse is hindered by the limited bandwidth cou-
pled into the ﬁber (see Figure 4). Currently the band-

width is limited by clipping at the input of the ﬁber.
We estimate that sub-100fs pulses should be achiev-
able with the current system. Past this limit, as the
bandwidth is increased linearly to support a shorter
pulse, the resolution of the SLM must be increased cu-
bically. This occurs since the pulse shaper compensates
primarily for 3rd order dispersion in the transport sys-
tem. The need for increased resolution in the SLM can
be avoided by using a ﬁxed phase mask, so that the
adaptive pulse shaping makes only small corrections to
the pulse shape. With these improvements sub-50 fs,
nJ scale pulse delivery should be possible. The system
has been successfully put to use at the Subpicosecond
Pulse Source (SPPS) experiment at the Stanford Lin-
ear Accelerator Center where it is used for a relative
timing diagnostic for ultrafast x-ray diﬀraction exper-
iments [14].

Figure 4: Spectrum of the output pulse. Spatial chirp
from mirrors and grating pair is cleaned out by the
ﬁber.

[2] I. Wilke, A. M. MacLeod, W. A. Gillespie, G.
Berden, G. M. H. Knippels, and A. F. G. van der
Meer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 124801 (2002)

[3] LCLS Conceptual Design Rebort, SLAC-R-593,

2002.

[4] M. D. Pelusi, X. Wang, F. Futami, K. Kikuchi,
and A. Susuki, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 12,
795 (2000)

[5] C.-.C Chang, H. P. Sardesai, and A. M. Weiner,

Opt. Lett. 23, 283 (1998)

[6] S. A. Planas, N. L. Pires Mansur, C. H. Brito
Cruz, H. L. Fragnito, Opt. Lett 18, 699 (1993).

[7] B. R. Washburn, J. A. Buck, and S. E. Ralph,

Opt. Lett. 25, 445 (2000).

[8] M. T. Myaing, J. Urayama, A. Braun and T. B.

Norris, Optics Expresss, 7, 210 (2000).

[9] S. W. Clark, F. Ilday, F. Wise, Opt. Lett. 26, 1320

Figure 3: Auto-correlation of output pulse from the
ﬁber delivery system. With SLM on, FWHM is re-
duced to 130 fs.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank B. Pearson, M. DeCamp, and P.
Bucksbaum for valuable discussions and the SPPS col-
laboration for use of the laser oscillator. This research
was supported in part by the US Department of En-
ergy, under contract no. DE-FG02-99ER45643 and the
National Science Foundation, FOCUS Physics Frontier
Center under grant no. 011436.

(2001)

(1969).

[10] G. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Academic

Press, San Diego, 2001.

[11] E. B. Treacy, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 5, 454

References

[1] P. Emma,K. Bane, M. Cornacchia, Z. Huang, H.
Schlarb, G. Stupakov, and D. Walz Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 074810 (2004).

[12] T. Baumert, T. Brixner, V. Seyfried, M. Strehle,
and G. Gerber, Appl. Phys. B 65, 779 (1997)

[13] 3M FS-PM-4616, 5.3 µm core.

[14] A. Cavalieri, et al., in preparation.

