4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spatial and polarization structure in
micro-dome resonators: eﬀects of a
Bragg mirror

David H. Foster and Jens U. N¨ockel
Oregon Center for Optics,

1274 University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR 97403-1274
http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~noeckel

Published in Laser Resonators and Beam Contol VII, edited
by Alexis V. Kudryashov and Alan H. Paxton, Proceedings of
SPIE 5333, 195-203 (2004)

Micro-domes based on a combination of metallic and dielectric multilayer
mirrors are studied using a fully vectorial numerical basis-expansion method
that accurately accounts for the eﬀects of an arbitrary Bragg stack and can
eﬃciently cover a large range of dome shapes and sizes. Results are examined
from three diﬀerent viewpoints: (i) the ray-optics limit, (ii) the (semi-) con-
focal limit for which exact wave solutions are known, and (iii) the paraxial
approximation using vectorial Gaussian beams.

1 Introduction

Microresonators based on planar distributed Bragg reﬂectors (DBR) are ubiquitous be-
cause they aﬀord great design ﬂexibility, e.g., tailored stopbands of ultrahigh reﬂectivity,
and at the same their fabrication is well-developed in many material systems. In many
applications, however, control over transverse mode proﬁles and sidemodes is improved
when non-planar structures are used. Stable, dome-shaped cavities have been employed
with InGaAs quantum-well lasers [1], and as passive ﬁlter cavites [2]. Such cavities are
expected to be of great promise for semiconductor-based quantum optics [3], because

1

strong focusing and large modulation of the local density of states can be achieved
[4]. Because dome shaped DBR structures are technologically challenging, combinations
of ﬂat DBR stacks and curved metal mirrors have been considered as a compromise
solution[4]. Planar metal layers have recently proven useful as top mirrors in thin-ﬁlm
organic lasers [5], and novel fabrication schemes [6] are likely to make curved metal mir-
rors a building block in microcavity design. In this paper, we address dome cavities in
which metal mirrors and Bragg stacks are combined.

Computationally, such cavities are nontrivial even when the medium is linear, because
they combine an unconventional three-dimensional shape with boundary conditions that
diﬀer at the top and bottom of the structure. Realistic Bragg mirrors of ﬁnite depth
may also permit signiﬁcant leakage, which has to be modeled accurately in order to
determine the coupling properties of the resonator. We have performed fully vectorial
electromagnetic simulations of axially symmetric cavities formed by a curved metallic
dome on a stratiﬁed Bragg stack. The composition of the stack mirror and the shape
of the metal dome have been varied in a wide range of parameters, and the capabilities
of the numerical methods have been tested up to cavity lengths of 50λ, where λ is the
wavelength in the dielectric comprising the bulk of the dome.

2 Cavity geometry

The cavity geometry is shown in Fig. 1. It is useful to deﬁne a cylindrical coordinate
system (ρ, φ, z) with z being the symmetry axis. The height h of the dome above the
Bragg mirror, and its (not necessecarily constant) radius of curvature, R, determine
the type of modes the cavity can support. For deﬁniteness, in this work the bulk of
the dome and the space outside of the structure have refractive index n0 = 1. In the
numerical results shown below, we will adjust the the Bragg stack design such that its
stop band is centered at the modes of interest. The DBR layer structure begins with
a spacer layer of optical thickness λs and refractive index 3.5, followed by Ns = 20
quarter-wave layer pairs AB of refractive index nA = 3.0, nB = 3.5. Our main goal is to
demonstrate the importance of the polarization-dependent phase shifts induced by this
mirror in determining the resonator modes. Therefore, we also performed comparative
calculations with the Bragg stack replaced by a conducting surface. In accordance with
this main goal of the present study, absorption in the metal surfaces was neglected.
Below, the curved mirror will be taken to be a spherical shell of constant R. However,
we have also carried out calculations for domes in the shape of a rotational paraboloid,
to compare with earlier calculations based on a separation of variables that is possible
for that system [4] when only scalar ﬁelds are considered. At size parameters between
kR = 26 . . . 31, and using only metal mirrors, all modes agreed in their spectral positions
to better than ﬁve decimal places, despite the very diﬀerent computational approach used
in the present work.

2

Figure 1: Geometry of the dome resonator with a Bragg mirror at its base. The dome
h
mirror is taken to be a spherical shell of radius R, centered at a depth R
below the planar mirror surface. The bulk of the dome, and the substrate have
refractive index n0.

−

3 Vector ﬁelds in the dome resonator

ıωt]) electric ﬁelds
We are looking for the divergence-free, monochromatic (
satisfying the vectorial wave equation. Using the axial symmetry, the ﬁeld components
Eρ, Eφ and Ez can be assumed to have a φ-dependence of the form exp(imφ). For ﬁxed
azimuthal mode number m, the electric ﬁeld transverse to the z axis, ET = Eρ ˆρ + Eφ ˆφ,
can be decomposed into circularly polarized components using

exp[

−

∝

Eρ =

(E+ −

E−)

Eφ =

(E+ + E−)

ı
√2
1
√2

where

With this, one has

ρ2

2 + k2

E± = (1

2m)E±

∇
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

±

ET =

(Eρ + ıEφ)

eıφ

1
2

1
ı (cid:19)

−

+

1
2

(cid:18)

(Eρ −

ıEφ)

e−ıφ

1
ı (cid:19)

(cid:18)

∝ exp(ımφ)
{z

|

}

∝ exp(ımφ)
{z

|

}

The standard conducting-mirror boundary conditions on the curved dome (Ek = 0,
H⊥ = 0), together with the planar mirror at the base of the dome, generally couple Eρ,
Eφ and Ez. All modes can be labeled by m, and the substitution m
= 0)
leads to a degenerate mode. In presenting results later on, there is no loss of generality
if m

0 is assumed.

m (for m

→ −

As was found in [4], focusing on the z axis is most pronounced for the states of the
cavity in which either the magnetic or the electric ﬁeld is polarized exlusively in the
azimuthal direction ˆφ. If B

ˆφ, then E has components only along ˆz and ˆρ.

≥

∝

(1)

(2)

3

6
4 All-metal cavity

In a recent free-space beam experiment [7], extremely strong focusing was indeed ob-
served with light having this type of polarization; the beam was called “radially polar-
ized”, but a signiﬁcant contribution to the focused spot actually comes from Ez. The
analogue of this for our dome cavity is illustrated in Fig. 2, assuming the ﬂat mirror to
be a conductor 1. In the hemispherical limit, this mode evolves smoothly into an even
more strongly focused electric multipole with m = 0 and l = 1.

Figure 2: Grayscale plots of the E-ﬁeld components (a) Ex and (b) Ez for a “radially
polarized” mode at λ = 867nm in a conducting dome with h = 9.95 µm,
R = 10 µm. Tight focusing is apparent, especially in Ez. Here and in the
following vertical cross-sections, the ﬁeld is plotted in the xz plane. The
projection of the electric polarization in a transverse (xy) plane at height
z = 0.25 µm above the planar metal mirror are shown in (c).

In the generic cavity with h < R, any given mode will have admixtures of many
multipoles with diﬀerent l, both of electric and magnetic type. The azimuthal mode
number m is a ﬁxed parameter in the calculation. To obtain Fig. 2, the coeﬃcients y
of this basis expansion are determined from a linear system of equations set up by the
boundary conditions. The number of unknowns is determined by the number of diﬀerent
l = lmin . . . lmaxin the expansion. Here, lmin = max(1,
), and an approximate cutoﬀ
lmax is given by the semiclassical limit kn0ρmax where ρmax is the maximum radial extent
of the dome. Since we are interested in cavity modes, there is no incoming wave outside
1In all wave plots that are shown, we set ωt = π/2 or 0 and take the real parts of the electric ﬁelds.

m
|

|

4

the dome, and the resulting system of equations is initially homogeneous. Our method
proceeds by adding a further “seed” equation that sets a certain linear combinations of
unknowns equal to one [8], thus converting the problem into an inhomogeneous matrix
= 0 because of the seed
equation Ay = b where the matrix A depends on k, and b
condition. The boundary conditions are enforced by point matching (real-space points
on the curved mirror, and k-space points for the planar mirror), and the wavenumbers
2 as a function of
of the cavity modes are found by minimizing the residual
k. Details of the numerical method are presented in [9]. Before discussing the additonal
complications posed by a dielectric stack mirror, we use the all-metal cavity to further
investigate the eﬀect of the dome-shaped mirror.

b
|

Ay

p

−

|

5 Relation to ray dynamics and confocal limit

A global picture of the possible cavity modes can be obtained from geometric optics.
Mirror conﬁgurations with h < R are called stable because they support modes cen-
tered on stable axial rays, while h = R creates a confocal geometry if one unfolds the
cavity about the planar mirror [4] (one might alternatively refer to h = R as the “semi-
confocal” condition, but ray-optically there is no diﬀerence to a symmetric, confocal
mirror arrangement). This marginally stable limiting case features highly focused but
non-paraxial modes. Non-paraxial ray orbits that can support cavity modes are also
found for h < R, and an eﬃcient tool to reveal all the coexisting types of stable mode
patterns is the Poincar´e surface of section[4].

The axial symmetry of the cavity implies that any given ray trajectory r(s), where s
is the path length, can be parametrized by an equation of the form r
dr/ds = L with
a vector L that changes upon reﬂection at the boundaries but whose component Lz is
a constant of the motion (the skewness of the rays). Thus Lzlabels families of rays, and
fundamental Gaussian-beam type modes are built on rays with Lz ≈
0. However, even
when Lz is ﬁxed, stable periodic ray orbits with a multitude of diﬀerent topologies will
generally be found.

×

Regarding the internal ray dynamics, the dome cavity is thus closely related to axially
symmetric spheroidal resonators, such as droplets and microspheres [10], for which the
confocal limit corresponds to perfect sphericity. This analogy extends to the occurence
of whispering-gallery type patterns and their non-perturbative breakup under shape
distortion, which has recenty been observed in fused-silica microspheres [11]. As an
illustration of this phenomenology in a dome cavity, Fig. 3 shows a cavity with h = 9 µm,
R = 10 µm. The rectangular ray pattern in (a) for Lz = 0 can be thought of as a
stabilized periodic whispering-gallery trajectory.

A corresponding solution of the vectorial wave equation is shown in Fig. 3 (b), in-
dicating that the potential for strongly focused modes in near-confocal cavities comes
at the price of an increased variety of oﬀ-axis modes which need to be characterized in
order to choose the optimal design. It is conceivable that such new mode patterns are
in fact desirable for certain applications. In order to take advantage of this new variety
of modes, it will be important to combine 3D cavity shape design with suitably tailored

5

6
Figure 3: (a) ray pattern (b) y-component of the electric ﬁeld (grayscale), plotted in a

meridional cross section along the xz plane. Axis labels are in microns.

Bragg mirrors that discriminate against the unwanted type of modes. For paraboloidal
domes, some initial exploration of this aspect has been performed[4], in particular ap-
plying ray-optic phase space analysis to the problem of angle-dependent Bragg mirror
transmission.

6 Relation to the paraxial approximation

However in the remainder of this paper, we turn our attention to the more conventional
modes centered on the z axis. These can be understood in terms of Gaussian beams
when the paraxial parameter p
1, where zR = πw0 is the the Rayleigh range
and w0 is the beam waist radius [12]. An expression for the transverse ﬁeld at a ﬁxed
m in terms of the vector Laguerre-Gaussian basis can be written in analogy to (2),

λ/zR ≪

≡

ET = A

LGm+1

N (r) + B

LGm−1

N (r)

(3)

1
ı (cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

1
ı (cid:19)

(cid:18)

|

|

±

+ 1,

m
|

Here, A and B are amplitude coeﬃcients, the scalar Laguerre-Gauss functions LGm±1
have a φ dependence exp(ı(m
1)φ), and N is the order of the Laguerre-Gauss beam,
+ 3, . . .. This deﬁniton is related to a convenient normalized expression
m
N =
|
k,l available in the literature [13] by LGµ
uLG
1 for
ﬁxed m). The special choice N =
= 0; in this case,
admissible solutions must have A = 0 if m > 0, or B = 0 if m < 0, so that ET has
circular polarization. As a consequence, free-space LG solutions at given m with order
N =
1 are nondegenerate. For all other orders N (and any m), the two terms in
(3) are degenerate free-space solutions in the paraxial approximation, and will remain
nearly degenerate in a paraxial cavity. The polarization properties of the mode are ﬁxed
by the way in which the boundary conditions split this doublet (for m

uLG
(N −µ)/2,(N +µ)/2 (we have µ = m

1 is also possible, provided m

= 0).

N ≡

| −

| −

m

m

±

N

|

|

The fundamental Gaussian modes of the dome can be obtained by setting m = 1, N =
0 and A = 0. The spatial dependence is then ET ∝
0, which is also called a TEM00
mode. Figures 4 (a) and (b) show how the resemblance to this Gaussian mode emerges
starting from the hemispherical limit.

LG0

6

6
6
Raising N in increments of 2 makes higher transverse excitations of the Gaussian mode
accessible. This is again borne out by the numerical vectorial solutions, as shown for
m = 1 in Fig. 4 (c) and (d). These modes are well described by (3) with N =
+1 = 2
and either A = 0 (c) or B = 0 (d). Note that the all-metallic boundary conditions have
uniquely ﬁxed the polarization of the modes in Fig. 4 to be circular, i.e. only one of the
terms in (3) is present in all cases shown up to this point, and the degeneracy in λ is
lifted by a small but ﬁnite amount.

m
|

|

Figure 4: Some modes of the all-metal cavity with azimuthal order m = 1: ﬁxing R =
10 µm, a mode of type TEM00 narrows as h decreases from (a) h = 9.9992
(λ = 889.02 nm) to (b) h = 9.9000 (λ = 881.30 nm). Compare to the analogous
results with a Bragg stack in Fig. 5. Shown in (c) is a paraxial mode of type
LG0
2 at h = 10.5 µm, R = 70 µm and λ = 796.060nm. (d) shows its near-
degenerate partner LG2
2 at λ = 796.055nm. See Fig. 6 for the transverse
polarization patterns corresponding to (c) and (d).

7 Combining metal dome and Bragg mirror

The previous results raise the question if all cavity modes of the axially symmetric dome
necessarily factor into a unique polarization vector multiplied by a spatial wave function,
thus making the wave problem essentially scalar. We will demonstrate below that this
is not the case when a Bragg stack replaces the planar metal mirror at the base of the
dome. To this end we ﬁrst discuss the necessary extension of the numerical method
based on the basis expansion of Section 4, allowing us to treat the combined problem of
metal dome and dielectric mirror without approximations.

The complex reﬂection amplitude of an arbitrary planar Bragg grating is calculated
with the transfer matrix method [14] and can be written in the plane-wave basis as a
function of polarization, wavelength and angle of incidence, rs,p(k, θ). Here, subscripts s

7

and p distinguish between polarization perpendicular and in the plane of incidence. Be-
cause of this simplicity, one may decide to solve the whole dome problem in a discretized
plane wave basis, which after symmetrization according to the axial rotation invariance
leads to expansions of all vector ﬁeld components in Bessel beams. Their (scalar) form
in the dome region is

ψBessel(ρ, φ, z; θ) = 2πım exp(ımφ) exp(ın0kz cos θ) Jm(ρn0k sin θ),

(4)

where θ is a parameter that speciﬁes the cone of plane waves from which this beam is
constructed.

However, the approach we follow in this paper is to combine Bessel waves and mul-
tipoles. We use the ψBessel to describe the DBR mirror, because reﬂection amplitudes
for a Bessel beam of given θ are identical to those of a plane wave at that same incident
angle, rs,p(θ). But we retain multipoles as the basis in which to specify the dome bound-
ary conditions, because these basis functions evolve into the true cavity modes in the
limiting case of the all-metal hemisphere. We discuss elsewhere [9] the relative merits of
this approach compared to the procedurally more direct method of using a single basis
for the entire domain. Our two-basis method makes it necessary to (i) discretize the
cone angles θ used in the expansions, and (ii) to implement a transformation between
multipoles and plane waves so that we eﬀectively obtain a formulation of the Bragg
reﬂection in the multipole basis.

With these modiﬁcations, the solution algorithm is the same as described for the all-
metal cavity in Section 4. An important additional piece of information that enters for
the Bragg-bounded dome is the Q-factor of the modes: if the Bragg reﬂectivities rs,p(θ)
are not of modulus one, there is leakage loss which makes the modes metastable; to ﬁnd
these modes, their wavenumbers k are now allowed to be complex [15]. In the following
we consider only modes calculated to have Q > 104, but omit a more detailed discussion
of the Q-factors because that will require addressing the competing absorption losses in
the curved metal mirror as well.

Figure 5 lists a set of results analogous to the ones shown in Fig. 4, but now including
the eﬀect of the Bragg mirror. There is no signiﬁcant distinction between the two systems
from a purely ray-optic point of view, and the modes in parts (a,b) of Figures 4 and
5 were obtained in the same way, by adiabatically following a fundamental Gaussian
mode from small to large h. Nevertheless, the near-hemispherical mode of Fig. 5 (a)
exhibits a V-shaped distribution in Ey which is absent for all-metal mirrors. We have
found the same behavior in cavities as large as R = 40 µm, h = 39.7 µm. The mode is
predominantly s-polarized, and its formation can be interpreted as a consequence of the
fact that the Bragg reﬂectivity rs(θ) has a phase that depends on angle of incidence; in
this sense, this phenomenon is induced by the Bragg stack, but arises essentially as a
scalar wave eﬀect [9].

The vector nature of the electromagnetic ﬁeld enters in a more intricate way if we
compare the modes shown in Fig. 5 (c), (d) to the corresponding ones in Fig. 4 (c), (d).
For this cavity shape, all modes shown are well approximated by Eq. (3) with m = 1
and N = 2. However, whereas A = 0 or B = 0 in Fig. 4, we now ﬁnd A, B
= 0 in

8

6
Figure 5: Modes with m = 1 in the cavity bounded by metal dome and dielectric Bragg
stack. The cross sections in (a) and (b) were obtained with R = 10 µm for
modes at dome heights (a) h = 9.782 µm and (b) h = 9.544 µm. The calculated
wavelengths and Q-factors are (a) λ = 812.394nm, and (b) λ = 796.328nm.
A striking diﬀerence between (a) and the comparable metallic-mirror mode
in Fig. 4 (a) is the V-shaped spatial pattern; this disappears at the slightly
more paraxial h in (b). (c) and (d) show Gauss-Hermite like modes for the
same cavity shape as in Fig. 4 (c), (d). The modes form a doublet at (c)
λ = 811.063nm and (d) λ = 811.068nm.

both members of the doublet. Since the spatial dependence of LG0
2 is diﬀerent,
polarization and orbital part of the wave are entangled in the sense that it is impossible
to factor out a uniform polarization vector.

2 and LG2

The diﬀerence between the side views in Fig. 5 (c), (d) and Fig. 4 (c), (d) is due
to the fact that the spatial mode proﬁles in the dome with Bragg stack more closely
resemble Hermite-Gauss beams[13], uHG
µ,ν . This can be reconciled with Eq. (3) by noting
that both LG2

2 have projections onto uHG

0,2 and uHG
2,0 .

2and LG0

However, a transverse cross section of the mode ﬁeld reveals the entanglement of
polarization and spatial structure in these modes, which is not obvious from the side
views alone. In Fig. 6, we compare the paraxial modes from Figs. 5 and 4 with respect
to the instantaneous projections of the mode ﬁeld into a horizontal plane. Because Eq.
(3) is approximately valid, one can in fact construct [9] both (c) and (d) by appropriately
superimposing the circularly polarized ﬁelds (a) and (b). Neglecting the z components
of the electric ﬁeld, the resulting modes in Fig. 6 (c) and (d) are close to circular
polarization near the z axis, but generally exhibit varying polarization over the cross
section. The vortex pair bracketing a central high-ﬁeld region in Fig. 6 (c) corresponds
to a ring of radial (linear) polarization when the time dependence of the wave is taken
into account.

It is remarkable in the Bragg-mirror dome that the particular transverse polarization

9

Figure 6: Transverse polarization cross sections. (a) and (b) correspond to the modes
in Fig. 4 (c), (d); the section is taken at height z = 0.25 µm and is cropped
to contain only the regions of signiﬁcant ﬁeld strength. To see that this repre-
sents circular polarization, imagine the pattern rotating rigidly, and track the
resulting arrow direction at any ﬁxed point. Similarly, (c) and (d) correspond
to the modes in Fig. 5 (c), (d), but plotted at z = 0.05 µm to intersect the
domains of strongest ﬁeld.

patterns in Fig. 6 (c), (d) are in fact robust over a large range of cavity shapes h and
also quite insensitive to the spectral location of the mode within the stop band of the
Bragg mirror.

The Laguerre-Gauss modes responsible for the persistent mixing with polarization
structure given by Fig. 6 (c), (d) have order N = 2. For completeness, we verify that
the other remaining mode of order 2, which has m = 3, does not undergo the same
qualitative transition when changing from metal to Bragg mirror. The reason is that in
this case N =
1 and thus there is no doublet from which superpositions can be
formed. The circularly polarized singlet modes of the paraxial dome remain circularly
polarized independently of the nature of the planar mirror. This is shown in Fig. 7.

| −

m

|

10

Figure 7: Transverse polarization cross sections at height z = 0.25 µm for a mode cor-
responding to m = 3, N = 2. This is a circularly polarized singlet state
because N =
1. Consequently, the polarization patterns with metal mir-
ror (a) at λ = 796.091nm and Bragg stack (b) at λ = 811.086 are practically
indistinuishable. Insets show the corresponding proﬁle of Ex in the yz plane.

| −

m

|

8 Conclusion

There exists a great wealth of other stable but non-paraxial modes in the dome cavity
with h < R, which can be classiﬁed with the help of ray-based methods as exempliﬁed by
Fig. 2. The exact numerical calculations demonstrated in the present work are relevant
to such quasiclassical studies because we are able to treat realistic cavities whose size is
large in relation to λ. Future work in this direction will in particular have to address
complex boundary conditions as they arise when diﬀerent types of mirrors make up the
3D cavity. In our case, a combination of conducting surface and dielectric multilayers is
considered.

The vectorial nature of the cavity ﬁelds is essential in this system. Fully vectorial
mode calculations of the type performed here indicate that one of the eﬀects induced by
a Bragg-stack is the persistent mixing of doublets illustrated in Fig. 6. The nonuniform
polarization patterns can be further analyzed, in particular regarding the locations of
their singularities: in the near-paraxial situation, we pointed out the occurence of linear
polarization on rings surrounding the circularly polarized beam axis. These considera-
tions are of signiﬁcance in particular when the coupling between cavity ﬁeld and dipole
emitters at the base of the dome is considered [4].

Although we presented only results for dome mirrors in the form of a conducting
spherical shell, other shapes such as paraboloids can be treated. By making contact with
various limiting cases in this paper, the general numerical techniques have been validated.
A more detailed discussion of the numerical methods and their implementation can be
found in a forthcoming publication[9].

11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by NSF Grant ECS-02-39332.

References

[1] F. M. Matinaga, A. Karlsson, S. Machida, Y. Yamamoto, T. Suzuki, Y. Kadota, and
M. lkeda, “Low-threshold operation of emispherical microcavity single-quantum-
well lasers at 4 k,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, pp. 443–445, 1993.

[2] M. Aziz, J. Pfeiﬀer, and P. Meissner, “Modal behaviour of passive, stable micro-

cavities,” Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 188, pp. 979–982, 2001.

[3] T. M.Stace, G. J. Milburn, and C. H. W. Barnes, “Entangled two-photon source
using biexciton emission of an asymmetric quantum dot in a cavity,” Phys. Rev. B
67, p. 085317, 2003.

[4] J. U. N¨ockel, G. Bourdon, E. L. Ru, R. Adams, J.-M. M. I. Robert, and I. Abram,
“Mode structure and ray dynamics of a parabolic dome microcavity,” Phys. Rev. E
62, pp. 8677–8699, 2000.

[5] V. Bulovic, V. G. Kozlov, V. B. Khalﬁn, and S. R. Forrest, “Transform-limited,
narrow-linewidth lasing action in organic semiconductor microcavities,” Science
279, pp. 553–555, 1998.

[6] S. Coyle, G. V. Prakash, J. J. Baumberg, M. Abdelsalem, and P. N. Bartlett,
“Spherical micromirrors from templated self-assembly: Polarization rotation on the
micron scale,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, pp. 767–769, 2003.

[7] R. Dorn, S. Quabis, and G. Leuchs, “Smaller, sharper focus for a radially polarized

light beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, p. 233901, 2003.

[8] J. U. N¨ockel, PhD thesis, Yale University, 1997.

[9] D. H. Foster and J. U. N¨ockel, “Methods for 3-d vector microcavity problems in-

volving a planar dielectric mirror,” Opt. Commun. 234, pp. 351–383, 2004.

[10] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone, and R. K. Chang, “Ray chaos and

q-spoiling in lasing droplets,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, pp. 2682–2685, 1995.

[11] S. Lacey, H. Wang, D. Foster, and J. N¨ockel, “Directional tunnel escape from nearly

spherical optical resonators,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, p. 033902, 2003.

[12] A. E. Siegman, Lasers, University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 1986.

[13] M. W. Beijersbergen, L. Allen, H. E. L. O. van der Veen, and J. P. Woerdman,
“Astigmatic laser mode converters and transfer of orbital angular momentum,”
Opt. Commun. 96, pp. 123–132, 1993.

12

[14] P. Yeh, Optical waves in layered media, Wiley, New York, 1988.

[15] J. U. N¨ockel and R. K. Chang, “2-d microcavities: Theory and experiments,” in
Cavity-Enhanced Spectroscopies, R. D. van Zee and J. P. Looney, eds., Experimental
Methods in the Physical Sciences 40, pp. 185–226, Academic Press, San Diego, 2002.

13

