4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Femtosecond laser as a tool for experimental study
of inequality of forward and reversed processes in optics.

V.A.Kuz’menko1

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

Abstract

The classical pump-probe scheme for experiments with femtosecond
laser is proposed to use for study the inequality of forward and reversed
transitions in optics.

PACS number: 33.80.Rv, 42.50.Hz

Rather usual situation in nonlinear optics is a case, when the mathematical
description of phenomenon is not accompanied by corresponding clear explana-
tion of physical nature of this phenomenon. The most signiﬁcant example is the
eﬀect of adiabatic population transfer in a two level system after sweeping of
resonance conditions. The mathematical model of rotating wave approximation
gives excellent description of phenomenon, but it physical explanation is absent
[1,2].

Similar situation exists in the ﬁeld of rotational coherence spectroscopy [3].
Corresponding mathematical model well describes the temporal characteristics
and the shape of observed rotational transients (revivals) [4]. As a physical
explanation of the nature of transients the concept of quantum interference of
coherent states is usually used [3]. However, the opinion exists that the concept
of coherent states has not reliable physical base [5-7]. Good alternative here is
the concept of inequality of forward and reversed processes in optics [8]. Now we
have not only indirect evidences, but also the quite direct experimental proofs
of such inequality [9-11].

The experiments show that the reversed process can have extremely high
eﬃciency. For optical transitions it corresponds to very high cross-section of
reversed transition into the initial state. However, the integral cross-sections
of forward and reversed transitions (Einstein’s coeﬃcients) should be equal.
Some indirect evidences allow to suppose the following shape of orientation de-
pendence of cross-section for reversed transition: extremely high cross-section
for transition into the initial state and relatively small cross-section for other
orientation of molecules in space (Fig.1). In this case the explanation of phys-
ical origin of rotational coherence and population transfer eﬀects become quite
simple and clear.

The main way for experimental study of transition cross-section dependence
from orientation of molecule relative to the direction of laser beam is quite clear:
we can use a sequential optical transitions [12]. The radiation of the ﬁrst laser

1Electronic address: kuzmenko@triniti.ru

1

selects the molecules from isotropic distribution, the second laser beam deals
with the aligned molecules and the third laser beam will deals with the oriented
molecules. However, any complete and extensive experimental works of such
kind are absent in literature.

Some negative role here, obviously, plays the concept of so-called pendular
states [12]. It is supposed, that intense laser radiation can break a free rotation of
molecules and align it about the laser polarization axis. Extensive experimental
works in this ﬁeld, however, can not give any reliable proofs, that this eﬀect
really exists [12]. The alternative explanation of the experimental results, which
includes the concept of inequality of forward and reversed transitions, is quite
possible [13].

Pump-probe experiments with femtosecond laser may be used for study the
orientation spectra of both forward and reversed transitions. Large number of
pump-probe experiments in the ﬁeld of rotational coherence spectroscopy are
described in literature. But in most cases the energy of the probe pulse is equal
to the energy of the pump pulse [4,14,15] or even exceeds it [16]. The scientists
usually take an interest in temporal characteristics and in shape of revivals.

The main purpose of this note is to propose to use for experimental study
of cross-sections of forward and reversed transitions the classical pump-probe
scheme, when the energy of probe pulse is much smaller, than the energy of
pump pulse. In this case the radiation of probe pulse does not change substan-
tially the distribution of molecules after the pump pulse and does not make
diﬃculties for interpretation of experimental results. Measured amplitude of
transients contains information about the cross-section of forward and reversed
transitions.

Two diﬀerent proposed experimental schemes are presented in Fig.2. In the
ﬁrst case (Fig.2a, where the excited state takes part) the dependence of integral
ﬂuorescence intensity of molecules is studied from the delay time between pump
and probe pulses. The energy of the probe pulse should be 0,01 - 0,05 of the
pump pulse. It is advisable to modulate intensity of probe beam and to use
a phase-sensitive detection scheme for precise measurement of absorption or
ampliﬁcation of probe pulse radiation. We can expect to observe very strong
transients with even some ampliﬁcation of probe pulse (similar in shape as
If we know the fraction of molecules excited by the
in Fig.5 of Ref.
pump pulse, we can determine the ratio of cross-section of forward and reversed
transitions.

[9]).

The second case is very similar to work [4] (Fig.2b, Raman variant without
an excited states of molecules), where the modiﬁcation of polarization of reading
pulse is measured. This reading pulse is tuned to one of the far transients. The
probe pulse has the same polarization as the pump pulse. In this case it is also
helpful to use the phase-sensitive detection scheme with modulated probe beam.
We can expect, that the scanning of the probe pulse will give some decreasing
of measured signal due to eﬃcient transfer of molecules into the initial state.
The dependence of signal from intensity of pump and probe pulses will give
information about the cross-section of forward and reversed transitions.

In conclusion, we expect that the discussed experiments will make clear a

2

physical origin of large number of phenomena in nonlinear optics.

References

[1] R.L.Shoemaker, in Laser and Coherence Spectroscopy, Ed. J.I.Steinfeld,

N.Y., Plenum, p.197 (1978).

[2] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0306148.

[3] P.M.Felker, J.Phys.Chem., 96, 7844 (1992).

(2000).

[5] K.Molmer, Phys.Rev.A 55, 3195 (1997).

[4] E.Hertz, O.Faucher, B.Lavorel, and R.Chaux J.Chem.Phys. 113, 6132

[6] T.Rudolph and B.C.Sanders, Phys.Rev.Lett. 87, 077903 (2001).

[7] K.Nemoto and S.L.Braunstein, E-print, quant-ph/0312108.

[8] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0401051.

[9] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[10] A.S.Schwanecke, A.Krasavin, D.M.Bagnall, A.Pots, A.V.Zayats, and

N.I.Zheludev, Phys.Rev.Lett. 91, 247404 (2003).

[11] B.Dayan,

A.Pe’er,

A.A.Friesem and

Y.Silberberg,

E-print,

quant-ph/0401088.

[12] H.Stapelfeldt and T.Seideman, Rev.Mod.Phys. 75, 543 (2003).

[13] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0310090.

[14] M.J.Cote, J.F.Kauﬀman, P.G.Smith, and J.D.McDonald, J.Chem.Phys.

90, 2865 (1989).

[15] A.Weichert, C.Riehn, and B.Brutschy, J.Chem.Phys. 113, 7830 (2000).

[16] I.V.Litvinyuk, K.F.Lee, P.W.Dooley, D.M.Rayner, D.M.Villeneuve, and

P.B.Corkum, Phys.Rev.Lett. 90, 233003 (2003).

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

σ 

1 

2 

Fig.1   The supposed shapes of dependences of cross-section 
from the angel between molecule axis and the direction of the 
laser beam for forward (1) and reversed (2) transitions. 

θ 

 

a) 
probe 

pump 

I2 cell 

PM 

b) 

probe 

pump 

reading 

P 

CO2 cell 

 

 

PM 

A 

Fig  2.      Proposed  experimental  setup  for  pump-probe  study  of  the 
reversed  transitions:  a)  for  the  case  with  excited  states  of  molecules 
and  b)  for  the  Raman  case  without  excited  states  of  molecules.      
PM- photomultiplier, P- polarizer,  A- analyzer. 

 

