4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Engineering of directional emission from
photonic crystal waveguides

Steven K. Morrison and Yuri S. Kivshar
Nonlinear Physics Centre and Centre for Ultra-high bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems
(CUDOS), Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
skm124@rsphysse.anu.edu.au

Abstract: We analyze, by the ﬁnite-difference time-domain numerical
methods, several ways to enhance the directional emission from photonic
crystal waveguides through the beaming effect recently predicted by
Moreno et al. [Phys. Rev. E 69, 121402(R) (2004)], by engineering the sur-
face modes and corrugation of the photonic crystal surface. We demonstrate
that the substantial enhancement of the light emission can be achieved by
increasing the refractive index of the surface layer. We also measure power
of surface modes and reﬂected power and conﬁrm that the enhancement
of the directional emission is related to the manipulation of the photonic
crystal surface modes.

© 2008 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: (230.3990) Microstructure devices; (230.7370) Waveguides; (240.6690) Surface
Waves; (999.9999) Directional Emission

References and links

1. E. Moreno, F.J. Garc´ia-Vidal, and L. Mart´in-Moreno, “Enhanced transmission and beaming of light via photonic

crystal surface modes,” Phys. Rev. B 69, 121402(R) (2004).

2. P. Kramper, M. Agio, C.M. Soukoulis, A. Birner, F. M¨uller, R.B. Wehrspohn, U. G¨osele, and V. Sandoghdar,
“Highly directional emission from photonic crystal waveguides of subwavelength width,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
113903 (2004).

3. T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and P.A. Wolff, “Extraordinary optical transmission through

sub-wavelength hole arrays,” Nature (London) 391, 667-669 (1998).

4. H.J. Lezec, A. Degiron, E. Devaux, R.A. Linke, L. Mart´in-Moreno, F.J. Garc´ia-Vidal, and T.W. Ebbesen, “Beam-

ing light from a subwavelength aperture,” Science 297, 820-822 (2002).

One of the recent advances in the physics of photonic crystals is the discovery of enhanced
transmission and highly directional emission from photonic crystal waveguides predicted the-
oretically by Moreno et al. [1] and demonstrated independently in experiment by Kramper et
al. [2]. These results provide a new twist in the study of surface modes in photonic crystals.
Indeed, it is generally believed that surfaces and surface modes are a highly undesirable feature
of photonic crystals, unlike point defects which are useful for creating efﬁcient waveguides
with mini-band gaps inside the photonic band gaps of a periodic structure. However, appropri-
ate corrugation of the surface layer may lead to coherent enhancement of the radiating surface
modes and highly directional emission of the light from a truncated waveguide [1, 2].

As already mentioned by Moreno et al. [1], the major motivation for the discovery of highly
directional emission from photonic crystal waveguides is largely provided by the physics of
extraordinary optical transmission through subwavelength hole arrays in metallic thin ﬁlms [3]
and beaming of light from single nanoscopic apertures franked by periodic corrugations [4]. In

both those cases, an incident light beam couples to the surface plasmon oscillations via corru-
gations in a metallic ﬁlm, and is then emitted from the other side of the ﬁlm being enhanced by
its other corrugated surface. For photonic crystal waveguides, properties of the surface layer [1]
or terminated surface [2] provide a key physical mechanism for the excitation of surface modes,
their constructive interference, and subsequent highly directed emission.

In this paper, we study, by means of the ﬁnite-difference time-domain (FDTD) numerical
method, the directional emission from a photonic crystal waveguide achieved by appropriate
corrugation of the photonic crystal interface, following the original suggestion [1]. We ana-
lyze several strategies for enhancing the light beaming effect by varying the surface properties
and by engineering the surface modes of a semi-inﬁnite two-dimensional photonic crystal cre-
ated by a square lattice of cylinders in vacuum. In particular, we optimize the corrugation at
the surface, as well as vary the refractive index of the surface layer. We demonstrate that, in
comparison with the previously published results [1], the substantial enhancement of the light
emission and improved beaming effect can be achieved by increasing the refractive index of
the surface layer while using a positive (i.e. opposite to that employed in Ref. [1]) corrugation
displacement. We also measure the power of surface modes and reﬂected power and conﬁrm
that the enhancement of the directional emission through the beaming effect links closely to the
manipulation of the surface modes supported by the photonic crystal interface.

We consider a photonic crystal slab created by a square lattice of cylinders with dielectric
constant e r = 11.56 (e.g. GaAs at a wavelength of 1.5 m m) and radius r = 0.18 a, where a
is the lattice period. A row of cylinders removed along the plane x = 0 forms a single-mode
waveguide (see Fig. 1) that supports a guided mode with frequencies between w = 0.30×2p c/a
and w = 0.44 × 2p c/a propagating in the plane normal to the cylinders, with the electric ﬁeld
parallel to them.

When a source is placed in the waveguide at the point z = 0, it excites waves that propagate
along the waveguide and are then emitted at the waveguide exit (at z = 9a). Since no surface
modes are supported by a simple truncated slab, the light radiating from the waveguide under-
goes uniform angular diffraction as demonstrated in Fig. 1(a) for the spatial distribution of the
Poynting vector calculated for the source frequency w = 0.408 × 2p c/a.

To characterize the transmission from the photonic crystal waveguide, we measure the di-
rected power PD, normalized to the input power, incident upon a cross-sectional length of 2a
centered at x = 0 and z = 45 a. A likewise normalized measure is taken of the reﬂected power
PR incident upon a cross-sectional length of 20 a centered at the input to the waveguide, x = 0
and z = −a. This reﬂected power is considered a close measure of all reﬂected power. For the
bulk photonic crystal with standard surface layer the directed power is PD = 0.0123, and the
reﬂected power is PR = 0.0158.

Distribution of the Poynting vector for the directional emission from the photonic crystal
waveguide demonstrated by Moreno et al. [1] is shown in Fig. 1(b). These results are produced
by altering the surface layer geometry in two ways. Firstly, by reducing the radius of the surface
cylinders to the value rs = 0.5r = 0.09 a, and thereby creating the conditions for a surface
mode to exist at the truncated surface. And secondly, by displacing N = 9 even-numbered
cylinders (numbered consecutively away from the waveguide) on both sides of the waveguide
by D z = −0.3 a along the z−axis of the crystal, thus enhancing radiation of surface modes. Our
calculations show that the directed power for such a structure is PD = 0.0723, while the reﬂected
power is substantially large, PR = 0.2635. To further characterize the enhanced beaming effect,
we measure one half of the total surface mode power, PS, incident upon a cross-sectional length
2 a positioned centrally at x = 24 a, z = 9 a; again normalized to the input power. Moreover, to
characterize the containment of the directed power we measure the width of the central lobe
of the directed emission wL between the ﬁrst nulls at z = 45 a. For the geometry considered

Fig. 1. Spatial distribution of the Poynting vector for the light emitted from a photonic
waveguide: (a) unchanged surface; (b) surface cylinders with rs = 0.09 and N = 9 even-
numbered cylinders displaced by D z = −0.3 a (see [1]); (c) surface cylinders with rs = 0.09,
refractive index ns = 3.6, and N = 9 odd-numbered cylinders displaced by D z = +0.4 a; in
addition, the radius of the cylinders in the layer prior to the surface layer is reduced to
rs−1 = 0.135 a; (d) surface cylinders with rs = 0.09, refractive index ns = 4.5, and N = 9
odd-numbered cylinders displaced by D z = +0.4 a.

in Ref. [1], the surface mode power is PS = 0.0030, while the width of the central lobes is
wL = 18.1 a.

A signiﬁcant drawback of a surface layer design suggested in Ref. [1] is a large amount of the
reﬂected power. We ﬁnd that the reﬂected power can be reduced by trapping the electrical ﬁeld
mostly within the surface layer, as occurs for the uncorrugated surface. Increasing the applied
wavelength by 4.4% from l = 2.45 a to l = 2.55 a to account for the proportionally increased
distance resulting from the corrugated surface cylinders allows us to decrease the reﬂected
power to PR = 0.048, while increasing the directed power and surface mode power marginally
to PD = 0.0768 and PS = 0.0484, respectively. A measure of the average wave impedance in
the vicinity of the waveguide shows that the increased wavelength reduces the impedance from
∼ 1000W

to ∼ 320W

.

In order to increase the directional power, we alter the surface layer structure by shifting
the even-numbered cylinders forward by the distance of D z = 0.4 a, while leaving the odd-
numbered cylinders on the lattice sites (i.e. no displacement). As the increased distance due
to this corrugation over that of the uncorrugated distance is 7.7%, the applied wavelength is
increased proportionally to l = 2.63865 a. This new surface produces the directed power of
PD = 0.15418 and decreased reﬂected and surface mode powers of PR = 0.0318 and PS =

0.0100, respectively. Furthermore, the central lobe of the directed emission is now contained
within wL7.79 a.

Fig. 2. Power density incident upon the cross-section at z = 45 a for (a) unchanged sur-
face; (b) surface conﬁguration from Ref. [1]; (c) optimal surface conﬁguration with the
maximized beaming, and (d) with the surface refractive index n = 4.5.

Our analysis shows that substantial improvement to the directed power can be achieved by
increasing the refractive index of the surface layer from ns = 3.4 to ns = 3.6. This results in
the directed power increasing to PD = 0.1689, while decreasing the reﬂected and surface-mode
power to PR = 0.0295 and PS = 0.0023, respectively. The width of the directed beam’s central
lobe resulting from the increased surface layer’s refractive index is wL = 9.553 a. The increased
power is achieved by decreasing the light-line slope, thus placing the surface mode closer to
the continuum of radiative modes.

Additional improvement of the directed power can be achieved by decreasing the radius
of the cylinders one layer prior to the surface layer, z = 8 a to rs−1 = 0.135 a. This change
induces a near-surface defect mode that leaks coherently into the surface layer before being
radiated, increasing the directed power to PD = 0.2104, the reﬂected power, to PR = 0.1028,
and decreasing the surface power to PS = 0.0078. The width of the central lobe of the directed
emission becomes wL = 8.642 a. The spatial distribution of the Poynting vector for this optimal
design is shown in Fig. 1(c). A comparison of the signiﬁcantly enhanced beaming over the
standard interface and that of Ref. [1] is provided in Fig. 2, for a cross-section of the power
density measured at z = 45 a.

Control of the directed emission is achieved through the manipulation of the refractive index
of the surface layer cylinders. This is illustrated in the attenuation of the directed power shown
in Fig. 1(d), where the refractive index of the surface cylinders is increased to the value n = 4.5.
In this case, the outgoing beam splits, the directed power vanishes, and the surface-mode is in
cut-off with a localized state formed within the ﬁrst two surface cylinders next to the waveguide
exit. Figure 2(d) shows a cross-section of the power density measured at z = 45 a for the beam
splitting depicted in Fig. 1(d).

The effect produced by a change of the surface refractive index is demonstrated is Fig. 3
where the index is varied from n = 2.4 to n = 4.4. As already mentioned, the refractive index of
the surface layer has a profound effect on both the directed and reﬂected powers, suggesting that
it could be used not only for achieving a control over the beaming effect but also for matching

Fig. 3. Normalized power density incident upon a cross-sectional length of 2 a centered
at x = 0 and z = 45 a as the normalized refractive index of the surface cylinders varies.
Top: surface layer used in Ref. [1]. Bottom: with the surface cylinders’ radius reduced to
rs = 0.09 a and the refractive index ns = 3.6, with N = 9 odd-numbered cylinders displaced
D z = +0.4 a, and the radius of the cylinders in the layer prior to the surface layer reduced
to rs−1 = 0.135 a.

Fig. 4. Normalized power density incident upon a cross-section of the length 2 a centered
at x = 0 and z = 45 a as the radius of the surface cylinders varies. Top: surface layer from
Ref. [1] but for different values of rs. Bottom: with the radius of the surface cylinders
reduced to=20 rs = 0.09 a and their refractive index increased to=20 ns = 3.6, with N = 9
odd-numbered cylinders displaced by D z = +0.4 a.

the waveguide to the surrounding media.

The inﬂuence of the radius of the surface cylinders on the beaming effect is summarized
in Fig. 4, where the radius is varied from rs = 0.045 a to rs = 0.2 a. The radius is the key
parameter in the inducement of the surface mode and these results illustrate clearly that the
optimum radius is indeed close to rs = 0.9 a used in Ref. [1].

In conclusion, we have implemented different strategies for the enhancement of the light
beaming effect by engineering the surface modes of photonic crystals. In particular, we have
revealed that, in comparison with the previous studies, the substantial enhancement of the light
emission and improved light beaming can be achieved by increasing the refractive index of the
surface layer. We have provided a link of the observed enhancement of the directional emission
with the properties of the surface modes supported by the photonic crystal interface.

We acknowledge a partial support of the Australian Research Council and useful discussions

with Sergei Mingaleev and Costas Soukoulis.

