Huygens description of resonance phenomena in subwavelength hole arrays

C. Genet, M.P. van Exter, and J.P. Woerdman
Huygens Laboratory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9504, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands

We develop a point-scattering approach to the plane-wave optical transmission of subwavelength
metal hole arrays. We present a real space description instead of the more conventional reciprocal
space description; this naturally produces interfering resonant features in the transmission spectra
and makes explicit the tensorial properties of the transmission matrix. We give transmission spectra
simulations for both square and hexagonal arrays; these can be evaluated at arbitrary angles and
polarizations.

4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experiments have revealed the crucial role played by
surface wave excitations (often called surface plasmons)
in the case of extraordinary transmission features of
nanoperforated metallic ﬁlms1. This experimental work
has generated an important theoretical literature which
can be grossly separated into two parts. A ﬁrst cate-
gory is based on ab initio fully numerical simulations
in
of the scattering amplitudes of these nanoarrays;
this case, the interpretation of simulated spectra is of-
ten diﬃcult2,3,4,5. A second category is accordingly de-
voted to the search for physical understanding of the
phenomenon6,7,8. The main criticism that can be ad-
dressed to these interpretative papers is that they rely
on the a priori deﬁnition of resonances as surface modes
at a smooth interface (i.e. no holes) which are coupled
to the incident ﬁeld via momentum matching by the hole
array.

The aim of this paper is to ﬁll the intermediate gap
with a simple model which allows both a clear physical
description and straightforward simulations of transmis-
sion spectra. The main attractive features of our model
are related to the fact that it is based on a real space (in-
stead of a reciprocal space) surface wave scattering anal-
ysis. We stress that our work naturally produces trans-
mission resonances and that it does so without invoking
a priori wavevector matching between surface modes on
a smooth interface and grating momenta, i.e.
recipro-
cal lattice vectors. Most importantly, it reveals interfer-
ence eﬀects between neighbouring resonances, contrary
to the usual reciprocal space (i.e. Fourier) description
of wavevector matching. Our description makes explicit,
among others, the polarization dependence and the ten-
sorial properties of the transmission matrix. It describes
the inﬂuence of the incident angle tuning on transmission
spectra and, eventually, it naturally relates correspond-
ing band structures to symmetries of the reciprocal lattice
of the array. All these aspects are, for the sake of demon-
stration, best clariﬁed in a rather simpliﬁed framework,
as we will discuss below. This implies that we do not aim
at quantitative agreement with experimental transmis-
sion spectra. Nevertheless, we feel that our model yields
original physical insights into the dynamics of transmis-
sion through nanohole arrays.

Our approach is rooted in the role played by surface
modes on the transmission process. The transmission
process of a plane wave through sub-wavelength metallic

hole arrays will be cast into the context of a Huygens-
type principle, where the array is discretized as a lat-
tice of holes acting as point-scatterers that scatter the
incident radiation coherently into two-dimensional sec-
ondary wavelets. Speciﬁcally, the array is contained in
the (x, y) plane of a cartesian (x, y, z) frame and is illu-
minated by a paraxial plane wave of wavevector kin and
polarization vector ˆuin. This wave is described by far-
kin
ﬁeld angles kin/
(θx, θy, 1) and two electric ﬁeld
|
components E
(Ex, Ey), decomposed into the basis of
∼
the TE and TM polarizations. Retaining only the 0th
diﬀraction order, the transmission can be formulated as
Eout[λ, θ] = t
2 transmission matrix
t[λ, θ], λ being the wavelength and θ = (θx, θy) the far
ﬁeld angles of the incoming and outgoing ﬁeld.

Ein[λ, θ] with a 2

| ∼

×

·

As schematically shown in ﬁg.(1), we will distinguish
two contributions to this transmission matrix5,9. A ﬁrst
one, t
Bethe, wavelength dependent and proportional to
the identity matrix, corresponds to a transmission of the
incoming ﬁeld directly through the holes, i.e. to a Bethe-
type diﬀraction regime10. A second contribution, t
Scatt,
corresponds to the resonant part of the transmission ma-
trix, on which we focus hereafter. Fig.(1) describes this
resonant transmission process as a three-step process: (i)
the incident plane wave is converted into a surface wave
at a given point scatterer, (ii) the surface wave propa-
gates on the surface of the array and (iii) is eventually
re-emitted as a plane wave through the array. Then, in

FIG. 1: Schematic representation of the scattering process,
including the direct scattering contribution deﬁned at a cho-
sen origin of the lattice.

the spirit of Fresnel diﬀraction, the global resonant ma-
trix t
Scatt, evaluated at the center (0) of the array, is
based on the near-ﬁeld of the array, as the coherent re-
summation over all the secondary surface wavelets emit-
ted by each of the holes, acting as independent uncoupled

holes with elementary scattering matrices τ

t
Scatt(0) =

τ (0, rj)

X{rj }

(1)

{

}

rj}

. The singular term

The summation is deﬁned on the lattice distribution of
rj = 0
holes
is related to
{
the direct transmission channel of t
Bethe and is therefore
naturally excluded from this resonant part. As a periodic
lattice, the array is coordinated by its two primitive vec-
tors (a1, a2). We restrict this paper to
= a0
square and hexagonal lattices, as these symmetries are
most popular experimentally11,12. The position of each
scattering hole on each of these lattices is deﬁned as
rj = na1 + ma2 with (n, m) integers. The summation on
= (0, 0)
Eq.(1) therefore corresponds to a double (n, m)
summation over the lattice.

a1
|

a2
|

=

|

|

In this work, we calculate the τ matrix from the dy-
namics of a scattered surface wave characterized by a
complex transverse wavevector
= (η1 + iη2)2π/λ. On
a smooth metal-dielectric interface (i.e. no holes), with
dielectric functions ε1, ε2 respectively, theory predicts13

ˆk
|

|

η1 + iη2 =

ε1ε2
ε1 + ε2

r

(2)

Note that this expression holds for a metal-dielectric in-
terface, from the visible to the microwave domain, but
not for a dielectric-dielectric interface. In practice, the
observed transmission resonances in metallic nanohole
arrays are much broader than and red-shifted by typi-
cally a few percent from the mode dispersion on a smooth
interface6,14,15. These discrepancies are most likely re-
lated to direct Bethe-type transmission channel and to
radiative losses of the surface waves when they scatter
on the holes of the actual structure. In our simulations,
we use realistic values for η1 and η2 (see below).

In our model, the polarization of each surface wave is
taken along its propagation direction with a unitary po-
larization vector ˆuj = rj /
rj|
. Surface polarization plays
|
a crucial role, as it determines both the incoupling eﬃ-
ˆuin between the free-space incident photons
ciency ˆuj ·
and the excited surface wave, as being proportional to
their electric ﬁeld overlap, and the polarization of the
ˆuin = cos ϕ
emitted radiation. The incoupling factor ˆuj ·
corresponds to a two-dimensional dipole radiation pat-
tern for the surface wave emitted at the hole; this pat-
tern has been experimentally observed16. The full polar-
ˆuj
ization behaviour is contained in the tensorial ˆuj ⊗
nature of the elementary point-scattering matrix (
de-
⊗
notes a tensorial product).

We assume that the elementary scattering matrix τ is

spherical in the far-ﬁeld so that it reads as

ˆk
τ (0, rj) = f (
)
|
|

eikin.rj ˆuj ⊗

ˆuj

ei|ˆk||rj |
rj |
|
p
amplitude

The
ˆk
s(
|

scattering

)e−iπ/4
|

ˆk
Re(
|

q

is

ˆk
)
f (
|
|

)/2π in the far-ﬁeld approxima-
|

(3)

=

2

t
|

Scatt ·

2.
|

≪

ˆk
rj | ≫
1 of the Huygens phase, being certainly
tion
||
|
2πa0η1. For simplicity, we neglect the
satisﬁed for λ
ˆk
) and, in
frequency dependence of the shape factor s(
|
|
the point-scattering limit, replace it by a constant s.
This limits the discussion to spatial symmetries of the
lattice. Point-group issues matter when speciﬁc shapes
of the scatterers are introduced. Then, the scattering
amplitude has to include a true s(ˆk) shape factor. The
coherence of the surface scattering is insured by the
ﬁxed phase relation eikin.rj with the incident ﬁeld kin.
Eventually, with an input plane wave Ein = Ein ˆuin and
no polarization analysis in transmission, we evaluate the
resonant part of the intensity transmission coeﬃcient
T =

ˆuin

∼

∼

In our simulations, we normalize the wavelength by
λ0 = a0η1 and the transmission matrix by the constant
scattering amplitude factor s.
Internal damping and
radiative losses of a surface wave propagating on the
lattice are quantiﬁed with a single eﬀective parameter
η = η2/η1. This η determines the convergence speed
of the scattering summation. For simplicity, we neglect
the frequency dependence of both η1 and η2 and choose
0.02 which correspond to a constant mean free path
η
3 µm for a0 = 0.7 µm17. Convergence is
of a0/(4πη)
80 points. If
then easily reached with a lattice of 80
the damping is lower, a larger lattice should be chosen.
The frequency dependence of t
Scatt is determined by
running simulations for 800 wavelengths positioned on
a regular grid ranging from λ/λ0 = 0.4 to λ/λ0 = 1.2.
This interval is very large (factor of 3) but is neverthe-
less consistent with our model, avoiding both shorter
wavelength where the direct transmission channel takes
over the resonant one, and longer wavelength for which
the far-ﬁeld approximation might break down. These
nominal parameters given, the evaluation of an element
of the transmission matrix, at a given incidence angle,
takes about 5 seconds for the whole spectrum.

×

As a ﬁrst working example of our method, we present
in ﬁg.(2) a simulated spectrum of the transmission
coeﬃcient of a square array over the wavelength range
mentioned above, under plane-wave illumination at
In this case, both TE and
normal incidence θ = 0.
TM polarizations are degenerate and the transmission
matrix is simply proportional to the identity matrix.
Our model immediately shows the resonant behaviour
of the transmission spectrum. We stress again that we
make here no use of the usual momentum conservation
argument specifying resonances in terms of reciprocal
lattice; the resonances arise naturally from the summa-
tion of Eq.(1).

The position and the relative strength of the peaks
shown in the spectrum of ﬁg.(2) can be understood from
a Fresnel-zone type argument18. A resonance builds
up each time the Huygens phase satisﬁes an in-phase
condition, related to the deﬁnition of the reciprocal lat-
tice. Resonances are thus expected at approximately the
same positions predicted by the usual ad hoc dispersion

6
relation for surface waves on periodic arrays, that is at

1/√n2 + m2.

3

direction). Rotation angles ranging from 0o to

We have also investigated non-normal incidences that
correspond to tilts along the y axis, for both square and
hexagonal arrays (oriented with one lattice vector in the
11.5o
x
2.3o were studied. TE and TM polariza-
in steps of
tions, now distinct, are displayed in separate ﬁgures. A
central result of this paper, shown in ﬁgs.(3), is that our
model immediately and naturally produces spectral band

∼

−

∼

λres
λ0

=

1
√n2 + m2

(4)

for a square array and λres/λ0 = √3/2√n2 + nm + m2
for a hexagonal array6. We adopt hereafter the conven-
tion of indexing a surface mode as [n, m]. The strength of
the peaks scales with the corresponding inverse distance
1/√n2 + m2. The increase in peak transmission for the
[2, 1] mode as compared to the [2, 0] mode results from
fold, lead-
an increase in degeneracy from 4
ing to a factor 2 increase in amplitude and a factor 4 in
intensity. The spectrum in ﬁg.(2) is shown in arbitrary
units (a.u.) where, from Eq.(1), one hole at one lattice
spacing contributes one arbitrary unit.

fold to 8

−

−

We note that the two-dimensional summation on a dis-
crete two-dimensional lattice (see Eq.(1)) does not pro-
vide all in-phase conditions. For the square array, for in-
stance, the in-phase conditions derived from Eq.(1) read
as

n2 + m2 λ0
λres

2π

p

= 2πp

(5)

with p a given positive integer. However, n2 + m2 can
not provide all such p integers. For this reason, there
is no resonance between the [1, 1] and [2, 0] modes of a
square array, though such an in-phase condition could in
principle be satisﬁed in between. This lack of resonances
corresponds to a modiﬁcation of the simple Fresnel-zone
argument: with a two-dimensional lattice, the only mul-
tiplicities corresponding to resonant conditions are those
matching the discretization of the lattice.

This picture is useful to understand the positions and
strengths of the resonances. But we would like to stress
that our real space-based model goes beyond that, pro-
ducing interferences between surface modes that have a
strong inﬂuence on the transmission spectrum. Peaks
present asymmetries due to the interference of overlap-
ping tails of adjacent resonances. These tails can even

FIG. 2: Transmission coeﬃcient of a square array at normal
incidence, as a function of normalized input wavelength.

interfere quite destructively as in between modes [2, 1]
and [2, 0] (see ﬁg.(2)). The interferences between the
modal amplitudes make the actual position of the reso-
nance λres/λ0 slightly diﬀerent from the “pure” location

FIG. 3: Transmission spectra for a square array (ﬁrst row)
for a)TE and b)TM polarizations and for a hexagonal array
(second row) for c)TE and d)TM polarizations. These spec-
tra have been calculated as a function of normalized input
wavelength and angle of incidence when the tilt is performed
along the y−axis - see insets. For clarity, we show a globally
shifted curve for each angular increment of ∼ 2.3o.

structures.

For a square array, illuminated with a TE polarized
wave, the [1, 0] resonance remains practically stationary,
whereas it splits into a doublet for a TM polarization as
the angle of incidence is increased. For the [1, 1] mode,
one observes a doublet splitting for both polarization.
For a hexagonal array, the principal resonance splits into
a triplet with a central peak for TE polarization, whereas
it evolves into a doublet for TM polarization. Split res-
onances will eventually overlap, through their progres-
sive shifts. This can lead to a destructive interference,
11.5o incidence angle on ﬁg.(3, a)) be-
as seen at an
tween the [1, 1] and [2, 0] resonances for TE polarization
or to a constructive interference, as seen on ﬁg.(3, b))
between the [1, 0] and [1, 1] modes for TM polarization.
One should also note that for both square and hexago-
nal arrays, central peaks are in fact only approximately
stationary as the tilting angle is varied. With an increas-
ing angle of incidence, a positive transverse component
of the wavevector kin emerges and leads to a slight blue
shift of central peaks.

∼

It is interesting to compare these simulations, and in

particular the splitting of resonances, with what could
be expected from rather intuitive arguments. Intuitively,
a nanohole array is simply characterized by the spatial
symmetries of its direct lattice. The direction of propaga-
tion of a given surface mode will be naturally associated
to a particular axis of this direct lattice, with an incou-
pling eﬃciency argument as presented above and based
on the projection factor between such a propagation axis
and the incident polarization. Thus, one forbids modes
which propagate along directions perpendicular to the in-
cident polarization to be excited. Within this intuitive
frame, one predicts splitting of resonances by merely per-
forming symmetry operations on the direct lattice as the
array is tilted. It turns out however that following this
line of reasoning leads to wrong predictions.

On the contrary, it is important to realize that the
band structures of ﬁgs.(3) can only be fully inferred if one
realizes that Eq.(1), starting indeed from point-scatterers
on the direct lattice of the array, provides resulting waves
that are directional and that propagate along axes of the
reciprocal lattice rather than the direct one. Therefore,
these band structures are only consistent with the sym-
metry arguments performed on the reciprocal lattice19,
together with a polarization “selection-rule” killing sur-
face waves that are allowed by symmetry to propagate
on reciprocal lattice axes perpendicular to the incident
polarization.

The disagreement with the intuitive approach men-
tioned above is not present for a square array since in this
case, the direct lattice and the reciprocal lattice are iden-
tical. It is however easily visible for a hexagonal array for
which direct and reciprocal lattices do not coincide. In
this case, if one concentrates the symmetry arguments on
the direct lattice, the expected splitting of resonances will
not agree with simulations. For instance, symmetry ar-
guments applied to a direct hexagonal lattice tilted along
its y
axis lead to the prediction of quadruplet splitting
with no stationary mode for the principal resonance, for
both polarizations. The same argument applied to the
reciprocal lattice, together with accounting for the pro-
jection factor between lattice axes and polarization, leads
to a triplet, respectively a doublet, for TE, respectively
TM, polarization; this is indeed observed in ﬁg.(3, c))
and ﬁg.(3, d)).

−

In conclusion, we have presented a simple and straight-
forward model based on a Huygens-type principle. This
work provides physical insight into the surface-plasmon-
assisted transmission process through metal nanohole ar-

4

rays, emphasizing symmetry and tensorial properties of
the transmission amplitude.
It yields band structures
consistent with directional collective surface excitations
propagating on the reciprocal lattice of the nanohole ar-
ray and does not rely on any ad hoc momentum matching
argument.

In order to stress the core characteristics of our Huy-
gens description, we have used a simpliﬁed model that
addresses the resonant contribution t
Scatt to the trans-
mission through a single interface only and that does not
account for the direct transmission channel contribution
t
Bethe. Our point-scattering approach amounts to con-
sidering the holes in the metallic ﬁlm to be in the far
subwavelength limit, i.e. basically in the limit of holes
of zero diameter. To quantitatively compare with exper-
imental data, the following extensions are needed: both
the dielectric constant of the metal and the scattering
amplitude s(ˆk) require a frequency dependence. Further-
more, related in particular to hole size eﬀects, this scat-
tering amplitude should be speciﬁed and the direct con-
tribution t
Bethe to the transmission should be included,
providing resonance line shapes with red-shifts and red-
tails9.

Of course, a qualitative agreement between our simu-
lations and angle dependent transmission measurements
should be easier to obtain, in particular as far as split-
tings of resonances are concerned. But discrepancies are
already found at this less ambitious level when refer-
ring to experiments performed with standardly designed
nanohole arrays6? .
In fact, such nanohole arrays cor-
respond to optical systems with two-interfaces, possibly
identical in the case of free-standing ﬁlms. There, an-
gle dependent couplings between surface modes deﬁned
on each interface induce perturbations too strong to al-
low even a qualitative matching with the mere single-
interface band structure provided by our model. Nev-
ertheless, if one could design an eﬀective single-interface
nanoperforated ﬁlm, such a qualitative check should be
possible. A metallic ﬁlm, with very small holes, deposited
on a given dielectric substrate with a thick titanium (Ti)
bonding layer is likely to be a relevant candidate9. Strong
absorbtion in this Ti layer prevents indeed any surface
mode from being excited on this metal-dielectric inter-
face, thus keeping only a single air-metal interface into
play. In this framework therefore, it will be interesting
to confront experimental transmission spectra with the
Huygens description formulated in our paper.

1 T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and

4 S. Enoch, E. Popov, M. Nevi`ere, and R. Reinisch, J. Opt.

P. A. Wolﬀ, Nature 391, 667-669 (1998)

A: Pure Appl. Opt. 4, S83-S87 (2002)

2 E. Popov, M. Nevi`ere, S. Enoch, and R. Reinisch, Phys.

5 M. Sarrazin, J.-P. Vigneron, and J.-M. Vigoureux, Phys.

Rev. B 62, 16100-16108 (2000)

3 L. Mart´in-Moreno, F. J. Garc´ia-Vidal, H. J. Lezec, K. M.
Pellerin, T. Thio, J. B. Pendry, and T. W. Ebbesen, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 86, 1114-1117 (2001)

Rev. B 67, 085415-1 085415-8 (2003)

6 H. F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, D. E. Grupp, T. W. Ebbesen, and

H. J. Lezec, Phys. Rev. B 58, 6779-6782 (1998)

7 J.-M. Vigoureux, Optics Commun. 198, 257-263 (2001)

5

8 S. A. Darmayan and A. V. Zayats, Phys. Rev. B 67,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1110-1113 (2001)

035424-1 035424-7 (2003)

9 C. Genet, M. P. van Exter, and J. P. Woerdman, Optics

Commun. 225, 331-336 (2003)

10 H. A. Bethe, Phys. Rev. 66, 163-182 (1944)
11 W. A. Murray, S. Astilean, and W. L. Barnes, Phys. Rev.

B 69, 165407-1 165407-7 (2004)

12 E. Altewischer, C. Genet, M. P. van Exter, J. P. Woerd-
man, P. F. A. Alkemade, A. van Zuuk, and E. W. J. M.
van der Drift, arXiv:physics/0405141

13 H. Raether, Surface Plasmons on Smooth and Rough Sur-

faces and on Gratings (Springer-Verlag, 1988)

14 L. Salomon, F. Grillot, A. V. Zayats, and F. de Fornel,

15 A. Krishnan, T. Thio, T. J. Kim, H. J. Lezec, T. W. Ebbe-
sen, P. A. Wolﬀ, J. Pendry, L. Martin-Moreno, and F. J.
Garcia-Vidal, Optics Commun. 200, 1-7 (2001)

16 B. Hecht, H. Bielefeldt, L. Novotny, Y. Inouye, and D. W.

Pohl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1889-1892 (1996)

17 E. Altewischer, M. P. van Exter, and J. P. Woerdman,

Nature 418, 304-306 (2002)

18 M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Cambridge

University Press, 1975)

19 E. Altewischer, M. P. van Exter, and J. P. Woerdman, J.

Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 1927-1931 (2003)

