Harmonic generation in a two dimensional nonlinear quasicrystal

R. T. Bratfalean, A.C. Peacock, N. G. R. Broderick,∗ and K. Gallo

Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ UK

Ruth Lewen

Abstract

Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ UK

Second harmonic generation in a two dimensional nonlinear quasi-crystal is demonstrated for the ﬁrst

time. Temperature and wavelength tuning of the crystal reveal the uniformity of the pattern while angle

tuning reveals the dense nature of the crystal’s Fourier spectrum. These results compare well with theoretical

predictions showing the excellent uniformity of the crystal and suggest that more complicated “nonlinear

holograms” should be possible.

4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
1
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Periodic poling of ferroelectric materials such as lithium niobate is a well established tech-

nique for improving the eﬃciency of nonlinear optical processes[1]. When combined with channel

waveguide technology, periodically poled lithium niobate (PPLN) is perhaps the premier system

for nonlinear optics at telecommunications wavelengths. Recently work has begun in exploring

both theoretically[2, 3] and experimentally[4, 5] the properties of two dimensionally poled nonlin-

ear photonic crystals. We present here the ﬁrst example of a two dimensionally poled nonlinear

quasi-crystal and discuss its properties.

The importance of a PPLN crystal can best be understood by considering second harmonic

generation (SHG). In this process two photons of frequency ω1 are converted into one photon

of frequency 2ω1 a process that automatically conserves energy. For this interaction to occur

momentum must also be conserved leading to:

k(ω) + k(ω) + Gn = k(2ω)

(1)

where k is the wavevector of the light in the material and Gn is a reciprocal lattice vector of the
crystal. For a strictly periodic PPLN crystal |Gn| ∝ n/d where n ∈ Z and d is the period of the

crystal. As the period of the crystal can be freely chosen during the fabrication process, Eq. (1) is

also a design rule for PPLN allowing the phase matching of any single interaction.

If we consider a harder problem that of simultaneously phase matching two nonlinear processes

we can immediately see that instead of having to satisfy one momentum conservation equation we

need to satisfy two. With the only free parameter in a PPLN crystal being the domain period

d this cannot in general be done as the phase mismatches are rarely integer multiples of some

constant. Hence an alternative approach must be taken. The simplest scheme would be to write two

gratings on top of one another, however due to the digital nature of the poling process (essentially

the nonlinear coeﬃcient can be either ±1) and the fact that there is a minimum domain size

of ≈ 5 µm, means that this is not possible and more complicated patterns must be poled. Two

diﬀerent patterns have been suggested in the literature. The ﬁrst is to use an aperiodic pattern

usually based on a Fibonacci sequence[6] while the second is to use a two dimensional periodic

pattern[7]. Our aim in this paper is to look at the combination of both approaches, i.e. a two

dimensional aperiodic poled pattern.

More generally there is a need to produce poled patterns that are not strictly periodic such as

chirped PPLN, superstructured PPLN, transversed pattern PPLN etc[8, 9, 10]. In all these cases

the additional structure in real space provides additional functionality (e.g. pulse compression,

spatial focussing, etc.) and we can consider these gratings as simple cases of “nonlinear holography”

2

in which both the temporal and frequency components of an input pulse are altered to produce an

output pulse with both a diﬀerent central frequency and pulse shape. Doing this in an arbitrary

fashion would require the ability to pole arbitrary shapes in a 2D crystal and as a stepping stone

we look in this paper at the poling and optical response of a 2D Penrose pattern as shown in Fig. 1.

A Penrose pattern is an aperiodic tiling of the plane which has long range order but which lacks

any translational or rotational symmetry[11]. As shown in Fig. 1, a Penrose pattern can be thought

of as a tiling of a plane by two rhombuses - a “thick” rhombus and a “thin” rhombus. To go from

the Penrose lattice to our crystal structure we decided to place a poled region at each vertex point

(the alternative of placing a poled region at the centre of each rhombus was considered and makes

no signiﬁcant diﬀerence). Upon taking the Fourier transform of the resulting structure the result

is as shown in Fig. 1 (insert). In the insert the location of the dots correspond to the location of

reciprocal lattice vectors which can be used for quasi-phase matching [via Eq. (1)] while the size

of the dots indicate the size of the corresponding Fourier coeﬃcients.

As there are an inﬁnite number of nonequivalent Penrose tilings of the plane[12] (two tilings are

nonequivalent if one cannot be transformed into the other by a simple translation and rotation)

it was necessary to decide which one to use. Clearly initially the pattern must be scaled so that

the reciprocal lattice vectors satisfy Eq. (1). Then the size and the shape of the poled regions

must be chosen to maximum the relevant Fourier coeﬃcient ( in a QPM process the strength of

the interaction is proportional to the size of the Fourier coeﬃcient corresponding to the reciprocal

lattice vector mediating the process). We numerically generated several diﬀerent patterns and

optimised the shape of the poled region resulting in a pattern that could be used to phase match
second harmonic generation at 140o C with a fundamental wavelength of 1536nm.

We then wrote a 20.53mm by 1.15mm portion of this Penrose pattern onto a lithography mask

which was used to pole the LiNbO3 crystal in the standard way. A thin layer of photo-resist was

deposited on the -z face of the 0.5mm thick, z-cut LiNbO3 sample and then photo-lithographically

patterned according to the mask. The width and lengths of the Penrose regions were carefully

aligned with the x and y crystallographic axes of LiNbO3 , respectively. Poling was accomplished

by applying an electric ﬁeld via liquid electrodes on the ±z faces at room temperature. As shown

in Fig. 1, the Penrose pattern fabricated onto the sample was found to be uniform across the entire

poled area and was faithfully reproduced throughout the crystal depth (z axis). Finally we polished

the ±x faces, allowing a propagation length of 20mm through the sample.

We ﬁrst measured the temperature tuning curve for second harmonic generation. The crystal
was rotated with respect to the incident beam to obtain maximum SHG at 140 oC. Next the

3

temperature tuning curve was measured over the range 120 − 160 oC as shown in Fig. 2 and has a
FWHM of 5.1 oC. For this measurement the incident fundamental beam was gently focussed into

the crystal and consisted of 5 ns pulses at a repetition rate of 100 kHz and an average power of 300

mW which was suﬃciently small to ensure we were in the low conversion regime. The input beam

was confocallly focused to a spot size of 162 µm in the centre of the crystal. Due to non-collinear

nature of the interaction we would expect a Gaussian response rather than a sinc shaped one[13]

and that it should be broader than a collinear response.

Next we measured the wavelength response of the crystal over the range 1533nm to 1543nm

using a tuneable source with an average power of 150mW. The crystal was rotated to give maximum
SHG at 1538nm and kept at a constant temperature of 140 oC. The results are as shown in Fig. 2

(insert). We found a FWHM of 1.3nm which corresponds well to the measured temperature tuning

width.

A distinguishing feature of an aperiodic crystal compared to a periodic crystal is the dense

nature of its Fourier transform. As such it should be possible to observe SHG with our crystal for

a much larger set of input angles than for a periodic crystal (see Fig. 4 in [4]). To do this we ﬁxed

the input wavelength and incident power and the crystal temperature and rotated the crystal noting

when a SH spot appeared. For each SH beam that was produced we measured the input angle of the

fundamental along with the angle between the fundamental and second harmonic. These results

are shown in Fig. 3 (circles). We measured 43 distinct spots which was roughly 50% more that

what we had measured previously for a periodic crystal (the numbers are not strictly comparable

as the input power was roughly 1000 times bigger in the earlier measurement[4]!) illustrating the

dense nature of the Fourier space. In addition we have shown on Fig. 3 the theoretically predicted

input and output angles for the Fourier peaks involved in the interactions.

The importance of measuring the output SHG spots is that it directly gives us information

about the position and strength of the peaks in Fourier space which in turn gives us information

about the crystal lattice. For example Fig. 3 is mirror symmetric to a good degree indicating a

mirror plane in Fourier space. We were not however able to rotate the crystal suﬃciently to observe

fully the 5 ﬁve symmetry but the beginnings of it can be seen. We are able to account for almost all

of the experimental spots apart from two while similarly only one theoretical Fourier peak appears

for which there is no corresponding experimental spot. The reason for this is not currently known

although we believe that it might relate to overpoling of the crystal in some regions causing a

change in the size of the Fourier coeﬃcients.

Finally we measured the eﬃciency of the second harmonic generation for near normal incidence

4

and at a temperature of 105o C. The reason for this is that while angle tuning of the crystal gives

us information about the location of the peaks in Fourier space it does not provide us with any

information about their size. However the SH power is proportional to the square of the Fourier

coeﬃcients which in turn depends on the size of the poled regions. For the spot we chose we

measured an eﬃciency of 1.64% while the predicted theoretical eﬃciency for a collinear interaction

would be 2.73%. The two most likely causes for this discrepancy are the noncollinear nature of

our interaction which would reduce the eﬃciency and the fact that we do not precisely know the

size of the poled regions over the whole of the crystal. Thus our measurements suggest that there

is some degree of overpoling in the crystal. We note that although the eﬃciency is low this is due

to the choice of Fourier peak choosing a diﬀerent Fourier peak should in principle allow conversion

eﬃciencies > 90% for our available pump power.

In conclusion we have designed and fabricated the ﬁrst two dimensional nonlinear photonic

quasicrystal for use in second harmonic generation. Measurements on this crystal demonstrate the

greater density of reciprocal lattice vectors compared to a periodic crystal along with the ﬁve fold

rotational symmetry. Such crystals are likely to ﬁnd use in the simultaneous phase-matching of

multiple nonlinear interactions due to their ﬂexibility in the location of the Fourier peaks. The

fabrication of such a non-periodic crystal is a signiﬁcant step forwards towards the design and

fabrication of ”nonlinear holograms” which would allow complete spatial and temporal shaping of

input beams through the nonlinearity.

∗ Electronic address: ngb@orc.soton.ac.uk

[1] J. A. Armstrong, N. Bloembergen, J. Ducuing, and P. S. Pershan, “Interactions between Light Waves

in a Nonlinear Dielectric,” Phys. Rev. 127, 1918 (1962).

[2] V. Berger, “Nonlinear Photonic Crystals,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4136–4139 (1998).

[3] A. H. Norton and C. M. de Sterke, “Optimal poling of nonlinear photonic crystals for frequency

conversion,” Opt. Lett. 28, 188–190 (2003).

[4] N. G. R. Broderick, G. W. Ross, H. L. Oﬀerhaus, D. J. Richardson, and D. C. Hanna, “HeXLN: A two

dimensional nonlinear photonic crystal,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4345–4348 (2000).

[5] A. Chowdhury, C. Staus, B. F. Boland, T. F. Kuech, and L. McCaughan, “Experimental demonstration

of 1535-1555-nm simultaneous optical wavelength interchange with a nonlinear photonic crystal,” Opt.

Lett. 26, 1353–1355 (2001).

[6] S. ning Zhu, Y. yuan Zhu, Y. qiang Qin, H. feng Weng, C. zhen Ge, and N. ben Ming, “Experimental

Realization of Second Harmonic Generation in a Fibonacci Optical Superlattice of LiTaO3,” Phys. Rev.

5

[7] S. M. Saltiel and Y. S. Kivshar, “Phase matching in nonlinear χ(2) photonic crystals,” Opt. Lett. 25,

Lett. 78, 2752–2755 (1997).

1204–1206 (2000).

[8] G. Imeshev, M. A. Arbore, M. M. Fejer, A. Galvanauskas, M. Fermann, and D. Harter, “Ultra-short

pulse second harmonic generation with longitudinally nonuniform quasi-phase-matching gratings: pulse

compression and shapping,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 17, 304–318 (2000).

[9] G. Imeshev, M. Proctor, and M. M. Fejer, “Lateral patterning of nonlinear frequency conversion with

transversely varying quasi-phase-matching gratings,” Opt. Lett. 23, 673–675 (1998).

[10] J. R. Kurz, A. M. Schober, D. S. Hum, A. J. Saltzman, and M. M. Fejer, “Nonlinear physical optics

with transversely patterned quasi-phase-matching gratings,” IEEE J. Select. Top. Quantum Electron.

[11] R. Penrose, “The Role of Aesthetics in Pure and Applied Mathematical Research,” in The Physics of

Quasicrystals, P. J. Steinhardt and S. Ostund, eds., (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1987), Chap. Appen-

[12] D. Levine and P. J. Steinhardt, “Quasicyrstals. I. Deﬁnition and Structure,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 596–616

8, 660–664 (2002).

dex I.

(1986).

[13] N. G. R. Broderick, R. T. Bratfalean, T. M. Monco, D. J. Richardson, and C. M. de Sterke, “Tempera-

ture and wavelength tuning of 2nd, 3rd and 4th harmonic generation in a two dimensional hexagonally

poled nonlinear crystal,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 19, 2263–2272 (2002).

6

FIG. 1: Optical picture of the poled pattern used in the experiments. The insert shows the Fourier transform

of the pattern.

7

FIG. 2: Temperature Tuning curve for the Penrose Pattern. The insert shows the wavelength tuning

response.

8

−25

−20

−15

−10

−5

0

5

10

15

20

External Pump Angle (Degrees)

FIG. 3: Picture of the measured and theoretical input and output angles for the Penrose pattern.

25

20

15

10

5

0

−5

−10

−15

−20

−25

)
s
e
e
r
g
e
D

l

(
 
e
g
n
A
H
S

 

 
l
a
n
r
e
t
x
E

9

