4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Angular momentum of a strongly focussed Gaussian beam

Timo A. Nieminen,∗ Norman R. Heckenberg, and Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop
Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia

A circularly polarized rotationally symmetric paraxial laser beams carries ±¯h angular momentum
per photon as spin. Focussing the beam with a rotationally symmetric lens cannot change this
angular momentum ﬂux, yet the focussed beam must have spin |Sz| < ¯h per photon. The remainder
of the original spin is converted to orbital angular momentum, manifesting itself as a longitudinal
optical vortex at the focus. This demonstrates that optical orbital angular momentum can be
generated by a rotationally symmetric optical system which preserves the total angular momentum
of the beam.

PACS numbers: 41.20.Jb,42.25.Bs,42.25.Ja

INTRODUCTION

That optical and other electromagnetic ﬁelds can carry
angular momentum is a direct result of the fact that they
can carry linear momentum. Since the linear momentum
ﬂux density of an electromagnetic ﬁeld is E× H/c, giving

for the time-averaged momentum ﬂux density of a time-
harmonic electromagnetic beam, it is tempting to write

p =

Re(E × H∗

)

1
2c

j =

Re(r × (E × H∗

)).

1
2c

(1)

(2)

as the corresponding angular momentum ﬂux density.
However, since the conservation law for linear momen-
tum only contains the time-derivative of the momentum
density, and the divergence of the ﬂux (or the volume
integrals of these, noting that the volume integral of a
divergence of a quantity can be written as the surface in-
tegral of the quantity), it is premature to identify this as
the actual angular momentum ﬂux density. If the above
expression was in fact the correct angular momentum
ﬂux density, then the angular momentum of a circularly
polarized plane would be zero. Since the correct classical
angular momentum density must agree with the classical
limit of the quantum angular momentum density, this
must be incorrect. This was recognized long ago, and
a separation of the angular momentum of the ﬁeld can
be separated into spin and orbital components yields a
result in agreement with the quantum result [1, 2, 3].

The total momentum or angular momentum ﬂux
through a plane can be unambiguously determined by
integrating the above quantities over the plane; this is
a straightforward application of the integral form of the
conservation law for angular momentum, and is there-
fore independent of the actual choice of expression for
It can be noted that
the angular momentum density.
the actual momentum and angular momentum densities
(as opposed to the ﬂux densities given above) contain an
extra 1/c factor, and can be integrated over the whole

beam to give the total momentum and angular momen-
tum content. However, for the case of an inﬁnitely long
beam, these quantities are inﬁnite, and it is better to
consider only the ﬂuxes.

Separating the total angular momentum ﬂux of the

beam into spin and orbital components gives

J = L + S

(3)

where the total angular momentum ﬂux J is the sum of
an orbital term L and a spin term S. A similar rela-
tionship exists for the angular momentum ﬂux densities
and densities at any point. The distinction is simply
that the spin angular momentum density is independent
of the choice of origin; that is, it is invariant with re-
spect to translations of the coordinate system. Since the
local conservation of angular momentum as the beam
propagates in free space cannot depend on the choice of
the origin of the coordinate system, both the orbital and
spin components must be individually conserved, as well
as the total angular momentum, since there would oth-
erwise exist a choice-of-origin dependent torque exerted
by the beam on free space. These quantities can only
change if the ﬁeld interacts with matter [2].

In general, the separation into spin and orbital com-
ponents is not quite as straightforward as one might
hope [1, 2, 3]. One can, however, write expressions for
the spin and orbital components. The Cartesian compo-
nents of the time-averaged spin angular momentum ﬂux
density s are [1, 2, 3]

sx = ǫ0Im(EyE⋆
sy = ǫ0Im(E⋆
sz = ǫ0Im(ExE⋆

z )/ω
xEz)/ω
y )/ω

(4)

where Ex,y,z are the Cartesian components of E, the
complex vector amplitude. This result can also be
written in terms of the Levi–Civita symbol as si =
iǫ0ǫijkEjE⋆
k/(2ω), where the expression is summed over
repeated indices and the real part is taken. The orbital
components are [1, 2, 3]

li = iǫ0Ej (r × ∇)E⋆

j /(2ω).

(5)

ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF A FINITE BEAM

exp(−2 tan2 θ/ tan2 θ0) sin θdθ.

(11)

These give simple results for paraxial beams. For exam-
ple, a circularly polarized paraxial beam of power P and
frequency ω has a spin angular momentum ﬂux of ±P/ω,
depending on the handedness of the polarization [4]. This
result is equivalent to the quantum mechanical result of
±¯h per photon. If the beam has a uniform phase over
a plane, or, more generally, phase that is rotationally
symmetric about the beam axis, then the orbital angular
momentum ﬂux density is zero.

We will consider such rotationally symmetric beams

here, and present speciﬁc results for a Gaussian beam.

The case of spin angular momentum ﬂux equal to P/ω
results only in the paraxial approximation, as it depends
on Ez being zero. If we consider a beam of ﬁnite width
in its focal plane, then the beam will spread through
diﬀraction, and will, at a suﬃciently large distance, be
propagating in a purely radial direction. That is, for
large r, we must have Er = 0. In this case, the electric
ﬁeld is purely tangential, and the spin angular momen-
tum density in polar spherical coordinates is

sr = ǫ0Im(EθE⋆

φ)/ω,

(6)

with the other vector components being zero. For a ro-
tationally symmetric beam of the type we consider here,
sr will be independent of the azimuthal angle φ.

Therefore, the maximum possible contribution to the
total spin angular momentum, of which, by symmetry,
only the z component is non-zero, is sr cos θ, where θ is
the angle measured from the z axis. Integrating this over
the beam must result in |Sz| < ¯h per photon. A conse-
quence of this is that a focussed beam cannot be purely
circularly polarized everywhere in a plane, including the
focal plane. If the beam is rotationally symmetric and lo-
cally circularly polarized in the far ﬁeld, the beam cannot
be partially plane polarized in the focal plane, either—
therefore, the electric ﬁeld must have an axial component
(Ez 6= 0). A similar argument using linear momentum
shows that plane polarized beams must have Ez 6= 0 in
the focal plane as well.

As an example, we will ﬁnd the spin carried by a fo-
cussed Gaussian beam. A paraxial Gaussian beam has a
(scalar) amplitude in the far ﬁeld of

U = U0 exp

−

k2w2

0 tan2 θ
4

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(7)

where k is the wavenumber and w0 is the paraxial beam
waist radius [5], or in terms of the beam convergence
angle given by tan θ0 = 2/(kw0),

U = U0 exp(− tan2 θ/ tan2 θ0).

(8)

)
n
o

t
o
h
p

 
r
e
p
 
π
2
h
 
(
 

/

i

n
p
S

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5
0

2

For maximum possible spin, we have sr = ǫ0U 2/ω, and
the total spin angular momentum of the beam, in units
of ¯h per photon, can be found by integrating over a hemi-
sphere:

Sz = A/P

(9)

exp(−2 tan2 θ/ tan2 θ0) sin θ cos θdθ

(10)

where

π/2

A =

Z
0

and

π/2

P =

Z
0

This can be readily integrated numerically, and the result
for all practically realizable Gaussian beams is shown in
ﬁgure 1. The qualitative behaviour seen here is expected
since Sz = 0.5P/ω for a dipole radiation ﬁeld [3].

20

60
40
80
Beam convergence angle θ
 (degrees)
0

100

FIG. 1: Spin angular momentum in ¯h per photon for a non-
paraxial TEM00 Gaussian beam. The solid line shows the
exact result, the dotted line shows the small-angle approxi-
mation.

For θ0 ≪ 1, small angle approximations can be made,

giving

Sz = 1 − θ

2
0/4.

(12)

The relative error in the change in spin (1 − Sz) is less
than 0.01 for beam convergence angles θ0 < 6.25◦, and
less than 0.1 for θ0 < 21◦.

Although the spin angular momentum ﬂux of the beam
is reduced by the beam being focussed, a lossless rotation-
ally symmetric optical system cannot change the total
angular momentum ﬂux of an electromagnetic ﬁeld [6].
Therefore, there must be a corresponding increase in the
orbital angular momentum. This is in remarkable con-
trast to the usual methods of generating optical vortices

which employ astigmatic or cylindrical lenses or holo-
grams designed to break the rotational symmetry. The
key diﬀerence is that orbital angular momentum genera-
tion by focussing depends on the initial presence of spin
angular momentum, whereas astigmatic systems do not.
An interesting question that remains to be answered is
in what way the focussed beam carries the orbital angu-
lar momentum. This is best addressed by considering a
rigorous electromagnetic model of the beam.

Multipole expansion

A time-harmonic electromagnetic beam can be repre-

sented as a sum of of electric and magnetic multipoles:

E(r) =

anmMnm + bnmNnm

(13)

∞

n

Xn

Xm=−n

where Mnm and Mnm are the TE and TM regular mul-
tipole ﬁelds, or vector spherical wavefunctions [5]. Not
only are these wavefunctions a complete orthogonal set
of divergence-free solutions of the vector Helmholtz equa-
tion (and hence solutions to the Maxwell equations), they
are also eigenfunctions of the angular momentum opera-
tor J 2, with eigenvalues [n(n+ 1)]1/2, and Jz, with eigen-
values m. The spin and orbital contributions to the an-
glular momentum can be calculated from the expansion
coeﬃcients anm and bnm [3, 7].

The only non-zero multipole coeﬃcients for a left-
circularly polarized rotationally symmetric beam are
those with m = 1. Thus, the total angular momen-
tum about the z axis is ¯h per photon. The multipole
expansion coeﬃcients for the beam can be determined
by an overdetermined point-matching method [5]. For a
beam of ﬁnite width, it is found that the total spin is less
than ¯h per photon (spin calculated in this way exactly
reproduces the curve in ﬁgure 1). The remainder of the
angular momentum is orbital.

Since the multipole expansion of the beam is known,
the ﬁelds can be calculated at any point in space. The
components of the electric ﬁeld in the focal plane are
shown in ﬁgure 2. For a strongly focussed beam such as
is shown in ﬁgure 2, the longitudinal (ie z) component of
the ﬁeld is signiﬁcant, with a magnitude of ≈ 0.3 times
the transverse components. All components of the elec-
tric ﬁeld show secondary diﬀraction rings (note that the
radial dependence of multipole ﬁelds includes a spheri-
cal Bessel function). The phases of the x and y compo-
nents are uniform, except for an increment of π between
successive diﬀraction rings, and, due to the circular po-
larization, diﬀer by π/2 from each other. The phase of
the z component, however, shows a clear azimuthal de-
pendence identical to that seen in l = 1 paraxial vortex
modes. Since this vortex behaviour is only possessed by
the longitudinal component of the ﬁeld, this can be called
a longitudinal optical vortex.

3

Calculation of the Poynting vector shows that there is
indeed a transverse component, which, since its handed-
ness is uniform, is responsible for the transport of the
orbital angular momentum.

FIG. 2: Electric ﬁeld components of a strongly focussed cir-
cularly polarized Gaussian beam, with a convergence angle of
◦
45
. The x, y, and z components of the electric ﬁeld in the
focal plane are shown in (a), (b), and (c), while (d) shows
phase contours (with a spacing of 2π/20) for the z compo-
nent, showing azimuthal variation of phase as seen in vortex
beams.

1

0.5

y

0

−0.5

−1
−1

−0.5

0
x

0.5

1

FIG. 3: Poynting vector of a strongly focussed circularly po-
larized Gaussian beam, with a convergence angle of 45◦. The
transverse part (x and y components) of the Poynting vector
in the focal plane are shown.

As the beam is more strongly focussed, the magnitude
of the longitudinal (z) component of the ﬁeld increases,
and the orbital angular momentum increases as a result.

The same increase can also be considered to result from
the decrease of spin angular momentum, along with the
conservation of total angular momentum. The change in
the angular momentum and the growth of the longitu-
dinal optical vortex is smooth and well-behaved as the
convergence angle of the beam is increased, with no sud-
den qualitative or quantitative changes. As the beam is
more strongly focussed, the diﬀraction rings also become
more prominent, but this does not aﬀect the angular mo-
mentum of the beam.

DISCUSSION

Torque density acting on lens

In light of the above considerations, the transformation
of spin angular momentum to orbital angular momentum
by the lens must result in a reaction torque density about
the z-axis acting on the lens that depends on the choice
of origin. While such a torque acting on empty space is
unacceptable on physical grounds, it is not only entirely
reasonable, but expected, in the case of a lens.

One need only to consider a simple ray picture of the
action of a lens, not centered on the z axis, on a ray
parallel to the z-axis. The focussed ray will generally
not pass through the z-axis, and is not parallel to the z-
axis, and hence carries orbital angular momentum about
the z-axis. Consequently, there must be a reaction torque
density acting on the lens. Note that this torque density
depends on the choice of origin. The component about
any axis parallel to the beam axis of the total torque
acting on the lens is, of course, zero.

Rotation in optical traps

The presence of orbital angular momentum in the focal
region suggests that orbital motion of absorbing or reﬂec-
tive spherical particles should be observable in optical
tweezers. However, since particles trapped in a Gaus-
sian beam trap will be located on the beam axis, all that
will be observed will be spinning of the particle about its
axis. In order to observe this orbital angular momentum,

4

it would be necessary to use a multi-ringed beam with
zero orbital angular momentum, for example a Laguerre-
Gauss mode LGp0, with p > 1, or a Bessel beam, as the
input to the objective lens of the trap. In this case, par-
ticles trapped in one of the rings rather than the central
spot can be be expected to undergo orbital motion.

CONCLUSION

We note that focusing a circularly polarized beam pre-
serves the total angular momentum ﬂux of the beam
about its axis. However, the spin component of the an-
gular momentum ﬂux is necessarily reduced as the beam
is more strongly focussed. Due to the conservation of
total angular momentum when the beam is focussed by
a rotationally symmetric optical system, there must be
a corresponding increase in the orbital angular momen-
tum ﬂux. This result is remarkable in that it predicts the
generation of orbital angular momentum by a rotation-
ally symmetric optical system, in apparent contradiction
with common expectation.

This orbital angular momentum is carried by the axial
component of the electric ﬁeld, Ez, which has the typical
exp(iφ) dependence of charge 1 optical vortices; we call
this a longitudinal optical vortex.

∗

timo@physics.uq.edu.au

[1] J. Humblet, Physica 10, 585 (1943).
[2] S. J. van Enk and G. Nienhuis, J. Mod. Opt. 41, 963

(1994).

[3] J. H. Crichton and P. L. Marston, Electronic Journal of

Diﬀerential Equations Conf. 04, 37 (2000).

[4] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley,

New York, 1999), 3rd ed.

[5] T. A. Nieminen, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N. R. Heck-
enberg, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 79-80, 1005
(2003).

[6] P. C. Waterman, Physical Review D 3, 825 (1971).
[7] A. I. Bishop, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and
H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Phys. Rev. A 68, 033802 (2003).

