Optical velocimetry; LA-UR-04-6453

W. T. Buttler, S. K. Lamoreaux, F. G. Omenetto and J. R. Torgerson
University of California,Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Physics Division P-23, M.S. H803, Los Alamos, NM 87545
(Dated: July 14, 2004)

This work considers current potential uses of laser Doppler velocimetry. A discussion of other
optical velocimetry techniques is presented and compared with their practical application to modern
shock physics diagnostics, such as VISAR.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. OPTICAL DIAGNOSTICS: SHOCK PHYSICS
APPLICATIONS

Measurement problems in shock physics present their
own special diﬃculty in determining parameters impor-
tant for modeling continuous mechanical systems, such
as steel or other metals, under extreme pressures. At

4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Doppler eﬀect concepts were ﬁrst introduced by math-
ematician Christian Johann Doppler in the 1800s [1].
Doppler postulated that the frequency of sound, and
light, depended on whether the source was moving or
stationary, and on the medium through which the sound
was carried. As a proof, in 1845 Doppler performed an
experiment at a train station in which two identical horns
played the same note while one horn was on a mov-
ing train and the other was stationary. This result is
now generally appreciated by most persons as most have
heard the diﬀerence between the sound of a car horn,
siren, etc., that is travelling toward or away from a sta-
tionary listener.

At a later date (∼ 1848), Armand Fizeau indepen-
dently formalized Doppler’s theory for electromagnetic.
Fizeau was unaware of Doppler’s work [1], and his pos-
tulates dealt with the red shift of light by moving stars.
He postulated that the speed of the star depended on its
color, or frequency. Of Course, Einstein fully established
the relativistic Doppler eﬀect with his Special Theory of
Relativity in the early 1905 [2].

Presently the Doppler eﬀect is used quite eﬀectively,
and regularly, to determine the velocities of many diﬀer-
ent objects, to answer many diﬀerent physics questions.
Police use the Doppler eﬀect, with optical- and radio-
frequencies, to remotely determine the velocity of cars.
The military has used Doppler radar for similar purposes.
Doppler annemometers are used to measure particle ve-
locities in ﬂuid ﬂow. Laser Doppler velocimeters are used
to measure wind speeds [3], etc.

Modern laser Doppler techniques were introduced in
the early 1960s by Yeh and Cummins [4]. Shortly there-
after, Forman, et al, [5] proved Yeh’s eﬀorts and devel-
oped practical applications of laser Doppler velocimetry
as a ﬂuid ﬂow diagnostic (see Fig. 1). Since this mod-
ern inception, Doppler methods as a diagnostic tool have
become popular in atmospheric physics, eavesdropping,
etc.

FIG. 1: This schematic shows the basic conﬁguration used by
Forman [5]. Its salient characteristic is that it splits oﬀ the
reference beam and heterodynes it with the Doppler shifted
beam. The concept is simple, and the technique sensitive.
(Not shown are any attenuators that might be needed to bal-
ance the reference beam with the reﬂected beam intensity;
neither is the beamsplitting ratio speciﬁed, nor any other de-
tailed optics speciﬁcations.)

once Doppler methods looked promising to measure the
parameters important in equation-of-state studies, and
yet were diﬃcult to practically implement. The largest
problems centered on available laser-light frequencies,
and detection-and-measurement technologies available at
that time. For example, consider the Doppler shift from
He-Ne light (λ = 633 nm) scattered oﬀ of a surface
shocked up to a velocity on the order of 1, 000 m-s−1.
This shift is represented by a Doppler beat frequency of:

ωD =

v
c
∴ |fD| = a ·

× ω0
v
λ0

= 1.58 GHz.

(1)

(The constant, a, is determined by the angle of observa-
tion, and whether the light is travelling along or against
the ﬂow; for normal incidence reﬂection, a = 2.) Thus,
one can see quite clearly that in the early stages of
Doppler development, that measurement-and-detection
technologies at the time limited Doppler techniques to
low speed measurements.

Not to be denied, scientists applied some neat optical
techniques to measure velocities of this order of mag-
nitude; namely, VISAR (velocity interferometer system
for any reﬂector) [6]. The success of VISAR relies on
the Doppler shift to determine a velocity from a reﬂec-
tor, but it does not actually measure the Doppler shift.
Rather, VISAR measures the diﬀerence in the Doppler
shift between two relatively Doppler shifted, reﬂected
light beams. Thus, if you will, VISAR measures the ac-
celeration of a surface as a function of time.

The VISAR concept, essentially, is based on an un-
balanced interferometer, i.e., one arm of the interferom-
eter is longer than the other (see Fig. 2). The eﬀect is
to interfere early-time reﬂected light with late-time re-
ﬂected light. In its simplest concept, detector amplitude
measurements are made in quadrature; the amplitude
measurements then represent the sine and cosine of the
detected amplitude at the last beamsplitter. In this con-
cept, the sine- or-cosine is plotted versus the cosine- or-
sine of the measured amplitude–the phase angle between
the early- and late-time reﬂected light. To complete the
system, polarizers and waveplates are used to ascertain
whether the surface is accelerating in a positive or neg-
ative sense. The velocity is determined by integrating
(counting) the number of fringes that spin by. The longer
the signal is integrated in time, the more uncertain the
result.

VISAR was an elegant solution to an intractable
measurement-and-detection bandwidth problem in the
early 1970s. However, it has also been regularly applied
to Asay foil measurements [7] when in fact direct Doppler
measurements are more appropriate as the foil velocity
in such systems is seldom greater than a few tens of me-
ters per second (a beat frequency on the order of tens of
mega-Hertz). It would be much simpler and more cost
eﬀective to simply apply Doppler techniques to the Asay
foil diagnostic.

2

Another technique currently in use to measure the free-
surface velocity of a projectile, or shocked system of par-
ticles, is referred to as Fabry-Perot [8]. Basically, this
concept involves directly measuring the change in the
wavelength of the reﬂected light. This is accomplished
with a high quality etalon. When properly aligned,
the fringe pattern formed when light passes through the
etalon forms an Airy pattern. This Airy pattern (a.k.a.
Fraunhofer diﬀraction pattern of a circular aperture) is
imaged onto a slit preceding a streak camera that is used
for detection. As the surface is shocked, or as the pro-
jectile moves, the Airy pattern fringe spacing changes.
These changes in the fringe patterns are recorded on the
streak camera and relate the velocity of the free-surface
similarly as the direct Doppler measurements.

III. DISCUSSION

We have discussed several methods whereby it is pos-
sible to measure the velocity of a free surface, such as a
projectile or shocked surface. The techniques commonly

FIG. 2: This ﬁgure [6] schematically describes the VISAR
concept. Early-time reﬂected light [light that travels the up-
per (long) path] is ”interfered” with late-time reﬂected light
[light that travels the lower (short) path]. The two detectors
deﬁne the quadrature measurement. [It is worth noting that
many of the subsequent improvements to this earlier system
are left out of the schematic. The improvements include a
quality block of glass (this changes the rate of modal disper-
sion), and polarizers and waveplates, to name a few of these
important improvements.]

in use today at national laboratories in the United States
and Europe include VISAR and Fabry-Perot, and the
most common technique in use is VISAR [6]. A reason-
able question to ask, is “why consider diﬀerent techniques
today as we have at least two proven diagnostic methods
to accomplish this task?”. To answer this question, it is
appropriate to ask the following: “what method would we
consider today for these measurements if these types of
measurements had never been accomplished before, and
we were not limited by our technology?”. The answer for
velocities on the order of u(t) . 1, 000 m-s−1, is that we
would consider Doppler.

Doppler measurements give the instantaneous velocity,
so long as certain parameters are known. For example, is
the object moving toward or away from the measurement
apparatus? Is the angle of incidence normal to the surface
or is the angle known?

The Doppler measurement gives the velocity in the ab-
sence of a priori information. For example, if the VISAR
system is not activated prior to the initial motion of the
surface, the all important initial phase angle information
is lost and it cannot be recovered. The initial motion of
interest must be covered prior to being able to determine
a velocity; failure to measure this angle is equivalent to
not knowing (measuring) the integration constant.
In
addition, due to bandwidth limitations, VISAR cannot
accurately determine the jump-oﬀ velocity as the mea-
surement is sensitive to small diﬀerences in the Doppler
shift.

Fabry-Perot requires similar information as VISAR.
For example, the streak-camera timing must be precise
enough to make certain that the recording system is ac-
tive prior to the initial surface motion, otherwise the mo-
tion of the fringes from the static position will not be
known, and neither will the velocity.

It is simple to argue that Doppler has other limitations
as well. It is clear, however, that it is better to start the
recording of the diagnostic prior to projectile motion, or
free-surface motion, otherwise it would not be able to
specify the position as a function of time, at least not
precisely (x0 is needed, for the same reasons that the
initial phase angle is needed for VISAR, and the initial
fringe position is needed for Fabry-Perot: position follows
from integrating and the initial constant is required for
a quantitative result).

Because VISAR “velocities” represent an integration
of the acceleration measurement, it is clear that if each
fringe that is integrated is known to within some con-
stant uncertainty, then the uncertainty in velocity in-
creases with time in a non-linear fashion. If velocity is
then integrated again, to generate position as a func-
tion of time, then those uncertainties again increase in a
non-linear fashion. An advantage of an optical Doppler
measurement is that it measures velocity directly, and its
uncertainty is, for the most part, ﬁxed with each mea-
surement, i.e, the uncertainty is related to how well one
can determine the distance between adjacent peaks in the
beat frequency, fD. This is true for each measurement of

the beat frequency. The positional uncertainty, of course,
increases with time, non-linearly.

3

IV. WHAT MAKES SENSE?

As noted earlier, a normally reﬂected Doppler mea-
surement with a He-Ne wavelength of 633 nm requires
a detector and recording bandwidth of & 3.2 GHz.
While this is achievable today with current technology,
it would nevertheless remain expensive as the recording-
and-detection technologies are expensive; the laser tech-
nology is within reach (for example, one might double
and Nd:YAG laser to 532 nm). However, these types of
bandwidths remain impractical for practical applications
(one might imagine that velocities of interest may be one
or two times 1, 000 m-s−1).

The advent of high-speed optical communications tech-
nologies provides a path forward for direct Doppler tech-
niques. For example, if the standard communications
wavelength of λ ≈ 1, 550 nm is used, then a bandwidth
of ≈ 1.3 GHz is needed for a 1, 000 m-s−1 velocity deter-
mination. This leaves room for much higher velocities.

It should also be noted that Doppler will cost much
less to ﬁeld per data set.
It can be achieved without
laser systems that cost several hundred thousands of dol-
lars, and should not require one or two persons several
months to set up, stabilize, and maintain until the mea-
surements are complete. There is no reason that laser
Doppler velocimetry cannot be plug-and-play.

The applications include high-velocity measurements
at 1, 550 nm (single-mode light, erbium doped ﬁber am-
pliﬁers will work well), and Asay foil type measurements
with a He-Ne type laser.

Other potentially practical uses include laser Doppler
vibrometry [9] to measure strain coeﬃcients in piezoelec-
tric materials. This technique could possibly be used to
directly measure the sensitivity of piezoelectric probes
ﬁelded as a low-proﬁle companion diagnostic to the Asay
foil.

Our current eﬀort includes development of a laser
Doppler velocimeter at 1, 550 nm. All optics have been
purchased and measurements on the order of mm-s−1
velocities have been accomplished; velocities on the or-
der of cm-s−1 have also been accomplished with a “fast”
solenoid. The crude apparatus has been used and ini-
tial plans are to test the diagnostic at the Proton-
Radiography facility powder gun, and other LANL ﬁring
sites; ﬁelding the diagnostic at the Bechtel, Santa Bar-
bara, boom-box has also been considered.

Our objective is to develop an alternative optical di-
agnostic to VISAR techniques where VISAR techniques
are not required for success. These situations include
velocities up to about 3 km-s−1, with a λ ≈ 1, 550 nm
laser tool, and a visible He-Ne system for use with Asay
foils. The laser technologies are well established and the
measurement-and-detection technologies are available.

V. CONCLUSION

We have presented a discussion of current, laser re-
mote velocity determining systems. These systems in-
clude VISAR, Fabry-Perot and Doppler. Direct laser
Doppler techniques have several advantages over both
Fabry-Perot and VISAR. Namely, Doppler techniques are

more sensitive than VISAR or Fabry-Perot; Doppler does
not suﬀer from the same visibility issues as either VISAR
or Fabry-Perot; Doppler is easier to ﬁeld with oﬀ the shelf
components and does not have the expense, nor should
it require the continual support required by VISAR or
Fabry-Perot.

4

[1] C. J. Doppler, “On the coloured light of the double stars

and certain other stars of the heavens,” (1842).

[2] A. Einstein, ”The electrodynamics of moving bodies,”

(1905).

[3] W. T. Buttler, C. Soriano, J. Baldasano and G. H. Nickel,
“Remote sensing of three-dimensional winds with elastic
lidar: explanation of maximum cross-correlation method,”
Boundary-Layer Meteorol. 101, 305-328 (2001).

[4] Y. Yeh and H. Z. Cummins, “Localized ﬂuid ﬂow mea-
surements with an He-Ne laser spectrometer,” App. Phys.
Lett 4, 176 (1964).

[5] J. W. Forman, Jr., E. W. George and R. D. Lewis, “Mea-
surement of localized ﬂow velocities in gases with a laser
Doppler ﬂowmeter,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 7, 77-78 (1965).
[Also see: J. W. Forman, Jr., E. W. George and R. D.
Lewis, ‘Feasibility study of a laser ﬂowmeter for local ve-
locity measurements in gas ﬂow ﬁelds,’ Technical note

#149, Teledyne Brown Engineering Co. Inc., Huntsville,
AL.]

[6] L. M. Barker and R. E. Hollenbach, ”Laser interferometer
for measuring high velocitis of an reﬂecting surface,” J.
Appl. Phys 43, 4669-4675 (1972).

[7] J. R. Asay, “Thick-plate technique for measuring ejecta
from shocked surfaces” J. Appl. Phys. 49, 6173 (1978).
[8] C. F. McMillan, D. R. Goosman, N. L. Parker, L. L. Stein-
metz, H. H. Chau, T. Huen, R. K. Whipkey and S. J.
Perry, “Velocimetry of fast surfaces using Fabry-Perot in-
terferometry,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 59, 1-21 (1988).

[9] K. M. Rittenmyer and P. S. Dubbelday, “Direct measure-
ment of the temperature-dependent piezoelectric coeﬃ-
cients of composite materials by laser Doppler vibrome-
try,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 91, 2254-2260 (1992).

