4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fabrication of micro-mirrors with pyramidal shape using anisotropic
etching of silicon

Z. Moktadir∗,1 C. Gollasch,1 E. Koukharenko,1 M. Kraft,1 G. Vijaya
Prakash,2 J.J. Baumberg,2 M. Trupke,3 S. Eriksson,3 and E.A. Hinds3
1School of Electronics and Computer Science, Southampton University, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom∗
2School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
3Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, Prince Consort Road, London, United Kingdom

Gold micro-mirrors have been formed in silicon in an inverted pyramidal shape. The pyramidal
structures are created in the (100) surface of a silicon wafer by anisotropic etching in potassium
hydroxide. High quality micro-mirrors are then formed by sputtering gold onto the smooth silicon
(111) faces of the pyramids. These mirrors show great promise as high quality optical devices
suitable for integration into MOEMS systems.

The miniaturization of optical components leads to
higher packaging density and increased speed of devices
that manipulate light. This is part of the vast ﬁeld
of Microsystems technology, designated by Micro-Opto-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MOEMS), in which elec-
tronic, mechanical, and optical devices are integrated
on the micron scale. Mirrors are fundamental compo-
nents of most optical systems. A repeatable technique
for the fabrication of high-quality micro-mirrrors is there-
fore an essential step in the advancement of this ﬁeld.
For example, if the surface quality of the mirrors were
high enough, one could contemplate using them to make
miniature optical resonators, which would have signiﬁ-
cant applications ranging from narrow-band ﬁlters in op-
tical communications1 to the enhancement or suppres-
sion of spontaneous emission in cavity QED devices.2 At
present there is no simple MOEMS technique to make
small mirrors. Small optical cavities have been made
using silica and quartz microspheres (see for example
ref. [3]), and Coyle et al.4 have reported spherical metal-
lic mirrors fabricated using templated self-assembly, but
neither method is ideally suited for integration with
MOEMS technology.

We have fabricated 2-dimensional arrays of micro-
mirrors in silicon using a method that is simple, economi-
cal, and compatible with MOEMS. We start with a (100)-
oriented silicon wafer, coated with a thin layer of oxide.
Optical lithography is then used to make square openings
in the oxide, through which the silicon can be etched. We
use the anisotropic etchant potassium hydroxide (KOH)
at a concentration of 25% by volume and a temperature
of 80 ◦C. This attacks the Si(100) plane more rapidly
than the Si(111) plane, resulting in a pyramidal pit5
bounded by the four surfaces (1, 1, 1), (¯1, 1, 1), (1, ¯1, 1)
and (¯1, ¯1, 1). Typical resulting pyramids are shown in
Fig. 1. The Si(111)- faces of the pyramids are expected to
be extremely smooth because of the layer-by-layer etch-
ing mechanism involved.6,7 Atomic force microscope mea-
surements conﬁrm this, giving an rms surface roughness
value of less than 0.5 nm for the uncoated pyramid faces.
This makes them ideal as substrates for high-quality opti-
cal mirrors. After stripping the oxide mask away, a layer
of gold of 100 nanometers thickness is applied to the sili-

con. Gold was chosen as it is a good reﬂector for infrared
light, but mirrors for other wavelengths can be made by
using other metals or multi-layer dielectric coatings. Af-
ter sputtering, the surface roughness increases to 3 nm
(rms). With this amount of roughness one can calculate
that the scattering loss of the specularly reﬂected inten-
sity should be less than 0.5% in the near-infrared range.8
By perfecting the coating procedure it should be possible
to decrease these losses to less than 0.01% in this region
of the spectrum.

FIG. 1: SEM micrographs of the etched and gold-coated pyra-
mids. (a) top view showing pyramids in a rectangular array
with a pitch of 100 µm. (b) Cross-sectional view of a single
pyramid. This was obtained by cleaving the pyramid paral-
lel to one of its edges. The base of the pyramid has a side
of length 30 µm, corresponding to a perpendicular depth of
21.3 µm

Fig. 1 (a) shows a small section of the array viewed un-
der a scanning electron microscope after completion of
the gold coating. In this particular sample, the pyramids
have a square base whose sides are of 30 µm long. These
are arranged in a square lattice with a pitch of 100 µm.
Both the etching and the sputtering processes are stan-
dard techniques and can be accurately controlled, guar-
anteeing that the fabrication results are reproducible.
Furthermore, large numbers of mirrors can be packed at
high density in a single batch. In the rest of this paper
we measure directly how the pyramids respond to light
and we show that they oﬀer a promising new approach
to fabricating micro-mirrors for MOEMS.

Our ﬁrst test of the mirrors is to illuminate them
with a collimated 1 mm-diameter laser beam (wavelength

2

FIG. 2: Measured intensity distribution of reﬂected light, at
a distance of 7 cm from the array of pyramids, when it is il-
luminated at normal incidence. A central bright spot, which
is caused by reﬂection from the region between pyramids, has
been covered to improve visibility of the light reﬂected from
the pyramids. The circles in (a) show the reﬂection pattern
expected for a perfect pyramid, while the circles in (b) in-
dicate the calculated reﬂection pattern for a pyramid with
rounded corners. Size indicates expected relative intensity.

633 nm) propagating along the z axis, i.e. normal to the
silicon surface and along the symmetry axis of the pyra-
mids. The sides of the pyramids deﬁne x and y axes,
as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 (a) shows the reﬂected pattern
of light observed on a screen 7 cm away from the mir-
rors. On this we have drawn circles indicating the posi-
tion of spots as expected from a perfect pyramid. The
three prominent spots at the corners of the square are
due to doubly reﬂected rays, which we classify as type
(1). These reﬂect from opposite faces of the pyramid, as
illustrated by the solid line in Fig. 3 (a). There should be
a fourth spot at the bottom of the photographs, but this
is blocked by a mount holding the beamsplitter through
which the array is illuminated.

If the angle between opposite mirrors is α, the type (1)
beams make an angle of (π − 2α) with the z axis. From
the angles measured, we ﬁnd that α = (70.6 ± 0.7)◦,
in agreement with the expected angle between oppos-
ing faces of arccos(1/3) = 70.5◦. When the incident ray
is close to the apex of the pyramid (within 1.6 µm for a
pyramid of 30 µm base length), it is reﬂected twice by the
ﬁrst mirror, as illustrated by the dashed line in Fig. 3 (a).
These rays, which we call type (2), should produce sec-
ondary spots just inside the type (1) spots. However, the
power in the type (2) reﬂected beams is expected to be
100 times smaller because of the small area from which
they originate, as shown in Fig. 3 (b). Consequently it is
not possible to identify the type (2) beams clearly against
the diﬀracted wings of the type (1) beams. Furthermore,
there is a background of light along the x- and y-axes
caused by reﬂection from rounded edges on the entrance
aperture of the pyramid, which can be seen in Fig. 1 (b).
If a ray is incident near one of the corners of the pyra-
mid, the ﬁrst reﬂection sends it oﬀ towards the opposite
mirror, but is is intercepted and deﬂected by the adja-
cent mirror before the opposite mirror sends it out of the
pyramid as a type (3) ray. These rays make an angle of

FIG. 3: (a) Cross section in the x−z plane through a pyramid,
showing type (1) and type (2) trajectories. These involve
reﬂections from mirrors on opposite sides of the pyramid. (b)
View of the entrance aperture of the pyramid, showing the
regions that produce type(1), type (2) and type (3) rays.

31.5◦ with the z axis and form double spots at azimuthal
angles of 36.9◦, 53.1◦, etc. as shown in Fig. 2 (a). These
spots are less distinct than those of type (1) because the
corners of the pyramid are rounded, a feature that does
not aﬀect the type (1) rays. Fig. 2 (b) shows the same
photographed reﬂection pattern, but here the superim-
posed circles indicate the expected position and magni-
tude of spots reﬂected from a pyramid with rounded cor-
ners. The roundness is included in the ray-tracing model
by four additional surfaces at each corner. These are
shaped to form approximate cone sections with radii of
2.5 µm at the base and 0.825 µm at the apex of the pyra-
mid. The resulting reﬂection pattern closely matches the
photographed intensity distribution.

The three types of rays described above also present
diﬀerent characteristics when observed under illumina-
tion using polarised light. Type (1) reﬂections leave the
linear polarisation of the light unchanged, whereas the
type (3) reﬂections produce a rotation of ±53◦ or ±78◦.
This is investigated in our second test of the mirrors, in
which we examine them under an optical microscope, il-
luminating them with white light once again along the z
axis. Fig. 4 (a) shows the image calculated by raytracing
for unpolarised light with the microscope focussed in the
plane of the apex of a perfect pyramid.
In this ﬁgure
most of the area is bright. In ﬁg. 4 (b) we show the ex-
pected image for linearly polarised light, viewed through
a parallel analyser, which suppresses the type (3) con-
tribution. This leads to a reduction in the intensity of
reﬂections from the corner region. In Fig. 4 (c), the anal-
yser is crossed with the polariser and only type (3) rays
contribute, making the corner region bright. The In-
tensity patterns observed in the laboratory are shown in
ﬁgures 4 (d), 4 (e), and 4 (f). They correspond closely to
the calculated distributions, indicating that the pyramid
reﬂects light as expected.

Knowing the types of reﬂected beams and their polar-
isations one has the possibility of designing the optics to
control the ﬁeld distribution within the pyramid. For ex-
ample, appropriately angled mirrors can be used to make

3

closed resonant cavities containing only type (1) rays of
uniform polarisation. These can be either standing-wave
or ring cavities. Rays of type (3) give quite diﬀerent ﬁeld
distributions with a strong vertical standing wave close
to the axis of the pyramid, and horizontal standing waves
near the faces of the pyramid. Yet more elaborate ﬁeld
distributions can be achieved by mixing the two. Po-
tential applications for the pyramids are in the areas of
atom optics, photonics and telecommunications. For ex-
ample, by ﬁlling the pits with ferroelectric material or
liquid crystals and applying an electric ﬁeld, it should be
possible to use the pyramids as fast optical switches.

In summary, we have designed, fabricated and char-
acterized a new type of micro-mirror, produced by
anisotropic etching through square apertures on a sili-
con single crystal. Optical ﬂatness is achieved naturally
through the layer-by-layer etching mechanism involved.
As an elementary component for optics, the micro-mirror
has a variety of possible applications in MOEMS devices,
including miniature optical switches and microcavities.
Detailed experiments and further theoretical analysis are
currently under way to develop these applications.

FIG. 4: Views of the vertex pyramidal mirror under an opti-
cal microscope at 100× magniﬁcation. Top row: Raytracing
simulation. Bottom Row: Photographs. (a) and (d): without
polarisers; (b) and (e): parallel polariser and analyser; (c)
and (f): crossed polariser and analyser.

Electronic address: zm@ecs.soton.ac.uk

∗
1 K. Djordjev, S. J. Choi, and P. D. Dapkus, IEEE Phot.

Technol. Lett. 14, 828 (2002).

2 H. J. Kimble, Physica Scripta T76, 127 (1998).
3 V. LefevreSeguin and S. Haroche, Mat, Sci. Eng. B 48, 53

(1997).

4 S. Coyle, G. V. Prakash, J. J. Baumberg, M. Abdelsalem,

and P. N. Bartlett, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 767 (2003).

5 R. Brendel, in Proc. 14th European Photovoltaic Solar En-
ergy Conference, edited by H. A. Ossenbrink, P. Helm, and

H. Ehmann (Stephens, Bedford, 1997), p. 1354.

6 Z. Moktadir and H. Camon, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng.

5, 481 (1997).

7 K. Sato, M. Shikida, T. Yamashiro, M. Tsunekawa, and

S. Ito, Sens. and Actuat. A 73, 122 (1999).

8 P. Beckmann and A. Spizzichino, The Scattering of Elec-
tromagnetic Waves from Rough Surfaces (Pergamon Press,
1963).

