4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spatial homogeneity of optically switched semiconductor photonic crystals
and of bulk semiconductors

Tijmen G. Euser∗ and Willem L. Vos
Complex Photonic Systems (COPS), Department of Science and Technology and MESA+ Research Institute,
University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands†

This paper discusses free carrier generation by pulsed laser ﬁelds as a mechanism to switch the
optical properties of semiconductor photonic crystals and bulk semiconductors on an ultrafast time
scale. Requirements are set for the switching magnitude, the time-scale, the induced absorption as
well as the spatial homogeneity, in particular for silicon at λ = 1550 nm. Using a nonlinear absorption
model, we calculate carrier depth proﬁles and deﬁne a homogeneity length ℓhom. Homogeneity length
contours are visualized in a plane spanned by the linear and two-photon absorption coeﬃcients. Such
a generalized homogeneity plot allows us to ﬁnd optimum switching conditions at pump frequencies
near ν/c=5000 cm−1 (λ = 2000 nm). We discuss the eﬀect of scattering in photonic crystals on the
homogeneity. We experimentally demonstrate a 10% refractive index switch in bulk silicon within
230 fs with a lateral homogeneity of more than 30 µm. Our results are relevant for switching of
modulators in absence of photonic crystals.

PACS numbers: 42.70.Qs, 42.65.Pc, 42.79.-e

I.

INTRODUCTION

serves as a cavity with a high quality factor.[5]

There is a fast growing interest in photonic crys-
tals; composite materials whose refractive index
varies periodically on length scales that match
the wavelength of light.[1] The optical proper-
ties of photonic materials are determined by the
spatially varying refractive index, analogous to
the periodic potential for an electron in a crys-
tal. Large spatial variations of the refractive index
cause a strong interaction between light and the
composite structure. Bragg diﬀraction causes the
photonic dispersion to organize into bands, much
like the energy levels of electrons in semiconduc-
tors. A major goal of the ﬁeld is the realization
of three-dimensional (3D) structures that possess
a photonic band gap.[2, 3] At frequencies inside
the band gap, the optical density of states van-
ishes. This should completely inhibit spontaneous
emission of sources inside the photonic crystal.[2]
Indeed, strong modiﬁcations of the spontaneous
emission lifetime of quantum dots have recently
been demonstrated in photonic crystals.[4] In the
presence of weak controlled disorder, Anderson lo-
calization of light is also predicted.[3] In this case,
a photon may be trapped at a point defect which

∗Electronic address: T.G.Euser@utwente.nl
†URL: www.photonicbandgaps.com

In the examples above, the photonic crystals
themselves do not change in time. Switching ex-
periments,
in which the properties of photonic
crystals are modiﬁed on an ultrafast timescale al-
low many interesting new opportunities. Switching
3D photonic crystals is particularly interesting, as
it provides the dynamic control over the density
of states inside the crystal as well as a change in
Bragg reﬂections.[6] Ultrafast control of the den-
sity of states should allow the switching of spon-
taneous emission of light sources inside a crystal,
and capturing and releasing light in cavities inside
the crystal.
In absence of photonic crystals, ul-
trafast switching of bulk semiconductors ﬁnds ap-
plications in high speed optical modulators[7] and
waveguides.[8] Last but not least, ultrafast control
of photonic crystals is important for controlling the
propagation of light, such as in switched macrop-
orous silicon,[9] or 2D crystal slabs.[10]

In optical switching experiments, four important
requirements have to be met.[6] First of all, the
magnitude of the induced change in the real part
of the refractive index n′ must be large enough to
obtain the desired eﬀect. A relative change in n′ of
5% is required to induce a major change in the den-
sity of states. Such large changes can be induced
by free carrier generation[11] but are not achiev-
able with Kerr switching. The second requirement,
which is important for applications, is the mini-
mum time scale ∆t over which the switch occurs.

In experiments where light pulses are trapped in-
side photonic crystals, a switching time scale on
the order of a few hundred femtoseconds is neces-
sary. The third requirement is that the absorption
of probe light, gauged by n′′, should be small in
the switched sample. Excited carriers in a semi-
conductor bring about inevitable absorption (re-
lated by a Kramers-Kronig relation to the change
in n′), that should remain within limits by a lim-
ited carrier density. The fourth requirement con-
cerns the spatial homogeneity of the change ∆n′ in
a sample. Homogeneity is particularly important
in switching the density of states in 3D photonic
crystals. A large gradient in ∆n′ in the crystal re-
sults in a highly chirped switched sample, which
can no longer be considered a photonic crystal.
All of these requirements also pertain to other ap-
plications of switched semiconductors, such as in
waveguiding,[7] albeit much relaxed. Therefore, we
expect the results from the present study also to be
relevant for applications outside photonic crystals.
Switching experiments in photonic crystals were
pioneered by Leonard et al..[9] Optical free carrier
generation was used to change the refractive index
of the backbone of a 2D silicon photonic crystal.
The carrier density generated in their experiment
was suﬃciently high to induce a shift of a Bragg
stopgap on ultrafast time scales. Nevertheless, the
experiments revealed a serious limitation: the ab-
sorption of the pump beam limits the volume of
switched material and leads to a spatial inhomo-
geneity in the degree of switching. Leonard et al.
deduced that only a layer of three unit cells near
the sample surface was switched.[9] Similar inho-
mogeneity is probably also playing a role in recent
studies of silicon inﬁltrated opaline crystals, where
a disappearance of the Bragg peak was observed in
the absorption range.[12] Therefore, the use of two-
photon absorption was proposed as a way to in-
crease the penetration depth of pump light into the
sample and improve the switching homogeneity.[6]
In this paper, we investigate the spatial homo-
geneity of optically generated free carrier plasmas
in semiconductors. We discuss a non-linear ab-
sorption model that takes into account both linear
and two-photon absorption processes. From this
model, we derive optimum pumping conditions and
we deﬁne a homogeneity length scale to obtain ho-
mogeneous switching conditions. In particular we
trace constant homogeneity lengths in a general
parameter-diagram that pertains to any semicon-
ductor. We discuss the role of disorder-induced

2

diﬀusion of the pump beam in photonic crystals.
Finally we experimentally demonstrate that suﬃ-
cient ultrafast refractive index changes can be ob-
tained with suﬃcient lateral homogeneity.

We concentrate on silicon, not only because of its
wide technological use, but also because it allows
greater homogeneity than GaAs that was discussed
in Ref. 6. Examples are given for light in the tele-
com band at νtele/c = 6450 cm−1 (λ = 1550 nm),
but can easily be generalized to other frequencies.
We set a minimum volume of 5 unit cells cubed
in which the change ∆n′ must remain within 10%
of its maximum value. This homogeneity require-
ment holds for both the lateral directions x and y,
as well as for the z-direction deﬁned in ﬁgure 1.
Even in such a small crystal volume, the DOS al-
ready shows a signiﬁcant decrease for frequencies
that lie in the band gap.[13] The typical unit cell
size of silicon inverse opal photonic crystals with
a bandgap near νtele is a = 1.2 µm, therefore the
homogeneously switched area must extend at least
6 µm in all three dimensions.

II. FREE CARRIER GENERATION

In optical free carrier generation a pump pulse
is absorbed by a semiconductor sample, creating
a free carrier plasma with electron-hole density
Neh. The generated carrier plasma changes the di-
electric function ǫ(ω) of the sample by an amount
∆ǫeh(ω). In the case of silicon, the Drude model
gives a excellent description of the resulting ǫ(ω)
for densities below 1022 cm−3 (see Ref. 11).

ǫ(ω) = ǫB(ω) + ∆ǫeh(ω) = ǫB

2

ωp
ω (cid:17)

1
1 + i 1
ωτD

,

− (cid:16)

(1)

where ǫB is the bulk dielectric constant, ω
(=2πν) the frequency of the probe light, me the
electron mass, m∗
opt the optical eﬀective mass
of the carriers, τD the Drude damping time,[14]
(Nehe2)/(ǫ0 m∗
and ωp =
optme) the plasma fre-
1,
quency. Under the condition that 1/(ωτD)
which is valid for silicon at ωtele, we can derive the
following simpliﬁed expression for the refractive in-

q

≪

dex from Eq. (1):

absorption length ℓca of the excited carrier plasma
is equal to

′

′′

n

+in

=

ǫ(ω) =

ǫB

r

−

p

(

ωp
ω

)2+i

2ω3τD

ω2
p

ǫB

For

−
(2)
below
1020 cm−3, the refractive index is linear with
the carrier density within 0.2%:

silicon with

densities

carrier

q

.

( ωp

ω )2

′

n

= √ǫB

e2
optmeω2 Neh.
2√ǫBǫ0m∗
Thus, the induced change in the refractive in-
dex n′ (via ǫ(ω)) is completely determined by the
optically induced carrier density.

(3)

−

An example of a carrier induced change of re-
fractive index in bulk silicon is given in Fig. 2. In
this experiment, a powerful ultrashort pump pulse
was focussed to a spot with radius rpump = 70 µm,
resulting in a peak intensity at the sample inter-
face of I0 = 115 GWcm−2. The reﬂectivity of a
weaker probe pulse with a smaller spot radius of
rprobe = 20 µm was measured in the center of the
pumped spot at diﬀerent time delays with respect
to the pump pulse. The scan in Fig. 2 shows that
the reﬂectivity of the sample changes from 32%
90% rise time is 230 fs, con-
to 28%. The 10%
ﬁrming an ultrafast change in n′. From Fresnel’s
formula we ﬁnd the refractive index change to be
more than 10%, corresponding to a large generated
1020 cm−3. This is about
carrier density of 1.6
twice the carrier density that is needed to obtain a
change in n′ of 5% for probe light at ωtele. We have
shown that optical carrier generation can be used
to change n′ by a large amount on a sub picosecond
timescale, meeting the ﬁrst two of the four main
density of states switching requirements.

×

−

For applications such as optical modulators and
waveguides, much smaller changes in n′ are already
suﬃcient, typically ∆n′ = 10−4, see Ref. 7. This
corresponds to a carrier density of 1016 cm−3. For
such low carrier densities, the required pump pulse
energy at νpump/c = 12500 cm−1 is on the order
of several nJ, allowing the use of diode lasers with
repetition rates exceeding 1 GHz as a pump source.
Thus it seems that carrier-induced optical switch-
ing may have much broader applications beyond
photonic crystals.

Next, we will discuss the induced absorption in
switched semiconductors, which is the third den-
sity of states switching requirement. The carrier

3

(4)

(5)

where k0 = ωn′(ω)/c. After inserting the ex-
pressions for n′(ω) and n′′(ω) from Eq. (2) we get:

ℓca =

1
2k0 n′′(ω)

ℓca =

2

ω
ωp (cid:19)

(cid:18)

τDc.

We immediately see that the absorption length
is inversely proportional to the plasma frequency
ωp squared and thus inversely proportional to the
carrier density.
In silicon, the carrier absorption
length of probe light at ωtele is ℓca = 22 µm for
a carrier density of 1020 cm−3.
In our analysis
of 3D photonic crystals we assume the crystals to
be inverse opals with a typical ﬁlling silicon ﬁll-
ing fraction of Φ = 25%. The carrier absorption
length in such crystals will then be approximately
four times larger than the bulk carrier absorption
length, or ℓca = 88 µm. This result shows that
in our analysis, where the carrier density is less
than 1020 cm−3, the carrier induced absorption for
ωtele remains very small. We have now shown that
the ﬁrst three requirements for successful switch-
ing experiments can be met for silicon at telecom
frequencies. The remainder of this paper will dis-
cuss the fourth requirement: the spatial switching
homogeneity.

III. OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SILICON

To analyze the switching homogeneity in the z
direction, we brieﬂy consider how pump light is
absorbed in semiconductors. At low pump inten-
sities I, the absorption of light in semiconductors
scales with the intensity: αI, where the absorp-
tion coeﬃcient α tends to zero for photon energies
¯hω below the electronic bandgap energy Egap, see
Fig. 3 for silicon. At high pumping intensities, non
linear two-photon absorption starts to play an im-
portant role. For two-photon absorption, the ab-
sorption is proportional to βI 2 where β is the two-
photon absorption coeﬃcient. This coeﬃcient is
expected to vanish for ¯hω > Egap/2. Fig. 3 displays
the frequency dependence of the linear and two-
photon absorption coeﬃcients of silicon. The data

±

was obtained from our measurements and from
Refs.[15, 16, 17, 18]: With our lasersystem,[19]
z-scan measurements[20] were performed to ob-
tain the two-photon absorption coeﬃcient β at
two additional wavelengths. For bulk silicon at
νpump/c = 5000 cm−1, β was measured to be
0.05 cmGW−1. At νpump/c = 6250 cm−1,
0.20
0.1 cmGW−1. The latter
we obtained β = 0.80
value is in excellent correspondence with the value
0.13 cmGW−1 at νpump /c= 6494 cm−1
β = 0.88
from Ref. 16. Our measurements conﬁrm that
β tends to zero for photon energies approaching
Egap/2. Both the linear and the nonlinear absorp-
tion coeﬃcient can thus be controlled by varying
the pump frequency.

±

±

IV. HOMOGENEITY OF SWITCHED
SEMICONDUCTORS

A. Homogeneity in the z-direction

We now present a model that calculates the car-
rier density depth proﬁle Neh(z) caused by absorp-
tion of pump light. The absorbed intensity is de-
scribed by the nonlinear diﬀerential equation

dI(z)
dz

−

=

[αI(z) + βI 2(z)],

(6)

which we have solved by implicit integration.
The resulting expression describing the intensity
depth proﬁle is

I(z) =

I0e−αz
1 + (βI0/α)(1

,

e−αz)

−

(7)

where I0 is the intensity at the interface. The
resulting carrier density proﬁle Neh(z) is related to
the intensity depth proﬁle I(z) as

Neh(z) =

I(z)τpump
¯hωpump h

α +

1
2

,

βI(z)
i

(8)

where τpump is the pump pulse duration. The
factor 1/2 for two-photon absorption indicates that
two photons must be absorbed to generate one
electron-hole pair. Substitution of Eq. (7) into
Eq. (8) allows us to calculate the carrier density
proﬁle for any given combination of α, β and I0.

4

We now investigate the relation between the
absorption coeﬃcients and pumping homogeneity.
To quantify the homogeneity of a switched sample,
we ﬁrst deﬁne the homogeneity length ℓhom within
which the carrier density remains within 10% of its
surface value:

ℓhom

0.1

≡

× (cid:20)

1
Neh(z)

dNeh(z)
dz

.

(cid:21)z=0

(9)

×

Because the homogeneity length is directly re-
lated to the maximum gradient in the carrier depth
proﬁle,
it is a helpful parameter in quantifying
the homogeneity of switched semiconductors. For
applications where switching homogeneity is im-
portant, the homogeneity length should be much
larger than the size of the switched sample. To il-
lustrate the homogeneity length, three carrier den-
sity depth proﬁles are shown in Fig. 4 for which
β is kept constant at 2 cmGW−1, and α is var-
ied from zero (dotted curve) to 400 cm−1 (dashed
curve) to 800 cm−1 (solid curve). For each case,
I0 is chosen such that the carrier density reaches
1020 cm−3 at the sample interface, corre-
0.9
sponding to a 5% change in n′ at νtele in silicon. On
the right y-axis the corresponding real part of the
refractive index n′ for silicon at νtele is shown. The
pump frequency was assumed to be 5000 cm−1.
A closer look at the three depth proﬁles in Fig. 4
shows that for α = 0 cm−1, the homogeneity length
is 1.0 µm. As α increases to 400 cm−1, the homo-
geneity length increases to 1.2 µm. As α increase
further to 800 cm−1, the homogeneity length de-
creases again to 1.0 µm. The surprising occurrence
of a maximum in the homogeneity length can be
explained with the aid of Eq. (8). For small α
I0β), the absorption is dominated by two-
(α
photon absorption. If α increases, the pump inten-
sity I0 needed to obtain the surface carrier density
decreases, reducing the slope of the intensity pro-
ﬁle at the interface, determined by the exponent
(α + I0β). This leads to an increase in ℓhom. If α
−
increases further to the regime where the absorp-
tion is dominated by linear absorption (α
I0β),
any further increase in α will result in a decrease of
the homogeneity length. In the region between the
two extremes, the homogeneity length apparently
attains a maximum value. This means that sim-
ply choosing two-photon (or perhaps even higher-
photon) absorption over linear absorption is not
always suﬃcient to ensure an optimal homogene-
ity.

≪

≫

×

We make a homogeneity plot to obtain further
insight in the inﬂuence of α and β on the homo-
geneity. First we choose a ﬁxed electron density at
1020 cm−3. The cor-
the interface Neh(0) = 0.9
responding homogeneity length contours are then
deduced from our absorption model, and visual-
ized in a plane spanned by linear and two-photon
absorption coeﬃcients, see Fig. 5. The absorp-
tion coeﬃcients for silicon at various frequencies
taken from Fig. 3 are also plotted in the plane in
Fig. 5. The three depth proﬁles shown in Fig. 4
correspond to positions a, b, and c in Fig. 5. To
obtain a certain minimum homogeneity, the ab-
sorption coeﬃcients must remain below the curve
corresponding to the particular minimum homo-
geneity. This graph thus allows us to directly ob-
tain the homogeneity length that can be obtained
for a semiconductor at a certain frequency. The ho-
mogeneity plot demonstrates how pumping homo-
geneity can be maximized by choosing the appro-
priate pump frequency. Generally, smaller absorp-
tion coeﬃcients lead to an increased homogeneity.
This increase comes at the price of a higher neces-
sary pump intensity I0. From Fig. 5 we conclude
that the most homogeneous switch for silicon can
be achieved for νpump/c = 5000 cm−1. For this
pump frequency, the homogeneity length is 2.9 µm.
For comparison: if νpump/c is equal to 12500 cm−1,
the homogeneity length is only 0.6 µm. The neces-
sary pump intensity remains below the maximum
available pump energy of our laser system Imax.
Our generalized homogeneity plot is valid for all
materials and allows us to ﬁnd optimum switch-
ing conditions. The choice for pumping frequencies
which are low in the two-photon absorption regime
drastically increases the pumping homogeneity.

We now make a plot that shows surface carrier
density contours (Neh(0)) corresponding to a par-
ticular ﬁxed homogeneity length. From such a plot
the maximum homogeneous change in refractive
index can be derived. We choose a ﬁxed homo-
geneity length of 1.5 µm, since inside a typical
photonic crystal with 25% ﬁlling fraction, the ho-
mogeneity length will be four times larger (6 µm)
thus fulﬁlling our homogeneity requirement. Fig. 6
displays contours for two diﬀerent carrier densities
eh = 1

1020 cm−3.
the upper curve is the homo-
geneity contour, and the lower one of each pair
of curves indicates the minimum absorption co-
eﬃcients for which carrier density can be gen-
erated given the maximum available intensity

1020 cm−3 and 2

In Fig.

×

×

6,

5

×

Imax = 1 TWcm−2.[19] For feasible switching ex-
periments, the absorption coeﬃcients must be in
the area to the right of the intersection of the two
curves. As the carrier density increases, the con-
stant ℓhom line moves towards lower absorption co-
eﬃcients, while the Imax line moves towards higher
values. As an example:
for a carrier density of
1020 cm−3, homogeneous switching can only
2
be achieved for absorption coeﬃcients within the
shaded area in Fig. 6. It is seen that this area does
not overlap with the trajectory of silicon parame-
ters. Therefore, this carrier density is not achiev-
able given ℓhom = 1.5 µm. With decreasing carrier
density, the range between the curves will over-
lap the silicon parameter trajectory at some point.
Such an intersection determines the upper limit to
the carrier density (given ℓhom = 1.5 µm) as well as
the pump frequency that pertains to the relevant
(α,β)-point. For silicon, this intersection is calcu-
1020 cm−3. From
lated to occur at Neh = 1.9
Eq. (3) we obtain the corresponding maximum ho-
mogeneous change in refractive index at νtele to be
11%.

×

The condition of a maximum intensity Imax can
be relaxed by choosing a smaller pump spot ra-
dius rpump. The assumed pump radius of 75 µm
provides a lateral homogeneity which is large com-
pared to the homogeneity requirement, therefore
we could choose a smaller rpump while maintain-
ing suﬃcient lateral homogeneity. A higher pump
intensity would allow homogeneous switching ex-
periments at even lower absorption coeﬃcients, al-
lowing larger changes of the refractive index. How-
ever, we must keep in mind that the carrier ab-
sorption length is inversely proportional to the in-
duced carrier density, see Eq. (5). For a refractive
index change of 11%, we predict the carrier ab-
sorption length inside a photonic crystal to drop
to ℓca = 38 µm, which may be suﬃcient to meet
our third requirement for switching experiments in
photonic crystals. At higher carrier densities how-
ever, the carrier absorption length will become too
small to meet this requirement.

A similar analysis can be done for other semicon-
ductor materials. The carrier density needed for a
5% change in n′ will depend on material proper-
ties such as the optical eﬀective mass of the carriers
and the Drude damping time τD (see Eq. (1)). We
brieﬂy discuss switching of GaAs at a frequency
ν/c = 9430 cm−1 proposed in Ref. 6. For GaAs
the optical eﬀective mass m∗
opt = 0.06 is 2.5 times
smaller than for silicon.[21] Therefore, the carrier

density in GaAs is 2.5 times lower than what is re-
quired for the same refractive index change in sili-
con. We ﬁnd that the area increases in which the
homogeneity requirement can be met. However,
the two-photon absorption coeﬃcient for GaAs
at ν/c = 9430 cm−1 is 26 cmGW−1, far above
the homogeneous switching area.[21] This imme-
diately shows, that GaAs at this pump frequency
cannot be used in homogeneous switching experi-
ments. From this brief analysis we learn that the
pumping frequencies in GaAs should be reduced,
to where the two-photon absorption coeﬃcient is
much lower value.

B. Lateral homogeneity

±

We now consider the homogeneity in the lat-
eral (x,y) directions. We have measured the rel-
ative change in probe reﬂectivity from a bulk sili-
con sample pumped in the two-photon absorption
regime at νpump/c = 6250 cm−1. For this fre-
0.1 cmGW−1 and α = 0. The
quency, β = 0.8
probe delay is ﬁxed at 10 ps to avoid transient
eﬀects. The pump focus position is shifted with
respect to the probe focus by adjusting the pump
mirror with a micrometer drive. The pump energy
Epump is 10.8 µJ on a focus with rpump = 80 µm.
The probe frequency νprobe/c is 7692 cm−1, with a
focus size of rprobe = 25 µm. The dashed line in the
graph is drawn to indicate the width of the pump
intensity distribution. The measured relative re-
ﬂectivity shows a minimum at the center of the
pump distribution, and decreases away from the
center. The reﬂectivity data was ﬁtted by a Gaus-
sian curve (solid curve). The radius of this mea-
5 µm, which is
sured reﬂectivity minimum is 34
considerably smaller than the rpump. To obtain the
lateral homogeneity length, we have determined
the maximum lateral distance by the pump focus
center for which ∆R/R remains within 10% of its
maximum value (dotted lines). This distance turns
out to be 16 µm in both directions, corresponding
to a homogeneity length of 32 µm. This illustrates
that for a sample pumped by a pump beam with
rpump = 80 µm, the lateral homogeneity length is
much better than the 6 µm which we required for
switching of the density of states.

±

6

V. SWITCHING HOMOGENEITY IN
REAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS

The above analysis was done for bulk semicon-
ductor samples. To obtain the homogeneity length
in photonic crystals, the bulk absorption length
is divided by the semiconductor ﬁlling fraction
Φ.
In case of a 5% switch of the refractive in-
dex in a silicon photonic crystal with Φ = 25%
at νpump/c = 5000 cm−1, the homogeneity length
thus increases from 2.9 µm to 11.6 µm, which is
twice the homogeneity requirement of 6 µm. For
a higher pump frequency of 12500 cm−1, we ﬁnd
a homogeneity length of 2.3 µm, which is too low.
This illustrates that the homogeneity required for
switching of the density of states in silicon photonic
crystals can only be performed at two-photon ab-
sorption frequencies.

In the analysis so far, the extinction of pump
light due to random scattering inside the photonic
crystals was neglected. We now discuss how to
incorporate inevitable scattering in photonic sam-
ples. Scattering is quantiﬁed by the mean free path
ℓmfp: the characteristic length over which a co-
herent beam becomes diﬀuse. The homogeneity
length of light inside a photonic crystal is related
to ℓmfp and ℓabs as

ℓhom = 0.1

1
ℓabs

+

1
ℓmfp (cid:21)

× (cid:20)

−1

.

(10)

≫

limit

In the

ℓabs, Eq.10 reduces to ℓhom = 0.1

of weak scattering, where
ℓabs. In
ℓmfp
×
ℓabs, the
the limit of strongly scatter, where ℓmfp
homogeneity length becomes ℓ + hom = 0.1
ℓmfp.
As opposed to the adverse eﬀect of scattering on
the homogeneity in the z-direction, scattering will
generally be favorable for lateral homogeneity, as
pump light which is removed from the coherent
pump beam is be scattered laterally.

≪

×

Recently, our group has developed a quantita-
tive model of the mean free path inside photonic
crystals.[22] One of the main results of the anal-
ysis is that the mean free path for pump light
decreases with pump frequency squared ω−2
pump.
The absolute value of the mean free path depends
not only on frequency, but also on many proper-
ties of the crystal such as the unit cell size, the
amount of disorder and the refractive index con-
trast. As an example, we apply the model to a
silicon inverse opal photonic crystal with a lat-
tice parameter of a = 1240 nm, corresponding

to a bandgap frequency near ωtele. We assume
combined size poly dispersity and lattice displace-
ments of 2% (which is beyond the current state
of the art). From the model of Ref. 22, we ob-
tain a mean free path of 5.3 unit cells for pump
light at νpump/c = 12500 cm−1. The correspond-
ing homogeneity length, dominated by ℓmfp, would
thus be 0.5 unit cells, well below our homogene-
ity requirement of 5 unit cells. For a 2.5 times
lower pump frequency of 5000 cm−1, the model
predicts a (2.5)2 times larger mean free path of
ℓmfp = 33.3 unit cells inside the crystal. To-
gether with the earlier obtained absorption length
of ℓabs = 116 µm (= 93 unit cells), we obtain a ho-
mogeneity length of [(1/93+1/33)−1]/10 = 2.4 unit
cells. This result points out that even at pump
frequencies near the two-photon absorption edge
of silicon, the homogeneity requirement of 5 unit
cells can not be met in silicon inverse opals with a
lattice parameter of a = 1240 nm.

The scattering model predicts that decreasing
the unit cell size will result in higher homogeneity,
as this will reduce the relative pump frequency.
Therefore, we consider silicon inverse opals with
a reduced lattice parameter of a = 900 nm, cor-
responding to a bandgap near 8900 cm−1, just
below the absorption edge of silicon. The scat-
tering model predicts a larger mean free path for
pump light with a frequency of 5000 cm−1 of
ℓmfp = 63 unit cells. Using the absorption length of
116 µm (= 116 unit cells), we obtain homogeneity
length of: ℓhom = [(1/116 + 1/63)−1]/10 = 4.1 unit
cells, close to our homogeneity requirement.

Major improvements in switching homogene-
ity can be made by studying diamond-like
structures,[23, 24] as the lattice parameter can be
as low as 600 nm for a bandgap near ωtele in such
crystals. In such structures, the scattering model
remains unchanged, apart from a constant pref-
actor that depends on the shape of the unit cell.
We predict that reduced lattice parameters will
decrease the relative pump frequency suﬃciently
to allow homogeneous photonic density of states
switching experiments.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have discussed four important requirements
for free-carrier induced optical changes in semicon-
ductors, with emphasis on density of states switch-
ing in photonic crystals: the amplitude of change

7

in refractive index, the timescale on which the
switch takes place, the induced absorption, and
the homogeneity of the induced change. We have
demonstrated that the ﬁrst two requirements can
be met: a 10% change in n′ in bulk silicon observed
within 230 fs. We have also experimentally demon-
strated suﬃcient lateral homogeneity in a bulk sil-
icon. Furthermore, we have measured two-photon
absorption coeﬃcients bulk silicon. The induced
absorption was deduced to be low for carrier den-
sities below 1020 cm−3.

We have discussed a non linear absorption model
to describe the spatial homogeneity of optically
generated electron-hole plasmas in semiconduc-
tors. We have introduced a homogeneity plot,
which directly relates linear and two-photon ab-
sorption coeﬃcients to the maximum homogeneity
that can be achieved for any semiconductor. From
such a plot, we conclude that for density of states
switching in silicon photonic crystals, the optimum
carrier density is about 1020 cm−3. To obtain
the required homogeneity, the absorption coeﬃ-
cients must be minimized, by a judicious choice of
pump frequency. Due to peak intensity limitations
the lowest pump frequency that can be chosen is
around 5000 cm−1.

We have discussed the eﬀect of scattering in pho-
tonic crystals on the pumping homogeneity. The
homogeneity of switched photonic crystals turns
out to be limited by scattering. We conclude
that the homogeneity condition can barely be met
in silicon inverse opals. We predict that in dia-
mond structures the relative pump frequency will
be small enough to allow homogeneous density of
states switching experiments.

Finally, we have brieﬂy discussed the ramiﬁca-
tions for waveguides and modulators and we con-
clude that free-carrier switching is also useful for
applications outside photonic crystal.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors wish to thank Irwan Setija and Rut-
ger Voets (ASML) for deep UV lithography, Meint
de Boer (TST) and Willem Tjerkstra for dry etch-
ing, and Leon Woldering for sample preparation.
We also thank Allard Mosk and Ad Lagendijk for
fruitful discussions and Martijn Wubs for deriving
Eq. (7). This work is part of the research program
of the ”Stichting voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek
der Materie” (FOM), which is supported by the

”Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk
Onderzoek” (NWO).

[1] ’Photonic Crystals and Light Localization in the
21st Century’, Ed. C.M. Soukoulis (Kluwer, Dor-
drecht, 2001).

[2] E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987).
[3] S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2458 (1987).
[4] P. Lodahl, A. F. van Driel, I. Nikolaev, A. Irman,
K. Overgaag, D. Vanmaekelbergh, and W. L. Vos,
Nature 430, 654 (2004).

[5] E. Yablonovitch, T.J. Gmitter, R.D. Meade, A.M.
Rappe, K.D. Brommer, and J.D. Joannopoulos,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3380 (1991).

[6] P. M. Johnson, A. F. Koenderink, and W. L. Vos,

Phys. Rev. B 66, 081102 (2002).

[7] A. Liu, R. Jones, L. Liao, D. Samara-Rubio, D.
Rubin, O. Cohen, R. Nicolaescu, and M. Paniccia,
Nature 427, 615 (2004).

[8] A. D. Bristow, J. P. R. Wells, W. H. Fan, A.
M. Fox, M. S. Skolnick, D. M. Whittaker, A.
Tahraoui, T. F. Krauss, and J. S. Roberts, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 83, 851 (2003).

[9] S. W. Leonard, H. M. van Driel, J. Schilling, and
R. B. Wehrspohn, Phys. Rev. B 66, 161102 (2002).
[10] V. R. Almeida, C. A. Barrios, R. R. Panepucci,
M. Lipson, M. A. Foster, D. G. Ouzounov, and A.
L. Gaeta, CLEO/IQEC and PhAST Technical Di-
gest on CDROM (The Optical Society of America,
Washington, DC, 2004), CTuFF3.

[12] D. A. Mazurenko, R. Kerst, J. I. Dijkhuis, A.
V. Akimov, V. G. Golubev, D.A. Kurdyukov,
A.B. Pevtsov, A. V. Sel’Kin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91
213903 (2003)

[13] J.S. Kole, Ph.D. dissertation, 2003, Groningen,

Rijksuniversiteit Groningen.

[14] For silicon, the value of τD is 10−13, and the value

for m∗

opt is 0.15, see Ref. 11.

[15] E.D. Palik, ”Handbook of optical constants of

8

solids” (Academic press Inc., London 1985).
[16] M. Dinu, F. Quochi, and H. Garcia, Appl. Phys.

[17] J. F. Reintjes and J. C. McGroddy, Phys. Rev.

[18] A. J. Sabbah and D. M. Riﬀe, Phys. Rev. B 66,

Lett. 82, 2954 (2003).

Lett. 30, 901 (1973).

165217 (2002).

[19] Our laser system provides high power pulses at
two independently tunable frequencies. The setup
consists of a regeneratively ampliﬁed Ti:Saf fs
laser system (Spectra Physics Hurricane) which
is used to pump two Topas optical parametric
ampliﬁers (OPA). The OPA’s have a continu-
ously tunable output frequency between 3850 and
21050 cm−1 and produce 120 fs pulses (for an au-
tocorrelation graph see Fig. 2, lower panel) with a
pulse energy Epulse of at least 20 µJ over the whole
frequency range. Given a focal radius of 75 µm the
maximum intensity Imax is at least 1 TWcm−2
[20] M. Sheik-Bahae, A. A. Said, T. H. Wei, D. J. Ha-
gan, and E. W. van Stryland, IEEE J. Quantum
Electron. 26, 760 (1991).

[21] A. Dargys and J. Kundrotas, Handbook on Phys-
ical Properties of Ge, Si, GaAs and InP (Science
and Encyclopedia Publishers, Vilnius, 1994), and
references therein.

[22] A.F.

Koenderink

and

W.L.

Vos,

Rev. Lett. 25, 3152 (1990).

[24] R. Hillebrand, St. Senz, W. Hergert, and U.

G¨osele, J. Appl. Phys. 94, 2758 (2003).

VIII. FIGURES

[11] K. Sokolowski-Tinten and D. von der Linde, Phys.

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0406052

Rev. B 61, 2643 (2000).

[23] K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys.

9

FIG. 1: Schematic image of a sample: The z-axis is
deﬁned to be pointing into the sample, the x- and y-
directions are the lateral directions. In the ﬁgure, the
front face of the sample displays a SEM image of a dry
etched Si 2D photonic crystal with a slightly rhomboid
symmetry (lattice angle 85 deg). The lattice parame-
ter a is equal to 750 nm. SEM courtesy of L.Woldering.

FIG. 2: Time resolved reﬂectivity measurement on
bulk Si, pumped at νpump/c = 12500 cm−1, pulse en-
ergy Epump = 2 µJ, pulse duration τpump = 120 fs,
rpump = 70 µm and peak intensity 115 GW/cm2
The reﬂectivity of a probe with
(upper panel).
νprobe/c = 7692 cm−1,
rprobe = 20 µm and
τprobe=120 fs decreases from 32% to 28%, corre-
sponding to a calculated carrier density Neh = 1.6 ×
1020 cm−3 at the surface of the sample (see right-hand
scale). The time diﬀerence between 10% and 90% of
the total change is 230 fs. The lower panel shows the
intensity autocorrelation function (ACF) of the pump
pulses. The full width half maximum (FWHM) of
200 fs corresponds to a pulse width of 140 fs FWHM.

10

FIG. 3: Absorption coeﬃcients α and β of Si versus
pump frequency. The dashed vertical lines correspond
to photon energies of Egap/2 and Egap. The open
squares indicate linear absorption coeﬃcients taken
from Ref. 15(right-hand scale). The solid triangles in-
dicate the two-photon absorption coeﬃcients that we
have determined by z-scan measurements (left-hand
scale). The left-ﬁlled triangles indicate the values from
Ref. 16, the right-ﬁlled triangles are data from Ref. 17,
and the open triangle data from Ref. 18

FIG. 4: Calculated carrier density depth proﬁle Neh(z)
for constant β = 2 cmGW−1 and three diﬀerent
linear absorption coeﬃcients: α = 0 (solid curve),
α = 400 cm−1 (dashed curve) and α = 800 cm−1 (dot-
ted curve). With Neh at the interface kept constant
at 0.9 × 1020 cm−3, the necessary pump intensity
I˘0 is calculated, assuming that τpump = 120 fs and
rpump = 75 µm. The corresponding carrier density
depth proﬁle was obtained with Eq. (7). The homo-
geneity length ℓhom is shown for α = 0. The right-
hand scale shows the resulting refractive index n′ for
ν/c = 6450 cm−1 light in Si.

11

FIG. 5: Homogeneity plot. Contours of constant
ℓhom are plotted in the (α, β) plane, deﬁning regions
in which homogeneous switching can be achieved.
The generated carrier density is kept constant at
Neh(0) = 0.9 × 1020 cm−3, enough for a 5% change in
n′. The solid curve corresponds to ℓhom = 2.9 µm, the
dashed curve to ℓhom = 1.0 µm and the dotted curve to
ℓhom = 0.6 µm for bulk silicon. The closed squares con-
nected by the dotted arrow are linear and two-photon
coeﬃcients for Si obtained from Fig. 2. The open cir-
cles a, b and c correspond to the depth proﬁles Neh(z)
plotted in Fig. 4. Pumping parameters: τpump = 120
fs, rpump = 75 µm and νpump/c = 5000 cm−1.

12

FIG. 6: Carrier density contours for a particular bulk
homogeneity chosen as ℓhom = 1.5 µm. The con-
tours correspond to two diﬀerent values for Neh(0):
the dashed lines to Neh(0) = 1 × 1020 cm−3, and the
solid lines to Neh(0) = 2 × 1020 cm−3. The upper one
of each pair of curves corresponds to ℓhom = 1.5 µm.
The lower curve of each pair indicates the minimum
absorption coeﬃcients for which the given Neh(0) can
be obtained without exceeding the maximum inten-
sity Imax = 1 TWcm−2. The closed squares con-
nected by the dotted curve line are the α and β
coeﬃcients for Si obtained from Fig. 3. Pumping
τpump = 120 fs, rpump = 75 µm and
parameters:
νpump/c = 5000 cm−1.

13

Relative probe reﬂectivity measurement
FIG. 7:
on a bulk Si sample for diﬀerent lateral positions
of the probe focus with respect to the probe focus.
The probe delay is ﬁxed at 10 ps. Pumping pa-
τpump = 120 fs, νpump/c = 6250 cm−1,
rameters:
Epump = 10.8 µJ, rpump = 80 µm, τpump = 120 fs,
νprobe/c = 7692 cm−1, rprobe = 25 µm. The squares
are the measured datapoints, ﬁtted with a Gaussian
curve width of 68 ± 10 µm (solid curve). The hori-
zontal dotted line indicates the level where the change
in reﬂectivity has decreased by 10%. From the verti-
cal dotted lines, which indicate the intersections of the
90% line with the Gaussian ﬁt of the data, we obtain
a lateral homogeneity length of 32 µm, illustrating the
excellent lateral homogeneity. The dashed curve indi-
cates the measured width of the pump focus.

