4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Bragg-induced orbital
angular-momentum mixing in paraxial
high-ﬁnesse cavities

David H. Foster and Jens U. N¨ockel
Department of Physics, University of Oregon

1371 E 13th Avenue
Eugene, OR 97403
http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~noeckel

To be published, Optics Letters 29, December 1, 2004

Numerical calculation of vector electromagnetic modes of plano-concave mi-
crocavities reveals that the polarization-dependent reﬂectivity of a ﬂat Bragg
mirror can lead to unexpected cavity ﬁeld distributions for nominally paraxial
modes. Even in a rotationally symmetric resonator, certain pairs of orbital an-
gular momenta are necessarily mixed in an excitation-independent way to form
doublets. A characteristic mixing angle is identiﬁed, which even in the paraxial
limit can be designed to have large values. This correction to Gaussian theory
is zeroth-order in deviations from paraxiality. We discuss the resulting nonuni-
form polarization ﬁelds. Observation will require small cavities with suﬃciently
high Q. Possible applications are proposed.

Unconventional beam proﬁles in free-space paraxial optics have recently received renewed
attention, based in large part on the new degrees of freedom made accessible in light-matter
interactions when Gaussian beams carry not only spin but orbital angular momentum
[1, 2]. To realize the full potential of the resulting rich phenomenology in quantum optical
applications [3], it is an important next step to turn from free-space optics to ultrahigh-Q
resonators. In this Letter, we study numerically a type of cavity that enables robust and
spectrally addressable creation of nearly paraxial light ﬁelds with orbital and polarization
proﬁles that are, surprisingly, not predicted by the standard solutions of paraxial theory.
We build upon the initial examination in [4, 5].

1

Beams carrying orbital angular momentum require an axially symmetric environment,
and hence the cavity in this study has a rotation axis z. The dome-shaped resonator
is shown in Fig. 1 (a). Standard paraxial wave solutions with deﬁnite orbital angular
momentum are the Laguerre-Gauss beams (LG). They are labeled by the number p of
radial nodes, and the orbital angular momentum quantum number ℓ: in polar coordinates
ρ, φ,

LGℓ

p(ρ, φ)

|ℓ|

√2ρ
w !

L|ℓ|
p

2ρ2
w2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

∝  

e−ρ2/w2

eiℓφ,

(1)

2p +

where L|ℓ|
p (x) is an associated Laguerre polynomial and w is the beam waist radius. All
beams of the same order N
form a degenerate manifold in the sense that their
longitudinal wave functions are the same for a given frequency ω. The degree of degeneracy
is g = 2(N + 1), including two possible polarization states (e.g. right and left circular, with
Jones vectors ˆσ±); this allows the formation of linear combinations of Laguerre-Gaussians
to obtain a wide variety of transverse beam proﬁles. The cross-sectional electric ﬁeld within
a degenerate LG manifold of order N can be expanded as

≡

ℓ

|

|

Ex
Ey (cid:19)

=

(cid:18)

Xp,ℓ

LGℓ

p(ρ, φ)

Ap,ℓˆσ+ + Bp,ℓˆσ−

,

(2)

(cid:3)
N + 2j (j = 0, 1, . . . N), and p is ﬁxed by 2p +

where ℓ =
= N. This carries
over to paraxial resonators where the discrete resonant frequencies ων,N are labeled by a
longitudinal index ν and the mode order N, and do not depend on ℓ and p individually.

−

(cid:2)

ℓ

|

|

Our exact numerical solutions reveal that corrections [6] to the standard paraxial res-
onator theory stated above lead to a splitting of the N-multiplets in (2). Compared to the
equidistant transverse mode spacing in ων,N (governed by the Guoy phase shift), this addi-
tional non-paraxial splitting typically occurs on a scale so ﬁne that it can be disregarded in
large resonators. However, ultrahigh-ﬁnesse microcavities, which are now becoming tech-
nologically feasible, will make it necessary to quantify this substructure. The problem is
then analogous to zeroth-order degenerate perturbation theory, the small quantity being
the paraxiality parameter, h

λ/(πw) = tan(divergence angle).
The question how the degeneracy in (2) is lifted goes beyond paraxial theory. A ﬁrst
guess would be that the new eigenmodes are the LG basis modes LGℓ
1 is
the spin. All modes are then uniquely labeled by p, ℓ and s. This is indeed what we ﬁnd
when modeling the planar mirror in Fig. 1 (a) as a perfect electric or magnetic conductor
(Etangential = 0 or Htangential = 0).

p ˆσs where s =

±

≡

In this Letter, however, we focus attention on the case where the planar mirror is a realis-
tic Bragg stack. Then, most of the dome cavity modes are not labeled by a unique (p, ℓ, s),
even for the smallest values of the paraxiality parameter h. What makes distributed Bragg
reﬂectors (DBR) diﬀerent is their polarization-dependent plane-wave reﬂectivity rs/p(θ),
where s/p denotes linear polarization perpendicular/parallel to the plane of incidence and
θ is the angle of incidence. Figure 1 (b) illustrates that reﬂection phase shifts φs/p with

2

Figure 1: (a) Schematic cross section of the cavity. The dome is metal, the base is either
metal or Bragg mirror. The radius of curvature R is ten times larger than the
arg(rs/p) of the
length L. (b) Polarization-dependent reﬂectivity phases φs/p ≡
diﬀerent mirrors used in the calculation, versus angle of incidence θ. (c) Index
proﬁles of the quarter-wave Bragg mirrors used in Figs. 2 and 3. Each has 36
pairs of layers of index 3.0 and 3.5.

strong θ dependence may occur even if the DBR design wavelength λd is chosen so that
the modes of interest are at the center of the stop band, where
1. We have
calculated the fully vectorial cavity modes, using a recently developed numerical technique
combining a basis function expansion in the dome region with the transfer matrix tech-
nique for the DBR [4, 5]. What we describe below can be called DBR-induced, paraxial
spin-orbit coupling of light.

rs/p(θ)

| ≈

|

}

{

p ˆσs

LGℓ

The numerical method is not restricted to near-paraxial modes[4], and the results pre-
sented here are observed over a wide range of h; but we shall focus on the limit h
1
where
should constitute a suitable basis in which to express the (transverse)
cavity ﬁelds. The vectorial modes can be chosen to be eigenfunctions of the total angular
momentum around the z axis, with integer eigenvalues m.
If orbital and spin angular
momenta ℓ and s are “good quantum numbers”, then m = ℓ + s. As illustrated in Table 1
of Ref. [4], specifying N and m in (2) singles out pairs of LGℓ
1 (unless
= N occurs). We shall call these pairs doublets because
m
|
|
their paraxial degeneracy is in fact lifted. This is to be distinguished from a remaining
reﬂection-induced exact degeneracy between modes diﬀering only in the sign of m. By

= N + 1, in which case only

p ˆσs, with ℓ = m

≪

±

ℓ

|

|

3

Figure 2: Mixing angle α for numerically calculated vector cavity modes, versus (a) relative
detuning between the mean wavelength λ of the doublet C, D and the Bragg
φp. Line ﬁts use the function given in the
design wavelength λd, and (b) φs −
text. Cavity dimensions are L = 10µm and R = 100µm.

ﬁxing m, the latter degeneracy can be disregarded for our purposes.

The lowest order for which the above doublets exist is N = 2, and we consider this
case from now on. Both A
0ˆσ− are transverse basis functions with
≡
m = 1. If m is a good quantum number but ℓ and s are not, then the transverse parts of the
actual m = 1, N = 2 cavity modes (denoted symbolically by C, D) will be superpositions

1ˆσ+ and B

LG0

LG2

≡

C
D

=

cos α
sin α

sin α
−
cos α

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:20)

A
B

,

(cid:21) (cid:18)

(cid:19)

(3)

where α is a mixing angle: when α = 0, the modes are well approximated by pure LG
proﬁles. Among the diﬀerent mirrors shown in Fig. 1, only the conductor shows α = 0 in
general. The doublet’s resonant frequencies satisfy ωD −
0, but the mixing
angle α generally does not vanish in this paraxial limit.

ωC →

0 for h

→

Figure 2 (a) gives the variation of α as λd is changed. The sigmoid shape of the curves
means that in a typical cavity, one will ﬁnd the doublet C, D at a value of
near 45◦.
This is the furthest from pure LG modes we can get, in spite of the rotational symmetry of
the whole cavity. Note that α = 90◦ again describes pure LG states, and in going through
a total variation by ∆α = 90◦ the modes exchange character. This dramatic change occurs
over a narrow λ
λd interval, going through the “unmixed” state α = 0 at which point
the resonance frequencies ωC, ωD exhibit an avoided crossing (not shown).

−

α

|

|

The non-conservation of orbital and spin angular momentum does not rely on paraxiality:
the x-y ﬁeld components of a cavity eigenstate with total angular momentum m are linear

4

Figure 3: Cross-sectional electric ﬁeld of C and D for the point marked by the arrow in
3.6◦). The
Fig. 2 (a) (mirror design 2, λ = 401.1nm, divergence angle θ
ellipses represent only the x-y components of the electric ﬁeld; white or black
ﬁlling indicates sense of rotation. Each polarization ellipse is decorated with a
line pointing along the instantaneous ﬁeld vector to indicate the phase. Here the
mixing angle is α = 39◦, and ωD −
3.4GHz. Inset: Ex in the x-z plane.

ωC = 2π

≈

×

combinations of two opposing circular polarization ﬁelds which individually transform un-
der coordinate rotations according to diﬀerent orbital angular momenta ℓ = m
1; modes
A and B in (3) are the paraxial realization of this general fact. A Bessel-wave expansion[4]
of the mode shows that one of the orbital wave functions can in fact be made to vanish
exactly if rs(θ)
rp(θ) for the planar mirror. This occurs for pure magnetic or electric
conductors. In the DBR cavity, on the other hand, we only have rs = rp at θ = 0, cf. Fig.
1 (b). Since even the most paraxial modes contain nonzero θ in their angular spectrum,
one cannot generally factor the ﬁeld into a ﬁxed polarization vector multiplying a scalar
orbital wave function. Within the conventional paraxial approach, where this factorization
is performed at the outset, the consequences of a ﬁnite α at nearly vanishing h are lost.

≡

±

≈

h at which to evaluate φs −

By changing the detuning of the doublet from λd, we also change the phase diﬀerence
φp at any ﬁnite angle of incidence θ. As discussed elsewhere [7], one can identify an
φs −
“eﬀective” ˜θ
φp in
Fig. 2 (b), the universality of the spin-orbit coupling is revealed: the data diﬀer widely
in the mirror designs and wavelengths used, but collapse onto very similar curves. The
broad appearance of the dotted curve in 2 (a) arises mainly because the reﬂection phases
of mirror 3 are less sensitive to detuning. The data are ﬁt by the function[7], tan α =
. The oﬀset φ0 for attaining circular polarization
(φs −
−

φp. Plotting α versus this variable φs −

φp −

φp −

φs −

φ0|

φ0)/

Γ +

|

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

5

→

→

(α = 0) accounts for the fact that φs and φp are not equal at zero detuning when evaluated
45◦ has width Γ, and persists in the zeroth-order
at ﬁnite θ. The crossover between α
limit h

0 where Γ

≈ ±

0.

In Figure 3, we illustrate the polarization patterns produced by the spin-orbit coupling.
In particular, the single mode C
Polarization ellipticity and orientation vary spatially.
exhibits circular polarization near the axis but radial linear polarization within its second
radial maximum; in mode D, a crossover from circular to azimuthal linear polarization
ωC to be resolved despite
occurs. The L = 10µm cavity height in this example allows ωD −
the ﬁnite widths of the modes, which is taken into account in our numerics (cf. the DBR
design in Fig. 1, and the data on decay widths in Ref. [4]). Assuming that both mirrors
have a power reﬂectivity r2 in the range (1
r2) < 10−3.5±0.5, we estimate that the eﬀects
−
shown here should be observable for cavities with paraxiality h < 0.2 if the height L of the
resonator lies in the window 12λ < L < 60λ. The mode patterns in Fig. 3 are governed
by the mixing angle α; Fig. 2 suggests the intriguing possibility of externally controlling α
by changing the cavity dimensions or Bragg wavelength λd.

When addressed by laser pulses at ωC and ωD, the doublet modes could interact with
one, two, or more asymmetric (polarization-sensitive) quantum dots embedded in the DBR.
Thus the mixed modes may allow a new scheme of quantum processing. Cavities of the
type studied here can also act as ﬁlters or laser emitters of pure or mixed LG beams, useful
as “optical tweezers”[2] or as carriers of information[8].

Provided that at least one of the mirrors is a Bragg stack, any stable cavity should
exhibit paraxial mixing of orbital angular momenta. Its observability hinges on the ability
to distinguish true degeneracies from “quasi”-degeneracies caused by the breakdown of
Eq. (2). Our quantitative analysis shows that the necessary requirements can be met by
realistic cavities that are being pursued for quantum-optics applications.

We thank Mike Raymer for valuable discussions. This work was supported by NSF

Grant ECS-0239332.

References

[1] M. Padgett, J. Courtial, and L. Allen, Physics Today 57, 35–41 (2004).

[2] D. G. Grier, Nature 424, 810–816 (2003).

[3] T. M. Stace, G. J. Milburn, and C. H. W. Barnes, Phys. Rev. B 67, 085,317 (2003).

[4] D. H. Foster and J. U. N¨ockel, Opt. Commun. 234, 351–383 (2004).

[5] D. H. Foster and J. U. N¨ockel, in Resonators and Beam Control VII, A. V. Kudryashov

and A. H. Paxton, eds., Vol. 5333 of Proceedings of SPIE, pp. 195–203 (2004).

[6] V. M. Babic and V. S. Buldyrev, Short-wavelength diﬀraction theory (Springer Verlag,

Berlin, 1972).

6

[7] D. H. Foster and J. U. N¨ockel, “Coupling of optical Born-Oppenheimer modes in near-

paraxial cavities”, in preparation

[8] E. J. Galvez, P. R. Crawford, H. I. Sztul, M. J. Pysher, P. J. Haglin, and R. E. Williams,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 203901 (2003).

7

