J Leach†§, M R Dennis‡, J Courtial†, and M J Padgett†
†Physics and Astronomy, University Av, Kelvin Bld, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK
‡School of Mathematics, University of Southampton, Highﬁeld SO17 1BJ, UK

Optical vortices generically arise when optical beams are combined. Recently, we
reported how several laser beams containing optical vortices could be combined to form
optical vortex loops, links and knots embedded in a light beam (Leach et al 2004). Here,
we describe in detail the experiments in which vortex loops form these structures. The
experimental construction follows a theoretical model originally proposed by Berry and
Dennis, and the beams are synthesised using a programmable spatial light modulator
and imaged using a CCD camera.

Abstract.

4 Vortex Knots in Light
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 03.65.Vf, 02.10.Kn, 42.25.Hz, 42.40.Jv

Optical vortices (phase singularities, wave dislocations) are ubiquitous in nature,
occurring whenever three or more light waves interfere. They are places in the
interference ﬁeld where the intensity is zero, and the phase is undeﬁned, and usually
occur at points in 2-dimensional ﬁelds, and along lines in 3 dimensions (see,
for
example,
[1, 2, 3]). Within the laboratory, vortices are commonly produced using
computer generated holograms or diﬀractive optics. Holograms of the design originally
demonstrated by [4, 5] are now widely used to create light beams with vortices embedded,
and the orbital angular momentum [6, 7] with which they are associated. Here, we
describe in detail our experimental generation [8] of laser beams in which these vortex
ﬁlaments are knotted and linked.

An optical vortex embedded on the axis of a laser beam is usually characterised by a
function, R|l| exp(ilφ) describing the local structure of the optical ﬁeld around the vortex
point in a transverse cross section of the beam. The exp(ilφ) term describes the phase
singularity nature of the vortex, the R|l| term shows that this must be accompanied
by a zero of intensity. The integer l determines the number of phase cycles made in a
right-handed circuit of the vortex and is called the strength of the singularity. Although
l can take any integer value, positive or negative, vortices with |l| > 1 are unstable and,
in the presence of astigmatism, degenerate to form multiple vortices of l = ±1 upon
propagation. Many observations have been reported on the seeming interaction between
two or more vortex points as light propagates from one plane to the next. For example,
in this picture, two vortices with oppositely signed l may spontaneously appear together
in one plane, propagate to a subsequent plane, and then recombine (birth/creation and

§ To whom correspondence should be addressed.

Vortex Knots in Light

2

death/annihilation of vortices). This language implies a temporal evolution which is, of
course, misleading since the optical beam is static in time.

A more accurate physical description is to recognise that the pair of vortices forms a
looped thread within the beam (see, for example, [9]). An arbitrary light ﬁeld containing
many optical vortices, such as a speckle pattern caused by random interference, will
contain a complicated arrangement of many vortex loops distributed within the volume
of the beam [10].

In 2001, Berry and Dennis showed theoretically [11, 12] that speciﬁc superpositions
of beams could be generated in which vortex loops could be linked together and even
knotted. The original analysis [11] used a combination of Bessel beams [13] to form the
links and knots. From an experimental standpoint this construction has two problems:
ﬁrstly, that ideal Bessel beams have inﬁnite aperture (their transverse proﬁle, speciﬁed
by a Jl Bessel function, is inﬁnitely extended); secondly, that the range of intensity in the
proposed beams was too large to observe the faint light around the knotted and linked
dark threads. The construction was later extended [12] to give the same topological
structures within paraxial beams, allowing the possibility of knotted dark structures
within Laguerre-Gaussian beams [6], with ﬁxed frequency speciﬁed by the wavenumber
k. In cylindrical coordinates R, φ, z, these have the normalised form

s

× L|l|
p

ψlp(R, φ, z|w) =

p!
π(|l| + p)!

−R2
2(w2 + iz/k)
p

R|l| exp(ilφ)
(w2 + iz/k)|l|+1 exp
(cid:18)
R2
w2 − iz/k
w2 + iz/k
w4 + z2/k2
where L denotes the generalized Laguerre polynomials. In addition to an axial optical
vortex of strength l, there are two other parameters that may be varied - the radial
number p, which is an integer determining the order of the Laguerre polynomial
(eﬀectively, the number of nodal rings about the beam axis), and the waist width w,
which is a continuous variable setting the ﬁnite transverse width of the beam. These
additional degrees of freedom allow us to create the same topological structures, but
with a reduced range of intensity, enabling the nodal structures to be unambiguously
seen.

(cid:19) (cid:18)

(1)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

The links and knots we synthesize occur in the perturbed superposition ψlink,knot
of three Laguerre-Gaussian beams with the same index l (i.e. the same axial vortex
strength), but with diﬀerent amplitudes, and choices of p and waist width w (given in
equation (3) and afterwards). The amplitudes of the Laguerre-Gaussian beams in the
unperturbed superposition ψunpert are chosen so that at a speciﬁc radius R0 in the waist
plane, both the ﬁeld and its radial derivative are zero, i.e.

ψunpert(R0) = 0,

∂Rψunpert|R0 = 0.

(2)

The resulting destructive interference forms a conﬁguration of three circular vortex
loops in the transverse plane, centred on the z-axis. One is in the waist plane
(z = 0) with radius R0, and the other two, which share the same smaller radius, are
symmetrically arranged on either side of this plane. The fact that the radial derivative

Vortex Knots in Light

3

vanishes on the central vortex ring (z = 0, R = R0) means that it has zero strength -
it can be thought of as two superposed rings with opposite strengths. The numerical
value of R0 and particular choices of p and w in the superposed beams are chosen such
that the intensity is relatively bright in the regions separating the three vortex rings
from each other and from the l-fold singularity on the axis.

To this superposition is added a simple Gaussian perturbing beam with near planar
phasefronts. As the amplitude of the perturbing beam increases, the conﬁguration of
three vortex rings deforms through a sequence of reconnections [12] to give an (l, 2)
torus knot [14]. The total superposition of beams we used is

ψlink,knot(x, y, z) = ψl0(x, y, z|2w0) + a1ψl0(x, y, z|w0)

+ a2ψl1(x, y, z|w0) + apertψ00(x, y, z|8w0)

(3)

Here, w0 is a ﬁxed working transverse lengthscale of the beam, chosen in our experiment
to be 1mm. The link, depicted later in ﬁgures 3, 5, was formed with l = 2, and the
following choices of relative amplitudes: a1 = −0.35, a2 = 0.36, apert = 0.35 (which gave
R0 = 2w0). The knot of ﬁgures 4, 6 was formed with l = 3, and relative amplitudes
a1 = −0.26, a2 = 0.29, apert = 0.25 (which gave R0 = 2.2w0). If l = 1 the ‘torus knot’
is a single loop, wrapped twice around the vortex axis, which will not be described
further. The beam combinations we have chosen, satisfying the general conditions of
[12], are not unique (two equations are solved, but three parameters (a1, a2 and R0) are
varied; also, the values of p and w can be changed). They are convenient in that they
are straightforward to implement and the resulting intensity range makes it possible to
image the singularities. Adjustment of the superposition numerically reveals that that
the link occurs for values of the relative perturbation amplitude apert between 0.3 and
0.42. Both the knot and link are stable between similar ﬁnite ranges of their various
parameters.

As discussed above, vortex carrying beams can be easily created within the
laboratory using diﬀractive optical components. For example, if a diﬀraction grating
is modiﬁed such that the lines near its centre combine to form a fork dislocation, then
the ﬁrst-order diﬀracted beam contains an optical vortex. The strength l of the vortex
In addition, p circular discontinuity or
is equal to the order of the fork dislocation.
discontinuities can be added to these designs to give the radial index of the resulting
beam [15]. Although a hologram of this kind provides precise control over the phase
of the diﬀracted beam, the intensity distribution depends also on the proﬁle of the
illumination beam.
It transpires that for a simple single-forked hologram design,
illumination by a fundamental Gaussian mode gives an l = 1 vortex beam in the far ﬁeld
which has over 80% of its energy in the l = 1, p = 0 Laguerre-Gaussian mode. Although
satisfactory for many studies and applications, this level of mode purity is insuﬃcient
to form the topological structure we desire.

The design of phase-only holograms can be modiﬁed to control not only the phase
structure of the diﬀracted beams but their intensity also [16, 17, 18]. In essence the
intensity at any point in a plane can be attenuated by adjusting the eﬃciency of the

Vortex Knots in Light

blazing in that region of the hologram.

4

Our required superposition of Laguerre-Gaussian beams could be generated with
multiple holograms, but it is more convenient to produce a single diﬀractive component
that produces the combination of beams directly. We adopt a simple yet highly
eﬀective approach to phase-only hologram design. Once the required indices, amplitude
weightings and relative phases of the ingredient modes are determined theoretically (as
described above), the phase distribution of the link and knot beam in the waist plane,
Φ(x, y)beam = arg ψlink,knot(x, y, 0), is calculated. To this phase distribution is added the
phase distribution of a blazed diﬀraction grating Φ(x, kx)grating such that the ﬁrst order
diﬀracted energy is angularly separated from the other orders, which are subsequently
blocked using a spatial ﬁlter. The desired intensity I(x, y) of the superposition is also
calculated and normalised so the maximum intensity is unity. This intensity distribution
is applied as a multiplicative mask to the phase distribution of the hologram, acting as
a selective beam attenuator imposing the necessary intensity distribution on the ﬁrst
order diﬀracted beam.

The resulting phase distribution of the hologram Φ(x, y)holo, expressed within a 0

to 2π range is given by

Φ(x, y)holo = (((Φ(x, y)beam + Φ(x, kx)holo)mod2π − π))
× sinc2 ((1 − I(x, y)) π) + π.

(4)

The sinc distortion of the intensity terms accounts for the mapping of phase depth to
diﬀraction eﬃciency. An example of this process is shown in ﬁgure 1.

To implement this hologram design we use a programmable spatial light modulator
under computer control to produce the desired beam. Such devices are based on liquid
crystal arrays, which introduce spatially dependent phase retardation across the beam
proﬁle, allowing the creation of any speciﬁc combination of beams. Compared to a
static hologram, the spatial light modulator allows us to control the beam parameters
dynamically and, most importantly, the amplitude of the perturbation in real time.

The optical beams were produced using a spatial ﬁltered HeNe laser, expanded to
overﬁll the 15mm aperture of the spatial light modulator, and conﬁgured to generate
the appropriate superposition of Laguerre-Gaussian beams, as shown in ﬁgure 2. The
modulator was imaged to a second plane using a pair of lenses, with an aperture between,
to ensure only the ﬁrst-order diﬀracted beam was transmitted. A CCD array positioned
in this second plane and translated along the beam axis measured the intensity structure
of the beam on each side of the waist. Given that the ﬁne details of the vortex threads
lie in regions of near darkness and in order to measure the vortex positions within the
beam cross-section, it is necessary to over-saturate the CCD. The resulting image is
mainly white, but contains points of darkness corresponding to the vortices as they
intersect the plane of the CCD. These transverse vortex coordinates were measured in
neighbouring planes, enabling the 3-dimensional spatial conﬁguration to be deduced.
The amplitude of the perturbation was chosen initially at the theoretically optimized
value, then adjusted to give the best deﬁned link or knot. In ﬁgures 3 and 4, images

Vortex Knots in Light

5

are shown taken at various transverse planes through the vortex link and knot beams.
Figures 5 and 6 show the observed spatial vortex lines corresponding to the link and
knot constructions that are geometrically indistinguishable, and topologically identical,
to the theoretical structures.

We have described the creation and observation of static knots and links of dark
vortex threads in light waves, verifying an earlier prediction of Berry and Dennis that this
was possible within optical wave ﬁelds. Knotted vortices have been studied theoretically
since Lord Kelvins vortex atom hypothesis [19] in a range of diﬀerent physical situations,
such as hydrodynamics [20, 21], ﬁeld theory [22] and nonlinear excitable media [23, 24].
However, in these contexts, nonlinearities mean that vortex knots are probably unstable.
Our structures are superpositions of free space optical modes with the same frequency,
so are temporally stable. It is not known theoretically whether arbitrary topological
conﬁgurations of vortices can be embedded in free space optical ﬁelds; only a few special
cases are known (the knots and links studied here [11, 12], which have to be threaded,
and certain braids [25], which require counterpropagating beams). In addition to being
of fundamental interest, these experiments illustrate topological light shaping that might
be used as a topological waveguide for quantum mechanical matter waves, such as Bose-
Einstein condensates [26].

We are grateful to Michael Berry for useful suggestions and comments. Figures 5 and 6
were plotted in Mathematica using Mitch Berger’s tuba package. MRD acknowledges
support from the Leverhulme Trust and the Royal Society. JC is supported by the Royal
Society.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] Nye J F and Berry M V 1974 Dislocations in wave trains Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 336 165–90
[2] Berry M V, Nye J F and Wright F J 1979 The elliptic umbilic diﬀraction catastrophe Phil. Trans.

[3] Nye J F 1999 Natural focusing and ﬁne structure of light: caustics and wave dislocations. Bristol:

R. Soc. A 291 453–84

Institute of Physics Publishing

[4] Bazhenov V Y, Vasnetsov M V and Soskin M S 1990 not sure yet JEPT Lett. 52, 492494
[5] Heckenberg N R, McDuﬀ R, Smith C P and White A G 1992 Generation of optical-phase

singularities by computer-generated holograms Opt. Lett. 17 221-23

[6] Allen L, Beijersbergen M, Spreeuw R J C, and Woerdman J P 1992 Orbital angular momentum
of light and the transformation of Laguerre-Gaussian laser modes Phys. Rev. A 45 8185–9
[7] Allen L, Padgett M J, and Babiker M 1999 The orbital angular momentum of light Prog. Opt.

[8] Leach J, Dennis M R, Courtial J, and Padgett M J 2004 Knotted threads of darkness Nature,

39 291–372

432 165

[9] Berry M V 1998 Much ado about nothing: optical dislocation lines (phase singularities, zeros,
in Proceedings of International Conference on Singular Optics, Soskin M S ed.,

vortices...),
SPIE volume 3487 1–15

Vortex Knots in Light

6

[10] Berry M V and Dennis M R 2000 Phase singularities in isotropic random waves Proc. R. Soc.

[11] Berry M V and Dennis M R 2001 Knotted and linked phase singularities in monochromatic waves

Lond. A 456 2059–79

Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 457 2251–63

[12] Berry M V and Dennis M R 2001 Knotting and unknotting of phase singularities: Helmholtz
waves, paraxial waves and waves in 2+1 dimensions J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 34 8877–88
[13] Durnin J, Miceli Jr J J, and Eberly J H 1997 Diﬀraction-free beams Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 1499–501
[14] Adams C C 1994 The knot book New York: Freeman
[15] Arlt J, Dholakia K, Allen L and Padgett M J 1998 The production of multi-ringed Laguerre-

Gaussian modes by computer generated holograms J. Mod. Opt. 45 1231-1237

[16] Vasara A, Turunen J and Friberg A T 1989 Realization of general nondiﬀracting beams with

computer-generated holograms J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 6 1748-1754

[17] Basistiy I V, Slyusar V V, Soskin M S, Vasnetsov M V and Bekshaev A Ya 2003 Manifestation
of the rotational Doppler eﬀect by use of an oﬀ-axis optical vortex beam Opt. Lett. 28 14
[18] Franke-Arnold S, Barnett S M, Yao E, Leach J, Courtial J and Padgett M J 2004 Uncertainty

principle for angular position and angular momentum New J. Phys. 6 103

[19] Lord Kelvin (W Thompson) 1867 On vortex atoms Phil. Mag. 34 15–24
[20] Moﬀatt H K 1969 The degree of knottedness of tangled vortex lines J. of Fluid Mech. 35 117–29
[21] Aref H and Zawadzki I 1991 Linking of vortex rings Nature 354 50–3
[22] Faddeev L and Niemi A J 1997 Stable knot-like structures in classical ﬁeld theory Nature 387

58–61

[23] Winfree A T and Strogatz S H 1983

Singular ﬁlaments organize chemical waves in three

dimensions. III. Knotted waves Physica D 9 333–45

[24] Sutcliﬀe P M and Winfree A T 2003 Stability of knots in excitable media Phys. Rev. E 68 016218
[25] Dennis M R 2003 Braided nodal lines in wave superpositions New J. Phys. 5 134
[26] Ruostekoski J and Anglin J R 2001 Creating vortex rings and three-dimensional skyrmions in

Bose-Einstein condensates Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 3934–7

Vortex Knots in Light

7

Figure 1.
Illustration of the algorithm used to generate the holograms used in the
link experiment (the knot hologram was similar). The desired phase of the beam
at the beam waist is added mod2π to a carrier. This is then multiplied by the
desired intensity of the beam (corrected to account for the mapping of phase depth to
diﬀraction eﬃciency) to produce the hologram which is used in the experiment. The
0-2π range is represented in greyscale, as is actually programmed into the hologram.

Figure 2. Experimental conﬁguration used to produce the vortex beams. The light
reﬂected by the spatial light modulator is spatially ﬁltered by the aperture to remove
unwanted orders.
It is re-collimated and transverse cross-sections of the beam are
imaged by a CCD camera.

Vortex Knots in Light

8

Figure 3. Theoretical and experimental transverse cross-sections of the vortex link.
The distances refer to the distance from the beam waist. In the model, the positions
of the vortices are indicated by coloured spots, red (l = +1) and blue (l = −1). These
vortices are observed as black dots in the saturated model and the experimental results.

Vortex Knots in Light

9

Figure 4. Theoretical and experimental transverse cross-sections of the vortex knot.
The distances refer to the distance from the beam waist. In the model, the positions
of the vortices are indicated by coloured spots, red (l = +1) and blue (l = −1). These
vortices are observed as black dots in the saturated model and the experimental results.

Vortex Knots in Light

10

Figure 5. 3-dimensional representation of the vortex link. Diﬀerent projections of
the link are shown, and the direction of propagation in each case is indicated by the
arrow. The link is formed by the red and green loops. The threading vortices, which
do not take part in the link, are represented by thinner blue and grey lines. The scale
for the direction of propagation has been reduced by approximately 1000.

Vortex Knots in Light

11

Figure 6.
3-dimensional representation of the vortex knot. Diﬀerent projection of
the knot are shown, and the direction of propagation in each case is indicated by the
arrow. The knot is represented by the red loop. The threading vortices, which do not
take part in the knot, are represented by thinner blue and grey lines. The scale for the
direction of propagation has been reduced by approximately 1000.

