Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping
and ﬂuorescence detection

P Baranowski, J Zacks, G Hechenblaikner and C J Foot

University of Oxford, Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford OX1 3PU

E-mail: P.Baranowski1@physics.ox.ac.uk

4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

2

Abstract. We present methods and results of the testing of an inexpensive home-made
diﬀraction limited lens system, the design of which was proposed in [1] and which has since
been used (with slight alterations) by several research groups (e.g. [2, 3, 4]). Our system
will be used for both: focussing a collimated laser beam at a wavelength of λ = 830 nm
down to a narrow spot and for collimating ﬂuorescence light (λ = 780 nm) emitted from
rubidium atoms captured in this spot. Useful tests for lens systems include the use of ray
tracing software [5], shear-wave interferometers [6, 7], the imaging of test charts [8] and
of polystyrene beads of a very small size [9, 10]. We present these methods and show how
conclusions can be drawn for the design under test.

1. Introduction

In some cases, the choice of appropriate lenses may decide upon the success of an
experiment. To keep lens aberrations small, experimenters often choose corrected
doublet lens systems, aspheric lenses or GRIN lenses which can have aberrations below
the diﬀraction limit. However, certain applications require a diﬀraction limited lens
performance with a high numerical aperture (NA) and a reasonable working distance (about
37 mm in our case) at the same time, e.g. for picking up ﬂuorescence light from a weak
source which is observed through the window of a vacuum cell. In many of such cases,
commercially available lens systems are either very expensive or not available. The lens
system we discuss in the following (Fig. 3c) was originally designed for the collimation
single ions emitting ﬂuorescence light in a Paul
of radiation from a point source, e.g.
trap [11].
In addition to the requirement of a high NA we also want to correct the
spherical aberrations introduced by the plane silica window through which the light source
is usually observed. The setup currently under construction in our group even underscores
the requirements of high resolution imaging. Cold neutral atoms can be trapped in
optical dipole traps [12]. In dipole traps, laser light with a frequency far-detuned from
the resonance of an electronic transition in the atom interacts with the induced atomic
dipole moment. The trapping potential can be calculated in terms of second-order time
independent perturbation theory. The result is a shift in the ground states (“ac Stark
shift”) which can be exploited for trapping neutral atoms. In this context, two quantities
are of general interest:

(i) the dipole potential Udip(r)
(ii) the scattering rate Γsc(r)

Γ
∆I(r)
∝
( Γ
∆)2I(r)

∝

Here, Γ denotes the dipole matrix element between the ground state and the excited state,
∆ is the detuning frequency and I(r) the intensity of the electric ﬁeld. Since the scattering
rate scales as I/∆2, optical dipole traps usually use large detunings (about 50 nm in our
case) to keep the scattering rate as low as possible. Consequently, high laser intensity
is required to achieve suﬃcient trap depth. One aim of our experiment is to produce a
mini lattice made up of the spots of laser beams focussed through this objective under
test. The spot size will ﬁnally determine the intensity and hence, the trap depth. The
lattice will be loaded with rubidium-87 atoms from a Bose-Einstein condensate and probed

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

3

Figure 1. Performance of a selection of commercially available achromatic doublet
lenses (Comar DQ series and Newport VALUMAX r
lenses). These data were gathered
(cid:13)
from manufacturers’ speciﬁcations and ray tracing results. The circles/ triangles denote
diﬀraction limited/ aberration limited lenses. The ’+’ sign denotes our objective lens.
If a great NA is wanted only doublets from the catalogue assortment with very short f
perform diﬀraction limited.

−

5P3/2 (D2) transition. We slightly altered the design proposed
through exciting the 5S1/2
in [1] for optimum performance at the ﬂuorescence wavelength of 780 nm, which is the
wavelength corresponding to the D2 transition. However, since we use the same lens as
well for focussing the dipole trap beam, an unvarying performance is requested as well for
830 nm light. The use of the objective for both, focussing laser beams and picking up
ﬂuorescence from the atoms make it a crucial part of our experiment and this requires a
thorough testing. Fig. 1 shows the limitations of achromatic doublets for our needs. For
all statements about diﬀraction limited performance, we apply Rayleigh’s Criterion as a
check, that is

∆l = 1.22

f λ
D

,

(1)

where ∆l denotes the smallest resolvable distance, f the eﬀective focal length of the system,
λ the wavelength of the light and D the diameter of the aperture.
In the case of our
objective we have f = 37 mm, D = 25.4 mm (NA=0.27) and hence ∆l = 1.74 µm
(λ = 780 nm).

2. Designing and testing using ray tracing software

A common way of designing and theoretically testing imaging systems is to use ray tracing
software which has become an indispensable complement to aberration theory. Built-in

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

4

routines allow the designer to optimize a system to speciﬁc needs by varying parameters
such as the air gaps between lenses or the curvature of surfaces. These programs specify
rays to be traced through the system, compute the corresponding trajectories and also
give some basic interpretation of the results. Usually the programs select a reference ray
which pass through some prescribed interior point in the system. This ray is found by the
program through tracing an arbitrary ray and then applying an iterative algorithm on it
until the ray intersects the chosen point. A common choice for the reference ray to intersect
is the center of the aperture stop which makes it the chief ray. Another type of ray is the
ordinary ray which starts from a certain point of the object in a prescribed direction. Both
kinds of rays are called real rays for their trajectories are calculated to obey Snell’s law
exactly. In contrast, paraxial rays are traced using the approximation sin(α)
α where α
is the angle of the ray with the normal to the surface of a lens. This approximation is only
good for rays traveling close to the optical axis. Usually, the performance of an imaging
system is in some way characterized by comparing the behavior of a number of ordinary
rays with the reference ray at a certain point of the system (e.g. the focus). The method of
selecting appropriate ordinary rays is called ray aiming. For most large aperture systems
0.1) an aplanatic ray aiming method is applied where the coordinates of the rays
(NA
on the entrance pupil are chosen to be proportional to the direction cosines of ray angles.
This method is equivalent to aiming the rays at a sphere centered on the object point. The
totality of rays traced through the system is called a fan of rays. Useful information about
ray tracing principles and applications can be found in [13].

≥

≈

2.1. Interpreting ray data

Ray intercept curves and optical path diﬀerence (OPD) evaluations are used to measure
aberrations of an optical system. The respective principles are explained in Fig. 2. Intercept
curves are graphical plots of ray fans (Fig. 2a). In Fig. 3 we show such curves for meridional
fans. The characteristics of intercept curves allow designers not only to deduce the
amount of aberrations in a system, but also to get ﬁrst ideas about the type of aberration
contributing most. A discussion of how the types of individual aberration alter the shape
of the curve is beyond the scope of this paper. However, another very useful quantity that
can be deduced from this ray analysis is the root mean square (RMS) spot size radius σr
of an imaging system. This quantity represents the theoretical spot size when diﬀraction
eﬀects are neglected and is deﬁned as:

σr = (

1
W

n

Xi=1

wi[(DXi−

< x >)2 + (DYi−

< y >)2])1/2

(2)

The sum extends over the n rays traced through the system, DXi and DYi are the two
components of the aberration vector which are measured relative to the point of intersection
of the reference ray, < x > and < y > are the centroids of the spot

< x >=

wiDXi

< y >=

wiDYi ,

(3)

1
W

n

Xi=1

1
W

n

Xi=1

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

5

Figure 2. ways of quantifying aberrations: (a) ray aberration vector (DX,DY) e.g.
depicted in ray intercept curves as a function of the fractional pupil coordinates (FX,FY)
(b) wave aberration QQ′ e.g. measured in shear-wave interferometers in units of fractions
of the wavelength. P is the image point of an aberration-free system (center of Gaussian
reference sphere). Q and Q’ are the points of intersection of an actual ray with the
Gaussian reference sphere and with the actual wavefront respectively. P’ is the actual
image point.

wi is a number representing a weight of the ray considered and W =

wi. σr can be
compared directly to the diﬀraction limit of a system and hence determine whether it is
diﬀraction limited or not.
As another tool, the OPD (Fig. 2b) can also be speciﬁed if the image plane is at inﬁnity
and can hence be applied e.g.
for the investigation of collimated beams. A minimum
standard invented for high-quality optical performance is that the wavefront is distorted
or deformed by spherical aberration less than λ/4 peak-to-valley (P-V), with λ being the
wavelength of yellow-green light (Rayleigh’s quarter wavelength rule). This can be more
generally expressed as a maximum allowed RMS departure of the wavefront of about λ/14
[14].

P

3. Lens data

The lens system discussed here consists of three standard lenses and one meniscus lens
(Fig. 3c). The glass is BK7 for all lenses. They were obtained from [15]. The system
was optimized for our needs (λ = 780 nm and a silica window of 2 mm thickness)
using the optimization routine of the ray-tracing program. During this procedure, the
radii of curvature of the lens surfaces were ﬁxed to catalog values and the lens distances
were used as variables. This allows the program to correct for the squared sum of the
spherical aberrations up to seventh order and third order coma and astigmatism. Once

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

6

Figure 3. design, meridional ray intercept curves and rms spot sizes for (a) plano-convex
lens, (b) cemented doublet lens, (c) four lens system. The simulations (OSLO) were run
for a Gaussian beam with 20 mm 1/e2-diameter for light of 780 nm wavelength. The
0.27, the diﬀraction limit is 1.74 µm, hence only (c)
numerical aperture for a,b and c is
performs diﬀraction limited.

≈

the appropriate values were obtained through the iterations,
it was also veriﬁed that
the performance will be comparably good when manufacturer’s tolerances are taken into
consideration. These tolerances correspond mainly to the precision to which the lenses
were mounted within a brass tube and kept separated by thin aluminium spacer rings.
The data for the lens surface curvatures are (in mm): R1 ﬂat, R2=39.08, R3=103.29,
103.29,R5=39.08, R6 ﬂat, R7=26.00, R8=78.16. The widths of the lenses and air
R4=
gaps are (in mm): a=3.08, b=7.24, c=4.97, d =0.40, e=5.12, f =0.40, g=5.07, h=21.00,
i (silica)=2.00, j =12.73. All lenses have a diameter of 25.4 mm.

−

4. Experimental testing of lens systems

4.1. Shear wave interferometer

Shear wave interferometers are useful tools for testing the collimation of a laser beam. The
principle of operation is fairly simple: the front and rear surface of a high quality optical
ﬂat are used for reﬂecting the beam at an angle of 45◦. The two surfaces are not quite
parallel but slightly wedged to produce a graded path diﬀerence between the front and back
surface reﬂections of the shear plate. When the two reﬂected beams overlap on a screen,
they produce a linear fringe pattern. For a perfectly collimated beam, the interference

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

7

pattern will consist of a series of equally spaced straight fringes. A noncollimated beam
which is reasonably close to collimation will produce the same pattern, but rotated w.r.t.
the fringes from collimated light. The radius of curvature can be deduced from the angle of
rotation. Wavefront aberration will distort the straight lines of the pattern in characteristic
ways (Fig. 4a-c). Hence, from looking at the fringe pattern, one can roughly deduce the
magnitude and the kind of main aberration in an optical system [6, 7]. Further practical
information can be found in [16]. For the case of our lens system, it is convenient to
collimate light from a point source (e.g. a 1 µm pinhole onto which a laser beam is focussed)
and analyze it using the interferometer. Following this procedure, the P-V wavefront
aberration for the objective lens in [1] was estimated to be less than λ/4 (Fig. 4d).

Figure 4. Study of wavefront aberration. Left: model sketches for collimated beams
with (a) no aberrations, (b) λ/4 spherical aberrations and (c) λ/4 comar. Right: (d) an
actual wavefront measurement for the lens proposed in [1] (Fig. 4d courtesy of Urban &
Fischer-Verlag)

4.2. Test chart imaging

A very common way of quantitatively testing the performance of a lens is to image an
appropriate test chart [8]. The USAF 1951 Test Target was invented for testing the
resolution of a lens and it is one of the most commonly used charts. Furthermore, a
variety of more specialised charts are available, e.g. by using Dot Distortion Targets,
one can determine the amount of distortion from an array of precisely placed dots in a
regular array. The Sector Star Target consists of equally sized bar and space segments and
was designed to test for astigmatism. However, a couple of performance features beyond
resolution can be deduced from imaging a resolution chart onto a CCD camera [17]. Some
methods are presented in the following. For the image shown in Fig. 5a we illuminated the

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

8

×

25

chart with weak laser light (few µW of laser power, λ = 780 nm) and imaged it to a plane
EFL away from the back focal plane, where EFL denotes the eﬀective focal length
≈
of the system (37 mm). Even though the image distance is considerably larger than the
object distance, the performance of the objective is better when it is used for collimation
instead of imaging. Hence, all results given in this examination should be considered as
lower limits of the lens performance. For critical applications it is recommended to image
the collimated light with low NA diﬀraction limited optics.

Figure 5. (a) Inverted picture of the ﬁnest region of USAF R70 test chart obtained
with our objective. The smallest line separation is 4.4 µm. Important information on
the performance was obtained from measuring the contrast of the ﬁnest structure of the
chart. (b) Solid line: sharp steps of the ﬁnest structure. Dashed line: convolution with
the pixel function (single step of 16 µm width). The dashed line shows how the sharp
structure gets washed-out due to the ﬁnite CCD pixel size. We used a magniﬁcation of
25 to get useful data.(c) an actual measurement (points are linked for clearness). The
≈
dashed line of Fig. 5b is what would be obtained by averaging over many measurements.

4.2.1. Astigmatism An oblique parallel ray bundle incident on a lens will suﬀer from
the focal lengths for meridional and sagittal rays in this bundle will
astigmatism, i.e.
be diﬀerent. Our system performs without pronounced astigmatism for ray angles (or,
equivalently, tilts of the objective w.r.t. the optical axis) < 0.25 deg. This number was
deduced from measuring the diﬀerent contrasts for the ﬁnest horizontal and vertical stripes
of the test chart against tilts of the objective lens (Fig. 6a). The contrast was always deﬁned
as max/min counts in measurements such as Fig. 5c. Note that by using this deﬁnition,
the contrast becomes sensitive to the counts in the minima. To obtain comparable data, it

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

9

is therefore essential to keep the background constant within a test series. The observation
of astigmatism on test charts can be eﬀectively used for the alignment of the system.

4.2.2. Field of view One of the requirements for the objective lens was speciﬁed by the
designer as a ﬁeld of view of about 1 mm [1]. It is important to have a suﬃciently large ﬁeld
of view, since the position of trapped atoms in a vacuum cell cannot be perfectly speciﬁed
and might additionally extend over a greater range. Furthermore, when the objective is
used for focussing laser beams to create dipole traps, a great ﬁeld of view provides a uniform
trapping potential over a convenient range. Ray tracing simulations aﬃrm a diﬀraction
limited performance over a range of about 1 mm (compare Fig. 6d). We evaluated the
contrast of the ﬁnest stripes while the objective was translated horizontally/ vertically
w.r.t. the optical axis. From this measurement, we could deduce a ﬁeld of view of about
0.4 mm (Fig. 6b). This is also in agreement with ray tracing predictions for the actual
experimental way of testing the lens (see above).

Focal

4.2.3.
tolerance From evaluating the diﬀraction integral
for a spherical
monochromatic wave emerging from a circular aperture in the proximity of the focal point,
one can deduce an expression for the focal tolerance ∆z [18]. This distance is deﬁned by
the convention, that a loss of
20% in the intensity of the focal point along the axis is
permissible. It follows:

≈

∆z

≈ (cid:18)

2

f
a (cid:19)

λ

where a denotes the radius of the aperture of the lens. For our system, this yields
∆z = 10.4 µm. We have roughly veriﬁed this by measuring the contrast of the ﬁnest
stripes of the test chart (Fig. 6c). The similar behavior for vertical and horizontal stripes
in Fig. 6b) and c) is a good indicator for the centring of the system.

4.2.4. Resolution As shown in Fig. 5, the resolution is obviously considerably better than
4.4 µm. In an attempt to specify the resolution more precisely, we analyzed images of the
100 µm) of the test chart. The edge was considered as
edge of a very broad stripe (
a sharp knife edge. When laser light is used, the actual shape of the image will be the
convolution of a step function with a coherent transfer function. For a purely diﬀraction
limited system, the transfer function is the electric ﬁeld E(x,y) as obtained from Fraunhofer
diﬀraction at a circular aperture:

≈

E(x, y) = E0

where

θ =

2J1(θ)
θ

2πaq
λI

.

Here, x and y are the Cartesian coordinates in the image plane and q2 = x2 + y2. E0 is the
amplitude of the electrical ﬁeld, J1(θ) is the Bessel function of ﬁrst order, a is the radius
of the aperture and I is the image distance minus the EFL (Fig. 7a). Moreover, we have
to consider the phases. The convolution integral yields:

KED(X) = [

dy′ E(x′, y′) cos φ(x′, y′)]2

∞

X

dx′

Z

−∞

Z

−∞

(4)

(5)

(6)

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

10

Figure 6. measuring the contrast of the ﬁnest horizontal/ vertical stripes of the test
chart while tilting/ translating the objective. From this, we determined the (a) amount
of astigmatism, (b) ﬁeld of view and (c) focal tolerance. The contrasts were deduced from
plots such as Fig. 5c. The error bars take into account the spread of the measured counts.
The respective points are linked for clearness (solid line, dashed line). (d) Spot sizes for
points at the verge of the respective ﬁeld of view. Diﬀraction limited performance can be
expected for a ﬁeld of view up to about 1 mm (ray-tracing program).

where φ(x, y) is the relative phase given to a good approximation as φ = πq2
[19]
(compare Fig. 7a). Finally, KED(X) (’Knife-Edge Distribution’ ) expresses the actual one-
dimensional intensity of the knife edge image as a function of the scanning coordinate X
on the x-axis. The numerical evaluation of Eq. 6 is shown in Fig. 7b. It can be seen that
the phase factors have no practical relevance. An experimental measurement for a small
aperture is shown in Fig. 7c.
For practical purposes, the KED measured in an experiment can usually be well ﬁtted to

λI

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

11

(7)

(8)

(9)

the error function:

erf (X/w) =

X/w

e−t2

dt.

2
√π Z
0

Here, w corresponds to the 1/e-waist of a Gaussian distribution. Rayleigh’s criterion
(Eq. 1) deﬁnes the resolution as the distance between the peak and the ﬁrst minimum of
Eq. 5 and hence ∆l it is determined by θ. After the convolution, ∆l will be encoded in
the width of the transition at the edge and therefore there is a linear relation between ∆l
and w. We integrate Eq. 6 numerically for a known resolution (i.e. for a certain θ) and
ﬁt an error function to the result. Thereby we obtain the following simple formula for the
resolution as a function of the ﬁtting parameter w:

∆l = 3.38

w
magniﬁcation

.

Note however, that this formula is only good for systems which perform in reasonable
proximity of the diﬀraction limit. For highly aberrated systems, a considerable amount of
intensity will be outside the Airy disk. In addition to broadening the transition in KED(X),
this alters the shape of the distribution. Consequently Eq. 8 delivers erroneous results in
such cases. It should rather be used for verifying that a system performs diﬀraction limited
instead of calculating the actual resolution of a system in which aberrations prevail. In the
same sense, ∆l can be determined from the periodicity of the intensity oscillation on the
top edge of KED(X) (compare Fig. 7b). The theoretical treatment yields a linear relation
between the periodicity and the resolution:

∆l =

Λ

1.78

magniﬁcation

·

where Λ denotes the periodicity of the oscillation. This was veriﬁed within an error
of 5% in an actual measurement (Fig. 7c).
In Fig. 7d we show the result of resolution
measurements (obtained by using Eq. 8) for diﬀerent apertures (an iris was attached close
to the aperture stop). The solid line depicts Rayleigh’s diﬀraction limit (Eq. 1).

4.3. Measuring the PSF directly

From looking at the Point Spread Function (PSF) for a lens, one can deduce many
important properties of the system including resolution and amount of aberrations.
It
expresses the intensity distribution of the image of a mathematical point source. The PSF
of a diﬀraction limited system is usually given by the Airy function, i.e. the square of
E(x, y) in Eq. 5. A way to measure the PSF directly is to image particles that are smaller
than the diﬀraction limit. One can either image light scatter from Polystyrene beads or
ﬂuorescence light emitted from convenient sources [9]. Adequate beads are commercially
available in a great variety of sizes. We tested both, ﬂuorescence and light-scatter particles.
In this report we will only focus on the latter. We chose a sample with a diameter of
1 µm [10], diluted the concentrate by a factor of 1000 with water in a glass cuvette and
illuminated the suspension with laser light. The beam intersected the cuvette slightly oﬀ
the EFL to produce an image with a magniﬁcation of about 25. Due to the ﬁnite beam

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

12

πq2
Figure 7. (a) derivation of the relative phase diﬀerence between A’ and B’: φ
2I ,
(b) numerical integration of Eq. 6 with and without phases for a diﬀraction limit of
1.74 µm and error function ﬁt, (c) an actual experimental measurement for a diﬀraction
limit of 10 µm with the objective under test and error function ﬁt (magniﬁcation 25.4),
(d) resolution measurements for diﬀerent apertures. The solid line depicts Rayleigh’s
diﬀraction limit (Eq. 1). λ = 780 nm for all sketches.

≈

diameter, not only beads within the focal tolerance scatter light, but also particles that
are further oﬀ-focus. Consequently, the image on the CCD consists of sharp points for in-
focus beads and blurred circles for oﬀ-focus beads. Although, for our purposes, the design
of the system was optimized for a wavelength of 780 nm, ray tracing simulations predict
a diﬀraction limited performance for wavelengths down to about 400 nm. By using the
Argon-Ion 488 nm line for the illumination of the beads, we tested the performance for a
wavelength somewhat shifted from the design wavelength. For a quantitative evaluation,
we compare the CCD counts of the image for an in-focus bead with the PSF obtained from
ray tracing simulation. For the determination of the width of the main peak of a measured
PSF, one has to consider the ﬁnite pixel width of the CCD camera used, which washes-out
the original image depending on the position of the pixels with respect to the structure

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

13

of the image. For the PSF shown in Fig. 8, in the worst conﬁguration, the error in the
measured width can be as high as 46%. Within that error the measured PSF width is in
good agreement with the predictions (solid line). For reliable statements one must either
use a suﬃcient great magniﬁcation, a small pixel size or to take several measurements.

Figure 8.
(a) Imaging of light scatter from small polystyrene beads, (b) calculated
normalised Point Spread Functions for 488 nm light (solid line) and 780 nm (dashed line)
(OSLO). The measurement (ﬁlled circles) was done with light of wavelength of 488 nm.
The CCD pixel size is 16 µm, the magniﬁcation is 25.4 for both sketches

5. Conclusion

We have assembled a diﬀraction limited objective lens with an EFL of 37 mm and an
active aperture of 20 mm following the proposal in [1]. The system will be used in an
experiment for both: focussing a laser beam of 830 nm laser light to create a tight optical
dipole trap and for collimating ﬂuorescence light at 780 nm collected from atoms conﬁned
in this trap. We have conducted a number of straightforward tests on the system which
showed agreement with predictions of ray tracing software and hence, a diﬀraction limited
performance. The methods described here can easily be adopted for testing this or other
lens systems.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge stimulating discussions with Geoﬀrey Brooker and Herbert Crepaz, and
would like to thank Richard Berry’s group for providing us with test beads as well as useful
information and help. This work was supported by the EPSRC.

Testing and design of a lens system for atom trapping and ﬂuorescence detection

14

References

[1] Alt W 2002 Optik 113 142
[2] Alt W et al 2003 Phys. Rev. A 67 033403
[3] Schulz M 2002 PhD thesis “Tightly conﬁned atoms in optical dipole traps”, Universit¨at Innsbruck
[4] Hanssen J, 2004 PhD thesis “Controlling Atomic Motion: From Single Particle Classical Mechanics

to Many Body Quantum Dynamics”, The University of Texas at Austin

[5] We used OSLO LT and ZEMAX
[6] Murty M V R K 1964 Appl. Opt. 3 531-534
[7] Senthilkumaran P et al 1995 Appl Opt. 34 1197-1202
[8] We used USAF Resolving Power Test Target, 1951 standard, R70 pattern
[9] We used F-8848 FluorSphere sulfate microspheres from Molecular Probes

[10] We used Microbeads from Polysciences, Inc.
[11] Neuhauser W et al 1980 Phys. Rev. A 22 1137
[12] Grimm R et al 2000 Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42 95
[13] OSLO Optics Reference Manual. Free download from http://www.lambdares.com
[14] Mar´echal A 1947 Rev. d’Optique 26 257
[15] LENS-Optics GmbH, Finkenweg 14a, 85391 Allershausen, Germany, http://www.lens-optics.de/
[16] http://beammeasurement.mellesgriot.com/
[17] We used an Andor Ixon DV887 CCD camera
[18] Born M and Wolf E 1959 Principles of Optics London: Pergamon Press, chapter 8.8.2
[19] Dr. Geoﬀrey Brooker, private communication

