4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LASER CONTROL OF ATOMIC MOTION
INSIDE DIATOMIC MOLECULES

V.M.Akulin1
1Laboratory Aim´e Cotton, Bat. 505,Campus d’Orsay, 91405 Orsay, France

V.A.Dubovitskii2
2Institute of Chemical Physics, 142432 Chernogolovka, Russia

A. M.Dykhne 3

3TRINITI, 142092 Troitsk, Russia

A. G.Rudavets4
4Institute of Chemical Physics, 142432 Chernogolovka, Russia
Arudavets@mics.msu.su∗

Abstract

Globally optimal solution describing a phase conjugated ﬁeld of Raman scatter-
ing on the resonant B ← X transition of iodine I2 is studied. Maximum optical
coherence is found as a top eigenvalue problem. A reversibility theorem has
been stated. This provides sufﬁcient conditions for a tightly localized waveform
and molecular hologram to exist. A noisy picosecond pulse has been computed
to show how femtosecond polarization is regained at target time.

1.

Introduction

Molecular wave packet engineering has attracted much attention in the works
collected under the rubric of "quantum control" 1−14. Current world-wide ef-
forts in the problematic have been mounted to develop efﬁcient methods for
breaking selected molecular bonds 11−14 or to harness speciﬁc molecular states
for optical processing devices and spectroscopic uses. The rapid progress did

∗address for correspondences

2

not take a long time, because it was prepared by the enormous lore in photo-
molecular spectroscopy accumulated since Lord Rayleigh epoch and the be-
ginning of quantum mechanics. From the other hand, optimal control theory
comprising dynamic programming and modern variational calculus has been
the subject of mathematical studies enabling to propose a theoretical apparatus
to the quantum control.

Of prime importance were the minimum quantum uncertainty states intro-
duced by Schr-odinger. For decades they were meant of only as "Gedankenex-
perimente". Up-to-date femtosecond technique has made it possible to observe
both classically conﬁned states of Rydberg atoms 4 and space-localized wave
packets in molecules 6,9. The title of this paper obliges us to restrict ourselves
by the latter. The quantum control theory of ultrafast events close to dissoci-
ation limit of diatomic molecules is our major concern. The challenge here is
to ﬁnd optimal laser excitation of picosecond scale causing femtosecond radi-
ation of an optically thin sample.

We shall deal with the subject regarding the iodine I2 molecule as our test
example. Diatomic iodine in gas or condensed state has become the reference
standard 15 and ideal benchmark 16,17 in modelling the wave packet evolution.
Our task is greatly facilitated by the considerable volume of researches, in
which the quantun control of molecular motion has been exploited theoretically
5,7,9. The following experiments 6,8,9 with the laser-induced ﬂuorescence (LIF)
have supported the idea of wave packet localization inside a molecule. These
works have again emphasized the link of the phase modulated photoexcitation
and molecular vibrations, which was broadly known in Raman spectroscopy
from 1920s 18.

The goal yet achieved in the dynamic quantum control 9 includes localiza-
tion of the vibrational wave packet at the attractive side of molecular potential.
This scheme was referred to as the molecular reﬂectron 5. Bulk literature has
been devoted to focusing the matter states 3−9. The right posed theoretical
limits 10,11 indicate an existence of femtosecond coherence.

Our approach to the problem of a drastical shortening optical transient of a
single molecule is started from a crucial relation between a time-reverse molec-
ular dynamics and phase conjugate resonance scattering ﬁeld. A considerable
interest presents a justiﬁcation of the relation, which, despite its generality, we
have not been able to ﬁnd in the literature. There are two aspects: designing a
right chosen objective and tailormaking optimal optical pulses. To understand
how they appear, it is worth noting, that the rapid improving of femtosecond
techniques is based on compression of chirped light pulses provided by the
well-established wave guides in optics. One can borrow the key element of the
pulse compression physics to apply it to squeezing an optical coherence inside

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

3

molecular space. Namely, the Franck-Condon region must play a role both dis-
persive wave guide and frequency modulator owing to molecular vibrations.

The vibrational wave packet is expected to be focused at will on inner
Franck-Condon region, since the Franck-Condon factor is at its maximum
at the steep repulsive curve. Simultaneously the momentum variance ∆p ≈
2M v0 will be maximal at this point with v0 being the wave packet velocity.
The uncertainty principle ∆p∆q ∼ ¯h guarantees a tight localization ∆q of
the rebound wave packet. Thus, its overlap with the ground state, having the
variance ∆q0 ≫ ∆q, lasts just for recoil lifetime (∼ ∆q0/v0) and gives rise to
ultrashort coherent transient. This picture appeals to the "billard ball" model,
19 which still remains to be extended to involve spreading wave packets on
molecular curves. As example we shall look at the reﬂectron scheme.

The speciﬁc iodine reﬂectron 5,6,9 works at certain frequency above the
ground state X. A tailored electric ﬁeld excites the B state until the wave packet
begins to concentrate near an outer turning point far removed from the loca-
tion of the original Franck-Condon transitions. The closer the excitations to the
dissociation limit, the longer a delay before the wave packet will be reﬂected
from the outer curve and moves back to inner repulsive core. From here the
wave packet recoils and may radiate photons of resonant frequency to the B-X
transition, so that, an optical coherence begins to appear with a some delay.
This "dark" period might cause a ﬂuorescence to spark at a chosen time.

Having the name drawn from the electronic prototype, the molecular re-
ﬂectron is the scheme to create vibrational wave packet and to focus it on a
desired material target. Our prime interest is a radiation process, in which
the wave packet is periodically returning into resonance Franck-Condon re-
gion and recoiling from it. Hence, a molecular "magnetron" is the best-ﬁtting
term to our design, which underlines a parallel between optical-molecular and
radio-electronic phenomena. In fact, the vibrational wave packet spreading as-
sisted by molecular anharmonicity could be negated by the tailored laser pulse,
because an interplay between its modulation and quantum dispersion squeezes
the wave packet, as does a properly chirped radio pulse propagating along a
dispersive delay line.

Molecular states promoted nearby their dissociation limit can be localized
more tightly than the ground state by itself. For the excited levels are quasi-
classical in their nature. Thus, we can treat the recoil lifetime τrec as a kine-
matical overlap of the state X and B presented schematically in Figure 1. Here,
the resonance Franck-Condon transitions are drawn by the vertical arrows; the
horizontal arrows designate the wave packet motion. The wave packet velocity
v and recoil time τrec are found from the potential functions (molecular curves
shown in Figure 1) as

4

v(r) = [2(ε − UB(r))/M ]1/2 ,

τrec ≈

dr/v(r).

R0+∆R

ZR0

The distance R0 = 2.7A is the equilibrium molecular position in the ground
X state of I2. The ∆R is a maximum variance for the overlapping states,
where ε is the energy of excitation (equal to an optical frequency) and M
being the reduced mass of I2. The variance ∆R=(¯h/M Ω)1/2 ≈ 0.05 A (with
Ω ≈ 214cm−1) for the ground state is more than it for focused B wave packet
on the inner molecular wall. Furthermore, if its variance is disregarded, the
recoil lifetime is limited below by the magnitude τrec ≈ 15 f s. The state
B can be populated at the energy ε ≈ 19050cm−1 (∼ 525 nm) for a more
long time than the recoil time τrec. Setting the gate of excitation by the typical
vibrational period T ≈ 546 f s at ε, one can measure the squeezing by the
ratio T /τrec which is expected about 30 or more. As it will be clear later,
even subtle details of controlling the atomic motion inside diatomic molecules
can be understood by means of the classical characteristics and semiclassical
distribution functions.

The plan of our paper is as follows. In section 2 we apply the optimal control
theory to optical polarization in the weak ﬁeld response. "A priori" pulse shape
will not be conjectured. An exact and unique solution to a maximum coher-
ence peaked at target time is derived for isolated I2 molecule in optically thin
media. A time reverse (phase cojugate) resonance Raman scattering providing
for a feedback to the vibrational spreading is represented as a basic principle
of the quantum control. Controlling the pure and mixed states is considered.
In section 3 we reconcile the quantum machinery with a reasoning appealing
to the classical kinematics and discuss the phase modulated ﬁeld of the scat-
tered radiation associated with the classical action of the recoiling wave packet.
Section 4 illustrates the general formulation by the numerical simulation. In
section 5 we conclude and outline the future prospects.

2.

Mapping the Matter to a Light Field

A rigorous mathematical treatment of molecular "magnetron" necessitates
to solve the quantum equations dealing on equal footing with vibrational mo-
tions and nonadiabatic electronic transitions.

The adiabatic dynamics of a diatomic molecule is governed by Hamiltonian
operators ˆHb = ˆTkin + ˆVb and ˆHx = ˆTkin + ˆVx. Here ˆTkin is the operator of
radial kinetic energy, where the only active coordinate is a distance between
atoms, ˆVb and ˆVx model the adiabatic potentials of the B and X states respec-
tively. Having the fastest vibrational motion in diatomic molecule, we neglect
the more slow molecular rotations (and the ﬁne structure as well), since those

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

5

transients are separated by time scales 15. For heavy molecule as I2, the vibra-
tional transient occurs on a subpicosecond time, while the rotational transient
occurs on a longer time scale of 10 ps. Then, we can limit our consideration by
the former, because the angular correlations happen past the vibrational ones.
In fact, the rotational correction will only require a modiﬁcation of the Hamil-
tonians and averaging over initial rovibrational states. As justiﬁed in the works
7,9, the inclusion of the molecular rotations does not abandon the dynamic
quantum control of vibrational wave packet towards a desired goal.

Throughout this paper the Condon approximation for dipole transition mo-
ment µ is used, with µ being independent of internuclear separation in molecule.
This assumption is valid for the weak ﬁeld quantum control, when the molec-
ular ground state is being well localized. The electronic states are coupled by
the electric dipole operator ˆVbx(t) = ˆµE(t), where the laser ﬁeld is

E(t) = E(t)eiω0t/¯h+

∗
E (t)e−iω0t/¯h

and its slow envelop E(t) of allocated duration Tp is to be found under a con-
strain limiting the pulse energy,

J =

dτ E(τ )

∗
E (τ ).

Tp

Z0

G(t) =

Gαδ(t − tα).

α
X

This laser ﬁeld should prepare the molecular transition to a desired goal. Let
optical dipole target be a linear superposition of weighted Dirac δ-like en-
velopes shifted on tα,

The wisdom of that representation to the resonance coherence will be obvious
further.

The Schr-odinger equation for the wave functions Ψb and Ψx reads as

i¯h ˙Ψb = ( ˆHb − ω0)Ψb + ˆVbx(t)Ψx
i¯h ˙Ψx = ˆHxΨx + ˆV †

bx(t)Ψb.

The empty B state and populated ground X state (at zero temperature) will be
of use as our initial condition Ψb(0) = 0, Ψx(0) = Ψx,0. Also, the rotating
wave approximation is utilized in eq (3) to avoid fast oscillations of optical
frequency of the B-X transition. Then, the resonance interaction is given by
the slow amplitude ˆVbx(t) = ˆµ

∗
E (t).

(1)

(2)

(3)

6

Our objective consists in controlling the polarization,

Dxb(t) = µ(Ψ†

x|Ψb) = µ

∗
Ψx (r, t)Ψb(r, t),

dr

∞

Z0

which in its turn manifests in the molecular optical susceptibility. The ﬁrst
correction to the transition dipole moment Dxb(t) in the weak ﬁeld regime is

Dxb(t) = −i

dτ S00(t − τ )

(t > Tp).

(4)

∗
E (τ ),

Tp

Z0

To characterize the molecular transition, it is useful to extract a temporal struc-
ture factor independing of the excitation ﬁeld envelope E(τ ). For this goal we
introduce a wave-packet correlation function as

S00(τ ) =

(Ψ†

x,0|e−iτ ˆHb/¯h|Ψx,0)

µ2
¯h

(5)

This formula describes the optical polarization caused by the δ-like pulse of
electric ﬁeld Es(τ ) = δ(τ ). Modulation of the B-X transitions is formed
while the Ψx,0 replica propagates on the B curve. The bound wave packet os-
cillates spreading between turning points and permits the molecule to radiate
the Raman scattering signal. In frequency domain, the erratic spectral pattern
17 of the resonance Raman intensity is accordingly observed. The spectral pro-
ﬁle of the S correlator is represented by the KHD formula for the fundamental
Raman overtone. Its resonance dependence is given by

∞

Ir(ω) ∝

dτ eiωτ /¯hS00(τ )
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Z0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

=

µ4
¯h2

(Ψ†

x,0|Ψb,m)(Ψ†

b,m|Ψx,0)

γ + i(βm − ω)

2

,

(6)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
where γ is the damping constant; the eigenstates Ψb,m and eigenleveles βm
can be found from eigenequation ˆHbΨb,m = βmΨb,m. The Stokes overtones
are manifested when the wave packet reaches a favorable position to overlap
the vibrational X states. 21

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

m
X

To maximize the overlap between the Franck-Condon density |Dxb(t)|2 and

optical dipole target G(t), we deﬁne the ﬁeld functional as

F =

dtG(t)|Dxb(t)|2 =

dτ

dτ1P00(τ, τ1) E(τ )

∗
E(τ1).

(7)

Z

Tp

Tp

Z0

Z0

One should note, that given functional does not conﬁne the optical polarization
throughout the time. However, it does guarantee a maximal dipole moment at

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

our objective G(t). The Frank-Condon transitions develop freely beyond the
target time constrained only by the ﬁeld energy in eq 1. The dynamic quantum
control begins with the X state Ψx,0, which is tightly localized in the I-I dis-
tance at the start. The B state must be optimally driven below the dissociation
limit to avoid bound-free transitions resulting in losses. Evident wave nature
will impede the control, in which the B wave packet having undamped oscil-
lation between turning points, must be focused on the inner steep core with
a maximum velocity at target time. Those requirements will be met under a
global maximum of the ﬁeld functional F/J = λ. This condition is set by

small variation of the probe ﬁeld

∗
E (τ ) in the variational equation,

δ(F − λJ) = 0,

where λ is the Langrange multiplier enabling to enforce the energy constrain.
Herefrom the basic problem of dynamic quantum control in the weak ﬁeld
regime reduces to the Fredholm eigenequation,

7

(8)

(9)

Tp

Z0

dτ1P00(τ, τ1)E(τ1) = λE(τ ),

where the kernel of the homogeneous equation is given by the complex hermi-
tian matrix,

P00(τ, τ1) =

dtG(t)S00(t − τ )

∗
S 00(t − τ1).

(10)

Z

The integral kernel P depends exclusively on a chosen dipole target and speci-
ﬁcation of the electronic transition being a pump-independent in the weak ﬁeld
limit. In some sense, it copies the material properties of the molecule to a light
ﬁeld. The time-dependent matrix elements eq (5) forming the kernel in eq (9)
have long been known in the "matter-radiation" interaction theory, beneﬁted to
understanding nonlinear optics and utilized in quantum control of wave packets
with different material objectives: the minimum space variance of wave pack-
ets (I.S.Averbukh, M.Shapiro 3), the delta-like space density target (V.Dubov,
H.Rabitz 7), the minimum quantum uncertainty state (K.R.Wilson et al. 5,6,9).

To recall their argumentation, we shall take a quick look at another ﬁeld

functional, which describes a total B population in the weak ﬁeld regime,

N =

dr|Ψ(1)

b (r, t)|2 =

dτ dτ1M00(τ, τ1) E(τ1)

∗
E(τ ),

(11)

∞

Z0

Tp

Tp

Z0

Z0

where the self-conjugate kernel M00(τ, τ1) in eq 5 is proportional to the S-
correlator depending on the difference argument τ − τ1, because the molecular

8

potentials are independent of time

M00(τ, τ1) = S00(τ1 − τ )/¯h =

∗
S 00 (τ − τ1)/¯h

(12)

Again one can repeat above steps searching a global maximum for the func-
tional N/J = λ, which gives a maximum population yield per unit ﬁeld en-
∗
E (τ ) for the variational equation

ergy. Considering a small ﬁeld variation
δ(N − λJ) = 0, we obtain an eigenequation

∗
S 00 (τ − τ1)E(τ1) = ¯hλE(τ )

dτ1

(13)

Tp

Z0

We obtain the degenerated kernel having separated the time arguments τ and
τ1 by means of the unity decomposition
α,m = 1. Then, a solution
to the integral equation can be cast as

Ψα,mΨ†

m
P

E(τ ) =

µ2
λmax¯h2

m
X

(Ψ†

x,0|Ψb,m) eiβmτ /¯hEm

Unkno wn coefﬁcients Em are found from the system of linear equations taken
at a maximal eigenvalue λmax

Mm,nEn = λmaxEm

The matrix Mm,n is formed by the Franck-Condon factors and energy levels
of the B state

Mm,n = (Ψ†

b,m|Ψx,0)(Ψ†

x,0|Ψb,n)

ei(βm−βn)Tp/¯h − 1
i(βm − βn)

The optimal ﬁeld E(τ ) depends on the oscillator strengths of the molecu-
lar transition in eq(16), which includes factors of the increasing frequency due
to the energy ladder β0 < β1... < βm < ... of vibrational levels. This ﬁeld
must steadily populate the molecular states. It is expedient to put on the text-
book Condon’s model of the molecular transition between the parabolic curve
Vx = M Ω2r2/2 and ﬂat continuum Vb = const, where the S-correlator is the
following:

S00(t) = (1 + iΩt/2)−1/2 = A0(t) e−iφ0(t)/2
The phase proﬁle φ0(t) = arctg(Ωt/2) is provided by the spreading wave
packet in continuum which is projected to the ground vibrational state. On
using a slope molecular curve Vb = −f r models the repulsive Franck-Condon

(14)

(15)

(16)

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

9

region and recoiling wave packet. The phase correction φ(t) = φ0(t) +
t(f t)2/(12M ¯h) is explicitly derived in the model dealing with the momen-
tum representation of wave packet dynamics. The amplitude correction turns
out to be of Gaussian type and like the Debye - Waller factor is given by the
ratio of the recoil energy R = (f t)2/(2M ) to vibrational quantum ¯hΩ, i.e.

A(t) = A0(t)e−R/(2¯hΩ).

∗
The ﬂat and slope continuum of molecular states provide for the kernel
S 00(τ −
τ1) with negative chirp of frequency for a short time duration τ1, when the ex-
pansion in the power of τ1 is legitimate. The conclusion holds also in a gen-
eral picture of semiclassical approximation as demonstrated in next section.
Thus, a short pulse having positive frequency chirp slows down the fast inte-
grand oscillations in eq (13) enabling one to maximize its eigenvalue, (i.e. the
yield of the population). The maximum population has to involve a gain of
ﬂuorescence.22−24

Other trends of wave packet correlations make it possible to control a se-
lected molecular state or coherent transients. According to eq 9, a top eigen-
value λ gives a maximum optical dipole transition per unit of ﬁeld energy
having eigenvector Eλ(τ ) as the globally optimal ﬁeld of the allocated dura-
tion Tp. To demonstrate this statement we address the δ-Dirac model as the
simplest optical dipole target, where the coherent envelope G(t) = δ(t − td)
will be peaked at time td after turning off the excitation pulse. The condi-
tion td > Tp means, that the "spontaneous" polarization will stand out on the
pulse-free background. The delta-like target model results in the degenerate
Fredholm kernel. An unique solution to the integral equation is explicitly writ-
ten as

Eλ(τ ) = S00(td − τ )(J/λ)1/2,
where td marks a moment when the optical polarization is regained with λ
being the normalized coherent yield,

(17)

λ =

∗
S 00 (td − τ )S00(td − τ ).

dτ

(18)

Tp

Z0

The indication of optimality according to Bellman principle is indeed real-
ized: the control depends on the state of system at the current moment alone.
This globally optimal ﬁelds can be understood in general terms, for their en-
velopes Eλ(τ ) match those of the wave packet correlations representing the
time-reversed resonance scattering. The delay time td ﬁts an absolute max-
imum of the optical transient to target time τ = td. The dipole transition
moment is given by the convolution integral

10

Dxb(t) = −i (J/λ)1/2

dτ S00(t − τ )

∗
S 00 (td − τ ).

(19)

Tp

Z0

The optimal ﬁeld in eqs 17, 19 cancels out the fast oscillating behaviour of
the integrand as being designed to have the phase conjugate wave-packet cor-
relations excited by the δ-like pulse. The optical transient by virtue of eq 19
exhibits periodical recurrences, having the maximum magnitude −i(Jλ)1/2
exactly at the target time td.

The straightforward extension of the δ-dipole target to the realistic shape
G(t) speciﬁes an eigenvalue problem in eq 9. The integral operator P can be
decomposed into sum of the degenerate kernels according to eq 10 in the weak
ﬁeld limit. The solution is

E(τ ) =

S00(tα − τ )GαEα/λmax

where the Eα being the eigenstate at a top eigenvalue of the system

ˆPαα1 Eα1 = λmaxEα

The matrix coefﬁcients are given by,

ˆPαα1 = Gα

dτ S00(tα − τ )

∗
S 00 (tα1 − τ )

α
X

Tp

Z0

(20)

(21)

(22)

so that the optimal ﬁeld satisﬁes the energy constrain by the deﬁnition.

We have established an important fact, which merits to be reformulated as a
reversibility theorem asserting sufﬁcient conditions to reverse the spread wave
packet in time: In order to drive molecular transition to the polarization tar-
get G(t), the optimal ﬁeld should be made of superimposed phase conjugate
ﬁelds of the resonance Raman scattering of ultrashort pulses of amplitudes
GαEα/λmax at the delay time tα.

The resonance scattering radiation itself may seem to be "erratic" in time.
The wave-packet collapse and spreading and destructive interference are re-
sponsible for the apparent noise due to molecular "disorder" on account of
potential anharmonicity, uncommensurate frequencies, curve crossing etc. But
phase conjugate feedback with respect to molecular correlations (resonant scat-
tering) allows the wave packet to be recovered at a ﬁxed space-time point at
will. The optical coherence can be restored not only for the Raman fundamen-
tal overtone. Our treatment might be readly extended to controlling the high
overtones of molecular resonance scattering.

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

11

We term the ﬁeld enabling to squeeze the optical coherence as a quantum
hologram to note its key role for a wave packet interference in the Franck-
Condon region. The quantum holography is relying on the wave packet corre-
lations, which can be found by detecting a ﬂuorescence or population created
by two phase locked ultrashort pulses. Accordingly, in the limit of weak ﬁeld,
the excited state B is obtained from eq 3, in the ﬁrst order to the resonance
interaction as,

b (t) = −iθ1e−it ˆHb/¯h ˆΨx,0(0) − iθ2e−i(t−T ) ˆHb/¯h ˆΨx,0(T ).
ˆΨ(1)

(23)

This superposition is obvious analog of an incident and object waves in optical
holography. To produce the quantum interference of wave packets, the ﬁrst
laser pulse at t = 0 must be followed by the delayed pulse at t = T . If the
laser pulses are phase-locked and their areas are small with respect to π, the
population N of the state B contains the contribution 14 of the one photon
two-pulse interference, i.e.

N =

dr|Ψ(1)

b (r, t)|2 = |θ1|2 + |θ2|2 + Re{ θ2

∗
θ1 S00(T ) }

(24)

∞

Z0

The alternative pathways in course of the Franck-Condon transitions depend
on the delay time T between pulses. This dependence is being just required
to controlling the wave packet motion. The phase locked laser pulses must re-
trieve synphase and quadrature components of the S correlator. The LIF signal
14, ionization channel 25, or other means for the matter-wave interferometry
may be employed. Then, the use of programmable optics 26,27 and algorithms
based on the reversibility theorem fed into computer codes can be made to tai-
lor the optimal ﬁeld. This quantum holography program must be realized to
rebuild the well localized replica of the ground state or to squeeze optical co-
herence as called on even for unknown molecular curves as well as collisional
or intramolecular dephasing and relaxation.

The reversibility theorem still holds for mixed states inevitably residing in
statistical systems, for which irreversible processes hamper the quantum con-
trol of the wave packets. By considering the nondiagonal density matrix of the
ˆΨβi, the brackets h...i symbolize an ensemble
resonance transition ˆραβ = h ˆΨ†
α
averaging in quantum kinetic theory. Here, the populations ˆρxx = h ˆΨ†
ˆΨxi,
x
ˆρbb = h ˆΨ†
ˆΨxi adhere to the kinetic equations:
b

ˆΨbi and polarization ˆρbx = h ˆΨ†
b

i¯h

∂ ˆρ
∂t

=

ˆH, ˆρ
i
h

− i (Γˆρ)

(25)

12

where the rectangular brackets [...] denote a quantum commutator ˆH ˆρ − ˆρ ˆH of
the operators which are represented in the matrix notation as:

ˆρ =

ˆρbb, ˆρbx
ˆρxb, ˆρxx (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)

ˆH =

ˆHbb, ˆVbx
ˆVxb, ˆHxx !

 

(26)

A phenomelogical damping matrix ˆΓ designates the overall losses in irre-
versible processes for collisions, spontaneous radiation, etc. Experiments in
solids, liquids and gas cell conditions indicate an existences of coherent vibra-
tional transients of I2 to tens of picoseconds 14. Thus, the quantum control
theory within the matrix density formalism, in which the relaxation will not be
scrutinized further, may be applied.

Just as for pure states, we take care of the optical polarization ˆρbx at target
time. One can immediately maximize the overlap between the optical transi-
tion ρbx and its dipole target in eq 2. By letting the polarization operator ˆρbx
be a complex valued quantity, we deﬁne an overlap functional as

F = −µ

dt Im{G(t) T r{ˆρbx}} =

Tp

dτ Re {

∗
E (τ )P00(τ )}

(27)

0
Z

where another ﬁeld functional P00(τ )} is easily obtained from Eqs. (25),(26)
to be

Z

P00(τ ) =

dt G(t)e−Γ(t−τ ) T r {e−i(t−τ ) ˆHb /¯h [ˆρxx − ˆρbb] ei(t−τ ) ˆHx/¯h}
(28)
The functional F is indentiﬁed as a work that a given target G(t) would pro-
duce on the Franck-Condon transition. This statement can be readily under-
stood, since according to eq 25 the ﬁeld functional F can be rewritten as the
populations difference due to the target ﬁeld "action"

Z

µ2
¯h

F = −

dt ImT r [G(t)ˆρbx(t)] = ¯h

dt T r

= ¯h(Nb − Nx)

Z

Z
To maximize F, we apply the standard variational procedure of eq 8. The dy-
namic quantum control in the weak ﬁeld limit reduces to a problem of a linear
mathematical programming. As a bonus of the approach, no integral equation
needs to be solved at all, because, even for any target shape G(t), the varia-
tional equation

˙ˆρb(t) − ˙ˆρx(t)
i
h

δ(F − λJ)/δ

∗
E (τ ) = 0

results in an unique solution:

E(τ ) = λ−1P00(τ )

(29)

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

13

By using the empty B state and populated state X, ˆρbb = 0 ˆρxx = ˆρ0, as the
initial conditions, we set that

P00(τ ) =

dt G(t)e−Γ(t−τ )T r {e−i(t−τ ) ˆHb/¯h ˆρ0ei(t−τ ) ˆHx }

(30)

µ2
¯h

Z

and the maximum coherent yield λ becomes explicitly known from the energy
constrain represented as

λ2 = J −1

Tp

∗
P 00 (τ )P00(τ )dτ.

(31)

0
Z
By choosing the pure state ˆρ0 = Ψ†
x,0Ψx,0 for the initial condition, we recover
the main result of eq 5, as it must. Matrix density formulation has the ad-
vantage of being applied to irreversible physical systems of gas and condensed
matter. The predissociation 1 and caging phenomena can be considered as well.
What is more, the observation and control of wave packets is in the progress 8,9
and includes rearrangement of subtle chemical structures in solids and liquids.
Having postponed the feasible generalization, we shall discuss in next section
the reversibility theorem in the semiclassical uniform approach.

3.

Semiclassical approximation

The semiclassical limit of quantum dynamics is characterized by classical
equations, that require to be supplemented by the quantum initial conditions to
take full account of the singularity ¯h = 0. The former is clear, only classically
possible paths joining R0 with R1 contribute to the S-correlator. These paths
are invoked by Hamilton’s principle δW = 0, where the classical action is

W(R0, R1, t) =

t

dτ

M
2

(cid:18)

0
Z

˙R2(τ ) − Ub(R(τ ))
(cid:19)

(32)

If the action is known, it enables us to ﬁnd a momentum P0 = −∂W(R0, R1, t)/∂R0
and density of states ∂P0/∂R1. Appearance of the derivative of classical tra-
jectory in determining the density distribution in phase space is not occasional
28. The quantum transition amplitude connecting the points R0 and R1 de-
pends on Plank ’s constant ¯h and can not be deduced from the classical postu-
late. Instead, the quantum grounds dictate

K(R0, R1, t) = hR0|e−itHb/¯h|R1i = (−2iπ¯hδR1/δP0)−1/2 exp(iW(R0, R1, t)/¯h).

(33)

1J.Jortner has drawn our attention to curve crossing effects in experiments reported by V.Apkarian [8] et
al. and M.Chergui [17] et al. Our theory can be extended for B-(B",a,a’) couplings affecting the quantum
control. The results is the entanglement with continuum molecular states shortening optical transients.

14

The probability density, |K|2 = (2π¯h)−1δP0/δR1, stems from the total num-
ber of atoms reached the point δR1 started out from the point R0 and having the
classical action W = W(R0, R1, t). The eq(33) does not give the quantum am-
plitudes correctly for certain space-time points. Suffering from known draw-
backs, it fails in the classically forbidden region, caustics and turning points.
The story is old as the quantum theory itself. However, for our goals, the semi-
classical approach does at least serve to a clue idea about the quantum control
29.

The classical action W is inherited by the phase of electric ﬁeld promoting
resonant B-X transition. By this, the optimal laser ﬁeld is related with the S-
correlator which projects the wave packet B to the ground state X. The latter
is centered at R0 = 2.7A in the I-I distances with the variance ∆R = 0.05A
being much less than the Franck-Condon region extension itself. Hence, the
mere closed paths passing the point R0 contribute to the optimal ﬁeld. We can
present its phase by the classical action eq 33 expanded for ultrashort pulse as

W(R0, R0, td − τ ) = W(R0, R0, td) + Ub(R0)τ − M ( ¨R0)2τ 3/3.

(34)

in the vicinity of inner turning point R0. The potential Ub(R0) plays the role
of frequency detuning of the B-X transition. Owing to zero velocity ˙R0 = 0,
its linear chirp will be negligible as compared with the nonlinear chirping. In-
stead, there is a signiﬁcant quadratic chirp −M ( ¨R0)2τ 2t as adominant feature
of acceleration ¨R = −M −1(dUb(R)/dR) due to the steep inner core. By
travelling a distance δr in vicinity of R0, the wave packet detunes down the
resonant frequency on δr(dUb(R)/dR). The greater δr = ¨R0τ 2 the smaller
the frequency of B-X transition. This gives the negative chirp, which qualita-
tively is in agreement with the known reasoning 6,29. In practice, for a more
longer pulse duration, this simple classical expression may overestimate the
chirp rate, because the particle also travels far from the steep potential in a less
repulsive Franck-Condon region. Reducing of frequency modulation, as well
as linear chirping owing to a wave packet velocity is quite possible.

A care must be taken to the turning points, where the semiclassical transition
amplitude postulated in eq 33 diverges ∂R1/∂P0 = 0. This is the case for our
molecular magnetron design, in which the wave packet must be focused just
in vicinity of the inner turning point. This severity can be circumvented by the
uniform approach based on the Wigner representation of quantum operators.
To ﬁnd the S-correlator density, we must overlap the initial and propagated
distributions in the phase space s = (r, p),

|S(−t)|2 =

drdp ρ0(r, p) ρ0(R, P )

(35)

µ4
¯h2

Zs

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

15

(36)

(37)

where R = R(−t; s, 0) and P = P (−t; s, 0) being the current coordinate
and momentum of a particle experiencing the force −∂Ub(R)/∂R. The clas-
sical integrals of motion are ﬁxed by the initial conditions R(0; s, 0) = r and
P (0; s, 0) = p in the phase space. According to the Newton laws, the particle
travels as,

˙R = P/M ˙P = −∂Ub(R)/∂R,

and the Wigner density function obeys the transport equation:

∂ρ0(s, t)
∂t

+

p
M

∂ρ0(s, t)
∂r

−

∂Ub(r)
∂r

∂ρ0(s, t)
∂p

= 0.

Hence, the solution is ρ0(R(0; s, t), P (0; s, t)) propagating along the trajectory
passing the point s in time t with the distribution for the ground X state, which
is deﬁned as

ρ0(r, p) =

eiqp/¯hΨ†

x,0(r +

)Ψx,0(r −

) =

e−F (p,r),

(38)

q
2

q
2

1
π¯h

∞

Z−∞

dq
2π¯h

where

(39)

F (p, r) = ((r − R0)/∆R)2 + (p∆R/¯h)2.
The Wigner function of the ground state X is sharply peaked at the point
q0 = (R0, 0) having Gaussian variances (∆R, ¯h/∆R) in the coordinates and
momenta, respectively. The classical orbits passing this stretched ellipse make
a major contribution to the S-correlator amplitude. 2 Then, one can apply
the fastest descent method to estimate the amplitude in eq 35. We expand
the exponent functional F (R, P ) to second order in the declines from the path
s0(t) = (R(0; q0, t), P (0; q0, t)) passing the equilibrium point q0 of the ground
X state. The family of orbits in its neighborhood contributes signiﬁcantly.
Thus, this topology determines basically a quadratic form

F (R, P ) = F 0 + F 0

s (s − q0) +

s,s1(s − q0)(s1 − q0) + ...,

(40)

F 0

1
2

The function F 0 = F (s0(t)) is taken on the path s0(t). A small stirring of
its initial condition yields the four ﬁrst and six second derivatives of R, P
with respect to two-dimensional indices s = (r, p) or s1 = (r, p). Then, the
quadratic form is settled by the twelve related functions:

R(0; q0, t), P (0; q0, t), Rs(0; q0, t), Ps(0; q0, t), Rs,s1(0; q0, t), Ps,s1(0; q0, t),

2It is worth noting, that a central role of the classical trajectories for calculating matrix elements of high
excited states has been well known since the thirties, due to Landau seminal contribution to the chemical
collisions theory 30.

16

,

(41)

(42)

Of course, these functions adhere to Newton’s equations and their derivatives.
The useful vector and matrix notations

~V = (F 0

r , F 0

p ); ˆF =

(∆R)−2 + F 0
F 0

rp ,

rr/2 ,

 

F 0
rp

(∆R/¯h) 2 + F 0

pp/2 !

simplify the resulting Gaussian integral:

|S(t)|2 ∝ ¯h−1(det F)− 1

2 exp

−F 0 +

~V ˆF −1 ~V †

.

1
4

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

The derivatives of the classical path with respect to its starting point in the
space s represent the states density already mentioned in this section. Now we
see, that a given method leads to the determinant in denomenator to set a den-
sity of paths contributing to the quantum amplitude. In fact, this determinant is
dictated by the uncertainty principle for the conjugate variables like coordinate
and momentum. The merit of the average density valid for all paths, having
the quantum spreading ﬁxed by the initial distribution, is evident at the caustic
and turning points. Here, the zeroth derivative Rp(t; s, 0) = 0 provides for
the concentration of the classical paths, for which the Van Vleck’s determinats
diverge 28,29,31. However, our determinantal relation still remains to be a good
solution for the quantum amplitude.

It is necessary to look more closely at the semiclassical recipe to gain insight
about a frequency modulation of wave-packet correlations. The S-correlator is
written as a trace of the polarization density matrix, see also eq 30,

S00(t) = µ2¯h−1T r{ˆρ(t)} ∝

drdp ρ(s, t).

Zs

With initial condition ˆρ(0) = ˆρ0, a solution formally satisﬁes to

ˆρ(t) = e−it ˆHb/¯h ˆρ0eit ˆHx/¯h

(43)

The transport equation for the nondiagonal matrix element ρbx(t) is immedi-
ately obtained with accuracy ¯h2 to be sure containing the description of quan-
tum interference on the Franck-Condon transition:

∂ρ(s, t)
∂t

+

p
M

∂ρ(s, t)
∂r

−

∂Ud(r)
∂r

∂ρ(s, t)
∂p

−

Ud(r)
i¯h

ρ(s, t) = 0

(44)

The difference potential Ud(r) = Ub(r) − Ux(r) deﬁnes corresponding reso-
nant frequencies. An average potential is the half sum of the molecular curves
Ua(r) = (Ub(r) + Ux(r))/2. The equations of motion are

˙R = P/M ˙P = −∂Ua(R)/∂R

(45)

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

17

So that, the S-correlations are represented as an integral of local density with
fast oscillating exponential prefactor in the space s given by the expression,

T r{ˆρ(t)} =

drdp e

ρ0(s(t))

(46)

−i

d τ Ud(R(τ ;s,t))/¯h

At the start, the function ρ0(s(0)) = ρ0(R(0; s, 0), P (0; s, 0)) has a quite sim-
ple shape of Gaussian distribution. Its contour lines look like the stretched el-
lipses. Then, the map exhibits a complicated topology due to winding motion
around a minimum of the average potential and its anharmonicity. Together
with the fast oscillating functional for the difference potential of the B-X states,
it presents a challenge to calculating the trace integral representation for ’topo-
logical singularities’ of the turning point structure which is common for the
semiclassical approximations of wave mechanics 31.

The solution to our problem is written down in Langrange coordinates S =
(R, P ) = (R(0; s, t), P (0; s, t)). By virtue of Liouville theorem, the phase
volume in the jacobian transformation from Euler to Lagrange variables is in-
variant, whilst molecular potentials are independent of velocity. In the Lan-
grange picture

T r{ˆρ(t)} =

dR dP e

ρ0(S),

(47)

−i

d τ Ud(R(τ ;S,0))/¯h

Zs

ZS

the basic integrand becomes a function of R, P

ˆρ(t) = exp(−iΦ(S, t)) ρ0(S).

To expand the path functional Φ in the exponent to the second order in depar-
tures from the point q0, we use a series

Φ(s, t) = Φ0 + Φ0

s (s − q0) +

s,s1(s − q0)(s1 − q0) + ...,

(48)

where

Φ0 = Φ(s0, t) =

d τ Ud(R(τ ; q0, 0))/¯h

and the path s0(t) = (R(0; q0, t), P (0; q0, t)) obeys eq 45. By re-using the
vector and matrix notation again, one can represent the ﬁnal expression as a
two-dimensional Gaussian integral,

t

0
R

t

0
R

Φ0

1
2

t

Z0

18

S(t) = (µ/¯h)2(det ˆΠ)− 1

2 exp

−iΦ0 −

~U ˆΠ−1 ~U †

,

(49)

1
4

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where the vector ~U and matrix Π are given by

~U = (Φ 0

r , Φ 0

p ); ˆΠ =

(∆R)−2 + i Φ 0
i Φ 0

rp ,

rr/2 ,

 

i Φ 0
rp

(∆R/¯h) 2 + i Φ 0

pp/2 !

.

(50)
The phase modulation is set by the function Φ0(t). Additional corrections in
the exponent are responsible also for the decay amplitude giving generalized
Debye-Waller factors for wave packet recoiling. The phase and amplitude for-
mulae may be simpliﬁed due to peculiar features of molecular curves, short
times evolution etc. This approach would be of interest to address Landau-
Ziner transitions, and the spectral lines structure from impact center to static
wings may be uniformly exploited. An analytical formulation of the globally
optimal ﬁelds has some advantage of being used to model the molecular wave
packet correlations. On propagating in a space the laser pulse might be tai-
lormade to mimic the known optimal ﬁelds. With this aim the high frequency
ﬁltering in optical guides, nonlinear frequency dispersion, reﬂection from holo-
graphic ﬁlm, gratings etc. giving the right temporal and spectral trends may be
adapted to perform the quantum control.

As an example, we will discuss a chirping in static wing of spectral molec-
ular line. Accessed by the ultrashort pulse, the wave packet develops in the
average potential Ua(R) between points connected by the direct path. For a
small τ (a femtosecond scale), these points are close together on the trajectory

R(τ ; R, P ) = R + τ P − (τ 2/2M ) (dUa/dR)

The difference potential in eq 46 can be expanded for the small departures from
the equilibrium point q0, and we may rewrite the frequency in Φ 0 as a power
series for a small τ

Ud(R(τ ; q0, 0) = Ud(R0) − (τ 2/2M ) (dUa/dR0)(dUd/dR0) =
= Ud(R0) − (τ 2/4M ) (dUb/dR0)2.

Since the condition dUx(R)/dR = 0 (zero force) should be met in R = R0
(at a minimum of X curve), the result is the quadratic chirp lowering the pulse
frequency with a correction coefﬁcient of 0.25 to its classical rate in eq 34.
The correction of this sort is not surprising for the classical - semiclassical -
quantum correspondence. Moreover, considering more closely the phase and
amplitude modulation of wave packet correlations resulted from ~U ˆΠ−1 ~U † in
eq 49, one can ﬁnd additional corrections due to recoil from the slope molecu-
lar curve. The ﬁrst non-vanishing terms of the power τ and τ 3 in the exponent
are an exact match the quantum formulae in the Condon model (see Sec. II

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

19

after eq 16).
It is worth stressing that the wave packet is found in the co-
herent superposition of two resonance states, i.e. B and X, and their mixing
will reduce the chirp rate on the classically gained formula in eq 34, because
the molecular force acts only through the curve B (in recoiling from the inner
curve), and does not in the equilibrium point of curve X.

This argumentation must be revised further for returning trajectories on a
long time duration. In the case, our uniform treatment warrants a more careful
study that will be reported elsewhere. For completeness sake, the basic ideas of
quantum control should be examined in a quantum simulation, which is favored
to the semiclassical treatment, if one cannot limit by one classical path. Thus,
in the next section, we shall rely on the quantum computation leaving aside a
detailed numerical analysis of the classical equations.

4.

Numerical Simulations

The quantum model eq 3 for the motion along one active I-I coordinate and
electronic transition belongs to the polynomial class of numerical complexity
of N linear equations, where N is the number of grid points. There is more that
one recipe with which to perform their computations 32. The QR diagonaliza-
tion requires the O(N 3) operations. In speciﬁc cases, the QR algorithm, as a
stable spectral decomposition, can be used for the wave packet propagation.
The time implicit symmetrical schemes of Gaussian elimination 33 necessitate
O(N ) operations. The symmetrized split operator method does O(N log(N ))
steps based on the fast Fourier transform (FFT) 34. The FFT propagates the
wave packet similar to Feynman’s path integral and alternates the coordinate
and momentum representations involving the thorough dynamical picture in
hand. These methods are in good agreement. The practical value of FFTs or
Gaussian elimination is that they enable to get rid of the matrix diagonalization.

The absorbing boundary condition has been used in the numerical simu-
lations. The imaginary negative optical potential discriminates the outgoing
wave packet at outer edge of the numerical grid and has no effect on the
bound states. This feature is visible in Figure 2, where the molecular dynam-
ics following impact resonance interaction on B-X transition is shown. The
ground state replica transforms into a wave-packet which is scattering above
the molecular dissociation limit and binding below it. The scattering states,
shown in the foreground of Figure 2, are involved due to impact photodissoci-
ation (i.e., the δ-like pulse action). This branch is not mixed with the bound-
bound transitions responsible for coherent recurrences, while the wave packet
recoils against the molecular walls and oscillates spreading for the B state an-
harmonicity.

The resonance scattering radiation in the wake of ultrashort pulse proceeds
in two stages: a fast monotonic decay due to direct photodissociation gives

20

way to a "non-regular" reviving. This picture is shown in Figure 3 for the
fundamental overtone of Raman intensity. Since a damping out is assumed to
be small, the wave packet correlations hold during many molecular periods.
The amplitude and phase proﬁle will follow in reverse order. Thus, Figure 3
showing its fundamental overtone intensity must be read " from right to left".
The phase conjugate scattering signal in Figure 4(a) has been designed to drive
the spread waves towards td. The target time td exactly represents the starting
point of wave-packet correlations. Furthermore, on going back in time their
envelope S(td − τ ) is not delta correlating as a white noise signal.

There are two regular trends: the negative frequency chirp, which has been
explained with the semiclassical arguments, and amplitude growing to the
pulse end. The last feature stemmed from the reversibility theorem can be also
understood qualitatively. Since the wave packet is spreading between turn-
ing points, the result is a small amplitude almost everywhere in the classically
accessible Franck-Condon region. The optimal ﬁeld on its start is set by a pro-
jection of the spread wave packet to the X state. The S-correlations undergo
fast oscillations due to multiple recoils of the wave packet against molecular
walls and its spreading accompanied by decreasing amplitude. Evolving back
in time, the wave packet becomes more regular, and its shape is recovered and
copies well localized replica of the ground X state. Focussing the wave packet
in the vicinity of the inner turning point results in a further rise of its amplitude
3. The projection to the ground X state grows together. This explains why the
globally optimal ﬁeld behaves in such a way in Figure 4(a). Induced resonance
transient given by eq 4 is shown in Figure 4(b). The 1 ps square gate of optimal
ﬁeld creates the transient spike at delay time 1.5 ps. The temporal full width at
half maximum (FWHM) equals Tw = 25 fs that is in good agreement with the
kinematical overlap lifetime τrec = 15f s.

This semiclassical estimate is astonishingly accurate although less then quan-
tum computed. There are two main reasons of this distinction. The wave
packet interference is absent in the classical kinematics and the dispersion of
excited state is not taken into account. Thus, the ignorance of quantum wave
nature underestimates the width of the coherent peak. To cure the situation, the
semiclassical uniform approach, which copes with initial quantum distribution,
classical motions, caustic and turning points, may be applied.

For deﬁniteness sake, setting Tg = 50 fs square gate of optical target G at
the delay time 1.5 ps, we now can consider a realistic optical transient. Av-
eraging the globally optimal envelope over G washes out the high frequency
components as shown in Figure 5. However, the average pulse shape is yet

3A clear analogy is given by a point of intense radiation behind burning-glass exposed to sun.

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

21

endowed with a chirp. This feature is exhibited in Figure 6 (a), where Wigner
spectrogram is shown. The Wigner function of the optimal ﬁelds is deﬁned as

W (t, ν) =

eiντ /¯hE(t +

dτ
2π¯h

Z

∗
E (t −

)

τ
2

τ
2

).

Picosecond square gate envelope and periodic boundary condition have been
used in evaluating the spectrograms. The frequency-time maps manifest a
striking correlation between the optimal ﬁelds and wave packet evolution. For
instance, the envelop of allocated duration Tp = 1ps consists of more shorten
subpulses. Their number is associated with the number of vibrational cycles
between turning points during Tp. For every recoiling from inner molecu-
lar core the wave packet gives rise to a subpulse. The contour levels of the
two-dimensional Wigner spectrogram are taken at one-half a maximum height.
A slope and concavity characterizes respectively a linear and quadratic fre-
quency chirp of subpulse. The semiclassical reasoning relate the chirping to
wave packet velocity and acceleration. The chirp is in fact linear because
time duration of pulse Tp (in picosecond range) is much more than the re-
coil lifetime τrec = 15fs. Thus, the wave-packet is far from turning points
and does not accelerate most of the time. The spectral FWHM in Figure 6
(a) is about ∆ν ≈ 500 cm−1 being consistent with the reciprocity relation
∆ν = 2π¯h/∆Tg

35 .

A minor decoherence of the objective as shown in Figure 6b is obtained in
our numerical simulation. The temporal FWHM is about 60 fs being 10 fs over
the square gate target width Tg = 50 fs. The distinction stems from the wave
packets quantum dispersion. The wave packet dynamics is displayed in Figure
7 and Figure 8. The resonance frequency is 19050 cm−1 above the ground X
term; the excitation bandwidth is about 500 cm−1 (FWHM). Thus, the wave
packet B is created below the molecular continuum to spread from 2.2A to 4A
not far from its dissociation limit. Given intensity of transitions, the depopula-
tion of state X is involved to the pulse end, although the X state localization is
not affected at the saturation. The optical transient rises and falls, following the
wave packet recoils from the inner core. The spatial variance of a maximum
focused wave packet at target time reaches 0.04 A, being slightly less than the
original localization in agreement with our qualitative reasoning. The result is
robust to slow sinusoidal or Gaussian aberrations of optimal ﬁelds and akin to
known stability of phase conjugate ﬁelds due to the wave speckle structure 36.

5.

Conclusion and Future Perspectives

The numerous possible applications in femtosecond spectroscopy are rested
on the concept of coherence. The proceedings of Femtochemistry III Confer-
ence in Lund testify (see the special issue of the Journal of Physical Chem-

22

istry), that this realm of knowledge is ﬂourishing and another lines of re-
searches have now been opened. As an example we refer the ﬁeld of deemed
quantum computers37−39. Here, controllable coherence of logic gates could
boost performance of massive parallel computation exponentially with num-
ber of quantum nodes. These nodes may be constituted from clusters or single
molecules and their resonance optical transitions must act in concert with vi-
brational wave packets captured by "molecular cavities". A run stage of a quan-
tum computer, its coherence may not be affected by environment 40. Thus, the
danger of dephasing requires the optical coherence to be actively controlled ac-
cording to a state-mapping protocol. From this point of view, the reversibility
theorem stated in our paper exempliﬁes a paradigm of controllability expected
for wave packets dynamics and optical transients.
In fact, the fundamental
connection between physical laws and computations based on time reversable
Hamiltonians has been addressed yet by R.Feynman 41. The computational
quantum networks requires the reversable transmission among distant nodes
42.

The central aim of this paper is to set a globally optimal solution to a max-
imum squeezing the optical coherence of a single molecule. The sufﬁcient
conditions of recovering coherence have been stated in the reversibility theo-
rem. Our time reversed ﬁelds have been tested in the model computation of
I2 B-X transition conﬁrming effeciency of the phase conjugate resonant Ra-
man scattering for quantum control. The result is not limited only to diatomic
molecules in gas or condensed states, but is valid for the quantum control of
electron wave packets as well 43,44.

The four-wave mixing interaction and related stimulated Raman emission
is deserving of mention. These optical transients would make it possible to
automate the quantum control to be held both for bound states and molecular
continuum. To take one example, ultrashort transform limited pulses driv-
ing bound-free transitions result in the photon echo of photodissociation 45, to
mean an automated controlling wave packet motion. Photon echoes 19 imply
that dynamical holograms are written on resonance Franck-Condon transitions.
But it takes more strong laser ﬁelds to induce at least the third order nonlin-
ear polarization. A self-adaptive "quantum mirror" has been devised 36,46 to
reverse wave evolution on curing the optical aberrations of a noise wave front
propagated trough inhomogenious media. Moreover we have seen that the
phase cojugate (time-reverse) Raman scattering negates also delocalization of
molecular wave packets.

The use of the phase conjugate signals presents an intriguing illustration
of how the original quantum state is restored in the matter-wave interferome-
try. An uniform semiclassical formula has been derived for the optimal ﬁeld
envelop. The simple estimates are contrasted with quantum simulation. We

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

23

conclude that femtosecond coherence of a single molecule must exist in varied
conditions (even on resonant transitions saturated to the pulse end). Robustness
of our molecular magnetron design has been demonstrated also. We propose
to test experimentally the molecular magnetron design verifying the quantum
holography directly on observing delayed sparks of femtosecond ﬂuorescence
which is excited by a more long picosecond pulse in optically thin sample.

6.

Acknowledgments

We thank K.R.Wilson for reprints on controlling the future of matter avail-
able before their publication. The work beneﬁted from useful discussions with
S.R.Hartmann, J.Jortner, M.Chergui and I.Averbukh. Sincere thanks to the ref-
erees of our manuscript for their critical reading, advices and editorial help in
getting the paper to readable form. One of the authors (A.Rudavets) is espe-
cially indebted to V.Aquilanti, B.Soep, J.Chergui, K.Kulander, V.Sundstroem
for a kind hospitality extended to him to visit quantum control meetings around
the world. It was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Researches
grant 96-02-18760.

References

Pierce, A.P.; Dahleh, M.A.; Rabitz, H. Phys. Rev. A1988, 37, 4950. Warren, W.S.; Rabitz, H.;

Dahleh, M. Science, 1993, 259, 1581.

Shapiro, M.; Brumer,P. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1993, 208, 193.
Averbukh, I.S.; Shapiro, M. Phys. Rev. 1993, A47, 5086. Abrashkevich, D.G.;Averbukh, I.S.;

Shapiro, M. J.Chem.Phys. 1995, 101(11), 9295.

Yeazell, J.A.; Stroud Jr. C.R. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1988, 60, 1497. West, J.A.; Stroud Jr.C.R., Optics

Exprs. 1997, 1, 31.

6562.

Krause, J.L.; Whitnell, R.M.; Wilson, K.R.; Yan, Y.; Mukamel, S.; J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 99,

Kohler, B.; Yakovlev, V.V.; Che,J.; Krause, J.L.; Messina, M.; Wilson, K.R.; Whitnell, R.; Yan,

Y. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 74, 3360.

Dubov, V.; Rabits, H. J. Chem. Phys., 1995 103, 8412.
Apkarian, V.A. Ultrafast Physical and Chemical Processes in Molecular Systems, Proceedings

of Femtochemistry: The Lausanne Conference, ed. Chergui M., 1995; 603.

Bardeen, C.J.; Che, J.; Wilson, K.R.; Yakovlev, V.V.; Apkarian, V.A.; Martens, C.C.; Zadoyan,

R.; Kohler, B.; Messina, M.; J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 106(20), 8486.

Zewail, A.H. Ultrafast Physical and Chemical Processes in Molecular Systems, Proceedings of

Femtochemistry: The Lausanne Conference, ed. Chergui M., 1995; 3.

Jortner, J. Ultrafast Physical and Chemical Processes in Molecular Systems, Proceedings of

Femtochemistry: The Lausanne Conference, ed. Chergui M., 1995; p.15.

Tannor, D.J.; Rice, S.A. J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 83, 5013.
Kosloff, R.; Rice, S.A.; Gaspard, P.; Tersigni, S.; Tannor, D. J. Chem. Phys. 1989, 139, 201.
Scherer, N.F.; Carlson, R.J.; Matro, A.; Du, M.; Ruggiero, A.J.; Romero-Rochin, V.; Cina, J.A.;

Fleming, G.R.; Rice,S.A. J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 1487.

Milliken, R.S. J. Chem. Phys., 1971, 55, 288.
Gruebele, M., Zewail, A.H. J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 98(2), 883.

24

Phys., 1995, 92, 541.

Xu, J.; Schwenter, N.; Henning, S.; Chergui, M.; J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 7381. J. Chim.

Landsberg, G.; Mandelstam, L. Z. Phys. 1930, 60, 364. Mandelstam, L.; Landsberg, G.; Leon-

towitsch, M. Z. Phys. 1930, 60, 334. Tamm, I. Z. Phys. 1930, 60, 345.

Friedberg R.; Hartmann, S.R. Phys. Rev. 1993, 48(2), 1446.
Tellinghuisen, J. J. Chem. Phys. 1973, 58, 2821. J. Chem. Phys. 1982, 76, 4736.
Heller, E. J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 68, 2066.
Schkurinov A.P. (private communication).
Cerrulo, G.; Bardeen, C.J.; Wang, Q.; Shank, C.V. Opt. Lett. 1996, 19, 737.
Cao, J.; Bardeen, C.J.; Wilson, K.R. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997, submitted.
Baumert, G.T.; Grosser, M.; Thalweiser R.; Gerber, G. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1991, 67, 3753.
Weiner, A.M.; Leaird, D.E.; Patel, J.S.; Wullert, J.L. Opt. Lett. 1990, 15, 326. Wefers, M.;

Nelson, K.; Weiner, A.M. Opt. Lett. 1996, 21, 746.

Hillegas, S.W.; Tull, J.X.; Goswami, D.; Strickland, D.; Warren, W.S. Opt.Lett. 1994, 19, 737.
Dirac, P. A. M. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford; Claredon Press, 1947.
Cao, J.; Wilson, K.R. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 107, 1441.
Landau, L.D. Phys.Zs.Sowjet., 1932, 1, 88; ibid, 1932, 2, 46.
Berry, M.V.; Mount, K.E. Rep. Prog. Phys.1972, 35, 315.
Press, W.H.; Teukolsky, S.A.; Vetterling, W.T.; Flannery, B.P. Numerical recipes in Fortran, The

art of Scientiﬁc Computing, 2nd ed.;, Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Fedorenko R., Introduction into computational physics, Moscow Institute of Physics and Tech-

nology Publishing, (1994).

Feit, M.D.; Fleck Jr., J.A.; Steiger, A. J. Comput. Phys. 1982, 47, 412.
S.R.Harmann suggested that a noisy emission may be transformed into ultrafast optical signal

of equivalent bandwidth (private communication to A.R.)

B.Ya.Zeldovich, N.F.Pilipetsky, V.V.Schkunov, Phase conjugated wave fronts, Moscow: Nauka,
(1985); V.V.Ragulsky, Optical phase conjugaion by stimulated scattering, Moscow: Nauka,
(1990).

Feynman, R.P. Foundations of Physics, 1986, 16, 507.
Duetsch, D. Proc. R. Soc. Lond., 1989, A425, 73.
Lloyd, S. Scientiﬁc American, 1995, 273(4), 140.
Unruh, W.G. Phys. Rev., 1995, 41, 992.
Feynman, R.P. Int. J. Theor. Phys., 1982, 21, 467.
Cirac, J.; Zoller, P.; Kimble, H.J.; Mabuchi, M. Quantum state transfer and entaglement distri-

bution among distant nodes in quantum network, quant-ph/9611017.

Schafer, K.J.; Krause, J.L. Optics Expr., 1997, 1(7), 210.
Noel, M.W.; Stroud Jr., C.R. Optics Exprs. 1997, 1(7), 176.
Akulin, V.M.; Dubovitskii, V.A.; Dykhne, A.M.; Rudavets, A.G. in Ultrafast Physical and Chem-
ical Processes in Molecular Systems, Proceedings of Femtochemistry: The Lausanne Con-
ference, ed. by Chergui, M. 1995; 62.

Pepper, D.M. Nonlinear optical phase conjugation, Opt. Engineering 1982, 21, 156.

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

25

The resonance curves of I2 molecule [20]. Our design represents the iodine mag-
Figure 1.
netron. A tailored laser pulse, as shown by the point-ﬁlled box, excites the vibrational wave
packet. Then, the wave packet is reﬂected from outer curve and moves back to focus on the
inner Franck-Condon region. The result is a tight overlap with the ground state X. The maximal
optical polarization must be followed by the resonance ﬂuorescence burst at target time.

26

Figure 2.
The picture shows the nodal structure of bound wave packet ranging between
2.2 − 4AA. The wave packet fringes are due to interference of the wave packet in virtue of
multiple collisions against the molecular curves.

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

27

Intensity of fundamental overtone of resonant scattering as a function of time. This
Figure 3.
resonance transition is induced by the photon impact (the delta-like pulse). The scattering B
states contribute to monotonic free decay signal ﬁrst few fs. The bound states interference,
present in the background in Figure 2, is responsible for reviving the resonance Raman scatter-
ing after 320 fs delay, which is matched with a molecular period (at 570 nm in B state).

28

Figure 4.
The square 1 ps gate of the optimal ﬁeld in (a). This optimal ﬁeld creates the dipole
transition moment shown in (b). The accomplishment of our coherent objective is evident at
target time equal to 1.5 ps.

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

29

Figure 5.
designed to create 50 fs square gate optical coherence at target time 1.5 ps.

The intensity of optimal ﬁeld in (a) and its real part in (b). This optical pulse is

30

Figure 6.
The frequency-time plot of the globally optimal pulse for the 50 fs square gate
target is given by the contour map at half a maximum of Wigner spectrogram in (a). The
coherent transient in (b) is created by the optimal ﬁeld. The temporal FWHM equal to 60 fs ﬁts
well the 50 fs square gate target.

Laser Control of Atomic Motion

31

32

Figure 8.
inner turning point to overlap well the ground state X at target time 1.5 ps.

The wave packet B free propagates after the pulse to a tightly squeezed state at the

