Applied Physics B. manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Bandgap properties of two-dimensional low-index photonic crystals

Aaron Matthews1, Xue-Hua Wang1,2, Yuri Kivshar1, Min Gu3

1 Nonlinear Physics Center and Center for Ultra-high bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems (CUDOS), Research School of

Physical Sciences and Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia,
phone: +61 2 6125 8277 fax: +61 2 6125 8588 e-mail: afm124@rsphysse.anu.edu.au

2 Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China
3 Center for Micro-Photonics and Center for Ultra-high bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems (CUDOS), Swinburne Uni-

versity of Technology, P.O. Box 218, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract We study the bandgap properties of two-
dimensional photonic crystals created by a lattice of rods
or holes conformed in a symmetric or asymmetric trian-
gular structure. Using the plane-wave analysis, we calcu-
late a minimum value of the refractive index contrast for
opening both partial and full two-dimensional spectral
gaps for both TM and TE polarized waves. We also an-
alyze the eﬀect of ellipticity of rods and holes and their
orientation on the threshold value and the relative size
of the bandgap.
PACS 42.70.Qs, 78.20.Bh, 78.20.Ci

1 Introduction

It is well established that three-dimensional periodic di-
electric structures, called photonic crystals, possess one
or many complete photonic band gaps in the transmis-
sion spectrum for propagation of electromagnetic waves [1].
Light-based technological applications have their roots
in planar technology, which requires a knowledge of the
bandgap properties of two-dimensional structures assumed
an inﬁnitely long extension in the third dimension. The
theoretical study of photonic crystals in two dimensions
is easier due to the fact that in this case the wave propa-
gation can be analyzed separately for two diﬀerent polar-
izations, thus the original vector problem is reduced to
two scalar problems. These polarizations are Transverse
Magnetic (TM), if the electric ﬁeld is perpendicular to
the plane deﬁning the structure, and Transverse Electric
(TE), if the same occurs for the magnetic ﬁeld. When the
bandgaps for two diﬀerent polarizations overlap, they
create a combined band gap known as an absolute (or
full) photonic bandgap. Several structures are known to
possess photonic band gaps for one of these polarizations
and for both polarizations simultaneously, as examined
comprehensively for high values of the refractive index
ratio in the two-dimensional geometry [2].

One of the classical results in the theory of photonic
crystals is the existence of the critical (minimum) value
of the refractive index contrast to open a full spectral
band gap in a three-dimensional geometry [1]. For ex-
ample, as was ﬁrst shown by Ho et al. [3], a diamond
structure requires the minimum refractive index contrast
larger than 2. Similarly, the threshold values of the re-
fractive index appears in the theory of two-dimensional
photonic crystals [4]. In particular, a triangular lattice of
air holes in a dielectric material possesses a large band
gap for TE polarized waves and a complete one for larger
air holes.

Recently, several experimental groups demonstrated
novel methods for fabricating photonic crystals in solid
polymer materials. In particular, the group of Min Gu [5,
6] employed the generation of submicron-size void chan-
nels by tightly focused femtosecond-pulsed laser light;
the technique is a one-step approach which does not
require chemical postprocessing, and it allows to fab-
ricate photonic crystals with a high degree of perfection.
In addition, the studies of Zhou et al. [7] demonstrated
two-dimensional triangular void channel photonic crys-
tals fabricated by femtosecond laser drilling in a solid
polymer material, and characterized their properties for
TE and TM polarized illumination. Although complete
photonic band gaps cannot exist in low-index contrast
structures, two-dimensional band gaps are possible for
speciﬁcally polarized electromagnetic modes, and such
structures can be used for photonic-crystal optical de-
vices such as superprisms or waveguides.

The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, we calcu-
late the dependence of the spectral bandgaps on the re-
fractive index contrast for the two most popular types of
triangular lattices of two-dimensional photonic crystals.
In particular, we ﬁnd the critical value of the refractive
index contrast for opening partial (for TM or TE polar-
ized waves, respectively) as well as full two-dimensional
spectral band gaps. Second, being motivated by the re-
cent success in fabricating low-index photonic crystal

2

Aaron Matthews et al.

Fig. 1 Bandgap spectrum of TM (left) and TE (right) polar-
ized waves for a triangular lattice of circular rods (Cx = Cy =
0.575) at ǫ = 5.8 which is the permittivity of the chalcogenide
glass waveguides [11].

structures in solid polymers and chalcogenide glass, we
explore further the concept of the partial bandgaps of
two-dimensional photonic crystals and analyze the ef-
fect of ellipticity of rods and holes and their orientation
on the critical value and the size of both partial and full
spectral bandgaps.

As we assume that the materials we are working with
are macroscopic and isotropic, we are able to deﬁne the
refractive index as n = ǫ1/2 keeping µ = 1. In this paper,
we also interchange between the ωa/2πc form and the
a/λ forms to show more clearly how the ratio increases
with a decreasing refractive index, as shown by Li et
al. [8].

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we con-
sider a two-dimensional photonic crystal created by a
triangular lattice of dielectric rods in air. In this case,
a partial gap appears ﬁrst for the TM polarized waves,
and it is shown to require a relatively low index con-
trast. In Sec. 3 we consider the same problem for a two-
dimensional photonic crystal created by air holes drilled
in a dielectric slab, where the bandgaps ﬁrst appear for
the TE polarized waves. And last, Sec. 4 concludes the
paper.

2 Dielectric rods in air

First, we consider a two-dimensional photonic crystal
created by a triangular lattice of circular or elliptic di-
electric rods assuming an arbitrary rotation of the ellip-
tic rod relative to the lattice symmetry axis. The pho-
tonic bandgap spectrum is calculated by solving Maxwell
equations by means of the plane-wave expansion method [3,
9] employing the well-known numerical algorithm [10].

An example of the photonic band-gap structure of
such a two-dimensional photonic crystal is shown in Fig. 1
for the well-known case of a triangular lattice of circular
rods. The rods have the electric permittivity ǫ = 5.8 that

Fig. 2 (a,b) Relative size of the partial bandgaps for TM
(left) and TE (right) polarized waves for a triangular lattice
of circular (solid curve) and elliptic (other three curves) rods
as a function of ǫ for the ﬁling factor 30%. Dotted, dashed,
and dot-dashed curves show the results for the elliptic rods
(Cx = 0.65, Cy = 0.51) with 0o, 15o, and 30o rotation angle.
The critical value for the TM bandgap is ǫ = 1.73. Stars
indicate the permittivity of polymer [6] (at ǫ = 2.4) and
the permittivity of the chalcogenide glass waveguides [11] (at
ǫ = 5.8). Note the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in scale of the two
graphs.

corresponds to the values measured for planar waveg-
uides made of chalcogenide glass [11]. In this case, the
frequency spectrum of a lattice of circular rods display
several gaps for the TM polarized waves, and two rela-
tively large lower bandgaps with the relative size 27.15%
and 14.61%, respectively.

As the next step, we verify a general concept of the
bandgap spectrum of asymmetric lattices [12] and con-
sider a triangular lattice made of elliptic rods with an ar-
bitrary orientation. In particular, we study the eﬀect of
the hole rotation on the value of the partial and absolute
bandgaps. These results can naturally be compared with
the bandgap spectra of the two-dimensional structures
created by circular holes (see below). In a full agreement
with the previous studies [13] and recent fabricated de-
vices [14], we observe that for the case of dielectric rods
in air a deviation of the cylinders from a circular sym-
metry produces a reduction of the relative size of the
bandgaps. The similar eﬀect is produced by the rod ro-
tation, so that larger values of the photonic band gap
are observed for the ellipses with smaller or no rotation
(dotted curve in Fig. 2), and the bandgap becomes max-
imum for the case of circular rods.

Finally, we study how the ellipticity of the dielec-
tric rods in the triangular-lattice photonic crystal may
change the size of the maximum TM bandgap at diﬀerent
values of the ﬁlling fraction. We assume that the dielec-
tric rods are ellipses with the axes Cx and Cy, and we
vary the value of Cx for a ﬁxed orientation, also changing
the size of Cy in order to keep the ﬁlling fraction con-
stant. Figure 3 summarizes some of our results for three
values of the ﬁlling fraction, 44.5% (solid), 30% (dot-
ted), and 22.5% (dashed). The main result is that the
maximum value of bandgap is achieved for a triangular
lattice of circular rods (here, at Cx = Cy = 0.575) with
the ﬁlling fraction 30%. This result is in agreement with

Bandgap properties of two-dimensional low-index photonic crystals

3

Fig. 3 Eﬀect of varying rod ellipticity and ﬁlling fraction on
the size of the TM bandgap. Shown is the relative size of the
lower bandgap of the TM polarized waves (see Fig. 1) as a
function of Cx, with Cy varying to retain a constant ﬁlling
fraction, at ǫ = 2. Maximum bandgap is found for the circles
(Cx = Cy = 0.575) with the ﬁlling fraction 30%.

all previous studies of triangular-lattice two-dimensional
photonic crystals.

3 Air holes drilled in dielectric

Next, we consider the other important case when a two-
dimensional photonic crystal is created by a triangular
lattice of circular [see Fig. 4] or elliptic [see Fig. 5] holes
drilled in a dielectric slab, assuming an arbitrary rota-
tion of the elliptic hole relative to the lattice symmetry
axis.

As opposed to the case of rods, air holes produce an
extremely large bandgap in the TE spectrum of a pho-
tonic crystal, this is demonstrated experimentally in the
work of zhou et al. [7]. The key advantage to this sys-
tem as opposed to rods is the frequency position of the
bandgap, especially for the case shown in Fig. 4, which
is the case of the refractive index corresponding to the
chalcogenide glass waveguides [11]. When it is viewed as
a wavelength using the simple conversion ωa/2πc = a/λ
we can see that with the bandgap around a/λ = 1, the
wavelength of the conﬁned light is equal to the size of
the lattice giving us the ability to fabricate the planar
structures on the scale of the wavelength of interest un-
like the common a/λ values of 0.3 to 0.5 which would
lead to structures 1/3 to 1/2 of the lattice size in order to
produce a bandgap for the same wavelength, a challenge
for any fabrication method.

Another advantage is in the nature of the holes drilled
in a dielectric structure such as physical resistance to a
damage. Indeed, the rods which, when being fabricated
with the large aspect ratios to exhibit bandgaps, are very
sensitive to a physical damage, whereas the hole struc-
ture, which has a constant lattice of joined dielectric is

Fig. 4 Bandgap spectrum of TM (left) and TE (right) po-
larized waves for a triangular lattice of circular holes (Cx =
Cy = 0.735) at ǫ = 5.8 (the chalcogenide glass waveguides).

Fig. 5 (a,b) Relative size of the partial bandgaps for TM
(left) and TE (right) polarized waves for a triangular lattice
of circular (solid curve) and elliptic (other three curves) holes
as a function of ǫ and constant ﬁling factor 51%. Dotted,
dashed, and dot-dashed curves show the results for the ellip-
tic holes (Cx = 0.8, Cy = 0.675) with 0o, 15o, and 30o rota-
tion angle. The critical value for the TE bandgap is ǫ = 1.95.
Stars mark the permittivity of the polymer [6] (at ǫ = 2.4)
and the permittivity of the chalcogenide glass waveguides [11]
(at ǫ = 5.8). Note the scale diﬀerence of two graphs.

far stronger and therefore more resistant to the rigors of
the fabrication processes than free-standing rods.

For the photonic crystals fabricated in the chalco-
genide glass waveguides [11], round holes, 1139nm in di-
ameter, forming a trigonal lattice with a lattice spac-
ing of 1550nm should provide a photonic bandgap at
telecommunications wavelengths. This should also, as
shown by the previous studies, be able to support diﬀer-
ent guided modes although the adaptation of the struc-
ture to the speciﬁc optical devices should be analyzed in
more details.

As follows from Figs. 5(a,b), the tradeoﬀ when opti-
mizing the structures also applies to the hole photonic
crystals. In this case, the eﬀect of rotation is insignif-
icant and the case of purely circular holes is optimal
and produces a bandgap of over 40% at ǫ = 10. When
comparing Fig. 2 and Fig. 5, we can see that the TM
bandgap for the rod structure starts at a lower value
of the permittivity than the TE bandgap for holes, and
it can be seen that the rod bandgap is larger than the
hole bandgap until around ǫ = 2.8 after which the hole

4

Aaron Matthews et al.

slab, for diﬀerent (including the lowest possible) values
of the refractive index contrast. Using the plane-wave
analysis, we have calculated the critical value of the re-
fractive index contrast for opening partial (either for TM
or TE polarized waves) and full two-dimensional spec-
tral bandgaps. We have analyzed the eﬀect of elliptic-
ity of rods and holes and their orientation on the crit-
ical value and the size of the bandgaps. In particular,
we have predicted that partial bandgaps may appear in
the frequency spectrum for the index contrast as low
as ǫ = 1.73, in the case of rods (for the TM polarized
waves), and ǫ = 2, in the case of holes (for TE polarized
waves). We have demonstrated also that, by reducing
the refractive index from some large values (e.g. for Si)
to lower value slightly above the threshold, we are able
to obtain far more fabricable periodic structures for ex-
periment due to an increase in the wavelength-to-period
ratio. We believe that our results will be important for
the current eﬀorts in fabricating planar photonic-crystal
structures based on dielectric materials with low refrac-
tive index such as solid polymers, polymer resin, and
chalcogenide glasses.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Sergei Mingaleev for useful discus-
sions and references. This work was supported by the
Australian Research Council through the Center of Ex-
cellence Program.

References

1. See, e.g., J.D. Joannopoulos, R.D. Meade, and J.N. Winn,
Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1995), 133 pp.

2. See, e.g., R.Z. Wang, X.H. Wang, B.Y. Gu, and G.Z. Yang,
J. App. Phys. 90, 4307 (2001), and references therein.
3. K.M. Ho, C.T. Chan, and C.M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 65, 3152 (1990).

4. R.D. Meade, K.L. Brommer, A.M. Rappe, and J.

Joannopoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 495 (1992).

5. M.J. Ventura, M. Straub, and M. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett.

6. M. Straub, M. Ventura, and M. Gu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,

82, 1649 (2003).

043901 (2003).

7. G. Zhou, M.J. Ventura, M. Straub, and M. Gu, A. Ono,
S. Kawata, X.-H. Wang, and Yu.S. Kivshar, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 84, 4415 (2004).

8. Z.Y. Li, B.Y. Gu, and G.Z. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,

2574 (1998).

9. K.M. Leung and Y.F. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2646

(1990).
10. S.G.
MIT
http://ab-initio.mit.edu/mpb/.

and
Johnson
Photonic-Bands

J.D.

Joannopoulos,

Package

home

The
page

11. Y.L. Ruan, W.T. Li, R. Jarvis, N. Madsen, A. Rode, and

B. Luther-Davies, Opt. Express 12, 5140 (2004).

Fig. 6 Eﬀect of varying hole ellipticity and ﬁlling fraction
on the size of the TE bandgap. Shown is the relative size of
the lower bandgap of the TE polarized waves (see Fig. 4) as
a function of Cx, with Cy varying to retain constant ﬁlling
fraction at ǫ = 2. Maximum band gap is found for the circles
(Cx = Cy = 0.735) with the ﬁlling fraction 51%.

bandgap becomes signiﬁcantly larger (≈ 7% at ǫ = 10).
This should be taken into consideration when choosing
an appropriate structure for a given fabrication process.
Figure 6 shows, by a very steep drop-oﬀ on all curves,
that ellipticity has a far greater eﬀect in this system than
on the system shown in Fig. 3. It should be remembered
in these two graphs that after the system passes through
the point corresponding to a circle it becomes an equiva-
lent ellipse rotated by 30o. While this will prove a prob-
lem for fabrication the bandgaps are large enough that
small errors in ellipticity will not lead to the removal of
the bandgap completely. It can also be seen that an error
towards larger holes, visualized as a lower ﬁlling fraction
of dielectric, retains the bandgap size better than a re-
duction in the hole size.

Our results demonstrate that a threshold value of
the permittivity to open a partial bandgap is 1.73 which
equates to a refractive index of 1.31, and we therefore
believe that it is safe to rule out attempts at producing
photonic bandgap devices in any system with a refractive
index lower than this limit.

While ellipticity caused by directional defocusing of
the etching beam causes rapid loss of bandgap, imple-
menting the optimal system allows a much greater resis-
tance to ellipticity using the simple fact that the change
in bandgap size vs. ellipticity is fairly constant as we
move further from the maximum so an advantageous ﬁll-
ing factor will lead to a larger margin for error before the
bandgap disappears.

4 Conclusions

We have analyzed the bandgap properties of two-dimensional
photonic crystals created by triangular lattices of dielec-
tric rods in air and air holes drilled in a planar dielectric

Bandgap properties of two-dimensional low-index photonic crystals

5

12. A.F. Matthews, S.F. Mingaleev, and Yu.S. Kivshar,

Laser Physics 14, 631 (2004).

13. R. Padjen, J.M. G´erad, and J.Y. Marzin, J. Mod. Opt.

41, 295 (1994).

14. T. Fujimura, T. Tamura, T. Itoh, C. Haginoya, Y. Ko-
mori, and T. Koda, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 1478 (2001).

