5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Strong optical force induced by morphology dependent resonances

Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clearwater Bay, Hong Kong, China

Jack Ng, C.T. Chan, and Ping Sheng

Zhifang Lin

Department of Physics, Fudan University, China

Compiled February 2, 2008

We consider the resonant optical force acting on a pair of transparent microspheres by the excitation of the
Morphology Dependent Resonance (MDR). The bonding and anti-bonding modes of the MDR correspond
to strong attractions and repulsions respectively. The dependence of the force on separation and the role of
absorption are discussed. At resonance, the force can be enhanced by orders of magnitude so that it will
dominate over other relevant forces. We ﬁnd that a stable binding conﬁguration can be induced by the resonant
optical force.

Optical forces are useful in the manipulation of ultra-ﬁne
particles and mesoscopic systems, and the development
is rather astounding in the last three decades. The most
well known types of the optical forces are the radiation
pressure and the optical gradient force. There is also an
inter-particle optical force, induced by the multiple scat-
tering of light.1–7 We present here an interesting type of
resonant inter-particle force. We will see that the tun-
ing of the incident light frequency to the Morphology
Dependent Resonance (MDR) of a cluster of transpar-
ent microspheres would induce a strong resonant optical
force (MDR-force) between the spheres. The MDR of a
pair of spheres had been observed in ﬂuorescent8, 9 and
lasing10 experiments. Here we study theoretically the
force induced by such resonances. We will see that the
MDR-induced force, derived from the coherent coupling
of the whispering gallery modes (WGM’s), is a strong
short ranged force that can be attractive or repulsive
depending on whether the bonding mode (BM) or the
anti-bonding mode (ABM) is excited. The strength of
the optical forces can be enhanced by orders of magni-
tude when a MDR is excited. As microsphere cavities
are emerging as an alternative to the photonic crystal
in controlling light,8–10 the MDR-force may be deployed
for the manipulation of a microsphere cluster.

In this paper, we calculate the electromagnetic (EM)
forces acting on microspheres when WGM’s or MDR’s
are excited. The optical force acting on a microsphere
can be computed via a surface integral of the Maxwell
↔
stress tensor,
T , over the sphere’s surface. The micro-
spheres cannot respond to the high frequency compo-
nent of the time varying optical force, so we calculate
⇀
⇀
S. The EM
the time-averaged force <

↔
T > ·d

F >= H <

↔
ﬁeld required in evaluating
T is computed by the multi-
ple scattering theory,1, 11 which expands the ﬁelds in vec-
tor spherical harmonics. This formalism is quite possibly
the most accurate method that can be applied. It is in
principle exact, and the numerical convergence is being
controlled by the maximum angular momentum (Lmax)

used in the expansion. The calculation for the resonance
of dielectric microspheres near contact requires a high
Lmax,12 which is chosen so that further increase in Lmax
does not change the value of the calculated force. In most
of the calculations, the size parameter (kR) is between
28 and 29, and Lmax=63 was used. We adopt the Gen-
eralized Minimal Residual iterative solver (GMRES) for
the linear system of equations.13 In the following, the
WGM’s will be labeled as “(l)TE(n)” or “(l)TM(n)”,
where l and n are the mode and order number, and
TE (TM) means transverse electric (magnetic) respec-
tively. Unless otherwise noted, a linearly polarized inci-
dent plane wave with a modest intensity of 104 W/cm2 is
assumed throughout this paper. The spheres have radius
R=2.5 µm, with a dielectric constant ε=2.5281+10−4i.
The loss level of Im{ε}=10−4 or smaller can be easily
achieved with insulators, glass or possibly good quality
polystyrene spheres.

The well-known WGM’s for a transparent micro-
sphere have many interesting properties and applica-
tions, mostly because of its high quality factor and the
enhanced EM ﬁelds near the surface. While the ﬁelds
can be enhanced by orders of magnitude when a WGM
is excited, the radiation pressure is only increased by
about 30% or less, as shown in Fig. 1(a). It is because
the intensity distribution of a WGM is symmetrical, so
that the gradient force acting on the sphere at any point
is cancelled by its counterpart on the other side of the
sphere. However, a much stronger enhancement in the
optical force can be induced by the resonances involv-
ing two spheres. When two spheres are near each other,
their EM modes are coherently coupled and split into
BM’s and ABM’s through the quasi-normal mode split-
ting.5, 12 The BM’s (ABM’s) have resonant frequencies
that are lower (higher) than that of the single sphere, and
have an even (odd) parity in the EM ﬁeld distribution.12
Unlike the single sphere resonance where the force is not
enhanced that much, the MDR’s correspond to strong
attractions (BM’s) or repulsions (ABM’s) between the
spheres. The overall intensity distribution of the two-

1

28.4

28.5

28.6

Size Parameter (kR)

Fig. 2. Optical forces acting on a pair of spheres with
the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1(d). The horizontal axis
is the size parameter of the bottom sphere. Solid lines:
both spheres have radius of 2.5 µm. Dotted lines: The
bottom sphere has radius of 2.5 µm and the top sphere
has radius of 2.45 µm.

eter (dotted line). We see that the MDR force remains
signiﬁcant even when the two spheres do not have the
same radius.

 

 

)

N
p
(
 

e
c
r
o
F

0

-20

-40

)

N
p
(
 

e
c
r
o
F

25

0

-25

-50

-75

0

10

20

30

40

Size Parameter (kR)

Fig. 3. Optical forces as a function of the size parameter
acting on two contiguous spheres as depicted in Fig. 1(d).
ε=2.5281+10−4i. Only the force acting on top sphere is
plotted.

Figure 3 shows the forces acting on a pair of spheres
over a wide range of size parameters. From this ﬁgure,
we see that the attractive resonant force is generally
stronger than the repulsive resonant force. The resonant
force is most signiﬁcant for spheres with size parame-
ters between 20 and 30. The force for those with size
parameters greater than 30 is damped by absorption.

The MDR frequencies actually depend on the distance
between the spheres, and this property can be utilized
to bind the spheres into a stable structure. As an illus-
trative example, we consider a pair of spheres (aligned
along z-axis) illuminated by an incident ﬁeld of the form

⇀

Ein = ˆxEo sin(kz), which compose of a pair of counter-
propagating waves going along the bisphere axis. At a
particular frequency of the incident wave, slightly higher
than the resonant frequency of a WGM, the ABM is ex-
cited at a particular distance between the spheres, lead-
ing to strong repulsion. However, at distances larger than

2

Fig. 1. (a): The radiation pressure for a sphere with
ε=2.5281. (b)-(c): Optical forces acting on two contigu-
ous microspheres (ε=2.5281+10−4i), with conﬁguration
depicted in inset (d), with Panel (b) for the upper sphere
and Panel (c) for the lower sphere. (d): A pair of con-
tiguous spheres illuminated by a linearly polarized plane
wave propagating along the bisphere (z) axis.

sphere resonance is still symmetrical, but the ﬁeld pat-
tern on each sphere is not. The strong internal ﬁelds then
induce strong optical forces on the spheres. We note that
the BM and ABM forces are also observed between layers
of 2 dimensional photonic structure.5

In Fig. 1(b)-(c) we plot the optical forces acting on
a pair of spheres with the geometry shown in Fig. 1(d).
The wavelengths of the incident light fall inside the range
of 542 nm to 561 nm, chosen to match with that of
the previous works on MDR.12, 14 The BM and ABM
of 39TE1 and 34TM2 are marked on Fig. 1(b). When a
resonance is excited, the force is tremendously enhanced
compared to oﬀ-resonance. The BM’s (ABM’s) have the
maximum (minimum) ﬁeld intensity at the contact point
of the spheres, giving rise to attractions (repulsions). The
resonant linewidths of the MDR are also several orders
of magnitude wider than that of a single sphere,12,14
and they are further broadened by absorption. We re-
mark that the small peak at kR=28.03 in Fig. 1(b)-(c)
is the ABM of 34TE2, and also the interactions between
39TM1 and 35TE2 complicated the splitting, and their
coupling give rise to the MDR-force peaks at kR=28.527,
28.605 and 28.620.

One of the major challenges in studying MDR of
spheres experimentally is that the resonant frequency is
very sensitive to the size of the sphere and thus requires
extremely accurate particle sizing.14 This diﬃculty has
been overcome by utilizing the narrow linewidth of
the single sphere resonance to determine the particle
size.8–10 Nevertheless, the MDR force is actually quite
robust against size dispersion. The solid line in Fig.
2 shows the MDR force at kR=28.527 when the two
spheres are of the same diameter, to be compared with
the forces in which the two spheres diﬀer by 2% in diam-

about 80 kbT to push the spheres across the middle peak
of Fig. 4(b) (corresponding to λ=558.2 nm). Another rel-
evant comparison is the strength of the van der Waals
forces. An upper bound on the magnitude of the van
der Waals force between two dielectric spheres, |Fvdw|,
can be calculated by the non-retarded approximation:
|Fvdw(D)| ≤ AR/12D2, where A=6.6×10−20 Joule is
the Hamaker constant.15 The magnitude of the van der
Waals force is plotted on Fig. 4. One sees that the res-
onant force can dominate over the van der Waals force
if the D is more than a few tens of nano-meter. Finally,
the weight of a glass sphere (mass density =2400 kg/m3)
is about 1.5 pN.

We note from Fig. 4 that the resonant separation
(where the force is maximum) increases as the incident
frequency is tuned closer to the resonant frequency of
the WGM. This can be understood from the fact that a
larger separation corresponds to a smaller splitting of the
WGM. In the ideal case with no absorption (see 4(a)),
the strength of the MDR-force is an increasing function
of resonant separation. This is because the quality fac-
tor, and thus the internal ﬁeld of the MDR, attains the
huge values of the WGM as the separation increases.12
We note that resonant force for the ideal case approaches
a nano-Newton. However, in reality the resonances are
inevitably subject to absorptive losses.

We emphasize that the properties of the resonant
mode is determined by the morphology. As long as the
incident frequency matches the resonant frequency, the
resonance will be excited irrespective of the external light
proﬁle. However, it is the projection (coupling) of the
incident light onto the resonating mode that determines
the strength of the resonat force. A plane wave is in
fact not the most eﬃcient way to excite the MDR, as
most of the light is coupled to the non-resonating, dis-
sipative modes. Our calculations aim to illustrate the
resonant behavior and the corresponding strong optical
forces. In actual implementation, other form(s) of inci-
dent light wave (e.g. evanescent wave) can be used to
realize a stronger force and thereby to utilize the full
potential of the resonant eﬀect. We also note that while
absorption will degrade the strength of the resonance,
microspheres containing gain materials can in principle
enhance the resonant force, and the eﬀect should be most
interesting when the WGM starts lasing.10 These would
be interesting topics for further studies.

Support by Hong Kong RGC through CA02/03.SC05
and HKUST6138/00P is gratefully acknowledged. Zhi-
fang Lin is also supported by CNKBRSF and NNSF of
China. C.T. Chan’s e-mail address is phchan@ust.hk.

References

1. J. Ng, Z.F Lin, C.T. Chan and P. Sheng, “Pho-
tonic Clusters”, available at http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-
mat/0501733.

2. M.M. Burns, J-M Fournier and J.A. Golovchenko, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 63, 1233 (1989).

Fig. 4. Optical force acting on a pair of spheres plotted
as a function of D, the separation between the closest
points on the spheres. The forces acting on the spheres
are equal and opposite by symmetry, with positive force
represents repulsion and vice versa. The positions of the
spheres are (0, 0, −D/2 − R) and (0, 0, D/2 + R). The in-

⇀

Ein = ˆxEo sin(kz). The 39TE1
cident wave has the form
resonance of a single sphere is at λ=558.6 nm. |Fvdw| is
an upper bound of the magnitude of the van der Waals
force. (a): Ideal case with no absorption, i.e. ε=2.5281.
(b) ε=2.5281+10−4i. The stable equilibrium separations
(optical force equals zero and stable against perturba-
tion) for diﬀerent incident wavelength are marked by ar-
rows.

that particular distance, both the radiation pressure and
the Van der Waals forces will push the balls together.
This competition between ABM resonant repulsion and
other attractive forces lead to the stable position. Fig-
ure 4 shows the force as a function of D, the separation
between the closest points on the spheres. The dielec-
tric constant is taken to be 2.5281+10−4i in Fig. 4(b),
and the ideal case results with no absorption (ε=2.5281)
are shown in Fig. 4(a) for comparison. Stable equilib-
rium separations, where the optical force is zero, are
marked by arrows in Fig. 4(b). The spheres will expe-
rience an attractive (repulsive) force if their separation
is increased (decreased) from the equilibrium distance.
Binding can also be achieved by using two lasers, one
tuned to a BM and the other tuned to an ABM such
that there is an equilibrium separation “sandwiched” by
the resonant force peaks. The interaction between the
two laser beams can be neglected because of the lack of
coherence.

We also compare the MDR-force with other relevant
interactions. The energy associated with the repulsive
barriers created by the ABM’s are on the order of tens
of kbT (the thermal energy at room temperature) at an
incident intensity of 104 W/cm2. For example, it takes

3

3. S.A. Tatarkova, A.E. Carruthers and K. Dholakia, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 89, 283901 (2002).

4. H. Xu and M. Kall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 246802 (2002).
5. M.I. Antonoyiannakis and J.B. Pendry, Europhys. Lett.

40, 613 (1997).

6. W. Singer, M. Frick, S. Bernet and M. Ritsch-Marte, J.

Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 1568 (2003).

7. P.C. Chaumet and M. Nieto-Vesperinas, Phys. Rev. B

64, 035422 (2001).

8. T. Mukaiyama, K. Takeda, H. Miyazaki, Y. Jimba and
M. Kuwata-Gonokami, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4623 (1999).
9. Y.P. Rakovich, J.F. Donegan, M. Gerlach, A.L. Bradley,
T.M. Connolly, J.J. Boland, N. Gaponik and A. Rogach,
Phys. Rev. A 70, 051801 (2004).

10. Y. Hara, T. Mukaiyama, K. Takeda and M. Kuwata-

Gonokami, Opt. Lett. 28, 2437 (2003).

11. Y.L. Xu, Appl. Opt. 34 4573 (1995).
12. H. Miyazaki and Y. Jimba, Phys. Rev. B 62, 7976

(2000).

13. V. Fraysse, L. Giraud, S. Gratton and J. Langou, CER-

FACS Technical Report TR/PA/03/3 (2003).

14. K.A. Fuller, Appl. Opt. 30, 4716 (1991).
15. See e.g., J. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface

Forces, 2

nd

ed. (Academic Press, London, 1991).

4

