A Millimeter-Wave Achromatic Half Wave Plate

5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Shaul Hanany

School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455

hanany@physics.umn.edu

Johannes Hubmayr

School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455

Bradley R. Johnson

School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455
Present Address: School of Physics and Astronomy
Cardiﬀ University,
5 The Parade, Queens Buildings
Cardiﬀ, CF24 3YB, UK

Tomotake Matsumura

School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455

Paul Oxley

School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455

1

Matthew Thibodeau

School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
116 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455

We have constructed an achromatic half wave plate (AHWP) suitable for
the millimeter wavelength band. The AHWP was made from a stack of
three sapphire a-cut birefringent plates with the optical axes of the middle
plate rotated by 50.5 degrees with respect to the aligned axes of the other
plates. The measured modulation eﬃciency of the AHWP at 110 GHz was
96 ± 1.5%. In contrast, the modulation eﬃciency of a single sapphire plate
of the same thickness was 43 ± 4%. Both results are in close agreement with
theoretical predictions. The modulation eﬃciency of the AHWP was constant
as a function of incidence angles between 0 and 15 degrees. We discuss
design parameters of an AHWP in the context of astrophysical broad band
c(cid:13) 2008 Optical Society of
polarimetry at the millimeter wavelength band.
America

OCIS codes: 120.5410, 230.5440, 260.5430, 350.1260.

1.

Introduction

Half wave plate (HWP) retarders are used extensively for polarimetric measurements. The
technique is used across a broad range of electro-magnetic frequencies because it provides
an eﬀective way to discriminate against systematic errors. The modulation eﬃciency of a
HWP that is constructed from a single birefringent plate can reach 100% for a set of discrete
electro-magnetic frequencies but away from these frequencies the eﬃciency drops rapidly. To
overcome this limitation it has been proposed to stack several birefringent plates with speciﬁc
relative angles of their optical axes.1–3 Such a construction has been called achromatic HWP
(AHWP) because it has a broader frequency range over which the polarimetric eﬃciency
is high compared to a HWP that is made from a single plate. The eﬃciency of an AHWP
depends on the number of plates in the stack and on their relative angles. The concept
has been demonstrated experimentally in the optical and IR bands.4 Murray et al.5 have
described brieﬂy measurements of an AHWP made of 5 quartz plates for wavelengths between
350 and 850 µm and an AHWP made of 3 quartz plates for wavelengths between 1 and 2 mm.
No detailed information is given about the measurements, the analysis, tests for systematic
errors, or about the optimization of the AHWP in respect to the relative angles between the

2

plates. A 2-element achromatic waveguide polarizers for operation at ∼1 cm is mentioned
by Leitch et al.6

In this paper we present the construction of a sapphire AHWP and measurements of its
properties at a wavelength of 2.7 mm (110 GHz). We also present an analysis of the design
of a three-plate sapphire AHWP for a wavelength of 2 mm. There is currently interest in
an AHWP that is suitable for the mm-wave band because of the increase in experimental
eﬀorts to measure the polarization of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Several
experiments will use HWPs and increasing the bandwidth where the eﬃciency is high will
increase the signal-to-noise ratio of the experiment.

2. Experimental Setup

A top-view sketch of the experimental setup is shown in Figure 1. We used a Gunn oscillator7
at 110 GHz and a diode detector8 as a source and detector of radiation, respectively. Both
source and detector had conical horns that provided beams of 12 degrees full width at half
maximum. They emitted and were sensitive to linearly polarized radiation with a -15 dB
maximum level of cross polarization at ∼10 degrees from peak gain. The source and detector
were aligned by maximizing the signal received by the detector as a function of its orientation
relative to the ﬁxed orientation of the source.

We used wire grid polarizers to increase the level of linear polarization of the light emitted
by the source and detected by the detector. The grids, which were made by Buckbee-Meers,
were measured to have a modulation eﬃciency of 97%.9

The source, detector, and polarizers were housed in metallic boxes that were lined inside
(outside) with Emerson and Cuming Eccosorb LS-16 (LS-14). One side of the boxes was
open.

Between the boxes were placed two 1.25 cm thick plates of Emerson and Cuming Eccosorb
MF-124 which served as collimators. They had 19 mm diameter knife-edged holes which faced
the source. The knife edges were covered with 0.07 mm thick aluminum tape. The HWP was
installed between the collimators in a 5 cm diameter Newport mount that could rotate
around the x axis with a resolution of 1 degree. The mount was held by a cylindrical leg that
gave it another degree of freedom for rotation around the z axis. The beam ﬁlled the central
15% area of the HWP. Its angular extent when it reached the detector was 2 degrees.

The entire experiment was mounted on a metallic optics bench. Aluminum sheet metal
lined with egg-crate Eccosorb-CV3 enclosed the experiment from three sides. Egg-crate Ec-
cosorb was also placed both in front and above the source and detector boxes, as shown in
Figure 1.

3

Fig. 1. A top view sketch of the experimental setup.

4

3. Achromatic Half Wave Plate

We used a stack of three sapphire a-cut plates to construct the AHWP. Each of the ﬁne
ground plates had a thickness of 2.32 ± 0.05 mm, which made each a HWP for a frequency
of 193 GHz. The three plates were mounted together with a front and back anti-reﬂection
coating made of 0.35 mm thick polished Herasil. The orientation of the second plate was
rotated by 50.5 deg with respect to the orientation of the aligned ﬁrst and third plates. We
had an angular accuracy of ±1 degree in assembling the stack and an accuracy of ±1.5 degrees
in orienting the stack-mount normal to the incoming beam. The ordinary and extraordinary
axes of any of the plates were known to within 0.5 degree.

We compared the performance of the AHWP to the performance of a ‘chromatic’ plate, a
single a-cut plate of sapphire with a thickness of 2.32 mm. The chromatic plate was stacked
with the same layers of anti-reﬂection coating as the AHWP.

We used a frequency of 110 GHz to make the measurements because at this frequency the
diﬀerence between the modulation eﬃciency of the AHWP and of the single plate are nearly
maximized thereby providing a clear demonstration of the achromaticity of the stack.

4. Measurements, Analysis, and Results

To quantify the eﬃciency of the plates we measured the detected intensity as a function of
their rotation angle α about the x axis. Data were taken every 10 degree in angle and are
shown in Figure 2. Error bars are the standard deviation of 5 repeat measurements of the
eﬃciency. A repeat measurement consisted of assembling all individual pieces into a stack,
mounting the stack, and taking data. No changes in other elements in the experiment were
made between repeat measurements.

A constant oﬀset of about 0.7 mV was measured when the aperture of the detector box was
blocked and was subtracted from the data. This level was constant with rotation of the plates,
between diﬀerent independent measurements of a given stack, and between measurements
with diﬀerent stacks. The data was then ﬁt with the following model

The output of the ﬁtting were the 9 amplitudes and 8 phases, where φ0 was set to zero. The
modulation eﬃciency was deﬁned as

The value of ǫ did not change when we ﬁt the data only up to the fourth harmonic (5
amplitudes and 4 phases). The quality of the ﬁt however degraded from a reduced χ2 of 0.27
and 0.9 for the achromatic and chromatic plates, respectively, with 8 harmonics to 5.8 and
2.6, respectively, with 4 harmonics.

D =

Ai cos(iα + φi).

8

X
i=0

ǫ =

A4
A0

.

5

(1)

(2)

)

V
m

(
 
t
u
p
t
u
O

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

 50

 100

 150

 200

 250

 300

 350

HWP angle (deg)

Fig. 2. Measurements (points) and theoretical predictions (dash) of the signal
detected as a function of rotation angle of the plates for the chromatic plate
(blue diamond) and for the AHWP (red triangles). Error bars are the standard
deviations of 5 repeated measurements. The theoretical predictions have no
free parameters.

6

Predictions about the eﬃciency of the plates were calculated using the technique of Mueller
matrices. The intensity of the light incident on the detector was generated by multiplying
an incident Stokes vector representing 100% Q polarized light by Mueller matrices that
simulated the response of the two anti-reﬂection layers, the plates, and a 100% Q polarized
detector. An overall normalization was taken from a measurement of the power detected in
the absence of a HWP in the light path. The phase was taken from the known orientation of
the plates. Normal incidence was assumed throughout. A prediction for the detected intensity
was calculated as a function of α in steps of 1 degree, ﬁtted by the model given in Equation 1,
and a predicted eﬃciency was calculated using Equation 2. The predicted response of the
plates as a function of angle is shown in Figure 2. The prediction shown is not a ﬁt to the
data. There are no free parameters in this prediction.

Figure 3 shows the predicted eﬃciency of the chromatic and achromatic plates as a function
of frequency and our measured values of 43 ± 4% and 96 ± 1.5%, respectively. The predicted
values are 43.5% and 100%, respectively. Uncertainty in the predicted values of the eﬃciency,
due to uncertainty in the indices of sapphire,10 is 1.5% for the single plate and negligible for
the AHWP. The errors on the measurements of the modulation eﬃciency were calculated by
summing the statistical and an estimate of the systematic errors in quadrature.

We also measured the eﬃciency for angles of incidence that are not normal by tilting the
AHWP about the z axis between angles of zero and 15 degrees. We found no change in the
eﬃciency as a function of angle within statistical errors.

Spurious signals generated by reﬂections can be a source of systematic errors. We checked
the level of signal detected by the detector when either of the collimators were blocked with
metal or with a piece of Eccosorb MF124. The level was 0.7 mV for all cases and did not
change as a function of the rotation angle of the plates in their mount.

The experiment was repeated for various distances of the plates from the source. The
eﬃciency of the single plate varied in a sinusoidal manner with position with an amplitude
of 1.9 % and a period of 1.4 mm. This period is also half the wavelength of the source and we
hypothesize that reﬂections in the setup cause the small variation in eﬃciency. We have also
observed that the shape of the deviations between the theoretical prediction for the detected
signal and the one measured vary as a function of the position of the plate. The data shown
in Figure 2 is representative of the magnitude of such deviations. For the achromatic plate
the peak-to-peak changes in eﬃciency as a function of distance were smaller than the quoted
statistical error.

5. Discussion

There is good agreement between each of the no-free-parameters predictions shown in Fig. 2
and the data. Both the predicted overall modulation amplitude and the relative phase shift

7

y
c
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
E

Frequency

(GHz)

Fig. 3. The predicted modulation eﬃciency as a function of frequency of the
AHWP (red broad) and of a single plate (blue narrow) and the measured
eﬃciency of both plates.

8

are reproduced by the measurements. The measured modulation eﬃciencies are close to the
predicted values.

AHWP’s can be constructed with various combinations of birefringent plates each giving
a diﬀerent degree of achromaticity. Title3 showed that with 3 plates of the same material an
AHWP should have the ﬁrst and last plates aligned and most of our discussion is restricted
to such a stack. Figure 4 shows the eﬃciency of an AHWP made of three sapphire plates as
a function of frequency and for three diﬀerent orientations of the second plate. Each of the
plates is a HWP at odd harmonics of 50 GHz, suitable for a cosmic microwave background
polarization experiment - EBEX - that we are currently constructing. EBEX will operate
at 150, 250, 350 and 450 GHz. An orientation angle of 58 degrees gives close to a constant
modulation eﬃciency over a band of ∼40 GHz. A plate orientation angle of 47 degrees gives a
band of ∼60 GHz at the expense of variations of the eﬃciency within that band. It is therefore
interesting to quantify the average modulation eﬃciency as a function of bandwidth and as a
function of rotation angle of the second plate. The results are shown in Figure 5 for a top-hat
frequency response and they demonstrate several features. The maximum average eﬃciency
decreases as a function of bandwidth but with a proper choice of angle average eﬃciencies
that are larger than 95% are achievable with up to 60 GHz of bandwidth. The angular
precision required for the orientation of the second plate is rather coarse. The eﬃciency for
60 GHz of bandwidth is larger than 95% for any angle between 47 and 56 degrees. Even
smaller accuracy is required for narrower bandwidths.

A stack of 5 plates can give high modulation eﬃciency over an even broader range of
frequencies compared to a 3-stack; see Figures 6 and 7. With an assumption of a top-hat
frequency response of the instrument we calculate that for the balloon-borne EBEX the
penalty in increased absorption and emission from the thicker stack of sapphire plates would
be smaller than the increase in signal and therefore a properly designed 5-stack would increase
the signal-to-noise ratio of the experiment.

Interest in mm-wave AHWP has increased recently because of the scientiﬁc interest in the
polarization of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Several experiments including
our own EBEX are proposing to use HWP’s as means to modulate the incident polariza-
tion.11, 12 The results presented in this paper provide reassurance that these experiments can
rely on an AHWP and that the eﬃciency of such a plate is constant for a relatively broad
range of incidence angles.

9

Fig. 4. Predicted modulation eﬃciency of an AHWP as a function of frequency
near 150 GHz for rotation angles of 47 (dash dot, green), 53 (solid, red) and
58 (dash, blue) degrees of the second plate. Each sapphire plate in the stack
is a HWP for a frequency of 50 GHz.

10

Fig. 5. The average modulation eﬃciency (color scale and contours) as a
function of the orientation of the second plate and the spectral width of a
top hat band centered on 150 GHz (for example, a width of 60 GHz means
150 ± 30 GHz).

11

5HWP

3HWP

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

y
c
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
E

100

125

150
Frequency

 (GHz)

175

200

Fig. 6. The modulation eﬃciency of an AHWP made of a stack of 5 plates
compared to the modulation eﬃciency of an AHWP made of a 3-stack. The
5-stack has orientation angles of 28.8, 94.5, 28.8 and 2 degrees for the plates
after the ﬁrst, respectively. For the 3-stack the second plate is at 57.5 degrees.
Each of the plates is sapphire and is optimized for 50 GHz.

12

Fig. 7. The average modulation eﬃciency (color scale and contours) for an
AHWP made of a 5-stack. The eﬃciency is given as a function of the orien-
tation of the second and fourth plates (relative to the ﬁrst) and the spectral
width of a top hat band centered on 150 GHz. The relative angles of the third
and ﬁfth plates are 94.5 and 2 degrees, respectively.

13

References

1. S. Pancharatnam. Achromatic combinations of birefringent plates. Raman Research

Inst. Bangalore, Memoir, 71:137–144, 1955.

2. A. M. Title and W. J. Rosenberg. Achromatic retardation plates.

In Polarizers and
Applications, SPIE Proceedings Vol. 307. Edited by Giorgio B. Trapani. Bellingham,
WA: Society for Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, 1981., p.120, January 1981.

3. A. M. Title. Improvement of birefringent ﬁlters. Applied Optics, 14:229–237, 1975.
4. J. Tinbergen. Astronomical Polarimetry. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,

1996.

5. A. G. Murray, R. Nartallo, C. V. Haynes, F. Gannaway, and P. A. R. Ade. An Imaging
Polarimeter for SCUBA. In ESA SP-401: The Far Infrared and Submillimetre Universe,
pages 405–+, 1997.

6. E. M. Leitch, J. M. Kovac, C. Pryke, J. E. Carlstrom, N. W. Halverson, W. L. Holzapfel,
B. Reddall, and E. S. Sandberg. Measurement of polarization with the degree angular
scale interferometer. Nature, 420:763, December 2002. astro-ph/0209476.
7. Spacek Labs Millimeter Wave Technology Gunn Oscillator Model GW-110-10.
8. Spacek Labs Millimeter Wave Technology Gunn Diode Model DW-3.
9. B. R. Johnson. MAXIPOL: a bolometric, balloon-borne experiment for measuring the
polarization anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background radiation. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Minnesota/Twin Cities, 2004.

10. J. W. Lamb. Miscellaneous data on materials for millimetre and submillimetre optics.

Int. J. IR and Millimeter Waves, 17:1997–2034, 1996.

11. P. Oxley, P. Ade, C. Baccigalupi, P. deBernardis, H.-M. Cho, M. J. Devlin, S. Hanany,
B. R. Johnson, T. Jones, A. T. Lee, T. Matsumura, A. D. Miller, M. Milligan, T. Ren-
barger, H. G. Spieler, R. Stompoer, G. S. Tucker, and M. Zaldarriaga. The EBEX
Experiment. In W. L. Barnes and J. J. Butler, editors, Earth Observing Systems IX: In-
frared Spacebourne Remote Sensing, volume 5543 of Proceedings of SPIE, pages 320–331,
2004.

12. S. Church, P. Ade, J. Bock, M. Bowden, J. Carlstrom, K. Ganga, W. Gear, J. Hinderks,
W. Hu, B. Keating, J. Kovac, A. Lange, E. Leitch, O. Mallie, S. Melhuish, A. Mur-
phy, B. Rusholme, C. O’Sullivan, L. Piccirillo, C. Pryke, A. Taylor, and K. Thompson.
QUEST on DASI: a South Pole CMB polarization experiment. New Astronomy Review,
47:1083–1089, December 2003.

14

