5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Design of beam splitters and microlasers using
chaotic waveguides

O. Bendix a, J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez a,∗,1,
G. A. Luna-Acosta b,2, U. Kuhl c, H. -J. St¨ockmann c

aMax-Planck-Institut f¨ur Dynamik und Selbstorganisation, Bunsenstraße 10,
D-37073 G¨ottingen, Germany
bInstituto de F´ısica, Universidad Aut´onoma de Puebla, Apartado Postal J-48,
Puebla 72570, M´exico
cFachbereich Physik der Philipps Universit¨at Marburg, Renthof 5, D-35032
Marburg, Germany

Abstract

We consider waveguides formed by single or multiple two-dimensional chaotic cavi-
ties connected to leads. The cavities are chaotic in the sense that the ray (or equiv-
alently, classical particle) dynamics within them is chaotic. Geometrical parameters
are chosen to produce a mixed phase space (chaotic regions surrounding islands of
stability where motion is regular). Incoming rays (or particles) cannot penetrate into
these islands but incoming plane waves dynamically tunnel into them at a certain
discrete set of frequencies (energies). The support of the corresponding quasi-bound
states is along the trajectories of periodic orbits trapped within the cavity. We take
advantage of this diﬀerence in the ray/wave behavior to demonstrate how chaotic
waveguides can be used to design beam splitters and microlasers. We also present
some preliminary experimental results in a microwave realization of such chaotic
waveguide.

Key words: Beam splitter, Microlaser, Quantum chaos/Wave chaos
PACS: 42.55.Sa, 42.79.Fm, 05.45.-a

Corresponding author: antonio@chaos.gwdg.de

∗
1 Supported by the GIF, the German-Israeli Foundation for Scientiﬁc Research and
Development.
2 Partially Supported by Mercator Professorship, Germany.

Preprint submitted to Microelectronics Journal

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

During the last years there has been a growing interest in the use of chaotic
cavities as resonators for microlasers, mainly due to the possibility of quality
factor tuning and its highly directional emission, see for example [1]. The key
feature behind these characteristics is the cavity geometry, which is designed
in most cases to produce mixed chaotic dynamics.

Here we propose a two-dimensional (2D) locally deformed waveguide that can
be used as beam splitter or as (single or multi-cavity) resonator for microlasers.
The novel and important feature of our model is that the cavities are open,
unlike the well known model of Ref. 1. This diﬀerence allows for a wider versa-
tility and range of applications. The splitting and lasing mechanism requires
that the deformation yields particle (ray) motion in a mixed phase space. We
remark that due to the equivalence between the problem of a TM wave inside
a 2D waveguide with Dirichlet boundary conditions (Helmholtz equation) to
that of a quantum wave in a 2D billiard (Schr¨odinger equation) [3], our results
are applicable to electromagnetic as well as electronic setups.

2 The Model

The 2D waveguide we shall use consists of a cavity connected to two collinear
semi-inﬁnite leads of width d extended along the x-axis. The prototype cavity
has the geometry of the so-called cosine billiard extensively studied in [4,5]:
it has a ﬂat wall at y = 0 and a deformed wall given by y(x) = d + a[1 −
cos(2πx/L)], where a is the amplitude of the deformation and L is the length
of the cavity. In Fig. 1(a) we show the geometry of the cavity.

For any a > 0 the cavity develops a ternary horseshoe [2] that can be either in-
complete (proper of mixed chaotic dynamics) or complete (prescribing global
chaos), depending on the particular values of (d, a, L).[6] When a waveguide is
constructed with a cavity characterized by an incomplete horseshoe, its con-
ductance ﬂuctuates strongly with sharp resonances [4b,5].The wave functions
corresponding to the sharpest conductance resonances can be identiﬁed with
energy eigenstates living in phase space stability islands, whence they are quasi
bound states (QBS) [5]. Note that incoming trajectories cannot penetrate into
the resonance (stability) island as motion in the islands correspond to tra-
jectories trapped within the cavity. However, the wave function dynamically
tunnels into the islands at the resonance values, allowed by Heisenberg’s un-
certainty principle. All QBS have support on stability islands surrounding low
period periodic orbits. In particular, for (d, a, L) = (1.0, 0.305, 5.55) the QBS
reveal I- and M-shaped patterns while for (d, a, L) = (1.0, 0.5, 5.55) V- and

2

(a) 

y 

y = d + a[1−cos(2πx/L)] 

x 

d 

L 

(b) 

(c) 

(1) 

(3) 

(5) 

(2) 

(4) 

(6) 

(7) 

Fig. 1. (a) Geometry of the cavity, (b) a multi-cavity waveguide, and (c) examples
of beam splitter setups.

W-shaped patterns are observed. In Fig. 2 examples of I-, M-, V-, and W-type
QBS are shown.

3 Discussion

3.1 Microlasers

If the waveguide described above is constructed with a semiconductor material
having a refraction index n and a wave is introduced into one of the leads with
an energy corresponding to a sharp conductance resonance, the cavity acts as a
laser resonator since light will bounce in the cavity region having the chance to
escape only for certain incidence angles, which depend on the type of the QBS
excited and the index of refraction of the waveguide. In Fig. 3 ray dynamics
was used to predict the direction and intensity of the lasing produced by
M- and I-type QBS for typical values of refraction index, showing both high
quality and high directionality [7]. The great advantage of a waveguide-based
resonator may be in that no pedestals or couplers (pumpers) close to the cavity
are needed, as is the case with the currently investigated 3D and 2D micro
lasers.

3

Fig. 2. Wave function density plots for the waveguide of Fig. 1(a), showing (a)
M-, (b) I-, (c) W-, (d) Π-, and (e) V-type quasi-bound states. See [5,6,7] for the
calculation details.

Fig. 3. Ray prediction of lasing emission for M- and I-type quasi-bound states.

4

Fig. 4. Wave function density plots for the multi-cavity waveguide of Fig. 1(b)
showing I-type quasi-bound states.

3.2 Multi-cavity resonators

Our waveguide model can also be used to construct multi-cavity resonators
formed, for example, by a co-linear array of coupled 2D chaotic cavities, c.f.
Fig. 1(b). Here, as the number of cavities is increased most of the ray tra-
jectories take longer to be transmitted or reﬂected; they oscillate irregularly
around the widest parts of the coupled cavities. The dwelling of the rays in the
outskirts of the resonance islands induces a higher probability of dynamical
tunneling into the classical inaccessible regions. Thus, the trapping of scatter-
ing wave functions along bounded ray trajectories is enhanced. See in Fig. 4
an I-type QBS excited in the milti-cavity resonator of Fig. 1(b). Even though
a multi-cavity resonators is of general interest in the ﬁeld of optics, one may
also consider the construction of a micro laser using a resonant multi-cavity.
A multi-cavity micro laser would have two main advantages: (i) the multi-
cavity array would enhance considerably the emission intensity compared to
a micro laser constructed with one cavity only, and (ii) the micro laser would
emit several parallel beams in one or more directions since I-, M-, V-, W-, or
Π-type QBS can be excited by choosing the appropriate cavity geometry [9].

3.3 Beam splitters

Once one knows the type of QBS that can be excited for a given set of cavity
parameters (d, a, L), it is possible to construct electromagnetic or electronic
beam splitters by attaching transversal leads to the waveguide. The transversal
leads are prescribed as follows [9]: (i) they have to be located on the stability
islands supporting the QBS, and (ii) their width must be small enough to
preserve the global phase space structure. For example, Figs. 1(c1-c2), (c3),
and (c5-c6) show beam splitter setups suitable for I-, M-, and V-type QBS,
respectively. We still consider plane waves coming from the horizontal leads.
Then, the scattering wave functions which tunnel into stability islands will
be guided out of the cavity through the transversal leads. Fig. 1(c4) is an
example of a beam splitter using both I- and M-type QBS, where the beam
will be guided up or down depending on the excited QBS, as shown in Fig.
5. Obviously, one can also anticipate the construction of multi beam splitters,
as suggested in Fig. 1(c7).

5

Fig. 5. Wave function density plots for two examples of beam splitters.

3.4 Experimental

We have recently performed measurements on the experimental realization of
the cosine billiard in the microwave regime. Figure 6 shows the experimental
setup. Not shown in the ﬁgure is a top metallic plate. The distance between
the top and bottom plates, the resonator height h, is 0.8 cm. As long as the
frequency ν is less than c/2h = 18.75 GHz (c is the speed of light) the cavity is
a 2D system and there is a one to one correspondence between the electric ﬁeld
strength and the quantum mechanical wave function (see [3]). The present set
up includes three electric dipole antennas. The ﬁst one is ﬁxed on the left
lead, near the top left corner, at (x, y) = (−18.0, 7.725) cm, the second one
is ﬁxed on the opposite side, at (x, y) = (18.0, 7.725) cm. The third antenna
is inside the cavity, scanning in small steps the whole cavity region (normally
in steps of 2.5 mm) for each value of frequency in the range 1-18.75 GHz. A
vector network analyzer is used to measure reﬂection in each of the antennas
as well as transmission between them. Using the methods developed in [8] the
modulus and sign of the wave function can be obtained from the transmission
measurements, while the reﬂection measurement provides only the modulus
of the wave function. In Fig. 6 we present a wave function obtained from the
reﬂection measurements from the scanning antenna at ν = 13.7708 GHz, a
resonance frequency. Experimental results like this conﬁrm the existence of

6

Fig. 6. Left: Microwave Cosine billiard. Right: I-type QBS, experimentally obtained.

I-type QBS, corresponding to the theoretical predictions of Fig. 2(b), and
forecast the realization of the proposed waveguide-based beam splitters and
(multi-cavity) resonators.

Finally, as an additional note we want to mention that in the case of a waveg-
uide with a cavity characterized by a complete horseshoe the conductance is
in general a smooth function of the energy (or frequency). However, some non-
generic complete horseshoes anticipate the appearance of scars [10], which in
turn produce conductance resonances and Π-type QBS [9]. See an example of
a Π-type QBS in Fig. 2(d) where (d, a, L) = (1.0, 1.0, 5.55) was used. Then
the construction of microlasers and beam splitters based on scared QBS could
be also accomplished.

References

[1] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, E. E. Narimanov, J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, J. Faist,

D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, Science 280 (1998) 1556.

[2] For a deﬁnition of a (Smale) horseshoe, see, e.g., Wiggins S, Introduction to
Applied Nonlinear dynamical Systems and Chaos (Springer-Verlag, New York,
1990).

[3] H.-J. St¨ockmann, Quantum chaos: an introduction (Cambridge University

Press, Cambrige, 1999).

[4a] Gursoy B. Akguc and L. E. Reichl, J. Stat. Phys. 98 (2000) 813.

[4b] A. B¨acker, A. Manze, B. Huckestein, and R. Ketzmerick, Phys. Rev. E 66 (2002)

[4c] J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez, G. A. Luna-Acosta, and F. M. Izrailev, Physica E 22

016211.

(2004) 881.

7

[5] J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez, G. A. Luna-Acosta, P. ˇSeba, and K. N. Pichugin, Phys.

Rev. E 66 (2002) 046207.

[6] J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez, et. al., in Focus on Laser and Electro-Optics Research,

NOVA Science Publishers, in press (2005).

[7] J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez, G. A. Luna-Acosta, P. ˇSeba, and K. N. Pichugin, Phys.

Rev. B 67 (2003) 161104.

[8a] U. Kuhl, E. Persson, M. Barth, and H.-J. St¨ockmann, Eur. Phys. J. B 17 (2000)

253.

165317.

[8b] Y.-H. Kim, M. Barth, H.-J. St¨ockmann, and J. P. Bird, Phys. Rev. B 65 (2002)

[9] O. Bendix, J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez, and G. A. Luna-Acosta, to be submitted.

[10] E. J. Heller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 (1984) 1515.

8

