5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Design of switches and beam splitters using chaotic cavities

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Dynamik und Selbstorganisation, Bunsenstraße 10, D-37073 G¨ottingen, Germany

O. Bendix and J. A. M´endez-Berm´udez

Compiled February 2, 2008

We propose the construction of electromagnetic (or electronic) switches and beam splitters using chaotic
two-dimensional multi-port waveguides. A prototype two-port waveguide is locally deformed in order to
produce a ternary incomplete horseshoe proper of mixed phase space (chaotic regions surrounding islands of
stability where motion is regular). Due to tunneling to the phase space stability islands the appearance of
quasi-bound states (QBS) is induced. Then, we attach transversal ports to the waveguide on the deformation
region in positions where the phase space structure is only slightly perturbed. We show how QBS can be
guided out of the waveguide through the attached transversal ports giving rise to frequency selective switches
and beam splitters.

c(cid:13) 2008 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: 230.1360, 230.7370, 270.3100.

Switches and beam splitters are key elements in opti-
cal information processing, imaging, integrated photonic,
and optical communication systems. In this letter we
propose a novel way to construct switches and beam
splitters using two-dimensional (2D) chaotic waveguides.
The 2D waveguide we shall use is formed by a cavity
connected to two collinear semi-inﬁnite ports of width
d extended along the x-axis. The prototype cavity has
the geometry of the so-called cosine billiard:1–4 it has a
ﬂat wall at y = 0 and a deformed wall given by y(x) =
d + a[1 − cos(2πx/L)], where a is the amplitude of the
deformation and L is the length of the cavity. In Fig.
1(a) we show the geometry of the waveguide.

horseshoe.5 It gives the topology of the homoclinic tangle
which completely characterizes the scattering dynamics,
connecting the interacting region with the asymptotic re-
gions. For our waveguide, the domain of the interacting
region is the cavity, while the asymptotic regions are the
ports. The number of fundamental orbits (period-one pe-
riodic orbits) determine the order of the horseshoe. Our
cavity (for a > 0) has three of them (shown in dashed
lines in Fig. 1(a)) and hence its horseshoe is ternary. The
horseshoe is formed by the invariant manifolds (stable
and unstable) of the hyperbolic ﬁxed points of the cav-
ity (the ones located at the edges of the cavity). We plot
the horseshoe using a Poincar`e Map6 (PM), i.e., we fol-
low orbits with initial conditions along the manifolds and
each time a ray impinges on the ﬂat wall of the waveg-
uide (chosen as surface of section) we plot the position x
and the angle θ, the angle the ray makes with the lower
boundary. In Fig. 1(b) we present the horseshoe of the
waveguide with parameters (d, a, L) = (1.0, 0.305, 5.55)
where only the tendrils5 up to the hierarchy level three
are plotted. In particular for this set of parameters the
horseshoe is incomplete; a typical situation of mixed
phase space.

For the set of parameters used here, the cavity de-
velops a period-one and period-four resonance islands
whose boundaries are shown with thick lines in Fig. 1(b).
These islands are formed by trapped orbits bouncing in
the neighborhood of stable periodic orbits. In particu-
lar the central island is formed by trajectories colliding
nearly perpendicular with the walls around x = L/2.
Note that the orbits within these islands are not acces-
sible to scattering rays.

To further analyze our waveguide system we use the
transient Poincar`e map3 which is a PM where the initial
conditions are chosen to lie outside the cavity. The tran-
sient PM generated by trajectories whose initial condi-
tions start in the left port is presented in Fig. 1(c). Com-
parison of Fig. 1(b) and Fig. 1(c) shows, as expected,
that the stability islands produced by bounded motion
inside the cavity are forbidden phase space regions for

Fig. 1. (a) Geometry of the waveguide, (b) horseshoe,
and (c) transient Poincar`e map with surface of section
at y = 0, (d, a, L) = (1.0, 0.305, 5.55). The tendrils5 of
the horseshoe in (b) are plotted up to level three. The
thick lines in (b) are the limits of stability islands. The
transient Poincar`e maps in (c) is constructed for rays
entering the cavity from the left port.

In order to obtain the panorama of the ray (classi-
cal) dynamics of the waveguide we construct its Smale

1

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

Fig. 2. Density plots for scattering wave functions cal-
culated at resonance energies (light-dark = minimum-
maximum). (a) E = 4008.8583, (b) E = 4027.0597.
These QBS are constructed by averaging all the M = 20
open modes. E = 2d2EW ∼ M2π2; where EW is the
energy of the wave and M is the largest transversal
mode m beyond which the longitudinal wave vector
[2EW − (mπ/d)2]1/2 becomes complex.

scattering trajectories. Also note that the structure of
the transient PM shadows the unstable manifold of the
corresponding horseshoe.

To study the wave scattering phenomena we numer-
ically solve the Schr¨odinger equation to compute the
scattering wave functions (by means of the Fisher-
Lee relation7) and the energy-dependent conductance
Gpq (using the Landauer-B¨uttiker formalism7), meas-
ured from port q to port p. We want to emphasize that
since the problem of a quantum wave in a 2D billiard
(Schr¨odinger equation) is equivalent to that of a TM
wave inside a 2D waveguide with Dirichlet boundary con-
ditions (Helmholtz equation),8 our analysis is applicable
to both, electronic and electromagnetic setups.

Additionally, to explore ray-wave correspondence we
use the Husimi distribution9 which is the projection of
a given state onto a coherent state of minimum uncer-
tainty. The Husimi distribution is a phase space proba-
bility density that can be directly compared to the ray
phase space.

It has been shown3, 4 that when the cavity of the
waveguide of Fig. 1(a) is characterized by an incom-
plete horseshoe the conductance GLR (= GRL) ﬂuctu-
ates strongly with sharp resonances. The wave functions
belonging to the sharpest conductance resonances can
be identiﬁed with energy eigenstates living in the phase
space stability islands. In particular, we noticed10 that
some wave functions at resonance reveal I-, V- and M-
shaped patterns which shadow the ray trajectory of a
particle in a period one, two and four periodic orbits,
respectively. The reason of this phenomenon is Heisen-
berg’s uncertainty principle that allows scattering wave
functions to tunnel through KAM barriers.6 Since the
scattering wave functions that tunnel into classical is-
lands are very similar to a set of eigenfunctions of the
corresponding closed cavity, we named them quasi bound
states (QBS). For the set of parameters chosen for the
cavity in this work, the QBS may be of two types only:

Fig. 3. Examples of (a-c) switch and (d-f) beam splitter
setups.

I-type or M-type. See the corresponding scattering wave
functions in Fig. 2 found at GLR local minima for waves
incident from the left port. Notice that under resonance
conditions the cavity acts as a resonator. The I-type (M-
type) QBS have support on the period-one (period-four)
resonance island, as can be clearly seen in Fig. 5(a-b)
where we plot the Husimi distributions for the QBS of
Fig. 2 together with the transient PM of the system.

Now, the idea is to attach transversal ports to the cav-
ity in order to guide the QBS out of the waveguide (once
they are excited by the appropriate resonance energy) to
construct switches and/or beam splitters. Without loss
of generality, we will attach semi-inﬁnite ports of width
dT extended along the y-axis (see some multi-port se-
tups in Fig. 3). Then, to make use of the I-type QBS the
ports have to be attached to the waveguide centered at
x = L/2 (the position of the period-one periodic orbit
supporting I-type QBS) on the lower boundary, on the
upper one [Fig. 3(a)], or on both [Fig. 3(d)]. While to
use the M-type QBS, the ports should be centered at
x = L/2 and L/2 ± 0.975 on the lower boundary or/and
at x = L/2 ± 0.975 on the upper one, see for example
Figs. 3(b,e,f). In particular we will use the setup of Fig.
3(c) which combines both, I- and M-type QBS.

Evidently, by attaching transversal ports to the waveg-
uide the cavity phase space is perturbed. However since
we want to make use of QBS, the width dT of the at-
tached ports must be small enough to preserve the global
phase space structure. Then, in Fig. 4 we analyze the
eﬀect of the size of the transversal ports on the phase
space for the setup of Fig. 3(c) by plotting the transient
PM for diﬀerent values of dT. Notice that by increas-
ing dT, the chaotic region separating the period-one and
period-four stability islands becomes narrower until it
completely disappears. Thus, we will use a value of dT
for which the transient PM still shows period-one and
period-four stability regions: dT = 0.15, see Fig. 4(c).

Remember that the QBS shown in Fig. 2 are produced
at frequencies that correspond to sharp local minima in
GLR. Now, for the multi-port setup of Fig. 3(c) we can
also measure the conductance from the left to the upper
port, GLU, and from the left to the lower port, GLD. We
observe, as expected, that some of the sharpest minima
in GLR correspond to maxima in GLU or GLD, meaning
that at such frequencies a wave tunneling to the stabil-
ity regions is guided up or down through the transver-

2

Fig. 4. Transient Poincar`e maps with surface of section
at y = 0 constructed for rays entering the beam splitter
setup of Fig. 3(c) from the left port. (a) dT = 0.05, (b)
dT = 0.10, (c) dT = 0.15, and (d) dT = 0.25.

sal ports. To show such behavior, in Fig. 5 we compare
the Husimi distributions for the QBS of Fig. 2 (waveg-
uide without transversal ports) to Husimi distributions
for scattering states at GLR resonance for the muti-port
setup Fig. 3(c). The states of Figs. 5(c) and 5(d) corre-
spond to minima in GLR and maxima in GLU and GLD, re-
spectively. As expected since GLR is minimum, the max-
imum probability of the Husimi distributions for these
states is located inside phase space stability regions (as
the QBS of the two-port terminal do). However, there
is a probability minimum (equal to zero) at the center
of the stable regions indicating that in fact the QBS are
guided out from the cavity through the transversal ports.
Note that with the setup of Fig. 3(c) one is able to
guide a beam up (down) by exciting an I- (M-) type
QBS, thus, giving rise to a frequency selective switch.
While, a beam splitter may be constructed by using the
setup of Fig. 3(d) (Fig. 3(e)), since an I- (M-) type QBS
could be splitted up and down (down) at certain reso-
nant frequencies. Moreover, by the appropriate choice of
the geometrical parameters of the cavity one can excite
diﬀerent types of QBS (V-, W-, Π-type, for example),
allowing in this way diverse device designing.

In summary, we have proposed the construction of fre-
quency selective switches and beam splitters using 2D
multi-port waveguides. Using ray as well as wave dynam-
ics we shown that the switching and splitting mechanism
is based on tunneling into classically forbidden phase
space regions. Finally, we want to stress that the choice
of the cosine billiard as waveguide cavity does not restrict
the applicability of our results, since the construction of
frequency selective switches and beam splitters, as de-
scribed above, only requires a cavity characterized by an
incomplete horseshoe.

JAMB (antonio@chaos.gwdg.de) thanks support from

Fig. 5. Transient Poincar`e maps (dots) and Husimi dis-
tributions (orange-white = minimum-maximum) with
surface of section at y = 0 constructed for rays/waves en-
tering the waveguide of (a-b) Fig. 1(a) and (c-d) Fig. 3(c)
from the left port. In (a) and (b) the Husimi distribu-
tions for the QBS of Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(b) are shown,
respectively. In (c) and (d) the Husimi distributions for
scattering sates at GLU and GLD maxima are plotted, re-
spectively, both at GLR minima. (c) E = 3997.34, (d)
E = 4103.4096.

the GIF, the German-Israeli Foundation for Scientiﬁc
Research and Development. We thank J. P. Bird, R.
Fleischmann and G. A. Luna-Acosta for useful discus-
sions.

References

(2003).

1. G.B. Akguc and L.E. Reichl, Phys. Rev. E 67, 046202

2. J.A. M´endez-Berm´udez, G.A. Luna-Acosta, and F.M.

Izrailev, Physica E 22, 881 (2004).

3. J.A. M´endez-Berm´udez, G.A. Luna-Acosta, P. ˇSeba, and

K.N. Pichugin, Phys. Rev. E 66, 046207 (2002).

4. A. B¨acker, A. Manze, B. Huckestein, and R. Ketzmerick,

Phys. Rev. E 66, 016211 (2002).

5. J. Guckenheimer and P. Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations,
Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Fields
(Springer-Verlag, NY, 1983).

6. A.J. Lichtenberg and M.A. Lieberman, Regular and
Chaotic Dynamics, 2nd Edition (Springer-Verlag, NY,
1992).

7. S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems

(Cambridge University Press, Cambrige, 1995).

8. H.-J. St¨ockmann, Quantum chaos: an introduction

(Cambridge University Press, Cambrige, 1999).

9. K. Husimi, Proc. Phys. Math. Soc. (Jpn.) 22, 246

(1940).

10. J.A. M´endez-Berm´udez, G.A. Luna-Acosta, P. ˇSeba, and
K.N. Pichugin, Phys. Rev. B 67, 161104(R) (2003).

3

