5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Plasmonic bandgaps and Trapped Plasmons on Nanostructured Metal Surfaces

submitted to PRL

T.A. Kelf,∗ Y. Sugawara, and J.J. Baumberg
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton
Highﬁeld, Southampton, SO17 1BJ

M. Abdelsalam and P.N. Bartlett
School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Highﬁeld, Southampton, SO17 1BJ
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Nanostructured metal surfaces comprised of periodically arranged spherical voids are grown by
electrochemical deposition through a self-assembled template. Detailed measurements of the angle-
and orientation-dependent reﬂectivity reveal the spectral dispersion, from which we identify the
presence of both delocalized Bragg- and localized Mie-plasmons. These couple strongly producing
bonding and anti-bonding mixed plasmons with anomalous dispersion properties. Appropriate plas-
mon engineering of the void morphology selects the plasmon spatial and spectral positions, allowing
these plasmonic crystal ﬁlms to be optimised for a wide range of sensing applications.

PACS numbers: 73.20.Mf, 42.70.Qs, 72.15.Rn, 81.07.-b

In recent years the topic of surface plasmons and
plasmon-active surfaces has become of interest to a broad
range of disciplines.[1] Stemming from the desire to con-
struct plasmon devices and the ability to make and
characterize metallic structures on the nano-scale, plas-
monics ﬁnds applications in ﬁelds as diverse as opti-
cal switching[2, 3], near-ﬁeld photonics[4] and surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy.[5] A critical issue for the
application of plasmons is their location and spatial ex-
tent within complicated 3D metal geometries. Despite
impressive progress in the ﬁeld of scanning near-ﬁeld mi-
croscopy, the technique is selective in the plasmons it
records, is somewhat invasive to the plasmon ﬁelds, and
is unable to distinguish between localized or delocalized
modes.[6] The diﬃculties are exempliﬁed by the extended
debate about how light squeezes through arrays of sub-
wavelength holes[7, 8], whether through delocalized plas-
mon propagation and interference[9] or localized plas-
mon waveguiding.[10] Similarly, extreme localization of
plasmons on rough metal surfaces is thought to produce
‘hot-spots’ for resonant Raman scattering.[11, 12] It has,
however, proved diﬃcult to study in detail this process
of plasmon localization.

Here we study the band-structure of, and coupling be-
tween diﬀerent plasmon modes on a series of carefully
controlled metal nanostructured surfaces. By measuring
the polarized reﬂectivity of a focused white light laser
while varying the sample orientation and incident angle,
the spectral dispersion of surface and localized plasmons
as a function of sample geometry is measured. Strong
coupling between diﬀerent plasmon modes is clearly ob-
served, along with the systematic localization of sur-
face plasmons at a critical geometrical condition. Un-
derstanding the complexity of the plasmon localization
opens the way to plasmon engineered surfaces, designed

∗Electronic address: tkelf@phys.soton.ac.uk

for particular applications.

Along the boundary between a metal and a dielec-
tric, surface plasmon-polaritons (SPPs) can propagate
freely. By patterning such surfaces with a periodic array
of holes, an incident optical ﬁeld can be diﬀracted and
couple to these SPPs.[13] The SPPs will also multiply
scatter oﬀ the periodic components of the array leading to
‘Bragg’ plasmon modes with plasmonic bandgaps. Plas-
mons can become localised if the ﬁeld ﬂuctuations be-
come spatially pinned and disconnected from each other.
These localised modes are highly dependent on the geom-
etry of the surface and have attracted a growing interest
for achieving large ﬁeld enhancements.[14]

The nano-structured surfaces investigated here are
formed using a nano-casting process, by electrochemi-
cal deposition through a template of self-assembled la-
tex spheres.[15, 16] The resulting metallic mesh reﬂects
the order of the self-assembled close-packed template,
allowing convenient control of the pore diameters and
regularity of the array. Templates are produced using
a capillary force method, allowing a monolayer of well-
ordered spheres to be produced, with sphere diameters, d,
(and hence pitch) between 100nm and > 10µm. Electro-
deposition while measuring the total charge passed al-
lows the accurate growth of metal to a required thickness
t. Furthermore by systematically retracting the sample
from the plating bath during growth, the nano-structure
geometry can be graded. After deposition the template
is dissolved, leaving the freestanding structure. This al-
lows the production of shallow well-spaced dishes as well
as encapsulated spherical voids on a single sample. Op-
tical and electron microscopy shows that the resulting
surfaces are smooth on the sub-10nm scale. We com-
bine these with scanning probe microscopy to determine
the ﬁlm thickness locally. To date nano-structured metal
ﬁlms of Au, Ag, Cu, Ni, Co and Pt have been realized.
Here we concentrate mostly on Au voids, although very
similar features are seen for Ag samples.

On thin regions of the sample (normalised ﬁlm thick-

2

void in Au, the energies of s, p, d Mie states are 0.97eV,
1.64eV and 2.22eV respectively, compared to the Bragg
plasmon mode at k=0 of 2.12eV.

Hence as the thickness of the ﬁlm is increased, the
localized Mie modes drop from the 2D plasmon around
2.6eV, down through the propagating Bragg modes. It
is the strong coupling between these modes that controls
the plasmon properties on these nanostructured metal
surfaces.

The key role of spectral- and angular-dispersion moti-
vates the collection of accurate data from diﬀerent thick-
nesses of these nanostructures. An automated goniome-
ter conﬁguration allows precise control over the orienta-
tion and position of a sample, which is illuminated by
a super-continuum white light laser with wavelengths
from 480nm up to 2µm. The reﬂected light is col-
lected using a 100µm diameter multimode ﬁbre and anal-
ysed in a broadband spectrometer. The use of a high-
brightness laser allows high angular resolution from a
small sample region.[19] This set-up enables full charac-
terization of the plasmon dispersion for diﬀerent sample
morphologies. Using suitable polarization optics, both
polarization-preserving and polarization-rotating spectra
are observed. These show similar trends in absorption for
both TE and TM incident light due to the strong polari-
sation conversion from the voids.[20] Here we concentrate
on plasmon absorption dips in the co-polarized spectra,
leaving the more subtle polarization-rotation spectra to
a subsequent publication.

To exemplify the physics of the plasmons, we focus
on a gold nano-void ﬁlm of pitch 600nm, which most
clearly resolves the plasmon interactions in the visible
spectral region. For each nanostructure morphology on
this graded-thickness sample, the spectral absorption is
measured over a range of incident angles and sample ori-
entations. Figure 2 shows cuts through these data sets
of reﬂectivity, R(ω, kx, ky) for three diﬀerent ﬁlm thick-
nesses. The upper images show the energy dispersion
with incident angle, at particular sample azimuthal ori-
entations φ (measured from the ΓK direction). The dis-
persion of various plasmon modes is clearly observed,
along with anticrossings between diﬀerent modes. The
lower images are slices at ﬁxed energy of the symmetry
of the modes in the kx − ky plane. Propagating modes
will see diﬀerent dispersions in diﬀerent directions and
hence posses a 6-fold symmetry arising from the hexago-
nal lattice. Localized plasmon modes are conﬁned within
individual voids, so feel little of the samples asymmetries,
appearing almost circular in these plots.

On thin nano-void ﬁlms (Fig.2a) nearly-pure Bragg
modes are observed. This shows that for shallow dishes,
the observed modes are indeed propagating plasmons,
which, even at high energies (where the imaginary part
of the Au dielectric constant increases strongly near the
2D plasmon energy), propagate for many lattice periods
through the structure. Although they conform well to the
folded Bragg dispersion theory (dotted), plasmon mode
repulsion is clearly identiﬁed in the lower modes near

FIG. 1: (a) Dispersion of zone-folded surface plasmon polari-
tons, for voids in Au spaced by 600nm. Images show surface
electric ﬁeld distribution for the corresponding standing wave
modes at k = 1/µm close to ΓK, red circles mark dishes. (b)
Localised plasmon energies vs normalised sample thickness,
¯t. Calculated xy ﬁeld distributions for encapsulated spheres,
¯t=1. Inset: scanning electron micrograph of sample at ¯t=0.9.

ness, ¯t = t/d < 0.2) where the surface takes the form of
a hexagonal array of shallow dishes, SPPs are observed.
These states multiply scatter oﬀ the rims of the dishes,
forming plasmonic bandgaps similar to those formed in
2D dielectric photonic crystals. For weak scattering these
Bragg plasmons track the folded plasmon dispersion in
the 2D lattice (Fig.1a). The scattering mixes these six-
fold degenerate modes, splitting their energies and form-
ing standing waves with ﬁeld distributions exhibiting
diﬀerent overlaps with the shallow dishes (bands 1,2,6
shown for small in-plane k along the ΓK direction). Be-
cause the Bragg plasmons are travelling modes, their en-
ergy depends strongly on their direction of propagation.
As the thickness of the ﬁlm increases, the rim of the
spherical voids expands while the pitch remains constant,
strongly increasing the scattering of the Bragg plasmons.
For hemispherical voids, the top planar surface breaks up
into disconnected triangular islands, preventing straight-
forward passage of the surface modes.

On the other hand, localized plasmons are trapped
in the deep spherical cavities embedded in the ﬁlm at
larger thicknesses. Within fully encapsulated voids these
modes can be modelled using a Mie scattering approach
[17, 18], hereafter referred to as ‘Mie’ plasmons. Be-
cause they are localized they can directly couple to opti-
cal ﬁelds and are nearly isotropic - largely uninﬂuenced
by the electric ﬁelds from neighbouring voids. When the
voids are truncated (¯t < 1), Mie modes of diﬀerent sym-
metry are coupled together and their energies are forced
upward (Fig.1b) towards the energy of the 2D surface
plasmon (the ﬂat metal limit for t=0). Previous work
in amorphous random arrays of voids directly identiﬁed
this tuning of the Mie plasmons.[17] The Mie plasmon
wavefunctions correspond to spherical harmonics simi-
lar to atomic orbitals, labelled by angular and azimuthal
quantum numbers, (l, m). For a single 600nm spherical

3

FIG. 2: Measured energy dispersion of reﬂectivity for TM po-
larised light as a function of in-plane wavevector for increasing
void thickness, ¯t (a-c). Log colour scale, white dotted lines
show zone-folded plasmon dispersion, sample orientations φ =
◦
15
respectively. (i-iv) k-space cuts through disper-
sion relation at; (i) (¯t,E)=(0.25,2.2eV); (ii) (¯t,E)=(0.4,2.2eV);
(iii) (¯t,E)=(0.4,1.7eV); (iV) (¯t,E)=(0.6,2.2eV). Light shade
corresponds to absorption features.

◦
, 48

◦
, 33

normal incidence, corresponding to a plasmonic bandgap
at k=0. This bandgap is reduced for even thinner ﬁlms,
but shows already that plasmon scattering is extremely
strong.

As the voids become deeper the Mie plasmon drops
in energy and approaches the Bragg plasmon, produc-
ing a mixing of the states (Fig.2b). The new mixed
modes become highly non-dispersive, and their mode-
In particular the
symmetries appear more localized.
lower Bragg modes are mixed with a Mie mode and form
new states separated by an energy gap of >400meV. This
strong-coupling regime implies that the Bragg modes are
strongly perturbed and mixed when the Mie states within
the voids are in resonance with them. The modes visible
in Fig.2b smoothly convert from Mie to Bragg in the top
band and vice versa in the lower band. As the thickness
increases further the next Mie mode appears at higher en-
ergy, while the lowest Mie mode drops below the Bragg
energy and the surface modes begin to reform (Fig.2c).
As the modes come out of resonance, the weaker coupling
gives small anticrossings between lower Mie plasmon in
the void and the lower Bragg plasmon which moves on
the ﬂat surface (at 1.5eV in Fig.2c).

The coupling of the mixed plasmon mode with incom-
ing light is modiﬁed in the strong Bragg-Mie coupling
regime. Out of resonance, the Mie modes are visible at
for ¯t = 0.2) as are the Bragg
normal incidence (e.g.
modes for smaller ¯t < 0.15 (not shown). However when
mixed, some of the resulting modes can be conspicuously
absent around k < 1µm−1 (Fig.2c). This implies that
either the wavefunction becomes conﬁned into a ring in
k-space, or that the upper mixed plasmon is not dipo-
lar in this symmetry. The former explanation is un-
likely given the circular dispersion symmetry observed

(a) Extracted energies of Bragg and Mie plasmons
FIG. 3:
◦
◦
as a function of normalised sample thickness for θ = 0
,
, 30
showing anticrossing (dashed lines depict uncoupled modes
to guide eye). (b-d) Reﬂection image plots of energy vs nor-
malised thickness for, (b) θ = 0◦, φ = 0◦, (c) θ = 30◦, φ = 0◦,
(d) θ = 30◦, φ = 30◦.

since the plasmon would need to be delocalized over more
than twenty spherical voids. The latter explanation cor-
responds to an anti-symmetric combination of the two
dipole-allowed Bragg and Mie modes, which gives rise to
a ‘dark’ quadrupolar plasmon state at k=0.

The resonant coupling of the Bragg modes to a given
Mie mode is dependent on their in-plane momentum. Ex-
tracting the mode energies at θ = 0, 30◦ (Fig.3a) shows
that the maximum Rabi splittings of the mixed modes
occur at diﬀerent thicknesses. At normal incidence the
Bragg plasmons are near degenerate close to the Bragg
energy at 2.1eV.

At increasing thickness, the Mie mode comes into res-
onance and an anticrossing is observed at ¯t = 0.4. When
oﬀ normal incidence, the six Bragg modes open up, of
which the lower two are clearly visible. One of these
modes is quickly suppressed by ¯t = 0.3, while the other
shows a Rabi splitting maximized at ¯t > 0.6. Thus the
downwards angular dispersion of both Mie and Bragg
modes causes the maximum coupling to occur for dif-
ferent ¯t at diﬀerent angles. The observed splitting of
the plasmons corresponds to bonding and antibonding
plasmon orbitals. We note however that the coupling is
between a localised and a delocalised plasmon, and thus
rather diﬀerent to electronic states in molecules.

The gap between bonding and anti-bonding mixed
plasmons can be seen more clearly in (Fig.3b-d). The
three images show the energy dependence of the diﬀer-
ent modes at increasing void thickness, tracked through
the reﬂectivity, for incident angles of 0◦,30◦. In the latter
case we show the thickness dependence for both princi-

4

isting in the plasmonic crystal of shallow dishes couple
strongly to Mie modes forming new mixed states. Par-
ticular Bragg modes whose ﬁelds are already stronger in
the dishes lose their extended character and drop into
Mie plasmons. Bragg modes with ﬁelds on the surface
vanish at a critical thickness.

These conclusions are conﬁrmed by experiments on a
large number of samples of diﬀerent pitch (and void di-
ameter), and composition. In each case, the Bragg plas-
mons vanish at a critical thickness just as the lowest lo-
calized modes appear (Fig.4). Currently, exact calcula-
tion of plasmon energies in arrays of truncated spher-
ical voids is not yet possible, though progress is being
made.[18] However, it is interesting to see already the
universal features of the experimental plasmon phase di-
agram (Fig.4b). Plasmon transport is rather diﬀerent in
the regimes of delocalized Bragg modes (coherent plas-
mon transport with scattering and damping) and local-
ized Mie modes (hopping plasmon transport, enabled by
coupling to nearby Bragg modes).

As the Mie modes localize the plasmons, the surface
electric ﬁelds increase in strength, thus enabling many
applications for plasmonic devices. For instance, we have
recently shown that these surfaces are ideal for surface en-
hanced Raman scattering (SERS) which is strongly en-
hanced in the localised Mie regime.[21] The ability to
now predict and engineer appropriate plasmons suited to
speciﬁc pump and emission wavelengths is a drastic im-
provement on previous SERS substrates. This approach
has proved so promising that it is now in commercial
production for a variety of applications in medical and
pharmaceutical screening, homeland security and envi-
ronmental monitoring.[22] Understanding plasmons on
nanostructured surfaces is the gateway to a new genera-
tion of nano-plasmonic devices.

We enthusiastically acknowledge discussions with Ta-
tiana Teperick, Sacha Popov, and Javier Garcia de
Abajo. This work was supported by EPSRC grants
EP/C511786/1, GR/R54194/01. YS was supported by
a JSPS Fellowship for Research Abroad, HEISEI 15.

FIG. 4:
(a) Energy dispersion vs thickness of Au nanovoid
samples of diﬀerent diameter d, mapped by reﬂectivity of TM
◦
polarised light for sample orientations θ = 30
. Light
shade correspond to absorption features. Vertical white line
shows position of Bragg mode collapse, blue line indicates
separation between Bragg modes (low energy) and Mie modes
(high energy). (b) Extracted sample thickness (normalised)
of Bragg mode collapse with increasing void diameter.

◦
, φ = 0

pal sample orientations. In all cases the drop in energy
of the Mie modes can be clearly observed with increas-
ing thickness. At normal incidence, (Fig.3b) the Bragg
modes visible around 2.1eV abruptly disappear at ¯t = 0.4
while a localized Mie state appears at 1.55eV for ¯t > 0.5.
For non-normal incidence, the mode mixing depends on
φ. Examining the two orientations for plasmons travel-
ling either along the necks between voids (φ = 0◦, Fig.3c)
or along the line of voids (φ = 30◦, Fig.3d) reveals the
symmetry of the Bragg modes that mix with the plas-
mons trapped in the voids. In both directions, the low-
est Bragg mode (band 1) abruptly vanishes for ¯t > 0.4.
For φ = 0◦, the next Bragg mode (band 2) around 1.6eV
strongly couples to the Mie mode forming a distinctive
band gap. Along φ = 30◦ a high energy mode emerges
and drops down into the lowest localized mode at 1.55eV,
producing the same band gap. Examining the ﬁeld distri-
butions suggest that this is the upper Bragg mode (band
6) which has its largest electric ﬁeld already within the
void (Fig.1a).

Thus the scenario of localization on these nanostruc-
tured surfaces can be summarized: Bragg plasmons ex-

[1] W.L. Barnes, A. Dereux, and T.W. Ebbesen, Nature

(London) 424, 824 (2003).
[2] http://www.mmphotons.dk;
[3] A.V. Krasavin, A.V. Zayats, and N.I. Zheludev, J. Opt.

A: Pure Appl. Opt. 7, 85 (2005).

[4] A.V. Zayats, and I.I. Smolyaninov, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl.

Opt. 5, 16 (2003).

9463 (2002).

[6] S.C. Hohng, Y.C. Yoon, D.S. Kim, V. Malyarchuk, R.
M¨uller, Ch. Lienau, J.W. Park, K.H. Yoo, J. Kim, H.Y.
Ryu, and Q.H. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 3239 (2002).
[7] T.W. Ebbesen, H.L. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and

P.A. Wolﬀ, Nature (London) 391, 667 (1998).

[8] W.L. Barnes, W.A. Murray, J. Dintinger, E. Devaux, and
T.W. Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 107401 (2004).
[9] H.J. Lezec, and T. Thio, Opt. Express 12, 3629 (2004).
[10] L. Mart´in-Moreno, F.J. Garci´a-Vidal, H.J. Lezec, K.M.
Pellerin, T. Thio, J.B. Pendry, and T.W. Ebbesen, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 86, 1114 (2001).

[11] M.I. Stockman, S.V. Faleev, and D.J. Bergman, Phys.

[12] H. Xu, E.J. Bjerneld, M. K¨all, and L. B¨orjesson, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 4357 (1999).

[13] I.R. Hooper, and J.R. Sambles, Phys. Rev. B 65, 165432

[14] D.J. Bergman, and M.I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

(2002).

027402 (2003).

[5] Z.Q. Tian, B. Ren, and D.Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 106,

Rev. Lett. 87, 167401 (2001).

[15] P.N. Bartlett, P.R. Birkin, and M.A. Ghanem, J. Chem.

[19] M.C. Netti, M.D.B. Charlton, G.J. Parker, and J.J.

Soc. Chem. Commun. 2000, 1671 (2000).

Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 991 (2000).

[16] P.N. Bartlett, J.J. Baumberg, S. Coyle, and M. Abdel-

salam, Faraday Discussion 125, 19 (2003).

[17] S. Coyle, M.C. Netti, J.J. Baumberg, M.A. Ghanem, P.R.
Birkin, P.N. Bartlett, and D.M. Whittaker, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 87, 176801 (2001).

[18] T.V. Teperik, V.V. Popov, and F.J. Garc´ia de Abajo

Phys. Rev. B 71, 085408 (2005).

[20] S. Coyle, G.V. Prakash, J.J. Baumberg, M. Abdelsalam,
and P.N. Bartlett, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 767 (2003).
[21] M. Abdelsalam, P.N. Bartlett, J.J. Baumberg, T.A. Kelf,
S. Pelfrey, and A. Russell, Submitted to Chem. Comm.
[22] www.mesophotonics.co.uk/products/klariteSERS.html

5

