Photoemission Electron Microscopy as a tool for the investigation

of optical near ﬁelds

M. Cinchetti, A. Gloskovskii, S. A. Nepjiko and G. Sch¨onhense

Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at, Institut f¨ur Physik, 55099 Mainz, Germany

Max Planck Institut f¨ur Polymerforschung, 55128 Mainz, Germany

H. Rochholz and M. Kreiter∗

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Photoemission electron microscopy was used to image the electrons photoemitted from specially

tailored Ag nanoparticles deposited on a Si substrate (with its native oxide SiOx). Photoemission

was induced by illumination with a Hg UV-lamp (photon energy cutoﬀ ¯hωU V = 5.0 eV, wavelength

λU V = 250 nm) and with a Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser (¯hωl = 3.1 eV, λl = 400 nm, pulse

width below 200 fs), respectively. While homogeneous photoelectron emission from the metal is

observed upon illumination at energies above the silver plasmon frequency, at lower photon energies

the emission is localized at tips of the structure. This is interpreted as a signature of the local

electrical ﬁeld therefore providing a tool to map the optical near ﬁeld with the resolution of emission

electron microscopy.

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
5
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The intensity of optical ﬁelds may be largely enhanced in the vicinity of nanoscopically

structured metal objects. Extreme local ﬁeld enhancement is believed to be responsible for
the increase of the Raman cross section of organic molecules by up to a factor of 1014 [1]

in the vicinity of stochastically roughened silver ﬁlms. Fluorescence as well is drastically

altered by an enhanced optical near ﬁeld which was shown to improve the performance of

chromophores [2, 3] and semiconductor quantum dots [4] signiﬁcantly. These eﬀects are in

general explained in terms of an increased coupling of a local absorbing or emitting dipole

with both incident and outgoing far ﬁeld photons, such aﬀecting both the optical excitation

and emission process. In analogy to antenna used for radiation of lower frequency, in this

context metal objects can be regarded as antenna for the optical regime. These nanoscopic

antenna are characterised by an overall optical resonance similar to the well-known plasmon

resonance of spherical metal particles [5, 6]. Such resonances have been observed for rods

[7], closely spaced particle dimers [8] and nanorings [9], to name only a few. In all these

cases a strong dependence of the resonance wavelength on the geometry was found. An

important additional requirement for a good antenna are geometrical features of very small

dimension that focus the optical ﬁeld to extremely high intensities in volumes far below the

diﬀraction limit. One prominent example is the nanoscopic gap which is formed between two

almost touching metal spheres [10] or cylinders [11] or between a plane and a sphere [12].

Sharp tips are another important example for nanoscale structures where it could be shown

experimentally [13] that the photophysics of a single ﬂuorescent molecule is signiﬁcantly

altered by the large ﬁeld enhancements, this result being in qualitative agreement with

theory [14].

Mapping of the near ﬁeld distribution down to the nanometer scale is the key to under-

stand and optimize such antenna structures. Fluorescence microscopy [15] has been used

for the mapping of near ﬁelds but this method is restricted to the structure of the near ﬁeld

above the diﬀraction limit. Near ﬁeld optical microscopy has proven to give a resolution

down to some 10 nm [16]. It must be pointed out, though, that metal tips which provide a

good optical resolution form, if approaching the object under study, a highly complex metal

structure which is composed of tip and sample, possessing a nanoscopic gap between tip

and object. The optical response is in turn strongly altered preventing the optical char-

acterization of the sample object alone. Dielectric tips are less perturbing but have only

limited resolution. They have been used to investigate the optical near ﬁelds of several

2

plasmonic nanostructures [17]. The use of almost pointlike probes for the near ﬁeld such as

a single molecule [18] or the end of a carbon nanotube [19] circumvents the aforementioned

problems but the experimental diﬃculties prevent these approaches from being applicable

as a standard method for the investigation of a larger amount of samples. An approach to

use the high resolution of electron microscopy was demonstrated by Yamamoto et al.

[20]

who detected light emission induced by an electron beam and were able to image multipolar

patterns on small silver particles, taking advantage of the superior resolution of electron

optics.

Photoelectron emission has been shown to be enhanced by the increase of the local electri-

cal ﬁeld upon excitation of the particle plasmon of small silver clusters [21]. In this context,

photoemission dynamics of surface-bound silver particles was studied in detail [22] and the

inﬂuence of the collective electron dynamics could be quantiﬁed [23, 24] as well as charg-

ing of the particles [22]. However, in the above mentioned works the photoemission signal

was recorded without lateral resolution. In the present paper it is shown that photoemission

electron microscopy (PEEM) can be used to map the near ﬁeld distribution. Using the same

experimental technique, we have been previously able to localize regions on inhomogeneous

Ag and Cu surfaces where laser illumination excites collective electron modes, or localized

surface plasmons (LSP). Laterally resolved electron energy distribution spectra have shown

that the LSP-induced enhanced near ﬁeld aﬀects the photoemission and its dynamics in a

crucial way [25, 26]. In these experiments the structural features giving rise to the locally

enhanced photoemission yield were not known and remained speculative. For this reason, we

present in this publication experiments on well-deﬁned metal structures that posses sharp

tips as required for high local ﬁeld enhancement.

Nanoscopic crescent-shaped silver objects were prepared on a Si wafer using a combina-

tion of colloid templating, metal ﬁlm deposition and ion beam milling [27]. Figure 1 shows

a typical Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) image of the crescents with a diameter of

roughly 400 nm and a thickness of 50 nm. Photoelectron emission was induced by illumi-

nating the sample with two diﬀerent light sources. A Hg deep-UV lamp (photon energy

cutoﬀ ¯hωU V = 5.0 eV, wavelength λU V ≥ 250 nm), was focused on the sample at an angle
θ = 65◦ with respect to the surface normal. The fundamental of a femtosecond Ti:Sapphire

laser (MaiTai Spectra Physics, wavelength tunable between 750 nm and 850 nm, repetition

rate 80 MHz) was frequency-doubled by a commercial device (3980 Spectra Physics), giving

3

FIG. 1: Scanning electron micrograph of the silver crescents. The inset shows a magniﬁed view

a photon energy tunable between 2.9 and 3.3 eV and a pulse width below 200 fs. For this

experiment the photon energy was kept ﬁxed at ¯hωl = 3.1 eV (λl = 400 nm). The frequency-
doubled beam was focused on the sample at θ = 65◦, from the opposite direction in the same
plane of incidence as the UV lamp. The obtained ﬂuence per pulse was about 6.4 µJ cm−2.

A Fresnel rhomb allowed to adjust the direction of the polarization vector (p-polarization).

The photoemission electron microscope was a commercial instrument (Focus IS-PEEM).

Model calculations were performed in order to illustrate the dependence of the optical re-

sponse of silver on photon energy. For the calculations, the optical response of silver was

described by literature values [28] and a two-dimensional geometry of an inﬁnitely extending

rod with a cross section similar to the crescents was considered. Maxwell equations were

solved with a commercial Finite Element Code (Femlab GMBH, G¨ottingen).

In a PEEM image, the brightness in a given area is proportional to the intensity of

electron emission from that area. Thus, for the interpretation of the data it is important

to know the physical processes leading to electron emission for a certain wavelength of the

incident light. The work function φ of Ag ranges between 4.2 and 4.8 eV [29], depending

on crystal orientation. Upon illumination of the sample with the UV lamp, electrons are

emitted by regular, one-photon photoemission (1PPE), since ¯hωU V > φ. On the other hand,

under laser illumination at λ = 400 nm ¯hωl = 3.1 eV, the photon energy is smaller than the

work function and photoemission requires a multiphoton process, where it can be expected

that two-photon processes as lowest order dominate. In two-photon photoemission (2PPE)

the photoemission intensity is proportional to the forth power of the local electrical ﬁeld

which, especially for LSP-resonant metal particles may signiﬁcantly diﬀer from the ﬁeld

of the incoming wave [24]. The presence of a Fermi edge in the laterally resolved electron

energy distribution spectra recorded from Cu and Ag nanoclusters [25, 26] demonstrate that

4

FIG. 2: High-resolution PEEM images of the same region of the sample.

(a) UV-PEEM image, ¯hωU V = 5.0 eV (exposure time ∆t = 200 s); (b) Schematic drawing to

indicate the position of the silver crescents on the sample. (c) Laser-PEEM image, ¯hωl = 3.1 eV

(exposure time ∆t = 5 s).

processed to enhance the contrast.

The arrows indicate the direction of illumination. Both images (a) and (c) have been digitally

even in this case 2PPE gives a substantial contribution to the recorded electron yield. As

a ﬁrst approximation it can be assumed that in this case the electron emission yield scales

with the square of near ﬁeld photon density [30], which is given by the local electric ﬁeld

to the power 4. Due to the inelastic mean free path of the electrons, PEEM only probes

the ﬁrst few nm (at our energies about 5 nm) from the surface, thus giving a ﬁngerprint of

the electrical ﬁeld in this region. This quantity is crucial to understand the aforementioned

luminescence enhancement eﬀects and is diﬃcult to access by alternative near ﬁeld imaging

techniques. Details of the interaction of the local electric ﬁeld E with the electrons certainly

must take into account the vector character of E as well as the nature of the states from

where electrons are emitted.

Figure 2 (a) and (c) show a UV-PEEM image and a laser-PEEM image of the same

region of the sample, respectively. The photoemission signal of ﬁve silver crescents is visible

in both images.

In particular, in (a) ﬁve ring-like structures can be identiﬁed. To help

the eye of the reader, we added Figure 2 (b) to indicate the position and orientation of

the crescents. In (c) the photoemission yield is enhanced in diﬀerent positions than in (a).

Note that the dark spots visible in Figure 2 (a) are due to defects on the imaging unit of

the photoemission electron microscope and must not be interpreted as part of the electron

5

(a)

(b)

(c)

250 nm

FIG. 3:

(a) Magniﬁcation of the third crescent from the top in Figure 2 (a), ¯hωU V = 5.0 eV.

(b) Magniﬁcation of Figure 2 (c), ¯hωl = 3.1 eV.

(c) Corresponding SEM image of a crescent with identical orientation and scale.

emission map. Figure 3 (a) and (b) show a magniﬁcation of the third crescent from the

top in Figure 2 (a) and (c) for the two illumination modes. The dark spot in the upper

left corner is one of the above mentioned defects. The images for UV and laser excitation

reveal a marked diﬀerence.

In particular, comparison to the orientation of the crescents

(c) suggests that upon UV illumination electron emission is enhanced throughout the metal

structure. Some highly localized features which are diﬀerent for the individual objects are

superimposed on this average behavior. Illumination at λ = 400 nm on the other hand leads

to an enhanced emission in between the tips of the structure. These observations can be

explained by consideration of the dielectric response of silver [28]. At the experimentally

used wavelengths silver has a dielectric function of ǫ (250 nm) = −0.1377 + 3.5046ı and

ǫ (400 nm) = −4.4604 + 0.2147ı, The dominating imaginary part for ǫ (250 nm) indicates

that this radiation corresponds to an energy above the onset of interband transitions. The

dominating negative real part of ǫ (400 nm) is typical for all energies below the interband

transitions: this behavior rules the entire frequency range down to the static limit and may

be termed ”metallic” response.

Figure 4 shows calculations for a cross section through a silver rod in vacuum to illustrate

qualitatively the optical near ﬁeld distribution for these two cases. At λ = 250 nm, there

is an almost homogeneous ﬁeld inside the silver while at λ = 400 nm enhanced and highly

localized optical ﬁelds are observed, especially near to the tips. This calculation must not be

regarded as a quantitative description of the electromagnetic response of the crescents since

they are 50 nm thick structures on an interface between two media with highly diﬀerent

polarizabilities (vacuum and silicon) whereas the calculations are performed on inﬁnitely

extending rods in vacuo. Still, the central conclusion of a qualitatively diﬀerent response

6

FIG. 4: Local magnitude of the electric ﬁeld, calculated for a 2D geometry of silver in vacuum for

light incident from the left with wavelength λU V = 250 nm (a) and λl = 400 nm (b). The gray

scale bar indicates the enhancement factor of the squared ﬁeld amplitude

of the metal objects to optical ﬁelds above and below the onset of interband transitions is

justiﬁed and in agreement with theoretical studies on similar geometries [11, 14].

As a general trend it can be stated that the particle plasmon wavelength given by Re(ǫ) =

−2 roughly divides a regime of metallic behaviour at lower photon energies where large

ﬁeld enhancements and optical resonances are observed from a non-metallic regime, i.e. a

response without signiﬁcant change of the ﬁeld distribution of the exciting photon beam

at higher energies. Our experimental observations can be interpreted along these lines,

homogeneous electron emission from the entire silver surface should appear as a 1:1 image

of the geometrical shape of the crescents for the case of UV illumination above the particle

plasmon energy. This image is expected to be smeared out due to convolution with the

point spread function of the photoemission electron microscope, explaining the observation

of ring-like structures in Figure 2 (a). The localized diﬀerences from ring to ring are partly

due to imperfections in the crescents which may inﬂuence the electron emission process in

a way independent of the optical ﬁeld strength (topographic contrast). It is noted, though,

that for silver particles the peculiar property of a blue-shifted plasmon frequency for very

small particles is observed [31] which may point towards another possible source for localized

highly emissive spots at grains or cracks in the metal crescents in the UV. As a consequence

of these superimposed eﬀects, the signature of the opening of the ring, which should be in

principle visible, is highly obstructed. In the laser-PEEM image (Figure 3 (b)), the enhanced

2PPE yield at the gap position points towards a locally enhanced electrical optical ﬁeld close

to the tips of the structure in agreement with the behavior that can be expected for a photon

energy in vicinity of the particle plasmon energy.

7

In summary, it has been shown experimentally for deﬁned metal structures that local op-

tical ﬁelds can be imaged directly by PEEM, a technique which can reach a lateral resolution

down to 20 nm [32]. This provides an easy-to-use method for the quantitative investigation
of local ﬁeld distributions (E2 or E4) at the surface. Note that our approach provides in-

formation that is diﬀerent from the light emission induced by electron beams which was

reported already [20]. In such experiments photons are generated by electrons passing the

optical antenna, such giving information on the 3D electrical ﬁeld distribution around the

antenna, similarly to SNOM-experiments[16, 17, 18, 19]. The PEEM method therefore

promises to shed more light on the optical near ﬁeld right at the metal surface, which up to

now has been very diﬃcult to access quantitatively. It should be noted that description of

the electromagnetic response in terms of a macroscopic dielectric function ǫ (ω) can only be

regarded as a ﬁrst approximation near the surface of the material from where the photoelec-

trons are emitted. For the metallic structure the microﬁelds in this region are inﬂuenced by

the oscillating surface charges, being located in the electron spill-out region [31]. In the gap

of the crescents the photoemission signal comes from the surface region of the oxide-covered

silicon. Here, the local ﬁeld is modiﬁed by the properties of the vacuum-substrate interface.

For both cases the near ﬁeld cannot be treated properly using an ansatz for a sharp interface

between vacuum and material. It will be a challenging task for the future to develop a more

reﬁned model giving a proper description of the ﬁeld right at the surface. To reach this goal,

we are also working on an optimized sample preparation with reduced individual diﬀerences

between the objects under study. Then, more experiments in combination with reliable

theoretical predictions and independent purely optical reference experiments are planned to

achieve a complete understanding of the factors inﬂuencing the image formation.

We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from BMBF projects 03N8702 and 03N6500.

∗ Electronic address: kreiter@mpip-mainz.mpg.de

[1] S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science 275, 1102 (1997).

[2] A. Wokaun, Mol. Phys. 56, 1 (1985).

[3] J. R. Lakowicz, C. D. Geddes, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka, Z. Gryczynski, K. Aslan, J. Lukomska,

E. Matveeva, J. Zhang, R. Badugu, et al., J. Fluor. 14, 425 (2004).

8

[4] K. T. Shimizu, W. K. Woo, B. R. Fisher, H. J. Eisler, and M. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,

[5] C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huﬀmann, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles (John

117401 (2002).

Wiley, 1983).

[6] U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical properties of metal clusters (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1992).

[7] C. S¨onnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, O. Wilson, and P. Mulvaney,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 3010 (2002).

[8] T. Okamoto and I. Yamaguchi, J. Phys. Chem. 107, 10321 (2003).

[9] J. Aizpurua, P. Hanarp, D. S. Sutherland, M. K. Garnett, W. Bryant, and F. J. G. de Abajo,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 057401 (2003).

[10] P. K. Aravind, A. Nitzan, and H. Metiu, Surf. Sci. 110, 189 (1981).

[11] J. P. Kottmann and O. J. F. Martin, Optics Express 8, 655 (2001).

[12] P. K. Aravind and H. Metiu, Surf. Sci. 124 (1983).

[13] A. Kramer, W. Trabesinger, B. Hecht, and U. P. Wild, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 1652 (2002).

[14] J. P. Kottmann and O. J. F. Martin, Phys. Rev. B 64, 235402 (2001).

[15] H. Ditlbacher, J. R. Krenn, N. Felidj, B. Lamprecht, G. Schider, A. Leitner, and F. Aussenegg,

Appl. Phys. Lett 80, 404 (2002).

[16] H. G. Frey, F. Keilmann, A. Kriele, and R. Guckenberger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 5030 (2002).

[17] J. R. Krenn, J. C. Weeber, A. Dereux, E. Bourillot, J. P. Goudonnet, B. Schider, A. Leitner,

F. Aussenegg, and C. Girard, Phys. Rev. B 60, 5029 (1999).

[18] J. Michaelis, C. Hettich, J. Mlynek, and V. Sandoghdar, Nature 405, 325 (2000).

[19] R. Hillenbrand, F. Keilmann, P. Hanarp, D. S. Sutherland, and J. Aizpurua, Appl. Phys. Lett.

[20] N. Yamamoto, K. Araya, and F. J. G. de Abajo, Phys. Rev. B 64, 205419 (2001).

[21] J. Lehmann, M. Merschdorf, W. Pfeiﬀer, A. Thon, S. Voll, and G. Gerber, Phys. Rev. Lett.

83 (2003).

85, 2921 (2000).

[22] W. Pfeiﬀer, C. Kennerknecht, and M. Merschdorf, Appl. Phys. A 78, 1011 (2004).

[23] M. Scharte, R. Porath, T. Ohms, M. Aeschlimann, J. R. Krenn, H. Ditlbacher, F. R.

Aussenegg, and A. Liebsch, Appl. Phys. B 73, 305 (2001).

[24] M. Merschdorf, C. Kennerknecht, and W. Pfeiﬀer, Phys. Rev. B 70, 193401 (2004).

[25] M. Cinchetti, D. A. Valdaitsev, A. Gloskovskii, A. Oelsner, S. Nepijko, and G. Sch¨onhense, J.

9

Electron. Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 137-140, 249 (2004).

[26] M. Cinchetti and G. Sch¨onhense, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 17, 1319 (2004).

[27] J. Shumaker-Parry, H. Rochholz, and M. Kreiter, Adv. Mater. accepted (????).

[28] P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B 6, 4370 (1972).

[29] H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys. 48, 4729 (1977).

[30] V. M. Shalaev, C. Douketis, T. Haslett, T. Stuckless, and M. Moskovits, Phys. Rev. B 53,

11193 (1996).

[31] A. Liebsch, Phys. Rev. B 48, 11317 (1993).

[32] C. Ziethen, O. Schmidt, G. H. Fecher, C. M. Schneider, G. Sch¨onhense, R. Fr¨omter, M. Seider,

K. Grzelakowski, M. Merkel, D. Funnemann, et al., J. Electron. Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom.

88-91, 983 (1998).

10

