5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Adaptive aperture defocused digital speckle
photography

Jose M. Diazdelacruz
e-mail: jmdiaz@etsii.upm.es
Department of Applied Physics,
Faculty for Industrial Engineering,
Polytechnic University of Madrid.
Jose Gutierrez Abascal 2. 28006 Madrid. Spain

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Speckle photography can be used to monitor deformations of solid sur-
faces. The measuring characteristics, such as range or lateral resolution
depend heavily on the optical recording and illumination set-up. This
paper shows how, by the addition of two suitably perforated masks, the
optical aperture of the system may vary from point to point, accordingly
adapting the range and resolution to local requirements. Furthermore, by
illuminating narrow areas, speckle size can be chosen independently from
the optical aperture, thus lifting an important constraint on its choice.
The new technique in described within the framework of digital defocused
speckle photography under normal collimated illumination. Mutually lim-
iting relations between range of measurement and spatial frequency res-
olution turn up both locally and when the whole surface under study is
considered. They are deduced and discussed in detail.

Keywords: Defocused speckle photography, tilt measurement

1 Introduction

When a solid object undergoes a load change, its deformation ﬁeld exhibits
diﬀerent behaviours over the surface. For instance, when a vertical force is
applied at the free end of a horizontal cantilever beam, slope changes are bigger
and more uniform in the vicinity of the load than near the supported end.[1]
In other words, the ranges for spatial frequencies and magnitudes of the slope
variation ﬁelds are not evenly distributed over the object surface.

On the other hand, when optical methods are used to measure the surface
deformation, they are generally tuned to provide adequate characteristics for
the whole surface, so that there are one range of measurement and one lateral

1

resolution. This may lead to compromise solutions where the high values ex-
pected in some areas reduce the lateral resolution available even in points with
anticipated lower values.

Defocused speckle photography has long been used to measure the distribu-
tion of out-of-plane rotations over a surface under load changes. However, its
measuring ranges for rotation and spatial frequency are the same over the whole
area under study. Moreover, when digital recording systems are used, these val-
ues are strongly conditioned by the camera resolution. This paper describes a
new enhancement of the system that makes its capabilities more adaptable both
by allowing diﬀerent measuring characteristics over the surface and by untying
their relation to the camera resolution.

When a visible laser beam is scattered by a rough surface, the reﬂected light
intensity exhibits a grainy distribution, called speckle pattern. The origin of this
phenomenon is the interference of the light coming from all the points of the
surface. If non-coherent light is used, the interference patterns vary so quickly
that only the average intensity is observed and therefore speckles only appear
under coherent illumination.

The intensity pattern of the light scatterd from a rough surface can be col-
lected by an optical system and recorded on a plane. Each set-up determines
the way in which the light from diﬀerent points in the surface interfere and thus
the amplitudes, spatial frequencies, average speckle size and other characteris-
tics of the intensity pattern at the recording plane.[2] For a given set-up, the
speckle distribution represents a unique signature of the surface under observa-
tion. When the surface undergoes a mechanical transformation the interference
combinations at every point in the recording plane are altered, but sometimes
they can be partially reconstructed in a diﬀerent point at the recording plane.
In this case, the speckle pattern is said to be shifted (displaced) and decorrelated
(slightly modiﬁed).

Speckle photographic techniques explore the possibilities of determining the
object transformation from the speckle shift that takes place at the recording
plane. When it is at the back focal plane of the optical set-up, the method is
called Defocused Speckle Photography (DSP). If a digital detector (as a CCD
camera) is used to record the speckle pattern then the system is said to be a De-
focused Digital Speckle Photographic system (DDSP). Under normal collimated
illumination, this tecnique is sensitive to out-of-plane rotations (or tilts) of the
surface under observation. The speckles are displaced in the back focal plane
of the lens by a distance which is proportional to the rotation angle (provided
it is small).[3] It will be assumed that the investigated area is part of a rough
planar surface.

The recorded speckle pattern (or specklegram) is stored in a computer. Then
a load change is applied to the object and a second specklegram is obtained.
Once the two specklegrams are available, computer algorithms are applied to
ﬁnd the speckle displacement with sub-pixel accuracy. Finally, the distribution
of the tilt throughout the area is evaluated.

When digital recording is used, speckle size considerations may play an im-
portant role in the design of the optical system. Speckles should not be smaller

2

than the detector cell, because the speckle pattern would be spatially averaged
in the recorded specklegram. This leads to a reduction in the speckle contrast
and eventualy to a total loss of the pattern. On the other hand, if speckles are
much wider than the detector cells, many pixels are necessary to compute the
speckle displacement, leading to poorer lateral resolution. Moreover, random
errors in the results of digital processing depend on speckle size, so that it should
be kept as small as posible, yet taking into account the previous considerations.
Some studies have been published in order to set the optimal speckle size in
digital speckle photography, so that its optimum value s∗ lies close to

where w is the pitch of the cells in the sensor array.[4, 5, 6]

Speckle size in the recording plane of a defocused speckle photographic sys-
tem is determined by the narrowest aperture am of the light arriving at a point
of the detector.

and therefore, it should be assured that

∗ ≈ 2w

s

s =

1.22λf
am

am ≈

1.22λf
s∗

(1)

(2)

(3)

As alredy stated, defocused speckle photography is used to assess the distri-
bution of slope variations over a surface when a load change is produced. The
aperture of the optical system determines both the range and the lateral reso-
lution of measurement. It will be shown that big apertures allow larger ranges
and narrower resolutions and small apertures work in the opposite way.

The core of the method described in this paper is the use of a pair of coupled
masks to illuminate and collect light from the surface into the digital camera.
The masks should be suitably perforated so as to provide the speckle size, eﬀec-
tive aperture, lateral resolution and measuring range from a distributed system
approach. In this paper, the mathematical relations satisﬁed by the main pa-
rameters and their mutual limitations are analysed.

Previously described implementations of the method exhibit two limiting

characteristics:

a) the optical system has one aperture, and thus, the measuring range and
lateral resolution are shared by all the points in the surface under obser-
vation.

b) the aperture of the system sets the already mentioned measuring char-
acteristics and the speckle size, so that it is not possible to tune them
independently.

The system presented here relays on a slightly modiﬁed implementation that
improves on the afore mentioned problems. First, the optical set-up is described
and then its main features are analysed.

3

In short, as alredy stated, lateral resolution and maximum range depend
on the eﬀective aperture of the optical system, so that, in order to relieve the
aperture determination from speckle size considerations, we use an illumination
mask that produces an illumination pattern made of a discrete set of narrow
circles of diameter a, so that the speckle size is primarily determined by a.
Besides, a second mask is added in order to assign a diﬀerent entrance pupil for
every illuminated area. Therefore, it is possible to have diﬀerent speckle sizes,
lateral resolutions and measuring ranges over the illuminated area.

Recording areas and their individual cells are often rectangular, although in
this work, for the purpose of simplicity, they are assumed to be square. In the
following sections, the sides of the sensing area and the individual cell squares
will be supposed to be b, w, respectively. Besides, a focal length f , an object
to lens optical distance d, an L × L square observed area and a lens aperture
diameter D are assumed. Further, in order to use the maximum recording area,
the following relation

will be supposed to hold.

2 Antecedents

The ﬁrst paper describing a defocused two-exposure method to measure out-
of-plane rotations was due to Tiziani,[7] and was later extended for vibration
analysis.[8] If normal illumination and observation are used, the speckle shift at
the recording plane is given by[9]

b
f

=

L
d

dx = 2f β

dy = −2f α

(4)

(5)

(6)

where α, β are the (small) rotation angles around the x, y axis of a cartesian
system placed on the mean plane of the object surface and f is the focal length
of the recording system. Lateral displacements do not appreciably alter these
values.

Gregory considered divergent illumination and showed that when the optical
system is focused on the plane than contains the image of the point source
considering the object surface as a mirror, the speckle shift only depends on
out-of-plane tilts.[10, 11, 12] Chiang and Juang described a method to measure
the change in slope by defocused systems.[13] A great number of later papers
document the use of defocused speckle photography to measure in-plane and
out-of-plane rotations and strains.[14, 15, 16, 17]

Today CCD cameras store the specklegrams taken before and after the me-
chanical transformation in a digital computer and adequate algorithms reveal
the speckle shift distribution with sub-pixel accuracy.[18, 19, 20, 21]

Fig.1 represents a typical set-up for measuring slope chages in a solid sur-
face. A laser source LS emits a light beam, half of which goes through beam

4

(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:6)

(cid:3)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:7)

(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:2)

(cid:3)(cid:2)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

Figure 1: DIDDSP set-up.

5

splitter BS and reaches the rough surface S. Part of the light scattered from S is
reﬂected by BS and recorded at the back focal plane R of lens L1. Henceforth,
this system will be refered to as DIDDSP(direct illumination digital defocused
speckle photography) set-up.

For a defocused recording system, the speckle size is given by[22]

When a part of the object surface undergoes an out-of-plane rotation α, the
light scattered from it experiments a rotation 2α and completely falls oﬀ the
aperture of the system when

D
d
Thus the maximum measurable rotation is

2α >

Neglecting diﬀraction eﬀects, the diameter of the area which reﬂects light to
the same point at the detector plane is D. Consequently, the lateral resolution
∆ of the measurements is equal to D

The relation

represents the mutual limitation on range and spatial frequency, that holds for
any aperture.

With regard to the requirements posed by the use of a digital system, it
follows that if the optimum speckle size is s∗, the diameter D should be chosen
according to

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

and hence,

3 AADDSP

In Fig.2 the new system is depicted. A beam from the laser source LS is ex-
panded and spatially ﬁltered to obtain a collimated beam at least as wide as
the area under study. The beam is splitted by the perforated mask IM into a
set of narrow beams of diameter ai, provided that the wavelength λ is much
smaller than ai (λ ≪ ai). A beam splitter BS lets half of the radiation arrive
at the diﬀuse surface Σ. The light reﬂected by Σ reaches BS again, half of its
intensity goes through a second perforated mask AM and is ﬁnally recorded on

s =

1.22λf
D

Γ =

D
2d

Γ
∆

=

1
2d

D =

1.22λf
s∗

Γ =

∆ =

1.22f λ
2ds∗
1.22λf
s∗

6

(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:1) (cid:2)

(cid:8)(cid:9)

(cid:0)(cid:6)

(cid:3)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:7)

(cid:10)(cid:9)

(cid:11)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)(cid:2)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

Figure 2: AADDSP set-up.

the back focal plane of lens L1. The circular holes in AM are aligned with the
rays coming from the centers of the holes in IM to the center of L1. We will re-
fer to this set-up as Adaptive Aperture Defocused Digital Speckle Photographic
(AADDSP) system. An equivalent uniaxial system is depicted in Fig.3.

The Fig.4 represents an IM (a), a corresponding AM (b) and the resulting

specklegram (c).

Each collimated beam emerging from IM illuminates a circle Σi of diameter
ai in the object surface Σ. From each point in Σi parts a light cone limited by
a corresponding circle ei of diameter ci in AM. The aperture diameter D of L1
is to be computed so as to exclude the light that pasess trough any other circle
(ej, j 6= i) in AM, yet letting all the radiation from the corresponding circle (ei)
reach the recording plane, where it forms a speckled circle ri of diameter gi.

The speckle size at ri depends mainly on the narrowest aperture encountered

by the cone, so that by assuring the condition

the speckle size is made practically independent from ci and can be approxi-
mated by

(14)

(15)

ci ≥ 4ai

si =

1.22λf
ai

7

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:12)

(cid:13)

(cid:9)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:10)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:11)

(cid:4)

Figure 3: AADDSP uniaxial equivalent.

(cid:14)

(cid:23)

(cid:15)

(cid:24)

(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:20)

(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:20)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Figure 4: a. Illumination mask (IM); b. Aperture mask (AM); c. Speckle circles
at the recording plane.

(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:20)

8

Condition 14 also limits the decorrelation and intensity fading that occurs to-
wards the border of the circle.

The optimum speckle size s∗ depends mainly on the camera resolution, so

that the diameters ai should all be equal to

Next, it has to be assured that the circles ei on AM do not overlap, provided
that the circles ri in the recording plane do not. This means that the AM circles
diameter ci and the AM width p must satisfy

where gi is the diameter of the speckle circle in the detector which is given by

and

being m, n the distances from IM to the object and the lens surfaces respectively,
so that

On the other hand, spatial consiterations limit the posible values for m

so that

which entails

L ≤ m ≤

=

d
2

f L
2b

f ≥ 2b

that is easily satisﬁed by current popular CCD cameras.

As yet another restriction, it is necessary to avoid laser from an illuminated
spot to get through the aperture of another spot and reach the entrance of the
system. If the separation between the centers of two neighboring holes at IM is
δ, the distance between the centers of the corresponding circles at AM is

that determines an angle for the deviated ray from the chief one

a =

1.22λf
s∗

p
ci

≥

b
gi

gi = f

p = n

ci
m

b
f

m ≤ n

m ≥ L

δc =

nδ
d

δc −

c
2

m

9

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

which has to be stopped, thus

c
2

δc −

m

D
2

≤ d

=

δ −

n
m

d
2m

c

Nevertheless, the aperture must let laser from the corresponding circles at IM
go through AM, so that

Taking into account that the measuring range γ for the tilts is given by

we arrive at

γd ≤

≤

δ − γd

so that the maximum measuring range for all the surface is

which implies a minimum lateral resolution ∆ at the points where the maximum
range is allowed, so that

2mdΓ
n
which is further limited by the non-overlapping condition for the circles at

∆ ≥

(31)

the detector plane

which, taking into account condition 20, is more restrictive, so that

In order to make condition 14 easier to fulﬁll, and considering Eq.28, the set-up
will be arranged so that

Substitution for D in Eq.33 yields

The term b/f in popular cameras is on the order of 0.2.

If a maximum
measuring range of 1 × 10−2 rad is desired then a 10 × 10 (or bigger) matrix can
be obtained.

The condition 14 translates into

D ≥ c

d
m

γ =

c
2m

D
2

Γ =

n
m

D
2d

∆ ≥ 2dΓ

∆ = 2dΓ

m = n =

d
2

L
∆

=

b
2f Γ

4a < 2γm

10

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

which for γ = 1 × 10−2 rad and d = 100 cm yields

a < 2.5mm

which is satisﬁed for typical detector cells whose width w is on the order of 10
microns and require values of a

assuming λ ≈ 0.5 microns, f = 20 mm, w = 12.2 microns. Or, from another
perspective

which, after substitution for the previous values, yields

a ≈

1.22f λ
2w

≈ 0.5mm

γ >

2.44λf
wd

γ > 0.0025

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

4 Discussion

As stated earlier, Γ is the maximum measuring range and ∆ is its associated
minimum lateral resolution, so that the sampled points in the surface may have
better lateral resolutions (δ ≤ ∆), although at the cost of lower ranges (γ ≤ Γ).
Taking into account Eq.35 and Eq.4, it follows that the possible values of ∆, Γ
for AADDSP are mutually limited by Eq.10, exactly as for DIDDSP. Once Γ, ∆
are set in AADDSP, the measuring range γ and the lateral resolution δ for each
sampled point in the surface can be chosen taking into account their mutually
limiting relation

− Γ

γ ≤

δ
d
so that all possible pairs (δ, γ) are those contained in the hatched area in Fig.5.
The maximum resolvable spatial frequency corresponds to a lateral resolution
∆
2 , with the further restriction arising from condition 39. The possible values
for ΓDI , ∆DI using conventional DIDDSP are those placed on the dashed line
in Fig.5. The main advantages of AADDSP are the possibility of having dif-
ferent measuring characteristics throughout the surface and the tunning of D
with attention only to the measuring characteristics, because the speckle size is
independently set by the choice of a.

(41)

For λ ≈ 0.5 microns, f = 20 mm, w = 12.2 microns, d = 100 cm, DIDDSP
would require values of D = 0.5 mm and ΓDI = 0.5 × 10−3 radians, ∆DI = 0.5
mm. With AADDSP, there is an ample choice for Γ. If Γ = 1 × 10−2, then a
minimum resolution δ can vary from 5 to 10 mm.

Assuming a maximum measuring range Γ, the value of D is established by

the equation

D = 2dΓ

(42)

11

(cid:6) (cid:7)

(cid:14)

(cid:4) (cid:5)

(cid:13)(cid:13)

(cid:9)(cid:9) (cid:11)(cid:12)

(cid:13)

(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:9)(cid:9) (cid:11)(cid:12)

(cid:0)

(cid:3)

(cid:1)(cid:2)

(cid:8)

(cid:1) (cid:5)

Figure 5: Measuring range versus lateral resolution for DIDDSP and AADDSP.

Accordingly, the possible values of δ, γ lie in the segment joining the points
(∆, Γ), (∆/2, 0) excluding those which do not satisfay condition 39. This con-
dition may be rewritten as

which entails

γ ≥ 8ΓDI

∆ ≥ 8∆DI

(43)

(44)

so that for the same optical and recording system, the worst lateral resolution
in AADDSP is allways at least eight times poorer than in DIDDSP. However,
this drawback may be outweighed by the advantages that will be mentioned in
the following.

As a ﬁrst advantage of the new method stands its greater range of measure-
ment, which is at least eight times larger than in DIDDSP, assuming the same
digital camera. A second advantage is the possibility of diﬀerent sensitivities in
measuring tilts at diﬀerent points of the surface. The DIDDSP method has one
single value for measuring range and lateral resolution, which can be matched
by AADDSP in the maximum range points, although this technique allows ﬁner
lateral resolutios in other points at the cost of smaller ranges, according to the
relation represented by segment AB in Fig.5.

The third advantage of AADDSP is that the requirements imposed by the
recording system (speckle size) can be met without restraining the choice pos-
sibilities for range or lateral resolution. This is because the speckle size is set
by properly choosing the diameter a of the holes in the illumination mask. In
DIDDSP, it was the speckle size what set the aperture and thus the measuring
characteristics. Moreover, in many cases (such as plate bending analysis), the

12

practical values of slope change allowed by the size of the recording cells in
DIDDSP fall too short and AADDSP ﬁnds its primary applications.

If abstraction is made of speckle and pixel sizes, (for instance, by considering
diﬀerent optic elements) the DIDDSP technique may be tuned so that ∆DI , ΓDI
may lay on any point of segment AB in Fig.5. For AADDSP, it is a segment
(not just a point) what can be chosen, and it is any segment whose slope is
twice the one of AB and whose right-top end lies on AB.

References

[1] Belendez T, Neipp C, Belendez A. Large and small deﬂections of a cantilever

beam. European Journal of Physics 2002;23:371-9.

[2] Goodman JW. Statistical properties of laser speckle patterns. In Dainty JC,
editor. Laser Speckle and Related Phenomena , Berlin: Springer Verlag;
1975, p. 9-75.

[3] Jones R, Wykes C. Holographic and Speckle Interferometry . 2nd ed. New

York: Cambridge University Press; 1989.

[4] Sj¨odahl M, Benckert LR. Systematic and random errors in electronic speckle

photography. Appl Opt 1994;32:7461-71.

[5] Sj¨odahl M. Accuracy in electronic speckle photography. Appl Opt 1997; 36:

2875-85.

[6] Sj¨odahl M. Some recent advances in electronic speckle photography. Opt

Laser Eng 1998;29:125-44.

[7] Tiziani H. A study of the use of laser speckle to measure small tilts of

optically rough surfaces accurately. Opt Commun 1972;5:271-4.

[8] Tiziani H. Vibration analysis and deformation measurement. In: Erf RK,

editor. Speckle Metrology, New York: Academic; 1978, p. 73-110.

[9] Rastogi PK. Techniques of Displacement and Deformation Measurements
in Speckle Metrology. In: Sirohi RR, editor. Speckle Metrology , NewYork:
Marcel Dekker; 1993, p. 41-98.

[10] Gregory DA. Basic physical principles of defocused speckle photography: a

tilt topology inspection technique. Opt Laser Technol 1976;8:201-13.

[11] Gregory DA. Speckle scatter, aﬃne geometry and tilt topology. Opt Com-

mun 1977;20:1-5.

[12] Gregory DA. Topological speckle and structural inspection. In: Erf RK,

editor. Speckle Metrology, New York: Academic; 1978, p. 183-223.

[13] Chiang FP, Juang RM. Laser speckle interferometry for plate bending prob-

lems. Appl Opt 1976;15:2199-204.

13

[14] Ennos AE, Virdee MS. Laser speckle photography as an alternative
to holographic interferometry fot measuring plate deformation. Opt Eng
1982;21:478-82.

[15] Chiang FP, Juang RM. Vibration analysis of plate and shell by laser speckle

interferometry. Opt Acta 1976;23:997-1009.

[16] Schwieger H, Banken J. Speckle photography for deformation analysis of

bent plates. Mater Pruef 1985;27:153-6.

[17] Sj¨odahl M. Electronic speckle photography: measurement of in-plane strain
ﬁelds through the use of defocused laser speckle. Appl Opt 1995;34:5799-5808.

[18] Sutton MA, Wolters WJ, Peters WH, Ranson WF, McNeill SR. Determi-
nation of displacements using an improved digital correlation method. Com-
puter Vision 1983;1:133-9.

[19] Chen DJ, Chiang FP, Tan YS, Don HD. Digital speckle-displacement mea-
surement using a complex spectrum method. Appl Opt 1993;32:1839-49.

[20] Sj¨odahl M, Benckert LR. Electronic speckle photography: analysis of
an algorithm giving the displacement with subpixel accuracy. Appl Opt
1993;32:2278-84.

[21] Amodio D, Broggato GB, Campana F, Newaz GM. Digital Speckle Correla-
tion for Strain Measurement by Image Analysis. Exp Mech 2003;34:396-402.

[22] Cloud G. Optical Methods of Engineering Analysis. New York: Cambridge

University Press; 1998.

14

