5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photoluminescence measurements of quantum-dot-containing semiconductor microdisk resonators
using optical ﬁber taper waveguides

Kartik Srinivasan,1, ∗ Andreas Stintz,2 Sanjay Krishna,2 and Oskar Painter1
1Thomas J. Watson, Sr., Laboratory of Applied Physics,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
2Center for High Technology Materials, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Fiber taper waveguides are used to improve the efﬁciency of room temperature photoluminescence measure-
ments of AlGaAs microdisk resonant cavities with embedded self-assembled InAs quantum dots. As a near-ﬁeld
collection optic, the ﬁber taper improves the collection efﬁciency from microdisk lasers by a factor of ∼ 15-100
times in comparison to conventional normal incidence free-space collection techniques. In addition, the ﬁber
taper can serve as a efﬁcient means for pumping these devices, and initial measurements employing ﬁber pump-
ing and collection are presented. Implications of this work towards chip-based cavity quantum electrodynamics
experiments are discussed.

PACS numbers: 42.60.Da, 42.50.Pq, 42.70.Qs

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ability to efﬁciently couple light into and out of semi-
conductor microcavities is an important aspect of many mi-
crophotonic technologies1, and plays a vital role in chip-based
implementations of cavity quantum electrodynamics (cQED)
for quantum networking and cryptography2,3,4. While some
geometries, such as micropillar cavities, exhibit highly direc-
tional emission that can be effectively collected5,6, coupling
to wavelength-scale semiconductor microcavities is in general
non-trivial4,7,8,9, due to a number of factors. These include
the size disparity between the modes of the microcavity and
those of standard free-space and ﬁber optics, as well as the
refractive index difference between semiconductors and glass
or air, as well as the potentially complicated cavity mode pro-
ﬁles sustained by these devices. One technique that we have
recently employed to couple efﬁciently to semiconductor mi-
crocavities is evanescent coupling through an optical ﬁber ta-
per waveguide10.

The ﬁber taper11,12 is simply a standard single mode ﬁber
that has been heated and stretched down to a minimum di-
ameter on the order of a wavelength. Such ﬁber tapers
have been used as near-ideal coupling channels for glass-
to-glass coupling with silica-based microcavities such as
microspheres13,14,15,16 and microtoroids17. Our recent exper-
iments have indicated that they can also serve as efﬁcient
couplers to high-refractive index semiconductor-based de-
vices, such as photonic crystal waveguides18, photonic crystal
cavities10,19 and microdisks20,21. Here, we consider the use
of ﬁber tapers within active semiconductor devices consisting
of AlGaAs microdisk cavities with embedded InAs quantum
dots21.

In Section II, we qualitatively describe the issues addressed
in this paper, as well as the methods used in device fabrica-
tion and the experimental setup we use.
In Section III, we
brieﬂy review passive measurements in the 1200 nm wave-
length band to determine the intrinsic optical losses of the op-
tical resonant cavities under study. In Section IV, we present
experimental results demonstrating the improvements that re-

sult when free-space collection is replaced by ﬁber-based col-
lection in photoluminescence measurements, while in Section
V, we present initial results on microdisk lasers that employ
both ﬁber pumping and ﬁber collection. Finally, in Section
VI, we consider some of the applications of this work to fu-
ture experiments.

II. PRELIMINARY DISCUSSION AND EXPERIMENTAL
METHODS

The speciﬁc devices we consider in this work are AlGaAs
microdisk cavities with embedded quantum dots (QDs). The
epitaxy used is shown in Table I, and consists of a single
layer of InAs quantum dots embedded in an InGaAs quantum
well22, which is in turn sandwiched between layers of AlGaAs
and GaAs to create a 255 nm thick waveguide. This DWELL
(short for dot-in-a-well) material has a room temperature
ground state emission peak at around 1190 nm (Fig. 3(a)), and
is grown on top of a 1.5 µm Al0.70Ga0.30As layer that eventu-
ally serves as a support pedestal for the microdisk. Fabrica-
tion of the microdisks (Fig. 1) is accomplished through the
following series of steps: (i) deposition of a 200 nm SixNy
mask layer, (ii) electron-beam lithography and a subsequent
reﬂow of the resist, (iii) inductively-coupled plasma reactive
ion etch (ICP-RIE) of the SixNy layer, (iv) ICP-RIE of the QD-
containing waveguide layer, (v) photolithography and isola-
tion of the microdisk onto a mesa stripe that is several microns
above the rest of the chip (Fig. 1(b)), and (vi) HF acid etch of
the Al0.70Ga0.30As layer to form the pedestal which supports
the disk. The fabricated microdisks in this work are D ∼4.5
µm in diameter.

The free-space collection from a whispering gallery mode
(WGM) of a microdisk is a function of a number of factors,
including the position and numerical aperture (NA) of the col-
lection lens, the radiation pattern, and the quality factor (Q)
of the resonant mode. Optical losses from the microdisk in-
clude not only the (ideal) radiation due to radial tunneling of
light from the disk periphery, but also scattering losses due to
surface roughness imperfections at the disk edge and material

2

TABLE I: Epitaxy for 1-DWELL microcavity lasers.

Layer

Materials

Thickness

Surface cap layer

GaAs

InAs

2.4 monolayer

Barrier layer

In0.15Ga0.85As

Top waveguide
layer

Top waveguide
layer

Quantum well
layer
Quantum dot layer

Bottom waveguide
layer

Bottom waveguide
layer

Sacriﬁcial buffer
layer
Substrate

Al0.30Ga0.70As

GaAs

In0.15Ga0.85As

GaAs

Al0.30Ga0.70As

Al0.70Ga0.30As

◦
A
◦
A

◦
A

100

400

740

◦
A

60

◦
A
◦
A

10

740

◦
A

500

15000

◦
A

GaAs

N/A

FIG. 1: (a)-(b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of fab-
ricated microdisk structures. Image (b) shows the isolation mesa that
is incorporated in order to aid in the taper testing. An optical ﬁber
taper aligned to the side of a microdisk is also visible in this image.

absorption. For high-refractive index (n ∼ 3.5) III-V semicon-
ductor microdisks, surface roughness scattering is typically
the dominate form of radiation from the microcavity. The in-
trinsic radiation loss of semiconductor microdisks is almost
negligible in all cases, save the smallest of microdisks; the
radiation Q of the lowest radial order WGM of the D ∼ 4.5
µm microdisks studied here is greater than 1016 at the QD
emission wavelength of 1200 nm, and is greater than 106 for
D ∼ 1.5 µm. As such, any light that is collected through free-
space methods is the result of scattering of the WGM off im-
perfections in the microdisk8, a relatively inefﬁcient and non-
directional process. Bulk material absorption and absorption
due to surface states also play a role, and for even high-purity
(nominally undoped) AlGaAs microdisks we have found ab-
sorption losses on par with scattering losses in the 1.2-1.5 µm
wavelength range for D ∼ 5 µm microdisks fabricated using
the above described procedure (note that absorption losses
rapidly increased below 1 µm wavelength, an effect we are
currently studying further). This results in a situation where
the more perfect the microdisk is made (through reduction in
surface roughness), and the further the Q factor is improved,
the more difﬁcult it becomes to collect light from the resonant
modes. Although there may be some potential in modifying
the disk geometry4,8 to improve this situation (for example, by
etching a shallow second-order grating in the microdisk sur-
face), the ability to do this while maintaining high Q factors
could be of potential difﬁculty. The most successful method to
date for increasing collection efﬁciency from semiconductor
microdisk resonators seems to be placement of the collection
optics in the plane of the disk23,24, resulting in more effective
capture of the predominantly low-angle scattered light.

The ﬁber taper offers an attractive alternative because it pro-
vides a means to directly couple light out of the WGMs, with-
out relying upon the weak intrinsic radiation of the microdisk
or the non-directionality of surface roughness scattering. This
evanescent near-ﬁeld coupling, which is a function of the in-
tegrated modal overlap of the microdisk and taper modes over
the interaction region25,26, has been demonstrated to be appre-
ciable in previous works with small diameter semiconductor
microdisks20,21 where phase-matching between the glass ﬁber
taper waveguide and the semiconductor microdisk is not as
limiting. While the ﬁber taper does load the cavity mode, and
thus degrade its Q, the key point is that the added loss is pri-
marily good loss in the sense that it can be efﬁciently collected
into the taper mode of interest16,19. This allows for the loaded
Q to be maintained at a high value while simultaneously ob-
taining high collection efﬁciency20,21. The situation is analo-
gous to the case of a Fabry-Perot cavity where one mirror is
intentionally made to have a slightly lower reﬂectivity for out-
put coupling, which limits the Q of the cavity, but not beyond
some acceptable level. While in that case, the cavity Q is ﬁxed
by the mirror reﬂectivities, here we have some ﬂexibility over
the Q and the amount of loading by adjusting the cavity-taper
separation.

To compare free-space and ﬁber-taper-based collection, we
use the experimental setup depicted in Fig. 2, which con-
sists of a ﬁber taper probing station that has been incorporated
into a standard photoluminescence (PL) measurement setup.
The taper probing station consists of a motorized X-Y stage
(50 nm encoded resolution) on which the microcavity chip is
placed, while the ﬁber taper waveguide is held in a “u”-shaped

3

FIG. 2: Note: Figure is to extend over both columns. (a)Experimental setup for studying the QD-microdisk devices. The sample is mounted
on an X-Y stage with 50 nm encoded resolution for positioning, and a pump beam at l p = 830 nm is directed through an ultra-long working
distance objective lens (NA = 0.40) at normal incidence to the sample surface. The free-space pump laser power is monitored by using a
830 nm wavelength 50/50 non-polarizing beamsplitter (NPBS) with a calibrated photodetector (PD) on one of the ports. The QD free-space
photoluminescence in the 1200 nm band is collected at normal incidence from the sample surface using the same objective lens for pump
focusing, is transmitted through the 830 nm NPBS and a long-pass pump rejection ﬁlter (LPF), and is ﬁnally collected into a multi-mode ﬁber
(MMF) using an objective lens with NA = 0.14. The pump laser and photoluminescence beams are shown as light gray and black arrows,
respectively. To allow for ﬁber taper measurements, the ﬁber taper is strung across the sample and positioned in the near-ﬁeld of the microdisk
from above, thus allowing simultaneous (normal incidence) free-space and ﬁber taper optical pumping and photoluminescence collection. The
output of the ﬁber taper can either be connected to an InGaAs photodetector (PD) for wavelength scans using the swept tunable laser source
in the 1200 nm band, or to an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) for analysis of the photoluminescence from the microdisk. The OSA is also
used to analyze the free-space photoluminescence using a MMF input. Alignment of the pump beam and the ﬁber taper to the microdisk
is performed by imaging through the pump and collection objective lens, as shown in the inset (a mirror ﬂips in-and-out of the free-space
photoluminescence beam path to direct the image to a 12X zoom imaging system). (b) Schematic of the ﬁber taper probing geometry in which
the ﬁber taper is mounted in a “u”-shape conﬁguration on a Z-axis stage with 50 nm encoded resolution for near-ﬁeld positioning of the taper.
(c) Schematic of the taper-to-microdisk interaction region, showing the resonant ﬁber taper coupling to WGMs of the microdisk.

conﬁguration on an acrylic mount as shown in Fig. 2(b). The
acrylic ﬁber mount is attached to a separate motorized Z-axis
stage (50 nm encoded resolution) so that the ﬁber taper can
be precisely aligned to the microdisk (the taper moves verti-
cally and the sample moves in-plane). The entire taper prob-
ing setup (motorized stages, microcavity chip, and ﬁber taper
waveguide) is mounted onto a larger manually actuated X-Y-Z

stage that is positioned underneath a ultra-long working dis-
tance objective lens (NA = 0.4). This microscope objective
is part of a PL setup that provides normal incidence pumping
and free-space collection from the samples. The pump laser
in the majority of the measurements is a 830 nm laser diode
that is operated in quasi-continuous-wave operation (280 ns
pulse width, 300 ns period). The pump beam is shaped into

a Gaussian-like proﬁle by sending the laser beam through a
section of single mode optical ﬁber, and is then focused onto
the sample with a spot size that is slightly larger than the size
of the microdisk (area ∼ 18 µm2). Luminescence from the mi-
crodisks is wavelength resolved by a Hewlett Packard 70452B
optical spectrum analyzer. All of the measurements presented
here were performed with the sample maintained in a room
temperature environment, with no active cooling or tempera-
ture control.

This integrated setup allows for a number of different mea-
surements to be made. Passive measurements of the microdisk
resonant modes are performed by connecting the input of the
ﬁber taper to a 1200 nm band scanning tunable laser. The
polarization of the tunable laser output at the ﬁber taper inter-
action region with the microdisk (coupling to the WGMs of
the microdisk is polarization sensitive) is controlled using a
paddle wheel polarization controller (PC). The light transmit-
ted past the microdisk resonator is fed from the optical ﬁber to
a photodetector in order to monitor the wavelength-dependent
transmission. Photoluminescence measurements can be done
in any of four potential conﬁgurations (i) free space pumping,
free space collection: here, the ﬁber taper plays no role, and
the vertically emitted power from the disks is collected into a
multimode optical ﬁber that is then fed into the OSA; (ii) free
space pumping, ﬁber taper collection: here, the output of the
ﬁber taper is connected to the OSA; (iii) ﬁber taper pumping,
free space collection: here, the input of the ﬁber taper is con-
nected to a ﬁber-coupled pump laser; (iv) ﬁber taper pumping,
ﬁber taper collection: here, the free-space optics used in the
standard PL measurements play no role.

III. MEASUREMENT OF CAVITY Q IN THE 1200 NM
WAVELENGTH BAND

The devices studied in this work have been previously char-
acterized in the 1400 nm band, and Qs as high as 3.6×105
have been measured21. Those measurements were done at
wavelengths signiﬁcantly red-detuned from the QD emis-
sion band, where QD absorption and material absorption in
the GaAs/AlGaAs waveguide layers are expected to be quite
small. To conﬁrm that the cavity Qs are still high near the
ground-state QD emission wavelength (peaked near 1190 nm
as shown in Fig. 3(a)), we perform passive ﬁber-taper-based
measurements10,20,21 in the 1200 nm band49. The input of the
taper is connected to a ﬁber-coupled scanning tunable laser
with a wavelength range of 1215-1265 nm and a spectral res-
olution of better than 0.01 pm. The transmission past the mi-
crodisk is monitored by connecting the taper output to a ﬁber-
pigtailed photodetector. The taper-WGM coupling is sensi-
tive to polarization, and here coupling was optimized for TE-
like WGMs with electric ﬁeld polarized predominantly in the
plane of the microdisk. The ﬁber taper is brought into the
near-ﬁeld of the microdisk by ﬁrst vertically aligning the ﬁber
taper within the plane of the microdisk and then bringing it in
from the side towards the disk edge (Fig. 2(c)). Resonances
begin to appear within the taper’s transmission spectrum when
it is several hundred nanometers to the side of the microdisk.

4

The high-Q resonances within the transmission spectrum, un-
der closer inspection, are seen to consist of a pair resonances
dips (inset to Fig. 3(b)). The two resonance dips (doublets)
correspond to standing wave modes that are formed when
surface scattering couples and splits the initially degenerate
clockwise and counterclockwise traveling wave WGMs of the
microdisk. Such doublet resonances have been observed by a
number of authors for different whispering-gallery geometries
and materials20,27,28.

FIG. 3: (a) Photoluminescence from an unprocessed region of the
1DWELL material. (b) Passive taper-based measurements of a mi-
crodisk in the 1200 nm band. The insets show high resolution scans
for two sets of doublet modes for this device. These high resolution
scans are taken when the taper-microdisk separation is a few hundred
nm and the depth of coupling is ∼5-10 %.

Finite-element frequency mode solutions29 of the WGM
resonances of the microdisks studied in this work (D = 4.5
µm) show that the free spectral range (FSR) is ∼ 40 nm in the
1200 nm wavelength band for TE-polarized modes of low ra-
dial mode number (q = 1, 2, 3, 4). Higher radial order WGMs
(q ≥ 5) are expected to show up only very weakly in the ﬁber
taper transmission owing to their small radiation limited Q
factors (. 104) and signiﬁcantly larger overlap with the sup-
port pedestal. From the broad spectral wavelength scan shown
in Fig. 3(b), a pair of deeply coupled resonant modes sepa-
rated by a full FSR are observed (l ∼ 1222 and 1263 nm),
as well as several other deeply coupled resonant modes. Due
to the extended nature of the higher order radial modes and

their better phase-matching to a low-index glass waveguide
such as the ﬁber taper, the coupling to the lowest order q = 1
WGM is typically lower than that of the q = 2 mode for simi-
lar sized microdisks20,26. We believe that these doublet modes
at l ∼ 1222 nm and l ∼ 1263 nm are ﬁrst order (q = 1) ra-
dial modes, while the mode at l ∼ 1242 nm is probably a
q = 2 radial mode. The broader and more weakly coupled in-
termediate modes are most likely higher order radial modes,
q = 3, 4 (higher order slab modes in the vertical direction of
microdisk are also a possibility, though less likely due to their
reduced radiation Q). Examining the linewidth of the doublet
resonances when the taper is relatively far away from the mi-
crodisk gives an estimate for the cold-cavity, unloaded Q of
the modes. Qs as high as 2.2×105 at ∼1260 nm and as high
as 1.9×105 at ∼1220 nm are measured in these microdisks
(insets of Fig. 3(b)), the latter of which is only 30 nm red-
detuned from the peak of the QD emission spectrum (Fig.
3(a)). These Q factors are still quite high for a wavelength-
scale AlGaAs microcavity23,24,30,31,32, and correspond to a
cavity decay rate of k /2p ∼ 0.6 GHz for resonant modes with
an effective mode volume of only Veff ∼ 6(l /n)3. Neverthe-
less, some degradation in the quality factors from those previ-
ously measured in the 1400 nm band are observed. These are
believed to be at least in part due to absorption in the QD lay-
ers, as evidenced by the emission in the PL spectrum at these
wavelengths (Fig. 3(a)).

IV.

IMPROVED COLLECTION EFFICIENCY WITH

FIBER TAPERS

We now turn to the heart of the current work, which is a
study of the gains in efﬁciency that can be achieved by us-
ing optical20,21 ﬁber tapers as a collection tool in PL mea-
surements. This is initially done by comparing the amount of
power obtained in free-space and ﬁber taper collection con-
ﬁgurations, while maintaining identical free-space pumping
conditions (in terms of pump-beam intensity and pump beam
position). The free-space collection for a microdisk that has
been pumped at normal incidence with ∼ 580 W/cm2 at 830
nm is shown in Fig. 4(a). This pump intensity incident is near
the laser threshold for this device (see below), and we see that
the peak height at l ∼ 1193.5 nm is ∼ 30 pW. For comparison
to the ﬁber taper collection described below, an estimate of
the optical losses in the free-space collection setup were made
(after removal of the pump rejection ﬁlter). By measuring the
collected pump laser power reﬂected off of the mirror-quality
surface of the AlGaAs epitaxy, and assuming a 30% reﬂec-
tion coefﬁcient from the AlGaAs surface, 43% of the reﬂected
pump beam was collected into the OSA. Additional limita-
tions in the normal incidence free-space collection stem from
the ﬁnite numerical aperture of the collecting lens (NA=0.4)
which covers only 4% of the full 4p

steradians.

Next, we consider the use of the optical ﬁber taper as a col-
lection optic in the PL measurements. To obtain an estimate of
the amount of coupling between the taper and the microdisk,
the free-space pump beam is blocked, and passive measure-
ments at wavelengths that are slightly red-detuned from the

5

FIG. 4: (a) Emission spectrum and (b) Light-in-vs-Light-out (L-L)
curve for normal incidence free-space collection from a (free-space)
optically pumped microdisk. Fiber taper collected (c) emission spec-
trum and (d) L-L curve from the same microdisk resonator, under
identical pumping conditions. The emission spectrums for both the
free-space and ﬁber taper collection conﬁgurations were taken near
laser threshold at ∼ 580 W/cm2 of incident pump beam intensity.
The ﬁber taper collected power included that from the forward prop-
agating transmission channel only. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, in all
of the measurements described in this work, a detector sensitivity of
∼ 1 pW is used, and the resolution bandwidth of the OSA is set to
0.1 nm.

QD emission are performed as described above in Section III.
Since the FSR for the low radial number WGMs of the mi-
crodisks studied here is ∼ 41 nm in the 1200 nm wavelength
band, the modes coupled to and studied passively are typically
a single FSR red-detuned from the lasing mode. For most ex-
periments, the taper is placed in direct contact with the top
edge of the microdisk, which increases the amount of coupling
from that shown in Fig. 3(b) to transmission depths between
30 − 60%. For this initial measurement, a resonance depth of
∼38% is obtained for a cavity mode at l ∼ 1238.1nm, which
gives us a qualitative estimate for the coupling to WGMs over-
lapping the peak of the gain spectrum50. This coupling depth
corresponds to a taper collection efﬁciency h 0 ∼ 11%, where
h 0 is deﬁned19 as the fraction of the optical power from the
cavity resonant mode that is coupled into the fundamental
ﬁber taper mode in the forward propagating transmission di-
rection. Other loss channels from the microdisk include in-
trinsic loss of the cavity in absence of the taper, parasitic cou-
pling into higher-order, non-collected modes of the ﬁber taper,
and for the standing wave modes studied here, coupling into
the backwards propagating fundamental taper mode. For the
moderate coupling depths measured here, the taper coupling
efﬁciency into the forward and backward propagation direc-
tions is approximately equal, thus yielding an overall taper

coupling efﬁciency of h

′
0 ∼ 22% for this WGM.

Once this level of coupling has been achieved, the tun-
able laser output is blocked, the free-space pump beam is un-
blocked, and the output of the ﬁber taper is disconnected from
the photodetector and connected to the OSA to measure the
emitted power from the microdisk. Fig. 4(c) shows the re-
sulting spectrum collected by the ﬁber taper in the forward
propagating transmission direction. We see that at the wave-
length l ∼ 1193.5 nm, the peak height is ∼ 725 pW, which is
nearly a factor of 25 times improvement over the peak height
observed in normal incidence free-space collection. In addi-
tion, a signiﬁcant amount of power is present within modes
that were not detectable in the free-space case (the noise ﬂoor
of the OSA was approximately 1 pW), due to the poor efﬁ-
ciency of collection in this conﬁguration.

This straightforward comparison of the collected powers
for a single pump power is not necessarily the most appropri-
ate comparison, however. The reason for this is that the ﬁber
taper loads the cavity, thus decreasing the Q of the resonant
modes and increasing the threshold pump power, so that for
a given pump power the laser is not equally above threshold
in the two measurements. Another, more appropriate compar-
ison is the differential collection efﬁciency above threshold,
which we label x . This is determined by measuring a light-in-
light-out (L-L) curve for the microdisk and taking the slope
of this curve above threshold. In these curves, the light-out
is taken to be the total power within the laser line, while the
light-in is taken to be the estimated absorbed pump power.
The absorbed pump power is determined by multiplying the
pump beam intensity by the area of the microdisk to get an
incident pump power (the beam overlaps the entirety of the
disk), and then multiplying this value by the absorption of
the microdisk at 830 nm. We estimate this absorption to be
∼ 10%, assuming an absorption coefﬁcient of 104 cm−1 in
the GaAs, quantum well, and QD layers33, and a reﬂection
coefﬁcient of 30% at the GaAs-air interfaces at the top and
bottom of the disk. The resulting L-L curves are shown in
Fig. 4(b),(d) for both free-space and ﬁber-taper collection.
We see that the threshold pump power has indeed increased in
the case of ﬁber-taper collection, but that the differential ef-
ﬁciency has also signiﬁcantly improved and is more than 70
times that of the free-space value.

To study the tradeoffs between x

and threshold more
closely, in Fig. 5(a) several L-L curves are plotted, each for a
different taper position with respect to the microdisk (note that
the microdisk studied here is not the same as the one studied
above, but the qualitative behavior is identical). The different
taper positions correspond to a varying level of coupling be-
tween the microdisk and taper, which we again qualitatively
estimate through measurements of the coupling to a microdisk
WGM that is red-detuned from the QD emission in the 1200
nm band. From Fig. 5(a), we see that in general, both the
threshold power and x
increase with increasing h 0. As might
be expected, in the course of these measurements it was pos-
sible in some cases to load the microdisk strongly enough to
degrade the initial laser mode’s Q to the point that it no longer
lases, and a different mode (with a higher loaded Q) begins to
lase.

6

FIG. 5: (a) L-L curves for free-space pumping and ﬁber taper collec-
tion at different taper positions. For each curve, we note the thresh-
old pump power (Pth), the ﬁber taper collection efﬁciency (h 0) for a
mode that is red-detuned from the peak QD emission, and the above
threshold differential efﬁciency (x ). (b) Scatter plot of the differen-
tial efﬁciency for ﬁber taper (ﬁlled circles) and free-space collection
(open circles) for a number of different microdisk lasers. For these
measurements the ﬁber taper collected power included that from the
forward propagating transmission channel only.

A number of different microdisk devices have been studied,
and the results described above are fairly consistent from de-
vice to device, with x
routinely 1-2 orders of magnitude larger
when ﬁber taper collection is employed. A scatter plot for
some of this data is shown in Fig. 5(b). Despite the signiﬁ-
cant improvement obtained using the ﬁber taper, we see that
the largest x measured is roughly 10 nW/µW, which means
that only 1% of the pump photons are converted to a col-
lected signal photon, and we should thus consider why x
is
far below unity. We ﬁrst note that when considering collec-
tion into both directions of the ﬁber taper, x
is actually 2%
for the standing wave WGMs of the microdisks studied here.
A measure of the ﬁber taper collection efﬁciency of the mi-
crodisk WGM laser light, h 0, from the passive wavelength
scans described above indicate that the external ﬁber taper col-
lection efﬁciency should be as high as ∼ 22% (corresponding
to 11% for the forward transmission direction only). The total

7

loss through the ﬁber taper and all of the fusion-splices and
connections in the ﬁber path was measured to be ∼ 1.6dB in
these experiments. If symmetric loss in the taper about the mi-
crodisk coupling region is assumed, this corresponds to a loss
of ∼ 17% of the WGM laser photons collected by the taper
before they reach the OSA. Taken together, these two factors
put an estimate of the upper bound on the ﬁber-coupled exter-
nal laser efﬁciency of 18% for collection into both directions
of the ﬁber.

The roughly order of magnitude difference between the
measured (2%) and expected (18%) differential laser efﬁ-
ciency may be a result of several factors involving the complex
dynamics within the DWELL active region. Previous mea-
surements of DWELL injection lasers in stripe geometries22
indicate that the internal quantum efﬁciency of the quantum
dots is h QD
i ∼ 0.5 (this is roughly the percentage of carriers
captured by the QDs in the DWELL structure that contribute
to stimulated emission above threshold). This factor can cer-
tainly change from growth to growth, and given that the laser
threshold values are roughly 2-2.5 times higher than that mea-
sured in previous work on identically fabricated devices from
a different wafer growth21, we might qualitatively expect x
to
be reduced by a factor in the range of 2-5 due to h QD

.

i

Both the spectral and spatial distribution of carriers within
the microdisk may also lead to reductions in the laser differ-
ential efﬁciency through incomplete clamping of the sponta-
neous emission into the non-lasing modes of the microdisk
above threshold. To examine such effects in our structures,
we measure L-L curves (Fig. 6(a)) for a number of the most
prominent non-lasing WGMs of the microdisk studied in Fig.
4. We see that the emission into these modes is largely
clamped above the threshold for the lasing mode (estimated
to be 10.7µW of absorbed pump power). The aggregate effect
is clearly seen in Fig. 6(b), where the power into the non-
lasing WGMs has been summed and plotted along with the
L-L curve for the lasing mode. Such clamping has been re-
ported by other authors for similarly sized microdisks34, while
smaller microcavity devices with a larger laser mode sponta-
neous emission rate, have exhibited a gradual rollover and/or
incomplete clamping of spontaneous emission7,34,35,36. Mea-
surement of the background spontaneous emission into non-
WGM, radiation modes of the microdisk was performed us-
ing free-space collection (the ﬁber taper is much more sen-
sitive to WGM emission than to emission from the center of
the microdisk into radiation modes), and did show incomplete
clamping of the spontaneous emission. This sort of spatial
hole burning has been predicted in numerical modeling of mi-
crodisk cavities37. If this is the case, the effective pump area is
limited to a region about the WGM. Assuming that the WGM
radial width is approximately (l /neff), where neff is the effec-
tive refractive index in the plane of the microdisk51, this cor-
responds to a 7µm2 area in the devices under test here. Since
the total disk area is ∼ 16µm2, then only 7/16 of the pump
photons would be effectively pumping the WGM. Including
this factor brings the expected value of x within the range of
experimentally measured values.

FIG. 6: (a) L-L curves for non-lasing modes of the disk studied in
Fig. 4. (b) Total power in the non-lasing modes (shown by open
circles), showing saturation for pump values close to the threshold
value for the lasing mode (shown by asterisks). Note that the y-axis
scale for the lasing mode is 15 times larger than that for the non-
lasing modes.

improved upon to increase x . This can be done by adjusting
the geometry of the disk (using thinner disks, for example)
to bring the effective index of the WGMs of the semicon-
ductor microdisks closer to that of the silica ﬁber taper, so
that more efﬁcient coupling can be obtained. A study of such
modiﬁcations in Si microdisk structures has been undertaken,
and the regimes of critical coupling and overcoupling have
been achieved26. In addition, if spatial hole burning is signif-
icant, another factor that could potentially be improved is the
method of pumping. In particular, the pumping beam could be
shaped to preferentially pump the perimeter of the microdisk
(i.e., an annular-shaped beam could be used). Alternately, as
discussed below, a ﬁber taper could be used to pump the mi-
crodisk.

V. FIBER-PUMPED MICRODISK LASERS

Aside from reducing taper loss (loss < 0.5dB can be eas-
ily achieved in our lab), h 0 is the main parameter that can be

In addition to improving the collection efﬁciency, optical
ﬁber tapers have the potential for improving the pump efﬁ-

ciency of these QD-containing microdisks; such an effect has
in fact been demonstrated in previous work on doped glass
microcavities38,39,40. In particular, if the pump laser is reso-
nant with a WGM of the microdisk, light can be absorbed with
high efﬁciency, and in the case of critical coupling, complete
power transfer can be achieved. This should be contrasted
with the case of free-space pumping, where only a small per-
cent (10% for the devices we’ve considered here) of the in-
cident pump light is absorbed by the device, and some of this
absorption is in a region (the center of the microdisk) that does
not contribute to useful gain for the resonant WGMs37. On the
other hand, ﬁber taper pumping delivers pump light directly to
the perimeter of the disk. As we shall discuss in the following
section, the ability to efﬁciently optically access microcavi-
ties is also of particular importance to future quantum optics
experiments.

FIG. 7: (a) L-L curve for a QD-microdisk device where the ﬁber
taper is used for both pumping (at l = 967.6 nm) and collection.
The absorbed power was estimated to be 66% of the input power in
the ﬁber taper. (b) Sub-threshold spectrum for this device taken at an
estimated absorbed power of 37 µW (highlighted point in (a)).

For an initial demonstration, we use a tunable laser oper-
ating in the 980 nm band as a pump source. The 830 nm
pump laser is not used in this experiment because the absorp-
tion within the microdisk at this wavelength is too large to
allow uniform pumping of the microdisk perimeter (the pump

8

light is absorbed before a single round trip around the cav-
ity can be made). At 980 nm, the material absorption is still
relatively high (in particular, the quantum well layer will be
highly absorbing), so that the Q980 of WGM modes near the
pump wavelength are not expected to exceed a few hundred.
The 980 nm tunable laser is connected to the ﬁber taper input,
and the ﬁber taper output is connected to the OSA. The taper
is contacted to the side of the microdisk, and the pump wave-
length and polarization of the tunable laser are manually ad-
justed until the collected power in the OSA is maximized (this
is necessary in order to resonantly couple to a mode within
the pump wavelength band). A typical L-L curve and sub-
threshold spectrum are shown in Fig. 7. We see that a sig-
niﬁcant amount of power is collected into the ﬁber taper, and
that in particular, the sub-threshold spectrum shows a number
of well-resolved modes with a good signal-to-noise ratio. The
estimated absorbed pump power in the microdisk displayed in
Fig. 7(a) corresponds to 66% of the input power in the ﬁber
taper, and is found by taking the difference in the 980 nm
band taper transmission between when the taper is displaced
tens of microns above the microdisk (no coupling) and when
it is in contact with the microdisk (strongly coupled). We note
that the pump threshold value in this pumping geometry is
only about a factor of two less than the incident pump power
in the 830 nm free-space pumping, and is signiﬁcantly larger
than what might be expected (ideally, the pump power here
should be less than the absorbed pump power in the 830 nm
pumping). This is most likely a result of the relatively crude
method we have employed to estimate the power absorbed in
the microdisk; a much more accurate method for determin-
ing the coupled pump power uses the wavelength-dependent
transmission of the ﬁber taper to map out the resonance line
due to the WGM at the pump wavelength. Here, the strong ab-
sorption of the microdisk in the 980 nm band makes it difﬁcult
to separate resonantly coupled power from scattering losses
at the taper-microdisk junction.
In order to more carefully
study the efﬁciency of this ﬁber-pumping and ﬁber-collecting
conﬁguration, experiments in which an excited state of the
quantum dots is resonantly pumped through the ﬁber taper are
currently underway.

VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE APPLICATIONS

As mentioned in the introduction of this paper, efﬁcient op-
tical access to wavelength-scale microcavities is of great im-
portance to quantum optics and information processing appli-
cations currently being investigated within cavity QED sys-
tems. In almost any application involving the coherent trans-
fer or manipulation of quantum information, loss is a signiﬁ-
cant detriment. As described in Ref. 41, current implementa-
tions of linear optics quantum computing require a near-unity
collection efﬁciency of emitted photons from a single photon
source. The same is true for applications involving quantum
repeaters in a quantum network42. A solution that is often
proposed is to embed the single photon emitter within a mi-
crocavity with a high spontaneous emission coupling factor b
,
so that the majority of emitted photons are coupled into the

microcavity mode. However, it is important to note that even
for a b = 1 microcavity, it is still necessary to have a method
to effectively collect all of the photons that are radiated by
that one cavity mode43. Also, from a very practical perspec-
tive, efﬁcient collection of emitted light from a microcavity is
of premium importance for optical telecommunication wave-
lengths > 1µm, where the dark count rates from single photon
counters are often 2-3 orders of magnitude larger than the Si
single photon counters used at shorter wavelengths44.

An efﬁcient coupling channel can also enable a number of
different types of experiments. Having access to this cou-
pling channel makes the cavity transmission (and reﬂection)
an experimentally accessible parameter whose behavior can
be monitored to detect signatures of speciﬁc types of system
behavior. In recent experimental measurements of coupling
between a single quantum dot and a resonant mode of a semi-
conductor microcavity5,6,30,32,45, spontaneous emission from
the coupled system is the only parameter measured. Alterna-
tively, vacuum-Rabi splitting in a system consisting of a single
QD coupled to a cavity mode can be detected by simply mea-
suring the transmission through the cavity as a function of the
input wavelength to the cavity; such an experiment is directly
analogous to the experiments done with cooled alkali atoms
coupled to a Fabry-Perot cavity46,47. Non-linear effects, such
as optical bistability and photon blockade, and coherent con-
trol of the quantum system can also be more easily performed
through the optical transmission or reﬂection channel of a mi-
crocavity. Perhaps most importantly, by knowing the precise
level of coupling between the ﬁber taper and the microcavity,
the number of photons injected into the cavity can be precisely
calibrated. This is obviously of paramount importance in ex-
periments that involve few or single cavity photons.

Finally, it is important to note that while some of the advan-
tages described above are also available to in-plane waveg-
uides that are microfabricated next to the microcavities, the
ﬁber taper provides a level of ﬂexibility that the microfabri-
cated waveguides do not, as described in detail in Ref. 48.
In particular, it can accommodate a number of different cav-
ity geometries, which is very important for resonators such
as microdisk cavities, where developing a suitable in-plane
waveguide is not necessarily trivial (in this case, due to the
undercut nature of the microdisks). Furthermore, ﬁber tapers

9

can be routinely fabricated with low losses (∼ 0.1-0.5 dB in
our lab), while in-plane waveguides still require a device to
provide low-loss coupling into and out of them which poses a
similar, albeit slightly less difﬁcult, problem as coupling di-
rectly into the microcavity.
In addition, employing optical
ﬁbers to couple to the microcavities makes these devices easy
to integrate into larger, ﬁber-optic based networks. As optical
ﬁbers are the low-loss transmission medium of choice, such
a ﬁber-based device architecture would be suitable for imple-
mentation into quantum networks such as those proposed in
Ref. 42.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the utility of ﬁber
tapers in the photoluminescence measurements of QD-
containing microdisk cavities.
Improvements in collection
efﬁciency of 1-2 orders of magnitude in comparison to nor-
mal incidence free-space measurements are exhibited, and ini-
tial measurements on microdisk lasers employing ﬁber taper
pumping and collection have been presented. The largest dif-
ferential laser efﬁciency was measured to be as high as 2%
when accounting for collected light into both directions of
the ﬁber taper. From direct passive measurements of the mi-
crodisks at wavelengths 30 nm red detuned from the ground-
state QD emission peak, the ﬁber taper collection efﬁciency
of the laser light (including all optical losses of the opti-
cal ﬁber and ﬁber taper) is estimated to be 18% (again in-
cluding both directions of emission within the ﬁber taper).
With further modiﬁcations of the microdisk structure to en-
able better phase-matching of the ﬁber taper waveguide and
the whispering-gallery modes of the high-refractive index
microdisk26, signiﬁcant increases in coupling efﬁciency, ap-
proaching unity, are believed possible with this technique.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank Matt Borselli, Paul Barclay and Tom
Johnson for valuable discussions and assistance in setting up
some of the measurement equipment, and Matt Borselli for
numerical simulations of the microdisk modes. K.S. thanks
the Hertz Foundation for its graduate fellowship support.

∗ Electronic address: kartik@caltech.edu
1 Y. Yamamoto and R. E. Slusher, Physics Today 46(6), 66 (1993).
2 H. Mabuchi and A. C. Doherty, Science 298, 1372 (2002).
3 H. J. Kimble, Physica Scripta T76, 127 (1998).
4 W. L. Barnes, G. Bj ¨ork, J. G´erard, P. Jonsson, J. Wasey, P. Wor-

9 J. N ¨ockel, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 188(3), 921 (2001).
10 K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, Phys.

Rev. B 70, 081306(R) (2004).

11 T. A. Birks and Y. W. Li, J. Lightwave Tech. 10(4), 432 (1992).
12 T. Birks, in Optical Fiber Communications Conference (OFC)

thing, and V. Zwiller, Eur. Phys. J. D 18, 197 (2002).

(2004).

5 G. Solomon, M. Pelton, and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. Lett.

13 J. Knight, G. Cheung, F. Jacques, and T. Birks, Opt. Lett. 22(15),

86(17), 3903 (2001).

1129 (1997).

6 J.-M. G´erard and B. Gayral, J. Lightwave Tech. 17(11), 2089

14 N. Dubreuil, J. C. Knight, D. K. Leventhal, V. Sandoghdar,

7 R. E. Slusher, Semiconductor Science and Technology 9(11),

15 M. Cai, O. Painter, and K. Vahala, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(1), 74

J. Hare, and V. Lef`evre, Opt. Lett. 20(8), 813 (1995).

(1999).

2025 (1994).

(2000).

8 A. Levi, R. Slusher, S. McCall, J. Glass, S. Pearton, and R. Lo-

16 S. M. Spillane, T. J. Kippenberg, O. J. Painter, and K. J. Vahala,

gani, Appl. Phys. Lett. 62(6), 561 (1993).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 91(4), 043902 (2003).

17 D. K. Armani, T. J. Kippenberg, S. M. Spillane, and K. J. Vahala,

Nature 421, 925 (2003).

18 P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, Opt. Lett.

29(7), 697 (2004).

801 (2005).

19 P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, and O. Painter, Opt. Express 13(3),

20 M. Borselli, K. Srinivasan, P. Barclay, and O. Painter, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 85(17), 3693 (2004).

21 K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, T. Johnson, P. Barclay, O. Painter,
A. Stintz, and S. Krishna, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 151106 (2005).
22 G. Liu, A. Stintz, H. Li, T. Newell, A. Gray, P. Varangis, K. Mal-
loy, and L. Lester, IEEE J. Quan. Elec. 36(11), 1272 (2000).
23 B. Gayral, J. M. G´erard, A. Lemaˆitre, C. Dupuis, L. Manin, and

J. L. Pelouard, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75(13), 1908 (1999).

24 P. Michler, A. Kiraz, L. Zhang, C. Becher, E. Hu, and

A. Imamoglu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77(2), 184 (2000).

25 C. Manolatou, M. Khan, S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, H. Haus, and

J. Joannopoulos, IEEE J. Quan. Elec. 35(9), 1322 (1999).

26 M. Borselli, T. Johnson, and O. Painter (2005), manuscript in

27 D. S. Weiss, V. Sandoghdar, J. Hare, V. Lef`evre-Seguin, J.-M.

Raimond, and S. Haroche, Opt. Lett. 20(18), 1835 (1995).

28 T. Kippenberg, S. Spillane, and K. Vahala, Opt. Lett. 27(19), 1669

preparation.

(2002).

29 S. M. Spillane, T. J. Kippenberg, K. J. Vahala, K. W. Goh, E. Wil-

cut, and H. J. Kimble, Phys. Rev. A 71, 013817 (2005).

30 T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. Gibbs,
G. Rupper, C. Ell, Q. Schenkin, and D. Deppe, Nature 432, 200
(2004).

31 A. Lofﬂer, J. Reithmaier, G. Sek, C. Hofmann, S. Reitzenstein,
M. Kamp, and A. Forchel, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 111105 (2005).
32 A. Badolato, K. Hennessy, M. Atature, J. Dreiser, E. Hu,

P. Petroff, and A. Imamoglu, Science 308, 1158 (2005).

33 L. A. Coldren and S. W. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Photonic In-
tegrated Circuits (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1995).
34 R. E. Slusher, A. Levi, U. Mohideen, S. McCall, S. Pearton, and

R. Logan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 63(10), 1310 (1993).

10

C. Gmachl, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83(10), 1915 (2003).

37 K. Nozaki and T. Baba, in International Symposium on Photonic
and Electromagnetic Crystal Structures V, PECS-V (2004), p.
225.

38 V. Sandoghdar, F. Treussart,

J. Hare, V. Lef`evre-Seguin,
N. Dubreuil, J.-M. Raimond, and S. Haroche, Phys. Rev. A 54(3),
R1777 (1996).

39 M. Cai, O. Painter, K. Vahala, and P. Sercel, Opt. Lett. 25(19),

40 L. Yang, D. Armani, and K. Vahala, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83(5), 825

41 A. Kiraz, M. Atature, and A. Imamoglu, Phys. Rev. A 69(032305)

1430 (2000).

(2003).

(2004).

42 J. Cirac, P. Zoller, H. Kimble, and H. Mabuchi, Phys. Rev. Lett.

78(16), 3221 (1997).

43 J. M. G´erard and B. Gayral, Proceedings of SPIE 5361, 88 (2004).
44 G. Ribordy, N. Gisin, O. Guinnard, D. Stucki, M. Wegmuller, and
H. Zbinden, Journal of Modern Optics 51(9-10), 1381 (2004).
45 J. Reithmaier, G. Sek, A. Loffer, C. Hoffman, S. Kuhn,
S. Reitzenstein, L. Keldysh, V. Kulakovskii, T. Reinecke, and
A. Forchel, Nature 432, 197 (2004).

46 R. Thompson, G. Rempe, and H. Kimble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68(8),

1132 (1992).

47 A. Boca, R. Miller, K. Birnbaum, A. Boozer, J. McKeever, and

H. Kimble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 233603 (2004).

48 K. Srinivasan, P. Barclay, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, accepted
for publication (available at www.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0406129)
(2004).

49 The WGMs in the 1400 nm wavelength band are expected to have
very similar radiation and scattering losses as those in the 1200
nm band for the microdisk geometries studied here. Differences
in Q at these two wavelengths are thus expected to be indicative
of wavelength-dependent material absorption losses.

50 The coupling between the taper and microdisk can be different
for different cavity modes, so this technique is used primarily as
a qualitative guide.

51 Finite-element simulations have shown this to be an accurate es-

35 M. Fujita, R. Ushigome, and T. Baba, IEEE Photonics Tech. Lett.

timate.

13(5), 403 (2001).

36 K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, O. Painter, J. Chen, A. Y. Cho, and

