5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measuring the quantum eﬃciency of single radiating dipoles using a scanning mirror

B. C. Buchler,1 T. Kalkbrenner,1, ∗ C. Hettich,1, † and V. Sandoghdar1, ‡
1Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Using scanning probe techniques, we show the controlled manipulation of the radiation from
single dipoles. In one experiment we study the modiﬁcation of the ﬂuorescence lifetime of a single
molecular dipole in front of a movable silver mirror. A second experiment demonstrates the changing
plasmon spectrum of a gold nanoparticle in front of a dielectric mirror. Comparison of our data
with theoretical models allows determination of the quantum eﬃciency of each radiating dipole.

It is a well established matter that the radiation of
an oscillating electric dipole can be manipulated if it is
placed in front of a planar interface [1]. Experiments
investigating this system date back to Drexhage [2] who
looked at the inﬂuence of a metallic mirror on the ﬂuores-
cence lifetime of ensembles of Eu3+ ions. By preparing
a large number of samples, each with a diﬀerent spac-
ing between the mirror and the emitter layer, two major
eﬀects were observed. Firstly, it was shown that the de-
cay rate (Γ) oscillates at large distances due to the re-
tarded interaction of the dipoles with their own reﬂected
ﬁelds. Secondly, it was shown that Γ is strongly modiﬁed
very close to the mirror due to the energy transfer to the
metal [1, 2]. Since that time, numerous works have in-
vestigated the modiﬁcation of spontaneous emission from
ensembles in thin dielectric layers [1]. Various key param-
eters such as the dipole’s orientation, its distance to the
interface and its quantum eﬃciency are, however, aver-
aged in ensemble measurements.

Due to challenges such as detection sensitivity, pho-
tostability and position control, experiments with single
emitters have been scarce. Some researchers have never-
theless shown eﬀects of the local dielectric environment
by adding an index matching ﬂuid to eliminate an inter-
face [3, 4] or by introducing the subwavelength boundary
In this work we study the ﬂuo-
of a sharp tip [5, 6].
rescence lifetime and intensity of a single molecule at a
well-deﬁned orientation and position, while moving an
external silver mirror in its vicinity. We also examine
the plasmon spectrum of a well-characterized single gold
nanoparticle at various locations in front of a dielectric
mirror. These experiments allow us to demonstrate, for
the ﬁrst time, both the far-ﬁeld modulation and the near-
ﬁeld modiﬁcation of the total decay rate (Γ) for individ-
ual dipoles. Since the far-ﬁeld modulations are only due
to changes in the radiative decay rate (Γr) we can deter-
mine the quantum eﬃciency η = Γr/Γ of each dipole.

A theoretical description of dipole decay in multi-layer
structures was ﬁrst developed by Chance et al. [7] and
has been expanded by many authors to cover numerous

∗Present address:FOM-Institute for Atomic and Molecular Physics
(AMOLF), 1098 SJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
†Present address:Niels Bohr Institute, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
‡Electronic address: vahid.sandoghdar@ethz.ch

situations. In particular, Sullivan and Hall [8] present an
elegant plane wave solution that can easily be adapted
to our system. For a single dipole at angle θ with respect
to the normal of the dielectric layers we ﬁnd [9]:

Γ = Γ0[1 − η0 + η0(V cos2 θ + H sin2 θ)]

(1)

where η0 and Γ0 are the quantum eﬃciency and decay
rate, respectively, in bulk dielectric. The functions V
and H are, respectively, the normalised decay rates of
dipoles perpendicular and parallel to the layers. These
functions depend on the position of the dipole, as well as
the thickness and refractive indices of the various layers.
The essential feature of our experimental system was
the combination of an inverted microscope and a shear-
force controlled scanning probe stage [10]. A schematic
of the setup used for the single molecule measurements
is shown in Fig. 1A. Samples of highly photostable terry-
lene molecules embedded in a thin para-terphenyl (pT)
matrix were prepared following the method described in
[11]. The thickness (t) of the pT layer in this work was
35±5nm as measured using shear-force microscopy. The
sample was illuminated through an oil immersion objec-
tive (NA=1.4) by 13 ps pulses of p-polarized 532 nm
light at a repetition rate of 5 MHz. The laser light was
focused in the back focal plane of the objective to give a
near-collimated beam at the pT layer. An oﬀset of the
beam at the back focal plane resulted in an incidence
angle φ and total internal reﬂection at the pT-air inter-
face. The ﬂuorescence of the terrylene (λ ∼ 580 nm)
was collected confocally through the objective and sent
to an avalanche photodiode (APD) for lifetime measure-
ments or to a CCD for imaging. Above the pT layer we
mounted a micro-mirror in the shear-force stage. The
mirror was made by melting the end of a tapered optical
ﬁbre to give a ball of diameter 40 µm, then coating this
ball with 200 nm of silver. Using the scanning stage, the
mirror was lowered onto the pT layer, bringing it into
shear-force contact at a height z0. This point of closest
separation was in the range 5 to 20 nm. The calibrated
piezo used in the z-axis of the system thus gave an accu-
rate measurement of the mirror-pT distance (z) relative
to the zero deﬁned by z0. The lateral position of the mir-
ror against a molecule was optimized by maximizing the
quenching of the ﬂuorescence with the mirror at z0.

Figure 1B shows the image obtained when the ﬂuo-
rescence from a single molecule, measured without the

2

the mirror moved towards and away from the molecule,
thereby verifying the mechanical stability of the system
and lack of any drifts. We note that more than 5 ×
107 photons were detected per molecule, emphasizing the
advantage of a sample with very high photostability [11].
The data in Fig. 2 clearly shows the near-ﬁeld short-
ening of the lifetime due to quenching by the metal as
well as far-ﬁeld oscillations that can be understood as
being due to the retarded interaction of the dipole with
its mirror image [1, 2]. The solid curves in the ﬁgure
show ﬁts to the data made using Eq. 1. The refrac-
tive indices ngl and nAg of glass and silver at 580 nm
are taken to be 1.52 and 0.26+4i, respectively. Para-
terphenyl is bi-axial with refractive indices nz = 2.0,
ny = 1.69 and nx = 1.59 [11, 15].
In the calculations
we take the out-of-plane polarizations to have an index
of (nx + ny)/2 = 1.64. For polarizations parallel to the
plane of incidence we assume an index of 1.85 [16]. Using
these assumptions, the unknown parameters η0, h and z0
can be approximated by ﬁtting the model to the data.
For molecule A we ﬁnd 0 < h < 13 nm, 0.9 < η0 < 1
and z0 = 12±2 nm whereas for B, 12 < h < 32 nm,
0.9 < η0 < 1 and z0 = 11±5 nm. These values are con-
sistent with what we know about our system. Molecules
with longer lifetimes are expected to have smaller depth
(h) and the oﬀset (z0) agrees well with the typical shear-
force interaction range of z0 < 20nm. The estimates of
η0 and h are limited by the uncertainty in the dipole
orientation θ, a parameter that is integrated out in the
theoretical treatments of ensembles, but plays a central
role in single emitter studies [4].

The ﬂuorescence intensity is also measured using the
APD. For molecule B of Fig. 2 this is shown in Fig. 3I
along with the lifetime data (curve II). For large z, there
is a clear correlation between the intensity and lifetime.
The strong intensity modulation is due to our detection
optics only seeing a part of the emission pattern while the

FIG. 2: Lifetime as a function of mirror position (z) for 2
molecules A (squares) and B (triangles). The solid curves
display theoretical ﬁts assuming η0 = 0.98, h = 3 nm and
z0 = 12 nm for A, η0 = 1, h = 22 nm and z0 = 11 nm for B
and θ = 16◦ in both cases.

FIG. 1: A: Terrylene molecules embedded in para-terphenyl
(pT) were illuminated by p-polarized light that undergoes to-
tal internal reﬂection at the pT-air interface. A silver micro-
mirror was positioned in front of the sample with a three-
dimensional piezo stage (not shown). Fluorescence light is col-
lected and sent to an APD or CCD camera. Parameters used
in the modelling are deﬁned in this diagram. B: The inten-
sity distribution at the back focal plane for a single molecule
(with no mirror). C: A cross section indicated in B. A ﬁt to
this data shows a dipole angle θ of 16±5 degrees.

mirror, is collected by the objective and sent directly to
the CCD with no further imaging optics. The highly di-
rectional (doughnut like) emission stems from the fact
that the terrylene dipole is oriented nearly perpendicu-
lar to the substrate plane [11]. As has been shown very
recently [12], by analyzing this image we can determine
the tilt angle θ of the dipole. From the cross section in
Fig. 1C we ﬁnd θ = 16 ± 5 degrees.

Fluorescence lifetime (τ = 1/Γ) was measured via
time-correlated single photon counting. Photon arrival
times were histogrammed and an exponential decay curve
was ﬁtted to ﬁnd the excited state lifetime. To achieve
the required accuracy, 1 to 2 s of data were required
per measurement. In bulk pT the lifetime of terrylene is
τ0 = 1/Γ0 = 4.1 ± 0.1 ns [13]. In our system (without
the micro-mirror) lifetimes were in the range 15 to 25 ns.
Increased lifetime is expected for molecules embedded in
thin dielectric ﬁlms [14]. This eﬀect can be described us-
ing Eq. 1 and, due to the dependencies of V and H, is
highly sensitive to the dipole orientation and depth of the
molecule in the ﬁlm. A particular virtue of single emitter
studies is their ability to deal with such inhomogeneities.
We now turn to the lifetime measurements of single
molecules as a function of the mirror position z. During
the course of the experiment, data was collected from
around 15 diﬀerent molecules. Shown in Fig. 2 are two
of these measurements. The lifetime was monitored as

3

properties of a nanoparticle can be described by a mul-
tipole expansion. For gold particles smaller than about
100 nm, it suﬃces to consider only a dipolar oscillation
if one accounts for the eﬀect of radiation damping [21].
In an ellipsoidal particle, up to 3 dipolar oscillations can
be excited yielding independent plasmon resonances at 3
diﬀerent frequencies [20]. In a recent publication we have
demonstrated a tomographic approach to identify these
resonances and ﬁnd the orientation of the particle axes in
the laboratory frame [22]. Furthermore, in [23] we pre-
sented a recipe for attaching a single nanoparticle to the
extremity of a sharp optical ﬁber. Here we exploit these
techniques to ﬁrst characterize an ellipsoidal nanoparticle
(nominal diameter of 80 nm) attached to a ﬁber tip and
then monitor the width of one of its plasmon resonances
as we move the particle relative to a glass substrate.

Details of the setup and the spectroscopy procedure
are given in [22]. In short, the system was illuminated
at grazing incidence with white light from a xenon lamp
(see Fig. 4III). The scattered light was collected by a
microscope objective (NA=0.85) through the glass sub-
strate and sent to a spectrometer. By performing a tomo-
graphic measurement as described in [22], we determined
the long axis of the particle to be oriented at θ = 10◦±2◦.
We then rotated the tip about its axis as well as the po-
larization of the illumination to excite only the long axis
plasmon. Figure 4II shows the measured plasmon spec-
trum and a ﬁt obtained using the dipole term of Mie
theory with a radiation damping correction [22].

A scanning piezo stage was used to control the dis-
tance (z) between the gold particle and a microscope
coverglass (ngl = 1.52). The point of closest approach
(z0) was found, as in the case of the single molecules,
using a shear force signal. The plasmon decay time was
found according to τ = 1/(2πγ) [24], where γ (in Hz) is
the full-width at half-maximum of the resonance. A plot

FIG. 4: I: The squares show the measured decay time and
linewidth of the plasmon oscillations. The solid line shows
a theoretical ﬁt using Eq. 1. A stretch factor of 0.8 was ﬁt-
ted to the z axis as the piezo in this system was not cali-
brated. II: Circles show a plasmon spectrum recorded from
the nanoparticle at the tip. The solid curve is a ﬁt according
to a modiﬁed Mie theory. III: A schematic of the setup.

FIG. 3: I (left-hand axis): Symbols show measured intensity
of molecule B in Fig. 2. The curve is the theoretical ﬁt to the
data with ﬁtted parameters of φ = 53 ± 1, N A = 1.00 ± 0.01
and other variables as in Fig 2.
II (right-hand axis): The
curve B of Fig. 2. III: The pump intensity at the position of
the molecule with φ = 53◦.

angular distribution of the ﬂuorescence is changing with
the mirror position. The modiﬁcation of emission pat-
terns in the presence of planar boundaries was originally
described by Drexhage [2] and more recently exploited in
the design of semiconductor cavities [17].

The ﬂuorescence intensity can be modelled by ﬁnd-
ing the emission pattern and then integrating over the
numerical aperture of the collection optics [18, 19]. As
shown by Fig. 3III, we must also consider the change in
pump intensity experienced by the molecule when the
mirror enters the evanescent ﬁeld above the pT surface.
As our measurements were made well below the pump
saturation level, we just multiply the integrated emission
pattern by the pump intensity. The solid curve in Fig. 3I
shows the theoretical ﬁt to the intensity data, displaying
reasonable agreement. We note that although the nu-
merical aperture of our objective was 1.4, the intensity
modulation is best reproduced by NA=1. Numerous fac-
tors, such as misalignment of the detection optics or the
birefringence of the pT ﬁlm, could lead to a reduction
of the eﬀective numerical aperture. We believe that the
main cause of the discrepancy is that the integration of
the emission pattern over the numerical aperture assumes
the entire dipole-mirror system is at the focus of the ob-
jective. This is not actually the case for z > 500 nm,
equivalent to a Rayleigh range of the microscope objec-
tive. In this regime our high NA confocal detection sys-
tem begins to lose some of the photons that are ﬁrst
emitted upward and then reﬂected by the mirror.

We will now consider the second experimental system,
namely a gold nanoparticle in front of a glass substrate.
A gold particle can support plasmon resonances that
stem from the collective oscillation of electrons in the
metal [20]. The spectrum of the plasmon resonance de-
pends on the size and shape of the particle, as well as the
complex dielectric constants of the particle and surround-
ing medium. In general, the scattering and absorption

of the plasmon lifetime (and linewidth on the right-hand
axis) as a function of z is shown in Fig. 4I. This result
qualitatively resembles that of the molecular dipole. In
particular for large z we see slowly dying oscillations of
the lifetime that eventually relax to a value of 2.43 fs.
As shown by the solid curve in Fig. 4I, the data is well
reproduced by a theoretical ﬁt according to Eq. 1 [25].
Fitted parameters in this case were z0 = 9 ± 6 nm and
η0 = 0.64 ± 0.07. There are two complications in this
data that are unique to the gold plasmon measurements.
Firstly, the agreement between theory and experiment
deteriorates for z < 200 nm. We believe that this is be-
cause a gold particle close to the glass surface can be no
longer treated as a point dipole. Data with z < 250 nm is
therefore excluded from the ﬁt. Secondly, the linewidth
measurement is aﬀected by interference between the plas-
mon scattering and stray excitation light [26] that causes
a small but constant modulation of the linewidth at large
z. This artifact, with peak-to-peak amplitude 0.007 fs
and period equal to half the plasmon centre wavelength,
has been subtracted from the data.

The so-called “quantum eﬃciency” for a classical an-
tenna, such as a gold particle, can again be deﬁned as
η = Γr
Γ whereby here Γr and Γ denote the scattering (ra-
diation) and total plasmon relaxation rates, respectively
[24, 27]. Equivalently, this quantity can be written as

4

η = σs
σs+σa where σs and σa denote the scattering and ab-
sorption cross sections of the particle, respectively. Using
the outcome of the tomographic measurements and the
speciﬁed particle size, we calculated the values of σs and
σa according to Mie theory and obtained η0 = 0.69±0.07.
Considering the substantial uncertainty in the parame-
ters that enter into the Mie calculation, the agreement
between the calculated quantum eﬃciency and that ex-
tracted from the experiment is very good.

In summary, we have demonstrated the in situ mod-
iﬁcation of the decay rate for a single quantum emit-
In both cases
ter as well as a classical nano-antenna.
the manipulation of a movable external mirror at large
distances modiﬁes the dipole’s radiative decay rate but
leaves its nonradiative dissipation channels unaﬀected.
This enables us to extract the quantum eﬃciency of a
single dipole, a quantity that is nontrivial to determine
even for ensembles [28]. Our approach could be ex-
tended to various emitters of current interest, ranging
from dye molecules and semiconductor nanoparticles to
nanotubes. Such measurements would allow the investi-
gation of ﬂuctuations due to variations in the structure
of the emitter or its local environment.

We thank A.F. Koenderink and S. K¨uhn for assistance
and fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the
Swiss National Science Foundation.

[1] W. L. Barnes, J. Mod. Opt. 45, 661 (1998).
[2] K. H. Drexhage, Progress in Optics 12, 165 (1974).
[3] J. Macklin, J. Trautman, T. Harris, and L. Brus, Science

272, 255 (1996).

[4] X. Brokmann, L. Coolen, M. Dahan, and J. P. Hermier,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 107403 (2004).

[5] W. P. Ambrose, P. M. Goodwin, J. C. Martin, and R. A.

Keller, Science 265, 364 (1994).

[6] W. Trabesinger, A. Kramer, M. Kreiter, B. Hecht, and

U. Wild, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 2118 (2002).

successfully employed an average index [2, 29]. Biaxial
layers could, in principle, be included in the model, how-
ever to our knowledge this has never been done.

[17] H. Benisty, H. DeNeve, and C. Weisbuch, IEEE J. Quant.

Elect. 34, 1612 (1998).

A 15, 1192 (1998).

[18] H. Benisty, R. Stanley, and M. Mayer, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

[19] J. Enderlein, Chem. Phys. 247, 1 (1999).
[20] U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal

Clusters (Springer Berlin, 1995).

[7] R. R. Chance, A. Prock, and R. Silbey, Adv. Chem. Phys.

[21] A. Wokaun, J. P. Gordon, and P. F. Liao, Phys. Rev.

[8] K. G. Sullivan and D. G. Hall, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14,

[22] T. Kalkbrenner, U. Hakanson, and V. Sandoghdar, Nano

Lett. 48, 957 (1982).

Lett. 4, 2309 (2004).

37, 1 (1978).

1149 (1997).

(2000).

[9] L. Novotny, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 14, 91 (1997).
[10] K. Karrai and I. Tiemann, Phys. Rev. B 62, 13174

[11] R. J. Pfab, J. Zimmermann, C. Hettich, I. Gerhardt,
A. Renn, and V. Sandoghdar, Chem. Phys. Lett. 387,
490 (2004).

[12] M. A. Lieb, J. M. Zavislan, and L. Novotny, J. Opt. Soc.

Am. B 21, 1210 (2004).

[13] G. S. Harms, T. Irngartinger, D. Reiss, A. Renn, and

U. P. Wild, Chem. Phys. Lett. 313, 533 (1999).

[14] M. Kreiter, M. Prummer, B. Hecht, and U. P. Wild, J.

Chem. Phys. 117, 9430 (2002).

[15] K. Sundararajan, Z. Krist. 93, 238 (1936).
[16] The choice of n is not so critical. The model ﬁts our data
well for 1.78 < n < 1.95 and in all cases the value of
η is greater than 0.90. The value of 1.85 was found by
considering the fraction of power radiated parallel and
perpendicular to the slow axis. Previous work has also

[23] T. Kalkbrenner, M. Ramstein, J. Mlynek, and V. San-

doghdar, J. Micros. 202, 72 (2001).

[24] C. S¨onnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. von Plessen,
J. Feldmann, O. Wilson, and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 077402 (2002).

[25] The ﬁber tip has a negligible inﬂuence on the plasmon
spectrum [22]. Moreover, we are only sensitive to changes
of the plasmon due to the glass substrate while any in-
ﬂuence of the tip is constant during the experiment.

[26] T. Kalkbrenner et al., In preperation.
[27] E. J. Heilweil and R. M. Hochstrasser, J. Chem. Phys.

82, 4762 (1985).

[28] G. A. Crosby and J. N. Demas, J. Phys. Chem. 75, 991

[29] R. M. Amos and W. L. Barnes, Phys. Rev. B 55, 7249

(1971).

(1997).

