Cavity-enhanced single frequency synthesis via DFG of

mode-locked pulse trains

Gabriele Ferrari

INFM, European Laboratory for Non-linear Spectroscopy,

via N. Carrara 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.∗

Iacopo Carusotto
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure,

24 rue Lhomond, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France and

BEC-INFM Research and Development Center, I-38050 Povo, Trento, Italy†

Abstract

We show how to synthesize a CW, single-frequency optical ﬁeld from the frequency-dispersed,

pulsed ﬁeld of a mode-locked laser. This process, which relies on diﬀerence frequency generation

in an optical cavity, is eﬃcient and can be considered as an optical rectiﬁcation. Quantitative

estimates for the output power and amplitude noise properties of a realistic system are given.

Possible applications to optical frequency synthesis and optical metrology are envisaged.

PACS numbers:

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: ferrari@lens.uniﬁ.it
†Electronic address: carusott@science.unitn.it

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The introduction of Kerr-lens mode-locked lasers (KLML) as referenced optical frequency

synthesizers [1, 2] represents a milestone in optical frequency synthesis. Before the advent

of KLML, optical frequency synthesis and measurements were generally performed through

harmonic generation in frequency chains [3, 4] relying on involved apparatuses. In addition,

only narrow portions of the optical spectrum were accessible. Alternative techniques of

frequency interval bisection [5, 6] and optical comb generators [7, 8] simpliﬁed to some extent

the task of synthesizing optical frequencies, but still could not provide a single instrument

to cover the whole optical spectrum from the visible to the near infra-red.

By providing a wide ruler of well spaced optical frequencies, KLML now represent the

best solution to measure and synthesize optical frequencies ranging from the near IR to

most of the visible. These lasers have a spectrum composed by a comb of frequencies fm =

m fr + fCEO, where fr is the repetition rate of the pulsed laser, fCEO is the carrier envelope

oﬀset frequency, and m is an integer [9]. On one hand, optical frequency measurements are

performed by measuring the beat note between the optical frequency f to be measured and

the closest tooth of the KLML comb, and then determining the integer m from a rough

wavelength measure. On the other hand, an optical frequency can be synthesized by locking

the frequency of a continuous wave optical ﬁeld to a tooth of the KLML comb.

From the practical point of view, such optical measurements depend critically on two

issues: the determination and stabilization of the comb parameters fr and fCEO, and the

amount of power available at the frequency component fm closest to the one of the laser

ﬁeld to be measured [11]. While fr is directly available from the amplitude modulation of

the KLML, the determination and stabilization of fCEO, typically known as self-referencing,

involves delicate manipulation of the ultra-broadband light, e.g. by means of nonlinear

optical processes such as frequency doubling of the red tail of the spectrum and its beating

with the blue tail [9] or even more complex schemes, as discussed in [10].

This, in turn, requires the use of octave-spanning sources such as Ti:Sa femto-second lasers

spectrally broadened through micro-structured ﬁbers [12], or ultra-broadband femto-second

lasers [13]. From the point of view of the power available on the frequency component fm of

interest, self-referenced comb generators were demonstrated to have a suitable spectrum to

measure frequencies in the wavelength range from 500 nm up to 2 µm [9, 14]. The region of

2

optimal sensitivity for the measurement depends on the frequency comb spectral envelope

and therefore on the nature of the medium used to generate the ultra-broadband spectrum

[11].

II. CAVITY-ASSISTED RECTIFICATION: GENERAL IDEA

We propose a diﬀerent approach to directly synthesize optical ﬁelds from mode-locked

lasers. The basic idea consists in the conversion of the comb of frequency components present
in a mode-locked laser into a single frequency component ¯f . The idea can be implemented to

devise an optical rectiﬁer that eﬃciently converts a pulsed light source into a monochromatic

continuous wave optical ﬁeld. Two regions of the spectrum of a mode-locked laser are sent

through a non-linear crystal so as to generate radiation via diﬀerence frequency generation

(DFG). The nonlinear polarization in the crystal is composed by a comb of frequency which

are integer multiples of the repetition rate fr. An optical cavity surrounds the non-linear
crystal and is resonant with the polarization component at frequency ¯f, while all other

components are oﬀ-resonance with respect to all cavity modes.
In these conditions, the
polarization mode at ¯f solely contributes to the ﬁeld circulating in the cavity, hence a

nearly monochromatic radiation is generated with a power proportional to the ﬁnesse of the
cavity. This results in a power on the component at ¯f orders of magnitude higher than

the one that would be obtained by means of a simple frequency ﬁltering of the radiation

generated by a single-pass DFG. Moreover, the suppression of all non resonant components

by the action of the cavity results in a signiﬁcant reduction of the amplitude noise spectrum.

III. THEORETICAL MODEL

Consider a ring cavity of total length L containing a slab of nonlinear medium of length

ℓ, as sketched in ﬁg.1. The cavity mirrors are assumed to be perfectly transmitting for the

source laser light so as to avoid the need of matching the cavity spectral range with the

comb spacing, but highly reﬂecting at the ¯ω of the radiation to be generated so as to take

advantage of resonance eﬀects at ¯ω. Here, the reﬂectivity R of three mirrors will be taken

exactly 1, while the fourth one will have a ﬁnite but small transmission T

1 and will be

≪

considered as the output of the system.

3

(1)

(2)

The source beam consists of a train of ultrashort pulses

E(t) =

E0(t

nτ ) einφ0,

n
X

−

where E0(t) describes the shape of each pulse, τ is the temporal spacing of the pulses and

φ0 is their relative phase. In Fourier space this train of pulses corresponds to a comb of

δ-function peaks

˜E(ω) = 2π ˜E0(ω)

∞

δ(ωτ + φ0 −

2πn),

n=−∞
X
at equispaced frequencies ωm = m ωr + ω0, where ωr = 2π/τ = 2π fr is the comb spacing
φ0/τ = 2π fCEO is the carrier envelope oﬀset. The comb envelope ˜E0(ω) is the

and ω0 =

−

Fourier transform of the single pulse proﬁle E0(t), which is centered at the carrier frequency

ωc and has a width of the order of the inverse of the single pulse duration tp.

Since we are interested in generating light at a given frequency ¯f = ¯ω/2π, two spectral

sections of the comb are selected centered at ¯ω1 and ¯ω2, respectively, and such that their
diﬀerence ¯ω1 −
two sections is limited by the acceptance bandwidth ∆ωacc of the nonlinear crystal as well

¯ω2 is close to ¯ω. In the following, we shall see that the width ∆ω of the

as by the diﬀerent group velocity of the two sub-pulses at ¯ω1,2 during the propagation

towards the crystal, i.e. the dephasing of the diﬀerent teeth within each of the two sections.

Concerning the latter point, dispersion can be compensated with standard techniques such

as chirped mirrors and/or negatively dispersing optical elements, while for the dispersion in

the nonlinear crystal the acceptance bandwidth is directly obtained from data available in

literature. We will discuss in the following a possible experimental realization.

We start by assuming a constant nonlinear susceptibility of the crystal equal to χ(2), and

we neglect source depletion and reﬂections at the crystal interfaces. As the relative phase

between the diﬀerent teeth within each of the two sections around ¯ω1,2 is assumed to be

negligible, the nonlinear polarization inside the crystal can be written as:

P2(z, t) = χ(2)

˜E∗(ωm) ˜E(ωj) ei(kj −km)z e−i(ωj −ωm)t,

(3)

Xj,m

where n(ωj) =

ǫ(ωj) is the linear refractive index of the nonlinear medium at ωj and

kj = n(ωj) ωj/c is the corresponding wave vector; n is assumed to be real at all frequencies

q

of interest; the indices j and m run over the frequency components of the comb. The Fourier

transform of (3) is a comb of δ-function peaks spaced of ωr with a vanishing oﬀset. The

4

amplitude of the component at the frequency ωp = p ωr is given by the sum over all pairs

(j, m) such that j

m = p.

−

The steady-state amplitude of the cavity ﬁeld is obtained by solving the wave equation

with the source term corresponding to the nonlinear polarization (3). As the calculation is

somewhat lengthy, the details are given in the Appendix A, and we here discuss the ﬁnal

result only. The frequency spectrum of the cavity ﬁeld has the same discrete structure of

the nonlinear polarization. On the internal side of the output mirror, the amplitude of the

ω = ωp component has the explicit expression:

˜Eint(ωp) =

e−iωpLeﬀ /c eikNLz1 e−iωpz1/c

(4)

1

T )1/2
(1
−
−
p n(ωp)1/2
4πω2

c2
ei[k(j,m)
k2
p −

NL −kp]ℓ

1

−
k(j,m) 2
NL

Xj−m=p

χ(2) E∗(ωm) E(ωj),

where the optical length of the cavity is deﬁned as usual as Leﬀ = n(ωp) ℓ + (L

ℓ) and z1

−

gives the position of the front interface of the crystal.

The denominator of the ﬁrst fraction on the RHS accounts for resonance eﬀects due to

the presence of the cavity whose modes are determined by the usual round-trip condition

ωqLeﬀ/c = 2πq (q integer). For a weak transmittivity T

1 of the output mirror, and

≪

in the absence of signiﬁcant losses in the cavity, the damping rate Γ of the cavity modes

is determined by the ﬁnite transmittivity T of the output mirror Γ

Γrad = T c/Leﬀ.

≈

The fraction in the sum takes into account the phase-matching eﬀects associated with the

refractive index dispersion of the nonlinear crystal. Because of dispersion, the polarization
at ωp produced by the diﬀerent pairs (j, m) has a diﬀerent wave vector k(j,m)

km.

NL = kj −

This wave vector has to be close to the one of the radiation to be generated kp = n(ωp) ωp/c

for the DFG process to be eﬃcient.

Physical insight on the spectrum of the generated light can be found by rewriting the
amplitude of the output beam ˜Eout(ωp) = √T ˜Eint(ωp) in terms of the ﬁeld ˜Esp(ωp) that

would be generated by the same crystal in a single-pass geometry. The same calculations

(see Appendix A) that led to (4) give the following expression:

˜Eout(ωp) =

1

(1

−

−

√T
T )1/2 eiωpLeﬀ /c

˜Esp(ωp).

(5)

5

For T

1, one sees that the output power which is obtained under the resonance condition is

a factor 4/T larger than the one that would be obtained in a single-pass geometry. If the non-
radiative cavity losses Γloss are not negligible, the output power is a factor 1/(1 + Γloss/Γrad)2

≪

weaker.

IV.

ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES

As we are interested in obtaining a single-frequency output beam, a single tooth out of

the comb of frequencies actually present in the nonlinear polarization spectrum has to be

singled out by the action of the cavity. This has therefore to be designed in such a way

that only the component at the desired frequency ¯ω is on resonance with a cavity mode,

while all the others, being oﬀ-resonance, are suppressed. To this purpose, several strategies

can be adopted. The most trivial one consists in choosing the cavity free spectral range

and the repetition rate of the source laser to be non-commensurate to avoid multiple exact

resonances [15]. Another option is, in analogy with standard laser techniques, to insert in the

cavity some frequency discriminators, like Fabry-Perot etalons, which introduce additional

losses to suppress unwanted resonances keeping the resonant enhancement only for the mode

of interest.

As an illustrative example, we consider a resonator with a free spectral range (FSR) of

1,13 GHz pumped by a femtosecond laser with a repetition rate fr of 1 GHz and containing

two uncoated glass etalons 410 µm and 2.2 mm thick. The two etalons have unity trans-
mission at ¯f, and the ﬁnesse of the cavity is 1570 and limited by the transmissivity of the

output mirror Tout=0.2%. The polarization of the non-linear crystal is a 1/ cosh proﬁle
with FWHM of 6.4 THz and centered on ¯f. Figure 2 represents the output spectrum for
these speciﬁc parameter values with the optical power normalized to ﬁeld at ¯f generated in

single-pass DFG. The inset shows that the resonator not only enhances the component at
¯f but also suppresses the power on most of the other, non-resonant, components. With the
parameters considered here, the power at ¯f is increased by a factor 2000 with respect to

the single-pass conversion, and the sum of the power on all non-resonant modes amounts to
13 % of that at ¯f. This means that the output is indeed a continuous wave ﬁeld at frequency
¯f superposed to a small, amplitude modulation at frequency fr and its higher harmonics

with a bandwidth of the order of the frequency spread of the DFG polarization, of the order

6

of ∆ω/2π.

Giving a realistic estimate of the power generated by the optical rectiﬁer requires stringent

assumptions on the experimental parameters [16]. We examine, for instance, the case in

which the optical rectiﬁer synthesizes radiation at 2.8 µm. We consider the spectral windows

at 680 and 900 nm form a mode-locked laser, each having a spectral width of 3 THz equal

to the acceptance bandwidth of the non-linear crystal. Supposing that the model-locked

laser has 1 GHz repetition rate and delivers both at 680 and 900 nm 30 pJ per pulse [13],

that the non-linear medium is a 1 mm crystal of periodically poled lithium niobate (PPLN),

neglecting losses [17], then the single-pass DFG energy can be estimated to be of 0.2 pJ

per pulse. With the given repetition rate fr=1 GHz and spectral width for the envelope of

the DFG radiation, the peak single-pass conversion to 2.8 µm is about 35 nW per frequency
component. The use of the optical rectiﬁer increases the output power at ¯f to 70 µW. This

value is comparable [18] or larger [19] than the power produced by alternative systems with

analogous spectral characteristics.

V. DISCUSSION

Let’s now summarize the main advantages oﬀered by the proposed optical rectiﬁer as a

frequency synthesizer of continuous wave optical ﬁelds. It is well known that the frequency

components generated by DFG between separate spectral regions of one mode-locked laser

depend only on the repetition rate fr and not on the carrier envelope oﬀset frequency fCEO.

This makes its stabilization unnecessary and therefore reduces the complexity of the system.

Another common feature of DFG processes with mode-locked lasers is that the amplitude
at the frequency ¯f is not determined by a single (l, m) pair, but from the constructive

interference of all the pairs l

m = p that lie within the acceptance window of the nonlinear

If we denote by (l∗, m∗) the pair of components which gives exact phase

crystal ∆ωacc.
matching k(l∗,m∗)
its values respectively at ωl∗ and ωm∗, the number Nc of pairs which are actually phase

= n(¯ω) ¯ω /c and we linearize the dispersion of the refractive index around

N L

−

matched can be estimated to be of the order of:

Nc ≈

π
ℓ ωr (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1

vg(¯ω1) −

1
vg(¯ω2)

−1

=

∆ωacc
ωr

.

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(6)

The power of the generated beam is therefore a factor N 2

c larger than the one that would

7

be generated by a single (l, m) pair.

In our cavity-enhanced set-up, the power of the generated light is further enhanced by

a factor proportional to the ﬁnesse. Moreover, suppressing the power on all frequency
components available from the polarization but ¯f , the optical rectiﬁer allows for a strong

reduction on the amplitude modulation of the generated ﬁeld. This results into a reduction

of the noise spectrum of the beatnote signal between the synthesized frequency and that

to be measured [11]. This should lead to high contrast measurements even with relatively

weak ﬁelds.

the others.

In conventional lasers the coherence properties of the generated light are determined by

the spontaneous symmetry breaking induced by coupling between the cavity and the gain

medium [20]. However, it is worth noting that in our optical rectiﬁer the coherence properties

of the output are determined by the ones of the mode-locked laser and, in particular, through

its repetition rate. The cavity plays only the role of selector among the pairs of frequencies

allowed by diﬀerence frequency generation, enhancing one single frequency while suppressing

From the practical point of view, the spectrum of the pumping mode-locked laser has to

be taken into account in the choice of the cavity parameters. Neglecting all cavity losses but

the output mirror, equation (5) shows that output power increases as 1/T . This holds true

in the most usual case when the linewidth of each frequency component of the mode-locked

laser is narrower than the linewidth of the cavity mode. By increasing the ﬁnesse of the

cavity beyond this condition one can easily prove that the circulating power now increases

proportionally to 1/T, while the output power tends to a constant.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we presented a novel scheme for synthesizing continuous wave and single-

frequency optical beams from pulsed mode-locked lasers. We believe that this scheme for

optical rectiﬁcation holds promises for applications to optical frequency metrology and direct

synthesis of CW optical ﬁelds from radiofrequencies. The continuous wave optical synthesizer

would be composed by a mode-locked laser spanning the spectral regions to pump the DFG,

with the repetition rate stabilized to a radiofrequency reference, followed by the optical

rectiﬁer tuned to the frequency to be generated.

8

Acknowledgments

We thank M. Artoni, R.E. Drullinger, G. Giusfredi, D. Mazzotti, and G.M. Tino for stim-

ulating discussions. Laboratoire Kastler Brossel is a unit´e de Recherche de l’Ecole Normale

Sup´erieure et de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, associ´ee au CNRS.

[1] S.A. Diddams, D.J. Jones,

J. Ye,

S.T. Cundiﬀ,

J.L. Hall,

J.K. Ranka, R.S. Windeler,

R Holzwarth, T. Udem, and T.W. H¨ansch, “Direct Link between Microwave and Optical Fre-

quencies with a 300 THz Femtosecond Laser Comb”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5102–5105 (2000).

[2] T. Udem, R. Holzwarth, and T.W. H¨ansch, “Optical frequency metrology”, Nature 416, 233-

237 (2002).

[3] D.A. Jennings, C.R. Pollock, F.R. Petersen, R.E. Drullinger, K.M. Evenson, J.S. Wells,

J.L. Hall, and H.P. Layer, “Direct frequency measurement of the I2-stabilized He-Ne 473-THz

(633-nm) laser”, Opt. Lett. 8, 136–138 (1983).

[4] H. Schnatz, B. Lipphardt, J. Helmcke, F. Riehle, G. Zinner, “First Phase-Coherent Frequency

Measurement of Visible Radiation”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 18–21 (1996).

[5] H.R. Telle, D. Meschede, and T.W. H¨ansch, “Realization of a new concept for visible frequency

division: phase locking of harmonic and sum frequencies”, Opt. Lett 15, 532–534 (1990).

[6] T. Udem, A. Huber, B. Gross, J. Reichert, M. Prevedelli, M. Weitz, and T.W. H¨ansch, “Phase-

Coherent Measurement of the Hydrogen 1S-2S Transition Frequency with an Optical Fre-

quency Interval Divider Chain”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2646–2649 (1997).

[7] M. Kourogi, K. Nakagawa, and M. Ohtsu, “Wide-span optical frequency comb generator for

accurate optical frequency diﬀerence measurement”, IEEE J. Quant. Electron 29, 2693–2701

(1993).

[8] K. Nakagawa, M. de Labachelerie, Y. Awaji, and M. Kourogi, “Accurate optical frequency atlas

of the 1.5-µm bands of acetylene”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 13, 2708–2714 (1996).

[9] S.T. Cundiﬀ, J. Ye., and J.L. Hall, “Optical frequency synthesis based on modelocked lasers”,

Rev. Sci. Instrum. 72, 3749–3771 (2001), and references therein.

[10] H.R. Telle, G. Steinmeyer, A.E. Dunlop, J. Stenger, D.H. Sutter, U. Keller, “Carrier-envelope

oﬀset phase control: A novel concept for absolute optical frequency measurement and ultra-

9

short pulse generation”, Appl. Phys. B 69, 327–332 (1999).

[11] L. Hollberg, C.W. Oates, E.A. Curtis, E.N. Ivanov, S.A. Diddams, Th. Udem, H.G. Robinson,

J.C. Bergquist, W.M. Itano, R.E. Drullinger, and D.J. Wineland , “Optical Frequency Stan-

dards and Measurements”, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 37, 1502–1513 (2001).

[12] J.K. Ranka, R.S. Windeler, and A.J. Stentz, “Visible continuum generation in air silica mi-

crostructure optical ﬁbers with anomalous dispersion at 800nm”, Opt. Lett. 25, 25–27 (2000).

[13] T. Ramond, S.A. Diddams, L. Hollberg, and A Bartels, “Phase-coherent link from optical to

microwave frequencies by means of the broadband continuum from a 1-GHz Ti:sapphire fem-

tosecondoscillator”, Opt. Lett. 27, 1842–1844 (2002).

[14] I. Thomann,

A. Bartels, K.L. Corwin,

N.R. Newbury,

L. Hollberg,

S.A. Diddams,

J.W. Nicholson and M.F. Yan, “20-MHz Cr:forsterite femtosecond ring laser and continuum

generation in the 1-2 µm range”, Opt. Lett. 28, 1368–1370 (2003).

[15] This approach requires a ﬁnesse suﬀuciently high to avoid the contribution of cavity modes

close to unwanted resonances and may result in very high ﬁnesse cavities.

[16] The detailed spectrum of a mode locked laser depends critically on the dispersion properties

of its cavity, and eventually those of medium employed to broaden its spectrum.

[17] L.E. Myers, R.C. Eckardt, M.M. Fejer, R.L. Byer, and W.R. Bosenberg, “Multigrating quasi-

phase-matched optical parametric oscillator in periodically poled LiNbO3”, Opt. Lett. 21,

591–593 (1996).

[18] P. De Natale, S. Borri, P. Cancio, G. Giusfredi, D. Mazzotti, M. Prevedelli, C. De Mauro, and

M. Inguscio, “Extending the optical comb synthesizer to the infrared: from He at 1.083 µm to

CO2 at 4.2 µm”, in Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Laser Spectroscopy

(ICOLS 2003), P. Hannaford, A. Sidorov, H. Bachor, and K. Baldwin eds. (World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore 2004), pp. 63-67.

[19] T. Fuji, A. Apolonski, and F. Krausz, “Self-stabilization of carrier-envelope oﬀset phase by use

of diﬀerence-frequency generation”, Opt. Lett. 29, 632–634 (2004).

[20] A.E. Siegman, Lasers (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986).

[21] R.W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, London, 1992).

[22] P.N.Butcher and D.Cotter, The elements of nonlinear optics (Cambridge Univ.Press, 1993).

10

APPENDIX A: SOLUTION OF THE WAVE EQUATION

The purpose of this appendix is to give some details about the calculations that lead

to the expression (4) for the in-cavity ﬁeld generated by the nonlinear polarization of the

medium.

As Maxwell’s equations are linear, we can calculate the emitted ﬁeld separately for each

pair (j, m) such that ωj −
quency ωp of interest. The ﬁnal result (4) will be the sum of all these contibutions. From now

ωm = ωp which then contributes to the polarization at the fre-

on all quantities are to be considered as Fourier components at the frequency ωp of the cor-

responding quantity. The spatial coordinate z goes around the cavity; let z = 0 correspond

to the output mirror, and the nonlinear medium extend from z = z1 to z = z1 + ℓ.

The general solution of Maxwell’s equation in the free-space outside the nonlinear medium

has the usual plane-wave form:

Efs(z) = ¯Efs eiωpz/c.

There is no need for taking into account the counterpropagating wave thanks to the assump-

tion of negligible reﬂections at the nonlinear medium interfaces. The general solution (A2)

has to be applied in the two regions outside the crystal z

[0, z1] and z

[z1 + ℓ, L], where

∈

∈

the ﬁeld can be respectively written as

¯E(1,2)
fs

being parameters to be determined later.

Using the explicit expression for nonlinear polarization of the nonlinear medium:

E(1,2)
fs

(z) = ¯E(1,2)

eiωpz/c

fs

P2(z) = PN L eikNLz,

the inhomogeneous wave equation inside the nonlinear medium has the form:

∂2
∂z2 + ǫ(ωp)

ω2
p
c2 !

 

E(z) =

4πω2
p
c2 PN L eikNLz.

−

where kN L = kj −
χ(2) ˜E∗(ωm) ˜E(ωj) its amplitude, n(ωp) =

km gives the spatial dependence of the nonlinear polarization, PN L =

ǫ(ωp) is the linear refractive index of the nonlin-

ear medium at the frequency ωp, and kp = n(ωp) ωp/c the corresponding wavevector [21, 22].

q

The general solution of (A3) is:

Emed(z) =

eikNLz + ¯Emed eikpz,

(A5)

4π
c2

−

p PN L
k2
N L

ω2
k2
p −

11

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

where ¯Emed is a parameter to be determined.

The parameters ¯Emed and ¯E(1,2)

fs

can be determined by imposing the appropriate boundary

conditions at the interface between the free-space and the nonlinear medium and at the cavity

mirrors.

As reﬂections at the nonlinear medium interface have been taken as negligible, the energy

ﬂux is conserved across the interface. This imposes that:

¯Emed(z1) = ǫ(ωp)−1/4 ¯E(1)

fs (z1)

¯Emed(z1 + ℓ) = ǫ(ωp)−1/4 ¯E(2)

fs (z1 + ℓ).

Assuming for simplicity a vanishing reﬂection phase for the cavity mirrors, the electric ﬁeld

is continuous at the three perfectly reﬂecting ones, while at the fourth, output, mirror one

has the boundary condition:

¯E(1)

fs (0) = √1

T ¯E(2)

fs (L),

−

where the electric ﬁelds at z = L, 0 are respectively the incident and reﬂected ﬁelds, and T

is the mirror transmittivity.

By imposing the three conditions (A6,A7,A8) onto the general solutions (A2) and (A5)

of the wave equations in the nonlinear medium and in the two regions of free space, one
obtains explicit expressions for the three parameters ¯Emed and ¯E(1,2)

.

fs

In particular, we are interested in the amplitude of the in-cavity ﬁeld just before the

output mirror:

E(2)

fs (L) = ¯E(2)

fs eiωpL/c =

4πω2

p ǫ(ωp)1/4

c2

eikNLz1 e−iωpz1/c
T )1/2

e−iωpLeﬀ /c

−

1

ei(kNL−kp)ℓ
−
k2
N L

k2
p −

(1

−

PN L

(A9)

the eﬀective optical length being deﬁned as Leﬀ = n(ωp)ℓ + (L

ℓ). Summing over all the

−

pairs (j, m), one ﬁnally obtains the expression (4).

From the general solution of the wave equation (A5) inside the medium, it is immediate

to obtain the amplitude of the ﬁeld generated in a single-pass conﬁguration. One has to
ﬁx ¯Emed by imposing that the ﬁeld vanishes at the front interface Emed(z1) = 0 and then

evaluate the corresponding value of the ﬁeld at the exit interface:

Emed(z1 + ℓ) =

eikpℓ eikNLz1

(A10)

4πω2
pPN L
c2

1

ei(kNL−kp)ℓ
k2
N L

−
k2
p −

12

from which the generated ﬁeld in a single-pass geometry is immediately obtained using the

boundary condition (A7):

E(2,sp)
fs

(L) =

4πω2

p ǫ(ωp)1/4

eikpℓ eikNLz1 ei(L−ℓ−z1)ωp/c 1

c2

ei(kNL−kp)ℓ
k2
N L

−
k2
p −

PN L.

(A11)

The relation (5) is then simply obtained by comparing (A9) and (A11). Note that (A11)

could be obtained from (A9) simply by imposing that a full transmission of the output

mirror T = 1.

13

M1

χ(2)

M3

MSE

M4

Pump: ω

1,2

M2

Output: ω

FIG. 1: Experimental setup of the optical rectiﬁer for mode-locked lasers. A non-linear medium,

chosen for diﬀerence frequency generation (DFG) between two spectral regions of a mode-locked

laser, is placed into an optical cavity resonant with one frequency component ¯ω generated by DFG.

The M1,2,3 mirrors are highly reﬂective at the frequencies generated by DFG and highly transmit-

ting for all the other frequencies. The output mirror M4 is chosen to be slightly transmitting for

the circulating light. MSE: mode selective etalons.

14

10(cid:13)3(cid:13)

10(cid:13)2(cid:13)

10(cid:13)1(cid:13)

10(cid:13)0(cid:13)

10(cid:13)-1(cid:13)

10(cid:13)-2(cid:13)

10(cid:13)-3(cid:13)

10(cid:13)-4(cid:13)

)(cid:13)
r
e
w
o
p

 
s
s
a
p
-
e
g
n
s
(
 

l

i

e
d
o
m

 
r
e
p

 
r
e
w
o
P

 (cid:13)

10(cid:13)2(cid:13)

10(cid:13)0(cid:13)

 

10(cid:13)-2(cid:13)

10(cid:13)-4(cid:13)

0(cid:13)

20(cid:13)

40(cid:13)

60(cid:13)

80(cid:13) 100(cid:13)

 (cid:13)

 (cid:13)

 

 

0(cid:13)

1(cid:13)

2(cid:13)

4(cid:13)

5(cid:13)

6(cid:13)

7(cid:13)

3(cid:13)

-(cid:13)

f - f (THz)(cid:13)

FIG. 2: Output power-spectrum of the rectiﬁer discussed in the text. Each point corresponds to the

frequency component of the polarization at fp = ωp/2π. The power is normalized to the single-pass
conversion eﬃciency of the nonlinear crystal at the center frequency ¯f ; the dashed line corresponds

to the emission that one would have in a single-pass DFG. The inset represents a magniﬁcation of

the same spectrum around the resonant mode (bold circle), with the frequency expressed in GHz.

The polarization is here considered to have a 1/ cosh proﬁle centered at ¯f with FWHM of 6.4 THz

(dashed line). The graph shows the increase of the power available on the resonant frequency

component and the corresponding reduction of the power on all the non-resonant components.

15

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
