5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cut-wire pairs and plate pairs as magnetic atoms for optical metamaterials

G. Dolling, C. Enkrich, and M. Wegener
Institut f¨ur Angewandte Physik, Universit¨at Karlsruhe (TH),
Wolfgang-Gaede-Straße 1, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany

J. Zhou and C. M. Soukoulis∗
Ames Laboratory and Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, U.S.A.

S. Linden
Institut f¨ur Nanotechnologie, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe in der
Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft, Postfach 3640, D-76021 Karlsruhe, Germany

We study the optical properties of metamaterials made from cut-wire pairs or plate pairs. We
obtain a more pronounced optical response for arrays of plate pairs – a geometry which also elim-
inates the undesired polarization anisotropy of the cut-wire pairs. The measured optical spectra
agree with simulations, revealing negative magnetic permeability in the range of telecommunications
wavelengths. Thus, nanoscopic plate pairs might serve as an alternative to the established split-ring
resonator design.

c(cid:13)2005 Optical Society of America

Magnetic and left-handed metametarials have recently
attracted considerable attention [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] be-
cause of their unusual optical properties [8] and because
of potential applications, such as, for example, ”perfect
lenses”.[9] The latter require a negative refractive index,
which can be realized by a negative electric permittiv-
ity and a negative magnetic permeability – at the same
frequency. Traditionally,[10] this is achieved by a combi-
nation of artiﬁcial “electric atoms” and artiﬁcial “mag-
netic atoms”, i.e., by split-ring resonators and metallic
wires, with “lattice constants” much smaller than the
wavelength of light, such that the light ﬁeld experiences
an eﬀective homogeneous medium.

Other theoretical work [11, 12, 13] showed, however,
that pairs of ﬁnite-length wires (“cut-wire pairs”) would
not only be able to replace the split-ring resonators
(SRR) but would possibly also lead to a negative re-
fractive index directly – without the need for additional
metallic wires.
It is the aim of this letter to investi-
gate the optical properties of metamaterials made from
such cut-wire pairs and from related plate pairs experi-
mentally and to systematically study the dependence on
diﬀerent design parameters.

Fig. 1 (a) illustrates the connection between usual SRR
and cut-wire pairs. On the LHS, a usual SRR is shown,
which can be viewed as just one winding of a magnetic
coil with inductance L in series with a capacitance C.[4]
The latter is formed by the ends of the wire. The os-
cillating magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the SRR plane
induces a circulating current in the coil. Near to the LC
resonance at angular frequency ωLC = 1/√LC, the circu-
lating current in the coil can lead to a magnetic moment
perpendicular to the plane of the coil that can counteract
the external magnetic ﬁeld, enabling a negative magnetic
permeability. Opening up the split in the SRR decreases
the capacitance C, hence increases the LC resonance fre-

FIG. 1:
(a) Scheme illustrating the “adiabatic” transition
from split-ring resonators (LHS) to cut-wire pairs (RHS) as
“magnetic atoms” of optical metamaterials. (b) Electron mi-
crograph (oblique-incidence view) of an actual cut-wire pair
with w = 150 nm, t = 20 nm, d = 60 nm, l = 700 nm, (c)
corresponding top view.

quency. Additionally opening the bottom arm of the re-
sulting “U” leads to a second serial capacitance, further
reducing the net capacitance in the circuit. This results
in an increase of the resonance frequency. Further open-
ing of the lower slit brings us to a pair of cut wires. The
result of this transition is that the Ohmic currents in the
horizontal arms on the LHS of Fig. 1 (a) have been re-
placed by displacement currents on the RHS. On the one
hand, we have increased the LC resonance frequency for
a given minimum feature size. On the other hand, this
increased resonance frequency at ﬁxed lattice constant
decreases the ratio between (resonance) wavelength, λ,
and lattice constant, a. A true metamaterial requires a
very large ratio of wavelength to lattice constant, typi-
cally on the order of λ/a = 10 for SRR.[14, 15] With the
cut-wire-pair design, this ratio is typically λ/a

2.

Obvious relevant design parameters are the length of
the cut wires l, the metal thickness t, the width w of
the wires, and the spacing between the wires d. To fab-
ricate structures suitable for the polarization conﬁgura-

≈

tion depicted in Fig. 1(a) on a substrate for normal in-
cidence conditions, the cut wires have to be on top of
each other, with a certain dielectric spacer layer in be-
tween (see Fig. 1(b)). Such design is straightforward to
realize: We start by deﬁning the lateral structure in a
PMMA photoresist (spin-coated onto a glass substrate
covered with 5-nm layer of indium-tin-oxide) using stan-
dard electron-beam lithography. Thereafter, we sequen-
tially deposit a t = 20-nm thin gold layer, a MgF2 layer
of thickness d and refractive index 1.39, and another 20-
nm thin gold layer, all via electron-beam evaporation,
followed by a lift-oﬀ procedure. All samples presented in
this letter have a total area of (80 µm)2.

Transmittance and reﬂectance spectra are measured
with a Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (Bruker
Equinox 55, NIR halogen source) combined with
an infrared microscope (Bruker Hyperion 1000, 36
×
cassegrain lens, numerical aperture NA = 0.5, Si detec-
tor or liquid N2-cooled InSb detector, infrared polarizer).
The samples are aligned with their surfaces perpendicu-
lar to the optical axis. The transmittance and reﬂectance
spectra are normalized to the bare substrate and a silver
mirror, respectively, and are taken for two orthogonal
linear polarizations of the incident light.

FIG. 2: Measured transmittance (red) and reﬂectance (blue)
spectra for cut-wire pairs for vertical incident polarization
(LHS column) and horizontal polarization (RHS column). Pa-
rameters varied: (a) l = 500 nm, (b) l = 400 nm, and (c)
l = 300 nm. Fixed parameters for (a)–(c): w = 150 nm,
t = 20 nm, d = 80 nm, ax = 500 nm, and ay = 1050 nm.
The dotted curves in (a) are spectra from a nominally identi-
cal structure, but without the upmost gold wire. (d) as (b),
but d = 60 nm rather than 80 nm. The insets in (a)-(d) show
corresponding electron micrographs (top view).

2

FIG. 3: Measured transmittance (red) and reﬂectance (blue)
spectra for arrays of plate pairs. Parameters varied: (a) w =
l = 300 nm and (b) w = l = 200 nm. Fixed parameters: t =
20 nm, d = 80 nm, and ax = ay = l + 350 nm. Representation
as in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2 (a)-(c) show results for cut-wire pairs of diﬀer-
ent length but ﬁxed MgF2 spacer thickness and ﬁxed wire
width. The dotted curves in (a) correspond to a nomi-
nally identical sample, however, without the upmost gold
layer. This single cut-wire sample shows only one pro-
nounced resonance – the Mie resonance – for each po-
larization. For an incident polarization along the long
axis of the cut-wire pairs, two resonances are observed,
which essentially disappear for orthogonal polarization.
If the two wires were identical, had identical environ-
ments, and were excited equivalently, these two reso-
nances would correspond to the symmetric (antisymmet-
ric) low-frequency (high-frequency) mode of the coupled
system of the two cut wires. However, in our case the
symmetry is already broken by the excitation geome-
try and by the presence of the substrate. As a result,
both resulting resonances have antisymmetric character
to some extend, thus, both of them have a corresponding
magnetic dipole moment connected with a resonance in
the magnetic permeability µ. A comparison of Fig. 2 (b)
and (d) shows the dependence on the MgF2 spacer thick-
ness d. As expected from the above picture of two cou-
pled oscillators, the splitting between the two eﬀective
resonances depends on their coupling: For thin (thick)
spacers, the coupling is strong (weaker), hence the two
resonances are split by a large (smaller) amount in the
spectrum.

The obvious polarization dependence of the cut-wire
pairs is undesired, for example in potential applications
as “perfect lenses”. Thus we have also investigated sam-
ples for which the wire width equals the wire length, i.e.,
where w = l. In this case, the cut-wire pairs turn into
nanoscopic plate pairs. Their measured optical proper-
ties are shown in Fig. 3. Obviously, the resulting optical
resonances are qualitatively similar, yet even more pro-
nounced than in the case of cut-wire pairs. Reducing the
value of w = l, allows for tuning of the resulting reso-
nance positions.

3

mittance and reﬂectance spectra as well as the retrieval
for the parameters of the structure shown in Fig. 3(a).
For the long-wavelength resonance, we obtain a spectral
region with a negative real part of µ indeed, but no neg-
ative Re(ǫ) at the same frequency and no negative Re(n)
(red curves). The corresponding imaginary parts of µ,
ǫ, and n (blue curves) are also depicted. The retrieval
for the short-wavelength resonance and beyond should
be taken with some caution as one gradually leaves the
metamaterial limit, i.e., periodicity eﬀects come into play.

In conclusion, we have experimentally realized and
characterized nanoscale cut-wire pairs and plate pairs,
both of which are alternatives for split-ring resonators
as “magnetic atoms” in metamaterials. Plate pairs are
advantageous compared to cut-wire pairs because their
optical properties are identical for the two orthogonal in-
cident linear polarizations. Comparison with theory and
subsequent retrieval shows that both options exhibit a
frequency range with negative magnetic permeability. In
contrast to other reports,[16] however, we do not obtain a
negative refractive index from the cut-wire pairs or plate
pairs alone, that we have studied so far.

We acknowledge support by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft through subproject A1.5 of the DFG-
Forschungszentrum “Functional Nanostructures” (CFN)
and by project We 1497/9-1. The research of C. M. S.
is further supported by the Alexander von Humboldt
senior-scientist award 2002, by Ames Laboratory (Con-
tract No. W-7405-Eng-82), EU FET project DALHM
and DARPA (HR0011-05-C-0068).

∗ C.M.S. is also at Institute of Electronic Structure and

Laser at FORTH, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

FIG. 4: (a) Calculated transmittance T (red) and reﬂectance
R (blue) spectra for the structure shown in Fig. 3(a), i.e., for
a single layer. Vertical and horizontal incident linear polar-
ization are strictly identical. (b) Electric permittivity ǫ, (c)
refractive index n, and (d) magnetic permeability µ as ob-
tained from the corresponding retrieval for a stack of layers.

For the mentioned reasons, the samples corresponding
to Fig. 3(a) seem most attractive to us. Thus, we explic-
itly present the retrieval of the magnetic permeability
µ, the electric permittivity ǫ, and the refractive index
n here. We use the Drude model for the gold [4] and
all other parameters as described above. The retrieval is
done along the traditional lines,[14, 15] i.e., we calculate
transmittance and reﬂectance spectra for a sequence of
layers perpendicular to the substrate, i.e., for a periodic
medium with lattice constant az = 130 nm and retrieve
µ, ǫ, and n from that. Fig. 4 shows the calculated trans-

[1] R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Science 292,

77 (2001).

[2] T. J. Yen, W. J. Padilla, N. Fang, D. C. Vier, D. R. Smith,
J. B. Pendry, D. N. Basov, and X. Zhang, Science 303,
1494 (2004).

(1996).

[10] J. B. Pendry, A. J. Holden, D. J. Robbins, and W. J.
Stewart, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 47, 2075
(1999).

[11] A. N. Lagarkov and A. K. Sarychev, Phys. Rev B 53, 6318

[3] D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry, and M. C. K. Wiltshire, Sci-

[12] L. V. Pamina, A. N. Grigorenko, and D. P. Makhnovskiy,

ence 305, 788 (2004).

[4] S. Linden, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, J. Zhou, T. Koschny,

and C. M. Soukoulis, Science 306, 1351 (2004).

[5] S. Zhang, W. Fan, B. K. Minhas, A. Frauenglass, K. J.
Malloy, and S. R. J. Brueck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 37402
(2005).

[6] H. O. Moser, B. D. F. Casse, O. Wilhelmi, and B. T. Saw,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 63901 (2005).

[7] N. Katsarakis, G. Konstantinidis, A. Kostopoulos, R. S.
Penciu, T. F. Gundogdu, M. Kafesaki, E. N. Economou,
Th. Koschny, and C. M. Soukoulis, Opt. Lett. 30, 1348
(2005).

[8] V. G. Veselago, Sov. Phys. Usp. 10, 509 (1968).
[9] J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966 (2000).

Phys. Rev B 66, 155411 (2002).

[13] V. A. Podolskiy, A. K. Sarychev, E. E. Narimanov, and
V. M. Shalaev, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 7, 32 (2005).
[14] D. R. Smith, S. Schultz, P. Markos, and C. M. Soukoulis,

Phys. Rev. B 65, 195104 (2002).

[15] Th. Koschny, P. Markos, E. N. Economou, D. R. Smith,
D. C. Vier, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. B 71, in
press (2005).

[16] While completing this manuscript we learned about inde-
pendent and related work on cut-wire pairs: V. M. Sha-
laev, International Conference on Quantum Electronics
and Laser Science (QELS), Baltimore (U.S.A.), May 22-
27, 2005, JThA1.

