Surface state photonic bandgap cavities

A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko
Department of Science and Technology, Link¨oping University, 601 74, Norrk¨oping, Sweden
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We propose and analyze a new type of a resonant high-Q cavity for lasing, sensing or ﬁltering
applications, which is based on a surface states of a ﬁnite photonic crystal. We demonstrate that
such the cavity can have a Q factor comparable with that one of conventional photonic band-gap
defect mode cavities. At the same time, the distinguished feature of the surface mode cavity is that
it is situated directly at the surface of the photonic crystal. This might open up new possibilities
for design of novel photonic devices and integration of photonic circuits.

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 42.70.Qs, 42.25.Bs, 42.60.Da

Photonic crystals have attracted ever increasing atten-
tion in the last decade due to their unique properties and
possible applications in future generation of optical and
photonic devices like light emitting diodes, delay lines,
waveguides and lasers [1, 2]. The lasing eﬀect has been
demonstrated for variety of photonic crystal structures
including bandgap defect mode lasers [3], distributed
feedback lasers [4], and bandedge lasers [5]. High-Q pho-
tonic bandgap cavities ﬁnd their potential application in
In this
all-optical networks and photonic chips [6, 7].
Letter we present a new type of a photonic bandgap cav-
ity utilizing a surface state residing on the surface of a
photonic crystal, which can be used for lasing, sensing or
ﬁltering applications. We demonstrate that a weak cou-
pling of the resonant modes of the cavity with the out-
going radiation results in a strongly enhanced intensity
of an electromagnetic ﬁeld on the surface of the photonic
crystal and leads to the ultra-high cavity Q factor.

Surface states reside at the interface between a pho-
tonic crystal and open space, decaying both into the
crystal and air [1]. An unmodiﬁed surface of a semi-
inﬁnite photonic crystal does not normally support the
surface state. The surface state appears in the band-
gap of the photonic crystal when the boundary of the
photonic crystal is modiﬁed by, e.g., truncating the sur-
face rods, shrinking or increasing their size, or creating
more complex surface geometry [1, 8, 9, 10, 11].
It is
important to emphasize that the surface mode residing
on the inﬁnitely long boundary of a semi-inﬁnite crystal
represents a truly bound state with the inﬁnite lifetime
and Q factor, and consequently does not couple with the
incoming/outgoing radiation.

In our recent work [11] we have demonstrated that
when the translational symmetry along the boundary of
the semi-inﬁnite crystal is broken, the surface mode turns
into a resonant state with a ﬁnite lifetime, which can be
utilized for lasing and sensing applications. The main
purpose of the present Letter is to propose and analyze
a structure that can be used for experimental realization
of a high-Q surface state cavity in the bandgap photonic
crystal. To identify the surface state resonant modes and
compute their quality factors, we apply a novel compu-
tational approach based on the two-dimensional (2D) re-
cursive Green’s function technique [11]. Using this tech-

nique, the intensity distribution of the electromagnetic
radiation is computed in the frequency domain on the
basis of the the Green’s function of the photonic struc-
ture that is calculated recursively by adding slice by slice
on the basis of Dyson’s equation.
In order to account
for the inﬁnite extension of the structure both into air
and into the space occupied by the photonic crystal we
make use of the so-called ”surface Green’s functions” that
propagate the electromagnetic ﬁelds into (and from) in-
ﬁnity.

FIG. 1: (color online) Dispersion relation for the TM modes of
an inﬁnite square-lattice photonic crystal in the ΓX direction.
The rod diameter D = 0.4a, where a is the lattice constant;
ε = 8.9. Shaded regions indicate the bandgaps. The red line
shows the dispersion relation for the surface mode in a semi-
inﬁnite photonic crystal where the diameter of the outermost
surface rods d = 0.5D. The inset depicts the intensity of
the Ez-component of the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the surface
state.

We study a semi-inﬁnite square-lattice photonic crystal
composed of dielectric rods (ε = 8.9, diameter D = 0.4a,
a is a lattice constant) in the air background. This struc-
ture has a fundamental bandgap for the TM-polarization
in the interval 0.33 ≤ ωa/2πc ≤ 0.44 [1], see Fig 1. To
modify the surface we place rods of a reduced diameter
d = 0.5D on the inﬁnitely long surface of a semi-inﬁnite
photonic crystal. This conﬁguration supports one sur-
face mode whose dispersion relation along the surface is
illustrated in Fig. 1. The inset to Fig. 1 shows the in-

tensity of the Ez-component of the electromagnetic ﬁeld
in the surface state. The ﬁeld is strongly localized at the
surface rods and quickly decays both into the bulk of the
photonic crystal and into air.

In order to provide a coupling between the surface state
and incoming/outgoing radiation we consider a semi-
inﬁnite photonic crystal structure containing only a ﬁnite
number N of the surface rods of the reduced diameter
d = 0.5D. These rods deﬁne a resonant cavity situated
at the surface of the photonic crystal as illustrated in the
inset to Fig. 2 for the case of N = 6.

[11] for details).

Our calculations are performed in the supercell geom-
etry that inﬁnitely extends into the air region to the left
and into the bulk of the photonic crystal to the right
(see Ref.
In the transverse direction
in the direction parallel to the surface) we utilize
(i.e.
the cyclic boundary condition.
In our calculation the
supercell consists of N + 4 unit cells in the transverse
direction. Because of the rapid decay of the ﬁeld inten-
sity into the bulk, this choice is proven to be suﬃcient to
ensure that the neighboring supercells are well isolated
from each other.

In order to calculate the Q factor of the structure at
hand, we illuminate the surface by an incidence wave
(that excites the surface modes) and compute the in-
tensity of the ﬁeld distribution. The Q factor, deﬁned
as Q=2πω*(stored energy)/(energy lost per cycle), then
can be expressed in the following form [2, 11]:

Q = ω

Ω
4 R Sindy

,

(1)

where ΩT M = R [εε0|Ez|2 + µ0(|Hx|2 + |Hy|2)]dxdy
characterizes the energy stored in the system (TM-
polarization) and the integral over Sin is the incoming
energy ﬂux.
It should be stressed the value of the Q
factor at resonance depends on the coupling of the sur-
face state modes with the outgoing radiation, and thus is
independent of the incidence angle of the incoming wave.
Note that the calculated ﬁeld distribution includes the
contributions from both the surface mode (exited by the
incident light), and the incident and reﬂected waves. This
leads to a nearly constant oﬀ-resonance background in
the dependence Q = Q(ω) that is caused by the contri-
bution of the incident and reﬂected waves in the total
ﬁeld intensity in Eq. (1). To remove this background
we calculate the Q factor of a structure without surface
states. We choose this structure as a semi-inﬁnite pho-
tonic crystal with all identical rods, which is known not
to support surface modes [1]. Then the obtained value is
subtracted from the calculated value of the Q factor of
the system under study [11].

Figure 2 shows a Q factor of the resonant cavity as
a function of the frequency of the illuminating light. In
the given frequency interval there are three cavity modes
with the Q factors of the order of ∼ 105 − 106. (Note
that above values might underestimate the actual theo-
retical Q factors obtained within present 2D calculations,
because even ﬁner frequency steps in the vicinity of the

2

FIG. 2: (color online) (a) Frequency dependence of the Q
factor of a surface state photonic bandgap cavity. Inset illus-
trates the resonant cavity deﬁned by the N = 6 surface rods of
the smaller diameter d = 0.5D placed on the photonic crystal
surface. (b) The dispersion relation for the surface state for
the semi-inﬁnite photonic crystal. The dashed lines indicate
the expected resonant wave vectors for the modes α = 5, 6, 7
given by Eq. (2) and corresponding expected resonant fre-
quencies. Parameters of the photonic crystal are the same as
for the lattice of Fig. 1. The structure is illuminated at the
◦
incidence angle ϕ = 34.7

.

resonances are required for better resolution of the Q
factors). The calculated values of the Q factors are com-
parable to those predicted and achieved in defect mode
bandgap cavities [3, 7] and in whispering-gallery trajec-
tories cavities [12, 13, 14, 15]. It is expected however that
in actual photonic structures realized typically in a slab
geometry, the Q factor will be reduced due to the radia-
tive decay in the direction perpendicular to the plane of
the photonic crystal [7] (which has not been accounted
for in the present 2D calculations).

Let us now analyze the positions of the calculated res-
onance peaks. The structure at hand can be considered
as a conventional Fabry-Perot resonator whose resonant
wavelengths are given by λα = 2π/kα, with the wavevec-
tor

kα =

πα
w

,

(2)

where α is the mode number and w is the width of the
cavity (7a in the present case). For the photonic crys-
tal under study the surface state exists only in a limited
frequency interval, 0.33 . ωa/2πc . 0.42 (see the disper-
sion relation for the surface state in Fig. 1). It follows
from this dispersion relation that all the modes given by

Eq. (2), except α = 5, 6, 7 are situated outside this in-
terval. An estimation of the expected positions for the
resonant peaks for the modes α = 5, 6, 7 based on Eq.
(2) and on the dispersion relation for the surface mode
is shown in Fig. 2 where the discrepancy between the
expected and calculated resonance frequencies does not
exceed 0.5%.

3

the rods, and the intensity dies oﬀ very quickly both to
the open space and to the photonic crystal. The ﬁeld
intensity at diﬀerent rods in the cavity is expected to
be determined by the overlap of the αth eigenstate of
the Fabry-Perot resonator with the actual positions of
the rods in the cavity. This overlap for the 6th mode is
shown in Fig. 3, which agrees very well with the actual
calculated intensity distribution pattern. Note that all
the results reported in this Letter correspond to the case
of N = 6 rods (see inset to Fig. 2). We performed
calculations for diﬀerent numbers of rods N = 5 − 11
and we always ﬁnd an excellent agreement between the
calculated and expected resonant frequencies as well as
between the intensity distributions.

Recently, it has been demonstrated that a surface of a
photonic crystal supporting a leaking surface mode can
serve as a kind of antenna to beam the emitted light
in a single direction, which may be used for integration
of the photonic crystals with conventional ﬁber optics
devices or lenses [16, 17]. The proposed surface mode
photonic bandgap cavities, thanks to their unusual prop-
erties where the electromagnetic ﬁeld resides directly on
the surface, can also lead to new applications and novel
integration schemes. These might include utilization of
the surface state cavities for lasing and sensing applica-
tions as well as integration of the photonic crystal devices
with e.g. whispering-gallery-trajectory microlasers that
can be directly coupled to the surface mode cavities.

To conclude, we propose and analyze a novel high-Q
cavity based on a surface state of a photonic crystal. The
resonant cavity is localized directly on the surface row of
the photonic crystal. This unusual property of the sur-
face mode photonic bandgap cavities might open up new
possibilities for design and integration of novel photonic
devices for lasing, sensing and ﬁltering applications.

FIG. 3: (color online) Lower panel: Calculated intensity of the
Ez component for the 6th mode of a resonant cavity shown
in Fig. 2. Upper panel: Expected ﬁeld intensity at diﬀerent
rods is given by the overlap of the 6th eigenstate of the cavity
with the actual positions of the rods.

Figure 3 illustrates the intensity of the Ez component
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld for the resonance mode α = 6.
As expected, the ﬁeld is localized in the cavity inside

[1] J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, and J. N. Winn,
(Princeton University

“Molding the Flow of Light”,
Press, Princeton, 1995).

[2] K. Sakoda, “Optical properties of photonic crystalls”

(Springer, Berlin, 2001).

[3] O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D.
O’Brien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, Science 284, 1819
(1999).

[4] M. Meier, A. Mekis, A. Dodabalapur, A. Timko, R. E.
Slusher, J. D. Joannopoulos, and O. Nalamasu, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 74, 7 (1999).

[5] S.-H. Kwon, H.-Y Ryu, G.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Lee, and S.-B.

Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3870 (2003).

[6] J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve,and S. Fan, Nature

[7] B.-S. Song, S. Noda, T. Asano, and Y. Akanane, Nature

[8] F. Ramos-Mendieta and P. Halevi, Phys. Rev. B, 59

386, 149 (1997).

Materials 4, 207 (2005).

15112 (1999).

[9] X. Zhang, L.-M. Li, Z.-Q. Zhang, and C. T. Chan, Phys.

Rev. B, 63 125114 (2001).

[10] J. M. Elson and K. Halterman, Opt. Express 12, 4855

(2004).

[11] A.I. Rahachou, and I.V. Zozoulenko, to appear in Phys.

Rev. B (arxiv:physics/0504088).

[12] S. L. McCall, A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. J. Pearton,
and R. A. Logan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 289-291 (1992).
[13] B. Gayral, J. M. G´erard, A. Lemaˆitre, C. Dupuis, L.
Manin, and J. L. Pelouard, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 1908-
1910 (1999).

[14] A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko, J. Appl. Phys. 94,
7929 (2003); A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko, Ap-
plied Optics 43, 1761 (2004)

[15] D. K. Armani, T. J. Kippenberg, S. M. Spillane and K.

J. Vahala, Nature 421, 925 (2003).

[16] E. Moreno, F. J. Garc´ia-Vidal, and L. Mart´in-Moreno,

Phys. Rev. B 69, 121402(R) (2004).

[17] P. Kramper, M. Agio, C.M. Soukoulis, A. Birner, F.
M¨uller, R. B.Wehrspohn, U. G¨osele, and V. Sandoghdar,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 13903 (2004).

