Applied Physics B manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Beaming eﬀect from increased-index photonic crystal waveguides

Steven K. Morrison and Yuri S. Kivshar

Nonlinear Physics Centre and Centre for Ultra-high bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems (CUDOS),
Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
(Fax: +61-26125-8277, Email:skm124@rsphysse.anu.edu.au)

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract We study the beaming eﬀect of light for the
case of increased-index photonic crystal (PhC) waveg-
uides, formed through the omission of low-dielectric me-
dia in the waveguide region. We employ the ﬁnite-diﬀe-
rence time-domain numerical method for characterizing
the beaming eﬀect and determining the mechanisms of
loss and the overall eﬃciency of the directional emission.
We ﬁnd that, while this type of PhC waveguides is ca-
pable of producing a highly collimated emission as was
demonstrated experimentally, the inherent characteris-
tics of the structure result in a restrictively low eﬃciency
in the coupling of light into the collimated beam of light.

PACS42.70.Qs; 78.20.Bh

1 Introduction

Photonic crystals (PhC) are expected to play an impor-
tant role in the development of small integrated opti-
cal circuits, combining the diverse functionality of opti-
cal devices and intra-connections that conﬁne light on
a sub-wavelength scale. Yet, associated with this sub-
wavelength conﬁnement of light is the complexity of in-
terfacing the small light waveguides and cavities of pho-
tonic crystals with conventional optical systems such as
ﬁbers, waveguides, and freely propagating light beams.
Indeed, coupling light directly out of PhC waveguides
into free-space in an usable manner is particularly chal-
lenging due to the strong diﬀraction of light by the sub-
wavelength dimensions of the waveguide exit [1]. How-
ever, the beaming eﬀect of light, which has been studied
in metallic-thin-ﬁlm systems [2,3] and shown to exist in
PhCs [4,5,6], has been suggested as a possible approach
to overcome these limitations, allowing highly directed
emissions from PhC waveguides that exist below the
diﬀraction limit. To overcome the diﬀraction limit and
achieve a directed emission, the beaming eﬀect utilizes

leaky surface modes and coherent interference to redis-
tribute the power of the transmitted light into a narrow
beam directly in front of the waveguide exit. Coupling
from the leaky or radiative surface modes is achieved
through a periodic corrugation in the exit surface of the
PhC structure, with the geometric and material proper-
ties of this corrugation establishing a spatial phase and
amplitude distribution within the radiated ﬁeld that, un-
der appropriate conditions, leads to a highly directed
emission.

However, the full utility and eﬃciency of the beaming
eﬀect is yet to be determined. Our recent study has illus-
trated the potential to substantially enhance and control
the beaming eﬀect by engineering the surface and near-
surface structure of a particular PhC [7]. In this case,
the enhanced beaming structure makes use of a PhC
created using a square lattice of high dielectric rods in
air, where a row of rods is removed to form a waveguide.
Unfortunately, this type of PhC does not exhibit a com-
plete photonic band gap (PBG) for both polarisations of
light and the surface structure required for the beaming
eﬀect is not easy to fabricate. For these reasons, in this
paper we examine the eﬀectiveness of the beaming ef-
fect in the more readily manufactured PhC structure—a
triangular lattice of holes in a high dielectric material—
in which the beaming eﬀect has been experimentally
demonstrated [6]. A waveguide can be formed within this
PhC through the omission of a row of holes to create an
increased-index guiding region that does exhibit a PBG
for both polarisations of light. In this paper, we analyze,
by the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain numerical method,
the conditions required to achieve optimal beaming from
the increased-index waveguide, highlighting the sources
of losses and ineﬃciencies. From our analysis, we illus-
trate how this structure, while producing a highly di-
rected emission, does not achieve an eﬃcient coupling
to the transmitted light, thus limiting its technological
application.

2

Steven K. Morrison and Yuri S. Kivshar

Fig. 1 Photonic crystal model based on Ref. [6, 8]: (a) de-
tailing the waveguide and surface structures; and (b) depict-
ing the supercell construction for calculation of the surface
modes’ dispersion relationships.

Fig. 2 Project dispersion relationship of the even-symmetry
waveguide modes. A mini-stop band exists between the sec-
ond and third waveguide bands.

the spatial phase to be varied over the surface Brillouin
zone as the eigenmodes of the surface structure are deter-
mined from Fourier analysis. A small surface termination
region exists that supports surface modes, however, the
modes of this region are weakly localized, causing them
to be rapidly radiated. This rapid coupling of the surface
modes to the radiated ﬁeld is a result of the sharp cusps
of high dielectric created by the partial holes along the
surface [see surface of Fig. 1(b)], resulting in an optical
rough surface that limits the spatial distribution of the
diﬀractively focussing components of light, thus limiting
the formation of the directed emission. To obviate this
limited distribution of the surface modes, we apply a di-

2 Characterisation of the directional emission

We consider the PhC model based on the experimen-
tally demonstrated structures described, for example, in
Refs. [6,8]. It consists of a two-dimensional triangular
lattice of holes created in a background of high dielec-
tric material with a dielectric constant of ǫr = 11.56,
representing silicon at a wavelength of 1.5µm. With a
hole-radius to lattice-pitch ratio of r/a = 0.43, a pho-
tonic band gap is created for TM polarized light (mag-
netic ﬁeld parallel to the hole and travelling in a plane
perpendicular to the holes) within the frequency range
of ω = 0.28×2πc/a to 0.45×2πc/a. We orientate the tri-
angular lattice such that the Γ − K irreducible Brillouin
vector is directed along the z-axis, and form a waveguide
in this direction at x = 0, through the omission of a row
of holes, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). A Gaussian source
is introduced to the waveguide 20a from the waveguide
exit to ensure only true waveguide modes are coupled
from the guide. The dispersion relationships for the even-
symmetry modes of this waveguide are presented in Fig.
2. The terminating surface of the PhC is formed along a
plane parallel to the Γ − M direction, perpendicular to
the waveguide. This terminating plane, introduced any-
where within an inﬁnite PhC, leaves partial holes along
the surface resulting in a natural surface corrugation,
providing wave vector matching to achieve coupling be-
tween surface and radiative modes.

To determine the surface terminations that will sup-
port surface modes, a supercell representation of the sur-
face is created with a combination of periodic bound-
ary and perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary con-
ditions, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). The ﬁelds within the
supercell are represented as complex numbers, allowing

Fig. 3 Surface mode dispersion relationship within the di-
electric in-ﬁll layer for three surface termination of: (i) τ = 0;
(ii) τ = 0.1a; and (iii) τ = 0.2a

Beaming eﬀect from increased-index photonic crystal waveguides

3

Fig. 4 Spatial distribution of the intensity from the increased-index waveguide for: (a) a surface termination of τ = 0.2a and
frequency ω = 0.409 × 2πc/a; and (b) a surface termination of τ = 0.2a and frequency ω = 0.409 × 2πc/a, with a Fabry-Perot
resonance induced by terminating the input end of the waveguide with the bulk of the photonic crystal and the other end by
the partially reﬂective waveguide–vacuum interface.

electric layer to the truncated surface that in-ﬁlls the
partial holes, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). This in-ﬁll layer
has two eﬀects: it reduces the roughness of the surface
allowing the surface modes to travel further along the
surface, and it changes the surface corrugation period
within the range of surface terminations that support
surface modes. Again, using the supercell method we
calculate the surfaces that support surface modes within
the dielectric in-ﬁll region, deﬁned by τ in Fig. 1(a). Fig-
ure 3 illustrates the dispersion relations for three surface
terminations (τ = 0, 0.1a, 0.3a) within this region.

A spectral analysis of a series of terminations within
the surface mode forming region reveals that optimal
beaming occurs for a surface termination of τ = 0.2a
at frequencies corresponding to the band-edges of the
waveguide’s mini-stop band [9] [see Fig.2], where the
waveguide mode’s group velocity tends to zero, increas-
ing the coupling time to surface modes and consequently
increasing the power within the diﬀractively focussing
components of light.To characterize this optimal directed
transmission we calculate the fraction of power, normal-
ized to the total power, within the central lobe of the
directed emission in the simulation domain and between
the ﬁrst nulls of the beam, Pd, and the width of the beam
between the ﬁrst null, wd, at a distance of 20a in front of
the waveguide exit. A likewise normalized measurement
is also taken of the combined power within the surface
modes and transmitted side lobes, Ps. In addition to
these measurements, we calculate the return loss, R, ex-
pressed at a fraction of the total power, experienced at
the waveguide exit. In this manner, we characterize the
directed emission for a surface termination of τ = 0.2a
and source frequency ω = 0.409 × 2πc/a to have a di-

rected power of Pd = 0.054, a return loss of R = 0.93,
with the remaining power of Ps = 0.016, delivered into
the surface modes and side lobes. In this conﬁguration,
the directed emission has a beam width of wd = 6.2a, as
illustrated in the color contour plot of the spatial light
intensity of Fig. 4(a), where the color scaling highlights
the beaming. Notably, 77% of the transmitted light emit-
ted from the waveguide is delivered into the highly colli-
mated emission; unfortunately though, this accounts for
only 5.4% of the total light. The very poor transmission
of light from the waveguide is a result of large Fresnel
reﬂections occurring at the waveguide-vacuum interface
as the light attempts to move from a high refractive in-
dex to a low refractive-index media. The transmission is
also further limited by an impedance mismatch between
the waveguide mode and the surface and radiated ﬁelds.

Noting that optimal beaming occurred for a waveg-
uide mode with vanishing group velocity, and that the
waveguide exit forms a partially transmitting mirror, we
take the ﬁndings to their natural extension: a Fabry-
Perot resonant cavity. To complete the basic elements of
the cavity, we terminate the internal end of the waveg-
uide with the bulk of the photonic crystal, and tune
the cavity length to a Fabry-Perot resonance. Using the
previously described characterization method, we ﬁnd
the direct emission is doubled, the power within the
surface modes and side lobes equally doubled, and the
beam width maintained. The reﬂection coeﬃcient at the
waveguide exit is expected to be similar to that of the
initial structure, as there is minimal change to the waveg-
uide mode structure. The spatial distribution of the ﬁeld
intensity for the Fabry-Perot cavity beaming is illus-
trated in Fig. 4(b), with a plot of the power cross-section

4

Steven K. Morrison and Yuri S. Kivshar

light sources such as light emitting diodes and lasers. In-
deed, the mechanism for determining optimal beaming—
low group velocity within the cavity to improve the cou-
pling time to surface modes—reinforces this application.

4 Conclusions

We have analyzed the conditions for optimal beaming of
light from an increased-index waveguide formed within a
PhC structure created by a triangular lattice of holes in
a high dielectric material. From this analysis, we have
demonstrated the ineﬃciencies that result from large
Fresnel reﬂections that occur at the waveguide-vacuum
interface, and how this loss mechanism will be funda-
mental to all such high-index waveguide structures used
to produce the beaming eﬀect, thus limiting the techno-
logical applications of this type of PhC structure.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the support of the Australian Research
Council through the Centre of Excellence Program and
useful discussions with Sergei Mingaleev and Costas Souk-
oulis.

References

1. H. A. Beth. Phys. Rev., 66, 1944.
2. T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and

P. A. Wolﬀ. Nature, 391, 1998.

3. H. J. Lezec, A. Degrion, E. Devaux, R. A. Linke,
L. Mart´ın-Moreno, F. J. Garcia-V´ıdal, and T. W. Ebbe-
sen. Science, 297, 2002.

4. E. Moreno, F. J. Garcia-V´ıdal, and L. Mart´ın-Moreno.

Phys. Rev. B, 69, 2004.

5. E. Moreno, F. J. Garcia-V´ıdal, and L. Mart´ın-Moreno.

Photon. Nano. Fund. Appl., 2, 2004.

6. P. Kramper, M. Agio, C. M. Soukoulis, A. Birner,
F. M¨uller, R. B. Wehrspohn, U. G¨osele, and V. Sandogh-
dar. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92(11), 2004.

7. S. K. Morrison and Y. S. Kivshar. Appl. Phys. Lett., 86(1),

2005.

8. J. Schilling, R. B. Wehrspohn, A. Birner, F. M¨uller,
R. Hillebrand, U. G¨osele S. W. Leonard, J. P. Mondia,
F. Genereux, H. M. van Driel, P. Kramper, V. Sandogh-
dar, and K. Busch. J. Opt.A: Pure Appl. Opt, 3, 2001.
9. M. Agio and C. M. Soukoulis. Phys. Rev. E, 64, 2001.

Fig. 5 Power density incident upon a cross-section 20a in
front of the waveguide exit for: (i) optimal beaming condi-
tions [see text]; and (ii) optimal beaming conditions from a
Fabry-Perot resonant cavity.

highlighting the beaming proﬁle of the two structures
given in Fig. 5.

3 Discussions

We believe that the primary diﬃculty in achieving highly
eﬃcient coupling of light into the directional emission is
the large Fresnel reﬂections that occur from the step
change in the refractive index at the waveguide-vacuum
interface. As this step change is fundamental to the waveg-
uide structure, little can be done to reduce this source
of ineﬃciency. Minor reduction of the reﬂections may be
possible for diﬀerent mode symmetries at diﬀerent bands
of the dispersion relationship or with the introduction of
defects within the waveguide and near the exit, as has
been demonstrated in the experimental setup [6]. How-
ever, in introducing these changes the other conditions
from optimal beaming—low group velocity and source
frequency matching to the surface corrugation period—
would change, requiring further engineering of the struc-
ture. Indeed, the large reﬂections at the waveguide exit
are not the only issue of a possible concern. The nar-
row bandwidth for optimal beaming is also a restric-
tive attribute; limiting the information-carrying capacity
of light transmitted from the waveguide. Indeed, in its
present form, the low bandwidth capacity of the beam-
ing eﬀect would prevent it from being used in control or
communication applications, with this restriction being
general to the beaming eﬀect’s mechanism of operations,
and not just the PhC and waveguide structure consid-
ered here.

However, as demonstrated by the Fabry-Perot cav-
ity beaming, the beaming eﬀect can be used to colli-
mate light from cavity defects, opening the possibility for
controlling and shaping the emissions from near-surface

