5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Focusing and correlation properties of
white-light optical vortices

Vladlen Shvedov1,2, Wieslaw Krolikowski3, Alexander Volyar2,
Dragomir N. Neshev1, Anton S. Desyatnikov1, and Yuri S. Kivshar1
1Nonlinear Physics Center, Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Australian
National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
2 Department of Physics, Taurida National University, Simferopol 95007 Crimea, Ukraine
3Laser Physics Center, Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Australian
National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
asd124@rsphysse.anu.edu.au

http://www.rsphysse.anu.edu.au/nonlinear

Abstract: We generate double-charge white-light optical vortices by
sending a circularly polarized partially incoherent light through an uniaxial
crystal. We show that the generated polichromatic vortices are structurally
stable, and their correlation properties can be altered by the beam focusing,
resulting in changes of the vortex core visibility.

© 2008 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: (030.1640) Coherence; (030.1670) Coherent optical effects; (350.5030) Phase

References and links

1. J. F. Nye and M. V. Berry, “Dislocations in wave trains”, Proc. R. Soc. London A 336, 165-190 (1974).
2. G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., “Optical vortex ﬁlaments”, in Optical Vortices, eds. M. Vasnetsov and K. Staliunas Vol.

228 of Horizons in World Physics (Nova Science, Huntington, N.Y., 1999).

3. See, e.g., a comprehensive review paper, M. S. Soskin and M. V. Vasnetsov, “Singular optics”, in Progress in

Optics, Vol. 42, Ed. E. Wolf (Elsevier, Amstredam, 2001).

4. See an extensive list of references on optical vortices in G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., Singular Optics/Optical Vortex

References, http://www.u.arizona.edu/˜grovers/SO/so.html.

5. A. S. Desyatnikov, Yu. S. Kivshar, and L. Torner, “Optical vortices and vortex solitons”, in Progress in Optics,

Vol. 47, Ed. E. Wolf (Elsevier, Amstredam, 2005).

6. M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, 7th (expanded) ed. (Cambridge U. Press, Cambridge, 1999).
7. M. Berry, “Coloured phase singularities”, New J. Phys. 4, 66.1-66.14 (2002).
8. M. Berry, “Exploring the colours of dark light”, New J. Phys. 4, 74.1-74.14 (2002).
9. G. Gbur and T. D. Visser, “Coherence vortices in partially coherent beams”, Opt. Commun. 222, 117-125 (2003).
10. S. A. Ponomarenko, “A class of partially coherent vortex beams carrying optical vortices”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A

18, 150-156 (2001).

11. G. V. Bogatyryova, C. V. Fel’de, P. V. Polyanskii, S. A. Ponomarenko, M. S. Soskin, and E. Wolf, “Partially

coherent vortex beams with a separable phase”, Opt. Lett. 28, 878-890 (2003).

12. H. F. Schouten, G. Gbur, T. D. Visser, and E. Wolf, “Phase singularities of the coherence functions in Young’s

interference pattern”, Opt. Lett. 28, 968-970 (2003).

13. J. Leach and M. J. Padgett, “Observation of chromatic effects near a while-light vortex”, New J. Phys. 5, 154.1-

14. D. M. Palacios, I. D. Maleev, A. S. Marathay, and G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., “Spatial correlation singularity of a

15. A. V. Volyar, Yu. A. Egorov, A. F. Rubass, and T. A. Fadeeva, “Fine structure of white optical vortices in crystals”,

154.7 (2003).

vortex ﬁeld”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 143905 (2004).

Tech. Phys. Lett. 30, 701-704 (2004).

16. I. D. Maleev, D. M. Palacios, A. S. Marathay, and G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., “Spatial correlation vortices in partially

coherent light: theory”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21, 1895-1900 (2004).

17. M. S. Soskin, P. V. Polyanskii, and O. O. Arkhelyuk, “Computer-synthesized hologram-based rainbow optical

vortices”, New J. Phys. 6, 196 (2004).

18. K. Motzek, Yu. S. Kivshar, M.-F. Shih, and G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., “Spatial coherence singularities and incoher-

ent vortex solitons”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 22, 1437-1442 (2005).

19. O. V. Angelsky, S. G. Hanson, A. P. Maksimyak, and P. P. Maksimyak, “On the feasibility for determining the

amplitude zeroes in polychromatic ﬁelds”, Opt. Exp. 13, 4396-4405 (2005).

20. A. V. Volyar and T. A. Fadeeva, “Generation of singular beams in uniaxial crystals”, Optics and Spectroscopy

94, 235-244 (2003).

21. A. V. Volyar and T. A. Fadeeva, “Decay and fusion of polarization umbilics in a singular beam passed though a

crystal”, Optics and Spectroscopy 95, 792-799 (2003).

22. See also a review paper A. V. Volyar, “Singular beams in unixial crystals”, Ukr. J. Phys. 4, 400-408 (2004).
23. G. Gbur, T. D. Visser, and E. Wolf, “Anomalous behaviour of spectra near phase singularities of focused waves”,

24. K. Bezuhanov, A. Dreischuh, G. G. Paulus, M. G. Sch¨atzel, and H. Walther, “Vortices in femtosecond laser

25. G. A. Swartzlander, Jr. and J.Schmit, “Temporal Correlation Vortices and Topological Dispersion”, Phys. Rev.

26. S. A. Ponomarenko and E. Wolf, “Spectral anomalies in a Fraunhofer diffraction pattern”, Opt. Lett. 27, 1211-

27. G. Popescu, A. Dogariu, “Spectral Anomalies at Wave-Front Dislocations”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 183902(4)

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 013901(4) (2002).

ﬁelds,” Opt. Lett. 29, 1942 (2004).

Lett. 93, 093901(4) (2004).

1213 (2002).

(2002).

Opt. A 6, S239-S242 (2004).

Am. A 21, 2097-2102 (2004).

28. G. Gbur, T. D. Visser and E. Wolf, “Hidden singularities in partially coherent and polychromatic waveﬁelds”, J.

29. D. G. Fischer and T. D. Visser, “Spatial correlation properties of partially coherent focused ﬁelds”, J. Opt. Soc.

1.

Introduction

Vortices are fundamental objects in the physics of waves, and they can be found in different
types of coherent systems. A vortex has the amplitude vanishing at its center and a well-deﬁned
2p n phase ramp associated with the circulation of momentum around the helix axis [1]. In
optics, vortices are associated with phase dislocations (or phase singularities) carried by optical
beams [2, 3]. Last few years have seen a resurgence of interest in the study of optical vortices [4,
5], owing in part to readily available computer-generated holograms and other techniques for
creating phase singularities in coherent laser beams.

However, if a light beam is polychromatic and/or partially incoherent, the phase front topol-
ogy of the vortex-carrying beam is not well deﬁned, and statistical description is required to
quantify the beam structure [6]. In the incoherent limit neither the helical phase nor the char-
acteristic zero intensity at the vortex core can be observed. Nevertheless, several recent theo-
retical and experimental studies have shed light on the question how phase singularities can be
unveiled in partially coherent light ﬁelds [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. In par-
ticular, Palacios et al. [14] used both experimental and numerical techniques to explore how a
beam transmitted through a vortex phase mask changes as the transverse coherence length at the
input of the mask varies. Assuming a quasi-monochromatic, statistically stationary light source
and ignoring temporal coherence effects, they demonstrated that robust attributes of the vortex
remain in the beam, most prominently in the form of a ring dislocation in the vortex cross-
correlation function. The existence of a stable ring structure in the cross-correlation function
has been shown in the effect of vortex stabilization in a self-focusing nonlinear medium [18].

In this paper, we generate experimentally double-charge white-light optical vortex with
different degrees of spatial coherence. Instead of using a holographic phase mask for im-
printing the vortex phase, we employ a generation technique suggested by the group of Vol-
yar [20, 21, 22]. With this technique, a circularly polarized polychromatic light beam is tightly
focused inside an uniaxial crystal and subsequently ﬁltered by a polarizer, giving rise to gener-
ation of an optical vortex of double charge with zero chromatic dispersion. First, we reveal that
the generated double-charge polychromatic vortices are structurally stable during their long-
distance propagation, meaning that all spectral components remain co-axial and do not exhibit

spectral anomalies near the vortex core. The vortex visibility in the transverse cross-section
of the light beam, however, depends strongly on the correlation properties of the white-light
source. Second, we study the process of focusing of such double-charge white-light vortices
and reveal that the vortex correlation properties can be altered by the beam focusing. In partic-
ular, we demonstrate that a vortex generated in a spatially partially-coherent beam can become
invisible at the focal point for relatively weak incoherence of the input beam. In contrary, an ini-
tially invisible vortex imprinted into a highly incoherent white-light beam may reappear again
after the focus. The effect of recovery of the near-ﬁeld vortex image by the lens implies that the
information about the vortex can be effectively transfered from the cross-correlation function
to its intensity distribution (auto-correlation function).

2. Generation of polychromatic partially-coherent double-charge vortices

Fig. 1. Experimental setup for the generation of partially incoherent double-charge vortices;
HL - halogen white-light source (50 W), L - lenses, D - diffuser, A - aperture, P - polarizers,
l /4 - quarter-wave plate (532 nm), MO - microscope objectives, UaC- uniaxial crystal.

The experimental setup for generating white-light vortices is shown in Fig. 1. A collimated
light beam generated by a halogen white-light lamp (HL) (with the angular divergence 13◦) is
focused by the lens (L1, focal length F1 = 120 mm) onto a diffuser (D), introducing a random-
varying phase across the beam transverse section in the focal plane of L1. The magnitude of
the solid angle of the light after the diffuser determines the degree of spatial coherence of the
generated polychromatic light. This angle can be controlled by the size of the aperture (A)
variable from the diameter D = 1 mm to 13 mm. Alternatively, the solid angle can be changed
by adjusting the position of the aperture away from the diffuser. After the aperture, the light
passes through a polarizer (P1) and l /4 plate attaining circular polarization. Subsequently, the
light beam is focused by a microscope objective (MO) with an aperture of 8 mm onto an uniaxial
sapphire crystal (UaC) with the optical axes oriented along the beam propagation. The distance
between the effective source and the microscope objective remains unchanged (F2 = 110 mm),
so that the degree of spatial coherence of the polychromatic light is solely deﬁned by the size
of the aperture. After the crystal the light is collimated by a second microscope objective and
passes through a second l /4 plate and a polarizer. The crystal changes the degree of ellipticity
of polarization of the light beam. Then, by rotating the second polarizer (P2) we can extract a
linearly polarized double-charge optical vortex as earlier predicted by Volyar et al. [20, 21, 22].
The transverse intensity distribution of the vortex is registered by a colour CCD camera that can
be translated along the beam propagation axis. This arrangement allows to scan the transverse
structure of the polychromatic ﬁeld during its propagation.

The implementation of our method for vortex generation has several advantages over the
commonly used methods based on computer generated holograms and spiral phase plates.
Firstly, the method is intrinsically free from chromatic dispersion and avoids anomalous spec-
tral behavior near the vortex core [7, 13, 17, 23]. Compensation of the chromatic dispersion can
also be achieved with prism [13] or grating compensators [24], however our method provides
high conversion efﬁciency into the vortex mode. Effects of topological dispersion for the dif-
ferent spectral components, as present in the vortex generation from a spiral phase plate [25],
are also absent.

To control the generation and propagation of an optical vortex we employ an additional
laser beam and combined it with the polychromatic light onto a beam splitter. The laser light
(l = 532 nm) was passed through a system of lenses in such a way that its divergence corre-
sponded to that of the polychromatic light. Blocking one of the beams we can observe the ﬁeld
distribution in monochromatic or white light. The phase dislocations in both cases coincide,
thus the use of the additional laser light allows us to compare the vortex propagation in coher-
ent and incoherent cases. As shown in the inset of Fig. 1, the vortex generated in the green laser
light posses a distinct dark core in the centre, followed by a dark ring-type phase dislocation,
similar to the Airy ring patterns in the diffraction of a beam from a ﬁnite aperture.

Fig. 2. (a) Color images of the vortex beam at different distances after the crystal for two
different apertures: D = 1 mm (upper row) and D = 13 mm (lower row). (b) Visibility
length as a function of aperture size D. Solid line is ∼ 1/D ﬁt to the experimental points.
Inset: transverse beam proﬁles for the case of low coherence.

In our ﬁrst experiments, we varied the beam spatial coherence and revealed a number of
speciﬁc features in the generation and evolution of a polychromatic optical vortex. The in-
tensity of polychromatic vortices generated at two different degrees of spatial coherence are
shown in Fig. 2(a, left), and we also tested interferometrically the imprinted double-charge
phase structure. The vortex visibility in the polychromatic beam depends strongly on the spa-
tial coherence, as was noticed in earlier studies (see, e.g., Ref. [14]). As a result, the intensity
of strongly incoherent light shows no sign of the imprinted vortex after some propagation, and
the characteristic vortex structure is “washed out” completely. Figure 2 shows three examples
of the vortex beams transverse section, for two different degrees of spatial coherence (differ-
ent aperture sizes). In the case of higher coherence (upper row), the vortex becomes invisible
after propagating 435 mm from the crystal, while in the case of low coherence, this distance
is much shorter, 50 mm. This behavior can be intuitively explained by the overlap of different
spatial mutually incoherent components. A characteristic parameter of the process of vortex
“wash-out” is the visibility length. It is determined by the propagation distance at which the
vortex core completely disappears and the intensity distribution resembles a ﬂat-top Gaussian
beam, as shown in Fig. 2(b-inset) with proﬁles of total intensity corresponding to the case of
lower coherence. The experimentally measured visibility length, shown in Fig. 2(b), is well

approximated by a ∼ 1/D dependence (solid line).

The presence of a vortex in a partially coherent beam can be characterized by the mutual

coherence function

G (r1, r2; z) = hE ∗(r2, z,t)E(r1, z,t)i ,

(1)

where the brackets stand for averaging over the net ﬁeld, so that the intensity is given by the
auto-correlation function, I(r; z) = G (r, r; z). The intensity of a fully coherent vortex preserves
the characteristic zero point at the origin during the propagation, while the intensity of spa-
tially incoherent vortex beam is blurred in the far-ﬁeld. Palacios et al. [14] demonstrated that
the presence of a phase singularity corresponds to ring-type dislocation in the cross-correlation
function G (r, −r; z) of an incoherent vortex beam. The radius of the ring dislocation, R, grows
with decreasing of the relative coherence length, s = Lc/w, where Lc is the transverse coher-
ence length of a source and w is the beam size [14, 16]. Subsequently, the visibility of the
partially coherent vortex can be associated with the radius R, so that R = 0 for fully coherent
beam. In particular, the visibility of vortex core vanishes if the correlation dislocation radius ex-
ceeds some value R > Rc. Using the estimations for the radius R(z) [14] we ﬁnd that indeed the
visibility length, zc = k(2p )−1/2RcLc, is inversely proportional to the source transverse size D,
measuring the coherence length, Lc ∼ 1/D. These estimations agree well with experimentally
measured dependence in Fig. 2(b).

An important characteristic of the propagation of the polychromatic vortex beam is that all
spectral components propagate coaxially near the vortex core and this region has typical white
colour (depending on the emission spectrum of halogen lamp). In contrast, the Airy rings sur-
rounding the vortex, representing edge-type phase dislocation, exhibit strong coloring in the
form of rainbow rings. Such behavior is to be expected as theoretically predicted in Ref. [26]
and experimentally demonstrated in Ref. [27]. In the later stages of propagation the rainbow
rings are also wiped-out due to the large spatial incoherence of the beam.

3. Focusing of a white-light vortex

In order to test the structural stability of the generated white-light vortices we performed ex-
periments on focusing of the vortex beam by a lens. Here, we demonstrate that even after the
process of vortex wash-out, its near-ﬁled intensity structure can be recovered by a simple focus-
ing of the polychromatic singular beam. To show this, we introduce an additional lens L2 into
the beam path (Fig. 1). The distance from the collimator to the lens F4 is varied depending on
the particular point of free-space vortex evolution we aim to study. In addition, at a ﬁx position
of the lens L2 we vary the aperture size changing the coherence of the effective source.

We conducted two different experiments for the focusing of the spatially incoherent vortex,
and the results are summarized in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. In the ﬁrst case (see Fig. 3), we ﬁxed the
size of the aperture to D = 1 mm, and placed a lens with a focal length f = 60 mm at a distance
F4 = 100 mm from the collimator. The beam intensity distribution just before the lens is shown
on the left side of Fig. 3. The dark core of the vortex is clearly seen in the transverse structure
of the beam for any point between the crystal and the lens. However, near the focal point of
the lens the vortex is “washed out”, it becomes invisible in the transverse beam proﬁle, as is
seen in Fig. 3 (image at 0 mm). Behind the focal point the vortex reappears again, being almost
identical to the input vortex.

In the second case (see Fig. 4), we set the size of the aperture to a larger value D = 13 mm,
that deﬁnes larger incoherence of the optical beam, and placed the lens L2 of a focal length
f = 35 mm at a distance F4 = 100 mm from the collimator. After the propagation of 100 mm the
beam intensity is homogeneous in front of the lens and no vortex structure is visible [see Fig. 4
(input)], indicating that the beam is highly spatially incoherent. Near the focal point the vortex is
not yet visible (it is hidden [28]), but it starts to reappear after the focus and it is fully recovered

Fig. 3. Focusing of the polychromatic vortex beam: f = 60 mm, D = 1 mm. Left – beam
before the lens; right – intensity distribution after the lens for different positions relative to
the focal point.

Fig. 4. The same as in Fig. 3 for f = 35 mm and D = 13 mm. Left – beam before the lens;
right – intensity distribution for different distances behind the focal point.

at the image plane, as shown in Fig. 4 at 30 mm, where the distances are measured from the
focal plane. This effect indicates a simple mean to recover the hidden information about the
phase singularities [28], otherwise only possible through the analysis of the cross-correlation
function [14]. We expect that the analysis of the beam cross-correlation function [14, 29] can
be applied to the case of a double-charge vortex discussed here and it may reveal interesting
features to explain the effect of the vortex transformation observed experimentally.

4. Conclusions

We generated double-charge white-light optical vortices by sending a circularly polarized poly-
chromatic light beam through an uniaxial crystal and showed that these vortices are structurally
stable in propagation. By measuring the vortex visibility length for different degrees of coher-
ence of the source, we explored the correlation properties of such polychromatic vortices. We
demonstrated that the vortex visibility can be altered by the beam focusing, so that vortex core
disappears near the focal region, while an initially invisible vortex imprinted into a white-light
beam will become visible after the focal point. These results can be interpreted as the exchange
of the information about the vortex between its intensity distribution and the cross-correlation
function carrying a robust ring-type dislocation.

5. Acknowledgements

The authors thank G. Swartzlander and S. Ponomarenko for useful discussions and acknowl-
edge a support of the Australian Research Council. V. Shvedov and A. Volyar thank Nonlinear
Physics Centre for a warm hospitality during their stay at the Australian National University.

