5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
2
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coherent Light Scattering from Semicontinuous Silver Nanoshells Near the
Percolation Threshold

C. A. Rohde, K. Hasegawa, and M. Deutsch
Oregon Center for Optics and Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

We report on measurements of visible extinction spectra of semicontinuous silver nanoshells grown
on colloidal silica spheres. We ﬁnd that thin, fractal shells below the percolation threshold exhibit
geometrically tunable plasmon resonances. A modiﬁed scaling theory approach is used to model the
dielectric response of such shells, which is then utilized to obtain the extinction cross section in a
retarded Mie scattering formalism. We show that such spherical resonators support unique plasmon
dynamics: in the visible there is a new regime of coherently driven cluster-localized plasmons, while
crossover to homogeneous response in the infrared predicts a delocalized shell plasmon.

Noble-metal nano-scale shells are comprised of thin gold or silver ﬁlms surrounding sub-micron dielectric cores.
In recent years nanometer-scale metal particles have been the focus of extensive studies, owing mainly to large
enhancements of surface-induced electric ﬁelds at the plasma resonance of the nanoparticles [1]. This unique optical
response is well exempliﬁed in the nanoshells’ extinction spectra, which are governed by a geometrically tunable
plasmon resonance. When the core diameter is in the sub-micrometer range, the optical response of the composite
particle is tunable over the entire visible and near infrared spectrum [2]. This constitutes a powerful tool for custom-
designing Raman [3] and surface-plasmon-based ultra sensitive optical sensors [4].

The strong optical resonance observed in spherical nanoshells is attributed to a delocalized shell plasmon, typically
well-modelled by classical linear response to electromagnetic plane-wave scattering [5]. This was formulated by Aden
and Kerker (AK) [6] as an extension to classical Mie scattering theory [7]. More reﬁned theories utilizing ab-initio
quantum mechanical modelling of metallic nanoshells have also veriﬁed this approach [8].

The existence of the spherical-shell plasmon relies on highly symmetric and uniform shell morphology, and is
typically observed in nanoshells which are smooth and continuous. It has been previously shown that the extinction
spectra of incomplete or highly fragmented nanoshells do not exhibit unique geometrical resonances, but are dominated
instead by absorption resonances of the metal clusters on the sphere surfaces [9, 10, 11, 12].

In this Letter we present light scattering experiments of silica spheres coated with discontinuous silver nanoshells.
We distinguish two shell morphologies with diﬀering optical signatures. For thin, two-dimensional (2D) fractal shells,
we show that the optical response of the metal is best described within the framework of percolation theory. We ﬁnd
that while these shells support mainly localized plasmon modes and are electrically insulating, distinct geometrical
resonances are clearly present, due to coherent optical driving of cluster-localized plasmons. For thick (3D), conducting
and porous shells classical, Maxwell Garnett (MG) theory is used instead to obtain the eﬀective dielectric response
of the shell. We show that in both cases, although the shells are locally highly irregular, observed ﬁne resonances are
still well modelled by the AK solution to Maxwell’s equations for uniform core/shell systems.

Colloidal silica spheres (0.3 - 1µm diameter, 1 - 3% polydisperse) were coated with nanocrystalline silver shells using
a Tollen’s reagent method to form metallodielectric core/shell particles. In this reaction aqueous ammoniacal silver
nitrate is mixed with an aldehyde reducing agent, leading to rapid precipitation of silver atoms. When performed
with a slow reducing agent (here glucose) at temperatures below 5◦C the reaction kinetics are dramatically slowed,
resulting in controlled deposition of nanocrystalline silver, only at the spheres’ interfaces. Typical reactions last
20-30min. After termination of the reaction the spheres are washed by repeated centrifugation and sonication to
eliminate residual silver nanocrystals in solution. Despite the lack of surface functionalization, the silver adheres
strongly to the silica spheres and does not separate during this process.

Transmission electron micrographs (TEM) of more than 200 coated spheres per data set are used to determine
average shell thickness and polydispersity. We ﬁnd that for thin coatings (∼20 - 30nm) ensemble polydispersities can
remain as low as 2%, indicating a highly uniform deposition process. High resolution TEM analyses of isolated metal
clusters indicate that the latter consist of aggregated silver nanocrystals 5 - 10nm in size.

Further characterization of the shells’ morphologies utilizes high-resolution scanning electron micrographs (SEM).
These reveal the non-contiguous nature of the thin shells, which we characterize in terms of their metal ﬁlling fraction,
p, and a fractal dimension, Df . SEM images as in Fig. 1(a) are ﬁrst processed with a high pass fast Fourier
transform ﬁlter to eliminate nonuniform background intensity variations across the sphere surface. Sphere curvature
and shadowing eﬀects are minimized by utilizing only a small portion of the exposed surfaces close to nadir, shown
enclosed in the box in Fig. 1(a). The size of this area must be small enough to minimize shadowing eﬀects, while still
suﬃciently large to provide statistical integrity. With a resolution-limited pixel size of ≃ 2nm, we ﬁnd that for coated

spheres of radius R a box size of (R2/4) ≃ 2002 pixels satisﬁes this condition. Linear contrast enhancement and
thresholding of the cropped section provide the binary image in Fig. 1(b). Visual inspection of such images suggests
a strong resemblance to percolating planar metal ﬁlms deposited under ultra-high vacuum, where both linear and
nonlinear optical characteristics have been previously addressed [13, 14].

2

FIG. 1:
view of the region inside the square in (a). Scale bar is 200nm. (c) Histogram of p, generated from 80 images as (b).

(a) Scanning electron micrograph of 1µm diameter silica sphere coated with a 20nm silver quasi-shell. (b) Magniﬁed

Using a box-counting method [15] we ﬁnd Df = 1.72 ± 0.06, indicating diﬀusion-limited aggregation in 2D [16].
Since this is below the fractal dimension of 2D percolating clusters, Dp = 1.89 [17], we conclude that these shells
lie slightly below the percolation threshold. We have veriﬁed this by measuring the average ﬁlling fraction p of thin
shells utilizing the processed SEM images. For an ensemble of ∼100 spheres we ﬁnd p = 0.55, shown in Fig. 1(c).
Comparing to the experimental percolation threshold, pc = 0.68 [13], our thin shells have p <

This is supported by measurements of the bulk resistance of silver-coated spheres. A dense aggregate of spheres
is formed by drying several concentrated drops of the sphere suspension between two gold electrodes separated by
∼100µm. For shells 20 - 40nm thick we measure a resistance R∼20MΩ, while shells of thickness ≥70nm exhibit a
resistance of R≃1Ω. These are typical values, also obtained previously for the sheet resistance of planar thin metal
ﬁlms near the percolation threshold [13].

∼ pc.

To optically characterize our core/shell composites we measured the extinction of freshly prepared, dilute aqueous
suspensions using a UV/vis spectrometer. Spectra of sparsely coated spheres as in Fig. 2(a) exhibit a single peak
centered near 420nm. This is a signature of the excitation of the dipolar plasmon eigenmodes of individual, non-
aggregated silver nanocrystals nucleated on the spheres [9, 11]. Due to the dilute metal surface-coverage, these modes
do not couple to the weak Mie resonances of the dielectric spheres, and are therefore independent of sphere size. At
the opposite extreme are densely coated spheres, shown in Fig. 2(b). In this limit the extinction is well-modelled by
applying MG theory within the framework of Mie scattering, as discussed in a later section.

FIG. 2: (a) Extinction spectrum of sparsely coated 1µm spheres (TEM inset) exhibiting a plasmon resonance at 420nm. (b)
Measured extinction (dots) and ﬁtted AK model using MG theory (line) for a 70nm thick shell (SEM inset).

Nucleation and aggregation of silver crystals onto the spheres result in an intermediate regime of discontinuous
nanoshells of thickness 20 - 30nm. Extinction spectra of spheres as in Fig. 1(a) reveal several distinct resonance
peaks, all shifted from the single-particle plasmon resonance, as shown in Fig. 3(a). These are core/shell multipole
modes, typically observed in high-contrast layered spherical particles. In addition, the inhomogeneously broadened
enhanced red extinction tail present in fractal metal aggregates is strongly modulated here. These indicate that
cluster-localized plasmon modes are interacting via cavity Mie resonances. Furthermore, varying the core size aﬀects
both peak number and positions, verifying the geometric nature of the resonances. In this new regime of coherently
driven localized plasmons collective response of a strongly disordered shell is thus achieved.

A convenient method for modelling linear light scattering from core/shell particles employs AK-modiﬁed Mie
formalism, which accounts for multiple scattering in layered concentric shells [6]. This method requires knowledge
of the dielectric functions of core, shell and embedding medium materials. Using tabulated values for the dielectric

3

(1a)

(1b)

1.0

0.38

0.71

a

0.65

n
o
i
t
c
n
i
t
x
E

b

c

0.4

Wavelength (μm)

1.0

FIG. 3: (a) Comparison of normalized, averaged EMT (blue), and ST (red) extinction functions with measured spectra (dots).
Also shown is the extinction obtained using the tabulated bulk silver dielectric function (black). (b) Normalized extinction
spectra of two separate samples with same core/shell size parameters. Subtraction of computed background functions reveals
(c) Comparison of background-subtracted, averaged extinction spectra for EMT
universal spectral characteristics (Inset).
(blue), ST (red) and measured data (black). All samples were 1µm silica cores with 20nm shells.

function of bulk silver to model the extinction coeﬃcient exhibited serious discrepancies and failed to reproduce the
experimental data, as seen in Fig. 3(a).

As previously indicated, our thin-shell samples are insulating, with shell ﬁlling fractions and morphology close to
the percolation threshold. We therefore develop a method for modelling the optical response of such quasi-shells based
on scaling theory (ST) for percolating planar metal ﬁlms. The details of ST are described elsewhere [18], and only
its germane points are summarized here. In this approach the scaling properties of a self-aﬃne fractal network of
conductors and insulators allow the deﬁnition of a scaling function [19]. A dielectric function ǫ(ω; Lξ) is obtained in
terms of this function and a characteristic length scale Lξ, describing the largest length scale over which homogeneous
averaging may occur. Lξ is frequency-dependent, and is determined by the smallest of the relevant length scales: the
percolation correlation length, ξ, or the optical coherence length L(ω), given respectively by

ξ ∝ (|p − pc|/pc)

−ν

L(ω) ∝ ω

−1/(2+θ)

For a 2D system near percolation the critical exponent is ν = 4/3, and θ = 0.79. Dielectric functions ǫi and ǫc,
corresponding to insulating and conducting components of the metal ﬁlm, respectively, are then calculated for each
length scale Lξ(ω).

The main diﬀerence between near-percolation planar ﬁlms and our nanoshells stems from the closed shell geom-
etry, which introduces correlations between ﬁlm components that are otherwise uncorrelated in an open, planar
conﬁguration. This allows coherent driving of cluster-localized plasmon resonances through multipole electromag-
netic cavity-modes, clearly resolved in the extinction spectra. We account for this cluster-coupling by deﬁning the
shell-averaged dielectric function

ǫshell(ω) = hǫ(ω; Lξ)i = pǫc(ω, Lξ) + (1 − p)ǫi(ω, Lξ),

(2)

which is then utilized to calculate the extinction cross section in the AK formalism.

The resulting eﬀective dielectric function exhibits characteristics that are strikingly diﬀerent from those of both
bulk and nanocrystalline silver. Most importantly, in the visible and near infrared (IR) spectral range Eq. (2) yields

4

(3)

positive values for Re[ǫshell(ω)] and relatively large values for Im[ǫshell(ω)], implying a lossy dielectric response. This is
typical of disordered metal ﬁlms below the percolation threshold. This function is then seen to cross over to negative
values in the IR. For common embedding dielectrics the crossover to metallic behavior occurs at λ ∼ 1.5 − 2µm.
This is related to a crossover from inhomogeneous to homogeneous optical response, which we calculate to occur
near λξ ∼ 650nm in our samples [13]. At wavelengths much greater than λξ the shell may be treated as optically
homogeneous. The consequences of this are discussed in a later section.

The physical properties of composite materials are often treated using an eﬀective-medium approach. This method
asserts that when spatial inhomogeneities manifest on scales much smaller than the relevant length scale in the system,
here the optical wavelength, average homogeneous treatment is justiﬁed. However, close enough to the percolation
threshold this has been shown to break down [13, 20, 21]. We have also examined Bruggeman eﬀective medium
theory (EMT), which is best suited for systems near percolation [22, 23], as a plausible model for the shells’ dielectric
response. The eﬀective dielectric function, ǫeﬀ is given by

p

ǫm − ǫeﬀ
gǫm + (1 − g)ǫeﬀ

+ (1 − p)

ǫd − ǫeﬀ
gǫd + (1 − g)ǫeﬀ

= 0

where ǫm and ǫd are known dielectric functions of the interpenetrating metal and the dielectric, respectively, and
g = 0.68 is the depolarization factor. Using measured values of p we obtain an expression for ǫeﬀ, which is then
utilized to calculate the extinction cross section as described above. For the relevant experimental parameters ǫeﬀ is
a positive function over the entire EM spectral range, implying non-metallic response. As a ﬁnal step for both ST
and EMT approaches, the calculated extinction cross sections are averaged over the measured ﬁlling fraction p and
sphere size distributions, and are plotted together for comparison in Fig. 3(a).

Close inspection of the two models reveals discrepancies in the general trend of the functions, with ST better
following the data. Most importantly, the number of core/shell resonances, as well as their position and contrast,
are not well-described by EMT. It is interesting to note that data taken from diﬀerent samples may exhibit opposite
background trends, as shown in Fig. 3(b). This is attributed mainly to various degrees of nanocrystal aggregation
present in each batch, where increased aggregation results in a broad, enhanced red absorption tail. To properly
account for this we therefore ﬁt a background continuum function to each data set using boxcar averaging of the
normalized extinction spectra. Subtraction of each continuum function from its respective spectrum reveals excellent
agreement between the prominent spectral features, as shown in Fig. 3(b) (inset). In Fig. 3(c) we plot the normalized
background-subtracted spectra, which may then be further analyzed using bandpass spectrophotometry. It is clearly
seen that while ST properly reproduces the experimental results, EMT cannot account for the observed geometrical
resonances.

As shell thickness increases through deposition of additional silver, we observe shifting of the core/shell resonances
as shown in Fig. 2(b). High-resolution SEM micrographs indicate that the increase in shell thickness is accompanied
by additional ﬁlling of interparticle voids, as well as further coarsening of the shells. Shells thicker than 50nm
are therefore better treated as dense 3D aggregates of silver nanocrystals, with metal ﬁlling fractions estimated at
0.8 <
∼ 0.9. Average measured polydispersities of such nanoshells may still be as low as 5%. Extinction spectra
reveal characteristics closely similar to those of continuous solid silver nanoshells. It is therefore possible to describe
the eﬀective dielectric response of the porous shell using the classical Maxwell Garnett model. The dielectric function
ǫMG is given now by

∼ p <

ǫMG = ǫm (cid:20)

1 +

3(1 − p)(ǫd − ǫm)/(ǫd + 2ǫm)
1 − (1 − p)(ǫd − ǫm)/(ǫd + 2ǫm) (cid:21)

,

(4)

describing a solid silver shell with 1 − p volume fraction of spherical dielectric inclusions. Following our procedure for
calculating the size-averaged extinction cross section, we obtain the plot shown in Fig. 2(b). We ﬁnd that this model
reproduces well our experimental observations.

An interesting discrepancy between ST and EMT emerges when the extinction calculations are extended into the IR
range, as shown in Fig. 4. We ﬁnd that ST predicts a broad IR absorption, while EMT exhibits a decaying Rayleigh
extinction tail. The broad peak centered near 3.2µm is due to a mostly dipolar shell plasmon resonance, as veriﬁed by
numerical mode-decomposition of both absorption and scattering cross-sections. This is a consequence of the above
mentioned crossover to metallic behavior in ST, which enables the excitation of a delocalized shell plasmon. We note
that this IR resonance should be distinguished from anomalous IR absorption observed previously in metal-dielectric
composites [24]. The latter originates from enhanced absorption in the embedding dielectric, due to intense local
electric ﬁelds [25]. Here we assume both silica core and dielectric inclusions in the shell are lossless, therefore all
absorption in this model is due to intrinsic losses in the metal shell.

5

n
o
i
t
c
n
i
t
x
E

1.0

Wavelength (μm)

5.0

FIG. 4: Calculated extinction for ST (line) and EMT (dashed) for p = 0.55, 20nm silver shells on 1µm diameter silica cores.

In summary, we have shown that extinction properties of semicontinuous silver nanoshells grown on dielectric
cores unambiguously diﬀer from previously reported smooth core/shell systems. We have demonstrated tuning of
the plasmon resonance with shell growth - from a single dipolar mode in sparse coatings to multiple high order
shell excitations in densely aggregated thick shells. We have identiﬁed an intermediate regime of thin fractal shells
near the percolation threshold, where geometrically tunable plasmon resonances persist despite disorder and the
shells’ discontiguous character. A modiﬁed approach for modelling the dielectric response of fractal shells, based on
scaling theory is consistent with experimental observations. We attribute this new resonant regime to cluster-localized
plasmons, coherently driven by micro-resonator modes. Future work will address the predicted delocalized plasmon
resonance, resulting from a crossover to homogeneous metallic response in the IR .

The authors thank J. Bouwman and S. Emmons for assistance with chemical syntheses. We also acknowledge
helpful discussions with R. Haydock and G. Bothun. This work was supported by NSF Grant No. DMR-02-39273
and ARO Grant No. DAAD19-02-1-0286.

[1] M. Moskovits, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 783 (1985).
[2] S. J. Oldenburg et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 288, 243 (1998).
[3] J. B. Jackson et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 257 (2003).
[4] S. Schultz et al., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97, 996 (2000).
[5] R. D. Averitt, D. Sarkar, and N. J. Halas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4217 (1997).
[6] A. L. Aden and M. Kerker, J. Appl. Phys. 22, 1242 (1951).
[7] G. Mie, Ann. Phys. 24, 377 (1908).
[8] E. Prodan and P. Nordlander, Nano Lett. 3, 543 (2003).
[9] T. Ji et al., Adv. Mater. 13, 1253 (2001).
[10] C. Graf and A. van Blaaderen, Langmuir 18, 524 (2002).
[11] D. I. Gittins et al., Adv. Mater. 14, 508 (2002).
[12] C. M. Aguirre et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 7040 (2004).
[13] Y. Yagil et al., Phys. Rev. B 46, 2503 (1992).
[14] V. M. Shalaev and A. K. Sarychev, Phys. Rev. B 57, 13265 (1998).
[15] C. Douketis et al., Phys. Rev. B 51, 11022 (1995).
[16] P. Jensen et al., Phys. Rev. B 50, 15316 (1994).
[17] M. B. Isichenko, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 961 (1992).
[18] Y. Yagil et al., Phys. Rev. B 43, 11342 (1991).
[19] J. P. Straley, J. Phys. C 9, 783 (1976).
[20] D. Stroud, Phys. Rev. B 19, 1783 (1979).
[21] V. A. Shubin et al., Phys. Rev. B 62, 11230 (2000).
[22] D. Bruggeman, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 24, 6736 (1935).
[23] R. W. Cohen et al., Phys. Rev. B 8, 3689 (1973).
[24] R. P. Devaty, Phys. Rev. B 44, 593 (1991).
[25] M. Gadenne et al., Europhys. Lett. 53, 364 (2001).

