5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of:
D. K. Gramotnev, S. J. Goodman and T. A. Nieminen
“Grazing-angle scattering of electromagnetic waves in gratings with varying mean parameters: grat-
ing eigenmodes”
Journal of Modern Optics 51, 379–397 (2004)

Grazing-angle scattering of electromagnetic waves in
gratings with varying mean parameters: grating eigenmodes
D. K. Gramotnev1, S. J. Goodman1 and T. A. Nieminen2
1Applied Optics Program, School of Physical and Chemical Sciences, Queensland University of
Technology, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, Australia; e-mail: d.gramotnev@qut.edu.au
2Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics, The University of Queensland,
St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia

Abstract

A highly unusual pattern of strong multiple resonances for bulk electromagnetic
waves is predicted and analysed numerically in thick periodic holographic grat-
ings in a slab with the mean permittivity that is larger than that of the surround-
ing media. This pattern is shown to exist in the geometry of grazing-angle scat-
tering (GAS), that is when the scattered wave (+1 diffracted order) in the slab
propagates almost parallel to the slab (grating) boundaries. The predicted reso-
nances are demonstrated to be unrelated to resonant generation of the conven-
tional guided modes of the slab. Their physical explanation is associated with
resonant generation of a completely new type of eigenmodes in a thick slab with
a periodic grating. These new slab eigenmodes are generically related to the grat-
ing; they do not exist if the grating amplitude is zero. The ﬁeld structure of these
eigenmodes and their dependence on structural and wave parameters is anal-
ysed. The results are extended to the case of GAS of guided modes in a slab with
a periodic groove array of small corrugation amplitude and small variations in
the mean thickness of the slab at the array boundaries.

1

Introduction

Grazing-angle scattering (GAS) is a strongly resonant type of scattering in uniform strip-like slanted
wide periodic gratings [14]. It is realized when the scattered wave (+1 diffracted order for ﬁrst-order
GAS [1,2,4], or +2 order for second-order GAS [3]) propagates almost parallel to the front grating
boundary, that is at a grazing angle to this boundary. Thus, GAS is intermediate between extremely
asymmetrical scattering (EAS) (which occurs when the scattered wave propagates parallel to the grat-
ing boundaries [58]) and conventional Bragg scattering in reﬂecting or transmitting gratings (where
the scattered wave propagates at a signiﬁcant angle with respect to the grating boundaries).
The main distinctive feature of GAS is a strong resonant increase in amplitudes of the scattered wave
(+1 order [1,2,4] or +2 order [3]) and incident wave (zero order) inside a wide slanted grating at a
resonant (grazing) angle of scattering. A grating is regarded to be wide if its width L is larger than a
determined critical width Lc [9,10]. In narrow gratings (i.e. for L < Lc) the GAS resonance does not
exist [13].
One of the most unexpected features of the GAS resonance is that it strongly increases in height and
sharpness with increasing grating amplitude and/or grating width [14]. A physical explanation for
this resonant behaviour with respect to angle of scattering has been related to resonant generation
of a special new type of grating eigenmodes that are guided by the grating in the absence of any
conventional guiding effect in the structure [2,3].

1

Another interesting and practically important feature of EAS and GAS is their unusual and strong
sensitivity to small step-like variations of mean structural parameters (e.g. mean dielectric permittiv-
ity) at the grating boundaries [4,11]. This is because one of the main physical mechanisms resulting
in EAS and GAS is diffractional divergence of the scattered wave (similar to divergence of a laser
beam of ﬁnite aperture) [1,6,7,911]. Since diffractional divergence can be strongly affected by small
variations in mean structural parameters [12], EAS and GAS appear to be highly sensitive to such
variations [4,11]. The expected consequences of such a sensitivity for the experimental observation
and application of EAS and GAS have been discussed in [4,11].
In particular, Gramotnev et al. [4] investigated GAS in a symmetric structure with a holographic
grating in a slab surrounded by identical media with the permittivities that are smaller than the
mean permittivity in the grating region (slab). However, only very small variations in the mean
permittivity at the grating boundaries were considered, such that the angle of total internal reﬂection
for the wave in the slab is larger than the angle of scattering corresponding to the GAS resonance [4].
As a result, the tolerance of GAS to small variations in the mean permittivity has been determined
[4].
In this paper, we shall demonstrate the existence of new, highly unusual strong multiple resonances
in a slanted holographic grating in the geometry of GAS in the presence of the conventional guiding
effect, that is when the mean permittivity in the grating region (slab) is larger than outside it. These
multiple resonances will be shown to exist only in sufﬁciently wide gratings (with L > Lc) and for
relatively large variations in the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries, such that the angle of
total reﬂection for the wave in the slab is smaller than the GAS resonant angle.
A new type of electromagnetic mode guided by a slab with a periodic holographic grating will be
discovered theoretically. The ﬁeld structure and propagation parameters of these modes will be
investigated. The multiple GAS resonances in the considered structure will be explained by resonant
generation of the predicted new slab eigenmodes. The analysis for bulk electromagnetic waves will
be carried out by means of the rigorous theory of GAS and EAS [2,8], based on the enhanced T-matrix
algorithm [13,14]. The extension of the theory to the case of GAS of optical modes guided by a slab
with a corrugated boundary will also be discussed.

2 Structure and methods of analysis

The structure that is under investigation in this paper is similar to that analysed in [4]. Namely, we
consider GAS of bulk transverse electric (TE) electromagnetic waves in a holographic grating in a
slab of thickness L between two media of constant dielectric permittivities ǫ1 and ǫ3 (ﬁgure 1):

ǫ1,
ǫ2 + ǫg exp(iQxx + iQy y) + ǫ∗
ǫ3,

ǫs = 




g exp(−iQxx − iQy y)

, for

(1)

x < 0,
0 < x < L,
x > L,






where the coordinate system is shown in ﬁgure 1, ǫ2 is the mean dielectric permittivity in the grating,
ǫg is the grating amplitude, Q = (Qx, Qy) is the reciprocal lattice vector that is parallel to the x0
axis, |Q| = 2π/Λ, and Λ is the grating period. The grating is assumed to be inﬁnite along the y and
z axes, and the dissipation is absent, that is ǫ1,2,3 are real and positive. The step-like variations of
the mean dielectric permittivity at the front and rear grating boundaries are given by ∆ǫ1 = ǫ1 − ǫ2
and ∆ǫ2 = ǫ3 − ǫ2. In this paper we shall mainly assume that ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0, that is, the grating
region represents a planar waveguide capable of guiding electromagnetic modes. A plane bulk TE
electromagnetic wave (with the amplitude E00 and wave vector k00 in medium 1 (see ﬁgure 1) is
incident on to the grating at an angle θ10 that is measured anticlockwise from the positive direction
of the x axis to the vector k00 (ﬁgure 1). The non-conical geometry of scattering is considered. The
angle θ21 of scattering in the grating region is supposed to be close to π/2, that is, the scattered wave
(the +1 order) with the wave vector k21 and the x-dependent amplitude S21(x) propagates almost
parallel to the grating boundaries (the geometry of GAS) (ﬁgure 1).

Figure 1: The scheme for GAS of bulk TE electromagnetic waves in a slanted holographic grating
of width L and grating amplitude ǫg; ǫ1, ǫ2 and ǫ3 are the mean permittivities in front, inside and
behind the grating, respectively. The angle of incidence is θ10, and the amplitude of the incident
wave in front of the grating is E00. The Bragg condition is satisﬁed precisely for the +1 diffracted
order (scattered wave) that propagates at an angle θ21 that is close to π/2 (i.e. at a grazing angle with
respect to the grating boundaries), and k11, k21 and k31 are the wave vectors of the scattered wave in
front, in the middle and behind the grating, respectively.

As mentioned above, Gramotnev et al. [4] have investigated GAS in the same structure, but with
small variations in the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries, such that the angle θ21int of total
internal reﬂection for a wave in the slab was larger than the angle θ21r of scattering corresponding to
the GAS resonance in the same grating but with zero variations in the mean permittivity [4]. This con-
dition restricted the analysis to the case of only very small values of ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 ≈ 0.07ǫg ≪ ǫ2. This
was important for understanding the tolerances of GAS and its application possibilities for design
of new sensors and measurement techniques. At the same time, in the next section we demonstrate
that the case of larger variations in the mean permittivity (when the angle of total reﬂection is larger
than the resonant angle for GAS) is even more interesting, since it results in a discovery of a num-
ber of much stronger additional resonances and a new type of eigenmodes of a slab with a slanted
holographic grating.

3 Numerical results

As mentioned above, Gamotnev et al. [4] determined the tolerance of GAS to small symmetric vari-
ations in the mean dielectric permittivity at the grating boundaries (∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0), such that the
angle θ21int of total internal reﬂection for a wave in the slab was larger than or equal to the GAS
resonant angle θ21r [1,2]. Figures 2 and 3 present the dependences of amplitudes of the +1 order
(scattered wave) on the angle θ21 of scattering in the middle of the grating (solid curves) and at the
front and rear boundaries (dotted curves) in the opposite case, that is for larger symmetric varia-
tions of the mean permittivity (∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0), such that θ21int < θ21r. The speciﬁc values of
∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 = 0.1508 are chosen so that θ21int = 80◦, and we have a sufﬁciently broad range of angles
between θ21int and θ21r. Note that for the considered structures the scattered wave amplitudes at the

front and rear grating boundaries are almost identical, and thus they are represented by only one
dotted curve in each of the subplots. The grating (or slab) width is kept the same for all the subplots:
L = 30µm (the other structural and wave parameters are presented in the ﬁgure captions). The Bragg
condition is assumed to be satisﬁed precisely for all angles of scattering: that is, we investigate only
the effect of the angle of scattering on the pattern of GAS, excluding the effect of frequency and/or
angular detunings of the Bragg condition.

Figure 2: The dependences of relative amplitudes |S21/E00| of the scattered wave (the +1 diffracted
order) on scattering angle θ21 in the middle of the grating (—) and at the front and rear grating
boundaries (...)
for equal negative step-wise variations in the mean dielectric permittivity at the
grating boundaries, ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 = −0.1508 (∆ǫ1 = ǫ1 − ǫ2; ∆ǫ2 = ǫ3 − ǫ2), and different grating
amplitudes: (a) ǫg = 2 × 10−3 (the critical grating width Lc ≈ 51µm); (b) ǫg = 8 × 10−3 (Lc ≈ 20µm),
and (c) ǫg = 0.02 (Lc ≈ 11µm). The other structural parameters are: ǫ2 = 5, θ10 = 45◦, L = 30µm,
and λ(vacuum) = 1µm. The numbers above the highest resonances in (b) and (c) indicate their
actual height.

Depending on the grating amplitude ǫg, the considered grating width L = 30µm can be smaller
or larger than the critical grating width Lc. For example, for ﬁgure 2 (a), the grating amplitude
ǫg = 2 × 10−3, which corresponds to Lc ≈ 50µm [9]. This is noticeably larger than L = 30µm.
Therefore, the pattern presented in ﬁgure 2 (a) is typical for narrow gratings. It will be discussed
in detail below. At this stage we shall only mention that the presented resonances (ﬁgure 2(a)) are
not related to GAS, since GAS resonances do not exist in narrow gratings [1,2] (for more detail see

Figure 3: The same as for ﬁgure 2, but with (a) ǫg = 0.037 (Lc ≈ 9µm), (b) ǫg = 0.055 (Lc ≈ 7.2µm)
and (c) ǫg = 0.06 (Lc ≈ 5.2µm).

below).
Figures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)–(c) present the typical dependences of scattered wave amplitudes
in the middle of the grating (slab) and at its boundaries in wide gratings of the same actual width
(L = 30µm), but with larger grating amplitudes ǫg that make the critical grating width smaller, that
is L > Lc. The speciﬁc values of Lc for each of the subplots are presented in the ﬁgure captions.
It can be seen that increasing the grating amplitude so that the grating width becomes just larger
than Lc (ﬁgure 2 (b)) results in the appearance of extremely high and sharp resonances just below
θ21r which is the GAS resonant angle in the same structure, but with zero variations in the mean
permittivity (for ﬁgure 2 (b), θ21r ≈ 89.22◦ [1,2]). The rightmost resonant maximum in ﬁgure 2 (b)
(i.e. in the structure with ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0) occurs almost exactly at θ21 ≈ θ21r. This statement is also
correct for all other subplots (ﬁgures 2 (c) and 3 (a)(c)). Note that, as mentioned in [1,2], θ21r decreases
with increasing grating amplitude. Therefore, the rightmost maxima in ﬁgures 2 (b) and (d) and 3
(a)(c) shift to the left with increasing ǫg.
Though the rightmost maxima in ﬁgures 2 (b) and (d) and 3 (a)(c) occur at θ21 ≈ θ21r, these resonances
are much stronger and sharper than those in the same structures, but with zero variations in the mean
permittivity. For example, in ﬁgure 3 (a), the rightmost maximum goes up to about 290E00, while in
the same structure with ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 = 0 it is only about 13E00. Thus, symmetric negative variations

in the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries may result in an extremely strong increase in the
GAS resonance at θ21 = θ21r. One of the physical reasons for this effect is that, if θ21int < θ21r, then the
scattered wave at θ21 ≈ θ21r experiences total internal reﬂection from the slab interfaces. This leads
to a substantial reduction in the energy losses from the grating, since the +1 diffracted orders outside
the grating become non-propagating (evanescent) waves. As a result, the scattered wave amplitude
inside the grating may signiﬁcantly increase.
In addition, if L > Lc, then on the left of the resonance at θ21 ≈ θ21r there appear a number of other
extremely strong and sharp (often, even sharper and stronger) resonances at resonant angles θ21rs
within the angle range θ21int < θ21rs < θ21r (ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c)). As the grating ampli-
tude increases, so that the grating width L becomes just larger than Lc, a bunch of these additional
strong resonances appears just below the angle θ21r (ﬁgure 2 (b)). If the grating amplitude is increased
(so that L becomes increasingly larger than Lc), this bunch of maxima ‘shifts’ from θ21r towards θ21int
(ﬁgure 2 (c)). The word ‘shifts’ is put in quotes because the discussed resonant maxima do not ac-
tually move along the horizontal axis with increasing ǫg. Changing ǫg results in only insigniﬁcant
variations in the values of the resonant angles θ21rs. However, the height of these resonances can
change very strongly. For example, the sharp resonances within the range between approximately
82◦ and 85◦ in ﬁgure 2 (c) simply increase when the grating amplitude increases to 20 × 10−3.
When the ﬁrst bunch of resonances ‘moves away’ from the angle θ21r (for a sufﬁciently large ǫg)
another bunch starts to appear near this angle (ﬁgure 2 (c)). This bunch also ‘shifts’ to the left towards
θ21int with further increasing ǫg, and so on (ﬁgures 3 (a)(c)). At larger grating amplitudes, this process
becomes less obvious, since the angular distance between the bunches and the number of resonances
in a bunch decreases (ﬁgures 3 (a)(c)). Note also that the number of resonances in a bunch increases
as the bunch ‘shifts’ towards θ21r.
The resonances in the bunches are spaced (on the angular scale) approximately periodically, espe-
cially for smaller grating amplitudes (ﬁgures 2 (c) and 3 (a)). The period is approximately the same
for all the bunches, but resonances in each successive bunch occur approximately between the reso-
nances in the previous bunch (ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c)). Increasing grating width results in
a rapid increase in the total number of the resonances, that is, the angular distance between them is
reduced. Increasing grating width also results in increasing typical height and sharpness of the reso-
nances. On the other hand, changing values of ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0 has only a limited effect on the values
of θ21rs and the typical angular distance between the resonances. At the same time, varying the mean
permittivity in the grating can substantially change (increase or decrease) the height and sharpness
of the resonances (optimization of the values of ∆ǫ = −∆ǫ1 = −∆ǫ2 > 0 will be discussed below).
The number of the GAS resonances is also increased with increasing ∆ǫ, because of the increasing
range of angles between θ21int and θ21r.
If an asymmetric structure is considered (with ∆ǫ1 6= ∆ǫ2, ∆ǫ1 < 0 and ∆ǫ2 < 0), then some of
the GAS resonances may strongly increase, while others may be reduced, depending on particular
values of the variations of the mean permittivity. At the same time, the angular position of the
resonances depends on ∆ǫ1 and ∆ǫ2 only very weakly. In this case, strong GAS resonances can be
observed within the range of angles max(θ21int1,θ21int2)< θ21 < θ21r, where θ21int1 and θ21int2 are the
angles of total internal reﬂection from the front and rear boundaries of the grating (slab). Below this
range, strong GAS resonances cannot exist, because in this case the scattered wave either in front (if
∆ǫ1 > ∆ǫ2) or behind (if ∆ǫ1 < ∆ǫ2) the grating becomes a propagating wave travelling away from
the grating. This wave is associated with substantial energy losses from the grating, resulting in a
deterioration of any strong resonance of scattering. This is also the reason why the described pattern
of strong multiple GAS resonances (ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c)) cannot exist if at least one of the
variations ∆ǫ1 or ∆ǫ2 is zero, positive or sufﬁciently small negative that the angle of total reﬂection
from the corresponding slab interface is larger than θ21r [4].

4 Physical reasons: conventional guided modes or not?

It is obvious that the structure with ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0 (i.e. the mean permittivity in the slab is higher
than that of the surrounding media) is capable of supporting the conventional guided modes. There-
fore, a reasonable question naturally arises from the above consideration: are all, or at least some, of
the predicted strong multiple GAS resonances in ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c) related to generation
of the conventional guided modes of the slab? To answer this question, let us consider physically the
conditions for effective generation of conventional guided modes in a slab with a holographic grat-
ing. A conventional guided mode can be represented by a bulk wave travelling in the slab and
experiencing total internal reﬂection from its boundaries [15]. An angle θ21sm, at which this bulk
wave should propagate in the slab to form a particular slab mode, is determined by the dispersion
relationship for the guided mode and the fact that the wave vector of this guided mode must be equal
to the tangential (to the slab) component of the wave vector of the bulk wave in the slab [15]. Thus,
θ21sm21sm = arcsin(q/k21), where q is the magnitude of the wave vector of the considered conven-
tional slab mode. Determining q from the dispersion relationship for the slab modes, we can easily
see that each of the resonant angles corresponding to the sharp resonances within the range from 80◦
to 86◦ in ﬁgure 2 (c) lies almost exactly in the middle between two neighbouring values of θ21sm. This
clearly suggests that the above-mentioned GAS resonances cannot be associated with generation of
the conventional slab modes.
On the other hand, the same consideration demonstrates that all the resonances in ﬁgure 2 (a) occur
at the angles corresponding to the conventional slab modes in the considered structure. This suggests
that, if the grating amplitude and/or grating width are sufﬁciently small, we indeed have resonant
generation of the conventional slab modes in the structure (the maxima of the solid curve in ﬁgure
2 (a) correspond to symmetric TE slab modes, while the maxima of the dotted curve correspond to
antisymmetric TE slab modes).
This is because a bulk wave in a slab (reﬂecting from the slab interfaces) forms a guided mode only
if it experiences at least several reﬂections from the slab interfaces, otherwise it is just a bulk wave
travelling from one slab boundary to another with no restrictions on the angle of propagation. On
the other hand, scattering in the grating is characterized by a critical length of the grating (along the
y axis), lc ≈ τcǫ−1/2
, within which the steady-state regime of scattering is reached [7,16]. Here, τ is
the relaxation time for a particular resonance [7,16], and c is the speed of light in vacuum. Resonant
generation of the conventional modes guided by a slab with a holographic grating occurs (ﬁgure 2
(a)) when lc for the corresponding resonance is noticeably larger than the distance lref = L/ cos(θ21)
that the bulk wave in the slab travels between two successive reﬂections. For example, for ﬁgure 2
(a), the analysis developed in [16] gives lc ≈ 0.4 cm, while lref ranges from about 0.02 cm to 0.2 cm for
the angles θ21 within the range between 80◦ and 89◦.
If the grating width is increased, then lref increases proportionally. If lc < lref, we rather have gen-
eration of a bulk wave in the grating region, and the successive reﬂections do not effectively restrict
angles of scattering so that they can vary in a wide range, not necessarily corresponding to a con-
ventional guided mode. This may also happen when the grating amplitude is increased and L =
In this case, lref is constant, but the efﬁciency of scattering is increased, resulting in a
constant.
smaller critical grating length lc. This eventually leads to the same inequality lc < lref. Therefore,
the resonances due to generation of the conventional guided slab modes must become broader with
increasing grating width L and/or grating amplitude ǫg. This is what can clearly be seen from the
comparison of the curves in ﬁgure 2 (a) with the curves in ﬁgure 2 (b) at angles θ21 < 87◦. (A very
similar effect occurs when the grating width is increased and ǫg = constant).
Note that increasing angle of scattering results in increasing lref. Therefore, the maxima in ﬁgures
2 (a) and (b) due to the conventional slab modes increase in width with increasing θ21. Eventually,
for angles of scattering θ21 ≈ 87◦ in ﬁgure 2 (b), lc becomes approximately the same as lref and
the whole pattern of scattering drastically changes; for angles θ21 > 87◦, the resonances due to the
conventional guided modes disappear, being replaced by strong GAS resonances at ‘wrong’ resonant
angles of scattering (ﬁgure 2 (b)).

2

However, it is important to note that, for strong GAS resonances, the relaxation time is large, and lc
becomes again larger than lref. This is also quite clear from the fact that, in the GAS resonances, the
selectivity of scattering with respect to angle θ21 is extremely high (ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c)),
which can only be achieved if the effect of the rear slab boundary on scattering is signiﬁcant (recall
that we do not consider the angular response of the grating, and the Bragg condition is satisﬁed
precisely for all scattering angles). That is, the bulk scattered wave in the grating should be able to
travel many times across the grating, before the steady state is ﬁnally reached. This implies that for
the GAS resonances the condition lc > lref must again be satisﬁed.
As a result of this consideration, we can draw an important conclusion that strong GAS resonances
in a slab with a slanted holographic grating have nothing to do with the resonant generation of the
conventional slab modes. All the predicted GAS resonances represent a new phenomenon in a slab
with a slanted grating.
This conclusion can be made even more convincing if we investigate the angular dependences of the
scattered wave amplitude in the grating at angles θ21 > 90◦. Indeed, if we extend the curves in ﬁgure
2 (a) to angles θ21 > 90◦, they will be almost exactly symmetric with respect to θ21 = 90◦. This is well
expected, since a conventional guided slab mode can be represented by a bulk wave successively
reﬂecting from the slab interfaces. Therefore, scattering at two angles 90 − ∆θ21 and 90 + ∆θ21 can
equally result in generation of the same mode guided by the slab.
On the contrary, no GAS resonances can be observed at angles θ21 > 90◦. This is similar to what was
predicted for gratings with zero variations in the mean permittivity at the boundaries [1,2]. That is,
unlike scattering into conventional guided modes of a slab with a holographic grating, the pattern
of GAS is completely asymmetric with respect to the scattering angle θ21 = 90◦. This once again
emphasizes strong differences between the resonances of scattering due to generation of conventional
slab modes (ﬁgure 2 (a)) and GAS resonances (ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c)).

5 New grating eigenmodes

In the previous section, we have clearly demonstrated that the predicted multiple-GAS resonances
have nothing to do with generation of the conventional guided modes in the slab (grating region).
However, this still does not give us a physical explanation for these new resonances. On the other
hand, it is well known that any strong resonance is associated with some kind of eigenoscillations or
eigenmodes in the structure. Therefore, the described strong GAS resonances must also be related to
generation of some type of eigenmodes in the considered structure with a grating in a slab. At the
same time, as demonstrated in the above section, these are not conventional guided slab modes that
are responsible for the predicted GAS resonances. Therefore, a completely new type of eigenmode
must be generated in the slab by means of an incident wave. These are grating eigenmodes that were
ﬁrst predicted in [2,3]. However, in [2,3], grating eigenmodes were considered only in the absence
of the conventional guiding effect in the structure. Here, we demonstrate that the presence of the
conventional guiding effect, that is when the mean permittivity in the grating region is larger than
the permittivity outside the grating, results in drastic changes in the pattern of GAS and therefore of
the structure of the grating eigenmodes.
Indeed, ﬁgures 2 and 3 clearly demonstrate that a large number of very sharp and strong resonances
can exist in a grating with ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0. These resonances appear to be much higher than those
in the case when ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 = 0 [2] (ﬁgures 2 and 3). The typical number of these sharp and strong
resonances rapidly increases with increasing grating width L and/or mean permittivity in the grating
(see above), so does the number of different grating eigenmodes in the structure.
It is also clear that the discussed grating eigenmodes in a slab are not true eigenmodes, because they
weakly leak into the regions outside the grating (see also [2,3]). Indeed, these modes are resonantly
generated by an incident bulk wave, and coupling between guided and bulk waves can occur only if
the guided waves (grating eigenmodes) leak into the surrounding media. At the same time, since the
corresponding GAS resonances are extremely high (up to hundreds (ﬁgures 2 and 3) or even thou-
sands (see below) of the amplitude of the incident wave at the front grating boundary), the leakage

of the grating eigenmodes must be very weak (weak coupling between the incident wave and grat-
ing eigenmodes). Therefore, these eigenmodes should be able to propagate long distances along the
grating (in the absence of the incident wave at the front boundary), before their amplitudes are signif-
icantly decreased owing to leakage. These typical distances can approximately be determined by the
relaxation time for the corresponding GAS resonances. The larger the relaxation time, the stronger is
the resonance and the longer is the distance that the corresponding eigenmode can propagate with-
out noticeable decay (due to leakage) along the grating. The relaxation time can be determined using
the method based on the Fourier analysis of the incident pulse [16]. As mentioned above, during
the relaxation time τ, the scattered wave propagates the distance lc ≈ τcǫ−1/2 along the grating,
which should approximately be equal to the distance that the corresponding eigenmode can propa-
gate along the grating in the absence of the incident wave. For example, the results of [16] suggest
that a resonance of about 100E00 high should usually correspond to an lc value of about several tens
of centimetres.
It is important to understand that the predicted new eigenmodes of a guiding slab with a grating
are generically associated with scattering. They do not exist if there is no grating in the slab. This
is one of their major differences from the conventional slab modes. Grating eigenmodes exist only
at sufﬁciently large grating amplitudes and/or widths of the grating (see the previous section and
[2,3]). If the grating amplitude and/or grating width are small (so that L < Lc), GAS resonances and
the corresponding eigenmodes do not exist and are replaced by the resonances caused by generation
of the conventional guided slab modes (ﬁgure 2 (a)).
The typical x dependences of the relative amplitudes |S21(x)/E00| and |S20(x)/E00| of the scattered
and incident waves, respectively, inside the grating are presented in ﬁgure 4 for several strong reso-
nances that are indicated by the solid arrows in ﬁgures 2 (a), 2 (c) and 3 (a) (other diffracted orders
have negligible amplitudes at the considered grating amplitudes). Since these resonances are very
high, the ﬁeld structure in the grating at the corresponding resonant angles θ21rs of scattering should
approximately be the same as that of the corresponding eigenmodes. Indeed, in this case, the modes
are only weakly leaking from the grating (slab), and the amplitude of the incident wave at the front
grating boundary is much smaller than the amplitudes of the scattered and incident waves in the
grating (ﬁgure 4). Therefore, the resultant sum of the ﬁelds corresponding to the eigenmode and to
the incident wave will hardly be different from the ﬁeld structure of the eigenmode alone. Note that
this is relevant to any sufﬁciently sharp resonance, irrespective of whether this resonance is due to
the conventional guided slab modes (ﬁgure 2 (a)), or new grating eigenmodes (ﬁgures 2 (b) and (c)
and 3 (a)(c)). Therefore, the dependences presented in ﬁgures 4 (a)(c) with a good approximation
represent the ﬁeld structure of the corresponding eigenmodes (conventional and new).
Thus the dotted and solid curves in ﬁgure 4 (a) approximately represent the ﬁeld structure in sym-
metric and antisymmetric conventional guided modes of the slab, corresponding to the resonances
indicated by the solid arrows in ﬁgure 2 (a). The broken curve represents the x dependences of the
incident wave amplitude for both the considered resonances. However, the incident wave in the
grating is not a part of the conventional slab eigenmode. Indeed, the incident wave amplitude in the
grating can be made arbitrarily small compared with the amplitude of the scattered wave by reduc-
ing the grating amplitude. Therefore, conventional slab modes can obviously exist in a slab with no
grating.
The situation with the grating eigenmodes is completely different. Firstly, grating eigenmodes are
usually generated at different angles of scattering (see section 3). Secondly, grating eigenmodes of
a slab are intrinsically related to scattering and cannot exist in the absence of the grating. Thirdly,
because they are generically related to scattering, the 0 diffracted order (incident wave) in the grating
is an inseparable part of the grating eigenmodes (also [2,3]). The amplitude of the 0 diffracted order
in the grating can never be made arbitrarily small compared with the amplitude of the scattered
wave (+1 order) without destroying the eigenmode (and the corresponding GAS resonance). Thus
the ﬁeld structure in a grating eigenmode is given not only by the scattered wave but rather by a
superposition of the ﬁelds of all diffracted orders involved (see also [2,3]).
Figures 4 (b) and (c) present the typical dependences of the scattered and incident wave amplitudes
in the grating for the several resonances indicated by the solid arrow in ﬁgures 2 (c) and 3 (a) (corre-

Figure 4: The typical dependences of the relative amplitudes |S21(x)/E00| (—,...) and |S20(x)/E00|
(- - -,-.-) of the scattered and incident waves on distance x from the front grating boundary for the
resonances indicated in ﬁgures 2 (a) and (c) and 3 (a) by the solid arrows. (a) The x dependences
corresponding to the resonances indicated by the arrows in ﬁgure 2 (a) (the zeroth bunch of maxima);
(...), θ21 = 84.1805◦, (—), θ21 = 84.596◦. The dependences of the incident wave amplitude are
almost indistinguishable for both the resonances and are given by just one broken curve. (b) The x
dependences corresponding to the resonances indicated by the solid arrows in ﬁgure 2 (c) (the ﬁrst
bunch); (...), ( ): θ21 = 83.5497◦, (—)(.), θ21 = 83.963495◦ . (c) The dependences corresponding to the
resonances indicated by the solid arrows in ﬁgure 3 (a) (the second bunch); (...), ( ), θ21 = 84.55485◦,
(—), (.), θ21 = 84.9622◦.

sponding to generation of grating eigenmodes in the slab). It can be seen that these dependences are
signiﬁcantly different from those in ﬁgure 4 (a). In particular, unlike ﬁgure 4 (a), the amplitudes of
the incident wave in ﬁgures 4 (b) and (c) are much larger than E00, its amplitude at the front grating
boundary. As mentioned above, there is no way that we could make them negligible compared with
the amplitude of the scattered wave, without destroying the corresponding resonances and, hence,
the grating eigenmodes.
Comparison of ﬁgure 4 (a) with ﬁgures 4 (b) and (c) suggests that the scattered wave amplitudes
inside the grating experience strong oscillations (as a function of x) for both conventional slab modes
and grating eigenmodes. However, the x dependences corresponding to grating eigenmodes display
beat-like modulation of these oscillations with one or more waists (see the solid and dotted curves
in ﬁgures 4 (b) and (c)). The number of these waists is determined by the bunch of maxima (ﬁgures
2 (b) and (c) and 3 (a)(c)) that the considered resonance belongs to. For example, the x dependences
of the scattered wave amplitude in ﬁgure 4 (b) show only one waist if the corresponding resonances
belong to the ﬁrst bunch of maxima (ﬁgure 2 (c)). The two waists are displayed by the solid and
dotted curves in ﬁgure 4 (c), because the corresponding resonances belong to the second bunch of
maxima (ﬁgure 3 (a)), etc.
The typical number of oscillations of the x dependences of the scattered wave amplitude in the grat-
ing increases with decreasing resonant angle θ21rs of scattering (i.e. with increasing grazing angle
between k21 and the grating boundaries). For example, if we shift from the resonance in ﬁgure 2 (c),
indicated by the right solid arrow, to the neighbouring resonance indicated by the left solid arrow,
the number of oscillations of the x dependencies of the scattered wave amplitudes is increased by
one (compare the dotted and solid curves in ﬁgure 4 (b)). This is very similar to what occurs for the
conventional guided modes (ﬁgure 4 (a)).
Thus, if we consider the GAS resonance at θ21 ≈ θ21r (the largest possible resonant angle), the number
of oscillations of the x dependence of the scattered wave amplitude in the grating is reduced to one.
This is demonstrated by ﬁgures 5 (a) and (c) that are plotted for the rightmost resonances in ﬁgures 2
(c) and 3 (a), respectively. The number of bumps on the solid curves in ﬁgures 5 (a) and (c) (two for
ﬁgure 5 (a) and four for ﬁgure 5 (c)) corresponds to the bunch number that these resonances belong
to (these bumps correspond to the ‘waists’ in the case of the large number of oscillations (ﬁgures 4
(b) and (c)).
Note also that the dependences in ﬁgures 5 (a) and (c) are similar to those obtained for grating eigen-
modes in the case of zero variations of the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries [1,2]. The
main difference from the case when ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 = 0 [1,2] is that the x dependencies of the scattered
wave amplitudes in ﬁgures 5 (a) and (c) are not close to zero at the grating boundaries. If this were
the case for a grating with constant mean permittivity, there would have been substantial energy
losses from the grating because propagating scattered waves outside the grating carry the energy
away from the grating. As a result, the corresponding grating eigenmodes would have quickly de-
cayed owing to strong leakage. This is the reason why only a limited number of grating eigenmodes
can exist in the gratings with constant mean permittivity, that is only those for which the scattered
wave amplitude is close to zero at the grating boundaries [1,2].
In the presence of the conventional guiding effect in the grating (i.e. when ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 < 0), the
situation is signiﬁcantly different. In the scattering angle range θ21int < θ21 ≤ θ21r, the scattered
waves outside the grating are non-propagating (evanescent) waves that do not carry energy away
from the grating. Therefore, the leakage of the grating eigenmodes can occur only as a result of the 0
diffracted order (incident wave) at the rear boundary, which has an amplitude that is much smaller
than the amplitudes of the incident and scattered waves in the grating (recall that other diffracted
orders in the considered gratings have even smaller amplitudes). Therefore, the leakage is weak in
the whole mentioned range of angles θ21. As a result, a number of new (additional), weakly leaking
grating eigenmodes with different ﬁeld structures (presented, for example, in ﬁgures 4 (b) and (c)
and 5 (b) and (d)) can exist in a slab with a holographic grating.
As mentioned above, variations in the mean permittivity in the grating region (in the slab) result in
only limited variations in the angles θ21rs corresponding to strong GAS resonances in ﬁgures 2 (b) and

Figure 5: The typical dependences of the relative amplitudes of the scattered waves (—) and incident
waves (...) on distance from the front grating boundary for the resonances near the angle θ21r, indi-
cated in ﬁgures 2 (c) and 3 (a) by the broken arrows. (a) The resonance indicated by the right broken
arrow in ﬁgure 2 (a), that is θ21 ≈ θ21r ≈ 88.7143◦; (b) the resonance indicated by the left broken
arrow in ﬁgure 2 (a), that is θ21 ≈ 88.2095◦; (c) the resonance indicated by the right broken arrow in
ﬁgure 3 (a), that is θ21 ≈ θ21r ≈ 88.12875◦ ; (d) the resonance indicated by the left broken arrow in
ﬁgure 3 (a), that is θ21 ≈ 87.47955◦.

(c) and 3 (a)(c). At the same time, these variations may have a drastic effect on height and sharpness
of the GAS resonances. This means that changing the mean permittivity in the grating region (slab)
must have a substantial impact on the leakage of the corresponding grating eigenmodes.
It is not difﬁcult to optimize the variations in the mean permittivity, ∆ǫ = −∆ǫ1 = −∆ǫ2 > 0, so that
a particular GAS resonance becomes as high as possible for a given grating amplitude. To do this,
we plot the dependence of the scattered wave amplitude (e.g. in the middle of the grating) on the
scattering angle θ21 and record the maximal value of this amplitude, corresponding to a particular
resonance for a given ∆ǫ. Then, change ∆ǫ and repeat the above procedure. As a result, we obtain
the dependence of maximal values of the scattered wave amplitude, corresponding to a particular
resonance, on ∆ǫ. For example, the solid curve in ﬁgure 6 (a) represents such a dependence for the
maximal scattered wave amplitude in the middle of the grating for the ﬁrst GAS resonance (i.e. at
θ21 ≈ θ21r). The grating parameters are ǫg = 0.03, L = 10µm, θ0 = 45◦ and λ(vacuum) = 1µm. The
broken curve in this ﬁgure gives the corresponding values of the scattered wave amplitudes at the
front and rear grating boundaries. Note that, since θ21r weakly depends on ∆ǫ, its values are slightly

Figure 6: (a) The dependence of the maximal relative scattered wave amplitude in the middle of the
grating (—) for the GAS resonance at θ21 ≈ θ21r on the variation in the mean permittivity at the
grating boundaries: ∆ǫ = −∆ǫ1 = −∆ǫ2 > 0 (symmetric structure). The broken curve gives the
corresponding scattered wave amplitudes at the front and rear grating boundaries (which are almost
the same). The other structural parameters are as follows: ǫ2 = 5, ǫg = 0.03, θ10 = 45◦, L = 10µm
and λ(vacuum) = 1µm. (b) The dependences of the scattered wave amplitudes in the middle of the
grating (—) and at the grating boundaries (- - -) on the scattering angleθ21 for the same structure as for
ﬁgure 6 (a), but with ∆ǫ = 0.0844, which is the optimized value of ∆ǫ corresponding to the highest
point of the solid curve in ﬁgure 6 (a). (c) The x dependences of the amplitudes of the scattered (—)
and incident (...) waves inside the grating at the optimized value of ∆ǫ = 0.0844 and the resonant
scattering angle θ21 ≈ θ21r ≈ 88.008555◦ (see ﬁgure 6 (b)).

different for different points on the curves in ﬁgure 6 (a). Thus, it is clear that variations in the mean
permittivity in the grating region (compared with the regions outside the grating) may lead to a very
substantial increase of the height of the GAS resonance (ﬁgure 6 (a)).
The predicted strong resonances at optimal values of ∆ǫ (∆ǫ ≈ 0.0844 in ﬁgure 6 (a)) obviously
result in the generation of very weakly leaking grating eigenmodes. Thus, optimization of ∆ǫ to the
strongest GAS resonance automatically means optimization of the corresponding eigenmode to the
minimal losses due to leakage. According to the results of the rigorous analysis of nonsteady-state
EAS [16], the typical propagation distance for such an eigenmode is expected to be around several
tens of metres. However, the exact analysis of this question will require more consistent application
of the methods developed in [16] to GAS in the considered structure (which is beyond the scope of

the current paper).
The dependences of the relative scattered wave amplitudes on angle of scattering at the optimized
value of (∆ǫ ≈ 0.0844 (ﬁgure 6 (a)) are presented in ﬁgure 6 (b) by the solid curve (in the middle of
the grating) and broken curve (at the grating boundaries). It can be seen that the angular width of
the optimized resonance is about 1.3 × 10−5◦. It is quite clear that such a resonance can hardly be
achieved in practice, owing to the excessively long relaxation time. Therefore, its major importance
is in the demonstration of the existence of new, very weakly leaking grating eigenmodes. In the
end, these eigenmodes can be generated by the same means as conventional slab modes (but not
necessarily by means of GAS).
The x dependences of the amplitudes of the incident (dotted curve) and scattered (solid curve) waves
in the optimized grating eigenmode (i.e. corresponding to the resonance in ﬁgure 6 (b): ∆ǫ ≈ 0.0844
and θ21 = 88.008555◦ ) are presented in ﬁgure 6 (c). It can again be seen that, unlike the eigenmodes
in gratings with zero variations in the mean permittivity [13], the amplitudes of the scattered wave
at the grating boundaries are strongly non-zero. As has been indicated, this does not result in any
energy losses from the grating, since the scattered waves outside the grating are evanescent. On the
contrary, the amplitudes of the 0 diffracted order (incident wave) at the grating boundaries are neg-
ligible compared with that in the middle of the grating (dotted curve in ﬁgure 6 (c)), which ensures
only small leakage losses from the grating.

6 Grating eigenmodes in planar waveguides

As indicated in [4,6,11], a very similar pattern of scattering in the geometry of EAS and GAS can also
be obtained in the case of scattering of guided slab modes of arbitrary polarization (TE or transverse
magnetic (TM) modes) in wide periodic groove arrays.
In this case, the plane of ﬁgure 1 is the
surface of the slab with a periodic groove array within a strip of width L. An incident guided mode
of the slab (with the wave vector k00) propagates at an angle θ10 (ﬁgure 1), enters the array and is
scattered into a scattered mode of the same slab, so that the wave vector k21 of the scattered mode
is almost parallel to the array boundaries (the geometry of GAS) (ﬁgure 1). The mean thickness of
the waveguide inside the array (at 0 < x < L) is assumed to be larger than outside it, that is, the
mean thickness of the slab experiences a step-like variation at the grating boundaries. This results in
a step-like increase in the effective mean permittivity for the guided modes inside the grating region
(similar to what was considered in sections 3 and 4 for bulk waves).
The procedure of extending the results obtained in the above sections for bulk TE electromagnetic
waves in holographic gratings to the case of GAS of guided slab modes in periodic groove arrays is
presented and justiﬁed in [4,11]. In particular, it follows from here that slanted periodic groove arrays
are capable of guiding electromagnetic modes, similar to the eigenmodes of regular rib waveguides.
At the same time, these grating eigenmodes are strongly different in terms of ﬁeld structure and exis-
tence conditions from the conventional modes of a rib waveguide (see section 4). The ﬁeld structure
of the grating eigenmodes of a rib with a periodic groove array must be approximately the same as
that described in section 4 (for further justiﬁcations see [4,11]). Similar to the considered eigenmodes
of a slab with a holographic grating (section 4), eigenmodes of a rib waveguide with a periodic groove
array must be weakly leaking into guided modes in the regions outside the array. The sharper the
corresponding GAS resonance, the weaker is this leakage, and the longer is the propagation distance
for the eigenmodes.
However, it is important to understand that the extension of the obtained results (sections 3 and 4) to
the case of guided modes in periodic groove arrays has only been justiﬁed within the frames of the
applicability of the approximate theory of GAS, based on the two-wave approximation [4,11]. The
actual applicability condition for the approximate theory of GAS of bulk electromagnetic waves was
derived in [1] and veriﬁed in [2,8]:

ρgas =

2λ2
Λ2 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

E00
ǫgmax|S21(x)|

> 10,

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(2)

where λ is the wavelength in vacuum, S21(x) is the amplitude of the +1 order (scattered wave) inside
the grating and ǫg is the amplitude of the holographic grating.
If condition (2) is satisﬁed for GAS of bulk TE waves in a holographic grating, then we can ﬁnd a
structure with GAS of guided modes in a slab with a periodic groove array [4,11], for which all the
dependences of the amplitudes of the incident and scattered waves are very close to those for bulk
TE waves (sections 3 and 4). Similarly, if we have a particular structure with GAS of guided modes
(without mode conversion), the same procedure [11] allows us to ﬁnd an equivalent structure with
bulk TE electromagnetic waves in a holographic grating with the same dependences of the incident
and scattered wave amplitudes.
Another applicability condition for the discussed extension to GAS of guided modes is that the cor-
responding variations of the mean thickness of the slab at the boundaries of the groove array should
be much smaller than the mean thickness itself [4,11]. If this is not the case, signiﬁcant energy losses
from the structure due to generation of bulk waves at the array boundaries may occur, resulting in
deterioration of the predicted resonances.
One might also think that owing to very large amplitudes of the scattered wave at the grating bound-
aries (ﬁgures 4 (b), 5 (d) and 6 (a)(c)), even small variations in the mean thickness of the slab may
result in the signiﬁcant energy losses. However, this is not the case, since GAS resonances occur at
scattering angles θ21int < θ21 ≤ θ21r. Within this range, the y component of the wave vector of the
scattered guided mode in the array is larger than the wave vector of the same mode outside the array
and, even more so, larger than the wave vector of the bulk waves in the media surrounding the slab.
Therefore, propagating bulk waves will not be generated at the grating boundaries by means of the
scattered slab mode in the range of angles where strong GAS resonances occur.
On the contrary, the incident slab mode can result in generation of bulk waves at the front and rear
grating boundaries. However, this wave has much smaller amplitudes at these boundaries, than
the amplitude of the scattered wave in the grating. Thus, the resultant additional energy losses
must be negligible for small variations in the mean thickness of the slab. Small thickness variations
correspond to small variations in the mean effective dielectric permittivity for the guided modes,
which is in agreement with the typical (small) values of ∆ǫ considered for bulk waves in sections 3
and 4.

7 Conclusions

This paper has used the rigorous theory [2,8,11] for the analysis of GAS of bulk electromagnetic
waves in wide holographic gratings with step-like variations in the mean dielectric permittivity at
the grating boundaries. A highly unusual pattern of strong multiple wave resonances has been pre-
dicted in such gratings when the scattered wave propagates nearly parallel to the grating boundaries
(the geometry of GAS). These resonances are shown to exist only in gratings with sufﬁciently large
amplitudes and/or widths, when the mean permittivity in the grating region is larger than the per-
mittivities outside the grating. In this case, the grating region is actually a slab capable of guiding
electromagnetic modes.
At the same time, it is clearly demonstrated that the predicted GAS resonances are unrelated to
generation of conventional guided modes of the slab. It has been shown that these resonances are
associated with generation of a completely new type of modes in a slab with a periodic grating. In
particular, it has been shown that these grating eigenmodes have a different ﬁeld structure and are
generated at angles of scattering that are substantially different from those required for generation
of conventional slab modes. Moreover, the predicted grating eigenmodes are generated in gratings,
where effective generation of conventional slab modes is not possible due to relatively large grating
amplitude and/or width.
It has been demonstrated that the grating eigenmodes of a slab with a holographic grating are intrin-
sically associated with scattering and cannot exist in the absence of the grating. Unlike conventional
slab modes, they are formed not only by the scattered wave (the +1 order), but also by a super-
position of all diffracted orders generated in the grating. Grating eigenmodes have been shown to

leak weakly into the regions outside the grating. The main existence conditions for grating eigen-
modes have been discussed. However, the higher the considered GAS resonance, the longer is the
propagation distance for the corresponding grating eigenmode.
Optimization of the variations in the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries has been made
to achieve the highest GAS resonance(s) (which can reach thousands of amplitudes of the incident
wave at the front grating boundary). This procedure automatically means optimization of the corre-
sponding eigenmodes(s) to the minimal leakage and thus maximal propagation distance along the
grating.
Extension of the obtained results to the case of GAS of electromagnetic modes guided by a slab with
a slanted periodic groove array has been carried out. In particular, the existence of a new type of
eigenmodes of a rib waveguide with a slanted periodic groove array has been predicted.

References

1. Gramotnev, D.K., Opt. Quant. Electron., 2001. 33: p. 253.

2. Gramotnev, D. K., T. A. Nieminen, Optics Commun., 2003. 219: p. 33.

3. Pile, D. F. P., D. K. Gramotnev, Applied Physics B, 2003. 76: p. 65.

4. Gramotnev, D. K., S. J. Goodman, D. F. P. Pile, J. Mod. Opt., 2003 (to be published).

5. Kishino, S., A. Noda, and K. Kohran, J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 1972. 33: p. 158.

6. Bakhturin, M.P., L.A. Chernozatonskii, and D.K. Gramotnev, Applied Optics, 1995. 34: p. 2692.

7. Gramotnev, D.K., J. Phys. D, 1997. 30(14). p. 2056-2062.

8. Nieminen, T.A. and D.K. Gramotnev, Opt. Commun., 2001. 189: p. 175.

9. Gramotnev, D.K. and D.F.P. Pile, Opt. Quant. Electron., 2000. 33: p. 1097.

10. Pile, D. F. P., D. K. Gramotnev, Opt. Quant Electron., 2003. 35: p. 237.

11. Gramotnev, D.K., T.A. Nieminen, and T.A. Hopper, J. Mod. Opt., 2001.

12. Akhmediev, N.N. and A. Ankiewicz, Solitions: Nonlinear pulses and beams. 1997: Chapman

and Hall.

13. Moharam, M.G., et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1995. A12: p. 1077.

14. Moharam, M.G., et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1995. A12: p. 1068.

15. Yariv, A. and P. Yeh, Optical waves in crystals. Propagation and control of laser radiation. 1984,

John Wiley, New York.

16. Nieminen, T. A. and D. K. Gramotnev, Optics Express, 2002, 10, p.2683.

