5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-referenced prism deﬂection measurement schemes with microradian precision

Rebecca Olson,∗ Justin Paul, Scott Bergeson, and Dallin S. Durfee
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah 84602, USA
(Dated: July 26, 2013)

We have demonstrated several inexpensive methods which can be used to measure the deﬂection
angles of prisms with microradian precision. The methods are self-referenced, using various reversals
to achieve absolute measurements without the need of a reference prism or any expensive precision
components other than the prisms under test. These techniques are based on laser interferometry
and have been used in our lab to characterize parallel-plate beamsplitters, penta prisms, right
angle prisms, and corner cube reﬂectors using only components typically available in an optics lab.
Published in Applied Optics, Vol. 44, No. 22. c(cid:13)2005 Optical Society of America.

INTRODUCTION

Reﬂecting prisms are key components in a variety of
optical instruments. They can be used in place of mir-
rors to alter the direction of optical beams. Unlike mir-
rors, however, prisms can be used in such a way that
the angle through which the beam is deﬂected does not
change when the optic is rotated. For example, after a
beam reﬂects oﬀ of the three perpendicular surfaces of a
corner cube it will exit the prism travelling in precisely
the opposite direction as the incoming beam. No careful
alignment is needed to achieve this nearly perfect 180 de-
gree deﬂection. Reﬂecting prisms are useful in situations
where it is diﬃcult to perform the initial alignment or
when it is critical to maintain a particular beam deﬂec-
tion for a long period of time. One well known example is
the use of corner reﬂectors for lunar ranging experiments
[1]. Our interest in prisms is to generate an extremely
stable array of laser beams for use in an atom interfer-
ometer.

Since the beam deﬂection is determined by the angles
between the prism surfaces rather than the alignment of
the optic, it is extremely important that the prisms be
made correctly. Several methods are commonly used to
measure deﬂection angles of prisms [2, 3, 4]. One class of
techniques utilizes telescopes and autocollimators to im-
age the separation of two beams at inﬁnity. Our methods
are based on a second class in which the angle between
the two beams is ascertained using optical interference.
Both types of measurements are limited by the size of
the beam of light passing through the optics, in the ﬁrst
case by Rayleigh’s criterion, and in the second by the
large fringe spacing resulting from nearly parallel beams.
As such, both types of measurements have similar ulti-
mate resolution limits. Techniques based on either type
of measurement typically require a calibrated reference
prism or other expensive optical components.

After purchasing a set of extremely high precision
prisms for use in an atom interferometer, we began to
have doubts as to whether the manufacturer had met
our required speciﬁcations. Not having access to an in-
strument capable of measuring prism deﬂection angles
to the necessary accuracy, we developed a set of tech-

niques which allow prism deﬂection angles to be mea-
sured with accuracies of a few microradians. Our scheme
is self referencing, requiring no calibrated prism. In ad-
dition to the prisms under test we only needed several
standard-quality mirrors, lenses, and attenuators, an in-
expensive alignment laser, a low quality surveillance cam-
era, and for some measurements a piezoelectric actuator.
We characterized parallel plate beamsplitters (which gen-
erate two precisely parallel beams), penta prisms (which
deﬂect light by 90 degrees), right angle prisms (which
fold light by 180 degrees in the plane of the prism), and
corner cubes.

Our methods utilize optical interferometry and bear
similarity to the Jamin interferometer [5]. Like several
other schemes, in our methods the deﬂection angles of
prisms are determined from the spacing between fringes
formed by two interfering beams. Each of our designs
produce similar intensities for the two interfering beams,
resulting in high-contrast fringes for maximum sensitiv-
ity. Lenses and mirrors are only used before the beams
are split or after the interference pattern is formed such
that alignment or wavefront errors due to these optics
have a negligible eﬀect on the measurements.

MEASURING THE ANGLE BETWEEN TWO
BEAMS

When two monochromatic plane waves intersect they
form an interference pattern. Because the spacing be-
tween interference fringes depends on the angle between
the two wave vectors, it is possible to ascertain the angle
between the two propagation directions by analyzing the
fringe pattern. Using Fig. 1 and simple trigonometry it
is easy to ﬁnd a relationship between the fringe spacing
d and the angle between the k-vectors of the two plane
waves ∆θ.
In the small angle approximation, for two
plane waves with wavelength λ projected onto a screen at
near normal incidence, the angle between the two beams
is given by

∆θ =

λ
d

.

(1)

2

tion, it reveals the sign of the angle between the beams
(not just the magnitude), and it can be used for other
types of measurements (such as surface proﬁling) which
cannot easily be done with the method we chose. But
our spatial fringe-ﬁtting method has the advantage that
all of the data is recorded in a single moment, making
It also doesn’t
it more robust in noisy environments.
require the incorporation of a phase-shifting device, re-
ducing cost and complexity and eliminating potential er-
rors due to phase shifter beam deﬂections, drifts, and
hysteresis. Adding a phase shifter would have greatly
complicated our scheme for the measurement of plate
beamsplitters. In our other schemes it could have been
implemented by scanning one prism with a piezoelectric
actuator. As discussed later, we used piezoelectric actu-
ators in some of our schemes for other purposes, but the
piezos lacked suﬃcient stability for this purpose (see Fig.
7(a) in section ).

To ﬁnd the angle between the two beams we simply
curve-ﬁt the intensity pattern on our camera. But to
get accurate results when less than one fringe is visible
we have to take into account the spatial proﬁles of the
beams. To do this we ﬁrst write down the expression
for the electric ﬁeld of a laser beam as a function of the
position on the camera r and time t. To simplify our
analysis we assume that the interfering beams have the
same polarization. We also assume that the two beams
are well collimated such that the phase of each beam’s
electric ﬁeld is of the form k
ωt + φ where k is the
wave vector of the beam, ω is the angular frequency of
the light ﬁeld, and φ is a constant phase oﬀset. With
these assumptions, the electric ﬁeld of each beam can be
written as

−

r

·

En(r, t) = fn(r) cos(kn ·

r

−

ωt + φn),

(2)

where fn(r) is the amplitude of the electric ﬁeld at posi-
tion r and the subscript n is equal to 1 or 2 depending
on which of the interfering beams we are describing.

The intensity of the interference pattern of two inter-
secting beams is related to the time average of the square
of the sum of the two interfering electric ﬁelds. When the
time average is evaluated and the equation is simpliﬁed
it can be expressed as

I12(r) = I1 + I2 + 2

I1I2 cos(krel

r + ∆φ),

(3)

·

p
φ2 and krel = k1

k2, and where I1 and
where ∆φ = φ1
I2 are the intensity patterns which would be measured on
the camera if only one of the two interfering beams was
present.

−

−

Without losing generality we can deﬁne the plane of
the camera’s detector to be the z = 0 plane (such that r
has no z component). Then we can write the dot product
krel
r as kxx + kyy where x and y are cartesian coordi-
nates describing the location of pixels on our camera and
kx and ky are the spatial frequencies of the interference

·

FIG. 1: Fringes formed by two crossing plane waves. In (a)
the interference pattern formed when two beams from a HeNe
laser crossed at a small angle is shown. In (b) the gray arrows
represent the propagation or k-vectors of the two plane waves,
and the thin gray lines represent the wavefronts of the two
travelling waves. The angle between the propagation vectors
of the two beams is labelled as ∆θ. The interference maxima,
where the two waves are always in phase, are denoted with the
dashed lines and the spacing between interference maxima is
labelled as d.

Fitting to a Piece of a Fringe

Most of the optics we tested have a clear aperture of
2.5 cm. To prevent clipping we made our measurements
using a helium-neon laser (λ = 632 nm) collimated to a
diameter of about 1 cm, suggesting that we would only
be able to measure fringe spacings if the fringes were
less than 1 cm apart. According to Eq. 1 this limit on
d results in a minimum measurable ∆θ of 0.13 millira-
dians. The optics we measured were speciﬁed to have
angular tolerances of a few microradians.
In order to
make measurements with microradian precision we had
to infer angles from images which contained much less
than one fringe.

One method commonly used in this situation is phase
shifting, in which intensity is measured at several points
as the fringe pattern is scanned across the points by shift-
ing the phase of one beam [6]. This method has several
advantages over the spatial fringe-ﬁtting method used in
our experiments: it is less susceptible to wavefront distor-

pattern imaged by the camera. If both beams strike the
camera near to normal incidence, then the z component
of krel will be nearly zero and krel will be approximately
equal to (k2
y)1/2. These deﬁnitions result in the fol-
x + k2
lowing expression:

I12

I1
−
−
2√I1I2

I2

= cos (kxx + kyy + ∆φ) .

(4)

The left-hand side of this equation can be thought of as
a “normalized” intensity.

≃

If the two beams are nearly parallel it can be shown
that krel
2π∆θ/λ. To ﬁnd ∆θ we simply measure I12,
I1, and I2 and numerically ﬁt the left side of Eq. 4 to the
right side to ﬁnd kx and ky treating ∆φ as a free parame-
ter. We then calculate krel and from that ∆θ. The three
intensity patterns needed to calculate the left side of Eq.
4 are measured by taking four images: one of the two
interfering beams, one of beam 1 with beam 2 blocked,
one of beam 2 with beam 1 blocked, and a “dark ﬁeld”
image with both beams blocked. An example of a set
of images is shown in Figs. 2(a)-(d). We then subtract
the dark ﬁeld image from the other three to generate the
three background-free intensity patterns I12, I1, and I2.
The separate I1 and I2 terms in Eq. 4 make this measure-
ment technique work even if the fringes have low contrast
due to mismatched power in the two interfering beams.
Lower contrast does increase digitization noise, which is
of special importance when using a low bit-depth cam-
era. This technique also works if the interfering beams do
not overlap perfectly, although misalignments can reduce
the region of useful data (see Fig. 2(e)). Large overlap
misalignments coupled with wavefront curvature in the
beams can also add errors to the measurements.

Figure 2(e) shows the result of this calculation applied
to the data in Figs. 2(a)-(d). Curve ﬁts to ﬁnd kx and
ky from this data are illustrated in Figs. 3(a) and (b).
Although the data in these ﬁgures is somewhat noisy we
can still get accurate, repeatable results by applying the
constraint that the “normalized interference pattern” on
the left-hand side of Eq. 4 should oscillate with unity
amplitude and zero oﬀset. This is clearly evidenced by
the consistency of the measurements shown in Fig. 7 in
section .

Experimental Subtleties

When using this curve-ﬁtting approach to measure de-
ﬂection angles of prisms we often made small adjustments
to the prism or beamsplitter alignment in order to shift
the relative phase of the two interfering beams such that
images were not centered on a light or dark fringe. Only
small adjustments which did not aﬀect the overlap of the
interfering beams were needed. Capturing data between
a light and a dark fringe results in a more precise ﬁt to

3

FIG. 2: Calculating the normalized interference pattern inten-
sity. Images (a) through (d) are an example of the four images
which are needed to evaluate Eq. 4. The closely spaced inter-
ference lines visible in these images are low contrast fringes
due to reﬂections oﬀ of the camera window and the focusing
lens. The high contrast fringes due to the angle between the
two beams are not apparent in the “interference” frame be-
cause the spacing between fringes is larger than the size of
the beams. Plugging the data from these images into the left-
hand side of Eq. 4 results in the image shown in (e). Only the
central part of (e), where both beams are present, contains
meaningful information. The shading scale in (e) runs from
-1.35 (pure black) to 0.05 (pure white).

the data. Fitting data near an extremum of the cosine re-
quires precise measurement of the curvature of the data.
Near a zero crossing, however, simply extracting the slope
of the data is enough to get a good measurement of k.

In our treatment we have assumed a well-collimated
laser beam and have ignored eﬀects of wavefront cur-
vature. To ensure good beam collimation we con-
structed a simple Michelson-Morley interferometer with
mismatched arms, one arm being about 2 centimeters
long and the other over one meter long. The interferom-
eter was aligned to create a circular interference pattern.
We then adjusted the the lenses used to telescope up the
size of the laser beam until no interference rings were vis-
ible. When measuring prism deﬂection angles we made
sure that the two optical paths were the same length on
a millimeter scale and that the two interfering beams hit

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

−0.4

−0.5

−0.6

−0.7

−0.8

−0.9

−0.5

−0.6

−0.7

−0.8

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

(a) 

−1

80

100

120

140

160

x Coordinate (pixels)

−0.9

(b) 

150

200
250
y Coordinate (pixels)

300

350

FIG. 3: Curve ﬁts to ﬁnd the angle between two beams. Strips
through the center of the data from Fig. 2(e) are shown, along
with least-squared ﬁts to the functions cos(kxx + φx) and
cos(kyy + φy). The deviation of the data from the ﬁts is
largely due to camera window reﬂections. These higher spa-
tial frequency low-contrast fringes average away to a large
extent in the curve ﬁt.

the camera at nearly the same place. This made any
residual wavefront curvature common to both ﬁeld com-
ponents such that it did not eﬀect on our results.

The detector on the camera used in these experiments
was smaller than the laser beam diameter. Since catching
only part of the interference pattern limits sensitivity to
small relative beam angles, we used a lens to demagnify
the pattern. To account for the demagniﬁcation and to
ﬁnd the correct “eﬀective size” of the camera pixels we
placed a ruler in front of the lens. The ruler’s position
was adjusted until it came into clear focus on the cam-
era. We then took pictures of the ruler to determine the
magniﬁcation due to the lens. We veriﬁed that this had
been done correctly by using the lens’ focal length and
the distance to the camera to calculate the position at
which we would expect the ruler to come into focus and
the expected magniﬁcation.

When we evaluated the left-hand side of Eq. 4, we had
to be careful to utilize only the parts of the images where

4

suﬃcient laser light was present in both beams to avoid
large errors due to division by small numbers (see Fig.
2(e)). We designed our software to prompt the user to se-
lect a region of interest to avoid regions of low intensity.
The left-hand side of equation Eq. 4 is then computed
in this region. The software then ﬁts a horizontal row
of data in the middle of the selected region to the func-
tion cos(kxx + φx), and ﬁts a vertical column of data in
the middle of the region to the function cos(kyy + φy).
From these two one-dimensional ﬁts it calculates krel and
determines the angle between the beams.

MEASURING PRISM BEAM DEFLECTIONS

The following paragraphs discuss several methods
which we used to characterize the properties of parallel-
plate beamsplitters, penta prisms, right angle prisms,
and corner cubes. We tested uncoated optics. Light in-
tensity was lost due to imperfect transmission each time
a beam entered or exited a prism. Much larger losses
occurred due to missing reﬂective coatings on the beam-
splitters and the penta prisms (right angle prisms and
corner cubes do not require reﬂective coatings due to to-
tal internal reﬂection). But even with these losses we
could still saturate the camera. Balancing the intensities
of the two interfering beams was necessary to achieve
high contrast fringes to get the most accuracy with the
ﬁxed bit-depth of our camera. Our methods have sym-
metric losses in each beam, resulting in well matched
beam intensities.

Absolute Beamsplitter Characterization

The beamsplitters we measured were uncoated plates
of BK7 glass with parallel surfaces. As shown in Fig. 4,
when a laser beam passes through an uncoated piece of
glass, surface reﬂections result in multiple beams exiting
the glass. We are concerned only with the beam which
passes through without reﬂecting and the nearly paral-
lel beam resulting from one reﬂection from each surface
(labelled 1 and 2 in the ﬁgure). If the two beamsplitter
surfaces are exactly parallel, these two beams will emerge
exactly parallel. Otherwise there will be an angle θ be-
tween the two exiting beams (see Fig. 4). By measuring
θ, the prism wedge angle ψ can be inferred.

The relationship between θ and ψ can be found us-
If beam 1 in
ing Snell’s law and the law of reﬂection.
Fig. 4 deﬁnes the z axis and the x axis is deﬁned such
that the angle γ is in the x-z plane, in the limit of small
wedge angles the x component of ψ is related to the the
x component of θ by

ψx =

θx
2 s

1
n2

−
−

sin2(γ)
sin2(γ)

(5)

5

In this arrangement the interference pattern does not
reveal the wedge angle of a single beamsplitter, but gives
a combination of the wedge angles of both beamsplitters.
To ﬁnd the wedge angle of a single beamsplitter we make
four measurements using diﬀerent combinations of three
beamsplitters and use the fact that ﬂipping a beamsplit-
ter over eﬀectively reverses the sign of its wedge angle.
The ﬁrst and second measurements use beamsplitters
“A” and “B” with beamsplitter “B” turned over between
measurements. The third and fourth measurements use
beamsplitters “A” and “C” with beamsplitter “C” turned
over between them. In each of the four conﬁgurations we
measure the kx and ky of the interference pattern to ex-
tract the magnitude of the x and y components of the
angle between the outgoing interfering beams using the
methods discussed previously.

If θAx, θBx, and θCx represent the x components of
the relative deﬂection errors of beamsplitters “A,” “B,”
and “C,” and the magnitudes of the x components of the
angle between the interfering beams in the four measure-
ments are represented by M1x, M2x, M3x, and M4x, the
four measurements yield the following results:

θBx, s

M1x = θAx −
M2x = θAx + θBx,
±
θCx,
M3x = θAx −
M4x = θAx + θCx.

±
±

(6)
(7)

(8)
(9)

A similar set of equations can be written down for the y
components. Fitting our data using Eq. 4 does not reveal
the sign of the angle between the two interfering beams.
But we can assume a convention in which the angle be-
tween the two interfering beams is deﬁned to be positive
for our ﬁrst measurement. For the following measure-
ments we must stick to the same convention. The
sign
in the lower three relations therefore results from the un-
certainty in the sign of the angle between the interfering
beams when they are measured interferometrically.

±

The equations can be solved for the x component of the
relative deﬂection angle of each beamsplitter as a func-
tion of the four measured angles. But without knowledge
of the sign of the angle between the interfering beams,
these expressions cannot be evaluated. Fortunately, the
above system of four equations yields two independent
expressions for θAx, one in terms of M1x and M2x, and
the other in terms of M3x and M4x. In most cases the
requirement that θAx be the same as determined by both
equations unambiguously determines the sign of each
measurement term. Once the signs are determined, the
wedge angle for each of the three beamsplitters can be
determined. Using this technique we characterized sev-
eral high-precision beamsplitters, measuring wedge an-
gles from 1 to 6 µrad.

FIG. 4: Generation of two nearly parallel beams with a plate
beamsplitter. The gray lines represent laser light. Light en-
ters the beamsplitter in the lower left-hand corner. At each
interface the beam is split into a reﬂected and a transmitted
beam. For most of our studies we are only interested in the
two beams exiting the beamsplitter which are labelled 1 and
2 in the above ﬁgure. The angle between the incoming beam
and the normal of the ﬁrst surface is labelled as γ, the angle
between beams 1 and 2 is labelled as θ, and the wedge angle
of the glass plate is labelled ψ.

FIG. 5: Optical setup to measure the wedge angles of parallel-
plate beamsplitters.

where n is the index of refraction of the beamsplitter.
The y component of ψ is given by the same relationship,
with ψy and θy replacing ψx and θx.

To measure the wedge angle of parallel plate beamsplit-
ters we used the conﬁguration shown in Fig. 5. In this
conﬁguration two beamsplitters form a Mach-Zehnder in-
terferometer. Since each of the two beams undergoes two
reﬂections the two interfering beams have similar inten-
sities, resulting in high contrast interference fringes. To
get good overlap between the interfering beams and to
make the Fresnel coeﬃcients the same in both beamsplit-
ters, the two beamsplitters were placed at similar angles
relative to the incoming beam.

6

magnitude of the wave vector describing the sinusoidal
interference pattern measured at the output would equal
the quadrature sum of two orthogonal components: a
component due to errors in the manufacture of the prisms
and a component due to the relative alignment of the
prisms, as shown in Eq. 10 below.

krel =

p + k2
k2
a

(10)

q
Here kp represents the component due to error in the
prism, and ka represents the component due to alignment
error.

Because krel is at a minimum when there is no align-
ment error (i.e., when ka = 0), it is possible to measure
kp by making measurements while adjusting the out-of-
plane alignment of one prism. Rather than searching for
a minimum value, we took several measurements at dif-
ferent alignments and ﬁt our measurements to the form
of equation Eq. 10 to extract an accurate value for kp. To
do this we mounted one of our prisms on a piezoelectric
(PZT) mount which enabled ﬁne alignment adjustments.
We would manually adjust the alignment such that the
minimum of krel occurred near the middle of the range of
our PZT actuator. We then took images as we scanned
the PZT.

Because our fringe analysis method utilizes data taken
at a single moment in time, we were able to make pre-
cise measurements of kp even though our PZT actuator
was unstable. Assuming that ka will be proportional to
the voltage V applied to the piezoelectric element, we
can take the measured krel as a function of V and per-
form a curve ﬁt to ﬁnd kp. This curve ﬁt requires two
free parameters (in addition to kp): the voltage at which
ka = 0 and the constant of proportionality between V
and ka. As shown in Fig. 7(a), however, due to nonlin-
earity and drift in our piezoelectric mount the data does
not ﬁt the hyperbolic form of Eq. 10 well. But since the
kp component was approximately in the horizontal plane
of our camera and ka was in the vertical, we could per-
form much better ﬁts when we plotted the total krel vs.
ky, the vertical component of krel extracted by our im-
age analysis software. These ﬁts had no free parameters.
Typical curve ﬁts are shown in ﬁgures 7(b) and (c).

The ﬁt in Fig. 7(b) yields a kp of 64.4 rad/m corre-
sponding to a relative deﬂection angle of 6.5 µrad for the
two prisms with an RMS ﬁt error corresponding to 0.38
µrad. Scanning the PZT had the side eﬀect of moving
the location of bright and dark fringes such that some
images contained an extremum. But comparing the data
points in 7(b) which contained an extremum to those
which didn’t, it is clear that this did not signiﬁcantly re-
duce the accuracy of the ﬁts. A ﬁt using just the data for
which the image did not contain an interference minimum
or maximum gives a relative deﬂection of 7.5 µrad. Al-
though most of the information in the plots is contained
in the lowest points where the hyperbola is dominated

FIG. 6: Optical setup to measure relative deﬂection angles of
penta prisms.

Relative Penta Prism Characterization

Our application does not place tight requirements on
the absolute angular deﬂection produced by our penta
It does, however, require that pairs of penta
prisms.
prisms be precisely matched. As such we measured the
relative deﬂection of each matched pair rather than the
absolute deﬂection of individual prisms. We did this us-
ing the optical conﬁguration shown in Fig. 6. In this con-
ﬁguration one of the plate beamsplitters, characterized
using the methods described above, was used to generate
two parallel beams. These beams were then folded at
right angles using a pair of penta prisms. The two beams
were then recombined using a second plate beamsplitter.
In this layout the two beam paths are symmetric, al-
lowing us to make the two path lengths nearly the same
and making for equal intensity losses in each beam as
they reﬂect oﬀ of our uncoated prisms. We used the
same angle of incidence for both beamsplitters to make
the Fresnel coeﬃcients equal. To get the two interfering
beams to overlap we adjusted the separation of the penta
prisms to make the spacing between the two beams en-
tering the second beamsplitter equal to the spacing of the
two beams exiting the ﬁrst beamsplitter.

Penta prisms ensure deﬂection of a beam by a precise
angle in the plane of the prism. If, however, one prism is
tilted out of the plane deﬁned by the other prism, the two
interfering beams would be at an angle to one another
determined not by the accuracy of the prisms but by
their relative alignment. For small misalignments we can
think of the light deﬂection by the second prism as a ﬁxed
deﬂection in the plane deﬁned by the ﬁrst prism plus an
out-of-plane deﬂection due to misalignment. As such, the

(a) 

0

0

50

100

150

Piezo Voltage (V)

(b) 

−1

0

4

−0.5
k

0
 (rad/mm)

y

0.5

1.5

1

)

m
m
/
d
a
r
(
 

l

e
r

k

0.5

1.5

1

)

/

m
m
d
a
r
(
 

l

e
r

k

0.5

3.5

)

/

m
m
d
a
r
(
 

l

e
r

k

3

2.5

(c) 

−1

−0.5
k

0
 (rad/mm)

y

0.5

the PZT voltage (a) and vs.

FIG. 7: Finding the relative deﬂection error of two penta
prisms. The magnitude of the wave vector describing the
interference pattern at diﬀerent prism alignments is plotted
the y component of the
vs.
wave vector (b). The crosses and the asterisks represent the
actual data extracted from the interference patterns. The
asterisks represent the data points which should be the most
accurate since the image happened to fall between a light and
a dark fringe. The crosses represent data points for which
the image contained a light or dark extremum. The lines
represent equally weighted least-squares ﬁts of the entire data
set to Eq. 10. Data from a diﬀerent set of prisms which did
not meet our speciﬁcations is shown in (c).

7

by kp, simply ﬁtting to the two points at the extremes
of the scan gives a reasonable relative deﬂection of 6.8
µrad, implying that only a small number of images are
needed to get accurate results. Similar results were seen
for our other prism pairs suggesting a repeatability of this
method at the µrad level. Due to the known deﬂection
error of the beamsplitters used in these measurements,
the absolute accuracy of our measurements was limited
to about 2 µrad.

The consistency of the data in Fig. 7 gives a good idea
of the overall accuracy of our fringe measurement tech-
nique. One sign of self-consistency is the fact that the
asymptotes of the hyperbola in Fig. 7(b) cross at a value
of krel which is very close to zero.
In all of our mea-
surements of precision prism pairs we measured oﬀsets
corresponding to angle measurement errors ranging from
nearly zero to 1.02 µrad. Another indication of the ac-
curacy of our fringe analysis is the low RMS error of the
curve ﬁts to Eq. 10. These ran from 0.40 to 1.24 µrad.

Right Angle Prism and Corner Cube
Characterization

We characterized the relative deﬂection of pairs of right
angle prisms using a scheme similar to the one we used for
penta prisms. Because these prisms deﬂect light back to-
wards the beamsplitter, an optical layout analogous with
the one we used to measure penta prisms cannot be used
— a beam reﬂected oﬀ of one prism would be occluded
by the second prism. One approach would be to use a de-
sign in which the beams were deﬂected vertically back to
a second beamsplitter placed above the ﬁrst beamsplit-
ter. To avoid the complications of multi-tiered optics, we
instead used the layout shown in Fig. 8. In this design
a single beamsplitter is used to split and recombine the
two beams. Unlike the schemes described earlier in this
paper, the intensities of the two interfering beams are not
precisely balanced in this setup; while both paths involve
one beamsplitter reﬂection, the path through the upper
prism undergoes two more transmissions through beam-
splitter surfaces than the path through the lower prism.
Due to the low reﬂectivity of the uncoated beamsplitters
we still achieved nearly 100% fringe contrast. This same
set-up could also be used to characterize corner cubes.

In addition to the two beams we are interested in, a
third beam travelling through the upper prism in the op-
posite direction can have an eﬀect on the interference
pattern. This beam undergoes two additional beamsplit-
ter reﬂections and is therefore much less intense. When
measuring right angle prisms, the prisms can be tilted
vertically to walk this stray beam out of the interference
pattern. With the vertical alignment walked oﬀ, the dis-
tance between the beamsplitter and the prisms will have
to be adjusted to achieve good overlap of the interfer-
ing beams. As with the penta prism measurements, to

8

FIG. 8: Optical setup for measuring the relative deﬂection of
two right angle prisms or corner cubes.

measure the diﬀerence in the intrinsic deﬂection angles
of two right angle prisms we scanned the vertical angle
of one of the prisms and then ﬁt the measured relative
beam angles to Eq. 10. Using this method we measured
the relative deﬂection angle of pairs of high-quality right
angle prisms. The repeatability of these measurements
was similar to what we achieved with our penta prism
measurements.

To measure the absolute deﬂection angle of a single
right angle prism or corner cube we used the scheme il-
lustrated in Fig. 9. Unlike the other schemes presented
in this paper this scheme requires that the beamsplit-
ter angles be chosen carefully. Simpler designs using one
or two beamsplitters had problems with stray reﬂections
which resulted in interference of more than two paths and
unequal intensities of interfering beams. The three beam-
splitter design allows us to control stray reﬂections but
requires a diﬀerent angle of incidence at each beamsplit-
ter. This results in diﬀerent Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcients
at each beamsplitter. Also, like our scheme for relative
measurements of right angle prisms, in this setup one of
the beams undergoes two more transmissions through a
beamsplitter surface than the other beam. By carefully
choosing the beamsplitter angles one can make the two
pathways overlap and be equal in intensity at the camera.
This is easily done with a knowledge of the beamsplitter
thickness and index of refraction.

We used this method to measure the absolute deﬂec-
tion angles of several high-quality right angle prisms as
well as a low-quality right angle prism and a high-quality
corner cube. The high-quality prisms and the corner cube
deﬂection angles were typically found to deviate from 180
degrees by a few microradians. The deﬂection angle of
the cheap right angle prism was found to be much less
accurate. Once again we found repeatability at the µrad
level.

FIG. 9: Optical setup for absolute measurement of right angle
prism and corner cube deﬂection angles.

COMPONENTS USED

≃

Our measurements used only the prisms under test
and parts available in our lab. The laser was an in-
expensive
1 mW helium-neon alignment laser [JDS
Uniphase Model 1507P]. Because the prisms and beam-
splitters did not have reﬂective coatings, only about 0.01
to 1 percent of the laser light reached the camera de-
pending on the type of prisms being measured. Even so
we still needed signiﬁcant attenuation to avoid saturating
the camera. The laser had a good spatial mode and a co-
herence length long enough to produce good interference
fringes on the asymmetric Michelson-Morley interferom-
eter mentioned previously. A laser with poorer spatial
and temporal qualities could also have been used. The
required spatial mode can easily be achieved by spatial
ﬁltering, especially considering the low power needed. If
the two optical paths are made equal within about 1 mm
when measuring the prisms, a short-term linewidth of

tens of GHz would be suﬃcient to produce high-contrast
fringes. Although a short coherence length would not
allow collimation to be tested using an asymmetric in-
terferometer, there are many other ways to ensure good
collimation.

The camera was a $156 closed circuit surveillance cam-
era connected to a computer frame grabber card. The
low quality camera resulted in three signiﬁcant diﬃcul-
ties. First was the camera’s nonlinear response. Our
camera was not designed for scientiﬁc work and its re-
sponse function was not well calibrated. As a result,
in our ﬁrst measurements the “cosine” function in Eq.
4 did not oscillate between -1 and 1. We attempted to
characterize the camera’s response (surveillance cameras
usually have a response in which the value of each pixel
is proportional to the intensity of light on the pixel raised
to some power γ). But we found that, even with a ﬁxed
iris setting, at high intensities the signal reported on one
pixel depended on the intensity present on other parts
of the chip! But for suﬃciently low intensities the cam-
era response was fairly linear. So our solution was to
reduce light intensities by adding attenuators in front of
the camera until the highest value reported at any pixel
was 80 counts (out of a maximum of 255 counts for the
8-bit camera).

The other two problems with the camera were related
to its low signal-to-noise ratio and to an uncoated window
on the front of the camera. The signal-to-noise problem
was overcome by averaging 50 frames to produce each
image. This took less than 2 seconds on our 30 frames-
per-second video camera. The uncoated window aﬃxed
to the camera produced low-contrast interference fringes
in our data (see Figs. 2 and 3). We were unable to remove
this window. But by tilting the camera we were able to
make the spatial frequency of these fringes high enough
that they did not confuse the ﬁtting routines when ﬁt-
ting the much broader fringes due to the relative angle of
the two interfering beams. Note that Eq. 4 was derived
under the assumption that the beams strike the camera
near to normal incidence. The equation is still approxi-
mately correct when we tilt the camera, especially when
the camera is tilted around an axis which is nearly per-
pendicular to the fringes. Tilting our camera, therefore,
did not change the way that we analyzed our images and
the residual error due to the camera tilt was negligible.
The lenses and mirrors we used were standard research-
quality optics which were already available in the lab.
Two lenses were used to telescope and collimate the laser
beam before entering the interferometer. These had to
be of reasonable quality to prevent signiﬁcant wavefront
distortion of the laser. Any distortion due to these lenses
is common to both of the interfering beams and should
have a reduced impact on the measured fringes. A third
lens was used to demagnify the interference pattern to ﬁt
onto the camera. This lens simply images the interfer-
ence pattern. Small wavefront errors at this lens do not

9

have an eﬀect on the measurement, and only its imaging
characteristics need to be considered. Like the lenses, the
mirrors were only employed before the optical beam was
split or after the two paths had been recombined such
that wavefront distortions were common to both paths.
After verifying the quality of our parallel-plate beam-
splitters, these optics were used in the evaluation of the
other prisms. Therefore our measurements were limited
to the accuracy of the beamsplitters. It should be possi-
ble to remove this oﬀset by careful characterization of the
beamsplitters used and by making two sets of measure-
ments with the beamsplitters ﬂipped over between them.
But given the λ/10 surface quality of the beamsplitters,
it is possible that the deﬂection angles for two diﬀerent
1 cm sized spots on a beamsplitter will diﬀer at the mi-
croradian level even if the optic has no overall deﬂection
error. Lowering this systematic error, therefore, would
require either beamsplitters with better surface ﬂatness
or calibration at the precise locations at which beams
enter and leave the beamsplitters.

CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have demonstrated several relatively
simple and inexpensive techniques to characterize the
deﬂection angles of parallel-plate beamsplitters, penta
prisms, right angle prisms, and corner cubes. We have
achieved accuracies at the level of 2 µrad (0.4 arcsec-
onds), approaching what is possible in high-end commer-
cial devices. Better results are likely to be possible by
calibrating and removing eﬀects due to imperfect beam-
splitters and by using a higher quality detector.

We acknowledge the contributions of Rebecca Merrill
and Elizabeth Cummings. This work was supported by
the Research Corporation and the National Science Foun-
dation.

∗ Currently at: Department of Physics, University of Mary-

land, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA

[1] J. O. Dickey, P. L. Bender, J. E. Faller, X. X. Newhall,
R. L. Ricklefs, J. G. Ries, P. J. Shelus, C. Veillet, A. L.
Whipple, J. R. Wiant, J. G. Williams, and C. F. Yoder,
“Lunar Laser Ranging: A Continuing Legacy of the Apollo
Program,” Science 265, 482-490 (1994).

[2] M. V. Mantravadi, “Newton, Fizeau, and Haidinger In-
terferometers,” in Optical Shop Testing, 2nd ed., D.
Malacara, ed., (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York,
1992), pp. 1-50.

[3] D. Malacara, “Twyman-Green Interferometer,” in Optical
Shop Testing, 2nd ed., D. Malacara, ed., (John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., New York, 1992), pp. 51-94.

[4] Z. Malacara, “Angle, Distance, Curvature, and Focal
Length,” in Optical Shop Testing, 2nd ed., D. Malacara,

ed., (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1992), pp.
715-742.

[5] M. V. Mantravadi, “Lateral Shearing Interferometers,” in
Optical Shop Testing, 2nd ed., D. Malacara, ed., (John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1992), pp. 123-172.

[6] J. E. Greivenkamp and J. H. Bruning, “Phase Shifting
Interferometers,” in Optical Shop Testing, 2nd ed., D.
Malacara, ed., (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York,
1992), pp. 501-598.

10

