5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of:
D. K. Gramotnev and T. A. Nieminen
“Rigorous analysis of grazing-angle scattering of electromagnetic waves in periodic gratings”
Optics Communication 219, 33–48 (2003)

Rigorous analysis of grazing-angle scattering of
electromagnetic waves in periodic gratings
D. K. Gramotnev1 and T. A. Nieminen2
1Applied Optics Program, School of Physical and Chemical Sciences, Queensland University of
Technology, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia; e-mail: d.gramotnev@qut.edu.au
2Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Qld 4072, Australia

Abstract

Grazing-angle scattering (GAS) is a type of Bragg scattering of waves in slanted
non-uniform periodic gratings, when the diffracted order satisfying the Bragg
condition propagates at a grazing angle with respect to the boundaries of a slab-
like grating. Rigorous analysis of GAS of bulk TE electromagnetic waves is un-
dertaken in holographic gratings by means of the enhanced T-matrix algorithm.
A comparison of the rigorous and the previously developed approximate theo-
ries of GAS is carried out. A complex pattern of numerous previously unknown
resonances is discovered and analysed in detail for gratings with large ampli-
tude, for which the approximate theory fails. These resonances are associated
not only with the geometry of GAS, but are also typical for wide transmitting
gratings. Their dependence on grating amplitude, angles of incidence and scat-
tering, and grating width is investigated numerically. Physical interpretation of
the predicted resonances is linked to the existence and the resonant generation
of special new eigenmodes of slanted gratings. Main properties of these modes
and their ﬁeld structure are discussed.

1

Introduction

Grazing-angle scattering (GAS) is a strongly resonant type of wave scattering in uniform, strip-like,
slanted, wide periodic gratings [1]. It is realised when the scattered wave (the ﬁrst diffracted order)
propagates almost parallel to the front grating boundary, i.e. at a grazing angle with respect to this
boundary. Thus, GAS is intermediate between extremely asymmetrical scattering (EAS) (that occurs
when the scattered wave propagates parallel to the grating boundaries [26]) and conventional Bragg
scattering in reﬂecting or transmitting gratings (where the scattered wave propagates at a signiﬁcant
angle with respect to the grating boundaries).
GAS is characterised by a unique combination of two simultaneous resonances [1]. One of these
resonances is with respect to frequency of the incident wave. This resonance is typical for EAS and
is related to a strong increase in the scattered wave amplitude inside and outside the grating at a
resonant frequency [1–6]. The other resonance is with respect to angle of scattering (we will call it
GAS resonance) [1]. It occurs at a grazing resonant angle of scattering when the scattered wave (the
+1 diffracted order) propagates almost parallel to the front boundary into the grating [1]. The GAS
resonance may result in further strong increase of the scattered wave amplitude inside (especially in
the middle of) the grating [1]. It is important that in the GAS resonance, not only the scattered wave
amplitude experiences a strong resonant increase compared to its values typical for EAS, but also the
amplitude of the incident wave resonantly increases in the middle of the grating [1]. The larger the
1

grating width and/or the grating amplitude, the stronger and sharper the GAS resonance for both
incident and scattered waves [1]. Note that this is the complete opposite to the general tendency for
EAS, where increasing grating amplitude and/or grating width results in decreasing scattered wave
amplitude [3–9].
It has been demonstrated that one of the main physical reasons for the unique wave behaviour during
GAS is the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave (that is similar to divergence of a laser
beam of ﬁnite aperture). The necessity of taking the divergence into account can easily be seen in
the geometry of EAS, i.e. when the scattered wave propagates parallel to the grating boundaries.
Indeed, scattering occurs only within the grating, and the scattered wave propagates parallel to the
grating. Therefore, if the diffractional divergence is ignored, the scattered beam must be conﬁned
to the grating region, i.e. must have an aperture that is equal to the grating width. Obviously such
a beam experiences diffractional divergence into the regions outside the grating. For more detailed
discussion of the role of diffractional divergence in EAS see [3–6]. Since GAS is intermediate between
EAS and the conventional scattering, the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave plays an
important role for it as well [1]. In particular, it was shown that strong GAS resonance occurs only in
sufﬁciently wide gratings of widths that are larger than a critical width. Physically, half of the critical
width is equal to the distance within which the scattered wave can be spread across the grating by
means of the diffractional divergence, before being re-scattered by the grating [7,8].
On the basis of understanding the role of the diffractional divergence, a new powerful approximate
method of analysis of GAS and EAS has been developed [1,3–8]. This approach is directly appli-
cable for all types of waves, including surface and guided optical and acoustic waves in wide pe-
riodic groove arrays [1,3,4,6]. Rigorous analysis of EAS of bulk electromagnetic waves in volume
holographic gratings [9] has conﬁrmed a high degree of accuracy of the approximate approach in
gratings where the scattered wave amplitude experiences a strong resonant increase. Simple appli-
cability conditions for the approximate theory have been derived [1] and veriﬁed by means of the
rigorous analysis [9].
However, the excellent agreement of the approximate and rigorous theories for EAS in gratings with
sufﬁciently small grating amplitude [9] does not automatically extend to the case of GAS. This is
because the GAS resonance results in a further substantial increase of amplitudes of the +1 and
0th diffracted orders (scattered and incident waves) in the grating. Since these diffracted orders are
directly coupled to the −1 and +2 diffracted orders [9], the amplitudes of the −1 and +2 orders must
also signiﬁcantly increase even if the grating amplitude is small (if the scattered wave amplitude is
sufﬁciently large). As a result, the approximate theory (neglecting all diffracted orders other than
the zeroth and the ﬁrst orders) is expected to fail if the GAS resonance is sufﬁciently strong. This is
especially the case for larger grating amplitudes that are associated with larger amplitudes of higher
diffracted orders and stronger GAS resonance [1]. In addition the analysis of GAS in gratings with
large amplitude may result (and this is clearly conﬁrmed by this paper) in radically new physical
phenomena in slanted gratings.
Therefore, the aim of this paper is to present a rigorous analysis of GAS and associated resonances in
wide holographic gratings with small and large grating amplitude. The rigorous analysis of DEAS
will be carried out by means of the enhanced T-matrix algorithm [10,11]. Applicability conditions
for the approximate theory [1] will be veriﬁed, and the comparison between the approximate and
rigorous analyses will be carried out. The analysis will not only be conﬁned to the geometry of GAS.
It will be shown that scattering in the conventional transmitting gratings with large amplitude is
also characterised by very strong GAS-like resonances, the analysis of which will be carried out in
detail. New special eigenmodes guided by a grating will be shown to exist, analysed and used for
the interpretation of the predicted resonances.

2

Structure and solutions

Consider an isotropic medium with a volume, uniform, holographic grating represented by sinu-
soidal variations of the dielectric permittivity (Fig. 1):

ǫs = ǫ+ ǫg exp(iqxx + iqy y) + ǫ∗

g exp(−iqxx − iqy y)

if 0 < x < L,

ǫs = ǫ if x < 0 or x > L,

where L is the width and eg is the amplitude of the grating, the mean dielectric permittivity, ǫ, is the
same throughout the structure (see Eq. (1)), qx and qy are the x- and y-components of the reciprocal
lattice vector q, q = 2π/Λ, Λ is the period of the grating; the co-ordinate system is shown in Fig. 1. It
is also assumed that there is no dissipation of electromagnetic waves inside and outside the grating (ǫ
is real and positive), and the structure is inﬁnite along the y- and z-axes. A bulk TE electromagnetic
plane wave with the amplitude E00 and wave vector k0 is incident onto the grating at an angle θ0 in
the xy-plane—Fig. 1 (non-conical scattering).
The solutions inside and outside the non-uniform grating can be written as [9–11]:

E1(x, y) =

Sn(x) exp(iknxx + ikny y),

E|x<0 = E00 exp(ik0 · r) +

An exp(ikrn · r),

+∞

n=−∞

E|x>L =

Bn exp(iktn · r − iktnxL),

+∞

n=−∞

+∞

n=−∞

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Figure 1: The scheme for grazing-angle scattering of bulk TE electromagnetic waves in a slanted
holographic grating of width L and grating amplitude ǫg. The angle of incidence is θ0 and the ampli-
tude of the incident wave in front of the grating is E00. The Bragg condition is satisﬁed precisely for
the ﬁrst diffracted order (scattered wave) that propagates at an angle θ1 that is close to π/2 (i.e. at a
grazing angle with respect to the grating boundaries).

(cid:229)
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
where the dependence of the ﬁeld on time, i.e. the factor exp(−iωt), is omitted, knx and kny are the
x- and y-components of the wave vectors kn determined by the Floquet condition:

kn = k0 − nq (n = 0, ±1, ±2, ...)

and the components of the wave vectors krn and ktn of the nth reﬂected and transmitted waves in
the regions x < 0 and x > L are determined by the equations:

krny = ktny, krnx = −ktnx = −(k2

0 − k2

ny)1/2.

If kny ≤ k0, then krnx ≤ 0 and ktnx ≥ 0 (propagating waves), while if kny > k0, then Im(krnx) < 0 and
Im(ktnx) > 0 (evanescent waves).
The Bragg condition is assumed to be satisﬁed precisely for the +1 diffracted order in Eq. (2) for
all angles of scattering h1 that are assumed to be close to π/2 (the geometry of GAS—Fig. 1). The
fact that the Bragg condition is satisﬁed precisely for all values of θ1 means that we have to adjust
the grating parameters (the period and slanting angle) for each value of θ1. This is inconvenient in
practice, but allows the analysis of GAS at optimal conditions, i.e. separately from the effects of small
detunings of the Bragg condition (the same was done in [1] for the approximate theory of GAS).
The x-dependencies of amplitudes of the diffracted orders inside the grating are obtained from the so-
lution of the truncated rigorous coupled wave equations and the boundary conditions at the grating
boundaries x = 0, L. As mentioned above, the rigorous analysis of the coupled wave equations and
boundary conditions is carried out by means of the numerically stable enhanced T-matrix algorithm
developed by Moharam et al. [10,11].

(5)

(6)

3 GAS in gratings with small amplitude

in Eq.

As indicated in the introduction and paper [1], GAS is characterised by a strong resonance with
respect to angle of scattering θ1 (GAS resonance) only if the grating width L is greater than the critical
width Lc. Therefore, in this paper, we will consider mainly wide gratings with L > Lc. Physically,
half of the critical width is equal to the distance within which the scattered wave can be spread across
the grating by means of the diffractional divergence, before being re-scattered by the grating [7,8].
Two simple methods for the determination of Lc have been described in [7,8].
For example, consider a volume holographic grating with the parameters: ǫ = 5, θ0 = π/4, and the
wavelength in vacuum λ = 1µm. The grating amplitude eg and grating width will be varied below
(however, we will always have L > Lc). The Bragg condition is assumed to be satisﬁed precisely
(5), k1 = ǫ1/2ωc, and k1 is almost parallel to the grating
for the +1 diffracted order, i.e.
boundaries—Fig. 1.
Typical rigorous dependencies of amplitudes of the +1 and 0th diffracted orders (the scattered and
incident waves) in the middle of the grating (i.e. at x = L/2) on angle of scattering h1 are presented
in Figs. 2(a) and (b) for the gratings of width L = 64.5µm, and ǫg = 5 × 10−3 (dashed curves) and
ǫg = 5 × 10−2 (solid curves). The reasons for choosing L = 64.5µ will become clear below.
It can be seen that a very strong resonant increase of the scattered (Fig. 2(a)) and incident (Fig. 2(b))
wave amplitudes occurs at a resonant angle of scattering θ1r < π/2, i.e. when the scattered wave
propagates at a grazing angle into the grating.
It is important that these amplitudes in the GAS
resonance are much larger than those typical for EAS (i.e. at θ1 = π/2—Figs. 2(a) and (b)). It can
also be seen that the larger the grating amplitude, the stronger the GAS resonance—compare solid
and dashed curves in Figs. 2(a) and (b) (the same conclusion as in the approximate theory [1]). In
addition, the resonant angle noticeably decreases with increasing grating amplitude (Figs. 2(a) and
(b)).
Similarly to the approximate theory, the rigorous analysis suggests that the GAS resonance increases
with increasing grating width L. It can also be seen that for given structural parameters there is a
set of approximately periodically spaced optimal grating widths Lopt for which the scattered wave
amplitude outside the grating is zero (amplitudes A1 and B1 in Eqs. (3) and (4) are zero), and the

Figure 2: The rigorous dependencies of the relative amplitudes of (a) the scattered wave (the +1
diffracted order), |S1/E00|, and (b) the incident wave (the 0th diffracted order), |S0/E00|, in the middle
of the grating (i.e. at x = L/2) on angle of scattering θ1. The structural parameters: ǫ = 5, θ0 = 45◦,
the wavelength λ(vacuum) = 1µm, L = 64.5µm, the period and orientation of the gratings are
determined by the Bragg condition and θ1. Dashed curves: ǫg = 5 × 10−3; solid curves: ǫg =
5 × 10−2.

energy of the scattered wave is entirely concentrated within the grating region—see also [1]. Recall
that since the mean dielectric permittivity is the same inside and outside the grating (see Eq. (1)),
there is no conventional guiding effect in the grating. The entire localisation of the scattered wave
inside the grating (at L = Lopt) is achieved due to peculiarities of scattering, re-scattering and diffrac-
tional divergence (similarly to the approximate theory [1]). It can also be seen that the values of Lopt
and the corresponding resonant angles of scattering (θ1r)opt obtained from the rigorous theory at
ǫg = 5 × 10−3 (small grating amplitude) are only insigniﬁcantly different from those obtained in the
approximate theory [1], if the grating width does not exceed ≈ 100µm. At the same time, for very
large grating widths, or large grating amplitudes, the rigorous theory gives different values of Lopt.
These values can be found in the rigorous theory in the same way as it was done in [1]. The consid-
ered grating width L = 64.5µm (Figs. 2(a) and (b)) is one of Lopt if ǫg = 5 × 10−3 (dashed curves in
Figs. 2(a) and (b)).
However, it is important to remember that strong GAS resonance occurs not only at L = Lopt, but
at any other width that is larger than the critical width (for the considered structures, Lc ≈ 28µm

for ǫg = 5 × 10−3, and Lc ≈ 6.5µm for ǫg = 5 × 10−2 [7,8])—see solid curves in Figs. 2(a) and (b).
The main effect of optimal grating widths for small grating amplitudes is the total localisation of the
scattered wave inside the grating. If the grating amplitude is larger than ≈ 0.1ǫ, then at L = Lopt,
the scattered wave amplitude at the grating boundaries may be of the order of the incident wave
amplitude in front of the grating (see below).

Figure 3: The comparison of the rigorous angular dependencies of the scattered wave amplitudes in
the middle of the grating, presented in Fig. 2(a) (solid curves), with the same dependencies obtained
from the approximate theory [1] (dotted curves). (a) ǫg = 5 × 10−3, (b) ǫg = 5 × 10−2.

If we plot the corresponding approximate curves (obtained in [1]) in Figs. 2(a) and (b), we will
hardly notice any difference from the presented rigorous curves. However, this is not because the
approximate and rigorous theories give the same results, but rather the scale in Figs. 2(a) and (b) is
too small to see the differences between the curves near sharp resonances. Therefore, Figs. 3(a) and
(b) present the rigorous and approximate angular dependencies of the scattered wave amplitudes
just near the GAS resonance. It can clearly be seen that if the GAS resonance is not very strong and
the grating amplitude is small, then the agreement between the approximate and rigorous theories
is very good (within ≈ 2%—Fig. 3(a)). At the same time, if the grating amplitude is increased
10 times, then the GAS resonance becomes much stronger and sharper, which results in signiﬁcant
discrepancies between the approximate and rigorous theories (Fig. 3(b)). Note however that these
discrepancies are mainly limited to variations of the resonant angle of scattering. Indeed, as seen
from Figs. 3(a) and (b), the shape and the height of maximums of the rigorous and approximate
dependencies are practically identical, and the only difference is that the rigorous curve is slightly

shifted to the right (in the direction of larger angles of scattering). That is, values of the resonant
angle θ1r in the rigorous theory are larger than those predicted by the approximate theory [1].
It is interesting that reducing the angle of incidence θ0 results in noticeably better agreement between
the approximate and rigorous theories, despite increasing strength of the GAS resonance for smaller
angles of incidence. For example, if the angle of incidence θ0 = 0, then the maximums similar to
those in Fig. 3(b) practically merge, and the corresponding discrepancies between the approximate
and rigorous theories are no more than those in Fig. 3(a).

Figure 4: The comparison of the rigorous (solid curves) and approximate (dotted curves) angular
dependencies of the scattered wave amplitudes at the front (a) and rear (b) grating boundaries for
the structure corresponding to the solid curves in Figs. 2(a) and (b) (and to Fig. 3(b)), i.e. with
ǫg = 5 × 10−2, ǫ = 5, θ0 = 45◦, λ(vacuum) = 1µm, L = 64.5µm.

Similar conclusions can be drawn when considering rigorous angular dependencies of the scattered
wave amplitudes at the front and rear boundaries of the grating with ǫg = 5 × 10−2—Figs. 4(a) and
(b). These dependencies are practically the same as those obtained by means of the approximate
theory [1], except for that they are slightly shifted towards larger angles of scattering by the same
value as the rigorous curves in Fig. 3(b). Decreasing angle of scattering results in better agreement

between the approximate and rigorous theories.
Note that this result is fairly unexpected. One could think that taking into account higher diffracted
orders in the rigorous theory should result in signiﬁcant changes in the pattern of scattering, espe-
cially in the case of strong and sharp oscillations as in Fig. 4. In particular, these expectations could
be related to additional energy losses from the grating due to boundary scattering and additional
propagating orders outside the grating [9]. However, as seen from Figs. 2–4, the only effect of higher
diffracted orders in the rigorous theory is a slight shift of the corresponding dependencies towards
larger angles of scattering. In particular, this is probably because GAS is characterised by a strong
resonant increase of the incident and scattered wave amplitudes in the middle of the grating, while
at the boundaries (x = 0 and x = L) the scattered wave amplitudes normally do not exceed a few
amplitudes of the incident wave, especially if the grating amplitude is large. Moreover, if L = Lopt
and θ1 = (θ1r)opt, then the scattered wave amplitude at the grating boundaries and outside the grat-
ing is approximately zero. Therefore, the amplitudes of propagating orders outside the grating (in
particular, the amplitude of boundary scattered wave) must be small, as well as the associated energy
losses. Thus their effect on the pattern of scattering is limited.

4 Scattering in gratings with large amplitude

All the results and tendencies presented in the previous section are true not only for very small grat-
ing amplitudes (Figs. 2–4), but also for values of ǫg up to ≈ 10% of the mean dielectric permittivity
in the grating (for the considered gratings this is ǫg ≈ 0.5). However, when the grating amplitude
approaches approx0.1ǫ, the rigorous pattern of GAS changes substantially. For example, if the grat-
ing amplitude ǫg = 0.55 and all other parameters are the same as for Figs. 2–4, then the rigorous
dependencies of the scattered (and incident) wave amplitude on angle of scattering θ1 in the middle
of the grating display sharp oscillations between two distinct resonant peaks (Fig. 5(a)). Outside the
range of angles between these two peaks the scattered wave amplitude is relatively small and only
weakly depends on θ1—Fig. 5(a). Increasing grating amplitude results in shifting these two peaks
towards each other—see Fig. 5(b). In this case both the peaks become rapidly sharper and higher.
This is especially relevant to the left maximum that may even overtake the main GAS resonance (i.e.
the right maximum in Fig. 5(a) and (b)). The number of peaks in between the extreme left maximum
and the extreme right maximum reduces with increasing grating amplitude. Finally, the two extreme
maximums come so close to each other that they can hardly be resolved (solid curve in Fig. 5(c))
and then merge together in one extremely sharp and high maximum (dotted curve in Fig. 5(c)). The
merger occurs at a critical grating width ǫgc1 (the reason for using the index 1 in ǫgc1 will be clear
below). In the considered case, ǫgc1 = 0.595562—Fig. 5(c). Further increase of the grating ampli-
tude results in a rapid decrease of the GAS resonance at ǫg = 0.6—solid curve in Fig. 5(d), with its
complete disappearance at ǫg = 0.65—-dotted curve in Fig. 5(d).
The presence of a critical grating amplitude ǫgc1, at which the two extreme maximums merge, pro-
ducing an extremely strong resonance (with its subsequent rapid reduction for ǫg > ǫgc1, is the
general feature of GAS in different gratings. In particular, it can be seen that generally ǫgc1 depends
on grating width. However, this dependence is weak. For example, for gratings of L = 64.5µm
(Fig. 5), L = 20µm (Fig. 6), and L = 10µm (Fig. 7a) the values of the critical grating amplitude
are 0.595562, 0.5868, and 0.567, respectively. The main features of the pattern of GAS in gratings of
smaller widths are the same as for the grating with L = 64.5µm (compare Figs. 5–7(a)). However, the
typical height and sharpness of the resonance maximums are signiﬁcantly reduced when the grat-
ing width is reduced—Figs. 6 and 7(a). This is similar to the general tendency for GAS obtained
by means of the approximate theory [1]. At the same time, it is important to understand that the
approximate theory completely fails to predict the actual pattern of GAS at large grating amplitudes,
in particular, in the vicinity of the critical grating amplitude.
Note that increase of height of the resonance is not monotonous with increasing grating amplitude—
see curves 1–3 in Fig. 6(a). This is partly because the grating width L = 20µm is approximately equal
to one of the optimal widths Lopt for the grating amplitudes ǫg = 0.38, 0.51, 0.5868.

Figure 5: The rigorous dependencies of the relative scattered wave amplitude |S1/E00| in the middle
of the grating on angle of scattering θ1 for large grating amplitudes: (1) ǫg = 0.55, (2) ǫg = 0.59, (3)
ǫg = 0.593, (4) ǫg = 0.595, (5) ǫg = ǫgc1 ≈ 0.595562, (6) ǫg = 0.6, (7) ǫg = 0.65. The other structural
parameters are as for Figs. 2–4.

Curves 2 and 3 in Fig. 7(a) also indicate another highly unusual and unexpected feature of scattering,
that can be revealed only using the rigorous theory. Indeed, when the two limiting maximums dis-
cussed above merge together (at ǫg = ǫgc1) and result in a very strong and sharp resonance (dotted
curve in Fig. 5c, and curves 3 and 2 in Figs. 6(b) and 7(a), respectively), there appears another peak
at a signiﬁcantly smaller angle of scattering—see the small sharp bump on curve 2 in Fig. 7(a) at
about 77◦. When the grating amplitude is increased (ǫg > ǫgc1), this maximum increases substan-
tially and turns into a strong resonance—curve 3 in Fig. 7(a). Note that this is not the same maximum
corresponding to the described GAS resonance, shifted towards smaller angles. Indeed, it appears
when the GAS resonance is still strong (curve 2 in Fig. 7(a)). We will call this maximum second
GAS resonance. It exists not only in the considered grating of L = 10µm. For example, Fig. 7(b)
presents the comparison of the second GAS resonance for two gratings of L = 20µm (curve 1) and
L = 10µm (curve 2, which the same as curve 3 in Fig. 7(a)). In particular, Fig. 7(b) demonstrates
the general tendency that, similar to the ﬁrst GAS resonance, the second GAS resonance becomes

Figure 6: The same dependencies as in Fig. 5, but for different grating width L = 20µm, and the
following grating amplitudes: (1) ǫg = 0.38, (2) ǫg = 0.44, (3) ǫg = 0.51, (4) ǫg = 0.565, (5) ǫg = 0.58,
(6) ǫg = 0.5868.

stronger and sharper with increasing grating width (compare the main maximums for curves 1 and
2 in Fig. 7(b)). However, it is interesting that the angle of scattering, at which the second GAS reso-
nance occurs, is almost independent of grating width (Fig. 7(b)). This is again similar to the ﬁrst GAS
resonance—compare for example dotted curve in Fig. 5c with curves 3 and 2 in Figs. 6(b) and 7(a),
respectively.
In addition, the whole pattern of scattering near the second GAS resonance is very similar to that
demonstrated by Figs. 5(a)–(c) and 6(a) and (b) near the ﬁrst GAS resonance. For example, on the
right of the main resonant maximum the angular dependence of the scattered wave amplitude in the
middle of the grating is fairly smooth, whereas on the left it is characterised by a number of oscilla-
tions with sharp maximums (Fig. 7(b)). The larger the grating width, the larger the typical amplitude
and number of these oscillations (compare curves 1 and 2 in Fig. 7(b)). If the grating amplitude is
increased, these oscillations appear to be conﬁned to an angular interval between two distinct max-
imums in exactly the same fashion as it was for the ﬁrst GAS resonance—see Figs. 5(a) and (b) and
6(a). One of these limiting maximums is the main maximum corresponding to the second GAS reso-

Figure 7: (a) The rigorous dependencies of the relative scattered wave amplitude |S1/E00| in the
middle of the grating on angle of scattering θ1 for the grating with L = 10µm and (1) ǫg = 0.3, (2)
ǫg = ǫgc1 ≈ 0.567, (3) ǫg = 0.8. (b) The second GAS resonance. The comparison of the rigorous
dependencies of the relative scattered wave amplitudes in the middle of two gratings of different
widths: (1) L = 20µm, ǫg = 0.8, (2) L = 10µm, ǫg = 0.8 (i.e. curve 2 is the same as curve 3 in (a)).
The other structural parameters are as before: ǫ = 5, θ0 = 45◦, λ(vacuum) = 1µm.

nance in Fig. 7(b), and the other one is just appearing at the angle of about 73◦. Further increase of
the grating amplitude results in a signiﬁcant increase of both these limiting maximums. In the same
way as for the ﬁrst GAS resonance (Figs. 5 and 6), increasing grating amplitude results in shifting
the limiting maximums (in the second GAS resonance) towards each other with the simultaneous
reduction of the number of oscillations between them (compare curves 1 in Figs. 8 and 7(b) with
curves in Figs. 6(a) and (b)). Finally, when the grating amplitude reaches the second critical value
ǫg = ǫgc2 (the index 2 stands for the second GAS resonance), the two limiting maxi- mums merge
together producing a very strong and sharp resonance—curve 2 in Fig. 8. Further increase of the
grating amplitude results in a rapid decrease of the second GAS resonance (curve 3 in Fig. 8), which
is very similar to the ﬁrst GAS resonance—Fig. 5(d).
Note also that the height of the second GAS resonance at ǫg = ǫgc2 is very close to that of the ﬁrst GAS
resonance at ǫg = ǫgc1—compare curves 2 and 3 in Figs. 8 and 6(b), respectively. This statement is
more accurate for gratings of larger width. It is also interesting that the value of ǫgc2 is approximately
2 times larger than ǫgc1.
Very strong similarities between the patterns of scattering in the ﬁrst and the second GAS resonances

Figure 8: The second GAS resonance in the grating of L = 20µm, ǫ = 5, θ0 = 45◦, λ(vacuum) =
1µm, and (1) ǫg = 1.12, (2) ǫg = ǫgc2 ≈ 1.1309, (3) ǫg = 1.14.

suggest that when the second GAS resonance disappears at ǫg > ǫgc2, it is reasonable to expect
another resonance (third GAS resonance) to appear at smaller angles of scattering and larger grating
amplitudes. This is indeed the case, and this third GAS resonance is characterised by the same pattern
of scattering. That is, when the second GAS resonance is suppressed by increasing ǫg above ǫgc2,
there appear two distinct maximums at angles that are several degrees less than the angle at which
the second GAS resonance occurs at ǫg = ǫgc2. These maximums increase with increasing grating
amplitude and shift towards each other. Oscillations of the angular dependence of the scattered
wave amplitude occur only between these two limiting maximums (in exactly the same way as it
was for the ﬁrst and the second GAS resonances—Figs. 5(a) and (b), 6(a), and 7(b)). Finally, these
limiting maximums merge together, producing a very strong and sharp resonance, and this occurs at
ǫg = ǫgc3. Further increase of ǫg results in a rapid decrease of the third GAS resonance. After that,
the fourth GAS resonance appears at larger grating amplitude and a smaller angle of scattering, and
so on. The corresponding resonant dependencies of the scattered wave amplitudes in the middle of
the grating of L = 20µm and ǫg = ǫgci, where i = 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, are presented in Fig. 9(a).
Fig. 9(a) clearly demonstrates that unlike the second GAS resonance at ǫg = ǫgc2, that is almost
the same in height as the ﬁrst GAS resonance at ǫg = ǫgc1, the third, fourth, etc. resonances at
ǫg = ǫgci are signiﬁcantly smaller. For example, the height of the seventh GAS resonance in the
grating of L = 20µm is only ≈ 0.76E00, where E00 is the amplitude of the incident wave at the front
boundary—curve 5 in Fig. 9(a). Note also that height of all the GAS resonances strongly depends on
grating width (unlike the values of angles and grating amplitudes at which these resonances occur).
For example, the height of the ﬁrst two GAS resonances at ǫg = ǫgc1,2 is ≈ 670E00 for L = 64.5µm,
while for L = 20µm they are ≈ 10 times smaller (Figs. 6(b) and 8). Similarly, the seventh GAS
resonance at L = 20µm (curve 5 in Fig. 9(a)) is also ≈ 10 times smaller in height than the same
seventh resonance at L = 64.5µm. It is interesting that resonance half-width is practically the same
for all the maximums in Fig. 9(a), despite the signiﬁcant decrease in their height with increasing
grating amplitude (all these maximums, including those of curves 3 and 2 in Figs. 6(a) and 8, have
the half-widths ≈ 3 × 10−4 deg). At the same time, the half-width of the resonances noticeably
increases (decreases) with decreasing (increasing) grating width. For example, the half-width of the
maximum of curve 2 in Fig. 7(a) is ≈ 0.01◦.

Figure 9: The rigorous dependencies of amplitudes of the scattered (a) and incident (b) waves in the
middle of the grating (i.e. at x = L/2) at the critical grating amplitudes ǫgci (i = 3, 4, 5, 6, 7) for the
ith GAS resonance: (1) ǫg = ǫgc3 ≈ 1.50988, (2) ǫg = ǫgc4 ≈ 1.763, (3) ǫg = ǫgc5 ≈ 1.9357, (4)
ǫg = ǫgc6 ≈ 2.055, (5) ǫg = ǫgc7 ≈ 2.1407. The other structural parameters: L = 20µm, ǫ = 5,
θ0 = 45◦, λ(vacuum) = 1µm.

Decreasing angle of incidence results in a noticeable increase of the height and sharpness of the
predicted resonances. In addition, the resonant angles of scattering decrease, and the critical grating
amplitude, at which the merger of two limiting maximums occurs, increases with decreasing angle
of incidence. For example, if L = 64.5µm and θ0 = 20◦ (compared to θ0 = 45◦ for Figs. 2–5), then
ǫgc1 = 1.654118, the corresponding resonant angle θ1 ≈ 73.039◦, and the height of the resonance
≈ 1300E00 (compare with ǫgc1 = 0.595562, θ1 ≈ 80.192◦, and the resonance height ≈ 740E00 for the
dotted curve in Fig. 5c).
If the angle of incidence is close to zero (almost normal incidence onto the grating), the pattern of
scattering noticeably changes. This is illustrated by Fig. 10, presenting the dependencies of the am-
plitude of the scattered wave (+1 diffracted order) on angle of scattering in the middle of the grating
of L = 10µm. If θ0 = 0◦, then we obtain the pattern with two strong limiting maximums, similar
to that in Figs. 5(a) and (b) and 6(a) (though appearing at much larger grating amplitudes: ǫg = 4
in Fig. 10(a)). However, if the angle of incidence is slightly different from 0, then the right limiting
maximum in Fig. 10(a) splits into two, and there are three distinct maximums in the pattern. The
middle (out of three) maximum is indicated by the arrows in Figs. 10(b)–(d). As |θ0| increases from

Figure 10: Small angles of incidence (near-normal incidence). The rigorous dependencies of the
relative scattered wave amplitude in the middle of the grating of L = 10µm, ǫg = 4, ǫ = 5,
λ(vacuum) = 1µm. (a) θ0 = 0◦, (b) θ0 = 0.3◦ (dotted curve), θ0 = −0.3◦ (solid curve), (c) θ0 = 0.5◦
(dotted curve), θ0 = −0.5◦ (solid curve), (d) θ0 = 1◦ (dotted curve), θ0 = −1◦ (solid curve). The
arrows indicate the middle maximum that splits from the right limiting maximum at θ0 6= 0 and
shifts towards the left limiting maximum with increasing |θ0|.

zero, this middle maximum splits off the right limiting maximum in Fig. 10(a) and shifts towards
the left limiting maximum. Already when θ0 = ±0.3◦ (Fig. 10(b)), the pattern of scattering is sub-
stantially different from what it was at θ0 = 0◦ (Fig. 10(a)). The middle maximum in Fig. 10(b)
is already more than half way through from the right limiting maximum to the left. Note that for
negative values of θ0 the middle maximum shifts closer to the left limiting maximum than for the
same positive values (compare solid and dotted curves in Fig. 10(b)). If |θ0| is increased further, the
middle maximum may vary strongly in height and sharpness (Figs. 10(b–d)). Finally, the middle
and the left maximums for θ0 < 0 (solid curves) merge together, producing a very high resonance,
and further increase of |θ0| quickly results in annihilation of both the maximums (solid curve in Fig.
10(d)). A similar pattern is observed when the angle θ0 in increased from zero—see the dotted curves
in Figs. 10(b)–(d). However, in this case the merger of the left and the middle maximums occur at
larger values of θ0—compare Figs. 10(c) and (d). The right limiting maximum tends to decrease with
increasing θ0. Therefore, it may have noticeable height only at almost normal incidence—typically

for θ0 ≤ 5◦.
From here, we can see the relationship between the pattern of scattering presented by Figs. 5–7a
for large incidence angles and the pattern shown by Fig. 10. As mentioned above, decreasing (in-
creasing) angle of incidence results in increasing (decreasing) values of ǫgc1. Therefore, instead of
ﬁxing θ0 and ﬁnding ǫgc1, we can ﬁx ǫg and choose the critical angle of incidence θ0c corresponding
to the merger of the maximums. This suggests that the middle and the left limiting maximums in
Figs. 10(b)–(d) correspond to the two limiting maximums considered in Figs. 5–7a. The right limiting
maximum in Figs. 10(b)–(d) could not be seen in Figs. 5–7a since it is negligible at large angles of
incidence.
Note also that according to the tendency mentioned above, resonant angles of scattering decrease
with decreasing angle of incidence. This is also in obvious agreement with Figs. 10(a)–(d).

Figure 11: The rigorous dependencies of the scattered wave amplitude in the middle of the grating
when the left and the middle maximums merge, i.e. at ǫge = ǫgc1. The grating width is optimised
for the strongest merged resonance in each grating. (1) L = 10µm, ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 4.2439906, θ0 = 1◦,
resonance halfwidth δθ ≈ 7 × 10−6 deg, (2) L = 9.93µm, ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 3.53973, θ0 = 3◦, δθ ≈
4 × 10−5 deg, (3) L = 10.05µm, ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 3.1133, θ0 = 5◦, δθ ≈ 6 × 10−5 deg, (4) L = 9.97µm,
ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 2.4325, θ0 = 10◦, δθ ≈ 1.5 × 10−4 deg, (5) L = 10µm, ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 2.3624, θ0 = −3◦,
δθ ≈ 4 × 10−5 deg, (6) L = 10.05µm, ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 5.1491, θ0 = 0, δθ ≈ 9 × 10−7 deg, (7) L = 10µm,
ǫge = ǫgc1 ≈ 5.1823, θ0 = 0, δθ ≈ 3 × 10−7 deg.

As mentioned above, when the middle and the left limiting maximums in Figs. 10(b)–(d) merge,

they produce extremely strong and sharp resonances (similar to those in Figs. 5c, 6b, 7a, 8 and 9).
This merger can be achieved by choosing the right angle of incidence and/or grating amplitude.
The resultant typical resonance maximums are presented in Fig. 11. The corresponding structural
parameters and half-widths of the maximums are presented in the ﬁgure caption. Note that for
all resonances in Figs. 11 the grating width has been optimised for maximal height of the main
maximums. This is the reason for slight variations of the grating widths of the considered gratings.
It can be seen that decreasing angle of incidence results in a substantial increase of height of the
merged maximums (compare curves 1–5 in Fig. 11). The smaller maximums of curves 5 and 3 (for
curve 3 it occurs at ≈ 68.1◦—Fig. 11(a)) correspond to the right limiting maximums in Figs. 10(b)–
(d). For positive θ0, this maximum completely disappears at θ0 > 10◦, whereas for negative θ0 it is
much more noticeable even for non-normal incidence (though still relatively small).
At normal incidence, there is no middle maximum (Fig. 10(a)), and the merger occurs between
the two limiting maximums. The resultant merged resonance is especially strong—curve 6 in Fig.
11. In this case, further increase of the grating amplitude results in an oscillatory behaviour of the

Figure 12: The rigorous dependencies of the relative amplitudes of the six diffracted orders (having
signiﬁcant amplitudes) on angle of scattering θ1 for the structure corresponding to the dotted curve
in Fig. 10(d). The number of the particular diffracted order is indicated in each of the subplots.

resonance. For example, increasing grating amplitude beyond the value corresponding to curve 6
(ǫg = 5.1491) results in a signiﬁcant reduction of the resonance (to ≈ 300E00), and then in increas-
ing it back to ≈ 1090E00 (at ǫg = 5.1823—see curve 7 in Fig. 11). Further increase of the grating
amplitude results in other maximums that exceed several thousands of E00.
It is obvious that the predicted extremely large amplitudes of the +1 diffracted orders, together with
the large grating amplitude, must lead to very signiﬁcant amplitudes of other diffracted orders in
the Floquet expansion (2). This is demonstrated by Fig. 12, where amplitudes of several diffracted
orders, other than the +1 order, are presented for the structure corresponding to the dotted curve in
Fig. 10(d).
It can be seen that the amplitude of the incident wave (0th diffracted order) approximately follows
the +1 diffracted order—compare the dotted curve in Fig. 10(d) and the curve in Fig. 12(a). This is
similar to what has been predicted previously for GAS by means of the approximate and rigorous
theories (see [1] and Fig. 2(b)). In particular, both the scattered and incident wave amplitudes expe-
rience a strong resonant increase in the middle of the grating. This is expected, since the extremely
large scattered wave amplitude inside the grating must result in substantial re-scattering, as a result
of which the incident wave must also have a large amplitude (note however that the energy con-
servation requires the incident wave amplitude at the rear grating boundary to be ≤ E00). The +2
diffracted order is also expected to be large, since it is directly coupled to the resonantly strong +1
diffracted order (Fig. 12c). However, what is really surprising is that the −1 diffracted order is sig-
niﬁcantly stronger than the 0th and +2 orders. This is unexpected, since the −1 order is not coupled
directly to the resonantly strong scattered wave, and one could think that it should be weaker than
the 0th and +2 orders. The rigorous analysis demonstrates that this expectation is not correct, and
the amplitude of the −1 order is not only larger than those of the 0th and +2 orders, but is very close
to the amplitude of the +1 order (i.e. scattered wave). The same situation is with the −2 order that
has (in the middle maximum) the amplitude only ≈ 2 times less than that of the +2 order, though it
can be expected to be signiﬁcantly smaller.
This effect is even more obvious if we calculate amplitudes of the diffracted orders for the structures
corresponding to curves 6 and 7 in Fig. 11. In this case, the angular dependencies of the amplitudes of
the −1 and +1 orders are practically indistinguishable. The same is true for the −2 and +2 orders, −3
and +3 orders, etc. In addition, all these dependencies almost exactly reproduce the shape of curves 6
and 7 in Fig. 11 (though of different maximal heights). Therefore, presentation of these dependencies
here is not worthwhile. Instead, Fig. 13 presents the typical x-dependencies of amplitudes of several
diffracted orders in the gratings of widths L ≈ 10µm (Fig. 13a–c) and L = 20µm (Fig. 13(d)). The
subplots in Fig. 13 correspond to the maximums of curve 6 in Fig. 11 (Fig. 13(a)), curve 7 in Fig.
11 (Fig. 13(b)), curve 1 in Fig. 11 (Fig. 13c), and curve 3 in Fig. 6(a) (Fig. 13(d)). In accordance
with the mentioned above, the x-dependencies of the amplitudes of the +1 and −1 diffracted orders
in Figs. 13(a) and (b) are practically indistinguishable and are both represented by curves 2. The
match of these dependencies is better for Fig. 13(b), while in Fig. 13(a) there are minor differences
near the two minimums of curve 2 in the grating (not shown in the ﬁgure). Similarly, each of curves
3 in Figs. 13(a) and (b) simultaneously represent the amplitudes of the +2 and −2 orders, and the
lower solid curves in both the ﬁgures correspond to the +3 and −3 orders. This result is completely
unexpected and surprising. Indeed, despite the obvious non-symmetry of the structure (Fig. 1) with
respect to scattering into, for example, +1 and −1 orders (e.g., the Bragg condition is satisﬁed only
for the +1 order), the amplitudes of these orders (and all other +n and −n orders) are practically
indistinguishable in Figs. 13(a) and (b).
This however is not the case for less sharp and high resonances at larger angles of incidence—Figs.
13(c) and (d). In these ﬁgures, the amplitudes of the +1 and −1 orders (as well as those of the +2
and −2 orders, etc.) are noticeably different. Nevertheless, the stronger the resonance, the closer the
amplitude of the −1 order to that of the +1 order (compare Figs. 13(c) and (d)). It is worth noting
that strong resonances, as in Fig. 11, are highly sensitive to grating width. For example, if for curve
6 in Fig. 11 the grating width is changed from 10.02 to 10.1µm, then the maximum of curve 6 in Fig.
11 reduces to ≈ 420E00 (i.e. more than two times compared to what it is in Fig. 11).
The small oscillations displayed by all the curves in Fig. 13(d) are also typical for other subplots in

Figure 13: The rigorous x-dependencies of the relative amplitudes of several diffracted orders with
noticeable amplitude inside the grating at the resonance angles of scattering θ1r. The subplots (a)–(d)
correspond to the resonances of curves 6, 7, 1 in Fig. 12, and curve 3 in Fig. 6, respectively. (a) 0th
order (curve 1), +1 and −1 orders (curve 2), +2 and −2 orders (curve 3), +3 and −3 diffracted orders
(lower solid curve); θ1 = θ1r ≈ 68.51250565◦ . (b) 0th order (curve 1), +1 and −1 orders (curve 2), +2
and −2 orders (curve 3), +3 and −3 diffracted orders (lower solid curve); θ1 = θ1r ≈ 68.59630026◦ .
(c) 0th order (curve 1), +1 order (curve 2), −1 order (curve 3), +2 order (curve 4), −2 order (curve
5), +3 and −3 orders (lower dashed and solid curves, respectively); θ1 = θ1r ≈ 67.1545608◦ . (d) 0th
order (curve 1), +1 order (curve 2), −1 order (curve 3), +2 order (curve 4); θ1 = θ1r ≈ 80.6295◦.

Fig. 13. However, due to much smaller scale, these oscillations are hardly seen on curves in Fig.
13a–c.
It is also important to realise that the presented results are not only relevant to the particular struc-
tural parameters considered above. It can be shown that the scaling procedure described in [12] is
readily applicable to the considered gratings. For example, if the mean permittivity together with
the grating amplitude are increased α times, then decreasing grating width α1/2 times must result in
exactly the same results as for the gratings discussed above.

5 Eigenmodes of a slanted grating

The results obtained in Sections 3 and 4 demonstrate an extremely complex pattern of scattering,
involving a number of strong resonances associated with strong increase of amplitudes of several

diffracted orders inside the grating. It is obvious that a comprehensive physical explanation of all
the predicted effects and resonant behaviour is hardly feasible at this stage. However, it is rather
clear that diffractional divergence of the scattered wave, that has been used for the explanation of
wave effects in the geometry of EAS [3–8], can hardly be used for the explanation of the predicted
resonances. This is because if the grating amplitude is large, these resonances occur at angles of scat-
tering signiﬁcantly different from π/2. For example, at almost normal incidence, strong resonances
have been found at angles of scattering θ1 between 40◦ and 50◦. It is hardly possible to expect that
diffractional divergence of the +1 order (or any other diffraction order) can play a signiﬁcant role at
such angles of propagation with respect to the grating boundaries (see also [3–8]). Moreover, though
the resonances were frequently referred to as GAS resonances in Section 4, one should not be de-
ceived by this terminology, since in some cases the scattered wave no longer propagates at a grazing
angle with respect to the grating boundaries (see also Figs. 9–12).
The explanation of the observed extremely strong resonances can be understood from Fig. 13. This
ﬁgure demonstrates that in the strongest resonances, the amplitudes of the diffracted orders are res-
onantly large only inside the grating, whereas at its boundaries they are close to zero. On the other
hand, any sufﬁciently strong resonance is associated with generation of some kind of eigen oscilla-
tions or eigenmodes in the structure. Therefore, the discovered resonances must be related to the
resonant generation of a special new type of grating eigenmodes by an incident wave (the grating
eigenmodes are coupled to the incident wave). Actually, these modes are not true structural eigen-
modes, since if they were, they would have not been coupled to a incident wave. Due to the presence
of this weak coupling, grating eigenmodes weakly leak from the grating. However, since the pre-
dicted resonances are extremely high (up to hundreds or even thousands of the amplitude of the
incident wave), the leakage must be weak. In the case of a high resonance, the ﬁeld in the grating
represents, to a high degree of accuracy, the ﬁeld in the corresponding grating eigenmode. Thus the
ﬁeld distribution presented in Fig. 13 is actually the ﬁeld distribution in the grating eigenmodes.
This is because the perturbation effect of the relatively weak incident wave (with E00 ≪ S1|x=L/2) on
the ﬁeld distribution inside the grating is negligible.
It is important to recall that the considered gratings are not associated with any conventional guiding
effect, since the mean dielectric permittivity ǫ is assumed to be the same inside and outside the
grating (see Section 2 and Fig. 1). The guiding effect on the eigenmodes is imposed only by the
grating. As a result, a grating of 10µm width can guide a wave with the amplitude in the middle of
the grating, that is thousands of times larger than at the grating boundaries. It is also interesting that
all the gratings considered in this paper are oblique (slanted) gratings, which makes them asymmetric
from the view-point of a mode propagating along the grating. Nevertheless, the ﬁeld distribution in
the modes corresponding to strong resonances is always practically symmetric with respect to the
middle of the grating (Figs. 13(a)–(c)).
The discovered eigenmodes are formed by the interacting diffracted orders in the grating. This in-
teraction occurs so that amplitudes of the diffracted orders decrease to about zero as they propagate
towards a grating boundary. For example, the diffracted orders whose wave vectors point towards
the rear grating boundary increase in amplitude (gaining energy from the diffracted orders “travel-
ling” in the opposite direction) in the ﬁrst half of the grating (from x = 0 to x = L/2), and then lose
their energy due to the same interaction in the second half of the grating. The opposite occurs for
diffraction orders with the wave vectors pointing towards the front boundary.
Since we can consider a wave incident on the grating from its either side, the discovered eigenmodes
can equally propagate in both directions along the grating, i.e. in the positive and negative directions
of the y-axis in Fig. 1.
As can be seen from Fig. 13, the structure of the grating eigenmodes can be quite different, de- pend-
ing on structural parameters and angles of propagation of diffraction orders (i.e. mode type). These
modes are signiﬁcantly more complex than the conventional modes of a slab waveguide. This has
also been demonstrated by the consideration of grating eigenmodes in the presence of the conven-
tional guiding effect, i.e. in a guiding slab with a modulated dielectric permittivity [13]. In this case,
a number of new grating eigenmodes are predicted, that are strongly different from the conventional
guided modes in a slab (e.g., grating eigenmodes in a slab cannot exist in the absence of the grating)

[13].
Note that without the consideration of the grating eigenmodes the discussed strong resonances, like
those in Figs. 11(a)–(c), are practically useless. This is because they are very difﬁcult to achieve in
practice due to extremely large relaxation times, and thus impractically large apertures of the incident
bean that would be required for the steady-state to be achieved. However, the existence of the grating
eigenmodes radically changes the situation. The resonances are used only for the determination of
the ﬁeld structure of these modes that can be generated by other means, similar to those used for
generation of the conventional slab modes.
Note also that especially strong resonances (and the described grating eigenmodes) are often ob-
tained for very large grating amplitudes (e.g., ǫg ≈ 3 to 5). Recalling that, according to Eq. (1), the
actual amplitude of modulation of the mean permittivity in the grating is equal to 2Re(ǫg), we can
see that ǫg ≈ 5 corresponds to the modulation amplitude 2ǫg ≈ 10. This is 2 times larger than the
mean permittivity in the structure. This means that the permittivity in the grating must vary from
positive to negative values. On the other hand, negative permittivity can be obtained in metals, ionic
crystals (between the frequencies of transverse and longitudinal optical phonons), or near any sufﬁ-
ciently strong material resonance. In this case, dissipation in the medium is inevitable. The accurate
analysis of the grating eigenmodes and the associated resonances in the presence of dissipation is
beyond the scope of this paper. However, it can be noted that small dissipation could, for example,
be compensated by appropriate gain in the material of the grating.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, the detailed rigorous analysis of GAS of bulk TE electromagnetic waves in slanted
uniform holographic gratings has been carried out. This analysis has demonstrated high accuracy
of the previously developed approximate theory for gratings with small amplitudes (up to ≈ 1% of
the mean permittivity), especially for near-normal incidence. Even if the discrepancies between the
approximate and rigorous theories are noticeable (at grating amplitudes that are less than ≈ 10% of
the mean permittivity), they are mainly restricted to variations of resonant angles, but not the shape
of the curves and the height of the GAS resonances.
On the other hand, a highly unusual, unexpected, and complex pattern of resonant behaviour of
several diffracted orders in gratings has been discovered at large grating amplitudes (greater than
≈ 10% of the mean permittivity). The resonant angles in this case lie within the large range and do
not necessarily correspond to the geometry of GAS (where the +1 diffracted order propagates at a
grazing angle with respect to the grating boundaries). Even in relatively narrow gratings (of ≈ 10µm)
these new resonances can be extremely strong (up to thousands of the amplitude of the incident
wave at the front boundary). Increasing grating amplitude generally results in a rapid increase of the
corresponding resonances.
Though the analysis was carried out only for sinusoidal gratings, it is highly likely that similar reso-
nances occur in gratings with arbitrary proﬁles, as well as in two-dimensional and three-dimensional
grating with large amplitude (i.e. photonic crystals). The analysis of such structures is currently be-
ing carried out.
Physical explanation of the predicted resonant behaviour of waves in the grating has been linked to
the generation of a special new type of grating eigenmodes. These modes are guided by a slanted
grating with large amplitude, like modes guided by a slab. However, grating eigenmodes are shown
to have much more complex structure with several diffracted orders involved. The ﬁeld distribution
in such modes has been investigated and discussed.
It is obvious that for the predicted resonances to be achieved experimentally, the corresponding time
of relaxation to the steady-state regime of scattering must be reasonably small. Otherwise, the aper-
ture of the incident beam that could be required for achieving the steady-state regime would be
impractically large [4,5,14]. The determination of which of the predicted resonances can reasonably
be achieved in practice, together with the analysis of non-steady-state scattering, can be carried out
by methods developed for non-steady-state EAS in [14].

On the other hand, the main importance of the discovery of the strongest predicted resonances (that
are obviously not achievable in practice due to large relaxation times) is in the two main results. First,
they demonstrate radically new, previously unseen resonant effects in slanted gratings. Second, the
existence of grating eigenmodes and their ﬁeld structure are derived from the consideration of these
resonances. In the end, the discovered eigenmodes can well be generated by means other than the
resonant scattering of the incident wave in the grating (for example, by means similar to those used
for generation of slab modes).

The authors gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support for this research from the Queensland Univer-
sity of Technology.

Acknowledgements

References

1. D.K. Gramotnev, Opt. Quant. Electron. 33 (2001) 253.

2. S. Kishino, A. Noda, K. Kohra, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 33 (1972) 158.

3. M.P. Bakhturin, L.A. Chernozatonskii, D.K. Gramotnev, Appl. Opt. 34 (1995) 2692.

4. D.K. Gramotnev, Phys. Lett. A 200 (1995) 184.

5. D.K. Gramotnev, J. Phys. D 30 (1997) 2056.

6. D.K. Gramotnev, Opt. Lett. 22 (1997) 1053.

7. D.K. Gramotnev, D.F.P. Pile, Phys. Lett. A 253 (1999) 309.

8. D.K. Gramotnev, D.F.P. Pile, Opt. Quant. Electron. 32 (2000) 1097.

9. T.A. Nieminen, D.K. Gramotnev, Opt. Commun. 189 (2001) 175.

10. M.G. Moharam, E.B. Grann, D.A. Pommet, T.K. Gaylord, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 12 (1995) 1068.

11. M.G. Moharam, D.A. Pommet, E.B. Grann, T.K. Gaylord, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 12 (1995) 1077.

12. D.K. Gramotnev, T.A. Nieminen, T.A. Hopper, J. Mod. Opt. 49 (2002) 1567.

13. D.K. Gramotnev, S.J. Goodman, T.A. Nieminen, in press.

14. D.K. Gramotnev, T.A. Nieminen, Opt. Express 10 (2002) 268.

