5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of:
D. K. Gramotnev, T. A. Nieminen and T. A. Hopper
“Extremely asymmetrical scattering in gratings with varying mean structural parameters”
Journal of Modern Optics 49(9), 1567–1585 (2002)

Extremely asymmetrical scattering in gratings with varying
mean structural parameters
D. K. Gramotnev, T. A. Nieminen and T. A. Hopper
Centre for Medical, Health and Environmental Physics, School of Physical Sciences, Queensland
University of Technology, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia

Abstract

Extremely asymmetrical scattering (EAS) is an unusual type of Bragg scattering
in slanted periodic gratings with the scattered wave (the +1 diffracted order)
propagating parallel to the grating boundaries. Here, a unique and strong sen-
sitivity of EAS to small stepwise variations of mean structural parameters at the
grating boundaries is predicted theoretically (by means of approximate and rig-
orous analyses) for bulk TE electromagnetic waves and slab optical modes of
arbitrary polarization in holographic (for bulk waves) and corrugation (for slab
modes) gratings. The predicted effects are explained using one of the main phys-
ical reasons for EAS—the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave (similar
to divergence of a laser beam). The approximate method of analysis is based on
this understanding of the role of the divergence of the scattered wave, while the
rigorous analysis uses the enhanced T-matrix algorithm. The effect of small and
large stepwise variations of the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries is
analysed. Two distinctly different and unusual patterns of EAS are predicted in
the cases of wide and narrow (compared to a critical width) gratings. Compari-
son between the approximate and rigorous theories is carried out.

1

Introduction

Previously, it has been demonstrated that scattering in slanted, strip-like, wide (compared to the
wavelength) periodic gratings with the scattered wave propagating parallel or almost parallel to the
front grating boundary is characterized by a strong resonant increase in the scattered wave amplitude
[1–12]. This type of scattering was called extremely asymmetrical scattering (EAS). It has been shown
to be radically different from the conventional Bragg scattering in transmitting or reﬂecting gratings
[1–12]. For example, in addition to the strong resonant increase of the scattered wave amplitude at the
Bragg frequency, scattering in the geometry of EAS may also be characterized by additional unique
strong resonances, such as an additional exceptionally strong resonance in the sidelobe structure at
a frequency that is noticeably higher than the Bragg frequency [11], additional unique resonance
with respect to angle of scattering if the scattered wave propagates almost parallel to the grating
boundaries [12], combinations of strong simultaneous resonances in non-uniform gratings [7–9], etc.
It has also been shown that the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave inside and outside the
grating (similar to the divergence of a laser beam of ﬁnite aperture) is responsible for all these unique
wave effects in the geometry of EAS [2–9,11,12]. The necessity of taking the divergence into account
can be seen from the fact that if the divergence is neglected and the scattered wave propagates parallel
to a strip-like grating (the geometry of EAS), then this wave must be located within this grating. Thus
we would have a scattered beam with aperture equal to the grating width even if the incident wave is
a plane wave. This scattered beam must spread outside the grating owing to diffractional divergence.
For a more detailed analysis of the role of diffractional divergence in EAS see [2–9,11,12]. Note that
when the scattered wave propagates at a signiﬁcant (usually several degrees) angle with respect to
1

the grating boundaries, the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave can be neglected [12], and
we have conventional scattering in transmitting or reﬂecting gratings.
On the basis of understanding the role of the diffractional divergence for scattering in the EAS ge-
ometry, a new powerful method of simple analytical (approximate) analysis of this type of scattering
has been introduced and justiﬁed [2–9,11,12]. The main advantage of this method is that it is di-
rectly applicable to the analysis of all types of waves in different periodic gratings, including surface
and guided waves in periodic groove arrays [2–9,11,12]. Even in a complex ﬁve-layer structure with
non-collinear grating-assisted coupling, the new method allowed accurate analytical analysis of ex-
tremely asymmetrical coupling of two optical modes guided by neighbouring optical slabs with a
corrugated interface [2]. The analysis of the applicability conditions for the new method, based on
physical speculations [12] and rigorous analysis of EAS [10], has demonstrated that this method nor-
mally gives excellent agreement with the rigorous theory for gratings with small amplitude. It is
these gratings with small amplitude that are of most interest from the viewpoint of EAS since they
result in strong resonant increase of the scattered wave amplitude [2–9]. In addition, the new method
provides excellent insight into the physical reasons for EAS, which will allow thoughtful selection of
optimal structural parameters for future EAS-based devices and techniques.
If required (for example, for very narrow gratings or large grating amplitude), rigorous analysis of
EAS of bulk electromagnetic waves can also be carried out by means of one of the known numerically
stable rigorous approaches, such as an enhanced T-matrix approach [13,14], S-matrix and R-matrix
approaches [15,16], an S-matrix approach using an oblique Cartesian system of coordinates [17], a
C method [18] (for EAS of guided modes in corrugation gratings), etc. For example, in a recent
paper [10], the enhanced T-matrix approach was used for the rigorous analysis of EAS of bulk TE
electromagnetic waves in uniform holographic gratings with constant mean dielectric permittivity.
Note, however, that all these rigorous numerical methods do not reveal the main physical reason for
the unique pattern of scattering in EAS—the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave.
Since the divergence plays a crucial role for EAS, variations in this divergence are expected to result
in substantial variations in the whole pattern of scattering. It is well known that stepwise or gradual
variations of mean structural parameters across a laser beam (for example, in nonlinear wave prop-
agation [19]) may result in substantial variations in the diffractional divergence. Therefore, it can be
expected that EAS will be unusually sensitive to even small variations of mean structural parameters
across the grating.
On the one hand, this unusual sensitivity may present a problem for experimental observations of
EAS, since variations of mean structural parameters naturally occur during manufacturing of peri-
odic gratings. For example, etching or ruling processes that are used for the fabrication of strip-like
relief gratings on a surface of a planar waveguide usually result in a small reduction of the mean
thickness of the waveguide (slab) in the region of the grating. Thus, mean thickness of the guid-
ing slab will experience a step-like variation at the front and rear grating boundaries. Fabrication
of holographic gratings for bulk and guided optical waves also results in varying mean dielectric
permittivity in the grating. For example, if coherent UV radiation is used for writing a grating in a
photosensitive material, the mean dielectric permittivity in the region of the grating will be slightly
increased compared with the regions outside the grating that are not affected by the UV radiation.
Such small variations of mean structural parameters can normally be ignored in the case of conven-
tional Bragg scattering in transmission and reﬂection gratings. However, in the case of EAS, these
variations may result in very signiﬁcant changes in the pattern of scattering.
On the other hand, the unusual sensitivity of EAS to small variations of mean structural parame-
ters may be very useful, e.g. for the development of new optical and acoustic sensors and precise
measurement techniques. For example, consider EAS of an optical slab mode into another guided
mode of the same slab in a strip-like grating on one of the slab interfaces. Deposition of thin ﬁlms
or layers of some substance onto the regions of the slab outside or inside the grating will result in
varying mean effective permittivity of the slab at the grating boundaries. Thus, EAS can be used for
the detection of such deposited layers (thin ﬁlm sensors).
However, no theoretical analysis of EAS of optical waves in non-uniform gratings with varying mean

structural parameters has been carried out so far.
Therefore, the aim of this paper is to present theoretical (approximate) and numerical (rigorous) anal-
yses of EAS of optical bulk and guided waves in gratings with step-like variations of mean dielectric
permittivity (for bulk TE waves) and mean slab thickness (for optical guided TE and TM modes) at
the front and rear grating boundaries. The theoretical analysis will be based on the recently devel-
oped approximate method allowing for the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave [2–9,12]. It
will be used for the investigation of EAS of bulk and guided optical waves in holographic and surface
relief gratings, respectively. The rigorous numerical analysis will be presented for bulk TE electro-
magnetic waves and will be based on the enhanced T-matrix approach developed by Moharam et al.
[13,14]. Comparison between the approximate and rigorous results will be carried out. In particular,
the unusually strong sensitivity of EAS to small variations in the mean structural parameters at the
front and rear grating boundaries will be conﬁrmed and analysed.

2 Structure and methods of analysis

Figure 1: The geometry of EAS in a slanted holographic grating of width L with stepwise variations
of the mean permittivity at the front and rear boundaries. The vectors k11, k21, and k31 are the wave
vectors of the scattered wave (the ﬁrst diffracted order) in front, inside, and behind the grating. For
EAS of slab modes in a corrugation grating, the plane of the ﬁgure is the plane of the slab, and ǫ1,
ǫ2, ǫ3, and ǫg must be replaced by the slab thicknesses h1, h2, the mean slab thickness in the grating
region h3, and the corrugation amplitude ξg, respectively.

The structure analysed in this paper is presented in ﬁgure 1. First consider bulk electromagnetic
waves in a holographic grating with sinusoidal variations of the dielectric permittivity within a slab
of thickness L:

ǫ1,
ǫ2 + ǫg exp(iqxx + iqy y) + ǫ∗
ǫ3,

ǫs = 




x < 0,
0 < x < L,
x > L,

, for




g exp(−iqxx − iqy y)

(1)

where the coordinate system is shown in ﬁgure 1, ǫ2 is the mean dielectric permittivity in the grating,
ǫ1 and ǫ3 are the dielectric permittivities of media 1 and 3 surrounding the grating (ﬁgure 1), ǫg is the
complex amplitude and q = (qx, qy) is the reciprocal lattice vector of the grating that is parallel to the

x0-axis, q = 2π/Λ, Λ is the period and L is the grating width. The grating is assumed to be inﬁnite
along the y- and z-axes. It is also assumed that dissipation is absent, i.e. ǫ1,2,3 are real and positive
(the effect of dissipation on EAS is considered in [20]). The variations of the mean permittivity at the
front and rear boundaries are given by∆ǫ1 = ǫ1 − ǫ2 and ∆ǫ3 = ǫ3 − ǫ2 (these values can obviously
be real positive or negative). A TE electromagnetic wave with the amplitude of the electric ﬁeld S10
and wave vector k10 is incident onto the grating at an angle θ10 in the xy plane—ﬁgure 1 (non-conical
scattering).
The solution to the wave equation in the grating can be written in the form of the expansion [13,14,21]:

E2(x, y, t) =

E2n(x, y, t),

+∞

n=−∞

where

E2n(x, y, t) = S2n exp(ixk2nx + iyk2ny − iωt)

is the ﬁeld in each of the inhomogeneous waves in the sum (2) with the x-dependent amplitude
S2n(x), and k2nx and k2ny are the components of the wave vectors

k2n = k20 − nq,

(n = 0, ±1, ±2, ...).

If for some value of n the magnitude of the wave vector k2n is equal to ωǫ1/2
2 /c, where ω is the
frequency of the wave, and c is the light speed in vacuum, then the Bragg condition is satisﬁed for
this value of n, and the nth wave in expansion (2) may have amplitude that is comparable with or
even larger than the amplitude of the incident wave (zeroth term in equation (2)).
In this paper it is assumed that the Bragg condition is satisﬁed precisely for the ﬁrst diffracted order,
i.e. for n = 1:

k21 = k20 − q,

where k21 = |k21| = ωǫ1/2
2 /c. The wave vector of the scattered wave (the ﬁrst diffracted order) in the
grating, k21, is parallel to the grating boundaries, i.e. parallel to the y-axis (ﬁgure 1)—the geometry
of EAS [1–10].
In the approximate method of analysis of EAS [2–9,11,12], only the zeroth order (incident wave) and
the ﬁrst order (scattered wave) in equation (2) are considered to be signiﬁcantly non-zero (the two-
wave approximation). It has been shown that the allowance for the second-order x-derivative of the
scattered wave amplitude in the grating is essential for the correct description of scattering in the
geometry of EAS [2–9,11,12]. In the approximate method [2–9,11,12], this second-order derivative is
introduced into the coupled wave equations through consideration of the diffractional divergence of
the scattered wave, which is one of the main physical reasons for resonant wave effects in the EAS
geometry [2–12]. This approach is especially useful for the analysis of EAS of surface and guided
waves [2–9, 12], where other methods fail to provide any reasonably simple solutions.
The approximate method developed in [2–9,12] is also directly applicable to the case of non-uniform
gratings with step-like variations of the mean structural parameters at the grating boundaries. For ex-
ample the coupled wave equations in the grating in the geometry of EAS can be written as [4,6,9,12]:

d2S21(x)/dx2 + K0S20(x) = 0,
dS20(x)/dx − iK1S21(x) = 0,

where

K0 = −2k21Γ0 sin(η− θ20), K1 = Γ1 cos(η)/ cos)θ20),
θ20 is the angle of refraction of the incident wave at the front boundary, η is the angle measured from
the x0-axis to the wave vector of the incident wave k20 in the grating counter-clockwise (ﬁgure 1), Γ0
and Γ1 are the coupling coefﬁcients that are determined in the conventional coupled wave theories
for non-slanted gratings with fringes parallel to the grating boundaries.
The incident wave is partly reﬂected from the front grating boundary, because the mean dielectric
permittivity experiences a step-like variation at x = 0. However, in the considered approximation,

(5)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(cid:229)
this process of reﬂection (and refraction) is independent of scattering inside the grating. Therefore,
the reﬂected and refracted waves at the front boundary x = 0 can be found separately from scattering
by means of the well-known Fresnel’s equations for an interface. The determined amplitude S200 of
the refracted wave at the grating boundary x = 0, and the angle of refraction θ20 must then be used
in equations (4) and (5) as the amplitude and the angle of incidence of the incident wave at this
boundary. The wave vector of the incident wave in the grating should be taken as k20—the wave
vector of the refracted wave.
Similarly, the reﬂection of the incident wave at the rear boundary can also be considered separately
from the process of scattering. In this case, the incident wave in the grating at x = L is regarded
as the wave transmitted through the grating. Then the reﬂection from the rear boundary will be the
reﬂection of the transmitted wave from this boundary, which (in the approximate method of analysis
[2–9,12]) has no effect on the process of scattering.
It can also be seen that if ǫ2 6= ǫ1,ǫ3, then the scattered wave outside the grating should not neces-
sarily propagate parallel to the grating boundaries, even if this is the case inside the grating (ﬁgure
1). In general, the solutions for the scattered wave outside the grating are

E11(x, y, t) = A0 exp(ik11y y − ik11xx − iωt),
E31(x, y, t) = B0 exp(ik31y y + ik31xx − iωt),
where A0 and B0 are the amplitudes of the scattered waves in media 1 and 3, respectively, k11y =
k31y = k21,

(6)

k11x = (k2

11 − k2

21)1/2, k31x = (k2

31 − k2

21)1/2,

1 /c, k31 = ωǫ1/2

where k11 = ωǫ1/2
3 /c, and k11x and k31x are chosen positive real or positive imaginary.
Note that in the rigorous analysis, equations (6) are replaced by the Rayleigh expansions of the elec-
tric ﬁeld in the regions x < 0 and x > L [13–16,18,21]. In this case the waves with amplitudes A0 and
B0 (equations (6)) are the ﬁrst diffracted orders in these expansions.
In the two-wave approximation, the boundary conditions at the grating boundaries can then be writ-
ten as [2–9,12]:

S20|x=0 = S200, S21|x=0 = A0, (dE21/dx)x=0 = (dE11/dx)x=0,
E21|x=L = E31|x=L, (dE21/dx)x=L = (dE31/dx)x=L.

(7)

(8)

Note again that the refraction of the incident (transmitted) waves at the front and rear boundaries of
the grating has not been considered when writing boundary conditions (8).
For the rigorous theory, the boundary conditions at the grating boundaries are given in [13,14,21].
Boundary conditions (8) determine unknown wave amplitudes A0, B0, and three constants of inte-
gration in the solutions to the coupled wave equations (4) in the grating region [2–6]. These constants
determine the incident and scattered wave amplitudes inside and outside the grating (for the explicit
form of the solutions see [2–6]).

3 Numerical results

The numerical results of the approximate and rigorous analyses of EAS in gratings described by
equation (1) are presented in this section for bulk TE electromagnetic waves. As has been indicated
in [6–9,11,12], there are two typical patterns of EAS, which correspond to narrow and wide gratings.
Narrow gratings are those whose widths are less than a critical width Lc, wide gratings are those
with widths larger than Lc [6–9,11,12]. Physically, Lc/2 is the distance within which the scattered
wave (beam) can be spread across the grating (i.e. in the direction normal to the wave propagation)
by means of the diffractional divergence, before being re-scattered by the grating [7–9]. Simple meth-
ods of determination of the critical width were developed in [7, 9]. This critical width is extremely
important for scattering in the geometry of EAS. It appears to determine numerous resonant effects
in uniform and non-uniform gratings [7– 9,11,12]. Strong differences in the patterns of scattering will
also be demonstrated here for EAS in narrow and wide gratings with step-like variations of the mean
structural parameters.

3.1 Narrow gratings

Figure 2: The x-dependencies of relative amplitudes |S21(x)/S10| of the scattered bulk TE electro-
magnetic wave in the holographic grating with the parameters: ǫ2 = 5, ǫg = 5 × 10−3, L = 10µ,
θ10 = π/4, λ(vaccum) = 1µ, the grating period (Λ ≈ 0.584µm) and the orientation of the
fringes are determined by the Bragg condition and the direction of the wave vector k21.
(a, b)
|Deltaǫ1 = ǫ1 − ǫ2 6= 0 and |Deltaǫ3 = ǫ3 − ǫ2 = 0 (variations of the mean permittivity only at
the front boundary); (c, d) |Deltaǫ1 = ǫ1 −ǫ2 = 0 and |Deltaǫ3 = ǫ3 −ǫ2 6= 0 (variations of the mean
permittivity only at the rear boundary). Curves 1: ∆ǫ1 = 0 and ∆ǫ3 = 0 (no variations of the mean
permittivity). Curves 2, 3, 4, 5: (a) ∆ǫ1 = −10−5, −10−4, −10−3, −10−1, respectively; (b) ∆ǫ1 = 10−5,
10−4, −0−3, 10−1; (c) ∆ǫ3 = −10−5, −10−4, −10−3, −10−1; (d) ∆ǫ3 = 10−5, 10−4, −0−3, 10−1. Curve
6: ∆ǫ1 = −4, i.e. ǫ1 = 1 (vacuum in front of the grating).

Figure 2 presents the dependencies of the normalized scattered wave amplitude on the x-coordinate
inside the holographic grating with L = 10µm, ǫ2 = 5, ǫg = 5 × 10−3, λ(vaccum) = 1µm, θ10 = 45◦,
and step-like variations of the mean permittivity at the front (ﬁgures 2(a), (b)) and rear (ﬁgures 2
(c), (d)) grating boundaries as indicated in the ﬁgure caption. The Bragg condition is assumed to be
satisﬁed precisely. The above structural parameters correspond to the critical width Lc ≈ 30µm [7,9],
and therefore, the dependencies in ﬁgure 2 are typical for narrow gratings with L < Lc.
The most important feature that can be seen from this ﬁgure is that the scattered wave amplitude
is unusually sensitive to small variations of the mean permittivity at the grating boundaries. Even

very small step-lik e variations of the mean permittivity at either of the boundaries (∆ǫ1,3 = 10−5 =
2 × 10−6ǫ2 ≪ ǫg = 10−3ǫ2) may result in noticeable changes in the scattered wave amplitude in
the grating—compare curves 1 and 2 in ﬁgures 2(b), (d). Note that further decrease of grating width
results in an approximately proportional increase of sensitivity of EAS to small variations of the mean
dielectric permittivity at the grating boundaries. This is related to sharper EAS resonance in narrower
gratings (if the width is less than Lc) [4,5,12].
The unusually strong sensitivity of EAS to small variations of mean structural parameters has no
analogies in conventional Bragg scattering. As has been mentioned in section 1, it can be explained
by a strong sensitivity of the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave to small variations of
structural parameters along the wave front.
Another interesting aspect is that varying mean permittivity at one of the grating boundaries results
in signiﬁcant changes of the scattered wave amplitude throughout the structure (ﬁgures 2(a)–(d)).
Moreover, if the dielectric permittivity outside the grating is larger than inside (i.e. ∆ǫ1,3 > 0—see
ﬁgures 2(b), (d)), then the scattered wave amplitude is almost constant across the grating (especially
for small values of ∆ǫ1,3). If ∆ǫ1,3 < 0 (ﬁgures 2(a), (c)), then the dependence of the scattered wave
amplitudes on the x-coordinate is fairly noticeable. However, if the grating width is reduced further
(e.g. down to ≈ 5µm), then the scattered wave amplitude becomes approximately constant across
the grating for both the cases with ∆ǫ1,3 > 0 and ∆ǫ1,3 < 0. This is because in narrow gratings
(with L < Lc) the diffractional divergence is very efﬁcient in spreading the scattered wave across the
grating (see also [6–9]). Thus, any changes in the scattered wave (caused, for example, by varying
mean structural parameters) at one boundary of the grating are effectively felt at the other boundary
(and everywhere in the grating). Therefore, variations of the scattered wave amplitude in the grating
are smoothed out by the diffractional divergence, and this results in only weak dependence of the
scattered wave amplitude on the x-coordinate (see curves 1–4 in ﬁgures 2(a)–(d)). If the grating width
is decreased, the diffractional divergence becomes even more efﬁcient (at shorter distances), and the
x-dependencies of the scattered wave amplitude become even weaker for all values of ∆ǫ1,3.
It can also be seen that if ∆ǫ1,3 > 0 (i.e. the dielectric permittivity outside the grating is larger than
inside), then the sensitivity of EAS to small variations of the mean permittivity at the grating bound-
aries is stronger than for ∆ǫ1,3 < 0 (compare curves 1–4 in ﬁgures 2(a), (c) with curves 1–4 in ﬁgures
2(b), (d)). This is because if ∆ǫ1,3 < 0, then the waves outside the grating are exponentially decaying
with increasing distance from the grating (see also section 2). These waves cannot be associated with
an energy ﬂow towards or away from the grating. On the other hand, if ∆ǫ1,3 > 0 (ﬁgures 2(b), (d)),
then the scattered waves outside the grating (according to Snell’s law) are propagating waves travel-
ling away from the grating. The resultant energy losses from the grating cause more signiﬁcant (than
in the case of ∆ǫ1,3 < 0) reduction in the scattered wave amplitudes (ﬁgures 2(a)–(d)). The smaller
the grating width and/or grating amplitude ǫg, the stronger the difference in sensitivity of EAS to
small positive and small negative values of ∆ǫ1,3.
Note that the approximate and rigorous analyses of EAS in the structures considered give practically
indistinguishable x-dependencies of the scattered wave amplitude in the grating. Therefore, the
dependencies presented in ﬁgures 2(a)–(d) can equally be regarded as approximate and rigorous
(within an accuracy of ≈ 0.1%).
Typical approximate dependencies of the normalized amplitude of the incident wave on the x-
coordinate inside a narrow grating are presented in ﬁgures 3(a), (b) for the same structure as ﬁgures
2(a), (b), i.e. with ǫ2 = 5, ǫg = 5 × 10−3, λ = 1µm, θ10 = 45◦, L = 10µm, and ∆ǫ3 = 0 (i.e. there is no
variation of the mean permittivity at the rear grating boundary).
If the variation of the mean permittivity at the front boundary ∆ǫ1 ¡ 0 (i.e. ǫ1 < ǫ2—ﬁgure 3(a)), the
scattered wave does not carry the energy away from the grating, and energy conservation results in
the same magnitudes of the amplitudes of the incident wave at the front (x = 0) and rear (x = L)
boundaries (ﬁgure 3(a)). If ∆ǫ1 > 0 (i.e. ǫ1 > ǫ2—see ﬁgure 3(b)), then the scattered wave at x < 0 is
a propagating wave carrying energy away from the grating. As a result, the amplitude of the incident
wave at the rear boundary is smaller than at the front boundary (ﬁgure 3(b)).
If the mean permittivity varies at the rear boundary, i.e. ∆ǫ3 6= 0 and ∆ǫ1 = 0, then for small

Figure 3: The x-dependencies of relative amplitudes |S20(x)/S10| of the incident wave inside the
holographic grating with the same parameters as for ﬁgure 2 (ǫ2 = 5, ǫg = 5 × 10−3, L = 10µm,
θ10 = π/4, λ(vacuum) = 1µm). (a, b) ∆ǫ1 = ǫ1 − ǫ2 6= 0 and ∆ǫ3 = ǫ3 − ǫ2 = 0 (variations of
the mean permittivity only at the front boundary). Curves 1: ∆ǫ1 = 0, ∆ǫ3 = 0. Curves 2, 3, 4:
(a) ∆ǫ1 = −10−4, −10−3, −10−1, respectively; (b) ∆ǫ1 = 10−4, 10−3, 10−1. (c, d) The approximate
(thick solid curves) and rigorous (oscillating thin curves) dependencies of the relative incident wave
amplitudes in the same grating but with (c) ∆ǫ3 = 0, ∆ǫ1 = 0.1 (curves 1) and ∆ǫ1 = −0.1 (curves
2); (d) ∆ǫ1 = 0, ∆ǫ3 = 0.1 (curves 1) and ∆ǫ3 = −0.1 (curves 2).

variations of the mean permittivity (∆ǫ1,3 ≪ ǫ2) the approximate dependencies of the incident wave
amplitude in narrow gratings are approximately the same as for the case with ∆ǫ3 = 0 and ∆ǫ1 6= 0
(ﬁgures 3(a), (b)). The smaller the grating width, the more accurate is this statement. Note, however,
that this is not true for large variations of the mean permittivity ∆ǫ1,3 ≈ ǫ2, for which reﬂection of
the incident wave from the front boundary becomes noticeable.
If ∆ǫ1 and/or ∆ǫ3 are positive in a narrow grating with L < Lc, then it is possible to choose optimal
values of ∆ǫ1,3 ≪ ǫ2 such that the amplitude of the incident wave at the rear boundary is next to zero.
The smaller the grating width, the smaller the amplitude of the incident wave at the rear boundary
can be. In this case, almost total conversion of the energy of the incident wave into energy of the
scattered wave occurs. This is radically different from the conventional scattering in narrow gratings
with small amplitude, where scattering is very inefﬁcient and the scattered wave amplitude is small
(as is the energy ﬂow in it).
If ∆ǫ3 = 0 and ∆ǫ1 6= 0, then the rigorous x-dependencies of the amplitude of the zeroth diffracted
order are practically the same as the corresponding approximate dependencies of the incident wave
amplitude (ﬁgure 3(c)). The main distinctive feature of the rigorous dependencies is the weak fast
oscillations with the period of the order of the wavelength (ﬁgure 3(c)). These oscillations are related

to boundary scattering of the scattered wave at the grating interface x = L [10]. The wave resulting
from this boundary scattering propagates in the negative x-direction as if it is a mirror reﬂected in-
cident wave from this boundary. Therefore, mathematically, the zeroth term in equation (2) includes
both the incident wave and the wave caused by the boundary scattering [10]. Interference of these
two waves results in a standing wave pattern represented by fast oscillations of amplitude of the
zeroth diffracted order. The period of these oscillations, λ/(2ǫ1/2
cosθ20), is in excellent agreement
with the period of oscillations of the rigorous dependencies in ﬁgure 3(c).
It is interesting that if variations of the mean permittivity occur at the rear grating boundary, i.e.
∆ǫ3 6= 0, then the amplitude of oscillations of the rigorous dependencies may be signiﬁcantly larger
(ﬁgure 3(d)). Increasing |∆ǫ3| results in increasing amplitude of these oscillations. This is due to
reﬂection of the incident wave from the rear grating boundary with ∆ǫ3 6= 0. Mathematically, the
reﬂected wave is also included in the zeroth term in equation (2). Its amplitude increases with in-
creasing |∆ǫ3|, which results in stronger oscillations of the resultant interference pattern.
It follows that the difference between the approximate and rigorous curves in ﬁgure 3(d) can be
reduced by including the reﬂected wave into the approximate analysis. Indeed, the total electric ﬁeld
resulting from the interference of the incident and reﬂected waves is given as

2

[S20(x) + S2r exp(−2ik20xx)] exp(ik20xx + ik10y y − iωt),
where S20(x) is the x-dependent amplitude of the incident wave in the grating, and S2r is the am-
plitude of the wave reﬂected from the rear grating boundary (as mentioned above, S2r is given by
the Fresnel equations for reﬂection of the incident wave with the amplitude S20(L) from the interface
x = L). Wave (9) has a periodically varying amplitude (the expression in the square brackets). If we
plot the x-dependencies of the magnitude of this amplitude for the gratings corresponding to curves
1 and 2 in ﬁgure 3(d), the resultant approximate (oscillating) curves will be very close to the rigorous
oscillating curves in ﬁgure 3(d). (Note that in the rigorous approach the term S2r exp(−2ik20xx) is
formally included in the amplitude S20(x).)

(9)

3.2 Wide gratings

If the grating width L ≥ Lc, then the pattern of scattering changes signiﬁcantly. Typical x-
dependencies of the scattered wave amplitude inside the grating of critical width (L = Lc ≈ 30µm)
are presented in ﬁgure 4. It can be seen that in this case the effect of varying mean permittivity on
the scattered wave amplitude tends to be localized in the half of the grating that is adjacent to the
boundary at which the variation occurs (ﬁgure 4). This tendency becomes much more obvious if we
consider EAS in wide gratings, e.g. with L = 80µm > Lc ≈ 30µm—ﬁgure 5.
If the variation of the mean permittivity occurs at the rear boundary (ﬁgures 4(c), (d) and 5(c), (d)),
then the effect of this variation on the scattered wave amplitude is always localized within the dis-
tance ≈ Lc/2 near the rear boundary. Everywhere else in the grating, the scattered wave amplitude is
hardly affected by the varying mean permittivity for small and large, positive and negative values of
∆ǫ3 (ﬁgures 4(c), (d) and 5(c), (d)). This is because the diffractional divergence can effectively spread
the scattered wave only within distances ≈ Lc/2 [7–9,12], and thus the effects of any perturbations
at the rear boundary (e.g. variation of the mean permittivity) can be felt only within these distances
(ﬁgures 4(c), (d) and 5(c), (d)).
If a variation of the mean permittivity occurs at the front boundary, i.e. ∆ǫ1 6= 0, then for negative
values of ∆ǫ1 (ﬁgures 4(a), 5(a)) the situation is largely the same as in ﬁgures 4(c), (d) and 5(c), (d).
However, if |∆ǫ1| is large (of the order of ǫ2), then the scattered wave amplitude is affected (reduced)
everywhere in the grating—see curves 5 in ﬁgures 4(a), 5(a). This is mainly because when ∆ǫ1 is large
and negative, the amplitude of the incident TE wave transmitted through the boundary x = 0 into
the grating is noticeably less than the amplitude of the incident wave in the region x < 0. This must
also result in a reduction of the scattered wave amplitude everywhere in the grating.
If ∆ǫ1 > 0 (ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b)), then increasing ∆ǫ1 results in a monotonous decrease of the scattered
wave amplitude near the front boundary to about zero (similar to ﬁgures 4(a), 5(a)). However, in-
side the grating (and at the rear boundary) the situation is different. The scattered wave amplitude

Figure 4: The x-dependencies of relative scattered wave amplitudes |S21(x)/S10| inside the holo-
graphic grating with the same parameters as for ﬁgure 2, but with L ≈ Lc ≈ 30µm. (a, b) ∆ǫ1 6= 0
and ∆ǫ3 = 0, (c, d) ∆ǫ1 = 0 and ∆ǫ3 6= 0. Curves 1: ∆ǫ1 = 0 and ∆ǫ3 = 0. Curves 2, 3, 4: (a)
∆ǫ1 = −10−4, −10−3, −10−1, respectively; (b) ∆ǫ1 = 10−4, 10−3, 10−1; (c) ∆ǫ3 = −10−4, −10−3,
−10−1; (d) ∆ǫ3 = 10−4, 10−3, 10−1. Curves 5: (a) ∆ǫ1 = −4, i.e. ǫ1 = 1 (vacuum in front of the
grating), and (b) ∆ǫ1 = 4.9 (in this case the angle of incidence θ10 = 45◦ is very close to the critical
angle ≈ 45.29◦ for the interface x = 0).

decreases with increasing ∆ǫ1 (curves 1–3 in ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b)), goes through a minimum, increases
back to approximately the same values as for gratings with ǫ1 = ǫ2 = ǫ3 (see curves 1 and 4 in ﬁgures
4(b), 5(b)), and then decreases again for large ∆ǫ1 (curves 5 in ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b)).
The more complex behaviour of the curves in ﬁgures 4(a), (b) and 5(a), (b) compared to the curves
in ﬁgures 4(c), (d) and 5(c), (d) is mainly related to the fact that if a perturbation occurs at the front
boundary, then the effect of this perturbation can be spread into the grating not only by means of the
diffractional divergence of the scattered wave, but also by means of the incident wave that propagates
into the grating. At the same time, the effect of perturbations at the rear boundary can be spread into
the grating only by means of the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave. Therefore the effect
of varying mean permittivity at the front boundary may affect the wave amplitudes everywhere in
the grating (ﬁgures 4(a), (b) and 5(a), (b)), whereas variations of the mean permittivity at the rear
boundary may affect the wave amplitudes only within the distance ≈ Lc/2 from the rear boundary
(ﬁgures 4(c), (d) and 5(c), (d)).
The noticeable differences between ﬁgures 4(a), 5(a) and ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b) are due to the fact that if
∆ǫ1 > 0 (ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b)), then the scattered wave in the region x < 0 carries the energy away

Figure 5: Same as ﬁgure 4, but for grating width L = 80µm > Lc ≈ 30µm.

from the grating (see also the discussions of ﬁgure 2). The resultant energy losses from the grating
can cause noticeable reduction of the scattered wave amplitude in the whole grating (see curves 1–
3 in ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b)). However, if the variation of the mean permittivity ∆ǫ1 is sufﬁciently large,
then the amplitude of the scattered wave at the front boundary is small (curves 4 in ﬁgures 4(b),
5(b)). As a result, the energy losses drastically reduce, and the scattered wave amplitude inside the
grating (not near the front boundary) increases—compare curves 2, 3 and 4 in ﬁgures 4(b), 5(b). For
a particular value of ǫ1 (in our examples this is ǫ1 = ǫ1c = 10), the angle of incidence θ10 (if it is
non-zero) becomes equal to the critical angle for the interface x = 0. In this case, the incident wave
in the grating propagates parallel to this interface, i.e. θ20 = π/2. On the other hand, if the angle of
incidence in the grating θ20 → π/2, the amplitude of the scattered wave is strongly reduced [4]. This
is the reason for the reduction of the scattered wave amplitudes represented by curves 5 in ﬁgures
4(b) and 5(b).
If the mean permittivity varies simultaneous at both the boundaries, then the effect of such variations
is roughly the superposition of the effects of separate variations at each of the boundaries. This
statement holds better for small variations of mean parameters.
An important general feature of EAS can be seen from the approximate and rigorous analyses of
scattering of bulk electromagnetic waves in narrow and wide gratings.
Increasing or decreasing
wavelength p times with the simultaneous increasing or decreasing grating width p times leaves the
amplitudes of the scattered and incident waves unchanged (though scaled to different grating width).
For example, EAS of bulk TE waves of λ = 2µm in gratings with L = 160µm will be represented by

exactly the same curves as in ﬁgures 5(a)–(d) with x/2 instead of x on the horizontal axis (scaling to
the two times larger grating width). The other structural parameters are assumed to be the same as
for ﬁgure 5.
Similarly, p times increase or decrease of the dielectric permittivity in the structure (including grat-
ing amplitude and step-like variations of the mean permittivity) with the simultaneous p1/2 times
decrease or increase of the grating width also leaves the wave amplitudes unchanged (though again
scaled to the different grating width).

4 EAS of guided modes

As has been mentioned in the Introduction, the approximate method of analysis of EAS described is
directly applicable to the case of EAS of guided optical modes of arbitrary polarization in gratings
with constant mean structural parameters [2,5,6,9,12]. Here, we will see that this is also true for EAS
of optical modes guided by a slab with varying mean thickness at the grating boundaries. In this
case, the plane of ﬁgure 1 is the plane of the slab. One of the boundaries of the slab is periodically
corrugated within the strip of width L (ﬁgure 1). Thus the thickness of the waveguide inside and
outside the grating is given by the equation:

(10)

(11)

h(x0) = 




h1,
h2 + ξg f (x0)
h3,

, for




x < 0,
0 < x < L,
x > L,

where h2 is the mean thickness of the slab inside the grating region, h1 and h3 are the slab thicknesses
outside the grating, ξg is the grating amplitude (corrugation amplitude), f (x0) is a periodic function
with the period Λ, max(| f (x0)|) = 1, and the average (over the period) value of f (x0) is equal to
zero. Dissipation is neglected and all media in contact are isotropic. The variations of the mean slab
thickness at the front and rear boundaries are given by ∆h1 = h1 − h2 and ∆h3 = h3 − h2 (∆h1,3 can
obviously be either positive or negative).
As in the case of bulk electromagnetic waves in structures described by equation (1), the most inter-
esting case of resonantly strong EAS of guided modes occurs at small grating amplitudes:

|ξg|/Λ ≪ 1.

In this case, the approximate theory (based on the two-wave approximation and the scalar theory of
diffraction) is again expected to give highly accurate results (see [9,10,12]).
Using speculations similar to those in section 2, one comes to the conclusion that equations (4) also
describe EAS of guided modes in gratings with varying mean thickness at the grating boundaries.
However, the coupling coefﬁcients Γ0 and Γ1 are obviously different from those for bulk TE waves
and are determined in the approximate theories of conventional Bragg scattering in corrugation grat-
ings with grooves parallel to the grating boundaries [22–25]. The wave numbers for the incident
and scattered modes (e.g. k11, k21, k20, etc.) are determined by the dispersion equation for the cor-
responding slab modes. The effective dielectric permittivities corresponding to these modes can be
introduced by the equations: ǫ21eff = k21c/ω)2, ǫ20eff = k20c/ω)2, etc.
Similarly to bulk electromagnetic waves experiencing reﬂection and refraction at the grating bound-
aries with non-zero ∆ǫ1,3, guided incident and scattered modes also interact with the step-like varia-
tions of the mean thickness of the slab. For example, interaction of the incident mode with a step-like
variation of h at the front boundary results in generation of other guided modes in the slab and bulk
electromagnetic waves outside the slab [22–26]. In the approximate theory, however, all these waves
do not contribute to scattering in the grating, except for one guided mode for which the Bragg con-
dition is satisﬁed. Therefore, the situation is similar to the approximate theory of EAS of bulk elec-
tromagnetic waves in section 2. For example, from consideration of the interaction of the incident
mode with the front boundary (by means of the mode matching theory [22–26]), one can determine
the amplitudes and the directions of propagation of the resulting bulk and guided waves, and then

regard the guided mode with the amplitude S200, the angle of propagation θ20, and the wave vector
k20 that satisﬁes the Bragg condition as the incident wave at x = 0 in the grating (inside the grating,
the amplitude of this wave is S20(x)).
It follows that equations (4)–(7) are directly applicable to the analysis of EAS of guided modes in
In this case, however,
corrugation gratings with step-like variations of the mean slab thickness.
appropriate equations have to be used for the coupling coefﬁcients, wave numbers, and it is assumed
that S20, S21, A0, and B0 are components of the electric or magnetic ﬁeld in the incident and scattered
modes. Note also that this approach is valid for both TE and TM guided modes.
Interaction of the scattered wave with step-like variations of the mean thickness at the grating bound-
aries also results in the generation of bulk and guided waves. This means that boundary conditions
(8) (except for the ﬁrst one) have to be modiﬁed in order to include these bulk and guided waves.
This can again be done in the general case in the same way as in the mode matching theory [22–26].
However, manufacturing gratings with small amplitude usually results in small variations of the
mean thickness of the slab. Adsorption and deposition of thin ﬁlms on the slab surface (e.g. in the
region x < 0) also results in only small variations of mean slab parameters (thickness or effective
dielectric permittivity). Therefore, small variations of mean slab thickness are of most importance
from the viewpoint of experimental observation and applications of EAS.
The analysis of EAS in such structures does not require the general approaches of the mode matching
theory and can be carried out by means of approximate boundary conditions similar to (8). This is
because if ∆h1,3 ≪ h2, then reﬂection and transformation of modes at such small stepwise variations
of the mean slab thickness can be neglected.
It can be seen that in this case, for TM modes, the
boundary conditions at the grating boundaries x = 0 and x = L can be written as

S20|x=0 = S200, E21z|x=0 = E11z|x=0, (dE21z/dx)x=0 = (dE11z/dx)x=0,

E21z|x=L = E31z|x=L, (dE21z/dx)x=L = (dE31z/dx)x=L.

(12)

For TE modes, the z-components of the electric ﬁelds should be replaced by the z-components of the
magnetic ﬁeld. S20 is the amplitude of one of the components of the electric (or magnetic) ﬁeld in
the incident TM (or TE) mode inside the grating region (note that if ∆h1 ≪ h2, then S200 ≈ S10—the
amplitude of the incident wave in the region x < 0, and θ20 ≈ θ10). The incident and scattered modes
are assumed to be of arbitrary order.
It can be seen that equations (12) are exactly the same as equations (8) with the only difference that
the z-components of the electric or magnetic ﬁelds in equations (12) replace the total electric ﬁeld in
equations (8).
When using the boundary conditions (12), it is convenient to use effective dielectric permittivities
for the scattered modes: ǫ11eff = k11c/ω)2, ǫ21eff = k21c/ω)2, and ǫ31eff = k31c/ω)2 in front, inside
and behind the grating, respectively. In this case, step-like variations of the mean slab thickness at
the grating boundaries are related to the corresponding step-like variations of the mean effective
permittivities. For example, for the front boundary:

∆ǫ11eff = ǫ11eff − ǫ21eff ≈

2k21c2
ω2 (cid:18)

dk21
dh (cid:19)h=h2

∆h1.

(13)

As mentioned above, this formula (and the similar one for the rear boundary) is correct only if
∆h1,3 ≪ h2. Note that we do not have to consider step-like variations of the effective permittiv-
ity for the incident wave. These variations can be neglected since for ∆h1,3 ≪ h2 we have: S10 ≈ S200
and θ20 ≈ θ10 (and similar for the rear boundary), i.e. interaction of the incident mode with the grat-
ing boundaries can be neglected. (Note that, though being small, ∆ǫ11eff cannot be neglected owing
to its signiﬁcant effect on the diffractional divergence of the scattered wave.)
For example, consider EAS of an incident TE zeroth (TE0) mode into the scattered TE0 mode in the
structure: vacuum–GaAs slab (permittivity 12.25)–AlGaAs substrate (permittivity 10.24); the mean
slab thickness within the grating region h2 = 6 × 10−5cm, θ20 ≈ θ10 = π/4 (for small values of ∆h1 ≪
h2), the wavelength in vacuum λ = 1.5 × 10−4cm, the corrugation is assumed to be sinusoidal,

f (x0) = sin(x0), and the effective permittivity ǫ21eff ≈ 11.48. The period of the corrugation,
i.e.
determined by the Bragg condition, is Λ ≈ 0.579µm. The wavelength of the guided TE0 mode in
this structure is 0.42µm, which is 92% of the wavelength (0.45µm) in the grating used for ﬁgures 2–5.
Therefore, according to the general tendency discussed at the end of section 3, in order to get the same
dependencies for the guided modes as in ﬁgures 2–5, we need to use the gratings of widths 0.92L
(where L is the width in ﬁgures 2–5), and the step-like variations of the slab thickness determined by
equation (13) with

∆ǫ1,3eff ≈

∆ǫ1,3
ǫ2

ǫ21eff,

(14)

where ǫ2 = 5 and ∆ǫ1,3 are the variations of the mean permittivity in ﬁgures 2–5. In this case, the
corrugation amplitude can be chosen (ξg ≈ 2 × 10−6cm) so that the x-dependencies of amplitudes
of the scattered and incident slab modes in the grating are exactly the same as those given by ﬁgures
2–5 with the replacement of x by x/0.92 on the horizontal axis (scaling to the new grating width).
It can be seen from equations (13) and (14) that the variations of the mean dielectric permittivity in
ﬁgures 2–5 ∆ǫ1,3 = 10−5, 10−4, 10−3, 10−1 correspond to ∆h1,3 ≈ 1.3 × 10−3nm, 0.13 nm, 1.3 nm,
130 nm in the considered guiding structure. Thus variations of the mean thickness of ≈ 0.1 mono-
layer may result in noticeable variations of the scattered wave amplitude in the structure—see curve
2 in ﬁgures 2(b), (d). Obviously, on the one hand, this is a signiﬁcant complication to the experimental
observation and application of EAS of guided modes. On the other hand, this demonstrates a very
high sensitivity of EAS to conditions on slab interfaces, which may open up excellent opportunities
for the design of highly sensitive optical sensors (such as adsorption sensors, sensors of dielectric
permittivity, etc.).
If the high sensitivity of EAS to varying mean structural parameters is not desirable, then one should
use wide gratings, where the effect of varying mean parameters at the grating boundaries is notice-
able only within a half of the critical distance—see ﬁgures 4 and 5. Also, use of larger grating am-
plitudes results in reduction of the sensitivity of EAS to varying mean parameters. Another option
is to use grazing-angle scattering (GAS) [12] rather than EAS, where the amplitude of the scattered
wave may be especially large at the middle of the grating but not at its boundaries. There is also a
possibility of compensating (at least partial) for varying mean parameters by choosing the angle of
scattering so that the scattered wave outside the grating propagates parallel to the grating [27].
Another option for the reduction of the high sensitivity of EAS for guided modes is to use slabs with
larger thickness h, and permittivity that is closer to the permittivities of the surrounding media. For
example, in the structure with a polymer slab (dielectric permittivity 2.56) on a silica substrate (dielec-
tric permittivity 2.22), h = 2µm, λ = 1.4µm, L = 20µm, and grating amplitude ξg = 3.3 × 10−5cm we
have: ǫ21eff = 2.49, and the equivalent structure for bulk waves (having the same dependencies of the
wave amplitudes) must have ǫ2 = ǫ21eff, same λ and L, and ǫg = 7 × 10−3. In this case, ∆ǫ1 = 10−4 in
the equivalent structure corresponds to a variation in the mean thickness ∆h1 ≈ 1.8 nm. These varia-
tions of the permittivity or thickness result in ≈ 15% reduction of the scattered wave amplitude from
≈ 8S200 to ≈ 6.8S200 at the front grating boundary x = 0. Recall that a similar 15% variation of the
scattered wave amplitude in the GaAs waveguide with L = 9.2µm, h = 0.6µm, and ξg = 2 × 10−6cm
is achieved at a much smaller value of ∆h1 ≈ 1.3 × 10−2nm—compare curves 1 and 2 in ﬁgure 2(b).
Finally, it is important to note that in the case of EAS of surface waves (e.g. surface acoustic waves, or
surface electromagnetic waves) in corrugation gratings, the problem with varying mean parameters
hardly exists. This is because in this case the step-like variation of the mean level of the substrate
surface inside and outside the grating does not affect the length of the wave vector (or the wave-
length) of the surface waves. Only if, for example, outside the grating we have additional layers on
the surface, may the mean propagation parameters change and the above-mentioned effects occur.
Thus a surface wave sensor based on EAS in periodic groove arrays is especially easy to design.

5 Conclusions

This paper has demonstrated yet another unique feature of scattering of optical waves in extremely
asymmetrical geometry—the unusual sensitivity of the incident and scattered wave amplitudes to
small stepwise variations of mean structural parameters (e.g. mean dielectric permittivity or mean
waveguide thickness). This effect has no analogies in conventional Bragg scattering. It has been
explained by the high sensitivity of diffractional divergence to small variations of mean structural
parameters across an optical beam.
Two distinct typical patterns of scattering have been described for gratings that are narrower and
wider than a grating of critical width Lc [7–9] (half of Lc is equal to the distance within which the
scattered wave can be spread across the grating by means of the diffractional divergence, before it
is re-scattered by the grating [7–9]). In particular, it has been shown that in narrow gratings (with
L < Lc), varying mean permittivity at either of the boundaries strongly affects the scattered wave
amplitude everywhere in the structure, whereas in wide gratings (with L > Lc), the effect of vary-
ing mean parameters is usually (but not always) signiﬁcant only within the distance Lc/2 from the
boundaries.
The analysis has been carried out by means of approximate and rigorous methods, showing a very
good agreement between them for the most interesting cases of strong EAS in gratings with small
amplitude.
The analysis of EAS of guided modes has revealed especially high sensitivity of scattered wave am-
plitudes to small variations of the mean slab thickness. This is mainly due to strong dispersion of
guided modes, i.e. strong dependence of their wave numbers on slab thickness. This sensitivity may,
on the one hand, present a complication for experimental observation of EAS, and on the other hand,
be very useful for the application of EAS in the design of highly sensitive sensors and measurement
techniques. Several options for dealing with this possible experimental complication are discussed.

References

1. Kishino, S., Noda, A., and Kohra, K., 1972, J. Phys. Soc. Japan., 33, 158.

2. Bakhturin, M. P., Chernozatonskii, L. A., and Gramotnev, D. K., 1995, Appl. Opt., 34, 2692.

3. Gramotnev, D. K., 1995, Phys. Lett. A, 200, 184.

4. Gramotnev, D. K., 1997, J. Physics D, 30, 2056.

5. Gramotnev, D. K., 1997, Opt. Lett., 22, 1053.

6. Gramotnev, D. K., and Pile, D. F. P., 1999, App. Opt., 38, 2440.

7. Gramotnev, D. K., and Pile, D. F. P., 1999, Phys. Lett. A, 253, 309.

8. Gramotnev, D. K., and Nieminen, T. A., 1999, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 1, 635.

9. Gramotnev, D. K., and Pile, D. F. P., 2000, Opt. Quantum Electron., 32, 1097.

10. Nieminen, T. A., and Gramotnev, D. K., 2001, Opt. Commun., 189, 175.

11. Gramotnev, D. K., 2000, Frequency response of extremely asymmetrical scattering of electro-
magnetic waves in periodic gratings, 2000 Diffractive Optics and Micro-Optics (DOMO-2000),
Quebec City, Canada, pp.165–167.

12. Gramotnev, D. K., 2001, Opt. Quantum Electron., 33, 253.

13. Moharam, M. G., Grann, E. B., Pommet, D. A., and Gaylord, T. K., 1995, J. Opt. Soc. Am., A12,

1068.

14. Moharam, M. G., Pommet, D. A., Grann, E. B., and Gaylord, T. K., 1995, J. Opt. Soc. Am., A12,

1077.

15. Chateau, N., and Hugonin, J. P., 1994, J. Opt. Soc. Am., A11, 1321.

16. Li, L., 1996, J. Opt. Soc. Am., A13, 1024.

17. Liu, J., Chen, R. T., Davies, B. M., and Li, L., 1990, Appl. Op., 38, 6981.

18. Li, L., Chandezon, J., Granet, G., and Plumey, J. P., 1999, Appl. Opt., 38, 304.

19. Akhmediev, N., and Ankiwicz, A., 1997, Solitons, Non-linear Pulses and Beams (London:

Chapman & Hall).

20. Gramotnev, D. K., and Pile, D. F. P., 2001, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 3, 103.

21. Gaylord, T. K., and Moharam, M. G., 1985, Proc. IEEE, 73, 894.

22. Popov, E., and Mashev, L., 1985, Opt. Acta, 32, 265.

23. Biehlig, W., Hehl, K., Langbein, U., and Leberer, F., 1986, Opt. Quantum Electron., 18, 219.

24. Biehlig W., 1986, Opt. Quantum Electron., 18, 229.

25. Shigesawa, H., and Tsuji, M., 1986, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., MMT-34, 205.

26. Borsboom, P. P., and Frankena, H. J., 1995, J. Opt. Soc. Am., A12, 1134.

27. Gramotnev, D. K., and Andres, Ch., Grazing-angle scattering of waves in inﬁnitely wide peri-

odic gratings, 2002, (unpublished).

