5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Increasing the output of a Littman-type laser by use of an intracavity Faraday rotator

Rebecca Merrill, Rebecca Olson, Scott Bergeson, and Dallin S. Durfee
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah 84602, USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We present a new method of external-cavity diode laser grating stabilization which combines the
high output power of the Littrow design with the ﬁxed output pointing of the Littman-Metcalf
design. Our new approach utilizes a Faraday-eﬀect optical isolator inside the external cavity. Ex-
perimental testing and a model which describes the tuning range and optimal tuning parameters of
the laser are described. Preliminary testing of this design has resulted in a short-term linewidth of
360 kHz and a side-mode suppression of 37 dB. The laser tunes mode-hop free over 7 GHz and we
predict that much larger tuning ranges are possible. Published in Applied Optics, Vol. 43, No. 19.
c(cid:13)2004 Optical Society of America.

INTRODUCTION

Inexpensive single-mode laser diodes are readily avail-
able at a variety of wavelengths from the red to the near-
infrared. They require no maintenance, consume little
electrical power, require almost no cooling, can have very
high amplitude and pointing stability, and can be easily
modulated at high frequencies (see [1] and the references
therein). Using optical feedback techniques and employ-
ing stable current and temperature controllers [1, 2, 3],
laser diodes can be made to operate at a single frequency
with a narrow linewidth, making them suitable for appli-
cations such as precision spectroscopy and laser cooling.
Stabilized diode systems can often replace considerably
more expensive systems requiring signiﬁcant infrastruc-
ture and regular maintenance.

The two commonly used diode stabilization schemes,
the Littrow [4] and Littman-Metcalf [5, 6] designs, each
have their advantages. The simplest of the two designs
is the Littrow scheme. In this arrangement a reﬂection
grating is placed in front of a collimated diode at an angle
such that the ﬁrst order diﬀraction peak at a particular
wavelength is directed back into the diode. Mode com-
petition then favors this wavelength. The zeroth-order
grating reﬂection is used as the output-coupler to ex-
tract light from the cavity. Light only diﬀracts oﬀ of
the grating once per round trip through the cavity in
this conﬁguration. As discussed below, this can result in
higher output powers than is possible with the Littman
design. This can be of great importance due to the low
power typical of single-mode diode laser systems relative
to what is possible with other technologies. While it is
possible to amplify a weak laser beam or use a weak sta-
bilized beam to injection-lock a free running diode, this
adds cost and complexity.

The main drawback of the Littrow design is that as the
laser is tuned by rotating the grating, the pointing of the
zeroth-order output beam changes. This is not the case
In a Littman laser the
in the Littman-Metcalf design.
grating is placed in front of the diode at an angle closer to
grazing incidence, such that the diﬀracted light does not
return to the laser diode. Instead, the diﬀracted beam

is directed to a mirror. Depending on the angle of the
mirror, a particular wavelength will be precisely retro-
reﬂected back to the grating such that it returns to the
diode after diﬀracting a second time. Like the Littrow
design, the zeroth-order beam from the grating is used
to couple light out of the cavity. The laser can be tuned
with the mirror while keeping the grating ﬁxed such that
the output beam pointing does not change as the laser is
tuned.

Because the angle between the incident beam and the
grating is not ﬁxed to the Littrow angle, it is possible
to adjust the cavity of a Littman laser to accommodate
grating angles closer or further from grazing incidence,
allowing the diﬀraction eﬃciency of the grating to be
“tuned” to produce the minimum necessary feedback,
thereby optimizing the intensity of the output beam. An-
other advantage of the Littman design is that mode-hop
free tuning across the entire gain curve of the diode can
be accomplished by simply pivoting the tuning mirror
about a ﬁxed axis [7, 8].

The disadvantage of the Littman design is its inher-
ently lower power. In the Littman scheme a single round-
trip through the cavity involves diﬀracting twice oﬀ of the
grating. This has the fortunate side-eﬀect of increased
side-mode suppression. But the double diﬀraction means
that the grating eﬃciency needs to be larger in order for
suﬃcient light to be coupled back to the diode. This re-
sults in less light being coupled out in the zeroth-order
of the ﬁrst grating pass. The “missing power” is cou-
pled out in the zeroth-order beam of the second grating
pass in a secondary output beam which does not remain
ﬁxed as the laser is tuned. As such, commercial Littman-
conﬁguration lasers typically produce just over half of the
power of comparable Littrow-conﬁguration devices [9].

We have devised and tested a new external-cavity
grating stabilization scheme which combines the single-
diﬀraction power advantage of the Littrow conﬁgura-
tion with the frequency-independent output pointing and
freedom of grating alignment of the Littman-Metcalf
scheme. Like the Littman design, in our scheme a mirror,
rather than the grating, is used to tune the laser, keeping
the output beam pointing ﬁxed. But rather than reﬂect-

2

isolator at the expense of higher isolator losses.

EXPERIMENT

For our ﬁrst test of this new stabilization scheme we
utilized a 657 nm “Circu-Laser” diode from Blue Sky Re-
search [14] collimated with an aspheric lens to a Gaus-
sian beam waist radius of 0.5 mm. This diode, originally
purchased for a diﬀerent purpose, was not an optimum
choice for this work because it lacked an anti-reﬂection
(AR) coating on its front facet. Despite the greater sus-
ceptibility of an un-coated diode to mode-hopping [15],
we have achieved excellent results with this laser. Us-
ing a Fabry-Perot spectrum analyzer we have veriﬁed a
mode-hop free tuning range of 7 GHz. Theoretical cal-
culations presented in the last half of this paper suggest
that much larger tuning ranges are possible.

In our current implementation the diode laser is placed
5.7 cm from the end of a 11.8 cm long isolator. Prior to
entering the isolator the laser is collimated with a 1 mm
focal length aspheric lens and passed through a half-wave
plate to align the polarization of the beam with the input
polarizer of the isolator. A holographic grating is placed
2.8 cm from the isolator’s output polarizer. The tuning
mirror is mounted to a three-axis piezo-electric kinematic
mount. The laser is tuned coarsely by manually adjust-
ing threaded actuators on the mount, and ﬁne tuning is
done using the piezos. By scanning the voltages applied
to the piezos such that the voltages on each side of the
mount diﬀer only by a proportionality constant, the mir-
ror can be made to both rotate and translate as the laser
is scanned, eﬀectively causing the mirror to pivot about
an axis oﬀset from the center of the mirror.

Using our calculations, we found that the optimum
pivot point for our conﬁguration is about 17 cm from the
center of the mirror (see Eq. 11 in Sec. ). This relatively
large length means that the mirror must be translated
a considerable distance per degree of rotation about its
center to achieve the optimum tuning range. As a re-
sult, scanning the laser frequency over 7 GHz required
the piezos to be scanned over their entire voltage range.
Scans longer than 7 GHz could possibly be accomplished
by changing the dimensions of our cavity to move the
optimum pivot point closer to the mirror or by using ac-
tuators with a greater range of motion.

The spectral properties of our laser are typical of what
would be expected for a Littrow conﬁguration. Us-
ing Fabry-Perot spectrum analyzers we have measured
a short-term linewidth of 360 kHz and a side-mode sup-
pression of 37 dB. Due to losses in the optical isolator,
the output power is somewhat less than in a compara-
ble Littrow laser. But since most installations of grating
stabilized lasers require an isolator on the output of the
laser, this is not a serious disadvantage. Due to the low
ﬁnesse typical of the external cavity of grating stabilized

FIG. 1: Schematic of the grating stabilization scheme. The
laser is ﬁrst collimated, and then the polarization is rotated
with a λ/2 plate such that all of the light passes through
the Faraday-eﬀect isolator. Upon exiting the isolator, the
light strikes a diﬀraction grating. The zeroth-order specular
reﬂection is used as the output-coupler for the laser. The
ﬁrst-order diﬀracted light passes through a λ/2 plate which
rotates the polarization by 90 degrees, and is then reﬂected
by a mirror into one of the rejection ports of the isolator.
The frequency of light which is coupled back into the laser is
determined by the angle of the grating and the position of the
mirror.

ing the light back at the grating, in this new scheme
the mirror directs the light into a rejection port of an
intra-cavity Faraday-eﬀect optical isolator such that the
light is directly coupled back into the laser diode without
striking the grating a second time. This design is similar
to experiments in which a slave laser has been injection
locked by coupling a master laser through the rejection
port of an isolator [10]. In this case, however, the laser
is “injection locked” to itself. The design is illustrated in
Fig. 1.

We should point out that our technique is not the only
way to improve output power while keeping beam point-
ing ﬁxed. For example, various multi-arm grazing inci-
dence cavities developed to increase the mode selectiv-
ity [11] or lower the threshold [12] of Littman-type dye
lasers could be used to increase the output of a Littman
diode lasers. Other previously demonstrated techniques
include the employment of a mirror moving in conjunc-
tion with the grating to correct the beam pointing of a
Littrow laser at the cost of a small parallel displacement
of the beam [13]. Our technique has the advantage that it
requires only one moving element and creates no output
beam displacement. And, unlike the multi-arm cavities
in which extra boundary conditions must be met in or-
der to avoid mode-hopping, this new the scheme uses a
simpler single loop cavity.

We should also note that due to the size of the isola-
tor, there are practical limits on how small the external
cavity can be in our design, possibly causing longitudi-
nal modes to be stacked closer together than would be
desirable. Nevertheless, despite the slightly larger-than-
average cavity length in our setup we have not had dif-
ﬁculty keeping the laser running in a single longitudinal
mode. This limit could be mitigated by using a miniature

3

lasers, the loss due to the isolator inside the cavity is
comparable to the loss that would be caused by an iso-
lator external to the cavity. The intra-cavity isolator in
our design provides the same immunity to reﬂections as
an external isolator.

MODE-HOP FREE TUNING THEORY

In order to keep the laser from jumping between lon-
gitudinal modes as the frequency of the laser is scanned,
the length of the cavity must increase in proportion to
the wavelength of light injected back into the diode. If
λ0 represents the wavelength of light coupled back into
the diode and S0 represents the round-trip optical path
length of the cavity before the laser is tuned, then mode-
hop free tuning is achieved when

∆S
S0

=

∆λ
λ0

(1)

where ∆S and ∆λ represent the shift in the cavity length
and the injected wavelength from their nominal values.
This condition ensures that as the wavelength of the laser
is tuned, the round-trip length of the cavity is always a
ﬁxed integer times the wavelength of the laser:

S = mλ

inin

(2)

Due to the low ﬁnesse of typical grating cavities, grating
stabilized lasers can operate in a single mode even when
m is not precisely an integer. But if m increases or de-
creases by more than 0.5, the losses in the current mode
become greater than the losses in an adjacent mode and
with near certainty the laser will hop to the next mode.
Using the simplest model of our laser, in which it is
assumed that the light fed back to the laser exactly re-
traces the path of the outgoing beam, it would appear
that it is impossible to scan our laser in a way which
satisﬁes Eq. 1.
In Fig. 2(a) it can be seen that by ro-
tating and translating the upper mirror, it is possible to
increase the angle between the beam incident upon the
grating and the diﬀracted beam (this angle is denoted
as γ in the ﬁgure). When this is done the length of the
external cavity increases, while the wavelength of light
diﬀracted with increasing γ decreases, causing the feed-
back wavelength and the cavity length to scan in opposite
directions. Using this model we would predict that our
laser should only be able to scan about 100 MHz before it
became favorable to hop to another mode. The fact that
we have been able to scan much further without mode
hops indicates that this model is incomplete.

In our current model, the returning beam is allowed
to be at a slight angle δ relative to the beam exiting the
diode (see Fig. 2(b)). Since the collimated laser beam has
a ﬁnite width, the beam contains a spread of wavevectors.
By measuring the Gaussian radius w0 of the collimated

FIG. 2: Tuning the laser. The four parameters L1, L2, θ,
and α which, along with the nominal laser wavelength and
the grating line spacing, deﬁne the cavity, are shown in (a).
The angle γ is determined from Eq. 3. Shortening the cavity
at higher γ can be done by letting the beam return to the
laser diode at a small angle δ relative to the outgoing beam,
as shown in (b).

beam we can calculate the 1/e2 full angular divergence of
the beam: φ = 2λ/πw0. In our model we assume that a
beam returning with a δ which is considerably less than
φ/2 will couple back to the diode nearly as well as a beam
going straight back with δ = 0.

To calculate the tuning range using this model, we ﬁrst
used simple trigonometry to calculate the round trip path
length for a cavity. The optical path length from the
laser diode to the rejection port polarizing beamsplitter
of the isolator (labeled as L1 in Fig. 2), and the optical
path length from the beamsplitter to the grating (labeled
L2 in Fig. 2) were assumed to be known quantities. In
addition, the angles between the incident beam and the
normal vectors of the beamsplitter and grating (labeled
θ and α, respectively), the spacing between lines on the
grating d, and the nominal (δ = 0) wavelength of the
laser λ0 were assumed to be known. These six quantities
deﬁne the conﬁguration of a particular laser.

The calculated path length, S, is a function of the
known parameters as well as the feedback angle δ and

the angle between the incident and diﬀracted beam at
the grating γ. Using the grating equation and assuming
that the ﬁrst diﬀraction order from the grating is the one
fed back to the diode, the angle γ can be solved for in
terms of the wavelength of the laser:

γ = α − arcsin (λ/d − sin(α))

(3)

Substituting this relation for γ in our expression for S
resulted in an equation for the round trip path length
which is only a function of known quantities, the angle
δ, and the wavelength λ = λ0 + ∆λ.

Next we substituted our expression for S into Eq. 1 to
generate an equation which relates the wavelength shift
∆λ to δ under the condition that the mirror is moved
and rotated in the manner which satisﬁes the criterion
for mode-hop free tuning. This somewhat complicated
equation can be solved numerically to ﬁnd ∆λ for a given
δ. In order to generate an analytical solution, we ﬁrst lin-
earized this equation in δ and were then able to solve the
resulting ﬁrst-order equation for ∆λ. Then, because the
tuning range of a diode laser is more often discussed in
terms of frequency than wavelength, we converted this
to an equation for the frequency detuning, ∆f , with the
ﬁrst order relationship ∆f = ∆λc/λ2
0. Finally, we cal-
culated the tuning range of the laser by assuming that
allowed values of δ ranged from −φ/2 to φ/2.

The ﬁnal result of this calculation is an equation for
detuning which is just the maximum allowed range of δ
times a constant:

∆f = Qδ

(4)

The tuning range of the laser can then be approxi-
mated by taking the diﬀerence between ∆f calculated
at δ = φ/2 and at δ = −φ/2, which gives a tuning range
of Q times the full-angle Gaussian divergence φ. The
proportionality constant Q is given by the following ex-
pression.

Q =

c (L1A + L2B)
λ0 (S0 + L2λ0C/d)

Here c is the speed of light and λ0 is the nominal wave-
length of the laser. The unitless parameters A, B, and
C are given by

A ≡ 1 + cos ψ0

sin ψ0

B ≡ sin γ0

1 − cos ψ0

and

C ≡

sin 2θ
cos (α − γ0) [1 − cos ψ0]

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

4

where γ0 is the angle between the incident and diﬀracted
beam at the grating when δ = 0. This angle can be mea-
sured physically for a particular laser or can be calculated
by setting λ = λ0 in Eq. 3. The angle ψ0 = 2θ − γ0 is
the angle between the incident and reﬂected beams at
the tuning mirror (see Fig. 2(b)) when δ = 0.

The S0 term in Eq. 5 is the round-trip optical path

length of the cavity when δ = 0, given by the relation

S0 = 2L1 +

1 +

(cid:18)

sin 2θ + sin γ0
sin ψ0

(cid:19)

L2

(9)

Using the parameters of the laser which we tested, the
ﬁrst-order model predicts a mode-hop free tuning range
of ≃ 4 × 1011 Hz (or about 0.6 nm), well in excess of the
measured range, implying that we have not realized the
maximum possible tuning range for our conﬁguration.
This ﬁrst-order tuning range estimate agrees with the
predicted tuning range determined from a full numerical
solution to better than 0.1%.

Although “ideal tuning” in this conﬁguration is not
achieved by simply pivoting the mirror about a ﬁxed axis,
in many cases this simple method is close enough to the
ideal geometry that the full tuning range predicted by
Eq. 4 can be achieved. For example, a complete numeri-
cal model of our current laser conﬁguration reveals that
if the correct pivot point is chosen, tuning by simply piv-
oting the mirror results in a change of m in Eq. 2 by
only 0.08 over the entire tuning range predicted by Eq.
4. The precise location of this pivot point, however, is
very important. The numerical model of our laser shows
that changing the pivot point by ±1 mm reduces the ex-
pected scan range by more than an order of magnitude.
To calculate the ideal pivot lever arm P (see Fig. 2(b))
for a maximum mode-hop free tuning range, we ﬁrst used
Eqs. 3 and 4 to ﬁnd γ as a function of δ. This relation
was reduced to lowest order in δ to produce the equation
γ = γ0 + Gδ where G is given by
Qλ2
0
cd cos (α − γ0)

G =

(10)

We were then able to ﬁnd the angle ψ = 2θ0 − γ + δ ≃
2θ0 − γ0 + (1 − G)δ in Fig. 2(b), as well as the location
of the point in space where the beam reﬂects oﬀ of the
mirror, as a function of known quantities and δ. From
this, and using the law of reﬂection, we were able to write
down an equation for the line which follows the surface
of the mirror (indicated by the dotted lines near the top
of Fig. 2(b)) as a function δ in slope-intercept form. We
then set both sides of the equation for a line at ﬁnite δ
equal to the equation for the δ = 0 line. After linearizing
this relation we solved for the point at which these two
lines cross. The distance from this point to the place at
which the beam strikes the mirror when δ = 0 is given
by the relation

P =

2 sin (θ + γ0/2) (L1D + L2E)
(1 + G) sin2 ψ0

(11)

where the unitless parameters D and E are given by

D ≡

sin ψ0
sin (2θ + γ0)

[cos 2θ + cos γ0]

(12)

and

E ≡ cos 2θ + cos γ0
sin (2θ + γ0)

[sin γ0 − G sin 2θ]

(13)

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a new scheme for
external cavity diode laser stabilization which combines
the higher output of the Littrow scheme with the stable
output pointing of the Littman-Metcalf scheme. We have
measured the spectral properties of a prototype laser, and
found them to be comparable to typical Littrow lasers.
We have measured a mode-hop free scan range of several
GHz when tuning the laser by pivoting the mirror about a
ﬁxed axis, and we have developed a model which predicts
that much larger tuning ranges are possible.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by grants from the
Research Corporation and from the National Science
Foundation (Grant No. PHY-9985027).

[1] Carl E. Wieman and Leo Hollberg, “Using diode lasers
for atomic physics,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 62, 1-20 (1991).
[2] K. G. Libbrecht and J. L. Hall, “A low-noise high-speed
diode laser current controller,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 64,
2133-2135 (1993).

[3] C. C. Bradley and J. Chen and Randall G. Hulet, “In-
strumentation for the stable operation of laser diodes,”
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 61, 2097-2101 (1990).

5

[4] T. W. H¨ansch, “Repetitively pulsed tunable dye laser for
high resolution spectroscopy,” Appl. Opt. 11, 895-898
(1972).

[5] Michael G. Littman and Harold J. Metcalf, “Spectrally
narrow pulsed dye laser without beam expander,” Appl.
Opt. 17, 2224-2227 (1978).

[6] I. Shoshan and N. N. Danon and U. P. Oppenheim, “Nar-
rowband operation of a pulsed dye laser without intra-
cavity beam expansion,” J. Appl. Phys. 48, 4495-4497
(1977).

[7] Karen Liu and Michael G. Littman, “Novel geometry for
single-mode scanning of tunable lasers,” Opt. Lett. 6,
117-118 (1981).

No.

Lasertechnik,
13”,

[8] Patrick McNicholl and Harold J. Metcalf, “Synchronous
cavity mode and feedback wavelength scanning in dye
laser oscillators with gratings,” Appl. Opt. 24, 2757-2761
(1985).
[9] Sacher

Note
-
2004,
http://data.sacher-laser.com/techdocs/comparison.pdf.
[10] P. Bouyer and T. L. Gustavson and K. G. Haritos and M.
A. Kasevich, “Microwave signal generation with optical
injection locking,” Opt. Lett. 21, 1502-1504 (1996).
[11] D. J Binks and D. K. Ko and L. A. W. Gloster and
T. A. King, “Laser mode selection in multiarm grazing-
incidence cavities,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 15, 2395-2402
(1998).

“Technical
11 March

retreived

[12] Guangzhi Z. Zhang and Dennis W. Tokaryk, “Lasing
threshold reduction in grating-tuned cavities,” Appl.
Opt. 36, 5855-5858 (1997).

[13] C. J. Hawthorn and K. P. Weber and R. E. Scholten,
“Littrow conﬁguration tunable external cavity diode
laser with ﬁxed direction output beam,” Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 72, 4477-4479 (2001).

[14] Circu-laser diodes have a cylindrical lens mounted in the
9 mm package to produce a beam with symmetric diver-
gence.

[15] G.-Y. Yan and A. L. Schawlow, “Measurement of diode
laser characteristics aﬀecting tunability with an external
grating,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 9, 2122-2127 (1992).

