5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reduced-symmetry two-dimensional solitons in photonic lattices

Robert Fischer,1 Denis Tr¨ager,1, 2 Dragomir N. Neshev,1 Andrey A.
Sukhorukov,1 Wieslaw Krolikowski,1 Cornelia Denz,2 and Yuri S. Kivshar1
1Nonlinear Physics Centre and Laser Physics Centre,
Centre for Ultrahigh-bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems (CUDOS),
Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia
2Institut f¨ur Angewandte Physik, Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at, Corrensstr. 2, 48149 M¨unster, Germany

We demonstrate theoretically and experimentally a novel type of localized beams supported by the
combined eﬀects of total internal and Bragg reﬂection in nonlinear two-dimensional square periodic
structures. Such localized states exhibit strong anisotropy in their mobility properties, being highly
mobile in one direction and trapped in the other, making them promising candidates for optical
routing in nonlinear lattices.

PACS numbers: 42.65.Jx, 42.65.Tg, 42.65.Sf

Nonlinear periodic structures attract increasing atten-
tion due to the possibility to engineer the transmission
and reﬂection properties of waves, opening new applica-
tions of photonic crystals for all-optical signal processing
and switching [1]. An important part of such applications
is the ability to control wave propagation in the form of
nonlinear localized modes or solitons [2]. Conventional
approaches are based on wave transport through struc-
tural defects or embedded waveguides, however increased
ﬂexibility can be achieved when the internal structure
and symmetry of the nonlinear state itself select the di-
rection of propagation in defect-free periodic structures.
The symmetry of solitons is intrinsically deﬁned by
the physical mechanisms responsible for light localiza-
tion, and two distinct scenarios are possible in periodic
photonic structures with self-focusing nonlinearity. First,
it is light waveguiding in the regions of high refrac-
tive index due to the eﬀect of total internal reﬂection;
this eﬀect leads to the formation of discrete lattice soli-
tons [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Second, it is resonant Bragg or Laue
reﬂection in periodic structures; this eﬀect leads to the
formation of gap solitons with the frequencies inside the
photonic bandgaps of one-dimensional [1, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12]
and two-dimensional [6, 13, 14, 15] periodic structures.

In this Letter, we demonstrate that in two-dimensional
periodic nonlinear systems it is possible to utilize both
localization mechanisms jointly to obtain self-trapped
states with diﬀerent properties along the two principal
directions in a square lattice. We describe theoretically
the families of such reduced-symmetry gap solitons and
study experimentally the nonlinear beam self-trapping.
Further, we identify the unique mobility of these gap soli-
tons which is highly anisotropic along the two principal
axes of the square lattice, suggesting a novel mechanism
for directional nonlinear wave transport in symmetric lat-
tices.

Optically-induced photonic lattices provide an impor-
tant experimental tool to study the eﬀects of nonlin-
earity on light propagation in periodic structures, being

dynamically reconﬁgurable and possessing strong non-
linear response at the mW level. We study the prop-
agation of an optical beam through a two-dimensional
(2D) optically-induced lattice which is governed by the
parabolic equation for the slowly varying amplitude of
the electric ﬁeld [6, 7, 16]

i

∂E
∂z

+ D

∂2E
∂x2 +

∂2E
∂y2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

+ F (x, y, I)E = 0,

(1)

where D is the diﬀraction coeﬃcient and the function F
describes the refractive-index modulation induced by the
lattice and the beam. We consider a periodic potential
imprinted in a biased photorefractive crystal by an inten-
sity pattern of the form F (x, y, |E|2) = −γ(Ib + Ip(x) +
|E|2)−1. Here Ib = 1 is the normalized constant dark ir-
radiance, Ip(x) = Ig[cos(π(x + y)/d) + cos(π(x − y)/d)]2
is the interference pattern [see Fig. 1(b)] which induces
a lattice with the period d, γ is the nonlinear coeﬃcient
proportional to the applied DC ﬁeld, and I = |E|2 is the
intensity of the probe beam.

The propagation of linear (small-amplitude) waves is
described by the spatially extended eigenmodes in the
form of Bloch waves [17]. The Bloch waves are found
as solutions of the linearized Eq. (1) in the form E =
ψ(x, y) exp(iβz + iKxx + iKyy), where ψ(x, y) has the
periodicity of the underlying lattice. For a square lat-
tice the dispersion dependencies β(Kx, Ky) are periodic
with respect to translations Kx,y → Kx,y ± 2π/d, and
therefore are fully deﬁned by their values in the ﬁrst
Brillouin zone. Then the calculated bandgap spectrum
can be folded along the principal axis of the lattice, and
it is shown in Fig. 1(a). The parameters used for the
calculations are chosen to match the experimental con-
ditions: the diﬀraction coeﬃcient is D = zsλ/(4πn0x2
s);
xs = ys = 1µm and zs = 1 mm are the scales of the di-
mensionless variables x, y, z; n0 = 2.35 is the refractive
index of a bulk photorefractive crystal, λ = 532 nm is
the laser wavelength in vacuum, γ = 2.36, and Ig = 0.49.
In a self-focusing medium nonlinearity increases the

2

FIG. 1: (color online) (a,b) Bandgap spectrum and intensity
distribution of the 2D square lattice. (c,d) Calculated inten-
sity and phase distribution of the Bloch wave corresponding
to the X-point of the second band of the spectrum (a).

beam propagation constant, shifting it inside the gap for
the modes corresponding to the top of dispersion bands,
and allowing for the formation of self-trapped states or
It follows that for a square lattice
spatial solitons [2].
the solitons can originate from the Γ point of the ﬁrst
band and X (or Y ) point of the second band [13] [see
Fig. 1(a)]. At the Γ point, the Bloch-wave diﬀraction
is fully symmetric along the principal lattice directions
(x and y), giving rise to discrete lattice solitons [6, 8].
Symmetric superposition of X and Y states gives rise to
symmetric gap solitons [13, 14] or gap vortices [18]. It
was predicted [13], that solitons may be also associated
with pure X (or Y ) states, having diﬀerent widths along
the principal axis directions. The analysis in Ref. [13] was
performed using the semi-analytical approach based on
the coupled-mode theory, which can only provide qual-
itative description of wide solitons which extend over
many lattice sites. However, we ﬁnd that wide solitons
may experience quasi-collapse and transform into highly-
localized states. We demonstrate below that their prop-
erties strongly depend on the position with respect to the
lattice, and show that this has a fundamental eﬀect on
the soliton transport.

The families of gap solitons originating from the X-
symmetry point are found numerically by the 2D relax-
ation technique, and they are shown in Fig. 2(top). There
exist four diﬀerent symmetries of the 2D gap solitons, as
shown in the examples (a-d) for β = −2.04. They are
centered at or between the lattice sites for the horizon-
tal and vertical axis, respectively. In all the cases, the
soliton phase is constant in y- and oscillating in the x-
direction, resembling the structure of the corresponding

FIG. 2: (color online) Families of gap solitons shown as nor-
malized soliton power vs.
(a-d)
Examples of four types of gap solitons for β = −2.04. Lines
show the position of the lattice maxima.

the propagation constant.

Bloch state [see Fig. 1(c,d)]. Alternating phase is a key
signature for localization due to Bragg reﬂection, whereas
the constant phase in the y-direction indicates that total
internal reﬂection is responsible for self-trapping along
this axis. We also note that the solitons are broader
in the x- and more localized in the y-direction, having
reduced-symmetry with respect to the underlying square
lattice. This happens because the diﬀraction is stronger
in the x-direction due to Bragg scattering, similar to the
eﬀect of dispersion enhancement in Bragg gratings [1],
whereas along the y-direction, diﬀraction is weaker re-
sembling discrete ﬁeld tunneling in waveguide arrays [3].
The ability to control soliton motion in nonlinear lat-
tices may open new possibilities for optical switching. It
was shown that solitons can become trapped in a 1D pho-
tonic structure due to a self-induced Peierls-Nabarro po-
tential when the optical power exceeds a certain thresh-
old [19, 20]. Most remarkably, we ﬁnd that reduced-
symmetry solitons can simultaneously be trapped in one
direction, and fully mobile in another direction, oﬀer-
ing a novel approach for control of nonlinear transport
in symmetric lattices. Indeed, since the powers for the
types (a) and (b) solitons depicted in Fig. 2(top) coin-
cide for any value of the propagation constant, it follows
that the Peierls-Nabarro potential is negligible along the
x axis, allowing for soliton propagation in this direction.
On contrary, there is a large diﬀerence in the powers for
the solutions of types (a,b) and (c,d). This implies the
existence of a signiﬁcant Peierls-Nabarro potential along
the y axis and reduced mobility or trapping of the soli-
tons along this direction. We also note that the states
(a) and (b) appear energetically preferable and likely to
be experimentally observable.

In experiment, we induce a 2D periodic modulation

3

In order to match the ﬁeld proﬁle of the linear Bloch
state [Figs. 1(c,d)], we use a broad input beam with sev-
eral out-of-phase humps [Fig. 3(a)], positioned in between
the lattice sites along the x-direction, while centered onto
a lattice site in the y-direction. To compensate for the
anisotropic diﬀraction, the input beam is made elongated
along the x-direction. Such a broad beam allows for spec-
trally pure excitation of the Bloch state from the top
of the second band at the X point, which can then be
moved adiabatically into the gap as the beam self-focuses,
thus avoiding radiation into other spectral bands. In 2D
lattices, the broad beams are often susceptible to col-
lapse instability, as their width gradually decreases due
to self-focusing when the input power slightly exceeds the
threshold for the soliton formation [14]. We ﬁnd that for
reduced-symmetry states, the collapse is arrested when
the beam becomes conﬁned to a single lattice site in the
y direction, eﬀectively reducing the dimensionality to a
quasi-1D system where collapse does not occur, similar
to pulse dynamics in ﬁber arrays [22]. The process of lo-
calization of the optical beam with increasing of the laser
power is summarized in Fig. 3. The predicted anisotropy
in diﬀraction can be clearly seen in Fig. 3(top), where
the beam widths along the two lattice axes are plotted
against the input power. The widths are estimated as the
full width of the half maximum (FWHM) of the Gaus-
sian envelope of the modulated beam proﬁle in both di-
rections. At low intensities [20 nW, Fig. 3(b)], the beam
diﬀracts linearly and its width increases more in x- than
in y-direction despite the fact that the input size along
the x-direction is larger. The spatial structure of the out-
put beam well represents the characteristic ﬁne-structure
of the Bloch wave from the X-point of the second band,
with out-of-phase lobes along the x direction as conﬁrmed
with interferometric measurements. At higher laser pow-
ers, the beam focuses until a strongly localized state is
formed at about 230 nW [Fig. 3(c)] which covers approxi-
mately three lattice sites in the x and one in y directions.
To support our experimental results and conﬁrm the
formation of localized gap states we performed direct
numerical simulations of Eq. (1) with the initial con-
ditions similar to the experimental ones [cf. Figs. 3(a)
and (d)], deﬁning the input beam envelope as ψ(x, y) =
A exp(−x2/δ2
y) sin(2πx/d), where δx and δy are
the beam widths along the two lattice axes. We ﬁnd that
the results of the corresponding numerical simulations
[lines in Fig. 3(top) and Figs. 3(e,f)] show the same ten-
dencies as our experiments. Similar to the experiment,
the width of the output state decreases to a minimum
value of about 40 µm in the x-direction and down to
one lattice period (23 µm) in the y-direction. The slight
increase of the beam width along the x-direction at pow-
ers higher than 250 nW is due to beam splitting into
two solitons. This eﬀect is typical for one-dimensional
solitons [2], and shows that strongly localized reduced-
symmetry solitons indeed demonstrate a quasi-1D dy-

x − y2/δ2

FIG. 3:
(color online) Focusing of a beam corresponding to
the X-point of the second band: (top) width at the crystal
output in experiment (dots) and theory (lines). Solid line
and dots – widths along x; Dashed line and triangles – widths
along y.
(a-c) experimental, (d-f) numerical results: (a,d)
input beam proﬁle; (b,e) output beam proﬁles at low power;
(c,f) localized states at high power. Inset - optical lattice.

of the refractive index in a biased 20 mm long SBN:60
photorefractive crystal [16]. As a light source we use a
cw frequency-doubled Nd:YVO4 laser at 532 nm. The
laser beam is split into two parts by a polarizing beam
splitter forming ordinary and extraordinary waves with
respect to the crystalline axes. To create the photonic
lattice, the ordinary polarized beam passes through a
diﬀractive optical element (DOE), splitting it into four
coherent broad beams. The DOE is imaged by an opti-
cal telescope on the front face of the crystal, thus creating
a 2D square interference pattern with a period of 23 µm.
The lattice extends through the whole length of the crys-
tal and is oriented at 45 degrees with respect to the bias
(horizontal) electric ﬁeld [Fig. 3(top, inset)], in order to
reduce the eﬀect of the intrinsic anisotropy of the pho-
torefractive nonlinearity [21]. The second extraordinary-
polarized beam is directed onto a programmable phase
modulator (1024×768 pixels), to allow for phase and am-
plitude engineering of the X-point Bloch states from the
second band. The ﬁeld structure produced by the modu-
lator is also imaged onto the front face of the crystal and
combined with the lattice onto a beam splitter. The front
and the back faces of the crystal can be imaged onto a
CCD-camera to capture beam intensity distribution.

4

combined eﬀects of total internal and Bragg reﬂection.
These states originate from the X-symmetry point of the
lattice bandgap spectrum, and they possess a reduced
symmetry and highly anisotropic diﬀraction properties.
Due to this anisotropy, they exhibit enhanced mobility
along the modulated direction and are trapped by the
lattice in the transverse direction, allowing for control of
directional wave transport with possible applications for
optical routing and switching in planar nonlinear periodic
photonic structures.

This work has been supported by the Australian Re-
search Council. D.T. thanks Nonlinear Physics Centre
for hospitality during his stay in Canberra and Konrad-
Adenauer-Stiftung e.V. for ﬁnancial support.

[1] Nonlinear Photonic Crystals, Vol. 10 of Springer Series
in Photonics, R. E. Slusher and B. J. Eggleton, eds.,
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003).

[2] Yu. S. Kivshar and G. P. Agrawal, Optical Solitons: From
Fibers to Photonic Crystals (Academic Press, San Diego,
2003).

[3] D. N. Christodoulides et al., Nature 424, 817 (2003).
[4] H. S. Eisenberg et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3383 (1998).
[5] J. W. Fleischer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 023902 (2003).
[6] J. W. Fleischer et al., Nature 422, 147 (2003).
[7] D. Neshev et al., Opt. Lett. 28, 710 (2003).
[8] H. Martin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 123902 (2004).
[9] C. M. de Sterke and J. E. Sipe, “Gap solitons,” in
Progress in Optics, E. Wolf, ed., (North-Holland, Am-
sterdam, 1994), Vol. XXXIII, pp. 203–260.

[10] A. A. Sukhorukov et al., IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 39,

31 (2003).

[11] D. Mandelik et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 093904 (2004).
[12] D. Neshev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 083905 (2004).
[13] S. John and N. Akozbek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1168
(1993); N. Akozbek and S. John, Phys. Rev. E 57, 2287
(1998).

[14] S. F. Mingaleev and Yu. S. Kivshar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,

[15] P. Xie and Z. Q. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 213904

5474 (2001).

(2003).

[16] N. K. Efremidis et al., Phys. Rev. E 66, 046602 (2002).
[17] P. St. J. Russell et al., “Photonic Bloch waves and pho-
tonic band gaps,” in Conﬁned Electrons and Photons, E.
Burstein and C. Weisbuch, eds., (1995), pp. 585–633.
[18] O. Manela et al., Opt. Lett. 29, 2049 (2004); G. Bartal

et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 053904 (2005).

[19] Yu. S. Kivshar and D. K. Campbell, Phys. Rev. E 48,

3077 (1993).

[20] R. Morandotti et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2726 (1999).
[21] A. S. Desyatnikov et al., Opt. Lett. 30, 869 (2005).
[22] A.B. Aceves et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 73 (1995); D.
Cheskis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 223901 (2003).
[23] D. N. Christodoulides and E. D. Eugenieva, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 87, 233901 (2001).

(color online) (a-d) Numerically calculated output
FIG. 4:
beam proﬁles for diﬀerent initial tilts of the beam.
(a) no
tilt, (b) 20 mrad tilt along x, (c) 20 mrad tilt along y, (d)
20 mrad tilt along x and y. White bars mark lattice periods.
(e,f) show two experimental examples for the mobility along
x, the cross marking the beam center at the crystal front face.

namics. In the numerical simulations, we can also resolve
the complete beam evolution inside the crystal. The cal-
culations show that the beam experiences quasi-collapse
at its initial stage of propagation, whereas it reaches a
steady-state propagation afterwards. We ﬁnd that the
solitons may disintegrate due to the development of weak
oscillatory instabilities at large propagation distances.
However, all solutions from the family presented in Fig. 2
propagate steadily for experimentally feasible distances.
We now investigate the soliton mobility, which is ex-
pected to be highly anisotropic. We impose an initial
tilt of the input beam along the diﬀerent directions and
study the beam displacement at the output, comparing to
the immobile soliton position [Fig. 4(a)]. In simulations,
an initial tilt of 20 mrad (15% of the Bragg angle) in x
moves the output for two lattice sites [Fig 4(b)], whereas
the same tilt in y leads only to a small deformation but
no movement of the output state [Fig 4(c)]. Even with
both tilts superimposed, the soliton moves the same two
lattice sites along the x axis only [Fig 4(d)]. Two exam-
ples of the corresponding experimental results presented
in Fig. 4(e,f) demonstrate the high mobility of the lo-
calized states along x direction. We underline that the
lattice itself is uniform in x and y, and the directional
mobility is only determined by the localized state itself.
Their ability to robustly move along one row (or column
for Y state) of the lattice makes them good candidates
for ﬂexible soliton networks in 2D periodic structures.
This oﬀers new opportunities compared to the soliton
networks suggested earlier for optical signal routing and
switching [23].

In conclusion, we have presented the experimental ob-
servation of novel self-trapped gap states in a square two-
dimensional lattice, where localization is based on the

