Near-ﬁeld enhancement and imaging in double cylindrical

polariton-resonant structures: Enlarging perfect lens

Pekka Alitalo, Stanislav Maslovski, and Sergei Tretyakov

Radio Laboratory / SMARAD, Helsinki University of Technology

P.O. Box 3000, FI-02015 TKK, Finland

E-mails: pekka.alitalo@tkk.ﬁ, stanislav.maslovski@tkk.ﬁ, sergei.tretyakov@tkk.ﬁ

(Dated: December 23, 2013)

Abstract

We experimentally demonstrate a prototype of a cylindrical enlarging lens capable of enhancing

and restoring evanescent ﬁelds. The enabling phenomenon is the resonant excitation of coupled

surface modes in a system of two cylindrical arrays of small resonant particles. As was shown in

[J. Appl. Phys. 96, 1293 (2004)], this phenomenon in planar arrays can be used in electromagnetic

near-ﬁeld imaging. Here, we use a similar structure in a cylindrically symmetric conﬁguration,

which gives us a possibility to obtain an enlarged near-ﬁeld image.

5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

INTRODUCTION

Since J. Pendry found that a slab ﬁlled by a material with negative parameters ε and

µ theoretically operates as a perfect lens [1], enhancing evanescent components, many re-

searchers tried to realize such a device experimentally. The main diﬃculty in the design

is the problem of losses in the artiﬁcial material ﬁlling the lens. Recently, we proposed an

alternative approach to enhancement and imaging of evanescent ﬁelds, which is based on two

parallel planar lattices of small resonant particles [2]. Since no volumetric artiﬁcial media

are used in this device, the issue of losses can be mitigated. Experiments in the microwave

region have demonstrated imaging of near ﬁelds in these new structures [2]. Evanescent

ﬁelds are enhanced on lattices of small resonant particles, because these planar structures

support propagation of slow electromagnetic waves, which is also the key property of inter-

faces between vacuum and materials with negative parameters. Such waves are known also

as surface or Zenneck waves in radio science, or as surface plasmons or polaritons in optics.

These waves are called slow because their phase velocity (along the surface) is less than the

speed of light. Respectively, the ﬁelds of such waves decay exponentially from the surface.

The ideal planar perfect lens restores the ﬁeld distribution of the source (both amplitude

and phase) in the image plane. A natural extension would be the use of more complex

lens shapes to enable also enlargement of the image. Using geometrical optics, it has been

theoretically shown that image enlargement is indeed possible in a perfect lens of a cir-

cular cylindrical shape [3]. However, no attempts to realize this eﬀect using volumetric

metamaterials experimentally have been made.

Our purpose here is to experimentally show enhancement of evanescent ﬁelds and enlarged

images of source ﬁeld distribution using arrays of resonant particles. For this purpose we

construct two concentric lattices of particles, creating a cylindrically symmetrical system.

We restrict ourselves by the case when the surface modes propagate around the cylinders, i.e.

we consider only the angular spatial spectrum. Contrary to the inﬁnite planar geometries

this spectrum is discrete.

To excite slow waves, either a non-uniformity in the surface is needed, or the incident

ﬁeld must be in phase synchronism with these waves. The latter means that the exciting

ﬁeld must be an evanescent plane wave. When the propagation factor (along the surface) of

the incident wave coincides with the propagation factor of a surface wave, a strong resonance

2

occurs. In this case the surface wave is most eﬀectively excited.

The source of evanescent ﬁeld and the cylindrical arrays are placed in a model cell de-

scribed in [2]. Essentially, this cell is a planar waveguide operating below cut-oﬀ. Because of

the symmetry of the waveguide modes, a circular ring of particles placed inside the waveg-

uide behaves as an inﬁnitely long cylinder under incidence of an evanescent wave. We will

show that the surface modes excited on the arrays can be used to amplify near ﬁelds of a

source and, respectively, to obtain an image mimicking the distribution of the source ﬁeld

on a larger scale.

EXPERIMENT

The experimental setup was similar to that used in [2]. The setup consisted of a two-plate

waveguide, in which the distance between the metal plates (h) was smaller than λ/2 (λ is the

wavelength in free space). The setup is shown in Fig. 1. The evanescent source ﬁelds were

excited by two horizontal λ/4-dipoles placed inside the waveguide. The operating frequency

of the setup was close to 5 GHz and therefore h was chosen to be 2.5 cm (λ at 5 GHz is 6

cm).

FIG. 1: (Color online). Experimental setup used to measure the distribution of the evanescent

ﬁelds inside the waveguide.

In order to measure the ﬁelds inside the waveguide, the upper plate of the waveguide

was made of a dense metal wire mesh, which was weakly penetrable to the ﬁelds inside
the waveguide (the transmission coeﬃcient of the mesh was measured to be about −20 dB

for normal plane-wave incidence at 5 GHz). The distribution of electric ﬁeld inside the

3

waveguide could then be measured using a probe, which was a horizontal λ/4-dipole placed

approximately 3 mm above the metal mesh and controlled by a robot connected to a PC.

The source dipoles were connected to port 1 of a vector network analyzer (VNA) using a

power divider and the probe was connected to port 2 of the VNA. By scanning the surface

of the metal mesh with the probe and at the same time measuring S21 with the VNA, it

was possible to measure the relative ﬁeld distribution (in the horizontal plane) inside the

waveguide.

The cylindrical arrays consisted of small particles. These particles, in which the surface

resonance occurs, were made of thin copper wires that were meandered to make the overall

particle size considerably smaller than the resonant wavelength, see Fig. 2. First a large

amount of these resonant particles was manufactured and each was tested to have approx-
imately the same resonant frequency (fr ≈ 5.464 GHz). The testing was done by placing

the particle under test inside the waveguide and close to a source dipole (distance between

the particle and the source dipole was approximately 2 cm). When the ﬁeld magnitude was

measured as described before, the ﬁeld on top of the resonant particle had a sharp peak

(much stronger than the ﬁeld on top of the source dipole) at a certain frequency. This

frequency was then determined to be approximately the same for all the resonant particles

used.

5 mm

5 mm

2.5 mm

FIG. 2: A resonant particle with fr ≈ 5.464 GHz. Diameter of the copper wire is 0.8 mm.

First an array consisting of ten resonant particles and a radius of r = 40 mm was con-

structed. The array was placed inside the waveguide around two source dipoles (the dipoles

were approximately in the center between the two plates of the waveguide) with the other

end of the array about 15 mm from the dipoles. The resonant particles were placed in a di-
electric foam holder (εr ≈ 1), so that the particles were approximately in the center between

the waveguide’s two plates.

When the ﬁelds were measured, two strong ﬁeld maxima occurring at the measuring
frequency of f ≈ 5.28 GHz were observed on top of the array, see Fig. 3. The ﬁelds in Fig. 3

were measured with the probe dipole oriented along the x-axis. By measuring the same

4

situation with the probe oriented along the y-axis, it was seen that the ﬁeld distribution was

approximately the same as shown in Fig. 3 (the two maxima were at the same places and no

other maxima were seen). As can be seen from Fig. 3, the array was strongly excited near
the two sources. Also another resonant frequency was found (f ≈ 5.37 GHz) at which also

the other side of the array was excited (symmetrically with that shown in Fig. 3, i.e. four

maxima altogether).

FIG. 3: (Color online). Distribution of electric ﬁeld amplitude measured on top of the waveguide

(f = 5.28 GHz). The probe dipole is oriented along the x-axis. Two evanescent sources are placed

inside a cylindrical array made of resonant particles. The places of the sources and the array are

shown with white color.

Next, another, larger array consisting of 18 resonant particles arranged at a circle with the

radius r = 70 mm was manufactured. The measurements showed that this array had many

resonant frequencies, with one of them most pronounced. By measuring the ﬁeld distribution

as before (with the other side of the array close to the two sources, as in Fig. 3), it was

noticed that there existed a resonance near 5.3 GHz. By manually shifting the positions

of the particles, the resonant frequency of the array could be tuned to coincide with the

resonant frequency of the smaller array. The array was tuned to resonate at f = 5.28 GHz,

corresponding to the resonant frequency at which the ﬁelds in Fig. 3 were measured.

The particles of the larger array were excited only near the two sources when measured

at this frequency. Again two maxima were seen on top of the array. Next, both arrays were

5

placed around the sources in a coaxial manner, see Fig. 4. The geometry of this conﬁguration

is the same as for a volumetric perfect lens theoretically studied in [3]. From the ﬁeld plot it

is seen that the smaller array was weakly excited and the larger array had four strong ﬁeld

maxima (images of the source ﬁeld), as shown in Fig. 4. Similar results were obtained with

planar arrays in [2], where the resonant array situated closer to the source was not excited

at all, but the resonant array situated further had a very strong maximum.

FIG. 4: (Color online). Distribution of electric ﬁeld amplitude measured on top of the waveguide

(f = 5.28 GHz). The probe dipole is oriented along the x-axis. Two evanescent sources are placed

inside two coaxial cylindrical arrays made of resonant particles. The places of the sources and the

arrays are shown with white color.

The maxima of the ﬁeld at the image side appear to follow the same angular distribution

as that of the source ﬁeld. The two images on the other side of the larger array can be

considered as “parasitic” images. The ﬁelds in Fig. 4 were measured with the probe dipole

oriented along the x-axis. By measuring the same situation with the probe oriented along

the y-axis, it was seen that the ﬁeld distribution was approximately the same as shown in

Fig. 4 (the four maxima were at the same places and no other maxima were seen).

The larger array was also tuned to match the other resonant frequency of the smaller

array (i.e. f = 5.37 GHz). Using that frequency, the two “parasitic” images seen in Fig. 4

did not appear.

6

CONCLUSION

We have experimentally demonstrated a prototype of an enlarging perfect lens, using

ampliﬁcation of evanescent ﬁelds on two cylindrical arrays of small particles. The arrays

supported surface waves at certain frequencies. By tuning the arrays to resonate at the same

frequency, the evanescent source ﬁelds inside the two arrays were ampliﬁed and reached the

maximum values on the outer array. According to the measured ﬁeld distributions, the an-

gular distribution of the source ﬁeld located inside the two coaxial arrays is properly restored

on the outer array. The angular resolution of the image is mainly determined by the period

of the arrays. Resonant meandered pieces of copper wires were successfully used in this

microwave concept demonstration. For higher-frequency realizations other small resonating

particles may be used, such as plasmonic nano-spheres for potential optical applications.

[1] J.B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966 (2000).

[2] S.I. Maslovski, S.A. Tretyakov, and P. Alitalo, J. Appl. Phys. 96, 1293 (2004).

[3] J.B. Pendry, Optics Express 11, 755 (2003).

7

