5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photonic Bloch oscillations and Zener tunneling in two-dimensional optical lattices

Henrike Trompeter,1, 2 Wieslaw Krolikowski,1 Dragomir N. Neshev,1 Anton S. Desyatnikov,1
Andrey A. Sukhorukov,1 Yuri S. Kivshar,1 Thomas Pertsch,2 Ulf Peschel,2 and Falk Lederer2
1Nonlinear Physics Centre and Laser Physics Center,
Centre for Ultra-high bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems (CUDOS),
Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,
Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
2Institute of Condensed Matter Theory and Solid State Optics,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Max-Wien-Platz 1, 07743 Jena, Germany

We report on the ﬁrst experimental observation of photonic Bloch oscillations and Zener tunneling
in two-dimensional periodic systems. We study the propagation of an optical beam in a square
photonic lattice superimposed on a refractive index ramp, and demonstrate the tunneling of light
from the ﬁrst to the higher-order transmission bands of the lattice bandgap spectrum, associated
with the spectral dynamics inside the ﬁrst Brillouin zone and corresponding oscillations of the
primary beam.

PACS numbers: 42.82.Et, 42.25.Bs, 42.65.Wi

One of the fundamental concepts of quantum mechan-
ics is a duality of particles and waves. Electromagnetic
waves propagating in a periodic dielectric medium can
behave in a rather similar fashion to electrons in a crys-
talline potential. Hence many eﬀects originally predicted
in solid-state physics can be observed by monitoring light
propagation in photonic structures.

Two well-known fundamental phenomena associated
with the propagation of waves and quantum particles in
periodic media under the action of an external driving
force are Bloch oscillations [1] and Zener tunneling [2].
Indeed, in a periodic potential the dynamics of a par-
ticle is dramatically aﬀected by the bandgap structure
of its energy spectrum. Moreover, due to the existence
of the maximum wavenumber determined by the edge of
the Brillouin zone, even particles associated with a sin-
gle spectral band can behave in a rather unexpected way.
For example, they do not follow the direction of a driv-
ing force, but instead perform an oscillatory motion, the
so-called Bloch oscillations. Such oscillations occur be-
cause the presence of an external force causes the particle
to gain momentum and approach the Bragg resonance.
Since the band structure is periodic, the initial ﬁeld dis-
tribution is recovered after one crossing of the Brillouin
zone. Therefore, one observes an oscillatory motion but
no net shift of the particle in a real space.

In order to explain why electrons move in a crystalline
lattice under the action of a dc electric ﬁeld, this single-
band picture of the Bloch oscillations should be extended
to take into account coupling to other bands, the eﬀect
known as Zener tunneling [2].
If the variation of the
superimposed linear potential within a unit cell is com-
parable with the size of the gap to the adjacent band, an
intra-band transition occurs. The strongest Zener tun-
neling takes place when the particle reaches the edge of
the ﬁrst Brillouin zone where the gap is smallest.

in crystals, Bloch oscillations and Zener tunneling were
also extensively investigated in diﬀerent physical systems,
including electrons in semiconductor superlattices [3, 4]
and cold atoms in optical lattices [5, 6]. Recent progress
in the fabrication and investigation of complex optical
nanostructures has allowed for direct experimental ob-
servations of many phenomena related to the wave prop-
agation and interference. One-dimensional optical Bloch
oscillations were observed in dielectric structures with a
transversely superimposed linear ramp of the refractive
index [7, 8, 9, 10]. A periodic distribution of the refrac-
tive index plays a role of the crystalline potential, and
the index gradient acts similar to an external force in
a quantum system. It causes the beam to move across
the structure where it experiences Bragg reﬂection on
the high-index and total internal reﬂection on the low-
index side of the structure, resulting in an optical ana-
logue of Bloch oscillations. These experiments have re-
cently been followed by the observations of tunneling in
one-dimensional waveguide arrays [11, 12]. It was demon-
strated that for a small spectral gap even with a moderate
strength of the index gradient, reasonably high transmis-
sion rates from the ﬁrst to the higher-order bands can be
achieved facilitating a direct observation of the optical
Zener tunneling.

All direct experimental observations of Bloch oscilla-
tions and Zener tunneling performed so far were limited
to one-dimensional geometries. New eﬀects may be asso-
ciated with these phenomena in systems of higher dimen-
sionality [13, 14]. In a two-dimensional periodic poten-
tial the wave follows complex Lissajous-type trajectories
when the direction of the static force does not coincide
with a principal axis of the lattice. Additionally, the pro-
cess of Zener tunneling becomes nontrivial as the band-
gap structure can cause an enhanced tunneling in pre-
ferred directions determined by the lattice symmetries.

While originally predicted in the context of electrons

In this Letter, we report on the ﬁrst experimental ob-

2

FIG. 1:
(color online) (a) Interference pattern of four beams
forming a square lattice; the inset shows symmetry points in
the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. (b) Experimentally measured proﬁle
of the background illumination Im (dash-dotted), and cor-
responding change in the refractive index (solid). Dashed
line indicates the initial position of the probe beam. (c) Cal-
culated band structure of the lattice for Im = 0. (d) Band
structure of the lattice vs. Im. Horizontal line is the adiabatic
value of propagation constant; the dashed segment indicates
Zener tunneling through the gap.

servation of Bloch oscillations and Zener tunneling in
two-dimensional (2D) periodic systems. By launching a
laser beam into an optically-induced lattice with a super-
imposed index gradient, we observe the occurrence of 2D
Bloch oscillations and tunneling of light into the second
transmission band of the lattice.

The lattice is created by interfering four mutually co-
herent ordinary-polarized broad beams in a biased pho-
torefractive crystal [15, 16, 17]. The periodic light in-
tensity distribution inside the crystal has the form of a
square lattice shown in Fig. 1(a), described by the ex-
pression

Ig(x, y) = A2 cos2(πX/d) cos2(πY /d),

(1)

∓

≡

(x

y)/√2, x and y are the transverse
where (X, Y )
coordinates, A is the normalized amplitude, and d is the
lattice period. Such a periodic light pattern induces a
2D modulation of the refractive index for the extraordi-
nary polarized probe beam. The ordinary polarized lat-
tice beams, however, remain stationarity along the whole
length of the crystal [15, 16]. Orientation of the lattice is
set to 45◦ with respect to the c-axis of the crystal (hori-
zontal in all ﬁgures; coincides with x axis in our notation)
in order to reduce the eﬀect of the intrinsic anisotropy of
the photorefractive nonlinearity [18]. In order to create
a transverse refractive index gradient we illuminate the
crystal from the top with an incoherent white light which
is modulated transversely, but is constant along the crys-
tal length. The measured transverse intensity proﬁle of

FIG. 2:
(color online) (top) Numerically calculated position
of the beam’s center of mass; solid line – Bloch oscillations on
the lattice; dashed line – beam deﬂection without the lattice.
The vertical line indicates the position of the exit facet of the
crystal. The light intensity distributions corresponding to the
positions (a), (b), and (c) are depicted in the three snapshots.

the white light is shown in Fig. 1(b) (dash-dotted line)
and it can be well approximated as

Im(x) = B [1 + tanh (x/η)] /2,

(2)

where the parameter η determines the extent of the in-
duced index ramp. The total induced refractive index
pattern is then given by [Fig. 1(b), solid]

∆n(x, y) = γ

Ig(x, y) + Im(x)
1 + Ig(x, y) + Im(x)

,

(3)

where γ can be tuned by varying the bias voltage. Then,
we simulate the propagation of a probe optical beam by
solving paraxial equation for the normalized electric ﬁeld
envelope E(x, y, z),

λ

i

∂E
∂z

+

4πn0 (cid:18)

∂2E
∂x2 +

∂2E
∂y2 (cid:19)

2π
λ

+

∆n(x, y)E = 0,

(4)

where z is the propagation distance. We use the following
parameters to match our experimental conditions: wave-
length in vacuum λ = 0.532 µm, linear refractive index
of the medium n0 = 2.35, lattice period d = 20µm and
amplitude A = 0.5, γ = 6.5, η = 100µm, and B = 1.

Propagation of waves in a homogeneous lattice (for a
ﬁxed Im) is characterized by dispersion of Bloch waves
which proﬁles have the form E = Ψ(X, Y ) exp(iKX X +
iKY Y +iβz), where K = (KX , KY ) is the Bloch wavevec-
tor, the eigenvalue β is the propagation constant, and
eigenmode proﬁle Ψ has the same periodicity as the un-
derlying lattice. We show the ﬁrst Brillouin zone in the
inset of Fig. 1(a), and the dispersion curves character-
izing the band-gap spectrum are presented in Fig. 1(c)
for Im = 0, where the high-symmetry points are marked
for the ﬁrst two bands. The background illumination of
the crystal, Im(x), results in the index distribution which
represents a periodic structure imposed onto a monoton-
ically increasing background. Because of the saturable

3

FIG. 3:
◦
output for diﬀerent initial inclinations of the input beam. The inclination is (a) −0.095
◦
(d) 0.12

(color online) Light intensity proﬁles (top row) and corresponding Fourier spectra (bottom) measured at the crystal
, and

. The arrow in (a) indicates the direction of the index gradient. White diamonds indicate the ﬁrst Brillouin zone.

◦
, (b) −0.035

◦
, (d) 0.035

◦
, (c) 0

character of the photorefractive nonlinearity, the contrast
of the resulting index grating varies transversely across
the crystal, and the complete gap decreases, ﬁnally clos-
ing for high background intensities, see Fig. 1(d). Ex-
periments were performed in the area of largest gradient
where the gap is still open.

R

E
|

E
x
|

2dr/
|

We now model the propagation of an input Gaus-
sian beam with a full width at half intensity maxi-
mum of 37.5 µm launched straight along the lattice, and
plot in Fig. 2(top) the evolution of the beam center of
2dr. As expected, the
mass, deﬁned as
|
beam oscillates but, in contrast to the canonical Bloch-
R
oscillations [13], the trajectories are deformed due to the
transverse variations of the depth of the periodic poten-
tial. According to the adiabatic theory, the Zener tunnel-
ing from the initial Γ1 point in Figs. 1(c,d) occurs when
the eﬀective propagation constant β reaches the gap edge
M1 and then tunnels through the gap to the point M2, see
the horizontal line in Fig. 1(d). Due to the square sym-
metry of the lattice this process results in the splitting of
the initial beam into four parts, as shown in Figs. 2(a-c).
The intensity maxima of the strongest (reﬂected) por-
tion are centered on the high-index points of the lattice.
Hence this beam belongs to the fundamental band, and
it keeps propagating in an oscillatory fashion. The other
three beams are formed as a result of the tunneling to
the second band, which is conﬁrmed by the fact that
their maxima are located in between the index maxima
of the lattice. Weak or even vanishing gap on the high-
index side promotes strong tunneling of light even for a
moderate strength of the index gradient.

We study experimentally the oscillations and tunnel-
ing in 2D optical lattices using a 23 mm long, stron-
tium barium niobate (SBN:65) photorefractive crystal,
biased with an electric ﬁeld of 5000 V/cm. A light from
a green cw laser at 532 nm is used to create the lat-
tice and the probe beam, while additional while light
illuminator is used to induce the transverse index gradi-

ent. First, we test the eﬀect only of the induced index
gradient on the beam propagation by switching oﬀ the
lattice and launching the extraordinary polarized signal
beam into the region with the steepest gradient. Mea-
surements of the ﬁeld at the output facet of the crystal
performed with a CCD camera showed that the beam
experiences a maximum transverse shift of 350 µm. In
the next step, we launch the signal beam in the presence
of optical lattice and the index gradient. Respective im-
ages of the signal beam at the exit facet of the crystal are
displayed in Figs. 3(a-e, top row). It is not possible to
follow the evolution of the beam inside the crystal, but
we can infer the details of its behavior by varying the
incident angle of the probe beam. For angles below the
Bragg resonance, the excitation by the probe with dif-
ferent transverse wavenumber is equivalent to diﬀerent
starting points in the Brillouin zone. Therefore, when
we launch the beam at diﬀerent input angles we can scan
the ﬁeld evolution through the Bloch oscillation at the
output facet of the crystal. In this way, we are able to
monitor diﬀerent stages of the Bloch oscillations, which
would normally require crystals of diﬀerent lengths. In
Fig. 3(a-e, top row) we can clearly see the predicted re-
shaping of the beam and the tunneling of the beam en-
ergy into three diﬀerent channels.

It should be noted that, as we tilt the input beam, we
lose information about the absolute position of the Bloch
trajectory. Nevertheless, we can study the inter-band
tunneling by comparing the output intensity proﬁles. Ad-
ditionally, fully conclusive picture of the beam evolution
during a Bloch oscillation and the related Zener tunnel-
ing can be obtained by monitoring the Fourier spectrum
of the output ﬁeld. This is realized by placing a lens in
the beam path at the position of the image plane of the
back side of the crystal. Then the focal plane of the lens
contain the corresponding Fourier image.
In this way
various stages of the tunneling process can be resolved
[see Fig. 3, bottom row]. The plot in Fig. 3(a) corre-

4

whole Brillouin zone, there always exists a component
which propagates in the vicinity of the band edge. Hence,
the tunneling occurs now continuously over the whole
Bloch period. To observe this eﬀect we use a tightly fo-
cused probe beam (20µm) which is centered at one of
the lattice sites and launched into the crystal at normal
incidence. We record the light intensity distribution at
the exit facet of the crystal varying the strength of the
transverse index gradient. Figures 4(a,d) show the dis-
crete diﬀraction of a narrow beam in the lattice with no
superimposed index gradient. Note the almost perfect
spatial symmetry of the ﬁeld distribution which reﬂects
the geometry of the lattice. In the case of a rather weak
gradient [Figs. 4(b,e)] the light travels approximately two
thirds of the Bloch period before reaching the end of the
crystal. The central part of the beam starts to refocus
while some light already tunnels to the second band. Al-
though no pronounced spatial separation of the light in
the ﬁrst and second bands occurs at the available crystal
length, the induced asymmetry of the ﬁeld distribution
is a clear indication that tunneling takes place. For a
strong gradient in Figs. 4(c,f) almost no breathing is vis-
ible and the light in the ﬁrst band is conﬁned to the input
waveguide and its direct neighbors.

In conclusion, we have studied the propagation of light
beams in a two-dimensional optically-induced photonic
lattice in the presence of a transverse ramp of the refrac-
tive index. We have observed two-dimensional photonic
Bloch oscillations and Zener tunneling to distinct points
of the bandgap spectrum.

This work was produced with the assistance of the Aus-
tralian Research Council under the ARC Centres of Ex-
cellence program.

[1] F. Bloch, Z. Phys. 52, 555 (1928) (in German).
[2] C. Zener, Proc. R. Soc. London A 145, 523 (1934).
[3] J. Feldmann et al., Phys. Rev. B 46, 7252 (1992).
[4] M. Ghulinyan et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 127401 (2005).
[5] M. B. Dahan et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4508 (1996).
[6] B. P. Anderson and M. A. Kasevich, Science 282, 1686

(1998).

[7] T. Pertsch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4752 (1999).
[8] R. Morandotti et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4756 (1999).
[9] R. Sapienza et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 263902 (2003).
[10] V. Agarwal et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 097401 (2004).
[11] H. Trompeter et al., “Photonic Zener Tunneling,” In
Quantum Electronics and Laser Science Conference,
OSA Technical Digest, page QFA2 (Optical Society of
America, Washington DC, 2005).

[12] B. A. Usievich et al., Opt. Spektrosk. 97, 841 (2004) (in

Russian) [Opt. Spectrosc. 97, 790 (2004)].

[13] A. R. Kolovsky and H. J. Korsch, Phys. Rev. A 67,

063601 (2003).

[14] D. Witthaut et al., New J. Phys. 6, 41 (2004).
[15] N. K. Efremidis et al., Phys. Rev. E 66, 046602 (2002).
[16] J. W. Fleischer et al., Nature 422, 147 (2003).
[17] D. Neshev et al., Opt. Lett. 28, 710 (2003).

FIG. 4: (color online) Light intensity proﬁles calculated (a-c)
and measured (d-f) at the crystal output for a single site exci-
tation. (a,d) discrete diﬀraction with no transverse gradient,
(b,e) weak and (c,f) strong index gradients.

−

0.095◦ (negative an-
sponds to the initial beam tilt of
gle corresponds to an initial motion of the beam against
the force produced by the gradient). For this angle the
beam intensity proﬁle at the output facet of the crystal is
strongly modulated with adjacent maxima being approx-
imately out-of-phase. Corresponding intensity distribu-
tion in the Fourier domain shows that the beam propa-
gates at the Bragg angle (0.32◦) in the M-symmetry point
of the lattice. Increasing the input angle allows us to scan
through diﬀerent positions inside the Bloch period and to
monitor the light tunneling into the higher-order bands.
Evidently, only one peak lies inside the ﬁrst Brillouin
zone for all the incident angles, and it corresponds to
the ﬁeld which undergoes Bloch oscillations. The other
three peaks representing tunneled beams lie outside the
boundaries of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone, thus they belong to
0.035◦
the second transmission band. For an angle of
[Fig. 3(b)] the beam just experiences its ﬁrst Bragg re-
ﬂection and the three tunneled beams emerge from all
M-symmetry points of the lattice. At larger angles all
the beams get accelerated again by the index gradient,
and the central part of the beam completes a full Bloch
oscillation, see Figs. 3(c-e). We note that changing the
angle between the lattice and the index gradient leads
to asymmetry in scattered and tunneled beams, but the
qualitative picture remains the same.

−

As discussed above, the Zener tunneling accompany-
ing Bloch oscillations of a broad beam that covers several
sites of the lattice occurs only when the beam approaches
the edge of the Brillouin zone. A drastically diﬀerent sce-
nario has been predicted [14] for an input beam which is
initially very narrow, comparable in its size with a single
site of the 2D lattice. Such a beam excites simultane-
ously waves with wavevectors distributed over the whole
Brillouin zone. This results in a symmetric breathing of
the beam in the ﬁrst band as it periodically diﬀracts and
refocuses in propagation [7]. Because the narrow beam
excites modes with the wave vectors distributed over the

[18] A. S. Desyatnikov et al., Opt. Lett. 30, 869 (2005).

5

