5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modeling a Slicer Mirror Using Zemax
User-Deﬁned Surface

S. Viv`es a, E. Prieto a, G. Moretto a, M. Saisse a

aLaboratoire d’Astrophysique de Marseille, Site des Olives BP8-13376, Marseille,
France

Abstract

A slicer mirror is a complex surface composed by many tilted and decentered mirrors
sub-surfaces. The major diﬃculty to model such a complex surface is the large
number of parameters used to deﬁne it. The Zemax’s multi-conﬁguration mode is
usually used to specify each parameters (tilts, curvatures, decenters) for each mirror
sub-surface which are then considered independently. Otherwise making use of the
User-Deﬁned Surface (UDS-DLL) Zemax capability, we are able to consider the set
of sub-surfaces as a whole surface. In this paper, we present such a UDS-DLL tool
comparing its performance with those of the classical multi-conﬁguration mode. In
particular, we explore the use of UDS-DLL to investigate the cross-talk due to the
diﬀraction on the slicer array mirrors which has been a burden task when using
multi-conﬁguration mode.

Key words: astronomical instrumentation, integral ﬁeld spectroscopy, image
slicers, Zemax, complex surface modeling

1 Introduction

Since several years a research and development activity on image slicer system
for integral ﬁeld spectroscopy is conducted with already in-use instrumenta-
tions, such as GEMINI/GNIRS[1], and future applications for major ground-
based (VLT second-generation instruments[3]) and space (JWST[4], SNAP[2])
observatories.

An image slicer system is usually composed of a slicer mirror array associated
with rows of pupil mirrors and slit mirrors. These components are formed

Email address: Sebastien.Vives@oamp.fr (S. Viv`es).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

Fig. 1. At left, a lens array User-Deﬁned Surface included with ZEMAX r (3D-view
and surface sag). At right an example of slicer mirror array modeled using the
LAM-DLL here developed.

by a segmented assembly of several tilted and spherical mirrors. Making use
of optical design software ZEMAX r, the classical modeling method consists
in using the multi-conﬁguration mode. However, the use of such a mode im-
plies that each mirror is independently computed compared with each other.
Futhermore, such classical modeling is time-consuming because ZEMAX r
has to compute a large number of parameters (i.e. curvatures, tilts, decenters
for each sub-mirror) and conﬁgurations (one by sub-mirror) to consider the
whole instrument.

Taking advantage of UDS-DLL Zemax capability, we present an easier method
to simulate segmented surfaces (slicer mirror array and rows of mirrors).

2 Slicer Mirror User-Deﬁned Surface

For those cases where a specialized surface is required, ZEMAX r supports a
User-Deﬁned Surface (UDS). All the properties of such a surface are deﬁned
in a separate C or C++ program, compiled and linked into ZEMAX r using a
Windowsr DLL (Dynamic Link Library). The DLL contains functions which
compute and return to ZEMAX r all the data required to draw the surface,
trace rays, compute refraction angles, etc.

The UDS-DLL lend itself to model slicer mirrors by oﬀering a complete de-
scription of their segmented surfaces. Fig. 1 shows two complex surfaces mod-
elled using two diﬀerent UDS-DLL: a micro-lenses array as included in ZE-
MAX r and a slicer mirror array here developed (called LAM-DLL).

2

Fig. 2. Slicer mirror array optical speciﬁcations and notations.

2.1 A Slicer Mirror

The LAM-DLL allows to model a slicer mirror array where each individual
mirror has a rectangular clear aperture and could be spherical or ﬂat in shape.
One may speciﬁed the number of slices and their dimensions as well as curva-
tures and tilts for each slices. Their X- and Y-positions (Fig. 2) are directly
controlled by the LAM-DLL while their Z-position along the current optical
axis may be speciﬁed for each slice individually. Surface sag and rays propa-
gation are computed, and basically a close loop with ZEMAX r is established
in order to determine which segment of the slicer mirror array is struck by the
rays on the one hand, and on the other, to use the local curvature and tilts to
compute the properties of the reﬂected rays.

In such a way, a slicer mirror array is correctly described by two sets of data
parameters speciﬁed in the Lens Data Editor or in the Extra Data Editor as
following described.

2.2 Parameter data

Making use of Lens Data Editor, the user may speciﬁed parameters deﬁning
the whole component such as the number of slices and their dimensions in
both X- and Y-directions (Fig. 2). Furthermore, three additional parameters
are introduced as following:

(1) ”Active slice?” deﬁnes which slice is considered in the paraxial calcu-
lation providing pupil location, magniﬁcation, eﬀective focal length, etc.
(2) ”Centered?” acts as a decenter of the complete surface: the optical axis
may be centered on the ﬁrst slice or on the entire surface of the slicer
array. This parameter allows to avoid error due to the possible lack of
chief ray data in the case of the number of slice is even.

(3) ”Iter.” deﬁnes the number of iterations used to compute which slice is
struck by each ray. This parameter could be useful if the step between
two consecutive slices is large and/or if rays come from high angles of

3

Fig. 3. Basic optical design of an IFU (3 slices). The slicer mirror array and the
row of pupil mirrors are modeled by the LAM-DLL.

incidence.

2.3 Extra data

Making use of Extra Data Editor, the user may speciﬁed parameters deﬁning
each slice individually such as curvature, tilts in both directions (Tilt-X and
Tilt-Y) and decenter along the optical axis (Z-Dec). Note that the parameter
Z-Dec does not aﬀect the whole surface but only shifts each slice’s vertex along
the current optical axis.

Bear in mind that the curvature is deﬁned in the Extra Data Editor and that
only ﬂat and spherical surfaces are considered. Thus allocations initially used
by ZEMAX r to specify the curvature and the conic constant in the Lens
Data Editor are ineﬀective.

3 Discussion

The LAM-DLL acts like the commonly used ”standard surface”, thus opti-
mization and analysis features of ZEMAX r apply as well. The LAM-DLL
is capable to consider all operands deﬁned in the Merit Function making op-
tical optimizations faster by a factor 2 to 5 for the same design using Multi
Conﬁguration Editor. Meanwhile the construction of the Merit Function needs
some adaptations to consider all facets of the segmented surface and since the
LAM-DLL can form multiple focal spots.

Analysis and tolerancing can be performed with equal results but some anal-
ysis are facilitated in particular those need to consider all slices such as the
cross-talk due to diﬀraction. An optical layout composed by a simulated tele-
scope, a slicer and a pupil mirror arrays (modelled by LAM-DLL) was de-

4

Fig. 4. Cross-talk analysis (diﬀraction). The two-dimensional point spread function
(PSF) formed onto the slicer mirror array (a) is optically divided into three small
images that are re-imaged along a slit (c). The slicer mirror array has some power
in order to re-image the telescope stop on the row of pupil mirrors (b).

signed in order to emphasize cross-talk due the diﬀraction that it is a direct
issue using LAM-DLL. We used the Physical Optical Propagation (POP) tool
of ZEMAX r. The simulated telescope forms an image of a point source lo-
cated to inﬁnity onto the slicer mirrors array (Fig. 4a). This image is optically
divided into three small images that are re-formed by the pupil mirrors along
a slit (Fig. 4c). Fig. 4b also shows the image of the telescope pupil formed by
the slicer onto the row of pupil mirrors. Note that both results (Fig. 4b and
4c) suggest some cross-talk analysis of the system.

As detailled in the section 2, the LAM-DLL uses four parameters to describe
each slice that leads to 60 slices maximum since Lens Data Editor only has
242 allocations available. This is clearly a limitation of the number of param-
eters describing each slice.

Finally by making the Multi Conﬁguration Editor available, the LAM-DLL is
appropriated to design new wide-ﬁeld spectrographs using multiple integral-
ﬁeld units (e.g. GEMINI/GIRMOS[5] which uses 32 image-slicing IFUs or
VLT/MUSE[3] which uses 24 IFUs).

In the immediate future, we are studying the possibilities of implementing
aspherical surface shapes and variable pitch between two consecutive vertex
(at the expense of reducing the maximum number of slice).

5

References

[1] Dubbeldam, M. et al., Integral ﬁeld unit
spectrograph Proc. SPIE, 4008, 136, 2000

for the Gemini near-infrared

[2] Ealet, A., Prieto, E., & SNAP Collaboration 2002, An Integral Field
Spectrograph for SNAP Supernova Identiﬁcation, Bulletin of the American
Astronomical Society, 34, 1258, 2002

[3] Henault, F., et al., MUSE: a second-generation integral-ﬁeld spectrograph for

the VLT Proc. SPIE, 4841, 1096, 2003

[4] Prieto, E. et al., Great opportunity for NGST-NIRSPEC: A high resolution

integral ﬁeld unit, Proc. SPIE, 4850, 486, 2003

[5] Wright, G. S., et al., GIRMOS: an infrared multi-object spectrograph for Gemini

Proc. SPIE, 4008, 729, 2000

6

