Waveguiding properties of surface states in photonic crystals

A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko
Department of Science and Technology, Link¨oping University, 601 74, Norrk¨oping, Sweden
(Dated: December 30, 2013)

We propose and analyze novel surface-state-based waveguides in bandgap photonic crystals. We
discuss surface mode band structure, ﬁeld localization and eﬀect of imperfections on the waveguiding
properties of the surface modes. We demonstrate that surface-state-based waveguides can be used
to achieve directional emission out of the waveguide. We also discuss the application of the surface-
state-waveguides as eﬃcient light couplers for conventional photonic crystal waveguides.

we apply a novel computational method based on the re-
cursive Green’s function technique [11]. The advantage
of this method is that it allows us to calculate and use
surface Bloch modes as scattering states of the system,
which makes it possible to compute the transmission co-
eﬃcients for surface modes and corresponding ﬁeld dis-
tributions.

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 42.70.Qs, 42.79Gn, 42.82.Et

Introduction. Photonic crystals (PCs) have attracted
increasing attention in the last decade due to their unique
properties and possible applications in integrated opti-
cal and photonic devices like light emitting diodes, delay
lines, waveguides and lasers [1, 2]. Among variety of
photonic-crystal-based devices waveguides play a crucial
role not only as optical interconnections but also as active
elements in wide-angle branches [3], channel add/drop
ﬁlters [4, 5], tapered couplers [6], optical switches [7],
etc. Waveguides represent line defects in periodic crys-
tal structures supporting guided Bloch modes whose fre-
quency is located in the bandgap. These modes are
strongly conﬁned within the waveguide region and can
propagate without loss to substantial distances. In the
present letter we propose a novel type of waveguiding
structures, namely waveguides that operate on surface
states of semi-inﬁnite photonic crystals and are located
on the surface of a PC. Employing surfaces of photonic
crystals as waveguides may open up new possibilities for
design and operation of photonic structures for feeding
and redistributing light in PCs.

Surface states reside at the interface between a pho-
tonic crystal and open space, decaying into both mediae
In a square
[1] and propagating along the boundary.
lattice photonic crystal the surface states appear in the
bandgap when a boundary of a PC is modiﬁed in some
way, by, e.g., truncating the surface rods, shrinking or
increasing their size, or creating more complex surface
geometry [1, 8, 9, 10, 11]. The surface modes in a semi-
inﬁnite photonic crystal represent truly Bloch states with
the inﬁnite lifetime and Q factor, and consequently do
not couple to incoming/outgoing radiation. At the same
time, it has been demonstrated that when the transla-
tional symmetry along the boundary of the semi-inﬁnite
crystal is broken, the surface mode turns into a resonant
state with a ﬁnite lifetime, which can be utilized for las-
It has also been
ing and sensing applications [11, 12].
recently shown that with the help of surface modes it is
possible to achieve directional beaming from the waveg-
uide opening on the modiﬁed surface of a photonic crys-
tal [13, 14]. Surface states there, coupled with outgoing
waveguide radiation, suppress diﬀraction and focus out-
going beam. At the same time, so far there have been no
reports on study of guiding properties of PC surfaces.

In order to study surface states in photonic crystals,

FIG. 1: (color online) Band structures for TM modes in ΓX
direction of a square-lattice photonic crystals composed of
rods diameter D = 0.4a and permittivity ε = 8.9 along with
the projected surface modes. The diameter of the surface
rods is (a) d = 0.2a and (b) d = 0.68a. The fat line denotes
the light line. Lower panel shows the normalized intensity of
Ez component in diﬀerent points of surface-mode dispersion
curves.

Surface band structure. We consider a semi-inﬁnite
square-lattice photonic crystal composed of cylinders
with ε = 8.9 and diameter D = 0.4a (a is a lattice con-
stant) in air background. We study two diﬀerent sur-
face geometries supporting the surface states where the
outmost rods has (a) reduced diameter d = 0.2a and
(b) enlarged d = 0.68a. This photonic crystal has a
fundamental bandgap for TM-polarization in the range
0.33 < ωa/2πc < 0.44 and supports one surface mode for
case (a), and two modes for case (b) as shown in Fig. 1.
The surface modes for these two structures shows diﬀer-
ent patterns of ﬁeld localization. For structure (a) the

2

are known as the most suitable for waveguidung appli-
cations, whereas slow modes can rather attract interest
in structures for ”slowing light” [15] or in surface-state
cavities [11, 12].

ﬁeld intensity has one maximum within each rod and ex-
tends into the air, quickly decaying into the crystal. For
low energies a signiﬁcant part of the ﬁeld intensity ex-
tends into a wide ∼ 5 − 10a air layer near the surface of
the PC. This can be apparently attributed to the prox-
imity between the dispersion curve of the surface state
and the light line, where the group velocity of the sur-
face state, v = ∂E/∂k, is close to c, see Fig. 1(a) and
Fig. 3 (a). As the energy increases, the dispersion curve
moves away from the light line, and the ﬁeld becomes
mainly concentrated on the surface rods. For the case
of the structure (b) with enlarged surface rods, the ﬁeld
is mostly located within each cylinder and has a node
oriented either horizontally (mode I) or vertically (mode
II),see Fig. 1(b). In contrast with case (a) the intensity
of both surface modes is mainly localized within the sur-
face rods and its extent to the air is small for the whole
energy range.

FIG. 2: (color online) Fragments of the band structures for
TM modes in ΓX direction of inﬁnite square-lattice test pho-
tonic crystals composed of rods with ε = 8.9 and diameter
(a) d = 0.2a, (b) d = 0.68a along with the projected surface
modes of the semi-inﬁnite photonic crystal of Fig. 1. Field
distributions (Ez-components) for corresponding bands are
given as the insets.

Let us concentrate now on the surface mode disper-
sion and the intensity distribution in structures with re-
duced and enlarged surface cylinders. To this end, we
construct two test photonic crystals entirely consisting of
corresponding surface rods (i.e. with diameters d = 0.2a
and d = 0.68). Their band structures along with the pro-
jected surface states for the structures (a) and (b) (shown
in Fig. 1) are represented in Fig. 2. The dispersion curve
of the surface state for the structure (a) begins at the
light line and remains nearly linear up to ωa/2πc & 0.40,
where its slope slowly decreases and ﬁnally reaches zero.
Figure 2(a), demonstrate that the shape of the surface
state closely follows the valence band of the test crys-
tal in the ΓX direction. The same situation holds also
for structure (b), where both surface bands mimic the
bulk levels in the conduction band of the correspond-
ing test PC (given in Fig. 2(b)). Field distributions
for corresponding bands are given as the insets to Fig. 2
and outline the relations between surface-state bands and
corresponding bands of test PCs. It is worth mentioning
that both surface bands for structure (b) have lower ve-
locity in comparison to structure (a). Fast surface states

FIG. 3: (color online) (a) Velocity of diﬀerent surface modes
(b) Transmission coeﬃcient for surface modes
from Fig.1.
propagating in a non-ideal surface-mode waveguide.
Inset
shows the structure under study, where the shaded regions
denote ideal semi-inﬁnite waveguides, and the central region
of the width of 5a represents an imperfect photonic crystal
where scattering of the Bloch surface states takes place.

Eﬀect of inhomogeneities. Let us focus on the eﬀect of
inhomogeneities of the PC (imperfections in a shape of
the rods, their displacement, or variation of the refrac-
tion index throughout the crystal, etc.) on the waveg-
uiding properties of surface states. It has been demon-
strated previously that such imperfections strongly af-
fect the performance of lasing microcavities [16]. We will
show below that such the imperfections can cause a pro-
found impact on the waveguiding eﬃciency of the surface
modes.

In order to study the eﬀects of imperfections, we di-
vide the system under study into three regions as shown
in the inset to Fig. 3. Two of them are left and right
semi-inﬁnite periodic structures (perfect waveguides for
surface modes), and the block of the PC in between is
an imperfect region. Utilization of the Green’s function
technique allows us to use surface Bloch modes as scat-
tering states that propagate in perfect waveguides from
the inﬁnity into the imperfect region where they undergo
scattering. Obviously, in the case when the scattering
region is absent (perfect waveguides are attached to each
other), the Bloch states propagate freely without any
scattering.

Because the model is numerical, the discretization of
the circular rods of PCs can not be perfect and thus
can be treated as inhomogeneities or roughness of the

structure. Note that the periodic waveguides are also
discretized, but their discretization is deliberately chosen
diﬀerently from that for the central region. The central
scattering region represents a photonic crystal of a width
of 5 unit cells, each of them being discretized into 25
meshes (∼ λ/50) in both x and y directions. Fig. 3
shows the velocities of surface states in both structures
and corresponding transmission coeﬃcients.
(We note
that when the discretization of each cell in the central
region is chosen the same as for unit cells in the left and
right waveguides, the transmission coeﬃcient through the
structure is unity).

The transmission coeﬃcients for each surface mode
drop quite rapidly in the energy regions corresponding
to the low velocity of the surface state. This is because
the backscattering probability is greatly enhanced for the
low-speed states. Slow states for structure with enlarged
surface rods are the most strongly aﬀected. Even for 5
imperfect unit cells the transmission coeﬃcients for both
modes approaches 1 only in very narrow energy range,
which makes these states hardly appropriate for waveg-
uiding purposes. At the same time the transmission coef-
ﬁcient for the fast surface state in the structure (a) with
the reduced boundary rods remains 1 in a wide energy
region up to ωa/2πc ∼ 0.40, which makes it better can-
didate for waveguiding applications.

Applications of surface-state waveguides: Light cou-
pler. Due to a unique location on the surface of the
PC, surface-state waveguides can be exploited in a va-
riety of novel applications.
In this letter we focus on
two of them, introducing novel light lead-in structure and
sketching the possibility to use a surface-state waveguide
as a directional emitter.

Feeding light into waveguides in photonic crystals com-
posed of dielectric rods in air background is a compli-
cated challenge, as normally it requires extremely ac-
curate positioning of a dielectric waveguide and precise
mode matching [17, 18]. Even in this case diﬀraction
at the waveguide termination usually hampers coupling,
and the eﬃciency of such lead-in systems hardly exceeds
60%. Other coupling techniques, like utilization of adi-
abatic dielectric tapers [19] can improve the device per-
formance but exhibits high sensitivity to parameters of
the tapers.

In this letter we propose a novel coupler based on
waveguiding properties of surface states. Figure 4 illus-
trates such a lead-in structure composed of a surface-
state waveguide to the left and a conventional tapered
PC waveguide to the right. The diameter of the surface
rods in the surface-state waveguide gradually decreases
to zero in the region of the conventional PC waveguide as
shown in Fig. 4. In this device an incoming state in the
surface-mode waveguide region enters a tapered region
where it is adiabatically transformed into conventional
waveguiding state.

The maximum achieved transmission reaches T ≈ 0.8,
see inset to Fig. 4. We should also mention that care-
ful optimization of the surface geometry may further im-

3

FIG. 4: (color online) A lead-in coupler structure composed
of a surface-state waveguide to the left and a conventional
tapered PC waveguide to the right. The size of the surface
rods gradually decreases to zero in the central region where
the surface-state waveguide transforms in a conventional PC
waveguide. Intensity distribution is shown for Ez-component
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld at ωa/2πc ≈ 0.365. Arrows de-
pict the ﬂow of the Poynting vector. Transmission coeﬃcient
subject to energy of incoming light is given in the inset. Pa-
rameters of the photonic crystal correspond to structure (a)
in Fig. 1.

prove the performance of surface-state waveguide cou-
plers, but such the work is out of the scope of the present
Letter. We also note that our 2D calculations do not ac-
count for the radiative decay in the direction perpendic-
ular to the plane of the photonic crystal.

Applications of surface-state waveguides: Directional
emitter. The width of a conventional waveguide in PC is
of the order of wavelength of light λ. Because of this, the
beam launched from a semi-inﬁnite photonic crystal into
open space is diﬀracted at the waveguide opening in a
strong angular spread ∼ 2π. It has been recently shown
that it is possible to achieve directional emission out of a
PC waveguides with corrugated terminations supporting
leaky or evanescent surface states [13, 14]. We demon-
strate below that directional emission with the angular
spread much less than in conventional waveguides can
also be achieved for the case of surface-state waveguides
coupled to air. Figure 5 shows Ez ﬁeld intensity and
directional diagram for the surface state propagating in
semi-inﬁnite waveguide corresponding to the structure
(a) with the surface rods of a reduced diameter. The
most of the beam intensity is localized within a range
∆Θ ∼ 20◦.
It should be also noted that the coupling
of the surface state to air is rather high. Inset to Fig.
5 shows the transmission coeﬃcient for the surface state
in the semi-inﬁnite surface waveguide propagating into
open space. T is close to unity in the energy region cor-
responding to high velocity of the surface state and drops
rapidly for energies ωa/2πc & 0.40 where the velocity of
the surface state decreases.

For the case of PC waveguides with corrugated ter-
minations the directional emission is achieved as the re-
sult of the coupling between the incident beam in the

4

waveguide with the surface modes on the PC termination
that causes the destructive interference for all directions
(Note that a
except a narrow beaming cone [13, 14].
mechanism of the directional beaming in PC waveguides
is conceptually similar to that one in a subwavelength
aperture in corrugated metallic ﬁlms, where the incident
beam is coupled to the surface plasmons residing at the
corrugated boundary [20, 21]).

The origin of a rather narrow beaming cone for the case
of surface-state waveguides is related to the fact that the
surface state is localized in a wide spatial region near the
surface . 10a (as opposed to conventional waveguides
whose width is typically ∼ a), see Fig. 1. The angular
spread in this case due to the diﬀraction, sin θ ∼ λ
10a is
consistent with the calculated far-ﬁeld radial distribution
of the Poynting vector. As the frequency of the incoming
light increases, the surface mode becomes more localized,
and the spread of the outgoing radiation increases. The
eﬀect of directional beaming in surface-mode waveguides
might ﬁnd its practical application for integration of PC-
based devices with conventional ﬁber-optic devices.

Conclusions We put forward a novel concept for waveg-
uiding structures based on surface modes in the bandgap
photonic crystal structures. We analyze surface mode
band structure, ﬁeld localization and eﬀect of imperfec-
tions on the waveguiding properties of the surface modes.
To illustrate applications of the surface-state waveguides
we suggest a new principle for feeding light into a pho-
tonic crystal waveguide and demonstrate that a semi-
inﬁnite surface-state waveguide can be used as a direc-
tional emitter.

FIG. 5:
(color online)(a) Intensity distribution for Ez-
component of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the surface-mode
waveguide terminated to air for ωa/2πc = 0.34. (b) Far-ﬁeld
radial component of the Poynting vector Sr(θ) radiated out
of a surface-mode waveguide as a function of azimuthal angle
θ for diﬀerent ωa/2π. Inset shows the transmission coeﬃcient
for the surface state as a function of the frequency. Parame-
ters of the waveguide correspond to structure (a) in Fig. 1.

[1] J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, and J. N. Winn,
(Princeton University

“Molding the Flow of Light”,
Press, Princeton, 1995).

[2] K. Sakoda, “Optical properties of photonic crystalls”

(Springer, Berlin, 2001).

[3] S. Fan, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, C. Manolatou,
and H. A. Haus, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 18, 162 (2001).
[4] T. Asano, B.-S. Song, Y. Tanaka, and S. Noda, Appl.

[5] S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys.

Phys. Lett., 83, 407 (2003).

Rev. B, 59, 15882 (1999).

[6] S. G. Johnson, P. Bienstman, M. A. Skorobogatiy, M.
Ibanescu, E. Lidorikis, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys.
Rev. E 66, 066608 (2002).

[7] M. F. Yanik, S. Fan, M. Soljarci´c, and J. D. Joannopou-

los, Opt. Lett, 28, 2506 (2003).

[9] X. Zhang, L.-M. Li, Z.-Q. Zhang, and C. T. Chan, Phys.

Rev. B, 63 125114 (2001).

[10] J. M. Elson and K. Halterman, Opt. Express 12, 4855

[11] A.I. Rahachou and I.V. Zozoulenko, Phys. Rev. B 72,

15112 (1999).

(2004).

155117 (2005).

[12] J.-K. Yang, S.-H. Kim, G.-H. Kim, H.-G. Park, Y.-H.

Lee, and S.-B. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 84, 3016 (2004).
[13] E. Moreno, F. J. Garc´ia-Vidal, and L. Matri´in-Moreno,

Phys. Rev. B, 69, 121402(R) (2004).

[14] P. Kramper, M. Agio, C. M. Soukoulis, A. Birner, F.
M¨uller, R. B. Wehrspohn, U. G¨ossele, and V. Sandogh-
dar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 11903-1 (2004).

[15] A. Figotin and I. Vitebskiy, arxiv:physics/0504112.
[16] A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko, J. Appl. Phys. 94,
7929 (2003); A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko, Appl.
Optics 43, 1761 (2004).

[17] P. Sanches, P. Bienstman, B. Luyssaert, R. Baets, and J.

Marti, IEEE J. Quant, Electron. 40, 541 (2004).

[18] R. Stoﬀer, H. Hoekstra, R. M. De Ridder, E. V. Groesen,
and F. P. H. Van Beckum, Opt. Quant. Electron. 32, 947
(2000).

[19] A. Mekis, and J. D. Joannopoulos, IEEE J. Lightwave

[20] H.J. Lezec, A. Degiron, E. Devaux, R.A. Linke, L.
Martin-Moreno, F.J. Garcia-Vidal, and T.W. Ebbesen,
Science 297, 820 (2002).

[21] L. Martin-Moreno, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, J. J. Lezec, A.
Degiron, and T.W. Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 167401
(2003).

[8] F. Ramos-Mendieta and P. Halevi, Phys. Rev. B, 59

Technol. 19, 861, (2001)

