5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Brewster’s eﬀect for TE waves with metamaterials

Y. Tamayama,1 T. Nakanishi,1, 2, ∗ K. Sugiyama,1, 2 and M. Kitano1, 2, †
1Department of Electronic Science and Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan
2CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 103-0028, Japan
(Dated: March 16, 2008)

We have realized Brewster’s eﬀect for transverse electric (TE) waves with metamaterials. It has
been recognized that Brewster’s no-reﬂection eﬀect arises only for TM waves. However, it arises
for TE waves under the condition that the relative permeability µr is not equal to unity. We have
designed an array of split ring resonators (SRRs) as a metamaterial with µr 6= 1 using a ﬁnite-
diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) method. The reﬂection measurements were carried out in a 3-GHz
region and the disappearance of reﬂected waves at a particular incident angle was conﬁrmed.

PACS numbers: 41.20.Jb, 42.25.Gy, 78.20.Ci

Brewster’s no-reﬂection condition is one of the main
features of the laws of reﬂection and refraction of elec-
tromagnetic waves at a boundary between two media.
For a speciﬁc incident angle, known as the Brewster an-
gle, the reﬂection wave vanishes. This phenomenon ex-
ists only for transverse magnetic (TM) waves (p waves),
and not for transverse electric (TE) waves (s waves). It
is conveniently applied in optical instruments. One can
generate completely polarized light from an unpolarized
light source only with a glass plate. It can also be used to
avoid the reﬂection losses at the surfaces of optical com-
ponents. The Brewster window of the discharge tube in
gaseous lasers is a typical example.

For a plane electromagnetic wave incident on the plane
boundary between medium 1 and medium 2, the ampli-
tude reﬂectivities of TE and TM waves are given by the
Fresnel formulae:

rTE =

sin (θt
θi)
sin (θt + θi)

−

,

rTM =

tan (θi
θt)
tan (θi + θt)

−

,

(1)

where θi and θt are the angles of incidence and trans-
mission, respectively [1]. The numerators in Eq. (1) can-
not vanish because θi is not equal to θt. However, rTM
can vanish because tan (θi + θt) diverges to inﬁnity when
(θi + θt) is equal to π/2.

Physically, Brewster’s phenomena can be understood
as follows. The direction of the induced electric dipole
in medium 2 is perpendicular to the wavevector therein.
With regard to TM waves, the dipole lies in the plane of
incidence. A linearly vibrating dipole radiates transver-
sally and cannot emit radiation in the direction of the
vibration. This direction coincides with the wavevector
of the reﬂected wave when the Brewster condition is sat-
isﬁed. The oscillating dipoles in the medium 2 do not
send any waves in the direction of the reﬂection. On
the other hand, with regard to TE waves, each dipole is
perpendicular to the plane of incidence and emits waves
isotropically in the plane. Therefore, no special angles
exist for TE waves. (The dipole model also explains the
sign change in the amplitude reﬂectivity when the angle
is changed through the Brewster angle.)

Brewster’s eﬀect exists only for TM waves, and not
for TE waves. This asymmetry results from the assump-
tion that the relative permeability µr is almost unity for
higher frequencies, such as microwaves and light waves.
Each medium is characterized only by its relative permit-
tivity εr. The assumption that is used in deriving Eq. (1)
is quite reasonable because for common materials, any
kind of magnetic response is frozen in high frequency re-
gions. However, the assumption must be reconsidered for
metamaterials, for which both εr and µr can be changed
signiﬁcantly from unity.

A metamaterial is composed of small conductive ele-
ments such as coils or rods, upon which currents are in-
duced by the incident electric or magnetic ﬁelds. When
their sizes and separations are signiﬁcantly smaller than
the wavelengths, the collection of elements can be viewed
as a continuous medium. By utilizing resonant struc-
tures, both εr and µr could be signiﬁcantly shifted from
unity. In particular, a medium with εr < 0 and µr < 0 at-
tracts attention because of its peculiar behaviors owing to
εrµr
the negative index of refraction n = √εr√µr =
p
|
|
[2]. Negative refraction has been experimentally con-
ﬁrmed in microwave and terahertz regions [3, 4, 5].

−

An artiﬁcial medium with εr = 1, µr

= 1, which is a
= 1, µr = 1, can be
dual of normal dielectric materials, εr
designed. Magnetic dipoles are induced by the magnetic
ﬁeld of the incident wave. Repeating the discussion with
the dipole model, one can conclude that Brewster’s eﬀect
can be observed for TE waves in the case of such magnetic
metamaterials.

We assume that medium 1 is a vacuum and medium 2
is a medium with εr and µr. The amplitude reﬂectivities
for TE waves and TM waves are expressed as follows:

rTE =

Zr cos θi
cos θt
Zr cos θi + cos θt

−

,

rTM =

cos θi
Zr cos θt
cos θi + Zr cos θt

−

, (2)

where Zr = pµr/εr is the normalized wave impedance of
medium 2 [1]. The incident angle θi and the transmitted
angle θt are related by Snell’s law sin θi/ sin θt = n with
n = √εr√µr. The no-reﬂection conditions, rTE = 0 or

6
6
2

FIG. 1: Brewster condition for media with relative permittiv-
ity εr and relative permeability µr. Brewster conditions for
TE waves and TM waves exist in the unshaded and shaded
areas, respectively. The curves represent the contour lines of
the Brewster angles.

rTM = 0, can be written as follows:

sin2 θi =

0

≤

α2
α2

−
−

n2
1 ≤

1,

(3)

where α = µr for TE waves and α = εr for TM waves.
With this equation, the Brewster angle can be deter-
mined for a given pair, (µr, εr). In Fig. 1, the Brewster
angles are plotted parametrically on the (µr, εr)-plane.
Based on the inequalities of Eq. (3), we see that the Brew-
ster angle for TM waves exists only in the shaded area in
Fig. 1. By exchanging the roles of εr and µr, we obtain
the Brewster condition for TE waves as indicated by the
unshaded area in Fig. 1.

It is apparent that Brewster’s eﬀect arises only for TM
waves in normal media (µr = 1). However, for a medium
with µr
= 1, the Brewster condition for TE waves can
be realized. For a given µr ≷ 1, when 1/µr ≶ εr ≶ µr is
satisﬁed, there exists a Brewster angle for TE waves. In
other words, the medium must be more magnetic, rather
than electric, in order to realize the Brewster condition
for TE waves.

We consider an array of split ring resonators (SRRs),
as shown in Fig. 2 (a). It serves as a magnetic medium
with µr
= 1 in microwave regions [6]. Each SRR func-
tions as a series resonant circuit formed by the ring in-
ductance and inter-ring capacitance. When we apply
time-varying magnetic ﬁelds through the ring, a circu-
lar current around the ring is induced near the resonance
frequency so that it produces a magnetic moment. Ow-
ing to the resonant structure, the eﬀective permeability
µr could be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from unity.

We calculate the relative complex permittivity εr and
permeability µr of the SRR array using a ﬁnite-diﬀerence

FIG. 2: (a) Split ring resonator. r is the average radius of
two rings; w, the width of the ring; d, the distance between
the two rings; t, the thickness of the ring. (b) SRR used in
the FDTD analysis.

time-domain (FDTD) method [7]. We consider a rectan-
gular SRR, as shown in Fig. 2 (b), for the purpose of
simplicity in calculation. Assuming that a plane wave is
incident on the SRR array, we analyzed the charge distri-
bution and the induced current, from which the electric
and magnetic dipole moments originate. The permittiv-
ity εr (permeability µr) can be derived from an electric
(magnetic) dipole moment of a single SRR and the den-
sity of the SRRs.

Figure 3 shows εr and µr as a function of frequency f .
The real parts of εr and µr are related to the dispersive or
refractive properties of metamaterials, and the imaginary
parts are related to the losses or absorption. As seen in
Fig. 3, the permittivity can be regarded as unity for any
frequency, and Re(µr) and Im(µr) can be approximated
by the Lorentz dispersion and absorption functions. The
SRR array functions as a magnetic medium with ﬁnite
losses. We also found that the LC circuit model is helpful
in the estimation of the resonance frequency.

The reﬂectivity at the Brewster angle for the SRR ar-
ray, unlike an ideal medium without losses, has a nonzero
value due to the dissipation. If the dispersive property
of the magnetic medium dominates the dissipation, we
can detect a signiﬁcant depression in the power reﬂec-
tivity around the Brewster angle. In order to estimate
the magnitude of the depression, we introduce the ratio
of the minimum power reﬂectivity Rmin to the power re-
ﬂectivity for normal incidence, R0. The lesser the ratio
Rmin/R0, the more easily we can detect Brewster’s eﬀect
in the experiments. From the calculation by the FDTD
method, we ﬁnd that the ratio Rmin/R0 reduces in a
narrow region below the resonance frequency, which is
indicated by the arrow marked with an asterisk in Fig. 3,
and the Brewster condition for the TE wave could easily
be detected.

A power-reﬂectivity measurement system as shown in
Fig. 4, is used to observe Brewster’s eﬀect for the TE
waves with an SRR array.

The SRRs are formed on printed circuit boards. To

6
6
3

RX

TX

network
analyzer
E
θ
H k

θ

D = 4.5λ0

SRR array

W = 13.6λ 0

aluminum
plates

z

x

y

FIG. 4: Schematic diagram of the reﬂectivity measurement
system. Measurement is performed in a 2D waveguide com-
posed of two aluminum plates. The separation between two
aluminum plates is 38 mm(= 0.38λ0).

value calculated with the LC circuit model.

We used a network analyzer as the microwave gener-
ator and detector. We connected a horn antenna to the
transmitting port of the network analyzer in order to
transmit a plane wave. We use another horn antenna
connected to the receiving port in order to receive the
plane wave reﬂected at the boundary. Only the plane
wave propagating normal to the antenna aperture can be
coupled to the receiver. We always set the direction of
the receiving horn antenna such that a plane wave re-
ﬂected with a reﬂection angle equal to the incident angle
is detected.

We measured the θ dependence of the power reﬂectiv-
ity for a ﬁxed frequency. One of the results is shown in
Fig. 5 (a). Compared with the case of perfect reﬂection,
the reﬂectivity decreases by more than 27 dB in the vicin-
ity of θ = 60◦, which corresponds to the Brewster angle
for TE waves.

We measured the frequency dependence of the Brew-
ster angle. The result is shown in Fig. 5 (b) (solid circles).
The Brewster angles could be determined only in a lim-
ited region just below the resonance frequency. In this
region, the measured Brewster angles increase with the
frequency. We calculated the frequency dependence of
the Brewster angles from Eq. (2) by assuming εr(f ) = 1
f 2
0 ), where f0 = 2.65 GHz
and µr(f ) = 1
is the resonance frequency that is previously determined
by the absorption measurement. By ﬁtting the calculated
values to the measured values, we ﬁxed the parameters
F and γ. The calculated angle is shown as the dashed
line in Fig. 5 (b). It increases with frequency; this is in
agreement with the experimental results.

F/(f 2 + iγf

−

−

As previously discussed, we can observe the Brewster
angles only in a limited frequency region. It should be

FIG. 3: Complex relative permittivity εr and complex relative
permeability µr versus frequency for the SRR array. The
SRRs in Fig. 2 (b) are placed every 4.4 mm in both the E
direction and the H direction to form a 2D array. The array
is a monolayer in the k direction. The conductivity of the ring
is 1.0×108 S/m. Rmin/R0 is very small in the frequency region
and is represented by the arrow marked with an asterisk.

facilitate easy preparation, the parameters are chosen as
r = 4.0 mm, w = 0.61 mm, d = 0.48 mm, and t = 35 µm.
From a simpliﬁed LC circuit model, the resonance fre-
quency is estimated to be 3.04 GHz; this corresponds to
the wavelength in a vacuum, λ0 = 9.9 cm.

×

We set two aluminum plates (1 m

1.5 m) parallel to
each other to form a two-dimensional waveguide, in which
horn antennas and an SRR array are inserted. The sep-
aration between the two plates is 38 mm(= 0.38λ0). In
this waveguide, the electric ﬁeld is perpendicular to the
plates, and the electromagnetic ﬁeld becomes uniform
along the z direction. Thus only TE waves can be prop-
agated.

The unit cell size of an SRR array must be signiﬁcantly
smaller than λ0; therefore, we arranged the SRRs every
1.4 cm(= 0.14λ0) in the x and y directions and 1.3 cm(=
0.13λ0) in the z direction. The direction of H varies in
the xy plane because the power reﬂectivity is measured
for various incident angles θ. We arranged the SRRs
orthogonally to make the response of the SRR array
isotropic. The dimension of the SRR array is (W, D, T ) =
(135 cm, 45 cm, 38 mm) = (13.6λ0, 4.5λ0, 0.38λ0). In or-
der to ensure an extended boundary, we set the width W
to be signiﬁcantly larger than λ0. We made the depth
D suﬃciently large so that the inﬂuence of the back side
reﬂection can be avoided.

First, we measured the transmissivity of the SRR array
in order to determine the resonance frequency f0, which
was found to be 2.65 GHz; it was 12.8 % smaller than the

4

small. In the other on-resonance frequency regions, Rmin
cannot be suﬃciently small due to the absorption losses.
On the other hand, R0 reduces in the oﬀ-resonance re-
gions.

In conclusion, we observed Brewster’s eﬀect for TE
waves, which had previously never been observed for nor-
mal dielectric media. We need a medium whose µr is
not equal to unity. We have used a metamaterial com-
posed of SRRs in order to achieve a magnetic medium
in a microwave region. This is a good example of the
use of metamaterials. In terms of the parameter space
(µr, εr), by introducing metamaterials, the rigid condi-
tion of εr > 0, µr = 1 can be eliminated. The restric-
tions εr > 0 and µr > 0 can also be eliminated. The
working range of metamaterials presently extends from
microwaves to terahertz or even to optical regions.
In
the near future, we may be able to fabricate a Brewster
window for TE light.

This research was supported by the 21st Century COE

Program No. 14213201.

∗ Electronic address: t-naka@kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp
† Electronic address: kitano@kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp
[1] E. Hecht, Optics (Addison-Wesley, 1998), 3rd ed.
[2] V. G. Veselago, Sov. Phys. Usp. 10, 509 (1968).
[3] R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Science 292,

[4] C. G. Parazzoli, R. B. Greegor, K. Li, B. E. C. Koltenbah,
and M. Tanielian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 107401 (2003).
[5] A. A. Houck, J. B. Brock, and I. L. Chuang, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 90, 137401 (2003).

[6] J. Pendry, A. Holden, D. Robbins, and W. Stewart, IEEE

Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 47, 2075 (1999).

[7] A. Taﬂove and S. C. Hagness, Computational electrody-
namics: the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain method (Artech
House, 2005), 3rd ed.

FIG. 5:
(a) Power reﬂectivity of the SRR array at f =
2.6001 GHz as a function of θ. (b) Measured (solid circle) and
calculated (dashed line) Brewster angles versus frequency.

77 (2001).

noted that in actual experiments, the reﬂectivity varies
somewhat erratically due to the interference of spurious
waves or other reasons, and the dip in reﬂectivity can be
detected only for the cases where Rmin/R0 is suﬃciently

