5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nanosecond microscopy with a high spectroscopic resolution

Christoph Heinrich, Stefan Bernet, and Monika Ritsch-Marte
Division of Biomedical Physics, Innsbruck Medical University, M¨ullerstr. 44, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
(Dated: July 23, 2013)

We demonstrate coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy in a wide-ﬁeld setup
with nanosecond laser pulse excitation. In contrast to confocal setups, the image of a sample can be
recorded with a single pair of excitation pulses. For this purpose the excitation geometry is specially
designed in order to satisfy the phase matching condition over the whole sample area. The spectral,
temporal and spatial sensitivity of the method is demonstrated by imaging test samples, i.e. oil
vesicles in sunﬂower seeds, on a nanosecond timescale. The method provides snapshot imaging in 3
−1
nanoseconds with a spectral resolution of 25 cm

.

PACS numbers: 87.64.-t, 87.64.Vv, 42.65.Dr

Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) has
established as a spectrally selective method in mi-
for imaging structures within biological
croscopy, e.g.
cells [1, 2, 3].
In contrast to ﬂuorescence microscopy,
it is not necessary to stain the sample with ﬂuorescent
dyes. Instead, excitation is performed with a pair of laser
pulses which have a frequency diﬀerence corresponding
to a Raman transition of the selected structures. This
results in coherent emission of light at the so-called anti-
Stokes frequency. The blue-shifted signal can be eas-
ily separated from the excitation light by corresponding
high-pass ﬁlters. Typically, a confocal microscopy setup
is used, where the two excitation pulses are collinearily
focused at a single spot of the sample, where the emitted
anti-Stokes signal is detected from. Imaging is then per-
formed by sampling the specimen point-by-point and re-
constructing its shape by the computer. For this purpose,
the pulses are provided by pico- or femtosecond laser sys-
tems which provide a high pulse intensity required for the
nonlinear process at a suﬃciently high repetition rate for
fast sampling. Advantages of such a confocal setup con-
sist in its high spatial resolution, which is similar to con-
focal ﬂuorescence microscopy, in the possibility of three-
dimensional sectioning of the object volume, and in the
chemical selectivity, allowing to image speciﬁc substances
by controlling the frequency diﬀerence of the excitation
pulses [4].

However, here we demonstrate the advantages of a dif-
ferent CARS microscopy setup in a wide-ﬁeld imaging
geometry [5] using nanosecond excitation pulses. Such
a system is complementary to typical confocal scanning
setups: On the one hand, our wide-ﬁeld system oﬀers
a lower spatial resolution, because it lacks the spatial
ﬁltering capabilities of confocal microscopy. On the
other hand, it promises faster image acquisition, since
the whole sample is recorded without scanning, and it
can principally provide a better chemical resolution due
to the smaller bandwidth of the nanosecond excitation
pulses as compared to pico- or femtosecond systems.

Here we demonstrate ultra-fast microscopic imaging of
cell components with a single pair of excitation pulses

k

p1

k

p2

ωp ωs

ωp

ωas

kas

k

s

ωvib

FIG. 1: Left: CARS transition scheme. Two incident pump
photons with a frequency of ωp are converted into an outgo-
ing Stokes- (ωs) and an anti-Stokes (ωas) photon in the vicin-
ity of a Raman active molecule with a vibrational transition
frequency of ωvib. The process is stimulated by an external
Stokes beam. Right: Extremely folded CARS wave-matching
geometry [5, 6] with two pump photons (wave vectors ~kp1 and
~kp2) being converted into a Stokes (~ks) and an anti-Stokes
(~kas) photon which are counter-propagating.

on a nanosecond timescale, with a spectral resolution on
the order of a few wavenumbers, corresponding to a wave-
length bandwidth in the sub-nanometer regime - which
provides a three-dimensional sectioning capability (ver-
tical resolution) on the order of one micron. As a test
sample we use cells of sunﬂower seeds, where included
oil-ﬁlled vesicles are imaged using the Raman-transition
of the contained linoleic acid molecules at the 2870 cm−1
aliphatic CH-stretch-vibration to generate a CARS sig-
nal.

For this purpose we use an excitation geometry al-
ready presented in a previous publication [5], which is
similar to a combination of epi-ﬂuorescence, and ultra-
dark-ﬁeld microscopy, and which satisﬁes the required
”wave-matching condition” over the whole sample area
simultaneously. This setup has the additional advantage
that it collects all signal light, even if the microscope
objective has only a small numerical aperture, and that
it is inherently background-free, i.e.
the optical beam
path guides only the CARS-signal photons directly to
the CCD camera.

In general, the generation of a CARS image in a wide-
ﬁeld setup is a non-trivial task, since two conditions
have to be satisﬁed in the extended interaction region
[7]. First, the CARS transition scheme shown on the
left hand side of Fig. 1 sketches the requirement of en-
ergy conservation:
In the vicinity of a Raman-active
molecule with a vibrational transition at a frequency ωvib,
two incoming pump photons with frequency ωp are con-
verted into an outgoing Stokes-, and an anti-Stokes pho-
ton (which is the desired signal), such that the corre-
sponding frequencies are determined by: ωs = ωp − ωvib
and ωas = ωp + ωvib, respectively. The eﬃciency of this
process is strongly increased by providing an external
Stokes beam for stimulated emission of the Stokes pho-
ton.

−→
ks +

−→
kp2 =

The second condition is based on the required mo-
mentum conservation between the 4 interacting photons.
It requires that the sum of the wave-vectors of the two
pump photons equals the sum of the Stokes and the anti-
−→
−→
kas. The two
kp1 +
Stokes wave-vectors, i.e.
conditions of energy and momentum conservation have
a trivial solution in a non-dispersive medium: There the
4 interacting photons can travel collinearily. In a liquid
or a solid, however, the medium is dispersive and the
wave-matching condition can only be satisﬁed at special
beam propagation directions. One solution - which we
use in our setup - is indicated in Fig. 1 on the right hand
side: Our goal was to ﬁnd a geometry where the anti-
Stokes signal beam counter-propagates with respect to
the incident Stokes beam. This can be achieved if the
two corresponding pump photons come from two almost
opposite directions which are nearly perpendicular to the
directions of the Stokes- and anti-Stokes beam. It turns
out that the angle α between the direction of the anti-
−→
kp1
Stokes beam
−→
kp2 has to satisfy [5]:
and

−→
kas and each of the two pump-beams

cos(α) =

(kas − ks)
2kp

≈ ωvib
ωp

,

(1)

The approximation holds for suﬃciently small dispersion.
Fig. 2 is a sketch of our experimental setup: A sam-
ple is sandwiched between two cover-slips on a micro-
scope stage (Zeiss Axiovert 135). The 532 nm pump-
pulse is emitted from a doubled ND:YAG laser system
(with a pulse width of 3 ns), and guided by a multi-
mode-ﬁber (diameter 1000 µm) to the input of an oil-
immersion ultra-dark-ﬁeld condenser with a numerical
aperture range between 1.2 and 1.4. The homogeneously
illuminated ﬁber output is sharply imaged in the sample
plane as a circular area with a diameter of approximately
60 microns. The directions of the pump photons lie on
the surface of a cone with an opening half-angle in the
range of 64o − 90o degrees (in water between the two
coverslips). This available angular range allows to sat-

2

FIG. 2: Experimental implementation. The pump pulse en-
ters the sample from above under a ﬂat angle on the sur-
face of a cone through an ultra-dark-ﬁeld condenser with a
high numerical aperture. The Stokes pulse comes from be-
low through the microscope objective, and the emitted signal
pulse counter-propagates back through the same microscope
objective and a dichroic beam splitter to an intensiﬁed, gated
CCD imaging system.

isfy the wave-matching condition for CARS transitions
in a wave-number range between 0 and 8000 cm−1.

The Stokes-pulse is emitted from an optical paramet-
ric oscillator (OPO) which is pumped by the tripled
ND:YAG pulse of the pump laser. The wavelength of
the Stokes beam can be scanned continuously in a range
between 420 nm and 2600 nm. The bandwidth of the
OPO depends on its emission wavelength, and in our
case (around a wavelength of 628 nm)it is on the order
of 30 cm−1. The pulse is guided by another multi-mode
ﬁber (diameter 600 microns) to the epi-ﬂuorescence input
of the microscope. The homogeneously illuminated ﬁber
output is also imaged through a dichroic mirror and an
oil-immersion microscope objective (magniﬁcation 40 ×
with a numerical aperture of 0.65) into the sample plane
in a circular area with a diameter of approximately 90
microns, where it arrives at the same time and overlaps
with the image of the pump-beam ﬁber. The Stokes pulse
frequency can be scanned to match a Raman transition
of structures within the sample.
In this case, an anti-
Stokes signal is emitted, and - due to the spatial coher-
ence of the generated CARS signal - it travels directly to
the microscope objective, from where it is collected and
transmitted by the dichroic mirror to an imaging system
consisting of an intensiﬁed CCD camera. The microchan-
nel intensiﬁer is gated with a trigger pulse of the pump
laser system, such that it records only signals during the
duration of the excitation pulses, thus suppressing back-
ground and luminenscence light. The intensity of the un-
polarized pump- and Stokes pulses in the sample plane
are on the order of one micro-Joule at a repetition rate of
10 Hz. We stay below the damage threshold of the optics
by using multi-mode ﬁbers which cause a phase-front dis-

FIG. 3:
Images of a test sample consisting of a cut through
a sunﬂower seed immersed in water. Image frame diameter is
130 µm. Left: Dark-ﬁeld image with white light illumination.
Next four pictures: Resonant CARS images captured in 60
s at diﬀerent vertical positions of the dark-ﬁeld condenser
(displaced by 2 microns from image to image), demonstrating
the vertical sectioning capability of the setup.

tortion preventing the formation of a diﬀraction-limited
focus somewhere in the beam path or at the sample. This
setup has the advantage that it collects all signal light.
Thus, microscope objective with a small numerical aper-
ture can be used. Furthermore, the method is inherently
background-free, i.e. the optical beam path guides only
the CARS photons directly to the CCD camera, whereas
the pump-pulse misses the microscope objective due to
its ﬂat angle caused by the ultra-dark-ﬁeld condenser.

A sample image recorded with this setup is displayed
in Fig. 3. The left image shows a dark-ﬁeld exposure
(taken with white light) of a cut through a sunﬂower
seed immersed in water and sandwiched between two
glass coverslips. The circular areas consist of oil-ﬁlled
vesicles containing Raman-active linoleic acid. The fol-
lowing sequence of 4 exposures shows CARS images taken
at a Stokes wavelength (627.9 nm) matched to the CH-
stretch vibration Raman resonance of linoleic acid at a
wave-number of 2870 cm−1. The images were taken at
diﬀerent heights of the ultra-dark-ﬁeld condenser above
the sample, with a vertical spacing from exposure to ex-
posure of 2 microns. Each image was taken by integrating
over a number of 600 excitation pulses, corresponding to
a 60 s exposure at our pulse repetition frequency of 10
Hz. The images demonstrate that the oil-ﬁlled vesicles
are excited to emit a CARS signal (at a wavelength of
461.5 nm) in a region with a diameter of approximately
50 microns, where the two excitation beams overlap. The
sequence of images taken at diﬀerent vertical positions of
the dark-ﬁeld condenser reveals a remarkably high verti-
cal resolution of the system, since images taken at a dis-
tance of 2 microns already appear completely diﬀerent.
This vertical resolution is based on the high numerical
aperture of the ultra-dark-ﬁeld condenser, and it can be
used for sectioning of a specimen in order to produce a
three-dimensional sample proﬁle.

In order to verify the CARS-origin of the detected sig-
nal, we measured a spectrum of the signal by record-
ing a number of images at diﬀerent wavelength of the
Stokes-pulse. The camera was used as an intensity de-
tector by integrating the CCD counts in the CARS-active
area within the images. The results are drawn in Fig. 4.

3

 CARS-signal of linoleic acid

 Background of pumpbeam

4

x10

25

20

15

10

]
s
t
c
[
 
y
t
i
 
s
n
e

t

n

i

5

0

2550

2700

2850

3000

3150

3300

wavenumber [cm

]

-1

FIG. 4:
Spectroscopic CARS signal of the aliphatic CH-
vibration of linoleum acid, detected in a region around the
resonant CARS wavelength of 461.5 nm after excitation with
532 nm (ﬁxed), and a tuneable wavelength (OPO) around
628 nm. The average signal intensity in the center of images
(like those plotted in Fig. 3) is recorded at various Stokes-
beam wavelengths and plotted as a function of the frequency
diﬀerence between the two excitation pulses converted to wave
numbers. The resulting curve exhibits the typical spectral
asymmetry of spectroscopic CARS data, and demonstrates a
frequency resolution on the order of 25 cm

−1

.

The data demonstrate the expected lineshape of the
CARS resonance at 2870 cm−1.
It shows the typical
asymmetry based on the interference of the resonant
CARS signal with a non-resonant (but coherent) sig-
nal from the background [7]. Furthermore, the spec-
trum demonstrates the wavelength resolution of the setup
which is on the order of 25 cm−1, corresponding to a
wavelength bandwidth of less than 1 nm, which is bet-
ter resolved than typical CARS images taken with ultra-
short laser pulses. The spectroscopic resolution is lim-
ited by the bandwidth of our currently used broad-band
OPO which is 20-30 cm−1 in the respective wavelength
range, whereas the pump beam has a spectral bandwidth
of only 0.03 cm−1. Although a spectral resolution below
10 cm−1 has been already obtained with optimized pi-
cosecond laser systems [3, 8, 9, 10], the use of a narrow-
band nanosecond-OPO in our setup would promise an
easily achievable spectral resolution on the order of 0.1
cm−1.

In order to check the temporal resolution of our setup
we performed imaging experiments with a decreasing
number of pulses, down to single-shot experiments. The
results of such an experiment are shown in Fig. 5. The
left image again shows a dark-ﬁeld exposure taken with
white light illumination. It shows a drop of sunﬂower-
seed oil in the lower right image section. The follow-
ing image shows a CARS-exposure of the same sample,
integrating over 100 shots of the excitation pulses with

4

within biological samples in the highly selective ﬁnger-
print regime of organic molecules (mainly in the vicinity
of 1200 - 1600 cm−1) [12]. For example, imaging a sample
at a sequence of selected CARS transition frequencies of
diﬀerent organic molecules can be followed by numerical
image processing to produce a pseudocolour map of the
chemical composition of the sample. The very high spec-
tral resolution which can be principally obtained with
nanosecond excitation has its major applications in ma-
terial research, where sub-wavenumber vibrational fea-
tures are reported for example in crystalline structures
of semiconductors [13], deposited diamond coatings [14],
or crystalline fullerenes [15]. Altogether, we feel that the
combination of the two features of our setup, i.e. ultra-
fast imaging and a high spectral resolution, is an ideal
complement to the superior spatial resolution oﬀered by
confocal scanning CARS systems.

[1] M. D. Duncan, J. Reintjes, and T. J. Manuccia, Opt.

[2] A. Zumbusch, G. R. Holtom, and X. S. Xie, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 7, 350 (1982).

Lett. 82, 4142 (1999).

J. 83, 502 (2002).

(2004).

Lett. 84, 816 (2004).

[3] J.-X. Cheng, Y. K. Jia, G. Zheng, and X. S. Xie, Biophys.

[4] J.-X. Cheng and X. S. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 827

[5] C. Heinrich, S. Bernet, and M. Ritsch-Marte, Appl. Phys.

[6] M. M¨uller, J. Squier, C. A. de Lange, and G. J. Braken-

hoﬀ, J. Microsc. 197, 150 (2000).

[7] G. L. Eesley, Coherent Raman Spectroscopy (Pergamon

Press, Oxford, 1981).

[8] J.-X. Cheng, A Volkmer, L. D. Book, and X. Sunney Xie,

J. Phys. Chem. B 106, 8493 (2002).

[9] M. M¨uller, and J. M. Schins, J. Phys. Chem. B 106, 3715

(2002).

[10] E. O. Potma, D. J. Jones, J.-X. Cheng, X. S. Xie, and J.

Ye, Opt. Lett. 27, 1168 (2002).

[11] E. O. Potma, W. P. de Boeij, P. J. M. van Haastert,
and D. A. Wiersma, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 1577
(2001).

[12] M. Hashimoto, T. Araki, and S. Kawata, Opt. Lett. 25,

[13] W. M. Theis, and W. G. Spitzer, J. Appl. Phys. 56, 890

1768 (2000).

(1984).

[14] S.-A. Stuart, S. Prawer, and P. S. Weiser, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 62, 1227 (1993).

[15] P. J. Horoyski, M. L. W. Thewalt, and T. R. Anthony,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 194 (1995).

FIG. 5: Time resolution of wide-ﬁeld CARS imaging: The
left picture shows a sunﬂower-seed sample under dark-ﬁeld
illumination with white light, showing an oil-drop in the mid-
dle. The next picture shows a resonant CARS image of the
sample, taken with an exposure time of 10 s by integrating
over 100 excitation pulses. The third picture shows a single
exposure resonant CARS image, recorded in 3 nanoseconds.
The ﬁnal picture again shows a single exposure CARS image
of the sample, however taken under non-resonant conditions
after detuning the Stokes-laser. Clearly, the spectroscopic
resolution of the system is still present even under single shot
excitation.

the Stokes-laser again adjusted for resonance at the 2870
cm−1 CH-vibration. The CARS process leads to a high
contrast image of the oil drop. The next picture of the se-
quence shows again a resonant CARS image of the drop,
however, now taken with only one single pair of exci-
tation pulses. The contrast is suﬃciently high for the
CARS-active drop to be recognized and distinguished
from its surroundings. Although the low signal intensity
leads to a reduced spatial resolution, the position and the
approximate size of the drop are clearly detected. As a
test, the next image was taken under the same conditions,
however with the Stokes-laser detuned from the CARS
resonance by 7 nm. As expected, the signal disappears.
The comparison of the resonant and non-resonant exper-
iments thus demonstrates that the spectroscopic CARS
resolution is already present at single shot exposures. For
future experiments, we expect much improvement by us-
ing optimized optical components for a larger excitation
power and a higher signal transmission.

Our experiment is a ﬁrst demonstration of an im-
provement in image exposure time of nine orders of
magnitude compared to the fastest other CARS setups,
which use confocal scanning methods. Possible appli-
cations of such a snapshot CARS imaging could con-
sist in the study of fast processes in biological systems,
like electro-physiological processes (nerve signaling, cilia
mechanisms), in imaging the progress of diﬀusion pro-
cesses [11], or to study chemical reactions in micro-ﬂuids.
On the other hand, the high spectroscopic resolution
of nanosecond CARS imaging will make it possible to
map the spatial distribution of diﬀerent chemical species

