5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An original image slicer
designed for Integral Field Spectroscopy with NIRSpec/JSWT

Submitted paper

S. Viv`es∗ and E. Prieto
Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Marseille,
Site des Olives BP8-13376, Marseille, France

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Integral Field Spectroscopy (IFS) provides a spectrum simultaneously for each spatial sample
of an extended, two-dimensional ﬁeld.
It consists of an Integral Field Unit (IFU) which slices
and re-arranges the initial ﬁeld along the entrance slit of a spectrograph. This article presents an
original design of IFU based on the advanced image slicer concept [1]. To reduce optical aberrations,
pupil and slit mirrors are disposed in a fan-shaped conﬁguration that means that angles between
incident and reﬂected beams on each elements are minimized. The fan-shaped image slicer improves
image quality in terms of wavefront error by a factor 2 comparing with classical image slicer and,
furthermore it guaranties a negligible level of diﬀerential aberration in the ﬁeld. As an exemple, we
are presenting the design LAM used for its proposal at the NIRSPEC/IFU invitation of tender.

Keywords: Astronomical Instrumentation, Integral Field Spectroscopy, Image Slicer, JWST

I.

INTRODUCTION

Integral Field Spectroscopy (IFS) provides a spectrum
simultaneously for each spatial sample of an extended,
two-dimensional ﬁeld. Basically, an IFS is located in
the focal plane of a telescope and is composed by an
Integral Field Unit (IFU) and a spectrograph. The IFU
acts as a coupler between the telescope and the spectro-
graph by reformatting optically a rectangular ﬁeld into a
quasi-continuous pseudo-slit located at the entrance focal
plane of the spectrograph. Therefore, the light from each
pseudo-slit is dispersed to form spectra on the detector
and a spectrum can be obtained simultaneously for each
spatial sample within the IFU ﬁeld.

The IFU contains two main optical sub-systems: the
fore-optics and the image slicer. The fore-optics intro-
duces an anamorphic magniﬁcation of the ﬁeld with an
aspect ratio of 1×2 onto the set of slicer mirrors opti-
cal surfaces. In such way each spatial element of resolu-
tion forms a 1×2 pixels image on the detector (i.e. the
width of each slice corresponds to 2 pixels), which en-
sures correct sampling in the dispersion direction (per-
pendicular to the slices) and prevents under-sampling
the spectra. This anamorphism can be avoided if under-
sampling spectra is acceptable by science (for example,
the SNAP [2] project) or if a spectral dithering mecha-
nism is included in the spectrograph in order to recover
for the under-sampling. The image slicer optically di-
vides the anamorphic (or not) two-dimensional ﬁeld into
a large number of contiguous narrow sub-images which
are re-arranged along a one-dimensional slit at the en-
trance focal plane of the spectrograph.

An image slicer is usually composed of a slicer mirror
array located at the image plane of the telescope and as-

∗Electronic address: Sebastien.Vives@oamp.fr

sociated with a row of pupil mirrors and a row of slit
mirrors. The slicer mirror array is constituted of a stack
of several thin spherical mirrors (called ”slices”) which
”slice” the anamorphic ﬁeld and form real images of the
telescope pupil on the pupil mirrors. The pupil mirrors
are disposed along a row parallel to the spatial direction.
Each pupil mirror then re-images its corresponding slice
of the anamorphic ﬁeld on its corresponding slit mirror
located at the spectrograph’s focal plane (slit plane). The
slit mirrors are also diposed along a row parallel to the
spatial direction. Finally, each slit mirror which acts as
a ﬁeld lenses, re-images the telescope pupil (pupil mir-
rors) onto the entrance pupil of the spectrograph. The
principle of an image slicer is presented in Fig. 1.

In order to improve image quality and/or reduce costs
of image slicer, several adaptations have been recently
developed:

• Catadioptric image slicer where pupil and slit
mirrors are replaced by dioptric elements [3]. This
allows to improve both image performances and
costs while increasing the complexity of the opto-
interface in cryogenic environment.
mechanical
Furthermore, dioptric elements present chromatic
aberrations and result in a complex arrangement of
pupil and slit mirrors since they are close together.

• ”Staggered” image slicer where pupil mirrors
are staggered in two rows instead of a single row [4].
This allows to place the pupil mirrors twice as far
away while mainting the slit location so that the
largest oﬀ-axis angles are reduced by a factor of
two and then to improve image quality.

• Image slicer using a ﬂat facet slicer mirror
array. This image slicer [5] needs an additional
spherical or cylindrical ﬁeld lens located very close
the slicer stack. A ﬁrst look could conduct to think
that this conﬁguration optimally reduces cost man-
ufacturing. But nevertheless, the fore-optics has to

2

II. PRINCIPLES OF THE FAN-SHAPED
IMAGE SLICER

Our purpose was to design an image slicer compliant
with the required performances described in Tab. I. In
particular, the IFU shall have very high performances
in terms of image quality and telecentricity while ﬁt-
ting within the small envelope and operating at cryogenic
temperature.

As described before, previous designs use diotric ele-
ments (micro-lenses) or complex rows of pupil mirrors
(”staggered” design) to improve image quality. Because,
dioptric elements have a limited bandpass, are not well
adapted to cryogenic environment and present chromatic
aberrations, the design employs all reﬂective optics. Each
surface of the image slicer are spherical in shape in order
to facilitate manufacturability, assembly and alignement
of the overall optical system.

Since the main source of aberrations comes from oﬀ-
axis optics, angles between the incident and the reﬂected
beams must be minimized on each surface in both spec-
tral and spatial directions.

To limit angles in the spectral direction (perpendicular
to the stack slicer), the complete image slicer is slightly
tilted until the slicer stack almost sends the light back
on itself in this direction. To limit angles in the spatial
direction (parallel to the stack slicer), each pupil mirror
is located such as the incident chief ray is almost paral-
lel with its normal at the vertex. The pupil mirrors are
disposed in a fan-shaped conﬁguration which is coinci-
dent with the exit pupil images locations deﬁned by the
slicer mirror array. Finally, by tilting each slit mirror it
is possible to limit angles between the incident and the
reﬂected beams on each slit mirror. The beam becomes
parallel to the main optical axis after the slit mirrors (see
Fig. 6).

The image on the slit is greatly improved, because each
channel (composed by a slice and its corresponding pupil
and slit mirrors) is now almost on-axis in both directions.
Performances are compared with a classical IFU design
in the section IV.

III. APPLICATION TO NIRSPEC/JWST

The original concept of ”fan-shaped” image slicer de-
scribed above was successfully appplied to the integral
ﬁeld unit (IFU) of the NIRSpec/JWST instrument. The
Near-Infrared Spectrograph (NIRSpec) for JWST is a
multi-object spectrograph covering the wavelength range
from 0.7 µm to 5.0 µm and operating in three distinct
modes: multi-object spectrograph mode (MOS), integral
ﬁeld spectrograph mode (IFS) and a canonical long-slit
spectrograph mode (LSS). The IFU operates in the IFS
mode and reformats a tiny portion NIRSpec ﬁeld of view
in a long entrance slit for the spectrograph. The main
IFU requirements were derived from the NIRSpec require-
ments speciﬁcation document and are listed in Tab. I.

FIG. 1: The principle of an image slicer. The slicer mirror
array, located at the image plane of the telescope, divides the
entrance ﬁeld of view (FOV) and re-mages the telescope exit
pupils along a line on the pupil mirrors. Each pupil mirror
then re-images its corresponding slice of the entrance FOV
on its corresponding slit mirror located at the spectrograph’s
focal plane (slit plane). The reformatted FOV acts as the en-
trance slit in the spectrograph where all the slices are aligned
as a pseudo long slit.

be more complex (re-imaging the pupil to a pre-
cise position after the slicer mirror array), and the
progress in glass spherical slices manufacturing pro-
cess permits to keep the cost diﬀerential small for
a good system beneﬁt. Furhtermore, such a conﬁg-
uration has the drawback of slightly decreasing the
instrument throughput since an additional compo-
nent is introduced in the optical layout.

• Concentric image slicer where the row of pupil
mirrors, the row of slit mirrors and the collima-
tor are disposed along concentric circles centered
on the slicer mirror array [6, 7]. This conﬁgura-
tion preserves aberrations in the ﬁeld of view since
angles are identical between each elements of each
sub-slit channel. Thus this conﬁguration is well
adapted to diﬀraction limited instruments.

It is in the context of improving performances of such
a complex system that we propose an original concept of
image slicer called ”Fan-shaped”. As an exemple, we are
presenting the design LAM used for its proposal at the
NIRSPEC/IFU invitation of tender [8]. The fan-shaped
image slicer is described in section II. Section III is de-
voted to the description of the whole IFU designed for the
NIRSpec/JWST instrument and its performances. Sec-
tion IV compares performances of the fan-shaped image
slicer with a classical image slicer design.

3

FIG. 2: The main units of IFU design to produce the required exit beam feeding the spectrograph with appropriate plate scale
(PS) and magniﬁcation (M).

Every development on the IFU was guided by the lowest
possible impact on the spectrograph and other modes of
NIRSpec. Thus, the IFU should be integrated apart from
the instrument and plug-in during the integration phase
of NIRSpec.

A.

IFU optical design

The total spectral range of the IFU (0.7 to 5 µm) pre-
vents for inserting lenses or dioptric elements within the
overall optical layout. An all-reﬂective design takes ad-
vantage of its facility to adapt to a cryogenic environment
and presents an higher throughput. All the optical com-
ponents are made of Zerodur ensuring both preservation
of the optical properties of the IFU at operating tempera-
ture (35-40 K) and the manufacturability of the IFU (see
below). All optical surfaces are gold-coated to maximise
their reﬂectivity in the (near) infrared. The IFU design
comprises two units, the fore-optics and the image slicer,
as shown schematically in Fig. 2. Figure 3 shows the
overall layout for the fore-optics and image slicer unit.

The fore-optics unit is composed of three ﬂat pick-
oﬀ mirrors (PM1, PM2, PM3) and four re-imaging mir-
rors (RM1, RM2, RM3 and RM4) as shown in Fig. 4.
The pick-oﬀ mirrors are used to capture the input beam
(PM1, PM2) and redirect it to the image slicer unit
(PM3). The fore-optics unit, used to re-image and mag-
nify the F/12.5 entrance ﬁeld onto the slicer mirror ar-
ray, is disposed orthogonally to the main optical axis to
ﬁt with the envelope dimension. The re-imaging mirrors
RM1, RM2, RM3 are cylindrical mirrors and RM4 is a
spherical mirror. The fore-optics seems to be complex
by using four mirrors but this choice preserves the man-
ufacturability and allows to reach high surface quality of
each component while reducing costs.

The slicer unit is composed of the slicer mirror ar-

ray (SL1), the row of pupil mirrors (SL2) and the row
slit mirrors (SL3). To ﬁt within the envelope while
reaching the required optical performances, the ”fan-
shaped” image slicer conﬁguration, described above, was
applied. The slicer mirror array is made from a stack
of 30 thin mirrors with a typical optical aperture of
10 mm × 0.55 mm and depth of 10 mm. The pupil
image once deﬁned by the fore-optics is placed by each
slicer mirror in an optimum position deﬁning a line of
discrete sub-pupils images. Each element of the slicer
mirror array is spherical and has discrete tilts and cur-
vature. The pupil mirrors unit is made from two sets of
15 mirrors disposed on both sides of the beam coming
from the fore-optics (see Fig. 3). Each pupil mirror is co-
incident with the line of exit pupil image deﬁned by the
corresponding slicer mirror. They re-image each speciﬁc
slice mirror onto another line conﬁguration deﬁning the
locus for each slit mirror.

Some words are needed to understand why we adopt
glass standard polished optics instead of monolithic Alu-
minium diamond turned optics. Maximum throughput
means accurate roughness only available using classical
polishing technics. Classicaly a roughnes of 0.7 nm can be
reached on plane, spherical and cylindrical surfaces (with
a surface form of λ/100) which results in a global trans-
mission of 80% at 0.7 µm. Here we considered a surface
roughness of 2 nm for each optical component (which
is a low level of roughness very standard polishing) to
reach an overall throughput better than 65%. In term of
comparison a roughness of 10 nm (which is the standard
roughness for surfaces manufactured by diamond turn-
ing) on the aluminium results in an overall throughput
of 50%. A critical point about slicer stack manufactur-
ing is the thickness of edges and the fragments size on
each sub-mirror element. Using classical polishing tech-
nics, edges of 1 µm with fragments less than 5 µm are
classically reached. It is clear from such estimations the

4

FIG. 3: Overall layout for the complete IFU (fore-optics and image slicer units). The white light beam is the virtual exit beam
deﬁning the virtual slit.

the complete IFU. Wavefront error is also discussed in
section IV for the fan-shaped image slicer only.

The tolerancing analysis results show that the overall
theoretical WFE shall be less than 55 nm to keep the
overall toleranced WFE inside of speciﬁcations (100 nm)
considering optical manufacturing defects and aligment
errors. The mean theoretical WFE calculated over all
sub-slit is about 47 nm while considering a combinaison
of all optical manufacturing defects and aligment errors,
the WFE is about 82 nm in the worst case. This is com-
pliant with the requirement.

Analysis of the system throughput results in an average
optical throughput greater than 65% for any wavelength
in the operating range and any position within the FOV.
This calculation considers the complete system with gold
coated 2 nm roughness surfaces and includes diﬀraction
losses. As mentionned above, glass polishing technics
classically reachs a surface roughness of 0.7 nm which
results in an overall IFU throughput greater than 80% at
0.7 µm (not required here).

The telecentricity requirements corresponds to the po-
sition of the pupil on the exit pupil of the spectrograph.
The sampling, derived from both the expected ﬁnal qual-
ity of the Point Spread Function (PSF) and the optimized
signal to noise ratio on the detector, imposes very se-
vere constraints on the telecentricity requirements. Fig 5
shows the distribution of the theoretical telecentricity (in
degree) considering 3 speciﬁc ﬁelds over all channels: the
centre and the 2 extremes. It appears that all ﬁelds are
comprised in the range ±0.034◦. However, considering
optical manufacturing defects and aligment errors, the
telecentricty of the overall system is about ±0.1◦ in the

FIG. 4: The fore-optics composed of three ﬂat pick-oﬀ mir-
rors (PM1, PM2, PM3) and four powered re-imaging mirrors
(RM1, RM2, RM3 and RM4). The optical reference axis is
deﬁned by (X0, Y0, Z0) on the centre of the input ﬁeld of view
(3×3 arcsec2).

beneﬁt of standard glass manufacturing over the diamond
turning manufacturing on the Aluminium. Furhtermore,
diamond turning process cannot meet a monolithic sys-
tem array with individual radius of curvature for each
optical sub-aperture.

B.

IFU Performances

Analysis of the design show that the system is compli-
ant with all optical requirements listed in Tab. I includ-
ing tolerancing and margin (calculated after 10000 trials
making use of ZEMAX r Monte Carlo algorithm capa-
bility). We detailled, hereafter, performances in terms of
wavefront error (WFE), throughput and telecentricity of

As an example in Fig. 7, we consider the distribution of

5

FIG. 5: Distribution of the theoretical telecentricity (in de-
gree) considering 3 speciﬁc ﬁelds over all channels: the centre
(dark) and the 2 extremes (white and grey).

FIG. 7: Theoretical wavefront error (T-WFE) distribution
for the fan-shaped (top) and the classical image slicer (bot-
tom). The dashed line marks the fore-optics mean T-WFE
over the whole FOV.

the theoretical WFE (T-WFE) of both fan-shaped and
classical image slicers. The T-WFE of the fan-shaped
image slicer is about 45.5+5
−3 nm and the T-WFE of the
classical image slicer is about 76.1+30
−25 nm. It is interest-
ing to note that the fore-optics (see section III A) pro-
vides a mean T-WFE of about 45.7 nm over the whole
FOV (marked by a dashed line in Fig. 7). Thus, the fan-
shaped image slicer preserves the image quality of the
fore-optics over the whole FOV (all channels) while the
classical image slicer degrades the T-WFE by a factor two
in certain channels. Furthermore, the distribution of the
T-WFE of the fan-shaped image slicer is sharp since the
range of values is about 8 nm over all channels allowing
to guaranty a negligible level of diﬀerential aberration in
the ﬁeld.

FIG. 6: Overall layouts (seen from above) for both the clas-
sical image slicer (top) and the fan-shaped image slicer (bot-
tom). The fore-optics used for the JWST/NIRSpec proposal
is also presented. Considering the classical image slicer, pupil
and slit mirrors are opposite one another and slit mirrors
are disposed along a line. Considering the fan-shaped im-
age slicer, pupil and slit mirrors are disposed in a fan-shaped
conﬁguration in order to minimize angles between incident
and reﬂected beams on each elements.

worst case.

V. CONCLUSION

IV. FAN-SHAPED DESIGN VERSUS
CLASSICAL DESIGN

In order to estimate advantages of using the fan-shaped
image slicer, we compared its performances with an im-
age slicer using only classical principles brieﬂy described
in section I (see Fig. 6). Both image slicer are designed to
cope with the NIRSpec/JWST requirements. It appears
that all performances of the fan-shaped image slicer are
better than those of the classical one and are all about
the same level comparing all channels together.

This article presents an original concept of image slicer
called ”Fan-shaped”.
Its design delivers good and ho-
mogeneous image quality over all IFU elements. We
successfully apply its design to JWST/NIRSpec. Here
we didn’t discuss about manufacturing aspects since the
performance aspects were preponderant however further
investigations are under studying to drastically reduce
costs and manufacturing aspects in such a design by pre-
serving performances. Furthermore, a prototyping of the
IFS (IFU and spectrograph) for the SNAP application is
undergoing at LAM [9].

6

Entrance FOV

stack, shall be at least 1.2mm×1.2mm.

• The ﬁeld of view (FOV), deﬁned by the region of the sky imaged on the IFU slicer

TABLE I: Main IFU requirements.

Exit Focal Plane
Virtual Slit

Spatial sampling

• The IFU shall accomodate a geometric aperture of F/12.5 at the IFU entrance ﬁeld.
• The IFU’s virtual slit shall be divided into two sets of 15 sub-slits each.
• The IFU exit focal plane (the focal plane of the IFU virtual slit) shall

nominally coincide with the entrance IFU focal plane.

o
• The IFU virtual slit shall be telecentric to the IFU ﬁeld to within an angle of 0.2
• The IFU shall preserve the geometric aperture (F/12.5) at the IFU exit plane.
• The average spatial sampling distance of the IFU along the spatial direction

.

in the IFU exit image plane shall be 40 µm ± 1 %.

Virtual slit dimensions

• The average FWHM of each IFU virtual sub-slit along the spectral direction

in the IFU exit image plane shall be 80 µm ± 1 %.

Wavelength band

• The IFU shall meet the functional requirements over a wavelength range spanning

Optical transmission

• The average optical throughput shall be ≥50% for any wavelength in the

from 0.7 to 5 µm.

Image quality
IFU envelope
Temperatures

operating range and for any position within the FOV.

• The overall rms wavefront error (WFE) shall be less than 100 nm.
• The IFU shall ﬁt within the static envelope: 190 × 100 × 60 mm.
• All requirements given below apply at operating temperature and cryogenic

environement (35-40 K).

[1] Content, R., A new design for integral ﬁeld spectroscopy

Proc. SPIE 5492, 262, 2004

with 8-m telescopes, Proc. SPIE 2871, 1295, 1997

[2] Ealet, A. et al. SNAP: an integral ﬁeld spectrograph for
supernova identiﬁcation, Proc. SPIE 4850, 1169, 2003
[3] H´enault F. et al., MUSE optomechanical design and per-

formance Proc. SPIE 5492, 214, 2004

[4] H´enault F. et al., Slicing the Universe at aﬀordable cost:
The Quest for the MUSE Image Slicer Proc. SPIE 5249,
13, 2003

[5] Tecza M. et al. SPIFFI Image Slicer: High-Precision Op-
tics at Cryogenic Temperatures Proc. SPIE 4842, 375,
2003

[6] Dopita M.A. et al., WiFeS: the wide ﬁeld spectrograph

[7] Prieto E., Saisse M., Hibon P., Beuzit J.-L., Lagrange A.-
M., High-contrast diﬀerential-aberration-free 3D spectrom-
eter for the Planet Finder instrument, Proc. SPIE 5492,
271, 2004

[8] Prieto E. et al., Great opportunity for NGST-NIRSPEC:
a high-resolution integral ﬁeld unit Proc. SPIE 4850, 486,
2003

[9] Aumeunier M.-H. et al., An Integral Field Spectrograph
with Slicer for SNAP: Design and Prototypes Proc. Work-
shop IFS Durham, under publication, 2005

