5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Directional interacting whispering gallery modes in coupled dielectric microdisks

Jung-Wan Ryu1,2, Soo-Young Lee1, Chil-Min Kim1, and Young-Jai Park2
1 National Creative Research Initiative Center for Controlling Optical Chaos,
Pai-Chai University, Daejeon 302-735, Korea and
2 Department of Physics, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea

We study the optical interaction in a coupled dielectric microdisks by investigating the splitting
of resonance positions of interacting whispering gallery modes (WGMs) and their pattern change,
depending on the distance between the microdisks. It is shown that the interaction between the
WGMs with odd parity about y-axis becomes appreciable at a distance less than a wavelength and
causes directional emissions of the resulting interacting WGMs. The directionality of the interacting
WGMs can be understood in terms of an eﬀective boundary deformation in ray dynamical analysis.
We also discuss about the oscillation of the splitting when the distance is greater than a wavelength.

PACS numbers: 42.55.Sa, 42.65.Sf

I.

INTRODUCTION

In spherical and cylindrical dielectric cavities high-
Q modes are the whispering gallery modes (WGMs) in
which light rays circulate along the curved inner bound-
ary of the cavities, reﬂecting from the boundary with
an incident angle always greater than the critical angle
for total internal reﬂection, thus remaining trapped in-
side the cavities[1, 2]. There are only minute isotropic
emissions of light caused by evanescent leakage. For the
applications to optical communication and optoelectric
circuit, this isotropic emission is not desirable, rather di-
rectional emission is much more useful and eﬀective[2].

As a simple system for directional emissions, slightly
deformed microcavities have been proposed, and direc-
tional emissions, tangential from the boundary points
with the highest curvature, are achieved. In the ray dy-
namical viewpoint, as being slightly deformed, some in-
variant tori are destroyed in the Poincar´e surface of sec-
tion (PSOS), but the Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM)
tori still conﬁne the rays supporting the WGMs. In this
case, the tunneling process, through the lowest dynamical
barrier, to the critical line for the total internal reﬂection
can explain the tangential emissions[2, 3].

When the cavity boundary is highly deformed, the
PSOS shows a global chaotic sea with very small
integrable regions (islands).
In this strong chaotic
case, the directional emissions can be found in scarred
resonances[4] and quasiscarred resonances[5]. Unlike the
slightly deformed case, the direction of emission in these
resonances can be deviated from the tangential, and is
well explained by the unstable manifold structure near
the critical line for total internal reﬂection[6] and the
Fresnel ﬁltering eﬀect[7]. In addition, there are special
boundary shapes for generating unidirectional emission,
spiral-shaped[8] and rounded triangle-shaped[9]. We note
that the eﬀorts for directional emissions are mainly based
on the deformation of boundary shapes.

In this paper we show, through a numerical study on
the interacting WGMs in a coupled identical disks, that
a mode-mode interaction can generate directional emis-

sions. The interaction between two WGMs is parameter-
ized by the distance between two disks, and it turns out
that the strength of the interaction between WGMs with
odd parity about y-axis becomes appreciable at a dis-
tance less than a wavelength, which are evident from the
results on variation of resonance positions and patterns.
In order to explain the resulting directional emission, we
assume that the circular boundary shapes would be eﬀec-
tively deformed due to the mode-mode interaction. With
this assumption the ray dynamical analysis gives a good
explanation for the degradation of Q-factor and the en-
hancement of directional emissions.
In addition, when
the WGMs are weakly coupled, the resonance positions
show an oscillating behavior depending on the distance.
II we il-
lustrate our system, i.e., a coupled dielectric microdisks.
The numerical results for the strongly interacting WGMs
and a ray dynamical model with an eﬀective deforma-
III. The behavior of weakly
tion are presented in Sec.
interacting WGMs is discussed in Sec.
IV. Finally, we
summarize results in Sec. V.

The paper is organized as follows.

In Sec.

II. COUPLED DIELECTRIC MICRODISKS

As a simple system for the study on interacting WGMs,
we take coupled dielectric microdisks. In this system, the
strength of the interaction can be controlled by adjusting
the distance between two disks. It is well known that the
WGMs of a single dielectric microdisk are two-fold de-
generate due to the circular symmetry, and are classiﬁed
by the angular momentum mode index m and the radial
mode index l[2]. Therefore, in the coupled microdisks,
the WGMs would show an approximate four-fold degen-
eracy when the distance d between the disks is very large,
equivalently, the interaction between WGMs is negligi-
ble. As the distance is getting smaller, the WGM in one
microdisk starts to know the existence of the WGM in
the other microdisk, then the system is no longer cir-
cular symmetric, and the four-fold degenerate resonance
positions start to split each other, and the degree of the
splitting measures the strength of the interaction between

2

EE

OE

EO

OO

FIG. 1: The four symmetry classes of the coupled identical
disks. The former letter indicates the parity on x and the
latter does the parity on y coordinates. Even (Odd) symmetry
is marked by dashed (solid) lines.

the WGMs.

Figure 1 shows the four symmetry classes of coupled di-
electric microdisks. The system has two symmetry lines
and the former letter E(O) is even(odd) if the wave func-
tion is even(odd) with respect to x → −x and the latter
refers to y → −y.

In practical calculation of the interacting WGMs in the
coupled dielectric microdisks, we use the boundary ele-
ment method (BEM) which is eﬀective when the bound-
ary is strongly deformed from a circular shape and the
cavities are coupled[10]. In this paper, we focus on the
TM polarization where both the wavefunction and its
normal derivative are continuous across the boundary.
The radius of disks is R, the distance between two dielec-
tric disks is d, and nin and nout are the refractive indices
inside and outside disks, respectively. We set nout = 1
throughout the paper.

III. STRONGLY INTERACTING WGMS

In this section we present numerical results on the vari-
ation of resonance positions and patterns of the strongly
interacting WGMs, i.e., the case of the short distance,
d < λ. As mentioned before, we expect that the four-
fold degenerate WGMs would start to split each other
due to the interaction between WGMs as the distance d
decreases. As a result of the interaction the directional
emissions appear in the interacting WGMs with odd par-
ity about y-axis. We explain this directionality by assum-
ing an eﬀective deformation of boundary in ray dynam-
ical analysis. In the practical BEM calculation, we take
12 elements per a wavelength inside (λin = 2π/nink).

A. Variation of resonance positions and patterns

Numerical calculation is performed for the WGM of
mode index (m, l) = (77, 1) with nin = 1.4. Exact res-
onance positions of the WGM in an isolated microdisk

FIG. 2:
(color online) The splitting of the degenerate
W GM(77,1) due to the mode-mode interaction in the coupled
disks system. Re(kR) (a) and Im(kR) (b) are plotted de-
pending on the distance d between two disks. Note that kR
converges into the resonance position of the single disk case,
59.7155−i0.0039 as d increases. Black circle, red square, green
diamond, and blue triangle correspond to EE, EO, OE, and
OO modes, respectively.

can be obtained from the matching conditions between
the Bessel function and the Hankel function of the ﬁrst
kind which are inner and outer radial solutions of the
Helmholtz equation, respectively. The exact resonance
position of W GM(77,1) is kR = 59.7136 − i2.5687 × 10−8
where k is the vacuum wavenumber. The very small
value of |Im(kR)| means high Q factors from the rela-
tion Q = −Re[kR]/2Im[kR]. Unfortunately, it is very
diﬃcult to get the exact imaginary values from the
BEM, for example, when we take 12 elements per λin,
the BEM calculation for the isolated microdisk gives
kR = 59.7155 − i3.9 × 10−3 for W GM(77,1). In spite of
the restriction in the precision of resonance positions, we
rely on the BEM calculation in analyzing the interacting
WGMs based on the following reasons. First, the change
of δ(kR) ≃ 10−3 does not give any visible variation in
resonance patterns. Second, the BEM calculation would
give a correct result when the variation of resonance po-
sitions exceeds the precision limit, δ(kR) ≃ 10−3.

Figure 2 shows the variation of resonance positions of
the interacting WGMs. The four fold degenerate state
starts to split into two groups at d ≃ 0.8λ in Re[kR] and
at d ≃ 0.4λ in Im[kR]. Here we can see that the reso-
nances with odd parity about y−axis(OE, OO modes)
show larger variations,
indicating that the WGMs in
the resonances are strongly coupled. We note that the
Re[kR] values of OE, OO modes increase with decreas-
ing d. The increment of Re[kR] implies a reduction of ef-
fective boundary perimeter, and the interaction between
WGMs in the OE, OO modes is, thus, repulsive. From
the same argument, we conclude that the interaction in
the EE, EO modes is weakly attractive. This result will
be used in determining the eﬀective deformation in the
ray model in the next subsection. As shown in Fig. 2

3

FIG. 3:
(color online) Resonance patterns of the interacting
W GM(77,1)s when nin = 1.4 and d = 0.02λ. (a) EE mode.
(b) OE mode. Red-white-blue-dark blue colors indicate high
to low intensity on a logarithmic scale.

FIG. 4:
(color online) Resonance patterns of the interacting
W GM(29,1)s when nin = 2.0 and d = 0.005λ. (a) EE mode.
(b) OE mode. Red-white-blue-dark blue colors indicate high
to low intensity on a logarithmic scale.

(b) the Im[kR] values of OE, OO modes decrease with
decreasing d, implying the degradation of Q-factor due to
the repulsive interaction. Therefore, we can expect that
the emission of the OE, OO modes would be stronger
than those of the EE, EO modes. From the viewpoint of
the eﬀective boundary deformation due to the repulsive
interaction, we can understand the diﬀerence of the onset
points of the splitting in Re[kR] and Im[kR]. In a slightly
deformed cavity, the rays supporting the WGM are com-
pletely conﬁned by the KAM tori, resulting no drastic
reduction of Q-factor. As the cavity is more deformed,
the KAM tori would be broken and the rays can diﬀu-
sively escape along the unstable manifolds, and then the
Q-factor, equivalently Im[kR], would decrease rapidly.

From the splitting behavior of the resonance positions,
we can expect that the resonance patterns of EE and
EO modes would be diﬀerent from those of OE and OO
modes. In Fig. 3 the resonance patterns of the interact-
ing W GM(77,1)s are shown when the distance d is 0.02λ.
The resonance position of EE mode shown in Fig. 3 (a)
is kR = 59.6829−i0.0040 and, as expected from the small
absolute value of Im[kR], the very small evanescent leak-
age is shown[11]. However, as shown in Fig. 3 (b), the
resonance pattern of OE mode (kR = 59.7998 − i0.0215)
shows clear directional emissions, reﬂecting the strong
repulsive mode-mode interaction. Its far ﬁeld emission
pattern is plotted in Fig. 5 (a) where the four strong
directional emissions are clearly seen. We ﬁnd that the
directionality of the emission pattern is insensitive to the
distance d, although the strength of emissions decreases
with increasing d.

In OE and OO modes, the strong directional emis-
sion by the repulsive mode-mode interaction is a generic

feature, but the emission directions are closely related
to the reﬂective index nin. As an example, the reso-
nance patterns of EE and OE modes in the interacting
W GM(29,1)s, when nin = 2.0 and d = 0.005λ, are shown
in Fig. 4. As expected, four strong directional emissions
are shown only in the OE resonance pattern in Fig. 4
(b), and the two beams emitted from one disk are almost
parallel to x-axis. Note that the direction of emission is
quite diﬀerent from that of the interacting W GM(77,1)
in Fig. 3 (b). The corresponding far ﬁeld emission pat-
tern is shown in Fig. 5 (b) where we conﬁrm the two
directional emissions along x-axis and clear interference
pattern of the parallel beams.

In the next subsection we will introduce a ray dynami-
cal model to explain the nin dependence of the direction-
ality of emissions in the interacting WGMs with OE and
OO parities.

B. Ray dynamical model : Eﬀective deformation

In a circular disk, the ray dynamics is simple. The
rays with incident angles greater than the critical an-
gle, θc = arcsin(1/nin), are perfectly conﬁned in the disk
by the total internal reﬂection, while the other rays es-
cape isotropically due to its rotational symmetry. With
a simple combination of this trivial ray dynamics, it is
impossible to explain the directionality of the interacting
WGMs shown in the previous subsection.

We recall that the interaction between WGMs are re-
pulsive in OE and OO modes.
In fact, this originates
from the constraint that the ﬁeld value at x = 0 or on
y-axis should be zero due to the odd parity about y-axis.

4

FIG. 5:
The far ﬁeld emission patterns of the interacting
WGMs. (a) The interacting W GM(77,1)s (nin = 1.4) shown
in Fig. 3 (b). (b) The interacting W GM(29,1)s (nin = 2.0)
shown in Fig. 4 (b).

As a result, the intensity spots confronting each other
near x = 0 would shift repulsively, and the structure of
the whole intensity spots in a WGM would be slightly
deformed from circle.
In order to incorporate this ef-
fect of the repulsive interaction into the ray dynamics,
we consider a slightly deformed circular boundary which
can support the slightly deformed WGM similar to one
of the interacting WGMs.

As a simple ray dynamical model containing the eﬀect
of the repulsive interaction, we consider a circular disk
with a cut as shown in Fig. 6 (a). The deformation pa-
rameter is ǫ which is the reduced length of the radius by
the cut. Figure 6 (b) shows its PSOS representing the
trajectory of a ray starting from one point in phase space
(s, p), where s is the boundary coordinate and p = sin θ, θ
being the incident angle, without the consideration of the
refractive escape. Since the circle with a cut is a discon-
tinuous deformation(non-KAM system), this model can-
not describe weakly deformed case where the rays sup-
porting WGM are still conﬁned in KAM tori. So, our
model is more suitable to a moderately deformed case
where the rays supporting WGM can diﬀusively escape.
The ray can change their incident angle only through the
bounce on the cut, and eventually the ray trajectory ﬁll
up the whole phase space, even though there are so many
marginally stable lines. The broken lines at p ∼ 0.50 and
p ∼ 0.71 represent the families of the marginally stable
triangular and rectangular periodic orbits, and the gaps
of lines correspond to the cut of the boundary.

The dielectric microcavities are open systems where
rays can refractively escape from the microcavities,
and the escape rate are determined by the Fresnel
In order to understand the emission di-
equations[12].
rection of rays, we obtain the survival probability distri-
butions in both cases of nin = 1.4 and nin = 2.0 which
are shown in Fig. 7 (a) and (b), respectively. The gray

FIG. 6:
(a) The boundary shape used in the ray dynamical
analysis; a circle with a cut. (b) PSOS for the billiard shown
in (a) when R = 1 and ǫ = 0.01.

points in Fig. 7 correspond to the rays with normal-
ized probability greater than 0.1 in the time range of
50 < t < 53 with a time scale as the length of ray tra-
jectory, and the rays start from a uniform ensemble of
1000 × 1000 initial positions in the phase space. The pat-
tern of the survival probability distribution reveals the
openness structure on the unstable manifold background
near the critical lines, pc = 1/nin, for the total inter-
nal reﬂection. The directionality of emissions and the
emitting part of boundary are explained by the pattern
below the critical line. The color plots below the critical
lines in Fig. 7 (a) and (b) illustrate how the long-lived
rays supporting the WGMs can escape. We ﬁnd that the
long-lived rays refractively escape through the unstable
manifold structure arising in the survival probability dis-
tribution. As mentioned before, the ray far above the
critical line changes its angular momentum only when
bouncing from the cut and, depending on the bouncing
position on the cut the angular momentum can increases
or decreases, in other words, the angular momentum dif-
fuses to other values. From repetition of this diﬀusion
process, the ray can reach below the critical line and
eventually escape the microcavity. The ensemble of the
above escape process makes the color plots. The dark-
ness of the color plots represents the population of the
ensemble.

5

FIG. 7:
(color online) The survival probability distribution.
The colored spikes show the parts through which long-lived
rays escape. (a) nin = 1.4 case. (b) nin = 2.0 case.

The colored spikes below the critical line(pc ≃ 0.714) in
Fig. 7(a) correspond to the rays following the diamond-
typed period orbit inside the microcavity and indicate
that the ray emission from about s = 3π/2 is very strong
for the counterclockwise circulating rays(p > 0). These
are consistent with the resonance pattern shown in Fig.
3 (b) where the faint diamond structure is seen inside the
microdisks and the strong emission comes out from about
s = 3π/2 of the right microdisk. If we consider another
eﬀective deformed microcavity to simulate the interacting
WGMs, we can get the resulting emission pattern shown
in Fig. 8 (a) where we neglect the emission from the cut.
This ray dynamical result is very similar to the far ﬁeld
emission pattern of Fig. 5 (a) except the interference
oscillation in peaks. The same discussion is valid for the
case of nin = 2 case shown in Fig. 7 (b). The resulting
emission pattern is given in Fig. 8 (b), and this explains
well the far ﬁeld pattern of the interacting WGMs shown
in Fig. 5 (b).

Although the deformed disk in Fig. 6 (a) is a non-
KAM system, this explains well the insensibility of the
directionality of emissions to the distance d. The longer
distance d corresponds to the smaller ǫ value. In this case,
although the average escape rate and the emitting part
of the boundary would decrease, it is clear that the emis-
sion directions and the emitting positions on the bound-
ary are essentially invariant. However, the mode-mode
interaction would create a continuous deformation, i.e.,
the system would be a KAM system. In a KAM model,
even if the rays supporting the WGM are conﬁned in

FIG. 8: The ray dynamical far ﬁeld emission patterns of the
deformed dielectric disk. (a) nin = 1.4 case. (b) nin = 2.0
case.

KAM-tori, it is still possible for the rays to reach chaotic
sea through the dynamical tunneling, and then diﬀuse
along the unstable manifolds to the critical line[13]. The
unstable manifold structure near the critical line in the
KAM model would be similar to that of the non-KAM
model if the global boundary shapes of both models are
almost identical. Therefore, both models would give the
essentially same emission directionality.

IV. WEAKLY INTERACTING WGMS

When the distance d is larger than λ, the interaction
between WGMs becomes very small. The strength of
the small interaction can be measured by the deviation
of resonance position from that of isolated corresponding
WGM as done for the strongly interacting WGMs in the
previous section. Figure 9 (a) shows the variation of the
resonance position in the range of 2λ < d < 6λ for the in-
teracting W GM(29,1)s with nin = 2. It is shown that the
resonance positions of both EE(black circle) and OE(red
square) modes oscillate with the period ∆d ≃ λ/2. The
oscillatory behavior also appears for EO and OO modes.
The interference eﬀect of emitted waves from the WGMs
seems to be responsible for the oscillatory behavior. As
pointed out in the previous section, the BEM calculation,
however, has the precision limit of δ(kR) ≃ 10−3. We
note that the amplitude of the oscillations is almost same
order with the precision limit. So, we have to be careful
to accept the oscillatory behavior as a real phenomenon,
because it can be a numerical artifact. To check this,
we performed the same calculation for the interacting
W GM(7,2)s (nin = 2.0) which are relatively low-Q res-
onance modes. Since the emission of the W GM(7,2) is
stronger than the W GM(29,1) case, we expect the varia-
tion of the resonance position would be larger than the
precision of BEM.

6

FIG. 9:
(color online) The oscillatory behavior of the res-
onance position of interacting WGMs when d > λ.
(a)
W GM(29,1) case. (b) W GM(7,2) case. Black circle and red
square denote EE and OE modes, respectively.

The exact resonance position of the W GM(7,2) in an
isolated circular disk is kR = 6.5806 − i0.1117 and in the
BEM kR = 6.5808 − i0.1127 giving the same precision
limit of δ(kR) ≃ 10−3. For the interacting W GM(7,2)s,
the variations of resonance positions for EE and OE
modes are shown in Fig. 9 (b). When d & λ, both
real and imaginary parts of kR oscillate with a period
∆d ≃ λ and the oscillation amplitude is much greater
than the precision limit of the BEM, which supports that
the oscillatory behavior of the interacting W GM(29,1) in
Fig. 9 (a) would be a real phenomenon, not a numerical
artifact. We note that the oscillation of the resonance po-
sition of OE mode is out of phase with that of EE mode
in both Re(kR) and Im(kR). The resonance patterns at
the local maxima of Im(kR), corresponding to minimum
leakages of the system, denoted by arrows in Fig. 9 (b)
are shown in Fig. 10, and these explain why the oscil-
lations of resonance positions of OE and EE modes are
out of phase and have a period ∆d ≃ λ. The internal
patterns of the resonances are almost invariant, and the
characteristic diﬀerence is the number of intensity spots
on the horizontal axis between two disks which increases
one by one. Odd and even number of spots appear in OE
and EE modes, respectively. Roughly we can understand

(color online) Resonance patterns of those corre-
FIG. 10:
sponding to the maxima of the oscillation indicated by ar-
rows in Fig. 9 (b). The resonance positions are (a) kR =
6.5744 − i0.0712 (OE mode), (b) kR = 6.5824 − i0.0793 (EE
mode), and (c) kR = 6.5812 − i0.0877 (OE mode). nin = 2.0
is used and red-white-blue-dark blue colors indicate high to
low intensity on a logarithmic scale.

this oscillation behavior as the degree of the accordance
with the quantization condition of the unstable periodic
orbit lying on the horizontal axis between two disks even
though the boundary condition on the ends of the period
In fact this kind of explanation is
orbit is not trivial.
valid only for relatively low kR case where the interfer-
ence on the unstable orbit dominates, and other inference
eﬀects are negligible. In the high kR case many beams
emitted from the intensity spots inside disks take part
in the interference process, and the resulting oscillation
of each symmetry mode would show more complicated
behavior in its period and amplitude.

V. SUMMARY

In the coupled disks system, we have shown that the
strongly interacting WGMs with odd parity about y-axis
gives good directional emissions, and the directions of
the emissions are determined by the refractive index of
the dielectric disks. This ﬁnding has been well explained

by an eﬀective boundary deformation in ray dynamical
model. It is also shown that the resonance positions of
the weakly interacting WGMs oscillate depending on the
distance d between two microdisks, and this oscillation
can be understood as the result of interference of emitted
beams from the WGMs.

Acknowledgments

7

This work is supported by Creative Research Initia-
tives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.

[1] S. L. McCall, A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. J. Pearton,
and R. A. Logan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 20 (1992);Y. Ya-
mamoto and R. E. Slusher, Physics Today 46, 66 (1993).
[2] Optical Processes in Microcavities, edited by R. K. Chang
and A. J. Campillo (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996).
[3] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone, and R. K.
Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2682 (1995); J. U. N¨ockel,
A. D. Stone, G. Chen, H. L. Grossman, and R. K. Chang,
Opt. Lett. 21, 1609 (1996); J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone,
Nature 385, 45 (1997).

[4] E. J. Heller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 1515 (1984); S.-B. Lee,
J.-H. Lee, J.-S. Chang, H.-J. Moon, S. W. Kim, and K.
An, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 033903 (2002); C. Gmachl, E.
E. Narimanov, F. Capasso, J. N. Baillargeon, and A.
Y. Cho, Opt. Lett. 27, 824 (2002); T. Harayama, T.
Fukushima, P. Davis, P. O. Vaccaro, T. Miyasaka, T.
Nishimura, and T. Aida, Phys. Rev. E 67, 015207(R)
(2003).

[5] S.-Y. Lee, S. Rim, J.-W. Ryu, T.-Y. Kwon, M. Choi, and

S. Rim, and C.-M. Kim, arXiv:nlin.CD/0505040 (2005).
[7] N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, H. G. L. Schwefel, R. K. Chang,
and A. D. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 094102 (2002);
[8] G. D. Chern, H. E. Tureci, A. D. Stone, R. K. Chang,
M. Kneissl, and N. M. Johnson, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83,
1710 (2003); M. Kneissl, M. Teepe, N. Miyashita, N. M.
Johnson, G. D. Chern, and R. K. Chang, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 84, 2485 (2004); T. Ben-Messaoud and J. Zyss,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 241110 (2005).

[9] M. S. Kurdoglyan, S.-Y. Lee, S. Rim, and C.-M. Kim,

Opt. Lett. 29, 2758 (2004).

[10] J. Wiersig, J. Opt. A : Pure Appl. Opt. 5, 53 (2003);
S.-Y. Lee, M. S. Kurdoglyan, S. Rim, and C.-M. Kim,
Phys. Rev. A 70, 023809 (2004).

[11] The intensity outside disks of Fig. 3 (a) is much smaller
than that of Fig. 3 (b) but for convenient sake, we show
the near ﬁeld intensity patterns with diﬀerent intensity
scale. It is the same as Fig. 4.

[12] J. F. B. Hawkes and I. D. Latimer, Lasers : Theory and

[13] V. A. Podolskiy and E. E. Narimanov, Opt. Lett. 30, 474

C.-M. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 164102 (2004).

Practice, (Prentice Hall, 1995).

[6] H. G. L. Schwefel, N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, R. K. Chang,
A. D. Stone, T. Ben-Messaoud, and J. Zyss, J. Opt. Soc.
Am. B 21, 923 (2004); S.-Y. Lee, J.-W. Ryu, T.-Y. Kwon,

(2005).

