Tailored quantum dots for entangled photon pair creation

A. Greilich, M. Schwab, T. Berstermann, T. Auer, R. Oulton, D. R. Yakovlev, and M. Bayer
Experimentelle Physik II, Universit¨at Dortmund, D-44221 Dortmund, Germany

V. Stavarache, D. Reuter, and A. Wieck
Angewandte Festk¨orperphysik, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany
(Dated: July 30, 2013)

We compare the asymmetry-induced exchange splitting δ1 of the bright-exciton ground-state
doublet in self-assembled (In,Ga)As/GaAs quantum dots, determined by Faraday rotation, with its
homogeneous linewidth γ, obtained from the radiative decay in time-resolved photoluminescence.
Post-growth thermal annealing of the dot structures leads to a considerable increase of the homoge-
neous linewidth, while a strong reduction of the exchange splitting is simultaneously observed. The
annealing can be tailored such that δ1 and γ become comparable, whereupon the carriers are still
well conﬁned. This opens the possibility to observe polarization entangled photon pairs through the
biexciton decay cascade.

PACS numbers: 71.36.+c, 73.20.Dx, 78.47.+p, 42.65.-k

6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Entangled photon pairs are a key requirement for the
implementation of quantum teleportation schemes.
[1]
Typically, such photon pairs are created by parametric
down conversion of a strongly attenuated laser beam in
a non-linear optical crystal, with limited eﬃciency. Re-
cently, the decay of a biexciton complex conﬁned in a
quantum dot (QD) has been suggested as an eﬃcient
source for polarization entangled photon pairs.
[2] This
concept was based on the assumption of an idealistic QD
structure for which the valence band ground state has
pure heavy hole character with angular momentum pro-
jections Jh,z =
3/2 along the heterostructure growth
direction. When an electron-hole pair is injected, the
momenta of the carriers become coupled by the exchange
interaction. If the dot has perfect D2d-symmetry, angu-
lar momentum is a good quantum number: the optically
active states with momenta M =
1 are degenerate, and
their decay leads to emission of σ±-circularly polarized
photons.

±

±

If the dot ground states are occupied by two electrons
and two holes, each with opposite spin orientations, a
spin singlet biexciton X2 is formed, for whose decay two
channels exist, as shown in Fig. 1 (upper panel left). The
ﬁrst photon is emitted with either σ+ or σ−-polarization,
and then the second photon with opposite polarization,
as long as no spin ﬂip occurs after the ﬁrst process.
Unless a polarization measurement is performed, the
two photon polarization state is therefore described by
2) /√2, forming an entan-
|
i
|
gled state. A key requirement is that the photons emitted
at each stage of the cascade are quasi-degenerate within
their homogeneous linewidth, such that they cannot be
distinguished by an energy measurement.

1
| −i

= (
|

| −i

2+

1
i

2γ

+

+

i

Experiments have failed up to now to demonstrate such
an entanglement, as only classical correlations were ob-
[3] While some of the idealizations of the origi-
served.
nal proposal are well fulﬁlled, for example, for strongly
conﬁned self-assembled (In,Ga)As/GaAs quantum dots
(such as the long exciton spin relaxation time as com-

FIG. 1: Upper: Scheme of the possible decay channels of
a biexciton X2 conﬁned in a QD. Left hand side gives the
situation for an idealized dot with D2d-symmetry, while the
right hand side does the same for a dot with reduced symme-
try. Plus/minus signs and x/y signs indicate circular and lin-
ear polarization of the emitted photons, respectively. Lower:
Low excitation photoluminescence spectra of QD ensembles
annealed at diﬀerent temperatures, leading to diﬀerent con-
ﬁnement potentials, as indicated at each spectrum.

pared to the radiative lifetime [4], or the almost pure
heavy-hole character of the valence band ground state
[6]), a fundamental problem arises from the broken D2d
symmetry, which is reduced to at least C2v or even lower
symmetry in realistic dot structures. [7, 8, 9] As a conse-
quence, angular momentum is no longer a good quantum

±

number and the
1 excitons become mixed to linearly
polarized eigenstates, resulting in an energy splitting δ1
of the bright exciton doublet (see Fig. 1, upper panel
right). Generally, this splitting is considerably larger
than the homogeneous linewidth of the exciton. There-
fore the two decay channels can be distinguished even
without a polarization measurement, simply by measur-
ing the energy of the ﬁrst photon. Photon entanglement
is not preserved in this case.

The only way to achieve polarization entanglement is
to reduce the splitting such that δ1 becomes smaller than
the homogeneous linewidth γ, which at cryogenic temper-
atures is radiatively limited. [10] Several strategies have
been pursued to reach the goal of a quasi-degeneracy of
the bright exciton doublet. One example is the applica-
tion of an electric ﬁeld in the quantum dot plane, to com-
pensate the asymmetry. This has shown some promise,
but the reduction of δ1 was still too small.
[11] Lately,
it was found by non-linear optical techniques that ther-
mal annealing may lead to a strong reduction of the ex-
change splitting down to the few µeV-range.
[12, 13]
Very recently, it has been demonstrated by single dot
spectroscopy that, within the experimental accuracy, the
splitting may even become zero or its sign may be re-
versed. [14]

Here we complete this picture by addressing not only
the asymmetry splitting for dots with varying conﬁne-
ment, but we also compare this splitting to the homo-
geneous linewidth γ: Any reduction of δ1 even to very
small values would not enable entanglement as long as
δ1 > γ. We show that the two energies may be made
comparable through an annealing step, which, however,
still keeps the dot carriers well conﬁned. For determining
the energies we use spectroscopic techniques complemen-
tary to those used previously, and we compare the results
to data reported in literature.

The experiments were performed on arrays of self-
assembled (In,Ga)As/GaAs QDs. To obtain strong
enough light-matter interaction, the samples contained
20 layers of QDs, that were separated by 60 nm wide
barriers. The structures were fabricated by molecular
beam epitaxy on (001)-oriented GaAs substrate. The
samples were annealed for 30 s at diﬀerent temperatures
Tann between 800 and 980◦C by which the conﬁnement
is reduced due to intermixing between dot and barrier
material. Fig. 1 (lower panel) shows typical photolumi-
nescence spectra of samples diﬀering in Tann, which show
the established behavior for such a series of structures: [5]
With increasing Tann, a blue shift as well as a narrowing
of the emission line is observed. Even though there is a
clear trend of increasing emission energy with increasing
Tann for the samples under study, an exact correlation
cannot be made. As a more characteristic quantity for
the electronic conﬁnement therefore we in the following
label the samples by the conﬁnement potential, which
we deﬁne as energy separation of the ground state dot
emission from the wetting layer at about 1.48 eV. The
wetting layer emission also shifts to higher energies with

2

FIG. 2: (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence of QD ensem-
bles with diﬀerent conﬁnement without polarization analysis.
Excitation power was 1 W cm−2. (b) Same as (a), but for
a sample with 95 meV conﬁnement. Excitation into wetting
layer was σ+-polarized, detection was either σ+ (open cir-
cles) or σ−
-polarized (solid circles). Solid line gives average
of both traces. (c) Diﬀerential transmission for same sample
as in panel (b). Pump beam was σ+-polarized, probe either
σ+ (open circles) or σ−-polarized (solid circles). Solid line
again gives average.

increasing Tann, but this shift is weak. The conﬁnement
energies range from 410 down to 60 meV.

The samples were immersed in helium gas at a tem-
perature of 5 K. Optical excitation was done by a mode-
locked Ti-sapphire laser emitting pulses with a duration
of about 1 ps at 75.6 MHz repetition rate, which hit the
sample along the heterostructure growth direction.

The exciton lifetimes were studied using time-resolved
photoluminescence,
for which the wavelength of the
pulsed laser was tuned to the GaAs band gap at 1.512 eV.
The emission was dispersed by a 0.5 m monochromator
and detected by a streak camera with a S1 photocathode.
Excitation powers as low as possible were used to study
the pure exciton decay by avoiding multiparticle occu-
pation eﬀects such as Pauli blocking and related ground
shell reﬁlling. Fig. 2(a) shows decay curves of four diﬀer-
ent QD samples. The excitation was linearly polarized,
while the emission was detected without polarization res-
olution. One clearly sees that the decay is the faster, the
shallower the conﬁnement is. The observed decays have
been analyzed by single exponential ﬁt, and the decay
times are indicated at each trace. The decay time de-
creases from 1030 to 165 ps with decreasing conﬁnement.
This behavior is expected: the exciton lifetime is deter-
mined by the exciton coherence volume, which is given
by the dot size. The size is increased by the annealing
step, leading to the decrease of the exciton lifetime.

Fig. 2(b) shows time-resolved PL spectra of a sample
with a conﬁnement potential of 95 meV. In this case the

excitation was σ+-circularly polarized and resonant with
the wetting layer at about 1.48 eV. Detection was taken
either σ+ (open circles) or σ− (solid circles) polarized.
For clarity, the two curves have been shifted vertically
relative to each other. The average of these traces is also
shown (the solid line) which follows to a good approx-
imation an exponential dependence with a decay time
of 420 ps. The polarization-resolved decays show some
modulation which is in antiphase for the two curves. A
rough estimate gives a period of 600
50 ps for the oscil-
lation, which corresponds to an energy splitting of about
7 µeV. This is comparable to the expected ﬁne structure
splitting δ1. [12]

±

A priori it is not clear that time-resolved PL measure-
ments yield the exciton lifetime T1, in particular for non-
resonant excitation, as the dynamics involves also car-
rier relaxation. Therefore we have also performed pump-
probe diﬀerential transmission studies on the 95 meV
conﬁnement sample: The pump beam was resonant to
the ground state dots transition and excites a correspond-
ing carrier population, whose decay is then tested by a
probe beam. The data are shown in Fig. 2(c). The traces
show data with σ+ pump excitation, and σ+ (open cir-
cles) and σ− (solid circles) -polarized detection, respec-
tively. The solid line gives again the average of the two
traces, resulting in a decay time of 430 ps. Within the ex-
perimental error, this time agrees well with that obtained
by time-resolved photoluminescence, conﬁrming that un-
der the applied experimental conditions, the PL decay
time does indeed give the exciton lifetime T1, from which
the homogeneous linewidth γ = 2~/T1 is obtained (see
Fig. 4). Note that for the polarized diﬀerential transmis-
sion traces an antiphase modulation is again observed,
even though it is too weak to determine an oscillation
period.

As mentioned, studies of the exchange interaction in-
duced splitting have been up to now reported by pho-
toluminescence on single QDs [7, 8] or by non-linear
spectroscopy such as four-wave-mixing [12] or diﬀeren-
tial transmission [13] on ensembles. Here we use another
non-linear technique to address this problem, namely
pump-probe Faraday rotation [15], for which the laser
was tuned to the energy of the ground state transition
in the QDs and split into two trains: An electron spin
polarization is induced by a circularly polarized pump
beam and is tested by the rotation of the linear polariza-
tion of a probe beam. For recording the rotation angle,
a homodyne technique based on phase-sensitive balanced
detection was used.

Following previous results for small δ1 values [12], we
focused in these experiments on strongly annealed dots
with small conﬁnement potentials. Fig. 3(a) shows Fara-
day rotation signals for two samples with conﬁnement
potentials of 140 and 95 meV. The polarization direc-
tion of the probe beam was directed along the [100] crys-
tal axis. Strongly damped oscillations are observed in
both cases (note that the data were recorded at zero
magnetic ﬁeld), as a result of precession of the exciton

3

confinement 
potential        95 meV

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r
 
y
a
d
a
r
a
F
 

 

 

140 meV

(a)

95 meV

 

(b)

 

 

[110]

Probe polarization

[100]

[010]

0

200

400

600

Time (ps)

FIG. 3: (a) Faraday rotation signal with probe beam polar-
ized linearly along the [100] crystal direction for samples with
conﬁnement potentials of 95 and 140 meV. (b) Faraday rota-
tion traces recorded on the sample with 95 meV conﬁnement
potential for diﬀerent linear polarization orientations of probe
beam. In both cases, the pump beam was σ+-polarized. T =
5 K.

i

1

+1

i ∝|

Ψ1,2

i± | −

angular momentum about the in-plane anisotropy axes
of the QDs along [110] and [1¯10]. This precession re-
ﬂects the quantum beats occurring due to the coherent
excitation of both linearly polarized exciton eigenstates
by the circularly polarized pump
|
pulse. The data can be analyzed by an oscillatory ﬁt
function with an exponentially damped amplitude. The
oscillation period is clearly shorter for the sample with
a stronger conﬁnement potential (390 ps) as compared
to the sample with weaker conﬁnement (600 ps). The
energy splittings δ1 that are derived from the oscillation
period are 10.5 and 7.1 µeV for the 140 and 95 meV
samples, respectively. These values agree very well with
data determined from four-wave-mixing on samples with
comparable conﬁnement. [12]

For clarity we note that in the pump-probe measure-
ments true quantum beats are observed due to direct res-
onant excitation of the exchange-split ground state exci-
ton, while in the time-resolved photoluminescence stud-
ies with non-resonant excitation described above the ob-
served oscillation are due to polarization interferences of
the emitted photons. [16]

For understanding the observed Faraday rotation more
intuitively, a pseudospin formalism can be used for the
exciton description. [17] The bright exciton doublet with

M

= 1 is described by the matrix

|

|

=

H

(cid:18)

E0 + δ0
2
δ1
2

δ1
2
E0 + δ0

,

2 (cid:19)

100

T = 5 K

10

)

V
e
µ
(
g

1

100

10

)

V
e
µ
(

1
d

1

50

100

200

300

400

Confinement potential (meV)

FIG. 4: Homogeneous linewidth γ (squares) and exchange
splitting δ1 (circles) of the exciton in InGaAs/GaAs quantum
dots as function of the conﬁnement potential. Solid circles are
measured with Faraday rotation; open circles are taken from
Ref. [12]. Squares are measured by time resolved PL.

where E0 is the exciton energy, disregarding exchange
interaction eﬀects, and δ0 gives the energy splitting be-
= 1 and the dark
tween the bright excitons with
|
excitons with
= 2. This Hamiltonian can be rewrit-
M
|
ten as
= (E0 + δ0/2) I +δ1σx/2, where I is the identity
and σx is the Pauli matrix. The second term has the same
form as that of a spin in a perpendicular magnetic ﬁeld
pointing along the x-direction, resulting in the observed
precession.

M

H

|

|

Fig. 3(b) shows diﬀerent Faraday rotation traces of
the QD sample with 95 meV conﬁnement. The polar-
ization direction of the probe beam, as indicated by the
corresponding crystal directions, was varied. The probe
polarization has no inﬂuence on the beat period, but ev-
idently aﬀects the phase of the oscillation. The exciton
state created by the circularly polarized light is given by
the superposition state

Ψ

Ψ1 exp

∝

i

δ1t
2~ (cid:19)

(cid:18)−

+ Ψ2 exp

+i

(cid:18)

δ1t
2~ (cid:19)

.

(1)

4

Fig. 4 gives an overview of γ and δ1 as function of the
conﬁnement potential. Note that both values are plotted
on a logarithmic scale, as is the conﬁnement potential.
The solid circles and solid squares give the exchange split-
ting and homogeneous linewidth, respectively, measured
in our experiments. For comparison, the open circles give
the δ1 values from Ref. [12]. For the as-grown QD sample
with the highest conﬁnement, δ1 is by a factor 50 larger
than the homogeneous linewidth. This holds for all sam-
ples with conﬁnement potentials larger than about 300
meV. Most studies reported up to now on polarization
entangled photons were done on comparable structures.
The data in Fig. 4 underlines why no entanglement was
observed yet.

However, when the conﬁnement potential height is de-
creased to less than 300 meV, a drastic reduction of the
exchange splitting is observed. Simultaneously, the ho-
mogeneous linewidth increases. For the QDs with con-
ﬁnement potential around 100 meV, both quantities are
of comparable magnitude. For the most shallow QDs, δ1
is reduced down to about 5 µeV, while γ is increased to 7
µeV. For these QDs the exchange splitting can no longer
be resolved by an energy measurement. It is these QDs
from which polarization entangled photon pairs might be
expected, and which we will study in the future. For this
purpose the cross-correlation should be measured for the
biexciton decay cascade in a single QD by a Hanbury-
Brown-Twiss setup. [3]

In summary, we have demonstrated that thermal an-
nealing performed on QDs favors a situation in which po-
larization entangled photon pairs may be observed. On
one hand, it reduces strongly the asymmetry-induced ex-
change splitting of excitons. On the other hand, it simul-
taneously increases the exciton homogeneous linewidth,
under which a ﬁnite splitting may be hidden. The latter
eﬀect may be enhanced further if the QDs were placed
in an optical resonator, which could be used not only for
reducing the exciton lifetime through the Purcell eﬀect
[18], but also for funnelling the emission into a desired
spatial direction, thus enhancing the collection eﬃciency.
[18, 19, 20]

At a certain time, diﬀerent components of this state are
tested by varying the polarization of the probe, causing
the phase shift of the Faraday rotation. In particular, a
phase shift occurs for a 900-deg. rotation of the probe
π
polarization from [010] to [110].

−

Acknowledgements. We are grateful to E.L.
Ivchenko for insightful discussions. The work was sup-
ported by the DFG (research group ’Quantum Optics
of Semiconductor Heterostructures’). R. O. thanks the
Alexander von Humboldt foundation.

[1] D. Bouwmeester, A. Ekert, and A. Zeilinger, The Physics

of Quantum Information, Springer, Berlin (2000).

[2] O. Benson, C. Santori, M. Pelton, Y. Yamamoto, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 84, 2513 (2000).

G. S. Solomon, Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. B 66, 45308
(2002); R. M. Stevenson, R. M. Thompson, A. J. Shields,
I. Farrer, B. E. Kardynal, D. A. Ritchie, M. Pepper,
Phys. Rev. B 66, 081302(R) (2002).

[3] see,

for example, E. Moreau,

I. Robert, L. Manin,
V. Thierry-Mieg, J. M. Gerard, I. Abram, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 87, 183601 (2001); C. Santori, D. Fattal, M. Pelton,

[4] M. Paillard, X. Marie, P. Renucci, T. Amand, A. Jbeli,
and J. M. Grard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1634 (2001).
[5] see, for example, S. Fafard and C. Allen, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 75, 2374 (1999).

[6] see, for example, S. Cortez, O. Krebs, P. Voisin, and J. M.

Gerard, Phys. Rev. B 63, 233306 (2001).

[8] see,

[7] M. Bayer, A. Kuther, A. Forchel, A. Gorbunov,
V. B. Timofeev, F. Schfer, J. P. Reithmaier, T. L. Rei-
necke and S. N. Walck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1748 (1999).
for example, M. Bayer, G. Ortner, O. Stern,
A. Kuther, A. A. Gorbunov, A. Forchel, P. Hawry-
lak, S. Fafard, K. Hinzer, T. L. Reinecke, S. N. Walck,
J. P. Reithmaier, F. Klopf, and F. Schfer, Phys. Rev. B
65, 195315 (2002) and references therein.

[9] see, for example, G. Bester and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B

71, 045318 (2005).

[10] W. Langbein, P. Borri, U. Woggon, V. Stavarache,
D. Reuter, and A. D. Wieck, Phys. Rev. B 70, 033301
(2004).

[11] K. Kowalik, O. Krebs, A. Lematre, S. Laurent, P. Senel-
lart, P. Voisin, and J. A. Gaj, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86,
041907 (2005).

[12] W. Langbein, P. Borri, U. Woggon, V. Stavarache,
D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, Phys. Rev. B 69, 161301(R)
(2004).

[13] A. I. Tartakovskii, M. N. Makhonin,

I. R. Sellers,
J. Cahill, A. D. Andreev, D. M. Whittaker, J-P. R. Wells,
A. M. Fox, D. J. Mowbray, M. S. Skolnick, K. M. Groom,

5

M. J. Steer, H. Y. Liu, and M. Hopkinson, Phys. Rev. B
70, 193303 (2004).

[14] R. J. Young, R. M. Stevenson, A. J. Shields, P. Atkin-
son, K. Cooper, D. A. Ritchie, K. M. Groom, A. I. Tar-
takovskii, and M. S. Skolnick, Phys. Rev. B 72, 113305
(2005).

[15] D. D. Awschalom and N. Samarth,

in Semiconductor
Spintronics and Quantum Computation, edited by D. D.
Awschalom, D. Loss, and N. Samarth, Springer Berlin
(2002).

[16] For a detailed discussion see, for example, M. Sns, B. Ur-
baszek, X. Marie, T. Amand, J. Tribollet, F. Bernardot,
C. Testelin, M. Chamarro, and J.-M. Grard, Phys. Rev.
B 71, 115334 (2005), and references therein.

[17] E.L. Ivchenko, Optical Spectroscopy of semiconductor
nanostructures, Alpha Science International, Harrow
(2005).

[18] E.M. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946).
[19] J. M. Grard, B. Sermage, B. Gayral, B. Legrand,
E. Costard, and V. Thierry-Mieg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
1110 (1998).

[20] B. Ohnesorge, M. Bayer, A. Forchel, J. P. Reithmaier,
N. A. Gippius, and S. G. Tikhodeev, Phys. Rev. B 56,
R4367 (1997).

