Experimental veriﬁcation of the key properties of a

three-dimensional isotropic transmission line based superlens

Pekka Alitalo, Stanislav Maslovski, and Sergei Tretyakov

Radio Laboratory / SMARAD, Helsinki University of Technology

P.O. Box 3000, FI-02015 TKK, Finland

E-mails: pekka.alitalo@tkk.ﬁ, stanislav.maslovski@gmail.com, sergei.tretyakov@tkk.ﬁ

(Dated: January 16, 2014)

Abstract

Design and experimental realization of a three-dimensional superlens based on LC-loaded trans-

mission lines are presented. Commercially available components and materials are used in the

design. Transmission properties of the designed structure are studied experimentally and the ob-

served lens properties are compared with analytical predictions. Backward-wave propagation and

ampliﬁcation of evanescent waves in the prototype structure are veriﬁed both analytically and

experimentally.

6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Systems that are able to focus propagating electromagnetic waves and amplify evanes-

cent waves have received a lot of attention after Pendry published his paper1 about a su-

perlens capable of subwavelength focusing. The ampliﬁcation of evanescent waves is the key

feature in the subwavelength focusing characteristics of the superlens, because evanescent

waves carry information about ﬁne details (smaller than the wavelength) of the source ﬁeld.

Pendry’s superlens is based on a planar slab made of a backward-wave (BW) material (also

called double-negative material or Veselago medium), in which the real parts of the eﬀective

permittivity and permeability are both negative.

The ﬁrst successful demonstrations of a BW material and negative refraction were done

using an array of resonant cells, which were comprised of thin wire strips (eﬀective negative

permittivity) and split-ring-resonators (eﬀective negative permeability).3–5 However, these

structures are highly anisotropic and they allow one to achieve the properties of a BW ma-

terial only within a narrow frequency band due to the use of resonant phenomena in split

rings. Also, such systems would be very diﬃcult to implement at RF-frequencies. This is

why other ways to realize a BW material have been extensively studied in the recent liter-

ature. Another approach to create a BW material is based on LC-loaded transmission-line

networks.6,7 These networks do not rely on resonant response from particular inclusions, and

the periods of the structures can be made very small as compared to the wavelength. These

features allow realization of broadband and low-loss devices, which is extremely diﬃcult if

resonant inclusions are used.

So far the transmission-line (TL) network approach has been successfully realized in

one- and two-dimensional networks,8,9 and the main challenge on the route towards truly

three-dimensional broadband and low-loss superlenses is the realization of isotropic three-

dimensional artiﬁcial BW structures. In our recent paper we introduced a three-dimensional

(3D) LC-loaded transmission-line network and derived necessary equations to design such

a structure.10 The key idea of our approach is that the inside volume of every TL section

is eﬀectively screened from the other sections and from the outer space.10 Other ways to

design three-dimensional FW and BW transmission-line structures have been proposed,11,12

but to the best of our knowledge those structures have not been realized.

The goal of this paper is to show that the three-dimensional structure analytically de-

2

scribed earlier10 can be practically manufactured and allows us to realize the two basic prop-

erties of Pendry’s superlens, i.e. backward-wave propagation and ampliﬁcation of evanescent

waves.

II. THE DESIGNED STRUCTURE

The components that are used to realize the 3D superlens are listed in Table I with

their main properties. The structure is designed to work at a frequency close to 1 GHz. The

period of the structure (d) should be much smaller than the wavelength (λ) at this frequency.

Accordingly, the period of the structure is chosen to be 13 mm (λ0 at 1 GHz is 300 mm, λ0

is the wavelength in free space). For the ease of manufacturing, the thickness of the BW

slab (l) has been decided to be three periods, i.e. l = 3d = 39 mm. Using the equations for

the characteristic impedances,10 suitable impedance values of the TLs have been found to be

Z0,TL,FW = 66 Ω (impedance of the TLs in the FW region) and Z0,TL,BW = 89 Ω (impedance

of the TLs in the BW region). With these values the characteristic impedances of the FW

and BW regions should be approximately equal. The height of the substrate is 0.787 mm

(Rogers RT/Duroid 5870). The lumped elements, i.e., the capacitors and inductors, have

been supplied by American Technical Ceramics Corp. (ATC).

TABLE I: Properties of the prototype components.

Value Tolerance Manufacturer Q-factor or
loss tangent

d

13 mm

Z0,TL,FW 66 Ω

Z0,TL,BW 89 Ω

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

C

L

3.3 pF ±0.05 pF

6.8 nH ±0.136 nH

ATC

ATC

QC,1GHz = 500

QL,1GHz = 50

Substrate εr = 2.33 ±0.02

Rogers

tan δ = 0.0012

Using the well-known equations for microstrip lines, one can ﬁnd the widths (w) and

the eﬀective permittivities (εr,eﬀ) for the required transmission lines (66 Ω and 89 Ω). The

results for the FW network are wFW ≈ 1.437 mm, εr,eﬀ,FW ≈ 1.902, and for the BW network

wBW ≈ 0.794 mm, εr,eﬀ,BW ≈ 1.845.

3

Detailed description of the dispersion equations and characteristic impedances for the

FW and BW networks will be published elsewhere10 and due to their complexity they are

not repeated here. By plotting the dispersion curves for the FW and BW networks, one can

see that the matching frequency (at which the longitudinal component of the wavenumber

in the BW region equals to the negative of the longitudinal component of the wavenumber

in the FW region, i.e. kz,BW = −kz,FW) is f ≈ 0.8996 GHz, see Fig. 1a. In the dispersion

curves plotted here only propagation along the z-axis (lens axis) is considered. From Fig. 1a

it is also seen that at the matching frequency the absolute value of kzd is approximately

0.5909 (in both FW and BW regions), which corresponds to the longitudinal wavenumber
kz = 0.5909/d ≈ 45.5 m−1. This is equal to the maximum transverse wavenumber (kt)

that a propagating wave can have, and therefore we can conclude that for evanescent waves
kt > 45.5 m−1. The maximum transverse wavenumber for evanescent waves is at the edge of
the ﬁrst Brillouin zone: kt,max = π/d ≈ 242 m−1. By plotting the characteristic impedances

(Z0) for the FW and BW networks, one can see that the characteristic impedances of the two

networks are approximately equal at the design frequency (f ≈ 0.8996 GHz), see Fig. 1b.

FIG. 1: a) Dispersion curves for the FW and BW networks (ideal, lossless components). b)

Characteristic impedances for the FW and BW networks (ideal, lossless components). Propagation

along the z-axis is considered. Solid lines: FW network, dashed lines: BW network.

4

III. TRANSMISSION PROPERTIES OF THE DESIGNED STRUCTURE

The equation for the transmission coeﬃcient of the lens (TLens) as a function of the

transverse wavenumber kt was derived earlier10, and the result was:

TLens(kt) =

[Z0,FW(kt) + Z0,BW(kt)]2e+jkz,BW(kt)l − [Z0,FW(kt) − Z0,BW(kt)]2e−jkz,BW(kt)l , (1)
where we again assume that the lens axis is parallel to the z-axis. The total transmission

4Z0,FW(kt)Z0,BW(kt)

from the source plane to the image plane is then (the distance from the source plane to the

lens is s1, and the distance from the lens to the image plane is s2)10

Ttot(kt) = TLens(kt)e−jkz,FW(kt)·(s1+s2).

(2)

To estimate the performance of the designed superlens, the total transmission from the

source plane to the image plane can be plotted using equations (1) and (2), see Fig. 2a,

where we have used s1 = s2 = 19.5 mm and l = 39 mm (lossless case).

FIG. 2: Absolute value (solid line) and phase (dashed line) of the transmission coeﬃcient of

the designed superlens as a function of the transverse wavenumber. a) f = 0.8996 GHz, ideal

components. b) f = 0.91 GHz, dissipation in the lumped components and in the substrate taken

into account.

Tuning the frequency, imaging can be improved, eﬀectively enhancing transmission of the
modes with kt > 45.5 m−1 (i.e., evanescent waves). This is due to a better matching of the

characteristic impedances at those values of kt that correspond to evanescent waves. For

example, in the lossless case at f = 0.91 GHz the transmission coeﬃcient Ttot is practically

5

equal to unity for all transverse wavenumbers in the range 0 ≤ kt ≤ kt,max. The eﬀect

of dissipation caused by the substrate and the lumped components can be considered by

taking into account the loss tangent (tan δ) of the substrate and the quality factors (Q) of

the lumped components (shown in Table I), see Fig. 2b for this case. As is seen from Fig. 2b,

the transmission properties of this lossy structure are close to the ideal case: |Ttot| ≈ 1 and

arg(Ttot) ≈ 0 for a wide range of kt which includes propagating as well as evanescent spectral

components.

IV. TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROTOTYPE

First, in order to check the operational principles of the proposed structure, a two-

dimensional prototype was built (see Fig. 3). The prototype had the same properties and

component values as shown in Table I. The edges of the structure were terminated with

resistive loads that were approximately matched to the TL impedances. This was done in

order to reduce reﬂections of the propagating modes from the edges of the structure.

FIG. 3: (Color online). Two-dimensional prototype of the proposed structure (one horizontal layer

of the designed 3D structure).

The structure was excited by a coaxial feed (SMA-connectors) connected to the edge

of the ﬁrst FW region as shown in the bottom of Fig. 3. To have a possibility to change

the position of the excitation, four SMA-connectors were soldered to the structure. The

inner conductors of the SMA-connectors were soldered to the microstrip lines and the outer

6

conductors to the ground. The SMA-connectors that were not used at each measurement

were terminated with 50 Ω loads.

By connecting port 2 of a vector network analyzer to the excitation point(s) of the

structure and port 1 to a probe antenna (a short vertical monopole antenna), the electric ﬁeld

distribution on top of the structure could be measured (by measuring S12). The measured

vertical component of the electric ﬁeld is proportional to the voltage at the network nodes,

a non-invasive direct measurement of which can be a complicated task at 1 GHz. The probe

antenna was connected to an automated measurement robot, which could be programmed to

position the probe at certain points. Here the ﬁeld was measured at the center of each node

of the structure which corresponds to 70 measurement points. The BW region is situated

in the area 19.5 mm < z < 58.5 mm. See Fig. 4 for the measured electric ﬁeld distributions

on the top of the structure.

FIG. 4: (Color online). Measured amplitude of the vertical component of electric ﬁeld on top of

the 2D structure at f = 900 MHz. Fields normalized to the maximum value. a) Symmetrical

excitation by two sources at x = 52 mm, z = −6.5 mm and x = 65 mm, z = −6.5 mm. b) One

source at x = 39 mm, z = −6.5 mm.

As is seen in Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b, the maximum values of the amplitude occur at the back

edge of the BW region (as it is expected from the theory). In Fig. 4b the point of excitation

is displaced from the middle to show that the eﬀects seen are not caused by reﬂections

from the side edges. It is clear that both propagating and evanescent modes are excited in

7

the structure, because the ﬁelds do not experience signiﬁcant decay in the ﬁrst FW region

(evanescent modes decay exponentially) and there is a remarkable growth of the amplitude

in the BW region (only evanescent modes can be “ampliﬁed” in a passive structure like this).

The experiment does not show any noticeable reﬂections at the FW/BW interfaces, which

implies to a good impedance matching between the two types of networks.

To show that the structure supports backward waves, the time-harmonic electric ﬁeld

was plotted from the measured complex ﬁeld using

Ereal = Re{Ecomplexejωt}.

(3)

When the ﬁeld plot is animated as a function of time, it is seen that the waves propagate

“backwards” (towards the point of excitation) in the BW region. To illustrate this eﬀect,

some contour lines of the time-harmonic ﬁeld are plotted in Fig. 5 with diﬀerent values of

the phase angle (φ = ωt).

a)

b)

c)

FIG. 5: (Color online). Time-harmonic electric ﬁeld on top of the 2D structure at f = 900 MHz.

Fields normalized to the maximum value. Symmetrical excitation by two sources at x = 52 mm,

z = −6.5 mm and x = 65 mm, z = −6.5 mm. a) φ = 1, b) φ = 1 + π/20, c) φ = 1 + 2π/20.

V. THREE-DIMENSIONAL REALIZATION

To realize a three-dimensional structure, a second two-dimensional layer as in section IV

was manufactured. To connect these two layers, ten vertical sub-layers of height 12.2 mm

were soldered between them. See Fig. 6a for the geometry of the structure (one horizontal

layer and ten vertical sub-layers are shown). The resulting 3D structure is isotropic with re-

spect to waves propagating inside the TLs (distance between adjacent horizontal and vertical

8

nodes remains the same and the vertical microstrip lines are also loaded with capacitors in

the BW region). A photograph of the manufactured two-layer structure is shown in Fig. 6b.

FIG. 6: (Color online). a) Geometry of the 3D structure (one horizontal layer and ten vertical

sub-layers shown). b) Experimental prototype of the 3D structure with two horizontal layers.

Having more than one layer in the structure, wave propagation along the vertical axis (the

y-axis) can be also experimentally tested. This was done by exciting the structure from the

bottom of the lower horizontal layer at x = 78 mm, z = 39 mm. See Fig. 7 for the electric

ﬁeld distribution measured on top of the upper layer and Fig. 8 for the instantaneous electric

ﬁeld snapshots. Fig. 7 proves the three-dimensional isotropy of the proposed network that

was predicted theoretically.10 Fig. 8 demonstrates backward-wave propagation, because the

point of the source appears to be a “sink” for moving contours of instantaneous values of

the electric ﬁeld.

Next, a third layer as in section IV was manufactured and appended to the top of the

other two horizontal layers using vertical sub-layers as shown in Fig. 6a. A photograph of

the manufactured three-layer structure is shown in Fig. 9. The structure was again excited

using the same connectors as in section IV (situated now in the lowest horizontal layer).

The electric ﬁeld distribution on top of the upper layer was measured as in section IV. See

Fig. 10 for the measured electric ﬁeld distribution on the top of the structure.

As is seen in Fig. 10, the maximum ﬁeld value occurs near the back edge of the BW

region. Vertical propagation in the BW region was veriﬁed as in the case of two horizontal

layers and similar results as in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 were obtained.

9

FIG. 7: (Color online). Measured amplitude of the vertical component of electric ﬁeld on top of the

3D structure (two horizontal layers) at f = 900 MHz. Fields normalized to the maximum value.

One source below the lower horizontal layer at x = 78 mm, z = 39 mm.

a)

b)

c)

FIG. 8: (Color online). Time-harmonic electric ﬁeld on top of the 3D structure (two horizontal

layers) at f = 900 MHz. Fields normalized to the maximum value. One source below the lower

horizontal layer at x = 78 mm, z = 39 mm. a) φ = 1.2, b) φ = 1.2 + π/20, c) φ = 1.2 + 2π/20.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have described realization and testing of a three-dimensional

transmission-line network which is a circuit analogy of the superlens proposed by Pendry.

The backward-wave slab, which is the key part of this superlens, is implemented by loading a

transmission-line network with lumped inductive and capacitive components. Detailed theo-

retical analysis of such structures will be published elsewhere.10 In this paper we have shown

10

FIG. 9: (Color online). Experimental prototype of the 3D structure with three horizontal layers.

FIG. 10: (Color online). Measured amplitude of the vertical component of electric ﬁeld on top of

the 3D structure (three horizontal layers) at f = 900 MHz. Fields normalized to the maximum

value. One source at x = 39 mm, z = −6.5 mm, situated in the bottom layer.

that a realizable three-dimensional superlens can be quite easily designed and manufactured.

A prototype of the designed structure has been built and backward-wave propagation and

ampliﬁcation of evanescent waves in the structure have been veriﬁed by measurements of

electric ﬁeld distributions.

11

Acknowledgments

This work has been done within the frame of the Metamorphose Network of Excel-

lence and partially funded by the Academy of Finland and TEKES through the Center-

of-Excellence program. The authors would like to thank Dr. Mikhail Lapine for helpful

discussions.

1 J.B. Pendry, Physical Review Letters 85, 3966 (2000).

2 V.G. Veselago, Soviet Physics Uspekhi 10, 509 (1968).

3 D.R. Smith, W.J. Padilla, D.C. Vier, S.C. Nemat-Nasser, and S. Schultz, Physical Review

Letters 84, 4184 (2000).

4 R.A. Shelby, D.R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Science 292, 77 (2001).

5 C.G. Parazzoli, R.B. Greegor, K. Li, B.E.C. Koltenbah, and M. Tanelian, Physical Review

6 G.V. Eleftheriades, A.K. Iyer, and P.C. Kremer, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques

Letters 90, 107401 (2003).

50, 2702 (2002).

7 C. Caloz, H. Okabe, T. Iwai, and T. Itoh, Proc. USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meeting,

San Antonio, USA 1, 39 (2002).

8 C. Caloz and T. Itoh, IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation, 52, 1159 (2004).

9 A. Grbic and G.V. Eleftheriades, Physical Review Letters, 92, 117403 (2004).

10 P. Alitalo, S. Maslovski and S. Tretyakov, “Three-dimensional isotropic perfect lens based on

LC-loaded transmission lines,” arXiv:physics/0509149, submitted to Journal of Applied Physics

(2005).

11 A. Grbic and G.V. Eleftheriades, Journal of Applied Physics, 98, 043106 (2005).

12 W.J.R. Hoefer, P.P.M. So, D. Thompson and M.M. Tentzeris, IEEE MTT-S International

Symposium Digest, 313 (2005).

12

