6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
0
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Conformal Mapping and Dielectric Invisibility Devices

Ulf Leonhardt
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews KY16 9SS, Scotland
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

An invisibility device should guide light around an object as if nothing were there, regardless
where the light comes from. Ideal invisibility devices are impossible due to the wave nature of light.
This paper develops a general recipe for the design of media that create perfect invisibility within the
accuracy of geometrical optics. Here the imperfections of invisibility can be made arbitrarily small
to hide objects that are much larger than the wavelength. Using modern metamaterials, practical
demonstrations of such devices seem possible. The method developed here can be also applied to
escape from detection by other forms of waves such as sound.

PACS numbers: 42.15.-i, 02.40.Tt

According to Fermat’s Principle [1], light rays take the
shortest optical paths in dielectric media. Here the re-
fractive index n integrated along the ray trajectory de-
ﬁnes the path length. When n is spatially varying the
shortest optical paths are not straight lines, but are
curved, in general. This light bending is the cause of
many optical illusions. For example, in a mirage in the
desert [2], light rays from the sky are bent above the hot
sand where the air is thin and the refractive index is low,
because in this way the rays minimize their optical paths,
creating images of the sky that deceive the observer as
illusions of water [2]. Imagine a diﬀerent situation where
a medium guides light around a hole in it. Suppose that
all parallel bundles of incident rays are bent around the
hole and recombined in precisely the same direction as
they entered the medium. An observer would not see
the diﬀerence between light passing through the medium
or propagating across empty space (or, equivalently, in a
uniform medium). Any object placed in the hole would
be hidden from sight. The medium would create the ul-
timate optical illusion: invisibility [3].

However, Nachman [4] and Wolf and Habashy [5]
proved that perfect invisibility is unachievable, except
in a ﬁnite set of discrete directions where the object ap-
pears to be squashed to inﬁnite thinness and for certain
objects that are small compared with the wavelength [6].
In order to carry images, though, light should propagate
with a continuous range of spatial Fourier components,
i.e.
in a range of directions. The mathematical reason
for the impossibility of perfect invisibility is the unique-
ness of the inverse-scattering problem for waves [4]: the
scattering data, i.e.
the directions and amplitudes of
the transmitted plane-wave components determine the
spatial proﬁle of the refractive index [4]. Therefore, the
scattering data of light in empty space are only consis-
tent with the propagation through empty space. Perfect
illusions are impossible due to the wave nature of light.

On the other hand, Nachman’s theorem [4] does not
limit the imperfections of invisibility, they may be very
small, nor does the theorem apply to light rays, i.e. to
light propagation within the regime of geometrical optics

[1]. Here we develop a general recipe, accompanied by an
example, for the design of media that create perfect invis-
ibility for light rays over a continuous range of directions.
Since this method is based on geometrical optics [1], the
inevitable imperfections of invisibility can be made expo-
nentially small for objects that are much larger than the
wavelength of light.

To manufacture a dielectric invisibility device, media
are needed that possess a wide range of the refractive
index in the spectral domain where the device should
operate.
In particular, Fermat’s Principle [1] seems to
imply that n < 1 in some spatial regions, because only
in this case the shortest optical paths may go around the
object without causing phase distortions. In our exam-
ple, n varies from 0 to about 35.9. In practice, one could
probably accept a certain degree of visibility that signiﬁ-
cantly reduces the demands on the range of the refractive
index.

Extreme values of n occur when the material is close
to resonance with the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Metamate-
rials [7] with man-made resonances can be manufactured
using appropriately designed circuit boards, similar to
the ones used for demonstrating negative refraction [8].
In this research area, the quest for the perfect lens [9]
has lead to spectacular recent improvements [7, 10, 11]
mainly focused on the magnetic susceptibilities so far.
In such metamaterials, each individual circuit plays the
role of an artiﬁcial atom with tunable resonances. With
these artiﬁcial dielectrics, invisibility could be reached
for frequencies in the microwave to terahertz range. In
contrast, stealth technology is designed to make objects
of military interest as black as possible to radar. There,
using impedance matching [12], electromagnetic waves
are absorbed without reﬂection, i.e. without any echo
detectable by radar. Recently, nanofabricated metama-
terials with custom-made plasmon resonances have been
demonstrated [11] that operate in the visible range of the
spectrum and may be modiﬁed to reach invisibility here.
Our method is also applicable to other forms of wave
propagation, for example to sound waves, where the in-
dex n describes the ratio of the local phase velocity of the

wave to the bulk value, or to quantum-mechanical matter
waves where external potentials act like refractive-index
proﬁles [1]. For instance, one could use the proﬁles of
n described here to protect an enclosed space from any
form of sonic tomography. But, for having a deﬁnite ex-
ample in mind, we focus on light in media throughout
this paper. We study the simplest non-trivial case of
invisibility, an eﬀectively two-dimensional problem.

Consider a dielectric medium that is uniform in one
direction and light of wavenumber k that propagates or-
thogonal to that direction. The medium is characterized
by the refractive-index proﬁle n(x, y).
In order to sat-
isfy the validity condition of geometrical optics, n(x, y)
must not signiﬁcantly vary over the scale of an optical
wavelength 2π/k [1]. To describe the spatial coordi-
nates in the propagation plane we use complex numbers
z = x + iy with the partial derivatives ∂x = ∂z + ∂∗
z and
∂y = i∂z − i∂∗
z where the star symbolizes complex conju-
gation. In the case of a gradually varying refractive-index
proﬁle both amplitudes ψ of the two polarizations of light
obey the Helmholtz equation [1]

4∂
(cid:0)

∗
z ∂z + n

2

k

2

ψ = 0 ,

(cid:1)

(1)

x + ∂2

y = 4∂∗

written here in complex notation with the Laplace op-
erator ∂2
z ∂z. Suppose we introduce new co-
ordinates w described by an analytic function w(z) that
does not depend on z∗. Such functions deﬁne confor-
mal maps [13] that preserve the angles between the co-
ordinate lines. Since ∂∗
w∂w, we obtain
in w space a Helmholtz equation with the transformed
refractive-index proﬁle n′ that is related to the original
one as

z ∂z = |dw/dz|2∂∗

(2)

′

n = n

.

dw
dz (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
Suppose that the medium is designed such that n(z) is
the modulus of an analytic function g(z). The integral
of g(z) deﬁnes a map w(z) to new coordinates where, ac-
cording to Eq. (2), the transformed index n′ is unity.
in w coordinates the wave propagation
Consequently,
is indistinguishable from empty space where light rays
propagate along straight lines. The medium performs an
optical conformal mapping to empty space. If w(z) ap-
proaches z for w → ∞ all incident waves appear at inﬁn-
ity as if they have travelled through empty space, regard-
less what has happened in the medium. However, as a
consequence of the Riemann Mapping Theorem [13] non-
trivial w coordinates occupy Riemann sheets with several
∞, one on each sheet. Consider, for example, the simple
map

a2
z

,

w = z +

1
2 (cid:16)
illustrated in Fig. 1, that is realized by the refractive-
index proﬁle n = |1 − a2/z2|. The constant a character-

w2 − 4a2

w ±

z =

(3)

p

(cid:17)

,

2

y

x

FIG. 1: Optical conformal map. A dielectric medium conformally maps phys-
ical space described by the points z = x + iy of the complex plane onto Riemann
sheets if the refractive-index profile is |dw/dz| with some analytic function w(z).
The figure illustrates the simple map (3) where the exterior of a circle in the picture
above is transformed into the upper sheet in the picture below, and the interior of
the circle is mapped onto the lower sheet. The curved coordinate grid of the upper
picture is the inverse map z(w) of the w coordinates, approaching a straight rect-
angular grid at infinity. As a feature of conformal maps, the right angles between
the coordinate lines are preserved. The circle line in the figure above corresponds
to the branch cut between the sheets below indicated by the curly black line. The
figure also illustrates the typical fates of light rays in such media. On the w sheets
rays propagate along straight lines. The rays shown in blue and green avoid the
branch cut and hence the interior of the device. The ray shown in red crosses
the cut and passes onto the lower sheet where it approaches ∞. However, this ∞
corresponds to a singularity of the refractive index and not to the ∞ of physical
space. Rays like this one would be absorbed, unless they are guided back to the
exterior sheet.

izes the spatial extension of the medium. The function
(3) maps the exterior of a circle of radius a on the z
plane onto one Riemann sheet and the interior onto an-
other. Light rays traveling on the exterior w sheet may
have the misfortune of passing the branch cut between
the two branch points ±2a. In continuing their propaga-
tion, the rays approach ∞ on the interior w sheet. Seen
on the physical z-plane, they cross the circle of radius
a and approach the singularity of the refractive index at
the origin. For general w(z), only one ∞ on the Riemann
structure in w space corresponds to the true ∞ of physi-
cal z space and the others to singularities of w(z). Instead
of traversing space, light rays may cross the branch cut
to another Riemann sheet where they approach ∞. Seen
in physical space, the rays are irresistibly attracted to-

wards some singularities of the refractive index. Instead
of becoming invisible, the medium casts a shadow that is
as wide as the apparent size of the branch cut is. Never-
theless, the optics on Riemann sheets turns out to serve
as a powerful theoretical tool for developing the design
of dielectric invisibility devices.

All we need to achieve is to guide light back from the
interior to the exterior sheet, i.e., seen in physical space,
from the exterior to the interior layer of the device. To
ﬁnd the required refractive-index proﬁle, we interpret
the Helmholtz equation in w space as the Schr¨odinger
equation [1] of a quantum particle of eﬀective mass k2
moving in the potential U with energy E such that
U − E = −n′2/2 [1]. We wish to send all rays that have
passed through the branch cut onto the interior sheet
back to the cut at precisely the same location and in the
same direction they entered. This implies that we need
a potential for which all trajectories are closed. Assum-
ing radial symmetry for U (w) around one branch point
w1, say +2a in our example, only two potentials have
this property, the harmonic oscillator and the Kepler po-
tential [14].
In both cases the trajectories are ellipses
[14] that are related to each other by a transmutation
of force according to the Arnol’d-Kasner theorem [15].
The harmonic oscillator corresponds to the transformed
refractive-index proﬁle n′ with

where r is a constant radius. The Kepler potential with
negative energy E is realized by the proﬁle with

′2

n

= 1 −

|w − w1|2
r2

′2

n

=

r
|w − w1|

− 1 .

(4)

(5)

Note that the singularity of the Kepler proﬁle in w space
is compensated by the zero of |dw/dz| at a branch point
in physical space such that the total refractive index (2)
is never singular.
In both cases (4) and (5), r deﬁnes
the radius of the circle on the interior w sheet beyond
which n′2 would be negative and hence inaccessible to
light propagation. This circle should be large enough to
cover the branch cut. The inverse map z(w) turns the
outside of the circle into the inside of a region bounded
by the image z(w) of the circle line in w space. No light
can enter this region. Everything inside is invisible.

Yet there is one more complication: light is refracted
[1] at the boundary between the exterior and the inte-
rior layer. Seen in w space, light rays encounter here a
transition from the refractive index 1 to n′. Fortunately,
refraction is reversible. After the cycles on the interior
sheets light rays are refracted back to their original di-
rections, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The invisibility is not
aﬀected, unless the rays are totally reﬂected. According
to Snell’s Law [1], discovered by Ibn Sahl more than a
millennium ago [16], rays with angles of incidence θ with

3

FIG. 2:
Light guiding. The device guides light that has entered its interior
layer back to the exterior, represented here using two Riemann sheets that corre-
spond to the two layers, seen from above. At the branch cut, the thick line between
the two points in the figure, the branch points, light passes from the exterior to
the interior sheet. Here light is refracted according to Snell’s law. On the lower
sheet, the refractive-index profile (5) guides the rays to the exterior sheet in ellip-
tic orbits with one branch point as focal point. Finally, the rays are refracted back
to their original directions and leave on the exterior sheet as if nothing has hap-
pened. The circle in the figure indicates the maximal elongations of the ellipses.
This circle limits the region in the interior of the device that light does not enter.
The outside of the circle corresponds to the inside of the device. Anything beyond
this circle is invisible.

respect to the branch cut enter the lower sheet with an-
gles θ′ such that n′ sin θ′ = sin θ. If n′ < 1 this equation
may not have real solutions for θ larger than a critical
angle Θ. Instead of entering the interior layer of the de-
vice the light is totally reﬂected [1]. The angle Θ deﬁnes
the acceptance angle of the dielectric invisibility device,
because beyond Θ the device appears silvery instead of
invisible. The transformed refractive-index proﬁles (4)
and (5) at the boundary between the layers are lowest
at the other branch point w2 that limits the branch cut,
w2 = −2a in our example. In the case of the harmonic-
oscillator proﬁle (4) n′ lies always below 1 and we obtain
the acceptance angle

Θ = arccos

|w2 − w1|
r

.

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(6)

For all-round invisibility, the radius r should approach
inﬁnity, which implies that the entire interior sheet is
employed for guiding the light back to the exterior layer.
Fortunately, the Kepler proﬁle (5) does not lead to total
reﬂection if r ≥ 2|w2 − w1|. In this case, the invisible
area is largest for

r = 2|w2 − w1| .

(7)

Figure 3 illustrates the light propagation in a dielectric
invisibility device based on the simple map (3) and the
Kepler proﬁle (5) with r = 8a. Here n ranges from 0
to about 35.9, but this example is probably not the op-
timal choice. One can chose from inﬁnitely many con-
formal maps w(z) that possess the required properties
for achieving invisibility: w(z) ∼ z for z → ∞ and two
branch points w1 and w2. The invisible region may be de-
formed to any simply-connected domain by a conformal

4

Finally, we return to the starting point and ask why our
scheme does not violate Nachman’s theorem [4] that per-
fect invisibility is unattainable. The answer is that waves
are not only refracted at the boundary between the ex-
terior and the interior layer, but also reﬂected, and that
the device causes a time delay. However, the reﬂection
can be signiﬁcantly reduced by making the transition be-
tween the layers gradual over a length scale much larger
than the wavelength 2π/k or by using anti-reﬂection coat-
ings. In this way the imperfections of invisibility can be
made as small as the accuracy limit of geometrical optics
[1], i.e. exponentially small. One can never completely
hide from waves, but from rays.

I am grateful to Leda Boussiakou, Luciana Davila-
Romero, Mark Dennis, Malcolm Dunn, Greg Gbur, Clare
Gibson, Julian Henn and Awatif Hindi for the discussions
that led to this paper. My work has been supported by
the Leverhulme Trust and the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council.

[1] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1999).

[2] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feyn-
man lectures on physics. Mainly mechanics, radiation
and heat. Chapter 26 (Addison Wesley, Reading, Mass.,
1983).

[3] G. Gbur, Prog. Opt. 45, 273 (2003).
[4] A. I. Nachman, Ann. Math. 128, 531 (1988).
[5] E. Wolf and T. Habashy, J. Mod. Opt. 40, 785 (1993).
[6] M. Kerker, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 65, 376 (1975); A. Alu and

N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. E 72, 016623 (2005).

[7] D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry, and M. C. K. Wiltshire, Sci-

[8] R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Science 292,

ence 305, 788 (2004).

77 (2001).

[9] J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966 (2000).
[10] A. Grbic and G. V. Eleftheriades, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
117403 (2004); T. J. Yen et al., Science 303, 1494 (2004);
S. Linden et al., ibid. 306, 1351 (2004).

[11] A. N. Grigorenko et al., Nature 438, 335 (2005).
[12] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New

York, 1998).

1952).

Oxford, 1976).

[13] Z. Nehari, Conformal Mapping (McGraw-Hill, New York,

[14] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics (Pergamon,

[15] V. I. Arnol’d, Huygens & Barrow, Newton & Hooke
(Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 1990); T. Needham, Amer.
Math. Monthly 100, 119 (1993); Visual Complex Analy-
sis (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2002).

[16] R. Rashed, Isis 81, 464 (1990).
[17] M. J. Ablowitz and A. S. Fokas, Complex Variables

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997).

FIG. 3: Ray propagation in the dielectric invisibility device. The light rays are
shown in red. The brightness of the green background indicates the refractive-index
profile taken from the simple map (3) and the Kepler profile (5) with r = 8a in
the interior layer of the device. The invisible region is shown in black. The upper
figure illustrates how light is refracted at the boundary between the two layers
and guided around the invisible region where it leaves the device as it nothing
were there. In the lower figure, light simply flows around the interior layer.

map that is the numerical solution of a Riemann-Hilbert
problem [17]. We can also relax the tacit assumption
that w1 connects the exterior to only one interior sheet,
but to m sheets where light rays return after m cycles.
If we construct w(z) as af (z/a) with some analytic func-
tion f (z) of the required properties and a constant length
scale a the refractive-index proﬁle |dw/dz| is identical for
all scales a. Finding the most practical design is an en-
gineering problem that depends on practical demands.
This problem may also inspire further mathematical re-
search on conformal maps, in order to ﬁnd the optimal
design and to extend our approach to three dimensions.

