6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chasing ’Slow Light’

E.B.Aleksandrov∗ and V.S.Zapasskii∗∗

∗Ioﬀe Physico-Technical Institute, St. Petersburg, 194021 Russiaa
∗∗All-Russia Research Center ”Vavilov State Optical Institute”,
St. Petersburg, 199034 Russia;
St. Petersburg State University, Institute of Physics, St. Petersburg, 1985044 Russia
e-mail: zap@vz4943.spb.eduu

A critical review of experimental studies of the so-called ’slow light’ aris-

ing due to anomalously high steepness of the refractive index dispersion un-

der conditions of electromagnetically induced transparency or coherent pop-

ulation oscillations is presented. It is shown that a considerable amount of

experimental evidence for observation of the ’slow light’ is not related to the

low group velocity of light and can be easily interpreted in terms of a standard

model of interaction of light with a saturable absorber.

I. INTRODUCTION

In the last decade, the topic of ’slow’ and ’fast’ light - light pulse propagating in a medium
with ultralow, or superluminal, or even negative group velocity - has gained a particular
popularity. The keen interest to this topic is related not so much to the possibility itself to
controllably vary the light group velocity in a medium, as to a huge scale of these variations
(7 orders of magnitude and more) and to the claimed favorable prospects for application of
’slow light’ in telecommunication and optical computing. As a result, in the late 90s, the
’slow light’ has, in fact, turned out into a separate trend of physical optics. Several hundreds
of publications have been devoted to these problems. They are discussed on special topical
meetings and workshops. A somewhat sensational character of the claimed achievements
(including the eﬀects of ’stopped’ and ’stored’ light) renders this topic popular not only in
scientiﬁc literature, but also in mass media.

Concurrently with the increased rate of publications on ’slow light’ research, the quality
of the publications was getting noticeably poorer. Phenomenological simplicity of man-
ifestations of ’slow light’ made it possible to observe similar eﬀects in relatively simple
experimental conditions and ascribe them to ’slowing down’ and ’stopping’ of light without
suﬃcient grounds.

In these notes, we critically analyze the publications on ’slow light’ and demonstrate
inconsistency of a considerable number of the arguments intended to provide evidence for

1

dramatic charges of the light group velocity.

II. FROM THE HISTORY OF GROUP VELOCITY OF LIGHT

The problem of slowing down of light in a medium has a long history, dating back to
Newton’s ’Optics’. Early in the last century, the attention to the problem of the light
velocity in a medium was attracted again in connection with the as-developed special theory
of relativity, which limited (in its second postulate) the speed of transfer of information by
the velocity of light in vacuum (c). The problems of propagation of electromagnetic waves
in real media were studied in the early 20th century by classics of physical optics. It is worth
to mention A.Sommerfeld and his disciple L. Brillouin, who summarized the results of these
studies in monograph [1]. Later on, the velocity of light in a medium attracted attention of
researchers, mainly, in the cases when it strongly diﬀered from that in vacuum. Forty years
ago, a ’superluminal’ group velocity of light was claimed to be observed in [2]. The studies
were performed with the light pulses propagating in a gain medium under conditions of
strong nonlinearity related to the gain saturation under the action of the pulse. In this case,
the shape of the pulse changed as it propagated through the medium, with its peak being
shifted in the forward direction. By deﬁning the group velocity of light as the velocity of
motion of the pulse maximum, the authors of [2] claimed observation of the 9-fold excess of
the velocity of light in the medium over that in vacuum. This phenomenon was, in essence,
the inverse eﬀect of the light pulse delay in a saturable absorber (see, e.g., [3]) and, therefore,
was not of any principal interest . 1

A new splash of attention to this issue was associated with the linear propagation of
optical pulses whose spectrum fell into the region of steep dispersion of the refractive index
of the medium. In this case, in the standard formula for the light group velocity Vg

Vg =

c
n + ω dn/dω

(1)

the dispersion term starts to predominate. As a result, the motion of the light pulse in
the medium slows down not so much due to the deviation of the refractive index n from
unity (the resources of this mechanism are rather limited), as due to steep dependence of
the refractive index on the frequency ω. This dispersion-related contribution aﬀects only
the group velocity of light and does not change its phase velocity controlled by the value of
n.

1It is noteworthy that neither in this paper, nor in any other subsequent report on superluminal
propagation of the light pulse, the authors claimed to refute the epccial theory of relativity (see,

e.g., review [4]).

2

It is noteworthy that the problem of deﬁnition of the light group velocity frequently
becomes the subject of controversy. The notion of group velocity introduced in [1] is fairly
deﬁnite for a bi-frequency wave, being deﬁned as the speed of motion of the beat envelope.
This, rather abstract, ﬁeld is evidently of limited interest for practice. As applied to the light
pulse with a continuous spectrum, the problem of group velocity becomes more complicated,
since the pulse, while traveling through a dispersive medium, changes its shape, and the
quantitative evaluation of its displacement in space becomes ambiguous. In what follows,
we will understand the light group velocity as it is deﬁned by Eq. (1). For transparent
media, this deﬁnition corresponds to the velocity of motion of the pulse maximum and, in
a certain approximation, with the velocity of motion of the pulse as a whole. It is known,
for instance, that if the spectrum of the pulse ﬁts into the region of linear dispersion of the
refractive index, the original pulse of Gaussian shape will propagate through the medium
practically without any distortion (see, e.g., [5]), provided that the absorption (gain) of
the medium does not strongly change within the spectral width of the pulse (see also the
experiment [6]).

Thus, the group velocity in the sense of Eq. (1) is the speed of motion of the pulse
maximum, but it does not mean that the opposite statement is also valid, i.e., that the
speed of motion of the pulse maximum is always the group velocity of light. Deﬁnition (1) is
applicable to a transparent, linear, and stationary medium, whose properties change, neither
due to external perturbations, nor due to self-action of the light pulse, in the process of
the pulse propagation through the medium(I.E., the medium is supposed to be linear with
respect to the probe pulse whose group velocity is measured). For the absorbing, nonlinear,
and nonstationary media, there may exist other mechanisms of the pulse maximum delay
(e.g., of the time vignetting type), which have nothing to do with the dispersion of the
medium and cannot be described by Eq. (1). In our opinion, the delays of this kind cannot
be attributed to changes in the light group velocity in the commonly accepted understanding
of this notion.

III. ’SLOW LIGHT’ AND THE GOAL OF THESE NOTES

A real boom of publications devoted to the anomalies in the light group velocity (or
to ’slow light’ 2 ) was associated with realization of the electromagnetically induces trans-
parency (EIT) [7] which has made it possible to combine two, previously exclusive, proper-

2In what follows, we, for brevity, will understand under ’slow light’ all the phenomena associated
with dramatic changes of the light group velocity due to steep dispersion of the refractive index,

i.e., the ’slow light’, ’fast light’, and the light with ’negative’ group velocity.

3

ties of the medium - a high steepness of dispersion and transparency. The eﬀect is usually
observed on the systems with the energy-level diagram schematically shown in Fig. 1 (the
so-called Λ-scheme). Two electromagnetic ﬁelds, ω and ω, are applied to transitions between
two, usually closely spaced, sublevels of the ground state (|1i and |2i) and the third common
excited level |3i. The excitation of this type is capable of creating coherence between the
two lower states. If the frequency ω of one (usually stronger) ﬁeld is ﬁxed, and the frequency
ω of the other (probe) ﬁeld is being scanned, then, in the point of the two-photon resonance,
one will detect a dip in the absorption spectrum (’transparency window’), corresponding to
a destructive quantum interference of the transitions to the excited state via two alternative
routes. To this dip, in accordance with the Kramers-Kronig relations, should correspond a
region of steep dispersion of the refractive index. This steepness may be extremely high due
to extreme narrowness of the coherence resonance of the ground state sublevels. Under these
conditions, it appears possible to demonstrate anomalously high retardation of a light pulse
in the medium [8–10]. The most impressive results - reduction of the light group velocity
by more than seven orders of magnitude! - have been obtained on ultracold sodium atoms
(in the vicinity of the Bose-Einstain condensation temperature) [11,12].

In more recent experiments, the circle of mechanisms capable of providing ’slow light’ was
widened, the studies were performed in rather simple experimental conditions, and analysis
of the results was made, in our opinion, not critically enough, attributing any apparent delay
of the light pulse in the medium to its low group velocity. Some obviously erroneous works
of this trend were criticized in [13–15]. However, the essence of the matter consists, in our
opinion, not in the errors committed in certain papers, but rather in the inconsistence of the
provided evidence. As a result, in the present-day situation, the reliability of conclusions of
considerable number of publications on ’slow light’ raises strong doubts.

In these notes, we consider some eﬀects of incoherent nonlinear optics which are phe-
nomenologically similar to the ’slow light’ eﬀects, should be necessarily observed in slow
relaxing media with nonlinear absorption, and have nothing to do with ’slow light’. We
attract attention to a number of commonly accepted pieces of evidence for ’slowing down’
and ’stopping’ of light that cannot be used as such. We also discuss certain speciﬁc features
of the ’slow light’ eﬀects that allow one to experimentally distinguish them from the eﬀects
of ’slow medium’, universally observable in resonance media with saturable absorption.

Since the problems of interpretation of experimental observations considered in these
notes are of conceptual nature, and the eﬀects of incoherent nonlinear optics that mimic
the ’slow light’ are known well enough and have been repeatedly described in the literature,
we consider it possible to restrict ourselves to a qualitative level of their treatment with-
out reproducing the known theoretical derivations (which, if needed, can be found in the
references).

4

IV. THE SUBJECT OF STUDY -A NONLINEAR ABSORBER

The simplest (and chronologically the ﬁrst discovered) eﬀects of nonlinear optics were
related to resonance perturbation of populations of quantum states (eﬀects of saturation)
[16]. For suﬃciently long relaxation times, these incoherent nonlinear eﬀects can be, in prin-
ciple, observed at arbitrarily low light intensities. The opposite side of the high nonlinearity
of such ’slow’ systems is a certain sluggishness of their optical response and, therefore, their
limited applicability to the up-to-date broadband systems of optical information processing.
These eﬀects, as a whole, are naturally considered to be well known and, perhaps, for this
reason, are not given suﬃcient attention.

The eﬀects of saturation, in their simplest form are known to be revealed when the time
of interaction of the light with the nonlinear medium substantially exceeds the transverse
relaxation (dephasing) time of the resonance oscillators and when the rate of the light-
induced transitions becomes comparable with that of the population relaxation.
In this
case, the populations of the system and, hence, the absorption of the medium change. Most
frequently, the absorption of the medium drops with increasing light intensity (the medium is
bleached). But there also exist situations when absorption of the medium increases with light
intensity. The appropriate nonlinear absorbers are called inverse. For practical applications
(mainly in laser technique), as saturable absorbers are used diverse optical media, like dye
solutions, doped crystals and glasses, dielectrics with semiconductor nanocrystals, etc. A
typical ’slow’ saturable absorber is the ruby crystal, where the coherence of the light-induced
excitation of the medium in the blue-green spectral range is rapidly destroyed by the fast
relaxation from the excited state of the Cr3+ ions to metastable levels, whose long lifetime
provides retardation of the optical response of the crystal.

The most perfect model of saturable absorber is, however, provided by the optically
pumped atoms of alkali metals, which are also characterized by fairly long ground-state
in the
population relaxation times, but, in addition, show one more important property:
absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld, their anisotropy is entirely controlled by anisotropy
of the acting light (see, e.g., [17]). As a result, in the ﬁeld of polarized light, these systems
may be considered as as polarization saturable absorbers, which diﬀer from the conventional
ones by additional degrees of freedom - polarization of the exciting light and anisotropy of
the medium. These degrees of freedom considerably widen the range of phenomena observed
under conditions of optical pumping.

Below, we will dwell, in more detail, upon the properties of these ’slow’ saturable ab-
sorbers, which are basic subjects of the ’slow light’ experiments. We will consider the eﬀects
that should necessarily be observed in ’slow’ nonlinear absorbers regardless of spectral fea-
tures of the medium’s dispersion and variation of the light group velocity. All the eﬀects
considered below are, in fact, combinations of elementary properties of a saturable absorber

5

and do not contain anything essentially new. Still, it is exactly these eﬀects that are fre-
quently considered as manifestations of ’slow light’.

V. ON CAPABILITIES OF SATURABLE ABSORBER

So, the question is: What is to be expected from a saturable absorber under conditions
of optical excitation typical for the ’slow light’ experiments and what really new has been
found in those experiments?

1. Time-domain response. The simplest property of the saturable absorber is re-
lated to the dynamics of its response to a change in the incident light intensity. When the
light intensity at the entrance changes in a step-wise way, the light intensity at the exit,
evidently, experiences a jump, corresponding to the linear light transmission, and an expo-
nential growth (or exponential fall for the inverse saturable absorber), corresponding to the
process of establishment of steady-state populations of the system (Fig. 2).

Experimental dependences of this kind are reported, for instance, in [18], where the
probe-pulse shape distortion is ascribed to the eﬀect of steep dispersion of refractive index
of the medium in the region of resonance of the electromagnetically induces transparency
and electromagnetically induced absorption. These temporal dependences, as being of no
interest, usually are not presented in the papers on ’slow light’. We mention this type of
response only for completeness sake and for passing to the next, more constructive, item.

2. Frequency-domain response Fourier-transform of the above time dependences
yield their frequency-domain representation, which can be easily obtained experimentally
by measuring the frequency dependence of the amplitude and phase of oscillations of a
modulated light beam transmitted through a saturable absorber. Figure 3 shows what the
dependences of this kind look like for a bleachable absorber. As expected, the frequency
dependence of the response displays a peculiarity in the range of low frequencies comparable
with the inverse population relaxation time of the absorber (τ ). Absolute time delay ∆t(ω) of
the intensity modulation signal is seen to be the greatest in the region of lowest frequencies,
while the relative (i.e., phase) delay ϕ(ω) reaches its maximum at frequencies ω ∼ 1/τ and
does not exceed a small fraction of the oscillation period.

In [19,21–24], these simple properties of nonlinear absorbers (crystals with paramagnetic
impurities) have been erroneously ascribed to the reduction of the group velocity of light
due to spectral hole burning under conditions of coherent population oscillations. Full
agreement of the experimental data obtained in those papers with prediction of the simple
model of saturable absorber was shown in [15,25], where one can ﬁnd a more detailed and
grounded criticism of the publications [19–24]. The same perverted interpretation of the
eﬀects of delayed photoresponse in a saturable absorbed has received further development
in the experiments with bacteriorhodopsin molecules in a polymer ﬁlm [26].

6

3. The light pulse delay When a light pulse travels through a saturable absorber, the
absorption of the medium, in the general case, changes in the process of its propagation.
This leads not only to a change of the pulse amplitude, but also to a distortion of the pulse
shape. If the shape of the pulse is smooth and its width is comparable with the relaxation
time τ or exceeds it, then the distortion of its shape appears to be small, and, in the ﬁrst
approximation, is reduced to a pure shift in time. Note that the sign of the delay is positive
for the usual bleachable absorber and negative for the inverse saturable absorber. This eﬀect
was studied as far back as 60s of the last century (see, e.g., [3,27]). To the same category
of the eﬀects can be attributed the eﬀect (already mentioned above) of apparent increase of
the light group velocity in a ’saturable ampliﬁer’ [2,28], when, like in the inverse saturable
absorber, the pulse is distorted in favor of its front edge. Figure 4 shows the calculated
curves that illustrate the pulse ’delay’ for the usual (a) and inverse (b) saturable absorber
for some ratios of the pulse width d and relaxation time t [15]. Note that the illusion of
the pulse delay arises, in this case, due to the amplitude normalization of the output pulse.
With no normalization, the output pulse, in this ﬁgure, would always lie inside the input one.
The light pulse delay in the saturable absorber, evidently, is not related to the dispersion
of the refractive index. This delay is a consequence of the light-induced nonstationarity
In the already mentioned papers
of the medium and, in essence, is not a delay as such.
on hole-burning under conditions of coherent population oscillations, this delay of the light
pulse, with no additional justiﬁcation, was ascribed to ’slow light’ (see, e.g., [2,26]).

4. Dynamics of polarization response Under the action of a resonance polarized
light, the polarization saturable absorber, mentioned above, becomes dichroic. In accordance
with the general laws of symmetry (Neumann’s principle), the type of the light-induced
dichroism (linear, circular, or elliptical) should correlate with polarization of the acting
light. As is known, these properties are displayed, in particular, by the optically pumped
atomic systems, in zero magnetic ﬁeld, amenable both to orientation and alignment (this
fact was recently demonstrated once again in [29]). In the case of a bleachable absorber,
the light-induced dichroism of the medium corresponds to its bleaching in the polarization
of the acting light. When polarization of the incident light is changed, the anisotropy of the
nonlinear medium and the light polarization at the exit of the medium follow these changes
with a certain time delay controlled by the characteristic time of the absorber (for more
detail, see [14]).

A pulse of polarization modulation can be formally represented as a pulsed admixture of
the orthogonally polarized component to a polarized beam . (in practice, this is usually made
by phase shifting the polarization components in a single beam with the aid of polarization
modulators like, e.g., a Pockels cell). Polarization dynamics of the pulse at the exit of the
medium can be also monitored by detecting this orthogonal component of the output beam
(Fig. 5).

7

Figure 6 shows what the weak pulse of the orthogonally polarized component looks like
at the exit of a saturable (bleachable) absorber for some ratios between the pulse width δ
and relaxation time τ . As is seen from the ﬁgure, the distortion of the pulse shape at the
exit (as for the case of pure intensity modulation, see item 3) decreases with increasing pulse
width, gradually approaching pure shift. For the bleachable polarization absorber, this shift
is positive (delay), and for the inverse absorber, negative (advance). In this conﬁguration
of the experiment, in contrast to the case of a ’single-channel’ scheme described in item 3,
the observed delay of the polarization component, as one can see by comparing Figs. 4 and
6, may be fairly large. In addition, the delay, in this case, is not apparent, but real in the
sense that the signal at the exit can be observed after completion of the input signal (due
to permanent presence of the initial polarization component transformed by the perturbed
nonlinear medium).

The nature of the above delay of the polarization pulse in a ’slow’ nonlinear absorber
evidently reﬂects only the retarded dynamics of the medium and has nothing to do with
variation of the light group velocity in terms of Eq. (1). However, in the works on ’slow light’,
the delay of this kind is usually ascribed to the group velocity reduction (see, e.g., [30,31]).
Note also that the above scheme with admixing of the orthogonal polarization component
and its separation at the exit (Fig. 5) makes it possible to monitor the polarization dynamics
of the light at the exit of the absorber, but does not allow one, by any means, to probe the
medium by this polarization component (no matter how weak it is), because the anisotropy
of the absorber, under the action of the polarization pulse, varies in time, and the initial
polarization components cease to be independent (normal) modes. Therefore, the delay
of the pulse of one polarization component, in this experimental conﬁguration, cannot be
ascribed to the low group velocity of light for the additional reason that the notion of velocity
for the waves that are not normal cannot be introduced [32].

5.

Intensity-related characteristics of the response At low light intensities,
the relaxation rate of the saturable absorber (exponential regions in Fig, 2) is intensity-
independent and is determined by the ’dark’ population relaxation time T1. With increasing
intensity, the eﬀective population relaxation rate (t-1), controlled by the sum of the dark
and light-induced relaxation processes, grows in a linear way (see, e.g., [16]), whereas the
delay time of the pulse or of the light intensity oscillations (at suﬃciently low frequencies,
see item 2), correspondingly, decreases hyperbolically. For this reason, the dependence pre-
sented in Fig. 7 demonstrate standard properties of a saturable absorber and cannot be
used to conﬁrm the ’slow light’ model, as this is made in [33].

6. ’Storage’ of the light-induced anisotropy The real delay of the polarization pulse
at the exit of a nonlinear absorber with respect to the input pulse signiﬁes, in particular,
that the contribution to the anisotropy of the medium, induced by the polarization pulse,
persists for some time after the end of the pulse. This time is evidently determined by

8

the relaxation parameters of the medium, which, as was already pointed out above, depend
on the light intensity. For this reason, by switching oﬀ the light beam immediately after
completion of the polarization pulse, we can ’freeze’ the residual anisotropy induced by
the polarization pulse and to ’store’ it during the dark relaxation time T1, which may be
rather long.
If, after such a pause, we again switch the light beam on, then, to within
the relaxation during the pause, we will reproduce the situation existed at the moment of
switching the light oﬀ. It means that the light beam will continue ’readout’ of the anisotropy
of the medium induced by the polarization pulse, and at the exit of the medium we will
detect the ’tail’ of this process (Fig. 8). The dependence of the relaxation rate on the light
intensity will be evidently revealed in the fact that the length of this ’tail’ will vary with
the pump beam intensity (see, e.g., [34]). In our opinion, this natural manifestation of the
relaxation properties of a polarization nonlinear absorber may be considered as the eﬀect of
polarization memory, but there are no grounds to consider it as ’stopped light’ as it is done
in many papers on ’slow light’ where a degenerate Λ-scheme is used (see., e.g., [30,31,35–37];
for more detail see [13,14]).

7. Polarization-interference paradoxes Let us turn again to the polarization scheme
shown in Fig. 5 where the polarized light passing through a nonlinear absorber composed
of two mutually coherent and orthogonal polarization components is analyzed, at the exit
of the medium, in the same polarization basis. Let these components, for deﬁniteness,
be linearly polarized and in-phase, so that, being superimposed, they form the light of
linear polarization. Consider the case when, like in the eﬀect of electromagnetically induced
transparency (EIT), one of the beams (the pump or coupling beam) is strong, whereas the
other (probe) beam is weak. Then we come to the eﬀect which may seem, at ﬁrst sight,
paradoxical and which is widely exploited in the ’slow light’ studies.

Under the action of the only strong pump beam, the medium is bleached and the beam
propagates over its own polarization route (- in Fig. 5). The weak probe beam, in the
absence of the pump, also propagates along its own route (-), but, being unable to bleach
the medium, experiences strong absorption and appears to be strongly attenuated at the
exit. However, if we measure transmission of the probe light in the presence of the pump,
we will ﬁnd that the system is transparent. Therefore, in this experimental arrangement,
bleaching of the medium in one polarization makes it bleached for an arbitrarily weak beam
of orthogonal polarization. Paradoxicality of this result is that the probe beam, as it may
seem, should be a normal wave of the medium whose anisotropy is formed by the beam of
orthogonal polarization and should be able to probe the medium in conformity with all laws
of polarization optics.

Of course, there is no riddle here. On the one hand, this is a simple combination of non-
linear absorption with the eﬀect of interference of polarized rays. If we trace the amplitudes
of the two ﬁelds (it is exactly what should be done when analyzing interference eﬀects), we

9

will see that addition of the probe-ﬁeld component gives rise to a slight rotation of polariza-
tion plane of the acting ﬁeld. Due to high intensity of the ﬁeld, the anisotropy (dichroism)
axis of the medium follows this rotation virtually with no delay, and the medium remains
bleached for the new polarization of the pump. As a result, the beam (and each its compo-
nent) passes through the medium with no attenuation. On the other hand, this is a sort of
play of words. We tacitly assumed that the weak beam probes the medium, while, as was
already pointed out, this is not correct (to really probe the medium by this beam, it suﬃces
to switch the pump oﬀ; we will see that the medium is opaque). And eventually, it will be
correct to say that this is the EIT eﬀect or what this eﬀect turned into in the degenerate
L-scheme. However, whereas for unequal frequencies of the beams in the non-degenerate
L-scheme, with the measuring time being much longer than the beat period, the scheme
in Fig. 5 is consistent in the sense that the probe beam, corresponding to a normal wave
of the medium, is really able to probe it, for equal frequencies, this approach is physically
illegal. For this reason, in the degenerate polarization L-scheme, the notions of the ’probe’
and ’pump’ beams are improper. These reasoning refers to all the papers on ’slow light’ that
used the popular degenerate conﬁguration described in [30].

8. Saturable absorber in the rotating frame We have already mentioned that
as an adequate model of the saturable absorber may serve optically pumped atoms in zero
magnetic ﬁeld. The absorption saturation of the system corresponds, in this case, depending
on the light polarization, to either orientation, or alignment, or their combination. In the
presence of an external magnetic ﬁeld, the light-induced ordering of atomic moments appears
to be hampered by their precession. However, as is known (see, e.g., [17]), by modulating
the intensity or polarization of the light, at the frequency of the precession, one can realize
the orientation (or alignment) in the rotating frame. Thus one comes to numerous eﬀects
of quantum and nonlinear optics treated in terms of coherent population trapping, double
microwave-optical resonance, beat resonances, superposition of quantum states, stimulated
Raman scattering, electromagnetically induced transparency, ’dark’ polariton, etc. (see, e.g.,
[38]). The EIT eﬀect is most frequently implemented in a 3-level L-scheme with a relatively
small distance between the two low levels formed by the Zeeman or hyperﬁne interaction
(Fig. 1). To observe the EIT eﬀect, to one of the arms of the L-scheme (with the unpopulated
low level) is applied a strong pump beam and to the other arm, a weak probe beam. The
pulse of this probe light is used to observe the eﬀect of the group velocity reduction. The
eﬀect is detected when the frequency diﬀerence between the two ﬁelds is exactly equal to
that of the transition between the two low levels |1i and |2i. ”Exactly” means to within the
width of this transition, which determines spectral width of the ’transparency window’ and
may be extremely small. From the narrowness of the transparency window it is concluded
that the spectral dependence of the dispersion of the medium at the frequency of the probe
beam (at resonance) may be extremely steep, and the group velocity (due to the normal

10

spectral dependence of the dispersion), extremely low.

The experiments on ’slow light’ frequently use phase-correlated light beams obtained
either by shifting the frequency of a single laser source or by phase-locking their diﬀer-
ence frequency. Under these conditions, the fact of observation of the EIT resonance upon
scanning of the frequency diﬀerence between the beams (i.e., the fact that the resonance is
observed in the low-frequency domain of the transition |1i - |2i) does not mean that such
a narrow resonance is present in the optical spectrum in the vicinity of the resonance |1i -
|3i. Moreover, when the spectral width of the laser source substantially exceeds that of the
EIT resonance (which is frequently the case), such a narrow resonance in the optical range
cannot exist in principle. In other words, under these conditions, the medium is probed by the
diﬀerence frequency, whose high monochromaticity provides small width of the instrumental
function of this spectroscopic technique in the relevant frequency range.

This circumstance is often overlooked in theoretical studies of the EIT eﬀect performed
in terms of monochromatic waves. In this case, scanning one of the frequencies is evidently
identical to scanning the diﬀerence frequency, and the question about phase succession of
the beams loses its sense. At the same time, this circumstance is, in our opinion, highly
important for interpretation of the experiments on ’slow light’, because in a considerable
number of these studies, the narrow resonances of the eﬀects of EIT and coherent population
oscillations are observed under conditions of scanning of the diﬀerence frequency. In this
case, the conclusion about a narrow resonance in the optical spectrum can be made only when
reliable information about spectral width of the light beams is available. This is remark may
be addressed both to most papers on ’hole burning’ under conditions of coherent population
oscillations [19–24,26] and to a number of papers on the EIT-based ’slow light’ [18,33,39,40].
9. On the intensity spectra We have already pointed out that the distortion of
a smooth light pulse transmitted through a saturable absorber is reduced to pure shift
provided its temporal width exceeds the population relaxation time. A similar requirement
reformulated into the language of frequencies is imposed upon the probe pulse of ’slow light’
in the eﬀects of EIT or coherent population oscillations, when the pulse spectrum should ﬁt
into the narrow transparency window. The diﬀerence is that, in the ﬁrst case, we deal not
with the spectrum of optical signal but rather with its intensity spectrum (whose amplitude,
in particular, at optical frequency vanishes). The intensity spectrum of the optical pulse can
be narrowed indeed by changing its duration, but the optical spectrum of the pulse can be
varied by changing its duration only if the pulse is transform-limited. This circumstance
is often overlooked, and the spectral width of an optical pulse is implised to be entirely
controlled by the pulse duration (see, e.g., [18]).

10. Spatial aspect When using gaseous nonlinear media, with moving elementary
carriers of the optical nonlinearity (in particular, the optically pumped atoms), the light-
induced anisotropy may come out beyond the beam dimensions, spreading over the volume

11

occupied by the system.. The degree of this spreading evidently depends on the ratio
between the relaxation and diﬀusion parameters of the atomic medium. Speciﬁcally, in the
paraﬃn-coated ’vacuum’ cells (with no buﬀer gas), a narrow light beam, a few millimeter in
diameter, is able to completely orient (or align) the atoms in a cell several cm in size. The
light-induced anisotropy (or coherence) may, in this case, be successfully detected by a probe
beam passing through any part of the cell. In the cells with buﬀet gases, this fairly obvious
eﬀect was observed, in various modiﬁcations, beginning from 1967 (see, e.g., [41–43]). This
is why, we cannot agree with the authors of [44] who consider this eﬀect as ”signiﬁcantly
expanding the capabilities of the quantum information storage technique”.

VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

In these notes, we have considered, in a qualitative way, some simple eﬀects observable
in the media with nonlinear absorption, which are phenomenologically close to some man-
ifestations of ’slow light’, but have nothing to do either with a narrow spectral dip in the
absorption spectrum of the medium, or with a steep dispersion of its refractive index, or
with the ’slow light’ proper. When considering all these phenomena in the framework of the
model of saturable absorber, we have also touched on a non-degenerate Λ-scheme by passing
to the rotating coordinate frame, when the ’diagonal’ relaxation of populations is replaced
by the relaxation of coherence, and the eﬀects of incoherent nonlinear optics (saturation ef-
fects), to which our discussion was originally supposed to be restricted, are transformed into
the eﬀects of coherent nonlinear optics. This, however, does not change the essence of the
matter. In all the cases considered above, the retarded response of the medium is a result
of boundedness of its frequency passband. In the ’slow light’ eﬀects, the extreme narrow-
ness of transparency window gives rise to similar limitation in the transmission bandwith.
This accounts for the phenomenological similarity of these essentially diﬀerent eﬀects. The
diﬀerence is that, in one case, this ’narrow’ band is localized in the range of optical frequen-
cies, whereas, in the other, in the range of much lower (e.g., zero) frequencies. However,
when detecting the intensity spectrum of the transmitted light, localized at low frequencies,
this diﬀerence vanishes. To really observe slow light with ultralow group velocity in the
sense of Eq. (1), one has to necessarily provide the highest frequency stability and spectral
narrowness of the light beams used in the experiment.

It seems evident that the nonlinear eﬀects considered above are much less exacting to the
properties of the nonlinear medium and light beams and can be observed much easier. These
are trivial and rather universal eﬀects of nonlinear optics that should be taken into account
by the experimentalist ﬁrst of all. However, in the studies on ’slow light’, these trivial
possibilities, as a rule, are not considered at all. As was already mentioned, many papers
do not contain highly important information about spectral widths of the light beams.

12

The experiments are frequently performed with phase-correlated light beams with a well
deﬁned diﬀerence frequency, but with poorly deﬁned optical frequencies and, hence, with a
fundamentally uncertain position of the ’transparency window’. The eﬀects of slowing down
and storage of light are frequently demonstrated using the ’degenerate’ Λ-scheme, which
perfectly models the polarization saturable absorber and is unsuitable for demonstrating
speciﬁc properties of the EIT eﬀect (at least for totally coherent beams). A delay of the
light pulse in the medium (in diﬀerent experimental arrangements) is always ascribed to a
change of its group velocity related to a steep dispersion of the refractive index. The group
velocity is always calculated by dividing the length of the medium by the delay time of the
pulse maximum. It is evident that the quantity with the dimensions of velocity obtained in
this way may have nothing in common with the group velocity of light in the medium. This
universal practice of measuring the light group velocity in some cases becomes obviously
self-exposing.
In particular, in [26], a sluggishness of the photoresponse (in the range of
seconds) of bacteriorhodopsin molecules in a polymer ﬁlm is ascribed to the spectral hole-
burning eﬀect under conditions of coherent population oscillations, and the group velocity
measured in the standard way was found to be 0.091 mm/s. There is no question that
the records of this kind can be set up ad inﬁnitum. An even more striking example is the
experiment [45], in which was detected a retarded holographic reconstruction of the writing
light beam in a photorefractive crystal. In this study, the group velocity calculated in the
same universal way was as low as 0.025 cm/s (with the shape and amplitude of the pulse at
the exit of the crystal modiﬁed drastically). Of course, this eﬀect (as well as the holography
proper) may be referred to as ’slow’ or ’stopped’ light, but is there any sense in these
terminological manipulations? The authors frequently ignore the fact that the standard
formula for the light group velocity (1) is applicable only to a linear, optically transparent
medium and cannot be applied to a nonlinear absorber , when the speed of motion of the
pulse peak cannot be identiﬁed with the group velocity of light. At the same time, the
studies on ’slow light’ frequently do not pay suﬃcient attention to the experimental facts
that contradict canonical model of the eﬀect. Among them may be mentioned, in particular,
the dependence of the ’released’ pulse shape on the pump beam intensity [34], the admissible
nonadiabaticity of switching of the pump beam [44], and ideal agreement of the results of
the experiments on ’slow light’ under conditions of ’coherent population oscillations’ with
the prediction of the trivial model of saturable absorber (see, [15,25]).

In our opinion, to observe the ’slow light’ eﬀect, in the sense assigned to it by the authors
of this term [7], it is not enough to demonstrate a delay of the light pulse maximum in the
medium, or phase delay of the amplitude modulation of the probe light, or polarization
memory of a photochromic medium. Speciﬁcity of this eﬀect allows one fairly easily to
distinguish it from standard manifestations of properties of a nonlinear absorber. Stress once
again that the diﬀerence between the pulse distortion in the saturable absorber (including the

13

polarization scheme considered above) and dispersion-related pulse retardation is of physical
nature and cannot be attributed to terminological discrepancies (as sometimes claim our
opponents). The dispersive basis of the group velocity variation in the ’slow light’ eﬀects
is known to be revealed not only in speciﬁc features of their spectral behavior but also in
a dramatic spatial compression of the light pulse in the medium. This popular image is
frequently used in publications on ’slow light’ (see, e.g., [30,37]), whereas, real compression
was demonstrated only in the classical experiments with ultracold atoms [46], as well is
in recent experiments with photonic crystal waveguide structures [47]. Unfortunately, the
diﬃculties of experimental observation of this compression usually do not allow one to use it
for diagnostics of the ’slow light’ eﬀects. As an implicit evidence of the spatial compression
of the pulse may serve the pulse delay exceeding the pulse width. In this case, the spatial
size of the light pulse cannot exceed the size of the medium. It is implied, of course, that
the changes in the pulse shape are negligibly small. The pulse delays considerably exceeding
their width has been indeed observed in [10,11], in which the conditions for observation of
the EIT eﬀect were satisﬁed, and the interpretation of the results raises no questions.

As for the prospects of application of ’slow light’ in atomic vapor for the buﬀering and
processing of optical signals, these hopes seem to be substantially deﬂated by the narrow
frequency band inherent in this eﬀect [48]. Perhaps, more interesting, in this respect, are
the experiments on the light slowing down in optical ﬁbers under conditions of stimulated
Raman or Brillouin scattering [49].

In these notes we did not pursue the goal to give a comprehensive review of publications
on ’slow light’, and, of course, a great number of papers devoted to these problems remained
beyond the scope of our discussion. Still, the above analysis allows us to deﬁnitely state
that a considerable number of claims on observation of ’slow light’ are erroneous or, at best,
groundless. The situation is aggravated by the fact that even the most evident physical
errors of these papers systematically remain ’unnoticed’, and the relevant publications do
not ﬁnd critical evaluation in the literature, holding their high citation level. It is noteworthy
also that all the papers involved into this trend, regardless of their scientiﬁc novelty and
degree of reliability, are published in the most prestigious journals and automatically acquire
a high rating, whereas the attempts to express, in the same journals, some doubts about
correctness of these ’achievements’ meet a strong corporative resistance. This state of aﬀairs,
in our opinion, brings damage both to the prestige of science and to recognition of genuine
achievements of this trend of physical optics.

14

FIG. 1. A model three-level energy diagram for observation of the electromagnetically induced

transparency eﬀect (Λ-scheme).

15

FIG. 2. Schematic depiction of time dependence of the light intensity at the exit of a usual (b)

and inverse (c) saturable absorber for a step-wise change of the intensity at the entrance (a).

16

FIG. 3. Typical frequency variations of the amplitude |K(ω)|, phase ϕ(ω), and time delay ∆t(ω)

of intensity oscillations of the light beam passed through a saturable (bleachable) absorber.

17

FIG. 4. Normalized Gaussian pulses I(t) ∼ exp −(t/δ)2 propagating through a usual (a) and
inverse (b) saturable absorber for diﬀerent ratios of the pulse width δ and the relaxation time of

the absorber τ : δ/τ = 1 (1), 2 (2) and 4 (3). Solid lines - pulses at the entrance, dashed lines -

pulses at the exit [15].

18

FIG. 5. The pump-probe conﬁguration, popular in the ’slow light’ experiments with coherent

orthogonally polarized beams from a single source (’degenerate’ Λ-scheme).

- pump (coupling)

beam, - probe beam, SA - saturable absorber, BS - polarization beamsplitter, PD - photodetector.

19

FIG. 6. The shape of the ’probe’ pulse (in the arrangement shown in Fig. 5) at the entrance (1)

and at the exit (2 - 4) of the medium for diﬀerent ratios of the pulse width δ and relaxation time

of the absorber τ : τ = δ/2(2), δ(3), and 2δ(4) [15].

20

FIG. 7. Standard dependence of the pulse (or intensity oscillation) delay time at the exit of a

nonlinear absorber and of the absorption relaxation rate on light intensity.

21

FIG. 8. Standard time dependence of the ’probe’ beam intensity (solid line) in demonstrations

of ’stopped light’ in the arrangement shown in Fig. 5. Dotted line - intensity of the ’probe’ beam

at the entrance, dashed line - intensity of the pump beam at the entrance.

22

[1] L. Brillouin ”Wave Propagation and Group Velocity”, Academic Press Inc., New York (1960).

[2] N. G. Basov, R. V. Ambartsumyan, V. S. Zuev, P. G. Kryukov, and V. L. Letokhov, Zh. Eks.

Teor. Fiz., 50, 23 (1966).

[3] A. C. Selden, Brit. J. Appl. Phys., 18, 743 (1967).

[4] P. W. Milonni, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 35, 31 (2002).

[5] M. D. Crisp, Phys. Rev., A 4, 2104 (1971).

[6] S. Chu and S. Wong, Phys. Rev. Lett., 48, 738 (1982).

[7] S. E. Harris, Phys. Today, 50, 36 (1997).

[8] S. E. Harris, J .E. Field, and A. Kasapi, Phys. Rev., A 46, R29 (1992).

[9] Min Xiao, Yong-qing Li, Shao-zheng Jin, and Julio Gea-Banacloche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 74, 666

(1995).

[10] A. Kasapi, Maneesh Jain, G. Y. Yin, and S. E. Harris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 74, 2447 (1995).

[11] L. V. Hau, S. E. Harris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi, Nature, 397, 594 (1999).

[12] Ch. Liu, Z. Dutton, C. N. Behroozi, and L. W. Hau, Nature, 409, 490 (2001).

[13] E. B. Aleksandrov and V. S. Zapasskii Physics: Uspekhi, 47, 133 (2004)

[14] G. G. Kozlov, E. B. Aleksandrov, and V. S. Zapasskii, Opt. Spectrosc., 97, 909 (2004).

[15] V. S. Zapasskii and G. G. Kozlov, Opt. Spectrosc., 100, 000 (2006); V. S. Zapasskii and G. G.

Kozlov, LANL, arXiv:physics/0509181, v1, 22 Sept. 2005.

[16] L. Allen and J. H. Eberly, Optical Resonance and Two-Level Systems, John Wiley, Chichester,

1975, Ch. 6.

[17] W. Happer, Rev. Mod. Phys., 44, 169 (1972).

[18] 18 A. M. Akulshin, A. Cimmino, A. I. Sidorov, P. Hannaford, and G. I. Opat, Phys. Rev., A

[19] L. W. Hillman, R. W. Boyd, J. Krasinski, and C. R. Stroud, Jr., Opt. Commun., 45, 416

[20] M. Malcuit, R. W. Boyd, L. W. Hillman, J. Krasinski, and C. R. Stroud, Jr. J. Opt., Soc. Am.

67, 011801(R) (2003).

(1983).

B 1, 73 (1984).

[21] M. S. Bigelow, N. N. Lepeshkin, and R. W. Boyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 113903 (2003).

23

[22] M. S. Bigelow, N. N. Lepeshkin, and R. W. Boyd, Science, 301, 200 (2003).

[23] E. Baldit, K. Bencheikh, P. Monnier, A. Levenson, and V. Rounget, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95,

143601 (2005); LANL, arXiv: ccsd-00004377, 2005.

[24] Yun-Dong Zhang et al., Chinese Phys. Lett., 21, 87 (2004).

[25] A.C.Selden, ArXiv: physics/0512149 v1,16 Dec. 2005.

[26] P. Wu and D. V. G. L. N. Rao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 253601 (2005).

[27] A. C. Selden, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 3, 1935 (1970).

[28] A. Icsevor and W. E. Lamb, Jr., Phys. Rev., 185, 517 (1969).

[29] H. Gao, M. Rosenberry, and H. Batelaan, Phys. Rev., A 67, 053807 (2003).

[30] D. F. Phillips, A. Fleischhauer, A. Mair, R. L. Walsworth, and M.D.Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

86, 783 (2001).

(2002).

2005.

(2005).

[31] M. Kozuma, D. Akamatsu, L. Deng, E. W. Hagley, M. G. Payme, Phys. Rev., A66, 031801

[32] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Pergamon Press, 1993.

[33] M. M. Kash, V. A. Sautenkov, A. S. Zibrov, L. Hollberg, G. R. Welch, M.D. Lukin, Yu.

Rostovtsev, E. S. Fry, and M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 5229 (1999).

[34] A. Lezama, A. M. Akulshin, A. I. Sidorov, and P. Hannaford, LANL, arXiv: physics/0506199,

[35] H. Gao, M. Rosenberry, J. Wang, and H. Batelan, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 38, 1857

[36] A. Mair, J. Hager, D. F. Phillips, R. L. Walsworth, and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev., A, 65,

031802(R) (2002).

[37] M. D. Lukin, Rev. Mod. Phys., 75, 457 (2003).

[38] 38. M. O.Scully nd M. S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1997. Ch. 7.

[39] O.Schmidt, R.Wynands, Z.Hussein, and D.Meschede, Phys. Rev., A 53, R27 (1996).

[40] A. V. Turukhin, V. S. Sudarshanam, M. S. Shaahrian, Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 023602 (2002).

[41] L. N. Novikov, Opt. Spektrosk., 23, 498 (1967).

[42] S. Nakayama, G. W.Series, and W. Gawlik, Opt. Comm., 34, 389 (1980).

24

[43] B. D. Agapiev, M. B. Gornyi, N. A. Dovator, R. A. Zhitnikov, and B. G. Matisov, Pis’ma Zh.

Tekh. Fiz., 10, 774 (1984).

[44] A. S. Zibrov, A. B. Matsko, O. Kocharovskaya, Y. V. Rostovtsev, G. R. Welch, and O. Scully,

Phys. Rev. Lett., RL 88, 103601 (2002).

[45] E. Podivilov and B. Sturman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 083902 (2003).

[46] Z. Dutton, N. S. Ginsberg, Ch. Slowe, and L. V. Hau, Europhys. News, 35, 33 (2004).

[47] H. Hersen, T. J. Karle, R. J. P. Engrlrn, W. Bogaerts, J. P. Korterik, N. F. van Hulst, T. F.

Krauss, and I. Kuipers, Phys. Rev. Lett,, 94, 073903 (2005).

[48] A.B.Matsko, D.V.Strekalov, L. Maleki, Opt. Express, 13, 2210 (2005).

[49] D. Gauthier, Physics World, 18, 30 (2005).

25

