6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prepared for RSI

Development of deformation-tunable quadrupolar microcavity

Juhee Yang, Songky Moon, Sang-Bum Lee and Jai-Hyung Lee, Kyungwon An∗
School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, Korea

Sang-Wook Kim
Department of Physics Education, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735, Korea

Jeong-Bo Shim and Hai-Woong Lee
Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Taejon 305-701, Korea
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We have developed a technique for realizing a two-dimensional quadrupolar microcavity with
its deformation variable from 0% to 23% continuously. We employed a microjet ejected from a
noncircular oriﬁce in order to generate a stationary column with modulated quadrupolar deformation
in its cross section. Wavelength red shifts of low-order cavity modes due to shape deformation
were measured and were found to be in good agreement with the wave calculation for the same
deformation, indicating the observed deformation is quadrupolar in nature.

PACS numbers: PACS number(s): 05.45.Mt, 42.55.Sa

I.

INTRODUCTION

Unlike circular microcavities showing isotropic output
emission, asymmetric resonant microcavities (ARM’s)
provide directional output [1, 2, 3] along with fairly high
cavity quality factors up to certain degree of deforma-
tion. In addition, the internal ray dynamics of ARM ex-
hibits an evolution from regularity to chaos as the degree
of deformation increases. With these properties, ARM
serves not only as a useful resonators for optoelectronics
devices but also as a versatile tool for studying ray and
wave chaos [4].

In ARM’s, the internal ray dynamics strongly depend
on the degree of deformation, and so do mode properties
such as output directionality [5, 6, 7] and cavity quality
factor. Whispering gallery modes and their ultrahigh Q
factors of circular microcavities can be associated with
regular ray dynamics in the cavities. As the deformation
is increased gradually, this dynamical regularity begins
to be broken following Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser(KAM)
scenario in phase space. The emission pattern also expe-
riences a dramatic change, from isotropic emission into
collimated tangential emission at high-curvature points
on the surface. When the deformation is further in-
creased, even KAM tori are broken and the internal ray
dynamics becomes more chaotic. However, this ray pic-
ture is not fully applicable to typical microcavities with
their radial size ranging from several microns to tens of
microns. In this region, it is not well understood how the
chaotic ray dynamics is related to both actual modes of
cavity and output emission patterns of these modes.

If one can tune the deformation of a microcavity from
a perfect circle to a ﬁnal deformed form continuously,
one can follow the evolution of modes and thus can eas-

∗Electronic address: kwan@phys.snu.ac.kr

ily identify the origin and mode numbers of observed
modes of ARM. Such identiﬁcation allows us to perform
direct comparison with wave calculation and help us to
obtain better understanding on the connection between
the mode distribution, cavity quality factors and out-
put directionality of these modes and the aforementioned
chaotic ray dynamics.

Despite of the advantage of electrical pumping capa-
bility, microcavities made of semiconductor [6, 8, 9, 10],
are rigid under room temperature and thus cannot be
changed in shape. In order to have varied shapes, sep-
arate cavities with diﬀerent deformation should be em-
ployed. However, it is almost impossible to make con-
nections among observed modes from the separate cavi-
ties. Another problem with the semiconductor microcav-
ity lies with the fabrication process. The etching resolu-
tion is limited by the wavelength of masking light, leaving
wavelength-scale shape uncertainty and roughness on the
cavity surface. Due to this problem, the cavity quality
factors are limited to 104 ∼ 105 without cumbersome an-
nealing process even for fairly large microcavities with
diameters of hundreds of microns. However, such large
cavity size introduces another problem. The free spec-
tral range of modes are comparable to or larger than the
linewidth of modes and thus individual modes can hardly
be resolved.

To overcome these limitations, we have developed an
alternative type of microcavity, a liquid microjet cavity.
Due to the surface tension and the viscosity of liquid, a
very smooth and stable surface can be easily obtained.
By precisely controlling the hydrodynamics of the mi-
crojet, we can achieve a stable stationary microcavity
with continuously variable deformation. Our liquid mi-
crocavity oﬀers another beneﬁt that the concentration of
gain molecules for lasing and other spectroscopic mea-
surements can be easily adjusted. Although it is only
subject to optical pumping, the liquid microjet ARM is
therefore an ideal system for studying the aforementioned

ray-wave correspondence or the quantum chaos in the mi-
crocavity.

This paper is organized in the following way. In Sec.
II, we describe a method to realize deformed microcavi-
ties with a set of discrete degrees of deformation by us-
ing a stationary surface-modulated microjet column. A
method to obtain quadrupole cavities with continuously
tunable deformation by controlling the pressure of the
jet is discussed in Sec. III. Spectral analysis of cavity
modes in deformed microcavities is presented in Sec. IV,
where we demonstrate that the wavelength red shift due
to shape deformation only can be extracted from raw ex-
perimental data. The observed shifts vs. the measured
degrees of deformation are shown to be in good agree-
ment with the results of wave calculation. A summary
and concluding remarks are then presented in Sec. V.

II. METHOD TO OBTAIN DISCRETE DEGREE
OF DEFORMATION

An ARM can be obtained from a horizontal cross sec-
tion of a microjet, which is made of ethanol (n=1.361)
doped with Rhodamine B dye as gain molecules. A sim-
ilar microjet generator with a circular oriﬁce was intro-
duced previously [11]. However, in the present study the
microjet employs a noncircular oriﬁce as a nozzle.

We have reported elsewhere [13] that such a noncircu-
lar oriﬁce induces a microjet to form a stationary tidal
column as depicted in Fig. 1(a). Viscosity of the liquid
makes the oscillation amplitude of the column rapidly
damped along the jet propagation direction. The shape
of the jet column can be approximated in the cylindrical
coordinates by the following time-independent equation

− z
vzτ

2π
vzT

r(θ, z) = a

1 + η0 exp

sin

z + ξ

cos 2θ

,

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:21)
(1)
where a is the mean radius and η0 is a seed deformation
parameter, τ is the decay rate, T is the period of oscil-
lation and ξ is an initial phase of oscillation. Both the
decay rate and the period of oscillation are approximately
constant depending on the properties of the liquid. The
jet velocity vz is assumed to be uniform across the entire
jet [14]. In order to ﬁne tune the jet ejection pressure for
stable operation of the jet in a stationary form, a pres-
sure regulator with 1 mbar resolution is equipped to the
generator.

Two-dimensional ARM is obtained by selecting cross-
sectional planes located at the extrema zn’s (n=-1, 0, 1,
2,. . . in Fig. 1(a)) of the amplitude oscillation, where the
cavity boundary is given by

n
r(θ, zn) = a [1 + (−)

ηn cos 2θ] ,

where

(2)

(3)

ηn = η0 exp

− zn
vzτ

(cid:18)

.

(cid:19)

2

FIG. 1: (a) Model for the deformed microjet column.
(b)
Fabrication procedure of a noncircular oriﬁce. The side view
shows that the inner walls are inclined. The bottom view is
a real image of a noncircular oriﬁce.

It is our convention to denote the cross-sectional plane
or anti-nodal plane at zn as Dn (n = 1, 2, 3 . . .). Ac-
cording to our convention, D1 corresponds to the second
minimum of amplitude oscillation from the nozzle in Fig.
1(b). Equation (1) describes a quadrupole of deformation
η = ηn, and thus we can obtain quadrupole-deformed mi-
crocavities (QDM’s) at D1, D2, D3, etc. The major axis
of QDM’s at D1, D3, D5, etc is rotated by 90◦ with re-
spect to that of QDM’s at D2, D4, D6, etc.

Degree of possible three-dimensional (3D) eﬀect due to
a ﬁnite thickness of the region to be used in experiment
around the cross-sectional plane, which is about 10 mi-
crons, can be estimated in the following way. Under our
experimental conditions to be described below, a typical
value of vzT is 280 microns, which is much larger than the
mean radius a of 15 microns. The possible variation in
the cavity size along the z direction is then estimated to
be only [1 − cos(2π × 5µm/280µm)]=0.6% or 0.1 micron
in diameter, and therefore, the 3D eﬀect can be safely
neglected.

The degree of deformation of QDM’s can be deter-

mined from their diﬀraction patterns as described in
Refs. [12] and [13]. For example, under 1.8 bar of ejection
pressure, we obtain QDM’s of 35% (D1), 22% (D2), 16%
(D3), 11% (D4), 7.7% (D5), etc.

Let us now describe the fabricating process of the non-
circular oriﬁce, a key component in our system. Figure
1(b) depicts the fabrication procedure. A tip of pyrex
tube is placed vertically in the center of a Nichrome heat-
ing coil. As the tube melts down, the bottom part of the
tube droops. At that moment, the tip of the tube resem-
bles the letter ‘V’. While being heated, the both sides of
the tip are pressed with a tweezer. After slightly grind-
ing oﬀ and polishing the tip we can obtain a noncircular
oriﬁce on it. The diameter can be controlled by amount
of polishing. Typical diameter is 30 µm. The pressed
sides of the tip are steeper than the others. The diﬀeren-
tial wall steepness plays an important role in the cavity
deformation control to be discussed in the next section.

III. METHOD TO OBTAIN CONTINUOUSLY
TUNED DEGREE OF DEFORMATION

According to Eq. (1), the microjet boundary at the

nozzle (z = 0) is given by

r(θ, 0) = a (1 + η0 sin ξ cos 2θ) ,

(4)

which should match the boundary of the oriﬁce.
In
fact, the boundary of the oriﬁce usually contains higher-
order components of small magnitude. These higher-
order components have larger damping rates than that
of the quadrupole, and therefore, by the time of the jet
reaches D1 location, the microjet surface becomes well
approximated by Eq. (1).

Since the degree of deformation at the nozzle is more
or less prescribed by the shape of the oriﬁce, ηi ≡ η0 sin ξ
can be regarded to be ﬁxed. However, η0, called a seed
deformation, can still be changed under this constraint,
and therefore, the deformation ηn at anti-nodal plane
Dn (n = 1, 2, 3 . . .), proportional to η0 as in Eq. (3),
can be modiﬁed accordingly. The seed deformation η0
can be tuned by the ejection pressure of the jet. For
example, with an ejection pressure increased to 2.0 bar,
we obtained a new set of QDM’s with deformations of
38% (D1), 24% (D2), 18% (D3), 13% (D4), 8% (D5),
etc, increased from 35% (D1), 22% (D2), 16% (D3), 11%
(D4), 7.7% (D5), etc at 1.8 bar.

The pinching of the nozzle in one direction in the
fabrication process has introduced diﬀerent inner wall
slope and this diﬀerential wall slope in turn causes the
quadrupole oscillation in the microjet column. The ini-
tial radial velocity just outside the oriﬁce can be obtained
from Eq. (1) by a taking time derivative:

vr(θ) ≈

2πa
T

η0 cos ξ cos 2θ ,

(5)

(cid:19)
where we have neglected the damping eﬀect in taking the
time derivative. Due to the guided compression by the

(cid:18)

3

inner wall of the nozzle, the radial velocity inside the noz-
zle is proportional to the ejection velocity, proportional
to the ejection pressure. Therefore, we can assume that
the initial radial velocity of the quadrupole oscillation is
also proportional to the jet velocity in the z direction just
outside the oriﬁce:

vr(θ) = Kvz cos 2θ ,

(6)

where K is a constant depending only on the inner geom-
etry of the nozzle and the properties of the liquid. It is
independent of the ejection pressure. From Eqs. (5) and
(6), we can see that cos ξ must be proportional to vz:

η0 cos ξ = KvzT /2πa .

(7)

With this and the relation ηi = η0 sin ξ, we then obtain
the following result showing that the seed deformation
can be controlled by the jet ejection velocity.

η0 =

η2
i +

s

2

v2
z .

KT
2πa

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(8)

For the representative values of the parameters in Eq.
(8), T ∼ 30 µs, vz ∼ 10 m/s, a ∼ 15 µm, ηi ∼ 0.6 and
K ∼ 0.3, the ratio (2πaηi/KvzT ) ∼ 0.6, and thus we
ﬁnd that η0 is approximately linear to the jet velocity vz,
which can be controlled by the jet ejection pressure.

It is noted that the oscillation of the quadrupole defor-
mation along the z direction is analogous to a damped
harmonic oscillator with a non-zero launching velocity.
The dependence of ξ and consequently the amplitude of
deformation oscillation on the jet velocity vz is illustrated
in Fig. 2. In addition, the contribution due to the damp-
ing in the initial radial velocity is much smaller than that
of the harmonic oscillation. For the parameter values in
Fig. 2, the ratio is T /2πτ ∼ 0.1.

Deformation tuning by the jet ejection pressure is
experimentally demonstrated in Fig. 3, where the de-
grees of deformation ηn at several anti-nodal planes Dn’s
(n = 2, 3, 4, 5) are plotted as a function of the ejection
pressure P , which is varied from 1.4 bar to 2.6 bar by a
0.2-bar step. A stable microjet is obtained in this pres-
sure range. By choosing a proper combination of the anti-
nodal planes Dn and the jet pressure P , we can tune the
deformation to any value from 5% (D5, 1.4 bar) to 30%
(D2, 2.6 bar) as shown in Fig. 3. Some deformation can
be achieved with more than one combination of Dn and
P . Small deformation from 0% to 5% can be obtained
around high anti-nodal planes (D6∼D10) under a ﬁxed
pressure. The small deformation can be more precisely
measured with spectroscopic methods in the next sec-
tion than with the diﬀraction patterns since the diﬀrac-
tion patterns for such slightly deformed QDM’s are not
distinct enough to be used for determining their defor-
mations reliably.

4

FIG. 2: Cross sectional view of the deformation oscillation
along the z axis, given by Eq. (1) with θ = 0. Initial deforma-
tion ηi(= η0 sin ξ) at z = 0 is predetermined by the oriﬁce. As
the jet velocity vz is increased, the initial phase ξ changes in
such a way that cos ξ is proportional to the velocity (c.f. Eq.
(6)). Consequently, the deformations at anti-nodal planes,
D1, D2, D3 . . ., can be increased as the jet velocity. The pa-
rameter values used for these plots are T = 28µs, τ = 39µs,
a0 = 15µm, K=0.3 and ηi = 0.6.

IV. SHAPE CONFIRMATION BY SPECTRUM
ANALYSIS

A. Method and Principle

Low-order whispering gallery modes in a circular mi-
crocavity reside very close to the cavity boundary. As the
microcavity is deformed from a circle to an asymmetric
shape while the internal area is preserved, these low-order
modes experience frequency shifts. Since the low-order
modes still reside very close to the cavity boundary even
in a deformed cavity, these frequency shifts can be related
to the change in the perimeter of the cavity. Therefore,
by measuring the frequency shift, we can ﬁnd out how
much known type of deformation the cavity has.

Spectra of cavity modes can be observed in several
diﬀerent ways. We use the cavity modiﬁed ﬂuorescence
of cavity medium. Speciﬁcally, we measure the ﬂuores-
cence of dye molecules resolved in the microjet. Due to
the cavity quantum electrodynamics eﬀect, the ﬂuores-
cence spectrum exhibits enhancement wherever the cav-
ity modes are located and thus it replicates the resonance
lines of the cavity modes.

The setup for spectrum measurement is similar to that
of Ref. [12]. The microjet is excited by an argon-ion
pump laser at 514 m. The pump laser is focused with a
cylindrical lens into a thin proﬁle with a thickness of 10
micron in the z direction so that a thin slab can be se-
lected to be a two-dimensional microcavity in the micro-
jet. The ﬂuorescence emitted from this region is collected
by an objective lens and delivered to a spectrometer with

FIG. 3: (a) Variation of deformation parameter according
to the ejection pressure of the jet at D2, D3, D4 and D5
positions. (b) For deformation below 5%, the deformation is
tunable by selecting diﬀerent anti-nodal planes at a ﬁxed jet
pressure of 1.4 bar.

a charge-coupled-device detector. The observed ﬂuores-
cence spectrum shows several sequences of peaks with
well-deﬁned free spectral ranges (FSR’s). The modes sep-
arated by the same FSR are the modes of the same mode
order. In this way, we can identify the mode orders of all
of the observed modes.

A low-order mode, which has a good visibility, can
be tracked in the spectrum as the deformation is var-
ied. Some examples are shown in Fig. 4(a). Since the
low-order mode reside very close to the cavity bound-
ary as discussed above, the resonance wavelengths of
these modes are approximately proportional to the cavity
perimeter S, given by

2π

S =

dθ

(dr/dθ)

2

+ r2 ,

(9)

0
Z

q

5

to the same mode undergoing wavelength shifts. Anti-
nodal plane D3 was chosen and the peak was tracked
from 1.4 bar to 2.6 bar. The deformation parameters
measured by the diﬀraction technique were 12.1%, 14.3%,
16.5%, 17.5%, 18.9%, 21.5% and 22.2%, respectively, in
the ascending order of the listed pressure values. In Fig.
4(b), the wavelength shifts with respect to the wavelength
at 1.4 bar, measured at 0.25 bar interval, are plotted in
ﬁlled squares. Contrary to our expectation, they show
blue shifts as the deformation increases from 1.4 bar to
2.0 bar, beyond which they start to show red shifts. We
have found that the blue shift occurs because the cross-
sectional area contracts as the ejection pressure (velocity)
increases due to the Bernoulli eﬀect.

In the microjet the vertical velocity vz decreases
slightly as the jet rises due to air friction and the gravity.
However, this eﬀect is negligibly small over the distance
(about 1 mm from D1 to D5) the microjet is used. Since
the ﬂux of the jet should be conserved, the cross sectional
area slightly expands as the velocity drops. The amount
of wavelength shift due to this eﬀect is very small, about
0.3 nm from one anti-nodal plane to the next. Further-
more, this shift is uniform for all modes.

We checked how much area contraction occurs by mea-
suring spectra at anti-nodal plane D8. Since the defor-
mation there is less than 1%, the deformation eﬀect can
be neglected, and thus the wavelength shift of a partic-
ular mode due to area contraction can be measured as
a function of the ejection pressure Since area contrac-
tion accompanies reduction in perimeter, it leads to a
blue shift. Filled circles in Fig. 4(b) represent the ob-
served wavelength shifts at D8 as a function of the ejec-
tion pressure. They indeed exhibit pure blue shifts. The
area contraction is believed to be completed immediately
after the jet leaves the oriﬁce.

By subtracting the wavelength shifts due to the area
contraction from the overall wavelength shifts, we obtain
the wavelength shifts due to the deformation eﬀect only.
The results are shown in Fig. 4(b) as crosses, exhibiting
pure red shifts as expected.

The range of deformation obtained from D3 is limited,
from 12% to 22.7%. Smaller deformation can be obtained
from D4 and D5. Since the measurement of wavelength
shift requires that the same mode be followed as the de-
formation changes, we need to ﬁnd the same mode in D2
and D5 as the one used in D2. We can directly compare
the spectrum obtained from D3 at 1.4 bar with the spec-
trum from D4 at 2.2 bar since both give 12% deformation
as shown in Fig. 3(a). By using the fact that the same
mode should have the same FSR, we can identify the
mode in the spectrum from D4 that is the same as the
mode tracked in the spectrum from D3. Once the same
mode is found, we can adjust the pressure and extend the
wavelength shift measurement from 2.6 bar down to 1.4
bar for D4. Similarly, we can connect the measurement
from D4 to D5. In this way, we can follow one particu-
lar mode with a good visibility across several anti-nodal
planes and measure the wavelength shift for deformation

FIG. 4: (a) Cavity-modiﬁed ﬂuorescence spectra observed at
D3 as the jet pressure is varied. A particular mode of a good
visibility marked by arrows is followed as the jet pressure is
(b) Observed wavelength shifts of the particular
changed.
mode in (a), measured for the jet pressure varied at a small
interval, are denoted by ﬁlled squares. Wavelength blue shifts
due to the area contraction as the pressure is increased are
represented by ﬁlled circles. The wavelength shifts due to
the deformation only, denoted by crosses, are obtained by
subtracting the latter from the former.

where

r(θ) =

(1 + η cos 2θ) ,

(10)

a
1 + η2/2

p

and η is the quadrupole deformation parameter, i.e., one
of ηn’s at anti-nodal planes. The square root factor in the
denominator is a normalization factor needed to make the
area of the quadrupole conserved regardless of η. A solid
curve in Fig. 6 shows the red shift for given deformation
according to Eqs. (9) and (10). This phenomenon will be
refered to as ‘(pure) deformation eﬀect’ from now on.

B. Experimental results

Figure 4(a) shows the observed spectra for various jet
pressure values. The peaks marked by arrows correspond

from 5%(at 1.4 bar in D5) to 22.7% (at 2.6 bar in D3).
Although the deformation can be made larger than
23% in D2, we did not measure the wavelength shift for
such high deformation since the quadrupole deformation
beyond 24% looses its convexity and turns into a peanut-
like shape and thus the properties of modes, including
resonance wavelength, change abruptly across the 24%
deformation.

C. Small deformation case

Deformation smaller than 5% can be obtained from
the region of jet from D5 and above. Since the deforma-
tion is so small there, the surface proﬁle is nearly ﬂat,
and thus any thin slice in this region can serve as a two-
dimensional microcavity. We can easily track one mode
in the observed spectra while we scan the excitation lo-
cation continuously with the ejection pressure of the jet
ﬁxed. The observed wavelength shifts for various excita-
tion location on the jet at 1.4 bar are shown in Fig. 5(a).
The oscillatory behavior is due to the oscillation of the
cavity perimeter according to the oscillation of the degree
of deformation as in Eq. (1). The overall underlying red
shift is due to the slight area expansion as the jet goes
up. As discussed above, the vertical velocity of the jet
vz decreases slightly as the jet goes up due to air friction
and the gravity and the ﬂux conservation forces the area
to expand accordingly.

The red shift can be easily extracted from the observed
shifts. The local minima in the observed shifts must cor-
respond to no deformation (i.e., circle) and they are ﬁt
well by a straight line as shown in Fig. 5(b). These local
minimum values are the red shifts due to the area expan-
sion. The amount of red shift over a distance from one
anti-nodal plane to the next is only 0.3 nm. After sub-
tracting the amount of red shifts corresponding to this
linear ﬁt from the observed shifts, we obtain the shifts
due to the deformation only as shown in Fig. 5(c).

The observed oscillatory behavior conforms to an ef-

fective deformation parameter ηeﬀ given by

− z
vzτ

2π
vzT

ηeﬀ = η0 exp

sin

z + ξ

.

(11)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
The zero shift occur when the sine factor vanishes (no
(cid:12)
deformation) whereas the local maxima occurs when the
sine factor is ±1 (at the anti-nodal planes). The exper-
imental points for the degree of deformation below 5%
in Fig. 6 are obtained from the peak shift values at the
anti-nodal planes D6∼D10.

(cid:19)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

We can calculate the perimeter of a quadrupole deﬁned
by Eq. (10) and from this perimeter we can calculate
wavelength shift due to deformation only with respect to
the wavelength for η = 0. The result is shown as a solid
curve in Fig. 6. In our experiment, we can measure the
degree of deformation as a function of the jet pressure
by using the diﬀraction technique as mentioned before.
We can also measure the wavelength red shift due to

6

FIG. 5: (a) Wavelength shifts in the small deformation region.
Oscillating pattern shows the deformation eﬀect and the un-
derlying slope is due to the area expansion as the jet goes up.
(b) Wavelength shifts due to the area expansion can be ob-
tained by joining the local minima in (a), corresponding to no
deformation. (c) Wavelength shifts due to deformation only is
obtained by subtracting the shifts due to the area expansion
in (b) from the total shifts in (a).

deformation only for a given jet pressure as discussed
above. We then obtain a series of pairs of a red shift and a
degree of deformation for various jet pressure values. For
small deformation, we measure the red shift for a ﬁxed
pressure but at diﬀerent position on the jet as discussed
above. The results are shown as ﬁlled squares in Fig. 6.
The experimental results are in good agreement with the
calculation assuming quadrupole deformation.

Small deviation observed for large deformation is due
to the fact that considering the low order modes followed
in spectra as a ray circulating very close to the cavity
boundary is just too much simpliﬁcation. We can solve
the wave equation for a given quadrupole cavity with the
same size parameter as in the experiment and ﬁnd res-
onance wavelengths of the same mode observed in the
experiment. Details of mode calculations are given in
Ref. [15]. The resulting wavelength shifts from the wave
calculations are shown in Fig. 6 as open triangles, which
also show about the same amount of deviation from the
solid curve by the simple model. The observed wave-
length shifts match well with the results of the wave cal-
culation, and therefore, we conclude that the shape of our
microcavity can be regarded as a quadrupolar deformed
microcavity within the limit of our experimental error.

V. CONCLUSION

7

We have realized a deformation-tunable quadrupolar
microcavity by using a liquid jet ejected through a non-
circular oriﬁce. The degree of deformation was controlled
by selecting a proper anti-nodal plane of quadrupole os-
cillation and by adjusting the ejection pressure of the jet.
The deformation could be varied from 0% to 24% by a
small interval, spanning from the region of regular ray
dynamics to the region of complete ray chaos. The re-
sults of spectral analysis of the low-order cavity modes
for various cavity deformation indicate that the observed
deformation can be regarded as quadrupolar deformation
within the experimental error of our spectrum measure-
ment. The deformation-tunable microcavity is an impor-
tant technique for many fundamental studies including
the study of the connection between the properties of
cavity modes and the ray chaos.

This work was supported by Korea Science and Engi-
neering Foundation Grant (NRL-2005-01371) and by Ko-
rea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2002-070-C00044,
-2005-070-C00058).

FIG. 6: Observed wavelength red shifts vs. the degree of de-
formation measured by the diﬀraction technique. Solid line is
the calculated red shift from the perimeter of a quadrupole,
ﬁlled triangles are the result of wave calculation for the same
cavity and ﬁlled squares are the experimental results.

[1] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett.

19, 1693 (1994).

[2] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone, and R. K.

Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2682 (1995).

[3] R. K. Chang and A. K. Campillo, eds., Optical Processes
in Microcavities (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996)
[4] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[5] H. G. L. Schwefel, N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, R. K. Chang,
and A. D. Stone, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 21, 923 (2004).
[6] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, E. E. Narimanov, J. U. N¨ockel,
A. D. Stone, G. J. Faist, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho,
Science 280, 1493 (1998).

[7] S. Lacey, H. Wang, D. H. Foster, J. U. N¨ockel, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 91, 033902 (2003).

[8] S. Gianordoli, L. Hvozdara, G. Strasser, W. Schrenk, J.
Faist and E. Gornik, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 36,
094102 (458).

[9] C. Gmachl, E. E. Narimanov, F. Capasso, J. N. Bail-
largeon, and A. Y. Cho, Opt. Lett. 27, 824 (2002).

[10] N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, H. G. L. Schwefel, R. K. Chang,
and A. D. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 094102 (2002).
[11] H. Moon, Guang-Hoon Kim, Yong-Sik Lim, Chun-Soo
Go, Jai-Hyung Lee, and Joon-Sung Chang, Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 66, 3030 (1995).

[12] S. B . Lee, J. H. Lee, J. S. Chang, H. J. Moon, S. W.
Kim, and K. An, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 033903 (2002).
[13] S. B . Lee, J. Yang, S. Moon, J.-B. Shim, H.-W. Lee, S.-
W. Kim, J.-H. Lee, and K. An, “Diﬀraction patterns by
quadrupolar deformed microcavities”, to be published.

[14] Lamb, Hydrodynamics, pp.473-475 (Dover, New York,

1945)

[15] J.-B. Shim and H.-W. Lee, S. B. Lee, J. Yang, S.
Moon, J.-H. Lee, and K. An, S.-W. Kim, “Reg-
ular spectra and universal directionality of emitted
radiation from a quadruplar deformed microcavity”,
arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603221.

