6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Regular Spectra and Universal Directionality of Emitted Radiation from a
Quadrupolar Deformed Microcavity

Jeong-Bo Shim and Hai-Woong Lee∗
Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 305-701, Korea

Sang-Bum Lee, Juhee Yang, Songki Moon, Jai-Hyung Lee, and Kyungwon An
School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, Korea

Sang Wook Kim
Department of Physics Education, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Korea
(Dated: July 26, 2013)

We have investigated quasi-eigenmodes of a quadrupolar deformed microcavity by extensive nu-
merical calculations. The spectral structure is found to be quite regular, which can be explained
on the basis of the fact that the microcavity is an open system. The far-ﬁeld emission directions
of the modes show unexpected similarity irrespective of their distinct shapes in phase space. This
universal directionality is ascribed to the inﬂuence from the geometry of the unstable manifolds in
the corresponding ray dynamics.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Symmetrical (cylindrical or spherical) microcavities
have attracted much attention in the past as laser res-
onators, due to their compact and simple geometry, eas-
iness to fabricate, and ultra-high Q values, which is at-
tributed to formation of the so-called whispering gallery
modes (WGM’s) [1]. The isotropic radiation pattern of
light emitted from the symmetrical microcavity, however,
reduces their practical usefulness. One way to overcome
this problem, as has been proposed by N¨ockel et al., is to
deform the shape to construct asymmetric resonant cavi-
ties (ARC’s) [2, 3]. Directional emission has indeed been
observed experimentally from asymmetrically deformed
microlasers made of semiconductors [4, 5], dye jets [6]
and polymers [7].

Fundamental optical properties of ARC’s can be partly
understood in terms of the ray dynamics. From the clas-
sical dynamical viewpoint, it belongs to a class of sys-
tems having mixed-type phase space, i.e., a mixture of
both regular and irregular trajectories [8, 9, 10]. When
deformation is very small, the phase space is dominated
by regular rays of whispering gallery type and these rays
escape from the cavity only by evanescent leakage (tun-
nelling). At larger deformations, however, emission prop-
erties are mainly determined by chaotic rays that diﬀuse
stochastically and refract out of the resonator when the
angle of incidence χ reaches the critical angle χc ,i.e.,
sin χc = 1/n, where n is the refractive index of the res-
onator. This simple ray dynamics model predicts that at
large deformations the escape occurs primarily into the
tangential direction near the points of maximum curva-
ture [2, 11].

Although the model captures the essence of the direc-

∗Electronic address: hwlee@laputa.kaist.ac.kr

tional property of emitted radiation from ARC’s, there
may exist other complications. For example, a phe-
nomenon referred to as dynamical eclipsing [12] occurs
when stable islands occupy the phase space region at
which the escape would have taken place without them,
resulting in strong suppression of emission intensity in
directions predicted by the ray model and appearance of
split peaks in nearby directions. There are evidences that
stable or unstable periodic orbits strongly inﬂuence the
emission pattern of ARC. The emission originating from
bow-tie modes [4, 13] , whose corresponding classical or-
bit is a stable island, and the so-called scarred modes of
hexagonal [6] and triangular [5] unstable periodic orbits,
has been observed. So far the direction of the far-ﬁeld
emission obtained in experiments has been a commonly
used tool to investigate the characteristics of the lasing
mode of ARC, since it has been assumed that the shape
of the wavefunction inside the cavity strongly inﬂuences
or sometimes even completely governs the far-ﬁeld emis-
sion pattern. It has been reported, however, that, due to
the correction with Fresnel coeﬃcients, the emission di-
rection of the mode with a rather smaller Q value can be
considerably deviated from an expectation based upon
the above simple assumption [5]. Deviations from the
prediction of the simple ray dynamics model also occur
when the nonlinear eﬀect of a medium is involved [14].

The simple ray dynamics model has recently been re-
ﬁned by Schwefel et al. [7]. They found that highly direc-
tional emission patterns from ARC’s persist well beyond
the deformation limit predicted from the ray model [2],
and developed a more accurate model which emphasizes
the importance of unstable manifolds of short periodic
orbits. However, they did not show the direct evidence
of the crucial role played by unstable manifolds in con-
netion with their structure embedded in quantum wave-
functions. A similar analysis has been reported by Lee
et al. in a stadium shaped microcavity, although the au-
thors did not precisely mention the role of the unstable

manifolds [15].

The main purpose of this paper is to investigate opti-
cal properties of a quadrupolar micro-resonator with low
refractive index (n = 1.361) by extensive numerical cal-
culations. The reason why we choose the speciﬁc refrac-
tive index is that this work is initiated from our previous
experiment of the dye-jet microcavity laser [6]. We would
like to deliver two main results: ﬁrstly the energy level
distribution shows deviations from an expectation from
the usual random matrix theory (RMT), and secondly
the far-ﬁled emission direction exhibits a nontrivial uni-
versal feature.

To a certain degree, optical properties of ARC’s can be
understood by using an analogy with chaotic dynamical
properties of the billiard system which has been exten-
sively studied in the context of nonlinear dynamics. The
quantum mechanical manifestation of classical chaos, re-
ferred to as quantum chaos, has generally revealed that
there is a close relation between the classical nonlinear
dynamics (whether it is regular or chaotic) and quan-
tum spectral statistics (whether the energy level spacing
distribution is described by Poissonian or Wigner) [16].
Based on this observation, one might expect that there
also exists close correlation between the ray dynamics
and the statistical properties of the eigemodes of ARC’s.
Speciﬁcally, energy levels may be regularly distributed at
small deformations, where the ray dynamics is predom-
inantly regular, while they may look quite irregular at
large deformations where chaotic rays dominate. We will
show, however, that this simple expectation does not ex-
actly hold true. There is an essential diﬀerence between
ARC and the billiard system: The former is an open
system while the latter is a closed one. The openness
of ARC raises a nontrivial question: Where is the emit-
ted output directed? This is completely meaningless in
a closed system. Although the analogy between ARC
and the billiard system is a useful starting point because
the billiard has been thoroughly studied in the past, one
cannot push the analogy too far.

This paper is organized in the following way:
In
Section II, we brieﬂy explain both the ray dynamics
and the wave properties of a quadrupolar billiard, and
a quadrupolar deformed microcavity (QDM). In Sec-
tion III, we show numerical results for spectra and far-
ﬁeld emission directionality of a QDM and discuss the
regularity of the spectra and the universal directionality
we obtained from the numerical computations. Finally
in Section IV, we present a conclusion.

II. A QUADRUPOLAR DEFORMED
MICROCAVITY

When a liquid jet with circular cross section is de-
formed, its cross section can in general be described by

2

FIG. 1: A schematic view of Birkhoﬀ coordinates: They con-
sist of the distance along the boundary S(φ) and the reﬂection
angle, χ. To make them canonically conjugate, sin χ is used
instead of χ.

the following multipole expansion [17]

r(φ) =

a0 +

aj cos jφ +

bj sin jφ,

(1)

1
2

∞

Xj=1

∞

Xj=1

where r is the distance from the center and φ the
The lowest order even-symmetric
azimuthal angle.
quadrupolar contribution becomes dominant when the
perturbation inducing deformation is small. The cross
section of the dye jet can then be described by

r(φ) =

(1 + ε cos 2φ),

(2)

r0
1 + ε2/2

p

where r0 and ε are respectively the radius of the unde-
formed (circular) cavity and the deformation parameter.
The denominator in Eq. (2) guarantees that the cross
sectional area is conserved irrespective of ε, which is con-
sistant with the experimental condition of Ref.
[6]. In
this paper we focus on such a speciﬁc ARC, i.e., a QDM.

A. A quadrupolar billiard: closed system

At ﬁrst, we consider the ray dynamics of a QDM with
hard walls, namely a quadurpolar billiard. The Birkhoﬀ
coordinate system is quite useful to study the ray dy-
namics in a billiard.
It consists of two variables S (or
equivalently φ) and sin χ, which respectively represent
the arc length of the position at which the ray strikes
the boundary and the sine of the incident (or reﬂected)
angle at the boundary [18] (Fig. 1). In Fig. 2 we show
the Poincare surfaces of section (PSOS) of the dynamics
in the quadrupolar billiard by using Birkhoﬀ coordinates.
It exhibits a typical Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser scenario
[19], i.e. the evolution toward stochastic behavior as the
deformation parameter ε is increased.

3

FIG. 2: The Poincares surfaces of section of a quadrupolar billiard for (a) ε = 0, (b) ε = 0.05, (c) ε = 0.10, and (d) ε = 0.12.

The wave nature of a quadrupolar billiard can be de-
scribed by the following Helmholtz equation with Dirich-
let boundary condition

ψ(r) + k

ψ(r) = 0,

2

2
∇

(3)

where k is the wave number. For a circular billiard, the
solution of Eq. 3 takes the form Jm(r) exp(imφ), where
Jm is a Bessel function. All the eigenvalues klm are ana-
lytically determined and form a well organized structure
since they are just the lth zeros of the mth order Bessel
functions. When a circular billiard is deformed, how-
ever, the distribution of eigenvalues starts to deviate from
the regular structure. For large enough deformations, in
which case the corresponding ray dynamics is predom-
inantly chaotic, the well established RMT plays an im-
portant role. Although the nearest neighbor level spacing
distribution of eigenvalues is described by the universal
Wigner function, the eigenvalues themselves show quite a
complex structure due to a lot of avoided crossings. Fig. 3
shows the evolution of eigenvalues (kr) as a function of
the deformation parameter.

FIG. 3: Evolution of the eigenvalues as a function of ε.
shows a complicated structure.

It

B. A quadrupolar deformed microcavity: open
system

A QDM is an open system in the sense that the ray
with the incident angle larger than a critical angle is al-
lowed to escape from the cavity. It does not make any

 

101

100

99

98

97

96

)
r
k
n
(
 
r
e

t

e
m
a
r
a
P
e
z
S

 

i

4

When the system is open, a question naturally arises:
Into which direction is the output ﬁeld emitted? In a
circular cavity, the emission direction should be isotropic
due to the circular symmetry, while it is highly non-trivial
to address it for ARC’s.
In the viewpoint of the ray
dynamics, the emission direction is determined from the
position (φ,sin χ) at which the incident angle of the ray
becomes equal to the critical angle. In wave mechanics,
however, one should ﬁnd quasi-eigenmodes, which are an
open system analogue to eigenmodes of a closed system,
by direct numerical calculation. In this work we use the
boundary element method to compute quasi-eigenmodes
[20, 21].

 

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

0.16

Quadrupolar deformation ( )

FIG. 4: Evolution of the real part of the eigenvalues of the
mode with l = 1 (the dotted line), l = 2 (the solid line), and
l = 3 (the dashed line) of a QDM as a function of ε.

inﬂuence on the ray dynamics itself inside the cavity, but
for n = 1.361 the
reduces available phase space: e.g.
phase space area below sin χc = 1/n
0.73 can be ig-
nored.

≈

The wave properties of an open system somewhat dif-
fer from those of a closed one. The eigenvalues of Eq. (3)
now take complex values. Their imaginary part is asso-
ciated with the decay rate of the mode. To quantify the
decay rate, a cavity quality factor Q deﬁned as
kr/ki,
where kr and ki are respectively real and imaginary parts
of the eigenvalue, is commonly used . The real part of
the eigenvalue is represented by the size parameter de-
ﬁned as nkrr0, which is abbreviated as nkr if there is no
confusion.

×

−

2

As far as a circular microcavity is concerned, Eq. (3)
is still separable so that two good quantum numbers, ra-
dial (l) and angular ones (m), can be well deﬁned. The
eigenvalues klm are analytically given by matching be-
tween Bessel and Neumann functions. Similarly to a cir-
cular billiard, one can see the well-deﬁned free spectral
range (FSR) among the modes with the identical radial
quantum number l.

Figure 4 presents a continuous variation of the real part
of eigenvalues as the deformation is increased. Surpris-
ingly, the eigenvalues vary quite regularly in comparison
with the complicated structures in Fig. 3. This regu-
lar structure remains, although the deformation becomes
large enough to generate global chaos in classical dynam-
ics. The monotonic decrease of nkr implies the red shift
of spectral lines. In case of WGM it can be explained
by considering an elongated optical path due to defor-
mation. In order to explain the regularity of spectrum,
we need to investigate more carefully the nature of the
modes. In the following section their phase space distri-
bution will be discussed based mainly upon the Husimi
plot.

III. REGULAR SPECTRUM AND UNIVERSAL
EMISSION DIRECTIONALITY

In this section we discuss the origin of the regularity of
the spectrum and the universal emission directionality.
The Husimi distribution function is a very powerful tool
to study these issues.

A. The Husimi plot of the eigenmode of the
deformed microcavity

The Husimi distribution function can be regarded as a
mathematical description of the phase-space distribution
in which the minimum-uncertainty Gaussian wave packet
is used as a basis [22]:

Hψ(q0, k0) =

ψ(q) ξ(q

q0, k0) dq

,

(4)

−

where

Z

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

ξ(q

q0, k0) = exp

−

(q

q0)2

−
2σ

(cid:20)−

+ ik0(q

q0)

.

(cid:21)

−

(5)

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

In order to obtain the Husimi plot in Birkhoﬀ coordi-
nates, it is necessary to modify Eqs. (4) and (5). Taking
it into account that φ is 2π periodic, the basis function
ξ can be rewritten as

ξ(φ

φ0, sin χ) =

exp

−

Xl

(φ + 2πl
2σ

−

(cid:20)−

φ0)2

+ik sin χ(φ

φ0)] ,

(6)

−

and the integration in Eq. (4) should be taken from 0 to
2π [23, 24]. For our calculation we set the width of the
gaussian as σ = √2/k0.

In Fig. 5 we present Husimi plots of several quasi-
eigenmodes obtained numerically. The l = 1 modes in
a circular cavity evolves from a horizontally ﬂat shape to
the distribution localized somewhere in the phase space
in Fig. 5(c). A similar evolution is also observed in the
l = 2 modes except that it is localized on the period-6

5

FIG. 5: Husimi plots of a QDM with (a)ε = 0.05, (b) 0.1 and (c) 0.16 for the l = 1 modes, and with (d) ε = 0.05, (d) 0.1
and (f) 0.16 for the l = 2 modes. The corresponding complex size parameters are (a) 96.64 − i0.003, (b) 96.89 − i0.004, (c)
95.87 − i0.004, (d) 96.10 − i0.005, (e) 96.25 − i0.014, and (f) 96.61 − i0.029. The critical line deﬁned by sinχc = 1/n is indicated
with the red horizontal lines.

∼

orbit which loses its stability around ε
0.12. The l = 2
modes then forms a hexagonal shaped scarred mode ex-
tensively investigated in our previous work [6]. All the
modes identiﬁed with l = 2 in Fig. 4 appear to have
the similar shapes in Husimi plots as shown in Fig. 6.
It is more diﬃcult to identify the corresponding classical
orbit of the l = 1 modes. It seems to correspond to the
period-6 orbit based upon Fig. 5(c), since it has six en-
hanced localized probability maxima in the phase space.

However, their locations along the vertical axis (sin χ) ﬁt
themselves to those of the period-8 orbit. Interestingly,
this mode exactly corresponds to the period-8 orbit for
larger nkr. We believe that the l = 1 mode is experi-
encing the transition from the period-6 to the period-8
orbit. More details will be discussed elsewhere.

6

FIG. 6: Husimi plots of the l = 2 mode at (a) nkr = 96.073 and (b) nkr = 98.12 for ε = 0.16. These two modes are separated
by two units of FSR.

B. Regular spectra

C. Universal emission directionality

In closed systems, chaotic states which are irregularly
distributed over available phase space are frequently ob-
served, so that they strongly interact with and repel each
other to generate avoided crossings and form complicated
spectral structures as shown in Fig. 3. In contrast, quasi-
eigenmodes in open systems hardly form chaotic states.
The reason is that the chaotic modes have too small Q
values to form modes in the practical sense, since they de-
cay in a short time due to refractive escape. In Fig. 4 the
l = 3 mode seems to disappear at ε
0.08, which implies
that it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the mode due to a very small Q,
since, for a given nkr, the larger l is the smaller Q is. The
mode with even larger l (> 3) may exist in Fig. 3 but is
practically meaningless, because Q is extremely low. One
may more frequently ﬁnd chaotic modes for larger nkr,
because Q is exponentially enhanced as nkr is increased.
It leads us to the conclusion that in open systems chaotic
quasi-eigenmodes are rarely observed unless nkr is large
enough.

∼

It is no wonder that non-chaotic modes show devia-
tions from the prediction based upon RMT, since they
are localized somewhere in phase space.
It is unlikely
that for a given nkr the l = 1 mode has a similar shape
with the l = 2 mode. In the semiclassical theory [25] the
larger l the bigger the incident angle of the ray. It implies
that the modes with diﬀerent l’s form distinct shapes in
phase space. It is clearly shown in Figs. 5(c) and (f) that
those two modes hardly overlap with each other. As ε
is increased, they independently evolve with their own
shape maintained in phase space. That explains the reg-
ular spectral structure observed in Fig. 4.

The quasi-eigenmodes of an open system contain
evanescent waves outside the cavity, which cause decay
of the modes in time. Figures 7(a) and (b) show that
some of the waves leak out, which cannot be seen in the
Husimi plot. The output directionality is in practice the
most important characteristics that we seek from ARC’s.
It is more deﬁnitely illustrated by the far-ﬁeld emission
intensity as a function of the output direction as shown in
Figs. 7(c) and (d). Surprisingly, these two ﬁgures demon-
strate an almost identical pattern whose maximum is lo-
cated around 40◦. It should be emphasized that the cor-
responding Husimi plots of these two modes diﬀer from
each other as shown in Figs. 5(c) and (f). Since it has
been believed that the emission direction is determined
from the internal shape of the quasi-eigenmode, it is nec-
essary to explain this unexpected observation.

The clue for the origin of the identical far-ﬁeld direc-
tionality irrespective of the shapes of a quasi-eigenmode
comes out of the fact that the far-ﬁeld pattern obtained
from ray dynamics shown in Fig. 8(d) is not much dif-
ferent from those from the wave calculations. In the ray
calculations, the ray incident with the angle smaller than
the critical angle is reﬂected in or emitted out with the
probability determined by Fresnel coeﬃcients.

In a long time the ray dynamics in the chaotic region is
governed by the so-called unstable manifolds [19]. They
are easily seen by launching a set of localized initial con-
ditions of rays in quadrupolar billiard and following the
dynamics for a few tens of collisions [see Figs. 8(a) and
(b)]. As time goes to the inﬁnity, the ray dynamics in a
closed system will ﬁnally become ergodic so that the rays
are uniformly distributed over phase space. As far as an
open system is concerned, however, rays escape from a
cavity before reaching uniform distribution. Therefore,
the available phase space is limited, and the dynamics in

7

rectionality is determined mainly by the structure of the
unstable manifolds.

∼

In order to show that the above conclusion is quite
general, we also investigate the Husimi plots and the far-
ﬁeld emission directionality of the modes for larger nkr,
namely
200. Figures 10 (a)-(e) show a variety of shapes
of Husimi plots of the modes: For example, (b) is an
octagonal and (d) is a hexagonal scarred mode. Another
interesting point found in Fig. (10) is that each mode
does not have any considerable overlap with the others.
In this sense, every mode in Fig. 10 is quite distinct from
one another. Surprisingly again, the far-ﬁeld emission
directions are almost identical for all such ﬁve distinct
modes as shown in Fig. 11. As mentioned above, it is
also attributed to the geometry of the unstable manifolds
as clearly seen in Figs. 10(f)-(j). Therefore, we call the
identical far-ﬁeld emission directionality determined from
the unstable manifolds a universal directionality.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this work we have studied spectral properties and
mode structure of a quadrupolarly deformed microcavity
and the output directionality of the radiation emitted
from it. We summerize the main conclusion of our work.
(1) When the system is open like a QDM, chaotic or-
bits no longer easily form a quasieigenmode since their
Q values are expected to be very low due to the refrac-
tive escape. Consequently the localized modes such as
scarred ones are more frequently observed in comparison
with the usual closed chaotic system. This explains the
regular structure of the spectrum with well-deﬁned level
spacings even at large deformations.

(2) The direction of the radiation emitted from a
quadrupolar microcavity resonator is determined mainly
by the geometry of the unstable manifolds of the res-
onator. As the geometry of the unstable manifolds is
governed by classical dynamical properties of the res-
onator and thus is independent of the structure of the
excited modes, the output directionality exhibits univer-
sality, largely independent of the degree of deformation
and the pump power.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the KOSEF Grant (R01-
2005-000-10678-0). JBS and HWL were supported by
a grant from KRISS. SNU group is supported by the
KOSEF Grants(NRL-2005-01371). SWK was supported
by the KRF Grant (KRF-2004-005-C00044).

FIG. 7: Probability distributions of the wavefunctions of the
quasi-eigenmodes in real space for (a) nkr = 97.72 (l = 1) and
(b) nkr = 98.12 (l = 2). The far-ﬁeld emission intensities are
shown for (c) the mode corresponding to (a) and (d) the mode
corresponding to (b).

the restricted space is described by the motion along a
few dominant unstable manifolds. As a result, the unsta-
ble manifolds dominate the long (but not extremely long)
time dynamics in ARC’s, and consequently the output
directionality. In Fig. 8(c), we plot the accumulated in-
tensity in phase space, obtained by recording the Birkhoﬀ
coordinates at which each ray escapes and totaling the
number of the escaped rays weighted by Fresnel refrac-
tive coeﬃcients at each phase space point (φ,sinχ). The
intensitty pattern resembles the structure of the unstable
manifolds shown in Fig. 8(b). In Fig.8(d) we show the
far ﬁeld emission intensity obtained from the ray dynam-
ics calculations, which is seen to be consistent with the
results of the wave calculations shown in Figs. 7(c) and
7(d).

The unstable manifolds can also be found through a
careful examination of Husimi plots, as Figs. 9(a) and
9(b) indicate. Such a ﬁne structure could not be seen
in the original Husimi plots of Figs. 5, because it is as-
sociated with a tiny probability. No matter how small
the probability associated with the unstable manifold is,
it signiﬁcantly overlaps the region below the critical an-
gle. It means that this ﬁne structure mainly contributes
to the output directionality regardless of the tiny prob-
ability, unless the Q value is not too small. Note that
104 for both the l = 1 and l = 2 modes. We
Q
may now conclude that, based on both the ray dynamics
calculations and the wave calculations, the emission di-

∼

[1] Y. Yamamoto and R. E. Slusher, Physics Today 46, 66

(1993).

[2] J. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[3] A. D. Stone, Physica A 288, 130 (2000).

8

4
FIG. 8: Time evolution of the rays starting from a set of 10
initial conditions localized on the upper left side of the phase space
and far-feld emission intensity. (a) The rays after a few steps. (b) The rays after 20 collisions on the boundary(the complicated
structure of unstable manifold manifest themselves). (c) The accumulated intensity of the escaped rays weighted by Fresnel
refractive coeﬃcients. (d) The far-ﬁeld emission intensity obtained from the ray dynamics.

FIG. 9: An expanded view of the Husimi plots of (a)Fig. 5(c) and (b) Fig. 5(f) for the region below the critical angle. The
unstable manifolds are shown in the background with black curves.

9

FIG. 10: Husimi plots of various modes for ε = 0.16 whose complex size parameters are respectively (a) 228.87 − i0.002 (l = 1),
(b) 232.27 − i0.018 (l = 2), (c) 226.30 − i0.027 (l = 3), (d) 227.65 − i0.018 (l = 4), and (e) 230.86 − i0.021 (l = 5). (f)-(j)
expanded views of the Husimi plots of (a)-(f) for the region below the critical angle. The critical line deﬁned by sinχc = 1/n
is indicated with the red horizontal lines on (a)-(e). The unstable manifolds are shown in the background with black curves on
(f)-(j).

10

Am. B 21, 923 (2004).

[8] S. W. Kim and H. W. Lee, Phys. Rev. E 59, 5384 (1998).
[9] I. C. Percival, Journal of Physics B B 6, L229 (1973).
[10] O. Bohigas, S. Tomsovic, and D. Ullmo, Physics Report

223, 43 (1993).

19, 1693 (1994).

[11] J. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R.K.Chang, Optics Letter

[12] S. S. Chang, J. N¨ockel, R. K. Chang, and A. D. stone,

JOSA B 17, 1828 (2000).

[13] J. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R.K.Chang, Optics Express

[14] P. D. Takehisa Harayama and K. S. Ikeda, Phys. Rev.

10, 752 (2002).

Lett. 82, 3803 (1999).

[15] S.-Y. Lee, J.-W. Ryu, T.-Y. Kwon, S. Rim, and C.-M.

Kim, Phys. Rev. A 72, 061801 (2005).

[16] F. Haake, Quantum Signatures of Chaos (Springer-

Verlag, 1991).

[17] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics (Dover,New York, 1945).
[18] G. D. Birkhoﬀ, Acta. Math 50, 359 (1927).
[19] Lichtenberg and Lieberman, Regular and Stochastic Mo-

tion (Springer-Verlag New York Inc., 1983).

[20] S. Kagami and I. Fukai, IEEE Trans. Antennas Prapag.

32, 455 (1984).

[21] J. Wiersig, Journal of Optics A 5, 53 (2003).
[22] H.-W. Lee, Physics Report 259, 147 (1995).
[23] G. P. B. Crespi and S.-J. Chang, Phys. Rev. E 47, 986

[24] M. Hentschel and H. Schomerus, Europhys. Lett. 62, 636

(1993).

(2003).

[25] J. N¨ockel, Ph.D. thesis, Yale University (1997).

FIG. 11: The far-ﬁeld emission distributions associated with
the ﬁve modes presented in Fig. 10.

[4] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, E. E. Narimanov, J. N¨ockel,
A. D. Stone, J. Faist, D. Sivco, and A.Cho, Science 280,
1556 (1998).

[5] N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, H. G. L. Schwefel, R. K. Chang,
and A. D. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 094102 (2002).
[6] S.-B. Lee, J.-H. Lee, J.-S. Chang, H.-J. Moon, S. W. Kim,

and K. An, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 033903 (2002).

[7] H. G. L. Schwefel, N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, R. K. Chang,
A. D. Stone, T. ben Massoud, and J. Zyss, J. Opt. Soc.

