6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of:
D. R. Mason, S. J. Goodman, D. K. Gramotnev, and T. A. Nieminen
“Resonant coupling between bulk waves and guided modes in a dielectric slab with a thick holographic grating”
Applied Optics 45(8), 1804–1811 (2006)

Resonant coupling between bulk waves and guided modes
in a dielectric slab with a thick holographic grating

D. R. Mason, S. J. Goodman, and D. K. Gramotnev
Applied Optics Program, School of Physical and Chemical Sciences,
Queensland University of Technology, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, Australia

T. A. Nieminen
Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, Department of Physics,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia

What we believe to be a new type of resonant coupling of an incident bulk wave into guided modes
of a slab with a thick holographic grating is shown to occur in the presence of strong frequency
detunings of the Bragg condition. This happens through the reﬂection of the strongly noneigen +1
diﬀracted order with the slab–grating boundaries, the resultant reﬂected waves forming a guided
slab mode. Rigorous coupled-wave analysis is used for the numerical analysis of the predicted
resonant eﬀects. Possible applications include enhanced options for the design of multiplexing
and demultiplexing systems, optical signal-processing devices, optical sensors, and measurement
techniques.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Resonances and anomalies of scattering of electromag-
netic waves in periodic gratings have been extensively an-
alyzed in the past [1, 2, 3]. This includes resonant gener-
ation of guided and surface waves by means of bulk waves
interacting with periodic surface-relief gratings [1, 2].
The associated anomalies of reﬂection and the strong res-
onant increase of the scattered wave near the interface
were called Wood’s anomalies [2, 3]. They occur when
the scattered wave propagates almost parallel to the in-
terface of the two media with a grating. The recent rapid
development of photonics, optical communications, and
signal processing has resulted in a strong renewed interest
in these anomalies, mainly due to the possibility of using
them for the design of multiplexing and demultiplexing
devices and coupling of bulk electromagnetic waves to
guided or surface modes [4]. All these eﬀects usually
take place in thin gratings of thickness that is smaller
than or of the order of the wavelength (e.g., surface-relief
gratings with small amplitude).

Recently, several new and unusual resonant eﬀects in
thick gratings (of thickness that is much larger than
the wavelength) have been predicted theoretically in
the geometry of extremely asymmetrical scattering and
grazing-angle scattering (GAS), i.e., when the scattered
wave propagates parallel5 or almost parallel to the grat-
ing boundaries [6]. In particular, strong GAS resonances
have been associated with the generation of a new type of
mode in gratings and photonic crystals—grating eigen-
modes [7, 8, 9, 10]. These modes can be guided by a
slanted grating alone without conventional guiding eﬀects

in the structure [7, 8, 9]. At the same time, increasing
the mean dielectric permittivity inside the grating re-
gion, i.e., assuming that the grating is formed in a guid-
ing slab, results in a number of new modes propagating
in the slab [10]. These modes have nothing to do with
the conventional guided slab modes—they are generated
at wrong angles of scattering and have an unusual ﬁeld
structure inside the slab [10].

Grating eigenmodes are formed by all the diﬀracted or-
ders interacting with each other inside the grating, and
thus cannot exist in the absence of the grating [7, 8, 9,
10]. They appear to be weakly coupled to the bulk in-
cident wave, which results in strong resonances of scat-
tering in the grating at angles that do not correspond
to generation of the conventional guided modes [11]. In
fact, grating eigenmodes can exist only if the conven-
tional guided modes are not eﬀectively generated due to
large grating amplitude and or grating width, and, vice
versa, structures in which conventional guided modes are
eﬀectively generated cannot support grating eigenmodes.
Therefore grating eigenmodes exist only in suﬃciently
wide gratings with large amplitude (e.g.,
in photonic
crystals).

Remarkably, grating eigenmodes can exist (and the as-
sociated resonances can be very strong) in the presence of
strong frequency detunings of the Bragg condition [9, 12].
In fact, in some structures, the strongest resonances oc-
cur when the frequency is almost halfway between the
two Bragg frequencies corresponding to the ﬁrst- and
second-order scattering [9]. However, strong resonances
of scattering at frequencies that are strongly detuned
from the Bragg frequency normally occur at large grating

amplitude (more than
10% of the mean permittivity
in the grating) [9]. If the grating amplitude is reduced,
the resonances disappear and eventually are replaced by
resonances caused by the generation of conventional slab
modes [10].

≈

The aim of this paper is to investigate theoretically
a new eﬀect that is associated with strong and sharp
resonances in wide holographic gratings in a guiding slab
with small grating amplitude and at large (up to
50%)
detunings of the Bragg frequency. Remarkably, it will
be shown that the scattered wave is not only strongly
noneigen in the slab, but also propagates in a direction
that does not correspond to a guided mode of the slab.
Nevertheless, the predicted resonances will be explained
by generation of the conventional guided modes, but in
a peculiar way by means of interaction of the noneigen
(due to strong frequency detunings) scattered wave from
the slab boundaries.

≈

II. STRUCTURE AND METHODS

Consider a slanted holographic grating in a thick di-
λ (the wavelength in vacuum)

electric slab of width L
with the dielectric permittivity given as

≫

ǫ(x, y) =

ǫ1
ǫ2 + ǫg exp(iq
ǫ3

·

r) + ǫ∗

g exp(iq

for x < 0,
r) for 0 < x < L,
for x > L

·

(1)
where ǫ2 is the mean permittivity in the grating re-
gion; ǫ1 and ǫ3 are the permittivities in front of and be-
ǫ2 < 0 and
hind the grating, respectively; ∆ǫ1 = ǫ1 −
ǫ2 < 0 (guiding slab); ǫg is the grating am-
∆ǫ2 = ǫ3 −
plitude; q = (qx, qy) is the reciprocal lattice vector; and
q = 2π/Lambda, with Λ as the grating period. The sys-
tem of coordinates is presented in ﬁgure 1; all the media
are isotropic and nondissipative, and the grating is inﬁ-
nite in the y and z directions.

Let a TE electromagnetic wave with amplitude E10
and wave vector k10 (k10 = ǫ1/2
1 ω/c, where ω is the an-
gular frequency and c is the speed of light in vacuum)
be incident onto the grating from the left (x < 0) at an
angle θ10 with respect to the x axis (ﬁgure 1).
In the
rigorous coupled-wave theory, the ﬁeld E(x, y) inside the
grating is represented in the form of a superposition of an
inﬁnite number of spatial harmonics (diﬀracted orders)
with x-dependent amplitudes E2n(x) [4]:

+∞

Xn=−∞

E(x, y) =

E2n(x) exp(ik2nxx + ik2nyy

iωt), (2)

−

and the wave vectors k2n are determined by the Floquet
condition [4]:

k2n = k20 −

nq,

(3)

where k20 is the wave vector of the incident wave (the
0th diﬀracted order) in the grating (slab), with k20 =
ǫ1/2
2 ω/c.

2

FIG. 1: Thick holographic grating with period Λ, amplitude
ǫg, and reciprocal lattice vector q (q = 2π/Λ) in a guiding di-
electric slab of width L. All the materials are assumed to be
linear, isotropic, and lossless; the dielectric permittivities in
front and behind the guiding slab are ǫ1 and ǫ3, respectively.
The mean permittivity in the slab is ǫ2. A bulk TE electro-
magnetic plane wave with wave vector k10 and amplitude E10
is incident onto the slab at the angle θ10 with respect to the
x axis. The axes of coordinates are also presented.

Substituting equation (2) into the wave equation in the
grating gives an inﬁnite set of coupled-wave secondorder
diﬀerential equations that are then truncated and solved
numerically for the amplitudes of the diﬀracted orders
E2n(x) (see, for example, [4]). The unknown constants of
integration are determined from the boundary conditions
at the grating boundaries. If at some frequency ω = ω0
and n = 1 we have k21 = k20 = ǫ1/2
2 ω0/c, then the Bragg
condition is satisﬁed for the +1 diﬀracted order, and ω0 is
called the Bragg frequency (ﬁrst-order Bragg scattering).
In this case, the +1 diﬀracted order is an eigen bulk wave
in the material of the slab.
If the frequency ω is such
= k20, then the Bragg condition is detuned by
that k21 6
the value ∆ω = ω

ω0.

In this paper we will investigate the frequency response
of thick holographic gratings (described by equation (1))
in a guiding slab. The grating amplitude is assumed to be
small, so that the GAS resonances do not occur, and res-
onant generation of conventional slab modes is expected
in the slab. In Section 3, strong anomalies of scattering
will be predicted and explained at large (up to
50%)
negative frequency detunings of the Bragg condition, i.e.,
when the frequency of the wave ω
ω0/2. Rigorous
coupled-wave theory based on the enhanced T -matrix
algorithm [13] will be used for the analysis, although in
some cases the approximate coupled-wave theory based
on the two-wave approximation [14] will be suﬃcient.

≈

≈

−

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS

As an example, consider a structure with the following
10−3; θ10 =
parameters: L = 10 µm; ǫ2 = 5; ǫg = 2
×
45◦; ǫ1 = ǫ3 = 4.8492, i.e., ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 =
0.1508 (the
value of ∆ǫ has been chosen so that the critical angle of
total internal reﬂection for a wave propagating inside the
layer is equal to 80◦). The Bragg condition is assumed to
1015
be satisﬁed precisely at the frequency ω0 = 1.88
rad/s (the corresponding Bragg wavelength in vacuum is
λ0 = 1 µm).

×

−

Figure 2 presents the dependencies of the relative
amplitude of the scattered wave (+1 diﬀracted order)
in the grating on the angle of scattering θ21.
E21/E10|
|
This is the angle of propagation of the +1 diﬀracted or-
der in the grating with respect to the x axis. The Bragg
condition is assumed to be satisﬁed precisely for all con-
sidered angles of scattering, i.e., the slanting angle and
the period of the grating are adjusted accordingly for
each angle of scattering. The dependencies are presented

FIG. 2: Dependencies of the relative amplitudes of the +1
diﬀracted order |E21/E10| on the angle of scattering θ21 (i.e.,
angle between the vector k21 and the x axis in the grating):
(a) at the front and rear grating boundaries (i.e., at x = 0
and x = L) and (b) in the middle of the grating (i.e., at
x = L/2). The slanting angle for grating fringes and the
period Λ are adjusted for each angle of scattering θ21 so that
the +1 diﬀracted order satisﬁes the Bragg condition precisely
1/2
2 ω0/c). The structural and wave parameters
(i.e., k21 = ǫ
are L = 10 µm, λ0 (vacuum) = 1 µm, ǫ2 = 5, ǫ1 = ǫ3 = 4.8492
−3, and the
◦
(the critical angle in the slab is 80
◦
angle of incidence θ10 = 45

), ǫg = 2 × 10

.

3

at the front and rear boundaries of the grating (guiding
slab) (ﬁgure 2(a)) and in the middle of the grating (slab)
(ﬁgure 2(b)).

Sharp resonances of scattering can be seen in ﬁgure 2,
indicating a strong increase of the scattered wave am-
plitude at several resonant angles of scattering. At these
angles, resonant coupling between the incident bulk wave
and the modes guided by the slab takes place. The max-
imums in ﬁgure 2(b) represent the symmetric modes of
the slab. This is because the electric ﬁeld of the anti-
symmetric modes in the middle of the slab is equal to
zero (and we do not see the corresponding resonances in
ﬁgure 2(b)). At the same time, at the slab boundaries,
both symmetric and antisymmetric modes have a nonzero
electric ﬁeld. Therefore twice as many maximums can be
seen in ﬁgure 2(a), corresponding to both symmetric and
antisymmetric modes.

The patterns of the resonances are almost symmet-
ric with respect to θ21 = 90◦ in ﬁgures 2(a) and 2(b).
This is because a guided mode in the slab can be repre-
sented by a bulk wave successively reﬂecting from the slab
boundaries [11]. Therefore such a mode can equally be
generated by means of coupling of the incident bulk wave
into the +1 diﬀracted order propagating toward the front
grating boundary (θ21 > 90◦) or toward the rear grating
boundary (θ21 < 90◦), as long as this diﬀracted order
propagates at the angle (with respect to either of the slab
boundaries) corresponding to a guided mode. Therefore
the pattern of resonances is symmetric with respect to
θ21 = 90◦. As a result, the eight maximums in ﬁgure
2(b) correspond to four diﬀerent symmetric slab modes
(pairs of maximums that are symmetric with respect to
θ21 = 90◦ correspond to the same mode). Similarly, 16
maximums in ﬁgure 2(a) (at the slab boundaries) corre-
spond to four symmetric and four antisymmetric modes.
Note, however, that the mentioned symmetry disappears
when the thickness of the slab becomes of the order of
or less than the wavelength of the incident wave [15]. In
this case, the Bragg regime of scattering is replaced by
the Raman–Nath regime [4], and it is hardly possible to
speak about a slanting angle of the grating fringes with
respect to the slab boundaries. This eﬀectively means
that the reciprocal lattice vector of the grating is parallel
to the slab, rather than pointing at some angle with re-
spect to the grating slab boundaries. As a result, the pat-
tern of the resonances becomes asymmetric with respect
to θ21 = 90◦, and the maximum(s) at θ21 > 90◦ [15].

We emphasize again that thick holographic gratings in
a guiding slab resonantly couple the incident radiation
into a slab mode if the angle of propagation of the +1
diﬀracted order (for which the Bragg condition is satis-
ﬁed) is equal to the angle of propagation of the bulk wave
representing the guide mode of the slab.

Let us now consider the frequency response of scatter-
ing in the thick holographic gratings in a guiding slab.
For example, consider the same structure with the thick
holographic structure in a slab of thickness L = 10 µm,
10−3; θ10 = 45◦; ǫ1 = ǫ3 = 4.8492,
with ǫ2 = 5; ǫg = 2

×

i.e., ∆ǫ1 = ∆ǫ2 = ∆ǫ =
0.1508. However, this time
−
we ﬁx the orientation and the period of the grating so
that the Bragg condition for the +1 diﬀracted order is
satisﬁed precisely at ω = ω0 and the angle of scattering
is θ21 = 70◦. At the mentioned structural parameters,
we change the frequency of the incident wave. The de-
pendencies of the amplitude of the +1 diﬀracted order on
frequency detuning of the Bragg condition ∆ω are pre-
sented in ﬁgures 3(a) and 3(b) at the boundaries and in
the middle of the slab, respectively.

FIG. 3: Dependencies of the relative amplitudes of the +1
diﬀracted order |E21/E10| on frequency detuning ∆ω: (a) at
the front and rear grating boundaries (i.e., at x = 0and x = L)
and (b) in the middle of the grating (i.e., at x = L/2). The
structural parameters are the same as in ﬁgure 2. However,
this time we ﬁx the grating orientation and period so that the
+1 diﬀracted order satisﬁes the Bragg condition at θ21 = 70◦
and ω = ω0 = 1.88 × 1015 rad/s (λ0 = 1 µm).

≈
×

The main unusual features of these dependencies (ﬁg-
ure 3) are the strong and sharp resonances of scatter-
ing at the frequency detunings ∆ω that are just
5–6
1015
times smaller than the Bragg frequency ω0 = 1.88
rad/s. Note that it is hardly possible to expect any
scattering in the grating at the considered small grat-
ing amplitude ǫg and such large frequency detunings. It
is obvious that these resonances must be related to the
resonant generation of some type of localized or guided
modes in the structure. Further decrease of the grat-
ing amplitude results in a rapid increase of the height
and sharpness of the considered resonances. However,
the angles at which these resonances occur are hardly
aﬀected by reducing the grating amplitude. If the grat-
ing amplitude tends to zero, then the resonances tend to
inﬁnity, which means that the corresponding modes still

4

exist, but they become uncoupled to the incident wave.
This demonstrates that these modes can exist in the ab-
sence of the grating. Therefore they cannot be a type of
grating eigenmode [7, 8, 9, 10] but must simply be the
conventional guided modes of the dielectric slab. This
has also been conﬁrmed by considering the ﬁeld distribu-
tions in the grating and slab at the resonant frequency
detunings. It can be shown that these distributions are
practically identical to those corresponding to the con-
ventional guided modes in the slab. As a result, it can
be seen that the resonances in ﬁgure 3(b) correspond to
the generation of the symmetric modes of the slab, and
the additional maximums in ﬁgure 3(a) correspond to the
antisymmetric modes. In particular, the leftmost peaks
in ﬁgures 3(a) and 3(b) (at the largest ∆ω) correspond to
the fundamental guided mode of the slab, and the peaks
at smaller detunings represent the higher-order guided
modes.

= ǫ1/2

q, k21 6

However, there is still a question as to how these slab
modes could be generated by the incident wave at the
mentioned strong (up to
20%) frequency detunings
≈
∆ω of the Bragg condition, when the +1 diﬀracted order
in the grating is expected to be a strongly noneigenwave
with the wrong wave vector k21 = k20 −
2 ω/c
(ω = ω0 +∆ω), which does not correspond to a bulk wave
propagating in the material of the slab. Moreover, it can
be shown that at each of the resonant detunings (ﬁgure 3)
the angle between the vector k21 and the slab boundaries
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the angle that one would
expect for a guided slab mode. Therefore noneigen oscil-
lations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld corresponding to the
+1 order should be driven by the incident wave in the
0. Such
grating and must rapidly tend to zero if ǫg →
a noneigenwave in the slab cannot form a guided mode.
This, however, is in obvious contradiction with the ob-
tained rigorous numerical results (ﬁgure 3).

To understand the physical origins of the resonances
observed in ﬁgure 3, consider ﬁgure 4. If ∆ω = 0 (i.e.,
ω = ω0), then the wave vector of the incident wave inside
the grating and slab is k200.
In this case, we assume
that the Bragg condition is satisﬁed and thus the +1
diﬀracted order is a propagating eigenwave in the slab.
Thus the wave vector of this wave k210 = k200−
q is equal
in magnitude to k200, i.e., k210 = ǫ1/2
2 ω0/c (the angle
between the k210 vector and the x axis is θ210 = 70◦—
see above).

Introducing nonzero detunings of the Bragg condition
by reducing the frequency of the incident wave by ∆ω
results in reduction of the wave vector of the incident
wave k20 (ﬁgure 4). At all frequency detunings, the wave
vector k21 of the +1 diﬀracted order is given by the Flo-
quet condition (equation (3)) with n = 1. Therefore it
can also be seen that if ∆ω < 0, then
, and
the angle between the k21 vector and the x axis increases
with increasing magnitude of the detuning (ﬁgure 4).

k21|
|

k20|
|

>

As mentioned above, the wave vector k21 has a wrong
2 ω/c) and direction (that does
magnitude (k21 6
not correspond to a guided mode in the slab). The

= ǫ1/2

5

If this reﬂected wave is an eigenwave in the slab (i.e.,
ǫ1/2
2 ω/c = k21r) and it propagates at an angle
k21ry ≤
that corresponds to one of the guided modes in the slab,
then this guided mode will be resonantly generated in
the slab (ﬁgure 3). Thus the guided modes of the slab
in this case are generated by means of the interaction of
the noneigen +1 diﬀracted order with the slab bound-
aries. Only the presence of the boundaries (structural
discontinuities along the x axis) results in transforma-
tion of the wrong wave vector of the +1 diﬀracted order
in the presence of strong frequency detunings into the
correct vector corresponding to a guided slab mode.

Since changing the frequency results in changing the
direction of the k21 vector and its magnitude, the cor-
responding direction of the wave vector of the reﬂected
eigenwave in the slab k21r will also change. Thus, ad-
justing frequency detuning, we automatically adjust the
direction and magnitude of the vector k21r. When the
detuning is such that k21r corresponds to a guided slab
mode, resonant generation of such a mode occurs (ﬁg-
ure 3). The resonant detuning must be strong so as to
result in a signiﬁcant adjustment of the magnitude and
direction of the k21r vector. Since the detuning is strong,
the amplitude of the noneigen +1 diﬀracted order in the
grating is very small. This means that the coupling of
the incident wave into the corresponding slab mode is
very weak, which results in very strong and sharp res-
onances in ﬁgure 3. Decreasing the grating amplitude
results in a further decrease of the coupling and the cor-
responding increase of the height and sharpness of the
resonances (ﬁgure 3). However, the resonant frequency
detunings will hardly depend on the grating amplitude,
since it does not aﬀect the directions and the magnitudes
of the considered wave vectors (ﬁgure 4). This is clearly
conﬁrmed by the numerical results.

The height of the observed resonances (ﬁgure 3)
is practically infeasible—it will be hardly possible to
achieve such resonances experimentally because this
would require very large relaxation times (due to weak
coupling). This example has been used to highlight the
considered new type of coupling and to demonstrate that
the resulting resonances are associated with the conven-
tional guided modes generated in an unusual way by
means of reﬂection of the noneigen +1 diﬀracted or-
der from the slab boundaries. A more reasonable sit-
uation occurs when the grating amplitude is increased
(ǫg = 0.08) and the corresponding resonances are sig-
niﬁcantly lower, as shown in ﬁgure 5. As can be seen
in ﬁgure 5, the positions of the resonances are practi-
1% reduction
cally the same as in ﬁgure 3 with only
of the resonant frequency detunings. This demonstrates
very weak dependence of the resonant detunings on grat-
ing amplitude. This is expected, since only large grating
amplitudes are expected to noticeably change the guiding
properties of the slab and the corresponding wave vectors
of the slab modes.

≈

FIG. 4: Scheme of coupling between the bulk waves and
slab modes by means of the interaction of the noneigen +1
diﬀracted order with the grating boundaries: k200 and k210
are the wave vectors of the 0th and +1 orders in the slab when
the Bragg condition is satisﬁed (∆ω = 0 and ω = ω0); k20 and
k21 are the wave vectors of the 0th and +1 orders at nonzero
frequency detuning ∆ω < 0; k21r and k′
21r are the wave vec-
tors of the waves resulting from the reﬂection of the noneigen
+1 diﬀracted order (with the amplitude E21s and the wave
′
vector k21) from the grating boundaries: k21ry = k
21ry = k21y
21r = (ω0 + ∆ω)(ǫ2)1/2/c (i.e., the
(Snell’s law) and k21r = k
reﬂected waves are eigen for the slab). When the angle of
propagation of these reﬂected waves θr corresponds to one of
the guided slab modes, resonant generation of this mode oc-
curs with a strong resonant increase of the amplitude of the
+1 diﬀracted order in the grating (ﬁgures 3, 5, and 6). This
is because the reﬂected waves are formally included in the +1
diﬀracted order (see equations (2) and (5)).

′

noneigenwave with this wave vector interacts with the
slab–grating boundaries and generates a periodic ﬁeld
pattern along these boundaries. According to the Huy-
gens principle, this pattern will generate a reﬂected bulk
wave in the slab with the wave vector k21r (ﬁgure 4).
The tangential (to the boundaries) component of this
vector k21r is equal to the y component of the wave vec-
tor k21: k21ry = k21y (Snell’s law). However, since this
reﬂected wave is not driven by scattering (its wave vector
does not satisfy the Floquet condition of equation (3)),
it must be either an evanescent wave in the grating (if
k21ry > ǫ1/2
2 ω/c) or a propagating eigenwave in the ma-
ǫ1/2
2 ω/c). Therefore the x
terial of the slab (if k21ry ≤
component of its wave vector k21r is given as

k21rx =

ǫ2ω2/c2

−q

k2
21y 6

=

−

−

k21x.

(4)

The fact that the resonances in ﬁgures 5(a) and 5(b)
still correspond to conventional guided modes is again

6

FIG. 5: Dependencies of the relative amplitudes of the +1
diﬀracted order |E21/E10| on frequency detuning ∆ω: (a) at
the front and rear grating boundaries (i.e., at x = 0 and
x = L) and (b) in the middle of the grating (i.e., at x = L/2).
The structural and wave parameters are the same as in ﬁgure
3, except for the increased grating amplitude: ǫg = 0.08.

conﬁrmed by the analysis of the ﬁeld distribution in the
+1 diﬀracted order inside the slab at each of the res-
onant frequency detunings. For example, the obtained
ﬁeld distributions inside that slab for the three leftmost
maximums in ﬁgure 5(a) are presented in ﬁgure 6(a).
It can be seen that these distributions are very close to
those in the ﬁrst three conventional modes guided by the
slab. Therefore the leftmost maximum in ﬁgure 5(a) cor-
responds to curve 1 in ﬁgure 6(a) (fundamental mode
of the slab), the second-from-the-left maximum in ﬁg-
ure 5(a) corresponds to curve 2 in ﬁgure 6(a) (the ﬁrst
antisymmetric mode), etc.

At the same time, it can be noticed that curve 1 in
ﬁgure 6(a) displays small bumps, which is not a typical
feature of the ﬁeld distribution corresponding to the fun-
damental slab mode. These bumps become more pro-
nounced with increasing grating amplitude (see ﬁgure
6(b) for ǫg = 0.1). Curve 2 in ﬁgure 6(b) also displays
similar irregularities (unlike curve 2 in ﬁgure 6(a) for
ǫg = 0.08). This is related to the eﬀect of the grating
on the guided modes. This eﬀect rapidly increases with
increasing grating amplitude (compare ﬁgures 6(a) and
6(b)). Eventually, when the grating amplitude becomes
suﬃciently large, the structures of the guided modes sub-
stantially change, and they may be transformed into grat-
ing eigenmodes [7, 8, 9, 10]. Note also that the eﬀect
of the grating is more pronounced for lower slab modes

FIG. 6: Dependencies on x of the relative amplitudes of the
+1 diﬀracted order |E21/E10| inside the grating and slab for
the three leftmost resonances in ﬁgure 5(a): (a) ǫg = 0.08,
(b) ǫg = 0.1. Curves 1, 2, and 3 in (a) correspond to the
leftmost, second leftmost, and third leftmost resonances in
ﬁgure 5(a). Resonant detunings are ∆ω1 ≈ −3.71 × 1014
rad/s, ∆ω2 ≈ −3.67 × 1014 rad/s, ∆ω3 ≈ −3.59 × 1014 rad/s
for curves 1–3, respectively, in both (a) and (b).

(compare the curves in ﬁgures 6(a) and 6(b)).

It is also important to note that the reﬂected wave
with the wave vector k21r does not appear explicitly in
the coupled-wave expansion of equation (2). Rather, it is
formally included in the amplitude of the +1 diﬀracted
Indeed, the +1 diﬀracted order in equation (2)
order.
can be represented as

(cid:2)

r

E(21)(x) exp(ik21 ·

−
E(21s)(x) + E(21r) exp(ik21rx −
′
ik21rx −
(21r) exp(
−
r
exp(ik21 ·

+E

×

iωt) =

ik21x)

ik21x)
i
iωt),

−

(5)

where E21s(x) is the x-dependent amplitude of the +1
diﬀracted order resulting from the direct interaction
(scattering) of the incident wave with the grating, and
the other two terms in the square brackets are due to the
two waves reﬂected from the rear grating boundary (E21r
with k21rx < 0; see equation (4)) and the front grating
boundary (E′
21r). All three waves have the same y com-
ponents of their wave vectors (Snell’s law, or conserva-
tion of the tangential component of momentum), whereas
the x components are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent: k21x, k21rx,
and
k21rx, respectively. Because the y components of
the wave vectors are the same for all three waves, these

−

waves can formally be included in the +1 diﬀracted order
in the expansion in equation (2), which eventually results
in a strong resonant increase of the overall amplitude of
this order at the resonant frequency detunings (ﬁgure 3).
Actually, these are the amplitudes E21r and E′
21r that
experience a strong resonant increase at the resonant de-
tunings, whereas the amplitude E21s(x) remains small (it
0). In this case, because the am-
tends to zero as ǫg →
plitudes of the reﬂected waves become predominant at
the resonant detunings, the ﬁeld distribution inside the
grating and slab indeed appears to be almost identical to
that in the corresponding slab modes (ﬁgure 6).

It is possible to derive analytical equations for the reso-
nant detunings in a slab with a thick holographic grating.
For this purpose, we will need to determine the magni-
tude and components of the wave vectors k21 and k21r.
From ﬁgure 4, it can be seen that the magnitude of the
wave vector k21 is determined by the equation

21 = k2
k2

210 + ∆k2

20 −

2k210∆k20 cos(2α),

(6)

where α is the angle between k200 and the grating fringes
(ﬁgure 4) and

∆k20 = k200 −

k20 =

∆ω
c

−

√ǫ2.

It follows that, since 2α is the angle between k200 and
k210 (ﬁgure 4),

2α = θ210 −

θ200.

It can also be seen that the angle β between the two
vectors k21 and k20 is determined by the equation

q2 = k2

21 + k2

20 −

2k21k20 cos(β).

(9)

Then the angle θ21 between the vector k21 and the x axis
is

θ21 = θ200 + β.

(10)

Using equations (6)–(10), we ﬁnd the y component of the
wave vector k21, and thus the components of the k21r
vector:

k21y = k21 sin θ21 = k21ry,

k21rx =

ǫ2ω2/c2

q

21 sin2 θ21
k2

−

From here, the angle of propagation of the reﬂected wave
θr (ﬁgure 4) is

(7)

(8)

(11)

(12)

(13)

θr = arctan

k21ry
k21rx (cid:19)

.

(cid:18)

For example, consider the leftmost peak in ﬁgure
It corresponds to the frequency detuning ∆ω1 ≈
3.
1014 rad/s. Using equations (6)–(13), we
88.55◦. The conventional analysis of the

3.7279
−
×
obtain θr ≈

7

guided modes [11] in the considered slab at the frequency
ω = ω0 + ∆ω1 demonstrates that this is exactly the angle
of the wave propagation in the slab, which corresponds to
the fundamental slab mode. Thus the leftmost maximum
in ﬁgure 3 corresponds to the resonant generation of the
fundamental slab mode at the frequency ω = ω0 + ∆ω1
in an unusual way through the noneigen +1 diﬀracted
order, interacting with the slab boundaries. Using a sim-
ilar procedure, it can be shown that the other resonances
in ﬁgure 3 are associated with the generation of higher
slab modes by means of the same mechanism.

It is important to note that, as can be seen from ﬁgure
4, an increase in the magnitude of the frequency detun-
ing ∆ω (i.e., a reduction of k20) results in an increase
in the angle θr. This is the reason why the resonance
associated with the generation of the lower-order guided
modes (corresponding to larger angles θr) is found at
larger detunings (ﬁgures 3 and 5).

It is also important to emphasize that the considered
eﬀect of resonant coupling at strong resonant frequency
detuning occurs in a wide range of angles of scattering
and incidence. The angle θ210 = 70◦ has been chosen
just as an example, and a similar pattern occurs for other
scattering angles. However, the actual values of the res-
onant frequency detunings will depend on the angles of
scattering and incidence.

Increasing the grating–slab width and/or the mean
permittivity in the slab results in an increase in the num-
ber of guided modes. Therefore this will also result in an
increase in the number of diﬀerent resonant frequency
detunings.

∆ω
|

It can be seen that ﬁgure 3 displays only seven reso-
nances, whereas in ﬁgure 2 we have eight diﬀerent maxi-
mums corresponding to eight diﬀerent modes supported
by the slab.
It can also be shown that the number of
resonances at strong frequency detunings (∆ω < 0) de-
creases with decreasing angle of scattering θ1 and increas-
ing
. This is because such strong negative frequency
|
detunings result in signiﬁcant reduction of the frequency
of the guided slab modes. Therefore the thickness of the
slab is eﬀectively reduced compared to the wavelength,
and the number of modes that can be sustained by the
slab decreases. For example, it can be seen that this is
the highest antisymmetric mode (shown in ﬁgure 2) that
does not result in a maximum (i.e., does not exist) in
ﬁgures 3 and 5.

It can be seen that the considered new way of cou-
pling between an incident electromagnetic wave and slab
modes in the presence of a thick holographic grating can
occur not only by means of the +1 diﬀracted order but
also by means of any other diﬀraction order in the grat-
ing (e.g., +2,
1 orders, etc.). In this case, for example,
the strongly noneigen +2 diﬀraction order in the grat-
2 ω/c) interacts with the slab boundaries
ing (k22 6
and, if the detuning and the direction of the vector k22
are appropriate, the resultant reﬂected wave may form a
guided mode. An equation similar to equation (13) can
also be derived in this case. However, because the higher

−
= ǫ1/2

diﬀracted orders are much weaker than the +1 order in
gratings with small amplitudes ǫg, the eﬃciency of this
coupling will be much lower, and the corresponding res-
onances will be very sharp. This makes these resonances
less achievable for the real structures, because they will
correspond to large relaxation times. This problem could
be overcome by increasing grating amplitude, but this
will result in a noticeable eﬀect of the grating on the
resultant guided modes. Therefore the described new
type of coupling of bulk waves and guided slab modes
can practically be achieved mainly for the +1 diﬀracted
order (ﬁgures 5 and 6), although the principles of this
approach can be applicable to any other higher order of
scattering.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have described a new method of cou-
pling an incident electromagnetic wave into a guided
mode of a thick slab with a holographic grating. As a
result, strong resonances were shown to exist at very
large negative frequency detunings of the Bragg condi-
tion in the grating. These resonances rapidly increase
with decreasing grating amplitude, despite the strong
(up to
20%) frequency detuning of the Bragg condi-
tion. It was demonstrated that it is the reﬂection of the
strongly noneigen +1 diﬀracted order from the slab grat-
ing boundaries that may result in a reﬂected eigenwave
that forms a conventional guided mode of the slab. Thus
a new type of resonant generation of the conventional
slab modes in a thick slab with a holographic grating

≈

8

was demonstrated to occur by means of the intermediate
strongly noneigen +1 diﬀracted order interacting with
the slab–grating boundary.

−

The predicted resonant coupling of the incident wave
into a thick slab waveguide with a holographic grating
may also occur by means of an nth diﬀracted order (e.g.,
1, etc.). In this case, if the grating ampli-
n = +2, n =
tude is small, the coupling eﬃciency should signiﬁcantly
reduce with an increase in the intermediate diﬀracted or-
der because the amplitude of this order rapidly decreases
with increasing n. This results in a rapid increase of the
height and sharpness of the corresponding resonance with
increasing n.

Rigorous coupled-wave theory was used for the analy-
sis of scattering, and the example of bulk TE incident
electromagnetic waves was considered. However, it is
important to note that if the grating amplitude is suﬃ-
ciently small, the approximate coupled-wave theory [14]
may also be used for the approximate determination of
the predicted resonances at n = 1, if reﬂections at the
slab boundaries are taken into account (see, for exam-
ple, [16]). At the same time, for other values of n, the
rigorous coupled-wave theory is essential even if the grat-
ing amplitude is small. This is because the approximate
theory based on the two-wave approximation [14] simply
excludes the higher orders that are essential intermedi-
aries of the resonant coupling.

Possible applications of the discovered new type of cou-
pling include enhanced options for multiplexing and de-
multiplexing, resonant excitation of slab waveguides, de-
sign of new optical sensors, and measurement techniques.

[1] V. M. Aranovich and D. L. Mills, Surface Polari-
tons: Electromagnetic Waves at Surfaces and Interfaces
(North-Holland, 1982).

[2] R. Petit, Electromagnetic Theory of Gratings (Springer-

Verlag, 1980).

[3] M. C. Hutley, Diﬀraction Gratings (Academic, 1982).
[4] T. K. Gaylord and M. G. Moharam, Analysis and appli-
cation of optical diﬀraction by gratings, Proc. IEEE 73,
894-938 (1985).

[5] D. K. Gramotnev, Extremely asymmetrical scattering of
slab modes in periodic Bragg arrays, Opt. Lett. 22, 1053-
1055 (1997).

[6] D. K. Gramotnev, Grazing angle scattering of electro-
magnetic waves in periodic Bragg arrays, Opt. Quantum
Electron. 33, 253-288 (2001).

[7] D. K. Gramotnev and T. A. Nieminen, Rigorous analysis
of grazing-angle scattering of electromagnetic waves in
periodic gratings, Opt. Commun. 219, 33-48 (2003).
[8] D. F. P. Pile and D. K. Gramotnev, Second-order grazin-
gangle scattering in uniform wide holographic gratings,
Appl. Phys. B 76, 65-73 (2003).

[9] D. K. Gramotnev and D. F. P. Pile, Frequency re-
sponse of second-order extremely asymmetrical scatter-
ing in wide uniform holographic gratings, Appl. Phys. B

77, 663-671 (2003).

[10] D. K. Gramotnev, S. J. Goodman, and T. A. Niemi-
nen, Grazing-angle scattering of electromagnetic waves
in gratings with varying mean parameters: grating eigen-
modes, J. Mod. Opt. 51, 379-397 (2004).

[11] A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals (Wiley,

1984).

[12] D. K. Gramotnev, Frequency response of extremely
asymmetrical scattering of electromagnetic waves in pe-
riodic gratings, in Diﬀractive Optics and Micro-Optics,
Postconference Digest, Vol. 41 of OSA Trends in Optics
and Photonics (Optical Society of America, 2000), pp.
165-167.

[13] M. G. Moharam, D. A. Pommet, E. B. Grann, and T. K.
Gaylord, Stable implementation of the rigorous coupled-
wave analysis for surface relief gratings: enhanced trans-
mittancematrix approach, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 12, 1077-
1086 (1995).

[14] K. Kogelnik, Coupled wave theory for thick hologram
gratings, Bell. Syst. Tech. J. 48, 2909-2947 (1969).
[15] I. Avrutsky, Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, Wayne State University Detroit, Mich. (per-
sonal communication, 2004).

[16] D. K. Gramotnev, T. A. Nieminen, and T. A. Hopper,

Extremely asymmetrical scattering in gratings with vary-
ing mean structural parameters, J. Mod. Opt. 49, 1567-

1585 (2002).

9

