6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬃcient nonresonant pumping of scar modes in asymmetrically deformed
microcylinder lasers

Sang-Bum Lee,1 Jeong-Bo Shim,2 Sang Wook Kim,3 Juhee
Yang,1 Hai-Woong Lee,2 Jai-Hyung Lee,1 and Kyungwon An1, ∗
1School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea
2Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Taejon 305-701, Korea
3Department of Physics Education, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735, Korea
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We have demonstrated angle-dependent nonresonant optical pumping of high-Q scar modes in
a quadrupole-deformed microcavity. Three-fold enhancement in the lasing power was achieved
when the pumping direction was optimized, consistently with ray tracing and wave overlap integral
calculations.

PACS numbers: PACS number(s): 05.45.Mt, 42.55.Sa

Asymmetrical microcavities have recently attracted
much interest since they feature highly directional emis-
sion, overcoming the problem of weak isotropic emission
in circular microcavities [1, 2, 3, 4]. Asymmetric reso-
nant microcavities can also serve as a versatile tool for
studying classical and quantum chaos phenomena.

For a circular cavity, optical pumping is not partic-
ularly eﬃcient in exciting low-order whispering gallery
modes (WGM’s) which are distributed near the cavity
boundary. This is due to the fact that a ray refracting
in immediately refracts out due to the cavity symmetry
as shown in Fig. 1. As a result, most of pump beam
refracts out and only the region near the opposite end
to the incident side is intensely pumped, leaving most of
the region overlapping with the low-order WGM’s reside
unpumped.

Evanescent-wave coupling by using a prism or a ta-
pered ﬁber can increase the pumping eﬃciency by many
orders of magnitude since pump light can be built up in
the cavity undergoing total internal reﬂections [5]. How-
ever, such evanescent coupling is basically resonant cou-
pling, requiring ﬁne wavelength tunning to a particular
cavity mode, which may not be desirable for many prac-
tical applications.

Asymmetrical microcavities have an advantage in this
regard.
It is possible to build up pump laser signiﬁ-
cantly in an asymmetrical microcavity, for example a
quadrupole-deformed microcavity (QDM) as shown in
Fig. 1 (b), even in the case of nonresonant puming. Due
to asymmetry imposed by the cavity boundary, a ray
can refract in and circulate near the cavity boundary for
many round trips. This can be understood by consider-
ing its time reversed process. When a ray is launched
inside the cavity at an angle larger than the critical an-
−1(1/n) with n the index of refraction of the
gle χc = sin
cavity medium, the ray would undergo total internal re-
ﬂections until its incident angle would eventually become
larger than χc due to cavity asymmetry and refract out.
If we trace the ray trajectory in reverse, we ﬁnd a ray

FIG. 1: Comparison of nonresonant pumping schemes in ray
picture for (a) a circular cavity (n = 1.361, kr = 45.000) and
(b) a quadrupole-deformed asymmetric cavity.

which would perform eﬃcient optical pumping for modes
such as high-Q scar modes [6] distributed near the cav-
ity boundary. In practice, if a pump beam impinge on
a QDM at a properly chosen angle, a part of the pump
beam can be eﬃciently coupled into the cavity and its
intensity can be signiﬁcantly built up. One can further
enchance intensity build up by ﬁne tuning the pump laser
frequency to a scar mode in the pump frequency region
since such a scar mode would share much of the mode
distribution with the scar mode that undergoes laser os-
cillation in the longer wavelength.

Based on this idea, we have demonstrated eﬃcient non-
resonant pumping for a ultrahigh-Q scar mode in an
asymmetric microcavity with quadrupole deformation of
17%. A QDM used in experiment is made of a liquid jet
of ethanol (n=1.361) doped with Rhodamine B dye at
a concentration of 10−4 M/L. The details on our liquid
jet QDM including its fabrication and characteristics are
described elsewhere [7]. The boundary of the QDM is
well approximated by the relation ρ(φ) = r(1 + η cos 2φ),
where η is the deformation parameter.

In experiment, both cavity mode spectrum and output
directionality of the QDM are measured. Figure 2 shows
experimental setup for these measurements. The liquid
jet apparatus is mounted in the center of a computer-
controlled rotational stage so that the pumping angle can
be changed at will. The pumping angle, deﬁned as the

2

FIG. 2: The schematic of experimental setup for measuring
emission directionality of cavity modes.

angle between the minor axis of the QDM and the di-
rection of the pump laser beam, is denoted as θp in Fig.
2. For the pump laser, a second-harmonics (532nm) of
a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser with a pulse width of about
10 ns is used to excite the QDM column from the side.
The polarization of the pump laser is parallel to the cav-
ity column. The deformation parameter η is measured
from the diﬀraction pattern of the pump beam caused
by the QDM column. The detailed procedure of defor-
mation parameter measurement is described elsewhere
[9]. A photodiode array (PDA) is used for measuring
emission directionality, i.e., far-ﬁeld distribution of the
output emission.

Figure 3 shows typical lasing spectrum emitted from
the QDM with η=17%. The lasing spectrum represents
cavity modes with cavity quality factor Q high enough
to support laser oscillations for the ﬁxed concentration
of Rhodamine B gain molecules. The spectrum is mea-
sured for a ﬁxed pumping angle of 30◦. Although only
one mode group seems to appear in the spectrum, in
fact, there exist several mode groups with well deﬁned
free spectral ranges in that spectrum. For example, the
prominent three peaks do not belong to a single mode
group, but are composed of two mode groups. The de-
tailed study on mode groups in our QDM is presented
elsewhere [10].
In the present study, we focus on the
most prominent peak centered around 608 nm. From
both laser threshold analysis [6, 8] and photolumines-
cence analysis [11], this peak is found to have Q of 106.
In fact, it corresponds to a scar mode with radial quan-
tum number of l = 4, associated with a six-fold unsta-
ble periodic orbit of ray in classical limit [10]. The size
parameter nkr for our QDM is about 260 at the pump
wavelength, where k = 2π/λ the wave vector with λ the
wavelength of light and r the mean radius of QDM.

Figure 4 shows the far-ﬁeld emission patterns of this
scar mode. The emission is highly directional and peaked
at around 35o with respect to the minor axis of QDM.
The far-ﬁeld pattern was repeatedly measured for various
pumping angles. As the jet apparatus is rotated, the

FIG. 3: Lasing spectrum from a quadrupoled-deformed liquid
jet at η = 17%.

FIG. 4: Lasing eﬃciency dependence on pumping angle

far-ﬁeld pattern is also shifted. The measured far-ﬁeld
pattern presented in Fig. 4 has been corrected for this
shift. The largest lasing signal is observed when θp =
45◦, at which its peak height is about 2.5 times larger
than that of θp = 90◦. This pumping angle dependence
indicates that our idea on nonresonant pumping on QDM
actually works.

In order to analyze the observed pumping angle depen-
dence quantitatively, we ﬁrst employ ray tracing analy-
sis, which should be reasonably adequate considering the
large size parameter at the pump wavelength. A concept
of an average density of ray in the cavity has been de-
vised for this purpose. We treat the incident pump beam
as a set of a large number (∼ 104) of equally-spaced par-
allel rays as shown in the inset of Fig. 5(b). The inten-
sity fraction of each ray that penetrates into the QDM is
given by the Fresnel formula and its angle by Snell’s law.
For a given incident angle θ we then follow each ray (let
us say ith ray) until it refracts out the cavity and then
calculate the distance li(θ) it has traveled before the re-
fractive escape. Then the average density of ray in the
cavity is deﬁned as σ(θ) = Pi li(θ)/2πr. The result is
shown in Fig. 5(a). We found that the average density is
maximized at θ ≃ 47◦, which means that rays launched
above critical angle inside the cavity would refract out at
θ ≃ 47◦ after many reﬂections. We also calculated the
average ray density for an elliptical-deformed cavity with
a similar deformation parameter. Since the ray motion
in an ellipse is regular and integrable like in a circle, the
average ray density does not show a strong dependence
on an incident angle and its value is similar to the base

3

trary, for the input angle of 0◦ and 90◦ such enhancement
is absent. Among these angles, we observe the strongest
intensity distribution near the cavity boundary when the
incident angle is set at 45◦.

Since the wave calculation is done for nkr about three
times smaller than the actual experiment, direct compar-
ison of the wave calculation result with the experiment
is at best instructive. Nonetheless, we can calculate the
overlap integral I(θp) of the wave functions in Figs. 6
(a)-(e) with the scar mode wave function shown in Fig. 6
(k), obtained at kr = 45.055 by using boundary element
method [12, 13]. The result is shown in Fig. 6 (l), which
is, interestingly, more closer to the experimental result
than the ray tracing analysis is.

The eﬃcient nonresonant pump coupling technique
demonstrated in the present work can be applied to mi-
crocavity lasers and ﬁlters. When pump wavelength tun-
ability is added, the present technique would make pos-
sible ultralow threshold optical pumping of high Q scar
mode lasing in deformed microcavities.

This work was supported by the National Research
Laboratory Grants and by the Korea Research Founda-
tion Grants (KRF-2002-070-C00044, -2005-070-C00058).
SWK was supported by the KRF Grants (KRF-2004-005-
C00044).

∗

Electronic address: kwan@phya.snu.ac.kr

[1] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone, and R. K. Chang, Opt. Lett.

19, 1693 (1994).

[2] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone, and R. K.

Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2682 (1995).

[3] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[4] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, E. E. Narimanov, J. U. N¨ockel,
A. D. Stone, G. J. Faist, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho,
Science 280, 1493 (1998).

[5] V. Sandoghdar, F. Treussart, J. Hare, V. Lefe‘vre-Seguin,
J.-M. Raimond, and S. Haroche, Phys. Rev. A 54, R1777
(1996).

[6] S. B . Lee, J. H. Lee, J. S. Chang, H. J. Moon, S. W.

Kim, K. An, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 033903 (2002).

[7] J.H. Yang et al., “Development of deformation-tunable
quadrupolar deformed microcavity ”, in preparation.
[8] H. J. Moon, Y-T. Chough, and K. An, Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 3161 (2000).

[9] S. B. Lee et al., “Diﬀraction pattern from a shape-

osillating liquid jet”, in preparation.

[10] J.-B. Shim et al., “Regular spectra and universal di-
rectionality of emitting radiation from a quadruplar de-
formed microcavity”, in preparation.

[11] P. Chylek, H. B. Lin, J. D. Eversole, and A. J. Campollo,

Opt. Lett. 22, 1723(1991).

[12] S. Kagami, I. Fukai, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and

Techniques 32 455 (1984).

[13] J. Wiersig, J. Opt. A 5 53 (2003).

FIG. 5: Average density of ray as function of the angle of
incidence for (a) quadrupolar and (b) elliptical microcavities.
Inset: Ray model for the calculation of the intracavity pump
intensity when pumped by a plane wave

◦
, (d) 30

◦
and (e) 0

FIG. 6: Calculated wave distribution for a QDM with η =
17% when a plane wave satisfying ka = 45.000 is incident
◦
from the left at various pumping angles: (a) 90
(c)
◦
45
. The pump wavelength is nonresonant
with the nearest scar mode of ka = 45.055, which is shown in
(k). In (f)-(j), intensity-intensity overlap with the scar mode
is shown just below each wave distribution. (l) Plot of overlap
integral as a function of the pumping angle. Dashed line is
for visual interpolation.

◦
,(b) 60

value for QDM.

Since the present size parameter is by no means large
enough to exclude any wave nature in buildup of pump
ﬁeld inside the QDM, we also calculated wave func-
tion density for nonresonant case for various incident
angles. The calculation is carried out for kr=45.000
(nkr=61.245). The results are shown in Figs. 6 (a)-(e).
When the input beam is incident at 30◦, 45◦ and 60◦ an
enhanced intensity distribution is seen near the bound-
ary due to multiple total internal reﬂections. On the con-

