6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reﬂectionless evanescent wave ampliﬁcation by two dielectric planar
waveguides

Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125

Mankei Tsang and Demetri Psaltis

Compiled February 21, 2014

Utilizing the underlying physics of evanescent wave ampliﬁcation by a negative-refractive-index slab, it is
shown that evanescent waves with speciﬁc spatial frequencies can also be ampliﬁed without any reﬂection
simply by two dielectric planar waveguides. The simple conﬁguration allows one to take advantage of the high
c(cid:13) 2014 Optical Society
resolution limit of a high-refractive-index material without contact with the object.
of America

OCIS codes: 110.2990, 230.7390

Conventional optical imaging systems cannot resolve
features smaller than the optical wavelength, because the
high-spatial-frequency modes that describe the subwave-
length features are evanescent waves, which exponen-
tially decay away from the object and do not propagate
to the far ﬁeld. Observing the evanescent waves is there-
fore one of the most important yet formidable challenges
in the ﬁeld of optics, with important applications in op-
tical lithography, data storage, and microscopy. Near-
ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy can detect the evanes-
cent waves,1 but it requires scanning, which may not be
desirable for many applications. A groundbreaking pro-
posal by Pendry suggests that evanescent waves can be
ampliﬁed without any reﬂection in a negative-refractive-
index slab,2 causing signiﬁcant interest as well as con-
troversy3 in the mechanism of evanescent wave ampliﬁ-
cation (EWA). On the practical side, the fabrication of a
negative-refractive-index material for optical frequencies
is a challenging task, as it requires both negative per-
mittivity and negative permeability, the latter of which
does not naturally occur in materials, and methods of
implementing an eﬀective negative refractive index4–6 of-
ten introduce signiﬁcant loss detrimental to the EWA
process. As proposed by Pendry2 and experimentally
demonstrated by Fang et al.,7 a negative permittivity
in a metal slab can also amplify evanescent waves to
some extent, but the thickness of the slab is limited by
the electrostatic approximation as well as loss. A simpler
EWA scheme that utilizes less lossy materials would thus
be desirable.

Along this direction, Luo et al. propose that a photonic
crystal slab can be used to amplify evanescent waves,8
since evanescent waves with speciﬁc spatial frequencies
can be coupled into the bound states of the photonic
crystal slab, and the build-up of the bound states pro-
duces an enhanced evanescent tail on the other side of
the slab. Apart from the diﬃculty in fabricating a three-
dimensional photonic crystal for two-dimensional imag-
ing, the kind of EWA achieved by a photonic crystal slab
is not ideal, because the build-up of the bound states
also creates enhanced reﬂected evanescent waves, causing

multiple evanescent wave reﬂections between the object
and the photonic crystal. On the other hand, in order to
obtain information about the output evanescent waves
on the image plane, energy must be extracted, and the
only way for the detector to “tell” the imaging system
to give up energy is via a reﬂected evanescent wave. In
other words, detection of an evanescent wave always cre-
ates a reﬂected evanescent wave, so there exist multiple
reﬂections between an imaging system and the detector
as well. Since the magnitudes of evanescent wave trans-
mission and reﬂection coeﬃcients can be larger than 1 or
even inﬁnite, multiple evanescent wave reﬂections can be
very signiﬁcant and should not be ignored in the design
of near-ﬁeld imaging systems. An ideal near-ﬁeld imag-
ing system should hence have 100% transmission as well
as zero reﬂection, as if the imaging system is not there
and the object directly touches the image plane. This ideal
behavior also allows multiple imaging systems to be cas-
caded and a longer distance between the object and the
detector.

In this Letter, the underlying physics of reﬂectionless
evanescent wave ampliﬁcation (REWA) by the use of
a negative-refractive-index slab is explained, and, using
this knowledge, it is shown that evanescent waves with
speciﬁc spatial frequencies can be ampliﬁed without re-
ﬂection simply by two dielectric planar waveguides. Since
loss in a dielectric can be orders-of-magnitude lower than
metals or metamaterials, our proposed scheme is the sim-
plest way of experimentally demonstrating the intriguing
phenomenon of REWA and oﬀers simple alternatives to
the use of left-handed materials, surface plasmons, or
photonic crystals for near-ﬁeld imaging applications.

One of the most poorly understood aspects of Pendry’s
proposal is that at the interface of an n = 1 material
and an n = −1 material, the transmission and reﬂec-
tion coeﬃcients are theoretically inﬁnite.2 Mathemati-
cally this indicates the presence of an unstable pole on
the imaginary axis in the complex transverse-spatial-
frequency (s = ikx) plane, and physically the transmit-
ted and reﬂected evanescent optical ﬁelds must therefore
increase linearly along a semi-inﬁnite interface. This is

1

hardly surprising if one recalls the well-known fact that
inﬁnite scattering coeﬃcients correspond to bound-state
solutions, so the incoming evanescent waves are simply
resonantly-coupled into the waveguide modes of the in-
terface. The most peculiar aspect of Pendry’s interface is
that the scattering coeﬃcients are always inﬁnite, mean-
ing that bound-state solutions exist for all kx. This is not
true for other waveguides, including photonic crystals,8
which have discrete bound states with diﬀerent discrete
kx’s. In particular, for ideal surface plasmons, only one
bound state exists.

First, consider a dielectric slab with thickness a and
refractive index n1 in the x − y plane. Suppose that
an evanescent s-polarized wave with an electric ﬁeld ex-
ponentially decaying along the z axis given by E0+ =
[0, 1, 0] exp(ikzz + ikxx − iωt) impinges on the slab,
where kx is assumed to have subwavelength resolution,
so kx > ωn0/c, kz is determined by the dispersion rela-
x − k2
k2
tion, given by kz = i
0, k0 = ωn0/c, and n0 is
the refractive index of the surroundings. Considering the
ﬁrst interface between n0 and n1 only, the reﬂected wave
is r[0, 1, 0] exp(−ikzz + ikxx − iωt), and the transmitted
wave inside the slab is t[0, 1, 0] exp(ik′
zz + ikxx − iωt).
kx is the same on both sides of the interface, and k′
z is
given by the dispersion relation k′
x, where
k1 = ωn1/c. k′
z is hereafter assumed to be real for waveg-
uide modes to exist. This restricts kx to be bounded by
the wave numbers in the two media,

− k2

z =

k2
1

p

p

k0 < kx < k1.

(1)

z)/(kz + k′

The transmission and reﬂection coeﬃcients across the
ﬁrst interface are given by t = 2kz/(kz + k′
z) and
r = (kz − k′
z) respectively. Likewise, the scat-
tering coeﬃcients across the second interface are t′ =
2k′
z + kz). To obtain the
total transmission, τ , across the slab, multiple scattering
events must be summed,

z + kz) and r′ = (k′

z − kz)/(k′

z/(k′

+ t exp(ik

′
za)[r

′

exp(ik

′
za)]2t

′

+ ... (2)

τ = t exp(ik

′

′
za)t
tt′ exp(ik′
za)
1 − r′2 exp(2ik′

=

.

za)

The total reﬂection coeﬃcient can be obtained similarly,

Γ = r +

tt′r′ exp(2ik′
za)
1 − r′2 exp(2ik′

za)

.

Waveguide modes correspond to those with evanescent
tails exponentially decaying away from the waveguide.
In other words, the total transmitted evanescent wave
and the total reﬂected evanescent wave for the waveg-
uide modes can exist by themselves without any incom-
ing wave E0+, or, mathematically speaking, τ and Γ are
inﬁnity. This happens when

1 − r

′2 exp(2ik

′
za) = 1 −

exp(2ik

′
za) = 0,

2

k′
z − kz
z + kz (cid:17)
k′

(cid:16)

which simply states that the accumulated phase in a
round trip inside the waveguide must be multiples of 2π.
As both kz and k′
z depend on kx, Eq. (5) is an eigen-
value equation of kx for the TE modes of the single
waveguide. A simple dielectric slab can hence achieve
EWA due to the waveguide mode coupling resonances,
similar to a photonic crystal.8 If only subwavelength fea-
tures are concerned and all-angle negative refraction9 is
not needed, a complicated structure such as photonic
crystal is not necessary. However, just like a photonic
crystal, the reﬂection coeﬃcient Γ of a slab waveguide
is also inﬁnite, causing potential problems with multiple
reﬂections.

In Pendry’s proposal, both interfaces of a negative-
refractive-index slab need to be considered for ideal
REWA. The two interfaces can be considered as two
waveguides, and the total transmission of the slab ex-
ponentially increases with respect to the thickness of
the slab, or the distance between the two waveguides,
when the single-interface scattering coeﬃcients are inﬁ-
nite. This suggests that REWA may also exist for other
kinds of double-waveguide structures, when the resonant
coupling condition of the single waveguide is reached.

(3)

(4)

Fig. 1. Reﬂectionless evanescent wave ampliﬁcation
(REWA) by two slab waveguides, where n1 > n0.

Now let us go back to the dielectric slab waveguide
example and add another identical waveguide a distance
d away from the ﬁrst, as depicted in Fig. 1. The total
transmission coeﬃcient for this double-waveguide struc-
ture is

T =

τ 2 exp(ikzd)
1 − Γ2 exp(2ikzd)

.

When kx coincides with one of the single-waveguide
bound-state eigenvalues determined by Eq. (5), the total
transmission becomes

lim
r′2 exp(2ik′

z a)→1

T =

lim
z a)→1
r′2 exp(2ik′
= − exp(−ikzd),

− τ 2
Γ2 exp(−ikzd)

(6)

(7)

(5)

2

frequency components that lie outside the waveguiding
band or do not coincide with the bound states cannot be
perfectly reproduced. For this reason, ideal surface plas-
mons are ill-suited for faithful image transmission, as
they have only one bound state with one eigenvalue kx.
Loss can increase the bandwidth of the transmitted spa-
tial frequencies near each discrete waveguide mode, but
also severely limits the distance between the two waveg-
uides at which eﬀective REWA occurs. For dielectrics,
multimode waveguides can partially solve this problem
by oﬀering more Fourier modes within the band. One
may also use a broadband light source to increase the
amount of available spatial frequencies.

In conclusion, the use of two dielectric planar waveg-
uides is proposed to amplify evanescent waves without
reﬂection. The simple conﬁguration elucidates the most
essential physics of REWA and presents a simple way
of experimentally demonstrating such an intriguing phe-
nomenon. In practice, the proposed setup also allows
one to take advantage of high resolution limit of a di-
electric without contact with the object. This work was
sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) Center for Optoﬂuidic Integration.

References

1. E. Betzig and J. K. Trautman, Science 257, 189 (1992).
2. J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966 (2000).
3. See, for example, N. Garcia and M. Nieto-Vesperinas,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 207403 (2002).

4. S. Zhang, W. Fan, B. K. Minhas, A. Frauenglass, K.
J. Malloy, and S. R. J. Brueck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
037402 (2005).

5. S. Zhang, W. Fan, N. C. Panoiu, K. J. Malloy, R. M. Os-
good, and S. R. J. Brueck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 137404
(2005).

6. V. M. Shalaev, W. Cai, U. K. Chettiar, H.-K. Yuan, A.
K. Sarychev, V. P. Drachev, and A. V. Kildishev, Opt.
Lett. 30, 3356 (2005).

7. N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun, and X. Zhang, Science 308,

534 (2005).

8. C. Luo, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, and J. B.

Pendry, Phys. Rev. B 68, 045115 (2003).

9. C. Luo, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, and J. B.

Pendry, Phys. Rev. B 65, 201104 (2002).

10. D. F. Edwards and E. Ochoa, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 71, 607

(1981), and references therein.

11. C. D. Clark, P. J. Dean, and P. V. Harris, Proc. Roy.

Soc. A 277, 312 (1964).

12. M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1855 (1991).
13. M. Fleischhauer, C. H. Keitel, M. O. Scully, C. Su, B. T.
Ulrich, and S.-Y. Zhu, Phys. Rev. A 46, 1468 (1992).
14. A. S. Zibrov, M. D. Lukin, L. Hollberg, D. E. Nikonov,
M. O. Scully, H. G. Robinson, and V. L. Velichansky,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3935 (1996).

which increases exponentially with respect to d. The to-
tal reﬂection coeﬃcient of the double-waveguide struc-
ture is likewise given by

R = Γ +

τ 2Γ exp(2ikzd)
1 − Γ2 exp(2ikzd)

,

(8)

and in the limit of kx being a bound-state eigenvalue of
a single waveguide,

lim
r′2 exp(2ik′

z a)→1

R =

lim
r′2 exp(2ik′

z a)→1 (cid:16)1 − τ 2

Γ2 (cid:17)Γ = 0. (9)

Hence, an evanescent wave can propagate with perfect
transmission and zero reﬂection in the setup depicted in
Fig. 1, thereby achieving REWA, if u + v = d and the
resonant single-waveguide coupling condition is reached.
Identical results can also be derived for p-polarized waves
and TM modes. REWA should be quite general for any
kind of symmetric and identical waveguides, as long as
the bound-state limit of τ 2/Γ2 is 1, so two photonic crys-
tal slabs may be used to achieve all-angle negative refrac-
tion9 and REWA simultaneously.

For imaging applications, it is important to stress that
the double-waveguide device only beats the resolution
limit of the cladding layer with refractive index n0, but
not the resolution limit of the core layer with refractive
index n1. This is because the bound-state eigenvalues
of kx are bounded by wave numbers of the two media,
as shown by Eq. (1). That said, for a highly multimode
waveguide, the maximum kx is close to the wave num-
ber of the core medium, so the proposed device can still
take advantage of the high resolution limit oﬀered by a
high-refractive-index material without contact with the
object. This can be advantageous for many applications
because many solids have higher refractive indices than
ﬂuids but it is not very practical to ﬁll the whole imaging
system with solids as in oil immersion microscopy. Fur-
thermore, for biomedical imaging applications, it is not
always possible to place the high-refractive-index mate-
rial directly in touch with the object plane, because the
contact may damage the biological sample, or one may
desire to put the object plane inside a semi-transparent
object, such as a cell.

Promising high-refractive-index material candidates
include diamond, which can have a refractive index as
high as 2.710 and transparent down to a wavelength of
about 230 nm,11 and coherently-prepared atoms (con-
ﬁned in, say, a dielectric box) with a resonantly-enhanced
refractive index,12 which can theoretically reach the or-
der of one hundred13 and a proof-of-concept experiment
of which has already been demonstrated.14

An outstanding problem of using any waveguide, ex-
cept negative-refractive-index slabs, for EWA is that
ideal enhancement only occurs for single-waveguide
modes, which are discrete and band-limited for each ω.
For instance, the discrete kx’s of the TE modes in a
symmetric slab waveguide are determined by Eq. (5)
and band-limited by Eq. (1). As a result, an object with

3

