6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Wave-particle duality in chaos: universal output directionality of ultrahigh-Q single
modes in a deformed microcavity with low index of refraction

Sang-Bum Lee,1 Jeong-Bo Shim,2 Sang Wook Kim,3 Juhee Yang,1
Songkee Moon,1 Jai-Hyung Lee,1 Hai-Woong Lee,2 and Kyungwon An1, ∗
1School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea
2Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejon 305-701, Korea
3Department of Physics Education, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Korea
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

Experimental investigation of the characteristics of quasi-bound states of a quadrupole deformed
microcavity has revealed ﬁve distinct mode groups in cavity emission spectra with cavity quality
factors diﬀerent by orders of magnitude and consistently with much diﬀerent intracavity mode
distributions but with almost universal far-ﬁeld emission patterns. These universal directionality
of high-Q modes are explained by a subtle manifestation of particle nature of light, speciﬁcally
unstable manifolds of classical chaos, in the formation of quasi-bound states, i.e., wave nature of
light in quantum chaos.

PACS numbers: 05.45.Mt,42.55.Sa,42.65.Sf

Understanding mode formation in microscopic cavi-
ties is an important task both in designing eﬃcient laser
cavities for photonics applications [1] and in studying
quantum-classical correspondence in terms of wave and
particle pictures of light. Particularly, deformed micro-
cavities of stadium or quadrupole shape not only support
collimated directional output desirable for eﬃcient micro-
lasers but also provide a testing ground for classical and
quantum chaos [2].

The output directionality observed from deformed mi-
crocavities has been explained either by ray dynamics
based on chaos theory [3], or by the nature of modes
obtained from Maxwell’s wave equations. Adequacy of
each approach depends on several factors, but most im-
portantly on the size of microcavity with respect to the
wavelength of interest or the size parameter nkr, where
n is the refractive index of the cavity medium, k = 2π/λ
the wave vector with λ the wavelength and r the repre-
sentative radius of the cavity.

Most studies on output directionality have been per-
formed on relatively large cavities with nkr ∼ 103 or so
[4, 5, 6, 7], for which analysis of ray dynamics in phase
space, corresponding to classical limit of nkr → ∞, has
been successful in correctly predicting the output emis-
sion properties of stadium, quadrupole or hexadecapole
microcavities [6]. Since it is evidently the various modes
of such cavities that give rise to directional emission ob-
served in experiments, wave equations have to be solved
and compared with the experimental results as well as
those of the ray analysis. Interestingly, it has been com-
mon practice to solve the wave equation for rather small
size parameter such as nkr ≃ 50 ∼ 200, due to limitation
in numerical computation and to employ a vulnerable
argument of asymptotic correspondence or irrelevance of
cavity size in order to justify the apparent discrepancy
in cavity size between theory and experiment.

those experiments with large nkr, measuring actual mode
spectra and resolving individual modes have not been re-
ported mainly due to the fact that the free spectral range
(FSR) of a mode in such large cavities is not much larger
than the linewidths of individual modes of relatively low
cavity quality factor Q, associated with the observed out-
put directionality.

There have been experiments performed on com-
parably smaller quardrupole-deformed microcavities
(QDM’s) with nkr ∼ 200 [8], corresponding to an inter-
esting regime where wave and particle nature of light may
coexist. Recently scar modes, i.e. quantum localization
or a quasi-bound state along an unstable periodic orbit
(UPO) in ray picture have been observed in deformed
microcavities with nkr ∼ 102 − 103 [4, 5, 7, 8]. However,
spectra of high-Q scar modes with well-deﬁned FSR have
been only observed in QDM’s of low index of refraction
(n = 1.36) with nkr ∼ 200 [8] due to the aforementioned
technical reasons.

The aim of the present work is to elucidate the inter-
play between wave and particle natures of light in a QDM
of properly chosen size parameter (nkr ∼ 200) with di-
rect comparison between experiment and theory with the
same size parameter. In particular, we report observa-
tion of ﬁve diﬀerent well-deﬁned mode groups including
scar modes, with Q values ranging from 104 to 106, in
both spectrum and output directionality in a QDM with
a large deformation to enable complete classical chaos
for the ray undergoing total internal reﬂections. Inter-
estingly, these modes exhibit similar output directional-
ity regardless of their diﬀerent spatial distributions in-
side the cavity. These universal directionality of high Q
modes can be explained by an unexpected manifestation
of particle nature of light or ray ﬂow in classical chaos in
the formation of quasi-bound states in quantum chaos,
corresponding to the wave nature of light.

Although modes of cavity are inevitably involved in

A two-dimensional microcavity used in our experi-

2

FIG. 1: Schematic of our experimental setup for measuring
cavity mode spectrum and single-mode far-ﬁeld emission pat-
tern of a QDM.

ment is made of a liquid jet of ethanol (refractive index
n=1.361) doped with Rhodamine B dye at a concentra-
tion of 10−4 M/L. The details of our new liquid-jet appa-
ratus is described elsewhere [9]. In short, the new liquid-
jet technique provides an approximately quadrupole-
deformed microcavity with the deformation parameter
η tuable from 0 to 0.25 with a mean radius r of about
16 µm. The boundary of QDM is deﬁned as ρ(φ) =
r(1 + η cos 2φ). The deformation parameter is measured
by analyzing the diﬀraction pattern of a cw Ar+ laser
beam by the QDM.

As illustrated in Fig. 1, the microjet apparatus is
mounted in the center of a rotatable stage and the mi-
crojet QDM is illuminated by a cw Ar+ pumping laser
(λp =514 nm) with its polarization parallel to the QDM
column. The pumping laser also serves as a probe
laser for the diﬀraction pattern measurement as discussed
above. Since the oﬀ-resonance pumping eﬃciency for a
QDM depends on pumping angle [10], the pump laser
beam is delivered through an optical ﬁber with its exit
end mounted on the rotatable stage with a ﬁxed angle
of 45◦ with respect to the major axis of QDM when
output spectrum and directionality are measured. The
cavity-modiﬁed ﬂuorescence (CMF) or lasing light from
the QDM is collected by an objective lens with a full col-
lection angle of 5 degrees and focused on to an entrance
slit of a spectrometer. A polarizer placed in front of the
slit selects only the polarization component parallel to
the QDM column. The emission spectrum is then mea-
sured for a ﬁxed angle θ of the rotation stage.

Figure 2 shows CMF and lasing spectra of a QDM with
its degree of deformation η measured to be 22%. Detec-
tion angle θ is ﬁxed at θ=40◦ for various pumping powers.
We can identify ﬁve distinct mode groups, each of which
consists of a sequence of peaks with a well-deﬁned FSR.
Modes in the same mode group diﬀer from each other by
FSR in frequencies and share similar modal properties
such as quality factor and spatial distribution. By exam-
ining their FSR values, we can label these mode groups as
l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in increasing order of FSR in frequency in
analogy to radial mode order for a circular cavity. Some
mode groups undergo laser oscillations as the pumping

FIG. 2: Photo-luminescence and lasing spectra of a QDM
with 22% deformation for the pump power of 54 mW and
112 mW. Inset: Five distinct mode groups are identiﬁed and
labeled as l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 with increasing order of FSR. The
positions of these mode groups are marked as vertical ticks
below the spectra.

power increases.

Since the instrumental resolution of spectrometer (0.2
nm) limits the largest Q value to be directly observed to
∼ 103, we employed two independent methods to mea-
sure Q values of the observed mode groups. Firstly, in
the CMF spectra as in Fig. 2(a) the Q value is deter-
mined from the wavelength at which the visibility of a
mode drops as we scan from long to short wavelengths
since at that wavelength the cavity loss approximately
equals the known absorption loss of the cavity medium
[11]. Secondly, the Q value can also be measured from the
wavelength at which a mode undergoes laser oscillation
at threshold as seen in Fig. 2(b) [8, 12]. Both methods
consistently give Q = 5 × 105 for l = 1. For l = 2, 3, 4, 5
only the CMF method is used since their Q’s are not
large enough to undergo laser oscillation at the preﬁxed
dye concentration. The results are Q = 2 × 105 for l = 2,
Q = 2 × 104 for l=3 and 4 and Q = 1 × 104 for l = 5.

Output emission directionality of each single mode can
be measured by taking spectra like Fig. 2(a) for various
rotation angles θ and then plotting the peak height of
each mode as a function of θ, which also equals an far-
ﬁeld emission angle with respect to the direction of minor
axis of the QDM. By this method, contribution by back-
ground luminescence, mostly due to bulk ﬂuorescence of
the cavity medium, can be discriminated. The resulting
single-mode far-ﬁeld emission pattern is shown in Fig. 3.
In comparison, previously reported far-ﬁeld patterns for
deformed microcavities of nkr ∼ 103 [6] were measured
without any resolution on individual modes and thus they
correspond to multimode far-ﬁeld emission patterns.

The most striking feature of the far-ﬁeld patterns in

3

FIG. 3: The far-ﬁeld emission pattern of cavity modes for
η=22%. From bottom, l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Baseline for each curve
is denoted by dotted lines.

Fig. 3 is that they all look similar, highly directional
and peaked around 40◦-60◦. One plausible explanation
for the observed similarity would be that all ﬁve mode
groups might have very similar intracavity mode distri-
butions regardless of their completely diﬀerent Q values.
However, this is quite unlikely since diﬀerent Q values
by several orders of magnitude are usually associated
with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent mode distributions. In fact,
we show below theoretically that these mode groups in-
deed have quite diﬀerent mode distributions inside the
cavity.

Consideration of the ray dynamics in a QDM in classi-
cal limit (nkr → ∞) often sheds light on understanding
mode formation in a QDM of a ﬁnite nkr. The ray dy-
namics can be completely analyzed in terms of a Poincar´e
surface of section (PSOS) obtained by recording both the
angle of incidence χ and the azimuthal angle φ for suc-
cessive reﬂections oﬀ the cavity boundary. PSOS’s for
η = 0.16, shown as backdrops in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b),
show that there exist no stable periodic orbits above the
line of critical angle, sin χc = 1/n. Due to the reason
to be explained below, our deformed microcavity with
η=22% in experiment corresponds to a pure QDM with
η=16% in theory. None of ﬁve mode groups observed in
our experiment can thus be associated with stable peri-
odic orbits.

Modes or quasi-bound state solutions of Maxwell’s
equations for an open QDM are calculated by using
boundary element method [13, 14]. For direct compari-
son with experiment, we search for the modes in the same
range of nkr as in the actual experiments. In the eigen-
values of the quasi-bound states numerically obtained, we
also observe ﬁve distinct mode groups with well-deﬁned
mode spacing or FSR, according to which modes are la-
beled as l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 as before. Their Q values are
comparable to those of experiment.

FIG. 4: Husimi Plots of quasieigen modes for η=16% with (a)
nkr = 232.27 and (b) nkr = 226.29, corresponding to l=2 and
4 mode groups, respectively. Distributions below critical line
(= 1/n) in (a) and (b) are enhanced 100 times in intenisty in
(c) and (d), respectively.

Husimi distributions of some of the modes (l = 2, 4)
are shown in Fig. 4, superimposed on the classical PSOS.
The Husimi distribution is a Gaussian-smoothed version
of the Wigner function, representing the corresponding
quantum mechanical probability distribution in phase
space [2, 15]. We conﬁrm that modes belonging to the
same mode group show almost the same shape of wave-
function [16]. Some of the mode groups are localized on
the UPO’s, and thus categorized as scar modes: we can
associate an octagon with l = 2 mode and a hexagon with
l = 4 mode in Fig. 4. The ﬁve mode groups exhibit quali-
tatively diﬀerent spatial distributions, barely overlapping
in Husimi plot. Complete results on mode calculations
and analyses on our experiment can be found in Ref. [16].
The far-ﬁeld emission pattern can be calculated once
a quasi-bound state is known. Surprisingly, all ﬁve mode
groups give rise to very similar far-ﬁeld patterns as shown
in Fig. 5, supporting the experimental observation in Fig.
3.

So far, it has been widely accepted that the modes with
distinct shapes exhibit diﬀerent output directionality, so
the above experimental and theoretical results contradict
to the conventional wisdom. This seeming contradiction
is, however, resolved by close examination on the phase-
space mode distribution in the Husimi plot. When we
enhance the intensity near the line of critical angle by
100 times, we can see a few tail-like faint structures ex-
tending from the regions of wave concentration to the
Integrated
region far below the line of critical angle.
probability associated with these structures below the
line of critical angle is negligibly small compared to that
of the total mode distribution for l = 2, 4 in Fig. 4. No

4

Husimi distribution has signiﬁcant overlap with the re-
gion below the critical angle and thus the output direc-
tionality is mainly determined by the intracavity mode
distribution as usual [16]. In addition, for high-Q modes
for rather small nkr, namely ∼ 50, which happens to be
the size parameter at which many other theoretical stud-
ies have been performed on the role of unstable mani-
folds in output directionality [6], the faint structure cor-
responding to the unstable manifolds has not been ob-
served in our numerical studies [16].

Finally, it is possible that our deformed microcavity
might contain an immeasurably small mixture of high-
order multipoles, which can slow down the progress to
chaos as η increases [17]. We have found from numerical
simulations that addition of mere 0.8% of an octapole
deformation to 22% of a quadrupole can reproduce the
output directionality and Q values of a pure QDM with
η=16%. This is why we can compare our experiment of
η=22% with the theory of η=16%.

This work was supported by Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation Grant (NRL-2005-01371) and
by Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2005-070-
C00058). SWK was supported by KRF Grant (KRF-
2004-005-C00044) and by KOSEF Grant (R01-2005-000-
10678-0).

∗

Electronic address: kwan@phya.snu.ac.kr

[1] K. Vahala, eds., Optical Microcavities (World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore, 2004) and references therein.

[2] L. E. Reichl, The Transition to Chaos in Conservative
Classical Systems: Quantum Manifestations (Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1992).

[3] A. J. Lichtenberg and M. A. Lieberman, Regular and
Stochastic Motion (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983).

[4] C. Gmachl et al., Opt. Lett. 27, 824 (2002).
[5] T. Harayama et al., Phys. Rev. E 67 015207(R) (2003).
[6] H. G. Schwefel et al., J. OPt. Soc. Am. B 21, 923 (2004).
[7] N. B. Rex et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 094102 (2002).
[8] S.-B . Lee et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 033903 (2002).
[9] J. Yang et al., “Development of deformation-tuable quad-
rupolar microcavities”, arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603247.

[10] S.-B. Lee et al., “Eﬃcient nonresonant pumping of scar
modes in asymmetrically deformed microcylinder lasers”,
arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603158.

[11] P. Chylek et al., Opt. Lett. 22, 1723(1991).
[12] H.-J. Moon, Y-T. Chough, and K. An, Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 3161 (2000).

[13] S. Kagami and I. Fukai, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory

and Techniques 32 455 (1984).
[14] J. Wiersig, J. Opt. A 5 53 (2003).
[15] B. Crespi, G. Perez, and S.-J. Chang, Phys. Rev. E 47,

986 (1993).

[16] J.-B. Shim et al., “Regular spectra and universal di-
rectionality of emitted radiation from a quadruplar de-
formed microcavity”, arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603221.
[17] J.-B. Shim et al., “Eﬀect on output directionality of high-
order multipole components in a quadrupole-deformed
microcavity”, to be published.

FIG. 5: Calculated far-ﬁled distributions associated with
quasieigenmodes with nkr=228.87, 232.27, 226.29, 227.65 and
230.87, which belong to mode groups labeled as l = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
◦
respectively. Curves are smoothed over 5
intervals to match
the experimental angular resolution.

matter how small their probability is, they are the only
direct routes to outside world by refraction. Without
them, light would have to tunnel through a substantial
distance in phase space from the region of wave concen-
tration to outside across the line of critical angle, and
thus the probability of such tunneling would be extremely
low. For the other mode groups similar faint structures
also exist, providing routes to refractive escape of light.
Interestingly, the origin of these faint route structures
in the wave function can be traced back to the classi-
cal chaos, where particle nature of light prevails. A hint
comes from the observation that the far-ﬁeld emission
pattern obtained from ray dynamics in classical limit
for the QDM is similar to those from the wave calcu-
lation and the experiment. For an open system, long
time ray dynamics in chaotic region are predominantly
determined by the so-called unstable manifolds [2, 3],
which are drawn in Fig. 4(c) and (d) in dark lines for
our QDM. Since rays escapes from an open cavity before
reaching completely ergodic limit, ray dynamics is usu-
ally restricted in limited phase space and thus follows a
few dominant unstable manifolds.

This scenario is, however, valid in the classical limit
nkr → ∞, and the long time dynamics in this picture
usually corresponds to several ray circulations, which is
much shorter than 102−3 ray circulations corresponding
to Q ∼ 105 − 106 observed in our experiment. Nev-
ertheless, the underlying structure of unstable manifold
imposed by the geometric shape of the deformed cavity
persists as a weak quantum localization and thus leaves
a trace as a few faint structures in phase-space mode dis-
tribution across the line of critical angle, although not as
strong as UPO’s for the formation of scar modes, result-
ing in the observed directional output.

It is noted that for a mode with rather low Q the

