6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Lineshape measurement of an extreme-weak amplitude-ﬂuctuating light source by the
photon-counting-based second-order correlation spectroscopy

Hyun-Gue Hong, Wontaek Seo, Moonjoo Lee, Wonshik Choi, Jai-Hyung Lee, and Kyungwon An
School of Physics, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-747, Korea∗
(Dated: July 28, 2013)

We demonstrate lineshape measurement of an extreme-weak amplitude ﬂuctuating light source
by using the photon-counting-based second-order correlation spectroscopy combined with the het-
erodyne technique. The amplitude ﬂuctuation of a ﬁnite bandwidth introduces a low-lying spectral
structure in the lineshape and thus its eﬀect can be isolated from that of the phase ﬂuctuation. Our
technique provides extreme sensitivity suited for single-atom-level applications.

PACS numbers:

Lineshape is one of the most basic properties to be
measured for characterization of a light source. Examples
are resonance ﬂuorescence lineshape of atoms and line-
shape of lasers operating below and above laser threshold
[1], where the lineshapes provide information on the light
emission processes [2].

Recent development of fundamental devices such as
the micromaser [3], the microlaser [4], the one-trapped-
atom laser [5] and even single-photon sources on demand
[6, 7] make lineshape measurement of these rumdimen-
tary light sources extremely compelling to perform. How-
ever, such measurements call for ultra sensitive tech-
niques due to extremely low output intensity (∼ subpi-
cowatt) of these systems. Furthermore, such techniques
should provide a way to extract intrinsic lineshape in the
presence of technical noises such as cavity vibration and
pump ﬂuctuation.

The conventional techniques such as monochromator,
Fabry-Perot-type optical spectrum analyzer and electri-
cal spectrum analyzer in heterodyne conﬁguration usu-
ally require rather descent input powers to be used.
Among these conventional techniques, heterodyne spec-
troscopy (HS) provides the best sensitivity [8]. One may
hope to improve the sensitivity further by employing pho-
ton counting. However, HS with an electronic spectrum
analyzer operates in photo current mode (analog), not
compatible with photon counting mode (digital).

Close examination of HS, however, reveals a way to
overcome this incompatibility. The heterodyne signal
Ih(t) is a beat note of a source and a local oscillator (LO)
ﬁeld. What a spectrum analyzer does is to produce the
power spectrum |Ih(ω)|2 of an input signal Ih(t). This is
equivalent to calculating ﬁrst an intensity-intensity cor-
relation function hIh(t)Ih(t + τ )i with h. . .i indicating a
time average and then taking a Fourier transform of it.
Furthermore, the intensity-intesity correlation function
hIh(t)Ih(t + τ )i is nothing but the second-order corre-
lation g(2)(τ ) of the heterodyne ﬁeld. The measurement
technique of g(2)(τ ) is well established in quantum optics,
employing photon counting technique, and thus measure-

∗Electronic address: kwan@phya.snu.ac.kr

ment of g(2)(τ ) can be readily performed for extremely
low-signal cases.

In this Letter, we demonstrate the validity and use-
fulness of the photon-counting-based second-order corre-
lation spectroscopy (SOCS) in the measurement of the
lineshape of an extremely weak source with both phase
and amplitude ﬂuctuations. In addition, the contribution
from the phase ﬂuctuation can be separated from that of
the amplitude ﬂuctuation simulating technical noises.

Let us write the time variation of the electric ﬁeld,
the spectrum of which we want to measure, as E(t) =
E0(t)ei[ω0t+φ(t)], where φ(t) is a randomly ﬂuctuating
phase of the ﬁeld and E0(t) is a slowly varying envelope.
In HS, the signal of interest, E(t), is mixed with an LO
ﬁeld, given by EL(t) = ELOeiωLt, where ωL is the carrier
frequency of LO. It is assumed that the linewidth of LO
is so small compared to that of the source to be measured
that the LO can be regarded as a monochromatic ﬁeld.
The heterodyne signal or the beat note is then

Ih(t) = |E(t) + EL(t)|2

= |E0(t)|2 + |ELO|2

+E∗

L0E0(t)ei[ωB t+φ(t)] + c.c.

(1)

where ωB = ω0 − ωL.

The second-order correlation function of the beat note

is given by [9]

g(2)
B (τ ) =

hI ∗
h(t)Ih(t + τ )i
hI ∗
h(t)ihIh(t + τ )i
I0ILO

= 1 + 2

(I0 + ILO)2 |g(1)(τ )| cos ωBτ
I 2
0
g(2)(τ ) − 1
(I0 + ILO)2
h

i

+

(2)

where I0 = h|E0(t)|2i, ILO = |ELO|2, g(1)(τ ) and g(2)(τ )
are the ﬁrst and the second-order correlation functions
of E(t) itself. Note that g(2)
B (τ ) oscillates at frequency
ωB with its amplitude mainly determined by g(1)(τ ) and
modiﬁed near the origin by g(2)(τ ).

Amplitude ﬂuctuation can be modeled by consider-
ing an inﬁnite superposition of intensity modulations like
|E0(t)|2 = I0(1 + M cos Ωt), where the modulation depth

2

FIG. 1: Experimental scheme. The upper path corresponds to
a test source and lower path corresponds to a local oscillator.

M is less than 1. The corresponding ﬁeld amplitude can
be written as

E0(t) =

I0(1 + a1eiΩt + a−1e−iΩt + a2ei2Ωt · · · )

(3)

p

where 1 ≫ a1, a−1 ≫ a2 · · · for M ≪ 1. This means
that the spectrum will have symmetric sidebands around
the carrier frequency. For a ﬁnite band for amplitude
ﬂuctuations we can write

|E0(t)|2 = I0 (cid:20)

1 +

Z

′

m(Ω

) cos Ω

′t dΩ

′

(4)

(cid:21)

with a modulation-depth density m(Ω), and the result-
ing spectrum would contain a low-lying wing structure
around the carrier.

The schematic of our experiment is shown in Fig. 1. A
laser beam from an external cavity diode laser (ECDL)
with a linewidth of about 0.5 MHz is split and guided into
two acousto-optic modulators (AOMs), one of which is
tunable (tuning rate of 22 MHz/V), imposing both phase
and amplitude ﬂuctuations to the laser beam. This beam
is greatly attenuated and serves as a test light source
whose spectrum is to be measured with a local oscilla-
tor, which is prepared by the other AOM with a ﬁxed
frequency shift.

Phase ﬂuctuatuation is simulated by imposing a white
noise of 1 MHz bandwidth from a signal synthesizer
(Model DS345 by Stanford Research) on the frequency
tuning port of the tunable AOM. Amplitude ﬂuctuation
is provided by applying the white noise ﬁltered by a low-
pass ﬁlter (cutoﬀ frequency of 50 kHz) to the intensity
modulation port of the tunable AOM so that the inten-
sity of the deﬂected beam oﬀ the AOM is modulated in
a random manner. The restricted bandwidth helps one
to easily distinguish the eﬀect of amplitude ﬂuctuations
from that of phase ﬂuctuations in the experiment. For
phase ﬂuctuation no band ﬁlter is used since the white
noise leads to a well-known Lorentzian lineshape.

Split beams are combined to generate a beat note.
Since both the test light source and the local oscillator
are derived from a common ECDL, the phase noise of the
ECDL itself is exactly canceled out. In addition the am-
plitude noise of the ECDL is negligible. Therefore, only
the imposed phase and amplitude ﬂuctuations determine
the lineshape to be observed in the heterodyne ﬁeld.

FIG. 2: (a) Observed g(2)
B (τ ) with phase ﬂuctuations only.
Bin time: 250ns. (b) A detail view of the central region of
(a). (c) Normalized spectral density in linear scale. Gray line:
conventional heterodyne spectroscopy, black line: the second-
order correlation spectroscopy. (d) Linewidth broadening as
a function of the noise rms voltage.

The combined beam is then split into two with a beam
splitter. One beam leads to a silicon photodiode (Model
FFD100 by Perkin Elmer) with a minimum detectable
power of 3.4 nW and the photo-current is analyzed by an
RF spectrum analyzer. The other is attenuated by a set
of neutral density ﬁlters down to the sub-picowatt level,
which is 10−9 of its original power and then detected by
an avalanche photodiode (APD, Model SPCM-AQR-13
by Perkin Elmer) in photon counting mode. The mean
photon counting rate is about 500 kcps. The setup for
measuring g(2)(τ ) is similar to that of our previous works
[10, 11].

Figure 2 shows the result obtained when only the white
phase noise is present without amplitude noise. The de-
caying envelope of g(2)(τ ) determines the linewidth while
the oscillation reﬂects the carrier frequency of the beat
note. The corresponding lineshape, obtained by taking
the Fourier transform of Fig. 2(a), is shown as a black
curve in Fig. 2(c). A gray curve in Fig. 2(c) is obtained
by the conventional HS with the original power of the test
light source without the 10−9 attenuation. Note that the
spectra measured with two diﬀerent methods are practi-
cally the same, being a Lorentzian of a single linewidth.
The full width at half maximum (FWHM) is increased
quadratically as the rms noise voltage (∆R) to the AOM
is increased (Fig. 2(d)). The smallest linewidth, about
3 kHz, is determined by the intrinsic noise in the AOM.
Frequency resolution is about 500 Hz for both lineshapes.
The data acquisition time is 100 sec for both.

The eﬀect of the amplitude noise is shown in Fig. 3. In-
tensity ﬂuctuation causes an overall peak in g(2)
B (τ ) near
τ = 0, corresponding to photon bunching eﬀect in quan-
tum optics. The Fourier transform of g(2)
B (τ ) is obviously

3

function set by the electric low-pass ﬁlter. The deviation
from a Lorenztian (dotted line) is easily recognizable in
log-scale. Still the spectra measured with the two diﬀer-
ent methods are practically identical, and thus the valid-
ity of our g(2) spectroscopy for lineshape measurement
for extremely weak light source is well justiﬁed.

As the amplitude noise voltage is increased, FWHM
does not show a signiﬁcant increase whereas the power
spectral density of the low lying structure does. The ratio
of rms to DC in the applied noise voltage to the AOM is
denoted by diﬀerent depth of gray-scale in Fig. 3(d). The
slight asymmetry observed in the spectral density around
the carrier frequency is due to the small leakage voltage
from the intensity modulation port to the frequency mod-
ulation port of the AOM. The spectral structure near the
origin is also related to the spectrum of the imposed am-
plitude noise (c.f. the third term in Eq. (2)).

From Eqs. (2) and (4), we can show that g(2)(0)−1 pro-
portional to the integral of the square of the modulation-
depth density m(Ω) of the amplitude ﬂuctuatuions [12].
This relation is clearly seen in Fig. 3(e), where g(2)
B (0) − 1
is proportional to the square of the rms-to-DC ratio of
the applied amplitude noise voltage.

It is noted that manifestation of the amplitude noise,
usually of classical origin, as a low-lying spectral struc-
ture allows us to distinguish it from a Lorentzian line-
shape due to the phase noise of often quantum origin
like spontaneous emission in the laser. Although ultimate
signal-to-noise ratios of both SOCS and the conventional
HS are determined by the number of photons detected
during the entire measurement time, the photon-counting
based SOCS is observed to be 109 times more sensitive
than the current-based HS in our experiment since the
former is free from thermal and other technical noises
usually present in the latter. Our technique with an ex-
treme sensitivity thus can be applied to measuring the
lineshapes of the single-atom radiators mentioned above.
This work was supported by Korea Science and Engi-
neering Foundation Grants (NRL-2005-01371) and Korea
Research Foundation Grants (KRF-2005-070-C00058).

[10] W. Choi et al., Rev. Sci. Inst. 76, 083109 (2005).
[11] W. Choi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 093603 (2006).
[12] H.-G. Hong, W. Seo, M. Lee, W. Choi, J.-H. Lee, and K.
An, “Analysis on the eﬀect of technical ﬂuctuations on
laser lineshape”, arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603254.

FIG. 3: (a) Observed g(2)
B (τ ) with amplitude ﬂuctuations in-
cluded. (b) A detailed view of the central region of (a). (c)
Normalized spectral density in log scale. The color convention
is the same as in Fig. 2(c). A Lorentzian ﬁt (dotted line) is
shown for comparison. (d) Fourier transform of g(2)
B (τ ) as the
ratio of rms to DC noise voltage is increased. (e) g(2)
B (0) − 1
as a measure of amplitude ﬂuctuation is plotted as a func-
tion of the ratio of rms to DC noise voltage to the intensity
modulation port of the AOM.

not a Lorentzian of a single linewidth. It contains a low-
lying wing structure reﬂecting the amplitude noise band

[1] A. L. Schawlow and C. H. Townes, Phys. Rev. 112, 1940

(1958).

[2] M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics, (Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997).

[3] D. Meschede, H. Walther and G. M¨uller, Phys. Rev. Lett.

54, 551 (1985).

[4] K. An, J. J. Childs, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 73 , 3375 (1994).

[5] J. McKeever et al., Nature 425, 268 (2003).
[6] A. Kuhn, M. Hennrich and G. Rempe, Phys. Rev. Lett.

89, 067901 (2002).

[7] J. McKeever et al., Science 303, 1992 (2004).
[8] J. T. H¨oﬀges, H. W. Baldauf, W. Lange, and H. Walther,

J. Mod. Optics 44, 1999 (1997).

[9] E. Jakeman, J. Phys. A: Gen. Phys. 3, 201 (1970).

