Generation of Traveling Surface Plasmon Waves by Free-Electron

Impact

M. V. Bashevoy, F. Jonsson, A. V. Krasavin, N. I. Zheludev

EPSRC Nanophotonics Portfolio Centre, School of Physics and Astronomy,

University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ United Kingdom

Y. Chen

Rutherford Appleton Laboratory Didcot,

Oxon, OX11 0QX United Kingdom

M. I. Stockman

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University,

University Plaza Atlanta, GA 30303-3083 United States

(Dated: April 28, 2006)

Abstract

The injection of a beam of free 50 keV electrons into an unstructured gold surface creates a

highly localized source of traveling surface plasmons with spectrum centered around 1.8 eV. The

plasmons were detected by a controlled decoupling into light with a grating at a distance from the

excitation point. The dominant contribution to the plasmon generation appears to come from the

recombination of d-band holes created by the electron beam excitation.

PACS numbers:

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) are coupled transverse electromagnetic ﬁeld and charge

density oscillations which propagate along the interface between a conductor and a dielec-

tric medium. The main feature of the SPPs that currently attracts exploding attention is

that they are strongly localized, making them favored candidates as information carriers in

applications such as high-density broadband interconnections and signal processing [1, 2].

The excitation of SPPs is usually performed by optical means, and since SPPs do not

couple to light illumination at ﬂat metal-vacuum interface, the energy coupling is achieved

using gratings or prism matching schemes. Surface plasmon waves can also be generated in

corrugated tunnelling junctions [3]. Unfortunately, these techniques do not easily allow for

a high localization of the SPP source, as being essential for nanophotonic devices. Disconti-

nuities of a plasmon waveguide, such as a nanoparticle, nanowire [4] or nanoscale aperture

of a nearﬁeld optical probe [5], may be used for a more localized launch of plasmon waves.

However, these coupling techniques are cumbersome, and they do not always allow for easy

repositioning of the plasmon source. Ritchie predicted that the electron bombardment of a

metal ﬁlm could lead to the excitation of surface plasmons [6], and evidence of this was later

observed in aluminium ﬁlms by electron energy loss spectroscopy [7] and by light emission

of silver grating surfaces [8]. Recently an evidence of propagating surface plasmon modes

was observed in the spatial distribution of optical emission on microscale gold corral under

electron excitation in the scanning tunneling microscope [9].

In this Letter, we report on the ﬁrst demonstration of direct excitation of SPPs by in-

jection of a beam of free electrons on the unstructured metal interface, creating a plasmon

source potentially with nanoscale localization, which may be easily and dynamically reposi-

tioned anywhere in a plasmonic device, for example in a SPP waveguide.

A fast electron penetrating a metal ﬁlm loose a fraction of its energy by exciting plasmons

on the metal surface, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In our experiments the SPPs were excited in

gold ﬁlms by a focused electron beam of a scanning electron microscope. The SPPs were

decoupled into light by a microscopic grating manufactured on the metal surface, with the

uncoupled light being collected by a parabolic metal mirror into an optical multichannel

spectrum analyzer consisting of a Jobin-Yvon C140 spectrograph and a liquid nitrogen

cooled CCD array, in a geometry as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The samples were 200 nm thick

gold ﬁlms which incorporated 50 nm deep gratings with a period of 4.25 µm. The gratings

were speciﬁcally designed for decoupling of light predominantly in the backward direction.

2

The evidence of SPP generation by electron beam excitation was seen in two series of

experiments.

In the ﬁrst series we compared light emission from the unstructured gold

surface with emission from the gold grating. In this case the experiments were performed
using scanning mode of the microscope, with a scan area of about 130 × 100 µm2. Optical

emission of the unstructured gold surface was clearly seen in our experiments. This is a

combination of the d-band ﬂuorescence, as previously seen in femtosecond photolumines-

cent experiments [9], transient radiation of the collapsing dipoles formed by the electrons

approaching the metal surface and their oppositely charged mirror image, and the ﬂuores-

cence of any residual contaminants on the sample. These mechanisms of emission create a

smooth spectrum centered at about 700 nm, shown as line B in the inset of Fig. 2. The

emission spectrum of unstructured gold surface was identical to that of the grating parallel

the direction towards the collection mirror. However, when the grating was oriented with

its ribs perpendicular to the direction to the mirror, the emission was stronger than of the

unstructured gold and its spectrum showed some pronounced modulations. Such a diﬀerence

in detection of emission is explained by the directionality of the decoupling of the travelling

SPPs, which only in the latter case are decoupled into light directed towards the detection

A grating fabricated on a metal surface facilitates decoupling of light by providing a wave

vector mismatch equal to an integer multiple of the grating vector kG = 2π/a where a is the

grating period, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Only SPPs of certain frequencies are decoupled

by the grating in the direction of the detector, at an angle of approximately θ = 70 degrees,

as determined by the geometry of setup. This decoupling is described by the kinematic

system.

equation

Re{kSPP(ω)} − nkG = (ω/c) sin(θ(ω)),

(1)

where n is a positive integer describing the diﬀraction order.

In the spectrum shown in

Fig. 2, the peak wavelengths at which optimum detection of the decoupled radiation occur

are indicated with the corresponding diﬀraction orders n, as calculated from Eq. (2). One

can clearly see that peaks in the emission spectrum indeed to a high degree coincide with

the predicted values for eﬃcient SPP emission. One also can also observe several dips in

the emission spectrum and even wavelengths at which the emission from the grating is less

intense than that of unstructured gold. This is believed to result from the modiﬁcation of

3

the plasmon dispersion by the grating at frequencies ω = ωres given by the Bragg condition

mkG/2 = Re{kSPP(ω)} =

Re

(2)

ω
c

ε(ω)
1 + ε(ω)(cid:19)

(cid:26)(cid:18)

1/2

,
(cid:27)

where m is a positive integer describing the resonance order. Here ε(ω) is the complex-

valued permittivity of gold. Corresponding wavelengths of Bragg resonance are in Fig. 2

presented for various values of m, indicating that the SPPs at Bragg resonance are either

badly coupled to light or their generation by the electron beam is inhibited by the grating.

The second experimental series aimed to demonstrate the generation of travelling SPP

waves on an unstructured metal surface, their propagation and controlled decoupling into

light by a grating. In these experiments we studied the dependence of the optical emission

as function of distance R between the excitation point and the grating edge. This series of

experiments was performed using spot mode of excitation, with a spot diameter of about

1 µm. The large spot size was used in order to allow higher beam current and more intense

peaks in decoupled light. The spectrum of the signal detected by placing the electron beam

at the edge of the grating facing the mirror is essentially the same as in the scanning mode

over the grating, with the only diﬀerence that the negative values in the diﬀerential spectrum

seen in Fig. 2 at about λ = 500, 870 and 950 nm do not appear, corroborating with the idea

that they are indeed relevant to the Bragg frequencies.

As the point of excitation is moved away from the grating, the spectrum gradually changes

and the SPP component of emission diminishes, as shown in Fig. 3. This graph illustrates

that SPP waves corresponding to diﬀerent parts of the emission spectrum decay with dif-

ferent pace (see inset into Fig. 3). For a point-like source, the in-plane plasmon intensity is
proportional to e−R/ξ/R. Due to our detection system, collecting light in a range of in-plane
azimuthal angles, this leads to an e−R/ξ dependence for the decoupled and detected signal,

giving the experimental attenuation lengths ξ609 = 5 µm, ξ705 = 11 µm, and ξ832 = 45 µm.

Indeed, plasmons corresponding to the vacuum wavelength of 609 nm shall be strongly at-

tenuated by losses in gold with damping length rapidly increasing towards the infrared part

of the spectrum. This is also what we ﬁnd in our experimental data. However, our experi-

mentally derived energy attenuation lengths are somewhat shorter than predicted from the
formula ξ = (2|Im{kSPP}|)−1 and the bulk values of the dielectric coeﬃcient of gold. This

is explained by imperfections and granulation of the gold surface, providing an additional

source for plasmon scattering losses.

4

All our observations, in particular the wavelength dependent decay of the emission spec-

trum with the distance between the excitation point and the grating, prove that electron

beam excitation indeed provides a source of SPPs. The plasmon emission spectrum largely

correlates with the spectrum of unstructured gold emission as shown in graph B of Fig. 2,

suggesting that the dominant contribution to SPP generation comes from the recombination

of d-band holes created by electron beam excitation [10], rather than from direct scattering

of free electrons [6]. Therefore it appears that plasmon emission spectrum, as the spectrum

of luminescence are strongly connected to the energy separation between d holes and the

Fermi surface near X and L points roughly at 1.8 eV (λ = 690 nm), and 2.4 eV (λ = 516 nm),

correspondingly [9].

From our experimental data, one can obtain an estimate of the order of magnitude of the

total power of the SPP source at the point of excitation. At the electron beam current of
10 µA, or equivalently 6×1013 electrons per second, we detect plasmon-related photons at the
rate of 3 × 104 s−1 across the spectrum. As a rough estimate of the quantum eﬃciency of our
light decoupling, collection and detection system, we obtain about 10−6. This corresponds
to a SPP source with a total power of 10 nW, generating 3 × 1010 SPPs per second at the

point of excitation. The corresponding probability for a single electron to excite a SPP is
then 3 × 10−4, which is consistent with Refs. [6, 11].

In conclusion, we have shown that electron beam excitation of an unstructured gold

surface provides a potentially highly localized source of propagating surface plasmons. This

may be the technique of choice for creating the high density of plasmons necessary for

demonstrating nonlinear regimes of SPP propagation, and also for achieving a high density

of plasmons in the active media of spaser applications [12].

This work was supported by grants from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research

Council (UK), the Oﬃce of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy, and the

US National Science Foundation. Stimulating discussions with Javier Garcia de Abajo and

useful references provided by Mathieu Kociak are also acknowledged.

[1] W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature 424, 824 (2003).

[2] A. V. Zayats, I. I. Smolyaninov, A. A. Maradudin, Phys. Rep. 408, 131 (2005)

5

[3] J. R. Kirtley, T. N. Theis, and J. C. Tsang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 37, 435 (1980); N. Kro´o, Z.

Szentirmay and J. F´elszerfalvi, Phys. Lett. A 81, 399 (1981).

[4] J. R. Krenn et al., J. of Microscopy 209, 167 (2003).

[5] C. S¨onnichsen et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 140 (2000)

[6] R. H. Ritchie. Phys. Rev. 106, 874 (1957))

[7] C. J. Powell and J. B. Swan, Phys. Rev. 115, 869 (1959); P. E. Batson and J. Silcox, Phys.

[8] Y. Teng and E. Stern, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 511 (1967); D. Heitmann, J. Phys. C: Solid State

Rev. B 27, 5224 (1983).

Phys. 10, (1977).

[9] M. R. Beversluis, A. Bouhelier, and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. B 68, 115433 (2003).

[10] E. Dulkeith et al., Phys. Rev. B 70, 205424 (2004).

[11] R. A. Farrell, Phys. Rev. 111, 1214 (1958).

[12] D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 027402 (2003).

6

(a)

Electron beam

Parabolic
mirror

Outcoupled light

Fiber bundle to
spectrum analyzer

(b)

a

k
e

k

SPP

k

light

R

L

k

light

k

SPP

n k
G

FIG. 1:

Schematic of (a) the experimental setup for excitation of surface plasmon polaritons

(SPPs) with wave vector kSPP by direct injection of a beam of free electrons of wave vector ke, and

their decoupling as light by a grating, and (b) the geometry of the wave vector matching between

SPPs, uncoupled light and the grating.

7

FIG. 2: Diﬀerential spectrum of light emission of a gold grating of period a = 4.25 µm, oriented

with its ribs perpendicular to the direction of the mirror and excited by a beam of electrons of

50 keV energy at a beam current of 12 µA. The inset shows non-normalized emission spectrum of

(A) the grating and and (B) the unstructured gold surface. The diﬀerential spectrum is obtained

by subtracting spectrum (B) from spectrum (A), hence implying that the diﬀerential spectrum

only consists of the impact of the grating, eliminating transient radiation and luminescence of the

gold ﬁlm.

8

FIG. 3: Decay of the SPPs as function of distance R between the grating edge and electron

injection point. The diﬀerential spectra were obtained by substracting the spectrum sampled at

R = 60 µm from the spectra sampled at shorter distances. The inset shows normalized intensities

of decoupled SPP signal at diﬀerent peak wavelengths as function of distance R between the edge

of the grating and the point of excitation.

9

