6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Circular conversion dichroism in planar chiral metamaterials

V. A. Fedotov,1 P. L. Mladyonov,2 S. L. Prosvirnin,2 A. V. Rogacheva,1 Y. Chen,3 and N. I. Zheludev1, ∗
1EPSRC Nanophotonics Portfolio Centre, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
2Institute of Radio Astronomy, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kharkov, 61002, Ukraine
3Central Microstructure Facility, Engineering and Instrumentation Department,
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Oxfordshire, OX11 0QX, UK
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We report the ﬁrst experiential observation and theoretical analysis of the new phenomenon of
planar chiral circular conversion dichroism, which in some aspects resembles the Faraday eﬀect in
It
magnetized media, but does not require the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld for its observation.
results from the interaction of an electromagnetic wave with a planar chiral structure patterned
on the sub-wavelength scale, and manifests itself in asymmetric transmission of circularly polarized
waves in the opposite directions through the structure and elliptically polarized eigenstates. The
new eﬀect is radically diﬀerent from conventional gyrotropy of three-dimensional chiral media.

 

Since Hetch and Barron [1] and Arnaut and Davis
[2] ﬁrst introduced planar chiral structures to electro-
magnetic research they have become the subject of in-
tense theoretical [3, 4] and experimental investigations
with respect to the polarization properties of scattered
ﬁelds [5, 6, 7]. It was understood by many that planar
chirality is essentially diﬀerent in symmetry from three-
dimensional chirality. Whereas in three-dimensional chi-
ral structures the sense of perceived rotation remains un-
changed for opposing directions of observation (think, for
example, of a helix observed along its axis), planar chi-
ral structures possess a sense of twist that is reversed
when they are observed from opposite sides of the plane
to which the structure belongs. Consequently, if planar
chiral structures were to exhibit a polarization eﬀect (due
to this twist) for light incident normal to the plane, the
sense of the eﬀect would be reversed for light propagat-
ing in opposite directions. Such behavior has never been
observed before, but if proven would be of profound ben-
eﬁt to the development of a new class of microwave and
optical devices.

In this paper we report such a polarization sensitive
eﬀect.
It is a previously unknown fundamental phe-
nomenon of electromagnetism that asymmetric materi-
als can generate behaviors that in some ways resemble
the famous non-reciprocity of the Faraday eﬀect, which
emerges when a wave propagates through a magnetized
medium. However, the phenomenon reported here does
not require the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld and results
from an electromagnetic wave’s transmission through a
chiral planar structure patterned on the sub-wavelength
scale. Both in the Faraday eﬀect and in that produced
by planar chirality, the transmission and retardation of
a circularly polarized wave are diﬀerent in opposite di-
rections. In both cases the polarization eigenstates, i.e.
polarization states conserved on propagation, are ellipti-
cal (circular).

There are also essential diﬀerences between the two
phenomena. The asymmetry of the Faraday eﬀect with
respect to propagation in opposite directions applies to

a) 

b) 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

Intensities and phase retardations of these 
polarization components are the same 

H 

W 

H 

W 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

Intensities and phase retardations of these 
polarization components are different 

+ 

c) 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

Total intensities of transmitted 
waves are different 

FIG. 1: Propagation of circularly polarized waves through
(a) three dimensional chiral medium (b) Faraday and (c) pla-
nar chiral media. The colored circular arrows denote circular
polarization states: blue for RCP, red for LCP. Propagation
through an anisotropic planar chiral structure leads to polar-
ization conversion. The vector H denotes an external mag-
netic ﬁeld, the vector W indicates the twist of the planar
chiral structure.

the transmission and retardation of the incident circu-
larly polarized wave itself. The planar chirality eﬀect
leads to the (partial) conversion of the incident wave into
one of opposite handedness, and it is the eﬃciency of
this conversion that is asymmetric for the opposite di-
rections of propagation (see Fig.1). The eigenstates of
an anisotropic Faraday medium are two elliptically po-
larized waves of opposite handedness. The eigenstates of
a planar chiral medium are two elliptical polarizations
of the same handedness. The newly observed eﬀect of
planar chirality is also radically diﬀerent from conven-
tional gyrotropy in three-dimensional chiral media, such
as the sugar solution which is complectly symmetric with

respect to the inversion of the direction of propagation.
The later property of conventional gyrotropy results from
the fact that the sense of helicity of a spiral (or any
three-dimensional chiral object for this matter) does not
depend on the direction at which it is observed. The
propagation asymmetry observed in planar chiral media
is nevertheless compatible with the general notion of reci-
procity as deﬁned by the Lorentz Lemma. Moreover, the
asymmetric eﬀect in planar chiral structures is inherently
linked to losses in the structure. This will be explained
in more detail below.

i = χij E0

If a medium is described by a complex transmission
matrix χ for the ﬁeld amplitudes of the incident E0
and transmitted ET circularly polarized waves, then
ET
j , where the indices i and j correspond to
the transmitted and incident polarization states, which
could be either right (RCP, +) or left circular polariza-
tions (LCP, −). The matrix χF for an isotropic mag-
netized Faraday medium and matrix χ3D for isotropic
three-dimensional chiral medium are diagonal matrices.
In the Faraday medium the transmission matrices for op-
posing directions of propagation (denoted by arrows), i.e.
←−
−→
χF , are related by the permutation of their di-
χF and
agonal elements, while in the three-dimensional chiral
medium the transmission matrices for opposing direc-
←−−
χ3D, are identical.
tions of propagation, i.e.
In these terms the transmission matrix for a planar chi-
ral anisotropic medium is a non-Hermitian matrix with
equal diagonal elements χ2D =

−−→
χ3D and

. The transmis-

α β
γ α (cid:27)

(cid:26)

←−−
χ2D

sion matrices for opposing directions of propagation will
−−→
χ2D
be mutually transposed:
ji . For a given direc-
ij =
tion of propagation the equality of the diagonal elements
χ++ = χ−− = α implies that losses and retardation are
identical for RCP and LCP waves passing through the
structure. However, since χ+− 6= χ−+, switching be-
tween RCP to LCP incident waves leads to a change in
the intensity and phase of the corresponding LCP and
RCP converted circular components.

The new propagation phenomenon described by the
matrix χ2D has been observed in a chiral ‘ﬁsh-scale’ pla-
nar structure. This is a chiral version of a new type
of electromagnetic meta-material, the non-chiral form of
which was recently investigated for its frequency selective
properties and ‘magnetic wall’ behavior [8]. The chiral
‘ﬁsh-scale’ is a 2-dimensional continuous pattern of tilted
meanders existing in two enantiomeric (mirror) forms in-
terconverted by reﬂection across a line in the plane of
the structure (see Fig.2). On the basis of both intuitive
perception and strict mathematical deﬁnition [9], the left-
tilted ﬁsh-scale A shows an overall anti-clockwise twist,
while the right-tilted ﬁsh-scale B twists clockwise. An
axial ‘twist’ vector W, governed by the cork-screw law,
may be associated with each of the enantiomers.

In the experiments reported here we used a metallic

2

FIG. 2: Fragments of the two enantiomeric forms A and B of
the chiral ‘ﬁsh-scale’ pattern of copper strips on a dielectric
substrate, for which planar chiral circular conversion dichro-
ism was observed at normal incidence. The dashed line box
indicates the elementary translational cell of the structure.
Part C shows a non-chiral ﬁsh-scale structure, which exhib-
ited no chiral eﬀect in transmission.

ﬁsh-scale structure, with a 15×15 mm square translation
cell, etched from a 35 µm copper ﬁlm on a 1.5 mm thick
dielectric PCB material substrate (see Fig. 1). The width
of the strips was 0.8 mm. The overall size of the samples
was approximately 220 × 220 mm. We studied the reﬂec-
tion and transmission of this structure in the 4 − 18 GHz
spectral range, performing measurements in an anechoic
chamber using a vector network analyzer (Agilent, model
E8364B). The structure does not diﬀract electromagnetic
radiation at frequencies lower than 20 GHz so a single-
wave regime was achieved in the experiments. We inves-
tigated transmission through the two enantiomeric forms
of the chiral ﬁsh-scale structure at normal incidence. The
handedness of the pattern depends on whether it is ob-
served from one side of the screen or the another.
In
this paper the handedness will be deﬁned as seen by the
incident electromagnetic wave and the structure will be
referred to as being ‘clockwise’ if the vector W is antipar-
allel to the direction of the incident wave. All parameters
for the incident and transmitted waves will be deﬁned in
a right-handed cartesian coordinate frame where the Z
axis is directed perpendicular to the plane of the struc-
ture along the direction of the incident wave, while the
X and Y axes are directed along and perpendicular to
the meander lines respectively.

Measuring the circular polarization transmission ma-
trix χ2D directly requires circularly polarized emitters
and receivers. Although circular polarization antennae
exist, they are only capable of producing high purity
circular polarization in a narrow spectral range and are
therefore not suitable for broadband measurements. In-
stead, we used high-quality broadband linearly polarized
and log-periodic antennas (Schwarzbeck M. E. model
STLP 9148) and measured the complex transmission
matrix t for linearly polarized ﬁelds. The complex
circular polarization transmission matrix was
then
calculated as follows:

−−→
χ2D = 1

txx + tyy + i(txy − tyx)
txx − tyy + i(txy + tyx)

txx − tyy − i(txy + tyx)
txx + tyy − i(txy − tyx) (cid:27)

2 (cid:26)

3

χ2D are equal across the whole spectral range of inter-
est. Moreover, the diagonal elements are the same for
the two enantiomeric ﬁsh-scale structures A and B and
for propagation in both directions. In Fig. 3 we present
the squared modulus of the diagonal elements, but their
arguments linked to the phase retardation of the corre-
sponding circular components of the transmitted waves
are also equal within experiential accuracy. The fact that
the diagonal elements of the transmission matrix are in-
dependent of the propagation direction and the chiral-
ity of the sample is fully consistent with the outcome
of calculations based on the method of moments. This
indicates that the structure does not manifest a polariza-
tion eﬀect of the same symmetry as conventional optical
activity or the optical Faraday eﬀect in bulk media. How-
ever, it shows an intriguing new assymetric polarization
conversion eﬀect.

The data presented in Fig. 4 illustrates polarization
conversion and the asymmetric properties of the chi-
ral ﬁsh-scale structures. Fig. 4a shows the phase dif-
ference between converted polarization components re-
sulting from excitation with circularly polarized waves of
opposite handedness, measured as ∆φ = Arg{χ−+} −
Arg{χ+−}. Here one can see that the diﬀerential phase
delays for the two enantomeric forms of the structure
have opposite signs, i.e. ∆φA = −∆φB. On the other
hand, for a given structure the diﬀerential phase delay
observed in the forward direction is the same as the delay
for its enantiomer observed in the opposite direction, i.e.
←−−−
−−→
∆φA =
∆φB. Similar symmetries are observed for the
normalized diﬀerence in the intensities of the converted
waves, measured as ∆Ξ = 2(Ξ−+ − Ξ+−)/(Ξ−+ + Ξ+−).
←−−−
−−−→
∆ΞB. This in-
∆ΞB and
Once again
dicates that the perceived sense of rotation of the planar
chiral structure (which depends on whether the struc-
ture is observed from one side or another) controls the
sing of the eﬀect. In other words it matters if the wave
vector of the incident wave is parallel or anti-parallel to
the vector of structure’s twist W (see Fig. 1). This is
in sharp contrast with conventional gyrotropy in three-
dimensional chiral media where observable eﬀect do not
depend on the direction of propagation.

−−−→
∆ΞA = −

−−−→
∆ΞA =

←−
tyx,

←−
txy =

−→
txy =

−→
txy =

←−
tyx and

It should be noted that our raw experiential data for
the cartesian transmission matrix, and the results of com-
−→
putational analysis, show that in all cases
tyx,
−→
←−
txy =
tyx. The last two of
these equalities constitute the requirement imposed on
transmission through a planar chiral structure by the
Lorentz Lemma [11]. In terms of circular polarizations
←−−
χ2D
the Lemma may be re-written as an equality
ji ,
which holds within experimental and computational tol-
erance as illustrated in Fig. 4. Thus, the eﬀect presented
here does not mount any challenge to the validity of the
reciprocity Lemma. The somewhat surprising compati-
bility of this asymmetric eﬀect with the Lorentz Lemma

−−→
χ2D

ij =

FIG. 3: Mean value of Ξii measured for both enantiomeric
forms (A and B) of the structure, both incident polarization
states (RCP and LCP) and in both forward and backward
directions of propagation. The mean value, an average over
eight diﬀerent combinations of sample and wave handedness
and propagation direction, is represented by the black circles.
The solid red and blue lines show the limits of the variation
in transmission for the four conﬁgurations. The small varia-
tion in the results illustrates that all eight experiments yield
the same value of Ξii for given frequency. The solid black
line shows the theoretical value of Ξii calculated using the
method of moments. Within the model Ξii does not depend
on the direction of propagation and handedness of the struc-
ture or polarization state. Therefore the structure shows no
conventional optical activity or Faraday-eﬀect-like polariza-
tion eﬀect.

In the following we also use an intensity transmission
and conversion matrix Ξij =|χij|2. The matrix Ξ for
ﬁsh-scale structures A and B, where transmission is mea-
sured for waves entering the structure from the side of the
−→
ΞB respectively.
metal pattern, will be denoted
Measurements were also conducted for waves entering the
structures from the opposite side, i.e. through the dielec-
tric layer ﬁrst. The corresponding transmission matrices

−→
ΞA and

←−
ΞA and

←−
ΞB.

are

The transmission properties of the ﬁsh-scale structure
were also rigorously modelled using the method of mo-
ments described in [10]. This widely used computational
approach is based on a vectorial integral equation for
the surface current induced by the electromagnetic wave
on the metal strips of the structure, which are assumed
to form an inﬁnitely thin perfectly conducting patterned
with topography identical to the structures used in the
experiment (see Fig. 2). This analysis takes into account
electromagnetic losses in the dielectric substrate support-
ing the metal structure, which are introduced through
the imaginary part of the complex relative permittivity
of the substrate material ε = 4.5 + i0.2. The results of
these calculations show remarkable agreement with those
of the experiments. They are presented in ﬁgures 3 and
4 as continuous lines alongside the experimental points.
The data presented in Fig. 3 illustrates that within
experiential accuracy, the diagonal elements of matrix

4

−−→
χ2D and

therefore responsible for

incident wave. The antisymmetric part is proportional
to a pseudo-scalar combination kW that changes its
It
sign on reversal of the direction of propagation.
←−−
χ2D and
gives rise to the diﬀerence between
is
the direction-dependent
transmission. Essentially, the anti-symmetric part is also
proportional to txy, i.e. it may only exist in anisotropic
patterns of low symmetry (if the structure possesses a
4-fold symmetry axis, txy = 0). Moreover, it is only
in dissipative systems that txy cannot be eliminated
In
by the choice of an appropriate coordinate system.
other words, transmission asymmetry is only possible in
anisotropic dissipative planar chiral structures.

++ +

−−→
ΞA

−−→
ΞA

++ +
←−−
ΞA

tion is given by

++ =
−+ 6=

The origins of ∆φ and ∆Ξ are completely diﬀerent. ∆φ
results from the structures’ anisotropy. Its value depends
on how enatiomeric samples are mutually oriented in the
experiment. More speciﬁcally it depends on the orienta-
tion of the meander’s direction of both enantiomers with
respect to the line of mirror symmetry inter-converting
them. ∆φ does not lead to any asymmetrical eﬀects that
can be detected in the intensity of propagating waves.
In contrast, ∆Ξ results in an observable intensity eﬀect.
The eﬀect is astonishing: the planar chiral structure is
more transparent to a circularly polarized wave from one
side than from another. For instance for an incident RCP
wave the total transmitted intensity in the forward direc-
−+, while in the opposite direc-
←−−
ΞA
−+. In spite of the fact that
tion it is given by
←−−
−−→
ΞA
ΞA
++, polarization conversion is asymmetric, i.e.
←−−
−−→
ΞA
ΞA
−+, leading to a diﬀerence in the total trans-
mitted intensities. No such dependence on the direction
of propagation would be seen in a lossless chiral struc-
ture or an anisotropic non-chiral planar or bulk material
of any description (indeed, no ∆Ξ was detected for the
anisotropic non-chiral ﬁsh-scale structure C). Therefore
this phenomenon is somewhat analogous to the magnetic
circular dichroism eﬀect (MCD) and may be called pla-
nar chiral circular conversion dichroism (PCD). Our cal-
culations show that it is inherently linked to losses and
increases in proportion to the imaginary part of the com-
plex relative permittivity of the substrate material. Loss-
less planar chiral metamaterial shall not display asym-
metric transmission for a circularly polarized wave. As
we already mentioned above, this asymmetric eﬀect is
also forbidden in any planar structure containing a 4-fold
axis of rotation and is therefore irrelevant to the recent
observation of the polarization rotation in four-fold gam-
madion arrays [12].

Our theoretical analysis shows that in lossy anisotropic
planar chiral structures the asymmetry of total transmis-
sion is accompanied by similar asymmetries in reﬂection
and absorption. Nevertheless, the total energy is always
conserved. The spectral dispersions of transmission, re-
ﬂection and absorbtion asymmetries are, in general, dif-

FIG. 4: Planar chiral circular conversion dichroism in chiral
ﬁsh-scale meta-material: polarization conversion in the two
enantiomers of the planar chiral structure in the forward and
backward directions of propagation. The upper graph shows
the phase diﬀerence ∆φ between converted polarization com-
ponents resulting from excitation with circularly polarized
waves of opposite handedness. The lower graph shows the
normalized diﬀerential intensity of conversion, ∆Ξ. The blue
and red ﬁlled circles correspond respectively to the A and B
enantiomers for the forward direction, while the blue and red
empty circles correspond to B and A forms for the reverse
direction. Note, that similar results in the opposite directions
are obtained for the enantiomeric forms of the structure. The
solid curves are obtained using method of moments.

tions of propagation, i.e.

is easily explained by the fact that the asymmetry ob-
served here results from the asymmetry of polarization
conversion for circular polarizations in the opposite direc-
−−→
χ2D
−+, while the Lorentz
In compari-

−+ 6=
−−→
χ2D
−−→
χF
++ and the Lorentz
son, for the Faraday eﬀect
Lemma does not hold, nor indeed is it supposed to in the
presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.

Lemma only requires that

−+ =
++ 6=

←−−
χ2D
+−.

←−−
χF

←−−
χ2D

The origin of the assymetric interaction may be traced
to the structure of the transmission matrix χ2D. It may
be presented as a sum χ2D = χ2D
g,
where

0 + itxysign(kW)

b

0 = 1
χ2D

2 (cid:26)

txx + tyy
txx − tyy

txx − tyy
txx + tyy (cid:27)

and is a symmetric matrix and
is an
anti-symmetric matrix. Here k is the wave vector of the

g =

0 (cid:27)

(cid:26)

b

0 −1
1

3D Chiral Medium 

Faraday medium 

Planar Chiral medium 

 
d
r
a
w
r
o
F

 
d
e
s
r
e
v
e
R

a) 

d) 

H 

H 

W 

W 

b) 

e) 

c) 

f) 

H 

H 

W 

W 

FIG. 5: Polarization eigenstates in an anisotropic three-
dimensional chiral medium (a left); an isotropic three-
dimensional chiral medium (a right); anisotropic Faraday
medium (b, left); an isotropic Faraday medium (b, right); an
anisotropic planar chiral medium (c, left). The single asymp-
totic polarization eigenstate for a planar chiral structure with
vanishing anisotropy is shown in (c, right). Parts (e), (e)
and (f) show the corresponding polarization eigenstates for
an electromagnetic wave propagating in the opposite direc-
tion to that of cases (a), (b) and (c), correspondingly.

 

ferent and can therefore take zero values at certain fre-
quencies. For instance, at frequency 4.89GHz absorp-
tion is the same for both directions of propagation. Here
the asymmetric transmission is due solely to the asym-
metric reﬂection. At 16.3GHz transmission asymmetry
vanishes, but the asymmetry of reﬂection exists and is
due to the asymmetry of absorption.

Knowledge of the complex transmission matrix enables
the calculation of the polarization eigenstates of the sys-
tem, i.e. the polarization states that are not aﬀected by
transmission through the planar structure (see Fig 5). In
analog to the anisotropy of bulk media, the eigenstates
of an anisotropic non-chiral planar structure are two mu-
tually perpendicular linear polarizations. In a loss-less
chiral structure they are also linear. However, the eigen-
states become elliptically polarized in lossy planar chiral
structures.
In contrast to the Faraday eﬀect, or con-
ventional three-dimensional chirality in bulk media for
that matter, where the eigenstates are a pair of counter-
rotating elliptical states, the eigenstates of a lossy planar
chiral structure are two co-rotating elliptical polariza-
tions as illustrated in Fig. 5. These eigenstates only diﬀer
in the azimuths of their main axes (they are orthogonal).
As in the case of the Faraday eﬀect (but in contrast to gy-
rotropy in conventional three-dimensional chiral media),
the sense of rotation of the elliptically polarized eigen-
states is reversed for the opposite direction of propaga-
tion through a planar chiral structure. It is interesting
to note here that if a planar chiral structure is somehow
continuously transformed so as to retain its geometri-
cal chirality but to reduce its anisotropy, the eigenstates
will tend towards a degenerate single circularly polarized
eigenstate. This eigenstate has only asymptotic meaning
because in isotropic planar chiral media the polarization
conversion eﬀect vanishes.

5

We derived the ellipticity of the eigenstates from the
eigenvectors of the experimental transmission matrix tij
and also calculated corresponding theoretical values for
the matrix obtained by the method of moments.
In
both cases the frequency dispersion of the ellipticity
strongly resembles the dispersion of ∆Ξ with the maxi-
mum ellipticity angle reaching 35 deg. As expected, the
polarization eigenstate ellipticities have opposite signs
for counter-propagating directions and for enantiomeric
samples. Here the ellipticity η of the polarization state
is deﬁned in standard fashion as η = 0.5 arctan(S3/S0),
where S3 and S0 are components of the the Stokes Pa-
rameter of the polarization state.

In conclusion, circular conversion dichroism in a pla-
nar chiral structure is a unique, previously unknown ef-
fect, which results from the chirality and anisotropy of
the structure and is inherently linked to dissipation in
the substrate. An attempt to describe it in terms of an
eﬀective medium approximation, and in particular to at-
tribute it to the standard classiﬁcation scheme of local
and non-local reciprocal and non-reciprocal polarization
phenomena in homogeniouse media [13, 14], fails and is
not appropriate. Therefore this phenomenon is perhaps
more closely related to but not the same as the theoret-
ically predicted phenomena of non-reciprocal transmis-
sion through the interface between local and non-local
media [15], and circular diﬀerential reﬂectivity of pla-
nar chiral interface [4]. We expect that the asymme-
try of transmission through an appropriately scaled sub-
wavelength chiral planar structure could be seen in opti-
cal experiments.

The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial
support of the Engineering and Physical Sciences Re-
search Council, UK and the EU Network of Excellence
‘Metamorphose’.

∗

Electronic
URL: www.nanophotonics.org.uk

address:

n.i.zheludev@soton.ac.uk;

[1] L. Hetch and L. D. Barron, Chem. Phys. Lett 225, 525

(1994).

[2] L. R. Arnaut and L. E. Davis, in Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Electromagnetics in Advnaced
Applications (Nexus Media, Swanley, UK, 1995), pp.
381–388.

[3] S. L. Prosvirnin and N. I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. E 71,

[4] D. Bedeaux, M. A. Osipov, and J. Vlieger, J. Opt. Soc.

037603 (2005).

Am. A 21, 2431 (2004).

[5] A. Papakostas, A. Potts, D. M. Bagnall, S. I. Prosvirnin,
H. J. Coles, and N. I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
107404 (2003).

[6] A. S. Schwanecke, A. Krasavin, D. M. Bagnall, A. Potts,
A. V. Zayats, and N. I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
247404 (2003).

[7] S. Takahashi, A. Potts, D. Bagnall, N. I. Zheludev, and

A. V. Zayats, Opt. Comm. 255, 91 (2005).

[8] V. A. Fedotov, P. L. Mladyonov, S. L. Prosvirnin, and
in press (available at

N. I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. E.,
arXiv.org: cond-mat/0504761).

[9] A. Potts, D. M. Bagnall, and N. I. Zheludev, J. Opt. A

6, 193 (2004).

[12] M. Kuwata-Gonokami, N. Saito, Y. Ino, M. Kauranen,
K. Jeﬁmovs, T. Vallius, J. Turunen, and Y. Svirko, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95, 227401 (2005).

[13] G. A. Smolenskii, R. V. Pisarev, and I. G. Sinii, Usp. Fiz.

Nauk 116, 231 (1975).

[14] R. R. Birrs and R. G. Shrubsall, Phil. Mag. 15, 687

[10] S. Prosvirnin, S. Tretyakov, and P. Mladyonov, J. Elec-

(1967).

tromagn. Waves Applic. 16, 421 (2002.).

[15] Y. P. Svirko and N. I. Zheludev, Polarization of Light in

[11] J. A. Kong, Electromagnetic wave theory (EMW Pub-

Nonlinear Optics (Wiley, Chichester, 1998).

lishing, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 2005).

6

