Balanced homodyne detection in second-harmonic generation

microscopy

L. Le Xuan,1 F. Marquier,2 D. Chauvat,1, 3 S. Brasselet,1

F. Treussart,1 S. Perruchas,4 C. Tard,4 T. Gacoin,4 and J.-F. Roch1

1Laboratoire de Photonique Quantique et Mol´eculaire, ENS Cachan,
UMR CNRS 8537 , 61 Avenue du Pr´esident Wilson, 94235 Cachan Cedex, France∗

2Laboratoire EM2C, UPR 288 CNRS,

Ecole Centrale Paris, Grande Voie des Vignes,

92295 Chˆatenay-Malabry Cedex, France

3Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, UMR CNRS 6627,

Universit´e Rennes 1, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France

4Laboratoire de Physique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee,

Ecole Polytechnique, UMR CNRS 7643, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France

(Dated: February 20, 2014)

Abstract

We demonstrate the association of two-photon nonlinear microscopy with balanced homodyne

detection for investigating second harmonic radiation properties at nanoscale dimensions. Variation

of the relative phase between second-harmonic and fundamental beams is retrieved, as a function

of the absolute orientation of the nonlinear emitters. Sensitivity down to 2σ ≈ 3.2 photon/s in the

spatio-temporal mode of the local oscillator is obtained. This value is high enough to eﬃciently

detect the coherent second-harmonic emission from a single KTiOPO4 crystal of sub-wavelength

size.

PACS numbers: 42.65.-k,42.50.-p,07.60.Ly,42.30.Rx

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Compared to two-photon absorption microscopy [1], non-resonant second-harmonic gen-

eration (SHG) can circumvent photobleaching issues [2]. However SHG microscopy usually

leads to weak photon ﬂux, and extremely faint signals are therefore expected from nano-

objects with second-harmonic nonlinear response. Direct detection with avalanche photodi-

ode in photon-counting regime is a practical solution. However their sensitivity is limited by

dark count noise, usually ≈ 10 photons per second. Fortunately, SHG is a coherent process

thus interferometric detection schemes are possible, most interestingly coherent balanced

homodyne detection which exhibits a sensitivity to extremely low photon ﬂux rates [3]. Al-

though high sensitivity with such a technique has been demonstrated to detect surface SHG

emission from an air-semiconductor interface [4], to the best of our knowledge it has never

been applied to the study of nano-objects. Since SHG phase is directly related to the sign of

the associated nonlinear susceptibility, retrieving its value provides important information

about the nonlinear material [5]. At nanometric scale, it allows to determine the absolute

orientation of dipoles with nonlinear hyperpolarisabilities such as organic nanocrystals [6],

to detect the polarity in cell membranes [7], or to study the boundary between microscopic

crystalline domains [8]. Such application prospects strongly motivate the development of

phase-sensitive SHG microscopy with highly sensitive detection compared to SHG interfero-

metric schemes previously developed [5]. In this work coherent balanced homodyne detection

is associated to SHG microscopy, allowing us to detect nano-objects with high signal-to-noise

ratio and phase sensitivity.

The principle of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1. Femtosecond infrared light pulses are

injected in an inverted optical microscope and tightly focused. Backward second-harmonic

emission by a nonlinear crystal placed on a glass cover slide at the microscope focus is

collected by the microscope objective and transmitted through a dichroic mirror toward the

detection set-up. A small fraction of the fundamental beam is also reﬂected from the cover-

slide and follows the same optical path, providing the phase reference. Second-harmonic

obj ] , where φ(2ω)

emission of the crystal, further referred as “signal”, is associated with an electrical ﬁeld
E(2ω) = |E(2ω)| exp[iφ(2ω)
object as compared to the one of the incident fundamental ﬁeld E(ω)
in on the object. For a
. Thus, φ(2ω)
macroscopic nonlinear crystal, the SHG ﬁeld is E(2ω) ∝ χ(2)E(ω)
obj reﬂects the
phase of the nonlinear susceptibility χ(2). For a nonlinear crystal in its spectral transparence

is the phase shift of the SHG ﬁeld emitted by the

obj

in

2

window, χ(2) is real with positive or negative values depending on the absolute orientation

2

of the nonlinear response in respect to the crystal axis. Therefore determination of φ(2ω)

obj

allows to infer the absolute orientation of the nonlinear crystal.

For the coherent optical homodyne detection of the SHG signal, the local oscillator (LO)

is generated by sending part of the incident infrared beam into a BBO nonlinear crystal

(Fig. 1). A Glan prism ensures linear polarization of the local oscillator along the x-axis and

x-polarized signal and local oscillator are recombined by a non-polarizing 50/50 beamsplitter
cube. The 180◦ out-of-phase interferences at the two output ports of the beamsplitter are

detected by photodetectors D1 and D2.

In balanced detection mode, the two resulting

photoelectric signals S1 and S2 are subtracted [9], thus canceling out their DC component.

The interferometric signal is then :

∆S(2ω) = K × 2V qP (2ω)

LO P (2ω)

sig

cos (cid:16)φ(2ω)

sig − φ(2ω)
LO (cid:17)

(1)

sig

LO and P (2ω)

denote the mean optical power of local oscillator and signal, V is

where P (2ω)
the fringe visibility, and K includes the quantum eﬃciency of the photodiodes. The phase
shift of the signal at frequency 2ω , φ(2ω)
sig = φ(2ω)
the x-polarized radiation emitted by the nonlinear object and the phase shift φ(2ω)

contains the phase shift φ(2ω)

1 + φ(2ω)

due to

of

2

1

2

propagation in the interferometer.

In order to measure the phase shift φ(2ω)

sig , temporal interference fringes are created by
displacing a mirror mounted on a piezoelectric transducer (PZT) driven with a triangular

shape voltage. The resulting fringes are shown in inset of Fig. 1. To extract the phase shift

information, fringes at 2ω are compared to reference fringes resulting from fundamental

beam. More precisely, we perform with detectors D3 and D4 a separate balanced homodyne

detection of the residual fundamental beam reﬂected by the sample by mixing it with the

residual light at ω which follows the reference arm. A reference interference signal (see
sig − φ(ω)
inset of Fig. 1) is then obtained, equal to ∆S(ω) = K ′ × 2V ′
LO(cid:17)
with same notations meaning as in Eq. (1). The quantity to be extracted is then ∆φ =
(cid:16)φ(2ω)
1 + φ0, where φ0 is an
“instrumental” phase shift. Although φ0 can be measured with a reference crystal its value
is not required if we are only concerned in variation of φ(2ω)
while keeping φ0 constant.
Finally, the value of ∆φ is extracted using a numerical procedure.

LO(cid:17) which can be written as ∆φ = φ(2ω)

LO (cid:17) − (cid:16)φ(ω)

sig cos (cid:16)φ(ω)

sig − φ(2ω)

sig − φ(ω)

LO P (ω)

qP (ω)

1

A macroscopic KTiOPO4 (KTP) crystal with axes as shown in Fig. 2 is used to test the

setup. The Z-axis is parallel to the crystal input face. With a strongly focused pump beam,

3

a SHG backward emitted beam from the interface is observed [10]. We ﬁrst check in Fig. 2b
that ∆S(2ω) associated to this surface SHG grows linearly with the fundamental incident
power on the crystal P (ω)
in , as expected from Eq. (1). If the crystal is rotated by 180◦ around
the microscope optical axis (z-axis), the nonlinear coeﬃcient χ(2) is transformed in −χ(2)
and a 180◦ SHG-phase-shift is expected. Results are shown in Fig. 2c. The amplitude shows

a maximum of x-polarized SHG when the linear polarization is aligned along the Z-axis of
the crystal (ψ = 0◦ or 180◦) which exhibits the highest nonlinear coeﬃcient. The full line is

the theoretical result assuming an x-polarized incident plane wave normal to the interface

and a single nonlinear emitting dipole which takes into account all nonlinear coeﬃcients of

the KTP χ(2) tensor. It yields good agreement with experimental points. The phase-shift

∆φ (Fig. 2d) remains constant while the nonlinear dipole has a positive projection along
the x-axis (0◦ < ψ < 90◦). It then endures a 180◦-phase-shift when it becomes negative
(90◦ < ψ < 180◦). The small deviation to the constant value is attributed to drift of the φ0

parameter during the step-by-step rotation of the KTP crystal.

We then apply the method to the detection of SHG from nanometric size objects. Here we

use inorganic KTP crystals of sub-wavelength size (≤ 200 nm). To ﬁrst locate the crystals,

the sample is raster-scanned in x and y directions with piezoelectric translators and SHG

is detected with the avalanche photodiode as shown in Fig. 1. A SHG signal image of such

a nano-crystal is shown in Fig. 3a. A quadratic dependence of the detected SHG intensity
is observed upon varying P (ω)

as expected (see Fig. 3b). After positioning the focused

in

infrared excitation beam at the center of the detected emission spot of a single nano-crystal,

we switch to the coherent balanced homodyne detection set-up. SHG interference fringes

(Fig. 3d) associated to fundamental ones (Fig. 3c) are clearly visible, giving evidence for

the coherence of the nano-crystal SHG emission. Focusing the input beam next to the

nano-crystal, we check that no SHG is detectable.

Since the balanced homodyne detection method consists in the projection of the signal

electric ﬁeld on the spatio-temporal mode of the local oscillator, mode-matching between

signal and LO beams determines maximal amplitude of the fringes. This can be quantiﬁed

by the fringe visibility V of Eq. (1) being equal to unity for perfect mode-matching. With

a 2 mW LO average power, the smallest SHG fringe amplitude measured with 1 s duration
averaging is equivalent to a signal power P (2ω)
sig ≈ (7.2 ± 5.0)×10−19 W assuming V = 1. The
uncertainty evaluated for 95 % conﬁdence interval is equivalent to 3.2 detected photons/s,

4

close to the shot noise limit. However a unity fringe visibility is practically diﬃcult to

achieve. In an auxiliary experiment using equal powers for signal and LO beams, we measure

V = 0.21, leading to an actual sensitivity of 80 photons/s. Such a reduced value for the

visibility factor is attributed to imperfect mode-matching between signal and LO modes,

including polarization mismatch, wave-front distortion, and frequency chirp on the SHG-

emitted femtosecond pulses.

To conclude we have demonstrated a SHG phase-sensitive microscope with coherent bal-

anced homodyne detection, showing a sensitivity at the photon/s level. The high-spatial

resolution and the sensitivity of the technique is well-adapted to the study of SHG from

nano-crystals. Lock-in detection techniques, requiring higher interferometer stability, will

allow us to detect much lower ﬂux of photons.

We are very grateful to V. Le Floc’h for ﬁrst observation of SHG fringes, and to D. Lupin-

ski and Ph. Villeval at Cristal Laser S.A. (Nancy, France), for providing us with the KTP

material. We acknowledge fruitful discussions with F. Grosshans, J. Zyss, J.-J. Greﬀet and

R. Carminati, and the help of R. Hierle for sample preparation. This work is supported by

the AC Nanoscience research program and by Institut Universitaire de France.

∗ Electronic address: roch@physique.ens-cachan.fr

[1] W. Denk, J. H. Strickler, and W. W. Webb, Science 248, 73 (1990).

[2] G.H. Patterson and D.W. Piston, Biophys. J. 78, 2159 (2000).

[3] H.P. Yuen and V.W.S. Chan, Opt. Lett. 8, 177 (1983).

[4] J. Chen, S. Machida, and Y. Yamamoto, Opt. Lett. 23, 676 (1998).

[5] R. Stolle, G. Marowsky, E. Schwarzberg, and G. Bergovic, Appl. Phys. B 63, 491 (1996); and

[6] S. Brasselet, V. Le Floc’h, F. Treussart, J.-F. Roch, J.-F. Zyss, E. Botzung-Appert, and

A. Ibanez, Phys. Rev Lett. 92, 207401 (2004).

[7] L. Moreaux, O. Sandre, and J. Mertz, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 17, 1685 (2000).

[8] F. Laurell, M. G. Roelofs, W. Bindloss, H. Hsiung, A. Suna, and J. D. Bierlein, J. Appl. Phys.

Refs. therein.

71, 4664 (1992).

[9] We use an autobalanced photoreceiver (Nirvana, Model 2007, New Focus, San Jose CA) which

5

achieves 50 dB common noise rejection.

[10] R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, 2nd ed., 2003).

6

FIG. 1: Schematic of the experimental set-up. L: femtosecond laser (86 MHz repetition rate, ≈ 100

fs pulse duration, λ = 986 nm); BBO: nonlinear χ(2) crystal; P: Glan prism; O: microscope objective

(N.A. = 1.40, × 100) leading to a ≈ 300 nm FWHM diameter focal spot; BS: non-polarizing beam-

splitter; CC: corner-cube; PZT: mirror mounted on a piezoelectric transducer; KTP: macroscopic

KTiOPO4 crystal or single sub-wavelength size crystal; F: SHG ﬁlter; APD: avalanche photodiode

in photon counting regime; D1 and D2: p-i-n Si photodetectors of the balanced receiver recording

SHG at 2ω (a SHG ﬁlter, not shown, is put in front of the detectors); D3 and D4: the same for the

balanced receiver at fundamental optical frequency ω (an IR ﬁlter, not shown, is put in front of

the detectors). Insert: full lines : detected signals as a function of time for a forward translation
of the mirror. Up: signal ∆S(ω) at fundamental frequency with a sinusoidal ﬁt at frequency f =
1.9 kHz, and bottom: ∆S(2ω) at SHG frequency with a sinusoidal ﬁt at frequency 2f = 3.8 kHz,

dashed line: voltage applied to the PZT on half a period (vertical scale: a.u.).

7

FIG. 2: Results from the balanced homodyne detection.

(a) Laboratory axes (x, y, z) with x-

polarized incident fundamental beam propagating along z-axis. (X, Y, Z) KTP crystal principal
axes (θ = 90◦ and Φ = 23.5◦). Full lines denote axes in the (x, y) plane. ψ : rotation angle of
the χ(2) nonlinear crystal around the z-axis. (b) Linearity of ∆S(2ω) as a function of fundamental
incident power. Points : experimental data, full line : best linear dependence ﬁt. (c) : ∆S(2ω) as

a function of ψ (in degrees). (d) : Relative SHG phase shift ∆φ as a function of ψ.

8

FIG. 3: Application of the balanced homodyne technique to sub-wavelength-size nonlinear crystals.

(a) Raster-scan image of SHG signal from a KTP nano-crystal with an avalanche photodiode. The

FWHM diameter of SHG spot intensity is about 300 nm, very close to the theoretical two-photon

microscope resolution (320 nm FWHM). (b) Number of detected SHG photons as a function of
incident power with a best square-law dependence ﬁt. (c) Fundamental interference signal ∆S(ω) as
a function of time for a single nano-crystal and (d) corresponding SHG interference signal ∆S(2ω).

9

