6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the origin dependence of multipole
moments in electromagnetism.

Patrick De Visschere

Ghent University, Dept. ELIS
Sint-Pietersnieuwstraat 41, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
tel. +32-9-264 8950; fax. +32-9-264 35 94; e-mail: pdv@elis.UGent.be

2nd February 2008

Abstract

The standard description of material media in electromagnetism is based
on multipoles. It is well known that these moments depend on the point of
reference chosen, except for the lowest order. It is shown that this “origin
dependence” is not unphysical as has been claimed in the literature but forms
only part of the effect of moving the point of reference. When also the com-
plementary part is taken into account then different points of reference lead
to different but equivalent descriptions of the same physical reality. This
is shown at the microscopic as well as at the macroscopic level. A similar
interpretation is valid regarding the “origin dependence” of the reﬂection co-
efﬁcients for reﬂection on a semi inﬁnite medium. We show that the “trans-
formation theory” which has been proposed to remedy this situation (and
which is thus not needed) is unphysical since the transformation considered
does not leave the boundary conditions invariant.

1

Introduction

In classical electrodynamics[1] material media are modelled at the microscopic
level as an ensemble of stable building blocks (atoms, ions, molecules, . . . ) with
certain microscopic charge (h ) and current ( j) densities. The microscopic ﬁelds

1

(e, b) then obey the microscopic Maxwell equations:

(cid:209) × e = −

¶ b
¶ t

(cid:209) ×

b
m 0

=

¶e

0e
¶ t

+ j

· b = 0

· e 0e = h

With a purely classical model the microscopic sources may be written as:

h = (cid:229)

qkld (r − Rkl)

j = (cid:229)

˙Rkld (r − Rkl)

qkl

k,l

k,l

where the index k labels the building blocks and l the point charges (with po-
sition Rkl and velocity ˙Rkl) within a building block. The macroscopic Maxwell
equations then follow by a suitable averaging procedure. Due to the linearity
these equations are similar to the ones in (1) with (e, b) replaced by the macro-
scopic ﬁelds (E, B) and with the microscopic sources replaced by their averages
(hh i, h ji). The microscopic source densities (2) can be rearranged and expressed
in terms of the (microscopic) electric and magnetic multipole moment densities.
Usually only the 2 lowest order multipole moments are taking into account. After
averaging, these lead to the usual macroscopic source densities:

where (r , J) are the unbound charge and current densities and P and M the
polarization and magnetization densities. In order to avoid the complexities asso-
ciated with moving media, in what follows we will consider only non-moving me-
dia. Substituting (3) in the averaged (1) and deﬁning D = e 0E +P and H = B
−M
m 0
one ﬁnds the standard macroscopic Maxwell equations:

· P

hh i = r − (cid:209)
¶ P
¶ t

h ji = J +

+ (cid:209) × M

(cid:209) × E = −

(cid:209) × H =

¶ D
¶ t

¶ B
¶ t

+ J

· B = 0

· D = r

If higher order multipole contributions are taken into account then additional
terms show up in (3). By adapting the deﬁnition of (D, H) accordingly equations
(4) remain valid. However it should be noted that at a boundary between 2 media
the jump conditions which follow from (4) have to be adapted in order to take into
account these additional multipole contributions.

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(cid:209)
(cid:209)
(cid:209)
(cid:209)
It is well known that the multipole moments are not unique and more precisely
they depend on the choice of the reference point (e.g. the centre of mass) used for
calculating the moments, except for the lowest order non vanishing moment. E.g.
the total charge of an ion qk = (cid:229)
l qkl is independent of the reference point but
the electric dipole moment is not, except if qk = 0. For insulating materials the
dipole terms are unique and since higher moments are usually not considered the
non-uniqueness of the higher moments is often of no consequence.

In [2] [3] material media are treated up to the electric octopole and the mag-
netic quadrupole terms. The emphasis is on optical phenomena (in insulating
media) and in particular Fresnel reﬂection coefﬁcients are calculated for a semi-
inﬁnite medium taking into account these quadrupole and octopole effects. There-
fore the authors are faced with the problem of the non-uniqueness of these higher
order moments. As a result of lengthy calculations they ﬁnd that in general those
reﬂection coefﬁcients also depend on the chosen reference point (it is called “ori-
gin dependent”, but this should not be mistaken for the origin of the laboratory
frame, but as a reference point within an atom.) These results are then discarded
as being “unphysical” and using a “transformation theory” they adapt the “stan-
dard theory” so that “origin-independent” reﬂection coefﬁcients are obtained. Al-
though at ﬁrst sight the reasoning may seem tempting no indication is given at
what point exactly the “standard theory” became “unphysical”. After some con-
sideration we became convinced that there is actually no problem with the “stan-
dard theory” and that on the contrary the “origin dependence” as calculated in [2]
has no physical meaning since only part of the effect of changing the position of
the “origin” has been taken into account. In fact when choosing another reference
point not only the higher order multipole moments do change but so does the po-
sition of these elementary sources. If both effects are taken into account then the
microscopic charge density remains unchanged as expected. This is explained in
more detail in section 2. In sections 3 and 4 the same idea is worked out in the
macroscopic domain and in section 5 the effect on reﬂection coefﬁcients is con-
sidered. It will become clear that there is no need for a “transformation theory”.
On the contrary, since the “standard theory” and the “transformation theory” give
different results, at least one of them must be unphysical. In the last section 6
it will be shown that the “transformation theory” is unphysical since it does not
leave the boundary conditions invariant.

3

2 Microscopic charge and current densities

In order to simplify the notation we consider only a single building block. Then
up to quadrupole order the microscopic charge density is written as:

h = qd (r − R) − pi¶ id (r − R) + qi j¶ i jd (r − R) + · · ·

where the electric multipole moments are deﬁned as[4]:

m (n) =

1
n!

l

qlrn
l

(cid:1)

In (5) we use

q, pi, qi j
(cid:0)

as a shorthand notation for the 3 lowest order mul-
tipole moments, ¶ i for the derivative with respect to xi, the cartesian components
of r, R for the position vector of the reference point and rl for the position vector
of charge l with respect to this reference point (thus Rl = R + rl, where compared
If we choose another reference point
with (2) the index k has been omitted).
within the building block via R = R′ + d and rl = r′
l − d then in general different
multipole moments are obtained:

pi = (cid:229)

qlxil = (cid:229)

l

l

ql(x′

il − di) = p′

i − qdi

and similarly for the quadrupole moment:

qi j = q′

i j −

(di p′

j + p′

id j) +

qdid j

1
2

1
2

On the other hand these modiﬁed moments must now be placed in the new

reference point. With a Taylor series we write:

= d (r − R′) − di¶ id (r − R′) +

d (r − R) = d (r − R′ − d)
did j¶ i jd (r − R′) + · · ·

1
2

Inserting (7) (8) and (9) into (5) and retaining only terms up to quadrupole

order one ﬁnds a similar expression but referred to the new reference point:

h = qd (r − R′) − p′

¶ id (r − R′) + q′

i

i j

¶ i jd (r − R′) + · · ·

(10)

Therefore the microscopic charge density (h ) is as expected independent of
the choice of reference point within the building block, although the multipole
moments themselves do change according to (7) and (8). The interpretation is
straightforward: suppose q 6= 0 then moving the reference point over −d changes

4

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(cid:229)
(11)

(12)

(13)

the dipole moment with qd but the monopole q must be moved with the reference
point and this constitutes an additional dipole moment exactly cancelling the ﬁrst
change.

A similar conclusion can be drawn with respect to the microscopic current

density. We deﬁne the magnetic multipole moments by:

n (n) =

n
(n + 1)!

l

qlrn−1
l

(rl × ˙rl)

with in particular for the magnetic dipole moment (n = 1):

mi =

qlei jkx jl ˙xkl

1
2

l

mi = m′

i −

ei jkd j ˙p′
k

1
2

where ei jk is the Levi-Civita tensor. This dipole moment transforms according

to:

Up to electric quadrupole and magnetic dipole order, the microscopic current

density is then given by:

ji = ˙pid (r − R) − ˙q ji¶

jd (r − R) + ei jkmk¶

jd (r − R)

(14)

Substituting (7) (8) (13) and (9) into (14) again results in a similar expression

for the microscopic current density with respect to the new reference point:

ji = ˙p′
i

d (r − R′) − ˙q′
ji

¶

jd (r − R′) + ei jkm′

k¶

jd (r − R′)

(15)

We consider now as an example the reﬂection of a plane wave impinging on
a semi inﬁnite medium as was treated in [2]. In principle the problem could be
solved at the microscopic level and this would result in deﬁnite values for the
charge and current densities in each atom of the medium and thus for the global h
and j. We could then describe these resulting charge and current densities using
multipole moments up to some chosen order and as shown this representation is
independent of the choice of reference point, although the moments themselves
are “origin dependent”. This shows that already at the microscopic level the “ori-
gin dependence” of the multipole moments has no physical consequence supposed
they are treated in a consequent way, meaning that the multipoles should be placed
at their particular reference point.

5

(cid:229)
(cid:229)
3 Macroscopic charge and current densities

Since the macroscopic charge and current densities (hh i, h ji) are obtained by av-
eraging the microscopic densities, this conclusion must extend to the macroscopic
level. The proper way of averaging is over an ensemble [5] with a probability
density f (Rkl, ˙Rkl;t) which depends on the positions of all charges and their ve-
locities. Alternatively the probability can be expressed as a function of the atomic
. Since the probability of
positions
ﬁnding the system in a particular conﬁguration is independent of the choice of the
atomic reference point it follows that:

and the internal coordinates

rkl, ˙rkl
(cid:0)

Rk, ˙Rk
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:1)

f (Rk, ˙Rk, rkl, ˙rkl;t) = f ′(R′

k, ˙R

′
k, r′

kl, ˙r′

kl;t)

(16)

where we have already taken into account that the Jacobian of the transforma-
tion (Rk = R′
kl − d) equals unity. If we take the sum over all building
blocks of the ﬁrst contribution in (5) and take the average over this distribution
function, we ﬁnd the unbound charge density r

k + d, rkl = r′

in (3):

r = h(cid:229)

qkd (r − Rk)i = (cid:229)

d (r − Rk) fk(Rk;t)dRk = (cid:229)

k

qk Z

k

qk fk(r;t)

(17)

k

where fk(r;t) is the probability density for ﬁnding building block k at r. Again
for simplicity we consider now only the contribution of one particular kind of ions
and (17) can then be written as:

where f1(r;t) is the probability density for ﬁnding 1 ion of this kind at r.
¶ t = 0 and (ii) r should be sup-
Note that (i) since we excluded moving media
plemented with a contribution from the free electrons; but since these have no
internal structure they are not relevant for our subject.

¶r

If we choose another reference point (shift of the origin) then in general an-

other unbound charge density (due to the ions) is found:

Due to (16) the probability densities are related by f1(r;t) = f ′

1((r − d);t)

and therefore r (r) = r

′(r − d). After developing we ﬁnd:

r = r

′ − di¶ ir

′ +

did j¶ i jr

′ + · · ·

This result is completely similar with that found for the corresponding mi-
croscopic quantities where the d -functions in the latter are here replaced by the

r = q f1(r;t)

r

′ = q f ′

1(r;t)

1
2

6

(18)

(19)

(20)

probability density function. The same reasoning can be followed for the higher
order terms. For the polarization we ﬁnd:

(21)

(22)

P = h(cid:229)

k

pk

d (r − Rk)i =

Z

p(rl) f2(r, rl;t)drl

where the integration is over all internal coordinates and a similar expres-
sion holds for the shifted origin where the distribution functions are related by
f2(r, rl;t) = f ′

l;t). Taking into account (7) and (19) we then ﬁnd:

2(r − d, r′

Pi(r) = P′

i(r − d) − dir

′(r − d)

where we have also taken into account that the integration of f ′

2 over the
1 and where we have omitted the time dependence.

internal coordinates yields f ′
After developing we ﬁnd:

Pi = P′

i − dir

′ + did j¶

jr

′ − d j¶

jP′

i + · · ·

(23)

For the quadrupole density we ﬁnd in the same way:

Qi j(r) = Q′

i j(r − d) −

(diP′

j(r − d) + P′

i(r − d)d j) +

did jr

′(r − d)

(24)

1
2

and then up to quadrupole order:

Qi j = Q′

i j −

(diP′

j + P′

id j) +

did jr

′ + · · ·

(25)

1
2

Although the individual multipole contributions do transform with a shift of
the origin, according to (20) (23) (25) and so on, the total macroscopic charge
density:

1
2

1
2

hh i = r − ¶ iPi + ¶ i jQi j + · · · = r

′ − ¶ iP′

i + ¶ i jQ′

i j + · · ·

(26)

does not, as can readily be veriﬁed. A similar conclusion can be drawn with

respect to the macroscopic current density h ji, which is given by:

h jii = ¶ t Pi − ¶ t¶

jQ ji + ei jk¶

jMk = ¶ tP′

i − ¶ t¶

jQ′

ji + ei jk¶

jM′

k

(27)

where ¶ t is the partial derivative with respect to time and where the magneti-

zation density transforms according to:

Mi(r) = M′

i(r − d) −

ei jkd j¶ tP′

k(r − d)

(28)

1
2

7

and then up to quadrupole order:

Mi = M′

i −

ei jkd j¶ t P′

k

1
2

(29)

Since at the macroscopic level only hh i, h ji have physical meaning, whereas
in general r , Pi, Qi j, Mi, · · · do depend on the choice of reference point the lat-
ter must be considered as equivalent representations of the same physical macro-
scopic charge and current densities.

4 Polarizabilities

The constitutive equations of a medium express the response ﬁelds Pi, Qi j, Mi, · · ·
as a function of the ﬁelds Ei, Bi. This dependence can be local in space and time
or more in general the response ﬁelds can also depend on the values of the ﬁelds
in nearby points and/or in the past. We will use the same linear expressions as in
[2] (with slightly different notations) and we will consider only a non magnetic
medium and again limit ourselves to terms of electric quadrupole/magnetic dipole
order:

Pi = P(0)

i + a

i jE j + ai jk¶

jEk + Gi j¶ tB j

Qi j = Q(0)
Mi = M(0)

i j + aki jEk
i − G ji¶ tE j

(30)

The values of the multipole densities in the absence of any ﬁelds are indi-
cated with a superscript (0). In [2] the origin dependence of the polarizabilities
a
i j, ai jk, Gi j, · · · have been found based on a microscopic (and quantum mechani-
cal) theory. Strictly speaking one should then consider ﬁrst the local ﬁelds in (30)
and then eliminate these so that only the macroscopic ﬁelds remain. We avoid
this complication by considering (30) as pure macroscopic equations where the
polarizabilities are phenomenological parameters. From the transformation prop-
erties of the response ﬁelds which have been found in the previous section we can
deduce those of the polarizabilities.

Consider ﬁrst the 2nd equation which we write in extenso as Qi j(r) = Q(0)

aki jEk(r). A similar equation holds for the shifted reference point Q′
Q′(0)
ki jEk(r). In view of (24) we combine these 2 into:

i j (r) + a′

i j (r)+
i j(r) =

Qi j(r + d) − Q′

i j(r) = Q(0)

i j (r + d) − Q′(0)

i j (r) + aki jEk(r + d) − a′

ki jEk(r)

(31)

8

Using (24) twice this becomes:

−

1
2

di(P′

j(r) − P′(0)

j (r)) −

(P′

i(r) − P′(0)

i

(r))d j = aki jEk(r + d) − a′

ki jEk(r)

1
2

On the left side we use the ﬁrst equation of (30) only retaining terms up to
quadrupole order (for the same reason the d on the right side can be dropped) and
we then ﬁnd:

In exactly the same way we ﬁnd from the second equation in (30) and using

(28):

aki j = a′

ki j −

(dia

′

jk + a

′

ikd j)

1
2

Gi j = G′

i j +

e jkldka

′

li

1
2

Lastly from the ﬁrst equation in (30) and using (22) we ﬁnd at ﬁrst:

a

i jE j(r + d) + ai jk¶

jEk(r + d) + Gi j¶ t B j(r + d) = a

′

i jE j(r) + a′

i jk¶

jEk(r) + G′

i j¶ tB j(r)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

Equating the terms of dipole-order on both sides one ﬁnds:

a

i j = a

′

i j

All terms of quadrupole order cancel each other if one uses (33), (34) and
also takes into account Faraday’s law ¶ tB j(r) = −e jkl¶ kEl(r) and the symmetry
of a
i j. The results (33) (34) and (36) are exactly the same as those found in [2],
although they have been derived in a different way. Note that in transforming
the polarizabilities we have taken into account that with the shift of the origin
(for calculating the moments) one must also change the (position of the) driving
expression is relevant due to our
ﬁeld (see e.g. (35), where only the ﬁrst
(cid:0)
limitation to quadrupole order). It follows that if we use the origin dependencies
of the polarizabilities as used in [2] and combine these with the proper shift of
the ﬁeld-point then the resulting macroscopic charge and current densities do not
depend on the choice of origin as shown by (26) and (27).

r + d

(cid:1)

5 Reﬂection coefﬁcients

Turning now to the wave propagation in this medium it has been noted [2] that
the (plane wave) modes are origin-independent. This was to be expected based on

9

the analysis given above. In order to determine the reﬂection coefﬁcients for an
air/medium interface we need the boundary or jump conditions at this interface,
taking into account the quadrupole effects. Choosing the (x,y)-axes into the plane
of the interface and with the z-axis pointing into the medium these can be written
as:

e 0D
e 0D

sEx = ¶ xPz = −¶ xQzz
sEy = ¶ yPz = −¶ yQzz

e 0D

sEz = p s = −Pz + ¶ xQzx + ¶ yQzy + ¶

jQ jz

sBx
m 0

sBy
m 0

= −Ky = −Mx + ¶ tQzy

= Kx = −My − ¶ tQzx

(37)

(38)

(39)

sBz = 0

where D

(40)
s stands for the ﬁeld on the air side minus the ﬁeld in the medium. p s
is the (bound) surface charge density, Kx, Ky are the components of the (bound)
surface current density and Px, Py, Pz those of the surface polarization density.
These equations are the same as those used in [2] except for (38) where the contri-
bution ¶ zQzz in the last term on the RHS is missing in [2] (and the conditions differ
from those published previously [6]). The quadrupole contributions in (37)-(39)
can be understood as follows: in the bulk of the medium the quadrupole density is
equivalent with a polarization density PQ
jQ ji. At the interface this density
becomes singular and gives rise to a surface polarization density Pi = −Qzi. The
normal component Pz = −Qzz gives rise to a local voltage difference over the
boundary and its variation along the boundary enters Faraday’s law and explains
(37). The in-plane components on the other hand give rise to a surface charge den-
sity −¶ xPx − ¶ yPy, which explains the ﬁrst 2 quadrupole contributions in (38),
and a surface current density with components ¶ t Px and ¶ tPy, which explain the
contributions in (39). In the bulk the polarization PQ
jQ ji is equivalent with
a charge density −¶ iPQ
i = ¶ i¶
jQ ji. The
former has a singularity at the surface leading to a surface charge density ¶
jQ jz,
which is the last contribution in (38). Note that without this term the normal com-
ponent of the accompanying current density is not balanced at the surface.

jQ ji and a current density ¶ tPQ

i = −¶ t ¶

i = −¶

i = −¶

Using Faraday’s law on both sides of the interface it is easily seen that (37)
implies (40). Similarly using instead Ampère’s law one can also verify that (39)
implies (38). Therefore we only need the equations (37) and (39) to ﬁnd the re-
ﬂection coefﬁcients. In general the quadrupole contributions in these equations

10

D
D
D
will change if another reference point is chosen, as in the bulk of the material.
However just as in the bulk this change will be balanced exactly by the displace-
ment of the (lower order) dipole moment and therefore if calculated correctly no
change in reﬂection coefﬁcients should be found. However whereas in the bulk
the latter effect is accounted for automatically (and yields an origin independent
wave equation and origin independent modes) at the free surface it must be taken
into account explicitly. It seems indeed logical that when moving the (atomic)
reference point, and therefore all multipoles, over a distance d, then one should
at the macroscopic level, move the boundary surface over the same distance with
the immediate conclusion that only dz will be relevant. The effect of such a shift
(alone) on the reﬂection coefﬁcients is easily found to ﬁrst order as:

(dR)ss = −2 jkzdzR

where “ss” stands for “surface shift” and with kz the normal wave vector com-
ponent in free space (we use the time dependence e jw
t). If the reﬂection coefﬁ-
cients are origin independent then the change in the reﬂection coefﬁcients due to
the change of the quadrupole moments alone must exactly be opposite to the one
in (41):

(dR)qc = 2 jkzdzR

where “qc” stands for “quadrupole change” and this should be true irrespec-
tive of any symmetry properties of the medium. Proving this relation by direct
analytical calculation turns out too complex so far in the most general case, this
means for oblique incidence on an arbitrary medium1. However we could prove
relation (42) if we relax one of these conditions: (i) perpendicular incidence on an
arbitrary medium or (ii) oblique incidence on a medium with a 4-fold symmetry
axis perpendicular to the surface. Further evidence for the general validity of (42)
can be gathered directly from the relevant boundary conditions (37) and (39). Us-
ing (25) and (29) the changes in Pz, Kx, Ky due to the change of the quadrupole
moment are given by2:

(41)

(42)

(43)

Since the bulk current density has components ¶ tPx, ¶ tPy along the free surface
these variations are indeed as if the surface moved outwards over dz whereas dz >

1“arbitrary” means in this context “without any special symmetry properties”.
2Note that due to our deﬁnition of d (R = R′

+ d) the difference equals unaccented quantities

minus accented quantities.

(dPz)qc = dzPz
(dKx)qc = dz¶ t Px
(dKy)qc = dz¶ t Py

11

0 actually represents an inward movement of the surface, since the z-axis points
into the medium. Finally we note that the lowest order term shown in (42) is
imaginary since it corresponds with a pure phase shift. In [2] the variation of
the modulus of R only was considered and therefore the relevant lowest order
contribution to dR was missed. The variation of the modulus is indeed of a higher
than quadrupole order and since calculations have been done up to quadrupole
order only this is a meaningless result.

6 Transformations

In the frequency-domain the constitutive equations can generally be expressed as:

Di = e i jE j + g i jB j
Hi = b i jE j + n i jB j

(44)

(45)

where the material constants can be calculated from (30):

e i j = e 0d i j + a

g i j = jw Gi j

b i j = jw G ji

i j + jkm(a jmi − aim j)
d i j

n i j = m −1

0

Due to (33), (34) these material constants will usually be “origin dependent”
and therefore at ﬁrst sight also material dependent properties like e.g. reﬂection
coefﬁcients. As explained in the previous section the change of reference point
should be accompanied by a shift of the free surface boundary and when both ef-
fects are taking into account the reﬂection coefﬁcients are invariant. Raab and De
Lange[2] [3] [7] did not take the latter effect into account but instead, in order to
get rid of the “origin dependence” of the material constants in (45), they devel-
oped a “transformation theory”, which essentially applies changes D Gi j and D ai jk
to the polarizabilities in such a way that Maxwell’s equations remain invariant.
The new formulation is supposed to be equivalent with the original one, but since
both formulations lead to different physical results (in casu different reﬂection co-
efﬁcients) this cannot be true. This is due to the fact that no attention was given
to the boundary conditions. In fact it is almost inescapable that different reﬂec-
tion coefﬁcients (in casu origin independent ones) could only have been obtained
using this procedure by changing the boundary conditions.

In order for the boundary conditions (37) and (39) to be invariant the RHS
terms should not change by the transformation, since the ﬁelds E and B are unique,
thus:

D Qzz = 0

D Kx = 0

D Ky = 0

(46)

12

With (30) and since these conditions should hold for an arbitrary electric ﬁeld

it follows that:

D a jzz = 0
−D G jy + D a jzx = 0
D G jx + D a jzy = 0

(47)

for any j. Since in addition boundary conditions should remain invariant along
any possible boundary (not only the (x, y)-plane considered in this example) these
conditions should also hold after cyclic permutation x → y → z. It then readily
follows that D Gi j = 0 and D ai jk = 0 meaning that no transformation leaves the
boundary conditions invariant.

7 Conclusions

Changing the point of reference for calculating the multipole moments for the
building blocks of a medium has two consequences. The moments themselves
usually change with the reference point and the position in space of these elemen-
tary multipoles changes. If both effects are taken into account then the resulting
charge and current densities are independent of the reference point. This has been
shown at the microscopic and at the macroscopic level. The same interpretation
can be applied to e.g. the reﬂection coefﬁcients for a semi inﬁnite medium: if with
a change of origin the boundary of the medium is shifted accordingly, then the re-
ﬂection coefﬁcients are invariant. If the shift of the boundary is not taken into
account then the reﬂection coefﬁcient will show a variation corresponding with
a pure phase shift. There is no need to remedy this “origin dependence” effect
with a “transformation theory”. In fact there is no transformation which leaves
all possible boundary conditions invariant. We have performed all calculations
including the multipoles of electric quadrupole/magnetic dipole order and for a
non-magnetic and non-absorbing medium but we have no doubt that these results
are still valid for more general materials.

References

ter 6, p.248.

[1] J.D. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics,” 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, Chap-

[2] R.E. Raab, O.L. De Lange, “Multipole Theory in Electromagnetism,” Claren-

don Press, Oxford, 2005.

13

[3] R.E. Raab, O.L. De Lange, “Symmetry constraints for electromagnetic con-
stitutive relations,” J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., vol. 3, p.446-451, 2001.

[4] A.C. Eringen, G.A. Maugin, “Electrodynamics of Continua I,” Springer-

Verlag, 1990.

[5] S.R. de Groot, L.G. Suttorp, “Foundations of Electrodynamics,“ North-

Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1972.

[6] E.B. Graham, R.E. Raab, “Multipole solution for the macroscopic electro-
magnetic boundary conditions at a vacuum-dielectric interface,” Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. A vol. 456, p.1193-1215, 2000.

[7] O.L. De Lange, R.E. Raab, “Completion of multipole theory for the electro-
magnetic resonse ﬁelds D and H,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, vol. 459, p.1325-
1341, 2003.

14

