6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tamm states and nonlinear surface modes in

photonic crystals

Steven K. Morrison ∗,a and Yuri S. Kivshar a

aNonlinear Physics Center and Center for Ultra-high bandwidth Devices for

Optical Systems (CUDOS), Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,

Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia

Abstract

We predict the existence of surface gap modes, known as Tamm states for electronic

systems, in truncated photonic crystals formed by two types of dielectric rods. We

investigate the energy threshold, dispersion, and modal symmetries of the surface

modes, and also demonstrate the existence and tunability of nonlinear Tamm states

in binary photonic crystals with nonlinear response.

Key words: Surface modes, Tamm states, photonic crystals

PACS: 73.20.-r, 42.70.Qs, 42.65.-k

1 INTRODUCTION

Surface modes are a special type of wave localized at the interface separating

two diﬀerent media. In periodic systems, the modes localized at the surfaces

∗ Tel.: +61 261258277; Fax.:+61 261258588

Email address: skm124@rsphysse.anu.edu.au (Steven K. Morrison).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

are known as Tamm states [1], ﬁrst found as localized electronic states at the

edge of a truncated periodic potential. Surface states have been studied in

diﬀerent ﬁelds of physics, including optics [2], where such waves are conﬁned

to the interface between periodic and homogeneous media.

Photonic crystals, artiﬁcially fabricated periodic structures with bandgap spec-

tra [3], can be used for controlling the properties of light in diﬀerent devices

including dielectric mirrors and waveguides. In many such applications, pho-

tonic crystals are ﬁnite, and are terminated at surfaces where electromagnetic

waves are signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the breaking of the translational invariance

by the underlying periodic structure.

Although the properties of electromagnetic waves in bulk photonic crystals are

well understood, studies of electromagnetic waves near the surfaces of photonic

crystals are relatively limited and, unlike electronic Tamm states, a truncated

photonic crystal does not always support surface states [4]. Surface states in

photonic crystals have only been shown to exist under appropriate changes to

the surface layer, such as a termination though the surface cell or a change to

the surface geometry or material properties [5,6,7]. Furthermore, such surface

waves are known to be signiﬁcantly sensitive to the surface termination [6,8].

In this Communication, we study surface waves in photonic crystals with ter-

minated (but not altered) surface structures. For the ﬁrst time to our knowl-

edge, we show the existence of strongly localized surface modes in binary

photonic crystals, in a complete analogy to Tamm states in electronic sys-

tems. Our analysis of the linear properties of the diatomic structure illus-

trates the dispersion relations and ﬁeld localization of the surface states, and

the subsequent inﬂuence of variations to the crystal geometry. Additionally,

2

we study the nonlinear behavior of the surface states when the dielectric func-

tion of the photonic crystal includes a Kerr style nonlinearity, and discuss the

nonlinearity-induced tunability of nonlinear Tamm surface states.

2 Model and numerical methods

We consider the propagation of the TM-polarized waves in a two-dimensional

binary photonic crystal formed by two square lattices of larger and smaller

dielectric rods, as shown in Fig. 1(a), where ra and rb are the rod radii popu-

lating the lattices. These two elemental lattices merge to form a single lattice

of period a, with a unit cell created by a single, large rod at the center of the

cell and a single small rod distributed as four quadrants at the corners of the

cell; thereby forming a unit cell with two rods. In general, the binary structure

reduces the geometric symmetries of the photonic crystal, thereby lifting the

degeneracies of some of the crystal states [9]. However, the structure we study

here does not possess this capacity and as such maintains the C4v point group

symmetry of the constituent square lattices.

We consider the surface termination that has translational symmetry along

the surface where a row of either large radius rods ra or small radius rods rb

form the surface layer exclusively. In all cases discussed below only complete

rods are considered within the surface layers, similar to the original context

of Tamm states.

For these binary crystals, we set the radius of the rods as ra = 0.21a and

rb = 0.13a. The dielectric rods of the photonic crystal correspond to high

potential optical regions. In this study, we set the linear dielectric constant of

3

Fig. 1. (a) Structure of a binary photonic crystal with a surface termination. Shad-

ings (red and green) show the equivalent irreducible Brillouin zone of an inﬁnite

and semi-inﬁnite photonic crystal projected onto the crystal geometry. (b) Spatial

proﬁle of the linear surface mode as the color plot of |Ez|2.

the rods to εr = 11.56, corresponding to AlGaAs at a wavelength of 1550nm,

and assume negligible losses.

To analyze the surface states, we employ two complementary numerical meth-

ods: the plane wave expansion method (PWE) [10,11] and the ﬁnite-diﬀerence

time-domain method (FDTD) [12,13]. Due to the normal computational in-

tensive nature of the FDTD method and the need to reduce the time step

to maintain numerical stability [14] for the nonlinear case, the method is ex-

tremely time consuming. To reduce this burden, we model a semi-inﬁnite crys-

tal using a supercell representation [15,13] that has a transverse size of one

unit cell, and contains nine unit cells of the photonic crystal, including the sur-

face cell, and nine unit cells of vacuum in the lateral direction. The supercell

is bordered by a perfectly matched layer [16]. The boundaries perpendicular

to the surface are periodic, and conﬁgured with a π spatial phase shift that

sets the wave vector to the edge of the surface Brillouin zone.

The supercell is excited using a two-dimensional Gaussian pulse, centrally

located within the spatial domain and the photonic band gap, that energizes

4

Fig. 2. (a) Surface mode dispersion relationships for the surface formed by larger

(upper solid line) and smaller (lower dashed line) rods. (b,c) Photonic band gap

and surface mode frequencies with respect to dielectric rod radii. In (b) the larger

rods of radius ra are held constant while the radius rb of the smaller rods is varied,

whereas in (c) the smaller rods of radius rb are held constant while the radius ra of

the larger rods is varied.

the resonant modes of the crystal and the surface structures. A discrete Fourier

transform of the time evolution data, recorded at the surface of the photonic

crystal, is used to determine the spectral response of the surface states. In a

similar manner, the spatial mode proﬁle is calculated from the time evolution

data of the full simulation domain at the peak frequency of the surface state.

3 Linear Tamm states

For the linear surface states, the dispersion relationships are presented in

Fig. 2(a). The dark grey region within the dispersion diagrams depicts the

continuum of free-space states that exist above the line light (ω = ck) that

are not bound to the surface. Light grey regions within the diagram indicate

the Bloch states of the inﬁnite photonic crystal; states within these regions

5

can couple into the crystal, and again are not bound to the surface.

Surface states are formed within the second photonic bandgap of the inﬁnite

crystal, and are shown with a solid black line in the diagram. The surface

states occurs within the second band gap when the surface is terminated in

a row of large rods of radius ra. A localized surface state can form within

the ﬁrst bandgap when the crystal is terminated in a row of smaller rods, as

indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 2(a). This state, however, can couple to

the Bloch states of the inﬁnite crystal, and we do not consider it in detail.

We analyze the characteristics of the surface states by varying the radii of the

constituent rods of the photonic crystal. Figures 2(b,c) show the inﬂuence of

the rod radii on the bandgap edges and surface state frequencies. The larger

rods principally deﬁne the upper bandgap edge for the Γ − X direction and

have virtually no eﬀect on the lower bandgap edge, whereas the smaller rods

set the lower bandgap edge with very weak eﬀect on the upper bandgap edge.

Figures 2(b,c) also conﬁrm that the surface mode does not exist when the

radii of the two constituent rods are equal

The consistency of the location of the surface states within the bandgaps

signiﬁes the states existence domain is predominantly deﬁned by the crystal

geometry; a feature attributed to the binary nature of the crystal, which has

previously been shown to provide robust spectral features in the presence of

geometric variations [9]. The spatial ﬁeld localizations can be understood by

noting the symmetries of the Bloch waves above and below the bandgap. In

the Γ − X direction below the second bandgap, the Bloch wave symmetries

place the electric ﬁeld within the smaller rods, whereas for above the bandgap

the ﬁeld resides between the rods in free-space, with some overlap into the

6

larger rods. As the surface is formed by large rods and the states are near

the upper bandgap edge, they take on the Bloch mode symmetries of this

frequency region.

4 Nonlinear Tamm states

We study the properties of nonlinear surface states through the addition

of a third-order susceptibility term within the polarization ﬁeld of all rods.

Throughout our analysis we only modify the χ(3) coeﬃcient and maintain the

input ﬁeld intensity and density. Under steady-state conditions, the principal

eﬀect of the nonlinear term is to induce an intensity dependent change to the

dielectric strength of the surface rods. Simulations of the nonlinear dielectric

rods of the photonic crystals are performed using the FDTD method [17,12].

This is achieved by adding a χ(3) term to the polarization as: P = χ(1)E +

χ(3)|E|2E. The analysis of the linear surface states revealed that the ﬁeld in-

tensity varies appreciably across the surface rods. For the nonlinear surface

rods this causes an equivalent change in the dielectric constant. In our anal-

ysis of the nonlinear surface states we consider only a focussing nonlinearity

( χ(3) > 0) that results in localized increases in the dielectric index which are

proportional to the cube of the electric ﬁeld. In turn, this leads to a decrease

in the resonant frequency of the surface state.

Figure 3(a) illustrates the surface mode frequency shift as the strength of

the third-order susceptibility grows. A strong frequency shift is observed for

moderate changes in χ(3), with a threshold to the onset of strong frequency

shifting at approximately χ(3) = 1 × 10−3µm2/V . These χ(3) values exemplify

the signiﬁcant dynamic range of the nonlinear surface state of a binary pho-

7

Fig. 3. (a) Nonlinear frequency shift of the surface state vs. the nonlinear suscep-

tibility for ra = 0.21a and rb = 0.13a; (b,c) Spatial proﬁle of the surface modes

as the color plots of the ﬁeld density |Ez|2 for χ(3) = 2 × 10−3µm2/V (left), and

χ(3) = 9 × 10−3µm2/V (right).

tonic crystal using realistic nonlinearities; for example a typical value of χ(3)

for AlGaAs is χ(3) = 8.2 × 10−3µm2/V [18].

The distinct spatial ﬁeld proﬁle of the surface state, and its dramatic change

with dielectric strength leads to the strong χ(3) sensitivity. This is demon-

strated in Fig. 3(b,c), which shows the spatial ﬁeld proﬁles for (b) χ(3) =

2 × 10−3µm2/V , and (c) χ(3) = 9 × 10−3µm2/V . In a homogeneous nonlinear

focusing medium, a nonlinearity-induced change in the dielectric constant re-

sults in a greater localization of the light, which under appropriate conditions

can lead to spatial surface solitons. However, for the surface state of the bi-

nary photonic crystal, the increased dielectric constant causes the conditions

for the surface resonance to diminish, resulting in a reduction in the ﬁeld

8

localization, leading to a complex balance between the nonlinearity and sur-

face interaction. In general, as the nonlinear surface state evolves and reaches

steady state conditions, the ﬁeld intensity within the surface rods reduces. This

eﬀect provides optical limiting that prevents saturation of the nonlinearity and

unrealistic changes to the dielectric strength. Additionally, the competing ef-

fects due to nonlinearity and the surface can lead to complex behavior, as seen

for χ(3) = 7 × 10−3µm2/V where the frequency of the surface state increases.

Another consequence of the nonlinear surface structure is the formation of a

near-surface defect state, as seen in Fig. 3(c), where the localized state forms

in the neighboring row of small rods.

Recent studies have demonstrated the application of optical surface states of

photonic crystals for guiding light, the formation of high-quality micro cavities,

and sub-wavelength imaging [19,20,21]. We expect that the nonlinear tunable

Tamm states found here would provide substantial nonlinearity-induced con-

trol within these applications leading to novel all-optical surface devices such

as optical limiters and switches.

5 Conclusion

In conclusion, we have predicted the existence of surface Tamm states in bi-

nary two-dimensional photonic crystals. Using nonlinear surface rods, we have

highlighted the dynamic tunability of the surface states resulting from the

unusual spatial distribution of the surface mode, and its geometric transfor-

mation through a competition of the nonlinearity and surface eﬀects.

9

This work was produced with the assistance of the Australian Research Coun-

cil under the ARC Centres of Excellence program.

Acknowledgment

References

[1]

I.E. Tamm, Z. Phys. 76, 849 (1932).

[2] P. Yeh, A. Yariv, and A.Y. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett. 32, 102 (1978).

[3] J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, and J. N. Winn, Photonic Crystals (Princeton

[4] X. Yi, P. Yeh, J. Hong, S. Fan, and J. D. Joannopoulos, (QTuG6), p. 85, In:

University, Princeton, 1995).

Proceeding of QELS, 2000.

Rev. B 44 10961 (1991).

[5] R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer, A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys.

[6] W. M. Robertson, G. Arjavalingam, R. D. Meade, K. D. Brommer,

A. M. Rappe, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Opt. Lett. 18, 528 (1994).

[7] F. Ramos-Mendieta and P. Halevi, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 14, 370 (1997); Phys.

Rev. B 59, 15112 (1999).

[8] Y. A. Vlasov, N. Moll, and S. J. McNab, Opt. Lett. 29, 2175 (2004).

[9] C. M. Anderson and K. P Giapis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2949 (1996).

[10] K. Sakoda, Optical Properties of Photonic Crystals (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

2001).

[11] S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Optics Express 8, 173 (2000).

10

[12] A. Taﬂove, Computational Electrodynamics. The Finite-Diﬀerence Time-

Domain Method (Artech House, Norwood, 1995).

[13] T. Baba, Roadmap on Photonic Crystals (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2003).

[14] R. F. Remis, J. Comp. Phys. 163, 249 (2000).

[15] C. T. Chan, Q. T. Yu, and K. M. Ho, Phys. Rev. B, 51(23), 16635 (1995).

[16] J. P. Berenger, Comp. Phys. 114, 185 (1994).

[17] R. M. Joseph and A. Taﬂove, IEEE Trans. Ant. and Prop. 45 364 (1997).

[18] M. Bahl, N. Panoiu, and R. M. Osgood Jr., Phys. Rev. E, 67, 056604 (2003).

[19] J. Yang, S. Kim, G. Kim, H. Park, and Y. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3016

[20] S. Xiao and M. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 111102 (2005).

[21] Li. Chengyu , J. M. Holt, and A. L. Efros J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 23, 490-497

(2004).

(2006).

11

