6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Giant gyrotropy due to electromagnetic coupling

A. V. Rogacheva, V. A. Fedotov,∗ A. S. Schwanecke, and N. I. Zheludev†
EPSRC NanoPhotonics Portfolio Centre, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We report the ﬁrst experimental evidence that electromagnetic coupling between physically sepa-
rated planar metal patterns located in parallel planes provides for exceptionally strong polarization
rotatory power if one pattern is twisted in respect to the other, creating a 3D chiral object. In terms
of optical rotary power per sample of thickness equal to one wavelength, the bi-layered structure
rotates ﬁve orders of magnitude stronger than a gyrotropic crystal of quartz in the visible spectrum.
We also saw a signature of negative refraction for circularly polarized waves propagating through
the chiral slab.

The ability to rotate the polarization state of light (gy-
rotropy) by chiral molecules is one of the most fundamen-
tal phenomena of electrodynamics. It was discovered by
F. Aragot in 1811 and is now widely used in analytical
chemistry, biology and crystallography for identifying the
spatial structure of molecules. Recent explosive increase
in the interest in gyrotropic media is driven by an op-
portunity for the development of negative index meta-
materials, where simultaneous electric and magnetic re-
sponse of gyrotropic structures are required to achieve
negative refraction [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Sculptured heli-
cal pillars for the optical part of the spectrum [8], he-
lical wire springs [9, 10] and twisted Swiss-role metal
structures [2] for microwave applications have been dis-
cussed as possible candidates for achieving strong artiﬁ-
cial gyrotropy that can be used for implementing nega-
tive refraction. However, from meta-material prospective
it would be very desirable if chirality could be achieved
by planar patterning using well-established planar tech-
nologies, thus making nano-fabrication of such structures
for the optical part of the spectrum a practical proposi-
tion. The opportunity of creating true 3D chirality in
non-contacting layers of planar metal structures was ﬁrst
It was suggested that inductive
identiﬁed in Ref. [11].

FIG. 1: Dextral (D, right-handed) and sinistral (S,
left-
handed) enantiomeric helicoidal bi-layered structures con-
structed from planar metal rosettes separated by a dielectric
slab of thickness d. L is the end-to-end length of the rosette’s
strip and W is its width. The rosettes forming the enan-
tiomeric structures are mutually twisted around the axis of
4-fold symmetry on angles −ϕ and ϕ respectively.

coupling between two identical mutually twisted metal
patterns can create an optically active chiral object and
thus provide for gyrotropy.

In this letter we show the ﬁrst experiential demonstra-
tion that giant optical gyrotropy can be achieved in a bi-
layered chiral structure through electromagnetic coupling
between the layers and that there is no need to sculpture
continuous helix-like volume three-dimensional chiral ob-
jects to achieve strong polarization rotatory power. We
also saw clear evidence of negative refraction in the struc-
ture. The experiments were performed in the microwave
part of the spectrum. Although we expect the eﬀect to
be seen with a large variety of patterns, we investigated
a structure consisting of two identical metal rosettes of
4-fold rotational symmetry located in parallel planes, as
presented on Fig. 1. The 4-fold symmetry of the rosette
ensures that the structure is isotropic for observations at
normal incidence and therefore shows no birefringence.
Due to curved lines rosette-like structure exhibit resonant
properties at wavelengths larger than the overall size of
the design. The latter would be important for achiev-
ing a non-diﬀracting regime if two-dimensional arrays of
such structures were used to form planar metamaterial
sheets and volume structures. The rosettes were etched
from 35 µm ﬂat copper ﬁlm on both sides of a dielec-
tric substrate. The rosettes had the length L = 53 mm
and strip width W = 0.4 mm and were spaced by a
homogeneous dielectric layer of thickness d = 1.5 mm
(ε = 3.77 + i 0.03).

We studied circular birefringence and dichroism of the
structure in 4.5 − 7.0 GHz frequency range (wavelength
range 4.3 − 6.7 cm) using a microwave waveguide po-
larimeter. The polarimeter included a 480 mm long cir-
cular waveguide with a diameter of 41.5 mm and two
high quality circular polarizers of either same or opposite
handedness (series 64 by Flann Microwave) attached on
both sides of the waveguide. Each sample was placed in
the middle of the waveguide, perpendicular to its axis. A
full S-parameter vector network analyzer (model E8364B
by Agilent) was used to measure both magnitude and
phase of the wave transmitted through the polarimeter.
In our experiments we compared pairs of enantiomeric
forms of the structure (designated as type D and S in

2

fections of polarimeter and/or sample, we performed ex-
periments at diﬀerent mutual orientations rotating the
sample around the axis of the cylindrical waveguide, and
found virtually no dependence of the observed eﬀects on
the orientation.

The structure’s three-dimensional chirality and thus
its gyrotropic characteristics should depend strongly on
the mutual orientation of the rosettes and distance d be-
tween them. To verify this we manufactured a truly pla-
nar version of the structures by etching both rosettes
from the same metal ﬁlm (d = 0) and sandwiching them
between two layers of dielectric for symmetry. We also
manufactured a bi-layered structure with no twist be-
tween rosettes (ϕ = 0, d 6= 0). No circular dichroism or
diﬀerential phase delay was observed in both cases. We
also studied the dependence of gyrotropic characteristics
of the structure on the value of ϕ. The complete picture
of the dependence of gyrotropy on ϕ may be obtained by
measuring it in the interval of ϕ between 0 and 45◦. In-
deed, due to the four-fold symmetry of the rosettes, the
structure with ϕ between 0 and 45◦ is equivalent to the
structures twisted on ϕ ± n · 90◦, where n is an integer
number. The sinistral structure with ϕ in between 45◦
and 90◦ is equivalent to the dextral structure with mu-
tual twist of ϕ − 90◦ and therefore has an opposite sign
of gyrotropy.

Characteristic spectral dependencies of ∆ and δ exhib-
ited by the sinistral structure are presented in Fig. 2(i) for
ϕ = 15◦. They show two resonances located below and
above 6 GHz. They will be called resonance A and B cor-
respondingly. From Fig. 2(ii) it follows that on a sinistral
(left) structure, losses at resonance A for right circular
polarization are smaller than for left circular polariza-
tion. However, losses at resonance B for right circular
polarization are stronger than for left circular polariza-
tion. Phase delay ψ = arg(t) is presented on Fig. 2(iii).
Provided that an electromagnetic wave is presented in the
form ei(ωt+kx), in the proximity of resonance A the group
velocity vg = d/(∂ψ/∂ω) for right circular polarization in
the sinistral structure has opposite sign to the phase ve-
locity vp = cψλg/2πd (here λg is guided the wavelength
in the circular waveguide). In accordance with Ref.
[2]
this is a signature of negative refraction in chiral media.
In proximity of resonance B, negative refraction is ob-
served for both circular polarizations on the background
of high losses. Availability of negative refraction is espe-
cially important in the proximity of resonance A, where
overall losses are small.

In general, a linearly polarized wave transmitted
through the structure will become elliptical on trans-
mission and its polarization azimuth will rotate. Us-
ing standard deﬁnitions of the degree for ellipticity η
and polarization azimuth rotation θ of elliptically po-
larized light [12], we calculated polarization changes of
the linearly polarized incident wave as follows: η =

FIG. 2: Electromagnetic properties of the bi-layered sinis-
tral chiral structure with mutual twist ϕ = 15◦. Frequency
dependencies of: (i) circular dichroism, ∆, (black line) and
circular diﬀerential phase delay, δ, (gray line); (ii) transmis-
sion losses for right circularly polarized wave (black line) and
left circularly polarized wave (gray line); (iii) phase delay for
right circularly polarized wave (black line) and left circularly
polarized wave (gray line). The shaded area in section (iii)
represents a frequency range where the phase velocity vp and
group velocity vg have opposite signs for right circular polar-
ization, which is a signature of negative refraction.

Fig. 1) with various angles of mutual twist, ϕ, in the
range from ϕ = 0◦ to ϕ = 45◦. To describe the results of
polarimetric measurements we will deﬁne transmission of
a sample, t, measured by the polarimeter as follows: the
superscript index refers to the type of the sample, D or
S, while subscript indices refer to the state of polarizer
and analyzer. In these terms circular dichroism is deﬁned
−−|2 while circular diﬀerential phase
as ∆ = |tS
delay (responsible for circular birefringence) is deﬁned
as δ = arg(tS
−−). To eliminate any possible
polarization eﬀects, which could have resulted not from
three-dimensional chirality, but from anisotropic imper-

++) − arg(tS

++|2 − |tS

3

FIG. 3: Frequency dependencies of polarization azimuth rotation θ (left column) and ellipticity, in terms of the ellipticity angle
η (right column) that a linearly polarized wave would acquire upon transmission through a sinistral bi-layered chiral structure
for various twist angles ϕ. Vertical scale is shown in the right bottom corners. Dotted line at ϕ = 15◦ shows the frequency
dispersion of the eﬀect as predicted by the Born-Kuhn model.

|tS

∆
++|2+|tD

++|2 ), θ = − 1

1
2 arcsin(
2 δ. This is presented in
Fig. 3 for diﬀerent values of ϕ. The peak values of both
rotation and ellipticity initially increase with ϕ. They
reach their absolute maxima at about ϕ = 15◦ with
η = −30◦ at frequency νB (η = −45◦ corresponds to
perfectly left-handed circularly polarized light). At the
exact resonance no polarization rotation is seen as its
dispersion passes zero, but in proximity of resonance νB
rotation reaches θB+ = 28◦. Between the peaks, in the
spectral range of low losses and virtually zero dichroism,
we observe a pure rotation of polarization azimuth of
about θ0 = 3◦. With further increase of ϕ, resonances A
and B move closer to one another and the dispersions of
θ and η change. Peak value of rotation and ellipticity de-
creases as well as rotatory power at frequencies between

the peaks. Gyrotropy completely collapses at ϕ = 45◦ as
should be expected, see Ref. [11].

It shall be noted that the observed rotation induced
by the artiﬁcial bi-layered structure (which has a thick-
ness d of only about 1/30 of the wavelength) is huge. To
appreciate its magnitude it shall be compared with the
gyrotropy of natural optical active materials.
Indeed,
in terms of optical rotary power per sample thickness
equal to one wavelength, bi-layered structure rotates ﬁve
orders of magnitude stronger than a gyrotropic crystal
of quartz and three orders of magnitude stronger than
cholesteric liquid crystals in the visible spectrum (spe-
ciﬁc rotatory power of quartz and cholesteric liquid crys-
tals is about 20◦/mm and 103 ◦/mm [13] respectively).
Rotatory power of the bi-layered system is also two or-
ders of magnitude stronger that in the recently intro-

duced metal-on-dielectric chiral system, where resonant
rotation of about 1◦ was seen in a sample 1/6 of the
wavelength thick [14].

ξν2

η(cid:1) ∝ (cid:0)Re
Im(cid:1)

To identify the underlying nature of the observed po-
larization eﬀect we recall the classical model of gyrotropy
developed by Born and Kuhn [15]. In this model two spa-
tially separated charged oscillators moving along orthog-
onal directions have an elastic binding between them.
Excitation of one of them by the incident electromag-
netic wave is then transferred by the elastic coupling to
Induced oscillations of its charge then re-
the other.
emit a wave at a diﬀerent polarization and with some
delay, thus ensuring both polarization azimuth rotation
and dichroism. Analogously, current driven in the rosette
arm by the incident wave is inductively (or capacitively)
coupled to the current in the rosette arm of the second
layer. The induced current in the second layer is then
re-emited into the transmitted wave with a diﬀerent po-
larization state providing for gyrotropy. It is remarkable
how well the Born-Kuhn model is suitable for describ-
ing this process. It gives the following dispersion of the
eﬀect (cid:0)θ
0 +ξ−iγν−ν2)2−ξ2 , where ν0 and γ are
(ν2
the resonant frequency and damping parameter of indi-
vidual oscillator and ξ is the Hooke coeﬃcient of elas-
tic force between the oscillators [15]. Here, ν0 is anal-
ogous to the resonant frequency of the dipole interac-
tion of an electromagnetic wave with the arm of an in-
dividual rosette, which shall be about c/L = 5.7 GHz.
The Hooke elastic interaction between the oscillators in
the Borh-Kuhn model is analogous to the electromag-
netic coupling between rosettes. According to above for-
mula, the Born-Kuhn model predicts a two-peak disper-
sion of rotatory power and circular dichroism with the
peak spectral separation increasing with coupling ξ. In-
deed, in our experiments the peak separation is at maxi-
mum for small ϕ when the electromagnetic interaction
between rosettes is strong.
It decreases with increas-
ing ϕ when rosette overlapping diminishes and separa-
tion of the peaks reduces accordingly. The Born-Kuhn
dispersion accurately describes the main features of the
rotatory power and circular dichroism in the bi-layered
structure as may be see in Fig.3, where theoretical dis-
persion curves are plotted as a dotted line for ϕ = 15◦
(ν0 = 5.247 GHz, γ = 4.4 · 107s−1, ξ = 4.6 · 1019s−2). Im-
portantly, the model indicates strong coupling between
rosettes in the bi-layered system, where ﬁgure of merit is
ξ/ν2
0 = 0.26, i.e. the energy of the interaction between
rosettes amounts to a quarter of the energy of interac-
tion between individual rosette and ﬁeld, which explains
incredibly strong gyrotropy of the system in chiral conﬁg-
urations. The Born-Kuhn model is less accurate in giv-
ing a correct ratio of the eﬀect magnitude in the peaks.
This small discrepancy is not surprising as elastic cou-
pling is not really equivalent to the electromagnetic one,
and there are other mechanism of enantiomericly sensi-

4

tive interactions with the bi-layered structure, which are
not covered by the Born-Kuhn model. For instance, one
can see the twisted rosette pair as an enantiomeric sen-
sitive scattering object. Scattering, could happen in all
direction creating enantiomericly sensitive losses for the
wave propagating in the forward direction. In the reality
of the conﬁned environment of the waveguide we per-
haps see a strong interplay between the Born-Kuhn like
gyrotropy and enantiomericly sensitive scattering that
creates a complex frequency dispersion of the eﬀect at
various ϕ.

In summary, we provided the ﬁrst experimental evi-
dence that strong gyrotropy can be achieved by electro-
magnetic coupling in chiral bi-layered disconnected metal
structures and saw a signature of negative refraction for
circularly polarized waves on the chiral bi-layered struc-
ture. We expect that optical activity of this nature will
also be displayed by appropriately scaled sub-wavelength
nanostructures in the optical part of the spectrum.

The authors are grateful to Martin McCall for fruitful
discussions. Financial support of the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council, UK and EU Network
of Excellence ”Metamorphose” is acknowledged.

∗ Electronic address: vaf@phys.soton.ac.uk
† URL: www.nanophotonics.org.uk

[1] S. Tretyakov, I. Nefedov, A. Sihvola, S. Maslovski, and
C. Simovski, J. Electromagn. Waves Appl. 17, 695
(2003).

[2] J. B. Pendry, Science 306, 1353 (2004).
[3] S. Tretyakov, A. Sihvola, and L. Jylha, Photonics Nanos-

truct. Fundam. Appl. 3, 107 (2005).

[4] Y. Jin and S. He, Opt. Express 13, 4974 (2005).
[5] C. Monzon and D. W. Forester, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,

123904 (2005).

[6] V. M. Agranovich, Y. N. Gartstein, and A. A. Zakhidov,

Phys. Rev. B 73, 045114 (2006).

[7] Q. Cheng and T. J. Cui, Phys. Rev. B 73, 113104 (2006).
[8] A. Lakhtakia and R. Messier, Sculptured Thin Films:
Nanoengineered Morphology and Optics (SPIE Press,
Bellingham, WA, 2005).

[9] I. Tinoco and M. P. Freeman, J. Phys. Chem. 61, 1196

(1957).

(1989).

78, 498 (2001).

[10] D. L. Jaggard and N. Engheta, Electron. Lett. 25, 173

[11] Y. Svirko, N. Zheludev, and M. Osipov, Appl. Phys. Lett.

[12] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley,

[13] P. G. de Gennes, The physics of liquid crystals (Claren-

New York, 1999), 3rd ed.

don Press, Oxford, 1974).

[14] M. Kuwata-Gonokami, N. Saito, Y. Ino, M. Kauranen,
K. Jeﬁmovs, T. Vallius, J. Turunen, and Y. Svirko, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95, 227401 (2005).

[15] Y. P. Svirko and N. I. Zheludev, Polarization of Light in

Nonlinear Optics (John Wiley, Chichester, 1998).

