6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PHYSICAL REVIEW B

Vertical beaming of wavelength-scale photonic crystal resonators

Se-Heon Kim,∗ Sun-Kyung Kim, and Yong-Hee Lee
Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
(Dated: March 17, 2011)

We report that > 80% of the photons generated inside a photonic crystal slab resonator can be
◦
. The far-ﬁeld radiation properties of a photonic
funneled within a small divergence angle of ±30
crystal slab resonant mode are modiﬁed by tuning the cavity geometry and by placing a reﬂector
below the cavity. The former method directly shapes the near-ﬁeld distribution so as to achieve
directional and linearly-polarized far-ﬁeld patterns. The latter modiﬁcation takes advantage of
the interference eﬀect between the original waves and the reﬂected waves to enhance the energy-
directionality. We ﬁnd that, regardless of the slab thickness, the optimum distance between the
slab and the reﬂector closely equals one wavelength of the resonance under consideration. We have
also discussed an eﬃcient far-ﬁeld simulation algorithm based on the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain
method and the near- to far-ﬁeld transformation.

PACS numbers: 42.70.Qs, 41.20.Jb, 42.60.Da

I.

INTRODUCTION

Multitudes of optical resonant modes can be created
by introducing a structural defect into a perfect pho-
tonic crystal (PhC) having photonic band gap (PBG).
Many researchers have been interested in designing novel
nanocavities based on the PhC in the hope of controlling
the ﬂow of light in unprecedented ways.[1] Especially two-
dimensional (2-D) PhC slab structures have been widely
studied by utilizing well-established standard fabrication
processes.[2] In the horizontal directions of such 2-D PhC
slab structures, photons can be spatially localized by 2-
D photonic bandgap eﬀects. Additionally in the vertical
direction, photons are conﬁned rather eﬃciently through
total internal reﬂection.[2, 3] Air-hole triangular lattices
are widely adapted as a basic platform of the 2-D PhC
because of their large photonic bandgap.[2]

After the ﬁrst demonstration of the PhC nanocav-
ity laser based on a single missing air-hole by Cal-
tech group,[4] various cavity structures have been
demonstrated,
showing rich characteristics such as
nondegeneracy,[5] low-threshold,[6] high Q/V value,[7, 8]
and so on. Recently, 2-D PhC cavities have drawn
much attention as a promising candidate for cavity
quantum electrodynamics (CQED) experiments report-
ing vacuum Rabi splitting[9] and high-eﬃciency single
photon sources[10]. For CQED experiments, various PhC
cavities with ﬁne structural tunings have been proposed
to achieve good coupling between the cavity ﬁeld and
an emitter placed inside the cavity.[11, 12] Park et al.
demonstrated the ﬁrst electrically-driven PhC laser based
on the monopole mode that has an electric-ﬁeld null at
the cavity center where the current-ﬂowing post[13] is
placed. The 2-D PhC structure can also be used for in-
plane integrated optical circuits where PhC cavities and
PhC waveguides are coupled[14] to supply added func-

∗Electronic address: seheon@kaist.ac.kr

tionalities. By using a PhC-based channel add-drop ﬁl-
ter, one can drop (or add) photons horizontally (or verti-
cally) through the cavity.[15, 16, 17] In this way, various
functional PhC devices have been designed.

In this article, we shall discuss useful design rules
for the vertical out-coupling of PhC light emitters. To
achieve eﬃcient out-coupling into a single mode ﬁber
using conventional optics, the far-ﬁeld of the PhC res-
onator should be both well-directed and linearly polar-
ized. Gaussian-like far-ﬁeld emission proﬁle is generally
preferable to have good modal overlap with the funda-
mental mode of a ﬁber. Moreover, one needs to ﬁnd
ways to overcome the strong diﬀractive tendency of a
wavelength-small cavity. We begin by looking for pos-
sible remedies through the defect engineering approach
(tuning the structure near the defect). Then, we will
investigate eﬀects of a bottom reﬂector on the far-ﬁeld
characteristics. The surface of high-index (∼ 3.5) sub-
strate is regarded as a bottom reﬂector at ﬁrst. Note
that such a reﬂector is practical since it can be natu-
rally embedded in most of the wafer structures.[18, 19]
One can also think of a highly-reﬂective Bragg mirror
made of alternating layers of high- and low- refractive in-
dex dielectric slabs[20] as an alternative bottom reﬂector.
We will investigate both the defect engineering approach
and the bottom reﬂector eﬀects to engineer the far-ﬁeld
radiation characteristics. A simple and an eﬃcient far-
ﬁeld simulation method based on the 3-D ﬁnite-diﬀerence
time-domain (FDTD) method and the fast Fourier trans-
form (FFT)[21, 22] will also be discussed.

This article is organized as follows.

In Sec. II, vari-
ous characteristics of 2-D PhC slab resonant modes are
reviewed. In Sec. III, we will describe the far-ﬁeld sim-
ulation method and show simulation results. In Sec. IV,
we will discuss how the defect engineering method can be
applied to the PhC resonant mode to realize directional
emission. Then, eﬀects of the presence of a bottom re-
ﬂector will be discussed. Finally, we discuss how the two
proposed schemes can be combined to give both direc-
tional and linearly-polarized emission.

II. RESONANT MODES IN A MODIFIED
SINGLE DEFECT CAVITY

In this section, we review some important characteris-
tics of a few possible resonant modes in a modiﬁed single
defect PhC cavity.[18] The 3-D FDTD method was em-
ployed to analyze optical characteristics such as the mode
proﬁle, the Q factor, the resonant frequency, and so on.
A typical structure of the modiﬁed single defect cavity
and various resonant modes are shown in Fig. 1(a). A
free-standing PhC slab structure is assumed as a plat-
form for a triangular PhC lattice. The refractive in-
dex of the slab is chosen to be 3.4, which corresponds
to that of GaAs around 1 µm. For real applications,
one can insert active semiconductor layers, such as the
in the middle of the slab. The
InAs quantum dots,
air-hole radius and the slab thickness are chosen to be
0.35a and 0.50a, respectively, where a represents the lat-
tice constant of the triangular PhC. The choice of the
slab thickness is important to support only fundamental
modes of the slab (TE-like modes).[23] Without modiﬁ-
cation on the nearest air-holes around the defect, only
the doubly-degenerate dipole mode can be excited.[4, 24]
However, by reducing the radius of the six nearest air-
holes as indicated in Fig. 1(a), other resonant modes
within the PBG can be excited. This type of modiﬁ-
cation was ﬁrst proposed by Park et al. so as to ﬁnd a
nondegenerate monopole mode used for a photo-pumped
low-threshold PhC laser.[5] Especially, as indicated by
Ryu et al., the hexapole mode can have a very high Q/V
value due to the whispering gallery nature of the sym-
metric ﬁeld distribution.[8] For those modes having an
electric-ﬁeld intensity node at the cavity center, intrinsic
properties of those resonant modes is not changed appre-
ciably even after the introduction of a small post at the
cavity center. This was a crucial design rule applied for
the electrically-pumped PhC laser.[13] One disadvantage
of these resonant modes is that the vertical emission is
inherently prohibited due to the destructive interference
of the anti-symmetric ﬁeld patterns.

Resonant frequencies and Q factors of possible reso-
nant modes in the modiﬁed single defect cavity are sum-
marized in Table I. Generally, the total radiated power
(1/Qtot) can be decomposed into a vertical contribution
(1/Qvert) and an in-plane contribution (1/Qhorz).[24]
One usually refers to 1/Qvert as the inherent optical loss
of the resonant mode, because the in-plane loss (1/Qhorz)
can be arbitrary reduced by increasing the number of
PhC layer surrounding the cavity.
In fact, the Q fac-
tors listed in Table I are Qtot, which have been obtained
by using a suﬃciently large horizontal computational do-
main (16a × 16a). The optical loss of the resonant mode
is closely related to the in-plane ﬁeld distributions. For
graphical illustration of the vertical loss, the momen-
tum space intensity distribution[25] obtained by Fourier
transforming the in-plane ﬁeld (|F T (Ex)|2 + |F T (Ey)|2)
is calculated. From the in-plane momentum conserva-
tion rule, only plane-wave components inside a light-cone

2

[k2

x + k2
y = (ω/c)2] can couple with propagation modes.
As can be seen from the momentum space intensity
distributions of the resonant modes in Fig. 2, the major
fraction of the resonant photons live outside the light-
cone, which implies an eﬃcient index conﬁnement mech-
anism. The hexapole mode has negligible plane-wave
components inside the light-cone, hence a high Q fac-
tor of ∼ 168 000. Among four possible resonant modes,
the monopole mode and the dipole mode have relatively
low Q factors (∼ 10 000). Due to the presence of dc com-
ponents (kx = ky = 0), the dipole mode shows relatively
large radiation losses. Although the controlled vertical
emission is essential for good out-coupling, one should
not give up the quality factor too much. In fact, several
groups have reported high Q/V PhC cavities with direc-
tional emission.[7, 11, 14] Later, we will investigate how
one can perform additional ﬁne tunings on the modiﬁed
single defect cavity to obtain both directionality and high
Q/V .

Finally, we would like to mention how the structural
symmetry of the PhC cavity can aﬀect far-ﬁeld char-
acteristics. The modiﬁed single defect PhC cavity de-
picted in Fig. 1 retains complete six-fold symmetry. The
group theory tells us one can classify all the resonant
modes into nondegenerate modes and doubly degener-
ate modes depending on the rotational symmetry; the
monopole mode and the hexapole mode are nondegener-
ate and the dipole mode and the quadrupole mode are
doubly degenerate.[26, 27] Fig. 3 shows Ex and Ey ﬁeld
distributions of the resonant mode. First, let us look at
the case of one of the degenerate dipole modes. In Ex
ﬁeld distribution, due to the odd reﬂection symmetries
by both x = 0 and y = 0, the Ex vertical emission is
prohibited. However, in Ey distribution, since all the
reﬂection symmetries are even, there remains a dc com-
ponent which contributes y-polarized vertical emission in
the far-ﬁeld. In the cases of the monopole mode and the
quadrupole mode, at least one of the reﬂection symme-
tries are odd, thus the vertical emission is always pro-
hibited. In the case of the hexapole mode, Ex ﬁeld dis-
tribution shows even reﬂection symmetries by both axes
(x = 0 and y = 0). Considering its perfect six-fold sym-
metry, Ex ﬁeld components must be completely balanced
to give a zero dc component. Thus, Ex ﬁeld distribution
reveals that such delicate balance can be easily broken
by introducing a small structural perturbation, resulting
in nontrivial vertical emission. We will discuss this type
of defect engineering in Sec. IV.

III. FAR-FIELD SIMULATION

A. Far-ﬁeld simulation method

To obtain the far-ﬁeld radiation pattern, we should
deal with the radiation vectors that are suﬃciently far
(r ≫ λ) from a light emitter.[28] Direct application of
the FDTD method would be diﬃcult because of the lim-

ited computer memory size and time. Here, we shall
explain how one can eﬃciently obtain the far-ﬁeld radia-
tion by combining the 3-D FDTD method and the near-
to far-ﬁeld transformation formulae. This method has
been well known in the ﬁeld of electronics since 1980s
dealing with antenna radiation problems. Vˇukovi´c et al.
applied the FFT-based far-ﬁeld simulation algorithm to
their Q factor optimization of the PhC cavity mode.[22]
We explain the basic concept of the eﬃcient far-ﬁeld
computation in Fig. 4. Here, we divide the whole cal-
culation domain by a horizontal plane located just above
the PC slab. The upper domain is bounded by an inﬁ-
nite hemisphere. All ﬁeld components (E and H ) are
assumed to fall oﬀ as 1/r, typical of radiation ﬁelds. It
is also assumed that in-plane ﬁeld components (Ex, Ey,
Hx, and Hy) detected at the horizontal plane decay ex-
ponentially as the horizontal distance ρ. According to
the surface equivalence theorem, for the calculation of
the ﬁelds inside an imaginary closed space Ω, the equiv-
alent electric (Js) and magnetic (Ms) currents on the
surrounding surface can substitute all the information on
the ﬁelds out of the Ω, where Js and Ms are calculated
by using the following formulae.

Js = ˆn × H = −ˆxHy + ˆyHx
Ms = −ˆn × E = ˆxEy − ˆyEx

Here, ˆn is a unit normal vector on the surface. Neglect-
ing the ﬁelds on the hemisphere, only the in-plane ﬁeld
data detected at the horizontal plane will be used for the
far-ﬁeld computation. Then, these equivalent currents
are used to obtain the following retarded vector poten-
tials.

Zs

Jse−ikr
4πr
Mse−ikr
4πr

dS

dS

A = µo

F = ǫo

Zs

In the far-ﬁeld regime, (r ≈ R − ρ cos Ψ), the above

formulae can be simpliﬁed as

A = µo

Jseikρ cos ΨdS ≡ µo

F = ǫo

Mseikρ cos ΨdS ≡ ǫo

e−ikR
4πR
e−ikR
4πR

Zs

Zs

e−ikR
4πR
e−ikR
4πR

N

L

Using a relation kρ cos Ψ = kxx + kyy, the radiation

vectors N and L are simply related by 2-D FTs.

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

N ≡

Jseikρ cos ΨdS = F T (Js)

Zs
Mseikρ cos ΨdS = F T (Ms)

L ≡

Zs

3

(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

x and y components of the radiation vectors can be

represented as

Nx(kx, ky) = −F T {Hy(x, y)}
Ny(kx, ky) = +F T {Hx(x, y)}
Lx(kx, ky) = +F T {Ey(x, y)}
Ly(kx, ky) = −F T {Ex(x, y)}

Then, far-ﬁeld radiation patterns are obtained by cal-
culating time-averaged Poynting energy per unit solid
angle.[28]

2

Lθ
η
!
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(13)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

Lφ
η

k2η
32π2

dP
dΩ

= R2hE×Hi·ˆn =

Nθ +

+

Nφ −

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
where η is the impedance of free space.

 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
One can easily implement this algorithm into the
FDTD code. During the FDTD time stepping, the in-
plane ﬁeld data (near-ﬁeld data) that contain complete
information on the far-ﬁeld are obtained. Once the
FDTD computation is completed, the radiation vectors
(N and L) are calculated by the FTs. Then, these ra-
diation vectors are used to obtain far-ﬁeld patterns ac-
cording to Eq. (13). One can use the 2-D FFT algorithm
for eﬃcient FT computations [see Eqs. (9)-(12)]. In our
FDTD simulation, the size of the computational grid was
a/20 (a is the lattice constant), and the size of the hori-
zontal calculation domain were 16a × 16a. Thus, each in-
plane ﬁeld data will contain approximately 320×320 data
points. In the FFT algorithm, N × N input data I(x, y)
are transformed to the output matrix data O(fx, fy) with
the same N × N size, where f is k/2π.[29] Assume that
N unit cells in the I(x, y) data correspond to a spatial
length of L wavelengths (λ). The frequency step △f
is 1/(Lλ) ≡ f0/L and the maximum frequency is thus
N f0/L. Thus, the value f = f0 of the light-cone corre-
sponds to the Lth point in the frequency space. Note that
only the wavevector components lying inside the light-
cone whose radius is L cells can contribute to the outside
radiation. To increase the resolution of the far-ﬁeld sim-
ulation, one should increase the horizontal size of the
FDTD domain. Fortunately, there is an easy way to do
so without performing an actual calculation in the larger
FDTD domain. We can enlarge the input matrix data by
ﬁlling null (0) values, for example, into 2048 × 2048 size
matrix. Such arbitrary expansion is legitimate since most
of the near-ﬁeld energy of a PhC cavity mode is strongly
conﬁned around the central defect region. When the nor-
malized frequency of a PhC cavity mode is a/λ ∼ 0.35
(typical of PhC defect modes), L = 2048 cells = 102.4a
∼ 36(λ). Thus, the resultant far-ﬁeld data resolution is
△f = f0/L ∼ f0/36.

Finally, we would like to mention one more before pre-
senting calculated far-ﬁeld patterns. All E and H data
described in the above formulae are phasor quantities.
Thus, when we detect the in-plane ﬁeld data, we have to

extract both amplitude and phase information, because,
in general, phases will change diﬀerently at each position.
The situation containing the bottom reﬂector is the case,
where the reﬂected waves can no longer be described as
a simple standing wave of E(r, t) = |E(r)|eiωt. Assuming
a single mode ω, all ﬁeld vectors in the simulation should
have the following form.

E(r, t) = ˜E(r) exp(iωt) = |E(r)| exp(iϕ(r)) exp(iωt)

(14)
An eﬃcient method to obtain the exact phasor quanti-
ties ˜E(r) is to incorporate recursive discrete FTs (DFTs)
concurrently with the FDTD time stepping.

Exreal|n
Eximag|n

i,j = Exreal|n−1
i,j = Eximag|n−1

i,j + Ex|n
i,j + Ex|n

i,j · cos(ω · n∆t)
i,j · sin(ω · n∆t)

(15)

(16)

Here, to obtain real (Exreal) and imaginary (Eximag) com-
ponents of Ex ﬁeld, simple recursive summations are per-
formed on each grid point (i, j) at the FDTD time n.
Note that the above formulae correspond to the follow-
ing Fourier transformation.

˜Ex(r, ω) =

Ex(r, t)eiωtdt

(17)

Z

In general, this summation should continue until the
ﬁeld values ‘ring down’ to zero. However, in the case
of high Q factor resonant mode, by carefully exciting
a dipole source (source position and frequency), small
FDTD time steps (usually 20 000 ∼ 30 000 FDTD time
steps, or equivalently ∼ 200 optical periods) are suﬃcient
to obtain nearly exact phasor quantities.
In the next
section, we will show calculated far-ﬁeld patterns.

B. Far-ﬁeld simulation results

To calculate the far-ﬁeld pattern, we have used the 3-D
FDTD method and the near- to far-ﬁeld transformation
algorithm which has been outlined in the previous subsec-
tion. The horizontal calculation domain of 16a × 16a and
the spatial grid resolution of a/20 were used. Calculated
far-ﬁeld patterns are shown in Fig. 5. All the far-ﬁeld
data (x, y) shown in this article are represented by using
a simple mapping deﬁned by x = θ cos φ and y = θ sin φ.
Depending on the rotational symmetry that the each res-
onant mode has, the far-ﬁeld pattern also shows several
regularly spaced lobes, which in turn explain the labeling
of these modes; Number of lobes in the far-ﬁeld pattern
are four (six) in the case of the quadrupole mode (the
hexapole mode). Ignoring weak intensity modulation laid
upon dominating circular emission pattern, the monopole
mode shows two concentric ring-shape patterns, which
show indeed a monopole-like oscillation. In fact, emission
patterns of the hexapole mode and the monopole mode

4

does not bear perfect six-fold symmetry, e.g. two hori-
zontal lobes look bigger than the others in the case of the
hexapole mode. These discrepancies are due to rectan-
gular grids of the FDTD computation cell which are not
well matched with the six-fold symmetric case. (Later,
we will explain more in detail.) Along with total intensity
(|E|2) patterns, we also display theta-polarized intensity
(|Eθ|2) patterns and phi-polarized intensity (|Eφ|2) pat-
terns. Note that such polarization-resolved far-ﬁeld data
can be easily obtained in the real measurement setup
(a solid angle scanner) by placing a polarizer in front
of a photo-detector which scans the whole hemispherical
surface.[30]

First, let us look at the results of the quadrupole mode.
Comparing with the total intensity power, it can be de-
duced that most of the emitted power is theta-polarized.
Also in the case of the hexapole mode, theta-polarized
emission seems to dominate phi-polarized one. Table I
summarize percentages of the theta-polarized power and
the phi-polarized power. As expected, the quadrupole
mode and the hexapole mode are almost theta-polarized
(> 70%). However, the monopole mode shows opposite
result; phi-polarized emission dominates by ∼ 99%. As
indicated by Povinelli et al., one may create an artiﬁ-
cial magnetic emitter by using the monopole-like mode
which shows the same emission characteristics reminis-
cent of those of the magnetic multipole.[31] Consider-
ing that electric (magnetic) dipole radiation is theta-
polarized (phi-polarized),[28] such polarization charac-
teristics seem to be closely related with composition
of the electric multipoles and the magnetic multipoles.
Thus, the so called multipole decomposition could pro-
vide other perspectives for various radiation properties
of PhC nanocavities along with the plane-wave decom-
position (FT based analyses).

From polarization-resolved far-ﬁeld patterns, it looks
as if the dipole mode has a certain singularity near the
north pole (θ = 0). This feature comes from the strongly
y-polarized dipole mode. Upon inspection of the region
around the vertical, one can observe that directions of the
electric ﬁeld vectors indeed predominantly lie in the y di-
rection. Fig. 6(a) shows the x-polarized emission pattern
(|Ex|2) and the y-polarized emission pattern (|Ey|2). The
result shows the domination of the y-polarized emission
over the x-polarized one.[32] Thus, except the inherent
degeneracy, the dipole mode itself can be a good candi-
date for the vertical emitter.

Finally, we would like to mention the origin of the
unevenness for the six lobes in the far-ﬁeld patterns
of the hexapole mode and the monopole mode. These
symmetry-breaking comes from the rectangular grid,
used in the FDTD computation, which does not ﬁt in
the hexagonal symmetry. To check this point, we re-
calculated the far-ﬁeld pattern of the hexapole mode with
the grid of the ﬁner grid resolution. In this computation,
∆z was ﬁxed and only the horizontal grids (∆x, ∆y) were
changed. Fig. 6(b) shows that, by increasing the horizon-
tal grid resolution, the far-ﬁeld pattern restores the in-

herent six-fold symmetry. This comparison conﬁrms that
such unbalanced lobes are attributable to the rectangular
FDTD grid. Note that even in case of ∆x = ∆y = a/20,
all important features of the radiation can still be ob-
tained except the slight unevenness. Thus, all the calcu-
lations in Sec. IV were performed with the grid resolution
of a/20.

IV. ENGINEERING RADIATION PROPERTIES

A. Defect engineering

As discussed, the in-plane ﬁeld distribution determines
the far-ﬁeld radiation pattern. In this subsection, we will
investigate how the defect engineering method can be ap-
plied to manipulate the radiation proﬁle. The hexapole
mode depicted in Sec. II shows null vertical emission due
to the symmetric ﬁeld distribution which has a zero dc
component. However, as discussed in the last part of
Sec. II, it seems that the ﬁeld balance can be easily bro-
ken by introducing small structural perturbation. As
shown in Fig. 7(a), the structural tuning that we have
applied is to enlarge two horizontal air-holes facing with
each other.[33] From the hexapole mode ﬁeld distribution
shown in Fig. 3, it can be expected that such perturba-
tion will break the delicate balance of the Ex distribu-
tion. Note that noticeable amount of the dc component
appears in the Ex.[34]

In Fig. 7(b), the far-ﬁeld patterns are plotted as we
increase the air-hole radius. Here the same structural
parameters used in Fig. 1 are assumed. One can clearly
observe how the hexagonally-distributed pattern is trans-
formed into the directional beaming. The radiation pat-
tern becomes more directional with the air-hole radius.
When the air-hole radius increment is 0.04a, the vertical
In this case, ∼ 65% of
emission looks most favorable.
the total radiated energy falls within the collection angle
of ±30◦. In other words, ∼ 32.5% of the total emitted
photons can be collected from the top. The downward
photons could be re-directed by introducing a reﬂector
underneath. In the next section, we shall discuss the ef-
ﬁcient unidirectional beaming strategy based on the de-
fect tuning and the bottom reﬂector. The Q factors of
the proposed hexapole mode are presented in Fig. 7(c).
The exponential decrease of the Q factor is observed as a
function of the detuning parameter (p). Note that when
the p = 0.04a, the Q factor is still not too bad, ∼ 20 000.
Since the above modiﬁcation of two air holes breaks
mostly the balance of the Ex ﬁeld and not that of the
Ey ﬁeld, the directional beaming obtained here will be
almost x-polarized. Fig. 8(a) shows the polarization-
resolved far-ﬁeld patterns, where such directional beam-
ing is clearly x-polarized. With the same numerical aper-
ture of the lens (0.5) used previously, the polarization
extinction ratio is estimated to be ∼ 70 : 1. There-
fore, we claim that both the directionality and the linear
polarization can be obtained from the hexapole mode

5

by introducing small structural perturbation. However,
by the same token, this result implies that the hexapole
mode in the modiﬁed single defect cavity is not robust
against the structural perturbation, because the electric
ﬁelds are concentrated in the proximity of the nearest
air-holes. This fact also explains one of the reasons why
the observed Q factors of the hexapole mode are much
smaller than the values obtainable in the FDTD compu-
tation .[8, 35] Recently the other class of hexapole modes
that are robust against the perturbation was also found,
where the electric ﬁeld energy is concentrated in the di-
electric region between the nearest air-holes.[34, 36]

Finally, it should be noted that the near-ﬁeld distri-
bution of the deformed hexapole mode is almost identi-
cal to that of the ideal hexapole mode and retains the
whispering-gallery-like nature. Remember that the Ex,
Ey, and Hz ﬁeld components shown in Fig. 8(b) is the
results obtained after only very slight modiﬁcation of the
holes (p = 0.04a). It is interesting that the resulting far-
ﬁeld pattern can be changed drastically by such minute
perturbation. Thus, as indicated by Shin et al. a thor-
ough understanding of wavelength-size small cavities re-
quires investigations in the both regimes; the near-ﬁeld
and the far-ﬁeld.[30]

B. Eﬀects of the bottom reﬂector

Purcell claimed that the spontaneous emission lifetime
is a constant that can be altered depending on the op-
tical mode density and the electric-ﬁeld intensity near
the emitter .[37] Borrowing this concept, it can be said
that inherent radiation properties of the PhC slab res-
onant mode should be modiﬁed by placing a reﬂector
near the cavity.[38] In the early days, researchers used
PhC resonant cavities as a vehicle to study the alter-
ation of spontaneous emission .[39, 40, 41] For example
inside the periodic structure, the spontaneous emission
can be suppressed for a certain frequency range (PBG)
or enhanced for a particular frequency. As will be shown
below, one can further modify the resulting radiation
properties from the PhC cavity by using a ﬂat-surface
mirror.[42]

The PhC slab structure to be investigated here is
shown in Fig. 9. The proposed structure is very sim-
ple; it consists of a PhC slab and a bottom reﬂector.
As a reﬂector, a simple dielectric substrate or a Bragg
mirror is to be used. Such a structure is realistic since
the thickness of each layer can be controlled during the
wafer growth. We note that similar planar systems were
studied by Schubert[43] and Benisty[44] in an attempt
to alleviate the poor light extraction eﬃciency of micro-
cavity LEDs. To investigate eﬀects of the presence of
the bottom reﬂector, we have calculated the change of
Q factors and far-ﬁeld radiation patterns as we vary the
air-gap distance between the PhC slab and the bottom
reﬂector (see Fig. 10). Here, the Q factor represents the
lifetime of the resonant mode (τ = Q/ω). As a PhC

resonant mode, the quadrupole mode shown in Fig. 5 is
used. As a bottom reﬂector, we assumed a simple dielec-
tric substrate whose refractive index is 3.4.

Compared with the original far-ﬁeld pattern shown
previously in Fig. 5, the radiation proﬁle shown in
Fig. 10 changes noticeably with the air-gap size. The
far-ﬁeld patterns show the signature of concentric ring-
shape modulation laid upon the original far-ﬁeld pattern,
which is reminiscent of the Fabry-P´erot fringes [45] in
the Fabry-P´erot etalon. Although the reﬂectivity of the
bottom GaAs (or InP) substrate is only ∼ 30%, the in-
terference between the original wave and the reﬂected
wave is easily noticeable. Upon inspection of the far-
ﬁeld patterns in Fig. 10(a), one can ﬁnd that the sim-
ilar far-ﬁeld patterns show up again after the air-gap
increment of ∼ 1.75a (for example, compare 1.75a and
3.50a). This increment corresponds to around a half-
wavelength (∼ 1.75a × 0.3179λ/a ∼ 0.55λ). It should be
noted that the directional beam cannot be achieved from
the quadrupole mode. To achieve unidirectional emis-
sion, we need to investigate the inherently directional
resonant mode such as the deformed hexapole mode.

Similar systematic dependence on the air-gap size is
also observed in the Q factor of the resonator, at a period
of approximately λ/2. Note that the Q factor decreases
drastically when the air-gap size becomes less than 0.25λ.
There are two distinct reasons for this phenomenon; one
is the TE-TM coupling loss through the PhC slab [46]
and the other is the diﬀraction loss in the downward di-
rection. The TE-TM coupling loss always occurs when
the vertical symmetry of the PhC slab structure is bro-
ken. The reason for the increase of the diﬀraction loss
to the downward direction is that the light-cone of the
bottom substrate is eﬀectively enlarged by a factor of n
(the refractive index of the substrate). When the bot-
tom substrate is too close from the slab, the tail of the
evanescent ﬁeld begins to feel the substrate. Such an
expanded light-cone will allow the more plane-waves to
be coupled to substrate-propagating modes. Therefore,
in order to prevent this loss, the air-gap size larger than
λ/2 is generally recommended. It is interesting to ﬁnd
that the Q factor can be enhanced even in the presence
of the bottom substrate. In fact, when the air-gap size
is larger than λ/2, the Q factor oscillates around the
original value. Note that the interference phenomena ob-
served here are similar to the cases of the dipole antenna
placed near an ideal plane mirror.[42]

The case of the deformed hexapole mode is worth spe-
cial attention. Fig. 11(a) shows the far-ﬁeld radiation
patterns with a perturbation parameter p = 0.04a (see
Fig. 7). The same bottom substrate of index 3.4 is used.
Here again, one can see that the original far-ﬁeld pat-
terns are modiﬁed by concentric ring-shape modulations.
Comparing the patterns of 1.25a and 3.00a, one can wit-
ness that the similar vertical enhancement is restored
after the air-gap is increased by additional thickness of
∼ 1.75a. This air-gap thickness corresponds to, approxi-
mately, a half-wavelength (∼ 1.75a×0.3192λ/a ∼ 0.56λ).

6

At this point, the vertical enhancement condition seems
to be summarized as 2d ∼ mλ , where d is the air-gap
size and m integral multiple. Moreover, the air-gap size
of 3.00a where the good directionality is obtained is ap-
proximately equal to one wavelength (∼ 0.96λ). If one
wants to ﬁnd the rigorous conditions of optimal verti-
cal enhancement, the analyses need to include the eﬀects
of the optical thickness of the PhC slab and the phase
change upon reﬂection. In the next section, we shall de-
velop a simple, plane-wave based interference model to
explain the vertical enhancement conditions. From the
Q factors, one can clearly see, again, the modiﬁcation
of the intrinsic radiation lifetime, where the oscillation
period around the dotted line is ∼ λ/2 [See Fig. 11(b)].
Note that there seems to be no deﬁnite relation between
the Q factor optimization and the vertical enhancement
condition; The optical loss of the cavity (∼ 1/Q) is a re-
sult of the sum of the emitted power (
(dP/dΩ)dΩ). A
simple guess of the Q by the emission pattern itself can
be misleading.

R

In principle, one can completely block the downward
propagating energy by using a highly-reﬂective Bragg
mirror. For example, a stack of 25 AlAs/GaAs pairs
give a reﬂectivity in excess of 0.998.[20] In the subsequent
analyses, we will use a Bragg mirror made of a stack of 20
AlAs/GaAs pairs whose reﬂectivity is ∼ 99%. Remem-
ber that the FDTD grid resolution for the z direction
[(1/20)a] is, in fact, not suﬃciently ﬁne to fully describe
the each Bragg layer (around 10 grids are used to describe
one pair of AlAs/GaAs).[21] As a result, the reﬂectivity
would be slightly smaller than the actual value.

Far-ﬁeld patterns in presence of a Bragg mirror are
In comparison with
collectively shown in Fig. 12(a).
Fig. 11(a), the concentric ring-shape modulation is more
pronounced due to the high reﬂectivity of the bottom
structure. In the Q factor plot shown in Fig. 12(b), the
modiﬁcation of the radiation lifetime is also prominent.
The maximum Q factor is increased from ∼25 000 to ∼35
000, which represents an increase of the radiation life-
time by 75% in comparison with that without a reﬂector.
Note that, except for such increased interference eﬀects,
all other characteristic features in the far-ﬁeld patterns
still remain almost unchanged. In short, we conﬁrmed
that both the radiation lifetime and the radiation pat-
tern can be controlled by simply adjusting the distance
between the PhC slab and the reﬂector. As shown in
the far-ﬁeld pattern of 3.00a, one can achieve a sharp
directional emission in which most of the emitted power
(∼ 80%) is concentrated within ±30◦.

C. Design rule for directional emission

In the preceding subsection, we have shown that, by
using the 3-D FDTD method and the near- to far-ﬁeld
transformation algorithm, the radiation patterns of the
PhC defect modes can be altered by the bottom reﬂector.
Especially the choice of ∼ 1λ air-gap seems to give the

best directional emission. In this subsection, we will try
to ﬁnd conditions for the directionality, by developing a
simple analytic model based on plane-wave interferences.
We assume that the PhC slab can be approximated
as a uniform dielectric slab having an eﬀective refractive
index[47] and the PhC resonant mode can be treated as
a point dipole source embedded in the middle of the slab
and the radiations are described by scalar plane-waves.
We also assume that the bottom reﬂector is positioned
suﬃciently far (> λ/2) from the PhC slab. The reﬂector
does not perturb too much the original characteristics of
the resonant mode. Thus, the initially upward and down-
ward propagating waves (See Fig. 13(a)) can be assumed
to be symmetric, 1 and 1. The downward propagating
component will eventually be redirected upward to make
an interference with the upward propagating component.
Although these assumptions seem to be very simple, sim-
ilar approaches based on the plane-wave interferences
have already been used for the calculation of radiation
patterns of atomic dipoles in a planar microcavity.[44, 48]
As indicated by Dowling[48], the mode structure of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld is a classical phenomenon.

In the simplest case when multiple reﬂections between
the PhC slab and the bottom reﬂector can be neglected
[49], a constructive inteference condition at the vertical
becomes

7

all the waves detected upward which initially propagate
downward. Then, an interference between the originally
upward propagating wave and the S will be described by
1 + S, and the resultant intensity will be proportional to
|1 + S|2. To sum all the waves which undergo inﬁnitely
many multiple reﬂections in the slab and in the air-gap,
we introduce a simple method which take advantage of
the similarity of such multiple reﬂections and transmis-
sion.

We trace several reﬂections and transmissions of the
wave which start out at point A in the initial stage. At
point B, the wave is divided into two. Here, the down-
ward propagating component will undergo the same mul-
tiple reﬂections as the wave at A. Let Q be the sum of
all the waves detected upward which propagate upward
at B, then we get the following equation for the S.

S = e2iϕeiε (t0Q + (−r0)S)

(22)

Now, let us proceed the upward propagating wave at B
more. The wave once reﬂected at the top of the slab will
reach at point C, there, two divided waves have resem-
blance to the waves which contribute to the Q and the
S, respectively. Describing these processes,

Q = eiφ

t0 + r0eiφ(r0Q + t0S)

(23)

e2iϕeiǫeiφ = 1

(18)

We get the S by equating Eq. (22) and Eq. (23).

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

where 2ϕ is a round-trip phase in the air-gap.
ǫ and
φ are the phase changes at the bottom reﬂector [50]
and through the PhC slab, respectively (See Fig. 13(a)).
When the radiation into an angle θ is considered,

ϕ = (2π/λ)d cos θ

φ = (2πnef f /λ)L

1 − (1/n2

ef f ) sin2 θ

q
where d and L are the air-gap thickness and the slab
thickness, respectively. Considering the typical thickness
of the PhC slab of ≈ λ/(2n), one may assume φ ≈ π.[2]
Then, Eq. (18) becomes

(19)

(20)

exp(−i4πd/λ) ≈ 1

(21)

This condition is consistent with the previous obser-
vation (2d ∼ mλ) which has been deduced from the
far-ﬁeld patterns. However, in general, the PhC slab
thickness does not satisfy this ‘slab resonance condition
(L = λ/(2n))’ and the residual reﬂection can not be com-
pletely cancelled. Then, what should be changed in the
vertical enhancement conditions [Eq. (18)] when multiple
reﬂections become signiﬁcant?

Fig. 13(a) describes the situation where the emission
from the cavity is divided by the upward and the down-
ward propagating waves. Here, we focus only on the ver-
tical interference conditions (θ = 0). r0 and t0 are coeﬃ-
cients of amplitude reﬂection and transmission for a sin-
gle dielectric interface, respectively. Let S be the sum of

S =

t2
0eiφ
0e2iφ)(r0 + e−2iϕe−iε) − r0t2
Now, let us examine two representative cases of the

(1 − r2

0e2iφ

(24)

PhC slab; ‘slab resonance’ and ‘slab antiresonance’.

(1) Slab Resonance

This is a case when φ = π, i.e., eiφ = −1. From the well
known result for the transmittance in a uniform dielectric
slab,[20] we know that the slab becomes transparent and
multiple reﬂections in the air-gap do not occur. Thus, we
can easily guess that this case restores the simplest two-
beam interference result dealt in Eq. (18). By inserting
eiφ = −1 into the Eq. (24), we get

S =

(1 − r2

t2
0(−1)

0)(r0 + e−2iϕe−iε) − r0t2
0
−iε
e−2iϕe−iε = −e

−2iϕe

−1

=

Resultant radiation intensity becomes

(25)

W = |1 + S|2 = |1 − e

−2iϕe

−iε|2

(26)

This is the famous two-beam interference formula, if
the phase change at the bottom mirror is ǫ = π, then the
condition for a constructive interference becomes

2ϕ = 2mπ

(27)

The maximum radiation intensity is Wmax = 4 with

the above condition.

(2) Slab Antiresonance

This is a case when φ = 1.5π, i.e., eiφ = −i. The
reﬂectance from the dielectric slab is maximized with this
slab thickness. Inserting eiφ = −i into Eq. (24),

S =

−it2
0
0)(r0 + e−2iϕe−iε) + r0t2
0

(1 + r2

(28)

Here, we let ǫ again be π, then one can easily prove that
the condition of the air-gap to maximize |S| is e−2iϕ = 1
(air-gap resonance).

Smax =

(1 + r2

−it2
0
0)(r0 − 1) + r0t2
0
(1 + r0)
(1 − r0)

(1 − r2
0)
(1 − r0)2 = i

= i

(29)

Assuming the eﬀective refractive index of the slab
(nef f ) by 2.6, then r0 = (nef f − 1)/(nef f + 1) ≈ 0.44.
The vertical radiation intensity becomes

W = |1 + S|2 = 12 +

≈ 7.9

(30)

2

1 + r0
1 − r0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

which can be larger than that of the slab resonance.
Note that the condition for maximizing W is slightly
diﬀerent from the slab antiresonance, because of a phase
diﬀerence between two complex numbers (Smax is a pure
imaginary while ‘1’ is a real).

In Fig. 13(c), we plot W as a function of the slab thick-
ness (φ) for various air-gap sizes (ϕ). A blue line repre-
sents the result when the air-gap size exactly equals the
emission wavelength (d = 1.00λ). Other lines represent
the air-gaps as indicated. Here, it is found that 1) the
overall emission intensity decreases as the air-gap is de-
tuned from the ‘λ’ condition and 2) when the air-gap size
is ‘λ’(on-resonance), there exists a relatively wide con-
cave plateau in the neighborhood of the ‘slab resonance’
(φ = π). In this case, the vertical emission is enhanced
by a factor larger than 4, over a wide range of slab thick-
nesses. Although the better vertical enhancement can be
obtained near the ‘slab antiresonance’ (φ = 1.5π), the
thickness of the PhC slab is better to be chosen near the
‘resonance’ condition, because the thicker slab tends to
support unwanted higher-order guided modes.[23] Thus,
thanks to the multiple reﬂection eﬀect, the vertical en-
hancement condition now becomes rather simple. Above
analyses suggest that the focus should be placed more
on the air-gap size that has be exactly matched with the
emission wavelength λ than on the PhC slab thickness
that is already designed near the antiresonance condi-
tion.

8

To conﬁrm the above argument, we have calculated
far-ﬁeld patterns of the deformed hexapole mode using
the ‘λ’ air-gap. We have increased the slab thickness
from 0.6a to 0.9a, which correspond to approximately
the phase thickness from ∼ π to ∼ 1.2π [51]. Since reso-
nant mode frequencies are changed by the slab thickness,
the air-gap sizes have been adjusted to ﬁt the ‘λ’ con-
dition. As shown in Fig. 14, good directional patterns
are obtained. It is interesting to note that the far-ﬁeld
pattern becomes more directional as the slab thickness
increases. Therefore, as expected in the previous argu-
ment, the slab slightly thicker than that satisfying the
resonance condition is preferable for the enhanced ver-
tical beaming. From the far-ﬁeld pattern of L = 0.9a,
it is found that more than 80% of the emitted power is
contained within an angle of ±30◦.

Figure 15 shows the electric-ﬁeld intensity distribu-
tions detected in the x-z plane. For comparison, the
case of a symmetric PhC slab cavity without a bottom
In Fig. 15(b), one can clearly
reﬂector is also shown.
see that the downward propagating waves are eﬀectively
redirected by the Bragg mirror and the unidirectional
emission is achieved. In other words, we have shown that
inherent radiation patterns of the PhC slab resonant
mode can be controlled either by modifying the defect
structures, or by placing a reﬂector near the cavity. By
simply adjusting the air-gap size to be λ, one can obtain
fairly good directional patterns.
The directionality
improves continuously until the slab thickness becomes
near the slab antiresonance.
In a practical point of
view, the air-gap size is a ﬁxed quantity which cannot
be changed after the wafer growth [52]. Thus, the most
important design rule for the directional emission is to
choose the air-gap size (thickness of a sacriﬁcial layer) to
be a target wavelength ‘λ’. Then, the remaining critical
issue will be that of the lithographic tuning that matches
the resonant wavelength of the mode of interest with the
emission wavelength of quantum well or quantum dots.

V. SUMMARY

We have shown that the radiation pattern and the ra-
diation lifetime of the 2-D PhC slab resonant mode can
be controlled by placing a mirror near the cavity. To cal-
culate the far-ﬁeld pattern, we have developed a simple
and eﬃcient simulation tool based on the FDTD method
and the near- to far-ﬁeld transformation. We have dis-
cussed two distinct physical mechanisms responsible for
the modiﬁcation of the far-ﬁeld radiation pattern. Ei-
ther by tuning the defect structure or by placing a re-
ﬂector near the cavity, we have shown that the unidi-
rectional emitter whose energy is concentrated within a
small divergence angle (±30◦) can be achieved. Simple
plane-wave based interference model has revealed that
the vertical enhancement condition is satisﬁed when the
air-gap size is equal to the emission wavelength. To fur-

ther enhance the directionality, the slightly thicker PhC
slab design than the ‘slab resonance’ condition would be
recommended. The proposed structure is practical since
the critical design parameter can be precisely controlled
during the epitaxial growth.

tance and discussions. S. H. Kim would also like to thank
J. M. G´erard in CEA in France for his valuable discus-
sions. This research was supported by a Grant from the
Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Korea.

9

Acknowledgments

One of the authors, S. H. Kim, would like to thank S.
H. Kwon, M. K. Seo, J. K. Yang for their valuable assis-

[1] J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve, and S. Fan, Nature

[22] J. Vˇukovi´c, M. Lonˇcar, H. Mabuchi, and A. Scherer,

(London) 386, 143 (1997).

[2] S. G. Johnson, S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopou-
los, and L. A. Kolodziejski, Phys. Rev. B 60, 5751 (1999).
[3] S. H. Kim, G. K. Kim, S. K. Kim, H. G. Park, Y. H. Lee,

and S. B. Kim, J. Appl. Phys. 95, 411 (2004).

[4] O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Yariv, A. Scherer, J. D.
O’Brien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, Science 284, 1819
(1999).

IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 850 (2002).

[23] H. Y. Ryu, J. K. Hwang, and Y. H. Lee, J. Appl. Phys.

88, 4941 (2000).

[24] O. J. Painter, A. Husain, A. Scherer, J. D. O’Brien,
I. Kim, and P. D. Dapkus, IEEE J. Lightwave Technol.
17, 2082 (1999).

[25] K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, Opt. Express 10, 670

(2002).

[5] H. G. Park, J. K. Hwang, J. Huh, H. Y. Ryu, Y. H. Lee,

[26] S. H. Kim and Y. H. Lee, IEEE J. Quantum Electron.

and J. S. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 3032 (2001).

39, 1081 (2003).

[6] H. Y. Ryu, S. H. Kwon, Y. J. Lee, Y. H. Lee, and J. S.

[27] K. Sakoda, Optical Properties of Photonic Crystals

Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3476 (2002).

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2001).

[7] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. S. Song, and S. Noda, Nature

[28] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New

(London) 425, 944 (2003).

York, 1974).

[8] H. Y. Ryu, M. Notomi, and Y. H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett.

83, 4294 (2003).

[9] T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. M.
Gibbs, G. Rupper, C. Ell, O. B. Shchekin, and D. G.
Deppe, Nature (London) 432, 200 (2004).

[10] J. M. G´erard and B. Gayral, Proc. SPIE 5361, 88 (2004).
[11] J. Vˇukovi´c and Y. Yamamoto, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 2374

(2003).

[12] K. Hennessy, A. Badolato, P. M. Petroﬀ, and E. Hu,

Photonics and Nanostructures (Elsevier) 2, 65 (2004).

[13] H. G. Park, S. H. Kim, S. H. Kwon, Y. G. Ju, J. K. Yang,
J. H. Baek, S. B. Kim, and Y. H. Lee, Science 305, 1444
(2004).

[14] S. Noda, M. Imada, M. Okano, S. Ogawa, M. Mochizuki,
and A. Chutinan, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 38, 726
(2002).

[15] T. Asano, M. Mochizuki, S. Noda, M. Okano, and
M. Imada, IEEE J. Lightwave Technol. 21, 1370 (2003).
[16] S. Noda, A. Chutinan, and M. Imada, Nature (London)

[29] W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W. T.
Vetterling, Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientiﬁc
Computing (Cambridge University Press, 1992), 2nd ed.
[30] D. J. Shin, S. H. Kim, J. K. Hwang, H. Y. Ryu, H. G.
Park, D. S. Song, and Y. H. Lee, IEEE J. Quantum Elec-
tron. 38, 857 (2002).

[31] M. L. Povinelli, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, and

J. B. Pendry, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 1069 (2003).

[32] O. Painter and K. Srinivasan, Opt. Lett. 27, 339 (2002).
[33] S. K. Kim, (unpublished).
[34] S. H. Kwon, (unpublished).
[35] G. H. Kim, (private communication).
[36] S. K. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. H. Kim, I. K. Hwang, Y. H. Lee,
and S. B. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 031101 (2005).

[37] E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946).
[38] G. Bj¨ork, S. Machida, Y. Yamamoto, and K. Igeta, Phys.

[39] J. K. Hwang, H. Y. Ryu, and Y. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B

Rev. A 44, 669 (1991).

60, 4688 (1999).

407, 608 (2000).

[40] R. K. Lee, Y. Xu, and A. Yariv, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 17,

[17] H. Takano, Y. Akahane, T. Asano, and S. Noda, Appl.

1438 (2000).

Phys. Lett. 84, 2226 (2004).

[18] H. G. Park, J. K. Hwang, J. Huh, H. Y. Ryu, S. H. Kim,
J. S. Kim, and Y. H. Lee, IEEE J. Quantum Electron.
38, 1353 (2002).

[41] H. Y. Ryu and M. Notomi, Opt. Lett. 28, 2390 (2000).
[42] E. A. Hinds, in Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics (Aca-
Inc, Orlando, 1994), edited by P. R.

demic Press,
Berman.

[19] H. Y. Ryu, H. G. Park, and Y. H. Lee, J. Sel. Top. Quan-

[43] E. F. Schubert, Y. H. Wang, A. Y. Cho, L. W. Tu, and

tum Electron. 8, 891 (2002).

[20] L. A. Coldren and S. W. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Pho-
tonic Integrated Circuits (Wiley, New York, 1995).
[21] A. Taﬂove and S. C. Hagness, Computational Elec-
the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain method

trodynamics:
(Artech House, Norwood, MA, 2000), 2nd ed.

G. J. Zydzik, Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 921 (1992).

[44] H. Benisty, H. D. Neve, and C. Weisbuch, IEEE J. Quan-

tum Electron. 34, 1612 (19982).

[45] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Cambridge

University Press, 1980), pp. 329,330.

[46] Y. Tanaka, T. Asano, Y. Akahane, B. S. Song, and

TABLE I: Normalized frequencies (ωn = a/λ), Q factors, and
theta-polarized percentages of the resonant modes shown in
Fig. 1(b).

Dipole
Quadrupole
Monopole
Hexapole

ωn
0.2886
0.3179
0.3442
0.3149

Q
14 900
45 000
11 000
168 000

Pθ/Ptotal(%)
46
75.9
1.2
74.5

S. Noda, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 1661 (2003).

[47] S. Fan and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B 65, 235112

(2002).

[48] J. P. Dowling, M. O. Scully, and F. DeMartini, Opt.

Commun. 82, 415 (1991).

[49] When an optical thickness of a PhC slab is ‘slab res-

10

onance condition’, the PhC slab becomes transparent
(zero reﬂectance).

[50] When we use a Bragg mirror as a bottom reﬂector, a
reﬂection phase is π at the Bragg frequency. This phase
shift is the same with the case of a perfect conducting
mirror.

[51] Optical thicknesses of the PhC slab are estimated from
the transmittance spectrum which has been obtained by
using the 3-D FDTD method with periodic boundary
conditions. For references, see Fan et al. [47]

[52] Recently, LEOM group in France has demonstrated PC-
MOEMS, where one can control the air-gap size by using
electro-static force. See, for instance, J. L. Leclercq, B.
BenBakir, H. Hattori, X. Letartre, P. Regreny, P. Rojo-
Romeo, C. Seassal, P. Viktorovitch, Proc. SPIE, 5450,
300 (2004).

11

FIG. 1: (a) Structure of a modiﬁed single-defect cavity. Here,
the six nearest neighbor holes are pushed away from the cavity
center after reducing their radii from r = 0.35a to rm =
0.25a. (b) Various resonant modes in a modiﬁed single-defect
cavity. Dipoles and quadrupoles are doubly degenerate while
a monopole and a hexapole are nondegenerate. We plot Hz
components of the each resonant mode, where the electric-
ﬁelds are polarized in the x-y plane (TE-like modes).

12

2
FIG. 2: Momentum space intensity distribution (|F T (Ex)|
+
|F T (Ey)|2) of the resonant modes in a modiﬁed single-defect
cavity. The dotted white circle in each graph represents a
light-line deﬁned by k
. The major fraction
of the plane-wave components is outside the light-line, which
implies the eﬃcient index conﬁnement mechanism.

2
y = (ω/c)

2
x + k

2

FIG. 3: Ex and Ey ﬁeld distributions of the resonant modes in a modiﬁed single-defect cavity. For the doubly degenerate
modes such as the dipole and the quadrupole, we plot one of the degenerate pair (the left ones among degenerate pairs shown
in Fig. 1).

13

FIG. 4: Geometry used for the far-ﬁeld computation. The
whole calculation domain is divided by the horizontal plane
just above the photonic crystal slab. According to the surface
equivalence theorem, the near-ﬁeld components (Ex, Ey, Hx,
and Hy) at the horizontal plane give suﬃcient information on
the far-ﬁeld pattern in the upper domain (Ω).

FIG. 5: Calculated far-ﬁeld patterns of the resonant modes
depicted in Fig. 3. All the far-ﬁeld data (x, y) are represented
by using a simple mapping deﬁned by x = θ cos φ and y =
θ sin φ (The radius of the plot corresponds to θ.). Along with
total intensity (|E|2) patterns, we also display theta-polarized
intensity (|Eθ|2) patterns and phi-polarized intensity (|Eφ|2)
2
patterns. Intensities of |Eθ|
are normalized by the
maximum value of both data.

2
and |Eφ|

14

(a) x-polarized intensity (|Ex|2) pattern and the
FIG. 6:
2
) pattern of the dipole mode. In-
y-polarized intensity (|Ey|
2
2
tensities of |Ex|
are normalized by the maximum
and |Ey|
value of both data. (b) Calculated far-ﬁeld patterns of the
hexapole mode for the ﬁner grid resolution (∆x, ∆y). The
vertical grid resolution ∆z was ﬁxed to be a/20 throughout
the calculation.

FIG. 7: Radiation characteristics of the deformed hexapole
mode. (a) Schematic of the deformed structure, where two
horizontal air-holes facing with each other are enlarged by
p(a). Except for this enlargement, all the structural param-
eters are kept the same as the previous structure shown in
Fig. 1(a). (b) Calculated far-ﬁeld patterns for various values
of the air-hole size increment p. When p = 0.04a, the far-
ﬁeld pattern shows good directionality. (c) Quality factor of
the deformed hexapole mode as a function of the deformation
parameter p.

15

2
FIG. 8:
(a) x-polarized intensity (|Ex|
) pattern and the y-
2
) pattern of the deformed hexapole
polarized intensity (|Ey|
2
are normalized by the
mode. Intensities of |Ex|
maximum value of both data. (b) Ex, Ey, and Hz ﬁeld com-
ponents of the deformed hexapole mode when p = 0.04a. Note
that, although the resulting near-ﬁeld distribution is almost
identical to that of the ideal hexapole mode, the far-ﬁeld pat-
tern changes drastically.

2
and |Ey|

FIG. 9: Schematic of a novel photonic crystal unidirectional
emitter which consists of a photonic crystal slab and a bottom
reﬂector. The resonant modes are conﬁned around the defect
region of the slab.

16

FIG. 10: Radiation characteristics of the quadrupole mode
in the presence of a simple dielectric substrate with a refrac-
tive index of 3.4. (a) Calculated far-ﬁeld patterns for various
values of the air-gap thickness. Here, each intensity value has
been normalized to the maximum value of its own data. (b)
Calculated quality factors as a function of the air-gap size. A
horizontal dotted line represents the original quality factor in
the absence of the reﬂector.

17

FIG. 11: Radiation characteristics of the deformed hexapole
mode in the presence of a simple dielectric substrate with
a refractive index of 3.4.
(a) Calculated far-ﬁeld patterns
for various values of the air-gap thickness. Here, each inten-
sity value has been normalized to the maximum value of its
own data. (b) Calculated quality factors as a function of the
air-gap size. A horizontal dotted line represents the original
quality factor in the absence of the reﬂector.

18

FIG. 12: Radiation characteristics of the deformed hexapole
mode in the presence of a Bragg mirror. (a) Calculated far-
ﬁeld patterns for various values of the air-gap thickness. Here,
each intensity value has been normalized to the maximum
value of its own data.
(b) Calculated quality factors as a
function of the air-gap size. A horizontal dotted line repre-
sents the original quality factor in the absence of the reﬂector.

19

FIG. 13: Vertical emission in the presence of the perfectly conducting mirror (PCM). (a) Simple vertical interference model.
The emission from the cavity is divided by the upward and the downward propagating waves. (b) Calculated vertical emission
2
intensity |S|
(θ = 0) from the initially downward propagating wave. Here, ǫ = π and ϕ = 2π are assumed. (c) Calculated
vertical emission enhancement factor W = |1 + S|2 (θ = 0) as a function of the slab thickness for various values of the air-gap
thickness ranging from 1.00λ to 0.85λ.

FIG. 14:
Calculated far-ﬁeld radiation of the deformed
hexapole mode in the ‘λ’ air-gap condition. (a) Far-ﬁeld pat-
terns for various values of the slab thickness ranging from
0.6a to 0.9a, which approximately correspond to from ∼ π to
∼ 1.2π. (b) Polar plot of the far-ﬁeld pattern. Note that the
far-ﬁeld pattern becomes more directional as the slab thick-
ness increases. From the far-ﬁeld pattern of L = 0.9a, it is
found that more than 80% of total emitted power is directed
within a small divergence angle of ±30◦.

20

FIG. 15: Electric-ﬁeld intensity distributions of the deformed
hexapole mode detected in the x-z plane (a) in the absence
of the reﬂector (b) in the presence of the Bragg mirror.

