6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Enhanced transmission of light through a gold ﬁlm due to excitation of standing
surface plasmon Bloch waves.

Igor I. Smolyaninov, Yu-Ju Hung
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We have observed enhanced transmission of light through a gold ﬁlm due to excitation of standing
surface plasmon Bloch waves in a surface Fabry-Perot resonator. Our experimental results strongly
contradict the recently suggested model of light transmission via excitation of a composite diﬀractive
evanescent wave.

Transmission of light through nanostructured metal
ﬁlms remains a topic of considerable interest and un-
Immedi-
resolved controversy over the last few years.
ately after the ﬁrst observations in the late nineties1,2
the dominant mechanism of light transmission was be-
lieved to involve excitation of surface plasmon polaritons
(SPP)3,4 on the interfaces of the metal ﬁlm. Since the
SPPs of the nanostructured metal interfaces are strongly
coupled to each other and to the free space photons, they
seem to be responsible for the eﬀect of extraordinary op-
tical transmission5. Very recently a reassessment of the
earlier transmission measurements of ref.1 and a new the-
oretical model of the enhanced optical transmission has
been oﬀered6,7, which relies on a new theoretical con-
struction called a composite diﬀractive evanescent wave
(CDEW). The main claim of these recent papers is that
SPPs play a minor auxiliary role in the optical transmis-
sion of nanostructured metal ﬁlms, while excitation of
CDEWs is primarily responsible for the eﬀect of extraor-
dinary light transmission. The main diﬀerence between
SPPs and CDEWs is that the SPP is a propagating long-
range surface wave of charge density and the associated
electromagnetic ﬁeld3,4, while according to ref.6 CDEW
is a combination of diﬀracted evanescent modes originat-
ing at an abrupt surface discontinuity such as a hole, a
bump, etc. The wavelength of a CDEW corresponds to
the wavelength of the excitation light in free space6. The
CDEW is not a propagating surface wave in a sense that
its ﬁeld intensity E2 is proportional to 1/x2, where x is
the distance from the source6. Since many practical de-
vices are being built or are proposed to be built using the
eﬀect of extraordinary light transmission through metal
ﬁlms, understanding of the main mechanism behind this
eﬀect is very important. At the moment, the discus-
sion about the comparative role of SPPs and CDEWs
in the eﬀect in question is conducted primarily based on
theoretical arguments. In this letter we report a set of
simple experiments, which strongly favor the dominant
role of SPPs in the eﬀect of extraordinary light transmis-
sion through nanostructured metal ﬁlms. We show that
transmission of light through a gold ﬁlm is strongly en-
hanced due to excitation of standing SPP Bloch waves in
a surface Fabry-Perot resonator, which is approximately
16 micrometers long. Our experimental results strongly
contradict the model of light transmission via excitation

of a CDEW. Another important implication of our results
is that ability to make two-dimensional Fabry-Perot res-
onators for surface plasmon polaritons brings us closer to
experimental realization of a SPASER8, a quantum co-
herent source of SPPs. A plasmonic medium with gain
has been already demonstrated recently9. Thus, in or-
der to realize the SPASER we need to bring these two
advances together in one device.

In our experiments 50 nm thick gold ﬁlms were sput-
tered onto a glass substrate using a Magnetron Sput-
tering Machine. An overlay of polymethyl methacrylate
(PMMA) ﬁlm was then spin-coated and patterned us-
ing E-beam lithography. The dielectric PMMA ﬁlm was
about 100-200 nm thick. An example of a patterned bi-
grating is shown in Fig. 1(a). It consists of individual
PMMA dots on gold ﬁlm surface. The grating period
is 500 nm in both directions. The gold ﬁlms under the
PMMA layer were still intact after the gratings were de-
veloped using MIBK/IPA developer. With 502 nm laser
light illumination the area of the gold ﬁlm above which
the PMMA grating has been formed exhibited the eﬀect
of extraordinary optical transmission similar to the one
described in ref.1. This is illustrated in Figs.1(b,c), in
which the area of the gold ﬁlm under the PMMA grat-
ing appears similar in brightness to the areas of the gold
ﬁlm punctured with a periodic array of 200 nm diameter
nanoholes when illuminated with the same laser power.
The idea of our experiment was to fabricate a Fabry-
Perot type surface resonator for the SPP Bloch waves
and to check if there would be a noticeable increase in
the eﬀect of extraordinary light transmission associated
with the resonance. Note that since CDEWs are non-
propagating waves, this eﬀect would be impossible to ob-
serve with CDEWs in a surface Fabry-Perot resonator,
which is a few tens of micrometers long.

A surface plasmon polariton Bloch wave can be excited
on the surface of the rectangular bi-grating (Fig.1(a))
at a number of resonant angles. These angles αn are
determined by the quasi-momentum conservation law4:

k sin αn = kp + 2πn/a,

(1)

where k is the wavevector of photons in free space, kp
is approximately equal to the SPP wave vector on the
ﬂat metal surface, a is the period of the structure in the

direction of propagation, and n is an integer. Such SPP
Bloch waves have been observed in ref.10. The geometry
of our sample is shown in Figs.2(a,c). A corner of the
rectangular array of the PMMA dots shown in Fig.1(a)
occupies the bottom left corner of Fig.2(a). The outside
area is the non-strucutered PMMA ﬁlm on top of the gold
ﬁlm. The T-shaped feature inside the array of PMMA
dots was exposed to the E-beam and etched away, so that
the gold ﬁlm is naked in this area. The AFM image of the
edge of the PMMA dots array is shown in Fig.2(c). The
microscopic photo image of this structure illuminated by
532 nm laser light is shown in Fig.2(b). It is quite appar-
ent from this image that the area of the PMMA dot array
between the end of the long leg of the T and the near-
est edge of the PMMA dot array exhibits much higher
transmission than the rest of the PMMA dot array. On
the other hand, the two areas of the array between the
edge of the structure and the two arms of the T exhibit
about the same transmission as the rest of the PMMA
dot array. The observed eﬀect is very sensitive to the illu-
mination angle. Compared to the image in Fig.2(b), the
illumination angle of the 532 nm laser light in Fig.2(d)
was increased by only 3 degrees.

In order to prove that the area between the leg of the
T and the nearest edge of the PMMA array behaves as
a Fabry-Perot resonator for surface plasmon polaritons
we have analyzed the two cross sections of the image in
Fig.2(b). These cross sections are shown in Fig.3. The
directions of the cross sections are shown in Fig.3(a).
The cross section in Fig.3(b) is performed along the op-
tical axis of the Fabry-Perot resonator. The maxima of
the optical ﬁeld indicated by the arrows are separated
by ΛBloch/2 distances, where the wavelength of the SPP
Bloch wave

2

corresponds to n = −1 in equation (1). The second
cross section in Fig.3(c) is performed along a diagonal
direction. It indicates that the intensity of light trans-
mitted inside the plasmonic Fabry-Perot resonator is en-
hanced by approximately a factor of 4 compared to the
transmission of the rest of the PMMA dot array. It ap-
pears that this result strongly contradicts the CDEW
model described in refs.6,7. The intensity of a CDEW
wave would drop by a factor of (2µm/32µm)2 ≈ 0.004
upon the double pass through the Fabry-Perot interfer-
ometer. This estimate is based on the ≈ 2µm CDEW
propagation length cited in ref.6, and the length of
the plasmonic Fabry-Perot resonator shown in Figs.2,3.
Thus, no resonance enhancement of the eﬀect of the ex-
traordinary light transmission is possible due to excita-
tion of CDEW in the resonator. On the other hand,
the resonator length is smaller than the typical values
of the SPP propagation length measured in the exper-
iments and calculated theoretically2,4, while the length
of the resonator corresponds to approximately two SPP
Bloch wavelengths estimated using equation (2). We be-
lieve that the plasmon-assisted mechanism of light trans-
mission is proven beyond reasonable doubt.

In conclusion, we have observed enhanced transmission
of light through a gold ﬁlm due to excitation of standing
surface plasmon Bloch waves in a surface Fabry-Perot
resonator. Our experimental results strongly contradict
the recently suggested model of light transmission via ex-
citation of a composite diﬀractive evanescent wave. An-
other important implication of our results is that ability
to make two-dimensional Fabry-Perot resonators for sur-
face plasmon polaritons brings us closer to experimental
realization of a SPASER8.

ΛBloch = − aλp

(λp − a)

≈ 8.3µm

This work has been supported in part by the NSF

(2)

grants ECS-0304046, CCF-0508213, and ECS-0508275.

1 T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and

P.A. Wolﬀ, Nature, 391, 667 (1998).

2 I.I. Smolyaninov, D.L. Mazzoni, and C.C. Davis, Phys.

7 G. Gay, O. Alloschery, B. Viaris de Lesegno, C. O’Dwyer,
J. Weiner andH. J. Lezec, Nature Physics 2, 262 (2006).
8 D.J. Bergman and M.I. Stockman, Phys.Rev.Lett. 90,

Rev. Lett., 77, 3877 (1996).

3 H. Raether, Surface Plasmons (Springer, Berlin, 1988).
4 A.V. Zayats, I.I. Smolyaninov, and A. Maradudin, Physics

027402 (2003).

177401 (2005).

Reports, 408, 131 (2005).

5 L. Salomon, F. Grillot, A. V. Zayats, and F. de Fornel

59, 2454 (1999).

9 J. Seidel, S. Grafstrm, and L. Eng, Phys.Rev.Lett. 94,

10 I.I. Smolyaninov, W. Atia, and C.C. Davis, Phys.Rev.B,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1110 (2001).

6 H.J. Lezec, and T. Thio, Optics Express 12, 3629 (2004).

3

FIG. 1: (a) An AFM image of a bi-grating fabricated on the
surface of 50 nm thick gold ﬁlm, which consists of individual
PMMA dots. The grating period is 500 nm in both directions.
(b) With 502 nm laser light illumination the area of the gold
ﬁlm above which the PMMA grating has been formed exhibits
the eﬀect of extraordinary optical transmission similar to the
one described in ref.1. This is illustrated in (c), in which
the area of the gold ﬁlm punctured with a periodic array of
200 nm diameter nanoholes appears to have similar brightness
when illuminated with the same laser power.

FIG. 2: Photos of the Fabry-Perot resonator for the SPP
Bloch waves illuminated from the top with white light (a), and
illuminated from the bottom with 532 nm light (b). (c) shows
an AFM image of the boundary between the non-structured
area of the PMMA ﬁlm on top of the gold ﬁlm and the area of
the gold ﬁlm covered with a periodic array of PMMA bumps.
(d) The eﬀect of resonant transmission disappears when illu-
mination angle is increased by 3 degrees: compare (b) and
(d).

FIG. 3: The lines in (a) indicate the directions of the cross
sections of the optical intensity shown in (b) and (c). The
cross sections are made along the optical axis of the resonator
(b), and in the diagonal direction (c). The distance between
the maxima of the optical intensity in (b) corresponds to
ΛBloch/2. The cross-section in (c) indicates that the trans-
mission of the PMMA dot array inside the Fabry-Perot res-
onator is approximately four times higher than in the rest of
the PMMA dot array.

