6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sub-diﬀraction light propagation in ﬁbers with anisotropic dielectric cores

Alexander A. Govyadinov and Viktor A. Podolskiy∗
Physics Department, Oregon State University, 301 Weniger Hall, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA

We present a detailed study of light propagation in waveguides with anisotropic metamaterial
cores. We demonstrate that in contrast to conventional optical ﬁbers, our structures support free-
space-like propagating modes even when the waveguide radius is much smaller than the wavelength.
We develop analytical formalism to describe mode structure and propagation in strongly anisotropic
systems and study the eﬀects related to waveguide boundaries and material composition.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Guided propagation of optical signals in isotropic dielectric ﬁbers is possible only when the light-transmitting region
of a ﬁber is at least of the order of the free-space wavelength1. This fact strongly limits resolution of modern optical
microscopy and spectroscopy, prevents the construction of compact all-optical processing units and further develop-
ment in other areas of photonics2,3,4,5,6,7. Although it is possible to propagate GHz radiation in deep subwavelength
areas in coaxial cables or anisotropic magnetic systems8,9,10,11, the direct scale-down of these techniques to optical or
IR domains is problematic12.

Until recently, all designs involving optical light transport in subwavelength areas relied on the excitation of a surface
wave – a special kind of electromagnetic wave propagating at the boundary between the materials with positive and
negative dielectric constants13,14,15,16. The spatial structure of surface waves, however, is fundamentally diﬀerent
from the one of “volume” ﬁber modes or free-space radiation. While it is possible to couple the radiation between
the volume and surface modes, such a coupling is typically associated with substantial scattering losses and involves
materials and devices of substantial (in comparison with optical wavelength) size1,17.

A new approach to guide volume modes in subwavelength areas has been recently introduced in Ref.18. It has been
demonstrated that the waveguide with strongly anisotropic dielectric core supports propagating modes even when its
radius is much smaller than the wavelength. The phase velocity of these propagating modes can be either positive or
negative depending on the waveguide core material. It has been also shown that anisotropic core waveguides can be
tapered and used to eﬀectively transfer free-space radiation to and from nanoscale. These tapered systems, photonic
funnels, are in a sense variable-index (n ≶ 0), volume mode-analog of the adiabatic surface mode compressor, proposed
in Ref.15.

In this manuscript we describe the perspectives of light propagation in anisotropic waveguides. In Section 2 we
describe the physics behind the volume mode propagation in subwavelength waveguides with perfectly conducting
metallic walls. Eﬀects of the core micro-structure on the light propagation are considered in Section 3. Section 4
is devoted to the eﬀect of waveguide walls on mode structure, conﬁnement, and propagation constants. Section 5
concludes the paper.

II. LIGHT TRANSMISSION IN WAVEGUIDES WITH PERFECTLY CONDUCTING WALLS

The geometry of the light transmission considered in this work is schematically shown in Fig. 1. The direction
of light propagation is assumed to coincide with z axis of cylindrical coordinate system. The optical axis of the
anisotropic core material is assumed to be parallel to z direction; ǫk and ǫ⊥ denote the values of the eﬀective dielectric
permittivity parallel and perpendicular to optical axis respectively.

Following the formalism, introduced in18,19, the waves propagating in a waveguide with perfectly conducting walls
can be represented as a series of (T E) and (T M ) modes. Each mode has its own spatial structure across the waveguide,
determined by a structural parameter κ as described below. The propagating component of the mode’s wavevector
can be related to its frequency through the free-space-like dispersion relation:

where ω is the angular frequency of light, c is the speed of light in the vacuum, and the polarization-dependent
propagation constants28

k2
z = ǫν

ω2
c2 ,

ǫT E = ǫT M = ǫ⊥,

νT E = 1

κ2c2
ǫ⊥ω2 ,

−

(1)

(2)

2

(3)

(4)

FIG. 1: Schematic geometry of a waveguide with strongly anisotropic dielectric core (a). Nano-layered metal-dielectric meta-
material realization of a strongly anisotropic core is shown in (b). Optical axis and the direction of light propagation are parallel
to z axis.

For T M waves the structural parameter κ and the mode structure across the waveguide can be related to the z

component of E ﬁeld, which is in turn is determined from the diﬀerential equation

with ∆2 being the 2D Laplacian operator, and an additional condition that the electric ﬁeld Ez satisﬁes the boundary
conditions along the core-cladding interface1. Although Eq. (3) determines mode structure in a waveguide with
arbitrary cross-section, here we consider a cylindrical waveguide to illustrate our approach. In this geometry the
T M r)eimφ+ikz z. Similar considerations relate T E waves to
structure of T M modes is described by Ez(r, φ, z)
Hz(r, φ, z)

T Er)eimφ+ikz z. The structural parameters are:

Jm(κ0

Jm(κ0

∝

∝

νT M = 1

κ2c2
ǫkω2 .

−

∆2Ez + κ2Ez = 0,

κ0
(T M|T E) =

X(T M|T E)
R

where R is a waveguide radius and X is given by Jm(XT M ) = 0 for TM waves J ′

m(XT E) = 0 for T E waves respectively.
The dispersion equation Eq.(1) is fundamentally similar to the dispersion of a plane wave in isotropic material.
√ǫν, which plays a role of the eﬀective index of refraction, is combined from
Indeed, the combination n = kzc/ω =
two (mode-dependent) scalar quantities, ǫ and ν. The mode propagation requires both propagation constants to be
of the same sign.

±

While the parameter ǫ depends solely on the dielectric properties of the core material, the propagation parameter ν
can be controlled (through κ), by changing the waveguide (or mode) geometry. Since κ is inversely proportional to the
waveguide size [see Eq.(4)]1, there exists a cut-oﬀ radius Rcr ∼
λ/2, corresponding to ν = 0 for every free-space-like
mode propagating in the waveguide with isotropic dielectric core. The modes propagate in structures with R > Rcr,
and are reﬂected from thinner systems. This appearance of the cut-oﬀ radius in all dielectric waveguides can be
considered as a manifestation of a diﬀraction limit – it is impossible to localize a combination of plane waves to a
region much smaller than the wavelength inside the material λ = λ0/n, with λ0 being free space wavelength.

Material anisotropy in a sense opens another direction in controlling the light propagation in waveguides. Indeed,
anisotropy of dielectric constant makes the T M -mode parameters ǫ and ν completely independent of each other (T E
waves are not aﬀected by material anisotropy18,19). Extremely anisotropic optical materials may be used to achieve
the volume mode propagation in deep subwavelength waveguides.

As it directly follows from Eqs.(1,2), when (ǫ⊥ > 0, ǫk < 0), the parameter ν is positive regardless the size of
the system. Thus, the cut-oﬀ radius does not exist at all: the decrease of the waveguide radius is accompanied by
R, in a sense “postponing” the diﬀraction limit in the
the decrease of the internal wavelength of the mode 2π/kz
system.

∝

The case of opposite anisotropy (ǫ⊥ < 0, ǫk > 0), is of a special interest. The mode propagation is now possible
only when ν < 0, which in turn requires the waveguide cross-section to be extremely small. Furthermore, causality
arguments now require the phase velocity of a propagating mode to be negative (Fig.2)18,19.
In a sense, such a
waveguide is a complete antipode of a conventional dielectric ﬁber, in terms of phase propagation, as well as in terms
of cut-oﬀ radius.

Fig.3 shows the dependence of refractive index on the waveguide radius. It is clearly seen that the “subdiﬀractional”
light propagation indeed follows from the reduction of the internal wavelength [increase of eﬀective n] in thinner

3

(5)

FIG. 2: Dashed lines: dispersion relation of T M01 mode in a waveguide with Si core; R = 80nm. Solid lines: dispersion relation
of the T M01 mode in the waveguide with anisotropic core [material dispersion is neglected]; k = ω/c. Material parameters are
those of Si-Ag composite described in the text for λ0 = 1.2µm (a) and λ0 = 500nm (b). The former case corresponds to a
negative refraction (ǫ⊥ < 0, ǫk > 0), while the latter describes positive refraction case (ǫ⊥ > 0, ǫk < 0). Positive group velocity
is assumed. See text for details

FIG. 3: Eﬀect of material inhomogeneity on the mode propagation in the waveguides with homogeneous anisotropic cores
(solid lines) and in waveguides with nanolayered composite cores (dashed lines). Material parameters correspond to T M11
mode propagation in Si-Ag system, λ0 = 1.2µm (a) and T M01 mode propagation in Si-Ag system, λ0 = 500nm (b). Horizontal
and vertical lines correspond to kz(a + b) = 1 and to κT M (a + b) = 1 respectively.

waveguides. The ﬁgure also compares the eﬀective index of refraction in homogeneous anisotropic material to the one
in anisotropic meta-material composed from a number of thin metal-dielectric layers as described below.

III. MATERIAL INHOMOGENEITY AND SUBWAVELENGTH LIGHT PROPAGATION

Conﬁnement of the propagating waves to deep subwavelength areas requires extremely strong anisotropy of the
dielectric core. While a large number of anisotropic materials exist in nature, only a few of them exhibit the required
strong anisotropy20. In this section we consider the perspectives of using nanostructured composites, known as meta-
materials, as strongly anisotropic dielectric cores. Some examples of these systems include nanolayer and nanowire
structure21,22. Here we consider the case when strong anisotropy is achieved in an array of metal-dielectric nanolayers,
shown in Fig.1b.

To fabricate these structures, one may use standard CVD, MOCVD, or e-beam writing techniques to build a
nanolayer composite with the total height equal to the length of the anisotropic ﬁber, followed by ion-beam or
chemical etching to “shape” the cylindrical or conical waveguide. E-beam writing or self-assembling techniques could
be also used to directly fabricate the ﬁber with nanolayer core.

When the characteristic thickness of each individual layer becomes much smaller than the wavelength, the properties

of the metal-dielectric composite are well-described by eﬀective-medium theory (EMT)21:

ǫ⊥ =

adǫd + amǫm
ad + am

ǫk =

(ad + am)ǫdǫm
adǫm + amǫd

,

where ad, am and ǫd > 0, ǫm < 0 are thicknesses and permittivities of dielectric and metal layers respectively.

As an example, in this work we assume that the core material is composed from 15

nm-thick layers of Ag (modeled
using Drude approach) and Si (ǫSi = 12). As it directly follows from Eq.(5), this system works as right-handed
(ǫk =
30.51 + 0.77i)
for λ0 = 1.2 µm. The mode behavior in these systems is illustrated in Fig. 3. Two approaches are used to calculate the

59.48 + 2.78i, ǫ⊥ = 1.72 + 0.06i) for λ0 = 500 nm, and as left-handed (ǫk = 28.72 + 0.12i, ǫ⊥ =

−

−

−

propagation constant of the mode in each system: EMT [Eq.(5)], and analytic solution of light transmission though
a 1D periodic layer array18,23. It is seen that the predictions of both techniques are almost identical for the thicker
waveguides, but strongly disagree for thinner systems. In fact, inhomogeneous microstructure of the waveguide core
introduces the cut-oﬀ radius in anisotropy-based systems. While the appearance of such a critical radius may seem
similar to the one in “conventional” dielectric ﬁbers, the two have fundamentally diﬀerent origins. In homogeneous
systems the wave propagation becomes impossible when one tries to conﬁne the propagating wave to the spatial area
smaller than the wavelength. In metamaterial-based structures, on the other hand, the wavelength “self-adjusts” to
the waveguide radius. The mode cut-oﬀ in this case has its origin in the break-up of the EMT when the internal ﬁeld
variation scale [Λ = min(2π/kz, 2π/κ)] becomes comparable to an inhomogeneity scale [∆

(ad + am)]25.

We note that while thinner layers may in principle allow unrestricted conﬁnement of free-space light, in reality
such a conﬁnement will be limited by ﬁnite-size corrections to the material properties of the layers (spatial dispersion,
Landau damping26,27). For metals, the minimum layer thickness can be estimated using

≃

amin
m ≈

λ0

vf
c ∼

λ0
100

,

with vf being Fermi velocity26.

The range of wave propagation in metamaterial-core waveguides is aﬀected not only by spatial dispersion, but also
by implicit material absorption. For the systems that can be successfully treated with EMT the ﬁeld attenuation given
by the imaginary part of the propagation constant kz depends on waveguide geometry along with material properties
[see Eq.(1)]. For T M01 modes in Ag-based systems with R = 80nm considered here the attenuation is dominated
by absorption inside Ag. We estimate that the intensity of the light attenuates in e times on the length of 1.5µm.
This attenuation, although it is acceptable for the short-range signal transfer, may be further compensated or even
reversed, by implementing the gain into the “dielectric” component of a metamaterial18.

IV. EFFECT OF WAVEGUIDE WALLS

In this section we consider the mode dynamics in waveguides with dielectric or metallic walls. Similar to the case of
perfectly conducting walls described above, the light propagation in ﬁbers with any isotropic cladding can be related
to the propagating waves with T E and T M polarizations. In this approach, the ﬁeld is represented as a series of
T M and T E waves with same propagating constant kz and frequency ω, and the boundary conditions are used to
ﬁnd the eﬀective refractive index n = kzc/ω. Note that T E and T M components of the mode have similar but not
identical spatial structure inside the anisotropic core. Explicitly, this structure is given by Jm(κ(T E|T M)r) exp(imφ)
with κ2
k2
z /ǫ⊥). The mode structure in the cladding material is described
by Km(κclr) exp(imφ) with κ2
ǫclω2/c2, and ǫcl being permittivity of the cladding. The boundary condition
matching yields the following dispersion relation for a propagation constant of a mode in waveguide with anisotropic
core:

T M = ǫk(ω2/c2

T E = ǫ⊥ω2/c2

z, and κ2
k2

cl = k2

z −

−

−

m(κT ER) + K ‡
J ‡

m(κclR)

ǫkJ ‡

m(κT M R) + ǫclK ‡

m(κclR)

=

m2ω2
R2c2

ǫ⊥
κ2

T E

+

ǫcl
κ2

(cid:18)

cl (cid:19) (cid:18)

ǫk
κ2

T M

+

ǫcl
κ2

cl (cid:19)

(7)

(cid:2)
m(κR) = L′

(cid:3) (cid:2)

where L‡
m(κR)/[κLm(κR)]. The two terms in the left-hand side of the equation correspond to the
contributions from T E and T M modes respectively. As it is follows from Eq.(7) the “pure” T M and T E modes are
only possible when (i) m = 0, or (ii) ǫcl → −∞
. The latter case corresponds to perfectly conducting metallic walls
described in Section 1. Solutions of Eq.(7) can be separated into two fundamentally diﬀerent groups: the ones with
κ2
(T E|T M) > 0 describe volume modes, while the ones with κ2
It is possible to dramatically simplify Eq.(7) for the case of waveguides with metallic walls. At optical or infrared
frequencies, the permittivity of metals is dominated by plasma-like response of their free electrons26. As a result, this
permittivity is negative and

1. A straightforward Taylor expansion of Eq.(7) yields

(T E|T M) < 0 correspond to surface waves.

(cid:3)

ǫcl| ≫
|

kT E
z ≃

k(0)
z

1 +

"

2

cκ(0)
ωk(0)2

T E Jm(κ(0)
m(κ(0)
z RJ ′′

T ER)
T ER)  

1 +

kT M
z ≃

k(0)
z

ωǫ⊥
ck(0)2

z R

−
2

1
(cid:18)
k(0)
z m2ǫk
T E κ(0)2
ǫ⊥κ(0)2

1

√

ǫcl (cid:19)
−
1

,

,

T M R2 !

√

−

ǫcl #

where the superscript (0) denotes the mode parameters in a waveguide with perfectly conducting walls. Note that
similar to planar waveguides21, ﬁnite value of permittivity of the waveguide wall leads to a mode expansion into the
cladding region.

4

(6)

(8)

5

FIG. 4: T M11(HE11) volume modes in waveguides with anisotropic cores. Permittivities of core material correspond to Si-Ag
composite described in the text. λ0 = 1.2µm. Panel (a) corresponds to perfectly conducting waveguide walls, panel (b) shows
the mode in a waveguide with Ag cladding. Lines represent exact results [Eq. (7)]; dots correspond to perturbative Eq.(8)

FIG. 5: T M02 mode in anisotropic ﬁber with free-standing anisotropic core (ǫcl = 1) (a); SPP mode propagating at Ag-Air
interface (b); λ0 = 1.2µm. Note the fundamental structural diﬀerence between volume and surface modes. Also note that
volume mode has better conﬁnement than its surface counterpart.

Besides aﬀecting the mode propagation constant, cladding material in ﬁber systems also aﬀects the mode structure.
1 mode of a cylindrical waveguide with real (metal or dielectric) walls can be represented as a linear
In fact, the m
combination of T E and T M waves, known as HE or EH waves24. In particular, the HE wave can be represented as a
combination of the T M mode with an admix of the T E mode: Ez
αJm(κT Er) exp(imφ),
with the admix parameter α given by:

Jm(κT M r) exp(imφ), Hz

∝

∝

≥

α =

iωkzmǫk(ǫ⊥ −
cǫ⊥κ2

clκ2

T M R ·

ǫcl)

Jm(κT M R)
m(κT ER) + K ‡
J ‡

m(κclR)

(9)

Note that the eﬀect of mode structure modiﬁcation is unique to ﬁber-geometries and is not observed in planar
waveguides. Our calculations show that for Ag walls, this admix in the HE11 mode is below 2%.

As noted before, the T E (EH) modes are (almost) unaﬀected by the material anisotropy. Therefore the properties

of these waves are identical to the properties of T E modes in waveguides with isotropic core.

In Fig.4 we illustrate a propagating volume mode in the Ag-Si system described above for λ0 = 1.2µm. We provide
a comparison of the mode structure in waveguides with perfectly conducting and Ag walls. It is clearly seen that for
the silver waveguide, the mode structure is well-described by the perturbative result [Eq.(8)].

Finally, use the exact dispersion relation [Eq.(7)] to calculate the modes in the metamaterial ﬁber without cladding,
and compare these modes to the surface polariton mode on the Ag nanowire29. Results of these simulations are shown
in Fig.5. It is clearly seen that the structure of the surface mode (localized at core-cladding boundary) is fundamentally
diﬀerent from the one in the volume modes. It is also seen that surface waves have weaker conﬁnement than their
volume counterparts.

V. CONCLUSIONS

6

In conclusion, we have presented an analytical description of light propagation in waveguides with strongly
anisotropic dielectric cores. We demonstrated that these systems support propagating modes even when the waveg-
uide radius is as small as 1/15 of free-space wavelength. We have analyzed the eﬀect of material microstructure
and waveguide cladding on mode propagation and structure, and suggested a practical realization of subwavelength
structure for telecom frequencies.

Finally, we note that our analysis can be easily generalized for the case of non-circular waveguides, for diﬀerent

classes of dielectric, plasmonic, or polar materials, and for diﬀerent frequency ranges, from optics to IR to THz18.

This research was partially supported by the General Research Fund, Oregon State University.

∗ Electronic address: viktor.podolskiy@physics.oregonstate.edu
1 L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, and L.P.Pitaevskii Course of theor. phys. Vol.8, 2-nd ed., Reed educ. prof. publish. Ltd (1984)
2 A. Lewis, H.Taha, A. Strinkovski, et.al. Nature Biotechnology, 21 1378 (2003)
3 E. Betzig, J.K. Trautman, T.D. Harris, J.S. Weiner, and R.L. Kostelak, Science 251, 1468, (1991)
4 S.F. Mingaleev, Y.S. Kivshar, J.Opt.Soc.Am. B 19, 2241 (2002)
5 M.F. Yanik, S.Fan, M. Soljˆaci`c, J.D. Joannopoulos, Opt.Lett. 28 2506 (2003)
6 D. Walba, Science, 270, 250 (1995)
7 Q. Xu, B. Schmidt, S. Pradhan, M. Lipson, Nature, 435, 325 (2005)
8 H.G. Frey, F. Keilmann, A. Kriele, R. Guckenberber, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 5030 (2002); A. Kramer, F. Keilmann, B. Knoll,

9 J.D. Baena, L. Jelinek, R. Marqu´es, and F. Medina, Phys. Rev. B 72, 075116 (2005); R. Marqu´es, J. Martel, F. Mesa, and

et. al., Micron, 27, p.413 (1996)

F. Medina, Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 183901 (2002)

10 S. Hrabar, J. Bartolic, and Z. Sipus, IEEE Trans. on Ant. and Prop., 53, No.1, 0018-926 (2005)
11 P.A. Belov, C.R. Simovski, Phys. Rev. E 72, 036618 (2005)
12 F. Demming, A. v-d Lieth, S. Klein, K. Dickmann, Adv.Func.Mat. 11, p.198 (2001)
13 S.A. Maier, P.G. Kik, H.A. Atwater et al, Nature 2, 229 (2003)
14 S.I. Bozhevolnyi,V.S. Volkov, and K.Leosson, Phys. Rev. Lett, 89, 186801 (2002)
15 M.I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett, 93, 137404 (2004)
16 A. Karalis, E. Lidorikis, M. Ibanescu, et.all. Phys. Rev. Lett, 95, 063901 (2005)
17 A.Bouhelier, J. Renger, M.R. Beversluis, L.Novotny, J. Microscopy, 210 p.220 (2002)
18 A.A. Govyadinov, V.A. Podolskiy, Phys.Rev.B, 73, 155108 (2006)
19 V.A. Podolskiy and E.E. Narimanov, Phys. Rev. B, 71, 201101(R) (2005)
20 V. A. Podolskiy, L. V. Alexeev and E. E. Narimanov, J. of Mod. Opt., 52, 16, 2343 (2005)
21 R. Wangberg, J. Elser, E. Narimanov, V. Podolskiy JOSA B 23, 498 (2006)
22 J. Elser, V.A. Podolskiy, E.E. Narimanov, arXiv:physics/0604065 (2006)
23 P. Yeh, A. Yariv, and C. Hong, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 67, 423 (1977)
24 M. J. Adams An introduction to optical waveguides, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. (1981)
25 J. Elser, A. Govyadinov, V. Podolskiy, et.al. Surface modes in waveguides with strongly anisotropic core, in preparation
26 E.M. Lifshitz, and L.P.Pitaevskii Course of theor. phys. Vol.10, Reed educ. prof. publish. Ltd (1984)
27 I. Larkin, M.I. Stockman, Nano Lett. 5, p.339 (2005)
28 Note the diﬀerence between the geometry considered in this work (and in18) and the one in19
29 In contrast to its “right-handed” counterpart, left-handed Ag-Si ﬁber described here does not support surface modes.

Complete description of surface modes in strongly anisotropic systems will be presented in25.

