6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
2
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mode hopping strongly aﬀects observability of dynamical instability in optical
parametric oscillators

Axelle Amon1, ∗ and Marc Lefranc2
1Laboratoire PALMS, UMR CNRS 6627, Universit´e de Rennes I,
Campus de Beaulieu, F-35042 Rennes Cedex, France
2Laboratoire PhLAM, UMR CNRS 8523, CERLA,
Universit´e des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex, France
(Dated: January 12, 2014)

Theoretical investigations of dynamical behavior in optical parametric oscillators (OPO) have
generally assumed that the cavity detunings of the interacting ﬁelds are controllable parameters.
However, OPOs are known to experience mode hops, where the system jumps to the mode of
lowest cavity detuning. We note that this phenomenon signiﬁcantly limits the range of accessible
detunings and thus may prevent instabilities predicted to occur above a minimum detuning from
being evidenced experimentally. As a simple example among a number of instability mechanisms
possibly aﬀected by this limitation, we discuss the Hopf bifurcation leading to periodic behavior
in the monomode mean-ﬁeld model of a triply resonant OPO and show that it probably can be
observed only in very speciﬁc setups.

PACS numbers: 42.65.-k, 42.65.Sf, 42.65.Yj

I.

INTRODUCTION

optical

parametric

Continuous-wave

[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]).

oscillators
(OPOs) are tunable sources of coherent light that have
proved extremely useful in quantum optics or high reso-
lution spectroscopy [1]. They also have attracted great
interest as model systems in nonlinear dynamics because
they are based on the simplest optical nonlinearity,
three-wave mixing, and are expected to exhibit complex
dynamical behavior in some regions of parameter space.
Indeed, many theoretical studies have predicted a variety
of complex temporal and spatio-temporal dynamics (see,
e.g.,
In particular, the
simplest model of a triply resonant OPO (TROPO),
the degenerate monomode mean-ﬁeld model, was shown
twenty-ﬁve years ago to display a Hopf bifurcation
leading to periodic behavior [2, 3], and later to exhibit
deterministic chaos
[4]. Quite surprisingly, this in-
stability has to our knowledge not yet been observed
experimentally. Although oscillatory behaviors have
been reported in several experiments [11, 12, 13, 14],
they have been shown to stem either from thermal
eﬀects [12, 13] or from the interaction of transverse
modes [14]. Very recently, chaotic behavior has been
evidenced in a TROPO [15] but is believed to be also
linked to multimode operation.

Most of the instabilities that have been investigated
theoretically require large values of the cavity detunings
and of the pumping rate. As the latter is obviously lim-
ited by the power of the pump laser, it would only be nat-
ural to identify it as the limiting factor when searching
for the instability [10]. As for detunings, they are gener-
ally considered as parameters that can be easily tuned so

∗Electronic address: axelle.amon@univ-rennes1.fr

as to pull the system away from equilibrium and observe
complex behaviors. However, there are two limitations
on the values cavity detunings can take. The ﬁrst is
simply that the OPO threshold increases quadratically
with detuning, and thus that operation is restricted to
detuning values for which threshold power remains be-
low available pump power. The second arises because of
a phenomenon known as mode hopping: OPOs sponta-
neously choose their operation frequency so as to operate
on the cavity mode with smallest detuning. As the OPO
is pulled away from a cavity resonance in order to increase
detuning, a more favorable operating point appears near
another cavity resonance and the system jumps to it. Be-
cause mode hops in OPOs occur for variations of cavity
length as small as a few nanometers, they make it diﬃ-
cult to stabilize doubly or triply resonant OPO and to
achieve smooth tuning [16, 17, 18]. Here, our concern
is that mode hops prevent the OPO from achieving high
values of the detunings and thus restraint the parameter
range that can be explored. Such a limitation might very
well preclude the experimental observation of dynamical
behaviors predicted theoretically.

In this paper, we discuss this problem in a simple ex-
ample, the Hopf bifurcation that leads to periodic behav-
ior in the monomode mean-ﬁeld model of a TROPO. We
show that mode selection in OPOs indeed prevents exper-
imental observation of this instability in most practicable
conﬁgurations. We ﬁrst recall the basic properties of the
monomode mean-ﬁeld TROPO model and the conditions
under which the Hopf bifurcation occurs. In the limit of
inﬁnite pump power, a simple lower bound for signal de-
tunings at which the Hopf bifurcation can occur is easily
obtained, which conﬁrms that this bifurcation requires
high values of the signal detuning. In a second part we
derive the expression of the maximal value that signal
detuning can reach before a mode hop occurs, which de-
pends on the length and ﬁnesse of the cavity as well as on

crystal birefringence. By comparing the two bounds and
searching for parameter regions where they are compati-
ble, we ﬁnd that mode hops generally keep the TROPO
away from parameter ranges where the Hopf bifurcation
can be observed, unless very high-ﬁnesse and very short
cavities are used, which would make operation extremely
diﬃcult. This is conﬁrmed by a numerical exploration at
ﬁnite pump power of the parameter space of this model
for various values of the cavity ﬁnesses.
It shows that
mode hopping rather than pump power is the limiting
factor in order to reach instability. This result provides
a plausible explanation of the fact that the Hopf bifurca-
tion of the monomode TROPO has not yet been observed
experimentally. It also calls for further investigations in
order to determine whether mode hopping also interferes
with other predicted instabilities.

II. TROPO MONOMODE MEAN-FIELD
DEGENERATE MODEL: HOPF INSTABILITY

We now recall the main features of the simplest
TROPO model, the degenerate longitudinally and trans-
versely monomode mean-ﬁeld model [2, 3, 4]. Light gen-
eration in an optical parametric oscillator is based on
parametric down-conversion in a nonlinear crystal of a
pump photon into two lower-frequency photons called
signal and idler.
In a TROPO, the optical cavity en-
closing the crystal is resonant for all three ﬁelds so as to
minimize operation threshold. In the mean-ﬁeld (a.k.a.
uniform-ﬁeld) approximation, the time evolution of the
normalized amplitudes As, Ai and Ap of the signal, idler
and pump ﬁelds inside the cavity can be described by the
following diﬀerential equations [4]:

2

then easy to show that Eqs. (1a) and (1b) imply that af-
ter a suﬃciently long time, the amplitudes As and Ai are
equal up to a constant phase diﬀerence that can always
be removed by a redeﬁnition of the amplitudes. This is
obviously linked to the fact that signal and idler pho-
tons are twin photons created in the same quantum pro-
cess. Without loss of generality, the asymptotic dynam-
ics of the TROPO can then be modeled by the following
normalized equations (degenerate model) describing the
time evolution of the complex amplitude of the signal
ﬁeld As and of the pump ﬁeld Ap [4]:

˙As = −(1 + i∆s)As + A∗
˙Ap = γ

sAp,
−(1 + i∆p)Ap − A2

s + E

,

(2a)

(2b)

For pumping rates above the parametric emission thresh-
old given by

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

E2

th = (1 + ∆2

p)(1 + ∆2

s),

(3)

equations (2) have non-zero stationary solutions which
have been shown to ﬁt accurately experimental observa-
tions in the vicinity of threshold [11]. When pump rate is
increased, these stationary solutions can become unsta-
ble through a Hopf bifurcation giving rise to oscillatory
behavior [2, 3, 4]. A necessary condition for this bifurca-
tion is [4]

∆p∆s < −

1 +

"

γ(1 + ∆2
p)
2

,

#

which ensures that there is a ﬁnite pump rate EH > Eth
at which the stationary nonzero solution bifurcates to a
periodic solution, which is is given by [4]

(4)

2





(5)

˙As = −(1 + i∆s)As + A∗
˙Ai = −(1 + i∆i)Ai + A∗
˙Ap = γ [−(1 + i∆p)Ap − AsAi + E] ,

i Ap,
sAp,

(1a)

(1b)

(1c)

E2

H =

γ2(1 + ∆2

p) + 4(1 + γ)
−2(1 + γ)2[1 + 2(1+∆p∆s)
p) ]

γ(1+∆2



− (∆p∆s − 1)


+(∆p + ∆s)2,

where ∆s, ∆i and ∆p are the detunings between the
optical frequency and the frequency of the closest cavity
resonance for the signal, idler and pump ﬁelds, respec-
tively, and E is the pumping rate. The time unit is the
cavity decay time of the signal ﬁeld and γ is the cavity
decay rate for the pump. In this paper we focus on the
stationary regimes of Eqs (1), and are interested in de-
termining when they become unstable to give birth to
periodic oscillations depending on values of control pa-
rameters.

A little known property of Eqs. (1) is that although the
signal and idler ﬁelds are in principle distinct, their time
evolution can be described by a single amplitude after
transients have died out. First it should be noted that
stationary solutions of Eqs. (1) exist only for ∆s = ∆i, a
relation that can be shown to follow from photon num-
ber conservation [19]. Replicating a similar calculation
carried out in the analysis of a bimode model [20], it is

At higher pump rates, the limit cycle born in the Hopf
bifurcation undergoes a period-doubling cascade leading
to chaos [4].

As inequality (4) is closer and closer to equality, the
Hopf threshold EH given by (5) becomes larger and larger
and is eventually rejected to inﬁnity. For a given max-
imal pump rate available, Emax, whether the instability
can be observed at ﬁxed detunings inside the parameter
domain delimited by (4) is determined by the inequal-
ity Emax > EH (∆p, ∆s). Since we are interested here in
specifying the unstable region by simple bounds on the
detunings, we ﬁrst assume that we have inﬁnite pump
power available. Under this approximation, whose valid-
ity will be checked in numerical simulations in Sec. IV,
the Hopf instability domain is solely determined by in-
equality (4).

The instability domains in the (∆p, ∆s) plane have
been plotted in Fig. 1 for diﬀerent values of γ, and are

g =2 
g =5 
g =10

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d
 
d
e
i
f
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

l

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

−5

−10

−15

−20

−20 −15 −10

 10

 15

 20

−5

 0
Pump field detuning

 5

FIG. 1: Map (∆p, ∆s) for diﬀerent values of the parameter
γ. The curves delimits the areas for which condition (4) is
fulﬁlled.

seen to be bounded away from the origin. Along their
boundaries, (4) is an equality and deﬁnes the signal de-
tuning as a function of pump detuning. It is easily found
that the minimum absolute value that the signal detun-
ing can take on the boundary, and hence in the instability
domain, is:

∆H

min = min{|∆s|} =

γ(γ + 2),

(6)

p

(2 + γ)/γ. Note that ∆H
and is obtained for |∆p| =
min
is roughly proportional to γ and thus increases with it.
p
Since (4) still holds at ﬁnite pump power, the lower
bound provided by (6) is always valid. This clearly shows
that the Hopf bifurcation of the monomode degenerate
mean-ﬁeld model can only occur for suﬃciently high sig-
nal detunings. In the next Section, we describe the pro-
cess of mode hopping and how it limits the values that
signal detunings can take leading to a maximal absolute
value for the detunings. Whether the two constraints
can be satisﬁed simultaneously will eventually determine
whether the Hopf bifurcation can be observed experimen-
tally.

III. LIMITATION OF SIGNAL DETUNING DUE
TO MODE HOPPING

A. Theory

In the theoretical analysis of Sec II, it was assumed
that the frequency detuning of the signal ﬁeld is a ﬁxed
parameter. This is however not entirely true, because
the operating frequency of an OPO is not actually cho-
sen by the experimentalist but results from a complex
mode selection process. While small variations of the
cavity length most often modify frequency and hence de-
tuning gradually, sudden jumps will occur when a remote

3

operating point becomes more favorable. As we discuss
below, this process tends to minimize frequency detuning
and consequently to limit its maximum value, which can
be derived analytically.

As with any optical oscillator where an amplifying
medium is enclosed inside an optical cavity, there are
two main constraints that determine the operating con-
ditions of an OPO: the ﬁrst one is that the gain in the
amplifying medium must be suﬃcient to overcome cavity
losses over each round trip in the cavity, the second one
is that the generated ﬁeld must be nearly resonant with
one of the cavity modes so that ampliﬁcation by the gain
medium is cumulative over successive round trips.

In optical parametric oscillators, the nonlinear inter-
action is optimal when the relative phases of the three
interacting waves remain ﬁxed during propagation. The
phase-matching condition is easily formulated in a cor-
puscular point of view: the conversion of one pump pho-
ton into signal and idler photons must satisfy energy and
momentum conservation:

ωp = ωs + ωi
~kp = ~ks + ~ki

(7a)

(7b)

where ωp,s,i and kp,s,i denote the frequencies and the
wavevectors of the pump, signal and idler ﬁelds.

The pump properties being ﬁxed, relations (7) gen-
erally single out unique values for the signal and idler
frequencies and much of OPO design consists in ensur-
ing that these values fall in the desired frequency range.
However, while energy conservation (7a) strictly holds for
continuous-wave OPOs, momentum conservation may be
satisﬁed only approximately because of the ﬁnite size of
the nonlinear crystal. Thus there is a small but ﬁnite
frequency domain around the exact phase-matching fre-
quency where the nonlinear gain is adequate for OPO
operation. It is usually the case that many cavity reso-
nances fall inside this domain, and an important problem
is to determine the resonances near which oscillation will
actually occur.

Monomode optical parametric oscillators behave as ho-
mogenously broadened lasers in that when there are sev-
eral frequencies for which gain overcome losses in the
empty cavity, the one with the lowest threshold takes
over by saturating the gain in such a way that compet-
ing modes remain below threshold. Mode selection thus
amounts to determining which operating modes have low-
est threshold.
If variation of raw gain in the domain
around perfect phase-matching is neglected, and consid-
ering pump detuning as a ﬁxed parameter, this is equiva-
lent to ﬁnding the allowed operating frequencies for signal
and idler ﬁelds that have lowest frequency detuning, as
expression (3) for parametric threshold shows.

In doubly and triply resonant OPOs, this problem is
made diﬃcult by the fact that the signal and idler ﬁelds
must be simultaneously resonant. Thus operation can
only take place at coincidences between two frequency
combs. In general the two combs have diﬀerent periods,

either because the signal and idler ﬁelds have very diﬀer-
ent frequencies or because they are polarized along dif-
ferent axes of a birefringent crystal (the so-called type-II
phase-matching [21]). A singular conﬁguration that we
will not consider here is when signal and idler have identi-
cal polarizations and frequencies (type-I phase matching
at degeneracy). As a result, frequency tuning in OPOs is
a complicated problem that has been studied very care-
fully both in the type-I and type-II cases [16, 17].

The detunings of the signal and the idler ﬁelds are
given respectively by ∆ωs = ωs − ωR
s and ∆ωi = ωi − ωR
i ,
where ωs and ωi are the optical frequencies of the signal
and idler ﬁelds and ωR
i are the closest resonance
frequencies of the cavity. For the sake of simplicity, we
assume in the following that ωs and ωi are close to a 1:1
ratio but the argument can be generalized easily to any
rational number.

s and ωR

Taking energy conservation (7a) into account, the total
frequency mismatch ∆ω = ∆ωs + ∆ωi for the signal-idler
mode pair is given by :

∆ω = ωp − ωR

s − ωR
i ,

(8)

which does not depend of the speciﬁc oscillation frequen-
cies ωs and ωi chosen by the system, but only of the pump
frequency and the resonance frequencies of the cavity for
the signal and the idler modes. For our purposes, ∆ω is
the relevant quantity to consider as the individual detun-
ings ∆ωs and ∆ωi are proportional to it in a stationary
state, as a consequence of energy and photon number
conservation [19]. The mode pair selected by the OPO
will be the one that minimizes the total frequency mis-
match ∆ω so as to minimize threshold.

Taking into account that ωR

i belong to two
frequency combs speciﬁed by the free spectral ranges δωs
and δωi:

s and ωR

s = Nsδωs, ωR
ωR

i = Niδωi

(9)

where Ns and Ni are the mode indices, and having in
mind that |δωs − δωi| ≪ δωs, δωi, we rewrite (8) as

∆ω = ωp − ¯N (δωs + δωi) − ∆N (δωs − δωi)

(10)

with ¯N = (Ns + Ni)/2 and ∆N = (Ns − Ni)/2. Under
our hypotheses, we have ∆N ≪ ¯N . Hence the last term
in (10) is in ﬁrst approximation negligible compared to
the second term, and the integer value of ¯N that min-
imizes ∆ω is determined independently of ∆N . Then
the optimization problem can be reﬁned by searching for
the integer value of ∆N that minimizes (10) at ﬁxed ¯N .
Studies of tuning properties of double or triply resonant
OPO have shown that the operating modes are grouped
into clusters, each cluster consisting of a sequence of ad-
jacent modes [16, 17]. In (10), ¯N indicates the cluster
and ∆N distinguishes between adjacent modes inside the
cluster.

An important consequence of (10) is that ∆ω can at
best be adjusted in steps of |δωs − δωi|. With such steps,

4

the frequency mismatch ∆ω can always be made to be-
long to the interval [− |δωs−δωi|
] but cannot be
brought closer to zero. This minimal ∆ω corresponds to
the mode pair chosen by the OPO. By considering the
worst case, the maximal frequency mismatch that can be
reached is

, |δωs−δωi|
2

2

∆ωmax =

|δωs − δωi|
2

,

(11)

which agrees with the general expression of the detun-
ing given in [16]. As the OPO is pulled away from an
exact cavity resonance by increasing the cavity length,
the frequency mismatch will increase up to the maximal
value given by (11), at which point there will be an op-
erating mode with a lower mismatch to which the OPO
will switch. This phenomenon is well known as mode
hopping [16, 17].

Before (11) can be compared with the bound found for
the Hopf bifurcation in Sec. II, it has to be expressed
in the same units. The detunings used in equations (2)
are normalized so that half-height width of the cavity
resonance is 2. Since the cavity ﬁnesse F is deﬁned so
that the half-height width is δω/F , we have

∆s = 2Fs

∆i = 2Fi

,

∆ωs
δωs
∆ωi
δωi

.

(12a)

(12b)

As mentioned before, ∆s and ∆i are not independent
in the stationary regime but obey the simple relation
∆s = ∆i as a consequence of energy and photon number
conservation [19]. Taking into account that ∆ω = ∆ωs +
∆ωi, one obtains from (12):

∆s = ∆i =

2FsFi∆ω
Fiδωs + Fsδωi

.

This expression was derived assuming ωs ≃ ωi, so that we
should ﬁx Fs ≃ Fi for consistency. The maximal value
of the frequency mismatch authorized by mode selection,
as given by equation (11), can thus be rewritten as

∆M

max = Fs

|δωs − δωi|
δωs + δωi

,

Before we can discuss whether the Hopf bifurcation can
be observed in typical experiments, we have to reformu-
late (14) in terms of the experimental conﬁguration.

Given that

δωs,i =

2πc
2(Lcav + (ns,i − 1)lc)

where Lcav is the geometric length of the cavity, lc is
the length of the nonlinear crystal, ns,i the indices of the
signal (resp. idler) ﬁelds and c is the celerity of light in
the vacuum, (14) can be rewritten as

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

∆M

max = 2Fs

|δn|lc
[L]

,

5

min (g  = 10)

min (g  = 5)

max

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

where

[L] = 2(Lcav + (

− 1)lc)

ns + ni
2

is the average optical path for the signal and the idler
ﬁelds over one round trip in the cavity and

δn =

|ns − ni|
2

.

In the limit case of a monolithic OPO (Lcav = lc),
expression (16) leads to the remarkably simple expression

∆M

max/Fs =

2|δn|
ns + ni

(17)

showing the key role played by cristal birefringence. Ex-
pression (17) yields an absolute upper bound for (16)
since cavity length obviously cannot be smaller than crys-
tal length.

Note that since δn ≪ ns,i for a standard crystal, ex-
pressions (16) and (17) ensure that the small-detuning
hypothesis of the mean-ﬁeld approximation is fulﬁlled for
the signal and idler ﬁelds.

We are now in a position to obtain a simple criterion
to determine whether the Hopf bifurcation can be ob-
served in a given conﬁguration at inﬁnite pump power.
Obviously, we must have

∆H

min < ∆M

max

(18)

which, using (6) and (16), and expressing the pump cav-
ity decay rate as

γ =

Fs
Fp

,

translates into

1
Fp (cid:18)

1
Fp

s

+

2
Fs (cid:19)

< 2

|δn|lc
[L]

(19)

which is the main result of our paper. Again, (19) sim-
pliﬁes in the monolithic case. A noteworthy feature of
inequality (19) is the asymmetry in the dependences with
respect to the pump and signal ﬁnesses. It is easily seen
that increasing pump ﬁnesse is much more eﬀective to
have (19) satisﬁed. Assuming Fp = 50 and Fs = 500,
doubling the pump ﬁnesse decreases the left hand side
of (19) by 46% while doubling the signal ﬁnesse only
does so by 4%.

B. Numerical estimates

To get a better understanding of whether the crite-
rion obtained in Sec III A is easily satisﬁed or not, we
now compute numerical estimates for typical experimen-
tal conﬁgurations. In previous experiments [12, 13, 14,

 2

 3

 4

 5

 7
Cavity length (cm)

 6

 8

 9

 10

FIG. 2: Solid lines : values of maximal detuning authorized
by mode selection when cavity length is varied between 1.5
cm and 10 cm. Dashed lines : minimal detuning permitted by
the conditions of the Hopf bifurcation for two diﬀerent values
of γ : 5 and 10.

15, 20], we used a KTP crystal of length lc = 15 mm cut
for type-II phase-matching, with an extraordinary index
ne = 1.75 and an ordinary index no = 1.83. The crys-
tal is enclosed in a Fabry-Perot cavity delimited by two
spherical mirrors with a radius of curvature of 5 cm. The
cavity ﬁnesses for the signal and pump ﬁelds are around
500 and 50, respectively.

The most easily adjustable parameter is the geomet-
rical cavity length, which is bounded from below by the
crystal length (1.5 cm) and from above by the concentric
condition (∼10 cm). Figure 2 shows the evolution of the
maximal detuning ∆M
max with cavity length. The main
feature is that ∆M
max decreases monotonically with cavity
length, as is easily seen in expression (16). Thus the most
favorable situation will always be obtained in the “mono-
lithic” conﬁguration where cavity length equals crystal
length. In practice, this conﬁguration cannot be reached
when spherical mirrors are used because of the size of the
crystal mount, but the shortest feasible cavity length (3
cm in our experiments) should be sought.

In our experiment, γ = Fs/Fp = 10, from which we
can compute the value ∆H
min =
γ(γ + 2) of the minimal
detuning necessary to obtain the Hopf bifurcation. This
value does not depend on cavity length and is represented
in Fig. 2 by the upper dashed horizontal line. We see that
there is hardly a conﬁguration where ∆H
max. In
this conﬁguration, the Hopf bifurcation cannot be ob-
served regardless of pump power because mode hopping
prevents to reach suﬃciently high detunings.

min < ∆M

p

In order to lower ∆H

min, assume now that pump ﬁnesse
is increased to 100 so that γ decreases to 5. This cor-
responds to the lower horizontal dashed line in Fig. 2.

D
D
D
There is now a range of cavity lengths where ∆H
∆M

min <
max as shown by the black area between the two curves.
If Fs and Fp are increased simultaneously keeping γ
min remains un-

constant, ∆M
max will increase while ∆H
changed, and the instability region will also widen.

C. Conclusion

In this section we have taken into account the fact
that the signal frequency detuning is not a ﬁxed parame-
ter but is determined by the operating frequency chosen
by the OPO so as to minimize this detuning. As a re-
sult the signal frequency detuning is bounded from above
by the mode hopping phenomenon. Since signal detun-
ings at which periodic behaviors appear are bounded
from below, the Hopf bifurcation can only be observed if
∆H
max. Our analysis has shown that even in the
ideal case where inﬁnite pump power is available, mode
hopping can prevent from reaching detunings suﬃciently
large to observe the Hopf bifurcation of the monomode
model.

min < ∆M

The numerical estimates obtained for the conﬁguration
used in our previous experiments explain why we could
not observe the Hopf bifurcation in this setup. In order
to obtain instabilities, one should take into account that
∆H
min depends on the ratio of signal and pump ﬁnesses
while ∆M
max is proportional to signal ﬁnesse. More gen-
erally, the ﬁnesses should satisfy inequality (19). As will
be discussed in Sec. V, the theoretically most favorable
conﬁgurations are extremely diﬃcult to build experimen-
tally.
In all cases, cavity should be made as short as
possible.

It remains to be checked that in cases where the insta-
bility can be observed, it persists when pump power is
limited. We do so in Section IV.

IV. NUMERICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT
FINITE PUMP POWER

So far, our analysis has assumed inﬁnite pump power,
which has allowed us to obtain simple analytical formu-
las such as (19) to decide whether the Hopf bifurcation
is screened by mode hopping or not. We now have to
determine how good this approximation is in the real-life
situation where only ﬁnite pump power is available and
if conclusions drawn from our theoretical analysis remain
relevant.

At ﬁnite pump power, whether the Hopf bifurcation
can be observed no longer depends only on inequal-
ity (4) but also on whether the Hopf threshold (5) can
be reached given available pump power. Because expres-
sion (5) is much more complicated than inequality (4), we
restrict ourselves here to a numerical exploration of the
detuning ranges where periodic behavior is found and
compare our results with predictions from the inﬁnite
pump power analysis. This exploration is carried out

6

for several values of the cavity ﬁnesses, other parame-
ters being chosen so as to match our previous experi-
ments [12, 13, 14, 15, 20]. As we shall see, it will allow
us to conclude that pump power is not a limiting factor
with commonly available pump lasers and that the cri-
teria derived in the inﬁnite pump power analysis remain
relevant.

A few general observations are in order before we
present our numerical results. The relevant criterion is
whether the minimum detuning ∆H
min at which Hopf bi-
furcation occurs is smaller than the larger detuning ∆M
max
allowed by mode hopping. Thus it is interesting to com-
ment on how these bounds evolve when pump power is
limited.

Regarding onset of periodic behavior, it should be re-
called that inequality (4) holds regardless of pump power,
that equality can be achieved only for inﬁnite pump
power and that otherwise the Hopf threshold (5) yields a
more stringent condition than (4) on the detunings. As
a result, the instability regions are systematically shifted
towards higher values of the detunings, leading to an in-
crease of ∆H
min compared to expression (6).

As for the maximal value ∆M

max of the detuning al-
lowed by mode hopping [Expr. (14)], it does not depend
on pump power as it is obtained by considering the fre-
quency combs of the cavity resonances. However a limi-
tation that has to be taken into account at ﬁnite pump
power is that if the OPO is below parametric emission
threshold at ∆s = ∆M
max, then the latter bound certainly
cannot be achieved and the actual bound will be lower
(the stationary ON state must exist for the bifurcation
to occur). Using the expression for parametric thresh-
old (3), the expression for the maximal signal detuning
value becomes

∆MT

max = min

∆M

max,

 

E2
1 + ∆2
p

s

− 1

!

(20)

where E is the pump parameter and ∆p is the pump
detuning. The compatibility between the values of the
minimal detuning at which periodic behavior occurs and
of the maximal detuning at which stationary paramet-
ric emission occurs is now more diﬃcult to analyze be-
cause both depend on pump detuning. However, it is
easy to see that as pump power is decreased, the former
can only increase and the latter only decrease so that the
Hopf bifurcation is necessarily harder to observe in the
ﬁnite pump power case. We now assess by how much by
carrying out numerical simulations.

The phase diagrams in Fig. 3 shows in black the regions
in the (∆p, ∆s) parameter plane where periodic behav-
ior is found for diﬀerent values of the cavity ﬁnesses, the
values of the remaining parameters being ﬁxed so as to
match our experiments [12, 13, 14, 15, 20]. For each pa-
rameter set, the dynamical regime is classiﬁed as periodic
when

• Inequality (4) is satisﬁed, and

• EH (∆p, ∆s) < Emax(Fp, Fs)

where Emax(Fp, Fs) is the maximum pump parameter
corresponding to the pump power available in our exper-
imental conditions (4 W) [23]. Since the unstable zones
are enclosed inside the regions where parametric emission
occur and the instability regions at inﬁnite pump power,
the boundaries of these regions, which can be computed
analytically, are also shown in Fig. 3 so that we can es-
timate how well they approximate the numerical results.
In order to make meaningful comparisons between setups
corresponding to diﬀerent values of the ﬁnesses, the do-
mains of variations of the pump and signal detunings are
chosen so that ∆s,p ∈ [−Fs,p/(10π), Fs,p/(10π)]. This
corresponds in each case to the same variation of the
physical cavity length (∆L = λ/40π) and thus there is
no diﬀerence in the scans from an experimental point
of view. Since |∆s,p| ≪ 2Fs,p, this also ensures that
the small-detuning hypothesis of the mean-ﬁeld model is
satisﬁed.

Fig. 3(a) shows that for parameter values correspond-
ing to our experimental setup, periodic behavior does not
occur, explaining why we do not observe the Hopf bifur-
cation in this setup. It also shows that the boundaries
of the unstable region at inﬁnite pump power are located
outside the central band where ∆s ∈ [−∆M
max] and
thus that mode hopping prevents the bifurcation from be-
ing observed in this conﬁguration even if inﬁnite pump
power was available. The proximity of the two curves
corresponding to parametric threshold and bifurcation at
inﬁnite pump power probably explains why no instability
can be observed.

max, ∆M

In contrast with Fig. 3(a), Figs. 3(b) to 3(d) display
larger and larger instability zones as cavity ﬁnesses are
increased. While in Fig. 3(b) the intersection of the un-
stable region with the central band of allowed signal de-
tunings is very small, it becomes sizable in Fig. 3(d).
More precisely, the fraction of the central band occupied
by unstable regions is 1.6% in Fig. 3(b), 3.5% in Fig. 3(c)
and 17% in Fig. 3(d). These numbers are meaningful as
probability estimates if we assume that there is no cor-
relation between the signal and pump detunings on av-
erage, i.e., that the entire allowed band may be explored
over several experiments. It should be noted that during
a scan of cavity length through a single resonance of the
pump, pump and signal detuning will vary jointly as illus-
trated in Fig. 3(a) and that this may aﬀect the probabil-
ity of hitting the unstable zone. However, it is expected
that there is no relation between paths followed in the
(∆p, ∆s) plane for diﬀerent pump resonances so that no
part of the allowed band should remain inaccessible.

Examination of Figs. 3(a)-(d) shows that although in-
creasing ﬁnesses globally makes it easier to observe the
Hopf bifurcation, ﬁnesses for the pump and signal ﬁelds
have diﬀerent inﬂuences. The twofold increase in Fp be-
tween Figs. 3(a) and (b) clearly modiﬁes the phase dia-
gram much more than the twofold increase in Fs between
Figs. 3(b) and (c). Similarly, increasing Fp from 100
to 500 is critical to have a signiﬁcant probability of ob-
serving the Hopf bifurcation. This is consistent with the

(a)

Fp = 50, Fs = 500

7

mode hop

o

o

−1.5 −1 −0.5  0  0.5  1  1.5
Pump field detuning

(b)
(b)

Fp = 100, Fs = 500

−3 −2 −1  0  1  2  3
Pump field detuning

(c)
(c)
(c)

Fp = 100, Fs = 1000

−3 −2 −1  0  1  2  3
Pump field detuning

(d)
(d)
(d)
(d)

Fp = 500, Fs = 1000

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d
 
d
e
i
f
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

l

 15

 10

 5

 0

−5

−10

−15

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d
 
d
e
i
f
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

l

 15

 10

 5

 0

−5

−10

−15

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d
 
d
e
i
f
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

l

 30

 20

 10

 0

−10

−20

−30

i

g
n
n
u
t
e
d
 
d
e
i
f
 
l

l

a
n
g
S

i

 30

 20

 10

 0

−10

−20

−30

−15 −10 −5  0  5  10  15
Pump field detuning

FIG. 3:
Phase diagrams in the (∆p, ∆s) plane showing
the instability regions as black areas for diﬀerent values of
the ﬁnesses of the pump (Fp) and of the signal (Fs) ﬁeld:
(a) Fp = 50, Fs = 500, (b) Fp = 100, Fs = 500, (c)
Fp = 100, Fs = 1000, (d) Fp = 500, Fs = 1000. Solid curves
delimit areas above parametric emission threshold. Dashed
lines indicate where (4) is an equality and delimit unstable
areas in the inﬁnite pump power approximation. Dotted hor-
izontal lines indicate the maximal detuning value allowed by
mode hops. In (a), the dotted and dashed line shows a pos-
sible path followed by detunings as cavity length is scanned.
The discontinuity occurring as the path reaches the horizontal
dotted line corresponds to a mode hop.

discussion of criterion (19) in Sec. III which showed that
increasing pump ﬁnesse was much more eﬀective than in-
creasing signal ﬁnesse. However increasing pump ﬁnesse
is extremely diﬃcult from a practical point of view, as
we discuss in Sec. V. Interestingly, it was similarly noted
in Ref. [10] that increasing pump ﬁnesse while keeping
signal ﬁnesse allowed one to observe an hexagonal trans-
verse pattern at lower signal detunings.

An important conclusion that can be drawn from the
numerical exploration summarized in Figs. 3(a)-(d) is
that except in Fig. 3(a), the theoretical analysis at in-
ﬁnite pump power provides a very good approximation
of the ﬁnite pump power case, all the better as ﬁnesses
are higher and as observing the Hopf bifurcation becomes
more plausible. Indeed the instability zones are tightly
delimited by the boundaries obtained at inﬁnite pump
power and by the parametric threshold line except for
larger pump detunings. In particular, the agreement is
excellent at the tip of the unstable zones, near the point
of minimal signal detuning. This makes us conﬁdent that
for pump lasers currently available, the criterion obtained
in (19) is eﬀective in assessing the probability of occur-
rence of the Hopf bifurcation. It also shows that pump
power is not a limiting factor as when there is a nonempty
intersection between the unstable zone and the central
band of allowed detunings, its area only marginally in-
creases from the ﬁnite to the inﬁnite pump case, mostly
in regions far from the minimum detuning value.

To conclude, numerical calculations at ﬁnite pump
power show that while the Hopf bifurcation becomes
harder to observe than in the inﬁnite pump power case,
the mode hopping phenomenon remains the main limit-
ing factor by limiting the range of values signal detun-
ing can take. In order to obtain experimental evidence
of the bifurcation, building a dedicated setup would be
much more eﬀective than increasing pump power. How-
ever, there are some experimental diﬃculties in doing so,
which we discuss in Section V.

V. EXPERIMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

The theoretical analysis at inﬁnite pump power of
Sec. III and the numerical computations at ﬁnite pump
power of Sec. IV have suggested that the Hopf bifurca-
tions of the monomode mean-ﬁeld model might be ob-
servable in some conﬁgurations. In this Section, we dis-
cuss the feasibility of an experimental setup specially de-
signed for evidencing the bifurcation.

Some parameters are easily optimized using the ﬁnd-
ings of Sec. III and IV. As discussed in Sec. III B, cav-
ity should be as short as possible and in this respect a
monolithic conﬁguration would be optimal. Then, crys-
tal birefringence should be chosen as large as possible
[see Eq. (17)]. However this may not be an option as
brifrigence is primarily used to achieve phase-matching
in the desired operating range. Of course, pump power
should be as large as possible, but our analysis has shown

8

that there were modest returns in increasing it much
beyond that oﬀered by currently available pump lasers.
The two parameters left for setup optimization are then
the signal and pump cavity ﬁnesses. Criterion (19) indi-
cates that those ﬁnesses, and especially the pump ﬁnesse,
should be taken as large as possible.

However, cavities of very high ﬁnesse are critical to
align and are very sensitive to ﬂuctuations. For example,
a change of δL of the cavity length will induce a variation
of δ∆ = 4F δL/λ of the detuning, where λ is the optical
wavelength. For λ = 1064 nm and F = 1000, a ﬂuctua-
tion δL = 5 ˚A of the cavity length will induce a variation
of the detuning δ∆ = 2, corresponding to full-width of
the resonance. The length of the cavity must thus be ad-
justed carefully and maintained constant to within less
than a few angstr¨oms.

This stability problem is all the more critical when
thermal eﬀects are taken into account. In our conﬁgura-
tion, it has been shown that thermal eﬀects can induced
complex dynamical behaviors [12, 13] during which cavity
length can be spontaneously swept by a few nanometers.
Such instabilities were observed even at incident pump
powers around 500 mW [12], which for a pump ﬁnesse of
45 corresponds to an intracavity pump power of about
6.5 W. For 4 W of incident pump power and a ﬁnesse
of 500, intracavity pump power would reach ∼640 W
at resonance and thermal eﬀects would then be a hun-
dred times as strong. For illustration purposes, let us
recall that the only chaotic regime reported so far in an
TROPO was observed in a situation where cavity length
could not be made stationary [15], although the conﬁgu-
ration was standard.

Another adverse inﬂuence of pump absorption in the
crystal is that it puts a limit on the highest ﬁnesse achiev-
able. In our setup, for example, pump absorbtion in the
1.5cm-long crystal is 2% cm−1 which implies that pump
ﬁnesse cannot be higher than about 100 even if perfectly
reﬂecting mirrors were used. Except for crystals with ex-
ceptional low absorption, high values of the pump cavity
ﬁnesses such as 500 appear to be completely unrealistic.
Apart from the previous remarks which hold for all
systems featuring an absorbing material enclosed in a
resonant cavity, speciﬁc restrictions on the ﬁnesses are to
be considered for a TROPO, inside which several ﬁelds
must be simultaneously resonant. Generally cavity ﬁ-
nesses in an experimental TROPO setup are chosen so
that Fp ≪ Fs. It ensures that numerous resonances of
the signal ﬁeld are found inside the wider resonance of
the pump ﬁeld, in other terms that several mode hops
occur before OPO falls below threshold. This allows one
to only consider coincidences of signal and idler cavity
modes. For very high cavity ﬁnesses of the pump, the
mode with smallest signal detuning might very well be
below threshold because of a large pump detuning.
In
fact, the analysis of part III should then be reworked
and reformulated in terms of coincidences of three reso-
nances instead of two. It is not certain that this more
complicated problem admits solutions.

To conclude, an OPO designed in order to observe the
Hopf bifurcation should have a short cavity (e.g., mono-
lithic setup), high birefringence and pumping rate. The
pump cavity ﬁnesse should be as high as possible. Under
these conditions, however, an OPO would be very diﬃ-
cult to operate and to stabilize on an operating point.
Even then, the numerical analysis of Sec. IV indicates
that unstable zones would remain small compared to the
range of operating parameters. This casts serious doubts
on the experimental observability of the Hopf bifurcation
of the monomode mean-ﬁeld model.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper we have raised the issue that contrary to
what is commonly assumed in theoretical studies of the
dynamics of optical parametric oscillators, signal detun-
ing is not a ﬁxed parameter but a dynamical variable
whose value results from a complex selection process.
Thus, detuning limitation due to mode hopping may af-
fect the occurrence of dynamical instabilities occurring
at high values of the detuning. As a simple example,
we analyzed under which conditions the Hopf bifurcation
leading to periodic behavior in the monomode mean-ﬁeld
model of a triply resonant OPO can be observed.

We ﬁrst showed that signal detuning must reach a min-
imal value for the bifurcation to occur, even at inﬁnite
pump power. We then described how the mechanism of
mode hopping restraints the values signal detuning can
take and we gave an analytical expression of the maximal
detuning allowed by mode hopping. By comparing the
two bounds so obtained, we showed that they are incom-
patible in many conﬁgurations, showing that ﬁnite pump
power is not necessarily the limiting factor for observing
this instability. This was conﬁrmed in numerical compu-
tations of instability domains carried out at a ﬁnite pump
power corresponding to our experimental conﬁguration,
in which we observed that most of the unstable domains
are inaccessible because of mode hopping. We found that
pump ﬁnesse is a critical parameter that should be made
as large as possible in order to observe the Hopf bifur-
cation. However experimental setups designed for this
purpose should most certainly be extremely diﬃcult to
operate.

9

For the sake of simplicity, our derivation of the max-
imal detuning allowed by mode hopping relied on two
main hypotheses. One was that signal and idler have
frequencies close to 1:1 ratio but experience diﬀerent in-
dices, as in our type-II experiments. Generalization to
other frequency ratios in the type-II conﬁguration should
be straightforward and is not expected to modify the
conclusions of the present work. Type-I OPOs near fre-
quency degeneracy have more complex tuning properties
and should be analyzed separately. The other hypothe-
sis was that parametric gain can be considered constant
along a frequency domain containing many longitudinal
modes so that the lowest possible detuning is always se-
lected. If that is not the case, then values of signal de-
tuning higher than predicted may be obtained and our
analysis would have to be adapted. However, it does not
seem likely that our conclusions would be modiﬁed a lot.
An open question is whether conclusions drawn for
the Hopf bifurcation of the monomode mean-ﬁeld model
also hold for other theoretical predictions of temporal
or pattern-forming instabilities in doubly or triply opti-
cal parametric oscillators. Indeed, such instabilities have
usually been predicted for relatively high values of the
signal detuning and/or of the pumping rate (see, e.g.,
Refs. [4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]). Thus, their observability may
very well be also aﬀected by detuning limitation due to
mode hopping rather than by ﬁniteness of the pump
power. A detailed comparison of instability thresholds
in detuning space with the maximum values allowed by
mode hopping is in order for these theoretical predictions
so that their relevance for experimental systems can be
assessed. To conclude, mode hops are not only a nuisance
for stabilizing and tuning OPOs but also for using them
as tools to study complex dynamical behavior.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are most grateful to S. Bielawski, D. Derozier, P.
Suret, and J. Zemmouri for stimulating discussions. The
Centre d’´Etudes et de Recherches Lasers et Applications
is supported by the Minist`ere charg´e de la Recherche, the
R´egion Nord-Pas de Calais and the Fonds Europ´een de
D´eveloppement ´Economique des R´egions.

[1] Special issue on χ(2) second order nonlinear optics, Quan-

tum and semiclassical Optics 9(2) (1997).

[2] K. J. McNeil, P. D. Drummond, and D. F. Walls, Opt.

[3] P. D. Drummond, K. J. McNeil, and D. F. Walls, Opt.

Commun. 27, 292 (1978).

Acta 27, 321 (1980).

[4] L. A. Lugiato, C. Oldano, C. Fabre, E. Giacobino, and
R. J. Horowicz, Nuovo Cimento 10 D, 959 (1988).
[5] G. L. Oppo, M. Brambilla, and L. A. Lugiato, Phys. Rev.

A 49, 2028 (1994).

[6] K. Staliunas, J. Mod. Opt. 42, 1261 (1995).
[7] M. Marte, H. Ritsch, K. I. Petsas, A. Gatti, L. A. Lu-
giato, C. Fabre, and D. Leduc, Opt. Express 3, 71 (1998).
[8] C. Schwob, P. F. Cohadon, C. Fabre, M. A. M. Marte,
H. Ritsch, A. Gatti, and L. A. Lugiato, Appl. Phys. B
66, 685 (1998).

[9] M. Tlidi, M. Le Berre, E. Ressayre, A. Tallet, and

L. Di Menza, Phys. Rev. A 61, 043806 (2000).

[10] G. L. Oppo, A. J. Scroggie, D. Sinclair, and M. Bram-

billa, J. Mod. Opt. 47, 2005 (2000).

10

[11] C. Richy, K. I. Petsas, E. Giacobino, C. Fabre, and L. A.

Semiclassical Optics 9, 165 (1997).

Lugiato, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 12, 456 (1995).

[20] A. Amon, M. Nizette, M. Lefranc, and T. Erneux, Phys.

[12] P. Suret, D. Derozier, M. Lefranc, J. Zemmouri, and
S. Bielawski, Phys. Rev. A 61, 021805(R) (2000).
[13] P. Suret, M. Lefranc, D. Derozier, J. Zemmouri, and

2nd ed.

Rev. A 68, 023801 (2003).

[21] R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, 2003),

S. Bielawski, Opt. Lett. 26, 1415 (2001).

[22] A. Yariv and W. H. Louisell, IEEE J. Quantum Electron.

[14] P. Suret, M. Lefranc, D. Derozier, J. Zemmouri, and

S. Bielawski, Opt. Commun. 200, 369 (2001).

[15] A. Amon and M. Lefranc, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 094101

QE-2, 418 (1966).

[23] Emax(Fp, Fs) =

(2004).

[16] R. C. Eckardt, C. D. Nabors, W. J. Koslovsky, and R. L.

Byer, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 8, 646 (1991).

[17] T. Debuisschert, A. Sizmann, E. Giacobino, and

C. Fabre, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 10, 1668 (1993).

[18] A. J. Henderson, M. J. Padgett, F. G. Colville, J. Zhang,
and M. H. Dunn, Opt. Commun. 119, 256 (1995).
[19] C. Fabre, P. F. Cohadon, and C. Schwob, Quantum and

p

Pmax/Pth(Fp, Fs) with Pmax the
maximum pump power available and Pth(Fp, Fs)
the pump power at
is known that
γpPth(Fp, Fs) ∝ γ2
[17, 22] and consequently
E
= cst. In our experimental setup, Fp0 = 45,
Fs0 = 550, Pmax ≃ 4 W and Pth(Fp0, Fs0) ≃ 10 mW,
which leads to E

2
max(Fp,Fs)
FpF 2
s

threshold.

≃ 400.

s γ2
p

It

2
max(Fp,Fs)
FpF 2
s

