Lasing with coherent feedback in weak scattering media

X. Wu1, W. Fang1, A. Yamilov1,2, A. A. Chabanov1,3, and H. Cao1

1 Department of Physics and Astronomy,

Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 60208.

2 Department of Physics, University of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla, Missouri, 65409.

3 Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of Texas-San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, 78249.

Abstract

We present detailed experimental and numerical studies of lasing with coherent feedback in

weakly scattering systems. The interference eﬀects, which are weak in the passive systems, are

strongly enhanced by coherent ampliﬁcation in the active systems. The lasing modes are conﬁned

in the vicinity of the excited volume due to absorption of emitted light outside it. In the ballistic

regime where the size of gain volume is less than the scattering mean free path, lasing oscillation

occurs along the direction in which the gain volume is most extended, producing directional laser

output. The feedback for lasing originates mainly from backscattering of particles near the bound-

aries of pumped region, because its longest length of one path across the gain volume leads to most

ampliﬁcation. It results in regular frequency spacing of lasing modes, which scales inversely with

the maximum dimension of the gain volume.

PACS numbers: 42.55.Zz,42.25.Dd

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Since the pioneering work of Letokhov and coworkers1, lasing in disordered media has

been a subject of intense theoretical and experimental studies2. It represents the process of

light ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission with feedback mediated by random ﬂuctuation

of dielectric constant in space. There are two kinds of feedback: one is intensity or energy

feedback, the other is ﬁeld or amplitude feedback2. The ﬁeld feedback is phase sensitive

(i.e. coherent), and therefore frequency dependent (i.e. resonant). The intensity feedback is

phase insensitive (i.e. incoherent) and frequency independent (i.e. non-resonant). Based on

the feedback mechanisms, random lasers are classiﬁed into two categories: (i) random lasers

with incoherent and non-resonant feedback, (ii) random laser with coherent and resonant

feedback.

Over the past few years, there have been many studies on random lasers with coher-

ent feedback3. In our previous experiments with highly disordered semiconductor powder

and polycrystalline ﬁlms, the transport mean free path was short, and recurrent scattering

provided ﬁeld feedback for lasing4. When the optical gain was suﬃcient, lasing oscillation

occurred at discrete frequencies that were determined by the interference of multiply scat-

tered light. However, lasing with coherent feedback was realized also in weakly scattering

random media5,6,7,8,9. The coherent feedback mechanism relies on the interference eﬀect,

which is expected to be small in the weak scattering regime. That is why the phase of elec-

tromagnetic ﬁeld is ignored in the diﬀusion equation for intensity. In this paper, however,

we demonstrate that the interference eﬀect is dramatically enhanced in the presence of high

gain, leading to lasing with coherent feedback in weakly scattering systems. Strong coherent

ampliﬁcation of ﬁeld feedback can result in lasing in the ballistic regime where the size of

gain volume is less than the scattering mean free path, i.e., the feedback originating from

single particle scattering may be enough for lasing under intense pumping.

In our previous paper10, we illustrated with numerical simulations that the lasing modes in

weakly scattering system may be spatially localized. The localization is caused not by strong

scattering, but by absorption of emitted light outside the pumped region. The reabsorption

of emission suppresses the feedback from the unpumped part of the random system and

eﬀectively reduces the system size. The lasing modes are therefore drastically diﬀerent

from the quasimode of the passive system (without gain or absorption). Even if all the

2

quasimodes of the passive system are extended across the entire system, the lasing modes

are still conﬁned in the vicinity of the gain volume.

In this paper, we provide a direct

experimental proof for the absorption-induced localization of lasing modes. Our results also

indicate that when the size of gain volume is less than the scattering mean free path, the

lasing modes may be diﬀerent from the quasimodes of the reduced system. In the absence of

gain, the quasimodes are formed by scattering of all particles inside the reduced system. In

contrast, the lasing modes are formed mainly by scattering of particles near the boundary

of the reduced system when the optical gain is very high.

The paper is organized as follows. In section II, a detailed experimental study of las-

ing in weakly scattering systems is presented. The feedback mechanism is demonstrated

via simpliﬁed numerical simulations in Section III. Section IV has a brief discussion and

conclusion.

II. EXPERIMENTS

We have performed experiments on several weakly-scattering systems which consist of

passive scatterers embedded in active homogeneous media. The scatterers are TiO2 particles

of radius 200 nm, ZnO particles of radius 38 nm, SiO2 particles of radius 220 nm. The

nanoparticles are suspended in a laser dye solution, e.g., Rhodamine 640 perchlorate or

Rhodamine 590 chloride in diethylene glycol (DEG) or methanol. The experimental results

obtained with diﬀerent particles, dyes and solvents are qualitatively similar. As an example,

we will demonstrate the lasing phenomena with colloidal suspensions of TiO2 particles in

DEG with Rhodamine 640.

A small amount of TiO2 (rutile) particles, with an average radius of 200 nm, were dissolved

in the DEG solution of rhodamine 640 perchlorate dye. To prevent ﬂocculation, the TiO2

particles were coated with a thin layer of Al2O3. DEG was chosen as the solvent instead of

the widely-used methanol because of the facts that (i) the windows of the quartz cuvette

that contained the methanol solution were coated with a layer of TiO2 particles, whereas

such coating was not observed for the DEG solution; (ii) the viscosity of DEG is about

30 times larger than methanol, thus the sedimentation of TiO2 particles in DEG is much
slower. In our experiment, the particle density ρ ranged from 1.87 × 108 cm−3 to 5.6 × 1010
cm−3. The scattering mean free path was estimated by ls = 1/ρσs, where σs is the scattering

3

cross section of a TiO2 spherical particle with radius 200 nm. The value of ls varied from

1.07 cm to 35 µm. The dye molarity M also changed from 3 to 10 mM. Right before

the lasing experiment, the suspension was placed in an ultrasonic bath for 30 minutes to

prevent sedimentation of the particles. During the experiment, the solution was contained

in a quartz cuvette that was 1.0 cm long, 1.0 cm wide and 4.5 cm high. The dye molecules

in the solution were optically pumped by the frequency-doubled output (λp = 532 nm) of a

mode-locked Nd:YAG laser (25 ps pulse width, 10 Hz repetition rate). The pump beam was

focused by a lens into the solution through the front window of the cuvette. The radius of

the pump spot at the entrance to the solution was about 20 µm. The experimental setup is

shown schematically in the inset of Fig. 1. The emission from the solution was collected in

the backward direction of the incident pump beam. A second lens focused the emission into

a ﬁber bundle (FB) which was connected to the entrance slit of a spectrometer with cooled

CCD array detector. The spectral resolution was 0.06 nm.

We started the experiment with a sample of M = 5 mM and ρ = 3.0 × 109 cm−3. At

low pumping level, the emission spectrum featured the broad spontaneous emission band of

rhodamine 640 molecules. Above a threshold pump intensity, discrete narrow peaks emerged

in the emission spectrum, and their intensities grew rapidly with increasing pumping. This

behavior corresponded to the onset of lasing. The lasing peaks could be as narrow as 0.12

nm. Their frequencies changed from pulse to pulse (shot). We repeated the experiment with

samples of diﬀerent particle density but the same dye concentration. Lasing was observed

only within certain range of particle density. Figure 1 show the spectra of emission from

ﬁve samples taken at the same incident pump pulse energy 0.4 µJ. Each spectrum was

integrated over 25 shots. Only a relatively broad ampliﬁed spontaneous emission (ASE)

peak was observed for the neat dye solution, whereas a few discrete lasing peaks emerged
on top of the ASE spectrum at small particle concentration ρ = 1.87 × 108 cm−3. Increasing
particle density to 1.87 × 109 cm−3 led to an increase in the number of lasing peaks and the
peak intensity. However, when ρ increased further to 1.3 × 1010 cm−3, the lasing emission
started to decrease. Eventually at ρ = 5.0 × 1010 cm−3 lasing peaks disappeared. A further

increase of the incident pump pulse energy to 1.2 µJ resulted in an ASE peak at longer

wavelength, shown in the right inset of Fig. 1. The red shift of the ASE peak might be

caused by the surface eﬀect on emission frequency of Rhodamine 640 molecules adsorbed on

the TiO2 particles. One support for this explanation was that the emission frequency was

4

blue shifted when we replaced the TiO2 particles by SiO2 particles.

In Fig. 2, the incident pump pulse energy at the lasing threshold Pt is plotted against

the particle density ρ. At the lasing threshold, the slope of emission intensity versus pump
pulse energy exhibited a sudden increase (inset of Fig. 2). At ρ = 3.8 × 108 cm−3, lasing
started at 0.21 µJ. As ρ increased to 1.5 ×109 cm−3, Pt decreased gradually to 0.12 µJ. Then

it remained nearly constant with a further increase of ρ. The threshold started to rise at
ρ = 1.9 × 1010 cm−3, then went up quickly with ρ. At ρ = 5.6 × 1010 cm−3, no lasing peaks

were observed up to the maximum pump pulse energy 2.0 µJ we used, although at 1.0 µJ

an ASE peak appeared at longer wavelength.

The threshold behavior illustrated that lasing in the dilute suspension of particles was

very diﬀerent from random lasing in strongly-scattering systems. In the latter, the lasing

threshold decreases with an increase in the amount of scattering2. However, the particles

must play an essential role in the former lasing process because it did not happen in the

neat dye solution. One possibility was lasing within individual particles that served as laser

resonators. It contradicted two experimental observations: (i) the lasing threshold depended

on the particle density (Fig. 2); (ii) the lasing emission was highly directional (shown next).

The left inset of Fig. 3 is a sketch of our directionality measurement setup. A ﬁber bundle

was placed at the focal plane of the lens. It was scanned with ﬁne steps parallel to the focal

plane. At each step, the spectrum of emission into a particular direction was recorded. The

emission angle θ was computed from the ﬁber bundle position. Its range was limited by the

diameter of the lens to about 14 degree. θ = 0 corresponded to the backward direction of

the incident pump beam. In each spectrum, the emission intensity was integrated over the

wavelength range of 604 − 612 nm in which the lasing peaks were located. Figure 3 is a
plot of the integrated emission intensity versus the output angle θ at ρ = 3.0 × 109 cm−3.

Although the spontaneous emission at low pumping was isotropic, the lasing emission was

strongly conﬁned to the backward direction of the incident pump beam. The divergence

angle ∆θ of the output laser beam was merely 4 degree. To check the eﬀect of reﬂection

by the front window of the cuvette on lasing, we rotated the cuvette around the vertical

axis and repeated the measurement. As shown in the right inset of Fig. 3, φ represented

the angle between the incident pump beam and the normal of the front window. Similar

lasing phenomena were observed except a slight increase of the lasing threshold. The lasing

emission was always conﬁned to the backward direction of pump beam even when φ was

5

much larger than the divergence angle of the focused pump beam, which was about 4 degrees.

This result demonstrated that the front window of the cuvette did not play an essential role

in the lasing process. Figure 3 also shows the angular distribution of ASE from a sample
of higher particle density (ρ = 5 × 1010 cm−3). The integrated intensity of ASE (at longer

wavelength) was nearly constant over the angular range of detection.

To understand the directionality of lasing emission from the dilute suspension, the

pumped region was imaged through a side window of the cuvette. The measurement setup

is sketched in the inset of Fig. 4(a). Emission from the excited region was collected through

the side window by a 5x objective lens and imaged onto a CCD camera by integrating mul-

tiple pulses. Spectrum was taken simultaneously by partitioning the signal with a beam

splitter (BS). Figure 4(a) compares the spectrum of emission through the side window to
that through the front window of the cuvette from the same sample (ρ = 3 × 109 cm−3,

M = 5 mM) under identical pumping condition. The spectrum of emission from the front

window exhibited large lasing peaks. However, only spontaneous emission was observed

through the side window, and it shifted to longer wavelength as a result of reabsorption in

the unpumped solution between the excited region and side window. To calibrate the re-

absorption, we measured the spontaneous emission spectra at low pumping from both front

and side windows. The magnitude of reabsorption was estimated from the intensity ratio of

emission through the side window to that through the front. Based on this estimation, we

concluded that the absence of lasing peaks in the side emission spectrum at high pumping

was not caused by reabsorption. This conclusion was in agreement with the directionality

measurement result presented in the Fig. 3. More importantly, the image of spontaneous

emission intensity distribution taken through the side window exhibited the shape of the

excited region in the sample. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the excited volume at low particle

density had a cone shape. The length of the cone was much larger than its base diameter.

Unfortunately, we could not get the exact length of the cone from the image, because near

its end the spontaneous emission was too weak to be recorded by the CCD camera. At high

particle density, the shape of excited volume changed to hemisphere as shown in Fig. 4(c)

at a higher pumping power. This change was caused by increased scattering of pump light.
In Fig. 4(b) ρ = 3.0 × 109 cm−3, the scattering mean free path ls at the pump wavelength

λp = 532 nm was estimated to be 800 µm. The (linear) absorption length la, obtained

from the transmission measurement of neat dye solution, was about 50 µm at λp = 532 nm.

6

Strong pumping in the lasing experiment could saturate the absorption of dye molecules,

leading to an increase of la. Since the shape of the excited volume shown in Fig. 4(b) was

nearly identical to that in the neat dye solution, the scattering of pump light must be much
weaker than absorption, i.e., la was still shorter than ls. In Fig. 4(c) ρ = 5.0 × 1010 cm−3,

ls was shortened to 53 µm. Scattering of pump light became much stronger. As a result of

multiple scattering, the cone was replaced by a hemisphere. The image of excited volume

provided some clue to high directionality of lasing emission at small ρ and non-directionality

of ASE at large ρ in Fig. 3. At low particle density, stimulated emission in the cone-shaped

gain volume was the strongest along the cone due to the longest path length. Since the cone

was parallel to the incident pump beam, lasing was conﬁned to the direction parallel to the

pump beam. The divergence angle ∆θ of laser output was determined by the aspect ratio

of the excited cone, namely, ∆θ ∼ 2rp/Lp, where Lp is the cone length and rp is the base

radius. At large ρ, emitted photons experienced multiple scattering while being ampliﬁed

in the hemisphere-shaped gain volume. Hence, the ASE was nearly isotropic.

Therefore, the shape of gain volume determined the lasing directionality, i.e., lasing

occurred along the direction in which the gain volume was most extended. However, it

was still not clear how the laser cavities were formed in the dilute suspension, in other

words, where the coherent feedback for lasing came from. We examined the lasing spec-

tra more carefully by taking single-shot emission spectra with the setup shown in the inset

of Fig. 1. Surprisingly, in most single-shot spectra the lasing peaks were almost equally

spaced in frequency. Figure 5(a) is an example of single-shot emission spectrum taken from
the sample of ρ = 1.87 × 109 cm−3 and M = 5 mM. The spectral correlation function
C(∆λ) ≡ hI(λ)I(λ + ∆λ)i/hI(λ)2i was computed for the spectrum in Fig. 5(a) and plotted

in Fig. 5(b). The regularly spaced correlation peaks revealed the periodicity of lasing peaks.

Despite that the lasing peaks completely changed from shot to shot, the peak spacing was

nearly the same. In the spectrum taken over many shots, the periodicity was smeared out

due to random (uncorrelated) peak positions in diﬀerent shots. As an example, in Fig. 1 the

lasing spectra (curve 3) were integrated over 25 pulses and the lasing peaks did not exhibit

clear periodicity. We also noticed that the periodicity was less obvious at higher particle

density.

We would like to point out that the lasing peaks in the dilute suspension of particles

are fundamentally diﬀerent from the stochastic ASE spikes that could be observed even in

7

the neat dye solution. Figure 6 shows a single-shot spectrum of emission from the DEG

solution of 5 mM Rhodamine 640 without any particles. The spectrum was taken under

the same condition as that in Fig. 5. At high pumping level, stochastic spikes appeared

on top of the ASE peak. The spikes in Fig. 6 were much denser and narrower than the

lasing peaks in Fig. 5. They changed constantly from shot to shot. When integrating the

spectrum over subsequent shots, the spikes were quickly averaged out, leaving a smooth

ASE spectrum shown as curve 1 in Fig. 1. Unlike the lasing peaks, the stochastic spectral

structures of ASE was rather ubiquitous. We varied the dye molarity, changed the solvent,

and tried a diﬀerent dye LDS722. The emission spikes always appeared when the pumping

was high enough. However, lasing peaks were not observed in some of these dye solutions

when TiO2 particles were added. Note that the stochastic spikes also appeared in the

spectrum of emission from the dye solutions with particles. However, they were taken over

by the huge lasing peaks at high pumping level. The stochastic structure of the pulsed

ASE spectrum was reported thirty years ago11,12. Since then, there have been detailed

experimental and theoretical studies on this phenomenon13,14,15,16. The spectral ﬂuctuation

originated from random spontaneous emission at one end of the cone-shaped pump volume.

It was strongly ampliﬁed as it propagated through the cone. Non-stationary interference

of the partially coherent ASE not only presented a grainy spatial pattern, but also caused

drastic temporal ﬂuctuation of intensity. The random intensity ﬂuctuation within an ASE

pulse in the time domain generated stochastic spikes in the spectral domain. According to

the Fourier transformation, the width of spectral spikes was inversely proportional to the

ASE pulse duration. In our case of picosecond pumping, the ASE pulse duration was of the

order 25 ps. Thus the average spike width should be ∼ 0.05 nm, which was close to the

measured value of 0.07 nm.

To ﬁnd out the location and size of the laser cavities in the dilute suspension, we placed

a metallic rod in between the excited volume and the back window (inset of Fig. 7). On

one hand, the rod prevented the emission from being reﬂected by the back window into the

gain volume. On the other hand, a Fabry-Perot cavity was formed by the rod and the front

window. Lasing in this cavity produced equally spaced peaks in the emission spectrum.

The peak spacing ∆λ was determined by the cavity length d (the distance between the rod

and the front window), ∆λ = λ2/2ned, where ne is the eﬀective index of suspension. As

plotted in Fig. 7, ∆λ decreased with increasing d. However, when d exceeded a critical

8

value d0 ≃ 450 µm, ∆λ jumped to a constant value and did not change with d any more

(Fig. 7). The lasing spectrum and peak spacing at d > d0 were identical to those from the

same sample without the metallic rod. This result demonstrated that the laser cavity in

the colloidal solution was located within 450 µm from the front window, i.e., in the vicinity

of excited cone. Despite the scattering mean free path ls ∼ 800 µm much larger than the

wavelength, the laser cavity was not extended over the entire sample, but conﬁned to a region

of dimension less than ls. This is due to reabsorption of laser emission in the unpumped part

of sample. Our white-light absorption measurement and photoluminescence measurement

of neat dye solution showed that Rhodamine 640 molecules in DEG had signiﬁcant overlap

between the absorption band and emission band. At the dye concentration M = 5 mM, the

absorption length at the emission wavelength λe ∼ 610 nm was about 300 µm. When the

density of TiO2 particles in the solution was low, the absorption length of emitted photons

in the unpumped region was shorter than the scattering length. Once an emitted photon

left the pumped region, the chance of coming back after multiple scattering was extremely

low. Therefore, the reabsorption of emission suppressed the feedback from the unpumped

region of the system, and eﬀectively reduced the system (or cavity) size10.

The above experiment illustrated the laser cavity was conﬁned in the vicinity of the

excited region as a result of the interplay between ampliﬁcation and reabsorption. The di-

rectionality of laser output suggested the laser cavity was oriented along the excited cone.

Using the formula of a Fabry-Perot cavity, we derived the cavity length Lc from the wave-
length spacing ∆λ of the lasing peaks, Lc = λ2/2ne∆λ ∼ 200 − 300 µm. The estimated

cavity length was close to the length of excited cone observed from the side images. The cone

length was determined by the penetration depth Lp of pump light into the suspension. When

the scattering mean free path ls exceeded the absorption length at the pump wavelength,

Lp was determined solely by absorption of pump light. This could explain the experimental

observation that the wavelength spacing of lasing peaks barely changed when the scattering

mean free path ls was varied by more than one order of magnitude. The cavity length Lc

(or the penetration depth Lp) did not depend on ls as long as ls exceeded the absorption

length. This result was conﬁrmed by the side images of excited cones.

In the case of linear absorption, Lp was on the order of the (linear) absorption length

la. However, the pumping in the lasing experiment was so intense that it saturated the

absorption of dye molecules. The saturation photon ﬂux density Is = 1/σf τf , where σf is

9

the ﬂuorescence cross section and τf is the lifetime of dye molecules in the excited state.
For Rhodamine 640 molecules, σf is of the order 10−16 cm2, and τf 10−9 s. Thus, Is ∼ 1025
cm−2s−1. The typical pump pulse energy at the lasing threshold was ∼ 0.1 µJ. From the

pump pulse duration and pump spot size, we estimated that the incident pump photon ﬂux
density Ip ∼ 1027 cm−2s−1, which was two orders of magnitude higher than Is. Hence, at

the lasing threshold the absorption of dye molecules near the front window of the cuvette

was strongly saturated, and the penetration depth Lp was much longer than la. Our pump

pulse was so short that the probability of a dye molecule being excited then deexcited

and excited again during one pump pulse was negligible. Assuming every dye molecule

inside the excited cone absorbed one pump photon per pulse, we estimated the cone length

Lp = Ep/(hνp)/(Dπr2

p/3), where Ep is the incident pump pulse energy, h is the Planck

constant, νp is the pump frequency, D is the density of dye molecules. For Ep = 0.1 µJ, λp
= 532 nm, D = 3.1 × 1024 m−3, rp = 20 µm, we got Lp = 236 µm. This value was close

to the laser cavity length estimated from the wavelength spacing of lasing peaks, Lc = 265

µm.

To conﬁrm Lc ∼ Lp, we changed Lp by varying the dye concentration. The higher the

dye concentration, the shorter the penetration depth. If Lc ∼ Lp, the spacing of lasing peaks

∆λ should increase. Figure 8(a) shows the single shot lasing spectra from three solutions of
M = 3, 5, 10 mM. The particle density ρ was ﬁxed at 3 × 109 cm−3. It was evident that the

spacing of lasing peaks increased at higher dye concentration. Images of the excited cones

in the inset of Fig. 8(b) directly show that the excited cone was longer in the solution of

lower dye concentration. Figure 8(b) plots the spectral correlation functions for the three

spectra in 8(a). From them we extracted ∆λ = 0.34, 0.48, 0.96 nm for M = 3, 5, 10 mM.

This result conﬁrmed that the laser cavity length was determined by the pump penetration

depth. Hence, the laser cavity was located in the excited cone, and the cavity length was

approximately equal to the cone length.

The experimental analysis suggested that the laser cavity in the weakly-scattering dye

solution resembled a Fabry-Perot cavity with the “mirrors” at the tip and base of the excited

cone. But what made of the mirrors in the dilute colloidal suspension? The experiments

presented earlier in this section already ruled out the front and back windows of the cuvette

as the mirrors. The mirrors could not be formed by the nonlinear change of refractive index

(both its real and imaginary parts) of the dye solution under intense pumping, otherwise

10

lasing would have occurred also in the neat dye solution without particles. Another pos-

sibility is that the particles aggregated in the solution to form large clusters that served

as mirrors. We monitored the solution during the experiment by imaging it onto a CCD

camera through a side window of the cuvette. No clusters of size larger than 1µm were

observed in the pumped solution. To remove the clusters smaller than 1 µm, we passed

the solution through a 0.8 µm pore-size ﬁlter paper. After the ﬁltering, lasing phenomena

remained the same. We also tried other particles such as ZnO and SiO2 in diﬀerent solvents

like methanol and DEG. Our previous studies conﬁrmed the particles did not aggregate in

some of these solutions where we observed lasing. Therefore, the mirrors were not clusters of

particles. Another candidate was bubbles or shock waves that were generated by the pump

pulse17,18,19. We indeed observed bubbles in the solution when the pump beam was strong

enough and its focal spot was close to the front window of the cuvette. However, when the

bubbles were big enough to be seen with our imaging apparatus, lasing peaks disappeared.

Hence, big bubbles did not facilitate lasing. Small bubbles, which were invisible, might be

generated when the pumping was not very high. Such bubbles were usually generated at the

focal spot of the pump beam where the pump intensity was the highest. Thus the bubble

formation should be sensitive to the distance between the focal spot and the front window,

which aﬀected the pump intensity at the focal spot due to absorption in the solution. How-

ever, the lasing behavior remained the same when we shifted the focal spot by moving the

lens. This result eliminated the possibility of small bubbles contributing to lasing. All the

experimental results led us to the speculation that the coherent feedback for lasing came

from the particles in the solution. More speciﬁcally, the feedback could come mainly from

the particles located near the tip and base of the excited cone.

In the dilute suspensions of particles in which lasing could be realized, the gain volume

had a cone shape and the cone length was shorter than the scattering mean free path. If we

considered only one photon, it most likely would not be scattered as it traveled from one end

of the cone to the other. However, the intense pumping generated a huge number of emitted

photons. Despite the low probability of one photon being scattered, a signiﬁcant number

of emitted photons were scattered by the particles inside the excited cone. Some of them

were scattered backwards, providing feedback for lasing along the cone. Such weak feedback

was strongly ampliﬁed due to high optical gain. The longer the path length, the stronger

the ampliﬁcation. Thus the light backscattered by the particles near one end of the cone

11

experienced the most ampliﬁcation as it traveled to the other end of the cone. Therefore the

feedback could be dominated by the particles located near the two ends of the excited cone.

To support this conjecture, we performed numerical simulations which will be presented in

the next section.

III. NUMERICAL SIMULATION

Several models were set up in the theoretical studies of stimulated emission in active

random media, e.g. the diﬀusion equation with gain20,21, the Monte Carlo simulation22,23.

These models calculated light intensity instead of electromagnetic ﬁeld, thus they ignored

the interference eﬀect. Although it is usually weak in the diﬀusive regime, the interference

eﬀect is not always negligible. One example is the coherent backscattering. The interfer-

ence between the counter-propagating light enhances the backscattered intensity by a factor

of two.

In the presence of optical gain, coherent ampliﬁcation can strongly enhance the

interference eﬀect. Thus it may not be neglected even when light scattering is weak.

To include the interference eﬀect, we directly calculated the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a

random medium by solving the Maxwell’s equations using the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain

(FDTD) method24. The optical gain was modeled as negative conductance

σ(ω) = −

σ0/2
1 + i(ω − ω0)T2

−

σ0/2
1 + i(ω + ω0)T2

.

(1)

σ0 determined the gain magnitude, ω0 and 1/T2 represented the center frequency and width

of the gain spectrum, respectively. The absence of gain saturation in Eq. 1 was not cru-

cial as we intended to ﬁnd the lasing modes just above the threshold. A seed pulse with

broad spectrum was launched at t = 0 to initiate the ampliﬁcation process. The lasing

threshold was deﬁned by the minimum gain coeﬃcient (σ0) at which the electromagnetic

ﬁeld oscillation built up in time. To shorten the computing time, we simulated lasing in

two-dimensional systems. In order to model the elongated gain volume in the experiment,

optical gain was introduced to a strip of length Lp and width Wp. The refractive index

was set at 1.0 both inside and outside the strip. Dielectric cylinders of radius 100 nm and

refractive index 2.0 was placed randomly in the strip as scattering centers. The strip dimen-

sion was much smaller than the experimental value due to the limited computing power.

Consequently, the number of cylinders inside the strip was reduced to keep the system in

12

the weak scattering regime.

At the end of last section, we conjectured that the coherent feedback for lasing resulted

mainly from the particles located near the tip and base of the excited cone. In the dilute

suspension of particles, there was probably only one particle located at the tip of the cone.

One question was whether the backscattering of a single particle could provide enough

feedback for lasing. To answer this question, we considered there were only two particles

in the gain strip, one on each end, in the numerical simulation. The total system size was

16 µm × 8 µm, and the gain strip 8 µm × 4 µm. At the system boundary, there was a

perfectly matched absorbing layer. As shown in Fig. 9(a), two cylinders of radius 100 nm,

placed at the two ends of the gain strip, had a separation of 8 µm. When the gain coeﬃcient

σ0 was above a threshold value, we observed lasing oscillation in the two-scatterer cavity.

The spatial distribution of lasing intensity was plotted in Fig. 9(b). It revealed that lasing

occurred along the strip with the feedback from the two particles. The spatial nonuniformity

of laser intensity distribution was caused by beating of multiple lasing modes, which could be

seen in the emission spectrum in Fig. 9(c). The spectrum was obtained by Fourier transform

of the electric ﬁeld, and the lasing modes were equally spaced in frequency. We varied the

separation between the two scatterers, and the frequency spacing of lasing modes changed

accordingly. The shorter the particle separation, the larger the mode spacing. These results

illustrated lasing in the resonator composed of only two scatterers.

In 1998, Wilhelmi proposed a laser composed of two Rayleigh scatterers with gain medium

in between25. We generalized the Rayleigh scatterers to Mie scatterers and derived the lasing

threshold condition for the two-particle cavity:

σb
L2
c

egeLc = 1.

(2)

σb was the backscattering cross section of one particle, which depended on the particle size,

refractive index and incident light wavelength. Lc was the cavity length which was equal to

the separation between the two scatterers. ge was the threshold gain coeﬃcient for lasing.

Eq.(2) reveals two competing factors in determining the lasing threshold. On one hand,

the optical feedback from one particle to the other is inversely proportional to L2

c. The

farther apart the two particles, the higher the loss of the two-scatterer cavity. On the other

hand, light ampliﬁcation grows exponentially with Lc. When the optical gain is high, the

exponential growth of ampliﬁcation dominates over the quadratic increase of cavity loss. The

13

lasing threshold decreases with increasing Lc. Hence, the resonator with the lowest lasing

threshold is composed of two particles with the largest separation inside the gain volume.

In other words, the lasing cavity length is equal to the largest dimension of the gain volume.

Experimentally, tight focusing of the pump beam created a cone-shaped gain volume in a

dilute suspension of particles. The two particles furtherest apart were located at the base

and tip of the cone. The lasing cavity length was equal to the cone length. The lasing

modes were longitudinal modes of the two-particle cavity. Hence they were equally spaced

in frequency with the spacing ∆ν = c/2neLc, where c was the speed of light and ne was

the eﬀective refractive index of gain medium between the two particles. The regular mode

spacing was consistent with our numerical simulation which conﬁrmed Wilhelmi’s theory of

such a microscopic laser.

Although the equally spaced lasing modes were expected, the directional lasing output

from a two-scatterer cavity was a surprise to us. In our numerical simulation, the near-ﬁeld

to far-ﬁeld transformation of electric ﬁeld gave the output laser intensity as a function of

polar angle. Figure 9(d) shows the numerical data for three gain strips of length Lp = 4, 8, 16

µm. The strip width Wp was ﬁxed at 4 µm. The two scatterers were always placed at the

ends of the strip. From the envelop of the far-ﬁeld intensity distribution, we obtained the

angular width of the output laser beam. It decreased as the aspect ratio of the gain strip

Lp/Wp increased. Similar results were obtained when we varied Wp and kept Lp constant.

These results indicated that the output from a two-particle cavity laser cannot be simply

regarded as scattering of a plane wave by a single particle. The formation of coherent lasing

modes relied not only on the geometry of the scatterers, but also on the shape of gain strip.

Hence, the directionality of lasing output depended on the aspect ratio of the gain strip.

Experimentally there were particles not only at the ends of the excited cone, but also in

the middle. To ﬁnd out what happened when there were additional scatterers in between

the two near the ends, in the numerical simulation we randomly placed a few cylinders inside

the gain strip in addition to the two at the ends. Figure 10(a) shows the spatial distribution

of laser intensity with four additional cylinders inside the gain strip of dimension 8 × 4 µm.

Despite the presence of additional scatterers, lasing still occurred in the direction parallel

to the strip. The lasing spectrum in Fig. 10(b) again exhibited almost equally spaced

lasing peaks. The peak spacing was close to that with only two cylinders at the strip ends.

This numerical result conﬁrmed our speculation that the contributions to lasing for the

14

scatterers near the strip ends dominated over those from the scatterers in the middle. For

a simple illustration, let us consider the photons emitted near one end of the gain strip,

e.g., the left end, and propagating along the strip to the right. The stimulated emission

led to an exponential growth of photon number with the path length. When they reached

one scatterer inside the strip, a small percentage of the photons were scattered, while the

majority continued propagating. The longer the propagation path, the larger the number of

photons. As long as the strip length was less than the scattering mean free path, the number

of photons reaching the right end of the strip was the largest, so was the number of photons

scattered by the particle near this end. The backscattered photons were ampliﬁed as they

propagated along the gain strip to the left end. Some of these photons were scattered into

other directions by the particles on the way. This linear scattering loss was oﬀset by the high

optical gain which led to exponential increase of photon number. The light backscattered

from the particle at the right end was ampliﬁed the most among all the backscattered waves

reaching the left end, because of its longest path in the gain strip. Therefore, the feedbacks

from the scatterers near the ends of gain strip were much stronger than those from the

particles in the middle. As a result, the lasing frequencies were mainly determined by the

distance between the scatterers nears the two ends of the gain strip, and the lasing modes

were almost equally spaced in frequency. Experimentally, when the number of scatterers

increased, the pump strip was shortened due to increased scattering of pump light. Thus

the lasing threshold rose. A further increase of scatterer density destroyed the regular

spacing of lasing modes as multiple scattering became dominant.

Although in the dilute suspension there was probably only one particle at the tip of

the excited cone, there were more particles at the cone base whose dimension exceeded the

average distance between the particles. For example, when the particle density ρ = 5 × 108
cm−3 and pump spot diameter ∼ 40 µm, there were at least ten particles near the base of

the excited cone. To simulate this experimental situation, we placed ten scatterers randomly

near one end of the gain strip and only one scatterer at the other end. Figure 10(c) shows

the spatial distribution of laser intensity. The lasing peaks were almost equally spaced in

frequency, as shown in Fig. 10(d). The peak spacing was close to that with only two

scatterers in the strip, one on either end.

It suggested that the feedback from the ten

scatterers near one end of the gain strip was equivalent to that from one located somewhere

close to this end, as far as the lasing frequencies were concerned. Hence, the frequency

15

spacing of lasing peaks scaled inversely with the length of gain strip.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Although our numerical simulations were performed on 2D systems with smaller dimen-

sions, the conclusions obtained were in agreement with the 3D systems of larger dimensions

in our experiment. They presented a qualitative explanation for the lasing behaviors in

the weakly-scattering systems. When the scattering mean free path exceeded the size of

gain volume, lasing oscillation built up in the direction of strongest ampliﬁcation, i.e., the

direction in which the gain volume was most extended. This behavior was similar to that of

ampliﬁed spontaneous emission in the weak scattering regime26. The fundamental diﬀerence

from the ASE was the existence of feedback that originated from the backscattered light.

The extreme weakness of feedback was compensated by high optical gain due to intense

pumping. As pointed by Kumar and coworkers, the statistically rare sub-mean-free-path

scattering could be made eﬀective by strong ampliﬁcation27. They demonstrated lasing in

active, sub-mean-free-path-sized systems with dense, random, weak scatterers. The feed-

back came from all the scatterers in the system.

In our case the feedback came mainly

from the scatterers near the ends of the gain strip, because it was selectively ampliﬁed due

to the long propagation path in the gain volume. However, at very low particle density,

the chance of having particles near the ends of a gain strip was reduced, thus the lasing

threshold was increased. Moreover, when the particle density was high, the shape of gain

volume was changed to a hemisphere. The reduction of path length in the gain volume led

to an increase of lasing threshold.

A few years ago, Vardeny and coworkers observed lasing oscillation along a pump strip5,6.

They attributed the feedback to weak backscattering occurring repeatedly along the entire

strip. In other words, the process of multiple scattering supplied the distributed feedback

for lasing. In our case, the feedback was not distributed over the entire excited cone, but

came mainly from the scatterers near the cone ends as a result of weak scattering and strong

ampliﬁcation. Thus the lasing modes had constant frequency spacing, which depended on

the cone length. Our previous numerical study10 illustrated that the lasing modes can be

completely diﬀerent from the quasimodes of the passive systems in the case of local pumping.

The absorption of emitted light outside the pumped region eﬀectively reduces the system

16

size, and the lasing modes are conﬁned in the pumped region. In this work, we suggested that

the lasing modes may also diﬀer from the quasimodes of the reduced system without gain or

absorption. The former were formed mainly by scattering of particles near the boundary of

the reduced system in the presence of high gain, while the latter were formed by scattering

of all particles inside the reduced system in the absence of gain and absorption.

In summary, we observed lasing with coherent feedback in dye solutions containing a small

amount of nanoparticles under conﬁned intense optical pumping. The focused pump beam

created a cone-shaped gain volume. The cone length was determined by the absorption of

dye molecules since optical scattering was very weak. The laser output was in the direction

parallel to the cone. The lasing modes were almost equally spaced in frequency, and their

spacing was inversely proportional to the cone length. Despite the weak scattering, the laser

cavity was conﬁned to the excited volume of dimension less than the scattering length. It

was a result of interplay between strong ampliﬁcation of emission inside the excited volume

and reabsorption of emitted light outside it. Hence, even in a weakly-scattering system, the

lasing modes may be localized in a small region by local pumping. Moreover, the shape

of gain volume determined the orientation of laser cavities. In the ballistic regime where

the size of gain volume was less than the scattering mean free path, lasing occurred along

the direction in which the gain volume was most stretched for maximum ampliﬁcation. It

led to directional laser output. The extreme weakness of feedback originating from the

backscattering was oﬀset by the strong ampliﬁcation under intense pumping. The high

optical gain selectively ampliﬁes the feedback from the scatterers near the ends of the pump

strip due to long propagation path inside the gain region. Thus the frequency spacing of

lasing modes was determined by the maximum dimension of the gain volume. These results

illustrated that it is possible to control the lasing frequencies and output directionality

of random lasers by varying the pumping geometry, the scattering mean free path, the

absorption length at excitation and emission wavelengths.

The authors acknowledge Dr. Christian Vanneste for stimulating discussion. This work

was supported by the National Science Foundation under the grant no. ECS-0244457 and

17

ECS-0601249.

1 R. V. Ambartsumyan, N. G. Basov, P. G. Kryukov, and V. S. Letokhov, IEEE J. Quant.

Electron. QE-2 442 (1966).

2 H. Cao, Waves in Random Media 13, R1 (2003).

3 H. Cao, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 38, 10497 (2005), and reference therein.

4 H. Cao, J. Y. Xu, S.-H. Chang, S. T. Ho, E. W. Seelig, X. Liu, and R. P. H. Chang, Phys. Rew.

5 S. V. Frolov, Z. V. Vardeny, A. Z. Zakhidov, and R. H. Baughman, Opt. Commun. 162, 241

6 S. V. Frolov, M. Shkunov, A. Fujii, K, Yoshino, and Z. V. Vardeny, IEEE J. Quantum Electron.

Lett. 84, 5584 (2000).

(1999).

36, 2 (2000).

7 Y. Ling, H. Cao, A. L. Burin, M. A. Ratner, C. Liu, R. P. H. Chang, 64, 063808 (2001).

8 R. C. Polson, M. E. Raikh, and Z. V. Vardeny, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris IV 3, 500 (2002).

9 R. C. Polson, and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. B 71 045205 (2005).

10 A. Yamilov, X. Wu, H. Cao, and A. Burin, Opt. Lett. 30, 2430 (2005).

11 F. A. Korolev, G. V. Abrosimov, A. I. Odintsov, and V. P. Yakunin, Opt. Spectrosc. 28, 540

(1970); F. A. Korolev, V. I. Atroshchenko, S. A. Bakhramov, and V. I. Odintsov, ibid 34 591

12 V. I. Ishchenko, V. N. Lisitsyn, A. M. Razhev, S. G. Rautian, and A. M. Shalagin, JETP Lett.

13 F. A. Korolev, A. I. Odintsov, N. G. Turkin, and V. P. Yakunin, Sov. J. Quant. Electron. 5 237

14 V. Ye. Brazovsky and V. N Lisitsyn, Appl. Phys. 18 421 (1979).

15 Z. Bor, S. Szatmari, and A. Muller, Appl. Phys. B 32, 101 (1983).

16 P. Sperber, W. Spangler, B. Meier and A. Penzkofer, Opt. Quantum Electron. 20, 395 (1988).

17 A. A. Chastov and O. L. Lebedev, Sov. Phys. JETP 31 455 (1970).

18 V. I. Bezrodnyi, V. I. Vashchuk, and E. A. Tikhonov, Sov. Phys. Tech. Phys. 23 89 (1978).

19 A. Vogel, K. Nahen, D. Theisen, and J. Noack, IEEE J. Sel. Topic. Quant. Electron. 2 847

19 346 (1974).

(1973).

(1975).

(1996).

18

20 D. S. Wiersma and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. E 54, 4256 (1996).

21 S. John, and G. Pang, Phys. Rev. A 54, 3642 (1996).

22 G. A. Berger, M. Kempe, and A. Z. Genack, Phys. Rev. E 56, 6118 (1997).

23 S. Mujumdar, M. Ricci, R. Torre, and D. W. Wiersma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 053903 (2004).

24 A. Taﬂove and S. C. Hagness, Computational Electrodynamics (Artech, 2000).

25 B. Wilhelmi, Microwave and Optical Tech. Lett. 17, 111 (1998).

26 D. S. Wiersma, M. P. van Albada, and A. Lagendijk, Nature (London) 373, 203 (1995).

27 B. R. Prasad, H. Ramachandran, A. K. Sood, C. K. Subramanian, and N. Kumar, Appl. Opt.

36, 7718 (1997).

19

FIG. 1: Spectra of emission from DEG solutions of Rhodamine 640 (5 mM) and TiO2 particles.
The particle density ρ = 0 (dotted curve), 1.87× 108 cm−3 (thin solid curve), 1.87× 109 cm−3(thick
solid curve), 4: 1.3 × 1010 cm−3(dot-dot-dashed curve), 5: 5.0 × 1010 cm−3 (dashed curve). All

spectra were taken at the same pump pulse energy 0.4 µJ. Each spectrum was integrated over 25

shots. Left inset is the skematic of our experimental setup, BS: beam splitter, SP: spectrometer,
FB: ﬁber bundle. Right inset is the emission spectrum shows the ASE peak. ρ = 5.0 × 1010 cm−3.

The pump pulse energy is 1.2 µJ.

20

FIG. 2: The threshold pump pulse energy Et as a function of the T iO2 particle densityρ. The

concentration of Rhodamine 640 in DEG is 5 mM. The inset is a plot of the emission intensity I
versus the pump pulse energy Ep for the suspension with ρ = 3.0 × 109 cm−3.

21

FIG. 3: The angular distribution of output emission intensity from DEG solutions of 5 mM Rho-
damine 640 and 3.0 × 109 cm−3 (solid square) and 5.0 × 1010 cm−3 (open circle) TiO2 particles.

The solid line is a Gaussian ﬁt of output laser beam. θ = 0 corresponds to the backward direction

of pump beam. Left inset is a sketch of experimental setup, BS: beam splitter, SP: spectrometer,

FB: ﬁber bundle. Right inset shows the angle φ between the pump beam and the normal to the

front window of the cuvette.

22

FIG. 4: (a): Spectra of emission through the side window (dashed curve) and front window (solid

curve) of the cuvette. The inset is a sketch of the experimental setup, BS: beam splitter, SP:

spectrometer, FB: ﬁber bundle.
(b): Side image of excited region in DEG solution of 5 mM
Rhodamine 640 and 3.0 × 109 cm−3 TiO2 particles. The pump pulse energy is 0.2 µJ. (b): Side
image of excited region in DEG solution of 5 mM Rhodamine 640 and 5.0 × 1010 cm−3 TiO2

particles. The pump pulse energy is 1.2 µJ.

23

FIG. 5: (a): A single shot emission spectrum from DEG solution of 5 mM Rhodamine 640 and
1.87×109 cm−3 TiO2 particles. The pump pulse energy is 0.2 µJ pumping. (b): Spectral correlation

function computed for the spectrum in (a).

24

FIG. 6: A single shot emission spectrum from the DEG solution of 5 mM Rhodamine 640 without

any particles. The pump pulse energy is 0.3 µJ pumping.

25

FIG. 7: The wavelength spacing ∆λ of lasing modes as a function of the distance d between the

metallic rod and the cuvette front window. The concentration of Rhodamine 640 in DEG is 5 mM,
and the TiO2 particle density is 3.0 × 109 cm−3. The pump pulse energy is 0.2 µJ. The inset is a

sketch of experimental setup. BS: beam splitter, FB: ﬁber bundle.

26

FIG. 8: (a): Single shot emission spectra from colloidal solution of 3.0 × 109 cm−3 TiO2 particles.

The molarity of Rhodamine 640 in DEG is (from top to bottom) 3 mM, 5 mM, and 10 mM. (b)

Spectral correlation functions of the single shot emission spectra in (a). Insets are side images of

pumped region for in each solution.

27

FIG. 9: (a) Geometry of a 2D system in our numerical simulation. The system size is 16 µm ×

8 µm. The gain strip in the center has a dimension of 8 µm × 4 µm. Two cylinders of radius

100 nm are located on both ends of the gain strip. (b) Spatial distribution of laser intensity. (c)

Emission spectrum features multiple lasing modes that are almost equally spaced in frequency. (d)

Far-ﬁeld intensity of laser emission as a function of polar angle. The zero degree corresponds to

the direction parallel to the gain strip. The dimensions of the gain strip are 4 µm × 4 µm (dotted

curve), 8 µm × 4 µm (dashed curve), 16 µm × 4 µm (solid curve).

28

FIG. 10: (a) Spatial distribution of laser intensity with four scatterers randomly placed in between

the two scatterers near the ends of gain strip. (b) Lasing spectrum corresponding to (a). (c) Spatial

distribution of laser intensity with one scatterer on one end of the gain strip, and ten randomly

placed scatterers near the other end. (d): Lasing spectrum corresponding to (c).

29

