Optical polarizer/isolator based on a rectangular waveguide with

helical grooves

Gennady Shvets

The University of Texas at Austin,

Department of Physics, Austin TX 78712

Abstract

A chirality-based approach to making a one-way waveguide that can be used as an optical

isolator or a polarizer is described. The waveguide is rectangular, and chirality is introduced by

making slanted rectangular grooves on the waveguide walls. Chirality of the waveguide manifests

as a strong circular dichroism, and is responsible for transmitting one circular polarization of light

and reﬂecting the other. Optical isolation of the propagating circular polarization is accomplished

when the chiral waveguide is placed in front of a non-chiral optical device. Even the crudest

implementations of chirality are shown to exhibit signiﬁcant circular dichroism.

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
2
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

It is widely believed that the complete integration of electronics and photonics on a sub-

micron scale [1] must be accomplished in the near future. Thus the toolbox of integrated

photonics is rapidly expanding, reﬂecting recent technological advances in photonic crys-

tals [2], dielectric waveguides [3], and magnetooptic materials [4]. Particularly challenging

to make in the integrated form are optical polarizers (devices that transmit only one light

polarization) and related to them isolators (one-way optical elements that suppress reﬂection

of at least one polarization). Devices schematically shown in Fig. 1 solve the problem of

developing a linear one-way optical element by using a rectangular waveguide with a chiral

(arranged as a single right-handed helix) perturbation to its side walls. Because of the sim-

ple rectangular crossection of the waveguide, and a rather crude implementation of chirality

using periodically arranged slanted grooves in the waveguide wall, such a device should be

relatively easy to fabricate and integrate with other optical waveguides. As demonstrated

below, propagation of the right- and left-hand circularly polarized (RHCP and LHCP) laser

ﬁelds can diﬀer dramatically: a band of frequencies exists for which only the LHCP wave

propagates through the chiral waveguide (ChW), eﬀectively making it a simple circular

polarizer [5].

Chiral twisted ﬁber gratings with a ”perfect” double-helical perturbation of the refrac-

tive index have been suggested as polarization selective ﬁlters in the optical [6] and mi-

crowave [7, 8] frequency range. Twisting is incompatible with the silicon-based waveguides,

which are also diﬃcult to fabricate with the crossection diﬀerent from the rectangular one.

The signiﬁcance of the proposed structures is that their helicity has a very crude discrete

step and turn symmetry (neither ”perfect” nor even continuous helix) and, therefore, are

easy to implement in the context of integrated optics. Further simpliﬁcation of the structure

and suppression of Bragg scattering is due to the single-helix geometry of the grooves.

The proposed chiral optical waveguide can also act as a polarization-preserving one-way

waveguide when inserted between two optical elements (I and II) that need to be isolated

from reﬂections. Under a proper choice of the laser frequency ω, waveguide width D, and the
helical pitch λu ≡ 2π/ku, one of the polarizations (e. g., LHCP) can be largely transmitted

by the ChW when incident from I (that needs to be isolated) towards II. Let us assume that
the non-chiral element II reﬂects a small fraction η ≪ 1 of the incident LHCP radiation.

Because the polarization of the reﬂected radiation is now RHCP, it will be reﬂected by the

ChW towards II, reﬂected again by II as LHCP, and ﬁnally emerge from the ChW into

2

element I. Because two reﬂections from the element II are involved, the overall reﬂection
coeﬃcient can be as small as η′ = η2 ≪ η. Because such isolator is reciprocal, it works

only for one of the two circular polarizations. ChW is thus similar to another well-known

reciprocal optical isolator based on a quarter wave plate placed behind a linear polarizer,

with the important diﬀerence that both the incident on and transmitted through the ChW

electromagnetic waves have the same polarization. The only practical drawback of a ChW-

based isolator is that the most reﬂecting elements of the integrated optical network would

have to be operated with the circularly polarized light.

Propagation of electromagnetic waves in a chiral medium (approximated here by a chiral

waveguide) is modelled by the following equation [9, 10, 11] describing the coupling between

the amplitudes a+ of the RHCP and a− of the LHCP components of the electric ﬁeld:

∂2
∂x2 +
∂2
∂x2 +

(cid:20)

(cid:20)

ω2
c2 n2
ω2
c2 n2

+(x)

a+ =

−(x)

a− =

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

ω2
c2 ge2ikuxa−,
ω2
c2 ge−2ikuxa+,

(1)

(2)

where n±(x) are the refractive indices and g is the strength of the Inter-Helical Bragg

Scattering (IHBS). In the context of wave propagation in the plasma with a helical magnetic

ﬁeld, Eqs. (1,2) were shown to accurately describe coupling between RHCP and LHCP

waves through coupling to a third (idler) plasma wave. As a simple example, consider the
TE01 and TE10 modes of a square (−D/2 < y < D/2 and −D/2 < z < D/2) metallic
waveguide propagating in x−direction. RHCP and LHCP modes constructed by linear
c /ω2, where ωc = cπ/D.
superposition have the identical refractive indices n2
Additionally, the two propagation constants will be modulated with the period λu due to

± = ¯n2(ω) ≡ 1−ω2

the realistic (quasi-helical) perturbation, as will be addressed below by the ﬁrst-principles

electromagnetic simulations using FEMLAB [12]. Note that IHBS is a second-order eﬀect:

RHCP wave with m = +1 helicity interacts with the helical perturbation and excites the

idler (e.g., TM11 with m = 0) mode. The idler mode, in turn, interacts with the helical
perturbation and excites the LHCP mode with m = −1 helicity. Note that the identiﬁcation

of RHCP with m = +1 mode holds only for the waves propagating in the +x direction. For
the waves propagating in the −x direction, the m = +1 mode corresponds to the LHCP

wave.

To facilitate the qualitative discussion, assume that n2

± = ¯n2(ω) does not depend on z,
i. e. that the perturbation is purely helical. Assuming that a+ ∝ exp i(k + ku)x and a− ∝

3

exp i(k − ku)x, a simple dispersion relation can be derived: n2 = n2

u + g2,
where n = ck/ω and nu = cku/ω. Depending on ω, this equation can have zero, two, or four

u + ¯n2 ±

4¯n2n2

p

real roots. It can be analytically shown that, regardless of the chiral medium parameters
ωc, ku, and g, only two propagating solutions exist for ω1 < ω < ω2, where ω2
c2k2

c +
u)/(1 ± g) are the cutoﬀ frequencies. The frequency interval ω1 < ω < ω2 is sometimes
referred to in the chiral media literature as the de Vries bandgap [9, 10] for one of the circular

1,2 = (ω2

polarizations. This remarkable property of the chiral bandgap enables a polarizer/one-way

waveguide based on the chiral material which transmits only one light polarization (e. g.,

LHCP for the right-handed structure). The approach described here is to create a reasonable

approximation to a chiral medium by employing a waveguide with the sidewalls perturbed

in a single helix-like fashion.

As the ﬁrst example consider a rectangular waveguide shown in Fig. 1(a) consisting of four

quarter-wavelength sections with rectangular grooves along the waveguide walls. Each of the

sections is obtained from the preceding one by translation through the distance ∆x = λu/4

and rotation by the angle φ = π/2 around the propagation direction x. The wall structure of

the waveguide thus approximates a helical groove while remaining simple and amenable to

standard fabrication techniques: the waveguide itself and the cuts are rectangular. Although

we have assumed, for computational simplicity, perfect electric conductor (PEC) boundary

conditions at the metal wall, the results are not expected to be fundamentally diﬀerent from

those for a high-contrast silicon-based waveguide. Because of the PEC boundary conditions,

the scale length L (approximately equal to a quarter of the vacuum wavelength) is arbitrary.

The waveguide’s width and height (its y and z dimensions, respectively) are W = H = 2L,

and the pitch of the helix is λu = 10L. The width and height of the cuts are w = h = 0.3L.

We have numerically solved Maxwells’s equations with periodic boundary conditions at
x = 0 and x = λu boundaries, and with PEC boundary conditions at y = ±W/2 and
z = ±H/2 boundaries. The waveguide sections −λu/4 < x < 0 and λu < x < 5λu/4 shown

in Fig. 1(a) were not employed in this source-free (eigenvalue) simulation. The following

characteristic frequencies have been found: ω1L/c = 1.64 (lower edge of the chiral bandgap),

and ω2L/c = 1.70 (upper edge of the chiral bandgap). Strong asymmetry between diﬀerent

mode polarizations propagating is expected inside or near the chiral bandgap. This property

of the ChW was veriﬁed by launching RHCP and LHCP waves through the waveguide

structure depicted in Fig. 1(a). The forward RHCP and LHCP waves with the frequencies

4

ω = ω2 were launched at the x = −λu/4. The ratio of the transmission coeﬃcients (measure
of circular dichroism) of the two polarizations is TR/TL ≈ 0.13. We have numerically veriﬁed
the reciprocality of the structure by launching the two circular polarizations in the −x

direction as well, and obtaining the same transmission ratio as for the forward waves. Thus,

even a single period of a chiral waveguide acts as a strong polarizer and, for the LHCP light,

a polarization-preserving isolator.

As simple as the ChW shown in Fig. 1(a) is, it may still be challenging to fabricate.

Speciﬁcally, it may be diﬃcult to create rectangular cuts on all four sidewalls of the waveg-

uide. Therefore, we have simpliﬁed the waveguide structure even further by making slanted

grooves on only two opposite waveguide walls. Two periods of the structure are shown in

Fig. 1(b), where the cuts are made on top and bottom walls. One can still show that this

waveguide has a well-deﬁned helicity with a pitch λu = 5L. However, it is very crude com-

pared with the idealized helical waveguides previously considered in the literature [6, 7, 8],

and even with the waveguide shown in Fig. 1(a). Nevertheless, the transmission ratio for

the two polarization at ω = 1.95c/L, or for the same polarizations travelling in opposite
directions is TR/TL ≈ 0.4. This constitutes a very strong circular dichroism given that the

structure consists of only two periods. To understand why the transmission of LHCP is so

small, we have plotted the on-axis values of the m = +1 (corresponding to forward RHCP
and backward LHCP) and m = −1 (corresponding to forward LHCP and backward RHCP)

components (dashed and solid lines, respectively) for the incident forward LHCP (red lines)

and RHCP (black lines) waves.

First, consider the incident RHCP wave. The amplitude of the m = +1 component

(black dashed line) at the waveguide’s exit (X = 5λu/2 = 12.5L) is almost three times

smaller than at the entrance. This is because a signiﬁcant portion of the forward travelling
RHCP component (m = +1) is reﬂected back into the m = −1 component (black solid line)

through the IHBS mechanism. Therefore, the amplitude of the backwards travelling RHCP
component at the waveguide entrance (X = −λu/2 = −2.5L) is almost equal to that of

the incident RHCP wave. There is also signiﬁcant conversion into the forward propagating
LHCP that is not described by Eqs. (1) with n+(x) = n−(x) ≡ ¯n(ω). This conversion occurs

due to the regular Bragg backscattering of the forward RHCP into the backward LHCP,

and the consequent IHBS into the forward LHCP. The end result is that a strong coupling

between the forward and backward travelling RHCP’s results in the low transmission of the

5

RHCP wave.

Second, consider the incident LHCP wave which has the same sense of rotation as the
chiral groove. The amplitude of its m = −1 component (red solid line) at the waveguide’s

exit is only 25% smaller than its incident amplitude. This reduction is due to the usual

(non-chiral) Bragg scattering of the forward moving LHCP wave into the backward moving

RHCP. The amplitude of the backward moving LHCP wave is very small at the waveguide’s

entrance implying that there is very little IHBS between the forward and backward LHCP

waves. The above discussion illustrates that there is a signiﬁcant asymmetry in IHBS for

the LHCP and RHCP waves: chiral scattering is strong for RHCP and weak for LHCP.

It appears that the resulting circular dichroism can be further enhanced by controlling the

usual (non-chiral) Bragg scattering. This can be done by introducing additional non-chiral

grooves, and by gradual tapering of the grooves parameters (e. g. width) in a multi-period

ChW.

It has also been veriﬁed that the chiral nature of the grooves is necessary for creating

circular dichroism of the waveguide. Speciﬁcally, the waveguide cuts have been arranged in

a non-chiral way by modifying the chiral waveguide shown in Fig. 1(b): in the new (non-

chiral) waveguide the grooves are slanted in the same directions on the top and bottom

walls of the waveguide. Transmission coeﬃcients of the RHCP and LHCP through the non-

chiral waveguide are identical (to the accuracy of our simulation, which is better than 1%)

independently of the propagation direction. Therefore, only a chiral waveguide can serve as

a circular polarizer or a one-way optical element.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated using ﬁrst principles electromagnetic simulations

that a crude approximation of a chiral medium based on a rectangular waveguide perturbed

by slanted grooves can act as a circular polarizer which could also be the basis for an

optical isolator. Numerical results are interpreted on the basis of a model of an ideal chiral

medium. The chiral waveguide shown in Fig. 1(b) is an extremely crude approximation

of the chiral medium for the following reasons: (a) it has diﬀerent cutoﬀ frequencies for
the z− and y− polarizations; (b) coupling is not only between counter-propagating waves

of the same circular polarization, but also between those with opposite polarizations; (c)

the chiral perturbation of the waveguide is a very crude approximation of a helical groove.

The fact that even two periods of such a simply designed chiral waveguide possess a high

degree of circular dichroism suggests that a robust design of a polarization preserving optical

6

isolator/circular polarizer based on chirality is possible. Future work will extend these results

to more practically relevant silicon-on-insulator waveguides.

This work was supported by the ARO MURI grant W911NF-04-01-0203 and by the

DARPA contract HR0011-05-C-0068. Insightful conversations with Drs. N. I. Zheludev and

Y. A. Vlasov are gratefully acknowledged.

7

[1] M. J. Kobrinsky et al., Intel Technol. J. 8, 129 (2004).

[2] Y. A. Vlasov, M. O’Boyle, H. F. Hamann, and S. J. McNab, Nature 438, 65 (2005).

[3] Y. A. Vlasov and S. J. McNab, Opt. Exp. 12, 1622 (2004).

[4] T. Izuhara, M. Levy, and R. M. O. Jr., Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 1261 (2000).

[5] J. J. Wang, F. Liu, X. Deng, X. Liu, L. Chen, P. Sciortino, and R. Varghese, J. Vac. Sci. Tech-

[6] V. I. Kopp, V. M. Churikov, J. Singer, N. Chao, D. Neugroschl, and A. Z. Genack, Science

[7] G. G. Denisov, V. L. Bratman, A. D. Phelps, and S. V. Samsonov, IEEE Trans. Plasma

[8] V.I.Kopp and A.Z.Genack, Opt. Lett. 28, 1876 (2003).

[9] H. de Vries, Acta Crystallogr 4, 219 (1951).

[10] P. A. Bermel and M. Warner, Phys. Rev. E 65, 010702 (2001).

[11] G. Shvets, M. Tushentsov, M. D. Tokman, and A. Kryachko, Phys. Plasmas 12, 056701 (2005).

[12] FEMLAB Reference Manual, Comsol AB, Stockholm, Sweden, version 2.3 ed. (2001).

nol. B 23, 3164 (2005).

305, 74 (2004).

Science 26, 508 (1998).

8

FIG. 1: (Color online) Schematic of two rectangular right-handed chiral waveguides with helically

arranged grooves. (Top): grooves in all four walls. Density of the Poynting ﬂux for the injected

RHCP wave is color coded in several planes to illustrate the preservation of the circular polarization

for the wave with the same sense of rotation as the helical grooves. (Bottom): grooves in top and

bottom walls. PEC boundary conditions are assumed. Distance is normalized to an arbitrary scale

L approximately equal to a quarter of the vacuum wavelength of the injected wave.

9

FIG. 2: (Color online) Dashed lines: amplitudes of the m = +1 (corresponding to forward-moving

RHCP and backward-moving LHCP) waves; solid lines: amplitudes of the m = −1 (corresponding

to forward-moving LHCP and backward-moving RHCP) waves along the waveguide. Two cases

are considered: incident RHCP (black lines) and incident LHCP (red lines) into a chiral waveguide

shown in Fig. 1(b). In the case of incident RHCP wave most of radiation is reﬂected back while

almost no reﬂection is observed for the incident LHCP radiation. The overall RHCP transmission

is less than half of that of the LHCP.

10

