Zero permeability and zero permittivity band gaps in 1D

metamaterial photonic crystals

Ricardo A. Depine ∗† and Mar´ıa L. Mart´ınez-Ricci ‡

Grupo de Electromagnetismo Aplicado, Departamento de F´ısica,

Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,

Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Universitaria,

Pabell´on I, C1428EHA Buenos Aires, Argentina

Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada, Universidad Polit´ecnica de Valencia, 46022 Valencia, Spain

Juan A. Monsoriu §

Enrique Silvestre ¶ and Pedro Andr´es ∗∗
Departamento de ´Optica, Universidad de Valencia, 46100 Burjassot, Spain

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

We consider layered heterostructures combining ordinary positive index materials and dispersive

metamaterials. We show that these structures can exhibit a new type of photonic gap near frequencies

where either the magnetic permeability µ or the electric permittivity ǫ of the metamaterial change

signs. Although the interface of a medium with zero refractive index (a condition attained either when

µ = 0 or when ǫ = 0) is known to give full reﬂectivity for all incident polarizations, here we show

that a gap corresponding to µ = 0 occurs only for TE polarized waves, whereas a gap corresponding

to ǫ = 0 occurs only for TM polarized waves. These band gaps are scale-length invariant and very

robust against disorder, although they may disappear for the particular case of propagation along the

stratiﬁcation direction.

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ email: rdep@df.uba.ar
‡ email: mricci@df.uba.ar
§ email: jmonsori@ﬁs.upv.es
¶ email: enrique.silvestre@uv.es
∗∗ email: pedro.andres@uv.es
†Member of CONICET (Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y Tecnol´ogicas).

1

Photonic band gap (PBG) materials allow electromagnetic ﬁeld propagation in certain fre-

quency bands, but not in others, their essential feature being the periodic arrangement of

high-contrast electromagnetic properties. The simplest version of a PBG material is the 1D

planar layered stack, which has been commonly used in optics in the form of ﬁlters or Bragg

reﬂectors [1].

Almost every available natural material has been used to construct PBG structures. Possibil-

ities have been widened with the recent advent of metamaterials (MMs), artiﬁcially constructed

composites exhibiting electromagnetic properties that are diﬃcult or impossible to achieve with

conventional, naturally occurring materials [2]. Key representatives of this new class of materi-

als are MMs with negative index of refraction, a property that arises in media with a negative

electric permittivity together with a negative magnetic permeability in the same frequency

range [3]. Multilayered PBG structures containing MMs have attracted much attention in re-

cent years [4, 5, 6, 7]. Two new kinds of PBG, fundamentally diﬀerent from the usual Bragg

gaps originating from interference in the periodic structure, have been identiﬁed: the ”zero

averaged refractive index” gap [5] and the ”zero eﬀective phase” gap [6]. The ﬁrst one appears

in multilayers combining ordinary materials (positive refractive index) and MMs with negative

refractive index, whereas the second one appears in multilayers containing two diﬀerent single-

negative (permittivity- or permeability-negative) MMs. In contrast to Bragg PBGs, both the

”zero averaged refractive index” and the ”zero eﬀective phase” gaps remain invariant to scale-

length changes and are robust against disorder. PBGs with these characteristics can be useful

as photonic barriers in quantum well applications, such as multiple channeled ﬁltering [6].

Since Bragg PBGs result from interference between waves reﬂected at diﬀerent layers, mate-

rial dispersion does not play a crucial role in their appearence. In other words, Bragg PBGs in

1D multilayers always exist, even when the dispersion of the constituent materials is neglected.

On the other hand, the existence of a ”zero averaged refractive index” PBG highly relies on

the dispersive characteristics of the material layers, since for nondispersive materials this PBG

would cover all frequencies, except for singular points [5]. In this Letter we show that MM mul-

tilayers can also exhibit a new kind of PBG, where material dispersion –and not interference–

plays the key role. These new PBGs correspond to frequency regions where the constitutive

parameters of the MM change their signs. Since they are not based on the Bragg interference

mechanism, they are also invariant to scaling and even more insensitive to disorder than the

2

”zero averaged refractive index” and the ”zero eﬀective phase” gaps.

If losses are neglected, the refractive index of a MM n(ω) =

µ(ω)ǫ(ω) is zero at the values of

the frequency ω where the magnetic permeability µ(ω) or the electric permittivity ǫ(ω) change

q

their sign. Therefore, at these frequency values one could expect to ﬁnd gaps for both TE and

TM polarization, since it is well known that the boundary of a zero refractive index material

exhibits full reﬂectivity [8, 9].

In contrast to this expectation, we show that at frequencies

where µ = 0 a gap occurs for TE polarized waves, but not necesarily for TM polarized waves,

whereas at frequencies where ǫ = 0 a gap occurs for TM polarized waves, but not necessarily

for TE polarized waves. Moreover, we show that these gaps can be completely absent for the

particular case of propagation along the stratiﬁcation direction, which could explain why its

presence went unnoticed in previous studies (see, for example, Fig. 2 in [5]).

We consider the 1D periodic structure created by layers of two diﬀerent materials: a conven-

tional dielectric with permeability µ1, permittivity ǫ1 and thicknesses d1, and a MM with per-

meability µ2(ω), permittivity ǫ2(ω) and thicknesses d2. The stratiﬁcation direction is the y axis

and we consider wave propagation in the x − y plane. Let the function f (x, y) represent the z–

directed component of the electric ﬁeld for the TE–polarization case (electric ﬁeld parallel to the

layers), and the z–directed component of the magnetic ﬁeld for the TM–polarization case (mag-

netic ﬁeld parallel to the layers). The propagating waves in the periodic structure have the form

of Bloch modes, for which the ﬁelds satisfy the condition f (x, y + d) = f (0, y) exp i(kxx + Kd),

where d = d1 + d2 is the period of the structure, kx is the wave vector component along the

layers and K is the Bloch wave number. For two-layered periodic structures, the dispersion

relation K(ω, kx) can be found explicitly from [1]

cos(Kd) = ξ ≡ cos(k1yd1) cos(k2yd2) −

1
2 "

σ2k1y
σ1k2y

+

σ1k2y
σ2k1y #

sin(k1yd1) sin(k2yd2) ,

(1)

where the index j = 1, 2 indicates the layer, σj = µj for TE polarization or σj = ǫj for TM
polarization, k2

x, and kj = ωnj/c are wave numbers in each media with refractive

jy = k2

j − k2

indexes nj. The quantity ξ, half the trace of the matrix characterizing the unit cell translation

operator [1], determines the band structure. It takes real values for lossless media and real kx.

Regimes where |ξ| < 1 correspond to real K and thus to propagating Bloch waves. In regimes

where |ξ| > 1, K has an imaginary part, therefore the Bloch wave is evanescent, and this regime

3

corresponds to forbidden bands (or gaps) of the periodic medium. The band edges are those

regimes where |ξ| = 1.

Let us consider frequency regions where the refractive index n2(ω) goes through zero, that

is, where a constitutive parameter of the MM –either µ2(ω) or ǫ2(ω)– changes its sign. Note

that the term between square brackets in the right hand side of eq. (1) becomes singular under

these conditions. For propagation along the stratiﬁcation direction (kx = 0), k2y → 0 and

the singularity is compensated. To be speciﬁc, and taking into account that µ2 and ǫ2 do not

generally change their sign at the same frequency value, we assume that ǫ2 → 0 but µ2 6= 0. In

this limit, k2y → 0 and the quantity ξ for both TE and TM polarizations adopts the form

ξ ≈ cos(k1d1) −

µ2d2 sin(k1d1) ,

(2)

1
2

ω
c s

ǫ1
µ1

which can take any real value, either outside or inside the interval [−1, 1]. A similar conclusion

can be obtained when µ2 → 0 but ǫ2 6= 0. Thus, gaps near regions where a constitutive

parameter changes its sign do not occur automatically at normal incidence. For example, the

multilayer considered to obtain Fig. 2 in Ref.

[5], exhibits Bragg gaps and a ”zero averaged

refractive index” gap, but there is no gap in the regions where µ2 and ǫ2 change signs. This

can be observed in the band diagrams shown in Figs. 1b and 1f, obtained for kx = 0 and the

following geometric and constitutive parameters [5]: d1 = 12 mm, d2 = 6 mm, ǫ1 = µ1 = 1,

ǫ2(f ) = 1 +

52
0.92 − f 2 +

102
11.52 − f 2 ,

µ2(f ) = 1 +

32
0.9022 − f 2 ,

(3)

where f is the frequency measured in GHz.

For oblique incidences, on the other hand, kx 6= 0, k2y → ±ikx 6= 0 and the second term

in the right hand side of eq. 1 remains singular when µ2 = 0 (TE polarization) or when

ǫ2 = 0 (TM polarization), thus originating new gaps, as shown in Fig. 1 for θ = 30◦ and 60◦

(kx = k1 sin θ). The non singular behavior of ξ at normal incidence and its singular behavior

for oblique incidences is illustrated in Fig. 2 for both polarizations. We conclude that these

new gaps always appear for non zero propagation angles θ in layer 1: the µ2 = 0 gap appears

for TE, but not for TM, polarization; whereas the ǫ2 = 0 gap appears for TM, but not for TE,

polarization.

4

The projected band structure corresponding to this example is shown in Fig. 3. White

regions indicate forbidden bands where there are no electromagnetic modes, regardless of K.

The width of the ”zero averaged refractive index” gap does not change appreciably for TE

polarization, but it gets narrower when θ → 90◦ for TM polarization. On the other hand, the

µ2 = 0 and the ǫ2 = 0 gaps increase with the angle θ.

Like the ”zero averaged refractive index” gap [5] and the ”zero eﬀective phase” gap [6], the

gap arising from µ2 = 0 or ǫ2 = 0 diﬀers fundamentally from the usual Bragg gap. First,

its central frequency is independent of the lattice constant, while all Bragg gap frequencies

must scale with the lattice constant. This fact is shown in Fig. 4, where we compare the

transmittance through 16 unit cells corresponding to the periodic multilayer considered in Fig.

3 for θ = 45◦, with the transmittance obtained for similar structures with lattice constants

scaled by factors of 2/3 and 4/3. While the Bragg gap shifts upward or downward in frequency,

the ”zero averaged refractive index” gap –near 2.3 GHz (TE) and 3.55 GHz (TM)– and the

new gaps –near 3.55 GHz (TE) and 3.9 GHz (TM)– remain unchanged. Second, the Bragg

gap, relying on interference mechanisms, is destroyed by strong disorder, while the µ2 = 0 and

the ǫ2 = 0 gaps, relying on constitutive properties of the MM, should be expected to be robust

against disorder. In Fig. 5 we compare the transmittance through 16 unit cells corresponding

to the periodic multilayer considered in Fig. 3 for θ = 45◦ and to similar structures with

thickness ﬂuctuation of ±3 mm and ±6 mm, each ensemble averaged over 24 realizations. As

expected, the Bragg gap is destroyed by disorder, but the ”zero permeability” and the ”zero

permittivity” gaps survive.

To summarize, we have shown that periodic multilayers containing MMs can exhibit a

new type of photonic gap near frequencies where either the magnetic permeability µ or the

electric permittivity ǫ of the MM change signs. In contrast to Bragg PBGs, originating from

interference mechanisms,

it is the material dispersion of the MM what mainly determines

the appearence of these new gaps. Therefore,

like the ”zero averaged refractive index”

and the ”zero eﬀective phase” gaps, the new gaps also remain invariant to scaling and

insensitive to disorder. Although electromagnetic waves would be completely reﬂected at the

boundary of a medium with zero refractive index, our results show that multilayers with MM

constituents do not automatically exhibit PBGs at frequencies where the refractive index is

zero:

for propagation along the stratiﬁcation direction, zero refractive index PBGs can be

5

completely absent, whereas for oblique propagation they may emerge for diﬀerent polarizations,

depending on which of the constitutive parameters µ(ω) or ǫ(ω) makes the refractive index zero.

This work was funded by the Plan Nacional I+D+i (grant TEC2005-07336-C02-02/MIC),

Ministerio de Educaci´on y Ciencia, Spain, and FEDER, and the Generalitat Valenciana, Spain

(grant Grupos03/227). RAD acknowledges ﬁnancial assistance provided by the Universidad de

Valencia (Programa de Estancias Temporales para Investigadores Invitados). MLMR acknowl-

edges partial support from Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas (CON-

ICET), Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA) and Agencia Nacional de Promoci´on Cient´ıﬁca y

Tecnol´ogica (ANPCYT-BID 802/OC-AR03-14099).

[1] P. Yeh, A. Yariv, and C. Hong, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 67, 423 (1977).

[2] D. Smith, J. Pendry, and M. Wiltshire, Science 305, 788 (2004).

[3] V. G. Veselago, Sov. Phys. Usp. 10, 509 (1968).

[4] J. Gerardin and A. Lakhtakia, Microwave Opt. Technol. Lett. 34, 409 (2002).

[5] J. Li, L. Zhou, C. T. Chan, and P. Sheng, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 083901 (2003).

[6] H. Jiang, H. Chen, H. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Zi, and S. Zhu Phys. Rev. E 69, 066607 (2004).

[7] I. Shadrivov, A. Sukhorukov, and Y. Kivshar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 193903 (2005).

[8] N. Garcia , E. Ponizovskaya, and J. Xiao, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 1120 (2002).

[9] B. Schwartz and R. Piestun, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 2448 (2003).

FIG. 1: Band structure for TE and TM polarizations and diﬀerent angles of incidence corresponding

to a periodic stack with air layers (µ1 = ǫ1 = 1, d1 = 12 mm) and MM layers (µ2 and ǫ2 given by

eq. 3, d2 = 6 mm). The left column shows the frequency behavior of the constitutive parameters

corresponding to layer 2.

FIG. 2: Half of the trace of the unit cell translation matrix, ξ, as given by eq. 1, for the structure

considered in Fig. 1, θ = 0◦, 30◦, and 60◦. The left column corresponds to TE polarization, whereas

the right column corresponds to TM polarization.

8

FIG. 3: Projected band structure for the MM multilayer considered in Fig. 1.

FIG. 4: (color online) TE and TM transmittance through 16 unit cells corresponding to the band

structure in Fig. 3 for θ = 45◦ (solid line), the same structure but the lattice constant scaled by 2/3

(dashed line), and the same structure but the lattice constant scaled by 4/3 (dotted line).

9

FIG. 5: (color online) TE and TM transmittance through 16 unit cells corresponding to the perfectly

periodic multilayer considered in Fig. 3 for θ = 45◦ (solid line), to a similar structure with thickness

ﬂuctuation of ±3 mm (dashed line), and thickness ﬂuctuation of ±6 mm (dotted line), averaged over

24 samples.

10

