6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Hyperlens: Far-ﬁeld imaging beyond the
diﬀraction limit

Zubin Jacob, Leonid V. Alekseyev and Evgenii Narimanov
Department of Electrical Engineering,
Princeton University.

Abstract

We propose an approach to far-ﬁeld optical imaging beyond the diﬀrac-
tion limit. The proposed system allows image magniﬁcation, is robust
with respect to material losses and can be fabricated by adapting existing
metamaterial technologies in a cylindrical geometry.

1 Introduction

Resolution of conventional optics is generally constrained by the diﬀraction
limit, which prevents imaging of subwavelength features. Such ﬁne details are
encoded in rapid spatial variations of electromagnetic ﬁelds at the object’s sur-
face. However, these ﬁelds decay exponentially with distance and are thus only
detectable in the near ﬁeld [Fig. 1(a)]. Outside the near ﬁeld, the loss of high
spatial frequency information carried by the decaying evanescent waves pre-
cludes reconstructing the image of an object with resolution better than λ/2.

Subwavelength optical imaging in the near ﬁeld can be performed via near
ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy, whereby the exponentially decaying evanes-
cent waves are detected by a scanning probe [1]. While successful in resolving
subwavelength structures, this serial technique suﬀers from several drawbacks,
including low throughput, the necessity for substantial post-processing of the
scanning probe data, and inability to simultaneously observe diﬀerent parts of
the imaged object. It is highly desirable for many applications (e.g. biological
microscopy) to use a system which would produce a direct optical far ﬁeld image
that includes subwavelength features. It is for this reason that the recently pro-
posed “superlens” [2] – a device capable of subwavelength resolution that relies
on materials with negative index of refraction [3, 4, 5] received much attention.
The originally proposed superlens would not only focus the propagating
waves, but would also amplify the evanescent waves in such a way that both
the propagating and evanescent ﬁelds would contribute to an image in the far
ﬁeld, resulting in resolution far below the diﬀraction limit [Fig. 1(b)]. How-
ever, subsequent studies demonstrated that due to the resonant nature of the
enhancement of evanescent waves the subwavelength resolving power of most

1

Figure 1: (a) A conventional imaging system transforms propagating waves,
but does not operate on the decaying evanescent waves; these waves can only be
detected in the near ﬁeld. (b) “Superlens” ampliﬁes the evanescent waves but
does not change their decaying character. (c) An ideal device would convert
evanescent waves to propagating waves for ease of detection and processing;
these waves should not mix with the propagating waves emanating from the
object.

superlens implementations is severely curtailed by material losses [6, 7, 8] or
the characteristic patterning of the negative index systems [9]. Furthermore,
although a superlens ampliﬁes evanescent modes and thus in principle enables
their detection, the evanescent waves cannot be processed or brought to focus
by conventional optics.

An ideal imaging device would avoid this problem: it would not only capture
evanescent ﬁelds to retrieve subwavelength information, but would also allow for
their processing with standard optical components. This could be accomplished
by transferring the information carried by evanescent ﬁelds into a portion of the
propagating spectrum [Fig. 1(c)]. Following the conversion, these propagating
waves would be detected and processed in the far ﬁeld by methods similar to
those of conventional imaging.

Here we propose a device capable of forming a magniﬁed optical image of
a subwavelength object in the far ﬁeld. This device relies on recently proposed
strongly anisotropic metamaterials that feature opposite signs of the two permit-
tivity tensor components, ǫk and ǫ⊥ [10, 11, 12]. Such metamaterials have been
theoretically shown to support propagating waves with very large wavenum-
bers [10, 13] (in ordinary dielectrics, such high-k modes undergo evanescent
decay). This unusual property arises from the hyperbolic functional form of the
dispersion relation for such metamaterials, and is the key feature enabling sub-
wavelength resolution of our proposed device. It is for this reason that we call
our imaging device the hyperlens.

The hyperlens utilizes cylindrical geometry to magnify the subwavelength
features of imaged objects so that these features are above the diﬀraction limit
at the hyperlens output. Thus, the output of the hyperlens consists entirely
of propagating waves, which can be processed by conventional optics. Further-
more, our simulations show that material losses do not appreciably degrade the
performance of the proposed device due to its non-resonant nature.

2

Figure 2: (a) Scattering of an incident plane wave by a target (yellow object) can
be represented as scattering of various angular momentum modes (the regions
of high intensity are shown in black and low intensity in white). Higher order
modes are exponentially small at the center (b). This results from an upper
bound on values of kθ and the formation of the caustic shown in red in (c).

2 Angular Momentum States as

Information Channels

Conventional lenses image objects by applying an appropriate phase transfor-
mation to the propagating waves, bringing them to focus at a certain distance
beyond the lens. However, a conventional lens does not operate on the evanes-
cent waves emanating from the object. As such, the evanescent ﬁelds are lost.
This apparent loss of information restricts a regular lens from reconstructing the
image of an object with a resolution better than λ/2. Converting the evanes-
cent waves to propagating waves without mixing is the key to extracting the
subwavelength information in the far ﬁeld.

In traditional discussions of imaging, waves scattered by the object are ex-
amined in a monochromatic plane wave basis with a wide spectrum of spatial
frequencies. The choice of basis, however, is dictated by the symmetry of the
object under consideration and/or by convenience. Mathematically, the prob-
lem can be equivalently treated in a basis of cylindrical waves. In particular,
any plane wave illuminating an object can be expanded in a basis of cylindrical
waves as

exp(ikx) =

imJm(kr) exp(imφ),

(1)

where Jm(kr) denotes the Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind and m is the an-

m=∞

X
m=−∞

3

gular momentum mode number of the cylindrical wave [this decomposition is
illustrated schematically in Fig. 2(a)]. In this representation, reconstructing an
image is equivalent to retrieving the scattering amplitudes and phase shifts of
the various constituent angular momentum modes. The resolution limit in the
cylindrical wave basis can be restated as the limit to the number of retrieved
angular momentum modes with appreciable amplitude or phase change after
scattering from the object.

We may think of the scattered angular momentum modes as distinct infor-
mation channels through which the information about the object at the origin is
conveyed to the far ﬁeld. However, even though the number of these channels is
inﬁnite [m is unbounded in expansion (1)], very little information is carried over
the high-m channels. As evidenced by Fig. 2(b), which shows the exact radial
proﬁle of the electric ﬁeld for m=1 and m=14, for high values of m the ﬁeld
exponentially decays at the origin. This suggests that the interaction between a
high-m mode and an object placed at the origin is exponentially small, i.e. the
scattering of such modes from the object is negligible. Classically, this corre-
sponds to the parts of an illuminating beam that have a high ‘impact parameter’
and therefore miss the scatterer.

Exponential decay of high-m modes at the center can also be seen as a result

of conservation of angular momentum,

where m is the angular momentum mode number, kθ is the tangential compo-
nent of the wave vector and r is the distance from the center. Conservation law
(2) implies that the tangential component of the wave vector increases towards
1/r. On the other hand, the dispersion relation in an
the center, i.e. kθ ∝
isotropic medium such as vacuum constrains the allowed radial and tangential
components of the wave vector to lie on a circle [Fig. 3(a)]:

m = kθr,

2
r + k
k

2
θ = ǫ

ω2
c2 .

(2)

(3)

Thus, as the tangential component of the wave vector increases towards the cen-
ter there comes a point when the radial component of the wave vector vanishes.
This classical turning point – the boundary at which the incoming wave turns
back – corresponds to the caustic [Fig. 2(c)]. Inside the caustic, the angular
momentum states become evanescent. Using m = kθr in the dispersion rela-
mλ. Thus,
tion (3) to ﬁnd when kr = 0 yields the radius of the caustic, Rc ∝
the caustic radius increases with angular momentum and the circumference of
the caustic corresponds exactly to m wavelengths – i.e. the distance between
each of the m nodes in an angular momentum mode m is λ at a distance Rc
from the center.

4

Figure 3: Dispersion relation for isotropic medium (a) and for a material with
ǫr < 0, ǫθ > 0 (b). Note that for a ﬁxed frequency, the wave vector k can take
on arbitrarily large values (within the eﬀective medium approximation).

3 Angular Momentum States in

Strongly Anisotropic Media and the
Hyperlens

The existence of the caustic, and hence the exponential decay of the ﬁeld for
r < Rc, is a consequence of the upper bound on kθ dictated by the functional
form of dispersion relation (3). This functional form, however, becomes diﬀerent
for anisotropic materials due to the dependence of dielectric response on wave
propagation direction.

In the case of uniaxial anisotropy, dielectric permittivity is characterized by
two values: ǫk along the optical axis of the crystal, and ǫ⊥ transverse to the op-
tical axis. Propagating modes, in turn, can be decomposed into two polarization
states: the ordinary (TE) and extraordinary (TM) waves. For ordinary (TE)
waves, the electric ﬁeld vector is transverse to the optical axis and produces the
same dielectric response (given by ǫ⊥) independent of wave propagation direc-
tion. However, for the extraordinary (TM) waves, the electric ﬁeld vector has
components both along and transverse to the optical axis. Accordingly, both
ǫk and ǫ⊥ play a role in the dielectric response and in the dispersion relation,
given by

k2
⊥
ǫk

k2
k
ǫ⊥

+

=

ω2
c2 ,

(4)

where k⊥ and kk refer to wave vector components normal or parallel to the
optical axis. Evidently, the allowed k values for the TM waves describe an
ellipse.

In the case of strong anisotropy where ǫ⊥ and ǫk are of opposite signs, the
dispersion relation (4) becomes hyperbolic [Fig. 3(b)]. Materials with such
anisotropy (sometimes referred to as indeﬁnite media [14]) enable photonic
structures with unusual features, including adiabatic wavelength compression

5

Figure 4: (a) High angular momentum states in an isotropic dielectric cylinder
(b) High angular momentum states in a cylinder made of ǫθ > 0, ǫr < 0 meta-
material (in the eﬀective medium approximation); note that the ﬁeld penetrates
to the center.

and highly conﬁned guided modes with very large cutoﬀ [10, 13]. These phe-
nomena arise due to unbounded values of wave vector k at a ﬁnite frequency,
allowed by the hyperbolic dispersion relation.

We consider now extraordinary waves (TM modes) in a bulk medium with
strong cylindrical anisotropy where dielectric permittivities have diﬀerent signs
in the tangential and radial directions (ǫθ > 0, ǫr < 0). The hyperbolic disper-
sion relation

k2
θ
ǫr|
|
allows for very high values of k, limited only by the material scale of the medium.
As the tangential component of the wave vector increases towards the center,
the radial component also increases; Eq. 5 can be satisﬁed for any radius and
any value of m. Thus, as long as the eﬀective medium description is valid, there
is no caustic, and the ﬁeld of high angular momentum states has appreciable
magnitude close to the center.

k2
r
ǫθ −

ω2
c2

(5)

=

The cylindrical TM mode solution for the (ǫθ > 0, ǫr < 0) anisotropy above

is given by

Bz ∝

Jm√ǫr/ǫθ (cid:16)

√ǫθ(cid:17) exp(imφ).

ω
c
This mode is plotted in Fig. 4(b). Note that the cylindrical anisotropy causes a
high angular momentum state to penetrate toward the center – in contrast to
the behavior of high-m modes in regular dielectrics [see Fig. 4(a)].
We now consider a hollow core cylinder of inner radius Rinner ∼

λ and outer
radius Router, made of a cylindrically anisotropic homogeneous medium. The
Router are cap-
high angular momentum states with radius of the caustic Rc ≤
tured by the device and guided towards the core. In this case, cylindrical sym-
metry implies that the distance between the ﬁeld nodes at the core is less than

(6)

6

the vacuum wavelength (see Fig. 4). Therefore, such high angular momentum
states can act as a subwavelength probe for an object placed inside the core.
Furthermore, since in the medium under consideration these states are prop-
agating waves, they can carry information about the detailed structure of the
object to the far ﬁeld. Our proposed device, thus, enables extra information
channels for retrieving the object’s subwavelength structure. In the absence of
the device, the high angular momentum modes representing these channels do
not reach the core and as such carry no information about the object.

The resolution of our device (which we refer to as the hyperlens) is deter-

mined by the eﬀective wavelength at the core and is given by

4 Achieving the Cylindrical Anisotropy: Meta-

cylinder Realizations

Cylindrical anisotropy is known in the mechanical properties of tree bark [15],
but there exist no natural materials with the desired cylindrical anisotropy in
the dielectric response. However, the required anisotropy can be attained using
metamaterials, e.g. a hollow core cylinder consisting of ‘slices’ of metal and
dielectric or alternating concentric layers of metal and dielectric (Fig. 5). The
layer thickness h in each of these structures is much less than the wavelength λ
and when h
r we can treat this ﬁnely structured material as an eﬀective
medium with

≪

≤

λ

∆

∝

Rinner
Router

λ.

ǫθ =

ǫr =

ǫm + ǫd
2
2ǫmǫd
ǫm + ǫd

,

(7)

(8)

(9)

where ǫm and ǫd denote the dielectric permittivities of the metal and dielectric
layers respectively. A low loss cylindrically anisotropic material can also be
achieved by metallic inclusions in a hollow core dielectric cylinder.

As described in the previous section, the core of the hyperlens has access
to high angular momentum states, which are the far-ﬁeld subwavelength infor-
mation channels. The eﬀective wavelength near the core is much less than the
free space wavelength. Thus, an object placed inside this hollow core near the
periphery will form an image just outside the cylinder with resolution better
than λ/2.

It should be noted that the polar dielectric permittivities are ill deﬁned at the
center and any practical realization of cylindrical anisotropy, such as metamate-
rial structures, can only closely approximate the desired dielectric permittivities
away from the center (when r
λ). Furthermore, the eﬀective medium equa-
tions are not valid close to the center and thus singularities exhibited by Eq. 6
as r
λ,
however, as we shall see in the following section, the eﬀective medium descrip-
tion is adequate.

0 are not present in any physical system with Rinner

λ. For Rinner

→

≥

∼

≥

7

Figure 5: Possible realizations of metacylinders. Concentric metallic layers
alternate with dielectric layers (a) or radially symmetric “slices” alternate in
composition between metallic and dielectric (b) to produce (ǫθ > 0, ǫr < 0)
anisotropy. This results in a hyperbolic dispersion relation necessary for pene-
tration of the ﬁeld close to the center.

5 Numerical Simulations

As follows from the preceding discussion, close to the core one cannot rely on
the eﬀective medium approximation. Therefore we adopt a numerical approach
of solving Maxwell’s equations in a hollow core cylinder consisting of alternating
layers of metal and dielectric [Fig. 6(a)].

As expected from the theoretical analysis in Section 3, the numerical simu-
lations show that high angular momentum states do indeed penetrate close to
the core [Fig. 6(b)]. Also note that this penetrating nature is in sharp contrast
to the peripheral behavior of a high angular momentum state with the same
mode number in a uniform dielectric hollow core cylinder [Fig. 6(c) and (d)].

To study the imaging characteristics of our device we consider two sources
kept inside the core of the hyperlens [Fig. 7(a)], separated by a distance below
the diﬀraction limit. The corresponding intensity pattern is shown in Fig. 7(b)
in false color. Note that a conventional optical system cannot resolve such a
conﬁguration of sources. The simulation solves for the actual electromagnetic
ﬁeld in each layer taking into account the losses in the metal. The highly
directional nature of the beams from two sources placed a distance λ/3 apart
allows for the resolution at the outer surface of the hyperlens. Furthermore,
the separation between the two output beams at the boundary of the device
is 7 times the distance between the sources and is bigger than the diﬀraction
limit, thereby allowing for subsequent processing by conventional optics. This
magniﬁcation corresponds to the ratio of the outer and inner radii, and is a
consequence of cylindrical symmetry, together with the directional nature of
the beams.

To further improve the performance of the proposed system, this hyperlens
(which is essentially an evanescent wave to propagating wave converter) can
be combined with an evanescent wave enhancer [2, 16] (inner core coating of

8

(a) Top view of the hyperlens made of 50 alternating layers of
Figure 6:
metal(dark regions) with ǫm =
2 and dielectric (grey regions) with ǫd = 5
.The outer radius is 2.2µm and the inner radius is 250nm. (b) Calculated light
intensity for m=20 angular momentum state in false color representation where
red denotes high intensity and blue corresponds to low intensity. Note the pen-
etrating nature due to the achieved cylindrical anisotropy. (c) A hollow core
cylinder of the same geometry made from a uniform dielectric ǫuniform = 1.5
(average of ǫm and ǫd) (d) Corresponding intensity for m=20 mode

−

9

Figure 7: (a) Schematics of imaging by the hyperlens. Two point sources sepa-
rated by λ/3 are placed within the hollow core of the hyperlens consisting of 160
1 + 0.01i) and dielectric (ǫ = 1.1) each 10 nm
alternating layers of metal (ǫ =
thick (the inner layer of the device is dielectric). The radius of the hollow core is
Rinner=250 nm, the outer radius Router=1840 nm, the operating wavelength is
300 nm and the distance between the sources is 100 nm. (b) False color plot of
intensity in the region bounded by the rectangle showing the highly directional
nature of the beams from the two point sources. The boundary is shown in
black where the separation between the beams is much greater than λ due to
magniﬁcation.

−

Figure 8: Demonstration of subwavelength resolution in the composite hyperlens
containing two sources placed a distance λ/4.5 apart inside the core. (a): Field
at the source. (b): Field outside the hyperlens.

10

≈

≈ −

1 ) to yield higher resolution in the far ﬁeld. We illustrate this by
Re[ǫ]
simulating two sources placed at a distance λ/4.5 apart (λ = 365 nm) inside
a hyperlens made of 160 alternating layers of silver (ǫ =
2.4012 + 0.2488i
[16]) and dielectric (ǫ
2.7), each 10 nm thick. The intensity distribution at
the source is shown in Fig. 8(a), whereas the intensity distribution just out-
side the hyperlens is shown in Fig. 8(b). The two sources are clearly resolved,
even though the distance between them is clearly below the diﬀraction limit. It
should be noted that realistic losses do not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the sub-diﬀraction
resolution capabilities of the hyperlens. Furthermore, due to the optical mag-
niﬁcation in the hyperlens (by a factor of 5 in the simulation of Fig. 8), even
for the subwavelength object, the scale of the image can be substantially larger
than the wavelength – thus allowing for further optical processing (e.g. further
magniﬁcation) of the image by conventional optics.

−

6 Conclusion

We have demonstrated a system that projects an image onto the far ﬁeld with
resolution beyond the diﬀraction limit. The proposed hyperlens can be realized
by adapting existing planar metamaterial technologies to a cylindrical geometry.
Our system is capable of magniﬁcation, and since the output consists of prop-
agating waves, the optical image can be further manipulated by conventional
optics. Furthermore, due to the non-resonant nature of our device, it is not
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by material losses.

7 Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation grants DMR-
0134736 and ECS-0400615, and by Princeton Institute for the Science and Tech-
nology of Materials (PRISM). We would like to thank Prof. X. Zhang for helpful
discussions.

References

[1] B. Hecht, B. Sick, U. P. Wild, V. Deckert, R. Zenobi, O. J. F. Martin and
D. W. Pohl, “Scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy with aperture probes:
Fundamentals and applications,” J. Chem. Phys. 112, 7761 (2000).

[2] J. B. Pendry, “Negative refraction makes a perfect lens,” Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 3966-3969 (2000).

[3] V. G. Veselago, “The electrodynamics of substances with simultaneously
negative values of permittivity and permeability,” Sov. Phys. Usp. 10, 509
(1968).

11

[4] R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz,“Experimental veriﬁcation of a

negative index of refraction,” Science 292, 77-79 (2001).

[5] V. M. Shalaev, W. Cai, U. K. Chettiar, H.-K. Yuan, A. K. Sarychev, V.
P. Drachev, and A. V. Kildishev, “Negative index of refraction in optical
metamaterials,” Opt. Lett. 30, 3356-3358 (2005),

[6] V. A. Podolskiy and E. E. Narimanov, “Near-sighted superlens,” Opt. Lett.

30, 75-77 (2005),

[7] R. Merlin, “Analytical solution of the almost-perfect-lens problem,” Appl.

Phys. Lett. 84, 1290-1292 (2004).

[8] K. J. Webb, M. Yang, D. W. Ward, and K. A. Nelson, “Metrics for negative-

refractive-index material,” Phys. Rev. E 70, 035602(R) (2004).

[9] C. Luo, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, and J. B. Pendry, “All-angle
negative refraction without negative eﬀective index,” Phys. Rev. B 65,
201104-1-201104-4 (2002).

[10] V. A. Podolskiy, and E. E. Narimanov, “Strongly anisotropic waveguide as
a nonmagnetic left-handed system,” Phys. Rev. B 71, 201101 (2005).

[11] V. A. Podolskiy, L. Alekseyev, and E. E. Narimanov, “Strongly anisotropic
media: the THz perspectives of left-handed materials”, J. Mod. Opt. 52(16)
2343 (2005).

[12] R. Wangberg, J. Elser, E. E. Narimanov, and V. A. Podolskiy, “Non-
magnetic nano-composites for optical and infrared negative refraction index
media,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 23, 498 (2006).

[13] A. A. Govyadinov and V. A. Podolskiy, “Meta-material photonic funnels for
sub-diﬀraction light compression and propagation,” Phys. Rev. B 73(15),
155108 (2006).

[14] D. R. Smith and D. Schurig, “ Electromagnetic Wave Propagation in Media
with Indeﬁnite Permittivity and Permeability Tensors,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,
077405 (2003).

[15] T. C. T. Ting, “New solutions to pressuring, shearing, torsion, and exten-
sion of a cylindrically anisotropic elastic circular tube or bar,” Proc. Roy.
Soc. London, A455, 3527-3542 (1999).

[16] N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun and X. Zhang, “Sub-diﬀraction-limited optical

imaging with a sliver superlens,” Science 308, 534-537 (2005).

12

