6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Light propagation in nanorod arrays

A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko
Solid State Electronics, Department of Science and Technology,
Link¨oping University 601 74, Norrk¨oping, Sweden
(Dated: February 9, 2008)

We study propagation of TM- and TE-polarized light in two-dimensional arrays of silver nanorods
of various diameters in a gelatin background. We calculate the transmittance, reﬂectance and
absorption of arranged and disordered nanorod arrays and compare the exact numerical results with
the predictions of the Maxwell-Garnett eﬀective-medium theory. We show that interactions between
nanorods, multipole contributions and formations of photonic gaps aﬀect strongly the transmittance
spectra that cannot be accounted for in terms of the conventional eﬀective-medium theory. We also
demonstrate and explain the degradation of the transmittance in arrays with randomly located rods
as well as weak inﬂuence of their ﬂuctuating diameter. For TM modes we outline the importance of
skin-eﬀect, which causes the full reﬂection of the incoming light. We then illustrate the possibility
of using periodic arrays of nanorods as high-quality polarizers.

PACS numbers: 71.45.Gm, 78.67.Bf, 42.25.Dd, 42.70.Qs, 78.70.-g

I.

INTRODUCTION

Resonance properties of nanoparticles have been ob-
served for centuries thanks to beautiful colors of gold-
and silver-patterned stained glasses. Over the last decade
nanopatterned materials have attracted even increased
attention due to their unique electronic and optical char-
acteristics. Novadays, they are considered as promis-
ing candidates for wide variety of applications in sub-
wavelength waveguiding1,2, enhanced Raman scattering
spectroscopy3, non-linear optics4, photovoltaics5 and bi-
ological/medical sensing6 and many others.

A characteristic size of metallic nanoparticles d is
about an order of magnitude smaller than the wavelength
of incoming light λ, which can excite collective oscilla-
tions of electron density inside the particle, - plasmons.
The plasmon excitation results in an enhanced extinc-
tion (extinction = absorption + scattering) as well as an
increased intensity of the electromagnetic ﬁeld near the
particle7.

The important issue that makes nanoparticles so at-
tractive for sensing applications is the eﬀect of the geom-
etry and size of nanoparticles and surrounding environ-
ment on a position of the plasmonic resonance7,8,9,10. For
example, the presence of antibodies in cells aﬀected by
cancer modiﬁes the environment for the gold nanopar-
ticles placed on a tissue and results in a shift of ex-
tinction peak that can be easily imaged by conventional
microscopy11.

Recently it has also been demonstrated12,13 that em-
bedding metallic nanoparticles into a polymeric matrix
provides the larger contrast in the eﬀective refractive in-
dex of the blend material, being much lower or higher
than that of a pure polymer. Developing such the mate-
rials can facilitate creating high-contrast-index photonic
polymer crystals.

tion) arises from the evanescent dipole ﬁeld from each
particle, which excites a plasmon on its neighbour. This
excitation travels along the chain, making the electron
density within all the particles oscillate in resonance.

In the present paper we will focus on light propaga-
tion in large arrays of inﬁnitely long nanorods. Proto-
types of such the arrays have been recently fabricated
experimentally16,17. These arrays represent randomly
oriented or aligned long rods (or spikes) of a material
(dielectric or metal), several tens of nanometers in diam-
eter. Despite of signiﬁcant progress in nanofabrication
technologies, to our knowledge, however, the theoretical
description of light propagation in nanorod arrays is still
missing.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we out-
line transmittance properties of nanorod arrays within
the framework of the Maxwell-Garnett eﬀective-medium
theory. In Section III we present numerical modeling of
light propagation through periodic arrays of nanorods
and compare the results with the predictions of the
Maxwell-Garnett theory. In Section IV the eﬀect of var-
ious types of disorder is studied.

II. EFFECTIVE MEDIUM THEORY

We consider a gelatin matrix with an embedded two-
dimensional array of silver nanorods. The eﬀective dielec-
tric function εef f (ω) of that composite can be estimated
from developed for more than 100 years ago Maxwell-
Garnett theory7:

εef f (ω) − εmat
εef f (ω) + 2εmat

= f

εrod(ω) − εmat
εrod(ω) + 2εmat

,

(1)

Nanoparticles assembled in nanochains can also be ap-
plied as subwavelength waveguides2,15.
In the case of
closely placed particles the coupling (and light propaga-

where f = S2/S1 is the ﬁlling factor of the nanorods
embedded into the matrix, S1 is the active area of the
matrix and S2 is the total cross-section area of the

nanorods. The dielectric function of the gelatin ma-
trix is εmat = 2.25. The dielectric function εrod(ω) of
the nanorods is taken from the SOPRA database18 for
the bulk material. The Maxwell-Garnet theory is valid
for relatively small nanoparticles (nanorods) (up to sev-
eral tens of nanometers) at low concentrations (less then
30%). The dielectric function (here and hereafter all the
spectra are given in respect of light wavelength in vacuum
λ0) of the Ag(10%)-gelatin blend is presented in Fig. 1
(a).

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) Dielectric function of a blend of sil-
ver nanorods (nanoparticles) with the concentration 10% em-
bedded into a gelatin background. Transmittance, reﬂectance
and absorprtion of the TE (b) and TM (c) modes propagating
through a 0.7µm thick layer of Ag(10%)-gelatin blend. Inset
in (b) outlines the system under study.

7.

The dielectric function in Fig. 1 (a) characterizes the
blend as a higly-dispersive lossy material with an ab-
sorption peak centered around 414 nm. According to
the Mie’s theory this peak corresponds the plasmon reso-
nance of a single Ag spherical nanoparticle in gelatin, the
position of the peak obeys the well-known relation εrod =
−2εmat
In order to study light propagation through
the layer of the blend we consider a 2D “sandwich-like”
structure consisting of semi-inﬁnite gelatin “waveguides”
connected to the blend region [see inset to Fig. 1 (b)].
The structure is assumed to be inﬁnite in z-direction,
thus the solution to the Maxwell’s equations decouples
into TE (vector of a magnetic ﬁeld is parallel to z) and
TM (vector of an electric ﬁeld is parallel to z). The trans-
mission, reﬂection and absorption for both polarizations
are given in Fig. 1 (b) and (c) respectively.

It is easy to see that for both TE and TM polarizations
there exists a gap (or a stop-band) in the transmission
caused by the enhanced absorption near the extinction

2

resonance peak. However, the reﬂectance and absorption
within the stop-band possess distinct behavior for diﬀer-
ent polarizations. When the real part of the dielectric
constant of the blend becomes negative (400 < λ0 < 425
nm) the reﬂectance of the TE mode increases due to
increased contrast against the dielectric function of the
gelatin matrix (which causes a dip in the absorption).
At the same time, for TM-polarized light the reﬂectance
sharply increases up to 1 because of the metallic char-
acter of the blend in this region and enhanced skin ef-
fect. For both polarizations Bragg’s reﬂections from the
boundaries of the blend region, manifested themselves as
minima and maxima, are clearly seen for λ0 > 500 nm.

small

Despite its adequacy for

isolated circular
nanoparticles, a simple Maxwell-Garnet theory, how-
ever, has certain limitations. Namely, it does not ac-
count for the shape and distribution of metal clusters in
the dielectric medium, neglecting important polarization
properties of both single non-circular particles and their
arrangements19,20. In order to incorporate these features
and study transmission characteristics of periodic and
disordered nanorod arrays we apply the recursive Green’s
function technique21.

III. PERIODIC NANOROD ARRAYS

We now focus on 2D arrays of inﬁnitely long silver
nanorods arranged as a square lattice in a gelatin back-
ground. Keeping the ﬁlling factor of Ag, f = 10%,
constant, we consider two cases, (a) a ﬁnite-size lattice
with thickness a = 0.7µm of nanorods with the diameter
d = 10nm, and (b) the lattice of the same width assem-
bled from nanorods of 60 nm in diameter, see Fig. 2.
Lattice constants are 29 and 175 nm for cases (a) and
(b) respectively.

FIG. 2: (Color online) Arrays of silver nanorods with diameter
(a) 10 nm, and (b) 60 nm embedded in an inﬁnite gelatin
background. For both cases the thickness of the layer a =
0.7µm and the ﬁlling factor f =10%.

Such the choice of nanorod sizes is motivated by the
essential diﬀerence in polarization properties of small and

large nanoparticles10. If the nanoparticle is small enough
(d << λ0), according to the Mie’s theory, only the dipole
plasmonic oscillations contribute to the extinction spec-
tra, whereas for larger particles higher-order resonances
contribute to the spectra as well10. Using the recursive
Green’s function technique we perform numerical simu-
lations for both TE and TM polarizations of light falling
normally from the left to the boundary between gelatin
and the blend.

A. TE-modes

When a nanosized metallic nanoparticle is illuminated
by light, the electric components of an electromagnetic
ﬁeld excite collective oscillations of electronic plasma in-
side the particles – plasmons.
If the particles are ar-
ranged into chains, these plasmonic oscillations possess
a resonant character that facilitates the propagation of
light along the chain. Such the chains have been inten-
sively studied in literature2 as promising candidates for
sub-wavelength wave-guiding.

Let us irradiate the array of inﬁnitely long nanorods
with TE-polarized light.
In this case Ex and Ey com-
ponents of the electromagnetic ﬁeld excite coherent plas-
monic oscillations on each nanorod. Figure 3 shows the
calculated transmittance, reﬂectance and absorption of a
TE mode propagating through the arrays of nanorods.

FIG. 3: (Color online) Transmittance, reﬂectance and ab-
sorption of a TE mode travelling through the square arrays
of nanorods with diameter (a) 10 nm and (b) 60 nm (see Fig.
2 for details).

Small nanorods. Let us ﬁrst concentrate on an array
of nanorods with the diameter 10 nm [Fig. 3 (a)]. In the
spectra one can clearly distinguish two regions, namely
the region of high absorption (λ0 < 600 nm), containing
a wide main absorption peak at 414 nm, two minor peaks
at 350 and 530 nm and the region of high transmittance
(λ0 > 600 nm). Now we will take a closer look at these
regions separately.

The position of the main extinction resonance agrees
well with that obtained from Eq. (1). However, in con-
trast to the Maxwell-Garnett theory, the spectrum con-
tains two minor peaks near 350 and 530 nm. In order to
explain them one needs to account the eﬀect of coupling

3

between several nanorods. For this sake we compare light
propagation through (a) a single isolated nanorod (diam-
eter 10 nm), (b) two coupled nanorods aligned parallel
to the light propagation direction, (c) those aligned per-
pendicularly, and (d) four coupled nanorods. These four
cases are presented in Fig. 4.

FIG. 4: (Color online) Transmittance, reﬂectance and absorp-
tion of a single (a), a pair of horizontally (b) and vertically (c)
aligned, and (d) four coupled nanorods for the TE-polarized
light. The inter-rod distances are taken 29 nm, equal the lat-
tice constant for the array (Fig. 2 (a)). The size of the com-
putational domain is also the same as that for the nanorod
arrays in Fig. 2.

For the case of a single isolated rod [Fig. 4 (a)] only one
peak near 410 nm emerges which is in a good agreement
with the analytical value of 414 nm. For the cases (b)
and (c) of twin coupled nanorods the additional peaks,
centered at 355 and 620 nm respectively, appear. Their
origin has been thoroughly studied in19 and clariﬁed in
terms of enhanced [case (b)] and weaken [case (c)] restor-
ing forces between the particles. However, for the sys-
tem of four particles (d) these forces partially compen-
sate each other, and the minor resonances move closer
towards the main peak.

Let us now focus on the wavelength region λ0 > 600
nm, where TE-polarized light propagates at high trans-
mittance. In order to understand this behavior, we com-
plement the transmission coeﬃcient with the band dia-
gram of the nanorod array. It should be mentioned that,
in general, a band diagram represents propagating Bloch
states (states with real eigenvalues). However, as the
metallic rods (or nanoparticles) are absorbing, all the
states in the blend will be decaying and eventually die
oﬀ at the inﬁnity. Yet all the Bloch eigenvalues in such
systems have imaginary components. In Fig. 5 (a) we
represent a band structure (real parts of eigenvalues) in

ΓX-direction for the states with the smallest imaginary
parts.

FIG. 5: Band diagrams of the nanorod arrays from Fig. 2 (a)
and (b) respectively. The dashed line outlines the light cone.

The dispersion curve in Fig. 5 (a) has a small bump
around 550 nm, which is caused by the minor extinction
resonance. The band is located very close to the light line
that results in a rather strong coupling between the in-
coming light and the plasmonic Bloch states of the blend
region. Such the strong coupling explains high transmit-
tance in the red wavelength region.

Large nanorods For nanorods with the diameter 60 nm,
the position of the main extinction peak agrees with that
one of the small particles. However, there is an essen-
tial diﬀerence in physics behind. When the diameter
of a nanoparticle increases, higher-order dipole oscilla-
tions now contribute the resulting extinction spectrum7.
It has been recently shown10 that the peak centered at
≈ 400 nm is due to the quadruple resonance of a nanorod,
whereas the dipole resonance is redshifted and overlaps
with the region of the enhanced reﬂectance (500 < λ0 <
700 nm). The indication in favor of this interpretation
is a narrower width of the stop-band in the transmission
(60 nm against 100 nm in case of small rods). This is
because the higher-order dipole interactions causing the
stop-band behaviour for the case of large nanorods are
generally weaker.

Now let us clarify the origin of the high-reﬂectance
region. The lattice constant for this structure is 175
nm. This is of the same order as the wavelength of
light, such that the structure eﬀectively represents a two-
dimensional photonic crystal. The plasmonic band in
Fig. 5 (b) extends from ωa/2πc = 0 to 0.4 (λ0 ≈ 660
nm) where it experiences a photonic bandgap that causes
the high reﬂectance of the structure. This bandgap over-
laps with the tail of the extinction peak near 500 nm (see
Fig. 3).

B. TM-modes

Let us now consider the TM-polarization of the in-
coming light. Figure 6 (a) shows the transmittance, re-
ﬂectance and absorption of the TM-polarized light for
the small nanorods. In contrast to the Maxwell-Garnett
picture (Fig. 1), almost for the whole wavelength range
under study light does not penetrate the region occupied
by nanorods and gets fully reﬂected back, resulting in

4

zero transmittance. This discrepancy can be explained
by the skin-eﬀect on the silver rods. At the same time,
the Maxwell-Garnett theory (1) fully disregards the im-
portant screening properties of the rods, simply averag-
ing the eﬀective dielectric constant over the structure. It
is also worth mentioning, that as we consider inﬁnitely
long nanorods, incoming TM-mode does not excite any
plasmons on the rods and thus there is no plasmonic con-
tribution in overall transmission.

FIG. 6: (Color online) (a) Transmission, reﬂection and ab-
sorption coeﬃcients of the TM-mode through a nanorod ar-
ray of d = 10 nm. Due to the skin-eﬀect light does not pen-
etrate the blend region. For λ0 < 328 nm the real part ε′ of
the dielectric function of silver (b) becomes positive and the
transmission coeﬃcient abruptly increases.

However, for very short wavelengths (λ0 . 328 nm)
the real part of the dielectric function of silver becomes
positive (see Fig. 6 (b)) and the blend behaves like a
lossy dielectric rather than a metal. This results in non-
zer transmission in this region.

The obtained results clearly show that resonant plas-
monic oscillations in periodic nanorod arrays represent
a dominating light propagation mechanism for the TE-
polarized light, whereas for the TM modes the nanorod
structure represents practically a perfect screen. This
features can be utilized in a nearly 100% eﬀective polar-
izer.

IV. DISORDERED NANOROD ARRAYS

As we have demonstrated in the preceding section,
TE-polarized incident light in oﬀ-resonance wavelength
region propagates through periodic arrays of small
nanorods at very high transmission. Now we introduce
some disorder in this array and consider two separate
cases, namely when nanorods are arranged in a square
lattice but have randomly varying diameter, and rods of
equal diameter, randomly distributed within the layer.
For both cases the ﬁlling factor f =10% is kept constant,
the distribution is taken uniform. Figures 7 (a, c) and

5

ter than reﬂects. The clustering and more complex inter-
actions of nanorods inﬂuence the region λ0 < 600 as well.
The main and minor absorption peaks for the structure
Fig. 7 (b) almost overlap, whereas for Fig. 7 (d) are still
well-separated.

We should specially mention that in order to incorpo-
rate the eﬀect of nanoparticle aggregates into Maxwell-
Garnett theory, several approaches were suggested7 (see
also references therein). In that case the eﬀective medium
dielectric function is derived by inserting the total aggre-
gate polarizabilities instead of that of a single isolated
particle into the Maxwell-Garnett theory.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have studied propagation of TE- and TM-polarized
light in two-dimensional arrays of silver nanorods in a
gelatin background. In order to calculate transmittance,
reﬂectance and absorption in arrays of ordered and dis-
ordered nanorods we applied the recursive Green’s func-
tion technique and compared the obtained numerical re-
sults with predictions of the Maxwell-Garnett eﬀective-
medium theory. We have demonstrated that this theory
describes adequately only the case of the TE-polarized
light propagating in ordered arrays of small (∼ 10 nm),
well-separated nanorods and only in the frequency inter-
val outside the main plasmonic resonance.

Our numerical calculations outline the importance of
geometrical factors such as the size of the rods and their
distribution. In particular, we have demonstrated, that
interaction between adjacent nanorods brings the signif-
icant contribution to the transmission spectra, which is
manifested as additional absorption peaks (that are miss-
ing in the eﬀective-medium approach). The Maxwell-
Garnett theory also disregards both the impacts of
higher-order dipole contributions and formation of pho-
tonic band gaps in the case of arrays of large nanorods.
We have also studied the eﬀect of disorder on the trans-
mittance of the nanorod arrays. We have introduced two
types of disorder, (a) ordered array with randomly vary-
ing nanorod diameters, and (b) a random distribution of
nanorods of the same size within the blend. The disor-
der in rod placement leads to a strong suppression of the
transmission (and the enhanced absorption) due to plas-
monic resonances related to the clustering of the rods.
We have demonstrated that clustering eﬀects are sensi-
tive to the actual geometry of the structure. In contrast,
the impact of randomly varying diameters of the rods is
much less profound.

Despite its partial adequacy for the TE-polarized light,
the Maxwell-Garnett eﬀective-medium theory is shown
to be invalid for the case of TM polarization. It simply
averages the eﬀective dielectric function inside the blend,
missing the important screening properties of the metal-
lic nanorods and characterizing the blend as a (partially)
transparent medium.
In contrast, the numerical mod-
elling shows the strong skin eﬀect that fully prohibits the

FIG. 7: (Color online) Transmission, reﬂection and absorp-
tion coeﬃcients of the TE-polarized light propagating through
disordered nanorod arrays. (a, c) Two diﬀerent conﬁgurations
of nanorods arranged in a square lattice, their d diameter ran-
domly varies from of 5 to 20 nm. (b, d) Nanorods with ﬁxed
d = 10 nm are randomly distributed within the layer. Insets
show the actual geometries of the structures.

(b, d) demonstrate the transmittance, reﬂectance and
absorbtion for both cases.

The transmission characteristics for the structure with
the random diameter of nanorods [Fig. 7 (a, c)] closely
resemble those for the array of ﬁxed-sized nanoparticles
[Fig. 3 (a)]. The main diﬀerence is that weaker dipole
interactions between adjacent particles of diﬀerent diam-
eter cause a minor narrowing of the stop-band (60 nm
versus 100 nm in the ideal case) and a slight degradation
of the minor extinction peak. It should be emphasized
that the transmission properties of arrays with diﬀerent
distributions of the nanorod diameter [Fig. 7 (a) and (c)]
are virtually the same.

For the case of the randomly distributed equal-sized
nanorods [Fig. 7 (b, d)] the situation changes. In con-
trast to the previous case of the ordered nanorod array
with random diameter, the absorption spectra in the re-
gion λ0 > 600 nm are extremely sensitive to the geometry
of the structure. It is interesting to note how clustering
of nanorods manifests itself. The overall absorption in
the region λ0 > 600 nm is much higher (and the trans-
mision is lower) in comparison to the periodic lattice, as
it consists of the averaged multiple absorbtion peaks of
closely situated, touching or overlapping nanorods. Since
the inter-rod distances are not constant any longer, each
single rod is now aﬀected by many dipole interactions of
diﬀerent strengths from neighboring rods. Reﬂectances,
however, are practically identical and not signiﬁcantly
higher than for the periodic case.
It can be explained
that due to its non-periodicity this structure absorbs bet-

propagation of the TM modes through the structure. The
region of high transmittance for the TE modes and the
strong skin eﬀect for the TM modes makes the nanorod
arrays promising candidates for high-quality polarizers.

nancial support from the Center for Organic Electronics
at Link¨oping university. Useful conversations with Nils-
Christer Persson are also appreciated.

6

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Olle Ingan¨as for stimulating
and fruitful discussions. We acknowledge a partial ﬁ-

1 S. A. Maier, M. L. Brongersma, P. G. Kik, and H. A.

13 G. P. Wang, C. Tan, Y. Yi, and H. Shan, J. Mod. Opt. 50,

Atwater, Phys. Rev. B 65, 193408 (2002).

2 R. Quidant, G. L´evˆeque, J.-C. Weeber, A. Dereux, C. Gi-

rard, and J. Weiner, Europhys. Lett. 66, 785 (2004).

3 G. Bachelier and A. Mlayah, Phys. Rev. B 69, 205408

(2004).

4 J. W. Haus, N. Kalyaniwalla, R. Inguva, and C. M. Bow-

den, J. Appl. Phys. 65, 1420 (1989).

5 M. Westphalen, U. Kreibig, J. Rostalski, H. L¨uth, and D.

Meissner, Sol. Energ. Mat. Sol. Cel. 61, 97, (2000).

6 A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol. 22, 47 (2004).
7 U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal

Clusters (Springer, Berlin, 1995).

8 N. G. Khlebtsov, L. A. Trachuk, and A. G. Melnikov, Opt.

Spectrosc. 98, 83 (2005).

9 K.-S. Lee and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B 109,

20331 (2005).

10 K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao, and G. C. Schatz,

2155 (2003).

14 J. R. Krenn, A. Dereux, J. C. Weeber, E. Bourillot, Y.
Lacroute, J. P. Goudonnet, G. Schider, W. Gotschy, A.
Leitner, F. R. Aussenegg, and C. Girard, Phys. Rev. Lett.
82, 2590 (1999).

15 S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel,
B. E. Koel, and A. A. G. Requicha, Nature Mater. 2, 229
(2003).

16 A. Dev, S. Kar, S. Chakrabarti, and S. Chaudhuri, Nan-

otechnology 17, 1533 (2006).

17 D. Losic, J. G. Shapter, J. G. Mitchell, and N. H. Voelcker,

Nanotechnology, 16, 2275 (2005).

18 URL: http://www.sopra-sa.com/more/database.asp
19 W. Rechberger, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn, B.
Lamplecht, and. F.R. Aussenegg Opt. Comm. 220, 137
(2003).

20 K. H. Fung, and C. T. Chan, unpublished (preprint

J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 668 (2003).

arxiv:physics/0605021) (2006).

11 I. H. El-Sayed, X. Huang, and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett.

21 A. I. Rahachou and I. V. Zozoulenko, Phys. Rev. B 72,

12 G. P. Wang, Y. Yi, and W. Lin, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21,

5, 829 (2005).

554 (2004).

155117 (2005).

