6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Control of lasing in fully chaotic open microcavities by tailoring the shape factor

W. Fang1, G. S. Solomon2, and H. Cao1
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208.
2 Solid-State Photonics Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305;
and Atomic Physics Division, NIST, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8423.

We demonstrate experimentally that lasing in a semiconductor microstadium can be optimized
by controlling its shape. Under spatially uniform optical pumping, the ﬁrst lasing mode in a GaAs
microstadium with large major-to-minor-axis ratio usually corresponds to a high-quality scar mode
consisting of several unstable periodic orbits. Interference of waves propagating along the constituent
orbits may minimize light leakage at particular major-to-minor-axis ratio. By making stadium of
the optimum shape, we are able to maximize the mode quality factor and align the mode frequency
to the peak of the gain spectrum, thus minimizing the lasing threshold. This work opens the door
to control chaotic microcavity lasers by tailoring the shape factor.

The Bunimovich’s stadium billiard is a well-known
model for classical and quantum chaos [1]. The ray me-
chanics in a stadium billiard exhibits “full chaos”, i.e.,
there are no stable periodic orbits. However, a dense set
of unstable periodic orbits (UPOs) are embedded in the
sea of chaotic orbits. Although the UPOs are found with
zero probability in the classical dynamics, in wave (quan-
tum) mechanics they manifest themselves in the eigen-
states of the system. There exist extra and unexpected
concentrations, the so-called scars, of eigenstate density
near UPOs [2]. Detailed studies have been carried out
on closed or almost closed stadium cavities. A dielectric
stadium, however, has its entire boundary open so that
refractive escape and tunneling escape of light could hap-
pen at any point on the boundary. When optical gain is
introduced to the stadium, light ampliﬁcation may com-
pensate the escape loss, leading to lasing action. In the
past few years, lasing was realized in both scar modes
and chaotic modes of semiconductor stadiums with cer-
tain major-to-minor-axis ratio [3, 4]. Highly directional
output of laser emission was predicted [5] and conﬁrmed
in polymer stadiums [6]. However, not only output di-
rectionality but also low lasing threshold is required for
many applications of microlasers.

In this letter, we demonstrate experimentally that low
lasing threshold can be obtained in a semiconductor mi-
crostadium by controlling its shape. Contrary to com-
mon expectation, modes of such a completely open fully
chaotic microcavity may have long lifetime. These spe-
cial modes are typically scar modes [7, 8]. When such a
mode consists of several UPOs, the interference of par-
tial waves propagating along the constituent orbits may
minimize light leakage at certain major-to-minor-axis ra-
tio [7]. Thus by tailoring the stadium shape, we are able
to achieve optimum light conﬁnement in a dielectric mi-
crostadium and thus a low lasing threshold.

The sample was grown on a GaAs substrate by molecu-
lar beam epitaxy. The layer structure consists of 500nm
AlGaAs and 200nm GaAs. In the middle of the GaAs
layer there is an InAs quantum well (QW) of 0.6nm. The
lower refractive index of AlGaAs layer leads to the forma-

tion of a slab waveguide in the top GaAs layer. Stadium-
shaped cylinders were fabricated by photolithography
and wet chemical etching. The major-to-minor-axis ratio
of the stadiums was varied over a wide range while the
stadium area remains nearly constant. The deformation
of the stadium is deﬁned as ǫ ≡ a/r, where 2a is the
length of the straight segments connecting the two half
circles of radius r.

To study their lasing properties, the stadium micro-
cavities were cooled to 10K in a cryostat, and optically
pumped by a mode-locked Ti-sapphire laser at 790nm.
The pump beam was focused by an objective lens onto a
single stadium. The emission was collected by the same
lens, and sent to a spectrometer. As the pump power
increased above threshold, certain peak corresponding to
cavity resonance showed drastical increasing of peak in-
tensity, accompanied with width narrowing. The thresh-
old behavior indicated lasing phenomena. Lasing was re-
alized in most stadiums with ǫ ranging from 0.4 to 2.2 and
area ∼ 70µm2. Figure 1(a) shows the emission spectra of
twelve stadiums slightly above their lasing thresholds so
that we mainly see the ﬁrst lasing mode. As ǫ increases,
the ﬁrst lasing mode jumps back and forth within the
gain spectrum of the InAs QW. It is not always located
near the peak of the gain spectrum. At some deforma-
tion, e.g. ǫ = 0.94, 1.9, the ﬁrst lasing mode is far from
the gain maximum at λ ∼ 857nm. This phenomenon is
not caused by lack of cavity modes near the maximum of
the gain spectrum. A few small and broad peaks in the
emission spectrum between 847nm and 857nm are due to
cavity resonances. These resonances experiences higher
gain than the lasing mode at λ ≈ 847nm. The only rea-
son they do not lase is their quality (Q) factors are low.
This result indicates the lasing modes, especially the ﬁrst
one, must be high-Q modes. However, when the lasing
mode is away from the maximum of the gain spectrum,
the relatively low optical gain at the lasing frequency re-
sults in high lasing threshold. This is conﬁrmed in Fig.
1(b), which shows the lasing threshold strongly depends
on the spectral distance between the ﬁrst lasing mode
and the maximum of the gain spectrum. Unlike many

2

FIG. 2: The dotted curve is the lasing spectrum from a GaAs
stadium with ǫ =1.51. A bandpass ﬁlter of 1nm bandwidth
selects the ﬁrst lasing mode at 856.95 nm (solid curve), and
the inset A is the corresponding near-ﬁeld image taken si-
multaneously. The dashed curve is the spectrum when the
bandpass ﬁlter is tuned away from cavity resonances, the cor-
responding near-ﬁeld image of ASE is shown in the inset B.
Top-view SEM image of the stadium is shown in the inset C.

straight segments. The clear diﬀerence between the near-
ﬁeld images of lasing mode and ASE not only conﬁrms
the bright spots in the former are from the laser emission,
but also reveals the escape routes for laser emission and
ASE are distinct.

To understand the experimental results, we simulated
lasing in GaAs microstadiums. The polarization mea-
surement of laser emission from the stadium side wall
conﬁrmed the lasing modes are transverse electric (TE)
polarized (the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the top surface of
the stadium). From the calculation of TE wave guided in
the GaAs layer, we obtained the eﬀective index of refrac-
tion nef f ≃ 3.3. The exact size and shape of the fabri-
cated stadiums were extracted from the scanning electron
microscope (SEM) images. Using the ﬁnite-diﬀerence
time-domain (FDTD) method, we solved the Maxwell’s
equations for electromagnetic (EM) ﬁeld inside and out-
side a two-dimensional (2D) stadium of refractive index
nef f together with the four-level rate equations for elec-
tronic populations in the InAs QW [11]. Light exiting
the stadium into the surrounding air was absorbed by
uniaxial perfectly matched layers. The external pump-
ing rate for electronic populations was assumed uniform
across the stadium, similar to the experimental situation.
We gradually increased the pumping rate until one mode
started lasing. Fourier transform of the EM ﬁeld gave
the frequency of the ﬁrst lasing mode. Figure 3(a) shows
the intensity distribution of the ﬁrst lasing mode at λ =
850.7 nm in the stadium with ǫ = 1.51 and area ≃ 70µm2.
The pumping rate is slight above the lasing threshold.
For comparison, we also calculated the high-Q modes in
the passive stadium (without optical gain). Details of
our numerical method can be found in Ref.[7]. By com-

FIG. 1: (a) Lasing spectra from twelve GaAs stadiums with
diﬀerent deformations. (b) Wavelength and lasing threshold
of the ﬁrst lasing mode as a function of ǫ.

deformed microcavities [9, 10], the lasing threshold in a
microstadium does not increase monotonically with the
deformation, e.g., the lasing thresholds in stadiums of ǫ
= 0.7 and 2.2 are nearly the same despite of their dra-
matically diﬀerent deformations.

To investigate individual lasing modes in microstadi-
ums, we used a narrow band pass ﬁlter to select one lasing
mode and took its near-ﬁeld image with a CCD camera.
Figure 2 shows the measurement result of a stadium with
ǫ = 1.51. The solid curve is the emission spectrum when
the narrow bandpass ﬁlter is tuned to the ﬁrst lasing
mode at λ = 856.95nm. The near-ﬁeld image exhibits
four bright spots on the curved part of stadium bound-
ary. We believe these four spots represent the positions
of major escape of laser light from the stadium. They
can be seen from the top because of optical scattering
at the boundary. However, the scattering inside the sta-
dium is so weak that the spatial intensity distribution of
lasing mode across the stadium could not be observed
from the top. By tuning the bandpass ﬁlter away from
cavity resonances, we took the near-ﬁeld image of am-
pliﬁed spontaneous emission (ASE) shown as the inset
B of Fig. 2. The virtually constant intensity along the
curved boundary suggests the ASE leaves the stadium
mainly through the boundary of half circles instead of the

3

FIG. 3: (a) Calculated intensity distribution of the ﬁrst lasing
mode in a stadium with ǫ = 1.51 (left), and the correspond-
ing mode in the passive stadium without gain (right). Both
modes have the wavelength 850.7 nm. (b) Husimi phase space
projection of the mode in (a). The horizontal coordinate s
represents the length along the stadium boundary from the
rightmost point, normalized by the stadium perimeter. The
vertical axis corresponds to sinχ, where χ is the incident an-
gle on the stadium boundary. The squares, dots and crosses
mark the positions of three diﬀerent types of UPOs shown in
the inset. (c) Q-factor of the mode in (a) as a function of ǫ.

paring the lasing mode with the resonant modes of the
passive cavity, we ﬁnd the ﬁrst lasing mode corresponds
to the highest-quality mode within the gain spectrum.
As shown in Fig. 3(a), the spatial proﬁle of the ﬁrst las-
ing mode is almost identical to the mode at λ = 850.7nm
in the passive stadium. This result illustrates the non-
linear eﬀect on the lasing mode is insigniﬁcant when the
pumping rate is not far above the lasing threshold.

The intensity of light escaping through the stadium
boundary can be approximated by the intensity just out-
side the boundary. From the calculated lasing mode pro-
ﬁle, we extracted the intensity about 100nm outside the
stadium boundary. To account for the ﬁnite spatial res-
olution in our experiment, the output intensity distribu-
tion along the stadium boundary was convoluted with
the resolution function of our imaging system. The ﬁ-
nal result (dashed curve in Fig. 4) agrees well with the
measured intensity along the stadium boundary (solid
curve), especially since it reproduces the positions of four
bright spots in the near-ﬁeld image of the lasing mode.

FIG. 4: Output intensity of laser emission (a) and ASE (b)
along the boundary of a GaAs stadium with ǫ = 1.51 and
area ≃ 70µm2. The range of the horizontal coordinate is
half of the stadium boundary, from the center of one straight
segment to the other. The solid curves are the experimental
results extracted from the near-ﬁeld images of the lasing mode
and ASE in the insets of Fig. 3. The dashed curves are the
numerical simulation results obtained with the FDTD method
(a) and real-space ray tracing (b).

Since there is no other mode that has similar (low) lasing
threshold and output intensity proﬁle like the measured
one, we conclude the ﬁrst lasing mode observed experi-
mentally in the stadium of ǫ = 1.51 corresponds to the
calculated mode at λ = 850.7nm. The slight diﬀerence
(less than 1%) in wavelength is within the experimental
error of determining the refractive index of GaAs and
AlGaAs at low temperature. The escape of ASE from a
stadium is simulated by classical ray tracing in real space,
as the interference eﬀect can be neglected due to lack of
coherence in ASE. Following the method in Ref.[5], we
calculated the intensity distribution of output rays along
the boundary of a stadium with nef f = 3.3 and ǫ = 1.51
[dashed curve Fig. 4(b)]. The ray-tracing result agrees
with the ASE intensity distribution obtained from the
near-ﬁeld image [solid curve in Fig. 4(b)].

To ﬁnd out the classical ray trajectories that the lasing
modes correspond to, we obtained the quantum Poincar´e
sections of their wavefunctions. Figure 3(b) is the Husimi

phase-space projection of the lasing mode in Fig. 3(a),
calculated from its electric ﬁeld at the stadium boundary.
It reveals the lasing mode is a scar mode, and it consists
mainly of three diﬀerent types of UPOs plotted in the
inset of Fig. 3(b). Since the constituent UPOs are above
the critical line for total internal reﬂection, the lasing
mode has long lifetime. We calculated the quality factor
of this mode in passive stadium as we varied the defor-
mation ǫ around 1.51. Its Q value ﬁrst increases then de-
creases as ǫ increases, leading to a maximum at ǫ = 1.515.
Such variation of quality factor is attributed to interfer-
ence of waves propagating along the constituent UPOs
[7, 12]. The interference eﬀect depends on the relative
phase of waves traveling in diﬀerent orbits. The phase
delay along each orbit changes with the orbit length as
ǫ varies. At some particular deformation, constructive
interference may minimize light leakage out of the cav-
ity, thus maximizing the quality factor. Since the actual
deformation ǫ = 1.51 is nearly identical (within 0.3%) to
the optimum deformation (ǫ = 1.515), the mode is al-
most at the maximum of its quality factor. Furthermore,
its frequency is close to the peak of the gain spectrum.
Thus the lasing threshold is minimized, as shown in Fig.
1(b).

We simulated lasing in fabricated microstadiums with
various deformations. By comparing the simulation re-
sults with the experimental data, we ﬁnd the ﬁrst lasing
modes always correspond to high-quality scar modes of
the passive cavities. This is because the gain spectrum
of the InAs QW is broad enough to cover some of these
modes. Note that not all the scar modes have high qual-
ity or long lifetime. Nevertheless the chaotic modes al-
ways have short lifetime, because their relatively uniform
distributions in the phase space facilitate the refractive
escape of light from the stadium. If the gain spectrum
is too narrow to contain any high-Q scar modes, lasing
may occur in low-Q chaotic modes lying within the gain
spectrum [4] but with much higher threshold.

One unique property of microstadium lasers is that
the Q-spoiling is eﬀectively stopped at large deformation
[7]. High-Q modes exist at large ǫ, due to nonmonotonic
change of quality factors of some multi-orbit scar modes
with deformation. Indeed we observed diﬀerent types of
high-Q scar modes consisting of several UPOs at various
deformations in our simulation. This observation is sup-
ported by our experiment result that the lasing threshold
at large deformation ǫ = 2.2 is nearly the same as that
at small deformation ǫ = 0.7. Since the lasing wave-
lengths in these two stadiums of same area are nearly
the same, the spectral overlap of the ﬁrst lasing modes

4

with the gain spectrum is almost identical. Therefore,
the almost same lasing threshold implies the quality fac-
tor of the ﬁrst lasing mode in the stadium with ǫ = 2.2 is
nearly identical to that with ǫ = 0.7. The eﬀective stop
of Q spoiling does not exist in the elliptical cavity (an
integral system) or the quadrupolar cavity (a partially
chaotic system) [9, 10]. Those systems exhibit contin-
uous Q spoiling with increasing deformation when the
cavity area is ﬁxed [7]. Thus a global increase of lasing
threshold is expected when the major-to-minor-axis ratio
of dielectric ellipse or quadrupole increases.

In summary, we demonstrated experimentally that las-
ing in a semiconductor microstadium can be optimized
by controlling its shape. By tuning the stadium shape
to the optimum deformation, we not only optimize light
conﬁnement in the stadium but also extract the maxi-
mum gain by aligning the mode frequency to the peak
of the gain spectrum. The simultaneous realization of
the lowest cavity loss and the highest optical gain leads
to minimum lasing threshold of a microstadium laser. As
the dielectric microstadium represents a completely open
fully chaotic cavity, this work opens the door to control
chaotic microcavity lasers by tailoring its shape.

We acknowledge Prof. Peter Braun and Dr. Gabriel
Carlo for stimulating discussions. This work is supported
by the MRSEC program of the National Science Foun-
dation (DMR-00706097) at the Materials Science Center
of Northwestern University.

[1] M.C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Me-

chanics (Springer, Berlin, 1990).

[2] E.J. Heller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 1515 (1984).
[3] T. Harayama et al, Phys. Rev. E 67, 015207(R) (2003).
[4] T. Harayama, P. Davis, and K.S. Ikeda, Phys. Rev. Lett.

90, 063901 (2003).

[5] H.G.L. Schwefel et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21, 923 (2004).
[6] M. Lebental et al., Appl. Phys. Lett 88, 031108 (2006).
[7] W. Fang, A. Yamilov, and H. Cao, Phys. Rev. A 72,

023815 (2005).

[8] S.Y. Lee et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 023809 (2004).
[9] J.U. Nockel and A.D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).
[10] E.E. Narimanov et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4991 (1999).
[11] A.S. Nagra and R.A. York, IEEE Trans. Antennas Prop-

agat. 46, 334 (1998).

[12] T. Fukushima, J. Lightwave Technol. 18, 2208 (2000); T.
Fukushima, T. Harayama, and J. Wiersig, Phys. Rev. A
73, 023816 (2006); T. Fukushima, IEEE J. Selet. Topic
Quantum Electron. 10, 1039 (2004).

