6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Full-wave simulations of electromagnetic cloaking structures

Steven A. Cummer,∗ Bogdan-Ioan Popa, David Schurig, and David R. Smith
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

John Pendry
Department of Physics, The Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Based on a coordinate transformation approach, Pendry et al. have reported electromagneti-
cally anisotropic and inhomogeneous shells that, in theory, completely shield an interior structure
of arbitrary size from electromagnetic ﬁelds without perturbing the external ﬁelds. We report
full-wave simulations of the cylindrical version of this cloaking structure using ideal and nonideal
(but physically realizable) electromagnetic parameters in an eﬀort to understand the challenges of
realizing such a structure in practice. The simulations indicate that the performance of the elec-
tromagnetic cloaking structure is not especially sensitive to modest permittivity and permeability
variations. This is in contrast to other applications of engineered electromagnetic materials, such
as subwavelength focusing using negative refractive index materials. The cloaking performance de-
grades smoothly with increasing loss, and eﬀective low-reﬂection shielding can be achieved with a
cylindrical shell composed of an eight (homogeneous) layer approximation of the ideal continuous
medium.

PACS numbers: 41.20.Jb, 42.25.Fx, 42.25.Gy

Pendry et al. [1] have reported a coordinate transfor-
mation approach for designing an electromagnetic mate-
rial through which electromagnetic ﬁelds can be excluded
from a penetrable object without perturbing the exterior
ﬁelds, thereby rendering the interior eﬀectively “invisi-
ble” to the outside. Related work has shown how small
reﬂections can be realized through engineered coatings
for objects of restricted size and shape [2], and refractive
index proﬁles have been derived that bend light to pro-
duce 2D invisibility based on a conformal mapping ap-
proach and assuming the short wavelength geometrical
optics limit [3]. The approach in [1] is far more general:
it can be applied to problems of any dimension, and it
applies under any wavelength condition, not just geomet-
rical optics. It requires anisotropic media with each per-
mittivity and permeability element independently con-
trolled, but this is within the realm of the metamaterial
approach for engineering electromagnetic materials [4].
This approach also requires permittivity and permeabil-
ity elements with relative magnitudes less than one, and
consequently the bandwidth of a passive cloaking mate-
rial will be limited.

This cloaking structure shares many qualities with
another application based on exotic electromagnetic
materials—the negative refractive index perfect lens [5].
Both are surprising, novel, and of signiﬁcant theoretical
and practical interest. The physical realizability of each
is also not immediately obvious from the original analyti-
cal derivation. The realization of subwavelength focusing
is constrained by strict limits on the precise properties of
the medium [5, 6], although the eﬀect has been demon-
strated in experiment in a number of forms [7, 8, 9].
Full-wave electromagnetic simulations provided substan-

tial insight into understanding the physical realizability
and limitations of this phenomenon. For example, ini-
tial simulations were unable to observe the eﬀect at all
[10, 11], despite ideal conditions. Only through great care
were later simulations able to demonstrate the eﬀect [12],
which highlighted the delicate conditions needed to pro-
duce it and the related diﬃculty in practically realizing
it.

The challenges of realizing the ideal cloaking material
are not known at this point. The analytical derivation
does give some clues about its sensitivity to material per-
turbations. This structure does not rely on system res-
onances the way subwavelength focusing does, and the
absence of any interfaces between positive and negative
permittivity (or permeability) implies no surface reso-
nances should occur. Additionally, the derivation shows
that the transformation required to produce the cloaking
material is not unique. Both of these facts suggest that
small perturbations to the cloaking shell properties may
not aﬀect the cloaking properties too much. Whether
perfect cloaking is achievable, even in theory, is also an
open question. On the basis of scattering uniqueness, it
has been shown that perfect invisibility is not achievable
under the Born approximation [13]. However, the scat-
terer considered here is not a weak scatterer. Also, the
behavior of the on-axis ray, which cannot be deﬂected
[1], may degrade cloaking performance to an unknown
degree.

In this letter, we report the analysis of full wave simu-
lations with the goal of deﬁning the practically achievable
performance of this class of cloaking structure and iden-
tifying any challenges in its implementation. Speciﬁcally,
we wish to understand the degree to which the on-axis ray

2

FIG. 1: Computational domain and details for the full-wave
cloaking simulation.

and the use of physically realizable, non-ideal materials
limit cloaking performance. The COMSOL Multiphysics
ﬁnite element-based electromagnetics solver is used for
the reported simulations because of the ﬂexibility it al-
lows in specifying material anisotropy and continuous in-
homogeneity.

We solve the 2D cylindrical problem in which ﬁelds
are excluded from an inﬁnite circular cylinder. Following
the approach in [1], cloaking a central cylindrical region
of radius R1 by a concentric cylindrical shell of radius R2
requires a cloaking shell with the following radius depen-
dent, anisotropic relative permittivity and permeability
(speciﬁed in cylindrical coordinates):

ǫr = µr =

, ǫφ = µφ =

r − R1
r

ǫz = µz =

R2
R2 − R1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

r
r − R1
r − R1
r

,

.

2

The COMSOL solver requires cartesian coordinates, for
which the z components do not change but the standard
transformation to x and y yields

2

2
φ + ǫφ sin

ǫxx = ǫr cos

φ,
ǫxy = ǫyx = (ǫr − ǫφ) sin φ cos φ,
φ,

2
ǫyy = ǫr sin

2
φ + ǫφ cos

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

with ¯¯µ = ¯¯ǫ completing the material tensor description.

Figure 1 shows the computational domain in which a
2 GHz transverse electric (TE) polarized time harmonic
uniform plane wave is incident on a perfect electrical con-
ductor (PEC) shell of diameter 0.2 m (1.33 wavelengths)
surrounded by a cloaking shell as speciﬁed above with
outer diameter 0.4 m (2.67 wavelengths). Although ana-
lytically the inner region is shielded from external ﬁelds
even without the PEC shell, a penetrable center implies
that the internal ﬁelds are not unique. This results in an
ill-conditioned problem and, not surprisingly, the simu-
lated solutions are better behaved if a PEC shell is used

FIG. 2: The permittivity and permeability components used
in cases 1, 3, and 4 described in the text.

to exclude the interior from the calculation. Note that
the presence of the PEC shell does not aﬀect in any way
the cloaking operation of the system; any object can be
present in the interior region, and ideally the external
ﬁelds are unperturbed whether or not the PEC shell is
present.

Diﬀerent conﬁgurations were simulated to explore the
sensitivity and realizability of the cloaking function. Ma-
terial parameters (in cylindrical coordinates) for these
diﬀerent conﬁgurations are shown in Figure 2, assuming
R2 = 2R1. Case 1 is the ideal cloak material parameters,
with lossless ¯¯ǫ(r) and ¯¯µ(r) as deﬁned above. In case 2,
the ideal cloak material parameters are used but with the
addition of loss to give a constant electric and magnetic
loss tangent of 0.1. The metamaterial approach in the
GHz range can achieve loss tangents signiﬁcantly lower
than this value [14]. In case 3, the cloaking structure is
implemented in a step-wise homogeneous eight layer ap-
proximation of the ideal, lossless continuous parameters.
This represents the necessary approximation of realizing
a continuous medium with a ﬁnite number of discrete
layers.

Case 4 is an approximate realization with simpliﬁed
permittivity and permeability derived as follows. Lim-
iting ourselves to TE ﬁelds and letting Dz = ǫzEz, the
Maxwell equations inside the cloaking material are

jωDz =

1
r (cid:20)

∂(rHφ)
∂r

− ∂Hr
∂φ (cid:21)
∂(Dz/ǫz)
∂φ

jωµrHr =

1
r
jωµφHφ = − ∂(Dz/ǫz)

.

∂r

(6)

(7)

(8)

If ǫz is spatially uniform, then the above equations de-
pend on only two material parameters (µrǫz and µφǫz)
instead of the original three. This gives the ability to
choose one of the three arbitrarily to achieve some fa-
vorable condition. One good choice would be to select

3

FIG. 3: The resulting electric ﬁeld distribution in the vicinity of the cloaked object. Power ﬂow lines (in gray) show the
smooth deviation of electromagnetic power around the cloaked PEC shell. In all cases power ﬂow is from left to right. Upper
left (case 1): Ideal parameters. Upper right (case 2): Ideal parameters with a loss tangent of 0.1. Lower left (case 3): 8-layer
stepwise approximation of the ideal parameters. Lower left (case 4): Reduced material parameters.

2

2

r−R1
r

R2
R2−R1

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:16)

and µr =

. This
µφ = 1 so that ǫz =
(cid:17)
has the beneﬁt of making only one component spatially
inhomogeneous and also eliminates any inﬁnite values,
as shown in Figure 2. This reduced medium loses its re-
ﬂectionless property at interfaces with free space, but it
maintains the phase front and power ﬂow bending of the
ideal cloaking material. The simulations below show that
this reduced cloaking material can demonstrate the ba-
sic physics of the this class of cloaking and may present
a simpler path to an experimental demonstration.

Figure 3 shows the resulting simulated electric ﬁeld dis-
tribution and electromagnetic power ﬂow lines for these
four cases. Displayed is the real part of the electric ﬁeld
phasor (equivalent to the time domain ﬁelds at the in-
stant of time when the source phase is zero) so that the
individual phase fronts are clearly visible. The cloak-
ing eﬀect is especially clear in the ideal case (upper left
panel). Outside the cloaking shell, the plane wave is
In-
almost unaltered, as if no scatterer were present.
side the cloaking material, the power ﬂow lines are bent
smoothly around the PEC shell, and the phase fronts
are also warped in the manner predicted by the origi-
nal transformation [1]. The ﬁelds are smoothly excluded
from the interior region with minimal scattering in any
direction. It is immediately evident that the ideal cloak-
ing material must be highly anisotropic because the wave

vector (the normal to the wavefront) and the direction of
power ﬂow (the streamlines) are not parallel in the cloak-
ing material. In many locations they are almost perpen-
dicular. Anisotropy is required to meet this constraint
on the phase and ray directions.

The simulated ﬁelds shown in each case were com-
puted with approximately 85,000 elements and 340,000
unknowns, although nearly identical solutions were ob-
tained with a coarser mesh. In the ideal parameter sim-
ulation, there are approximately 32 layers of elements
spanning the cloaking material region, which is not es-
pecially ﬁne considering the strong variation of the ma-
terial parameters across this region. It is interesting to
note that the integration of the on-axis ray incident on
the center of the cylinder stops because power ﬂow is
eﬀectively zero at the inner edge.

To quantify the cloaking performance of this 2D sce-
nario, we computed the total scattered power per unit
length of the cylinder (integrated over all angles) by tak-
ing the diﬀerence between the solution from simulations
with and without the cloak and object. We then normal-
ized this total scattered power by the incident wave power
incident on the diameter of the inner PEC sphere per unit
length of the cylinder. This ratio is the scattering width
(the 2D equivalent of radar cross section) of the compos-
ite object, averaged over all angles, and normalized to
the diameter of the cylinder. For the simulation shown,

this ratio is 0.06. No doubt this could be pushed even
smaller with careful tuning of the simulation parameters;
for our purposes, however, it quantitatively shows that
the cloaking material is quite eﬀective. Interestingly, the
scattered power is almost isotropically distributed over
all angles, an unusual property for an object that is not
electrically small.

Loss degrades cloaking performance in a straightfor-
ward way. With electric and magnetic loss tangents of
0.1, the upper right panel of Figure 3 shows that lossy
cloaking material is still eﬀective. Almost no power is
scattered in any direction except the forward direction,
which is unavoidable because the lossy material absorbs
almost all of the forward traveling wave power. With the
loss tangent reduced to only 0.01 (not shown), the eﬀect
of loss is almost imperceptible. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences
were observed when loss was introduced as a constant
imaginary part instead of a constant loss tangent.
In-
terestingly, the phase fronts to the left of the object are
perturbed less in the lossy case than the lossless case, in-
dicating that the addition of loss can improve backscatter
performance (but not the forward scatter) of the cloak.
We speculate that this is due to the following.

The incident wave power is contained near the on-axis
ray requires the most aggressive redirection around the
object and is thus the power most likely to be imper-
fectly handled. We suggest that small deviations from
the ideal medium inherent in a discrete simulation scat-
ter this nearly-on-axis wave power in the almost isotropic
scattering pattern observed. With loss, the cloaking layer
absorbs some of scattered power before it exits the cloak.
We thus expect that a lossy cloak would isotropically
scatter less than the lossless cloak, at the expense of
strong forward scattering. This is precisely what the sim-
ulations show. Further investigation is merited to deter-
mine whether performance of the cloak is limited by this
nearly-on-axis power.

Any physical realization of the ideal continuous cloak-
ing material will require discretization of the material pa-
rameters. The lower left panel of Figure 3 shows the ﬁeld
distribution when the cloak material is approximated by
8 discrete and homogeneous cylindrical layers (see Figure
2). The discretized cloaking material, with a normalized
isotropic scattering width of 0.215, does not perform as
well as the continuous material, as reﬂected by the more
perturbed wavefronts outside the cloaking material. But
most of the incident wave energy is still smoothly bent
around the central object. This simulation shows that
systematic perturbations to the ideal material parame-
ters on the order of 10% do not disrupt the basic cloak-
ing physics. We speculate that random material property
perturbations of the same magnitude probably degrade
performance to the same degree.

The lower right panel in Figure 3 shows the ﬁeld dis-
tribution when the cloak material is composed of the re-
duced material described above, in which the µφ compo-

4

FIG. 4: Simulated cloaking with ideal parameters for a larger
cloaked object and thinner cloaking shell.

nent is set to unity, ǫz is constant, and only µr is spa-
tially varying. The signiﬁcant amplitude variation across
the phase fronts indicate that scattering in all directions
is signiﬁcant. But the bending of the individual phase
fronts inside the reduced cloaking material is still present.
In fact, images of the electric ﬁeld phase for the ideal
and reduced cases (not shown) are in close agreement.
This reduced material may be an easier (although not
ideal) path to an initial experimental demonstration of
this cloaking phenomenon. In its simplest form it would
only require fabricating a material with an inhomoge-
neous µr component, as µφ is unity and ǫz is real and
greater than one, and thus could be realized with an or-
dinary dielectric. Moreover, the very large-valued com-
ponents required by the ideal cloak are eliminated, and
only values on the order of unity and smaller, which are
easier to realize in practice, are required in this reduced
cloaking material.

The simulations presented above all contained a cloak-
ing material layer with a thickness parameter R2/R1 − 1
(cloak thickness normalized to the radius of the cloaked
region) of unity. One might reasonably ask if the cloaking
process becomes substantially more diﬃcult to simulate,
and therefore realize, with a thinner cloaking shell and
an electrically larger object. To the extent the computa-
tional power is not a limitation, Figure 4 suggests that
the answer is no. Here we simulate the cloaking of a PEC
cylinder of diameter 2.67 wavelengths with a cloaking
layer of thickness parameter 0.25 (i.e., the cloak thickness
is only 25% the cloaked cylinder radius). Even with the
more aggressive ray and phase front bending and wave-
length compression required to cloak this object, high
ﬁdelity simulations of the eﬀect can be achieved with a
relatively modest number of elements (approximately 20)
across the width of the cloaking shell. It seems likely that
thinner cloaking shells will be require more tightly con-
trolled electromagnetic parameters, but the relative ease

with which this eﬀect can be simulated suggests that sen-
sitivity to medium parameters is still modest. An exper-
imental demonstration of the basic physics of this class
of electromagnetic cloaking structure should be possible
even with non-ideal electromagnetic metamaterials.

David Schurig would like to acknowledge support from

the IC Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Program.

Electronic address: cummer@ee.duke.edu

∗
[1] J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig, and D. R. Smith, Science 312,

to be published on May 26, (2006).

[2] A. Alu and N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. E 72, 016623 (2005).
[3] U. Leonhardt, Science 312, to be published on May 26,

[4] D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry, and M. C. K. Wiltshire, Sci-

(2006).

ence 305, 788 (2004).

[5] J. B. Pendry, A. J. Holden, D. J. Robbins, and W. J.

5

Stewart, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques 47,
2075 (1999).

[6] D. R. Smith, D. Schurig, M. Rosenbluth, S. Schultz, S. A.
Ramakrishna, and J. B. Pendry, App. Phys. Lett. 82,
1506 (2003).

[7] A. Grbic and G. V. Eleftheriades, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

207403 (2004).

[8] N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun, and X. Zhang, Science 308, 534

[9] B.-I. Popa and S. A. Cummer, Phys. Rev. E 73, 016617

[10] R. W. Ziolkowski and E. Heyman, Phys. Rev. E 64,

(2005).

(2006).

056625 (2001).

[11] P. F. Loschialpo, D. L. Smith, D. W. Forester, and F. J.

Rachford, Phys. Rev. E 67, 025602 (2003).

[12] S. A. Cummer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 1503 (2003).
[13] E. Wolf and T. Habashy, J. Mod. Opt. 40, 785 (1993).
[14] R. B. Greegor, C. G. Parazzoli, K. Li, and M. H.

Tanielian, App. Phys. Lett. 82, 2356 (2003).

