6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of:
Simon Parkin, Gregor Kn ¨oner, Timo A. Nieminen, Norman R. Heckenberg and Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop
“Measurement of the total optical angular momentum transfer in optical tweezers”
Optics Express 14(15) 6963–6970 (2006).
Online at: http://www.opticsinfobase.org/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-14-15-6963

Measurement of the total optical angular momentum transfer
in optical tweezers
Simon Parkin, Gregor Kn ¨oner, Timo A. Nieminen, Norman R. Heckenberg
and Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop
Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, School of Physical Sciences,
The University of Queensland, QLD 4072, Australia

Abstract

We describe a way to determine the total angular momentum, both spin and orbital, transferred to a parti-
cle trapped in optical tweezers. As an example an LG02 mode of a laser beam with varying degrees of circular
polarisation is used to trap and rotate an elongated particle with a well deﬁned geometry. The method success-
fully estimates the total optical torque applied to the particle. For this technique, there is no need to measure
the viscous drag on the particle, as it is an optical measurement. Therefore, knowledge of the particle’s size
and shape, as well as the ﬂuid’s viscosity, is not required.

1

Introduction

The major application of optical tweezers, since their invention in 1986 [1], has been the study of microscopic
biological systems. The ﬁrst measurements were made on bacterial ﬂagella and the transport of organelles
within a cell [2, 3]. Advances in force measurement technology enabled high temporal and spatial resolution
force measurements, for example, on motor proteins walking along microtubules [4, 5], polymerase transcrib-
ing DNA [6], protein folding [7, 8] and viruses packaging DNA [9]. Optical tweezers force measurements have
provided a great insight into the physics of microscopic biological mechanisms and this application will con-
tinue due to the huge number of biological systems available for study. To further our understanding of the
microscopic biological world, different quantitative measurement techniques need to be developed. Here we
present a new technique to measure torques applied by optical tweezers opening a way to new quantitative
studies of microscopic biological systems and their rotational dynamics.

Techniques to apply torques using optical tweezers by the transfer of angular momentum from the beam to
the particle are well established. Absorption is the simplest transfer mechanism, whereby the particle absorbs
the light’s angular momentum. Both spin and orbital angular momentum have been transferred in this way
[10, 11]. The ﬁrst is due to the light’s polarisation, while the orbital component is associated with the spatial
distribution of the light’s wavefront. A more elegant approach, that avoids unwanted heating due to absorp-
tion, is to trap a birefringent crystal with a circularly polarised beam [12]. This allows for efﬁcient angular
momentum transfer and the applied torque can be measured optically [13]. The advantage of an optical mea-
surement of the torque is that knowledge of the properties of particle and its surrounding environment is not
required. The particle’s exact shape or the ﬂuid’s viscosity and refractive index do not affect the measurement
of the applied torque. Based on this technique a micro-viscometer has been demonstrated using a spherical
birefringent crystal as the object which was trapped and rotated [14]. However such crystals are somewhat
difﬁcult to produce and they are unstable in harsh media, such as acidic solutions. Therefore it would be
useful to quantify torque transfer via orbital angular momentum as a larger torque efﬁciency is available [15]
and suitable optically asymmetric objects are more abundant [16, 17]. Such objects include photopolymerised
structures with sub-micron features which have been shown to function as light driven micromachines [18].
The ability to optically measure the torque applied to these micromachines would increase their functionality
and would allow for quantitative measurements of rotational dynamics and feedback control.

Measurement of orbital angular momentum has been of interest in the ﬁeld of quantum information and
computing. Computer generated holograms have been used to measure the orbital angular momentum of
single photons produced by parametric down-conversion. The experiments showed that orbital angular mo-
mentum is conserved during down conversion and that the orbital angular momentum states are entangled
[19]. Measurement of the orbital angular momentum of an arbitrary beam using a similar technique has been
demonstrated [20]. In these experiments the torque applied to a elongated phase object by a paraxial laser
beam was determined by measuring the power in the forward scattered azimuthal modes. However to mea-
sure a large number of azimuthal modes requires a complicated setup and is impractical. This is the case for
1

measurements involving optical tweezers in particular, due to the variety of modes that are forward scattered
by a particle trapped in a highly converging and diverging beam. Radial modes present a further complication
for the measurement of the azimuthal modes.

◦

Optical angular momentum can also be quantiﬁed by measuring the rotational Doppler shift introduced
by rotating optical elements in the beam path [21]. The orbital component has been determined by measuring
the frequency shift between two beams with different azimuthal indices [22]. In this experiment one of the
prism. In principle this technique could be used to measure the orbital angular
beams is rotated using a 90
momentum of an arbitrary beam. However it would be difﬁcult to distinguish the different frequencies and, in
particular, their amplitudes due to the noise from the rotating optical element required to give the frequency
shift. A similar technique based on a Mach–Zehnder interferometer allows sorting of photons with different
angular momentum states [23]. However, in practice this technique would also be difﬁcult to implement in
optical tweezers due to the series of interferometers required to measure the angular momentum of an arbitrary
beam.

In this paper we present a method which enables the measurement of the total optical angular momentum
transfer in optical tweezers. The spin component of the angular momentum can be measured purely optically
as previously [17]. In order to measure the orbital component we take advantage of this existing method, and
the linear relationship between the rotation rate of the trapped particle and the torque applied to it, to measure
the orbital angular momentum transferred to the particle. To demonstrate this method we measure the torque
applied to a trapped elongated particle with a well deﬁned size and geometry. The accuracy of the particle’s
dimensions is important in order that the measured torque can be compared to the viscous drag on the particle
as a test of the validity of the experimental method, but is not required for the torque measurement itself.

2 Theory

A convenient method to optically measure the torque applied to an object by the spin angular momentum of a
laser beam was described in detail in [13]. The torque on the particle due to spin angular momentum transfer
is given by τspin = ∆σP/ω where ∆σ is the change in the degree of circular polarisation as the beam passes
through the particle, P is the laser power and ω is the optical angular frequency.

For a particle rotating steadily the optically applied torque is equal to the drag torque applied by the sur-
rounding liquid. In a low-Reynolds-number Newtonian ﬂuid the drag torque is proportional to the rotation
rate. The applied torque is also equal to the sum of the torques applied by the spin and orbital components.
Therefore the torque acting on the trapped particle is given by:

τtotal = τorbital + τspin = ΩK

(1)

where K is an unknown constant of proportionality and Ω is the rotation rate. We assume that the the laser’s
frequency and power are known, which means τspin can be found directly from the change in polarisation (∆σ).
This leaves an equation with two unknowns. By varying the independent variable (τspin) and measuring the
rotation rate (Ω), K and the torque due to orbital angular momentum transfer (τorbital) can be determined.

3 Experiment

The optical tweezers setup (Fig. 1) was used to make measurements of the optical angular momentum trans-
ferred to trapped particles. A computer generated hologram [20] was used to generate a Laguerre–Gauss mode
with an azimuthal index of two (LG02) in the ﬁrst diffraction order. The beam was expanded to ﬁll the back
aperture of an 100× oil immersion objective (NA = 1.3) to yield the best trapping geometry and efﬁciency. The
quarter wave plate before the objective was rotated to different angles to make left handed, right handed or
linearly polarised laser light. An oil immersion condenser, with a numerical aperture greater than the objective
(NA = 1.4), collected the diverging light from the optical trap created by the objective. A glass slide deﬂected a
small percentage of the collected light to a photo-detector (photo-detector 3). The angle between the face of the
as possible (the angle
glass slide and the axis of the laser beam’s direction of propagation was as close to 90
in the ﬁgure is exaggerated for clarity). This minimised both the amount of light deﬂected and the tendency
for a certain polarisation to be deﬂected more strongly than its orthogonal counterpart. The spot size of the
laser beam was greater than the area of the photo-detector so that the intensity of only a section of the beam
was measured. The laser light transmitted through the glass slide was sent to a circular polarisation detection
system. The spot size of the laser light incident on the two detectors (1 & 2) was smaller than the detector
area so that the two detectors collect all the laser light collected by the condenser. The polarising beam splitter
cube ensures that the two photo-detectors measure orthogonal linearly polarised components of the laser light.
The quarter wave plate in front of the polarising beam splitter cube is aligned to ensure that right circularly

◦

2

Figure 1: The optical tweezers setup used to make measurements of optical torque applied to a trapped object.
The two polystyrene spheres that were trapped and rotated are shown in the inset. The phase hologram created
a LG02 beam in the ﬁrst diffraction order, which was used as the trapping beam. The three detectors measured
the rotation rate of the particle and the change in polarisation of the trapping beam.

polarised light incident on the quarter wave plate is sent to one detector while left circularly polarised light is
sent to the other detector.

A demonstration experiment was carried out in the optical tweezers with a simple asymmetric object that is
readily available and has a relatively simple geometry. Two polystyrene beads (each two microns in diameter)
were trapped and pushed together in the LG02 beam so that they behaved as one elongated object. Although
in principle this object could be three dimensionally trapped, we chose to trap the beads two dimensionally
against the glass slide to overcome the tendency for the elongated dimension of the object to align vertically in
the trap.

Measurement of the laser power at the focus of the objective was needed for the determination of the
optically applied torque on the trapped particle . A direct measurement is difﬁcult due to the short working
distance and high numerical aperture of the objective. Therefore the power at the focus was estimated by
determining the transmission of the objective and condenser. As shown earlier, the optically applied torque
also depends on the change in polarisation of the trapping beam. The circular polarisation detection system
measures the power in each of the orthogonal circularly polarised components which allows the degree of
circular polarisation to be found.

In order to determine the torque applied by the orbital component of the beam, the rotation rate of the
trapped particles was measured. The ﬂuctuations in intensity measured by photo-detector 3 corresponds to
the rotation rate of the trapped particles. The particles have two fold symmetry which means that half the fre-
quency of the intensity ﬂuctuations is the particles’ rotation rate. The constant of proportionality (K) between
the rotation rate (Ω) and the optically applied torque (τtotal) can not be measured and was instead found by
making three measurements of Ω and τspin at three different polarisations. Although two polarisations would
be sufﬁcient, linear, right handed circular and left handed circular polarisations were used.

4 Results and discussion

The change in polarisation of laser light that causes the rotation of two 2 µm beads, as well as their rotation
rate, was measured for each of the three polarisations of the incident beam. A typical signal from the photo-
detector that measures the particles’ rotation rate is shown in Fig. 2(a). A sinusoidal ﬁt to the signal shows that
3

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Typical signal from photo-detector 3, from which the rotation rate of the particle was found. The
solid line (—) is the actual signal from the detector and the dashed line (−−) is a sinusoidal ﬁt of the data. (b)
Typical signals from photo-detectors 1 and 2 for the case when no particle is trapped and also the case when
the particles are trapped by the optical tweezers. The ‘ripple’ visible in the signal with the particle trapped is
due to the rotation of the particle in the trap and has the same frequency as measured by photo-detector 3.

a constant rotation rate is maintained for a one second interval. The sampling duration was 5 seconds for each
measurement and the average rotation rate over this interval was found.

The circularly polarised components of the beam were measured by 2 photodetectors. Typical signals from
these detectors are shown in Fig. 2(b). The signals for each detector with and without a particle are plotted
for the 5 second sampling interval. The average for each signal, over the time interval, was found. The degree
of circular polarisation is calculated from these averages and the change in polarisation (∆σ) was found by
subtracting the signal without a particle from the signal with a trapped particle.

The rotation rates measured for the three different polarisations are shown in Fig. 3. Each point on the plot
has been averaged over 10 data sets. The torque transferred due to the spin component of the optical angular
momentum (on the x axis of the plot) was calculated from the change in polarisation. The torque transfer via
orbital angular momentum is found directly from this plot using equation 1 and setting τspin to zero:

τorbital = KΩ

0 =

= 0.017 ± 0.003¯h.

Ω

0
slope

which means the torque due to the orbital component in this case is 5 times the torque due to the spin com-
ponent.
It should be noted here that this is an optical measurement of the torque and was made without
knowledge of the particle’s shape or refractive index, or the surrounding ﬂuid’s viscosity or refractive index.
However, in this case, we do know the shape and size of the particle and the viscosity of the ﬂuid, so the optical
measurement can be compared to a viscous drag model.

For a steadily rotating particle the optically applied torque is equal to the viscous drag torque on the
trapped particles. Therefore in order to check the measured value for the optically applied torque, we can
model the viscous drag on the rotating particle. A simple model based on Stokes’ drag on a translating sphere
gives the following torque for two adjacent spheres rotating about their point of contact:

τD = 12πηa3Ω

here a is the radius of each sphere (and the lever arm), η is the viscosity of the surrounding ﬂuid and Ω is
the rotation rate of the two spheres. The parameters used for this calculation are power (20 mW), rotation rate
(2.4 Hz) and the individual spherical beads’ radius (1 µm). The model gives a torque efﬁciency of 0.05 ¯h. We
estimate the error in the model could be as much as 50 % due to wall effects and slipstreaming.

The results of the experiment and theory are of the same order of magnitude. This level of agreement is
signiﬁcant because it demonstrates that orbital torque can be estimated using this technique. The difﬁculty in
the presented method is that a small change in polarisation signal needs to be measured in order to determine
the orbital torque. For an orbital torque as small as 0.017¯h, the signal measured by photo-detectors 1 and 2 only
changed by 0.2%. This level of precision requires careful alignment of polarising optics and accurate reading
4

(2)

(3)

Figure 3: The rotation rate, Ω, of the trapped particle (two polystrene spheres) as a function of the optically
applied torque due to the spin angular momentum of the trapping beam, τspin. The torque transfer of the
orbital component is found from the slope (1/K) and intercept (Ω

0) of the ﬁt.

from the photodetectors. The ideal solution to this problem would be to boost the change in polarisation signal
by choosing a particle that exhibits a stronger birefringence or form birefringence. Such a particle would allow
for an accurate torque measurement. The method, as it stands, has only provided a good estimate of the optical
torque transfer in optical tweezers. Fortunately techniques exist, such as photopolymerisation [18], which
allow particles with sub-micron features to be fabricated. Such ﬁne features can enhance the particles form
birefringence which would make them very suitable for torque measurements.

The method described in this paper has the potential to make accurate measurements of the total optical
angular momentum transfer in optical tweezers when there is negligible absorption. For proper application of
the method a linear dependence of rotation rate on applied torque is assumed. This means the particle must
freely rotate and that the behaviour of the ﬂuid must be Newtonian. However, in the case of a particle that
is not freely rotating, for example a particle attached to a cell, the calibration of the torque can be carried out
prior to attaching the particle. Non-Newtonian behaviours, such as shear thinning are unlikely to affect the
validity of the technique. Firstly because the shear rates created by particles in optical traps are usually too
small for non-linearities to be observed [24] and secondly the trapping power can be reduced to decrease the
rotation rate so that a linear regime of the ﬂuid can be accessed. Once the torque transfer is calibrated then
non-linearities could be studied.

Feasible applications for this technique are in studying microscopic biological systems and in the imple-
mentation of micromachines. For example previous studies on bacteria ﬂagella [2, 25] could be extended by
measuring the torque directly. Other applications include torsional elasticity measurements of single polymer
chains or DNA strands as well as microviscosity measurements [18].

5 Conclusion

We have demonstrated a technique to measure both the spin and orbital components of the angular momentum
transferred to a particle trapped in optical tweezers. For this technique, there is no need to measure the viscous
drag on the particle, as it is an optical measurement. Therefore, knowledge of the particle’s size and shape, as
well as the ﬂuid’s viscosity, is not required. The technique successfully estimated the total optical torque on an
asymmetric object when compared with a simple theoretical model. We have suggested that the accuracy of
this method could be improved by using photo-polymerisation techniques to ‘tailor-make’ form birefringent
particles. Such particles would have the advantage that both spin and orbital angular momentum could be
more efﬁciently transferred from the trapping beam. In our experiment the orbital angular momentum was
5 times the magnitude of the spin component in this system which suggests that orbital angular momentum
transfer will prove to be useful for quantitative study of torques in microscopic biological systems and in
micromachine applications.

5

We would like to acknowledge the support of The University of Queensland and the Australian Research
Council.

Acknowledgements

References

[1] A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, and S.Chu, “Observation of Single-Beam Gradient Force Optical

Trap for Dielectric Particles,” Opt. Lett. 11, 288–290 (1986).

[2] S. M. Block, D. F. Blair, and H. C. Berg, “Compliance of bacterial ﬂagella measured with optical tweezers,”

Nature 338, 514–518 (1989).

[3] A. Ashkin, K. Schutze, J. M. Dziedzic, U. Euteneuer, and M. Schliwa, “Force generation of organelle

transport measured in vivo by an infrared laser trap,” Nature 348, 346–348 (1990).

[4] K. Svoboda, C. F. Schmidt, B. J. Schnapp, and S. M. Block, “Direct observation of kinesin stepping by

optical trapping interferometry,” Nature 365, 721–727 (1993).

[5] J. T. Finer, R. M. Simmons, and J. A. Spudich, “Single myosin molecule mechanics: piconewton forces and

nanometre steps,” Nature 368, 113–119 (1994).

[6] H. Yin, M. D. Wang, K. Svoboda, R. Landick, S. M. Block, and J. Gelles, “Transcription Against an Applied

Force,” Science 270, 1653–1657 (1995).

[7] M. S. Z. Kellermayer, S. B. Smith, H. L. Granzier, and C. Bustamante, “Folding-Unfolding Transitions in

Single Titin Molecules Characterized with Laser Tweezers,” Science 276, 1112–1116 (1997).

[8] L. Tskhovrebova, J. Trinick, J. A. Sleep, and R. M. Simmons, “Elasticity and unfolding of single molecules

of the giant muscle protein titin,” Nature 387, 308–312 (1997).

[9] D. E. Smith, S. J. Tans, S. B. Smith, S. Grimes, D. L. Anderson, and C. Bustamante, “The bacteriophage
theta 29 portal motor can package DNA against a larger internal force,” Nature 413, 748–752 (2001).

[10] H. He, M. E. J. Friese, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Direct Observation of Transfer of
Angular Momentum to Absorptive Particles from a Laser Beam with a Phase Singularity,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
75, 826–829 (1995).

[11] M. E. J. Friese, J. Enger, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, and N. R. Heckenberg, “Optical angular-momentum

transfer to trapped absorbing particles,” Phys. Rev. A 54, 1593–1596 (1996).

[12] M. E. J. Friese, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical alignment and

spinning of laser-trapped microscopic particles,” Nature 394, 348–350 (1998).

[13] T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical measurement of microscopic

torques,” J. Mod. Opt. 48, 405–413 (2001).

[14] A. I. Bishop, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical Microrheology

Using Rotating Laser-Trapped Particles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 198104 (2004).

[15] L. Allen, M. W. Beijersbergen, R. J. C. Spreeuw, and J. P. Woerdman, “Orbital angular momentum and the

transformation of Laguerre–Gaussian laser modes,” Phys. Rev. A 45, 8185–8189 (1992).

[16] K. D. Bonin and B. Kourmanov, “Light torque nanocontrol, nanomotors and nanorockers,” Opt. Express

10, 984–989 (2002).

[17] A. I. Bishop, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical application and
measurement of torque on microparticles of isotropic nonabsorbing material,” Phys. Rev. A 68, 033802
(2003).

[18] P. Galajda and P. Ormos, “Complex micromachines produced and driven by light,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 78,

249–251 (2001).

[19] A. Mair, A. Vaziri, G. Weihs, and A. Zeilinger, “Entanglement of the orbital angular momentum states of

photons,” Nature 412, 313–316 (2001).

6

[20] S. J. Parkin, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Optical measurement of
torque exerted on an elongated object by a noncircular laser beam,” Phys. Rev. A 70, 023816 (2004).

[21] J. Courtial, D. A. Robertson, K. Dholakia, L. Allen, and M. J. Padgett, “Rotational Frequency Shift of a

Light Beam,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4828–4830 (1998).

[22] I. V. Basistiy, V. V. Slyusar, M. S. Soskin, and M. V. Vasnetsov, “Manifestation of the rotational Doppler

effect by use of an off axis optical vortex beam,” Opt. Lett. 28, 1185–1187 (2003).

[23] J. Leach, J. Courtial, K. Skeldon, S. M. Barnett, S. Franke-Arnold, and M. J. Padgett, “Interferometric
Methods to Measure Orbital and Spin, or the Total Angular Momentum of a Single Photon,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 013601 (2004).

[24] G. Kn ¨oner, S. Parkin, N. R. Heckenberg, and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, “Characterization of optically driven

ﬂuid stress ﬁelds with optical tweezers,” Phys. Rev. E 72, 031507 (2005).

[25] W. S. Ryu, R. M. Berry, and H. C. Berg, “Torque-generating units of the ﬂagellar motor of Escherichia coli

have a high duty ratio,” Nature 403, 444–447 (2000).

7

