Near-ﬁeld enhancement and sub-wavelength imaging in the

optical region using a pair of two-dimensional arrays of metal

nanospheres

P. Alitalo1, C. Simovski1,2, A. Viitanen3, and S. Tretyakov1

1Radio Laboratory / SMARAD Center of Excellence,

Helsinki University of Technology, P.O. Box 3000, FI-02015 TKK, Finland

2Physics Department, State University of Information Technologies,

Mechanics and Optics, St. Petersburg, Russia

3Electromagnetics Laboratory, Helsinki University of Technology, Finland

E-mails: pekka.alitalo@tkk.ﬁ, simovsky@phoi.ifmo.ru,

ari.viitanen@tkk.ﬁ, sergei.tretyakov@tkk.ﬁ

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Near-ﬁeld enhancement and sub-wavelength imaging properties of a system comprising a coupled

pair of two-dimensional arrays of resonant nanospheres are studied. The concept of using two

coupled material sheets possessing surface mode resonances for evanescent ﬁeld enhancement is

already well established in the microwave region. This paper shows that the same principles can

be applied also in the optical region, where the performance of the resonant sheets can be realized

with the use of metallic nanoparticles. In this paper we present design of such structures and study

the electric ﬁeld distributions in the image plane of such superlens.

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recently, there have been many studies of near-ﬁeld enhancement and sub-wavelength

imaging using metamaterial slabs with negative permittivity and permeability (double-

negative or DNG media). The predicted negative refraction,1 which occurs at an interface

between double-positive (DPS, positive permittivity and permeability) and DNG media, was

conﬁrmed experimentally in the microwave domain using arrays of split rings and wires2–4

and also using meshes of loaded transmission lines.5,6 Also, the predicted enhancement of

evanescent modes7 was experimentally conﬁrmed.8,9 A lot of eﬀort is devoted to realization

of DNG-slab superlenses in the optical region.10–15 However, there are many obstacles on

this way, due to fundamental diﬃculties in realization of artiﬁcial magnetic materials in the

optical region with the use of nano-sized resonant particles.

An alternative approach to the realization of superlenses for evanescent ﬁelds has been

suggested in Ref. 16. This approach is based on the use of a pair of coupled resonant

arrays or resonant sheets placed in a usual double-positive medium, e.g.

free space or a

dielectric. Systems comprising coupled pairs of arrays of resonant metal particles have been

used to demonstrate experimentally the sub-wavelength imaging properties at microwave

frequencies.16–18 The main advantage of this route to superlens design is that a superlens

with sub-wavelength resolution can be realized without using a bulk DNG medium. Only

two sheets supporting surface modes in a broad spectrum of spatial frequencies are required,

if enhancement of only evanescent modes is desired (although the propagating modes in

this case are not focused in the image plane as with a bulk DNG slab, the imaging is still

possible16–18). Removal of the bulk DNG slab strongly mitigates the problem of losses that

have been present in any realized DNG medium so far.

The goal of the present work is to show that sub-wavelength imaging characteristics in a

device based on resonant arrays can be achieved also at very high frequencies (the optical

region and above) if we use metallic nano-sized particles as the resonating inclusions of the

two arrays. This approach to the realization of an optical superlens was ﬁrst suggested in

Ref. 19. In this paper we will study the dispersion in two-dimensional arrays of silver and

gold nanospheres and show that the dispersion characteristics are suitable for using these

types of arrays for evanescent ﬁeld enhancement. Next, the electric ﬁeld distributions in a

superlens consisting of two arrays of metal nanospheres are studied numerically, in order to

2

conﬁrm and analyze the sub-wavelength resolution of the image formed by the lens.

II. STRUCTURE OF THE LENS AND DISPERSION IN ARRAYS OF VERTI-

CALLY POLARIZED METAL SPHERES

The structure of the superlens that is studied in this paper is shown in Fig. 1. The spher-

ical particles have the diameter which is considerably smaller than the optical wavelength,

and the sphere material is a noble metal. The spheres exhibit a plasmonic resonance within

the optical region (λ0 = 400 nm...700 nm). The whole structure (including the source and

image planes) is embedded in a host medium with the relative permittivity εh. We will

consider the lens to be working properly if we obtain a sub-wavelength image in the image

plane with the distance between the source and image planes being larger than λeﬀ/2 (λeﬀ

is the wavelength in the host medium).

x

d

z

FIG. 1: A superlens formed by two planar arrays of spherical metal particles, embedded in a host

medium.

The operational principle of the device requires that at the operational frequency each

of the two sheets supports surface waves (plasmons) in a wide range of propagation con-

stants along the sheet planes. Existing of eigenmodes with high values of the propagation

constant ensures resonant ampliﬁcation of incident evanescent waves with large values of

the transverse wavenumber. This means that for the optimal operation of the superlens

we need to design nano-scaled arrays whose dispersion curve is as ﬂat as possible in the

y

3

surface).

Ref. 19)

vicinity of the operational frequency. Using the approach of Ref. 19, we will ﬁrst study the

dispersion in a single array of the proposed lens. The goal is to ﬁnd the suitable parameters

of the particles and the array period using a simpliﬁed model of inﬁnite arrays, which can

be further optimized by numerical studies of realistic structures of a ﬁnite size. In addition

to the assumption of the inﬁnite grid (along x and y), in this section we will also assume

that each particle is polarized vertically (i.e., the polarization vector is normal to the array

The dispersion in an inﬁnite, two-dimensional array of vertical dipoles can be calculated

using the interaction coeﬃcient C of such array:20

where k is the wavenumber, kt =

x + k2
k2

y is the transverse wavenumber and Rmn is the

distance between spheres m and n. The inverse polarizability of a metal sphere is (e.g.,

C = k2

4πεhε0

∞

m,n=−∞
P
e−jkRmn

1 + j
h

kRmn

+ 1
k2R2

mn

i

jkt

Rmn

,

−
Rmn

·

×

q

1
α

=

εm + 2εh
4πr3
0
3 (εm

3ε0εh

εh)

−

+ j

k3
6πε0εh

,

εm = 1

−

ω (ω

jωD)

,

ω2
p

−

Re

1
α (cid:19)

(cid:18)

= Re(C).

where εm is the permittivity of metal and r0 is the radius of the sphere. The permittivity

of metal can be expressed as:21

where ωp and ωD are the plasma and damping frequencies of the metal, respectively. For
lossless particles ωD = 0 and the dispersion equation 1/α = C transits to the real equation19

Equation (4) was solved numerically using the fast-converging representation for series

(1).20 By studying the dispersion characteristics of an inﬁnite two-dimensional array, the

dimensions of the array (i.e., the radius of the spheres and the period a) can be found in

such a way that the dispersion curve is reasonably ﬂat while the size of the spheres is of the

same order as the period of the arrays.

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The parameters of the arrays that are used in this paper are shown in Tables I and II,

where the wavelengths λp and λD correspond to the plasma and damping frequencies of the

spheres, respectively. Here we have used the plasma and damping frequencies for bulk silver

and gold, which is an adequate approximation for the sphere sizes that we are using.21 The

plasma and damping frequencies for silver have been obtained from Ref. 22 and for gold

from Ref. 21. In the calculation of the dispersion curve, we have used εh = 1 for simplicity.

The resonant frequency (fr) of the spheres that is shown in Tables I and II is calculated

from the plasma frequency with

ωr = ωp/√1 + 2εh.

(5)

TABLE I: Parameters of the silver sphere array.

r0

a

λp

λD

fr (εh = 1)

28 nm 65 nm 328 nm 58433 nm 5.2806

1014 Hz

TABLE II: Parameters of the gold sphere array.

r0

a

λp

λD

fr (εh = 1)

15 nm 40 nm 145 nm 11500 nm 1.1945

1015 Hz

·

·

With the values shown in Tables I and II, the dispersion curves of the arrays can be

plotted using (4), see Figs. 2 and 3. From these results we can conclude that the dispersion

curve for both types of metal spheres is reasonably ﬂat in a large range of values of q (where

q = kx/√2 = ky/√2).

III. FIELD DISTRIBUTIONS IN THE IMAGE PLANE OF THE LENS

With the suitable array dimensions found in the previous section, it is now possible to

study the electric ﬁeld distributions in a system of two ﬁnite two-dimensional arrays of

resonant nanospheres. The losses of the metal spheres are taken into account by using

complex values for the polarizability of the spheres and the permittivity of the metal. The

ideal operation of the lens is illustrated in Fig. 4, where the image (deﬁned in the image

5

FIG. 2: Dispersion of an inﬁnite two-dimensional array of silver nanospheres. Normalized frequency

as a function of the normalized transverse wavenumber. The spheres are assumed to be polarized

vertically.

FIG. 3: Dispersion of an inﬁnite two-dimensional array of gold nanospheres. Normalized frequency

as a function of the normalized transverse wavenumber. The spheres are assumed to be polarized

vertically.

plane z = 0).

plane, i.e., z = 2h + d) appears as a perfect reconstruction of the source (situated in the

The ﬁelds are calculated simply by considering each sphere as having three orthogonal

dipole moments at the same frequency (where the dispersion curve is ﬂat) and calculating

separately the contribution of each sphere to the image plane ﬁeld. Because the two arrays

6

z=0

z=h

z=h+d

z=2h+d

z

Source

x

Image

FIG. 4: (Color online) Ideal operation of the superlens.

of spheres interact, the ﬁrst task is to solve all the dipole moments Pm that correspond to

each sphere, taking into account the interaction between all the spheres. This can be done

by solving the following equation:

Pm = αEloc = α

Eext


m +



,

En


Xn6=m

where Eloc is the local ﬁeld acting on the m:th sphere, Eext

m is the external ﬁeld (caused by
Pn is the ﬁeld caused by dipole Pn. All ﬁelds are evaluated at

the source) and En = Φm,n

·

the position of the m:th sphere. Here the dyadic function Φm,n (with m

= n) describes the

interaction between spheres m and n. If we introduce the notation

where I is the unit dyadic, (6) can be expressed in a simpler form (for each orthogonal

component of the vectors separately):

Φm,m =

1
α

−

I,

Φm,nPn =

Eext
m .

−

n
X

The electric ﬁeld at point (x, y, z) of a dipole with the dipole moment p placed at (x′, y′,

z′) is (e.g., Ref. 23)

where

E = 1

4πεhε0

k2(u

p)

u e−jkr

r

×

+

1
4πεhε0 (

[3u(u

p)

n

·

×

p]

1
r3 +

jk
r2 !

 

o
e−jkr

,

)

−

7

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

6
(10)

(11)

(x

x′)x0 + (y

u =

−

y′)y0 + (z
−
r

−

z′)z0

and

From (9) we can derive Φm,n.

r =

(x

x′)2 + (y

y′)2 + (z

z′)2.

−

−

−

q

Next, let us assume that two ﬁnite two-dimensional arrays of spheres are placed in a

host medium with permittivity εh. The distance between the arrays along the z-direction

is d. Also, let us assume that a source, which consists of one or more short vertical electric

dipoles, is placed on top of the ﬁrst array at distance h from the surface of that array. The

source excites both arrays, and the x, y and z-components of the ﬁeld at the position of

each sphere (Eext

m,x, Eext

m,y and Eext

m,z) can be calculated from (9) by choosing p = pz0. The x-,

y-, and z-components of Φm,n can also be calculated with (9), where r is now the distance

from sphere m to n. The dipole moments Pn,x, Pn,y and Pn,z of each sphere can then be

calculated from (8). With the dipole moments solved, (9) can be used to calculate the

vertical component of electric ﬁeld in the image plane caused by all the spheres in the two

arrays. To get the total ﬁeld in the image plane, we must add also the ﬁeld produced by the

source to the ﬁeld of the arrays.

We have calculated the ﬁeld distributions in the image plane for diﬀerent sphere materials

(silver and gold) and also for diﬀerent sources (one or more vertical dipoles in the source

plane) using (8) and (9). In the following, we will study arrays with 20

20 silver spheres

×

in each array. The dimensions of the arrays are the same as shown in Table I, i.e., the radius

of the spheres is r0 = 28 nm and the period of the arrays is a = 65 nm. The dimensions of

the lens are h = a and d = 2a. If we choose the source plane to be at z = 0, then we plot the

image plane ﬁeld at z = d + 2h = 4a. As the permittivity of the host material we have used

εh = 2.301, which corresponds to the permittivity of PMMA (polymethyl methacrylate)
dielectric.24 PMMA is used here due to its very low losses (in fact, we have neglected the

losses in the host material to simplify the calculations).

Without any extensive optimization procedure, we have found a suitable frequency of

operation to be 1.037fr (where fr

3.8643

1014 Hz), which corresponds to the eﬀective

wavelength of λeﬀ

493.52 nm in the host medium. Comparison of this result with the

≈

≈

·

8

dispersion curve in Fig. 2 shows a considerable diﬀerence in the expected operational fre-

quency. This eﬀect can be explained by the fact that the curve in Fig. 2 is plotted for an

inﬁnite array. Indeed, as the number of the spheres in the array increases, the operational

frequency is expected to decrease, as in arrays of resonant scatterers.23 At the frequency

1.037fr, the distance between the source and image planes is 4a = 260 nm

0.53λeﬀ.

≈

A. Excitation by a single source

First, let us have a look at the electric ﬁeld distribution in the image plane caused by

a point source (a short vertical electric dipole) which is situated in the source plane.

In

this example, the position of the source dipole is at x = 3a, y = 0 (the origin of the

coordinate system is now at the center of the arrays in the xy-plane). See Fig. 5 for the

distribution of the z-component of the electric ﬁeld plotted in the image plane, i.e., in the

plane z = 2h + d = 4a. For a more detailed picture of the ﬁeld distribution, see Fig. 6,

where we have plotted the ﬁeld distributions along the line y = 0.

From Fig. 6 we can conclude that the half-power width of the “image” is about 0.23λeﬀ,

which clearly conﬁrms the sub-wavelength imaging eﬀect. As can also be seen from Fig. 6,

the ﬁeld in the image plane is very strongly enhanced by the arrays: The ﬁeld in the image

plane without the arrays (dashed line) is negligible compared to the ﬁeld strength of the

image formed by the “lens”.

FIG. 5: (Color online) Calculated electric ﬁeld distribution in the image plane with a single source.

Fields are normalized to the maximum value.

9

FIG. 6: (Color online) Calculated electric ﬁeld distributions along the line y = 0 nm in the image

plane. Fields are normalized to the maximum value. Solid line: image plane ﬁeld with the arrays.

Dashed line: image plane ﬁeld without the arrays.

B. Excitation by two sources

Next, let us consider excitation by two short vertical dipoles, situated in the source plane.

To study the resolution properties of the lens, we place the sources very close to each other.

The position of source dipole (1) is x = 1.25a = 81.25 nm, y = 0 nm and the position of

source dipole (2) is x =

1.25a =

81.25 nm, y = 0 nm. With this positioning the distance

−

−

between sources (1) and (2) is approximately 0.329λeﬀ. See Fig. 7 for the distribution of the

z-component of the electric ﬁeld plotted in the image plane. For a more qualitative picture

of the ﬁeld distribution, see Fig. 8, where we have plotted the ﬁeld distribution along the

line y = 0.

From Fig. 8 we can conclude that the two sources can be resolved very reliably (on the

level half of the maximum intensity) from the image plane ﬁeld distribution. As can be seen

from Fig. 7, the introduction of multiple sources causes some additional maxima (because

of the interference eﬀect), which can potentially hinder the resolution in the image plane.

The maximum ﬁeld corresponding to these unwanted maxima (along line y = 106 nm) is

also plotted in Fig. 8 (dotted line). We see that this maximum is well below the half-power

level of the total intensity.

10

FIG. 7: (Color online) Calculated electric ﬁeld distribution in the image plane with two sources.

Fields are normalized to the maximum value.

FIG. 8: (Color online) Calculated electric ﬁeld distributions in the image plane. Fields are nor-

malized to the maximum value. Solid line: y = 0 nm, image plane ﬁeld with the arrays. Dashed

line: y = 0 nm, image plane ﬁeld without the arrays. Dotted line: y = 106 nm, image plane ﬁeld

with the arrays.

C. Eﬀect of the positioning of the sources

The non-symmetric positioning of the sources with respect to the unit cell of the arrays

aﬀects the ﬁeld distributions. The cases studied above relate to the “worst case”, because

there the sources are positioned in the center between four neighboring spheres of the arrays

(in the xy-plane). When a source is positioned directly above a sphere, the maximum

of the image will be even more pronounced. Also, when using two sources that are not

11

symmetrically positioned with respect to the unit cell of the arrays (as in the previous

subsection), it may happen that the image of the other source has a larger maximum (which

corresponds to the fact that this source is closer to a sphere in the xy-plane). By studying

these special cases it was noticed that the eﬀect of the source positioning is not crucial to the

formation of a clear and unambiguous image. The maxima corresponding to the positions

of the sources are always above the half-power level.

The eﬀect of the positioning of the sources with respect to the entire sphere array was

also studied. It has been noticed that even when using the arrays of 20

20 spheres, the

×

image is properly formed as long as the sources are not very close to the edge of the arrays

(in the xy-plane). When using two or more sources, the interference maxima grow stronger

as the sources get closer to the edge of the arrays.

For an example, see Fig. 9, where two sources are positioned in such a way that the

distance from the sources to their closest spheres is diﬀerent and the both sources are close

to the edge of the arrays (in the xy-plane). The position of source dipole (1) is x = 4.5a =

292.5 nm, y = 5a = 325 nm and the position of source dipole (2) is x = 2a = 130 nm,

y = 5a = 325 nm. With this positioning the distance between the sources is the same as in

the above example (approximately 0.329λeﬀ).

The reason for the diﬀerence in the amplitudes of the two “images” in Fig. 9 is not the

fact that one source is closer to the edge of the array than the other. The main reason for

this is the positioning of the sources with respect to the unit cell of the arrays. However,

the interference maximum is aﬀected also by the distance to the edge of the arrays. The

dotted line in Fig. 9 corresponds to this interference term of the total ﬁeld. The maximum

of this interference term is somewhat stronger than the one in Fig. 8, and it is due to the

placing of the sources near the edge of the arrays.

D. Further improvements of the resolution of the proposed lens

It is possible to further improve the resolution characteristics of the lens studied in this

paper. First, the removal of the propagating modes from the lens should mitigate the

unwanted interference maxima (this can be realized simply by introducing a thin silver slab

between the source plane and the lens). Second way to improve the imaging properties is to

introduce a small deviation in the parameters of the arrays (i.e., the radius and the period).

12

FIG. 9: (Color online) Calculated electric ﬁeld distributions in the image plane. Fields are nor-

malized to the maximum value. Solid line: y = 325 nm, image plane ﬁeld with the arrays. Dashed

line: y = 325 nm, image plane ﬁeld without the arrays. Dotted line: y = 167 nm, image plane ﬁeld

with the arrays.

This will make the dispersion curve even more ﬂat, with the result that more modes are

supported by the arrays. The study of these improvements is beyond the scope of this paper.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have studied the possibility of using a coupled pair of arrays comprising

metallic nanospheres as a near-ﬁeld imaging device enhancing evanescent ﬁelds. We have

shown that in arrays with inﬁnitely many silver or gold spheres the dispersion is ﬂat enough

so that in a very narrow frequency band most of the evanescent modes are resonantly

excited in the arrays. According to the studies made in this paper, this excitation enables

the “superlensing” eﬀect, already known in the microwave region, in the optical domain. In

the proposed device the enhancement of a large number of the evanescent modes emitted

by the source can be realized. We have numerically studied a superlens consisting of two

ﬁnite arrays of silver spheres and have shown that in the image plane of the lens, resolution

better than λeﬀ/3 is achievable, even when the distance between the source and image

planes is larger than λeﬀ/2. According to the results presented in this paper, the use of

metallic nanospheres is a very prospective way of extending the use of near-ﬁeld enhancement

phenomenon into the optical region.

13

Acknowledgments

This work has been partially funded by the Academy of Finland and TEKES through the

Center-of-Excellence program. The authors wish to thank Liisi Jylh¨a for helpful discussions.

1 V. G. Veselago, Soviet Physics Uspekhi 10, 509 (1968).

2 R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Science 292 77 (2001).

3 C. G. Parazzoli, R. B. Greegor, K. Li, B. E. C. Koltenbah, and M. Tanielian, Phys. Rev. Lett.

4 A. A. Houck, J. B. Brock, and I. L. Chuang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 137401 (2003).

5 G. V. Eleftheriades, A. K. Iyer, and P. C. Kremer, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech-

90 107401 (2003).

niques 50 2702 (2002).

6 C. Caloz and T. Itoh, IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation 52 1159 (2004).

7 J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 3966 (2000).

8 A. Grbic and G. V. Eleftheriades, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 117403 (2004).

9 P. Alitalo, S. Maslovski, and S. Tretyakov, J. Appl. Phys., 99 124910 (2006).

10 J. Zhou, Th. Koschny, M. Kafesaki, E. N. Economou, J. B. Pendry, and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 95 223902 (2005).

11 G. Dolling, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, C. M. Soukoulis, and S. Linden, Opt. Lett. 31 1800 (2006).

12 A. V. Kildishev, W. Cai, U. K. Chettiar, H.-K. Yuan, A. K. Sarychev, V. P. Drachev, and V.

M. Shalaev, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 23 423 (2006).

13 S. Zhang, W. Fan, K. J. Malloy, and S. R. J. Brueck, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 23 434 (2006).

14 I. R. Gabitov, R. A. Indik, N. M. Litchinitser, A. I. Maimistov, V. M. Shalaev, and J. E.

Soneson, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 23 535 (2006).

15 A. Al`u and N. Engheta, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 23 571 (2006).

16 S. Maslovski, S. A. Tretyakov, and P. Alitalo, J. Appl. Phys. 96 1293 (2004).

17 M. J. Freire and R. Marques, Appl. Phys. Lett., 86 182505 (2005).

18 P. Alitalo, S. Maslovski, and S. Tretyakov, Phys. Lett. A, 357 397 (2006).

19 C. R. Simovski, A. J. Viitanen, and S. A. Tretyakov, Phys. Rev. E 72 066606 (2005).

20 C. R. Simovski, P. A. Belov, and M. S. Kondratjev, Journal of Electromagnetic Waves and

14

21 C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huﬀman, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles, John

22 P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B 6 4370 (1972).

23 S. Tretyakov, Analytical modeling in applied electromagnetics, Norwood, MA: Artech House,

24 H. Lee, Y. Xiong, N. Fang, W. Srituravanich, S. Durant, M. Ambati, C. Sun, and X. Zhang,

Applications 13 189 (1999).

Wiley & Sons, 1983.

2003.

New J. Phys. 7 255 (2005).

15

