6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tunable split-ring resonators for
nonlinear negative-index metamaterials

Ilya V. Shadrivov, Steven K. Morrison, and Yuri S. Kivshar
Nonlinear Physics Centre, Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering
Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
ivs124@rsphysse.anu.edu.au

http://wwwrsphysse.anu.edu.au/nonlinear

Abstract:
We study experimentally the dynamic tunability and
self-induced nonlinearity of split-ring resonators incorporating variable
capacitance diodes. We demonstrate that
the eigenfrequencies of the
resonators can be tuned over a wide frequency range, and signiﬁcantly, we
show that the self-induced nonlinear effects observed in the varactor-loaded
split-ring resonator structures can appear at relatively low power levels.

© 2008 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: (260.2110) Electromagnetic Theory; (999.9999) Metamaterials.

References and links

1. C. Soukoulis, “Bending back light: The science of negative index materials,” Optics and Photonics News, Vol.

17, No. 6, pp. 18-21 (2006), and references therein.

2. J. B. Pendry, A. J. Holden, W. J. Stewart, and I. Youngs, “Extremely low frequency plasmons in metallic

mesostructures,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4773–4776 (1996).

3. J. B. Pendry, A. J. Holden, D. J. Robbins, and W. J. Stewart, “Magnetism from conductors and enhanced nonlinear

phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 47, 2075–2084 (1999).

4. P. Markos and C. M. Soukoulis, “Numerical studies of left-handed materials and arrays of split ring resonators,”

5. P. Markos and C. M. Soukoulis, “Transmission studies of left-handed materials,” Phys. Rev. B 65, 033401–4

Phys. Rev. E 65, 036622–8 (2002).

(2002).

6. D. R. Smith, W. J. Padilla, D. C. Vier, S. C. Nemat Nasser, and S. Schultz, “Composite medium with simultane-

ously negative permeability and permittivity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4184–4187 (2000).

7. M. Bayindir, K. Aydin, E. Ozbay, P. Markos, and C. M. Soukoulis, “Transmission properties of composite meta-

materials in free space,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 120–122 (2002).

8. C. G. Parazzoli, R. B. Greegor, K. Li, B. E. C. Koltenbah, and M. Tanielian, “Experimental veriﬁcation and

simulation of negative index of refraction using Snell’s law,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 107401–4 (2003).

9. V. G. Veselago, “The electrodynamics of substances with simultaneously negative values of epsilon and mu,”

Usp. Fiz. Nauk 92, 517–526 (1967) (in Russian) [English translation: Phys. Usp. 10, 509–& (1968)].

10. S. Linden, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, J. Zhou, T. Koschny, and C. M. Soukoulis, “Magnetic response of metama-

terials at 100-terahertz,” Science 306, 1351–1353 (2004).

11. V. M. Shalaev, W. Cai, U. K. Chettiar, H. K. Yuan, A. K. Sarychev, V. P. Drachev, and A. V. Kildishev, “Negative

index of refraction in optical metamaterials,” Opt. Lett. 30, 3356–3358 (2005).

12. A. A. Zharov, I. V. Shadrivov, and Yu. S. Kivshar, “Nonlinear properties of left-handed metamaterials,” Phys.

Rev. Lett. 91, 037401–4 (2003).

13. M. Lapine, M. Gorkunov, and K. H. Ringhofer, “Nonlinearity of a metamaterial arising from diode insertions

into resonant conductive elements,” Phys. Rev. E 67, 065601–4 (2003).

14. I. V. Shadrivov, A. A. Sukhorukov, Yu. S. Kivshar, A. A. Zharov, A. D. Boardman, and P. Egan, “Nonlinear

surface waves in left-handed materials,” Phys. Rev. E 69, 16617–9 (2004).

15. V. M. Agranovich, Y. R. Shen, R. H. Baughman, and A. A. Zakhidov, “Linear and nonlinear wave propagation

in negative refraction metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. B 69, 165112–165117 (2004).

16. M. Lapine and M. Gorkunov, “Three-wave coupling of microwaves in metamaterial with nonlinear resonant

conductive elements,” Phys. Rev. E 70, 66601–8 (2004).

17. A. A. Zharov, N. A. Zharova, I. V. Shadrivov, and Yu. S. Kivshar, “Subwavelength imaging with opaque nonlinear

left-handed lenses,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 091104–3 (2005).

18. N. A. Zharova, I. V. Shadrivov, A. A. Zharov, and Yu. S. Kivshar, “Nonlinear transmission and spatiotemporal

solitons in metamaterials with negative refraction,” Optics Express 13, 1291–1298 (2005).

19. I. V. Shadrivov, A. A. Zharov, N. A. Zharov, and Yu. S. Kivshar, “Nonlinear left-handed metamaterials,” Radio

Science 40, RS3S90 (2005).

20. I. V. Shadrivov, A. A. Zharov, and Yu. S. Kivshar, “Second-harmonic generation in nonlinear left-handed meta-

materials,” Journal of the Optical Society of America B (Optical Physics) 23, 529–534 (2006).

21. M. V. Gorkunov, I. V. Shadrivov, and Yu. S. Kivshar, “Enhanced parametric processes in binary metamaterials,”

Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 71912–3 (2006).

22. K. Aydin, K. Guven, N. Katsarakis, C.M. Soukoulis, and E. Ozbay, “Effect of disorder on magnetic resonance

band gap in split-ring resoanntor structures,”, Opt. Exp. 12, 5896-5901 (2004).

23. I. Gil, J. Garcia Garcia, J. Bonache, F. Martin, M. Sorolla, and R. Marques, “Varactor-loaded split ring resonators

for tunable notch ﬁlters at microwave frequencies,” Electron. Lett. 40, 1347–1348 (2004).

24. I. Gil, J. Bonache, J. Garc´ia-Garc´ia, F. Mart´in, “Tunable metameterial transmission lines based on varactor-loaded

split-ring resonantors,” IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Techn., 54, 2665 - 2674 (2004).

1.

Introduction

Specially engineered microstructured materials (or metamaterials) that demonstrate many in-
triguing properties for the propagation of electromagnetic waves such as negative refraction
have been discussed widely during recent years (see, e.g., the review paper [1] and references
therein). Such materials have been studied theoretically (see, e.g., Refs. [2, 3, 4, 5] to cite a few)
and also fabricated experimentally (see, e.g., Refs. [6, 7, 8]). The simplest composite material
of this kind is created by a three-dimensional lattice of metallic wires and split-ring resonators
(SRRs) with its unique properties associated with the negative real parts of the magnetic per-
meability and dielectric permittivity. Since the ﬁrst theoretical paper by Veselago [9], such
negative-index metamaterials have also been described as left-handed materials.

Within the microwave and millimeter frequency ranges, the composite metamaterials created
by SRR systems have been shown to possess macroscopic negative-index (left-handed) prop-
erties and thus exhibit peculiarities not found in natural materials. Recent strong experimental
efforts have been directed towards the attainment of metamaterials with negative response in
the Terahertz [10] and even optical [1, 11] frequency domains.

Since the ﬁrst extensive studies on negative-index metamaterials, the attention of most re-
searchers has been focused on the passive control and linear properties of these composite
structures, where the effective parameters of the structure do not depend on the intensity of
the applied ﬁeld or propagating electromagnetic waves. However, to achieve the full potential
of the unique properties of the metamaterials requires the ability to dynamically control the
material’s properties in real time through either direct external tuning or nonlinear responses.
Dynamic control over metamaterials is a nontrivial issue since such materials possess left-
handed properties only in some ﬁnite frequency range, which is basically determined by the
geometry of the structure. The possibility to control the effective parameters of metamateri-
als using nonlinearity has recently been suggested in Refs. [12, 13] and developed extensively
in Refs. [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] where many interesting nonlinear metamaterials ef-
fects have been predicted theoretically. The main reason for the expectation of strong nonlinear
effects in metamaterials is that the microscopic electric ﬁeld in the vicinity of the metallic par-
ticles forming the left-handed structure can be much higher than the macroscopic electric ﬁeld
carried by the propagating wave. This provides a dynamic yet important physical mechanism
for dramatic enhancing nonlinear effects in left-handed materials. Moreover, changing the in-
tensity of the electromagnetic wave not only changes the material parameters, but also allows
switching between transparent left-handed states and opaque dielectric states.

In this paper, we make the ﬁrst step toward the creation and study of fully controlled, tunable
nonlinear metamaterial systems through the study of the tunability and self-induced nonlin-

Fig. 1. Experimental structure used to study tunability and nonlinearity of a varactor-loaded
split-ring resonator system. (a) Photography showing the fabricated SRR and biasing cir-
cuitry used for direct voltage tuning of the resonant frequency. (b) Top: electromagnetic
representation of the SRR-diode structure; bottom: schematic of the biasing circuit.

ear response of a single SRR. The analysis of SRRs as tunable components within extended
composite systems is an extremely important step, and this approach has, for example, been
employed to study the effect of disorder in SRR structures [22]. To achieve our goals, we add a
variable-capacitance diode (varicap) to the SRR resonant structure. Tunability of the diode ca-
pacitance is achieved by varying the width of its speciﬁcally doped P-N junction, and associated
depletion layer, through the application of a DC bias voltage, or more attractively, through the
self-action of the diode with increased applied electromagnetic energy, giving rise to dramatic
self-induced nonlinear effects. Changes in the diode capacitance alter the resonant conditions of
the SRR producing frequency shifts, which in turn adjust the effective magnetic permeability of
left-handed metamaterials. Using this methodology, we experimentally establish a qualitative
measure of the tunability of an SRR, and conﬁrm earlier predictions for the dynamic control
over the properties of SRRs by varying the intensity of the incident electromagnetic signal.

2. Tunable split-ring resonators

Effective control over the resonant conditions of the SRR is achieved by adding the capacitance
of diodes in series with the distributed capacitance of the outer ring of the SRR at a point of
maxima in the electric currents. This methodology, as well as the motivation, is thus signif-
icantly different to previous works by Gil et al. [23, 24] that used a varicap to obtain edge
coupling between the two rings of a uniquely designed SRR structure employed to form a mi-
crowave notch ﬁlter. Indeed, the series application of the diode provides a simple mechanism
for both tunability and nonlinearity suited to the formation of left-handed metamaterials, partic-
ularly with the recent developments in magnetic thin-ﬁlm and microwave nonlinear materials.
The symmetry and simplicity of our system also lends itself to greater integration, allowing the
structure to be translated more readily to the THz and optical frequency domains.

To study the potential tunability and nonlinearity of metamaterials we use a single archetype

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) Experimental and (b) numerical results for the modulus of the reﬂection coefﬁ-
cient (S11) as a function of frequency for the SRR without the diode circuit, and with the
diode circuit under both positive and negative biasing conditions.

SRR, constructed on ﬁbreglass (FR4, e r ≈ 4.4) with copper metallization as shown in Fig. 1(a).
An additional gap is created in the outer SRR ring for mounting of the Skywork’s SMV1231-
0790 varicap diode. A DC voltage is used to achieve direct tuning of the diode. The parasitic
effects of the voltage supply are isolated from the electromagnetic structure of the SRR via a
biasing circuit. The simple biasing circuit consist of wire-wound shunt inductors (L1, L2) and
de-coupling capacitor (C1), as illustrated in the schematic of Fig. 1(b). In the forward biasing
regime a series resistor (R1) is used to limit the forward bias current through the diode and
prevent damage; in the reverse bias region this resistor has negligible effect on the circuit’s
operation. Electromagnetic coupling to the SRR is accomplished with a short trace probe near
the SRR that is de-tuned to have a mostly ﬂat response in the SRR’s operational bandwidth, al-
lowing the SRR’s properties to dominate. The SRR is energized and measured using a 20GHz
Rohde and Schwartz vector network analyzer (ZVB20), wherein resonant conditions are ob-
served through a reduction in the reﬂection coefﬁcient (S11) at resonance.

Two reference frequency responses are taken for the SRR: without the diode and gap, and
with the diode structure at zero bias voltage, as shown in Fig. 2 (a). An initial resonance located
at 2.22GHz for the SRR is shifted to 2.44GHz with the diode structure. This increase in resonant
frequency is a result of the zero-bias junction capacitance (CJ0) caused by the intrinsic depletion
layer of the diode. As the diode’s capacitance is added in series to the distributed capacitance
of the SRR, it causes the total capacitance to decrease and the resonance frequency to increase.
Application of a negative biasing voltage to the diode results in an increase of the depletion
layer and a subsequent decrease in the diode’s capacitance pushing the resonant frequency
higher. Conversely, a positive biasing voltage increases the diode’s capacitance and decreases
the SRR’s resonant frequency. However, due to the current-voltage relationship of the diode it
can only be forward biased to a maximum voltage of 1.2 volts.

For a negative bias voltage of -10 volts (not shown) the resonant frequency can be shifted to
2.9GHz, whereas for a positive voltage of 1 volt the resonant frequency decreases to 2.27GHz.
For this particular varicap diode and SRR structure there is a tuning bandwidth of 0.63GHz,
equivalent to a tuning range of approximately 26%.

We note here that this tuning range has not been optimized. Further increases to this range
could be achieved through improved materials and impurity doping of the diode, bringing about
an increase capacitance ratio, in addition to greater integration of the diode with the SRR struc-
ture. Indeed, Fig. 2 (a) shows the quality factor of the SRR’s resonance is decreased with the

0 dBm
10 dBm
15 dBm

t
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
e
o
C
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
R

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75

2.3

2.4
Frequency (GHz)

2.5

Fig. 3. Experimentally measured modulus of the SRR reﬂection coefﬁcient (S11) as a func-
tion of frequency and applied input power from the vector network analyzer. Power levels
at the diode are signiﬁcantly lower due to input coupling (see text).

inclusion of the diode structure, resulting from the inherent series resistance of the diode, and
packaging and mounting parasitics; all of which can be reduced through greater integration and
more advanced fabrication techniques.

3. Numerical simulations

To determine the optimal placement of the varicap diode, we employ numerical simulations.
We use a ﬁnite element method based electromagnetic simulator in conjunction with a detailed
SPICE model of the varactor diode and bias circuit. S-parameters were extracted from the
SPICE model and included within the S-parameter calculations of the SRR as a generic two-
port device. Results of our numerical simulations generated in this manner are presented in
Fig. 2(b) for several biased and unbiased conditions.

By comparing these results with the experimental curves, we observe a good qualitative
agreement between the measured and simulated resonant frequency locations. However, the
numerical results do not reﬂect the voltage and frequency dependent changes in the quality
factors of the resonances. We believe that changes in the measured quality factors of the reso-
nances occur due to changes in the parasitic series resistance of the diode and, to a lesser extent,
changes in the impedance mismatch of the diode and the SRR structure. While the impedance
mismatch effect is modeled numerically, the variable series resistance is not, resulting in the
quality factor discrepancy. Greater accuracy of the simulated results requires more knowledge
of the diode’s fabrication, which is not available for the diode used in our experiment.

4. Nonlinear split-ring resonators

Tunability of the SRR via an applied voltage is a valuable mechanism; however the integration
of the biasing network and delivery of voltage sources, albeit possible, requires careful design
to prevent these components affecting the composite performance of a LHM. Furthermore, the
ability to change the properties of a LHM in response to the power of the applied signal leads
to important effects such as dynamic control of the material’s opaqueness and the switching
between left- and right-handed material responses. To study these self-induced nonlinear effects
we zero bias the diode and sweep the applied power from the vector network analyzer from
0dBm to 17dBm. The power levels at the diode are, however, substantially lower due to the
signiﬁcant losses at the input coupling probe.

As previously described theoretically in Ref. [12], the nonlinear properties of the SRR em-

2.35 GHz
2.37 GHz
2.40 GHz
2.42 GHz
2.43 GHz
2.44 GHz
2.46 GHz

0.85

0.8

t
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
e
o
C
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
R

0.75

0

2.70 GHz
2.81 GHz
2.83 GHz
2.85 GHz
2.88 GHz

0.85

0.8

0.75

(a)

15

0.7

0

5

10

Power (dBm)

5

10

Power (dBm)

15

Fig. 4. Experimentally measured modulus of the reﬂection coefﬁcient (S11) as a function of
the output power of vector network analyzer; (a) at several frequencies in the vicinity of the
linear resonance, and (b) zero bias conditions. Power levels at the diode are signiﬁcantly
lower due to input coupling (see details in the text).

(b)

bedded with the varicap diode gives rise to eigenfrequency shifts as the intensity of the applied
electromagnetic wave is varied. The self-induced nonlinear response of the SRR-diode struc-
ture is illustrated in Fig. 4(a), where the dependence of the reﬂection coefﬁcient on the applied
signal is observed for the zero-biased condition. The demonstrated reﬂection coefﬁcient depen-
dence provides switching between high and low reﬂection states, corresponding to high and low
currents in the SRR and thus the magnetic momenta. Control over the nonlinear response can
be achieved with static biasing of the diode as illustrated in Fig. 4(b), where a ﬁxed reverse bias
voltage of -7 volts has been applied. Negative biasing results in an enhanced response whereas
positive biasing causes a reduced response arising from the increased series resistance and di-
minished quality factor. As the nonlinear effects are observed near the linear SRR resonance,
the frequency range where the SRR is strongly nonlinear shifts as the bias voltage changes.

5. Conclusions

We have demonstrated experimentally both the direct real-time tunability and self-induced non-
linear response of a varactor-loaded split-ring resonator structure; a key element for the creation
of a nonlinear, negative-index metamaterial. The structure we have used is based on a typical
SRR design, and employs a commercially available varactor diode placed at a maximum of
the SRR’s current and in series with its distributed capacitance. Through the application of a
positive and negative biasing voltage, we have observed more than half a GHz frequency tun-
ing range; a tuning range equivalent to 26% of the zero-biased frequency. Using a zero-bias
diode, with and without an external biasing circuit and voltage supply, we have demonstrated
the ability of this structure to switch between high and low reﬂection states associated with a
power-dependent frequency shift. These results suggest that negative-index metamaterials con-
structed with SRRs and varactor diodes can exhibit large tunability and nonlinearity, enabling
many unique and novel metamaterial properties not available within nature. We believe our
results will encourage the future design of nonlinear, negative-index metamaterials within the
microwave and optical frequency domains.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Australian Research Council. We thank C.M. Soukoulis, V.
Shalaev, R. McPhedran, A. Mitchell, and M. Gorkunov for useful and encouraging discussions.

