6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chiral molecules split light: Reﬂection and refraction in a chiral liquid

Ambarish Ghosh and Peer Fischer
The Rowland Institute at Harvard, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142

A light beam changes direction as it enters a liquid at an angle from another medium, such as
air. Should the liquid contain molecules that lack mirror symmetry, then it has been predicted by
Fresnel that the light beam will not only change direction, but will actually split into two separate
beams with a small diﬀerence in the respective angles of refraction. Here we report the observation
of this phenomenon. We also demonstrate that the angle of reﬂection does not equal the angle of
incidence in a chiral medium. Unlike conventional optical rotation, which depends on the path-
length through the sample, the reported reﬂection and refraction phenomena arise within a few
wavelengths at the interface and thereby suggest a new approach to polarimetry that can be used
in microﬂuidic volumes.

PACS numbers: 33.55.Ad, 42.25.Gy, 42.25.Lc, 78.20.Ek, 78.20.Fm, 78.30.Cp

Liquids composed of randomly oriented molecules are,
in the absence of an external inﬂuence, isotropic, and
are generally described by a single scalar refractive in-
dex. Optically active liquids, that is, chiral liquids which
have the ability to rotate the polarization vector of light,
are an important exception. These are characterized
by two refractive indices, one for left- (−) and one for
right- (+) circularly polarized radiation. Linearly polar-
ized light may be regarded as a coherent superposition of
left- and right-circularly polarized waves of equal ampli-
tude, and Fresnel’s theory of optical rotation shows that
a diﬀerence in the respective indices of refraction causes
the waves to acquire diﬀerent phases as they propagate
through the liquid and the polarization vector to rotate
[1, 2]. The signiﬁcance of optical rotation lies in the fact
that it is a means to distinguish the two mirror image
forms (enantiomers) of a chiral molecule. Most biologi-
cally important molecules are chiral and optical rotation
is a well established analytical technique used to deter-
mine their absolute stereochemical conﬁguration (hand-
edness) in solution. Optical activity in liquids should,
however, not only manifest itself through optical rotation
in transmission, but should also be observable in reﬂec-
tion and refraction – as we demonstrate in this Letter.

If one considers the refraction of light at a boundary
formed by a chiral and an achiral isotropic medium, as
shown in Fig.1a, then the circularly polarized compo-
nents must independently obey Snell’s law:

n0 sin θ0 = n(±) sin θ(±) .

(1)

Circularly polarized light, incident with angle of inci-
dence θ0 from the achiral medium characterized by the
polarization independent refractive index n0, will thus
refract with angles of refraction θ(−) and θ(+), depend-
ing on whether it is, respectively, left- or right-circularly
polarized [1, 4, 5, 6]. Similarly, if unpolarized or linearly
polarized light is incident from the achiral medium, then
the light will split into two beams, one left- and the other
right-circularly polarized [4, 7].

In order to verify that a linearly polarized light beam
does split into its left- and right-circularly polarized com-
ponents as shown in Fig.1a, we imaged the separation be-

a

θ

0

b

n

0

n(+)-

chiral liquid

δ

(- )
θ

(+)
θ

θ(+)

θ(- )

θ

i

δ’

n(+)-

chiral liquid

n

0

FIG. 1:
(color online) (a) Refraction geometry at an achi-
ral/chiral interface. A wave incident from an isotropic achiral
medium (angle of incidence θ0) is split into its circularly po-
larized wave components in the chiral medium. In an achiral
medium the angle of reﬂection (not shown) does not depend
on the polarization of the light and is therefore not sensi-
tive to chirality. However, Silverman et al. showed that the
specular reﬂection oﬀ a chiral surface can exhibit diﬀerences
in intensity for the two circularly polarized components that
depend on the circular dichroism (diﬀerential absorption) in
the chiral medium [3]. Reﬂection geometry at a chiral/achiral
interface in a chiral medium. A wave incident from a chiral
medium is reﬂected at the interface and is split into its circu-
larly polarized wave components. The transmitted ray (not
shown) splits similar to the scheme shown in a).

tween the two refracted beams on a CCD camera. Given
that the diﬀerence between the refractive indices is small,
the angular divergence δ = θ(+) − θ(−) between the re-
fracted beams in Fig.1a can be written as

tan θ

(2)

δ ≈

(cid:17) ,

n (cid:16)n(−) − n(+)
where n = (n(−) − n(+))/2 and where θ is the average
of the two angles of refraction. The splitting needs to
be large enough for it to be resolved on the detector.
Fresnel showed that multiple-refraction at non-parallel
interfaces can be used to increase the net divergence [1,
4]. Our experimental geometry, depicted in Fig.2a, makes
use of this ampliﬁcation scheme, and is similar to the one
originally devised by Fresnel to image double refraction

a

plane

b

S

S

S

S

polarized light

R

R

R

R

R

S

R

CCD

I

II

III

IV

50 µm

0.1

0.5

1

FIG. 2: (color online) (a) Schematic of the experimental ge-
ometry used to image double refraction. A plane polarized
light ray is incident onto a stack of prismatic cuvettes, which
are alternately ﬁlled with the R- and S- enantiomer of a chiral
liquid. The angular divergence increases by ∼ 2δ at each R\S
or S/R interface, since both the order of the enantiomers and
the orientation of the interface changes from one cuvette to
the next. The beam would not split in an achiral liquid. (b)
Intensity plots of a laser with Gaussian beam proﬁle recorded
on a CCD camera (4.6 micron pixel size). The images cor-
respond to a passage through 8, 12, 16, and 20 interfaces,
(labeled I-IV respectively). Image IV clearly shows two well
separated Gaussian beam proﬁles that are right- (upper) and
left- (lower) circularly polarized.

in quartz crystals [1, 4, 5]. In Figure 2b it is seen that
the splitting of a 405 nm diode laser beam, traversing
prismatic cuvettes ﬁlled with optically active solutions
of limonene, increases with the number of interfaces and
becomes clearly resolvable on a CCD camera. We veriﬁed
that the two beams in Fig.2b IV are indeed circularly
polarized and that they are of opposite circularity. The
refracted beams are of equal intensity and are coherent as
the incident light is plane polarized. Should the incident
light be unpolarized, then the two circularly polarized
refracted beams have no ﬁxed phase-relation [7].

Multiple interfaces amplify the double-refraction ef-
fects, since the angular deviation increases with each in-
terface, but they are not required in order to measure the
chirality-induced splitting of a light beam, which may
also be observed in reﬂection. In the case of reﬂection
inside a liquid, as shown in Fig.1b, the angles can be
obtained by considering the boundary conditions of the
electromagnetic waves at the interface. The latter re-
quires that the wavevectors of the incident ~ki and the
reﬂected beam ~kr have the same tangential components
along the interface, i.e. satisfy ki sin θi = kr sin θr, where
the angle of reﬂection (measured from the interface nor-
mal) is θr , and where kr = 2πnr/λ and nr is the re-
fractive index the reﬂected beam experiences. ki is cor-
respondingly deﬁned for the incident beam. An ordinary
achiral liquid is described by a single refractive index and
it follows that the law of reﬂection (θr = θi) holds regard-
less of the polarization state of the light. Because a cir-
cularly polarized wave undergoes a (partial) polarization
reversal upon reﬂection, the wavevectors for the incident
and the reﬂected wave in a chiral liquid are associated

2

(3)

with diﬀerent refractive indices. Hence, in an optically
active medium θr 6= θi, and there are two reﬂected waves
with angles of reﬂection θ(−) and θ(+) [8, 9, 10]. Their
angular divergence after reﬂection is given by

δ′ ≈

tan θi

n (cid:16)n(−) − n(+)

(cid:17) .

In general, the circular polarization components will not
fully reverse their circularity upon reﬂection, but become
elliptically polarized. The degree of circular polarization,
and hence the fraction of the beam that doubly reﬂects,
depends on the Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcients for a given
interface, and needs to be accounted for in practice.

The divergence between the two circular components
of a reﬂected or refracted beam can be directly compared
with the optical rotation in radians developed by light at
the wavelength λ traversing a distance d in a chiral liquid
[2, 11]:

α =

π d

λ (cid:16)n(−) − n(+)

(cid:17) ,

(4)

which is also a function of the circular birefringence
n(−) − n(+). It is thus expected that δ/λ and δ′/λ will
exhibit the same dependence on wavelength as optical
rotation does, provided the dispersion of the average re-
fractive index of the chiral medium in Eqs. (2) and (3)
has been accounted for. To test this, we passed light from
a Xe arc lamp through a monochromator and recorded δ
and δ′ as a function of wavelength. The setup is schemat-
ically depicted in Fig.3a. A photoelastic modulator is
used to modulate the polarization of the light between
left- and right-circularly polarized at ∼50 kHz and the
position of the light beam is synchronously recorded by
a one-dimensional position sensitive detector and a lockin
ampliﬁer. Figure 3b shows that the angular divergence
measurements obtained in reﬂection as well as in refrac-
tion at a single interface between a chiral liquid and an
achiral medium, are in complete agreement with the con-
ventionally measured optical rotatory dispersion (ORD)
spectrum. Our results show that reﬂection and refraction
can be used in place of conventional optical rotation mea-
surements, and their dispersion correspondingly in place
of ORD for structural and stereochemical studies. The
reﬂection data conﬁrms that the ‘law of reﬂection’ does
not necessarily hold in the presence of chiral molecules.
Similar results have been obtained with other optically
active liquids, such as pinene and aqueous glucose solu-
tions.

Away from the interface, the bulk of a liquid does not
aﬀect reﬂection and refraction angles, and so it is interest-
ing to ask if it is indeed possible to miniaturize the sample
cell and hence the liquid volume without any loss of sen-
sitivity. In doing so an important aspect is the shape of
the liquid cell. The two circularly-polarized (cp) compo-
nents will experience a small parallel displacement upon
traversing a thin slab geometry with parallel front and
exit windows, but will not experience any change in their
propagation directions. The parallel displacement scales

3

a

b

)

m
c
/
e
e
r
g
e
d
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r
 
l
a
c
i
t
p
O

20

10

0

-10

-20

  
polarizer

PEM

light source

sample
  cell

macroscopic cell

micro-cell (inset)

refraction

reflection

PSD

PSD

R-limonene

  ORD 
 refraction  
 reflection  

3.0

2.0

1.0

0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0

)
d
a
r

(m
 

d

i

 
,
n
o
i
t
a
v
e
d
 
r
a
u
g
n
A

l

R-carvone

  ORD 
 refraction 
 reflection 

450

550

650

750

Wavelength (nm)

FIG. 3: (color online) (a) Schematic of the experimental ge-
ometry used for the reﬂection and refraction measurements,
where PSD denotes a position sensitive diode and PEM a
In order to clearly separate reﬂec-
photoelastic modulator.
◦
tion and refraction phenomena, a 90
prismatic cuvette holds
the chiral liquid, so that the doubly reﬂected beam exits the
cuvette without doubly refracting. (b) Optical rotation and
optical rotatory dispersion (ORD) data obtained from the
wavelength-dependence of the measured angular divergence in
both reﬂection (open triangles) and refraction (solid circles) at
a single achiral/chiral interface for two optically active liquids
R-(−)-carvone (symbols in red) and R-(+)-limonene (symbols
in blue). The data is seen to be in excellent agreement with
conventional optical rotation measurements obtained with a
spectropolarimeter (corresponding solid lines).

with the thickness of the ﬂuid layer and this precludes
miniaturization. The reﬂection/refraction must therefore
take place in an asymmetric fashion, and in general, both
phenomena will contribute to the angular divergence be-
tween the cp beams. We have constructed a micro-cell
(inset Fig.4) where the liquid is conﬁned asymmetrically
by a part of a cylindrical Fresnel lens. In Figure 4 we com-
pare the results from double refraction measurements in
the micro-cell where the average path length through the
chiral liquid is ∼400 µm with results from a macroscopic
cuvette where the light propagates ∼2 cm through an op-
tically active liquid. A polarimeter would record an opti-
cal rotation in the micro-cell that is 50 times smaller than
that of the macroscopic cell, yet in Fig.4 it is clearly seen
that the measurements of the micro-cell and the macro-
scopic cuvette give rise to the same angular divergences.
Since the circular birefringence of the chiral medium is
proportional to the concentration diﬀerence between the
two enantiomers, it follows that the angular divergence

-100

-60

-20

0

20

60

100

Enantiomeric excess (%)

FIG. 4: (color online) Angular divergence δ, measured in re-
fraction, as a function of the concentration diﬀerence between
the two enantiomers of limonene, denoted by R and S, respec-
tively. The enantiomeric excess is deﬁned as the percent con-
centration diﬀerence between the enantiomers %[R] − %[S].
The measurements are obtained at a single achiral/chiral in-
terface in two experimental geometries: a macroscopic cell
(red circles) and a micro-cell (blue squares), with average
path-lengths of ∼2 cm and ∼400 µm, respectively. Each data
point is measured with a standard deviation of ∼10 nanora-
dians and the straight line is a guide to the eye. The ex-
perimental setup used in conjunction with the micro-cell is
shown in the inset: a thin ﬁlm of liquid passes through part
◦
of a commercial Fresnel lens (height of 45
sawtooth-prisms
∼700 µm), and a glass window separated by a 40 µm spacer
(not shown). The data sets have been obtained with a 488
nm Ar+ and a 405 nm diode laser and have been normalized
to 488 nm.

must be of equal magnitude and of opposite sign as the
solution changes its handedness, and must be zero for the
racemic (50:50) mixture, as is observed for both cells.

An attractive feature of the interfacial refraction and
reﬂection phenomena is that the sample volume can be
reduced further. If the optical pathlength in the micro-
cell is reduced to a few microns, then already a modest
[12] angular resolution of 100 nanoradians (well within
the current absolute accuracy of the setup used in Fig.4)
will make it possible to observe optical activities that are
below the resolution limit of a standard laboratory po-
larimeter, i.e. < 0.001◦. Miniaturization of optical com-
ponents to micrometer dimensions is expected to give
rise to diﬀraction phenomena. This immediately raises
the interesting question whether the circular diﬀeren-
tial reﬂection and refraction phenomena of this Letter
can also be observed in diﬀraction. Under normal in-
cidence, the angular position of the diﬀracted spot at
order m for a diﬀraction grating with a groove spacing D
is given by D sin β = (mλ)/n, where n is the refractive
index of the light in the medium where the diﬀraction
grating is placed. Since the refractive indices of right
and left circularly polarized light are diﬀerent in an opti-
cally active medium (n(±)), the angular positions of the
diﬀracted spots are also expected to diﬀer. We have

4

made measurements with reﬂection gratings and found
that a chiral diﬀraction eﬀect exists, such that left- and
right-circularly polarized components diﬀract with diﬀer-
ent angles of diﬀraction [13]:

D sin β(±) = (mλ)/n(±) .

(5)

We believe that these ﬁndings together with our obser-
vation of double refraction and reﬂection in chiral liquids
will open new possibilities in the detection of optically
active molecules in small sample geometries such as in
thin ﬁlms or microﬂuidic devices.

The unique optical properties of chiral media have also
been considered as components in electromagnetic coat-
ings and microwave devices [14], and more recently, in
connection with negative index media [15, 16]. Artiﬁ-
cial structures such as chiral helices have been used to
make optically active materials that give rise to relatively

much larger optical rotations at microwave frequencies
[17, 18, 19]. The double refraction and reﬂection phe-
nomena that we have observed in liquids are therefore
expected to give rise to correspondingly much larger an-
gular divergences and splittings in chiral metamaterials.

Finally, it is interesting to note that a magnetic ﬁeld
renders any medium optically active, for a linearly po-
larized light wave propagating along the direction of the
ﬁeld will experience optical rotation. It thus follows, that
the Faraday eﬀect can also be observed in reﬂection and
refraction [13] – similar to the chiral phenomena reported
in this Letter.

The authors thank Drs. M. Burns, Y.-F. Chen, and J.-
M. Fournier for helpful comments, J. Park for the loan
of a diode laser, and D. Rogers for the construction of
a cuvette holder. Funding through the Rowland Junior
Fellows program is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] A. Fresnel, Ann. Chim. Phys. 28, 147 (1825).
[2] L. D. Barron, Molecular light scattering and optical ac-

tivity (Cambridge University Press, 2004), 2nd ed.
[3] M. P. Silverman, J. Badoz, and B. Briat, Opt. Lett. 17,

886 (1992).
[4] A. J. Fresnel,

in Œvres compl`etes d’Augustin Fresnel,
edited by H. d. S´enarmont, E. Verdet, and L. Fresnel
(Paris, 1822), vol. 1.

[5] T. M. Lowry, Optical rotatory power (Dover Publications,

New York, 1964).

[6] M. P. Silverman, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 3, 830 (1986).
[7] R. W. Ditchburn, Light (Dover Publications, New York,

[10] I. J. Lalov and E. M. Georgieva, J. Mod. Opt. 44, 265

[11] E. U. Condon, Rev. Mod. Phys. 9, 432 (1937).
[12] We note that diﬀerent detection schemes permit the res-
olution of 0.1 nanoradians, see for instance R.V. Jones,
J. of Sci. Inst. 38 37 (1961).

[13] A. Ghosh and P. Fischer, manuscript in preparation

(1997).

(2006).

[14] H. Cory, J. Electrom. Waves Appl. 9, 805 (1995).
[15] J. B. Pendry, Science 306, 1352 (2004).
[16] C. Monzon and D. W. Forester, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,

123904 (2005).

[17] K. L. Lindmann, Ann. Phys. 63, 621 (1920).
[18] I. Tinoco and M. P. Freeman, J. Phys. Chem. 61, 1196

[8] A. Lakhtakia, V. V. Varadan, and V. K. Varadan, J. Opt.

Soc. Am. A 6, 23 (1989).

(1957).

[9] M. P. Silverman and J. Badoz, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 11,

[19] F. Gu´erin, PIER 9, 219 (1994).

1991).

1894 (1994).

