6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
1
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Channel plasmon-polaritons: modal shape, dispersion, and losses

Esteban Moreno and F. J. Garcia-Vidal
Departamento de F´isica Te´orica de la Materia Condensada, Universidad Aut´onoma de Madrid, E-28049 Madrid, Spain

Sergio G. Rodrigo and L. Martin-Moreno
Departamento de F´isica de la Materia Condensada, Universidad de Zaragoza-CSIC, E-50009 Zaragoza, Spain

Department of Physics and Nanotechnology, Aalborg University, DK-9220 Aalborg Ost, Denmark

Sergey I. Bozhevolnyi

Compiled February 2, 2008

We theoretically study channel plasmon-polaritons (CPPs) with a geometry similar to that in recent
experiments at telecom wavelengths (Bozhevolnyi et al., Nature 440, 508 (2006)). The CPP modal shape,
dispersion relation, and losses are simulated using the multiple multipole method and the ﬁnite diﬀerence
time domain technique. It is shown that, with the increase of the wavelength, the fundamental CPP mode
shifts progressively towards the groove opening, ceasing to be guided at the groove bottom and becoming
c(cid:13) 2008 Optical Society of America
hybridized with wedge plasmon-polaritons running along the groove edges.

OCIS codes: 240.6680, 130.2790, 260.3910.

The guiding of light within a subwavelength cross sec-
tion has been recently attracting a great deal of atten-
tion due to ever increasing demands for miniaturization
of photonic circuits. Light may be conﬁned in the di-
rection perpendicular to a ﬂat metallic surface for ener-
gies below the metal plasma frequency. The mode guided
along the metallic interface is known as surface plasmon-
polariton (SPP). Various geometries have been proposed
to achieve conﬁnement of the plasmon-polariton in the
plane transverse to the propagation direction.1–5 Among
these proposals, the plasmon-polariton guided by a V-
shaped groove carved in a metal (channel plasmon-
polariton, CPP) is particularly interesting. CPPs were
theoretically suggested by Maradudin and coworkers6
and subsequently studied in the visible regime.3, 7 Re-
cently, CPPs have been experimentally investigated at
telecom wavelengths,8 displaying strong conﬁnement,
low damping, and robustness against channel bending.
Thank to these properties, prototypes of basic devices
could be demonstrated.9 The mentioned devices have
been developed with the help of the eﬀective index ap-
proximation but, to our knowledge, no rigorous electro-
dynamic computation of CPPs at telecom wavelengths
has been reported. The eﬀective index approximation
can deliver information about the dispersion relation,
but it is expected to be inaccurate for frequencies close
to the mode cutoﬀ and is unable to determine modal
shape and polarization. The functionality of many de-
vices relies on the overlapping of electromagnetic ﬁelds at
various sites inside the device. For this reason the knowl-
edge of the modal shape is essential to provide a solid
foundation for the design of CPP-based devices. Here
we present rigorous simulations of guided CPPs aimed
to elucidate their characteristics at telecom wavelengths,
including full vectorial modes, dispersion, and losses. We

show that, contrary to what is commonly believed, CPPs
at telecom wavelengths are not guided at the groove bot-
tom, at least for the groove parameters used in the exper-
iments.8, 9 Instead, the CPP ﬁeld at the groove entrance
hybridizes with wedge plasmon-polaritons (WPPs) run-
ning along the edges of the groove.

Our goal is to understand the fundamental CPP mode
guided by realistic grooves at telecom wavelengths.8 Nev-
ertheless, in order to comprehend the behavior in this
regime, which is close to cutoﬀ, we will consider a broader
spectrum, higher order modes, and a number of diﬀerent
geometries. The simulations have been performed with
two rigorous electrodynamic techniques: the multiple
multipole method (MMP)10 and, where mentioned, the
ﬁnite diﬀerence time domain (FDTD) method.11 Within
the MMP method the corners are rounded (10 nm radius
of curvature). FDTD results were converged for a mesh
of about 5 nm. Such ﬁne meshes are essential, the more
so for wavelengths shorter than 0.8 µm. The grooves are
carved in gold and we employ experimentally measured
values of the dielectric permittivity ε.

Figure 1 shows the dispersion relation for a non-
truncated groove with a semiangle of θ = 12.5◦ and in-
ﬁnitely long sides. This structure sustains two modes,
being termed CPP(∞) (see right insets), which are out-
side the dispersion line of the SPP at a ﬂat surface. The
modal shape (time averaged electric ﬁeld) is shown in
the right insets for a wavelength of λ = 0.6 µm. In the
ﬁgure it is also plotted the dispersion relation for a non-
truncated metallic wedge of semiangle α = 51.25◦ and
inﬁnitely long sides. The corresponding wedge mode run-
ning along the edge is termed WPP(∞) (see left inset).
WPP(∞) for this α will be relevant when we later trun-
cate the above groove at a ﬁnite height: it corresponds to
the edges at both sides of the ﬁnite-height groove. The

1

Fig. 1. (Color online) Dispersion relation for various
modes. Black thick line: SPP mode on a ﬂat surface.
Green lines (squares): CPP(∞) modes for an inﬁnitely
deep groove. Red line (open circles): WPP(∞) mode for
an inﬁnitely deep wedge. Right insets: time averaged
electric ﬁeld of the two CPP(∞) modes at 0.6 µm. Left
inset: same for the WPP(∞) mode. The lateral size of
the insets is 2 µm.

Fig. 2. (Color online) Dispersion relation for various
modes. Black thick line: SPP mode on a ﬂat surface.
Blue lines (full circles): CPP modes for a groove of
height 1.172 µm (computed with MMP method). Trian-
gles: same as before computed with FDTD method. Red
line (open circles): WPP(∞) mode for an inﬁnitely deep
wedge. Insets: time averaged electric ﬁeld of the two CPP
modes at 0.6 µm. The lateral size of the insets is 2 µm.

WPP(∞) modal ﬁeld at 0.6 µm is shown in the left inset.
For increasing wavelength all three modes approach the
SPP line (none of them has a cutoﬀ). In this process the
modal shapes remain qualitatively the same, the only
diﬀerence being that the ﬁelds are expelled away from
the groove or wedge corners.

Figure 2 represents a similar plot but now a groove
of ﬁnite height is considered, the height being 1.172 µm.
The CPP modes exhibit now cutoﬀ at diﬀerent wave-
lengths (∼ 1.44 µm for the ﬁrst mode and ∼ 0.82 µm
for the second one). This was advanced in Ref. 12, and
it is a consequence of the above mentioned behavior of
the ﬁelds for increasing wavelength. As the wavelength
grows, the ﬁeld is pushed out of the groove and, after
a certain threshold, it can no longer be conﬁned by the
groove sides and is radiated in the form of SPPs along
the contiguous horizontal metal surfaces. It is important
to realize that, before reaching the SPP dispersion line,
both modes approach and cross the WPP(∞) line. This
means that close to cutoﬀ the CPP modes must be hy-
bridized with the modes running on the edges at both
sides of the groove. This idea is visualized in the in-
sets, that render the modal shapes (time averaged elec-
tric ﬁeld) at 0.6 µm. At this wavelength the ﬁrst mode
is not close to WPP(∞) and the hybridization does not
take place, but it is already happening for the second
mode. The described phenomenon is even more distinct
in Fig. 3 displaying the fundamental mode for increasing
wavelengths. It is observed that the CPP mode becomes
more and more mixed with the WPP(∞). Close to cut-
oﬀ (at about 1.44 µm) the mode is not guided at the
groove bottom anymore but rather at the groove edges.
A hint of this possibility was mentioned in Ref. 13. In

the experiments, the edges at both sides of the groove
have larger radius of curvature than in the previously
presented simulations. We have veriﬁed that this does
not alter our conclusion by repeating the same compu-
tation with a radius of curvature of 100 nm at the groove
edges (and keeping 10 nm at the bottom). Figure 3(d)
shows the instantaneous transverse electric ﬁeld for this
case and it is clear that hybridization with edge modes
still occurs. The transverse electric ﬁeld is approximately
horizontal inside the channel (an assumption used by
the eﬀective index approximation), but it is not horizon-
tal near the edges where the ﬁeld is maximum. Let us
note in passing the excellent agreement of the two tech-
niques employed here (the residual discrepancy in Fig. 2
for the fundamental mode at 0.6 µm is due to diﬀerent
rounding schemes of the groove bottom in the two meth-
ods). From the point of view of fabrication it is useful
to mention that, for λ ∈ (0.6 µm, 0.8 µm), the disper-
sion relation is extremely sensitive to the ﬁne details of
the groove bottom (e.g., rounding), as concluded after a
large number of simulations where the details of the bot-
tom were subjected to small perturbations. On the other
hand, this does not happen for telecom wavelengths (as
expected from the modal shape), a circumstance that
has also been observed experimentally.9 Note that the
calculated cutoﬀ wavelength of the fundamental mode is
somewhat lower than the wavelengths used in the experi-
ments. This discrepancy can be ascribed to (small) diﬀer-
ences in the groove geometry, both in the groove shape
(angle, side ﬂatness) and in the groove depth, and/or
diﬀerent dielectric permittivity of gold. We have veriﬁed
(not shown here for brevity) that slightly less negative ε
or/and smaller groove semiangle θ leads to a higher cut-

2

Fig. 4. (Color online) Propagation length versus wave-
length for various modes. Black thick line: SPP mode
on a ﬂat surface. Blue line (full circles): CPP fundamen-
tal mode for a groove of height 1.172 µm. Green line
(squares): CPP(∞) fundamental mode for an inﬁnitely
deep groove. Red line (open circles): WPP(∞) mode for
an inﬁnitely deep wedge.

simulations of CPPs at telecom wavelength. CPPs have
been fully characterized in terms of modal shape, dis-
persion, and losses. We have shown that, for relatively
shallow grooves, the ﬁeld is guided at the groove opening
and is hybridized with modes running along the groove
edges (WPPs). We expect that our ﬁndings will be of
help for the design of improved CPP devices.

References

1. J. Takahara, S. Yamagishi, H. Taki, A. Morimoto, and

T. Kobayashi, Opt. Lett. 22, 475 (1997).

2. P. Berini, Opt. Lett 24, 1011 (1999).
3. D. F. P. Pile and D. K. Gramotnev, Opt. Lett. 29, 1069

(2004).

4. D. F. P. Pile, T. Ogawa, D. K. Gramotnev, T. Okamoto,
M. Haraguchi, M. Fukui, and S. Matsuo, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 87, 061106 (2005).

5. D. F. P. Pile, T. Ogawa, D. K. Gramotnev, Y. Mat-
suzaki, K. C. Vernon, K. Yamaguchi, T. Okamoto, M.
Haraguchi, and M. Fukui, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 261114
(2005).

6. I. V. Novikov and A. A. Maradudin, Phys. Rev. B 66,

7. D. F. P. Pile and D. K. Gramotnev, Opt. Lett. 30, 1186

035403 (2002).

(2005).

8. S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, E. Devaux, and T. W.

Ebbesen, Phys. Rev. Lett 95, 046802 (2005).

9. S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, E. Devaux, J.-Y. Laluet,

and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature 440, 508 (2006).
10. C. Hafner, Post-Modern Electromagnetics

(Wiley,

Chichester, 1999).

11. A. Taﬂove and S. Hagness, Computational Electrody-
namics: The Finite-Diﬀerence Time-Domain Method
(Artech House, Boston, 2000).

Fig. 3. (Color online) Modal shape of the CPP fun-
damental mode for increasing wavelength λ. (a) λ =
0.6 µm, (b) λ = 1 µm, (c) λ = 1.4 µm (close to cutoﬀ).
These panels display the time averaged electric ﬁeld. (d)
Instantaneous transverse electric ﬁeld at λ = 1.4 µm for
a structure with groove edges rounded with 100 nm ra-
dius of curvature. All panels have a lateral size of 2 µm.

oﬀ wavelength. Finally, the experiments were conducted
at ambient conditions so that water condensation could
not be excluded (a very thin water layer can signiﬁcantly
increase the cutoﬀ wavelength).

The eﬀect of absorption is summarized in Fig. 4 that
renders the propagation length l = [2Im(kz)]−1, versus
wavelength for the various considered structures (kz is
the modal wave vector). The propagation lengths are in
all cases smaller than that of SPPs at a ﬂat surface. This
is a consequence of the ﬁeld enhancement at the cor-
ners and the ﬁeld conﬁnement that decreases the por-
tion of ﬁeld propagating in air. When comparing the
CPP modes it is observed that the eﬀect of truncation
at a ﬁnite height is only important for wavelengths larger
than 1 µm, which is reasonable because the ﬁeld is very
much conﬁned at the groove bottom for smaller λ. For
longer wavelengths the CPP propagation length is de-
creased as compared to that of CPP(∞). At λ = 1.4 µm
we ﬁnd that lCPP = 53 µm. The values reported in Ref. 8
at 1.55 µm are twice as large. The discrepancy can be
again ascribed to slight diﬀerences in geometry and/or
dielectric permittivity that rise the cutoﬀ wavelength. If
the trend of the line corresponding to the CPP is ex-
trapolated, we ﬁnd good agreement with the reported
data. It is to be observed that the propagation length of
WPP(∞) is signiﬁcantly higher, a fact that could ﬁnd
obvious applications.

In conclusion, we have presented rigorous computer

3

12. D. K. Gramotnev and D. F. P. Pile, Appl. Phys. Lett.

85, 266323 (2004).

13. V. S. Volkov, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, E. Devaux, and T. W.

Ebbesen, Opt. Express 14, 4494 (2006).

4

