6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Design of Resonant Microcavity Gyroscopes without Deadband

Satoshi Sunada and Takahisa Harayama
1Department of Nonlinear Science ATR Wave Engineering Laboratories
2-2-2 Hikaridai Seika-cho Soraku-gun Kyoto 619-0228 Japan

(Dated: February 20, 2014)

There is a deadband of rotation rate where the Sagnac beat frequency does not change proportional
to input rotation rate in optical gyroscopes using resonant microcavities. The region’s existence is
related to the symmetry of a resonant microcavity. In this Letter, we show that it is possible to
remove the region by designing the symmetry of a resonant microcavity as Cnv (n ≥ 3) symmetry.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Pm, 41.20.-q, 42.55.Sa

Optical gyroscopes such as ring laser gyroscopes and
ﬁber-optic gyroscopes utilize the Sagnac eﬀect, which
is the phase diﬀerence between two counter-propagating
light beams in the same rotating ring resonator [1, 2, 3].
These optical gyroscopes are the most precise rotation ve-
locity sensors among all types of gyroscopes. Therefore,
combining of the optical gyroscopes with highly-precise
acceleration sensors yields autonomous positioning sys-
tems used in airplanes, rockets, ships, etc.
since they
do not use any external signals like the Global Position-
ing System (GPS) and always supply their own positions
with very high precision. The present commercial ring
laser gyroscopes are composed of the He-Ne laser, and so
very large, heavy, and expensive. If optical gyroscopes
were to become smaller, lighter, and cheaper, they might
become key components for personal navigation systems
as complements to GPS. They could even be contained
inside mobile phones, which would be crucially important
for positioning in the case of emergency call by mobile
phones as well as personal navigation.

The Sagnac eﬀect had been theoretically derived for
such slender waveguides as optical ﬁbers or ring cavities
composed of more than three mirrors by assuming that
the light propagates one-dimensionally and the wave-
length of the light is much shorter than the sizes of the
waveguides or the ring cavities [1, 2]. The assumption of
the existence of clockwise (CW) and counter-clockwise
(CCW) propagating waves also plays a crucial role in
conventional theory of the Sagnac eﬀect. When the sizes
of the cavity are of the order of the wavelength, it is im-
possible to assume one-dimensional propagation of waves
inside the cavity. Consequently, a conventional descrip-
tion of the Sagnac eﬀect is not applicable for resonant
microcavities.

By perturbation theory typically used in quantum me-
chanics, we have recently shown that the Sagnac eﬀect
can be observed even in resonant microcavities when in-
put rotation rate is increased enough above a certain
threshold where nearly-degenerate standing wave func-
tions are combined to produce rotation waves [4]. Most
importantly, below the threshold, there is a deadband
where the Sagnac beat frequency does not change propor-
tional to input rotation rate. The Sagnac beat frequency
is proportional to the rotation rate above the threshold.

The threshold phenomenon has characteristics that re-
semble the lock-in phenomenon that has been observed
both in ring lasers [2, 3] and in a passive ring resonator
[5]. Yet the existence of the phenomenon does not come
from the eﬀect of backscattering and the nonlinearity of
an active medium inside a cavity, but depends on the
symmetry of the cavity-shape.

In this Letter, we show that designing cavity symmetry
as Cnv (n ≥ 3) yields degenerate resonances and can in
principle eliminate deadband.

First, let us brieﬂy review the Sagnac eﬀect in reso-
nant microcavities [4]. We have derived the following
stationary wave equation from the Maxwell equation in
the rotating frame of reference when two-dimensional mi-
crocavity is clockwisely rotating in xy-plane with angular
velocity Ω(> 0):

xy + n2k2

ψ −

∇2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

2ikΩ

c (cid:18)

x

∂
∂y

∂
∂x (cid:19)

− y

ψ = 0,

(1)

where c and n are respectively the velocity of the light
and a refractive index inside the cavity and k is the wave
number. We assumed that the TM wave of the elec-
tric ﬁeld E oscillates as E = (0, 0, ψe−ickt) and that the
Dirichlet boundary condition is imposed on the electric
ﬁeld at the edge of the cavity.

When the cavity is not rotated, equation (1) is re-
duced to a conventional wave equation. A wave equa-
tion with Ω = 0 does not necessarily give exact de-
generate counter-propagating wave solutions in a non-
rotating cavity, because the existence of degenerate so-
lutions (eigenstates) is related to the symmetry of cav-
ity shape, as explained by employing the representation
theory of groups below. If the wave equation does not
give degenerate solutions in the cavity with a symmetry,
nearly-degenerate standing wave solutions are yielded
instead of counter-propagating waves. Consequently,
the existence of nearly-degeneracy causes a threshold
phenomenon of the Sagnac eﬀect for angular velocity,
as a lock-in phenomenon and an anti-crossing around
zero angular velocity comes from frequency-splitting due
to backscatter-induced linear coupling between counter-
propagating waves [6, 7].

By applying the perturbation theory of the nearly-
degenerate states to equation (1), we have estimated the

threshold Ωth as follows:

Ωth =

∆ω(0),

(2)

n2
S

where ∆ω(0) is frequency spacing between nearly-
degenerate eigenstates of Eq. (1) with Ω = 0 in non-
rotating microcavity and

drψ0 (cid:18)
y

∂
∂x

− x

∂
∂y (cid:19)

S =

Z ZD

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(3)

,

ψ1(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

where ψ0 and ψ1 are the wavefunctions of these nearly-
degenerate eigenstates in a non-rotating cavity and D
denotes the domain of the cavity.

When the cavity is rotated but angular velocity Ω is
(2), the fre-
smaller than threshold Ωth shown in Eq.
quency diﬀerence between the nearly-degenerate stand-
ing waves does not change, and the eigenfunctions remain
as standing waves. For Ω > Ωth, frequency diﬀerence
∆ω(Ω) starts to increase proportional to angular velocity
Ω as ∆ω(Ω) = S/n2Ω [8], and the standing-wave eigen-
functions change into a pair of CW and CCW rotating
waves. Accordingly, the Sagnac beat frequency can be
observed above threshold Ωth.

Based on equation (2), note that the condition where
threshold Ωth becomes zero and deadband is eliminated
can be satisﬁed in cases of S/n2 6= 0 and

∆ω(0) = 0.

(4)

When the cavity has a stable ring trajectory, scale factor
S/n2 is not zero for the eigenstates associated with ring
trajectory. On the other hand, whether condition (4) can
be satisﬁed depends on cavity symmetry.

The simplest case that satisﬁes condition (4) is when a
cavity has continuous symmetry, such as circular sym-
metry, (e.g., microdisk), because there are degenerate
CW and CCW rotating waves in the non-rotating cavity.
However in a real system, to measure the Sagnac beat fre-
quency, the cavity must be coupled with an apparatus,
such as a coupler or a photo detector. The total conﬁg-
uration of the cavity and such an apparatus cannot have
continuous symmetry, even if the cavity itself has ideal
continuous symmetry. Therefore, a break in symmetry
causes splitting from a degeneracy between the CW and
CCW rotating waves even in the absence of rotation, i.e.,
∆ω(0) 6= 0, in this case. Moreover, degenerate CW and
CCW rotating waves change into non-degenerate stand-
ing waves. Thus, coupling the cavity with continuous
symmetry with an apparatus complicates satisfying con-
dition (4). Accordingly, to preserve the existence of de-
generate eigenstates even in cases of total conﬁguration,
the cavity must have at most a discrete symmetry, be-
cause it is possible to preserve the discrete symmetry of
the conﬁguration by symmetrically deposing the appara-
tus.

The existence of degenerate eigenstates in the cavity
with discrete symmetry can be shown by applying rep-
resentation theory of groups to wave equation (1) with

2

Ω = 0. Here we are concerned with the ﬁnite point group
that leaves the cavity invariant in two dimensions. An
irreducible representation (IR) of the symmetry group
of the cavity can characterize an eigenstate of the wave
equation. Then the dimension of the IR equals to the
degree of degeneracy of the eigenvalue. That is, when
the symmetry group of the cavity has a two dimensional
IR, the wave equation can give a degenerate eigenstate
corresponding to the IR.

According to group theory, the point groups (rota-
tions and reﬂections) in two dimensions can have one-
dimensional and two-dimensional IR’s. The requirement
for the existence of a two-dimensional IR is that the
group is not commutative.
If the symmetry group of
the cavity is commutative group, such as Ci symmetry,
Cn (n = 1, 2, · · · ) symmetry or Cnv (n ≤ 2) symme-
try, the group has only one-dimensional IR’s, namely, no
degenerate eigenstates (barring accidental degeneracy).
Accordingly, the symmetry of the cavity should be Cnv
(n ≥ 3) symmetry group, which is not commutative.

Here, let Rn and σ be the rotation operator of 2π/n
around the origin of the coordinate system and the re-
ﬂection symmetry operator with respect to a symmetry
axis, respectively. Then, we denote wavefunctions that
are even and odd with respect to the symmetry axis by
ψ+ and ψ−, respectively, i.e., σψα = αψα with pari-
ties α ∈ {+, −}. Even and odd parity wavefunctions
ψ+ and ψ− are always the solutions of the wave equa-
tion in a cavity with a symmetry axis. In a cavity with
Cnv (n ≥ 3) symmetry, the eigenvalues of wavefunctions
ψ±, which satisfy the following condition for an integer
k ∈ {1, 2, · · · n}, are degenerate; that is, wavefunctions
ψ± are the basis of a two-dimensional IR of the symme-
try group:

Rk

nψ± 6= R−k

n ψ±.

(5)

n . Then, linear combination Rk

The reason is because ψ−(+) can be converted to ψ+(−) in
the following way. First, odd parity wavefunction ψ− is
rotated by 2π/nk clockwise and counterclockwise around
the origin of the coordinate system. Rotated wavefunc-
tion R±k
n ψ− also has the same eigenvalue as wavefunction
ψ−, because the cavity is invariant for rotational opera-
tors R±k
n ψ− also
has the same eigenvalue and even parity with respect to
the same symmetry axis. Accordingly, even-parity wave-
function ψ+ can be written as ψ+ = ck(Rk
n ψ−),
where ck is a constant. Even-parity wavefunction ψ+ can
also be converted to odd parity wavefunction ψ− in the
same way. Accordingly, condition (4) can be satisﬁed,
and threshold Ωth can become zero for the eigenstates of
the wavefunctions satisfying condition (5) in the cavity
with Cnv (n ≥ 3) symmetry.

nψ− − R−k

nψ− − R−k

Theoretical predictions are conﬁrmed by numerical
simulation, in which we chose a cavity deﬁned by bound-
ary R(θ) = R0(1 + ǫ cos 3θ)(ǫ > 0), that has C3v sym-
metry. Figure 1 shows the four parity symmetry chasses
of this cavity. In notation A+, · · · , the sign is +(−) if
the wave function is even (odd) with respect to the hori-

A-A+

A-

B-B+

B-

FIG. 1: Four parity symmetry classes of cavity, where ǫ =
0.065. Even (odd) symmetry is marked by dashed (solid)
lines.

(a)

(b)

3

function that does. Therefore, solving wave equation (1)
with Ω = 0 yields two degenerate standing-wave eigen-
functions, as shown in Figs. 2 (a) and (b), which are
classiﬁed into B+ and B−, respectively.

For Ω > 0, the standing-wave eigenfunctions, as shown
in Figs. 2 (a) and (b), change into the rotating wavefunc-
tions shown in Figs.2 (c) and (d), respectively. Then, as
shown in Fig. 3, the frequency diﬀerence between the two
eigenstates is proportional to angular velocity Ω. Accord-
ingly, one can see that the Sagnac beat frequency can be
observed without threshold Ωth.

In summary, we showed that it is possible to delete
threshold Ωth, as shown in equation (2), by designing
cavity symmetry as Cnv (n ≥ 3). This result can be
applied not only to the case for microcavities but also
to the case for macroscopic gyroscopes such as ring laser
gyroscope or ﬁber optic gyroscope.

c
/
ω
∆

(x10-9)
 3

0
R
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

 2

 1

 0

(c)

(d)

FIG. 2: Degenerate standing-wavefunctions of (dimension-
less) eigenvalue nkR0 = 50.220063 in non-rotating cavity
(a)-(b). Wavefunctions of rotating cavity with R0Ω/c ≈
−11 (c)-(d). White curves denote cavity boundary.
6.28 × 10

 0

 2

 4

Angular velocity R0

Ω/c

(x10-11)

 6

FIG. 3:
(dimensionless) angular velocity R0Ω/c.

(Dimensionless) frequency diﬀerence R0∆ω/c v.s.

Acknowledgments

zontal axis. Letter A indicates a wavefunction that does
not satisfy condition (5), while letter B indicates a wave

The work was supported by the National Institute of

information and Communication Technology of Japan.

[1] E. J. Post, Rev. Mod. Phys, 39, 475 (1967).
[2] W. W. Chow, J. Gea-Banacloche, L. M. Pedrotti, V. E.
Sanders, W. Schleich, and M. O. Scully, Rev. Mod. Phys.
57, 61, (1985).

[3] F. Aronowitz, in Laser Applications, M. Ross, ed. (Aca-

demic, New York, 1971), Vol. 1, pp 133-200.

[4] S. Sunada and T. Harayama, Phys. Rev. A., 74,

021801(R), (2006).

[5] F. Zarinetchi and S. Ezekiel, Opt. Lett., 11, 401, (1986).
[6] R. J. C. Spreeuw, J. P. Woerdman, and D. Lenstra, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 61, 318, (1988).

[7] R. J. C. Spreeuw, R. Centeno Neelen, N. J. van Druten,
E. R. Eliel, and J. P. Woerdman, Phys. Rev. A, 42, 4315,
(1990).

[8] Scale factor S/n2 agrees with conventional scale factor
(4Aω)/(cnP ) by assuming that the light propagates one-
dimensionally and resonant modes in a non-rotating mi-
crocavity can be described as one-dimensional WKB solu-
tions along an optical path. (Above, A is the area bounded
by the optical path and P is the perimeter of the optical
path.)

