6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LATTICE PARAMETERS MODIFICATION OF PARA-DICHLORBENZOL
NANODIMENSION FILMS

M.A. Korshunov∗
L.V. Kirensky Institute of Physics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, 660036 Krasnoyarsk, Russia
(Dated: August 22, 2013)

Inﬂuence of decrease of the sizes of crystallites of para-dichlorbenzol on Raman spectrums is
studied. Lattice oscillations frequencies are calculated. On this basis the modiﬁcation of lattice
parameters for particles smaller than 5µ and an incremented modiﬁcation of nanodimension sized
particles are studied. Magniﬁcation of lines intensities are related to transmitting oscillations and
orientation oscillations frequency decrease is found.

PACS numbers:

As it is scored in a number of operations of a lattice
of [1] parameters nanodimension particles constructed on
atoms diﬀer from parameters of a lattice of crystals of the
greater size. Thus for one crystal the sizes of a lattice can
be incremented, for others will decrease. The modiﬁca-
tion of physical properties because of resizing crystallites
for the structures constructed of organic molecules, ap-
parently, should be observed at their greater size, than
for the structures constructed of atoms. Organic crys-
tals ﬁnd the increasing application in the molecular elec-
tronics engineering (at making crystals, and in units of
storage). Therefore as will lead parameters of a lattice
for organic molecular crystals at decrease of particle sizes
up to nanodimensions, represents practical interest. For
learning this problem it has been carried out examination
of particles from 5µ and below ∼1µ organic matter by a
method of a Raman eﬀect of light of small frequencies.
This method has been selected, as spectrums of the lat-
tice oscillations are rather sensitive to modify structure
of a crystal. As the object of examination the molecular
crystal of para-dichlorbenzol which is the good modelling
object has been selected. Para-dichlorbenzol was stud-
ied by various methods.
It crystallizes in space group
P21/awith two molecules in cell [2].

Samples were prepared by a following method. On a
glass plate (an integumentary glass) the studied crystal
has been raised out of dust. A ﬁlm derivated consist,
apparently, from separate crystallites. After a sputtering
the ﬁlm was evaporated up to the necessary width. It has
been prepared three exemplars by width from 30µ, ∼5µ
and less 1µ. The ﬁlm consists of separate crystallites.
From above the received ﬁlm of the necessary width has
been covered by other integumentary glass, for decrease
of transpiration. After that Raman spectrums of small
frequencies have been received.

In Fig. 1 the spectrums of the lattice oscillations ob-
tained for ﬁlms of studied width of para-dichlorbenzol
are shown.
In a spectrum of the lattice oscillations of
a single crystal it should be observed six intensive lines
of the molecules caused by rotational eﬀects around of
moments of inertia. As we see, there is a decrease of
In a
the value of frequencies of similar spectral lines.

spectrum detrusion of frequencies depending on the sizes
of crystallites is observed, the it is less particle size, the
detrusion is more.

Intensity of lines of the molecules caused by rotational
hunt eﬀects around of an axis with the greatest moment
of inertia also decreases with decrease of particle sizes.
The same lines have also the greatest detrusion of fre-
quencies. As we see, the modiﬁcation of frequencies of
lines even if it is a ﬁlm and its size is observed varies in
one direction. This ﬁlm it is possible to consider as quasi
a two-dimensional crystal. In a spectrum with decrease
of width of a ﬁlm appearance of additional lines of small
intensity is observed. Intensity of these lines increases.

For an explanation of observable modiﬁcations of fre-
quencies of lines calculations of spectrums of the lattice
oscillations by a Dyne method [3] have been done. And
calculations on transformation of parameters of a lattice
at resizing crystallites. Minimization on energy was done
for various layouts of molecules and their amount.

At matching the calculated spectrum with experimen-
tal it is discovered, that parameters of a lattice with de-
crease of the sizes of crystallites for para-dichlorbenzol
are incremented.
If to guess, that decrease of value of
frequencies is linked only to decrease of the sizes of crys-
tallites, how show calculations should be observed more
signiﬁcant decrease of frequencies for rotational oscilla-
tions linked with the least moment of inertia. The part
of lines of small intensity can be caused by transmitting
oscillations (these are lines in the ﬁeld of 36 m−1 and
70 m−1) which intensity at decrease of width of a ﬁlm
is incremented. Appearance of additional lines can be
caused by the several reasons that demands the further
examination.

Thus, it is shown that at examination of ﬁlms of or-
ganic crystals coming nearer to nanosized particle by a
method of a Raman eﬀect of light decrease of value of fre-
quencies of the lattice oscillations is observed. As show
calculations it is caused by magniﬁcation of parameters
of a lattice of para-dichlorbenzol. As magniﬁcation of in-
tensity of lines linked with transmitting oscillations is ob-
served. The modiﬁcation of physical properties because
of resizing crystallites for the structures constructed of

TABLE I: Modiﬁcation of orientation oscillations frequencies with a modiﬁcation of a ﬁlm width.

∼ 1µ,cm−1
−1
∼ 5µ,cm
∼ 30µ,cm

−1

22.5
25.8
27.0

43.5
45.5
47.0

45.5
47.5
48.0

49.5
53.5
55.0

91.0
92.0
92.5

100.0
100.5
101.0

2

other organic molecules, probably, has other character.

∗ Electronic address: mkor@iph.krasn.ru
[1] A.I. Gusev. . 168, 1, 55 (1998).
[2] .I. Kitaigorodsky, Organic Crystal Chemistry (Akad. Nauk

SSSR, Moscow, 1955), 558 p.

[3] P. Dean, J.L. Martin, Proc. Roy. Soc. 259, 409 (1960).

FIG. 1: A spectrum of the lattice oscillations of para-
dichlorbenzol at resizing crystallites ∼30µ, ∼5µ and less 1µ.

