6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Enhanced Transmission and Reﬂection of Femtosecond Pulses by a Single Slit

M. Mechler,1 O. Samek,2 and S.V. Kukhlevsky3
1South-Trans-Danubian Cooperative Research Centre,
University of P´ecs, Ifj´us´ag u. 6., 7624 P´ecs, Hungary
2Institute for Analytical Sciences, Bunsen-Kirchhoﬀ-Strasse 11, 44139 Dortmund, Germany
3Department of Physics, University of P´ecs, Ifj´us´ag u. 6., 7624 P´ecs, Hungary

We show that a physical mechanism responsible for the enhanced transmission and reﬂection of
femtosecond pulses by a single subwavelength nanoslit in a thick metallic ﬁlm is the Fabry-Perot-
like resonant excitation of stationary, quasistationary and nonstationary waves inside the slit, which
leads to the ﬁeld enhancement inside and around the slit. The mechanism is universal for any
pulse-scatter system, which supports the stationary resonances. We point out that there is a pulse
duration limit below which the slit does not support the intraslit resonance.

PACS numbers:

In the last decade a great number of studies have
been performed to map the eﬀects and potential applica-
tions of enhanced scattering of continuous light waves by
metallic subwavelength nanoapertures (for example, see
the studies [1, 2] and references therein). With the fast
development of ultrashort-pulse lasers naturally arose the
question: How does a subwavelength aperture aﬀect a
femtosecond (fs) light pulse? Experiments as well as
computations were performed to investigate this problem
for various parameters: pulse length, object shapes and
sizes, etc.[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] It was
shown that the scattering process alters the pulse shape
and spectrum, resulting in various eﬀects such as pulse
broadening, compression, time delay and advancement,
and spectral shifts. The recent study[8] showed that the
transmission of fs pulses through a single slit can be en-
hanced at appropriate resonant conditions. Although a
general point of view has been suggested on the physics
underlying the enhanced transmission and reﬂection of
fs pulses by various nanostructured materials, as due to
excitation of the long-lived quasistationary eigenstates of
the eﬀective Hamiltonian for the Maxwell theory [12], a
detailed investigation of the problem for the most funda-
mental system of wave physics (a single slit) is required.

In the present paper, a direct solution of Maxwell’s
equations shows that a physical mechanism responsi-
ble for the enhanced scattering (transmission and reﬂec-
tion) of fs pulses by a single subwavelength nanoslit in a
thick metallic ﬁlm is the Fabry-Perot-like resonant exci-
tation of Fourier components (stationary waves) of a fs
wavepacket inside the slit. That leads to the resonant ex-
citation and enhancement of stationary, quasistationary
and nonstationary fs pulses inside the slit with the en-
hanced ﬁeld around the slit. The mechanism is universal
for any pulse-scatter system that supports the stationary
resonances. We point out that there is a pulse duration
limit below which the slit does not exhibit the enhanced
scattering.
In such a case the intraslit ﬁelds are quite
diﬀerent from those observed in the case of stationary
(continuous) waves.

The model used in the present study is based on
the Neerhoﬀ and Mur rigorous numerical solution of
Maxwell’s equations for a continuous wave (CW) passing
through a subwavelength slit in a thick metallic screen
of perfect conductivity [14]. As a light pulse can be
treated mathematically like the sum of Fourier compo-
nents (CW’s) of the wavepacket, we extended this model
to Gaussian fs pulses through the Fourier decomposition.
The incident pulse has been ﬁrst decomposed into a sum
of CW’s through a discrete Fourier transform. The Neer-
hoﬀ and Mur method then was applied to these continu-
ous waves (for details, see Ref. [15]). Finally, the inverse
Fourier transform was applied to the CW’s to restore the
pulse. The analysis was performed for diﬀerent parame-
ters of the pulse-slit system. The three general regimes
of the pulse enhancement have been found, which corre-
spond to long, medium and short incident pulses. The
results presented in Figs. 1-3 demonstrate the regimes for
the following parameters of a pulse-slit system: central
wavelength of the wavepacket λ = 800 nm (the wave-
length of a Ti:Sapphire laser), slit width 2a = 25 nm,
screen thickness b = 345.4 nm. The values of λ, a and
b correspond to the resonant conditions for enhancement
[8]. The pulse ( ~H(x, y, z, t) =
of CW according to Ref.
iω0t)~ey, where τ is the
U (x, z)exp[
pulse duration and ω0 = 2πc/λ0 is the central frequency)
was assumed to be TM polarized; the pulse was consid-
ered to fall normally onto the slit. The computation re-
sults are shown for three diﬀerent pulse durations: 25 fs,
10 fs and 5 fs (Figs. 1, 2, and 3, respectively). The elec-
tric ﬁeld distribution Ex (Figs. 1(a), 2(a) and 3(a)) and
the ﬂux Sz (Figs. 1(b), 2(b), and 3(b)) are shown as the
function of time t and position on the z axis. The time
evolutes from positive values towards the negative values
(in the ﬁgures, from the right to left), while the pulse
propagates in the z direction from the positive values
from the top towards
towards the negative values, i.e.
bottom.

2 ln(2)(t/τ )2]exp(

−

−

In the case of a long (25 fs) pulse, which corresponds
to a narrow spectral width of the wavepacket, practically

all the Fourier components experience the intra-slit reso-
nant enhancement. At any time during the pulse, the real
part of the electric ﬁeld spatial distribution (Fig. 1(a))
appear to be quite similar to the resonances observed
with a CW[8], except that it has a temporal distribu-
tion. The enhancement regime shown in Fig. 1(a) can be

FIG. 1: The stationary regime of enhancement of a 25 fs
Gaussian pulse in front(I), inside (II) and behind (III) a sub-
(a) Electric ﬁeld distribution Re(Ex). (b)
wavelength slit.
Energy ﬂux Sz. (c) Amplitude transmission T 1/2
(A), spec-
tra of transmitted Etr (B) and incident Ein (C) pulses.

2

z /Sin
z

called as stationary one. In such a regime, the amplitude
of the transmitted pulse is given with high accuracy by
Etr = Ein√TCW , where TCW = Str
is the trans-
mission coeﬃcient. Only a very small diﬀerence can be
observed. It can be explained by the fact that the phase
shifts of the diﬀerent frequency components at the slit en-
trance and exit are approximately the same. Inside the
slit, the maximum of the distribution near the input and
output of the slit are slightly shifted from that of CW [8].
The eﬀect is caused by the internal reﬂection of the pulse
at the slit entrance and exit. We also observe the inter-
ference of the incident, reﬂected and diﬀracted ﬁelds at
the slit entrance. A pronounced zero level is produced
between the incident and reﬂected ﬁelds that move with
the time. Notice that in front of the slit, the diﬀracted
ﬁeld has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the interference only in the
near-ﬁeld region. Behind the slit, one can see the output
pre-pulse (at
20 fs) and post-pulse between -20 and -40
In Fig. 1(b), the pulse shape shows two important
fs.
8 fs (theoretical transmis-
features: a pulse delay of
sion time is
1.15 fs) and also the output pre-pulse and
post-pulse. The pulse delay is in agreement with that
observed in the case of thick screens [7]. However, it
is diﬀerent from the superluminarity predicted for thin
screens [4, 8]. Notice that the output prepulse and post-
pulse have an energy ﬂow direction opposite to the main
pulse. The maximal value of the energy ﬂux behind the
slit is approximately half of that inside the slit and 10/1
of that in front of the slit. The transmission coeﬃcient is
given with high accuracy by T = TCW = 10. Analysis of
Figs. 1(a) and (b) shows the pulse enhancement and tem-
poral broadening and delay, while Fig. 1(c) indicates the
ampliﬁcation of the spectral components, and the spec-
tral narrowing (temporal broadening: τ tr/τ in = 1.15) of
the transmitted pulse.

≈

≈

≈

In the case of a shorter (10 fs) pulse having a more wide
spectra of the wavepacket, the enhancement regime is dif-
ferent (Fig. 2(a)) from the stationary regime observed in
the case of a long (25 fs) pulse.
In this regime, most
of the Fourier components experience the intra-slit reso-
nant enhancement. Concerning the phase shift, most of
the frequency components endure nearly the same shift
at the slit entrance and exit as the central frequency.
However, in this case there are some components that
have completely diﬀerent shift from that of the central
frequency. Although the ﬁeld distribution is periodically
reproduced during the pulse, the distributions are altered
from that of stationary distributions. The amplitude of
transmitted pulse is smaller than in the previous long-
pulse case (Etr < Ein√TCW ). The enhancement regime
shown in Fig. 2(a) can be called as quasistationary one.
We notice that the intra-slit resonances show a more pro-
nounced multiple reﬂection. The reﬂections occur in ap-
proximately 6 fs, they can be attributed to the long living
resonances observed also in the study [12]. This eﬀect is
attributed to the interference of the waves (Fourier com-

ponents) having slightly diﬀerent phases inside the slit.
Fig. 2(b) shows the energy ﬂux of the 10 fs pulse. We
5 fs and the internal reﬂection
notice a pulse delay of
5 fs). The fact of the internal reﬂec-
(a dark area at t =
tion is supported by the time diﬀerence (b/c
1.15 fs)
between the minimum values at the two ends of the slit.

≈

≈

−

FIG. 2: The quasistationary regime of enhancement of a
10 fs Gaussian pulse in front (I), inside (II) and behind (III)
a subwavelength slit. (a) Electric ﬁeld distribution Re(Ex).
(b) Energy ﬂux Sz.
(A),
spectra of transmitted Etr (B) and incident Ein (C) pulses.

(c) Amplitude transmission T 1/2

3

The maximum value of the energy ﬂux behind the slit
is nearly equal to that inside the slit and
4/1 of that
in front of the slit. The ﬂux enhancement is somewhat
smaller than in the stationary case, Str
z . Fig-
ures 2(a) and (b) show the pulse enhancement and tem-
poral broadening and delay, while Fig. 2(c) indicates the
ampliﬁcation of the spectral components, and the spec-
tral narrowing (temporal broadening: τ tr/τ in = 1.64) of
the transmitted pulse.

≈
z = TCW Sin

Comparison of the electric ﬁeld distributions of a 5 fs
pulse with a 25 fs and 10 fs pulses (Fig. 3(a), Fig. 1(a)
and Fig. 2(a), respectively) reveals the most pronounced
diﬀerence. In this enhancement regime, considerable part
of the Fourier components does not experience the intra-
slit resonant enhancement. Examining again the phase
shift, the majority of the frequency components suﬀer
quite diﬀerent shifts from that of the central frequency.
Although the ﬁeld distribution is periodically reproduced
during the pulse, the distributions are completely diﬀer-
ent from that of stationary and quasi-stationary distri-
butions. The very weak enhancement regime shown in
Fig. 3(a) can be called as nonstationary one. Indeed, in
Fig. 1(a) the instantaneous distribution is similar to that
observed with a CW [8], i.e., minimum at one end of the
slit and maximum at the other, while Fig. 3(a) shows one
maximum approximately at the center of the slit. We also
notice a wave-like ﬂuctuation in the time of the maximum
relative to the middle of the slit. This eﬀect is caused by
the interference of the waves (Fourier components) hav-
ing diﬀerent phases inside the slit. Fig. 3(b) shows the en-
ergy ﬂux of the 5 fs pulse. We notice that the ﬂux is com-
pletely diﬀerent from that of a 25-fs pulse. In this case,
the maximal value of the energy ﬂux behind the slit is
approximately equal to the value observed inside the slit,
and
1.3 times bigger than that in front of the slit. Fig-
ures 3(a) and (b) show the pulse enhancement and tem-
poral broadening and delay, while Fig. 3(c) indicates the
ampliﬁcation of the Fourier components, and the spec-
tral narrowing (temporal broadening: τ tr/τ in = 1.15) of
the transmitted pulse.

≈

In conclusion, a direct solution of Maxwell’s equa-
tions showed that a physical mechanism responsible for
the enhanced scattering (transmission and reﬂection) of
fs pulses by a single subwavelength nanoslit in a thick
metallic ﬁlm is the Fabry-Perot-like resonant excita-
tion of Fourier components (stationary waves) of a fs
wavepacket inside the slit. That leads to the resonant
excitation and enhancement of stationary, quasistation-
ary and nonstationary fs pulses inside the slit with the
enhanced ﬁeld around the slit. The three general regimes
of the pulse enhancement have been found, which corre-
spond to long, medium and short incident pulses. The en-
hancement mechanism is universal for any pulse-scatter
system that supports the stationary resonances. We
point out that there is a pulse duration limit below which
the slit does not exhibit the enhanced scattering. In such

a case the intraslit ﬁelds are quite diﬀerent from those
observed in the case of stationary (continuous) waves.
We believe that the presented results clarify not only
the physical mechanism of the enhanced scattering of fs
pulses by a slit (the most simple and fundamental system
of wave physics), but gain physical inside into the nature

of resonant enhancement of fs pulses by more complex
nanosystems.

4

[1] T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and

P.A. Wolﬀ, Nature (London) 391, 667 (1998)

[2] W.L. Barnes et al., Nature (London) 424, 824 (2003)
[3] B.A. Nechay, U. Siegner, M. Achermann, H. Bielefeldt,

and U. Keller, Rev. Sci. Instr. 70, 2758 (1999)

[4] O. Mitrofanov et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 907 (2001)
[5] M.I. Stockman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. f88, 067402 (2002)
[6] A. Pack, M. Hietschold, and R. Wannemacher, Ultrami-

croscopy 92, 251-264 (2002)

[7] P.N. Stavrinou and L. Solymar, Phys. Rev. E 68, 066604

(2003)

[8] S.V. Kukhlevsky, M. Mechler, L. Csapo, and K. Janssens,

Phys. Lett. A 319, 439-447 (2003)

[9] A. Dechant et al. , Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 4678 (2004)
[10] R. M¨uller, C. Ropers, and C. Lienau, Opt. Express 12,

5067 (2004)

[11] M. Labardi, M. Zavelani-Rossi, D. Polli, G. Cerullo, M.
Allegrini, S. De Silvestri, and O. Svelto, Appl. Phys. Lett.
86, 031105 (2005)

[12] A.G. Borisov, F.G. Garc´ia de Abajo, and S.V. Shabanov,

Phys. Rev. B 71, 075408 (2005)

[13] Y. Ben-Aryeh, Appl. Phys. B 84, 121 (2006).
[14] F.L. Neerhoﬀ and G. Mur, Appl. Sci. Res. 28, 73 (1973)
[15] E. Betzig, A. Harootunian, A. Lewis, and M. Isaacson,

Appl. Opt. 25, 1890 (1986)

FIG. 3: The nonstationary regime of enhancement of a 5 fs
Gaussian pulse in front (I), inside (II) and behind (III) a sub-
(a) Electric ﬁeld distribution Re(Ex). (b)
wavelength slit.
Energy ﬂux Sz. (c) Amplitude transmission T 1/2 (A), spec-
tra of transmitted Etr (B) and incident Ein (C) pulses.

