Eﬃcient Photonic Crystal Cavity-Waveguide Couplers

Andrei Faraon, Dirk Englund, Ilya Fushman, Jelena Vuˇckovi´c
E. L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305

Edo Waks
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742
(Dated: October 12, 2006)

Coupling of photonic crystal (PC) linear three-hole defect cavities (L3) to PC waveguides is
theoretically and experimentally investigated. The systems are designed to increase the overlap
between the evanescent cavity ﬁeld and the waveguide mode, and to operate in the linear dispersion
region of the waveguide. Our simulations indicate increased coupling when the cavity is tilted by
60o with respect to the waveguide axis, which we have also conﬁrmed by experiments. We obtained
up to 90% coupling eﬃciency into the waveguide.

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Structures that consist of InGaAs/GaAs quantum
dots (QDs) coupled to two-dimensional PC cavities are
promising candidates for highly eﬃcient single photon
sources. They represent essential devices for quantum
cryptography and quantum computation [1, 2, 3, 4].
Eﬃcient implementation of quantum computation de-
vices requires integration of photonic circuits directly
on the chip. These circuits consist of single photon
sources (SPSs) that inject single photons into the waveg-
uides, which subsequently redirect them to other quan-
tum nodes, i.e. other PC cavities containing QDs. Once
the necessary quantum operations have been performed,
photons need to be outcoupled from the waveguide ei-
ther out-of-plane for vertical collection (e.g., by coupling
the photons back into an “output cavity” that scatters
them out of plane), or collected in the PC plane (e.g., by
outcoupling to a ﬁber). The performance of this kind of
circuit is limited by the coupling eﬃciency between the
cavities and the waveguides. Our work investigates this
coupling with the goal of improving the eﬃciency of sin-
gle photon transmission from one cavity to another. The
results are also relevant for channel drop ﬁlter applica-
tions in optical telecommunications.

In this paper we investigate the coupling of linear
three-hole cavities (L3) [5] into PC waveguides. We
choose the L3 cavities for their high quality factor(Q) to
mode volume (V) ratio and good matching between cav-
ity and waveguide ﬁeld patterns, which improves in-plane
coupling eﬃciency [6, 7]. The cavity mode we work with
has magnetic ﬁeld with even/odd symmetry with respect
to the x/y axes. This mode, whose magnetic ﬁeld con-
ﬁguration is depicted in Fig. 1(a), needs to be coupled to
one of the guided modes in the PC waveguide. The ﬁeld is
computed using three-dimensional ﬁnite diﬀerence time
domain simulations (3D FDTD). Of the possible waveg-
uide bands inside the PC band gap [6] the best choice for
coupling the L3 cavity is the one with similar symmetry
and frequency as the L3 cavity mode (Fig. 1(b)). To
get eﬃcient coupling, the cavity and waveguide modes
need to be spatially overlapped and frequency matched.
A closer look at the L3 cavity ﬁeld proﬁle (Fig. 1(a))
reveals that the evanescent ﬁeld is strongest along a di-

rection tilted with respect to the cavity axis and is weak
along the cavity axis. A good approach for obtaining a
larger overlap between the cavity and waveguide mode is
to tilt the cavity with respect to the waveguide axis by
an angle of 60o (Fig. 1(c)). The choice of this angle is de-
termined by the symmetry constraints of the triangular
lattice. Directional couplers with cavity axes non-parallel
to waveguide axes have recently been studied by Kim et
al [8] for coupling the hexapole modes of single hole de-
fect cavities and by Shinya et al for coupling L3 and L4
cavities [9]. In contrast with previous work, we present
here optimized designs of couplers as well as detailed the-
oretical and experimental data, conﬁrming the advantage
of the tilted conﬁguration for coupling L3 cavities to PC
waveguides.

FIG. 1: (a) Magnetic ﬁeld (Bz component) for the mode with
the highest quality factor in a L3 cavity. (b) Magnetic ﬁeld
pattern of the even mode in a PC waveguide. (c) Fabricated
tilted cavity coupled to a waveguide (four holes separation).
In this experiment we shift the cavity with respect to the
waveguide along the direction indicated by the arrow.
(d)
Fabricated straight cavity coupled to a waveguide (three holes
separation).

To test the validity of our approach, we compare the
coupling parameters for the tilted cavity conﬁguration
(Fig. 1(c)) to the standard approach where the cavity

and the waveguide share the same axis (straight cavity
conﬁguration) (Fig. 1(d)). First, 3D FDTD simulations
of coupled cavity waveguide systems were performed with
both tilted and straight couplers. The frequency of the
waveguide band was lowered with respect to the cav-
ity frequency by reducing the size of the PC holes that
bound the waveguide. In this way, coupling occurs in the
dispersion-free linear region of the waveguide band. We
directly simulated tilted and straight coupler conﬁgura-
tions with spacing of two-to-ﬁve lattice holes separation
between the cavity and the waveguide. An image of the
simulated magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle for a tilted cavity coupled
to a waveguide with three-hole separation is depicted in
Fig. 2(inset) . In the tilted conﬁguration, the separation
between the cavity and the waveguide is changed along
a direction indicated by the arrow in Fig. 1(c).

FIG. 2:
Simulation results for the cavity waveguide cou-
pling expressed in terms of the quality factor. The coupling
strength is proportional to (1/Qwg ). Simulated magnetic
ﬁeld of a cavity-waveguide coupler in tilted conﬁguration with
three hole separation (inset).

The energy transfer into the waveguide degrades the
Q of the coupled cavity. The total Q of a coupled cav-
ity relates to the uncoupled cavity quality factor (Qc)
according to:

Qtot

−1

= Qc

−1

+ Qwg

−1

,

(1)

where Q−1

wg is the loss rate into the waveguide.

Diﬀerent applications require diﬀerent coupling. For
high-eﬃciency single photon transfer, the in-plane cou-
pling into the waveguide modes needs to be dominant
so Qwg should be lower than Qc. On the other hand,
the advanced single photon sources [3] require cavities
with a quality factor on the order of thousands, which
implies Qwg should also be in the same range. For other
applications, single photons need to be scattered out of
plane from a PC waveguide through an output cavity. To
achieve high transfer eﬃciency from waveguides to the
output cavities, the cavity-waveguide system needs to be

2

in the critical coupling regime deﬁned by Qwg = Qc. In
that case, we do not need the output cavity to have a
high quality factor.

The coupling strength between the cavity and the
waveguide is given by 1/Qwg which is proportional to the
decay rate of the cavity ﬁeld into the waveguide. The
quality factor Qwg was computed from the 3D FDTD
simulations, with results presented in Fig.
2. For
the same cavity-waveguide separation, Qwg is generally
smaller for the tilted than for the straight conﬁguration.
This is an indication of better cavity-waveguide coupling
obtained by tilting the cavity. One peculiar aspect of the
simulations is that for the tilted coupling conﬁguration,
the Q is actually larger for four-holes than for ﬁve-holes
separation. This is unexpected because it is natural to
assume that reducing the distance between the cavity and
waveguide should improve the overlap integral between
the two modes. However, this increase in the quality
factor is observed under a large variety of diﬀerent simu-
lation parameters, suggesting that it is real, as opposed
to a simulation artifact. We suspect that, at four hole
separation, the anti-node of one of the modes overlaps
with the node of the other resulting in an lower over-
lap integral. Further investigation is required in order to
conclusively conﬁrm this.

The coupling changes from Qwg ≈ 500 for the tilted
cavity with two-hole separation to Qwg ≈ 106 for four and
ﬁve-holes separation (both conﬁgurations). For single
photon sources based on PC cavities with InGaAs QDs
operating at 900nm − 1000nm, the experimental out-of-
plane quality factor is limited to about Qc = 104 be-
cause of material loss and fabrication imperfections [10].
On the other hand, to get eﬃcient photon transfer into
the waveguide, Qwg needs to be lower than Qc therefore,
only the coupling conﬁgurations with two- and three-hole
separation represent good options. Experimentally we
expect the total Q to be independent of the waveguide
coupling in the case of four and ﬁve holes separation.

To test the validity of our simulation results, the cou-
plers were fabricated on a 165 nm thick freestanding
GaAs membrane containing a InGaAs QD layer. Struc-
tures with two- to ﬁve-hole separation in both tilted and
straight conﬁguration (Fig. 1(c, d)) were fabricated. We
made seven structures of each kind. The spectrum of
each cavity was measured using the InGaAs QDs embed-
ded in the GaAs membrane as an internal light source.
The fabrication and measurement procedures are similar
with those reported in [3]. The mean value of the qual-
ity factor for each conﬁguration is plotted in Fig. 3(a),
where the error bars are given by the standard deviation
in Q due to fabrication ﬂuctuations between the seven
structures of each kind.

As expected from simulations, the experimental data
show that for the same cavity-waveguide separation, the
total quality factor is lower for the tilted than for the
straight conﬁguration. This result is a consequence of
higher coupling for tilted cavities.

Since a more eﬃcient coupling between the cavity and

3

equally spaced, and get closer together as the frequency
approaches the band edge. Since the cavity resonance
was positioned in the region with equidistant fringes, we
concluded that the coupling occurs in the linear region
(Fig. 4(d)).

For a direct comparison between simulation and ex-
periment, Qc of the uncoupled cavity needs to be known.
The upper bound for Qc is limited by fabrication imper-
fections and material loss. Our simulation results indi-
cate that in the case of coupled cavities with four hole
separation the coupling into the waveguide is very small
so the total Q is well approximated by Qc. For this rea-
son, the average value of the measured Q for the tilted
conﬁguration with four hole separation was used as Qc.
By plugging Qc and the simulated value for Qwg into ex-
pression (1), the predicted value for the total Q (Qtot)
was computed. The values for the Q inferred from simu-
lations are plotted in Fig. 3(b) and show good agreement
with the experimental data (Fig. 3(a)). Some incon-
sistency is observed in the case of ﬁve-hole separation.
These inconsistencies result from fabrication errors.

The coupling eﬃciency into the waveguide was com-
puted by taking the ratio Q/Qwg and the results are
plotted in Fig. 3(c). The coupling eﬃciency is up to
90% in the case of tilted conﬁguration with two holes
separation and up to 40% for straight conﬁguration with
two holes separation.

In conclusion we have designed PC cavity-waveguide
couplers with optimized coupling eﬃciency and operating
in the linear waveguide dispersion region. We have shown
both theoretically and experimentally that the coupling
between a L3 PC cavity and PC waveguides can be im-
proved by tilting the cavity with respect to the waveg-
uide. The coupling is more eﬃcient because the evanes-
cent tails of the cavity ﬁeld are not oriented along the
cavity axis but at a 30o angle. Understanding and con-
trolling the coupling mechanism is essential for on-chip
single photon transfer and the implementation of on-chip
quantum networks.

Financial support was provided by the MURI Center
for photonic quantum information systems (ARO/DTO
program No. DAAD19-03-1-0199), ONR Young Investi-
gator Award and NSF Grant No. CCF-0507295.

FIG. 3: Comparison between simulations and experimental
data for cavity-waveguide couplers. (a) The measured value
of total Q (mean) (b) The value of Q inferred from simula-
tions by combining simulated Qwg and measured Qc. (c) The
coupling eﬃciency from the PC cavity into the PC waveguide.
(d) Measured spectrum of a closed waveguide coupled to a L3
cavity. The Fabry-Perot fringes are equidistant in the linear
region of the waveguide dispersion relation (where the cav-
ity is also located) and they get closer next to the waveguide
band-edge (970nm).

the waveguide degrades the cavity quality factor, when
designing a PC network one should choose the conﬁgu-
ration that gives the optimum trade-oﬀ between transfer
eﬃciency and high Q. One advantage of using the tilted
cavity is that the same set of parameters can be obtained
with the cavity further spaced from the waveguide.

As mentioned before, the cavity coupling was designed
to couple in the linear region of the waveguide-band
dispersion relation. To test the position of the cav-
ity with respect to the waveguide band, we fabricated
longer waveguides closed at the ends. These waveguides
act as Fabry-Perot resonators. Fringes can be observed
using the broad distribution of the QDs [11].
In the
linear region of the dispersion relation the fringes are

[1] J. Vuˇckovi´c, D. Fattal, C. Santori, G. S. Solomon, and
Y. Yamamoto. Enhanced single-photon emission from a
quantum dot in a micropost microcavity. Applied Physics
Letters, 82(15):2374–76, April 2003.

[2] E. Waks and J. Vuˇckovi´c. Dipole induced transparency
in frop-ﬁlter cavity-waveguide systems. Physical Review
Letters, 80(153601), April 2006.

[3] D. Englund, D. Fattal, E. Waks, G. Solomon, B. Zhang,
T. Nakaoka, Y. Arakawa, Y. Yamamoto, and J. Vuˇckovi´c.
Controlling the Spontaneous Emission Rate of Single
Quantum Dots in a Two-Dimensional Photonic Crystal.

Physical Review Letters, 95:013904, July 2005.

[4] B. Sanders, J. Vuˇckovi´c, and P. Grangier. Single photons
on demand. Europhysics News, 36(2):56–58, March/April
2005.

[5] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda. High-Q
photonic nanocavity in a two-dimensional photonic crys-
tal . Nature, 425(6961):944–947, October 2003.

[6] D. Englund, I. Fushman, and J. Vuˇckovi´c. General
Recipe for Designing Photonic Crystal Cavities. Optics
Express, 12(16):5961–75, August 2005.

[7] E. Waks and J. Vuˇckovi´c. Coupled mode theory for pho-

tonic crystal cavity-waveguide interaction. Optics Ex-
press, 13(13):5064 – 5073, June 2005.

[8] G. H. Kim, Y. H. Lee, A. Shinya, and M. Notomi.
Coupling of small,
low-loss hexapole mode with pho-
tonic crystal slab waveguide mode. Optics Express,
12(26):6624–6631, December 2004.

[9] A. Shinya, S. Mitsugi, T. Tanabe, M. Notomi, I. Yoko-
hama, H. Takara, and S Kawanishi. All-optical ﬂip-ﬂop
circuit composed of coupled two-port resonant tunnel-
ing ﬁlter in twodimensional photonic crystal slab. Optics

Express, 14(3):1230–1235, February 2006.

[10] D. Englund and J. Vuˇckovi´c. A direct analysis of photonic
nanostructures. Optics Express, 14(8):3472–3483, 2006.
[11] X. Letartre, C. Seassal, C. Grillet, P. Rojo-Romero,
P. Viktorovitch, M. Le Vassor d’Yerville, D. Cassagne,
and C. Jouanin. Group velocity and propagation losses
measurement in a single-line photonic-crystal waveg-
Applied Physics Letters,
uide on InP membranes.
79(15):2312–2314, October 2001.

4

