EXAMINATION OF THE ALLOCATIONS OF BUILDING MOLECULES IN THE
SINGLE CRYSTAL OF THE PARA-DICHLORBENZOL WITH THE
P-DIBROMOBENZENE SOLID SOLUTION BY THE METHOD OF THE RAMAN
EFFECT OF LIGHT DEPENDING ON REQUIREMENTS OF SELECTION

M.A. Korshunov∗
L.V. Kirensky Institute of Physics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, 660036 Krasnoyarsk, Russia
(Dated: January 11, 2014)

Allocation of molecules of para-dichlorbenzol in equimolar single crystals of para-dichlorbenzol
with p-dibromobenzene solid solutions grown by the Bridgmen’s method is studied. It is shown, that
the mutual concentration of builders longwise an exemplar depends on requirements of selection.
Probably as a uniform modiﬁcation of concentration of builders along an exemplar, and a wavy
modiﬁcation of concentration. Critical speed at a modiﬁcation of character of allocation made 15.0
·10-6 cm/s at a lapse rate of temperature dT/dl=7.7 grad/cm.

PACS numbers:

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In a number of publications [1] it is shown, that for two-
component solid solutions depending on requirements of
selection of single crystals on method Bridgmen it is
possible both a uniform modiﬁcation of concentration
of builders, and wavy.
In operation it speaks periodic
appearance and wedging out of blocks during propa-
gation boundaries which segregation of impurity takes
place. These examinations were spent on junction14H14
andC14H10. Operation by [2] us it is carried out ex-
amination of solid solutions of para-dichlorbenzol with a
p-dibromobenzene grown on method Bridgmen at veloc-
ities of pulling down of dish V=8.3·10-6–8.9·10-6 cm/s
and a lapse rate temperature dT/dl=7.6-7.7 grad/cm.
Monotone allocation of impurity has been discovered.
Therefore in the yielded operation are carried out ex-
aminations for various velocities of pulling down of dish.
To deﬁne nonmonotone allocation of impurity in studied
mix-crystals takes place at a modiﬁcation of requirements
of selection.

It promotes understanding of the mechanism of crystal

growth and will enable to inﬂuence it.

and

para-dichlorbenzol

P-dibromobenzene

(α-
crystallizes in centrosymmetric space
modiﬁcation),
group P21/a with two molecules in a low level cell.
These chips were researched by a X-ray diﬀraction
method [3], methods of a Raman eﬀect of light [4] and a
nuclear quadrupole resonance [5]. X-ray diﬀraction data
on the mix-crystals studied in operation, us it is not
revealed. These mix-crystals have been selected because
their components are isomorphic among themselves and
form solid solutions at any concentrations of builders.
Single crystals of solid solutions have been grown on
method Bridgmen.

In the yielded operation the method of a Raman eﬀect
of light which allows to judge on spectrums of the lat-
tice and intramolecular oscillations character of layout of
molecules of impurity among molecules of the main chip
is used.

In Fig. 1 spectrum of the lattice oscillations the mixed

FIG. 1: Spectrum of the lattice oscillations.

chip of a p-dibromobenzene with para-dichlorbenzol is re-
duced at concentration 50 pier. % of builders. The spec-
trum of mix-crystals is similar to spectrums of builders
that speaks about allocation of impurity as substitution.
The value of concentration of impurity in the grown
single crystals of solid solutions was deﬁned on rela-
tive intensity of the valence intramolecular oscillations.
According to operation [6] line in spectrum of a p-
dibromobenzene with frequency of ν =212.0 cm−1 cor-
responds to valence vibration C-Br, and a line with fre-
quency of ν =327.0 cm−1 in para-dichlorbenzol – to va-
lence vibration C-Cl.

In Fig. 2 spectrums of intramolecular oscillations (in
the ﬁeld of from 150 up to 400 cm−1) a p-dibromobenzene
(1), para-dichlorbenzol (2) and studied mix-crystals
are presented at equimolecular concentrations of para-
dichlorbenzol in a p-dibromobenzene (3). Using a rela-
tion intensity the symmetric valence vibrations in mix-
crystals, the modiﬁcation of concentration of builders
longwise single crystals is revealed. Examinations of dif-
ferent exemplars it was spent at the same parameters of a

various winding of a heating coil and made dT/dl=7.6-
7.7 a grad/cm.

2

FIG. 4: Allocation of impurity of para-dichlorbenzol and p-
BromoClorobenzene) longwise (h) the mixed chip at a high
speed of propagation.

In Fig. 3 association of relative concentration of a p-
dibromobenzene to para-dichlorbenzol is shown. The
initial concentration of p-dibromobenzene CBr
in fusion
0
mixture of the researched exemplars made 50 pier. %.
Apparently, in process of propagation of single crystals
concentration of impurity increases.

In Fig. 4 graphics of allocation of a builder of para-
dichlorbenzol C/CBr
0 on an axis of a single crystal in solid
solutions are presented at greater growth rate V = 20.0
·10-6 cm/s and a lapse rate of temperature dT/dl=7.7
grad/cm.

As we see Allocation of builders has wavy character.
The velocity of pulling down of dish at which is broken
monotone allocation makes in our case V 15.0 ·10-6 cm/s.
So, changing requirements of selection it is possible to
change allocation of molecules of impurity thus probably
as a uniform modiﬁcation of concentration of all builders
along an exemplar, and a wavy modiﬁcation of concen-
tration of two substances that will aﬀect long-distance
and short-range order of layout of molecules.

∗ Electronic address: mkor@iph.krasn.ru
[1] A. Krivandina. Crystallography ReportsVol.23, No.2,

[2] M.A. Korshunov, Crystallography Reports Vol. 48, No.3,

(1978) 372.

(2003) 531.

[3] A.I. Kitaigorodsky, Organic Crystal Chemistry (Akad.

Nauk SSSR, Moscow, 1955). 558 p.

[4] V.F. Shabanov, V.p. Spiridonov, M.A.Korshunov, Zh.

Prikl. Spektrosk. 25 (4), (1976) 698.

[5] V.S. Grechischkin, Nuclear Quadrupole Interactions in

Solids (Nauka, Moscow, 1973).

[6] M. Suzuki, M. Ito, Spectrochim. Acta A 25(5), (1969)

1017.

FIG. 2: Spectrum of intramolecular oscillations.

FIG. 3: Allocation of impurity of para-dichlorbenzol and p-
BromoClorobenzene longwise (h) the mixed chip at low speed
of propagation.

data-acquisition equipment. In operation concentration
of builders was measured in molar unities.

The single crystal was grown in a glass tube in diam-
eter d = 1 cm and length h = 10 cm with the plucked
capillary. In a handset put mother substances in the nec-
essary percentage. After that from a handset pumped out
air, and she was sealed oﬀ.

The handset with substance was omitted in the crys-
tallizing furnace with velocity V=8.3·10-6–8.9·10-6 cm/s.
The lapse rate of temperature of the furnace was set by

