6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

UCRL-JRNL-219848

Femtosecond Diﬀractive Imaging with a Soft-X-ray Free-Electron Laser

Henry N. Chapman,1, 2, ∗ Anton Barty,1 Michael J. Bogan,1 S´ebastien Boutet,1, 3, 4 Matthias Frank,1 Stefan P.
Hau-Riege,1 Stefano Marchesini,1, 2 Bruce W. Woods,1 Sa˘sa Bajt,1 W. Henry Benner,1 Richard A. London,1, 2 Elke
Pl¨onjes,5 Marion Kuhlmann,5 Rolf Treusch,5 Stefan D¨usterer,5 Thomas Tschentscher,5 Jochen R. Schneider,5
Eberhard Spiller,6 Thomas M¨oller,7 Christoph Bostedt,7 Matthias Hoener,7 David A. Shapiro,2 Keith O. Hodgson,3
David van der Spoel,4 Florian Burmeister,4 Magnus Bergh,4 Carl Caleman,4 G¨osta Huldt,4 M. Marvin Seibert,4
Filipe R.N.C. Maia,4 Richard W. Lee,1, 4 Abraham Sz¨oke,1, 4 Nicusor Timneanu,4 and Janos Hajdu3, 4, †
1 University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue, Livermore CA 94550, USA.
2 Center for Biophotonics Science and Technology, University of California,
Davis, 2700 Stockton Blvd., Suite 1400, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.
3 Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center,
2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94305, USA.
4 Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Uppsala University, Husargatan 3, Box 596, SE-75124 Uppsala, Sweden.
5 Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, DESY, Notkestraße 85, D-22607 Hamburg, Germany.
6Spiller X-ray Optics, Livermore CA 94550, USA.
7 Institut f¨ur Atomare Physik, Technische Universit¨at Berlin,
Hardenbergstraße 36, PN 3-1, 10623 Berlin, Germany.

Theory predicts [1, 2, 3, 4] that with an ultrashort and extremely bright coherent X-ray pulse,
a single diﬀraction pattern may be recorded from a large macromolecule, a virus, or a cell before
the sample explodes and turns into a plasma. Here we report the ﬁrst experimental demonstration
of this principle using the FLASH soft X-ray free-electron laser. An intense 25 fs, 4 × 1013 W/cm2
pulse, containing 1012 photons at 32 nm wavelength, produced a coherent diﬀraction pattern from
a nano-structured non-periodic object, before destroying it at 60,000 ◦K. A novel X-ray camera as-
sured single photon detection sensitivity by ﬁltering out parasitic scattering and plasma radiation.
The reconstructed image, obtained directly from the coherent pattern by phase retrieval through
oversampling [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], shows no measurable damage, and extends to diﬀraction-limited resolu-
tion. A three-dimensional data set may be assembled from such images when copies of a reproducible
sample are exposed to the beam one by one [10].

X-ray free-electron lasers (X-ray FELs) are expected
to permit diﬀractive imaging at high-resolutions of
nanometer- to micrometer-sized objects without the need
for crystalline periodicity in the sample [1, 2, 3, 4]. High-
resolution structural studies within this size domain are
particularly important in materials science, biology, and
medicine. Radiation-induced damage and sample move-
ment prevents the accumulation of high-resolution scat-
tering signals for such samples in conventional experi-
ments [11, 12]. Damage is caused by energy deposited
into the sample by the very probes used for imaging, e.g.
photons, electrons, or neutrons. At X-ray frequencies in-
ner shell processes dominate the ionisation of the sample;
photoemission is followed by Auger or ﬂuorescence emis-
sion and shake excitations. The energies of the ejected
photoelectrons, Auger electrons, and shake electrons dif-
fer from each other, and these electrons are released at
diﬀerent times, but within about ten femtoseconds, fol-
lowing photoabsorption [1, 13]. Thermalisation of the
ejected electrons through collisional electron cascades is
completed within 10-100 femtoseconds [14, 15]. Heat
transport, diﬀusion and radical reactions take place over
some picoseconds to milliseconds.

Radiation tolerance in the X-ray beam could be sub-
stantially extended, if we could collect diﬀraction data
faster than the relevant damage processes [1, 16]. This

approach requires very short and very bright X-ray
pulses, such as those expected from short-wavelength
free-electron lasers. However, the large amount of en-
ergy deposited into the sample by a focused FEL pulse
will ultimately turn the sample into a plasma. The ques-
tion is when exactly would this happen? There are no
experiments with X-rays in the relevant time and inten-
sity domains, and our current understanding of photon-
material interactions on ultra-short time scales and at
high X-ray intensities is, therefore, limited. Computer
simulations based on four diﬀerent models [1, 2, 3, 4]
postulate that a near-atomic resolution structure could
be obtained by judicious choice of pulse length, inten-
sity and X-ray wavelength, before the sample is stripped
from its electrons and is destroyed in a Coulomb explo-
sion. Near-atomic resolution imaging with X-ray FEL
pulses faces other formidable challenges that must be ad-
dressed, such as developing the ability to record low-noise
and interpretable diﬀraction data under the extreme illu-
mination conditions expected from a focused FEL pulse.
Our experimental demonstration of “ﬂash diﬀractive
imaging” uses the ﬁrst soft X-ray FEL in the world, the
FLASH facility (formerly known as the VUV-FEL) at the
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY) in Hamburg
[17]. FLASH generates high power soft X-ray pulses by
the principle of self-ampliﬁcation of spontaneous emission

(SASE) [18]: a relativistic electron pulse from a super-
conducting linear accelerator makes a single pass through
a periodic magnetic ﬁeld of an undulator. During the
high-gain lasing process, the electrons, perturbed by the
magnetic ﬁeld of the undulator and by their own photon
ﬁeld, form coherent micro-bunches, which behave like a
single giant charge, producing strong ampliﬁcation. For
our experiment, FLASH was operating in an ultrashort
pulse mode [17], resulting in 25 fs coherent FEL pulses
with about 1012 photons in a pulse.

2

FIG. 1: Schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus.
The FEL beam is incident from the left and is focused to a 20-
µm spot on the sample, which is a 20-nm thick transmissive
silicon nitride membrane with a picture milled through its
entire thickness using a FIB (this is enlarged in the inset, and
the scale bar indicates 1 µm). The direct beam passes through
the sample window and exits the camera through a hole in a
graded multilayer planar mirror. The diﬀracted light from the
sample reﬂects from that mirror onto a CCD detector. The
contour lines on the mirror depict lines of constant incidence
angle (constant multilayer period). The on-axis path length
from the sample to the detector is 55 mm. For 32 nm radiation
and objects smaller than 20 µm, this distance is in the far
ﬁeld, where the diﬀraction pattern is equal to the Fourier
transform of the exit wave [27]. The numerical aperture of
the detector is 0.25.

Figure 1 shows our experimental arrangement. Diﬀrac-
tive imaging is elegant in its simplicity: a coherent X-ray
beam illuminates the sample, and the far-ﬁeld diﬀraction
pattern of the object is recorded on an area detector.
We focused a coherent 25 fs X-ray pulse from FLASH to
achieve a peak intensity of (4 ± 2) × 1013 W/cm2 on the
sample. We recorded the far-ﬁeld diﬀraction pattern of
the object on a novel detector centred on the forward di-
rection (see Methods). The image information encoded
in the coherent diﬀraction pattern is similar to a holo-
gram [19], except that the object acts as its own scat-
tering reference. Image reconstruction was performed by
phase retrieval using our iterative transform algorithm,
Shrinkwrap [8] (see Methods). Unlike similar algorithms
[7, 20, 21, 22, 23], Shrinkwrap solves the phase prob-
lem without requiring any a priori knowledge about the
object.

The ultrafast coherent diﬀraction pattern of a nano-
structured non-periodic object is shown in Fig. 2(a).

FIG. 2: Flash X-ray coherent diﬀraction patterns. (a) Co-
herent diﬀraction pattern recorded for a single (4 ± 2) × 1014
W/cm2, 25 ± 5 fs pulse, and (b) for the subsequent pulse of
similar intensity and duration, 20 s later, showing diﬀraction
from the damage caused by the pulse that formed (a). The
intensity is shown on a logarithmic grey scale with black de-
noting 1 photon/pixel and white denoting 2000 photons/pixel
for (a) and 50,000 photons/pixel for (b). The entire patterns
are shown as detected by the CCD, and extend to a diﬀrac-
tion angle of 15◦ at the midpoint of the edges (corresponding
to a momentum transfer of 8.1 µm−1).

The object was a micron-sized pattern cut through a
partially-transparent silicon nitride membrane with a
focused-ion beam (FIB), and it is shown in the insert
of Figure 1. The pattern extends to a diﬀraction angle
of 15◦ at the midpoint of its edge. Based on low-ﬂuence
optical parameters [24], we estimate [3, 25] that the ab-
sorbed energy density was approximately 20 eV/atom in
the silicon nitride and that the sample reached a tem-
perature of about 60,000 ◦K before vaporizing. A second
diﬀraction pattern taken 20 s after the ﬁrst exposure is
shown in Figure 2(b). This shows diﬀraction from a hole
left in the membrane caused by the ﬁrst pulse. That is,
the ﬁrst pulse utterly destroyed the sample but not be-
fore a diﬀraction pattern of the apparently undamaged

object could be recorded. Images of the object obtained
with a scanning electron microscope (SEM), before and
after FEL exposure, are shown in Figure 3.

FIG. 3: The reconstructed X-ray image shows no evidence
of the damage caused by the pulse. (a) Scanning electron mi-
croscope (SEM) image of the sample before exposure to the
FEL beam. The 20 nm thick sample was held in a square
supporting window that is 20 µm wide. (b) and (d) Image re-
constructed, from the ultrafast coherent diﬀraction pattern
of Fig.
2 (a), by phase retrieval and inversion using the
Shrinkwrap algorithm [8]. The squared modulus of the re-
trieved complex image is displayed on a linear grey scale from
zero scattered photons/pixel (white) to 1.5 × 106 scattered
photons/pixel (black). Pixel size in the reconstruction = 62
nm in (b), corresponding to the half period of the ﬁnest spa-
tial frequency that can be recorded on our camera at 32 nm
wavelength. The retrieved image clearly shows the silicon
window edge (in d), the FIB pattern, and dirt particles. (c)
SEM image of the test sample after the exposures to the FEL
beam, showing the square 20-µm window and some remaining
silicon nitride, as well as visible damage to the silicon support
caused by the non-circular beam. The scale bar for (a) and
(b) is 1 µm and the scale bar for (c) and (d) is 5 µm.

The main features of the diﬀraction pattern of Fig-
ure 2(a) are speckles and strong vertical and horizontal
lines that pass through the centre of the pattern. The
horizontal and vertical lines are caused by interference
of the waves diﬀracting from the opposite edges of the
square window frame that holds the silicon nitride mem-
brane. The speckles correspond to two length scales of
the sample. The modulations of ∼ 60 pixels (measured
diagonally) in the diﬀraction pattern near the centre cor-
respond to the narrow 2.5 µm diagonal dimension of the
object; and the ﬁner speckles of about 16 pixels corre-
spond to the distance between the picture object and
the window frame in which it is centered. The speckles
remain well deﬁned out to the edge of the detector, al-
though their visibility diminishes with scattering angle.
This may be due to the fact that at the high diﬀraction
angles at the edge of the CCD detector, the optical path
diﬀerence between rays diﬀracting from points in the ob-

3

ject transversely separated by 20 µm (the sample window
size) is sin (15◦) × 20 µm = 5µm. This is comparable to
the length of a 25 fs pulse, which is 7.5 µm. That is,
the overlap of the beams in time (and hence interference
between them) only occurs for one third of the pulse at
high angles.

Figures 3(b) and (d) show the image of the object re-
constructed directly from the diﬀraction pattern of Fig-
ure 2(a). The angular acceptance α, of our detector is
15◦ at the midpoint of the detector edges, and 20◦ at
the corners. The diﬀraction limited resolution length is
λ/(2 sin α) = 62 nm for a wavelength of λ = 32 nm.
This length is deﬁned as the half-period of the ﬁnest
spatial frequency in the image, equal to an image pixel
width. Along diagonal directions the increased CCD ac-
ceptance gives a resolution length of 43 nm. The actual
image resolution would be worse than the diﬀraction limit
if the retrieved phases were incorrect, in the same way
that phase errors in a lens cause image aberrations. We
estimate the image resolution by computing the Phase-
Retrieval Transfer Function (PRTF) [9, 23], shown in
Figure 4. This function represents the conﬁdence for
which the diﬀraction phases have been retrieved and is
calculated by comparing the Fourier amplitudes of the
average of multiple independent reconstructions to the
measured diﬀraction amplitudes. Where the phase of
a particular Fourier component is consistently retrieved
the complex values add in phase, whereas if the phase is
random the sum will approach zero. The PRTF is thus
equal to unity when the phase is consistently retrieved
and zero when the phase is unknown. We use the con-
vention that the resolution is given by the point where
the PRTF drops to 1/e (reference [23]), which for this
image occurs at the resolution limit (62 nm). We note
that the same experimental geometry deployed on a hard
X-ray free electron laser operating at 0.15 nm wavelength
would yield a diﬀraction-limited resolution length of 0.3
nm.

The “lensless” imaging method used here can be ex-
tended to atomic resolution, which will require shorter
wavelength X-rays and tighter focusing than demon-
strated here. Hard X-ray FELs are currently being de-
veloped that will create pulses which, when focused on
the sample, will produce ﬁve orders of magnitude higher
photon intensities than used here. An understanding of
photon-material interactions on ultra-short time scales
and at high x-ray intensities is fundamentally important
to all experiments with X-ray lasers. This area of sci-
ence is virtually unexplored. The FLASH free-electron
laser in Hamburg is the ﬁrst radiation source to permit
experiments near the relevant photon energies and inten-
sities. Our present results validate the concept of single-
shot imaging with extremely intense and ultra short soft
X-ray pulses that are capable of destroying anything in
their path. The resulting diﬀraction pattern carries high-
resolution structural information about the object, and

4

herence, no aperture was needed to select a coherent
patch of the beam, nor was a monochromator used to
select a narrow wavelength band of the radiation.

A novel X-ray camera was developed to record low-
noise diﬀraction data from the sample in the forward di-
rection (see Figure 1). In this camera, a graded multi-
layer plane mirror separates the diﬀracted beam from the
direct beam, and the intense direct beam passes harm-
lessly through the hole in the centre of the mirror without
damaging the detector. The diﬀracted light reﬂects onto
a back-illuminated direct-detection CCD chip (Prince-
ton Instruments in-vacuum PI-MTE CCD), containing
1300 × 1340 square pixels of 20 µm width. The resonant
X-ray multilayer of the planar mirror consists of layers
of Si, Mo, and B4C, and was fabricated so that the layer
period varies from 18 nm to 32 nm across the mirror.
The variation in multilayer period matches the variation
in the angle of incidence of rays emanating from the sam-
ple and which strike the mirror. This angle varies from
30◦ to 60◦, as depicted by the contour lines on the mir-
ror in Figure 1. The gradient was achieved by sputter-
depositing the multilayer materials through a mask onto
the rotating substrate, so that the time-averaged depo-
sition gave the desired material thickness at each point
on the mirror. The 32-nm reﬂectivity across the mirror
was 45%, as measured at a synchrotron-based reﬂectome-
ter [26]. Only X-rays within a bandwidth of 9 nm and
which propagate from near the sample interaction point
are eﬃciently reﬂected. Broadband plasma emission from
the sample is ﬁltered out by the resonant mirror. Also,
oﬀ-axis radiation scattered from beamline components
is reﬂected at less than 1% and hence ﬁltered from the
diﬀraction pattern. The reﬂectivity of the coating dimin-
ishes smoothly to zero close to the edge of the central
hole, due to decoherence of the coating layers caused by
the underlying substrate roughness where the hole was
cored. This “soft edge” reduces scatter from the hole,
whose shadow can be seen as a dark circle at the centre
of the patterns in Figure 2. The on-axis path length of
the reﬂected beam from the sample to the CCD was 55
mm, and for 32 nm radiation and objects smaller than 20
µm, this distance is in the far ﬁeld, where the diﬀraction
pattern is equal to the Fourier transform of the exit wave
[27].

Image reconstruction was carried out with the
Shrinkwrap algorithm [8]. Phase retrieval in Shrinkwrap
is a non-linear optimization problem in a high-
dimensional phase space. The dimensionality is equal
to the number of phases to be retrieved: 1.7 million in
this case. The solution is obtained iteratively by sequen-
tially enforcing known constraints in diﬀraction and im-
age spaces. We speciﬁcally aim for diﬀraction phases
that are such that the waves re-interfering to form the
image must all destructively cancel in areas outside the
object’s boundary (called its support), and that the am-
plitudes of the discrete Fourier transform of the image

FIG. 4: The image is reconstructed to the diﬀraction limit.
Phase-retrieval transfer function (PRTF) [9, 23] for the re-
constructed image shown in Figure 3(b) and (d), averaged
over shells of constant momentum transfer where is the wave-
length and the diﬀracted angle. The PRTF is equal to unity
when the phase is consistently retrieved and zero when the
phase is unknown. Using the convention [23] that the resolu-
tion is given by the point where the PRTF drops to 1/e, the
resolution of our reconstruction is estimated to be 62 nm.

the resolution of the reconstructed image extends to the
diﬀraction limit. This indicates that signiﬁcant damage
occurs only after the ultrashort 25 fs FEL pulse traverses
the sample. These results have implications for studying
non-periodic molecular structures in biology, or in any
other area of science and technology where structural in-
formation with high spatial and temporal resolution is
valuable. They also point to the viability of nanometer-
to atomic-resolution imaging of non-periodic and non-
crystalline objects [1, 2, 3, 4] with hard X-ray FELs.

METHODS

Samples consisted of a 20-nm thick silicon nitride mem-
brane spanning a 20 µm wide square silicon window. The
pattern was cut through the membrane with a dual-beam
focused ion beam instrument (FEI, National Center for
Electron Microscopy, Lawrence Berkeley National Labo-
ratory), using a 500 pA beam of 30 keV Ga+ ions. The 20
nm thick silicon nitride membrane has a transmission of
44% at a wavelength of 32 nm, and causes an estimated
phase advance of 20◦ relative to propagation through the
same length of vacuum, calculated from the known low-
ﬂuence optical constants [24].

Experiments were performed in vacuo as everything in
the direct beam contributes to the diﬀraction pattern.
The samples were placed in a vacuum vessel 70 m from
the FEL undulator. The FEL pulse was focused to a 30
µm×20 µm focal spot on the sample with a 2-m focal
length ellipsoidal mirror in the beam line. Single pulses
were selected with a fast shutter. Due to the source co-

match the measured diﬀraction amplitudes (which must
be measured ﬁnely enough to include enough empty space
beyond the object to constrain the phases). Other iter-
ative transform algorithms usually require that the sup-
port of the object be known a priori, and the closer the
support to the actual object boundary, the better the re-
construction. Shrinkwrap, however, periodically reﬁnes
the support constraint from the current estimate of the
image. The support constraint is calculated every 70 it-
erations by selecting pixels with intensity values greater
than 0.2 times the maximum image intensity, after ﬁrst
blurring the image with a Gaussian kernel. The blurring
kernel is initially set to 3 pixels full-width half-maximum
(FWHM) and is gradually reduced to 0.7 pixels FWHM
by iteration 5000. The ﬁnal support is that found four
update cycles prior to the point where the normalized
image error [9] exceeds a value of 0.2. This stopping
criterion is typically reached in 3000 to 4000 iterations.
During the iterations we did not constrain the intensity or
phase in the region in the mirror hole, which contains the
unrecorded zero spatial frequency, nor did we constrain
the object to be real or positive. We performed many
reconstructions, starting each time from random phases.
Each reconstructed image varied slightly due to the fact
that with photon shot noise there is no true solution that
exactly satisﬁes all constraint sets. However, each image
determined from the ﬁnal iterate was clearly recognizable
as compared with the SEM image. The image estimate,
displayed in Fig. 3 (b) and (d) is the average of 250
independent reconstructions.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Special thanks are due to the scientiﬁc and technical
staﬀ of FLASH at DESY, Hamburg, in particular to J.
Feldhaus, R. L. Johnson, U. Hahn, T. Nu˜nez, K. Tiedtke,
S. Toleikis, E. L. Saldin, E. A. Schneidmiller, and M. V.
Yurkov. We also thank R. Falcone, M. Ahmed and T. Al-
lison for discussions, J. Alameda, E. Gullikson, F. Dollar,
T. McCarville, F. Weber, J. Crawford, C. Stockton, W.
Moberlychan, M. Haro, A. Minor, H. Thomas and E.
Eremina for technical help with these experiments. This
work was supported by the following agencies: The U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract W-7405-
Eng-48 to the University of California, Lawrence Liv-
ermore National Laboratory (the project 05-SI-003 was
funded by the Laboratory Directed Research and Devel-
opment Program at LLNL); The National Science Foun-
dation Center for Biophotonics, University of Califor-
nia, Davis, under Cooperative Agreement PHY 0120999;
The National Center for Electron Microscopy and the
Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley Lab, under
DOE Contract DE-AC02-05CH11231; Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC
Postdoctoral Fellowship to MB); the U.S. Department of

5

Energy Oﬃce of Science to the Stanford Linear Acceler-
ator Center; the European Union (TUIXS); The Swedish
Research Council; The Swedish Foundation for Interna-
tional Cooperation in Research and Higher Education;
and The Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research.

Competing Financial Interests: The authors declare
that they have no competing ﬁnancial interests.

∗ Electronic address: henry.chapman@llnl.gov
† Electronic address: janos.hajdu@xray.bmc.uu.se

[1] Neutze, R. Wouts, R., van der Spoel, D. Weckert, E. &
Hajdu, J. Potential for biomolecular imaging with fem-
toscond X-ray pulses. Nature 406, 752-757 (2000).

[2] Jurek, Z., Faigel, G. & Tegze, M. Dynamics in a cluster
under the inﬂuence of intense femtosecond hard x-ray
pulses. Euro. Phys. J. D 29, 217-229 (2004).

[3] Hau-Riege, S.P., London R.A. & Sz¨oke, A. Dynamics of
X-Ray Irradiated Biological Molecules. Phys. Rev. E 69,
051906 (2004).

[4] Bergh, M, Timneanu, N.O. & van der Spoel, D. Model for
the dynamics of a water cluster in an x-ray free electron
laser beam. Phys. Rev. E 70, 051904 (2004).

[5] Fienup, J. R. Phase retrieval algorithms-a comparison.

Appl. Opt. 21, 2758-2769 (1982).

[6] Sayre, D., Chapman, H. N. & Miao, J. On the extendibil-
ity of x-ray crystallography to noncrystals. Acta Cryst.
A 54, 232-239 (1998).

[7] Miao, J., Charalambous, P., Kirz, J. & Sayre, D. Extend-
ing the methodology of x-ray crystallography to allow
imaging of micrometre-sized non-crystalline specimens.
Nature 400, 342-344 (1999).

[8] Marchesini, S. et al. X-ray image reconstruction from a
diﬀraction pattern alone. Phys. Rev. B 68, 140101(R)
(2003), arXiv:physics/0306174.

[9] Chapman, H. N. et al. High-resolution ab initio three-
dimensional X-ray diﬀraction microscopy. J. Opt. Soc.
Am. A 23, 1179-1200 (2006), arXiv:physics/0509066.
[10] Huldt, G., Sz¨oke, A. & Hajdu, J. Diﬀraction imaging
of single particles and biomolecules. J. Struct. Biol. 144,
219-227 (2003).

[11] Henderson, R. The potential and limitations of neutrons,
electrons and X-rays for atomic resolution microscopy of
unstained biological molecules. Quart. Rev. Biophys. 28
171-193 (1995).

[12] Howells, M. R. et al. An assessment of the resolution
limitation due to radiation-damage in x-ray diﬀraction
microscopy, J. Electr. Spect. Rel. Phenom. (in press),
arXiv:physics/0502059.

[13] Persson, P., Lunell, S., Sz¨oke, A., Ziaja, B. & Hajdu, J.
Shake-up and shake-oﬀ excitations with associated elec-
tron losses in X-ray studies of proteins. Protein Science
10, 2480-2484 (2001).

[14] Timneanu, N., Caleman, C., Hajdu, J. & van der Spoel,
D. Auger Electron Cascades in Water and Ice. Chemical
Physics 299, 277-283 (2004).

[15] Ziaja, B., London, R.A. & Hajdu, J. Uniﬁed model of
secondary electron cascades in diamond. J. Appl. Phys.
97, 064905 (2005).

[16] Solem, J.C. & Baldwin, G.C. Microholography of living

6

organisms. Science 218, 229-235 (1982).

Sci. USA 100, 110-112 (2003).

[17] Ayvazyan, V. et al. First operation of a free-electron laser
generating GW power radiation at 32 nm wavelength.
Eur. Phys. J. D 37, 297-303 (2006).

[18] Saldin, E.L., Schneidmiller, E.A. & Yurkov, M. The

physics of free-electron lasers. Springer, Berlin (2000).

[19] Wolf, E. Three-dimensional structure determination of
semi-transparent objects from holographic data. Opt.
Comm. 1, 153-156 (1969).

[20] Pfeifer M.A., Williams G.J., Vartanyants I.A., Harder,
R. & Robinson, I. K. Three-dimensional mapping of a
deformation ﬁeld inside a nanocrystal. Nature 442, 63-66
(2006).

[21] He, H. et al. Experimental lensless soft-x-ray imaging us-
ing iterative algorithms: phasing diﬀuse scattering. Acta
Cryst. A 59, 143-152 (2003).

[22] Miao, J. et al. Imaging whole Escherichia coli bacteria by
using single particle x-ray diﬀraction. Proc. Natl. Acad.

[23] Shapiro, D. et al. Biological imaging by soft x-ray diﬀrac-
tion microscopy. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15343-
15346 (2005).

[24] Henke, B.L, Gullikson, E.M. & Davis J.C. X-ray interac-
tions: photoabsorption, scattering, transmission, and re-
ﬂection at E=50-30000 eV, Z=1-92. At. Dat. Nucl. Dat.
Tab. 54, 181-342 (1993).

[25] More, R. M., Warren, K. H., Young, D. A. & Zimmerman
G. B. A new quotidian equation of state (QEOS) for hot
dense matter. Phys. Fluids 31, 3059-3078 (1988).

[26] Underwood, J.H. & Gullikson, E.M. High-resolution,
high-ﬂux, user friendly VLS beamline at the ALS for the
50-1300 eV energy region, J. Electr. Spect. Rel. Phenom
92, 265-272 (1998).

[27] Goodman, J. W. Statistical Optics. John Wiley Sons

(1985).

