6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Terahertz surface plasmon polariton propagation and focusing on periodically
corrugated metal wires

Stefan A. Maier,1, ∗ Steve R. Andrews,1 L. Mart´ın-Moreno,2 and F. J. Garc´ıa-Vidal3, †
1Centre for Photonics and Photonic Materials, Department of Physics, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK
2Departamento de F´ısica de la Materia Condensada,
Universidad de Zaragoza-CSIC, E-50009 Zaragoza, Spain
3Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica de la Materia Condensada,
Universidad Aut´onoma de Madrid, E-28049 Madrid, Spain
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

In this letter we show how the dispersion relation of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) propa-
gating along a perfectly conducting wire can be tailored by corrugating its surface with a periodic
array of radial grooves. In this way, highly localized SPPs can be sustained in the terahertz region
of the electromagnetic spectrum. Importantly, the propagation characteristics of these spoof SPPs
can be controlled by the surface geometry, opening the way to important applications such as energy
concentration on cylindrical wires and superfocusing using conical structures.

PACS numbers: 73.20.Mf, 42.25.Bs, 78.68.+m, 42.79.Gn

One of the major driving forces in the ﬁeld of plas-
monics is the ability to spatially conﬁne electromagnetic
energy at visible frequencies over distances signiﬁcantly
smaller than the wavelength. Surface plasmon polari-
tons (SPPs) and localized plasmons at metal/dielectric
interfaces open up a previously inaccessible length scale
for optical research, with promising applications in the
miniaturization of photonic circuits [1, 2], near-ﬁeld op-
tics [3] and single-molecule optical sensing [4, 5]. It would
be greatly advantageous to take concepts such as highly
localized waveguiding [6, 7, 8] and superfocusing [9, 10]
to lower frequencies, particularly the THz regime [11],
where plasmonics could enable near-ﬁeld imaging [12]
and biosensing [13] with unprecedented sensitivity. How-
ever, there is a basic problem: SPPs oﬀer sub-wavelength
ﬁeld localization only for frequencies close to the intrin-
sic plasma frequency of the conductor, which for most
metals is in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. At
THz frequencies on the other hand, metals resemble in
many ways a perfect conductor, and the negligible pene-
tration of the electromagnetic ﬁelds leads to highly delo-
calized SPPs akin to grazing-incidence light ﬁelds. In this
frequency range, SPPs are also known as Sommerfeld-
Zenneck waves [14]. Such weakly guided THz waves have
recently been characterized on cylindrical metallic wires
[15, 16, 17]. While this waveguide geometry is in princi-
ple suitable for a variety of applications such as biologi-
cal sensing in conﬁned spaces [15] or the local probing of
materials [18], the radial extent of the ﬁelds over many
wavelengths and the concomitant radiation loss due to
bends, non-uniformities or nearby objects severely limit
the eﬃciency and viability of such concepts.

In this letter we present a very promising route to
achieving sub-wavelength conﬁnement in metal wires at
THz or microwave frequencies by showing that the dis-
persion relation of SPPs can be engineered at will by peri-
odically structuring the cylindrical surface with grooves.

In this way, the conﬁnement does not rely on the ﬁnite
conductivity of the wire, but is purely due to the sur-
face structure. It is interesting to note that the viabil-
ity of this approach was hinted at by Goubau in 1950
[14]. More recently, the idea of tailoring the topography
of a perfect conductor to allow the existence of surface
waves resembling the behavior of SPPs at optical fre-
quencies was discussed in the context of two-dimensional
hole lattices [19] and one-dimensional groove arrays [20]
machined into ﬂat interfaces. Experimental veriﬁcation
of these ﬁndings in the microwave regime has been re-
cently reported [21]. Due to their mimicking characteris-
tics, these geometry-controlled surface waves were named
spoof SPPs. Here we demonstrate that spoof SPPs can be
sustained and exhibit a rich behavior in three dimensions,
including the possibility of deep sub-wavelength energy
concentration in cylindrical and superfocusing in conical
structures. The length scales of the surface structures
that we describe are within the limits of state-of-the-art
laser-machining techniques that are used to make corru-
gated feedhorns for sub-millimeter radiation [22].

−

The inset of Fig. 1a shows a schematic picture of the
envisioned structure. An array of radial grooves of depth
h = R
r, width a and lattice constant d is machined into
a perfectly conducting cylinder of radius R. Within the
perfect conductor approximation, valid for metals in the
microwave or THz ranges of the electromagnetic spec-
trum, the frequencies of the dispersion bands scale with
the reciprocal size of the structure. Therefore, in Fig. 1
d is used as the unit length. We are interested in calcu-
lating the dispersion relation (frequency, ω, versus axial
propagation constant, k) of TM-polarized waves propa-
gating in the z-direction along the wire. First we apply
a theoretical framework based on a modal expansion of
the EM-ﬁelds. In order to yield quasi-analytical expres-
sions for ω(k), we search for surface waves that have no
the azimuthal order m is
azimuthal (φ) variation, i.e.

equal to zero, and when describing the EM-ﬁelds inside
the subwavelength grooves, only the lowest eigenmode is
In this way, in region II,
considered in the expansion.
E and B are zero everywhere except inside the radial
grooves and Ez can be written as:

EII

z (ρ) = AJ0(gρ) + BN0(gρ)

(1)

where A and B are constants, J0 and N0 are the zero-
order Bessel and Neumann functions, respectively, and
g = ω/c, with c being the velocity of light. Within this
single mode approximation EII

ρ = 0.

On the other hand, the z-component of the E-ﬁeld in

region I (vacuum) can be expressed as:

EI

z (ρ, z) =

CnK0(qnρ)eiknz

(2)

+∞

Xn=−∞

p

→ ∞

k2
n −

where Cn are constants, kn = k + 2πn/d takes into ac-
g2. The radial
count diﬀraction eﬀects and qn =
dependence is controlled by K0, the zero-order modiﬁed
Neumann function, which displays a non-divergent be-
. Note that, as we are interested in the
havior as ρ
non-radiative region of the dispersion relation, k must
be outside the light cone, i.e., k > g. The other non-
zero components of E and B can be obtained straight-
forwardly from Ez. The dispersion relation of the TM-
polarized waves propagating along the cylinder is deter-
mined by imposing matching conditions on the parallel
components of E and B at the interface between regions
I and II and at the bottom of the grooves. Following this
procedure yields a transcendental equation for ω(k):

+∞

Xn=−∞

S2
n

g
qn

K1(qnR)
K0(qnR)

N0(gR)J0(gr)
N0(gr)J1(gR)

N0(gr)J0(gR)
N1(gR)J0(gr)

= 1

−
−

(3)
where J1 and N1 are the ﬁrst-order Bessel and Neu-
mann functions, respectively, and K1 is the ﬁrst-order
Sn is given by Sn =
modiﬁed Neumann function.

a/d sinc(kna/2).
Figure 1a shows the dispersion relation calculated us-
p
ing Eq.(3) for SPPs propagating along a periodically cor-
rugated, perfectly conducting cylinder. The inclusion of
just 3 or 4 diﬀraction orders in the sum appearing in
Eq.(3) yields suﬃcient convergence. The width of the
grooves is a = 0.2d and two diﬀerent depths of inden-
tation are analyzed: h = R
r = 0.4d (dashed lines)
and h = d (full lines). For both depths, several values
of the outer (R) and inner (r) radii are shown for ﬁxed
h. Figure 1a clearly shows that the inclusion of a peri-
odic array of grooves on a perfectly conducting wire dra-
matically changes the dispersion relation of SPPs. Note
that, within the perfect conductor approximation, SPP
bands coincide with the light line for the non-corrugated
geometry, and the modes are not bound. For the case

−

2

FIG. 1: (a) ω versus k for the corrugated, azimuthally invari-
ant wire geometry shown in the inset for two diﬀerent cases:
h = R − r = 0.4d (dashed lines) and h = d (full lines). For
each value of h, the dispersion relations calculated for increas-
ing values of R and r (h ﬁxed) are presented. The dotted line
shows the band obtained with a FDTD code for h = d and
R = 2d. (b) Dispersion relation of the SPP bands obtained
with the FDTD code for azimuthal modes m = 0, m = 2 and
m = 4. The insets show the amplitude of the E-ﬁeld in a
quarter cylinder for these three bands at k = π/d.

of spoof SPPs, ω(k) departs signiﬁcantly from the light
line and this departure is greater when the indentations
are deeper. This dispersion relation closely resembles
the behavior of SPPs propagating along a metal wire at
optical frequencies. In this last case, for m = 0, ω(k) ap-
proaches ωp/√2 (where ωp is the plasma frequency of the
metal) at large k. For the spoof SPPs bands, the asymp-
totic frequency (ωS) is mainly controlled by the depth
of the grooves. An analytical expression for ωS can be
obtained in the limit R, r >> d and λ
d, a. By us-
ing the asymptotic expansions of the diﬀerent Bessel and
Neumann functions appearing in Eq.(3) and neglecting

≫

the diﬀraction orders, k(ω) becomes:

k = gr1 +

a2
d2 tan2 gh

(4)

The asymptotic frequency ωS = πc/2h is inversely pro-
portional to h, explaining the behavior of ω(k) observed
in Fig. 1a when the depth of the radial grooves is varied.
In order to check the accuracy of the approximations
made in our quasi-analytical model, we have conducted
ﬁnite-diﬀerence-time-domain (FDTD) numerical simula-
tions on one unit cell of the wire structure. In Fig. 1a
the spoof SPP band obtained with this code for the case
of h = d and R = 2d is also plotted (dotted line). The
agreement between the band obtained from Eq.(3) and
the FDTD result is remarkable. In Fig. 1b we present
the m = 0, 2, 4 bands (only for k > g) for the corru-
gated wire analyzed above calculated with the FDTD
code. The spatial dependence of the amplitude of the
E-ﬁeld for the three bands (m = 0, 2, 4) evaluated at
k = π/d, border of the ﬁrst Brillouin Zone, is plotted
in the inset. The highly localized character of the spoof
SPPs along the radial direction is evident.

Once it has been shown how the bands of spoof SPPs
can be engineered, we now focus on their light guiding
properties in a wire tailored to operate at a frequency
near 1 THz. In panel (a) of Fig. 2, we show the disper-
sion relation of the spoof SPPs bands obtained with our
quasi-analytical approach for a = 10 µm, d = 50 µm,
r = 50 µm and R = 100 µm (black line). For this
set of geometrical parameters the asymptotic frequency,
fS, is equal to 1.1 THz. The spatial variation of the
E-ﬁeld associated to the spoof SPPs for diﬀerent fre-
quencies is displayed in panels (b-d) of Fig. 2. These
pictures have been obtained by numerical simulations
using the ﬁnite integration technique (FIT). The wire
has been excited using an input port with a radially po-
larized broadband THz pulse, and multiple calculations
with adaptive mesh reﬁnement ensured well-converged
results. For f = 0.6 THz, the E-ﬁeld is highly concen-
trated on the surface of the wire but this concentration
is much stronger at a higher frequency, f = 1.0 THz.
This is due to the fact that in this last case the prop-
agation constant is much longer than ω/c (see Fig.2a)
resulting in a very large radial component of the wavevec-
g2. For f = 1.2 THz (> fS), no spoof
tor, q =
SPPs propagate along the corrugated wire and light is
scattered at the input port.

k2

p

−

Both the high localization and low group velocity of
spoof SPPs on corrugated metal wires are advantageous
for applications in the routing of radiation with low bend
losses and for sensing. The fact that the dispersion rela-
tion of the spoof SPPs can be easily tuned by engineering
the geometry of the indentations opens up an even more
fascinating possibility, the gradual energy concentration

3

FIG. 2: (a) Dispersion relations of spoof SPPs for a = 10µm,
d = 50µm and R = 100µm for ﬁve diﬀerent values of the inner
radii r = 85, 60, 50, 40 and 20µm.
(b-d) Spatial variation
of the E-ﬁeld amplitude (logarithmic scale) calculated using
the ﬁnite integration technique on a wire with a = 10µm,
d = 50µm, R = 100µm, and r = 50µm for three diﬀerent
frequencies, f = 0.6, 1.0 and 1.2 THz.

of radiation propagating along wires, and superfocusing
of radiation at the tip of conical structures.

Panel (a) of Fig. 2 gives us a clue on how THz radi-
ation can be concentrated using periodically corrugated
metal wires. Let us imagine a metal wire in which the
outer radius is ﬁxed (R = 100 µm) and the inner one
(r) is adiabatically (i.e., back-reﬂection and scattering
are negligible) reduced, thus increasing the groove depth,
from r = 100 µm at the beginning to 20 µm at the end of
the wire. If the frequency of the surface wave is ﬁxed (for
example, f = 0.6 THz, λ = 500 µm, see dotted line in
Fig.2a), it is expected that the group velocity of the mode
will be gradually reduced as it propagates along the wire
in the direction of decreasing r. Along with this change
in the group velocity, the spatial extension of the mode in
the radial direction would be severely reduced, as can be
seen in Fig.3 (dotted lines), in which the dependence of
the E-ﬁeld concentration with r is analyzed. Notice that
these curves have been obtained with the quasi-analytical
method, assuming that the wire is inﬁnite and r is ﬁxed.
To conﬁrm the idea of gradual energy concentration, we
have conducted FIT numerical simulations on a ﬁnite
straight wire of radius R = 100 µm and length 2 mm
containing 40 grooves with d = 50 µm. In this wire the
inner radius r decreases from 95 µm to 20 µm in steps of

4

FIG. 3: Field concentration via adiabatic reduction of r. Dis-
tribution of the E-ﬁeld, evaluated at f = 0.6 THz, along the
radial direction at diﬀerent locations of the wire correspond-
ing to r = 85, 60, 40 and 20µm calculated using the quasi-
analytical method for an inﬁnite wire (dotted lines) and FIT
for the real ﬁnite structure (solid lines) on a linear color scale.
The inset shows the distribution of the E-ﬁeld in a logarithmic
scale.

5 µm every two lattice periods. This region is followed
by a number of lattice periods with constant r = 20 µm.
The distribution of the E-ﬁeld for f = 0.6 THz is plotted
on a logarithmic scale in the inset of Fig. 3. As expected
from our previous discussion, the mode becomes increas-
ingly conﬁned to the surface with propagation distance,
as shown in the main part of Fig. 3 (solid lines). At the
end of the wire, the E-ﬁeld is concentrated on a region
10 times smaller than the wavelength on the surface of
the wire. The agreement between the quasi-analytical
method and FIT validates the idea of concentrating light
via an adiabatic reduction of r.

The same concept can be extended to conical struc-
tures, where both R and r are adiabatically reduced. In
this case, we expect focusing as long as the gradual re-
duction in r is greater or equal to that in R. Figure
4 demonstrates this eﬀect for a cone where the groove
r = 5 µm is constant, d = 50 µm and R is re-
depth R
duced from 100 µm to 10 µm over a distance of 2 mm. As
apparent from this ﬁgure, eﬃcient deep sub-wavelength
conﬁnement to the tip (2r = 0.04λ) takes place. This ge-
ometry has great promise for channeling THz radiation to
micron-scale volumes for near-ﬁeld imaging, spectroscopy
and sensing applications.

−

In conclusion, we have shown that periodically cor-
rugated metal wires can sustain spoof surface plasmon
polaritons, and that their dispersion and mode proﬁle is
determined by the geometry. Apart from low-loss propa-
gation due to the good conﬁnement, such structures allow

FIG. 4: Superfocusing on a corrugated cone of length 2 mm,
with constant h = 5 µm and d = 50µm. R is reduced from
100µm to 10µm. Plot shows the magnitude of the E-ﬁeld on
a logarithmic scale spanning two orders of magnitude.

energy concentration and superfocusing. We expect these
results to enable a new class of THz optical research and
technology with only minor extensions of existing micro-
fabrication techniques.

This work was supported by the Air Force Re-
search Laboratory, under agreement number FA9550-05-
1-0488, the Royal Society, the Spanish MEC under grant
MAT2005-06608-C02 and the EU under project FP6-
NMP4-CT-2003-505699.

∗ Electronic address: S.Maier@bath.ac.uk
† Electronic address: fj.garcia@uam.es

[1] W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature

424, 824 (2003).

[2] E. Ozbay, Science 311, 189 (2006).
[3] C. Girard, Rep. Prog. Phys. 68, 1883 (2005).
[4] S. M. Nie and S. R. Emery, Science 275, 1102 (1997).
[5] K. Kneipp, Y. Wang, H. Kneipp, L. T. Perelman, I.
Itzkan, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld, Phys. Rev. Lett.
78, 1667 (1997).

[6] B. Lamprecht, J. R. Krenn, G. Schider, H. Ditlbacher,
M. Salerno, N. Felidj, A. Leitner, F. R. Aussenegg, and
J. C. Weeber, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 51 (2001).

[7] S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E.
Harel, B. E. Koel, and A. A. G. Requicha, Nat. Mat. 2,
229 (2003).

[8] S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, E. Devaux, J.-Y. Laluet,

and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature 440, 508 (2006).

[9] A. J. Babadjanyan, N. L. Margaryan and Kh. V.

Nerkararyan, J. Appl. Phys. 87, 3785 (2000).

[10] M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 137404 (2004).
[11] B. F. Ferguson and X-C. Zhang, Nat. Mat. 1, 26 (2002).
[12] H-T. Chen, R. Kersting and G. C. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett.

83, 1 (2003).

[13] M. Nagel, P. Haring Bolivar, M. Brucherseifer, H. Kurz,
A. Bosserhoﬀ and R. Buttner, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 154
(2002).

[14] G. Goubau, J. Appl. Phys. 21, 1119 (1950).
[15] K. Wang and D. M. Mittleman, Nature 432, 376 (2004).

[16] K. Wang and D. M. Mittleman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,

157401 (2006).

[17] T-I. Jeon, Jiangquang Zhang, and D. Grischkowsky,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 161904 (2005).

[18] Nick C. J. van der Valk and Paul C. M. Planken, Appl.

Phys. Lett. 87, 071106 (2005).

[19] J. B. Pendry, L. Mart´ın-Moreno, and F. J. Garc´ıa-Vidal,

Science 305, 847 (2004).

[20] F. J. Garc´ıa-Vidal, L. Mart´ın-Moreno, and J. B. Pendry,

J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 7, S97 (2005).

[21] A. P. Hibbins, B. R. Evans, and J. R. Sambles, Science
308, 670 (2005); A. P. Hibbins et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.
96, 073904 (2006).

[22] V. M. Lubecke, K. Mizuno, and G. M. Rebeiz, IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 46, 1821 (1998).

5

