Ultra Fast Nonlinear Optical Tuning of Photonic Crystal Cavities

Ilya Fushman,∗ Edo Waks,† Dirk Englund,‡ Nick

Stoltz,§ Pierre Petroﬀ,§ and Jelena Vuˇckovi´c¶

E. L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

We demonstrate fast (up to 20 GHz), low power (5 µW ) modulation of photonic crystal (PC)

cavities in GaAs containing InAs quantum dots. Rapid modulation through blue-shifting of the

cavity resonance is achieved via free carrier injection by an above-band picosecond laser pulse.

Slow tuning by several linewidths due to laser-induced heating is also demonstrated.

PACS numbers: 03.67,42.50.Ct,42.65

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
3
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: ifushman@stanford.edu; Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742
‡Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
§Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara, CA 93106
¶Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University

1

I.

INTRODUCTION:

Nonlinear optical switching in photonic networks is a promising approach for ultrafast

low-power optical data processing and storage [1].

In addition, optical data processing

will be essential for optics-based quantum information processing systems. A number of

elements of an all optical network have been proposed and demonstrated in Silicon photonic

crystals [2, 3]. Tuning of the photonic crystal lattice modes has also been demonstrated

[4, 5]. Here, we directly observe ultrafast (≈ 20 GHz) nonlinear optical tuning of photonic

crystal (PC) cavities containing quantum dots (QD). We perform the fast tuning via free

carrier injection, which alters the cavity refractive index, and observe it directly in the time

domain. Three material eﬀects can be used to quickly alter the refractive index. The ﬁrst

is the index change due to free carrier (FC) generation, which is discussed in this work, and

has been explored elsewhere [4]. The cavity resonance shifts to shorter wavelengths due to

the free-carrier eﬀect. Switching via free-carrier generation is limited by the lifetime of free

carriers and depends strongly on the material system and geometry of the device. In our

case, the large surface area and small mode volume of the PC reduce the lifetime of free

carriers in GaAs. Free carriers can alternatively be swept out of the cavity by applying a

potential across the device [6]. The second eﬀect that can be used to modify the refractive

index is the Kerr eﬀect, which is promising for a variety of other applications [7, 8] and,

in principle, should result in modulation rates of 1015 − 1016 Hz. However, the free carrier

eﬀect is more easily achieved in the GaAs PC considered here. The third eﬀect is thermal

tuning (TT) via optical heating of the sample through absorption of the pump laser. This

process is much slower than free carrier and Kerr eﬀects and shifts the cavity resonance to

longer wavelengths due to the temperature dependence of the refractive index. The time

scale for this process is on the order of microseconds. Here we consider these two processes

for modulating cavity resonances, and focus on the higher-speed FC tuning.

Photonic crystal samples investigated in this study are grown by molecular beam epitaxy

on a Si n-doped GaAs (100) substrate with a 0.1m buﬀer layer. The sample contains

a 10 period distributed Bragg reﬂector (DBR) mirror consisting of alternating layers of

AlAs/GaAs with thicknesses of 80.2/67.6 nm respectively. A 918 nm sacriﬁcial layer of

Al0.8Ga0.2As is located above the DBR mirror. The active region consists of a 150 nm thick

GaAs region with a centered InGaAs/GaAs QD layer. QDs self-assemble during epitaxy

2

operating in the Stranski-Krastanov growth mode.

InGaAs islands are partially covered

with GaAs and annealed before completely capping with GaAs. This procedure blue shifts

the QDs emission wavelengths [9] towards the spectral region where Si-based detectors are

more eﬃcient.

PC cavities, such as those shown in Fig.1, were fabricated in GaAs membranes using

standard electron beam lithography and reactive ion etching techniques. Finite Diﬀerence

Time Domain (FDTD) simulations predict that the fundamental resonance in the cavity

has a ﬁeld maximum in the high index region (Fig.1), and thus a change in the value

of the dielectric constant should aﬀect these modes strongly. We investigated the dipole

cavity (Fig.1), the linear three-hole defect cavity [10], and the linear two-hole defect cavity

designs. The experimentally observed Q’s for all three cavities were in the range of 1000-2000

(optimized cavities can have much higher Q’s), and consequently the experimental tuning

results were similar for all three cavities.

Photonic crystal cavities were made to spectrally overlap with the QD emission, and are

visible above the QD emission background due to an increased emission rate and collection

eﬃciency of dots coupled to the cavity. Quantum dot emission was excited with a Ti:Sapphire

laser tuned to 750 nm in a pulsed or CW conﬁguration.

In the pulsed mode, the pump

produced 3ps pulses at an 80 MHz repetition rate. Tuning was achieved by pulsing the

cavity with appropriate pump power. The cavity emission was detected on a spectrometer

and on a streak camera for the time resolved measurements.

Tuning is achieved by quickly changing the value of the dielectric constant ǫ = n2 of the

cavity with a control pulse. The magnitude of the refractive index shift ∆n can be estimated

from

∆ω
ω

≈ −

∆ǫ|E|2dV
ǫ|E|2dV

≈ −

∆n
n

1
2 R
R

(1)

Above, ω is the resonance of the un-shifted cavity, |E|2 is the amplitude of the cavity mode,
and the integral goes over all space. In order to shift by a linewidth, we require ∆ω
ω = 1
Q,
which gives ∆n = n
Q . Finite diﬀerence time domain (FDTD) calculations indeed verify that
for a linear cavity with Q 1000, a ∆n ≈ 10−2 shifts the resonance by more than a linewidth,

as seen in Fig. 1.

As described above, two tuning mechanisms were investigated in this work. The ﬁrst is

temperature tuning, which is quite slow (on the time scale of microseconds). The second is

3

FIG. 1: (a): Scanning electron micrograph of the L3 type cavity. (b): high-Q mode Electric ﬁeld

amplitude distribution, as predicted by FDTD simulations. (c): FDTD Simulations of frequency

and Q changes as ∆n/n changes from ±10−3 → ±10−1. A high-Q (QHQ = 20000) and low-L

(QLQ = 2000) cavity were tuned: (q1) ∆Q/Q for ∆n > 0 and Q = QHQ, (q2) ∆Q/Q for ∆n > 0

and Q = QLQ, (ω1) ∆ω/ω for ∆n < 0,(ω2) ∆ω/ω for ∆n > 0 for both high Q and low Q modes,

(q3) ∆Q/Q for ∆n < 0 Q = QLQ, (q4) ∆Q/Q for ∆n < 0 Q = QHQ. The lines ∆n/n for ∆n > 0

and ∆n < 0 are also plotted and overlap exactly with ω2 and ω1. As can be seen, the magnitude

of the relative frequency change is independent of Q, but the higher Q cavity is degraded more

strongly by the change in index. For an increase in n, the Q increases due to stronger Total Internal

Reﬂection conﬁnement in the slab, as expected.

the free carrier induced refractive index change, which is found to occur on the time scale of

tens of picoseconds. Therefore, we can look at the two eﬀects separately in the time domain.

II. FREE CARRIER TUNING

In the case of Free Carrier (FC) tuning only,

∆n(t)
n

=

∆nf c(t)
n

= ηNf c(t)

(2)

where Nf c(t) is the density of free carriers in the GaAs slab, and the value of η is given in

terms of fundamental constants (ǫ0,c), DC refractive index (n0), charge (e), eﬀective electron
[11] , and we calculate η ≈ 10−21cm3 for
mass (m∗

e) and wavelength (λ) as η = − e2λ2

8π2c2ǫ0n0m∗
e

our system.

The FC density changes with the pump photon number density P (t), with pulse width

4

τp, in time t as:

dNf c
dt

= −

Nf c +

1
τf c

P (t)
τp

The carriers decay with 1
τf c

= 1
τr

+ 1
τnr

+ 1
τc

, where τr, τnr are the radiative and non-radiative

recombination times of free carriers, and τc is the relaxation time (or capture time) into

the QDs. While τc ≈ 30 − 50ps << τr, τnr, the dot capture is not the dominant relaxation

process. The dots saturate for the duration of the dot recombination lifetime τd ≈ 200ps −

1ns, and, because the dot density is much smaller than the FC density, the eﬀective capture

time is much longer. Qualitatively, we can describe this eﬀect by lengthening τc by a factor

1/x as τc → τc/x << τr, τnr, where x << 1 is essentially the ratio of QD to FC densities.

The FC density is then given by:

Nf c(t) = Nf c(0)e

τf c + e

− t

− t
τf c

t

′

t
τf c

e

P (t′)
τp

dt′

Z
0

In order to shift the cavity resonance by a linewidth (∆n/n = 10−3), we need Nf c ≈
1018cm−3 according to Eq. 2. Taking into account the GaAs absorption coeﬃcient α ≈
104cm−1, reﬂection losses from the 160 nm GaAs membrane (R = ( nair−nGaAs
nair+nGaAs

)2 ≈ .3), lens

losses (50%), and an approximately 5µm spot size, powers as low at 1-10 µW average pulse
power in a 3 ps pulse should yield the desired shifts of order ∆n

n ≈ 10−3.

In our experiment, we monitor the cavity resonance during the tuning process using QD

emission. Thus, we need to account for the delay between the pump and onset of emission

in QDs. The QDs are excited by free carriers according to:

dNqd
dt

= −

Nqd +

1
τd

Nf c
τc

Thus the QD population (assuming no excited dots at carriers at t=0) is given by:

Nqd(t) =

t

− t
τqd
e
τpτc Z
0

t′(
e

1
τqd

− 1
τf c

)

t′

′′

t

τf c P (t′′)dt′′dt′

e

Z
0

where τp is the pump pulse width, τqd ≈ 200 ps is the average cavity coupled QD lifetime,

τf c ≈ 30ps is the FC lifetime, and P (t) is the pump photon number density. The observed

spectrum is that of a Lorentzian with a time - varying central frequency ω0(t) (for simplicity,

we assume that the Q factor is time invariant), which we deﬁne as:

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

S(ω, t) = (1 + 4Q2(1 −

ω2
0(t)
ω2 ))−1

5

FIG. 2: Numerical model of a free-carrier tuned cavity. In (a) the cavity is always illuminated by

a light source. Panel (b) shows the cavity resonance at the peak of the free carrier distribution

(t=0) and 50 ps later, as indicated by the yellow arrows in (a). The time-integrated spectrum

is shown as the asymmetric black line (lebeled Sp) in (b), and corresponds to the signal seen on

the spectrometer, which is the integral over the whole time window of the shifted cavity. The

asymmetric spectrum indicates shifting.

In (c) and (d) the same data is plotted, but now we

consider the cavity illuminated only by QD emission with a turn-on delay of 30 ps due to the carrier

capture lifetime τc, and a QD lifetime of 200 ps. In (d) the dashed line is the un-normalized t=0

spectrum, which now appears much smaller in magnitude. Furthermore, the asymmetry of the line

is even smaller in this case.

The numerical results are shown in Fig. 2. We ﬁnd that going beyond 10’s of µW does

not result in a larger shift, but destroys and shifts the cavity Q permanently.

The experimental data is shown in Fig. 3. We used moderate power (≈10 µW ) to shift

the cavity by one half linewidth. Stronger excitation results in higher shifts as indicated by

an extremely asymmetric spectrum shown on the inset in (d) of Fig. 3, where 100 µW were

used. However, prolonged excitation at this power leads to a sharp reduction in Q over time.

6

FIG. 3: Experimental result of FC cavity tuning for the L3 cavity.

In (a) the cavity is always

illuminated by a light source and pulsed with a 3ps Ti:Sapphire pulse. Panel (b) shows the cavity

resonance at the peak of the FC distribution (t=0) and 50 ps later, as indicated by the yellow

arrows in (a).

In order to verify that the cavity tunes at the arrival at the pulse, we combine

the pulsed excitation with a weak CW above band pump. The emission due to the CW source

is always present, and is in the box labeled CW in (a). This very weak emission is reproduced

in Panel (b) as the broad background with a peak at the cold cavity resonace in (b). The time-

integrated spectrum is shown as the black line (Spectrometer) in (b). In (c) and (d) the same

data is plotted, but now we consider the cavity illuminated only by QD emission pulsed by 10 µW

from the Ti:Sapphire source. In (d) suppression by about .4-.35 at the cold cavity resonance can

be seen. The inset shows a strongly asymmetric spectrum of a dipole type cavity under excitation

of 100µW and the same cavity at low power after prolonged excitation. Such strong excitation

degrades the Q.

III. THERMAL TUNING

In the case of Thermal Tuning (TT),

∆n(t)
n

= βT

(8)

Continuous wave above-band excitation of the sample results in both free carrier genera-

tion and heating. In this case, the heating mechanism dominates, and the cavity red-shifts.

The predominant eﬀect on the dielectric constant is the change in the bandgap with temper-

7

FIG. 4: Thermal tuning of the L3 cavity under CW excitation (a): Measured ∆ω/ω (left axis)

and ∆Q/Q (right axis) as a function of pump power for the L3 cavity, obtained from the ﬁts to the

spectra shown in (b). The Q initially increases due to moderate gain and then degrades, while ω

shifts linearly. The straight dashed line ﬁts ∆ω/ω = 3 × 10−3 × Pin − 5 × 10−5 with 95% conﬁdence

and with root mean square deviation of ≈ 0.99. At very high power, the change in frequency does

not follow the same trend. The inset in (b) shows a plot of ∆ω/(ω/Q), which is a measure of the

number of lines that we shift the cavity by. A shift of three linewidths is obtained.

ature due to lattice expansion and phonon population. The cavity itself could potentially

expand, but since the thermal expansion coeﬃcient of GaAs is on the order of 10−6K −1, this

is insigniﬁcant. As the cavity red-shifts, the Q ﬁrst increases due to gain and then drops due

to absorption losses. The experimental data for thermal tuning is shown in Fig. 4. From a

ﬁt to the frequency shift, we obtain β ≈ 3 × 10−3.

IV. CONCLUSION:

In conclusion, we show that fast (20 GHz) tuning of GaAs cavities can be realized with

reasonable pump powers (10 µW ) with no additional fabrication. Under these conditions

the cavity is shifted by almost a linewidth, which leads to suppression of transmission at

the cold-cavity frequency by ≈ 1/e. The suppression depends on the Q of the cavity and

for cavities with Q ≈ 4000, shifts by a full linewidth would be obtained. Thus, fast control

over photon propagation in a GaAs based PC network is easily achieved and can be used to

control the elements of an optical or quantum on-chip network. Free carrier tuning strongly

depends on the geometry of the cavity, since a larger surface area leads to a shorter FC

lifetime. Thus, our future work will focus on identifying optimal designs for shifting and a

8

demonstration of an active switch based on the combination of PC cavities and waveguides.

Our ultimate goal is all-optical logic with photon packets on the chip.

Financial support was provided by the MURI Center for photonic quantum information

systems (ARO/DTO program No. DAAD19-03-1-0199), ONR Young Investi-gator Award

and NSF Grant No. CCF-0507295. I.F. and D.E. would like to thank the NDSEG fellowship

for ﬁnancial support.

[1] M. Soljacic and J. Joannopoulos, Nature 3, 211 (2004).

[2] A. Shinya, S. Mitsugi, T. Tanabe, M. Notomi, I. Yokohama, H. Takara, and S. Kawanishi,

Optics Express 14, 1230 (2006).

[3] A. Shinya, T. Tanabe, E. Kuramochi, and M. Notomi, NTT Technical Review 3, 61 (2005).

[4] A. D. Bristow, J.-P. R. Wells, W. H. Fan, A. M. Fox, M. S. Skolnick, D. M. Whittaker, J. S.

Roberts, and T. F. Krauss, Applied Physics Letters 83, 851 (2003).

[5] P. M. Johnson, A. F. Koenderink, and W. L. Vos, Physical Review B 66, 081102 (2002).

[6] H. Rong, R. Jones, A. Liu, O. Cohen2, D. Hak, A. Fang, and M. Paniccia, Nature 433, 725

(2005).

[7] M. Hochberg, T. Baehr-Jones, G. Wang, M. Shearn, K. Harvard, J. Luo, B. Chen, Z. Shi,

R. Lawson, P. Sullivan, et al., Nature Materials 5, 703 (2006).

[8] I. Fushman and J. Vuˇckovi´c, quant-ph/0603150 (2005).

[9] P. M. Petroﬀ, A. Lorke, and A. Imamoglu, Physics Today 46, 54 (2001).

[10] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, , and S. Noda, Nature 425, 944 (2003).

[11] B. Bennett, R. Soref, and J. Del-Alamo, IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 36, 113 (1990).

9

