6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Coherence Spectro-Tomography by all-Optical
Depth-Wavelength analysis

L. Froehly, M. Ouadour, L. Furfaro, P. Sandoz, T. Gharbi

D´epartement d’Optique PM Duﬃeux, Institut FEMTO-ST, UMR CNRS 6174, Universit´e de Franche-Comt´e, 25030
Besan¸con Cedex, France

P. Leproux, G. Huss, V. Couderc

XLIM - UMR CNRS 6172, 123,avenue Albert Thomas, 87060 Limoges Cedex, France

Compiled November 21, 2013

Current spectroscopic optical coherence tomography (OCT) methods rely on a posteriori numerical calculation.
We present an alternative for accessing optically the spectroscopic information in OCT, i.e. without any
post-processing, by using a grating based correlation and a wavelength demultiplexing system. Conventional
A-scan and spectrally resolved A-scan are directly recorded on the image sensor. Furthermore, due to the
grating based system, no correlation scan is necessary. In the frame of this paper we present the principle of
the system as well as ﬁrst experimental results.

c(cid:13) 2013 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes:

050.0050, 070.0070, 110.4500, 120.0120, 120.3180, 170.4500

For a decade the interest for Optical Coherence To-
mography (OCT) has been growing in the ﬁeld of
biomedical imaging. Main reasons are the non destruc-
tive character of these methods, the image resolution
down to the micrometer scale either in-depth or in-
plane and the capability to perform optically in vivo
non-destructive biopsies. Tomographic images can be ob-
tained by diﬀerent OCT conﬁgurations which are classi-
ﬁed in two main families: Time-Domain OCT (TD-OCT)
and Fourier Domain OCT (FD-OCT).2

For a few years a new trend is to complement
the reconstruction of in-depth 3D tissue structure by
functional information as a help in medical diagnosis.
In this way solutions that supply indications on the
actual biological metabolism of the inspected tissues
were reported; for instance: polarization OCT imaging,3
spectroscopic OCT4 or CARS-OCT.5 Our work asso-
ciates also a functional signature to in-depth OCT mi-
crostructure reconstructions. We propose an all-optical
device for the spectro-tomographic characterization of
the inspected tissues. We access optically to a spectro-
tomogram characterizing the depth-wavelength behavior
of a sample line (x0, y0, z). This spectro-tomogram corre-
sponds to an usual A-scan that is spectrally-resolved on a
continuous set of spectral bands. The width of the latter
is determined by the setting of the experimental set-up.
Furthermore this spectro-tomogram is obtained without
any scanning since the depth exploration is performed
by a temporal correlator based on a static diﬀraction
grating.

The experimental set-up used is composed of three
main parts as depicted in Fig. 1. Firstly the sample infor-
mation is encoded via a Linnik interferometer. The latter
is illuminated with a supercontinuum of light issued from
a microstructured optical ﬁber pumped by a Q-switched
Nd-YAG laser.6 Since this low coherence light source has

Fig. 1. Experimental set-up (top-view): PL pump laser;
MF microstructured ﬁber; O microscope objectives; BS
beam splitter; S sample; G diﬀraction grating; L spheri-
cal lens; D detector.

a transversally singlemode emission, the sample is illu-
minated only along the axial point spread function of the
microscope objective used (therefore the OCT informa-
tion ﬁnally obtained with depth-wavelength resolution
corresponds also to this sample volume). Secondly the
light beams issued from the Linnik interferometer are
directed toward a second interferometer. In this Mach-
Zehnder-like interferometer the output beamsplitter is
replaced by a transmission diﬀraction grating disposed
in the perpendicular direction. Because of the incident
angles of the two beams, the transverse direction of the
diﬀraction grating introduces a time-delay τ varying lin-
early between the recombined beams. The sample depth
is thus encoded across the grating that forms a time cor-
relation axis. The inherent principle of that kind of tem-
poral correlator was ﬁrst introduced in 19577 for spec-
troscopy. In 1991 it has been applied to intermodal dis-
persion measurements in optical ﬁbers.8 More recently
some adaptations of this set-up were proposed for op-
tical tomography.1, 9–11 A key property of that conﬁgu-
ration is to reduce signiﬁcantly the carrier frequency of

1

the interference fringes. This eﬀect can be explained by
the change of the average propagating direction of the
interfering wavefronts after diﬀraction in the −1 order.
The third part of the set-up is a simple imaging system
that forms the image of the diﬀraction grating on a two-
dimensional CCD image sensor. Then the lines of the
CCD camera encode the depth of the sample and a A-
scan is displayed without scanning along the image lines
(since all the light incident on the diﬀraction grating is
issued from the same sample line, the diﬀerent lines of
the recorded image carry the same depth information).
The cascade of the two interferometers should result in
autocorrelation. In practise, interfering beams are cross-
polarized in both interferometers thanks to polarization
multiplexing (quarter and half waveplates are not repre-
sented in Fig. 1 for the sake of clarity). Thus we perform
intercorrelation instead of autocorrelation and the de-
tected signal can be expressed as:

C(x) = I + 2Re[

R(ν)S(ν)e

−j2π( 2x

γc sinθi)νej 4πx

γΛ dν] (1)

Zν

where x is the horizontal coordinate on the CCD cam-
era lines, I the background intensity, Re designs the real
part, R(ν) and S(ν) are the spectral distributions of the
reference and sample beams respectively, θi is the inci-
dence angle on the diﬀraction grating, Λ is the grating
period and γ is the imaging system magniﬁcation. The
grating eﬀect appears in the term ej 4πx
γΛ that introduces
the fringe frequency change. (The reference beam R(ν) is
assumed to be real while S(ν) can be either real or com-
plex depending on the optical sample properties). Fig. 2
presents the intensity distribution along an image line as
recorded for the inspection of a homemade sample. The
latter is made of a 2% Gifrer Eosine solution layered by
capillarity between two microscope coverslips. The four
interfaces (air-glass; glass-solution; solution-glass, glass-
air) are clearly visible and the thickness of both the cov-
erslip and the eosine solution can be retrieved from this
intensity distribution after depth calibration. Those data
could be used for spectroscopic analysis as obtained clas-
sically by numerical windowed Fourier Transform. The
light source spectrum extends from 350nm to 1750nm.
In this experiment an eﬀective bandwidth of 100nm cen-
tered around 550nm is chosen and selected through the
size of the imaging lens. This bandwidth should results in
a full depth resolution of about 6µm. In practice,mainly
due to sample dispersion, it is clear on Fig. 2 that the
resolution is lower (10 − 15µm).

At this stage of the set-up description, the device con-
stitutes a Linear TD-OCT system in a conﬁguration dif-
ferent from anterior works9–12 .

Complementary elements are necessary for the obten-
tion of a spectro-tomogram. These optical elements af-
fect the light propagation only along the vertical direc-
tion and appear in Fig. 3, that presents a side view of
the set-up. The key-element is the prism that changes
the output imaging system into a spectroscope. Then the

Fig. 2. Usual time-domain A-scan as obtained experi-
mentally without scanning on an eosine solution layered
between two microscope coverslips.

Fig. 3. Experimental set-up (side-view): PL pump laser;
MF microstructured ﬁber; O microscope objectives; BS
beam splitter; S sample; G diﬀraction grating; L spheri-
cal lens; CL cylindrical lens; P prism; D detector.

vertical direction of the CCD camera becomes a spectral
axis. The spectroscope resolution is tuned through the
position of the cylindrical lenses inserted in the Mach-
Zehnder arms and that focus the light beams incident
on the grating in a horizontal line, whose height con-
trols the spectral resolution. In this complete system
conﬁguration each image line is associated to a particular
wavelength and is illuminated by a restricted bandwidth.
Therefore each image line provides a spectrally-resolved
A-scan and the whole image forms a spectro-tomogram.
Fig. 4 presents the recorded spectro-tomograph as a mir-
ror is used as sample. In that case we obtain a signal re-
lated to the light source autocorrelation since the sample
beam is not modiﬁed. The spectral resolution is 1nm cor-
responding to a depth resolution of 300µm (given by the
relation ∆ν.∆t = 1). In this result each line corresponds
to the autocorrelation of a 1nm bandwidth centered
around the corresponding wavelength. The progressive
variation of the fringe period is due to the wavelength
dependence of the diﬀracted angle. For λ = 550nm, the
interfering beams are collinear after diﬀraction and no
fringes are visible. The spectro-tomographic information
can be expressed as:

C(x, y) = I + 2Re[

F (y, ν)R(ν)S(ν)e

−j2π( 2x

γc sinθi)ν

Zν

ej 4πx

γΛ dν] (2)

where y is the vertical coordinate on the CCD camera
and F (y, ν) is the spectroscope response for the line y.

The inspection of the eosine sample resulted in Fig. 5.

2

other hand dynamics and noise performances of image
sensors are usually worse than those of photodiodes or
PMTs. Finally our detection is closer to FD-OCT one’s
since each A-scan information is contained on one CCD
line.

A clear interest of an all optical processing system ap-
pears for the spectroscopic analysis of OCT responses.
In that case, the spectral resolution and the spectral
bandwidth of interest are actually determined by the
optical components of the device. This point is an ad-
vantage over post-processing techniques such as win-
dowed Fourier transforms which are constrained by digi-
tal sampling and discretization parameters. Furthermore
spectro-tomograms obtained optically are available in-
stantaneously and that point can be important for ap-
plications in which a high measurement rate is required.
The main drawback of our grating based correlation sys-
tem is the DC part which decreases the dynamic range
available for signal detection. This problem could be
solved using a particular kind of CMOS detection al-
ready used in parallel TD-OCT.14 This detector allows
both heterodyne detection and DC ﬁltering in real-time.
The next step of our work will be to demonstrate the fea-
sibility of the implementation of this kind of detection
with our system and the inﬂuence of this on the sys-
tem performances (SNR, sensitivity and dynamic range
available for signal detection).

Acknowledgements: We acknowledge the French ANR

for funding this work (ANR-05-JCJC-0187-01).

References

1. L. Froehly, M. Ouadour, G. Petitjean, L. Furfaro, P.
Sandoz, T. Gharbi, P. Leproux, G. Huss, V. Couderc,
SPIE proc. 6191,61910N (2006)

2. A.F. Fercher, W. Drexler, C. K. Hitzenberger, T. Lasser,

Rep. Prog. Phys. 66, 239-303 (2003)

3. M.R. Hee, D. Huang, E. A. Swanson, J. G. Fujimoto,

JOSA B. 9, 903-908 (1992)

4. W. Watanabe, K. Itoh, Opt. Rev. 7, 406-414 (2000)
5. C. Vinegoni, J.S. Bredfeldt, D.L. Marks and co (2003-

12-18) oai:arXiv.org:physics/0312114

6. V. Tombelaine, C. Lesvigne, P. Leproux, L. Grossard,
V. Couderc, J.L. Auguste, J.M. Blondy, G. Huss, and
P.H. Pioger, Opt. Express 13, 7399-7404 (2005)
7. P. Connes - J. of Mod. Opt. 4, 136 - 144 (1957)
8. G. Brun, I. Verrier, A. Barthelemy, C. Froehly, J.P.

Goure, J. of Opt. Comm. 13, 134 - 139 (1992)

9. I. Verrier, G. Brun, J.P. Goure, Appl. Opt. 36, 6225-

10. I. Zeylikovich, R. Alfano, Opt. Com. 135, 217-222 (1997)
11. K. Ben Houcine, M. Jacquot, I. Verrier, G. Brun and C.

Veillas, Opt. Lett. 29, 2908 (2004)

12. C. Hauger, M. W¨orz, T. Hellmuth, Appl. Opt. 42, 3896-

3902 (2003)

13. A. Tamburello Luca, PhD Thesis, ´Etude des interfaces
liquides par g´en´eration de deuxi`eme harmonique, 1583,
EPFL, Switzerland, 150-151, (1996)

14. M. Laubscher, M. Ducros, B. Karamata, T. Lasser, R.P.

Salathe, Opt. Express 10, 429-435 (2002)

Fig. 4. Experimental spectro-tomographic signal for au-
tocorrelation (mirror as sample).

In this case the spectral resolution was ﬁxed to 12nm,
leading to a depth resolution of 25µm. We observe that
the four sample interfaces are visible only in the lower
part of the ﬁgure, i.e. outside the absorption band of
eosine.13 Wavelengths corresponding to the upper part
of the ﬁgure are absorbed by the solution and no light
returns from the last interfaces that are no more de-
tectable. This spectral information is obtained optically
and instantaneously. It complements the reconstruction
of the in-depth microstructure of the sample. This result
demonstrates clearly the depth-wavelength capabilities
of the proposed method for optical coherence spectro-
tomography. The lateral resolution is determined by the
objective used(5X, N.A.=0.1)and was measured to be
20µm (USAF pattern).

Fig. 5. Instantaneous spectro-tomographic signal with
depth-resolved spectral absorption of the eosine layer.

6230 (1997)

At this stage of system development, signal to noise ra-
tio (SNR) measurements would not be signiﬁcant of the
ultimate method capabilities since detection elements
are not optimized yet. However one may notice already
the following points. Our detection scheme diﬀers from
TD-OCT one’s while reconstructed A-scans are quite
similar. In one hand no scanning is required and the inte-
gration time on the detector can be much longer. On the

3

