6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self consistent determination of plasmonic resonances in ternary nanocomposites

Department of Physics, Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville, IL 62026

Hernando Garcia∗

Justin Trice and Ramki Kalyanaraman†

Department of Physics, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130 and

Center for Materials Innovation, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130

Radhakrishna Sureshkumar‡

Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering,

Washington University in St. Louis, MO, 63130 and

Center for Materials Innovation, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130

We have developed a self consistent technique to predict the behavior of plasmon resonances in

multi-component systems as a function of wavelength. This approach, based on the tight lower

bounds of the Bergman-Milton formulation, is able to predict experimental optical data, including

the positions, shifts and shapes of plasmonic peaks in ternary nanocomposites without using any

ﬁtting parameters. Our approach is based on viewing the mixing of 3 components as the mixing of 2

binary mixtures, each in the same host. We obtained excellent predictions of the experimental optical

behavior for mixtures of Ag:Cu:SiO2 and alloys of Au-Cu:SiO2 and Ag-Au:H2O, suggesting that the

essential physics of plasmonic behavior is captured by this approach.

Accurate control and prediction of plasmonic behavior in metal nanoparticles in various conﬁgurations

are expected to realize future ultra-high density integrated photonic devices [1]. For example, plasmonic ef-

fects in metal nanoparticle waveguide arrays and metal-dielectric interfaces have been used to transport

electromagnetic energy below diffraction limited dimensions [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Glasses containing metal

nanoparticles exhibit intensity dependent refractive index values several orders of magnitude greater than

that of silica glass due to dielectric and quantum conﬁnement effects [7]. These enhanced effects, occurring

due to surface plasmon effects at the interface of the metal and the dielectric, could allow various use of

linear and nonlinear optical responses of mixtures [8, 9, 10], provided appropriate materials are selected

[11]. Experimental observations have also demonstrated that composites containing multiple metals show

multiple plasmonic peaks as well as dependence of such peaks on metal fraction [12, 13]. Therefore, the

∗Electronic address: hgarcia@siue.edu
†Electronic address: ramkik@wuphys.wustl.edu
‡Electronic address: suresh@che.wustl.edu

2

large optical nonlinearities, the waveguiding capability and multiple-wavelength sensitivity offered by plas-

mon behavior makes it an important area of study with potential applications to optoelectronics, sensing,

etc. In this Letter, we develop and demonstrate a self consistent technique to accurately predict the effective

dielectric constant of multi-component systems and apply it to ternary nanocomposites for which reliable

experimental data are available [12, 13, 14].

The accurate prediction of the optical properties of nanocomposites made from multiple optical mate-

rials is an outstanding problem in current research. This is primarily because the effective permittivity is

not uniquely determined by the optical properties of the individual components but also requires knowledge

of the composite microstructure [15, 16]. Previous theoretical work in this area has focused primarily on

estimating the effective permittivity of two-component mixtures where one of the components is a dielectric

and the other is a metal [17]. There are numerous models that predict the effective permittivity of two com-

ponent composites [18, 19, 20]. Moreover, there are already established rigorous bound for the values of the

permittivity in such composites [16, 21, 22]. However, these models have not been extended to or applied

towards interpreting the behavior of multi-metal composites and typically multi-parameter ﬁtting routines

have been used to reproduce experimental data [14, 23]. But such ﬁtting approaches are of limited use in

predicting the fundamental behavior of unexplored nanocomposite systems and hence, are not generally

applicable tools for new product design. Recently it was shown that the problem of calculating the bounds

for a multicomponent system can be reduced to the determination of the convex-hull generated in the com-

plex plane when the volume fraction of each component act as a barycentric coordinate for the hull [24].

One of the limitations of this approach is that it can be used only for obtaining the loosest bounds which

are the Wiener bounds [25]. These loose bounds cannot predict the location of the plasmon resonances in

frequency space for a simple two component system. This is because the resonance enhancement of the

absorption takes place at fm(ǫh − ǫ1) + ǫ1 = 0 and is in contradiction to the well known condition for the

resonance at 2ǫh + ǫ1 = 0, where fm is the volume fraction of the metal, ǫh is the dielectric permittivity of

the host and ǫ1 is the real part of the dielectric permittivity of the metal or inclusion.

Here we report a self consistent technique that accurately predicts the plasmonic behavior, including

peak positions, shifts and shapes, in multi-metal mixtures and/or alloy nanocomposites without the need

for any ﬁtting parameters. Our approach begins with the fact that for a two component nanocomposite the

tightest lower bound on the dielectric permittivity can be expressed through the Bergman-Milton formula

[15, 16], (which is based on restricting the values of the effective dielectric permittivity in the complex

plane using suitably deﬁned conformal mappings) as:

ǫef f (γ) =

fa
ǫa

"

+

fh
ǫh

−

2fafh (ǫa − ǫh)
3ǫaǫh [ǫhγ + ǫa (1 − γ)] #

2

−1

(1)

where fa and fh denote the volume fractions of the constituent materials with relative permittivity ǫa and

ǫh respectively, and fa + fh = 1. The parameter γ takes the values 2(1 − fa)/3 ≤ γ ≤ 1 − 2fa/3. In this

work we use γ = 1 − 2fa/3 because it corresponds to the exact Maxwell Garnett mixing rule [26]. The

upper bound corresponds to the complementary mixture and is not of interest to us.

The central idea of this paper is to use Eq. 1 in a self consistent fashion within the effective medium

approximation to calculate the effective permittivity of a three component or ternary nanocomposite. We

begin with the hypothesis that a three component system formed by ǫa, ǫb and the host ǫh can be viewed as
a mixture of two components, each having an effective permittivity ǫa,h

ef f calculated using Eq. 1.
In this mixing process the average electric ﬁeld within the composite is held ﬁxed at every stage of mixing.

ef f and ǫb,h

The constraint in the volume fraction is introduced while calculating the individual effective permittivities

while the ﬁnal effective permittivity is calculated using equal volumes of each mixture. Moreover, notice

that ǫh, which represents the dielectric permittivity of the host matrix, is common to both mixtures. This

simple binary mixing rule, depicted graphically in Fig. 1, can be stated as follows: the effective permittivity

of an N-component mixture can be determined by mixing N-1 binary mixtures, each comprising of a host

and a distinct metal, with the host being common to the N-1 pairs. In this Letter we focus on applying this

mixing rule to ternary systems for which experimental data exists.

In order to test the validity of our hypothesis we have calculated the optical absorption coefﬁcient of

ternary composites containing multi-metal and/or alloy nanocomposites using experimental data for the

individual permittivities of the metals obtained from ref. 27. The binary mixing rule was applied to the

formation of nanocomposites made from mixtures of two metals, as shown in Fig. 1(a), and for alloys, as

shown in Fig. 1(b). We also introduced a modiﬁcation to the imaginary component of the permittivity of

each metal in order to account for the enhanced rate of electron scattering due to particle size-dependent

effects by modifying the Drude model [28]. This was accomplished by expressing the imaginary component

in the high frequency limit as follows:

where ωp is the bulk plasmon resonance frequency of the metal, and τef f is an effective relaxation time

given by:

ǫ2 =

ω3
p
ω2τef f

= ǫbulk
2

2d + νF τbulk
2d

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1
τef f

=

1
τbulk

+

νF
2d

where τbulk is the bulk relaxation time of the electron, νF is the speed of the electrons close to the Fermi

surface, and d is the nanoparticle diameter. The second term in Eq. 3 takes into account the collision rate

of the electron with the metal walls for spherically shaped particles.

3

(2)

(3)

4

In order to compare our predictions to previous experimental measurements, we identiﬁed multi-metal

composites for which experimental observations of the plasmonic behavior are available including the three

parameters required for the calculations, namely: (i) the average metal particle size; (ii) the length of the

sample which determines the absorption, and (iii) the composition of the metal particles. Based on this, we

compared theoretical predictions with the experiments of Magruder and co-workers on Ag and Cu mixtures

in SiO2 [12], by Battaglin and co-workers on Au-Cu alloys in SiO2 [13] and by Moskovits and co-workers

on colloidal solutions of Au-Ag alloy nanoparticles in H2O [14]. In our calculations, the optical absorption

in a silica glass or water matrix was estimated in terms of the optical density (OD) given by OD = αl/2.3,
where α is the absorption coefﬁcient of the ﬁnal mixture given by α = 2π

noλ Im(ǫef f (γ)), where no is the
dielectric constant of the medium (corrected for addition of the nanoparticles), λ is the incident wavelength

and and l is the length of the sample.

Magruder et al. [12] measured the behavior of the plasmonic peaks as a function of the volume fractions

of the individual metals in a composite of Ag and Cu in SiO2. Here, the various ratios of the metal ions

were achieved by sequential ion implantation. The resulting composites had particles with a mean size of

d = 30 nm for Ag and Cu in ratios of 9:3, 6:6, and 3:9 respectively. The central observations were that: (i)

a dominant peak, attributed to Ag, shifts from ~410 nm to 440 nm as the Ag concentration was increased;

and (ii) a second weak peak near ~575 nm appeared as the Cu concentration increased. Using the above

values for the particle diameter and individual metal concentrations along with the experimental values for

νF and τbulk for Cu and Ag we calculated the effective permittivity using the mixing rule developed above

and estimated the plasmonic behavior of this system. Fig. 2 compares the experimental data extracted from

ref. [12] (symbols) with the results of our predictions (lines). The theory, without the use of any ﬁtting

parameters, predicts the position of the plasmon peaks as well as the shift occurring due to change in Ag

concentration. Our calculations predicted a shift from 417 nm to 452 nm with increasing Ag concentration.

The calculation also accurately captured the appearance of the second peak at 572 nm with increasing Cu

concentration. Moreover, the widths of the individual peaks, which is extremely sensitive to particle size,

were fairly well represented by our model. The peak widths were a consequence of the correction introduced

to the electron scattering time based on the particle size.

In Fig. 3 we compare model predictions with the data of Battaglin et al. [13] in which the plasmonic

behavior was studied as a function of alloy concentration and particle size for Au-Cu alloys in SiO2. Equal

ratios of Au and Cu were implanted and then subjected to different annealing conditions. The as-deposited

sample contained an alloy with Au2Cu1 composition (with the remaining Cu in atomic state) and average

particle size of 3.8 ± 1.2 nm. The sample annealed in H2 had a Au1Cu1 alloy with an average particle

size of 8.7 ± 2.5 nm while the sample annealed in air contained primarily Au nanoparticles of 33 ± 15 nm

5

diameter, with the Cu preferentially found as an oxide in the near surface of the samples. For the theoretical

calculations we ﬁrst created the appropriate alloys using the mixing rule (depicted in Fig. 1(b)) and then

the ﬁnal composite based on the volume fraction of the alloy and the experimentally assigned particle

diameters. The results are shown in Fig. 3, with experimental data as symbols and theory as lines. Once

again the theory accurately predicts the peak positions and shift for this alloy system without the need for

any ﬁtting parameters.

In Fig. 4 we compare the theoretically predicted and experimentally observed behavior of colloidal

solutions containing Au-Ag core-shell nanoparticle alloys of various compositions in a water matrix, as

measured by Moskovits and co-workers [14]. Their primary conclusions were: (i) a single plasmon peak

appeared for the core-shell structures and this peak shifted with changing Au-Ag concentration. This behav-

ior was attributed to the formation of an alloy in the shell whose composition changed with varying Au-Ag

fraction; and (ii) the trend could be ﬁtted by applying a multi-parameter ﬁtting routine to obtain the best ﬁt

based on summation of Lorentzian peaks. We applied our mixing rule to ﬁrst create the appropriate alloy

(Fig. 1(b)) with the particle diameters taken from [14]. The resulting theoretical behavior is shown as lines

in Fig. 4. The theory again predicted quite well the shift in the position of the plasmon peak with varying

alloy composition.

In conclusion, we have developed a self consistent technique to determine/predict the effective permit-

tivity of ternary composites containing mixtures and/or alloy nanocomposites using the Milton-Bergman

lower bound expression for two component composites. We have successfully tested our theory against

previously studied experimental systems comprising mixtures of multi-metal nanoparticles and/or alloys

of Ag:Au:SiO2, Ag-Cu:SiO2, and Au-Cu:H2O. This approach predicts quite accurately the peak position

and shift of plasmonic behavior in these mixtures and alloys by utilizing experimentally available optical

parameters [27] and without the need for any ﬁtting. This result clearly indicates that our mixing approach

captures the essential physics of plasmonic behavior in these multi-component systems. This calculation

can readily be extended for nanocomposites with more than three components. However, at this point, no

experimental data exists to validate the calculations for such systems. In addition, the shape of the plasmon

peaks could also be fairly well reproduced by utilizing a simple correction to the relaxation time of the elec-

trons that accounts for the enhanced scattering at the metal boundary as the particle size is reduced. This

model allows for further corrections due to quantum conﬁnement effects as the particle size gets reduced

below the 10 nm size scale [29]. This approach could be of great value towards predicting optical proper-

ties in terms of plasmonic behavior as a function of volume fraction, particle size and alloy composition in

multi-component mixtures and could guide the assembly of nanocomposites with tailored optical properties

[30, 31].

RK and RS acknowledge support by the National Science Foundation through grants # DMI-0449258

and # CTS-0335348 respectively.

6

[1] S. Koehl and M. Paniccia, Photonics Spectra 39, 53 (2005).

[2] A. Karalis, E. Lidorikis, M. Ibanescu, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljacic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 063901 (2005).

[3] S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, and H. A. Atwater, Phys. Rev. B 67 (2003).

[4] S. Maier, P. Kik, H. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. Koel, and A. Requicha, Nature Materials 2, 229 (2003).

[5] J. Krenn, J. C. Weeber, A. Dereux, B. Schider, A. Leitner, F. R. Aussenegg, and C. Girard, Phys. Rev. B 60,

5029 (1999).

[6] M. Quinten, A. Leitner, J. Krenn, and F. Aussenegg, Optics Lett. 23, 1331 (1998).

[7] S. Schmitt-Rink, D. A. Miller, and D. S. Chemla, Phys. Rev. B 35, 8113 (1987).

[8] R. Lopez, R. J. Haglund, L. Feldman, L. Boatner, and T. Haynes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 5191 (2004).

[9] L. Yang, D. H. Osborne, J. R. F. Haglund, R. H. Magruder, C. W. White, R. A. Zuhr, and H. Hosono, Appl.

Phys. A.: Mater. Sci. Process 62, 403 (1996).

[10] W. T. Wang, Z. H. Chen, G. Yang, D. Y. Guan, G. Z. Yang, Y. L. Zhou, and H. B. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 1983

[11] H. Garcia, H. Krishna, and R. Kalyanaraman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 141109 (2006).

[12] R. H. Magruder III, D. H. Osborne Jr., and R. A. Zuhr, J. Non-Cryst. Sol. 176, 299 (1994).

[13] G. Battaglin, E. Cattaruzza, F. Gonella, G. Mattei, P. Mazzoldi, C. Sada, and X. Zhang, Nuc. Instr. Met. Phys.

Res. B 166-167, 857 (2000).

[14] M. Moskovits, I. Srnova-Sloufova, and B. Vlckova, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 10435 (2002).

[15] D. J. Bergman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1285 (1980).

[16] G. W. Milton, J. Appl. Phys. 52, 5286 (1981).

[17] A. Sihvola, Electromagnetic Mixing Formulas and Applications (IEEE, Electromagnetic Theory, London, UK,

(2003).

1999).

[20] W.E. Kohler and G.C. Papanicolaou, in Multiple Scattering and Waves, edited by P.L. Chow, W.E. Kohler, and

[18] J. C. M. Garnett, Trans. Royal Soc. London CCIII, 385 (1904).

[19] D. A. G. Bruggeman, Ann. Phys. 24, 636 (1935).

G.C. Papanicolaou (North Holland, New York, 1981), pp. 199–223.

[21] Z. Hashin and S. Shtrikman, J. Appl. Phys. 33, 3125 (1962).

[22] D. J. Bergman, Physics Rep. 43 (1981).

[24] K. Peiponen and E. Gornov, Optics Letters 31, 2202 (2006).

[25] O. Wiener, Abh. Math. Phys. K1 Königl. Sächs. Ges. 32, 509 (1912).

[26] J. C. M. Garnett, Trans. Roy. Soc. 53, 385 (1904).

[23] T. Anderson, R. Magruder, D. Kinser, J. Wittig, R. Zuhr, and D. Thomas, J. Non-Cryst. Sol. 224, 299 (1998).

7

[27] SOPRA database, http://www.sopra-sa.com/.

[28] N. Ashcroft and N. Mermin, Solid state physics (Thomson learning, USA, 1976).

[29] W. P. Halperin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 533 (1986).

[30] C. Favazza, J. Trice, H. Krishna, R. Kalyanaraman, and R. Sureshkumar, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 1531181 (2006);

C. Favazza, J. Trice, A. Gangopadhyay, H. Garcia, R. Sureshkumar, and R. Kalyanaraman, J. Elec. Mat. 35,

1618 (2006); C. Favazza, R. Kalyanaraman, and R. Sureshkumar, Nanotechnology 17, 4229 (2006).

[31] S. Bozhevolnyi and V. Shalaev, Photonics spectra 40, 58 (2006).

Figure captions

8

1. Schematic of the binary tree approach to implement the self consistent binary mixing rule to obtain

the effective dielectric constant. (a) Application of the mixing rule to create a mixture of two metals

a and b in the host h. (b) Application of the rule to create an alloy nanocomposite in host h from

alloys of metals a and b.

2. Comparison of theory and experiment for plasmonic behavior in a nanocomposite containing various

mixtures of Au and Cu in SiO2. The theoretical results using the binary mixing rule are presented as

lines while experimental data (symbols) were extracted from the work of Magruder et al. [12]. The

peak position, shift and widths are predicted very well using the mixing rule. The experimental data

corresponds to various ratios of Ag:Cu achieved by sequential ion implantation.

3. Comparison of theory and experiment of plasmonic behavior in various Au-Cu alloy nanocomposites

in SiO2 obtained by ion implantation and annealing. The experimental data (symbols) was extracted

from the work of Battaglin et al. [13] while the theoretical calculations are represented as lines.

Alloy compositions are indicated on the ﬁgure.

4. Comparison of plasmonic behavior in colloidal solutions containing Au-Ag core-shell alloys for two

compositions. The symbols are experimental data extracted from Moskovits et al. [14] while lines

are theory. The numbers within brackets in the legends represent the mole fraction of Au in the

colloidal solution.

9

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Schematic of the binary tree approach to implement the self consistent binary mixing rule to obtain the

effective dielectric constant. (a) Application of the mixing rule to create a mixture of two metals a and b in the host h.

(b) Application of the rule to create an alloy nanocomposite in host h from alloys of metals a and b.

10

Figure 2: Comparison of theory and experiment for plasmonic behavior in a nanocomposite containing various mix-

tures of Au and Cu in SiO2. The theoretical results using the binary mixing rule are presented as lines while experi-

mental data (symbols) were extracted from the work of Magruder et al. [12]. The peak position, shift and widths are

predicted very well using the mixing rule. The experimental data corresponds to various ratios of Ag:Cu achieved by

sequential ion implantation.

Figure 3: Comparison of theory and experiment of plasmonic behavior in various Au-Cu alloy nanocomposites in

SiO2 obtained by ion implantation and annealing. The experimental data (symbols) was extracted from the work of

Battaglin et al. [13] while the theoretical calculations are represented as lines. Alloy compositions are indicated on

the ﬁgure.

11

Figure 4: Comparison of plasmonic behavior in colloidal solutions containing Au-Ag core-shell alloys for two compo-

sitions. The symbols are experimental data extracted from Moskovits et al. [14] while lines are theory. The numbers

within brackets in the legends represent the mole fraction of Au in the colloidal solution.

