6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On X-Ray Waveguiding in Nanochannels:
Channeling Formalism

S.B. Dabagov ∗
INFN - Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Via E. Fermi 40,
I-00044 Frascati, Italy

RAS - P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute, Leninsky pr. 53,
119991 Moscow, Russia

Abstract

The question on X-ray extreme focusing (smallest reachable spot size) brings us
to the idea for using the wave features of X-ray propagation in media. As known,
wave features are revealed at propagation in ultra-narrow collimators as well as
at glancing reﬂection from smooth ﬂat and/or strongly curved surfaces. All these
phenomena can be described within the general formalism of X-ray channeling.

Key words: X-ray waveguide, channeling, capillary optics, nanostructure
PACS: 41.50.+h, 42.82.Et, 61.85.+p, 68.49.Uv

1 Introduction

The advent of the nanotechnology era has given rise to unprecedented op-
portunities, challenges and enormous potential for new products and wealth
creation. Manipulation of matter on the atomic scale will require new tools
for lithography and metrology and radiation at X-ray wavelengths will be fun-
damental to the development of this area. Progress within the ﬁelds of nan-
otechnology and X-ray propagation will be mutually beneﬁcial. For instance,
some types of processes based on the self-organization of materials that have
recently attracted considerable interest because of the possibility of preparing
ﬁne patterns of nanometer dimensions over larger areas, can be used for the
fabrication of X-ray waveguides [1,2]. Among them the formation of highly-
ordered aligned carbon nanotubes and ordered arrays of uniform-sized porous

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 06 9403 2877; Fax: +39 06 9403 2427

Email address: dabagov@lnf.infn.it (S.B. Dabagov ).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

22 December 2013

in anodic alumina is of great interest. X-ray propagation in n-channels 1 is
important due to potential applications in X-ray optics. A special feature of
these structures is a long, hollow, inner cavity, which could act as a channel
for selective radiation penetration, similar to channeling of charged particles
in crystals (see [3] and Refs. in); n-channels can be considered as capillaries
(the base of capillary/polycapillary optical elements [4,5,6]). Research in X-
ray propagation in capillary structures shows that diminishing the capillary
internal radius from microns to nanometers results in a change of the charac-
ter of radiation propagation, from the surface channeling in µ-capillaries down
to bulk channeling in n-capillaries . Numerical simulations [7,8] have shown
that carbon nanotubes will act as soft X-ray waveguides and support modes
of propagation when coated with various materials [9]. Other researchers have
already demonstrated experimentally the coherent propagation of X-rays in
a planar waveguide with a tunable air gap [10]. The angular dependence of
the intensity of C Kα radiation vs the aligned carbon nanotubes’ orientation
suggests the possibility of X-ray channeling as well as radiation diﬀraction on
nanotube multiwalls [11].

It is important to clarify the origin of some peculiarites just from the begin-
ning in order to prevent misunderstanding (that time by time takes place in
publications) in the processes observed or to be expected. As shown below,
one exists a well speciﬁed diﬀerence in the origin of trapped (bound states)
radiation propagation for µ– and n–size channel structures 2 .

λ⊥ (λ⊥ ≃

The main criterion for observing the wave features of radiation propagation
in media of the length L is very simple - the transverse space where radiation
is limited at propagation, does not matter by either a proﬁled surface or a
speciﬁc collimation system, should approach by size the transverse radiation
λ/ϑc, where ϑc = ωp/ω with ω as photon energy
wavelength: X⊥ ≃
4πnee2/m0 - the plasmon energy, ne is the electron density of the
and ωp =
cladding, e and m0 are the electron charge and mass). For X-ray frequencies,
at reﬂection from a ﬂat surface (optimally, we deal with the total external re-
ﬂection) as well as at X-ray propagation in a planar waveguide, the transverse
Lϑc; and thus we get very
dimension of a beam can be estimated as X⊥ ≃
simple and important expression that allows the limits for revealing the wave
features at reﬂection to be evaluated

q

c ≃
It makes evident why even at radiation propagation in µ-channels it is possible
to observe the wave features. This relation will be in details examined below

(1)

Lϑ2

λ

1 Below in the text we use n- for nano- and µ- for micro-.
2 The latter is mainly related to propagation of X-rays in capillary structures
(mono- and polycapillaries of various origins and sizes, and optical elements on
its base).

2

from the view point of the both wave equation solution and simple physical
base of the phenomenon.

The modes of radiation propagation in a waveguide are revealed at interference
between the incident and reﬂected waves forming a standing wave pattern [1].
However, it becomes constructive just for speciﬁc angles. This phenomenon,
valid for reﬂection from a ﬂat surface, takes place just in the vicinity of the
surface. Similar phenomenon can be observed at radiation reﬂection from the
curved surface (so called ”whispering modes”) [12]. Strong radiation redistri-
bution takes also place behind capillary systems (which is actually a simple
example of the curved surface system); some structural features in the dis-
tribution are due to the spatial geometry of the system (typically, hexagon
type in the transverse cross section). However, some ﬁne features could not
be interpreted by the ray optics, and require solution of the wave equation of
radiation propagation.

History of interference phenomena observed for X-rays, from various sources,
propagating in capillary structures counts more than 10 years. First theoret-
ical note regarding such a possibility for capillary optical systems, where the
X-ray interference behind capillaries, was published as an internal note [13].
After that, during 1993-1994 this phenomenon was observed in a set of exper-
100 µm) in
iments with polycapillary optical elements (channels sizes of
10 ˚A, S-60 LPI). Then, the ﬁrst joint
the beams of synchrotron radiation (λ
≃
paper appeared [14] with the wave interpretation of the features recorded. Phe-
nomenology of the phenomenon given in [15] has shown that the ﬁne features
of X-ray propagation in µ-size channels, which have been observed behind
capillary structures, can be explained in view of the radiation interference due
to the various channel’s curvatures. Later the trapped radiation propagation
in the very vicinity of a surface was carefully studied in a number of works
[16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23] where the wave theory of X radiation propagation
along a curved surface was developed (for complete citation, please, see Refs.
in [3]).

∼

Regardless of the research on radiation transmission by capillary systems,
which represent circular guide systems, nowadays, considerable progress in
studying of X-ray waveguiding in the planar structures (as specially fabricated
waveguides consisting of the guiding and cladding layers, or ultra narrow slits
and collimators with air gap, etc.) is achieved [10,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31]. Ad-
ditional to the planar case, in paper [27] the authors have proposed a wave
theory of X-ray propagation through a circular guide. It is notable for this
paper that the wave theory of X radiation propagation in capillaries (circular
shaped guides!) was developed in many previous papers as a general theory of
radiation propagation for both µ-size and n-size capillaries. Detailed analysis
presented in many articles is based on the transverse wavelength aproach as a
main criterion (see the review [3]). The authors of the paper [27], thanking D.

3

Bilderback for the information on possibility to observe an interference picture
behind capillary/polycapillary systems, have forgotten to make any reference
to previously published results; the adequate citation were done just for the
case of planar waveguides 3 . Since 1994 new coherent features of X radiation
propagation in capillary structures have been discussed at many meetings:
SPIE annual conferences, specially organized meetings on capillary optics and
its applications (International Capillary Optics Meeting - Antwerp 2001; In-
ternational Conference on Capillary X-Ray and Neutron Optics - Zvenigorod
2001 and 2003, International Conference on Charged and Neutral Particles
Channeling Phenomena - ”Channeling 2004 ” and ”Channeling 2006 ” Fras-
cati), practically all conferences on X-ray physics.

In this work after the introduction to physics of coherent phenomena of radia-
tion scattering in µ– and n-structures and X-ray channeling in hollow channels
of various origins, the results obtained within international collaborations will
be presented.

2 General theory of X-ray channeling

As shown recently, the propagation of X-ray photons through the narrow
guides exhibits a rather complex character [14,26,27]. Not all the features
shown experimentally can be explained within the geometrical (ray) optics
approximation [18,21,34]. On the contrary, application of the wave optics
methods allows the processes of radiation transmission by the guides to be
described in details.

The passage of X radiation through the guides is mainly deﬁned by its in-
teraction with the inner guide walls. In the ideal case, when the boundary
between hollow channels and walls represents a smooth edge, the beam is
split in two components: the mirror-reﬂected and refracted ones. The latter
appears sharply suppressed in the case of total external reﬂection. The char-
acteristics of scattering inside the structures of ultra-small holes of various
shapes can be evaluated from solution of the Helmholtz equation. In the ﬁrst
order approximation, propagation of X radiation through specially designed
guides, the cladding material of which is characterized by the refractive index
δ(r) + iβ(r) deﬁning by the guide geometry, is described by a wave
n = 1

−

3 Moreover, in the paper there is no citation to the Bilderback’s paper [32] published
as a review on the discussions at the ICOM’2001 meeting (International Capillary
Optics Meeting, Antwerp, 17-21 June 2001), where the wave features of X radiation
propagation in capillary systems, theoretically evaluated and experimentally proved,
were presented and discussed. These results were published in the same volume of X-
Ray Spectrometry issued as a special volume of the ICOM’2001 proceedings [23,33].

4

propagation equation

(3)

(4)

∆ + k2n2(r)
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

E(r) = 0, n

≡ 


1 , hollow core

(2)

n0 = 1

δ0 + iβ0 , cladding

−

for the electromagnetic ﬁeld amplitude E, where k
(kk, k⊥) is the wave vec-
(r⊥, z).
tor of radiation, k = 2π/λ , ∆
Separating a transverse part of the radiation ﬁeld as E(r) = E(r⊥)eikkz, the
Helmholtz equation can be reduced to


≡
⊥ +∂2/∂z2 is the Laplasian, r
∂2/∂r2

≡

≡

2
⊥E (r⊥) =

2k2δ

∇

(cid:16)

k2
⊥

−

(cid:17)

E (r⊥) ,

where the right side term in brackets is a potential of interaction Vef f . Due
kϑ under the grazing wave
to the fact that the transverse wave vector k⊥ ≈
incidence (ϑ
1), an ”eﬀective interaction potential” is estimated by the
expression

≪

Vef f (r⊥) = k2

2δ (r⊥)

ϑ2

(cid:16)

−

= 


(cid:17)

−
k2 (2δ0 −

k2ϑ2 , guiding channel

ϑ2) , cladding

≡

∇

2
⊥ ≡

ϑc ≃


From the latter the phenomenon of total external reﬂection at Vef f = 0 fol-
√2δ0 is the Fresnel’s angle. One can see that Eq.(3)
lows, when ϑ
with the eﬀective potential (4) corresponds to the Schr¨odinger equation for
p2/(2m), in a speciﬁed potential well Vef f .
a massive particle motion,
That’s why it becomes much more convenient to use below the terminology
of ”channeling” [35], where a channel is formed by the eﬀective potential of
radiation interaction in a guide (a quantum well) 4 . As well known from quan-
tum mechanics, any well is able to support at least one quantum bound state
(channeling state); the number of the states can be estimated from the ex-
pression for the potential (4). The equation (3) for radiation propagation in a
media with the potential (4) can be solved for the case of µ-channels as well as
for the n-guides. It is important to underline the main diﬀerence of the radia-
tion propagation in µ- and n-channels that is deﬁned by the ratio between the
eﬀective channel size and the transverse wavelength of radiation. Moreover, in
µ-channels the main parameter of the guide is its shape (collimation proﬁle or
surface curvature) whereas for n-channels it is the transverse channel size.

However, there is another very interesting case to be examined, namely, when
the radiation is propagating along the curved surface (so called multiple re-
ﬂection regime). It is of strong importance in case of the circular µ-guides.

4 It is well known that channeling of charged particles may take place when the
small divergent beams are transversing crytals near the main crystallographic planes
or axes at the angles less than some critical one ϕL known as the Lindhard angle of
channeling (ϕL ≃

Vef f /ε, ε is the particle energy).

p

5

(4πc/ωp) ϑ−1

When the reﬂecting surface is not more ﬂat but curved, the eﬀective potential
reveals an additional contribution. To describe new expected features due to
the new surface proﬁle, we have to take into account the fact that reﬂection
of electromagnetic wave occurs on extended area. The minimal size of it at
c (c is the light velocity)
sliding angles is deﬁned by (∆d)kmin ∼
that is much greater than the atomic distances. Due to this fact, it is possi-
ble to consider that interaction takes place in a macro ﬁeld characterized by
a macroscopic dielectric permittivity ε0 ≡
0. The last determines reﬂection
and absorption characteristics of interaction. Thus, the reﬂection coeﬃcient
is deﬁned by polarization and absorption in the layer of electric ﬁeld pene-
2πc/ωp. General analysis shows, that at sliding angles less
tration (∆d)⊥ ∼
than the Fresnel’s angle, TER is observed. Within the geometrical optics ap-
poximation, the coherent scattering occurs in a specular (mirror) direction,
while the incoherence is taken into account by the radiation absorption in the
reﬂecting layer. In other words, a new term in the potential of interaction can
be considsered as corresponding to the additional ”potential energy”. Due to
the reﬂecting surface curvature a photon ”receives” an angular momentum
krcurvϕ , where rcurv is a curvature radius of the photon trajectory. The latter
is supplied by the ”centrifugal potential energy”

2k2r⊥/ (rcurv) [20]

n2

Vef f (r⊥) = k2

2δ (r⊥)

(cid:18)

−

2

r⊥
rcurv (cid:19)

.

ϑ2

−

−

(5)

Because of variation in the system spatial parameters, the interaction poten-
tial has been changed from the step potential with the potential barrier of
2k2δ0 to the well potential, with the depth and width deﬁned by the channel
characteristics.

Above we have described a general rule to be fullﬁled in order to reveal the ra-
diation wave behaviours. Obviously, it should be valid for any optical scheme
regardless both its size and shape (we can consider just two important pa-
rameters of any device: guide channel and its shape, which is actually deﬁned
by the interacting surface curvature). Let us now to estimate the limit in
the curvature radius rcurv, at which the wave behaviours are displayed under
propagation of radiation in channels [13] (in the case of capillaries or system
of capillaries it is deﬁned by its channel diameter and bending). Let consider
a photon with the wave vector k propagating along a curved surface with the
curvature radius rcurv (at the angles less than the critical one ϑc, it happens
as surface channeling, the bound states will be evaluated below in the text).
At small glancing angles, ϑ < ϑc, the change of the longitudinal wave vector,
k||, under reﬂection from a surface is negligibly small; but one mainly changes
the transverse wave vector k⊥, k⊥ ≃
1). Correspondingly, it follows
that the transverse wavelength will much exceed the longitudinal wavelength
that provides the interference eﬀects to be observable even for very short
λ/ϑc >> λ, and quantum mechanical principles
wavelengths. Indeed, λ⊥ ≃
postulate that, in order to display the wave properties of a channeling pho-

kϑc (ϑc ≪

6

ton, it is necessary that typical trasnverse sizes of an ”eﬀective space” δi , in
which waves have been propagating, be commensurable with the transverse
wavelength, i.e. δi(ϑ)
λ⊥. This condition may be rewritten in the following
form:

≡

rcurvϑ3

λ

c ≃

(6)

So, from this simple estimate we can conclude that the relation (6) provides
a speciﬁc dependence for surface bound state propagation of X-rays - surface
channeling - along the curved surfaces (for instance, in capillary systems).
Taking into account that in approximation of the glancing angles ϑ
1 one
deﬁnes the longitudinal size of the curved reﬂecting surface as L
rcurvϑ,
the expression (6) is in rather good agreement with a general condition (1)
to be satisﬁed at any optical device for observing wave character of radiation
propagation.

≪
≃

In the following we brieﬂy discuss a solution of the wave equation in the
case of an ideal reﬂecting surface (i.e. without roughness), when the reﬂected
beam is basically determined by the coherently scattered part of radiation (for
details see [19]). Evaluating the wave equation with the boundary conditions
of a channel shows that X-radiation may be distributed over the bound state
modes deﬁned by the channel potential. It is important to note here that the
channel potential acts as an eﬀective reﬂecting barrier, and then, the eﬀective
transmission of X-radiation by the hollow guides is observed. While the main
portion of radiation undergoes incoherent diﬀuse scattering, the remaining
contribution (usually small) is due to coherent scattering that represents a
special phenomenon, extremely interesting to observe and clarify [3,26,36].

3 Surface channeling: µ-channels

3.1 Planar guide

As mentioned above, in µ-channels the propagation features are deﬁned by
the radiation interaction with a surface. Taking into account that a skin layer,
where the reﬂection is formed, is negligible thin in respect with the guide wall
thickness, the amplitude of the guiding wave can be presented as

Em(r) = um(r⊥, z) e−ikkmz ,

(7)

xex + yey for a 2D
xex for a planar, 1D waveguide and r⊥ ≡
where r⊥ ≡
2 = 1, kkm is the propagation constant. Neglecting
ex|
waveguide,
|
absorption, in case of a planar waveguide with the guide channel diameter d,

ey|

2 =

|

7

the solution of the wave equation (3) gives for ϑ < ϑc (

1) [10]

um(x)

∝ 


sin(kϑmx) ,

6 d
2
> d
2

x
|
x
|

|

|

0 ,

≪

,

(8)


ϑ2
m
2

kd

k

−

1
(cid:16)

with ϑm = π(m+1)

where kkm = k cos ϑm ≃
. Hence we can deﬁne
also a maximum number of the waveguide modes for the ﬁxed wave number k
(cid:17)
in respect with geometrical parameters of the waveguide as mmax = 2d
1.
From the latter the condition for a single mode propagation can be reduced
d. Hence, as seen from the solution of Helmholtz equation for a
as λ⊥ ≡
planar guide, we have obtained the same criterion for observing wave features
of radiation propagation as obtained by the phenomenology above presented
(relation (1), where Lϑc ≃
Situation with a bent planar guide can be considered as a limit case of the
circular guide, analysis of which is given below via example of a capillary
system.

d, and λ⊥ ≃

λ ϑc −

λ/ϑc).

3.2 Circular guide

Since in the case of capillary systems, the principal waveguide is a hollow cylin-
drical tube (a circular guide), the interaction potential, in which the waves are
propagating, is determined by Eq.(5) with the radiation polarizability param-
ϑ2
eter δ0 ≃
c/2 (for simplicity the absorption is considered to be negligible
1). Solving the wave equation for the capillaries with µ-size holes we are
β0 ≪
mainly interested in the surface propagation, which, in fact, deﬁnes a wave
guiding character inside the channel (r⊥ ≃

r1) [17,23]

r1, ρ

≪

En (r)

Cmum(ρ) ei(kkz+nϕ) ,

≃

m
X

um(ρ)

∝ 


Aim(ρ) , ρ > 0 - guiding channel

αAi′

m(0) eαρ , ρ < 0

(α > 0) - cladding

,

(9)



where Aim(x) is the Airy function, and α is the arbitrary unit characterizing
the capillary substance. Evidently, these expressions are valid only for the
lower-order modes and in the vicinity of a channel surface. The expression
(9) characterizes the waves that propagate close to the waveguide wall, or
in other words, the equation describes the grazing modal structure of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld inside a capillary (surface X-ray channeling states). The
solution shows also that the wave functions are damped both inside the channel
wall and moving from the wall towards the center. It should be underlined
here that the bound modal propagation takes place without the wave front

8

distortion that is important for explaining the interference behind capillary
systems (in multiple reﬂection optics, [3] and Refs. in).

The analysis of these expressions allows us also to conclude that almost all
radiation power is concentrated in the hollow region and, as a consequence, a
small attenuation along the waveguide walls is observed. However, evaluating
the solution of the wave equation inside the cladding, we can estimate the
tunneling eﬀect (penetration of radiation deep into the cladding), which be-
comes signiﬁcant for the guide acceptance and propagation in both thin wall
and long legth guides .

As for the supported modes of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, estimating a charac-
teristic radial size of the main grazing mode (m = 0) results in

2π2u3

0 ≃

λ2r1

,

(10)

and we can conclude that the typical radial size u0 may overcome the wave-
length λ, whereas the curvature radius r1 in the trajectory plane exceeds the
λ (for example, u0 & 0.1 µm for a capillary
inner channel radius, r0: u0 ≫
channel with the radius r0 = 10 µm).

4 Bulk channeling: n-channels

Above we have considered the transmission of X-ray beams by the guides of
µ-size channels. As shown, in that case we deal with the surface channeling
of radiation due to the fact that the channel sizes are much larger than the
radiation wavelength and even than the transverse wavelength. However, the
situation sharply changes in the case when the sizes of channels become com-
parable with the radiation transverse wavelength. In practice it means, that
the angle of diﬀraction for the given wave, determined as ϑd = λ/d ( d is
the guide transverse size), becomes comparable with a critical angle of total
external reﬂection; and the transverse wavelength of a photon approaches the
guiding gap: λ⊥/d
1. In this case, at the speciﬁc conditions, channeling of
photons (note, not surface channeling!) in channels of capillary systems may
take place, i.e. actually, in other words, we deal with X-ray waveguiding sim-
ilar to light waveguiding in ﬁber optics. Situation is similar to channeling of
charged particles in crystals, that’s why it may be considered as bulk channel-
ing (the quantum well is formed by the bulk properties of a guiding channel)
[37].

∼

Of course, in this limit the radiation penetration into the cladding becomes to
be important (signiﬁcant) for resolving propagation problem that speaks on
the necessity of taking into account solution of the wave equation inside the
cladding.

9

4.1 Planar guide

(12)

(13)

Solving Eq.(3) for a planar 1D waveguide, we obtain the amplitudes of chan-
x
neling states inside the guiding core
|

6 d as

|

Em(x)

∝ 


cos(kϑmx) , even mode

sin(kϑmx) , odd mode

,

(11)

and inside the cladding


> d -

x
|

|

Em(x)

|

| ∝

e−k√ϑ2

c−ϑ2

m|x| ,

and the dispersion equations for the channeling quantum states -

tan(kϑmd) = 


−

(cid:16)



1/2

1
−1/2
(cid:17)

ϑ2
c
ϑ2
m −
ϑ2
(cid:16)
c
1
ϑ2
m −

(cid:17)

, even mode

, odd mode

The dispersion equations for a planar guide are deﬁning the modal structure
of radiation propagation, i.e. the quantum states of channeling. For instance,
the phase ∆ϕ
kϑcd determines character of radiation transmission: if the
number of quantum states of channeling is large, d/λ⊥ ≫
1, then we obtain
∆ϕ
2π that speaks on possibility of using the ray optics approach for
describing the radiation propagation.

≫

≡

Evidently, there is a special interest to consider a waveguide, which is formed
by the wall of periodic n-channels (multilayer planar guides or narrow multislit
system), with a central guiding air gap d0 and the distance d between the
layers composing a waveguide wall [38]. For the sake of simplicity, interaction
potential in such a waveguide system may be presented as follows:

V (x) =

Vn (x) = k2
⊥

1 + ∆

n
X

n
X
δ0d is the spatially averaged polarizability of the wall cladding.

"

δ

x

 |

| −

d0
2 −

nd

,

!#

(14)

where ∆

≡

Taking into account the boundary conditions and because of the potential
d0/2, solution
symmetry, one may conclude that for the central channel
of the propagation equation in the transverse plane will be deﬁned as

| ≤

x

|

E0(x)

cos(k⊥x) , even mode

sin(k⊥x) , odd mode

(15)

Solution for the 1st layer d0/2
d0/2+d is superposition of the opposite-
directed waves E(r) = b eik⊥x + c e−ik⊥x. Then, we impose on the solutions

| ≤

x

∝ 



≤ |

10

the requirements that the wave function E and its transverse derivative E ′
x
be continuous at the wall-channel boundary taking into account the Bloch
theorem E (x + d) = eiκdE(x) for the periodical potential function V (x) =
V (x + d). From these expressions we obtain the dispersion relations for even
and odd states

tan k⊥d0
2
cot k⊥d0
2






= 









k2∆
k⊥
−
k2∆
k⊥ −

+ cos(k⊥d)−eiκd
sin(k⊥d)
cos(k⊥d)−eiκd
sin(k⊥d)






(16)

that allow the eigenvalue problem to be solved. Finally the wave functions of
the supported modes for the narrow channel
1 can be presented
by the following

k⊥d0, k⊥d
{

} ≪

En(x)

≃

cos k⊥d0
2






eiκx sin(k⊥

)−sin[k⊥(

x

|

x
|
sin(k⊥d)
e

|

e

cos(k⊥x) eikz ,
−d)]
|

x
|
ei(κnd+kz) , n-th layer

| ≤

d0
2

,

(17)

|

e

x

x

−

|−

| ≡ |

d0/2

nd, and we see that the Eqs.(16) may be solved only for
where
the even modes. However, it is more important to underline that the even mode
exists for any ratio between the channel size and the layer distance. The spatial
distribution of the mode has a maximum at the channel center, and due to
the leak through the potential barrier of wall layers (the tunneling) we observe
the propagation of radiation in the cladding. The radiation intensity for the
successive layer decreases following an exponential law and is characterized by
a local maximum far from the layer wall. Owing strong tunneling of radiation
the acceptance of such a waveguide system can much exceed the critical angle
ϑc [39].

4.2 Circular guide

Well known solution of the wave equation for a circular guide with the channel
diameter d (that corresponds to X radiation propagation in a n–capillary) can
be reduced if to write the wave function of electromagnetic ﬁeld as E(r⊥) =
u(ρ)eimϕ, where ρ is the radial coordinate and ϕ is the azimuthal angle. In
this case the wave equation for the radial part of the ﬁeld amplitude becomes

ρ2 d2u

dρ2 + ρ

du
dρ

+

k2(ϑ2
(cid:16)

−

c)ρ2
ϑ2

−

(cid:17)

m2

u = 0 ,

(18)

11

from which the solutions of (18) in both a hollow part of the guide and the
guide wall cladding -

u(ρ)

∝ 


Km

Jm(kϑmρ) , ρ 6 d

kρ
(cid:16)

q

ϑ2
c −

ϑ2
m

(cid:17)

, ρ > d

,

(19)

and the dispersion equations -



(∂ρJm/Jm)
(∂ρKm/Km)

|ρ=d
|ρ=d

1/2

=

ϑ2
c
ϑ2
m −

 

1

!

(20)

can be obtained.

Here Jm(y) and Km(y) are the 1st kind and the modiﬁed 2nd kind Bessel func-
tions, respectively, giving us the bound states for X-ray channeling in a hollow
core of the waveguide. The constants of the proportionality can be obtained us-
ing the matching and normalization conditions. It is more important to note
the asymptotic behaviours of the Bessel functions speciﬁed. Namely, in the
ρ−1/2 cos αρ that proves the modal character
guide core we can use Jm(ρ)
of propagation (diﬀerent bound channeling states) with the mode amplitudes
decrease from the maximum at the guide center ρ = 0 to the minimum at the
guide wall ρ = d. In the same time we can estimate suppression of the radiation
ρ−1/2e−ρ. However,
penetration in the guide cladding for ρ > d as Km(ρ)
being suppressed the radiation penetrates rather deep in the cladding result-
ing ﬁnally in the strong tunneling. This phenomenon, ﬁrst seems to be useless,
provides, in turn, essential increase in the waveguide acceptance.

→

→

Speaking on circular guide systems it would be important also to consider nat-
ural nanotube systems (carbon or carbon based nanotubes, alumina porous
membranes) [40,41]. Due to the nanotube morphology, i.e. presence of inner
cavity, that speaks on possibility of the eﬃcient transmittance of X-ray, ther-
mal neutron and charged particle beams, a nanotube can be considered as a
capillary of very small inner diameter and wall thickness [7,8]. However, there
is a strong diﬀerence between typical glass capillary and nanotube from the
point of view of radiation propagation through these structures. First of all,
the dielectric function as a function of the distance from the center of glass
microcapillary channel varies by a step-law from zero for the inner hollow
cavity to the constant value deﬁned by the substance, for the channel wall.
On the contrary, in case of nanotube channel, we have continuous change of
the dielectric parameter value. However, the main factor, which deﬁnes the
character of radiation propagation inside nanotubes, remains the same as for
n-channels; it is the ratio λ⊥/d.

There is another very important behaviour to pay attention too. Because of
the small wall thickness of nanotube channels (less than λ⊥ . 100 ˚A) we have

12

to note that part of the radiation, channeling inside a nanotube structure, will
undergo ”tunneling” through the potential wall barrier. A simple analysis of
the radiation propagation in systems both for the case of macroscopic channel
and for the case of totally isotropic spatial structure, shows the presence of
the main channeling mode (the main bound state) for any structure, whereas
the high modes may be suppressed for speciﬁc channel sizes. Hence, nanotubes
present a special interest as waveguides, which allow the supported modes to
be governed [9]. Moreover, there is a special interest in studying the dispersion
of radiation in a nanosystem with a multilayered wall. As follows from the
analysis of the general equation of radiation propagation considered above, at
any correlation between the channel size and the interlayer distance at least
one mode (bound state) should be formed in such a structure. In that case the
diﬀraction of waves reﬂected from various layers of the channel wall should be
observed, hence aﬀecting the radiation distribution at the exit of system.

Evidently, the eﬃciency of these structures for applications have to be ana-
lyzed, despite the importance of the nanotube X-ray waveguide phenomenon
from the fundamental point of view. The problems associated with X-ray and
neutron channeling in capillary nanotubes (single- and multi-wall systems)
present a special interest. The ﬁrst observation of X-ray channeling in a forest
of multiwall carbon nanotubes and successive analysis of the results based on
X-ray channeling theory [11,42] has shown that this process is accompanying
by X-ray diﬀraction on the multilayer wall. The latter takes place due to the
strong tunneling of radiation through the nanotube wall cladding.

5 Resume

Solution of Maxwell equations describing propagation of electromagnetic waves
in media, where the index of refraction changes as a step function, results in
forming a discrete set of the modes [43]. Presently, the waveguides for various
types radiation are in wide use. Various kinds of them enable to shape the
beams of radiation in diﬀerent energy ranges that makes the waveguides to be
extremely attractive for applications. For instance, nowadays it is diﬃcult to
imagine any high tech instruments without various cavities for µ- and radio
waves, optical ﬁbers, etc. Among them X-ray waveguides are mainly in the
research stage of development.

Analysis of radiation propagation through the guides of various shapes, above
presented, has shown that all the observed features can be described within
an uniﬁed theory of X-ray channeling: surface channeling in µ-size guides and
bulk channeling in n-size guides. The main criterion deﬁning character of ra-
dition propagation is the ratio between the transverse wavelength of radiation
ϑd/ϑc, in other words, the ratio
and the eﬀective size of a guide, i.e. λ⊥/d

≡

13

between the diﬀraction and Fresnel angles. When this ratio is rather small,
i.e. when the number of bound states is large, the ray optics approximation is
d, a few modes will be formed in a quantum well;
valid. In turn, when λ⊥ ≃
d. Obviously, the latter requires solution of
and just a single mode - for λ⊥ ≫
the wave equation for describing all the features of radiation propagation in
such guides.

Recently, it was shown that at the center of a guide the ﬂux peaking of X
radiation, i.e. the increase of the channeling state intensity at the center of a
guide, should take place [39]. This feature is a proper channeling eﬀect that
can be explained only by the modal regime of radiation propagation, and may
ﬁnd an interesting application for the purposes of extreme focusing.

It is also important to note that all the considerations taken for X-rays should
be valid for thermal neutrons.

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to all my colleagues at LNF INFN (Frascati), Laboratory for High
Energy Electrons LPI (Moscow), and Institute for R¨ontgen Optics (Moscow)
actively contributed to the obtained results and supported my work. The
fruitful discussions with M. Kumakhov, V. Beloshitsky, D. Gruev, P. Childs,
S. Kukhlevsky and Yu. Dudchik are specially acknowledged.

References

[1] E. Spiller, and A. Segmuller, Appl. Phys. Lett. 24 (1974) 60.

[2] S.P.Pogossian, Opt. Comm. 114 (1995) 235.

[3] S.B. Dabagov, Phys. Uspekhi 46 (2003) 1053.

[4] M.A. Kumakhov, and F.F. Komarov, Phys. Rep. 191 (1990) 289.

[5] P. Engstr¨om, S. Larsson, and A. Rindby, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A302 (1991) 547.

[6] D.J. Thiel, D.H. Bilderback, A. Lewis, and E.A. Stern, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A317

(1992) 597.

[7] N.K. Zhevago, and V.I. Glebov, Phys. Lett. A250 (1998) 360.

[8] G.V. Dedkov, Nucl. Instr. Meth. B143 (1998) 584.

[9] P.A. Childs, and A.G. O’Neill, Physica E19 (2003) 153.

14

[10] M.J. Zwanenburg, J.F. Peters, J.H.H. Bongaerts, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82

(1999) 1696.

[11] A.V. Okotrub, S.B. Dabagov, A.G. Kudashov, et al., JETP Lett. 81 (2005) 34.

[12] A. Vinogradov, V. Kovalev, I. Kozhevnikov, and V. Pustovalov, Sov. Phys. -

Tech. Phys. 30 (1985) 335.

[13] S.B. Dabagov, ”Redistribution of X-Rays Traped in Bound States by Capillary

Systems” (Research Report of FIROS: Nalchik-Moscow, 1992).

[14] S.B. Dabagov, M.A. Kumakhov, S.V. Nikitina, et al., J. Synchrotron Rad. 2

(1995) 132.

[15] S.B. Dabagov, S.V. Nikitina, and M.A. Kumakhov, Phys. Lett. A203 (1995)

[16] S.B. Dabagov, and M.A. Kumakhov, Proc. SPIE 2515 (1995) 124.

[17] Yu.M. Alexandrov, S.B. Dabagov, M.A. Kumakhov, et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth.

B134 (1998) 174.

[18] N. Artemiev, A. Artemiev, V. Kohn, and N. Smolyakov, Phys. Scripta 57 (1998)

[19] S.B. Dabagov, A. Marcelli, V.A. Murashova, et al., Appl. Opt. 39 (2000) 3338;
S.B. Dabagov, V.A. Murashova, N.L. Svyatoslavsky, et al., Proc. SPIE. 3444
(1998) 486.

[20] Chien Liu, and J.A. Golovchenko, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79 (1997) 788.

[21] S.V. Kukhlevsky, F. Flora, A. Marinai, et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. B168 (2000)

279.

228.

276.

[22] G. Cappuccio, S.B. Dabagov, C. Gramaccioni, and A. Piﬀeri, Appl. Phys. Lett.

[23] S.B. Dabagov, X-Ray Spectrom. 32 (2003) 179.

[24] M.J. Zwanenburg, J.H.H. Bongaerts, J.F. Peters, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85

[25] F. Pfeiﬀer, C. David, M. Burghammer, et al., Science 297 (2002) 230.

[26] J.H.H. Bongaerts, C. David, M. Drakopoulos, et al., J. Synchrotron Rad. 9

[27] C. Bergemann, H. Keymeulen, and J.F. van der Veen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91

78 (2001) 2822.

(2000) 5154.

(2002) 383.

(2003) 204801.

[28] A. Jarre, C. Fuhse, C. Ollinger, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 074801.

[29] C. Fuhse, and T. Salditt, Physica B357 (2005) 57.

[30] C. Fuhse, and T. Salditt, Opt. Comm. 265 (2006) 140.

15

[31] I. Bukreeva, A. Popov, D. Pelliccia, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 184801.

[32] D. Bilderback, X-Ray Spectrom. 32 (2003) 195.

[33] S. Kukhlevsky, X-Ray Spectrom. 32 (2003) 199.

[34] S.B. Dabagov, and A. Marcelli, Appl. Opt. 38 (1999) 7494.

[35] J. Lindhard, Kgl. Dan. Vid. Selsk. Mat.-Fys. Medd. 34(14) (1965) 1.

[36] S. Kukhlevsky, ”Spatiotemporal

localization of coherent and incoherent
x-rays by mono and polycapillary optics:
from µ-meter/second to n-
meter/attosecond”, Report to the ”Channeling 2006” conference, 3-7 July 2006
(see link [37]).

[37] ”Channeling 2004” -

International Conference on Charged and Neutral
Particles Channeling Phenomena, ed. S. Dabagov, Proc. SPIE Vol. 5974
(http://www.lnf.infn.it/conference/channeling2004);

”Channeling 2006” - http://www.lnf.infn.it/conference/channeling2006.

[38] E. Burattini, S.B. Dabagov, and F. Monti, Nuovo Cimento 117B (2002) 769.

[39] V.V. Beloshitsky, D.I. Gruev, and M.A. Kumakhov, ”Theory of penetration
of x-rays through glass nano waveguides”, Report to the ”Channeling 2006”
conference, 3-7 July 2006 (see link [37]).

[40] S.Iijima, Nature 354 (1991) 56.

[41] R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus, and M. S. Dresselhaus, ”Physical Properties of Carbon

Nanotubes” (Imperial College Press: London, 1998).

[42] S.B. Dabagov, “From Surface down to Bulk X-Ray Channeling”, in book X-Ray
and Inner-Shell Processes, Eds. A. Bianconi, A. Marcelli, and N.L. Saini, AIP
Conference Proc. 652 (NY, 2003) 89.

[43] T.H. Metzger, Science 297 (2002) 205.

16

