Optical ﬁber taper coupling and high-resolution wavelength tuning of microdisk resonators at
cryogenic temperatures

Kartik Srinivasan∗ and Oskar Painter
Center for the Physics of Information and Department of Applied Physics,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A system for studying microcavity resonators at cryogenic temperatures (∼ 10 K) through evanescent cou-
pling via optical ﬁber taper waveguides is reported, and efﬁcient ﬁber coupling to AlGaAs microdisk cavi-
ties with embedded quantum dots is demonstrated. As an immediate application of this tool, we study high-
resolution tuning of microdisk cavities through nitrogen gas adsorption, as ﬁrst discussed by Mosor, et al [1].
By proper regulation of the nitrogen gas ﬂow and delivery of the gas to the sample surface, continuous tuning
can be achieved with modest gas ﬂows, and overall wavelength shifts as large as 4 nm are achieved.

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 42.70.Qs, 42.55.Sa, 42.60.Da, 42.55.Px

Solid-state systems involving a semiconductor microcavity
coupled to a semiconductor quantum dot (QD) [2] offer a
promising implementation of cavity quantum electrodynam-
ics (cQED) [3] for quantum information processing and com-
puting applications. In addition to demonstrations of vacuum
Rabi splitting in the emission spectrum of a QD-microcavity
system [4, 5, 6], the quality factor (Q) of wavelength-scale
III-V semiconductor microcavities has recently exceeded 105
[7, 8], paving the way for cQED experiments in which the
coherent QD-photon coupling rate can greatly exceed the sys-
tem’s dissipative rates. Also important is the development of
an efﬁcient interface through which the microscopic cavity
ﬁeld can be accessed from macroscopic optics. Silica optical
ﬁber tapers, initially used as effective input-output couplers
for silica microcavities [9, 10], have recently been used to
couple to high refractive index microcavities [11], including
AlGaAs microdisk cavities with embedded QDs [7].

Here, we report on the development of a system that ex-
tends our previous work, done at room temperature and pres-
sure, to the high vacuum (∼ 10−6 Torr), cryogenic (∼ 10 K)
environments in which QD-based cQED experiments are done
[4, 5, 6]. This system is used to interrogate wavelength-scale
GaAs/AlGaAs microdisk cavities containing self-assembled
InAs QDs, with information such as the cavity transmission
and QD emission spectrum obtained. In the second part of the
paper, we build on the work of Refs. [1, 12], using nitrogen
(N2) gas adsorption to tune the resonant wavelength of mi-
crocavities in a cryogenic environment. By proper regulation
of the N2 ﬂow and delivery of the gas near the sample sur-
face, potential difﬁculties discussed in Ref. [1] are overcome,
and reproducible, high-resolution tuning is achieved. Further-
more, the ﬁber taper coupling allows for detailed investigation
of the N2 adsorption process.

The ﬁber tapers used are single mode optical ﬁbers that
have been heated and stretched so that their central region has
a minimum diameter of ∼ 1µm. Potential difﬁculties in ex-
tending ﬁber taper coupling to a high vacuum, cryogenic en-
vironment include the mechanical stability of the ﬁber taper
assembly, the lack of viscous air-damping of ﬁber taper vibra-
tions, and the mechanical and optical stability of the ﬁber ta-

FIG. 1: Cut-away diagram of the cryostat interior, illustrating the
arrangement of the ﬁber taper, sample, and N2 ﬂow nozzle.

per itself under repeated temperature cycling. Figure 1 depicts
the setup we have developed, where the sample and ﬁber taper
reside inside a modiﬁed Janis ST-500 continuous ﬂow, liquid
He cryostat. A teﬂon-based compression ﬁtting [13] is used to
feed the two optical ﬁber pigtails of the ﬁber taper from the in-
terior vacuum to the exterior of the cryostat. The ﬁber taper is
held in a “u”-shaped conﬁguration to provide self-tensioning
of the taper. Coarse alignment of the taper to the microcav-
ity is achieved by positioning the microcavity sample using
slip-stick Y-Z piezo positioners with a displacement range of
several millimeters. Fine adjustment in the taper position is
provided by an X-Y-Z piezo-electric ﬂexure stage with a max-
imum displacement of several microns at 4.2 K. A thermally
conductive pathway between the sample and the cold ﬁnger is
provided by copper braids that connect the top sample mount
to the cold ﬁnger. This ensures that the sample can get to the
requisite low temperature (< 15 K), which is measured by a
silicon diode that is afﬁxed to the top sample mount.

The devices we study are small diameter (D=2-4.5 µm)
GaAs/AlGaAs microdisks that contain a single layer of InAs
QDs (room temperature ground state emission at ∼ 1317 nm),
as discussed elsewhere [7]. The cryostat is cooled to a sam-

2

volving N2 gas adsorption. To this end, a scanning tunable
laser (linewidth < 5 MHz) is connected to the ﬁber taper in-
put and the wavelength-dependent taper output transmission is
monitored with a photodetector. The polarization state of the
ﬁber taper mode is achieved through a polarization controller
inserted between the laser and taper input. Figure 2(b) shows
the transmission spectra of a cavity mode in a D = 4.5µm disk
in the 1500 nm band[22]. The cavity mode wavelength is seen
to shift approximately 20 nm as the temperature is reduced
from 298 K to 14 K as a result of the decrease in the AlGaAs
disk refractive index. As noted in our previous work (Ref. [7]
and references therein), the high-Q modes often appear as a
doublet (inset of Fig. 2(b)) due to surface roughness on the
microdisk which couples the initially degenerate WGMs into
frequency-split standing wave modes.

As discussed in many other works, the small tuning range
(0.3 nm for T= 14-40 K in Fig. 2(c)) afforded by thermal tun-
ing is a signiﬁcant limitation in cQED experiments due to the
imprecise spectral positioning of QD exciton peaks and cav-
ity modes during growth and fabrication. To overcome this
difﬁculty, Mosor, et al., utilized noble gas adsorption on the
sample surface to achieve post-fabrication shifts in a photonic
crystal cavity of up to 5 nm[1]. Here, we apply this method
to tune the resonances of our microdisk cavities while using
the ﬁber taper probe to monitor their behavior. Reference [1]
achieves wavelength tuning in discrete steps by ﬁlling a sec-
ondary chamber with gas (Xe or N2) until a desired pressure
is reached, releasing that volume into the cryostat, and then
repeating. The authors found that the ﬁll pressure must lie
within a vary narrow range, below which no tuning occurs
and above which excessively fast tuning occurs. To improve
upon the tuning resolution and repeatability, we have made
two key modiﬁcations. Rather than introduce the gas through
the cryostat vacuum line, we inject it through a 1/16” tube (in-
ner diameter 0.56 mm) that is routed into an opening in the top
of the side radiation shield (Fig. 1), so that gas can be locally
delivered with line-of-sight to the sample. Next, instead of
introducing the gas into the cryostat through repeated cycles,
we ﬁll an external chamber (V=0.1 L) until a ﬁxed pressure is
reached (10 torr) and then release it into the cryostat using a
metering valve to control the ﬂow rate. We monitor the cavity
mode transmission spectrum and use a shut-off valve to stop
the gas ﬂow when a desired wavelength shift is achieved (the
shut-off and metering valves are positioned as close as pos-
sible to the cryostat to minimize dead volume between them-
selves and the end of the injection nozzle).

Tuning data obtained using high purity (99.9995%) N2 gas
is shown in Fig. 3 for the microdisk mode studied in Fig.
2(b-c), with the taper in contact with the disk edge. Trans-
mission spectra of the taper-coupled microdisk were recorded
every 10 seconds over the entire tuning cycle, which included
an initial N2 dosing period, a subsequent N2 desorption phase
accomplished by heating the sample with a resistive heater,
and a ﬁnal cooldown period. The cavity transmission spec-
tra were ﬁt using a standard doublet model[15], from which
we obtain the spectral position of the resonant modes (l 0),

FIG. 2: (a) Comparison of photoluminescence data from an embed-
ded layer of QDs in a D=4.5 µm disk, using free-space collection
(top) and ﬁber-taper-based collection (bottom). Resolution band-
width is 0.1 (1) nm for the ﬁber taper (free-space) collection spectra.
(b)-(c) Temperature tuning data for the TE1,20 WGM.

ple temperature of 14 K, and during this process, no addi-
tional loss in the optical ﬁber taper transmission is observed
(typical total insertion loss is 10-50% depending upon the
taper tension). The taper is positioned in the near-ﬁeld of
the microdisk under study using the piezo stage conﬁguration
described above. An adjustable air-gap may be maintained
between taper and disk or the taper may be placed into di-
rect contact with the disk, depending upon the level of cav-
ity loading desired (anywhere from under- to over-coupled
is possible). Accuracy in the taper-disk gap is limited only
by vibration-induced ﬂuctuations in the taper position (tens
of nm in our current set-up). In general, we have found that
the taper can remain in a ﬁxed coupling position (at room or
cryogenic temperatures) for times as long as several hours.
The ﬁber taper was also unaffected by repeated temperature
cycling. As described in detail in Ref. [14], the taper can be
used to enhance the collection efﬁciency of light emitted from
microdisk whispering gallery modes (WGMs) by nearly two
orders of magnitude over normal-incidence free-space collec-
tion. Figure 2 compares ﬁber taper and free-space collection
of the low temperature (T= 14 K) emission from a D = 4.5µm
microdisk that is optically pumped with ∼100 µW of incident
power from an 830 nm laser diode. The collected power and
number of cavity modes observed in the taper-collected spec-
trum greatly exceeds that obtained by free-space collection,
with emission into WGMs from the ground (GS) and excited
state (ES) manifolds of the QDs clearly visible.

More than just an efﬁcient collection optic, the ﬁber taper
may also be used to optically probe and excite the cavity-
QD system in a highly efﬁcient manner. Here we use the
ﬁber taper to monitor the transmission properties of the cavity
modes of the microdisk as a function of temperature, and as
described below, during cavity mode tuning experiments in-

3

FIG. 4: Wavelength shift (D
0) versus (a) time and (b) N2 consump-
tion (thickness) for different N2 ﬂow rates. (◦, ·) correspond to mea-
surements of the mode in Fig. 3 (D=4.5 µm), while (+, ▽) are for a
WGM at l 0 = 1255 nm in a D=2.0 µm microdisk. The average ﬂow
rates are: {◦, ·, +, ▽} = {13.0, 7.4, 16.0, 5.5} × 1015 N2 molecules/s.
The (cid:3) (−−) curve in (b) corresponds to FEM (perturbation) simu-
lation of the tuning versus ﬁlm thickness for the D=4.5 µm TE1,20
WGM.

f − 1)G

different microdisks (D = 4.5, 2.0 µm). A simple perturba-
tive analysis relates the cavity mode tuning to the mode’s
overlap with the disk surface through the equation D
0 ∼
l 0(n2
′t f /2, where t f is the ﬁlm thickness, n f is the ﬁlm
refractive index (= 1.21[19]), and G
′ is the (linear) modal en-
ergy density at the air-disk interface. Such an analysis yields
an N2 ﬁlm thickness of t f & 50 nm for the measured mode tun-
ings of 2 − 4 nm. For ﬁlms of this thickness the perturbative
analysis breaks down and one must resort to more exact nu-
merical methods. Finite-element method (FEM) simulations
of the mode tuning versus N2 ﬁlm thickness were performed
for the TE1,20 mode of the D = 4.5 µm microdisk, and are plot-
ted in Fig. 4(b) for N2 coverage of the top and side of the disk
(assuming line-of-sight deposition). The measured data are
also plotted in Fig. 4(b) versus consumed N2 (estimated from
the initial and ﬁnal chamber pressures, and assuming an ex-
ponential decrease in the pressure with time). The simulated
N2 thickness is related to the measured N2 consumption with
a ﬁxed scaling factor (the sticking coefﬁcient of rare gases to
their solids is known to be near-unity[20], i.e., constant), de-
termined by a least-squares ﬁt to the measured data. From
these plots the measured tuning is seen to be independent of
ﬂow rate for each of the cavity modes, and the saturation in the
tuning rate with increasing layer thickness is well captured by
the FEM simulation.

In summary, we have demonstrated that optical ﬁber tapers
can provide an efﬁcient interface for transferring light to and
from standard laboratory ﬁber optics into a micron-scale cav-
ity housed in a high-vacuum, cryogenic environment. In ad-
dition, we have shown that rare gas adsorption can be used
to produce high resolution, continuous tuning of microdisk
WGM wavelengths. These two tools are of signiﬁcant utility
to future cQED experiments involving interactions of single
QDs with ﬁber-coupled microdisk cavities [21].

The authors thank A. Stintz and S. Krishna of the Univer-
sity of New Mexico for materials growth, and R. Heron of the
Janis Research Company for assistance in the cryostat design.

FIG. 3: Tuning data (TE1,20 mode in a D = 4.5µm disk) during N2
dosing, sample heating, and sample cooldown phases. (a) Sample
temperature (T), (b) resonant mode wavelengths (l 0), (c) doublet
mode splitting (D
), and (d) intrinsic cavity Q (Qi). The green (blue)
curve is for the short (long) wavelength doublet mode.

the doublet mode splitting (D
), and the intrinsic cavity Q-
factor (Qi). Figure 3(b) shows smooth, continuous tuning is
achieved, with a resonance wavelength shift of D
0 = 3.8 nm
occurring after 1060 s of N2 dosing. During the heating phase
the N2 shut-off valve is closed, and the wavelength dramati-
cally drops at T= 28 K as N2 begins to rapidly desorb from
the disk surface[16]. The temperature is further raised to 40 K
to ensure complete N2 removal. Finally, the sample is cooled
back down to the starting temperature, at which point l 0, D
,
and Qi have returned to their original values.

The tuning cycle of Fig. 3 was found to be repeatable
from run-to-run, and could be interrupted during the N2 dos-
ing phase to position the cavity mode resonance wavelength
with an accuracy of better than ±10 pm. Once positioned, for
temperatures below T= 20K (where N2 desorption is negligi-
ble over a timescale of hours[16]) we found the cavity mode
wavelength to be highly stable. One non-ideal side effect of
the N2 tuning, evident in Fig. 3(d), is the degradation in the
Q-factor with increasing N2 adsorption (Q-degradation factors
of 2-3 for 4 nm of tuning were typical for modes of Q ∼ 105).
Several features in the data of Fig. 3 indicate that the opti-
cal loss is due to sub-wavelength optical scattering from the
adsorbed N2 ﬁlm. The clearest indicator is the rapid rise in
doublet splitting with wavelength tuning (Fig. 3(c)), a result
of increased surface scattering[17]. Visual inspection of mi-
crodisks after large tuning excursions also showed clouding
of the top surface. Both observations point to an incomplete
wetting of N2 on AlGaAs, and the growth of a rough bulk
overlayer consisting of N2 crystallites[18].

Fig. 4(a) shows the wavelength shift versus elapsed time,
under varying ﬂow conditions, and for cavity modes of two

l
l
l
l
l
l
∗ Electronic address: phone: (626) 395-6269, fax: (626) 795-7258, e-mail: kartik@caltech.edu

[1] S. Mosor,

J. Sweet,
J. Hendrickson, B. C. Richards,
G. Khitrova, H. Gibbs, T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, O. B. Shchekin,
and D. G. Deppe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 141105 (2005).

[2] P. Michler, ed., Single Quantum Dots (Springer Verlag, 2003).
[3] H. J. Kimble, Physica Scripta T76, 127 (1998).
[4] J. P. Reithmaier, G. Sek, A. Loffer, C. Hoffman, S. Kuhn, S. Re-
itzenstein, L. V. Keldysh, V. D. Kulakovskii, T. L. Reinecke,
and A. Forchel, Nature 432, 197 (2004).

[5] T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. Gibbs,
G. Rupper, C. Ell, Q. Schenkin, and D. Deppe, Nature 432, 200
(2004).

[6] E. Peter, P. Senellart, D. Martrou, A. Lemaˆitre, J. Hours, J. M.

G´erard, and J. Bloch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005).

[7] K. Srinivasan, M. Borselli, T. J. Johnson, P. E. Barclay,
O. Painter, A. Stintz, and S. Krishna, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86,
151106 (2005).

[8] R. Herrmann, T. Sunner, T. Hein, A. Lofﬂer, M. Kamp, and

A. Forchel, Opt. Lett. 31, 1229 (2006).

[9] J. C. Knight, G. Cheung, F. Jacques, and T. A. Birks, Opt. Lett.

[10] M. Cai, O. Painter, and K. J. Vahala, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 74

22, 1129 (1997).

(2000).

4

[11] K. Srinivasan, P. E. Barclay, M. Borselli, and O. Painter, Phys.

Rev. B 70, 081306R (2004).

[12] S. Strauf, M. T. Rakher, I. Carmeli, K. Hennessy, C. Meier,
A. Badolato, M. J. A. DeDood, P. M. Petroff, E. L. Hu, E. G.
Gwinn, et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 043116 (2006).

[13] E. R. Abraham and E. A. Cornell, Applied Optics 37, 1762

[14] K. Srinivasan, A. Stintz, S. Krishna, and O. Painter, Phys. Rev.

[15] M. Borselli, T. J. Johnson, and O. Painter, Opt. Express 13,

[16] H. Schlichting and D. Menzel, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 64, 2013

[17] M. Borselli, T. J. Johnson, and O. Painter, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88,

[18] U. G. Volkmann and K. Knorr, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 473 (1991).
[19] S. Pilla, J. A. Hamida, K. A. Muttalib, and N. S. Sullivan, Phys.

[20] H. Schlichting, D. Menzel, T. Brunner, and W. Brenig, J. Chem.

[21] K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, quant-ph/0606142 (2006).
[22] From ﬁnite-element-method simulations, this mode is identi-
ﬁed as a TE (electric ﬁeld components predominantly in-plane),
p = 1, m = 20 WGM, where p and m denote the radial and az-
imuthal mode number, respectively.

(1998).

B 72, 205318 (2005).

1515 (2005).

(1993).

13114 (2006).

Lett. A 256, 75 (1999).

Phys. 97, 4453 (1992).

