6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PHNLO

Phase sensitivity of PNL interactions

Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
http://www.kinsler.org/physics/

Phase sensitivity of perturbative nonlinear interactions

P. Kinsler, G.H.C. New, and J.C.A. Tyrrell
Department of Physics, Imperial College, Prince Consort Road, London SW7 2BW, United Kingdom.
(Dated: December 23, 2013)

Despite the current concentration on phase control in few-cycle pulses, it emerges that there exists
a wide class of nonlinear optical interactions in which the carrier phase is essentially irrelevant, even
for the shortest pulse proﬁles. Most parametric processes and most perturbative processes fall into
this category, although others such as above threshold ionization (ATI) do not.
In an envelope
approach, the carrier oscillations are not part of the problem because they are removed at the
outset. When they are reinstated at the end of the calculation, one is free to include arbitrary phase
shifts – within certain constraints. In many cases the constraints are relatively weak, and it follows
that a single envelope solution can be used with an inﬁnite range of choices for the carrier phase.

I.

INTRODUCTION

We have investigated the role that the carrier phase
plays in the propagation and interaction of few-cycle
pulses aﬀected by perturbative nonlinear interactions, us-
ing theoretical methods as well as envelope approaches
and numerical solutions of Maxwell’s equations. The pur-
pose of this paper is to examine in detail the process and
consequences of how perturbative nonlinear interactions
become phase sensitive, a subject usually passed over with
only brief comment, or in rather general terms.

Here focus our attention on χ(n) nonlinear processes
and the interaction of multiple ﬁeld components. Some of
these, such as self phase modulation (SPM) are obviously
phase insensitive. Others, are phase sensitive, such as in
the experiments of Jones et.al.
[2] who use interference
with a super-continuum generated from part of the input
pulse, or Morgner et.al. [3] who use frequency doubling.
Whether or not a χ(n) process is carrier phase insensi-
tive depends both on the nonlinearity and the number
of ﬁeld components involved; it is not guaranteed merely
because it involves optical pulses only a few cycles long.
The reason interactions involving many-cycle pulses are
regarded as phase insensitive has little to do with the role
of the carrier phase, but is instead due to the indistin-
guishability of the many similar ﬁeld oscillations in such
pulses. Phase sensitive χ(2) interactions involving degen-
erate parametric soliton interactions have also been dis-
cussed [4, 5]. Many non-perturbative processes sugh as
above-threshold ionization (ATI) (see e.g. Apolonski et.
al.[1]) are also phase sensitive, however these are outside
the intended scope of this paper.

We show why some perturbative nonlinear processes
are phase insensitive, but others are phase sensitive by
reference to how is the χ(n) processes are modelled, and
whether the various frequency and nonlinear polarization
terms are or are not signiﬁcant. By reference to the pro-
cedure used when an envelope approach is adopted, we
systematize the procedure for generating models, and can
therefore clarify how phase (in)sensitivity occurs. The
key feature of an envelope approach [6] is that the car-
rier oscillations are removed at the outset and the pres-
In the
ence of the carrier is not part of the solution.

many cases where the carrier phase is irrelevant, arbi-
trary phase shifts can be included when the carriers are
reinstated at the end of the calculation. It follows that
a single envelope solution can include an inﬁnite range
of possibilities for the carrier phase. It is important to
stress that this argument remains valid even if the pulses
are so short that attempting to ﬁnd a solution based on
an envelope approach is impractical.

In order to illustrate the results discussed in this pa-
per, we compare two types of simulation. Firstly, we do
envelope-based simulations of pulse propagation, which
naturally agree with the phase insensitivity predictions of
the envelope-based theory. Since we wish to emphasize
that there is nothing intrinsically many-cycle or slowly-
varying about these predictions, we propagate our pulse
envelopes using the generalized few-cycle envelope ap-
proximation (GFEA) theory [7, 8, 9]. This allows us
(for example) to accurately model the self steepening
of the pulse envelope in self phase modulation (SPM).
Secondly, we do pseudospectral space-domain (PSSD)
simulations [10] that solve Maxwell’s equations without
extra approximation. By varying the position of the
carrier-like oscillations of the PSSD initial conditions,
we are able construct a “pseudo-envelope” at each fre-
quency of interest – the maximum excursions of a set of
PSSD simulations of varying phases. For a set of results
that match a phase insensitive envelope calculation, the
pseudo-envelope should mimic the true envelope.

II. BACKGROUND

When using an envelope theory (e.g. SVEA or GFEA)
to solve a pulse propagation problem, we ﬁnd the carrier
exponential (along with its phase φ) often vanishes from
the description, leaving only the chosen wavevector k and
frequency ω as propagation parameters. The question
we now ask is: Under what conditions can we apply a
carrier with a diﬀerent φ to the ﬁnal envelope, and still
reconstruct a physically correct answer? If we can change
the underlying carrier phase, our propagation is phase
insensitive, and for each envelope solution we can use
an inﬁnite set of phase choices. We will have solved for

1

PHNLO

Phase sensitivity of PNL interactions

Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
http://www.kinsler.org/physics/

an inﬁnite set of input electric ﬁeld pulses with a single
envelope propagation.

To examine this, we need to consider the deﬁnition of
a pulse envelope and carefully consider the role of the
carrier phase. An optical pulse can be written in the
form

E(t, z) = A(t, z)eı(kz−ωt+φ) + A∗

(t, z)e−ı(kz−ωt+φ),(1)

with [6] a carrier eı(kz−ωt+φ) and an envelope A(t, z). A
shift θ in the phase of this pulse could be eﬀected by
either adjusting the carrier (adding the shift θ to its ex-
isting reference phase φ); or by multiplying the envelope
A(t, z) by eıθ. We always choose the latter option, so
when the phase of the pulse evolves during its propaga-
tion, it is the phase of the envelope A that changes whilst
the carrier remains ﬁxed. If, for example, the centre of
the pulse (where kz = ωt) evolves from a cosine-like form
at z to a sine-like form at z′, the sole eﬀect is on the en-
velope, i.e. A(t, z) −→ A(t, z′) = ıA(t, z).

There is nothing intrinsically many (or few) cycle
about our conclusions here. If we can solve for the en-
velope propagation in principle, then our predictions for
phase sensitivity will still hold. Of course some of the
contributions neglected by the SVEA and GFEA theo-
ries do depend on the carrier phase, but in general, for
most materials, GFEA propagation is remarkably robust
even for pulses containing only a few carrier cycles.

The χ(n) processes we consider here model a wide va-
riety of nonlinear optical behaviour. For these, nonlinear
polarization aﬀecting the pulse propagation of multiple
ﬁeld components is a simple product of the sum of those
components

P (t) = χ(n)

Ej(t)

n

i

= χ(n)

hX

Aj(t)eı(kj z−ωjt+φj ) + c.c.

(2)

n

, (3)

(cid:17)i

hX (cid:16)

where kj, ωj, and φj are chosen to have convenient values,
depending on the details of the system being described.
When expanded, this will be a sum of many terms, each
of which comprises a product of envelope contributions
and carrier contributions. The normal procedure is to
take each term in sequence, combining all its carrier con-
tributions into a single exponential. We then match the
time-like behaviour of this to one of the individual carrier
exponentials [11] – so the envelope associated with that
carrier propagates according to the nonlinear contribu-
tion that best matches its frequency of oscillation. This
frequency match will often be exact because of the way
we have chosen our set of carrier frequencies ωj, but usu-
ally wavevector or carrier phase mismatches will remain.
In most common situations, this carrier phase mismatch
can be set equal to the phase of the frequency matched
carrier, whilst still leaving some freedom in the overall
choice of carrier phases.

Note that the term “phase mismatch” is commonly
used in nonlinear optics to denote the phase evolution

resulting from a wavevector mismatch, and does not re-
fer to a carrier phase mismatch. To avoid the potential
confusion generated by this widespread terminology, in
this paper we will only refer to either carrier phase mis-
matches or wavevector mismatches, as appropriate.

As we will see, some nonlinear eﬀects impose no rela-
tionship between the phases φj of the ﬁeld carriers; some
allow a degree of freedom; and others leave no freedom
at all. Any freedom to choose the φj in a particular case
means that that case is phase insensitive. One important
restriction on the ability of χ(n) interactions to be phase
insensitive is that they need to be (eﬀectively) instanta-
neous, so that the carrier oscillations at ωjt do not get
folded into the calculation. For most nonlinear materials
this is not a very signiﬁcant restriction, as the nonlinear-
ities are very fast compared to the optical frequencies of
interest, but in the case of (e.g.) slower semiconductor
nonlinear materials this may remain relevant.

How these χ(n) interactions stay phase insensitive (or
not) will become clearer after looking at the speciﬁc ex-
amples which follow.

III. SIMPLE CASES

A simple and commonly studied case of a nonlinear
interaction is self-phase modulation (SPM). The under-
lying nonlinearity that gives rise to SPM also gives rise
to other terms, such as third harmonic generation (THG)
terms (∼ A3
j ), Al-
though SPM is phase insensitive, these other terms are
not necessarily phase insensitive.
In many cases, how-
ever, they will be small and/or not wavevector matched
– and if we are interested speciﬁcally in SPM, then our
setup will be designed to ensure they are negligible.

i ) and other cross terms (e.g. ∼ AiA∗2

The polarization contribution that aﬀects the ﬁeld en-
velope A during propagation under SPM is the “polar-
ization envelope” BSP M , which has the same carrier as
the ﬁeld envelope. It is

BSP M = χ(3)A.A∗.A,

(4)

which has no dependence on the carrier phase. We
demonstrate this in ﬁg 1, where a set of PSSD solutions of
Maxwell’s equations [10] for SPM with a range of phases
match up exactly with the phase insensitive GFEA enve-
lope. The use of a GFEA[7] rather than an SVEA pulse
propagation equation for the envelope allows us to ac-
curately reproduce the strong self-steepening that occurs
for few-cycle pulses. It also emphasizes that this phase
insensitivity still persists in the few-cycle regime.

Another simple case is n-th order harmonic generation.
This needs to be modeled using two ﬁeld components,
with frequencies ωn = nω1. The underlying nonlinear-
ity gives us a total polarization P (t) = χ(n)E(t)n, from
which the two important contribution B1, Bn aﬀect the
propagation of the ﬁeld envelopes A1, An respectively. As
for the SPM case, other polarization contributions might

2

PHNLO

Phase sensitivity of PNL interactions

Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
http://www.kinsler.org/physics/

FIG. 1: SPM: We match a GFEA envelope to a set of PSSD
solutions to Maxwell’s equations, and achieve excellent agree-
ment. It is also possible to use the envelope to generate ﬁeld
proﬁles that match the individual PSSD solutions.
Heavy line: GFEA envelope solution.
Light lines: PSSD ﬁelds, phase intervals of π/4.

in some general case be signiﬁcant, but a harmonic gen-
eration experiment would be designed to ensure they are
negligible. The polarization envelopes B1 and Bn that
match to the fundamental A1 and n-th harmonic An are

B1 = χ(n)AnA∗
Bn = χ(n)An

1

n−1 exp {ı [∆nz + φn − nφ1]} ,

1 exp {ı [−∆nz + nφ1 − φn]} .

(5)

(6)

Here ∆n = kn−nk1 is the wavevector mismatch. These
have no dependence on φk’s if δ = φn − nφ1 is ﬁxed. This
means there is a phase sensitivity, but it only ﬁxes the
relative phase between the ﬁeld components. This leaves
one free choice of carrier phase, and so the interaction
can still be described as phase insensitive.

To demonstrate the phase properties for harmonic gen-
eration we present some simulation results for the special
case of second harmonic generation, using two ﬁeld com-
ponents with frequencies ω2 = 2ω1; hence ∆2 = k2 − 2k1
and the carrier phase condition is φ2 = 2φ1. In ﬁg. 2
we show results with the initial condition A2 = 0, auto-
matically satisfying the carrier phase condition, but still
allowing a free choice of the carrier phase φ1. Conse-
quently, it shows how a set of PSSD solutions (with range
of initial φ1) closely match the phase insensitive GFEA
envelopes. So, by ensuring that φ2 = 2φ1, a single en-
velope calculation can give us answers for any choice φ1
value.

In these simulations we needed to separate fundamen-
tal and second harmonic ﬁelds (and hence their pseudo-
envelopes) from the PSSD solutions for the total ﬁeld. To
do this we transformed into the spectral domain, sepa-
rated out the fundamental and second harmonic spectral
peaks, and transformed each back independently. This
process involved some judgment; and also ﬁltered out
the low frequency optical-rectiﬁcation eﬀects, which were
not included in the GFEA simulations in any case. This
means that the resulting pseudo-envelopes seen on the
graphs are not perfect matches to the envelopes, since,
for example, the ﬁeld spectra contributions in the region
between the carriers will not shared out in exactly the

FIG. 2: We match GFEA envelopes to a set of PSSD solu-
tions to Maxwell’s equations with excellent agreement.
Heavy lines: GFEA envelopes A1 and A2;
Light jagged lines: PSSD pseudo-envelopes ;
Oscillating lines: PSSD second harmonic ﬁeld E2 for φ1 = 0
(light), and the fundamental ﬁeld E1 (dotted).
The second harmonic envelope curve does not exactly match
the pseudo-envelope because of both phase sampling and
spectral ﬁltering. The fundamental envelope and pseudo-
envelopes barely be distinguished on the scale of this graph.

FIG. 3: We match the fundamental and second harmonic
GFEA envelopes to the corresponding PSSD solution to
Maxwell’s equations, and see excellent agreement (2φ1 =
φ2 = 0).
Heavy lines: GFEA envelopes A1 and A2;
Light lines: PSSD ﬁeld split into E1 and E2.
NB: peak E1(0) = 1.00 and peak E2(0) = 0.20.

same way.

To contrast with the above results, we now demon-
strate how phase sensitivity can manifest itself in simu-
lations that violate the 2φ1 = φ2 condition. We include
a ﬁnite second harmonic pulse of varying phase φ2 in the
initial conditions, but ﬁx φ1 = 0. On ﬁg. 3 we show the
case where φ2 = 0, which is the one phase that satisﬁes
2φ1 = φ2, and as a result we see the GFEA envelope and
PSSD ﬁelds in agreement. In contrast, on ﬁg. 4 we show
the second harmonic PSSD ﬁelds for a range of φ2, and
we see that no sensible envelope function could reproduce
the set of curves – as expected since 2φ1 6= φ2.

In a set of PSSD simulations where both φ1 and φ2
were varied, a given GFEA simulation would reproduce
the PSSD data along a line where 2φ1 = φ2. Even if a
particular case is phase insensitive, it is not guaranteed
to be of the type we might ﬁnd useful.

3

PHNLO

Phase sensitivity of PNL interactions

Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
http://www.kinsler.org/physics/

polarization contributions that are commonly considered,
then step-by-step add the rest back in to the model, de-
scribing the consequences for the phase sensitivity.

A. Standard (resonant) case

The standard subset of polarization contributions are
the ones exactly resonant with one of the three carriers.
As usual, Bα is a polarization envelope with the car-
rier exp [ı (kαz − ωαt + φα)], so that with the wavevector
mismatch ∆ = kp − ks − ki, we have

Bi = Bi,R = ApA∗
seı∆z+ı(φp−φs−φi)
Bs = Bs,R = ApA∗
i eı∆z+ı(φp−φi−φs)
Bp = Bp,R = AsAie−ı∆z+ı(φi+φs−φp)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Each gives us (the same) carrier phase constraint (A):
φp = φs+φi, and so any single envelope simulation can be
turned into a multiplicity of solutions for the ﬁelds, using
the two unconstrained carrier phases to determine the
third. Thus, for resonant-only polarization contributions,
the interaction is doubly phase insensitive (i.e. we have
two free choices of carrier phase).

B. Wideband case

Of course in a wideband (or miraculously well wavevec-
tor matched) situation, other polarization terms might be
relevant. Assuming that ωs − ωi ∼ ωi, and 2ωi ∼ ωs, we
would associate the extra polarization contributions with
the propagation of the envelope with the nearest carrier
frequency, so

Bi = Bi,R + Bi,W = Bi,R + AsA∗
Bs = Bs,R + Bs,W = Bs,R + A2

i eı(ks−2ki)z+ı(φs−2φi)(11)
i eı(2ki−ks)z+ı(2φi−φs) (12)

Both of these add the extra phase constraint (B): φs =
2φi. Substituting this into constraint (A) above therefore
gives us the new constraint φp = 3φi; which leaves us
with just one unconstrained phase from which we can
generate multiple ﬁeld solutions from a single envelope
simulation.

For example, in some recent carrier-envelope phase sta-
bilisation experiments [12, 13], the authors advance an
argument based (only) on the resonant terms to explain
(7)
why they can generate an idler ﬁeld insensitive to the ini-
tial phase of the pump pulse (from which the signal is also
derived). Since they have near resonant signal and idler
ﬁelds, the two “wideband” terms above in eqns. (11, 12)
will produce components near the pump (since 2ωi ∼ ωp)
and near the zero-frequency (since ωs − ωi ∼ 0) respec-
tively. Consquently their model is very insensitive to
these contributions to the nonlinearity, especially when
the pump ﬁeld is strong. However, if they had chosen a

FIG. 4: Two slices of the PSSD second harmonic ﬁeld E2 for
a selection of φ2 values with 2φ1 6= φ2. In the wings of the
pulse (left hand, 70–74fs) we can see approximately envelope-
like behavior because the phase-sensitive polarization terms
are small; but as we move towards the pulse peaks (right
hand, 90–94fs), clearly no reasonable envelope function could
match all the data.
NB: peak E1(0) = 1.00 and peak E2(0) = 0.20.

IV. COMPLETE EXAMPLE: THREE-FIELD χ(2)
INTERACTION

For a three-ﬁeld χ(2) interaction, such as in an optical
parametric ampliﬁer (OPA), we get a number of polar-
ization terms to consider.
In contrast to the previous
section, which looked at common nonlinear polarization
terms in isolation, here we give a more comprehensive
review of all the nonlinear polarization terms in a partic-
ular case. As we choose to use the interaction for an OPA
or OPO system, we follow the usual naming convention
and specify three ﬁeld components (pump, signal, idler)
with frequencies ωp > ωs ≥ ωi such that ωp = ωs + ωi.
The polarization terms from P (t) = E(t)2 that aﬀect the
propagation of the ﬁeld envelopes Ap, As, Ai are –

P + = A2

peı2(kpz−ωpt+φp) + Apeı(kpz−ωpt+φp)Aseı(ksz−ωst+φs)
+Apeı(kpz−ωpt+φp)Aieı(kiz−ωit+φi)
+Apeı(kpz−ωpt+φp)A∗
+Apeı(kpz−ωpt+φp)A∗
+Aseı(ksz−ωst+φs)Aieı(kiz−ωit+φi)
i e−ı(kiz−ωit+φi)
+Aseı(ksz−ωst+φs)A∗
i eı2(kiz−ωit+φi).
+A2

se−ı(ksz−ωst+φs)
i e−ı(kiz−ωit+φi) + A2

seı2(ksz−ωst+φs)

The zero and negative frequency polarization compo-
nents are not included here – the negative frequency ones
(P −) apply to the evolution of the conjugate parts of the
envelopes A∗
i ; and the zero frequency ones (P 0)
correspond to the uninteresting (for us) steady state con-
tributions.

s, A∗

p, A∗

In the following we will start by considering the three

4

PHNLO

Phase sensitivity of PNL interactions

Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
http://www.kinsler.org/physics/

scheme with ωs−ωi ∼ ωi, then the ωs−ωi nonlinear com-
ponent would disrupt their phase independent idler gen-
eration – although fortunately the term would be weak,
since it is dependent on the idler strength. More serious
problems would have ensued if the scheme required gener-
ation of a signal pulse from pump-idler interaction, since
then a strong ωi + ωi term would disrupt the hoped-for
generation of a phase-independent signal pulse.

C. Extreme case

Finally, in some extreme cases we might need (or want)
to include the remaining polarization terms. Because of
their high frequency, they are best assigned to drive the
ωp ﬁeld component

Bp = Bp,R + Bp,X

(13)

Bp,X = ApAieı[(kp+ki)z−(ωp+ωi)t+φp+φi]

+ApAseı[(kp+ks)z−(ωp+ωs)t+φp+φs]
+A2

seı2(ksz−ωst+φs) + A2

peı2(kpz−ωpt+φp). (14)

These would add constraints φi = 0, φs = 0, φp =
2φs, and φp = 0 respectively, any of which would leave
no adjustable carrier phases. This means that a single
envelope simulation corresponds to only one single ﬁeld
result. Trying to avoid this by adding extra carriers (e.g.
by inventing a ωq = 2ωs) is generally counter productive,
as these will generate extra polarization terms, each of
which will arrive with a new collection of constraints.

V. HIGH HARMONIC GENERATION

High harmonic generation is the process whereby an in-
tense laser ﬁeld is use to ionize an atom, with the electron
recollsion with the atom generating a wide range of high
harmonics oﬀ the laser pulse. It is clearly a phase sen-
sitive process, because for a short (few cycle) laser pulse
it is possible that only one of the carrier-like ﬁeld oscilla-
tions is suﬃciently near the peak of the pulse to reach the
ionization threshold. Changing the relative position of
the carrier w.r.t. the pulse peak could then shift the tim-
ing of the above-threshold part of the electric ﬁeld proﬁle,
and even possibly shift it from a positive value electric
ﬁeld to a negative value. This will either alter the timing
or direction of the ejected electron, and hence its recolli-
sion and the generated HHG signal. The typical descrip-
tion of HHG focuses on the electron trajectory, following
a tunnel-ionization event (caused by the distortion of the
atomic potential of the atom or molecule. Such models
bear no relationship to the perturbative χ(n) models al-
ready discussed here, and so cannot be interpreted in the
way we found useful above.

However, since HHG is a multi photon process, it is in-
structive to imagine a high-order nonlinear “perturbative

HHG” process which is compatible with our approach.
We emphasize that here we are not trying to make an
accurate model of the HHG process, but to reproduce
some of its features in a way that enables us to relate
its phase sensitivity to that of standard χ(n) nonlinear
processes.

In our simple model, we consider just one high-order
multi photon polarization term, and show how the phase
constraints it generates remove any possibility of phase
freedom. Considering an odd high-order process, we
specify N = 2m + 1 (i.e. N odd), and write down the po-
larization terms resulting from a single envelope-carrier
combination at the fundamental frequency ω –

PAT I = −γE(t)N

N

"

n=0
X

= −γ

n A∗(N −n)Aneı(2n−N )(kz−ωt+φ)
CN

(15)

,(16)
#

where CN
n are the binomial coeﬃcients. Thus the n-th
polarization term drives the electron at a frequency of
(2n − N ) ω –

P2n−N = −γ CN

n A∗(N −n) An eı(2n−N )(kz−ωt+φ). (17)

If we compare the eﬀect of the n-th term on the elec-
tron to that of the n′-th term, we see that they beat with
an exponential dependence like

eı(2n−2n′)(kz−ωt+φ).

(18)

Even this ﬁrst comparison shows a clear phase sensi-
tivity; before we have considered all N of the terms, and
before we consider the likelihood of contributions from
interactions of a diﬀerent order (e.g. N ′).

In the cases discussed in previous sections, we could
regard some terms as negligible because they were small
in magnitude or poorly wave-vector matched. Here all
terms contain N powers of the envelope amplitude, thus
none can be dismissed as negligible in size. All, however,
have diﬀerent frequencies. Our comparisons above shows
us that as long as the electron can respond signiﬁcantly to
even just two terms, it’s response will be phase sensitive.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have shown that nonlinear interactions can run
the full range from completely carrier phase insensitive
through to completely constrained, as demonstrated for
both the simple cases in section III and the detailed ex-
amination of a three-ﬁeld χ(2) interaction in section IV.
The principles and procedure outlined in section IV can
easily be applied to higher order χ(n) nonlinearities with
diﬀering numbers of ﬁeld components – all that is neces-
sary is a careful enumeration of the ﬁeld components and
signiﬁcant polarization terms, followed by the process of
matching up the polarization terms to the evolution of

5

PHNLO

Phase sensitivity of PNL interactions

Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
http://www.kinsler.org/physics/

the ﬁeld components. Lastly, in section V we saw how
any high-order χ(n) process will, without carefully de-
signed conditions, be be phase sensitive purely because
of the large number of constraints generated by the po-
larization expansion.

Although strictly speaking all nonlinear χ(n) interac-
tions allow no residual carrier phase insensitivity, such
complete descriptions are rarely necessary for accurate
physical models. This is because in many realistic cases
we can safely ignore many of the nonlinear polariza-
tion contributions and so recover some phase freedom, as
demonstrated in this paper. This is because the neglected
terms will be far oﬀ resonance and/or not wavevector
matched enough to accumulate and so will play a negli-
gible part in the propagation.

The phase (in)sensitivity of the particular models pur-
sued in this paper relate to experiments involving the
phase-control of few cycle pulses (e.g. [1, 2, 3]) in the fol-

lowing way: a scheme will be phase sensitive, and hence
useful to the experimentalists if, when analyzed, there
is no freedom to alter the carrier phase under some pre-
dicted ﬁnal-state pulse envelope. This contrasts with the
case for processes like SPM, where a single envelope prop-
agation code can predict a ﬁnal-state envelope where any
carrier phase can be used to generate a valid ﬁnal-state
electric ﬁeld proﬁle.

The phase insensitivity we have discussed can manifest
itself over the complete range from many- to few-cycle
pulses – as long as in principle an envelope solution to
the propagation is possible – and in principle, we might
even retain all of the terms approximated away in the
GFEA pulse propagation theory. Our conclusions are
supported by successful comparisons between envelope
predictions of carrier phase insensitivity and sensitivity
with PSSD solutions of Maxwell’s equations.

[1] A. Apolonski, A. Poppe, G. Tempea, Ch. Spielmann,
Th. Udem, R. Holzwarth, T. W. H¨ansch, and F. Krausz,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 740 (2000).

[2] D.J. Jones, S.A. Diddams, J.K. Ranka, A. Stentz, R.S.
Windeler, J.L. Hall, S.T. Cundiﬀ, Science 288, 635
(2000).

[3] U. Morgner, R. Ell, G. Metzler, T. R. Schibli, F. X. Krt-
ner, J. G. Fujimoto, H. A. Haus, E. P. Ippen, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 86, 5462-5465 (2001).

[4] G. Assanto, Opt. Lett. 20, 1595 (1995).
[5] P.D. Drummond, K.V. Kheruntsyan, and H. He, J. Opt.

B 1, 387 (1999).

[8] P. Kinsler, G.H.C. New, Phys. Rev. A 69, 013805 (2004).
[9] P. Kinsler, arXiv.org/physics/0212014.

[10] J.C.A. Tyrrell, P. Kinsler, G.H.C. New, J.Mod.Opt. 52,

973 (2005).

[11] We might instead choose to match up on the basis of
carrier wavevector rather than frequency, if it suited our
particular investigation. This would result in frequency
and carrier phase mismatches remaining after we have
matched the space-like (z) behaviour of the carrier expo-
nentials.

[12] X. Fang, T. Kobayashi, Opt. Lett. 29, 1282 (2004).
[13] A. Baltuska, T. Fuji, T. Kobayashi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88,

[6] D. Gabor, J. Inst. Electr. Eng. (London) 93, 429 (1946).
[7] P. Kinsler, G.H.C. New, Phys. Rev. A 67, 023813 (2003).

133901 (2002).

6

