6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Full and partial reversed transitions
in a vertical optical lattice

V.A.Kuz’menko1

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

Abstract

Physical explanation of the origin of quantum resonances in a peri-
odically kicked Bose-Einstein condensate is proposed. It is based on the
assumption of inequality of the diﬀerential cross-sections of forward and
partially reversed optical transitions. For quantitative determination of
such diﬀerences, we propose to study the Bloch oscillations in a vertical
optical lattice with short pulses of laser radiation.

PACS number: 03.75.Lm, 32.80.Lg

Rather usual situation in nonlinear optics is a case, when a physical phe-
nomenon has good mathematical description, but without clear physical expla-
nation. The most demonstrative example here is the Bloch equations, which
give excellent description of the dynamics of optical transitions, but which do
not have clear physical sense.

Other example is the description of a cold atoms motion in an optical lattice
with mathematical model based on the Gross-Pitaevskii equation [1]. It is sup-
posed here, that the polarization interaction of atoms with a periodic standing
wave is the physical base of the phenomenon. However, there is a fact, that the
amplitude of the Bloch oscillations greatly exceeds the lattice period. It makes
physically meaningless the polarization explanation.

In this note we shall discuss the origin of the so-called quantum resonances
in a periodically kicked Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) [2, 3]. The essence of
the phenomenon is that the most eﬃcient increasing of the momentum spread of
the atoms under action of pulses of laser radiation occurs at some ”resonance”
time delay between the laser pulses. The value of ”resonance” delay corresponds
to the time at which the atoms pass in space the distance multiple of the optical
lattice period. As usually, the phenomenon has good mathematical description,
but does not have physical explanation.

It was proposed early, that the inequality of forward and reversed processes
is a physical base of the majority of phenomena in nonlinear optics [4]. This con-
cept has several direct and enormous numbers of indirect experimental proofs.
The essence of the concept is that in spite of the equality of integral cross-
sections of forward and reversed transitions, its diﬀerential cross-sections can
diﬀer in many orders of magnitude. The cross-section of the reversed transi-
tion has very sharp dependence from the orientation of molecule in space, from

1Electronic address: kuzmenko@triniti.ru

1

the phase of atom vibration in the molecule, from the phase of laser radiation
and from the spatial position of the atom in the space. Fig.1 schematically
shows the supposed dependence of cross-section of reversed Raman transition
(in a vertical optical lattice) from the atom spatial position for the case of the
Bloch oscillations. Such character of the dependence leads to the situation, that
in the certain point of space the Raman transition takes place and the recoil
momentum returns the atom exactly into the initial state (point) [5].

Similar physical explanation can be proposed for the phenomenon of the
quantum resonances in a periodically kicked BEC. Characteristic property of
the present case is that we deal not with a full reversed optical transitions.
The phases of the laser radiation coincide, but the reversed Raman transition
cannot return the atoms exactly into the initial point. The atom displaces
from the initial spatial position during the time delay between the laser pulses.
Such transitions are only partially reversed. Moreover, there are possible next
partially reversed Raman transitions in the same direction and during the same
laser pulses. As a result of a number of such pulses and transitions, a resonance
”swinging” of the BEC takes place.

For correct description of the resonance phenomenon (and the dynamics of
optical transitions as a whole) it is important to obtain a quantitative informa-
tion about the ratio of cross-sections for forward, fully reversed and diﬀerent
variants of partially reversed transitions. The following inequality, probably,
exists:

σF R ≫ σP R ≫ σF

(1)
where σF R is the cross-section of a fully reversed transition, σP R is the cross-
section of a partially reversed transition and σF characterizes a forward transi-
tion. Receiving of exact quantitative information of such kind is, obviously, the
most important and fundamental problem in optics today. We propose to use
for this goal the experimental study of the atom Bloch oscillations in a standing
vertical optical lattice. The conditions of proposed experiments are very simi-
lar to those in [6, 7]. But we should use a short pulses of laser radiation with
repetition rate equal to the frequency of Bloch oscillations. Small modiﬁcation
of consecution of the laser pulses allows studying the Bloch oscillations not only
through the fully reversed Raman transitions, but also through the partially re-
versed ones. We expect that in such way some quantitative information about
the ratio of cross-sections for forward and reversed transitions in cold atoms
may be obtained.

References

(2004).

[1] T. Hartmann, F. Keck, H. J. Korsch, and S. Mossmann, New J. Phys. 6, 2

[2] F. L. Moore, J. C. Robinson, C. F. Bharucha, B. Sundaram, and M. G.

Raizen, Phys.Rev.Lett. 75, 4598 (1995).

2

[3] C. Ryu, M. F. Andersen, A. Vaziri, M. B. d’Arcy, J. M. Grossman, K.
Helmerson, and W. D. Phillips, Phys.Rev.Lett. 796, 160403 (2006).

[4] V. A. Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0506023

[5] V. A. Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0609120

[6] E. Roati, E. de Mirandes, F. Ferlaino, H. Ott, G. Modugno, and M. Ingus-

cio, Phys.Rev.Lett. 92, 230402 (2004).

[7] G. Ferrari, N. Poli, F. Sorrentino, and G. M. Tino, Phys.Rev.Lett. 97,

060402 (2006).

3

(cid:86)

mirror

BEC

z

1

2

z

Fig.1 The  supposed  dependences  of  cross-section  of
Raman  transition  from  the  atom  spatial  position  in  the 
vertical  optical  lattice  for  forward  (1)  and  reversed  (2) 
transitions.  The  inset  shows  the  simplified  scheme  of 
the proposed experimental set up. 

