Classical Phase Space Revealed by Coherent Light

Tomoko Tanaka,1 Martina Hentschel,1, 2 Takehiro Fukushima,1, 3 and Takahisa Harayama1
1 Department of Nonlinear Science, ATR Wave Engineering Laboratories,
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0228, Japan
2 Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Regensburg, D-93040 Regensburg, Germany∗
3 Department of Communication Engineering, Okayama Prefectural University, Soja 719-1197, Japan
(Dated: August 1, 2013)

We study the far ﬁeld characteristics of oval-resonator laser diodes made of an AlGaAs/GaAs
quantum well. The resonator shapes are various oval geometries, thereby probing chaotic and
mixed classical dynamics. The far ﬁeld pattern shows a pronounced ﬁne structure that strongly
depends on the cavity shape. Comparing the experimental data with ray-model simulations for a
Fresnel billiard yields convincing agreement for all geometries and reveals the importance of the
underlying classical phase space for the lasing characteristics.

6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 42.25.Bs,05.45.Mt,42.55.Sa

Introduction — In the past two decades, quantum
chaos has proven to be a successful concept in under-
standing, characterizing, and predicting the behavior of
mesoscopic systems [1, 2]. Originally used to study the
quantum analogue of classically chaotic hard-wall billiard
model systems, it also explains the behavior of realistic
systems of various shapes and character: The statistics
of Coulomb-blockade peaks in quantum dots [2], the ge-
ometry dependence of the weak localization peak [3], or
the level statistics of microwave billiards [4]. The stud-
ies on quantum chaos have mainly focused on the quest
for universality from the view-point of statistical physics.
Therefore, despite the evident importance of the sys-
tem’s underlying classical phase space for the behavior
of the quantum or wave mechanical analogue (based on
the analogy between Schr¨odinger and Helmholtz equation
[1]), its speciﬁc structure cannot be reconstructed from
the traces it leaves in typical observables like energy level
or wave function statistics.

In this Letter we shall see that detailed information
about the classical phase space can, however, be ex-
tracted from the far ﬁeld radiation characteristics of oval-
microcavity laser diodes. The observed far ﬁeld pattern
(FFP) depends very sensitively on the shape, that is,
on the system’s underlying classical phase space, and we
convincingly support this idea by numerical simulations.
It is interesting to note that information about the clas-
sical phase space is revealed by the coherent light ema-
nating from the lasing microcavity.

The oval-billiard family is a well-known model system
with interesting properties [5, 6, 7] in which each oval
shape is characterized by a shape parameter δ ≡ 2δ′/L,
cf. Fig. 1(b). The curvature is, by construction [see
Fig. 1(b) and, e.g., Ref. 7 for instructions], discontinu-
ous. This was found to be crucial for understanding the
phase-space evolution upon variation of δ [6]. Increasing
δ, the phase space changes from fully chaotic (δ = 0, sta-
dium shape), via mixed (0 < δ < 1, various oval shapes)
to integrable (δ = 1, disk). Figure 2 shows the phase

′

FIG. 1:
2δ
etry, and (c) phase-space coordinates.

(Color online) An oval microlaser with δ ≡
(a) Scanning Electron Micrograph, (b) geom-

/L=0.45.

space of the chaotic and integrable limit and the mixed
phase spaces for δ ∈ [0.45,0.85] that consist of chaotic re-
gions as well as regular islands [9]. The simultaneous ex-
perimental and theoretical investigation of a δ-dependent
mixed phase space has not, to the best of our knowledge,
been done before and is at the core of the present study.
To understand the dynamics of the system, let us con-
sider a light ray hitting the resonator boundary at polar
angle φ under an angle of incidence χ, cf. Fig.1(c), such
that total internal reﬂection takes place (| sin χ| ≥ 1/n).
In the circular cavity (δ = 1), the light ray will remain
conﬁned inside the cavity forever by means of conserva-
tion of angular momentum, and form whispering gallery
mode (WGM) tori. To a certain extent, this scenario will
remain valid even if δ is slightly decreased. The invariant
WGM tori are then perturbed to Kolmogorov-Arnold-
Moser tori, and the phase space becomes mixed. Note
that for δ ≥0.76 the chaotic regions are disconnected (the
chaotic sea is split into two disjoined regions) whereas
for δ <0.76 a singly connected chaotic layer penetrates
the phase space, bypassing the embedded regular islands

2

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
 
d
e
t
t
i

m
e

1000

500

0

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

shape parameter δ

Total emitted intensity of

FIG. 3:
lasing microcavities
vs. shape parameter δ. Note the intensity drop (marked by ar-
row) around δ ∼ 0.76 caused by the appearance of a transver-
sal barrier in phase.

cavities characterized by a shape parameter δ with ex-
tremely smooth and vertical boundaries, see Fig. 1(a);
the surface roughness is less than 1/10 of the lasing wave-
length λ ∼ 850 nm. Lasing operation of these devices was
achieved at room temperature by pumping with a pulsed
injection current of 500 ns width at a 1 kHz repetition
rate.

Experiments — In Fig. 3 we plot the total (polar-angle
integrated) far ﬁeld output power, measured at an injec-
tion current of four times the threshold current, as func-
tion of the shape parameter δ. The pronounced drop in
the emitted light intensity around δ . 0.76 (marked by
arrow) is a direct consequence of the above-mentioned ap-
pearance of a transversal barrier in classical phase space
and the change of the lasing modes from refractive modes
into evanescent, WGM-type modes. This dip is also a
clear sign that not individual modes, but the underlying
classical phase space as a whole (representing a wealth of
modes [8]) determines the behaviour of the system.

In the following, we will shift our focus from the total
output power to the angular distribution of the emitted
radiation in the far ﬁeld, i.e., the FFPs. The experimen-
tal FFPs of oval lasing diodes with various δ are shown
in Fig. 4 (black curves). FFPs were measured in a dis-
tance of d = 70 mm by scanning a photo-detector with
a window of w = 11 mm width around the laser diode
covering an angular range of 200◦ in φﬀ with a resolution
∆φﬀ = 2 arctan(w/2d) ∼ 9◦.

The red curves in Fig. 4 are the results of numerical,
ray-model based simulations (explained in more detail
below) that convincingly support the experimental re-
sults. A uniform background was substracted in all cases
in order to exclude eﬀects of spontaneous emission that
is assumed to be isotropic; the (absolute) minimum of
the experimental curves is set to zero by deﬁnition.

Model — The theoretical model used here is based on
the ray picture. This is motivated by the large size pa-
rameter ∼ 2πnL/λ ∼ 1000 of the experimental system;
the ray model can be expected to yield reliable results
in this regime.
[9, 10] A large number (250000) of rays
is started with unit amplitude and random initial condi-
tions covering the whole phase space. The dynamics of

FIG. 2: (Color online) Poincar´e surface of section (SOS) il-
lustrating the classical phase space of hard-wall oval billiards.
The critical lines | sin χ| = 1/n are shown by light-blue lines.
In the top raw, the limiting cases of a chaotic (δ = 0, sta-
dium) and an integrable (δ = 1, disk) phase space are shown;
for δ=0.45, 0.76, 0.8, and 0.85 the phase space is mixed. To
further visualize the diﬀerences in the phase-space structure,
the evolution of 50 rays with random initial conditions in the
interval 0 ≤ φ ≤ 0.1 and 0.28 ≤ sin χ ≤ 0.32 is followed for
25 reﬂections (superposed lighter points).

[6, 7], cf. Fig. 2. The smaller δ the more chaotic the
cavity becomes, reaching ergodicity in the limit δ = 0.

The above mentioned properties of ray-dynamics in
oval billiards imply in particular that when δ exceeds
values of ∼ 0.76,
light rays are trapped in the dis-
joined chaotic regions that lie above the critical line
| sin χ| = 1/n, unable to leave the cavity. Accordingly,
the emitted light intensity is expected to decrease around
δ ∼ 0.76 because the lasing modes will be strongly con-
ﬁned inside the cavity and leakage will be evanescent.

In order to elucidate if this property of classical phase
space could be detected in the emitted light, we actually
fabricated these oval-shaped semiconductor laser diodes
for various values of δ, one of which is shown in Fig. 1(a).
System — The resonators were made of metal organic
vapor phase epitaxy grown graded index seperate con-
ﬁnement AlGaAs/GaAs single-quantum well wafer with
n=3.3 the eﬀective index of refraction. The typical sys-
tem length is L ∼ 50 µm. Applying the reactive-ion-
beam etching technique allows one to realize speciﬁc oval

0

50

100

-50
  δ=0.45

15

  δ=0.76

experiment
simulation

)
.
u
.
a
(
 

f
f

I

)
.
u
.
a
(
 

f
f

I

)
.
u
.
a
(
 

f
f

I

)
.
u
.
a
(
 

f
f

I

0

5

5

0

5

0

0
10

  δ=0.8

  δ=0.85

-50

0

50

100

far field angle φ
ff

FIG. 4: (Color online) Experimentally observed FFPs (far
ﬁeld intensity Iﬀ vs. angle φﬀ, black curves; same injection
currents as in Fig. 3 were used) for various shape parameters
δ (see insets). The ray-model simulations are superimposed
◦
(red curves); all data was averaged over a 9
window. The
simulation data is oﬀset by the average residual background
of the experimental data, normalization is with respect to
the peak heights. Apart from the side peaks, the agreement
experiment-theory is convincing and the drastic changes in
the FFP upon tiny changes in the shapes are nicely reﬂected
in the simulation.

each ray is governed by Snell’s and Fresnel’s law [11] that
complement the condition of specular reﬂection. The far
ﬁeld radiation characteristics is reconstructed from rays
in the steady phase-space distribution [9, 12], an invari-
ant object uniquely related to the underlying phase-space
structure and characterized by an exponential decay of
the internal light intensity vs. trajectory length. The ini-
tial transient regime where the internal intensity decays
faster than exponentially due to the presence of, e.g.,
bouncing ball orbits, is discarded [9]. That the linear
ray-model works so well for describing non-linear, lasing
light is related to the large size-parameter and the fact
that not a single, but a multitude of modes is lasing. [8]
Results — The observed FFPs exhibit a clear and
prominent minimum-maximum structure that is remark-
ably well reproduced by the ray-model simulations for
all δ, cf. Fig. 4. Apart from the edges of the broad max-
ima where side peaks are sometimes missing, the simu-
lated FFPs capture the decreasing width and ﬁne struc-
ture of the central part, in particular its extreme shape-
sensitivity, in a semi-quantitative manner.

For all δ considered here, the preferred emission direc-
tion coincides with the shorter cavity axis (φﬀ ∼ 90◦).
Note that this direction is shifted by 90◦ in compari-

3

FIG. 5: (Color online) From classical phase space to the FFPs
of microcavities (ray-model based simulation). The transmit-
ted Fresnel intensity (color scale) is shown in the near ﬁeld
(lower panels, sine of angle of incidence χ vs. polar angle an-
gle φ at transmission) and far ﬁeld (upper panels, resulting
far ﬁeld angle φﬀ vs. polar angle φ of ray origin). The region
of violated total internal reﬂection is enclosed by light lines in
the lower panels. The intensity distribution in the lower pan-
els corresponds well to the hard-wall results (cf. the lighter
points in Fig. 2); their translation into the FFP in the upper
panels and in Fig. 4 is evident. The inset for δ = 0.45 illus-
trates how the details of the observed structure are related to
shape-speciﬁc orbits as the one shown (see text).

son with the stadium shaped microcavity laser [9] due to
dynamical eclipsing [13]: For δ > 0, regular (bouncing
ball) islands around the stable ﬁxed points sin χ = 0 and
φ = 0◦, 180◦ impose constraints on all other orbits. Light
rays will still emerge mainly from the regions of highest
curvature, but nearly tangentially, i.e., in direction of the
shorter cavity axis, cf. also Figs. 2 and 5.

In the remaining part of this Letter, we will focus on
the ﬁne structure of the FFP maxima and show how the
underlying classical phase space expresses itself in this
signature, cf. Figs. 4 and 5. That the ray-model can ef-
fectively reproduce the ﬁne structure and width of the
central part of the FFP maxima becomes especially evi-
dent when looking at δ = 0.76 where the side peaks are
clearly separated and the plateau-like structure of the
central part is well described, similar arguments apply to
the wide maximum with the slight dip for δ=0.45. The
power of our simple model is also nicely illustrated when
comparing the FFPs for δ = 0.8 and 0.85 which are strik-
ingly diﬀerent despite the very similar cavity geometry:

For δ = 0.8, a distinct minimum in the central plateau is
evident in both experiment and theory which is missing
for δ = 0.85, again in both data sets.

FFP and classical phase space — We now provide nu-
merical evidence that these distinct diﬀerences in the ﬁne
structure of the FFP maxima originate in the structure
of the underlying phase space. We already discussed the
Poincar´e SOS of oval (hard wall) billiards in Fig. 2 and
turn now to the properties of light leaving the open sys-
tem, cf. Fig. 5. The Fresnel intensity transmitted into far
ﬁeld direction φﬀ , originating from a certain near ﬁeld an-
gle φ and an angle of incidence χ prior to transmission,
is represented in color scale histograms for the near and
far ﬁeld intensity (lower and upper panels, respectively).
To this end the respective spaces, (sin χ, φ) and (φﬀ , φ),
were divided into cells in which the Fresnel intensity of
transmitted light rays was collected using the ray model
described above.

Superimposing the classical phase space from Fig. 2
on the light distribution in the near ﬁeld (lower panels)
reveals that for all δ light rays leave indeed exclusively
from the high curvature regions. Moreover, the larger δ,
the closer to the critical lines | sin χ| = 1/n are the angles
of incidence prior to transmission. That this is a charac-
teristic property of the underlying classical phase space
becomes even clearer when comparing the signatures in
Fig. 5 with the ﬁngerprint of light rays started at the
high curvature region with near-critical incidence in the
Poincar´e SOS, see the lighter points in Fig. 2.

For δ=0.45, the structure in the emmiting regions is
richer than Fig. 2 would suggest. This is related to the in-
tricate interplay between geometry, trajectory, and Fres-
nel’s law and illustrated in the inset of Fig. 5. To this end
50 rays (marked by white circles and numbered 0) leaving
the cavity in the high intensity region close to the crit-
ical line were followed for the next reﬂections (marked
by numbers, colors and white trajectory are guides for
the eye); those rays emit only little intensity at the ﬁrst
bounces.
Intensity is again emitted refractively at the
next subcritical reﬂections occuring 6 and 7 bounces later
(arrows in inset). The Poincar´e SOS signature of these
bounces is marked by green squares (the other numbers
complete the Poincar´e SOS schematically):
the emer-
gence of the line-like structure in the near ﬁeld Fresnel
intensity (originating at bounce 7) becomes evident (sym-
metry considerations complete the line pattern). Note
that trajectories started in the intensity gaps couple out
refractively after few bounces but not once the steady
phase space distribution is reached.

The upper panels of Fig. 5 show how the near ﬁeld
patterns are translated into the far ﬁelds, the correspon-
dence is evident. Since the FFPs shown in Fig. 4 are
obtained by summing the Fresnel intensities in the upper
panels horizontally (over all φ), we conclude that the ob-
served far-ﬁeld characteristics of (even) the lasing cavity
is intimately connected with, and can nicely be explained

4

by, the classical phase-space structure. Moreover, origin
and evolution of the ﬁne structure of the FFP maxima
in Fig. 4 are easily understood in the representation of
Fig. 5: Each FFP maxima in Fig. 4 consists of two con-
tributions corresponding to light leaving from the two
regions of highest curvature. For 0.45 ≤ δ ≤ 0.8, the two
contributions are separated in φﬀ causing a multipeak-
structure of the FFPs, whereas for the only slightly larger
shape parameter δ = 0.85 they (almost) merge, in excel-
lent agreement with experiment.

Conclusion — We fabricated oval-shaped resonant mi-
crocavity lasers of various shapes, and lasing operation
was successfully established. We showed that the emit-
ted coherent light uniquely reﬂects the characteristics of
the underlying classical phase space. We employed a ray-
based model that allows us to relate the observed peaks in
the FFPs convincingly and unambiguously to the phase-
space structure. In particular we ﬁnd that the formation
of a transversal barrier in the underlying classical phase
space around δ . 0.76 can be detected by coherent light.
We thank Susumu Shinohara and Satoshi Sunada for
helpful discussions. M.H. thanks the group of T.H. for
warm hospitality and support. The work at ATR was
supported in part by the National Institute of informa-
tion and Communication Technology of Japan.

∗

Present address: MPIPKS Dresden, N¨othnitzer Str. 38,
D-01187 Dresden, Germany

[1] For a review of quantum chaos in mesoscopic systems,
see e.g. H.-J. St¨ockmann Quantum Chaos: An introduc-
tion, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999 and
references therein.

[2] L. L. Sohn, L. P. Kouwenhoven, and G. Sch¨on (Editors),
Mesoscopic Electron Transport, Kluver Academic Pub-
lishers, 1997.

[3] A. M. Chang, H. U. Baranger, L. N. Pfeiﬀer, and

K. W. West, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2111 (1994).

[4] H.-J. St¨ockmann and J. Stein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2215
(1990); H. D. Gr¨af et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1296
(1992).

[5] G. Benettin and J.-M. Strelcyn, Phys. Rev. A 17, 773

[6] M. H`enon and J. Wisdom, Physica D 8, 157 (1983).
[7] H. Makino, T. Harayama, and Y. Aizawa, Phys. Rev. E

(1978).

59, 4026 (1999).

[8] This is commensurate with the free spectral range being
about 1/100 of the observed lasing mode line width.
[9] T. Fukushima and T. Harayama, IEEE Journal of Se-
lected Topics in Quantum Electronics 10, 1039 (2004).

[10] H. G. L. Schwefel, N. B. Rex, H. E. Tureci, R. K. Chang,
and A. D. Stone, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21, 923 (2004);
M. Hentschel and M. Vojta, Opt. Lett. 26, 1764 (2001).
[11] We assume transverse electric (TE) polarisation of light

leaving the microcavity.

[12] S.-Y. Lee, J.-W. Ryu, T.-Y. Kwon, S. Rim, and C.-

M. Kim, Phys. Rev. A 72, 061801(R) (2005).

[13] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, Nature 385, 45 (1997).

