6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Surface-wave interferometry on single subwavelength slit-groove structures fabricated
on gold ﬁlms

F. Kalkum∗ and G. Gay, O. Alloschery, J. Weiner
IRSAMC/LCAR
Universit´e Paul Sabatier, 118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse, France

H. J. Lezec
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque, 3, rue Michel-Ange, 75794 Paris cedex 16, France and
Thomas J. Watson Laboratories of Applied Physics,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 USA

Y. Xie, M. Mansuripur
College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721 USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We apply the technique of far-ﬁeld interferometry to measure the properties of surface waves
generated by two-dimensional (2D) single subwavelength slit-groove structures on gold ﬁlms. The
eﬀective surface index of refraction nsurf measured for the surface wave propagating over a distance of
more than 12 µm is determined to be nsurf = 1.016 ± 0.004, to within experimental uncertainty close
to the expected bound surface plasmon-polariton (SPP) value for a Au/Air interface of nspp = 1.018.
We compare these measurements to ﬁnite-diﬀerence-time-domain (FDTD) numerical simulations of
the optical ﬁeld transmission through these devices. We ﬁnd excellent agreement between the
measurements and the simulations for nsurf . The measurements also show that the surface wave
propagation parameter ksurf exhibits transient behavior close to the slit, evolving smoothly from
greater values asymptotically toward kspp over the ﬁrst 2-3 µm of slit-groove distance xsg. This
behavior is conﬁrmed by the FDTD simulations.

PACS numbers: 42.25.Fx. 73.20.Mf. 78.67.-n
Keywords: plasmon; surface wave; nanostructure

I.

INTRODUCTION

∼

≃

Recent measurements [1, 2] have characterized surface waves arising from optical excitation of a series of subwave-
length slit-groove structures fabricated on silver ﬁlms. The amplitude, wavelength and phase of these surface waves
have been measured over a slit-groove distance of a few microns. After an initial rapid amplitude decrease extending
3 µm from the slit edge, the interference fringe persists over several microns with a near-constant amplitude
to
and a contrast
0.3. The “near-zone” of rapidly changing surface wave character indicates initial transient phenom-
ena, while the longer-range “far-zone” settling to constant amplitude and contrast is the signature of a guided mode
8 nm resulted in the
surface plasmon polariton (SPP). The measured interference fringe wavelength λsurf = 814
determination of an eﬀective index of refraction nsurf = 1.047, signiﬁcantly higher than expected from conventional
theory [3], nspp = 1.015. The question naturally arose as to whether this result is simply a consequence of interference
fringe sampling over an interval predominantly in a transient near-zone peculiar to silver ﬁlms, or was related to the
speciﬁc surface properties of the silver ﬁlms deposited on fused silica [4], or may indicate a more generic phenomenon
related to the transient properties of surface waves, generated by subwavelength slits, within 2-3 wavelengths of the
edge of origin. Subsequent investigation of the physical-chemical properties of the silver ﬁlms conﬁrmed that they
were free of surface contaminants, and FDTD simulations showed excellent agreement with the experimental results
in silver ﬁlms [5, 6].

±

In order to explore these surface waves further we have carried out a series of experiments similar to those already
reported but using evaporated gold ﬁlms instead of silver. We performed only “output-side” experiments [1] because
they yield a phase modulated interference fringe less susceptible to noise than the amplitude modulation signal of
the “input-side” experiments [2]. In addition we have compared the measurements to detailed ﬁeld amplitude and

∗Permanent address: Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Bonn, Wegelerstrasse 8, 53115 Bonn, Germany

2

FIG. 1: Diagram showing interfering wavefronts, optical path diﬀerence between Et and Eg, and far-ﬁeld detection. Slit
dimensions are 100 nm width, 20 µm length. Groove dimensions are 100 nm width, 100 nm nominal depth, 20 µm length. The
evaporated gold layer deposited on a 1 mm fused silica substrate has a 400 nm nominal thickness.

FIG. 2: Goniometer setup for measuring far-ﬁeld light intensity and angular distributions. See text for description.

phase maps generated by FDTD numerical solutions [7, 8] to the Maxwell equations in the vicinity of the slit-groove
structure. Both experiments and FDTD simulation show that the surface wave exhibits transient properties in
wavelength and amplitude in the near-zone. This transient behavior can be interpreted in terms of surface modes all
of which dissipate beyond the near-zone except for kspp, the bound surface mode.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The structures were fabricated with a focused ion beam (FIB) station as described previously in [2]. The experiments
were performed on the same home-built goniometer setup used in the silver studies. For convenience, Figs. 1,2 of [1]
are reproduced here to show the principle of the measurement and the schematic arrangement of the apparatus.
Output from a temperature stabilized diode laser source, is modulated at 850 Hz by a mechanical chopper, injected
into a monomode optical ﬁbre, focused and linearly polarized (TM polarization, H-ﬁeld parallel to the slit long axis)
before impinging perpendicularly on the matrix of structures mounted in a sample holder. The beam waist diameter
and confocal parameter of the illuminating source are 300 µm and 33 cm, respectively. The sample holder itself is
ﬁxed to a precision x-y translator, and individual slit-groove structures of the 2-D matrix are successively positioned
at the laser beam waist. A photodiode detector is mounted at the end of a 200 mm rigid arm that rotates about

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

FIG. 3: Left panel: Points are the measured fringe phase ϕ(xsg) as a function of slit-groove distance xsg. The straight-line ﬁt
is ϕ0 = ksurf xsg + ϕint with constant slope ksurf and intercept ϕint. Gap in the data in left and right panels of this ﬁgure and
in the left and right panels of Fig. 4 is due to defective structures in this interval. Right panel: Fringe amplitude η0 ≃ 1/2C as
a function of xsg where C is the interference fringe contrast.

the center of the sample holder. A stepper motor drives the arm at calibrated angular increments of 1.95 mrad per
4 mrad. The photodetector output current passes to a
step, and the overall angular resolution of the goniometer is
lock-in ampliﬁer referenced to the optical chopper wheel. Data are collected on a personal computer that also controls
the goniometer drive.

≃

With the detector rotated perpendicular to the structure plane (θ = 0 in Figs. 1, 2) the expression for the normalized

detected intensity I/I0 as a function of slit-groove distance xsg is given by

where η0 is related to the fringe contrast C through

III. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

A. Measurements

I
I0 ∝

1 + η2

o + 2ηo cos(kxxsg + ϕint)

C =

2ηo
1 + η2
o

In the argument of the cosine term kx = 2π/λeﬀ relates the propagation parameter of the surface wave to the eﬀective
surface wavelength, and the “intrinsic phase” ϕint is any phase contribution not directly due to the propagation path
length xsg. It may be associated with phase shifts at the slit or groove structures. The interferometry measurements
were carried out on 4 separate substrates, each substrate containing about 50 structures in which the the slit-groove
separation was systematically varied from 50 nm to more than 12 µm in increments of 50 nm. The left panel of Fig. 3
plots the measured interference fringe phase against the slit-groove distance xsg. The ﬁtted value for ksurf = 2π/λsurf
determines the eﬀective surface index of refraction nsurf , and extrapolation to zero slit-groove distance xsg determines
the intrinsic phase ϕint. The ﬁt from the left panel of Fig. 3 yields

nsurf =

= 1.016

0.004

and

ϕint = 0.35π

0.01π

±

λ0
λsurf

±

The right panel of Fig. 3 plots η0, the amplitude factor of the interference term in Eq. 1, as a function of slit-groove
distance. From Eq. 2 this amplitude factor can be expressed in terms of the fringe visibility or contrast C as

1

η0 =

−

C2

√1
C

−

1
2

C,

≃

C

1

≪

4

FIG. 4: Left panel: Fringe phase diﬀerence ϕ(xsg) − ϕ0 as a function of slit groove distance xsg. Deviation in the near-zone
from ϕ0 indicates that early, transient fringe oscillation is slightly greater and approaches ϕ0 asymptotically in the far-zone
beyond ∼ 2 µm slit-groove distance. Right panel: Same data as shown in left panel but on an expanded scale of slit-groove
distances to emphasize the curvature in ϕ(xsg) − ϕ0 in the near-zone.

Although the fringe contrast shown in the right panel of Fig. 3 is about a factor of 5 below that measured for silver
structures [1], the same rapid fall-oﬀ in the near-zone, xsg
3 µm, followed by a near-constant contrast beyond is
≃
observed. This contrast behavior is evidence of surface-wave transient phenomena in the near-zone. More evidence of
this transient behavior is shown in left and right panels of Fig. 4 that plot ϕ(x)
ϕ0 vs. xsg, where ϕ0 = ksurf xsg + ϕint
is the best-ﬁt linear trace in the left panel of Fig. 3 over the range of slit-groove distances out to 12 µm. A pronounced
departure from the asymptotic value of ϕ0 is evident in the near-zone of slit groove distances, indicating that the
fringe oscillation frequency is initially somewhat greater than the SPP value and smoothly decreases to it beyond the
near-zone.

−

−

0

B. Numerical simulations

The time-dependent Maxwell equations are solved numerically using an FDTD non-conformal grid reﬁnement

method in Cartesian space coordinates. The methodology is described in greater detail in Refs [7–9].

|

|

Ez
|

Hy
|

Figure 5 shows a ﬁeld map of the z-component of the electric ﬁeld amplitude, and Fig. 6 shows a ﬁeld map of the
y-component of the magnetic ﬁeld amplitude. The
map clearly shows the dipolar charge distribution concentrated
at the corners of the slit on the input and output planes of the structure. These corner charge concentrations result
from currents induced on the input side of the gold ﬁlm by the magnetic ﬁeld components
shown in Fig. 6. The
incident light propagates from below through the fused silica substrate onto the gold ﬁlm and through the 100 nm
wide, 400 nm thick slit. The incident light is TM polarized and the guided mode propagating along the
z direction
within the slit sets up a standing wave resulting in a high
amplitudes at the output plane. The groove is
at the output side of the gold ﬁlm; and, in the simulations depicted, the distance between the center of the slit and
just
the center of the groove is 3.18 µm. The absolute value of the z-component of the electric ﬁeld amplitude
above (or just below) the gold ﬁlm is proportional to the surface charge density at the ﬁlm surface. Note that on the
output side surface, in the region between the groove and the slit, the surface wave excited at the left edge of the
slit travels to the groove, is reﬂected from the groove’s right edge, then interferes with itself. The standing wave is
clearly visible on and near the output side surface. Within the slit, on the vertical walls, Ez is fairly strong as well.
Here, however, Ez is parallel to the metallic surface, and its presence within the skin depth of the slit walls does not
signify the existence of surface charges; instead, the Ez-ﬁeld in this region is responsible for the surface currents that
carry the charges back and forth between the entrance and exit facets of the slit. Figure 6 shows the magnitude of
the magnetic ﬁeld
over the same region as Fig. 5. Interference fringes between the incident and reﬂected beams
on fused silica substrate are clearly visible. Note also the interference fringes between the excited evanescent waves
(mainly SPP) and the incident beam on the entrance facet of the gold ﬁlm adjacent the substrate. Inside the slit,
shows a dark band; this is caused by interference between the upward-moving guided mode within the slit and
Hy
|
the reﬂected, downward-travelling mode.

Hy
|

Hy
|

Ez
|

Ez
|

,
|

±

|

|

|

|

5

FIG. 5: FDTD simulations for slit-groove center-to-center distance of 3.18 µm, slit and groove widths 100 nm, groove depth
100 nm and gold ﬁlm thickness 400 nm. Map shows |Ez|, z-components (perpendicular to input and output facets) of the
electric ﬁeld amplitude in the vicinity of the input and output surfaces.

FIG. 6: FDTD simulations for slit-groove center-to-center distance of 3.18 µm, slit and groove widths 100 nm, groove depth
100 nm and gold ﬁlm thickness 400 nm. Map shows |Hy|, y-components (parallel to the slit and groove long axis) of the
magnetic ﬁeld amplitude in the vicinity of the input and output surfaces.

In addition to the electric and magnetic ﬁeld components Ez, Hy at the surface, the light transmission eﬃciency
in the z direction through the slit as a function of slit-groove distance xsg was calculated and is shown in Fig. 7.
The transmission eﬃciency T is deﬁned as the ratio of the z-component of the Poynting vector Sout
on the output
side, integrated over x, to the total energy ﬂux incident on the slit Sin
The red trace plots the transmission
z .
eﬃciency T = Sout
z as a function of xsg at the output plane. As expected the transmission eﬃciency exhibits
pronounced oscillations with a rapid decrease in amplitude in the near-zone followed by a constant amplitude oscillation
In the far-zone the blue trace ﬁts the oscillations to a single cosine function,
out to 6 µm, the calculation limit.
xsg + ϕfdtd
. These oscillations, as can be seen in Figs. 5 and 6, arise from the superposition of waves
cos
int
launched from the slit and back reﬂected at the groove. Because these waves are counterpropagating along x, rather
than copropagating along z, the intensity fringe frequency is twice the fringe frequency of the far-ﬁeld interferometry
results expressed by Eq. 1. This standing wave at the output plane results in

kfdtd
surf ·

z /Sin

(cid:1)(cid:3)

2

(cid:0)

(cid:2)

z

T = Sout

z /Sin

z ∝

2

1 + cos 2

kfdtd
surf ·

xsg + ϕfdtd
int

= 2

1 + cos 2 [ϕ (xsg)]
}
{

(5)

Taking into account this factor of two in the argument of the cos term, the fringe oscillation in the asymptotic far-
zone is in good agreement with measurement and the expected SPP. In the near-zone the oscillation ϕ (xsg) exhibits
a deﬁnite “chirp,” and Fig. 8 plots the deviation from the asymptotic value ϕ0 as function of xsg. Comparing Fig. 8
to Fig. 4 we see that the FDTD results accord well with deviations in the interferometric fringes measured in the far-
ﬁeld.

(cid:2)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:3)

6

FIG. 7: FDTD calculations of the transmission eﬃciency T = Sout
z as a function of xsg. Red curve traces T , and the
blue curve traces a cos `2kfdtd
surf · xsg + ϕfdtd
int ´ ﬁt to the oscillation in the asymptotic region. Note the decreasing transmission
amplitude in the near-zone close to the slit edge and the higher oscillation frequency compared to the asymptotic harmonic
wave. Best-ﬁt values for λfdtd

surf = 839 nm and intrinsic phase ϕfdtd

surf = 2π/kfdtd

int = 0.55π rad.

z /Sin

FIG. 8: Phase diﬀerence ϕ(xsg) − ϕ0 as a function of xsg, analogous to the right panel of Fig. 4 but derived from the FDTD
simulation data. Residual “high frequency” oscillations in the phase diﬀerence, believed to be due to numeric artifacts in the
FDTD results, have been smoothed.

IV. DISCUSSION

A. Surface wave in the far-zone

The index of refraction for the bound surface-plasmon-polariton nspp is given by the Raether formula [3]

nspp =

ǫmǫd
ǫm + ǫd

(6)

r
where ǫm and ǫd are the real parts of the dielectric constants of metal and dielectric at the interface on which the
surface wave propagates. Interpolation of reﬂectivity data for gold [10] at 852 nm yields ǫAu =
28.82 and from Eq. 6
the surface index of refraction for the surface plasmon polariton at the gold-air interface is ǫspp = 1.018. The measured
surface index of refraction reported here, to within experimental uncertainty and in the far-zone, is in accord with
the SPP prediction. The results from the FDTD calculations are also in agreement with the experimental results
and the SPP predictions. It appears therefore that in the far-zone, for both silver/air and gold/air surfaces, far-ﬁeld
interferometry and FDTD calculations show that the surviving long-range surface wave is indeed the expected bound

−

7

nspp
1.018
1.016
1.015
1.015
1.015

(7)

surface plasmon polariton. Table I summarizes the relevant parameters, far-ﬁeld interferometric measurements, and
ﬁnite-diﬀerence-time-dependent (FDTD) numerical simulations for gold and silver.

TABLE I: Summary of λsurf , nsurf and nspp determined from far-ﬁeld interferometric studies and FDTD simulations in gold
and silver

Au, Ref. [11]
Au, Ref. [12]
Ag, Ref. [13]
Ag, Ref. [14]
Ag, Ref. [15]

ǫm
−28.32
−31.62
−33.27
−33.27
−33.98

λsurf
839 ± 6 nm
839 nm
819 ± 8 nm
814 ± 8 nm
837 nm

nsurf
1.016 ± 0.004
1.016
1.04 ± 0.01
1.05 ± 0.01
1.017

B. Surface wave in the near-zone

In the near-zone both experiment and numerical simulation show that the surface wave deviates from pure SPP
behavior. The eﬀective propagation parameter kx, originating near the slit edge, appears greater than kspp and
evolves smoothly to the bound mode over the near-zone interval of a few microns. This behavior may be interpreted
either in terms of initial excitation of a composite evanescent surface “wave packet” in k-space at the slit edge [16],
followed by subsequent decay of all surface modes except the bound kspp mode or in terms of detailed ﬁeld matching
at the boundaries within the slit and near the slit edges [17]. These two points of view both invoke evanescent modes
kx
kspp in order to satisfy boundary conditions in the vicinity of the slit edge, but standard wave-guide theory
dictates that only the SPP mode is stable against phonon coupling to the bulk metal or to radiative decay. We can
estimate the the surface distance over which the dissipation occurs by appealing to the standard Drude model of a
metal that expresses the frequency dependence of the dielectric constant ǫ(ω) in terms of the bulk plasmon resonance
ωp and a damping constant Γ.

≥

ǫ(ω) = ǫ0

ǫ∞

 

−

ω2
p
ω2 + iΓω !

) is the dimensionless inﬁnite frequency limit of the
In Eq. 7 ǫ0 is the permittivity of free space and ǫ∞ = ǫ(ω
dielectric constant. The Drude model is based on a damped harmonic oscillator model of an electron plasma in which
the electrons oscillate about positive ion centers with characteristic frequency ωp, subject to a phenomenological
1014 s−1, and
damping rate Γ, normally assumed to be due to electron-phonon coupling. Values for Γ are typically
108 ms−1
1014 s−1. For a wave propagating on the surface with group velocity
3
in fact for Au the value is 1.02
the expected decay length

3 µm, consistent with the measurements and FDTD simulations.

→ ∞

∼
≃

×

×

In summary the picture that emerges from far-ﬁeld interferometry and FDTD simulation studies of these simple
slit-groove structures on silver and gold ﬁlms is that in the near-zone of slit-groove distances, on the order of a few
wavelengths, the surface wave consists of a composite of several evanescent modes all of which dissipate within this
near-zone. Only the bound, stable SPP mode survives into the far-zone, and in the studies reported here we have
observed essentially constant SPP amplitude out to 12 µm, a distance limited only by our fabricated structures.
Earlier measurements [2] indicate that absorption and surface roughness scattering should permit propagation lengths
as far as

100 µm.

80

≃

∼

−

Acknowledgments

Support from the Minist`ere d´el´egu´e `a l’Enseignement sup´erieur et `a la Recherche under the programme ACI-
“Nanosciences-Nanotechnologies,” the R´egion Midi-Pyr´en´ees [SFC/CR 02/22], and FASTNet [HPRN-CT-2002-
00304] EU Research Training Network, is gratefully acknowledged. F.K. gratefullly acknowledges support from the
Deutsche Telekom Stiftung. Facilities of the Caltech Kavli Nanoscience Institute are also gratefully acknowledged.

8

[1] G. Gay, O. Alloschery, B. Viaris de Lesegno, J. Weiner, and H. Lezec, “Surface Wave Generation and Propagation on
Metallic Subwavelength Structures Measured by Far-Field Interferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 213901-1–4 (2006).

[2] G. Gay, O. Alloschery, B. Viaris de Lesegno, C. O’Dwyer, J. Weiner and H. J. Lezec, “The optical response of nanostructured

surfaces and the composite diﬀracted evanescent wave model,” Nature Phys. 2, 262-267 (2006).

[3] H. Raether,Surface Plasmons on Smooth and Rough Surfaces and on Gratings, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988).
[4] P. Lalanne and J. P. Hugonin, “Interaction between optical nano-objects at metallo-dielectric interfaces,” Nature Phys. 2,

551-556 (2006).

[5] G. Gay, O. Alloschery, J. Weiner, H. J. Lezec, C. O’Dwyer, M. Sukharev, and T. Seideman, “Analysis of surface waves

generated on subwavelength-structured silver ﬁlms,” http://arXiv.org:physics/0608116 v2 (2006).

[6] G. Gay, O. Alloschery, J. Weiner, H. J. Lezec, C. O’Dwyer, M. Sukharev, and T. Seideman, “The Response of Nanostruc-

tured Surfaces in the Near Field,” Nature Phys. 2, xxx (2006).

[7] Y. Xie, A. Zakharian, J. Moloney, and M. Mansuripur, “Transmission of light through slit apertures in metallic ﬁlms,”

[8] Y. Xie, A. Zakharian, J. Moloney, and M. Mansuripur, “Transmission of light through a periodic array of slits in a thick

Opt. Express 12, 6106-6121 (2004).

metallic ﬁlm,” Opt. Express 13, 4485-4491 (2005).

12, 2631-2648 (2004).

[9] A. Zakharian, J. Moloney, and M. Mansuripur, “Transmission of light through small elliptical apertures,” Opt. Express

[10] P. Johnson and R. Christy, “Optical Constants of the Noble Metals,” Phys. Rev. B 6, 4370-4379 (1972).
[11] Present experimental results. Value of nsurf determined from data in the far-zone
[12] Present FDTD simulations. Value of nsurf determined from FDTD simulations in the far-zone
[13] Measurements from Ref. [1] predominantly in the transient near-zone.
[14] Measurements from Ref. [2] predominantly in the transient near-zone.
[15] Value of nsurf determined from FDTD simulations of Refs. [5, 6] in the far-zone.
[16] H. J. Lezec and T. Thio, “Diﬀracted evanescent wave model for enhanced and suppressed optical transmission through

subwavelength hole arrays,” Opt. Express 12, 3629-3651 (2004).

[17] Y. Xie, A. R. Zakharian, J. V. Moloney, and M. Mansuripur, “Transmission of light through periodic arrays of sub-

wavelength slits in metallic hosts,” Opt. Express 14, 6400-6413 (2004).

