6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
2
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards absolute calibration of optical tweezers

N. B. Viana,1, 2 M. S. Rocha,3 O. N. Mesquita,3 A. Mazolli,2 P. A. Maia Neto,1, 2 and H. M. Nussenzveig1, 2
1LPO-COPEA, Instituto de Ciˆencias Biom´edicas,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-590, Brazil
2Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
Caixa Postal 68528, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-972, Brazil
3Departamento de F´ısica, ICEx, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Caixa Postal 702, Belo Horizonte, MG, 31270-901, Brazil
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Aiming at absolute force calibration of optical tweezers, following a critical review of proposed the-
oretical models, we present and test the results of MDSA (Mie-Debye-Spherical Aberration) theory,
an extension of a previous (MD) model, taking account of spherical aberration at the glass/water
interface. This ﬁrst-principles theory is formulated entirely in terms of experimentally accessible
parameters (none adjustable). Careful experimental tests of the MDSA theory, undertaken at two
laboratories, with very diﬀerent setups, are described. A detailed description is given of the pro-
cedures employed to measure laser beam waist, local beam power at the transparent microspheres
trapped by the tweezers, microsphere radius and the trap transverse stiﬀness, as a function of radius
and height in the (inverted microscope) sample chamber. We ﬁnd generally very good agreement
with MDSA theory predictions, for a wide size range, from the Rayleigh domain to large radii,
including the values most often employed in practice, and at diﬀerent chamber heights, both with
objective overﬁlling and underﬁlling. The results asymptotically approach geometrical optics in the
mean over size intervals, as they should, and this already happens for size parameters not much
larger than unity. MDSA predictions for the trapping threshold, position of stiﬀness peak, stiﬀness
variation with height, multiple equilibrium points and ‘hopping’ eﬀects among them are veriﬁed. Re-
maining discrepancies are ascribed to focus degradation, possibly arising from objective aberrations
in the infrared, not yet included in MDSA theory.

PACS numbers: 87.80.Cc, 07.60.-j,87.80.-y

I.

INTRODUCTION

Optical tweezers have become invaluable tools for mea-
suring forces and displacements at the single molecule
level in cell biology [1]. Transparent microspheres are
employed as handles and force transducers. In the usual
domain of application, the trapping force is well described
by Hooke’s law, so that force calibration amounts to de-
termining the trap stiﬀness. Commonly applied methods
rely on comparisons with ﬂuid drag forces or on the de-
tection of thermal ﬂuctuation features [2].

Absolute calibration should be based on a theoretical
expression for the stiﬀness in terms of measurable pa-
rameters. In the most widely employed optical tweezer
setup, an incident TEM00 laser beam of vacuum wave-
length λ, typically around 1µm, is focused by a high nu-
merical aperture oil immersion objective of an inverted
microscope through a glass slide onto a transparent mi-
crosphere immersed in water inside a sample chamber.
One ﬁnds that high trapping eﬃciency requires a beam
waist that slightly overﬁlls the objective. The radius a
of the microsphere usually ranges between 0.1λ and 10λ.
Thus, an accurate theoretical model should ideally satisfy
several requirements:

(i) It should realistically model the strongly focused
laser beam produced by the objective. Since most micro-
scope objectives are corrected for the visible, there may
be objective aberrations to account for in the infrared.

(ii) With oil immersion, the index discontinuity be-

tween the glass slide and the water gives rise to spher-
ical aberration, which degrades the focus and must be
included in the beam description.

(iii) The direct interaction between the focused beam
and the microsphere spans the full range between
Rayleigh scattering and the ray optics limit, so that it
should be described in terms of Mie scattering.

(iv) At the upper end of the range of microsphere radii,
the results should approach the ray optics approximation.
However, as is typical of “semiclassical” approximations
[3], this is not to be understood as a pointwise limit, but
rather as a size average over rapid interference oscilla-
tions.

(v) The directly scattered beam undergoes multiple
reﬂections between the microsphere and the walls of the
sample chamber (reverberation). Usually, only the glass
slide may be close enough to have a possibly signiﬁcant
eﬀect.

A brief critical review of proposed theoretical models,

as far as possible in chronological order, follows.

A ray-optics model was formulated by Ashkin [4] from
preliminary results derived by Roosen [5]. It did not take
into account that high numerical aperture objectives are
designed to satisfy the Abbe sine condition, which was
later incorporated into the model by Gu et al. [6].

A widely employed wave-theoretical model is based on
so-called GLMT (Generalized Lorentz-Mie Theory), de-
veloped by Gouesbet et al. [7]. The laser beam is rep-
resented by an attempted improvement on the parax-

≫

ial Gaussian TEM00 model, including ﬁfth-order correc-
tions in powers of the ratio between wavelength and beam
waist [8]. However, it has been shown [9] that such an
approximation does not correctly represent the ﬁeld near
the focus of a high NA objective.

A new approach was taken by Tlusty et al. [10]. They
proposed to approximate the trapping force by the gra-
dient of the dipole interaction energy integrated over the
trapped particle, taken with respect to an unperturbed
incident Gaussian beam around the focal point. This
leads to a Gaussian fall-oﬀ of the transverse stiﬀness as
λ, a result that is incompati-
a function of a for a
ble with the hyperbolic fall-oﬀ implied by dimensional
arguments [11], and which is reﬂected in the large incon-
sistency they ﬁnd with experimental data in this region.
Already in Ashkin’s work [4] it was remarked that the
proper wave description of a highly convergent beam is
not a Gaussian, but rather the electromagnetic gener-
alization [12] of Debye’s classic exact scalar representa-
tion formulated by Richards and Wolf. This representa-
tion, with proper accounting for the sine condition, was
adopted by Maia Neto and Nussenzveig [11] to evaluate
the axial trapping force, with scattering described by Mie
theory. The force at the geometrical focus shows rapid
near-sinusoidal oscillations, accounted for by a simple in-
terferometer picture. The axial stiﬀness approaches the
Rayleigh limit for ka
1 (k = 2πn1/λ is the wavenum-
ber in the sample region, of index n1) and shows at-
1, with size
tenuated interference oscillations for ka
average approaching the ray optics result.

≪

≫

In a new treatment by Rohrbach and Stelzer [13], an
angular spectrum (Fourier) representation of the incident
beam [14] analogous to the Richards-Wolf representation
is employed. However, instead of the exact Mie theory,
they extend the approach of Tlusty et al. by splitting
the trapping force into a gradient force and a scatter-
ing force. The gradient force is given by an expression
similar to that of Tlusty et al. (apart from the modiﬁed
incident beam). The scattering force is obtained in the
Rayleigh-Gans approximation, in terms of extinction and
scattering eﬃciencies. While the result would suﬀer from
a similar incompatibility with the ray optics limit, this
problem does not arise, because use of the Rayleigh-Gans
approximation already restricts the domain of applicabil-
ity to the range

2(n2 −
where n2 is the refractive index of the sphere.

n1)a <∼ λ

(1)

The MD theory was extended to transverse trapping
forces by Mazolli et al.
It was explicitly demon-
[15].
strated that the exact partial-wave result approaches the
ray optics one for large ka, in the sense of a size aver-
age, as it should. Besides the transverse trap stiﬀness,
the equilibrium position with an external applied force
and the maximum transverse force were also evaluated,
taking due account of the interplay between axial and
transverse equilibrium. As remarked by Merenda et al.
[16], it is the only wave-theoretical treatment where this

2

eﬀect was correctly incorporated in the evaluation. Only
a few experimental points were available for comparisons,
and discrepancies were attributed to the eﬀects of spher-
ical aberration at the water/glass slide interface [eﬀect
(ii) above], not included in the MD theory.

A recent contribution by Rohrbach [17] does not prop-
erly refer to optical tweezers, but to a proposed new in-
strument, the photonic force microscope [18], which em-
ploys an upright microscope with a water-immersion ob-
jective, thereby avoiding this spherical aberration eﬀect.
The theory is the same as in Ref. [13], and therefore
it is also inconsistent with the ray-optic limit, although
the author asserts that it delivers reasonable results even
when condition (1) is not satisﬁed.

An improved version of MD theory, including the ef-
fects of spherical aberration at the water/glass slide in-
terface, denoted as MDSA theory and described in Sec.
II, was experimentally tested and the results were brieﬂy
reported by Viana et al. [19]. The present work is a de-
tailed presentation and discussion of these results.

II. MDSA THEORY

The eﬀect on a focused beam of spherical aberra-
tion produced by refraction at the interface between two
transparent media on a focused beam, extending the
Richards-Wolf solution, has been treated by T¨or¨ok et al.
[20]. We follow the same procedure to incorporate this
eﬀect into the MD theory. Since the refractive index n of
the glass slide is larger than the refractive index n1 of the
water in the sample chamber, part of the incident beam
angular spectrum of plane waves may exceed the critical
angle. However, we shall neglect possible contributions
from evanescent waves, expected to be negligible at dis-
tances from the interface larger than the wavelength, as
will be assumed. Thus, for each plane wave component
of the incident beam, the transmission amplitude is

T (θ) =

2 cos θ
cos θ + N cos θ1

,

(2)

where N = n1/n, θ is the angle between the wavevector
component k and the z-axis at the glass slide, and θ1 =
arcsin(sin θ/N ) is the corresponding angle in the sample
chamber [21].

The refraction also (and more importantly) modiﬁes
the phases of the diﬀerent plane-wave components of the
laser beam. This is quantiﬁed by the spherical aberration
function [20]

Ψ(z, θ) = k

cos θ + N (L + z) cos θ1

,

(3)

(cid:21)

L
N

−

(cid:20)

where L is the distance between the interface and the
paraxial focal plane (Fig. 1).

The position of the center of the sphere with respect to
the paraxial focus is (ρ, φ, z) in cylindrical coordinates.

In the absence of the interface (N = 1), A coincides with
2γ2 sin θ0) deﬁned in Refs. [11]
the ﬁlling factor 1
and [15].

exp(

−

−

Additional transmission losses through the objective,
if any, must be taken into account to evaluate the ac-
tual power P at the sample (rather than the power at
the entrance aperture) Investigation of the microscope
objective employed in the present work has revealed that
its transmittance at the infrared laser wavelength is not
radially uniform [23]. This aﬀects not only the power,
but also the intensity gradients in the sample region. The
objective transmission amplitude can be accurately mod-
eled by a Gaussian function:

Tobj(θ) = TA exp

f 2 sin2 θ
4ξ2

,

(cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

where TA is the axial transmittance amplitude, and ξ
is a length scale characterizing the objective for a given
wavelength. This eﬀect can readily be incorporated in
terms of an eﬀective reduced beam waist weﬀ given by

1
w2
eﬀ

=

1
w2 +

1
4ξ2 .

Q =

F
n1P/c

,

3

(6)

(7)

(8)

FIG. 1: Schematic representation of the dielectric microsphere
(radius a) in the water solution. The paraxial focus F corre-
sponds to the intersection of paraxial rays. Non-paraxial rays,
not represented for clarity, intersect the symmetry z-axis be-
tween F and the glass-water plane interface, which is at a
distance L from the paraxial focal plane. The microsphere
position is measured with respect to F.

For simplicity, we take circular polarization. In this case,
the optical potential does not depend on φ. With respect
to the ideal case considered in Ref. [15], the multipole
coeﬃcients of the incident beam are modiﬁed by multi-
plying each plane-wave component by T (θ)eiΨ(z,θ) :

θ0

0
Z

×

dj
m,1(θ1) Jm−1(kρ sin θ) eiΨ(z,θ),

Gjm =

dθ sin θ√cos θ exp(

γ2 sin2 θ) T (θ)

(4)

in the usual way [4]:

−

We represent the optical force by an eﬃciency factor

where dj
m,m′(θ) are the matrix elements of ﬁnite rota-
tions [22], and Jm are the Bessel functions of integer or-
der. The parameter γ = f /w is the ratio of the focal
length to the beam waist at the entrance aperture of the
objective (not at the sample). It determines the fraction
of available beam power that ﬁlls the objective aperture
(ﬁlling factor [4]). The fraction of available power trans-
mitted into the sample chamber is given by

A = 16γ2

ds s exp(

2γ2s2)

−

sin θ0

0
Z

(1

s2) (N 2

−
s2 + √N 2

−

s2)

2 .

s2
(5)

−

(cid:1)

√1
p

−

(cid:0)

where P is the local laser power at the sample and c is the
velocity of light. The evaluation of the trapping force in
terms of a partial-wave series is similar to that described
in [15]. We derive two separate contributions: Q = Qs +
Qe. Qe represents the rate of removal of momentum from
the incident beam. Its axial component is

Qez =

4γ2
A N

Re

j,m
X

(2j + 1)(aj + bj)Gj,mG′

∗,

j,m

(9)

where j ranges from one to inﬁnity and m ranges from
j to j, the star denotes complex conjugation, aj and bj
−
are the Mie coeﬃcients [24], Gj,m is given by Eq. (4) and

G′

j,m =

dθ sin θ√cos θ cos θ1 exp(

γ2 sin2 θ) T (θ) dj

m,1(θ1) Jm−1(kρ sin θ) eiΨ(z).

(10)

−

θ0

0

Z

The transverse components in cylindrical coordinates are

Qeρ =

Im

2γ2
A N

j,m
X

(2j + 1)(aj + bj)Gj,m(G(−)

G(+)

∗
j,m−1)

,

j,m+1 −

(11)

and

with

Qeϕ =

2γ2
A N

−

Re

j,m
X

(2j + 1)(aj + bj)Gj,m(G(−)

j,m+1 + G(+)

j,m−1)∗,

G

±
j,m =

dθ sin θ√cos θ sin θ1 exp(

γ2 sin2 θ) T (θ) dj

m±1,1(θ1) Jm−1(kρ sin θ) eiΨ(z).

−

θ0

0
Z

4

(12)

(13)

unit local power as functions of microsphere radius and
height in the sample chamber. Aiming at absolute cali-
bration, we propose to make a blind comparison between
theory and experiment, with no ﬁtting parameter. Hence
the relevant trap parameters, such as the power P at the
sample and the beam waist w at the entrance aperture
of the objective, were measured directly, and the result-
ing values were plugged into the MDSA model. When-
ever possible, two diﬀerent techniques were employed for
measuring each parameter, and the results were checked
against each other for consistency. The experiments were
performed independently at UFMG lab and COPEA lab,
reproducibly at intervals of several months.

The two labs employed very diﬀerent setups, represen-
tative of those most often found in practice. Fig. 2 is
a schematic drawing of the Diode Laser Setup (DLS),
employed at UFMG lab.

Qs represents minus the rate of momentum transfer
to the scattered ﬁeld. Its components are given in the
Appendix.

In this paper, we are particularly interested in the ax-
ial component (in order to derive the trapping threshold
and the stable equilibrium positions, if any), and in the
transverse trapping stiﬀness

κ⊥ =

n1P
c

∂Qρ
∂ρ

−

where the derivative is taken at the equilibrium position
zeq, which lies along the z-axis (ρ = 0). To obtain κ⊥, we
ﬁrst perform termwise diﬀerentiation of the partial-wave
series for Qρ and then perform the summation numeri-
cally. Similarly, zeq is computed numerically as the root
of Qz(zeq) = 0. When multiple equilibrium positions are
found, we take the most stable root, corresponding to the
deepest potential well.

The distance L between the interface and the parax-
ial focus in Eq. (3) is not experimentally accessible. In
the experiments, the (inverted) microscope objective is
ﬁrst moved down until the trapped microsphere just
touches the interface, and then the desired height in
the sample chamber is obtained by moving up the ob-
jective through a known distance d (for additional ex-
perimental details, see next section). In order to mimic
the experimental conditions, we adopt the following pro-
cedure. We ﬁrst compute the critical distance Lc for
which the equilibrium position is such that the sphere
touches the interface, by numerically solving the equa-
tion Qz(zeq = a
Lc) = 0 for Lc. This determines the
paraxial focal plane for the initial conﬁguration. By mov-
ing up the objective through a distance d, the paraxial
focal plane is displaced by N d. Accordingly, we evalu-
ate the equilibrium position and the transverse stiﬀness
taking

−

L = Lc + N d.

III. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

FIG. 2: Schematic representation of the diode laser setup
(DLS).

A. Experimental setups

The most important force calibration data for practical
applications are the values of the transverse stiﬀness per

A Nikon TE300 inverted optical microscope (inﬁnity
corrected) with 100X N.A. 1.4 Plan Apo CFI objec-
tive is employed for trapping, microsphere observation
and scattered light collection. To one port is attached

a CCD camera (CCD-72 DAGE-MTI) for visualization;
in the other port, we use a photodetector (EGG - Pho-
ton Counting Module, SPCM-200-PQ-F500), with col-
lection diameter of 150 µm, mounted in Newport XY
stages for precise positioning. The photodetector deliv-
ers TTL pulses ready to be fed into a Brookhaven BI-
9000AT digital correlator. An infrared (IR) diode laser
(SDL, 5422-H1) operating at 832nm is used for trapping.
A He-Ne laser (SP-127), operating at 632.8nm, is the
scattering probe. A 20nm width line ﬁlter is placed in
front of the photodetector to eliminate IR and any light
other than that of the He-Ne laser. A half-wave plate
and polarizers are used to control the intensity and po-
larization of the He-Ne incident and scattered light. A
motor (m) is connected to mirror M1, which drives the
IR beam onto the objective. The purpose of this mo-
tor is to move the IR beam and, consequently, move the
trapped bead in relation to the ﬁxed He-Ne laser beam,
to obtain the backscattering proﬁle. By determining the
backscattering proﬁle and measuring the backscattered
light intensity autocorrelation function (ACF), one can
obtain the decay time of the Brownian position ﬂuctua-
tions, and ﬁnally get the trap stiﬀness. This procedure
is described in detail by Viana et al. [25].

The YAG Laser Setup (YLS), employed at COPEA
lab, is shown in Fig. 3. The YAG laser beam is expanded

5

is used to get precise positioning (1 µm accuracy). We
use a CCD camera (Hamamatsu C2400) to observe the
samples. In front of the CCD is placed a line ﬁlter that
blocks light at the wavelength 1.064 µm, to prevent scat-
tered and reﬂected laser light from entering the view ﬁeld.
The signal from the CCD is fed to a Scion Digital Frame
Grabber. The digitized images are analyzed with the
NIH ImageJ program.

B. Measurement of beam waist

To test MDSA theory, it is not necessary to measure
the waist at the sample region, which is not an input
parameter. On the other hand, the beam waist at the
entrance aperture of the objective (or more generally the
beam transverse intensity proﬁle) is an important theo-
retical ingredient, which was measured independently by
two diﬀerent techniques: the CCD and the diaphragm
methods.

In the CCD method, the objective of the microscope
is removed and the sample is replaced by a mirror. After
taking oﬀ the line ﬁlter, the reﬂected beam is imaged by
the CCD. To get a ruler calibration, we ﬁrst increase the
laser power so as to saturate the image and obtain a good
deﬁnition of the diaphragm border, and then we mea-
sure the corresponding diaphragm aperture (see Fig. 3).
Fig. 4 shows an image of the expanded YAG beam (10
mm diameter) and Fig. 5 shows the radial intensity pro-
ﬁle obtained from Fig. 4. The intensity proﬁle is ﬁtted
to a Gaussian function,

I(ρ) = I0e

2
− ρ
2σ2 .

(14)

The beam waist radius is w = 2σ.
From the ﬁt we get σYLS = 2.3

0.2 mm for the YAG
beam. The error bar was obtained from the statistics
of ﬁve experiments performed over a period of one year.
The same method was applied to the diode laser beam,
yielding σDLS = 1.1

0.1 mm.

±

±

FIG. 3: Schematic representation of the YAG laser setup
(YLS).

by the lenses L1 and L2 to a diameter of 10mm. The mi-
croscope and objective are the same model as in the DLS
setup. The expanded beam is led to the objective by mir-
rors M1 and M2. Before the microscope epi-illumination
port a diaphragm D is employed to control the beam
radius. The microscope stage is moved by step motors
in the x and y directions, and a Prior motion controller

FIG. 4: YAG laser beam image.

In the diaphragm method, we vary the diaphragm
aperture R and measure, as a function of R, the transmit-
ted laser power P (R). With the Gaussian beam proﬁle

6

C. Measurement of power at the objective focus

To measure local power at the sample for the DLS
setup, two diﬀerent methods were used: the dual objec-
tive method [26] and a mercury microbolometer method
[27].

Fig. 7 schematizes the dual objective method. On top
of the microscope stage, with the inverted objective be-
low, is mounted a second, identical objective, in the up-
right position. PE is the power at the entrance of the
inverted objective, and Pout is the power transmitted by
the compound system. The transmittance is assumed the
same for both objectives. The objectives are positioned
using three Newport actuators and the microscope stage
in order to get a collimated beam emerging from the sec-
ond objective, coaxial with the beam entering the ﬁrst
objective.

FIG. 7:
method.

Schematic representation of the dual objective

From PE and Pout we obtain a value for the overall
transmittance of the compound system. However, care
must be taken, since the objective transmittance in the
infrared is usually not uniform: it is smaller for rays at
larger distances from the axis (corresponding to larger
angles in the sample region) [23]. Thus, the root-mean-
square overall transmittance overestimates the average
objective transmittance and the power at the sample (see
Ref. [23] for details).

The Gaussian transmission amplitude model (6) yields

the transmittance function (with ρ = f sin θ)

tobj(ρ) = tA exp

(16)

ρ2
2ξ2

,

(cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

where tA = T 2

A represents the axial transmittance [28].

Table I shows the measured values for the parame-
ters deﬁning the Gaussian transmittance function (16),
for the YLS and DLS laser wavelengths. The entrance

FIG. 5: Beam waist measurement with the CCD method:
YAG beam intensity variation in the transverse plane. The
Gaussian ﬁtting (solid line) yields σYLS = 2.3 ± 0.2mm.

ﬁt, we have

P (R) = Pt

1
(cid:18)

−

− R

2
2σ2

e

,

(cid:19)

(15)

where Pt is the total power of the beam incident on the
diaphragm.

Fig. 6 is a plot of P (R) for the YAG laser. Adjust-
ing the measured values to (15), we found a beam half-
waist σY LS = 2.1
0.2 mm. Here again, the error bar
was obtained from the statistics of ﬁve experiments per-
formed over a period of one year. Applying the same
method to the diode laser we found a beam half waist
σDLS = 1.3
0.1mm. Therefore, the two methods agree
±
to within the error bars.

±

Beam waist measurement with the diaphragm
FIG. 6:
method: variation of transmitted power versus diaphragm ra-
dius R for the YAG beam.

TABLE I: Parameters characterizing the Gaussian transmit-
tance function given by Eq. (6), for two diﬀerent wavelengths.
tA is the axial transmittance, and ξ is the transverse length
scale associated to the transmittance radial variation.

DLS (λ = 0.832 µm)
YLS (λ = 1.064 µm)

tA
0.53 ± 0.01
0.31 ± 0.01

ξ (mm)
2.2 ± 0.1
3.3 ± 0.1

aperture radii of the objectives were 3.5 mm for both
the DLS and the YLS. From these values and the laser
beam waists at the entrance port, we computed the av-
erage objective transmittance t for each setup. We found
t = 0.20
0.03 for the
DLS. As expected, both values are below the respective
axial transmittances shown in Table I. To evaluate the
error bars, we considered the propagation of the errors
in the measured beam half waists.

0.02 for the YLS, and t = 0.45

±

±

The value for the DLS setup was checked with the
help of a mercury microbolometer method [27]. The mi-
crobolometer, inserted into the DLS setup, consists of a
standard Corning microscope glass slide (thickness 170
µm), with an O-ring of 1cm diameter and 0.5cm height
glued onto it, ﬁlled with water and containing mercury
droplets with sizes in the µm range. Since we use an oil
immersion objective, the microbolometer does not have
any glass-air interface. Moreover, the oil refractive in-
dex (1.496) being very close to the glass refractive index
(1.51), we can ignore refraction at this interface in the
analysis. Since the typical radii of the mercury droplets
are in the micrometer range, each droplet may be mod-
elled as a sphere embedded within two semi-inﬁnite me-
dia (Fig. 8).

FIG. 8: Schematic representation of the microbolometer.

The incident laser beam is focused by the objective
onto the mercury bead, heating it. A steady-state situa-
tion is achieved in a time scale of the order of 1 second.
The mercury heat conductivity is about 13 times larger
than the water conductivity. Therefore, temperature at
the surface of the mercury droplet remains constant for
a given laser power. The laser power is then slowly in-
creased until the mercury bead jumps. This occurs when
its surface temperature reaches the boiling point of water
(Tb = 97.2oC at the laboratory), making the determina-
tion of this point very easy and accurate. Knowing the

7

mercury droplet radius, the heat conductivities of the
medium (κ1 = 0.6791 W/mK for 100oC) and glass slide
(κ2 = 9.43 W/mK for 100oC), the absorption coeﬃcient
of mercury for the laser wavelength used (Abs = 0.272),
one can determine the local laser power P. The objec-
tive transmittance is obtained by measuring the mercury
droplet radius as a function of the input power producing
the ‘jump’ (see [27] for details). We found t = 0.40
0.04,
in agreement with the dual-objective result within error
bars.

±

D. Measurement of bead radius

A thorough test of MDSA theory requires covering a
broad range of microsphere radii. Precision calibrated
commercial beads are available only for a restricted size
range. The DLS setup employs uncalibrated immersion
oil droplets in de-ionized water, produced by a sonicator,
yielding an almost continuous range of sizes, from sub-
micrometers to tens of micrometers. The radius of the
droplets employed for testing needs to be directly mea-
sured.

Up to a few µm, diﬀraction precludes reliable size de-
termination by videomicroscopy. To measure radii in the
range from 0.5 to 2.5 µm, we employed an alternative
method, based on the properties of the free Brownian
motion performed by the beads when the optical trap is
turned oﬀ. We infer the hydrodynamic drag coeﬃcient β
from the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D by using the Einstein re-
lation, and then obtain the radius from Faxen’s extension
of Stokes’s law [2].

To check the method, we ﬁrst applied it to a deionized

water solution of polystyrene spheres of radius a = 1.52
±
0.03µm. A 10−4% solution is placed within a chamber
built from an O-ring with
0.3 cm
width, glued on a coverslip with wax-candle, and covered
by another coverslip to avoid evaporation.

1 cm diameter and

∼

∼

To control the bead height h = z + L (see Fig. 1),
we ﬁrst trap it with the optical tweezers and, employing
the microscope knob, we move it towards the coverslip.
When the bead touches the coverslip we see a change in
its image. This is our reference height (h = a) and we use
it to place the bead at a desired height by acting again
on the microscope knob. This procedure allows height
determination with an uncertainty of 0.5 µm.

∼

× ∼

50 pixels

After positioning the bead, we choose a small image
area (
50 pixels), in order to get a good
frame capture rate, 27 to 28 frames per second. Each
14 MHz, corre-
pixel is read at a frequency
sponding to a time scale much shorter than the
measured time scales.
Then we turn the optical
potential periodically on (
0.5 s) by
0.5 s) and oﬀ (
∼
shutting the beam. We measure the position ρ = ρ ˆρ(φ)
of the bead center-of-mass on the xy plane (the three-
dimensional position is r = ρ + z ˆz). In Fig. 9 we show a
typical result for the radial distance ρ(t) as a function of
time. Note that ρ = 0, corresponding to the location of

∼

∼

the trapping beam, also represents the trapping position
on the xy plane.

8

where N is the total number of frames in a given time
window and ρ is the radial position vector of the bead
is
center of mass on the xy plane (note that only ρ =
plotted in Fig. 9).
The ﬁnal result

, the ensemble average
over all time windows, is plotted in Fig. 10 as a function
of time t = kδt. From the linear ﬁtting to (17), we obtain
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D.

(δρ)2(kδt)

ρ
|

ii

hh

|

FIG. 10: Mean square bead displacement as a function of
time.

D =

kBT
β

.

From the experimental value for D, we evaluate the
drag coeﬃcient β using Eq. (18). This procedure is re-
peated at various heights. Fig. 11 shows the resulting
values of β as a function of h.

(18)

FIG. 9: Radial distance to the beam axis as a function of
time when the optical trap is periodically switched on and
oﬀ. When the trap is oﬀ, the bead undergoes free Brownian
motion.

The mean square displacement is given by

(δρ)2(t)
i
h
where the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is given, for temperature T,
by the Einstein relation (kB = Boltzmann constant)[30]

= 4Dt,

(17)

The drag coeﬃcient β (for motion parallel to the glass
interface) is given by Faxen’s extension of the Stokes law
in terms of the bead radius a and the height h [29]:

β =

9
16

a
h

+ 1
8

a
h

1

−

4

45
256

a
h

1
16

a
h

−

6πηa
3

−

5 .

(19)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
From the data illustrated in Fig. 9, we calculate
,
i
excluding the regions where δρ < 0.01µm, the precision
limit for determination of the bead center of mass using
usual centroid-ﬁnding algorithms [2]. Such regions corre-
spond to the time intervals with the trap turned on. The
time interval t in Eq. (17) is an integer multiple of the
inverse frame acquisition rate δt.

(δρ)2
h

(δρ)2
h

In view of the time translation symmetry of free Brow-
nian motion, we may combine data from diﬀerent time
intervals, allowing us to improve our statistics in comput-
ing
. The data in Fig. 9 represents an ensemble
i
of which each time window with the trap switched oﬀ is
a realization. For each realization, we compute the aver-
age mean square displacements
between nearest
neighbors (separated by δt), between next nearest neigh-
bors (separated by 2δt), and so on, according to the for-
mula

(δρ)2
h

i

(δρ)2(kδt)
i
h

=

ρ[(j + k)δt]
{

ρ[jδt]
}

−

2 ,

(20)

k
N

N −k

j=0
X

FIG. 11: Measured drag coeﬃcient β as a function of bead
height h. The nominal bead radius is (1.52±0.02) µm, whereas
the value measured from the Brownian motion is (1.5±0.2) µm

The continuous line in Fig. 11 represents the curve ﬁt
to (19). Near the coverslip wall, a small variation in h
generates a substantial variation [cf. (19))] in the corre-
sponding value of β. To account for this source of error
in height determination, we introduce an oﬀ-set h0 in the
curve ﬁtting function. From the ﬁt we get h0 = 0.3µm

and a = 1.5
±
with the nominal radius 1.52
bead.

0.2µm. The latter is in good agreement
0.02µm of the calibrated

±

±

The dashed lines in Fig. 11 correspond to the calcu-
lated values of β for a variation of
10% in the sphere
radius a. We see that the data points are spread out
between the two dashed lines, showing that the sphere
radius is measured with 10% uncertainty. For droplets
with a > 2.5µm, the radius was measured by videomi-
croscopy and ruler calibration. Fig. 12 shows the image
0.1µm
of a polystyrene sphere of measured radius 5.8
and Fig. 13 shows the corresponding grey-level proﬁle.
We take the sphere diameter to be the distance between
the centers of the sigmoid branches in Fig. 13, and the
0.1 µm).
error bar as 1 pixel (

±

∼

9

E. Measurement of trap stiﬀness

For the DLS, trap stiﬀness is measured by analyzing
Brownian motion in the optical potential well (as op-
posed to the free Brownian motion employed for bead
size measurement) [25]. A He-Ne laser is used to probe
the bead motion, by detecting the intensity ﬂuctuations
of backscattered light. By measuring their time intensity
autocorrelation function (ACF) with a digital correlator,
one obtains the Brownian relaxation time of the bead
(see Fig. 14).

FIG. 12: Bead image: radius equal to 5.8µm, scale bar 10µm.

After normalization, the ACF can be ﬁtted to the fol-

FIG. 14: Typical normalized ACF ﬁtted to Eq. (21). Inset:
same ACF in a semilog plot.

lowing equation:

g(t) = 1 + A⊥ exp(

t/τ⊥) + Az exp(

t/τz),

(21)

−

−

where A⊥ and Az are the amplitudes and τ⊥ and τz are
the Brownian motion decay times in the radial and ax-
ial directions, respectively. From the resulting value of
τ⊥, we get the transverse stiﬀness from (see Ref. [25] for
details)

κ⊥ =

β
τ⊥

,

(22)

where the drag coeﬃcient β is known from the measure-
ment of the bead radii (see Sec. III.D).

The trap stiﬀness in the YLS was measured using
Faxen’s law and videomicroscopy. After trapping a bead
and positioning it at the desired height, the microscope
stage is set to move laterally with a known velocity v. The
Stokes force displaces the bead to a new oﬀ-axis equilib-
rium position. The entire process is recorded, digitizing
the images with a Scion frame grabber. The procedure
is repeated until one has 5 to 10 diﬀerent values for the
stage velocity in each direction. Velocities are taken small
enough to probe only the harmonic sector of the potential
well (linear regime). The images are analyzed in order
to infer the displacement from the equilibrium position
δρeq as a function of v, checking that the dependence is

FIG. 13: Radial grey level of the bead image shown in Fig.
12. The bead diameter, deﬁned by the distance between the
side hills, equals 11.6 µm.

For the YLS setup, we employed a few available cali-
brated beads in the range below 2 µm, and a polydisper-
sion of uncalibrated beads above this value, with radii
measured by videomicroscopy.

linear, of the form δρeq = αv. The trap stiﬀness is then
obtained from the angular coeﬃcient α by the relation

tion. Therefore,

κ⊥ =

β
α

.

(23)

IV. RESULTS

Following the procedures discussed in Sec. III, we have
measured the ratio κ⊥/P as a function of a, at diﬀerent
heights h above the glass interface. Measurements of all
relevant data allowed for a direct comparison with MDSA
theory, with no adjustable parameters. In addition to the
measurements of beam waist and bead radii discussed
III, we also measured the refractive indices of
in Sec.
immersion oil (n2 = 1.496) and deionized water (n1 =
1.343) at the diode laser wavelength λ = 832 nm by the
minimum deviation method.

For the polystyrene beads employed in the YLS, we
have taken the value n2 = 1.576 reported in Ref. [31] for
the YAG laser wavelength λ = 1064 nm, and we mea-
sured the refractive index of water to be n1 = 1.332 at
this wavelength. Much less important is the refractive in-
dex of the glass slide, which is relevant for the spherical
aberration eﬀect, but not for Mie scattering: n = 1.51.

For the DLS, the objective vertical displacement d was
adjusted to have (approximately) the same height h for
If the equilibrium position of the bead
all bead sizes.
with respect to the paraxial focus were independent of L
(distance between focus and glass wall), we would have
a height

h = a + N d

(24)

after displacing the objective by a distance d. A diﬀerent
displacement d was taken for each a, so as to keep a con-
stant h, as given by (24). Because the optical potential
depends on the L, the actual height diﬀers from (24) by
an amount < a. This diﬀerence is negligible with regard
to the Faxen correction of Stokes law (see Section III.D),
but it might be important for a quantitative evaluation
of the optical force and stiﬀness. Thus, it is taken into
account when computing the force and the trap stiﬀness.
However, the dependence with L and h turns out to
be negligible for the DLS, because the laser beam under-
ﬁlls the objective entrance aperture. Thus, the objective
produces a more paraxial beam in the sample chamber,
Indeed, the
rendering the aberration eﬀect irrelevant.
0.1 mm,
laser beam waist is rather small (σDLS = 1.1
see Sec.
III.B) in this setup. Moreover, a diaphragm
(radius rc = 2.0 mm) was employed, cutting oﬀ the tails
of the transverse intensity proﬁle. This translates into a
reduced eﬀective numerical aperture NAeﬀ = n sin θeﬀ,
where sin θeﬀ = rc/f, where f is the objective focal
length. In terms of the entrance aperture radius re, the
sine condition also yields f = re/ sin θ0, where θ0 rep-
resents the semi-aperture angle for plane-wave illumina-

±

10

(25)

NAeﬀ =

NA,

rc
re

where NA = 1.4 is the objective numerical aperture. For
our objective, we have re = 3.5 mm, yielding NAeﬀ = 0.8,
which corresponds to θeﬀ = 32o. Thus, we replace θ0 by
this value in (4) and (5) when computing the theoretical
values for the DLS.

For the YLS, on the other hand, the aberration ef-
fect is important, since the laser beam overﬁlls the en-
trance aperture. Plane-wave components at angles θ
≥
arcsin(N ) are refracted into evanescent waves in the sam-
ple chamber. Since we perform the experiments at a dis-
tance of several wavelengths from the glass interface, the
contribution of evanescent waves is neglected. When us-
ing the MDSA model presented in Sec. II, we replace
θ0 by arcsin(N ) = 61.9o, corresponding to an eﬀective
numerical aperture NAeﬀ = n1 = 1.332.

As discussed in Sec. II, the radial variation of the ob-
jective transmittance is taken into account by using the
eﬀective waist deﬁned by (7). From the values mea-
sured for the beam waist (Sec. III.B) and the length
ξ characterizing the transmittance variation (Table I of
Sec. III.C), we ﬁnd weﬀ = 2.2 mm and weﬀ = 3.5 mm for
the DLS and the YLS, respectively.

A. Trap stiﬀness

±

for

the

results

Fig. 15 displays

the DLS at
0.5) µm. Data points are averages of 4 inde-
h = (3.1
pendent measurements (each one lasting 100s) for ev-
ery microsphere; vertical error bars show the associated
standard deviations. Full and dashed lines correspond to
MDSA and GO (geometrical optic, i. e., WKB) theo-
ries, respectively. For 0.04 µm < a < 0.52 µm, the former
predicts that no stable trapping is possible, because no
equilibrium position is found in this range [32]. This is
indicated by the vertical dotted line break. Correspond-
ingly, experimental points cluster around diﬀerent values
in the neighborhood of the threshold at a = 0.52 µm.
In this range, the microspheres often escaped from the
trap during the measurement interval. Scattered data
points closely below threshold arise from microspheres
that stayed in the trap for at least 3 measurements
(around 300 s). Since the harmonic potential well ap-
proximation breaks down in this metastable region, such
data should be regarded mainly as conﬁrmation of un-
stable below-threshold behavior.

As shown analytically in Ref. [15], the GO values cor-
respond to size averages over the oscillations of the exact
curve for suﬃciently large values of the size parameter
2πn1a/λ. Fig. 15 shows that GO still provides not too
bad estimates of stiﬀness for sizes down to a
λ. This is
not surprising, since incident rays that contribute when
the sphere center is axially located are unaﬀected by the

∼

11

FIG. 15: Transverse trap stiﬀness (divided by the local power)
as a function of bead radius for oil beads (n2 = 1.496) in
deionized water (n1 = 1.343) at height h = 3.1 µm, for the
DLS (λ = 0.832 µm, objective underﬁlling). Circles: exper-
imental points (with error bars). Solid line: MDSA theory.
Dashed line: geometrical optics. The threshold for trapping
is indicated by a dotted vertical line.

dominant diﬀraction and resonance eﬀects in Mie scat-
tering, which are most important for rays incident near
the edge of the microsphere, and WKB is a good approx-
imation down to size parameters of order unity outside
of this edge domain [3]. Prior estimates of the domain of
applicability of GO [2] placed it beyond size parameter
30 (a > 5λ ). Our present theoretical and experimental
extension of that domain has obvious practical relevance.
16 shows the results for the YLS setup with
Fig.
0.5) µm, which corresponds to sphere heights
d = (3.0
h
0.5) µm according to Eq. (24). Polydisper-
a
sions allowed taking many data points for larger a, but
only a few (calibrated) polystyrene sizes were available
for smaller a. For such microspheres, at least 4 indepen-
dent measurements were taken (vertical bars represent
the corresponding standard deviations). Here we ﬁnd
(both experimentally and theoretically) stable trapping
below the peak of the stiﬀness curve. As compared to
the DLS, the major diﬀerence is the use of (moderate)
objective overﬁlling in this setup.

±
(2.7

−

≈

±

The ampliﬁed scale in the inset of Fig. 16 reveals the
persistence of oscillations around the GO curve in the
tail of the theoretical curve. They arise from interference
among multiple reﬂections at the upper and lower mi-
crosphere interfaces. As shown in [11], these oscillations
can be derived analytically from the partial-wave series.
The corresponding period is given by ∆a = 1
4 λ/n2 ≈
0.169 µm, in very good agreement with the solid line
curve in the inset of Fig. 16. For the DLS setup, on
the other hand, the oscillations are distorted (Fig. 15)
by the beam aperture constraint.

Our measurement accuracy is not suﬃcient to ver-
ify the presence of the interference oscillations, a very
demanding experimental challenge. However, the inset
shows that theory already predicts a band of halfwidth

FIG. 16: Same conventions as in Fig. 15, for polystyrene
beads (n2 = 1.576) in deionized water (n1 = 1.332) at d =
3 µm, for the YLS (λ = 1.064 µm, moderate objective overﬁll-
ing). Inset: ampliﬁcation of the region 2.8 µm ≤ a ≤ 4.0 µm.

of the order of 5%, about half our measurement uncer-
tainty, around the GO average, within which data points
are expected to fall.

For the lowest measured a, theory predicts two equi-
librium points, but only the most stable one, closer to
the paraxial focus, is considered. We have checked the
numerical results against the Rayleigh limit (very small
a).
In this regime, the force is proportional to the in-
tensity gradient of the incident ﬁeld alone, allowing us
to compare our results with those of
[33]. Spherical
aberration leads to the appearance of two local inten-
sity maxima along the axis, which correspond to stable
equilibrium positions in the Rayleigh limit. Outside the
Rayleigh regime, but with small values of a, there are
still multiple equilibria. This is clearly connected with
the spherical aberration eﬀect (thus explaining why no
such eﬀect takes place in the DLS).

a

±

−

≈

(13.2

We may enhance the eﬀect of spherical aberration by
increasing the vertical displacement d of the objective. In
Fig. 17, we show the YLS results for d = 15 µm, corre-
sponding to h
0.5) µm. The inset shows that
the period of oscillation for large a is not modiﬁed by the
aberration eﬀect, as expected. In the Rayleigh regime, on
the other hand, we ﬁnd seven stable equilibrium points.
They correspond to local intensity maxima lying along
the axis, between the glass slide and the paraxial fo-
cus, that result from interference fringes bordering the
focal region in the diﬀraction theory of spherical aber-
ration [33]. As we decrease a, starting from the value
a = 0.44 µm, the number of equilibrium points rapidly
increases and then saturates in the Rayleigh regime, as
shown in Fig. 18. In this regime of multiple equilibria, it
is very diﬃcult to achieve trapping and to measure the
stiﬀness. Moreover, the potential well around the equi-

librium point near the paraxial focus is usually very shal-
low in this case (see for instance the solid line in Fig. 19
for a = 0.265 µm). Thus, spherical aberration degrades
trapping eﬃciency for small a, producing a ‘threshold’ for
stable trapping at a = 0.44 µm. This is indicated by the
vertical dotted line in Fig. 17 (further discussion of mul-
tiple equilibrium points is given in Sec. IV.B). By com-
paring this ﬁgure with Fig. 16, we conclude that spherical
aberration decreases the peak stiﬀness value and slightly
displaces the peak towards larger values of a. On the
other hand, the eﬀect on stiﬀness is very small for larger
a values (GO limit).

Increasing the height above the glass slide does not
change the stiﬀness in the DLS, as expected for a more
paraxial beam. Measured and computed stiﬀness results
0.5) µm (not shown) diﬀer very little from
at h = (8.6
those of Fig. 15.

±

12

B. Bead hops

As discussed in Sec.

IV.A, the optical potential for
small sphere radii contains several equilibrium points be-
cause of the spherical aberration eﬀect.
In the course
of Brownian motion of the bead, it may hop from some
local minimum of the optical potential to a more stable
neighboring minimum. We have observed this eﬀect and
measured the size of the hop.

In Fig. 19, we plot the optical potential along the z-axis
in units of kBT as a function of z/a, for three diﬀerent
values of the objective vertical displacement: d = 15 µm
(solid line), d = 6.5 µm (dashed line) and d = 3.0 µm
(dotted line). We take parameters corresponding to the
YLS, with a = 0.265 µm and P = 20 mW.

Besides the equilibrium point nearest to the parax-
ial focus (z = 0), Fig. 19 shows additional equilibrium
points, located between z = 0 and the glass slide. They
decrease in number and in degree of stability (as mea-
sured by the corresponding well depth) as d decreases.

The arrow in Fig. 19 indicates the most stable equilib-
rium position when d = 15 µm. As d decreases to 6.5 µm,
its well depth remains close to 60kBT , and then starts
to decrease much faster below this point (this local min-
imum also approaches the paraxial focus, as expected,
because the interval between this point and the glass
slide, which contains all local intensity maxima, becomes
shorter as d decreases). At d = 6.5 µm, the potential well
near the focus is already much deeper, and the distance
between the two equilibrium points is 2.1 µm.

FIG. 17: Same as Fig. 16, at d = 15 µm.

FIG. 19: Optical potential along the z-axis (in units of kBT )
for the YLS, with a = 0.265 µm and local power P = 20mW.
Objective displacement: d = 15 µm (solid line), d = 6.5 µm
(dashed line) and d = 3.0 µm (dotted line). The arrow points
to the most stable equilibrium point for d = 15 µm.

These predictions were tested by video microscopy, fol-
lowing the image of the trapped bead as the objective
was displaced downwards (thus bringing the paraxial fo-
cus closer to the glass slide), from d = 15 µm down to
d = 3.0 µm. The image sharpness depends essentially on
the bead position with respect to the paraxial focus. Ini-
tially, the bead is trapped at the position indicated by

FIG. 18: Number of stable equilibrium points as a function
of sphere radius, for the YLS with d = 15 µm.

the arrow in Fig. 19. As we bring down the objective, at
ﬁrst the image does not change, indicating that the bead
follows the displacement of the paraxial focus, keeping an
approximately constant distance to this point (‘tweezer’
eﬀect). Hence, in this ﬁrst stage the bead remains in
the same potential well. However, at d = 6.5 µm, we ob-
served a sudden change in the image (see Fig. 20). Since
the bead size is a fraction of the wavelength, the image
behaves approximately like the diﬀraction pattern of a
point source by the circular objective aperture. On the
focal plane (bottom image), this approaches the standard
Airy pattern. Away from the focal plane (top image), it
corresponds to a Fresnel diﬀraction pattern, with central
spot brightness (in this case, dark) related to the number
of Fresnel zones within the aperture [34].

In order to calibrate the bead-focus distance, we re-
peated the experiment with the bead attached to the
glass slide. In this case, the distance between bead and
paraxial focus is known for each position of the objective.
By comparing the resulting images with those obtained
with the optically trapped bead, we derive the length of
the (upward) hop to be 2.2
0.5µm, in good agreement
±
with the MDSA prediction for the distance between the
two equilibrium points at d = 6.5 µm, shown in Fig. 19
(dashed line).

FIG. 20: Bead hop in the optical potential. a) Schematic
representation of the position of the trapped bead, paraxial
focus F (origin of the z axis) and glass slide S for d > 6.5µm
(top, bead below F) and d < 6.5µm (bottom, bead close to
F). b) Bead images for d > 6.5µm (top) and d < 6.5µm
(bottom). c) Calibration of bead-focus distance with bead
attached to the glass slide.

When the objective is moved upwards, we do not ob-
serve a reverse hop. Instead, the initially trapped bead
is lost as d approaches 15 µm. This is also consistent
with the solid line in Fig. 19: as the well near the focus
becomes shallower, the bead cannot climb the optical po-
tential barrier and reach the deeper well below the focus
(indicated by the arrow in Fig. 19). This is in line with
our previous discussion about the diﬃculty of trapping
small beads when the paraxial focus is too far from the
glass slide (‘threshold’ of Fig. 17).

13

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have demonstrated that the MDSA ab initio the-
ory of trapping forces in optical tweezers, formulated
solely in terms of experimentally accessible parameters,
already comes close to achieving a basis for absolute cal-
Indeed, we have veriﬁed in detail its conse-
ibration.
quences concerning trap stiﬀness and trapping thresholds
for two very diﬀerent setups, peak locations, relationship
with and domain of validity of geometrical optics, size
and height dependence resulting from interface spherical
aberration, covering the whole range from the Rayleigh
regime to the geometrical optic one, and including the
description of multiple equilibria and ‘hop’ eﬀects.

Among many attempts (Sec. I), it is the only treat-
ment that satisﬁes requirement (iv) of Sec. I, asymptot-
ically approaching geometrical optics in the mean. This
is specially important in view of our ﬁnding that geo-
metrical optics is already a reasonable approximation, as
far as trapping stiﬀness is concerned, for radii of the or-
der of the wavelength (a consequence of the absence of
near-edge diﬀraction eﬀects).

The combined experimental procedures and experi-
mental results reported here, with well-deﬁned and ac-
curately measured parameters, far outnumber all previ-
ously available optical tweezers stiﬀness data. Compar-
ison with MDSA theory shows that, within the typical
10% order of magnitude of the error bars, theory and
experiment are generally in very good agreement, for a
broad size range and two very diﬀerent (and often em-
ployed) setups, one with underﬁlling and the other one
with moderate overﬁlling of the objective. The theory
accurately predicts the trapping threshold and the loca-
tion of the stiﬀness peak, which is extremely sensitive
to beam shape, as well as the eﬀects of spherical aber-
ration arising from refraction at the interface, including
multiple equilibria situations.

The largest deviation from theoretical predictions oc-
curs within the stiﬀness peak, where the steeply chang-
ing curve is most sensitive to additional perturbations,
for the YAG laser setup. As the microsphere radius de-
creases in this region, one enters the domain of multi-
ple equilibria and Brownian ﬂuctuations are enhanced.
Note (Fig. 16) that the experimental result lies below
the MDSA prediction, indicating that missing eﬀects pre-
sumably arise from degradation of the focal region. Nat-
ural candidates are objective aberrations in the infrared
[eﬀect (i) in Sec. I]. In fact, agreement is better for the
diode laser setup, which employs a more paraxial beam
and a wavelength closer to the visible range.

Other eﬀects not taken into account in MDSA theory
include reverberation (multiple beam reﬂections between
the bead and the glass slide) and the eﬀects of evanes-
cent waves beyond the critical angle, as well as possible
bead surface distortions or contaminations. In applica-
tions requiring accurate force measurements, in view of
these perturbations, it seems advisable to stay at least a
couple of wavelengths away from the glass slide. Account-

ing for the deviations may yield new insights concerning
bead-surface interactions at close range.

Polarization eﬀects were not discussed in the present
work: we found the transverse stiﬀness to be practically
independent of polarization. Polarization eﬀects might
be relevant, on the other hand, when the sphere is at
a distance from the axis larger than or of the order of
the radius [35]. They will be discussed in a forthcoming
work.

It has sometimes been argued that absolute calibra-
tion is an impossible aim, in view of the multiplicity of
eﬀects that need to be taken into account, as well as the
errors in parameter determination. We do not share this
pessimistic outlook. Mie scattering, the basic interaction
involved, is understood and veriﬁed at a level of precision
approaching that of quantum electrodynamics [3]. While
we had to employ uncalibrated microspheres to cover a
wide size range, NIST-traceable calibrated microspheres
are commercially available. Achieving an understanding
and control over additional perturbing eﬀects can turn
out to be relevant not only to improving the performance
of conventional optical tweezers, but may have potential
applications to a variety of new techniques in precision
microscopy.

14

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Brazilian agencies
Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cient´ıﬁco e Tec-
nol´ogico (CNPq), Funda¸c˜ao de Amparo `a Pesquisa de
Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG), Projeto Milˆenio de Nan-
otecnologia, Projeto Milˆenio de Informa¸c˜ao Quˆantica,
Funda¸c˜ao de Amparo `a Pesquisa do Rio de Janeiro
(FAPERJ) and Funda¸c˜ao Universit´aria Jos´e Bonif´acio
(FUJB). M.S.R. acknowledges support by Laborat´orio
Nacional de Luz S´ıncrotron (LNLS).

APPENDIX A: MOMENTUM TRANSFER RATE
TO THE SCATTERED FIELD

In this appendix, we write the explicit partial-wave
series for the cylindrical components of Qs, which repre-
sents minus the momentum transfer rate to the scattered
ﬁeld:

Qsz =

8γ2
A N

−

Re

j(j + 2)(j

−

m + 1)(j + m + 1)
j + 1

aja∗

j+1 + bjb∗

j+1

Gj,mG∗

j+1,m +

2j + 1
j(j + 1)

majb∗
j |

Gj,m

,

2
|

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Qsρ = 4γ2

A N Im

√j(j+2)(j+m+1)(j+m+2)
j+1

aja∗

j+1 + bjb∗

j+1

Gj,mG∗

j+1,m+1 + Gj,−mG∗

j+1,−m−1

j,m " p
X

j,m

"

P

2 2j+1
j(j+1)

−

(j

−

p

(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)
m)(j + m + 1)Re(ajb∗

j )Gj,mG∗

j,m+1

,
#

and

Qsϕ =

4γ2
A N Re

−

j,m

"

P

√j(j+2)(j+m+1)(j+m+2)
j+1

aja∗

j+1 + bjb∗

j+1

Gj,mG∗

j+1,m+1 −

Gj,−mG∗

j+1,−m−1

(A3)

2 2j+1
j(j+1)

−

(j

−

p

(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)
m)(j + m + 1)Re(ajb∗

j )Gj,mG∗

j,m+1

.
#

#
(A1)

(A2)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

[1] D. G. Grier, Nature 424, 810 (2003).
[2] K. C. Neuman and S. M. Block, Rev. Scient. Instr. 75,

[5] G. Roosen, Can. J. Phys. 57, 1260 (1979).
[6] M. Gu, P. C. Ke and X. S. Gan, Rev. Scient. Instr. 68,

2787 (2004).

[3] H. M. Nussenzveig, Diﬀraction Eﬀects in Semiclassi-
cal Scattering (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1992).

[4] A. Ashkin, Biophys. J. 61, 569 (1992).

3666 (1997).

16, 83 (1985).

2800 (1989).

[7] G. Gouesbet, G. Gr´ehan and B. Maheu, J. Opt. Paris

[8] J. P. Barton and D. R. Alexander, J. Appl. Phys. 66,

[13] A. Rohrbach and E. H. K. Stelzer, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A

[26] H. Misawa, M. Koshioka, K. Sasak, N. Kitamura, and H.

[9] D. Ganic, X. Gan and M. Gu, Optics Express 12, 2670

[22] A. R. Edmonds, Angular momentum in quantum me-

[10] T. Tlusty, A. Meller and R. Bar-Ziv, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[11] P. A. Maia Neto and H. M. Nussenzveig, Europhys. Lett.

[12] B. Richards and E. Wolf, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 253, 358

(2004).

81, 1738 (1998).

50, 702 (2000).

(1959).

18, 839 (2001).

[14] C. W. McCutchen, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 54, 240 (1964).
[15] A. Mazolli, P. A. Maia Neto and H. M. Nussenzveig,

Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 459, 3021 (2003).

[16] F. Merenda, G. Boer, J. Rohner, G. Delacr´etaz, and R.-

P. Salath´e, Opt. Express 14, 1685 (2006).

[17] A. Rohrbach, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 168102 (2005).
[18] A. Rohrbach, H. Kress and E. H. K. Stelzer, Appl. Opt.

43, 1827 (2004).

[19] N. B. Viana, M. S. Rocha, O. N. Mesquita, A. Mazolli, P.
A. Maia Neto and H. M. Nussenzveig, Appl. Phys. Lett.
88, 131110 (2006).

[20] P. T¨or¨ok, P. Varga, Z. Laczik and G. R. Booker, J. Opt.

Soc. Am. A 12, 325 (1995).

[21] We have neglected the dependence of the transmission
amplitude on polarization, since N is very close to unity.
In this approximation, circular polarization as well as the
angle between the direction of linear polarization and the
scattering plane (containing the symmetry axis and the
wavevector k) are conserved by refraction. The electro-
magnetic Debye-type representation for the focused beam
developed by Richards and Wolf is itself based on this
approximation [12]. Hence, it would be inconsistent to
take the polarization dependence of transmittance at the
glass-water interface within the context of this model for
the focused beam. Polarization eﬀects will be discussed
in a forthcoming publication.

15

chanics (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1957).

[23] N. B. Viana, M. S. Rocha, O. N. Mesquita, A. Mazolli
and P. A. Maia Neto, Appl. Optics 45, 4263 (2006).
[24] C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huﬀman, Absorption and scatter-
ing of light by small particles, (Wiley, New York, 1983).
[25] N. B. Viana, R. T. S. Freire and O. N. Mesquita, Phys.

Rev. E 65, 041921 (2002).

Masuhara, J. App. Phys. 70, 3829 (1991).

[27] N. B. Viana, O. N. Mesquita and A. Mazolli, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 81, 1765 (2002).

[28] Our notation diﬀers from the one employed in Ref. [23],
where TA represents the axial transmittance itself rather
than the axial transmission amplitude.

[29] M. I. M. Feitosa and O. N. Mesquita, Phys. Rev. A 44,

6677 (1991).

[30] A. Einstein, Investigations on the theory of the Brownian

Movement (Dover, New York, 1956).

[31] X. Ma, J. Q. Lu, R. S. Brock, K. M. Jacobs, P. Yang and

X.-H. Hu, Phys. Med. Biol. 48, 4165 (2003).

[32] On the other hand, an equilibrium position very close to
the focus is found for any radius in the range a < 0.04 µm,
as expected for the Rayleigh regime. Of course, this is of
little practical value.

[33] C. J. R. Sheppard and P. T¨or¨ok, J. Microsc. 185, 366

(1997).

[34] F. A. Jenkins and H. E. White, Fundamentals of Optics,
1st ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1976), p. 180. A less
qualitative discussion of these patterns should include the
eﬀects of aberrations.

[35] A. Fontes, A. A. R. Neves, W. L. Moreira, A. A. de
Thomaz, L. C. Barbosa and C. L. Cesar, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 87, 221109 (2005).

