Design of mid-IR and THz quantum cascade laser cavities with complete TM photonic bandgap

Michael Bahriz,1 Orion Crisafulli,2 Virginie Moreau,1 Raffaele Colombelli,1,

∗ and Oskar Painter2, †

1Institut d’Electronique Fondamentale, Bat. 220, Universite Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay, France
2Thomas J. Watson, Sr., Laboratory of Applied Physics,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We present the design of mid-infrared and THz quantum cascade laser cavities formed from planar photonic
crystals with a complete in-plane photonic bandgap. The design is based on a honeycomb lattice, and achieves
a full in-plane photonic gap for transverse-magnetic polarized light while preserving a connected pattern for
efﬁcient electrical injection. Candidate defects modes for lasing are identiﬁed. This lattice is then used as a
model system to demonstrate a novel effect: under certain conditions - that are typically satisﬁed in the THz
range - a complete photonic gap can be obtained by the sole patterning of the top metal contact. This possibility
greatly reduces the required fabrication complexity and avoids potential damage of the semiconductor active
region.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Quantum cascade (QC) lasers are semiconductor laser sources based on intersubband (ISB) transitions in multiple quantum
well systems1. Their emission wavelength can be tuned across the mid-infrared2,3 (mid-IR, 5 µm < l < 24 µm) and THz4 (65
µm < l < 200 µm) ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum. In the mid-IR, where they are becoming the semiconductor source
of choice thanks to their good performance, the potential applications are chemical sensing, spectroscopy and free-space optical
communications. In the THz range the most promising application is the imaging of concealed objects. Biological materials,
semiconductor chip packaging and clothing are all THz-transparent (while they are opaque at shorter wavelengths), making THz
imaging useful for security and medical applications.

Most of the activity in the QC laser ﬁeld has concentrated on edge-emitting lasers due to the intrinsic transverse-magnetic (TM)
polarization of ISB transitions, and corresponding difﬁculty in implementing vertical-cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs).
Surface emission has been obtained, rather, by integrating second-order gratings on edge emitting devices5,6 or by replacing the
standard Fabry-Perot cavity with a photonic crystal (PC) resonator7,8. The latter solution, the application of photonic crystal
technology to QC lasers9,10, is particularly appealing because of the ﬂexibility that it allows the designer. Two-dimensional (2D)
photonic crystals can be used to create localized microcavity laser sources that can be built as two-dimensional arrays on a single
chip11,12 or for large-area, high-power, single-mode surface emitting laser sources13.

Of particular importance in determining the properties of any photonic crystal structure is the effective refractive index contrast
attainable. The higher the index contrast, the stronger the optical dispersion of the photonic bands and the greater the ability to
localize, diffract, and reﬂect light within the photonic lattice. A high index contrast is therefore crucial for device miniaturization.
In planar waveguide devices, the presence of a full optical band gap in two-dimensions is beneﬁcial (although not completely
necessary) in forming ultra-low-volume laser cavities with minimal optical loss. As is discussed in Ref.14, for 2D photonic
crystals, TM optical band gaps are favored in a lattice of isolated high-e regions. Unfortunately, this conﬁguration is incompatible
with an electrical injection device due to its non-connected nature and an alternate approach is required.

In this paper we study the use of a connected honeycomb lattice for creating 2D photonic crystal QC laser structures. We begin
in Section II with a review of the properties of this 2D lattice via a planewave expansion (PWE) analysis. We show that a full
2D optical bandgap for TM polarization can be obtained in this connected lattice, and study the localized resonant modes that
form around a simple point defect in the lattice. In Sections III and IV full three-dimensional (3D) ﬁnite-difference time-domain
(FDTD) simulations are used to analyze the properties of the honeycomb lattice in two different vertical waveguide structures.
Section III deals with mid-IR PC QC lasers. The real active-region and waveguide structure of a mid-IR surface-plasmon (SP)
QC laser is considered. The high-index contrast in this waveguide structure is obtained by air holes that penetrate deeply into
the semiconductor layers. Section IV focuses on THz PC QC laser waveguide structures. In the metal-metal waveguides of
THz lasers we ﬁnd that the effective index contrast, and therefore the photonic bandstructure, is strongly dependent on the
waveguide thickness37. In particular, below a certain critical waveguide thickness, a full photonic gap can be induced by the sole
patterning of the metal layers. This novel effect could be useful for the development of a variety of THz lasers, including PC
surface-emitting lasers15, due to the simple fabrication requirements.

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

II. TWO-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS: PLANEWAVE EXPANSION

A. The planewave expansion method

2

The calculations of this section are based on a planewave expansion (PWE) method. It is a frequency-domain method that
allows extraction of the Bloch ﬁelds and frequencies by direct diagonalization. The calculations were performed using the MIT
Photonic Bands (MPB) simulation tool16. With the PWE method it is possible to compute the bandstructures and electromagnetic
modes of perfectly periodic dielectric structures. Calculation of defect modes will be tackled in section II C using a super-cell
approach.

B. Photonic crystal structure and TM gap

The 2D photonic crystal considered in this work is that of a honeycomb lattice, consisting of a hexagonal Bravais lattice with
a basis of two air holes per unit cell (see Fig. 1(a)). The hole radius is r and the lattice constant is a. The reciprocal lattice is
also hexagonal, with G
, X and J the high symmetry points of the lattice (see Fig. 1(b)). In the 2D simulations of this section the
relative dielectric constant of the dielectric background is taken as e = 11.22 (n = 3.35), corresponding to the index of refraction
of most III-V semiconductor materials at frequencies below the energy gap.

FIG. 1: Structure of the honeycomb lattice . (a) Two-dimensional honeycomb lattice with two ”dielectric atoms” (A and B) per unit cell.
a1 = (a, 0) and a2 = (a/2, √3a/2) are the principal lattice vectors (a =
), r is the hole radius. (b) Two-dimensional reciprocal space
|
for the honeycomb lattice. The reduced Brillouin zone is shaded in blue. Reciprocal lattice vectors are superpositions of G1 = (0, 4p /√3a)
and G2 = (2p /a, 2p /√3a).

a1

a2

=

|

|

|

FIG. 2: Photonic band calculations for a 2D honeycomb lattice of air holes in a dielectric lattice (e = 11.22). (a) Photonic bandstructure for
TM polarization with r/a = 0.234. (b) Complete band gap (shaded blue region) as a function of r/a. A full TM gap exists only for r/a > 0.18

3

≈

Fig. 2(a) shows the photonic bandstructure for a lattice with r/a = 0.234. For this r/a ratio a full TM gap is present, centered
around a/l
0.225, with a width approximately 12% of the central gap frequency. The existence of a gap, however, depends
strongly on r/a. In Fig.2(b) we plot the gap-map for this lattice, which clearly shows that only above a critical value of circular
hole size (r/a
0.18) can a TM photonic gap be obtained. This is a common behavior of lattices of air holes; the larger the
holes, the closer the lattice is to a system of isolated high-e regions, and the larger the TM photonic bandgap9. The advantage of
the honeycomb lattice is that the TM gap opens when the hole size and porosity of the lattice are still reasonably small, allowing
for more efﬁcient electrical injection.

≥

C. 2D defect design: supercell method

In this section we study, in 2D, the localized resonances that form around a point-like defect of the honeycomb lattice. The
defect that we consider is obtained by removing a hexagon of six holes, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The defect modes are calculated
with a supercell method using the same PWE solver. The presence of the defect cavity breaks the periodicity of the lattice,
requiring the creation of a supercell over which the structure is assumed periodic. This supercell contains the defect cavity and
is tiled in space. The Wigner-Seitz cell of the reciprocal lattice of the supercell will be correspondingly smaller than that of the
underlying photonic lattice, resulting in a folding of the honeycomb lattice photonic bands (see Fig. 3(b)). The localized defect
states of the supercell appear as bands with almost no dispersion, lying inside the photonic bandgap of the honeycomb lattice.

FIG. 3: (a) Illustration of the 2D honeycomb lattice defect cavity supercell (background dielectric material shown as grey, air holes shown as
= a. The defect region consists of removal of the central hexagon of air holes
white). The principle lattice vectors are a1, a2, where
(central hexagon shown as a dashed line). (b) Folded TM photonic bandstructure for a 20-period supercell of the defect cavity shown in (a)
with r/a = 0.24. The blue-lines correspond to the folded bandstructure of the honeycomb lattice. The red lines are the defect frequency levels.
Localized defect modes: (c) hexapole and (d-e) dipole-like modes.

a1

a2

=

|

|

|

|

A PWE calculated bandstructure of the supercell defect structure with r/a = 0.24 is shown in Fig. 3(b). In these calculations,
a supercell consisting of 20 periods of the honeycomb lattice was used in order to obtain well localized resonant modes. Three
defect modes lie within the complete band gap: two degenerate dipole-like modes and a hexapole-like mode (Figs. 3(c-e)).
These are the defect modes that are predicted for the honeycomb lattice through simple symmetry arguments11. Of the defect
modes present in the bandgap, the dipole-like modes are more concentrated in the center of the defect region, thus giving them
the most overlap with the QC gain material. As such, these are the cavity modes we will focus on in the 3D simulations described
below.

Our choice of hole radius (r/a = 0.24) in the above cavity design was made based upon a trade-off between the extent of the
photonic bandgap and cavity mode localization, with that of the electrical and thermal resistance incurred in a semiconductor
realization of such a structure. As already mentioned, the reduced connectivity of a photonic lattice makes electrical injection of
a defect cavity more challenging. Electrical current in such structures is typically injected from the edge of the photonic crystal
vertically through the device active region. Injection into the defect region of the cavity is a result of lateral current spreading
into the center of the photonic crystal. The increased lateral resistance of highly porous photonic lattices signiﬁcantly reduces
the injection efﬁciency of the laser, resulting in added heating and reduced gain. Other injection geometries are possible, such
as the use of surface-plasmon laser cavities in which the top metal contact extends over the entire photonic crystal and provides
not only vertical waveguiding but also electrical injection. This geometry was used in the demonstration of the ﬁrst electrically
injected 2D photonic crystal microcavity laser7. Nonetheless, high-aspect ratio 2D photonic crystal lattices of high porosity
pose a greater challenge to fabricate due to the reduced critical dimension size. It should be noted that further optimization of
the honeycomb lattice can be obtained through use of air holes of a modiﬁed geometry. Lattices formed from air holes with
a truncated circular cross-section were found to have larger photonic bandgaps for a given critical dimension than that of the
standard lattice. In what follows, however, we focus on the honeycomb lattice with circular air holes.

III.

3D-FDTD ANALYSIS OF MID-IR DEVICES

4

The PWE method allows the rapid solution of structure eigenmodes in the frequency domain. However, for the 2D analysis de-
scribed above one can only approximate the laser active region with an effective index of refraction. The objective of this section
is to verify the design developed with the 2D model in Section II, and to apply it to a realistic mid-IR QC laser structure. An ac-
curate representation of the structure waveguide in the epitaxial direction will be taken into account within a 3D ﬁnite-difference
time-domain (FDTD) approach. It is well known that the material system of choice for mid-IR QC lasers is InGaAs/AlInAs
lattice matched to InP2,3. In addition, waveguides based on surface-plasmons17 have been shown to be advantageous for PC QC
lasers in the mid-IR18. This is therefore the model system that we will use for the 3D simulations.

A. Mid-IR surface-plasmon waveguides for QC lasers

Semiconductor diode lasers and conventional QC lasers rely on optical waveguides where a higher-index-core is sandwiched
between thick cladding layers of lower refractive index, thus conﬁning the light inside the active region stack. The small
refractive index difference between the active core and the waveguide claddings results in a standard mid-IR QC laser which is
typically 6 to 9 µm thick.

FIG. 4: Normalized intensity proﬁle of the fundamental optical mode computed for a quantum cascade laser dielectric waveguide (a) and a
surface-plasmon waveguide (b) designed for a wavelength of 8 µm. The shaded green areas indicate the stack of active regions and injectors.
The vertical dashed line indicates the position of the device surface. In the dielectric case the thickness of the epitaxially grown material is
6
≈
µm. The origin of the abscissa is at the air-semiconductor interface. In the surface-plasmon case the thickness is instead
3 µm. The optical
conﬁnement factor is indicated by G

≈

.

Maxwell’s equations, however, also allow for another type of optical waveguiding based upon surface-plasmons19. TM
polarized electromagnetic guided modes exist at the interface of two dielectrics with opposite sign of the real part of their
dielectric constants. Negative dielectric constants are typical of metals below the plasma frequency. Thus, guided surface-
plasmon modes at a metal-semiconductor interface are a useful waveguiding solution for QC lasers20. This is due to the intrinsic
TM polarization, i.e. normal to the layers, of intersubband transitions. SP waveguides need a smaller thickness of grown
material, while yielding even larger optical conﬁnement factors G

(see Fig. 4).

The surface-plasmon damping along the propagation direction can be approximated with the following formula21:

4p

≈

n3
d

,

nm

·
k3
m

·

(1)

is the wavelength. The 1/k3
m

where km (nm) is the imaginary (real) part of the metal index of refraction, nd is the real part of the semiconductor index of
l dependence of the propagation losses shows that SP waveguides are especially
refraction, and l
appealing at long wavelengths. In particular the 1/k3
m factor, which pushes the ﬁeld out of the metal region and reduces the
losses, becomes very small at long wavelengths. A simple Drude model shows that the imaginary part of the index of refraction,
for a generic metal, increases dramatically when moving from short (l = 1-3 µm) to long (l = 100-200 µm) wavelengths. Recent
advances have also shown that low-loss metallic waveguides can be implemented at mid-IR wavelengths17. We therefore employ
this waveguide structure as a model system for the 3D numerical simulations of our QC laser structures. The corresponding layer
sequence is displayed in Table I, together with the corresponding indeces of refraction that are used for the simulations.

a
l
5

8 µm.

≈

TABLE I: Layer structure for the mid-IR SP QC laser17 modeled in the 3D FDTD simulations. Nominal operating wavelength is l

Material
air
Au
InGaAs
InGaAs-AlInAs MQW
structure
InGaAs

InP

3)

Doping (cm−
n.a.
n.a.
1017/1018
1.7 x 1016

5 x 1016

1017

Thickness (µm)
4
0.3
0.05
2.6

0.5

3

n
1
perfect conductor
3.3/3.47
3.374

Function
top cladding
metal contact
contact layers
active region

3.475

3.077

Buffer/lower cladding
layer
substrate

While the vertical conﬁnement is provided by the SP waveguide, the in-plane optical conﬁnement is induced by the photonic
crystal. A high index contrast can be obtained by penetration of the air holes through the top metal layer and deep into the semi-
conductor waveguide structure. Intuitively, reduced scattering losses are obtained for a hole depth which overlaps a signiﬁcant
fraction of the guided mode energy22. In Fig. 5(a) we show a schematic of the vertical cross-section of the photonic crystal
SP waveguide structure, and in Fig. 5(b) we plot the vertical mode proﬁle of a localized defect mode (see Fig. 6(a)) of the
honeycomb lattice of air holes with a hole depth of 4.7 µm in the semiconductor heterostructure. At an operating wavelength
of 8 µm this results in a vertical mode overlap (energy overlap) with the air holes of almost 90%. It is clear from this example
why surface-plasmon QC lasers are ideally suited to PC technology; their reduced thickness allows for a signiﬁcantly shallower
etch of the semiconductor material in comparison to conventional laser waveguide structures in which an etch depth of 10 µm or
more would be required in the mid-IR.

FIG. 5: (a) Surface-plasmon optical mode proﬁle superimposed on a sketch of the vertical section of a mid-IR photonic crystal QC laser
with air holes extending 4.7 µm deep into the semiconductor. (b) 3D-FDTD calculated electric ﬁeld intensity cross-section of a defect mode
(top-view shown in Fig. 6(a)) of the deeply patterned honeycomb photonic lattice. The vertical mode proﬁle shows a similar behavior as the
1D surface-plasmon simulation of (a), whereas the conﬁnement in the in-plane direction is provided by distributed Bragg reﬂection of the
photonic lattice.

B. Defect cavity design

The cavity investigated in this section is the same as in Section II C. It is obtained by removing a full hexagon of air holes
from the PC lattice. As depicted in Fig. 5, we “etch” 4.7-µm deep holes into the semiconductor laser structure, with the r/a ratio
of the air holes set to 0.21. The properties of the different laser structure layers used in the simulation are given in Table I. Full
3D-FDTD simulations11,12,22 were performed with an effective grid resolution of 100 nm, corresponding to roughly 20 points
per wavelength in the high-index semiconductor material at an operating wavelength of 8 µm. The use of perfectly conducting
boundaries for the top metal contact layer is a small approximation at 8 µm due to the much higher plasma frequency of the Au
metal contacts used in practice.

A simulation of a photonic crystal cavity with nx = 7 periods in the ˆx-direction and ny = 4 periods in the ˆy-direction yields
the three localized defect modes shown in Fig. 6(a-c). These modes are the same modes as found in the 2D analysis of Fig. 3.
Comparison of the 2D and 3D mode properties are summarized in Table II. The normalized frequencies of the defect modes
lie within the TM-like bandgap of the 3D honeycomb lattice waveguide structure, and are centered around a/l
0.2. At a
wavelength of 8 µm this corresponds to a lattice constant of approximately a = 1.6 µm, a hole radius of r = 0.34 µm, and a
minimum dimension given by the gap between nearest neighbor holes of a(1/√3

2r/a) = 0.25 µm.
), topside vertical (Qt), and bottomside vertical (Qb) radiation losses are
also calculated for the 3D FDTD simulations. The topside vertical effective Q-factor for all of the defect modes is estimated at

Effective quality factors associated with in-plane (Q

−

∼

k

TABLE II: Comparison between 2D (PWE) and 3D (FDTD) simulated defect modes.

Parameter
PWE a/l
FDTD a/l
Q
k
Qt
Qb

x-dipole mode
0.2115
0.196
326

1.2

107

×
92

y-dipole mode
0.2115
0.197
288

9

106
×
93

hexapole mode
0.2162
0.205
169

1.1

107

×
114

6

> 106, due to the fact that the cavity modes lie predominantly below the light cone of the top air-cladding23. Qb on the other
hand, can be increased only slightly from that reported in Table II through deeper etching of the air holes, limited mainly by
the high-index of the semiconductor substrate and the localized nature of the cavity. Due to the TM-like polarization in-plane
bandgap provided by the honeycomb lattice, an increase in the number of PC mirror periods to a value above 10 effectively
eliminates in-plane radiation loss, and the Q-factor of the cavity modes is limited by both radiation into the substrate as well as
material absorption loss due to ohmic heating in the metal surface-plasmon layer (for wavelengths in the mid-IR, and a Au metal
surface-plasmon layer, material absorption limits the Q-factor to approximately 1038).

FIG. 6: In-plane mode proﬁles (Ez) for the (a) x-dipole, (b) y-dipole, and (c) hexapole defect modes of the surface-plasmon vertical waveguide
structure with an “etched” hexagonal defect cavity in the honeycomb lattice.

IV. ANALYSIS OF THZ DEVICES

Our FDTD analysis of mid-IR PC QC lasers examined structures in which the honeycomb lattice was patterned through the
QC semiconductor active region. This is necessary in order to induce a strong index contrast. However, a different solution
is possible if the optical mode is highly conﬁned in the vertical direction, as is the case for THz QC lasers with metal-metal
waveguide structures24,25. In this case, and under certain constraints related to the structure thickness, the sole patterning of the
top metal contact is capable of inducing a complete photonic bandgap. These metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structures26, as we
will refer to them here (see Figs. 7 and 8), will be the focus of our time domain modeling in the following sections. The appeal
of this design lies in the fact that only the top metal layer needs to be patterned27,28, which both simpliﬁes the fabrication process
and improves the efﬁciency of carrier diffusion in the active region.

A. MIM structures: waveguides for THz QC lasers

Metal-metal waveguides26 are usually employed for QC lasers in the THz range24,25 because they can provide almost unity
optical conﬁnement factors, and simultaneously, relatively low waveguide losses. The active laser core is sandwiched between
two metal layers (typically Ti/Au or Ge/Au/Ni/Au) which act as surface-plasmon layers (Fig. 7(a)). The two surface-plasmon
modes of both the top and bottom metal-core interfaces become coupled and form two guided modes, one of even parity and
one of odd parity (assuming a nearly symmetric metal-core-metal structure, and where the vector parity is determined by the
symmetry of the magnetic ﬁeld). The dispersion diagram of a double-metal waveguide with active layer core thickness of La = 1
µm is displayed in Fig. 7(e). For sub-wavelength core thicknesses the odd parity surface mode is cut-off, while the even parity

mode exists all the way down to zero frequency. The electric and magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles of the even parity surface mode at a
wavelength of l 0 = 100 µm are shown in Fig. 7(b-d), showing the near-unity conﬁnement factor of the ﬁelds in the core region.

7

FIG. 7: (a) Schematic showing the cross-section of a MIM waveguide (metal layers are assumed semi-inﬁnite). (b) Ez normal electric ﬁeld
component, (c) Ex longitudinal ﬁeld component, and (c) Hy magnetic ﬁeld plot of the even parity guided surface mode at l = 100 µm for an
active region core thickness of La = 1 µm. (e) Dispersion diagram of the double-metal (Au) waveguide structure (La = 1 µm). The core is
modeled with a constant refractive index of na = 3.59, while the metal layers are modeled using a Drude-Lorentz model for Au (background
dielectric constant e b = 9.54, plasmon frequency w p = 1.35

1016 rad/s, and relaxation time 8

15 s).

10−

×

×

As has been noted by other authors29, a reduction in the dielectric core region thickness of MIM structures results in an
increase in the in-plane wavevector of the even parity guided mode for a particular frequency. This is a result of the “pushing”
of the electromagnetic energy into the metal cladding regions with decreased core thickness. Of import to the current work is
the ability to create a large effective index contrast through patterning only of the metal layers. In such a patterned structure the
guided mode sees two effective indeces as it propagates, the large effective index of the guided surface-plasmon mode where
the metal is left intact, and a lower effective index, more delocalized mode of the dielectric core and air-cladding where the
metal is removed. That this picture is in fact valid, and can be used to great effect, is demonstrated below where we analyze the
bandstructure and localized resonances of double-metal waveguides with only a surface-patterning in the top metal contact.

B. Patterned MIM waveguide bandstructure analysis

FIG. 8: Schematic of the honeycomb lattice and MIM structure used in FDTD modeling. (a) Top view of the lattice with a central defect
consisting of the removing of the central hexagon of air holes. (b) Cross-section of the simulated structure. Only the top metal layer (perfect
conductor) is patterned. The displayed layer thicknesses are for an operating wavelength of l 0 = 100 µm and a normalized frequency of
a/l 0 = 0.17 within the bandgap of the honeycomb lattice.

The model MIM structure that we will consider here, shown schematically in Fig. 8(b), consists of the following sequence
of layers (from bottom to top): a bottom unpatterned metal contact, a QC active region dielectric core (modeled with a uniform

index of na = 3.59 for simplicity30), a top patterned metal contact, and a region of air above the structure. The metal layers are
assumed to be perfect conductors; loss due to absorption in the metal regions is discussed in section IV D. Mur absorbing bound-
ary conditions31 are used to model radiation loss out of the structure. For each of the THz FDTD simulations described below, a
grid resolution of 58 points per lattice constant a of the honeycomb lattice was used. At a nominal operating wavelength of 100
µm, and for normalized frequencies a/l 0
0.17 within the bandgap of the honeycomb lattice (see below), the lattice constant
is a = 17 µm. At this wavelength and normalized frequency (hereinafter the nominal operating conditions), the corresponding
spatial resolution is 0.3 µm (roughly 95 points per wavelength in the dielectric core material), and the MIM layer thicknesses are
as shown in Fig. 8(b).

∼

8

FIG. 9: FDTD calculated bandstructure of a patterned MIM waveguide with a normalized dielectric core thickness of La = La/a = 0.176 and a
normalized air hole radius of r/a = 0.25 in the top metal contact. Metal layers are simulated as perfect conducting boundaries. At an operating
wavelength of l 0 = 100 µm within the photonic bandgap (a/l 0 = 0.17), the corresponding physical sizes of the patterned double-metal
waveguide are

a, r, La
{

}

=

µm.
17, 4.25, 3
}
{

The band diagram for surface-patterned MIM waveguide structures with various dielectric core thicknesses were computed
to conﬁrm the existence of a complete in-plane bandgap, and to examine the dependence of the bandgap frequency width
on structure thickness. The simulation volume consists of a single unit cell of the honeycomb lattice with Bloch periodic
boundary conditions applied in the plane of periodicity and Mur boundary conditions in the top and bottom directions (normal
to the metal and semiconductor layers). Figure 9 shows the band diagram for a structure with a normalized core thickness of
La = La/a = 0.176 and a normalized air hole radius of r/a = 0.25 in the top metal layer. The corresponding physical core
thickness is La = 3 µm under nominal operating conditions (l 0 = 100 µm, a/l 0 = 0.17). In the band diagram, truly guided
modes lie below the air light-line, while leaky modes lie above it (in this case light can only leak into the top vertical direction
where patterning of the metal has been applied). The bottom-most band is a surface wave, lying just below the light-line of
the active region core. It is akin to the even parity guided surface-plasmon mode of the symmetric (unpatterned) double-metal
waveguide studied above. The higher-lying frequency bands constitute zone-folded versions of this surface wave. An in-plane
photonic bandgap exists for guided modes of this structure between normalized frequencies a/l 0 = 0.165
0.18. Due to the
extreme thinness of the dielectric core, the higher-order vertical modes of the MIM waveguide are not present in this diagram,
but lie at much higher frequencies (a/l 0 > 0.75). As a result, the photonic bandgap is a true full in-plane bandgap for guided
resonances of the MIM structure, not just for a single polarization or mode symmetry. Note, the modes that lie along the air
light-line in the diagram are radiation modes, predominantly localized in the air regions above the MIM structure.

−

In Fig. 10 we plot the dispersion of the bands deﬁning the (lowest) photonic bandgap between the high symmetry X and J
points of the honeycomb lattice for varying dielectric core thicknesses. The bandgap is seen to shrink with increasing dielectric
core thickness, closing for a normalized active region thickness greater than La = 0.294 (nominal physical thickness La = 5 µm).
Mode ﬁeld plots (see Fig. 11) at the X and J points indicate that the high and low frequency modes deﬁning the bandgap are
of mixed type: the low-frequency “dielectric” or “valence” band mode is predominantly a surface wave at the interface of the
top patterned metal surface, whereas the high-frequency “air” or ”conduction” band mode is predominantly a surface wave of
the bottom unpatterned metal interface. Additionally, the high-frequency gap mode sits largely beneath the unpatterned regions
of the top metal boundary and the low-frequency mode resides below the patterned areas with more energy residing in the air
cladding. The photonic bandgap in this case is a result of differences in these two surface waves. This simple picture, although
correct, betrays its complexity for two reasons: (i) perfect metal conductor boundaries were used in the simulations, which do
not support surface waves when continuous and ﬂat, and (ii) the patterned air holes are much smaller than the wavelength in air

9

), 0.176(

(a) Valence and conduction band dispersion between the X and J points for varying active region core thickness (La =
FIG. 10:
µm). The symbols correspond to
0.088(
◦
{
data points from FDTD simulations and the lines are guides to the eye. The normalized hole radius for all simulations was ﬁxed at r/a = 0.25.
Note that the complete band gap shrinks as device thickness increases, and is closed for La > 0.294 (La > 5 µm).

), 0.412((cid:3))
; nominal physical thicknesses La =
}

), 0.294(
⋄

), 7((cid:3))
}

1.5(
◦
{

), 5(
⋄

), 3(

×

×

of the guided mode. That a surface wave can indeed exist at the interface of a patterned perfect conducting layer was pointed
out in Ref.32, where it was shown that it is precisely the cut-off frequency of the air holes in the perfect conductor which sets
the effective plasma frequency of the layer. The thinner the dielectric core layer, the larger the fraction of energy that resides
at the top patterned metal interface, and a greater degree of mode delocalization that occurs into the air-cladding where the
top contact is removed, both effects which increase the effective index contrast of the two surface waves and thus the photonic
bandgap. It should be noted that the use in our model of perfect conducting boundaries as opposed to a Au metal contact layer,
for instance, does not affect the photonic bandstructure shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, as the plasma frequency of Au is much
greater than the THz frequencies under consideration. Further discussion and analysis of photonic bandgap structures formed
from surface patterned metal and perfectly conducting layers will be presented in a future study33. In practice, laser structures
with thicknesses much below that of several microns may be difﬁcult to fabricate and incur insurmountable optical losses (see
below for discussion), but the trend shown in Fig. 10 clearly indicates that such structures would support complete bandgaps
that are quite substantial, approaching 15% of the gap center frequency for La = 1.5 µm at an operating wavelength of l 0 = 100
µm.

C. Characterization of defect modes

Ultimately, one would like to utilize the strong photonic bandgap effects present in the patterned MIM waveguide structures
studied above to, for instance, form localized microcavity laser resonators. In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the top
metal patterning in this regard, we have also simulated the localized resonances that are formed within and around point defects
of the honeycomb metal pattern studied in the previous sub-section. In Fig. 12(a) we show the Ez ﬁeld plot of the localized
ˆy-dipole-like38 mode that forms around a point-defect consisting of the removal of the central 6 holes in the top metal (see Fig.
8(a)) of a MIM waveguide with an active region thickness of La = 3 µm (La = 0.176). The corresponding (in-plane) spatial
Fourier transform of the mode is plotted in Fig. 12(b), showing that the mode is localized at the kX points in reciprocal space,
and consistent with a “donor” mode formed from the “conduction” bandedge at the X-point11. This mode is identiﬁed as the
same dipole-like mode of the mid-IR surface-plasmon simulations of Fig. 6(b) in section III, where in those structures a deep air
hole patterning of the semiconductor dielectric material was used to create a large index-contrast.

For the ﬁxed waveguide core thickness of 3 µm the ˆy-dipole-like mode of Fig. 12(a) is seen to be highly localized in real-
space, as expected from the bandgap simulations of Fig. 10. Additional conﬁrmation of the in-plane localization of the defect
mode due to an in-plane photonic bandgap effect can be obtained by studying the scaling of the in-plane radiation losses as a
function of the number of periods of the PC patterning surrounding the central defect. The total quality factor due to radiation
loss is determined by

1
Qrad

=

+

1
Q

k

,

1
Q

⊥

(2)

10

(3)

FIG. 11: High-frequency (a-c) and low-frequency (d-f) gap mode ﬁeld plots (Ez) at the X-point of the honeycomb lattice for the patterned
double-metal waveguide structure of Fig. 10 with La = 0.294 (La = 5 µm). The in-plane ﬁeld plots of (a,d) correspond to a section through
the core of the MIM structure just below the patterned top metal contact. The dashed white lines in (a,d) and (b,e) indicate the position of the
sections used in the ﬁeld plots of (b,e) and (c,f), respectively.

k

and Q

quantify the in-plane and out-of-plane radiation losses12. The out-of-plane quality factor is found to be > 105
where Q
for these structures; thus the dominant radiation loss occurs in the in-plane direction. Fig. 13 shows a plot of the Q-factor as
a function of the number of surrounding PC periods. The radiation Q-factor increases exponentially with period number as
6.5 periods able to sustain a mode with radiation Q > 103.
expected for a bandgap mode, with a cavity consisting of only 12

⊥

×

D. Effective mode volume and metal absorption losses

We have shown above that in double metal structures the frequency-width of the photonic bandgap of an honeycomb photonic
lattice increases when the structure is thinner. It implies, intuitively, that the photonic crystal becomes increasingly effective in
conﬁning light when the waveguide core thickness is reduced. To quantify the modal localization versus core region thickness
we calculated the effective mode volumes Veff of the ˆy-dipole-like mode of Fig. 12 for various active region thicknesses (La).
Veff is deﬁned as:

Veff =

R e
2dV
E
|
|
max [e
2]
E
|
|

,

where max[..] denotes the maximum value of the argument. The results are reported in Table III. The decrease of Veff with the
active core region thickness La is super-linear, as can be seen in the third column of Table III in which Veff/La is tabulated. The
super-linear decrease in Veff with active region thinning is a clear indication that the photonic crystal formed from patterning of
the top metal surface provides more effective in-plane conﬁnement for thinner waveguide cores.

FDTD simulations to this point have approximated the metal contacts deﬁning the MIM waveguide structures with perfect

11

FIG. 12: In-plane mode proﬁle of the ˆy-polarized dipole-like defect mode for a point defect consisting of the removal of the central 6 air-hole
patterns in the top metal contact (see Fig. 8). (a) Real space proﬁle of Ez and (b) magnitude of the spatial Fourier transform of Ez for an
in-plane cut through the middle of the MIM waveguide.

k

FIG. 13: Increase of Q
with the number of PC periods for an MIM structure with La = 3 µm (La = 0.176) thick active region. The diamonds
show the results of FDTD simulations and the solid line is a least squares ﬁt to these results. The PC cavities were chosen to be approximately
6 (referring to Fig.
ny) used in the FDTD simulations were 3
square, so that the number of lattice periods (nx
8(a), a “period” in the ˆx direction is taken as a, whereas in the ˆy direction it is √3a). The abscissa of the plot refers to the number of periods
(nx) in the ˆx direction.

5 and 11

2, 5

3, 7

4, 9

×

×

×

×

×

×

conductor boundary conditions, neglecting ohmic heating loss in the metal layers. Additionally, the optical losses within con-
ventional THz QCLs include a contribution from free-carrier absorption, the level of which can be minimized through reduction
of the thickness and doping levels of the semiconductor contact layers24,25,30. Given that the thin MIM waveguide structures
studied here have a large fraction of mode energy at the metal surfaces, we will concern ourselves here with estimating the opti-
cal losses in the metal layers, with free-carrier absorption and other losses contributing at a level similar to that in conventional
THz QCL structures. Incorporation of “real” metals into the 3D FDTD simulations would require a prohibitively large amount
of memory and/or simulation time due to the very short skin depth at THz frequencies. Fortunately, an estimate of the ohmic
heating losses in the metal can be obtained for the patterned MIM waveguide structure by considering the analytically tractable
unpatterned MIM structure.

Speciﬁcally, we approximate the losses due to absorption in the metal contacts through an analysis of the fundamental,
even parity, coupled-surface-plasmon mode in a simple planar 1D double-metal waveguide structure26. The complex dielectric
constant of the Au metal layers in the THz (l = 100 µm) are taken from Ref.34 (e Au =
105). The
refractive index of the QC active region core (which is assumed to be homogeneous and lossless) is taken to be 3.59. The ﬁelds
and complex propagation constant are determined through numerical solution of the dispersion relation. The imaginary part of
the propagation constant, which determines the modal loss per unit length down the waveguide (see Table III), is converted to a
loss per unit time and related to an effective Q due to metal absorption for comparison with the radiation losses plotted in Fig.

105 + i1.93

1.06

−

×

×

12

(4)

(5)

TABLE III: Effective volume (Veff), metal-absorption-limited loss coefﬁcient (a m), Q-factor (Qm), and guided wave energy velocity n E as a
function of the active region thickness at a nominal vacuum wavelength of l = 100 µm.
a m (cid:0)cm−
1(cid:1)
50.6
25.8
22.2
15.5
10.5

Veff/La (cid:0)(l 0/na)2(cid:1)
0.247
0.31
0.337
-
-

Veff (cid:0)(l 0/na)3(cid:1)
0.37
0.93
1.18
-
-

La (µm)
1.5
3
3.5
5
7

c/n E
3.627
3.609
3.606
3.601
3.598

Qm
45
88
102
146
215

FIG. 14: Effective Q-factor due to metal waveguide loss (Qm, blue line) and effective energy velocity index (nE
region thickness (La) for a 1D MIM waveguide with Au metal guiding layers at l 0 = 100 µm.

≡

c/n E , red line) versus active

13:

where n E is the global energy velocity of the mode in the waveguide and w 0 the angular frequency of the mode. The energy
velocity is computed from

Qm =

w 0
2n EIm(b )

,

n E

R

S
i
h
W
i
h

dz
dz

,

≡

R

i

S
h

is the time-averaged Poynting ﬂux,

the time-averaged energy density valid for a lossy, dispersive medium35, and
where
the quantities are integrated along the transverse width (z-direction) of the waveguide. Fig. 14 shows the variation of Qm and
c/n E versus the width of the core region. This behavior is due to the penetration of the electric ﬁeld into the lossy metallic layers
when the active region is made thinner25,29. The metal-absorption-limited propagation loss per unit length (a m) and Q-factor
(Qm) for active core region thicknesses of La = 1.5, 3, 3.5, 5, and 7 µm are tabulated in Table III along with the effective mode
volume data. From this estimate we see that metal absorption loss will dominate the in-plane radiation losses of the ˆy-dipole-like
mode of Fig. 12 for defect cavities of 9

5 periods or more.

W
h

i

In order to connect this work with that of more conventional THz QC laser structures and measurements, and to determine
whether such thin double-metal waveguide structures are at all practical, one must relate the calculated Q-factors of Fig. 13 and
Fig. 14 to per unit length exponential loss coefﬁcients. The typical gains that can be achieved in THz QC lasers at l
100
130. These values refer to modes whose energy velocity is approximately equal to the phase velocity of
µm are
the bulk material. In thin metal waveguide structures the energy velocity of the plasmon mode can be much reduced relative to
that for a mode in a thick waveguide structure (see the dispersion of Fig. 7(e)); however, for the MIM waveguide thicknesses

40 cm−

20

∼

−

≈

×

1.5 µm) the energy and core phase velocity are nearly equal and the metal absorption loss coefﬁcients, a m,
considered here (La
of Table III can be directly compared to measured gain coefﬁcients of conventional laser structures. Such comparisons indicate
that for all but the thinnest waveguide structure (La = 1.5 µm), laser action should be achievable.

≥

13

In conclusion, we have described photonic crystal guided wave structures tailored for quantum cascade lasers, in which a full
TM photonic bandgap is present and lateral electrical injection is possible. Laser cavity designs in both the mid-IR and THz
ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum were considered. We identiﬁed candidate defect modes for lasing, and calculated their
mode proﬁles and Q-factors. In addition, we have shown that it is possible - under appropriate conditions - to implement high-
contrast photonic structures via the sole patterning of the top metal layer in THz QC lasers featuring double-metal waveguides.
Such photonic crystal structures are of particular interest for laser structures due to the negligible damage they introduce into the
active semiconductor layers and their reduced fabrication complexity.

V. CONCLUSIONS

Acknowledgements

The authors thank F. Julien, C. Sirtori, and Y. Chassagneux for useful discussions. The work conducted at the Uni-
versite Paris-Sud was performed as part of an EURYI scheme award (www.esf.org/euryi), with additional support from
the PICS program n.3417. The Caltech portion of this work was supported by an AFOSR MURI program in plasmonics
(http://www.plasmonmuri.caltech.edu/) and a DARPA UPR program in optoﬂuidics (http://www.optoﬂuidics.caltech.edu/).

∗ Electronic address: colombel@ief.u-psud.fr
† Electronic address: opainter@caltech.edu; URL: http://copilot.caltech.edu
1 C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, Rep. Prog. Phys 64, 1533 (2001).
2 L. Diehl, D. Bour, S. Corzine, J. Zhu, G. Hﬂer, M. Loncar, M. Troccoli, and F. Capasso, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 201115 (2006).
3 S. R. Darvish, S. Slivken, A. Evans, J. S. Yu, and M. Razeghi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 201114 (2006).
4 B. Williams, S. Kumar, Q. Hu, and J. Reno, Optics Express 13, 3331 (2005).
5 D. Hofstetter, J. Faist, M. Beck, and U. Oesterle, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 3769 (1999).
6 W. Schrenk, N. Finger, S. Gianordoli, L. Hvozdara, G. Strasser, and E. Gornik, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 2086 (2000).
7 R. Colombelli, K. Srinivasan, M. Troccoli, O. Painter, C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, D. M. Tennant, A. M. Sergent, D. L. Sivco, , et al., Science

8 K. Srinivasan, O. Painter, R. Colombelli, C. Gmachl, D. Tennant, A. Sergent, D. Sivco, A. Cho, M. Troccoli, and C. F, Appl. Phys. Lett.

302, 1374 (2004).

84, 4164 (2004).

9 J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, and J. N. Winn, Photonic crystals (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1995).
10 I. Vurgaftman and J. Meyer, IEEE J. Quan. Elec. 39, 689 (2003).
11 O. Painter and K. Srinivasan, Phys. Rev. B 68, 035110 (2003).
12 O. Painter, J. Vuˇckovi´c, and A. Scherer, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16, 275 (1999).
13 M. Imada, A. Chutinan, S. Noda, and M. Mochizuki, Phys. Rev. B 65, 195306 (2002).
14 R. D. Meade, A. M. Rappe, K. D. Brommer, and J. D. Joannopoulos, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 10, 328 (1993).
15 M. Schubert and F. Rana, IEEE J. Quan. Elec. 42, 257 (2006).
16 S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Opt. Express 8, 173 (2001), URL http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OPEX-8-3-173.
17 M. Bahriz, V. Moreau, J. Palomo, R. Colombelli, D. Austin, J. Cockburn, L. Wilson, A. Krysa, and J. Roberts, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 181103

(2006).

otechnology 15, 675 (2004).

18 R. Colombelli, K. Srinivasan, M. Troccoli, O. Painter, C. Gmachl, D. Tennant, A. Sergent, D. Sivco, A. Cho, and F. Capasso, IOP Nan-

19 H. Raether, Surface Plasmons, vol. 111 of Springer-Verlag Tracts in Modern Physics (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988).
20 C. Sirtori, C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, J. Faist, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchinson, and A. Y. Cho, Opt. Lett. 23, 1366 (1998).
21 P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Layered Media (John Wiley and Sons, 2005).
22 B. D’Urso, O. Painter, J. O’Brien, T. Tombrello, A. Scherer, and A. Yariv, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 15, 1155 (1998).
23 K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, Opt. Express 10, 670 (2002).
24 K. Unterrainer, R. Colombelli, C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, H. Hwang, A. Sergent, D. Sivco, and A. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3060 (2002).
25 B. Williams, S. Kumar, H. Callebaut, Q. Hu, and J. Reno, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 2124 (2003).
26 B. Prade, J. Y. Vinet, and A. Mysyrowicz, Phys. Rev. B 44, 13556 (1991).
27 L. Mahler, A. Redicucci, R. K¨ohler, F. Beltram, H. E. Beere, E. H. Linﬁeld, and D. A. Ritchie, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 181101 (2005).
28 O. Demichel, L. Mahler, T. Losco, C. Mauro, R. Green, J. Xu, A. Redicucci, F. Beltram, H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, et al., Opt. Express 14,

5337 (2006).

14

29 S. Maier, Optics Express 14, 1957 (2006).
30 S. Kohen, B. S. Williams, and Q. Hu, J. Appl. Phys. 97, 053106 (2005).
31 G. Mur, IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility 23, 377 (1981).
32 J. B. Pendry, L. Martin-Moreno, and F. J. Garcia-Vidal, Science 305, 847 (2004).
33 O. Painter and R. Colombelli (????), manuscript in preparation.
34 M. Ordal, L. Long, R. Bell, S. E. Bell, R. R. Bell, R. Alexander, and C. A. Ward, Applied Optics 22, 1099 (1983).
35 R. Ruppin, Phys. Lett. A 299, 309 (2002).
36 S. G. Johnson, S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopoulos, and L. A. Kolodziejaki, Phys. Rev. B 60, 5751 (1999).
37 A similar phenomenon occurs in guided membrane PC structures, where it is known that the extent of the photonic gap depends on the
membrane thickness36. However, in the dielectric membrane structures, beyond a critical membrane thickness further reduction in thickness
does not increase the bandgap due to a loss of mode localization in the dielectric membrane. The double-metal waveguide structure does
not suffer from such a loss of conﬁnement.

38 The symmetry of the mode is that of a ˆy-polarized dipole in the plane of the MIM waveguide. It is degenerate with a second dipole-like

mode with ˆx-polarization11.

