7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

All-optical delay of images using slow light

Ryan M. Camacho, Curtis J. Broadbent, Irfan Ali-Khan, John C. Howell
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA

Two-dimensional images carried by optical pulses (2ns) are delayed by up to 10 ns in a 10 cm
cesium vapor cell. By interfering the delayed images with a local oscillator, the transverse phase
and amplitude proﬁles of the images are shown to be preserved. It is further shown that delayed
images can be well-preserved even at very low light levels, where each pulse contains on average less
than one photon.

All-optical methods for delaying images may have
great potential in image processing, holography, optical
pattern correlation, remote sensing, and quantum infor-
mation. For example, in many digital image processing
applications, the amplitude and phase information of im-
ages must be preserved. Electronic conversion of optical
images requires relatively intense optical ﬁelds and infor-
mation is lost in analog to digital conversions. Alterna-
tively, one could use a long free-space delay line; however,
diﬀraction and physical space limitations impose serious
restrictions on such a system. A small all-optical buﬀer
in which the phase and amplitudes of the image are pre-
served would solve these problems.

In this work, we report on a series of several “slow
light” experiments showing that two-dimensional images
can be delayed while preserving the amplitude and phase
information of the images. The system we use has sev-
eral noteworthy characteristics. It requires no additional
laser beams to prepare the slow light medium. This re-
sults in low background noise and a high signal-to-noise
ratio in the delayed image, even at very low light levels.
The transverse images can be delayed by many times the
pulse length without aﬀecting the phase stability of the
image. This is demonstrated by interfering the images
with a pulsed local oscillator and monitoring the inter-
ference pattern. The interference stability has almost no
dependence on ﬂuctuations in the group velocity in the
slow light system, but only on the phase velocity, which
is unaﬀected by a slow light medium. This property leads
to stable and high fringe visibility when the delayed im-
age interferes with a local oscillator even if the slow light
medium has moderate thermal instabilities.

Slow light is the name given to the subﬁeld of optics
that deals with the slow group velocity (the velocity at
which the energy travels) of a light pulse in a highly
dispersive medium[1, 2]. A dispersive medium has a
frequency-dependent index of refraction, which occurs in
any system having frequency-dependent absorption. The
slow light medium used in the present experiments is a
hot Cesium (Cs) vapor. Delay bandwidth products (the
delay of the light signal in the medium multiplied by
the bandwidth of the signal) in excess of 50 [3] can be
achieved by spectrally tuning the signal between the two
D2 hyperﬁne ground states.

While several methods for achieving slow light have
been explored, the system discussed here is particularly
attractive. For example, most slow light systems, such
as electromagnetically induced transparency [4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10], coherent population oscillations [11, 12, 13] or
spectral hole-burning[14], require additional light ﬁelds
to prepare the medium. The use of additional light ﬁelds
results in transverse spatial inhomogeneities in the group
velocity of the medium. To the authors’ knowledge, the
only previous studies of transverse images in a slow light
medium were performed by Harris’ group [4, 5]. In the
Cs system used here, the group velocity is the same in all
directions. Also, this system has relatively low loss and
minimal broadening of the pulse.

A brief overview of some of the most important
theoretical elements will be given. A more detailed
treatment of the propagation of a Gaussian light pulse
through a medium with two widely spaced absorbing
Lorentzian optical resonances may be found in previous
work [3, 15, 16, 17]. Assuming two Lorentzian absorp-
tion resonances of equal strength, the complex index of
refraction may be written as the sum of a free-space term
(unity) and two distinct Lorentzian terms:

n(δ) = 1 +

β
2 (cid:18)

1
−(δ + ω0) − iγ

+

1
−(δ − ω0) − iγ (cid:19)

, (1)

where each resonance has a strength β, a spectral half-
width γ, δ is the detuning from the midpoint between the
two resonances, and 2ω0 is the separation between the
resonances. If the bandwidth of the input pulse is much
less than the resonance spacing 2ω0, we may expand the
refractive index in a power series and keep only the ﬁrst
few terms. The real and imaginary parts of the index
of refraction, responsible for pulse delay and absorption
respectively, may then be written as

′ ≈ 1 +

n

β
ω2
0

δ +

β
ω4
0

δ3

n

′′ ≈ βγ
ω2
0

+ 3

βγ
ω4
0

2

.

δ

(2a)

(2b)

It can be seen that dn′/dδ = n′′/γ, which can be used
to obtain a simple form for the group velocity. Combining

2

state resonances of the D2 lines (852 nm wavelength) in
Cesium. The pulses enter an unbalanced Mach-Zehnder
interferometer with a free-space path mismatch of 5 ns.
The pulses propagating in the long path are reference
pulses (local oscillator) that are made to interfere with
the pulses exiting from the slow light medium in the short
path. In the short path, the pulses impinge on an am-
plitude mask, and are called image pulses. A 4.5-lines-
per-millimeter test pattern was used as the mask. The
hot Cs vapor is in the middle of a 4f imaging system,
which consists of two identical 150 mm lenses. In a 4f
imaging system the object is placed a focal length (150
mm) in front of the ﬁrst lens, the distance between the
two lenses is two focal lengths (300 mm), and the image
is produced in the back focal plane of the second lens.
The 4f system was used to eliminate the quadratic phase
in the image plane. The group delays in the cell are var-
ied by changing the vapor pressure through temperature
control of the cell.

The image and reference pulses interfere via the sec-
ond 50/50 beam splitter. One of the mirrors in the long
path has a piezo-actuated mount allowing for precision
translations of the mirror. Movements on the order of a
few nm are possible allowing for control of the relative
phase of the reference and image pulses at the beamsplit-
ter. By translating the mirror through a phase shift of
π radians, it is possible to measure the fringe visibility.
The interference images were measured on a CCD cam-
era run in continuous mode (a CCD camera capable of
gating pulses in a 2 ns pulse window was unavailable for
the present study).

The experimental apparatus for the weak light ﬁelds
experiment is considerably diﬀerent from the macro-
scopic light ﬁelds experiment discussed above. Pulses
of light of 4 ns FWHM duration, repeating every 330
ns, are created in the same way as the macroscopic
light ﬁelds. However, the pulses are attenuated so that,
on average, there is less than 1 photon per pulse im-
pinging on the amplitude mask. The long arm of the
Mach-Zehnder interferometer is blocked, leaving only a
straightforward 4f imaging system and the slow light
medium. To recreate the image, a scanning multimode
ﬁber with a 62 µm diameter core is used to collect the
photons in the image plane. The multimode ﬁber is cou-
pled to a single-photon counting module with 300 ps de-
tector jitter (Perkin Elmer SPCM). The electronic signal
from the detector is sent to a 16 ps resolution time-to-
digital converter and is time-stamped. The multimode
ﬁber is continuously scanned using computer-controlled
translation stages with 20 nm resolution. The position
of the the translation stages is recorded as a function of
time. The clock of the computer-controlled translation
stages is synchronized with that of the time-to-digital
converter using the electronic pulse that is driving the
electro-optic modulator. Thus, the 2-dimensional image
is reproduced by binning the photon detection events into

FIG. 1: Experimental setup for the delay of transverse im-
ages. Light pulses of 2 ns duration are incident on a 50:50
beamsplitter. The transmitted pulses then pass through an
amplitude mask and a 4f imaging system. The transmitted
and reﬂected pulses are recombined at another 50:50 beam-
splitter. The transmitted part traverses a path approximately
5 feet shorter than the reﬂected path, and arrives at the sec-
ond beamsplitter about 5 ns sooner than the reﬂected pulse,
preventing interference between the two pulses. The temper-
ature of cesium vapor can then be adjusted to give 5 ns of
delay, resulting in interference. In the low-light-level experi-
ment, the pulses are attenuated such that each pulse contains
on average less than one photon and the reﬂected path is
blocked. A scanning optical ﬁber is used to collect the pho-
tons in the image plane and the photon arrival times recorded
using a photon counter with time-to-digital converter.

this result with α = 2ωn′′/c, where α is the optical in-
tensity absorption coeﬃcient of the medium at the pulse
carrier frequency, one obtains an approximate group ve-
locity

vg ≈ c
ω dn′
dδ

=

cγ
ωn′′ =

2γ
α

.

If the medium is of length L, the resulting pulse delay

in the medium is approximately

(3)

(4)

τg =

L
vg

≈ αL
2γ

.

Several points are worth noting. First, the pulse delay
is given entirely by the width of the optical resonances
and the optical depth of the medium at the pulse cen-
ter frequency, and is independent of the separation of
the optical resonances. Second, the signal bandwidth is
only limited by the frequency separation of the two op-
tical resonances (e.g., 9.2 GHz in Cs), which can be very
large. Third, the group velocity is isotropic in the sample.
Fourth, while not treated here, the temporal broadening
of the pulse in the delay medium is relatively small [3],
owing to the fact that the dispersive broadening domi-
nates the absorptive broadening.

Consider the experimental setup represented in Fig.
1. Light pulses with a duration of 2 ns full width half
maximum (FWHM), repeating every 7 ns, are used in
the experiment. The pulses are generated by passing
a CW laser beam through a ﬁber-coupled, high-speed
electro-optic modulator (DC to 16 Gb/s). The laser fre-
quency is set halfway between the two hyperﬁne ground

3

the cell or by tuning the delay of the pulse. In both cases
the observed visibility dropped, as seen in Figs. 2 b) and
c), respectively. The images show the same number of
phase shifts as the temporally matched pulses but the in-
terference visibility (after balancing the intensity in each
arm) is 6% for cell removal and 15% for delay tuning, far
lower than the 90% visibility for the temporally matched
case. As a note, there is always a small amount of CW
light leaking through the electro-optic modulator, which
has a 100:1 extinction ratio. The CW light is the pri-
mary culprit in giving the nonvanishing interference vis-
ibility when the pulses are temporally mismatched. The
amount of CW light can be much greater than 1% of the
total light since it is constantly “on”, which can lead to
a much larger integrated CW signal. In the interference
experiment, the CW background is about 5%. The CW
background light can be removed by using a camera that
is able to gate around a 2 ns window in a fashion similar
to that of the low light-level experiment.

The experimental results for the weak ﬁeld images are
shown in ﬁgures 3 through 5. Figs. 3(a) and (b) show
a delayed and non-delayed one-dimensional image (a bar
test pattern) where each pulse impinging on the image
mask contains, on average, 0.5 photons. The images are
measured by scanning an optical ﬁber in a line across
the image plane for a total duration of 36 seconds. A
histogram of the photon arrival times is made for each
incremented position of the ﬁber (an eﬀective pixel) as
it scans across the image (shown in Fig. 3(c)). The
measured image is the convolution of the image with the
ﬁber core. For these scans, the laser frequency is set
halfway between the optical resonances and the temper-
ature of the cell is set to give 9 ns of delay (shown in
red). The process is repeated but with the laser frequency
tuned far from either resonance, which gives almost no
delay (shown in blue). Approximately 99% of extraneous
counts from background light and detector dark counts
are removed by constructing the images using only those
photons which arrive in a 4 ns time window (out of the
entire 330 ns window) centered on the middle of the pulse
arrival time distribution. An analysis of the undesirable
counts led to an estimate of approximately 2 extraneous
counts per spatial bin shown in Fig. 3, which is in good

FIG. 3: (a) Delayed and (b) non-delayed one-dimensional low-
light-level image with (c) accompanying histograms of photon
arrival times. Each pulse contains, on average, 0.5 photons
before striking the image mask.

FIG. 2: Interference of a delayed image with a slightly diverg-
ing local oscillator. (a) An image (a black pattern of bars and
a numeral) delayed by 5 ns interferes with a reference beam
and produces a ring pattern superimposed with the image. In
the central dark spot, the two beams destructively interfere
and cancel one another except in the image, which remains
relatively bright. In the ring surrounding the central spot, the
two beams constructively interfere and add to create a bright
ring except in the image, which remains relatively dim. The
succeeding rings alternate between constructive and destruc-
tive interference.
(b) and (c) show the same superposition
of the two beams, but in the absence of slow light. In (b),
the wavelength of the laser is tuned outside of the dispersive
region and in (c) the cesium cell is removed. In both cases,
no interference between the beams can be seen.

the 2-dimensional positions at which they were detected.
Background counts (e.g., light from the room or detec-
tor dark counts) in the image are signiﬁcantly reduced
by only accepting time-binned data centered around the
relative delay of the image, within a time window that
is determined by the parameters of the pulse. This can
be done in postprocessing of the image by looking at the
temporal histogram of arrival times. The interferometer
was not used in the weak ﬁelds experiment for the prac-
tical reason that the relatively large interferometer was
not phase stable for the entire scan duration.

Consider the results for the macroscopic image inter-
ference shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2(a), the Cs cell temper-
ature is set to give 5 ns of delay, which matches the arrival
time of the image pulses at the second beamsplitter to
that of the reference pulses. The situation in which both
pulses arrive at the beamsplitter simultaneously will be
referred to as“temporally matched”. The intensity along
the two paths is balanced for maximum interference. The
phase of the local oscillator is set to give a dark fringe
in the center of the image. Several π radians of phase
shift across the image can be observed. The only regions
that do not experience interference are the image points
of the dark patterns of the amplitude mask. Since there
is no light in the delayed image at those points, the local
oscillator creates a constant background where the dark
regions of the amplitude mask are imaged. Hence, at the
center of the dark fringe the inverse image is created. An
interference visibility of 90 % ± 1 % was observed for the
temporally matched pulse regime. The pulses from the
two arms of the Mach-Zehnder interferometer are then
misaligned in time, so as to arrive at the beamsplitter at
diﬀerent times. This is accomplished by either removing

4

than that of the preservation of two state systems that
have been recently studied (qubits)[9, 10, 18, 19, 20, 21].
Second, the homogeneous linewidth of the cesium atoms
ultimately determines the upper limit in the absolute de-
lay of our slow light system. However, much narrower
resonances could achieve a much larger upper limit of
the delay at the expense of the usable signal bandwidth.
In conclusion, it is shown that a transverse image can
be delayed in a slow light buﬀer. The buﬀer is shown to
be able to delay the image by many pulse widths, while
also preserving its amplitude and phase characteristics.
The image is interfered with a pulsed local oscillator.
When the local oscillator and image pulse are temporally
overlapped, high visibility fringes with 90% visibility are
observed, demonstrating the preservation of phase infor-
mation after a 5 ns pulse delay. When the local oscillator
and image pulse are temporally misaligned, low visibility
fringes are observed, demonstrating the pulsed nature of
the imaging system. The slow light system is then used
to delay an image using weak-light pulses. Pulses with
less than one photon on average are used to image an
amplitude mask. The image of the mask is reproduced
with high ﬁdelity and low noise, demonstrating 9 ns pulse
delays of images at very weak light levels.

This research was supported by DOD PECASE,
DARPA Slow Light, NSF, and the Quantum Imaging
MURI.

[1] R. W. Boyd et al., Progress in Optics (Elsevier, 2002),

[2] R. Y. Chiao et al., Optics and Photonics News 13, 26

p. 497.

(2002).

[3] R. M. Camacho et al., Phys. Rev. A 73, 063812 (2006).
[4] A. Kasapi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2447 (1995).
[5] M. Jain et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 24, 4385 (1995).
[6] M. M. Kash et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5229 (1999).
[7] D. Budker et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1767 (1999).
[8] L. V. Hau et al., Nature 397, 594 (1999).
[9] C. Liu et al., Nature 409, 490 (2001).
[10] A. Turukhin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 023602 (2002).
[11] M. S. Bigelow et al., Science 301, 200 (2003).
[12] X. Zhao et al., Optics Express 93, 7899 (2005).
[13] P. Palinginis et al., Optics Express 13, 9909 (2005).
[14] R. M. Camacho et al., Phys. Rev. A 74, 033801 (2006).
[15] H. Tanaka et al., Phys. Rev. A 68, 053801 (2003).
[16] B. Macke et al., Phys. Rev. A 73, 043802 (2006).
[17] Z. Zhu et al., Optics Express 14, 16, 7238 (2006).
[18] D. F. Phillips et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 783 (2001).
[19] O. Kocharovskaya et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 628 (2001).
[20] M. Bajcsy et al., Nature 426, 638 (2003).
[21] M. F. Yanik et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 233903 (2004).

FIG. 4: False color representation of a (a) Delayed and (b)
non-delayed two-dimensional low-light-level image. An opti-
cal ﬁber was raster-scanned across a two dimensional image
consisting of the letters “UR”. Though attenuated, the de-
layed imaged shows similar image ﬁdelity and resolution to
the non-delayed image. Each pulse contains, on average, 0.8
photons before striking the image mask.

FIG. 5: Histogram of photon arrival times showing the de-
layed (red) and non-delayed (blue) two-dimensional image
shown in Fig. 5

agreement with the image noise.

Figure 4 shows the delay of a two-dimensional im-
age comprised of the letters “UR” representing the re-
searchers’ institution.
In this part of the experiment,
each pulse contains, on average, 0.8 photons before ar-
riving at the image mask. The image is constructed by
raster scanning a ﬁber across the image plane in a total
time of approximately 48 seconds. The time-binned ﬁl-
tering technique described above was also used to remove
background counts from the two-dimensional images. A
histogram of the photon arrival times for the two dimen-
sional images of Fig. 4 is shown in Fig. 5., showing the
delayed image pulses. Even though every photon used
to construct the image is delayed by approximately 3 ns,
the image is preserved with high ﬁdelity.

A few comments about the results are in order. First,
the propagation through the medium is a classical eﬀect,
meaning that its behavior does not change in going from
classical ﬁelds to quantum ﬁelds. A formal demonstra-
tion of the preservation of quantum ﬁelds was not under-
taken in the present study. However, the preservation of
amplitude and phase as well as the low noise character-
istics imply that this system can be an integral part of
quantum image buﬀering. The development of a highly
multimode quantum image buﬀer is a much diﬀerent goal

