Scanning Near-Field Optical Coherent Spectroscopy of
Single Molecules at 1.4 Kelvin

Ilja Gerhardt, Gert Wrigge, Mario Agio, Pavel Bushev∗, Gert Zumofen, and Vahid Sandoghdar
Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland

Compiled February 2, 2008

We present scanning near-ﬁeld extinction spectra of single molecules embedded in a solid matrix. By varying
the molecule-tip separation, we modify the line shape of the spectra, demonstrating the coherent nature of the
interaction between the incident laser light and the excited state of the molecule. We compare the measured
c(cid:13) 2008 Optical Society of
data with the outcome of numerical calculations and ﬁnd a very good agreement.
America

OCIS codes: 270.1670, 180.5810, 290.2200, 300.6250

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
3
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Scanning Near-ﬁeld Optical Microscopy (SNOM) was in-
vented about twenty years ago and has been used in a
wide range of applications where a subwavelength spatial
resolution is advantageous in optical studies.1 One of the
highlights of SNOM was to deliver the ﬁrst images of sin-
gle ﬂuorescent molecules at room temperature in 1993,2
initiating the active and fruitful ﬁeld of single molecule
microscopy. Since then various groups have combined
SNOM with spectroscopy of single emitters3–6 by de-
tecting the inelastic ﬂuorescence that is red-shifted with
respect to the excitation light. Developments in both
far-ﬁeld7–9 and near-ﬁeld10 spectroscopy of single nano-
objects have shown, however, that it is possible to study
them via the interference between the elastically scat-
tered light and a reference beam. Very recently, we used
this approach to demonstrate the ﬁrst near-ﬁeld extinc-
tion measurement on single molecules and reported a dip
in transmission as large as 6% without using any noise
suppression method.11 In this Letter, we present the de-
pendence of the single molecule extinction spectra on the
molecule-tip separation and compare our ﬁndings with
the outcome of numerical simulations.

The experimental setup is schematically depicted in
Fig. 1 and consists of a combined scanning confocal and
near-ﬁeld optical microscope that operates at T=1.4 K.
Details of this setup, the tip, the sample and the the-
oretical concepts of our work have been described in
Ref.11. In a typical experiment, we ﬁrst detected sin-
gle molecules via near-ﬁeld ﬂuorescence excitation spec-
troscopy,4 i.e. by recording the Stokes shifted emission
on transition 2 → 3 in Fig. 1b). We monitored the oscil-
lation of a quartz tuning fork and used the shear-force
interaction to control the tip-sample distance.12 In this
manner, we could position the tip at a given axial dis-
tance from the sample (thickness ∼ 50 − 100 nm) to
within 10 nm. Upon lateral scanning of the tip, we found
that despite electrical contacting of the tip to the ground,
a substantial position dependent Stark shift was consis-
tently present in all experiments. In order to compen-
sate this eﬀect, we ﬁrst laterally centered the tip on the
molecule by maximizing the ﬂuorescence signal on de-

Fig. 1. a) Schematics of the experimental setup. BS:
beam splitter, SP (LP): short (long) pass ﬁlter. b)
The level-scheme of a dye molecule. c) The Stark-shift
recorded as a function of the voltage applied to the tip.

tector P D23. We then varied the voltage on the SNOM
tip to the value corresponding to the apex of the voltage-
shift parabola, as shown in Fig. 1c. This procedure al-
lowed a near to full cancellation of the Stark shift, indi-
cating that its origin is probably charge build-up on the
sample or the oxidized surface of the tip.

Even in the absence of an external electric potential,
the presence of the tip could aﬀect the linewidth and
position of the molecular resonance13 similar to the case
of a molecule in front of a mirror. Our three-dimensional
ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) calculations show
that for a dipolar resonance with linewidth γ0, we should
expect a broadening in the range of γ0 to 3γ0 (depending
on the molecular dipole orientation) for a tip-molecule
separation of 30 nm. In our experiment, it turned out
that we could not probe these eﬀects because as shown by
an example in Figs. 2b and c, we often encountered spec-
tral instabilities for tip-sample separations under about

1

100 nm. The correspondence between the data in Fig. 2b
and the simultaneously recorded shear force signal dis-
played in Fig. 2a indicates that this eﬀect is due to a me-
chanical perturbation of the p-terphenyl matrix and that
moreover, our shear-force signal is assisted by mechani-
cal contact.14 Although this phenomenon merits further
investigations, in this work we have chosen to avoid it by
operating the tip at distances larger than about 60 nm
from the sample where the tip inﬂuence is negligible.

Fig. 2. Shear-force amplitude (a) and simultaneously
recorded ﬂuorescence excitation spectra (b) as a func-
tion of tip-sample separation. c) Three exemplary spec-
tra from the indicated tip-sample distances.

The signals on the two detectors P D23 and P D21
have been described in Ref.11 and its Supplementary
Material. In short, while P D23 records the conventional
Stokes shifted ﬂuorescence I23, the signal on P D21 is the
result of the interference between the transmitted laser
light through the tip and the light that is coherently
scattered by the molecule. Thus, a change in the posi-
tion of the tip with respect to the molecule can lead to a
change in the relative accumulated phase and a change
in the resonance shape. Figure 3 shows examples of such
spectra at three diﬀerent tip-molecule positions.

Fig. 3. Simultaneously recorded ﬂuorescence signal
(P D23) and extinction measurement (P D21) for three
diﬀerent heights from the tip to the sample. Solid curves
show ﬁts as discussed in Ref. 11

The coherent spectra recorded on P D21 can be ﬁt-
2 sin ψ)

ted by Ibg − IbgV
if the intensity of the
molecular emission is much smaller than the strength of

(∆ cos ψ+ γ

∆2+γ2/4

2

its interference with the laser ﬁeld, as is the case in our
experiment.7, 11 Here ∆ denotes the detuning between
ω21 and the excitation laser frequency, γ is the transi-
tion linewidth, ψ stands for the relative phase between
the excitation and scattered lights, and V is a parameter
that we call visibility. We remark that in these experi-
ments an iris of diameter 1 mm was used in the path of
P D21 to select the axial part of the beam.

Figures 4a-d summarize the analysis of a series of spec-
tra from diﬀerent axial tip-molecule separations for a
diﬀerent tip and molecule than in Fig. 3. In order to
compare our experimental data with theoretical expec-
tations, we have performed three-dimensional FDTD cal-
culations. The 50 nm-thick matrix was modelled accord-
ing to the refractive indices of p-terphenyl along its crys-
tal axes, and the molecule was taken to be a dispersive
Lorentz material along its dipole moment. The tip was
taken to be 700 nm long and buried 50 nm into con-
volutional perfectly-matched-layer absorbing boundary
conditions to avoid ﬁnite-size eﬀects.15 The total electric
ﬁeld of the tip and the molecule was recorded on a ref-
erence sphere of radius 1.2 µm centered at the molecule
position. We veriﬁed that this ﬁeld is transverse to within
99%. The frequency dependent signals obtained were ﬁt-
ted in the same fashion as the experimental data.

Figure 4a plots the excitation intensity Ibg determined
from the oﬀ-resonant tail of each frequency scan recorded
on P D21 while Fig. 4e shows the corresponding FDTD
results. As sketched by the inset in Fig. 4e, the oscil-
latory behavior of Ibg is caused by the interference be-
tween the part of the laser light that exits the tip and
directly propagates to the detector and a second part
that is ﬁrst reﬂected from the sample and then from the
tip (i.e. twice π reﬂection phase shifts) before traversing
the detection path. This oscillatory behavior has been
also reported previously in conventional SNOM experi-
ments.16 The FDTD calculations also clearly reproduce
this eﬀect.

Figure 4b displays I23 extracted from Lorentzian ﬁts
to the ﬂuorescence excitation spectra (see Fig. 3). A 30-
fold increase of the molecular ﬂuorescence upon the de-
crease of the tip-sample distance from 600 nm to 100 nm
provides the expected signature of near-ﬁeld excitation.
Furthermore, a careful scrutiny of I23 also reveals an os-
cillation as displayed by the zoom in the inset. As indi-
cated by the upper inset in Fig. 4f, this is caused by the
interference between the part of the molecular ﬂuores-
cence that is directed toward the detector and another
part that is reﬂected from the aluminum tip. The loca-
tion z ∼ 330 nm for the ﬁrst minimum is in fair agree-
ment with a simple ray optics picture that considers a
phase shift of π at the tip. Again the FDTD calculations
in Fig. 4f agree well with the data.

Figures 4c and d show experimentally determined V
and ψ as a function of the tip-molecule separation. As
the molecule gets closer to the tip, it is excited more
strongly and the visibility is increased. However, since
V is proportional to the ﬁeld of the molecular emission

and therefore to the ﬁeld of the excitation beam at the
position of the molecule,11 its growth is slower than the
ﬂuorescence signal displayed in Figs. 4b and f. In addi-
tion, V is inversely proportional to the ﬁeld of the laser
at the detector11 so that it is aﬀected by the behavior of
Ibg. Finally, we note that the reﬂection of the molecular
emission from the tip manifests itself also in oscillations
of V and ψ which correlate with those of I23 and Ibg.
Figures 4g and h display the results of the FDTD cal-
culations which reproduce all features of the experimen-
tal data. We emphasize, however, that despite an excel-
lent semiquantitative agreement with the measurements,
predicting the absolute magnitudes of quantities such as
phase and visibility require more precise knowledge of
the geometry than has been possible in this work.

Fig. 4. Experimental (a-d) and FDTD (e-h) data for the
the nonresonant transmission (BG), the ﬂuorescence sig-
nal I23 (Fluo), the visibility V and phase ψ of the extinc-
tion signal on P D21 as a function of the separation be-
tween the sample surface and a tip of 200 nm aperture.

We have also investigated the spectra recorded at dif-
ferent lateral tip-molecule displacements, while keeping
the tip at an axial distance of 90 nm from the sam-
ple. In Figs. 5a and b examples of spectra on P D23
and P D21 from one line of a 600×600 nm2 lateral scan
are presented. The line shape in Fig. 5b is clearly modi-
ﬁed within a displacement of a fraction of a wavelength.
Furthermore, the data reveal a small residual position-
dependent Stark shift. Figures 5c-e plot I23, V and ψ for
various lateral displacements.

In summary, we have presented direct near-ﬁeld opti-
cal coherent spectroscopy on single molecules without
the need for any noise suppression technique such as
lock-in detection. We have investigated the tip position
dependence of both inelastic and elastic components of
the single molecule emission. Our FDTD calculations

3

Fig. 5. Fluorescence (a) and extinction (b) spectra
recorded during a lateral scan with a 100 nm aperture
above a molecule. Fluorescence peak intensity (c), visi-
bility (d) and phase (e) of the spectra from one line scan.

show very good agreement with the experimental results
and reproduce all their central features.

We thank A. Renn and C. Hettich for fruitful dis-
cussions. This work was ﬁnanced by the Schweiz-
erische Nationalfond (SNF) and the ETH Zurich ini-
tiative on Quantum Systems and Information Tech-
nology (QSIT). V. Sandoghdar’s email address
is
vahid.sandoghdar@ethz.ch.
∗ Present address: Abteilung Quanten-Informations-
Verarbeitung, Universit¨at Ulm, D-89069 Ulm, Germany.

References

1. M. A. Paesler and P. J. Moyer, Near-Field Optics: The-
ory, Instrumentation, and Applications (Wiley & Sons,
1996).

2. E. Betzig and R. J. Chichester, Science 262, 1422 (1993).
3. H. F. Hess, E. Betzig, T. D. Harris, L. N. Pfeiﬀer, and

K. W. West, Science 264, 1740 (1994).

4. W. E. Moerner,et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2764 (1994).
5. K. Matsuda, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 177401 (2003).
6. J. R. Guest, et al, Phys. Rev. B 65, 241310 (2002).
7. T. Plakhotnik and V. Palm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 183602

8. K. Lindfors, T. Kalkbrenner, P. Stoller, and V. Sandogh-

dar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 037401 (2004).

9. A. H¨ogele, et al, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 221905 (2005).
10. A. A. Mikhailovsky, M. A. Petruska, K. Li, M. I. Stock-
man, and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. B 69, 085401 (2004).
11. I. Gerhardt, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 033601 (2007).
12. K. Karrai and R. D. Grober, Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 1842

(2001).

(1995).

13. R. X. Bian, R. C. Dunn, X. S. Xie, and P. T. Leung,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4772 (1995).

14. M. J. Gregor, P. G. Blome, J. Sch¨ofer, and R. G. Ulbrich,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 68, 307 (1996).

15. J. A. Roden, and S. D. Gedney, Microw. Opt. Technol.

Lett. 27, 334 (2000).

16. B. Hecht, H. Bielefeldt, D. W. Pohl, L. Novotny, and
H. Heinzelmann, J. Appl. Phys. 84, 5873 (1998).

