7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬀect of local pumping on random laser modes

X. Wu, J. Andreasen, H. Cao
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 60208.

A. Yamilov
Department of Physics, University of Missouri–Rolla, Rolla, MO 65409.

We have developed a numerical method based on the transfer matrix to calculate the quasimodes
and lasing modes in one-dimensional random systems. Depending on the relative magnitude of the
localization length versus the system size, there are two regimes in which the quasimodes are distinct
in spatial proﬁle and frequency distribution. In the presence of uniform gain, the lasing modes have
one-to-one correspondence to the quasimodes in both regimes. Local excitation may enhance the
weight of a mode within the gain region due to local ampliﬁcation, especially in a weakly scattering
system.

PACS numbers: 42.55.Zz,42.25.Dd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Random laser, in which optical feedback is provided
by scattering of light due to spatial inhomogeneity of the
medium rather than by well deﬁned mirrors, has recently
attracted much attention1. One important topic of re-
search is the nature of random laser modes. For a random
laser with non-resonant feedback, the lasing modes are
the diﬀusive modes, i.e, the eigenmodes of the diﬀusion
equation2. For a random laser with resonant feedback,
the lasing modes are believed to be the quasimodes, i.e,
the eigenmodes of the Maxwell equations3. This belief
implies the quasimodes of a passive random system are
not modiﬁed by the presence of gain. Such assumption
is conﬁrmed by the numerical studies of lasing modes in
the localization regime4,5. With the introduction of gain,
the localized modes of a passive random system are pre-
served and serve as the lasing modes. This conclusion is
extended to the random systems far from the localization
regime without direct conﬁrmation. The lasing modes
are regarded as the quasimodes with small decay rate, in
particular the anomalously localized states6,7. However,
recent theoretical study8 reveals that the quasimodes of a
passive random system are not the genuine normal modes
of the same system with gain. This is because the spatial
inhomogeneity of dielectric constant introduces a linear
coupling between the quasimodes, mediated by the po-
larization of the active medium. The latest development
of semiclassical laser theory for open complex or random
media leads to the speculation that the lasing mode in
a weakly scattering system may be a composite of many
quasimodes with low quality factor9,10. Moreover, under
local excitation the reabsorption outside the local gain
region suppresses the feedback from the unpumped part
of the random sample and eﬀectively reduces the sys-
tem size11. The lasing modes are therefore completely
diﬀerent from the quasimodes and conﬁned in the vicin-
ity of the pumped region. All these studies prompt us
to investigate carefully the relation between the lasing
modes and the quasimodes in both global pumping and

local pumping.
In this paper, we address the question
whether the lasing modes are the quasimodes of pas-
sive random systems. The answer to this question de-
termines whether the statistical distribution of the decay
rates of quasimodes can be used to predict the lasing
threshold and the number of lasing modes for random
laser12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19.

We conduct detailed numerical studies of quasimodes
and lasing modes in one-dimensional (1D) random sys-
tems. A numerical method based on the transfer ma-
trix is developed to calculate the quasimodes as well
as the lasing modes in the presence of global or local
gain. The main advantage of this method as compared
to the ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain method is that it
can calculate the quasimodes of weakly scattering sys-
tems which overlap spectrally and have short lifetime.
In our numerical simulation, the scattering strength is
varied over a wide range. The quasimodes, as well as
the lasing modes, are formed by distributed feedback in
the random system. The conventional distributed feed-
back (DFB) laser, made of periodic structures, operates
either in the over-coupling regime or the under-coupling
regime20. The random laser, which can be considered as
randomly distributed feedback laser, also has these two
regimes of operation. In the under-coupling regime the
system size L is much less than the localization length ξ,
while in the over-coupling regime L > ξ. The dominant
mechanism for the mode formation diﬀers in these two
regimes, leading to distinct characteristics of mode pro-
ﬁle and frequency distribution. With the introduction
of uniform gain, the lasing modes have one-to-one corre-
spondence to the quasimodes in both regimes. However,
local pumping can make the lasing modes signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the quasimodes, especially in the under-
coupling systems. Some quasimodes even fail to lase no
matter how high the pumping level is. The results we
obtain help understanding the random lasing with reso-
nant feedback in the weakly scattering systems21, espe-
cially the recent observations of periodic lasing peaks in
frequency22,23.

II. NUMERICAL METHOD

We have developed a numerical method based on the
transfer matrix to compute the quasimodes of 1D passive
systems. This time-independent method is also applied
to the calculation of lasing modes at the threshold under
global or local excitation. The random system is 1D lay-
ered structure. It is composed of N dielectric layers with
air gaps in between. The refractive index of the dielec-
tric layers is nd, and that of the air gaps is 1. Both the
thickness d1 of the dielectric layers and the thickness of
air gaps d2 are randomized. d1,2 = ¯d1,2(1 + ση), where
0 < σ < 1 represents the degree of randomness, and η
is a random number in [−1, 1], ¯d1 ( ¯d2) is the average
thickness of the dielectric layers (air gaps). Outside the
random system the refractive index is constant and its
value is equal to the average refractive index nef f of the
random system to eliminate the boundary reﬂection.

According to the transfer matrix formula:

p1
q1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

= M

p0
q0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(1)

where p0 and q0 represent the forward and backward
propagating waves on one side of the random system,
p1 and q1 on the other side, M is a 2 × 2 transfer matrix
that characterizes wave propagation through the random
system. The eigenmode of such an open system can be
deﬁned as “natural mode” or “quasimode”, which gener-
alizes the concept of eigenmode of a closed system24. It
satisﬁes the boundary condition that there are no incom-
ing waves but only outgoing waves through the boundary
of a random system, namely p0 = 0 and q1 = 0. In a pas-
sive system (without gain or absorption, the refractive
indices being real numbers), such boundary condition
requires the vacuum wavevector be a complex number,
k0 = k0r + ik0i. Substituting the boundary condition
into Eq. 1, we get M22 = 0. Since M22 is a complex
number, both the real part and imaginary part of M22
are equal to 0. These two equations are solved to ﬁnd k0r
and k0i. k0r = ω/c tells the frequency ω of a quasimode,
and k0i = −γ/c gives the decay rate γ of a quasimode.

After ﬁnding k0 of a quasimode, the correspond-
ing wavefunction can be obtained by calculating the
electric ﬁeld distribution E(x) throughout the random
system with the transfer matrix M (k0). The wave-
function inside the random system can be written as
E(x) = E+(x)ein(x)k0x + E−(x)e−in(x)k0x, where n(x)
is the (real part of) refractive index at position x,
E+(x)ein(x)k0x represents the forward-propagating ﬁeld,
and E−(x)e−in(x)k0x the backward-propagating ﬁeld.
Since k0 is a complex number, the amplitudes of forward
and backward propagating ﬁelds are E+(x)e−n(x)k0ix and
E−(x)en(x)k0ix (k0i < 0). These expressions show that
there are two factors determining the wavefunction. The
ﬁrst is E±(x), which originates from the interference
of multiply-scattered waves. The second is e±n(x)k0ix,
which leads to exponential growth of the wavefunction

2

toward the system boundary. Outside the random sys-
tem, the wavefunction grows exponentially to inﬁnity due
to the negative k0i. This is clearly unphysical. Thus we
disregard the wavefunction outside the random system
and normalize the wavefunction within the random sys-
tem to unity.

Optical gain is introduced to the random system by
adding an imaginary part ni (negative number) to the
refractive index. In the case of uniform gain, ni is con-
stant everywhere inside the system. Outside the random
system ni is set to zero. Diﬀerent from the quasimode
of a passive system, the vacuum wavevector k0 of a las-
ing mode is a real number. The wavevector inside the
random system is a complex number, k = kr + iki =
k0[n(x) + ini]. Its imaginary part ki = k0ni is inversely
proportional to the gain length lg. The onset of lasing os-
cillation corresponds to the condition that there are only
outgoing waves through the boundary of the random sys-
tem. The absence of incoming waves requires M22 = 0 in
Eq. (1). Again since M22 is a complex number, both its
real part and imaginary part are zero. These two equa-
tions are solved to ﬁnd k0 and ni. Each set of solution
(k0, ni) represents a lasing mode. k0 = ω/c sets the lasing
frequency ω, and nik0 = ki = 1/lg gives the gain length
lg at the lasing threshold. The spatial proﬁle of the las-
ing mode is then obtained by calculating the ﬁeld distri-
bution throughout the random system with the transfer
matrix M (k0, ni). Since our method is based on the time-
independent wave equation, it holds only up to the lasing
threshold25. In the absence of gain saturation, the ampli-
tude of a lasing mode would grow in time without bound.
Thus we can only get the spatially-normalized proﬁle of a
lasing mode at the threshold. The lasing mode is normal-
ized in the same way as the quasimode for comparison.
The amplitudes of forward and backward propagating
ﬁelds of a lasing mode are E+(x)e−nik0x and E−(x)enik0x
(ni < 0). The exponential growth factors e±nik0x depend
on the gain value |nik0|.

Local pumping is commonly used in the random laser
experiment. To simulate such situation, we introduce
gain to a local region of the random system. Our method
can be used to ﬁnd the lasing modes with arbitrary spa-
tial distribution of gain. The imaginary part of the re-
fractive index ni(x) = ˜nif (x), where f (x) describes the
spatial proﬁle of gain and its maximum is set to 1, ˜ni
represents the gain magnitude. The lasing modes can
be found in the way similar to the case of uniform gain.
The solution to M22 = 0 gives the lasing frequency k0
and threshold gain ˜nik0. The normalized spatial proﬁle
of a lasing mode is then computed with M (k0, ˜ni).

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Using the method described in the previous section,
we calculate the quasimodes of 1D random systems.
The quasimodes are formed by distributed feedback from
the randomly-positioned dielectric layers. We investi-

gate many random structures with diﬀerent scattering
strengths. Depending on the relative values of the lo-
calization length ξ and the system length L, there are
two distinct regimes in which the quasimodes are dra-
matically diﬀerent: (i) over-coupling regime L > ξ; (ii)
under-coupling regime L ≪ ξ.

As an example, we consider the random structure with
¯d1 = 100nm and ¯d2 = 200nm. σ = 0.9 for both d1
and d2. To change from the under-coupling regime to
the over-coupling regime, we increase the refractive in-
In particular, we take
dex nd of the dielectric layers.
nd = 1.05 and 2.0. The larger nd leads to stronger scat-
tering and shorter localization length ξ. To obtain the
value of ξ, we calculate the transmission T as a func-
tion of system length L. hln T i is obtained from aver-
aging over 10,000 conﬁgurations with the same L and
σ. When L > ξ, hln T (L)i decays linearly with L, and
ξ−1 = −dhln T (L)i/dL. In the wavelength (λ) range of
500nm to 750nm, ξ exhibits slight variation with λ due
to the residual photonic bandgap eﬀect. For nd = 1.05,
ξ ∼ 200 − 240µm, while for nd = 2.0, ξ ∼ 1.2 − 1.5µm. In
the calculation of quasimodes, we ﬁx the number of di-
electric layers N = 81 and hLi = 24.1µm. For n = 1.05,
ξ ≫ L in the wavelength range of interest, thus the ran-
dom system is in the under-coupling regime. In contrast,
for n = 2.0, ξ ≪ L and the system in the over-coupling
regime.

To illustrate the diﬀerence between over-coupling
regime and under-coupling regime, we compare the quasi-
modes of the same random structure with diﬀerent nd,
namely, nd = 2.0 or 1.05. Figures 1(a) and (b) are
the typical transmission spectra of these two systems.
For the system with nd = 2.0 most transmission peaks
are narrow and well separated in frequency, while for
nd = 1.05 the transmission peaks are typically broad and
overlapped. We ﬁnd k0 = k0r + ik0i of the quasimodes in
the wavelength range of 500-750nm. Figure 1(c) shows
the values of k0r and k0i/hk0ii of these modes (hk0ii is the
average over all the quasimodes in the wavelength range
of 500-750nm). In the system with nd = 2.0, most quasi-
modes are well separated spectrally, and they match the
transmission peaks. k0r corresponds to the frequency of
a transmission peak, and k0i to the linewidth of a trans-
mission peak. However, some quasimodes are located
close to the system boundary, thus having relatively large
k0i. They are usually invisible in the transmission spec-
trum due to spectral overlap with neighboring transmis-
sion peaks, which cause the number of transmission peaks
[Fig. 1(a)] slightly less than the number of quasimodes
[solid squares in Fig. 1(c)]. In the system with nd = 1.05,
however, the number of peaks or maxima in the trans-
mission spectrum [Fig. 1(b)] is signiﬁcantly less than the
number of quasimodes [open circles in Fig. 1(c)]. This
is because in the under-coupling regime the decay rates
of the quasimodes often exceed the frequency spacing to
neighboring modes. The spectral overlap of the quasi-
modes makes the transmission peaks less evident and
some even buried by the neighboring ones. It is clear in

3

 

 

 

 

1

(a)

1.0

(b)

B

A

0.9

n

=2.00

d

n

=1.05

d

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

(c)

 n=1.05 passive

(d)

k

 (nm

)

0

-1

 

 

 n=2.00 passive

 n=2,00 uniform gain

 n=1.05 uniform gain

-1

k

 (nm

)

0

 

 n=2.00 passive

 n=1.05 passive

2.5

 n=2,00 uniform gain

 n=1.05 uniform gain

T

0.8

 

0.7

0.6

0.5

3.0

>

k

<

/

k

r
0

r
0

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

T

1E-5

10

0.1

0.01

1E-3

1E-4

1E-6

1E-7

1E-8

1E-9

1E-10

1E-11

1E-12

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

>

k
<

/

k

i

0

i

0

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

-1

k

 (nm

)

0r

-1

k

 (nm

)

0r

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a), (b): Transmission T through a
1D random structure with nd = 2.0, 1.05 as a function of vac-
uum wavevector k0. (c) Frequencies k0r and normalized decay
rates k0i/hk0ii of the quasimodes in the random systems with
nd = 2.0 (solid square) and nd = 1.05 (open circle), com-
pared with the frequencies k0 and normalized threshold gain
ki/hkii of lasing modes in the same systems with nd = 2.0
(+) and nd = 1.05 (×) under uniform excitation. (d) Nor-
malized frequency spacing ∆k0r/h∆k0ri of neighboring quasi-
modes in the random systems with nd = 2.0 (solid square)
and nd = 1.05 (open circle), compared with the normalized
frequency spacing ∆k0/h∆k0i of neighboring lasing modes in
the same systems with nd = 2.0 (+) and nd = 1.05 (×) under
uniform excitation.

Fig. 1(c) that the decay rate ﬂuctuation is much stronger
in the random system with nd = 2.0 (solid squares) than
that with nd = 1.05 (open circles). This is consistent
with the broadening of quasimode decay rate distribu-
tion as a system approaches the localization regime with
increasing scattering strength. Figure 1(d) plots the fre-
quency spacing ∆k0r between adjacent quasimodes nor-
malized to the average value h∆k0ri. The quasimodes
of the random system with nd = 1.05 are more regu-
larly spaced in frequency than those in the system with
nd = 2.0. The average mode spacing is inversely propor-
tional to the system length L.

To interpret this phenomenon, we investigate the wave-
functions of the quasimodes. Figure 2(a) [(b)] shows
the spatial distribution of intensity I(x) = |E(x)|2 for
a typical quasimode of the random system with nd = 2.0
(nd = 1.05). I(x) is normalized such that the spatial in-
tegration of I(x) within the random system is equal to
unity. The expression of E(x) given in the previous sec-
tion reveals the two factors determining the envelop of
the wavefunction, i.e., the interference term E±(x) and
the exponential growth term e±n(x)k0ix. Depending on
which term is dominant, the spatial proﬁle of the quasi-

 

x (nm)

 

 passive

 global gain

 local gain

 

 

(a)

0.0000

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

0.0020

0.0016

0.0012

m
r
o
n

I

0.0008

0.0004

0.00010

0.00008

0.00006

m
r
o
n

I

0.00004

0.00002

(b)

0.00000

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

x (nm)

FIG. 2: (Color online) Spatial intensity distributions of quasi-
modes (black solid curve) and the corresponding lasing modes
in the presence of global gain (red dashed curve) or local gain
(green dotted curve). The pumped region is between the two
vertical lines, Lp = 11.87µm. (a) The mode marked as A in
Fig. 1(a), λ = 646nm, nd = 2.0. (b) The mode marked as B
in Fig. 1(b), λ = 549nm, nd = 1.05.

modes can be drastically diﬀerent. In the over-coupling
regime, strong scattering makes the interference term
dominant, and I(x) exhibits strong spatial modulation.
Most quasimodes are localized inside the random system,
similar to the mode in Fig. 2(a). Their decay rates are
low as a result of the interference-induced localization.
In the under-coupling regime, the interference eﬀect is
weak due to small amount of scattering. The exponen-
tial growth term e±n(x)k0ix dominates E(x), making I(x)
increase exponentially towards the boundaries. The in-
terference term only causes weak and irregular intensity
modulation. A typical example of such mode proﬁle is ex-
hibited in Fig. 2(b). Since the quasimodes in the under-
coupling system are spatially extended across the entire
random system, the rates of light leakage through the
boundaries are much higher than those of the localized
modes in the over-coupling system. We repeat the above
calculations with many random systems, and ﬁnd the two
diﬀerent types of quasimodes are rather typical for the
systems in the over-coupling and under-coupling regimes.
The mode proﬁles and frequency spacings in the under-
coupling systems reveal the feedbacks from the dielectric
layers close to the boundaries are dominant over those
from the interior. Thus the quasimodes in the under-
coupling systems are formed mainly by the feedbacks

4

from the scatterers near the system boundaries. How-
ever, the feedbacks from the scatterers in the interior
of the system are weak but not negligible, e.g. they in-
duce small ﬂuctuations in the frequency spacings and the
decay rates. Note that a random system in the under-
coupling regime cannot be approximated as a uniform
slab with the average refractive index nef f , despite its
quasimodes exhibit similar features as the Fabry-Perot
modes formed by the reﬂections from the slab bound-
aries. Since in our calculation the refractive index out-
side the random system is set to nef f , there would be
no quasimodes if the random system were replaced by
a dielectric slab of nef f . Hence, the quasimodes in the
under-coupling regime are not formed by the boundary
reﬂection. In the over-coupling regime, the feedback from
the scatterers deep inside the system becomes dominant,
and the interference of multiply scattered waves lead to
spatial localization of the quasimodes.

Next we study the lasing modes in the random system
with uniform gain and compare them to the quasimodes.
ni is constant everywhere within the random system, so
that the gain length lg = 1/ki = 1/k0ni in the dielectric
layers is equal to that in the air gaps. Using the method
described in the previous section, we ﬁnd the frequency
and threshold gain of each lasing mode. We calculate
the lasing modes in the same random systems as in Fig.
1 within the same wavelength range (500-750nm). The
frequency k0 and normalized threshold ki/hkii of each
lasing mode are plotted in Fig. 1(c) for comparison with
the quasimodes. It is clear that there exists one-to-one
correspondence between the lasing modes and the quasi-
modes for the random systems in both over-coupling and
under-coupling regimes. For the system with nd = 2.0,
the lasing modes match well the quasimodes, with only
slight diﬀerence between ki/hkii and k0i/hk0ii for the rel-
atively leaky modes. For the system with nd = 1.05,
the deviation of the lasing modes from the quasimodes is
more evident, especially for those modes with large decay
rates. Such deviation can be explained by the modiﬁca-
tion of transfer matrix M . In the passive system, k0i is
constant but ki = k0in(x) varies spatially. With the in-
troduction of uniform gain, ki becomes constant within
the random system, and the feedback inside the random
system is caused only by the contrast in the real part of
the wavevector kr = k0n(x) between the dielectric lay-
ers and the air gaps. With a decrease in the scattering
strength, k0i in the passive system gets larger, and the
ratio of the feedback caused by the contrast in ki to that
in kr increases. The addition of uniform gain results in
a bigger change of M , as it removes the feedback due to
the inhomogeneity of ki. Moreover, since there is no gain
outside the random system, ki suddenly drops to zero at
the system boundary. This discontinuity of ki generates
additional feedback for the lasing modes. In the weakly
scattering system, the threshold gain is high. The larger
drop of ki at the system boundary makes the additional
feedback stronger. To check its contribution to lasing, we
replace the random system with a uniform slab of nef f

while keeping the same gain proﬁle. Since the real part of
the refractive index or kr is homogeneous throughout the
entire space, the feedback comes only from the disconti-
nuity of ki at the slab boundaries. We ﬁnd the lasing
threshold in the uniform slab is signiﬁcantly higher than
that in the random system with nd = 1.05. This result
conﬁrms that for the random systems in Fig. 1, the ad-
ditional feedback caused by the ki discontinuity at the
system boundary is weaker than the feedback due to the
inhomogeneity of kr inside the random system. However,
if we further reduce nd or L, the threshold gain increases,
and the feedback from the system boundary due to gain
discontinuity eventually plays a dominant role in the for-
mation of lasing modes.

We also compute the intensity distribution I(x) of each
lasing mode at the threshold. I(x) is normalized such
that its integration across the random system is equal
to 1. Such normalization facilitates the comparison of
the lasing mode proﬁle to the quasimode proﬁle. In Fig.
2(a) [(b)], I(x) of the lasing mode is plotted together with
that of the corresponding quasimode. Although the las-
ing mode proﬁles in Figs. 2(a) and (b) are quite diﬀerent,
they are nearly identical to those of the quasimodes. For
the localized mode in the random system with nd = 2.0,
I(x) of the lasing mode does not exhibit any visible dif-
ference from that of the quasimode in Fig. 2(a). For the
extended mode in the system with nd = 1.05, the lasing
mode proﬁle deviates slightly from the quasimode proﬁle,
especially near the system boundaries. This deviation re-
sults from the modiﬁcation of the transfer matrix M by
the introduction of uniform gain across the random sys-
tem. The modiﬁcation is bigger in the under-coupling
system, leading to larger diﬀerence in the mode proﬁle.
Finally we investigate the lasing modes under local ex-
citation.
In particular, f (x) = 1 for |x − xc| ≤ L1/2,
f (x) = exp[−|x − xc|/L2] for L1/2 < |x − xc| ≤ L1/2 +
2L2, and f (x) = 0 elsewhere. The lasing mode frequency
k0, the threshold gain ˜ki = k0 ˜ni, and the spatial pro-
ﬁle I(x) are calculated with the method described in the
previous section. I(x) is normalized in the same way as
that of quasimode for comparison. As an example, we
consider the same random structures as in Fig. 1 and
introduce gain to the central region xc = L/2 of length
Lp = L1 + 4L2 = 8.84 + 3.03 = 11.87µm (marked by
two vertical lines in Fig. 2). Figures 3(a) plots k0 and
˜ki/h˜kii for all the lasing modes within the wavelength
range of 500-750nm. Comparing with Fig. 1, we ﬁnd
some quasimodes fail to lase under local pumping, no
matter how high the pumping level is. The rest modes
lase but their wavefunctions can be signiﬁcantly modiﬁed
by the particular local excitation. The two modes shown
in Fig. 2 both lase under the local pumping conﬁguration
we consider. Their intensity distributions are plotted in
Fig. 2. The mode in Fig. 2(a) is localized within the
pumped region, and its spatial proﬁle is barely modiﬁed
by the local gain. In contrast, the mode in Fig. 2(b) is
spatially extended and has less overlap with the central
gain region. The intensity distribution of the lasing mode

5

 

(a)

 n

=2.00

d

d

 n

=1.05

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

-1

k

 (nm

)

0

 

(b)

 n

=2.00

2.0

 n

=1.05

d

d

 

 

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

>
k
<

/
k

i

i

2.5

1.5

1.0

>

k

<

/

k

0

0

0.5

0.0

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

-1

k

 (nm

)

0

FIG. 3: (Color online) (a) Normalized threshold gain ˜ki/hkii
versus the frequency k0 of lasing modes in the random systems
with nd = 2.0 (solid squares) and nd = 1.05 (open circles) un-
der local excitation (between the two vertical lines in Fig. 2).
(b) Normalized frequency spacing ∆k0/h∆k0i of neighboring
lasing modes in the systems with nd = 2.0 (solid squares) and
nd = 1.05 (open circles) under local excitation.

diﬀers notably from that of the quasimode. The expo-
nential growth of I(x) towards the system boundaries is
suppressed outside the gain region, while inside the gain
region I(x) grows exponentially towards the ends of the
gain region at a rate higher than that of the quasimode.
These behaviors can be explained by the spatial variation
of gain. Outside the pumped region, there is no optical
ampliﬁcation thus light intensity does not increase expo-
nentially. Within the pumped region, the faster intensity
growth results from the higher threshold gain for las-
ing with local pumping than that with global pumping.
Nevertheless, the close match in the number and spatial
position of intensity maxima justiﬁes the correspondence
of the lasing mode to the quasimode. We repeat the
calculation with many modes under the same pumping
conﬁguration, and ﬁnd the weight of a mode within the
gain region is often enhanced. To quantify such enhance-
ment, we introduce a parameter δ which is equal to the
ratio of I(x) integrated over the pumped region to that
over the entire random system. We compare the values
of δ for the lasing modes under local excitation to that of
the corresponding quasimodes. For the mode Fig. 2(b),
δ is increased from 0.33 for the quasimode to 0.41 for the
lasing mode, while for the mode in Fig. 2(a) δ remains
at 0.98. Thus the eﬀect of local pumping is stronger for
the modes in the weakly scattering system. This is be-

cause when scattering is weak the local gain required for
lasing is high. The feedback within the pumped region
is greatly enhanced, leading to the modiﬁcation of mode
proﬁle.

We also investigate the ﬂuctuations in threshold gain
and frequency spacing of lasing modes under local excita-
tion. Figure 3(a) shows the lasing threshold ﬂuctuation
for the random system with nd = 1.05 is smaller than
that with nd = 2.0. Since the number of lasing modes
under local pumping is usually less than that of quasi-
modes, the average mode spacing h∆k0i is increased. Fig-
ure 3(b) plots the frequency spacing ∆k0 of adjacent las-
ing modes normalized to the average value h∆k0i. There
is more ﬂuctuation in the mode spacing for the random
system with nd = 2.0 than that with nd = 1.05. Hence,
with local gain the frequency spacing of lasing modes is
more regular in the under-coupling regime than in the
over-coupling regime. This result is similar to that with
uniform gain.

Although the local pumping enhances the feedback
within the pumped region, the feedback outside the
pumped region cannot be neglected. To demonstrate
this, we calculate the lasing modes in the reduced sys-
tems of length Lp by replacing the random structures
outside the gain region with a homogeneous medium of
nef f . The reduced system has uniform gain instead of
the gain proﬁle f (x) in the original system. The results
are shown in Fig. 4(a) for the system with nd = 2.0 and
in Fig. 4(b) for the system with nd = 1.05. The number
of lasing modes in the reduced system is less than that
in the original system under local pumping. In fact, the
lasing modes are generally diﬀerent, with only exception
for a few modes localized within the gain region in the
system with nd = 2.0. Moreover, the lasing threshold
in the reduced system is higher than that in the original
system with local gain. These diﬀerences are attributed
to the feedbacks from the random structure outside the
pumped region of the original system. It demonstrates
the scatterers in the unpumped region also provides feed-
back for lasing. By comparing Figs. 4(a) and (b), we ﬁnd
the diﬀerence in the lasing threshold between the origi-
nal system under local pumping and the reduced system
is smaller for the system with nd = 1.05 than that with
nd = 2.0.
It indicates the contribution from the scat-
terers outside the gain region to lasing is reduced as the
system moves further into the under-coupling regime.

We note that local pumping introduces inhomogene-
ity in the imaginary part of the refractive index, which
generates additional feedback for lasing. To check its ef-
fect, we simulate lasing in a homogeneous medium with
the average refractive index nef f . The local gain pro-
ﬁle f (x) remains the same. Only the spatial variation of
ki(x) = k0˜nif (x) provides feedback for lasing. As shown
in Figs. 4(a) and (b), the lasing thresholds are much
higher than those in the random systems, even for the
system with nd = 1.05. This result demonstrate that for
the random systems in Figs. 3 and 4, the feedbacks for
lasing under local pumping are predominately caused by

6

 

1
-

)

m

(
 
k

i

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.5

-0.6

-0.2

-0.4

1
-

)

m

(
 
k

i

 

 

-0.4

 original random system with local gain

(a)

 homogeneous media with local gain

 reduced random system with uniform gain

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

-1

k

 (nm

)

0

 

-0.6

(b)

 original random system with local gain

 reduced random system with uniform gain

 homogeneous media with local gain

-0.8

0.009

0.010

0.011

0.012

-1

k

 (nm

)

0

FIG. 4: (Color online): Threshold gain ˜ki/h˜kii of lasing modes
in the (original) random system of length 24.1µm with lo-
cal excitation in the central region of length 11.87µm (solid
square), compared to the threshold gain of lasing modes in
the reduced system of length 11.87µm under uniform excita-
tion (open circle) and the threshold gain of lasing modes in
the homogeneous medium with nef f under local excitation in
the region of length 11.87µm (a) nd = 2.0, nef f = 1.3361, (b)
nd = 1.05, nef f = 1.0168.

the inhomogeneities in the real part of the refractive in-
dex n(x) or the wavevector kr(x) = k0n(x). However, a
further reduction in nd or Lp could make the feedback
due to the inhomogeneity of ki(x) signiﬁcant.

IV. CONCLUSION

We have developed a numerical method to calculate
the quasimodes of 1D passive random systems and the
lasing modes at the threshold with either global or local
pumping. We identify two regimes for the quasimodes:
over-coupling regime (L > ξ) and under-coupling regime
(L ≪ ξ). In the under-coupling regime the electric ﬁeld
of a quasimode grows exponentially towards the system
boundaries, while in the over-coupling regime the ﬁeld
maxima are located inside the random system. The fre-
quency spacing of adjacent modes are more regular in
the under-coupling regime, and there is less ﬂuctuation
in the decay rate. The distinct characteristic of the quasi-
modes in the two regimes result from the diﬀerent mech-
anisms of mode formation. In an over-coupling system,
the quasimodes are formed mainly by the interference of

multiply scattered waves by the particles in the interior
of the random system. In contrast, the feedbacks from
the scatterers close to the system boundaries play a dom-
inant role in the formation of quasimodes in an under-
coupling system. The contributions from the scatterers in
the interior of the random system to the mode formation
are weak but not negligible. They induce small ﬂuctua-
tions in mode spacing and decay rate. As the scattering
strength is increased, the feedbacks from those scatter-
ers in the interior of the system get stronger, and the
frequency spacing of the quasimodes becomes more ran-
dom.

In the presence of uniform gain across the random sys-
tem, the lasing modes (at the threshold) have one-to-
one correspondence with the quasimodes in both over-
coupling and under-coupling systems. However, the las-
ing modes may diﬀer slightly from the corresponding
quasimodes in frequency and spatial proﬁle, especially
in the under-coupling systems. This is because the in-
troduction of uniform gain removes the feedback caused
by spatial inhomogeneity of the imaginary part of the
wavevector within the random system and creates addi-
tional feedback by the discontinuity of the imaginary part
of the wavevector at the system boundaries. As long as
the scattering is not too weak, the quasimodes are only
slightly modiﬁed by the introduction of uniform gain to
a random system and they serve as the lasing modes.
This conclusion is consistent with that drawn from the
time-dependent calculations4,5,26. Hence, the knowledge
of the decay rates of the quasimodes, in conjunction with
the gain spectrum, can predict the ﬁrst lasing mode. Be-
cause of the correspondence between the lasing modes
and the quasimodes, the frequency spacing of adjacent
lasing modes is more regular in the under-coupling sys-
tems with smaller mode-to-mode variations in the lasing
threshold.

When optical gain is introduced to a local region of the

7

random system, some quasimodes cannot lase no matter
how high the gain is. The rest modes can lase but their
spatial proﬁles may be signiﬁcantly modiﬁed. Such modi-
ﬁcations originate from strong enhancement of feedbacks
from the scatterers within the pumped region.
It in-
creases the weight of a lasing mode within the gain region.
Nevertheless, the feedbacks from the scatterers outside
the pumped region are not negligible. Moreover, the spa-
tial variation in the imaginary part of the refractive index
generates additional feedback for lasing. As the pumped
region becomes smaller, the number of lasing modes is
reduced, and the frequency spacing of lasing modes is in-
creased. In an under-coupling system, the regularity in
the lasing mode spacing remains under local excitation.
Our calculation results will help to interpret the latest
experimental observations22,23 of spectral periodicity of
lasing peaks in weakly scattered random systems under
local pumping. We note that the eﬀect of local excitation
can be signiﬁcant in an over-coupling system if the size of
the pumped region is much smaller than the spatial ex-
tend of a localized mode or the spatial overlap between
the pumped region and the localized mode is extremely
small. Hence, caution must be exerted in using the decay
rates of quasimodes to predict the lasing threshold or the
number of lasing modes under local excitation. Finally
we comment that the increase in the mode concentration
in the gain region by local pumping have distinct physi-
cal mechanism from the absorption-induced localization
of lasing modes in the pumped region11. The former is
based on selective enhancement of feedback within the
gain region, while the latter on the suppression of the
feedback outside the pumped region by reabsorption.

We acknowledge stimulating discussions with Profs.
Christian Vanneste, Patrick Sebbah, and Lev I. Deych.
This work is supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under the Grant No. DMR-0093949.

1 H. Cao, ”Lasing in random media,” Waves in Random Me-

dia 13, R1–R39 (2003).

2 V. S. Letokhov, “Quantum statistics of multi-mode radi-
ation from an ensemble of atoms,” Sov. Phys. JETP 26,
1246–1251 (1968).

3 H. Cao H, J. Y. Xu, S. H. Chang, S. T. Ho, E. W. Seelig,
X. Liu, and R. P. H. Chang, ”Spatial conﬁnement of laser
light in active random media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5584–
5587 (2000).

4 C. Vanneste and P. Sebbah, “Selective excitation of local-
ized modes in active random media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,
183903 (2001).

5 X. Y. Jiang, and C. M. Soukoulis, ”Localized random las-
ing modes and a path for observing localization,” Phys.
Rev. E 65, 025601 (2002).

6 V. M. Apalkov, M. E. Raikh, and B. Shapiro, ”Random
resonators and prelocalized modes in disordered dielectric
ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 016802 (2002).

7 H. Cao, Y. Ling, J. Y. Xu, and A. L. Burin, ”Probing lo-

calized states with spectrally resolved speckle techniques,”
Phys. Rev. E 66, R025601 (2002).

8 L. I. Deych, ”Eﬀects of spatial nonuniformity on laser dy-

namics,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 043902 (2005).

9 H. E. T¨ureci, A. D. Stone and B. Collier, ”Self-consistent
multimode lasing theory for complex or random lasing me-
dia,” Phys. Rev. A 74, 043822 (2006).

10 H. E. T¨ureci, A. D. Stone and L. Ge, ”Theory
of the spatial structure of non-linear lasing modes”’
arXiv:cond-mat/0610229.

11 A. Yamilov, X. Wu, H. Cao, and A. Burin, ”Absorption-
induced conﬁnement of lasing modes in diﬀusive random
medium,” Opt. Lett. 30, 2430–2432 (2005).

12 T. Sh. Misirpashaev and C. W. J. Beenakker, ”Lasing
threshold and mode competition in chaotic cavities,” Phys.
Rev. A 57 2041–2045 (1998).

13 Y. Ling, H. Cao, A. L. Burin, M. A. Ratner, C. Liu, R. P.
H. Chang, ”Investigation of random lasers with resonant
feedback,” Phys. Rev. A 64, 063808 (2001).

14 M. Patra, ”Decay rate distributions of disordered slabs and
application to random lasers,” Phys. Rev. E, 67, 016603
(2003).

15 S. H. Chang, H. Cao, and S. T. Ho, ”Cavity formation and
light propagation in partially ordered and completely ran-
dom one-dimensional systems,” IEEE J. Quantum Elec-
tron. 39, 364–374 (2003).

16 V. M. Apalkov and M. E. Raikh, ”Universal ﬂuctuations of
the random lasing threshold in a sample of a ﬁnite area,”
Phys. Rev. B, 71 054203 (2005).

17 G. Hackenbroich, ”Statistical theory of multimode random
lasers,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 38, 10537–10543 (2005).
18 T. Kottos, ”Statistics of resonances and delay times in ran-
dom media: beyond random matrix theory,” J. Phys. A:
Math. Gen. 38, 10761–10786 (2005).

19 K. L. van der Molen, A. P. Mosk, and A. Lagendijk, ”In-
trinsic intensity ﬂuctuations in random lasers”, Phys. Rev.
A 74, 053808 (2006).

20 H. Kogelnik, and C. V. Shank, ”Coupled-Wave Theory of

8

Distributed Feedback Lasers,” J. Appl. Phys. 43, 2327–
2335 (1972).

21 S. V. Frolov, Z. V. Vardeny, K. Yoshino, A. A. Zakhidov,
and R. H. Baughman, ”Stimulated emission in high-gain
organic media,” Phys. Rev. B 59, R5284–R5287 (1999).
22 R. C. Polson, and Z. V. Vardeny, ”Organic random lasers
in the weak-scattering regime,” Phys. Rev. B 71, 045205
(2005).

23 X. Wu, A. Yamilov, A. A. Chabanov, A. A. Asatryan, L. C.
Botten, and H. Cao, ”Random lasing in weakly scattering
systems,” Phys. Rev. A, 74, 053812 (2006).

24 S. M. Dutra, and G. Nienhuis, ”Quantized mode of a leaky

cavity,” Phys. Rev. A 62, 063805 (2000).

25 X. Y. Jiang, and C. M. Soukoulis, ”Symmetry between
absorption and ampliﬁcation in disordered media,” Phys.
Rev. B 59, R9007–R9010 (1999).

26 C. Vanneste, P. Sebbah, and H. Cao, unpublished.

