7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
3
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

APS/123-QED

Nonlocal eﬀects on the resonant dielectric surface
observed by near-ﬁeld optical probing in mid-infrared range

Dmitry Kazantsev∗
Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Physics,
B.Cheremushkinskaya st., 25, Moscow, 117218, Russia.
(Dated: January 19, 2014)

The local electromagnetic ﬁeld distribution over the dielectric (SiC) surface illuminated by mid-IR
light of frequency close to the lattice resonance was directly mapped with an apertureless scattering
near-ﬁeld optical microscope. Half of the sample surface was covered with a metal layer, in which
some small (0.2 − 10 µm) holes were formed. It was found, that due to the eliminating of collective
surface polarization eﬀects, the amplitude of the electromagnetic ﬁeld becomes several times higher
over such holes than over inﬁnitely open surface of the same dielectric.

PACS numbers: 07.79.Fc, 68.37.Uv, 71.36.+c, 73.20.Mf, 78.20.Ci, 78.68.+m, 87.64.Xx

Surface states, containing the mixture of strongly in-
teracting electromagnetic ﬁeld and lattice oscillations
at the solid surface (surface phonon-polariton states,
SPP [1]) attract the interest as possible base of opto-
electronic microdevices [2],
[3], as well as surface plas-
mon polariton phenomena [4]. Surface polariton eﬀects
can be also utilized for the spectroscopy of molecules ad-
sorbed on the substrate [5], if any ﬁeld enhancement on
subwavelength-size surface features takes place, like Ra-
man scattering enhancement [6], [7] on rough metal sur-
face due to surface plasmon excitations.

Collective electromagnetic excitations in polar crys-
tals, caused by the resonant displacement of charged
atoms in the presence of electromagnetic ﬁelds, have been
investigated since 1908 [8]. Maxwell equations for the
radiation must be solved together with the equations of
motion for the charged atoms in the lattice. This task
has been solved for bulk isotropic media [9],[10],[11] and
for semi-inﬁnite solid (it is well presented in [12],[13]).
The components of the E-ﬁeld are presented as plane
wave term Ej = E0j · e−σz (ω)z · eikx(ω)x · eiky(ω)y with
j ∈ {x, y, z}. For the light frequency at the rest-
strahlen band (near lattice resonance, between frequen-
cies of purely transversal ωT and purely longitudinal ωL
modes in bulk) the solution is known as the SPP mode.
For cubic crystals the lateral SPP wavevector can be ex-
pressed analytically as

kx,y(ω) =

ω
c s

εvεlat(ω)
εv + εlat(ω)

, εv ≡ 1,

(1)

and the ﬁeld decay in normal direction is described by

σz(beneath)(ω) = i

ω
c

εlat(ω)
εv + εlat(ω)

(2)

p

∗Electronic address: kaza@itep.ru; The experiment was carried out
in Max-Planck institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

where εlat(ω) is a frequency-dependent dielectric func-
tion, which can be expressed from experimentally ob-
served bulk phonon polariton frequencies ωL and ωT

εlat(ω) = εlat(∞)(1 +

L + ω2
ω2
T
T − ω2 − iωΓ

ω2

)

(3)

The consideration presented above assumes the collective
nature of the SPP oscillations on the inﬁnite surface. The
wave vector conservation law suppresses eﬀective excita-
tion of the SPP by the external radiation in this ideal
case. This symmetry rule can be lifted by any disconti-
nuities of the surface electromagnetic properties, in par-
ticular by the sharp edge(s) of the metal mask [14] formed
on the surface. It was hardly possible to prove the va-
lidity of description of the SPP excitation near ﬁnite-size
mask structures by the direct probing of the ﬁeld dis-
tribution in sub-wavelength scale, until SNOM [15] was
invented. The point-like tip of SNOM has no transla-
tional symmetry, and therefore no symmetry restrictions.
The scattering type (s-SNOM [16]) setup is a kind of
SNOM in which the light scattered by the tapping AFM
[17] tip is collected. The s-SNOM allows amplitude and
phase [18] mapping of the electromagnetic phenomena in
close vicinity of the surface with a spatial resolution at
some cases [19] as sharp as 1 nm, regardless to the wave-
length. The tip scatters some fraction of the SPP ﬁeld to
external space, and the amplitude of scattered wave can
be in dipolar approximation described [20] by

Esc ∝ αt(εs(x, y), zts) · Eloc

(4)

where Eloc is the ﬁeld at the tip location. The eﬀec-
tive polarizability αt(εs(x, y), zts) of the tip is a nonlin-
ear function of the tip-sample separation and strongly
depends on the local dielectric value of the sample.

In our experiment we investigated the conﬁguration of
the surface electromagnetic ﬁeld excited on the surface of
resonant media by the external radiation. We used the
SiC crystal sample with c-axis normal to the surface. The
laser frequency range (880-936 cm−1) was close to the lat-
tice resonance of SiC (νT =796 cm−1, νL=968 cm−1), so

2

FIG. 1: Experimental setup geometry. Laser - CO2 tunable
laser (880 − 936 cm−1), BS - interferometer beamsplitter, RM
- reference beam mirror, Obj - objective to focus laser beam
onto sample and tip and to collect scattered light, Det - mid-
IR photodetector.

that one could expect an eﬀective SPP excitation caused
by the laser beam. The sample surface was covered
with 120 nm Au ﬁlm, which is thick enough to be com-
pletely opaque for the light wave used. To deﬁne small
(0.2 − 10 µm) holes in the metal layer, a salt dust mask
was used in the evaporation process, so that some ”lakes”
of SiC remained open in the Au mask after the salt was
washed away. Half of the sample surface was left un-
cover, so that we are able to compare the light scattering
response on gold, on clean SiC surface far from the metal
edge, and on SiC surface at small holes in Au layer.

The experimental setup, based on s-SNOM instru-
ment [21], is shown in Fig. 1. The beam of the tun-
able 13C16O2 laser is focused onto the sample, so that
the Pt-coated Si tip of tapping-mode AFM is in the cen-
ter of focal spot. The shape of the focal spot could be
described by soft (Gaussian) function of some hundreds
micrometers width, and the phase fronts of the illumi-
nation light were proven to be ﬂat across whole spot.

FIG. 2: Tip scattering amplitude (A) and phase (P) images
of the SiC surface recorded at frequency 936 cm−1. The edge
of the Au mask, with small holes in it, can be seen. The
”pump” light direction (shown by arrow) is parallel to the
metal ﬁlm edge. The cantilever beam (schematically shown
at the image) is mainly parallel to the light direction. The
values in the ovals represent light scattering amplitude at the
marked points. The scan area dimensions are 95 × 65 µm

That means, that the sample illumination could be well
described by the plane wave with ﬁeld amplitude Elas0.
Thus, the direction of the exciting light is well deﬁned in
our experiment by azimuthal angle ϕ and incidence angle
θ = 30◦ to the sample surface. The light scattered by the
tip is collected back to the Michelson interferometer, and
the variations of the detector signal Idet(t) are demodu-
lated at higher harmonic components of the tip tapping
frequency Ω, utilizing the nonlinearity of αt(ε(x, y), zts)
dependency on zts. The averaging of demodulated sig-
nal I (nΩ)
over reference beam phase [22] gives us full
knowledge concerning amplitude and phase of scattered
radiation variations.

det

The near ﬁeld scattering component amplitude/phase
map is shown in Fig. 2. The spatial resolution is as sharp
as at least 200 nm (judging by 10%-90% step) in topog-

raphy, and also 180-200 nm in the optical response. That
shows not only high lateral resolution of the instrument
used, but also the sharpness of the mask features on the
sample.

We have shown in our previous work [23] that, in our
particular case (media, tip, tapping amplitude and light
frequency), the signal I (nΩ)
det detected in the experiment is
in fact proportional to the E-ﬁeld above the surface and
represents therefore the local polarization of the surface
being mapped:

det ∝ α(2Ω)
I (2Ω)

ef f (εs(x, y)) · Eloc(x, y)

(5)

α(2Ω)

Here

factor

complex

ef f (εs(x, y))

replaced
αt(εs(x, y), zts),
is a local property of surface point,
determined by the tip motion, scattering z-dependency
nonlinearity and the photocurrent demodulation at the
2nd harmonic component of the tip tapping frequency
Ω.

We have shown also that the local ﬁeld Eloc, in turn,
could be expressed as sum of incident radiation ﬁeld Elas
and some term proportional to the amplitude E′
spp of
[running] SPP wave(s), which was launched somewhere
far from the tip location:

Eloc(x, y) = (Elas + E′

spp) = (Elas0 + ηP0spp)eiωt

(6)

where η is a constant to convert polarization Pspp be-
low the surface to the ﬁeld E′
spp above the surface by
continuity conditions. Strictly speaking, Eqs. (1- 3) for
anisotropic SiC are a bit more complicated than for cubic
crystals (and we have taken that into account), but the
diﬀerence in εa, εc is just a few percent [24], [25] for SiC.
Therefore, even if one neglects the anisotropy completely,
it results in no more than 1-2% error in our case.

As one can see on the map (Fig.2), the E-ﬁeld am-
plitude above SiC surface within small openings in the
metal mask is several times (we observed up to 20 times
for some frequencies) higher than amplitude over open
surface of the SiC far from the metal edge. That means
the amplitude of local E-ﬁeld at any surface point does
not depend only on local amplitude/phase of incident
light and on local sample dielectric constant at given light
frequency. It indicates clearly, that also the presence of
the resonant media far beyond the tip-sample near-ﬁeld
interaction region (of dimensions known to be about tip
radius) plays signiﬁcant role, so that excluding most of
the surface around (with the opaque metal mask) leads
to the dramatic increase of the local response at the point
being investigated. In other words, all surface points of
SiC lattice, driven by the external electromagnetic radi-
ation, deliver their response to the point of observation
as SPP wave. For the inﬁnite open surface, the role of
that polarization of neighbors is (in average) destructive
in formation of the local ﬁeld.

3

We can demonstrate our explanation by the model cal-
culations utilizing Green’s function integration. We have
shown [26], that under the following conditions observed
in our experiment: (a) the SPP wave on semi-inﬁnite sur-
face is well described by the decayed sinewave (b) the si-
nusoidal ﬁeld distribution, produced by the straight edge
of the metal mask, starts as sharp as within 150-200 nm
from the edge (c) there is no signiﬁcant reﬂections of
SPP wave from the mask edges (the conditions in fact
take place), the quantitative description of the SPP ﬁeld
E′
spp can be
obtained in complex values by 2-dimensional integration
of Green’s function (see e.g. [27] )

spp can be dramatically simpliﬁed. Namely, E′

Espp(x, y) = ζ

Elas(x′, y′

)G(x − x′, y − y′

)dx′dy′

(7)

ZXY

where Elas(x, y) = E0exp(iωt + ikr) represents the ex-
ternal light over the surface point (x, y, z = 0) with its di-
rection described by ϕ and θ, complex value ζ expressed
from the ﬁeld components continuity conditions repre-
sent the ﬁeld component above the point (x, y) for the
SPP wave created at the point (x′, y′). Once launched
at the point (x′, y′), the SPP wave representing inter-
action of the point (x′, y′) with all other surface points,
automatically fulﬁls the wave equations if Green’s func-
tion G(x − x′, y − y′) is an eigenfunction of the equations
mentioned. The less is the ”skin-layer depth” (light pen-
etration depth deﬁned by (2)), the better is agreement
between experimentally observed data and simulation re-
sults in such a simpliﬁed model. For the description of
exited polarization delivery from one point of the surface
to another, cylindric functions [28], expressed in central
coordinates, are more convenient than plane waves. Nev-
ertheless, both kinds of functions are proven to be solu-
tions of the wave equation under the same conditions and
assumptions.

The results of numerical calculations are shown in
Fig. 3. The shapes of the areas to be used for integra-
tion were taken from bitmaps of real surface images. The
SPP wave pattern in every mask opening was calculated
separately. Despite the simplicity of the model used, the
calculations still show the following: (a) the amplitude
over the mask edge and over the SiC at any small hole in
the mask is higher than over the inﬁnitely open surface,
(b) the amplitude variations near the edge are stronger
if the illumination light comes from the metal mask side
and weaker for the opposite orientation of the sample,
and also (c) even the conﬁguration of the standing wave
in a small hole has qualitative agreement with the ob-
served scattering amplitude map for diﬀerent directions
of the light.

Comparing present results with the results of previous
investigations of the similar samples, we can state the
following. The modiﬁcation of the tip polarizability due

4

cient lateral transfer of lattice polarization by SPP waves,
the electromagnetic response of resonant dielectric sur-
face can not be described just by the tailoring of local
ﬁelds beneath and above the surface. Instead, it must be
considered as collective eﬀect, with integration over all
surface points around. In the terms of Green’s-function
formalism, explanation looks as: only those neighbors
contribute to the local surface polarization by construc-
tive way, which have no retardation. On the large open
surface the destructive contribution of the relatively far
neighbors is stronger because their amount is more, being
proportional to the distance R from them dS = 2πRdR.
Thus, excluding such far neighbors by covering the sur-
face with a metal mask containing just small openings,
leads to signiﬁcant enhancement of the local amplitude.

Author thanks Dr. R.Hillenbrand and Dr. F.Keilmann
for their everyday’s encouragement in the works reported
and their very constructive criticism. The author is in-
debted to use DSP demodulation circuit programmed by
N.Ocelic. The mechanical parts of the sSNOM head work
always perfectly due to the professional skill of R.Gatz
who fabricated it.

[1] G. Borstel and H. J. Falge, in Electromagnetic Surface
Modes, ed. by A. D. Boardman (Wiley, Chichester, 1982),
219.

[2] R. Hillenbrand, Ultramicroscopy 100, 421 (2004).
[3] T. Taubner, F. Keilmann, and R. Hillenbrand, Nano

Lett. 4, 1669 (2004).

[4] W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature

(London), 424, 824 (2003).

[5] M. S. Anderson, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 2964 (2003)
[6] Nie S. M., Emery S. R. Science 275, 1102 (1997).
[7] Kneipp, K. et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1667(1997).
[8] G. Mie, Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 25, 377 (1908).
[9] R.H.Lyddane, R.G.Sachs, E.Teller. Phys. Rev., 59, 673

(1941).

[10] M.Born, K.Huang, Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattices
(Oxford University Press, New York, 1954), Sec. 7

[11] T.H.K.Barron. Phys.Rev. 123, 1995 (1961).
[12] R.Ruppin, R.Engman. Rep. Prog. Phys. 33, 149 (1970).
[13] D.L.Mills, E.Burstein. Rep. Prog. Phys. 37, 817 (1974).
[14] Y.J.Chabal, A.J.Sievers, Appl.Phys.Lett. 32, 90 (1978).
[15] M.H.P. Moers et.al., J. Appl. Phys. 75, 1254 (1994).
[16] F.Zenhausern, M.P.O

Boyle, and H.K. Wickramasinghe,

′

Appl. Phys. Lett., 65(13), 1623 (1994).

[17] G.Binnig, C.F.Quate, C.Gerber. Phys.Rev.Lett. 56, 930

[18] R.Hillenbrand, F.Keilmann, Phys.Rev.Lett., 85, 3029

(1986).

(2000).

[19] F. Zehnhausern, Y.Martin, K.Wickramasinghe. Science

[20] F. Keilmann and R. Hillenbrand. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.

269, 1083, (1995).

London A 362 787 (2004).

croscopy, 210, 311 (2003).

[21] T.Taubner, R.Hillenbrand, F.Keilmann. J. of Mi-

FIG. 3: Excited E-ﬁeld amplitude/phase map calculated with
Greens function integration. Light frequency is 936 cm−1.
Image size 95×65 µm. Light incidence angles ϕ = 65◦ (shown
by arrow) and θ′
from normal.

◦
= 60

to the interaction with its dipole image in the surface
is deﬁned mainly by the surface region corresponding to
the tip radius and tip-sample distance. The dramatic
increase of the tip scattered near-ﬁeld signal was men-
tioned [29] by comparison of the scattered ﬁeld ampli-
tude while scanning over SiC surface at the frequency
close to SiC lattice resonance and the amplitude over
non-resonant surface of the metal mask. The mapping of
the sample dielectric function (which deﬁnes variations in
α(2Ω)
ef f (εs(x, y)), the tip eﬀective polarizability) was also
performed [30] to observe a material contrast between
two kinds of dielectric. In the current research, instead,
the dielectric function was assumed to be constant for
whole SiC surface being mapped, so that the sSNOM
tip was considered as just a tool (of constant α(2Ω)
ef f (εs)
sensitivity factor) to scatter the surface ﬁeld. Thus, the
scattering amplitude was compared not for the metal and
dielectric surface, but rather for the diﬀerent areas of the
same dielectric (SiC) media.

Thus, we can conclude that, in the presence of eﬃ-

[22] N. Ocelic, A. Huber, R. Hillenbrand. Appl. Phys. Lett.

89 101124 (2006).

[23] A. Huber et.al. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87 081103 (2005).
[24] Physics of Group IV Elements and III-V Compounds,
edited by K.-H. Hellwege and O. Madelung, Landolt-
B¨ornstein, New Series, Group III, Vol.17, Pt. a, Springer,
Berlin, 1982.

[25] B. Adolph et.al. Phys.Rev.B, 55, 1422 (1997).
[26] D. V. Kazantsev, JETP Letters, 83, 323 (2006).
[27] A.V. Zayats, I.I. Smolyaninov, A.A. Maradudin. Physics

5

Reports 408 131 (2005).

[28] We used the code of Hankel function from: Numerical
recipes in C: the art of scientiﬁc computing (ISBN 0-521-
43108-5) 1988-1992 by Cambridge University Press.
[29] R. Hillenbrand, T. Taubner, F. Keilmann. Nature, 418,

159 (2002).

[30] N.Ocelic, R.Hillenbrand. Nature Materials 3, 606 (2004).

