7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
3
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

APS/123-QED

Current-induced break of inversion symmetry in Si: optical second-harmonic
generation induced by a dc current

O.A. Aktsipetrov,∗ V.O. Bessonov, A.A. Fedyanin, and A.I. Maidykovsky
Department of Physics, Moscow State University, 119992 Moscow, Russia
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The dc-current-induced optical second-harmonic generation is observed at the surface of cen-
trosymmetric single crystal of Si. Surface dc-current with density up to jmax ∼ 103 A/cm2 results
in break of inversion symmetry of Si and induces optical second-harmonic generation with intensity
that corresponds to the appearance of dipole second-order susceptibility χ(2)d(jmax) ∼ 3·10−15m/V.

PACS numbers:

Optical second-harmonic generation (SHG) in reﬂec-
tion from the surface of centrosymmetric materials is at-
tractive topic of studies from the very beginning of non-
linear optics and dates back to the 1968’s experimental
paper by N. Bloembergen and coworkers [1]. For this
long-term period of studies and applications SHG was
recognized as versatile powerful probe of surfaces and
nanostructures [2]. High surface and interface sensitivity
of SHG was a base of the broad family of nonlinear optical
characterizations. Important role in these probes belongs
to the studies of SHG under external impacts. The dc-
electric-ﬁeld-induced SHG (EFISH) [3] and dc-magnetic-
ﬁeld-induced SHG (MSHG) [4] are broadly used nowa-
days for characterization of electron and magnetic prop-
erties of surfaces and nanostructures.

Silicon is one of the materials thoroughly studied be
means of the surface SHG. Apart from the general inter-
est to this semiconductor, Si serves as basic model of the
centrosymmetric material for nonlinear optical studies.
Centrosymmetric materials are very speciﬁc in nonlinear
optics as all even-order nonlinear susceptibilities vanish
away in this class of materials [5]. As a consequence,
SHG is strongly forbidden in the balk of centrosymmetric
materials in dipole approximation due to symmetry selec-
tion rules. Anyway, the weak second-order susceptibility
of the bulk still exists and is attributed to the quadrupole
contribution. This quadrupole susceptibility is responsi-
ble for a weak background SHG contribution originating
from the bulk. Basically this quadrupole SHG is the
sole second-order nonlinear response in inﬁnite samples
of centrosymmetric materials.

Situation is signiﬁcantly changed in semi-inﬁnite sam-
ples: quite strong dipole surface SHG appears. There are
three major mechanisms of the break of inversion sym-
metry at interfaces of centrosymmetric materials:

1. Inversion symmetry is broken at the boundary of
semi-inﬁnite sample due to the discontinuity of the crys-
tallographic structure at the interface [6]. The thickness
of surface layer with broken symmetry can be estimated
as several periods of crystal lattice. The interfacial break
of inversion symmetry results in appearance of dipole sur-

∗Electronic address: aktsip@shg.ru;http://www.shg.ru

face contribution that is dominant in reﬂected SHG.

2. Another mechanism of dipole reﬂected SHG is re-
lated to subsurface dc-electric ﬁeld in space charge region
(SCR) of semiconductors that appears in the vicinity of
interfaces due to the band banding eﬀect. A dc electric
ﬁeld in SCR, that is normal to the surface, breaks inver-
sion symmetry in SCR and provides the strong EFISH
contribution [7]. The thickness of SCR varies from sev-
eral nanometers to a few hundreds of nanometers that
depends on band banding potential and doping of semi-
conductor.

3. Third mechanism is related to the nonhomogeneous
surface stress that also breaks inversion symmetry at in-
terface and provides dipole susceptibility of surface layer
and dipole reﬂected SHG [8]. The thickness of disturbed
layer depends on stress relaxation and is in the range of
several nanometers.

The corresponding nonlinear polarization of semi-
inﬁnite centrosymmetric crystal is given by the following
formal equation:

P2ω ∝ [bχ(2)q,b(k) + bχ(2)d,s + bχ(2)d,b(E0)+
bχ(2)d,s(σ)]EωEω,

(1)

where bχ(2)q,b(k) is quadrupole bulk susceptibility that
originates from spatial dispersion and depends on wave
vector k of fundamental ﬁeld Eω, bχ(2)d,s is surface dipole
susceptibility that originates from the break of the crys-
talline structure at the boundary of semi-inﬁnite sample,
bχ(2)d,b(E0) is dipole susceptibility of SCR that appears
from the break of inversion symmetry by dc electric ﬁeld
E0 and bχ(2)d,s(σ) is dipole surface susceptibility induced
by strain which is described by strain tensor bσ. For the
last decades a number of experimental and theoretical
works were devoted to the studies of these mechanisms
of surface SHG in metals and semiconductors [9-11].

Generally, all these contributions to the SHG are at-
tributed to the noncentrosymmetric distortion of the
structure of the surface crystallographic unit cell.
Ini-
tially centrosymmetric unit cell becomes noncentrosym-
metric either due to existence of surface boundary or ap-
pearance of strong dc electric ﬁeld due to band bend-
ing and inhomogeneous surface stress in surface layer,
e.g. due to lattice missmatch between Si and SiO2.
Meanwhile, apart from these contributions conditioned

2

of polarization of the fundamental and SH waves, respec-
tively, the CISH signal appears as j is normal to the plane
of incidence: for transversal geometry, and vanishes as j
is in plane of incidence: for longitudinal geometry.

In this Letter current-induced break of the inversion
symmetry and dc-current-induced SHG are observed in
centrosymmetric Si. Three-fouled objective is targeted in
these studies: relation between symmetry properties of
electron subsystem and transport phenomenon in semi-
conductor, new nonlinear optical eﬀect in nonequilibrium
semiconductor, new probe for characterization and imag-
ing of surface current distribution at semiconductor sur-
faces and interfaces.

There are the following points in realization of this

experiment:

1. Fabrication of silicon structure that allows to pass
dc current with density high enough to induce noncen-
trosymmetric perturbation of electron distribution func-
tion.

2. Selection of experimental conditions to avoid the

inﬂuence of all other contributions except bχ(2)d(j).

3. Selection of experimental conditions to avoid arte-

facts related to heating the samples by current.

4. The direct CISH eﬀect should be distinguished from
the in-plane EFISH eﬀect, i.e. SHG induced by the dc
electric ﬁeld Edriv, that drives in-plane dc current.

Figure 2a shows schematic view of Si structure for ob-
servation of the CISH eﬀect. Highly p-doped (B-doped,
ρ ∼ 10−3Ωcm) Si(001) wafer is used as substrate for ex-
perimental structure. Square-shaped (approximately of
0.5 cm×0.5 cm area) Ni-electrodes are deposited on top of
Si(001) wafer with native oxide by thermal evaporation of
Ni in residual vacuum ∼ 10−6 torr. The gap between Ni-
electrodes is oriented along Y crystallographic axis. The
width of the gap is 200±20 microns. The thickness of
Ni ﬁlm is 300±20 nm. After deposition of Ni stripes the
samples were annealed to form Ohmic contacts between
Si wafer and Ni electrode in accordance with procedure
described elsewhere [13]. Contacts exhibit linear I − V
dependence and Ohmic resistance of approximately 0.02
Ω. Maximum voltage applied to electrodes without no-
ticeable heating is up to 0.5 V. The samples are mounted
on special cooler stage to reduce the heating. Directly
measured temperature of the sample during nonlinear
optical experiments is less than 40◦C. Estimated current
density in subsurface layer with the thickness of ∼ 50
nm, that corresponds to the escape depth of the SHG
radiation at wavelength λ2ω= 390 nm, is approximately
jmax ≃ 103A/cm2.

The output of an unampliﬁed Ti:sapphire laser with a
tuning range of wavelength from 710 nm to 850 nm, a
pulse duration of 80 fs, spectral bandwidth of 10 nm, an
average power of 130 mW and repetition rate of 86 MHz
is used as the fundamental radiation in nonlinear optical
studies. The train of femtosecond pulses at a 45 angle of
incidence is focused onto the Si(001) surface in the 200
micron gap between Ni-electrodes in sport with diame-
ter of 40 microns.The SHG radiation is ﬁltered out by

FIG. 1: Panel a: schematic view of band structure of model
direct gap n-doped semiconductor (from Ref. [12]). Current
J disturbs electron distribution function in the vicinity of lo-
cal Fermi level EF that is schematically shown by step-like
feature in conduction band. Arrows show electron transitions
(real or virtual) assisted with fundamental and SHG photons.
Panel b: the same scheme for p-doped Si.

by noncentrosymmetric distortions of crystalline lattice
one more mechanism of the break of inversion symme-
try exists that is almost missed so far. The dc current
ﬂowing through semiconductor distorts equilibrium dis-
tribution function of electrons in quasi-impulse domain.
This breaks inversion symmetry of electron subsystem
of centrosymmetric semiconductor and results in appear-
ance of the new term in Eq. 1: P2ω(j) = bχ(2)d(j)EωEω,
where j is current density and bχ(2)d(j) is correspond-
ing current-induced susceptibility. Theory of dc-current-
induced SHG (CISH) in model direct band n-doped semi-
conductor is developed by Khurgin in Ref.
[12]. Fig-
ure 1a shows schematic view of band structure of direct
band semiconductor with electron distribution function
in conduction band disturbed by a dc current (from Ref.
[12]). Distribution of electrons is asymmetric for kel and
−kel , where kel is electron quasi-impulse. Perturba-
tion theory approach results in appearance of current-
induced term in second-order susceptibility with sharp
resonance in the vicinity of local Fermi level for majority
carriers in conduction band, EF . From theoretical con-
sideration it follows that bχ(2)d(j) ∝ j, where j =| j | and
bχ(2)d(j) = − bχ(2)d(−j) that implies that current should
break inversion symmetry of centrosymmetric materials.
Symmetry analysis shows that for s-in, s-out combination

appropriate glass bandpass and interference ﬁlters and is
detected by a photo-multiplier tube and a gated photon-
counting electronics. A fraction of the fundamental laser
beam was split oﬀ to generate a SH reference signal from
a crystalline Z-cut quartz plate, which normalized against
drifts in average laser power and pulse duration during
data acquisition. A detection system in ”reference” arm
is identical to that in the ”sample” arm.

To distinguish between current-induced and heating-
induced eﬀects this is worth noting that current-induced
susceptibility changes its sign under reversal of current
direction. This implies that the nonlinear optical probe
of the CISH eﬀect should be sensitive to the current direc-
tion. The dc-current-induced SHG is studied by means
of the SHG interferometry [14] with external homodyne
reference [15]. Figure 2b shows the experimental scheme
of the nonlinear optical interferometry. A 30 nm thick
indium-tin-oxide (ITO) ﬁlm on a glass substrate is used
as homodyne reference.

The total SHG intensity from the sample and the ref-
erence depends on current density, current direction, the
reference displacement, r, and is given by:

±

2ω(j, r) ∝| Eref
I
2ω Esamp
2α(Eref

2ω + Esamp
2ω
2πr
(j)) cos[
L

2ω

(j) |2= (Eref

2ω )2 + (Esamp

2ω

(j))2±

+ Φref + Φsamp],

2ω

2ω

2ω

(j), Eref

(j) = Esamp

(j) exp(iΦsamp) and Eref

(2)
where Esamp
2ω =
Eref
2ω exp(iΦref ) are complex amplitudes of the current-
reversal and current-independent SH ﬁelds from sample
and reference, respectively; Esamp
2ω , Φsamp and
Φref are real amplitudes and phases of SH ﬁelds, respec-
tively; α is the coherence coeﬃcient of the fundamental
beam, L = λω(2∆n)−1 is period of interference pattern
and ∆n = n(2ω)−n(ω) describes the dispersion of the re-
fractive index of air, n, at the SH and fundamental wave-
lengths, respectively. Interference of two components of
the SH ﬁeld results in appearance of homodyne cross-
term that changes its sign under current reversal and os-
cillates as a harmonic function of the reference displace-
ment. The dc-current-induced SHG is characterized by
the CISH contrast, which is given by:

−
2ω (j,r)

ρj = I +
4Eref

2ω (j,r)−I
I ref
2ω
(j) cos[

2ω Esamp

2ω

∝
2πr
L

+ Φref + Φsamp],

(3)

To avoid the inﬂuence of current sensitive variations
of the SHG intensity related to EFISH and the stress-
induced SHG the azimuthal anisotropic properties of
SHG from Si(001) are used. From Refs.
[6] it follows
that for s-in,s-out combination of polarizations of the
SH and fundamental waves the anisotropic SH response
from Si(001) originates only from quadrupole bulk term
bχ(2)q,b(k) whereas other terms from Eq. 1 vanish away:
these terms contribute to SHG as p-polarized component
exists either for SH or fundamental ﬁelds. Moreover, one
can get rid of quadrupole bulk contribution for proper

3

mutual azimuthal orientation of Si(001) wafer and inci-
dent plane of fundamental radiation. Figure 1c shows de-
pendence of intensity of the bulk quadrupole SHG on the
azimuthal angle for the s-in,s-out combination, I s,s
2ω (θ),
that demonstrates eight-fold symmetry. If plane of inci-
dence is set at the angle θzero that corresponds to zero of
I s,s
2ω , this gets rid of the last contribution allowed for s-in,
s-out combination. It means that in these experimental
conditions the SHG intensity gets its zero value within
the experimental error bar and one can expect observa-
tion of the CISH signal on this ”zero background”.

Thus, at ”zero background” conditions of interferomet-
ric experiment in transversal geometry of electrical bias
we expect appearance of the CISH signal that should be
sensitive to reversal of j and linear with respect to j as
this is proportional to interferometric cross-term in Eq.
2, and vanishes under transition to longitudinal geom-
etry. It turns out in experiment, the current reversible

ω and Es

FIG. 2: Panel a: the schematic view of Si surface structure
with Ni electrodes and details of nonlinear optical experiment;
kω, k2ω, Es
2ω are wave vectors and s-polarized ﬁelds
of fundamental and SH waves, respectively. Coordinate frame
corresponds to crystallographic orientation of Si wafer. Panel
b: the scheme of the SHG interferometry. Panel c: azimuthal
anisotropic dependence of the SHG intensity for s-in, s-out
combination of polarizations.

CISH signal appears in the external homodyne SHG in-
terferometry for s-in,s-out combination and transversal
geometry: Figure 3a shows dependence of ρj on refer-
ence displacement. The solid line is result of approxima-
tion by oscillatory part of Eq. 3 with L= 4.8 cm that
is in good agreement with ∆n at wavelength of 780 nm

[16]. The interferometric scheme allows to maximize ρj
value: further measurement are performed at rmax cor-
responding to the maximum on dependence of ρj on r.
The analogous measurements of ρj are performed for s-
in,s-out combination and longitudinal geometry. Figure
3a demonstrates the lack of the CISH eﬀect for the lon-
gitudinal geometry: the detected SHG signal remains be
equal to ”zero background” within the experimental er-
ror bar. Figure 3b shows linear dependence of ρj on j

FIG. 3: Panel a: interferometric dependence of CISH contrast
at fundamental wavelength of 780 nm for transversal geome-
try, ﬁlled symbols (measured at J =1 A), and for longitudinal
geometry, open symbols (measured at J =4 A). The latter
show the lack of CISH eﬀect. Panel b: current dependence
of CISH signal. Panel c: spectral dependence of CISH eﬀect,
ﬁlled symbols (measured at J =4 A), and spectral dependence
of EFISH eﬀect, open symbols (from Ref. [18]); solid lines are
guide for eye.

at ﬁxed position of reference with respect to the sample,
which corresponds to the measurements of current de-
pendence of bχ(2)d(j) in accordance to Eq. 3. The linear
current dependence of ρj reveals analogous dependence
of interference cross-term in Eq. 3 and as a consequence
linear dependence of bχ(2)d(j) on j.

4

There is the only one source of the SHG signal, which
can disguise the CISH eﬀect in our experimental condi-
tions. This is in-plane EFISH. Two experimental argu-
ments prove that the SHG signal that accompanies a dc
current corresponds to the direct CISH eﬀect instead of
the in-plane EFISH.

The ﬁrst argument is comparison of the expected value
of the in-plane EFISH signal I2ω(Edriv) from our in-plane
biased Si and EFISH signal I2ω(ESCR) from space charge
region of Si in biased metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS)
capacitors. The ratio of these EFISH signals is propor-
tional to the squared ratio of the corresponding dc elec-
tric ﬁelds: I2ω(Edriv)/I2ω(ESCR) ∝ [Edriv/ESCR]2 [17].
The value of the in-plane dc electric ﬁeld Edriv = 103
V/m is typical for our Si structure and experimental con-
ditions. Whereas typical value of the dc electric ﬁeld nor-
mal to the surface is ESCR = 107 V/m [18]. Expected
ratio of EFISH signals is I2ω(Edriv)/I2ω(ESCR) ∼ 10−8÷
10−9. Meanwhile, the absolute value of the CISH contri-
bution to the SHG intensity I2ω(j) can be recalculated
from ρj. The corresponding ratio I2ω(j)/I2ω(ESCR) ∼
5 · 10−6 that is by two orders of magnitude large than for
the estimated in-plane EFISH contribution.

Another argument is comparison of spectral depen-
dence of the CISH and EFISH eﬀects in p-Si(001). Fig-
ure 3c shows spectral dependencies of the CISH con-
trast measured in our experiments and the EFISH co-
eﬃcient from Ref.
[18]. Comparison of these spectra
shows the diﬀerence that prove our conclusion that ob-
served current-induced variations of the SHG intensity
are not related to the EFISH eﬀect. Moreover, spectral
dependence of the CISH signal is in qualitative agreement
[12]. Figure
with results of model consideration in Ref.
1b shows schematically the band structure of Si. In the
case of p-doped Si distribution function for holes is sim-
ilar to that for electrons considered in Ref.
[12]. Local
Fermy level for holes at room temperature for our highly
p-doped Si wafers is 0.13±0.01 eV below the bottom of
valance band at k=0. This implies that sharp CISH res-
onance (Khurgin resonance) is expected approximately
at 3.53 eV whereas the SHG spectroscopy in Figure 3c
cover the spectral range below 3.4 eV that is restricted
by the tuning range of Ti:sapphire laser. Slightly arising
spectral dependence of the CISH contrast in Figure 3c
can be qualitatively associated with the low-energy wing
of the temperature broadened Khurgin resonance.

Comparison of the CISH signal with reﬂected SHG
from crystalline quartz which dipole second-order sus-
ceptibility is known from handbooks [19] allows to es-
timate maximum magnitude of the CISH susceptibility
χ(2)d(jmax) ∼ 3 · 10−15m/V and the CISH coeﬃcient
β ∼ 2 · 10−8 m2/A, which is deﬁned by: bχ(2)d(j) = β · j.
In conclusion, the dc-current-induced optical SHG is
observed in centrosymmetric single crystal of Si. dc cur-
rent with surface density up to jmax ∼ 103 A/cm2 in-
duces optical SHG with intensity that corresponds to the
second-order susceptibility χ(2)d(jmax) ∼ 3 · 10−15m/V.
Details of the CISH experiment: azimuthal orientation of

Si(001) surface, polarization combination, the SHG inter-
ferometry and spectroscopy techniques, prove the mech-
anism of the SHG current dependence that is current-
induced break of inversion symmetry of Si. Observation

of the CISH eﬀect opens perspectives of this novel sur-
face probe in characterization of semiconductor devices:
surface current imaging and mapping.

5

18, 167 (1967).

1229(1989).

New York, 1984).

51, 1983 (1983).

[1] N. Bloembergen, R.K. Chang, S.S. Jha, Phys. Rev., 174,

813 (1968).

[2] Y.R. Shen, Nature (London), 337, 519 (1989).
[3] S.H. Lee, R.K. Chang, N. Bloembergen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[10] J.F. McGilp, Phys. Stat. Sol. A 175, 153(1999) .
[11] G. L¨upke, Surf. Sci. Rep. 35, 75 (1999).
[12] J.B. Khurgin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 1113 (1995).
[13] A. Singh, W.S. Khokle, Proceedings of the IEEE 75, 852

[4] Ru-Pin Pan, H.D. Wei, Y.R. Shen, Phys. Rev. B, 39,

[14] G. Berkovic, Y.R. Shen, G. Marowsky, and R. Steinhoﬀ,

(1987).

J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 205 (1989).

[5] Y.R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics. (Wiley,

[15] J.I. Dadap, J. Shan, A.S. Weling, J.A. Misewich, A. Na-

[6] H.W.K. Tom, T.F. Heinz, Y.R. Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[7] J.I. Dadap, X.F. Hu, M.H. Anderson, M.C. Downer,
J.K. Lowell, O.A. Aktsipetrov, Phys. Rev. B 53, 7607R
(1996).

[8] W. Daum, H.-J. Krause, U. Reichel, H. Ibach, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 71, 1234 (1993).

[9] T.F. Heinz, in Nonlinear Surface Electromagnetic Phe-
nomena, H.-E. Ponath and G.I. Stegeman, eds. (North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1991).

hata, T.F. Heinz, Opt. Lett. 24, 1059 (1999).

[16] O.A. Aktsipetrov, E.D. Mishina, T.V. Misuryaev, A.A.
Nikulin, V.R. Novak, R. Stolle, and Th. Rasing, Surf.
Sci. 402-404, 576 (1998).

[17] O.A. Aktsipetrov, A.A. Fedyanin, V.N. Golovkina, T.V.

Murzina, Opt. Lett. 19, 1450 (1994).

[18] O.A. Aktsipetrov, et al. Phys. Rev. B, 60, 8924 (1999).
[19] R.J. Pressley, edit. Handbook of lasers with selected data
on optical technology. (Chemical Rubber Co. Cleveland,
1971).

