Preprint of:
A. M. Bra ´nczyk, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop
“Optical trapping of a cube”
in R. Sang and J. Dobson (eds), Australian Institute of Physics (AIP) 17th National Congress 2006: Refereed Papers,
Australian Institute of Physics, 2006 (CD-ROM, unpaginated).

7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical trapping of a cube
A. M. Bra ´nczyk, T. A. Nieminen, N. R. Heckenberg and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop
School of Physical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Australia

Abstract

The successful development and optimisation of optically-driven micromachines will be greatly
enhanced by the ability to computationally model the optical forces and torques applied to such
devices. In principle, this can be done by calculating the light-scattering properties of such de-
vices. However, while fast methods exist for scattering calculations for spheres and axisymmetric
particles, optically-driven micromachines will almost always be more geometrically complex. For-
tunately, such micromachines will typically possess a high degree of symmetry, typically discrete
rotational symmetry. Many current designs for optically-driven micromachines are also mirror-
symmetric about a plane. We show how such symmetries can be used to reduce the computational
time required by orders of magnitude. Similar improvements are also possible for other highly-
symmetric objects such as crystals. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of such methods by modelling
the optical trapping of a cube, and show that even simple shapes can function as optically-driven
micromachines.

Introduction

Optical tweezers (Ashkin et al. 1986) have been deployed for a variety of distinct uses: non-contact manip-
ulation of microorganisms, the measurement of piconewton forces, and as a tool for the study of a range of
microscopic systems, from colloids through to single molecules. One growing development is the exploitation
of optical torque, which has already seen practical application (Bishop et al. 2004; Kn ¨oner et al. 2005). A major
objective, towards which a number of groups are working, is the development of optically-driven microma-
chines (Nieminen et al. 2006). A serious impediment, however, is the difﬁculty of calculating the expected
optical forces and torques for such micromachines.

The optical forces and torques in optical tweezers arise from scattering of the trapping beam by the particle.
Therefore, the calculation of these forces and torques is essentially a problem in computational light scattering.
As the particles involved have dimensions comparable to the wavelength of the light used, large and small
particle approximations, such as geometric optics and Rayleigh scattering, respectively, are inapplicable. It
is necessary to resort to solution of either the Maxwell equations. A wide range of methods are available
for the solution of such scattering problems (Kahnert 2003), and, in principle, it should be possible to use
any such method. However, when modelling optical trapping, one typically wishes to know how the force
and torque vary with position, which required repeated calculations. One basic question is where in the
trap does the particle rest when in equilibrium—to answer this might require a few dozen calculations of the
force at different positions along the beam axis. To map the force and torque over a two-dimensional slice
through an optical trap will require approximately a thousand separate calculations to achieve a reasonable
resolution. When one considers the optical micromanipulation of a complex structure—such as an optically-
driven micromachine—the orientation affects both the force and the torque, introducing even more degrees
of freedom. Thus, a method that allows rapid repeated calculations is required for the modelling of optical
micromanipulation.

1

Fortunately, such a method—the T-matrix method (Waterman 1971; Mishchenko et al. 2004)—is available.
The T-matrix method is more properly a description of the scattering properties of a particle, rather than a
method of calculating the scattering properties. The incident ﬁeld can be expressed as a set of expansion
coefﬁcients an in terms of as a sufﬁciently complete basis set of functions ψ(inc)
, where n is a mode index
labelling the functions, each of which is a divergence-free solution of the Helmholtz equation:

n

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Uinc =

anψ(inc)

n

.

Uscat =

pkψ(scat)

,

k

pk =

Tknan

P = TA

Similarly, we can write the scattered wave, in terms of a basis set: ψ(scat)

,

k

where pk are the expansion coefﬁcients for the scattered wave. As long as the electromagnetic or optical prop-
erties of the scatterer are linear, the relationship between the two can be written as a simple matrix equation

or, in more concise notation,

where Tkn are the elements of the T-matrix. Thus, the T-matrix formalism is a Hilbert basis description of the
scattering properties of the particle, with the T-matrix depending only on the properties of the particle—its
composition, size, shape, and orientation—and the wavelength, and is otherwise independent of the incident
ﬁeld. As a result, the T-matrix only needs to be calculated once for a particular particle, after which it can be
used for rapid repeated calculations of the optical force and torque (Nieminen et al. 2004b).

In the simplest case, that of a homogeneous isotropic sphere, the T-matrix is given by the analytical
Lorenz–Mie solution (Lorenz 1890; Mie 1908), while more complex cases require computational solution.
For homogeneous isotropic axisymmetric particles of simple shape, such as spheroids or cylinders, this can
be done very rapidly using the extended boundary condition method, also known as the null-ﬁeld method
(Tsang et al. 2001), since surface integrals over the particle reduce to one dimension. For more complex shapes,
the computational time required increases greatly. However, symmetries such as discrete rotational symmetry
or mirror symmetry can be used to reduce the time required (Kahnert 2005). Notably, these are exactly the
symmetries typical of most optically-driven micromachine designs. We will proceed to use a cube as an ex-
ample of such optimisation, and in the process show that even simple shapes can function as optically-driven
micromachines.

Exploiting the Symmetry of a Cube

For a compact scatterer, the T-matrix method is usually implemented with vector spherical wavefunctions
(VSWFs) as the basis functions, which fall into two groups, TE and TM. These are usually written as Mnm and
Nnm, respectively, where n is the radial mode index and m is the azimuthal mode index. The properties that
are of importance when optimising the calculation of a T-matrix by exploiting the symmetry properties of a
scatterer are the parity and rotational symmetries.

We employ a point-matching method that allows us to calculate the T-matrix column-by-column consid-
ering only a single incident VSWF at a time (Nieminen et al. 2004b). Each column requires the solution of
an overdetermined linear system, and the time required by this is the dominant component in the overall
computational time. Solution of linear systems typically scales as N3, where N is the number of unknowns.

∞

n

∞

k

∞

n

2

(cid:229)
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
Parity

Each individual VSWF has either odd or even parity with respect to the xy-plane. That is, the magnitude of
the electric ﬁeld is symmetric relative to this plane, and the phase is either the same or differs by π, such that
E(x, y, z) = E(x, y, −z) (even parity) or E(x, y, z) = −E(x, y, −z) (odd parity). TE VSWFs have odd parity
when n + m is odd, and even otherwise. TM VSWFs have odd parity when n + m is even, and even otherwise.
When the scatterer is mirror symmetric about the xy-plane, the parity of the incident ﬁeld is unchanged on
scattering, and thus the scattered ﬁeld consists only of modes of the same parity as the incident ﬁeld. Accord-
ingly, only half of the total number of scattered ﬁeld modes need to be included in the linear system, halving
the number of unknowns, N, with a corresponding reduction in computational time.

Rotational symmetry

Each individual VSWF has an azimuthal dependence of exp(imφ). If a scatterer possesses discrete rotational
symmetry of order p, this effectively provides a periodic boundary condition, determining the periodicity
with respect to the azimuthal angle φ that the scattered ﬁeld can possess. From Floquet’s theorem, the allowed
azimuthal mode indices for the scattered ﬁeld are

mscat = minc + ip

(5)

where i is an integer. This is analagous to the generation of a discrete spectrum of scattered plane waves by a
grating. If the particle has no rotational symmetry (ie p = 1), then coupling to all azimuthal modes occurs. For
an axisymmetric particle, p = ∞ and mscat = minc, which is widely used when calculating scattering by such
± 8, .... As a result, the number of unknown in the
± 4, minc
particles. For a cube, p = 4, and mscat = minc, minc
linear system is reduced to approximately 1/4.

Make use of both symmetries together reduces the number of unknowns by a factor of eight, with a con-
siderable savings in computational time. For example, a cube with faces two wavelengths across required 30
minutes for the calculation of the T-matrix on a 32 bit single-processor 3GHz PC, as compared with 30 hours
without the symmetry optimisations.

Optical Trapping of a Cube

Figure 1 shows the optical trapping of a cube. The initial position of the cube is shown by the blue frame, and
the equilibrium position by the red frame. At each position, the optical force and torque are calculated, and the
motion of the cube found. The cube is assumed to be moving at terminal speed at all times (the time constant
for approach to terminal speed in optical tweezers is typically on the order of 0.1 µm (Nieminen et al. 2001),
which is much smaller than the time steps used to calculate the motion of the cube).

As the discrete rotational symmetry of a cube is typical of the rotational symmetry of optical driven micro-
machines (Nieminen et al. 2006), and the optical torque is determined by the rotational symmetry of a scatterer
(Nieminen et al. 2004a), a cube can be expected to rotate when illuminated by a beam carrying angular momen-
tum. To test this, the cube is place initially on the beam axis, at the focus of the beam. The beam is circularly
polarised, and therefore carries spin angular momentum of ¯h per photon. As can be seen in ﬁgure 2, the cube is
rapidly pushed into the equilibrium position along the beam axis, where it spins due to the transfer of angular
momentum from the beam to the cube. Although the face-up position is an unstable equilibrium, any torque
acting to bring the cube into the stable corner-up position seen in ﬁgure 1 is too small to have any visible effect
over the duration of the simulation. The cube is shown both from the side and from below.

Refererences

Ashkin, A., Dziedzic, J.M., Bjorkholm, J.E. and Chu, S. (1986). Observation of a single-beam gradient force

optical trap for dielectric particles. Optics Letters 11, 288-90.

3

Figure 1: Optical trapping of a cube

Bishop, A.I., Nieminen, T.A., Heckenberg, N.R. and Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H. (2004). Optical microrheology

using rotating laser-trapped particles. Physical Review Letters 92, 198104.

Kahnert, F.M. (2003). Numerical methods in electromagnetic scattering theory. Journal of Quantitative Spec-

troscopy and Radiative Transfer 79-80, 775-824.

Kahnert, M. (2005). Irreducible representations of ﬁnite groups in the T-matrix formulation of the electromag-

netic scattering problem. Journal of the Optical Society of America A 22, 1187-99.

Kn ¨oner, G., Parkin, S., Heckenberg, N.R. and Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H. (2005). Characterization of optically

driven ﬂuid stress ﬁelds with optical tweezers. Physical Review E 72, 031507.

Lorenz, L. (1890). Lysbevægelsen i og uden for en af plane Lysbølger belyst Kugle. Videnskabernes Selskabs

Mie, G. (1908). Beitr¨age zur Optik tr ¨uber Medien, speziell kolloidaler Metall ¨osungen. Annalen der Physik 25,

Skrifter 6, 2-62.

377-445.

Mishchenko, M.I., Videen, G., Babenko, V.A., Khlebtsov, N.G. and Wriedt, T. (2004). T-matrix theory of elec-
tromagnetic scattering by particles and its applications: a comprehensive reference database. Journal of
Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer 88, 357-406.

Nieminen, T.A., Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H., Heckenberg, N.R. and Bishop, A.I. (2001). Numerical modelling of

optical trapping. Computer Physics Communications 142, 468-71.

Nieminen, T.A., Rubinsztein Dunlop, H. and Heckenberg, N.R. (2003). Calculation of the T-matrix: general
considerations and application of the point-matching method. Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and
Radiative Transfer 79-80, 1019-29.

Nieminen, T.A., Parkin, S.J., Heckenberg, N.R. and Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H. (2004a). Optical torque and sym-

Nieminen, T.A., Heckenberg, N.R. and Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H. (2004b). Computational modelling of optical

metry. Proceedings of SPIE 5514, 254-63.

tweezers. Proceedings of SPIE 5514, 514-23.

Nieminen, T.A., Higuet, J., Kn ¨oner, G., Loke, V.L.Y., Parkin, S., Singer, W., Heckenberg, N.R. and Rubinsztein-
Dunlop, H. (2006). Optically driven micromachines: progress and prospects. Proceedings of SPIE 6038,
237-45.

4

Figure 2: Rotation of a cube

Tsang, L., Kong, J.A., Ding, K.H. and Ao, C.O. (2001). Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves: Numerical Simu-

Waterman, P.C. (1971). Symmetry, unitarity, and geometry in electromagnetic scattering. Physical Review D 3,

lation. Wiley, New York.

825-39.

5

