7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observation of the Faraday eﬀect via beam deﬂection in a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld

Ambarish Ghosh and Peer Fischer
The Rowland Institute at Harvard, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142

We report the observation of the magnetic ﬁeld induced circular diﬀerential deﬂection of light at
the interface of a Faraday medium. The diﬀerence in the angles of refraction or reﬂection between
the two circular polarization components is a function of the magnetic ﬁeld strength and the Verdet
constant. The reported phenomena permit the observation of the Faraday eﬀect not via polarization
rotation in transmission, but via changes in the propagation direction in refraction or in reﬂection.
An unpolarized light beam is predicted to split into its two circular polarization components. The
light deﬂection arises within a few wavelengths at the interface and is therefore independent of
pathlength.

PACS numbers: 33.55.Fi, 33.55.-b, 33.55.Ad, 78.20.Ek, 78.20.Fm, 78.20.Ls

Well established magneto-optical phenomena are the
Faraday, Cotton-Mouton-Voigt and the magneto-optical
Kerr (MOKE) eﬀects, as well as magnetic circular dichro-
ism. These are described by changes in the azimuth (opti-
cal rotation) or the ellipticity of an electromagnetic wave.
Apart from changes in these Stokes parameters, a mag-
netic ﬁeld may also inﬂuence the propagation direction
of light.

The deﬂection of a light beam in isotropic media sub-
ject to a homogenous [1] transverse magnetic ﬁeld has
been reported by Rikken and Tiggelen who observed the
deﬂection in scattering [2] as well as in transmission [3],
and by Blasberg and Suter [4] who showed that angu-
lar momentum conservation causes a small lateral dis-
placement near resonance in an atomic vapor. Trans-
verse magnetic ﬁeld induced refraction at the cesium va-
por/glass interface has been reported by Schlesser and
Weis [5]. However, their observed deﬂection appears to
be nonlinear in the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld and
nonlinear in the light intensity [5]. A complete explana-
tion for this eﬀect has not yet been provided [3, 5].

Here, we show that it is also possible to observe
magneto-optical deﬂection at an interface in the presence
of a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld. In particular, we show
that longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld induced refraction and
reﬂection at an interface gives rise to a circular diﬀeren-
tial beam deﬂection, and that this is an alternate means
to determine Verdet constants.

A magnetic ﬁeld renders any medium (isotropic or
oriented) optically active.
In particular, any isotropic
medium becomes uniaxial in the presence of a magnetic
ﬁeld, and its refractive indices for right- (+) and left-
(−) circularly polarized light are unequal, such that the
plane of polarization of a linearly polarized electromag-
netic wave rotates as the wave propagates along the di-
rection of the ﬁeld. The Faraday rotation in radians de-
veloped by an electromagnetic wave at the wavelength λ
traversing a distance l is given by:

α = V B l =

π l

λ (cid:16)n(−) − n(+)

(cid:17)

(1)

where V is the frequency-dependent Verdet constant, and
B is the magnetic ﬁeld strength. Magneto-optical ac-

(a)

(b)

B

B

θi

θ(−)

(+)θ

δ

+n(  )

0n

θi
θ(−)

(+)θ

δ'

FIG. 1: a) Double refraction at the boundary of a Faraday
medium (shaded) and a medium with negligible Verdet con-
stant characterized by the scalar refractive index n0. The
direction of the transmitted beam is diﬀerent for left- and
right-circularly polarized waves. An unpolarized or a linearly
polarized beam will thus split into two. b) Reﬂection inside
a Faraday medium. The incident beam is subject to circu-
lar birefringence n(±) such that the left- and right- circular
components have diﬀerent angles of reﬂection.

tivity should, however, not only manifest itself through
Faraday rotation in transmission, but should also be ob-
servable as a deﬂection of the light beam in reﬂection [6]
and in refraction at an interface. We have recently re-
ported the observation of related phenomena in the case
of natural optical activity (chirality) [7].

If one considers the refraction of an electromagnetic
wave at a boundary formed by a Faraday medium and
a medium with a negligible Verdet constant, as shown
in Fig. 1a, then the left- and the right-circularly po-
larized waves or wave-components must independently
obey Snell’s law. Circularly polarized waves that propa-
gate along the optical axis in the Faraday medium, will

thus refract in the medium characterized by the polar-
ization independent refractive index n0 with angles of
refraction θ(−) and θ(+), depending on whether they
are, respectively, left- or right-circularly polarized. Sim-
ilarly, if an unpolarized or linearly polarized wave is in-
cident from the Faraday medium with angle of incidence
θi, then it will split into two beams, one left- and the
other right-circularly polarized. The angular divergence
δ = θ(+) − θ(−) between the two refracted circular polar-
ization components in Fig. 1a is

δ ≈ (cid:0)

n(+) − n(−)
n0

(cid:1)

sin θi
cos θ

,

where θ is the average of the two angles of refraction.
It follows that B-ﬁeld induced deﬂection of light at an
interface can be used to determine circular birefringences,
and hence Verdet constants, or in the case of a known
Verdet constant the strength of an applied magnetic ﬁeld:

δ ≈ − λ sin θi
π n0 cos θ

V B .

It is interesting to note that unlike Faraday rotation (Eq.
(1)), which is a function of the light path through the
medium, magneto-optical double refraction arises within
a few wavelengths at the interface. This could for in-
stance be of use in the study of ultrathin transparent
samples [7].

One may also consider the components of an electro-
magnetic wave that reﬂect inside the Faraday medium.
Because a circularly polarized wave reverses its circular-
ity upon reﬂection, the incident and the reﬂected waves
are necessarily associated with diﬀerent refractive in-
dices. Hence, in an optically active medium the angle
of reﬂection of a circularly polarized wave will in gen-
eral not equal the angle of incidence [6, 7]. An un-
polarized or linearly polarized wave can therefore split
into its two circularly polarized components upon reﬂec-
tion [7]. The theoretical description of magnetic double
reﬂection is complicated by the fact that the reﬂected
wave no longer propagates along the optic axis of the
system. The reﬂected beam is thus potentially subject
to circular birefringence (Faraday eﬀect) as well as the
birefringence due to a transverse magnetic ﬁeld [3]. To
simplify the discussion we will consider a reﬂected beam
that propagates in a direction perpendicular to the mag-
netic ﬁeld as shown in Fig 1b, such that it experiences
no birefringence due to the longitudinal component of
the magnetic ﬁeld. Furthermore, we neglect any trans-
verse B-ﬁeld induced birefringence and assume that the
reﬂected waves are only subject to an average refractive
index n = (n(−) + n(+))/2. The angular divergence δ′ is
then given by

′ ≈ − λ tan θi

δ

V B .

π n

(4)

Depending on the Fresnel reﬂection coeﬃcients for a
given interface, the circular components may not fully

a)

light source

  
polarizer

PEM

B

sample
  cell

2

refraction

reflection

PSD

refraction

reflection

PSD

c)

2

1

0
0.0

i

)
n
a
d
a
r
 

6
-

0
1
(

δ

b)

3

2

1

0
0.0

(2)

(3)

0.5

1.0

0.5

1.0

Magnetic field (Tesla)

FIG. 2: a) Schematic of the experimental arrangement. Light
passes through a photoelastic modulator (PEM) where its po-
larization is switched between left- and right-circular at ∼50
kHz before refracting in a glass prism (solid line), or reﬂect-
ing inside a liquid cuvette (dotted line). The prism and the
prismatic cuvette are respectively mounted inside an electro-
magnet (not shown). The position of the beam is recorded
with a position sensitive detector (PSD). b) Refraction data
for SF11 glass at 532 nm. c) Reﬂection data for pure CS2 at
∼473 nm.

reverse their circularity upon reﬂection and become ellip-
tically polarized. This can be accounted for by including
the appropriate Fresnel coeﬃcients.

We have observed the magnetic ﬁeld induced double
refraction and reﬂection phenomena in an experimental
arrangement schematically depicted in Fig 2a. In the re-
fraction measurements light from a 532 nm diode laser
was modulated between left- and right-circular polarized
with a Hinds photoelastic modulator (PEM) at ∼ 50
kHz and then passed through a transparent glass (SF11)
prism mounted between the pole pieces of an electromag-
net (Walker HV7). The position of the laser beam was
recorded with a position sensitive diode and a lockin am-
plifer. The diﬀerence in the angles of refraction for the
two circular polarization components is shown in Fig. 2b
as a function of the applied magnetic ﬁeld strength. From
a linear ﬁt to the data and using Eqn. (3) a Verdet con-
stant of 29.37 ± 0.96 T rad−1 m−1 is obtained. This is in
good agreement with the tabulated values of the Verdet
constant for SF11 Schott glass [8], from which we ex-
trapolate a Verdet constant of 30.44 T rad−1 m−1. Each
data point in Fig. 2b is measured with an uncertainty
that is approximately the size of the symbol. However,
the photoelastic modulator itself gives rise to an angular
deviation that ﬂuctuates on the time scale of the mea-
surement and causes the data points to deviate from a

3

straight line. The goodness of the straight-line ﬁt is thus
a more appropriate measure of the experimental error.
The circular diﬀerential reﬂection in a longitudinal mag-
netic ﬁeld was observed in a right-angle prismatic cuvette
ﬁlled with carbon disulﬁde (CS2). A mirror was mounted
parallel to the hypotenuse on the inside of the liquid cu-
vette. The polarization modulated beam from a ∼473
nm diode pumped solid state laser travelled along the
direction of the magnetic ﬁeld in the liquid and upon re-
ﬂection exited the liquid perpendicular to the magnetic
ﬁeld and normal to the window of the cuvette. From
the detected angular divergence shown in Fig. 2c we de-
duce a Verdet constant of 23.7 ± 0.8 T rad−1 m−1. We
suspect that the small diﬀerence with the reported con-
stant of 0.0694 min G−1 cm−1 (20.2 T rad−1 m−1) at
476.5 nm [9] is due to ellipticity in the reﬂected beam,
which has not been accounted for. We stress that even
though the experimental geometry is chosen such that
the medium is (approximately) uniaxial, the eﬀects de-
scribed here will in general be exhibited by any wave that
refracts or reﬂects at the interface of a Faraday medium.

Similar eﬀects are expected to arise in diﬀraction [10].

In summary, we have shown that the Faraday eﬀect
can be observed via double refraction or reﬂection at an
interface in the presence of a longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld.
We have demonstrated that the diﬀerence in the propa-
gation directions of the two refracted (or reﬂected) cir-
cular polarization components is an alternative means to
determine Verdet constants or magnetic ﬁeld strengths.
The eﬀects reported here distinguish themselves in a
number of ways from magneto-optical measurements re-
ported hitherto. The magnetic double refraction and re-
ﬂection phenomena may be observed both with polarized
or with unpolarized electromagnetic waves. Further, the
eﬀects arise within a few wavelengths at the boundary,
and may thus ﬁnd application in the study of ultrathin
samples. Finally, the phenomena do not suﬀer from the
n-π ambiguity, which can plague Faraday rotation mea-
surements in large magnetic ﬁelds [11], or in space as-
tronomy. This prompts us to ask whether the deﬂection
phenomena of this paper also manifest themselves in as-
trophysical observations.

[1] A light beam may also deﬂect due to a variation in the
index of refraction as a result of a magnetic ﬁeld gradient:
R. Holzner et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 3451 (1997).
[2] G. L. J. A. Rikken and B. A. van Tiggelen, Nature 381,

54 (1996).

Lett. 78, 847 (1997).

[3] G. L. J. A. Rikken and B. A. van Tiggelen, Phys. Rev.

4021 (1979).

[4] T. Blasberg and D. Suter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2507

ration (2007).

[8] Optical Glass Catalog, (Schott-Glass, Mainz, Germany,
1985). Verdet constant of SF11 glass: 18.3, 23.6, 28.5,
and 49.5 T rad−1 m−1 at respectively 656.3, 589.3, 546.1,
and 439.5 nm.

[9] A. B. Villaverde and D. A. Donatti, J. Chem. Phys. 71,

[10] F. Fazal, A. Ghosh, and P. Fischer, manuscript in prepa-

[11] A diﬀerent scheme to overcome the n-π ambiguity is pre-
sented here: M. Tatarakis, I. Watts, F. N. Beg, E. L.
Clark, A. E. Dangor, A. Gopal, M. G. Haines, P. A. Nor-
reys, U. Wagner, et al., Nature 415, 280 (2002).

[5] R. Schlesser and A. Weis, Opt. Lett. 17, 1015 (1992).
[6] M. P. Silverman and R. B. Sohn, Am. J. Phys. 54, 69

[7] A. Ghosh and P. Fischer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 173002

(1992).

(1986).

(2006).

