Curvature-induced radiation of
surface plasmon polaritons propagating around bends

Keisuke Hasegawa, Jens U. N¨ockel, and Miriam Deutsch∗
Department of Physics, University of Oregon, 1371 E 13th Ave., Eugene, OR, USA 97403
(Dated: February 4, 2008)

We present a theoretical study of the curvature-induced radiation of surface plasmon polaritons
propagating around bends at metal-dielectric interfaces. We explain qualitatively how the curvature
leads to distortion of the phase front, causing the ﬁelds to radiate energy away from the metal-
dielectric interface. We then quantify, both analytically and numerically, radiation losses and energy
transmission eﬃciencies of SPPs propagating around bends with varying radii- as well as sign-of-
curvature.

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), coupled modes of
plasmons and photons, are low-dimensional excitations
propagating at metal-dielectric interfaces. As such, SPPs
are conﬁned to lateral dimensions of the order λ/10, with
λ the vacuum wavelength of light, enabling plasmonic
devices which are more compact than existing photonic
equivalents. Owing to their large electromagnetic (EM)
ﬁeld intensity at the interfaces, SPPs are highly sensi-
tive to the surface morphology, thus allowing the real-
ization of metallic structures capable of controlling and
manipulating light on the nano-scale. This, in addition
to advances in nanofabrication technologies, has led to
a growing interest in realizing ultra-compact plasmon-
based integrated circuits. Recent studies of plasmonic
manipulation include SPP waveguiding and bending in
patterned metallic ﬁlms[1, 2], guiding via resonant en-
ergy transfer in ordered arrays of metal nanoparticles[3],
as well as demonstrations of SPP prisms, lenses[4], mir-
rors, beamsplitters, and interferometers[5].

As the need for integration of compact lightwave de-
vices is growing, it is necessary that we obtain an under-
standing of the fundamental properties of SPP propaga-
tion and manipulation in these environments. Of par-
ticular interest is the development a quantitative the-
ory of curvature-induced radiative energy loss in SPPs
propagating at curved metal-dielectric interfaces. This
enables the determination of SPP propagation eﬃcien-
cies when the radius of curvature is smaller than or
comparable to the signal wavelength[6, 7, 8]. Careful
analysis of the relations between the propagation eﬃ-
ciency and the interface curvature is essential when de-
signing plasmonic devices, as it should set a limit on
the radius of curvature and, subsequently, on feature
size in plasmonic-circuits. Several recent studies have
addressed surface plasmon waveguiding around bends.
However, these studies are primarily focused on in-plane
guiding[9, 10, 11, 12] or on using multiple-interface ge-

∗Electronic address: miriamd@uoregon.edu

ometries such as metal-dielectric-metal waveguides[13] or
long-range SPP waveguides[14]. To date, SPP guiding on
a single bent interface remains largely unknown.

This article presents a theoretical analysis of curvature-
induced radiation emitted by SPPs propagating around
bends at metal-dielectric interfaces. In Sec. II we intro-
duce the geometry of our system, followed by a simple
qualitative analysis in Sec. III describing the radiative
nature of SPP propagation around bends. This enables
us to develop a more rigorous analytical approach for
calculating losses and propagation eﬃciencies, which we
present in Sec. IV. Section V provides a subsequent nu-
merical analysis, and its results are compared with the
analytical results. A novel resonator-based method for
enhancing the transmittance is presented in Sec. VI. Con-
clusions are presented in Sec. VII.

FIG. 1:
(a) The geometry of the curved metal-dielectric in-
terface. A rounded edge, characterized by a permittivity (cid:15)i,
has a bend angle θ and a ﬁnite bend radius R. The bend is
conﬁned to the region of space shown, with center of curva-
ture at the origin. The rest of space is occupied by a medium
with (cid:15)o. Axes x1 and x2 extend along the boundaries between
regions I and II and regions II and III, respectively. In the
x1 − x2 plane, regions I and III are semi-inﬁnite. The sys-
tem is also inﬁnite in extent along the entire z axis. Arrows
indicate incident and reﬂected ﬁelds in region I, and transmit-
ted ﬁeld in region III. In addition, (a) shows the intensity of
SPPs in greyscale. The intensity distribution is calculated for
SPPs traveling around a metallic corner (b), using the single-
mode approximation developed in the text. We also consider
the complementary conﬁguration, in which SPPs propagate
around a dielectric void (c).

Region IIIReoRegion IRegion IIqeieo>0Re[ei]<0Re[eo]<0(a)(c)(b)ei>0x1 x2 II. GEOMETRY OF THE CURVED
METAL-DIELECTRIC INTERFACE

The geometry of our study is shown in Fig. 1(a). The
system consists of a curved metal-dielectric interface oc-
cupying region II in space, matching smoothly to planar
and semi-inﬁnite interfaces in regions I and III. The axes
x1 and x2 deﬁne the boundaries between the three re-
gions, and the system is inﬁnite in the z direction. The
rounded edge is characterized by a permittivity (cid:15)i, with a
ﬁxed radius R and a ﬁnite bend angle θ. The surrounding
space is characterized by a permittivity (cid:15)o. Propagating
SPPs of frequency ω are incident from region I onto the
boundary at x1, and their counterclockwise transmission
through region II into region III is analyzed. We initially
consider the case of SPPs propagation around a metallic
corner with Re[(cid:15)i] < 0 and (cid:15)o > 0, depicted schemat-
ically in Fig. 1(b). This is essentially a segment of an
inﬁnitely long metal cylinder. We then analyze the com-
plementary reverse geometry shown in Fig. 1(c), in which
SPPs propagate around an open dielectric void.

III. A QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF
BEND-INDUCED RADIATION

The generalized dispersion relation of SPPs propagat-

ing at a metal-dielectric (i.e. anisotropic) interface is

⊥o,i

(1)

(cid:15)o,i

(cid:107) + k2

ω2
c2 = k2
where k(cid:107) and k⊥o,i are the components of the k-vector
parallel and perpendicular to the interface, respectively.
For a surface-guided mode, we require k(cid:107) >
(cid:15)oω/c
such that k⊥o,i becomes imaginary, hence non-radiative.
Rewriting this simple expression yields ω/k(cid:107) < c
(cid:15)o.
Simply stated, the phase velocity in the direction parallel
to the interface, v(cid:107) ≡ ω/k(cid:107), cannot exceed the speed of
light, c/

(cid:15)o, in order to sustain non-radiative guiding.

√

√

√

When propagating around a bend, v(cid:107) acquires a radial
dependence, with EM ﬁelds more distant from the inter-
face travelling at greater phase velocities. Thus, there
exists a threshold radius, r(cid:63), where the parallel phase
velocity reaches the speed of light. Beyond r(cid:63) the EM
ﬁeld of the SPP becomes radiative. As a result, SPPs
can be guided along curved interfaces with negligible ra-
diation loss as long as the ﬁelds are conﬁned near the
metal-dielectric interface and do not extend beyond r(cid:63).
This claim is veriﬁed analytically in the next section.

IV. TRANSMISSION AND REFLECTION AT
BENT INTERFACES

In order to quantify the degree of radiation loss and the
propagation eﬃciency of SPPs around the bend we now
exploit known solutions of Maxwell’s equations describ-
ing angular propagation of EM waves at the surface of

2

an inﬁnitely long metal cylinder. These solutions are ap-
plicable in region II. The magnetic ﬁeld in the dielectric
is hence given by

B = ˆz

(cid:104)
(cid:88)

A+

n e+inφ + A−

n e−inφ(cid:105)

H (1)

n (kor)e−iωt,

(2)

{n}

√

(cid:15)o/c and H (1)
where ko = ω
is the Hankel function of
n
the ﬁrst kind. The set of mode indices {n}, denoting
radial excitations, is determined by the metal boundary
matching equation

0 =

1
ki

J (cid:48)
n(kiR)
Jn(kiR)

−

1
ko

H (1)(cid:48)
H (1)

n (koR)
n (koR)

,

(3)

√

(cid:15)i/c, Jn is the Bessel function, and the
where ki = ω
prime denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to the argu-
ment. Since region II comprises only a segment of a full
cylinder (i.e. θ < 2π,) periodic boundary conditions need
not be satisﬁed, and n is therefore not constrained to in-
teger values.
In fact, since we choose the frequency ω
to be real-valued, one ﬁnds n to have a non-vanishing
imaginary part as well. The latter is a consequence of
radiation loss and absorption in the bend.

The azimuthal dependence of the SPP wave is given
by the standard expression exp[±inφ], where φ is the
measured from the x1 axis. Thus only solutions with
Im[n] ≥ 0 are admissible, describing attenuated prop-
agation. Away from the interface in the dielectric re-
gion, where kor (cid:29) Re[n] is satisﬁed, we may use the
asymptotic form of the Hankel function: H (1)
n (kor) ≈
(cid:112)2/πkor exp[i(kor − (2n + 1)π/4)]. Each mode can now
be written as

Bn ∼ e±inφ ei(kor−ωt)

√

r

(4)

thus recovering the expected free propagating cylindrical
wave form.

In general, Eq. (3) cannot be solved algebraically, and
it is necessary to employ a numerical method to ﬁnd the
set {n}. One convenient numerical approach employs
graphical plotting of the right-hand side of Eq.
(3) as
functions of both Re[n] and Im[n], and identifying its
zeros in the complex n-plane.

In principle, the set of solutions denoted by {n} is in-
ﬁnite.
In practice, we ﬁnd that a single mode of this
set dominates the propagation problem we are analyz-
ing in this work. The set {n} contains a fundamental
mode (i.e. the surface plasmon mode), which we label
with mode index m ∈ {n}. The EM ﬁeld of this mode
is concentrated near the metal-dielectric interface. The
solid line in Fig. 2 shows the dispersion relation of this
fundamental mode. In the limit of large momentum, it
asymptotically approaches ωsp ≡ ωp/
1 + (cid:15)o, the con-
ventional limit for surface plasmon modes. Also shown
in Fig. 2 are the dispersion relations of modes in the set
{n} with higher radial excitation values (dashed lines).

√

3

(5)

(6)

to approach its oscillatory (radiating) form, as shown by
the asymptotic expression leading to Eq. (4). The non-
oscillatory–to–oscillatory transition occurs when the ar-
gument and the order are approximately equal. We are
thus led to conclude that each mode of Eq. (2) undergoes
a non-radiative–to–radiative transition at a radius given
by kor ≈ Re[n].

√

n we require v(cid:107) = c/

The transition radius described above coincides with
the previously introduced threshold radius, r(cid:63). By deﬁ-
nition, at r = r(cid:63)
(cid:15)o, where the mode
index n is added to r(cid:63) since each mode with index n has a
diﬀerent threshold radius r(cid:63)
n in region II. The phase ﬂow
in the parallel direction is characterized by exp(iRe[n]φ),
and its associated wavenumber and phase velocity are
k(cid:107) = Re[n]/r and v(cid:107) = ω/k(cid:107) = ωr/Re[n], respectively.
We thus obtain

r(cid:63)
n =

Re[n]
ko

,

verifying that the threshold radius is indeed the non-
radiative–to–radiating-SPP transition radius. From this
it follows that the fundamental mode m, with lowest an-
gular momentum ( for ω < ωsp,) also has the smallest
threshold radius for radiation:

r(cid:63)
m =

Re[m]
ko

≈ Re

(cid:20)(cid:114) (cid:15)i

(cid:21)

R.

(cid:15)i + (cid:15)o

The approximation above follows from Re[m] ≈ kR,
where k = ω(cid:112)(cid:15)i(cid:15)o/((cid:15)i + (cid:15)o)/c is the wavenumber of
SPPs propagating at a ﬂat metal-dielectric interface. The
validity of this approximation is conﬁrmed in Fig. 2,
where it is shown that the dispersion relation of the fun-
damental mode is very close to that of SPPs at a ﬂat
interface.

The above analysis implies that when the majority of
the SPP ﬁeld is condﬁned to a region with r < r(cid:63)
m, we
should expect a negligible radiation loss during propaga-
tion. On the dielectric side of the interface the SPP ﬁeld
decays as exp{−Re[γo(r − R)]}, with the decay coeﬃ-
(cid:112)−1/((cid:15)i + (cid:15)0)/c. We see that
cient is given by γo = ω(cid:15)o
the ﬁeld conﬁnement in the dielectric is therefore charac-
terized by Re[γo]. Thus, we conclude that the radiation
loss is insigniﬁcant if G > 1, where G is the exponent
evaluated at r = r(cid:63)

m:

G ((cid:15)i, (cid:15)o, ωR/c ) ≡ Re[γo](r(cid:63)

m − R).

(7)

In Fig. 3 we plot Im[m] as function of G. The metal is as-
sumed lossless (i.e. Im[(cid:15)i] = 0), therefore Im[m] is related
solely to radiative loss. We ﬁnd that Im[m] is a monotoni-
cally decreasing function of G, as expected from the argu-
ments above. Moreover, when G = 1 Im[m] = 1.24 ∼ 1,
conﬁrming again that G = 1 is a very good approxi-
mation of the threshold where SPP propagation changes
from signiﬁcantly radiative (Im[m] (cid:38) 1) to mostly non-
radiative (Im[m] (cid:46) 1).

FIG. 2: Dispersion relations of various transverse-magnetic
modes on a metal cylinder with R = 2µm. The dispersion
relation for the fundamental mode (solid line) closely follows
that of SPPs on a ﬂat metal-dielectric interface (dash-dotted
line). The horizontal scale of the latter is normalized by the
factor R, so that the curve is a plot of ω as function of kR,
instead of k. Dispersion relations of modes with higher radial
excitations are also shown (dashed lines). These modes are
2
less conﬁned to the interface and do not approach ωp/
asymptotically. Higher radial excitation modes with even
weaker surface conﬁnement exist (not shown), all lying to the
right of the three dashed lines shown.

√

We see that these modes do not approach ωsp asymptot-
ically. Compared to the fundamental, these modes are
also found to be less conﬁned to the interface. As the ra-
dial excitation number increases even further, the modes
corresponding to these values of n all lie to the right of
the three non-fundamental modes shown in Fig. 2. As ex-
pected from the fundamental mode, Im[m] is the smallest
of the set {n} since the conﬁnement of this mode to the
interface is maximal, hence its radiation losses are the
lowest. This is generally true for metals such as gold and
silver, where the absorption losses are relatively low[15].
As shown in Fig. 2, away from ωsp the fundamental
mode has the smallest angular momentum (≈ kR) at a
given frequency. To understand this, we consider the fol-
lowing: The angular momentum is L = (cid:82) (r × S/c2)dr3,
where S is the Poynting vector. Compared to other
modes, the fundamental mode is more strongly conﬁned
near the surface. Since S for this mode is signiﬁcant
only at r (cid:39) R, the integrand is minimal (as long as S of
the fundamental mode is not disproportionately large.)
However, as the frequency approaches ωsp, S increases
asymptotically, which overcompensates for the smaller
value of r. This is seen in Fig. 2 as a crossover of the
fundamental mode and the other depicted modes, such
that at ω ∼ ωsp its angular momentum is higher than
that of the less conﬁned modes.

The radiative nature of the SPP solutions described
by Eq. (2) is also consistent with the qualitative analy-
sis presented in the previous section. This can be veri-
ﬁed by analyzing the nature of the Hankel function H (1)
n .
The Hankel function is non-oscillatory (depicting non-
radiative ﬁelds) while its argument is smaller than the or-
der Re[n]. When the argument exceeds Re[n], H (1)
n starts

Angular momentum number ( Re[ n ] )Frequency (w/wp)0302010600.60.40.840500.00.2704

FIG. 3: Plot of Im[m] as function of G for ωR/c = 1000 and
(cid:15)o = 1. The premittivity (cid:15)i is real and varies from (cid:15)i = −30
to −200.

To quantify the radiation loss and propagation eﬃ-
ciency around the bend it is now necessary to consider
the coupling of these metal-cylinder modes to planar-
interface SPP modes (i.e. propagating modes in regions
I and III). The magnetic ﬁeld of the SPP incident from
Region I is given by

(cid:26) exp(cid:2)−γi(x1 − R)(cid:3)
exp(cid:2)+γo(x1 − R)(cid:3)

B = ˆzA exp(cid:0)iky1 − iωt(cid:1)

x1 ≥ 0
x1 < 0
(8)
(cid:112)−1/((cid:15)i + (cid:15)0)/c.
with A the amplitude and γi = −ω(cid:15)i
Similar expressions hold for the SPPs reﬂected into region
I and the ﬁelds transmitted into region III.

Calculating exact values of the transmission and re-
ﬂection coeﬃcients is often impractical, since it requires
matching an inﬁnite number of modes in Eq. (2) to pla-
nar SPP modes in regions I and III. The mode matching
must be carried out along the entire spatial extent of the
x1 and x2 axes at the boundaries. However, in certain
cases it is possible to derive relatively simple approxi-
mate expressions for the required ﬁeld coeﬃcients. This
is because although each mode of region II has an EM
ﬁeld proﬁle normal to the surface which does not ex-
actly match the ﬁeld proﬁle of the incident planar SPP,
the fundamental mode of region II minimizes this spatial
mismatch. Non-fundamental modes are characterized by
EM ﬁelds which are less conﬁned to the surface, therefore
their ﬁeld proﬁles deviate more strongly from those of the
planar SPPs whose ﬁelds are always strongly bound at
the metal-dielectric interface.

In the short wavelength limit, it is possible to show that
incident SPP and the fundamental mode have identical
ﬁeld proﬁles near the interface. In this limit, the ﬁeld dis-
tribution of the fundamental mode in the radial direction
can be obtained by taking the appropriate limit of the
Bessel equation r2d2f /dr2 + rdf /dr + (k2
o,ir2 − m2)f = 0
to which Jm(kir) and H (1)
m (kor) are solutions, respec-
tively. As ωR/c → ∞, the curvature of the metal sur-
face becomes insigniﬁcant and m approaches kR. With
r = R+x, in the limit x (cid:28) R the Bessel equation reduces

FIG. 4: Comparison of intensity proﬁles of SPPs in region
I (solid line) and the fundamental mode in region II (dashed
line), calculated for ωR/c = 800. The proﬁle mismatch is
barely visible, indicating that SPPs in region I couple pre-
dominately to the fundamental mode in region II.

i,o = k2 − k2

to R2d2f /dx2 + (k2
i,o − k2)R2f = 0, to which the solu-
tions are exponentials. Thus, noting that γ2
i,o,
Jm(kir) ∼ exp(γir) and H (1)
m (kor) ∼ exp(−γor) which is
identical to the behavior of the SPP ﬁelds in regions I and
III near the interface. Far from the interface where the
condition x (cid:28) R no longer holds, Jm(kir) and H (1)
m (kor)
no longer exhibit exponentially decaying behaviors. How-
ever, due to the exponential decay near the interface,
their values are small far from the interface, making the
mismatch negligible along the entire x1 and x2 axes. This
is illustrated in Fig. 4, where we show that the intensity
proﬁles of the fundamental mode and the planar SPP are
well matched in the short wavelength limit.

We are thus led to conclude that in the short wave-
length limit planar SPPs couple predominately to the
fundamental mode, and neglect their coupling to all other
non-fundamental modes. For this reason, under this
single-mode approximation, it is necessary to consider
only a small number of modes:
the incident and re-
ﬂected SPPs in region I, the clockwise and counterclock-
wise propagating fundamental mode in region II, and the
transmitted SPP in region III. These modes are matched
at a single point on at each axis, at a distance R from the
origin, via the standard Maxwell boundary conditions.
Our analysis above ensures that the boundary conditions
are then approximately satisﬁed over the entire extent of
the axes. The problem of quantifying the propagation
eﬃciency has now essentially become one dimensional
(1D), and it is mathematically analogous to scattering
from a 1D ﬁnite potential well[16]. However, since the
allowed m values are always complex, bound-state solu-
tions in this type of well do not exist. This distinguishes
SPPs at curved surfaces from waveguide bends enclosed
on all sides by inﬁnite potential walls[17].

Applying the appropriate boundary conditions to the
ﬁelds at the x1 and x2 boundaries results in expressions
for the transmittance T and reﬂectance R:

T =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

4mkR
−eimθ(m − kR)2 + e−imθ(m + kR)2

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(9)

ei=-63.8ei=-200ei=-300.02.03.01.0GIm[m]0.01.02.03.0RIntensityx1 R-go-1R-2go-1R =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2 sin(mθ)(m2 − k2R2)
−eimθ(m − kR)2 + e−imθ(m + kR)2

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

.

(10)

In the presence of signiﬁcant absorption or radiation loss,
such that Im[m]θ (cid:29) 1, these expressions become

T ≈ 16

|mkR|2
|m + kR|4 e−2Im[m]θ

R ≈

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

m − kR
m + kR

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

.

(11)

(12)

As ωR/c → ∞, these expressions become exact.

In general, conservation of energy is expressed by
1 = T + R + P + A, where P and A are the radiation
and absorption loss coeﬃcient, respectively. For a metal
characterized by a real permittivity, the absorption loss
vanishes, and the radiation loss can be easily calculated
using the above expressions for T and R. For a lossy
metal, radiation losses must be calculated independently
in order to extract the absorption loss from the expres-
sion above. The radiation loss is obtained by integrating
the Poynting vector for unit incident ﬂux in region II at
r → ∞:

P ≡

S · ˆrrdφ.

(13)

(cid:90) θ+φ0

φ0

The lower integration limit is set to φ0 instead of 0,
since the energy radiated from the surface at φ = 0
propagates at an angle φ0 into the far ﬁeld. Like-
wise, the upper integration limit is θ + φ0 instead of
In the short-wavelength limit only the amplitude
θ.
of the forward-propagating mode is signiﬁcant, there-
fore the radiation losses are well approximated by in-
tegrating only the counterclockwise propagating mode.
A stationary phase approximation is used to obtain an
expression for φ0, using the position-dependent phase
Φ = kor + Re[m]φ. The change in angle as the wave
propagates a radial distance δr is δφ = Re[m]/(kor2)δr,
giving φo = (cid:82) ∞

R Re[m]/(kor2)dr = Re[m]/koR.
Calculations were carried out using typical values of sil-
ver ((cid:15)i = −15+i0.5) in air ((cid:15)o = 1) with ωR/c = 800 and
θ = 90◦. Assuming that the metal is lossless ((cid:15)i = −15),
we ﬁnd that most of the incident SPP energy is trans-
mitted with T = 0.997, R = 1.19 × 10−8, and P ≈ 0.003.
When the absorption loss is accounted for the results
change drastically to T = 0.0516, R = 1.18 × 10−6, and
P ≈ 0.00282. This result implies that absorption is the
dominant loss mechanism when R (cid:29) λ even for met-
als such as silver with relatively low losses. Surprisingly,
we ﬁnd that the overall absorption and radiation losses of
SPPs propagating at a non-planar interface may be lower
than the absorption loss of SPPs traveling the equivalent
arc distance on a ﬂat surface. This counterintuitive re-
sult comes from the fact that the ﬁeld inside the metal
in region II travels an arclength less than θR due to the
curvature. As a result, SPP ﬁelds sample less of the

5

FIG. 5: (a) The upper bound for the transmittance, Tu, plot-
ted for a silver-air interface with bend angle θ = 90◦, as func-
tion of bend radius R for wavelengths λ = 500nm (dashed-
dotted line), λ = 600nm (dashed line), and λ = 700nm
(solid line). (b) Magniﬁed view of the upper bound in the
diﬀraction-dominated regime.

metal volume when propagating on the curved interface
than when propagating on a ﬂat surface, resulting in the
reduced absorption.

In order to evaluate the accuracy of our results, it is
necessary to quantify the validity of the single-mode ap-
proximation. As discussed earlier, the single mode ap-
proximation is only appropriate when the ﬁeld proﬁle of
the fundamental mode (represented by the solution to the
Bessel equation) well approximates the exponentially de-
caying behavior of the planar SPP. Thus, evaluating the
mismatch between the Hankel function and the decay-
ing exponential gives a measure of whether the approxi-
mation is appropriate or not. We deﬁne the normalized
mismatch as

∆2 ≡

(cid:82) R+ηγ−1
R

o

(cid:12)
(cid:12)exp[−γo(r − R)] − H (1)
(cid:12)

m (kor)
m (koR)
|exp[−γo(r − R)]|2 dr

H (1)

(cid:82) R+ηγ−1
R

o

(cid:12)
2
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

dr

, (14)

where η = O(1). The expression in the numerator quan-
tiﬁes the ﬁeld mismatch near the interface. The condition
∆ (cid:28) 1 constitutes a criterion for the validity of our ap-
proximation. For example, when η = 3, (cid:15)i = −15, and
(cid:15)o = 1, ∆2 = 0.002 for ωR/c = 800, rendering our re-
sult applicable. On the other hand, for ωR/c = 100 we
obtain ∆2 = 0.3, indicating that the approximation is
less reliable now, hence the coupling to non-fundamental
modes can no longer be neglected.

When the single-mode approximation is not appropri-
ate, it is still possible to derive a physical quantity from

(a)R (mm) Tu05030100.080.040.000.124020(b)R (mm) Tu0.02.00.50.100.060.040.121.51.00.080.14the above analysis. As discussed previously, the mode
index m associated with the fundamental mode has the
smallest imaginary part compared to the mode indices of
non-fundamental modes. Since the wave depends on n as
exp[±inφ], modes with large Im[n] decay rapidly. Thus,
the transmission in the presence of coupling to nonfun-
damental modes does not exceed the upper bound of

Tu = exp(−2Im[m]θ).

(15)

Here we neglect reﬂections at the x1 and x2 boundaries,
thus excluding interference eﬀects. Figure 5(a) is a plot
of Tu as function of R. A peak is clearly visible, mov-
ing to higher values of R as the wavelength increases.
To the right of the peak, at large radii of curvature ab-
sorption losses in the metal dominate, and the maximum
transmittance decreases with increasing radius. To the
left of the peak radiation due to the high curvature is
the dominant loss mechanism, leading to a rapid drop
in Tu. At very high curvature (R ≤ 10µm) there is a
change in trend, and Tu starts to increase with decreas-
ing R. When calculating the radiation loss per arclength,
we ﬁnd that for this range of radii it increases slower than
elsewhere, allowing Tu to increase even as R attains very
small values.

The behavior of the transmittance for very high curva-
ture is a consequence of diﬀraction of the incident SPPs.
In general, diﬀraction is associated with the ﬁnite wave-
length of light, and the diﬀraction coeﬃcient approaches
zero in the limit of small wavelength[18]. For SPPs prop-
agating around bends, a decrease in the radius of cur-
vature is equivalent to an increase in the eﬀective wave-
length, λ/R. For this reason, SPP diﬀraction around
a corner increases as R decreases, resulting in greater
transmittance for smaller R. Since the diﬀraction is only
signiﬁcant at sharp corners, the transmittance becomes
weakly dependent on the dispersion of the metal at small
radii of curvature. Hence, as shown in Fig. 5(b), the up-
per bound at diﬀerent wavelengths converges to a single
value as R approaches zero.

From the discussion above, it is clear that the non-
monotonic behavior of the transmittance is a result of
three competing mechanisms: absorption, radiation, and
diﬀraction. Depending on the radius of curvature, one of
the three mechanisms becomes dominant, creating three
distinct regimes in Fig. 5(a). However, it is not possi-
ble to evaluate the potential discrepancies between the
upper bound model plotted here and the analytical re-
sults, since our analytical approach is not valid at high
curvatures. To examine the transmittance for such cases,
we turn to a numerical study using the ﬁnite-diﬀerence
time-domain method (FDTD).

V. COMPARISON BETWEEN ANALYTICAL
RESULTS AND FDTD CALCULATIONS

We apply here numerical FDTD calculations to study
the propagation of SPPs about bends, and compare with

6

FIG. 6: (a) FDTD simulation results showing the magnitude
of the magnetic ﬁeld for R = λ = 630nm. The SPPs are inci-
dent from the bottom and propagate counterclockwise around
the bend. (b) Analytical result for the transmittance upper
bound (black trace) compared to numerical simulations for
various values of R (red points). The upper bound values
are clearly higher than the simulation results, conﬁrming the
consistency of our analytical method.

our analytical results. Previously, the method of lines
has been used to study the diﬀraction and the propa-
gation of SPPs at a sharp bend with R = 0[19]. Our
present numerical study examines how the transmission
eﬃciency depends on the radius of curvature of the bend.
The dielectric function in our simulations is given by the
Debye model

(cid:15)(ω) = (cid:15)∞ +

(cid:15)s − (cid:15)∞
1 − iωτ

+ i

4πσ
ω

.

(16)

With the choice of parameters (cid:15)∞ = 3.90838, (cid:15)s =
−25658.4, τ = 1.20973 × 10−14sec, and σ = 1.68931 ×
1017sec−1 the Debye model closely matches experimen-
tally obtained values for silver[20]
in the wavelength
range 400–1200nm. We implement a nonuniform orthog-
onal grid, with mesh size in the range λ/300–λ/40. Dis-
persive perfectly matched layers[21] are used as absorbing
boundary conditions throughout our study. The wave-
length in vacuum is ﬁxed at λ = 630nm. A trial simula-
tion of SPP propagation at a planar metal–air interface
indicates that the simulated SPPs are well characterized
by the eﬀective dielectric constant (cid:15)s = −14.0 + i0.9,
which is reasonably close to (cid:15) = −15.7 + i1.1 calculated
using the Debye model.

A. Ninety-degree bend

A series of FDTD simulations were performed to an-
alyze propagation about the 90◦ rounded edge shown in
Fig. 6(a). The transmittance, T, is extracted for various
radii of curvature. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the transmit-
tance increases with decreasing radius, peaking at R = 0
with T ≈ 0.07. Hence, the numerical approach conﬁrms
the diﬀraction-dominated small-radius behavior of T pre-
dicted from our earlier analysis of Tu in Fig. 5. Interest-
ingly, our simulations reveal that the actual transmit-
tance is reasonably well described by the upper bound
(calculated now using (cid:15)s) even for R ≤ λ. Moreover, for
R > λ the discrepancy between the simulation and the

x (mm)y (mm)0.04.02.04.0(a)2.0R (mm)0.01.00.52.5(b)1.52.00.0-2.0-2.00.050T0.0550.0600.0650.0700.075R=3l analytical upper bound is less than 0.01. This mismatch
is expected to decrease even further with decreasing cur-
vature because the coupling to the fundamental mode
increases as λ/R → 0. We therefore conclude that the
calculated upper bound is a good estimate for the trans-
mittance for all R ≥ λ.

B. Bend with negative curvature

The analytical formalism developed above may also be
used to analyze the reversed geometry, where the metal
occupies the outer space, and the SPPs propagate around
a dielectric void in it as shown in Fig. 1(c).
In this
complementary picture the planar SPP modes are now
matched to the solutions of a hollow cylindrical void in
the metal. However, care must be taken when choos-
ing the appropriate solutions in region II for the mode
matching. For a dielectric cylinder surrounded by metal,
the radial solutions in the dielectric are the Bessel func-
tions. These functions, except for the one conﬁned to
the interface, have ﬁeld nodes. Since the existence of
nodes implies that photons are exchanged between op-
posing points on the cylindrical interface, these solutions
are unphysical in an open geometry such as our system.
Therefore, the only solution represented by the Bessel
function in region II is the surface conﬁned mode, which
lacks any nodes.

As before, the surface conﬁned mode corresponds to
the fundamental (SPP) mode, which minimizes the ﬁeld
mismatch with the incident planar SPP under the single-
mode approximation. Since the fundamental mode is
represented by the Bessel function, Eq. (3) remains un-
changed and the expressions for the transmittance and
the reﬂectance are valid for this reversed geometry. Our
calculations have shown that this problem is now appro-
priately analogous to the ﬁnite potential barrier model.
We also ﬁnd that the absorption loss in region II is now
greater than the absorption of planar SPPs. From the
argument above, it also follows that in the single-mode
approximation SPP propagation around a bend is non-
radiative. For this reason, SPP transmission through the
reversed geometry becomes highly eﬃcient when material
losses and reﬂections at the boundaries are negligible.

Our simulations show that eﬃcient propagation is in-
deed possible. For example, we ﬁnd that when R = λ
the transmittance is T = 0.73, in sharp contrast to the
value of T ≈ 0.06 obtained for an equivalent curvature
in the geometry of Fig. 6(a). However, when R = 0,
back-reﬂection at the bend becomes the dominant loss
mechanism with R = 0.96, while the radiation loss re-
mains small as shown in Fig. 7(b). The transmittance
decreases to T ≈ 0.002. Because of its high reﬂectance,
this particular geometry is essentially a SPP mirror and
may be implemented to construct SPP resonators[22].

7

FIG. 7: FDTD simulation results showing the magnitude
of the magnetic ﬁeld for (a) R = λ = 630nm and (b) R =
0 when SPPs, incident from the bottom, propagate around
a circular dielectric void. The radiation loss is signiﬁcantly
reduced compared to the propagation around a metallic bend.

VI. RESONATOR-ENHANCED
TRANSMISSION AROUND A SHARP BEND

We have shown that eﬃcient transmission of SPP en-
ergy around bends is possible when propagating around
small voids in metals, while SPP propagation about
In what follows we
metallic bends is highly radiative.
demonstrate a method for reducing radiation losses by in-
troducing an additional metal-dielectric interface into the
system, which provides an alternative, low-loss transmis-
sion channel for SPPs. Consider the geometry shown in
Fig. 8(a). A cylindrical hole of radius r is placed in close
proximity to two ﬂat metal interfaces joined by an abrupt
90◦ edge. Incident SPPs propagating upward along the
vertical interface are coupled through their near-ﬁelds
into the void and our of it onto the second interface.
Positioning of the resonator within the skin depth of the
metal allows eﬃcient excitation of the resonator modes
by the incident SPPs, and subsequent outcoupling. The
role of the dielectric void is similar to that of a dielectric
microring resonator, and the evanescent wave coupling
scheme is analogous to optical coupling between micror-

FIG. 8: (a) Schematic diagram of a SPP microresonator em-
bedded near a sharp edge. SPPs are incident from the bottom
along the direction of the red arrow, couple to the resonator
and couple out again. (b) Numerical FDTD simulation show-
ing the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld for d = 8.4nm and
r = 378nm. A signiﬁcant portion of the ﬁeld is seen to couple
into the resonator.

x (mm)y (mm)0.0-1.00.0-1.0-2.0-2.0x (mm)y (mm)0.0-1.00.0-1.0-2.0-2.0(a)(b)ddre=1e=1Re[e]<0x (mm)y (mm)0.02.01.02.0(b)1.00.0-2.0-2.0-1.0-1.0(a)ing resonators and dielectric waveguides[23]. The SPP
resonator provides an alternative transmission channel
into which the ﬁeld couples, leading to a reduction in
the total SPP energy impinging on the highly radiative
sharp edge. Hence, the eﬃciency of propagation increases
signiﬁcantly when a resonator is properly incorporated
into the metal in the vicinity of the bend. Figure 8(b)
shows the results of a simulation for a typical resonator-
coupled system. We ﬁnd that the transmission around
an inﬁnitely sharp bend in the absence of a resonator,
(T ≈ 0.07) increases to T = 0.17 when a cavity of ra-
dius r = 378nm is incorporated at a distance d = 8.4nm
from the interfaces. A scattering-theory formalism has
been previously developed to treat waveguide-resonator
couplings[24, 25]. However, this method requires ab-
initio knowledge of the scattering-matrix elements, at-
tainable by solving Maxwell’s equations using FDTD or
other numerical methods. When applied to the geome-
tries of our system, we ﬁnd that this approach is less
straightforward than our demonstrated method of ex-
tracting the transmission eﬃciency directly from FDTD
simulations of resonator-coupled interfaces. The trans-
mitted signal levels may be then optimized by ﬁne-tuning
additional parameters of the system, such as resonator
shape, the number of (cascaded) resonators and their
relative positioning near the bend.
In addition, incor-
porating a gain medium[26, 27] (i.e. SPP ampliﬁer ) in-
side the resonator cavity may further enhance transmis-
sion eﬃciencies. Future work will address the enhanced
transmission via SPP resonators in detail.

8

and numerically. We have presented and conﬁrmed a
physically intuitive picture of the bend-induced radia-
tion, and how the radiation loss is related to the SPP
conﬁnement at the interface.
In the short wavelength
limit, we have shown that calculating the propagation ef-
ﬁciency is analogous to a quantum mechanical 1D ﬁnite
square well which is readily solved to obtain the expres-
sions for energy transmission and reﬂection coeﬃcients.
The analysis of the upper bound on the transmittance
has revealed that absorption, radiation, and diﬀraction
are three competing mechanisms, responsible for the non-
monotonic behavior of the transmittance. Furthermore,
our numerical study has shown that the calculated upper
bound Tu is a good estimate for the actual transmittance
for all bend radii R ≥ λ. In the complementary reversed
geometry, when the SPPs propagate around a dielectric
void, it is argued that the fundamental mode is nonra-
diative, and thus SPP propagation is overall less radia-
tive. This prediction was veriﬁed numerically. Finally, we
have studied a bend geometry in which a surface plasmon
resonator is introduced to provide an alternative trans-
mission channel for enhancing the propagation eﬃciency.
Future studies will further analyze resonator design, as
well as the details of SPP coupling to resonators in the
presence of loss-compensation.

Acknowledgements

VII. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we have studied the propagation of SPPs
at a curved metal-dielectric interface both analytically

This work was supported by NSF CAREER Grants
ECS-02-39332 and DMR-02-39273, and ARO Grant
DAAD19-02-1-0286. K.H. and M.D. wish to thank D.
Grischkowsky for stimulating discussions. K.H. also
thanks R. Zia for helpful comments.

[1] S. I. Bozhevolnyi, J. Erland, K. Leosson, P. M. W. Skov-
gaard, and J. M. Hvam, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3008 (2001).
I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, K. Leosson, and

[2] S.

A. Boltasseva, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 1076 (2001).

Stepanov, A. Drezet, F. R. Aussenegg, A. Leitner, and
J. R. Krenn, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 094104 (2006).
[11] P. Berini and J. Lu, Opt. Express 14, 2365 (2006).
[12] I. P. Radko, T. Søndergaard, and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Opt.

[3] M. Quinten, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn, and F. R.

Express 14, 4107 (2006).

Aussenegg, Opt. Lett. 23, 1331 (1998).

[13] G. Veronis and S. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 131102

[4] A. Hohenau, J. R. Krenn, A. L. Stepanov, A. Drezet,
H. Ditlbacher, B. Steinberger, A. Leitner, and F. R.
Aussenegg, Opt. Lett. 30, 893 (2005).

[5] H. Ditlbacher, J. R. Krenn, G. Schider, A. Leitner, and
F. R. Aussenegg, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 1762 (2002).
[6] K. Hasegawa, J. U. N¨ockel, and M. Deutsch, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 84, 1835 (2004).

[7] T. I. Jeon and D. Grischkowsky, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88,

[8] A. Degiron and D. R. Smith, Opt. Express 14, 1611

061113 (2006).

(2006).

(2005).

[14] W. K. Kim, W. S. Yang, H. M. . Lee, H. Y. Lee, M. H.
Lee, and W. J. Jung, Opt. Express 14, 13043 (2006).
[15] If the metal is highly absorptive modes with stronger ﬁeld
conﬁnement may have larger Im[n], since they experience
greater absorption loss.

[16] A. Mekis, J. C. Chen, I. Kurland, S. Fan, P. R. Vil-
leneuve, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,
3787 (1996).

[17] F. Sols and M. Macucci, Phys. Rev. B 41, 11887 (1990).
[18] J. B. Keller, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 52, 116 (1962).
[19] H. A. Jamid and S. J. Al-Bader, IEEE Photon. Technol.

[9] J. C. Weeber, M. U. Gonz´alez, A. L. Baudrion, and

A. Dereux, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 221101 (2005).

Lett. 7, 321 (1995).

[10] B. Steinberger, A. Hohenau, H. Ditlbacher, A. L.

[20] E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids

9

(Academic Press, Orlando, 1985).

[21] G. X. Fan and Q. H. Liu, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propa-

[22] U. Schr¨oter, S. Seider, S. Tode, and D. Heitmann, Ultra-

gat. 48, 637 (2000).

microscopy 68, 223 (1997).

[23] A. Yariv, Electron. Lett. 36, 321 (2000).
[24] S. Fan, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. J. Khan,
C. Manolatou, and H. A. Haus, Phys. Rev. B 59, 15882
(1999).

[25] Y. Xu, Y. Li, R. K. Lee, and A. Yariv, Phys. Rev. E 62,

[26] G. A. Plotz, H. J. Simon, and J. M. Tucciarone, J. Opt.

[27] D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

7389 (2000).

Soc. Am. 69, 419 (1979).

027402 (2003).

