7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Meta-materials with negative refractive index at Optical Frequencies

S. Anantha Ramakrishna∗,†, Sangeeta Chakrabarti∗ and Olivier J.F. Martin†
∗ Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 208016, India
† Laboratory for Nanophotonics and Metrology, The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

We demonstrate that arrays of split ring resonators (SRR) can have negative refractive index at
optical frequencies (∼1.4 eV). Our calculations reveal that the electric ﬁelds of radiation interact
strongly with even symmetric SRR at optical frequencies as the size of the SRR becomes of the order
of the wavelength (∼ λ/3) for practicably realizable structures. We also demonstrate by calculations
the focussing of a line source by a ﬂat slab of a (2D) SRR medium. The negative refractive index
here is related to the plasmonic excitations of the SRR and cannot be directly explained by the usual
paradigm of negative dielectric permittivity and negative magnetic permeability in these limits when
homogenization breaks down.

PACS numbers: 78.30.Ci, 41.20.Jb, 42.25.Fx

Negative refractive index materials (NRM) were ﬁrst
proposed by Veselago[1] as materials having a negative
dielectric permittivity (ε < 0) and a negative magnetic
permeability (µ < 0). NRM have grown in popularity
since practical designs for structured metamaterials with
ε < 0[2] and µ < 0[3] at any frequency became available
and were implemented at microwave frequencies[4]. A
large number of counterintuitive eﬀects for wave propa-
gation in NRM including the possibility of super-lenses[5]
with sub-wavelength resolution have been predicted(See
[6] for a recent review).

One of the main challenges today is to obtain NRM
at optical frequencies. Although several noble and alkali
metals have ε < 0 at ultra-violet and optical frequencies,
magnetic properties due atomic or molecular orbital cur-
rents or electronic spin tend to be negligible at optical
frequencies. It has been shown both theoretically[7] and
experimentally[8] that the magnetic properties of Split
ring resonator (SRR) media tend to tail oﬀ at high fre-
quencies due to the plasma-like behaviour of the metal
of which they are composed of. Essentially there is an
extra inertial inductance for the SRR due to the ﬁnite
electronic mass and simply scaling down the SRR size
does not help to obtain negative magnetic permeabil-
ity. Novel ideas to overcome this limitation have been
put forth such as modiﬁed SRR with more splits[9], cou-
pled parallel wire-pairs[10] and plate pairs[11] and specif-
ically arranged plasmonic nano-particles[12]. One com-
mon problem with all these proposals is that for prac-
ticably realizable sizes of the structures, the lengthscale
of the structure becomes a sizeable fraction of the wave-
length of radiation. Thus homogenization and assign-
ment of eﬀective material parameters is often a problem-
atic issue.

Here we show that an array of suitably modiﬁed SRRs
can exhibit negative phase velocity or negative refractive
index at optical frequencies. The SRR, which are sym-
metric and have no bianisotropy in the quasi-static limit,
are shown to intensely interact with the electric ﬁeld of
the radiation. This interaction turns out to be crucial for

the negative refractive index. We also demonstrate that
an array of these SRR can focus a source via negative re-
fraction or via negative dielectric permittivity depending
on the orientation of the SRR.

Consider p-polarized radiation normally incident on an
array of the two dimensional SRR of silver. We consider
four possible designs for the SRR as shown in Fig. 1(a,
b, c, d). Invariance in the y direction is assumed. Due to
similiar sizes, the geometric inductance and the capaci-
tance of the structures are similiar which are expected to
have similiar magnetic properties. In fact, structure (c) is
identical to structure (b) but only rotated by π/2, while
structure (d), the typical plate pairs of[11] is the same
as structure(c) with the shorter legs absent. In Fig. 1(e,
f, g, h ) we present the band structure diagrams where
both the real (solid squares) and imaginary parts (hol-
low circles) of the wave-vector at normal incidence are
shown. For comparision, we have kept the same colour
(black or red) for the real and imaginary parts of the
eigenvalues with positive or negative real parts, respec-
tively.
In Fig. 1(i, j, k, l) we show the transmittance
and reﬂectance for a slab composed of four layers of such
SRRs respectively. These calculations were carried out
by a reﬁned version of the PHOTON codes based on the
transfer matrix method[13]. The experimental values for
the dielectric constant of silver[14] were used in the simu-
lations for the SRR material. The eigenvalues are chosen
so that the solutions in the dissipative medium corre-
spond to a decaying wave in the forward direction (along
the Poynting vector).

It is clear from the ﬁgures that completely diﬀerent
behaviour is obtained in the three cases. The greatest
surprise is the diﬀerence between structure(b) and struc-
ture(c) which is just the SRR in (b) reoriented. The most
interesting new feature that comes up is that structure
(a), structure(c) and structure(d) exhibit a negative re-
fractive index in the second and third bands as can be
seen from the fact that a waves with positive real wave
number have a negative imaginary part of the wave num-
ber. The second band also has a negative group velocity

(a)

180 nm

(b)

180 nm

(c)

180 nm

(d)

180 nm

E

k

24 nm

H

24 nm

E

k

H

24
nm

24 nm

E

k

H

24 nm

24 nm

E

k

H

24 nm

2

FIG. 1: (a), (b), (c), (d): Schematic diagram of the four SRR structures considered. The polarization and the direction of
incidence of the radiation have been indicated. (e), (f), (g), (h): Band structures for an array of SRRs of types (a), (b), (c)
and (d) respectively. The solid circles indicate the real parts of the wave vector while the hollow circles denote the imaginary
parts. The same colour (red or black) has been used for the real and imaginary parts of the eigenvalues with positive or
negative real parts. (i), (j), (k), (l): Reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients for a slab consisting of four layers of SRRs (a),
(b), (c) and (d) respectively

which is not separated from the higher positive group ve-
locity band by a band gap. In the case (a), these bands
are both very ﬂat and almost dispersionless. In case (b),
we have in comparision only a bandgap with an avoided
crossing with the next higher band.
Interestingly, one
obtains a gapless dispersion with a negative phase veloc-
ity over a large band in case (d). These bands for (a),
(c) and (d) have a negative phase velocity which can be
seen from the fact that the real and imaginary parts of
the wave-vector have opposite signs. Thus we have at
literally optical frequencies (1.4 eV ∼ 882 nm) both the
negative phase velocity - negative group velocity as well
as negative phase velocity and positive group velocity
bands that were reported recently in an experiment on
metamaterials[16]. Also note that at these frequencies,
the free space wavelength of the light is about thrice the
size of the unit cell and we have only one transmitted and
reﬂected beam from a slab of such SRRs as all higher-
order diﬀracted beams are evanescent.

The only identiﬁable diﬀerence between the systems is
that the electric ﬁeld of the incident radiation can in-
teract with the charge distributions formed across two,

nil or four capacitive gaps in the SRR (a), SRR (b) and
SRR (c) respectively. This along with the fact that the
usual SRR mechanism cannot be active at these high fre-
quencies [9], lead us to suspect that there are signiﬁcant
phase diﬀerences across a single SRR (b or c) whose size
(∼ λ/3) becomes a signiﬁcant fraction of the wavelength
at the bandgaps. The electric ﬁeld would thus be able
to interact with the dipoles which are not completely
screened out due to retardation. To corroborate this, we
computed the spectral problem for a small (3 X 4) ar-
ray of SRR of type (c) using the COMSOL FEMLAB
software with perfectly matched boundary layers (PML)
placed at least more than 1000 nm away[23].For typical
eigensolutions near 1.41eV, the magnetic ﬁelds were con-
centrated inside the SRRs as with the classical SRR, but
pointed in opposite directions in adjacent layers. Simi-
larly, the electric ﬁelds were concentrated in the capaci-
tive gaps with large dipole like ﬁelds in the gaps which
ﬂip in sign across the SRR. The displacement ﬁelds go
around the SRR similiar to a current. It could be con-
cluded from the above that the electric ﬁeld is exciting
the anti-symmetric modes[18] in the vertical legs across

3

ing one or two SRRs in the array. The images survive
with marginal changes in the ﬁelds.

In case of SRR(b), the slab transmits very little due
to the bandgap, but there is a faint image on the other
side (Fig. 2)which is conﬁrmed by the Poynting vector
map which shows a focussing of the energy ﬂow at the
In the case of SRR -(c) at the
location of the image.
same frequency, the slab transmits a lot more and the
image is also considerably brighter here (Fig. 3). This is
also conﬁrmed by a plot of the Poynting vector map. But
there are crucial diﬀerences in the two cases which enable
us to make a distinction. For the SRR (b), the ﬁeld at
the image has the opposite sign of the ﬁeld at the source
point and the focus is at about 1.4 µm instead of about
0.9 µm as expected for the ﬂat lens. This change of sign
typically happens for imaging for p-polarized light with
thick slabs of negative dielectric materials (See for exam-
ple ﬁg. 2(d) of Ref. [21] for the transmission coeﬃcient),
while the distance for the focus shown by the Poynting
vector occurs somewhat further away than that predicted
for the Veselago lens (See Fig. 3 of Ref. [22]). Thus the
array of SRR(b) is similiar to a stack of cut-wires (plates
in this case), with the electric ﬁeld of the incident ra-
diation directed the plates(wires), which shows negative
dielectric constant in the band-gap above the resonant
frequency[2]. If this were the case, the capacitive gaps
do not play much of a role in the phenomena. We veri-
ﬁed this by closing the capacitive gaps and found that the
weak imaging eﬀect is essentially unchanged with hollow
square cylinders as well. The band structure calculation
for the hollow square cylinders shows a wide band-gap in
the frequency range considered here, similar to SRR(b).
Thus the whole system just behaves as a diluted metal
and the imaging action for p-polarized light is due to
a negative dielectric permittivity over a wide range of
frequencies[20].

In case of SRR(c), we ﬁnd that the images are brighter,
the ﬁeld at the image has the same sign as at the source
position and also the image is found at almost exactly
0.9 µm where it is expected for the Veselago lens (Fig.
3(f)). Further it occurs where there is no bandgap. So
we conclude that the focussing in this case (c) is due to
negative refraction. We have veriﬁed that the focussing
happens in a reasonably wide range of frequencies 1.4 eV
to 1.47eV while the best resolution is obtained at 1.44
eV. Due to the ﬁnite size and numbers of the SRRs used
and dissipation we make no claims about the extent of
the sub-wavelength resolution possible here. In the case
of SRR(a) as well, we can see that there is a negative
phase velocity band possible.

We note an aspect of these systems that gives a clue
to the negative refractive index at high frequencies. The
large phase shifts for the radiation across a single unit cell
implies that the electric dipole moments formed across
the capacitive gaps will not be eﬀectively screened out.
In case (c), the electric ﬁeld can also drive the currents

FIG. 2: Left: Focussing a line source using a ﬁnite ﬂat slab of
SRR(b). The colour scheme indicates the intensity(arbitrary
units) Right: Poynting vector map for the same slab

FIG. 3: Left: A line source focussed by a ﬁnite ﬂat slab
consisting of SRR(c). The colour scheme indicates the in-
tensity(arbitrary units) Right: Poynting vector map for the
same slab

the SRR with opposing currents (displacement and real)
in the two legs. The interaction with the dipoles in the
capacitive gaps is crucial to the easy excitation of the
anti-symmetric mode. Thus the electric ﬁelds can eﬀec-
tively contribute to creating large magnetic ﬁelds under
suitable conditions.

Further, in Fig. 2 and 3, we present our results on
focussing a line source at 1.44eV frequency by a ﬁnite
ﬂat slab made of SRR. This is the frequency where the
light line intersects the negative group velocity band for
the SRR (c). Again the orientation of the SRR (b) or
(c) turns out to be important, although in both cases we
obtain an image.

The usual tests of shifting the source around and
putting in multiple sources were carried out to conﬁrm
the focussing eﬀect. Subwavelength focussing eﬀects by
evanescent waves were not considered as the wavelength
is quite comparable to the structure lengthscales. We
have also veriﬁed that the imaging eﬀects do not arise
due to band-dispersion eﬀects such as the all angle neg-
ative refraction (AANR)[19] by disordering the positions
of the SRRs to upto 10% of the lattice and also by remov-

around the loop by interacting with the dipole moments
across the capacitive gaps and reinforces the eﬀect due
to the magnetic ﬁeld. In case (b), the electric dipole re-
sponse of the ﬁnite wires (plates) dominates because the
wires (plates) in the adjacent cells can couple through the
electric ﬁeld. This would explain the negative refractive
index in case (c) and the negative dielectric medium in
case(b). Thus, the system has plasmonic resonances of
electric and magnetic character respectively, giving rise
to the band gaps on either side of the negative phase ve-
locity band. In case (d), the two plasmonic resonances
appear to be degenerate, resulting in a gapless disper-
sion. We used the Green’s tensor method to compute
the magnetic dipole moment per SRR for a ﬁnite number
of SRRs of ﬁnite length and found that a net magnetic
dipole moment arises at resonance in both the case (b)
and (c).

We do not believe that deﬁning homogeneous eﬀec-
tive medium parameters such as ε and µ makes sense
when homogenisation itself becomes questionable as the
unit cell size is a signiﬁcant fraction of the free space
wavelength at resonance (a ∼ λ/3). Hence we conﬁne
ourselves to the discussion of negative phase velocity or
negative refractive index only for the shown incidence.

In conclusion, we have shown that symmetric SRRs
can have negative phase velocity (negative refractive in-
dex) at optical frequencies if oriented such that the elec-
tric ﬁelds can drive the dipoles across the capacitive gaps.
in the orthogonal orientation, they behave as cut-wire
media with negative dielectric permittivity. The sim-
ple paradigm of a negative µ arising due to a L-C res-
onance in the SRR drive by the magnetic ﬁeld alone
breaks down and the negative refractive index that arise
in the limits when homogenization becomes problematic
have their origin in the plasmonic resonances of the sys-
tem. Our theoretical work conﬁrms the recent measure-
ments of diﬀerent combinations of positive and negative
group velocity and negative phase velocity[16]. The re-
sults presented here give speciﬁc directions for the design
of meta-materials with negative group and phase velocity
(negative refractive index) at optical frequencies.

Acknowledgment

SAR thanks S. Guenneau for helping with the calcu-
lations with FEMLAB and acknowledges partial support
from the Department of Science and Technology, India
under grant no.SR/S2/CMP-45/2003.

4

[1] V.G. Veselago, Usp. Fiz. Nauk, 92, 517 (1967); V.G.

Veselago, Sov. Phys.Usp. 10, 509 (1968)

[2] A.J. Holden, W.J. Stewart, I. Youngs, Phys. Rev. Lett.
76, 4773 (1996); J.B. Pendry, A.J. Holden, D.J. Robbins,
W.J. Stewart, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 10, 4785 (1998)
[3] J.B. Pendry, A.J. Holden, D.J. Robbins and W.J. Stew-
art, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 47 2075 (1999)
[4] R. Shelby, D.R. Smith and S. Schultz, Science 92, 297
(2001); C.G. Parazzoli, R.B. Greegor, K. Li, B.E.C.
Koltenbah and N. Tanielan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 107401
(2003)

[5] J.B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966 (2000)
[6] S.A. Ramakrishna, Rep. Prog. Phys. 68 449 (2005)
[7] S. OBrien and J. B. Pendry, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter

14, 6383 (2002).

[8] M.W. Klein, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, C.M. Soukoulis

and S. Linden, Opt. Lett. 31, 1259 (2006)

[9] S. OBrien, D. McPeake, S. A. Ramakrishna and J. B.

Pendry, Phys. Rev. B 69, 241101(R) (2004)

[10] V.M. Shalaev, W. Cai, U.K. Chettiar, H-K. Yuan, A.K.
Sarychev, V.P. Drachev and A.V. Kildishev, Opt. Lett.
30, 3356 (2005)

[11] G. Dolling, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, J.F. Zhou, C.M.
Soukoulis and S. Linden, Opt. Lett. 30, 3198 (2005).
[12] A. Alu, A. Salandrino and N. Engheta, Opt. Express, 14,

[13] J.B. Pendry and A. Mackinnon, Phys. Rev. Lett. (1992);

J.B. Pendry, J. Mod. Opt. 41, 209 (1994)

[14] P.B. Johnson and R.W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B, 6, 4370

[15] S.A. Ramakrishna and O.J.F. Martin, Opt. Lett. 30,

1557 (2006)

(1972)

2626 (2005)

[16] G. Dolling, C. Enkrich, M. Wegener, C.M. Soukoulis and

S. Linden, Science 312, 892 (2006).

[17] J. P. Berenger, J. Comp. Phy. 114, 185 (1994)
[18] V.A. Podolskiy, A.K. Sarychev, E.E. Narimanov and
V.M. Shalaev, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 7, S32 (2005)
[19] C. Luo, S. G. Johnson, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Phys.

Rev. B 65, 201104 (2002)

[20] S.A. Ramakrishna, J.B. Pendry, D. Schurig, D.R. Smith

and S. Schultz, J. Mod. Opt. 49 1729 (2002)

[21] J.T. Shen and P.M. Platzman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3286

[22] N. Fang and X.Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 161

(2002)

(2003)

[23] We have a mismatch of about 0.02eV between the results
obtained from FEMLAB and the transfer matrix method.
The FEMLAB results give a frequency about 0.02 eV
larger than the transfer matrix codes. This could be due
to diﬀerences in the discretization methods or the ﬁnite
array size eﬀects and PML conditons in the FEMLAB.

