7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Numerical optimization of a grating coupler
for the eﬃcient excitation of surface plasmons
at an Ag-SiO2 interface

Jesse Lu∗, Csaba Petre, Eli Yablonovitch
UCLA Electrical Engineering Dept.,
Los Angeles CA 90095-1594

Josh Conway
The Aerospace Corporation
El Segundo, CA 90245-4691

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The eﬃcient generation of surface plasmons from free space op-
tical waves is still an open problem in the ﬁeld. Here we present a
methodology and optimized design for a grating coupler. The photo-
excitation of surface plasmons at an Ag-SiO2 interface is numerically
demonstrated to yield greater than 50% coupling from a Gaussian
beam into surface plasmon voltages and currents.

1 Introduction

Surface plasmons are optical-frequency, alternating-currents that propagate
along the surface of a conductor [1]. These optical frequency surface modes
enable metallic structures to focus light to the nanoscale [2], enabling an en-
hancement and conﬁnement of the electric ﬁeld far beyond what is possible

∗email:jesselu@stanford.edu

1

in dielectric optics. The tremendous potential for energy concentration and
localization spans a multitude of disciplines and has the potential to enable
a host of future technologies. For instance, surface plasmon-based instru-
mentation is now commonplace in chemical spectroscopy and in detection
of trace biological material through surface-enhanced Raman scattering [3],
where Raman enhancements as high as 1014 have been reported. [4] [5] These
astronomical enhancements occur at stochastically located ‘hot spots’ or on
resonances of engineered nanoparticles [6]. The prime mechanism behind
this eﬀect is the coupling of free-space optical energy to a localized plas-
monic standing wave. Exploiting these large ﬁeld enhancements for many
engineering applications, however, requires coupling to a plasmonic travel-
ing wave. Applications include Heat-Assisted Magnetic Recording for the
next-generation of hard disks [7], near-ﬁeld lithography [8], surface plasmon
microscopy [9], and sub-wavelength optical circuitry [10]. In such plasmonic
devices the eﬃcient excitation of surface plasmons is critically important in
order to ensure a strong electric ﬁeld enhancement. Indeed, ineﬃcient cou-
pling may even nullify the electric ﬁeld enhancement which would otherwise
be obtained by such devices and this critical coupling is still considered an
open problem in nano-optics.
Schemes for the conversion of free-space optical waves into currents and volt-
ages include coupling by attenuated total reﬂection in prisms, end-ﬁre cou-
pling to plasmonic waveguides [11] [12] and various antenna structures.[13] [14]
However, exciting plasmons by attenuated total reﬂection requires a dielec-
tric prism which is a macroscopic device and therefore too bulky for most
applications. Eﬃcient end-ﬁre coupling, on the other hand, is limited in
applicability to special waveguide structures which are not compatible with
planar fabrication technologies. Most optical antenna structures suﬀer from
low radiation resistance which leads to Ohmic losses and a low directivity ra-
diation pattern which provides a poor mode match to incident plane waves.
The grating coupler then emerges as a most viable method to eﬃciently
convert laser power to electrical voltages and currents. Indeed the plasmon
grating coupler can be considered a special case of antenna, analogous to a
periodic antenna array or Yagi-Uda antenna [15] which achieve high eﬃcien-
cies due to very directive beam formation.
The high directivity associated with large grating antenna structures leads
to a high antenna capture cross-section, given by σantenna = λ2/Ω, where Ω
is the acceptance solid-angle, and λ is the vacuum wavelength. Thus the
captured power is Pin = Intensity · (λ2/Ω), which can be converted to an

2

optical frequency voltage by the formula V 2 = Pin · Rrad, where Rrad is the
antenna radiation resistance which is typically less than 50 Ohms.
Grating couplers have been employed in previous experimental work and
some rough optimizations have been implemented.[16] [17] However, a thor-
ough eﬀort to optimize a grating coupler has not yet been presented.
In
this paper, we present the methodology and design of an optimized grating
coupler topology which couples 50% of the energy from a 476 nm free-space
wavelength incident optical beam into the surface plasmon mode at an Ag-
SiO2 interface.

2 Mathematical Framework

The design space of the grating was limited to a one-dimensional array of
rectangular grooves of uniform depth at an Ag-SiO2 interface (Figure 1).
The dielectric constants corresponding to a free-space wavelength of 476 nm
were ǫr = − 7.06 + i0.27 and ǫr = 2.25, for Ag and SiO2 respectively [2].
The imaginary part of the permittivity of Ag was included in order to take
into account resistive losses in silver. The input beam was chosen to be of a
Gaussian proﬁle with a FWHM diameter of 1 µm and incident on the grating
at a 45 degree angle. Additionally, we chose to couple contra-directionally to
the surface plasmon mode in order to eliminate all diﬀraction orders, leav-
ing only the specular reﬂection to be suppressed, allowing all the remaining
power to be transferred into optical frequency surface currents (Figure 2).
Numerical simulations were obtained using COMSOL, a ﬁnite-element-method
solver, concentrating on the transverse magnetic (TM) mode. Perfectly
matched layers, where the imaginary parts of the permittivity and perme-
ability increase as a cubic power, were used as absorbing boundaries [2].
Computational instabilities associated with the sharp corners on the grating
were avoided by convolving a square-tooth topology with a Gaussian func-
tion of standard deviation 1 nm.
We deﬁned the eﬃciency of the grating coupler as the total power of the cou-
pled surface plasmon as it exited the grating divided by the total power of the
input beam. The power of the coupled surface plasmon was ﬁrst computed
several microns away from the nearest edge of the grating by integrating the
value of the Poynting vector along a line perpendicular to the Ag-SiO2 inter-
face; the power in the plasmon wave at the grating edge was then calculated
It was speciﬁcally
using the known decay length of the surface plasmon.

3

Figure 1: An input beam with a Gaussian proﬁle strikes the grating at 45
degrees oﬀ incidence and is coupled contra-directionally into the surface plas-
mon mode.

Figure 2: Wave-vector diagram illustrating how a (−1) grating wave vector
is added to the parrallel component of the wave-vector of the incident beam
in order to match the wave-vector of the contra-directionally propagating
surface plasmon mode (−ksp). The advantage of coupling contra-directionally
is that only the specular reﬂection order (+0) needs to be suppressed.

4

this coupled plasmon power calculated at the edge of the grating which was
employed in the eﬃciency calculation. The power in the input beam was
computed by simply integrating for the Poynting vector over the cross sec-
tion of the beam. For this input power calculation the silver was replaced
with appropriate absorbing boundaries in order to eliminate backscattering.

3 Problem Challenge

From a mathematical standpoint, converging on an optimal grating topology
is non-trivial. This is because of both the size and complexity of the opti-
mization space.
The expansiveness of the optimization space can be grasped when one consid-
ers that a reasonably eﬃcient topology must be the result of an 18-parameter
optimization, at the very least. One arrives at this minimum number of pa-
rameters by ﬁrst considering that the cross-section of the beam requires about
nine grooves for correct wave vector matching [1]. This corresponded to a
daunting 18-parameter optimization since each groove must be characterized
by at least its width and spacing. This overly large optimization space ren-
dered genetic optimization algorithms and other direct search algorithms [18]
completely ineﬀective in ﬁnding a meaningful optimum.
In addition to the expansiveness of the optimization space, the unavoidable
presence of multipath interference in electromagnetic wave problems further
exacerbated the task of mathematically searching for an optimum. Owing to
the multipath interference, we found that the optimization space was studded
with numerous local optima. The situation was analogous to that of laser
speckle, where although there is a global maximum at the center where the
laser light is most intense, there also exist numerous local maxima known as
speckle surrounding the center. It is therefore impossible for traditional nu-
merical methods such as steepest descent or simplex optimization methods,
which converge on local optima, to arrive at the global optimum unless by a
fortuitous starting point in the immediate vicinity of the global optimum.
The conclusion of these two observations is that one can arrive at an optimal
topology only if one has an initial topology which is already quite close to
the optimum. The crux of the problem is therefore in the successful selection
of such an already-eﬃcient initial topology.

5

4 Methodology

To determine a near-optimal initial topology, a hierarchal optimization method
was used which was repeated over a range of beam input angles, beam in-
put widths and groove depths. First, we started with a grating consisting
of a single groove with strong coupling characteristics placed at the edge of
the space where the grating was to be constructed, opposite the edge from
which the surface plasmon would exit the grating. Subsequent grooves were
then placed roughly one grating period away by performing a two-parameter
search which determined the most eﬃcient width and position for such a
groove, under the condition that previously placed grooves remained ﬁxed.
Additional grooves were added sequentially in this way until the eﬃciency
of the grating could no longer be improved. Note that the grating design
was completely deterministic after the initial placement of the ﬁrst groove,
since the successive two-parameter groove optimization that was used was
deterministic as well.
Having produced a reasonably eﬃcient design, the width and position of
each groove was adjusted individually, starting from the rear-most groove
and then moving forward, using the same two-parameter search as in the
initial placement phase. Lastly, the grating was ﬁne-tuned using a generic
direct search algorithm in conjunction with numerical simulation results.
The two-parameter search for each successive groove consisted of calculating
the eﬃciency of the grating while varying the location and width of each
groove over some range of values and then selecting the most eﬃcient conﬁg-
uration. However, individually determining the eﬃciency of every conﬁgura-
tion by numerical simulation was overly tedious computationally. To make
the search many times faster, we modeled the grating as a transmission line
studded with scattering centers [19]. This was accomplished by using numer-
ical simulation to tabulate the scattering parameters of individual grooves of
varied widths and then computing the strength of the output plasmon wave
by using a simple transfer matrix method [20].

5 Results

The ﬁnal grating coupled 50% of the energy from the input beam into the
surface plasmon mode (Figure 3). Its ﬁnal optimized structure consisted of
a 14-element grating with a groove depth of 50 nm. The average center-to-

6

center spacing between grooves was 184 nm, slightly larger than the expected
value of 165 nm dictated by wave-vector matching [1].
Also, the groove width of the optimized grating decreased monotonically from
101 nm to 18 nm from the rear to the front of the grating, which was precisely
dictated by the need to match the Gaussian proﬁle of the input beam. To
elucidate this further we consider the time-reverse case where the plasmon
propagates to the right, strikes the front of the grating and then is coupled to
free space radiation. In this case, one would expect the front of the grating
to be composed of weak scattering centers and the middle of the grating to
be composed of stronger scattering centers in order to produce a beam with
a Gaussian proﬁle, since such a beam’s energy is more concentrated toward
its center. However, toward the rear of the grating, even stronger scattering
centers are needed, since the strength of the incoming surface plasmon has
also decreased substantially as well. Thus the rearmost grooves, in order to
produce the desired Gaussian proﬁle, must do their best to scatter all the
remaining surface plasmon mode energy.
In order to validate our optimized grating, its robustness to small topological
changes was calculated. To this end we found that the width of any individual
groove could be varied by up to 5 nm without incurring the loss of more than
5% eﬃciency. The location of any individual groove could be shifted by 10
nm and the depth of the grating could also be varied by 5 nm without losing
more than 5% eﬃciency as well. Also, we found that the use of a Gaussian
apodization function with standard deviation either twice or half that of
the original would not result in a loss of more than 5% eﬃciency either.
These robustness calculations conﬁrmed that our topology was indeed a valid,
physical optimum, and not a mere computational artifact.
The sensitivity of the grating to changes in the width, alignment and angle
of the incoming beam was also calculated. Figure 4 shows that the grating
was relatively insensitive to the diameter of the beam in that the grating
remained more than 45% eﬃcient whether the beam width was narrowed to
0.6 µm or widened to 1.3 µm. In addition to being insensitive to the width
of the beam, we found that the grating was also insensitive to the alignment
of the beam since a shift of up to 200 nm in the center position of the beam
would not result in an eﬃciency below 45%. Finally, because a grating is
equivalent to a highly directive antenna array, we expected and found an
extreme sensitivity to the incident beam angle. Figure 5 shows that the
beam angle could not deviate more than 2 degrees if we wished to maintain
an eﬃciency greater than 45%.

7

Figure 3: The optimized grating. a) Finite Element Method simulation of
the TM magnetic ﬁeld. b) Close-up of a groove showing the slight rounding
of the corners needed to stabilize the FEM simulation. c) Diagram of the
widths and center-to-center separation distances of the grooves which form
the grating.

8

Figure 4: The diameter of the input beam can be varied substantially without
signiﬁcantly decreasing the eﬃciency of the grating.

Figure 5: The eﬃciency of the optimized grating decreases rapidly with even
small variations in the angle of the incident beam. This is expected due to
the high directivity of the grating coupler acting as an antenna array.

9

6 Conclusion

We have presented a grating coupler topology optimization that couples 50%
of the energy from a 1 µm diameter beam (FWHM) at λ = 476 nm free space
wavelength, into surface currents and voltages at an Ag-SiO2 interface. The
angle of incidence was chosen to be 45 degrees, and chosen to couple into
the surface plasmon mode contra-directionally. We note the diﬃculty caused
by multiple optimization parameters as well as multipath in electromagnetic
optimization, and we present an optimization routine that overcomes these
problems. Also, we show that our design approach is robust to topologi-
cal variations as well as to signiﬁcant changes in the beam diameter and
alignment. We verify that the grating is highly directive, as expected.

7 Acknowledgment

A portion of this work was peformed as part of The Aerospace Corporation’s
Independent Research and Development Program.

References

[1] H. Raether, Surface plasmons on smooth and rough surfaces and on

gratings (Springer-Verlag, 1988)

[2] J. Conway, Eﬃcient optical coupling to the nanoscale (PhD Dissertation,

University of California, Los Angeles, 2006).

[3] J. Holoma “Present and future of surface plasmon resonance biosensors,”

Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 377, 528-539 (2003).

[4] S. Nie and S.R. Emory, “Probing single molecules and single nanopar-
ticles by surface-enhanced Raman scattering,” Science 275, 1102-1106
(1997).

[5] K. Kneipp, Y. Wang, H. Kneipp, L.T. Perelman, I. Itzkan, R. Dasari and
M.S. Feld, “Single molecule detection using surface-enhanced Raman
scattering (SERS)”, Physical Review Letters 78, 1667-1670 (1997).

10

[6] K.H. Su, S. Durant, J.M. Steele, Y. Xiong, C. Sun and X. Zhang,
“Raman Enhancement Factor of a Single Tunable Nanoplasmonic Res-
onator,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B 110, 3964-3968 (2006).

[7] W. A. Challener, T. W. Mcdaniel, C. D. Mihalcea, K. R Mountﬁeld, K.
Pelhos, and I. K. Sendur, “Light delivery techniques for heat-assisted
magnetic recording,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 42, 981-988 (2003).

[8] X. Luo and T. Ishihara, “Surface plasmon resonant interference nano-

lithography technique,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 4780-4782 (2004).

[9] B. Rothenhausler and W. Knoll, “Surface-plasmon microscopy,” Nature

332, 615-617 (1988).

[10] S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. S. Volkov, E. Devaux, J.-Y. Laluet, and T. W.
Ebbesen, “Channel plasmon subwavelength waveguide components in-
cluding interferometers and ring resonators,” Nature, 440, 508-511
(2006).

[11] G. I. Stegeman, R. F. Wallis, and A. A. Maradudin, “Excitation of
surface polaritons by end-ﬁre coupling,” Optics Lett. 8, 386-388 (1983).

[12] R. Charbonneau and N. Lahoud, “Demonstration of integrated optics
elements based on long-ranging surface plasmon polaritons,” Optics Ex-
press 13, 977-984 (2005).

[13] E. Cubukcu, E. A. Kort, K. B. Crozier and F. Capasso, “Plasmonic laser

antenna,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 093120 (2006).

[14] D. P. Siu and T. K. Gustafson, “Coherent coupling of radiation to metal-
barrier-metal structures by surface plasmons,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 31,
pp.71-73 (1977).

[15] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design (John

Wiley and Sons, Inc, New Jersey, 1998) p. 187.

[16] C. Peng and W. A. Challener, “Input-grating couplers for narrow Gaus-
inﬂuence of groove depth,” Optics Express 12, 6481-6490

sian beam:
(2004).

11

[17] G. Leveque and O. J. F. Martin, “Numerical study and optimization
of a diﬀraction grating for surface plasmon excitation,” Proc. of SPIE.
5927, 592713 (2005).

[18] R. M. Lewis, V. Torczon and M. W. Trosset, “Direct search methods:
Then and now,” J. Comp. and Appl. Math, 124, 191-207 (2000).

[19] A. Narasimha, Low dispersion, high spectral eﬃciency, RF photonic
transmission systems and low loss grating couplers for Silicon-on-
Insulator nanophotonic integrated circuits (PhD Dissertation, Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles, 2004) pp. 70-71 .

[20] J. Helszajn, Microwave engineering: Passive, active and non-reciprocal

circuits (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1992) pp. 17-18 .

12

