7
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
1
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Properties of Deep Ice at the South Pole:
Absorption

The AMANDA Collaboration:
P. Askebjer∗, S.W. Barwick†, L. Bergstr¨om∗, A. Bouchta∗, S. Carius‡,
E. Dalberg∗, K. Engel§, B. Erlandsson∗, A. Goobar∗, L. Gray§, A. Hallgren‡,
F. Halzen§, H. Heukenkamp¶P.O. Hulth∗, S. Hundertmark¶ J. Jacobsen§,
A. Karle¶ V. Kandhadai§, I. Liubarsky§, D. Lowderk,
T. Millerk∗∗, P. Mock†, R. Morse§, R. Porrata†, P.B. Pricek, A. Richardsk,
H. Rubinstein‡, E. Schneider†, Ch. Spiering¶, O. Streicher¶ Q. Sun∗, Th. Thon¶,
S. Tilav§, R. Wischnewski¶, Ch. Walck∗ & G. Yodh†
Corresponding author: L. Bergstr¨om
e-mail: lbe@physto.se

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We discuss recent measurements of the wavelength-dependent absorption coeﬃcients in
deep South Pole ice. The method uses transit time distributions of pulses from a variable-
frequency laser sent between emitters and receivers embedded in the ice. At depths of 800
to 1000 m scattering is dominated by residual air bubbles, whereas absorption occurs both
in ice itself and in insoluble impurities. The absorption coeﬃcient increases approximately
exponentially with wavelength in the measured interval 410 to 610 nm. At the shortest
wavelength our value is about a factor 20 below previous values obtained for laboratory
ice and lake ice; with increasing wavelength the discrepancy with previous measurements
500 nm the experimental uncertainties are small enough for us to
decreases. At
resolve an extrinsic contribution to absorption in ice: submicron dust particles contribute by
an amount that increases with depth and corresponds well with the expected increase seen
near the Last Glacial Maximum in Vostok and Dome C ice cores. The laser pulse method
allows remote mapping of gross structure in dust concentration as a function of depth in
glacial ice.

415 to

∼

∼

∗Stockholm University, Sweden
†University of California, Irvine, USA
‡Uppsala University, Sweden
§University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA
¶DESY Zeuthen, Germany
kUniversity of California, Berkeley, USA
∗∗Currently at Bartol Research Institute, Delaware, USA

0

1

Introduction

The AMANDA experiment (Antarctic Muon and Neutrino Detector Array) is a
U.S.-Germany-Sweden collaboration with the aim of deploying a facility to detect
neutrinos from astrophysical sources (a “neutrino telescope”) deep in the South Pole
ice cap [1]. High-energy muon neutrinos will convert into charged muons through
charged weak current interactions somewhere in the ice volume (or in the bedrock
below the ice cap). As the muons are very penetrating, and move at relativistic
speed, they will generate Cherenkov light along, typically, several hundred meters
of track length. By recording the arrival times of Cherenkov photons at several
locations in the ice volume, the direction of the muon track can be reconstructed.
Interesting events will be muons coming from below the horizon, since they can only
have been generated by upcoming neutrinos (all other known particles would be
stopped in the interior of the earth).

The AMANDA detector will eventually consist of many strings, each with 20–50
optical modules containing photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) lowered around 2 kilome-
ters into the ice. Typical spacing between strings and between modules in strings
will be tens of meters.

The performance of the detector will depend crucially on the optical properties
of the ice. A ﬁrst stage of the detector, deployed during the 1993-94 austral summer,
consists of four vertical strings each having 20 PMTs spaced at 10 m distance. The
strings form an 80 deg sector of a circle of 30.4 m radius, with one string at the center
and three strings on the circumference. A laser calibration system was developed
in order to determine the precise detector geometry and the optical properties of
the ice. A brief summary of the results has recently been published in [2, 3]. The
results have shown that the ice at 800 - 1000 m depth is highly turbid. The short
scattering lengths (between 10 and 20 cm) are consistent with being due to a residual
population of bubbles of trapped air. Deeper in the ice these bubbles are expected
to be transformed to air hydrate crystals, which have a refractive index close to that
of ice [4] and therefore should not cause much scattering. (For a thorough discussion
of various scattering mechanisms in deep Antarctic ice, see the accompanying paper
[5].)

Surprisingly, the absorption coeﬃcient of the ice at wavelengths between 400 and
600 nm was found to be smaller by a large factor (greater than 10 at the shortest
wavelengths) than the value for laboratory ice [11, 12] (for a compilation of several
sets of experimental data see [6]). The South Pole ice is thus a remarkably clear
optical medium, and in the 1995-96 season we have deployed 4 new strings to a
maximum depth of 2000 m, where air bubbles should have entirely transformed into
air hydrates. The analysis of data from this deployment is in progress.

Since the reported AMANDA results (especially those of [3]) deviate from pre-
viously published values by such a large factor, we have felt the need to present
to the optical physics community the details of our experimental method, the pro-
posed explanation and implications of the long absorption lengths and an analysis
of absorption in dust present in the ice. Various sources of residual scattering at

1

bubble-free depths are discussed in [5].

2 Outline of the method to extract scattering and ab-

sorption lengths

The experimental setup for the measurement of the optical properties of the South
Pole deep ice is shown in Fig. 1. Light from a dye laser (driven by a Nd:YAG
laser) was brought down optical ﬁbers to diﬀusing nylon spheres (one per PMT)
approximately 30 cm below each PMT.

Pulsed laser light (4 ns FWHM) was fed into the optical ﬁbers at a frequency
of 10 Hz. By using gratings in the dye laser and a monochromator the wavelength
of the light could be varied between 410 and 610 nm, with a precision of around 2
nm. (At shorter wavelengths, not enough light could be transmitted through the
kilometer-long ﬁbers.) After passage down the ﬁber, the 4 ns pulses had broadened
to around 12 ns. Light was led down to one nylon sphere at a time, and the response
of neighboring PMTs in the same string and in the other strings was recorded.

The PMTs (8 inch EMI 9353 tubes with a noise rate in the ice of about 1.7 kHz)
were operated at a gain of 108, and had approximately 6 ns resolution, including
time smearing in the coaxial cables that fed the signals up to the surface. The signal
from the PMT 30 cm from the ﬂashing nylon sphere deﬁned t=0 (corrected for run
time through ﬁbers, etc.).

The main purpose of the laser system just described was to serve as a calibration
system for the absolute timings of the PMTs and their relative positions in the
AMANDA muon detector.
Immediately after the system became operational it
was realized, however, that the South Pole ice at depths between 800 and 1000
meters is not an ideal optical medium for imaging the tracks of muons through their
Cherenkov light. Instead of a narrow arrival pulse (expected, typically, at 87 ns for
20 m distance between emitting and receiving tube), a very broad structure with
maximum at around 500 ns was observed (see Fig. 2). As very exact timings are
required to recontruct the direction of muons from the sparsely sampled Cherenkov
photons they generate, the observed timing pattern makes the present array not
useful for muon tracking (but the array is used for other astrophysical applications
[1]).

However, the presence of the broad time distributions, and our modeling of them,
have permitted us to make more accurate measurements of the optical properties
of ice in the visible region than have ever been done in the laboratory. As shown
below, the in situ laser measurements in large volumes of ice and the random walk
nature of the light propagation permit a clear separation between absorption and
scattering, something which is extremely diﬃcult to study in the laboratory.

In that process, we have independently discovered a method similar to one re-
cently used in medical and other applications [7], one diﬀerence being the longer
time scales and distances involved here, another the fact that both the light emit-
ters (nylon spheres) and receivers (PMT tubes) are immersed in the medium to be

2

measured. The derivation that we will present of the relevant formulas seems to be
new (and simple), and may be of interest for optical physics researchers. We will
also show that a detailed Monte Carlo simulation of light propagation supports the
analytical treatment, and ﬁts the measured distributions excellently.

2.1 Random walk description of light propagation

The physical picture of photon propagation in the bubbly ice is that of a random
walk. When a photon leaves the nylon sphere it passes through clear ice along
a straight trajectory for some path length until it hits an air bubble. Then it is
refracted (or externally reﬂected), travelling in a new direction until it hits the next
bubble. The wide dispersion of arrival times at the PMTs must mean that a typical
photon has undergone many scatterings, and therefore a probabilistic analysis of the
random walk should be possible. The problem is simpliﬁed by the randomness of
the medium and the macroscopic distances of propagation which means that any
interference eﬀects can be ignored.

We deﬁne the simple, geometrical scattering length on spherical bubbles as

with the scattering coeﬃcient cbub given by

λbub =

1
cbub

,

cbub =

0
Z

∞

dnbub(r)
dr

πr2dr,

where dnbub(r)/dr is the number density of bubbles having radius between r and r +
dr; πr2 is the geometrical cross section. This means that the probability distribution
d/λbub . We
for the distance d between two successive scatterings is proportional to e−
note that the average geometrical scattering length is

and the second moment is

We only have to incorporate two modiﬁcations to the standard random walk
treatments given in the literature (e.g, [8]), namely absorption of the light beam
and the non-isotropy of the scattering amplitude for photons incident on air bub-
bles. Since the air bubbles themselves do not cause any absorption of photons, only
scattering, it is very simple to incorporate absorption in the random walk picture.
Suppose that a photon arrives at a PMT after N steps. Then the total path length
is on the average N λbub, and absorption can be taken into account by weighting that
particular path by the factor

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

= λbub

d
i
h

d2
h

i

= 2λ2

bub

−Nλbub
λa

e

3

(of course we assume N >> 1; typically N is on the order of 1000 in our problem),
where λa is the true absorption length (i.e. related to true absorption of photons in
the medium).

Sometimes it is convenient to discuss absorption in terms of the absorption co-

eﬃcient,

This is related to the absorptive (imaginary) part of the index of refraction by

αabs =

1
λabs

.

αabs =

4πIm(n)
λL

,

where λL is the wavelength of the light source.

Non-isotropy of the scattering from bubbles means that there is a correlation
between successive vectors making up the random walk. If the bubbles are spherical
there is still an azimuthal symmetry, and one can show that (e.g. by introducing
rotation matrices which rotate each successive vector to the polar axis)

~r1 ·
h

~r1+ki

= λ2

bub(δ0,k + τ k),

cos θ
h

where τ =
is the average of the cosine of the scattering angle, and the factor
of 2 entering for k = 0 (δ0,k is a Kronecker delta function) is a reﬂection of Eq.(3)
and Eq.(4).

i

In the formula for random walk with absorption introduced as just explained:

WN ( ~R) =

1
iN /3)3/2

(2π

~R2
h

2
3 ~R
2h ~R2
iN e

e−

−Nλbub
λa

,

it just remains to evaluate:

~R2
h

iN =

N

.
i

~ri)2

(
h
Xi=1
N
i=1 ~ri)2
i
2), 2(N

(
By expanding the squared sum in
h
2 + . . . +
2 +
~rN |
~r1|
P
|
−
|
1), and in general 2(N
~r1 + . . . + ~rN ·

distance 0 (namely,
~r2 + ~r2 ·
(~r1 ·
k.
Using then Eq.(8), we ﬁnd that the factor 2λ2

~r2|
|
~rN

−

−

one ﬁnds N terms with relative
1) terms of relative distance 1
k) terms of relative distance

bub can be taken outside and we

arrive at

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

N

1

−

(N

k)τ k =

−

~R2
h

bub

iN = 2λ2
(1

2N λ2

bub

−

Xk=0
τ ) + (τ N +1
τ )2
(1

−

τ )/N

.

−

In the limit of large N we obtain

4

2N λ2
bub
τ
1
With the identiﬁcation N λbub = cit, where ci = c/n is the velocity of light in the
ice, we obtain the formula corresponding to the Green’s function for the radiative
transport of a spherically symmetric laser pulse emitted at a distance d = 0 at time
t = 0

iN =

~R2
h

(12)

−

.

u(d, t) =

1
(4πDt)3/2 e

2
−d
4Dt e

−cit
λa ,

with d2 = ~R2, and where the constant of diﬀusion D is given by

with the eﬀective scattering length λef f related to λbub through the formula

D =

ciλef f
3

,

λef f =

λbub
τ
1

−

.

We note that in the expression for D only the refractive scattering part of the op-
tical amplitude needs to be taken into account. If diﬀraction or any other small-angle
scattering eﬀect is included, making the geometrical bubble cross section increase
from σ to (B + 1)σ, then

λbub →

λbub/(1 + B), τ

(B + τ )/(B + 1),

→

and D is easily seen to be invariant under these transformations. This has the
simple physical interpretation that the diﬀusion power of the very forward-peaked
diﬀraction has to be negligible compared to the large-angle scattering induced by
refraction on bubble walls.

The formula (13) can be put in a more convenient form as follows using two

dimensionless quantities y and κ. Deﬁning y = t/√f with

and the dimensionless quantity

one gets

with

f =

3λad2
4c2
i λef f

κ =

2

√3d
λaλef f

u(f, y) =

e−

κ(y+1/y)

C =

1
f 1/4(4πciλef f /3)

.

3
2

p
C
3
2

y

5

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

Using the basic integrals

∞

dy y−

1/2e−

κ(y+1/y) =

∞

dy y−

3/2e−

κ(y+1/y) =

2κ

e−

(20)

0
Z

0
Z

π
κ

r

one ﬁnds the average value of arrival time t for a given distance d

=

t
h

i

f

y
h

i

=

f =

p

p

√3d
2ci s

λa
λef f

,

i.e. a linear relation.

In fact, deﬁning the general class of integrals

fI (κ, n) =

∞

dy y−

3

2 +ne−

κ(y+1/y)

0
Z

one ﬁnds a very convenient recursion relation by taking the derivative of Eq.(22)
with respect to κ:

fI(κ, n + 1) =

fI (κ, n)

fI(κ, n

1),

−

−

d
dκ

−

with initial conditions for the recursion given by

fI(κ, 0) = fI (κ, 1) =

2κ

e−

π
κ

r

(the equality of fI(κ, 0) and fI(κ, 1) , or more generally, fI(κ, n) and fI (κ, 1
easily demonstrated by letting y

1/y in the integral.)

−

n) is

Using the arrival time distribution expressed in this scaling form, one can easily

→

calculate all moments of the distribution, e.g., the expectation value

E(y) = 1,

and the variance

V (y) = E(y2)

E(y)2 =

1
2κ

.

−
The scaling form of the distribution was used in the numerical ﬁtting procedure for
the arrival times of the laser pulses.

The value of time tpeak at which the distribution peaks is given by

tpeak =

√3d
2ci s

λa
λef f 

s

1 +

3λaλef f

4d2 − p

3λaλef f
2d

.





For the case at hand, with λa >> λef f , this also gives an essentially linear depen-
d2 for a random walk process without
dence of tpeak on d (compared to tpeak ∝
attenuation).

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)



6

2.2 Application to muons traversing bubbly ice

The results for the Green’s function derived here can also be used to obtain an
expression for the time distribution of Cherenkov photons coming from a straight
muon track, for which the closest approach (“impact parameter”) di to the PMT at
t = 0 is much larger than the scattering length λef f (i.e.
in our case greater than
a meter or so). Introducing a = 4λef f ci/3 and a cut-oﬀ length l (the “size” of the
detector) one ﬁnds

I(di, t; l) = N

c3
c1 Z

r

√c3/c1(t+l/c0)

max

0,√c3/c1(t

l/c0)

−

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

dz
z3/2 e−

(√c1c3(z+1/z)+c2),

(28)

where N is a normalization factor, c0 is the velocity of the muon (close to the velocity
of light in vacuum), and

c1 = (d2

c2 =
c3 = c2

i + c2
2c2

0t2)/a,
0t/a,

−
0/a + ci/λa.

The total ﬂux Fµ(di) received at a PMT of area AP M T from a muon generating
NC photons per unit track length passing the PMT at impact parameter d can be
obtained (for di >> λbub) by integrating this expression over time and taking the
limit l

. We ﬁnd

→ ∞

Fµ(di) =

3NC AP M T
8πλef f

K0

di

 

s

3
λef f λa !

,

where K0 is a modiﬁed Bessel function of the second kind.

In applications where directional information and time structure at the sub-
microsecond level are not important, such as the detection of neutrinos from super-
novae where relevant time scales are on the order of seconds, the present AMANDA
detector in bubbly ice is perfectly functional. A neutrino-induced event from a SN
explosion typically generates a positron track of only 10 cm, and can on the diﬀusion
scale
λaλef f be regarded as pointlike. Then the total response function (ﬂux per
unit area integrated over time) for NSN photons (typically of the order of 3000 per
positron) injected at distance d is given by

p

ISN (d) =

3NSN
16πλef f d

e−

q

3
λaλef f

d

.

We can deﬁne an eﬀective volume of ice seen by a PMT by integrating AP M T
times this ﬂux over all space (the error caused by using the formula at small d where
it is not strictly valid can be shown to be small, as it contributes a very small fraction
of the result).

We then obtain

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

7

VSN =

NSN AP M T λa
4

.

(34)

This result could (apart from the numerical factor) be anticipated on dimen-
sional grounds using the observation that scatterings do not change the average
photon ﬂux (thus the result should not depend on the scattering length). For a
real detector, correction factors related to the quantum eﬃciency of the PMTs and
Poisson statistics of detected photons have to be added. Since the Cherenkov ﬂux
1/λ2) as do λa, the quantum eﬃciency and to
depends strongly on wavelength (
some extent λef f , an integration over wavelength has to be performed in addition.

∼

2.3 Monte Carlo simulation of light propagation in bubbly ice

∼

To verify that the general picture and derivations above are correct, we have also
performed extensive Monte Carlo simulations of light propagation through the ice.
Thanks to the existence of widely separated length scales, d
λa >> λef f >> λL,
where λL is the wavelength of the laser light, a fairly simple optical treatment is
adequate to obtain an estimate of λa and λef f good to a few percent accuracy or
better. In fact, the estimate of λa is given quite directly by the fall-oﬀ of the arrival
times of photons for large times, and is very insensitive to the uncertainties in the
determination of λbub. To determine λbub one needs the average value of the cosine
of the scattering angle as input. One cause of uncertainty is that the bubbles may
not be smooth enough to be regarded as perfect spheres. In that case, the diﬀusing
ability could be greater (i.e.
smaller) and λbub consequently larger. Thus, we
are able to determine λef f quite accurately from laser data, but the relation between
λef f and the geometrical λbub contains uncertainties. A direct measurement of the
scattering function of air bubbles contained in the ice cores taken from the Antarctica
would obviously be of importance for this problem.

cos θ
h

i

Since photons from the coherent laser source scatter on the average between
500 and 1500 times on bubbles before arriving at the PM tubes, the initial state
in any single scattering can be regarded as being completely incoherent in phase,
direction and polarization. We have thus employed simple geometrical optics for
the scattering process incorporating singly refracted, externally reﬂected and totally
reﬂected light with the relative strength of the components given by the Fresnel
coeﬃcients. (In fact, we have also performed full Mie scattering calculations and
veriﬁed that the value of τ obtained from this simple analysis is correct.) We take
into account the change of index of refraction of the air in the bubble due to the
pressure and temperature. For the ice we use the wavelength-dependent values of the
refraction index given in [9]. The bubbles are assumed to be spherically symmetric,
in agreement with observations at these depths.

Although a more complete treatment of the scattering could be implemented in
the Monte Carlo, we emphasize that this, according to Eq. (15), only amounts to
a renormalization of the relation between the eﬀective scattering length λef f and
the geometrical bubble scattering length λbub (with the latter deﬁned as an average

8

over sizes and shapes of air inclusions), which is not important for discussion in this
paper. (It is of importance, though, when discussing the implications of our results,
e.g., for glaciology.) With our approximations we ﬁnd for the quantity τ entering
Eq. (15), a value around 0.75. This is slightly wavelength-dependent as the refractive
index of ice increases by some 2 % when going from 600 to 300 nm. The Cherenkov
angle arccos(1/(niβ)) (where β is the muon velocity in units of the speed of light
in vacuum) will also increase by some 4 % in going from the longest to the shortest
wavelengths.
(Since the intensity spectrum of the Cherenkov radiation varies as
1/λ2, the shorter wavelengths are most important for muon detection. Below 300
nm, however, the absorption in ice increases rapidly and the detection eﬃciency of
the optical modules drops.)

2.4 Fits to the experimental distributions

In making global ﬁts to the laser calibration data we used special routines that
computed maximum likelihood ﬁts to the observed distributions. The chi-squared
method was used to give starting values for the maximum likelihood ﬁt and to give
a ﬁgure of merit of the ﬁt. The Davidon variance metric algorithm [10] was used for
the minimization and the statistical errors were extracted from the variance matrix
of the maximum likelihood procedure. The function used was formulated as

where xn are the normalization constants for each measured arrival time distribution
1.0), En the number of events in distribution n, ∆x the bin size used in all
(xn ≈
distributions,

g(t) =

xn ·

En ·
y

3
2

∆x

T

e−

·

,

N

T = κ

y +

1
,
y
(cid:19)
∆tm
−
√f

,

(cid:18)

or

t

y =

t
√f

χ2 =

ndis

nbins

Xn=1

Xi=1

(yi,n −
yi,n

g(t))2

,

where ∆tm allows for a shift in the deﬁnition of time zero for each emitting tube (this
this depends on details of the PMT such as the value of the high voltage etc). We
allowed for uncertainties in the vertical positions of the strings as that was diﬃcult
to determine during deployment. The initial chi-squared sum we minimized was

where the ith bin in the nth distribution has a content of yi,n events and the theo-
retical prediction for this bin is g(t).

There is a potential problem with this laser calibration method due to the fact
that it is in general impossible to resolve several individual photons from the same
laser pulse hitting the same PMT. Since the arrival time recorded by the receiving
PMT is set by the ﬁrst photon, one may tend to suppress long arrival times, which

9

(35)

(36)

could underestimate the absorption length. To overcome this problem, we moni-
tored the total number of emitted laser pulses N . For each receiving tube we then
estimated the average number of photons reaching this detector from the zero class
of a Poisson distribution. If the distribution has n entries the Poisson parameter µ
is given by

(37)

(38)

(39)

i.e.

P (0) = e−

µ =

N

n

,

−
N

µ = ln

N

.

N

(cid:18)

n (cid:19)

−

The variable used to select non-saturated data is the sum of the zero class and the
class with one photon,

α = P (0) + P (1) = e−

µ + µe−

µ = e−

µ(1 + µ),

−

i.e. 1
α is the fraction of events expected to have two or more photons reaching the
detector and thus causing saturation. To avoid the saturation problem, we demanded
that 1
α was less than 1 %. To get a statistically signiﬁcant estimate of the optical
parameters only time distributions where at least 2000 hits were registered by the
receiving PM were selected. This left almost 500 time distributions for various
wavelength and distance combinations.

−

In Fig. 2 we show the distribution of arrival times as measured and as ﬁtted to
the analytical expression (Eq. 13) for our random walk model, for an emitter and a
receiver separated by 10 m. The results for wavelengths 410 and 610 nm are shown
as open and ﬁlled circles, respectively. The ﬁts shown give the same value for the
scattering length λbub (around 10 cm) for the two cases, but absorption lengths of
around 230 m and 10 m, respectively. The quality of the analytical ﬁt to the data
is quite remarkable. We thus conclude that the physics behind the laser calibration
data is well understood, and that we have, in fact, at our disposal a very powerful
tool to make in situ measurements of important properties of the ice such as λa and
λbub. In particular, λa and λef f are essentially uniquely determined by the temporal
distribution of arrived photons at each particular PM tube, once the geometry of
the detector array is ﬁxed.

One may notice that the values of λa and λef f obtained through this analy-
λaλef f . Since we let
sis are essentially spatial averages over the diﬀusion scale
these parameters depend on depth in the analysis we are using an “adiabatic ap-
proximation” that should be excellent if the quantities vary slowly with depth. The
goodness of the ﬁt to the function (13) for all wavelengths and all depths shows the
self-consistency of this scheme.

p

3 Summary of Experimental Results

In this Section, we brieﬂy summarize the results on absorption length as a function of
wavelength obtained by the AMANDA calibration system at two depths, around 830

10

and 970 m depth, respectively. In [3] results are also given for an intermediate region
around 910 m, with results similar to those at the shallowest depth. The results are
shown in Table 1 (for details, see [3]). The errors given are only statistical; a
systematic error estimated to be around 5 % (dominated mainly by the uncertainty
of the exact geometry of the AMANDA array should be added.

4 Modeling the Optical Properties of Highly Pure South

Pole Ice

Using the results presented in Section 3, we next analyze the intrinsic optical prop-
erties of the South Pole ice and estimate the absorption due to solid impurities
present in the ice. In the discussion we compare our results for South Pole ice with
measurements made on less pure ice [6, 11, 12], on extremely pure water [13], and
on LiF [17] as an example of a highly transparent solid.

4.1

Intrinsic absorption in highly pure ice

Our discussion is based on features shown in Figs. 3 to 5. We focus attention
on three regions of the approximately V-shaped spectra with their minima in the
visible region. On the ultraviolet side the absorption in both ice [6, 11, 12] and
ionic crystals [17] decreases exponentially at wavelengths somewhat longer than that
13 eV for LiF).
corresponding to the electronic band gap energy (
The slope of this so-called Urbach tail is believed to be governed by exciton-phonon
interactions; for LiF it becomes more shallow with increasing temperature [17].

8 eV for ice,

∼

∼

On the long wavelength side of the minimum, absorption rises approximately
exponentially as a function of wavelength, but the window of transparency is much
narrower for ice than for ionic crystals. Ionic crystals are transparent throughout the
entire visible region, and their exponential absorption spectrum in the infrared is the
result of multiphonon processes, in which a photon is absorbed with the emission of
n phonons. Phenomenological models [18] lead naturally to an exponential depen-
dence of the absorption coeﬃcient on wavelength, in agreement with measurement
over six orders of magnitude, for n up to at least seven phonons. The argument
in the case of ionic crystals is that the contributions of overtones are generated
by processes that depend on some coupling constant, with the nth overtone going
as (coupling constant)n
1. This leads naturally to an exponential dependence on
overtone number.

−

−

In contrast, ice is a molecular crystal in which the H2O molecules are connected
by weak OH
O hydrogen bonds. Each O atom in the lattice is coordinated to
four H atoms, forming strong intramolecular bonds with two of them and hydrogen
bonds with the other two. Ice absorbs much more strongly than do ionic crystals in
the red region of the visible. The reason is that ice has additional degrees of free-
dom associated with the stretching and bending of H-O-H bonds in individual water
molecules. These internal modes lead to absorption in the red region. The funda-

11

mental stretching mode peaks at
3 µm. Numerous overtones and combinations of
stretching and bending modes with each other and with the lattice modes lead to
a roughly exponential slope from a minimum at about 400 nm to a large peak at 3
µm. The extension of this exponential to values of the absorption coeﬃcient below
1 can be seen only if the ice is very pure and if the measurement technique
10−
is able to discriminate absorption against scattering.

2 m−

∼

By application of the same reasoning that applies to multiphonon absorption, we
suggest that intramolecular vibrations depend on a coupling constant and that the
overtones decrease as increasing powers of the coupling constant, thus leading to an
exponential dependence of absorption on wavelength in the red and infrared. Since
this conjecture assumes no growth in the number of processes with overtone number,
the actual rate of increase of absorption with wavelength may, for large overtone
numbers, be less rapid than exponential. (We will make use of this assumption of
an exponential absorption in Section 4.5 when we estimate the contribution of dust
to absorption.)

Impurities, dislocations, vacancies, and their associated electronic defects con-
tribute to absorption and scattering. Almost no measurement techniques, with the
exception of our pulsed laser technique, are designed to be able to distinguish scat-
tering from absorption. These defects tend to ﬁll in the minimum in the spectrum
to a degree that depends on their concentration and size distribution.

Figure 3 compares absorption data and the calculated magnitude of Rayleigh
scattering for ice (solid curves and open symbols) and water (dashed curves and solid
points) at wavelengths near the absorption minimum. The most striking feature of
the data is the large discrepancy between values of the absorption near the minimum.
For water, the absorption decreases in order from the water of Lake Baikal [19],
to the Paciﬁc Ocean [20] (the DUMAND point), to “pure sea water” (with no
particulate content) as summarized by Smith and Baker [21], to the curve labeled
“purest water”, which gives the results of Quickenden and Irvin [13], who took
extraordinary measures to eliminate both inorganic and organic impurities, and
ﬁnally to the point labeled SNO. The SNO result is a recent measurement by No¨el
and Mes [23], who went to great lengths to purify the water to be used in the
Sudbury Neutrino Observatory experiment.

The Lake Baikal group has recently used a pulsed laser at 475 nm to measure
1,
scattering separately from absorption. They ﬁnd values of λscat ≈
17o [24]. None of the authors of the other studies on water made
with
a case for having been able to distinguish Rayleigh scattering from absorption. In
fact, the data for purest water approach asymptotically (to within a factor two) the
calculated Rayleigh scattering line for pure water.

cos θ
h

23 m−

i ∼

−

8

The measurements in Fig. 3 labeled “lab ice” represent the contributions of a
number of researchers [11, 12], none of whom took steps to measure scattering.
In contrast, the AMANDA experiment measured both the scattered and absorbed
components separately for ice that is probably the purest naturally-occurring solid
material on earth. (The concentration of impurities in South Pole ice is discussed
[22].) At the minimum in the curve for lab ice, the absorption measured by
in Ref.

12

AMANDA is about an order of magnitude lower than the Grenfell and Perovich [11]
1 as the abscissa on a linear
data. Fig. 4 shows the region in more detail, with λ−
scale so that the exponential dependence can be more clearly noted.

∼

0.2 to

The reader may have noticed that, in the interval

0.45 µm, the data
4 law, but about
for lab ice in Fig. 3 have a slope approximating the Rayleigh λ−
two orders of magnitude higher than the calculated contribution of Rayleigh (or
thermal) scattering for pure ice indicated by the solid straight line. In Section 4.2
and in [5] we suggest that the apparent absorption of lab ice in this interval may be
due to Rayleigh scattering from defects in lab ice. The dotted line in Figs. 3 and 4
is an exponential ﬁt to the data of Grenfell and Perovich [11] in the interval 0.6 µm
to 0.8 µm. It represents our conjecture as to the intrinsic absorption of ice in the
red region in the absence of impurities.

∼

Fig. 5 compares the absorption in ice and a number of transparent solids over
a broad range of wavelengths. We draw attention to the lines representing fourth-
4, which suggest scattering from crystalline defects with dimensions
power laws, λ−
much smaller than the wavelength. The techniques used to obtain these data could
not have distinguished scattering from absorption. Thus, it is tempting to conclude
4 dependence are
that the portions of the absorption curves that exhibit the λ−
mainly due to impurity scattering instead of being due to absorption.
In [5] we
estimate the concentration, size, and type of defects necessary to account for the
λ−

4 ﬁts to the data.

4.2 Absorption by solid dust particles in ice

We now focus on the AMANDA absorption data [3] taken at depths of 830 m (shown
in Figs. 3 and 4 as triangular symbols) and at 970 m (shown in Figs. 3 and 4 as square
symbols). Additional data, taken at a depth of 910 m, were indistinguishable from
those taken at 830 m. The data [3] show convincingly that the absorption deviates
more from the exponential extrapolation at 970 m than at 830 and 910 m. Our
interpretation is that, in addition to the intrinsic absorption by perfect ice, dust
particles with a greater concentration at 970 than at 830 and 910 m absorb light
with a coeﬃcient that decreases with increasing wavelength. This interpretation is
strongly supported by our model of age vs depth of South Pole ice, by means of
which we predicted dust concentration to increase to a maximum at a depth slightly
greater than 1000 m (ref. [14]).

We now derive the absorption coeﬃcient as a function of wavelength for dust
in South Pole ice, and we determine the ratio of dust concentration at 830 m to
that at 970 m. When trying to extract absolute values for the contribution of solid
impurities to the absorption coeﬃcient, one encounters the problem of estimating
the uncertainty involved in the exponential extrapolation of the intrinsic absorption
coeﬃcient of ice shown as the dotted line in Figs. 3 and 4. We developed the following
way to determine the wavelength dependence of the absorption of solid impurities,
normalized to some particular wavelength, independent of the unknown intrinsic ice

13

absorption. We write the measured absorption coeﬃcient αexpt(h, λ) as

αexpt(h, λ) = αint(λ) + αdust(h, λ) = αint(λ) + cdust(h)σdust(λ),

(40)

which exploits the facts that the intrinsic ice absorption coeﬃcient αint(λ) and the
absorption cross section of solid impurities σdust(λ) are independent of depth, and
the concentration of impurities, cdust(h), is independent of wavelength. This assumes
that the nature of solid impurities is independent of depth and only the concentration
changes1.

By using eq. (40) for two diﬀerent wavelengths and two diﬀerent depths, we can
eliminate the unknowns αint and cdust(h) and express the ratio of the absorption
cross section at two wavelengths in terms of only experimentally measured quantities.
The result is

σdust(λ1)
σdust(λ2)

=

αexpt(h1, λ1)
αexpt(h1, λ2)

αexpt(h2, λ1)
αexpt(h2, λ2)

.

−
−

(41)

We will use for the analysis only the data for the six wavelengths that give the
smallest statistical error. For h1 we use data from phototubes at 830 m (around
AMANDA level 3) and for h2 we use data at 970 m (around AMANDA level 17).
We normalize all impurity absorption cross sections to σdust(475 nm), which has the
most statistics of all the distributions. Figure 6 shows the result of this analysis.
To test the natural hypothesis that the absorbing impurity is atmospheric dust that
accumulated in the ice by precipitation onto the surface at the time the ice formed
from snow [15], we have compared our results with measurements of the absorption
spectra of various samples of atmospheric dust at U. S. locations [16]. As can be
seen, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that we do observe absorption
by dust. However, it must be noted that the model-independent analysis does not
have small enough error bars to exclude, e.g., a constant absorption coeﬃcient.

In Fig. 6 we have also included estimates based on the assumption that the
intrinsic absorption spectrum of dust-free ice follows the exponential shown by a
dotted line in Fig. 4. The good ﬁt shown in that Figure was obtained by the
expression

αint(λ) = 81 exp(

λ0/λ) cm−

1,

−

(42)

6.7 µm being determined not only by a ﬁt to the measured
with the value λ0 ∼
absorption in the near IR, but also requiring self-consistency of the Ansatz (40).
That is, the values obtained for dust concentration cdust(h) using the experimental
values αexpt(h, λ) and the ﬁtted αint(λ) should not depend on λ; neither should the
derived σdust(λ) depend on h.

Using (40), we can derive the following expression for the ratio of the dust

concentration at the lower level of the detector to the upper level:

cdust(970 m)
cdust(830 m)

αexpt(970, λ1)
αexpt(830, λ1)
1Royer et al. [15] inferred from the optical scattering properties of melted ice core samples from
Dome C that the particle size distribution and complex refractive index of dust show no depth
dependence, although it is not clear to us that these conclusions were very strongly supported by
their data.

αint(λ1)
αint(λ1)

−
−

(43)

=

.

14

∼

We see in Fig. 7 that all wavelengths give the consistent result

1.4 for this ratio.
Subtracting now the ﬁtted intrinsic absorption coeﬃcient from the measured
one at each wavelength, we ﬁnally obtain values for the absorption length (i.e. the
inverse of the absorption coeﬃcient) due to dust at the two AMANDA levels. We ﬁnd
that the absorption length due to dust increases with wavelength and decreases with
depth, with typical values being 200-300 meters, as shown in Fig. 8. This is consistent
with estimates based on measured dust content and composition in South Pole ice.
It must be kept in mind, though, that the exponential ﬁt to the intrinsic absorption
coeﬃcient is only a phenomenological procedure. To the statistical error bars in
Fig. 8 must therefore be added a systematic uncertainty of unknown magnitude.

We note that our results at 830 m depth give values for the absorption coeﬃcient
that represent the purest ice ever measured. Since a residual dust component is
known to exist also at these depths, the results for αabs must be interpreted as
upper bounds for the intrinsic absorption coeﬃcient of pure ice.

For completeness, we give in Appendix A a brief description of scattering on
dust grains, expected to be the dominant contribution to the turbidity at larger,
bubble-free depths.

4.3 A three-component model of absorption in dusty ice

To summarize the results of this section, Fig. 9 shows a three-component model which
we expect to apply to absorption by ice with an extremely low content of dissolved
impurities. Component 1, which dominates in the ultraviolet, is the exponential
Urbach tail, given by

αU V = AU V exp(

0.4818

λ),

(44)

−
where AU V is proportional to the density of insoluble dust in ice. As with ionic
solids, the slope of the Urbach tail may show a weak dependence on measurement
temperature.

·

Component 2, which dominates in the near-UV and blue, is the contribution of
insoluble dust, which we assume to have a size distribution similar to that of the
aerosols studied by Lindberg and co-workers [16]. Fitting their absorption data to
700 nm leads to a dependence proportional
a power law in the region 300
2
2 for measurements made both in 1974 and 1994. We assume the same λ−
to λ−
dependence for dust in South Pole ice:

≤

≤

λ

αdust = Adustλ−

2.

(45)

Component 3 is the exponential rise in the red and infrared, as parametrized in

Eq. (42).

From section 4.2, we take Adust at a depth of 970 m to be 1.4 times that at
830m. The family of curves in Fig. 9 is for values of Adust increasing incrementally
by factors of 1.4.

None of the curves in Fig. 9 ﬁts the data for laboratory ice, nor should they. as we
noted earlier, the contribution of scattering was not distinguished from absorption in

15

those experiments [6, 11, 12]. Even if scattering had been excluded, the laboratory
ice had been made from not very pure water and thus probably contained dissolved
impurities which contributed their own absorption bands to the ice.

5 Discussion and Conclusions

The pulsed laser method, applied via optical ﬁber to deep ice, provides a highly suc-
cessful method of independently measuring absorption and scattering as a function
of wavelength, over the interval 400 to 650 nm.

Previous laboratory studies of absorption of ice at visible and near-visible wave-
lengths where the scattering length is comparable to or less than the absorption
length are probably in error due to failure to determine the two parameters sepa-
rately and probably also to a greater concentration of impurities in ice made from
laboratory water than in Antarctic ice. Our work has shown that the intrinsic
1 at wave-
absorption of pure ice decreases to values less than a few times 10−
lengths between 300 and 400 nm. Our pulsed laser results support the conjecture
that the absorption increases exponentially with wavelength in the red region. We
think it would be worthwhile for quantum chemists to seek a theoretical basis for
the exponential behavior.

3 m−

The optical measurements by the AMANDA collaboration, initially intended for
calibration purposes, have revealed surprising properties of pure ice. The remarkably
low intrinsic absorption in the visible and near UV region may lead to interesting
applications for physics and astrophysics. Our simple three-component model for
absorption by pure but dust-bearing ice (Fig. 9) will be subjected to a critical test
when the data at depths 1500 to 1900 m taken in 1996 become available. In those
experiments we will measure absorption and scattering at wavelengths of 337, 350,
and 380 nm as well as in the region 410 to 650 nm.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Y. He and A. Westphal for useful comments on the manuscript.
L.B. acknowledges support from the Swedish Natural Science Research Council and
the Stockholm University - UC Berkeley exchange program. P.B.P. acknowledges
support under the National Science Foundation grant PHY-9307420 and the Upp-
sala University - UC Berkeley exchange program. The AMANDA collaboration is
indebted to the Polar Ice Coring Oﬃce and to Bruce Koci for the successful drilling
operations, and to the National Science Foundation (USA), the Swedish Natural
Science Research Council, the K.A. Wallenberg Foundation, the Swedish Polar Re-
search Secretariat, and the German Electron Synchrotron Institute DESY for their
support.

16

Appendix A. Simulations of scattering on dust grains
in Antarctic ice

Although we have reasons to believe that the optical properties of Antarctic ice
will be dramatically better at depths where the air bubbles have transformed into
clathrates, for future use we want to estimate the residual scattering on ice crystal
boundaries, clathrates, dust and other impurities, as well as Rayleigh scattering in
the ice itself.

It is only dust (including soot) of these sources that contributes measurably to
absorption. We start by brieﬂy discussing the scattering properties of dust, given
the absorption coeﬃcients derived in the previous Section.

The total concentration of insoluble impurities in recently deposited South Pole
ice has been estimated to be around 15 ng/g [25]. The size distribution of dust grains
has also been measured [26, 27] at the South Pole. At another Antarctic location
(Dome C), deep samples have been taken and analyzed using a scanning electron
microscope (giving the number vs radius distribution), a Coulter counter (giving
the volume distribution), and laser nephelometry (giving the combined scattering
function of a melted ice sample) [15]. In the latter work, the data could be well ﬁtted
by a log normal distribution with a modal radius of 0.25 µm (for the number to log
radius size distribution). Using this size distribution and applying Mie scattering
theory, they could get satisfactory agreement with the measured scattering function,
except at very large angles, where perhaps eﬀects of the non-spherical shapes of dust
grains appear.

We have developed Mie scattering programs to verify the ﬁndings of Royer et
al. for the scattering function. However, when simulations for a large detector like
AMANDA have to be done it is useful to ﬁnd approximations that give results much
faster than CPU-time consuming Mie calculations on an event-by-event basis.

We have found that a surprisingly good approximation to the results in [15]
can be obtained by simply using ﬁrst-order geometric optics (neglecting internal
reﬂections) on dust grains, i.e., by just calculating the deviation angle according
to Snell’s law. This is only a function of where on the beam-facing surface of the
sphere the light ray enters. We generate a radial variable r at random by setting
r = √x (x is a random number distributed between 0 and 1 and the square root
makes the geometric weight for a given r proportional to r). The scattering angle
for the Monte Carlo simulation can simply be taken as

δθ = 2(arcsin(r)

arcsin(r/nrel)),

(46)

−
where nrel is the relative refraction index (

1.18) between dust and ice.

∼
The expression (46) has the drawback that it underestimates large-angle scatter-
ing somewhat. In contrast to the multiple scattering case on air bubbles discussed
before, where only τ =
is of importance, for reasonable possible spacings
between PMTs in a working detector only a few scatterings on dust will occur and
therefore the full scattering function is more important. We have thus chosen a

cos θ
h

i

17

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

strategy which is based on the Henyey-Greenstein approximation to the scattering
function:

dσ
d(cos θ)

=

1
(1 + τ 2

τ 2

.

3
2

2τ cos θ)

−

−

i

This very accurately reproduces the true scattering function once the value of τ =
is known. To ﬁnd the latter, we calculated it using Mie theory, with the
cos θ
h
known properties of the dust in South Pole ice as input. For the values of Dome C
[15], we ﬁnd τ
0.92. For use in a simulation program, Eq. (47) must be integrated
and inverted. Setting now r = x (x: random number uniformly distributed between
0 and 1), we ﬁnd that a distribution of the form is obtained by choosing

≈

The 1+cos2 θ distribution applicable to Rayleigh scattering is similarly generated

by choosing

where

cos θ =

2r(1

τ + rτ )(1 + τ )2
τ + 2rτ )2

−
(1

1.

−

−

cos θ = 2(κ

1
3

1
4

−

1
3 +

κ−

1
2

)

1,

−

κ =

+

r +

1
4

−

1
2

1
8

5

−

16r + 16r2.

p
There is a diﬀerence between the measured dust size distributions at Dome C and
at the South Pole. In the latter case, the modal radius is around 0.1 µm (compared
to 0.25 at Dome C). This makes the scattering distribution markedly wider as a
consequence of the approach to the Rayleigh scattering regime, which is isotropic
on the average.

−

−

0.003 and

It is customary to deﬁne the albedo ω as the ratio of scattering to extinction
(i.e., scattering plus absorption) cross sections. The absorption in dust depends on
the imaginary part of the refractive index, which has been measured to be typically
0.007 for atmospheric dust [28]. From the Mie computations
between
(using again a log-normal size distribution) we obtain values of the albedo between
0.9 and 0.96 both at 500 and 350 nm, when the real part of the refractive index of dust
0.007.
varies between 1.53 and 1.56 and the imaginary part between
This is not too diﬀerent from the values inferred from the Dome C data in ref. [15].
The values of τ =
0.74
for 350 nm (not very much dependent on the value of the imaginary index). The
1.9 are
results using a so-called Junge law distribution dn/d(logr)
similar, except that the albedo depends more strongly on the imaginary part of the
refractive index. This seems to be due to the eﬀects of Mie-type resonances whose
exact location in size parameter depends on both the real and imaginary parts of the
index. The values of the eﬀective scattering power (deﬁned analogously to Eq. (15))
are relatively stable and correspond to ω and τ both being around 0.8 - 0.9.

are, however, much smaller:

0.70 for 500 nm and

rc, with c

0.003 and

cos θ
h

∼ −

∼

−

∝

−

∼

i

We note that typical scattering lengths on dust grains in the 800 - 1000 m depth
range are expected to be of the order of 50 m. Therefore, scattering on air bubbles

18

dominates completely. For greater depths, however, the results of this Appendix
should be of use.

References

[1] P.C. Mock, P. Askebjer, S.W. Barwick, L. Bergstr¨om, A. Bouchta, S. Carius,
B. Erlandsson, A. Goobar, L. Gray, A. Hallgren, F. Halzen, H. Heukenkamp,
P.O. Hulth, J. Jacobsen, S. Johansson, V. Kandhadai, A. Karle, I. Liubarsky,
D.M. Lowder, T.C. Miller, R. Morse, R. Porrata, P.B. Price, A. Richards, H.
Rubinstein, C. Spiering, Q. Sun, T. Thon, S. Tilav, C. Walck, R. Wischnewski,
and G. Yodh, “Status and capabilities of AMANDA-94”, Proc. of the XXIV
Cosmic Ray Conference, Rome, 1, 758-761 (1995); L. Gray, P. Askebjer, S.W.
Barwick, L. Bergstr¨om, A. Bouchta, S. Carius, B. Erlandsson, A. Goobar, A.
Hallgren, F. Halzen, H. Heukenkamp, P.O. Hulth, J. Jacobsen, S. Johansson,
V. Kandhadai, A. Karle, I. Liubarsky, D.M. Lowder, T.C. Miller, P.C. Mock,
R. Morse, R. Porrata, P.B. Price, A. Richards, H. Rubinstein, C. Spiering,
Q. Sun, S. Tilav, T. Thon, C. Walck, R. Wischnewski and G. Yodh, “The
design of a neutrino telescope using natural deep ice as a particle detector”,
Proc. of the XXIV Cosmic Ray Conference, Rome, 1, 816-819 (1995); S. Tilav,
“Indirect evidence for long absorption lengths in Antarctic ice”, Proc. of the
XXIV Cosmic Ray Conference, Rome, 1995, 1, 1011-1014 (1995).

[2] P. Askebjer, S.W. Barwick, L. Bergstr¨om, A. Bouchta, S. Carius, A. Coulthard,
K. Engel, B. Erlandsson, A. Goobar, L. Gray, A. Hallgren, F. Halzen, P.O.
Hulth, J. Jacobsen, S. Johansson, V. Kandhadai, I. Liubarsky, D. Lowder, T.
Miller, P.C. Mock, R. Morse, R. Porrata, P.B. Price, A. Richards, H. Rubinstein,
E. Schneider, Q. Sun, S. Tilav, Ch. Walck, and G. Yodh, “Optical properties
of the South Pole ice at depths between 0.8 and 1 kilometer”, Science 267,
1147-1150 (1995).

[3] P. Askebjer, S.W. Barwick, L. Bergstr¨om, A. Bouchta, S. Carius, B. Erlandsson,
A. Goobar, L. Gray, A. Hallgren, F. Halzen, H. Heukenkamp, P.O. Hulth, J.
Jacobsen, S. Johansson, V. Kandhadai, A. Karle, I. Liubarsky, D.M. Lowder,
T.C. Miller, P.C. Mock, R. Morse, R. Porrata, P.B. Price, A. Richards, H.
Rubinstein, C. Spiering, Q. Sun, T. Thon, S. Tilav, Ch. Walck, R. Wischnewski,
and G. Yodh, “Wavelength Dependence of Light Scattering and Absorption in
Deep Glacier Ice”, to be published (1996).

[4] T. Uchida, W. Shimada, T. Hondoh, S. Mae, and N.I. Barkov, “Refractive-
index measurements of natural air hydrate crystals in an Antarctica ice sheet”,
Appl. Opt. 34, 5746-5749 (1995).

[5] P.B. Price and L. Bergstr¨om, “Optical Properties of Deep Ice at the South Pole:

Scattering” (accompanying paper).

19

[6] S. G. Warren, “Optical constants of ice from the ultraviolet to the microwave”,

Appl. Optics 23, 1206-1225 (1984).

[7] M.S. Patterson , B. Chance and B.C. Wilson, “Time resolved reﬂectance and
transmittance for the non-invasive measurements of tissue optical properties”,
Appl. Opt. 28 (1989) 2331 - 2336; A. Ishimaru, “Diﬀusion of a pulse in densely
distributed scatterers”, J. Opt. Soc. 68 (1978) 1045 - 1050.

[8] S. Chandrasekhar, “Stochastic problems in physics and astronomy”, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 15 (1943) 1 - 88.

[9] Landolt-B¨ornstein Tables, New Series, ed. K.-H. Hellwege (Springer-Verlag,

New York, 1982), Group V, vol. 1b, p. 494.

[10] W.C. Davidon, “Variance algorithm for minimization”, Computer Journal 10,

406-410 (1968).

[11] T. C. Grenfell and D. K. Perovich, “Radiation absorption coeﬃcients of poly-
crystalline ice from 400-1400 nm”, J. Geophys. Res. 86, 7447-7450 (1981).

[12] D. K. Perovich and J. W. Govoni, “Absorption coeﬃcients of ice from 250 to

400 nm”, Geoph. Res. Lett. 18, 1233-1235 (1991).

[13] T. I. Quickenden and J. A. Irvin, “The ultraviolet absorption spectrum of liquid

water”, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 4416-4428 (1980).

[14] AMANDA Collaboration, “On the age vs depth and optical clarity of deep ice

at South Pole”, J. Glaciology 41, 445-454 (1995).

[15] A. Royer, M. de Angelis and J. R. Petit, “A 30000 year record of physical
and optical properties of microparticles from an east Antarctic ice core and
implications for paleoclimate reconstruction models”, Climatic Change 5, 381-
412 (1983).

[16] J.D. Lindberg and L.S. Laude, “Measurement of the absorption coeﬃcient of at-
mospheric dust”, Appl. Opt. 1, 1923-1927 (1974); J. D. Lindberg, “Absorption-
coeﬃcient-determination method for particulate materials”, Appl. Opt. 33,
4314-4319 (1994).

[17] T. Tomiki and T. Miyata, “Optical studies of alkali ﬂuorides and alkaline earth
ﬂuorides in VUV region”, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 27, 658-678 (1969); E. D. Palik
and W. R. Hunter, “Lithium Fluoride”, in Handbook of Optical Constants of
Solids, ed. E. D. Palik (Academic Press, New York, 1985), pp. 675-693.

[18] T. C. McGill, in Optical Properties of Highly Transparent Solids, ed. S. S. Mitra

and B. Bendow (Plenum Press, New York, 1975), p. 3.

20

[19] I.A. Belolaptikov, L.B. Bezrukov, B.A. Borisovets, E.V. Bugaev, G.V. Domo-
gatskii, L.A. Donskich, A.A. Doroshenko, Zh.A.M. Dzhilkibaev, M.D. Galperin,
M.N. Gushtan, A.M. Klabukov, S.I. Klimushin, O.Dzh. Lanin, B.K. Lub-
sandorzhev, N.V. Ogievetskii, A.I. Panﬁlov, I.A. Sokalskii, I.I. Troﬁmenko,
N.M. Budnev, A.G. Chenskii, V.I. Dobrynin, O.A. Gress, A.P. Koshechkin,
Dzh.B. Lanin, G.A. Litunenko, A.V. Lopin, V.A. Naumov, M.I. Nemchenko,
Yu.A. Parfenov, A.A. Pavlov, O.P. Pokalev, V.A. Primin, A.A. Sumanov, V.A.
Tarashanskii, V.L. Zurbanov, A.V. Golikov, E.S. Zaslavskaya, V.B. Kabikov,
L.A. Kuzmichov, E.A. Osipova, G.N. Dudkin, V.Yu. Egorov, A.A. Lukanin,
A.M. Ovcharov, V.M. Padalko, A.H. Padusenko, S.D. Alatin, S.V. Fialkovskii,
V.F. Kulepov, M.B. Milenin A.A. Levin, A.I. Nikiforov, M.I. Rosanov, H.
Heukenkamp, J. Krabi, T. Mikolajski, C. Spiering, R. Wischnewski, L. Jenek,
D. Kiss, L. Tanko, Yu.S. Kusner, V.A. Poleshchuk, and P.P. Sherstyankin, “The
Lake Baikal deep underwater detector”, in Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 19B,
388-395 (1991).).

[20] J. Babson, B. Barish, R. Becker-Szendy, H. Bradner, R. Cady, J. Clem, S.T.
Dye, J. Gaidos, P. Gorham, P.K.F. Grieder, T. Kitamura, W. Kropp, J.G.
Learned, S. Matsuno, R. March, K. Mitsui, D. O’Connor, Y. Ohashi, A. Okada,
V. Peterson, L. Price, F. Reines, A. Roberts, C. Roos, H. Sobel, V.J. Stenger,
M. Webster, and C. Wilson, “Cosmic-ray muons in the deep ocean”, Phys. Rev.
D 42, 3613-3620 (1990).

[21] R. C. Smith and K. S. Baker, “Optical properties of the clearest natural waters”,

Appl. Optics 20, 177-184 (1981).

[22] P.B. Price, P. Askebjer, S.W. Barwick, L. Bergstr¨om, A. Bouchta, S. Carius,
B. Erlandsson, A. Goobar, L. Gray, A. Hallgren, F. Halzen, H. Heukenkamp,
P.O. Hulth, J. Jacobsen, S. Johansson, V. Kandhadai, A. Karle, I. Liubarsky,
D.M. Lowder, T.C. Miller, P.C. Mock, R. Morse, R. Porrata, A. Richards, H.
Rubinstein, C. Spiering, Q. Sun, S. Tilav, T. Thon, C. Walck, R. Wischnewski,
and G. Yodh, “Optical Properties of South Pole Ice for Neutrino Astrophysics”,
in Proc. 24th Int. Cosmic Ray Conf., Rome, 1, 777-780 (1995).

[23] S. No¨el and H. Mes, “The measurement of the attenuation of light by water in

SNO”, Sudbury Neutrino Observatory preprint STR-91-062 (1991).

[24] I.A. Belolaptikov, L.B. Bezrukov, B.A. Borisovets, N.M. Budnev, A.G. Chen-
skii, I.A. Danilchenko, Zh.A.M. Dzhilkibaev, V.I. Dobrynin, G.V. Domogatskii,
L.A. Donskich, A.A. Doroshenko, S.V. Fialkovskii, A.A. Garus, O.A. Gress,
T.A. Gress, H. Heukenkamp, A. Karle, A.M. Klabukov, A.I. Klimov, S.I.
Klimushin, A.P. Koshechkin, J. Krabi, V.F. Kulepov, L.A. Kuzmichov, B.K.
Lubsandorzhev, M.B. Milenin, T. Mikolajski, R.R. Mirgazov, N.I. Moseiko,
S.A. Nikiforov, E.A. Osipova, A.I. Panﬁlov, Yu.V. Parfenov, A.A. Pavlov,
D.P. Petukhov, K.A. Pocheikin, P.G. Pokhil, P.A. Pokalev, M.I. Rosanov,
V.Yu. Rubzov, S.I. Sinegovskii, I.A. Sokalski, C. Spiering, O. Streicher, V.A.

21

Tarashanskii, T. Thon, I.I. Troﬁmenko, C. Wiebusch, and R. Wischnewski,
“Variation of Water Parameters at the Site of the Baikal Experiment and their
Eﬀect on the Detector Performance”, in Proc. of the XXIV Cosmic Ray Con-
ference, Rome, 1995.

[25] M. Kumai, “Identiﬁcation of nuclei and concentrations of chemical species in
snow crystals sampled at the South Pole”, J. Atm. Sci. 33, 833-841 (1976);
R. Delmas, M. Briat, and M. Legrand, “Chemistry of South Polar snow”, J.
Geophys. Res. 87, 4314-4318 (1982).

[26] R. I. Gayley and M. Ram, “Atmospheric dust in polar ice and the background

aerosol”, J. Geophys. Res. 90, 12921-12925 (1985).

[27] E. Mosley-Thompson, private communication (1995).

[28] G. A. d’Almeida, P. Koepke, and E. P. Shettle, Atmospheric Aerosols - Global
Climatology and Radiative Characteristics (Deepak Publishing, Hampton, Vir-
ginia, 1991).

22

Figure Captions

1. Method for measuring scattering and absorption in deep ice: pulses at a de-
sired wavelength are sent down one of 80 optical ﬁbers to a diﬀusing sphere mounted
immediately underneath a photomultiplier (PMT) module, and the distribution of
arrival times is measured at one of the neighbouring PMTs.

2. Distribution of arrival times as measured and as ﬁtted to the analytical
formula Eq. 13 for an emitter and a receiver separated by 10 m. The results for
wavelengths 410 and 610 nm are shown as open and ﬁlled circles, respectively. The
ﬁts shown give the same value for the scattering length λbub (around 10 cm) for the
two cases, but absorption lengths of around 230 m and 10 m, respectively.

3. Comparison of absorption spectra in the wavelength interval

800
nm for ice (solid curves and open symbols) and water (dashed curves and solid
points).

200 to

∼

∼

4. Absorption as a function of wave number in µm−

1 for laboratory-grown ice
crystals (open circles) and for South Pole ice at level 3 (830 m; triangular symbols)
and level 17 (level 970 m; square symbols). The dotted curve is an exponential ﬁt
to data for lab ice at 600 to 800 nm.

5. Comparison of absorption spectrum in ice and a number of other transparent
4, are meant

solids. The straight lines representing an inverse fourth-power law, λ−
to show that portions of each spectrum are due to Rayleigh scattering.

6. Wavelength dependence of the absorption on dust inferred from the AMANDA
laser measurements. The normalization is arbitrarily set to unity at λ= 475 nm.
Open squares, and the error bars, refer to the model independent analysis where
the intrinsic absorption in ice has been subtracted. Triangles and circles are values
from AMANDA depths 830 and 970 m, respectively, using an exponential ﬁt to
the intrinsic ice absorption. The band within the dashed lines corresponds to the
wavelength dependence measured for atmospheric dust at a US location [16].

7. Ratio of dust concentration at 970 m and 830 m as obtained by the analysis
in this paper. Note that the ratio does not depend on wavelength, which is a
consistency check of the scheme employed.

8. The absorption length (i.e. the inverse of the absorption coeﬃcient) given by
scattering on impurities in the ice, as a function of wavelength for AMANDA 830
m level (ﬁlled triangles) and 970 m (ﬁlled squares). The values were obtained by
subtracting the best ﬁt exponential for the intrinsic absorption from the measured
absorption.

9. Three-component model of absorption by ice containing insoluble dust but no
dissolved impurities. The concentrations of dust increase by factors of 1.4 for each
curve.

23

Wavelength (nm)
410
415
420
435
450
475
500
530
590
610

λ830m
abs
219.9
225.6
227.4
207.4
171.3
117.1
68.9
38.3
12.0
10.3

±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±

(m)
12.5
6.2
4.0
1.5
1.3
0.7
1.3
1.0
0.1
0.3

λ970m
abs

(m)

23.6
7.1
1.9
2.1
1.2
1.0
0.7
0.3

168.7
163.9
166.3
146.0
104.6
64.1
39.5
10.5

−
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
−

Table 1. Absorption lengths λabs (i.e.

the inverse of the absorption coeﬃcients αabs
deﬁned in Eq. ( 6) for several laser wavelengths at two diﬀerent depths, around
830 and 970 m, determined by the AMANDA calibration system in the South
Pole ice. For 410 and 610 nm, only data for 830 m could be obtained.

24

