Visible light emitting devices with Schottky contacts on silicon nanocrystals

S. Fujita and N. Sugiyama
Toshiba Corporation, Research and Development center, Advanced Research Laboratory 1, Komukai-toshibacho, Saiwaiku,
Kawasaki, Japan, 210-8582
(October 30, 2013)

We have fabricated light emitting diodes (LEDs) with Schottky contacts on Si-nanocrystals
formed by simple techniques as used for standard Si devices. Orange electroluminescence (EL) from
these LEDs could be seen with the naked eye at room temperature when a reverse bias voltage was
applied. The EL spectrum has a major peak with a photon energy of 1.9 eV and a minor peak with a
photon energy of 2.2 eV. Since the electrons and holes are injected into the radiative recombination
centers related to nanocrystals through avalanche breakdown, the voltage needed for a visible light
emission is reduced to 4.0 - 4.5 V, which is low enough to be applied by a standard Si transistor.

8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
2
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
5
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

There have been expectations that high-eﬃciency light
emitting diodes (LEDs) using silicon-(Si-) related mate-
rials can be realized for monolithic optoelectronic inte-
grated circuits (ICs). Various types of LED based on Si-
related materials have been tried to date. Of Si-related
materials investigated, porous Si (PS) has been studied
most actively. The quantum eﬃciency and stability of
LEDs based on PS have been gradually improved. [1]
Recently, Si nanocrystals (Si-NC) have also been studied
for their light-emitting characteristics. Si-NCs can be
formed using methods which ﬁt in better with standard
silicon technology as compared with PS, since electro-
chemical processes are not needed. Based on the previous
studies, it is predicted that the optical band gap is in-
creased [2] and the probability of radiative recombination
for excitons is enhanced [3] with a decrease in the size of
nanocrystals owing to the quantum conﬁnement eﬀect.
Signiﬁcant increases in oscillator strength are also pre-
dicted at the very small dimensions of NCs. [4] Visible
photo-luminescence (PL) with high eﬃciency has been
reported with Si-NCs formed by various methods: chem-
ical vapor deposition using silane or disilane gas resolved
by microwave plasma, [5] laser [6], or thermal reactions;
[7] ion implantation of Si into silicon oxide ﬁlms followed
by post-annealing; [8] and crystallization of amorphous
Si (a-Si) ﬁlms. [9] The reported photon energy of the PL
peak spectra is 1.5 to 1.9 eV (red) for most Si-NCs. Blue
PL emission with a peak photon energy of 3.2 eV has also
been obtained from Si-NCs formed by crystallization of
amorphous Si ﬁlms. [9] The luminescence related to de-
fects in SiO2 with a peak photon energy more than 2 eV
has also been reported. [8] The number of the reports on
electroluminescence (EL) from the LEDs [10] [11] [12] is
very small as compared with that for PL from Si-NCs.
This is principally because the carrier injection induced
electrically is more diﬃcult than that induced optically.
In the investigations reported, visible EL was obtained
from Si-NCs in SiO2 matrix formed by chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) [10] or by Si+-implantation into SiO2;
[11] and from a multi-quantum-well (MQW) composed of
silicon-nitride(SiNx)/Si-NC formed by plasma enhanced
CVD and laser annealing. [12] The EL in these cases was
strong enough to be seen with the naked eye. These re-
sults indicate that there is promise in using Si-NCs to re-

1

alize LEDs based on Si-related materials. However, as yet
the operating voltage is still rather high (10 25 V or more)
for the devices to be driven by standard Si-ICs. This is
because the Si-NCs in these cases are sandwiched be-
tween insulating layers or embedded by insulating layers,
through which the carriers must pass by direct tunneling.
This high voltage must be reduced in order to use LEDs
based on Si-NCs practically. A simple structure which
can be fabricated easily by standard Si-IC technology is
also desired for the LED. In this study, we have fabricated
simple LEDs with Schottky contacts on Si-NCs and with-
out the insulating layers. Visible EL has been observ ed
form this LED. The EL is strong enough to be seen with
the naked eyes at room temperature and with a relatively
low operating voltage. The Si-NCs were formed as fol-
lows by the crystallization of a-Si . The p-type Si wafer
had a diameter of 150 mm and low resistivity (0.01 ohm
cm). The native oxide was removed by etching before
the deposition of a-Si. A molecular beam of Si, formed
by resolving disilane using a tungsten cracking heater,
[13] was deposited onto the Si substrate at room tem-
perature. The a-Si was converted into nanocrystals by
rapid heating to 700 degree C for one or three minutes
in pure oxygen gas. During this heating, oxidation of sil-
icon occurs simultaneously. The oxidation is eﬀective to
stabilize the surface. It was known in advance that the
thickness of oxide formed on a crystalline Si substrate
for one and three minutes of oxidation was about 0.5
and 0.7 nm, respectively, in the oxidation furnace used.
PL measurements for these samples were performed us-
ing the Ar+ laser (458nm) at room temperature. The
structure of these samples was observed using a high-
resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM).
Metal contacts composed of titanium and gold (Ti/Au)
were formed by electron beam (EB) evaporation on the
back of the substrate. Ti/Au contacts 100 x 100 mm2 in
area were formed on the surface of the Si-NCs by the lift-
oﬀ process. Device isolation was not employed. Figure
1 shows a cross-sectional scheme of the resulting device.
For reference, p-type Si substrates were also annealed in
oxygen gas and the devices with Schottky contacts were
fabricated on them. The current-voltage (I-V) character-
istic was measured at room temperature. EL was mea-
sured at room temperature using a monochrometer and
a photomultiplier. At room temperature, the PL signal
with peak photon energy of 1.9eV was obtained from the
a-Si layers that experienced one minute of oxidation. On
the other hand, there were no detectable PL signals from
either the a-Si layers without annealing or the samples
that experienced three minutes of oxidation. Figure 2
shows a cross-sectional HR-TEM lattice image of an a-
Si layer that experienced one minute of oxidation. Tiny
Si-nanocrystal islands of almost hemispherical shape and
2-3 nm wide are seen in the a-Si layer. The presence of
stacking faults between the islands and the substrate in-
dicates that the islands did not exist prior to deposition of
the a-Si layer. It is possible that the other nanocrystals of
dimensions less than about 2nm was formed in a-Si layer,

2

since lattice image of such small crystals can hardly be
obtained even by HR-TEM. The surface of the a-Si layer
may be oxidized, though the oxide layer cannot be dis-
tinguished from the a-Si layer owing to the low contrast
between the two in the TEM image. A previous report in-
dicates that 2-3nm rectangular-shaped nanocrystals were
formed by a similar method and that strong blue PL was
observed. [14] In the case of a-Si layers that experienced
three minute of oxidation, it was reveled that most of
the a-Si was converted into large crystals of Si, whose
surface was slightly oxidized . Thus, it was founded that
the origin of PL was related to the formation of Si-NCs.
The I-V characteristics of these Si-NC devices show rec-
tifying behavior. Figure 3 shows a typical I-V character-
istic measured for a device that experienced one minute
of oxidation. Devices which experienced three minutes
of oxidation exhibited smaller forward and reverse cur-
rents. The I-V characteristic of each device was stable
and changed little after repeated measurements. Orange
EL emissions from Si-NC devices that experienced one
minute of oxidation were clearly seen with the naked eye
at room temperature when a reverse bias voltage was ap-
plied. The critical reverse current for the observation of
light emission with the naked eye was 30 to 40 mA at
an applied voltage of 4.0 to 4.5V. In contrast, it was not
possible to obtain visible EL emissions from either Si-
NC devices that experienced three minute of oxidation
or the reference devices without a-Si layers at room tem-
perature. These results indicate that the visible EL is
related to the existence of Si-NCs formed in a-Si . Figure
4 shows a typical EL spectrum for a Si-NC device. This
spectrum was measured at room temperature under a re-
verse bias of 5.0V and at a current of 60 mA. Two peaks
are visible. The peak wavelength, equivalent photon en-
ergy and full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) are 650
nm, 1.9 eV and 110 nm for the major peak (peak A),
and 570 nm, 2.2 eV and 30 nm for the minor peak (peak
B), respectively.The FWHM of the major peak (peak A)
is relatively small as compared with that of a PS EL
spectrum. [15] The peak wavelength and FWHM of the
main peak is close to that obtained from a multi-quantum
well (MQW) of (SiNx)/Si-NC. [12] In the report of this
MQW, it is thought that the orange EL is due to ra-
diative recombination between the states quantized by
the quantum conﬁnement at the Si-NCs. For the tiny
Si-nanocrystal islands seen in the TEM image of Fig.2,
their structure may be not eﬀective for the quantum con-
ﬁnement. However, in the case that nanocrystals which
are invisible in this TEM image are formed in SiOx near
the surface, the quantum conﬁnement is possible. In con-
trast, it has been reported that the red PL (1.5-1.9eV) in
the case of the oxidized Si-NC particles [5] [6] [7] is due
to the localization of excitons or carriers at the Si/SiOx
interface. [16] The peak energy for peak B (2.2eV) is close
to that for PL spectrum of oxidized Si-NC particles re-
ported in another article; [17] where its origin seems to
be Si/SiOx interface states; however, the details are un-
known. In order to clarify the origin of these EL peak

3

s, it is necessary to examine the details of luminescence
such as temperature dependence of both peak energy and
peak intensity, the size dependence of peak energy, and
the time-resolved characteristics of light emission. These
will be studied in the near future. Although the origin
of EL is unclear at this stage, it is evident that these
light emissions are deeply related to the formation of the
Si-NCs. It should be noted that the spectrum shown in
Fig.4 is quite diﬀerent from that produced by a reverse-
biased p-n junction of silicon, where the spectrum spans
the entire visible range and the emitted light is white.
[18] The observation that EL is emitted only under re-
verse bias is unique. Though similar characteristics have
been obtained for a LED based on germanium-NCs em-
bedded in SiO2, [19] such behavior is quite diﬀerent from
that reported in the past for those on PS or Si- NCs.
EL was obtained when avalanche breakdown occurred,
as shown in Fig.3, where the electrons and holes that
were produced by impact ionization have enough energy
to be injected into the emission centers at NCs. On the
contrary, when under forward bias, the injection of car-
riers into these levels is impossible, since the energy of
carriers outside the nanocrystals is low. Since avalanche
breakdown easily occurs in our devices even with a low
bias voltage, the operation voltage for visible EL can be
reduced to 4.0 to 4.5 V, which is so low that these diodes
can be driven by a standard Si bipolar transistor. It is
surprising that the volume of the light-emitting layer for
our devices is smaller by 30 to 500 times than those of the
other cases where a bright EL is visible to the eye. [11]
[12] It will also be possible to reduce the operating volt-
age of our devices further and to increase EL eﬃciency
by optimizing the device structure. For this purpose, the
use of avalanche breakdown in a p+/NCs/n+ structure
will be also eﬀective. Thus, the LED that we demon-
strated is a promising device to realize a monolithic op-
toelectronic ICs. In summary, we have fabricated LEDs
with Schottky contacts on Si-NCs formed by a simple
method. These LEDs give EL that can be seen with the
naked eye at room temperature. The EL spectrum has
a major peak of a photon energy of 1.9 eV and a minor
peak of an energy of 2.2 eV. Since the electrons and holes
for a radiative recombination are injected into the levels
of nanocrystals through avalanche breakdown, the light
emission voltage can be reduced to 4.0- 4.5 V, which is
low enough to be applied by a standard Si device.

The authors are grateful to Dr. T. Sakai of the Ad-
vanced Semiconductor Laboratories and S. Hosoi of the
Microelectronics Center of Toshiba Corporation for their
valuable suggestions and technical support in device fab-
rication. They would also like to thank Dr. A. Toriumi,
M. Ishikawa, and Dr. A. Kurobe of Research and Devel-
opment Center of Toshiba Corporation for their helpful
discussion.

4

[1] P.M. Fauchet, J. Lumines. 70, 294(1996).
[2] J.P. Proot, C. Delerue, and G. Allan, Appl. Phys. Lett.

[3] T. Takagawara and K. Takeda, Phys. Rev. B, 46, 15578

61, 1948 (1992).

(1992).

[4] J.B. Khurgin, E.W. Forsythe, G.S. Tompa, and B.A.
Khan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 1241 (1996).J.B. Khurgin,
E.W. Forsythe, S.I. Kim, B.S. Sywe, B.A. Khan, G.S.
Tompa, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. ??? 193 (1994).
[5] H. Takagi, H. Ogawa, Y. Yamazaki, A. Ishizaki, and T.

Nakagiri, Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 2379 (1990).

[6] Y. Kanemitsu, T. Ogawa, K. Shiraishi, and K. Takeda,

Phys. Rev. B, 48,4883 (1993).

[7] S. Schupper, S.L. Friedman, M.A. Marcus, D.L. Adler,
Y.-H. Xie, F.M. Ross, T.D. Harris, W.L. Brown, Y,J,
Chabal, L.E. Brus, and P.H. Citrin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72,
2648 (1994).

[8] T. S-. Iwayama, S. Nakao, K. Saitoh, Appl. Phys. Lett.

65, 1814 (1994).

[9] X. Zhao, O. Schoenfeld, J. Kusano, Y. Aoyagi, and T.
Sugano, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2, 33, 649 (1994). J. Appl.
Phys. 2, 33, 899 (1994).

[10] G.S. Tompa, D.C.Morton, F.T. Monmouth, B.S. Sywe,
Y. Lu, E.W. Forsythe, J.A. Ott, D. Smith, J.B. Khurgin,
B.A. Khan, N.A.Phlips, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc.
358 701(1995). (CVDmatrix)

[11] L.-S.Liao X.-M.Bao, N.-S. Li, X.-Q.Zheng, and N.-
B Min, Solid State Commun.97,1039(1996). 409(1994).
(Si+impla)

[12] K. Chen, M. Wang, W. Shi, L. Jiang, W. Li, J. Xu, and
X. Huang, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 198, 833 (1996). (a-Si to
c-Si)

[13] N. Sugiyama, J. Crystal Growth, 172 376(1997).
[14] O. Schoenfeld, X. Zhao, J. Christen, T. Hempel, S.
Nomura, and Y. Aoyagi, Solid State Electron. 40, 605
(1996).

[15] P. Steiner, F. Kozolowski, and W. Land, Mater. Res. Soc.

Symp. Proc. 358 665(1995).

[16] Y. Kanemitsu, Phys. Rev. B 53, 13515(1996).
[17] L. N. Dinh, L.L. Chase, M. Balooch, W. J. Siekhaus, and

F. Wooten, Phys. Rev. B, 54, 5029 (1996).

[18] J. Bude, N. Sano, and A. Yoshii, Phys. Rev. B 45,

5848(1992).

[19] K.V.Scheglov, C.M.Yang, K.J. Vahala, H.A. Atwater,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 745 (1995).

[20] H.A. Atwater, K.V.Scheglov, S.S. Wang, K.J. Vahala,
R.C.Flagan, M.L.Brongersma, and A. Polman, Mater.
Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 316

FIG. 1. Cross-sectional scheme of the formed device.

FIG. 2. Cross sectional HR-TEM lattice image of the a-Si

layers that ex perienced one minute’s oxidation.

FIG. 3. I-V characteristic measured for a Si-NC device that

experienced one minute of oxidation.

5

FIG. 4. EL spectra of a Si-NC device measured at room
temperature under the reverse bias of 5.0V and the current
of 60 mA.

6

