8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

DIRECTIONAL EMISSION FROM ASYMMETRIC RESONANT
CAVITIES

Jens U. N¨ockel, A. Douglas Stone, Gang Chen, Helene L. Grossman and Richard
K. Chang
Department of Applied Physics and Physics, Yale University
P. O. Box 8284, New Haven Connecticut 06520-8284

Published in Optics Letters 21, 1609 (1996)

ABSTRACT
Asymmetric resonant cavities (ARCs) with highly non-circular but convex cross-
sections are predicted theoretically to have high-Q whispering gallery modes with
very anisotropic emission. We develop a ray dynamics model for the emission
pattern and present numerical and experimental conﬁrmation of the theory.

In recent work [1, 2, 3], a new class of optical resonators has been proposed,
comprised of convex dielectric bodies which are substantially deformed from spherical
or cylindrical symmetry. We have shown [1, 3] that such asymmetric resonant cavities
(ARCs) still retain high-Q (Q > 1000) whispering gallery (WG) modes up to distor-
tions as large as 50% of the undeformed radius R; at the same time ray simulations
indicated that the emission pattern from these modes becomes highly anisotropic [1].
The initial work focused on cylindrical ARCs; subsequently [2] we generalized the ray
dynamics model to explain the experimentally observed directional lasing emission
from non-spherical microdroplets. In this work we propose for the ﬁrst time a general
framework for predicting the high-emission directions for ARCs. Although generi-
cally the ray dynamics in ARCs is chaotic, by using the Poincar´e surface of section
method and the adiabatic approximation, it is possible to ﬁnd universal features in
the ray motion which determine the high emission points. Interestingly, the latter do
not always coincide with the regions of highest curvature as might be expected. We
compare the ray model to the solutions of the wave equation for cylindrical ARCs
and to the experimentally determined lasing emission pattern from deformed liquid
columns and ﬁnd good agreement.

The WG modes of undeformed spheres or cylinders have high Q because the
rays impinge on the boundary with a conserved angle of incidence sin χ > sin χc ≡
1/n, (n is the refractive index) and are thus trapped by total internal reﬂection.
The intrinsic width of these resonances then arises only due to evanescent leakage.

In contrast, in ARCs sin χ is not conserved and the dominant escape mechanism is
refractive escape: starting from a WG orbit with sin χ > sin χc, after a large number
of reﬂections the ray may impinge on the boundary below the critical angle and escape
with high probability. The high intensity points in the near-ﬁeld correspond to the
regions where most of the refractive escape occurs; the far-ﬁeld directionality must
be determined by following the bundle of refracted rays.

In order to understand the high emission directions from ARCs, it is essential
to analyze the ray dynamics in phase space, and not just by ray-tracing in real
space. That is because the partially chaotic (mixed) phase space exhibits remnants
of regular structure[1, 2, 3], creating dominant ﬂow patterns which determine the
high intensity points. The standard technique used in non-linear dynamics to obtain
an understanding of a mixed phase space is the Poincar´e surface of section (SOS).
It is obtained by plotting, for successive reﬂections of a ray, the angular position φ
(azimuthal angle for cylinders, polar angle for spheroids) along the boundary where
the reﬂection occurs, and the value of sin χ. Recording on the SOS a relatively small
number of ray trajectories (∼ 10 − 20) for about 500 reﬂections yields a detailed
picture of the phase space structure. It typically exhibits “islands” and “random”
disconnected points, associated with stable and chaotic trajectories, respectively [1, 3].
Certain properties of the SOS are generic for all ARCs and can be used to deduce
general features of the escape directionality.

These generic features are illustrated by the ray dynamics of a cylindrical ARC
with a 2D quadrupolar deformation of its cross-section (normalized to constant area)
given in cylindrical coordinates by

r(φ) =

(1 + ǫ cos 2φ).

(1)

1
q1 + ǫ2/2

The parameter ǫ measures the degree of deformation, the aspect ratio being (1 −
ǫ)/(1 + ǫ) ≈ 1 − 2ǫ. For a circle, ǫ = 0; when ǫ ≥ 0.2 the shape becomes non-
convex and no WG caustics remain in existence [4]. The interesting regime for this
shape deformation then lies in the interval 0.05 < ǫ < 0.15. Equation (1) describes
the simplest 2D ARC because any dipolar component can be removed by a shift of
origin, and all other ARCs will involve higher multi-poles. For example, the ellipse
(which is the only 2D ARC which has no chaotic trajectories) has multipoles of all
even orders although it agrees with the quadrupole to order ǫ.

The partial SOS shown in Fig. 1 is generated for ǫ = 0.072 for which WG
trajectories with sin χ < 0.8 are no longer conﬁned by a caustic and are chaotic;
ultimately such orbits will diﬀuse to lower sin χ, reach sin χc and escape refractively.
However, if we follow these trajectories for 200 reﬂections as is done in Fig. 1, they
are seen to fall close to curves in the SOS which are given by[5]

sin χ(φ) = q1 − (1 − S2) κ(φ)2/3,

(2)

Figure 1: SOS for quadrupole at ǫ = .072, showing four chaotic trajectories followed for 100 - 200
reﬂections. Superimposed are the curves given by Eq. (2). Shaded horizontal lines indicate sin χc
for diﬀerent refractive indices n.

where κ(φ) is the curvature of the interface and S is a constant parametrizing the
curves, roughly equal to the average value of sin χ. The relation (2) represents an
adiabatic approximation valid for dκ/dφq1 − sin2 χ ≪ 1, which describes the ray
dynamics for intermediate times rather well, as shown in Fig. 1. It does not describe
the chaotic behavior of the rays and hence fails badly at long times when the ray will
leave the adiabatic curve.

While the failure of the adiabatic approximation for long times must be taken
into account in calculating the broadening of the resonance due to refractive escape,
the approximation is adequate for determining the resonance frequency using eikonal
theory [6]. In this approach (which neglects broadening) the adiabatic constant S in
Eq. (2) can take on only a discrete set of values Spm, where the integers p and m
reduce to the radial and azimuthal mode indices, respectively, of the state for circular
cross-section. For any deformation ǫ and for any resonance (p, m) we can ﬁnd the
adiabatic invariant curve (AIC) parametrized by Spm along which the corresponding
rays move. If this AIC intersects the critical line sin χc, then such resonances are very
short-lived and may be ignored. Labeling by Sc the AIC whose minima are tangent
to the critical line, the the long-lived WG modes are characterized by Spm > Sc. A
chaotic trajectory starting at S = Spm eventually deviates from this curve by diﬀusion
with a bias towards smaller S (sin χ). At each step of this diﬀusion process a ray
moves for intermediate times along a ﬁxed AIC. Ultimately the ray reaches the critical
AIC with S = Sc which is tangent to sin χc and the ray rapidly ﬂows along this AIC
to the minima where it escapes refractively with high probability. Therefore assuming
that the adiabatic approximation is valid for intermediate times, escape will occur

Figure Far-ﬁeld emission directionality from quadrupole (a,b) and ellipse (c) with distortion ǫ = 0.09,
for a resonance m = 68. Solid lines:
intensity from solution of the wave equation; histograms:
classical prediction. The refractive index is n = 2 in (a) and n = 1.54 in (b,c). The size parameter
at this ǫ is kR = 45.2 in (a), kR = 48.1 in (b) and kR = 48.0 in (c). The insets show the shapes.

only at or near the tangency points of Sc. [e.g. φ = 0, π For the quadrupole billiard
(Fig. 1)]. From Eq. (2) we see that quite generally the minima of the AIC’s occur at
the point(s) of maximum curvature. Hence this argument suggests that escape occurs
primarily near the points of maximum curvature, as might be intuitively expected.
Furthermore, because most rays escape from the tangent AIC, they just barely violate
the total internal reﬂection condition and are emitted almost tangent to the boundary.
The rays are therefore not strongly dispersed in angle by refraction, and the emission
pattern is peaked in both the near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld, with the far-ﬁeld emission peaks
simply rotated by π/2.

These conclusions are independent of the particular starting curve Spm as
long as it is larger than Sc. Hence we reach the central conclusion of this work:
there exists a universal and highly directional emission pattern for all WG resonances
of cylindrical (2D) ARCs corresponding to Spm > Sc. The actual pattern can be
generated approximately by simply following a ray ensemble begun on the AIC with
S = Spm and making a histogram of the number of rays escaping at a given angular
position (near-ﬁeld) and, after refraction, escaping in a given direction (far-ﬁeld) [2].
We refer to these as the “classical” directionality histograms.

The resulting far-ﬁeld directionality is shown in Fig. 2 (a) in comparison with
the intensity pattern obtained by exact numerical solution for the quasi-bound state.

The good agreement shown is also found for all other resonances studied at this index
of refraction. The wave results are obtained by solving for the quasibound states[7]
of a deformed cylinder assuming TM polarization. Our algorithm makes use of the
Rayleigh hypothesis[8] to expand internal and external ﬁelds in Bessel functions, and
then imposes appropriate matching conditions at the interface, satisﬁed for complex
wavevector.

Experimental evidence for the universality of the emission directionality can be
obtained from a measurement of the lasing emission produced by liquid dye columns.
In a variant on the well-studied lasing emission from micro-droplets[2], ethanol con-
taining Rhodamine B dye was forced through circular and rectangular oriﬁces without
the usual segmentation of the stream. The dye column produced by the circular ori-
ﬁce (of radius 75µm) is cylindrical, whereas that produced by the rectangular oriﬁce
(of dimension 1000µm × 25µm) has an oval cross-section with an eccentricity which
decays (because of viscous damping) until it is nearly circular at 2 cm from the oriﬁce.
The cross-sectional distortion which experiences the smallest damping is quadrupolar,
so that we expect the dominant deformation to be roughly given by Eq. (1). Hence
the dye column at the appropriate height provides a realization of a cylindrical ARC.
The surface tension causes the major axis of the quadrupole to oscillate in orientation
with respect to the long axis of the oriﬁce.

From previous studies of droplets the lasing of the column should involve many
WG modes; however if our universality hypothesis is correct we should still observe
highly directional emission from the deformed jet since all such WG modes have the
emission pattern of Fig. 2(a). Speciﬁcally, we expect to see high emission intensity in
the direction perpendicular to the long axis of the deformed cross section which will
be rotated by 90◦ with each half-cycle of the quadrupolar oscillation.

The dye column was pumped with a 537 nm pulsed dye laser with pulse dura-
tion ≈ 5ns. The pump laser is oriented perpendicular to the long-axis of the rectan-
gular oriﬁce. Two collection lenses set to f/22 were placed at 0◦ and 90◦ relative to
the pump laser beam. By using mirrors and a beam splitter, lasing images produced
by the two lenses were combined side by side on a single CCD detector and were
recorded simultaneously with appropriate calibration to preserve spatial correspon-
dence anywhere along the column. As predicted by the theory, we observe [Fig. 3(a)]
a striking oscillatory rotation of the high emission intensity between the 90◦ and 0◦
images, commensurate with the oscillation of the deformation of the cross section. No
such oscillatory behavior is observed in the lasing emission from the circular liquid
column [Fig. 3(b)].

The prediction of emission from the points of maximum κ is based on Eq. (2).
However, the actual phase-space ﬂow pattern departs strongly from that predicted by
the adiabatic approximation when the AIC intersects large islands of stable motion
as can be clearly seen in the SOS of Fig. 1. If the index of refraction is such that
sin χc intersects these large islands at the minima of the AIC, then the relevant
trajectories must circulate around these islands. Hence rays escaping at the critical

(a)

(b)

Top View

orifice

0˚

Top View

orifice

90˚

0˚

90˚

0˚

Detector Angle

90˚

0˚

Detector Angle

Lasing emission from a liquid dye column created by rectangular (a) and circular (b) oriﬁces. Si-
multaneous images taken at 0◦ and 90◦ angle with respect to the pump beam are shown side by
side.

line do not do so at the points of maximum curvature but at two points oﬀset by
roughly the width of the island. The resulting near-ﬁeld pattern is complex due to
interference of these two ray bundles, but often shows a dip at the points of maximum
curvature. Moreover, in all cases the far-ﬁeld pattern shows strong splitting of the high
emission peaks [Fig. 2(b)] in contrast to the two peaks of Fig. 2(a) for both the ray
histograms and the exact wave solutions. We refer to this remarkable phenomenon as
dynamical eclipsing. It deserves further experimental and theoretical study, however
the refractive index of n ≈ 1.5 required for this is not conveniently reached with
liquids.

It should be emphasized that the only parameter we changed in order to ﬁnd
the peak-splitting in our calculations is the index of refraction and that the splitting
occurs for all resonances we have tested at this index [6]. To conﬁrm further that
the numerically determined peak-splitting actually has the classical (ray dynamical)
origin we propose, we calculate in Fig. 2(c) the resonances of an elliptical ARC at the
same index and aspect ratio as the quadrupole of Fig. 2(b). The ellipse generates no
chaos and indeed the adiabatic approximation of Eq. (2) becomes exact. Hence there
are no islands near the critical line in the SOS, and we ﬁnd no peak splitting despite
the high similarity between the two shapes in Fig. 2(b),(c). Thus we believe that this
phenomenon provides an unambiguous and striking ﬁngerprint of the classical phase
space structure in the emission directionality.

We acknowledge partial support by U. S. Army Research Oﬃce Grant DAAH04-

94-G-0031 and NSF Grant DMR-9215065 and thank Ying Wu and Marko Robnik for
helpful discussions.

References

[1] J. U. N¨ockel, A. D. Stone and R. K. Chang, Optics Letters 19, 1693 (1994)

[2] A. Mekis, J. U. N¨ockel, G. Chen, A. D. Stone and R. K. Chang,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2682 (1995)

[3] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, in: Optical Processes in Microcavities, edited by

R. K. Chang and A. J. Campillo (World Scientiﬁc Publishers, 1996).

[4] J. N. Mather, Ergod. Th. & Dynam. Sys. 2, 397 (1982)

[5] M. Robnik and M. V. Berry, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 18, 1361 (1985)

[6] J. U. N¨ockel and A. D. Stone, unpublished

[7] E. S. C. Ching, P. T. Leung and K. Young, in: Optical Processes in Microcavities,
edited by R. K. Chang and A. J. Campillo (World Scientiﬁc Publishers, 1996).

[8] R. F. Millar, Electron. Lett. 5, 416 (1969)

