Theory of Circle Maps and the Problem of One-Dimensional
Optical Resonator with a Periodically Moving Wall

Rafael de la Llave∗
Department of Mathematics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA

Nikola P. Petrov†
Department of Physics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA

(October 7, 1998)

Abstract

We consider the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a cavity with a periodically oscillating
perfectly reﬂecting boundary and show that the mathematical theory of circle
maps leads to several physical predictions. Notably, well-known results in the
theory of circle maps (which we review brieﬂy) imply that there are intervals
of parameters where the waves in the cavity get concentrated in wave packets
whose energy grows exponentially. Even if these intervals are dense for typical
motions of the reﬂecting boundary, in the complement there is a positive
measure set of parameters where the energy remains bounded.

02.30.Jr, 42.15.-i, 42.60.Da, 42.65.Yj

8
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
0
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

In this paper, we consider the behavior of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a resonator one
of whose walls is at rest and the other moving periodically. The main point we want to
make is that several results in the mathematical literature of circle maps immediately yield
physically important conclusions.

The problem at hand is mathematically equivalent to the study of the motion of vibrating
strings with a periodically moving boundary [1,2], or the classical electromagnetic ﬁeld in a
periodically pulsating cavity [3,4]. It is connected with the vacuum quantum eﬀects in such
region [5,6]. The problem is also of practical importance, e.g., for the formation of short
laser pulses [7].

The goal of this paper is to show that the problem of a classical wave with a periodically
moving boundary can be easily reformulated in terms of the study of long term behavior
of circle maps and, therefore, that many well known results in this theory lead to physical
predictions. In particular, we give proofs of several results obtained numerically by Cole
and Schieve [4] and others. Extensions of this approach, that will be discussed elsewhere,
allow to reach conclusions for some quasi-periodic motions of small amplitude or possibly
for non-homogeneous media.

In the case of more than one spatial dimension, the analogous problem [8] is much more
complicated, so the predictions are not as clear as in the one-dimensional case and we will
not discuss them further.

We emphasize that the mathematical theory presented is completely rigorous and, hence,

the physical predictions made are general for the assumptions stated.

There are other intriguing relations for which we have no conceptual explanation. We
observe that a calculation of Fulling and Davies [9] leads to the conclusion that the energy
density radiated by a moving mirror is equal to the Schwarzian derivative of the motion of
the mirror (for details see Sec. IV E). This Schwarzian derivative is a diﬀerential operator
frequently used in the theory of one dimensional dynamical systems and particularly in the
theory of circle maps.

The plan of the exposition is the following. In Sec. II we show how the physical problem
can be formulated in terms of circle maps. Sec. III contains a brief exposition of the necessary
facts from the theory of circle maps, in Sec. IV these facts are applied to the problem at
hand and illustrated numerically, and in the conclusion we discuss the advantages of our
approach.

We consider a one-dimensional optical resonator consisting of two parallel perfectly re-
ﬂecting mirrors. For simplicity of notation, we will consider only the situation in which one

II. PHYSICAL SETTING

A. Description of the system

2

of them is at rest at the origin of the x axis while the other one is moving periodically with
period T . The case where the two mirrors are moving periodically with a common period
can be treated in a similar manner. We assume that the resonator is empty, so that the
speed of the electromagnetic waves in it is equal to the speed of light, c. The speed of the
moving mirror cannot exceed c.

We note that the experimental situation does not necessarily require that there is a
physically moving mirror. One experimental possibility – among others – would be to
have a material that is a good conductor or not depending on whether a magnetic ﬁeld
of suﬃcient intensity is applied to it, and then have a magnetic ﬁeld applied to it in a
changing region. This induces reﬂecting boundaries that are moving with time. Note that
the boundaries of this region could move even faster than c, hence the study of mirrors
moving at a speed comparable to c is not unphysical (even if, presumably, one would also
have to discuss corrections to the boundary conditions depending on the details of the
experimental realizations).

We shall use dimensionless time t and length ℓ connected with the physical (i.e., dimen-

sional) time tphys and length ℓphys by t := tphys/T , ℓ := ℓphys/(cT ).

Let the coordinate of the moving mirror be x = a(t), where a is a C k function (k =

1, . . . , ∞, ω) satisfying the conditions

a(t) > 0 ,

|a′(t)| < 1 ,

a(t + 1) = a(t) .

(2.1)

The meaning of the ﬁrst condition is that the cavity does not collapse, the second one means
that the speed of the moving mirror cannot exceed the speed of light, and the third one is
that the mirror’s motion is periodic of period 1. An example which we will use for numerical
illustrations is

a(t) =

+ β sin 2πt

|β| <

0 < |β| <

(2.2)

α
2

1
2π

,

(cid:18)

α
2 (cid:19)

.

Since there are no charges and no currents, we impose the gauge conditions A0 = 0,
∇ · A = 0 on the 4-potential Aµ = (A0, A) and obtain that A satisﬁes the homogeneous
wave equation. We consider plane waves traveling in x-direction, so that without loss of
generality, we assume that A(t, x) = A(t, x) ey, and obtain that A(t, x) must satisfy the
homogeneous (1 + 1)-dimensional wave equation,

Att(t, x) − Axx(t, x) = 0 ,

in the domain Σ := {(t, x) ∈ R2 | t0 < t, 0 < x < a(t)}. It will also need to satisfy some
boundary conditions that will be speciﬁed in Sec. II B, and appropriate initial conditions,

A(t0, x) = ψ1(x) ,

At(t0, x) = ψ2(x) .

Before discussing the boundary conditions and the method of solving the boundary-value
problem in the domain Σ, let us discuss the way of solving (2.3) in the absence of spatial
boundaries, i.e., in the domain {t0 < t, x ∈ R}.
It is well-known that in this case, the

(2.3)

(2.4)

3

solution of the problem (2.3), (2.4) at some particular space-time point (t, x) can be written
as

A(t, x) = Ψ−(x−

0 ) + Ψ+(x+

0 ) ,

(2.5)

(2.6)

where x±
:= x ± (t − t0), and Ψ− and Ψ+ are functions of one variable that are se-
0
lected to match the initial conditions (2.4). The explicit expressions for Ψ± follow from
the d’Alembert’s formula (see, e.g., [10])

(cid:21)
where ζ is an arbitrary constant (the same for Ψ+ and Ψ−).

Ψ±(s) =

ψ1(s) ±

ψ2(s′) ds′

,

1
2 (cid:20)

s

ζ
Z

The representation (2.5) has a simple geometrical meaning: the value of A(t, x) is a
superposition of two functions, Ψ−(x−
0 ) and Ψ+(x+
0 ), the former being constant along the
lines {x − t = const}, and the latter being constant along {x + t = const}. The disturbances
at a space-time point (T, X) propagate in the space-time diagram along the lines {x − t =
X − T } and {x + t = X + T } emanating from this point (in more physical terms, this
corresponds to two rays moving to the right and to the left at unit speed); these lines are
called characteristics, and the method of solving (2.3), (2.4) by using the representation
(2.5) is called the method of characteristics (see, e.g., [10,11]).

B. Method of characteristics, boundary condition at the moving mirror, and Doppler
shift at reﬂection

To obtain the boundary conditions at the stationary mirror, we note that the electric
ﬁeld, i.e., the temporal derivative of the vector potential, must vanish at this mirror, which
yields the following “perfect reﬂection” boundary condition:

At(t, 0) = 0 .

(2.7)

The boundary condition at the moving mirror can be easily obtained by performing a
Lorenz transformation from the laboratory frame to the inertial frame comoving with the
moving mirror at some particular moment t. The temporal and spatial coordinates in the
laboratory frame, t and x, are related to the ones in the instantaneously comoving inertial
frame, t′ and x′, by

where tanh ζ = a′(t). In the comoving frame, the boundary condition is At′(0, 0) = 0, which,
together with (2.8), yields

t − t0 = t′ cosh ζ + x′ sinh ζ

x − a(t0) = t′ sinh ζ + t′ cosh ζ ,

At(t, a(t)) + a′(t) Ax(t, a(t)) = 0 .

4

(2.8)

(2.9)

The method of characteristics developed in (2.5) and (2.6) for situations with no bound-
aries can be adapted to provide rather explicit solutions for systems in spatially bounded
space-time domains satisfying (2.9) at the boundaries (see, e.g., [12]).

The prescription is the following. The solution of the boundary value problem (2.3),
(2.4), (2.7), (2.9) in the domain Σ is a superposition of two functions that are constant on
the straight pieces of the characteristics and change their sign at each reﬂection. To ﬁnd
A(t, x), one has to consider the two characteristics, γ− and γ+, passing through (t, x), and
propagate them backwards in time (according to the rule that, upon reaching a mirror, they
change direction of propagation) until they reach the line {time = t0} at the points (t0, x−
0 )
and (t0, x+

0 ), resp. – see Fig. 1. Then A(t, x) is given by

A(t, x) = (−1)N−Ψ−(x−

0 ) + (−1)N+Ψ+(x+

0 ) ,

(2.10)

where N∓ are the number of reﬂections of γ∓ on the way back from (t, x) to (t0, x∓
Sec. II C we will give explicit formulae for x∓

0 and A(t, x) in terms in circle maps.

0 ). In

Indeed, because the solution (2.10) is the sum of two functions constant along the straight
pieces of the characteristics, the wave equation is satisﬁed in the interior. Also, the initial
conditions are easily veriﬁed because for t − t0 small, x−
0 are close to x [see (2.17)].
To check that this prescription also satisﬁes the boundary conditions, we need another
argument. Consider the space-time diagram of the reﬂection of the ﬁeld between two in-
ﬁnitesimally close characteristics reﬂected by the moving mirror at time θ, shown in Fig. 2.
The world line of the mirror is denoted by m, the angle δ between it and the time direction
is connected with the mirror’s velocity at reﬂection by tan δ = a′(θ). The Doppler factor
at reﬂection, D(θ), is deﬁned as the ratio of the spatial distances ∆ and ∆′ between the
characteristics before and after reﬂection:

0 and x+

D(θ) :=

∆
∆′ = tan

π
4

(cid:18)

− δ

=

(cid:19)

1 − tan δ
1 + tan δ

=

1 − a′(θ)
1 + a′(θ)

.

(2.11)

Thus, the absolute values of the temporal and spatial derivatives of the ﬁeld increase by a
factor of D(θ) after reﬂection. This implies that if in the space-time domain between the
two characteristics, the values of the corresponding derivatives of the ﬁeld before reﬂection
are denoted by At and Ax, then after reﬂection they will become −D(θ)At and D(θ)Ax, resp.
Hence, in the space-time domain of the overlap the derivatives of the ﬁeld will be

At(θ, a(θ)) = At − D(θ)At

Ax(θ, a(θ)) = Ax + D(θ)Ax .

(2.12)

Now, we will show that the modiﬁed method of characteristics is consistent with the bound-
ary condition (2.9). We note that At = −Ax, which simply means that before reﬂection the
rays are moving to the right at unit speed. If we multiply the second equation of (2.12)
by a′(θ) = 1−D(θ)
1+D(θ) [which follows from (2.11)] and add it to the ﬁrst, we obtain exactly the
boundary condition (2.9).

5

The same prescription gives a solution of the Dirichlet problem A(t, 0) = A(t, a(t)) = 0.

Similar methods can be developed for other boundary conditions.

We note that the method of characteristics also yields information in the important
case when the medium is inhomogeneous and perhaps time dependent. This is a physically
natural problem since in many applications we have cavities ﬁlled with optically active media
whose characteristics are changed by external perturbations. In this case, the method of
characteristics does not yield an exact solution as above but rather, it is the main ingredient
of an iterative procedure [11]. Physically, what happens is that in inhomogeneous media,
the waves change shape while propagating in contrast with the propagation without change
in shape in homogeneous media (2.5). We plan to come to this problem in a near future.

C. Using circle maps to solve the boundary-value problem (2.3), (2.4), (2.7), (2.9) in
the domain Σ

We now reformulate the method of characteristics into a problem of circle maps.
We consider a particular characteristic and denote by {τn} the times at which it reaches
the stationary mirror and {θn} the times at which it reaches the oscillating one; let . . . <
τn < θn < τn+1 < θn+1 < . . .. Note that, with this notation,

Therefore

τn = θn − a(θn) = (Id −a)(θn)

τn+1 = θn + a(θn) = (Id +a)(θn) .

τn+1 = (Id +a) ◦ (Id −a)−1(τn) =: F (τn)

θn+1 = (Id −a)−1 ◦ (Id +a)(θn) =: G(θn) .

(2.13)

(2.14)

We refer to F and G as the time advance maps. They allow to compute the time of reﬂection
on one side in terms of the time of the previous reﬂection on the same side. The conditions
(2.1) on the range of a and a′ guarantee that (Id −a) is invertible and that F and G are C k
(by the implicit function theorem).

When the function a is 1-periodic, F and G satisfy

F (t + 1) = F (t) + 1 ,

G(t + 1) = G(t) + 1 .

(2.15)

These relations mean that F (t) and G(t) depend only on the fractional part of t. In physical
terms, we characterize a reﬂection of a ray by the phase of the oscillating mirror when the
impact takes place, i.e., by the time of reﬂection modulo 1; if we know the phase at one
reﬂection, we can compute the phase at the next impact. Mathematically, this means that
F and G can be regarded as lifts of maps from S1 ≡ R/Z to S1 (see Sec. III).

We want to argue that the study of the dynamics of the circle maps (2.14) leads to
important conclusions for the physical problem, which we will take up after we collect some

6

information about the mathematical theory of circle maps. In particular, many results in
the mathematical literature are directly relevant for physical applications. This is natural
because the long term behavior of the solution can be obtained by repeated application of
the time advance maps [see (2.18)].

We call attention to the fact that

G = (Id +a)−1 ◦ F ◦ (Id +a) = (Id −a)−1 ◦ F ◦ (Id −a) ,

(2.16)

so that

Gn = (Id +a)−1 ◦ F n ◦ (Id +a) = (Id −a)−1 ◦ F n ◦ (Id −a) .

In dynamical systems theory this is usually described as saying that the maps F and G
are “conjugate” (see Sec. III C). In our situation, this comes from the fact that F and G
are physically equivalent descriptions of the relative phase of diﬀerent successive reﬂections:
F advances the τ variables while G advances the θ’s, and the θ’s are related to the τ ’s by
(2.13).

Now, we use circle maps to derive an explicit formula for the solution of the boundary-
value problem (2.3), (2.4), (2.7), (2.9) in the domain Σ. Let us trace back in time the
characteristics γ− and γ+ coming “from the past” to the space-time point (t, x) – see Fig. 1.
Let θ±
:= (a ∓ Id)−1(t − x) be the last moments the characteristics γ± are reﬂected by
0
the moving mirror, and let θ±
0 ). After N+, resp. N−, reﬂections on the way
backwards in time (out of which n+, resp. n−, are from the moving mirror), the characteristic
γ+, resp. γ−, crosses the line {time = t0}. The spatial coordinate of the intersection of γ±
and {time = t0} can be easily seen to be

−k := G−k(θ±

x±
0 = h(θ±

−n±, t0) := |(Id −a)(θ±

−n±) − t0| .

(2.17)

Thus, the formula for the vector potential is

A(t, x) = (−1)N−Ψ− ◦ h

G−n− ◦ (a + Id)−1(t − x), t0
(cid:16)
+(−1)N+Ψ+ ◦ h

(cid:17)
G−n+ ◦ (a − Id)−1(t − x), t0
(cid:16)

.

(cid:17)

(2.18)

D. Energy of the ﬁeld

The method of characteristics gives a very illuminating picture of the mechanism of the

change of the ﬁeld energy,

a(t)

0
Z

E(t) =

T 00(t, x) =

At(t, x)2 + Ax(t, x)2
h
due to the distortion of the wave at reﬂection from the moving mirror. Indeed, consider the
change of the energy of a very narrow wave packet at reﬂection from the moving mirror at
time θ. Since at reﬂection the temporal and the spatial distances decrease by a factor of

(2.19)

dx ,

i

0

a(t)

1
8π Z

7

D(θ), |At| and |Ax| will increase by a factor of D(θ). Therefore, the integrand of the energy
integral will increase D(θ)2 times, while the support of the integrand (i.e., the spatial width
of the wave packet at time t) will shrink by a factor of D(θ). Hence, the energy of the wave
packet after reﬂection will be D(θ) times greater than its energy before reﬂection.

In the general case, one can use (2.18) and obtain the energy of the system at time t.
For the sake of simplicity, we will give the formula only under the assumption that at time t
all the rays are going to the right, i.e., assuming that the vector potential is of the form
A(t, x) = (−1)N−Ψ−(x−
0 ). Let us introduce the “local Doppler factor”

D(t0, x−

0 ; t) :=

h(θ−

n−, t0)

=

(G−n−)′(θ−

0 ) .

(2.20)

∂
∂t

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1 − a′(θ−
−n−)
1 + a′(θ−
0 )

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

It has the physical meaning of the ratio of the frequencies of the incident wave and the wave
at time t [cf. (2.11)]. Note that D(t0, x−
0 ; t) is equal to the derivative of G−n− multiplied by
a factor which is bounded and bounded away from 0 independently of n− [due to the fact
that |a′(t)| < 1]. From (2.18) and (2.17) we obtain that the square of D(t0, x−
0 ; t) is the
ratio of the energy density T 00(t, x) and the initial energy density, T 00(t0, x−

0 ):

T 00(t, x) = 2

(Ψ−)′(x−
0 )

D(t0, x−

0 ; t)2 = T 00(t0, x−

0 ) D(t0, x−

0 ; t)2 .

0 ; t) is connected with the Jacobian of the change of coordinates

On the other hand, D(t0, x−
x−
0 7→ x by

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Hence, the energy of the system at time t is

= D(t0, x−

0 ; t)−1 .

2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

−1

=

∂x−
0
∂x (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

∂x
∂x−
0 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

a(t)

0
Z

E(t) =

T 00(t0, x−

0 ) D(t0, x−

0 ; t) dx−
0 .

(2.21)

Note that since the local Doppler factor squared is the ratio of the energy densities at
two consecutive reﬂection points, then it satisﬁes the following multiplicative property. Let
(t1, x−
k ) be space-time points on the characteristic connecting (t0, x−
0 )
and (t, x), such that at all of them the rays are going to the right, and let t0 < t1 < . . . <
tk < t. Then

2 ), . . . , (tk, x−

1 ), (t2, x−

D(t0, x−

0 ; t) = D(t0, x−

0 ; t1) D(t1, x−

1 ; t2) · · · D(tk−1, x−

k−1; tk) D(tk, x−

k ; t) .

As can be seen from (2.20), these multiplicative properties are closely related to the chain
rule for diﬀeomorphisms,

(Gn)′(θ) = G′(Gn−1(θ)) G′(Gn−2(θ)) · · · G′(θ) .

(2.22)

The mathematical theory of dynamical systems contains many results about derivatives
of highly iterated maps as above (2.22). In Sec. IV C we will be able to translate some of
them into asymptotic properties of the ﬁeld energy.

8

A simple and intuitively clear formula for the rate of change of the ﬁeld energy can be

obtained by using (2.19), (2.3), (2.7), (2.9), and integrating by parts:

E′(t) =

(AtAxx + AxAtx) dx +

a′(t)Ax(t, a(t))2

=

At(t, a(t))Ax(t, a(t)) +

a′(t)Ax(t, a(t))2

1
8π

1
8π

= −

a′(t)Ax(t, a(t))2 .

a(t)

0

1
4π Z
1
4π

1
8π

From this, we realize that the force experienced by the wall is 1

8π Ax(t, a(t))2.

E. The inverse problem: determining the mirror’s motion given the circle map

It is important to know whether the notion of a “typical” G is the same as the notion of
a “typical” a or a “typical” F (in the mathematical literature people speak about “generic”
maps, and in physical literature about “universal” maps). We do not know the answer to
this question, and here we will give some arguments showing that the answer is not obvious.
In this paper we will not use “generic” or “universal”. Rather we will make explicit the non-
degeneracy assumptions so that they can be checked in the concrete examples. In Sec. IV D
we will show that some universal properties for families of circle maps do not apply to G
constructed according to (2.14) with a(t) = ¯a + εb(t).

While the function a can be expressed in terms of F as a = F −Id

between G and a is much harder to invert. We should have

2 ◦

F +Id
2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

−1

, the relation

a(θ) + a(G(θ)) =

G(θ) ,

(2.23)

where

G(θ) := G(θ) − θ, so for any n,

e

e

a(θ) =

G(θ) −

G(G(θ)) + · · · + (−1)n

G(Gn(θ)) + (−1)n+1a(Gn+1(θ)) .

Hence, if G2k(θ0) = θ0 (mod 1), a necessary condition for the existence of a is that

e

e

e

(−1)i

G(Gi(θ0)) = 0 .

2k−1

Xi=0

e

(2.24)

An example of a G where the above condition is not satisﬁed can be readily constructed. We
note that if a map fails to satisfy (2.24) and if (G2k)′(θ0) 6= 1, then all small perturbations
will also fail to satisfy (2.24). Thus, there are whole neighborhoods of maps that cannot be
realized as G for a moving mirror.

On the other hand, given very simple G’s, it is easy to construct inﬁnitely many a’s
that satisfy (2.23) and that therefore lead to the same G. For example, for G(θ) = θ + 1
2,
(2.23) amounts to a(θ + 1
2. If we prescribe a for θ in [0, 1
2], then this equation
determines a on [ 1
2, 1] (the only care needs to be exercised so that the two determinations of

2) + a(θ) = 1

9

a match at θ = 1
prescribe a(θ) in an interval I, (2.23) determines a(θ) in G(I).

2 ). A similar construction works when G permutes several intervals – if we

In the case when G is conjugate to an irrational rotation, G = h−1 ◦ Rα ◦ h, then (2.23)

is equivalent to

a ◦ h−1 ◦ Rα + a ◦ h−1 = h−1 ◦ Rα − h−1 .

Then a ◦ h−1 can be determined using Fourier analysis, setting h−1(θ) = θ +
a ◦ h−1(θ) = θ +
ψke2πikθ, which leads to

∞
k=−∞

P

∞
k=−∞

τke2πikθ,

P

b

e2πikα + 1

ψk =

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

b

e2πikα − 1
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

τk .

Let us assume that |kα − n − 1
2 | ≥ const |k|−ν for some ν ≥ 1 (a condition of this type is
called a Diophantine condition – see deﬁnition III.4), and that h−1 has r derivatives (which
τ k| ≤ const |k|−r). Then if r > ν + 2, then
implies that its Fourier coeﬃcients
ψk deﬁne a smooth function (for more details see, e.g., [13, Sec. XIII.4]). Of
the coeﬃcients
course, once we know a◦h−1, then, since h−1 depends only on G and is therefore determined,
b
we can obtain a.

τk satisfy |

b

b

b

In summary, there are maps G that do not come from any a at all, come from inﬁnitely
many a’s, or come from one and only one a. The maps F can always be obtained from one
and only one a.

b

(2.25)

III. MAPS OF THE CIRCLE

In this section we recall brieﬂy some facts from the theory of the dynamics of the orien-
tation preserving homeomorphisms (OPHs) and diﬀeomorphisms (OPDs) of the circle S1,
following closely the book of Katok and Hasselblatt [14, Ch. 11, 12]; see also [15] and [13].
This is a very rich theory and we will only recall the facts that we will need in the physical
application.

We shall identify S1 with the quotient R/Z and use the universal covering projection

π : R → S1 ≡ R/Z : x 7→ π(x) := x (mod 1) .

Another way of thinking about S1 is identifying it with the unit circle in C, and using the
universal covering projection x 7→ e2πix.

Let f : S1 → S1 be an OPH and F : R → R be its lift to R, i.e., a map satisfying
f ◦ π = π ◦ F . The fact that f is an OPH implies that F (x + 1) = F (x) + 1 for each x ∈ R,
which is equivalent to saying that F − Id is 1-periodic. The lift F of f is unique up to an
additive integer constant. If a point x ∈ S1 is q-periodic, i.e., f q(x) = x, then F q(x) = x + p
for some p ∈ N.

10

A. Rotation number

A very important number to associate to a map of the circle is its rotation number,
introduced by Poincar´e. It is a measure of the average amount of rotation of a point along
an orbit.

Deﬁnition III.1 Let f : S1 → S1 be an orientation preserving homeomorphism and F :
R → R a lift of f . Deﬁne

τ0(F ) := lim
n→∞

F n(x) − x
n

,

τ (f ) := τ0(F ) (mod 1)

(3.1)

and call τ (f ) a rotation number of f .

It was proven by Poincar´e that the limit in (3.1) exists and is independent of x. Hence,

τ (f ) is well deﬁned.

The rotation number is a very important tool in classifying the possible types of behavior
of the iterates of the OPHs of S1. The simplest example of an OPH of S1 is the rotation
by α on S1 ≡ R/Z, rα : x 7→ x + α (mod 1) (corresponding to a rotation by 2πα radians
on S1 thought of as the unit circle in C). The map Rα : x 7→ x + α is a lift of rα, and
τ (rα) = α (mod 1). In the case of rα there are two possibilities:

(a) If τ (rα) = p/q ∈ Q, then Rq

p/q(x) = x + p for each x ∈ R, so every point in S1 is

q-periodic for rp/q. If p and q are relatively prime, q is the minimal period.

(b) If τ (rα) /∈ Q, then rα has no periodic points; every point in S1 has a dense orbit.
Thus, the α- and ω-limit sets of any point x ∈ S1 are the whole S1, which is usually
described as saying that S1 is a minimal set for rα. [Recall that α(x) is the set of the
points at which the orbit of x accumulates in the past, and ω(x) those points where it
accumulates in the future.]

B. Types of orbits of OPHs of the circle

To classify the possible orbits of OPHs of the circle, we need the following deﬁnition (for

the particular case f : S1 → S1).

Deﬁnition III.2

(a) On orbit O of f is called homoclinic to an invariant set T ∈ S1 \ O

if α(x) = ω(x) = T for any x ∈ O.

(b) An orbit O of f is said to be heteroclinic to two disjoint invariant sets T1 and T2 if O

is disjoint from each of them and α(x) = T1, ω(x) = T2 for any x ∈ O.

With this deﬁnition, the possible types of orbits of circle OPHs were classiﬁed by Poincar´e

[16] as follows (for a modern pedagogical treatment see, e.g., [14, Sec. 11.2]):

11

(1) For τ (f ) = p/q ∈ Q, all orbits of f are of the following types:

(a) a periodic orbit with the same period as the rotation rp/q and ordered in the same

way as an orbit of rp/q;

(b) an orbit homoclinic to the periodic orbit if there is only one periodic orbit;

(c) an orbit heteroclinic to two diﬀerent periodic orbits if there are two or more

periodic orbits.

(2) When τ (f ) /∈ Q, the possible types of orbits are:

(a) an orbit dense in S1 that is ordered in the same way as an orbit of rτ (f ) (as are

the two following cases);

(b) an orbit dense in a Cantor set;

(c) an orbit homoclinic to a Cantor set.

We also note that in cases 2(b) and 2(c), the Cantor set that has a dense orbit is unique

and can be obtained as the set of accumulation points of any orbit.

C. Poincar´e and Denjoy theorems

Because of the simplicity of the rotations it is natural to ask whether a particular OPH of
S1 is equivalent in some sense to a rotation. To state the results, we give a precise deﬁnition
of “equivalence” and the important concept of topological transitivity.

Deﬁnition III.3

(a) Let f : M → M and g : N → N be C m maps, m ≥ 0. The maps f
and g are topologically conjugate if there exists a homeomorphism h : M → N such
that f = h−1 ◦ g ◦ h.

(b) The map g is a topological factor of f (or f is semiconjugate to g) if there exists a
surjective continuous map h : M → N such that h ◦ f = g ◦ h; the map h is called a
semiconjugacy.

(c) A map f : M → M is topologically transitive provided the orbit, {f k(x)}k∈Z, of some

point x is dense in M.

The meaning of the conjugacy is that g becomes f under a change of variables, so that
from the point of coordinate independent physical quantities, f and g are equivalent. The
meaning of the semiconjugacy is that, embedded in the dynamics of f , we can ﬁnd the
dynamics of g.

The following theorem of Poincar´e [16] was chronologically the ﬁrst theorem classifying

circle maps.

Theorem III.1 (Poincar´e Classiﬁcation Theorem) Let f : S1 → S1 be an OPH with
irrational rotation number. Then:

12

(a) if f is topologically transitive, then f is topologically conjugate to the rotation rτ (f );

(b) if f is not topologically transitive, then there exists a non-invertible continuous mono-
tone map h : S1 → S1 such that h ◦ f = rτ (f ) ◦ h; in other words, f is semiconjugate
to the rotation rτ (f ).

If we restrict ourselves to considering not OPHs, but OPDs of the circle, we can say
more about the conjugacy problem. An important result in this direction was the theorem
of Denjoy [17].

Theorem III.2 (Denjoy Theorem) A C 1 OPD of S1 with irrational rotation number and
derivative of bounded variation is topologically transitive and hence (according to Poincar´e
theorem) topologically conjugate to a rotation. In particular, every C 2 OPD f : S1 → S1 is
topologically conjugate to rτ (f ).

We note that this condition is extremely sharp. For every ε > 0 there are C 2−ε maps
with irrational rotation number and semiconjugate but not conjugate to a rotation (see [13,
Sec. X.3.19]).

D. Smoothness of the conjugacy

So far we have discussed only the conditions for existence of a conjugacy h to a rotation,
requiring h to be only a homeomorphism. Can anything more be said about the diﬀerentia-
bility properties of h in the case of smooth or analytic maps of the circle? As we will see
later, this is a physically important question since physical quantities such as energy density
depend on the smoothness of the conjugacy. To answer this question precisely, we need two
deﬁnitions.

Deﬁnition III.4 A number ρ is called Diophantine of type (K, ν) (or simply of type ν) for
K > 0 and ν ≥ 1, if
q ∈ Q. The number ρ is called Diophantine
if it is Diophantine for some K > 0 and ν ≥ 1. A number which is not Diophantine is called
a Liouville number.

> K |q|−1−ν for all p

ρ − p
q

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

It can be proved that for K → 0, the set of all Diophantine numbers of type (K, ν) has

Lebesgue measure as close to full as desired.

Deﬁnition III.5 A function f is said to be C m−δ where m ≥ 1 is an integer and δ ∈ (0, 1),
if it is C m−1 and its (m − 1)st derivative is (1 − δ)-H¨older continuous, i.e.,

Dm−1f (x) − Dm−1f (y)

< const |x − y|1−δ .

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

13

The ﬁrst theorem answering the question about the smoothness of the conjugacy was the
theorem of Arnold [18]. He proved that if the analytic map f : S1 → S1 is suﬃciently close
(in the sup-norm) to a rotation and τ (f ) is Diophantine of type ν ≥ 1, then f is analytically
conjugate to the rotation rτ (f ), i.e., there exists an analytic function h : S1 → S1 such that
h ◦ f = rτ (f ) ◦ h. The iterative technique applied by Arnold was fruitfully used later in the
proof of the celebrated Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theorem – see, e.g., [19]. Arnold’s
result was extended to the case of ﬁnite diﬀerentiability by Moser [20]. In such a case, the
Diophantine exponent ν has to be related to the number of derivatives one assumes for the
map.

Arnold’s theorem is local, i.e., it is important that f is close to a rotation. Arnold conjec-
tured that any analytic map with a rotation number in a set of full measure is analytically
conjugate to a rotation. Herman [13] proved that there exists a set A ⊂ [0, 1] of full Lebesgue
measure such that if f ∈ C k for 3 ≤ k ≤ ω and τ (f ) ∈ A, then the conjugacy is C k−2−ε
for any ε > 0. The set A is characterized in terms of the growth of the partial quotients
of the continued fraction expansions of its members; all numbers in A are Diophantine of
order ν for any ν ≥ 1. His result was improved by Yoccoz [21] who showed that if f ∈ C k,
3 ≤ k ≤ ω, τ (f ) is a Diophantine number of type ν ≥ 1, and k > 2ν − 1, then there exists
a C k−ν−ε conjugacy h between f and rτ (f ) for any ε > 0, and by several others. The best
result on smooth conjugacy we know of, is the following version of Herman’s theorem as
extended by Katznelson and Ornstein [22].

Theorem III.3 (Herman, Katznelson and Ornstein) Assume that f is a C k circle
OPD whose rotation number is Diophantine of order ν, and k > ν + 1. Then the homeo-
morphism h which conjugates f with the rotation rτ (f ) is of class C k−ν−ε for any ε > 0.

There are examples of C 2−ε maps with a Diophantine rotation number arbitrarily close
to a rotation and not conjugated by an absolutely continuous function to a rotation – see,
e.g., [23].

E. Devil’s staircase, frequency locking, Arnold’s tongues

Let {fα}α∈A be a one-parameter family of circle OPHs such that fα(x) is increasing in
α for every x. Then the function α 7→ τ (fα) is non-decreasing. (Since the maps are only
deﬁned modulo an integer and so is the rotation number, some care needs to be taken to
deﬁne increasing and non-decreasing when some of the objects we are considering change
integer parts. What is meant precisely is that if one takes the numbers with their integer
parts, they can be made increasing or non-decreasing. This is done in detail in [14, Sec. 11.1],
and we will dispense with making it explicit since it does not lead to confusion.)

For such a family the following fact holds:

if τ (fα) /∈ Q, then α 7→ τ (fα) is strictly
increasing locally at α; on the other hand, if fα has rational rotation number and the
periodic point is attracting or repelling (i.e., there is a neighborhood of the point that gets
mapped into itself by forwards or backwards iteration), then α 7→ τ (fα) is locally constant

14

at this particular value of α, i.e., for all α′ suﬃciently close to α, τ (fα′) = τ (fα). The local
constancy of the function α 7→ τ (fα) is known as frequency (phase, mode) locking. Note
that, since the rotation number is continuous, when it indeed changes, it has to go through
rational numbers. The described phenomenon suggests the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition III.6 A monotone continuous function ψ : [0, 1] → R is called a devil’s staircase
if there exists a family {Iξ}ξ∈Ξ of disjoint open subintervals of [0, 1] with dense union such
that ψ takes constant values on these subintervals. (We call attention to the fact that the
complement of the intervals in which the function is constant can be of positive measure.)

The devil’s staircase is said to be complete if the union of all intervals Iξ has a full

Lebesgue measure.

A very common way of phase locking for diﬀerentiable mappings arises when the map
we consider has a periodic point and that the derivative of the return map at the periodic
point is not equal to 1. By the implicit function theorem, such a periodic orbit persists, and
the existence of a periodic orbit implies that the rotation number is locally constant. At the
end of the phase locking interval the map has derivative one and experiences a saddle-node
(tangent) bifurcation.

We note that, unless certain combinations of derivatives vanish (see, e.g., [24]), the
saddle-node bifurcation happens in a universal way. That is, there are analytic changes of
variables sending one into another. This leads to quantitative predictions. For example, the
Lyapunov exponents of a periodic orbit should behave as a square root of the distance of
the parameter to the edge of the phase locking interval.

Of course, other things can happen in special cases: the ﬁxed point may be attractive but
only neutrally so, there may be an interval of ﬁxed points, the family may be such that there
are no frequency locking intervals (e.g., the rotation). Nevertheless, all these conditions are
exceptional and can be excluded in concrete examples by explicit calculations. (For example,
if the family of maps is analytic but not a root of the identity, it is impossible to have an
interval of ﬁxed points.)

In the example we will consider, we will not perform a complete proof that a devil’s
staircase occurs, but rather we will present numerical evidence. In particular, the square
root behavior of the Lyapunov exponent with the distance to the edge of the phase locking
interval seems to be veriﬁed.

Let us now consider two-parameter families of OPDs of the circle, {φα,β}, depending
smoothly on α and β. Assume that when β = 0, the maps of the family are rotations by α,
i.e., φα, 0 = rα. We will call β the nonlinearity parameter. Assume also that ∂φα,β/∂α > 0.
An example of this type is the family studied by Arnold [18],

ηα,β : S1 → S1 : x 7→ ηα,β(x) := x + α + β sin 2πx (mod 1) ,

(3.2)

where α ∈ [0, 1), β ∈ (0, 1/2π).

The rotation number τ is a continuous map in the uniform topology, and φα,β is a con-
tinuous function of α and β, so the function (α, β) 7→ τ (φα,β) =: τβ(α) depends continuously

15

on α and β. The map τβ is non-decreasing; for β > 0, τβ is locally constant at each α for
which τβ(α) is rational and strictly increasing if τβ(α) is irrational. Thus, τβ is a devil’s
staircase.

Since τβ is strictly increasing for irrational values of τβ(α), the set Iν := {(α, β) | τβ(α) =
ν} for an irrational ν ∈ [0, 1] is a graph of a continuous function. For a rational ν, Iν has
a non-empty interior and is bounded by two continuous curves. The wedges between these
two curves are often referred to as Arnold’s tongues.

The fact that τ (φα,0) = τ (rα) = α implies that for β = 0, the set of α’s for which there
is frequency locking coincides with the rational numbers between 0 and 1, so its Lebesgue
measure is zero. When β > 0, its Lebesgue measure is positive. The width of the Arnold’s
tongues for small β for the Arnold’s map (3.2) is investigated, e.g., in [25]. Much of this
analysis carries out for more general functions such as the ones we encounter in the problem
of the periodically pulsating resonator.

The total Lebesgue measure of the frequency locking intervals, m({τ −1

β (ν) | ν ∈ Q ∩
[0, 1]}), becomes equal to 1 when the family of circle maps consists of maps with a horizontal
point (so that the map, even if having a continuous inverse, fails to have a diﬀerentiable
one) – see [26,27] for numerical results and [28] for analytical proof. With the Arnold’s map
ηα,β this happens when β = 1/2π. In our case this happens when the mirror goes at one
instant at the speed of light.

We note also that the numerical papers [29,26,27,30] contain not only conjectures about
the measure of the phase locking intervals but, perhaps more importantly, conjectures about
scaling relations that hold “universally”. In particular, the dimension of the set of parameters
not covered by the phase locking intervals should be the same for all non-degenerate families.
These universality conjectures are supported not only by numerical evidence but also by a
renormalization group picture – see, e.g., [31] and the references therein. These universality
predictions have been veriﬁed in several physical contexts. Notably in turbulence by Glazier
and Libchaber [32].

As we will see in Sec. IV D, we do not expect that the families obtained in (2.14) for
mirrors oscillating with diﬀerent amplitudes belong to the same universality class as typical
mappings, but they should have universality properties that are easy to ﬁgure out from those
of the above references.

F. Distribution of orbits

For the physical problem at hand it is also important to know how the iterates of the
circle map x 7→ g(x) := G(x)(mod 1) are distributed. As we shall see in lemma IV.1, if
the iterates of g are well distributed (in an appropriate sense), the energy of the ﬁeld in the
resonator does not build up. The distribution of an orbit is conveniently formalized by using
the concept of invariant measures. We recall that a measure µ on X is invariant under the
measurable map f : X → X if µ(f −1(A)) = µ(A) for each measurable set A.

Given a point x ∈ S1, the frequency of visit of the orbit of x to I ⊂ S1 can be deﬁned by

16

µx(I) := lim
n→∞

#{i | 0 ≤ i ≤ n and f i(x) ∈ I}
n

.

(3.3)

It is easy to check that if for every interval I, the limit (3.3) exists, it deﬁnes an invariant
measure describing the frequency of visit of the orbit of x. Therefore, if there are orbits
which have asymptotic frequencies of visit, we can ﬁnd invariant measures.

A trivial example of the existence of such measures is when x is periodic.

In such
a case, the measure µx is a sum of Dirac delta functions concentrated on the periodic
orbit. The measure of an interval is proportional to the number of points in the orbit it
contains. We also note that it is easy to construct two-dimensional systems [e.g., (r, θ) 7→
(1 + 0.1(r − 1), θ + (r − 1)2 sin(θ)2)] for which the limits like the one in (3.3) do not exist
except for measures concentrated on the ﬁxed points, so that even the existence of such
equidistributed orbits is not obvious.

There are also relations going in the opposite direction – if invariant measures exist,
they imply the existence of well distributed orbits. We recall that the Krylov-Bogolyubov
theorem [14, Thm. 4.1.1] asserts that any continuous map on a compact metrizable space has
an invariant probability measure. Moreover, the Birkhoﬀ ergodic theorem [14, Thm. 4.1.2]
implies that given any invariant measure µ, the set of points for which µx as in (3.3) does
not exist has measure zero.

Certain measures have the property that µx = µ for µ-almost all points. These measures
are called ergodic. (There are several equivalent deﬁnitions of ergodicity and this is one of
them.) From the physical point of view, we note that a measure is ergodic if all the points in
the measure are distributed according to it. For maps of the circle, there are several criteria
that allow to conclude that a map is ergodic.

For rotations of the circle with an irrational rotation number we recall the classical
Kronecker-Weyl equidistribution theorem [14, Thm. 4.2.1] which shows that any irrational
rotation is uniquely ergodic, i.e., has only one invariant measure – the Lebesgue measure m.
(Such uniquely ergodic maps are, obviously, ergodic because, by Birkhoﬀ ergodic theorem,
the limiting distribution has to exist almost everywhere, but, since there is only one invariant
measure, all these invariant distributions have to agree with the original measure.) Thus,
the iterates of any x ∈ S1 under an irrational rotation are uniformly distributed on the
circle.

For general non-linear circle OPDs the situation may be quite diﬀerent. As an example,
consider Arnold’s map ηα,β (3.2).
If it is conjugate to an irrational rotation by h, i.e.,
ηα,β = h−1 ◦ rτ (ηα,β ) ◦ h, then there is a unique invariant probability measure µ deﬁned for
each measurable set A by µ(A) := m(h(A)). This implies that if I is an interval in S1, then
the frequency with which a point x visits I is equal to µ(I).

On the other hand, if τ (ηα,β) = p/q ∈ Q, then all orbits are periodic or asymptotic to
periodic. Thus, the only possible invariant measure is concentrated at the periodic points
and therefore singular, if the periodic points are isolated. Let us now assume that α is very
close to τ −1
β (p/q), but does not belong to it. Then ηα,β has no periodic orbits, but still there
exists a point x which is “almost periodic”, i.e., the orbits linger for an extremely long time

17

near the points x, ηα,β(x), · · · , ηq−1
α,β (x). So that, even if the invariant measure is absolutely
continuous, one expects that it is nevertheless quite peaked around the periodic orbit – see
Fig. 5. The behavior of such maps is described quantitatively by the “intermittency theory”
[33].

The continuity properties of the measures of the circle are not so easy to ascertain.

Nevertheless, there are certain results that are easy to establish.

Of course, in the case that we have a rational rotation number and isolated periodic
orbits, some of them attracting and some of them repelling, the only possible invariant
measures are measures concentrated in the periodic orbits.

For the irrational rotation number case, the Kronecker-Weyl theorem implies that all the
maps with an irrational rotation number – since they are semi-conjugate to a rotation by
Poincar´e theorem – are uniquely ergodic. In the situations where Herman’s theorem applies,
this measure will have a smooth density since it is the push-forward of Lebesgue measure
by a smooth diﬀeomorphism.

We also recall that by Banach-Alaoglu theorem and the Riesz representation theorem,
the set of Borel probability measures is compact when we give it the topology of µn →
µ ⇐⇒ µn(A) → µ(A) for all Borel measurable sets A. (This convergence is called weak-*
convergence by functional analysts and convergence in probability by probabilists.)

Lemma III.1 If λ∗ is a parameter value for which fλ∗ admits only one invariant measure
µλ∗, given µλi invariant measures for fλi, with λi → λ∗, then µi converges in the weak-*
sense to µλ∗.

Note that we are not assuming that fλi are uniquely ergodic. In particular, the lemma
says that in the set of uniquely ergodic maps, the map that a parameter associates the
invariant measure is continuous if we give the measures the topology of weak-* convergence.

Proof. Let µλik
be a convergent subsequence. The limit should be an invariant measure for
fλ∗. Hence, it should be µλ∗. It is an easy point set topology lemma that for functions taking
values in a compact metrizable space, if all subsequences converge to the same point, then
this point is a limit. The space of measures with weak-* topology is metrizable because by
Riesz representation theorem is the dual of the space of continuous functions with sup-norm,
which is metrizable.

We also point out that as a corollary of KAM theory [18] we can obtain that for non-
degenerate families, if we consider the parameter values for which the rotation number
is Diophantine with uniform constants, the measures are diﬀerentiable jointly on x and
in the parameter.
(For the diﬀerentiability in the parameter, we need to use Whitney
diﬀerentiability or, equivalently, declare that there is a family of densities diﬀerentiable
both in x and in λ that agrees with the densities for these values of λ.)

On the other hand, we point out that there are situations where the invariant measure
In

is not unique (e.g., a rational rotation or a map with more than one periodic orbit).

18

such cases, it is not diﬃcult to approximate them by maps in such a way that the invari-
ant measure is discontinuous in the weak-* topology as a function of the parameter. The
discontinuity of the measures with respect to parameters, as we shall see, has the physical
interpretation that, by changing the oscillation parameters by arbitrarily small amounts, we
can go from unbounded growth in the energy to the energy remaining bounded.

IV. APPLICATION TO THE RESONATOR PROBLEM

Now we return to the problem of a one-dimensional optical resonator with a periodically
moving wall to discuss the physical implications of circle maps theory, and illustrate with
numerical results in an example.

A. Circle maps in the resonator problem

If we take a(t) to depend on two parameters, α and β, as in (2.2), then, as we saw in
Sec. II C, the time between the consecutive reﬂections at the mirrors can be described in
terms of the functions Fα,β and Gα,β deﬁned by (2.14). These maps are lifts of circle maps
that we will denote by fα,β and gα,β. The restriction on the range of β in (2.2) implies that
fα,β and gα,β are analytic circle OPDs. Therefore, we can apply the results about the types
of orbits of OPHs of S1, Poincar´e and Denjoy theorems, as well as the smooth conjugacy
results and the facts about the distribution of orbits.

In an application where the motion of the mirror [i.e., a(t)] is given, one needs to compute
Fα,β and Gα,β (2.14), which cannot be expressed explicitly from a(t) but they require only to
solve one variable implicit equation. In the numerical computations we used the subroutine
zeroin [34] to solve implicit equations. If y = Fα,β(t) and z = Gα,β(t), then for a(t) given
by (2.2), y and z are given implicitly by

− y + t + α + 2β sin[π(y + t)] = 0

− z + t + α + β [sin(2πt) + sin(2πz)] = 0 .

Given t, we can ﬁnd y, z applying zeroin.

B. Rotation number, phase locking

In this section, our goal is to translate the mathematical predictions from the theory of

circle maps into physical predictions for the resonator problem.

The theory of circle maps guarantees that the measure of the frequency locking intervals
for gα,β is small when β is small and becomes 1 when β = 1/2π. The theory also guarantees
for analytic maps that, unless a power of the map is the identity, the frequency locking
intervals are non-trivial. For the example that we have at hand, it is very easy to verify
that this does not happen and, therefore, we can predict that there will be frequency locking

19

intervals and that as the amplitude of the oscillations of the moving mirror increases so that
the maximum speed of the moving mirror reaches the speed of light, the devil’s staircase
becomes complete. Fig. 3 shows a part of the complete devil’s staircase – the situation which
happens when the maps gα,β and fα,β lose their invertibility, i.e., for β = 1/2π.

α,β(x)}∞

We also recall that the theory of circle maps makes predictions about what happens for
non-degenerate phase locking intervals. Namely, for parameters inside the phase locking
interval the map has a periodic ﬁxed point and the Lyapunov exponent is smaller than 0,
while at the edges of the phase locking interval the map experiences a non-degenerate saddle-
node bifurcation – provided that certain combinations of the derivatives do not vanish [24].
We note that for parameters for which the map is in non-degenerate frequency locking,
i.e., τ (gα,β) = p/q and the attractive periodic point of period q has a negative Lyapunov
exponent, {Gnq
n=0 will converge exponentially to the ﬁxed point for all x in a certain
interval, according to the results about the types of orbits of circle maps (Sec. III B). The
whole circle can be divided into such intervals and a ﬁnite number of periodic points. There-
fore, the graph of Gnq
α,β, will look – up to errors exponentially small in n –
like a piecewise-constant function with values (up to integers) in the ﬁxed points of gq
α,β – see
Fig. 4. The fact that certain functions tend to piecewise-constant functions for large values
of the argument (which follows from what we found about Gnq
α,β for large n) was observed
numerically for particular motions of the mirror in [6,4]. In physical terms, this means that
the rays will be getting closer and closer together, so with the time the wave packets will
become narrower and narrower and more and more sharply peaked. The number of wave
packets is equal to q. The number of reﬂections from the moving mirror per unit time will
tend to the inverse of the rotation number. In the next section we discuss how this yields
an increase of the ﬁeld energy which happens exponentially fast on time.

α,β, and hence of gnq

The fact that for τ (gα,β) ∈ Q the rays approach periodic orbits, is also interesting from
a quantum mechanical point of view due to the relation between the periodic orbits in a
classical system and the energy levels of the corresponding quantum system, given by the
Gutzwiller’s trace formula (see, e.g., [35]).

We also note that we expect that slightly away from the edges of a phase locking interval,
the invariant density will be sharply peaked around the points in which it was concentrated
in the phase locking intervals. This is described by the “intermittency theory” [33].

To observe numerically in our example what happens when α enters or leaves a fre-
quency locking interval, we set Nβ(ν) := {α ∈ [0, 1) | τ (gα,β) = ν}. Fig. 5 represents the
Radon-Nikodym derivative dµ/dm of the invariant probability measure µ with respect to the
Lebesgue measure m [i.e., of the density of the invariant measures, which, as we saw in (3.3),
is the frequency of visit of the iterates]. The ﬁgure shows dµ/dm for α close to the left end
of N0.1(1/6). When α approaches (from the left) the left end of N0.1(1/6), dµ/dm becomes
sharply peaked at some points, and when α enters the frequency locking interval, the invari-
ant measure becomes singular (gα, 0.1 undergoes tangent bifurcation at α = 0.253977 . . .).
All seems to be consistent with the conjecture that all the frequency-locking intervals in the
family (away of β = 0) are non-degenerate, i.e., that at the boundaries of the phase locking

20

intervals the map satisﬁes the hypothesis of the saddle-node bifurcation theorem.

C. Doppler shift

One of the most interesting parts of the applications of circle map theory is the ease with

which we can describe the eﬀect on the energy after repeated reﬂections.

Recall that in Sec. II D, we found the time dependence of the ﬁeld energy under the
assumption that at time t all rays are going to the right. This assumption is not very
restrictive in the case of a rational rotation number since, as we found in Sec. IV B, the ﬁeld
develops wave packets that become narrower with time, so (2.20) and (2.21) hold for the
asymptotic behavior of the energy. Note that (2.20) expresses the Doppler shift factor in
terms of the derivatives of the map G. This gives a very close relation between the dynamics
and the behavior of the wave packets.

Proposition IV.1 Let α and β be such that τ (gα,β) = p/q, and that the map G := Gα,β has
a stable periodic orbit Θq = {θ1, . . . , θq} such that (Gq)′(θ1) < 1. Assume that the initial
electromagnetic ﬁeld in the cavity is not zero at some space-time point for which the phase
of the ﬁrst reﬂection from the moving mirror is in the basin of attraction of Θq.

Then the energy of the ﬁeld in the resonator will be asymptotically increasing at an

exponential rate:

E(t) ∼ exp

ln D(Θq)
p

(

.

t
)

(4.1)

Proof. First notice that the number of reﬂections from the moving mirror per unit time
reaches a well deﬁned limit (one and the same for all rays) – the inverse of the rotation
number. Secondly, as was discussed in Sec. II, at reﬂection from the moving mirror at
phase θ, a wave packet becomes narrower by a factor of D(θ) (2.11), which leads to a
D(θ) times increase in its energy. Asymptotically, the phases at reﬂection will approach the
stable periodic orbit Θq = {θ1, . . . , θq} of gα,β. The Doppler factors at reﬂection will tend
correspondingly to {D(θ1), . . . , D(θq)} (2.11). Hence, in time p each ray will undergo q
reﬂections from the moving mirror, the total Doppler shift factor along the periodic orbit
Θq being

D(Θq) :=

D(θi) =

1 − a′(θi)
1 + a′(θi)

.

q

Yi=1

On the other hand, the deﬁnition of the map G as the advance in the time between
successive reﬂections from the moving mirror yields θi = Gi−1(θ1). The chain rule applied
to the explicit expression (2.14) for G yields

(Gq−1)′(θ1) =

G′(θj) =

1 + a′(θj)
1 − a′(θj+1)

,

q−1

Yj=1

q

Yi=1

q−1

Yj=1

21

which gives the following expression for D(Θq) [cf. (2.20)]:

D(Θq) :=

1 − a′(θ1)
1 + a′(θq)

(Gq−1)′(θ1)

−1

=

1 − a′(θ1)
1 + a′(θq)

(G1−q)′(θq) .

(4.2)

i
Hence, the energy density grows by a factor of D(Θq)2. Since after q reﬂections the wave
packet is concentrated in a length D(Θq) times smaller, the total energy grows by a factor
of D(Θq) in p units of time, which implies (4.1).

h

The quantities (Gn)′(θ) that appear in (4.2) have been studied intensively in dynamical
systems theory since they control the growth of inﬁnitesimal perturbations of trajectories.
Similarly, they are factors that multiply the invariant densities when they get transported,
as we will see in (4.3).

We found numerically the total Doppler factors D(Θq) for some particular choices of
In Fig. 6, log10 D(Θ6) is shown for diﬀerent values of β and for α ∈
the parameters.
Nβ(1/6). Obviously, the maximum value of D(Θ6) depends strongly on β, becoming inﬁnite
for β = 1/2π and some α ∈ N1/2π(1/6). For smaller values of β, the Doppler factor is
much smaller. Moreover, the width of the frequency locking intervals for small β is small,
so the probability of hitting a frequency locking interval with arbitrarily chosen α and β is
small. [The likelihood of frequency locking for the Arnold’s map (3.2) is studied numerically
in [27].]

In the case when Herman’s theorem apply, the derivatives of Gn are bounded indepen-
dently of n, which causes the energy of the system to be bounded for all times, which is
proved in the following proposition.

Proposition IV.2 If Gα,β is such that it satisﬁes the hypothesis of Herman’s theorem, then
the energy density remains bounded for all times.

Proof. In such a case Gα,β = h−1 ◦ R ◦ h with h diﬀerentiable and R a rotation by τ (gα,β).
Therefore Gn

α,β = h−1 ◦ Rn ◦ h and

(Gn

α,β)′(θ) = (h−1)′(Rn ◦ h(θ)) (Rn)′(h(θ)) h′(θ) = (h−1)′(Rn ◦ h(θ)) h′(θ)

because (Rn)′ = 1. The two factors in the right-hand side of the above equation are bounded
uniformly in θ and n. Thus, the “local Doppler factors” (2.20) will be bounded, which implies
the boundedness of the energy (2.21).

There is an interesting connection between the invariant densities of the system and the

growth of the electromagnetic energy density.

Recall that if a density µ is invariant, µ(G(θ)) = µ(θ)/G′(θ). Hence, if the density
µ never vanishes, G′(θ) = µ(θ)/µ(G(θ)) and, therefore, (Gi)′(θ) = µ(θ)/µ(Gi(θ)). Let us
assume that there is only one characteristic passing through the space-time point (t, x), and
this characteristic is going to the right. Then, using the notations of Sec. II C, we can write
the energy density at (t, x) as [cf. (2.20)]

22

T 00(t, x) =

1 − a′(θ−
−n−)
1 + a′(θ−
0 )

−n−))

µ(Gn−(θ−
µ(θ−
−n−)

#

"

2

T 00(t0, x−

0 ) .

(4.3)

In the general case [with two characteristics through (x, t)], one can use (2.18) and (2.19)

to prove the following result:

Lemma IV.1 If a system has an invariant density µ which is bounded away from zero, then
the electromagnetic energy density of a C 1 initial data is smaller than Cµ2 for all times.

In the cases that Herman’s theorem applies, there is an invariant density bounded away
from zero (and also bounded). Hence, we conclude that there are values of the amplitude of
mirror’s oscillations for which the energy density of the ﬁeld remains bounded. This set is
typically a Cantor set interspersed with values for which the energy increases exponentially.
Some other results about the behavior of the energy with respect to time and parameters

are obtained in [2].

We call attention to the fact that [18] contains examples of analytic maps whose rotation
numbers are very closely approximated by rationals and that are arbitrarily close to a rota-
tion such that they preserve no invariant density and, therefore, are not smoothly conjugate
to a rotation.

It is also known that for all rotation numbers one can construct C 2−ε maps arbitrarily
close to rotations with this rotation number and such that they do not preserve any invariant
measures [23]. It is a testament to the ubiquity of these maps that these questions were
motivated and found applications in the theory of classiﬁcation of C ∗ algebras.

D. The behavior for small amplitude and universality

We note that, even if all the motions of the mirror lead to a circle map as in (2.15), it
does not seem clear to us that all the maps of the circle can appear as F , G for a certain a.
This makes it impossible to conclude that the theory of generic circle maps applies directly
to obtain conclusions for a generic motion of the mirror. Of course, all the conclusions of the
general theory that apply to all maps of the circle apply to our case. Those conclusions that
require non-degeneracy assumptions will need that we verify the assumptions. Nevertheless,
the very developed mathematical theory of generic or universal circle maps cannot be applied
without caution to maps that appear as the result of generic or universal oscillations of the
mirror.

One aspect that we have found makes a big diﬀerence with the generic theory is the
situation where the mirror oscillates with small amplitude, i.e., aε(t) = ¯a + εb(t) with b
a periodic function of zero average and period 1, and ε ≪ 1. The ﬁrst parameter, ¯a, is
the average length of the resonator, while ε = 0 is called the “nonlinearity parameter” for
obvious reasons. If we denote by F¯a,ε and G¯a,ε the corresponding 2-parametric families of
maps of the circle constructed according to (2.14), then we have, for three times diﬀerentiable
families,

23

F¯a,ε(t) = t + 2¯a + 2εb(t + ¯a) + 2ε2b′(t + ¯a)b(t + ¯a) + O(ε3) ,

G¯a,ε(t) = t + 2¯a + ε[b(t) + b(t + 2¯a)] + ε2b′(t + 2¯a)[b(t) + b(t + 2¯a)] + O(ε3) .

(4.4)

Note that the term of order ε has vanishing average. As we will immediately show, this
property causes that some well known generic properties of families of circle mappings do
not hold for families of maps constructed as in (2.14).

Indeed, if we consider the expressions for small amplitude developed in (4.4), we can

write the maps as

Hε(t) = t + 2¯a + εH1(t) + ε2H2(t) + O(ε3) .

Since the conclusions of the theory of circle maps are independent of the coordinate system
chosen, it is natural to try to choose a coordinate system where these expressions are as
simple as possible. Hence, we choose hε(t) := t + εη(t), a perturbation of the identity, and
consider h−1
ε ◦ Hε ◦ hε, which is just Hε in another system of coordinates, related to the
original one by hε. Then, up to terms of order ε3, we have

h−1
ε ◦ Hε ◦ hε(t) = t + 2¯a + ε [η(t) − η(t + 2¯a) + H1(t)]

+ε2 {η′(t + 2¯a)η(t + 2¯a) − η′(t + 2¯a) [η(t) + H1(t)] + H ′

1(t)η(t) + H2(t)} .

(4.5)

η(t + 2¯a) dt =

We would like to choose η in such a way that the ε term is not present. Note that since
H1(t) dt = 0, H1
is smooth and 2¯a is Diophantine, a well-known result (see, e.g., [13, Sec. XIII.4]) shows that
R
in such a case we can obtain one η satisfying

η(t) dt, this is impossible unless

H1(t) dt = 0. When

R

R

R

η(t) − η(t + 2¯a) + H1(t) = 0

(4.6)

[Such η is conventionally obtained by using Fourier coeﬃcients. Note that in
and η = 0.
ηk(e2πik2¯a − 1) =
(H1)k. If H1 is smooth, the Fourier
Fourier coeﬃcients, (4.6) amounts to
coeﬃcients decrease fast and if 2¯a is Diophantine, then (e2πik2¯a − 1)−1 does not grow too
fast. For more details we refer to the reference above.]

d

b

Since for the functions F¯a,ε and G¯a,ε the term of order ε has a zero average, we can
transform these functions into lifts of rotations plus O(ε2). This implies, in particular, that
their rotation number is τ (F¯a,ε) = τ (G¯a,ε) = 2¯a + O(ε2). One could wonder if it would be
possible to continue the process and eliminate also to order ε2.

If we look at the ε2 terms in (4.5), we see that η′(t)η(t) = 0, and, when η is chosen as in

(4.6),

η′(t + 2¯a)[η(t) + H1(t)] = η′(t + 2¯a)η(t + 2¯a) ,

which also has average zero. Therefore, a necessary condition for the ε2 term in h−1
to be zero is H ′

1(t)η(t) + H2(t) = 0.

ε ◦Hε◦hε(t)

For the F¯a,ε in (4.4) we see that F2 has zero average. Nevertheless, the term F ′

1(t)η(t)
does not in general have average zero as can be seen in examples. Hence, we see that the
rotation number indeed changes by an order which is O(ε2) and not higher in general. This

24

property is not generic for families of circle maps starting with a rotation 2¯a and it puts
them outside of the universality classes considered in [29,31], etc., since the correspondence
between rotation numbers and parameters is not the same.

According to the geometric picture of renormalization developed in [31], the space of
circle maps is divided into slices of rational rotation numbers, which are – in appropriate
sense – parallel. In that language – in which we think of families of circle maps as curves in
the space of mappings – the families of advance maps F¯a,ε and G¯a,ε (for ﬁxed ¯a) have second
order tangency to the foliation of rational rotation numbers rather than being transversal.
Hence, the scaling predicted by universality theory should be true for ε2 in place of ε. We
have not veriﬁed this prediction, but we expect to come back to it soon.

E. Schwarzian derivative in the problem of moving mirrors

Fulling and Davies [9] calculated the energy-momentum tensor in the two-dimensional
quantum ﬁeld theory of a massless scalar ﬁeld inﬂuenced by the motion of a perfectly re-
ﬂecting mirror (see also [36]). They obtained that the “renormalized” vacuum expectation
value of the energy density radiated by a moving mirror into initially empty space is

T 00(u) = −

F ′′′(u)
F ′(u)

−

2

3
2  

F ′′(u)
F ′(u) !

1
24π 


,





where u = t − x, and F is related to the law of the motion of the mirror, x = a(t), by (2.14).
The right-hand side of this equation is nothing but (up to a constant factor) the Schwarzian
derivative of F – a diﬀerential operator which naturally appears in complex analysis, e.g.,
it is invariant under a fractional linear transformation; vanishing Schwarzian derivative of
a function is the necessary and suﬃcient condition that the function is fractional linear
transformation, etc. More interestingly, the Schwarzian derivative has been used as an
important tool in the proof of several important theorems in the theory of circle maps – see,
e.g., [21,37]. In the light of the connection between the solutions of the wave equation in a
periodically pulsating domain and the theory of circle maps it is not impossible that this is
not just a coincidence.

V. CONCLUSION

Using the method of characteristics for solving the wave equation, we reformulated the
problem of studying the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a resonator with a periodically oscillating
wall into the language of circle maps. Then we used some results of the theory of circle maps
in order to make predictions about the long time behavior of the ﬁeld. We found that many
results in the theory of circle maps have a directly observable physical meaning. Notably,
for a typical family of mirror motions we expect that the electromagnetic energy grows
exponentially fast in a dense set of intervals in the parameters. Nevertheless, it remains
bounded for all times for a Cantor set of parameters that has positive measure.

25

There are several advantages of the approach presented here. First, it allows us to
understand better the time evolution of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the resonator and the
mechanism of the change in the ﬁeld energy. Second, the predictions are based on the
general theory of circle maps so they are valid for any periodic motion of the mirror; let
us also emphasize that our method is non-perturbative. Last, but not least, for a given
motion of the mirror, one can easily make certain predictions about the behavior of the ﬁeld
by simply calculating the rotation number of the corresponding circle map, and without
solving any partial diﬀerential equations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was partially supported by N.S.F. grants.

26

REFERENCES

∗

†

E-mail address: llave@math.utexas.edu.

E-mail address: npetrov@math.utexas.edu.

[1] N. Balazs, J. Math. Anal. Appl. 3, 472 (1961); J. Cooper, ibid. 174, 67 (1993); J. Dit-

trich, P. Duclos, and P. ˇSeba, Phys. Rev. E 49, 3535 (1994).

[2] J.

Dittrich,

P.
http://www.ma.utexas.edu/mp_arc.

Duclos,

and

N.

Gonzalez,

Preprint

97-269

in

[3] J. Cooper, IEEE Transac. Ant. Prop. 41, 1365 (1993).

[4] C. K. Cole and W. C. Schieve, Phys. Rev. A 52, 4405 (1995).

[5] G. T. Moore, J. Math. Phys. 11, 2679 (1970); V. V. Dodonov, A. B. Klimov, and
D. E. Nikonov, ibid. 34, 2742 (1993); 34, 3391 (1993); C. K. Law, C. K. Law, Phys.
Rev. A 49, 433 (1994); 51, 2537 (1995); C. K. Cole, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Texas
at Austin, 1996; H. Johnston and S. Sarkar, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29, 1741 (1996).

[6] C. K. Law, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1931 (1994).

[7] W. C. Henneberger and H. J. Schulte, J. Appl. Phys. 37, 2189 (1965).

[8] J. Cooper and W. Strauss, Ind. J. Math. 25, 671 (1976); G. Popov and T. Rangelov,

Osaka J. Math. 26, 881 (1989).

[9] S. A. Fulling and P. C. W. Davies, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 348, 393 (1976).

[10] F. John, Partial Diﬀerential Equations 4th ed (Springer, New York, 1982), Sec. 2.4.

[11] P. R. Garabedian, Partial Diﬀerential Equations (Wiley, New York, 1964), Ch. 4.

[12] H. F. Weinberger, A First Course in Partial Diﬀerential Equations with Complex Vari-

ables and Transform Methods (Blaisdell, New York, 1965), Ch. 1.

[13] M. R. Herman, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. 49, 5 (1979).

[14] A. Katok and B. Hasselblatt, Introduction to the Modern Theory of Dynamical Systems

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).

[15] W. de Melo and S. van Strien, One-Dimensional Dynamics (Springer, Berlin, 1993),

Ch. I.

[16] H. Poincar´e, J. Math. Pures et Appl. (4. s´erie) 1, 167 (1885).

[17] A. Denjoy, J. Math. Pures et Appl. (9. s´erie) 11 333 (1932).

[18] V. I. Arnold, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 25, 21 (1961) (Russian); English trans-

lation: Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. (2) 46, 213 (1965).

27

[19] C. E. Wayne, in Dynamical Systems and Probabilistic Methods in Partial Diﬀerential
Equations (Berkeley, CA, 1994) Lectures in Appl. Math., 31 (Amer. Math. Soc., Prov-
idence, RI, 1996), p. 3.

[20] J. Moser, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa (3) 20, 499 (1966).

[21] J.-C. Yoccoz, Ann. Sci. ´Ecole Norm. Sup. (4) 17, 333 (1984).

[22] Y. Katznelson and D. Ornstein, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 9, 643 (1989).

[23] J. Hawkins and K. Schmidt, Invent. Math. 66, 511 (1982).

[24] D. Ruelle, Elements of Diﬀerentiable Dynamics and Bifurcation Theory (Academic

Press, Boston, 1989), Ch. 2.

[25] A. M. Davie, Nonlinearity 9, 421 (1996).

[26] M. H. Jensen, P. Bak, and T. Bohr, Phys. Rev. A 30, 1960 (1984).

[27] O. E. Lanford III, Physica 14D, 403 (1985).

[28] G. ´Swi¸atek, Comm. Math. Phys. 119, 109 (1988).

[29] S. J. Shenker, Physica D 5, 405 (1982).

[30] P. Cvitanovi´c, B. Shraiman, and B. S¨oderberg, Phys. Scripta 32, 263 (1985).

[31] O. E. Lanford III, in Statistical Mechanics and Field Theory: Mathematical Aspects
(Groningen, 1985) Lecture Notes in Phys., 257 (Springer, Berlin, 1986), p. 176; in
Nonlinear Evolution and Chaotic Phenomena (Noto, 1987) NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser.
B Phys., 176 (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 25.

[32] J. A. Glazier and A. Libchaber, IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems 35, 790 (1988).

[33] Y. Pomeau and P. Manneville, Comm. Math. Phys. 74, 189 (1980).

[34] G. E. Forsythe, M. A. Malcolm, and C. B. Moller, Computer Methods for Mathematical

Computations (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs), Ch. 7.

[35] M. C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer, New York,
1990), Ch. 17; M. Brack and R. K. Bhaduri, Semiclassical Physics (Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass., 1997), Ch. 5.

[36] V. M. Mostepanenko and N. N. Trunov, The Casimir Eﬀect and Its Applications

(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997), Sec. 2.7.

[37] M. R. Herman, Bol. Soc. Brasil. Mat. 16, 45 (1985); J. Graczyk and G. ´Swi¸atek, Comm.

Math. Phys. 176, 227 (1996).

28

FIGURES

(t,x)

γ+

t

+

θ

0

−

θ

0

γ−

γ+

γ−

t0

(t0,x0

−)

(t0,x0

+)

29

FIG. 1. Finding A(t, x) by the method of characteristics.

∆′

δ

 ∆

 m

FIG. 2. Reﬂection by the moving mirror.

30

0.33

τ

0.23

1/3

4/13

3/10

2/7

3/11

1/4

2/9

3/13

1/5

2/11

1/6

1/7

0.13

0.34

0.36

0.4

0.42

0.38

α

FIG. 3. A part of the graph of τ (gα,1/2π) vs. α.

31

0.5
x

1

FIG. 4. Development of the piecewise-constant structure of g6n

0.2545, 0.1 (the rotation number of
0.2545, 0.1 are plotted for n = 1 (dotted line), n = 5 (dashed line),

g0.2545, 0.1 is 1/6). Graphs of g6n
n = 10 (long dashed line), n = 100 (solid line).

g6n

0.5

1

0

0

32

dµ/dm

30

20

10

0

0

FIG. 5. Density of the invariant measures for β = 0.1 and α = 0.253 (dashed line), α = 0.2539

(solid line), and α = 0.253975 (dotted line).

0.5
x

1

33

1.0152

D(Θ

6)

3

2

1

)
6
/
1
(
β

N
∈
α

 
 
r
o
f
 
 
)

Θ
D

(

6

 

0
1
g
o
l

β=1/2π

1.0000

0

α−α

c

6×10−7

β=0.15

β=0.14

β=0.10

β=0.12

0
0.24

0.29

α

0.34

FIG. 6. A log-linear graph of the total Doppler factor for gα,β in the phase locking interval
of rotation number 1/6 for diﬀerent β. The insert [linear-linear graph of D(Θ6) vs. α − αc] calls
attention to the square-root behavior at edges; αc is the value of α at the left end of N0.14(1/6).

34

