Photonic quantum ring

J. C. Ahn, K. S. Kwak, B. H. Park, H. Y. Kang, J. Y. Kim, and O’Dae Kwon
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, 790-784, Korea.
E-mail: odkwon@postech.ac.kr
(July 5, 2014)

index in azimuthal direction(nM

nef f [1]).

≃

8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We report a quantum ring-like toroidal cavity nat-
urally formed in a vertical-cavity-like active microdisk
plane due to Rayleigh’s band of whispering gallery modes.
The √T -dependent redshift and a square-law property of
microampere-range threshold currents down to 2 µA are con-
sistent with a photonic quantum wire view, due to whispering
gallery mode-induced dimensional reduction.

PACS number: 42.55.Sa, 78.66.-w, 42.60.Da

For the last several years, there have been inten-
sive developments of microdisk semiconductor lasers
of whispering gallery(WG) modes for low-power and
high-density photonic array applications. These ef-
forts of earlier photo-pumped thumbtack-type WG lasers
[1] have been evolving to photonic-wire lasers [2] and
electro-pumped thumbtack-type WG lasers [3,4] of sub-
milliampere threshold currents.
In this letter, we
demonstrate a cylindrical vertical-cavity surface-emitting
laser(VCSEL)-like diode that exhibits WG modes with
unusual photonic quantum ring(PQR) characteristics
such as µA-range threshold currents and spectral √T -
dependence, in addition to the usual VCSEL mode. We
will thus illustrate and analyze the two-threshold behav-
ior of successive lasings, ﬁrst the PQR and then the VC-
SEL as well. Indeed, the quantum wire behavior of the
PQR is vividly demonstrated in the √T -dependent spec-
tral peak shift data. We note that the quantum-ring-like
WG modes are naturally formed in the circumferential
Rayleigh band region [5] of the active microdisk of a reg-
ular multi-quantum-well VCSEL-like structure but with-
out any intentional and real quantum ring patterning.

The PQR device diﬀers from the previous WG lasers
[1–4,6] in that the vertical conﬁnement is improved by
the top and bottom DBR layers, and that stripe or seg-
mented top electrodes are used for vertical output cou-
pling. The metal-organic vapor-phase epitaxy-grown de-
vice employs a one-λ thick active layer with four 80
˚A Al0.11Ga0.89As quantum wells(QWs), whose details
In the active
have been described elsewhere [8,9,12].
disk plane, the PQR region is deﬁned by Rayleigh’s
bandwidth, WRayleigh = (φ/2)(1
nef f /n), where the
WG mode occurs, which is well described in Ref. [7]:
Rayleigh’s annular band is deﬁned by the active disk’s
radius R(= φ/2) for outer boundary and the inner reﬂec-
tion point rin = RnM /n, where n is the refractive index
of the active medium and nM is the eﬀective refractive

−

1

FIG. 1. Calculated WG mode ring. (a) Annular Rayleigh
band with R = 7.5 µm, WRayleigh = 0.36 µm, and M = 188.
Azimuthal maxima region generates the WG ring while all
other ripples are ﬁltered out with -9 dB cutoﬀ in this plot. (b)
An exploded segment shows the eﬀective toroidal structure of
the PQR, where R is the index-guided outer limit and rin is
the inner reﬂection limit which may also be reinforced by gain
guiding. The radial evanescent ﬁeld results from forward and
backward helical traveling waves, and its intensity peaks at a
distance t

1 µm from the outer boundary.

≤

The calculated proﬁle of the annular WG emission
based on Rayleigh’s Bessel function analysis is shown in
Fig. 1(a) for our device with R = 7.5 µm. The azimuthal
mode number is rather large here, M = 2πRnef f /λ =
188, and hence the 376 azimuthal peaks are not well dis-
tinguishable, unlike the intra-cavity axial VCSEL mode
patterns being easily resolved as shown below. The ex-
ploded segment, Fig. 1(b), shows cross-sectional details
of the one-λ thick toroidal cavity of the PQR, formed
by the vertical DBRs, together with the in-plane annu-
lar Rayleigh conﬁnement, which then allows forward and
backward helical wave propagations of the intra-toroid
WG modes, evanescently leading to the extracavity emis-
sion in radial direction [9].

FIG. 2. Microscope pictures of the PQR laser. The emis-
sion is partly blocked due to the stripe electrode. (a) I = 3
µA, where a faint evanescent mode image appears indicating
the onset of the toroid transparency; (b) I = 12 µA, near
the PQR threshold; (c) I = 11.5 mA, right below the VCSEL
threshold; (d) I = 12 mA, at the VCSEL threshold.

∼

∼

We now illustrate unusual two-threshold successive las-
ing behaviors with the near-ﬁeld micrographs of a 15-
µm-diameter device as shown in Fig. 2. The annular
PQR emission patterns in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), exhibit-
ing an onset of transparency of
3 µA and a threshold
of
12 µA respectively, correspond to the conventional
WG lasers, which is extracavity evanescent ﬁeld emis-
sion [1]. There occurs tremendous intensity buildup with
increasing injection currents so that neutral density ﬁl-
ters were used in taking pictures of Figs. 2(c) and 2(d).
Nevertheless, the ring-shape emission pattern and spec-
tral behaviors remain mostly unchanged. As the injec-
tion current increases above the second(VCSEL) thresh-
old level of
12 mA, the emission of intra-VCSEL-cavity
high-order transverse axial mode with 10-fold rotational
symmetry appears [12]. We also note that, after the VC-
SEL threshold, the mode energies in the toroidal cavity
split into intracavity VCSEL mode and extracavity PQR
WG modes, and that recent studies of ultralow threshold
VCSELs may have to consider this mode split loss.

∼

We now mention some previous reports [10,11] of ob-
serving WG modes from VCSEL structures with distin-
guishable azimuthal peak patterns, even though the ob-
served WG mode patterns size-wise seem to be rather
intracavity-like. However, since the reports never dis-
cuss the temperature dependence as described below, a
direct comparison with our results is impossible. Oth-
erwise, perhaps due to submicron azimuthal mode spac-
ings, there has been no report of distinguishable WG
patterns actually observed [1,4].

2

FIG. 3. Light-current curves of the PQR and VCSEL
modes. We note that data ﬂuctuations occur in the low cur-
rent region especially for the PQR spectral peak measure-
ments. The microprobe for PQR measurements had a collec-
tion eﬃciency of
20% within a given radial segment. The
inset shows typical spectra, at I = 5 mA for PQR and at 13
mA for VCSEL.

∼

The room temperature CW light-current data for the
PQR device in Fig. 3 were collected by reading spectral
peak intensities that become resolvable for I > 400 µA
with a microprobe made of a tapered single mode ﬁber
and a spectrum analyzer (HP model 70951A). After the
VCSEL threshold, the portion of curve for the PQR emis-
sion was not separable from that of the VCSEL, be-
cause of data overlapping due to a monitoring micro-
scope placed right above the device. The near-vertical
5◦,
PQR emission, with an oﬀ-normal probe angle of
0.5 nm as compared with
had a spectral linewidth of
the VCSEL linewidth of
0.2 nm. The broadened PQR
linewidth due to peripheral surface roughness will be dis-
cussed later.

∼

∼

∼

Moreover, the above situation may involve a possible
universal mechanism of dimensional reduction [16], and
is also eﬀectively analogous to the enhancement of the
spontaneous emission factor β, which is the key inter-
est of the various microcavity structures suggested such
as microdisk, microdroplet, and photonic bandgap struc-
tures [17]. We also note that wavelength shifts of the
40◦C, which
PQR mode level oﬀ in the region of T
might solve the nagging problem of the spectral wander-
ing due to local device heating associated with typical
high-density laser arrays.

≥

The Rayleigh toroid, associated with the PQR emis-
sion as described above, is to conﬁne the WG modal
manifolds of the above-mentioned helically twisted trav-
eling waves. We thus propose a concept of 2-dimensional
pseudo-quantum rings for providing carriers needed for
the excitation of the WG modal manifolds, which would
take place well below the transparency of the whole
QW plane [18]. In order to estimate the threshold cur-
rent of the WG emission, we now assume the toroidal
structure of our device as a concentric array of PQRs
whose lateral characteristic unit length is deﬁned by
half the wavelength(λP QR/2), being much larger than
de Broglie’s wavelength, to reﬂect the nature of paraxial
lightwave characterized by transverse peaks with a half-
cycle interval. For such a pseudo-quantum wire, assumed
to provide the carriers needed for the individual PQR,
the transparency carrier density is calculated by using a
formula [14], Ntr = (√2mC/π¯h)
1.072pkB(T + 273).
The overall transparency current, I Rayleigh
, can now
be calculated by multiplying the transparency current,
I P QR
for a single quantum-wire ring
tr
with the number(χ) of concentric rings within the ac-
tive Rayleigh WG band so that I Rayleigh
=
WRayleigh/(λP QR/2nef f )Ntrπφe/(ητ ), where φ is the de-
vice diameter, η the quantum eﬃciency, and τ the carrier
lifetime. The additional terms [14] due to the intrinsic
loss αi = 5 cm−1 [19] and the mirror loss are then in-
cluded in the ﬁnal expression for the threshold current:

= Ntrπφe/ητ ,

χI P QR
tr

×

≡

tr

tr

+ Ii + Imirror

2
)φ

+ (

πdeαiw
1Dτ
2g

′

2
)φ

= (

Ith = I Rayleigh
tr
πnef f eNtrw
λP QRτ
dew ln R−1
1Dτ

+ (

2g

′

)φ,

(1)

′

1

×

−

≡

where w
nef f /n = WRayleigh/R is a normalized
Rayleigh bandwidth, d is the active region thickness, and
10−16 cm2 [19] is the diﬀerential gain co-
1D = 8
g
eﬃcient. This formula indicates a square-law property,
φ2, excluding the relatively small contribution from
Ith
the DBR mirror loss. A comparison between experiment
and theory is shown in Fig. 5, and it indeed suggests an
excellent agreement except some systematic discrepan-
cies presumably due to substantial scattering losses as-
sociated with microscopically rough peripheral structures

∝

3

FIG. 4. Temperature dependent spectra measured with a
constant injection current, I = 12 mA. Circles represent spec-
tral data for the VCSEL, while squares are for the PQR, in-
dicating a √T -dependence.

−

To distinguish the PQR WG mode from the VCSEL
mode, we present the wavelength shift data for both as
a function of the device temperature in Fig. 4 [13]. It is
notable that the spectral shift of the PQR mode shows a
distinct √T -dependence, while the VCSEL mode wave-
length increases linearly at a rate of 0.07 nm/◦C. The
best ﬁts to both curves in Fig. 4 are given as λP QR =
0.42√T
18 + 794.3 [nm] and λV CSEL = 0.07T + 794.3
[nm], respectively. One of the results in Ref. [15] shows
linear T -dependence for both the index-dominated spec-
tral change for short resonant cavities like the VCSEL
and the gain-dominated spectral change for long cavities
like the edge-emitting diode. The above measured tem-
perature coeﬃcient of 0.07 nm/◦C for the intracavity VC-
SEL mode is consistent with the index-dominated mech-
anism. On the other hand, the 3-dimensional Rayleigh
toroid for the PQR emission is to be classiﬁed as a long
cavity conﬁning the helical wave propagation along the
circumference of the active disk, and hence the PQR
emission ought to be gain-dominated. The observed spec-
tral √T -dependence then implies a gain-induced lasing,
and is best explained by the quantum wire assumption,
i.e., √T -dependent transparency condition [14].

We now pay special attention to the √T -dependent
characteristics of the PQR because the PQRs would oc-
cupy the peripheral region of the four QW active disk,
which should have a uniform carrier distribution. How-
ever, the observed two-threshold emission behavior indi-
cates a signiﬁcantly lowered transparency level for the
PQR region as seen in Fig. 2(a), compared with that of
the central region of the QW plane. A possible reason
for this is the Rayleigh conﬁnement mechanism leading
to the 3-dimensional toroidal cavity. This peculiar con-
ﬁnement appears to limit the number of guided resonant
modes drastically, which in turn reduces the amount of
energy required for the overall PQR mode excitation.

[9]. As the device diameter decreases, the Rayleigh band-
width WRayleigh also decreases, and in turn the scattering
loss due to the peripheral surface roughness is now more
serious and thus becomes the dominant loss factor. This
loss aﬀects the observed threshold currents: for instance,
Ith = 2 µA, larger than the calculated value Ith = 0.8 µA
for φ = 6µm, as tabulated in Fig. 5. The peripheral
roughness is also related to the broad linewidth of the
PQR mode, 0.5 nm, which is relatively large compared
with the VCSEL linewidth. Reﬁned epitaxy, lithogra-
phy and etching processes [12] for smoother cylindrical
surface, minimizing the scattering loss [1,4], will further
narrow the linewidth of the PQR emission like that of
VCSELs.

FIG. 5. Size-dependent PQR threshold currents. The solid
curve is from Eq. (1) and the circles are from PQR threshold
currents measured.

∼

In summary, we have observed ultralow threshold cur-
rents of
µA range, and two-threshold successive lasings
of the PQR and VCSEL modes, from a toroidal cavity
naturally formed in a VCSEL-like microcavity structure.
We have also shown the √T -dependence of the spectral
peak shift and a square-law behavior of threshold cur-
rents, consistent with the PQR analysis. Further work
for lowered scattering loss is also under way for achiev-
ing linewidth-narrowed, submicro-ampere laser diodes so
that the high-density integration of photonics to electron-
ics become a reality.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Drs. R. E. Slusher, D. A. B. Miller,
and L. M. F. Chirovsky for helpful discussions, and H.
Han, H. K. Shin, and B. S. Yoo for technical assistance.
This work was supported by KT, Samsung Co., and
KOSEF and ADD through KAIST.

4

[1] S. L. McCall, A. F. J. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. J. Pearton,
and R. A. Logan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 60, 289 (1992).
[2] J. P. Zhang, D. Y. Chu, S. L. Wu, S. T. Ho, W. G. Bi, C.
W. Tu, R. C. Tiberio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2678 (1995).
[3] A. F. Levi, R. E. Slusher, S. L. McCall, T. Tanbun-Ek,
D. L. Coblentz, and S. J. Pearton, Electron. Lett. 23,
1010 (1992).

[4] T. Baba, M. Fujita, A. Sasaki, M. Kihara, and R. Watan-

abe, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 878 (1997).

[5] Lord Rayleigh, “The problem of the whispering gallery”,
Scientiﬁc Papers 5, pp. 617-620. (Cambridge University,
Cambridge, England, 1912).

[6] I. Ury, S. Margalit, N. Bar-chaim, M. Yust, D. Wilt, and
A. Yariv, Appl. Phys. Lett. 36, 629 (1980); A. F. Levi,
R. E. Slusher, S. L. McCall, S. J. Pearton, and W. S.
Hobson, Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 2021 (1993).

[7] M. K. Chin, D. Y. Chu, and S. T. Ho, J. Appl. Phys. 75,

3302 (1994).

[8] O’Dae Kwon, J. C. Ahn, and H. Y. Kang, Post-deadline
Paper Tech. Dig. OECC’97, Seoul, Korea, 8-11 July 1997,
pp. 6-7, paper PDP1-3.

[9] J. C. Ahn, H. Y. Kang, and O’Dae Kwon, Proc. SPIE
3283, pp. 241-251, Optoelectronics ’98, San Jose, CA,
24-30 January 1998.

[10] D. Arbel, L. Djaloshinski, and M. Orenstein,

in Di-
gest of the 15th IEEE International Semiconductor Laser
Conference(IEEE, Piscataway, N. J., 1996), p. 79; L.
Djaloshinski and M. Orenstein, Opt. Lett. 23, 364 (1998).
[11] H. Deng, Q. Deng and D. G. Deppe, Appl. Phys. Lett.
69, 3120 (1996); Q. Deng, H. Deng and D. G. Deppe,
Opt. Lett. 22, 463 (1997).

[12] J. C. Ahn, H. Y. Kang, N. J. Son, B. H. Park, K. S. Kwak,
Y. H. Lee and O’Dae Kwon, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 36, 2134
(1997). High-order transverse VCSEL modes here showed
T -dependent spectra as well; S . W. Lee, K. U. Chu, S.
W. Kim, S. Park, O’Dae Kwon, K. W. Goossen, and S.
S. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 3065 (1994).

[13] Details of temperature experiments will be published

elsewhere.

[14] A. Yariv, Appl. Phys. Lett. 53, 1033 (1988).
[15] G. W. Taylor and P. A. Evaldsson, IEEE J. Quantum

Electron. QE-30, 2262 (1994).

[16] For an example in 2 dimension of the QW plane with a
uniform carrier distribution, we may have a dynamically-
generated carrier concentration hump, a quantum-wire-
like one-dimensional nature, along the peripheral bound-
ary. This is analogous to the soaring water head at the
moment of a collision with the wall of a pier as the waves
rush and collapse.

[17] H. Yokoyama and S. D. Brorson, J. Appl. Phys. 66, 4801
(1989); Y. Yamamoto and R. E. Slusher, Physics Today
46, 66 (1993); Optical Processes in Microcavities, edited
by R. K. Chuang and A. J. Campillo (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1996), chapter 10.

[18] We have recently found that hollow cylindrical cavities
show similar PQR threshold characteristics as well. This
aspect will be reported elsewhere.

[19] P. S. Zory, Quantum well lasers (Academic, San Diego,

1993).

