9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-Pulsating Semiconductor Lasers: Theory and Experiment

C. R. Mirasso1, G.H.M. van Tartwijk2,∗, E. Hern´andez-Garc´ıa3,1, D. Lenstra2, S. Lynch4,

P. Landais4, P. Phelan 5, J. O’Gorman4, M. San Miguel3,1, and W. Els¨aßer6

1 Departament de F´ısica, Universitat de les Illes Balears, E-07071 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081,

1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

3 Instituto Mediterraneo de Estudios Avanzados IMEDEA, CSIC-UIB,

E-07071 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

4 Optronics Ireland, Physics Department, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland.

5 Physics Department, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland.

6 Institut f¨ur Angewandte Physik, Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Schloßgartenstraße 7,

∗ Present address: Philips Optoelectronics B.V, Prof. Holstlaan 4, 5656 AA Eindhoven,

62289 Darmstadt, Germany.

The Netherlands

(Published in IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 35, 764-770 (1999).)

Abstract

We report detailed measurements of the pump–current dependency of the

self-pulsating frequency of semiconductor CD lasers. A distinct kink in this

dependence is found and explained using rate–equation model. The kink

denotes a transition between a region where the self–pulsations are weakly

sustained relaxation oscillations and a region where Q–switching takes place.

Simulations show that spontaneous emission noise plays a crucial role for the

cross–over.

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Self-pulsating semiconductor lasers (SPSL’s) are of great interest owing to their potential

application in telecommunication systems as well as in optical data storage applications. In

particular, in the latter case they are realized as so-called narrow–stripe geometry CD lasers

where the self-pulsation is achieved via saturable absorption in the transverse dimension

limiting the active region. A profound knowledge and understanding of their operation

dynamics is therefore desired.

SPSL’s have been studied since the ﬁrst diode lasers became available in the late 1960s

[1]. These ﬁrst semiconductor lasers, although designed to operate in continuous wave

(CW) mode, showed self-induced pulsations of the light intensity due to a combination of

two reasons: (i) the laser resonance is internally excited through the nonlinear interaction

of various longitudinal laser modes, thus causing mode beating at very high frequency;

(ii) defects in the active material act as saturable absorbing areas, thus causing absorptive

Q-switching processes.

In the case of self-pulsations caused by saturable-absorbing eﬀects, the self-pulsation

frequency (SPF) dependence on the pump current was investigated in [2]. In later works the

self pulsations were attributed to undamped relaxation oscillations (RO) [3,4]. The precise

values of the ROF, as calculated from a small-signal analysis, and the actual SPF, highly

nonlinear, are however diﬀerent, the SPF being always smaller than the ROF [5].

Saturable absorption eﬀects, causing self-pulsations in stripe-geometry lasers have been

investigated since the early 1980s [6–8]. Saturable absorption is also responsible for self-

pulsations in double-section laser diodes [9]. A similar mechanism of dispersive Q-switching

has been invoked to describe self-pulsations in multisection Distributed Feedback Lasers

[10–12].

In this paper we study both experimentally and theoretically the dependence of the self-

pulsation frequency (SPF) of narrow–stripe geometry self-pulsating semiconductor lasers,

also known as CD–lasers, on the bias pump current. In these lasers, self–pulsation is induced

2

via saturable absorption in the transverse dimension of the active region. The rate–equation

model of Ref. [3] has been proven to be quite successful in describing the mechanism of

self-pulsation and has already been used with success in analyzing such lasers subject to

weak optical feedback [5]. There it was found that, with and without feedback, there are

two distinct regions in the SPF vs. pump–current curve, one where spontaneous emission

dominates the laser dynamics between pulses and one where spontaneous emission always

plays a minor role.

In section II we present detailed measurements of the SPF vs pump–current curve. This

curve conﬁrms most of the ﬁndings of [5], and also shows a distinct cross-over point dis-

tinguishing between linear and square–root–like behavior.

In section III we confront the

experimental results with a theoretical model, inspired by Ref. [3]. Its results agree qualita-

tively well with the experimental results, showing a distinct cross-over region. The location

of the cross-over region is shown to be determined by the spontaneous emission rate. In

Section IV we discuss the relationship between the SPF and the ROF using a small signal

analysis. We discuss the various bifurcations that are predicted by our model, and compare

it with the model of Ref. [5].

II. EXPERIMENT

We use a SHARP CD semiconductor laser diode, model LTO22MD. The laser emits a

continuous train of regular pulses with a frequency that depends on the bias pump current.

A bulk layer of AlGaAs constitutes the active layer of this Fabry-Perot cavity that emits

at 800–nm wavelength. The gain section is deﬁned by the p-electrical contact and has the

following approximate dimensions: 250–µm long, 2–µm wide, and 0.2–µm thick. A very

narrow contact of ∼ 2µm allows for current injection. Since the region capable of stimulated

emission extends to both sides beyond the narrow stripe of the current contact, the wings

of the optical ﬁeld distribution will interact with these unpumped, and therefore absorbing,

regions. In fact, these regions are saturably absorbing; when the optical intensity in the

3

wings of the mode is large enough, the electron–hole pair population in the unpumped region

reaches transparency, thus allowing a “self–Q–switched” pulse. There is no sharp boundary

between the pumped and unpumped regions, making carrier diﬀusion an important eﬀect.

Indeed, in the model of Ref. [3] carrier diﬀusion between the pumped and unpumped regions

is crucial for the appearance of self–pulsation.

The experimental set-up is illustrated in Fig. 1. The laser is temperature controlled by

a Peltier cooler at 20 C. It is DC biased by a low noise current supply. Laser emission is

collected by an anti-reﬂection coated 0.65 N.A. laser diode lens. The resulting parallel beam

is passed through a 30–dB isolator to avoid spurious eﬀects caused by optical feedback and

is launched into a 60–GHz photodiode (New Focus Model 1006). The converted electrical

signal is observed with a 22–GHz bandwidth spectrum analyzer (HP 8563A). The typical RF

spectrum of the SPSL is characterized by a main peak at the SPF, followed by overtones. The

uncertainty on the self-pulsation frequency measurement is mainly due to the measurement

of bias current, which has an error of less than 0.1 mA. The resolution of the spectrum

analyzer is 100 kHz and the video ﬁlter is 30 kHz.

For values near the threshold current, the low power emission makes it diﬃcult to observe

the signal. The value of the spectral density of the self pulsations is very close to the noise

level and also the width of the feature in the power spectrum is wider than at higher currents.

To overcome this problem, a small current modulation is applied to the device for injection

currents below 47 mA [13], [14]. Its power is kept suﬃciently low so that it does not aﬀect

the oscillation behaviour of the laser and does not induce any supplementary oscillation

phenomena, e.g. relaxation oscillation or self-pulsations originating from a cross modulation

of the carrier density. The self-pulsation frequency shows up as an enhancement of the

oscillation of the laser emission if the two frequencies coincide. This allows an accurate

determination of the SPF frequency close to threshold.

Figure 2 a shows the optical power and SPF as a function of the bias current. The L-I

curve has been recorded using an integrating sphere. It is assumed that all emitted power is

collected. The laser is characterized by a threshold current of ∼ 44 mA and a slope eﬃciency

4

of 0.22 mW/mA. The SPF varies from 1 to 4 GHz in a bias current range of 46 to 64 mA,

which was the maximum injection current we could reach with these devices. In the region of

the lasing threshold the experimental values present a square-root like behavior dependence

reminiscent of standard relaxation oscillations as exhibited by a CW-semiconductor laser.

For bias currents above 55 mA this dependence was no longer observed and the SP behavior

appears to have a more linear dependence on the bias current.

III. THEORY

In this section we use a simple model to explain the observed bias–current dependence

of the SPF. The investigated laser has a narrow–stripe geometry, which can be modeled in a

straightforward way using rate-equations [3] for the optical intensity S (suitably normalized

to represent the number of photons in the cavity), the number of electron–hole pairs N1 in

the pumped region, and the number of electron–hole pairs N2 in the unpumped (absorbing)

region:

= [g1(N1 − Nt1) + g2(N2 − Nt2) − κ]S + Rsp + FS(t),

dS
dt
dN1
dt
dN2
dt

J
e

N1
τs

N2
τs

=

−

− g1(N1 − Nt1)S −

= −

− g2(N2 − Nt2)S +

N1 − vN2
T12

,

N1/v − N2
T21

.

(1a)

(1b)

(1c)

where g1 (g2) is the gain coeﬃcient at the transparency number Nt1 (Nt2) in the pumped

(unpumped) region, κ is the total loss rate. Rsp = βspηspN1/τs is the spontaneous emission

rate, ηsp is the spontaneous quantum eﬃciency, βsp is the spontaneous emission factor and τs

is the carrier lifetime. FS(t) is a delta-correlated Langevin noise source [15] with correlation

< FS(t1)FS(t2) >= 2RspSδ(t1 − t2)/τs, J is the bias pump-current, e is the elementary

charge, v = V1/V2 is the volume ratio of pumped and unpumped region, T12 is the diﬀusion

time from the pumped region to the unpumped region, and T21 is the diﬀusion time from

unpumped to pumped region. These two diﬀusion times are interrelated through the volume

ratio v [3,5]:

5

v =

=

V1
V2

T12
T21

.

(2)

Our model (1a-1c) is a simpliﬁcation of the model used in Ref. [5], where the carrier de-

pendence of the carrier lifetime τs is taken into account using the well-known second order

expression for τ −1

s

in the carrier number Nj. Here, we neglect this dependence for the

moment, as it simpliﬁes the analytical work and qualitatively gives similar results.

Using the parameter values listed in Table 1, Eqs. (1a-1c) are numerically solved with a

standard algorithm [5]. In Figure 3 we show the resulting SPF-J curves, with and without

spontaneous emission noise. Each value of the curves is calculated from an average over 103

pulses. It is seen that the observed kink in the SPF-J curve is the result of spontaneous

emission noise. There is a shift of the kink towards larger currents upon increasing the

spontaneous emission level. For the values of table 1 and βsp = 1.3 × 10−6, Jxover ≈ 82 mA.

It should be noticed that we do not expect a quantitave agreement between experimental

and numerical results, since the model neglects important eﬀects, such as gain saturation.

Nevertheless, the qualitative trends are well reproduced allowing us to physically understand

the origin of the experimental features.

Figure 4 shows time traces of the intensity for diﬀerent bias currents. Clearly, the in-

terpulse intensity drastically increases with current in the vicinity of the kink. For currents

J << Jxover the interpulse intensity is well dominated by the spontaneous emission (panel

a)), while for currents J > Jxover spontaneous emission does not aﬀect the intensity signiﬁ-

cantly. The kink-current Jxover can be deﬁned as the highest current at which the interpulse

intensity is dominated by spontaneous emission noise. As can be seen in Eq. (1a) sponta-

neous emission increases the intensity generation rate with an amount Rsp. The eﬀect of this

on the self–pulsation process depends on the generation rate through stimulated emission

Rstim = [g1(N1 −Nt1)+g2(N2 −Nt2)]S. For currents J < Jxover, Rsp > Rstim in the interpulse

region while for J > Jxover, the contrary happens. Therefore, the kink pump current Jxover

could be mathematically identiﬁed through

Rsp ≡ Rstim(Jxover),

(3)

6

where the current dependence of Rstim reﬂects the need to solve Eq. (3) implicitly using all

three equations (1a-1c) at the time at which the intensity reaches the minimum.

The long–dashed curve in Fig. 3 is obtained by putting Rsp = 0 in Eq. (1a). In that

situation, the interpulse intensity becomes extremely small upon decreasing the pump cur-

rent. The smaller the interpulse intensity becomes, the longer it takes for the absorber to

reach transparency. When including noise (Rsp 6= 0), the interpulse intensity remains at a

much higher level in the same pump current interval because of the spontaneous emission

rate Rsp. This will signiﬁcantly increase the speed with which a new pulse is generated after

the previous one has depleted the absorber. We note that the Langevin noise source FS(t)

in Eq. (1a) is responsible for the timing jitter of the pulses. In the region J < Jxover a single

noise event in between pulses may signiﬁcantly delay or advance the birth of the next pulse,

causing substantial jitter. For pump currents above the cross–over, the relative eﬀect of

the noisy events, and hence the jitter, is much smaller. The existence of two pump current

regions with very diﬀerent jitter characteristics was also found in Ref. [5].

In ﬁgure 5 the maximum pulse intensity (Smax) and the minimum interpulse intensity

(Smin) vs. the bias current are shown. An abrupt change (note that the scale in panel c) is

logarithmic) of Smin can be seen at Jxover (while Smax takes it maximum value). The kink-

current Jxover is therefore identiﬁed as the highest current at which the interpulse intensity is

dominated by spontaneous emission noise. The kink also denotes the boundary between two

regimes that can be described as follows: For currents larger than Jxover the self-pulsation

has the character of undamped RO, while for currents below this value clear self-Q-switching

takes place. Obviously, for currents J > Jxover the absorber is not depleted deeply enough

to cause a Q-switch: as soon as transparency is reached, the absorber is bleached but the

pump is strong enough to prevent total bleaching. For currents J < Jxover, the pump is

small enough to allow total bleaching of the absorbing regions, after which the number of

electron–hole pairs in the absorbing region has to start all over again. No bifurcation in the

usual sense can, however, be attributed to this critical current.

In the next section, we will look at the relationship between ROF and SPF in more

7

detail.

IV. RELAXATION OSCILLATIONS AND SELF-PULSATIONS

In the previous section we introduced a simple model which provides an explanation for

the peculiar cross-over region in terms of the average level of spontaneous emission. Here we

will put our numerical ﬁndings in an analytical framework, which leads to a clearer picture

of the self-pulsation characteristics.

This is achieved by solving for the CW solutions of Eqs. (1a-1c) and investigating their

stability properties. First we look for laser threshold, which is deﬁned as the circumstance

for which the trivial solution (S = 0) looses stability in the absence of spontaneous emission.

We therefore put Rsp = 0 in Eq. (1a) and obtain:

g1 Nt1 + g2 Nt2 + κ

Nth =

g1 +
1
τs

g2 τs
T12 + v τs
1
T12

−

= Nth [

+

Jth
e

v
T12

τs
T12 + v τs

]

(4)

(5)

Using the parameters listed in Table 1, we ﬁnd Jth = 44.53 mA.

In total, Eqs. (1a-1c) have three possible CW solutions. Below threshold, only the

solution with S = 0 is physically meaningful (the other two have negative power). At

threshold the solution S = 0 becomes unstable while one of the other two becomes stable

with positive power. This is found after performing a standard linear stability analysis, which

yields for every CW solution a set of (complex) characteristic exponents λ = λr + iλi. When

any of these exponents has a positive real part (λr > 0), the CW solution is unstable. The

imaginary part λi denotes the frequency with which perturbations initially will grow. Figure

6 shows how the real parts of the characteristic exponents of the relevant CW solution vary

with bias current. The CW solution is found to be unstable on the interval 44.556 <∼ J <∼ 92
mA. For bias currents J > 92 mA, stable CW emission is found. On the other side of the

interval, a more complex behavior is found. At J = 44.53 mA, the CW solution is stable,

but looses its stability already at J = 44.556 mA. This sequence of bifurcations from the

8

nonlasing (S = 0) state to self pulsation occurs in a very narrow range of currents around

threshold. Thus the sequence will be experimentally very hard to resolve due to diﬀerent

noise sources; the laser will seemingly begin to oscillate as soon as it crosses threshold.

Thus, our model (1a-1c) shows that there exists a CW solution that looses stability at

J = 44.556 mA and regains stability at J = 92 mA. In between these values, the CW state is

unstable, as indicated by a complex conjugate pair of characteristic exponents with positive

real parts (Hopf-instability). The region of instability coincides obviously with the region of

self-pulsating behavior, and is bounded by two Hopf-bifurcations. When the laser operates

at a bias current 44.556 < J < 92 mA, small perturbations to the CW state in question

initially grow as exp [(λr + iλi)t], i.e., with angular frequency λi. The linear stability analysis

does not provide any information on how this initial growth will saturate. Numerical results

from Eqs. (1a-1c) show that the resulting SPF is always smaller than the ROF λi/2π. This

is illustrated in Fig. 3. Both frequencies meet at J = 44.556 mA and at J = 92 mA, the

two Hopf bifurcation points. In the former case it means that the SPF must increase when

coming from higher bias currents to reach the RO value. However, this increase only occurs

in a very small range of currents so that it would be very hard to observe in the experiment.

It should be noted that a diﬀerent scenario is found in Ref. [5]. There, the carrier

lifetime τs is considered to be carrier dependent, to account for the radiative, non-radiative,

and Auger processes [22]:

τ −1
s,j (Nj) = Anr,j + BjNj + CjN 2
j ,

(6)

where j = 1 denotes the pumped region and j = 2 denotes the unpumped region. This carrier

dependence is considered necessary because during the strong pulsations, large variations in

the carrier numbers Nj may occur [22].

It was found in Ref. [5] that the carrier dependence of τs,j(Nj) plays a signiﬁcant role

around threshold. This is in sharp contrast with the well-known CW edge-emitting lasers

where N is clamped immediately above threshold. The kink region, lying far above thresh-

old, is not aﬀected signiﬁcantly by taking into account the carrier dependence of τs. This

9

illustrates the robustness of the cross-over behavior. At the high end of the self-pulsation

interval, also a Hopf bifurcation is found, but the dynamics at the low end diﬀers from the

one discussed here. First of all, there is no window of stability just after threshold. Figure

7 shows the location of the various CW solutions as a function of bias pump current. The

S = 0 solution (horizontal solid line) is only shown for currents where it is stable. It looses

stability at J = Jth. Around J = 0.85Jth two CW solutions are born out of a bifurcation.

Both CW solutions are linearly unstable. This is in contrast with the model discussed above

where the upper branch CW solution is stable in a short pump interval after its birth. The

bifurcation which starts the self-pulsation is not a Hopf one but a homoclinic bifurcation

(collision of a limit cycle and saddle). Thus, in the model of Ref. [5] self-pulsation occurs in

a region bounded by a Hopf-bifurcation on the high bias side and a homoclinic bifurcation at

the low bias side. This type is not uncommon in (passive Q-switching) self-pulsating lasers

with saturable absorbers [17–21].

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have investigated, both experimentally and theoretically, the dependence of the self-

pulsation frequency of semiconductor CD lasers upon changes in the bias current. A distinct

kink is found in this dependence, which is investigated using a rate–equation model. We

have identiﬁed that the kink is caused by spontaneous emission, whose average intensity sets

a lower bound on the emitted laser intensity and thereby on the average intensity, which

determines the relaxation oscillation frequency.

From our analysis we conclude that below the crossover point, the self-pulsations be-

have as passive Q-switching oscillations while above the crossover the behavior approaches

undamped relaxation oscillations.

The relationship between the relaxation oscillation frequency and the self-pulsation fre-

quency is investigated by means of a small signal analysis. We observe that the relaxation

oscillation frequency so obtained is an upper limit for the self-pulsating frequency. It is also

10

found that self-pulsation occurs in a bias current interval bounded by two Hopf bifurcations.

A small window of stable CW emission is found very close to the laser threshold in the ab-

sence of spontaneous emission. The model of Ref. [5] does not show such a window of stable

emission terminated by a Hopf bifurcation, but a homoclinic bifurcation is responsible for

the onset of the self-pulsating behavior. However, for the lasers we used in the experiment,

such diﬀerences between the models are irrelevant since they occur in a very small range of

currents too close to threshold to be resolved. These results raise an interesting question on

the nature of the bifurcation at the lower side of the self-pulsation interval.

Note added: A bifurcation analysis of the Yamada model neglecting interstripe diﬀusion

has been published [23]. The bifurcation scenario is diﬀerent from the one for our model

(1a)-(1c) (and closer to the one in [5]). However, these diﬀerences in the deterministic

behavior have no physical relevance, since they appear in parameter domains for which the

dynamics is dominated by noise.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the European Union through the Project HCM CHRX-

CT94-0594.

11

REFERENCES

[1] N. G. Basov, “Dynamics of injection lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. QE-4,

pp. 855–867, 1968.

pp. 470–474, 1979.

[2] R. W. Dixon and W. B. Joyce, “A possible model for sustained oscillations (pulsations)

in (Al,Ga)As double-heterostructure lasers”,IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. QE-15,

[3] M. Yamada, “A theoretical analysis of self-sustained pulsation phenomena in narrow-

stripe semiconductor lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 29, pp. 1330–1336, 1993.

[4] T. Tanaka and T. Kajimura, “Frequency control of self-sustained pulsating laser diodes

by uniform impurity doping into multiple-quantum-well structures,” IEEE Photon.

Technol. Lett., vol. 10, pp. 48–50, 1998.

[5] G. H. M. van Tartwijk and M. San Miguel, “Optical feedback on self-pulsating semi-

conductor lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 32, pp. 1191–1202, 1996.

[6] T. L. Paoli, “Saturable absorption eﬀects in the self-pulsing (AlGa)As junction laser,”

Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 34, pp. 652–655, 1979.

[7] M. Ueno and R. Lang, “Conditions for self-sustained pulsation and bistability in semi-

conductor lasers,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 58, pp. 1689–1692, 1985.

[8] M. J. Adams and C. Sinthanayothin, “Large-Signal Analysis of Self-Pulsating Laser

Diodes”, SPIE Proc. vol. 2994, pp. 513-519, (1998).

[9] E. A. Avrutin, “Analysis of spontaneous emission and noise in self-pulsing laser diodes,”

IEE proc. J, Optoelectron., vol. 140, pp. 16–20, 1993.

[10] U. Bandelow, H.-J. W¨unsche, and H. Wenzel, “Theory of self-pulsations in two-section

DFB lasers,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 1176-1179, 1993.

[11] H. Wenzel, U. Bandelow, H.-J. W¨unsche, and J. Rehberg, “Mechanisms of fast self-

12

pulsations in two-section DFB lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 32, pp. 69-78,

1996.

pp. 270-278, 1997.

[12] U. Bandelow, H.-J, W¨unsche, B. Sartorius, and M. Mohrle, “Dispersive self-Q-switching

in DFB lasers-theory versus experiment,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 3,

[13] P. Phelan, D. McDonald, A. Egan, J. Hegarty, R. O’Dowd, G. Farrell, S. Lindgren,

“Comparison of self-pulsation in multisection lasers with distributed feedback and in-

tracavity saturable absorbers,” IEE-Proc. Optoelectron., vol. 141, pp. 114–118, 1994.

[14] A. Egan, J. O’Gorman, P. Rees, G. Farrell, J. Hegarty, and P. Phelan, “Frequency

dependence of phase synchronised self-pulsating laser emission and injected periodic

electrical signals,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 802–803, 1995.

[15] C. H. Henry, “Theory of the linewidth of semiconductor lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum

Electron., vol. QE-18, pp. 259–264, 1982.

[16] G. H. M. van Tartwijk and D. Lenstra, “Semiconductor laser dynamics with optical

injection and feedback,” Quantum Semiclass. Opt., vol. 7, pp. 87–143, 1995.

[17] L. A. Lugiato, P. Mandel, S. T. Dembinski, and A. Kossakowski, “Semiclassical and

quantum theories of bistability in lasers containing saturable absorbers,” Phys. Rev. A,

vol. 18, pp. 238–254, 1978.

[18] T. Erneux , “Q-Switching bifurcation in a Laser with a Saturable Absorber” J. Opt.

Soc. Am. B, vol. 5, pp. 1063–1069, 1988.

[19] E. Arimondo, P. Bootz, P. Glorieux, and E. Meuchi, “Pulse shape and phase diagram in

the passive Q switching of CO2 lasers,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, vol. 2, pp. 193–201, 1985.

[20] F. de Tomasi, D. Hennequin, B. Zambon, and E. Arimondo, “Instabilities and chaos in

an infrared laser with saturable absorber: experiments and vibrorotational model,” J.

13

Opt. Soc. Am. B, vol. 6, pp. 45–57, 1989.

[21] D. Hennequin, F. de Tomasi, L. Fronzoni, B. Zambon, and E. Arimondo, “Inﬂuence of

noise on the quasi-homoclinic behavior of a laser with saturable absorber,” Opt. Comm.,

vol. 70, pp. 253–258, 1989.

Reinhold, New York, 1986.

[22] G. P. Agrawal and N. K. Dutta, Long-wavelength semiconductor lasers, Van Nostrand

[23] J.L.A. Dubbeldam, B. Krauskopf, Self-pulsations of lasers with saturable absorber: dy-

namics and bifurcations, Opt. Comm., vol. 159, pp. 325–338, 1999.

14

TABLES

TABLE I. Meanings and values of the parameters in the rate equations

Parameter Meaning

Value

Units

g1

g2

κ

τs

βsp

ηsp

Nt1

Nt2

Jth

α

v

Gain parameter of active region

Gain parameter of absorbing region

Inverse photon lifetime

Carrier lifetime

4.7 × 10−9

1.5 × 10−8

0.4

1.1

ps−1

ps−1

ps−1

ns

Spontaneous emission coeﬃcient

variable

dimensionless

Spontaneous quantum eﬃciency

Carrier number at transparency (active region)

Carrier number at transparency (absorbing region)

Threshold current of the solitary laser

0.33

6. 107

1.2 108

44.53

dimensionless

dimensionless

dimensionless

mA

Linewidth enhancement factor

5

dimensionless

Ratio of the active and absorbing volumes

0.115

dimensionless

T12

Diﬀusion time

2.1

ns

15

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Experimental set-up.

FIG. 2. Experimentally observed bias current dependence of the emitted laser power (solid

line) and the self-pulsating frequency (plus signs).

FIG. 3. Self-Pulsating Frequency (SPF) vs. Bias Current, obtained by numerically solving

Eqs. (1a-1c). The solid line indicates the value of the relaxation oscillation obtained from the

small signal analysis. Long–dashed line: SPF in the absence of noise; dash-dotted line: SPF with

βsp = 1.3 × 10−4; short-dashed line: SPF with βsp = 1.3 × 10−6; and dashed-triple-dotted line:

βsp = 1.3 × 10−8.

FIG. 4. Time traces of the intensity as a function of the bias current: a) J = 45 mA, b) J = 80

mA, c) J = 84 mA. βsp = 1.3 × 10−6

FIG. 5. Self pulsating frequency (top a)), maximum pulse intensity Smax (middle b))and min-

imum interpulse intensity Smin (bottom c)) vs. bias current for βsp = 1.3 × 10−6.

FIG. 6. The real part λr of the larger characteristic exponent of the CW solution with positive

intensity as a function of bias current. The inset, where the real part of all eigenvalues is included,

shows the tiny window of stable CW emission just after threshold.

FIG. 7. The intensity of the three CW solutions as a function of bias current, when the carrier

dependence of the carrier lifetime is included.

16

7

5

3

1

]
.
u
.
a
[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

−1

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

bias current J/Jth

