Lasing on the D2 line of sodium in helium atmosphere due to optical pumping on the
D1 line (up-conversion)

A.A. Apolonsky, S.A. Babin, S.I. Kablukov, R.V. Markov,
A.I. Plekhanov∗, A.M. Shalagin.
Institute of Automation and Electrometry, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia

9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A new method is proposed to produce population inver-
sion on transitions involving the ground state of atoms. The
method is realized experimentally with sodium atoms. Las-
ing at the frequency corresponding to the sodium D2 line is
achieved in the presence of pump radiation resonant to the
D1 line with helium as a buﬀer gas.

42.50.Hz, 42.50.Fx, 32.70.-n

In recent years, a growing interest has been attracted
to new schemes of laser action in gases based on quan-
tum interference induced by laser ﬁelds, see review pa-
pers [1–6] and citation therein. Especially attractive is
an opportunity to achive lasing from highly excited lev-
els into the ground state of atoms and molecules or into
the lowest possible energy levels usually having the high-
est population (in the absence of perturbing ﬁelds). It is
such schemes that are considered perspective for short-
wave generation.

There are numerous works investigating the ampliph-
ication of radiation in alkali-metal vapors on the tran-
sition into the ground state in the V -scheme. Some of
them exploit eﬀects of coherence to suppress absorption
on the transition from the ground-state to appropriate
upper level while the upper level is slightly populated by
various methods such as discharge current [7], collisions
with buﬀer gas particles [9].

In this paper we aim at drawing attention to new pos-
sibilities to produce laser action on transitions into the
ground state. The method is based on manipulation with
polarization of pump waves and speciﬁc collisional pop-
ulation transfer mechanism.

In earlier papers [10,11] the possibility of laser action
was demonstrated at the frequency corresponding to the
D1 line in the presence of strong pump ﬁeld tuned in res-
onance with the D2 line in alkali-metal vapors. The eﬀect
is generated by collisions with buﬀer-gas particles. The
collisions should be frequent enough in order to estab-
lish Boltzmann distribution of population between ﬁne-
structure components (P3/2 and P1/2) during pump pulse
action. At these conditions magnetic sublevels popula-
tions of the P1/2 state appear by the Boltzmann factor
higher than that of the P3/2 state. A strong pump ﬁeld
is used to equalize magnetic sublevels populations of the

∗E-mail: fractal@iae.nsk.su

1

ground state S1/2 and the resonant upper state P3/2. As
a result, the population of level P1/2 appears to be higher
than the population of level S1/2. Thus, the population
inversion on transition from the upper state P1/2 into the
ground state S1/2 is achieved, and laser action at the fre-
quency of the D1 line remains possible. In [10,11] lasing
reached the superluminosity regime.

In correspondence with nature of the process the gen-
erated frequency in [10,11] was lower compared to the
pump frequency (down-conversion). This naturally leads
to the question: whether up-conversion is possible, i.e.
to achieve laser action (on the D2 line) with frequency
higher then that for pump ﬁeld (resonant to the D1
line)? The present paper gives a positive answer. Such
an opportunity appears if one combines the above men-
tioned collisional processes with speciﬁc polarization ef-
fects. Let’s prove this statement. Consider an inter-
action of the pump pulse (speciﬁcally polarized) with
a gas of atoms in mixture with a buﬀer gas at a high
pressure. Let’s take for deﬁnitness sodium atoms with
corresponding level scheme, see Fig.1. The pump pulse
with carrier frequency resonant to the D1 line has the
following temporal and polarization structure.
It con-
sists of long low-intensity circularly-polarized prepulse
and much more intensive and short main pulse with or-
thogonal circular polarization. The prepulse is used for
optical orientation of sodium atoms in the ground state.
From this one can set the requirement on its duration
(it has to be longer compared to upper state relaxation
time) and intensity limit (it may be low, but enough for
optical orientation only). After the end of the prepulse
almost all the population is optically pumped into one
of the magnetic sublevels of the ground state (its pop-
ulation is shown in Fig.1(a) by symbolic column). The
main pulse may be shorter than the relaxation time of
the excited levels. It transfers the population from the
ground state onto sublevel of the excited level P1/2 that
is initially empty (corresponding transition is shown in
Fig.1(b) by a solid arrow). The intensity of the main
pulse must be high enough to maintain equality of pop-
ulations for the coupled sublevels. Furthermore, at high
buﬀer-gas pressure collisions are frequent enough to mix
the states P1/2 and P3/2 and their magnetic sublevels
as well. As a result the population is distributed be-
tween the sublevels almost equally, as shown in Fig.1(b)
by small columns. The sublevel M = −1/2 of the ground
state is almost empty (remember that it is pumped out
by the prepulse), whereas other sublevels of the ground
state and excited states are populated almost equally (the

population diﬀerence by the Boltzmann factor between
P1/2 and P3/2 states is insigniﬁcant here and may be ne-
glected). One can see that population inversion between
some upper magnetic sublevels (including those for the
P3/2 level) and the sublevel M = −1/2 of the ground
state is created. Hence, necessary conditions for laser ac-
tion, speciﬁcally from the level P3/2 to the ground state
S1/2 are met.

Thus, we have shown that there exist conditions for
producing laser action on the D2 line with pulsed exci-
tation resonant to the D1 line. Taking into account par-
tial oscillator strengths, we see that the highest gain is
achieved on the transition P3/2(M = −3/2) → S1/2(M =
−1/2), as shown in Fig.1(b) by a wavy arrow. It means
that the generated wave has presumably the same po-
larization as the main pump pulse. To avoid misunder-
standing, we should remind that collisions with particles
of non-magnetic buﬀer gas (noble gas as an example) mix
magnetic sublevels of the ground state in alkali metals
very weakly, so we neglect this factor with conﬁdence.

On the basis of the above treatment, we have exper-
imentally realized such scheme with population inver-
sion on transition 3P3/2 − 3S1/2 of sodium. A general
schematic of our experimental setup is shown in Fig.2.
In the experiment it was easier and more convenient to
use CW radiation instead of the prepulse. In this case
it maintains the orientation of the ground state between
pump pulses, coming from another laser source. We used
CW dye laser DL1 with linear vertical polarization (of
≈ 3 GHz spectral linewidth) and pulsed dye laser DL2
with horizontal polarization (of 10 GHz linewidth and
≈ 5 ns pulse duration). In the spectrum of the pulsed
laser together with narrow-band laser radiation, a broad-
band luminescence of the R6G dye is present, but its
spectral density is by 3 orders of magnitude weaker.

After passing the quarter-wave (λ/4) plate the beam of
the CW laser becomes clockwise polarized, and the beam
of the pulsed laser is counter-clockwise polarized. The
CW radiation prepares the medium converting it into the
S1/2(M = 1/2) state, and high-power pulses are used for
populating upper levels. Both beams propagate in the
same direction and are focused by the lens L1 with focal
length F = 55 cm into the cell with sodium-helium mix-
ture. The intensity near the beam waist is ≈ 60 W/cm2
for the CW laser, and up to 6 MW/cm2 for the pulsed
laser. The cell has 1.5-cm diameter and is 22-cm long
with heated zone (BC) of 4.5 cm in the central part. The
sodium vapour density is controlled by varying the tem-
perature, measured by thermocouple. The cell is placed
between the Helmholz coils (HC) that provide external
longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld to eliminate deorientating ef-
fect of transverse component of the laboratory ﬁeld. The
magnitude of the external ﬁeld up to B ≈ 80 G is avail-
able. Output radiation is focused by the lens L2 onto the
slit of the monochromator RAMANOR HG.2S (M ) with
an apparatus width of about 0.5 cm−1. Data from pho-
tomultiplier D connected to ampliﬁer and integrator are
registered with a computer. That allows us to store and

average measured data. The generation at the D2 line
frequency was measured in direction of the pump beam
as well as in the opposite direction. For this purpose the
beam splitter (BS2) was inserted into the pump beam
pathway, as shown in Fig.2.

First of all, it has been ascertained, that in the ab-
sence of the external magnetic ﬁeld and at low buﬀer-
gas (helium) pressure there is no coherent radiation at
the D2 line frequency in a broad range of other exper-
imental parameters. After the external magnetic ﬁeld
B > 0.5 G is applied, an intense coherent radiation at
the D2 line frequency appeares at helium pressure higher
than 200 torr with CW and pulse lasers being tuned to
exact resonance with the D1 line, see curve 1 in Fig.3(a).
Divergence of the output beam appeares to be no more
than that of the pump beam. Registered spectral width
is about 0.7 cm−1, being close to the apparatus width.
The radiation at the D2 line frequency has nearly the
same polarization as the strong pulsed ﬁeld. Curve 2 in
Fig.3(a) illustrates the measurement without magnetic
ﬁeld (B = 0). In this case only the absorption line is ob-
served because broadband R6G dye luminescence is ab-
sorbed in optically thick media. The coherent radiation
at the D2 line frequency is observed both in the direc-
tion of the pump beam, and in the opposite direction
(Fig.3(b)). Spectral width for the forward and backward
output radiations is nearly the same. In contrast to the
forward radiation, the backward one is also observable
in the absence of the external magnetic ﬁeld. Note, that
the intensity of the forward output radiaton is 80 times
as high as that of the backward radiation (in the pres-
ence of magnetic ﬁeld). This fact can be explained by the
eﬀect of dye luminescence that serves as a seed leading
to ampliﬁcation in its direction.

It is interesting to note that the backward generation
occurs in the absence of longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld, i.e.
when the optical orientation is noticeably destroyed. We
suppose that this happens due to a suﬃcient intensity
of the CW radiation that is able to transfer the resid-
ual population from sublevel S1/2 M = −1/2 into ex-
cited states, thus helping to create inversion on the op-
erating transition. Absence of forward generation under
identical conditions is most likely explained as follows.
The CW radiation gets absorbed propagating along the
heated zone. Because of this, inversion condition is no
longer valid in the output part of the zone. Hence, the
generated radiation coming forward is absorbed in the
output part.

The output intensity of generated radiation under ﬁxed
other conditions reaches its maximum when frequencies
of both lasers (CW and pulsed) ωL are tuned in reso-
nance with the D1 line of frequency ωD1 . Detuning from
the exact resonance |Ω| = |ωL − ωD1 | ≈ 4 cm−1 leads
to disappearance of the output signal. Appearing at he-
lium pressure of 200 torr, the intensity at the D2 line fre-
quency rises monotonically with increasing pressure up
to 810 torr, highest available in the experiment. The
maximum of output intensity measured as a function of

2

sodium vapour density is reached at N ≈ 8 × 1012 cm−3.
Under these conditions the cell transmission is ≈ 90% for
the pulse radiation, and ≈ 80% for the CW laser beam.
Starting at external magnetic ﬁeld strength B as low as
0.5 G (comparable to laboratory ﬁeld), the output signal
grows almost linearly with increasing ﬁeld up to B ≈
5 G when it saturates. Note, that an application of the
external magnetic ﬁeld considerably helps to orientate
sodium atoms by circularly polarized CW radiation. The
luminescence intensity is attenuated by a factor of 3 ÷
4 after the ﬁeld is applied, that means the portion of
oriented atoms reaches more than 80%.

When the pump intensity is attenuated down to 1.5 ÷
2 MW/cm2 the output intensity does not change signiﬁ-
cantly. Further attenuation of the pump radiation leads
to a smooth decrease in the generated power while its
spectral width remaines constant. At the same time, at-
tenuation of the CW laser power leads to an abrupt fall
in the generated power at the D2 line frequency. At opti-
mal conditions (Ω = 0, N ≈ 1013 cm−3, helium pressure
≈ 810 torr, B ≈ 5 G) the output intensity of generated
radiaton reaches 1.5÷2% of the absorbed pump intensity
(of the pulsed laser). The intensity of the generated radi-
ation inside the cell is estimated to be ∼ 5 kW/cm2, cor-
responding to strong saturation, æ ≫ 11. This suggests
that the generation occurs in superluminosity regime (at
least in the forward direction), i.e. the generated wave
is capable to utilize considerable portion of inversion on
the operating transition.

We also have considered parametric processes such as
wavemixing as alternative interpretation of our experi-
mental results.
It is well known that wavemixing pro-
cesses are suppressed at the resonance conditions due to
absorption [12], while our signal conversely has maxi-
mum at the frequensy resonant to the D2 line and vastly
decays with detuning from the resonance, and moreover,
signal generated in wavemixing in backward direction not
be present due to phase mismatching [13,14]. Thus our
original interpretation presented above seems to be more
realistic and reasonable.

Our work is based on the composition of well known
phenomena (laser excitation, optical pumping, collisional
population transfer), but we need to stress that only
appropriate combination of the phenomena mentioned
above lead to the new results which were obvious be-
forehand.

Thus, we have shown in the present work, that pro-
posed combination of polarization and collisional transfer
mechanisms opens new opportunities for resonant radia-
tive processes. In view of the development of the general

1

Saturation parameter is deﬁned as æ = (dmnE/2¯h)

/ΓΓm,
where dmn – matrix element of the dipole moment on tran-
sition m − n, E – electric ﬁeld amplitude, Γ – collisional
linewidth, Γm – relaxation rate (radiative) of the upper level
m.

2

3

method applied here for special case, we propose a vari-
ant of the scheme that allows one to achieve generation
of violet and UV radiation on transitions into the ground
state. For this purpose, instead of a single-photon pro-
cess a two-step or two-photon excitation into higher-lying
states can be explored (see Fig.4). In this case, radiative
transition from the excited state (m) into the ground
state is parity-forbidden. However, if there is another
close (within kT range) level l of diﬀerent parity, cou-
pled radiatively with the ground state n, the developed
method remains applicable. Using high-pressure buﬀer
gas an eﬃcient collisional mixing of upper levels m and l
can be provided. Then, due to the Boltzmann factor (if
level l is lower than level m) and high intensity pump
waves, a population inversion on transition l − n can
be achieved, thus resulting in laser action in short-wave
range. In case the available intensity and the Boltzmann
factor are not enough for generation, or level l lies higher
than level m, it is possible to prepare the system using
the same polarization technique: optical orientation of
the ground state n by resonant radiation (at ﬁrst-step
transition) opens an additional opportunity to build up
population inversion between corresponding sublevels of
transition l − n.

We are gratefully acknowledge fruitful discussions with
S.G. Rautian, Ye.V. Podivilov and M.G. Stepanov, and
an opportunity to use CW dye laser by ”INVERSion”
and ”Technoskan” companies. This work was supported
in part by Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grants
96-15-96642, 98-02-17924.

[1] O. Kocharovskaya, Physics Reports 219, 175 (1992);
[2] M.O. Scully, Physics Reports 219, 191 (1992);
[3] M.O. Scully, M. Fleischauer, Science 263, 337 (1994);
[4] E. Arimondo, in: Progress in Optics edited by E. Wolf
(North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1996), Vol. XXXV, Chap.
V, pp. 258-354;

[5] S.E. Harris, Phys. Today 50, 36 (1997);
[6] J.P. Marangos, J. Mod. Phys. 45, 471 (1998).
[7] J. Gao et al., Opt. Comm. 93, 323 (1992)
[8] J. Gao et al., Opt. Comm. 110, 590 (1994)
[9] J.A. Kleinfeld, A.D. Streater Phys. Rev. A 49, n.6,

(1994)

[10] B.A. Glushko, M.E. Movsesyan, T.O. Ovakimyan, Opt.

Spectrosc. (USSR) 52, 762 (1982).

[11] S.N. Atutov, A.I. Plekhanov, A.M. Shalagin. Opt. Spec-

trosc. (USSR) 56, 134 (1984).

[12] D.J. Harter,R.W. Boyd, Phys. Rev. A 29, n.2, 739 (1984)
[13] Yu.M. Kirin, S.G. Rautian, V.P. Safonov, B.M. Cher-

nobrod Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 66, n.6, 1945 (1977)

[14] V.M. Arutyunian, T.A. Papazian, Yu.S. Chilingarian,
A.V. Karmenian, S.M. Sarkisian Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 66,
n.2, 509 (1974)

FIG. 1. Relevant energy levels of Na and optical transitions

(quantization axis is collinear to wave vectors).

FIG. 2. Schematic of the experiment to observe superlumi-
nosity on the sodium D2 line. DL, dye lasers; P , polarizers;
L, lenses; HC, Helmholtz coils; BC, biﬁlar heater coil; BS,
beam splitters; M , monochromator; D, detector.

FIG. 3. Output lasing signal around the D2 line frequency
(ωD2 ) viewed from opposite directions. Forward signal on the
D2 line (a) is 80 times higher then the backward signal (b).
Curves 1 (a,b) show output signal of the D2 line with D1
pumping for 810 torr helium pressure, T = 495 K, B = 80 G.
Curves 2 (a,b) show output signal of the D2 line at the same
condition but for B = 0. Pump beams detunings from the
D1 resonance are equal to zero.

FIG. 4. Elucidation of the posibility of shortwave lasing.

4

(a)

m

l
(b)

(a)

1

-3/2

-1/2

1/2

3/2

-3/2

-1/2

1/2

1,0

0,8

0,6

y
t
i
s
DL
n
e
t
1
n
i
3P3/2
 
d
e
3P1/2
z
i
l
a
DL
m
r
2
o
N

P1
0,4
P2
0,2

0,0

3S1/2

BS2

k
L1

BS1

l/4
2
l-meter
0
4
w w-
-1
2 (cm )

D

-4

1,0

0,8

0,6
3P3/2
3P1/2
0,4
Sodium Cell

0,2

BC

HC
0,0
n
3S1/2

(b)
1
Computer

3/2
D

M

L2
2
BS3

-4

w w-

0
4
-1
2 (cm )
D

