9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

HeXLN: A 2-Dimensional nonlinear photonic crystal

N. G. R. Broderick, G. W. Ross, H. L. Oﬀerhaus, D. J. Richardson and D. C. Hanna
Optoelectronics Research Centre, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK.
Phone: +44 (0)1703 593144, Fax: +44 (0)1703 593142, email: ngb@orc.soton.ac.uk
(February 2, 2008)

We report on the fabrication of what we believe is the ﬁrst example of a two dimensional
nonlinear periodic crystal [1], where the refractive index is constant but in which the 2nd order
nonlinear susceptibility is spatially periodic. Such a crystal allows for eﬃcient quasi-phase matched
2nd harmonic generation using multiple reciprocal lattice vectors of the crystal lattice. External 2nd
harmonic conversion eﬃciencies > 60% were measured with picosecond pulses. The 2nd harmonic
light can be simultaneously phase matched by multiple reciprocal lattice vectors, resulting in the
generation of multiple coherent beams. The fabrication technique is extremely versatile and allows
for the fabrication of a broad range of 2-D crystals including quasi-crystals.

42.65.K,42.65.-k, 42.70.Qs,42.70.M

The interaction of light with periodic media is an area of intense interest both theoretically and experimentally.
A central theme of this work is the idea of a linear photonic crystal [2] in which the linear susceptibility is spatially
periodic. Photonic crystals can have a complete photonic bandgap over some frequency range and this bandgap can
be exploited for a wide variety of processes such as zero threshold lasers, inhibited spontaneous emission, or novel
waveguiding schemes such as photonic bandgap ﬁbres [3]. In one dimension photonic crystals, or Bragg gratings, have
been well studied for many years. In three dimensions a complete photonic bandgap at long wavelengths has already
been demonstrated and work on extending this to the visible region is rapidly progressing [2].

Recently V. Berger proposed extending the idea of photonic crystals to include nonlinear photonic crystals [1]. In
a nonlinear photonic crystal (NPC) there is a periodic spatial variation of a nonlinear susceptibility tensor while the
refractive index is constant. This is in contrast with other work done on nonlinear interactions in photonic crystals
[4,5] where the nonlinearity is assumed constant throughout the material and the photonic properties derive from
the variation of the linear susceptibility. The simplest type of NPCs are the 1-D quasi-phase-matched materials,
ﬁrst proposed by Armstrong et al. [6] in which the second order susceptibility undergoes a periodic change of sign.
This type of 1-D structure has attracted much interest since the successful development of periodically-poled lithium
niobate based devices. Generalisation to two and three dimensions in analogy with linear photonic crystals, was
recently proposed by Berger and here we report its experimental realisation as a 2-D periodic structure with hexagonal
symmetry in lithium niobate (HeXLN).

First we brieﬂy summarise the well known 1-D quasi-phase matching (QPM) concept before treating the 2-D case.
To this end consider the case of 2nd harmonic generation in a χ(2) material where light at a frequency ω is converted
to a signal at 2ω. In general the refractive index at ω and 2ω are diﬀerent and hence after a length Lc (the coherence
length) the fundamental and the generated 2nd harmonic will be π out of phase. Then in the next coherence length
all of the 2nd harmonic is back-converted to the fundamental - resulting in poor overall conversion eﬃciency. The idea
of quasi-phase matching is to change the sign of the nonlinearity periodically with a period of Lc, thus periodically
reversing the phase of the generated 2nd harmonic. This ensures that the 2nd harmonic continues to add up in phase
along the entire length of the crystal, resulting in a large overall conversion eﬃciency.

An alternative way to understand the physics of quasi-phase matching is through conservation of momentum. 2nd
harmonic generation is a three photon process in which two photons with momentum ~kω are converted in a photon
of momentum ~k2ω and if k2ω = 2kω (ideal phase matching) then the momentum is conserved and the interaction
is eﬃcient. However in general due to dispersion ideal phase matching is not possible and diﬀerent techniques must
be used to insure conservation of momentum. In the quasi-phase matched case conservation of momentum becomes
k2ω = 2kω + G, where G is the crystal momentum corresponding to one of the reciprocal lattice vectors (RLV) [7] of
the macroscopic periodic structure of the NPC. Clearly this technique allows one to phase-match any desired nonlinear
interaction, assuming that one can fabricate an appropriate NPC. In 1-D quasi-phase matching can occur in either
the co- or counter-propagating direction. For a strictly periodic lattice quasi-phase matching can only occur over
limited wavelength ranges since the RLVs are discrete and periodically spaced in momentum space. In order to obtain
broader bandwidths one approach is to use aperiodic structures which have densely spaced RLVs. An alternative
approach which is taken here is to move to a two dimensional NPC which brings added functionality compared to a
1-D crystal.

Clearly in a 2-D NPC the possibility of non-collinear phase matching exists due to the structure of the reciprocal
lattice. Once again we restrict ourselves to the case of 2nd harmonic generation and linearly polarised light such that
we can use the scalar wave equation. Then making the usual slowly varying envelope approximation and assuming

1

a plane wave fundamental incident upon the crystal, the evolution equation for the 2nd harmonic in the undepleted
pump regime can be written as [1]:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

k2ω

E2ω(r) =

· ∇

ω2
c2 χ(2)(r)(Eω)2e(i(k2ω −2kω)·r).

2i

−

Since χ(2) is periodic we can write it as a Fourier series using the RLVs Gn,m

χ(2)(r) =

κn,meiGn,m·r

, n, m

Z.

∈

n,m
X

The phase matching condition,

k2ω

2kω

Gn,m = 0,

−
arises from requiring that the exponent in Eq. (1) be set equal to zero ensuring growth of the 2nd harmonic along the
entire length of the crystal. Eq. (3) is a statement of conservation of momentum as discussed earlier. For each RLV
Gn,m and a prescribed kω there is at most a unique angle of propagation for the 2nd harmonic such that Eq. (3)
is satisﬁed. The coupling strength of a phase matching process using Gn,m is proportional to κn,m. If a particular
Fourier coeﬃcient is zero then no 2nd harmonic generation will be observed in the corresponding direction.

−

In order to demonstrate the idea of a 2-D NPC we poled a wafer of lithium niobate with a hexagonal pattern.
Fig. 1 shows an expanded view of the resulting structure, which was revealed by lightly etching the sample in acid.
Each hexagon is a region of domain inverted material - the total inverted area comprises
30% of the overall sample
area. The fabrication procedure was as follows. A thin layer of photoresist was ﬁrst deposited onto the -z face of a
0.3mm thick, z-cut wafer, of LiNbO3, and then photolithographically patterned with the hexagonal array. The x-y
orientation of the hexagonal structure was carefully aligned to coincide with the crystal’s natural preferred domain
wall orientation : LiNbO3 itself has triagonal atomic symmetry (crystal class 3m) and shows a tendency for domain
60◦ as seen in Fig. 1. Poling was accomplished by applying an electric
walls to form parallel to the y-axis and at
ﬁeld via liquid electrodes on the +/-z faces at room temperature [8]. Our HeXLN crystal has a period of 18.05 µm:
suitable for non-collinear frequency doubling of 1536nm at 150◦C (an elevated temperature was chosen to eliminate
photorefractive eﬀects). The hexagonal pattern was found to be uniform across the sample dimensions of 14
7mm
(x-y) and was faithfully reproduced on the +z face. Lastly we polished the
x -faces of the HeXLN crystal allowing
a propagation length of 14mm through the crystal in the ΓK direction (see Fig. 1).

∼

±

±

×

In Fig. 2 we show the reciprocal lattice (RL) for our HeXLN crystal. In contrast with the 1-D case there are RLVs
at numerous angles, each of which allows phase matching in a diﬀerent direction (given by Eq. 3). Note that for a
real space lattice period of d the RL has a period of 4π/(√3d) as compared with 2π/d for a 1-D crystal [9] allowing us
to compensate for a greater phase mismatch in a 2-D geometry than in a 1-D geometry with the same spatial period.
From Eq. (3) and using simple trigonometry it is possible to show that [1]

λ2ω
n2ω =

2π
G
|
|

1
s(cid:18)

−

nω
n2ω

2

+ 4

nω
n2ω sin2 θ

(cid:19)

where λ2ω is the vacuum wavelength of the second harmonic and 2θ is the walk oﬀ angle between the fundamental
and 2nd harmonic wavevectors.

±

To investigate the properties of the HeXLN crystal we proceeded as follows. The HeXLN crystal was placed in an
15◦ around the z-axis while still allowing light to
oven and mounted on a rotation stage which could be rotated by
enter through the +x face of the crystal. The fundamental consisted of 4ps, 300kW pulses obtained from a high power
all-ﬁbre chirped pulse ampliﬁcation system (CPA) [10] operating at a pulse repetition rate of 20kHz. The output from
the CPA system was focussed into the HeXLN crystal using a 10cm focal length lens giving a focal spot diameter
1.8GW/cm2. The initial experiments were done at zero angle of
of 150µm and a corresponding peak intensity of
0.2GW/cm2) the output was
incidence corresponding to propagation in the ΓK direction. At low input intensities (
as shown in Fig. 2(b) and consisted of multiple output beams of diﬀerent colours emerging from the crystal at diﬀerent
0.1)◦ from
angles. In particular two 2nd harmonic beams emerged from the crystal at symmetrical angles of
the remaining undeﬂected fundamental. At slightly wider angles were two green beams (third harmonic of the pump)
and at even wider angles were two blue beams (the fourth harmonic, not shown here). There was also a third green
beam copropagating with the fundamental. The output was symmetrical since the input direction corresponded to
a symmetry axis of the NPC. As the input power increased the 2nd harmonic spots remained in the same positions
while the green light appeared to be emitted over an almost continuous range of angles rather than the discrete angles

(1.1

∼

∼

±

±

2

observed at low powers. The two 2nd harmonic beams can be understood by referring to the reciprocal lattice of our
structure (Fig. 2). From Fig. 2 it can be seen that for propagation in the ΓK direction the closest RLVs are in the
ΓM directions and it is these RLVs that account for the 2nd harmonic light [1].

After ﬁltering out the other wavelengths the 2nd harmonic (from both beams) was directed onto a power meter and
the eﬃciency and temperature tuning characteristics for zero input angle were measured. These results are shown in
Fig. 3 and Fig. 5. Note that the maximum external conversion eﬃciency is greater than 60% and this is constant over
a wide range of input powers. Taking into account the Fresnel reﬂections from the front and rear faces of the crystal
this implies a maximum internal conversion eﬃciency of 82% –
41% in each beam. As the 2nd harmonic power
increases the amount of back conversion increases which we believe is the main reason for the observed limiting of the
conversion eﬃciency at high powers.

∼

Evidence of the strong back conversion can be seen in Fig. 4 which shows the spectrum of the remaining fundamental
in the z-direction and horizontally (solid line) polarised input light. As the phase
for both vertically (dashed) i.e.
matching only works for vertically polarised light the horizontally polarised spectrum is identical to that of the input
beam and when compared with the other trace (dashed line) shows the eﬀect of pump depletion and back-conversion.
Note that for vertically polarised light the amount of back-converted light is signiﬁcant compared to the residual
8dB (85%) of pump depletion which
pump which is as expected given the large conversion eﬃciency. Fig. 4 shows
agrees well with the measured value for the internal eﬃciency calculated using the average power.

∼

In the 1-D case, for an undepleted pump, the temperature tuning curve of a 14mm long length of periodically poled
material is expected to have a sinc2(T ) shape and to be quite narrow – 4.7◦C for a 1-D PPLN crystal with the same
length and period as the HeXLN crystal used here. However, as can be seen from Fig. 5, the temperature tuning curve
25◦C, and it exhibits
(obtained in a similar manner to the power characteristic) is much broader with a FWHM of
considerable structure. The input power was 300kW. We believe that the increased temperature bandwidth may be
due to the multiple reciprocal lattice vectors that are available for quasi-phase matching with each RLV producing
a beam in a slightly diﬀerent direction. Thus the angle of emission of the 2nd harmonic should vary slightly with
temperature if this is the case. Due to the limitations of the oven we were not able to raise the temperature above
205◦C and hence could not completely measure the high temperature tail of the temperature tuning curve. Note that
temperature tuning is equivalent to wavelength tuning of the pump pulse and hence it should be possible to obtain
eﬃcient phase-matching over a wide wavelength range at a ﬁxed temperature.

∼

After the properties of the HeXLN crystal at normal incidence we next measured the angular dependance of the 2nd
harmonic beams. As the crystal was rotated phase-matching via diﬀerent RLVs could be observed. For a particular
input angle (which determined the angle between the fundamental and the RLVs) quasi-phase matched 2nd harmonic
generation occurred, via a RLV, and produced a 2nd harmonic beam in a direction given by Eq. (4). These results
are shown in Fig. 6 where the solid circles indicate the measured angles of emission for 2nd harmonic while the open
squares are the predicted values. In the ﬁgure zero degrees corresponds to propagation in the ΓK direction. Also
indicated on the ﬁgure are the RLVs used for phase-matching, where [n, m] refers to the RLV Gn,m. Note that there
is good overall agreement between the theoretical and experimental results even for higher order Fourier coeﬃcients
which indicates the high quality of the crystal. The inversion symmetry of Fig. 6 results from the hexagonal symmetry
of the crystal. To further highlight this symmetry we have labeled the negative output angles with the corresponding
positive RLVs. The only obvious discrepancy comes from the [1, 1] RLVs where two closely separated spots are
observed rather than a single one. This may be due to a small amount of linear diﬀraction from the periodic array.
At the domain boundaries of the HeXLN crystal there are likely to be small stress-induced refractive index changes
giving a periodic variation in the refractive index. If this indeed proves to be the case then it should be possible to
eliminate this by annealing the crystal at high temperatures.

For applications where collinear propagation of the fundamental and 2nd harmonic is desirable propagation along
the ΓM axis of the HeXLN crystal could be used (since the smallest RLV is in that direction). For the parameters of
our crystal collinear 2nd harmonic generation of 1.446 µm in the ΓM direction is expected.

Visually the output of the HeXLN crystal is quite striking with diﬀerent colours (red, green and blue) being emitted
in diﬀerent directions (see Fig. 7). For a range of input angles and low powers distinct green and red spots can been
seen each emitted in a diﬀerent direction, often with the green light emitted at a wider angle than the 2nd harmonic.
The presence of the green light implies sum frequency generation between the fundamental and the 2nd harmonic. For
this to occur eﬃciently it must also be quasi-phase-matched using a RLV of the lattice. In certain regimes (of angle
and temperature) simultaneous quasi-phase-matching of both 2nd harmonic generation and sum frequency mixing
occurs with as much as 20% of the 2nd harmonic, converted to the green (in multiple beams). As mentioned earlier
at higher powers the green light appears to be emitted over a continuous range of angles. We believe that this might
be due to an eﬀect similar to that observed in ﬁbres where phase-matching becomes less critical at high intensities
[11]. If this were the case then the green light would have a broader spectrum in the non-phase-matched case than for
the quasi-phase-matched case but we have not yet been able to verify this. Lastly we believe that the 4th harmonic
results from quasi-phase matching of two 2nd harmonic photons by a higher order RLV since it is observed at quite

3

wide angles.

It should be noted that although lithium niobate preferentially forms domains walls along the y axis and at

60◦
we are not limited to hexagonal lattices. In fact essentially any two dimensional lattice can be fabricated, however
the patterned region of the unit cell will always consist of either a hexagon or a triangle. The shape of the poled
region will determine the strength of each of the Fourier coeﬃcients for the RLVs while the lattice structure will
determine their position. One can envisage creating more complicated structures such as a 2-D quasi-crystal in which
a small poled hexagon is situated at every vertex. Such a 2-D quasi-crystal could give improved performance for
simultaneously phase matching multiple nonlinear processes, as demonstrated recently with a 1-D poled quasi-crystal
[12]. Alternatively a HeXLN crystal could be used as an eﬃcient monolithic optical parametric oscillator [1]. Lastly
we note that NPCs are a speciﬁc example of more general nonlinear holographs which would convert a beam proﬁle
at one wavelength to an arbitrary proﬁle at a second proﬁle [13]. For example Imeshevx et al. converted a gaussian
proﬁle beam at the fundamental to a square top 2nd harmonic using tranversely patterned periodically poled lithium
niobate [14].

±

In conclusion we have fabricated what we believe to be the ﬁrst example of a two dimensional nonlinear photonic
crystal in Lithium Niobate. Due to the periodic structure of the crystal, quasi-phase matching is obtained for
multiple directions of propagation with internal conversion eﬃciencies of > 80%. Such HeXLN crystals could ﬁnd
many applications in optics where simultaneous conversion of multiple wavelengths is required.

[1] V. Berger, “Nonlinear Photonic Crystals,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4136–4139 (1998).
[2] J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, and J. N. Winn, Photonic Crystals (Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey,

[3] R. F. Cregan, B. J. Mangan, J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. S. Russell, P. J. Roberts, and D. C. Allan, “Single-mode photonic

band gap guidance of light in air,” Science 285, 1537–1539 (1999).

[4] S. John and N. Akozbek, “Nonlinear Optical Solitary Waves in a Photonic Band Gap,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1168–1171

[5] M. J. Steel and C. M. de Sterke, “Second harmonic generation in second harmonic ﬁber gratings,” Appl. Opt. 35, 3211

1995).

(1993).

(1995).

[6] J. A. Armstrong et al., Phys. Rev. 127, 1918 (1962).
[7] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 3rd ed. (John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1953). Note that in both Ref[1]

and Ref[2] the period of reciprocal lattice is incorrectly stated as 2π/d.

[8] M. Yamada, N. Nada, M. Saitoh, and K. Watanabe, “1st-order Quasi-phase matched LINBO3 wave-guide periodically
poled by applying an external-ﬁeld for eﬃcient blue 2nd-harmonic generation,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 435–436 (1993).

[9] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 3rd ed. (John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1953).

[10] N. G. R. Broderick, D. J. Richardson, D. Taverner, and M. Ibsen, “High power chirped pulse all-ﬁbre ampliﬁcation system

based on large mode area ﬁbre components,” Opt. Lett 24, 566–568 (1999).

[11] S. Trillo, G. Millot, E. Seve, and S. Wabnitz, “Failure of phase-matching concept in large-signal parametric frequency

conversion,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 150–152 (1998).

[12] Shi- ning Zhu, Yong-yuan Zhu, Yi-qiang Qin, Hai-feng Weng, Chuan-zhen Ge, and Nai-ben Ming, “Experimental Real-
ization of Second Harmonic Generation in a Fibonacci Optical Superlattice of LiTaO3,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2752–2755
(1997).

[13] V. Berger, in Conﬁned Photon Systems: Fundamentals and Applications, H. Benisty, J. M. Gerard, R. Houdie, J. Rarity,
and C. Weisbuch, eds., (Springer, Heidelberg, 1999), Vol. Lecture Notes in Physics vol. 531, Chap. Photonic Crystals for
Nonlinear Optical Frequency Conversion.

[14] G. Imeshev, M. Proctor, and M. M. Fejer, “Lateral patterning of nonlinear frequency conversion with transversely varying

quasi-phase-matching gratings,” Opt. Lett. 23, 673–675 (1998).

FIG. 1. Picture of the HeXLN crystal and the ﬁrst Brillouin zone. The period of the crystal is 18.05µm and is uniform over

the whole sample. In our experiments propagation was in the ΓK direction.

FIG. 2. Reciprocal Lattice for the hexagonal lattice shown in Fig. 1. The general reciprocal lattice vector Gn,m = ne1 +me2
where e1,2 are the basis vectors for the reciprocal lattice. Also indicated is the ﬁrst Brillouin zone showing the main symmetry
directions. In addition two examples of non-collinear QPM are shown using the [1, 0] and the [1, 1] RLVs. On the right is a
picture of the low power output of the crystal. Note that there are two 2nd harmonic spots and three 3rd harmonic spots.

4

FIG. 3.

2nd harmonic eﬃciency of the HeXLN crystal against input peak power. Note that the maximum eﬃciency is

> 60% and is limited principally by parametric back conversion.

FIG. 4. Output spectra at 1533nm for both horizontally (solid line) and vertically (dashed line) polarised light. Note
the large amount of pump depletion which can clearly be seen along with the back-conversion. The incident peak power was
300kW.

FIG. 5. Temperature tuning of the HeXLN crystal taken at an incident peak power of 300kW. The temperature tuning
curve is much broader than a comparable 1-D PPLN crystal and posses multiple features has to the large number of reciprocal
lattice vectors available.

FIG. 6. Graph of the experimental (circles) and theoretical (squares) output angles for the 2nd harmonic as an function
indicates propagation in the ΓK direction. The maximum internal angle between the

◦
of the external input angle, where 0
fundamental and 2nd harmonic was ∼ 8◦ (the refractive index of lithium niobate is ∼ 2.2).

FIG. 7. Output of the HeXLN crystal at high powers and a variety of input angles.

5

6

π

4

d

3

511nm

766nm

511nm

766nm
511nm

e1

e

2

2ω
k

ω
k

[1,0]

K

2ω
k

M

ω

k

ω
k

[1,1]

Γ

7

8

9

10

11

12

This figure "hexln3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9910036v1

