9
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
3
 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
2
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Marcatili’s Lossless Tapers and Bends: an Apparent Paradox and its Solution

Antonio-D. Capobianco1, Stefano Corrias1, Stefano Curtarolo1,2 and Carlo G. Someda1,3
1DEI, Universit`a di Padova, Via Gradenigo 6/A 35131 Padova, Italy.
2Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3corresponding author e-mail: someda@dei.unipd.it

Proceedings of Jordan International Electrical and Electronic Engineering Conference,
JIEEEC’98, April 27-29, 1998, Amman, Jordan

I. ABSTRACT.

Numerical results based on an extended BPM
algorithm indicate that, in Marcatili’s lossless ta-
pers and bends, through-ﬂowing waves are dras-
tically diﬀerent from standing waves. The source
of this surprising behavior is inherent in Maxwell’s
equations. Indeed, if the magnetic ﬁeld is correctly
derived from the electric one, and the Poynting
vector is calculated, then the analytical results are
reconciled with the numerical ones. Similar con-
siderations are shown to apply to Gaussian beams
in free space.

II. INTRODUCTION.

In 1985, Marcatili

infringed a historical
[1]
taboo, by showing that lossless tapers and bends
in dielectric waveguides can be conceived and de-
signed, at least on paper. The key feature shared
by all the inﬁnity of structures which obey Mar-
catili’s recipe, is the fact that the phase fronts of
the guided modes which propagate in them, are
closed surfaces. As well known, phase fronts which
extend to inﬁnity in one direction orthogonal to
that of propagation do entail radiation loss, but
closed fronts can avoid this problem. However,
shortly after the ﬁrst recipe [1], it was pointed out
[2] that that recipe could generate some inconsis-
tencies.
In fact, a traveling wave with a closed
phase front is either exploding from a point (or a
line, or a surface), or collapsing into such a set.
In a lossless medium where there are no sources,
this is untenable. On the other hand, it was also
pointed out in [2] that a standing wave with closed
constant-amplitude surfaces is physically meaning-
ful. Therefore, propagation of a through-ﬂowing
wave through any of Marcatili’s lossless tapers or
bends has to be described in this way: the incom-
ing wave must be decomposed as the sum of two
standing waves, of opposite parity with respect to a
suitable symmetry surface. The output wave was
then to be found as the sum of the values taken
by the two standing waves at the other end of the

device. Another point raised in [2] was that very
similar remarks apply to Gaussian beams in free
space.

Later on, the literature showed that interest in
this problem was not so high, for a long time. Re-
cently, though, we observed several symptoms of a
renewed interest in low-loss [3–5] and lossless [6,7]
tapers or bends. This induced us to try to go be-
yond the results of [2], and to clarify further the
diﬀerence between through-ﬂowing and standing
waves in Marcatili’s tapers.

The new results reported in this paper can be
summarized as follows.
In Section III, we show
that the numerical analysis (based on an extended
BPM algorithm) of Marcatili’s tapers reconﬁrms
that indeed through-ﬂowing waves are drastically
diﬀerent from standing ones. The latter ones
match very well the analytical predictions of the
original recipe [1], but through-ﬂowing waves have
open wave fronts, which do not entail any phys-
ical paradox.
In Section IV, we provide an ana-
lytical discussion of why, in contrast to what oc-
curs with plane waves in a homogeneous medium
and with guided modes in longitudinally uniform
waveguides, through-ﬂowing waves are so diﬀer-
ent from standing ones. We show that this is a
rather straightforward consequence of Maxwell’s
equations. From this we will draw the conclu-
sion that a through-ﬂowing wave propagating in
one of Marcatili’s tapers is never strictly lossless.
Nonetheless, our numerical results reconﬁrm that
the recipes given in [1] do yield extremely low ra-
diation losses.

Finally, we address brieﬂy the case of Gaussian
beams in free space, and explain why they be-
have essentially in the same way as the devices
we discussed above. In fact, Maxwell’s equations
show that in general the phase fronts of the mag-
netic ﬁeld in a Gaussian beam are not the same
as the phase fronts of the electric ﬁeld. Therefore,
the Poynting vector is not trivially proportional to
the square of the electric ﬁeld. Consequently, a
through-ﬂowing beam, resulting from two super-
imposed standing waves of opposite parities, can
be surprisingly diﬀerent from the parent waves.

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS.

The geometry of Marcatili’s tapers can eventu-
ally be very complicated (e.g., see [8]). For our
tests, however, we chose a simple shape, to avoid
the danger that geometrical features could hide the
basic physics we were trying to clarify. The re-
sults reported here refer to a single-mode taper
whose graded-index core region is delimited by the
two branches of a hyperbola (labeled A and A’ in
Figs. 1 and 2), and has a mirror symmetry with
respect to its waist. This is a “superlinear” taper,
according to the terminology of [1], with an index
distribution (see again [1])

n =

n0
n0

(cid:26)

p

1 + 2∆/(cosh2η − sin2θ) θ1 < θ < θ2
θ1 > θ > θ2

(1)

where η and ϑ are the elliptical coordinates, in
the plane of Figs. 1 and 2. Fig. 1 refers to a stand-
ing wave of even symmetry with respect to the
waist plane, Fig. 2 to a standing wave of odd sym-
metry. The closed lines are constant-amplitude
plots. We see that they are essentially elliptical,
so they agree very well with the predictions of [1].

FIG. 1. Constant-amplitude plot of a standing wave
of even symmetry (with respect to the waist plane) in
a superlinear Marcatili’s taper.

As mentioned brieﬂy in the Introduction, these
results were generated using an extended BPM,
In fact, it is
which deserves a short description.
well known that the standard BPM codes are suit-
able to track only traveling waves, as they neglect
backward waves. Our code (using a Pade’s op-
erator of order (5,5)) also generates a traveling
wave, and its direction of propagation is inverted
whenever the wave reaches one of the taper ends.
In order to generate single-mode standing waves,
each reﬂection should take place on a surface whose
shape matches exactly that of the wave front. This

is very diﬃcult to implement numerically, but the
problem can be circumvented, letting each reﬂec-
tion take place on a phase-conjugation ﬂat mirror.
Our code calculates then, at each point in the ta-
per, the sum of the forward and backward ﬁelds,
and stops when the diﬀerence between two itera-
tions is below a given threshold.

FIG. 2. Constant-amplitude plot of a standing wave
of odd symmetry (with respect to the waist plane) in
a superlinear Marcatili’s taper.

Figs. 3 and 4 refer to a through-ﬂowing wave.
The almost horizontal dark lines in Fig. 3 are its
phase fronts. They are drastically diﬀerent from
those predicted by the analytical theory in [1],
which are exempliﬁed in the same ﬁgure as a set
of confocal ellipses. Note that the through-ﬂowing
wave has been studied numerically in two ways.
One was simply to launch a suitable transverse
ﬁeld distribution, and track it down the taper with
a standard BPM code. The other one was to cal-
culate the linear combination (with coeﬃcients 1
and j) of the even and odd standing waves shown
in Figs. 1 and 2. The results obtained in these two
ways were indistinguishable one from the other.
This proves that indeed through-ﬂowing waves are
drastically diﬀerent from standing ones.
In par-
ticular, as we said in the Introduction, they keep
clear from any paradox connected with energy con-
servation.

Fig. 4 shows a ﬁeld amplitude contour plot for
the same through-ﬂowing wave as in Fig. 3.
It
indicates that propagation through the taper is in-
deed almost adiabatic. Therefore, as anticipated
in the Introduction, insertion losses of Marcatili’s
tapers are very low (at least as long as the length
to width ratio is not too small), although they are
not strictly zero. As a typical example, for a total
taper length of 2.5µm, a waist width of 0.55µm and
an initial-ﬁnal width of 1.65µm, BPM calculations
yield that the lost power fraction is 1.4 × 10−4. A
typical plot of power vs. distance along a taper

with these features is shown in Fig. 5.

FIG. 3. Phase fronts of a through-ﬂowing wave in

the same superlinear taper as in Figs. 1 and 2.

IV. THEORETICAL DISCUSSION.

For the sake of clarity, let us restrict ourselves to
the case of two-dimensional tapers, like those of the
previous section, where the geometry and the index
distribution are independent of the z coordinate,
orthogonal to the plane of the ﬁgures. However,
our conclusions will apply to 3-D structure also.

The index distributions found in the corner-
stone paper [1] are such that the TE modes (elec-
tric ﬁeld parallel to z) satisfy rigorously a wave
equation which can be solved by separation of vari-
ables. Obviously, the same equation is satisﬁed rig-
orously by the transverse component of the mag-
netic ﬁeld.

However, in general two solutions of these two
wave equations which are identical, except for a
proportionality constant, do not satisfy Maxwell’s
equations in that structure. This is very easy to
show, for example, for the case which was called
“linear taper” in [1], namely, a wedged-shape re-
gion with a suitable index distribution, where a
guided mode propagates in the radial direction.
The claim [1] that the dependence of Ez on the
radial coordinate is expressed by a Hankel func-
tion of imaginary order iν, related to other fea-
tures of the taper, is perfectly legitimate. How-
ever, one cannot extrapolate from it that the same
In fact, calculat-
is true for the magnetic ﬁeld.
ing the curl of the electric ﬁeld we ﬁnd that the
azimuthal component of the magnetic ﬁeld is pro-
portional to the ﬁrst derivative of the Hankel func-
tion, which is never proportional to the function
itself. The same is true for the Mathieu function
of the fourth kind, which satisfy the wave equation
in the coordinate system which ﬁts the superlinear
taper of the previous Section. This entails a dras-

tic diﬀerence with plane waves, and with guided
modes in uniform waveguides, where the deriva-
tive of the exponential function that describes the
propagation of the electric ﬁeld is proportional to
the function itself. In the cases at hand, the con-
cept of wave impedance becomes ill-grounded. In
fact, the electric ﬁeld and the transverse magnetic
ﬁeld have identical dependencies on the transverse
coordinate, so that their ratio is constant over each
wavefront, but they are diﬀerent functions of the
longitudinal coordinate, as if the ‘wave impedance’
were not constant at all along the wave path. This
indicates why it is very risky, in the case at hand, to
make general claims on the Poynting vector start-
ing from the spatial distribution of only the electric
ﬁeld. To strengthen our point, let us prove explic-
itly that it is not self-consistent to claim that a
purely traveling TE wave, whose radial dependence
is expressed by a Hankel function of imaginary or-
der, Hiν, can propagate along a linear taper. As
we just said, for such a wave Ez is proportional
to Hiν , Hψ is proportional to H ′
iν , so the radial
component of the Poynting vector is proportional
iν )∗. In a purely traveling wave there is
to Hiν (H ′
no reactive power in the direction of propagation.
Combining with what we just said, it is easy to see
that this would imply |Hiν |2 = constant along the
(radial) direction of propagation, a requirement
that is not satisﬁed by Hankel functions. (Note,
once more, that it is satisﬁed by exponential func-
tions). Therefore, any wave along a linear taper
whose radial dependence is expressed as a Hankel
function must be at least a partially standing wave.
A through-ﬂowing wave, if it exists, must behave
in a diﬀerent way.

FIG. 4. Field-amplitude contour plot, in the same

superlinear taper as in the previous ﬁgures.

Finally, let us address brieﬂy the case of Gaus-
sian beams in free space.
It was pointed out in
[2] that they behave essentially in the same way as
the devices we discussed above. There is still some-
thing to add to the discussion of [2]. Assume that

tapers apply to Gaussian beams in free space as
well.

[1] E.A.J. Marcatili, “Dielectric tapers with curved
axes and no loss”, IEEE J. Quant. Electron., vol.
21, pp. 307-314, Apr. 1985.

[2] E.A.J. Marcatili and C.G. Someda, “Gaussian
beams are fundamentally diﬀerent from free-space
modes”, IEEE J. Quant. Electron., vol. 231, pp.
164-167, Feb. 1987.

[3] O. Mtomi, K. Kasaya and H. Miyazawa, “Design
of a single-mode tapered waveguide for low-loss
chip-to-ﬁber coupling”, IEEE J. Quant. Electron.,
vol. 30, pp. 1787-1793, Aug. 1994.

[4] I. Mansour and C.G. Someda, “Numerical opti-
mization procedure for low-loss sharp bends in
MgO co-doped T i − LiN bO3 waveguides”, IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol 7, pp. 81-83, Jan. 1995.
[5] C. Vassallo, “Analysis of tapered mode transform-
ers for semiconductor optical ampliﬁers”, Optical
and Quantum Electron., vol. 26, pp. 235-248, 1994.
[6] M.-L. Wu, P.-L. Fan, J.-M. Hsu and C.-T. Lee,
“Design of ideal structures for lossless bends in
optical waveguides by conformal mapping”, IEEE
J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 14, pp. 2604-2614, Nov.
1996.

[7] C.-T. Lee, M.-L. Wu, L.-G. Sheu, P.-L. Fan and J.-
M. Hsu, “Design and analysis of completely adia-
batic tapered waveguides by conformal mapping“,
IEEE J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 15, pp. 403-410,
Feb. 1997.

[8] J.I. Sakai and E.A.J. Marcatili, “Lossless dielectric
tapers with three-dimensional geometry”, IEEE J.
Lightwave Technol., vol. 9, pp. 386-393, Mar. 1991.
[9] C.G. Someda, “Electromagnetic Waves”, Chap-

man & Hall, London, 1998, pp. 165-171.

[10] A. D. Capobianco, M. Midrio and C. G. Someda,
“TE and TM Gaussian beams in a homogeneous
medium”, to be published.

the electric ﬁeld of an electromagnetic wave has the
classical features of a T EM00 Gaussian beam (see,
e.g., [9]). Then, Maxwell’s equations show that the
phase fronts of the magnetic ﬁeld are not the same
as those of the electric ﬁeld, neither on the waist
plane nor far from it. Hence, the Poynting vector is
not trivially proportional to the square of the elec-
tric ﬁeld. This entails the presence of a reactive
power (never accounted for in the classical class-
room explanations of Gaussian beams), and an ac-
tive power ﬂow which is not always along the lines
orthogonal to the electric ﬁeld phase fronts. Once
again, a through-ﬂowing beam, resulting from two
superimposed standing waves of opposite parities,
is diﬀerent from the parent waves, and the diﬀer-
ence is maximum on the symmetry plane, i.e. at
the beam waist. Due to time and space limits, the
details of this discussion must be left out of this
presentation, and will be published elsewhere [10].

FIG. 5. Power vs. distance, in a superlinear taper
of the shape shown in the previous ﬁgures, whose pa-
rameters are speciﬁed in the text.

V. CONCLUSION.

We tried to shed new light on an old problem,
namely, whether the idea of a guided mode trav-
eling without any loss through a dielectric taper
can be sustained without running into any physical
paradox. Our numerical results, obtained with an
extended BPM technique, have fully reconﬁrmed
what was stated in [2]: in Marcatili’s tapers, stand-
ing waves have the basic features outlined in [1],
but through-ﬂowing waves do not. This prevents
them from running into a paradox, but on the
other hand entails some loss, although very small
indeed. Next, we have provided an explanation
for the unexpected and puzzling result, a drastic
diﬀerence between standing and through-ﬂowing
waves in the same structures. The source of these
“surprise” is within Maxwell’s equations.

It was pointed out in [2] that some of the prob-
lems discussed here with reference to Marcatili’s

