1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Gordian unknots

P. Pieranski1, S. Przybyl1 and A. Stasiak2
1Poznan University of Technology
e-mail: Piotr.Pieranski@put.poznan.pl
Nieszawska 13A, 60 965 Poznan, Poland
2University of Lausanne, Switzerland

February 9, 2008

Abstract

Numerical simulations indicate that there exist conformations of the
unknot, tied on a ﬁnite piece of rope, entangled in such a manner, that
they cannot be disentangled to the torus conformation without cutting
the rope. The simplest example of such a gordian unknot is presented.

Knots are closed, self-avoiding curves in the 3-dimensional space. The shape
and size of a knot, i.e. its conformation, can be changed in a very broad range
without changing the knot type. The necessary condition to keep the knot type
intact is that during all transformations applied to the knot the curve must
remain self-avoiding. From the topological point of view, all conformations of
a knot are equivalent but if the knot is considered as a physical object, it may
be not so. Let us give a simple example. Take a concrete, knotted space curve
K. Imagine, that K is inﬂated into a tube of diameter D. If K is scaled down
without scaling down D, then there is obviously a minimum size below which
one cannot go without changing the shape of K. Diminishing, in a thought or
computer experiment, the size of a knot one arrives to the limit below which in
some places of the knot the impenetrability of the tube on which it has been
tied would be violated.

Consider a knot tied on a piece of a rope.

If the knot is tied in a loose
manner, one can easily change its shape. However, the range of transformations
available in such a process is much more narrow than in the case of knots tied
on an inﬁnitely thin rope. Limitations imposed on the transformations used to
change the knot shape by the ﬁxed thickness and length of the rope may make
some conformations of the knot inaccessible from each other. The limitations
can be in an elegant manner represented by the single condition that the global
curvature of the knot cannot be larger than 2/D [1]. That it is the case we
shall try to demonstrate in the most simple case of the unknot. The knot is a
particular one since we know for it the shape of the ideal, least rope consuming
conformation [2]. The simplest shape of the unknot is obviously circular. If the
knot is tied on the rope of diameter D the shortest piece of rope one must use to

1

Figure 1: SONO disentagles an unknot entagled in a simple manner. How the
length of the rope changes in this process is shown in Fig.2 (lower curve).

form it has the length Lmin = πD. If one starts from the circular conformation
of the unknot tied on a longer piece of rope, the length of the rope can be
subsequently reduced without changing the circular shape until the Lmin value
is reached.

Consider now a diﬀerent, entangled conformation of the unknot tied on a
piece of rope having the length L > Lmin. Can it be disentangled to the
canonical circular shape? Are there such conformations of the unknot, which
cannot be disentangled to a circle without elongating the rope? For obvious
In what follows we
reasons we propose to call such conformations gordian.
shall report results of numerical experiments suggesting existence of the gordian
conformations of the unknot.

Imagine that the entangled conformation of the unknot is tied on piece the
ideal rope of diameter D and length L > Lmin. The ideal rope is perfectly
ﬂexible but at the same time perfectly hard. Its perpendicular cross-sections
remain always circular. The diameters of all the cross-sections are equal D.
None of the circular cross-sections overlap. The surface of the rope is per-
fectly slippery. In such conditions one may try to force the knot to disentangle
itself just by shortening the rope length. Such a process, in which the knot
is tightened, can be easily simulated with a computer. The details of SONO
(Shrink-On-No-Overlaps), the simulation algorithm we developed, are described
elsewhere[3]. As shown in [3], SONO disentangles some simple conformations
of the unknot. See Fig.1. It manages to cope also with the more complex con-
formation proposed by Freedman [4] disentangled previously by the Kusner and
Sullivan algorithm minimizing the M¨obius energy [5].

The steps of the construction of the Freedman conformation, are as follows

2

Figure 2: Evolution of the lenght of the rope in a process in which SONO disen-
tagles the Freedman’s F (31, 31) conformation of the unknot. Initially, the loose
F (31, 31) conformation is rapidly tightened. Then, the evolution slows down.
At the end of the slow stage one of the end knots becomes untied. Subsequently,
the other of the end knots becomes untied. Eventually the conformation be-
comes disentagled and the unknot reaches its ideal, circular shape. The lower
curve shows the evolution of the rope lenght in the much faster process in which
the unknot shown in Fig.1 becomes disentangled.

[6]:

smaller.

1. Take a circular unknot and splash it into a ﬂat double rope band.
2. Tie overhand knots on both ends of the band and tighten them. (From
the point of view of the knot theory, the overhand knots are open trefoil knots.)
3. Open and slip the end loops over the bodies of the overhand knots, so

that they meet in the central part of the band.

4. Move the rope through both overhand knots so that the loops become

In what follows we shall refer to the conformation as F (31, 31). To disentan-
gle F (31, 31), one must slip the loops back all around the bodies of the overhand
knots, which is diﬃcult, since the move needs ﬁrst making the loops bigger.

How the SONO algorithm copes with this task is shown in Fig.2, where con-

3

Figure 3: SONO tightens the F (51, 51) conformation of the unknot, but does
not manage to disentangle it.

secutive stages of the disentangling process are shown. Tightening the F (31, 31)
conformation SONO algorithm brings it to the very compact state, which seems
at the ﬁrst sight to be impossible to disentangle. The end loops are very tight
and they seem to be too small to slip back over the bodies of the overhand knots.
However, as the computer simulations prove, there exists a path in the conﬁg-
urational space of the knot along which the loops slowly become bigger and
one of them slips over the body of the overhand knot. Then, the disentangling
process proceeds without any problems. Results of the computer experiments
we performed suggest strongly, that the F (31, 31) conformation is not gordian.
The construction of original Freedman entanglement may be modiﬁed mak-
ing it more diﬃcult to disentangle. The simplest way of doing this is to change
the end trefoil knots to some more complex knots. For the sake of brevity we
will use F (K (1), K (2)) symbols to indicate with what kind of the Freedman con-
formation of the unknot we are dealing with. Results of computer simulations
we performed prove that the F (41, 41) conformation is also disentangled in the
knot tightening process. However, the F (51, 51) conformation proves to be re-
sistant to SONO algorithm. Fig.3 shows consecutive stages of the tightening
process. The initial conformation, is loose, it becomes tight soon. Then the
evolution process slows down and eventually stops. The ﬁnal conformation is
proves to be stable. The gordian conformation has been reached.

Eperimenting with knots tied on real, macroscopic ropes or tubes is by no
means easy [7]. First of all, the surface of any real rope is never smooth and
strong friction often stops the walk within the conﬁgurational space of a knot
tied on such a rope. The role of friction was exposed by Kauﬀman [8]. Fric-
tion can be signiﬁcantly reduced, however, when a knot is tied on a smooth
nanoscopic ﬁlament, e.g. a nanotube, or on a thermally ﬂuctuating polymer

4

molecule [9]. There exists another, less obvious, factor which makes laboratory
experiments on knots diﬃcult: the Berry’s phase [10], to be more precise, its
classical counterpart - the Hannay’s angle [11]. Modern ropes are often con-
structed in the following manner: a parallel bundle of smooth ﬁlaments is kept
together by a tube-like, plaited cover. As easy to check, such ropes are much
easier to bend than to twist. Forming a knot on a rope, one has to deform it.
In view of what was said above, the deformation applied is rather bending than
twisting. Avoiding the twist deformations one follows the procedure known as
the parallel transport. As a result, when at the ﬁnal stage of the knot tying
procedure the ends of the rope meet, they are in general rotated in relation to
each other: the misﬁt angle A is the Hannay’s angle. As shown in [12] and [13],
the Hannay’s angle A stays in a simple relation,

1 + W r = (A/2π) mod 2

with the writhe W r of the knot into which the rope has been formed. Splicing
the ends of the rope one ﬁxes the misﬁt angle A. Consequently, the writhe value
W r becomes ﬁxed as well. As a result, any further changes of the conformation
of the knot become very diﬃcult and are basically restricted to the manifold
of constant writhe. (The speciﬁc construction of the Freedman conformations
makes them achiral [14]. Their writhe is equal zero.)

The natural question arises, if the impossibility of disentangling the gordian
conformation does not stem from the described above friction and writhe factors.
We feel emphasize, that it is not the case. The rope simulated by the SONO
algorithm is perfect:
it is frictionless and utterly ﬂexible. It has no internal,
parallel bundle structure and it accepts any twist. Problems with disentangling
the gordian conformations are purely steric. Tightening the F (51, 51) Freedman
conformation SONO brings it into a cul-de-sac of what mathematicians call
thickness energy [15]. To get out of it, one needs elongate the rope. By how
much? We do not know yet the answer to this question.

We thank Jacques Dubochet, Giovanni Dietler, Kenneth Millett, Robert
Kusner, Alain Goriely, Eric Rawdon, Jonathan Simon, Gregory Buck and Joel
Hass for helpful discussions and correspondence. PP thanks the Herbette Foun-
dation for ﬁnancial support during his visit in LAU. This work was carried out
under Project KBN 5 PO3B 01220.

References

[1] O. Gonzalez and J. H. Maddocks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 96, 4769 (1999).

[2] V. Katritch et al. Nature 384, 142 (1996).

[3] P. Pieranski in Ideal Knots, edited by A. Stasiak, V. Katritch and L. H.

Kauﬀman (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1998).

[4] M. Freedman, Z.-X. He, Z. Wang, Annals of Math. 139, 1 (1994).

5

[5] R. B. Kusner and J. M. Sullivan in Ideal Knots, edited by A. Stasiak, V.

Katritch and L. H. Kauﬀman (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1998).

[6] An equivalent prescription for creation of the Freedman conformations of

the unknot was formulated by Joel Hass (private communication).

[7] G. Buck in Ideal Knots, edited by A. Stasiak, V. Katritch and L. H. Kauﬀ-

man (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1998).

[8] L. H. Kauﬀman, Knots and physics, (World Scientiﬁc, 1993.

[9] P.-G. de Gennes, Macromolecules 17, 703 (1985)

[10] M. V. Berry, Nature 326, 277 (1987).

[11] J. H. Hannay, J. Phys. A 31, L321 (1998).

[12] Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 472 (2000).

[13] J. Aldinger, I. Klapper and M. Tabor, (unpublished).

[14] C. Liang and K. Mislow, J. Math. Chem. 15, 1 (1994).

[15] See chapters by O. Hara, Simon and Rawdon in Ideal Knots, edited by
A. Stasiak, V. Katritch and L. H. Kauﬀman (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1998).

6

This figure "Fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103080v1

This figure "Fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103080v1

This figure "Fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103080v1

