1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The ideal trefoil knot

P. Pieranski and S. Przybyl
Poznan University of Technology
Nieszawska 13A, 60 965 Poznan
Poland
e-mail: Piotr.Pieranski@put.poznan.pl

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The most tight conformation of the trefoil knot found by the SONO
algorithm is presented. Structure of the set of its self-contact points is
analyzed.

1 Introduction

Finding the best way of packing a tube within a box seems to be rather a gar-
dening than a scientiﬁc problem. However, the optimal single helix, discovered
in a computer simulation study of this problem, [1] and [2], proves to be ubiqui-
tous in many proteins as their α-helical parts. It seems, as suggested in [3], that
also the closely packed double helix appearing in the process of twisting two
ropes together [4] have been already discovered and applied by nature. Labora-
tory experiments allow one to observe in the real time how the optimal helices
are formed in various systems e.g. the bacterial ﬂagellas [5] or phospholipid
membranes [6].

Both processes, of packing the ropes and twisting them together, occur si-
multaneously when a knot tied on a rope becomes tightened. The problem of
ﬁnding the most tight, least rope consuming conformations of knots was inde-
pendently posed and indicated as essential by diﬀerent authors; for references
see [7]. Knots in such optimal, most tight conformations are often called ideal,
a term proposed by Simon [8], and introduced into the literature by Stasiak [9].
Ideal conformations minimize the value of the size-invariant variable Λ = L/D,
where L and D are, respectively, the length and the diameter of the perfect rope
(deﬁned below) on which the knot is tied. The only knot whose ideal confor-
mation is known at present is the trivial knot (unknot). See Fig.1. Its length
in the ideal, circular conformation equals πD, thus Λ = π. Finding the ideal
conformation of a nontrivial knot is a nontrivial task. Initiated a few years ago
search for the ideal conformations of nontrivial knots continues.

1

Figure 1: Ideal unknot.

One of the algorithms used in the search is SONO (Shrink-On-No-Overlaps)[10].

SONO simulates a process in which the rope, on which a knot is tied, slowly
shrinks. The rope is allowed to shrink only when no overlaps of the rope with
itself are detected within the knot. When such overlaps occur, SONO modiﬁes
the knot conformation to remove them.
If this is no more possible, the pro-
cess ends. Unfortunately, ending of the tightening process does not mean that
the ideal conformation of a given knot was found. The tightening process could
have stopped also because a local minimum of the thickness energy was entered.
The possibility that there exists a diﬀerent, less rope consuming conformation,
cannot be excluded.

SONO has been used in the search of ideal conformations of both prime and
composite knots. Parameters of the least rope consuming conformations found
by the algorithm were listed in [11] and [12]. In a few cases, SONO managed to
ﬁnd better conformations than the simulated annealing procedure [9]. However,
for the most simple knots, in particular, the trefoil knot, the simulated annealing
and SONO provided identical results; the Λ values are identical within experi-
mental errors. It seems obvious, that no better conformations of the knot exist.
We feel obliged to emphasize, however, that it is only an intuitively obvious
conclusion - no formal proofs have been provided so far. As indicated in [3], we
are in a situation similar to that, which lasted in the problem of the best pack-
ing of spheres for 400 years. That the face centered cubic and hexagonal close
packed lattices were among the structures which minimize the volume occupied
by closely packed hard spheres seemed to be obvious since the times of Kepler,
however the formal proof of the conjecture was provided but a few years ago [13].
Waiting for the formal proofs that what we have observed in the knot tighten-
ing numerical experiments is the ideal conformation of the trefoil, seems to be
a too cautious attitude. Thus, after a few years of experimenting, we decided
to present the best, least rope consuming conformation of the trefoil knot we
managed to ﬁnd. We compare it with the most tight conformation of the knot
which can be found within the analytically deﬁned family of torus knots. In
particular, we describe the qualitative change in the set of self-contacts which

2

Figure 2: The perfect rope. Perpendicular sections of the rope are of the disk
shape. None of the disks are allowed to overlap. This puts a limit not only on
the spacial distance of diﬀerent fragments of the curve into which the rope is
shaped, but also on its local curvature.

takes place within the trefoil knot during the tightening process. We believe
that some of the features of the self-contact set we have found may be present
also in ideal conformations of other knot types.

An alternative method of searching for the most tight conformations of knots
consists in inﬂating the rope on which the knot has been tied In such a process
the length of the rope is kept ﬁxed. The maximum radius to which the rope
in a given conformation of a knot can be inﬂated is closely related with the
injectivity radius considered in detail by Rawdon [14].

2 The perfect rope

It is the aim of the computer simulations we perform to simulate the tightening
process of knots tied on the perfect rope: perfectly ﬂexible, but at the same time
perfectly hard in its circular cross-section. The surface of the perfect rope can
be seen as the union of all circles centered on and perpendicular to the knot
axis C. See Fig.2.

We assume that C is smooth and simple, i.e. self-avoiding, what guaranties
that at each of its points r the tangent vectors τ (r), and thus the circular
cross-section, are well deﬁned. The surface remains smooth as long as:

A. the local curvature radius rκ of the knot axis is nowhere smaller than

D/2,

.

−

B. the minimum distance of closest approach d∗ is nowhere smaller then D/2

The minimum distance of closest approach d∗, known also as the doubly
critical self-distance, see [8], is deﬁned in [16], as the smallest distance between
all pairs of points (r1, r2) on the knot axis, having the property, that the vector
r1) joining them is orthogonal to the tangent vectors τ (r1), τ (r2) located
(r2

3

Figure 3: The trefoil knot is a torus knot - it can be tied on the surface of a
torus.

at the points:

d∗(C) = min

r2

r1

: τ (r1)

r1,r2∈C {|

−

|

(r2

⊥

−

r1), τ (r2)

(r2

r1)
}

−

⊥

(1)

As shown by Gonzalez and Maddocks [16], the two conditions can be gath-
ered into a single one providing that the notion of the global curvature radius
ρG is introduced:

ρG(r1) =

min
r2,r3∈C
r16=r26=r36=r1

ρ(r1, r2, r3)

(2)

where, ρ(r1, r2, r3) is the radius of the unique circle (the circumcircle) which
passes through all of the three points: r1, r2 and r3. Using the notion of the
global curvature, the condition which guaranties smoothness of the knot surface
can be reformulated as follows:

C. the global curvature radius ρG of the knot axis is nowhere smaller than

D/2.

Analysis of the conformations produced by the SONO algorithm proves that

conditions A and B, (and C) are fulﬁlled.

3 Parametrically tied trefoil knot

The trefoil knot can be tied on the surface of a torus. See Fig.3Consider the set

4

of 3 periodic functions:

x = [R + r cos(2 ν1 π t)] sin(2 ν2 π t)
y = [R + r cos(2 ν1 π t)] cos(2 ν2 π t)

z = r sin(2 ν1 π t)

(3)
(4)

(5)

The trajectory determined by equations 3, 4 and 5 becomes closed as t spans
a unit interval. For the sake of simplicity we shall consider the [0, 1) interval.
For all relatively prime integer values of ν1, ν2 equations 3, 4 and 5 deﬁne self-
avoiding closed curves located on the surface of a torus. R denotes here the
radius of the circle determining the central axis of the torus while r denotes
the radius of its circular cross-sections. For the trefoil knot, frequencies ν1, ν 2
equal 2 and 3, respectively. In what follows we consider knots tied on a rope;
trajectories deﬁned by equations 3, 4 and 5 determine position of its axis.

The (ν1, ν 2) and the (ν 2, ν1) torus knots are ambient isotopic, i.e. they can
be transformed one into another without cutting the rope on which they are tied
[17]. As shown previously, the (2, 3) version of the trefoil is less rope consuming
[12]. Thus, the (3, 2) version will not be discussed below.

Assume that the trefoil knot whose axis is deﬁned by equations 3, 4 and 5
is tied on a rope of diameter D = 1. In what follows we shall refer to it as the
parametrically tied trefoil (PTT) knot. In such a case, radius r of the torus on
which the axis of knot is located, cannot be smaller than 1/2 ; below this value
overlaps of the rope with itself will certainly appear; at r = 1/2 the rope remains
in a continuous self-contact along the torus axis. To keep the self-contacts we
assume in what follows that r = 1/2. To check, if the knot is free of overlaps in
other regions, one can analyze the map of its internal distances. Let t1 and t2 be
two values of the parameter t, both located in the [0, 1) interval. Let (x1, y1, z1)
and (x2, y2, z2) be the coordinates of two points indicated within the knot axis
by t1 and t2, respectively. Let d(t1, t2) be the Euclidean distance between the
points:

d(t1, t2) = p(x2

x1)2 + (y2

y1)2 + (z2

z1)2

−

−

−

(6)

The map of the function, see Fig.4 displays a mirror symmetry induced by

the equality d(t1, t2) = d(t2, t1).

Looking for possible overlaps within the knot one looks for regions within the
internal distances landscape, where d(t1, t2) < 1. The most visible depression
within the landscape of the interknot distances is located around the diagonal
where t1 = t2. As easy to see, d(t1, t2) = 0 along the line, but for obvious
reasons this does not implies any overlaps within the knot.

Another valley within which d(t1, t2) may go down to the critical 1 value is
localized in the vicinity of lines deﬁned by equality
= 1/2. To see, if in
the vicinity of the lines the height really drops to or even below 1, we plotted
the map of the d(t1, t2) function in such a manner, that regions lying below the
arbitrarily chosen 1.005 level were cut oﬀ.

t2
|

−

t1

|

5

Figure 4: The map of the intraknot distances of the most tight PPT knot.

As seen in Fig.5 there are four such regions within the PTT knot: one in the
shape of a sinusoidal band and three in shapes of almost circular patches. The
band contains in its middle the mentioned above continuous line of self-contacts
points; it is the axis of the torus on which the knot is tied. The circular patches
contain 3 additional contact points; when R becomes too small, overlaps appear
around the points. Numerical analysis we performed reveals that (with the 5
decimal digits accuracy we applied) the overlaps occurring within these regions
vanish above R = 1.1158. For R = 1.1159 the distance between the closest
points located within these regions of the knot equals 0.9999. For R = 1.1158
the distance is equal 1.0000. Where, within the PTT knot the self-contact points
are located is shown in Fig.6

4 SONO tied trefoil knot

Considerations presented above indicated the value of R, at which the PTT
knot reaches its most tight conformation. The length Lt of the rope engaged
in this conformation of the trefoil knot equals 17.0883. Can one tie the trefoil
knot using a shorter piece of the rope? Theoretical considerations indicate
that this possibility cannot be excluded. As proven in [18] the piece of rope
used to tie the trefoil knot cannot be shorter than Lm = (2 + √2)π
10.72.
Such a location of this lower limit leaves a lot of place for a possible further
tightening of the knot. Application of SONO reveals that the tightening is
possible providing the conformation of the knot is allowed to leave the subspace
of the parametrically tied torus conformations. This happens spontaneously in

≈

6

Figure 5: The map of the intraknot distances. Left - the most tight PTT knot.
Right - the most tight STT knot. The map was cut from below at the height
10.005.

numerical simulations in which the most tight PTT knot is supplied to SONO as
the initial conformation. SONO algorithm manages to make it shorter. In the
simulations we performed, SONO reduced the length of the knot by about 4%
to Lexp = 16.38. The discrete representation of the knot used in the simulations
contained N = 327 nodes. Below we describe the ﬁnal conformation. For the
sake of simplicity we shall refer to trefoil knots processed by the SONO algorithm
as the SONO tied trefoil (STT) knots.

The diﬀerences in the conformation of the most tight conformations of the
PTT and STT knots is a subtle one. The essential diﬀerence lies in the structure
of the sets of their self-contact points. As mentioned above, the circular line of
self-contact points present in the family of the PTT knots stays intact as R is
changed within the family. Tightening of a PTT knot achieved by decreasing the
radius R of the torus stops when additional discrete points of contacts appear
at three locations within the knot. This happens as R becomes equal 1.1158.
Further tightening of the knot within the family of PTT knots is not possible,

7

Figure 6: Localization of the set of self-contact points within the most tight
PPT knot.

it becomes possible within the family of the STT knots.

During the tightening process carried out by SONO, the set of the self-
contact points undergoes both qualitative and quantitative changes. First of
all, the line of contacts present in the PTT knot changes its shape becoming
distinctly non-circular. Secondly, the three contact points give birth to pieces
of new line of self-contacts. Unexpectedly, the new pieces do not connect into a
new line, wiggling around and crossing the old line, but they are mounted into
the old line in such a manner, that a single, self-avoiding and knotted line of
self-contacts is created. That this is the case was revealed by a precise analysis
of the interknot distances function. A map covering the interknot distances only
within the very thin [1.00000, 1.00002] interval shows two separated lines, see
Fig.7, corresponding to a single, self-avoiding and knotted line of contact.

In addition to the line, a set of three points of self-contacts is formed. The
points are located at places where the line of self-contacts becomes almost tan-
gent to itself. The self-contact line runs twice around the knot. As a result,
each of the circular cross-sections of the rope stays here in touch with another
two such sections. The close packed structure formed in such a manner is much
more stable than the structure of the most tight PTT knot, where single con-
tacts were predominant. Let us note, that ﬁgure 1e presented in ref.
[16] a
similar self-contact line structure can be seen. Unfortunately, inspecting the
ﬁgure one cannot see, if the ”self-contact spikes” shown there form a single,
self-avoiding, knotted or a double, crossing itself line. The problem was not
discussed in the text. Let us emphasize, however, that the diﬀerence between

8

Figure 7: The set of the self-contact points in the most tight STT knot as seen
within the map of the intraknot distances.

the two possibilities is conﬁned to a zero-measure set.

5 Discussion

Ideal knots are objects of which very little is known still. The only knot whose
ideal conformation is known rigorously is the unknot. Its ideal conformation, a
circle of a radius identical with the radius of the rope on which it is tied, can
be conveniently described parametrically. The set of the self-contact points is
here limited to a single point: the center of the circle. All circular sections of
the rope meet at this point. The maximum local curvature and the minimum
double critical self-distance limiting conditions are simultaneously met.

The situation in the case of the trefoil knot, the simplest non-trivial prime
knot, is radically diﬀerent. Here the most tight parametrically deﬁned con-
formation proves to be not ideal. As demonstrated by the present authors, it
can be tightened more with the use of the SONO algorithm. The set of the
self-contact points becomes rebuilt during the tightening process. Its topology
becomes diﬀerent. In the case the PPT knot the set of the self-contact points
consists of acircle and 3 separated points. As the numerical experiments we per-
formed suggest, in the case of the STT knot, the set of the self-contact points
turns unexpectedly into a single line. Which the structure of the set of self

9

Figure 8: Position of the line of the self-contact points within the ideal trefoil
knot. To make the line more visible, a part of the knot was cut out.

contact points in other prime knots is, remains an open question.

Acknowledgment PP thanks Andrzej Stasiak, John Maddocs, Robert Kus-
ner, Kenneth Millet, Jason Cantarella and Eric Rawdon for helpful discussions.
This work was carried out under Project KBN 5 PO3B 01220.

References

(2000)

[1] A. Maritan, C. Micheletti, A. Trovato and J. R. Bonavar, Nature 406, 287

[2] S. Przybyl and P. Pieranski E. Phys. J. E, (2000, in print)

[3] A. Stasiak and J. H. Maddocks, Nature 406, 251 (2000).

[4] S. Przybyl and P. Pieranski, Pro Dialog 6, 87 (1998).

[5] R. E. Goldstein, A. Goriely, G. Huber and C.Wolgemuth, Phys. Rev. Let-

ters 84, 1631 (2000).

[6] I. Tsafrir, M.-A. Guedeau-Boudeville, D. Kandel and J. Stavans, Phys.

Rev. E, submitted for publication.

[7] Ideal Knots, eds. A. Stasiak, V. Katritch and L. H. Kauﬀman, World Sin-

gapore 1998.

[8] J. K. Simon, a talk at KNOTS’96, Waseda University, Tokyo (1996).

10

[9] V. Katritch, J. Bednar, J. Michoud, R. G. Scherein, J. Dubochet and A.

Stasiak, Nature 384, 142 (1996).

[10] P. Pieranski, Pro Dialog 5, 111 (1996).

[11] V. Katritch, W. K. Olson, P. Pieranski, J. Dubochet and A. Stasiak, Nature

[13] N. J. Sloane, Nature 395, 435-436 (1998).

388, 148 (1997).

[12] P. Pieranski in [7]

[14] E. Rawdon in [7]

[15] J. Simon in [7]

[16] O. Gonzalez and J. H. Maddocks, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96, 4769 (1999).

[17] C. C. Adams, The Knot Book, W. H. Freeman and Co., New York 1994,

p.111.

[18] Private communication.

11

This figure "31torus.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "DoubleLineInKnotGrey.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "HELICE2.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "Fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "Fig3_11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "Fig4_1005.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "IdealUnknot.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

This figure "map100002.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0103039v1

