2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantization of energy and writhe in
self-repelling knots

Phoebe Hoidn1, Robert B. Kusner2 and Andrzej Stasiak1

1 Laboratoire d’Analyse Ultrastructurale, Universit´e de Lausanne,
1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
E-mails: Phoebe.Hoidn@lau.unil.ch, Andrzej.Stasiak@lau.unil.ch

2 Department of Mathematics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
MA 01003-4515, USA. E-mail: kusner@math.umass.edu

Abstract

Probably the most natural energy functional to be considered for
knotted strings is the one given by the electrostatic repulsion.
In
the absence of counter-charges, a charged, knotted string evolving
along the energy gradient of electrostatic repulsion would progressively
tighten its knotted domain into a point on a perfectly circular string.
However, in the presence of charge screening the self-repelling knotted
strings can get stabilised. It is known that energy functionals in which
repulsive forces between repelling charges grow inversely proportional
to the third or higher power of their relative distance stabilise self-
repelling knots. Especially interesting is the case of the third power
since the repulsive energy becomes scale invariant and does not change
upon M¨obius transformations (reﬂections in spheres) of knotted trajec-
tories. We observe here that knots minimising their repulsive M¨obius
energy show quantization of the energy and writhe (measure of chiral-
ity) within several tested families of knots.

1

1

Introduction

Knot theory was given a strong impetus when in 1860’s Kelvin proposed
that knots made out of vortex lines of ether constitute elementary parti-
cles of matter which at this time were thought to be atoms [1]. However,
development of atomic physics, ﬁrst with classical and then with quantum
models of atoms, failed to show a connection between knots and atoms.
More recently though, today’s elementary particles are again considered to
be string like objects that may be closed [2, 3] and perhaps knotted. This
string theory approach partially revives the ideas of Kelvin and provides a
motivation for exploring quantization of energy and of other values in such
physical systems such as knotted magnetic ﬂux lines [4, 5] or knotted soli-
tons [6].

Knots made of self-repelling, inﬁnitely thin strings in 3-dimensional Eu-
clidean space have been considered by many authors [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Usually it was assumed that knots were perfectly ﬂexible for bending but not
extensible. The repelling charge was assumed to be continually spread along
the knots so that there were no elementary point charges and that the charge
contained within a given curvilinear segment is proportional to the length
of this segment. When the Coulomb energy would govern the evolution of a
knot of this type one should observe that the knotted domain gets progres-
sively tightened into a singular point while the rest of the knot would form
a perfect circle. Progressive tightening of knotted domains in electrostatic
knots may seem counterintuitive when one considers that the electrostatic
repulsion grows inversely proportional to the square of the distance between
every pair of charges. However, at the same time as tightening progresses,
the length of the knotted domain decreases and therefore there is less and
less charge in the tightly knotted domain. In fact the decrease of charge in
the knotted domain is more rapid than its contribution to overall repulsion.
Therefore the tightening that is driven by the decrease of the repulsion out-
side of the knotted domain can progress until a knotted domain shrinks to a
singular point and the entire string is perfectly circular. For this reason the
Coulomb energy is not interesting as energy functional for knots [13, 14].
However, it had been demonstrated that if the repulsion force were growing
inversely proportional to the third or higher power of the distance between
the repelling elements then the knotted domains in prime knots would have
no tendency to shrink to a singular point [7, 8, 10, 12]. The third power case

2

is especially interesting from mathematical and physical points of view since
the energy of a knot becomes conformal and therefore does not change when
the trajectory of the knot is rescaled or undergoes a M¨obius transformation
(reﬂection in a sphere) [10, 14, 15]. In this work we study conﬁgurations of
knots that minimise their M¨obius repulsive energy. From now on we will call
these conﬁgurations as M¨obius knots. Several earlier studies used numer-
ical simulations or analytical approach to investigate various properties of
M¨obius knots [9, 15], however the relations between such characteristic prop-
erties of M¨obius knots as their energy, crossing number, writhe or average
crossing number were not systematically examined before.

2 Energy of M¨obius knots

Let us consider an unknotted closed string that has a few repulsive point
charges equidistantly separated. An energy minimising shape of such an
unknotted string would be then an equilateral polygon with the number of
vertices corresponding to the number of the point charges. To be able to
operate with a model of self-repulsive knot whose shape is independent of
the number of charges in the knot one needs to assume that charges are
not localised but continuously spread over the knot. This mathematical
operation ensures that unknotted energy-minimising strings would always
form a perfect circle independently of the level of carried charge. However,
this non-physical assumption of continuous charge redistribution causes the
energy of a knot to become inﬁnite due to the repulsion of nearby elements.
In order to correct for this problem of inﬁnite energies O’Hara [8] introduced
a regularisation term and deﬁned the energy

ZZK×K (cid:18)

1
|x − y|2 −

1
dK (x, y)2 (cid:19)

dsK(x)dsK (y)

(1)

E(K) =

e

where dK (x, y) is the shorter arclength distance within K from x to y.
Notice that the integral of the second term corresponds to the repulsive
energy of a straight segment with the same length and carrying the same
charge as K. Another, computationally more stable approach is to neglect

3

tangential contributions to repulsion as nearest neighbour regions in smooth
trajectories are practically co-linear and deﬁne the cosine energy

(2)

(3)

E(K) =

ZZK×K

(1 − cos α)
|x − y|2 dsK(x)dsK (y)

where α is the conformal angle between the tangents at points x and y. In
fact it was demonstrated by Doyle and Schramm [15] that

E(K) = E(K) − 4.

e

We have applied here the second approach and used Kenneth Brakke’s
program Evolver to obtain M¨obius energy minimising conﬁgurations of var-
ious knots and to calculate their energies (Ref. 16 but see also http://www.
susqu.edu/facstaﬀ/b/brakke/). Examples of conﬁgurations of various knots
minimising their M¨obius energy can be seen in Reference 15. It should be
recalled that actual shapes of M¨obius energy minimizers of a given knot can
substantially vary because all conﬁgurations obtained by M¨obius transfor-
mations from one M¨obius energy minimizer are also M¨obius energy mini-
mizers. In practice these shapes depend on an arbitrary choice of starting
conﬁgurations used for the energy descent. However, the actual energy val-
ues obtained in our simulations converge to the same values independently of
the starting conﬁgurations of a given knot. In addition we have checked that
the obtained by us values for ten diﬀerent (2, p) torus knots were at most
diﬀerent by 0.1 % from the values calculated using an analytical approach
that can be applied to this class of knots [9, 15].

Figure 1 shows the relation between the M¨obius energy and the topolog-
ical, minimal crossing number for knots belonging to six diﬀerent families
of knots. We have analyzed torus knots with Alexander-Briggs notation
31, 51, 71 etc, twist knots with even number of crossings (Alexander-Briggs
notation 41, 61, 81 etc), twist knots with odd number of crossings (Alexander-
Briggs notation 31, 52, 72, 92 etc) and three Conway families of knots with
Conway notations (2p + 1, 1, 2p), (2p − 1, 2, 2p) and (1, 2p − 1, 1, 2p − 1) where
p are consecutive natural numbers (see Fig. 1b for schematic explanation
how these families are formed). Standard representations of these knots
classiﬁed according to Alexander-Briggs notations can be seen in tables of
knots [17, 18] while the M¨obius energy minimising conﬁgurations are shown
in Ref. 15 and one representative example of energy minimising conﬁgura-
tions of torus knot 111 is shown here in Figure 1c. From the data points
in Figure 1a we have excluded founders of the families as these frequently
belong to diﬀerent families at the same time. It is visible that in all these

4

Figure 1: Energy of M¨obius knots, a, Diﬀerent families of torus knots, twist
knots and Conway knots show the same slope. These analysed families are
represented in b with k = 1 and p = 2. c, The diﬀerence of energy between
sequential torus knots tends asymptotically towards 52.8 which corresponds
to 26.4 for each new crossing. The inset shows one of the conﬁgurations of
the torus knot 111 that minimises the M¨obius repulsive energy, its position
on the plot is indicated.

5

knot families the energy grows with a practically identical rate that seems
to be linear. Linear ﬁt over the tested range indicates that for each new
crossing the energy grows by around 26-27 units. To give an estimation of
energy units it is good to point out here that within the energy deﬁned by
the equation (1) the energetic costs of closing an open string into unknotted
circle is exactly 4 units [14]. Notice that some of the plotted lines in Figure
1a practically coincide with each other while other seem to be vertically
shifted by a constant value.

A closer look at energy values for the (2, p) torus knot family (31, 51, 71
etc.), including the founder 31 knot, suggests that the energy diﬀerence be-
tween consecutive torus knots shows an asymptotic convergence toward a
constant value of circa 53. Since the energy minimisation by simulation
with Evolver (or other programs) has its well known limitations in descend-
ing toward a global minimum, especially for complex trajectories, we have
used an analytical approach to generate torus knots conﬁgurations that are
believed to be minimizers of the M¨obius energy [9, 15]. Figure 1c shows that
the diﬀerence of energy between sequential torus knots tends asymptotically
toward 52.8 which corresponds to 26.4 for each new crossing.

On the basis of our simulation data (Fig. 1a) and analytical approach
(Fig. 1c) we conjecture that within such families of knots that iteratively
increase their interwound regions with double helix structure [15], the dif-
ferences in M¨obius energy due to each new crossing tend to an universal
constant value.

3 Writhe of M¨obius knots

As already discussed, knots minimising M¨obius energy do not have unique
shapes since M¨obius transformations can create inﬁnitely many diﬀerent
conﬁgurations that minimise the M¨obius energy for a given knot. How-
ever, certain characteristic properties of curves in space are not changed
by M¨obius transformation. It was proven by Banchoﬀ and White that the

6

absolute value of writhe for a given trajectory is invariant upon M¨obius
transformation [19]. Writhe (Wr) measures the extent of chirality of closed
curves in space and therefore provides an interesting measure for knotted
trajectories minimising a given energy functional. The writhe corresponds to
the average diﬀerence between numbers of right- and left-handed crossings
perceived when a given curve in space is observed from a random direction.
The value of writhe (Wr) is usually calculated using the Gauss integral for-
mula

dsK(x)dsK (y)

(u × v) · (x − y)
|x − y|3
where u and v are the unit tangent vectors to K at x and y, respectively. In
the case of tight knots minimising their rope length and that are known as
ideal, the writhe values showed a quantization [20, 21, 22] and the quantum
of writhe depended on the type of introduced crossings [23, 24]. We decided
therefore to check whether knots minimising their M¨obius energy also show
a similar quantization of writhe.

ZZK×K

Wr =

(4)

Figure 2a illustrates that M¨obius torus and twist families of knots show a
clear quantization of writhe where the writhe increase for torus knots is more
rapid than for twist knots. While the diﬀerences of energy within a given
family were showing an asymptotic descent toward a limiting constant value
(Fig. 1c), the diﬀerences of writhe showed a speciﬁc constant value (within
the accuracy of our computational approach) that seemed to be independent
of the complexity of the knot. In case of ideal knots (see Fig. 2b) it was
observed earlier that the slopes of writhe increase for torus knots and twist
knots were described by simple relations: 1+x and 1−x respectively [23, 24],
where x was the same for both families and seemed to correspond to 3/7
[23, 24] and where the integer values 1 (or −1 depending on the handedness
of crossing) is due to inter-coil crossing contribution while the noninteger
value x is due to intra-coil contribution to writhe [23]. We observed here
that the slopes of writhe increase for M¨obius torus and twist knots also show
opposing deﬂections from the slope of one, however the deﬂection value x is
close to 0.2 instead of 0.43. Thus torus-type of turns with positive signs of
crossings introduce a writhe of circa 1.2 per crossing. Twist-type of turns
with positive signs of crossings introduce a writhe of circa 0.8 per crossing.
Torus- and twist-type of turns can be recognised by the orientation along
both arcs enclosing double-arc ﬁelds in minimal crossing diagrams of a knot
[23]. Parallel and anti-parallel orientations characterise torus- and twist-
type of turns, respectively [23].

In the case of ideal knots it was observed that the writhe of achiral knots

7

Figure 2: Writhe of M¨obius knots. a and b show the quantization of absolute
writhe of M¨obius knots and ideal knots, respectively, the analysed families
are torus knots and twist knots. c, Absolute writhe slopes for all tested by
us families of knots.

8

Figure 3: Odd and even twist knots diﬀer in the sign and type of crossing
in the terminal clasp. Odd twist knots have terminal clasp with torus type
of crossings orientations along the arcs enclosing this double-arc ﬁeld is
parallel) while even twist knots have twist type of crossings (orientations
along the arcs enclosing this double-arc ﬁeld is anti-parallel) Notice that
sign of crossings in the terminal clasp also changes although signs and types
of crossings in the inter-wound region remain the same.

was essentially equal to zero [20, 24]. We observed here the same tendency
for knots minimising their M¨obius energy as all achiral knots tested by us
(i.e. 41, 63, 83, 89, 812, 817 and 818) had their writhe practically equal to zero.

Figure 2c shows absolute writhe slopes for all families of knots tested
by us. It is visible that within each of these families of knots there is ap-
parently constant, speciﬁc increase of writhe as one analyses consecutive
members of respective families. Interestingly the increase of writhe can be
simply predicted by analysing the type of turns that are introduced while
creating a next member of the family. So for example in the (2p + 1, 1, 2p)
Conway family, as one goes from a knot to its successor four new crossings
are introduced: two are positive torus crossings which increase the writhe
by about 2.4 and two are negative twist crossing which decrease the writhe
by about 1.6. Therefore the predicted increase of writhe of about 0.8 when
divided by four crossings gives us the observed slope about 0.2 (see Fig.
2b). We similarly can predict and explain why knots from even and odd
twist families of knots follow slopes with the same inclination but that are
vertically shifted by exactly four units in relation to each other. Figure
3 shows that change from an odd to an even twist family of knots impli-
cates that two torus type of crossings in the terminal clasp are replaced
by two twist type of crossings of opposite sign. Since the corresponding
writhe contributions of these crossings are 1 + x and −1 + x (or −1 − x
and 1 − x for opposite handedness), where x is a constant, the resulting

9

absolute diﬀerence of writhe is two per crossing irrespectively of the actual
value of intra-turn contribution (x) to writhe. Since there is a change of
two crossings the global diﬀerence of writhe between twist even and twist
odd families of knots results in the observed vertical shift of corresponding
writhe slopes by exactly four. We can apply a very similar type of reasoning
to explain why Conway families (2p + 1, 1, 2p) and (2p − 1, 1, 2p) diﬀer in
their corresponding values of writhe by exactly 2. Notice that the same type
of explanation (where intra-turn contributions to writhe cancel) applies not
only to M¨obius knots but also to ideal knots. Figure 2b shows that in the
case of ideal knots, odd and even twist knots also show the relative vertical
shift by exactly four although the actual slope values are diﬀerent. Axial
trajectories of ideal knots (rope length minimizers) can be regarded as a
limit of energy minimising conﬁgurations when the energy is taken to be an
integral of an ever-increasing inverse-power of the radius of certain circles
passing through three points of the curve [25]. Therefore this observation
strongly suggest that minimizers of repulsive functionals with any exponent
between 3 and ∞ will always have a constant shift of writhe slopes between
certain families of knots. Therefore for example slopes of absolute writhe for
even and odd twist knots will always show a relative vertical shift by exactly
four (compare Fig. 2a and b) provided that compaired knots minimize the
same repulsive functional with the exponent ranging between 3 and ∞.

4 Relations between energy and crossings

There are two principal measures of crossings applied to knots. Minimal
crossing number is a topological invariant and corresponds to the minimal
number of crossings that any representation of this knot type can have in
any orthogonal projection. Average crossing number (ACN) applies to a
given rigid embedding of a knot and corresponds to the average number of
perceived crossings (irrespective of their handedness) when this particular
embedding is perceived from a random point on a sphere enclosing a given
trajectory. The ACN value can be calculated using the unsigned Gauss

10

integral formula

ACN =

ZZK×K

|(u × v) · (x − y)|
|x − y|3

dsK (x)dsK (y)

(5)

where u and v are the unit tangent vectors to K at x and y, respectively.
Several studies considered theoretically the relation between the M¨obius in-
variant repulsive energy and the two measures of crossings mentioned above.
Freedman, He and Wang demonstrated for example that the M¨obius energy
of a knot is at least 2π fold bigger than the minimal crossing number of this
knot [10]. Figure 4a shows the relation between M¨obius energy and minimal
crossing number of all knots up to 9 crossings. It is visible that data points
ﬁll a “cone” and that for these relatively simple prime knots the lower lin-
ear bound of the energy could be put at least at 7.47π times the minimal
crossing number. One can also analyse the upper bound for the energy as
the function of minimal crossing number. In ﬁgure 1a we have shown that
within a given family the energy grows proportional to the crossing number,
but as the crossing number increases, founders of new families arise and
these can have very high energy as compared to the members of already
established families. Thus for example a twist knot 81 has the energy of
217.4 while the 818 knot founding a new family has the energy of 283.9. The
upper bound of the energy does not follow a linear relation with the crossing
number but approaches a 7/5 power law (see Fig. 4a). The ACN value is not
invariant upon M¨obius transformation, however, we have checked that ACN
value is very robust and hardly changes upon multiple M¨obius transforma-
tions. Therefore it seems reasonable to investigate the relation between the
energy and ACN of M¨obius, knots. Freedman, He and Wang showed that
the M¨obius energy of a knot increased by 56/11 is at least 12π/11 fold times
bigger than ACN of energy minimising conﬁgurations [10]. Existence of this
linear lower bound demonstrates that the M¨obius energy can not grow with
a power lower than 1 as a function of ACN. It could though grow with the
higher power. In fact our own data (Fig. 4b) indicate that data points for
the relation between the energy and ACN ﬁll much narrower “cone” than
it was the case for the relation between the energy and minimal crossing
number (see Fig. 4a). The lower bound of this cone can be described by a
nearly linear function, this function is given by

whereas the upper bound is better described by a nearly 7/5 power law, the
function is here

(6)

(7)

y = 22.25 · x

1.05

y = 14.78 · x

1.42

11

Figure 4: Relation between the energy and crossings for all prime knots up
to 9 crossings. a, The relation between M¨obius energy and minimal crossing
number for all prime knots up to 9 crossings. The upper on lower bounds
were best ﬁts of power law functions y = axn. Fits satisﬁed the condition that
no experimental point was outside of the bounds. b, The relation between
M¨obius energy and ACN for all prime knots up to 9 crossings. c, The energy
as a function of average crossing number within diﬀerent families of knots.

12

This power law behaviour may seem inconsistent with a linear growth of
energy with the ACN within diﬀerent analysed families of knots (Fig. 4c).
However as the ACN increases new founders of knots’ families enter and
they frequently start their families with a linear growth but at a higher
level. Again 81 and 818 knots are good examples as the diﬀerence of their
energy is much bigger than expected from a slightly higher ACN of 818 knot.

5 M¨obius knots and their relation to random knots

and other knotted physical systems

It was shown earlier that the average writhe for a population of random
knots of a given type closely corresponds to the writhe of ideal knot of the
corresponding type [20, 26]. We have shown here that with the exception
of achiral knots the writhe values of M¨obius knots do not correspond to
that of ideal knots. Although within given families there is a linear relation
between writhe of ideal and M¨obius knots these relations are not universal
and diﬀerent families will be related by diﬀerent linear relations. Thus for
example the writhe of torus knots grows more quickly for ideal knots than
for M¨obius knots but the opposite is true for twist knots. Therefore we can
conclude here that the writhe of M¨obius knots is not related to the writhe
of random knots of corresponding type.

Time averaged writhe value of randomly ﬂuctuating knots of a given
type seems to be independent of the length of random chains forming a
given knot. This is not the case of ACN (average crossing number) as its
value progressively increases with the length of a random chain. However,
it was observed that for relatively simple knots the diﬀerences between time
averaged ACNs of randomly ﬂuctuating knots of a given type and of un-
knots of the same chain size closely corresponds to the ACN of ideal knots
of the corresponding types [14]. However this does not apply to ACN values
of M¨obius knots since these are signiﬁcantly smaller than ACN values of
corresponding ideal knots. We conclude therefore that M¨obius knots in con-
trast to ideal knots are not good predictors of certain physical properties of

13

random knots of a given type such as knotted polymer molecules undergo-
ing a random thermal motion. However for other physical knotted systems,
M¨obius knots may better approximate their behaviour than ideal knots. If
we imagine a charged knotted string of dimensions comparable to an ef-
fective screening radius at given conditions then all pair-wise interactions
within such a knot should be repulsive. However, due to screening interac-
tions caused by counterions the repulsion would not follow the Coulomb law
but would decrease more rapidly with the separating distance, approaching
perhaps a cubic root dependence of the distance. Short ﬂexible polymeric
molecules like single-stranded DNA can make knots of dimensions compara-
ble to eﬀective screening radius at speciﬁc ionic conditions, such knots may
approach then the M¨obius behaviour. Finally one can entertain a thought
about string-like charged elementary particles (electrons, for example) sur-
rounded by short-lived mixture of other charged particles and antiparticles
generated from quantum ﬂuctuation of vacuum. Electrons may minimise
then an energy that resembles the M¨obius energy described here. If on the
way to relaxation a complex self-repelling knot could undergo from time to
time a strand passage and progressively simplify its type that would provide
a physical system with natural quantization of the energy.

Acknowledgments. We thank Fran¸cois Ubertini and Akos Dobay for
their help in solving frequent software and hardware problems, Piotr Pier-
anski and Corinne Cerf for discussions on writhe quantization, Jun O’Hara
and John Maddocks for discussions on energy of knots, Jacques Dubochet
for his keen interest and constant encouragement. This work was supported
by Swiss National Science Foundation Grant 31-61636.00 to A.S..

References

[1] Thomson W 1867 Phil. Mag. 34 15

[3] Maddox J 1999 Nature 398 766

[4] Moﬀatt H K 1990 Nature 347 367

[2] Greene B 2000 The Elegant Universe (Hamburg: Petersen)

[5] Chui A Y K and Moﬀatt H K 1995 Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 451 609

[6] Faddeev L D and Niemi A J 1997 Nature 387 58

14

[7] Fukuhara S 1988 A Fte of Topology ed Y Matsumoto and T. Mizutani,

(London: Academic Press) p.443

[8] O’Hara J 1991 Topology 30 241

[9] Kim D and Kusner R 1993 Experimental Math. 2 1

[10] Freedman M H, He Z-X and Wang Z 1994 Annals of Math. 139 1

[11] Simon J 1996 Mathematical Approaches to Biomolecular Structure and
Dynamics ed J P Mesirov, K Shulten and D W Sumners (New York:
Springer-Verlag) p 39

[12] Kusner R B and Sullivan J M 1997 Geometric Topology ed W H Kazez

(Providence: Amer. Math. Soc./Int’l Press) p 570

[13] Diao Y, Ernst C and Janse Van Rensburg E J 1998 Ideal Knots ed A
Stasiak, V Katritch and L H Kauﬀman (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) p
52

[14] O’Hara J 1998 Ideal Knots ed A Stasiak, V Katritch and L H Kauﬀman

(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) p 288

[15] Kusner R B and Sullivan J M 1998 Ideal Knots ed A Stasiak, V Katritch

and L H Kauﬀman (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) p 315

[16] Brakke K A 1992 Experimental Math. 1, 141

[17] Rolfsen D 1976 Knots and links (Berkeley, CA.: Publish or Perish Press)

[18] Adams C C 1994 The Knot Book (New York: W. H. Freeman and

Company)

[19] Banchoﬀ T F and White J H 1975 Math. Scand. 36 254

[20] Katritch V, Bednar J, Michoud D, Scharein R G, Dubochet J and

Stasiak A. 1996 Nature 384 142

[21] Pieranski P 1998 Ideal Knots ed A Stasiak, V Katritch and L H Kauﬀ-

man (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) p 20

[22] Pieranski P and Przybyl S 2001 Eur. Phys. J. E 4 445.

[23] Stasiak A 2000 Knots in Hellas ’98 ed C M Gordon, V F R Jones, L
H Kauﬀman, S Lambropoulu, and J H Przytycki (Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc) p 477

15

[24] Cerf C and Stasiak A (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 3795

[25] Gonzalez O and Maddocks J H 1999 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96

4769

[26] Janse Van Rensburg E J, Sumners D W and Whittington S G 1998
Ideal Knots ed A Stasiak, V Katritch and L H Kauﬀman (Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc) p 70

16

