3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CHEP’03, La Jolla, March 24-28, 2003

1

Grid Based Monitoring on the Rutgers CDF Analysis Farm

P. Jacques, F. Ratnikov, T. Watts
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019, USA

I. Terekhov
FNAL, Batavia, IL 60510, USA

Run II at the Fermilab Tevatron Collider started in March 2001, and it will continue probing the
high energy frontier in particle physics until the start of the LHC at CERN. The CDF collaboration
at Fermilab has already stored 260 TB of data and expects to store 1PB of data in the next two
years. The HEXCAF computing farm is being set up at Rutgers University to provide the software
environment, computing resources, and access to data for physicists participating in the Collabora-
tion. Some job submission, detector data access and storage of the output results are based on the
SAM-GRID tools. To extend monitoring for these jobs running on the farm a bridge was developed
between the SAM-GRID monitoring tools and the internal farm monitoring. This presentation will
describe the conﬁguration and functionality of the HEXCAF farm with the emphasis on the moni-
toring tools. Finally we summarize our experience of installing and operating a GRID environment
on a remote cluster that is being used for real physics studies in the big running experiment.

I. HEX FARM AT RUTGERS

The HEX farm [1] was developed for the High En-
ergy Physics EXperimental group of Rutgers Univer-
sity. The group contains about 20 physicists partic-
ipating in CDF, CMS and other experiments, with
about 70The primary goal of the farm is to satisfy
computing needs of the CDF group for physics data
analysis.

HEX farm is a good example of a small analysis
farm, as opposed to a big production farm, which
serves a typical university group participating in a big
HEP experiment.

II. HARDWARE CONFIGURATION

The farm is based on dual CPU PCs running Fermi
Linux [2]. Due to lack of IP addresses on the uni-
versity campus, 15 worker nodes[12] are connected in
a private network. Big IDE disks connected to the
worker nodes are cross mounted on every node of the
farm [13].

Three special ”portal” nodes are connected to both

WAN and private networks:

• Farm header node. Users here interactively pre-
pare and test their jobs. It also hosts home di-
rectories and experiment speciﬁc software, and
runs NAT and NIS servers.

• Data transfer node. This is used to pass data
between public and private networks. Traﬃc is
mainly data exchange between Rutgers and Fer-
milab; this channel network bandwidth is about
100 Mbits/s.

• Analysis facility header node. It controls anal-
ysis load, runs SAM[14], and hosts SAM data

MOET007

cache. This is the only fully kerberized node on
the farm. It is connected to the Fermilab ker-
beros domain.

As most of the jobs running on the farm are re-
lated to the CDF experiment, the software and com-
puter setup is mostly inherited from standard CDF
installations[3].

III. RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

To minimize compatibility issues, the HEX farm
uses CDF approved components for resource manage-
ment. CPU usage and data storage are farm resources
essential to manage.

We installed batch system developed for and used
on the CDF Central Analysis Facility (CAF) [15][4].
The system is built on top of the FBSNG batch system
[5] developed at Fermilab.

The HEX farm does not have its own mass storage
system. Necessary data either sits in the local disk
cache, some data locally created and some transferred
from Fermilab, or can be accessed from the CDF cen-
tral data handling system at Fermilab directly over
the WAN.

Since the CDF Data Handling system is evolving[6],
there are diﬀerent data delivery and cataloging sys-
tems in use, both at the Fermilab and at Rutgers.

A. Disk Inventory Manager (DIM) and Data
File Catalog (DFC)

DIM is the original light weight CDF data cache
system[7]. It is natively compatible with CDF soft-
ware. Central DIM running at Fermilab accesses the
central mass storage. The central DFC uses an Oracle
database to store metadata; the HEX farm instance

2

CHEP’03, La Jolla, March 24-28, 2003

uses MSQL. The HEX farm instance of DIM is not
connected to mass storage. Instead it can fetch data
from the central data handling system. A very con-
venient feature of the DIM at Rutgers is the ability
to synchronize a dataset replica with its master copy
at Fermilab. It is important because CDF is a run-
ning experiment and new data are continuously added
to datasets. Datasets interesting to Rutgers physicists
are set up in such a way that when new ﬁles are added
to the dataset at Fermilab and a user asks to read
the dataset, the new ﬁles are automatically fetched to
Rutgers and local metadata are updated accordingly.
dCache[6] data access is used for data delivery. The
data transfer unit in this mode is one ﬁleset, that is
about 10 one-GB ﬁles.

B. Sequential Data Access via Metadata (SAM)

SAM [8, 9, 10] is a sophisticated baseline data han-
dling solution for the D0 experiment at Fermilab.
CDF is currently adopting SAM. This system uses a
local data cache and centrally located metadata. Re-
quired data are delivered automatically from the clos-
est available source including the central mass stor-
age at Fermilab. SAM provides a native mechanism
for cataloging and storing in the central mass storage
system of new data produced on the local site.

SAM is still in trial use by CDF and is installed
on several sites including the HEX farm. The SAM
data cache disks are located on the SAM station and
exported to worker nodes via NFS.

C. Job Submission

The CAF batch system is used on the HEX farm.
User identity is authenticated via Kerberos through
the collection of collaboration CAF systems. This is
the reason that the HEX farm head node is attached
to the Fermilab kerberos domain. The CAF system
decouples well data submission, job executing, and
output delivery: the job is remotely submitted to the
farm, executed there, and output is delivered to the
speciﬁed remote destination.

This approach provides a good possibility for dis-
tributed computing. From user point of view, all CAF
farms are identical providing user is authorized to sub-
mit jobs there. The same GUI can submit the same
job to any of the available CAF farms. The following
is assumed:

• baseline software is available on the farm

• job tarball created on the ﬂy contains all ﬁles

needed to run in the base environment

This system is naturally extendible for resource broker
driven operation.

D. GRID Approach

The Hex farm has also installed a prototype of
the Job and Information Manager (JIM) [11]. This
tool provides resource brokering, job submission, and
a monitoring suite. The system is built on top of
Condor-G and uses SAM information about the avail-
ability of data ﬁles to select a destination for the job.
JIM has an adapter to the local CAF submitter and
uses LDAP based information providers and monitor-
ing tools. The prototype operation was demonstrated
at the SC2002 workshop, the HEX farm being one
execution site.

IV. MONITORING

Both JIM and CAF have nice monitoring systems.
Each one provides complete information about details
of the system status, history etc. But the connection
between these monitoring domains was broken when
the JIM-CAF adapter submitted a job to the batch
system. JIM operates in terms of a global univer-
sal job ID and CAF identiﬁes the job by a local ID
that is assigned when the job is released to the batch
queue. This problem is general for any GRID system
submitting jobs to local batch systems that are not
“gridifyed”. A database driven solution was selected
for JIM and is implemented on the HEX farm.

Figure 1 presents the method of monitoring. The
job submitter delivers the sandbox to the GRID-Batch
adapter on the local system. The adapter submits the
job to the local queue and gets back the local ID of the
job. The pair of global job ID and local job ID is put
into the database together with ongoing status of the
job. This database record works as a bridge between
the global and local system and makes possible the
requesting of the status of the local job by global ID.
After the job is completed, the corresponding record
may be removed from the database. A simple ﬁle
based database was used to prove the principle and
improve monitoring tools[16]. Figure 2 demonstrates
how information about matching between global and
local IDs allows a user to follow the local status of a
global job.

V. OPERATION EXPERIENCE

In summary, the HEX farm has a variety of diﬀer-
ent data access and job submission systems installed.
The farm is involved in essential CDF tests of frontier
computing technologies. At the same time it is oper-
ating as a computing facility for a university group.
This is an interesting test that can demonstrate the
choice by physicists who are not enthusiastic about
new computer technologies and who would rather use

MOET007

CHEP’03, La Jolla, March 24-28, 2003

3

!

(cid:21)(cid:22) "#(cid:23)#$%

standard CAF submitter.

(cid:0)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)

(cid:1)

(cid:5)

(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:9)

(cid:6)(cid:7)

DB

(cid:19) (cid:20)

(cid:20) (cid:24)(cid:25)

(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:23)

(cid:26)

(cid:20) (cid:24)(cid:25)

(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:23)

(cid:28)

(cid:26)

(cid:21)(cid:29) (cid:30) (cid:31) 

status

&&&

(cid:10)(cid:11)

(cid:12)(cid:13)

(cid:2)(cid:14)

(cid:0)

(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)

(cid:1)

status

(cid:15)

(cid:16)

(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:18)

(cid:1)(cid:17)

-

456

./0 1 23 2

sandbox

status

(cid:5)’(

(cid:9) )(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:18)

*(cid:14)+ )(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:18) )+

,

FIG. 1: Database driven approach for global monitoring
of the local system

these computers to proceed with physics analysis. Ex-
perience shows that:

• 80% of data are about 25 static DIM datasets
resident on the disk (some replicas of Fermilab
datasets and some locally created). These data
are intensively used for data analysis.

• Nearly 100% of big jobs are submitted via the

The farm is used for analysis, therefore neither mas-
sive data production nor huge Monte Carlo jobs run
there. Static datasets can easily be managed man-
ually in the small community. Although SAM data
handling is very sophisticated, the DIM has been in
use by CDF for a long time and is more familiar to
people. Our experience is that users prefer simple and
reliable solutions. At the same time, simple solutions
are usually less scalable and more sophisticated ones
become simpler for use when the system grows.

The HEX farm already has one and half times more
worker nodes and twice more computing power, than
at conference time, so massive Monte Carlo generation
can be reasonably performed on site. New generated
data need to be transferred to the central CDF mass
storage. Then the automated SAM solution becomes
faster and simpler with respect to data transfer and
cataloging on the central system; the SAM approach
will be deﬁnitely appreciated by HEX farm users.

Concluding,

in running an analysis farm for the
Rutgers HEP experimental group we contribute to
the development and testing of innovative computing
technologies deployed for the CDF collaboration and
keep innovations tuned for use by the physicists of the
group.

[1] http://hexfarm.rutgers.edu
[2] http://www-oss.fnal.gov/projects/fermilinux
[3] A.Kreymer, Revision Control in the Grid Era - the

unmet challenge, CHEP03, TUJT003

[4] F.Wuerthwein, The CDF Central Analysis Farm,

CHEP03, MODT005

[5] http://www-isd.fnal.gov/fbsng
[6] R.Kennedy, The CDF Run II Data Handling Design,

[7] D.Litvintsev, CDF Data Handling System, CHEP03,

was also installed

CHEP03, THKT004

THKT005
[8] G.Garzoglio,

CHEP03, TUAT004

Implementation of SAM in CDF,

[9] L.Lueking, Production Experience with the D0 Data

use

Handling System, MOKT002

[10] S.Stonjek, The SAMGrid Testbed: First D0 and CDF
Experiences with Analysis on the Grid, CHEP03,
MOCT009

[11] I.Terekhov, Grid Job and Information Manage-
ment for the FNAL Run II Experiments, CHEP03,
TUAT001

[12] by conference time, recently upgraded to 23 workers
[13] by conference time, a recently dedicated ﬁle server

[14] more details about SAM in III B
[15] more details about CAF in III C
[16] by conference time, an XML based database was in

MOET007

4

CHEP’03, La Jolla, March 24-28, 2003

FIG. 2: Bridge between global and local monitoring suits. The list of all JIM jobs was originally available (top right).
The farm information server provides information about the local ID and job status for a global job (bottom). This
information allows the monitoring of a particular job on the CAF local monitoring page (top left) and that gets further
local details about the job operation.

MOET007

