3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Critical Behavior in a Cellular Automata Animal Disease Transmission
Model

P.D. Morley
Veridian Corporation
National Systems Group
14700 Lee Road Chantilly, VA 201511

Julius Chang
Strategic Analysis Inc.
3601 Wilson Blvd
Suite 500
Arlington, VA 222012

Abstract

Using a cellular automata model, we simulate the British Govern-
ment Policy (BGP) in the 2001 foot and mouth epidemic in Great
Britain. When clinical symptoms of the disease appeared on a farm,
there is mandatory slaughter (culling) of all livestock on an infected
premise (IP). Those farms that neighbor an IP (contiguous premise,
CP), are also culled, aka nearest neighbor interaction. Farms where
the disease may be prevalent from animal, human, vehicle or airborne
transmission (dangerous contact, DC), are additionally culled, aka
next-to-nearest neighbor iteractions and lightning factor. The result-
ing mathematical model possesses a phase transition, whereupon if
the physical disease transmission kernel exceeds a critical value, catas-
trophic loss of animals ensues. The non-local disease transport prob-
ability can be as low as .01% per day and the disease can still be in
the high mortality phase. We show that the fundamental equation
for sustainable disease transport is the criticality equation for neutron
ﬁssion cascade. Finally, we calculate that the percentage of culled
animals that are actually healthy is ≈ 30%.

1e-mail address: peter.morley@veridian.com
2e-mail address: jchang@sainc.com

1

Keywords: Phase transition; critical behavior; cellular automata; animal dis-
ease transmission model; foot and mouth disease.

2

1 Prologue1

On or about February 19th, 2001, on a swill feeding farm (the index farm)
at Hedon-on-the-Wall in the county of Tyne and Wear, type O Pan-Asian
strain foot and mouth virus disease (FMD) was introduced into the United
Kingdom. From there the virus spread (probably by wind) to a sheep farm 7
km away, and then to 96 diﬀerent locations in Great Britain. By the time the
epidemic was identiﬁed, 43 farms were infected. To confront the epidemic,
the British Government instituted a policy of culling (killing of animals) to
eradicate the infection. One year later with over 4 million animals destroyed
(with unquantiﬁable human misery), Great Britain was declared disease-free.

2 Introduction

Foot and mouth disease is an extremely contagious trans-species (Bovidae
such as cattle, zebus, domestic buﬀaloes and yaks; sheep, swine, goats, all
wild ruminants, and suidae) virus that can live temporally outside the host
mammal. In this paper, we simulate in a mathematical model the 2001 BGP
in controlling and ﬁnally eradicating foot and mouth virus in Great Britain.
One could call the BGP ”risk aversion” in that it relied on no vaccinations
and culling of IP when clinical symptoms appeared. The main interest here
is the question of whether the BGP risked an unacceptable loss of animals by
not knowing that the underlying FMD mathematical model exists in diﬀerent
phases.

The FMD stochastic disease propagation cellular automata model used
in this paper has strong resemblance to the famous ”forest ﬁre” models2. In
general, probabilistic cellular automata models are a modern tool for sim-
ulations of dynamical systems. They can model complex spatio-temporal
structures involving cooperative, time-dependent phenomena3. In contrast
to the mentioned forest ﬁre diﬀusion models which have forest regeneration,
no steady-state is present with the BGP: the disease becomes eradicated
(The British Government prohibited the restocking of culled farms - ALL
livestock killed - until after the epidemic was oﬃcially declared over). Thus,
the only question is whether the peculiar epidemiology of FMD causes the
BGP to incur surprisingly severe losses. How this may happen is illustrated
in Fig. 1.

3

Figure 1: Culling destroys the animals of farm A and adjoining farm B, but
FMD can have already spread from farm B

There are three time scales: incubation time, contagious time and clinical
symptom time. All three time scales depend statistically on the host type of
animal, as well as the particular strain of FMD. For purposes of illustration,
let us choose a 3 day incubation time and a eight day clinical symptom time.
Refering to Fig. 1, farm A is infected on day 1 and enters its contagious period
on day 4. After day 3 onwards, it can transmit the disease to neighbors (farm
B) with some probablity per day value, which depends on the type of farm
B animals, their population and their distance away from farm A. On day 8,
clinical symptoms appear at farm A, and according to BGP, it becomes an
IP, with all animals culled (next day). Also, according to BGP, farm B is a
CP, and so its animals are culled, as well. As can be seen from Fig. 1, there is
a time period called the ”time-lag”, whereby the animals at farm B may have
been contagious and, before being culled, could have transmitted the disease
to yet another farm. In this illustration, the possible time-lag is 3 days (an
extreme case). Thus the culling of farms A and B does not necessarily stop
the diﬀusion of the disease starting originally from farm A. The existence of
the time-lag is the characteristic epidemiological feature of FMD. In the next
section, examples of physical probabilities Π are given from the FMD data,
and show that the disease has a long spatial tail, making time-lags inevitable
when a large number of infections are present. We will see that the cellular
automata model of BGP with time-lag has a phase transition, or critical
point, called the percolation limit. If the physical disease transmission kernel
exceeds a critical value, the disease percolates throughout the landscape, in
spite of the culling policy.

Within this paper, three variants of the cellular automata model are pre-

4

sented, and discussed in more detail later on. All model variants use [1] a
300 × 300 cellular landscape; [2] a conditional probability per day infection
(Π) which falls oﬀ with distance. This cellular automata fall-oﬀ distribution
is shown in Fig. 2.

Figure 2: Cellular diﬀusion probability distribution

The middle cell row = i, column = j is the IP. Those cells having a P
diﬀusion probability (discussed below) are the CP. The cells having a P/3
diﬀusion probability are the DC. The infection can jump from an IP to CP,
DC or beyond.

It is important to understand the diﬀerence between P and Π. When an
IP is identiﬁed in the contagious state, other cells containing healthy animals
are at risk from this IP. This probability risk increases with the number of
healthy animals in the other cell and decreases with the distance from the
IP. Thus Π is the conditional probability per day: given that an IP exists
X km away, what is the probability per day of infection Π if the healthy
farm contains N number of animals. The diﬀusion probability P , however,
measures the probability per day that a cell will obtain the disease, and so
it is equal to the probability that animals are actually present in the cell

5

(Panimals) times the probability per day that those animals will contact the
disease (Π):

P = Panimals × Π

(1)

Since England has about 93,000 square miles of area, the 300×300 lattice

has a physical mapping metric of about 1 square mile per cell.

The ﬁrst model variant, called the homogeneous model, has farms in
all cells, with a uniform, conditional probability per day of infection from
neighbors, Π = constant. That is, an IP can infect nearest neighbors with
a uniform, conditional probability Π, if these neighbors still have animals.
An IP also can infect second-nearest neighbor farms with a smaller, but still
uniform, conditional probability Π/3, and third-nearest neighbors with a still
smaller uniform, conditonal probability Π/9.

The second variant, called the heterogeneous model, adds a random spa-
tial density of farms (labeled by the symbol ν, where ν can range from 0
to 1). We use a farm density value ν = 0.75. Thus, a cell has a 100 × ν
probability of having a farm. As with the homogeneous model, an IP can
infect nearest neighbors with a uniform, conditional probability Π, if these
neighbors still have animals, second-nearest neighbor farms with a uniform,
conditional probability Π/3; and third-nearest neighbors with a uniform,
conditonal probability Π/9.

The third and most realistic BGP simulation has a heterogeneous spatial
distribution of farms, a stochastic conditional probability per day infection
of neighbors, Π 6= constant, and, most importantly, a lightning factor (LF
6= 0). The LF represents the non-local transmission probability of FMD4.

Model Variants
homogeneous case
heterogeneous case
BGP variant

Π
constant
constant
variable

Farm density (ν)
1
0.75
0.75

LF
0
0
constant (6= 0)

Table 1: The three models presented

6

3 Conditional Infection Probabilities per Day

(Π)

The extensive spread of the 2001 FMD in Great Britain allowed for the ﬁrst
time identiﬁcation of the physical transmission probability kernel5. This ker-
nel is an empirically derived function (depending on the susceptibility factor
of each species of animal, the number of animals of each species and the
distance from an IP) using FMD data taken directly from the 2001 epidemic.
Using this kernel for cattle, we plot in Fig. 3 the infection probability per
day for small farms (500 and 1000 cattle) and for large farms (2500 and 5000
cattle). This probability per day of infection means that a farm containing
N number of healthy animals situated X kms away from an IP, has an empir-
ically derived probability per day of getting the disease. So taking the 5000
cattle graph as an example: each day, a large farm containing 5000 healthy
cattle has a 60% chance becoming infected with FMD if an IP is located
6 km away. As already mentioned, we use the symbol Π to designate this
conditional probability per day attribute associated with a farm containing
healthy animals.

4 Cellular Automata Model

The developed cellular automata model is a fully object oriented C++ sim-
ulation. The square lattice 300×300 = 90,000 cells (with row i and col-
umn j) has both time and state information. The possible state information
is: Cell[i][j][1] = 0 is culled (originally with animals, but now empty), 1 is
diseased, 2 has unaﬀected animals, -1 means empty (no original animals).
Cell[i][j][0] has the time information: On the day of the infection, Cell[i][j][0]
has the value: -(time-lag)-(incubation); for each time unit (a day) 1 is added
to this such that when it is -(time-lag), contagious transmission can occur
and when zero, culling about Cell[i][j] occurs. An infected cell remains in-
fected until culling occurs. Empty cells are just an impediment to the disease
diﬀusion, not being capable of transmitting the disease. One of the more
interesting questions that a simulation can address is to compute the per-
centage of culled animals that are actually healthy. It is relatively simple to
keep track of the state of animals at the time of culling, and we ﬁnd that the

7

Figure 3: Computed conditional probability per day of infection Π vs. dis-
tance (km), based on actual transmission kernel data5 from the Great Britain
outbreak.

percentage healthy can be as high as 40%, with a typical average of around
30%.

In Fig. 4, we give the logic of the program, while in Fig. 2, the individual
diﬀusion probabilities per day (P ) are shown, relative to IP Cell[i][j]. When
IP Cell[i][j] has reached clinical symptoms, all CP are culled (those with dif-
fusion probability P ) and all DC are culled (those with diﬀusion probability
P/3).

Since the cellular automata model is a Monte Carlo simulation involving
millions of random numbers, it is important to use an unbiased random
number generator. In this paper, the ”gold plated”6 ran2 was used. Each
run had diﬀerent random numbers because the C++ time( ) function was

8

Figure 4: Program logic

used to set the value of the random number seed.

As mentioned previously, the main interest in the research is the question
of whether the BGP risked an unacceptable loss of animals by not knowing
that the underlying FMD mathematical model exists in diﬀerent phases.
Thus we are looking for critical behavior as we vary the model parameters.
There are multiple ways to detect a phase transition. One is to plot the
mortality or survivor ratio versus the transmission probability per day and
see a sharp transition. A second method is to plot the duration time of
the epidemic versus transmission probability per day and see that a peak
duration appears. The larger the lattice size, the more pronounced is the
phase transition.

Once the existence of the phase transition is established, there are in-
teresting quantities that can be investigated, such as critical exponents and
the disease time correlation function. A particularly challenging problem is

9

to compute analytically the critical probability of the phase transition for
variants of the model. In actual practice, one needs to go to extremely large
lattices to see power law and fractal scaling behavior, because small lattices
produce a ﬁnite width for the phase transition. The 300 × 300 lattice used
here, though producing a substantial width to the phase transition, is more
than adequate to demonstrate the underlying mathematics of the BGP.

4.1 Homogeneous Variant

The homogeneous version of the model has farms in all cells. An initial,
randomly chosen cell is infected and begins the simulation. We chose to
mitigate edge eﬀects by inserting the initial infection within (100,250) instead
of using periodic boundary conditions, because the former is computationally
far simpler while achieving the same end result of avoiding broadening of the
phase transition. In each run of this homogeneous variant, the transmission
probability per day Π is constant. Recall that Π is applied only to healthy
farms. 500 runs were averaged for each value of Π. Results were also obtained
using 1000 runs and showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences from the 500 batches.
The model parameters of time-lag (number of days between end of incubation
and beginning of culling) and incubation were set to two days and one day
respectively. The real FMD would have these as variable.

In Fig. 5, the ratio of the number of surviving farms (not culled) to the
number (homogeneous case: 90,000) initially present is plotted as a function
of Π. A phase transition is indicated. It represents the percolation critical
point whereby the disease has either zero density or approaches 100% density
(as one goes above the critical probability Πc) in the limit of very large
landscape area (limit L → ∞).
In the two-dimensional cellular automata
lattice used here, above and very near the critical probability Πc, the disease
density will scale as (Π − Πc)5/36; as soon as the conditional probability
moves away from this scaling region, the disease density → 100%. The
critical transmission probability Πc for the homogeneous case is Πc ≈ .33.
The epidemic time durations versus Π are plotted in Fig. 6. Again, a peak
is seen at Π ≈ .33. In order to be certain this is a phase transition, we run
the homogeneous variant using a smaller size lattice of 100 × 100 cells and a
larger size lattice of 700 × 700 to compare directly to the 300 × 300 case, Fig.
7. As expected, the smaller lattice has a pronounced widening and the larger
lattice has a pronounced narrowing. We thus have an unmistakable phase

10

transistion. In terms of the 300 × 300 lattice used, this critical probability is
reached for an average cattle density ≈ 1500; since pigs have a much higher
FMD susceptibility coeﬃcient, this critical probability is achieved with a
much smaller number of pig population, or with a smaller combined pig and
cattle population.

4.2 Heterogeneous Variant

The heterogeneous model diﬀers from the previous homogeneous case by
randomly selecting some cells to be vacant. As mentioned earlier, vacant
cells are an impediment to disease diﬀusion. Runs were done on the same
300×300 lattice and the farm occupancy factor, ν, was chosen to be ν = 0.75.
In Fig. 5 we plot the survival ratio as a function of Π, while in Fig. 6, the
epidemic duration as a function of Π is plotted. Again, a clear signal of a
phase transition is present with the critical conditional probability per day
transmission of Πc ≈ 0.44 for this heterogeneous case.

4.3 Analytical Solutions for Homogeneous and Hetero-

geneous Variants

The homogeneous and heterogeneous models are amenable to computation of
their critical conditional probabilities per day. Let us recall3 that the square
lattice has the critical (site) percolation density of

Ppercolation = 0.59273

(2)

For our situation here, the critical percolation density enters into the prob-
ability of ﬁnding animals in a cell, allowing the continued diﬀusion of the
infection. Cellular automata models have diﬀerent neighborhood rules which
cause the critical value of parameters to vary from model to model. In the
case here, the diﬀusion probability P is a function of Ppercolation. We ask,
”What is the probability of the disease spreading out from IP Cell[i][j] when
nearest neighbor and next-to-nearest neighbors are culled?”

Refering to Fig. 2, all farms with diﬀusion probability P or P/3 are
culled, so the disease starting out from IP Cell[i][j] must reach cells further

11

Figure 5: Farm survival ratio (fraction of farms not culled) versus conditional
transmission probability per day, Π, for both homogeneous and heteroge-
neous cases.

out within the alloted time-lag. The time-lag of 2 used here means that
if IP farm A has infected a CP or DC, designated by farm B, on the ﬁrst
day of contagiousness, the disease has one additional day to use farm B as a
new source of infection. We ﬁrst compute the diﬀusion probability that the
disease can go outside the culled area.

In the ﬁrst day of contagiousness, the only cells reachable outside the
future culled area are those that have diﬀusion probability of P/9 and there
are 8 of them, so ﬁrst day diﬀusion Pf irst day is

Pf irst day =

8P
9

.

(3)

However, if the infection successfully infects a CP or DC on day one, it has a
much better chance of escaping outside the culled area on day two. On day

12

Figure 6: Epidemic duration time (in days) versus transmission conditional
probability per day, Π, for the homogeneous and heterogeneous cases, show-
ing a peak duration which indicates a phase transition at a critical transmis-
sion probability.

two, each of the ﬁrst day’s successful jumps is itself a new Cell[i][j], which
spreads out according to Fig. 2. Thus we need to keep track of the second
day’s diﬀusion relative to the future culled cells. So, for example, if on day
one, it reaches a cell with probability P , and on the second day reaches its
neighboring cell of probability P , the disease only reaches a future culled
cell, so this mode adds nothing. To achieve diﬀusion, the second day jump
from farm B must reach at least its P/3 cell. The computation of all possible
routes is simple, but tedious. In Table 2, we tabulate the probabilities. The
last column is computed by multiplying the ﬁrst day’s probability by the
second day’s probability and summing over all of the routes that avoid the
future culled cells.

13

Figure 7: Homogeneous epidemic duration time (in days) versus transmission
probability per day, Π, for the 100 × 100 lattice, the 700 × 700 lattice and
the original 300 × 300 lattice

By adding up all the probabilities and seting the sum to equal one, we

deﬁne the meaning of the critical diﬀusion (percolation) probability Pc

1 =

16Pc
9

+

148P 2
c
9

.

(4)

Had we used a time-lag of three days, then the resulting polynomial would

have been cubic, changing to quartic for a time-lag of four days and so on.

The infection cannot continue to percolate, however, unless the cell it
has jumped to actually has animals. These potential jumped cells may have
already been culled in earlier time periods. Futhermore, a likely jumped cell
may be originally vacant, with probability 100 × (1 − ν), as happens in the
heterogeneous case. The probability Panimals that any of the possible jumped

14

ﬁrst probability second probability total probability

P/9
P
P
P
P/3
P/3
P/3

8P/9
0
20P2/3
16P2/9
8P2/3
32P2/9
48P2/27
8P/9

Table 2: Basic probabilities to avoid culled cells

cells has animals at exactly the critical diﬀusion limit is

Panimals = νPpercolation

Thus the critical diﬀusion probability Pc for disease percolation is a prod-
uct of the critical transmission probability per day for disease transmission,
Πc, when animals are present, times the probability that animals are actually
present:

Pc = Πc × ν × Ppercolation .

Solving Eq.(3) gives

Πc × ν × Ppercolation = 0.1984 .

Letting σmultiple = 1/.1984, where each infection generates a possible σmultiple
new ones outside of the culled area, the fundamental equation for disease
percolation becomes

Πc × σmultiple × ν × Ppercolation = 1

The product Πc × ν × Ppercolation is the probability that there are animals
in a cell and that they will obtain the disease. The number of cells outside of
the future culled area succesfully jumped to is σmultiple. Their product must
be equal to one in order for the disease to be sustainable. Those readers
familiar with the design of nuclear reactors will see that Eq.(8) is the neutron
equation for criticality.

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

P
P/3
P/9
P
P/3
P/9
P/9

15

The analytical solution of Πc for the homogeneous and heterogeneous
cases is given in Table 3. For the heterogeneous runs, the constant entering
the landscape farm density probability, ν, had the value of 0.75.

Eq. (8) explains why there are two phases for the BGP: if the average
diﬀusion probability is less than that required for escaping the culled cells,
then the infection cannot be sustained, and damps out; in the limit of large
landscape, the disease density is zero. Unfortunately with FMD, the long
spatial tail and time-lag require an enormously impractical culling area.

homogeneous case heterogeneous case

0.335

0.335/ν

Table 3: Analytical critical conditional probabilites per day Πc

In variant 3, where a stochastic conditional probability per day is used, Π
is required to satisfy the initial condition ΠLOW ≤ Π ≤ ΠM AX, for each farm.
That is, each Cell[i][j] that happens to contain a farm (probability 100 × ν
that a cell contains a farm) has assigned to it a random Π, which is the same
as saying that the Cell[i][j] has a random animal population.

4.4 BGP Variant

This variation of the model is the closest to the BGP. For each run, the
location of farms on the 300 × 300 lattice is random, as in the previous
heterogeneous case (again the probability that a cell contains a farm is 100 ×
ν).
In addition, the animal population of each farm varies randomly, but
ﬁxed for that entire run. Thus each run represents an idealized realization of
England with an initial random location of farms, each with an initial random
farm animal population, categorized by a cell’s value of Π. This Π initial
information is stored in an extra array: Prob[i][j] holds the randomly assigned
Π for Cell[i][j], if this cell has a farm. When an IP Cell[i][j] is identiﬁed, the
location of this IP to other cell locations Cell[i′][j′] containing healthy animals
is determined, and the probability Prob[i′][j′] is then used (refering back to
Fig. 4, this is the step ”if true, roll probability . . . ”). Thus, for example, if
Cell[i][j] is an IP, then Prob[i-1][j+1]/3 is used for the probability that a farm
containing healthy animals in Cell[i-1][j+1]becomes infected.

16

What is there left to vary? FMD has the frightening ability of non-local
disease transport, aka the lightning factor. As long as there is one IP on the
landscape, there is a lightning factor for every cell containing healthy animals.
This lightning factor is a constant probability per day of non-local infection
of healthy animals, a purely random eﬀect. Examples of the lightning factor
for FMD include airborne plume of virus, and the spread of FMD to locations
outside the local area by movement of persons, vehicles and animals through
markets and agents.
In Table 3, we present the results. The lower value
of Π (0.05) represents about 500 cattle (0.05 probability for 1 mile distance
from an IP), while the higher value of 0.70 represents about 2500 cattle (0.70
probability for 1 mile distance from an IP).

PLOW PM AX Survival ratio Duration (days) Lightning Farm density ν
0.05
0.05

0
0.0001

0.932
.122

0.75
0.75

0.70
0.70

134
386

Table 4: Variant 3 Results

For zero lightning factor, the disease is in the low mortality phase. A
lightning factor as low as 0.0001, however, pushes the disease into the high
mortality phase. No attempt was made to analytically predict variant 3.

5 Conclusion

The underlying mathematical model of the 2001 BGP in the FMD epidemic
possesses a phase transition. For a small average disease transmission kernel,
the infection is quickly eliminated at hotspots and in the limit of a large
area, the density of the disease is zero. A second outcome occurs if the
average disease transmission kernel and its associated lightning factor are
greater than well-deﬁned numerical critical values. This results in the disease
propagating throughout the landscape and, in the limit of a large area, the
disease density approaches one as the conditional probability is raised above
the critical value. FMD has wreaked havoc. The existence of the phase
transition comes from the epidemiological feature of FMD: time-lags exist
for any culling policy relying on the appearance of clinical symptoms.

17

In the United States, there are major cattle producing areas (e.g. Florida)
which have similar cattle density and spatial farm distribution as England.
Thus implementing the BGP would be a great risk to the United States. The
authors suggest the following alternative strategy:
it is possible to detect
the presence of the virus in animals before clinical symptoms or antibodies
appear. This is done by PCR (polymerase chain reaction: a method to du-
plicate RNA or DNA and thus amplify the amount of genetic material in
the sample) ampliﬁcation of viral RNA in the host’s serum. Recently, it has
been shown7 that the FMD virus can be detected this way in animals. This
technology means that the time-lag can be eliminated if mobile PCR labora-
tory units can be made to return results in a few hours. Stationing of these
units at ports-of-entry and within the interior will allow rapid ﬁrst-responder
capability. Identifying the virus at an IP before the clinical symptoms ap-
pear means the culling policy will eradicate the disease eﬃciently: with no
time-lag, no landscape percolation exists. Coincident with the PCR mobile
units is the critical requirement of creating a FMD predictor model, using
a complete database of farm animals. The FMD predictor model would
direct the movement of the mobile units to predicted high risk localities.
Without such a code, one squanders away the only real assest that will be
eﬀective in confronting this most formidable microorganism. With the use
of ﬁrst-responder units, a draconian movement restriction policy is essential
to lowering the lightning factor of non-local disease transport. Finally, the
United States must design and manufacture, as quickly as possible, mobile
crematoria with high throughput.

18

References

[1] http://www.pighealth.com;

http://www.defa.gov.uk; http://www.avma.org/press/fmd/default.asp;
http://www.nanotimes.com/healthscience/story/226462p-
2182193c.html.

[2] P. Bak, K. Chen, C. Tang, Phys. Lett. A147, 297 (1990); K. Chen, P.
Bak, M Jensem, Phys. Lett. A149, 207 (1990); B. Drossel, F. Schwabl,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1629 (1992).

[3] D. Stauﬀer and A. Aharony, Introduction to Percolation Theory, 2nd

edition (Taylor and Francis, London, 1991).

[4] E. Ahmed, A. S. Hegazi and A. S. Elgazzar, J. Mod. Phys. C 13, 189

(2002).

[5] Matt J. Keeling, et al, Science 294, 813 (2001); M. J. Keeling, et al,

Nature 421, 136 (2003).

[6] W. H. Press, W. T. Vetterling, S. A. Teukolsy and B. P. Flannery,
Numerical Receipes in Fortran-The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing, 2nd
edition (Cambridge Press, New York, 1992).

[7] J. D. Callahan et al, J. Am Vet Med Assoc 220, 1636 (2002).

19

