Lanczos Pseudospectral Propagation Method
for Initial-Value Problems in Electrodynamics
of Passive Media

Andrei G. Borisov a,1 and Sergei V. Shabanov b,2

a Laboratoire des Collisions Atomique et Mol´eculaires, UMR CNRS - Universit´e Paris-Sud
8625, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France

b Department of Mathematics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA

Abstract

Maxwell’s equations for electrodynamics of dispersive and absorptive (passive) me-
dia are written in the form of the Schr¨odinger equation with a non-Hermitian Hamil-
tonian. The Lanczos time-propagation scheme is modiﬁed to include non-Hermitian
Hamiltonians and used, in combination with the Fourier pseudospectral method, to
solve the initial-value problem. The time-domain algorithm developed is shown to be
unconditionally stable. Variable time steps and/or variable computational costs per
time step with error control are possible. The algorithm is applied to study transmis-
sion and reﬂection properties of ionic crystal gratings with cylindric geometry in the
infra-red range.

4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
2
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 email: borisov@lcam.u-psud.fr

2 email: shabanov@phys.uﬂ.edu

1

1. Introduction. There is a demand for fast time-domain solvers of the Maxwell’s equa-
tions to model dynamics of broad band electromagnetic pulses in dispersive and absorptive
media. This is driven by various applications that include photonic devices, communications,
and radar technology, amongst many others. Eﬃciency, accuracy, and stability are the key
criteria of choosing a concrete algorithm for speciﬁc applications. In the past decades, pseu-
dospectral methods of solving the initial value problem for diﬀerential equations have been
under intensive study [1]. Because of their high eﬃciency and accuracy, they have replaced
ﬁnite diﬀerencing approaches in many traditional applications as well as scientiﬁc simula-
tions, e.g., in quantum chemistry [2]. Unconditionally stable pseudospectral algorithms are
particularly attractive for numerical simulations.

In the present paper we develop an unconditionally stable time-domain algorithm for solv-
ing the initial value problem for Maxwell’s equations in dispersive and absorptive (passive)
media with sharp interfaces (discontinuities of medium parameters). It is a time-stepping
algorithm that is based on the Hamiltonian formalism for electrodynamics of passive contin-
uous media, the Lanczos propagation scheme [3, 4], and the Fourier pseudospectral method
[5]. Apart from the unconditional stability, the algorithm has a dynamical control of accu-
racy, which allows one to automatically optimize computational costs with error control at
each time step.

We apply the algorithm to the scattering of broad band electromagnetic pulses on grat-
ings, the photonic devices that currently attract lots of attention because of their transmis-
sion and reﬂection properties [6]. As for the passive medium, we choose an ionic crystal
material. From the numerical point of view, the model of the dielectric permeability of
such a material is rather representative and used in the vast number of applications. From
the physical point of view, the interest to gratings and photonic crystals made of this kind
of material is due two types of eﬀects in interaction with electromagnetic radiation: The
structural and polaritonic ones [7, 8]. We show that in the infrared range the reﬂection and
transmission properties of ionic crystal gratings change signiﬁcantly in narrow frequency
ranges due to structural and polaritonic resonances. Structural resonances are associated
with the existence of trapped (quasistationary) electromagnetic modes supported by the
grating geometry (guided wave resonances) [9]. Polaritonic resonances are associated with
dispersive properties of the material. Such resonances appear when the incident radiation
can cause polaritonic excitations in the medium. From the macroscopic point of view, this
occurs in the anomalous dispersion region of the dielectric constant.

2. Basic equations. Maxwell’s equations in passive media can be written in the form of
the Schr¨odinger equation in which the wave function is a multidimensional column, composed
of electromagnetic ﬁeld components and the medium polarization, and the Hamiltonian is,
in general, non-Hermitian when attenuation is present. The initial-value problem (the time
evolution of an electromagnetic pulse) is then solved by ﬁnding the fundamental solution
(the evolution operator kernel) for the Schr¨odinger equation. Here this idea is applied to
the ionic crystal material whose dielectric properties at the frequency ω are described by the
dielectric constant

(1)

ε(ω) = ε∞ +

ε∞)ω2
(ε0 −
T
ω2
ω2
iηω
T −

−

,

2

where ε∞,0 are constants, ωT is the resonant frequency, and η is the attenuation. In particular,
transmission and reﬂection properties of the periodic grating structure of circular parallel
cylinders made of such a material are studied.

Let P be a dispersive part of the total polarization vector of the medium. Then D =
ε∞E + P, where D and E are the electric induction and ﬁeld, respectively. By using the
Fourier transform, it is straightforward to deduce that P satisﬁes the second-order diﬀerential
equation

where the overdot denotes the time derivative, ω2
otherwise, ω2
ω2
p → −
P = ˙P = 0 at t = 0.

ε∞ is positive,
p in (2). Equation (2) must be solved with the zero initial conditions,

T /ε∞ if ε0 −

ε∞)ω2

¨P + η ˙P + ω2

T P = ε∞ω2

pE ,
p = (ε0 −

(2)

Deﬁne a set of auxiliary ﬁelds Q1,2 by P = √ε∞ωpQ1/ωT and ˙Q1 = ωT Q2. For non-
magnetic media (µ = 1), the Maxwell’s equations and (2) can be written as the Schr¨odinger
equation, i ˙ψ(t) = Hψ(t), in which the wave function and the Hamiltonian are deﬁned by

ψ =

, H =

−

ε1/2
∞ E
B
Q1
Q2













ic∇

ε−1/2
∞

0

×
0
iωp







×

icε−1/2
∞ ∇
0
0
0

−

iωp
0
0
0
iωT
0
iη
iωT −
−







,

(3)

where c is the speed of light in the vacuum, and B is the magnetic ﬁeld. A solution to the
initial-value problem is given by ψ(t) = exp(
itH)ψ(0). Boundary conditions at medium
−
interfaces are enforced dynamically, that is, parameters of the Hamiltonian H are allowed
to be discontinuous functions of position. In particular, ε∞,0 are set to one in the vacuum,
and to some speciﬁc values in the medium in question (see Section 4).

The norm of the wave function,

drψ†ψ, is proportional to the total electromag-
netic energy of the wave packet [11, 12]. When the attenuation is not present, η = 0, the
Hamiltonian is Hermitian, H † = H, relative to the conventional scalar product in the space
of square integrable functions, and the norm (energy) is conserved.

2 =

ψ

k

k

R

{

−

ψ(t), Hψ(t), ..., H n−1ψ(t)

3. The algorithm. The Lanczos propagation scheme is based on a polynomial approx-
imation of the short-time fundamental solution for the Schr¨odinger equation, ψ(t + ∆t) =
i∆tH)ψ(t) [4, 10]. If the exponential is expanded into the Taylor series and the latter
exp(
is truncated at the order O(∆tn), then the approximation of ψ(t + ∆t) belongs to the Krylov
space Kn = Span
. Let Pn be a projection operator of the original
Hilbert space onto the Krylov space, P 2
n = Pn. Let Pnψ = ψ(n). The exact
solution of the initial-value problem is approximated by a solution of the corresponding ini-
tial value problem in Kn, ψ(n)(t + ∆t) = exp(
i∆tH (n))ψ(n)(t), where H (n) = PnHPn. The
−
accuracy of the approximation is of order O(∆tn). Hence, for practical needs, it is suﬃcient
9). Then H (n) is a small matrix whose exponential is
to choose n not so large (typically, n
computed by direct diagonalization. If the Hamiltonian is Hermitian, then the corresponding
matrix is symmetric tridiagonal in the Lanczos basis for Kn [3, 4]. Therefore the propaga-
tion scheme is unitary, that is, the energy (norm) of the initial wave packet is preserved,

n = Pn and P †

≤

}

3

which also implies the unconditional stability of the algorithm. Another important feature
of the Lanczos propagation scheme for Hermitian Hamiltonians is the dynamical control of
accuracy [4, 10].

For non-Hermitian Hamiltonians, one possibility is to use the split method in combination
with the Lanczos propagation scheme for the Hermitian part of the Hamiltonian [13]. While
the unconditional stability is maintained, the accuracy is limited by the accuracy of the
split approximation of the inﬁnitesimal fundamental solution, typically, by O(∆t3). An
alternative, mathematically sound, and more accurate procedure is based on the use of the
dually orthonormal Lanczos basis in which H (n) retains the tridiagonal complex symmetric
structure [3]. In the particular case of a complex symmetric H, the use of the dual Krylov
space can be avoided. There is an orthogonal Lanczos basis for Kn in which H (n) is also
complex symmetric tridiagonal, but the orthogonality is now understood with respect to a
new scalar product (without complex conjugation of vectors) [14]. However, in both the
cases, the projector Pn is no longer Hermitian. This has an unpleasant consequence. One
can show that, while the accuracy remains of the order O(∆tn), the unconditional stability
is typically lost. The algorithm is only conditionally stable. A more detailed study of such
schemes will be given elsewhere. Here we focus on developing an unconditionally stable
algorithm. For this purpose we construct an orthonormal basis for Kn itself, ignoring the
In this basis H (n) has a Hessenberg form,
dual Krylov space and making Pn Hermitian.
that is, it is upper-triangular with one extra non-zero lower superdiagonal [14]. A direct
diagonalization of such a matrix is still not expensive for small n. The dynamical control of
accuracy is also preserved.

Let ψj, j = 0, 1, ..., n

1, form an orthonormal basis for Kn that is constructed as
follows. Set φ0 = ψ(t) and ψ0 = φ0/
) denotes
the conventional scalar product in the Hilbert space of square integrable functions. For
j = 1, 2, ..., n

00 = (ψ0, Hψ0) where (

. Compute h(n)

1, compute

φ0k

−

k

·

·

,

−

j−1

X
k=0

h(n)
kj−1ψk ,

φj = Hψj−1 −

ψj = φj/

φjk

k

,

h(n)
jj−1 = (ψj, Hψj−1) ,

and, for k = 0, 1, ..., j, compute

h(n)
kj = (ψk, Hψj) .

n−1
By construction, (ψj, ψk) = δjk. Let ψ(n)(t + ∆t) = Pnψ(t + ∆t) =
k=0 ck(∆t)ψk where
ck(∆t) = (ψk, ψ(t + ∆t)). Note that the basis functions ψj depend on t and so do cj. For
brevity of notations, the dependence on t of all quantities involving ψj is not explicitly shown
in what follows. The expansion coeﬃcients ck are united into a complex column c with n
entries. It is straightforward to infer that c(∆t) satisﬁes the Schr¨odinger equation i ˙c = h(n)c
with the initial condition ck(0) = δk0. The matrix h(n) has a Hessenberg form and is the
i∆th(n))c(0). The
projected Hamiltonian H (n) in the basis constructed. Thus c(∆t) = exp(
exponential of the Hessenberg matrix h(n) is computed by direct diagonalization.

P

−

To compute the basis functions, multiple actions of the Hamiltonian H on the current

4

(4)

(5)

(6)

wave function ψ(t) are required. This is done by the Fourier pseudospectral method on a
ﬁnite grid [5]. To suppress reﬂections of the wave packet from grid boundaries, absorbing
boundary conditions are enforced by a conducting layer placed at the grid edges (see, e.g.,
[15]). The position dependence of the conductivity σ is adjusted to suppress reﬂections
with desired accuracy in the frequency range of interest. The Hamiltonian H is modiﬁed
accordingly. In the upper left corner of H in (3), the function
4πiσ is inserted instead of
zero.

−

k

k ≤

GN (∆t)

const uniformly for all integers N > 0, ∆t

Let us discuss the stability of the algorithm. In a time-stepping algorithm, an ampliﬁca-
tion matrix G(∆t) is deﬁned by ψ(t + ∆t) = G(∆t)ψ(t). The algorithm is unconditionally
stable if
0 and all other parameters
.
characterizing the system [16]. The norm of an operator is deﬁned by
k
For any H the following decomposition holds: H = H0 + iV where H0 and V are Hermitian.
Clearly, V is responsible for attenuation in any physically reasonable model of a passive
medium. The norm of the initial-value problem solution decreases with time if V is negative
semideﬁnite, that is, for any ψ, (ψ, V ψ)
0. Now we prove that the Lanczos algorithm with
the Hessenberg projected Hamiltonian (6) is unconditionally stable, provided V of the total
Hamiltonian is negative semideﬁnite.

= sup

Gψ

≤

≥

G

ψ

k

k

k

k

k

/

k

−

k ≤

exp(

i∆tH)

Observe that

1 for ∆t > 0 and all parameters of H for which V remains
i∆tH (n)).
negative semideﬁnite. The ampliﬁcation matrix has the form G(∆t) = exp(
Thanks to the Hermiticity of Pn, it is suﬃcient to show that V (n) = PnV Pn is negative
1 uniformly for all
semideﬁnite because the latter implies that
k
integers N > 0, ∆t > 0, and all parameters of H. For any ψ, the following chain of equalities
holds, (ψ, V (n)ψ) = (ψ, PnV Pnψ) = (ψ(n), V ψ(n))
0. In the ﬁrst equality, the deﬁnition
of V (n) has been used, in the second one, the Hermiticity of the projection operator has
been invoked, and the ﬁnal inequality is valid since V is negative semideﬁnite. The proof is
completed.

GN (∆t)

G(∆t)

k ≤ k

≤

−

≤

k

N

cn−1(∆t)

The most expensive operation of the algorithm is the action of the Hamiltonian on the
wave function. Bearing also in mind the accumulation of round-oﬀ errors, when computing
powers of H with broad spectrum (cf.
[3]), this implies that the dimension of the Krylov
space has to be as small as possible at each time step while controlling the approximation
error. In the case of Hermitian Hamiltonians, the n needed at a speciﬁed time step can be
2
ǫ where ǫ is a small number. This condition
deduced from the condition [4] that
O(∆tn−1). Note that cn−1 determines the weight of
is based on the fact that cn−1(∆t)
H n−1ψ(t) in the Taylor expansion of ψ(t + ∆t). In our algorithm for a non-Hermitian H,
the time evolution of the vector c is generated by a Hessenberg matrix h(n). By examining
i∆th(n))c(0) it is easy to convince oneself
the Taylor expansion of the exponential in exp(
O(∆tn−1) remains valid thanks to cj(0) = δj0. Thus, the same dynamical
that cn−1(∆t)
accuracy control can be used. In particular, in our simulations the dimension of the Krylov
ǫ at a ﬁxed ∆t to control
space at each time step is determined by
10−14 with ∆t
weights of three highest Krylov vectors in the approximate solution, and ǫ
being ﬁxed. Note, however, that both the propagation parameters n and ∆t can be varied
at each time step to minimize computational costs at the given accuracy level.

cn−3|

cn−1|

cn−2|

2 +

2 +

∼

∼

≤

−

≤

∼

|

|

|

|

|

2

5

4. Ionic crystal gratings. The algorithm has been applied to simulate the scattering
of broad band electromagnetic (laser) pulses on a grating structure consisting of circular
parallel ionic crystal cylinders periodically arranged in vacuum. Our primary interest is to
study the eﬀect of trapped modes (guided wave resonances) and polaritonic excitations on
transmission and reﬂection properties of the grating in the infrared range. The dielectric
function of the ionic crystal material is approximated by the single oscillator model (1).
Following the work [7], we choose the parameters representative for the beryllium oxide:
ε∞ = 2.99, ε0 = 6.6, ωT = 87.0 meV, and the damping η = 11.51 meV. The packing density
R/Dg = 0.1, where R is the radius of cylinders and Dg is the grating period, has been kept
ﬁxed in simulations. The cylinders are set parallel to the y axis. The structure is periodic
along the x axis, and the z direction is transverse to the grating. A Gaussian wave packet
propagating along the z axis is used as an initial conﬁguration. It is linearly polarized with
the electric ﬁeld oriented along the y axis, i.e., parallel to the cylinders (the so called TM
polarization). The frequency resolved transmission and reﬂection coeﬃcients are obtained
via the time-to-frequency Fourier transform of the signal on “virtual detectors” placed at
some distance in front and behind the periodic structure [17]. The zero diﬀraction mode
is studied here for wavelengths λ
Dg so that reﬂected and transmitted beams propagate
along the z-axis. Similar to our previous works [11, 13] we use a change of variables in both
x (x = f1(ξ)) and z (z = f2(ζ)) coordinates to enhance the sampling eﬃciency in the vicinity
15Dg, and
of medium interfaces. A typical size of the mesh corresponds to
0.5Dg with, respectively, 384 and 64 knots. Note that, because of the variable
0.5Dg ≤
−
change, a uniform mesh in the auxiliary coordinates (ξ, ζ) corresponds to a non-uniform mesh
in the physical (x, z) space.

17Dg ≤
−

≥

≤

≤

x

z

Two types of resonances are expected for the gratings studied here. Structure resonances
are associated with the existence of guided wave modes [9, 13]. They are characteristic for
periodic dielectric gratings and, in the absence of losses, lead to the 100% reﬂection within
Dg. The second type of resonances arise
a narrow frequency interval(s) for wavelengths λ
∼
DT = 2πc/ωT . Calculations have been
because of polariton excitations for wavelengths λ
done for diﬀerent values of Dg so that the polaritonic excitation can be tuned through out
the wavelength range of interest (λ/Dg ≥

1) by changing the ratio DT /Dg.

∼

In Fig. 1 we show the results obtained for the transmission (blue curves) and reﬂection
(red curves) coeﬃcients for the beryllium oxide gratings characterized by the period Dg such
that DT /Dg = 0.5, 2.5, and 4 as indicated in the ﬁgure. The results are presented as a
function of the radiation wavelength measured in units of the grating period. Note that the
logarithmic scale is used for the horizontal axis in order to improve the resolution at small
wavelengths. Consider ﬁrst the following two limiting cases. According to (1), for short
wavelengths λ
ε∞. In
DT ), the medium responds as a dielectric material
the long wavelength limit λ
characterized by ε
ε0. In Fig. 1 the dashed and solid black curves represent the reﬂection
coeﬃcient of the grating made of a lossless, non-dispersive dielectric with ε = ε∞ and ε = ε0,
respectively. In agreement with the previously published results [13], the reﬂection coeﬃcient
in these two cases reaches 1 within a narrow frequency range for λ
Dg. This resonant
pattern is associated with the so-called Wood anomalies [18], and can be explained by the

DT ), the medium behaves as as a dielectric with ε
DT (Dg ≫

DT (Dg ≪
≫

≪

≈

∼

≈

6

existence of trapped modes or guided wave resonances [9, 11]. The width of the resonances
is determined by the lifetime of the corresponding quasi-stationary trapped mode which is
a standing wave along the x axis and is excited by the incoming wave. The width increases
with ε while the resonant wavelength gets redshifted, which explains the diﬀerence between
the dashed and solid black curves (ε0 > ε∞).

Now we turn to the discussion of the eﬀects due to dispersive properties of the ionic crystal
material. For DT /Dg = 0.5, the resonant excitation of polaritons is impossible within the
range of wavelengths of interest, and the dielectric constant is close to ε0. The result for
the reﬂection coeﬃcient in this case is similar to the data shown by the black solid curve.
However, there is an essential diﬀerence as compared to the case of a lossless, non-dispersive
dielectric grating. Indeed, for a lossless medium the sum of the reﬂection and transmission
coeﬃcients must be one, which is not the case for the beryllium oxide model because of the
damping (the dashed-dotted green curve). The maximal loss of energy corresponds to the
resonant wavelength. It is easily understood because the trapped mode remains in contact
with the material much longer than the main pulse, and, therefore, can dissipate more energy.

For DT /Dg = 2.5, two resonances emerge leading to the enhanced reﬂection within the
DT , is associated with
corresponding frequency ranges. The one at λ/Dg ∼
polaritonic excitations of the ionic crystal. The resonance at λ
Dg is a structure resonance.
As follows from (1), the dielectric constant in this case approaches ε∞ for small wavelengths
λ
Dg. Then the width and position of the structure resonance are close to the data given
by the dashed black curve. The imaginary part of the dielectric function is large enough
through out the entire wavelength range to produce a substantial energy loss at both the
resonances.

2.5, i.e., λ

∼

∼

∼

Finally, for DT /Dg = 4 the polariton excitation appears at λ

4Dg and the two reso-
nances are well separated. The structure resonance at λ
Dg closely matches the result for
a lossless, non-dispersive dielectric grating characterized by ε = ε∞. Observe that the reﬂec-
tion coeﬃcient is close to 1 in this case and the energy loss is small because the imaginary
part of ε(ω) is small far from ω = ωT .

∼

∼

Figs 2 and 3 show the reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients of the grating as functions
of the incident radiation wavelength and the grating period Dg. The polariton resonance
wavelength DT = 2πc/ωT and the packing density R/Dg are kept ﬁxed. The results for the
two limiting cases in which ε = ε0 and ε = ε∞ are represented by the left most and right
most colored columns, respectively. The resonance pattern of the system is clearly visible, in
particular, the transformation of the structure resonance at ε = ε0 into the polaritonic one.
Thus, by increasing the ratio DT /Dg, the “broad” structure resonance associated with ε = ε0
is turned into the polaritonic resonance and follows the diagonal of the plot (λ/Dg = DT /Dg).
At the same time, starting approximately with DT /Dg = 2, the “narrow” structure resonance
associated with ε = ε∞ emerges and fully develops for DT /Dg = 4.

Finally we would like to show the sensitivity of the results to the attenuation in the
present system. In Fig. 4, the transmission and reﬂection coeﬃcients are presented for two
diﬀerent choices of the attenuation η in (1). The geometry of the grating structure is set

7

∼

→

Dg and polaritonic resonance at λ

by DT /Dg = 2.5. The upper panel of the ﬁgure corresponds to η = 11.51 meV as used
throughout this paper. The lower panel of the ﬁgure corresponds to the damping reduced
η/20. Overall features are qualitatively the same in both the cases.
by the factor of 20 : η
Thus, both the structure resonance at λ
2.5Dg
are present, accompanied by the reduced transmission and enhanced reﬂection. As the
wavelength increases from the structure resonance, the reﬂectivity of the grating drops to
zero. Its subsequent onset for λ > 1.683Dg is linked with the metal-type behavior of the ionic
crystal (ε becomes negative). The characteristic frequency for the “metallization” can be
ε0/ε∞, leading to λL = 1.683Dg
deduced from the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation ωL = ωT p
for λT = 2.5Dg. Despite these common features, the reduction of the attenuation leads to
essential changes. In contrast to the upper panel of the ﬁgure, for η
η/20 the transmission
coeﬃcient reaches nearly 0 at both the resonances, and the reﬂection coeﬃcient is close to 1.
Moreover, new structures appear in the polaritonic resonance for λ = DT , i.e., as ε changes
from large negative to large positive values. These structures are completely washed out for
the medium with large damping. This result indicates the importance of accurate modelling
of losses in polaritonic media in order to make reliable predictions of transmission and
reﬂection properties of grating structures and photonic crystals.

→

∼

5. Conclusions. We have developed an unconditionally stable (time-domain) algorithm
for initial value problems in electrodynamics of inhomogeneous, dispersive, and absorptive
media. The method is based on the three essential ingredients: (i) the Hamiltonian formal-
ism in electrodynamics of passive media, (ii) the Lanczos propagation scheme, modiﬁed to
account for attenuation, and (iii) the Fourier pseudospectral method on non-uniform grids
induced by change of variables to enhance the sampling eﬃciency in the vicinity of sharp
inhomogeneities of the medium. Apart from the unconditional stability, the algorithm al-
lows for a dynamical accuracy control, meaning that the two propagation parameters, the
dimension of the Krylov space and the time step, may automatically be adjusted to minimize
computational costs in due course of simulations, while controlling error.

The algorithm has been tested by simulating the scattering of infrared electromagnetic
pulses on periodic gratings composed of parallel cylinders that are made of the ionic crystal
material. The Lorentz model describing dielectric properties of such a material is rather
representative and used to model a vast variety of dielectric materials. Our results demon-
strate the role of structure (or guided wave) resonances and polaritonic excitations for the
transmission and reﬂection properties of grating structures. The results are also shown to
be sensitive to the attenuation of polaritonic media.

Acknowledgments. S.V.S. thanks the LCAM of the Univestity of Paris-Sud and, in
particular, Dr. V. Sidis for support and warm hospitality extended to him during his stay
in Orsay. S.V.S. is also grateful to Dr. R. Albanese (US Air Force Brooks Research Center,
TX), Profs. J.R. Klauder and T. Olson (University of Florida) for the continued support of
this project. The authors thank Dr. D. Wack (KLA-Tencor, San Jose, CA) for stimulating
and supporting the work on this project.

8

References

2001)

[1] J.P. Boyd, Chebyshev and Fourier Spectral Methods, second ed. (Dover, Mineola, NY,

[2] C. Cerjan, ed. Numerical Grid Methods and Their Application to Schr¨odiger’s Equation
(NATO ASI Series, Series C: Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Vol. 412, Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, London, 1993);
R. E. Wyatt and Z.H. Zhang, Dynamics of Molecules and Chemical Reactions (Marcel
Dekker, NY, 1996)

[3] C.J. Lanczos, J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. 45, 255 (1950)

[4] T.J. Park, and J.C. Light, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 5870 (1986)

[5] D. Kosloﬀ, and R. Kosloﬀ, J. Comput. Phys. 52, 35 (1983)

[6] T.W. Ebbesen, H.J. Lezec, H.F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and P.A. Wolﬀ, Nature (London) 391,

667 (1998);
J.A. Porto,F.J. Garcia-Vidal, and J.B. Pendry,Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2845 (1999);
Y. Takakura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5601 (2001);
F.J. Garcia-Vidal, L. Martin-Moreno, Phys. Rev. B66, 155412 (2002);
M.M.J. Treacy, Phys. Rev. B 66, 195105 (2002);
Q. Cao and Ph. Lalanne, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 213901 (2003);
J.M. Steele, C.E. Moran, A. Lee, C.M. Aguirre, and N.J. Halas, Phys. Rev. B 68, 205103
(2003);
F. Yang and J.R. Sambles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 063901 (2002)

[7] A. Rung and C.G. Ribbing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 123901 (2004)

[8] K.C. Huang, P. Bienstman, J.D. Joannopoulos, K.A. Nelson, S. Fan, Phys. Rev. Lett.

90, 196402 (2003)

[9] R. Magnusson and S.S. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 1022 (1992);

S. Peng, G.M. Morris, Opt. Lett. 21, 549 (1996);
T. Peter, R. Br¨auer, O. Bryngdahl, Optics Communications 139, 177 (1997);
K. Koshino, Phys. Rev. B 67, 165213 (2003);
L. Pilozzi, A. D’Andera, R. Del Sole, Phys. Rev. B 54, 10763 (1996)

[10] C. Leforestier, R.H. Bisseling, C. Cerjan, M.D. Feit, R. Friesner, A. Guldberg, A. Ham-
merich, G. Jolicard, W. Karrlein, H.-D. Meyer, N. Lipkin, O. Roncero, and R. Kosloﬀ, J.
Comp. Physics 94, 59 (1991)

[11] A.G. Borisov, and S.V. Shabanov, J. Comput. Phys. 199, 742 (2004)

[12] S.V. Shabanov, Electromagnetic pulse propagation in passive media by path integral

methods, a LANL e-preprint, 2003, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.NA/0312296

[13] A.G. Borisov, and S.V. Shabanov, J. Comput. Phys., submitted

9

[14] H.A. van der Vorst, Iterative Krylov Methods for Large Linear Systems, Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 2004

[15] P.G. Petropoulos, J. Appl. Mathematics 60, 1037 (2000)

J.-L. Vay, J. Comp. Phys. 165, 511 (2000)

[16] R. Richtmyer and K. Morton, Diﬀerence methods for initial-value problems (Willey, NY,

[17] J. Sjakste, A.G. Borisov, J.P. Gauyacq, A.K. Kazansky, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 37,

1967)

1593 (2004)

[18] R.W. Wood, Phys. Rev. 48, 928 (1935)

10

Figure captions

Fig. 1.

Calculated zero-order reﬂection (red curves) and transmission (blue curves)
coeﬃcients for the ionic crystal grating described in the text. The results are presented as
a function of the incident radiation wavelength measured in units of the grating period Dg.
Diﬀerent panels of the ﬁgure correspond to diﬀerent values of the grating period as compared
to the resonance wavelength for the polaritonic excitation of the material, DT = 2πc/ωT .
The dashed and solid black curves represent the reﬂection coeﬃcient calculated for the
grating made of a lossless, non-dispersive dielectric characterized by ε = ε∞ and ε = ε0,
respectively. The sum of the reﬂection and transmission coeﬃcients is shown as the dashed-
dotted green curve. Its deviation from 1 represents the electromagnetic energy loss because
of the attenuation.

Fig. 2.

The zero-order transmission coeﬃcient for the ionic crystal grating described
in the text as a function of the incident radiation wavelength and the grating period. The
horizontal axis represents the ratio DT /Dg of the resonance wavelength for the polaritonic
excitation of the material DT = 2πc/ωT and the grating period Dg. The vertical axis
represents the incident radiation wavelength λ measured in units of Dg. Color codes used
for the plot are shown in the inset.

Fig. 3.

The zero-order reﬂection coeﬃcient for the ionic crystal grating described in
the text as a function of the incident radiation wavelength and the grating period. The
horizontal axis represents the ratio DT /Dg of the resonance wavelength for the polaritonic
excitation of the material DT = 2πc/ωT and the grating period Dg. The vertical axis
represents the incident radiation wavelength λ measured in units of Dg. Color codes used
for the plot are shown in the inset.

Fig. 4.

Calculated zero-order reﬂection (red curves) and transmission (dashed blue
curves) coeﬃcients for the ionic crystal grating. The sum of the reﬂection and transmission
coeﬃcients is shown as the dashed-dotted green curve. The geometry of the grating structure
is set by DT /Dg = 2.5. The upper panel of the ﬁgure corresponds to the attenuation
η = 11.51 meV as used throughout the paper. The lower panel of the ﬁgure corresponds
to the damping reduced by the factor of 20 : η
η/20. The vertical black line deﬁnes the
resonant wavelength λ = DT = 2πc/ωT .

→

11

This figure "Fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0410271v1

This figure "Fig2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0410271v1

This figure "Fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0410271v1

This figure "Fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0410271v1

