4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Robin Hood method - a novel numerical
method for electrostatic problems based on a
non-local charge transfer

Predrag Lazi´c, Hrvoje ˇStefanˇci´c and Hrvoje Abraham

Theoretical Physics Division, Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute
P.O.B. 180, HR-10002 Zagreb, Croatia

Abstract

We introduce a novel numerical method, named the Robin Hood method, of solving
electrostatic problems. The approach of the method is closest to the boundary
element methods, although signiﬁcant conceptual diﬀerences exist with respect to
this class of methods. The method achieves equipotentiality of conducting surfaces
by iterative non-local charge transfer. For each of the conducting surfaces non-
local charge transfers are performed between surface elements which diﬀer the most
from the targeted equipotentiality of the surface. The method is tested against
analytical solutions and its wide range of application is demonstrated. The method
has appealing technical characteristics. For the problem with N surface elements,
the computational complexity of the method essentially scales with N α, where α <
2, the required computer memory scales with N , while the error of the potential
decreases exponentially with the number of iterations for many orders of magnitude
of the error, without the presence of the Critical Slowing Down. The Robin Hood
method has a large potential of application in other classical as well as quantum
problems. Some possible applications outside electrostatics are outlined.

Key words: electrostatics, Robin Hood, non-local charge transfer,
equipotentiality, Critical Slowing Down, real space DFT
PACS: 02.70.-c, 41.20.-q, 41.20.Cv, 89.20-a

Email addresses: plazic@thphys.irb.hr (Predrag Lazi´c),

shrvoje@thphys.irb.hr (Hrvoje ˇStefanˇci´c), ahrvoje@thphys.irb.hr (Hrvoje
Abraham).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

The methods of solving electrostatic problems today range from the funda-
mentals of classical physics [1,2,3,4], practically representing the scientiﬁc her-
itage, to the state-of-the-art computational approaches [5,6,7,8] widely used for
handling complex technological problems. The development of computational
power in the last decades has resulted in a large number of available eﬃcient
methods for the solution of potential problems in electrostatics, as well as in
other areas of physical, engineering and technological applications. According
to the basic approach towards the main goal of electrostatic problems, the
determination of the electric potential in the relevant segment of space, meth-
ods can be roughly divided into Finite Element Methods (FEM), Boundary
Element Methods (BEM) and Finite Diﬀerence (FD) computational methods
[9,10]. In very general terms, FEM and BEM solve for the charge distribution
at relevant objects (or their boundaries) and thus obtain the potential indi-
rectly, whereas FD methods determine the potential directly in the relevant
segment of space.

In this paper we develop a robust new method for solving large classes of
electrostatic problems. The usefulness and applicability of the method with
respect to other potential problems will also be outlined.

“As simple as it gets”. In this paragraph we give a clear overview of the
simple physical idea that has guided us towards the development of the method
presented here. Owing to the abundance of technical details given later, the
main idea could be blurred and that simple idea is what gives our method
eﬃciency and robustness. To give the insight into the core of the method,
we describe a simple problem. Suppose that we have an ideal, insulated and
charge neutral, metal sphere standing in vacuum and we bring a point charge
next to it. What will happen with the charge distribution on the sphere?
It will redistribute until all the surface of the sphere becomes equipotential.
That is the stationary situation: the charge will not redistribute any further
because the potential is the same everywhere on the sphere surface. That is
a very simple high-school argument which reveals the qualitative nature of
the stationary solution. With equal simplicity, one can deduce that the elec-
tric ﬁeld must be perpendicular to the surface of the metal, as indeed will
be seen in the examples treated in this paper. Following only this equipoten-
tiality principle, we employ a straightforward numerical procedure to ﬁnd a
complete quantitative solution of this electrostatic problem. First, we divide
a sphere into ﬁnite triangle elements, each having some surface charge. The
initial surface charge distribution is chosen in such a way to respect the charge
neutrality of the sphere. One can simply set the charge distribution to zero
on the entire sphere. We calculate the electrical potential at each of these el-
ements due to charges on all triangles and a point charge. We determine two

2

of the triangles which have the highest and the lowest potential, respectively,
and transfer the charge from one of these two selected elements to the other
in such a manner that after the transfer the potentials on these two elements
are exactly the same. Since we do only the charge transfer, the total charge
on the sphere remains conserved, i.e. the sphere remains neutral. Then the
update of the potential, resulting from the charge transfer, is performed. We
iterate this process. The main idea is that such a procedure will lead to a more
and more equipotential surface, and eventually converge to the solution of the
electrostatic problem. Since the main idea of the method, namely taking from
the maximum and giving to the minimum thus making them equal, to the
principal ideas of Robin Hood (RH), we suggest this name for out method.

The conceptual importance of this “as simple as it gets” reﬂection is the
reason for placing this brief description of the method already here in the
introduction. All properties of the RH method stem from this main simple idea
of min-max equipotentialization and not from the particular implementation.
As a matter of fact, all essential elements of the RH method are provided in the
description given above, which best illustrates the conceptual attractiveness
of the RH method. The rest of the paper is devoted to the elaboration of the
stated principles and the description of the elements of implementation of the
RH method which raise afore-mentioned simple ideas to the level of a powerful
calculational technique.

The paper is organized as follows: The second section is devoted to the phys-
ical foundations of the RH method. This section gives general elements of the
method as well as the speciﬁc features for the cases of insulated conducting
surfaces and conducting surfaces at the exterior potential. The third section
speciﬁes details of the implementation of the method. The fourth section com-
prises several examples, some of which show the reliability of the RH method
by comparison with analytical solutions, while others demonstrate the broad
applicability of the method. The ﬁfth section exposes the technical charac-
teristics, like the computational complexity, memory requirements, speed of
convergence and others. The sixth section outlines the possibilities of exten-
sion of the RH method beyond electrostatics. The seventh section closes the
paper with conclusions.

2 Physical foundations

A large class of electric ﬁeld conﬁgurations is achieved by an appropriate spa-
tial conﬁguration of various conductors. These conductors, such as electrodes,
cables, plates, etc. are either maintained at the potentials of exterior voltage
sources or are insulated. For static electric ﬁelds, there are no electric cur-
rents and all parts of every conductor are at the same potential. The principle

3

of equipotentiality of conductors in electrostatics is at the very core of the
computational method presented in this paper.

Despite the fact that here we principally consider the electrostatic case, it is
instructive to take a look into the process of attaining the static conﬁgura-
tion of the electric ﬁeld. When one of the conductors is attached to an exterior
voltage source or charges are deposited close to the surfaces of the conductors,
the electric currents ﬂow and rearrange the distribution of free charges in the
conductors until the surfaces of the conductors become equipotential again.
Therefore, every static conﬁguration of the electric ﬁeld is initially achieved by
the redistribution of the free charge in the conductors. The description of the
process of reaching some electrostatic conﬁguration is generally more com-
plex than the description of the electrostatic conﬁguration itself. However,
it is tempting to investigate the usefulness of the concept of the charge re-
distribution in determining the electrostatic conﬁgurations themselves. Here
we present the method of solving electrostatic problems using the iterative
redistribution of the charge at the surfaces of conductors.

We consider the general problem of determining the electric potential in the
spatial segment delimited by conducting surfaces. The underlying assumption
of the method is that the Green function of the system is known, i.e. that
with the knowledge of the charge distribution at all surfaces it is possible to
determine the electric potential at any point of interest. This assumption rep-
resents the most fundamental limitation of the method, but is, on the other
hand, justiﬁed for a very large class of both theoretically and practically inter-
esting problems. The conducting surfaces either are kept at deﬁned potentials
or are insulated. Every conducting surface is divided into surface elements and
a point is chosen within each surface element. The potential is calculated in
the chosen point and in the remainder of the text this point will be referred to
as the point of calculation (POC). The area of the surface element i is denoted
by ∆Si, the coordinates of its POC by ~xi and the potential at its POC by
Ui. In the practical implementation of the method, described in section 3, the
surfaces are divided into triangles and the POCs are the barycentres of the
triangles. This choice is motivated by the fact that the dipole of the uniformly
charged triangle vanishes when it is calculated in the reference frame centered
at its barycentre. This feature will be exploited in the implementation of the
RH method. The aim of the method is to achieve the equipotentiality of each
of the conducting surfaces. Practically, this is realized by achieving the equal-
ity of the potential at all POCs for every individual conducting surface, to a
predeﬁned accuracy. In the case of conducting surfaces kept at a ﬁxed poten-
tial, the potential achieved at POCs is the potential of the exterior voltage
source, while for the insulated conducting surfaces, the achieved potential is
obtained as one of the results of the method. It is assumed that the surface
charge density is constant within every surface element. The surface charge
density of the surface element i is σi, while its charge is qi = σi∆Si.

4

In the process of ﬁnding the static distribution of the charge at the conducting
surfaces, we start from some initial distribution of the charge at each of the
conducting surfaces. Using the known Green function, it possible to calculate
the potential at each POC coming from the entire charge distribution in the
system:

U(~x) =

G(~x, ~x′)σ(~x′) dS′ ,

Z∂V

|−1 and ∂V stands for all
with the Green function G(~x, ~x′) = k | ~x − ~x′
boundary surfaces of the system. In our method, the analytic expression (1)
can be cast into the discretized form

Ui =

Iijqj ,

Xj

where

Iij =

1
∆Sj Z∆Sj

k | ~xi − ~x′ |−1 dS′ .

(1)

(2)

(3)

In the calculation of the potential at a given POC one needs to compute
the contributions of all surface elements, including the contribution from the
surface element within which the POC is situated. Once the potential at all
POCs is known, we can ﬁnd a pair of POCs at which potential diﬀers the
most from the target value. Finally, charge transfers to/from chosen surface
elements (where POCs from the chosen pair are situated) are performed in
order to equalize the potentials at the POCs of the chosen pair. The procedure
of equalizing potential diﬀers somewhat, depending on whether the conducting
surface is kept at the exterior potential or is insulated. Therefore we describe
this procedure separately for each of the two cases.

Insulated conducting surface. In this case, there is no target potential
which needs to be achieved in the process of determining the static surface
charge distribution. The only condition that must be satisﬁed is the equipo-
tentiality of the surface. Therefore, we choose two points which diﬀer the most
from the targeted equipotential conﬁguration: the POC of the maximal po-
tential and the POC of the minimal potential at the surface. We denote the
POCs of the maximal and the minimal potential by m and n, respectively.
The potentials of the two chosen POCs are equalized by the charge transfer
from the point of the maximal potential to the point of the minimal potential.
If the amount of charge q is transferred from m to n, the potentials at these
two points after the transfer will be

5

The condition of equality of the potential at the points m and n after the
charge transfer (U ′

n) yields the amount of charge to be transferred:

m = U ′

U ′
m = Um − Immq + Imnq ,
U ′
n = Un + Innq − Inmq .

q =

Um − Un
Imm + Inn − Imn − Inm

.

The transfer of the charge (5) clearly inﬂuences the potential values at other
POCs and generally brings a large majority of them closer to the requirement
of equipotentiality. This form of charge transfer also ensures the crucial prop-
erty of the conservation of charge. In the case of multiple insulated conducting
surfaces in the system, charge transfers are performed separately within each
surface. Charges at other surfaces, however, inﬂuence the potentials at any
individual surface.

Conducting surface at the exterior potential. For a conducting surface
at the exterior potential Uext, the targeted value of the potential is deﬁned.
Two POCs, denoted by k and l, at which the potential diﬀers the most from
the external potential value, are located. The amounts of charges q′
k and q′
l
are brought to the POCs k and l, respectively. The values of these charges are
determined from the condition that the potential at the chosen POCs after
introducing these charges should equal the potential of the external voltage
k and q′
source. After the charges q′
l are transferred to the points k and l, the
potentials at these two POCs are

′
k = Uk + Ikkq
U
l = Ul + Illq′
U ′

′
′
l ,
k + Iklq
l + Ilkq′
k .

The right amount of charges to bring the potentials at k and l to the exter-
nal potential (U ′
l = Uext) are obtained by solving the system of linear
equations (6)

k = U ′

q′
k =

q′
l =

(Uext − Uk)Ill − (Uext − Ul)Ikl
IkkIll − IklIlk
(Uext − Ul)Ikk − (Uext − Uk)Ilk
IkkIll − IklIlk

,

.

The sum of transferred charges q′
is the possibility of charge ﬂow to/from the exterior voltage source.

l is generally not zero because there

k and q′

Both procedures described above correct the potential at points where the
greatest deviations from the targeted equipotentiality exist. The entire proce-

6

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

dure is iterated for all conducting surfaces until the criterion of equipotentiality
is satisﬁed for each surface.

In both cases presented above it is possible that at some iteration multiple
minima or maxima exist (or equivalently, points with the largest departure
from the exterior potential). This kind of situation is most likely to appear
at the beginning of the iteration process when the system possesses some
symmetry. This possibility of degeneration, however, presents no diﬃculty for
the RH method. It is suﬃcient to choose one of the maxima and one of the
minima and to proceed with the algorithm of the method. For both cases it
is also possible to develop procedures in which an arbitrary number of points
Npoints is brought to the targeted potential at a single step of iteration. Such
procedures require ﬁnding the solution of the Npoints dimensional set of linear
equations. For the conducting surface at an exterior potential, the choice of
a single point (Npoints = 1) is also allowed in principle. However, in this case,
the stability of computations becomes questionable. Furthermore, it is our
view that the procedure with Npoints = 1 fails to exploit the possibilities of
fast convergence since it completely ignores the typical scales of the charge
distribution at the studied surface. The question of quality of convergence for
Npoints larger than 2 is presently open. For Npoints very large, i.e. close to the
number of surface elements, the method conceptually approaches the existing
BEM. For the time being, we ﬁnd the choice Npoints = 2 to be conceptually
the simplest and adopt it in the remainder of the paper. Furthermore, in
the extensions of the RH method to the problems in which the potential
depends non-linearly on the density (e.g. Thomas-Fermi model), or where
the potential at some POC is dependent on densities of surrounding POCs
(e.g. in representations of terms with derivatives) or densities are strictly non-
negative (e.g. in quantum problems), the case of Npoints larger that 2 becomes
increasingly cumbersome.

3 Implementation of the method

The focus of this section is on the practical implementation of the proce-
dures explained in the preceding section. There are several major segments of
implementation which are combined together into a robust and eﬃcient cal-
culational scheme. Each of these segments also introduces its discretizational
error which can be reduced by discretization reﬁnement. The ﬁrst segment
of implementation is the division of surfaces into surface elements i. In our
method, all surfaces are divided into triangles using algorithms included in
VTK [11] and Mathematica [12] program packages. Clearly, this step intro-
duces the error of approximating a (generally piece-wise smooth) surface with
a set of triangles. This error can be reduced by increasing the number of tri-
angles used to approximate the studied surface. Each of the triangles is then

7

divided into two right-angled triangles, which can be carried out in at least one
way. In this way we approximate the surface by a set of right-angled triangles.
The choice of right-angled triangles is not fundamental, but is motivated by
practical and numerical reasons. As speciﬁed in the preceding section, we take
that the surface charge density is uniform within each of the triangles. For
each right-angled triangle its POC is situated at its barycentre. Once the set
of approximating right-angled triangles is deﬁned, the integrals Iij (2) need
to be calculated. For the right-angled triangle i with the catheti ai and bi the
value of its self-contribution Iii can be obtained analytically:

Iii = kai [ln [(2si + ti,1)/(ti,3 − si)]

+ si [ln [(ti,4 + ti,2ti,3 + 2)/(ti,1ti,3 − 2ti,4 − 1)] /ti,3
+ ln [(3ti,2 + 6)/(3ti,3 − 3)]]] /3.

(8)

q

q

q

1 + s2

1 + 4s2

i , ti,2 =

Here we have used abbreviations si = bi/ai, ti,1 =

4 + s2
i
and ti,3 =
i . For the general integral Iij, one must, however, apply
non-analytic procedures. One option is the numerical calculation of the inte-
gral. This is generally rather time-consuming and will be avoided. The other
possibility is the expansion of the integral in a multipole expansion [1]. In a
multipole expansion for the potential of a given charge distribution we can
increase the quality of the approximation by adding the contributions of the
multipoles of higher rank. The calculation of higher-rank multipoles, however,
becomes increasingly cumbersome. On the other hand, for a calculation up to
some ﬁxed multipole rank, improvement in precision can be achieved by divid-
ing the initial charge distribution into several smaller charge distributions. In
this approach, however, the amount of calculation grows with more detailed
divisions of the initial charge distribution. We ﬁnd that it is optimal to use
the combination of these two approaches. Therefore, in our calculations we
combine the use of multipole moments up to the quadrupole and apply the
recursive division of the initial right-angled triangle into smaller right-angled
triangles. Let us consider this combination in more detail.

For a right-angled triangle in the x−y plane with the catheti aj and bj oriented
in the x and y axes, respectively, the dipole moment calculated with respect to
its POC vanishes (since for the POC of the triangle we choose its barycenter).
The quadrupole moment in the reference frame of POC is given by

aj b3
j
36

a3
j bj
18 −
j b2
a2
−
24
0

j

j

j b2
a2
−
24
a3
j bj
36 +
0

−

aj b3
j
18

Q =

2
ajbj








0

0
a3
j bj
36 −

−

aj b3
j
36

.








(9)

The integral Iij of the right-angled triangle up to the quadrupole contribution

8

Fig. 1. The result of the iterative division of the right-angled triangle with the
vertices A=(1,0,0), B=(0,4,0), C=(0,0,0) for the computation of the potential at
the point T=(1,0.7,0), denoted by the heavy dot.

at the point ~xi is given by the expression

Iij = k

1
| ~xi − ~xj |

"

+

Qmn

1
6

( ~xi − ~xj)m( ~xi − ~xj)n
| ~xi − ~xj |5

#

.

(10)

The expression given above is applicable for surface elements i and j suf-
ﬁciently far apart. However, if these elements are close, this approximation
may not suﬃce for some predeﬁned accuracy in the calculation of the poten-
tial. The criterion for the applicability of the expression (10) is that the ratio
of the distance | ~xi − ~xj | to the typical size of the right-angled triangle is larger
than some number. The measure of the size of the right-angled triangle is taken
to be the larger of its catheti. According to our numerical analysis, when the
value of the ratio of | ~xi − ~xj | and the larger cathetus (let us denote it by η) is
≥ 5.5, the quadrupole corrected monopole term (10) gives the approximation
of the result obtained by the direct numerical integration with an accuracy
of 10−4. Furthermore, when the ratio η is ≥ 26, the monopole term alone is
suﬃcient to provide the approximation with the same accuracy. These ﬁndings
are valid for all right-angled triangle shapes, i.e. for all ratios of the larger and
smaller catheti. Therefore, if the ratio η is ≥ 26, the monopole term is used
and if the afore-mentioned ratio is ≥ 5.5, the monopole plus quadrupole terms
are used. If, however, we have η < 5.5, the right-angled triangle is divided into
four similar right-angled triangles obtained by the bisections of the sides of
the original right-angled triangle. It is important to note that the respective
η ratios of the four newly formed right-angled triangles are generally larger
than those of the original triangle. The procedure is then repeated for each
of the four right-angled triangles and subsequently iterated until all obtained
right-angled triangles satisfy the condition η ≥ 5.5. The result of one such
iterative division for an elongated right-angled triangle and a nearby point is
shown in Fig. 1. Summation of contributions of all triangles yields the ﬁnal
result. At this place it is important to stress that the subdivision of the right-
angled triangle depicted in Fig. 1 is not a raﬁnement of the discretization of
the surface, but only an auxiliary tool during the calculation of the potential.
The combination of the multipole expansion up to the quadrupole and the
iterative division of the triangle surface provides a fast, reliable and robust

9

method for the calculation of Iij quantities.

During the entire execution of the RH method only the potentials at all POCs
are stored. The quantities Iij are calculated over again at each instance when
they are needed, i.e. they are not recorded at any instant during the execution
of the algorithm. If the algorithm of the method should include storing of
the quantities Iij, memory requirements would grow quadratically with the
number of surface elements N. In this case, an advantage would be that these
quantities would have to be calculated only once. However, we do not adopt
this approach. Since only potentials are recorded in the RH method, memory
requirements grow linearly with N. This feature is clearly a large advantage.
The disadvantage lies in the necessity of a new calculation of the quantities
Iij whenever they are needed. However, owing to the essential characteristics
of the RH method, this disadvantage is not so severe. Namely, the algorithm
of the RH method can be divided into two stages. In the ﬁrst initializational
stage, the values of the potential are calculated at all POCs from some initial
charge distribution. In this stage the number of required calculations of the
quantities Iij grows as N 2 (it is important to note that the times necessary
for all these calculations are not the same). In the second stage, the iterative
non-local charge transfers are made. A very important characteristic of the RH
method emerges in this stage. The potentials at all POCs after any iteration
(charge transfer) need not be completely calculated, but only updated. Namely,
it is only necessary to add changes due to the charge transferred between the
two chosen POCs. In this update the number of required calculations of Iij
scales as N. In this way, the potential is largely reused from one iteration to
the other. This feature of the potential updating is at the core of the many
powerful characteristics of the RH method. Recalculation of Iij at every step
fully justiﬁes great attention that was paid to the choice of the optimal method
for the calculation of these quantities, which was elaborated in the preceding
paragraphs. The choice of the optimal calculational method for Iij, together
with the updating feature described above, makes the execution times of the
RH method acceptable.

The RH method has also attractive properties with respect to parallelization.
In the parallelized version of the RH method, each of the processors would be
assigned a subset of surface elements. The advantages of parallelization can
be seen, e.g. in the update of the potential. Once in some iteration the charge
transfer is performed, each of the processors simultaneously calculates the
update of the potential in its realm. The possibility of eﬃcient parallelization
also signiﬁcantly improves the execution time of the RH method.

Another raﬁnement of the method is available if we consider the dynamical
approach to the division of the studied surface into triangles. In the present pa-
per, the initial division depends only on the surface geometry, while it is com-
pletely insensitive to physical quantities. In such a setting, it is possible that an

10

approximation of some conducting surface even with a large number of trian-
gles may in some areas where physical quantities have large gradients be inad-
equate and locally provide results of lower quality. Clearly, the solution of this
problem is in dividing the existing triangles into smaller ones in the areas where
the reﬁnement is needed. Within our method, it is especially easy to accommo-
date this form of reﬁnement of the approximation of the studied surface with a
set of right-angled triangles. There are two principal reasons for this. The solu-
tion satisfying the condition of equipotentiality for the cruder set of triangles
can be used as a starting distribution for the iteration with the reﬁned set of
triangles. This further accelerates the computation. Furthermore, it is straight-
forward to specify criteria which determine which triangles should be further
divided. Thus the iteration procedure naturally leads to the determination of
areas where the reﬁnement is required. One criterion might be that the per-
centage α of all triangles with the largest charges are further divided. Another
criterion might be to consider the average or overall diﬀerence of the potential
at the vertices of the triangle and its POC. For example, one might consider
B))2 + (U( ~xi) − U( ~xi
C))2,
A))2 + (U( ~xi) − U( ~xi
the quantity Gi = (U( ~xi) − U( ~xi
A,B,C stand for its vertices.
where ~xi denotes the POC of the triangle i, while ~xi
In this case, further division would be performed on those triangles for which
G1/2
i /U( ~xi) ≥ β, where β is a predeﬁned factor. The entire computational
scheme would then include iterations of a composite procedure: for a given set
of triangles, the equipotentiality at their POC would be achieved and then,
using one of the criteria speciﬁed above, the set of triangles would be reﬁned
by the division of some of them. The application of this composite iterative
procedure yields a powerful computational method for interesting classes of
electrostatic (and other) problems.

The adaptive subdivision, as described in the preceding paragraph, reﬁnes
only the set of triangles obtained in the initial discretization of the surface.
The vertices of the new triangles lie in the planes of the old triangle, not on the
original surface , which is in general case curved. The procedure that discretizes
the surface just produces the set of triangles, and the RH method uses these
triangles during the entire execution and possible adaptive subdivision. The
set of triangles is an input for the RH method. The full adaptive approach
would have to include the reﬁnement of the surface discretization and not only
the subdivision of the initial discretization of the surface. In such an approach
it becomes necessary to integrate the discretization procedure with the RH
method. This approach has not been pursued in this paper that serves as an
introduction to the RH method. For the high precision technical applications,
such as e.g. investigation of “hot spots”, this approach needs to be adopted.

11

4 Examples

The main goal of this section is to display solutions obtained using the RH
method. For each characteristic of the method we specify examples demon-
strating its advantages. In some of the examples given below, the units of
dimensional quantities are left unspeciﬁed since the results are valid for arbi-
trary units.

4.1 Comparison with analytic results

In this subsection we discuss solutions of two problems obtained by our com-
putational method and compare the numerical results with the analytical solu-
tions. To bring up several points we choose two signiﬁcantly diﬀerent problems:

i) a metal grounded sphere of radius R, centered at the origin and a point

charge q at a distance y from the centre of the sphere (y > R)

ii) two inﬁnite parallel metal cylinders, one completely inside the other as
shown in Fig. 2. The outer cylinder is charged with charge +Q and the
inner with -Q i.e. they form a capacitor.

The ﬁrst problem is easily accessible by the RH numerical method due to the
ﬁnite size of the objects involved in the calculation (the sphere and the point
charge). This problem is analytically solved in detail in [1] using the method
of images. The induced charge on the sphere has value qind = −qR/y. Our
solution for the parameters y = 3, R = 2, q = 10 and the sphere represented
by 139240 triangles yields qind = −6.6664 while the exact value is −20/3 =
−6.666666 which is 0.004% diﬀerence.

The second problem of capacitance of two inﬁnite cylinders can not be done
in numerical calculation without approximation of the inﬁnite cylinders by
the ﬁnite ones. Using the ﬁnite instead of the inﬁnite cylinders will introduce
the charge distribution at the ends of the cylinders diﬀerent from the one
obtained in exact analytical solution for inﬁnite cylinders. Nevertheless, one
can eﬃciently eliminate the contribution of these boundary eﬀects in the ﬁ-
nal solution for the capacitance per unit length. Generally, when we calculate
capacitance of some system, we put charges of equal size and diﬀerent sign
(namely +Q and −Q) on two objects representing the “plates” of the capac-
itor and then solve for the equipotentiality of each of these isolated charged
objects. By that we obtain the potential of each plate and the potential dif-
ference U between the capacitor plates. The capacity of such a system is then
given by deﬁnition as C = Q/U. In this case we know that the calculated
system is diﬀerent from the inﬁnite system and that the main diﬀerence is
in boundary eﬀects that are present in the numerical solution. Therefore we

12

(11)

(12)





perform two calculations with diﬀerent lengths of cylinders. The boundary
eﬀects contribution to capacitance of the system can be canceled and we can
obtain a very accurate value of C/L for the inﬁnite cylinders in the following
way: if the capacitance in the calculation in which the length of the cylinders
is L1 is C1 and the capacitance of the cylinders of length L2 is C2 then the
capacitance of the inﬁnite capacitor per unit length L would be

C
L

=

C2 − C1
L2 − L1

.

One can solve this problem analytically by the method of images replacing
two cylinders with two homogeneously charged wires at positions A and B as
shown in Fig. 2 and require for a constant potential at each cylindrical surface.
The obtained solution gives capacitance per unit length

−1

C
L (cid:19)

(cid:18)

= 2 ln





R2

1 + R2

2 − d2 +

R4

1 + R4

1 − 2d2R2

2 − 2R2

1R2
2

q

2 + d4 − 2d2R2
2R1R2

The two calculations were performed with the following parameters: i) for
d = 0.25, R1 = 1.0, R2 = 0.25, L1 = 15.6 and both cylinders represented by
N=75000 triangles, the obtained capacitance per unit length is C1/L1=0.391198.
ii) for d = 0.25, R1 = 1.0, R2 = 0.25, L1 = 19.6 and both cylinders rep-
resented by N=75000 triangles, the obtained capacitance per unit length is
C2/L2=0.394214.

When we calculate C/L as given in equation (11), we obtain C/L = 0.379433
which is only 0.06% diﬀerent from the analytical value.

We shall exploit this example further to demonstrate how the RH method
ﬁnds the distribution of surface charge in such a system which possesses the
mirror plane symmetry (it can also have axial symmetry in case of concentric
cylinders i.e. when d = 0). In the analytical solution one can ﬁnd the electric
potential and the electric ﬁeld everywhere in the space and particularly at the
surface of the cylinders. From the value of the electric ﬁeld at the cylinder
surfaces one can ﬁnd the surface charge on them. We compare the surface
charge of the outer cylinder found by the RH method with the values from the
analytical solution. Due to the boundary eﬀects, we choose for comparison one
slice from the middle of the cylinder as shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 3 is given the
comparison between the numerical and the analytical solution for the surface
charge. The agreement is very good, considering that the analytical solution
is obtained for inﬁnite cylinders. To show how the RH solution respects the
symmetry of the system, we calculate the electric potential and the electric
ﬁeld in the plane perpendicular to the axes of cylinders and passing through
the middle of their length. The symmetry of the RH solution perfectly respects

13

the symmetry of the problem even though in the RH method information on
symmetry on the problem is not imposed in any way and enters the calculation
process only through the positions of input triangles.

Fig. 2. The geometrical conﬁguration of the cylinders forming the capacitor. The
arrow in the left picture shows the slice for which the potential and the electric ﬁeld
are calculated and shown in Fig. 4

 

)
θ
 
(
 

 

σ

0.015

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.01

0.005

0

-2

0
θ

2

Fig. 3. The angular dependence of the surface charge density of the outer cylinder.
The very good agreement of the numerical and the analytical curve is evident.

4.2 Potential problems in complex conﬁgurations and geometries

In this subsection we present solutions of several potential problems with com-
plex conﬁgurations and geometries. These examples are designed to illustrate
that the numerical method introduced in this paper can quite easily handle
even very demanding geometries and conﬁgurations, i.e. shapes and relative
positions of the conducting surfaces.

14

Fig. 4. Once the distribution of the surface charge is found by the RH method, one
can calculate the electric potential (three ﬁgures on the left) and the electric ﬁeld
(three ﬁgures on the right) in the whole space which is very important in the study
of discharge, “hot spots”, etc. In the set of pictures describing the electric ﬁeld, the
absolute value of the electric ﬁeld vector is shown. The calculations were done for
the slice shown in Fig. 2

Fig. 5. The surface charge density, the equipotential surfaces and the lines of force
for the system of two insulated randomly generated surfaces with charges +Q and
−Q. The random surfaces were generated using the Perlin noise algorithm con-
tained in the VTK program package [11]. The colours towards red correspond to
positive charge densities and the colours towards blue correspond to negative charge
densities.

We study three diﬀerent systems of which each consists of two insulated con-
ducting surfaces. One of the surfaces carries the charge +Q while the other

15

Fig. 6. The surface charge density, the equipotential surfaces and the lines of force
for the system of two M¨obius stripes with charges +Q and −Q. The colours towards
red denote to positive charge densities and the colours towards blue denote negative
charge densities.

carries the charge −Q. In this way, each of three studied systems represents a
capacitor. In all three cases, shown in Figs 5, 6 and 7, the colours towards red
stand for positive charge densities while the colours towards blue represent
negative charge densities.

The ﬁrst system consists of two randomly generated surfaces. The solution in
terms of the surface charge densities, equipotential surfaces and the lines of
force is depicted in Fig. 5. The RH method handles without diﬃculty ran-
domly generated surfaces which conﬁrms its suitability for the treatment of
geometries with high degree of variability or irregularity. It is easy to extrap-
olate how the elaboration of this example might be used in realistic systems
with irregular surfaces.

The second system consists of two interlocked M¨obius stripes, as displayed in
Fig. 6. By itself it is a purely academic example, which, however in our case
demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of the RH method in more complex topologies.
Namely, M¨obius stripe has no inner and outer surface, as opposed to other
surfaces considered so far. Figure 6 shows the equilibrium surface charge den-
sities, the equipotential surfaces and the lines of force.

16

Fig. 7. The surface charge density, the equipotential surfaces and the lines of force
for the system of a segment of a spiral and a Klein bottle with charges +Q and
−Q. The colours towards red represent positive charge densities while the colours
towards blue represent negative charge densities.

The third system includes a segment of a spiral intertwined with a “Klein bot-
tle”. The purpose of this example is to show how far the geometric complexity
of the system can be pushed using the RH method. The equilibrium situation
for this system comprising the surface charge densities, equipotential surfaces
and the lines of force is given in Fig. 7.

The examples given in this subsection demonstrate how RH method handles
even geometrically very complicated situations. The results presented so far
show that the RH method is a robust method which can be used in treatment
of very diﬀerent geometries.

5 Technical characteristics of the method

In the preceding section we demonstrated the applicability of our method to a
broad range of diﬀerent conﬁgurations (arrangements of objects in space) and
geometries (shapes of individual objects), charge distributions and potential
boundary conditions, as well as its reliability by comparisons with analytic

17

100

a)

b)

1000

10000

100000

1000

10000

100000

number of triangles

number of triangles

c)

d)

1000

10

1

1000

100

10

1

]
s
[
 

e
m

i
t

]
s
[
 

e
m

i
t

1000

10000

100000

1000

10000

100000

number of triangles

number of triangles

Fig. 8. The computational complexity of the RH method. a) The dependence of the
execution time of the ﬁrst stage t1 on the number of triangles N for the system of
the conducting sphere at a ﬁxed potential and the point charge. b) The execution
time of the second stage t2 as a function of N for the same system as in a). c)
The dependence of t1 on N for the system of a point charge and a plane at a ﬁxed
potential. d) The dependence of t2 on N for the same system as in c).

solutions for selected problems. In this section we focus on technical charac-
teristics of the method.

One of the most prominent characteristics of any algorithm is its complexity.
It speciﬁes how the execution time of the algorithm changes depending on
the number of elements that the algorithm deals with. The complexity of our
method determines how the time required to achieve the equipotentiality in
the system scales with the number of surface elements N for a speciﬁed ge-
ometry. To make a more thorough analysis of the computational complexity
of the RH method, we chose to measure the dependence of the time of the
execution of two stages in the algorithm of the RH method on the number of
surface elements N. The ﬁrst stage is the calculation of the initial potential at
the surfaces of the considered system, while the second stage comprises succes-
sive iterations of the non-local transfer of the charge until equipotentiality is
achieved. To account for possible dependence of the complexity on the geom-
etry, we studied several geometries and conﬁgurations. For each total number
of surface elements N, the initial division of the surfaces was used throughout
the calculation, i.e. no iterative subdivisions of the surface elements described
in section 3 were used. Both the execution time of the ﬁrst stage, t1 and the
execution time of the second stage, t2, are well described by the power laws,

]
s
[
 

e
m

i
t

]
s
[
 

e
m

i
t

1000

100

10

1000

100

10

1

18

i.e. ti ∼ N αi, i = 1, 2. The ﬁrst system in which the investigation of the com-
plexity of the RH method was performed is the system of a point charge near
a conducting sphere at a ﬁxed potential. In this system, the exponents are
α1 = 1.62 and α2 = 1.58. For the system of the conducting plane kept at the
exterior potential and a point charge and a similar system of the insulated
plane and a point charge, we obtain very similar results. The exponents of the
ﬁrst stage are α1 = 1.70 and the exponents of the second stage amount to
α2 = 1.64 for both systems. The log-log plots illustrating complexity for the
speciﬁed systems are presented in Fig. 8. The exponents αi of the two stages
are generally diﬀerent, where α1 is slightly larger than α2 for all studied sys-
tems. The results obtained show that the complexity is geometry dependent.
The complexity diﬀerence of the two studied geometries is not large, but the
general dependence of the complexity on geometry is an open question. Very
similar results for the systems containing conducting planes indicate that there
is no signiﬁcant dependence of complexity on potential conﬁguration. These
results imply that RH method has no intrinsic complexity, but it is system de-
pendent. However, a very important characteristic of the RH method emerges
from the results of the studied systems. In all studied cases, the largest of the
two exponents (which determines the complexity of the entire RH method) is
considerably less than 2 for N of the order of 100 to the order of 105. This
feature, boosted by the easy parallelization and adaptive subdivision, makes
the RH method competitive for large-scale problems involving a large number
of surface elements.

A signiﬁcant advantage of the method introduced in this paper is connected
with memory requirements for calculations with N surface elements. Namely,
the required memory scales linearly with N, which is a tremendous reduction
of the required memory capacitance compared with, e.g. the existing BEM,
where the required memory scales as N 2. Even with a single processor, using
our method it was possible to easily perform calculations with N = 2 · 105
surface elements 1 .

A further important advantage is related to the speed of convergence of the
method. The speed of convergence was studied in three diﬀerent systems which
all exhibit similar convergence properties. The ﬁrst system consists of a charge
close to a sphere kept at a ﬁxed potential. The behaviour of the error of the
potential (deﬁned as (Umaxdiﬀ − Uext)/Uext at a given iteration, where Uext is
the external potential and Umaxdiﬀ is the potential diﬀering the most from
Uext) as a function of the number of iterations performed, which is quite ac-
curately equivalent to the execution time, is given as a log-lin plot in Fig.
9. From the ﬁgure it is clear that the error decreases exponentially with the
number of iterations. An analogous graph for the system of the point charge
close to an insulated conducting sphere is depicted in Fig. 10. The exponen-

1 Using 1 GB of RAM it could be possible to work with up to 107 triangles.

19

Fig. 9. The speed of convergence for the system of the point charge close to the
sphere kept at a ﬁxed potential. The exponential character of the error reduction
with the number of iterations is evident. There is no eﬀect of the Critical Slowing
Down and the error reduction eﬃciency is the same for any level of the error.

tial dependence of the decrease of error on the number of iterations is evident.
Finally, we consider a system consisting of a point charge and two insulated
conducting spheres. In this system each sphere ends up in a state with its
own potential and charge redistribution is performed separately within each
sphere. The error of the potential decays with the number of iterations in this
case as well. Since we have two separate bodies on which the potentials have
to be equalized separately, it is reasonable to ask if the method converges more
slowly than for the system where the potential has to be equalized on a single
surface only. To answer this question, in Fig. 11 we present the dependence
of the error of the potential on the number of iterations for the system with
two spheres (the upper curve) and for the system with one sphere (the lower
curve), which has already been presented in Fig. 10. This graph very clearly
shows that the speed of convergence is the same for both systems. To complete
the analysis of the speed of convergence, we studied the system consisting of
two insulated conducting randomly generated surfaces carrying charges +Q
and −Q. The results obtained are very similar to the preceding cases as shown
in Fig. 12. Namely, for both surfaces the convergence is at worst exponential.
The larger dissipation of points in the graph reﬂects the random nature of the
studied geometry. The facts stated above indicate that our method handles
systems of a diﬀerent degree of geometric and conﬁgurational complexity with
the same convergence speed, which is a very welcome property. It is important

20

Fig. 10. The speed of convergence for the system of the point charge located close to
the insulated conducting sphere. The error decreases exponentially with the number
of iterations for a broad range of error orders of magnitude. There is no eﬀect of
the Critical Slowing Down.

to state one additional convergence property common to Figs 9, 10, 11 and
12. The dependence of the error on the number of iterations is a straight line
in the log-lin plot for a broad range of iteration numbers. In other words, no
matter how small the error is, it is reduced by more or less the same per-
centage at subsequent iteration. The method has the same eﬃciency of error
reduction for all error sizes. Equivalently, the RH method equally well reduces
the error of the potential at the beginning of the calculation and at its end.
Therefore, there is no eﬀect of the Critical Slowing Down (CSD) present in
some calculational methods [13,14], where the use of the local information for
the solution update leads to signiﬁcant reduction in the convergence speed
with the number of iterations. This deﬁciency has been overcome using the
multigrid techniques [16] which, however, require additional adjustment pro-
cedures. From the principles of the RH method it is clear that the update of
the potential is based on the global information on the studied system. The
absence of CSD could be explained by completely non-local charge transfers
that always aﬀect the two worst points in the system making them the best
points according to the criteria of equipotentiality. One of the reasons of the
very fast convergence is a natural adaptation of quantity of charge transfer
being done at certain potential diﬀerence, i.e. at the reached precision. The
RH method handles the system equally eﬃciently at all levels of error. In this
sense, the system at a large potential diﬀerence of the order of 100 V (which

21

Fig. 11. The speed of convergence for the system of a point charge and two in-
sulated conducting spheres (upper curve) compared with the speed of convergence
of the system discussed in Fig. 10 (lower curve). In both cases, the error decreases
exponentially with the number of iterations. The addition of one more separate
conducting surface does not deteriorate the speed of convergence.

represents a solution far from convergence) represents exactly the same prob-
lem for the method as the same system when it has reached diﬀerences of 10−20
V (already well converged solution) and is being equally eﬃciently treated by
the method. The absence of the CSD, together with the N scaling of the re-
quired memory, makes our method very suitable for large-scale high precision
calculations.

Finally, we would like to address the technical features of the adaptive subdi-
vision procedure described in section 3. As already described, this procedure
achieves equipotentiality with the coarser division of the surface and uses the
charge distribution obtained as an initial distribution for the calculations with
the ﬁner surface division in the next step. The open question at each step of
this procedure is what proportion of triangles will be subdivided and according
to which criteria. Some of these criteria were proposed in section 3. We call the
sequence of proportions and criteria for each step subdivision strategy. With
the subdivision strategy of dividing each right-angled triangle to four similar
ones at each subdivision step, we achieved the reduction of the execution time
around 25 % for the system of a point charge near a grounded plane. Although
the RH method has excellent properties even without adaptive subdivision,
the choice of the subdivision strategy is a matter of the further optimization
of the entire method.

22

Fig. 12. The speed of convergence for the system of a two randomly generated
surfaces with charges of the equal amount and opposite sign. The error decreases
at worst exponentially with the number of iterations without the CSD eﬀect.

6 Applications beyond electrostatic problems

The applicability of a numerical method to some physical problems depends on
the mathematical formulation of the problem. Many diverse physical problems
have an identical (or analogous) mathematical formulation and, therefore,
can be treated with the same numerical method. The RH method can be
transferred from the class of electrostatic problems to any physical problem
with the same mathematical formulation. An obvious application of the RH
method beyond electrostatics is thermostatics.

One possibility of extending the ﬁeld of applicability of the RH method is its
transfer to the problems with identical mathematical formulation. However,
except transferring the method in its original form, it is possible to modify
the RH method maintaining its basic principle of achieving equipotentiality. In
the modiﬁed RH method, the quantities such as the potential and the charge
distribution have to be understood more generally. Let us consider a problem
in which it is necessary to ﬁnd a spatial conﬁguration of the system in its
physical state. The role of the potential can be played by a quantity, let us
call it the generalized potential, which is spatially constant when the system
is in the physical state. The role of the charge distribution is then played
by any source, spatial distribution of which has to be determined in order
to equipotentialize the generalized potential. These modiﬁcations of the RH

23

method allow its application in a very broad range of physical problems. In
the following paragraph are given several illustrations of possible applications.

The (modiﬁed) RH method can be applied to semiclassical and quantum prob-
lems as well. Each new application, apart from the modiﬁcations described
above, requires some technical adaptations. An example of the application of
the RH method in semiclassical problems is the treatment of the Thomas-
Fermi approach. In this case, the generalized potential becomes the energy of
the system and the source is the density of the particles. The generalized po-
tential depends non-linearly on the density owing to the approximation of the
kinetic term. The modiﬁed RH method handles this non-linear system equally
well as the linear ones. Another example of application is solving one-particle
Schr¨odinger equation in an arbitrary potential. This is an eigenvalue problem
which requires additional adaptations of the original RH method. In the def-
inition of the generalized potential appear the terms with derivatives. In the
discretized version of the problem, these terms introduce non-locality into the
problem. The ground state of the system can be obtained in a straightforward
fashion [15]. The problem of excited states and degeneracy is under current
study [15]. Finally, there are indications that the modiﬁed RH method might
be very useful within the DFT approach [16,17,18]. Recently, real space DFT
methods have emerged [16]. An implementation of real-space DFT based on
the RH method is a promising approach for the treatment of electronic struc-
ture problems.

7 Conclusions

In this paper we have presented a robust calculational method, which we have
named the Robin Hood (RH) method, for solving a large class of problems
in electrostatics. The physical basis of the RH method is the very intuitive
concept of non-local transfer of the electric charge on the conducting surfaces
with the aim of achieving equipotentiality of all conductors. The non-locality
of the charge transfer and the long range of the electrostatic interaction make
possible the global (i.e. at the level of all conducting surfaces) improvement
towards the equipotentiality with each charge transfer. The method is char-
acterized by many technical advantages which promote it into an attractive
tool for treating complex problems in electrostatics. The memory requirements
grow linearly with the number of surface elements N. The complexity of the
method itself scales as N α with α < 2 and is (somewhat) geometry depen-
dent. The speed of convergence is exponential and the Critical Slowing Down is
not present, which eliminates the necessity for procedures like multigrid tech-
niques. Our method does not use multigrids [5,16]. The results of the method
are “recyclable” in the sense that the charge distributions which satisfy the
condition of equipotentiality at coarse surface divisions can be eﬃciently used

24

as initial charge distributions for the calculations with ﬁner surface divisions.
The adaptive subdivisions of selected surface elements can be easily incor-
porated into the RH method, which can provide additional increase in the
computational eﬃciency of the method.

Despite many appealing sides of the RH method demonstrated in this paper,
there are other issues to be investigated and possibly improved. Although the
method is already in many respects optimized, the question of performing
charge transfers among more than two points at each conducting surface, in
linear problems such as electrostatics, remains. It is not excluded that for some
Npoints ≥ 3 the RH method delivers even better results, although a concep-
tually more complex approach. The strategy of the adaptive subdivisions of
selected surface elements is another aspect where careful optimization could
lead to further improvements. A more detailed study of the dependence of
complexity on geometry might shed some light on geometries in which the
method would provide an even better performance than for the systems stud-
ied in this paper. These matters, along with other technical aspects, clearly
constitute important questions worthy of further pursuit.

Besides rather academic examples shown in this paper, the RH method is
suitable for the electrostatic calculations of high precision in many practically
very important examples such as the design of high energy particle detectors,
instruments for medical applications, circuit board design and many others.

Although the RH method is applicable to large classes of problems in electro-
statics, it is worth investigating if the method could be modiﬁed to encompass
some other systems, such as those for which the explicit Green function is
not available. The RH method can be easily transferred into the related ﬁelds
of classical physics and engineering where the mathematical background is
equivalent. Furthermore, this method provides a new way of handling quan-
tum phenomena, the one-particle Schr¨odinger equation and DFT being some
of them. Although the strength of the (modiﬁed) RH method in quantum
problems is still to be properly gauged, it is deﬁnitely a new alternative for
unraveling the properties of important physical systems.

Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank dr. Radovan Brako and
Prof. Dragan Poljak for useful comments on the manuscript. We acknowledge
the use of VTK and Mathematica program packages. This work was supported
by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of Croatia under
the contract numbers 0098001 and 0098002.

25

References

York, 1975).

[1] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd edition, (John Wiley & Sons, New

[2] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of continuous media

(Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993).

[3] R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics

(Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 1970).

[4] E.M. Purcell, Electricity and Magnetism, in Croatian (Tehniˇcka knjiga, Zagreb,

1988).

[5] T.L. Beck, Multiscale Tecniques for Electrosatic and Eigenvalue Problems in
Real Space, in G. Hummer and L.R. Pratt, eds., Simulation and Theory of
Electrostatic Interactions in Solution (AIP Press, New York, 1999).

[6] D.J. Willis, J.K. White and J. Peraire, A pFFT Accelerated Linear Strength
BEM Potential Solver, presented at MSM ’04 7th Int. Conf. on Modeling &
Simulation of Microsystems, March 7-11, 2004, Boston MA.

[7] S-W. Chyuan, Y-S. Liao and J-T. Chen, An Eﬃcient Method for Solving
Electrostatic Problems, Computing in Science and Engineering, 5 (2003) 52-
58.

[8] Z. Liu, J.G. Korvink and M. Reed, Solving Singularities in Electrostatics with

High-order FEM, IEEE 2003 (Toronto, Canada, 2003).

[9] http://www.boundary-element-method.com/

[10] D.Poljak, A. Peratta and C. Brebbia, Eng. Anal. Bound. Elem. 28 (2004) 763;

D. Poljak, Eng. Anal. Bound. Elem. 27 (2003) 283.

[11] http://www.vtk.org

[12] http://www.wolfram.com

[13] T. Torsti, M. Heiskanen, M.J. Puska et al., MIKA: Multigrid-based program
package for electronic structure calculations, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 91 (2003)
171-176.

[14] M. Heiskanen, T. Torsti, M.J. Puska and R.M. Nieminen, Multigrid method for

electronic structure calculations, Phys. Rev. B 63 (2001) 245106.

[15] P. Lazi´c, H. ˇStefanˇci´c and H. Abraham, work in progress.

[16] T.L. Beck, Real-space mesh techniques in density functional theory, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 72 (2000) 1041-1080.

[17] http://www.fysik.dtu.dk/campos/Dacapo/

[18] W. Kohn and L.J. Sham, Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and

Correlation Eﬀects, Phys. Rev. 140 (1965) 1133-1138.

26

