5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analysis of band-gap formation in squashed arm-chair CNT

H. Mehrez, A. Svizhenko, and M. P.Anantram
Mail Stop: 229-1, NASA Ames Research center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035-1000, USA

M. Elstner and T. Frauenheim
Theoretische Physik, Universitat Paderborn, D-33098 Paderborn, Germany
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The electronic properties of squashed arm-chair carbon nanotubes are modeled using constraint
free density functional tight binding molecular dynamics simulations. Independent from CNT di-
ameter, squashing path can be divided into three regimes. In the ﬁrst regime, the nanotube deforms
In the second one, there is signiﬁcantly more resistance to squashing with
with negligible force.
the force being ∼ 40 − 100 nN/per CNT unit cell. In the last regime, the CNT looses its hexago-
nal structure resulting in force drop-oﬀ followed by substantial force enhancement upon squashing.
We compute the change in band-gap as a function of squashing and our main results are: (i) A
band-gap initially opens due to interaction between atoms at the top and bottom sides of CNT.
The π−orbital approximation is successful in modeling the band-gap opening at this stage. (ii) In
the second regime of squashing, large π − σ interaction at the edges becomes important, which can
lead to band-gap oscillation. (iii) Contrary to a common perception, nanotubes with broken mirror
symmetry can have zero band-gap. (iv) All armchair nanotubes become metallic in the third regime
of squashing. Finally, we discuss both diﬀerences and similarities obtained from the tight binding
and density functional approaches.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Experiments probing the electromechanical response
of carbon nanotubes have been the most interesting re-
cent work in nanotubes.1,2,3,4,5 These experiments in-
volve nanotubes interacting electrically with contacts and
mechanically with an atomic force microscope (AFM)
tip. Apart from the fundamental physics governing the
electromechanical response, these experiments are also
important for future use of carbon nanotubes as actua-
tors and nano electromechanical devices.6 There are two
categories of experiments exploring the electromechanical
properties. The ﬁrst category involves deformation of a
suspended nanotube with an AFM tip3,4,5. The electrical
conductance was found to decrease by two orders of mag-
nitude upon modest deformation due to bond stretching
which results in band-gap opening at Fermi energy7. The
second category of experiments involves the squashing of
nanotubes lying on a hard substrate1,2.
In the experi-
ment of Gomez et al.2 a metal to semiconductor tran-
sition has been demonstrated in squashed metallic nan-
otube. Theoretically, there have been several studies that
modeled the electro-mechanical properties of squashed
carbon nanotubes8,9,10,11. It was found that mirror sym-
metry breaking and formation of bonds between atoms
at the top-bottom sides of CNT are necessary to open
a band-gap in an arm-chair nanotube. While reference
[9,10] performed energy relaxation by enforcing speciﬁc
symmetries during deformation, reference [11] modeled
squashing by a tip whose width was 5.8 ˚A, which is
smaller than even a (6,6) nanotube diameter.
In this study, we model the tip-nanotube interaction
more realistically by performing constraint free density
functional tight binding (DF-TB) molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations. Our calculations diﬀer from prior

work in that we do not impose speciﬁc symmetry con-
ditions and allow for the nanotube to change symmetry
during deformation. Further, our tip diameter is larger
than the nanotube diameter, as in the experiments of
Ref.[1,2]. The aim of our work is to investigate: (i) the
magnitude of the force required to squash CNT, (ii) de-
pendence of band-gap formation on the initial conditions
of the MD simulations, (iii) applicability of π−orbital
theories to ﬁnd the band-gap upon deformation, (iv)
relative roles of interactions between atoms at the top-
bottom sides and atoms at the edges on the band-gap,
(v) the electronic properties of a CNT squashed beyond
the reversible regime, (vi) diameter dependence on the
band-gap opening upon squashing, and (vii) eﬀect of self
consistent calculations on band-gap formation.
We will address the aforementioned issues in the rest of
the paper. Initially we describe our method to simulate
the experiment. Following this we present the mechanical
properties of squashed CNT in Section III. In Section IV,
various aspects on the electronic properties of squashed
CNT will be investigated. Finally, the conclusion will be
given in Section V.

II. METHODOLOGY

An (n, n) CNT is generated from a planar rolled
graphene strip, where n ∈ {6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12}. The cor-
responding diameters of these CNTs are in the range of
∼ 8 − 16 ˚A. If such tubes are squashed in an AFM set-up,
the tip radius is at least one order of magnitude larger
than the CNT diameter. Hence we approximate the tip
as a rigid graphene sheet where the atoms do not re-
lax. The substrate is also modeled as a rigid graphene
sheet. The distance between the graphene sheets and

CNT edges is at least 4.5 ˚A at the beginning of the
MD simulations, so that CNT is not deformed in the
ﬁrst step. A snap shot of the atomic conﬁguration of a
squashed CNT between tip and sample is shown in the
inset of Fig.1-b. To model squashing of CNT we adopt
two diﬀerent methods: the ﬁrst method consists of mov-
ing both the tip and substrate symmetrically towards the
nanotube and the second one consists of moving only the
tip towards the nanotube. We do not employ any further
constraint on CNT atoms.
The MD simulations are performed using DFTB, which
is a density functional theory based tight binding
approach12,13. At each MD step of squashing, forces are
calculated using Hellmann-Feynman14,15 theorem and
CNT atoms are fully relaxed by the conjugate gradient
method. Convergence criteria on the relaxed CNT struc-
ture is set such that the maximum force of on each CNT
atom is < 10−4au. We have squashed the nanotubes
all the way to irreversible regime. That is, the CNT
structure is lost at the end of the simulation and cannot
be recovered if the graphene sheets are removed. Since
CNTs are constraint free, both “tank treading” (motion
of atoms along circumference) and translational motion
at various stages of squashing are possible if the energet-
ics is favorable to such movement. We have also found
that the symmetry of squashed CNT depends on the ini-
tial conformation of the CNT with respect to tip and
substrate as well as the method adopted to squash CNT.
As CNT is being squashed, atoms follow various tra-
jectories depending on the details of initial and ambient
conditions. This would aﬀect the conformation of the
CNT with respect to the AFM tip as well as the sym-
metry of the CNT itself during squashing. To model
this experiment faithfully and to draw more general con-
clusions on the electro-mechanical properties of squashed
arm-chair CNTs, various simulations are required. In our
work, constraint free squashing of more than ﬁfteen paths
have been performed on various CNTs and this represents
substantial improvement over previous simulations9,10,11.

III. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

Our MD simulations reveal three diﬀerent regimes of
a squashed nanotube. These regimes can be clearly re-
solved by plotting the distance between top and bottom
sides of the nanotube (dT B) vs. tip-substrate separation
distance (dT ip−Sub) as shown in Fig.1-a as well as the
force on the tip vs. dT ip−Sub as shown in Fig.1-b. In
the ﬁrst regime, dT B is larger than 3.8 ˚A and the nan-
otube is compressed relatively easily. This is reﬂected in
the rather large slope ∆dT B/∆dT ip−Sub ∼ 0.88 ± 0.07 as
seen in Fig.1-a, and small force of less than 10 nN/per
CNT unit cell on the tip as seen in Fig.1-b. The second
regime of squashing corresponds to dT B ∼ 2.3 − 3.8 ˚A.
Here the nanotube is more rigid to compression as seen
by the moderate value of ∆dT B/∆dT ip−Sub∼ 0.6 ± 0.05,
and the relatively large value of force on the tip, 40 − 100

2

nN/per CNT unit-cell. These two regimes are reversible,
i.e. retracting the tip and substrate results in a reversible
change of the nanotube. The third regime corresponds
to dT B < 2.3 ˚A and is characterized by an irreversible
change, where the honey-comb structure of the nanotube
is lost. The nanotube undergoes major atomic rearrange-
ments so that total energy of the system is reduced. The
CNT structural relaxation is also accompanied by force
drop-oﬀ on the tip. However, this is substantially en-
hanced upon further squashing as seen in Fig.1-b. An
interesting feature of this regime is that atoms at the top
and bottom sides of CNT are no longer planar. They
form a sawtooth structure and results in an increase of
dT B with decrease in dT ip−Sub as shown in Fig.1-a.

In Fig.1-b,c we present the force curves on the tip for
all CNTs as a function of dT ip−Sub and dT B, respec-
tively. The curves corresponding to (6,6) and (12,12)
nanotubes are shown as thick dotted and dashed lines, re-
spectively. Comparison of the two curves indicates that,
in general the force on the tip increases with increase
in nanotube diameter. However, we ﬁnd that the force
required to squash an (11,11) nanotube (shown as thin
lines) is larger than the one needed for a (12,12) nan-
otube when dT B > 2.3 ˚A. The underlying reason for this
discrepancy is that the mirror symmetry is preserved dur-
ing this simulation of the (11,11) nanotube while broken
in the (12,12) CNT. If the nanotube mirror symmetry
is preserved, atoms at the top-bottom sides of the nan-
otube are aligned. This results in a “more robust” struc-
ture, which oﬀers resistance to squashing. Over all, our
results indicate that the force required to squash nan-
otubes increases with increase in diameter, and is larger
for conformation which preserves mirror symmetry.

IV. ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES

(6,6) arm-chair CNT has been investigated substan-
tially and we start our discussion on the electronic prop-
erties of this tube. Depending on the initial orientation
of the tube with respect to the graphene sheets and the
manner of squashing, structural deformation may pro-
ceed along diﬀerent paths. At each step of these paths
and when the CNT atoms are fully relaxed, we compute
the band structure and ﬁnd the band-gap. Fig.2 shows
an evolution of the band-gap as a function of dT B for dif-
ferent paths. Qualitatively, one can see common features
corresponding to the three regimes of squashing.

In the ﬁrst regime, when dT B> 3.8 ˚A, initially metal-
lic (6,6) CNT shows a zero band-gap. The transition to
the second regime is manifested by the opening of the
band-gap at dT B∼ 3.8 ˚A, (Fig.2-(b-d)). It is at this de-
formation that atoms at the top and bottom sides of the
CNT start to interact, which leads to the stiﬀening of the
tube and to the modiﬁcation of the band structure. The
interaction between top and bottom sides of the CNT
induces a perturbation term to ideal CNT Hamiltonian
H0. We deﬁne this additional term as ∆HT B and it cor-

responds to the interaction between atoms shown as grey
and dark grey atoms in the insets of each panel of Fig.2.
We note, that the opening of the band-gap may occur
only when the mirror symmetry of the tube is broken,
which is not the case in Fig.2-a.

In the second regime, where CNT is squashed such
that 2.3 ˚A< dT B< 3.8 ˚A, major changes to the band-
gap occur. The most striking feature is that while the
band structure is qualitatively similar to that of the unde-
formed nanotube, the band-gap oscillates, becoming zero,
as in Fig.2-b,c at dT B∼2.90 ˚A. Another important ob-
servation is that the symmetry of the tube is constantly
changing in the course of deformation. Sudden changes
of symmetry are accompanied by steep changes of band-
gap, as in Fig.2-d at dT B∼3.0 ˚A. The galore of various
scenarios of band-gap behavior under squashing raises
a question about the robustness and universality of the
conductance modulation in such experiments. There are
two sources of uncertainty. The ﬁrst one is the con-
stantly changing symmetry of the tube which leads to
an “on-oﬀ” behavior of conductance as discussed in Sub-
section IV A. The second one is due to a collective eﬀect
of top-bottom and edge atomic interactions. As will be
shown in Subsection IV B, the curvature at the edges in-
duces large π − σ interactions, which may enhance or
cancel the band-gap due to π − π∗ interactions between
top and bottom atoms. This edge interaction, ∆HED,
is deﬁned such that the squashed CNT Hamiltonian is
Hs = H0 + ∆HT B + ∆HED. In this regime ∆HED in-
duces π − σ interaction and band gap cannot be deduced
within π-orbital model.

Finally, in the third regime, where dT B< 2.3 ˚A, we
ﬁnd that the band-gap vanishes in all the simulations.
At this stage the CNT undergoes irreversible structural
transformation where the honey-comb geometry is lost.
The electronic band structure of a completely squashed
nanotube resembles that of a metal, with multiple sub-
bands passing through EF .
Previous studies11 predicted that the nanotube will al-
ways become semiconducting in the course of squashing
due to a spontaneous symmetry breaking. However, we
ﬁnd that it is possible for a structure to remain mirror
symmetrical all the way till the irreversible regime as in
the case of Fig.2-a. Although mirror symmetry is bro-
ken in the irreversible regime, this does not lead to the
band-gap opening.

3

(1)

Hamiltonian11:

Hp =

Vππ Vππ∗
Vπ∗π Vπ∗π∗ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

where Hp = Hs − H0 and Hs, H0 are the Hamiltonians
of squashed and ideal CNTs, respectively. The diagonal
term in Eq.1 results in energy shift of π and π∗ bands by
Vππ and Vπ∗π∗ , respectively. This shifts the sub-bands
crossing point but does not lead to a band-gap. If the
oﬀ-diagonal term is applied a band gap Eg opens at Fermi
energy EF , such that Eg= 2|Vππ∗ |.
In Fig.3-a(b) we show that this approximation describes
well the band-gap opening in the ﬁrst regime (dT B> 3.8
˚A) for results presented in Fig.2-c(d). However, at
slightly higher deformations both the π-orbital represen-
tation and the perturbation approach fail, as elaborated
in the next sub-section.
A band-gap opening in arm-chair nanotubes has been
correlated to the mirror symmetry breaking9,10,11: when
the mirror symmetry is broken and bonds between top
and bottom atoms are formed, Vππ∗ becomes non zero
and the band-gap opens up. The underlying mechanism
is to make the two originally equivalent sub-lattices A
and B of the CNT distinguishable16. To investigate the
rigor of the correlation between the band-gap and mir-
ror symmetry breaking, we have analyzed CNT atomic
positions as a function of squashing.
In each panel of
Fig.2 we display a snap-shot of one (6,6) CNT ring at
dT B = 2.90 ± 0.05 ˚A. It is clear from Fig.2-a, that mir-
ror symmetry is preserved and indeed the band-gap does
not develop in the course of squashing. However, mirror
symmetry is broken for the other simulations as indi-
cated by the rest of the insets of Fig.2. Yet, our cal-
culations, which include 4-orbitals/atom, show that the
band-gap vanishes at dT B ∼ 2.9 ˚A for panels (b) and
(c) of Fig.2. These results indicate clearly that the de-
gree to which sub-lattices A and B are distinguishable is
not the main factor in determining the magnitude of the
band-gap upon deformation. We conclude that mirror
symmetry breaking is necessary, but not suﬃcient for the
band-gap opening, and thus can’t be used as a general
guide to the metal-to-semiconductor transition.

B. Failure of π-orbital representation and
perturbation approach

A. The role of symmetry breaking in the formation
of the band-gap

One can understand the band-gap opening in the ﬁrst
regime within a simple model11. In this model only a sin-
gle π-orbital/atom is taken into account. In addition to
this, squashing is treated as a ﬁrst order degenerate per-
turbation of the crossing sub-bands, π and π∗ of an ideal
arm-chair CNT. At the crossing point, the energy eigen-
states are determined by diagonalizing the perturbation

We now check the validity of the above model for the
description of the band-gap. The sp3 (4 orbitals/atom)
representation of a CNT Hamiltonian (H0 or Hs) can
be transformed into two sub-blocks Hsp2 and Hπ
17. The
band structure of an undeformed carbon nanotube in the
vicinity of the Fermi energy EF , can be described using
only the π-orbital Hamiltonian, Hπ. The band-gap de-
rived using the single π-orbital/atom model for these sys-
tems is shown in Fig.3-a,b as dashed lines. It is clear from
Fig.3-a that, for dT B < 3.5 ˚A, the single π-orbital/atom
model overestimates the band-gap and does not predict

the dip at dT B ∼ 2.9 ˚A. Similarly, it fails to determine
band-gap Eg for dT B < 4.5 ˚A in Fig.3-b. These results
show that the band structure is determined by interac-
tions between all orbitals, rather than π-orbitals alone.

We have also tested the rigor of perturbation the-
ory, i.e, whether the band-gap Eg can be estimated as
2|Vππ∗ |. In Fig.3, we display the value of 2|Vππ∗| calcu-
lated using the full Hamiltonian (triangle down symbols)
and the π-orbital Hamiltonian (triangle up). It is clear
that within sp3 model perturbation theory results do not
for dT B < 3.5 (3.7) ˚A in Fig.3-a(b). Even if
match Eg
a single π-orbital/atom model is employed, perturbation
theory results fail to describe Eg for dT B < 2.8 (3.0) ˚A in
Fig.3-a(b) . Hence we conclude that neither the single π-
orbital/atom model nor perturbation theory, assumed in
Eq.1 is able to describe the electronic band structure of
a squashed arm-chair carbon nanotube.

To determine the origin of single π-orbital/atom fail-
ure to describe the electronic properties of squashed arm-
chair CNT in the vicinity of EF , we decompose the per-
turbation Hamiltonian, Hs − H0, to a sum of top-bottom
and edge interaction, ∆HT B and ∆HED. We deﬁne
HT B = H0 + ∆HT B and use this Hamiltonian to ﬁnd
the band-gap, shown in Fig.4-a(b), for the structures dis-
cussed in Fig.3-a(b). We note that single π-orbital/atom
model describes Eg due to all top-bottom interaction
Hamiltonian accurately. Moreover, this band-gap can
be modeled within perturbation theory between π and
π∗ states for dT B≥ 2.7 ˚A. If CNT is squashed such that
dT B≤ 2.7 ˚A, top-bottom interaction is substantially en-
hanced and perturbation theory fails to predict the band-
gap.

When similar analysis is applied to the interactions at
the edges, HED = H0 + ∆HED, we ﬁnd that the single
π-orbital/atom model as well as perturbation theory fail
to reproduce full model calculations, as shown in Fig.4-
a’(b’). We see that a single π-orbital/atom model under-
estimates the true band-gap Eg
computed using 4 or-
bitals/atom, while the perturbation theory result 2|Vππ∗|
predicts a much smaller value. These graphs indicate
that at the high curvature edge regions, π − σ interaction
is large compared to π − π∗ interaction and cannot be
neglected.

The degree of sophistication required to describe the
band-gap of a squashed CNT in the second regime can
be summarized by the following steps: (i) if the mir-
ror symmetry is broken, top bottom interaction induces
a band-gap opening, which can be predicted within the
single π-orbital/atom model and a perturbation theory;
(ii) Further squashing increases π − σ interaction at the
edges due to large curvature. This interaction necessi-
tates the use of full calculation within sp3 model. It is
also important to note that neither top-bottom nor edge
interactions alone can explain the dips of the band-gap.
Only cancellation eﬀect of both interactions leads to the
oscillations of the band-gap in Fig.2-b,c.

4

C.

Eﬀect of CNT diameter

In this subsection we highlight the most important re-
sults for arm-chair CNTs with larger diameters. In Fig.5
we show the band-gap of (n, n) nanotubes as a function
of squashing, where n ∈ {7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12}.

In each panel of Fig.5, we display a snap shot of the
atomic conﬁguration of the corresponding CNT. These
insets indicate that when mirror symmetry is strongly
broken, larger band-gap is formed. The origin of this gap
is of the same nature as in the (6,6) CNT. It is due to top-
bottom interactions as well as edge eﬀects. In Fig.5, we
present the gap results when including only interactions
up-to second nearest neighbor as continuous lines while
dashed lines include all Hamiltonian except top-bottom
interactions. We note that the Hamiltonian which takes
into account only ﬁrst and second nearest neighbors is
similar to edge interaction Hamiltonian HED. These re-
sults indicate that edge eﬀect on the band-gap formation
is relevant only for dT B ≤ 3.5 ˚A. The initiation of the
gap at large separation distance, dT B, is solely due to
top-bottom interactions as found for (6,6) CNTs.

Our simulations also show that there is no preference
for mirror symmetry breaking during CNT squashing.
This is clearly seen for (7,7) and (8,8) CNTs whose gap
results are shown in Fig.5-a,b, respectively. In the course
of squashing of these tubes, mirror symmetry is broken at
dT B ∼ 3.4 ˚A and a gap is formed around EF . After 1 − 2
steps mirror symmetry is recovered and the gap closes at
an early stage, as seen in the graphs of Fig.5-a,b.

The major diﬀerences of the larger diameter nanotubes
are (i) the initiation of the band-gap at smaller deforma-
tion when mirror symmetry is broken, and (ii) the in-
creased stability of the system in the course of squashing.
This stability is due to robustness of the CNT conforma-
tion with respect to the tip: larger tubes have more atoms
at the surface interacting with graphene layers. Hence
“tank-treading” as well as translational motion is less sig-
niﬁcant. Therefore, we expect that for CNTs with large
diameters, the band-gap opening is more reproducible.

D. Eﬀect of self consistency

All our calculations are based on DF-TB parameter-
ization. However, such empirical potentials may suf-
fer from transferability problems, especially for largely
deformed structures. Hence we need to check the va-
lidity of our conclusions using better models. To test
our results, we consider the calculations of (6,6) CNT
structures displayed in Fig.2-a,b,d. Band-gap calcula-
tion using DF-TB model is compared to calculations
within self consistent density functional tight binding
model (SCTB)12,13 and density functional theory calcu-
lations (DFT)18. The latter is performed using Gaus-
sian03 framework19 within BPW91 exchange-correlation
functional parameterization20 and 6-31G basis set.

In Fig.6 we show the band-gap calculation results for

the three diﬀerent simulations using diﬀerent models.
When the CNT conserves its mirror symmetry a band-
gap cannot develop at EF . The three models agree and
the results are identical as shown in Fig.6-a. When mir-
ror symmetry is broken, the three models predict a band-
gap opening, non monotonic behavior and closure in the
same region of deformation, but the magnitude depends
strongly on the description of the interaction. In particu-
lar, DF-TB results which are shown as dotted lines with
open circles in Fig.6 do not incorporate charge redistribu-
tion. Such a description is reasonable for small deforma-
tion. However as dT B decreases below 3.3 ˚A, charge can
redistribute between carbon atoms and this may result in
diﬀerent electronic properties. The importance of charge
transfer revealed in the SCTB calculations is shown as
continuous line in Fig.6. It diverges from DF-TB model
only under strong deformation, dT B < 3.3 ˚A.

The band-gap calculated within DFT is diﬀerent from
DF-TB model. The origin of this diﬀerence is two fold:
DFT underestimates the band-gap and DF-TB model
fails to describe long range interaction. When mirror
symmetry is broken, both DF-TB and DFT predict mis-
match between sub-lattices A and B , but the strength
of the mismatch depends on the interaction. Within DFT
parameterization, the exchange correlation functional is
underestimated and hence the band-gap is smaller than
DF-TB results under large deformations. However, at
dT B ≥ 3.5 ˚A, DF-TB fails to describe long range inter-
action due to an imposed cut-oﬀ radius of 5.2 ˚A. This
causes DFT results to be larger than those of DF-TB.
Therefore, for large diameter squashed CNTs with bro-
ken mirror symmetry a band-gap can develop at much
earlier stage, i.e at dT B> 5.0 ˚A.

Finally we note that our results derived from the three
models are in qualitative agreement, and our conclusion
deduced from DF-TB calculations are valid. Quantita-
tively Eg depends on the model and some diﬀerences
emerge. In particular, within DFT model conductance
oscillations are less pronounced and disappear in Fig.6-
b. However, this model predicts Eg oscillations in Fig.6-c
and the band-gap vanishes dT B∼2.8 ˚A.

V. CONCLUSION

We have performed the state of the art DF-TB MD
simulations of squashing arm-chair CNT. Our analyses
have been carried out on tubes with diameters in the
range of 8 − 16 ˚A. Such a large number of simulations
enable to have more conclusive analysis on these systems
and we ﬁnd that:

• Force required to squash CNT increases with tube
diameter and is larger for conformations with mir-
ror symmetry preserved. The path for squashing
an arm-chair CNT can be split into three diﬀerent
regimes. For dT B> 3.8 ˚A, the force exerted on the
AFM tip is small (< 10nN/per CNT unit cell) and

5

the CNT undergoes most of the compression. In
the intermediate regime, dT B∼ 2.3 − 3.8 ˚A, force is
substantially enhanced and reaches 40−100nN/per
CNT unit cell. Finally, for dT B< 2.3 ˚A, CNT is
under strong deformation. It undergoes atomic re-
laxation and looses its hexagonal shape, resulting
in force drop-oﬀ.

• If CNT mirror symmetry is broken, Eg can develop
due to mismatch between sub-lattices A and B .
However, this distinguishability between the sub-
lattices is due to top-bottom interactions as well
as edge eﬀects. The former can be modeled within
single π-orbital/atom while the latter has strong
π − σ interaction and cannot be represented within
single π-orbital/atom.

• The band-gap is initiated primarily due to the top-
bottom interactions, but for dT B≤ 3.5 ˚A mismatch
at the edges becomes important and can lead to
cancellation of the band-gap formed. This can re-
sult in band-gap oscillation as a function of squash-
ing. However this eﬀect depends on the exact
atomic position at the edges. Hence we do not
expect smooth variation of the conductance as a
function of squashing.

• Under strong deformation CNT looses its honey-

comb structure and becomes metallic.

• Large diameter CNTs have more contact area with
AFM tip during squashing. Hence, their conforma-
tion with respect to the tip is more robust. Their
squashing results are expected to be more repro-
ducible in an AFM experiment performed in the
reversible regime of the CNT structure.

• Band-gap formation of squashed arm-chair CNT
described by DF-TB, SCTB and DFT models are in
qualitative agreement. However, quantitatively the
value of the band-gap is model dependent. Under
large deformation, dT B < 3.5 ˚A, charge transfer is
important and band-gap is over estimated within
DF-TB model. In addition to this, DF-TB model
under estimates long range interaction. Hence in-
teraction between top and bottom sides of CNT
are under estimated and this results in smaller gap
compared to DFT for dT B > 3.5 ˚A. Hence large
diameter squashed CNTs with broken mirror sym-
metry, are expected to develop a band-gap even for
dT B ≥ 5.0 ˚A.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

supported

HM was

by NASA contract

to
UARC/ELORET and NSERC of Canada. AS and
MPA was supported by NASA contract to UARC. We
are grateful to Dr. A. Maiti and Dr. J. Okeeﬀe for useful
discussions.

1 S. Paulson et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 2936 (1999)
2 C. Gomez-Navarro, P. J. DePablo and J. Gomez-Herrero,

Adv. Mater., 549 16 (2004).

3 T. W. Tombler et al., Nature 405, 769 (2000)
4 E. D. Minot, Y. Yaish, V. Sazonova, J-Y. Park, M. Brink
and P. L. McEuen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 156401 (2003);
5 J. Cao, Q. Wang and H. Dai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 157601

(2003)

6 Yu. N. Gartstein, A. A. Zakhidov, and R. H. Baughman,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 45503 (2002); Phys. Rev. B 68,
115415 (2003)

7 A. Maiti, A. Svizhenko and M. P. Anantram, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 126805 (2002); L. Yang, M. P. Anantram, J. Han,
and J. P. Lu, Phys. Rev. B 60, 13874 (1999); A. Heyd, A.
Charlier, and E. McRae, Phys. Rev. B 55, 6820 (1997).
8 C¸ . Kılı¸c, S. Ciraci, O. G¨ulseren, and T. Yildirim, Phys.

Rev. B 62, R16325 (2000).

9 C. J. Park, Y. H. Kim, and K. J. Chang, Phys. Rev. B 60,

10656 (1999).

10 O. G¨ulseren, T. Yildirim, S. Ciraci, and C¸ . Kılı¸c, Phys.

Rev. B 65, 155410 (2002).

11 J.-Q. Lu, J. Wu, W. Duan, F. Liu, B.-F. Zhu and B.-L.

Gu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 156601 (2003).

12 M. Elstner, D. Porezag, G. Jungnickel, J. Elsner, M.
Haugk, T. Frauenheim, S. Suhai, and G. Seifert, Phys.
Rev. B 58, 7260 (1998).

13 T. Frauenheim, G. Seifert, M. Elstner, Z. Hajnal, G. Jung-
nickel, D. Porezag, S. Suhai, and R. Scholz, Phys. Stat.
Sol.(b), 217, 41, (2000).
14 H. Hellmann, Einfuhrung
(Deuticke, Leipzig, 1937).

in die Quantum chemie

15 R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 56, 340 (1939).
16 Two Carbon atoms deﬁne a graphene unit cell. Hence
graphene can be viewed as a superposition of two sub-
lattices each composed of a single atom. This deﬁnes sub-
lattices A and B which have identical interactions for
ideal CNT.

17 To determine unit vector ~U corresponding to the π-
direction at every Carbon atom, we initially ﬁnd the unit
vectors ~C1, ~C2 and ~C3 in the direction of the three nearest
neighbors of the Carbon atom. Three vectors, ~V1, ~V2 and ~V3
are deﬁned such that ~Vi = ǫijk( ~Ci. ~Cj ) ~Ck + ǫikj( ~Ci. ~Ck) ~Cj.
~U should be orthogonal to the three vectors, ~V1, ~V2 and ~V3;
hence ~U is determined such that [ ~V1 ~V2 ~V3].~U has negligible
elements.

18 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).

6

W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).

19 Gaussian 03, Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburgh PA (2003).
20 K. Burke, J. P. Perdew, and Y. Wang, in Electronic Density
Functional Theory: Recent Progress and New Directions,
Ed. J. F. Dobson, G. Vignale, and M. P. Das (Plenum,
1998).

FIG. 1: The inset in (b) displays the atomic conﬁgura-
tion of a squashed CNT between tip and sample. dT ip−Sub,
and dT B are the tip-sample separation distance and the dis-
tance between top and bottom sides of CNT, respectively. (a)
dT B vs. dT ip−Sub; CNT squashing undergoes three regimes,
dT B> 3.8 ˚A, 3.8 ˚A>dT B> 2.3 ˚A, and dT B< 2.3 ˚A. These
regimes are separated by the horizontal dashed lines. In the
is ∼ 0.88 ± 0.07
ﬁrst regime, the slope of dT B vs. dT ip−Sub
while in the second regime the slope is ∼ 0.6 ± 0.05, where
the corresponding ﬁts are represented as thick solid lines.
At dT B< 2.3 ˚A, CNT undergoes structural transformation
and the honey-comb structure cannot be identiﬁed. (b),(c)
Force exerted on the tip (top graphene sheet) as a function
of dT ip−Sub and dT B, respectively. In all panels, every thin
line corresponds to one simulation and results for (6,6) and
(12,12) CNT are highlighted as thick dotted lines and dashed
lines respectively.

FIG. 2: Eg of (6,6) CNT at EF as a function of dT B for
diﬀerent simulations. In (a) and (b) only top graphene layer is
displaced, while in (c) and (d) both layers are moved to squash
CNT. The insets in each panel show the atomic conﬁguration
of the corresponding CNT unit cell for dT B 2.90±0.05 ˚A where
grey atoms and dark grey atoms indicate top and bottom sides
of CNT, respectively.

(a) and (b) show band-gap at EF and 2|Vππ∗ | of
FIG. 3:
(6,6) CNT for simulation results shown in Fig.2-c,d, respec-
tively. Continuous lines and dashed lines correspond to Eg us-
ing 4 orbitals/atom and a single π-orbital/atom, respectively.
Thin lines with triangle down symbols and dashed lines with
triangle-up symbols represent 2|Vππ∗ | using 4 orbitals/atom
and a single π-orbital/atom, respectively.

7

(a,b) and (a’,b’) show band-gap at EF and 2|Vππ∗ |
FIG. 4:
of (6,6) CNT for simulation results shown in Fig.2-c,d due to
top-bottom interactions (HT B) and edge eﬀects (HED), re-
spectively. Top and bottom of CNT are shown in the insets of
Fig.2 with grey and dark grey atoms. In these panels, contin-
uous and dashed lines correspond to Eg using 4 orbitals/atom
and a single π-orbital/atom, respectively. Thin lines with tri-
angle down symbols and dashed lines with triangle-up sym-
bols represent 2|Vππ∗ | using 4 orbitals/atom and a single π-
orbital/atom, respectively.

FIG. 5: Band-gap of arm-chair CNTs as a function of squash-
ing. (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) correspond to (7,7), (8,8),
(9,9), (10,10), (11,11) and (12,12) tubes, respectively. Dotted
lines with open circles correspond to all interactions, contin-
uous lines are interactions up-to the second nearest neighbor
and dashed lines correspond to results when top-bottom in-
teractions are omitted. The insets in each panel show the
atomic conﬁguration of the corresponding CNT unit cell for
dT B closest to 3.2 ˚A where grey atoms and dark grey atoms
indicate top and bottom sides of CNT, respectively.

FIG. 6: Energy gap of (6,6) CNT at EF as a function of
separation distance between top and bottom sides of CNT
(dT B) for simulations shown in Fig.2-a,b,d. Dotted lines with
open circles are the original calculations within DF-TB model.
Solid and dashed lines correspond to calculations using SCTB
and DFT, respectively.

