5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GRANMA manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Inﬂuence of particle elasticity in shear testers

Dirk Kadau1, Dominik Schwesig1,2, J¨org Theuerkauf2 and Dietrich E. Wolf1 ⋆

Abstract Two dimensional simulations of non-cohesive
granular matter in a biaxial shear tester are discussed.
The eﬀect of particle elasticity on the mechanical behavior
is investigated using two complementary distinct element
methods (DEM): Soft particle molecular dynamics sim-
ulations (Particle Flow Code, PFC) for elastic particles
and contact dynamics simulations (CD) for the limit of
perfectly rigid particles. As soon as the system dilates to
form shear bands, it relaxes the elastic strains so that one
ﬁnds the same stresses for rigid respectively elastic parti-
cles in steady state ﬂow. The principal stresses in steady
state ﬂow are determined. They are proportional to each
other, giving rise to an eﬀective macroscopic friction coef-
ﬁcient which is about 10 % smaller than the microscopic
friction coeﬃcient between the grains.

Key words. Granular matter, Contact Dynamics Simu-
lations, Molecular Dynamics Simulation, Distinct Element
Method, biaxial test, shearing, shear tester, steady state
ﬂow, elasticity

der to calculate dense granular ﬂows. These models con-
tain parameters whose connection to the properties of the
grains is not yet understood. It is the aim of distinct ele-
ment simulation methods (DEM) to establish the connec-
tion between the grain scale and the macroscopic behavior
directly [2,3].

The stress-strain behavior of a dense granular assembly
consists of two parts: the rearrangement of the particles
on the one hand, and their individual elastic or plastic
deformation on the other. In this paper we address the
question, how strongly the ﬂow properties are inﬂuenced
by the grain deformations compared to particle rearrange-
ments. Therefore, two diﬀerent distinct element methods
are used: soft particle molecular dynamics modelling elas-
tic particles (used here: PFC) and contact dynamics (CD)
to simulate perfectly rigid particles. By comparing the re-
sults of the two methods the inﬂuence of particle elas-
ticity can be separated from the eﬀect that particle rear-
rangements have on the macroscopic stress-strain behavior
found in e.g. the biaxial shear tester considered here.

We simulate dense granular ﬂow in a biaxial tester,
which allows for larger displacements than the Jenike
shear cell. The biaxial shear tester is a rectangular box [4,
5] in which the material is sheared under constant strain
rate in one direction and constant stress in a perpendic-
ular direction while the load plates in the third direction
are ﬁxed. In this setup one will reach steady state ﬂow
(constant volume and stress tensor), and the yield locus
can be determined.

1
Introduction

In powder technology the material ﬂow properties are usu-
ally determined experimentally, e.g. using shear testers [1].
The measurements provide input for various phenomeno-
logical continuum models that have been proposed in or-

Received: February 2, 2008/ Revised version: date

Dirk Kadau, Dominik Schwesig, J¨org Theuerkauf and Dietrich
E. Wolf

2
Models

Department of Physics
Duisburg-Essen University
D-47048 Duisburg, Germany

The Dow Chemical Company
Solids Processing Laboratory
Freeport TX 77541, USA

PACS number(s): 45.70.-n, 62.20.-x, 83.10.Rs

⋆ We thank J´anos T¨or¨ok for stimulating discussions and vi-
sualization of the shear bands. This work was supported by the
German Science Foundation (DFG) within SFB 445 and grant
WO 577/3-3, and by Federal Mogul GmbH.

Correspondence to: kadau@comphys.uni-duisburg.de

Both models we use simulate the trajectory of each indi-
vidual particle by integrating Newton’s equations. They
mainly diﬀer in the way, how the contact forces between
grains are determined. In soft particle molecular dynam-
ics (PFC) microscopic elastic deformations of each particle
have to be taken into account: They determine the forces.
By contrast, in contact dynamics (CD) particles are con-
sidered as perfectly rigid, and forces are calculated from
the volume exclusion constraint.

In order to make the comparison between the two
methods as stringent as possible, we simulate a very sim-
ple two dimensional system of noncohesive round particles
(disks) with Coulomb friction. The boundary conditions
and initial particle conﬁgurations are the same for both
types of simulations. In both cases the normal restitution
coeﬃcient is zero and the friction coeﬃcient is µ = 0.3.

2

In order to give speciﬁc numbers we also introduce dimen-
sional parameters, which have no eﬀect on the simulations:
The average particle radius is 1 mm, the mass density
of the material the particles are made of is 103 kg/m3.
Whereas no further parameters enter CD, the molecular
dynamics algorithm requires the speciﬁcation of two stiﬀ-
ness parameters as the particles are not perfectly rigid.

2.1
Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The Particle Flow Code used here is based on soft par-
ticle molecular dynamics [3,6]. Deformations of colliding
particles are represented by the overlap of idealized disks,
i.e. interaction forces between the particles are functions
of the overlap (= sum of the two disk radii - distance
between the disk centers).

The force between particles during contact is calcu-
lated with mechanical elements such as springs and dash-
pots [7,8]. In Fig. 1 a basic visco-elastic contact model
for two particles in contact is depicted schematically. The
contact force is decomposed into a normal and a tangen-
tial component. In the simplest case used here the normal
force is assumed to depend linearly on the overlap (the
displacement of the spring). The dashpot contributes a
normal dissipative force proportional to the time deriva-
tive of the overlap. The sum of both contributions Fn is
restricted to be repulsive, i.e. tensile normal forces are
not allowed, because the particles are assumed to be non-
cohesive.

The tangential component of the contact force is imple-
mented in terms of a linear spring-dashpot as well, where
the displacement of the spring is the integral of the tangen-
tial relative velocity over the time of nonzero overlap. This
represents static friction, hence it is restricted to absolute
values smaller than µFn. When this threshold is reached,
the tangential relative motion is regarded as sliding with
sliding friction µFn (directed opposite to the tangential
relative velocity).

The boundary conditions of the system are realized
by either strain driven walls or stress driven walls without
any friction. For all of the PFC simulations the commercial
Particle Flow Code (PFC2d ver3.0 [9]) was used.

For the PFC simulations, disks and walls with normal
and tangential stiﬀness coeﬃcients of 1 N/m are used.
This low stiﬀness has been chosen in order to empha-
size the possible diﬀerence compared to the perfectly rigid
particles in CD (stiﬀness → ∞). Moreover this keeps the
computing time for PFC low (it increases with the square
root of the stiﬀness). The viscous damping coeﬃcient is
set equal to the critical damping factor at each contact
so that the restitution coeﬃcients are zero for all particle
contacts.

2.2
Contact Dynamics
The contact dynamics simulation method has been used
for the simulation of dense and dry granular materials
since the beginning of the 1980’s. Presuming that the be-
havior of these materials is governed by perfect volume

Fig. 1. Mechanical contact model used in the PFC simulation:
Decomposition of contact forces between particles in normal
(left ﬁgure) and tangential (right ﬁgure) direction. In both di-
rections a spring and a dashpot is applied. Tensile forces are
prevented in normal direction (left ﬁgure), in tangential direc-
tion a frictional slider is used for realizing Coulomb friction
(right ﬁgure).

normal force F
n

tangential force

F
t

d

F

t,max

0

−
F

t,max

v

t,rel

Fig. 2. Contact laws in Contact Dynamics: Perfect volume
exclusion (Signorini graph, left ﬁgure) determines the normal
force FN , the tangential force Ft is determined by exact imple-
mentation of Coulomb’s law of friction with threshold Ft,max
(right ﬁgure).

exclusion and static Coulomb friction [10,11,12,13,14,15],
CD implements them as constraints without modelling the
microscopic elastic grain deformations underlying them.
Although CD can deal with more general systems as well
[16] we restrict ourselves to the simplest case here.

Volume exclusion of perfectly rigid particles is char-
acterized by the Signorini graph, Fig. 2(left): When two
particles touch each other (d = 0) the normal force Fn
at the contact assumes whatever positive value is needed
to avoid interpenetration. This value can in principle be
arbitrarily large (Fig. 2, left). Otherwise the particles do
not interact. The tangential force Ft at a contact is de-
termined by the Coulomb friction law, Fig. 2 (right): A
sticking contact (with relative tangential velocity vt = 0)
can bear any tangential force with absolute value up to
a threshold Ft,max = µFn. Exceeding this threshold leads
to sliding of the two particles in contact. If sliding occurs
(vt 6= 0) the magnitude of the tangential force is Ft,max,
while its direction is opposite to the sliding velocity.

For dense systems consisting of many particles with
a complex contact network, the calculation of all contact
forces is a global problem, because every force at a contact
inﬂuences all other contact forces. There exists no analyt-
ical solution for this complex problem [17,18], so that an
iterative procedure is applied: The forces at every contact
are calculated in a random order repeatedly until they all
comply with each other. In the simulations presented here

3

y

x

a ﬁxed number of iterations is chosen, which according to
our previous experience [19] is large enough that the forces
have converged within a small tolerance. If the number of
iterations would be too small, quasielastic eﬀects would
occur [19].

3
Simulated System
We simulate a rectangular system conﬁned by friction-
less walls perpendicular to the x- and y-axes, Fig. 3. The
boundary conditions are such that the material is sheared
under constant stress σxx at the yielding walls (perpen-
dicular to the x-axis) and with a constant strain rate ˙ǫyy
at the pushing walls (perpendicular to the y-axis). The
stress at the pushing walls, σyy, and the strain rate at the
yielding walls, ˙ǫxx, are evaluated. Since there is no wall
friction in our simulations, σyy and σxx are the principal
stresses.

In the PFC and CD simulations the same initial conﬁg-
urations are used. The system consists of about 800 round
particles (disks) with a Gaussian distribution of diameters
cut oﬀ below 1/2 and above 3/2 of the average value. The
width of the distribution is 0.1 times the average particle
diameter. The polydispersity is important to avoid layer-
ing within the system.

The initial conﬁguration is prepared in the following
way: The particles are randomly distributed at low con-
centration at ﬁrst. Using contact dynamics the system is
then biaxially compacted under small constant forces on
the four walls (leading to stresses small compared to the
ones applied later). This leads to a dense packing (Fig.
3, left). The forces in x-direction were twice as large as
those in y-direction in order to obtain an aspect ratio of
about 2:1. If the average particle radius is taken as 1 mm,
the system size is about 43mm (x-direction) times 73mm
(y-direction). Whereas in CD this conﬁgurations can be
directly used as initial conﬁguration (t = 0), a further
preprocessing step is needed for PFC. Using molecular
dynamics the conﬁguration is compressed a little in x-
direction until the desired stress σxx is reached due to elas-
tic response of the grains (here: small overlaps), while the
extent in y-direction is kept constant. Therefore the ini-
tial volume of the PFC-simulation (Fig. 3, right) is about
6% smaller in the x-direction than the one of the CD-
simulation, but otherwise the initial conﬁgurations are the
same.

To reduce ﬂuctuations the results were averaged over
10 similar systems where particles are randomly dispersed
and located while keeping the same average distribution.

4
Results
These dense systems (Fig. 3) are sheared under a con-
stant strain rate ˙ǫyy = −0.02 s−1 and diﬀerent values of
constant stress σxx. The stresses are calculated by divid-
ing the force on the corresponding wall by the wall area,
where the average disk radius, 1 mm, is taken as size per-
pendicular to the xy-plane.

For σxx = 10 Pa an example of a system after shear-
ing for t = 42 s is shown in Fig. 4. As will be discussed

Fig. 3. Initial conﬁgurations used for CD (left) and PFC
(right) for shearing under ﬁxed strain rate in y-direction and
ﬁxed stress in x-direction. In the right ﬁgure the left and right
walls have been moved together leading to elastic response of
the particles in order to ﬁx the stress σxx.

Fig. 4. Typical conﬁguration in steady state ﬂow at the same
time for CD (upper) and for PFC (lower panel). Both simula-
tions started with the same conﬁguration (up to a horizontal
compression by about 6% for PFC, see text).

below, at this time steady state ﬂow has already been
established. The vertical size of the simulation boxes is
the same, because the strain rate ˙ǫyy is the same in both
simulations. Remarkably, the horizontal size diﬀerence is
still about 6%, as for the initial conﬁgurations, although
it could have evolved diﬀerently depending on the elastic
properties, and in fact transiently does so. The strain built
up temporarily due to elasticity vanishes again in steady
state ﬂow. The ﬁnal particle positions are diﬀerent in the
two simulation methods, although they were initially the
same, which is no surprise in view of the highly nonlinear
dynamics. In particular the force network evolves diﬀer-
ently. On the other hand, Fig. 5 compares the distributions
of normal forces for a snapshot like Fig. 4. The distribu-
tions obtained with CD and PFC are similar, thus the
force statistics in the systems are comparable.

We evaluated the velocities of the grains for the CD-
simulations and found shear localization in shear bands.
In contrast to previous simulations [20,21,22], where the

PFC
CD

0.03

0.02

0.01

]

1
−

s
[
 

x
x

.

ε

4

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

)
l
a
r
g
e
t
n
i
 
y
b
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p

0

0

1

3

2
FN/<FN>

4

5

Fig. 5. Comparison of the distribution of normal forces from
a snapshot during steady state ﬂow for CD and PFC.

left wall was ﬁxed, i.e. strain controlled, whereas the right
one was stress controlled, the shear band which forms ini-
tially, is oriented along either diagonal, breaking the sym-
metry of our system spontaneously. Later on most of the
time four shearbands exist which form roughly a parallelo-
gram around the center which hardly moves. The dynam-
ics of the shear bands is very complex showing eddies and
strong ﬂuctuations. This will be analyzed in more detail
in a forthcoming publication [23].

The measured strain rate ˙ǫxx, averaged over 10 simi-
lar systems is shown in Fig. 6. One can distinguish three
time intervals: During the ﬁrst 2.5 s the elastic particles
are compressed, i.e. ˙ǫxx < − ˙ǫyy = 0.02s−1. As expected,
this region is much smaller for CD, where the system of
rigid disks gets compacted for only about 1 s, mostly due
to numerical errors creating tiny overlaps, which for per-
fect convergence of the force iterations would not occur.
However, a small amount of compaction due to particle
rearrangements is also possible. The second time inter-
val extends up to 10 s in both simulation models and is
characterized by ˙ǫxx > − ˙ǫyy, which means that the sys-
tem dilates. The volume increases to allow for shearing
[24]. As already seen in Fig. 4 the elastic system dilates
more, compensating for the initial compression, so that
ﬁnally the volumes of both systems diﬀer by roughly the
same percentage as initially. Obviously the elastic energy
stored during the compression phase is completely released
during dilation. After this transient the system reaches a
steady state where the strain rate ﬂuctuates around the
average value h ˙ǫxxi = − ˙ǫyy. In this region the average
volume remains constant. The PFC-results agree quali-
tatively with the ones obtained with molecular dynamics
simulations by Luding [20,21,22].

The time dependence of the stress σyy is shown in
Fig. 7: For elastic particles (PFC) it reaches a pronounced
maximum at the end of the compression phase after about
3 s. During the dilatancy phase it decreases and ﬁnally
ﬂuctuates around a constant value in steady state ﬂow.
For rigid particles (CD) the stress maximum is not very
pronounced: In order to distinguish it convincingly from
the ﬂuctuations, one would have to average over more than
10 independent runs. This conﬁrms that the stress maxi-
mum is due to elastic compression of the system. On the
other hand, the average steady state values of σyy are

0

0

20

t [s]

0

0

20

t [s]

−1

Fig. 6. Time dependence of the the strain rate ˙ǫxx at ﬁxed
˙ǫyy = −0.02 s
and σxx = 10 Pa in comparison for PFC (left)
and CD (right). Strain curves for diﬀerent ﬁxed σxx show the
same behavior (not shown).

0.03

0.02

0.01

]

1
−

s
[
 

x
x

.

ε

CD
PFC

2

σ

/

1.5

x
x

y
y

σ

1

0

10

20

30

t [s]

Fig. 7. Time dependence of the the stress σyy at ﬁxed ˙ǫyy =
−0.02 s

and σxx = 10 Pa for PFC and CD.

−1

the same for PFC and CD within the error bars. Elas-
tic contributions to σyy cannot be observed any more in
agreement with our picture, that the elastic deformation
relaxes during dilation at the onset of shearing.

We repeated the simulations for four diﬀerent stresses
σxx between 5 and 25 Pa keeping the strain rate ˙ǫyy =
−0.02s−1 the same. The time-dependence of the strain
rate ˙ǫxx as well as of the stress ratio σyy/σxx is in all
cases the same as in Fig. 6 respectively Fig. 7. In particu-
lar, hσyyi/σxx time-averaged in steady state ﬂow does not
depend on σxx, see Fig. 8. 1

As both principal values of the stress tensor are pro-
portional to each other in steady state ﬂow, this implies
a linear eﬀective yield locus. The eﬀective friction angle φ
is given by

sin φ =

hσyyi − σxx
hσyyi + σxx

.

(1)

(2)

With hσyyi/σxx ≈ 1.71 ± 0.05 this implies an eﬀective
friction coeﬃcient

µeﬀ = tan φ ≈ 0.27 ± 0.02

which is slightly smaller than the friction coeﬃcient be-
tween the grains, µ = 0.3.

The eﬀect of system size was investigated by increasing
the number of particles to 10000. However, no eﬀect of the
system size on the stress ratio was found.

1

Although the average values for CD seem to be slightly
larger than those for PFC by 1 to 3 %, the error bars are so
big that the above statement that elasticity does not play a
signiﬁcant role in steady state ﬂow is still valid.

1.8

σ

/

x
x

y
y

σ

1.7

CD
PFC

1.6

0

10

20

30

σ

xx [Pa]

Fig. 8. The average stress σyy in steady state ﬂow is propor-
tional to the applied stress σxx.

5
Conclusion
The results presented above for a two dimensional model
of a biaxial shear test show that particle elasticity only af-
fects the stress and volumetric strain during a short tran-
sient. Dilatancy leads to elastic strain relaxation so that
the stress in steady state ﬂow is essentially determined by
rearrangements of the particles. This could be proven by
comparing the simulation results obtained for elastic and
perfectly rigid particles, respectively.

In steady state ﬂow the principal stresses turned out
to be proportional to each other. Using Mohr-Coulomb
theory we determined the eﬀective macroscopic friction
coeﬃcient of the granular material, which is the ratio of
the shear stress to the normal stress at a shear plane.
We could relate it to the microscopic friction coeﬃcient
between the grains, which is slightly larger.

We also checked the inﬂuence of the strain rate ˙ǫyy
and found essentially no eﬀect. This can be explained
by comparing the orders of magnitude of inertia forces
due to the prescribed strain rate to the forces in the sys-
tem caused by the applied stress σxx. The typical time
scale for inertia eﬀects is given by the inverse strain rate
1/ ˙ǫyy, the length scale is given by the system size Ly,
the typical mass is the average particle mass ρr3
0 (we ne-
glect the factor π here). Thus, typical inertia forces are:
Finertia ∼ ρr3
yy. Typical forces due to the applied
stress σxx are estimated by multiplying with the system
size Ly (and its thickness r0): Fext ∼ σxxLyr0. The in-
teresting ratio: Finertia/Fext ∼ ρr2
yy/σxx. Inserting the
used values results in: Finertia/Fext ∼ 4 · 10−8 which is a
small number so that we are well in the region of slow
(quasistatic) deformations where we do not expect an in-
ﬂuence of the applied strain rate on the results as is found
here. This argument shows, that only the dimensionless
ratio ρr2
0 ˙ǫ2
yy/σxx matters, as long as elastic eﬀects are neg-
ligible: Increasing ˙ǫ2

yy is equivalent to decreasing σxx.

0Ly ˙ǫ2

0 ˙ǫ2

References
1. J. Schwedes. Review on testers for measuring of properties

of bulk solids. Granular Matter, 5:1–43, 2003.

5

2. P.A. Cundall. A computer model for simulating progres-
sive large scale movements of block rock systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the Symposium of the International Society of
Rock Mechanics, volume 1, pages 132–150, Nancy, France,
1971.

3. P.A. Cundall and O.D.L Strack. A discrete model for gran-

ular assemblies. Geotechnique, 29:47–65, 1979.

4. M. Nowak. Spannungs-/Dehnungsverhalten von Kalkstein
in der Zweiaxialbox. PhD thesis, TU Braunschweig, 1994.
5. R. J. M. Janssen and H. Zetzener. Measurements on co-
hesive powder with two biaxial shear testers. Chemical
Engineering & Technology, 26(2):147–151, ??

6. P.A. Cundall. Distinct element models of rock and soil
In Analytical and computational methods in
structure.
engineering and rock mechanics, London, England, 1987.
Allen & Unwin.

7. D.E. Wolf. Modelling and computer simulation of gran-
In K.H. Hoﬀmann and M. Schreiber, edi-
ular media.
tors, Computational Physics: Selected Methods - Simple
Exercises - Serious Applications, pages 64–94, Heidelberg,
1996. Springer.

8. S. Luding. Molecular dynamics simulations of granular
materials. In H. Hinrichsen and D. E. Wolf, editors, The
Physics of Granular Media, Berlin, Germany, 2004. Wiley-
VCH.

9. Itasca consulting, www.itasca.com. Particle Flow Code in

2 Dimensions. Online manual PFC2d version 3.0.

10. P. L¨otstedt. Mechanical systems of rigid bodies subject to
unilateral constraints. SIAM J. Appl. Math., 42:281–296,
1982.

11. M. Jean and J. J. Moreau. Unilaterality and dry friction
in the dynamics of rigid body collections. In Proceedings
of Contact Mechanics International Symposium, pages 31–
48, Lausanne, Switzerland, 1992. Presses Polytechniques et
Universitaires Romandes.

12. M. Jean. The non-smooth contact dynamics method.

Comput. Methods Appl. Engrg., 177:235–257, 1999.

13. J.J. Moreau. Some numerical methods in multibody dy-
namics: application to granular materials. Eur J Mech,
A/Solids, 13(4):93–114, 1994.

14. T. Unger and J. Kert´esz. The contact dynamics method
for granular media. In Modeling of Complex Systems, pages
116–138, Melville, New York, 2003. American Institute of
Physics. cond-mat/0211696.

15. L. Brendel, T. Unger, and D. E. Wolf. Contact dynamics
for beginners. In H. Hinrichsen and D. E. Wolf, editors,
The Physics of Granular Media, Berlin, Germany, 2004.
Wiley-VCH.

16. D. Kadau, G. Bartels, L. Brendel, and D. E. Wolf. Pore
stabilization in cohesive granular systems. Phase Trans.,
76(4-5):315–331, 2003.

17. F. Radjai, L. Brendel, and S. Roux. Nonsmoothness, inde-
terminacy, and friction in two dimensional arrays of rigid
particles. Phys. Rev. E, 54(1):861, 1996.

18. T. Unger, J. Kert´esz, and D. E. Wolf. Force indetermi-
nacy in the jammed state of hard disks. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
94:178001, 2005.

19. T. Unger, L. Brendel, D. E. Wolf, and J. Kert´esz. Elastic
behavior in contact dynamics of rigid particles. Phys. Rev.
E, 65(6):061305, 2002.

20. S. Luding, R. Tykhoniuk, J. Tomas, L. Heim, M. Kappl,
and H.-J. Butt. Flow behavior of cohesive and frictional
ﬁne powders. In Y. Shimizu, R. D. Hart, and P. A. Cun-
dall, editors, Numerical Modeling in Micromechanics via
Particle Methods - 2004, pages 157–163. A. A. Balkema,
2004. PFC Symposium procedings.

6

21. S. Luding. Anisotropy in cohesive, frictional granular me-
dia. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 17:S2623–S2640, 2005.
22. S. Luding. Shear ﬂow modeling of cohesive and frictional
ﬁne powder. Powder Technology, 2005. In press, corrected
proof available online 23 May 2005.

23. J. T¨or¨ok, D. Kadau, and D. E. Wolf. Properties of shear

bands in biaxial tests. in preparation.

24. O. Reynolds. On the dilatancy of media composed of rigid
particles in contact. Philos. Mag., Ser. 5(20):469, 1885.

