6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Squeezing of open boundaries by Maxwell-consistent
real coordinate transformation

D M Shyroki
Department of Communications, Optics and Materials, Technical University of
Denmark, Building 343v, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
E-mail: ds@com.dtu.dk

Abstract. To simulate open boundaries within ﬁnite computation domain, real-
function coordinate transformation in the framework of generally covariant formulation
of Maxwell equations is proposed. The mapping—realized with arctangent function
here—has a transparent geometric meaning of pure squeezing of space, is admissible
by classical electrodynamics, does not introduce artiﬁcially lossy layers (or ‘lossy
coordinates’) to absorb outgoing radiation nor leads to non-Maxwellian ﬁelds. At the
same time, like for anisotropic perfectly matched layers, no modiﬁcation (except for
transformation of material tensors) is needed to existing nearest-neighbor computation
schemes, which makes it well suited for parallel computing implementation.

1. Introduction

Direct numerical methods of modeling electromagnetic phenomena, such as ﬁnite-
diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) and frequency-domain (FDFD) schemes, are invariably
concerned with how to represent inﬁnite space surrounding the region of interest on a
bounded computation domain. Two approaches to combat that problem do exist; one,
as in [1] or [2], can be classiﬁed as non-local since it is not limited to the treatment
of nearest-neighbor interactions on a computation grid due to higher-order diﬀerentials
appearing in the formulation, a shortcoming when parallel computer implementation
is considered; another is aimed to modify the (local) material properties of boundary
regions in such a way that outgoing radiation experiences no parasitic reﬂections from
the boundaries of computation window [3, 4], and hence can be called local.

The now-classic local technique to represent open boundaries (called absorbing
boundaries when zero reﬂectivity of surrounding space is emphasized and mimicked
in simulations) is by means of absorbing perfectly matched layers (PMLs) introduced
originally in [5]. The technique, especially in its non-split version [4], is considered simple
and eﬃcient, and enjoy great popularity in the electromagnetic modeling community.
Nonetheless it cannot be considered as completely perfect because:

(i) free PML parameters, such as maximum conductivity and conductivity proﬁle, bear
not always obvious geometric or physical relation to particular problem to simulate,
hence need for the adjustment and optimization of PMLs so often;

Squeezing of open boundaries by Maxwell-consistent real coordinate transformation

2

(ii) use of complex-valued matrices for modiﬁed dielectric permittivity ǫ and magnetic
permeability µ leaves no room for CPU time and memory savings with real-ﬁeld
ﬁnite-diﬀerence formulations;

(iii) loss of accuracy when solving eigenproblems in frequency domain is inevitable
(though normally minor) due to nonzero mode tails extending into the regions
of modiﬁed ǫ and µ within PMLs;

(iv) diﬃculties with non-Cartesian and, in particular, non-orthogonal grids have been

reported [6].

As an attempt to overcome these problems while retaining locality of the formulation,
we propose a conceptually simple and numerically easy-to-implement squeezing of open
boundaries (SOB) technique in this Letter.

The underlying idea of SOB is to map inﬁnite surrounding space (or rather
the whole space, with better sampling for central region and coarser for outskirts)
onto the ﬁnite computation domain, instead of inserting anisotropic absorbing PMLs
between the region of interest and computation boundaries. A clever way to do such
mapping inexpensively is by transforming ǫ and µ ﬁelds as stipulated by generally
covariant electrodynamics, while retaining the form of Maxwell equations untouched.
The mapping—illustrated by use of arctangent function here, with other possibilities
discussed—is rigorous at the stage of analytic description; is smooth, while the nth
derivative of material tensors at PML interface (with n depending on the order of the
proﬁle) is discontinuous; and is real-valued, enabling ﬁnite-diﬀerence algorithms in real
notation where appropriate. Another advantage of the SOB method is its extendability:
that is, anisotropic, magnetic materials and nontrivial backgrounds can be treated
straightforwardly; and with same ease non-Cartesian and non-orthogonal coordinates,
if preferred, can be squeezed in the manner proposed. Finally, this technique justiﬁes a
surprising possibility for lossless PML formulation.

2. Covariant Maxwell equations

It was Lorentz-covariance of Maxwell equations that led to special relativity over a
century ago. Another, less celebrated though well and long ago established fact about
Maxwell equations is that they can be formulated in a generally covariant manner,
i.e., so that they do not change their form under arbitrary reversible transformation
from Cartesian coordinates [7, 8]. Surprisingly, this feature was ﬁrst exploited in direct
computation electromagnetics perhaps only a decade ago, in ‘logically Cartesian’ FDTD
simulations of high index contrast dielectric structures [9, 10] (see also [11]). For the
sake of completeness let us write coordinate-invariant Maxwell equations here, in terms
of electric covariant vector Eν and magnetic covariant pseudovector ˜Hν as in [12]:

˜Eκλν∂λEν = −µκλ ˙˜H λ,
˜Eκλν∂λ ˜Hν = ǫκλ ˙Eλ + jκ,

∂κµκλ ˜Hλ = 0,
∂κǫκλEλ = ρ,

(1)

(2)

Squeezing of open boundaries by Maxwell-consistent real coordinate transformation

3

a form which, written in components explicitly, is identical to conventional Cartesian
representation (pseudo permutation ﬁeld ˜Eκλν equals Levi-Civita symbol
in any
coordinate system), with the constitutive relations

˜Bλ = µλν ˜Hν, Dλ = ǫλνEν

(3)
(i.e., no optical activity assumed), where ˜Bλ is magnetic induction pseudo vector
density of weight +1, and Dλ is electric induction vector density; hence ǫλν and µλν
are contravariant tensor densities transformed according to
ν′µλ′ν′
λ′J ν

, µλν = |∆|−1J λ

ǫλν = |∆|−1J λ

ν′ǫλ′ν′

λ′J ν

(4)

,

λ′ ≡ ∂λ′xλ is the Jacobian transformation matrix for contravariant components,

where J λ
∆ ≡ det J λ

λ′ is its determinant.

Such formulation enables one to hide all metric information into ǫλν and µλν while
invariably using Cartesian-like representation of Maxwell equations (1), (2), which is
extremely convenient; no wonder many authors strived (successfully) to ‘derive’ (4) on
diﬀerent grounds and under diﬀerent assumptions, as in [9] for isotropic media or in [13]
for diagonal transformation matrices J λ
λ′. It is worth noting that, however, (4) are a
direct consequence of transformation characteristics assigned to electric and magnetic
ﬁelds; hence their general nature and no need in any tricky derivations. In practice,
dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability are referenced to Cartesian frame, so
if one wants to use non-Cartesian coordinates instead, with Cartesian-like equations (1),
(2), then transformation rules (4) are to be employed and speciﬁed for transformation
from Cartesian to those coordinates. We make such speciﬁcation for the mapping onto
arctangent-squeezed coordinates in the next Section.

3. Open boundaries on conﬁned domain

Let the Cartesian coordinates {x1′
{u, v, w} according to

, x2′

, x3′

} = {x, y, z} be transformed to {x1, x2, x3} =

u = arctan(x/x0),

v = arctan(y/y0), w = arctan(z/z0).

(5)

where x0, y0, z0 are the units of length along the corresponding coordinates. Such
mapping preserves central region of space (where the scatterer or the waveguide is
supposedly located) virtually untouched, while smoothly squeezing the outer space
into the (−π/2, π/2)3 bounded computation domain. The x0, y0 and z0 units are
arbitrary at this, analytic stage, but their careless choice may compromise accuracy of
ﬁnite-diﬀerence calculations on (more or less) equidistant grids in squeezed coordinates.
Indeed, poor sampling on a ‘squeezed’ grid of ‘physical’ lengths far from the origin of
coordinates (|x| ≫ x0, |y| ≫ y0, or |z| ≫ z0) is a reason to match scaling factors x0, y0
and z0 with actual physical dimensions of the region of interest or with the wavelength.
Note that in the proposed approach, x0, y0 and z0 are the only parameters to be adjusted
to particular physical problem, with a clear geometric relation to that problem.

Squeezing of open boundaries by Maxwell-consistent real coordinate transformation

4

By diﬀerentiating (5) one gets the transformation matrix

J λ
λ′ =

x−1
0 cos2 u
0
0







0
y−1
0 cos2 v
0

0
0
z−1
0 cos2 w

.







(6)

,

ǫvv = ǫyy

ǫuu = ǫxx

The ‘squeezed’ permittivity and permeability can be obtained with (4), (6) immediately;
the diagonal components of ǫλν, for example, are
z0x0 cos2 v
y0 cos2 u cos2 w

y0z0 cos2 u
x0 cos2 v cos2 w
and similarly for µλλ.
It should be emphasized that even if matrix representations
of dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability are non-diagonal in Cartesian
coordinates, this generates no additional complexity in deriving the ǫλν and µλν oﬀ-
diagonal components; here we omit them for brevity. Specifying the transformed ǫλν
and µλν for squeezed cylindrical or spherical coordinates also poses no diﬃculty in
present approach, but is out of scope here.

ǫww = ǫzz x0y0 cos2 w
z0 cos2 u cos2 v

(7)

,

,

The structure of (7) resembles that of modiﬁed ǫ and µ in PML regions with
‘stretching variables’ [14] sx = J u
x etc., but transformation (7) contains no complex-
valued functions and is smooth over the entire spatial domain. The price for the
smoothness is that under arctangent transformation (5), which is linear only in the
vicinity of the origin of coordinates, familiar geometric ﬁgures become distorted on
new mesh and, analytically, are deﬁned by equations with x, y and z coordinates
replaced by x0 tan u etc; this poses high demands on index averaging technique at index
discontinuities for better numerical convergence, as found in Section 4 for frequency-
domain eigenproblem. How to go around that by modifying the transformation function
in (5) is explained in Section 5, where we end up with non-absorbing PML formulation.

4. FDFD simulation of guided modes

It is common intuition that light tends to concentrate in high-index regions, so one may
expect that dielectric proﬁle transformed according to (5) shall support spurious modes
guided along computation boundaries where some of the permittivity and permeability
components head to inﬁnity. To disprove this, guided propagation in step-index ﬁber was
simulated with full-vector FDFD algorithm implementing permittivity and permeability
proﬁles as in (7), adopted to the two-dimensional geometry. No spurious boundary-
guided solutions were found, and numeric results show reasonable agreement with those
obtained analytically for the same ﬁber (ﬁgure 1). Convergence was found aﬀected by the
scaling parameters x0, y0 (the two curves in the ﬁgure correspond to the x0 = y0 = 3R
and x0 = y0 = 4R choices, where R is the ﬁber radius), and very sensitive to index
averaging scheme. This latter sensitivity is due to highly steep and nonlinear proﬁles of
ǫ and µ in squeezed coordinates, which can lead to systematic under- or overestimation
of the eigenvalues if inappropriate index averaging at material interfaces (e.g., simple
volume-weighted averaging, quite widespread in FDTD and FDFD modeling) is used.

Squeezing of open boundaries by Maxwell-consistent real coordinate transformation

5

−4

x 10

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

n
 
/

f
f
e

f
f
e

 

n
∆

 = 3R
 =  y
 x
0
0
 = 4R
 =  y
 x
0
0

−10

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

80
N

Figure 1. Relative discrepancy ∆neﬀ /neﬀ between SOB-FDFD computed and
analytically calculated mode indices of step-index ﬁber (radius R = 2 µm, material
index 1.45) in air background at 1.45 µm, with increasing the number of grid points
N per domain width.

5. A new way to construct PMLs

An interesting question is how arbitrary the transform function in (5) is. Indeed, one
may use, e.g., hyperbolic tangent for the mapping; such choice would lead to only slight
changes in (6), (7), with cos2(uπ/2) etc. on (−1, 1) substituted by 1 − u2 on the same
domain. And indeed, numeric simulations in tanh-transformed coordinates show results
similar to those in Section 4, although convergence was found poorer for the example
in ﬁgure 1, probably owing to higher steepness of appropriately transformed ǫ and µ
proﬁles near the domain boundaries which spur numerical errors at discretization.

Going a step further, one might introduce piecewise mapping functions like u = x for
|x| ≤ x1, u = x1 + x2 tanh x−x1
for |x| > x1, where x1 deﬁnes the interface between space
x2
region untouched by the transformation, and x2 the width of ‘non-absorbing perfectly
matched layer’. The analogy with conventional dispersive PMLs becomes even more
pronounced if we put x2 ∝ λ, which is a rather natural choice as noted in Section 3.
The advantage of this ‘piecewise’ formulation over smooth arctangent or hyperbolic
tangent squeezing is that within the |x| ≤ x1, |y| ≤ y1, |z| ≤ z1 region, ǫ and µ proﬁles
are deﬁned as on untransformed grid; the disadvantage is that they are consequently
sharper near computation domain boundaries, for the domain of the same width.

The notions of ‘complex coordinate stretching’ [14] or ‘lossy mapping of space’ [15]
have long been used to derive standard (lossy) PMLs, though it was not always clear
what physical sense those complex-valued ‘degrees of freedom’ added by hand to spatial
variables in Maxwell equations do have; in operational terms, whether complex-valued
coordinates are observable. The proposed SOB technique paves the way to construct
lossless PMLs with a clear geometric meaning of outer space squeezing; and if losses
should be introduced (as in frequency-domain calculations of leaky modes), this can
be done by adding, under the leakage irreversibility condition, an imaginary part to
refractive index of surrounding medium before squeezing.

Squeezing of open boundaries by Maxwell-consistent real coordinate transformation

6

6. Conclusion

Squeezing of open boundaries is proposed as an inexpensive and, at analytic stage,
rigorous alternative to standard lossy PML technique. What makes our method so
attractive is its conceptual clarity: we do not surround computation window with
artiﬁcial lossy media; we do not modify Maxwell equations in any way; all we do is
we choose coordinate system allowed by covariant nature of Maxwell equations and
suitable for calculations—and for the ﬁnite-diﬀerence or ﬁnite-element calculations on a
bounded domain, a suitable system is one that has bounded coordinates. The method
is more straightforward to apply in time domain; in our proof-of-principle frequency-
domain simulations of guided propagation, no spurious modes conﬁned in the regions
of strongly modiﬁed ǫ and µ have been detected.

References

[1] E. Lindman, “Free-space boundary conditions for the time dependent wave equation,” J. Comput.

[2] R. L. Higdon, “Numerical absorbing boundary conditions for the wave equation,” Math. Comput.,

Phys., vol. 18, pp. 66–78, 1975.

vol. 49, pp. 65–90, 1987.

[3] C. M. Rappaport and L. Bahrmasel, “An absorbing boundary condition based on anechoic absorber
for EM scattering computation,” J. Electromag. Waves Appl., vol. 6, pp. 1621–1634, 1992.
[4] Z. S. Sacks, D. M. Kingsland, R. Lee, and J.-F. Lee, “A perfectly matched anisotropic absorber
for use as an absorbing boundary condition,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat., vol. 43, pp.
1460–1463, 1995.

[5] J. P. B´erenger, “A perfectly matched layer for the absorption of electromagnetic waves,” J. Comput.

Phys., vol. 114, pp. 185–200, 1994.

[6] M. W. Buksas, “Implementing the perfectly matched layer absorbing boundary condition with
mimetic diﬀerencing schemes,” Prog. Electromagn. Research PIER, vol. 32, pp. 383-411, 2001.

[7] J. A. Schouten, Tensor Analysis for Physicists (Clarendon, Oxford, 1951).
[8] E. J. Post, Formal Structure of Electromagnetics (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1962).
[9] A. J. Ward and J. B. Pendry, “Refraction and geometry in Maxwell’s equations,” J. Modern Opt.,

vol. 43, pp. 773–793, 1996.

[10] A. J. Ward and J. B. Pendry, “Calculating photonic Green’s functions using a nonorthogonal

ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain method,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 58, pp. 7252–7259, 1998.

[11] D. M. Shyroki, “Note on transformation to general curvilinear coordinates for Maxwell’s curl

equations,” arXive:physics/0307029, 2003.
“Exact

equivalent-proﬁle

[12] D. M. Shyroki,

arXive:physics/0605002, 2006.

formulation for bent

optical waveguides,”

[13] F. L. Teixeira and W. C. Chew, “General closed-form PML constitutive tensors to match arbitrary
bianisotropic and dispersive linear media,” IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Lett., vol. 8, pp. 223–
225, 1998.

[14] W. C. Chew and W. H. Weedon, “A 3D perfectly matched medium from modiﬁed Maxwell’s

equations with stretched coordinates,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 599–604, 1994.

[15] C. M. Rappaport, “Perfectly mathed absorbing boundary conditions based on anisotropic lossy

mapping of space,” IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Lett., vol. 5, pp. 90–92, 1995.

