6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analyzing Trails in Complex Networks

Luciano da Fontoura Costa
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos. Universidade de S˜ao Paulo,
S˜ao Carlos, SP, PO Box 369, 13560-970, phone +55 16 3373 9858,
FAX +55 16 3371 3616, Brazil, luciano@if.sc.usp.br
(Dated: 1st Sep 2006)

Even more interesting than the intricate organization of complex networks are the dynamics
of systems underlined by such structures. Among the many types of dynamics, one particularly
interesting category involves the evolution of trails left by random walks and dilating processes as
moving agents progress through a complex network. Once such a trail occurs, important implied
problem includes the reconstruction of the trail and the identiﬁcation of its source. The present work
addresses these issues while taking into account permanent and transient self-avoiding trails, the
latter being further subdivided into Poissonian and evanescent types. Erd˝os-R´enyi and Barab´asi-
Albert models are considered. Several interesting results are obtained.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Hc,89.75.Fb,89.70.+C

‘... when you have eliminated the impossible, whatever
remains, however improbable, must be the truth.’ (Sir A.
C. Doyle, Sherlock Holmes)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Complex networks have become one of the leading
paradigms in science thanks to their ability to represent
and model highly intricate structures (e.g. [1, 2, 3, 4]).
However, as a growing number of works have shown
(e.g. [2, 3]), the dynamics of systems whose connectiv-
ity is underlined by complex networks is often even more
complex and interesting than the connectivity of the net-
works themselves. One particularly interesting type of
non-linear dynamics involves the evolution of trails along
the network, deﬁned by moving agents during random
walks or dilation processes. The latter type of dynamics
involves the progressive evolution of activity after start-
ing from one or more nodes. For instance, in case such a
process starts at a given node i, at each subsequent time
the neighbors of i are visited, and so on, deﬁning a hier-
[5, 6, 7]). Several
archical system of neighborhoods (e.g.
important phenomena are directly related to this type
of investigation, including the identiﬁcation of the ori-
gin of rumors, diseases, fads, opinion formation, among
many other relevant problems. Another important re-
lated problem involves attempts to recover incomplete
trails. In other words, in cases in which only partial evi-
dence is left by the trail, it becomes important to try to
infer the full set of visited nodes.

In order to properly represent trails occurring in com-
plex networks, we associate state variables to each node i,
i = 1, 2, . . . , N , of the network. The trail is then deﬁned
by marking such variables along the respective dynam-
ical process. Only self-avoiding trails and dilations are
considered in the current work, which are characterized
by the fact a node is never visited more than once. We
restrict our attention to binary trails, characterized by

binary state variables [11]. The types of trails can be
further classiﬁed by considering the marks to be perma-
nent or transient. In the latter case, the mark associated
to a node can be deleted after the visit. While many dif-
ferent transient dynamics are possible, we restrict our at-
tention to the following two types: (i) Poissonian, where
each mark has a ﬁxed probability of being removed after
the visit; and (ii) Evanescent, where the only observable
portion of the trail correspond to the node(s) being cur-
rently visited.

The current work addresses the problem of recovering
trails in complex networks and identifying their origin,
while considering permanent and transient binary marks
in Erd˝os-R´enyi and Barab´asi-Albert models. We start
by presenting the basic concepts in complex networks
and trails and follow by reporting the simulation results
obtained for the permanent and transient marks, with
respective discussions.

II. BASIC CONCEPTS IN COMPLEX
NETWORKS AND TRAILS

An undirected complex network (or graph) G is deﬁned
as G = (V, Q), where V is the set of N nodes and Q is the
set of E edges of the type {i, j}, indicating that nodes
i and j are bidirectionally connected. Such a network
can be completely represented in terms of its adjacency
matrix K, such that the presence of the edge {i, j} is
indicated as K(i, j) = K(j, i) = 1 (otherwise K(i, j) =
K(j, i) = 0). The degree of a node i corresponds to the
number of edges connected to it, which can be calculated
as k(i) = P

N
j=1 K(i, j).

This article considers two theoretical models of com-
plex networks: (a) Erd˝os-R´enyi – ER and (b) Barab´asi-
Albert – BA. The former model (e.g. [1, 8])is constructed
by considering constant probability of connection be-
tween any pair of nodes; the latter is grown by start-
ing with m0 nodes and progressively adding new nodes
with m edges, which are connected to the existing nodes

with probability proportional to their degrees (e.g. [1]).
All simulations considered in this work assume that the
networks have the same number of nodes N = 200 and
average degree hki = 2m = λ/(2(N − 1)), where λ is the
Poisson rate of the ER model.

Trails are henceforth understood as subsets of the
nodes V which are visited during the evolution of random
walks or dilations through the network. We assume that
the trail is being deﬁned by one (in the case of random
walks) or multiple (for dilations) moving agents which
are being marked and observed by some external entity
or individual. We also assume that just one trail is al-
lowed at any time in a complex network and that all trails
are self-avoiding, in the sense that no node can be visited
more than once.

In order to represent trails, we associate two bi-
nary state variables v(i) and s(i) to each node i, i =
1, 2, . . . , N , which can take value 0 (not yet visited) or 1
(visited). The state variables v(i) indicate the real vis-
its to each node but are available only to the moving
agents, the state variables s(i) provide not necessarily
correct information (see the transient cases below) about
the visits and are available to the observer. The struc-
ture of the network is assumed to be known to the ob-
server and possibly also to the moving agent(s). Such
a situation corresponds to many real problems. For in-
stance, in case the trail is being deﬁned as an exploring
agent moves through unknown territory, the agent may
keep some visited places marked with physical signs (e.g.
ﬂags or stones) which are accessible to observers, while
keeping a complete map of visited sites available only to
her/himself. Trails are here classiﬁed as permanent or
transient. In the latter type, the state variables s(i) of
each node i can be reset to zero after being visited. Tran-
sient trails can be further subdivided into: (i) Poissonian,
characterized by the fact that each visited node has a
ﬁxed probability of being observed; and (ii) Evanescent,
where only the last visit(s) are accessible to the observer.
Figure 1 shows the main types of trails considered in this
work.

2

sum of the state variables v(i). The observable extension
of a trail is equal to the sum of the state variables s(i).
Given a trail, we can deﬁne the observation error as being
equal to

ǫ =

1 − δ(v(i), s(i)),

(1)

where δ(a, b) is the Kronecker delta function, yielding
one in case a = b and zero otherwise. Note that this error
indicates how incomplete is the information provided to
the observer. It is also possible to normalize this error
by dividing it by N , so that 0 ≤ ǫ ≤ 1.

In this work, it is expected that the observer try to
recover the original, complete, trail from its observation.
In this case, the observer applies some heuristic in order
to obtain a recovered trail speciﬁed by the set of state
variables r(i). Such an heuristic may take into account
the overlap error between the observable states s(i) and
the recovered values r(i), deﬁned as

ξ =

1 − δ(s(i), r(i)).

(2)

Note that as the observer has no access to v(i), the re-
covery error has to be deﬁned with respect to s(i). The
actual recovery error, which can be used to infer the qual-
ity of the recovery, is given as

ρ =

1 − δ(v(i), r(i)).

(3)

Figure 2 illustrates the three state variables related to

each network node and the respectively deﬁned errors.

N

X
i=1

N

X
i=1

N

X
i=1

FIG. 1: Trails, including those deﬁned by random walks and
dilations, can be subdivided as being permanent or transient.
The latter type can be further subdivided into Poissonian and
Evanescent.

The real extension of a trail is deﬁned as being equal to

FIG. 2: The three state variables associated to each network
node i and the respectively deﬁned errors ǫ, ξ and ρ.

Although the recovery error provides quantiﬁcation of
the overall estimation of the original trail, it may happen
that two or more diﬀerent trails yield the same recovery
error. In this case, it is interesting to consider two ad-
ditional parameters in order to quantify the quality of
the recover: (i) the number M of estimated trajectories

corresponding to the minimum recovery error; and (ii)
the ﬂag f indicating whether the origin of the trail was
correctly identiﬁed (if so, f = 1; otherwise f = 0).

III. CONSIDERED PROBLEMS

Although the problem of trail analysis in complex net-
works is potentially very rich and can be extended to
many possible interesting situations, for simplicity’s sake
we restrict our interest to the four following cases:

Poissonian Trails Deﬁned by Random Walks:
Because the consideration of permanent and evanescent
trails left by random walks are trivial [12], we concen-
trate our attention on the problem of recovering Poisso-
nian trails left by single moving agents during traditional
random walks. By ‘traditional’ it is meant that, at each
stage of the walk, the agent is allowed to choose among
the outgoing edges leading to unvisited nodes with equal
probability (recall that we are considering self-avoiding
networks). Once such a trail is recovered, its source can
be estimated as corresponding to one of its two extrem-
ities. The Poissonian version of the trail is obtained by
deleting with ﬁxed probability γ the respective state vari-
ables s(i). Therefore, only a fraction 1 − γ visited nodes
are available to the observer.

Permanent Trails Deﬁned by Dilations: In such
a situation, one is left with the problem of identifying
the source of the trail. The assumed dilation dynamics
involves the visit to the progressive neighborhoods or hi-
erarchies (e.g. [5, 6, 7, 9]) around the initial node. More
speciﬁcally, in case the trail starts at node i0, the next
stage involves simultaneous visits to all its neighbors, and
so on. Figure

Poissonian Trails Deﬁned by Dilations: In this
case, only a fraction 1 − γ of the nodes visited by the
dilating process is available to the observer. Two prob-
lems are of interest here, namely recovering the trail and
identifying its origin.

Evanescent Trails Deﬁned by Dilations: In this
type of problem, only the currently visited nodes are
available to the observer, which is requested to recon-
struct the trail and infer its possible origin. This corre-
sponds to the potentially most challenging of the consid-
ered situations.

IV. STRATEGIES FOR RECOVERY AND
SOURCE IDENTIFICATION

Several heuristics can be possibly used for recovering
a trail from the information provided by K and s(i). In
this work, we consider a strategy based on the topological
proximity between disconnected nodes.
In the case of
trails left by random walks, the following algorithm is
used:

1. Initialize a list r as being equal to s;

3

FIG. 3: Dilating trail in a simple network. The origin of
this two-hierarchy-trail is the black node, whose immediated
neighbors are marked in gray. The nodes with the crossed
pattern correspond to the neighbors of the neighbors of the
source of the trail. The respective evanescent trail would in-
clude only the crossed nodes. A Poissonian version of this
trail would imply a ratio γ of unmarked (and unobservable)
nodes

2. For each node i in s, identify the node j in r which
has degree smaller than 2 an is closest to i (in
the sense shortest topological path, but excluding
shortest paths with length 0 or 1) and obtain the
list L of nodes linking i to j through the respective
shortest path; update the nodes of L into r.

After all nodes in s have been visited, the recovered

trail will be given by the list r.

Figure 4 illustrates a simple Poissonian random walk
trail, where the black nodes are those in s. The original
trail is composed of the nodes in s plus the gray nodes.
It can be easily veriﬁed that the application of the above
reconstruction heuristic will properly recover the original
trail in this particular case. More speciﬁcally, we would
have the following sequence of linkages:

Step 1: node 1 connected to node 5 through the short-

est path (1, 2, 3, 5);

Step 2: node 2 connected to node 5 (no eﬀect);
Step 3: node 5 connected to node 2 (no eﬀect);
Step 4: node 9 connected to node 5 through the short-

est path (9, 8, 6, 5).

However, in case the dashed edge connecting nodes 9
and 10 were included into the network, a large estimation
error would have been obtained because the algorithm
would link node 9 to node 1 or 2 and not to node 5.

A diﬀerent strategy is used for recovery and source
identiﬁcation in the case of dilation trails, which involves
repeating the dilation dynamics while starting from each

4

FIG. 4: Example of simple Poissonian trail in a network. The
black nodes correspond to s, the original trail included the
black and gray nodes.

of the network nodes. The overlap error is obtained for
each time along each of these simulations. The most
likely recovered trails are those corresponding to the
smallest obtained overlap error. Note that more than one
trail may correspond to the smallest error. Also, observe
that the possible trail sources are simultaneously deter-
mined by this algorithm. Actually, it is an interesting
fact that complete recovery of the trail is automatically
guaranteed once the original source is properly identiﬁed.
This is an immediate consequence of the fact that the re-
covery strategy involves the reproduction of the original
dilation, so that the original and obtained trails for the
correct source will necessarily be identical.

Some additional remarks are required in order to clar-
ify the reason why more than one trail can be identiﬁed
as corresponding to the minimal overlap error in Poisso-
nian dilation trails. Figure 5 illustrates a simple network
with two trails extending through two hierarchies, one
starting from the source a and the other from b, which
are respectively identiﬁed by the vertical and horizontal
patterns. Note that some of the nodes are covered by
both trails, being therefore represented by the crossed
pattern. Now, assume that the original trail was left by
a but that the respectively Poissonian version only in-
corporated the three nodes with thick border (i.e. all the
other nodes along this trail were deleted before presenta-
tion to the observer). Because the three nodes are shared
by both trails, the same overlap error will be obtained by
starting at nodes a or b. It is expected that the higher the
value of γ, the more ambiguous the source identiﬁcation
becomes.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We consider ER and BA networks with N = 200 nodes
and average degree hki = 2. All random walk trails
were Poissonian with real extent equal to 20 nodes and
γ = 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.8. All dilation trails took place along

FIG. 5: Simple illustration of the source of ambiguity in trail
source determination. See text for explanation.

2 hierarchies, while the respective Poissonian cases as-
sumed γ = 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.8. In order to provide statisti-
cally signiﬁcant results, each conﬁguration (i.e. type of
network, trail and γ) was simulated 100 times.

Figure 6 shows the observation (diamond) and recovery
average errors (×), with respective standard deviations,
obtained for the Poissonian random walk trails in ER (a)
and BA (b) networks. It is clear from this ﬁgure that the
recovery error increases linearly with γ. Such a mono-
tonic increase is explained by the fact that the higher
the value of γ, the more incomplete the observable states
become. As the recovery of trails with more gaps will
necessarily imply more wrongly recovered patches, the
respective error therefore will increase with γ. Also, the
adopted recovery heuristic only allowed some moderate
eﬀect for ER models, being almost useless for the BA
networks. The reason for this eﬀect follows from the fact
that the hubs existing in such a model tend to provide in-
correct bypasses to the proper continuations of the trails.
Figure 7 gives the averaged and standard deviation val-
ues of M of detected Poissonian trails corresponding to
the minimal overlap error ξ for ER (a) and BA (b) net-
works. In both these types of models, the average and
standard deviation values of M tends to increase, start-
ing at M = 1, with γ. This eﬀect is a consequence of the
fact that, the more sparse the information about the real
trail, the more likely it is to cover the observable states
s with dilations starting from diﬀerent nodes. Interest-
ingly, the increase is substantially more accentuated for
the ER networks.

The average hf i (and standard deviation) of the ﬂag
f is given in terms of γ in Figure 8 for ER (a) and BA
It is clear from this result that the av-
(b) networks.
erage number of times, along the realizations, in which
the correct source is identiﬁed among those trails corre-
sponding to the minimal overlap error ξ tends to decrease

5

(a)

(b)

FIG. 7: The number of detected trails corresponding to the
minimal overlap error for ER (a) and BA (b) networks.

FIG. 8: The average (and standard deviations) of the ﬂag f
indicating that the correct source has been identiﬁed among
the detected trails with minimal overlap error ξ for ER (a)
and BA (b) networks.

(a) and BA (b) networks. The average of f tends to stay
close to 1 in both cases, for reasons which are similar to
those discussed for the values of M .

(a)

(b)

FIG. 6: The recovery errors ρ obtained with (×) and without
(ﬁlled diamond) the recovery algorithm for ER (a) and BA
(b) networks.

with γ. This is a direct consequence of the fact higher
values of γ imply substantial distortions to the original
trail, ultimately leading to shifts in the identiﬁcation of
the correct source. Except for the higher standard devi-
ations observed for the ER networks, the dependence of
hf i is generally similar for both models.

Finally, we turn our attention to transient dilation
trails of the evanescent category. Recall that in this type
of trails only the current position of the trail (i.e. its bor-
der) is available to the observer. Figure 9 presents the
average and standard deviation values of M obtained,
in terms of γ, for ER (a) and BA (b) networks. Inter-
estingly, unlike in the Poissonian trails, the average of
M tends to remain constant, near 1, for both the ER
and BA cases, though the standard deviation tend to
vary strongly along γ. When compared to the Poisso-
nian counterparts, the increased uniqueness of trail esti-
mation for the evanescent type of trails is an immediate
consequence of the fact that it becomes more unlikely to
match the border of the trail to putative trails emanating
from diﬀerent possible sources. Remarkably, though in-
corporating less information about the original trail than
the respectively Poissonian counterparts, the evanescent
trails tend to allow a more stable (less ambiguous and
degenerate) identiﬁcation of the source of the trail and,
consequently, enhanced recovery of the original nodes.

Figure 10 shows the average and standard deviation of
the values of the ﬂag f in terms of γ obtained for the ER

6

heterogeneous connectivity, a growing number of evi-
dences has suggested that the dynamics of systems un-
derlined by complex networks can be even more interest-
ing and sophisticate than the own connectivity in these
networks (e.g. [2, 3, 10]). Among the many types of
interesting dynamics which can take place on complex
networks, we have the evolution of trails left by moving
agents during random walks and dilations. In particular,
given one of such (possibly incomplete) trails, immedi-
ately implied problems involve the recovery of the full
trail and the identiﬁcation of its possible source. Such
problems are particularly important because they are di-
rectly related to a large number of practical and theoret-
ical situations, including fad and rumor spreading, epi-
demiology, exploration of new territories, transmission of
messages in communications, amongst many others.

The important problem of analyzing trails left in net-
works by moving agents during random walks and dila-
tions in complex networks has been suggested and inves-
tigated by using two heuristic algorithms in the present
article. We considered two of the most important models
of complex networks, namely Erd˝os-R´enyi and Barab´asi-
Albert models, and two types of trails: permanent and
transient. Particular attention was given to transient net-
works. In the case of random walk trails, we investigated
how incomplete Poissonian trails can be recovered by us-
ing a shortest path approach. The recovery and iden-
tiﬁcation of source of dilation trails was approached by
reproducing the dilating process for each of the network
nodes and comparing the obtained trails with the observ-
able state variables.

It has been shown experimentally that both such
strategies are potentially useful for trail reconstruction
and source identiﬁcation. In addition, a series of inter-
esting results and trends have been identiﬁed. First, it
has been found that the shortest path approach works
more eﬀectively for recovery of trails left by random walks
in ER rather than in BA models. Second, it has been
showed that the dilation based approach allows complete
recovery of the trails whenever the respective source is
correctly identiﬁed. The performance of the latter op-
eration has been experimentally characterized in terms
of the number of recovered trails corresponding to the
minimal overlap error as well as the statistics of the
ﬂag indicating that the original source was included in
these detected cases. Such performance studies were con-
ducted for Poissonian and evanescent types of trails. In-
terestingly, the latter allowed more robust identiﬁcation
of sources, and therefore enhanced recovery, which was
identiﬁed to be a consequence of the higher discrimina-
tion allowed by the consideration of the trail borders (as
implied by the evanescent trails) instead of the denser
and more ambiguous Poissonian trails. This ﬁnding is
particularly surprising because the evanescent trails in-
corporate less information about the original trail than
the respective Poissonian counterparts.

It is believed that the suggested methods and exper-
imental results have paved the way to a number of im-

FIG. 9: The average and standard deviations, in terms of
γ, of the number M of detected trails corresponding to the
minimal overlap error obtained for the ER (a) and BA (b)
networks.

FIG. 10: The average and standard deviations, in terms of γ,
of the ﬂag f obtained for the ER (a) and BA (b) networks..

VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Great part of the interest in complex networks has
stemmed from their ability to represent and model in-
tricate natural and human-made structures ranging from
the Internet to protein interaction networks. While it has
become clear that much of the representational power of
complex networks is derived from their structured and

portant related works, including the investigation of the
scaling of the eﬀects and trends identiﬁed in the present
work to other network sizes, average node degrees and
network models. At the same time, it would be interest-
ing to consider graded state variables, more than a sin-
gle trail taking place simultaneously in a network, other
types of random walks (e.g. preferential [10]), as well as
alternative recovery and source identiﬁcation strategies.

One particularly promising future possibility regards the
recovery of diﬀusive dynamics in complex networks.

7

Luciano da F. Costa is grateful to CNPq (308231/03-1)

and FAPESP (05/00587-5) for ﬁnancial support.

[1] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

gary 12, 261 (1961).

[2] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003), cond-

50 (2006).

(2002).

mat/0303516.

[3] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and
D.-U. Hwang, Physics Reports 424, 175 (2006), cond-
mat/0303516.

[4] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. R. V.

Boas (2006), cond-mat/0505185.

[5] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, Computer

Communication Review 29, 251 (1999).

[6] L. da F. Costa, Physical Review Letters 93 (2004).
[7] L. da F. Costa and F. N. Silva, J. Stat. Phys. (2006), in

press, cond-mat/0412761.

[8] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, Acta Mathematica Scientia Hun-

[9] L. da F. Costa and L. E. C. da Rocha, Eur. Phys. J. B

[10] L. da F. Costa, Phys. Rev. E 74 (2006).
[11] In other words, a node can be marked as either already
visited (1) or not (0). Graded states, e.g. indicating the
time of the visit, are also possible but are not considered
in this work.

[12] Permanent trails left by random walks requires no re-
cover, while their source should necessarily correspond
to any of its two extremities. Evanescent trails deﬁned
by random walks are meaningless, as only the current
position of the single agent is available to the observer.

