2D pattern evolution constrained by complex network dynamics

L. E. C. da Rocha and L. da F. Costa∗
Grupo de Pesquisa em Vis˜ao Cibern´etica, Instituto de F´isica de S˜ao Carlos,

Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Av. Trabalhador S˜ao Carlense 400,

Caixa Postal 369, 13560-970, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil

(Dated: 29th September 2006)

Abstract

Complex networks have established themselves along the last years as being particularly suitable and

ﬂexible for representing and modeling several complex natural and human-made systems. At the same

time in which the structural intricacies of such networks are being revealed and understood, efforts have

also been directed at investigating how such connectivity properties deﬁne and constrain the dynamics of

systems unfolding on such structures. However, lesser attention has been focused on hybrid systems, i.e.

involving more than one type of network and/or dynamics. Because several real systems present such

an organization (e.g.

the dynamics of a disease coexisting with the dynamics of the immune system),

it becomes important to address such hybrid systems. The current paper investigates a speciﬁc system

involving a diffusive (linear and non-linear) dynamics taking place in a regular network while interacting

with a complex network of defensive agents following Erd¨os-R´enyi and Barab´asi-Albert graph models,

whose nodes can be displaced spatially. More speciﬁcally, the complex network is expected to control,

and if possible to extinguish, the diffusion of some given unwanted process (e.g. ﬁre, oil spilling, pest

dissemination, and virus or bacteria reproduction during an infection). Two types of pattern evolution are

considered: Fick and Gray-Scott. The nodes of the defensive network then interact with the diffusing

patterns and communicate between themselves in order to control the spreading. The main ﬁndings include

the identiﬁcation of higher efﬁciency for the Barab´asi-Albert control networks.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Hc,89.75.Kd,05.45.-a,02.70.Rr

6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: luciano@if.sc.usp.br

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Complex systems have always motivated intense scientiﬁc research. In the last decades, much

attention has been focused on systems involving strongly interacting agents. More recently, tools

provided by the theory of complex networks have been successfully applied in order to characterize

the structure of many of such systems [1, 2, 3]. Once the system of interest is properly translated

into a network, its structural properties [1, 3, 4, 5] can be calculated and used to characterize and

analyze the system as well as dynamical processes being underlined by the network [1, 6, 7, 8, 9].

However, many dynamics are often related to processes taking place outside the network, possibly

also over some network (the same or different). Such systems have received scant attention from

the complex network community.

The current paper investigates the evolution of dynamical systems underlined by two distinct

(but coexisting) networks, which are henceforth called disease and antidote. Note that this spe-

ciﬁc terminology is adopted here only for the sake of simplicity; the proposed model and dynamics

are valid for many situations (e.g. ﬁre spread, oil spilling, pest control, etc.) other than diseases

and inﬂammatory processes. The ﬁrst system, involving a complex network of the Erd¨os-R´enyi

– ER [10] or Barab´asi-Albert – BA [11] type, senses and interact with the other system, here

represented by a regular network over which linear (Fick [12]) and non-linear (Gray-Scott [13])

pattern formation is allowed to evolve. The Fick diffusion model provides a linear, homogeneous

and isotropic ﬂux of mass from a ﬁxed and inﬁnite source. The Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion

dynamics produces non-static, growing patterns without well-deﬁned sources. Examples of such

situations include forest ﬁres, where the nodes of the complex networks represent ﬁremen, orga-

nized into communicating groups, trying to stop the spreading of the ﬁre, represented by a diffusive

process in the regular network. Other similar situations include oil spilling (oil diffusing along the

regular network, while a complex network of cleaners try to control the process) and the evolu-

tion of a disease along a healthy tissue, with the nodes representing the defensive cells trying to

self-organize in order to control and stop the disease. Observe that the connections estabilished by

the agents of the system are not necessarily physical. In fact, these connections may correspond

to wireless communication, bio-chemical signaling or even intermediate agents (as modeled in

bi-partite graphs), e.g. enzymes in biological networks.

The article starts by presenting the pattern formation models (Fick and Gray-Scott) and pro-

ceeds by describing the interaction between the two involved networks (i.e. regular and complex).

2

The results and discussion follow, and the article is conclude by emphasizing the main contribu-

tions and perspectives for future developments.

II. DIFFUSION MODELS

Over the twentieth century, a number of natural phenomena have been modeled by diffusion and

pattern formation processes. The former type of dynamics includes the established topics of atoms

and molecules diffusion [14] as well as heat diffusion through different materials [15]. In addition,

econometricians have developed diffusion models to forecast the acceptance of new products and

the understanding of their life-cycle [16]. Migration of animals and spreading of organisms and

chemical substances are often investigated in terms of biological diffusion models [17]. More

recently, complex biological and chemical patterns have been reproduced by systems of equations

with diffusive and reactive terms [18]. These models range from simple diffusion equations (e.g.

heat diffusion in a rod) to more sophisticated advection-diffusion (e.g., chemical oceanography)

and reaction-diffusion equations (e.g., chemical and biological patterns). Two of such models are

considered in the present paper in order to represent a reasonably representative range of natural

and artiﬁcial phenomena: Fick diffusion and the Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion models.

The Fick diffusion model of an entity U is represented in eq. (1).

It can be derived from

the continuity equation [12]. The concentration u of U evolve in time proportionally to the

difference between the average value of u around a given point and the value of u at that point.

The proportionality constant is given by the diffusion coefﬁcient Du.

The Gray-Scott model includes the following two irreversible reactions [13]:

where U and V are two reacting specimens and P an inert precipitate. Considering the concen-

trations of specimens U and V , respectively as u and v, these reactions can be expressed by a pair

of non-linear partial differential equations (3) with diffusive and reactive terms.

∂u
∂t

= Du∇2u

U + 2V → 3V

V → P

∂u
∂t

= Du∇2u − uv2 + f (1 − u)

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

∂v
∂t

= Dv∇

2v + uv2

− (f + k)v

where Du and Dv are the diffusion coefﬁcients. The dimensionless feed rate of the ﬁrst reaction

is f ; k is the dimensionless rate constant of the second reaction.

III. DIFFUSION AND DEFENSE DYNAMICS

Both diffusion models were evaluated on a spatial mesh (i.e., a regular network) of 256 by 256

points with periodic boundary conditions. The system size was 3.0 in both directions. Numerical

integrations were carried out by the forward Euler method of the ﬁnite-difference equations re-

sulted from discretization of the diffusion operator. The time step was 1 time unit. The diffusion

coefﬁcients were set as Du = 0.00002 (to both diffusion models) and Dv = 0.00001. A complex

network was used to represent the agents (i.e., nodes) susceptible to be activated by the regular

network. There were two states associated to each node: susceptible or activated. All the nodes

began in the susceptible state. As soon as the disease overcame a threshold at the node spatial

position (x, y), or in case the node is requested to help its neigbors, the node was turned to the

activated state. In case a node is requested simultaneously as a consequence of high activity in the

regular network and by one of its neigbors in the complex network, priority is given to the former

situation. After a while, the node returned to the susceptible state.

Two conﬁgurations of initial conditions were investigated. In the ﬁrst conﬁguration (ﬁg. 1-a),

the entire system was placed in the uninfected state: U(x, y) = 0 (Fick model) and, U(x, y) = 1

and V (x, y) = 0 (Gray-Scott model). The source of the disease, a 11 by 11 square mesh points,

was centered in the middle of the board and set as U(x, y) = 1 (Fick model), and U(x, y) =

0.5 and V (x, y) = 0.25 (Gray-Scott model). In the latter model, the source was perturbed by

adding random values of ±0.01, in order to break the square symmetry. The node were randomly

distributed inside a rectangular area (one third of the board area, with 256 by 85 points) on the

left side of the mesh, at 38 mesh points away from the disease source. Initially, all the node were

set to the susceptible state. This simple arrangement was chosen to create a ”wall” of node and

contributed to the vertical symmetry of the conﬁguration, reducing the number of parameters to

be considered during simulation.

In the second conﬁguration (ﬁg. 1-b), the node were distributed inside the same rectangular

region as before, but the area was centered in the middle of the mesh. The source was broken

4

in two (11 by 6 rectangular mesh points each piece), to correspond to about the same amount of

initial disease. Both sources were symmetrically placed at same distance (i.e., 38 mesh points)

and opposite sides from the nodes ”wall”. This assembly induced a competition for neigbors of

activated node.

Figure 1: Two conﬁgurations of initial conditions for the Fick diffusion model: (a) one source and (b) two

sources. Similar initial conditions were used for the Gray-Scott model, except for the source value.

In the Fick model, a node became activated when the disease overcame a threshold TU (x, y) =

0.4 at the respective node position, i.e., x and y. In the Gray-Scott model, the disease must fell

below a threshold TU (x, y) = 0.6 in order to activate the node. Remember that absence of disease

was represented by U(x, y) = 0 in the Fick model and by U(x, y) = 1 in the Gray-Scott model. As

soon as a node had been activated, all its topological neigbors were requested to help (see ﬁg. 2).

The engaged neigbors were randomly distributed at distance R = 5 fromoi the activated node. In

order to avoid overlapping in the liberation of antidote, a circular area of inﬂuence (with radius

Ri = 5) was deﬁned around every node, so that no other activated node was included within this

area. In fact, we guaranteed a minimum distance (R = Ri = 5) between any two activated node,

ensuring a compact distribution of the node. Once this circle was ﬁlled, the remaining node were

assembled at double the initial radius, and so on (see, for example, the node with a star in ﬁg. 2).

The antidote liberation consisted in keeping for 50 time units an opposite Fick diffusion from all

activated node with Da = 0.00003, and intensity Ia(x, y) = 1 (Fick model) and Ia(x, y) = 10

(Gray-Scott model). The higher intensity is necessary in the latter model because of the fast

moving characteristic of this reaction-diffusion. Observe that the activated time is calculated so as

to liberate enough antidote within the circular area of inﬂuence of the node, reducing the overlap

between different node. Afterwards, the node ceased its activity and returned to the susceptible

5

state. If two node requested help from the same neighbor, the latter chose one of them with equal

probability.

Figure 2: Diagram illustrating a sub-network (a) before and (b) after the node activation. The dark-gray

node was spatially activated by the disease and the four light-gray node were the topologically activated

helpers.

IV. RESULTS

The suggested dynamics involving the interaction between two networks always resulted in

competition between the disease and the antidote, where the winner was ultimately a consequence

of the values chosen for the diffusion and defense parameters. Some parameter conﬁgurations

have been observed to lead to a situation where great part of the effort to control the disease was

wasted. On the other hand, it was possible to ﬁnd parameter conﬁgurations where the defense

always succeed, i.e, the disease vanished. Once such parameters were identiﬁed and adopted, we

compared the role of the network structure in the proposed defense dynamics.

Figure 3 presents snapshots of the evolution of the disease for four cases assuming the one-

source conﬁguration. A set of movies with all the conﬁgurations discussed in this paper can be

viewed at http://cyvision.ifsc.usp.br/∼luisrocha/paper/. The ﬁrst two rows show the evolution of

the Fick diffusion controlled by (a) ER and (b) BA defensive networks, both with 300 node and

hki ≈ 4. In this case, the activation of the ﬁrst node only took place after a relatively long period

of time. More precisely, the ﬁrst activation (not shown in the ﬁgures) occurred about 8200 time

units before the ﬁrst snapshot in the ER case and about 3600 time units in the BA case, but they

6

had little effect on disease control. However, these early activations were important because they

brought some node closer to the disease source. As soon as some node were close enough to the

source, they were activated, triggering a chain activation effect (ﬁrst snapshot in ﬁg. 3-a). The

latter effect occurred because some of the activated node fell at positions where the disease had

already overcame the threshold (second snapshot in ﬁg. 3-a). Hence, the spatially activation of

the node resulted on requests to their own neigbors, and so on. Observe the hub activation in

the BA case (ﬁrst snapshot in ﬁg. 3-b). In this case, many activated node were requested at once

and, consequently, some of them fell very near the source. As a result, their own neigbors (i.e.

the neigbors of the neigbors of the hub) were activated, consequently populating the area around

the source and enclosing it with a considerable amount of antidote (second snapshot in ﬁg. 3-b).

The ER network node took three times longer to achieve the control of the source (third snapshot

in ﬁg. 3-a), i.e. to encircle the source. After this stage of the chain reaction, the source became

enclosed and the node kept on changing their states. Each new spatial activation redistributed the

helpers around the source and even requested node which had never been activated before. The

latter effect, i.e. the activation of the hubs, implied in the fastest decrease in the total quantity of the

disease considering the BA network (fourth snapshot in ﬁg. 3-b). At the last considered snapshot,

the mesh was found to be more free of disease in the BA case, while a substantially more infected

conﬁguration was observed in the ER cases (ﬁfth snapshot in ﬁg. 3-a). After very long times, the

in node ended to converge around the source.

The chosen conﬁguration of the Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion (f = 0.04 and k = 0.064)

generated non-static patterns whose spots and stripes tended to quickly reach the complex network.

Figures 3-c and 3-d, represent the reaction-diffusion evolution constrained by the ER and BA

defensive networks, respectively, with 300 node and hki ≈ 4 each. After the ﬁrst node activation

(ﬁrst snapshot in ﬁg. 3-c,d), a chain reaction was triggered as in the Fick diffusion model. The

node were activated from the center to the boundary of each case (second snapshot in ﬁg. 3-c,d),

a natural consequence of the dynamics rules. Once again, the hub-based characteristic of the BA

network resulted on massive attack against the disease. This type of attack can be identiﬁed by

the great amount of eliminated disease in the reaction-diffusion constrained by the BA network

(second snapshot in ﬁg. 3-d) in contrast to the ER network (second snapshot in ﬁg. 3-c). Because

of the ﬁnite-size and sparse connectivity of both types of network, not enough neigbors nodes were

requested, allowing leakage and subsequent relapsing of the disease. Due to the antidote liberation,

the disease grew in the direction contrary to where the node were placed. Even the small disease

7

t = 55104

t = 55304

t = 55604

t = 60000

t = 80000

t = 50668

t = 50800

t = 51252

t = 60000

t = 80000

t = 3940

t = 4840

t = 6840

t = 7840

t = 8840

t = 3940

t = 4840

t = 6840

t = 7840

t = 8840

Figure 3: Snapshots of the pattern for the four cases: (a) Fick diffusion and ER network, (b) Fick diffusion

and BA network, (c) Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion and ER network and (d) Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion

and BA network. Red (on-line version) represents maximum disease intensity and cyan (on-line version)

no disease. The node are represented by the black dots. Both networks have 300 nodes and hki ≈ 4.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

8

sources of the BA case produced much infection in the mesh after about 3000 time units from the

ﬁrst activation (third snapshot in ﬁg. 3-d). However, the non-massive attacks of ER network nodes

resulted on more isolated patterns and in faster increase of the disease quantity (third snapshot

in ﬁg. 3-c). After the interval of increase (fourth snapshot in ﬁg. 3-c,d), the node retook control,

eliminating many isolated patterns (ﬁfth snapshot in ﬁg. 3-c,d). While the node were eliminating

many isolated patterns (ﬁfth snapshot in ﬁg. 3-c), a uniform spatial node distribution emerged in

the mesh. Conversely, in the presence of few infected areas, the nodes joined efforts to eliminate

them and concentrated themselves on the highest infected regions of the mesh (ﬁfth snapshot in

ﬁg. 3-d). After the complete elimination of the disease, the node remained on their last respective

positions. Observe that the original pattern was modiﬁed at the places where the antidote acted,

specially near the activated node.

The ability of the defensive network to control and stop the disease was veriﬁed to be directly

related to the number of node and to the connectivity of the network. We expected that with

more node being activated, they would more readily gather control and completely eliminate the

disease spreading. A larger and completely connected network would activate all the neigbors at

once and hence fully populate the mesh. Consequently, the disease would fade down quickly until

complete elimination. Such a network would imply high maintenance costs if adopted by natural

(or artiﬁcial) systems. In fact, it is often mandatory to achieve maximum efﬁciency by using the

minimum amount of energy.

In practice, many of the networks which have been investigated

in complex networks research are characterized by low connectivity among their node [1, 2, 3].

Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the efﬁciency of ER and BA networks with small number

of node (relatively to the mesh size) and low connectivity, as in many natural and artiﬁcial real

systems.

Figure 4-a compares the evolution of the amount of disease I for the Fick diffusion model

using the one-source conﬁguration. A total of 100 realizations was considered for each parameter

conﬁguration. The quantity I had a nearly constant growth rate up to a maximum, when the ﬁrst

node were activated. These node triggered a chain reaction, but on the average both networks had

similar efﬁciency in controlling the diffusion in the beginning, i.e., until about 60000 time units.

The time spent to enclose the source was relatively short and, on average, no difference could be

observed between both types of networks. The importance of hub-activation, implying liberation

of more antidote, showed up after 60000 time units, when the diffusion constrained by the BA

network clearly decreased faster than the diffusion observed for the ER network. By comparing

9

ﬁgures 4-a, 5-a and 6-a, it is clear, for both types of networks, that the diffusion dropped down and

reached minimum levels faster when the number of defensive node and the connectivity of them

were increased. However, BA network nodes continued to be more effective against the disease

than the ER network nodes. Interestingly, the minimal level of diffusion was reached at nearly

the same time in both types of networks in the ﬁrst conﬁguration (N = 300 and hki ≈ 4) and

about 20000 time units earlier in the BA case than in the ER case for the other two conﬁgurations

(N = 500, hki ≈ 4 and hki ≈ 6), a consequence of the increased amount of antidote liberated in

the ﬁrst stages of the defense.

The non-uniform patterns generated by the Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion implied richer dy-

namics (ﬁg. 3). Starting from the initial source, non-localized patterns emerged over time, creating

fast moving spots and stripes, so that the nodes had to actively move through the regular network

in order to eliminate the disease. The amount of disease increased in nearly quadratic fashion

with time up to a maximum when the ﬁrst node were activated. Depending on the connectivity

of the defensive network, different evolutions were clearly obtained after the ﬁrst activation. The

reaction-diffusion constrained by networks with hki ≈ 4 (see ﬁg. 4-b and ﬁg. 5-b), resulted on

three stages: (i) a decrease down to a minimum level, (ii) a relapse up to a local maximum level

and (iii) resumption of the decrease until the disease is eliminated. On the other side, the network

with hki ≈ 6 (see ﬁg. 6-b) exhibited two stages: (i) fast and (ii) slow elimination of the disease.

Observe that this phenomenon is not only due to the connectivity, but also depends on the num-

ber of nodes: a higher quantity of simultaneously activated nodes resulted in more antidote and,

consequently, reduction of the disease (i.e. I).

The ﬁrst stage of defense (between 4000 and 6000 time units), was a consequence of hierarchi-

cal neighbors activation [19]. Once the disease had considerably diffused along the space, every

new request contributed to the distribution of more activated nodes radially to the boundary of the

disease. Obviously, some nodes fell on positions without disease. It was also possible to have

some nodes requested by their own requested neigbors. Because of the ﬁnite-size of the network,

on the average the hierarchical number of neighbors had a peak nmax whose value depends on

the number of nodes and on the connectivity of the network [20]. The presence of hubs implied

that nmax is reached faster (in terms of hierarchical levels) in the BA than in the ER network. In

other words, BA node activate more neigbors at once than the ER node in the ﬁrst hierarchical

levels. Therefore, in this stage the disease decreased faster in the BA than the ER case as shown

in Figures 4-b, 5-b and 6-b. As expected, more node and higher connectivity implied on more

10

Figure 4: The amount of disease I in the mesh (y − axis) at time (x − axis). (a) Fick diffusion model and

(b) Gray-Scott model. One source, N = 300 and hki ≈ 4 conﬁguration. The standard deviation is (a) one

ﬁfth and (b) one tenth of the real value.

Figure 5: The amount of disease I in the mesh (y − axis) in terms of time (x − axis). (a) Fick diffusion

model and (b) Gray-Scott model. One source, N = 500 and hki ≈ 4 conﬁguration. The standard deviations

in this ﬁgure corresponds to one ﬁfth of their real values.

effective decrease in the disease intensity.

The second stage of defense (between 6000 and about 8000 time units) was characterized by

leakage of disease from the ﬁrst massive attack (i.e., chain reaction). The requested neigbors,

in the ﬁrst stage, were not enough to control the disease, i.e. although they broke the pattern,

some isolated regions of disease concentration remained which resumed progression. ER net-

works tended to engage less nodes than BA networks, allowing the creation of a larger number of

11

Figure 6: The amount of disease I in the mesh (y − axis) at time (x − axis). (a) Fick diffusion model and

(b) Gray-Scott model. One source, N = 500 and hki ≈ 6 conﬁguration. The shown standard deviation is

one ﬁfth of its real value.

isolated patterns. The latter effect implied more competition for node, postponing the control of

the disease. Figures 4-b and 5-b show that as the number of network nodes was increased, the

relapse peak tended to diminish, i.e., more node resulted in more effective control of the disease.

The relapse peak depended considerably of the height of the disease intensity I at the turning

point [21], i.e.. More distributed patterns implied in more intense relapse and increased difﬁcult

of respective control. The node had to swap their places constantly, following the requests which

depended on the connectivity of the defensive network and not on the node distance in the regular

network. Consequently, these movements of node resulted on vacancies in the regular network,

which allowed the local development of disease. Observe that the effective elimination of disease

by the latter network conﬁguration, i.e., N = 500 and hki ≈ 6 (ﬁg. 6-b), resulted in few remaining

sources. Consequently, the defensive network was capable to control the disease and maintained a

low level of disease prior to its complete elimination.

The third stage (between 8000 time units and the complete disease elimination, see ﬁg. 4-b

and ﬁg. 5-b - absent in the third network conﬁguration shown in Figure 6-b) was a consequence

of the recovery of control by the activated nodes. Recall that due to the initial conditions, much

antidote was liberated in the central area of the board in the ﬁrst stage of defense. Naturally,

the disease grew faster in the antidote-free regions, e.g. opposite to the central area. However,

much antidote was also concentrated in other regions over time. This amount of already liberated

antidote contributed to slowed down the growing rate of the disease. The fact that the node had

12

lesser disease to eliminate contributed to faster elimination of the infection. Interestingly, the long

tail in the graphic in Figures 6-b, 7-b and 8-b was a result of some small steady sources enclosed

by the antidote, these sources was not eliminated but could not grew too. Under this situation, an

equilibrium was ultimately established where any growth of the disease was promptly eliminated

by antidote being liberated by the surrounding node. The latter behavior was also identiﬁed before

the disease elimination in the third network conﬁguration (ﬁg. 6-b).

The competition for node played a fundamental role in the proposed dynamics since help re-

quests implied on depletion of node which were previously activated. If a neighbor j was helping

a node and another node requested help from j, that node changes its position with 50 per cent of

probability. Recall that node request as a consequence of high activity in the regular network has

priority over solicitations by neighboring nodes. As a consequence, only regular network activated

nodes did not change their positions while at this state. Given the degree distribution of ER and

BA networks, we expected improvement in the ability of disease control to be observed for the

ER network. The more uniform distribution of degrees in the former type of network resulted in

a better management of the distribution of node among many disease focuses. Conversely, the

request of many node by hubs tended to unbalance the number of node at each infected area.

We also investigated the evolution of the disease when two sources were established as initial

conditions. Once again, a total of 100 realizations was considered for each parameter conﬁgura-

tion. The resulting shape of the curves was similar to that observed for the one-source conﬁgu-

ration. Naturally, the Fick diffusion with two symmetrically displaced sources resulted in faster

increase in the total amount of disease, so that the threshold was quickly overcame (about 20000

time units before the one-source case - ﬁg. 7-a, ﬁg. 8-a and ﬁg. 9-a). The main strategy against

the Fick diffusion is to enclose the sources, which was obtained as soon as the chain effect was

triggered. Afterwards, the node only had to keep generating antidote in order to completely elim-

inate the already spread disease. A disease decrease rate similar to the one-source conﬁguration

was also expected. Once many node were still in their original positions, there were many sus-

ceptible nodes to be shared between the sources. Another interesting effect occurred when one

of the sources engaged all of the available node. The control of the second source turned out to

be indirect, i.e. due to the antidote generated by the node activated by the ﬁrst source. The latter

effect slowed down the elimination of the disease and increased its minimal level along the last

steps, since the antidote could not reach the source as effectively as could be achieved by node

displacement. This effect implied higher standard deviation of the disease intensity I, specially at

13

its minimal levels.

Figure 7: The amount of disease I in the mesh (y − axis) along time (x − axis). (a) Fick diffusion model

and (b) Gray-Scott model. Two sources, N = 300 and hki ≈ 4 conﬁguration. The standard deviation are

shown at one ﬁfth (a) and one tenth (b) of their real values.

Figure 8: The amount of disease I in the mesh (y − axis) along time (x − axis). (a) Fick diffusion model

and (b) Gray-Scott model. Two sources, N = 500 and hki ≈ 4 conﬁguration. The standard deviation is

shown at one ﬁfth of its real value.

The conﬁguration with higher number of nodes and connectivity (ﬁg. 8-a and ﬁg. 9-a) resulted

on decrease of the efﬁciency in the BA network in the last stage of the defense dynamics. The uni-

form distribution of ER connections resulted on average in a higher efﬁciency in the enclosement

of both sources. Over time, ER better managed the swapping of node between both sources. On

the other hand, hubs requests resulted in a higher concentration of node around one of the sources

14

Figure 9: The amount of disease I in the mesh (y − axis) along time (x − axis). (a) Fick diffusion model

and (b) Gray-Scott model. Two sources, N = 500 and hki ≈ 6 conﬁguration. The standard deviation is

shown at one ﬁfth of its real value.

(e.g., source 1). Consequently, the node were hardly activated due to the disease generated by

the other source (e.g., source 2). The latter effect diminished the elimination rate of the disease

because one of the sources (e.g., source 2) turned out to be indirectly controled, i.e., through the

antidote generated only by the node which were activated by the ﬁrst source (e.g., source 1).

The initial effect of the two sources in the Gray-Scott model was the creation of two large

infected areas on both sides of the wall of nodes. Each of them had approximately the same size

as the area generated by the one-source conﬁguration. The total amount of disease before the

ﬁrst activation was nearly twice as much in the two-sources conﬁguration than observed for the

one-source case. Consequently, when the spots and stripes reached the node, they initially had a

larger amount of disease to eliminate. The same three stages were identiﬁed (ﬁg. 7-b) as in the

one-source case. However, the uniform distribution of neigbors in the ER network favored a better

distribution of the node among the many infected areas. This effect contributed to improve the

defense ability of the network and enhanced its efﬁciency. On the other hand, hubs made massive

attacks against large infected areas. However, they requested many node which were defending

other areas. The same effect contributed to the appearance of the second peak in ﬁgure 4-b. The

increase of network node (ﬁg. 7-b) resulted in better control of the disease constrained by the ER

network. In fact, the second peak (relapse) was absent in this case. Finally, the increase in the

connectivity of the network, resulted in even faster elimination of the disease. In the average, each

request engaged more node, which contributed to the steady reduction of the amount of disease.

15

V. CONCLUSIONS

Many natural phenomena involve interactions between two or more independent sub-systems

with speciﬁc properties (e.g., ﬁremen combating forest ﬁre, infection spreading into a healthy tis-

sue while interacting with defensive cells, cleaners controlling oil spilling, pest control, etc). The

structure of each sub-system can be modeled in terms of a network while the dynamics is repre-

sented by processes occuring in each network (e.g., the movement of agents or pattern formation).

An interaction rule couple both sub-systems in such a way that the evolution of one sub-system

depends on the other one and vice-versa. Since the connections are responsible for the way the

defensive agents communicate, they play a fundamental role in the behavior of such complex sys-

tems, i.e.. they control the dynamical evolution of the agents (i.e, node) which in turn, constrains

the evolution of the dynamical pattern. For example, the speciﬁc way in which groups of ﬁremen

are organized determines whether they will control or not the ﬁre spreading. Similarly, the signal

connectivity of anti-bodies (i.e., complex network) is crucial to efﬁciently activate them to stop an

infection diffusion through a healthy tissue.

To investigate such phenomena, we proposed a dynamical hybrid system composed of a regular

and a complex network. The complex network represented connected defensive agents (i.e., node)

self-organizing to eliminate patterns evolving in the regular network which in turn, represented the

unwanted process. According to the local pattern intensity, the node were activated to liberate an

opposite diffusion aiming to eliminate the pattern. Two pattern growth models were considered:

Fick diffusion and Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion. The defensive agents were connected following

Erd¨os-R´enyi and Barab´asi-Albert models. Two types of initial conditions were investigated: one-

source and two-sources. The role of the network structure was investigated by using three network

conﬁgurations: (i) N = 300 and hki ≈ 4 (ii) N = 500 and hki ≈ 4 (iii) N = 500 and hki ≈ 6.

The main results included the better performance obtained by the BA comparatively to the ER

network to any chosen conﬁguration. The hub-based characteristic of the BA network provided

massive attacks against the disease. Heavy defense was crucial in the beginning in order to fast

accelerate the ratio of decrease of the amount of disease in the regular network. These massive at-

tacks avoided much leakage and emergence of isolated patterns which were present at higher rates

in the ER case. Isolated patterns were responsible for the relapse of the disease. The increase in the

number of network nodes and in their connectivity contributed signiﬁcantly to faster eliminate the

disease. These results have shown the importance of hubs in defensive networks. Hubs contribute

16

to diminish the average path length in the network. Consequently, on average the hierarchical

level with maximum number of nodes can be reached earlier in the BA than in the ER network.

As a result, a more effective defense can be evaluated when the disease is concentrated in a large

area. On the other side, despite of the better efﬁciency of the BA network, the uniform distribution

of nodes in the ER network contributed to efﬁcient defense strategies when many isolated patterns

emerged on different places in the regular network.

Future developments include: (i) investigation of optimal network structure to efﬁciently elim-

inate the pattern, (ii) analysis of how the system properties scale with its size, (iii) study of the

pattern evolution under network perturbations (e.g., node attack or edge rewiring), and (iv) im-

provement of the model by inclusion of other communication protocols taking place in the defen-

sive network, such as broadcasting.

Acknowledgments

LECR is grateful to CNPq for ﬁnancial support. LFC is grateful to CNPq (308231/03-1) and

FAPESP (05/00587-5) for ﬁnancial support.

[1] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Reviews 45, 167 (2003).

[2] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Advances in Physics 51, 1079 (2002).

[3] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Reviews of Modern Physics 74, 47 (2002).

[4] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Evolution of Networks, From Biological Nets to Internet and

WWW (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003).

[5] L. d. F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. R. Villas Boas, Characterization of complex

networks: A survey of measurements (2005), e-print arXiv:cond-mat/0505185.

[6] A. E. Motter, Physical Review Letters 93, 098701 (2004).

[7] N. Madar, T. Kalisky, R. Cohen, D. ben Avraham, and S. Havlin, European Physical Journal B 38, 269

(2004).

[8] L. K. Gallos and P. Argyrakis, Physical Review E 72, 017101 (2005).

[9] J. D. Noh and H. Rieger, Physical Review Letters 92, 118701 (2004).

[10] P. Erd¨os and A. R´enyi, Publicationes Mathematicae 6, 290 (1959).

17

[11] A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).

[12] J. Crank, The Mathematics of Diffusion (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1980).

[13] J. E. Pearson, Science 261, 189 (1993).

[14] H. S. Carslaw and J. C. Jaeger, Conduction of Heat in Solids (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986).

[15] L. Kadanoff, Statistical Physics: Statics, Dynamics, and Renormalization (World Scientiﬁc, Singa-

pore, 2000).

[16] P. Wilmott, S. Howison, and J. Dewynne, The Mathematics of Financial Derivatives: A Student Intro-

duction (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).

[17] P. Okubo and S. A. Levin, Diffusion and Ecological Problems: Mathematical Models (Springer Ver-

[18] P. Grindrod, The Theory and Applications of Reaction-Diffusion Equations: Patterns and Waves (Ox-

lag, Berlin, 1980).

ford University Press, Oxford, 1996).

[19] L. d. F. Costa and L. E. C. da Rocha, European Physical Journal B 50, 237 (2006).

[20] L. d. F. Costa and F. Nascimento, Hierarchical characterization of complex networks (2005), e-print

arXiv:cond-mat/0412761, to appear in Journal of Statistical Physics.

[21] The turning point corresponds to the abscissae of the relative minimum of the disease intensity I,

which tended to occur nearly after 6000 steps.

18

