Modeling Metallic Microstructure Using Moving Finite Elements
Andrew Kuprat and J. Tinka Gammel

Los Alamos National Laboratory
Theoretical Division Special Feature

T-1
Equation of State &
Mechanics of Materials

To attack the general problem of evolution of metal-
lic grain microstructure in 3D, we employ two diﬀerent
methods: using Monte Carlo (MC) techniques to anneal
an eﬀective discrete model on a ﬁxed lattice [1], and using
Gradient Weighted Moving Finite Elements (GWMFE)
to evolve grain boundaries by mean curvature (local ve-
locity proportional to the local curvature) – the simplest
continuum model for grain evolution [2,3]. These two
models reduce to each other in the appropriate limits.
MC has the advantage of computational and algorithmic
simplicity while GWMFE is more easily adaptable to in-
cluding coupled transport ﬁelds such as vacancies and
impurities, and other geometrical and physical complexi-
ties occurring in the simulation of interconnect-via inter-
actions as related to electromigration reliability of sub-
micron integrated circuits. Cross comparisons of the two
calculational techniques will produce the best synthesis of
accurate physical models and computational speed. We
also compare to other methods, such as 2D front-tracking
[3].

As an example of MC grain evolution in the conﬁned
geometry of an Al interconnect on a semiconductor chip,

7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Mean grain size normalized to the total vol-
ume as function of time and number of neighbors N from
Monte Carlo evolution of the Potts model [1] on an un-
structured grid generated by the LANL X3D grid code.
Note growth stagnates for N<5.

1

May 1997

we have evolved an initial microstructure of randomly ori-
ented grains on a ﬁxed lattice using a discrete eﬀective
classical spin model originally developed to model mag-
netic domains (Potts model) [1]. For the ﬁrst few time
steps, MC scales with the number of volume points. Ac-
tivity binning and N-fold or cluster ﬂip MC techniques al-
low signiﬁcant speed-ups in the time evolution [1]. (Incor-
poration of volume information may reduce the amount
of these speed-ups.) We evolved both a regular fcc lat-
tice, where discreteness trapping is not a problem [1], and
unstructured grids resulting from the LANL X3D code,
where we see from Fig. 1 that 5th neighbor interactions
are needed in order to get normal grain growth without
pinning at ﬁnite grain size. We are investigating how var-
ious algorithms for treating further neighbors eﬀect these
MC grain growth statistics. Having the ability to use the
MC code on the X3D generated geometries and meshes
will greatly enhance it’s usefulness as a tool to generate
initial conditions for the GWMFE code.

In the ﬁnite element approach, we represent the metal-
lic grains on an unstructured tetrahedral mesh, generated
using the LANL X3D grid code. We use an implicit im-
plementation of the GWMFE method to move the grain
surface (interface) triangles. Although volumes are de-
formed by the moving grid, the computational complex-
ity of the method is only 2D, not 3D, because GWMFE
moves triangles, not tetrahedra [2]. Fig. 2a shows an
intermediate microstructure, with the average grain size
approximately half the width, resulting from MC evolu-
tion on an underlying fcc grid, which we used as input to
GWMFE. After a few GWMFE time steps, the initially
jagged interfaces between the grains (a consequence of
the ﬁxed lattice used in the MC simulation) have begun
to smooth out under the action of mean curvature mo-
tion (Fig. 2b). In Fig. 2c, GWMFE has evolved the mi-
crostructure to a completely smooth state. Visible in the
interior, due to one of the foreground grains being made
“semitransparent”, are “triple lines”, where three grains
meet at 120◦ angles, and “tetrahedral points” where four

materials meet. On the surface of the geometry, we see
that the boundary constraint leads to several triple points
(analogous to 2D simulations) where three materials meet
at 120◦ angles. All interface angles agree with predic-
tions for mean-curvature motion. However, the under-
lying grid (Fig. 2d) composed of interface triangles is
becoming distorted, and must be reﬁned in some areas
and dereﬁned in other areas. Although the X3D code can
accomplish the necessary topological changes in a semi-
automated manner at this time, we are currently com-
pleting development of a fully-automated topological an-
alyzer called “Graph Massage” which will seamlessly ac-
complish the necessary topological changes for the simu-
lation to continue while preserving grain interfaces. High
level routines detect major topological “events” (such as
the collapse of an entire grain, which is then simulated
correctly by restricting mesh connectivity changes to only
those that suﬃciently preserve material volumes). We
next plan to investigate grain boundary evolution under
isotropic thermal strain starting from initially randomly
oriented grains.

environment of

To add the capability of correctly modeling grain
time-
boundary evolution in the
dependent stress and strain due to unsteady and spa-
tially nonuniform temperature and impurity gradients,
it will be necessary to couple the GWMFE code to a
truly 3D physics code. Currently under development for
this purpose is the Arbitrary Lagrangian Finite Element
(ALFE) code which is a fully-implicit Galerkin Finite El-
ement method for tracking the evolution of fully-coupled
systems of partial diﬀerential equations. The code un-
der development will use the latest “matrix-free” itera-
tive methods, and thus will be highly parallelizable. The
fully-implicit adaptive time-stepping scheme used will al-
low for eﬃcient resolution of phenomena at various time-
scales, while access to the X3D adaptive grid reﬁnement
capabilities will allow ALFE to track phenomena at var-
ious spatial scales as well. Finally we note that ALFE
is an “Arbitrary Lagrangian” code, which means it has
the capability of correctly tracking the evolution of phe-
nomena in an arbitrary, spatially and temporally nonuni-
form, coordinate system. This is crucial for the grain
growth simulation, where volume tetrahedral movement
is “slaved” to the interface triangle movement computed
by GWMFE.

We are also currently evaluating a 3D electromigration
simulation code from Motorola which will take as input
the microstructure from Fig. 2d and predict electromi-
gration reliability for the interconnect being simulated.
These studies will establish whether the additional over-
head of a fully 3D model is justiﬁed, or if 2D simulations
[3] adequately describe the evolved microstructure. We
expect that 3D models will be important in intrinsically
nonplanar geometries, such as vias.

[1] E.A. Holm, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Michigan,
1992, unpublished.
[2] Andrew Kuprat, in the Proceedings of the Fifth In-
ternational Conference on Numerical Grid Generation in
Computational Fluid Dynamics and Related Fields, Mis-
sissippi State University, Mississippi, 1-5 April, 1996.
[3] H.J. Frost and C.V. Thompson, J. Elec. Mater. 17,
447 (1988).

Fig. 2. GWMFE evolved microstructure as a function
of dimensionless time (surface tension of order 1 and spa-
tial dimensions of order 1): (a) t=0: MC model evolved
microstructure used as input. (b) t=0.1: GWMFE has
smoothed the initially jagged interfaces. There is oth-
erwise no signiﬁcant grain boundary motion. (c) t=30:
The smooth boundaries allow use of large timesteps in the
implicit adaptive GWMFE scheme. (d) Underlying sur-
face grid of triangles at the same time as in (c). (Volume
tetrahedra are obscured.) Topological change is neces-
sary at this point.

This figure "9705jtg.fig2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9705041v1

