Growth Models And The Question Of Universality Classes

W. E. Hagston, and H. Ketterl ∗
Department of Applied Physics, University of Hull,
HU6 7RX, U.K.
(January 26, 2014)

8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In the past many papers have appeared which simulated
surface growth with diﬀerent growth models. The results
showed that, if models diﬀered only slightly in their ‘growth’
rules, the resulting surfaces may belong to diﬀerent univer-
sality classes, i.e. they are described by diﬀerent diﬀerential
equations.
In the present paper we describe a mapping of
“growth rules” to diﬀerential operators and give plausibility
arguments for this mapping. We illustrate the validity of our
theory by applying it to published results.

I. INTRODUCTION

During the past few years the kinetic roughening of
surfaces has become a ﬁeld of increasing interest.
In
particular, many papers have appeared concerned with
computer simulations of surface growth [see e.g. Ref. 1].
In general, the surface is characterized by a height h
appropriate to a d dimensional substrate of size L. The
width of the surface w(t, L) at a time t is characterized

(h)2 − (h)

by w(t, L) =
where the bar denotes an av-
erage. If the resulting surface is self-aﬃne it can be rep-
resented by a dynamical scaling law

q

2

w(t, L) ∼ Lαf

t
Lz (cid:19)

,

(cid:18)

(1)

where the function f (x) → constant for x → ∞ and
f (x) ∼ xβ, with β = α/z as x → 0. The unit of time
corresponds to depositing L particles. For models which
do not contain vacancies or overhangs, so-called solid on
solid models (SOS), this means that the average height
h and the time t are identical. The exponents α, β and
z determine which universality class the given model be-
longs to. In the present paper we wish to examine the
implications of some of the standard assumptions in the
theory, and in particular to provide a mapping of pre-
scribed rules of growth to the corresponding diﬀerential
operators appearing in the associated stochastic growth
equations.

II. THEORY AND DISCUSSION

A. Simple growth systems

The dynamical evolution of a surface prior to any
movement of the deposited particles is presumed to be
described by the equation

∂h(x, t)
∂t

= F + η(x, t)

(2)

where η is a noise term with zero mean (i.e. η = 0) and
F is the ﬂux rate of incident particles. For the particu-
lar case, usually considered in the literature, that F is a
constant we obtain h = F t. The last result is only true
if there are no vacancies in the system. A similar result
(but with F replaced by a larger entity, F ′ say) would
also hold, if the vacancy concentration stays constant
over time, i.e. in this case we would again have h = F ′t.
However, for such a situation the starting equation would
not be equal to Eq.(2), and F ′ 6= F , the incident ﬂux. In
general, the form of the starting equation for situations
where vacancies and overhangs occur is far from obvi-
ous and is a problem we will return to later. Before we
can answer such questions it is pertinent to address a far
simpler problem. Namely, what type of deposition pro-
cess is Eq. (2) applicable to anyway? One class of such
processes is the so called SOS models in which particles
are deposited randomly at lattice sites, i.e. a number is
chosen at random and the number of particles at the site
characterized by that number is increased by one. This
is usually referred to as (pure) random deposition (RD)
and corresponds to a constant ﬂux F with a random noise
term η. (We refer to it as pure since the deposited atoms
are not permitted to move.) It is well known that the
interface width for (pure)RD increases indeﬁnitely with
time, i.e. the associated surface is not self-aﬃne with the
consequence that the width itself does not saturate.1

A variant of (pure) RD is to allow the particles to move
after they have been deposited. Two types of movement
are possible. One is ‘horizontal’ movement in which the
height of the moving particle does not change, and the
other is vertical movement in which the height of the
particle does change. With regard to the latter there are
two possible types. One is upward vertical movement in
which the height of the particle increases and the other
is downward vertical movement in which the height of
the moving particle decreases. In order to complete the
rules of growth with regard to the ‘allowed’ moves we
need to specify the conditions under which horizontal or
vertical movement is terminated. We will refer to these
collectively as ‘sticking rules’.

In what follows we will show that what superﬁcially ap-
pear to be ‘trivial’ or ‘obvious’ rules of movement (often
designed for convenience of implementation on a com-
puter) can have extremely subtle implications for the re-
sulting mathematics (and, in particular, the associated
diﬀerential equations purporting to model the resulting

1

surface structure). Furthermore, we will show that the
implications for the mathematics (even for the same set
of rules) can be diﬀerent dependent on the dimensionality
of the surface d′ under consideration.

To be deﬁnite, and also for reasons of simplicity, we
will focus attention initially on a d′ = 1 surface i.e. a
two dimensional structure (d = 2) having a y-axis (the
height) and an x-axis (the coordinate deﬁning the posi-
tion along the surface). Let us consider ﬁrst a variant on
the pure RD model in which we allow both horizontal and
vertical motion (such motion being described under the
general heading of surface relaxation processes). Within
the constraint of SOS, the allowed moves could be the
following. Permit the particle to be displaced horizon-
tally up to a maximum of l lattice sites provided always
If
that there is another particle immediately below it.
such a situation always prevails, then at the end of the
l moves leave the particle where it is. If, on the other
hand, in the course of making these moves the particle
encounters a gap, then allow it to move vertically down
until it reaches a position where there is again a particle
immediately below it at which point the particle move-
ment is terminated. Similarly, if in the course of making
up to l moves, it meets another particle on the same level
all movement is terminated.

It is clear that surface relaxation processes involving
such SOS movements have the eﬀect of changing the noise
term η in Eq (2) to a new value η′. Thus this situation
could be described by the equation

∂h
∂t

= F + η

.

′

Such an equation, although correct, is of little use from
an analytical viewpoint because we do not know the form
of the noise term η′. However the essential characteristic
of SOS movement that we can make use of is that it
leaves the average height of the surface unchanged. In
eﬀect one lattice site loses a particle and another lattice
site (which could be anywhere up to a distance l away
horizontally) gains one. This suggests that we write the
noise term η′ in the form

(3)

(4)

′

η

= η +

∂G
∂x

where G is any (well behaved) function we care to choose.
The reason being that the act of averaging over a ﬁnite
(but large) number of discrete particles is deemed as be-
ing equivalent (in a continuum description) to the act of
integrating and then dividing by the ‘length’ of the re-
gion of integration. Consequently, expressing the change
in the noise as a divergence means (at least in the limit
that the length of the system becomes inﬁnite) that the
average of η′ is zero (just like η). This then gives the
formal result

h = hhi = F t

which is known to be correct for SOS models. (One might
note that, strictly speaking, this result is not ‘exact’ for

a ﬁnite system since the divergence term integrates to
a small but ﬁnite entity. Such ‘errors’ are an inherent
feature of the modelling of ﬁnite systems by continuum
diﬀerential equations). Thus, for SOS models invoking
‘surface relaxation’ we expect the generalisation of the
equation of motion Eq (2), for (pure) RD to be

∂h
∂t

= F +

+ η

∂G
∂x

where G is, at this stage, some unspeciﬁed function. A
computer model of d′ = 1 RD plus surface relaxation was
evaluated by Family2 many years ago. According to this
author the resulting surface was self-aﬃne, i.e. was de-
scribed by Eq (1) with the value of the parameters α, β
and z being independent of the maximum number of lat-
tice sites l over which a particle was allowed to move
horizontally (a point we will return to later). Further-
more Family2 found that the scaling properties of the
surface (or equivalently, the values of α, β and z ) were
consistent with the choice

G = ν

∂h
∂x

with ν constant.

The resulting equation

∂h
∂t

= F + ν

∂2h
∂x2 + η

(5)

(6)

(7)

is well known in the literature and is referred to as the Ed-
wards Wilkinson EW equation.3 It is important to note
exactly how the mapping of the horizontal and vertical
motion onto a diﬀerential operator occurs in Eq (7). The
entity ν ∂2h
∂x2 (with ν positive) corresponds (as shown in
Fig. 1) to a movement of particles from the top of a ‘hill’
to the bottom of it, i.e a ﬂattening of the ‘hill’. In other
words it is consistent with movements both horizontally
and vertically downwards. This manifests itself clearly in
that model of Family2 in which all possible downwards
moves of a particle are allowed to occur, and the parti-
cle moves to the nearest neighbour position only in the
l = 1). The form of the as-
horizontal movement (i.e.
sociated surface is shown in ﬁgure 2. Examination of
the latter shows that the ‘vertical’ separation of nearest
neighbour columns is also small for this situation. Hence
the model leads self-consistently (as a result of the rules
of movement) to a situation where both small horizon-
tal and downward vertical motion is the norm. Thus the
situation were all possible downward motion is permit-
ted to occur with 100 % probability is replicated in the
mathematics by the diﬀerential form ν ∂2h
∂x2 .

This having been established we now return to the
claim by Family2 that the parameters α, β and z are
independent of the magnitude of l. To see that this can-
not possibly be true let us take a d′ = 1 surface of length
L and allow the number of horizontal moves to be up to
a maximum of L. For such a situation it is clear that we

2

will obtain layer by layer growth - the reason being the
following. During the ﬁrst monolayer coverage ‘islands’
will develop of size Li say. With increasing coverage it be-
comes increasingly probable that the next particle added
will be on one of these islands. However, if the particle is
allowed L horizontal moves, it will migrate readily to the
edge of the island, go over the side and then adhere to
the rim of it, thus extending the size of the island. There
are several important results to be deduced from these
considerations. First, if we have a surface of total length
L, then as long as we allow horizontal moves up to some
maximum l say, we may well ﬁnd a series of surfaces be-
longing to the same universality class. However this can
only be true as long as l is less than some fraction of the
total ‘length’ L of the surface. Once l exceeds this frac-
tion, an increasing number of islands will coalesce and we
will very quickly obtain layer by layer growth. In short,
dependent on the size of the system, universality classes
will only be obtained if we permit a limited number of
horizontal movements only. The precise number is ill de-
ﬁned at this stage, but typically in the literature this
number is chosen to be one or two only.

B. Surface Relaxation Involving Vertical Motion
Downwards Only

We consider next vertical motion. To this end we will
examine ﬁrst what is usually referred to in the literature
as (pure) ballistic deposition (BD). In such a model one
imagines the particles being deposited vertically onto a
substrate in a random sequence. The rule of movement is
to move vertically down until the particle meets another
particle. The latter can be either directly underneath or
at the side of the moving particle. In either event move-
ment is then terminated. As is well known, such a model
does have overhangs and vacancies present in it. Let us
pretend for the moment that we do not know the equa-
tion of motion for the evolution of such a surface and
consider instead a variant on this model. Namely (pure)
BD plus surface relaxation. The speciﬁcation of the latter
is the following. If there is another particle immediately
beneath the one under consideration then no movement
occurs. On the other hand, if there is no particle im-
mediately beneath the one under consideration move the
latter down until it comes into contact with either the
substrate or another particle which lies immediately be-
low it. At this point motion ceases. In other words we are
looking at a model of BD plus surface relaxation where
the latter is deﬁned to be vertical movement downwards.
At this stage the extent of the movement downwards is
ill deﬁned. It is obvious that such a model of BD plus
vertical movement downward gives us exactly the same
end result as (pure) RD. Hence the equation of motion
for BD plus vertical movement downward (or pure RD)
is Eq (2). However, the interface width for such a situ-
ation increases without limit and hence, after an inﬁnite

time, the width is inﬁnite. Correspondingly the verti-
cal movements downward must be inﬁnite. What this
shows us is that when we deﬁne the rules of movement
for BD plus vertical relaxation, we have no idea of the
extent of the vertical movement. However, the model,
when evolved self-consistently according to these same
rules, shows us that the motion in the vertical direction
is unlimited. Furthermore, although vertical movement
is occurring, the equation of motion, i.e. Eq (2), does not
contain any diﬀerential operators, the structure itself is
free of vacancies and the surface is not self-aﬃne.

1. Surface Relaxation Involving Vertical Motion Upwards
Only

Let us consider next a variant on this model but this
time involving upward motion. In essence, the previous
model started from (pure) BD allowed vertical motion
downwards and ended up with (pure) RD. We will now
consider the converse, i.e. we will start with (pure) RD
allow vertical motion upwards and end up with (pure)
BD. Thus the rules of motion are the following. Choose
a random number and add one particle to the correspond-
ing lattice point. If the added particle has no neighbour-
ing points occupied by particles to a higher level, then
leave it where it is. On the other hand, if the added par-
ticle ﬁnds higher columns next to it, move it up the side of
the highest such column until it is level with the top most
point. Again at this stage we have no idea of the extent
of the upward motion that will ultimately be involved in
such a model. It is well known of course that (pure) BD,
which is in essence the model we are describing, leads
to a surface width which ultimately saturates. In turn
this means that the upward motion is in fact ﬁnite and
determined by the surface width. Furthermore the asso-
ciated equation of motion for the surface is well known.
However we deliberately refrain from writing it down at
this stage for reasons that will be apparent later. Suﬃce
it to say that our original starting point was (pure) RD
for which the equation of motion is Eq (2). We then in-
cluded what turns out to be ﬁnite upward motion. The
latter can, apparently, be described by adding two dif-
ferential operators to Eq (2). One of these turns out to
have the same form as that given in Eq (7). However the
it is
other cannot be written as a divergence term i.e.
a non-conservative term and is in fact represented by a
non-linear operator.

Another interesting aspect of these two cases is the fol-
lowing. At the outset it is not apparent in either model
just what the extent of the vertical motion is. How-
ever the models themselves evolve in such a way that the
downward vertical motion is unlimited in extent whereas
the upward vertical motion is limited. This shows that
the rules of movement, which appear to be the ‘mirror
image’ of one another, lead to models which evolve in
such a way that up-down symmetry in the growth di-

3

rection is broken, i.e. motion downwards can occur to a
signiﬁcantly greater extent than motion upwards.

2. Surface Relaxation Involving Limited Vertical Motion
Downwards Only

We now wish to consider a third model which, as we
will show, turns out to be a hybrid of the previous two.
When considering horizontal movement, we argued that
the existence of universality classes, associated with sur-
face relaxation processes, was in fact a consequence of the
limited amount of horizontal movement that was permit-
ted to occur. We will now examine the corresponding
question of imposing a limited amount of vertical move-
ment downwards. Thus we begin with a model which
initially starts from (pure) BD and then allows a limited
number of vertical moves downward (i.e. a maximum of
100 lattice spacings say). Initially, when “growing” such
a model on the computer, we will be dealing with essen-
tially pure RD. This is because the interface width in the
early stages of ‘growth’ will be much less than 100 lattice
spacings. Hence initially we will have a SOS pure RD
growth mode in which there are no vacancies present in
the structure. For this stage of the growth the govern-
ing equation will be Eq (2). However, as we know, the
interface width grows without limit for (pure) RD and
a stage will eventually be reached at which the interface
width approaches and then exceeds 100 lattice spacings.
Once this occurs a situation will develop where some of
the downward vertical motion will leave vacancies in the
structure, i.e.
some of the downward motion will not
be SOS. For such a situation we would expect from our
earlier considerations that the form of the equation of
motion would change and, by analogy with the previ-
ous case, we might anticipate non-linear terms to appear
in it. The hybrid nature of the present case from the
earlier viewpoint of describing (pure) BD starting from
(pure) RD is that only some of the particles having higher
columns next to them are eventually moved up, and even
then they are only moved part of the way up the column.
The essential point here is the following. We started
from a model with well deﬁned rules of movement. In
the early stages of growth, the resultant structure was
defect free (i.e. no vacancies) and was described by a
particular equation. However, as a self - consistent result
of the rules of movement, the surface eventually evolves
according to a diﬀerent diﬀerential equation from the one
describing the earlier stages of growth. During the sec-
ond stage of growth defects (i.e. vacancies) do occur in
the structure and the resulting equation would be antic-
ipated to contain non-linear terms.
It is important to
stress that it is not the case that the equation of mo-
tion is the same throughout all the growth, but with
a cross-over from one regime of dominance to another
regime. Rather diﬀerent forms of equation are required
to describe the evolution of the diﬀerent stages of growth.
What is more, if we increased the maximum number of

allowed downwards vertical moves from 100 to say 1000,
the time during which the ﬁrst growth stage was gov-
erned by pure RD would increase correspondingly. This
shows clearly that the “cross-over” time between the two
regimes is governed by the number of vertical moves that
are permitted to occur. Given that (pure) RD is not
a self-aﬃne surface, we can see that in general whether
such a surface (i.e. self-aﬃne) is ever seen to evolve in
a ﬁnite time computer model can be crucially dependent
on the nature and extent of the permitted movements.

C. Heuristic rules

As a prelude to describing the proposed rules we con-
sider a simpliﬁed model which permits some insight into
this question. Consider ﬁrst pure random deposition in
one dimension and the question of the change in the inter-
face width following the deposition one monolayer. The
expression for the ﬁnal height hhif reads

hhif =

(hi + 1 + ηi)] = hhii + 1

(8)

1
L

[
Xi

where hhii is the initial average height and L the ‘length’
of the substrate.

hh2if =

(h2

i + 2hi + 1) + 2ηi(hi + 1) + η2
i ]

Similarly

i.e.

1
L

[
Xi

hh2if ≡ hh2ii + 2hhii + 1 + hη2
i i

(9)

It follows from equations 8 and 9 that the ﬁnal inteface
width wf is related to the initial inteface width wi by the
relation

f = hh2if − hhi2
w2

f = w2

i + hη2
i i

(10)

If we now imagine a relaxation process occuring in-
volving the movement of particles downwards in which a
fraction α of the columns lose a particle and a fraction α
of them gain one, a similar analysis leads readily to the
result

w

2
f = w

2
i + hη

2
i i + 2α + 2α[hhiig − hhiiL]

(11)

where hhiig(hhiiL) is the aveage height of the columns
which gain (lose) a particle. It follows from Eq. 11 that
saturation will occur if the following relation is obeyed.

hhiiL − hhiig =

1
2α

hη2

i i + 1

(12)

Since the noise term (i.e. hη2
i i) is ﬁxed it is clear that it
will be diﬃcult, in general, to satisfy this equation on a
layer by layer growth basis and that in general large ﬂuc-
tuations (or oscillations) about the ‘equilibrum’ width

4

will occur in computer simulations on ﬁnite size sub-
strates. Another important feature that is apparent from
examination of Eq. 12 is the following. If, within a class
of allowed moves, we permit only a fraction β of any given
move to occur, we would replace α by the fraction αβ.
This means that the entity on the left hand side would
increase progressively as we decreased the value of β. In
turn this implies that the corresponding interface width
would increase. Since allowed moves of a given class are
presumed to be associated with a universality class of a
particular type, this implies that the interface width of
the latter can be increased continously simply by reduc-
ing the probability of movement uniformly for all allowed
moves in the class (clearly the range of possible values of
β, although undeﬁned at this stage), can not be over the
entire region 0 ≤ β ≤ 1 since e.g. β = 0 gives the model
involving no relaxation i.e. exactly how small β can be is
not known at this stage. Put alternatively, this suggests
that interface width alone is a poor indicator of the uni-
versality class since the prefactor of the term describing
the time evolution of this width for such a class can be
increased by simply varying the probability of occurence
of all allowed moves in the class. It is revealing to pur-
sue this argument further and to distinguish between the
various types of move contained within a given class of
moves. This can be done on the basis of the co-ordination
number vi of the particle prior to movement. For exam-
ple in case of vi = 1 we could distinguish between the
fraction of particles α1 having a vi = 1 and sat on top
of a column, from the fraction α2 having a vi = 1 and
sat next to a step edge. Yet again these are to be distin-
guished from the fraction α3 of particles having a vi = 2.
For generality we will assume that the fraction of parti-
cles are α1 up to αn. (In terms of the previous notation
(α = α1 + α2 + . . . + αn). The generalisation of Eq. 11
can be readily shown to be

f = w2
w2

i + hη2

i i + 2α + 2{α1[hhiig − hhiiL}+

+ α2[hhii2g − hhii2L] + . . . + αn[hhiing − hhiinL]} (13)

where, in an obvious notation hhiing(hhiinL) is the av-
erage height of type n-columns that gain (lose) a parti-
cle. Once again the eﬀect of reducing all the αi by the
same factor β will give the immediate generalisation of
the result described earlier. However it is clear from the
present equation thath the functional form of the equa-
tion remains unchanged only when all the αi are reduced
in this way. As opposed to this, if the αi are all reduced
by diﬀerent factors βi, then the functional form of the
equation is changed. For such a situation it is far from
obvious whether the resultant class of moves belongs to
the same universality class as for β = 1 (or for a uniform
value of β ). In the extreme case that βi = 0 for some
of the moves, but exists for others, we would clearly an-
ticipate a diﬀerent universality class. However, even for
the latter situation, it is not clear whether increasing the

βi values which were previously identically zero to ex-
tremely small values would change the universality class
type, i.e. the stability of the latter to small changes of
movement type is not presently known. These questions
will be investigated in subsequent publications.

D. Heuristic arguments for the diﬀerential operators
appearing in the stochastic diﬀerential equation

To date, by considering simple “growth” mechanisms,
we have argued that the question of the nature of the
evolving surface, and the precise form of the stochastic
equation describing its evolution, is determined essen-
tially by the nature and extent of the ‘horizontal’ and
‘vertical’ movements that are permitted to occur. In the
present section, based on our considerations in the pre-
vious one, we will present simple heuristic arguments for
the form of the diﬀerential operators to be associated
with such movements.

Before proceeding to detail it is informative to consider
the range of possibilities that could occur for an evolv-
ing surface. Clearly the associated interface width could
either saturate or not. For the latter, there are then
two possibilities - namely that the associated stochastic
growth equation contains diﬀerential operators or it does
not. If on the other hand the interface width does satu-
rate it is almost certain that the associated growth equa-
tion does contain diﬀerential operators. The question is
which ones?

We form next a set of rules for which diﬀerential oper-
ators are to be associated with which situation (see also
Figure 1 ). In the latter, following conventional wisdom,
we have considered four types of diﬀerential operators
∂2
only namely ( ∂h
∂x2 ( ∂h
∂x4 (As should
be clear from Fig 1 the eﬀect of such operators on a ‘sym-
metric hill’ is symmetric - hence as long as the prescribed
rules of deposition and surface relaxation possess this left
- right symmetry one would expect such even order op-
erators).

∂x )2 and ∂4h

∂x )2, ∂2h
∂x2 ,

Our suggested rules (based simply on heuristic argu-
ments and arising from a consideration of the diﬀerent
types of interfaces that evolve from simple growth mod-
els) are the following.

For surfaces whose interface width saturates;

• Movement vertically downwards (further reﬁne-

ment of these rules are presented later)

1. employ the operator +ν ∂2
∂x2

if the rules of
movement include all possible downward mo-
tion

2. employ the operator −κ ∂4
∂x4

if the rules of

movement exclude certain vi = 2 particles.

• Movement vertically upwards (further reﬁnement

of these rules are presented later)

5

1. employ the operator +γ( ∂h

∂x )2 if the rules of
movement involve the creation of vacancies
in the structure and correspond to maximal
movement (with 100 % probability) of parti-
cles up the side of columns but do not involve
movement to the top of the adjacent column
(i.e. non SOS models).
2. employ the operator λ ∂2

∂x )2 if the rules of
movement do not involve the creation of va-
cancies in the structure and correspond to the
movement of particles (with 100 % probabil-
ity) upward from the top of one column to the
top of an adjacent column (i.e. SOS models).
Note that upwards motion can, on its own,
destabilize a surface, and for SOS relaxation
needs to be conterbalanced by an equivalent
downwards motion ‘current’

∂x2 ( ∂h

For surfaces whose interface width does not saturate
there are at least two distinct possibilities. Either the
growth equation does not contain diﬀerential operators
(e.g. pure RD or, as we will argue in a later paper, pure
shading) or it contains an instability. To see how the lat-
ter could arise consider the case of pure RD plus (limited)
surface relaxation (i.e. the deposition process modelled
by Family.2) As described earlier, the evolution of this
surface in d′ = 1 is described by Eq (7) and snapshots
of this surface at successive stages of growth is shown in
ﬁgure 2, i.e we have a smooth surface, in this instance,
in which the rules of movement lead, self-consistently, to
a succession of small horizontal and small vertical down-
ward motions.

Suppose we have a video ﬁlm of the evolution of this
surface as it runs forward in time and (unknown to the
viewer) we instantly stop the forward running of this ﬁlm
and instead run it backwards. Mathematically the re-
sulting unwinding of the surface relaxation process cor-
responds to time reversal and is equivalent to replacing
t by −t in Eq (7). One consequence of the latter is that
we would replace ν by −ν in Eq (7). Clearly this would
now correspond to small vertical upward motion (see ﬁg-
ure 2 for a graphic illustration of this) Eventually such
upward motion would ‘undo’ the eﬀects of the previous
surface relaxation processes and we would in eﬀect move
back towards pure RD - i.e. the surface would become
unstable as far as saturating the interface width was con-
cerned. In other words, the existence of a term −λ ∂2h
∂x2
could destabilize the surface growth.
(This result can
also be readily established via the formal machinery of
the group renormalisation approach.) It should be clear
from these considerations that reversing the sign of the
four diﬀerential operators we discussed earlier could also
result in instabilities in the associated diﬀerential equa-
tion. Hence one has to examine carefully the permitted
movements in order to ensure that such movements do
not ultimately lead, via self-consistency, to terms in the
associated diﬀerential equation which make its solution

unstable. An example of this is given later.

E. Comparison Of The Heuristic Rules With
Computer Models Reported In The Literature

Most computer models reported in the literature per-
mit the deposited particle one move in the horizontal
direction. Which direction the particle moves vertically
is also determined by the rules of movement. In certain
cases both upward and downward motion is permitted,
whereas in other cases upward (or downward) motion
only is permitted. For many cases reported in the liter-
ature the rules governing surface relaxation (which are
almost invariably of the SOS type) are not even stated
in this simple form, rather, in an eﬀort to mimick the
physics, the rules are deﬁned in terms of the coordina-
tion number vi of the particle to be moved. In particlular,
when vi ≥ 2 movement is not usually permitted unless
in those situa-
the coordination number increases - i.e.
tions where the coordination would be the same at the
end of the movement as it was prior to movement (the
so-called ‘tie’ situation) no movement is permitted. On
the other hand where the coordination number increases
via the movement, the rule could either be

(a) move to the nearest neighbour site that increases

the value of vi

or (b) move to the nearest neighbour site which gives the

maximum value of vi.

The subtlety of these rules is that, because of the topol-
ogy of the surface, (a) and (b) deﬁne diﬀerent types of al-
lowed moves in diﬀerent dimensions. For example Kotrla
et al.4 have shown that both (a) and (b) lead to vertical
motion downwards in d′ = 1. However in d′ = 2 rule (a)
leads to predominantly downward motion whereas rule
(b) leads to both downward and appreciable upward mo-
tion. (Further clariﬁcation of this point in quantitative
terms will be given in a subsequent paper.)

We will now consider various models from this view-
point. For the well known d′ = 1 case studied by Family2
the ‘tie’ situation occurs frequently for vi = 2 and the
rules of movement permit the particle to move down only
under these circumstances. Correspondingly the result-
ing interface is smooth - hence we are led to the conclu-
sion that if all moves downward are permitted (including
the tie situation) the resulting interface is smooth and
the associated relaxation downward is described by the
operator ν ∂2h
∂x2 . As opposed to this it is found that if,
in d′ = 1, moves downwards for the tie situation when
vi = 2 are forbidden (Figures 6 and 5) and downward mo-
tion only allowed if the coordination number is increased,
we obtain a rough interface (Fig 3 whose properties are
described by the operator −κ ∂4h
∂x4 .5,6 The generalisation
of these same rules to d′ = 2 presents an interesting sit-
uation in that for case (a) discussed above, this leads to

6

predominantly downward motion only and is hence de-
scribed by the operator −κ ∂4h
∂x4 .5,6 However for case (b),
signiﬁcant upward motion is also allowed which is essen-
tially SOS in nature. The coresponding interface (which
is rough) will be described by an equation in which the
downward motion is represented by the operator −κ ∂4h
∂x4
whereas the upward motion is decribed by λ ∂2
∂x )2.
This is in agreement with what is found in the computer
modelling4,7. Hence we here have a situation where the
equation of motion, because of the permitted rules of
movement, is governed by the following equation

∂x2 ( ∂h

∂h
∂t

= F − κ

∂4h
∂x4 + η

in d′ = 1, but is described by the equation

∂h
∂t

= F − κ

∂4h
∂x4 + λ

∂2
∂x2 (

∂h
∂x

)2 + η

(14)

(15)

in d′ = 2. We would argue, in contrast with statements
in the literature4 that this is not an unusual situation in
physical terms but is merely a consequence of the fact
that the permitted movements in d′ = 1 and d′ = 2 are
diﬀerent. Equally we would argue1 that it is not true
that the equation of motion is the same in d′ = 1 and
d′ = 2 but that the crossover has not been seen in d′ = 1.
Consider next the model of Lai and Das Sarma8 These
authors considered a similar model in d′ = 1 to the one
of Wolf and Villain5 and Das Sarma and Tamborenea.6
However in the case of tie with vi = 2 the particle was
moved to the nearest neighbour site with the smaller
height diﬀerence (i.e. sometimes upwards and sometimes
downward motion occurred). For the case of a tie with
vi = 1 the particle was allowed to diﬀuse to higher bond-
for d′ = 1 downward mo-
ing within a distance l - i.e.
tion could also occur for this situation. Given that these
rules are all SOS type and that signiﬁcant ammounts of
upward and downward motion is occurring, we would ex-
pect that the resulting equation is the fourth order non-
linear equation appearing in Eq (15) . This is precisely
what Lai and das Sarma8 found.

In view of our earlier comments we would envisage an
interesting situation developing if, in the case of tie with
vi = 2, the downward motion was forbidden and only
the upward motion was allowed. For such a situation
we could anticipate an instability could develop in the
system since such upwards motion is not counterbalanced
by an equivalent downwards motion ‘current’. This is
precisely what happens in the model of Park et al.9 where
no saturation of the interface width was found for systems
larger than a critical size.

As a ﬁnal example we consider model 1 in d′ = 2 of
Kotrla et. al.4. This model is a straightforward gener-
alisation of the Wolf and Villain5 and Das Sarma and
Tamborenea6 model in that if there is a neighbouring
site with a higher value of vi the particle relaxes to it
in either the upward or the downward direction In the

case of a tie the particle remains where it is. It should
be obvious from our previous discussion that once again
we have SOS relaxation in the upward and the downward
direction and that the fourth order non linear equation
i.e. Eq (15) will describe the evolution of the surface.
This is exactly what Kotrla et al.4 found.

Given the success of our heuristic rules we could then
invert the problem of predicting the permitted move-
ments to be associated with a given stochastic diﬀerential
equation. Consider for example the equation

∂h
∂t

= F + ν

∂2h
∂x2 + γ(

∂h
∂x

)2 + η .

(16)

The terms F + η imply that the initial deposition is
SOS and is pure RD. The second term represents move-
ments horizontally and vertically downwards. Similarly
∂x )2 implies relaxation vertically upwards with
the term ( ∂h
the particle being moved up the side of a column until it
was (at most) placed level with the top of it (i.e. non SOS
vertical motion which creates vacancies in the system).
In summary, we would expect that Eq (16) represented
RD following by surface relaxation in which the process
involves both downward and upward motion. It comes
as somewhat of a surprise therefore to ﬁnd that Eq (16)
is apparently applicable in d′ = 1, to pure BD. If any-
thing we might have expected that the latter corresponds
to (pure) RD followed by limited vertical movement up-
wards along the side of higher (neighbouring) columns -
i.e. one might have expected (pure) BD to have obeyed
the equation

∂h
∂t

= F + γ(

)2 + η .

∂h
∂x

A possible resolution of this paradox would be (as in-
dicated by our previous reasoning) that (pure) RD fol-
lowed by surface relaxation in both the downward and
upward direction is mathematically indistiguishable from
pure BD. This problem will be addressed in future publi-
cations. For the present we note that, in graphical terms,
what we are suggesting is that the situation depicted in
Fig 7 (a) (appropriate to ‘pure’ BD) is ultimately physi-
cally indistinguishable from that depicted in Fig 7 (b) i.e.
RD plus surface relaxation in the downward and upward
direction. Alternatively we could argue that we need
both a downward and an upward ‘current’ of particles to
obtain a stable interface.

III. CONCLUSION

In the present paper we have presented arguments to
the eﬀect that observation of universality classes in com-
puter simulations of surface growth is a consequence of
the limited number of horizontal moves that a given par-
ticle is permitted to make. (Conversely, if the particle
was permitted to make any number of moves up to a max-
imum value determined to be equal to the substrate size,

7

∗

current address:
Institut f˝ur Experimentelle und Ange-
wandte Physik, Universit˝at Regensburg, 93040 Regensburg
, Germany, hermann.ketterl@physik.uni-regensburg.de

1 L. Barabasi and H. E. Stanley, Fractal Concepts In Surface

Growth,(Cambricge University Press 1995).

2 F. Family, J. Phys A 19, L441, (1986).
3 S. F. Edwards and D. R. Wilkinson, Proc. Royal Soc. Lon-

don 381, 17, (1982).

4 M. Kotrla A.C. Levi and P Smilauer, Europhys Letters 20,

25, (1992).

5 D. E. Wolf and J. Villain, Europhysical Letters 13, 389,

(1990).

(1990)

(1992).

(1991).

6 S. Das Sarma and P. Tamborenea, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 325,

7 S. Das Sarma and S. V. Ghaisas Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3762,

8 Z. W. Lai and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2348,

9 H. Park A. Provata and S. Redner Journal of Physics A 24,

L1391, (1991).

then interface roughness would never develop in the sense
that growth would be of the layer by layer type). Given
the limited number of horizontal moves, the universal-
ity class is then determined by the nature and extent of
the vertical motion. This ultimately is controlled by the
rules associated with the coordination number vi taken
in conjunction with the dimensionality d′ of the surface.
In particular rules may be deﬁned which in eﬀect allow
for example

(a) downward motion only in both d′ = 1 and d′ = 2
or (b) downward motion in d′ = 1 but both downward

and upward motion in d′ = 2

∂x2 or ∂4h

If downward motion only is allowed and this is of the
SOS type (i.e. a particle has another particle beneath it
at the beginning and end of the motion) then the degree
of the diﬀerential operator i.e. ∂2h
∂x4 is determined
by the rules of motion associated with the tie situation. If
motion downwards is allowed in the tie situation, then the
second order diﬀerential operator is appropriate since this
corresponds to all moves downwards being permitted. On
the other hand, if motion downwards is forbidden in the
tie situation, then the fourth order diﬀerential operator
is applicable since such an operator is appropriate for
the situation where only a fraction of the moves that can
occur are permitted to occur. Similarly if both upward
and downward motion is allowed in the tie situation the
fourth order equation is again applicable.

In the case of upward motion the form of the diﬀer-
ential operator will again be determined by the rules of
movement. If the upward motion is of the SOS type then
it is decribed by the operator ∂2
∂x )2. However if it is
non SOS type (i.e. it leads to the creation of vacancies)
it will be described by the operator ( ∂h

∂x2 ( ∂h

∂x )2.

We have shown, in the body of the text, that these
heuristic rules are consistent with many standard results
reported in the literature. Furthermore we have pre-
sented arguments to show that the nature and extent
of the permitted vertical motion can lead to situations
where, for example, initially the growth contains no va-
cancies and is described by a particular diﬀerential equa-
tion. However, eventually vacancies will enter the struc-
ture (as a result of the rules of movement) and subse-
quently for this situation, the growth is described by a
diﬀerent diﬀerential equation.

Further substantiation for the validity of these argu-
ments will be presented in a series of subsequent papers
where we will also address the question of the apparent
anomaly of the equation of motion for pure BD, and the
question of the universality class when the βi is chosen
to have diﬀerent values for the diﬀerent move types i.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

H. K. is supported by the Hans B˝ockler Stiftung and

is very grateful for his support.

8

0.0

 

0

   

20

40

60

80

100

0.0

 

0

   

20

40

60

80

100

1.0

)
x
(
h

0.5

1.0

0.5

 

2

)
x
d
/
h
d
(

0.5

0.0

−0.5

−1.0

1.0

0.5

0.0

1.0

0.5

0.0

 

2

x
d
/
h
2
d

 

4

x
d
/
h
4
d

2

)
x
d
/
h
d
(
 

2

x
d
/
2
d

x

x

x

x

x

−0.5

 

0

   

20

40

60

80

100

−0.5

 

0

   

20

40

60

80

100

∂x2 removes particles form the top of the hill and redis-

FIG. 1. Diﬀerential Operators acting on the function h(x)
∂x )2 increases the particles at the side of the ‘hill’ but does

(+ ∂h
not ‘transport’ them to the top of it.
+ ∂2h
tributes them to the sides and bottom of it.
− ∂4h
∂x4 is similar to the previous case.
+ ∂2
∂x2 ( ∂h
top of it.

∂x )2 moves particles from the base of the hill to the

Ref. 1)

9

 

0

   

20

40

60

80

100

FIG. 2. Surface for RD plus relaxation after Family (taken

from Ref. 1)

FIG. 3. Surface of the Wolf and Villain Modell (taken from

FIG. 4. Growth rules of Family

FIG. 5. Growth rules of Das Sarma and Tamborenea

FIG. 6. Growth rules of Wolf

a

b

FIG. 7. Diﬀerent Rules With The Same Result

10

