9
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
3
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬀect of shape anisotropy on transport in a
2-d computational model: Numerical
simulations showing experimental features
observed in biomembranes

Gauri R. Pradhan a,3 Sagar A. Pandit a,1,2 Anil D. Gangal a,4
V. Sitaramam b,4

aDepartment of Physics, University of Pune, Pune 411 007, India
bDepartment of Biotechnology, University of Pune, Pune 411 007, India

Abstract

We propose a 2-d computational model-system comprising a mixture of spheres
and the objects of some other shapes, interacting via the Lennard-Jones potential.
We propose a reliable and eﬃcient numerical algorithm to obtain void statistics.
The void distribution, in turn, determines the selective permeability across the
system and bears a remarkable similarity with features reported in certain biological
experiments.
PACS: 07.05.Tp, 46.70.Hg, 87.16.Ac
Keywords: Void statistics, Algorithm, Biological membranes, Transport

1 Introduction

The problem of packing of spheres plays a major role in the modeling of many
physical systems and has been studied for more than four decades. Some of the
early examples [1–3] of the computer simulations of hard sphere liquids sug-
gest the existence of a ﬁrst order freezing transition. The problem of packing

1 e-mail: sagar@prl.ernet.in
2 Author for correspondence, Present address: Physical Research Laboratory,
Navrangpura, Ahmedabad 380 009, India, Ph. No: 91-79-6462129, Fax: 91-79-
656502.
3 The work was partially funded by DBT(India) and CSIR(India)
4 The work was funded by DBT(India)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

18 January 2014

of spheres in two and three dimensions is of great interest. Recent investiga-
tions of such systems have focused on the study of the statistical geometry
of the dense sphere packing. Such studies are important in the understand-
ing of physical properties of many systems, composed of a large number of
particles [4–13].

In this context we pose a question, with the motivation of studying the trans-
port across a two dimensional structure of packed circular disks (membrane),
how does the packing change when the membrane is doped with objects of
various shapes and sizes (e.g. spheres arranged rigidly in the form of rods of
diﬀerent lengths, L, T, X shapes etc. See Fig. 1) ? In particular we investigate
the eﬀect of these shapes on the distribution of “voids”. The “anisotropy” in
the interaction potential appears to play a key role in the induction of large
voids.

As pointed out by Sastri et. al. [11], no algorithm is available to compute
void statistics for the packing of shapes other than spheres. In this paper we
propose a simple numerical algorithm to compute void statistics. Unlike a
probabilistic algorithm (Monte Carlo), our algorithm is based on digitization
and cell counting.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we describe the model system.
A deﬁnition of “void” and an algorithm to compute void statistics is given
in Sec. 3. The results of numerical simulations and their relevance in lipid
biomembranes is discussed in Sec. 4 We summarize the paper in Sec. 5.

The conﬁguration space of the model system (membrane) is considered as
a two dimensional space with periodic (toroidal) boundary conditions. The
constituents of the membrane are disks and dopants.

2 The model system

2.1 The basic model

We consider a membrane made up of only circular disks interacting pairwise
via the Lennard-Jones potential:

VLJ (rij) = 4ǫ

N

N

X
i=1

X
j=i+1

(cid:16)(

σ
rij

)12 − (

σ
rij

)6

(cid:17)

2

where, rij is the distance between the centers of the ith and jth disks, σ deter-
mines the range of hard core part in the potential and ǫ signiﬁes the depth of
the attractive part. We choose the number of disks such that the area occu-
pied by these disks is around 70%, which is less than that of the close-packed
structure but still large enough to produce some closed voids.

2.2 The model with impurities

Further, we consider diﬀerent shape anisotropic combinations (dopants) con-
sisting of κ number of circular disks. We treat each of these combinations as
a single rigid cluster. Several such dopants (impurities) are considered. Fig.
1 shows some of these impurities. The interaction between impurities and
disks or other impurities is obtained by superposing the Lennard-Jones po-
tential corresponding to each of the constituent disk in impurity. We consider
a membrane with circular disks and impurities amounting to 10% of the total
number of circular disks, such that the area occupied is still 70%.

These membranes are brought to an equilibrium conﬁguration by the Monte
Carlo method [14] at a ﬁxed temperature. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show typical equi-
librium conﬁgurations of membrane without and with impurities respectively
(The impurity in Fig. 3 is a rod shaped structure made up of ﬁve disks (Rod5),
in general Rodκ for rod made up of κ number of disks). In the simulation the
temperature is so chosen that kBT < 4ǫ, where kB is the Boltzmann constant.
The equilibrium is conﬁrmed by simulated annealing.

3 Voids and an algorithm for void statistics

Now, we introduce the notion of an “r-void” in a membrane which is suitable
for the description of transport across membrane and further, propose an
algorithm to compute statistical quantities such as the number of voids in the
membrane, the void size distribution etc.

We deﬁne an r-void as a closed area in a membrane devoid of disks or impu-
rities, and big enough to accommodate a circular disk of radius r. Of course
an r-void is also an r′-void if r′ < r.

3.1 The algorithm to compute void statistics

To compute the void statistics for r-voids, we increase the radii of the disks
forming the membrane (including the disks in the impurities, without altering

3

the positions of the centers) by an amount r (See Fig. 4). Then we digitize the
entire membrane on a suitably chosen grid. The choice of grid size depends
on the required accuracy and the typical sizes of the voids. The digitization of
circular disks is carried out by the Bressenham circle drawing algorithm [15],
modiﬁed to incorporate periodic boundary conditions. The number of voids
in the membrane are computed by ﬂood ﬁlling [15] every closed void with a
diﬀerent color and then counting the number of colors. The sizes of various
voids can be obtained by counting the number of grid-cells ﬁlled by the cor-
responding color. The termination of ﬂood ﬁll algorithm is ensured since the
voids are closed. In our case this condition is automatically fulﬁlled in view of
periodic boundary conditions.

The geometric algorithms involving Vorenoi polygons [11–13] are mathemat-
ically satisfying and are expected to be accurate but would take much more
computation time. On the other hand, as pointed in [11], the probabilistic
algorithm is time eﬃcient but requires a very large sample size while dealing
with small voids.

Our algorithm is quite eﬃcient as well as suitable even when there are small
voids in the membrane. We further note that the algorithm can be easily gen-
eralized to higher dimensions. We expect that the eﬃciency of this algorithm
can be further enhanced by the use of a multi-resolution adaptive grid.

4 Results and Discussions

The simulations were carried out for membranes of diﬀerent compositions. Fig.
5 shows the graphs of the number of r-voids as a function of r measured in
units of the radius of the constituent disks. Curve (a) shows void distribution
in absence of impurities. Curve (b) represents the void distribution in a mem-
brane with rod shaped impurities made up of two disks (Rod2). Curves (c) and
(d) show the void distribution with L shaped impurities made up of four disks
(L4) and rod like impurities made up of four disks (Rod4) respectively. It is
clear from the graph that the number of large voids increases with an increase
in the anisotropy of the impurity. Even though L4 and Rod4 occupy the same
area, Rod4 being more anisotropic induces a larger number of big voids than
L4. This fact can be clearly seen in Fig. 5, curves (c) and (d). Moreover, the
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 demonstrate the fact that the voids are mostly found in the
neighborhood of the centers of anisotropy. Further, to strengthen our claim
that the shape anisotropy induces voids, we compared two membranes. In one
case we added rod impurities made up of two disks (Rod2) in the assembly
of circular disks, and in the other case we added circular impurities of larger
size, which occupied the same area as that of Rod2. We found that the former,
being more anisotropic, induced larger and more numerous voids as compared

4

to the later, though they occupied the same area.

Thus, reduced to the bare essentials, the anisotropy in the interaction potential
of the constituents, is seen to be responsible for the induction of large voids. If
studied from the perspective of energy minimization, as the potential becomes
direction dependent, some positions of the constituents are preferred over the
other positions. This induces large voids.

These features show a remarkable similarity with the observations reported
in certain biological experiments [16]. These experiments deal with the size-
dependent permeation of non-electrolytes across biological membranes. The
eﬀect of doping on the permeation of large molecules was studied in these
experiments. The liposome-membrane used in these experiments was made
up of mixture of two types of lipids (cardiolipins and phosphatidylcholine)
in a proportion 1:10. The understanding of the enhancement of transport in
doped membranes needed an algorithmic statement. The ingredients at the
algorithmic level involved:

(1) consideration of the structure as a strictly 2–dimensional assembly
(2) the cross sections of molecules being considered as constituents
(3) interactions of the constituents via the Lennard Jones potential
(4) permeating particles being considered as hard disks.

The features reported in [16] bear a similarity with the simulation carried
out with Rod2 as dopants. We have already seen in numerical simulations
(See Fig. 5, curves (a) and (b)) that the Rod2 type of impurities induced large
voids in the membrane. The appearance of larger voids naturally enhances the
transport of large particles. Thus an enhancement in the transport of large
non-electrolytes like glucose, which was observed in the lipid mixture [16] can
possibly be understood using our simple approach.

Further, apart from the biological implications, the model discussed is gen-
eral enough to incorporate the studies of transport in various weakly bound
granular media.

5 Summary

We have presented a numerical algorithm to compute the entire void statistics
in a two dimensional membrane consisting of circular disks and dopants. We
found that our simple two dimensional model has shown results consistent with
features observed in a complex biological system. The biological justiﬁcation
of the model and implications are discussed elsewhere [17]. Nevertheless, our
model and the proposed numerical algorithm which ﬁnds out the void statistics

5

in the model system are quite general and use no speciﬁc features of any
particular system. Therefore it is possible to use this method eﬀectively in
various systems from diverse disciplines. The result that the shape anisotropy
induces large voids in mixtures may be used as a tool for achieving controlled
selective permeability across such a system by merely changing the shape of
the constituents of the mixture.

Acknowledgments We thank N.V. Joshi, Deepak Dhar, H. E. Stanley and
S.S. Manna for fruitful discussions.

References

[1] B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright J. Chem Phys. 27 (1957) 1208

[2] B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright Phys. Rev 127 (1962) 359

[3] W. G. Hoover and F. H. Ree J. Chem. Phys 49 (1968) 3609

[4] R.J. Speedy, Molec. Phys. 80 (1993) 1105

[5] H. Reiss.and A.D.Hammerich J. Chem. Phys. 90 (1986)6252

[6] S. Torquato, B. Lu and J. Rubinstein Phys. Rev. A 41 (1990) 2059

[7] S .Torquato Phys. Rev. E 51 (1995) 3170

[8] M. D. Rintoul and S.Torquato Phys. Rev. Lett 77 (1996) 4198

[9] H. Reiss, H. M. Ellerby and J. A. Manzanares J. Chem. Phys. 100 (1996) 5970

[10] R. J. Speedy,J. Phys.:Condens. Matter, 9, 8591

[11] S. Sastri, D. S. Corti, P. G. Debenedetti and F. H. Stillinger Phys. Rev. E 56

(1997) 5524

[12] S. Sastri, D. S.,Debenedetti,F. H. Stillinger Phys. Rev. E 56 (1997) 5533

[13] S. Sastri, T. M. Truskett, P. G. Debenedetti , S. Torquato, and F. H. Stillinger

Mol. Phys. 95 (1998) 289

[14] Monte Carlo methods for Statistical Physics, Edit. K. Binder, (Springer Verlag)

(1979)

[15] R. A. Plastock, G. Kalley, Theory and Problems of Computer Graphics,
Schaum’s outline series, (McGraw-Hill Book Company, Singapore), (1986)

[16] J. Mathai and V. Sitaramam J. Biol. Chem. 268 (1993) 15442

[17] G. R. Pradhan, S. A. Pandit, A. D. Gangal, V. Sitaramam (in preparation)

6

Figure captions:

Fig. 1 Some examples of the impurities.

(a) Rod type impurity made up of three circles (Rod3).
(b) L type impurity made up of four circles (L4).
(c) X type impurity made up of ﬁve circles (X5).
(d) T type impurity made up of ﬁve circles (T5).

Fig. 2 Typical equilibrium conﬁguration of a membrane without impurity.
There are 556 circular disks used to form this membrane. The number is so
chosen that the area occupied is ≈ 70%. The σ in Lennard-Jones potential
is chosen as two times the radius of a circular disk.

Fig. 3 Typical equilibrium conﬁguration of a membrane with impurity of type
Rod5. The amount of impurity is 1:10 proportion. All the other parameters
are same as Fig. 2.

Fig. 4 Figure describes the algorithm to compute void statistics. The radius
of a circular disks (black disks) is R. These disks are expanded by amount
r, so that the region V is the void for particle of size r.

Fig. 5 The graphs of number of r-voids as a function of r measured in units

of the radius of the constituents.
Curve a The void distribution without impurities.
Curve b The void distribution with impurity of type Rod2.
Curve c The void distribution with impurity of type L4.
Curve d The void distribution with impurity of type Rod4.
Typically 10000 Monte Carlo steps are thrown away as thermalisation, and
it is ensured that total energy is minimized. The curves are averaged over
100 Monte Carlo steps.

7

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 1

(GRP & SAP et al.)

Fig. 2

(GRP & SAP et al.)

Fig. 3

(GRP & SAP et al.)

R

r

V

V

Fig. 4

(GRP & SAP et al.)

s
d
i
o
v

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

d

c

b

a

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

r

R

Fig. 5

(GRP & SAP et al.)

