Modelling Meso-Scale Diﬀusion Processes in

Stochastic Fluid Bio-membranes

H. Raﬁi-Tabar1

∗ and H.R. Sepangi2

1 Computational Nano-Science Research Group, Centre for Numerical Modelling and Process Analysis,

School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of Greenwich,

Woolwich Campus, Wellington Street, London SE18 6PF, UK.

2 Department of Physics, Shahid Beheshti University, Evin, Tehran 19834, Iran.

February 2, 2008

∗Corresponding author. H. Raﬁi-Tabar, School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University of

Greenwich, Woolwich Campus, Wellington Street, London SE18 6PF, UK. Tel: (+44)0181-3318548. Fax:

(+44)0181-3318665. Email: h.raﬁi-tabar@gre.ac.uk

9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

The space-time dynamics of rigid inhomogeneities (inclusions) free to move in a ran-

domly ﬂuctuating ﬂuid bio-membrane is derived and numerically simulated as a function

of the membrane shape changes. Both vertically placed (embedded) inclusions and hori-

zontally placed (surface) inclusions are considered. The energetics of the membrane, as a

two-dimensional (2D) meso-scale continuum sheet, is described by the Canham-Helfrich

Hamiltonian, with the membrane height function treated as a stochastic process. The

diﬀusion parameter of this process acts as the link coupling the membrane shape ﬂuc-

tuations to the kinematics of the inclusions. The latter is described via Ito stochastic

diﬀerential equation.

In addition to stochastic forces, the inclusions also experience

membrane-induced deterministic forces. Our aim is to simulate the diﬀusion-driven ag-

gregation of inclusions and show how the external inclusions arrive at the sites of the

embedded inclusions. The model has potential use in such emerging ﬁelds as designing

a targeted drug delivery system.

PACS 87.20- Membrane biophysics.

PACS 34.20- Interatomic and intermolecular potential.

PACS 87.22BT- Membrane and subcellular physics.

2

Amphiphilic molecules, such as lipids and proteins, can self-assemble themselves into a variety

of exotic structures in an aqueous environment [1]. Computer-based simulation of the dynamics

of these structures forms an interesting research area in the computational statistical mechanics

of bio- material systems. One such structure is the phospholipid bilayer which represents the

generic structure of all bio-membrane systems, both natural and artiﬁcial. These membranes

can have thicknesses of only few nano-metres but linear sizes of up to tens of micro-metres,

and can therefore be regarded as highly ﬂexible, ﬂuid-like, 2D continuum sheets embedded in

a three-dimensional space.

Thermal ﬂuctuations can induce shape ﬂuctuations and shape transformations in mem-

branes. For example, in the so-called budding transition [2] a spherical vesicle transforms into

a prolate ellipsoid as the temperature increases. There is also the possibility that the spherical

geometry becomes oblate, producing a shape similar to the biconcave rest shape of a red blood

cell.

Bio-membranes regulate the recognition and transport processes to and from the interior

of the cells, as well as between the cells, forming a barrier which all external particles arriving

at the cell must cross. They contain a variety of integral (embedded) inhomogeneities, such as

proteins and other macromolecules [3], that penetrate the thickness of the membrane and act

as transport channels. We shall refer to these as the M-type inclusions. These inclusions are

mobile and can freely diﬀuse across the membrane. Their presence, however, force the bilayer

to adjust its thickness locally so as to match the thickness of the hydrophobic region of these

inclusions [4, 5], causing local deformations in the membrane geometry. The perturbations

produced in the membrane shape due to these local deformations give rise to both short-

3

range and long-range membrane-induced indirect forces between the inclusions. These forces

act in addition to direct Van der Waals and electrostatic forces between the inclusions. The

Long-range forces originate from the perturbations associated with the long wavelength shape

ﬂuctuations [6], whereas the short-range forces are associated with the local deformations in the

immediate vicinity of the inclusions [4]. These membrane-induced forces between the inclusions

play a far more signiﬁcant role, viz the direct molecular interactions, when the length scales

involved are comparable to the size of the membrane. In addition to this mode of deformation,

a membrane can also deform due to the tension at the amphiphilic molecules-water interfaces.

This tension results in a change in the overall surface area of the membrane. A third mode

of deformation also exists and this is associated with the bending elastic-curvature property

of the membrane which distinguishes it from a sheet of simple ﬂuid dominated by surface

tension [2]. Accordingly, two models to study the inclusion-induced local deformations have

been developed. In the ﬁrst model, the membrane energy is taken to consist of a contribution

from the molecular expansion/compression due to the change in the thickness at the inclusion

boundary, and also a contribution from the overall change in the surface area. Using this

model, it is shown that [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] the inclusion- induced deformations cause exponential

decays in the thickness of the membrane, extending from the inclusion-imposed value to the

equilibrium thickness value, as shown schematically in Fig.1 for two rod-like inclusions. In the

second model [4, 12], the contribution of the membrane bending property is taken into account

in the energy term, and it is found that this signiﬁcantly aﬀects the perturbation proﬁle at

the inclusion boundary as well as modifying the membrane- induced interactions. Evidently,

an object supported by surface tension would have a diﬀerent dynamics than one supported

4

by the bending elasticity of the surface [13].

In addition to the M-type inclusions, membranes can also carry inclusions that lie on their

surfaces [14] as shown schematically in Fig.2. These surface inclusions can represent objects

that have arrived at the membrane from the outside and are therefore referred to as external

inclusions. We shall refer to these as the S-type inclusions.

At the meso-scale, i.e. when the detailed molecular architecture of the membrane can be

subsumed into a background 2D sheet, the free elastic energy of a symmetric membrane is

described by the Canham-Helfrich Hamiltonian [15, 16]

where

=

Z

H

{

d2σ√g

σ0 + 2κH 2 + ¯κK

,

}

K = det(Kij) =

H =

Tr(Kij) =

1
2

1
2 (cid:18)

1
R1

1
R1R2
1
R2 (cid:19)

,

.

+

(1)

(2)

are respectively the Gaussian and mean curvatures of the sheet, R1 and R2 are the two principle

radii of curvature of the sheet, σ0 is the surface tension, κ is the bending rigidity, ¯κ is the

Gaussian rigidity, g is determinant of the metric tensor and σ = (σ1, σ2) is the 2D local

coordinate on the sheet as opposed to the coordinates on the embedding space. The last term

in (1) is, by Gauss-Bonett theorem, an invariant for closed surfaces implying that the dynamics

of a membrane is not inﬂuenced by this term if its topology remains ﬁxed. In what follows,

we concentrate on membranes with ﬁxed topology and drop this term. We then have

=

Z

H

d2σ√g

σ0 + 2κH 2

.

}

(3)

{

5

The study of a membrane whose free energy is described by (3) is facilitated by considering it

to be nearly ﬂat, i.e.

its thickness to be much smaller than its linear size L. This is indeed

what we mean by a meso-scale model of a membrane. We therefore take the membrane to be

almost parallel to the (x1, x2) plane, regarded as the reference plane. The position of a point

on the membrane can then be described by a single-valued function h(x1, x2) representing the

height of that point. This simpliﬁcation is achieved by writing the Hamiltonian (3) in the

Monge representation [17] which gives for the mean curvature

2H =

g−3/2[∂2

1h(1 + (∂2h)2) + ∂2

2h(1 + (∂1h)2)

2∂1h∂2h∂1∂2h] ,

(4)

−

−

∂
∂xi , i = 1, 2. We assume that the area of the membrane can ﬂuctuate without

where ∂i ≡
constraint by setting σ0 = 0 in (3). Consequently, using (4), the Hamiltonian (3) to leading

order in derivatives of h becomes

H0 =

κ
2 Z

d2x(

2h)2.

∇

This is the Canham-Helfrich Hamiltonian in Monge representation, expressed in terms of the

height function of the membrane. It is the expression that we employ to describe the energetics

of the membrane.

Employing a statistical mechanics based on (5) only, and ignoring the contributions from

the expansion/compression and interfacial energies, the potential energy function

(5)

(6)

was constructed [6] to describe the membrane-induced temperature- dependent long-range

forces between a pair of disk shape M-type inclusions that can freely tilt with respect to each

V T
M M (Rij) =

kBT

−

12A2
π2R4
ij

,

6

other. Another function was also constructed for long-range interaction between two S-type

inclusions [14]

V T
SS(Rij, θi, θj) =

cos2[2(θi + θj)] ,

(7)

kBT

−

i L2
L2
j
128R4
ij

where A = πr2

0 is the area of an M-type inclusion of radius r0, kB is the Boltzmann constant,

Rij is distance between the centres of mass of two inclusions i and j, Li and Lj are the lengths

of two S-type inclusions making the angles θi and θj respectively with the line joining their

centres of mass (see Fig.2) and T is the membrane temperature. It is evident that both of

these membrane-induced potentials are attractive and fall oﬀ as R−4 with the distance. These

expressions are derived for rod-like inclusions that are assumed to be much more rigid than

the ambient membrane so that these inclusions can not move coherently with the membrane.

The only degrees of freedom for the rods are rigid translations and rotations while they remain

attached to the membrane.

So far, the modelling of bio-membrane dynamics decorated with inclusions has been mainly

concerned with constructing potential energy functions such as those given in (6) and (7).

An interesting problem, however, would be to use this information to simulate the space-

time behaviour of inclusions in a membrane described by (5) and undergoing stochastic shape

ﬂuctuations. This is the problem that we address in this paper. This type of simulation can

establish a direct link between the randomly changing membrane shape on the one hand and the

inclusion dynamics on the other. In such a simulation, the thermodynamic phase behaviour

of inclusions, such as their temperature-dependent aggregation, can be directly computed.

This phase behaviour plays a crucial role in the functional specialisation of a membrane [4].

Furthermore, information on the capture rate of the S-type inclusions, which could represent

7

external drug particles, at the sites of the M-type inclusions can be obtained as a function of the

changes in the environmental variables such as the ambient temperature. This type of meso-

scale simulation when coupled with the Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation of membrane

patches near the inclusions at the nano-scale [18], can produce a seamless multi-scale model of

the entire environment for many bio-molecular processes, starting with the arrival of external

inclusions at the cell, their diﬀusion in the membrane, and ﬁnally their molecular docking at

the site of the embedded inclusions.

To proceed, let us consider a 2D bio-membrane described by (5) containing both the M-

type and the S-type inclusions. To make the membrane a stochastically ﬂuctuating medium,

we treat the height function in (5) as a stochastic Wiener process with a Gaussian distribution,

whose mean and variance can be written as [19]

h(x1, x2; t)

= 0 ,

i

h

h(x1, x2; t) h(x1, x2; t)

=

[h(x1, x2; t)

h(x1, x2; t)

= 2Dt

i

h

− h

h

]2

i

i

(8)

(9)

where D is the diﬀusion constant associated with the height ﬂuctuations at the local position

(x1, x2) and represents the measure with which random ﬂuctuations propagates in the local

geometry. Such random height changes would cause a roughening of the membrane surface on

molecular scales, and this has been observed in NMR experiments [20].

Assuming that this is the only stochastic process present in the membrane, it is then

reasonable to suppose that this stochastic dynamics is communicated to the inclusions as well,

and that their ensuing random motions are contingent only on these ﬂuctuations. This implies

that the mathematical point representing the centre of mass of an inclusion coinciding with

the membrane point (x1, x2) would also experience the same ﬂuctuations and would diﬀuse

8

with the same diﬀusion constant. To derive an expression for D, based on (5), we start with

the static height-height correlation function obtained from (5). This is given by [2, 21]

h(q; 0)h∗(q′; 0)
i

h

=

kBT
κq4 (2π)2δ(q

−

q′) ,

h· · ·i

where

is the thermal averaging with respect to the Boltzmann weight, exp(

−H0/kBT ),
and q is the wave vector of magnitude q. The corresponding dynamic correlation function can

be obtained [2] by writing

h(q; t) = h(q; 0)e−γ0(q)t ,

giving

ing, is deﬁned as

[17, 21] to

h(q; t)h∗(q′; t)

=

kBT
κq4 e−2γ0(q)t(2π)2δ(q

−

q′) ,

i

h

where the damping rate, γ0(q), reﬂecting the long-range character of the hydrodynamic damp-

γ0(q) = κq3/4η ,

and η denotes the coeﬃcient of viscosity of the ﬂuid membrane. In real space, (12) transforms

h(x1, x2; t)h(x1, x2; t)

=

h

kBT
4πκ

i

L2e−2γ0t ,

where L is the length of the membrane. This is the equal-time correlation function for mem-

brane ﬂuctuations. A similar model of an active ﬂuctuating membrane in which the vertical

displacements of the membrane satisfy a Langevin equation in the q space has also been pro-

posed [22], and is its shown that a term similar to the static version of (12) contributes to

the correlation function which also contains a contribution from non-equilibrium ﬂuctuations.

The latter is in the form of a q−5 term which dominates at long distances. Comparison of (9)

9

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

and (14) yields the desired result

D = (cid:16)

kB T
4πκ (cid:17)

L2e−2γ0t
2t

.

(15)

It should be emphasised that the association of a diﬀusive process with the membrane height

function, and the resulting diﬀusion constant, is not analogous to the usual model of a diﬀusion

process in which, for example, a particle diﬀuses through a medium, such as a ﬂuid. Rather,

what is suggested here is that the magnitude of a mathematical function representing the

height of a mathematical point in the membrane is subject to random stochastic variations,

and the diﬀusion constant is a measure of this variation.

When the M-type inclusions are present they produce exponentially decaying local defor-

mations in the membrane geometry (see Fig.1). Correspondingly, the correlation function can

be modiﬁed by a multiplicative exponential factor to

h(x1, x2; t)h(x1, x2; t)

h

iN I = e−r0/R

h

h(x1, x2; t)h(x1, x2; t)

,

i

(16)

where r0 is the radius of an M-type inclusion, R + r0 is the radius of the circular region

around the inclusion with its centre coinciding with that of the inclusion, and NI stands for

near inclusion. It is evident that outside this region the exponential decay of the proﬁle is

negligible. Accordingly, within this circular region of radius R + r0, the diﬀusion constant is

also modiﬁed to

Dm = De−r0/R.

(17)

This equation implies that when the centre of mass an S-type inclusion enters a circular region

of radius R + r0 its diﬀusion coeﬃcient goes over to Dm and progressively approaches zero as

the boundary of an M-type inclusion is approached. We can ascertain, as a ﬁrst approximation,

10

that this is how an M-type inclusion interacts with an S-type inclusion.

In our simulations, the equations motion of both the S-type and the M-type inclusions are

represented by the diﬀerential equation of the the Ito stochastic calculus [19]

dr(t) = A[r(t), t] dt + D1/2dW(t).

(18)

This equation describes the stochastic trajectory, r(t), of the centres of mass of the inclusions

in terms of a dynamical variable of the inclusions, A[r(t), t], which is referred to as the drift

velocity, and a term, dW(t), which is a given Gaussian Wiener process with the mean and

variance given by

dW(t)

= 0

h

i

dWi(t)dWj(t)

= 2δijdt.

h

i

(19)

Equation (18) applies to each dimension of the motion. The Ito equation predicts the increment

in position, i.e. dr(t) = r(t + dt)

r(t), for a meso-scale time interval dt as a combination of

−

a deterministic drift part, represented by A[r(t), t], and a stochastic diﬀusive part represented

by D1/2dW(t) and superimposed on this drift part. This equation resembles the ‘position’

Langevin equation describing the Brownian motion of a particle [23]. The position Langevin

equation corresponds to the long-time (diﬀusive time) conﬁgurational dynamics of a stochastic

particle in which its momentum coordinates are in thermal equilibrium and hence have been

removed from the equations of motion. Since we are interested in diﬀusive time scales as well,

we can re-write (18) as

dr(t) =

F(t) dt + D1/2dW(t) ,

(20)

D
kBT

11

where F(t) is the instantaneous systematic force experienced by the i-th inclusion and is

obtained from the inter-inclusion potentials, given in (6) and (7), according to

Fi =

RiV (Rij).

− Xj>i ∇

We implemented (20) for our 2D simulations according to the iterative scheme[24]

X(t + dt) = X(t) +

FX(t) dt + √2Ddt RG
X

Y (t + dt) = Y (t) +

FY (t) dt + √2Ddt RG
Y

D
kBT

D
kBT

where RG

X and RG

Y are standard random Gaussian variables chosen separately and indepen-

dently for each inclusion according to the procedure given in [23], and FX, FY are the X

and Y components of the force F. For the S-type inclusions, we treated the angles in (7) as

independent stochastic variables described by

θ(t + dt) = θ(t) +

D

kBT L2 τ (t) dt +

1
L

√2Ddt θG ,

where τ is the torque experienced by an S-type inclusion and is given by

τi =

− Xj>i

∂V T (Rij, θi, θj)
∂θi

,

and θG is the angular counterpart of RG

X and RG
Y .

In the numerical simulations, recently reported in their broad outlines [25], we use a square

membrane with L = 40µm on its side. The other parameters used were set at κ = 10−19 J

and η = 10−3 J sec m−3 [2]. These values correspond to the condition in which the bending

mode of the membrane is important. From these data the damping coeﬃcient, γ0, in the real

12

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

space of the membrane, can be obtained from (13). The simulation temperature was set at

T = 300◦ K, and the correlation (delay) time, t, over which the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in (15)

was calculated, was set at t = 10−4sec. These data gave D = 2.6

10−9 m2sec−1, which is in

×

close agreement with the value of D

4.4

10−9m2sec−1 obtained at the molecular level via

≈

×

an MD simulation of a fully hydrated phospholipid dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC)

bilayer diﬀusing in the z-direction [26]. To justify our choice of the correlation time, t = 10−4

sec, we recall that the time scale of a stochastic particle, tD, of mass m is usually determined

from the relation [27]

(25)

(26)

Since tD is normally of the order of 10−9sec, then for the criterion of long-time dynamics,

employed in our model (cf (20)), to be justiﬁed the correlation (diﬀusive) time scale, t, in (15)

has to satisfy the condition [27]

For our calculated value of D and our choice of the inclusion mass m = 10−12µg, corresponding

to an inclusion of length Li = 0.1µm, we obtained a value of tD = 0.6

10−9sec, showing that

×

our choice of the correlation time was appropriate to satisfy the condition in (26). The radius

of an M-type inclusion was set at r0 = 0.01µm, and the inclusions were all equal in length.

The stochastic trajectories of the inclusions were obtained in a set of ﬁve simulations. The

simulation time step, dt, in (22) was set at dt = 10−9sec, and each simulation was performed

for 4

106 time steps, i.e for a mesoscopic interval of 4000µsec. The total number of inclusions

×

considered was 36, consisting of 13 S-type and 23 M-type.

tD =

m D
kB T

tD.

t

≫

13

In the ﬁrst simulation, we computed the random motions of the S-type inclusions in a

membrane devoid of the M-type inclusions. This was done in order to observe the details

of the drift-diﬀusion motion over mesoscopic time scales. Figure 3 shows the stochastic X-Y

trajectories of a sample of 4 S-type inclusions plotted on a micron scale up to the end of the

simulation time. In addition to the drift motions, represented by the second terms in (22),

the random Brownian-type variations, emanating from the membrane shape ﬂuctuations, are

superimposed on this drift motion and are clearly visible over the mesoscopic length and time

scales. Figure 4 shows the snapshots of a small patch of the membrane with both the S-type

(white spheres) and the M-type (black spheres) inclusions. In this, and subsequent ﬁgures, the

solid spheres refer to the centres of mass of the rod-like inclusions. In the initial state the outer

M-type inclusions were regularly positioned, whereas the inner ones were randomly distributed.

The S-type inclusions were all distributed completely at random. Figures 4a to 4c refer to the

simulation in which the M-type inclusions were pinned to the membrane, i.e. were static, and

only the S-type inclusions were mobile, and ﬁgures 4d to 4f refer to the simulation in which

both the M-type and the S-type inclusions were mobile. The initial states in both simulations,

ﬁgures 4a and 4d, were the same. The snapshots were obtained from dynamic simulations,

akin to a MD simulation, covering the entire simulation time interval. These snapshots were

recorded at 2

10−3 sec intervals, with ﬁgures 4c and 4f referring to the ﬁnal states reached

×

at the conclusion of the simulations after 4

106 time steps. The animation of a complete

run showed clearly the stochastic motions of the inclusions, and how the S-type inclusions

approached the M-type inclusions and were captured at the site of the M-type inclusions. An

examination of ﬁgure 4 shows that for the case of dynamic M-type inclusions, a larger number

×

14

of the S-type inclusions were captured at the M-type inclusion sites, i.e. the number was some

4 times higher than in the static case at the same temperature. We adopted the method of

counting an S-type inclusion as a captured inclusion when its centre of mass coincided with

that of an M-type inclusion. The numerical algorithm then transformed the colour code of that

S-type inclusion from white to black. Figures 4e and 4d also show some diﬀusion-driven local

aggregation of the M-type inclusions. The capture of the S-type inclusions can be viewed as

the ﬁrst stage in the molecular docking process which will eventually transfer these inclusions

into the interior of the cell.

To examine the membrane response to temperature changes, two of the simulations were

performed at diﬀerent temperatures. Figure 5 shows the snapshots of these simulations at

T = 100◦K (a to c) and at T = 350◦K (d to f). Figures 5d to 5f clearly show that both the

number of captured inclusions and the aggregation of the M-type inclusions were aﬀected by

these temperature diﬀerences, as can be seen by comparing ﬁgures 5c and 5f.

To sum up, although many dynamical aspects of membrane-like surfaces have been ad-

dressed in the past [28], it is only relatively recently that attention has focused on the dy-

namics of membranes with inclusions. To our knowledge no computer-based simulation of this

dynamics has been reported so far.

In this paper we constructed a meso-scale model of a

generic bio-membrane based on the Canham-Helfrich curvature-energy formalism. We treated

the height function of the membrane as a stochastic Wiener process whose correlation function

provides the relevant diﬀusion constant describing the membrane ﬂuctuations. Two types of

inclusions, one mimicking the internal embedded type and the other the external ﬂoating type,

are carried by this membrane. These inclusions experience the same stochastic ﬂuctuations as

15

those experienced by the membrane itself, resulting in the transformation of their determinis-

tic (drift) space-time dynamics into a stochastic Langevin-type dynamics described by the Ito

stochastic calculus. A set of dynamic simulations, resembling the standard MD simulations,

were performed to investigate the phase behaviour of these inclusions. In addition to stochastic

forces, these inclusions also experience deterministic interactions described by inter-inclusion

potentials varying as 1/R4 with their separations. The simulation results clearly indicate that

the capture and aggregation rates change with the temperature and that the embedded mo-

bile inclusions capture a greater number of the ﬂoating inclusions. A further extension of the

present work would be to include the inﬂuence of the surface tension, as well as the bending

rigidity, by keeping the corresponding term in (3). This will constrain the ﬂuctuations in the

surface area of the membrane and would have a direct bearing on the inclusion dynamics.

The second author(HRS) is grateful to the UK Royal Society for ﬁnancial support through

a visiting research fellowship and to the School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences

(Greenwich University) for their hospitality. Both authors acknowledge useful discussions

with Professor E. Mansﬁeld FRS on the dynamics of objects supported by surface tension.

References

[1] J.H. Hunter, Foundations of Colloid Science, Volume I, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1993.

[2] U. Seifert, Adv. in Phys. 46 (1997) 13.

[3] S.J. Singer, G.L. Nicolson, Science 175 (1972) 720.

16

[4] N. Dan, P. Pincus, S.A. Safran, Langmuir 9 (1993) 2768.

[5] N.Dan, A.Berman,P. Pincus, S.A.Safran, J. Phys. II France 4 (1994) 1713.

[6] M. Goulian, R. Bruinsma, P.Pincus P, Europhys. Lett. 22 (1993) 145. ibid 23 (1993) 155E.

[7] M. Bloom, E. Evans, O.G.Q. Mouristen, Rev. Biophys. 24 (1991) 293.

[8] J.R. Abney, J.C. Owicki, In Progress in Protein-Lipid Interactions, Watts, De Pont Eds,

Elsevier, New York, 1985.

[9] S.Marcelja, Biophys. Acta 455 (1976) 1.

[10] J.C. Owicki, H.M. McConnell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 76 (1979) 4750.

[11] D.R. Fattal, A. Ben-Shaul, Biophys. J. 65 (1993) 1795.

[12] H.W.Huang, Biophys. J. 50 (1986) 1061.

[13] E.H. Mansﬁeld, H.R. Sepangi, E.A. Eastwood, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 355 (1977)

869.

[14] R. Golestanian, M. Goulian, M. Kardar, Europhys. Lett. 33 (1996) 241.

[15] P.B. Canham, J. Theor Biol. 26 (1970) 61.

[16] W. Helfrich 1973, Z. Naturforsh 28c (1973) 693.

[17] G. Gompper, M. Schick, Self-assembling amphiphilic systems ,Phase Transition and Crit-

ical Phenomena, edited by C. Domb, J. Lebowitz Academic, London, 1994.

[18] O. Berger, O. Edholm, F. Jahnig, Bophys. J. 72 (1997) 2002, and references therein

17

69 (1995) 1230.

Wesley, Reading, 1994.

1987.

[19] C.W. Gardiner, 1985 Handbook of Stochastic Methods, Springer, Berlin, 1985.

[20] S.W. Chiu, M. Clark,V. Balaji, S. Subramaniam, H.L. Scott, E. Jakobsson, Biophys. J.

[21] S.A. Safran, Statistical Thermodynamics of Surfaces, Interfaces and Membranes, Addison-

[22] J. Prost, R. Bruinsma, Europhys. Lett, 33 (1996) 321.

[23] M.P. Allen, D.J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids, Clarendon Press, Oxford,

[24] H. Raﬁi-Tabar, L. Hua, M. Cross, J. Phys.:Condens. Matter 10 (1998) 2375.

[25] H.Raﬁi-Tabar, Scientiﬁc Computing World, 45, February/March (1999) 18.

[26] D.P. Tieleman, H.J.C. Berensden, J. Chem. Phys. 105 (1996) 4871.

[27] J.K.G. Dhont, An Introduction to Dynamics of Colloids, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996.

[28] D. Nelson, T. Piran, S. Weinberg, Statistical Mechanics of membranes and Surfaces,

Jerusalem Winter School for Theoretical Physics, Vol 5, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1989.

18

Figure captions

Figure 1: Two rod-like embedded (M-type) inclusions vertically placed in an amphiphilic

ﬂuid membrane. The inclusions impose exponentially decaying thickness-matching constraints

on the bilayer at the inclusion boundary. Heavy solid lines represent amphiphilic molecules.

Figure based on [5].

Figure 2: Two rod-like surface (S-type) inclusions lying on the surface of the membrane. The

rods have lengths L1 and L2, widths ǫ1 and ǫ2 and making angles θ1 and θ2 with the line joining

their centres of mass. Figure based on [14].

Figure 3: A small patch of the membrane showing the stochastic X-Y trajectories obtained

from equation (22) for a sample of four S-type inclusions without the presence of the M-type

inclusions. Both the drift and diﬀusion motions can be clearly distinguished.

Figure 4: A set of snapshots, obtained from dynamic simulations, showing the capture of

rod-like S-type inclusions (white spheres) at the rod-like M-type inclusion sites (black spheres)

for static (a to c) and dynamic (d to f) M-type inclusions. The aggregation of the M-type

inclusions can also be observed (d to f). Only the centres of mass of the inclusions are shown.

Figure 5: A set of snapshots, obtained from dynamic simulations, showing the capture of

rod-like S-type inclusions at the rod-like M-type inclusion sites for mobile M-type inclusions

at T = 100◦K (a to c) and T = 350◦K (d to f). Only the centres of mass of the inclusions are

shown.

19

L1

θ1

L2

θ2

R

ε2

ε1

n
o
r
c
m
Y

/

i

10.0

7.4

4.8

2.2

-0.4

-3.0

-5.6

-8.2

-10.8

-13.4

-16.0

-10.0

-8.0

-6.0

-4.0

4.0

6.0

8.0

10.0

-2.0

0.0
X/micron

2.0

