One-way multigrid method in electronic structure calculations

In-Ho Lee
School of Physics, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Cheongryangri-dong, Dongdaemun-gu,
Seoul 130-012, Korea

Yong-Hoon Kim and Richard M. Martin
Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Illinois 61801
(September 17, 1999)

Abstract

We propose a simple and eﬃcient one-way multigrid method for self-
consistent electronic structure calculations based on iterative diagonalization.
Total energy calculations are performed on several diﬀerent levels of grids
starting from the coarsest grid, with wave functions transferred to each ﬁner
level. The only changes compared to a single grid calculation are interpolation
and orthonormalization steps outside the original total energy calculation and
required only for transferring between grids. This feature results in a minimal
amount of code change, and enables us to employ a sophisticated interpola-
tion method and noninteger ratio of grid spacings. Calculations employing a
preconditioned conjugate gradient method are presented for two examples, a
quantum dot and a charged molecular system. Use of three grid levels with
grid spacings 2h, 1.5h, and h decreases the computer time by about a factor
of 5 compared to single level calculations.

71.15.-m, 71.15.Nc, 71.15.Mb, 71.15.Pd

9
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
1
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Recently, the usefulness of the real-space technique based on three-dimensional uniform
grid and higher-order ﬁnite-diﬀerence formula1 has been demonstrated2,3 for the electronic
structure calculations within the framework of the Kohn-Sham (KS) density functional the-
ory (DFT).4 All the computations are performed in real space without resort to fast Fourier
transforms as in the planewave formalism. The major parts of calculations are local opera-
tions, so the algorithm is easily parallelized. Furthermore, explicit storage of the Hamiltonian
matrix elements can be avoided, since the Laplacians and potential-wave functions multi-
plications are respectively evaluated by the ﬁnite-diﬀerence operation on the wave functions
and a simple one-dimensional vector multiplications.

Since the number of grids Ng is order of 105 ∼ 106, which increases further with the
system size and/or the level of accuracy, one requires an eﬃcient numerical procedure for
the Hamiltonian diagonalization in ﬁnite-diﬀerence real-space schemes. Iterative diagonal-
ization methods are usually employed as in other modern electronic structure calculations,
and due to the orthogonality condition between the KS orbitals the complexity of this iter-
ative diagonalization scales as O(N 2
b Ng), where Nb represents the number of lowest states
taken into account. It turns out that the prefactor of this scaling can be very dependent on
the details of calculation scheme, and the development of a new algorithm which results in
the optimal prefactor is a very important and challenging problem at the moment. Among
the most promising approaches in the literature are the multigrid (MG) algorithms.5,6 MG
methods originated as attempts to accelerate relaxation methods and they have been very
successful in improving the speed and accuracy in a wide variety of science and engineering
applications by combining computations at diﬀerent scales of grid levels.
In the context
of DFT electronic structure calculations, several groups have already applied the multi-
grid scheme to the solution of KS equations and demonstrated its eﬃciency: Briggs et al.
adopted coarse-grid-correction multigrid algorithm to the calculations of various periodic
and nonperiodic systems.7 Ancilotto et al. implemented full multigrid diagonalization pro-
cedure to study the fragmentation of charged Li clusters.8 While these two works employed
the pseudopotentials, Beck et al. has demonstrated the feasibility of all-electron grid calcu-
lation by employing full multigrid algorithm.9 These authors typically use integer ratio of
grid spacings (e.g., 4h, 2h, and h) and correction multilevel algorithm (V-cycle).

In this article, we introduce a simple one-way multigrid algorithm5 to accelerate self-
consistent electronic structure calculations based on iterative diagonalization. Calculations
start from the coarsest grid level and approximate solutions are transferred successively up
to the ﬁnest grid. An interesting aspect of this method is that the number of interpolation
is minimized : Interpolations are performed outside of original total energy calculation part,
hence only for (number of grid levels −1) times when the wave functions are transferred to the
next ﬁner grid level. It enables us to use an accurate interpolation scheme and the noninteger
ratio of grid spacing in the hierarchy of grids. Speciﬁcally we employ three diﬀerent uniform
grids spacings, 2h, 1.5h, and h to obtain the solution at the resolution of grid spacing h,
in which calculations on the preceding two coarse grids provide a good initial guess of the
wave functions for the ﬁnest level calculation. We demonstrate the eﬃciency of the current
scheme on the twenty-electron quantum dots and the charged H cluster systems in which
the ionic potentials have been replaced by ab initio pseudopotentials. The comparison with

2

a single-level calculations shows a factor of 5 improvement in CPU time.

II. METHODS

A. Basic issues

The iterative total energy minimization based on DFT is a nonlinear problem in which

the KS equations (Hartree atomic units are used throughout this paper)

−

(cid:26)

1
2

~∇2 + Vext(~r) + ˜VH(~r) + ˜V σ

xc(~r)

j (~r) = ǫσ
ψσ

j ψσ

j (~r), σ =↑, ↓, j = 1, · · · , Nb

(1)

(cid:27)

and the Poisson equation

~∇2 ˜VH(~r) = −4πρ(~r),

(2)

are closely coupled in the self-consistency loop.10 Here ˜VH(~r) and ˜V σ
xc(~r) respectively repre-
sent the input Hartree and spin dependent exchange-correlation potential, at each iteration
within the self-consistent calculations. Vext(~r) stands for the external potential, and the
charge density ρ(~r) is deﬁned as the squared summation of the occupied KS orbitals. In
the higher-order ﬁnite-diﬀerence real space formulation, the KS and Poisson equations are
discretized on a uniform grid. The Laplacian operation is evaluated by the higher-order
ﬁnite diﬀerence formula1 which is characterized by the ﬁnite-diﬀerence order N and grid
spacing h:

d2
dx2 f (x) =

N

Xj=−N

Cjf (x + jh) + O(h2N +2),

(3)

where {Cj} are constants.

KS(~r) = Vext(~r) + ˜VH (~r) + ˜V σ

In the present work solutions of the KS equations for the lowest Nb eigenstates are
found by the iterative preconditioned conjugate gradient method of Bylander, Kleinman, and
Lee,11,12 for a given total potential V σ
xc(~r). The Hartree potential
VH(~r) is obtained by solving the Poisson equation. Note that, for each self-consistent step,
we need to solve two Poisson equations for the given input and output charge densities. For
the ﬁnite systems considered here the boundary values of Hartree potential are evaluated
using a multipole expansion of the potential of the charge distribution and the relaxation
vectors at the boundary are set to zero for the Dirichlet boundary conditions. The solution
of Poisson equation inside of the box has been ﬁrst generated by a Fourier method with low
order ﬁnite diﬀerence (N = 1),6 and it has been subsequently relaxed by the preconditioned
conjugate gradient method13,14 with higher-order ﬁnite diﬀerence formula. At each step we
choose the new input density and potential using a simple linear mixing of output and input
densities.11

After obtaining orbitals and density from self-consistent solutions of Poisson and KS

equations, the total electronic energy is obtained:

Etot =

ǫσ
j −

Xσ,j

Xσ Z

d3r{ ˜VH(~r) + ˜V σ

xc(~r)}ρσ(~r) +

1
2 Z

d3r′

d3r

Z

ρ(~r)ρ(~r′)
| ~r − ~r′ |

+ Exc[ρ↑(~r), ρ↓(~r)], (4)

3

where the summations over the single particle energy (ǫσ
j ) are carried out for all the states
below the Fermi level, and Exc[ρ↑(~r), ρ↓(~r)] is the exchange-correlation energy. For our
local spin density approximation we use the Perdew and Zunger’s parameterization of the
Ceperley and Alder’s quantum Monte Carlo data.15

B. One-way multigrid method

The most time-consuming part of the self-consistent electronic structure calculations
described in the previous subsection is the iterative solution of KS equations. The sources
of this computation bottleneck can be traced to broadly two (but closely related) aspects
of self-consistent iterative diagonalization schemes. First of all, in general we do not have
a good initial guess of wave functions, which generate density, and hence ˜VH(~r) and ˜V σ
xc(~r)
in Eq. (1). So initial several self-consistency steps will be used to obtain solutions of biased
Hamiltonians, although they tend to be the most time-consuming part. Secondly, in single
iterative solution of KS equations, a direct application of a relaxation method on the ﬁne
grid has trouble in damping out the long-ranged or slowly varying error components in the
orbitals. This can be understood by the usual spectral analysis of relaxation scheme, or
considering that the nonlocal Laplacian operation on a ﬁne grid is physically short-ranged.
This means that there is an imbalance in the relaxation step for the long-ranged and short-
ranged error components.

MG is a quite general concept, and the choice of a speciﬁc algorithm is very dependent
on the problem under consideration. For our purpose, we seek a procedure which generates
a good initial guess for the ﬁnest grid calculation and eﬀectively removes long-range error
components of wave functions in the solution of KS equations. In this work, we employed
the one-way multigrid scheme with three diﬀerent uniform grids with noninteger ratio of
spacings, 2h, 1.5h, and h. The calculation starts from the coarsest grid 2h, and in each
grid-level calculation, Eqs. (2) and (1) are solved self-consistently as in the usual single-level
algorithm. After each self-consistent calculation on a coarse grid, only wave functions are
interpolated to the next ﬁne grid, and another set of self-consistent calculation is performed.
Since that the interpolated wave functions usually do not satisfy the orthonormality condi-
tion any more, we take an extra Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization process after each orbital
interpolation. So we have two interpolations and two Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization pro-
cesses for our hierarchy of three grid systems. In Fig. 1, we summarize the algorithmic ﬂow
of the procedures.

While an eﬃcient interpolation/projection scheme is a crucial ingredient of any successful
application of MG method, we note that it can be also time-consuming and tricky part due
to the physical conditions such as orthonormality of wave functions. Hence our strategy,
which is the characteristic of the current scheme, is to minimize the number of data transfer
between diﬀerent grid levels, while employ a sophisticated interpolation method which is
very accurate and allow us to use a noninteger ratio of grid spacings. Speciﬁcally, we
used a three-dimensional piecewise polynomial interpolation with a tensor product of one-
dimensional B-splines as the interpolating function.6,16 A piecewise cubic polynomials have
been taken as B-splines.

4

III. EFFICIENCY AND DISCUSSIONS

2ω2

2ω2

2ω2

yy2 + 1

xx2 + 1

We consider two diﬀerent electronic systems of a localized quantum dot model and a
charged hydrogen cluster to demonstrate the eﬃciency of the present algorithm. We ﬁrst take
a twenty-electron quasi two-dimensional quantum dot modeled by an anisotropic parabolic
conﬁnement potential3 Vext(~r) = 1
z z2. In-plane potential is characterized
by the conﬁnement energies ωx = ωy = 5 meV, and ωz = 45 meV has been taken to reproduce
the dot-growth z-direction conﬁnement caused by the quantum wells and heterojunctions.3
Our calculations for anisotropic parabolic dot in GaAs host material (dielectric constant
ǫ = 12.9, eﬀective mass m∗ = 0.067me) are based on the eﬀective mass approximation, and
B = 101.88 ˚A and 10.96 meV, respectively. Uniform
rescaled length and energy units are a∗
B with box size 81 × 81 × 21a∗ 3
grid spacing h = 0.3a∗
B have been used, hence the number of
grid points is about 1.4 × 105 points at the ﬁnest grid level (h = 0.3a∗
B) while only about
1.6 × 104 points at the coarsest grid level (2h = 0.6a∗
B). Finite diﬀerence order N = 3 has
been used at grid levels h and 1.5h, while N = 1 for grid level 2h, to solve a set of spin-
polarized KS equations with ﬁfteen orbitals in each spin channel. Noninteracting eigenstates
(Hermite polynomials) are used as an initial guess for the coarsest grid calculation.

The CPU times for each self-consistent iteration are shown in Fig. 2. The horizontal
axis stands for the self-consistency iteration index, while the vertical axis is the required
computer time for a given iteration step. The case of the present three-level one-way multi-
grid algorithm is shown in the lowest panel (c). Comparing with the results of a single-level
calculation shown in the panel (a), we see signiﬁcant savings of the computation time, in
which total computation time is about 5 times shorter than a single-level calculation. While
the three-level MG scheme requires more number of self-consistent iterations (28 iterations
compared with 20 iterations), they are mostly performed in the coarsest grid 2h, and at
the ﬁnest grid level h we only need several iterations. Interpolation and orthonormalization
steps are indicated by downward arrows, which take only a small amount of computation
time.

To further demonstrate the advantage of the usage of the intermediate grid spacing 1.5h
in our three-level scheme, we show the CPU time of two-level (2h and h) calculation in the
panel (b). While the number of iterations taken in the ﬁnest grid h is still much smaller than
the single-level calculation, it is much larger than that in the three-level calculation, resulting
in the ratio of computation times 5 : 2 : 1 for one-, two-, and three-level grid calculations.
Although noninteger ratio of grid spacing is not widely used in MG applications, this clearly
shows its usefulness.

We obtained similar results of factor 5 improvements in computation speed for other
test cases, such as the ab initio nonlocal pseudopotential calculation of a charged hydrogen
cluster H+
9 . Details of the calculation are identical to those of quantum dot calculations,
except that ionic external potentials are treated by separable17 nonlocal pseudopotential
generated by the method of Troullier and Martins.18 Finite diﬀerence order N = 6 at grid h
and 1.5h, and N = 1 for the grid 2h have been used to solve spin-unpolarized KS equations
with the lowest 6 states. The number of grid points involved in the ﬁnest grid calculation is
3.5 × 105, while it is 4.3 × 104 for the coarsest grid calculation.

We have to emphasize that the improvements seen in previous examples are purely
induced by the a simple usage of MG idea, in which the only modiﬁcation from the original

5

single-level code was the addition of an outer loop which transfer the wave functions. We can
expect that the introduction of the MG scheme at diﬀerent stages of calculations, such as
the correction path for the relaxation of KS orbital or Hartree potential, will result in further
improvements. To do so, we will need additional residual computation and projection steps
that can be combined with our conjugate gradient solvers. We also note that it will require an
interpolation strategy and grid levels which are diﬀerent from the current method. Finally,
we point out that this type of one-way multigrid idea is very similar to often-used practices in
plane-wave calculations based on iterative diagonalization, in which a solution is ﬁrst found
at one energy cutoﬀ (equivalent to a coarse grid) and used as the input to a higher energy
cutoﬀ calculation (equivalent to a ﬁner grid). This corresponds to interpolating solutions
from a coarser to a ﬁner grid using Fourier components.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we demonstrated that the introduction of a simple one-way multigrid
method greatly improves the eﬃciency of real-space electronic structure calculations based
on the iterative solution of KS equations. While minimizing the number of data transfer
between grids, we employed an accurate interpolation method, which enabled us to incor-
porate three-level grids with noninteger ratio of grid spacings. Our general strategy of using
2h, 1.5h, and h, showed a factor 5 improvement of computation time, while it required only
minimal computer code modiﬁcations. The usefulness of the intermediate grid step 1.5h has
been shown by comparing the current scheme with two-level (2h and h) calculations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant DMR

9802373. We are grateful to supercomputer center SERI.

6

REFERENCES

1 B. Fornberg and D. Sloan, in Acta Numerica 1994, edited by A. Iserles (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1994), pp. 203-267.
2 J. R. Chelikowsky, N. Troullier, and Y. Saad, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1240 (1994); J. R.
Chelikowsky, N. Troullier, K. Wu, and Y. Saad, Phys. Rev. B 50, 11 355 (1994).
3 I.-H. Lee, V. Rao, R. M. Martin, and J.-P. Leburton, Phys. Rev. B 57, 9035 (1998).
4 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964); W. Kohn and L. J. Sham,
Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
5 C. C. Douglas, IEEE Computational Science & Engineering, Winter 55 (1996).
6 W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes in
Fortran, (Second edition, Cambridge University Press, 1992).
7 E. L. Briggs, D. J. Sullivan, and J. Bernholc, Phys. Rev. B 52, R5471 (1995).
8 F. Ancilotto, P. Blandin, and F. Toigo, Phys. Rev. B 59, 7868 (1999).
9 J. Wang and T. Beck, preprint cond-mat/9905422 and references therein.
10 M. C. Payne, M. P. Teter, D. C. Allan, T. A. Arias, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 64, 1045 (1992).

11 D. M. Bylander, L. Kleinman, and S. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 42, 1394 (1990).
12 A. P. Seitsonen, M. M. Puska, and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. B 51, 14 057 (1995).
13 J. C. Strikwerda, Finite Diﬀerence Schemes and Partial Diﬀerential Equations,

(Wadsworth, Belmont, California, 1989), pp. 333-335.

14 T. Hoshi, M. Arai, and T. Fujiwara, Phys. Rev. B 52, R5459 (1995).
15 D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566 (1980); J. Perdew and A. Zunger,

Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981).

16 C. De Boor, A Practical Guide to Splines Vol. 5, (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1978), pp.

173-182.

17 L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).
18 N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 8861 (1991).

7

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Schematic diagram of the present one-way multigrid algorithm discussed in the text.
The self-consistent calculation at each level is done by using preconditioned conjugate gradient
relaxation. The values in circles, 2h, 1.5h, and h stand for the uniform grid spacing for a given
level. The calculation starts at the coarsest level (level 1, 2h) at the bottom, and ends at the ﬁnest
grid (level 3, h) at the top. Orbital interpolation and orthogonalization step is taken after each
coarse grid (level 1 and 2) calculation.

FIG. 2.

CPU time vs.

self-consistent iteration number for 20-electron quantum dot cal-
culations in (a) single-level (h), (b) two-level (2h and h), and (c) three-level (2h, 1.5h, and h)
schemes. Within the local spin density approximation, we minimized the total energy with re-
spect to the electronic degree of freedom. Downward arrows in (b) and (c) indicate the inter-
polation-orthogonalization steps. Calculations are performed on a DEC alpha 433au personal
workstation.

8

level 3

h

self-consistent calculation

interpolation & orthogonalization

level 2

1.5h

self-consistent calculation

interpolation & orthogonalization

Computation flows from left to right

F
i
g
.

1

9

level 1

2h

self-consistent calculation

1
0

2h

1.5h

h

h

2h

40

30

20

10

0

40

30

20

10

0

40

30

20

10

0

0

)
n
i
m

(
 
e
m

i
t
 

U
P
C

h

(a)

(b)

(c)

5

10

20

25

30

15
iteration

F
i
g
.

2

