0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

8
2

 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
6
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonlinear denoising of transient signals with

application to event related potentials

A. Eﬀern a,b, K. Lehnertz a, T. Schreiber c, T. Grunwald a,

P. David b, C.E. Elger a

aDepartment of Epileptology, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud Str. 25,

53105 Bonn, Germany

bInstitute of Radiation and Nuclear Physics, University of Bonn, Nussallee 11-13,

53115 Bonn, Germany

cDepartment of Physics, University of Wuppertal, Gauss-Strasse 20,

42097 Wuppertal

Abstract

We present a new wavelet based method for the denoising of event related potentials

(ERPs), employing techniques recently developed for the paradigm of deterministic

chaotic systems. The denoising scheme has been constructed to be appropriate for

short and transient time sequences using circular state space embedding. Its eﬀec-

tiveness was successfully tested on simulated signals as well as on ERPs recorded

from within a human brain. The method enables the study of individual ERPs

against strong ongoing brain electrical activity.

Keywords: nonlinear denoising, state space, wavelets, circular embedding

PACS numbers: 05.45.+b

87.22.-q

87.22.Jb

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

The electroencephalogram (EEG) reﬂects brain electrical activity owing to both

intrinsic dynamics and responses to external stimuli. To examine pathways and

time courses of information processing under speciﬁc conditions, several exper-

iments have been developed controlling sensory inputs. Usually, well deﬁned

stimuli are repeatedly presented during experimental sessions (e.g., simple

tones, ﬂashes, smells, or touches). Each stimulus is assumed to induce syn-

chronized neural activity in speciﬁc regions of the brain, occurring as potential

changes in the EEG. These evoked potentials (EPs) often exhibit multiphasic

peak amplitudes within the ﬁrst hundred milliseconds after stimulus onset.

They are speciﬁc for diﬀerent stages of information processing, thus giving

access to both temporal and spatial aspects of neural processes. Other classes

of experimental setups are used to investigate higher cognitive functions. For

example, subjects are requested to remember words, or perhaps they are asked

to respond to speciﬁc target stimuli, e.g. by pressing a button upon their oc-

currence. The neural activity induced by this kind of stimulation also leads

to potential changes in the EEG. These event related potentials (ERPs) can

extend over a few seconds, exhibiting peak amplitudes mostly later than EPs.

Deviation of amplitudes and/or moment of occurrence (latency) from those of

normal EPs/ERPs are often associated with dysfunction of the central nervous

system and thus, are of high relevance for diagnostic purposes.

As compared to the ongoing EEG, EPs and ERPs possess very low peak am-

plitudes which, in most cases, are not recognizable by visual inspection. Thus,

to improve their low signal-to-noise ratio, EPs/ERPs are commonly averaged

(Figure 1), assuming synchronous, time-locked responses not correlated with

the ongoing EEG. In practice, however, these assumptions may be inaccurate

2

and, as a result of averaging, variations of EP/ERP latencies and amplitudes

are not accessed. In particular, short lasting alterations which may provide

relevant information about cognitive functions are probably smoothed or even

masked by the averaging process. Therefore, investigators are interested in

single trial analysis, that allows extraction of reliable signal characteristics

out of single EP/ERP sequences [1]. In ref. [2] autoregressive models (AR)

are adopted to EEG sequences recorded prior to stimulation in order to sub-

tract uncorrelated neural activity from ERPs. However, it is an empirical fact,

that external stimuli lead to event-related-desynchronizaition of the ongoing

EEG. Thus, the estimated AR-model might be incorrect. The authors of [3]

applied autoregressive moving average (ARMA) models to time sequences

which were a concatenation of several EP/ERP sequences. In the case of

short signal sequences, this led to better spectral estimations than commonly

achieved by periodograms. The main restriction is, however, that investigated

signals must be linear and stationary, which cannot be strictly presumed for

the EEG. In particular the high model order in comparison to the signal length

shows that AR- and ARMA-models are often inadequate for EP/ERP analy-

sis. Other methods have been developed to deal with the nonstationary and

transient character of EPs/ERPs. Woody [4] introduced an iterative method

for EP/ERP latency estimation based on common averages. He determined

the time instant of the best correlation between a template (EP/ERP average)

and single trials by shifting the latter in time. This method corrects a possible

latency variability of EPs/ERPs, but its performance highly depends on the

initial choice of templates. The Wiener ﬁlter [5,6], on the other hand, uses

spectral estimation to reduce uncorrelated noise. This technique, however, is

less accurate for EPs/ERPs, because the time course of transient signals is

lost in the Fourier domain. Thus, DeWeerd [7,8] introduced a time adaptive

Wiener ﬁlter, allowing better adjustment to signal components of short du-

3

ration. The paradigm of orthogonal wave packets (wavelet transform 1 ) also

follows this concept of adopted time-frequency decomposition. In addition, the

wavelet transform provide several useful properties which make it preferable

even for the analysis of transient signals [9–11]:

• Wavelets can represent smooth functions as well as singularities.
• The basis functions are local which makes most coeﬃcient based algorithms

to be naturally adapted to inhomogeneities in the function.

• They have the unconditional basis property to represent a variety of func-
tions implying that the wavelet basis is usually a reasonable choice even if

very little is known about the signal.

• Fast wavelet transform is computationally inexpensive of order O(N), where
N denotes the number of sample points. In contrast, fast Fourier transform

(FFT) requires O(Nlog(N)).

• Nonlinear thresholding is nearly optimal for signal recovery.

For that reasons, wavelets became a popular tool for the analysis of brain

electrical activity [12–15], especially for denoising and classiﬁcation of single

trial EPs/ERPs. Donoho et al.[16] introduced a simple thresholding algorithm

to reduce noise in the wavelet domain requiring no assumptions about the

time course of signals. Nevertheless, high signal amplitudes are in need to

distinguish between noise and signal related wavelet coeﬃcients in single trials.

Bertrand et al. [17] modiﬁed the original a posteriori Wiener ﬁlter to ﬁnd

accurate ﬁlter settings. The authors emphasized better adoption to transient

signal components than can be achieved by corresponding techniques in the

frequency domain. However, due to the averaging process, this technique runs

1 Continuous wavelet transform: wa,b(Ψ, x(t)) = 1√|a| R +∞
−∞

x(t)Ψ( t−b

a )dt

w: wavelet coeﬃcient, a: scaling parameter, b: translation parameter, x(t): time
series, Ψ: mother wavelet function

4

the risk of choosing inadequate ﬁlter settings in the case of a high latency

variability. The same restriction is valid for discriminant techniques applied

e.g. by Bartink et al. [18,19]. Nevertheless, wavelet based methods enable a

more adequate treatment of transient signals than techniques applied in the

frequency domain. The question of accurate ﬁlter settings, however, is still an

unresolved problem.

To circumvent this problem, we introduce a new method for single trial anal-

ysis of ERPs that neither assumes fully synchronized nor stationary ERP

sequences. The method is related to techniques already developed for the

paradigm of deterministic chaotic systems, using time delay embeddings of

signals for state space reconstruction and denoising [20]. Schreiber and Ka-

plan [21] demonstrated the accuracy of these methods to reduce measurement

noise in the human electrocardiogram (ECG). Heart beats are also of transient

character and exhibit relevant signal components in a frequency range that

compares to ERPs. Unfortunately, ERPs are of shorter duration as compared

to the ECG. Thus, in the case of high dimensional time delay embedding (in

the order of the signal length), we cannot create a suﬃcient number of delay

vectors for ERP sequences. To circumvent this problem we reconstruct ERPs

in state-space using circular embeddings, that have turned out to be appro-

priate even for signal sequences of short duration. In contrast to the nonlinear

projection scheme described in [20], we do not use singular value decomposi-

tion (SVD) to determine clean signals in state space. The reason for this is

threefold. First, estimating relevant signal components using the inﬂexion of

ordered eigen-values is not always applicable to EEG because eigen-values may

decay almost linearly. In this case, an a priori restriction to a ﬁxed embedding

dimension is in need, running the risk either to discard important signal com-

ponents or to remain noise of considerable amplitude if only little is known

5

about the signal. Second, SVD stresses the direction of highest variances, so

that transient signal components may be smoothed by projection. Third, the

number of signal related directions in state space may alter locally, which is

also not concerned by SVD. Instead we calculate wavelet transforms of de-

lay vectors and determine signal related components by estimating variances

separately for each state-space direction. Scaling properties of wavelet bases

allow very fast calculation as well as focusing on speciﬁc frequency bands.

To conﬁrm the accuracy of our method, we apply it to ERP-like test signals

contaminated with diﬀerent types of noise. Afterwards, we give an example of

reconstructed mesial temporal lobe P300 potentials, that were recorded from

within the hippocampal formation of a patient with focal epilepsy.

2 Outline of the Method

A time series may be contaminated by random noise allowing the measurement

yn = xn +ǫn. If the measured time series is purely deterministic, it is restricted

to a low-dimensional hyper-surface in state space. For the transient signals we

are concerned with here, we assume this still to be valid. We hope to identify

this direction and to correct yn by simply projecting it onto the subspace

spanned by the clean data [22,21].

Technically we realize projections onto noise free subspaces as follows. Let Y =

(y1, y2, . . . , yN ) denote an observed time sequence. Time-delay embedding of

this sequence in a m-dimensional state space leads to state space vectors yn =

(yn, . . . , yn−(m−1)τ ), where τ is an appropriate time delay. In an embedding
space of dimension m we compute the discrete wavelet transform [11,10,9] of

all delay vectors in a small neighborhood of a vector yn we want to correct. Let

rn,j with j = 0, . . . , k denote the indices of the k nearest neighbors of yn, and

6

for yn itself, i.e. j = 0, and rn,0 = n. Thus, the ﬁrst neighbor distances from

yn in increasing order are d(Y )(1)
n ≡
||yn − yrn,2|| = min r′6=rn,1 ||yn − yr′||, etc., where ||y − y′|| is the Euclidean
distance in state space. Now the important assumption is that the clean signal

n ≡ ||yn−yrn,1|| = minr′ ||yn−yr′||, d(Y )(2)

lies within a subspace of dimension d ≪ m, and that this subspace is spanned
by only a few basis functions in the wavelet domain. Let wrn,j denote the fast
wavelet transform [23,24] of yrn,j . Futhermore, let C (k)
(wrn) = hwrn,jii denote
n,i the corresponding

the ith component of the centre of mass of wrn, and σ2

i

variance. In the case of neighbors owing to the signal (true neighbors), we can

expect the ratio C (k)

i

(wrn)/σ2

n,i to be higher in signal than in noise related

directions. Thus, a discrimination of noise and noise free components in state

space is possible. Let

˜wn,i =

wn,i

:

0 :

i

|C (k)
else




(wrn)| ≥ 2λ σn,i√k+1

(1)

deﬁne a shrinking condition to carry out projection onto a noise free manifold

[16]. The parameter λ denotes a thresholding coeﬃcient that depends on spe-

ciﬁc qualities of signal and noise. Inverse fast wavelet transform of ˜wn provides

a corrected vector in state space, so that application of our projection scheme

to all remaining delay vectors ends up with a set of corrected vectors, out of

which the clean signal can be reconstructed.

2.1 Extension to multiple signals of short length

Let Yl = (yl,1, yl,2, . . . , yl,N ) denote a short signal sequence that is repeatedly

recorded during an experiment, where l = 1, . . . , L orders the number of rep-

etitions. A typical example may be ERP recordings, where each Yl represents

an EEG sequence following well deﬁned stimuli. Time-delay embeddings of

7

these sequences can be written as yl,n = (yl,n . . . , yl,n−(m−1)τ ). To achieve a
suﬃcient number of delay vectors even for high embedding dimensions, we

deﬁne circular embeddings by

yl,n = (yl,n, . . . , yl,1, yl,N , . . . , yl,N−(m−q)) ∀ n < m,

(2)

so that all delay vectors with indices 1 ≤ n ≤ N can be formed. Circular
embeddings are introduced as the most attractive choice to handle the ends

of sequences. Alternatives are (i) losing neighbors, (ii) zeropadding, and (iii)

shrinking the embedding dimension towards the ends. However, discontinuities

may occur at the edges, requiring some smoothing. For each Yl we deﬁne the

smoothed sequence as

ys

l,n,i =

yl,n,ie−( q−i
p )2

yl,n,i
yl,n,ie−( i−(N −q)

p

)2




:

:

:

i < q
q ≤ i ≤ N − q
i > N − q

(3)

where q deﬁnes the window width in sample points, p the steepness of expo-

nential damping, and i the time index. Time-delay embedding of several short

sequences leads to a ﬁlling of the state space, so that a suﬃcient number of

nearest neighbors can be found for each point.

2.2 Parameter Selection

Appropriate choice of parameters, in particular embedding dimension m, time

delay τ , thresholding coeﬃcient λ, as well as the number of neighbors k is

important for accurate signal reconstruction in state space. Several methods

have been developed to estimate “optimal” parameters, depending on speciﬁc

aspects of the given data (e.g., noise level, type of noise, stationarity, etc.).

These assume that the clean signal is indeed low dimensional, an assumption

8

we are not ready to make in the case of ERPs. Thus, we approached the

problem of “optimal” parameters empirically.

Parameters τ and m are not independent from each other. In particular, high

embedding dimensions allow small time-delays and vice versa. We estimated

”optimal” embedding dimensions and thresholding coeﬃcients on simulated

data by varying m and λ for a ﬁxed τ = 1. To allow fast wavelet transform,

we chose m to be a power of 2.

Repeated measurements, like in the case of EPs/ERPs, have a maximum num-

ber of true neighbors which is given by kmax = L. In the case of identical signals

this is the best choice imaginable. However, real EPs/ERPs may alter during

experiments, and it seems more appropriate to use a maximum distance true

neighbors are assumed to be restricted to. We deﬁne this distance by

d(y)max =

√2
LN

L,N

X

l=1,n=1

d(y)(L)

n,l

(4)

3 Model Data

3.1 Generating test signals and noise

To demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our denoising technique and to estimate

accurate values for m, λ, and L, we applied it to EP/ERP-like test signals con-

taminated with white noise and in-band noise. The latter was generated using

phase randomized surrogates of the original signal [25]. Test signals consisted

of 256 sample points and were a concatenation of several Gaussian functions

with diﬀerent standard deviations and amplitudes. To simulate EPs/ERPs

not fully synchronized with stimulus onset, test signals were shifted randomly

in time (normally deviated, std. dev.: 20 sample points, max. shift: 40 sample

9

points). Since even fast components of the test signal extended over several

sample points, a minimum embedding dimensions m = 16 was required to

cover any signiﬁcant fraction of the signal. The highest embedding dimension

was bounded by the length of signal sequences and the number of embedded

trials, thus allowing a maximum of m = 256. However, if the embedding di-

mension is m = N, neighborhood is not longer deﬁned by local characteristics,

and we can expect denoised signals to be smoothed in the case of multiple time

varying components.

3.2 Denoising of test signals

Let Xl = (xl,1, xl,2, . . . , xl,N ) denote the lth signal sequence of a repeated

measurement, Yl = (yl,1, yl,2, . . . , yl,N ) the noise contaminated sequence, and
˜Yl = (˜yl,1, ˜yl,2, . . . , ˜yl,N ) the corresponding result of denoising. Then

r =

1
L

L

X

l=1

vuut

(Yl − Xl)2
( ˜Yl − Xl)2

(5)

deﬁnes the noise reduction factor which quantiﬁes signal improvement owing

to the ﬁlter process.

We determined r for test signals contaminated with white noise, using noise

amplitudes ranging from 25% - 150%, and embedding dimensions ranging from

16 - 128 (Figure 2a, Figure 3). Five repetitions for each parameter conﬁgu-

ration were calculated using 5 embedded trials each. In the case of λ ≤ 2,
the noise reduction factor was quite stable against changes of noise levels but

depended on embedding dimension m and thresholding coeﬃcient λ. Best per-
formance was achieved for 1.0 ≤ λ ≤ 2.0 (rm=128,λ=2.0
λ > 4.0, most signal components were rejected, and as a result, the noise re-

= 4.7). In the case of

max

duction factor r increased linearly with noise levels, as expected. Figure 2b and

10

Figure 4 depict eﬀects of denoising of 5 test signals contaminated with in-band

noise. In comparison to white noise the performance decreased, but neverthe-
less, enabled satisfactory denoising for 0.5 ≤ λ ≤ 1.0 (rm=128,λ=1.0
Within this range, the noise reduction factor r depended weakly on noise lev-

= 1.6).

max

els. Note that the embedding dimension must be suﬃciently high (m = 128)

to ﬁnd true neighbors.

In order to simulate EPs/ERPs with several time-varying components, we used

5 test signals which were again a concatenation of diﬀerent Gaussian functions,

each, however, randomly shifted in time (Figure 2c and Figure 5). In contrast

to test signals with time ﬁxed components, ”optimal” embedding dimension

depended on the thresholding coeﬃcient λ. Higher values of λ required lower

embedding dimensions and vice versa. Best results were achieved for 0.5 ≤
λ ≤ 2.0 (rm=128,λ=1.0

= 3.2).

max

Even for high noise levels, the proposed denoising scheme preserved ﬁner struc-

tures of original test signals in all simulations. Moreover, the reconstructed

sequences were closer to the test signals than the corresponding averages, es-

pecially for time varying signals. Power spectra showed that denoising took

part in all frequency bands and was quite diﬀerent from common low-, or

band-pass ﬁltering. Simulation indicated that ”optimal” values of the thresh-

olding coeﬃcient were in the range 0.5 ≤ λ ≤ 2.0. Best embedding dimension
was found to be m = 128, since the ongoing background EEG can be assumed

to be in-band with ERPs. The ﬁlter performance was quite stable against the

number of embedded sequences, at least for L = 5, 10, 20.

4 Real data

11

4.1 Data Acquisition

We analyzed event related potentials recorded intracerebrally in patients with

pharmacoresistent focal epilepsy [26]. Electroencephalographic signals were

recorded from bilateral electrodes implanted along the longitudinal axis of

the hippocampus. Each electrode carried 10 cylindrical contacts of nickel-

chromium alloy with a length of 2.5 mm and an intercontact distance of 4

mm. Signals were referenced to linked mastoids, ampliﬁed with a bandpass

ﬁlter setting of 0.05 - 85.00 Hz (12dB/oct.) and, after 12 bit A/D conver-

sion, continuously written to a hard disk using a sampling interval of 5760µs.

Stimulus related epochs spanning 1480 ms (256 sample points) including a

200 ms pre-stimulus baseline were extracted from recorded data. The mean of

the pre-stimulus baseline was used to correct possible amplitude shifts of the

following ERP epoch.

In a visual odd-ball paradigm 60 rare (letter < x >, targets) and 240 frequent

stimuli (letter < o >, distractors) were randomly presented on a computer

monitor once every 1200 ± 200ms (duration: 100 ms, probability of occur-
rence: 1 (< x >) : 5 (< o >)). Patients were asked to press a button upon

each rare target stimulus. This pseudo-random presentation of rare stimuli

in combination with the required response is known to elicit the mesial tem-

poral lobe (MTL) P300 potential in recordings from within the hippocampal

formation [27] (cf. Figure 1).

4.2 Results

By simulation, we estimated a range in which ”optimal” parameters of the

ﬁlter can be expected. However, the quality of denoising ERP sequences could

12

not be estimated, because the clean signal was not known a priori. A rough

estimation of ﬁlter performance was only possible by a comparison to ERP

averages. Taking into account results of simulation as well as ERP averages,

we estimated λ = 0.6 and m = 128 to be the best conﬁguration.

Based on the empirical fact that speciﬁc ERP components exhibit peak am-

plitudes within a narrow time range related to stimulus onset, we deﬁned a

maximum allowed time jitter of ±20 sample points (≈ 116ms) true neighbors
are assumed to be restricted to. This accelerated the calculation time and

avoided false nearest neighbors. Figure 6 depicts several ERPs recorded from

diﬀerent electrode contacts within the hippocampal formation. The number

of embedded sequences was chosen as L = 8. Comparing averages, we can ex-

pect that the ﬁlter extracted the most relevant MTL-P300 components. Even

for low amplitude signals reconstruction was possible, exhibiting higher am-

plitudes in single trial data than in averages. As corresponding power spectra

show, the 50 Hz power line was reduced but not eliminated after ﬁltering.

Especially low amplitude signals showed artifacts based on the 50 Hz power

line.

5 Conclusion

In this study, we introduced a new wavelet based method for nonlinear noise

reduction of single trial EPs/ERPs. We employed advantages of methods de-

veloped for the paradigm of deterministic chaotic systems, that allowed de-

noising of short and time variant EP/ERP sequences without assuming fully

synchronized or stationary EEG.

Denoising via wavelet shrinkage does not require a priori assumptions about

constrained dimensions, as is usually required for other techniques (e.g., singu-

13

lar value decomposition). Besides, it is more straight forward using thresholds

depending on means and variances rather than initial assumptions about con-

strained embedding dimensions. Moreover, the local calculation of thresholds

in state space enables focusing on speciﬁc frequency scales, which may be ad-

vantageous in order to extract signal components located within both narrow

frequency bands and narrow time windows.

Extension of our denoising scheme to other types of signals seems to be possi-

ble, however, demands further investigations, since ”optimal” ﬁlter parameters

highly depend on signal characteristics. In addition, the noise reduction factor

r does not consider all imaginable features of signals investigators are possibly

interested in, so that other measures may be more advantageous in speciﬁc

cases.

So far, we have not considered eﬀects of smoothing the edges of signal se-

quences. But since delay vectors as well as corresponding wavelet coeﬃcients

hold information locally, we can assume artifacts to be also constrained to the

edges which we were not interested in.

In conclusion, the proposed denoising scheme represents a powerful noise re-

duction technique for transient signals of short duration, like ERPs.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grant. no.

EL 122 / 4-2. ).

We thank G. Widman, W. Burr, K. Sternickel, and C. Rieke for fruitful dis-

cussions.

14

References

[1] F. H. Lopes da Silva, A. S. Givens, and A. Remond, editors. Handbook
Elsevier Science

of Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology.
Publisher B.V., Amsterdam, 1986.

[2] S. Cerutti, G. Basselli, and G. Pavesi. Single sweep analysis of visual evoked
potentials through a model of parametric identiﬁcation. Biol Cybern, 56:111,
1987.

[3] H. J. Heinze and H. K¨unkel. ARMA-ﬁltering of evoked potentials. Meth. Inform.

Med., 23:29, 1984.

[4] C. D. Woody. Characterisation of an adaptive ﬁlter for the analysis of variable

latency neuroelectric signals. Med Biol Eng, 5:539, 1967.

[5] D. O. Walter. A posteriori Wiener ﬁltering of average evoked response.

Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol (Suppl), 27:61, 1969.

[6] D. J. Doyle. Some comments on the use of Wiener ﬁltering in the estimation

of evoked potentials. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol, 38:533, 1975.

[7] J. P. De Weerd. A posteriori time-varying ﬁltering of averaged evoked potentials.

I. introduction and conceptual basis. Biol Cybern, 41:211, 1981.

[8] J. P. De Weerd and J. I. Kap. A posteriori time-varying ﬁltering of averaged
evoked potentials. II. mathematical and computational aspects. Biol Cybern,
41:223, 1981.

[9] C. S. Burrus, R. A. Copinath, and H. Guo. Wavelets and wavelet transforms.

Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1998.

[10] C. K. Chui. Introduction to wavelets. Academic Press, San Diego, 1992.

[11] I. Daubechies. Ten lectures on wavelets. Society for Industrial and Applied

Mathematics, Pennsylvania, 1992.

[12] R. R. Coifman and M. Y. Wickerhauser. Wavelets, adapted waveforms and

de-noising. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol (Suppl.), 45:57, 1996.

[13] V. J. Samar, K. P. Swartz, and M. R. Raghuveer. Multiresolution analysis of

event-related potentials by wavelet decomposition. Brain Cogn, 27:398, 1995.

[14] S. J. Schiﬀ, A. Aldrouby, M. Unser, and S. Sato. Fast wavelet transform of

EEG. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol, 91:442, 1994.

[15] S. J. Schiﬀ, J. Milton, J. J. Heller, and S. Weinstein. Wavelet transforms and
surrogate data for electroencephalographic spike and seizure detection. Opt
Eng, 33:2162, 1994.

[16] D. L. Donoho, I. M. Johnstone, and B. W. Silverman. De-noising by soft-

thresholding. IEEE Trans Inform Theor, 41:613, 1995.

15

[17] O. Bertrand, J. Bohorquez, and J. Pernie. Time frequency digital ﬁltering based
on an invertible wavelet transform: An application to evoked potentials. IEEE
Trans Biomed Eng, 41:77, 1994.

[18] E. A. Bartink, K. J. Blinowska, and P. J. Durka. Single evoked potential

reconstruction by means of wavelet transform. Biol Cybern, 67:175, 1992.

[19] E. A. Bartink, K. J. Blinowska, and P. J. Durka. Wavelets: New method of

evoked potential analysis. Med Biol Eng Comput, 30:125, 1992.

[20] H. Kantz and T. Schreiber. Nonlinear time series analysis. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1997.

[21] T. Schreiber and D. T. Kaplan.
electrocardiograms. Chaos, 6:87, 1995.

Nonlinear noise

reduction for

[22] P. Grassberger, R. Hegger, H. Kantz, C. Schaﬀrath, and T. Schreiber. On noise

reduction methods for chaotic data. Chaos, 41:127, 1993.

[23] S. G. Mallat. Multiresolution approximation and wavelet orthonormal bases of

L2. IEEE Trans Am Math Soc, 315:69, 1989.

[24] S. G. Mallat. A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: The wavelet

representation. IEEE Trans Patt Recog Mach Intel, 11:674, 1989.

[25] J. Theiler, S. Eubank, A. Longtin, B. Galdrikian, and J. D. Farmer. Testing
of nonlinearity in time series: The method of surrogate data. Physica D, 58:77,
1992.

[26] T. Grunwald, H. Beck, K. Lehnertz, I. Bl¨umcke, N. Pezer, M. Kutas,
M. Kurthen, H. M. Karakas, D. Van Roost, O. D. Wiestler, and C. E. Elger.
Limbic P300s in temporal
lobe epilepsy with and without Ammon’s horn
sclerosis. Eur J Neurosci, 11:1899, 1999.

[27] A. Puce, R. M. Berkovic, G A. Donnan, and P. F. Baldin. Limbic P3 potentials,
seizure localization, and surgical pathology in temporal lobe epilepsy. Annals
of Neurology, 26:377, 1989.

16

Figure captions:

Fig. 1: Examples of averaged ERPs recorded along the longitudinal axis of the

hippocampal formation in a patient with epilepsy. Randomized presentation of

target and standard stimuli is known to elicit the mesial temporal lobe P300, a

negative deﬂection peaking at about 500 ms after stimulus onset (cf. Sect. 4.1

for more details). Letters (a), (b), and (c) indicate recordings used for single

trial analysis (cf. Figure 6).

Fig. 2: Results of denoising test signals. Parts a) and b): contamination with

white noise and in-band noise. Part c): time varying signal components and

white noise contamination (see text for more details). Five calculations for each

parameter conﬁguration have been executed to determine standard deviations.

Fig. 3: Nonlinear denoising applied to white noise contaminated test signals (5

sequences embedded, each 256 sample points, randomly shifted in time (std.

dev.: 20 sample points, max. shift: 40 sample points), noise amplitude 75%,

m = 128, τ = 1, λ = 1.5). Power spectra in arbitrary units. For state space

plots we used a time delay of 25 sample points.

Fig. 4: Same as Figure 3 but for in-band noise and λ = 0.75.

Fig. 5: Same as Figure 3 but for Gaussian functions each randomly shifted in

time and λ = 0.75.

Fig. 6: Examples of denoised MTL-P300 potentials (cf. Figure 1). Power spec-

tra in arbitrary units. For state space plots we used a time delay of 25 sample

points.

17

