0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

2
1

 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Forecast and event control:

On what is and what cannot be possible

Karl Svozil

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Technische Universit¨at Wien

Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna, Austria

e-mail: svozil@tuwien.ac.at

http://tph.tuwien.ac.at/e svozil/publ/consist.{htm,ps,tex}

Abstract

Consequences of the basic and most evident consistency requirement—

that measured events cannot happen and not happen at the same
time—are shortly reviewed. Particular emphasis is given to event
forecast and event control. As a consequence, particular, very general
bounds on the forecast and control of events within the known laws of
physics are derived. These bounds are of a global, statistical nature
and need not aﬀect singular events or groups of events.

Principle of self-consistency

An irreducible, atomic physical phenomenon manifests itself as a click of
some detector. There can either be a click or there can be no click. This
yes-no scheme is experimental physics in-a-nutshell (at least according to a
theoretician). From this type of elementary observation, all of our physical
evidence is accumulated. Irreversibly observed events of physical reality (in
the context in which they can be deﬁned [1, 2, 3]) are subject to the primary
condition of consistency or self-consistency.

Any particular irreversibly observed event can either happen or cannot

happen, but it must not both happen and not happen.

Indeed, so trivial seems the requirement of consistency for the set of
physically recorded events that David Hilbert polemicised against “another

1

author” with the following words [4], “...for me, the opinion that the [[phys-
ical]] facts and events themselves can be contradictory is a good example of
thoughtlessness.”

Just as in mathematics, inconsistency, i.e., the coexistence of truth and
falseness of propositions, is a fatal property of any physical theory. Nev-
ertheless, in a certain very precise sense, quantum mechanics incorporates
inconsistencies in a very subtle way which assures overall consistency. For
instance, a particle wave function or quantum state is said to “pass” a double
slit through both slits, which is classically impossible. (Such considerations
may, however, be considered as mere trickery quanum talk, devoid of any
operational meaning.) Yet, neither a particle wave function nor quantum
states are directly associable with any sort of irreversible observed event of
physical reality.

And just as in mathematics it can be argued that too strong capacities

of event forecast and event control renders the system overall inconsistent.

Strong forecasting

Let us consider forecasting the future ﬁrst. Even if physical phenomena occur
deterministically and can be accounted for (”computed”) on a higher level
of abstraction, from within the system such a complete description may not
be of much practical, operational use.

Indeed, suppose there exists free will. Suppose further that an agent
could predict all future events, without exceptions. We shall call this the
strong form of forecasting.
In this case, the agent could freely decide to
counteract in such a way as to invalidate that prediction. Hence, in order to
avoid inconsistencies and paradoxes, either free will has to be abandoned or
it has to be accepted that complete prediction is impossible.

Another possibility would be to consider strong forms of forecasting which
are, however, not utilized to alter the system. Eﬀectively, this results in the
abandonment of free will, amounting to an extrinsic, detached viewpoint.
After all, what is knowledge and what is it good for if it cannot be applied
and made to use?

It should be mentioned that the above argument is of an ancient type. It
has been formalized recently in set theory, formal logic and recursive function
theory, where it is called “diagonalization method.”

2

Strong event control

A very similar argument holds for event control and the production of “mira-
cles” [5]. Suppose there exists free will. Suppose further that an agent could
entirely control the future. We shall call this the strong form of event control.
Then this observer could freely decide to invalidate the laws of physics. In
order to avoid a paradox, either free will or some physical laws would have
to be abandoned, or it has to be accepted that complete event control is
impossible.

Stated diﬀerently, forecast and event control should be possible only if this

capacity cannot be associated with any paradox or contradiction.

Thus the requirement of consistency of the phenomena seems to impose
rather stringent conditions on forecasting and event control. Similar ideas
have already been discussed in the context of time paradoxes in relativity
theory (cf. [6] and [7, p. 272], “The only solutions to the laws of physics that
can occur locally . . . are those which are globally self-consistent”).

Weak forcast and event control

There is, however, a possibility that the forecast and control of future events
is conceivable for singular events within the statistical bounds. Such occur-
rences may be “singular miracles” which are well accountable within classical
physics. They will be called weak forms of forecasting and event control.

It may be argued that, in order to obey overall consistency, such a frame-
work should not be extendable to any forms of strong forecast or event con-
trol, because, as has been argued before, this could either violate global
consistency criteria or would make necessary a revision of the known laws of
physics.

It may be argued that weak forms of forecasting and event control amount
to nothing else than the impossibility of any forms of forecasting and event
control at all.

This, however, needs not to be the case. The laws of statistics impose
rather lax constraints and do not exclude local, singular, improbable events.
For example, a binary sequence such as

11111111111111111111111111111111

3

is just as probable as the sequences

11100101110101000111000011010101

01010101010101010101010101010101

and its occurrence in a test is equally likely, although its statistical property
and the “meaning” an observer could ascribe to it is rather outstanding.

Just as it is perfectly all right to consider the statement “This statement
is true” to be true, it may thus be perfectly reasonable to speculate that
certain events are forecasted and controlled within the domain of statistical
laws. But in order to be within the statistical laws, any such method needs
not to be guaranteed to work all the time.

To put it pointedly: it may be perfectly reasonable to become rich, say,
by singular forecasts of the stock and future values or in horse races, but
such an ability must necessarily be irreproducible and secretive. At least to
such an extend that no guarantee of an overall strategy can be derived from
it.

The associated weak forms of forecasting and event control are thus be-
yond any global statistical signiﬁcance. Their importance and meaning seem
to lie mainly on a very subjective level of singular events. This comes close
to one aspect of what Jung imagined as the principle of “Synchronicity” [8].

Against the odds

This ﬁnal paragraphs review a couple of experiments which suggest them-
selves in the context of weak forecast and event control. All are based on the
observation that an agent forcasts or controls correctly future events such as,
say, the tossing of a fair coin.

In the ﬁrst run of the experiment, no consequence is derived from the

agent’s capacity despite the mere recording of the data.

The second run of the experiment is like the ﬁrst run, but the meaning of
the forecasts or controlled events are diﬀerent. They are taken as outcomes
of, say gambling, against other individuals (i) with or (ii) without similar
capacities, or against (iii) an anonymous “mechanic” agent such as a casino
or a stock exchange.

As a variant of this experiment, the partners or adversaries of the agent

are informed about the agent’s intentions.

4

In the third run of experiments, the experimenter attempts to counteract
the agent’s capacity. Let us assume the experimenter has total control over
the event.
If the agent predicts or attempts to bring about to happen a
certain future event, the experimenter causes the event not to happen and
so on.

It might be interesting to record just how much the agent’s capacity is
changed by the setup. Such a correlation might be deﬁned from a dichotomic
observable

e(A, i) =( +1

−1

correct guess
incorrect guess

where i stands for the i’th experiment and A stands for the agent A. A
correlation function can then be deﬁned as usual by the average over N
experiments; i.e.,

C(A) =

1
N

NXi=1

e(A, i).

From the ﬁrst to the second type of experiment it should become more
and more unlikely that the agent operates correctly, since his performance is
leveled against other agents with more or less the same capacities. The third
type of experiment should produce a total uncorrelation.

References

[1] Daniel B. Greenberger and A. YaSin. “Haunted” measurements in quan-

tum theory. Foundation of Physics, 19(6):679–704, 1989.

[2] Thomas J. Herzog, Paul G. Kwiat, Harald Weinfurter, and Anton
Zeilinger. Complementarity and the quantum eraser. Physical Review
Letters, 75(17):3034–3037, 1995.

[3] Karl Svozil. Quantum interfaces. forthcoming, 2000.

[4] David Hilbert. ¨Uber das Unendliche. Mathematische Annalen, 95:161–

190, 1926.

[5] Philip Frank. Das Kausalgesetz und seine Grenzen. Springer, Vienna,

1932.

5

[6] John Friedman, Michael S. Morris, Igor D. Novikov, Fernando Echever-
ria, Gunnar Klinkhammer, Kip S. Thorne, and Ulvi Yurtsever. Cauchy
problem in spacetimes with closed timelight curves. Physical Review,
D42(6):1915–1930, 1990.

[7] Paul J. Nahin. Time Travel (Second edition). AIP Press and Springer,

New York, 1998.

[8] Carl Gustav Jung. Synchronizit¨at als ein Prinzip akausaler Zusam-
In Carl Gustav Jung and Wolfgang Pauli, editors, Natur-

menh¨ange.
erkl¨arung und Psyche. Rascher, Z¨urich, 1952.

6

