0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
6
2

 

 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
6
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ROLE AND MEANING OF SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY
SOME COMMENTS ON COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS

G. D’AGOSTINI
Dipartimento di Fisica dell’Universit`a “La Sapienza”
Piazzale Aldo Moro 2, I-00185 Roma (Italy)†

Abstract. Criticisms of so called ‘subjective probability’ come on the one hand
from those who maintain that probability in physics has only a frequentistic inter-
pretation, and, on the other, from those who tend to ‘objectivise’ Bayesian theory,
arguing, e.g., that subjective probabilities are indeed based ‘only on private in-
trospection’. Some of the common misconceptions on subjective probability will
be commented upon in support of the thesis that coherence is the most crucial,
universal and ‘objective’ way to assess our conﬁdence on events of any kind.

Key words: Subjective Bayesian Theory, Measurement Uncertainty

1. Introduction

The role of scientists is, generally speaking, to understand Nature, in order to
forecast as yet unobserved (‘future’) events, independently of whether or not these
events can be inﬂuenced. In laboratory experiments and all technological applica-
tions, observations depend on our intentional manipulation of the external world.
However, other scientiﬁc activities, like astrophysics, are only observational. Nev-
ertheless, to claim that cosmology, climatology or geophysics are not Science, be-
cause “experiments cannot be repeated” - as pedantic interpreters of Galileo’s
scientiﬁc method do - is, in my opinion, short-sighted (for a recent defence of this
strict Galilean point of view, advocating ‘consequently’ frequentistic methods, see
Ref. [1]). The link between past observations and future observations is provided
by theory (or model).

It is accepted that quantitative (and, often, also qualitative) forecasting of
future observations is invariably uncertain, from the moment that we deﬁne suﬃ-
ciently precisely the details of the future events. The uncertainty may arise because
we are not certain about the parameters of the theory (or of the theory itself),
and/or about the initial state and boundary conditions of the phenomenon we want

†Email: giulio.dagostini@roma1.infn.it. URL: http://www-zeus.roma1.infn.it/∼agostini.

Contribution at the XX International Workshop on Bayesian Inference and Maximum Entropy
Methods in Science and Engineering, Gif sur Yvette, France, July 8–13, 2000.

2

G. D’AGOSTINI

to describe. But it may also be due to the stochastic nature of the theory itself,
which would produce uncertain predictions even if all parameters and boundary
conditions were precisely known. Nevertheless, the constant state of uncertainty
does not prevent us from doing science. As Feynman wrote, “it is scientiﬁc only to
say what is more likely and what is less likely”.[2] This observation holds not only
for observations, but also for the values of physical quantities (i.e. parameters of
the theory which have eﬀect on the real observations). And indeed, physicists ﬁnd
probabilistic statements about, for example, top quark mass or gravitational con-
stant very natural,[3] and several equivalent expressions are currently used, such
as “to be more or less conﬁdent”, “to consider something more or less probable, or
more or less likely”, “to believe more or less something”. However, the subjective
deﬁnition of probability, the only one consistent with the above expressions, is
usually rejected because of educational bias according to which “the only scien-
tiﬁc deﬁnition of probability is the frequentistic one,” “quantum mechanics only
allows the frequency based deﬁnition of probability,” “probability is an objective
property of the physical world,” etc. In this paper I will comment on these and
other objections against the so called ‘subjective Bayesian’ point of view. Indeed,
some criticisms come from ‘objective Bayesians’, who have been, traditionally, in
a clear majority during this workshop series.

I don’t expect to solve these debates in this short contribution, especially con-
sidering that many aspects of the debate are of a psychological and sociological
nature. Neither will I be able to analyse in detail every objection or to cite all the
counter-arguments. I prefer, therefore, to focus here only on a few points, referring
to other papers [4–6] and references therein for points already discussed elsewhere.

2. Subjective Probability and Role of Coherence

The main aim of subjective probability is to recover the intuitive concept of prob-
ability as degree of belief. Probability is then related to uncertainty and not (only)
to the outcomes of repeated experiments. Since uncertainty is related to knowl-
edge, probability is only meaningful as long as there are human beings interested
in knowing (or forecasting) something, no matter if “the events considered are
in some sense determined, or known by other people.”[7] Since - fortunately! -
we do not share identical states of information, we are in diﬀerent conditions of
uncertainty. Probability is therefore only and always conditional probability, and
depends on the diﬀerent subjects interested in it (and hence the name subjective).
This point of view about probability is not related to a single evaluation rule. In
particular, symmetry arguments and past frequencies, as well as their combination
properly weighted by means of Bayes’ theorem, can be used.

Since beliefs can be expressed in terms of betting odds, as is well known and
done in practice, betting odds can be seen as the most general way of making
relative beliefs explicit, independently of the kind of events one is dealing with,
or of the method used to deﬁne the odds. For example, everybody understands
Laplace’s statement concerning Saturn’s mass, that “it is a bet of 10000 to 1 that
the error of this result is not 1/100th of its value.”[8] I wish all experimental
results to be provided in these terms, instead of the misleading [9] “such and such

COMMENTS ON SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY

3

percent CL’s.” What matters is that the bet must be reversible and that no bet
can be arranged in such a way that one wins or loses with certainty. The second
condition is a general condition concerning bets. The ﬁrst condition forces the
subject to assess the odds consistently with his/her beliefs and also to accept the
second condition: once he/she has ﬁxed the odds, he/she must be ready to bet in
either direction. Coherence has two important roles: the ﬁrst is, so to speak, moral,
and forces people to be honest; the second is formal, allowing the basic rules of
probability to be derived as theorems, including the formula relating conditional
probability to probability of the conditionand and their joint probability (note
that, consistent with the use of probability in practice and with the fact that in
a theory where only conditional probabilities matter, it makes no sense to have
a formula that deﬁnes conditional probability, see e.g. Section 8.3 of Ref. [4] for
further comments and examples).

Once coherence is included in the subjective Bayesian theory, it becomes ev-
ident that ‘subjective’ cannot be confused with ‘arbitrary’, since all ingredients
for assessing probability must be taken into account, including the knowledge that
somebody else might assess diﬀerent odds for the same events. Indeed, the coherent
subjectivist is far more responsible (and more “objective”, in the sense that ordi-
nary parlance gives to this word) than those who blindly use standard ‘objective’
methods (see examples in Ref. [4]). Another source of objections is the confusion
between ‘belief’ and ‘imagination’, for which I refer to Ref. [5].

3. Subjective Probability, Objective Probability, Physical Probability

To those who insist on objective probabilities I like to pose practical questions,
such as how they would evaluate probability in speciﬁc cases, instead of letting
them pursue mathematical games. Then it becomes clear that, at most, probability
evaluations can be intersubjective, if we all share the same education and the
same real or conventional state of information. The probability that a molecule
of N2 at a certain temperature has a velocity in a certain range seems objective:
take the Maxwell velocity p.d.f., make an integral and get a number, say p =
0.23184 . . . This mathematical game gets immediately complicated if one thinks
about a real vessel, containing real gas, and the molecule velocity measured in a real
experiment. The precise ‘objective’ number obtained from the above integral might
no longer correspond to our conﬁdence that the velocity is really in that interval.
The idealized “physical probability” p can easily be a misleading “metaphysical”
concept which does not correspond to the conﬁdence of real situations. In most
cases, in fact, p is a number that one gets from a model, or a free parameter of a
model. Calling E the real event and P (E) the probability we attribute to it, the
idealized situation corresponds to the following conditional probability:

P (E | Model → p) = p .

(1)

But, indeed, our conﬁdence on E relies on our conﬁdence on the model:

P (E | I) = XModels

P (E | I, Model → p) · P (Model → p | I) ,

(2)

4

G. D’AGOSTINI

where I stands for a background state of information which is usually implicit in
all probability assessments. Describing our uncertainty on the parameter p by a
p.d.f. f (p) (continuity is assumed for simplicity), the above formula can be turned
into

P (E | p, I) · f (p | I) dp .

(3)

P (E | I) = Z 1

0

The results of Eqs. (2) and (3) really express the meaning of probability, describing
our beliefs, and upon which (virtual) bets can be set (‘virtual’ because it is well
known that real bets are delicate decision problems of which beliefs are only one
of the ingredients).

For those who still insist that probability is a property of the world, I like to
give the following example, readapted from Ref. [10]. Six externally indistinguish-
able boxes each contain ﬁve balls, but with diﬀering numbers of black and white
balls (see Ref. [6] for details and for a short introduction of Bayesian inference
based on this example). One box is chosen at random. What will be its white ball
content? If we extract a ball, what is the probability that it will be white? Then a
ball is extracted and turns out to be white. The ball is reintroduced into the box,
and the above two questions are asked again. As a simple application of Bayesian
inference, the probability of extracting a white ball in the second extraction be-
comes P (E2 = W ) = 73%, while it was P (E1 = W ) = 50% for the ﬁrst extraction.
One does not need to be a Bayesian to solve this simple text book example, and
everybody will agree on the two values of probability (we have got “objective”
results, so to say). But it is easy to realize that these probabilities do not rep-
resent a ‘physical property of the box’, but rather a ‘state of our mind’, which
changes as the extractions proceed. In particular, ‘measuring’, or ‘verifying’, that
P (E2 = W ) = 73% using the relative frequency makes no sense. We could imagine
a large number of extractions. It is easy to understand, given our prior knowledge
of the box contents, that the relative frequencies “will tend” (in a probabilistic
sense) to ≈ 20%, ≈ 40%, ≈ 60%, ≈ 80%, or ≈ 100%, but ‘never’ 73% 1. This
certainly appears to be a paradox to those who agree that P (E2 = W ) = 73%
is the ‘correct’ probability, but still maintain that probability as degree of belief
is a useless concept. In this simple case the six a priori probabilities pi = i/5,
with i = 0, 1, . . . , 5, can be seen as the possible “physical probabilities”, but the
“real” probability which determines our conﬁdence on the outcome is given by a
discretized version of Eq. (3), with f (pi) changing from one extraction to the next.
I imagine that at this point some readers might react by saying that the above
example proves that only the frequentistic deﬁnition of probability is sensible, be-
cause the relative frequency will tend for n → ∞ to the ‘physical probability’,
identiﬁed in this case by the white ball ratio in the box. But this reaction is quite
na¨ıve. First, a deﬁnition valid for n → ∞ is of little use for practical applications
(“In the long run we are all dead”[11]). Second, it is easy to show [6] that, for the
cases in which the ‘physical probability’ can be checked and the number of ex-
traction is ﬁnite, though large, the convergence behaviour of the frequency based

1Does this violate Bernoulli’s theorem? I leave the solution to this apparent paradox as amus-

ing problem to the reader.

COMMENTS ON SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY

5

evaluation is far poorer than the Bayesian solution and can also be in paradoxical
contradiction with the available status of information. Moreover, only the Bayesian
theory answers consistently, in unambiguous probabilistic terms, the legitimate
question “what is the box content?”, since the very concept of probability of hy-
potheses is banished in the frequentistic approach. Similarly, only in the Bayesian
approach does it make sense to express in a logical, consistent way the conﬁdence
on the diﬀerent causes of observed events and on the possible values of physics
quantities (which are unobserved entities). To state that “in high energy physics,
where experiments are repeatable (at least in principle) the deﬁnition of probabil-
ity normally used”[12] is to ignore the fact that the purpose of experiments is not
to predict which electronic signal will come out next from the detector (following
the analogy of the six box example), but rather to narrow the range in which we
have high conﬁdence that the physics quantities lie.2

4. Observed Frequencies, Expected Frequencies, Frequentistic Approach
and Quantum Mechanics

Many scientists think they are frequentists because they are used to assessing their
beliefs in terms of expected frequencies, without being aware of the implications for
a sane person of sticking strictly to frequentistic ideas. Certainly, past frequencies
can be a part of the information upon which probabilities can be assessed [6,9].
Similarly, probability theory teaches us how to predict future frequencies from the
assessment of beliefs, under well deﬁned conditions. But identifying probability
with frequency is like confusing a table with the English word ‘table’. This confu-
sion leads some authors, because they lack other arguments to save the manifestly
sinking boat of the frequentistic collection of adhoc-eries, to argue3 that “probabil-
ity in quantum mechanics is frequentistic probability, and is deﬁned as long-term
frequency. Bayesians will have to explain how they handle that problem, and they
are warned in advance.”[14]

Probability deals with the belief that an event may happen, given a particular
state of information. It does not matter if the fundamental laws are ‘intrinsically
probabilistic’, or if it is just a limitation of our present ignorance. The impact on
our minds remains the same. If we think of two possible events resulting from a
quantum mechanics experiment, and say (after computing no matter how compli-
cated calculations to also take into account detector eﬀects) that P (E1) ≫ P (E2),
this simply means that we feel more conﬁdent in E1 than in E2, or that we will
be surprised if E2 happens instead of E1. If we have the opportunity to repeat the
experiment we believe that events of the ‘class’ E1 will happen more frequently

2To be more rigorous, simple laboratory experiments can be performed in conditions of re-
peatability[13], but thinking of repeating very complex particle physics experiments run for a
decade make no sense (even in principle!). Perhaps the remark “in principle” in the above quo-
tation from Ref. [12] is to justify Monte Carlo simulation of the experiments. But one has to
be aware that a Monte Carlo program is nothing but a collection of our best beliefs about the
behaviour of the studied reaction, background reactions and apparatus.

3A similar desperate attempt is try to throw a bad shadow over Bayesian theory, saying that
in this theory “frequency and probability are completely disconnected”[14], using as argument an
ambiguous sentence picked up from the large Bayesian literature, and severed from its context.

6

G. D’AGOSTINI

than events of class E2. This is what we ﬁnd carefully reviewing the relevant liter-
ature and discussing with theorists: probability is ‘probability’, although it might
be expressed in terms of expected frequencies, as discussed above. Take for exam-
ple Hawking’s A Brief History of Time,[15] (which a statistician[16] said should
be called ‘a brief history of beliefs’, so frequently do the words belief, believe and
synonyms appear in it). For example: “In general, quantum mechanics does not
predict a single deﬁnite result for an observation. Instead, it predicts a number of
diﬀerent possible outcomes and tells us how likely each of these is” [15]. Looking
further to the past, it is worth noting the concept of “degree of truth” introduced
by von Weizs¨acker, as reported by Heisenberg [17]. It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd any diﬀer-
ence between this concept and the usual degree of belief, especially because both
Heisenberg and von Weizs¨acker were fully aware that “nature is earlier than man,
but man is earlier than natural science” [17], in the sense that science is done by
our brains, mediated by our senses. It is true that, reading some text books on
quantum mechanics one gets the idea that “probability is frequentistic probabil-
ity”[14], but one should remember the remarks at the beginning of this section,
and the fact that many authors have used, uncritically, the dominant ideas on
probability in the past decades. But some authors also try to account for proba-
bility of single events, instead of ‘repeated events’, and have to admit that this is
possible if probability is meant as degree of belief.

In conclusion, invoking intriguing fundamental aspects of quantum mechanics
in the discussion of inferential frameworks shows little awareness of the real issues
involved in the two classes of problems. First, the debate about the interpretations
of quantum mechanics is far from being settled [18]. Second, as far as ‘natural
science’ is concerned, it doesn’t really matter if nature is deeply deterministic
or probabilistic, as eloquently said by Hume: “Though there is no such thing as
Chance in the world; our ignorance of the real cause of any event has the same
inﬂuence on the understanding, and begets a like species of belief or opinion.”[19]

5. Who is Afraid of Subjective Bayesian Theory?

“It is curious that, even when diﬀerent workers are in substantially complete agree-
ment on what calculations should be done, they may have radically diﬀerent views
as to what we are actually doing and why we are doing it.” [20] It is indeed
surprising that strong criticisms of subjective probability come from people who
essentially agree that probability represents “our degree of conﬁdence” [21] and
that Bayes’ theorem is the proper inferential tool. I would like to comment here
on criticisms (and invitations to convert. . . ) which I have received from objective
Bayesian friends and colleagues, and which can be traced back essentially to the
same source. [20] The main issue in the debate is the choice of the prior to enter
in the Bayesian inference. I prefer subjective priors because they seem to me to
correspond more closely to the spirit of the Bayesian theory and the results of the
methods based on them are more reliable and never paradoxical [5]. Nevertheless,
I agree, in principle, that a “concept of a ‘minimal informative’ prior speciﬁcation
– appropriately deﬁned!”[22] can be useful in particular applications. The prob-
lem is that those who are not fully aware of the intentions and limits of the so

COMMENTS ON SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY

7

called reference priors tend to perceive the Bayesian approach as dogmatic. Let
us analyse, then, some of the criticisms.

- “Subjective Bayesians have settled into a position intermediate between or-
thodox statistics and the theory expounded here.”[20] I think exactly the
opposite. Now, it is obvious that frequentistic methods are conceptually a
mess, a collection of arbitrary prescriptions. But those who stick too strictly
to the theory expounded in Ref. [20] tend to give up the real (unavoidably
subjective!) knowledge of the problem in favour of mathematical convenience
or blindly following the stance taken by the leading ﬁgures in their school of
thought. This is exactly what happens with practitioners using blessed ‘ob-
jective’ frequentistic ‘procedures’ (for example, see Ref. [5] for a discussion on
the misuse of Jeﬀreys’ priors).

- “While perceiving that probabilities cannot represent only frequencies, they
[subjective Bayesians] still regard sampling probabilities as representing fre-
quencies of ‘random variables”’.[20] The name‘random variable’ is avoided
by the most authoritative subjective Bayesians [7] and the terms ‘uncertain
(aleatoric) numbers’ and ‘aleatoric vectors’ (form multi-dimensional cases)
are currently used. Even the idea of ‘repeated events’ is rejected [7], as ev-
ery event is unique, though one might think of classes of analogous events to
which we can attribute the same conditional probability, but these events are
usually stochastically dependent (like the outcomes black and white in the six
box example of Ref. [6]). In this way the ideas of uncertainty and probabil-
ity are completely disconnected from that of randomness `a la von Mises. [23]
Nevertheless, I admit that there are authors, including myself [4], who mix
the terms ‘uncertain numbers’ and ‘random variables’, to make life easier for
those who are not accustomed to the concept of uncertain numbers, since the
formal properties (like p.d.f., expected value, variance, etc) are the same for
the two objects.

- “Subjective Bayesians face an awkward ambiguity at the beginning of a prob-
lem, when one assigns prior probabilities. If these represent merely prior opin-
ions, then they are basically arbitrary and undeﬁned”. [20] Here the confusion
between subjective and arbitrary, discussed above, is obvious.

- “It seems that only private introspection could assign them and diﬀerent peo-
ple will make diﬀerent assignments”. No knowledge, no science, and there-
fore no probability, is conceivable if there is no brain to analyse the external
world. Fortunately there are no two identical brains (yet), and therefore no
two identical states of knowledge are conceivable, though intersubjectivity can
be achieved in many cases.

- “Our goal is that inferences are to be completely ‘objective’ in the sense that
two persons with the prior information must assign the same prior probabil-
ity.” [20] This is a very na¨ıve idealistic statement of little practical relevance.
- “The natural starting point in translating a number of pieces of prior infor-
mation is the state of complete ignorance.” [20] When should we deﬁne the
state of complete ignorance? At conception or at birth? How much is learned
and how much was already coded in the DNA?

8

G. D’AGOSTINI

6. Conclusions

To conclude, I think that none of the above criticisms is really justiﬁed. As for
criticisms put forward by frequentists or by self-designed frequentistic practition-
ers (who are more Bayesian than they think they are [3]) there is little more to
comment in the context of this workshop. I am much more interested in making
some ﬁnal comments addressed to fellow Bayesians who do not share some of the
ideas expounded here. I think that users and promoters of Bayesian methods of
the diﬀerent schools should make an eﬀort to smooth the tones of the debate,
because the points we have in common are without doubt many more, and more
relevant, than those on which there is disagreement. Working on similar problems
and exchanging ideas will certainly help us to understand each other. There is no
denying that Maximum Entropy methods are very useful in solving many compli-
cated practical problems, as this successful series of workshops has demonstrated.
But I don’t see any real contradiction with coherence: I am ready to take seri-
ously the result of any method, if the person responsible for the result is honest
and is ready to make any combination of reversible bets based on the declared
probabilities.

References

1. C. Giunti, Proc. Workshop on Conﬁdence Limits, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, January

2000. CERN Report 2000–005, May 2000, pp. 63–72, e-print arXiv: hep-ex/0002042.

2. R. Feynman, The character of physical law, MIT Press, 1967.
3. G. D’Agostini, Proc. of the XVIII International Workshop on Maximum Entropy and
Bayesian Methods, Garching (Germany), July 1998. (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dor-
drecht, 1999), pp. 157–170, e-print arXiv: physics/9811046.

4. G. D’Agostini, CERN Report 99–03, July 1999, electronic version available at the author’s

URL.

5. G. D’Agostini, Rev. R. Acad. Cienc. Exact. Fis. Nat., Vol. 93, Nr. 3, 1999, pp. 311–319,

e-print arXiv: physics/9906048.

6. G. D’Agostini, Am. J. Phys. 67 (1999) 1260-1268, e-print arXiv: physics/9908014.
7. B. de Finetti, Theory of Probability (J. Wiley & Sons, 1974).
8. D.S. Sivia, Data analysis – a Bayesian tutorial, Oxford University Press, 1997.
9. G. D’Agostini, Proc. Workshop on Conﬁdence Limits, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, January

2000. CERN Report 2000–005, May 2000, pp. 3–23.

10. R. Scozzafava, Pure Math. and Appl., Series C 2, 1991, pp. 223-235.
11. J.M. Keynes, A tract on Monetary Reform (Macmillan, London, 1923).
12. Particle Data Group, D.E. Groom et al., Eur. Phys. J. C15 (2000) 1 (Section 28).
13. DIN Deutsches Institut f¨ur Normung, “Grundbegriﬀe der Messtechnick – Behandlung von
Unsicheratine bei der Auswertung von Messungen”, (DIN 1319 Teile 1–4), Beuth Verlag
GmBH, Berlin, Germany, 1985.
ISO International Organization for Standardization, International vocabulary of basic and
genaral terms in metrology,” Geneva, Switzerland, 1993.

14. F. James, Proc. Workshop on Conﬁdence Limits, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, January

2000. CERN Report 2000–005, May 2000, pp. 1–2.

15. S.W. Hawking, A Brief history of time, Bantam Doubleday Dell, 1988.
16. D.A. Berry, Talk at the Annual Meeting of American Statistical Association, Chicago,

August 1996.

17. W. Heisenberg, Physics and philosophy. The revolution in modern science, 1958 (Harper &

Row Publishers, New York, 1962).

18. See e.g. G. ’t Hooft, In search of the ultimate building blocks, 1992 (Cambridge University

Press, 1996).

COMMENTS ON SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY

9

19. D. Hume, Enquiry concerning human understanding”, 1748.
20. E.T. Jaynes, Probability Theory: The logic of Science, Chapter 12 on Ignorance priors
and transformation groups, (book available at http://bayes.wustl.edu/etj/prob.html and
http://omega.albany.edu:8008/JaynesBook, but Chapter 12 is missing since beginning of
2000).

21. H. Jeﬀreys, Theory of probability, 1939 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998).
22. J.M. Bernardo and A.F.M. Smith, Bayesian Theory, John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
23. R. von Mises, Probability, Statistics and Truth, 1928, (George Allen & Unwin, 1957), second

edition.

