0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
5
1

 

 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Maximally Informative Statistics

Maximally Informative Statistics

David R. Wolf

PO 8308, Austin, TX 78713-8308, USA, E-mail: drwolf@realtime.net
Dr. Wolf is the corresponding author.

Edward I. George

Department of MSIS, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1175, Email:
egeorge@mail.utexas.edu

Revision history: April 1996. Presented Bayesian Statistics 6, Valencia, 1998.
Invited paper Monograph on Bayesian Methods in the Sciences, Rev. R.
Acad. Sci. Exacta. Fisica. Nat. Vol. 93, No. 3, pp. 381–386, 1999. Arxiv
version asserts bold vectors dropped in print.

Abstract: In this paper we propose a Bayesian, information theoretic ap-
proach to dimensionality reduction. The approach is formulated as a varia-
tional principle on mutual information, and seamlessly addresses the notions
of suﬃciency, relevance, and representation. Maximally informative statistics
are shown to minimize a Kullback-Leibler distance between posterior distri-
butions. Illustrating the approach, we derive the maximally informative one
dimensional statistic for a random sample from the Cauchy distribution.

Keywords: Bayesian Inference; Kullback-Leibler distance; Maximally in-
formative statistics; Suﬃcient statistics; Mutual information; Calculus of
variation.

c(cid:13)1999 by ﬁrst author. Reproduction for noncommercial purposes permitted.

Maximally Informative Statistics

2

1 Introduction

Dimensionality reduction is a fundamental goal of statistical science. In a
modeling context, this is often facilitated by estimating a low dimensional
quantity of interest. For example, suppose the quantities of interest are the
labels of a classiﬁcation of photographs of objects; of trees, children, etc.
The data are the photographs, and the goal is to infer which of the several
classes have been presented. In this case the data space often has dimension
on the order of > 106, while the parameter space is a small discrete set of
labels each having much lower dimension. A low dimensional summary of
the photograph is then obtained as the estimate of the classiﬁcation of the
photograph.

In this paper, we propose a novel fully Bayesian information theoretic
approach to dimensionality reduction, based on maximizing the mutual in-
formation between a statistic and a quantity of interest. The approach is for-
mulated as a variational principle on mutual information, and it seamlessly
addresses the notions of suﬃciency, relevance, and representation. We refer
to statistics which maximize this mutual information as maximally informa-
tive (MI) statistics. Such statistics are shown to minimize a Kullback-Leibler
distance between posterior distributions.

The mutual information between a statistic and a quantity of interest
is deﬁned in section 2. The mutual information based variational principle
for MI statistics is utilized in section 3 to derive non-variational derivative
forms of the principle.
In section 4 several properties of MI statistics are
derived. The important result of this section is that MI statistics provide
a generalization of the notion of suﬃciency, because they are sensible both
when they are not suﬃcient statistics, and when lower-than-data-dimension
suﬃcient statistics do not exist.
In section 5 we present the result that
in inference the Kullback-Leibler (KL) distance is properly a functional of
posterior distributions. There we ﬁnd MI statistics at functional minima of
a KL distance based on posterior distributions of the parameter of interest.
The arguments made here suggest that the KL distance derived here is to
be preferred to a maximum relative entropy distance, a fact which is not
discussed in, for example, Kullback [3] or Shor [5], and numerous others. In
section 6 the MI static for the location parameter of the univariate Gaussian
distribution is derived, and shown to be the expected result, since in this
case a one-dimensional suﬃcient statistic exists. In section 7 we ﬁnd a one-

Maximally Informative Statistics

3

dimensional MI statistic for the Cauchy distribution, where a suﬃciency
reduction does not exist. In section 8 we discuss approximating the posterior
distribution as a Gaussian and apply this technique to show that the MI
statistics are then Bayes’ estimators of the mean and standard deviation. In
that section a contrast of the approximate MI inference approach with the
Maximum Entropy method is made, and it is shown that although they agree
for Gaussian likelihoods, they disagree for other distributions, with simplicity
arguing in favor of the MI statistics.

2 The Mutual Information Between a Statistic and a Quantity of

Interest

Let the data x ∈ X be drawn according to a parameterized distribution
P (x | θ), with θ ∈ Θ, the parameter space. θ itself is distributed according
to the prior P (θ). The marginal distribution of x is obtained from P (x) =
R P (x | θ) P (θ) dθ, and the posterior of θ given x is obtained from Bayes

Theorem as

P (θ | x) =

(1)

P (x | θ) P (θ)

P (x)

The quantity of interest q = ξQ(θ) will be a function of θ, a mapping
from the parameter space Θ into some Q, ξQ(·) : Θ → Q. It will be useful
to use the Dirac delta-function δ(·) to represent the distribution of q as

P (q | θ)

:= P ({θ : q = ξQ(θ)} | θ)
= δ(q − ξQ(θ))
= Πkq

i=1δ(qi − ξQ,i(θ)),

(2)

(3)

where δ(z(·)) = Πiδ(zi(·)). Note that (2) may be seen directly by using
Bayes’ theorem to expand P (q, θ) as P (q | θ) P (θ), integrating that over q,
which must produce P (θ), and noting that because the support of P (q | θ)
is the unique q such that q = ξQ(θ) (θ is speciﬁed), P (q | θ) must therefore
be the Dirac delta function. The distribution of q given the data x, may be
written using (1) and (3) as

P (q | x) = Z P (q | θ) P (θ | x) dθ

(4)

Maximally Informative Statistics

4

A statistic r = ξR(x) will be a function of x, a mapping from the data
space X into some R, ξR(·) : X → R. Again using the delta notation, the
distribution of the statistic given data is

P (r | x) = δ(r − ξR(x))

= Πkr

i=1δ(ri − ξR,i(x))

(5)
(6)

The joint distribution of the statistic r and the quantity of interest q, con-
ditioned on the data x is

P (r, q | x) = P (r | x) P (q | x)

(7)

(since r = ξR(x) is speciﬁed once x is known, making P (r | x, q) = P (r |
x)), and the unconditional joint distribution is

P (r, q) = Z P (r | x) P (q | x)P (x)dx.

(8)

Finally, we deﬁne the mutual information between a statistic ξR(·) and a

quantity of interest ξQ(·) as

M(ξR(·), ξQ(·)) = Z Z P (r, q) log  P (r, q)

P (r) P (q)! dq dr

(9)

This mutual information is the Kullback-Leibler distance between the joint
distribution P (r, q) and the marginal product P (r)P (q) corresponding to
independence between r and q. Note that this Kullback-Leibler distance is
diﬀerent from the Kullback-Leibler distance mentioned in the introduction
(and seen later in section 5). A major contribution of this paper is the
demonstration of how these two Kullback-Leibler distances are related.

3 MI Statistics and the Variational Principle

We now deﬁne the maximally informative (MI) statistic.

Let S = {ξR(·)} be a set of statistics under consideration. A MI
statistic for a quantity of interest ξQ(·) is any statistic ξR(·) from
S maximizing the mutual information M(ξR(·), ξQ(·)) between the
statistic and the quantity of interest.

Maximally Informative Statistics

5

Let

The following variational principle can be used to obtain an MI statistic.
δf (·) denote the functional derivative with respect to f (·).

δ

Choose ξR(·) from S such that
is negative semideﬁnite, i.e. so that ξR(·) maximizes the informa-
tion between itself and ξQ(·), the quantity of interest. If possible,
choose the global maximum.

= 0 and

δξR(·)

δ2M (ξR(·),ξQ(·))

2

δξR(·)

δM (ξR(·),ξQ(·))

Note that MI statistics in S may occur on the boundary of S. This
may be a case of interest, which occurs when constraints are imposed on the
statistics, and may be handled with a trivial modiﬁcation. Note also that
the space S of statistics may be constrained to contain only low-dimensional
statistics, in order to force a dimesionality reduction of the data.

We now demonstrate the variational principle for MI statistics. The ar-
gument proceeds by varying (see, for example [1] for the variational calculus)
the mutual information of (9) with respect to the statistic function ξR(·) of
dimension kr, i.e. ξR(·) = (ξr,1(·), . . . , ξr,kr(·)). We now proceed to substitute
ξR(x) = ξ0

R(x) + ǫη(x) in (9), and take the derivative with respect to ǫ.

Assuming appropriate regularity conditions, we have

∂ǫM(ξR(·), ξQ(·)) = Z Z "∂ǫP (r, q)log  P (r, q)
P (r)P (q)!
+ P (r)∂ǫP (q | r)(cid:21) dqdr

= Z Z ∂ǫP (r, q)log  P (r, q)

P (r)P (q)! dqdr,

(10)

(11)

where simpliﬁcation from (10) to (11) occurs because probability is conserved.
Utilizing (7) we ﬁnd

P (r, q) = Z δ(r − ξR(x)) P (q | x) P (x) dx

(12)

Taking the derivative of (12) with respect to ǫ yields

∂ǫP (r, q) = Σkr

j=1Z δ′(rj − ξR,j(x))ηj(x)Πi6=jδ(ri − ξR,i(x))P (q | x)P (x) dx

(13)

Maximally Informative Statistics

6

Note that because η is arbitrary, we may choose it to simplify as needed.

We proceed by considering kr choices of η. Label the choices by m ∈

{1, . . . , kr}, and on choice m take the components of η as follows:

ηℓ(x) = δ(x − xc),
ηℓ(x) = 0,
(ℓ 6= m)

(ℓ = m)

(14)
(15)

where xc is any data point we may choose. The condition that the mutual
information is extremal then becomes the statement that for all xc and i ∈
{1, . . . , kr}.

(16)

∂ǫM(ξR(·), ξQ(·)) |ǫ=0 = 0

= Z Z δ′(ri − ξ0

R,i(xc)) Πi6=jδ(ri − ξ0

R,i(xc))

×P (q | xc) log  P (r, q)

P (r)P (q)! dqdr (17)

Integrating (17) by parts with respect to r (dropping both the “0” su-
perscript and subscript “c”, since there is no distinction to be made at this
point) yields the condition that for all x

Z P (q | x) ∂rlog  P (r, q)

P (r)P (q)! |r=ξR(x) dq = 0

(18)

where derivatives with respect to vectors are gradients (vectors of deriva-
tives). The form from which the theorems of the next section are proven, is
found by rewriting (18) as

Z P (q | x)
P (q | r)

∂rP (q | r) |r=ξR(x) dq = 0

(19)

4 MI Statistics and Suﬃciency

Now we prove several important properties concerning MI statistics. The
ﬁrst property is the intuitively obvious property that data is a MI statistic.
The second property is that any suﬃcient statistic is a MI statistic. Finally,
we note that MI statistics are not necessarily suﬃcient statistics.

Maximally Informative Statistics

7

Theorem 1 . Any 1–1 function of data is a MI statistic of the
quantity of interest
Proof: Let ξR(·) be the identity so that ξR(x) = x in (19). The
fraction in that equation is then 1, and the derivative integrates
to zero because probability is conserved. Having ξR(x) any in-
vertible function changes nothing as any value of it determines
x.

Theorem 2 . Any suﬃcient statistic for the quantity of interest
is a MI statistic of the quantity of interest

Proof: Note that, using the deﬁnition of ξR(x) being a suﬃcient
statistic, the ratio in (19) is one - the posterior distribution of the
quantity of interest given the data x is the same as the posterior
distribution of the quantity of interest given the suﬃcient statistic
ξR(x). The derivative then integrates to zero because probability
is conserved.

(Note that in both Theorems 1 and 2 the Hessian condition of the MI
inference variational principle is easily established since then the extremum
of the mutual information is easily seen to be a local maximum. Otherwise,
one must check convexity.)

Although it is true that any suﬃcient statistic is a MI statistic, the con-
verse is false.
In problems (of data dimension greater than one) where a
lower-than-data dimension suﬃcient statistic does not exist, there will exist
a lower-than-data dimension statistic which is MI but not suﬃcient. Thus,
the class of maximally informative statistics contains the suﬃcient statistics,
but is broader. MI statistics need not provide all of the available information
about the underlying quantity of interest. For example, as we show in Sec-
tion 7, such a lower-than-data dimension MI statistic can be obtained for the
Cauchy distribution where a lower-than-data dimension suﬃcient statistic is
a-priori unavailable. In this manner, MI statistics seamlessly address rele-
vance to the consumer of the information because it is about some relevant
quantity of interest that MI statistics are maximally informative.

Maximally Informative Statistics

5 MI Statistics and the KL Distance

Equation (19) may be rewritten as

∂r"Z P (q | x)log P (q | x)

P (q | r)! dq# |r=ξR(x)= 0

which, along with the curvature condition, states that

8

(20)

Theorem 3. The Kullback-Leibler distance between the posterior
distribution conditioned on the statistic and the posterior distri-
bution conditioned on the data is minimized by a MI statistic.

Again, note that MI statistics for the quantity of interest are generally not
suﬃcient statistics for the quantity of interest. Indeed, rather than making
the Kullback-Leibler distance zero, as in the case of suﬃcient statistics, MI
statistics are found at local minima of the Kullback-Liebler distance - viewed
as a functional of the statistic. This demonstrates how the approach of this
paper generalizes that performed by Lindley [4].

6 MI Statistics for the Gaussian distribution

This section details the inference of the one-dimensional MI statistic for the
one-dimensional Gaussian distribution. We take the position parameter of
the Gaussian to be q, and the the goal is to ﬁnd ξR(x) so that (19) holds.
From there note that the calculation of P (q | r) and P (q | x) is necessary,
and by Bayes’ theorem therefore it is necessary to ﬁnd P (r | q), which may
be written as

P (r | q) = Z P (r|q, x) P (x | q) dx
= Z P (r|x) P (x | q) dx
= Z δ(r − ξR(x))
Yi=1

N

e−(xi−q)2/2σ2

√2πσ

dx

(21)

i=1 λixi is useful (and not resrictive since the λ′is are
implicitly only restricted to be functions of x), and making the changes of

The ansatz ξR(x) = PN

Maximally Informative Statistics

9

variables yi = λixi followed by ui = λiq in (21) yields a form which may
immediately be recognized as the convolution of N Gaussians with means
µi = λiq and standard deviations σi = λiσ respectively,

P (r | q) = Z δ(r −

N

Xi=1

λiq −

ui)

N

Xi=1

N

Yi=1

i /2(σλi)2

e−u2
√2π(λiσ)

du.

(22)

This has the solution

P (r | q) = φ(0, σ′)(r −

λiq)

N

Xi=1

where σ′ = σqPN

i=1 λ2

i and φ(·,·)(·) is the Gaussian density
φ(µ, σ)(z) =

e−(z−µ)2/2σ2

1

.

√2πσ

(23)

(24)

Finally, inserting this result into Bayes’ theorem with uniform prior to ﬁnd
the posterior distribution of q conditioned on r yields

P (q | r) = S φ(0, σ′)(r −

λiq)

N

Xi=1

where S := PN

i=1 λi.

The calculation for P (q | x) is similar with the result is that

P (q | x) = φ(x,

σ
√N

)(q)

(25)

(26)

N PN

where x := 1
i=1 xi. From the forms of (25) and (26) it is clear that
not only will the integrand of (20) (that equation equivalent to (19)) be
minimized, but that it will be zero, if all λi = 1/N is chosen. This of course
i=1 xi/N is a suﬃcient statistic for q

is the expected result since ξR(x) = PN

when σ is known.

Alternatively, to satisfy that the calculation indicated in (19) is successful
at ﬁnding the expected result, continue by taking (25) and (26) and substi-
tuting them into (19) to ﬁnd after some simpliﬁcation the equation which
must be satisﬁed by ξR

0 = "Z (r − q

N

Xi=1

λi) e−(x−q)2/2(σ/√N )2) dq# |r=ξR(x) .

(27)

Maximally Informative Statistics

10

inferred statistic is ﬁxed by setting 1 = PN

This has the unique solution ξR(x) = x when the arbitrary scale of the
i=1 λi. To conclude this section,
the procedure culminating in (20) or (19) of ﬁnding MI statistics has been
shown to produce the expected known result for the Gaussian case. The
next section approaches the Cauchy distribution case for lower than data
dimension statistics, where there is no suﬃcient statistic available and the
result is novel.

7 MI Statistics for the Cauchy Distribution

This section outlines the inference of the one-dimensional MI statistic for
the one dimensional Cauchy distribution. The detailed steps may be taken
similarly to those of the last section but taking the Cauchy distribution
instead of the Gaussian distribution. Take the position parameter of the
Cauchy to be q, and the the goal is to ﬁnd ξR(x) so that (19) holds. As
in the last section it is necessary to determine both P (q | r) and P (q | x).
Assuming the same ansatz that ξR(x) = Pi λixi, the necessary convolutions
may be carried out with the use of the Fourier convolution theorem, with the
results that

P (r | q) =

P (q | r) =

S

π(S2 + (r − qS)2)

S

π(S2 + (r − qS)2)

,

,

(28)

(29)

(30)

and

P (q | x) ∝

n

Yi=1

1

π(1 + (xi − q)2)

where S := PN

equation that must be solved for ξR(x)

i=1 λi. Substituting (28), (29), and (30) into (19) yields the

0 = "Z   n
Yi=1

1

π(1 + (xi − q)2)!

1 + (r/S − q)2 dq# |r=ξR(x) .
r/S − q

(31)

Rewriting this equation in more suggestive terms, while taking the scale
S = 1, gives the result as an implicit equation for ξR(x),

ξR(x) = Z q P (q | (x, ξR(x)) ) dq.

(32)

Maximally Informative Statistics

11

The form of the result (32) says that ξR(x) is the posterior mean of q given
the data and itself as an additional observation. This form also suggests
that ξR(x) could be the posterior mean of q given the data. However, this
is not the case, as a check using the posterior moment forms derived in [6]
immediately shows. Further, assuming a value for ξR(x) on the right-hand
side of (32) allows that to be computed in closed form using the results
of [6]. This ﬁnally yields that the left-hand side is a rational function of
the right-hand side, a ﬁxed point equation which may be solved by standard
iterative methods. Other checks immediately show that the solution is not
the maximum likelihood solution, nor the median.

To conclude this section, the one-dimensional MI statistic for the Cauchy
distribution position parameter has been found as the posterior mean of the
position parameter of the Cauchy distribution given the data and the MI
statistic, and this statistic is diﬀerent from the Bayes’ estimator which is the
posterior mean given the data only.

8 Approximate MI Inference and Bayes Estimators

In many cases of interest, if not in all cases of relevance with high dimensional
data, the convolutions that appear similarly to those in (28) etc. will be quite
impossible to do in closed form, and probably in a practical sense will even
be numerically intractable. However, there is an approach that may be taken
which does some harm to a fully rigorous Bayesian approach, but which may
be necessary. The idea that is applicable in these cases of diﬃculty is to
directly take P (q | r) in (20) to be Gaussian with parameters r = ξR(x) =
(µ(x), σ(x)). The approximate MI approach just outlined is applied below
to ﬁnding the approximate MI statistics (µ(x), σ(x)). The approximate
MI approach is then contrasted with an alternative approach using the KL
distance inverted from that of (20), one that resembles Maximum Entropy
inference. The rusults of this section hold for any likelihood, as will become
apparent.

Take an arbitrary one-dimensional parameterized likelihood parameter-
ized by q (i.e. with q the parameter of interest). Parameterize the inferred
distribution P (q | r) of (20) as (see (24))

P (q | r = (µ, σ)) = φ(µ, σ)(q).

(33)

Maximally Informative Statistics

Equations (20) and (33) imply that the MI statistic is

µ = Z q P (q | x) dq
σ2 = Z (q − µ)2 P (q | x) dq

12

(34)

These quantities are the Bayes’ estimators for the mean and standard devi-
ation of the distribution.

If, on the other hand, the inverted form of the KL distance is taken, as

it often is in many of the cases we have observed, the statistic µ is

µ = R q φ(µ, σ)(q) log (P (q | x)) dq
R φ(µ, σ)(q) log (P (q | x)) dq

(35)

which, along with another non-linear equation for σ, is a complicated non-
linear system to be solved for r = (µ, σ).

Note that when the likelihood P (x | q) is Gaussian these two approxi-
mate approaches produce the same statistic, the posterior mean and standard
deviation; but for the Cauchy likelihood, for example, this is not the case,
with necessity to solve the complicated nonlinear system. In contrast, the
approximate MI inference technique always produces the posterior Bayes’
moment estimators.

The diﬀerence between the forms of the approximate MI statistics and
the inverted-KL statistics appearing in (34) and (35) respectively makes it
clear that one needs a good ﬁrst-principles approach to the KL distance.

9 Conclusion

We have formulated the mutual information based variational principle for
statistical inference, a fully Bayesian approach to inference, deﬁned MI statis-
tics for a quantity of interest, shown how the principle may be reformulated
as a minimal KL distance principle based on posterior distributions, and
demonstrated how inference proceeds, when lower-than-data dimension suf-
ﬁcient statistics are absent, using the Cauchy distribution. Finally, an ap-
proximate approach to the inference of MI statistics was discussed, and the
relationship of the resulting statistics to Bayes’ estimators and the Maximum
Entropy version of the same approximation was noted.

Maximally Informative Statistics

13

10 Acknowledgements

Thanks go to the Data Understanding Group at NASA Ames for their lively
and interactive critique, friendship, mentoring, and support. This paper was
improved by comments from Dr. Jeremy Frank and Hal Duncan, both of
NASA. Much thanks to Tony O’Hagan for detailed comments. This work
was suported by NASA Center for Excellence in Information Technology
contract NAS-214217. This work was supported by NSF grant DMS-98.03756
and Texas ARP grants 003658.452 and 003658.690.

References

[1] George Arfken. Mathematical Methods for Physicists. Academic Press,

Inc., London, 1985.

[2] George E. P. Box and George C. Tiao. Bayesian Inference in Statistical

Analysis. Wiley, NY, 1973.

[3] Solomon Kullback. Information Theory and Statistics. John Wiley and

Sons, Inc., New York, 1959.

[4] D. V. Lindley. On a measure of the information provided by an experi-

ment. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27:986–1005, 1961.

[5] John E. Shore and Rodney V. Johnson. Axiomatic derivation of the prin-
ciple of maximum entropy and the principle of minimum cross entropy.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 26(1):26–37, January 1979.

[6] David R. Wolf. Posterior moments of the cauchy distribution. In Max-
imum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, eds. W. van der Linden et. al.,
Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1998.

