1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Linear resolution and models that ﬁt the data
in linear inverse theory

Keith S Cover
Physics and Astronomy
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z1
TEL: 604-822-1794
FAX: 604-822-0702
EMAIL: kscover@physics.ubc.ca

Short Title: Linear resolution and models that ﬁt the data

Classiﬁcation numbers: 02.30.Z 02.30.Nw
Keywords: resolution kernels, linear inverse solutions

Id : Dicho.tex, v1.202001/01/1318 : 59 : 54kscoverExpkscover

1

Abstract

When trying to estimate a model from data it is generally believed that
ﬁnding an model which ﬁts the data is the method of choice. However, for
linear forward problems which are highly underdetermined, a very common
practice is to ﬁnd an estimate with good linear resolution, akin to optical
resolution, with no regard to ﬁtting the data. A prominent example is the
windowed discrete Fourier transform. It is demonstrated that if the linear
algorithm generating an estimate of the unknown model from the data is in-
vertable then the estimate, along with it noise statistics and linear resolution,
is a complete summary of all the models that ﬁt the data. The confusion
between models that ﬁt the data and linear resolution, which stretches back
at least 50 years, seems to be due to the success of some algorithms being
attributed to models ﬁt the data but were the good linear resolution is the
important property. Wiener deconvolution is a prime example.

2

1 Introduction

“The Master said, Yu, shall I tell you what knowledge is? When
you know a thing, to know that you know it, and when you do
not know a thing, to recognize that you do not know it. That is
knowledge.”

Analects of Confucius (Waley’s translation) (Jeﬀreys 1973)

Applications of the inversion of linear forward problems include the med-
ical imaging modalities of MRI, computed tomography (CT), single photon
spectroscopy (SPECT) and position emission tomography (PET) (Farquhar
T H et al 1998). Other applications include (1) the measurement of fre-
quency components of oscillating systems such as digital ﬁlter design using
the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and (2) multiexponential relaxation
components of a decaying system found in MRI and down hole magnetic
resonance used in the oil and gas industry. In each of these applications, the
interest is often in estimating the unknown model, mU (y), over the full range
of the variable y of equation 1. I will pursue the same goal.

If the inversion problem were purely a mathematical one, it would be
simple to solve. The solution is just the subset of the model space which
contains all models that ﬁt the data. Listing the data, a measure of the noise
and the corresponding data functions completely deﬁnes this set. But the real
problem is communicating an understanding of the contents of this subset to
an interpreter – especially because the subspace contains an inﬁnite number
of models. Dealing with an inﬁnite number of models which ﬁt the data
causes conceptual problems as well as computational ones. The conceptual
problems may be complicated by that fact that, in some cases, ﬁnding even
one model which ﬁts the data is a major accomplishment. Generating one,
or even a great many of estimates which ﬁt the data, is a generally a straight
forward task in the inversion of a linear forward problem. Conceptually,
linear and nonlinear forward problems are often considered together, again
directing a researcher away from the option of linear resolution, since it
generally does not exist for nonlinear forward problems.

In the inversion of a linear forward problem, we are trying to learn what
we can about an unknown model from measured data linearly related to the
unknown model. The linear transform from the unknown model, mU (y),
to the data is called the linear forward problem. The unknown model is a

3

member of the set of all possible models called model space. For the forward
linear problem I am interested in, the model space is a linear vector space as
deﬁned by Parker (1994 p 3). For practical purposes, you can think of model
space as containing every possible model.

The unknown model yields the N measured data, dk, through the linear

equation

dk =

mU (y) gk(y) dy + ek

b

a

Z

where the functions gk(y) are called the data functions and relate the un-
known model to the data. The random variables, ek, are the additive noise
and are usually assumed to be independent of each other and stationary
(Parker 1994 p 280). The constants a and b are the suitable limits on the in-
tegration. While equation 1 is only presented in one dimension, it can easily
be generalized to higher order dimensions.

Common problems with linear forward problems are the 1D Fourier trans-

form

Z
convolution

b

a

b

a

Z

0

Z

∞

dk =

mU (f )e−2πif tk df + ek,

dk =

mU (t)b(t − tk)dt + ek,

dk =

mU (τ )e−tk/τ dτ + ek.

and a relative of the Laplace transform, the multiexponential transform

The measured data, dk, is often thought of as list of numbers. However,
for the list of numbers to have meaning it must have a context. The context
is provided by the associated data function and noise statistics. Therefore,
when I refer to the information provided by the data, I am assuming it is
being interpreted in the context of the data functions and noise statistics.

Information other than that provided by the data about the unknown
model is usually referred to as a priori information. In some problems, the
available a priori information can be very helpful and should be taken ad-
vantage of. For example, if the unknown model is known to within two
parameters, ﬁtting to the two parameters is the best way to go. But often a

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

priori information is nonexistent, suspect or is of a form which is diﬃcult to
integrate into an algorithm estimating the unknown model. In these cases
producing an estimate which does not rely on any a priori information can
still be valuable and is the subject of this investigation.

At this point it is worth noting the subtle diﬀerence in the use of the
terms model and estimate. The model always refers to an element of the
model space and is a theoretical concept. Estimate refers to the output of
an estimation algorithm. There is some overlap in the use of these terms.

There is a major dichotomy in the current application of linear inverse
theory to many common problems. The commonly used algorithms for esti-
mating unknown models fall roughly into two mutually exclusive classes, but
there is some overlap. In the ﬁrst type, the algorithms generate models that
ﬁt the data to within the noise. The second type contains estimates with
good linear resolution. The ﬁrst type is seen by many to be the “obvious”
way to design an algorithm. The second type is widely used in applications
including windowed Fourier transforms and most medical imaging modalities.
Yet rarely in the literature is the dichotomy discussed in detail.

When most people hear the term resolution they think of how large an
object can be seen with a microscope, a telescope or some other optical
imaging modality. Figure 1 shows three images of the rings of a tree. Figure
1(a) has the highest images quality with 1(b) being blurrier and ﬁgure 1(c)
being noisier. The relative resolution and noise of the three ﬁgures can easily
be conﬁrmed by inspection but quantitative methods are also available. The
resolution at various locations in an image can be measured by using the same
imaging system to image observe a variety of point sources. The noise can
measured by imaging the tree rings repeatedly and comparing the images.

The term linear resolution, rather than just resolution, is used because,
while optical systems are generally linear, some are nonlinear and the math-
ematical properties of the resolution of linear optics are quite diﬀerent than
those of nonlinear optics. The same is true for linear and nonlinear inversion
algorithms as will be described below.

I believe the root cause of the dichotomy is that, at its heart, inversion
of a linear forward problem is not just a mathematical problem, but also a
problem of communicating to an interpreter what is known and not known
about a unknown model. An interpreter could be a radiologist reading the
images produced by a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner, a geo-
physicist reviewing the results of seismic processing or a engineer studying

5

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Three images of the same tree rings. The ﬁrst (a) is the best
quality image, (b) is blurrier and (c) is noisier.

6

the resonance modes of a bridge, just to name a few.

The goal of this paper is to resolve the dichotomy by providing a theo-
retical basis for linear resolution in the context of linear inverse theory. In
addition, I will demonstrate that linear resolution provides a much more pow-
erful and eﬃcient way to deal with the ambiguity due to the many models
that ﬁt the data in a linear inverse problem. I will also present a brief history
of the dichotomy.

2 Models that ﬁt the data

The most commonly recommended techniques to ﬁnd estimates of the un-
known model are based on the principle of “models that ﬁt the data”. (Menke
1984, Oldenburg 1984, Parker 1994, Sabatier 2000, Tarantola 1987, Twomey
1977). The basic principle of models that ﬁt the data is to ﬁnd a estimate that
reproduces the data to within the noise. The most commonly used criterion
to assess how well an estimate, mE(y), ﬁts the data is the χ2 criterion

where σk is the standard deviation of the noise ek and dE
predicted by a particular estimate, mE(y),

k are the data values

The value of χ2 must be suﬃciently small for the estimate to be considered
to ﬁt the data. A common practice is to consider χ2 equal to the number of
data points to be suﬃciently small. In equation 5 the noise of each data point
is assumed to be uncorrelated from all the others. If the noise is correlated
with a correlation matrix, C D

kl , the equation for χ2 is

χ2 =

k )2

(dk − dE
σ2
k

dE
k =

mE(y) gk(y) dy.

Xk

b

a
Z

Xk

χ2 =

(dk − dE

k )(C D

kl )−1(dl − dE
l ).

Equation 7 reduces to equation 5 when

kl = σ2
C D

kδkl.

7

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where δkl is equal to one when k = l and zero otherwise. For more details on
χ2 see Parker (1994 p 127) or any other of the above references.

Techniques which ﬁnd models that ﬁt the data have to choose among
the inﬁnite number of models that ﬁt the data. A great many mathemat-
ical algorithms have been introduced in various attempts to deal with this
nonuniqueness. But, as Twomey (1977 p vi) points out, while there have
been many advances in mathematical techniques for solving the problem of
estimating the unknown model, none of these techniques removes the fun-
damental ambiguity due to the inﬁnitely many models that ﬁt the data. He
continues on to say that, in some instances, however, these procedures can
eﬀectively hide the ambiguity. In other words, models that ﬁt the data are
good at telling us what we do know – that the generated models could be
the unknown model – but they are not very good at telling us what we don’t
know – all the models that also ﬁt the data which we haven’t generated.

There are a variety of views on how to use models that ﬁt the data. I
will attempt to summarize those views, but it is best to refer to the original
references for a detailed explanation of these techniques.

There are two main schools of thought in inverse theory on how to deal
with the nonuniqueness with models that ﬁt the data although these schools
overlap. The ﬁrst advocates presenting an interpreter with a wide selection of
models that ﬁt the data for each data set (Tarantola 1987 p 167, Oldenburg
1984 p 666). This solution is not practical for many problems. For example,
in MRI, many sets of scans would have to be generated for each MRI scan
of a patient. Each of these sets of scans would have to be examined by
a radiologist and stored. Currently, the resources required to examine and
store the standard one set of scans per patient is high. It would be totally
impractical to considerably increase the resources allocated. The additional
time it would take a radiologist to consider many scans for each patient would
also be a major burden.

The second school of thought is to devise an algorithm which selects the
“best” estimate which ﬁts the data. This is usually done by introducing an
ordering, from best to worst, of the set of possible estimates with a norm or
other ordering criteria. The best estimate that ﬁts the data to within the
noise is then selected. A common method for ordering the estimates is the
L2 norm which is calculated by the equation

(9)

L2 =

b

2

(mU )

(y) dy.

a
Z

8

The estimate which ﬁts the data to within the noise and has the smallest
L2 is considered the best estimate. As we shall see below, the smallest L2
estimate, also has the property of linear resolution.

Other ordering criteria are maximum entropy (Tarantola 1987 p 151),
maximin (Tarantola 1987 p351), smallest L1 norm (Menke 1984 p 37), and
nonnegative least squares (NNLS) (Lawson and Hanson 1974 p 160, Parker
1994 p 359), to name just a few. The question is which ordering to choose.
Commonly, an interpreter will try a variety of these orderings on a few data
sets and then select one of the criteria to use routinely. One of the risks
in this approach is that, as Twomey suggested, the nonuniqueness of the
solution may be hidden because only one solution is presented.

On occasion, a hybrid of the two schools of thought has been used where

a variety of best estimates are presented to the interpreter.

An example of the prevalence of ﬁtting the data is the attempts made
to apply deconvolution to correct the blurry images originally produced by
the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). A spherical aberration in the HST’s
main mirror caused a linear distortion in the images acquired during its
ﬁrst 4 years of operation. Since HST was carefully designed to be a highly
linear device with good linear resolution, the forward problem was linear,
although the actual linear resolution was less than optimum because of the
ﬂawed optics. A wide variety of deconvolution algorithms were applied to the
images to try to correct the distortions. While it turned out the blurriness
was too unpredictable to be corrected, it is interesting to note that every
algorithm presented at the major conference on the subject assumed the
estimate must ﬁt the data. Although a few of the algorithms were linear,
most were nonlinear (Hanisch and White 1993, Adorf H 1995).

Another example is an extensive review paper on estimating an un-
known model when the forward problem is a Laplace transform (Istratov
and Vyvenko 1999). Again only algorithms which ﬁt the data where consid-
ered.

3 Linear resolution

Linear resolution in inversion is mathematically equivalent to linear resolu-
tion in optics. This equivalence was appreciated at least as far back as 1952
and probably much earlier. In 1952 Fellgett and Schmeidler (1952) applied

9

Data
Function

Data
Point

Object
Plane

Forward
Problem

Data
Plane

Figure 2: The forward problem illustrated as an optics problem. The data
function, gk(y), corresponding to the data point, dk, illustrates the poor linear
resolution.

Wiener deconvolution (1949) to sharpening the focus of the limb of the sun
during a partial eclipse. Wiener’s work involved trading oﬀ between resolu-
tion and noise in the deconvolution problem.

Figure 2 is an optical representation of equation 1 for a particular data
function. The object plane represents the unknown model, mU (y), with
the continuous variable y varying over the object plane. The data plane
represents the measured data, dk, and the discrete index of the data, k,
varies over the data plane. The data function, gk(y), gives the weighting of
the various locations on the image plane that sum to give the intensity at the
data point. The data function in ﬁgure 2 clearly has poor linear resolution
because the light arriving at the data point on the data plane is summed
from a large part of the object plane. In optics, a second lens could be added
to the right of the data plane to focus the image onto an image plane and
improve the optical resolution. In similar fashion, in an inversion problem,
an estimate would achieve better resolution than the forward problem by
applying a linear operator to the data.

For an estimation algorithm to have linear resolution it must be linear. A
detailed deﬁnition of linear is given by Parker (1990 p 44), but for the prob-
lems considered herein, any inversion algorithm which can be represented

10

as a matrix is linear. This matrix, aij, will be called the estimation ma-
trix. Therefore, an estimate of the unknown model can be generated by the
equation

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

To precisely deﬁne linear resolution, Backus and Gilbert (1967, 1968, 1970)
substituted equation 1 into 10 to get

N

mE

j =

ajkdk

Xk=1
and its covariance matrix, C E

kl, is

C E

kl =

akpC D

pqalq.

p
X

q
X

mE

j =

mU (y)

b

a
Z

N

"
Xk=1

ajkgk(y)

dy

#

Rj(y) =

ajkgk(y).

N

Xk=1

and deﬁned a new function, called the averaging or resolution function, to
be

Proper choice of the estimation matrix, ajk, can often lead to resolution
functions which are well localized, or in other words well focused, about a
point of interest in the object plane. The resolution function can be thought
of as a synthetic data function. Likewise, the values of the estimate mE
j can
be though of as synthetic data. Equation 13 is a generalization of Wiener
deconvolution.

Figure 3 shows the optics representation of the forward problem combined
with the estimation matrix. The continuous variable y from equation 1 varies
over the image plane. Although the image plane is a function of a continuous
variable, we only calculate the image at a ﬁnite number of points that is
usually suﬃcient to characterize the image plane. The resolution function
on the object plane and its corresponding point in the image plane are also
displayed. The resolution function replaces the data function of ﬁgure 2 which
highlights the idea of the resolution function as a synthetic data function.

A common way of characterizing the performance of a lens set is to place
a point source at a variety of locations in the object plane and measure the

11

Resolution
Function

PSF
Point

Resolution
Point

PSF

Object
Plane

Forward
Problem

Data
Plane

Estimation
Matrix

Image
Plane

Figure 3: The estimation matrix when combined with the forward problem
gives good linear resolution.

corresponding projections in the image plane. The projections are referred
to as point spread functions (PSF’s) (Hecht and Zajac 1976). Since the
optics are linear, any intensity distribution in the objection plane can be
decomposed into a series of point sources and each corresponding PSF in the
image plane calculated. The PSF’s can be added together to get the same
image as a projection of the object would produce. Figure 3 shows a PSF
point source in the object plane and the corresponding PSF in the image
plane.

Once you have the complete set of PSF’s it is easy to calculate the res-
olution functions. The reverse is also true. Therefore the set of the PSF’s
contain the same information as the set of the resolution functions. As can
be easily shown, if all the resolution functions or all the PSF’s are spatially
invariant, the PSF’s must equal the resolution functions.

As mentioned above, an important requirement for linear resolution is
that the estimation algorithm is linear. This simple point seems to be often
over looked. Nonlinear estimation algorithms, which apply the data from lin-
ear forward problems of point sources, may give estimates with very narrow
peaks. However, since linearity does not apply, the width of the peak has
very little meaning when compared to the width of a peak from a linear es-
timation algorithm. Some estimation algorithms claiming “superresolution”

12

are examples of this oversight.

4 Conservation of information

The great power of linear resolution, as will be shown below, is that an
estimate, along with its noise statistics and resolution functions, can present
all the information about the unknown model in the data – no more, no less.
Thus, only one estimate presented to an interpreter gives the interpreter
complete information about all of the models that ﬁt the data, provided the
interpreter has an understanding of the estimate resolution and noise. This
is in contrast to estimates which generate models that ﬁt the data which
would have to generate a great many estimates to supply the interpreter
In medical imaging for example, radiologists
with the same information.
become familiar with the linear resolution and noise of various modalities
during their basic training. Thus, examining one image with good linear
resolution will provide the radiologists with all the information provided by
the data. I believe this is why the common modalities in medical imaging
including MRI, CT and SPECT, use linear resolution often with no regard
to whether the estimates ﬁt the data or not.

When presenting the information in the data about an unknown model to
an interpreter, it is often desirable that the information be presented faith-
fully and not altered in any way. To assess whether an estimation algorithm
accomplishes this goal, we need a mathematical formalism for presenting the
information about the unknown model. For this purpose Backus and Gilbert
used model space and Tarantola used model space with an additional prob-
ability density.

One can use equation 7 to assign a χ2 to every model in the model space.
This assignment is in line with Tarantola’s (1987 p 1) approach of assigning
a probability density to every model since the χ2 can be converted directly
to a probability density function on the model space. If we think about an
estimate as synthetic data, the resolution functions as synthetic data func-
tions and the covariance matrix of the estimate as synthetic noise statistics,
an estimate which conserves the information about the unknown model will
assign exactly the same χ2 to the model space as the data, as the following
steps will show.

The χ2 assigned to a model, mM (y), by a particular estimate, mE

k , its

13

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

noise and resolution functions, is given by

χ2 =

(mE
k

− mM

k )C E
kl

(mE
l

− mM

l ).

−1

where

Xk Xl

b

a
Z

mM

k =

mM (y) Rk(y) dy.

Substituting equation 13 into 15 and 10 and then substituting the results,
along with equation 11, into equation 14 yields

χ2 =

(

akrγr)(

alsγs)

Xk Xl

r
X

s
X

 

p
X

q
X

akpC D

pqalq

!

−1

where

γk = dk −

mM (y) gk(y) dy.

b

a
Z

Rearranging the indices in equation 16 yields

χ2 =

γrγs

(

akrakp

−1)C D
pq

−1

(

alsalq

−1)

r
X

s
X

p
X

q
X

Xk

Xl

If the estimation matrix is invertable, then this equation reduces to

χ2 =

−1

γrγsC D
rs

r
X

s
X

and it follows that this equation is equal to 7. Therefore, if the estimation
matrix is invertable, the estimate conveys exactly the same information about
the unknown model as the data.

This result is not completely surprising, but I am not aware of it being
published before. Conservation of information can be a very desirable char-
acteristic of an estimation matrix since it means all future calculations can
be done with just the estimate, its resolution functions and covariant matrix.
The measured data are no longer necessary.

In some cases perfect conservation of information may not be necessary
and a small amount of loss may be acceptable. However, to determine how
much information has been lost, we need a way to quantify the information.

14

Shannon’s measure of entropy oﬀers one way to accomplish this goal (Shan-
non 1948, Guiasu 1977). It should be possible to calculate the entropy due to
the data, it data functions and noise statistics. This same measure could be
applied to the estimate. If the values of entropy are diﬀerent, then informa-
tion has not been conserved. But the values of entropy may be close enough
that, for practical purposes, suﬃcient information has been conserved.

5 The Discrete Fourier Transform

The discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is perhaps the most common inversion
of a linear forward problem. A vast number of algorithms are available in
the literature for generating estimates of an unknown frequency spectrum.
Thus the DFT provides an excellent case study of the possible and preferred
approaches. The forward problem for the DFT is given in equation 2.

The most popular way to estimate the frequency spectrum is the discrete

Fourier transform (DFT),

mE(f ) =

wkdke2πikf

N −1

Xk=0

where

f = n/N n = −N/2, ..., N/2

(20)

(21)

and were wk is a window, N is the number of data points and dk are the data
points to be transformed. The DFT is often implemented as a fast Fourier
transform (FFT) because the FFT is much faster and less prone to round oﬀ
error.

A wide variety of estimation algorithms are available which provide es-
timates which ﬁt the data (Kay 1988) including the well known maximum
entropy method. Many of these algorithms are nonlinear and thus an inter-
preter must be very careful not to imbue the PSF’s of a nonlinear algorithm
with the properties of a linear algorithm. As mentioned earlier, it should also
be kept in mind that each one of these estimates, when interpreted as a esti-
mate that ﬁts the data, supplies information about only one of the inﬁnitely
many models that ﬁt the data.

All linear estimation algorithms for the Fourier transform can be imple-
mented by a windowed DFT because of the convolution theorem. Many

15

Hamming Window

Real

Imaginary

0

32

64
Time

96

128

1.0

0.0

-1.0

10

5

0

-5

10

5

0

-5

10

5

0

a
t
a
D

 
)
a
(

l
e
d
o
M
 
n
w
o
n
k
n
U

 
)
b
(

t
i
F
 
t
c
a
x
E
 
)
c
(

d
e
w
o
d
n
i
W

 
)
d
(

-5
0.000

0.125

0.250

0.375

-0.375

-0.250

-0.125

0.000

0.500
Frequency

Figure 4: Example discrete Fourier transforms. The exact ﬁt has χ2 = 0.0
while the windowed data has χ2 = 201118.9.

16

papers have been written on various windows (Harris 1978). Their purpose
is to adjust the linear resolution of the DFT. The variety of windows comes
from the diﬀerent preferences of what is optimal linear resolution.

A special property of the DFT inversion is that the resolution function is
spatially invariant and thus is equal to the PSF at all points in the estimate.
Another special property of the DFT inversion is that if wk = 1 (no window
is applied), then the estimate will ﬁt the data and have linear resolution.
However, when a window is applied the estimate will no longer ﬁt the data,
but it will still have linear resolution. It is interesting to note that to date, I
have not located a reference which mentions this point. Also, from personal
discussions with physicists and other people who work with data analysis and
results, few people seem to be aware of this point and many are surprised
when they realize it.

Figure 4 gives an example of the application of the Fourier transform.
Figure 4(a) presents 128 complex data points from the model in ﬁgure 4(b).
The model consists of purely real data with Dirac delta functions at f =
0.1438 and f = 0.5375 with amplitudes of 8.0 and -4.0 respectively. The
box car has a height of 3 and ranges between f = 0.5136 and f = 0.6975.
Gaussian noise with standard deviation of 0.001 has been added to the data.
Dimensionless units are used for the frequency and amplitude to keep the
example general.

Figure 4(c) is an estimate of the unknown model generated using equation
20. Figure 4(d) was generating using the Hamming window (Harris 1978,
Lowe and Sorenson 1997) shown in ﬁgure 4(a).

H(v) = 0.54 + 0.46cos(2πν/νmax)

(22)

From the isolated peak at f = 0.1438 you can determine the the PSF. Since,
for the Fourier transform, the PSF is spatially invariant, it is equal to the
resolution function. The ﬁt as measured by χ2 is given in ﬁgures 4(c) and
4(d).

Figure 4(c) is a exact ﬁt while ﬁgure 4(d) has such a large χ2 it would not
be considered a ﬁt by any standards but both have linear resolution. Both
estimates are interpretable, therefore, this suggests linear resolution is the
important property in interpretation.

When ﬁrst viewing ﬁgures 4(c) and (d), I suspect most interpreters use
the isolated peak to the left of each spectrum to gauge the PSF and then
examine the rest of the spectrum with the PSF in mind. This again suggests

17

linear resolution is being used to interpret the estimate and not models that
ﬁt the data.

There is a test which I believes conﬁrms linear resolution as the property
of the estimate of which interpreters are taking advantage. Cover either the
left or right half of the frequency spectrum in ﬁgures 4 with a piece of paper
or your hand. The visible parts of the spectra are still easily interpretable. If
the estimates were being interpreted as models that ﬁt the data, the estimates
would no longer be interpretable because we do not have an estimate that
ﬁts the data with just one half of the spectrum. But linear resolution only
requires a section of a spectrum which is bigger than the PSF to yield useful
information about that section of the spectrum.

The windowed Fourier transform is a good example of a linear estima-
tion algorithm which conserves the information about the unknown model
provided in the applied window is everywhere non zero. This is the case for
the Hamming window. Since the DFT without a window is invertable, the
windowed form is also invertable. That is why no information is lost when
further processing is performed in the frequency spectrum with no reference
to the original data. For example, you can ﬁt individual peaks of a spectrum
without having to ﬁt the whole data set.

The medical modality of MRI is a good example of an application which
uses windowed Fourier transforms, but in 2D rather than one (Lowe and
Sorenson 1997). MRI is reconstructed using a windowed 2D DFT. The pur-
pose of windowing the data is to reduce the ringing in the resulting image,
also known as truncation artifacts. This is akin to improving the focus of the
image with no regard as to whether the model ﬁts the data or not. Normally,
the windows used in the MRI 2D DFT conserve information. Two images are
produced for each data set, the real and imaginary. It is common practice to
combine the two images into a magnitude image with the magnitude image
being displayed to the interpreter. The phase information is only provided
to the interpreter in special circumstances and for many clinical uses, the
additional information it provides in not useful.

Examination of CT, SPECT and PET literature shows a similar situation
to MRI. Filtering has been added to original algorithms to improve the linear
resolution of the resulting images with no regard for the image ﬁtting the data
(King et al 1984, Gilland et at 1988, Farquhar 1998).

18

6 Estimates that ﬁt the data and have linear

resolution

How did the dichotomy between models that ﬁt the data and linear resolution
come about? It is impossible to say for sure, but careful examination of the
literature yields some valuable clues which suggest good linear resolution was
a fortunate byproduct of models that ﬁt the data.

The earliest reference with the dichotomy which I have been able to ﬁnd
is Wiener’s deconvolution (1949). This publication is considered by many
In this paper, Wiener used
to be a central publication of deconvolution.
the least squares ﬁt to the data to derive deconvolution digital ﬁlters which
had linear resolution.
In this classic work he gave no indication that for
deconvolution he considered that linear resolution and ﬁtting the data were
two independent concepts. The DFT is another widely used early example.
As mentioned above, without a window, it produces an estimate which both
ﬁts the data and has a linear resolution.

There is also a method by Backus and Gilbert (1967) based on the Dirich-
let criterion which produces estimation matrices which often have good reso-
lution for the linear forward problem. Menke (1984 p 95) showed that several
other methods for ﬁtting the data will produce the same estimation matrices
to within the noise handling properties. These ﬁtting methods include the
smallest L2 model, the least square ﬁt to the data and the maximum likeli-
hood ﬁt. Wiener’s deconvolution and the DFT are examples of these types of
algorithms. I suspect that these algorithms which produced estimates that
ﬁt the data and, inadvertently, also had good linear resolution, encouraged
researchers to confuse the two independent concepts.

Only rarely in publications describing the application of linear inverse
theory are estimates considered which have linear resolution but do not ﬁt
the data and the publication acknowledges that fact. Two such examples are
the Fourier transform and deconvolution (Oldenburg 1976, 1981) in addition
to others (Menke 1984).

Any mention of the dichotomy in the literature, as opposed to discussions
of the two part independently, is an uncommon occurrence. The issues are
discussed by Tarantola (1987 p 461) and Menke (1984). Tarantola advocates
models that ﬁt the data using the method of generating many models that
ﬁt the data for each data set. He talks about Backus and Gilbert giving a

19

“blurry” view of the unknown model. Tarantola states that if the estimate
with linear resolution is too blurry, you should use models that ﬁt the data.
This seems to be missing the point about linear resolution. A blurry estimate
with good signal to noise means that the data do not tell us as much about
the unknown model as we would like. The only way to get around this
problem is to get more and better data.

7 Conclusions

The dichotomy in estimating the unknown model for a linear forward problem
has been around for at least the last ﬁfty years. Careful analysis of the
dichotomy in the context of linear inverse theory has shown that a single
estimate, which was generated from the data by a linear transform which is
invertable and has good linear resolution, has the very powerful ability to
communicate to an interpreter a summary of all the models that ﬁt the data.
This is provided that the interpreter has an understanding of the noise and
linear resolution of the estimate. Such an estimate is much more eﬀective
at communicating to an interpreter what is known or not known about an
unknown model than one or many models that ﬁt the data.

One important problem which has not yielded to optimal linear resolution
is the inverse Laplace transform. Chapter 3 of this thesis discusses this
problem in more detail and shows how to modify the forward problem so
good optimal linear resolution can be achieved with an estimation matrix.

Acknowledgement

Thanks to Drs. A L Mackay, D W Paty, D K B Li, K Whittall and W H
McCutcheon for their assistance and support.

References

Adorf H 1995 Hubble Space Telescope image restoration in its fourth year
Inverse Problems 11 639–653
Backus G and Gilbert F 1967 Numerical application of a formalism for geo-
physical inverse problems Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc. 13 247–276

20

Backus G and Gilbert F 1968 The resolving power of gross earth data Geo-
phys. J. R. Astr. Soc. 16 169–205
Backus G and Gilbert F 1970 Uniqueness in the inversion of inaccurate gross
Earth data Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A 266 123–192
Farquhar T H, Chatziioannou A, Chinn G, Dahlbom M, Hoﬀman E J 1998
An investigation of ﬁlter choice for ﬁltered back-projection reconstruction of
PET IEEE Trans Nucl Sci 45 1133–1137
Fellgett P B and Schmeidler F B 1952 On the sharpening of observational
data with special application to the darkening of the solar limb Roy. Astr.
Soc. Notices 112 445–451
Gilland D R, Tsui B M W, McCartney W H, Perry J R, Berg J 1988 Deter-
mination of the optimum ﬁlter function for SPECT imaging J Nucl Med 29
643–650
Guiasu S 1977 Information theory with applications (New York: McGraw-
Hill)
Hanisch R J and White R L Eds 1993 The Restoration of HST Images and
Spectra - II Space Telescope Science Institute
Harris F J 1978 On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the discrete
fourier transform Proc. IEEE 66 51–83
Hecht E, Zajac A 1976 Optics (Don Mills, Ontario: Addison-Wesley)
Istratov A A, Vyvenko O F 1999 Exponential analysis in physical phenomena
Rev Sci Instr 70 1233-1257
Jeﬀreys H 1973 Scientiﬁc Inference (Cambridge: Cambridge)
Kay S M 1988 Modern spectral estimation (Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice
Hall)
King M A, Schwinger R B, Doherty P W, Penney B C 1984 Two-dimensional
ﬁltering of SPECT images using the METZ and Wiener Filters J Nucl Med
25 1234–1240
Lawson C L and Hanson R J 1974 Solving Least Squares Problems (Englwood
Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall)
Lowe M J and Sorenson J A 1997 Spatially ﬁltering functional magnetic
resonance imaging data Mag Res Med 37 723-729
Menke W 1984 Geophysical Data Analysis: Discrete Inverse Theory (New
York: Academic Press)
Oldenburg D W 1976 Calculation of Fourier Transforms by the Backus-
Gilbert Method Geophys J R Astr Soc 44 413–431

21

Oldenburg D W 1981 A comprehensive solution to the linear deconvolution
problem Geophys J R Astr Soc 65 331–357
Oldenburg D W 1984 An introduction to linear inverse theory IEEE Trans
Geosci Remote Sens GE-22 665-674
Parker R L 1994 Geophysical inverse theory Princeton: Princeton University
Press
Parker J A 1990 Image reconstruction in radiology Boston: CRC Press
Sabatier P C 2000 Past and future of inverse problems J Math Phys 41
4082–4124
Shannon CE 1948 A mathematical theory of communication Bell Syst. Techn.
J 27 379–423
Tarantola A 1987 Inverse Problem Theory (New York: Elsevier)
Treitel S and Robinson E A 1966 The design of High-Resolution Digital
Filters IEEE Trans Geosci Elec Ge-4 25–38
Twomey S 1977 Introduction to the Mathematics of Inversion of Remote
Sensing and Indirect Data (Amsterdam: Elsevier)
Wiener N 1949 Extrapolation, Interpolation and Smoothing of Stationary
Times Series (New York: John Wiley & Sons)

22

