1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Complexity Through Nonextensivity

William Bialek1, Ilya Nemenman1, and Naftali Tishby1,2
1NEC Research Institute, 4 Independence Way, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
2School of Computer Science and Engineering,
and Center for Neural Computation, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
(February 2, 2008)

The problem of deﬁning and studying complexity of a time series has interested people for years. In
the context of dynamical systems, Grassberger has suggested that a slow approach of the entropy to
its extensive asymptotic limit is a sign of complexity. We investigate this idea further by information
theoretic and statistical mechanics techniques and show that these arguments can be made precise,
and that they generalize many previous approaches to complexity, in particular unifying ideas from
the physics literature with ideas from learning and coding theory; there are even connections of this
statistical approach to algorithmic or Kolmogorov complexity. Moreover, a set of simple axioms
similar to those used by Shannon in his development of information theory allows us to prove that
the divergent part of the subextensive component of the entropy is a unique complexity measure. We
classify time series by their complexities and demonstrate that beyond the ‘logarithmic’ complexity
classes widely anticipated in the literature there are qualitatively more complex, ‘power–law’ classes
which deserve more attention.

PACS

The problem of quantifying complexity is very old. In-
terest in the ﬁeld has been fueled by three sorts of ques-
tions. First, one would like to make precise an impression
that some systems, such as life on earth or a turbulent
ﬂuid ﬂow, evolve toward a state of higher complexity,
and one would like to classify these states; this is the
realm of dynamical systems theory. Second, in choosing
among diﬀerent models that describe an experiment, one
wants to quantify a preference for simpler explanations
or, equivalently, provide a penalty for complex models
that can be weighed against the more conventional good-
ness of ﬁt criteria; this type of question usually is inves-
tigated in statistics. Finally, there are questions about
how hard it is to compute or to describe the state of a
complex system; this is the area of formal mathematics
and computer science.

Research in each of these three directions has given
birth to numerous deﬁnitions of complexity. The usual
objective is to make these deﬁnitions focused enough to
be operational in particular contexts but general enough
to connect with our intuitive notions. For many years
the dominant candidate for a universal measure has been
the mathematically rigorous notion of Kolmogorov or al-
gorithmic complexity that measures (roughly) the min-
imum length of a computer program that can recreate
the observed time series [1]. Unfortunately there is no
algorithm that can calculate the Kolmogorov complexity
of all data sets. Therefore, for applications to statistics,
Rissanen [2] and others have developed a new concept:
stochastic complexity of the data with respect to a par-
ticular class of models, which measures the shortest total
description of the data and the model within the class,
but cannot rule out the possibility that a diﬀerent model
class could generate a shorter code.

The main diﬃculty of all these approaches is that the

Kolmogorov complexity is closely related to the Shannon
entropy, which means that it measures something closer
to our intuitive concept of randomness than to the intu-
itive concept of complexity [3]. A true random string can-
not be compressed and hence requires a long description,
yet the physical process that generates this string may be
very simple. As physicists, our intuitive notions of com-
plexity correspond to statements about the underlying
process, and not directly to the description length or Kol-
mogorov complexity: a dynamics with a predictable con-
stant output (small algorithmic complexity) is as trivial
as one for which the output is completely unpredictable
and random (large algorithmic complexity), while really
complex processes lie somewhere in between.

The two extreme cases, however, have one feature in
common: the entropy of the output strings (or, equiva-
lently, the Kolmogorov complexity of a typical one) ei-
ther is a ﬁxed constant or grows exactly linearly with
the length of the strings. In both cases, corrections to
the asymptotic behavior do not grow with the size of the
data set. This allowed Grassberger [4] to identify the slow
approach of the entropy to its extensive limit as a sign of
complexity. He has proposed several functions to analyze
this slow approach and studied systems that exhibited a
broad range of complexity properties.

To deal with the same problem, Rissanen has empha-
sized strongly that ﬁtting a model to data represents an
encoding of those data, or predicting future data. Shorter
encodings generally mean better prediction or generaliza-
tion. However, much of the code usually describes the
meaningless, nongeneralizable “noise”—statistical ﬂuc-
tuations within the model. Only model description is
relevant to prediction, and this part of the code has been
termed the model complexity [2]. While systems with
model complexity of very diﬀerent types are known, the

1

two extreme examples above are similar: it only takes a
ﬁxed number of bits to code either a call to a random
number generator or to a constant function.

The present work may be viewed as expanding on the
notions of subextensivity and eﬀective prediction. We
construct a coherent theory that brings these ideas to-
gether in an intuitive way, but nonetheless is suﬃciently
general to be applied in many diﬀerent contexts. We will
show that with only a little bit of work Grassberger’s def-
initions may be made as mathematically precise as they
are aesthetically pleasing. Finally, we will argue that the
deﬁnitions are unique if one accepts a set of simple ax-
ioms in the spirit of Shannon’s original work, and that
these deﬁnitions relate to the usual Kolmogorov complex-
ity in a straightforward way. Much of this paper follows
closely a more detailed analysis in Ref. [5], to which we
refer for calculation details and a thorough discussion of
the relevant literature.

Our path to connecting the various complexity mea-
sures begins by noticing that the subextensive compo-
nents of entropy identiﬁed by Grassberger in fact deter-
mine the information available for making predictions.
This also suggests a connection to the importance or
value of information, especially in a biological or eco-
nomic context: information is valuable if it can be used
to guide our actions, but actions take time and hence ob-
served data can be useful only to the extent that those
data inform us about the state of the world at later times.
It would be attractive if what we identify as “complex”
in a time series were also the “useful” or “meaningful”
components.

While prediction may come in various forms, depend-
ing on context, information theory allows us to treat all
of them on the same footing. For this we only need to
recognize that all predictions are probabilistic, and that,
even before we look at the data, we know that certain fu-
tures are more likely than others. This knowledge can
be summarized by a prior probability distribution for
the futures. Our observations on the past lead us to
a new, more tightly concentrated distribution, the distri-
bution of futures conditional on the past data. Diﬀerent
kinds of predictions are diﬀerent slices through or aver-
ages over this conditional distribution, but information
theory quantiﬁes the “concentration” of the distribution
without making any commitment as to which averages
will be most interesting.

−

Imagine that we observe a stream of data x(t) over
a time interval
T < t < 0; let all of these past data
be denoted by the shorthand xpast. We are interested
in saying something about the future, so we want to
know about the data x(t) that will be observed in the
time interval 0 < t < T ′; let these future data be called
xfuture. In the absence of any other knowledge, futures
are drawn from the probability distribution P (xfuture),
while observations of particular past data xpast tell us
that futures will be drawn from the conditional distri-

xpast). The greater concentration of the
bution P (xfuture|
conditional distribution can be quantiﬁed by the fact that
it has smaller entropy than the prior distribution, and
this reduction in entropy is Shannon’s deﬁnition of the
information that the past provides about the future. We
can write the average of this predictive information as

Ipred(T, T ′) =
=

log2

(cid:20)

*

−h

P (xfuture|

xpast)

P (xfuture)

(cid:21) +

log2 P (xfuture)

log2 P (xpast)
i

i − h
] ,
log2 P (xfuture, xpast)
i

[
−h

−

(1)

(2)

where
of the past and the future, P (xfuture, xpast).

denotes an average over the joint distribution

h· · ·i

Each of the terms in Eq. (2) is an entropy. Since we
are interested in predictability or generalization, which
are associated with some features of the signal persist-
ing forever, we may assume stationarity or invariance
under time translations. Then the entropy of the past
data depends only on the duration of our observations,
= S(T ), and by the
so we can write
= S(T ′). Finally, the
same argument
entropy of the past and the future taken together is the
entropy of observations on a window of duration T + T ′,
= S(T + T ′). Putting
so that
these equations together, we obtain
Ipred(T, T ′) = S(T ) + S(T ′)

log2 P (xpast)
i
−h
log2 P (xfuture)
i

log2 P (xfuture, xpast)
i

S(T + T ′).

(3)

−h

−h

−

In the same way that the entropy of a gas at ﬁxed den-
sity is proportional to the volume, the entropy of a time
series (asymptotically) is proportional to its duration, so
that limT →∞ S(T )/T =
S0; entropy is an extensive quan-
tity. But from Eq. (3) any extensive component of the
entropy cancels in the computation of the predictive in-
formation: predictability is a deviation from extensivity.
If we write

S(T ) =

S0T + S1(T ) ,

(4)

then Eq. (3) tells us that the predictive information is
related only to the nonextensive term S1(T ).

We know two general facts about the behavior of
First, the corrections to extensive behavior
S1(T ).
are positive, S1(T )
0. Second, the statement that
≥
entropy is extensive is the statement that the limit
limT →∞ S(T )/T =
S0 exists, and for this to be true we
must also have limT →∞ S1(T )/T = 0. Thus the nonex-
tensive terms in the entropy must be subextensive, that
is they must grow with T less rapidly than a linear func-
tion. Taken together, these facts guarantee that the pre-
dictive information is positive and subextensive. Further,
if we let the future extend forward for a very long time,
T ′
, then we can measure the information that our
sample provides about the entire future,

→ ∞

Ipred(T ) = lim

T ′→∞ Ipred(T, T ′) = S1(T ) ,

(5)

2

and this is precisely equal to the subextensive entropy.

If we have been observing a time series for a (long)
time T , then the total amount of data we have collected
in is measured by the entropy S(T ), and at large T this
is given approximately by
S0T . But the predictive infor-
mation that we have gathered cannot grow linearly with
time, even if we are making predictions about a future
which stretches out to inﬁnity. As a result, of the total
information we have taken in by observing xpast, only a
vanishing fraction is of relevance to the prediction:

lim
T →∞

Predictive Information
Total Information

=

Ipred(T )

S(T ) →

0.

(6)

In this precise sense, most of what we observe is irrele-
vant to the problem of predicting the future. Since the
average Kolmogorov complexity of a time series is related
to its (total) Shannon entropy, this result means also that
most of the algorithm that is required to encode the data
encodes aspects of the data that are useless for prediction
or for guiding our actions based on the data. This is a
strong indication that the usual notions of Kolmogorov
complexity in fact do not capture anything at all like the
(intuitive) utility of the data stream.

· · ·

or T

→ ∞

→ ∞

Consider the case where time is measured in discrete
steps, so that we have seen N time points x1, x2,
, xN .
How much is there to learn about the underlying pattern
in these data? In the limit of large number of observa-
tions, N
the answer to this question is
surprisingly universal: predictive information may either
stay ﬁnite, or grow to inﬁnity together with T ; in the
latter case the rate of growth may be slow (logarithmic)
or fast (sublinear power).
The ﬁrst possibility,

limT →∞ Ipred(T ) = constant,
means that no matter how long we observe we gain only
a ﬁnite amount of information about the future. This sit-
uation prevails, in both extreme cases mentioned above.
For example, when the dynamics are too regular, such as
it is for a purely periodic system, complete prediction is
possible once we know the phase, and if we sample the
data at discrete times this is a ﬁnite amount of informa-
tion; longer period orbits intuitively are more complex
and also have larger Ipred, but this doesn’t change the
limiting behavior limT →∞ Ipred(T ) = constant.

Similarly, the predictive information can be small when
the dynamics are irregular but the best predictions are
controlled only by the immediate past, so that the corre-
lation times of the observable data are ﬁnite. This hap-
pens, for example, in many physical systems far away
Imagine, for example, that we
from phase transitions.
observe x(t) at a series of discrete times
, and that
at each time point we ﬁnd the value xn. Then we always
can write the joint distribution of the N data points as
a product,

tn}

{

P (x1, x2,

, xN ) = P (x1)P (x2|

x1)P (x3|

· · ·

x2, x1)

. (7)

· · ·

(8)

(9)

For Markov processes, what we observe at tn depends
only on events at the previous time step tn−1, so that

P (xn|{

x1≤i≤n−1}

) = P (xn|

xn−1),

and hence the predictive information reduces to

Ipred =

log2

*

(cid:20)

P (xn|

xn−1)

P (xn)

.

(cid:21) +

The maximum possible predictive information in this
case is the entropy of the distribution of states at one time
step, which in turn is bounded by the logarithm of the
number of accessible states. To approach this bound the
system must maintain memory for a long time, since the
predictive information is reduced by the entropy of the
transition probabilities. Thus systems with more states
and longer memories have larger values of Ipred.

log T .

~xi}
{

)
→ ∞

More interesting are those cases in which Ipred(T ) di-
In physical systems we know that
verges at large T .
there are critical points where correlation times become
inﬁnite, so that optimal predictions will be inﬂuenced by
events in the arbitrarily distant past. Under these condi-
tions the predictive information can grow without bound
as T becomes large; for many systems the divergence is
logarithmic, Ipred(T

∝
Long range correlation also are important in a time se-
ries where we can learn some underlying rules. Suppose
are drawn inde-
a series of random vector variables
α),
pendently from the same probability distribution Q(~x
|
and this distribution depends on a (potentially inﬁnite
dimensional) vector of parameters α. The parameters
are unknown, and before the series starts they are cho-
In this set-
sen randomly from a distribution
ting, at least implicitly, our observations of
pro-
~xi}
{
vide data from which we can learn the parameters α.
Here we put aside (for the moment) the usual problem
of learning—which might involve constructing some es-
timation or regression scheme that determines a “best
ﬁt” α from the data
—and treat the ensemble of
] as we would any other set of con-
~xi}
data streams P [
{
ﬁgurations in statistical mechanics or dynamical systems
In particular, we can compute the entropy of
theory.
the distribution P [
] even if we can’t provide explicit
~xi}
{
algorithms for solving the learning problem.

~xi}
{

(α).

P

As is shown in [5], the crucial quantity in such anal-
ysis is the density of models in the vicinity of the
target ¯α—the parameters that actually generated the
sequence. For two distributions, a natural distance
measure is the Kullback–Leibler divergence D( ¯α
α) =
||
α)], and the density is
¯α)/Q(~x
|
|

¯α) log [Q(~x
d~xQ(~x
|

ρ(D; ¯α) =

dKα

(α)δ[D

P

DKL( ¯α

α)].
||

−

(10)

Z
If ρ is large as D
0, then one easily can get close to
the target for many diﬀerent data; thus they are not very

→

R

3

(11)

(12)

informative. On the other hand, small density means
that only very particular data lead to ¯α, so they carry a
lot of predictive information. Therefore, it is clear that
the density, but not the number of parameters or any
other simplistic measure, characterizes predictability and
the complexity of prediction. If, as often is the case for
dim α <
, the density behaves in the way common
to ﬁnite dimensional systems of the usual statistical me-
chanics,

∞

ρ(D

0, ¯α)

AD(K−2)/2 ,

≈
then the predictive information to the leading order is

→

Ipred(N )

K/2 log N .

≈

The modern theory of learning is concerned in large
part with quantifying the complexity of a model class,
and in particular with replacing a simple count of pa-
rameters with a more rigorous notion of dimensionality
for the space of models; for a general review of these ideas
see Ref. [6], and for discussion close in spirit to ours see
Ref. [7]. The important point here is that the dimension-
ality of the model class, and hence the complexity of the
class in the sense of learning theory, emerges as the coeﬃ-
cient of the logarithmic divergence in Ipred. Thus a mea-
sure of complexity in learning problems can be derived
from a more general dynamical systems or statistical me-
chanics point of view, treating the data in the learning
problem as a time series or one dimensional lattice. The
logarithmic complexity class that we identify as being
associated with ﬁnite dimensional models also arises, for
example, at the Feigenbaum accumulation point in the
period doubling route to chaos [4].

As noted by Grassberger in his original discussion,
there are time series for which the divergence of Ipred
is stronger than a logarithm. We can construct an exam-
ple by looking at the density function ρ in our learning
problem above: ﬁnite dimensional models are associated
with algebraic decay of the density as D
0, and we can
imagine that there are model classes in which this decay
is more rapid, for example

→

ρ(D

0)

A exp [

B/Dµ] , µ > 0 .

≈

→

−
In this case it can be shown that the predictive informa-
tion diverges very rapidly, as a sublinear power law,

(13)

Ipred(N )

N µ/(µ+1) .

∼

(14)

One way that this scenario can arise is if the distribution
Q(~x) that we are trying to learn does not belong to any
ﬁnite parameter family, but is itself drawn from a distri-
bution that enforces a degree of smoothness [8]. Under-
standably, stronger smoothness constraints have smaller
powers (less to predict) than the weaker ones (more to
predict). For example, a rather simple case of predicting

∼

a one dimensional variable that comes from a continuous
distribution produces Ipred(N )

√N .

As with the logarithmic class, we expect that power–
law divergences in Ipred are not restricted to the learn-
ing problems that we have studied in detail. The gen-
eral point is that such behavior will be seen in prob-
lems where predictability over long scales, rather then
being controlled by a ﬁxed set of ever more precisely
known parameters, is governed by a progressively more
detailed description—eﬀectively increasing the number
of parameters—as we collect more data. This seems a
plausible description of what happens in language, where
rules of spelling allow us to predict forthcoming letters
of long words, grammar binds the words together, and
compositional unity of the entire text allows to make pre-
dictions about the subject of the last page of the book
after reading only the ﬁrst few. Indeed, Shannon’s clas-
sic experiment on the predictability of English text (by
human readers!) shows this behavior [9], and more re-
cently several groups have extracted power–law subex-
tensive components from the numerical analysis of large
corpora of text (see, for example, [10], [11]).

Interestingly, even without an explicit example, a sim-
ple argument ensures existence of exponential densities
and, therefore, power law predictive information models.
If the number of parameters in a learning problem is not
ﬁnite then in principle it is impossible to predict anything
unless there is some appropriate regularization. If we let
the number of parameters stay ﬁnite but become large,
then there is more to be learned and correspondingly the
predictive information grows in proportion to this num-
ber. On the other hand, if the number of parameters
becomes inﬁnite without regularization, then the predic-
tive information should go to zero since nothing can be
learned. We should be able to see this happen in a regu-
larized problem as the regularization weakens: eventually
the regularization would be insuﬃcient and the predictive
information would vanish. The only way this can hap-
pen is if the predictive information grows more and more
rapidly with N as we weaken the regularization, until ﬁ-
nally it becomes extensive (equivalently, drops to zero)
at the point where prediction becomes impossible. To
realize this scenario we have to go beyond Ipred ∝
log T
N µ/(µ+1); the transition from increasing
with Ipred ∝
predictive information to zero occurs as µ

1.

This discussion makes it clear that the predictive infor-
mation (the subextensive entropy) distinguishes between
problems of intuitively diﬀerent complexity and thus, in
accord to Grassberger’s deﬁnitions [4], is probably a good
choice for a universal complexity measure. Can this in-
tuition be made more precise?

→

First we need to decide whether we want to attach mea-
sures of complexity to a particular signal x(t) or whether
we are interested in measures that are deﬁned by an av-
erage over the ensemble P [x(t)]. One problem in assign-
ing complexity to single realizations is that there can be

4

atypical data streams. Second, Grassberger [4] in par-
ticular has argued that our visual intuition about the
complexity of spatial patterns is an ensemble concept,
even if the ensemble is only implicit. The fact that we
admit probabilistic models is crucial: even at a colloquial
level, if we allow for probabilistic models then there is a
simple description for a sequence of truly random bits,
but if we insist on a deterministic model then it may
be very complicated to generate precisely the observed
string of bits. Furthermore, in the context of probabilis-
tic models it hardly makes sense to ask for a dynamics
that generates a particular data stream; we must ask for
dynamics that generate the data with reasonable prob-
ability, which is more or less equivalent to asking that
the given string be a typical member of the ensemble
generated by the model. All of these paths lead us to
thinking not about single strings but about ensembles
in the tradition of statistical mechanics, and so we shall
search for measures of complexity that are averages over
the distribution P [x(t)].

Once we focus on average quantities, we can provide
an axiomatic proof (much in the spirit of Shannon’s [12]
arguments establishing entropy as a unique information
measure) that links Ipred to complexity. We can start by
adopting Shannon’s postulates as constraints on a mea-
sure of complexity: if there are N equally likely signals,
then the measure should be monotonic in N ; if the sig-
nal is decomposable into statistically independent parts
then the measure should be additive with respect to this
decomposition; and if the signal can be described as a
leaf on a tree of statistically independent decisions then
the measure should be a weighted sum of the measures at
each branching point. We believe that these constraints
are as plausible for complexity measures as for informa-
tion measures, and it is well known from Shannon’s orig-
inal work that this set of constraints leaves the entropy
as the only possibility. Since we are discussing a time de-
pendent signal, this entropy depends on the duration of
our sample, S(T ). We know of course that this cannot be
the end of the discussion, because we need to distinguish
between randomness (entropy) and complexity. The path
to this distinction is to introduce other constraints on our
measure.

First we notice that if the signal x is continuous, then
the entropy is not invariant under transformations of x
that do not mix point at diﬀerent times (reparameteri-
zations). It seems reasonable to ask that complexity be
a function of the process we are observing and not of
the coordinate system in which we choose to record our
observations. However, that it is not the whole function
S(T ) which depends on the coordinate system for x; it is
only the extensive component of the entropy that has this
noninvariance. This can be seen more generally by not-
ing that subextensive terms in the entropy contribute to
the mutual information among diﬀerent segments of the
data stream (including the predictive information deﬁned

here), while the extensive entropy cannot; mutual infor-
mation is coordinate invariant, so all of the noninvariance
must reside in the extensive term. Thus, any measure
complexity that is coordinate invariant must discard the
extensive component of the entropy.

If we continue along these lines, we can think about
the asymptotic expansion of the entropy at large T . The
extensive term is the ﬁrst term in this series, and we have
seen that it must be discarded. What about the other
terms? In the context of predicting in a parameterized
model, most of the terms in this series depend in detail
on our prior distribution in parameter space, which might
seem odd for a measure of complexity. More generally, if
we consider transformations of the data stream x(t) that
mix points within a temporal window of size τ , then for
T >> τ the entropy S(T ) may have subextensive terms
which are constant, and these are not invariant under
this class of transformations. On the other hand, if there
are divergent subextensive terms, these are invariant un-
der such temporally local transformations [13]. So if we
insist that measures of complexity be invariant not only
under instantaneous coordinate transformations, but also
under temporally local transformations, then we can dis-
card both the extensive and the ﬁnite subextensive terms
in the entropy, leaving only the divergent subextensive
terms as a possible measure of complexity.

To illustrate the purpose of these two extra conditions,
we may think of the following example: measuring veloc-
ity of a turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow at a given point. The condi-
tion of invariance under reparameterizations means that
the complexity is independent of the scale used by the
speedometer. On the other hand, the second condition
ensures that the temporal mixing due to the ﬁniteness of
the inertia of the speedometer’s needle does not change
the estimated complexity of the ﬂow.

In our view, these arguments (or their slight variation
also presented in [5]) settle the question of the unique
deﬁnition of complexity. Not only is the divergent subex-
tensive component of the entropy the unique complexity
measure, but it is also a universal one since it is con-
nected in a straightforward way to many other measures
that have arisen in statistics and in dynamical systems
theory. A bit less straightforward is the connection to
the Kolmogorov’s deﬁnition that started the whole dis-
cussion, but even this can also be made.

T < t

To make this connection we follow the suggestion of
Standish [14] that one should focus not on the complex-
ity of particular strings but of equivalence classes. In the
present case it is natural to deﬁne an equivalence class
of data x(
0) as those data that generate indis-
tinguishable conditional probability distributions for the
future, P [x(t > 0)
0)]. If this conditional
distribution has suﬃcient statistics, then there exists a
compression of the past data x(
0) into exactly
Ipred(T ) bits while preserving all of the mutual informa-
tion with the future. But this means that the ensemble of

T < t

T < t

x(

≤

−

−

−

≤

≤

|

5

[1] M. Li and P. Vit´anyi. An Introduction to Kolmogorov
Complexity and its Applications, Springer–Verlag, New
York (1993).

[2] J. Rissanen. Stochastic Complexity and Statistical In-
quiry, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1989); J. Rissanen,
IEEE Trans. Inf. Thy. 42, 40–47 (1996).

[3] C. Bennett, in Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of
Information, W. H. Zurek, ed., Addison–Wesley, Red-
wood City, pp. 137–148 (1990).

[4] P. Grassberger, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 25, 907–938 (1986).
[5] W. Bialek, I. Nemenman, and N. Tishby, to appear in
Neural Computation (2001). E-print: physics/0007070.
[6] V. Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory, John Wiley &

Sons, New York (1998).

[7] V. Balasubramanian, Neural Comp. 9, 349–368 (1997).
[8] W. Bialek, C. Callan, and S. Strong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,

4693–4697 (1996).

[9] C. E. Shannon, Bell Sys. Tech. J. 30, 50–64 (1951).

W. Hilberg, Frequenz 44, 243–248(1990).

[10] W. Ebeling, T. P¨oschel, Europhys. Lett. 26, 241–246

[11] T. Schurmann and P. Grassberger, Chaos, 6, 414–427

[12] C. E. Shannon, Bell Sys. Tech. J. 27, 379–423, 623–656

(1994).

(1996).

(1948).

[13] Throughout this discussion we assume that the signal
x at one point in time is ﬁnite dimensional. There are
subtleties if we allow x to represent the conﬁguration of
a spatially inﬁnite system.

[14] R. K. Standish, submitted to Complexity International.

E-print: nlin.AO/0101006.

[15] C. R. Shalizi and J. P. Crutchﬁeld,
in Journal of Statistical Physics
cond-mat/9907176.

to appear
(2001). E-print:

[16] N. Tishby, F. Pereira, and W. Bialek, in Proceedings of
the 37th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,
Control and Computing, B. Hajek and R. S. Sreenivas,
eds., University of Illinois, pp. 368–377 (1999). E-print:
physics/0004057.

data in an equivalence class can be described, on average,
using exactly this many bits. Thus, for dynamics such
that the prediction problem has suﬃcient statistics, the
average Kolmogorov complexity of equivalence classes de-
ﬁned by the indistinguishability of predictions is equal to
the predictive information. By the arguments above, pre-
diction is the useful thing which we can do with a data
stream, and so in this case it makes sense to say that the
Kolmogorov complexity of representing the useful bits of
data is equal to the predictive information. Note also
that Kolmogorov complexity is deﬁned only up to a con-
stant depending on the computer used [1]. A computer
independent deﬁnition requires ignoring constant terms
and focusing only on asymptotic behavior. This agrees
very well with our arguments above that identiﬁed only
the divergent part of the predictive information with the
complexity of a data stream.

In the terminology suggested by Grassberger, the
statement that the prediction problem has suﬃcient
statistics means that the True Measure Complexity is
equal to the Eﬀective Measure Complexity [4]; simi-
larly, the statistical complexity deﬁned by Crutchﬁeld and
coworkers [15] then also is equal to predictive informa-
tion deﬁned here. These are strong statements, and it is
likely that they are not true precisely for most natural
data streams. More generally one can ask for compres-
sions that preserve the maximum fraction of the relevant
(in this case, predictive) information, and our intuitive
notion of data being “understandable” or “summariz-
able” is that these selective compressions can be very
eﬃcient [16]—here eﬃciency means that we can com-
press the past into a description with length not much
larger than Ipred(T ) while preserving a ﬁnite fraction of
the (diverging) information about the future; an exam-
ple is when we summarize data by the parameters of the
model that describes the underlying stochastic process.
The opposite situation is illustrated by certain crypto-
graphic codes, where the relevant information is accessi-
ble (at best) only from the entire data set. Thus we can
classify data streams by their predictive information, but
additionally by whether this predictive information can
be represented eﬃciently. For those data where eﬃcient
representation is possible, the predictive information and
the mean Kolmogorov complexity of future–equivalent
classes will be similar; with more care we can guarantee
that these quantities are proportional as T
. Per-
haps Wigner’s famous remarks about the unreasonable
eﬀectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences could
be rephrased as the conjecture that the data streams oc-
curring in nature—although often complex as measured
by their predictive information—nonetheless belong to
this eﬃciently representable class.

→ ∞

6

