1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Statistics of Atmospheric Correlations

M. S. Santhanam ∗ and Prabir K Patra†
IBM-Research, India Research Laboratory, Block-1, Indian Institute of Technology,
New Delhi 110 016, India.
(February 2, 2008)

For a large class of quantum systems the statistical properties of their spectrum show remarkable
agreement with random matrix predictions. Recent advances show that the scope of random matrix
theory is much wider. In this work, we show that the random matrix approach can be beneﬁcially
applied to a completely diﬀerent classical domain, namely, to the empirical correlation matrices
obtained from the analysis of the basic atmospheric parameters that characterise the state of atmo-
sphere. We show that the spectrum of atmospheric correlation matrices satisfy the random matrix
prescription. In particular, the eigenmodes of the atmospheric empirical correlation matrices that
have physical signiﬁcance are marked by deviations from the eigenvector distribution.

PACS number(s): 05.45.Tp, 92.70.Gt, 05.40.-a, 02.50.Sk

To appear in Phys. Rev. E

I. INTRODUCTION

The study of random matrix ensembles have brought
in a great deal of insight in several ﬁelds of physics rang-
ing from nuclear, atomic and molecular physics, quantum
chaos and mesoscopic systems [1]. The interest in random
matrices arose from the need to understand the spectral
properties of the many-body quantum systems with com-
plex interactions. With general assumptions about the
symmetry properties of the system dictated by quantum
physics, random matrix theory (RMT) provides remark-
ably successful predictions for the statistical properties of
the spectrum, which have been numerically and experi-
mentally veriﬁed in the last few decades [2]. In recent
times, it has been realised that the ﬂuctuation properties
of low-dimensional systems, e.g. chaotic quantum sys-
tems, are universal and can be modelled by an appropri-
ate ensemble of random matrices [3]. From its origins in
quantum physics of high dimensional systems, the scope
of RMT is further widening with the new approaches
based on supersymmetry methods [4] and applications in
seemingly disparate ﬁelds like quantum chromodynamics
[5], two-dimensional quantum gravity [6], conformal ﬁeld
theory [1] and even ﬁnancial markets [7]. Thus, random
matrix techniques have potential applications and utility
in disciplines far outside of quantum physics. In this, we
show that the empirical correlation matrices that arise in
atmospheric sciences can also be modelled as a random
matrix chosen from an appropriate ensemble.

The correlation studies are elegantly carried out in the
matrix framework. The empirical correlation matrices
arise in a multivariate setting in various disciplines; for
instance, in the analysis of space-time data in general
problems of image processing and pattern recognition,
in particular for image compression and denoising [8];
the weather and climate data are frequently subjected
to principal component analysis to identify the indepen-
dent modes of atmospheric variability [9]; in the study of

ﬁnancial assets and portfolios through the Markowitz’s
theory of optimal portfolios [10]. Most often, the analysis
performed on the correlation matrices is aimed at sepa-
rating the signal from ‘noise’, i.e. to cull the physically
meaningful modes of the correlation matrix from the un-
derlying noise. Several methods based on Monte-Carlo
simulations have been used for this purpose [11]. The
general premise of such methods is to simulate ’noise’
by constructing an ensemble of matrices with random
entries drawn from speciﬁed distributions and the statis-
tical properties of its eigenvalues, like the level density
etc., are compared with that of the correlation matrices.
Even as the Monte-Carlo techniques become computa-
tionally expensive beyond a point, asymptotic formula-
tions take over. The deviations from ’pure noise’ assump-
tions are interpreted as signals or symptom of physical
signiﬁcance. In the context of the atmospheric sciences,
empirical correlation matrices are widely used, for ex-
ample, to study the large scale patterns of atmospheric
variability.
If the random matrix techniques are valid
for a correlation matrix, it might be useful as a tool to
separate the signal from the noise, with lesser computa-
tional expense than with methods based on Monte-Carlo
techniques. We show that RMT prediction for eigenvec-
tor distribution has potential application in this direction
for atmospheric correlation matrices.

II. CORRELATIONS AND TELECONNECTIONS

The state of the atmosphere is governed by the classical
laws of ﬂuid motion and exhibits a great deal of correla-
tions in various spatial and temporal scales. These corre-
lations are crucial to understand the short and long term
trends in climate. Generally, atmospheric correlations
can be recognised from the study of empirical correlation
matrices constructed using the atmospheric data.

1

FIG. 1. The NAO pattern as captured by the EOF analysis of sea-level pressure, with the geographical map of the domain
of analysis in the background. The contours are drawn after averaging over the ﬁrst two dominant EOFs. Note the north-south
dipole shown as closed contours, in mid-Atlantic (dotted contour) and over Greenland (solid contours).

FIG. 2. Dominant EOF from analysis of wind-stress vectors with the equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean domain in the background.
This eigenmode predominantly represents the annual ﬂuctuations in trade winds and accounts for 38% of the variability. This
eigenvector has been rotated by 45o to obtain physically meaningful pattern.

2

Most signiﬁcant correlations are documented as tele-
connection patterns, i.e., the simultaneous correlations
in the ﬂuctuations of the large scale atmospheric param-
eters at widely separated points on the earth. They could
be thought of as the dominant modes of atmospheric vari-
ability. Wallace and Gutzler have surveyed the entire
northern hemisphere teleconnections and show that the
dominant eigenmodes of the correlation matrices, in most
cases, reﬂect these teleconnection patterns [12]. For in-
stance, the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) [13] refers
to the exchange of the atmospheric mass between Green-
land/Iceland region and the regions of North Atlantic
ocean between 35oN and 40oN and is characterised by
a north-south dipole pattern as shown in Fig. 1.
It
is known that the NAO is associated with anomalous
weather patterns in the eastern US and northern Europe
including Scandinavia [14]. Such dominant modes need
not always have to be a teleconnection. For example, the
pattern in Fig 2 can be identiﬁed with the annual trade
wind ﬂuctuations in the equatorial Paciﬁc region; ob-
tained as a dominant eigenmode from the analysis of the
pseudo wind stress vectors. In subsequent sections, we
will perform statistical analysis on the spectra of atmo-
spheric correlation matrices, whose dominant modes dis-
play correlation patterns discussed above. Atmospheric
correlations are interesting to study from a RMT per-
spective because they arise naturally from known phys-
ical interactions and oﬀers instances to verify two (or-
thogonal and unitary) of the three Gaussian ensembles
of RMT.

A. Empirical Orthogonal Functions

The Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) method,
also called the Principal Component Analysis, is a mul-
tivariate statistical technique widely used in the analysis
of geophysical data [9]. It is similar to the singular value
decomposition employed in linear algebra and it provides
information about the independent modes of variabilities
exhibited by the system.

In general, any atmospheric parameter z(x, t), (like
wind velocity, geopotential height, temperature etc.),
varies with space(x) and time(t) and is assumed to follow
an average trend on which the variations (or anomalies,
as referred to in atmospheric sciences) are superimposed,
i.e., z(x, t) = zavg(x) + z′(x, t). The wind vectors can
be represented as a complex number, seiθ where s is
the wind speed and θ the direction. Thus, in general,
z(x, t) could be a complex number. The mathematical
treatment of complex correlations and EOFs is given in
ref [15].
In further analysis, the standardised anomaly
z′(x, t) will be used which will have zero mean (z′(x) = 0)
and is rescaled such that its variance < z′(x)2 > is unity.
If the observations were taken n times at each of the p
spatial locations and the corresponding anomalies z′(x, t)

assembled in the data matrix Z of order p by n, then the
spatial correlation matrix of the anomalies is given by,

S =

Z Z†

1
n

(1)

Note that the elements of the hermitian matrix S, of or-
der p, are just the Pearson correlation between various
spatial points. The eigenfunctions of S are called the
empirical orthogonal functions since they form a com-
plete set of orthogonal basis to represent the data matrix
Z. In the geophysical setting, the EOFs can be plotted
as contour maps by associating each component with its
corresponding spatial location as shown in Fig 1. If the
eigenvalue corresponding to the mth eigenmode is λm,
then the percentage variance associated with the mode
p
is given by, vm = (λm/
i=1 λi)100.0. Then, the domi-
nant mode would correspond to the EOF with the largest
eigenvalue. In the last few decades, several variants of
this basic EOF technique have been used to suit varied
requirements [9]. We will show that the spectrum of S
displays random matrix type spectral statistics.

P

III. EIGENVALUE STATISTICS

A. Data and analysis

Computing reliable correlation matrices depend on the
availability of suﬃciently long time series of data. Gen-
erally, the requirement is to have n >> p, as otherwise
the computed covariances could be noisy and correla-
tions could be regarded as random. Reliable records
of monthly averages for weather and climate parame-
ters of interest exist for the last 50 years. In our study,
we use both the daily as well as the monthly averaged
data available from NCEP reanalysis archives [16]. Fur-
ther in this direction, we study three cases; (i) monthly
mean sea level pressure (SLP) for the Atlantic domain
(0−90oN, 120oW−30oE) from 1948 to 1999. (ii) monthly
mean global sea surface temperatures (SST) [17] and (iii)
surface level pseudo wind-stress vectors in the equatorial
Paciﬁc ocean (20oS−20oN, 130oE−70oW). The ﬁrst case
identiﬁes many northern hemisphere teleconnections and
its climatic eﬀects and EOF aspects are documented [12].
Wind-stress is an important quantity in studies on cou-
pled ocean-atmosphere models that simulate the air-sea
interaction and the feedback mechanism. The pseudo
(u2 + v2)(u + iv), where
wind-stress is deﬁned as W =
u and v are the zonal and meridional wind components,
and this leads to complex correlation matrix. Its EOFs
exhibit signatures of the mean annual signal and ElNino
oscillations [18]. Note that the eigenmodes of complex
correlation matrix are determined only up to a complex
factor of unit modulus. This allows the freedom to choose
a phase angle to rotate the eigenvectors.

p

3

The atmospheric data is on an uniform spatial grid
of 2.5o along both the latitude and longitude. To en-
sure that n > p, in the calculations with monthly mean
data, the spatial resolution was reduced to 5o. Thus,
for the case(i) of monthly mean SLP correlations, p=434
and n=624.
In the case (iii) of monthly mean wind
stress analysis over equatorial Paciﬁc ocean, the land
points were removed from the calculations using land-
sea mask and it results in p=494 and n=624. Since a
longer time-series of monthly mean data was not avail-
able, another experiment was performed with daily aver-
aged time-series from 1990 to 1999 with much improved
ratio for r = n/p in the range 2.5-3.5. The required
means and anomalies were computed from which matri-
ces of orders ranging from 500 to 1200 is constructed and
diagonalised using standard LAPACK routines [19].

B. Level spacing distribution

One of the celebrated results of the random matrix
theory is the nearest-neighbour eigenvalue spacing dis-
tribution; i.e. the distribution of si = ǫi+1 − ǫi. It gives
the probability for ﬁnding the neighbouring levels with a
given spacing s. In the context of this work, the Gaussian
Orthogonal Ensemble (GOE) is appropriate for the mean
sea-level pressure correlations and Gaussian Unitary En-
semble (GUE) for pseudo wind-stress vectors. The spec-
tra of these classes exhibit universal ﬂuctuation proper-
ties and the spacing distributions are given by [22],

(2)

s2)

s exp(−

PGUE(s) =

PGOE(s) =

π
π
2
4
32
π2 s2 exp(−
The analytical forms above indicate level-repulsion, a
tendency against clustering, as evident from low prob-
ability for small spacings. The level repulsion is linear
for GOE and quadratic for GUE.

s2)

4
π

(3)

340

320

300

280

260

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

FIG. 3. The integrated level density, in the form of a stair-
case, for the eigenvalues of the monthly mean SLP correlation
matrix. The solid line is the empirical curve that ﬁts the level
density with dark circles denoting the location of eigenvalues.
The inset is magniﬁed view of a part of the curve.

P

First we look at the structure of eigenvalue density.
The integrated level density N (λ) =
Θ(λ − λi), can be
written as, N (λ) ≈ Navg(λ) + Nf l(λ), a sum of an aver-
age part and the ﬂuctuating part. The eigenvalues λi are
unfolded by ﬁtting an empirical function to the average
part of the integrated level density such that the unfolded
eigenvalues ǫi = Navg(λi) have mean spacing unity [20].
All the analysis reported further were performed on ǫi.
As Fig. 3 shows, for empirical correlation matrices, the
spectrum is dense at the lower end. This is typical of the
spectrum of correlation matrices formed from the data
matrix Z through eq (1) [21]. In contrast to this, for a
generic quantum system, the level density increases with
energy and is dense at the higher end of the spectrum.

FIG. 4. Eigenvalue spacing distribution for the monthly
mean SLP correlation matrix. The solid curve is the GOE
prediction. The inset shows the cumulative distribution for
the monthly and daily averaged correlation matrix.

In Fig. 4, we show the spacing distribution for the
eigenvalues of the correlation matrix of the monthly mean
SLP. The inset in this ﬁgure shows the cumulative spac-
ing distribution for the spectra obtained from the anal-
ysis of monthly and daily averaged SLP data. We ob-
serve a general agreement with the RMT predictions. In
Fig. 5, the spectra from the monthly mean wind-stress
correlation data is shown. If the spacings, s, were un-
correlated then we would expect a Poisson distribution,
P (s) = exp(−s) [20]. In all the cases we studied, the em-
pirical histograms do not follow the Poisson curves at all.

4

As would be expected, a better agreement between the
theoretical curves and the empirical distributions is ob-
served in the analysis of daily averaged data, in both the
cases of SLP and pseudo wind-stress correlations, since
they provide about 1000 eigenvalues for the statistics.
For instance, a Kolmogrov-Smirnov test at 65% conﬁ-
dence level could not reject the hypothesis that GOE is
the correct distribution for the eigenvalues of monthly
mean SLP correlation matrix, whereas a similar test for
the daily averaged SLP data could not reject the hypoth-
esis at 99% conﬁdence level. The monthly mean SST
correlation matrix analysis (not shown here) also sup-
ports RMT spacing distribution. The eigenvalue spacing
distribution for the equatorial Paciﬁc pseudo wind-stress
vector correlation matrix also indicates a good agreement
with the GUE prediction given by Eq (3) (see Fig 5).

∆3(L). (b) the number variance Σ2 is also a function of
two-point correlation function. Let n(L, L′) be the num-
ber of eigenvalues in the spectral interval L. Then, for a
choice of L′, Σ2 is given by,

Σ2(L, L′) = n(L, L′)2 − L2

Averaging n(L, L′)2 over L′ gives the number variance
Σ2(L). The asymptotic results, for large L, from random
matrix considerations, is given by [22],

∆3(L) =

Σ2(L) =

1
νπ2 log(L) + gν
2
νπ2 log(L) + hν

where ν = 1, 2 corresponds to GOE and GUE respec-
tively; g and h are also dependent on the ensemble.

(5)

(6)

(7)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

FIG. 5. Eigenvalue spacing distribution for the monthly
mean wind-stress correlation matrix. The solid curve is the
GUE prediction. The inset shows the cumulative distribution
for the monthly and daily averaged correlation matrix.

C. Long-range Correlations

Beyond the nearest-neighbour spacing distribution, we
study the long-range correlations. We compute the fol-
lowing spectral ﬂuctuation measures [20] which are based
on the two-point correlation function. (a) The spectral
rigidity, the so-called ∆3 statistic, measures the least-
square deviation of the spectral staircase function N (ǫ)
from the straight line of best ﬁt for a ﬁnite interval L of
the spectrum,

∆3(L, L′) =

[N (ǫ) − aǫ − b]2 dǫ

(4)

′+L

L

min
a, b

1
L

Z

L′

where a and b are obtained from a least-squares ﬁt. Av-
erage over several choices of L′ gives the spectral rigidity

FIG. 6. ∆3(L) for spectra from the correlation matrix of
(a) wind stress and (b) SLP. The solid curve in (a) is GUE
prediction and in (b) the GOE prediction. The circles are
for the correlation matrix obtained from daily averaged data
and triangles represent the matrix obtained from the monthly
mean data.

Fig 6 shows the ∆3(L) statistic for the SLP and wind-
stress correlation matrix spectrum, computed using the
method given by Bohigas and Giannoni [20]. Generally,
a good agreement is observed with the RMT predictions.
In all the cases, for small L the agreement is good and
small deviations begin to be seen for larger values indi-
cating a possible breakdown of universality. In general,
this should indicate system speciﬁc features that cannot
be modelled by assumptions based on randomness. Once
again, we notice that the correlation matrix spectra ob-
tained from daily data show better agreement with RMT
predictions, primarily due to larger orders of correlation
matrix involved and hence more eigenvalues for the anal-
ysis. Fig 7 shows the number variance Σ2(L) for all the

5

cases. We observe a fairly good agreement with RMT
predictions. The results for SLP and SST correlations
are in broad agreement with the similar analysis per-
formed on the ﬁnancial correlation matrices [7], both of
which are modelled by the orthogonal ensemble of RMT.
This, in itself, demonstrates the breadth of applications
of RMT.

distribution of complex eigenvectors correspond to GUE
class with ν = 2. The general understanding is that if the
eigenvectors are suﬃciently irregular in some sense, then
its components are χ2 distributed and deviations occur
if they show some symptoms of regularity.

FIG. 7. Σ2(L) for spectra from the correlation matrix of
(a) wind stress and (b) SLP. The circles are for the correla-
tion matrix obtained from daily averaged data and triangles
represent the matrix obtained from the monthly mean data.

IV. STATISTICS OF EOF COMPONENTS

With the eigenvalue statistics, it is not straightforward
to obtain detailed system speciﬁc information, unless
there are signiﬁcant deviations from random matrix pre-
dictions. The distribution of eigenvector components, on
the other hand, reveals ﬁne-grained information, at the
level of every eigenvector. In this section, we show that
almost all the EOFs follow the RMT distribution. How-
ever, a few EOFs that have physical signiﬁcance, like the
ones shown in Figs 1 and 2, deviate strongly from RMT.
Broadly, the variability captured by an EOF is seen to
be reﬂected in its deviation from RMT predictions.

Let am

j be the jth component of the mth eigenvector.
Assuming that these components are Gaussian random
variables with the norm being their only characteristic,
j |2, in the
it can be shown that the distribution of r = |am
limit when the matrix dimension is large, is given by the
special cases of the χ2 distribution [23],

Pν (r) =

ν
2 < r > (cid:17)

(cid:16)

ν/2 rν/2−1
Γ( ν
2 )

exp

−rν
2 < r > (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(8)

The case ν = 1 can be identiﬁed with GOE and gives
the well-known Porter-Thomas (PT) distribution. The

6

FIG. 8. Cumulative distribution of EOF components
for the SLP correlation matrix. The solid curve is the
Porter-Thomas distribution. The two curves with dotted lines
correspond to the ﬁrst two dominant EOFs, whose spatial
map is shown in Fig. 1. The long-dashed curves are the next
few dominant EOFs. The curve with dark-circles is a sample
from the bulk of lesser-dominant EOFs that mostly follow
Porter-Thomas distribution. The curve with small dashes
(marked as 45) is the 45th EOF that surprisingly deviates
from the PT curve (see text).

In further analysis, we will use the modulus square of
j |2, normalised to unit
the EOF components, i.e. r = |am
mean. For the monthly mean SLP correlation matrix,
Fig 8 shows the cumulative distribution of EOF compo-
nents. Since EOFs form an optimal basis to represent
the data, most of the variability is carried by a small
number of EOFs; in this case about 91% of the vari-
ability is captured by just 12 dominant EOFs. The rest
9% is accounted for by the bulk of the rest 422 EOFs.
The central result of this section is that the bulk of these
EOFs, accounting for a small fraction of the variability,
follow the cumulative Porter-Thomas (PT) distribution
given by, I(r) = erf(
r/2), where erf is the standard
error function. This strengthens the conclusion that the
empirical correlation matrices can be modelled as a ran-
dom matrix. As an example from a large number of such
EOFs, the distribution of 294th EOF is shown (denoted
by dark circles) in Fig 8, and it practically falls on the
PT curve. We observed that the distribution of the all
such EOFs follow RMT and this is also conﬁrmed by a
Kolmogrov-Smirnov test.

p

viation from the cumulative GUE curve. Next few domi-
nant EOFs also exhibit signiﬁcant deviations. Legler [18]
has performed EOF analysis on the Paciﬁc ocean wind-
stress vectors and attributed physical signiﬁcance to the
top three dominant EOFs. Thus, EOFs that have physi-
cal signiﬁcance, cannot be modelled by RMT ensembles.
An analogy with quantum eigenstates seems inevitable.
Studies on the distribution of the eigenfunctions of low-
disorder tight-binding systems and chaotic quantum sys-
tems show that a small fraction of the eigenstates, which
display quantum localisation, deviate from random ma-
trix predictions [24], while most others show RMT-like
behaviour.

There are two interesting observations in this study.
Firstly, we notice that there are few EOFs, occurring
at irregular intervals, which do not carry much of a sig-
niﬁcance in terms of the variability but deviate strongly
from RMT predictions. It is not immediately clear if they
carry any signiﬁcant information. Secondly, a surprising
observation is that the EOFs, corresponding to ﬁrst few
eigenvalues at the lower end of the spectrum, most of-
ten regarded as least dominant and random, devoid of
any system speciﬁc information, show marked deviations
from RMT (see also ref [7]). One such example for each
of GOE and GUE case is shown in Figs 8 and 9.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

This work shows that the random matrix predictions
are of considerable interest in the study of the correla-
tion matrices that arise in atmospheric sciences. Previous
work on the correlations of stock market ﬂuctuations has
come to similar conclusion [7]. This is despite the fol-
lowing basic diﬀerence; RMT assumes that the quantum
Hamiltonian matrix is part of an ensemble of random
matrices whose entries are independent random numbers
drawn from a Gaussian distribution. In the correlation
matrix formalism, the elements of data matrix are inde-
pendent Gaussian distributed random numbers. Then,
the correlation matrix in eq. 1 follows Wishart structure
[25], a form of generalised χ2-distribution.

In the application of EOFs in various disciplines an im-
portant question is the truncation of EOFs while opting
for a low-dimensional representation for a given data ma-
trix. The earlier approaches to this problem were based
on Monte-Carlo techniques or asymptotic theories [9,11].
It would be interesting to evolve a truncation criteria, for
using EOFs as empirical basis, from random matrix tech-
niques since the results here suggest that RMT could be
potentially applied to separate the random modes from
the physically signiﬁcant modes of the correlation matrix.
Even as we have documented evidence for RMT like be-
haviour from the atmospheric correlation matrices, there
is also a need to look at the limits of RMT description.
For instance, a correlation matrix which shows perfect

FIG. 9. Cumulative distribution of EOF components for
the pseudo wind-stress correlations. The solid curve is the
GUE prediction. The dotted curves are for the ﬁrst two dom-
inant EOFs; the spatial map of dominant EOF shown in Fig.
2. The curve with dark-circles is a sample from the bulk of
lesser-dominant EOFs that follow GUE. The curve with small
dashes (marked as 4) is the 4th EOF deviates signiﬁcantly
from the GUE prediction.

However, interesting cases arise from a small number of
dominant EOFs which deviate strongly from RMT pre-
dictions. The ﬁrst two dominant EOFs shown in Fig
8 (as dotted lines), representing about 30% and 22% of
the entire variability, show signiﬁcant deviations from cu-
mulative PT curve. The spatial structure of both these
eigenmodes, shown in Fig 1, jointly capture the essence
of North-Atlantic pattern. This scenario, of most dom-
inant of the EOFs deviating from the PT distribution
and lesser signiﬁcant ones showing agreement with it, is
repeated in the analysis of SST (not shown here) and
daily averaged SLP correlations as well. At this point,
we stress that these deviations are exceptions that arise
in about 1% of the EOFs.

Fig 9 shows the cumulative distribution for the EOFs
obtained from the analysis of the monthly mean wind-
stress correlation. Note that in this case, the appro-
priate prediction follows the unitary ensemble since the
EOF components are complex. The dominant 20 EOFs
explain nearly 90% of the variability in the wind stress
data. The rest of the large number (about 400) of EOFs
show good agreement with cumulative GUE curve for
eigenvector distribution given by I(r) = 1 − exp(−r).
One such case, 370th EOF, is shown in Fig 9 denoted by
dark circles. In general, EOFs show good agreement with
RMT except for the few dominant EOFs. The dominant
EOF, whose spatial pattern is shown in Fig 2, represents
the mean annual Paciﬁc trade-wind ﬂuctuations and ex-
plains 38% of the variability and shows pronounced de-

7

correlation will obviously not behave like RMT. Can cor-
relation matrix spectra display Poisson spacing distribu-
tion ? Such limits of RMT in the context of correlation
matrix is yet to be explored.

In summary, we have analysed atmospheric correla-
tion matrices from the perspective of random matrix the-
ory. The central result of this work is that they can be
modelled as random matrices chosen from an appropri-
ate RMT ensemble. The eigenvalue statistics exhibits
short and long-range RMT-type behaviour. Most of the
eigenmodes also follow the RMT type eigenvector dis-
tribution. Few dominant eigenmodes that have physical
signiﬁcance deviate from RMT predictions. We have ver-
iﬁed our conclusions with examples of correlation matri-
ces that belong to GOE and GUE universality classes of
random matrix theory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The atmospheric data used in this work is the NCEP
Reanalysis data provided by NOAA-CIRES Climate Di-
agnostics Center, Boulder, Colorado, USA, from their
Web site at http://www.cdc.noaa.gov. NCEP/NOAA-
CIRES is thankfully acknowledged for the same. We
thank Dr. Abhinanda Sarkar for clariﬁcations on the
nuances of statistics.

∗ msanthan@in.ibm.com
† Now at Atmospheric Composition Research Pro-
gramme, Frontier Research System for Global Change,
Yokohama 236-0001, Japan. prabir@jamstec.go.jp

[5] J.J.M. Verbaarschot, Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 53 88

[6] E. Abdalla, Lecture Notes in Physics 20 (Springer,Berlin,

(1997).

1994).

[7] L. Laloux et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1467 (1999); V.

Plerou et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1471 (1999).

[8] R. N. Hoﬀman and D. W. Johnson, IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sensing 32 25 (1994) and references therein.
[9] R. W. Preisendorfer, (ed. C. D. Mobley) Principal Com-
ponent Analysis in Meteorology and Oceanography, (El-
sevier,1988); Daniel S. Wilks, Statistical Methods in At-
mospheric Sciences (Academic Press, London, 1995).
[10] E. J. Elton and M. J. Gruber, Modern Portfolio Theory
and Investment Analysis (John Wiley, New York, 1995)
; H. Markowitz, Portfolio Selection : Eﬃcient Diversiﬁ-
cation of Investments (John Wiley, New York, 1959)
[11] R. W. Preisendorfer, F. W. Zweirs and T. P. Barnett,
Foundations of Principal Component Selection Rules,
Scripps Inst. of Oceanography, SIO Ref. Series 81-4
(NTIS PB83-146613).

[12] J. M. Wallace and Gutzler, Mon. Wea. Rev. 109 784

[13] P. J. Lamb and R. A. Peppler, Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 68
1218 (1987); H. van Loon and J. C. Rogers, Mon. Wea.
Rev. 106 296 (1978); J. C. Rogers, Mon. Wea. Rev. 112
1999 (1984).

[14] J. W. Hurrell, Science 269 676 (1995).
[15] D. M. Hardy and J.J. Walton, J. Appl. Met. 17 1153

(1981).

(1978).

[16] The data is taken from the NCEP 50-year reanalysis
archives of NOAA-CIRES at http://www.cdc.noaa.gov.
The daily and monthly mean data and its derivatives are
available from 1948 onwards.

[17] T. M. Smith et. al., J. Clim. 9 1403 (1996).
[18] D. M. Legler, Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 64 234 (1983).
[19] http://www.netlib.org/lapack
[20] O. Bohigas and M.-J. Giannoni

in Mathematical and
Computational Methods in Nuclear Physics, Vol 209 of
Lecture Notes in Physics, edited by J. S. Dehesa, J. M.
G. Gomez and A. Polls (Springer, 1984).

[21] A. M. Sengupta and P. P. Mitra, Phys. Rev. E 60 3389

[1] T. Guhr, A. Muller-Groeling and H. A. Weidenmuller,

(1999).

Phys. Rep. 299 189 (1999).

[2] T. Zimmermann et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 3 (1988); A.

Kudrolli et. al., Phys. Rev. E 49 R11 (1994)

Verlag, 1991).

[3] O. Bohigas, M. J. Giannoni and C. Schmidt, Phys. Rev.

[22] M. L. Mehta, Random Matrices Academic Press, (1991).
[23] F. Haake, Quantum Signatures of Chaos (Springer-

[24] K. Muller et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 215 (1997).
[25] S. S. Wilks, Mathematical Statistics (John Wiley, New

[4] K. Efetov, Supersymmetry in Disorder and Chaos (Cam-

York, 1962).

Lett. 52 1 (1984).

bridge Univ. Press, 1997).

8

