Reconstruction of dynamical equations for traﬃc ﬂow

S. Kriso1, R. Friedrich2, J. Peinke1 and P. Wagner3
1 Fachbereich 8 Physik, Universit¨at Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany
2Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik und Synergetik, Universit¨at Stuttgart, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany
3 Deutsches Zentrum f¨ur Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR) e.V., Institut f¨ur Verkehrsforschung, Rutherfordstrasse 2, 12489 Berlin,
Germany
(August 4, 2013)

1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Traﬃc ﬂow data collected by an induction loop detector on
the highway close to K¨oln-Nord are investigated with respect
to their dynamics including the stochastic content. In partic-
ular we present a new method, with which the ﬂow dynamics
can be extracted directly from the measured data. As a result
a Langevin equation for the traﬃc ﬂow is obtained. From the
deterministic part of the ﬂow dynamics, stable ﬁxed points
are extracted and set into relation with common features of
the fundamental diagram.

I. INTRODUCTION

By increasing the number of licensed vehicles on our
roads it becomes more and more necessary to reduce ap-
pearances of traﬃc congestion. Getting higher capacities
of highways means looking for optimized ﬂow rates of
cars. In order to do so, it is necessary to investigate the
complex system of traﬃc ﬂow and to understand its reg-
ularities. In a subsequent step, intelligent traﬃc control
systems may use these laws to inﬂuence the traﬃc ﬂow
and thus to increase the highway’s capacity utilization.
For our investigation a large amount of traﬃc ﬂow data
were collected at the highway near K¨oln-Nord (Germany)
over more than one week. For each car crossing an in-
duction loop detector the following data were recorded:
(i) the time, when the car crossed the detector, with an
resolution of 1 sec, (ii) the type of car (passenger car,
truck), (iii) the lane number, (iv) the velocity, truncated
to an 8-bit integer (0...255 km/h), accuracy of approx-
imately 3 %, (v) the length of the car in meters (8-bit
integer, not calibrated) and (vi) the distance to the car
driving ahead (an integer in the range 0. . . 999 m, not
calibrated). The lanes are labeled from A to C, where
lane A is the right driving lane where mostly trucks are
found (because of a German law), and lanes B and C are
the fast drivers’ lanes.

In the following we present a new method to derive
from the measured data dynamical equations for the traf-
ﬁc situation. We start with the common presentation of
the fundamental diagram. Next, we evaluate the deter-
ministic and the stochastic content of of the traﬃc dy-
namics by means of a Langevin equation. Finally, we give
an interpretation of the determined Langevin equation.

II. FUNDAMENTAL DIAGRAMS

Here and in the following we calculate the car density
k [km−1] and the ﬂux state q [h−1] of each car using the
measured data: the velocity v [km/h], the length of the
car l [m] and the distance d [m] to the car ahead:

k =

1000
l + d
q = k · v .

,

(1)

(2)

(3)

To avoid an overload of the presentation we restrict
the diagrams and the following calculations to two cases.
Firstly, only the traﬃc of a single lane C, secondly the
cumulative traﬃc of all three lanes A, B and C are con-
sidered. Furthermore we calculate for each density state
k the mean ﬂux state

hqik =

1
n(k) X q(k) .

The obtained fundamental diagrams

(qi;ki) and
(<q>;k) are shown in Fig. 1. We note that for this pre-
sentation no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the traﬃc dynamics
of one lane and the cumulative dynamics of three lanes
can be detected. In both diagrams we ﬁnd a maximum
ﬂux in free traﬃc ﬂow of qmax = 8000 cars/h, according
to the results of [1]. For the ﬂux out of traﬃc jams we
ﬁnd in both cases qout = 5000 cars/h. So we have a ratio
of η := qfree
max/qout = 1.6, which meets the value η ≈ 1.5
found in [1] quite well.

III. LANGEVIN EQUATION FOR THE TRAFFIC
FLOW

In order to grasp the underlying dynamics of the traf-
ﬁc ﬂow (one lane and all three lanes), we utilize a new
method to analyze the traﬃc data more extensively. In
particular, the iterative dynamics of the traﬃc state xN ,
given by the velocity vN and the ﬂux qN of the N -th car,
as a function of traﬃc state xN −1 of the N − 1-th car is
investigated. Note, that other state variables could have
been choosen as well.

For the iterative dynamics of the traﬃc state xN
(which may be taken in a generalized case as a r-
dimensional variable) we propose a description by a sta-

1

tionary Langevin equation, taking into account a com-
bination of deterministic and random (noisy) forces cf.
[2]:

xi,N +1 = xi,N + hi(xN ) +

gij(xN ) · Γj,N ,

(4)

r

X
j=1

where the indices i and j denote components of the mul-
tidimensional variables, N the time, and Γj,N are r × N
independent Gaussian noise variables with zero mean and
with variance 2, i.e.,

hΓj,N i = 0 , hΓj,M · Γk,N i = 2δj,kδM,N .

(5)

The central part of our following work is that it is pos-
sible to determine the functions hi and gij directly from
empirical data. Taking (4) as the Ito presentation of the
stochastic process the following relation to the Kramers-
Moyal coeﬃcients can be given,

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

D(1)
i

(x) = hi(x)

D(2)

ij (x) =

gik(x)gjk(x) ,

r

X
k=1

where D(1) and D(2) are called drift and diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient. These coeﬃcients can be evaluated by the condi-
tional moments

D(1)
i

(x) = hxi,N +1 − xii(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
ij (x) = h(xi,N +1 − xi)(xj,N +1 − xj )i(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

D(2)

xN =x

xN =x

,

.

Recently it has been shown that with the analogous
deﬁnition of these Kramers-Moyal coeﬃcients it is pos-
sible to reconstruct from time continuous dynamics the
underling stochastic diﬀerential equation [3].

Before presenting our results on the dynamics we want
to comment on the validity of this ansatz to describe the
traﬃc ﬂow by the Langevin equation (4). This ansatz
implies that the dynamics is in the class of Markovian
processes, i.e. the system does not have a memory. This
can be tested by conditional probabilities

p(xN|xN−1, . . . , xN−m) = p(xN|xN−1)

(10)

or by the necessary condition of
Kolmogorov equation

the Chapman-

p(xN|xN−r) = X
xN−s

p(xN|xN−s)p(xN−s|xN−r) , (11)

where r > s. From our data, conditional probabilities
have been evaluated and the validity of the Chapman-
Kolmogorov equation was found for the iterative dynam-
ics of both quantities, the velocity and the ﬂux. If this
Markovian property holds, the inherent noise of the dy-
It should be
namics (Γ) can be taken as δ-correlated.

noted, that even in the case where the noise is not δ-
correlated, the deterministic part of the dynamics can
be reconstructed from given data (8), as we found by
analysing numerically generated test data, [4].

As expressed by (9), the knowledge of the conditional
probabilities p(xN|xN−1) provides the basis to estimate
the Kramers-Moyal coeﬃcients from the traﬃc data.
First we consider the simpliﬁed case of the onedimen-
sional dynamics of the velocity only. The results for and
D(2)(v) for the traﬃc of one lane and for the cumulative
traﬃc of all three lanes are shown in Fig. 2. The one di-
mensional deterministic dynamics can also be expressed
by the potential ΦD(v), deﬁned as - δΦD
δv = D(1)(v). The
corresponding potentials are shown in Fig. 3. From these
results three noticable velocities v1 ≈ 37 km/h, v2 ≈ 75
km/h and v3 ≈ 107 km/h appear, which allows to iden-
tify the so called congested ﬂow for v ≤ v1, correlated
ﬂow for v1 < v ≤ v2 and the free ﬂow for v > v2 [5,7],
respectively. Note these velocities can be deﬁned as ﬁxed
points (D(1)(v) = 0) of the deterministic part of the cu-
mulative traﬃc dynamics (see Fig. 2b).

For the traﬃc dynamics of lane C we ﬁnd in the con-
gested and in the correlated regime metastable traﬃc
states, the deterministic drift term D(1) gets zero over
ﬁnite intervals. This corresponds to the plateau struc-
ture in the potential, see Fig. 3a. A clearly diﬀerent
behaviour is found for the cumulative traﬃc dynamics of
all three lanes, see Figs. 2b and 3b. The diﬀerent ﬂow
regimes are seperated by two ﬁxed points at v1 and v2.
The slope of these ﬁxed points deﬁnes the stability, thus
the congested and the correlated ﬂow regimes are sepa-
rated by a stable ﬁxed point, whereas the correlated and
the free ﬂow regime are separated by an instable ﬁxed
point. For the free ﬂow, in both cases of one lane or
three lane traﬃc a stable ﬁxed point is found at v3, cor-
respondingly the drift potential has its local minimum.
Because of a speed limit of 100 km/h given on the in-
spected highway we see a great increase of the potential
for v > v3: the faster a car is driving, the stronger the
attraction is to the potential’s minimum [6] .

To get an understanding of the real traﬃc dynamics
grasped by these drift coeﬃcients or drift potentials, the
additional noise has to be taken into account. In Fig. 2c
and d the corresponding magnitude of the noise are ex-
pressed by the evalutaed diﬀusion coeﬃcients D(2). The
noise will now cause transitions between diﬀerent ﬂow
states. For the traﬃcs dynamics of one lane, the noise
will eﬀect larger ﬂuctuations as it is the case for the cu-
mulative traﬃc dynamics, which has two clear minima
in the potential. A further interesting detail is that the
magnitude of D(2) has a minimum around the stable ﬁxed
point at v3. This indicates a pronounced stability of this
traﬃc situation.

Next we present the results of a higher dimensional
analysis by taking x with the components x1 = v and
x2 = q. Now also the drift coeﬃcient D(1) becomes a

2

are of practical importance if a control of a traﬃc should
be achieved. At last one may conclude that this method
will be helpful to perform a more thorough comparison
between traﬃc ﬂow models and empirical data.

Acknowledgement: Helpful discussions with Ch. Ren-
ner, St. L¨uck and M. Siefert are acknowledged. We also
would like to thank the Landschaftsverband Rheinland
and the Northrhine-Westfalia Ministry for Economy and
Transport for providing the data used in this study.

[1] B. S. Kerner, Traﬃc Flow, Experiment and Theory, in
Proceedings of the Workshop on Traﬃc and Granular Flow
’97, (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1998) pp. 239-267

[2] H. Risken, The Fokker–Planck Equation (Springer, Berlin,

[3] S. Siegert, R. Friedrich, and J. Peinke, Phys. Lett. A 243,

275 (1998); 271, 217 (2000).

[4] M. Siefert, Diplomarbeit Oldenburg, 2000.
[5] B. S. Kerner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3797 (1998).
[6] It is commonly known, that in Germany people like to
drive about 10 percent faster than given speed limits. With
this speed there is still no punishment by the police.

[7] L. Neubert, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider,
M. Schreckenberg, Phys. Rev. E 60 6480 (1999).
[8] B. S. Kerner, J. Phys. A 33, L221-L228 (2000).

and

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

1989).

vector depending on v and q, as shown in Fig. 4. These
results were obtained by binning the velocity ﬂux data
into a 25 × 25 matrix, corresponding to a binning of the
velocity into intervals of ∆ v = 5 km/h.

The solid lines in Fig. 4 show the states where we have
no drift of the ﬂux component: D(1)
q = 0. On these lines
we ﬁnd only a velocity drift with a constant ﬂux. In ac-
cordance to Fig. 2a we ﬁnd in Fig. 4a for slow velocities
mainly no velocity drift, in Fig. 4b (like in Fig. 2b) there
seem to exist stable velocity drift states at the same ve-
locities (vi ≈ 37km/h,107 km/h). The topology of the
instable ﬁxed point gets now a saddle point which is at-
tractive for larger and smaller ﬂux values but instable in
the direction of larger and smaller velocity values. Again
clear diﬀerences of the dynamics of on lane and three
lanes is found.

By the investigation of traﬃc ﬂow data as an itera-
tive stochastic process we were able to calculate from the
given data the 1-dimensional drift and diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cients and thus to ﬁnd the deterministic and stochastic
part of the corresponding Langevin equation. We are
able to ﬁnd stable, metastable and unstable states (ﬁxed
points) in the deterministic part of free, correlated and
congested traﬃc ﬂow. For a fully description of the whole
dynamics also the diﬀusion coeﬃcient has to be taken
into account, which provides transition probabilities be-
tween the diﬀerent (meta-)stable states. Without this
noisy part of the traﬃc ﬂow dynamics, the stable states
would never be left, i.e. a congestion would stay forever
if once prepared.

To see the dependency of velocity and ﬂow from each
other, the investigations were expanded to a higher di-
mensional analysis. In this case we ﬁnd the deterministic
and stochastic part of the 2-dimensional Langevin equa-
tion. Now we are able to identify stable velocity and ﬂux
states of the deterministic part.

Interestingly, the results found in this study are in
agreement with empirical investigations that have iden-
tiﬁed three phases of traﬃc [8], together with transitions
connecting theses phases. Especially the transition from
free ﬂow to correlated ﬂow (or synchronized ﬂow in the
terminology of [8]) has similarities.

Finally we want to point out, that we presented here
a new method to analyse traﬃc data with respect to a
derivation of dynamical equations from pure data analy-
sis. Furthermore we could show that our method provides
more insight into the traﬃc dynamics than the presenta-
tions of diagrams like the fundamental diagram. A clear
diﬀerence in the dynamics of one lane and the dynam-
ics of cumulative three lanes was found. Our analysis
provides evidence of the presence of ﬁxed points, which

FIG. 1. Fundamental diagram of (a) lane C and of (b) all
three lanes A,B, and C. The dots represent the measured traf-
ﬁc data, the solid line corresponds to the mean ﬂux hqik.

3

FIG. 3. Corresponding potentials for the deterministic dy-

namics given by the drift coeﬃcients in Fig. 2.

FIG. 2. Drift and diﬀusion coeﬃcients for the traﬃc of one

lane C, (a) and (c) and of all three lanes (b) and (d).

FIG. 4. Deterministic dynamics of the twodimensional
traﬃc states (q, v) given by the drift vector for (a) one lane C
and (b) all three lanes. Bold dots indicate stable ﬁxed points
and open dots saddle points, respectively.

4

