2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Mark correlations: relating physical
properties to spatial distributions

Claus Beisbart1, Martin Kerscher2, Klaus Mecke3,4

1 University of Oxford, Nuclear & Astrophysics Laboratory, Keble Road, Oxford

OX1 3RH, Great Britain

2 Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at, Sektion Physik, Theresienstraße 37, D-80333

3 Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Metallforschung, Heisenbergstr. 1, D-70569 Stuttgart,

4 Institut f¨ur Theoretische und Angewandte Physik, Fakult¨at f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at

Stuttgart, Pfaﬀenwaldring 57, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany

M¨unchen, Germany

Germany

draft January 5, 2014

Abstract. Mark correlations provide a systematic approach to look at objects both
distributed in space and bearing intrinsic information, for instance on physical prop-
erties. The interplay of the objects’ properties (marks) with the spatial clustering is
of vivid interest for many applications; are, e.g., galaxies with high luminosities more
strongly clustered than dim ones? Do neighbored pores in a sandstone have similar
sizes? How does the shape of impact craters on a planet depend on the geological sur-
face properties? In this article, we give an introduction into the appropriate mathemat-
ical framework to deal with such questions, i.e. the theory of marked point processes.
After having clariﬁed the notion of segregation eﬀects, we deﬁne universal test quanti-
ties applicable to realizations of a marked point processes. We show their power using
concrete data sets in analyzing the luminosity-dependence of the galaxy clustering, the
alignment of dark matter halos in gravitational N -body simulations, the morphology-
and diameter-dependence of the Martian crater distribution and the size correlations
of pores in sandstone. In order to understand our data in more detail, we discuss the
Boolean depletion model, the random ﬁeld model and the Cox random ﬁeld model.
The ﬁrst model describes depletion eﬀects in the distribution of Martian craters and
pores in sandstone, whereas the last one accounts at least qualitatively for the observed
luminosity-dependence of the galaxy clustering.

1.1 Marked point sets

Observations of spatial patterns at various length scales frequently are the only
point where the physical world meets theoretical models. In many cases these
patterns consist of a number of comparable objects distributed in space such
as pores in a sandstone, or craters on the surface of a planet. Another example
is given in Figure 1.1, where we display the galaxy distribution as traced by a
recent galaxy catalogue. The galaxies are represented as circles centered at their
positions, whereas the size of the circles mirrors the luminosity of a galaxy. In

2

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

order to test to which extent theoretical predictions ﬁt the empirically found
structures of that type, one has to rely on quantitative measures describing the
physical information. Since theoretical models mostly do not try to explain the
structures individually, but rather predict some of their generic properties, one
has to adopt a statistical point of view and to interpret the data as a realiza-
tion of a random process. In a ﬁrst step one often conﬁnes oneself to the spatial
distribution of the objects constituting the patterns and investigates their clus-
tering thereby thinking of it as a realization of a point process. Assuming that
perspective, however, one neglects a possible linkage between the spatial clus-
tering and the intrinsic properties of the objects. For instance, there are strong
indications that the clustering of galaxies depends on their luminosity as well as
on their morphological type. Considering Figure 1.1, one might infer that lumi-
nous galaxies are more strongly correlated than dim ones. Eﬀects like that are
referred to as mark segregation and provide insight into the generation and inter-
actions of, e.g., galaxies or other objects under consideration. The appropriate
statistical framework to describe the relation between the spatial distribution
of physical objects and their inner properties are marked point processes, where

Fig. 1.1. The galaxy distribution as traced by the Southern Sky Redshift Survey 2
(SSRS 2). We show a part of the sample investigated, projected down into two di-
mensions. Each circle represents a galaxy, its radius is proportional to the galaxy’s
luminosity. For further details see Section 1.2.1.

discrete, scalar-, or vector-valued marks are attached to the random points.
In this contribution we outline how to describe marked point processes; along

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

3

that line we discuss two notions of independence (Section 1.1) and deﬁne corre-
sponding statistics that allow us to quantify possible dependencies. After having
shown that some empirical data sets show signiﬁcant signals of mark segregation
(Section1.2), we turn to analytical models, both motivated by mathematical and
physical considerations (Section 1.3).
Contact distribution functions as presented in the contribution by D. Hug et al.
in this volume are an alternative technique to measure and statistically quan-
tify distances which ﬁnally can be used to relate physical properties to spatial
structures. Mark correlation functions are useful to quantify molecular orienta-
tions in liquid crystals (see the contribution by F. Schmid and N. H. Phuong in
this volume) or in self-assembling amphiphilic systems (see the contribution by
U. S. Schwarz and G. Gompper in this volume). But also to study anisotropies
in composite or porous materials, which are essential for elastic and transport
properties (see the contributions by D. Jeulin, C. Arns et al. and H.-J. Vogel in
this volume), mark correlations may be relevant.

1.1.1 The framework

The empirical data – the positions xi of some objects together with their intrin-
sic properties mi – are interpreted as a realization of a marked point process
{(xi, mi)}N
i=1 (Stoyan, Kendall and Mecke, 1995). For simplicity we restrict our-
selves to homogeneous and isotropic processes.
The hierarchy of joint probability densities provides a suitable tool to describe
the stochastic properties of a marked point process. Thus, let ̺SM
((x, m)) de-
note the probability density of ﬁnding a point at x with a mark m. For a homoge-
neous process this splits into ̺SM
((x, m)) = ̺M1(m) where ̺ denotes the mean
number density of points in space and M1(m) is the probability density of ﬁnd-
ing the mark m on an arbitrary point. Later on we need moments of this mark
distribution; for real-valued marks the kth-moment of the mark-distribution is
deﬁned as

1

1

mk =

dm M1(m)mk;

Z

(1.1)

2

M = m2 − m2.

the mark variance is σ2
Accordingly, ̺SM
((x1, m1), (x2, m2)) quantiﬁes the probability density to ﬁnd
two points at x1 and x2 with marks m1 and m2, respectively (for second-order
theory of marked point processes see [58,60]). It eﬀectively depends only on
m1, m2, and the pair separation r = |x2 − x1| for a homogeneous and isotropic
process. Two-point properties certainly are the simplest non-trivial quantities for
homogeneous random processes, but it may be necessary to move on to higher
correlations in order to discriminate between certain models.

4

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

1.1.2 Two notions of independence

In the following we will discuss two notions of independence, which may arise
for marked point patterns. For this, consider two Renaissance families, call them
the Sforza and the Gonzaga. They used to build castles spread out more or less
homogeneously over Italy. In order to describe this example in terms of a marked
point process, we consider the locations of the castles as points on a map of Italy,
and treat a castle’s owner as a discrete mark, S and G, respectively. There are
many ways how the castles can be built and related to each other.

Independent sub-point processes: For example, the Sforza may build their castles
regardless of the Gonzaga castles. In that case the probability of ﬁnding a Sforza
castle at x1 and a Gonzaga castle at x2 factorizes into two one-point probabilities
and we can think of the Sforza and the Gonzaga castles as uncorrelated sub-point
processes. In the language of marked point processes this means, e.g., that

̺S,M
2

((x1, m1), (x2, m2)) = ̺SM

1

((x1, m1)) ̺SM
= ̺2M1(m1)M1(m2),

1

((x2, m2))

(1.2)

for any m1 6= m2. If all the joint n-point densities factorize into a product
of n′-point densities of one type each, then we speak of independent sub-point
processes. Dependent sub-point processes indicate interactions between points
of diﬀerent marks; for instance, the Gonzaga may build their castles close to
the Sforza ones in order to avoid that a region becomes dominated by the other
family’s castles.

Mark-independent clustering: A second type of independence refers to the ques-
tion whether the diﬀerent families have diﬀerent styles to plan their castles. For
instance, the Gonzaga may distribute their castles in a grid-like manner over
Italy, whereas the Sforza may incline to build a second castle close to each cas-
tle they own. Rather than asking whether two sub-point processes (namely the
Gonzaga and the Sforza castles, respectively) are independent (“independent
sub-point processes”), we are now discussing whether they are diﬀerent as re-
gards their statistical clustering properties. Any such diﬀerence means that the
clustering depends on the intrinsic mark of a point.
Whenever the two-point probability density of ﬁnding two objects at x1 and x2
depends on the objects’ intrinsic properties we speak of mark-dependent clus-
tering. It is useful to rephrase this statement by using Bayes’ theorem and the
conditional mark probability density

M2(m1, m2|x1, x2) =

,

(1.3)

̺S,M
2

((x1, m1), (x2, m2))

̺S
2 (x1, x2)

in case the spatial product density ̺S
2 (·) does not vanish. M2(m1, m2|x1, x2) is
the probability density of ﬁnding the marks m1 and m2 on objects located at x1

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

5

and x2, given that there are objects at these points. Clearly, M2(m1, m2|x1, x2)
depends only on the pair separation r = |x1 − x2| for homogeneous and isotropic
point processes. We speak of mark-independent clustering, if M2(m1, m2|r) fac-
torizes

M2(m1, m2|r) = M1(m1)M1(m2)

(1.4)

and thus does not depend on the pair separation. That means that regarding
their marks, pairs with a separation r are not diﬀerent from any other pairs. On
the contrary, mark-dependent clustering or mark segregation implies that the
marks on certain pairs show deviations from the global mark distribution.
In order to distinguish between both sorts of independencies, let us consider the
case where we are given a map of Italy only showing the Gonzaga castles. If the
distribution of castles in Italy can be understood as consisting of independent
sub-point processes, we cannot infer anything about the Sforza castles from the
Gonzaga ones. However, if ̺S,M
((x1, S), (x2, G)) > ̺2M1(S)M1(G), Sforza
castles are likely to be found close to Gonzaga ones. Here, M1(S) and M1(G) are
the probabilities that a castle belongs to the Sforza or Gonzaga family. If, on the
other hand, mark-independent clustering applies, typical clustering properties
such as the spatial clustering strength are equal for both castle distributions,
and the Gonzaga castles are in the statistical sense already representative of the
whole castle distribution in Italy. That means in particular that, if the Gonzaga
castles are clustered, so are the Sforza ones.

2

Before we turn to applications, we have to develop practical test quantities in
order to test for segregation eﬀects in real data and to describe them in more
detail.

1.1.3 Investigating the independence of sub-point processes

To investigate correlations between sub-point processes, suitably extended near-
est neighbor distribution functions or K-functions have been employed [16,20].
Also the (conditional) cross-correlation functions can be used (see Eq. 1.8), for
a further test see [60], p. 302. Here we consider a multivariate extension of the
J-function [68], as suggested by [69].
For this, consider the nearest neighbor’s distance distribution from an object
with mark mi to other objects with mark mj, Gij(r) (“i to j”, for details see
[69]). Let Gi◦(r) denote the distribution of the nearest neighbor’s distance from
an object of type i to any other object (denoted by ◦). Finally, G◦◦(r) is the
nearest neighbor distribution of all points. Similar extensions of the empty space
function are possible, too. Let Fi(r) denote the distribution of the nearest i-
object’s distance from an arbitrary position, whereas F◦(r) is the nearest ob-
ject’s distance distribution from a random point in space to any object in the
sample. We consider the following quantities:

Jij(r) =

, Ji◦(r) =

, J(r) =

(1.5)

1 − Gi◦(r)
1 − F◦(r)

1 − G◦◦(r)
1 − F◦(r)

,

1 − Gij (r)
1 − Fj (r)

6

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

They are deﬁned whenever Fj(r), F◦(r) < 1. If two sub-point processes, deﬁned
by marks i 6= j, are independent then one gets [69]

Jij(r) = 1.

(1.6)

Note, that the Jij depend on higher-order correlations functions, similar to the
J-function [35]. Suitable estimators for these J-functions are derived from esti-
mators of the F and G-functions [58,4].

1.1.4 Investigating mark segregation

In order to quantify the mark-dependent clustering or to look for the mark
segregation, it proves useful to integrate the conditional probability density
M2(m1, m2|r) over the marks weighting with a test function f (m1, m2) [55,58].
This procedure reduces the number of variables and leaves us with the weighted
pair average:

hf iP =

dm1

dm2 f (m1, m2)M2(m1, m2|r).

(1.7)

Z

Z

The choice of an appropriate weight-function depends on whether the marks are
non-quantitative labels or continuous physical quantities.

1. For labels only combinations of indicator-functions are possible, the integral
degenerates into a sum over the labels. Supposed the marks of our objects
belong to classes labelled with i, j, . . . , the conditional cross-correlation func-
tions are given by

Cij(r) ≡ hδm1iδm2j + (1 − δij)δm2iδm1jiP (r),

(1.8)

with the Kronecker δm1i = 1 for m1 = i and zero otherwise. Mark segregation
i /̺2, where ̺i denotes
is indicated by Cij 6= 2̺i̺j/̺2 for i 6= j and Cii 6= ̺2
the number density of points with label i. The Cij are cross-correlation
functions under the condition that two points are separated by a distance
of r (compare [60], p. 264, for applications see the Martian crater distribution
studied in Sect. 1.2.3 and Figure 1.7 in particular).

2. For positive real-valued marks m, the following pair averages prove to be

powerful and distinctive [51,7]:

(a) One of the most simplest weights to be used is the mean mark:

km(r) ≡

hm1 + m2iP (r)
2 m

.

(1.9)

quantiﬁes the deviation of the mean mark on pairs with separation r
from the overall mean mark m. A km > 1 indicates mark segregation
for point pairs with a separation r, speciﬁcally their mean mark is then

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

7

larger than the overall mark average.
Closely related is Stoyan’s kmm function using the squared geometric
mean of the marks as a weight [55,60]

kmm(r) ≡

hm1m2iP (r)
m2

.

(b) Accordingly, higher moments of the marks may be used to quantify mark

segregation, like the mark ﬂuctuations

or the mark-variogram [70,61]:

var(r) ≡

(m1 − hm1iP (r))2

(r),

D

D

P

E

P

E

γ(r) ≡

1

2 (m1 − m2)2

(r),

(c) The mark covariance [17] is

(1.10)

(1.11)

(1.12)

cov(r) ≡ hm1m2iP (r) − hm1iP (r) hm2iP (r).
Mark segregation can be detected by looking whether cov(r) diﬀers from
zero. A cov(r) larger than zero, e.g., indicates that points with separa-
tion r tend to have similar marks. Sometimes the mark covariance is
normalized by the ﬂuctuations [33]: cov(r)/var(r).

(1.13)

These conditional mark correlation functions can be calculated from only
P (r).
three independent pair averages [51]: hmiP (r), hm1m2iP (r), and
Thus the above mentioned characteristics are not independent, e.g. var(r) =
(cid:11)
γ(r) + cov(r).
We apply these mark correlation functions to the galaxy distribution in Sec-
tion 1.2.1 (Figure 1.3), to Martian craters in Section 1.2.3 (Figure 1.7) and
to pores in sandstones considered in Section 1.2.4.

m2

(cid:10)

3. Also vector-valued information li, describing, e.g., the orientation of an
anisotropic object at position xi may be available. It is therefore interesting
to consider vector marks such as done by [45,49,60] who use a mark corre-
lation function to quantify the alignment of vector marks. Here we suggest
three mark correlation functions quantifying geometrically diﬀerent possi-
bilities of an alignment. In order to ensure coordinate-independence of our
descriptors, we focus on scalar combinations of the vector marks in using the
scalar product · and the cross product ×. Diﬀerent from the case of scalar
marks, it is a non-trivial task to ﬁnd a set of vector-mark correlation func-
tions which contain all possible information (at least up to a ﬁxed order in
mark space). We provide a systematic account of how to construct suitable
vector-mark correlation functions in a complete and unique way for general
dimensions in the Appendix.
Here we only cite the most important results. For that we need the distance
vector between two points, r ≡ x1 − x2, the normalized distance vector,
ˆr ≡ r/r, and the normalized vector mark: ˆli ≡ li/li with li = |li|. The
following conditional mark correlation functions will be used to quantify
alignment eﬀects:

8

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

(a) A(r) quantiﬁes the Alignment of the two vector marks l1 and l2:

A(r) =

1
2 hl1 · l2iP (r)

.

(1.14)

It is proportional to the cosine of the angle between l1 and l2. We nor-
malize with the mean l. For purely independent vector marks A(r) is
zero, whereas A(r) > 0 means that the marks of pairs separated by r
tend to align parallel to each other. – In some applications, e.g. for the
orientations of ellipsoidal objects, the vector mark is only deﬁned up to
a sign, i.e. l and −l mean actually the same. In this case the absolute
value of the scalar product is useful:

A′(r) ≡

1
2 h|l1 · l2|iP (r)

.

(1.15)

l

l

For uncorrelated random vectors we get A′(r) = 1/2. A and A′ can read-
Γ ( d
2 )
ily be generalized to any dimension d, where we expect A′ = π− 1
d+1
Γ (
2 )
for uncorrelated random orientations. In two dimensions A′ is propor-
tional to kd as deﬁned by [60].

2

(b) F (r) quantiﬁes the F ilamentary alignment of the vectors l1 and l2 with

respect to the line connecting both halo positions:

F (r) ≡

h|l1 · ˆr| + |l2 · ˆr|iP (r),

(1.16)

1
2 l

F (r) is proportional to the cosine of the angle between l1 and the distance
vector ˆr connecting the points. For uncorrelated random vector marks,
we expect again F (r) = 1/2; F (r) becomes larger than that, whenever
the vector marks of the objects tend to point to objects separated by r
– an example is provided by rod-like metallic grains in an electric ﬁeld:
they concentrate along the ﬁeld lines and orient themselves parallel to
the ﬁeld lines.

(c) P(r) quantiﬁes the Planar alignment of the vectors and the distance
vector. P(r) is proportional to the volume of the rhomb deﬁned by l1, l2
and ˆr:

P(r) =

1
2

2l

+

l2 ·

l1 ·
*(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

l2 × ˆr
|ˆl2 × ˆr| (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

l1 × ˆr
|ˆl1 × ˆr| (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(r),

+P

Quite obviously, this quantity can not be generalized to arbitrary dimen-
sions; the deeper reason for that will become clear in the Appendix. –
We get P(r) = 1/2 for randomly oriented vectors, whereas it is becoming
larger for the case that l2 is perpendicular to l1 as well as to ˆr.

Applications of vector marks can be found in Section 1.2.2 (Figure 1.4) where
we consider the orientation of dark matter halos in cosmological simulations.
But one can think of other applications: mark correlation functions may serve

(1.17)

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

9

as orientational order parameters in liquid crystals in order to discriminate
between nemetic and smectic phases (see the contribution by F. Schmid and
N. H. Phuong in this volume). They can also quantify the local orientation
and order in liquids such as the recently measured ﬁve-fold local symmetry
found in liquid lead [50]. As a further application one could try to measure the
signature of hexatic phases in two-dimensional colloidal dispersions and in
2D melting scenarios occurring in experiments and simulations of hard-disk
systems (for a review on hard sphere models see [39]. Finally, the orientations
of anisotropic channels in sandstone (see the contribution by C. Arns et al.
in this volume) are relevant for macroscopic transport properties, therefore
their quantitative characterization in terms of mark correlation functions
might be interesting.

Before we move on to applications a few general remarks are in order: First, the
deﬁnition of these mark characteristics based on the conditional density M2(·)
leads to ambiguities at r equal zero as discussed by [51], but there is no problem
for r > 0. – Furthermore, suitable estimators for our test quantities are based
on estimators for the usual two-point correlation function [60,13,7].
Mark-dependent clustering can also be deﬁned at any n-point level. Mark-inde-
pendent clustering at every order is called the random labelling property [16].
Mark correlation functions based on the n-point densities may be used. For
discrete marks the multivariate J-functions (see Eq. (1.5)) are an interesting
alternative, sensitive to higher-order correlations. The random labelling property
then leads to the relation

Ji◦(r) = J,

(1.18)

which may be used as a test [69].

1.2 Describing empirical data: some applications

In many cases already the question whether one or the other type of dependence
as outlined above applies to certain data sets is a controversial issue. In the
following we will apply our test quantities to a couple of data sets in order
to probe whether there is an interplay between some objects’ marks and their
positions in space. Other applications to biological, ecological, mineralogical,
geological data can be found in [57,60,43,20].

1.2.1 Segregation eﬀects in the distribution of galaxies

The distribution of galaxies in space shows a couple of interesting features and
challenges theoretical models trying to understand cosmological structure for-
mation (see e.g. [34]). There has been a long debate, whether and how strongly

10

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

the clustering of galaxies depends on their luminosity and their morphological
type (see, e.g. [28,30,27]). The methods which have been used so far to establish
such claims were based on the spatial two-point correlation function; it was esti-
mated from diﬀerent subsamples that were drawn from a catalogue and deﬁned
by morphology or luminosity. However, some authors claimed that the signal
of luminosity segregation observed by others was a spurious eﬀect, caused by
inhomogeneities in the sample and an inadequate choice of the statistics [64]. [7]
could show that methods based on the mark-correlation functions, as discussed
in Sect. 1.1.4, are not impaired by inhomogeneities, and found a clear signal of
luminosity and morphology segregation.
In order to quantify segregation eﬀects in the galaxy distribution we consider the
Southern Sky Redshift Survey 2 (SSRS 2, [18]), which maps a signiﬁcant fraction
of the sky and provides us with the angular sky positions, the distances (deter-
mined via the redshifts), and some intrinsic properties of the galaxies such as
their ﬂux and their morphological type. As marks we consider either a galaxy’s
luminosity estimated from its distance and ﬂux, or its morphological type. In the
latter case we eﬀectively divide our sample into early-type galaxies (mainly ellip-
tical galaxies) and late-type galaxies (mainly spirals). In order to analyze homo-
geneous samples, we focus on a volume-limited sample of 100h−1Mpc depth1 [7].

In a ﬁrst step we ask whether the early- and the late-type galaxies form indepen-
dent sub-processes. In Figure 1.2 we show Jel as function of the distance r being
far away from the value of one. Recalling Eq. (1.6), we conclude that the mor-
phological types of galaxies are not distributed independently on the sky. Not
surprisingly, the inequality Jel < 1 indicates positive interactions between the
galaxies of both morphological types; indeed galaxies attract each other through
gravity irrespective of their morphological types.
After having conﬁrmed the presence of interactions between the diﬀerent types of
galaxies, we tackle the issue whether the clustering of galaxies is diﬀerent for dif-
ferent galaxies. We consider the luminosities as marks (see Fig. 1.1). In Figure 1.3
we show some of the mark-weighted conditional correlation functions. Already
at ﬁrst glance, they show evidence for luminosity segregation, relevant on scales
up to 15h−1Mpc. To strengthen our claims, we redistribute the luminosities of
the galaxies within our sample randomly, holding the galaxy positions ﬁxed. In
that way we mimic a marked point process with the same spatial clustering and
the same one-point distribution of the luminosities, but without luminosity seg-
regation. Comparing with the ﬂuctuations around this null hypothesis, we see
that the signal within the SSRS 2 is signiﬁcant.
The details of the mark correlation functions provide some further insight into
the segregation eﬀects. The mean mark km(r) > 1 indicates that the luminous
1 One Mpc equals roughly 3.26 million light years. The number h accounts for the
uncertainty in the measured Hubble constant and is about h ≈ 0.65. Volume-limited
samples are deﬁned by a limiting depth and a limiting luminosity. One considers only
those galaxies which could have been observed if they were located at the limiting
depth of the sample.

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

11

Fig. 1.2. The Jel function of early-type (e) and late-type (l) galaxies vs. the galaxy
separation r in a volume-limited sample of 100h−1Mpc depth from the SSRS 2 cata-
logue.

galaxies are more strongly clustered than the dim ones. Our signal is scale-
dependent and decreasing for higher pair separations. The stronger clustering of
luminous galaxies is in agreement with earlier claims comparing the correlation
amplitude of several volume-limited samples [73].
The var(r) being larger than the mark variance of the whole sample, σ2
M , shows
that on galaxy pairs with separations smaller than 15h−1Mpc the luminosity
ﬂuctuations are enhanced. The fact that the mark segregation eﬀect extends to
scales of up to 15h−1Mpc is interesting on its own. In particular, it indicates that
galaxy clusters are not the only source of luminosity segregation, since typically
galaxy clusters are of the size of 3h−1Mpc.
The signal for the covariance cov(r), however, could be due to galaxy pairs inside
clusters. It is relevant mainly on scales up to 4h−1Mpc indicating that the lu-
minosities on galaxy pairs with small separations tend to assume similar values.
– Our results in part conﬁrm claims by [9], who compared the correlation func-
tions ξ2 for diﬀerent volume-limited subsamples and diﬀerent luminosity classes
of the SSRS 2 catalog (see also [8]).

12

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

Fig. 1.3. The luminosity-weighted correlation functions for a volume-limited subsam-
ple of the SSRS 2 with a depth of 100h−1Mpc. The shaded areas denote the range of
one-σ ﬂuctuations for randomized marks around the case of no mark segregation. The
ﬂuctuations were estimated from 1000 reshuﬄings of the luminosities.

1.2.2 Orientations of dark matter halos

Many structures found in the Universe such as galaxies and galaxy clusters
show anisotropic features. Therefore one can assign orientations to them and
ask whether these orientations are correlated and form coherent patterns. Here
we discuss a similar question on the base of numerical simulations of large scale
structure (e.g., [10,36]).
In such simulations the trajectories of massive particles are numerically inte-
grated. These particles represent the dominant mass component in the Universe,
the dark matter. Through gravitational instability high density peaks (“halos”)
form in the distribution of the particles; these halos are likely to be the places
where galaxies originate. In the following we will report on alignment correlations
between such halos [22], for a further application of mark correlation functions
in this ﬁeld see [25].
The halos used by [22] stem from a N -body simulation in a periodic box with
a side length of 500h−1Mpc. The initial and boundary conditions were ﬁxed

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

13

according to a ΛCDM cosmology (for a discussion of cosmological models see
[48,15]). Halos were identiﬁed using a friend-of-friends algorithm in the dark
matter distribution. Not all of the halos found were taken into account; rather
the mass range and the spatial number density of the selected halos were chosen
to resemble the properties of observed galaxy clusters in the Reflex catalogue
[12]. Typically our halos show a prolate distribution of their dark matter parti-
cles.
For each halo the direction of the elongation is determined from the major axis
of the mass-ellipsoid. This leads to a marked point set where the orientation li
is attached to each halo position xi as a vector mark with |li| = 1. Details can
be founds in [22].
In Fig. 1.4 the vector-mark correlation functions as deﬁned in Eqs. (1.14), (1.16),
and (1.17) are shown. Since only the orientation of the mass ellipsoids can be
determined, we use A′(r) (Eq. 1.15) instead of A(r). The signal in A′(r) indi-
cates that pairs of halos with a distance smaller than 30h−1Mpc show a ten-
dency of parallel alignment of their orientations l1, l2. The deviation from a pure
random alignment is in the percent range but clearly outside the random ﬂuctu-
ations. The alignment of the halos’ orientations l1, l2 with the connecting vector
ˆr quantiﬁed by F (r) is signiﬁcantly stronger; it is particularly interesting that
this alignment eﬀect extends to scales of about 100h−1Mpc.
In a qualitative picture this may be explained by halos aligned along the ﬁla-
ments of the large scale structure. Indeed such ﬁlaments are prominent features
found in the galaxy distribution [32] and in N -body simulations [41], often with
a length of up to 100h−1Mpc. The lowered P(r) indicates that the volume of
the rhomboid given by l1, l2 and ˆr is reduced for halo pairs with a separation
below 80h−1Mpc. Already a preferred alignment of l1, l2 along ˆr leads to such a
reduction, similar to a plane-like arrangement of l1, l2, ˆr. For the halo distribu-
tion the signal in P(r) seems to be dominated by the ﬁlamentary alignment.
The question whether there are non-trivial orientation patterns for galaxies or
galaxy clusters has been discussed for a long time. [11] reported a signiﬁcant
alignment of the observed galaxy clusters out to 100h−1Mpc. [62,63], however
claimed that this eﬀect is small and likely to be caused by systematics; [67] ﬁnd no
indication for alignment eﬀects at all. Subsequently several authors purported
to have found signs of alignments in the galaxy and galaxy cluster distribu-
tion (see e.g. [21,37,24,29]). Our Fig. 1.4 shows that from simulations signiﬁcant
large-scale correlations are to be expected in the orientations of galaxy clusters,
in agreement with the results by [11]. These results are also supported by a
simulation study carried out by [46].

1.2.3 Martian Craters

Let us now turn to another, still astrophysical, but signiﬁcantly closer object:
the Mars (see Figure 1.5). Many planets’ surfaces display impact craters with di-
ameters up to ∼ 260 km and a broad range of inner morphologies. These craters
are surrounded by ejecta forming diﬀerent types of patterns. The craters and

14

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

Fig. 1.4. The correlations of halo orientations in numerical simulations. The orientation
of each dark matter halo, speciﬁed by the direction of the major axis l of the mass
ellipsoid, is used as a vector mark. The dashed area is obtained by randomizing the
orientations among the halos.

their ejecta are likely to be caused by asteroids and periodic comets crossing
the planets’ orbits, falling down onto the planet’s surface, and spreading some
of the underlying surfaces material around the original impact crater. A vari-
ety of diﬀerent crater morphologies and a wide range of ejecta patterns can be
found. In principle, either the diﬀerent impact objects (especially their energies)
or the various surface types of the planet may explain the repertory of pat-
terns observed. Whereas the energy variations of impact objects do not cause
any peculiarities in the spatial distribution of the craters (apart from a possible
latitude dependence), geographic inhomogeneities are expected to originate in-
homogeneities in the craters’ morphological properties.
We try to answer the question for the ejecta patterns’ origin using data collected
by [6] who already found correlations between crater characteristics and the lo-
cal surface type employing geologic maps of the Mars. Complementary to their
approach, we investigate two-point properties without any reference to geologic
Mars maps. We restrict ourselves only to craters which have a diameter larger

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

15

Fig. 1.5. The Martian surface with its craters. Whereas the left panel (from
http://pds.jpl.nasa.gov/planets/captions/mars/schiap.htm) illustrates the various ge-
ological settings to be found on the planet’s surface, the other panels focus on a small
patch and show the craters together with their radii (middle panel, the size of the sym-
bols are proportional to the radii of the craters) and together with the craters’ types
(right panel, simple morphology as quadrangles and more complex craters as stars).
The latter viewgraphs rely on the data by [6].

than 8 km and whose ejecta pattern could be classiﬁed, ending up with 3527
craters spread out all over the Martian surface. We use spherical distances for
our analysis of pairs.
In a ﬁrst step we divide the ejecta patterns into two broad classes consisting of
either the simple patterns (single and double lobe morphology, i.e. SL and DL in
terms of the classiﬁcation by [6]; we speak of “simple craters”) or the remaining,
more complex conﬁgurations (“complex craters”). Using our conditional cross
correlation functions Cij as deﬁned in Equation (1.8), we see a highly signiﬁ-
cant signal for mark correlations (Figure 1.6). At small separations, crater pairs
are disproportionally built up of simple craters at the expense of cross corre-
lations. This can be explained assuming that crater formation depends on the
local surface type: if the simple craters are more frequent in certain geological
environments than in others, then there are also more pairs of them to be found
as far as one focuses on distances smaller than the typical scale of one geological
surface type. Cross pairs are suppressed, since typical pairs with small separa-
tions belong to one geological setting where the simple craters either dominate or
do not. Only a small, positive segregation signal occurs for the complex craters.
Hence our analysis indicates that the broad class of complex craters is distributed
quite homogeneously over all of the geologies. On top of this there are probably
simple craters, their frequency signiﬁcantly depending on the surface type.
If the ejecta patterns were independent of the surface, no mark segregation could
be observed (other sources of mark segregation are unlikely, since the Martian

16

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

craters are a result of a long bombardment history diluting any eventual pecu-
liar crater correlations). In this sense, the signal observed indicates a surface-
dependence of crater formation. This result is remarkable, given that we did not
use any geological information on the Mars at all. The picture emerging could
be described using the random ﬁeld model, where a ﬁeld (here the surface type)
determines the mark of the points (see below).

Fig. 1.6. The conditional cross-correlation functions for Martian craters. We split
the sample of craters into two broad classes according to their ejecta types: simple
morphologies (S) consisting of SL and DL types, and complex morphologies (C) with
all other types (see [6] for details). The results indicate, that at scales up to about 1500
km the clustering of the simple craters is enhanced at expense of cross correlations.
The shaded areas denote the one-σ ﬂuctuations for randomized marks estimated from
100 realizations of the mark reshuﬄing.

In a second step, we analyze the interplay between the craters’ diameters and
their spatial clustering. Now the diameter serves as a continuous mark. The re-
sults in Figure 1.7 show a clear signal for mark segregation in km and cov at
small scales. The latter signals that pairs with separations in a broad range up
to 1700 km tend to have similar diameters; this is in agreement with the earlier
picture: as [6] showed, the simple craters are mostly small-sized. Pairs with rel-
atively small separations thus often stem from the same geological setting and

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

17

Fig. 1.7. The radius-weighted correlation functions for craters on Mars. The radius of
each crater serves as a mark. r is the spherical distance. The shaded areas denote the
one-σ ﬂuctuations for randomized marks estimated from 100 realizations of the mark
reshuﬄing.

therefore have similar diameters and similar morphological type.
Also the signal of km seems to support this picture: since the simple craters
are more strongly clustered than the other ones and since they have smaller
diameters, one could expect km < 1. As we shall see in Sect. 1.3, however, a
km 6= 1 contradicts the random ﬁeld model; therefore, the mark-dependence on
the underlying surface type (thought of as a random ﬁeld) cannot account for
the signal observed. Thus, we have to look for an alternative explanation: it
seems reasonable, that, whenever a crater is found somewhere, no other crater
can be observed close nearby (because an impact close to an existing crater will
either destroy the old one or cover it with ejecta such that it is not likely to
be observed as a crater). This results in a sort of eﬀective hard-core repulsion.
This repulsion should be larger for larger craters. Thus, pairs with very small
separations can only be formed by small craters, therefore km < 1 for tiny r.
The scale beyond which km(r) ∼ 1 should somehow be hidden within the crater
diameter distribution. Indeed, at about 500 km the segregation vanishes, which
is about twice the largest diameter in our sample. Taking into account that the

18

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

ejecta patterns extend beyond the crater, this seems to be a reasonable agree-
ment. As shown in Sect. 1.3.1 a model based on these consideration is able to
produce such a depletion in the km(r). This eﬀect could also in turn explain part
of the cross correlations observed earlier in Figure 1.6. A similar eﬀect is to be
expected for the mark variance. Close pairs are only accessible to craters with a
smaller range of diameters; therefore, their variance is diminished in comparison
to the whole sample. However, an eﬀect like this is barely visible in the data.
Altogether, the crater distribution is dominated by two eﬀects: the type of the
ejecta pattern and the crater diameter depend on the surface, in addition, there
is a sort of repulsion eﬀect on small scales.

1.2.4 Pores in Sandstone

Fig. 1.8. The pores within a Fontainbleau sandstone sample. Note, that this is a neg-
ative image, where the pores are displayed in grey. The geometrical features of the
pore network are important for macroscopic properties of the stone. In this sample the
pores occupy 13% of the volume. The size of the whole sample shown is about 1.5 mm3
(Courtesy M. Knackstedt).

Now we turn to systems on smaller scales. Sandstone is an example of a porous
medium and has extensively been investigated, mainly because oil was found in
the pore network of similar stones. In order to extract the oil from the stone one
can try to wash it out using a second liquid, e.g. water. Therefore, one tries to
understand from a theoretical point of view, how the microscopic geometry of the

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

19

pore network determines the macroscopic properties of such a multi-phase ﬂow.
Especially the topology and connectivity of the microcaves and tunnels prove
to be crucial for the ﬂow properties at macroscopic scales. Details are given, for
instance, in the contributions by C. Arns et al., H.-J. Vogel et al. and J. Ohser
in this volume. A sensible physical model, therefore, in the ﬁrst place has to rely
on a thorough description of the pore pattern.
One way to understand the pore network is to think of it as a union of simple
geometrical bodies. Following [53], one can identify distinct pores together with
their position and their pore radius or extension. This allows us to understand
the pore structure in terms of a marked point process, where the marks are the
pore radii.
In the following, we consider three-dimensional data taken from one of the
Fontainbleau sandstone samples through synchrotron X-ray tomography. These
data trace a 4.52 mm diameter cylindrical core extracted from a block with bulk
porosity φ = 13%,, where the bulk porosity is the volume fraction occupied by
the pores. A piece with 2.91mm length (resulting in a 46.7 mm3 volume) of the
core was imaged and tomographically reconstructed [23,54,3,2]. Further details
of this sample are presented in the contribution by C. Arns et al. in this volume.
Based on the reconstructed images the positions of pores and their radii were
identiﬁed as described in [53].
In our results for the mark correlation functions a strong depletion of km(r)
and var(r) is visible for r < 200µm in Fig. 1.10. This small-scale eﬀect may be

Fig. 1.9. The empirical one-point distribution M1 of the pore sizes.

explained similarly to the Martian craters: large pores are never found close to
each others, since they have to be separated by at least the sum of their radii.
The histogram of the pore radii in Fig. 1.9 shows that most of the pores have
radii smaller than 100µm, and consequently this eﬀect is conﬁned to r < 200µm.
In Sect. 1.3.1 we discuss the Boolean depletion model which is based on this
geometric constraints and is able to produce such a reduction in the km(r). This

20

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

purely geometric constraint also explains the reduced var(r) and increased co-
variance cov(r). For separations larger than 200µm there is no signal from the

Fig. 1.10. The mark-weighted correlation functions from the holes in the Fontainbleau
sandstone. The pores’ radii serve as marks. The km being smaller than one indicates
a depletion eﬀect. The shaded areas again denote the range of one-σ ﬂuctuations for
randomized marks around the case of no mark segregation. The ﬂuctuations were
estimated from 200 reshuﬄings of the radii.

covariance, but both km(r) and var(r) show a small increase out to ∼ 1000µm.
This indicate that pairs of pores out to these separations tend to be larger in
size and show slightly increased ﬂuctuations. However, this eﬀect is small (of the
order of 1%) and may be explained by the deﬁnition of the holes, which may
lead to “artiﬁcial small pores” as “bridges” between larger ones. This hypothesis
has to be tested using diﬀerent hole deﬁnitions. In any case the main conclusion
seems to be that apart from the depletion eﬀect at small scales there are no
other mark correlations.

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

21

1.3 Models for marked point processes

Given the signiﬁcant mark correlations found in various applications, one may
ask how these signals can be understood in terms of stochastic models. A thor-
ough understanding of course requires a physical modeling of the individual
situation. There are, however, some generic models, which we will focus on in
the following: in Sect. 1.3.1 we introduce the Boolean depletion model, which
is able to explain some of the features observed in the distribution of craters
and pores in sandstone. Another generic model is the random ﬁeld model where
the marks of the points stem from an independent random ﬁeld (Section 1.3.2).
In Sect. 1.3.3 we generalize the idea behind the random ﬁeld model further in
order to get the Cox random ﬁeld model, which allows for correlations between
the point set and the random ﬁeld. Other model classes and their applications
are discussed by e.g. [20,44,17,60,71].

1.3.1 The Boolean depletion model

In our analysis of the Martian craters and the holes in sandstone, we found that
for small separations only small craters, or small holes in the sandstone, could
be found. We interpreted this as a pure geometric selection eﬀect. The Boolean
depletion model is able to quantify this eﬀect, but also shows further interesting
features.
The starting point is the Boolean model of overlapping spheres BR(x) (see also
the contributions by C. Arns et al. and D. Hug in this volume as well as [56]).
For that, the spheres’ centers xi are generated randomly and independently, i.e.
according to a Poisson process of number density ̺0. The radii R of the spheres
are then chosen independently according to a distribution function F0(R), i.e.
with probability density f0(R) = ∂F0(R)
∂R . The main idea behind the depletion is
to delete spheres which are covered by other spheres. To make this procedure
unique we remove only those spheres which are completely covered by a (notably
larger) sphere2. The positions and radii of the remaining spheres deﬁne a marked
point process. Note, that this depletion mechanism is minimal in the sense that
a lot of overlapping spheres may remain. This Boolean depletion model may be
considered as the low-density limit of the well-known Widom-Rowlinson model,
or (more generally) of non-additive hard sphere mixtures (see [72,40,39]).
The probability that a sphere of radius R is not removed is then given by

fnr(R) = lim

N,Ω→∞

dRi f0(Ri)

1 −

Θ(Ri − R)

(1.19)

4π
3

(Ri − R)3
|Ω|

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

N

∞

0
i=1 Z
Y
−̺0ωd

∞

(cid:18)

0
Z

= exp

dx f0(R + x)xd

,

(cid:19)

2 This process can be thought of as a dilution of the original Poisson process, for some
general remarks on diluting Poisson processes see [58], p. 163. A comparable model
was considered by [59].

22

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

with the step function Θ(x) = 0 for x < 1 and Θ(x) = 1 otherwise, and the
volume of the d-dimensional unit ball ωd (ω1 = 2, ω2 = π, ω3 = 4π/3). The limit
in Eq. (1.19) is performed by keeping ̺0 = N/|Ω| constant, with N the initial
number of spheres and |Ω| the volume of the domain.
The number density of the remaining spheres reads

̺ = ̺0

dR f0(R)fnr(R)

,

(1.20)

∞

0
Z

where the one-point probability density M1(R) that a sphere has radius R is
given by

M1(R) = f0(R)fnr(R)

(1.21)

̺0
̺

.

The probability that one or both of the spheres BR1 (x1) and BR2 (x2) are not
removed is given by

fnr(x1, R1; x2, R2) =

0
exp (−̺0gnr(x1, R1; x2, R2)) otherwise ,

if r < |R2 − R1|,

(

(1.22)

with BR<0(x) = ∅ and

∞

0
Z

gnr(x1, R1; x2, R2) =

dx V (Bx−R1 (x1) ∪ Bx−R2(x2)) f0(x).

(1.23)

At this point we have to consider the set union of two spheres with radii b1 ≡
x−R1 and b2 ≡ x−R2, respectively; the volume of this geometrical conﬁguration
can be calculated; in three dimensions , e.g., we have:

V (Bb1 (x1) ∪ Bb2 (x2)) =

(1.24)

2π
3

(b3

−

2π
3

1 + b3
2)
r3
8

−

(cid:18)

3
4

r(b2

1 + b2

2) −

(b2

2 − b2

2)2

3
8r

(cid:19)

for |b2 − b1| ≤ r = |x2 − x2| ≤ b1 + b2. Otherwise this volume reduces either to
the volume of the larger sphere (r < |b2 − b1|) or to the sum of both spherical
volumes (r > b1 + b2).
Similarly as in Eq. (1.20) the spatial two-point density turns out to be

2 (x1, x2) = ̺2
̺S
0

dR1

dR2f0(R1)f0(R2)fnr(x1, R1; x2, R2)

,

(1.25)

∞

∞

0
Z

0
Z

such that the conditional two-point mark density simply reads

M2(R1, R2|x1, x2) = f0(R1)f0(R2)fnr(x1, R1; x2, R2)

(1.26)

̺2
0
̺S
2 (x1, x2)

.

From this we can derive all of the mark correlation functions from Sect. 1.1.4.

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

23

A bimodal distribution: In order to get an analytically tractable model we
adopt a bimodal radius distribution in the original Boolean model and start
therefore with

f0(R) = α0δ(R − R1) + (1 − α0)δ(R − R2) ,

(1.27)

where we assume that R1 < R2. Due to the depletion the number density ̺ of
the spheres as well as the probability α to ﬁnd the smaller radius R2 at a given
point are then lowered; we get

e−n

α = α0

̺ = ̺0

1 − α0 + α0e−n ≤ α0,
1 − α0 + α0e−n
= ̺0

1 − α0
1 − α

(1.28)

(1.29)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

with n = ̺(1 − α) 4π
3 (R2 − R1)3. Altogether, the bimodal model can be parame-
terized in terms of the radii R1 R2, the ratio α0 ∈ [0, 1] and the density ̺0 ∈ R+.
The latter two quantities, however are not observable from the ﬁnal point pro-
cess, therefore we convert them into the parameters α ∈ [0, 1] and ̺ ∈ R+,
so that all other quantities can be expressed in terms of these, for instance,
α0 =
From Eq. (1.21) we determine the mean mark, i.e. the mean radius of the spheres

α+(1−α)e−n ≥ α, and ̺0 = ̺αen + ̺(1 − α),

α

m = R = αR1 + (1 − α)R2,

(1.30)

and from Eq. (1.25) the spatial product density

(1 − α)2R2 + α2R1 exp (nI(x))

0 ≤ x < 1,

1 + α2 [exp (nI(x)) − 1]

1 ≤ x < 2,

(1.31)

2 ≤ x,

2 (r) = ̺2 
̺S


1



with the normalized inter-sectional volume I(x) = 1 − 3
and x =
functions, e.g.

16 x3 of two spheres
|R2−R1| . Finally, using Eq. (1.26) one can calculate the mark correlation

4 x + 1

r

1 − α2(1 − α) R2−R1

exp(nI(x))−α−1+1
(1−α)2+α2 exp(nI(x))

0 ≤ x < 1,

1 − α2(1 − α) R2−R1

exp(nI(x))−1
1+α2[exp(nI(x))−1]

1 ≤ x < 2,

(1.32)

R

R

2 ≤ x.

km(r) = 


1



In Fig. 1.11 the km(r) function from the Boolean depletion model is shown. The
model with the solid line illustrates that a reduced km(r) for small radii can be
obtained by simply removing smaller spheres. At least qualitatively this model is
able to explain the depletion eﬀects we have seen both in the distribution of Mar-
tian craters (Fig. 1.7) and in the distribution of pores in sandstone (Fig. 1.10).
The jump at r = R2 − R1 is a relict of the strictly bimodal distribution with

24

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

only two radii. Fig. 1.11 also shows that the Boolean depletion model is quite
ﬂexible, allowing for a km(r) < 1, but also km(r) > 1 is possible.
Without ignoring the considerable diﬀerence of this Boolean depletion model to
the pore size distribution in real sandstones (see Figures 1.8-1.10) one may still
recognize some interesting similarities: This simple model explains naturally a
decrease of km(r) if the distribution of the radii is symmetric (α = 1/2). As
visible in Figure 1.9 this is approximately the case for the pore radii. Moreover,
note that even quantitative features are captured correctly indicating that the
decrease of km(r) visible in Figure 1.10 is indeed due to a depletion eﬀect. For
instance, the decrease starts at r ≈ RM where RM ≈ 100µm is the largest oc-
curring radius (see the histogram in Figure 1.9) and the value of km(0) ≈ 0.8 at
r = 0 is in accordance with Equation (1.32) assuming that R2 − R1 ≈ R and the
normalized density of pores n ≈ 1 necessary for a connected network. Of course
a more detailed analysis is necessary based on Eqs. (1.21) and (1.26) and the
histogram shown in Figure 1.9.

Fig. 1.11. The km(r) function for the Boolean depletion model with parameters R1 =
0.05, R2 = 0.15, ̺ = 500, and α = 0.5 (solid line), α = 0.3 (dotted line), α = 0.1
(dashed line).

1.3.2 The random ﬁeld model

The “random-ﬁeld model” covers a class of models motivated from ﬁelds such as
geology (see, e.g., [70]). The level of the ground water, for instance, is thought
of as a realization of a random ﬁeld which may be directly sampled at points

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

25

(hopefully) independent from the value of the ﬁeld or which may inﬂuence the
size of a tree in a forest.
In general, a realization of the random ﬁeld model is constructed from a real-
ization of a point process and a realization of a random ﬁeld u(x). The mark of
each object located at xi traces the accompanying random ﬁeld via mi = u(xi).
The crucial assumption is that the point process is stochastically independent
from the random ﬁeld.
We denote the mean value of the homogeneous random ﬁeld by u = E[u(x)] = u1
du w(u)uk, with the one-point probability density
and the moments by uk =
w of the random ﬁeld and E the expectation over realizations of the random
R
ﬁeld. The product density of the random ﬁeld is ρu
with
r = |x1 − x2|. For a general discussion of random ﬁeld models, see [1].
In this model the one-point density of the marks is M1(m) = w(m), and mk = uk
etc. The conditional mark density is given by

2 (r) = E

u(x1)u(x2)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

M2(m1, m2|x1, x2) = E

δ(m1 − u(x1))δ(m2 − u(x2))

,

(1.33)

where δ is the Dirac delta distribution. Clearly, this expression is only well-
deﬁned under a suitable integral over the marks. With Eq. (1.7) one obtains

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

hm1iP (r) = u,

P (r) = u2,
(cid:11)
and the mark-correlation functions deﬁned in Sect. 1.1.4 read

hm1m2iP (r) = ρu

m2
1

(cid:10)

2 (r),

km(r) = 1, kmm(r) = ρu

2 (r)/u2, γ(r) = u2 − ρu
2 (r),
2 (r) − u2, var(r) = u2 − u2 = σ2
M .

cov(r) = ρu

(1.34)

(1.35)

Therefore, there are some explicit predictions for the random ﬁeld model: an em-
pirically determined km signiﬁcantly diﬀering from one not only indicates mark
segregation, but also that the data is incompatible with the random ﬁeld model.
Looking at Figure 1.3 we see immediately that the galaxy data are not consis-
tent with the random ﬁeld model. Similar tests based on the relation between
kmm and the mark-variogram γ were investigated by [70] and [52]. The failure
of the random ﬁeld model to describe the luminosity segregation in the galaxy
distribution allows the following plausible physical interpretation: the galaxies
do not merely trace an independent luminosity ﬁeld; rather the luminosities of
galaxies depend on the clustering of the galaxies. We shall try to account for
this with a better model in the following section.

1.3.3 The Cox random ﬁeld model

In the random ﬁeld model, the ﬁeld was only used to generate the points’ marks.
In the Cox random ﬁeld model, on the contrary, the random ﬁeld determines
the spatial distribution of the points as well. As before, consider a homogeneous

26

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

and isotropic random ﬁeld u(x) ≥ 0. The point process is constructed as a Cox-
process (see e.g. [58]). The mean number of points in a set B is given by the
intensity measure

Λ(B) =

dx a u(x),

(1.36)

ZB

where a is a proportionality factor ﬁxing the mean number density ̺ = au. The
(spatial) product density of the point distribution is

2 (x1, x2) = a2 ρu
̺S

2 (r) = a2 u2(1 + ξu

2 (r)),

(1.37)

2 (r) denotes the product density of the random ﬁeld. ξu

where again ρu
2 is the
normalized two-point cumulant of the random ﬁeld (see below). We will also
need the n-point densities of the random ﬁeld:

n(x1, . . . , xn) = E
ρu

u(x1) · · · u(x1)

.

(1.38)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

Like in the random ﬁeld model, the marks trace the ﬁeld, but this time rather in
a probabilistic way than in a deterministic one: the mark mi on a galaxy located
at xi is a random variable with the probability density p(mi|u(xi)) depending
on the value of the ﬁeld u(xi) at xi. This can be used as a stochastic model for
the genesis of galaxies depending on the local matter density.
In order to calculate the conditional mark correlation functions we deﬁne the
conditional moments of the mark distribution given the value u of the random
ﬁeld:

mk(u) =

dm p(m|u) mk.

(1.39)

Z
The spatial mark product-density is

̺SM
2

((x1, m1), (x2, m2)) = a2E

p(m1|u(x1))p(m2|u(x2)) u(x1)u(x2)

.

(1.40)

and with Eq. (1.3)

M2(m1, m2|x1, x2) =

p(m1|u(x1))p(m2|u(x2)) u(x1)u(x2)

,

(1.41)

2 (r) 6= 0 and zero otherwise. The mark correlation functions can therefore

for ρu
be expressed in terms of weighted correlations of the random ﬁeld:

hmiP (r) =

E

m(u(x1)) u(x1)u(x2)

,

m2

P (r) =
(cid:11)

(cid:10)

hm1m2iP (r) =

(cid:2)
E

(cid:3)
m2(u(x1)) u(x1)u(x2)
i

,

h

m(u(x1))m(u(x2)) u(x1)u(x2)

.

(1.42)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

1
ρu
2 (r)

E

1
ρu
2 (r)
1
ρu
2 (r)
1
E
ρu
2 (r)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

27

A special choice for p(m|u): To proceed further, we have to specify p(m|u).
As a simple example we choose mi equal to the value of the ﬁeld u(xi) at the point
xi, such as in the random ﬁeld model. Thinking of the random ﬁeld as a mass
density ﬁeld and the mark of a galaxy luminosity, that means that the galaxies
trace the density ﬁeld and that their luminosities are directly proportional to
the value of the ﬁeld. With p(m|u) = δ(m − u) the conditional mark moments
become mk(u) = uk. The moments of the unconstrained mark distribution read
mk = uk+1/u, and the three basic pair averages are

hm1iP (r) =

ρu
3 (x1, x1, x2)
ρu
2 (r)

,

hm1m2iP (r) =

m2
1

P (r) =

ρu
4 (x1, x1, x1, x2)
ρu
2 (r)

(cid:11)

(cid:10)
ρu
4 (x1, x1, x2, x2)
ρu
2 (r)

.

Hence, the mark correlation functions deﬁned in Sect. 1.1.4 are determined by
the higher-order correlations of the random ﬁeld. With the Cox random ﬁeld
model we go beyond the random ﬁeld model, e.g.

km(r) =

hmiP (r)
m

=

u ρu

3 (x1, x1, x2)
u2 ρu
2 (r)

is not equal to one any more.

(1.43)

(1.44)

Hierarchical ﬁeld correlations: At this point, we have to specify the corre-
lations of the random ﬁeld u(x). The simplest choice, a Gaussian random ﬁeld,
is not feasible here, since a number density (cp. Eq. 1.36) has to be strictly posi-
tive, whereas the Gaussian model allows for negative values. Instead, we will use
the hierarchical ansatz: we ﬁrst express the two- and three-point correlations in
terms of normalized cumulants ξ2 and ξ3 (see, e.g., [19,5,35]),

ρu
2 (x1, x2) = u2

1 + ξu
(cid:16)
ρu
3 (x1, x2, x3) = u3

1 + ξu

2 (x1, x2)

,

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

2 (x1, x2) + ξu

2 (x2, x3) + ξu

2 (x1, x3) + ξu

3 (x1, x2, x3)

.

(1.45)
(cid:17)

In order to eliminate ξu

3 we use the hierarchical ansatz (see e.g. [47]):

ξu
3 (x1, x2, x3) = Q

2 (x2, x3) + ξu

2 (x2, x3)ξu

2 (x1, x3)

2 (x1, x2)ξu
ξu
(cid:16)

This ansatz is in reasonable agreement with data from the galaxy distribution,
provided Q is of the order of unity ([65]). Several choices for ξ2(r) and Q lead
to well-deﬁned Cox point process models based on the random ﬁeld u(x) [5,66].

+ ξu

2 (x1, x2)ξu

2 (x1, x3)

.

(1.46)

(cid:17)

28

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

Now we can express km(r) from Eq. (1.44) entirely in terms of the two-point
correlation function ξu

2 (r) of the random ﬁeld:

1 + 2ξu

2 (r) + ξu

2 (0) + Q

2 (r)2 + 2ξu
ξu

2 (r)ξu

2 (0)

km(r) =

,

(cid:17)

(1.47)

1 + ξu

2 (r)

(cid:16)

1 + ξu

2 (0)
(cid:17)

(cid:17)(cid:16)
u = u2 − u2 = u2ξu

(cid:16)

where we made use of the fact that σ2
2 (0). Inserting typical
parameters found from the spatial clustering of the galaxy distribution we see
from Fig. 1.12 that the Cox random ﬁeld model allows us to qualitatively de-
scribe the observed luminosity segregation in Fig.1.3. But the amplitude of km
predicted by this model is too high. The Cox random ﬁeld model, however, is
quite ﬂexible in allowing for diﬀerent choices for p(m|u); also diﬀerent models for
the higher-order correlations of the random ﬁeld may be used, e.g. a log-normal
random ﬁeld [14,42]. Clearly more work is needed to turn this into viable model
for the galaxy distribution.

Fig. 1.12. The km(r) function for the Cox random ﬁeld model according to Eq. (1.47).
u
2 (r <
We use Q = 1 and ξ
−1Mpc) = σ2
0.1h

−1Mpc/r)1.7 truncated on small scales at ξ

u
2 (r) = (5h
u/u2 = ξ

u
2 (0) ∼ 750.

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

29

1.4 Conclusions

Whenever objects are sampled together with their spatial positions and some
of their intrinsic properties, marked point processes are the stochastic models
for those data sets. Combining the spatial information and the objects’ inner
properties one can constrain their generation mechanism and their interactions.
Developing the framework of marked point processes further and outlining some
of their general notions is thus of interest for physical applications. Let us there-
fore look at mark correlations again from both a statistical and a physical per-
spective. We focused on two kinds of dependencies.
On the one hand, one can always ask, whether objects of diﬀerent types “know”
from each other. From a statistical point of view, this is the question whether
the marked point process consists of two completely independent sub-point pro-
cesses. Physically, this concerns the question whether the objects have been
generated together and whether they interact with each other.
On the other hand, it is often interesting to know whether the spatial distri-
bution of the objects changes with their inner properties. For the statistician,
this translates into the question whether mark segregation or mark-independent
clustering is present. For the physicist such a dependency is interesting since
one can learn from them whether and how the interactions distinguish between
diﬀerent object classes or whether the formation of the objects’ mark depends
on the environment.
We discussed statistics capable of probing to which extent mark correlations are
present in a given data set, and showed how to assess the statistical signiﬁcance.
Applying our statistics to real data, we could demonstrate, that the clustering
of galaxies depends on their luminosities. Large scale correlations of the orienta-
tions of dark matter halos were found. Using the Mars data we could validate a
picture of crater generation on the Martian surface: mainly, the local geological
setting determines the crater type. We also could show that the sizes of pores in
sandstone are correlated.
In order to understand empirical data sets in detail, we need models to compare
to. As generic models the Boolean depletion model, the random ﬁeld model and
its extension, the Cox random ﬁeld models are of interest.
Further application of the mark correlations properties may inspire the devel-
opment of further models. It seems therefore that marked point processes could
spark interesting interactions between physicists and mathematicians. Certainly,
the distributions of physicists and mathematicians in coﬀee breaks at the Wup-
pertal conference were clustered, each. But could one observe positive cross-
correlations? Using mark correlations we argue, that, even more, there is lots of
space for positive interactions. . . . .

Acknowledgments We would like to thank Andreas Faltenbacher, Stefan Gott-
l¨ober and Volker M¨uller for allowing us to present some results from the orienta-
tion analysis of the dark matter halos (Sect. 1.2.2). For providing the sandstone

30

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

data (Sect. 1.2.4) and discussion we thank Mark Knackstedt. Herbert Wagner
provided constant support and encouragement, especially we would like to thank
him for introducing us to the concepts of geometric algebra as used in the Ap-
pendix.

Appendix: Completeness of mark correlation functions

2

1 mn2

In order to form versatile test functions for describing mark segregation ef-
fects, we integrated the conditional mark probability density M2(m1, m2|r)
twice in mark space thereby weighting with a function of the marks f (m1, m2)
(see Eq. 1.7). Such a pair-averaging reduces the full information present in
M2(m1, m2|r). So one may ask, whether or in which sense the mark correlation
functions give a complete picture of the present two-point mark correlations.
For scalar marks mi this task is trivial. With a polynomial weighting function
f (m1, m2) ∼ mn1
(n1, n2 = 0, 1, ..) we consider moments of M2(m1, m2|r),
hence, we can be complete only up to a given polynomial order in the marks
m1 and m2. At ﬁrst order there is only the mean hmiP (r). At second order we
P (r) and hm1m2iP (r). All the mark correlation functions discussed
have
in Sect. 1.1.4 can be constructed from these three pair averages3. Higher-order
(cid:11)
moments of the marks involve more and more cross-terms.
For vector-valued marks, however, it is not obvious that the test quantities pro-
posed in Sect. 1.1.4 trace all possible correlations between the vectors up to third
order. To settle this case we have to consider the framework of geometric alge-
bra, also called Cliﬀord algebra. A detailed introduction to geometric algebra is
given in [31], shorter introductions are [26,38]. In geometric algebra one assigns
a unique meaning to the geometric product (or Cliﬀord product) of quantities
like vectors, directed areas, directed volumes, etc. The geometric product ab of
two vectors a and b splits into its symmetric and antisymmetric part

m2

(cid:10)

ab = a · b + a ∧ b.

(1.48)

Here a · b denotes the usual scalar product; in three dimensions, the wedge
product a ∧ b is closely related to the cross product between these two vectors.
However, a ∧ b is not a vector like a × b, but a bivector – a directed area. Higher
products of vectors can be simpliﬁed according to the rules of geometric algebra
(for details see [31]).
Let us consider the situation where objects situated at x1 and x2 bear vector
marks l1 and l2, respectively, and let the normalized distance vector be ˆr =
(x1 − x2)/r. Note, that ˆr is not a mark at all, rather it can be thought of as
another vector which may be useful for constructing mark correlation functions.
3 This completeness of

P (r) and hm1m2iP (r) at the two-point level, however,
does not imply that one should not consider linear combinations of them. For in-
stance, it may well be the case, that only certain linear combinations yield signiﬁcant
results.

m2

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

31

For many applications it is reasonable to assume isotropy in mark space, i.e.
all of the mark correlation functions are invariant under common rotations of
the marks. For galaxies, e.g., there does not seem to be an a priori preferred
direction for their orientation. In more detail we have then

M1(l) = M1(Rl) = M1(|l|)
,

M2(l1, l2|r) = M2(Rl1, Rl2|r)

,

and so on, where R is an arbitrary rotation in mark space. This means that the
mark correlation functions depend only on rotationally invariant combinations
of the vector marks. Therefore, only rotationally invariant combinations of vec-
tors are sensible building blocks for weighting functions. We thus can restrict
ourselves to scalar weighting functions, which result in coordinate-independent
vector-mark correlation functions.
Again we proceed by considering mixed moments as basic combinations. We re-
strict ourselves to scalar quantities being polynomial in the vector components.
One may also discuss moments in a broader sense allowing for vector moduli.
In this wider sense, for example, |l1| or |l1 × (l1 × ˆr)| would be allowed. We do
not consider such quantities here, because they are not polynomial in the vec-
tor components. Their squares anyway appear at higher orders. Furthermore, it
turns out that the characterization we will provide depends on the embedding
dimension. The ﬁrst- and second-order moments are identical in two and three
dimensions, but at the third order they start to diﬀer.

1. In the strict sense of scalar quantities being linear in the vector components

there are no ﬁrst-order moments for vectors.

2. At second order we encounter the following products: l1l1, ˆrˆr, l1l2, ˆrl1. Note,
that, e.g., l1ˆr and l2ˆr do not make any diﬀerence as regards the mark correla-
tion functions, since the pair averages implicitly render the indices symmet-
ric; moreover, although the geometrical product is non-commutative, l1 ∧ ˆr
and l1 ∧ ˆr do not lead to diﬀerent mark correlation functions. Furthermore,
ˆrˆr = 1. l1l1 = l1 · l1 = l2
1 provides us with higher moments of the modulus of
the vectors. To investigate these kinds of correlations already scalar marks
would be suﬃcient. New information is encoded in the other products.
Consider l1l2 = l1 · l2 + l1 ∧ l2. The symmetric part l1 · l2 is clearly a scalar
and deﬁnes the alignment A(r) (Eq. 1.14). The antisymmetric part l1 ∧l2 is a
2 − (l1 · l2)2,
bivector. Its – unique – modulus (see again [31]), |l1 ∧l2| =
may be useful, but is no longer a polynomial in the vector components.
|l1 ∧ l2|2 appears at the fourth order. In a completely analogous way we can
treat l1ˆr = l1 · ˆr + l1 ∧ ˆr. The symmetric part l1 · ˆr deﬁnes F (r). Hence at
second order, the only possible vector-mark correlation functions are A(r)
and F (r).

1l2
l2

p

3. At third order we have to consider products of three vectors. In general the

product of three vectors a, b, c splits into

abc = a(b · c) + (a · b)c − (a · c)b + a ∧ (b ∧ c).

(1.49)

32

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

i.e., a vector (consisting of the three ﬁrst terms), and a pseudo-scalar, a
directed volume. In two dimensions the pseudo-scalar a ∧ (b ∧ c) vanishes.
Now we have to form all possible products of the three vectors l1, l2, ˆr and to
derive scalars. In three dimensions the only new combination is the pseudo-
scalar l1 ∧ (l2 ∧ ˆr) giving the oriented volume l1 · (l2 × ˆr). Unfortunately, this
oriented volume averages out to zero. Thus, in a strict sense, there are no
interesting third-order quantities. Closely related, however, is the modulus
of the pseudoscalar |l1 · (l2 × ˆr)| proportional to our P(r). This expression is
invariant under permutations of the vectors.

4. At third order and in two dimensions all of the relevant combinations are
products of ﬁrst- and second-order combinations; no speciﬁcally new combi-
nation appears. This is diﬀerent from the case of three dimensions, where at
third order an entirely new geometric object, the pseudo-scalar l1 ∧ (l2 ∧ ˆr)
can be constructed. There is a general scheme behind this argument: since
in d dimensions any geometrical product of more than d vectors vanishes,
all relevant combinations of vectors at orders higher than d are essentially
products of combinations of lower-order factors.

References

ester)

1. Adler, R. J. (1981): The Geometry of Random Fields (John Wiley & Sons, Chich-

2. Arns, C., M. Knackstedt, W. Pinczewski, K. Mecke (2001): ’Characterisation of

irregular spatial structures by prallel sets’, In press

3. Arns, C., M. Knackstedt, W. Pinczewski, K. Mecke (2001): ’Euler-poincar´e char-

acteristics of classes of disordered media’, Phys. Rev. E 63, p. 31112

4. Baddeley, A. J. (1999): ’Sampling and censoring’. In: Stochastic Geometry, Likeli-
hood and Computation, ed. by O. Barndorﬀ-Nielsen, W. Kendall, M. van Lieshout,
volume 80 of Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability, chapter 2 (Chap-
man and Hall, London)

5. Balian, R., R. Schaeﬀer (1989): ’Scale–invariant matter distribution in the Uni-

verse I. counts in cells’, Astronomics & Astrophysics 220, pp. 1–29

6. Barlow, N. G., T. L. Bradley (1990): ’Martian impact craters: Correlations of
ejecta and interior morphologies with diameter, latitude, and terrain’, Icarus 87,
pp. 156–179

7. Beisbart, C., M. Kerscher (2000): ’Luminosity– and morphology–dependent clus-

tering of galaxies’, Astrophysical Journal 545, pp. 6–25

8. Benoist, C., A. Cappi, L. Da Costa, S. Maurogordato, F. Bouchet, R. Schaeﬀer
(April 1999): ’Biasing and high-order statistics from the southern-sky redshift
survey’, Astrophysical Journal 514, pp. 563–578

9. Benoist, C., S. Maurogordato, L. Da Costa, A. Cappi, R. Schaeﬀer (December
1996): ’Biasing in the galaxy distribution’, Astrophysical Journal 472, p. 452
10. Bertschinger, E. (1998): ’Simulations of structure formation in the universe’, Ann.

11. Binggeli, B. (1982): ’The shape and orientation of clusters of galaxies’, Astro-

Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36, pp. 599–654

nomics & Astrophysics 107, pp. 338–349

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

33

12. B¨ohringer, H., P. Schuecker, L. Guzzo, C. Collins, W. Voges, S. Schindler, D. Neu-
mann, G. Chincharini, R. Cruddace, A. Edge, H. MacGillivray, P. Shaver (2001):
’The ROSTA-ESO ﬂux limited X-ray (REFLEX) galaxy cluster survey I: The
construction of the cluster sample’, Astronomics & Astrophysics , p. 826

13. Capobianco, R., E. Renshaw (1998): ’The autocovariance function of marked point
processes: A comparison between two diﬀerent approaches’, Biom. J. 40, pp. 431–
446

14. Coles, P., B. Jones (January 1991): ’A lognormal model for the cosmological mass

distribution’, MNRAS 248, pp. 1–13

15. Coles, P., F. Lucchin (1994): Cosmology: The Origin and Evolution of Cosmic

Structure (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester)

16. Cox, D., V. Isham (1980): Point Processes (Chapman and Hall, London)
17. Cressie, N. (1991): Statistics for Spatial Data (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester)
18. da Costa, L. N., C. N. A. Willmer, P. Pellegrini, O. L. Chaves, C. Rite, M. A. G.
Maia, M. J. Geller, D. W. Latham, M. J. Kurtz, J. P. Huchra, M. Ramella, A. P.
Fairall, C. Smith, S. Lipari (1998): ’The Southern Sky Redshift Survey’, AJ 116,
pp. 1–7

19. Daley, D. J., D. Vere-Jones (1988): An Introduction to the Theory of Point Pro-

20. Diggle, P. J. (1983): Statistical Analysis of Spatial Point Patterns (Academic

cesses (Springer, Berlin)

Press, New York and London)

21. Djorgovski, S. (1987): ’Coherent orientation eﬀects of galaxies and clusters’. In:
Nearly Normal Galaxies. From the Planck Time to the Present, ed. by S. M. Faber
(Springer, New York), pp. 227–233

22. Faltenbacher, A., S. Gottl¨ober, M. Kerscher, V. M¨uller (2002): ’Spin and orienta-

tional correlations of halos’, In preparation

23. Flannery, B. P., H. W. Deckman, W. G. Roberge, K. L. D’amico (1987): ’Three–

dimensional X–ray microtomography’, Science 237, pp. 1439–1444

24. Fuller, T. M., M. J. West, T. J. Bridges (1999): ’Alignments of the dominant

galaxies in poor clusters’, Astrophysical Journal 519, pp. 22–26

25. Gottl¨ober, S., M. Kerscher, A. Klypin, A. Kravtsov, V. M¨uller, A. Faltenbacher
(2002): ’Spatial distribution of galactic halos and their merger histories’, In prepa-
ration

26. Gull, S., A. Lasenby, C. Doran (1993): ’Imaginary numbers are nor real. – the

geometric algebra of spacetime’, Found. Phys. 23(9), p. 1175

27. Guzzo, L., J. Bartlett, A. Cappi, S. Maurogordato, E. Zucca, G. Zamorani,
C. Balkowski, A. Blanchard, V. Cayatte, G. Chincarini, C. Collins, D. Maccagni,
H. MacGillivray, R. Merighi, M. Mignoli, D. Proust, M. Ramella, R. Scaramella,
G. Stirpe, G. Vettolani (2000): ’The ESO Slice Project (ESP) galaxy redshift
survey. VII. the redshift and real-space correlation functions’, Astronomics & As-
trophysics 355, pp. 1–16

28. Hamilton, A. J. S. (August 1988): ’Evidence for biasing in the cfa survey’, Astro-

physical Journal 331, pp. L59–L62

29. Heavens, A. F., A. Refregier, C. Heymans (2000): ’Intrinsic correlation of galaxy
shapes: implications for weak lensing measurements’, MNRAS 319, pp. 649–656
30. Hermit, S., B. X. Santiago, O. Lahav, M. A. Strauss, M. Davis, A. Dressler,
J. P. Huchra (1996): ’The two–point correlation function and the morphological
segregation in the optical redshift survey’, MNRAS 283, p. 709

31. Hestens, D. (1986): New Foundations for Classical Mechanics (D. Reidel Publish-

ing Company, Dordrecht, Holland)

34

Beisbart, Kerscher, Mecke

32. Huchra, J. P., M. J. Geller, V. De Lapparent, H. G. Corwin Jr. (1990): ’The CfA

redshift survey – data for the NGP + 30 zone’, ApJS 72, pp. 433–470

33. Isham, V. (1985): ’Marked point processes and their correlations’. In: Spatial Pro-
cesses and Spatial Time Series Analysis, ed. by F. Droesbeke (Publications des
Facult´es universitaires Sain-Louis, Bruxelles)

34. Kerscher, M. (2000): ’Statistical analysis of large–scale structure in the Universe’.
In: Statistical Physics and Spatial Statistics: The Art of Analyzing and Modeling
Spatial Structures and Pattern Formation, ed. by K. R. Mecke, D. Stoyan, Number
554 in Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer, Berlin), astro-ph/9912329

35. Kerscher, M. (2001): ’Constructing, characterizing and simulating Gaussian and
high–order point processes’, Phys. Rev. E 64(5), p. 056109, astro-ph/0102153
36. Klypin, A. A. (2000): ’Numerical simulations in cosmology i: Methods’, in ’Lecture
at the Summer School ”Relativistic Cosmology: Theory and Observations”’, astro-
ph/0005502

37. Lambas, D. G., E. J. Groth, P. Peebles (1988): ’Statistics of galaxy orientations:

Morphology and large–scale structure’, AJ 95, pp. 975–984

38. Lasenby, J., A. N. Lasenby, C. J. Doran (2000): ’A uniﬁed mathematical language
for physics and engineering in the 21st century’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A
358, pp. 21–39

39. L¨owen, H. (2000): ’Fun with hard spheres’. In: Statistical Physics and Spatial
Statistics: The Art of Analyzing and Modeling Spatial Structures and Pattern For-
mation, ed. by K. R. Mecke, D. Stoyan, Number 554 in Lecture Notes in Physics
(Springer, Berlin)

40. Mecke, K. (2000): ’Additivity, convexity, and beyond: Application of minkowski
functionals in statistical physics’. In: Statistical Physics and Spatial Statistics:
The Art of Analyzing and Modeling Spatial Structures and Pattern Formation, ed.
by K. R. Mecke, D. Stoyan, Number 554 in Lecture Notes in Physics (Springer,
Berlin)

41. Melott, A. L., S. F. Shandarin (1990): ’Generation of large-scale cosmological

structures by gravitational clustering’, Nature 346, pp. 633–635.

42. Møller, J., A. R. Syversveen, R. P. Waagepetersen (1998): ’Log Gaussian cox

processes’, Scand. J. Statist. 25, pp. 451–482

43. Ogata, Y., K. Katsura (1988): ’Likelihood analysis of spatial inhomogeneity for

marked point pattersn’, Ann. Inst. Statist. Math. 40, pp. 29–39

44. Ogata, Y., M. Tanemura (1985): ’Estimation of interaction potentials of marked
spatial point patterns through the maximum likelihood method’, Biometrics 41,
pp. 421–433

45. Ohser, J., D. Stoyan (1981): ’On the second–order and orientation analysis of

planar stationary point processes’, Biom. J. 23, pp. 523–533

46. Onuora, L. I., P. A. Thomas (2000): ’The alignment of clusters using large–scale

simulations’, MNRAS 319, pp. 614–618

47. Peebles, P. J. E. (1980): The Large Scale Structure of the Universe (Princeton

University Press, Princeton, New Jersey)

48. Peebles, P. J. E. (1993): Principles of Physical Cosmology (Princeton University

Press, Princeton, New Jersey)

49. Penttinen, A., D. Stoyan (1989): ’Statistical analysis for a class of line segment

processes’, Scand. J. Statist. 16, pp. 153–168

50. Reichert, H., O. Klein, H. Dosch, M. Denk, V. Honkim¨aki, T. Lippmann, G. Reiter
(2000): ’Observation of ﬁve-fold local symmetry in liquid lead’, Nature 408, p. 839
51. Schlather, M. (2001): ’On the second–order characteristics of marked point pro-

cesses’, Bernoulli 7(1), pp. 99–107

1 Mark correlations: relating physical properties to spatial distributions

35

52. Schlather, M. (2002): ’Characterization of point processes with Gaussian marks

independent of locations’, Math. Nachr. Accepted

53. Sok, R. M., M. A. Knackstedt, A. P. Sheppard, W. V. Pinczewski, W. B. Lindquist,
A. V. A, , L. Paterson (2000): ’Direct and stochastic generation of network models
from tomographic images; eﬀect of topology on two-phase ﬂow properties’. In:
Proc. Upscaling Downunder, ed. by L. Paterson, (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht)

54. Spanne, P., J. Thovert, C. Jacquin, W. Lindquist, K. Jones, P. Adler (1994): ’Syn-
chrotron computed microtomography of porous media: Topology and transport’,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, pp. 2001–2004

55. Stoyan, D. (1984): ’On correlations of marked point processes’, Math. Nachr. 116,

pp. 197–207

56. Stoyan, D. (2000): ’Basic ideas of spatial statistics’. In: Statistical Physics and
Spatial Statistics: The Art of Analyzing and Modeling Spatial Structures and Pat-
tern Formation, ed. by K. R. Mecke, D. Stoyan, Number 554 in Lecture Notes in
Physics (Springer, Berlin)

57. Stoyan, D. (2000): ’Recent applications of point process methods in forestry statis-

tics’, Statistical Sciences 15, pp. 61–78

58. Stoyan, D., W. S. Kendall, J. Mecke (1995): Stochastic Geometry and its Appli-

cations (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester), 2nd edition

59. Stoyan, D., H. Stoyan (1985): ’On one of mat´ern’s hard-core point process models’,

60. Stoyan, D., H. Stoyan (1994): Fractals, Random Shapes and Point Fields (John

Biom. J. 122, p. 205

Wiley & Sons, Chichester)

61. Stoyan, D., O. W¨alder (2000): ’On variograms in point process statistics, ii: Models

for markings and ecological interpretation’, Biom. J. 42, pp. 171–187

62. Struble, M. F., P. Peebles (1985): ’Erratum: A new application of Binggeli’s test

for large–scale alignment of clusters of galaxies’, AJ 90, pp. 582–589

63. Struble, M. F., P. Peebles (1986): ’A new application of binggeli’s test for large–

scale alignment of clusters of galaxies’, AJ 91, p. 1474

64. Sylos Labini, F., M. Montuori, L. Pietronero (1998): ’Scale invariance of galaxy

clustering’, Physics Rep. 293, pp. 61–226

65. Szapudi, I., G. B. Dalton, G. Efstathiou, A. S. Szalay (1995): ’Higher order statis-
tics from the APM galaxy survey’, Astrophysical Journal 444, pp. 520–531
66. Szapudi, I., A. S. Szalay (1993): ’Higher order statistics of the galaxy distribution

using generating functions’, Astrophysical Journal 408, pp. 43–56

67. Ulmer, M., S. L. W. McMillan, M. P. Kowalski (1989): ’Do the major axis of rich
clusters of galaxies point toward their neighbors?’, Astrophysical Journal 338,
pp. 711–717

68. van Lieshout, M. N. M., A. J. Baddeley (1996): ’A nonparametric measure of

spatial interaction in point patterns’, Statist. Neerlandica 50, pp. 344–361

69. van Lieshout, M. N. M., A. J. Baddeley (1999): ’Indices of dependence between

types in multivariate point patterns’, Scand. J. Statist. 26, pp. 511–532

70. W¨alder, O., D. Stoyan (1996): ’On variograms and point process statistics’, Biom.

71. W¨alder, O., D. Stoyan (1997): ’Models of markings and thinnings of poisson pro-

J. 38, pp. 895–905

cesses’, Statistics 29, pp. 179–202

72. Widom, B., J. Rowlinson (1970): ’New model for the study of liquid–vapor phase

transitions’, J. Chem. Phys. 52, pp. 1670–1684

73. Willmer, C., L. N. da Costa, P. Pellegrini (March 1998): ’Southern sky redshift

survey: Clustering of local galaxies’, AJ 115, pp. 869–884

