2
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
5
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chapter 1

A two-dimensional rough
surface: Experiments on a
pile of rice.

C. M. Aegerter, R. G¨unther, and R. J. Wijngaarden
Department of Physics and Astronomy; Vrije Universiteit; 1081HV
Amsterdam; The Netherlands.

Dynamical roughening of interfaces has received much attention in recent years.
However, experiments have been restricted to one dimensional (1d) systems. Moreover,
theoretical studies of the two dimensional (2d) case have been highly inconclusive. Here
we introduce an experimental 2d system, with which the theories can be tested. As is
shown, the surface of a 2d pile of rice shows roughening behaviour in both space and
time, with a roughness exponent α2d = 0.39(3) and a growth exponent β2d = 0.27(3).

1.1

Introduction

Roughening phenomena of interfaces have been studied extensively in recent
years due to their wide range of applicability. Rough interfaces appear in such
diverse systems as ﬂux propagation in superconductors [1], the burning of papers
[2], diﬀusion waves [3], bacterial colonies [4], ﬂow through porous media [5] and
many more [6]. Even though all of these systems have very diﬀerent microscopic
physics governing the processes, they can be described by simple models from
a very small number of universality classes [6]. The most famous such model is
described by a non-linear diﬀusion equation known as the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang
(KPZ) equation [7]:

2
∂th(x, t) = ν∆h(x, t) + λ(∇h(x, t))

+ η(x, t),

(1.1)

2

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

where ν is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, η is a noise term, λ quantiﬁes the non-linearity
and h(x, t) is the position of the interface. In one dimension, the scaling behavior
of an interface governed by the KPZ equation can be analytically solved. The
roughness is parameterized by the width of the interface given by:

σ(t, L) =

2
h(h(x, t) − hh(t)iL)
(cid:0)

1/2

.

iL

(cid:1)

(1.2)

Here, h·iL denotes the average over the interface in space. For a self-aﬃne
surface, the width growth as a power law in time σ ∼ tβ, until saturation is
reached when the correlation length becomes comparable to the system size [6].
This growth exponent, β, characterizes the dynamics of the process. After the
saturation time, the width is constant in time at a value σsat(L) ∼ Lα, which
grows as a power law with the system size [6]. This roughness exponent, α,
characterizes the structure of the interface. For the KPZ equation, one obtains
α = 1/2 and β = 1/3 [7].

For a multi-dimensional KPZ system however, the theoretical situation is un-
clear. Analytical treatments of the KPZ equation only exist in approximations
[8, 9, 10], and results from numerical simulations vary greatly [6]. Similarly,
experiments have up to now been restricted to a single dimension. The experi-
mental problem of a two dimensional rough surface asks for a surface reconstruc-
tion technique with enough spatial resolution to span some orders of magnitude,
while at the same time having the temporal resolution to capture the dynamics
of the process, which is not easily achieved. Secondly, a system has to be found
that exhibits KPZ roughening in 2d and is accessible experimentally. Presently,
there is some interest to combine the exact results on the KPZ equation with
the concept of self-organized criticality (SOC) [11]. The surface of a sandpile,
which is the archetypal system to study SOC, can be mapped onto a system
which follows KPZ dynamics [12]. This is intriguing since it brings together two
established ﬁelds of research, however has not yet been tested experimentally.
We study here the front of a 2d rice-pile and its roughening behavior, showing
that it does indeed obey KPZ dynamics. We choose rice, since it has been shown
in 1d that a rice-pile does indeed show SOC behaviour [13]. With the surface of
a rice-pile established as a roughening system, we can extend the study further
to include the full 2d surface of the pile spanning an area of ∼1x1m2. Using this
system, we can determine roughening and growth exponents in 2d and compare
them with theoretical predictions [8, 9, 10].

In section 2, we will discuss the experimental setup including the surface
reconstruction technique based on active-light stereoscopy, as well as the grow-
In section 3, we develop the analysis techniques,
ing mechanism of the pile.
with special emphasis on the generalization from known 1d methods to the 2d
problem. In section 4 we present the results of the rice-pile experiment. There,
it is ﬁrst shown that the front behaviour in 1d does in fact obey KPZ scaling
before discussing the 2d results. Those results are used to put constraints on
theoretical results for 2d KPZ behavior.

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

3

1.2 Experimental setup

The rice-pile is grown by dropping rice, uniformly distributed along a line using
a custom-built dispenser. The dispenser consists of a distribution board and
a sowing machine. In the sowing machine, an eccentric rotor keeps the rice in
motion such that a steady ﬂow of rice is achieved at the rate of ∼5 g/s. This
ﬂow of rice is subsequently distributed along a line of 1 m in the distribution
board using simple geometry (see Fig. 1.1). The principle is related to that of a
pin-board producing a Gaussian distribution.

Figure 1.1: A schematic image of the distribution board. Rice is dropped from a
single point on the top and subsequently divided into even compartments. At the end
a line of rice uniformly distributed in 64 intervals is obtained, which is used to grow
the rice-pile at a rate of ∼5 g/s.

In order to study the surface properties of the rice-pile, a 3d reconstruction
technique was developed, based on active-light stereoscopy [14]. A set of colored
lines is projected onto the pile at approximately right angles using an overhead
In the stereoscopic view [15], the projector takes the place of the
projector.
second camera passing its information to the camera via the colored lines. The
camera itself is placed at an angle of 45 degrees to the surface of the pile and
the projected lines. From this view-point the projected lines are deformed and
can be used to determine the 3d structure of the surface in the same way as
iso-height-lines do on a map. An example of such a reconstruction is shown in
Fig. 1.2. Measurements on test objects show that a surface of 1x1 m2 can be
reconstructed with an accuracy of 1-2 mm, which is comparable to the size of
the rice grains and thus suited for the present purpose. The use of diﬀerently
colored lines allows for better ﬁltering and thus for better identiﬁcation of the
lines in the computer.

1.3 Analysis methods

As noted in the introduction, rough surfaces are often analyzed using the width
of the interface to characterize its structure and dynamics. However, in order to

4

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

Figure 1.2: Reconstruction of the surface of a rice-pile. The white line indicates the
position of the growing front.

obtain reliable results, many experiments have to be averaged over, using such a
method [6]. A more promising way of analysis, which has been extensively used
in the analysis of 1d experiments is via the two-point correlation function [6]

2
C(x, t) = h(h(ξ, τ ) − h(ξ + x, τ + t))

1/2
ξ,τ .
i

(1.3)

In both space and time the scaling behaviour of the correlation function is the
same as that of the width thus making it possible to determine the growth
and roughness exponents from C(x, t). In addition, the growth exponent can be
determined from data obtained after the saturation time, since in the correlation
function only time diﬀerences are important.

When generalizing the method to 2d, computational diﬃculties arise. Be-
cause of the number of points to compare, the number of operations to be carried
out to determine the correlation function grows with the fourth power of the size
of the surface. However, tests on small surfaces indicate that the radial aver-
age of C(x, y, t) scales like the 2d local width, but due to the computational
ineﬃciency we were using yet another method to determine the roughness and
growth exponents.

The power spectrum, or structure function [16], can be determined easily for
1d and 2d systems from the square of the Fourier transform ˆh(kx, ky) of the local
height h(x, y)

S(kx, ky) = |ˆh(kx, ky)|
Here, the computational load is just given by determining the Fourier transforms,
which also in 2d only grows with the square of the size of the surface thus making
it feasible to calculate the distribution function of the whole rice-pile surface.
The square root of the integral of S(kx, ky) over k-space, the distribution function
σ(kx, ky),

(1.4)

2.

1/2

σ(kx, ky) =

(cid:18)Z Z

S(kx, ky)dkxdky(cid:19)

(1.5)

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

5

is equal to the rms-width of the interface [16]. Thus the distribution function also
has the same scaling behaviour as the width and can therefore be used to deter-
mine the roughness and growth exponents. Again, a radial average of σ(kx, ky),
σ(k), scales like the 2d local width, thus making comparisons with previous
simulations of ballistic deposition models possible. Moreover, real 2d measures
like the distribution function can also give information about anisotropies of the
scaling in the x- and y-directions.

The distribution function is also useful in investigations of the dynamics of
the processes. In that case, the square of the Fourier transform ˆh(ω) of the time
dependence h(t) has to be determined. The Fourier transforms are determined
using an FFT algorithm after padding the data with zeros to the next power of
two.

1.4 Results and discussion

In order to determine that the rice-pile surface does in fact follow KPZ behaviour
we ﬁrst determined the roughness and growth exponents of the front of the pile,
given by the line of equal height of the pile at 0.1 m. The distribution func-

Figure 1.3: The behavior of the front of a propagating rice-pile. Both the correlation
function (open symbols) and the distribution function (full symbols) show scaling in
space and time over two decades. The resulting roughness and growth exponents are
in excellent agreement with the KPZ universality class.

tions determined in both space, σ(k), and time, σ(ω), as well as the correlation
functions C(x, t) can be seen in Fig. 1.3, where the values of α = 0.48(3) and
β = 0.33(3) can be inferred. These values are in excellent agreement with the
expectations from the KPZ equation thus establishing that KPZ behaviour does
appear in SOC systems.

The 2d distribution function, σ(kx, ky), which characterizes the roughening
of the whole surface is shown in Fig. 1.4 on a triple-logarithmic plot. In the
insert, the angular dependence of a power-law ﬁt to σ is shown. This indi-
cates a dependence of the roughness exponent α on the direction, which shows

6

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

the anisotropy of the system. Such an anisotropy most probably arises from
the growth mechanism of the pile, which is seeded from a horizontal line, thus
breaking the symmetry of the x- and y-directions. It should be noted here that
the exponents corresponding to the x- and y-directions do not have to agree with
those determined in a 1d analysis. This is because σ(kx, 0) already includes data
from the y-direction due to the complex nature of the Fourier transform. Thus,
σ(kx, 0) already presents an eﬀective 2d measure.

Figure 1.4: The 2d distribution function for the rice-pile surface on a triple-
logarithmic plot. From a radial average, the roughness exponent can be determined.
The insert shows an angular dependence of the roughness exponent, with an anisotropy
in the x- and y-directions.

The radial average of the distribution function, σ(k), is shown in Fig. 1.5a,
where the value of the roughness exponent can also be determined. We ob-
tain α2d = 0.39(3), which is also in agreement with the average of the expo-
nents determined as a function of angle. In addition, the temporal behavior,
σ(ω) is shown in Fig. 1.5b, where we determine the 2d growth exponent to be
β2d = 0.27(3). Both the roughness and growth exponents determined experimen-
tally are in very good agreement with the conjecture derived from solid-on-solid
models by Kim and Kosterlitz [17] for higher dimensional exponents given by α
= 2/(d+3) and β = 1/(d+2). Numerical results from integrating the 2d KPZ
equation vary greatly, with values of α2d ranging from 0.18 [10] to 0.39 [8] and
β2d ranging from 0.1 [10] to 0.25 [8]. Our experimental results are in good agree-
ment with the numerical values of Amar and Family [8], as well as Bouchaud and
Cates [9] corresponding to the high range of the values, while excluding most of
the other numerical investigations into 2d KPZ behavior.

1.5 Conclusions

We have presented an experimental study on roughening in a 2d system. The
surface of a rice-pile is measured with a reconstruction technique based on active-

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

7

Figure 1.5: (a) The radial average of the 2d distribution function, allowing the de-
termination of the roughness exponent in 2d to be α2d = 0.39(3) form a scaling regime
spanning a decade and a half.
(b) The distribution function in time, leading to a
growth exponent of β2d = 0.27(3).

light stereoscopy. In 1d, the fronts of the rice as the pile is grown shows excellent
agreement with the 1d KPZ universality class with exponents α = 0.48(3) and β
= 0.33(3) from a scaling-regime spanning more than two decades. Thus having
established the KPZ nature of the system under study, we analyze the full 2d
surface of the pile, where ﬁnd a roughness exponent of α2d = 0.39(3) and β2d
= 0.27(3). This is consistent with numerical simulations for ballistic deposition
models [18, 19] and puts a strong experimental constraint on the available results
on 2d KPZ simulations. Our results are in good agreement though with the
results of Amar and Family [8], as well Bochaud and Cates [9] from numerical
integration of the 2d KPZ equation. In addition however, we have studied the
dependence of the exponent on the direction, where we ﬁnd that the system is
anisotropic with a somewhat higher exponent along the front direction. This is
probably related to the diﬀerence between the two directions due to the growth
mechanism.

1.6 Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation and by FOM
(Stiching voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie), which is ﬁnancially sup-
ported by NWO (Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek).

Bibliography

[1] Surdeanu, R., et al., “Kinetic roughening of penetrating ﬂux fronts in high
Tc superconducting thin ﬁmls.”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999), 2054–2057.

8

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

[2] Maunuksela, J., et al., ”Kinetic roughening in slow combustion of pa-
per”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997), 1515–1518; Myllys, A., et al., ”Kinetic
roughening in slow combustion of paper”, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001), 036101.

[3] Welling, M.S., private communication.

[4] Ben-Jacob, E., et al., ”Communication, regulation and control during

complex patterning of bacterial colonies”, Fractals 2 (1994), 15–44.

[5] He, S., G.L.M.K.S. Kahanda, and P.-Z. Wong, ”Roughness of wetting ﬂuid
invasion fronts in porous media”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 (1992), 3731–3734.

[6] Barabasi, A.-L., and H.E. Stanley Fractal Concepts in Surface Growth,

Cambridge University Press (1995).

[7] Kardar, M., G. Parisi, and Y.-C. Zhang, ”Dynamic scaling of growing

interfaces”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 (1986), 889–892.

[8] Amar, J.G., and F. Family, ”Numerical solution of a continuum equation
for interface growth in 2+1 dimension”, Phys. Rev. A 41 (1990), 3399–3402.

[9] Bouchaud, J.P., and M.E. Cates, ”Self-consistent approach to the KPZ

equation”, Phys. Rev. E 47 (1993), R1455–R1458.

[10] Chakrabarti, A., and R. Toral, ”Numerical study of a model for interface

growth.”, Phys. Rev. B 40 (1989), 11419–11421.

[11] Bak, P., C. Tang, and K. Wiesenfeld, ”Self-organized criticality: An ex-
planation of 1/f noise.”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 (1987), 381–384 and ”Self-
organized criticality.”, Phys. Rev. A 38 (1988), 364. See also Bak, P., How
nature works (Oxford Univ. Press, 1995).

[12] Szabo, G.J., M.J. Alava, and J. Kertesz, ”Self-organized criticality in
the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang-equation”, cond-mat/0112297; Alava, M.J., and
K.B. Lauritsen, ”Quenched noise and over-active sites in sandpile dynam-
ics”, Europhys. Lett. 53 (2001), 569–572.

[13] Frette, V., et al., ”Avalanche dynamics in a pile of rice”, Nature (London)

379 (1996), 49–51.

[14] G¨unther, R., Reconstruction and Roughening of two-dimensional granular

surfaces, Masters Thesis, Vrije Universiteit (2002).

[15] Zhang, Z., and G. Xu, Epipolar Geometry in Stereo, Motion and Object
Recognition: A uniﬁed Approach, Kluwer Academic Publishers, (1996).

[16] Schmittbuhl, J., J.-P. Vilotte, and S. Roux, ”Reliability of self-aﬃne
measurements”, Phys. Rev. E 51 (1995), 131; Siegert, M., ”Determining
exponents in models of kinetic surface roughening”, ibid. 53 (1996), 2309;
Lopez, J.L., M.A. Rodriguez, and R. Cuerno, ibid. 56 (1997), 3993.

A two-dimensional rough surface: Experiments on a pile of rice.

9

[17] Kim, J.M., and J.M. Kosterlitz, ”Growth in a restricted solid-on-solid

model.”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989), 2289–2292.

[18] Baiod, R., et al., ”Dynamical scaling of the surface of ﬁnite-density ballistic

aggregation.”, Phys. Rev. A 38 (1988), 3672–3678.

[19] Meakin, P., et al., ”Ballistic deposition on surfaces.”, Phys. Rev. A 34

(1986), 5091–5103.

