Europhysics Letters

PREPRINT

2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Maximum-likelihood absorption tomography

J. ˇReh´aˇcek 1 (∗), Z. Hradil 1, M. Zawisky 2, W. Treimer 3 and M. Strobl 3
1 Department of Optics, Palack´y University, 17. listopadu 50, 772 00 Olomouc, Czech
Republic
2 Atominstitut der ¨Osterreichischen Universit¨aten, Stadionallee 2, A-1020 Wien
3 University of Applied Sciences (TFH) Berlin, FB II, Luxemburgerstraße 10, D-13353
Berlin and Hahn-Meitner-Institute Berlin, Glienicker Straße 100, D-14109 Berlin

PACS. 42.30.Wb – Image reconstruction; tomography.
PACS. 87.57.F – Computer tomography.
PACS. 03.75.Be – Atom and neutron optics.

Abstract. – Maximum-likelihood methods are applied to the problem of absorption tomog-
raphy. The reconstruction is done with the help of an iterative algorithm. We show how the
statistics of the illuminating beam can be incorporated into the reconstruction. The proposed
reconstruction method can be considered as a useful alternative in the extreme cases where the
standard ill-posed direct-inversion methods fail.

Introduction. – The standard reconstruction method in present computerized tomo-
graphic (CT) imaging is the ﬁltered back-projection (FBP) algorithm which is based on the
Radon transformation [1]. Unfortunately FBP fails in case of missing projections and/or if
strong statistical ﬂuctuations of the counting numbers are present in the small detector pix-
els. The latter situation occurs e.g. in neutron tomography [2–5], if monochromatic neutron
beams are applied in order to avoid beam artifacts [6] or at the investigation of strong absorb-
ing materials. The cases of missing projections and incomplete data sets for monochromatic
neutron beams have been already investigated in the past in detail by means of algebraic re-
construction technique [7–9]. Scattering data from a double crystal diﬀractometer have been
used to reconstruct 2D scattering pattern and the results were compared with the standard
FBP. With this algebraic approach one could reconstruct 2D pattern in spite of the lack of
nearly 90 degrees of the scanning angle, whereas in such cases the FBP method entirely failed.
The computing time, however, was extremely long (up to several hours), so that this method
is useful for rather small 2D arrays (100 × 100 pixels) only.

The new reconstruction method proposed in this paper can improve several tomographic
applications in neutron optics which in many cases are limited by the weak intensity and the
poor detector resolution. The use of well collimated pencil beams which are scanned across
the sample surface could dramatically enhance the spatial image resolution but this method
is only rarely used due the long measurement times [10]. An improved reconstruction method
can encourage new applications in neutron optics which often suﬀer from the low counting

(∗) Email: rehacek@phoenix.inf.upol.cz

c(cid:13) EDP Sciences

2

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

y

ϕ

beam

sample

h

x

Fig. 1

Fig. 2

Fig. 1 – Geometry of the experimental setup

Fig. 2 – Deﬁnition of coeﬃcients cij

j

cij

i

numbers. Generally the new algorithm can achieve better reconstruction results or reduce the
scanning time in neutron optics and in medical and biological CT imaging.

LinPos tomography. – Basic notions and the geometry of experimental setup are as
follows. Let us assume that the sample is illuminated by parallel monochromatic pencil
beams, see Fig. 1. Data consist of the number of particles counted behind the sample for M
diﬀerent scans – each scan being characterized by horizontal position h and rotation angle ϕ.
Alternatively, a broad illuminating beam combined with a position-sensitive detector (CCD
camera) placed behind the sample can be used. In that case h labels pixels of the camera. For
the sake of simplicity a collective index j ≡ {h, ϕ} will be used, hereafter, to label the scans.
Mean number ¯nj of particles (intensity) registered in j-th scan is given by the exponential

law

¯nj = ¯n0 exp(−

µ(x, y)dsj ),

Z

where ¯n0 is the intensity of the incoming beam, µ(x, y) is the absorption index (cross section)
of the sample in position {x, y}, and the integration is the path integration along the pencil
beam. This exponential attenuation law is a good approximation if scattering can be neglected.
The beam hardening artifacts would also modify Eq. (1) but this complication can be avoided
experimentally by the use of monochromatic beams [6]. For practical purposes, it is convenient
to discretize Eq. (1) as follows,

¯nj = ¯n0 exp(−

µicij).

N

Xi=0

The sample is now represented by a 2D mesh. Each cell is assumed to have a constant
absorption index. The variables are now N numbers µi specifying absorption indices of those
cells. Overlaps between beams and cells are stored in the array {cij}, see Fig. 2.

Let us ﬁrst ignore the statistics of the illuminating beam, and assume that the counted
numbers of particles {nj} do not ﬂuctuate, nj = ¯nj, ∀j. Taking logarithms of both sides
of Eq. (2), one obtains a system of M linear algebraic equations for N unknown absorption
coeﬃcients µi:

fj = pj,

j = 1 . . . M,

(1)

(2)

(3)

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

J. ˇReh´aˇcek et al.: Maximum-likelihood absorption tomography

where we deﬁned,

fj = − ln

pj =

µicij.

nj
n0

,

Xi

Notice that problem (3) is a linear and positive (LinPos) problem. Positivity follows from
the fact that no new particles are created in the sample. Although direct inversion of Eq. (3)
is possible for N ≥ M , the solution is not always positively deﬁned. A negative value of a
reconstructed µi would suggest that particles were being created in the i-th cell in the course
of the experiment, which would obviously be a wrong conjecture. This problem can be avoided
if the problem (3) is solved in the sense of maximum likelihood (ML) on the space of physically
allowed absorption coeﬃcients. In this approach one considers the data f and the prediction
of the theory p as two probability distributions. One looks for absorption coeﬃcients {µi}
that minimize the Kullback-Leibler “distance”

d(f , p) = −

fj ln

Xj

pj
fj

L =

(cid:18)

Yj

fj

,

pj
k pk (cid:19)

µn+1 = R(µn) · µn,

Ri =

1
cij′

Pj′

fjcij
pj(µ)

,

Xj

between the data f and the theory p. Here a little extra care is needed since p and f are
generally not normalized to unity. The minimum of the Kullback-Leibler distance corresponds
to the maximum of the maximum likelihood (ML) functional [11]

P
that quantiﬁes the likelihood of the given distribution {µi} in view of the registered data. We
seek the maximum-likely distribution of the absorption indices. A convenient way how to ﬁnd
it is the celebrated Expectation-Maximization (EM) iterative algorithm [12, 13],

where

and µ0 is some initial strictly positive distribution µ(0)
i > 0, i = 1 . . . N . A nice feature of EM
algorithm is that its convergence is guaranteed for any input data fj [14]. For this reason it
became a valuable tool in many inverse problems which can be reduced to the form of Eq. (3),
e.g.
in positron emission tomography [14–16]. The original derivation of EM algorithm is
based on alternating projections on specially chosen convex sets of vectors. However, one
could directly use the calculus of variations to derive the necessary condition for the extreme
of the functional (6). Iterating these, one eventually arrives at the EM algorithm again. An
advantage of this alternative derivation is that it can be also applied to more realistic physical
models of the actual absorption experiment. One such possible generalization will be studied
in the following section.

Tomography with Poissonian signals. – Real signals are not composed of a sharp number
of particles. For instance, two signals often used in experiments —beam of thermal neu-
trons and laser light— both exhibit Poissonian ﬂuctuations in the number of particles. Also
monochromatic neutron beams are correctly described by Poissonian statistics if the detected
count events occur mutually independently [17]. The knowledge of the true character of sig-
nal illuminating the sample is a useful piece of prior information, which can be utilized for
improving the performance of ML tomography.

4

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

As the Poissonian character of the signal is preserved by the process of attenuation, the
counted numbers of particles behind the sample are random Poissonian variables. The corre-
sponding likelihood functional reads,

L ∝

j e−¯nj .
¯nnj

Yj

This is the joint probability of counting {nj} particles. Mean values {¯nj} obey the exponential
law (1) as before. They depend on the absorption in the sample {µj} that is to be inferred
from the data. The necessary condition for the extreme of the likelihood (9) can be derived
using the calculus of variations. The extremal equation can be shown to have the same vector
form as the extremal equation of the LinPos problem (7). The vector R now becomes

R(Poisson)

i

=

¯n0
cij′ nj′

Pj′

cij exp(−

µi′ ci′j).

Xj

Xi′

When the input intensity ¯n0 is not known, it can be estimated together with the absorption
of the sample:

(9)

(10)

(11)

¯n0 =

Pj
exp(−

.

µicij )

Pj

nj

Pi

Poissonian tomography is intrinsically a nonlinear problem. This has serious consequences for
the convergence properties of the iterative algorithm (7) and (10). Instead of converging to
a stationary point it might end up in oscillations. Typically such convergence problems arise
in the presence of very noisy data. When this happens one can always decrease the length of
the iteration step as follows: Ri → Rα
0 < α < 1. Of course, any solution to
i = 1 . . . M,
i ,
the regularized problem is also a solution to the original problem.

Discussion. – Generally, the reconstructed image will depend on which ML method is
chosen to process the data; see the apparent diﬀerence between Eqs. (8) and (10). It is inter-
esting to look more closely at the origin of this diﬀerence. Consider a tomographic setup with
a Poissonian beam. Then the Poissonian algorithm should provide a better reconstruction
than the LinPos algorithm which have been derived under the assumption of non-ﬂuctuating
signals. The LinPos reconstruction consists in minimizing the Kullback-Leibler distance be-
tween the data f and theory p. When logarithms of the counted numbers of particles are
chosen to be the input data rather than counted data itself, one arrives at the EM algorithm
(7) and (8). Taking logarithms of actual data makes the problem linear and considerably
simpliﬁes the reconstruction. However, one could, instead, directly minimize the Kullback-
Leibler distance between the counted data nj and the corresponding theory p′
j = n0 exp(−pj).
Interestingly enough, the extremal equations associated with this variational problem are the
same as Eqs. (7) and (10) derived above from the Poissonian theory (9). Choosing nj instead
of fj as the data is equivalent to taking the Poissonian statistics of the signal into account!
The diﬀerence between the LinPos and Poissonian ML reconstructions can thus be traced
down to whether the measured data are used directly or not. Tampering with data prior
to reconstruction may speed up and facilitate the whole process of reconstruction but some
information about the object might get lost.

Comparison with standard methods. – In a real experiment there are many factors that
could inﬂuence the quality of the measured data and therefore also on the result of the tomog-
raphy. Misalignments present in the experimental setup, instability of the illuminating beam,

J. ˇReh´aˇcek et al.: Maximum-likelihood absorption tomography

5

Fig. 3 – The object.

white spots and damaged detector pixels can be such factors, to name a few. To avoid this
problem we replaced the experiment by a simulation. The data were generated on a computer.
The artiﬁcial object used in the simulation is shown in Fig. 3. The object is a circle made of
a homogeneous material with many small round holes drilled through it. One additional rect-
angular piece of material was removed from the circle to make it less symmetric. Absorption
index of the material was chosen in such a way that the maximum attenuation along a beam
was close to 50% of the input intensity.

In the simulation, the object was subject to ﬁve diﬀerent experiments. Their parameters
are summarized in Table I. First four experiments correspond to the ideal situation of a
very high beam intensity where the Poissonian detection noise can safely be ignored. The
last reconstruction simulates more realistic conditions with 2000 counts per pixel in the open
beam. Notice that a relatively small number of rotations is chosen for all ﬁve experiments. In
this regime the Radon transformation is expected to yield bad results and the improvement of
the maximum-likelihood tomography upon the standard technique should be most prominent.
This regime is also important from the practical point of view. Doing more rotations implies
a longer measurement time and more radiation absorbed by a sample. The latter may be
an important factor if the imaging of biological samples is considered. So, imaging costs and
damage done to a sample due to radiation might be reduced provided the improvement of the
reconstruction technique gives comparable resolution with less data.

Reconstructions from the simulated data are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The simulated
data were ﬁrst processed using the IDL imaging software (Research Systems Inc.) which
implements the standard FBP algorithm (Radon transform), see Fig. 4. This software is
one of the industrial standards in the computer assisted tomography. The same data were
then processed using our iterative algorithm based on the maximization of the Poissonian
likelihood function, see Fig. 5.
In the absence of noise, see cases (a)-(d), the ﬁdelity of a
reconstruction depends on two main factors—the spatial resolution of the detector, and the
number of rotations used. It is apparent from Figs. 4 and 5 that the latter factor is more

reconstruction
a
b
c
d
e

angles
13
19
20
7
15

pixels
161
101
101
301
161

intensity
∞
∞
∞
∞
2000

Table I – Quality of the input data. The last column shows the mean number of counted particles
per pixel in the incident beam.

6

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

(a)

(b)

()

(a)

(b)

()

(d)

(e)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 4

Fig. 5

Fig. 4 – IDL reconstructions from the simulated data, for parameters see Tab. I

Fig. 5 – ML reconstructions from the same data. The proposed iterative algorithm, Eqs. (7) and (10),
has been used for reconstruction.

important of the two. Very small number of angles cannot be compensated by an increased
spatial resolution of the detector, compare e.g. cases (c) and (d), and reconstruction (d) is by
far the worst one. However, ML tomography is much less sensitive to the number of angles
than the standard ﬁltered back-projection. Even the large rectangular hole in the object
is hardly perceptible in Fig. 4d whereas it nicely shows in the ML reconstruction Fig. 5d.
ML reconstructions are superior to the standard ones also in cases (a)-(c); notice that the
reconstruction Fig. 5c done with as few as 20 diﬀerent angles is nearly perfect.

Beneﬁts of the ML tomography are fully revealed when the detected data are noisy. This
is case (e) in Tab. I. Standard ﬁltered back-projection applied to noisy data faces serious
diﬃculties. This is due to ill-poseness of the Radon transformation where data are integrated
with a singular ﬁlter function. Obviously such deconvolution greatly ampliﬁes any noise
present in the data. Having little or no prior information about the object it is diﬃcult
to tell true details of the object from artifacts. ML tomography gives much better results.
Since noises are incorporated into the algorithm in a natural and statistically correct way
artiﬁcial smoothing is not needed. Notice in Fig. 5e that noisy data yield a little distorted
but otherwise clear image unlike the corresponding very noisy standard reconstruction shown
in Fig. 4e. This is a nice feature of the intrinsically nonlinear ML algorithm which, in the
course of reconstruction, self-adapts to the registered data and always selects the most likely
conﬁguration.

Finally let us emphasize that apart from the size of the reconstruction mesh N [18] there
are no free parameters left in the ML algorithm to play with. This prevents one from in-
terfering when the reconstructed image “looks bad.” This also makes the whole procedure
more objective, which is a necessary presumption for the investigation of ultimate limits of
reconstruction schemes.

Conclusion. – We presented a new reconstruction method for CT imaging based on
the iterative maximization of the Poissonian likelihood. For small number of scans and/or
short measurement time this method was shown to yield a signiﬁcant improvement upon the
standard ﬁltered back-projection algorithm. This could be important for CT imaging with low-
intensity beams, and for applications where strong irradiation of a sample during the scanning
should be avoided. One area where reconstruction techniques of the type discussed in this

J. ˇReh´aˇcek et al.: Maximum-likelihood absorption tomography

7

paper would be very useful are coherent reconstruction techniques such as interferometric
phase tomography with X-rays [19, 20] or neutrons [21], or neutron holography [22]. There is
hopefully more to come.

This work was partially supported by Grant No. LN00A015 of the Czech Ministry of
Education (J. ˇR and Z.H.), by Austrian Science Foundation, project No P14229-PHY (M.Z.),
by the BMBF, project 03TRE9B6 (W.T. and M.S), and by the TMR-Network of the European
Union “Perfect Crystal Neutron Optics,” ERB-FMRX-CT96-0057.

∗ ∗ ∗

∗ ∗ ∗

REFERENCES

A424 (1998) 58.

(2001) 69.

4503 (2002) 359.

neering, 4 (1992) 250.

[1] A.C. Kak and M.Slaney, in Principles of Computerized Tomographic Imaging, edited by R.F.

Cotellessa (IEEE Press) 1987.

[2] B. Schillinger, W. Bl¨umlhuber, A. Fent and M. Wegner, Nucl. Instr. and Methods,

[3] B. Schillinger, E. Lehmann and P. Vontobel, Physica B, 276 (2000) 59.
[4] S. Koerner, B. Schillinger, P. Vontobel and H. Rauch, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A, 471

[5] P.J. McMahon, B.E. Allman, K.A. Nugent, D.L. Jacobson, M. Arif and S.A. Werner,

Appl. Phys. Lett., 78 (2001) 1011.

[6] F. Dubus, U. Bonse, T. Biermann, M. Baron, F. Beckmann and M. Zawisky, SPIE Proc.,

[7] W. Treimer, P. Maaß, H. Strothmann and U. Feye-Treimer, Physica B, 17 (1991) 532.
[8] P. Maaß, W. Treimer and U. Feye-Treimer, Impact of Computing in Science and Engi-

[9] W. Treimer and U. Feye-Treimer, Physica B, 241 (1998) 1228.
[10] B.E. Allman, P.J. McMahon, K.A. Nugent, D. Paganin, D.L. Jacobson, M. Arif and

S.A. Werner, Nature, 408 (2000) 158.

[11] M.G. Kendall and A. Stuart, Advanced Theory of Statistics, Vol. 2 (Charles Griﬃn, London)

1961.

[12] A.P. Dempster, N.M. Laird and D.B. Rubin, J. R. Statist. Soc. B, 39 (1977) 1.
[13] Y. Vardi and D. Lee, J. R. Statist. Soc. B, 55 (1993) 1993569.
[14] L.A. Shepp and Y. Vardi, IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., 1 (1982) 113.
[15] Y. Vardi, L.A. Shepp and L. Kaufman, Statist. Assoc., 80 (1985) 8.
[16] B.A. Mair, M. Rao and J.M.M. Anderson, Inverse Problems, 12 (1996) 965.
[17] H. Rauch, J. Summhammer, M. Zawisky and E. Jericha, Phys. Rev. A, 42 (1990) 3726.
[18] N can always be reasonably chosen based on the size M of the measured data. The rule of

[19] A. Momose, Nucl. Instr. and Methods, A352 (1995) 622.
[20] F. Beckmann, U. Bonse, F. Bush, and O. G¨unnewig, J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr., 21 (1997)

thumb is N ≈ M .

539.

[21] G. Badurek, R.J. Buchelt and H. Leeb, Physica B, 276 (2000) 588.
[22] L. Cser, G. Krexner and G. Torok, Europhys. Lett., 54 (2001) 747.

