CALT-HEP-68-2443

Estimation of Goodness-of-Fit in Multidimensional Analysis
Using Distance to Nearest Neighbor ∗

Ilya Narsky†

California Institute of Technology
(Dated: February 2, 2008)
Abstract
A new method for calculation of goodness of multidimensional ﬁts in particle physics experiments
is proposed. This method ﬁnds the smallest and largest clusters of nearest neighbors for observed
data points. The cluster size is used to estimate the goodness-of-ﬁt and the cluster location
provides clues about possible problems with data modeling. The performance of the new method
is compared to that of the likelihood method and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test using toy Monte Carlo
studies. The new method is applied to estimate the goodness-of-ﬁt in a B → Kll analysis at
BABAR.

PACS numbers: 02.50.-r, 02.50.Ng, 02.50.Sk.

3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Work partially supported by Department of Energy under Grant DE-FG03-92-ER40701.
†Electronic address: narsky@hep.caltech.edu

1

1.

INTRODUCTION

Fits are broadly used in analysis of particle physics experiments. If suﬃcient statistics
is accumulated, one usually plots observed data as a histogram and overlays an expected
histogram or modeling function. The goodness-of-ﬁt is then estimated by taking the de-
viation of the observed number of events in each bin from the expected number of events
in the same bin, summing the squares of these deviations to form a χ2 value and hence
compute a signiﬁcance level. This procedure assumes that the bin contents are normally
distributed, which is true only asymptotically in the large statistics limit. In low-statistics
experiments, one typically observes zero or just a few events per bin, and this procedure
does not produce a reliable result. One must then use other methods. Unbinned maximum
likelihood methods, discussed below, have been recently used in such situations in BABAR
and elsewhere. We also discuss Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, another well-known method.

In this note, we concentrate on the most general problem: how to test a distribution
in question against every reasonable alternative hypothesis. In other words, the null and
alternative hypotheses are stated as follows:
H0 : the observed data obey the expected distribution.
H1 : the observed data obey some other unknown but plausible distribution.
The goodness-of-ﬁt, 1 − α, is deﬁned as the conﬁdence level of the null hypothesis, and α
is therefore a Type I error. We remind the reader that the Type II error is traditionally
deﬁned as the probablility of accepting the null hypothesis if the alternative hypothesis is
true.

This deﬁnition of the problem conforms with the standard χ2 test of binned data. In-
deed, the χ2 test computes discrepancy between expected and observed probability density
functions (pdf’s) without imposing constraints on the alternative hypothesis. We do not
discuss examples, where the alternative hypothesis H1 can be stated in a more speciﬁc form,
e.g., testing normality versus uniformity. Our goal is to propose a new generic procedure
applicable to unbinned ﬁts.

It is not possible to design a versatile procedure applicable to all problems. For exam-
ple, we can always choose the alternative distribution to be a set of δ-functions positioned
precisely at the observed experimental points. In this case, the null hypothesis is inferior to
the alternative hypothesis and the null hypothesis is rejected. This simply reﬂects the fact
that the Type II error is undeﬁned for the generic test stated in the previous paragraph. We
would like to keep our procedure as generic as possible. Yet if more information about the
alternative hypothesis is available, it should be possible to design a more powerful test for
this speciﬁc alternative.

We note that the standard χ2 binned test computes an average deviation of observed
data from the expected density. However, in many experiments it is useful to focus on
the maximal deviation instead of the average one. Consider, for example, ﬁtting a one-
dimensional histogram divided into 20 bins in the range [−10, 10] to the sum of a standard
normal pdf N(0, 1) with zero mean and unit variance and a uniform pdf, as shown in Fig. 1.
The normal pdf represents signal (for example, mass of a certain resonance) and the uniform
pdf represents background, with the magnitude of each component ﬁxed to 100 entries. The
χ2 deviation, computed as
bins(Nexpected − Nobserved)2/Nexpected, is 19.34 per 20 degrees of
freedom for each of the three ﬁts, which results in a goodness-of-ﬁt value of 50%. Hence, the
procedure treats all ﬁts as those of equal quality. In reality, of course, the experimenter will
treat each ﬁt in a diﬀerent way. The top ﬁt will be likely considered as “good”. The middle

P

2

ﬁt will likely raise concern about a large background ﬂuctuation in one bin. The bottom ﬁt
will likely make the experimenter suspect that the signal is not well modeled by the normal
standard pdf with an area of 100. In fact, the experimenter is not really concerned about
the χ2 deviation averaged over all bins. The more interesting question is: what are the bins
that give largest χ2 deviations from expected values and how probable are these deviations?
The method proposed in this note is designed to answer both these questions for unbinned
ﬁts.

FIG. 1: Three ﬁts with 50% goodness-
of-ﬁt values computed using the stan-
dard χ2 method for binned data. Top
plot — the χ2 deviations are dis-
tributed uniformly over the bins; mid-
dle plot — the χ2 deviation is entirely
due to one bin at the left edge of the
histogram; bottom plot — the χ2 de-
viation is produced by the two central
bins.

2. MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD VALUE TEST

The Maximum Likelihood Value (MLV) test is laid out in the BABAR Statistics Report [1].

For any quantity x that characterizes ﬁt quality, the goodness-of-ﬁt is given by

1 − α = 1 −

f (x|H0)dx ,

(1)

Zf (x|H0)>f (xobs|H0)

3

where xobs is the value of x observed in the ﬁt to the data, and f (x|H0) is the pdf of quantity
x under the null hypothesis. For the MLV test, the quantity of interest is the likelihood and
so L replaces x in the equation above.

By construction, the MLV test can be only used to discriminate against a speciﬁc class
of alternative hypotheses. Data are ﬁtted to the density f (x|θ) and an estimate of the
parameter θ = θ0 is obtained from the ﬁt. Then the null hypothesis H0 : θ = θ0 is tested
against the alternative hypothesis H1 : θ 6= θ0. Note that the overall validity of the density
f (x|θ) is never questioned. If the data are drawn from a drastically diﬀerent pdf, this test
can produce a meaningless result.

Consider, for instance, ﬁtting a one-dimensional random sample to a standard normal
pdf N(0, 1). In reality, however, the data are drawn from a sum of two narrow normal pdf’s
placed two units apart: N(−1, 0.01) and N(+1, 0.01), as shown in Fig. 2. Distributions of
likelihood values computed under the null hypothesis for events drawn from the standard
normal pdf N(0, 1) and events drawn from the sum of two normal pdf’s are shown in Fig. 2.
Likelihood values computed under the null hypothesis N(0, 1) for the sum of two narrow
normal pdf’s are always consistent with the null hypothesis. The procedure does not have
any discriminative power and the obtained ﬁt always produces a reasonable goodness-of-ﬁt
value, even though the null hypothesis is clearly wrong. In this example an experimenter
can easily ﬁnd the problem by visual comparison of the distributions, but in the real world
of multidimensional distributions such a comparison would be harder to make.

FIG. 2: Densities for a standard normal pdf N (0, 1) (solid line) and a sum of two narrow normal
pdf’s N (−1, 0.01) and N (+1, 0.01) (dashed line) are shown on the left. −2 log L0 distributions
computed under the null hypothesis N (0, 1) for both pdf’s are shown on the right for 10,000 toy
MC experiments with 10 events in each experiment.

Why did the MLV test fail to reject the null hypothesis for the random sample described
in the previous paragraph? Because the alternative hypothesis H1 was not “every other
plausible distribution” but “another normal distribution”. The price for this assumption
was a futile test.
It is true that the procedure would also discriminate against certain
non-normal distributions. But it would work by accident, not by design.

4

Another good example is a test of uniformity. Maximum likelihood methods are useless
here because under uniformity the likelihood value is constant, no matter how points are
distributed.1

3. GENERIC TESTS

3.1. Outline

In the previous section, we established that the likelihood method does not address the
problem stated in the Introduction. A more versatile approach is to test the null hypoth-
esis without making speciﬁc assumptions about its alternative. We refer to such tests as
“generic”.

In Section 3.2, we brieﬂy discuss information about generic tests that can be found in
the statistics literature. Then we proceed with discussion of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test,
a well-known generic approach, in Section 3.4 and propose a new method in Section 3.6.
We emphasize that any generic test can be standardized by transforming the density of
interest to uniform and performing a test of uniformity. The transformation to a uniform
density is described in Section 3.3 and the deﬁnition of uniformity is discussed in Section 3.5.
The transformation to a uniform density is not required for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
but is essential for the proposed method. Subtleties related to the non-uniqueness of the
uniformity transformation are discussed in Section 3.7.

3.2. Statistics Literature

There is a great amount of statistics literature on goodness-of-ﬁt tests. Unfortunately, a

great fraction of this literature is useless to us because of one of the following reasons:

• The discussed problem is too speciﬁc, e.g., testing one speciﬁc type of pdf against

another speciﬁc type of pdf.

• Asympotic approximations, e.g., the central limit theorem, are used.

• Authors concentrate on designing an analytic tool (inevitably based on some approx-

imation) and dismiss MC simulation.

We, on the other hand, would like to have a generic approach for unbinned ﬁts with small
numbers of events. We can rely on MC generators; hence, analyticity of the solution is not
an issue.

A well-known method that complies with these requirements is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test. However, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test lacks sensitivity for a broad class of alternative
hypotheses.

To our knowledge, the distance-to-nearest-neighbor method proposed in Section 3.6 has
not been described anywhere in the literature. As the idea seems obvious, it is quite possible
that we are simply reinventing the wheel. But we hope that this wheel is worth reinventing.

1 Unless there is an experimental point observed outside the range of deﬁnition of the uniform pdf.

5

3.3. Transformation to Uniform Density

Before we proceed with discussion of various methods, we note that the problem can be
standardized by transforming any n-dimensional pdf in question to uniform. This transfor-
mation oﬀers a number of advantages:

• All problems are described by the same formalism.

• The practical task of generating toy MC experiments is easily solved with a uniform

random number generator.

model for the pdf.

• It is easy to implement this transformation numerically in the absence of an analytic

Any n-dimensional random vector (x(1), x(2), ..., x(n)) with a joint pdf f (x(1), x(2), ..., x(n))
can be transformed to a vector (u(1), u(2), ..., u(n)) uniformly distributed on an n-dimensional
unit cube 0 ≤ u(i) ≤ 1; i = 1, 2, ..., n. This transformation is given by

where

R

u(1) =
u(2) =

u(n−1) =
u(n) =

x(1)
−∞ f1(t, x(2), x(3), ..., x(n))dt/f2(x(2), x(3), ..., x(n))
x(2)
−∞ f2(t, x(3), x(4), ..., x(n))dt/f3(x(3), x(4), ..., x(n))
R
...
R
x(n−1)
−∞ fn−1(t, x(n))dt/fn(x(n))
x(n)
−∞ fn(t)dt
R

f1(x(1), x(2), ..., x(n)) = f (x(1), x(2), ..., x(n))
f2(x(2), x(3), ..., x(n)) =
f3(x(3), x(4), ..., x(n)) =

+∞

+∞

−∞ f1(x(1), x(2), ..., x(n))dx(1)
−∞ f2(x(2), x(3), ..., x(n))dx(2)
R
...
R
−∞ fn−1(x(n−1), x(n))dx(n−1)
R

+∞

fn(x(n))

=











This transformation is one-to-one for a strictly positive pdf f (~x).
The cumulative density function (cdf) for an n-dimensional uniform distribution is simply

F (~u) =

u(i) .

n

i=1
Y

3.4. Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test

A generic method broadly known to physicists is the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The
Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic for a random sample ~x1, ~x2, ..., ~xN of n-dimensional vectors
~x = (x(1), x(2), ..., x(n)) with a cdf F (~x) is given by [2, 3]

KN (F ) = sup~x∈Vn|F (~x) − Fobs(~x)| ,

where Vn is an n-dimensional domain for the cdf F (~x), and Fobs(~x) is the experimentally
observed cdf. The null hypothesis is accepted if KN (F0) is small and rejected if KN (F0) is
large, where F0 is a cdf for the null hypothesis.

6

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Because the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test compares cumulative densities, it lacks sensitivity
to ﬂuctuations within small clusters. Consider, for example, two sets of points on a unit
interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1:
Set 1: x1 = 1/4, x2 = 1/2, x3 = 3/4, x4 = 1
Set 2: x1 = x2 = 1/4, x3 = x4 = 3/4
Which one of these sets looks more uniform? The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test cannot diﬀer-
entiate between these two because the statistic (5) is 1/4 under uniformity in both cases.

3.5. What Is “Uniform”?

In fact, the question we asked in the previous section is not so simple. Can we indeed
make a statement about which set is more likely to be drawn from a uniform distribution?
The answer is: it depends.

Suppose we search for a heavily-suppressed decay using BABAR data. We plot the mass
distribution and we are convinced that background in our analysis is ﬂat. We would like
to know if there is an indication of any mass peaks in the plotted data. The data points
in Set 1 from the previous section are equally spaced while the data points from Set 2 are
grouped together in two clusters. Hence, Set 1 looks more uniform than Set 2.

Consider now another example. We have a detector that registers ionizing particles.
We would like to test the randomness of the particle ﬂux, that is, the exponentiality of
the distribution of time intervals between consecutive events. However, after an event is
registered, the detector becomes inactive for a certain period of time. If the expected time
interval between two consecutive events is much less than the detector’s deadtime, the device
will trigger at ﬁxed time intervals. This would indicate that the process is not exponential
but periodic. On these grounds, we would conclude that Set 1 looks less uniform than Set 2.
We obtained two opposite answers to the same question. Of course, the question was
not the same; in eﬀect, these were two diﬀerent questions. In the ﬁrst example, the vaguely
stated alternative hypothesis was “presence of peaks in the data”. In the second example,
it was “equidistant points on a ﬁnite interval”. We cannot design a test that gives the right
answer for every possible problem. Nevertheless, it would be good to have a procedure which
is more sensitive to clustering of data than the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is.

3.6. Distance-to-Nearest-Neighbor Test of Uniformity

i

i

, u(2)
i

The idea of using the distance to nearest neighbor for a test of uniformity is not new [4,
, ..., u(n)
5, 6]. For each data point, ~ui = (u(1)
), in an n-dimensional unit cube we ﬁnd
the nearest neighbor, ~uj, and compute the distance, dij = |~ui − ~uj|. Uniformity is tested
by comparing observed values of dij with those expected for a uniform distribution. In a
more general approach, one can use an average distance d(m)
to m > 1 nearest neighbors.
In Refs. [4, 5, 6], discussion revolves around using moments of distributions of distances
d(m)
as test statistics. We propose a test of uniformity based on minimal and maximal
i
values of the distance d(m)
It is intuitively clear that such test
should be more sensitive to maximal deviations of observed data from the tested pdf than
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is.

to m nearest neighbors.

i

i

A similar approach would be to use maximal and minimal volumes of Voronoi regions.
A Voronoi region for a given observed point ~ui is deﬁned as a set of points inside the n-

7

dimensional unit cube which are closer to ~ui than to any other observed point ~uj, j 6= i.
Voronoi regions have been used by the Sleuth algorithm [7] to search for new physics at the
D0 experiment.
In essence, Sleuth computes the probability of observing one data point
in each Voronoi region based on the expectation value for background and marks Voronoi
cells with low probabilities as candidates for a new physics signal. This method addresses
the same question: how consistent are observed data with a null hypothesis, where the null
hypothesis is deﬁned as “background events only”. To a zeroth order, the volume of a Voronoi
region around m + 1 points is proportional to the average size d(m)
of the cluster. Therefore,
both methods for goodness-of-ﬁt estimation are expected to produce similar results. This is
conﬁrmed by MC tests described in Section 4. However, using distance to nearest neighbor
is computationally simpler because the construction of Voronoi regions can be avoided.

i

3.7.

Invariance of Test Statistic under Uniformity Transformation

The transformation to uniformity is not unique, even if we limit the problem to continuous
mappings. A transformation ~x → ~u is continuous if two inﬁnitely close points are mapped
onto two inﬁnitely close points, i.e., lim|~xi−~xj|→0 |~ui − ~uj| = 0. Consider, for example, a
uniform pdf on a unit circle f (r, φ) = 1/π; 0 ≤ r ≤ 1, 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π. The joint pdf of random
variables

r′ = r
φ′ = φ + αr; 0 < |α| < ∞

(6)

is also uniform on the unit circle. However, this transformation does not conserve distance
between two points. Another example is relabeling of variables x(i) in transformation (2) for
a non-factorizable pdf in n > 1 dimensions.

It is clear that all possible transformations to uniformity do not necessarily produce iden-
tical values either for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic or the distance to nearest neighbor.
Inevitably, the value of goodness-of-ﬁt for a speciﬁc set of experimental data depends on the
choice of transformation. We do not consider this circumstance as a major obstacle. In many
problems, it is possible to ﬁnd a reasonable transformation to uniformity that preserves the
natural metric of the experiment.

In many particle physics experiments, observation variables are independent or weakly
correlated. The pdf of interest is therefore factorizable or close to such. In this case, trans-
formation (2) is reduced to u(i) = Fi(x(i)), i = 1, 2, ..., n, where Fi is a marginal cdf for ith
component. The transformation above is the most obvious and natural choice. In other ex-
periments, the pdf can be transformed to a factorizable one. For example, a two-dimensional
normal pdf can be rotated to align the axes of the normal elliptic contour with the coordinate
axes.

If the pdf is severely non-factorizable, one can split n observation variables into k mutually
independent (or weakly correlated) groups with ni, i = 1, 2, ..., k, variables in each group,
n = n1 + n2 + ... + nk. Within each group, variables are strongly correlated and the marginal
ni-dimensional pdf cannot be factorized. To obtain a test statistic invariant under relabeling
of observation variables x(i) in transformation (2), one would have to try all ni! permutations
of variables within each group. For example, the minimal distance to nearest neighbor would
be chosen as the minimum of all distances to nearest neighbor in these ni! permutations.
This method was proposed [3] for a multidimensional Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. We simply
restate it here in reference to the distance-to-nearest-neighbor approach.

8

4. TESTS

We consider four two-dimensional pdf’s f (x, y):

and zero correlation between x and y

• narrow normal pdf N(0, 0, 0.25, 0.25, 0)

• normal pdf N(µX = 0, µY = 0, σ2

X = 1, σ2

Y = 1, ρ = 0) with zero means, unit variances

• sum of two narrow normal pdf’s N(−1.3, 0, 0.01, 0.01, 0) and N(+1.3, 0, 0.01, 0.01, 0)

• uniform pdf deﬁned on a square −5 ≤ x ≤ 5; −5 ≤ y ≤ 5

For each density, we run 10,000 toy MC experiments with 10 events per experiment. We
use the standard normal pdf N(0, 0, 1, 1, 0) as the null hypothesis (except one example, as
discussed below) and plot in Fig. 3 likelihood values −2 log L0 computed under the null
hypothesis for all pdf’s. Assuming the null hypothesis, we apply uniformity transformation
to each MC experiment and plot values of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic for all pdf’s in
Fig. 4. We also plot two-dimensional distributions of maximal versus minimal distance to
nearest neighbor in Fig. 5. We use these MC distributions to estimate Type II errors for hy-
pothesis tests at a given conﬁdence level against each alternative to the null hypothesis. The
conﬁdence levels and errors are shown in Table 1. We repeat this exercise treating the uni-
form pdf as the null hypothesis and testing it against the standard normal pdf N(0, 0, 1, 1, 0).
This result is also shown in Table 1 and Fig. 6.

With the deﬁnitions of the Type II error and conﬁdence level shown in the Introduction,

the smaller is the Type II error for a ﬁxed conﬁdence level, the more powerful is the test.

We compared results obtained by the distance-to-nearest-neighbor method to those ob-

tained through Voronoi regions and found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence.

The maximum likelihood method is very eﬃcient for discriminating one normal pdf against
another and against a uniform pdf which can be considered as a limiting case of a normal
distribution with large variance. As expected, it fails to discriminate against two narrow
normal pdf’s because the implicit assumption of overall normality for the alternative hypoth-
esis does not hold in this case. The distance-to-nearest-neighbor method performs better
than the Kolmogorov-Smirnov approach for every test. This conﬁrms our intuitive assump-
tion about enhanced sensitivity of the distance-to-nearest-neighbor method to deviations of
data from an expected pdf. We note that the proposed distance-to-nearest-neighbor method
is versatile as it provides some level of discrimination against every alternative hypothesis,
although by no means should it be expected to provide the best discrimination against every
alternative hypothesis.

5. EXAMPLE: EVIDENCE FOR B → K (∗)l+l− AT BABAR

We apply the proposed distance-to-nearest-neighbor method to results of a B → K (∗)l+l−
study [8] at BABAR. In this study, eight B → K (∗)l+l− decays were investigated. Signal
rate and upper limit estimates were obtained for these eight decays. We concentrate on
two modes with measured signal yields: N(B+ → K +e+e−) = 14.4+5.0
−4.2 and N(B+ →
K +µ+µ−) = 0.5+2.3
−1.3 (statistical errors only). The former can be described as a “signiﬁcant
measurement” while the latter can be used to set an upper limit.

9

−2 log L0 under the null
FIG. 3:
hypothesis N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) for the four
pdf’s discussed in the text. A histogram
for the uniform pdf is not shown be-
cause it is far to the right.

TABLE I: Conﬁdence levels (CL) and Type II errors for the maximum likelihood value (MLV),
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS), and distance-to-nearest-neighbor (DTNN) tests. DTNN Type II errors
can be reduced for the N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0)-vs-N (0, 0, 0.25, 0.25, 0) test by imposing a two-dimensional
linear cut on the distributions shown in Fig. 5. Such a cut was not used here because these values
are for illustration only.

Test

CL

N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) vs uniform

N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) vs N (0, 0, 0.25, 0.25, 0)

95% 0.0%
50% 0.0%
95% 0.8%
50% 0.0%
N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) vs two narrow normal pdf’s 95% 100%
50% 97.1%
95% N/A
50%

uniform vs N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0)

Comment

Type II error
MLV test DTNN test KS test
27.2%
0.5%
55.9%
6.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.6%
0.0%

66.2% cutting on minimal
20.4% distance for DTNN
93.7% cutting on maximal
17.1% distance for DTNN
100% cutting on maximal
18.4% distance for DTNN
75.6% cutting on maximal
0.1% distance for DTNN

10

The Kolmogorov-Smirnov
FIG. 4:
statistic under
the null hypothesis
N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) for the four pdf’s dis-
cussed in the text.

Signal yields in this analysis are obtained using unbinned maximum likelihood ﬁts to
two-dimensional distributions of energy versus mass shown in Fig. 7. The two-dimensional
background is modeled by the pdf

f (∆E, mES) = A · exp(s∆E) · mES

1 −

· exp

−ξ

1 −

,

(7)

m2
ES
E2
b

s

m2
ES
E2

b (cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

where ∆E = EKll − Eb is the diﬀerence between the energy of the B candidate and the
beam energy, Eb = 5.29 GeV/c2; mES is the beam-constrained mass of the B candidate; s
and ξ are shape parameters; and A is a factor needed for proper normalization of the pdf.
The signal shape is modeled by a normal-like function whose speciﬁc analytic expression is
not important for this exercise.

We ask the following question: How consistent are the observed data with the background
pdf? In other words, we compute goodness-of-ﬁt values assuming that all events come from
the background. The background pdf (7) is smooth while a hypothetical signal is expected
to manifest itself through accumulation of events in a small region of the two-dimensional
plot. In this case, the alternative hypothesis can be reasonably stated as “presence of peaks
in the data”. Presence of peaks in the data would result in a smaller minimal distance d(m)
to m nearest neighbors than the one expected from the smooth background pdf.

i

To estimate the goodness-of-ﬁt, we transform the background pdf (7) to uniform using
Eq. (2), generate 10,000 MC experiments and determine the goodness-of-ﬁt as a fraction of
these MC experiments where the minimal distance d(1)
to nearest neighbor is less than the
one observed in the data. We conclude that the B+ → K +e+e− and B+ → K +µ+µ− data

i

11

FIG. 5: Maximal vs minimal distance
to nearest neighbor computed under
the null hypothesis N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) for
the four pdf’s discussed in the text. The
histogram for the uniform pdf shows a
very narrow peak at the left edge of the
plot.

are consistent with the ﬁt at the 51% and 80% level, respectively. At this point, there is no
indication of any peaks in the data.

Now we repeat the exercise described in the previous paragraph for d(m)

, m > 1.
Goodness-of-ﬁt values are plotted versus m for both Kll modes in Fig. 8. For a cluster
of size 12, we estimate that the B+ → K +e+e− data are consistent with the ﬁt only at the
0.13% level. At the same time, the goodness-of-ﬁt for the B+ → K +µ+µ− data does not
depend dramatically on the cluster size. The lowest goodness-of-ﬁt value of 6.8% for the
B+ → K +µ+µ− data corresponds to the test with clusters of size 8.

i

We conclude that the B+ → K +e+e− data are inconsistent with the background density.
Not surprisingly, the data cluster that gives the maximal deviation from the background pdf
consists mostly of points located inside the signal region.

6. SUMMARY

We have proposed a new method for estimation of goodness-of-ﬁt in multidimensional
analysis using a distance-to-nearest-neighbor test of uniformity. This procedure is recom-
mended as a more versatile tool than the maximum likelihood methods for a vague generic
alternative hypothesis. However, if the alternative hypothesis is stated in more speciﬁc
terms, other methods may be superior.

12

FIG. 6: Maximal vs minimal distance
to nearest neighbor computed under
the uniform null hypothesis for the uni-
form pdf deﬁned on a square −5 ≤ x ≤
5; −5 ≤ y ≤ 5 and N (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) .

FIG. 7: Diﬀerence ∆E (GeV) between the energy of the reconstructed B candidate and the beam
energy versus beam-constrained mass mES (GeV/c2) of the reconstructed B candidate. Data for
the B+ → K +e+e− decay are shown on the left, and data for the B+ → K +µ+µ− decay are shown
on the right. Signal regions are shown with boxes. Data clusters that give maximal deviations
from the expected pdf’s are shown with open circles.

13

FIG. 8: Goodness-of-ﬁt (%) versus number of nearest neighbors (cluster size minus one) included
in the goodness-of-ﬁt calculation for the B+ → K +e+e− data (left) and B+ → K +µ+µ− data
(right).

Acknowledgments

Thanks to Frank Porter for reviewing this note. Thanks to Art Snyder and Mike Sokoloﬀ

for comments. Thanks to Anders Ryd for providing details of the B → Kll analysis.

14

Barlow
6.2

[1] R.

et

al.,

Recommended

Statistical

Procedures

Particle
Sec.
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/BFROOT/www/Physics/Analysis/Statistics/ (2002).
[2] R. Saunders and P. Laud, “The multidimensional Kolmogorov goodness-of-ﬁt test”, Biometrika

Identiﬁcation:

“Likelihoods

in

for

BaBar,
Goodness-of-ﬁt”

67, 237 (1980).

[3] A. Justel, D. Pena and R. Zamar, “A multivariate Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of goodness of

ﬁt”, Statistics and Probability Letters 35, 251 (1997).

[4] P.J. Clark and F.C. Evans, “Distance to Nearest Neighbor as a Measure of Spatial Relationships
in Populations”, Ecology 35-4, 445 (1954); “Generalization of a Nearest Neighbor Measure of
Dispersion for Use in K Dimensions”, Ecology 60-2, 316 (1979).

[5] B.D. Ripley, “Modelling Spatial Patterns”, J. of the Royal Stat. Soc. B 39-2, 172 (1977).
[6] J. Cuzick and R. Edwards, “Spatial Clustering in Inhomogeneous Populations”, J. of the Royal

Stat. Soc. B 52-1, 73 (1990).

[7] D0 Collaboration, B. Abbott et al., “Search for New Physics in eµX Data at D0 Using Sleuth:
A Quasi-Model-Independent Search Strategy for New Physics”, hep-ex/0006011 v2 (2000).
[8] BABAR Collaboration, B. Aubert et al., “Evidence for the Flavor Changing Neutral Current De-
cays B → Kl+l− and B → K ∗l+l−”, BABAR-CONF-02/023, SLAC-PUB-9323, hep-ex/0207082
(2002).

15

