3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AS-TEXONO/03-05
October 25, 2012

Near Threshold Pulse Shape Discrimination
Techniques in Scintillating CsI(Tl) Crystals

S.C. Wua,b, Q. Yuec,d, W.P. Laia,e, H.B. Lia,b, J. Lic,d, Y. Liuc,
M.Z. Wangb, H.T. Wonga,∗, B. Xinf , Z.Y. Zhouf

aInstitute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
bDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
cInstitute of High Energy Physics, Beijing 100039, China.
dDepartment of Engineering Physics, Tsing Hua University, Beijing 100084, China
eDepartment of Management Information Systems, Chung Kuo Institute of Technology,

Hsin-Chu 303, Taiwan.

f Department of Nuclear Physics, Institute of Atomic Energy, Beijing 102413, China

Abstract

There are recent interests with CsI(Tl) scintillating crystals for Dark Matter
experiments. One of the major experimental challenges is to diﬀerentiate nuclear
recoil signatures from the background β/γ-events due to ambient radioactivity on
the basis of their diﬀerent pulse shapes in the domain where the light output is
close to the detection threshold. Using data derived from measurements with low
energy γ’s and nuclear recoils due to neutron elastic scatterings, several methods of
pulse shape discrimination are studied, and their relative merits are compared. Full
digitization of the pulse shapes is crucial to achieve good discrimination. Advanced
software techniques with mean time, neural network and likelihood ratios give rise
to satisfactory performance, and are superior to the conventional Double Charge
method commonly applied at higher energies. Pulse shape discrimination becomes
eﬀective at a light yield of at least 10 photo-electrons. This corresponds to a detec-
tion threshold of 2−3 keV electron-equivalence energy, or 15−20 keV recoil kinetic
energy, in realistic experiments.

PACS Codes: 29.40.Mc, 07.05.Kf, 84.35.+i.
Keywords: Scintillation detectors, Data analysis, Neural Networks.

∗Corresponding author: Email: htwong@phys.sinica.edu.tw; Tel:+886-2-2789-6789; FAX:+886-2-2788-

9828.

1

1 Introduction

The detection of Dark Matter and the studies of their properties [1] are of fundamental
importance in particle physics and cosmology. The Weakly Interacting Massive Particles
(WIMPs) are good candidates for “Cold Dark Matter”, and their experimental searches
have gathered a lot of interests in recent years. The most promising avenue is to detect
the nuclear recoil signatures due to elastic scatterings of WIMPs on the target isotopes.
The typical energy depositions are only of the order of 10 keV, imposing big experimental
challenges in terms of the detection of weak signals as well as background control at low
energy close to detection threshold. A wide spectrum of experimental techniques is being
pursued [1]. There is still much room for new detector concept to push the sensitivities
further. It would be of great interest if the sensitivities of WIMP searches can probe the
level predicted by the various Super-Symmetry models.

There are potential merits of using CsI(Tl) scintillating crystals [2] for WIMP search
and other low-energy low-background experiments [3, 4]. An experiment with 200 kg of
CsI(Tl) crystal scintillators to study low energy neutrino interactions at the Kuo-Sheng
power reactor is being pursued [4, 5], while the adaptation of the crystal for Dark Matter
searches are the focus of several on-going projects [6, 7, 8, 9].

The high-A content of the CsI enhances the sensitivities for the spin-independent
interactions (which depends on the neutron number squared) between the WIMPs and the
target, relative to most other candidate target isotopes. The high-Z composition allows a
compact design and provides large suppression of background due to ambient radioactivity
if a three dimensional ﬁducial volume deﬁnition can be realized. Both 133Cs and 127I are
100% in their respective isotopic abundance. Being close in their mass numbers, the
response to nuclear recoil from the interactions with WIMPs would be similar, allowing
simpler interpretations of the experimental signatures.

As a detector, the crystal has large light yield, low energy threshold and with pulse
shape discrimination (PSD) characteristics for diﬀerentiating β/γ background from the
nuclear recoil events [2, 5]. Scintillating NaI(Tl) crystals with the order of 100 kg target
mass have been deployed for Dark Matter experiments [10], but it has been shown that
CsI(Tl) provides superior PSD capabilities to NaI(Tl) [6]. Unlike NaI(Tl), CsI(Tl) is only
slightly hygroscopic such that it can be machined easily and does not require hermetic
seal (that is, passive materials) in a large detector system. In addition, large (40 tons)
electromagnetic calorimeter systems [11] have been constructed and made operational in
high energy physics experiments, making this technology aﬀordable and realistic to scale
up. Considering all the associated costs, the price of CsI(Tl) is in fact less than that for
NaI(Tl). In order to produce positive and deﬁnite evidence of the WIMPs, an accurate

2

measurement of the annual modulation (where the maximal eﬀects are only 7%) would
be necessary such that the availability of large target mass is a very desirable feature.

One of the key issues to realize a Dark Matter search experiment with CsI(Tl) crystal
scintillator is the studies of the experimental signatures of nuclear recoils due to WIMP-
nuclei elastic scatterings. Nuclear recoils produce high charge density (dE/dx) such that
the scintillating light yield is “quenched” and the timing proﬁle of pulse shape is diﬀerent
relative to the same energy deposition by minimum ionizing particles [12]. These WIMP-
induced signatures are the same as the nuclear recoil events produced by elastic scattering
of neutrons on nuclei, and hence can be studied in the laboratory.

This article reports on the studies of pulse shape discrimination to diﬀerentiate nuclear
recoil events from β/γ background in CsI(Tl) crystal scintillator in the light yield regime
close to the detection threshold.

2 Pulse Shape Discrimination

2.1 Basics

The light emission proﬁles of scintillating CsI(Tl) crystals exhibit diﬀerent shape for γ-rays
and electrons (that is, minimum ionizing particles), as compared to that for α-particles and
nuclear recoils, as depicted in the Flash Analog Digital Convertor (FADC) measurements
in Figure 1. Heavily ionizing events due to α-particles and nuclear recoils have faster
decays than those from e/γ’s − opposite to the response in liquid scintillator [12]. This
characteristic property makes particle identiﬁcation possible with this scintillator [13].

Fitted the pulse shape(A) as a function of time(t) to an analytical form of

A = Constant ∗ [ 1 − exp(−

) ] ∗ [

exp(−

) +

exp(−

) ]

(1)

t
τ0

1
τ1

t
τ1

r
τ2

t
τ2

for the light proﬁles of γ/α events, one obtains the ﬁtted-values of rise time(τ0) and
fall times(τ1, τ2) as well as the ratio between the slow and fast decay components(r) as
tabulated in Table 1. For comparison, those for undoped CsI crystal are also shown.
The values of τ0 in CsI(Tl) are dominated by the electronics shaping rise time of 250 ns
for > µs pulses [14]. The intrinsic rise times of the CsI(Tl) scintillator are expected to
∼125 ns and ∼20 ns for γ- and α-events, respectively [2].

The diﬀerence in the decay time constants between the γ’s and the nuclear recoils
forms the basis of PSD. Matured PSD techniques have been devised at high energies
where the photo-electrons are abundant. The experimental challenge for adapting the

3

PSD idea to Dark Matter experiments is that one must now work in the regime where the
number of photo-electrons (Npe) is small. In the following sub-sections, we investigate and
compare the performance in PSD at this low light output domain with diﬀerent software
techniques.

2.2 Measurements and Data Samples

A CsI(Tl) crystal of dimensions 5 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm was used to provide data for these
investigations. The light emissions were read out by a 29 mm diameter photo-multiplier
tube (PMT)† with standard bi-alkali photo-cathode. The conversion factor between en-
ergy deposition and light output is 4 photo-electron per keV of electron-equivalence en-
ergy. This was obtained by calibration measurements with an LED pulser operated at
the Npe ∼ 1 intensity. The events were digitized by a 20 MHz (that is, 50 ns for one
time-bin) FADC [14] with 8-bit resolution, such that the pulse shape can be denoted by
an amplitude time-sequence Ai.

Data were taken with standard radioactive γ (55Fe: 5.9 keV; 109Cd: 22.1 keV ; 137Cs:
662 keV) and α (241Am: 5.49 MeV) sources. Nuclear recoil data, on the other hand, were
taken from the neutron facility at the 13 MV Tandem accelerator at the China Institute
of Atomic Energy at Beijing. The data consisted of Time-of-Flight (ToF) measurements
which helped to distinguish nuclear recoil from the other background events. The results
of the quenching factor measurements were already published [9].

The nuclear recoil pulses recorded in a neutron beam environment were contaminated
by an intense accidental γ-background. The average pulse shapes for both nuclear recoil
and γ-background (as identiﬁed by the ToF cut) events derived from the neutron beam
measurements are depicted in Figure 2. Upon taking averages from a large sample and
subtracting an oﬀset, such data are suﬃcient to provide a good quenching factor mea-
surement as well as the average “background-free” nuclear recoil pulse shape displayed in
Figure 1. The energy dependence of the nuclear recoil proﬁle is small compared to the
diﬀerences in the pulse shapes between the recoil and γ-events shown in Figure 1.

However, at the event-by-event level, the time-proﬁle for photo-electron emissions
is complicated by an uncontrolled and sizable background contribution. Dark Matter
searches, on the other hand, are low-count-rate experiments such that nuclear recoils due
to WIMP interactions will not be contaminated by accidentals. Therefore the neutron
beam data do not provide a realistic sample for the studies of detector response in WIMP
searches at the event-by-event level.

†CR110, Hamamatsu Photonics, China

4

As remedies, the single-event nuclear recoil pulse shape was generated by simulations,
using as input the measured pulse proﬁles of Figure 1 and the parametrization of Table 1.
The LED pulser measurements provided the single photo-electron response of the PMT
and readout system. The simulated events were convolutions of several of these single
photo-electron pulses whose timing is distributed according to the average recoil pulse
shape. A “self-trigger” criterion was imposed to mimic the realistic situation − that is,
the time-zero of the events was deﬁned by the ﬁrst instants where the pulse was above
a speciﬁed threshold. As illustrations, typical events at Npe ∼ 20 from the measured γ
and simulated nuclear recoil data are displayed in Figure 3a and 3b, respectively. Both
categories of events are similar by visual inspection, demonstrating that (a) the simulation
algorithms are valid, and (b) advanced pattern recognition techniques would be necessary
to achieve event identiﬁcation.

Using the same algorithm but a diﬀerent reference proﬁle, simulated γ-events were
also generated. The data samples with simulated nuclear recoil and γ events, denoted by
Dnr and Dγ, respectively, were adopted in the PSD studies discussed below. The choice
of simulated events instead of measurements with low energy sources (55Fe, 109Cd) for
the γ samples allows a continuous scan of the input light yield in units of Npe. Residual
systematic eﬀects are also minimized and canceled out when comparisons are made among
simulated samples. Applying the various PSD methods to the measured γ data would
produce consistent results.

2.3 Classical Pulse Shape Discrimination Method

2.3.1 Double Charge Method

A well-established way to achieve PSD at high light yield is the “double charge method” [15].
This involves the comparison of the “total charge” (Qt) and the “partial charge” (Qp),
which are the total and partial integration of the pulse, respectively. This is the standard
approach with Analog Digital Convertor (ADC) based data acquisition systems where the
complete pulse shape information is not available. Typically, the partial charge measure-
ment is done by delaying the PMT pulses via cabling and both the prompt and delayed
signals are read out by the ABC sampled with the same gate.

Displayed in Figure 4 is the comparison of γ and α events at the MeV energy range
from data with ambient radioactivity and 241Am α-source, respectively. The ranges were
chosen such that Qt and Qp involve integration over 4 µs after trigger and after a delay
of 0.5 µs, respectively. A γ/α separation of >99% eﬃciency down to about 200 keV
electron-equivalence light output can be achieved. It has been shown that PSD can be

5

achieved even in high energy events where the FADC measurements are saturated [16].
However, as indicated in Figure 4, one would come into diﬃculties to perform PSD with
this simple algorithm for events at light yield below 100 keV electron-equivalence energy.

2.4 Pulse Shape Discrimination Methods at Full Digitization

With the advent and popular usage of FADCs, complete pulse shape digitization becomes
realistic. Three diﬀerent pattern recognition techniques were investigated, all of which
rely on the full digitization of the PMT signals.

2.4.1 Mean Time Method

The measurement of the average time for individual events by the mean time (MT) method
has been used for PSD studies [6]. The mean time is deﬁned as

hti =

(Ai ti)

P
i

Ai

P
i

,

where Ai is the FADC-amplitude at time-bin ti.

The typical hti distributions at Npe ∼ 20 for Dnr and Dγ are displayed in Figure 5a,
It can be seen that

at an integration of 2.5 µs after the time-zero set by the trigger.
satisfactory separation can be achieved under such conditions.

2.4.2 Neural Network Methods

The neural network (NN) methods [17] are now frequently adopted for analysis in high
energy physics experiments. It has been applied to event-by-event pulse shape analysis
for background identiﬁcation in double beta decay searches [18]. The pedestal-subtracted
FADC data within 2.5 µs after trigger corresponds to the input nodes of the neural
network. That is, the network has Ni=50 input nodes denoted by X(xi) with the integrated
sum normalized to unity:

X
i=1
Negative values were reset to zero. In addition, there were Nh=25 hidden nodes.

Ni

xi = 1 .

Adopting the Neural Network JETNET 3.0 package [17], a function F(X) is deﬁned

such that

F(X) = G(

uj G(

wjk xk + θj) + φ0)

Nh

X
j=1

Ni

X
k=1

6

(2)

(3)

(4)

where (uj, wjk) and (θj, φ0) are the “weight” and “oﬀset” coeﬃcients, respectively, to
be derived from the training samples, and the function G(y) is the non-linear neuron
activation function

G(y) =

[ 1 + tanh(y) ] =

1
2

1
1 + e−2y

,

which is the functional form characterizing a 3-layer neural network consisting of the
input, hidden and output layers.

A total of Nt=4000 events from both the Dnr and Dγ data sets are used as train-
ing samples, corresponding to T(X)=1 and 0, respectively. The optimal coeﬃcients are
obtained by minimizing the error function

E =

[ F(X) − T(X) ]2

.

Nt

X
i=1

Once the coeﬃcients are derived, the procedures are applied to independent data set
from Dnr and Dγ. The typical F(X) distributions at Npe ∼ 20 are displayed in Figure 5b,
showing good separation among them.

2.4.3 Likelihood Ratio Methods

Motivated by the commonly-used of likelihood ratio test [1, 19] for the goodness-of-ﬁt, a
likelihood ratio (LR) method was devised to perform the tasks of pulse shape analysis.
Similar methods are successfully applied in high energy physics data analysis in comparing
likelihoods and assigning probabilities among the diﬀerent hypotheses for events where
many output parameters are measured. The reference proﬁles for neutrons and γ’s from
Figure 1 are required as the input. This is diﬀerent from the previous two techniques
where prior knowledge of the reference proﬁles is not necessary.

The areas of the reference pulses are normalized to unity, and the proﬁles are denoted
by arrays R(ri) and Γ(γi) for the nuclear recoil and γ reference shapes, respectively. Two
likelihood functions, Lr and Lγ, are deﬁned for each event:

Lr =

;

Lγ =

Ni

Y
i=1

rxi
i

Ni

Y
i=1

γxi
i

,

where X(xi) with dimension Ni = 50 are the measured pulse shape information for the
events to be analyzed, as deﬁned in Section 2.4.2. The likelihood functions quantify how
probable the measured pulse shapes do originate from the the reference proﬁles. The
likelihood ratio LR deﬁned by:

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

LR =

Lr
Lr + Lγ

,

7

will test which hypothesis is more likely such that LR will be larger and less than 0.5 for
nuclear recoil and γ events, respectively.

The algorithm is applied to the Dnr and Dγ data set. The typical LR distributions
at Npe ∼ 20 are depicted in Figure 5c. The separation between the two data samples is
satisfactory.

2.5 Comparisons

To compare the performance of the three methods on Dγ and Dnr, two ﬁgures of merits
are deﬁned: (a) ǫ90: the survival eﬃciencies of Dnr at selections which ensure that 90% of
the Dγ events are suppressed; and (b) l90: the probabilities where the Dγ events would be
mis-identiﬁed as recoil signals at cuts where 90% of Dnr would survive. Both ǫ90 and l90
are energy dependent, and would approach 1 and 0, respectively, at the high light yield
(large Npe) limits.

The variations of ǫ90 and l90 as a function of Npe for the three diﬀerent methods (MT,
NN, LR) are depicted in Figures 6a and 6b, respectively. The photo-electron number
In this way, the results
Npe was adopted as the unit to characterize the light yield.
can be directly applicable to other conﬁgurations using CsI(Tl) as the detector medium.
Dotted lines in Figures 6a and 6b corresponds to the survival probabilities of Dγ and
Dnr, respectively. The results indicate that all the three methods: (a) can achieve PSD
with satisfactory eﬃciencies (>40% γ-background rejection) at Npe > 10; (b) can identify
>90% of the Dγ background while keeping the eﬃciencies for Dnr to be >90% at Npe > 60;
and (c) give similar performance among themselves, although the spread of the data
points as functions of Npe suggests that the LR method may subject to larger systematic
uncertainties, or alternatively, the LR method is more sensitive to the tunings in the
software parameters.

Tests have been performed on simulated events with diﬀerent single photo-electron
It is found that the performance parameters shown in Figures 6a
response functions.
and 6b remain unchanged. This shows that the results are robust and insensitive to the
details of the simulation algorithms so long as the reference proﬁles in Figure 1 are used
for the photo-electron timing distributions. Alternatively, this indicates that the PSD
methods are also valid in measurements of CsI(Tl) crystals with diﬀerent PMT response
and electronics settings like the shaping times.

8

3 Summary and Conclusions

This article reports on the studies on the applications of various software techniques to
achieve pulse shape discrimination near detector threshold for CsI(Tl) crystal scintillator.
The performance of the three methods based on complete pulse shape information (mean
time, neural network and likelihood ratio) is superior to the matured and conventional
double charge method well-demonstrated when photo-electrons are abundant. Full digi-
tization is crucial for achieving PSD at the marginal statistics domain. There is no big
diﬀerence in the performance among the three PSD methods. The algorithms are robust
and insensitive to the measurement parameters like PMT response or electronic shaping
times.

The results from this study are relevant to the potential capabilities and practical
design of Dark Matter experiments based on the CsI(Tl) crystal. Satisfactory separation
between γ and nuclear recoil events can be achieved when the photo-electron statistics is
larger than 10, which corresponds to an electron-equivalence energy threshold of 2−3 keV,
or 15−20 keV recoil kinetic energy, in the adopted detector conﬁguration of 0.56 kg target
mass. In realistic Dark Matter experiments, the modular mass for the CsI(Tl) target will
have to be bigger, such as at the range of several kg. To maintain or even improve
on such threshold, the light transmission within the crystal and from the crystal to the
PMT photo-cathode will have to be optimized. Larger PMT readout surfaces as well as
green-extended photo-cathodes to match the spectral emissions of CsI(Tl) can be used.

Although the studies focus on data with CsI(Tl) crystal scintillators for Dark Matter
searches, the techniques can be readily applied to other detector systems for other ex-
periments where the pulse shapes of individual events can provide information of their
identiﬁcation. The conclusions on the relative merits among the diﬀerent PSD methods
are expected to be applicable to other pulse shape analysis problems where the statistics
are marginal.

Besides diﬀerentiating β/γ-background from nuclear recoil events, these studies may
help to lower the detection threshold by suppressing electronic noise and microphonism
where the pulse shapes are in general diﬀerent from those of the signals. Experiments
which need both low threshold and background may potentially beneﬁt from these tech-
niques. Alongside with Dark Matter experiments, such requirements are critical in the
search of neutrino magnetic moments [4] and in the measurement of the coherent scatter-
ings of the neutrinos on the nuclei [20].

The authors would like to thank Drs. S.K. Kim and Y.D. Kim for fruitful discussions
and helpful comments, and are grateful to the technical staﬀ from CIAE and IHEP for the

9

neutron beam data. This work was supported by contracts CosPa 89-N-FA01-1-4-2 from
the Ministry of Education, Taiwan, NSC 89-2112-M-001-056, NSC 90-2112-M-001-037 and
NSC 91-2112-M-001-036 from the National Science Council, Taiwan, and NSF19975050
from the National Science Foundation, China.

References

[1] See the respective sections in Review of Particle Physics, Particle Data Group, Phys.

Rev. D 66 (2002), for details and references.

[2] H. Grassmann, E. Lorentz and H.G. Moser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 228, 323 (1985);
P. Schotanus, R. Kamermans, and P. Dorenbos, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 37, 177
(1990).

[3] H.T. Wong et al., Astropart. Phys. 14, 141 (2000).

[4] H.T. Wong and J. Li, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 15, 2011 (2000);

H.B. Li et al., TEXONO Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 459, 93 (2001);
H.B. Li et al., TEXONO Coll., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 131802 (2003).

[5] Y. Liu et al., TEXONO Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 482, 125 (2002).

[6] G. Gerbier et al., Astropart. Phys. 11, 287 (1999);
S. Pecourt et al., Astropart. Phys. 11, 457 (1999).

[7] V.A. Kudryavtsev et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 456, 272 (2001).

[8] H.J. Kim et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 457, 471 (2001).

[9] M.Z. Wang et al., Phys. Lett. B 536, 203 (2002).

[10] R. Bernabei et al., Phys. Lett.B 480, 23 (2000), and references therein.

[11] Y. Kubota et al., CLEO Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 320, 66 (1992);

E. Aker et al., Crystal Barrel Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 321, 69 (1992);
K. Miyabayashi, Belle Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 494, 298 (2002);
B. Lewandowski, BaBar Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 494, 303 (2002).

[12] See, for example, J.B. Birks, Theory and Practice of Scintillation Counting, Perga-

mon (1964).

10

[13] J. Alarja et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 242, 352 (1982);

F. Benrachi et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 281, 137 (1989).

[14] W.P. Lai et al., TEXONO Coll., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 465, 550 (2002).

[15] C.L. Morris et. al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods 137, 397 (1976);

M.S. Zucker and N. Tsoupas, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 299, 281 (1990).

[16] Q. Yue, hep-ex/0304022, in press, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A (2003).

[17] See, for example,

C. Peterson, T. Rognvaldsson and L. Lonnblad, Comput. Phys. Comm. 81, 185
(1994);
C.M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, Clarendon Press, Oxford
(1995).

[18] B. Majorovitis and H.V. Klapdor-Kleingrothaus, Eur. Phys. J. A 6, 463 (1999).

[19] S. Baker and R.D. Cousins, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 221, 125 (1984), and references

therein.

[20] H.B. Li and H.T. Wong, J. Phys. G 28, 1453 (2002).

11

Crystal

Event Type Rise Time
[τ0 (ns)]

Decay Time Constant
Fast Comp. Slow Comp.

Ratio (r)

[τ1 (µs)]

[τ2 (µs)]

CsI(Tl)

CsI(Tl)

α

γ

γ

203±3

0.54±0.1

2.02±0.02

0.29±0.02

261±2

0.87±0.1

5.20±0.04

0.61±0.01

CsI(pure)

∼0.55

0.19±0.01

−

−

Table 1: Fitted rise and decay time constants as well as the ratio between slow and fast
decay components for α and γ events measured by CsI(Tl) and undoped CsI.

12

Figure 1: The average pulse shapes of events due to γ-rays and α-particles from direct
measurements and background-free nuclear recoils derived from the neutron beam data.

γ

α

recoils

13

Figure 2: The average pulse shapes for the nuclear recoil and γ-background events directly
from the neutron beam measurements.

14

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Typical single (a) measured γ- and (b) simulated nuclear recoil events at
Npe ∼ 20.

15

Figure 4: The partial charge versus total charge at the high (MeV) energy range in
a CsI(Tl) crystal, showing excellent (>99%) pulse shape discrimination capabilities to
diﬀerentiate events due to α’s and γ’s. The α-events are from an 241Am source placed on
the surface of the crystal, while the γ-events are due to ambient radioactivity.

16

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5: Typical separations of the (a) hti, (b) F(X) , and (c) LR parameters at Npe = 20
between nuclear recoil (Dnr, in solid histograms) and γ (Dγ, in dotted histograms) events
with the mean time, neural network and likelihood ratio methods, respectively.

17

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: The variations of the ﬁgures of merit (a) ǫ90 and (b) l90 with Npe with the three
diﬀerent techniques applied to simulated nuclear recoil and γ data, respectively. Dotted
lines indicate survival probabilities of γ and recoil events in (a) and (b), respectively. The
statistical uncertainties are smaller than the data points.

18

