PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

1

Introduction to Statistical Issues in Particle Physics

Roger Barlow
Manchester University, UK and Stanford University, USA

3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An account is given of the methods of working of Experimental High Energy Particle Physics, from the viewpoint
of statisticians and others unfamiliar with the ﬁeld. Current statistical problems, techniques, and hot topics are
introduced and discussed.

1. Particle Physics

1.1. The Subject

Particle Physics emerged as a discipline in its own
right half a century ago.
It pioneered ‘big science’;
experiments are performed at accelerators of increas-
ing energy and complexity by collaborations of many
physicists from many institutes. It has evolved a re-
search methodology within which statistics is of great
importance, although it has done so without strong
links to the statistics community – a fault that this
conference exists to remedy. Thus although a statis-
tician will be familiar with the research methods and
statistical issues arising in, say, agricultural ﬁeld trials
or clinical testing, they may be interested in a brief
description of how particle physicists do research, and
the statistical issues that arise.

Particle physics is also known as High Energy
Physics 1 and the names are sometimes merged to give
High Energy Particle Physics. Whatever it is called,
its ﬁeld of study is all the ‘Elementary’ Particles that
have been discovered:

The 6 quarks (u, d, s, c, b, t)

The 6 leptons (e, µ, τ , νe, νµ, ντ )

The intermediate bosons: W , Z, γ, g

The 100+ hadrons made from two quarks( π, K,
Ds(2317)... ) or three quarks (p,n, Λ...) or ﬁve
quarks (Θ+...)

To this long list must be added the corresponding list
of antiparticles. However this is not all: the domain
of particle physics also includes all the particles that
have not yet been discovered – some of which never
will be discovered:

Higgs boson(s)

squarks and sleptons

•

•

•

•

•

•

1The terms are almost equivalent; strictly the phrase ‘High
Energy’ means ‘above the threshold for pion production’, i.e.
the energy at which a collision between two protons can produce
three outgoing particles.

MOAT002

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Winos and Zinos/charginos and neutralinos

further hadrons

etcetera etcetera...

This list of proposed particles is limited only by
the imagination of the theorists who propose them –
which is no limitation at all.

For each species of particle we want to establish:

Does it exist?

If it does exist, what are its properties: its mass,
its lifetime, its charge, magnetic moment and so
on?

If its lifetime is not inﬁnite, what particles does
it decay into? What are the branching fractions
to diﬀerent decay modes? What are the distri-
butions in the parameters (energies and direc-
tions) of the particles in the ﬁnal state? Do they
agree with our theoretical models?

What happens when it collides with another
particle? What processes can occur and with
what probabilities (expressed as cross sections)?
What are the distributions of the parameters of
the particles produced? Answers will depend on
the target particle and the collision energy.

1.2. Template for an Experiment

To study some phenomenon X, which could be
any of the above, a particle physics experiment goes
through the following stages:

Arrange for instances of X

This may involve a beam of particles, directly
from an accelerator or through some secondary
system, striking a target; the beam and tar-
get particles and the energy are chosen as being
favourable for X. It may entail a colliding beam
machine like LEP for the Z or BABAR for CP vio-
lation in the B system or the LHC for the Higgs.
It may be done by producing particles and then
letting them decay, as in the studies of CP vio-
lation in the K 0 system. An extreme example is
proton lifetime studies, where one just assembles

2

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

a large number of ordinary protons (perhaps as
hydrogen in water) in suitably low-background
conditions deep underground and waits to ob-
serve any decays.

For important studies dedicated experiments
(even accelerators) are built. For many more,
the experimenter utilises data taken with an
experiment designed primarily for another pur-
pose but also favourable for X. An example
is the study of charm mesons at BABAR, Belle
and CLEO, for which the primary purpose is B
physics.

Record events that might be X

•

A detector is built (or an existing detector is
utilised). ‘Events’ – interactions or decays – are
observed by a whole range of detectors (track-
ing detectors like drift chambers and silicon de-
tectors, calorimeters that measure deposited en-
ergy). Fast logic and/or online computers select
the events that look promising, and these are
recorded: the phrase ‘written to tape’ is used
even though today the recording medium is gen-
erally disk storage.

•

Reconstruct the measurable quantities of the
visible particles.

The electronic signals are combined and inter-
preted: points are joined to form tracks, and
measurement of their curvature in a magnetic
ﬁeld gives the particle momentum. A calorime-
ter may give the energy, a Cherenkov counter
the velocity. From this emerges a reconstructed
‘event’ as a list of the particles produced, their
kinematic quantities (energies and directions)
and possibly their identity (as pions or kaons
or electrons, etc.)

Select events that could be X by applying cuts

Knowing the pattern one is looking for, one
can then select the events that contain the phe-
nomenon being studied.

A key point is that this selection (and also the
electronic selection described above) is not going
to be perfect. There will always be a selection
eﬃciency which is less than 100%.

There is also a chance that some of the events
that look like X and survive the selection and
the cuts are actually from some other process.
There will be a background which is greater than
zero. Statistical techniques are obviously im-
portant for the treatment and understanding of
eﬃciency and background.

Histogram distributions of interesting variables

•

•

2

c
/
V
e
M
 
5
.
2
 
/
 
s
t
n
e
v
E

2000

1000

0
2000

1000

B0 → D p
background

B0 → D* p
background

0
5.2

5.22

5.24

5.26

5.3
5.28
mES (GeV/c2)

Figure 1: Examples of analyses: B0 decay to Dπ and
D∗π

Relevant quantities, sensitive to X, are formed
from the kinematic variables of the particles de-
tected and measured. These are typically dis-
played in a histogram, or histograms.
(Joint
two-dimensional plots are also common. Some-
times, but rarely, the data at this stage is a sin-
gle number.)

These distributions are then compared with the
theoretical predictions, of which there may be
several. One will be the predicted distribution
if X is not present. Another may be the predic-
tion if X is present in the amount, and with the
properties, predicted by an expected theory such
as the ‘Standard Model’ [1] of Particle Physics.
There may also predictions obtained within the
framework of a particular model, but with one
or more parameters adjusted to ﬁt the data.

An example of such a result is shown in Figure 1
(taken from [2]). In the top plot the phenomenon X
is the decay of the B0 meson to Dπ, in the lower
plot the decay to D∗π. The distributions show the
invariant mass, which is the quantity given by

2

2

M 2c4 =

Ei

!

−  

~pic

!

i
X

 

i
X

(1)

where the sums run over the two ﬁnal-state particles.
If the two observed particles do indeed come from the
decay of a B0 particle then this quantity should be
5.28 GeV/c2, though this is smeared out by experi-
mental resolution. The plots show the predictions of
a theory in which this decay does not occur (and all
events are background) and also a prediction in which
the decay is produced, with a normalisation adjusted
to give the best ﬁt to the data. The result of this
ﬁt gives the number of signal events, from which the
branching ratio can be obtained (though in fact that
was not done in this example).

If that looks trivial, a harder example is the decay
π0π0, taken from [3] and shown in Figure 2. (To
B
be fair, things are not quite as bad as this 1 dimen-
sional plot implies.)

→

In this confrontation of theory with experiment, one
can then ask: is there any evidence for X or is the null

MOAT002

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

3

(a)

2
2

150
150

 
 
)
)
 
 

c
c
 
 
/
/

V
V
e
e
M
M
 
 
5
5
.
.
2
2
 
 
(
(
 
 
/
/
 
 
s
s
t
t
n
n
e
e
v
v
E
E

100
100

50
50

0
0
5.2
5.2

5.22
5.22

5.24
5.24
   m
   m

5.28
5.26
5.28
5.26
2
2
 (GeV/c
 (GeV/c

)
)

ES
ES

Figure 2: Another example of an analysis: B0 → π0π0

hypothesis unrefuted? Given that there is X, what is
the best estimate for the normalisation (and perhaps
other) parameter(s) involved in our model for X? Are
these results compatible with the standard prediction
for X? These are familiar statistical questions.

1.3. Statistics in HEP

From the above description we can bring out some

features of the way statistics is used in HEP.

Firstly, everything is a counting experiment. To
measure a branching ratio or a cross section, one
counts the number of events produced and observed.
To measure the mass of a particle one uses a histogram
where the number of entries in each bin is a random
Poisson process. (The data of Figure 1 could be used
to ﬁt the mass of the B0 meson, were it not already
well known.) Poisson statistics is of paramount im-
portance. Even the Gaussian (Normal) distribution
plays its main rˆole as the large N limit of the Poisson.
(There are exceptions to this generalisation, but they
occur in the details of the reconstruction of particle
quantities.)

This unpredictability is not due to any lack of
knowledge on our part: not sampling error, or mea-
surement error, or due to unconsidered eﬀects. It is
true and absolute randomness, driven by the funda-
mental nature of quantum mechanics. We know that,
for instance, a K 0
s particle may decay into two charged
pions or two neutral pions, with probabilities of 69%
and 31% respectively. That is all we can ever know. A
sample of K 0 particles will decay to π+π− and π0π0 in
a ratio of roughly 2:1 even if they are prepared abso-
lutely identically – we have no hope of ever being able
to say which ones are more likely to ‘choose’ one path
rather than another. Likewise the timing of a decay is
absolutely random in that the probability that a par-
ticle existing at time t will decay before time t + δt is
a constant, independent of the value of t; there is no
‘ageing’ process.

But the Poisson distributions that result are just
like any conventional Poisson process. These and
other uncertainties, are (almost always) controlled
and understood. These distributions have standard

MOAT002

deviations known to be √N . The Gaussian used for
the signal distributions in Figure 1 is well established
(it has a mean of 5.28 and a standard deviation of
0.0025 GeV/c2).

So, in common with the other physical sciences, the
distributions involved (signal, backgrounds) are given
by functions known up to a few parameters – which
can be ﬁtted for. The approach to the data is not
descriptive (identifying features, looking for trends)
but prescriptive: the distribution is taken as having
some functional form, and one has a pretty good idea
as to what that functional form is, apart (possibly)
from a few adjustable parameters.

1.4. Unused Statistical Methods

A consequence of this knowledge of uncertainty –
the fact that we know what it is that we don’t know –
is that many techniques commonly used in the broad
ﬁeld of statistics are little used (or not used at all) in
particle physics.

Student’s t is unknown. This is a technique used to
handle small numbers of values from a distribution of
unknown mean and unknown standard deviation, but
our uncertainties come from known measurement er-
rors. (If a measurement error is not known, a separate
large-number determination is made.) The F test and
ANOVA, tools for studying problems with unknown
variances, are similarly of little use. The whole ex-
perimental design ﬁeld – Latin squares and similar
techniques used to minimise uncontrollable eﬀects –
is not needed as such eﬀects are not a problem.

Another set of neglected techniques are those han-
dling Time Series and Markov chains. Changes with
time can be relevant in some studies, but it appears
in them as another quantity to be measured and his-
togrammed. The development with time of a particle
is basically smooth, punctuated by radical transfor-
mations (such as the decay of a particle to two or
more lighter ones) which occur at random times.

Non-parametric Statistics are also barely featured,
as all these distributions, which are believed to be true
idealisations of what ‘really’ happens, or at least good
approximations to them, are parametrised.

The notion of a Parent population is not helpful:
a sample of particles is taken, but the randomness is
(as stated earlier) inherent in the nature of particle
behaviour and not produced by the sampling. If there
is a parent distribution, it is an inﬁnite set of particles
produced under these conditions – all the events we
might have seen.

The point here is not that particle physics has noth-
ing to learn from standard statistical techniques. The
Statistician has many implements in their toolbox.
Diﬀerent ﬁelds of application will call for diﬀerent
tools; some of those heavily used in other ﬁelds are
of less relevance in this one.

4

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

L(x1, x2...xN

θ) =
|

P (xi

θ)
|

ln L =

ln P (xi

θ)
|

Y

i
X

the form p(x
θ) is totally known, and L (or ln L) fol-
|
lows.

2. Tools

Having seen that particle physics makes little use of
some statistical tools, we take a more detailed look at
the ones it does utilise.

2.1. Monte Carlo Simulation

Theoretical distributions for the quantitites being
studied are predicted by quantum mechanics – per-
haps with a few unknown parameters – and are often
beautiful and simple. Angular distributions may be
ﬂat, or described by a few trigonometric terms; masses
often follow a Cauchy function (which the particle
physicists call the Breit-Wigner), time distributions
may be exponential, or exponential with a sinusoidal
oscillation.

These beautiful and simple forms are generally
modiﬁed by unbeautiful and complicated eﬀects
(higher-order calculations in perturbation theory, or
the fragmentation of quarks into other particles). Fur-
thermore the measurement and reconstruction process
that the detector does for the particles is not com-
pletely accurate or completely eﬃcient.

The translation from knowing the distributions in
principle to knowing them in practice is done by
Monte Carlo simulation. Particles are generated ac-
cording to the original simple distributions, and then
put through repeated random processes to describe
the theoretical complications and then the passage of
particles through the detector, including probabilities
for colliding with nuclei in the beam pipe, slipping
through cracks in the acceptance, or other eventual-
ities. A complete software representation of all the
experimental hardware has to be coded. The eﬀects
of the particles on the detector elements is simulated
and the information used to reconstuct the kinematic
quantities using the same programs that are run on
the real data. This provides the full theoretical distri-
bution function that the data is predicted to follow,
albeit as a histogram rather than a smooth curve.

These programs are large and slow to run. Signif-
icant resources (both people and machines) are put
into them. The generation of ‘Monte Carlo data’ is a
signiﬁcant issue for all experiments. Cases are known
where data has been taken and analysed but results
delayed because of lack of the correct Monte Carlo
data [4].

2.2. The Likelihood

Having the parametrised theoretical description of
the distribution means the likelihood function is al-
ways known, and it assumes an overwhelmingly im-
portant position. Writing this function – where the
xi are the data and θ the unknown parameter(s)

MOAT002

Figure 3: The log likelihood as a function of a parameter

Having the likelihood function, the Maximum Like-
lihood estimator is then easy to implement, and is very
widely used. Even estimators like least-squares are, at
least by some, ‘justiﬁed’ as being derivable from Max-
imum Likelihood. Its (asymptotic) eﬃciency, and its
invariance properties are desirable and useful.

In some cases the ML estimate leads to an algebraic
solution but in general, and in complex analyses, the
physicist just maps out ln L for their dataset as a func-
tion of θ and reads oﬀ the ML estimator from the peak,
as can be done in Figure 3. This also produces an in-
terval estimate as part of the minimisation process.
Following the value of ln L until it falls oﬀ by 1
2 from
its maximum gives the 68% central conﬁdence inter-
val. Strictly speaking this is valid only for large N ,
but this restriction is generally disregarded. Perhaps
we should not be so cavalier about doing so.

Maximum Likelihood methods can also be used for
functions with several parameters, as illustrated in
Figure 4. Conﬁdence regions are mapped out by read-
ing oﬀ the likelihood contours. This is done in many
analyses and the MINUIT program [5] is widely used
in exploring the likelihood and parameter space.

2.3. Fitting Data

Fitting the parametrised curve to the experimental

data is done by several techniques.

2

i

(yi−f (xi|θ))
n

1) χ2 using σ2 = n i.e. minimising χ2 =
has the advantage that the minimi-
sation can be done by diﬀerentiating and solving the
P
normal equation, which is especially simple if f is lin-
ear in θ. However the use of the observed number
rather than the predicted number in the denominator

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

5

goodness of ﬁt number. It is heavily used for GoF and
2-sample tests: researchers may quote χ2 or χ2/ND or
the probability of exceeding this χ2.

Alternative measures of goodness of ﬁt have never
really caught on. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is oc-
casionally used – generally misleadingly, in my opin-
ion. This is a totally robust test but pays the price for
that by being weak. If you know anything about the
data, e.g. that the numerical value of the parameter
means something, then a more powerful test should
be available. The KS test is being used to certify that
distributions are in agreement when a more powerful
approach would show up a diﬀerence.

2.5. Toy Monte Carlo

The ‘Toy Monte Carlo’ has emerged as a technique
made possible by modern computing resources. Hav-
ing obtained a result, it may be hard or impossible to
obtain signiﬁcance levels or conﬁdence regions in the
traditional analytic way, for instance if the likelihood
function one is studying does not even plausibly re-
semble a distorted parabola, but instead some shape
with multiple maxima.

}

{

x1 . . . xN

As an alternative approach, starting with an esti-
mate ˆθexp from the data, say
, how can one
establish a conﬁdence region? Consider any particular
θ) to generate a set of N values
θ. Use the known L(x
|
of x – an “experiment’. Use this in your estimator
(whatever that is) to ﬁnd a corresponding ˆθ. Repeat-
ing many times gives the probability that this θ will
give an estimate below (or above) the experimental
one. This is just what the Neyman construction uses.
To ﬁnd a particular conﬁdence region one has to ex-
plore the parameter space until one ﬁnds the limits
one wants.

3. Topics

Having explained the basic and generally agreed
techniques used, there are a number of topics where
advances are being made, or which are the subject of
heated dicussion and argument, or both.

3.1. Bayesian Probability

The religious war which has been waged over the
past few years has now cooled – although some iso-
lated zealots remain on both sides. The ‘frequen-
tists’ have come to accept that the use of Bayesian
techniques can be illuminating and helpful, and some-
times provide more useful information than a frequen-
tist conﬁdence level, especially for measurements of
bounded parameters (e.g. masses). The ‘Bayesians’
are recognising that Bayesian conﬁdence levels will not
totally replace the use of frequentist levels, and that

Figure 4: Contours of ln L in two dimensions

is recognised to lead to bias (downward ﬂuctuations
get an undue weight) and this cannot safely be used if
n is small. (Actually in many cases what happens is
that one of the bins has n = 0, and the physicist gets
divide-by-zero messages and then starts to worry.)

2) χ2 using σ2 = f i.e.

the predicted value
rather than the actual number, avoids the bias (and
the divide-by-zero problem) but gives nonlinear equa-
tions. It still suﬀers from using a Gaussian probability
as an approximation to a Poisson distribution and is
thus not the ‘real’ maximum likelihood estimator.

3) ‘Binned Maximum Likelihood’ uses the Poisson
likelihood in each bin rather than the χ2. It is there-
fore a proper Maximum Likelihood estimator. Eﬃ-
ciency is lost (only) if the bins are wider than the
structure of the data.

4) Full maximum likelihood does not use binning
at all.
It can be useful for very small event sam-
ples. For large samples it becomes computationally
intensive (as there is a sum over events rather than a
sum over bins) though with today’s computers this is
hardly important. Perhaps a more signiﬁcant factor
for physicists is that it does not have the readily in-
terpretable graphic image given by a histogram and
ﬁtted curve.

2.4. Goodness of Fit

Having found a ﬁt, one has to judge whether to
believe it. Whether the question is ‘Does the curve
really describe the data?’ or ‘Do the data really ﬁt
the curve’ depends on one’s point of view.

The likelihood value does not contain the answer
to this question. This appears counter-intuitive and
many people have wrestled (unsuccessfully) to pro-
duce ways that the likelihood can be used to say some-
thing about the quality of the ﬁt.

The χ2 =

yi−f (xi|θ)
σi

i

certainly does give a

2

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

P

MOAT002

6

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

they do have to take on board the issue of robustness
(or otherwise) under changes of prior.

A real beneﬁt of this debate has been to bring
the subject out into the open. The classic statistics
texts [6, 7], from which many particle physicists ﬁrst
learned the subject, slide swiftly between the frequen-
tist and Bayesian concepts of probability, never really
acknowledging that they are using two very diﬀerent
quantitites.

3.2. Small Signals and Conﬁdence
Regions

The ‘Energy Frontier’ is a cutting edge of parti-
cle physics: new, more powerful, accelerators open
up new areas for investigation and new particles are
discovered. Another cutting edge is the ‘Luminos-
ity Frontier’:
the discovery that processes hitherto
thought to be impossible do actually occur, albeit very
rarely. The discovery of CP violation [8]: that the
probability of the decay K 0
π+π− was not zero but
L →
0.2%, was enormously important despite the smallness
of the ﬁgure. Many of today’s experiments are look-
ing for phenomena which are known to be exceedingly
rare, at the parts-per-million level at best.

Although the implications can be spelt out quite
simply and dramatically – ‘If the AMS experiment
sees even one 12C nucleus, our entire view of the uni-
verse will change.’– in practice things are not so clear-
cut because of the presence of background. Also one
has to be able to handle not just the dramatic discov-
eries, but the much more frequent useful analyses that
make no discovery but push back the limits and the
region in which any discovery may be made.

An experiment that sees no events will note the
standard result from Poisson statistics that an ob-
served number of zero translates to a limit on the true
value of less than 3 events, with 95% conﬁdence. This
can then be converted (using the ﬁgures for this par-
ticular experiment) into a limit on the branching ratio
or cross section for the process concerned, and then
possibly into a limit on a mass or coupling constant.
If there is an expected background for this process
equivalent to, say, 0.2 events, then the amount for the
branching ratio limit is reduced to 2.8. But this clearly
has problems: suppose the predicted background were
3.1 and no events were observed (unlikely but not im-
possible), what can one then say about the limit?

There has been a lot of activity and discussion
recently in this area.
Indeed it sparked oﬀ the
workshop [9] of which this conference is the succes-
sor. The standard frequentist (Neyman) construc-
tion may result in statements about results in the
non-physical region (here, a negative number of sig-
nal events) which, though statistically correct, appear
nonsensical. Bayesian methods avoid this problem,
as does the frequentist technique proposed by Feld-

man Cousins [10] which switches smoothly and auto-
matically between quoting central and one-sided con-
ﬁdence regions.

3.3. When to Claim a Discovery?

Another area of discussion is over the form of re-
porting non-zero signals. When the number of signal
events is much larger than the expected background,
or a ﬁtted parameter is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
theoretical prediction, then clearly the experiment can
claim a discovery. If the numbers or parameter values
are compatible, the experiment quotes an upper limit.
But there is an area in between where the probability
of the null hypothesis giving the result is small enough
to be interesting, but not so small as to be completely
negligible. The experiment must not be rash, phoning
the New York Times with a discovery which turns out
to be a statistical ﬂuctuation, nor must it be too cau-
tious or the subject can never progress. Such results
are bound to occur – the probability that an exper-
iment will produce a value in this region is by deﬁ-
nition small-but-not-negligible, or better. Given the
large number of busy experiments reporting results,
this is a real problem.

Some experiments have policies such as 4σ for ‘evi-
dence for’, 5σ for ‘discovery of’ – signiﬁcance levels are
often presented in terms of the equivalent discrepancy
in standard deviations. Is it possible to report a two-
sided result (as the Feldman Cousins technique will
sometimes produce) and yet not claim a discovery?
‘We report with 95% conﬁdence that the branching
ratio lies in the range (2.3 to 3.4) 10−6 but we’re not
actually claiming to have seen it.’ Such ‘discoveries’
are reported in a way which must be aﬀected by the
prior (subjective) probability, in exactly the way the
Bayesians describe. Statistically identical data on the
decays B+
π−π0 would be re-
π+π0 and B+
ported completely diﬀerently.

→

→

3.4. Blind Analysis

In recent years particle physicists have become
aware of practitioner bias. This has been fuelled par-
ticularly by reports from the Particle Data Group,
which has the job of reporting and combining the mea-
surements of particle properties [11], who show how
some values change signiﬁcantly over time, but never
by more than one standard deviation. Another source
of disquiet was the Electroweak measurements from
LEP and the SLC which agree with each other and
with the Standard Model far too well with a χ2 per
degree of freedom well below 1 [12].

This practitioner bias is against claiming diﬀerences
from the null hypohesis. The experiment template
presented in section 1.2 often continues

MOAT002

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

7

•

•

•

•

•

Extract result, usually by ﬁtting parametrised
distribution(s) to data.

Compare your result with that of accepted the-
ory and/or other experiments.

If it disagrees, look for a bug in your analysis.
You will probably ﬁnd one. Keep searching and
ﬁxing until the agreement is acceptable.

The mistake in method is that the experimenter
stops looking for bugs when they have agreement, not
when they honestly believe that all (substantial) bi-
ases are accounted for. To guard against this the data
can be ‘blinded’. There are two techniques used, cov-
ering two types of situation

In the extraction of a result, this can be encoded
by some unknown oﬀset.

Choosing the cuts which select the data is done
on Monte Carlo data, or on real data in side-
bands – regions close to but not actually includ-
ing the region where the signal is expected. Oth-
erwise the temptation to nudge a cut slightly to
include a few more events is too great.

3.5. Systematic Errors

In the early days of particle physics, the 50s and 60s,
a typical experiment would get handfuls of events – a
few hundred if lucky – from painstaking analysis of
bubble chamber pictures. Statistical errors were thus
10% and were so large that the eﬀect of systematic

∼
uncertainites was generally small.

In the 70s and 80s, the development of counter ex-
periments led to event samples in the tens of thou-
sands. Statistical errors were now at the per cent level,
and systematic errors began to be more important.

The current generation of experiments – the Z fac-
tory at LEP, the B factories, Deep Inelastic Scattering
at HERA – deal with millions of events. Statistical er-
0.1% and we have learned
rors are at the level of
how to talk about ‘parts per mille’.

∼

Systematic errors (uncertainties in factors system-
atically applied in the analysis) can no longer be
fudged. The word ‘conservative’ has been grossly
overused in this context.
It sounds safe and reas-
suring; in practice it is usually a sign of laziness or
cowardice. The experiment perhaps cannot be both-
ered to evalute an uncertainty and makes a guess, and
then it inﬂates that guess to cover the possibility that
they’ll be caught out, and calls it a ‘conservative’ es-
timate of the systematic error.

Particle physicists also confuse the evaluation of
systematic errors with overall consistency checks.
There is bad practice being spread to and between
graduate students. They will identify all the calibra-
tion constants and parameters that contribute to the

MOAT002

ﬁnal result and vary those by their appropriate error,
and fold the resultant variation into the systematic
error. This is correct procedure. But they will also
vary quantities like cut values, which should not in
principle aﬀect the result, by some arbitary amount
and then solemnly fold those resulting variations into
the systematic error. This is nonsense. Looking at
what happens when you change a cut value is a good
and sensible thing: a (say) looser cut will give a higher
eﬃciency and a higher background and thus more ob-
served events, but after correcting for the new eﬃ-
ciency and background the result should be compati-
ble with the original. This is a useful check that one
understands what’s going on and that the analysis is
consistent. But it does not feed into a numerical un-
certainty.

3.6. Unfolding

Measurements of the properties of particles in
events are made with ﬁnite resolution, so the plots of
these quantities, and functions of these quantities, are
‘smeared out’. Events move between histogram bins.
Sharp peaks become broad, edges become slopes.

The recovery of the original sharp distribution from
the observed one is known as ‘unfolding’. This is an
alternative use of the Monte Carlo simulation process:
rather than compare the data with a theoretical pre-
diction smeared by Monte Carlo simulation, one com-
pares the original theory with the de-smeared data.
Clearly this is preferable, if it can be done, as the un-
folding process depends only on the experiment and
not on the original theory, and so once unfolded the
data can be compared with any prediction.

It looks a simple problem: given an original distri-
bution as a histogram, the probability of migration
from any bin i to any bin j, Pji, can be estimated
from a Monte Carlo sample (this includes the prob-
1).
ability that it may not be accepted:
The matrix is inverted, and then applied to the data
histogram to give the reconstructed original.

j Pji

P

≤

Unfortunately it is not at all simple [13]. In the ma-
trix inversion the errors on the Pji from ﬁnite statistics
have devastating consequences and produce unrealis-
tic results. There is a lot of activity in handling this in
a sensible way, and in investigating other approaches,
such as Maximum Entropy techniques.

3.7. Combining Results

The combination of compatible measurements with
diﬀerent errors is straightforward. However results
are sometimes incompatible, or marginally compati-
ble. But something must be done with the results,
as the community needs a way of using the combined
number. Indeed it is the responsibility of the Particle

8

PHYSTAT2003, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, September 2003

Data Group [11] to combine measurements and form
‘world average’ results in a meaningful way.

There is also a problem in combining limits. If two
experiments report 95% conﬁdence level upper limits
of, say, 0.012 and 0.013, how can one combine these
two measurements? This question was put forcefully
by the Higgs searches at the end of the LEP run.
The four experiments reported results separately com-
patible and possibly marginally suggestive of a signal
from a Higgs boson of mass around 114 GeV/c2. Did
four possibles make a probable? The answer to that
statistics question determined whether or not LEP
would run another year, at a cost of millions not only
in power bills but in its impact on the construction
schedule for the LHC. The CERN management de-
cided that the answer in this case was ‘no’. History
will be their judge.

In combining experiments the likelihood function
contains much more information than a simple limit,
or value and error. There is a suggestion that these
should be routinely published, and we are probably
going to see that happening a lot in the future.

3.8. Multivariate Classiﬁcation

The classiﬁcation of events (usually ‘signal’ and
‘background’) and particles (pion, kaon...) by means
of a cut on a discriminator variable is a basic hypoth-
esis testing problem. However there may be several
variables, each containing useful information, and the
best choice will be made by combining these in some
way.

The Fisher Discriminant has been re-discovered as
a technique which is good if the means of distributions
diﬀer between the two samples. The Neural Network
(feed-forward ‘perceptron’ conﬁguration) has become
a standard item in the toolbox which can handle more
general diﬀerences, and there are many developments
going on in this area.

The use of cuts is deeply engrained. In many cases
it is simple and appropriate. However in cases where
there are no clean boundaries it may be better to
consider all events, weighting them according to their
signal-like or background-like nature.

4. Conclusions

I have given several talks on ‘Statistics for Particle
Physicists’ but ‘Particle Physics for Statisticians’ has
been a new and interesting experience. This has been
a very broad view. Particular topics will be considered
in detail in the subsequent talks in this conference,
in both plenary and parallel sessions. Hopefully the
account here will provide you with a map which will
help you place them in context.

Acknowledgments

The author gratefully acknowledges the support of

the Fulbright Foundation.

References

[1] S. L. Glashow ‘Partial Symmetries of Weak Inter-

actions’, Nucl. Phys B22 579 (1961)
S. Weinberg ‘A Model of Leptons’, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 19 1264 (1967)
A. Salam ‘Weak and Electromagnetic Interac-
tions’, Proc. 8th Nobel Symposium, Svartholm
307 (1968).

[2] BABAR Collaboration,

‘Measurement of time-
dependent CP asymmetries in B0
D(∗)±π∓
decays and constraints on sin(2β + γ)’ SLAC-
PUB-100155, 2003. To be published in Phys. Rev.
Lett..

→

[3] BABAR Collaboration, ‘Observation of the decay
π0π0’, SLAC-PUB-100092, 2003. To be

B0
published in Phys. Rev. Lett..

→

[4] Details witheld to prevent embarrassment of

those involved.
James

[5] F.

‘MINUIT: Function Minimiza-
tion and Error Analysis Reference Manual’
http://wwinfo.cern.ch/asdoc/minuit/minmain.html.

[6] J. Orear ‘Notes on Statistics for Physicists’, Uni-
versity of California report UCRL-8417 (1958)
and Cornell report CLNS 82/511 (1982).

[7] A.G. Frodesen et al. ‘Probablity and Statistics
in Particle Physics’, Universitetsforlaget Bergen-
Oslo-Tromso (1979).

[8] V.L. Fitch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964) 138.
[9] Proc. Workshop on Conﬁdence Limits 17-18
January 2000, Ed. F. James, L. Lyons and
Y. Perrin. CERN yellow report 2000-005 (2000)
http://user.web.cern.ch/user/Index/library.html
Fermilab
dence
http://conferences/fnal.gov/c12k/.

in
March

Conﬁ-
2000.

Workshop

Limits

27-28

[10] G.J. Feldman and R.D. Cousins Phys. Rev. D57

(1998) 37731111.

[11] K. Hagiwara et al, ‘The Review of Particle Prop-

erties’ Phys. Rev. D66 (2002) 010001.

[12] See e.g. P. Harrison ‘Blind Analysis’ p 278, Proc.
Conf. on Advanced Statistical Techniques in Par-
ticle Physics’, Ed. M.R. Whalley and L. Lyons,
IPPP/02/39, Durham 2002.

[13] G. Cowan ‘A Survey of Unfolding Methods for
Particle Physics’, p248, Proc. Conf. on Ad-
vanced Statistical Techniques in Particle Physics’,
Ed. M.R. Whalley and L. Lyons, IPPP/02/39,
Durham 2002.
V. Blobel, ‘An Unfolding Method for High En-
ergy Physics Experiments’, p258 ibid..

MOAT002

