4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
1
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diﬀusion-based method for producing
density equalizing maps

Michael T. Gastner and M. E. J. Newman

Center for the Study of Complex Systems and Department of Physics,

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Abstract

Map makers have long searched for a way to construct cartograms—maps in which
the sizes of geographic regions such as countries or provinces appear in proportion to
their population or some other analogous property. Such maps are invaluable for the
representation of census results, election returns, disease incidence, and many other
kinds of human data. Unfortunately, in order to scale regions and still have them ﬁt
together, one is normally forced to distort the regions’ shapes, potentially resulting
in maps that are diﬃcult to read. Many methods for making cartograms have been
proposed, some of them extremely complex, but all suﬀer either from this lack of read-
ability or from other pathologies, like overlapping regions or strong dependence on the
choice of coordinate axes. Here we present a new technique based on ideas borrowed
from elementary physics that suﬀers none of these drawbacks. Our method is concep-
tually simple and produces useful, elegant, and easily readable maps. We illustrate the
method with applications to the results of the 2000 US presidential election, lung cancer
cases in the State of New York, and the geographical distribution of stories appearing
in the news.

1 Introduction

Suppose we wish to represent on a map some data concerning, to take the most common
example, the human population. For instance, we might wish to show votes in an election,
incidence of a disease, number of cars, televisions, or phones in use, numbers of people falling
in one group or another of the population, by age or income, or any of very many other
variables of statistical, medical, or demographic interest. The typical course under such
circumstances would be to choose one of the standard projections for the area of interest
and plot the data on it using some color code or similar representation. Such maps however
can be highly misleading. A plot of disease incidence, for example, will inevitably show high
incidence in cities and low incidence in rural areas, solely because there are more people
living in cities.

The obvious cure for this problem is to plot a fractional measure rather than raw incidence
data; we plot some measure of the number of cases per capita, binned in segments small
enough to give good spatial resolution but large enough to give reliable sampling. This
however has its own problems, since it discards all information about where most of the
cases are occurring. One case in a thousand means something entirely diﬀerent in Sydney
from what it means in Siberia.

What we would like is some representation of the data that factors out variations in

1

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

2

the population density but, at the same time, shows how many cases are occurring in each
region. It appears at ﬁrst that these two goals are irreconcilable, but this is not the case. On
a normal area-preserving or approximately area-preserving projection, such as a Mercator
or Robinson projection, they are indeed irreconcilable. However, if we can construct a
projection in which areas on the map are proportional not to areas on the ground but instead
to human population (or whatever the corresponding variable might be for the problem in
hand), then we can have our cake and eat it. Disease cases or other similar data plotted
on such a projection will have the same density in areas with equal per capita incidence
regardless of the population, since both the raw incidence rate and the area will scale with
the population. However, each case or group of cases can still be represented individually,
so it will be clear to the eye where most of the cases occur. Projections of this kind are
known as value-by-area maps, density equalizing maps, or cartograms.

The construction of cartograms turns out to be a challenging undertaking. A variety of
methods have been put forward, but none is entirely satisfactory. In particular, they often
produce highly distorted maps that are diﬃcult to read or projections that are badly behaved
under some circumstances, with overlapping regions or strong dependence on coordinate
axes. In many cases the methods proposed are also computationally demanding, sometimes
taking hours to produce a single map. In this paper we propose a new method which is, we
believe, intuitive, while also producing elegant, well-behaved, and useful cartograms, whose
calculation makes relatively low demands on our computational resources.

2 Previous methods for constructing cartograms

Before introducing our own method for constructing cartograms, we outline in this section
some of the previous methods that have been proposed. We will in most of the paper be
considering cartograms based on population density, although the developments are easily
generalized to other quantities. (We give one diﬀerent example in Sec. 5.) The construction
of a (ﬂat two-dimensional) cartogram involves ﬁnding a transformation r → T(r) of a
plane to another plane such that the Jacobian ∂(Tx, Ty)/∂(x, y) of the transformation is
proportional to some speciﬁed (population) density ρ(r) thus:

∂(Tx, Ty)
∂(x, y)

≡

∂Tx
∂x

∂Ty
∂y

−

∂Tx
∂y

∂Ty
∂x

=

ρ(r)
¯ρ

,

(1)

where ¯ρ is the mean population density averaged over the area A to be mapped.
(This
choice of normalization for the Jacobian ensures that the total area before and after the
transformation is the same.)

Eq. (1) does not determine the cartogram projection uniquely. To do that we need one
more constraint: two constraints are needed to ﬁx the projection for a two-dimensional
cartogram. Diﬀerent choices of the second constraint give diﬀerent projections, and no
single choice appears to be the obvious candidate, which is why many methods of making
cartograms have been suggested. One idea is to demand conformal invariance under the
cartogram transformation, i.e., to demand that angles be preserved locally. This is equivalent
to demanding that the Cauchy–Riemann equations be satisﬁed, but this imposes two, not
one, additional constraints and hence it is normally not possible to construct a conformally
invariant cartogram.

In an attempt at least to minimize the distortion of angles, Tobler [1, 2] took the ﬁrst
steps in the automated computer generation of cartograms in the late 1960s. He proposed
a method in which the initial map is divided into small rectangular or hexagonal cells, each
of which is then independently dilated or shrunk to a size proportional to its population

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

3

content. Since each cell is scaled separately, the corners of adjacent cells don’t match after-
wards. To re-establish a match, Tobler’s method takes a vector average over the positions of
corresponding corners and draws a new map with the resulting distorted cells. The process
is iterated until a ﬁxed point of the transformation is reached. Although the principle is
simple and intuitive it runs into practical problems. First, convergence tends to be rather
slow because a node a few cells away from a population center will feel the eﬀect of that
center only after several iterations. Second, under some circumstances the transformation
can produce overlapping or “folded” regions of the map, thereby ruining the topology. This
problem can be corrected by introducing additional constraints but the result is a more
complex algorithm with even slower run-times.

To increase the speed of the calculations, Dougenik et al. [3] introduced an algorithm
where the borders of a cell move in response not only to local space requirements but also to
“forces” exerted by other cells. Cells create force ﬁelds that diminish with distance from the
cell and that are larger for cells that contain larger populations. These forces “push” other
cells away from areas of high population in a manner reminiscent of the behavior of charged
objects in electrostatics (although the authors do not use this metaphor). Again the positions
are relaxed iteratively to achieve the ﬁnal cartogram, and convergence is substantially faster
than Tobler’s algorithm, although topological errors still cannot be ruled out.

Gusein-Zade and Tikunov [4] suggested a further twist that does away with the cells
altogether and uses a continuous “displacement ﬁeld” that measures the displacement of
each point in the map. Areas of high population exert a repulsive force on this displacement
ﬁeld and the authors are able to derive a diﬀerential equation for the ﬁeld, which they
integrate numerically. The method is slow and somewhat arcane but produces some of the
most attractive cartograms among the existing algorithms.

A more intuitive method, which makes use of cellular automata, has recently been pro-
posed by Dorling [5]. In this method the original map is drawn on a ﬁne grid. On each
iteration of the algorithm, cells lying on or close to the boundaries of regions are identiﬁed
and if a neighboring region needs extra area those cells are reassigned to the neighbor. The
procedure is iterated and the regions with greatest population grow slowly larger until an
equilibrium is reached and no further changes are needed. The procedure is elegant and
simple, but in practice it can distort shapes quite badly. One can add additional constraints
on the shapes to make the maps more readable, but then the method quickly loses its main
advantage, namely its simplicity.

Researchers have also experimented with several other methods. Kocmoud [6], for ex-
ample, uses a mass-and-spring model acting on a map expressed as points and lines, with
constraints applied to maintain certain topographic features such as angles or lengths. Due to
its complexity, however, this algorithm is prohibitively slow. The method of Keim et al. [7],
by contrast, is very fast, but achieves its speed primarily by working with polygonal maps
that have been heavily simpliﬁed before beginning the computations, which unfortunately
dispenses with many useful cartographic details. Finally, if one is willing to live with a
non-contiguous cartogram—one in which regions adjacent in real life are not adjacent on
the cartogram—then several quite simple methods give good results, such as Dorling’s cir-
cular cartograms [5]. Other reviews and discussions of cartogram methods can be found in
Refs. [8–11].

3 The diﬀusion cartogram

In this paper we propose a new type of cartogram, which might be called a “diﬀusion
cartogram,” for reasons we now describe. It is a trivial observation that on a true population

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

4

cartogram the population is necessarily uniform: once the areas of regions have been scaled
to be proportional to their population then, by deﬁnition, population density is the same
everywhere—hence the name “density-equalizing map.” Thus, one way to create a cartogram
given a particular population density, is to allow population somehow to “ﬂow away” from
high-density areas into low-density ones, until the density is equalized everywhere. There is
an obvious candidate process that achieves this, the linear diﬀusion process of elementary
physics [12], and this is the basis of our method. We describe the population by a density
function ρ(r), where r represents geographic position, and then allow this density to diﬀuse.
In the limit of long time t → ∞, the population density becomes uniform and so comes to
rest, and its total displacement from start to ﬁnish determines the projection of the map
necessary to produce a perfectly density-equalizing cartogram.

In the standard treatment of diﬀusion, the current density is given by

where v(r, t) and ρ(r, t) are the velocity and density respectively at position r and time t.
Diﬀusion follows the gradient of the density ﬁeld thus:

meaning that the ﬂow is always directed from regions of high density to regions of low and
that the ﬂow will be faster when the gradient is steeper. There is conventionally a diﬀusion
constant in Eq. (3), but we can set this constant to 1 without aﬀecting our results.

The diﬀusing population is also conserved locally so that

Combining Eqs. (2), (3), and (4) we then arrive at the familiar diﬀusion equation:

and the expression for the velocity ﬁeld in terms of the population density:

The calculation of the cartogram involves solving Eq. (5) for ρ(r, t) starting from the
initial condition in which ρ is equal to the given population density of the region of interest
and then calculating the corresponding velocity ﬁeld from Eq. (6). The cumulative displace-
ment r(t) of any point on the map at time t can be calculated by integrating the velocity
ﬁeld thus:

r(t) = r(0) +

′

v(r, t

′

) dt

.

t

Z
0

In the limit t → ∞ the set of such displacements for all points on the original map deﬁnes
the cartogram.

Most of the time we are not interested in mapping the entire globe, but only some
part of it, which means that the area of interest will have boundaries beyond which we
don’t know or don’t care about the population density. These boundaries might be country
borders or other political boundaries or coast lines. It would be inappropriate to represent
regions outside the boundaries as having zero population, even if they are, like the ocean

J = v(r, t) ρ(r, t),

J = −∇ρ,

∂ρ
∂t

∂ρ
∂t

∇ · J +

= 0.

∇2

ρ −

= 0

v(r, t) = −

∇ρ
ρ

.

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

5

for instance, unpopulated, since this would cause arbitrary expansion of the cartogram as
the population diﬀused into its uninhabited surroundings. (This is true of essentially all
methods for constructing cartograms.) Instead, therefore, we apply a “neutral buoyancy”
condition, ﬂoating the area of interest in a “sea” of uniform population density equal to the
mean density of the map as a whole. This keeps the total area under consideration constant
during the diﬀusion process.

The whole simulation, including the sea, is then enclosed in a box. For simplicity in
this paper we will consider only rectangular boxes, as most others have also done. Provided
the dimensions Lx and Ly of the box are substantially larger than the area to be mapped,
In the limit Lx, Ly → ∞ the cartogram will
the dimensions themselves do not matter.
be a unique deterministic mapping, independent of the coordinate system used, with no
overlapping regions. In practice, we ﬁnd that quite moderate system sizes are adequate—
dimensions three to four times the linear extent of the area to be mapped appear to give
good results.

We also need to choose boundary conditions on the walls of the box. These too have no
great eﬀect on the results, provided the size of the box is reasonably generous, and we have
found a good choice to be the Neumann boundary conditions in which there is no ﬂow of
population through the walls of the box.

The considerations above completely specify our method and are intuitive and straight-
forward. The actual implementation of the method, if one wants a calculation that runs
quickly, involves a little more work. We solve the diﬀusion equation in Fourier space, where
it is diagonal, and back-transform before integrating over the velocity ﬁeld. With the Neu-
mann boundary conditions, the appropriate Fourier basis is the cosine basis, in which the
solution to the diﬀusion equation has the form

ρ(r, t) =

4

LxLy Xk

˜ρ(k) cos(kxx) cos(kyy) exp(−k2t),

where the sum is over all wavevectors k = (kx, ky) = 2π(m/Lx, n/Ly) with m, n non-
negative integers, and ˜ρ(k) is the discrete cosine transform of ρ(r, t = 0):

˜ρ(k) =

1
4
1
2
1
2

Lx
0
Lx
0
Lx
0
Lx
0

R
R
R
R

Ly
0 ρ(r, 0) dx dy
Ly
R
0 ρ(r, 0) cos(kyy) dx dy
Ly
R
0 ρ(r, 0) cos(kxx) dx dy
Ly
R
0 ρ(r, 0) cos(kxx) cos(kyy) dx dy
R





if kx = ky = 0,
if kx = 0 and ky 6= 0,
if kx 6= 0 and ky = 0,
otherwise.

The velocity ﬁeld v is then easily calculated from Eqs. (6) and (8) and has components

vx(r, t) =

vy(r, t) =

k kx ˜ρ(k) sin(kxx) cos(kyy) exp(−k2t)
k ˜ρ(k) cos(kxx) cos(kyy) exp(−k2t)
P
k ky ˜ρ(k) cos(kxx) sin(kyy) exp(−k2t)
P
k ˜ρ(k) cos(kxx) cos(kyy) exp(−k2t)

,

.

P
P

Equations (9) and (10) can be evaluated rapidly using the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and
its back-transform respectively, both of which in this case run in time of order LxLy log(LxLy).
We then use the resulting velocity ﬁeld to integrate Eq. (7), which is a nonlinear Volterra
equation of the second kind and can be solved numerically by standard methods [13]. In
practice it is the Fourier transform that is the time-consuming step of the calculation and,
as we will see, with the aid of the FFT this step can be performed fast enough that the

(8)

(9)

(10a)

(10b)

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

6

whole calculation runs to completion in a matter of seconds or at most minutes, even for
large and detailed maps.

It is straightforward to see that our diﬀusion cartogram satisﬁes the fundamental deﬁni-
tion, Eq. (1), of a cartogram. In the limit t → ∞, Eq. (8) is dominated by the k = 0 term
and gives

ρ(r, ∞) =

4 ˜ρ(0)
LxLy

=

1
LxLy Z
0

Z
0

Lx

Ly

ρ(r, 0) dx dy = ¯ρ,

(11)

where ¯ρ is again the mean population density over the area mapped. Furthermore, by
deﬁnition, the total population within any moving element of area does not change during
the diﬀusion process, and hence, denoting by T(r) the ﬁnal position of a point that starts
at position r, we have ρ(r) dx dy = ¯ρ dTx dTy, and, rearranging, the Jacobian is given by
∂(Tx, Ty)/∂(x, y) = ρ(r)/ ¯ρ, in agreement with Eq. (1).

Below we present a number of applications of our cartograms to the visualization of
various types of data. Before we do that however, it is worth giving a brief comparison of
our method with the others discussed in Sec. 2. The main advantages of our method over
the original method of Tobler [1, 2], are ﬁrst speed and second independence of a particular
choice of cells. Tobler’s method is obliged to choose directions for the dilation of the cells
and this means that the resulting cartogram depends on the coordinate axes used. As we
will see, the practical application of our algorithm, like most numerical calculations, relies
on a sampling of the population density on a lattice of some kind, but the diﬀusion process
is, in the limit of small lattice spacing, independent of the topology of this lattice and
therefore does not show lattice-dependent eﬀects like the method of Tobler. The method
of Gusein-Zade and Tikunov [4] is also free of these eﬀects, but pays for it in run time and
complexity.

Conceptually our algorithm is in some respects similar to the cellular automaton method
of Dorling [5]. Our description of the diﬀusion method has been entirely in terms of macro-
scopic variables and equations, but one could equally look at the method as a microscopic
diﬀusion process in which each individual member of the population performs a Gaussian
random walk about the surface of the map. Over time the population will diﬀuse until it
is uniform everywhere within the box enclosing the map, except for statistical ﬂuctuations.
The projection of the cartogram is then derived by moving all boundaries on the map in
such a way that the net ﬂow passing through them is zero at all times during the diﬀusion
process. This resembles Dorling’s method in the sense that diﬀerent regions trade their area
until a fair distribution is reached.

Our method however has an advantage over Dorling’s in being based on a global, lattice-
independent diﬀusion process. The exchange of area between regions in Dorling’s method
occurs only between nearest-neighbor squares along the principle axes of a square lattice
and this introduces a strong signature of the lattice topology into the ﬁnal cartogram.

4 Population density function

The description of our method tells, in a sense, only half the story of how to create a car-
togram. Before applying this or indeed any method, we need to choose the starting density
ρ(r) for the map. We can, by deﬁning ρ(r) in diﬀerent ways, control the properties of the
resulting cartogram, including crucially the balance between accurate density equalization
and readability.

Population density is not strictly a continuous function, since people are themselves
discrete and not continuous. To make a continuous function the population must be binned
or coarse-grained at some level. All methods of constructing cartograms require one to do

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

7

this and there is no single accepted standard approach. Part of the art of making a good
cartogram lies in shrewd decisions about the deﬁnition of the population density.

If we choose a very ﬁne level of coarse-graining for the population density, then the high
populations in centers such as cities will require substantial local distortions of the map
in order to equalize the density. A coarser population density will cause less distortion,
resulting in a map with features that are easier to recognize, but will give a less accurate
impression of the true population distribution. The most common choice made by others has
been to coarse-grain the population at the level of the (usually political) regions of interest.
For example, if one were interested in the United States, one might take the population of
each state and distribute it uniformly over the area occupied by that state. This method
can be used also with our cartogram algorithm and we give one example below. But we are
not obliged to use it, and in some cases it may be undesirable, since binning at the level of
states erases any details of population distribution below the state level. In our work we have
mostly adopted instead a spatially uniform Gaussian blur as our coarse-graining function.
By varying the width σ of the blurring function we can tune our cartogram between accuracy
and readability.

Ultimately the choice of population density function is up to the user of the method,
who must decide what particular features are most desirable in his or her application. One
advantage of our diﬀusion-based algorithm is that it is entirely agnostic about this choice;
the process of computing the cartogram is completely decoupled from the calculation of the
population density and hence is not slanted in favor of one choice or another.

5 Applications

We give three examples of the use of our cartograms, focusing on the United States and
using population data from the 2000 US Census.

First, we examine the results of the US presidential election of 2000. Figure 1a shows the
popular vote by state in this election—the simple fraction of voters voting each way—with
state majorities for the two major candidates represented as shades of red (George Bush,
Republican) and blue (Al Gore, Democrat). The briefest appraisal by eye immediately
reveals that the Republicans dominate much more than a half of the country. This, however,
is a misleading conclusion because much of the Republicans’ dominance comes from their
success in the large but relatively unpopulated states in the center of the map, while the
Democrats carry the more populous areas in the northeast and on the west coast. Clearly
then, this is a poor visual representation of the results, in the sense that it is hard to tell
which party got more votes by looking at the map.

A much better representation is given by Figure 1b, in which the same color code is
used on a population cartogram constructed using the methods described in this paper.
This cartogram is based on a density function with a moderately broad Gaussian blur,
as described above, yielding a map whose features are distorted relatively little on short
scales; the individual states are still easily recognizable while being scaled close to the
size appropriate to their populations. To a good approximation the amounts of red and
blue in the ﬁgure now correspond to the true balance of the popular vote, and, as is clear
to the eye, this vote was very close between the two parties, in fact being won not by
the Republican candidate but by the Democrat. In Fig. 1c, we show a further cartogram
constructed using less coarse-graining on the population density, resulting in a map that
more perfectly represents states’ populations, but which also has more distortion on short
length-scales, making some regions hard to recognize. For example, the small but densely
populated Long Island now expands (quite correctly) to a size greater than the entire state

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

8

(a)

(c)

Republican

(b)

50:50

Democrat

(d)

Figure 1: The results of the 2000 US presidential election. (a) A normal cylindrical projection. (b) A
cartogram with moderate coarse-graining generated using a Gaussian blur of standard deviation
◦
σ = 0.75
, corresponding to about 80km. (c) A cartogram constructed using a narrower Gaussian
◦
(σ = 0.1
), resulting in greater distortion of state boundaries especially in the northeast—most
noticeably for Pennsylvania and Massachusetts. (d) A cartogram based on states’ representation
in the electoral college. The density of electors was calculated by spreading each state’s electors
evenly across the state.

of Wyoming. The user concerned both with readability and accurate portrayal of the data
would probably choose a map similar to Fig. 1b in this case.

Ultimately, the presidency is decided not by the popular vote, but by the electoral college.
Under the US system, each state contributes a certain number of electors to the electoral
college, who vote according to the majority in their state. The candidate receiving a majority
of the votes in the electoral college wins the election. The appropriate visualization for a vote
of this kind is one in which the sizes of the states are scaled in proportion to their numbers of
electors. This then is an example in which a coarse-graining according to political boundaries
(state boundaries in this case) makes good sense. We show a cartogram calculated in this
way in Fig. 1d. The allocation of electors to states roughly follows population levels, but
contains a deliberate bias in favor of less populous states, and as a result some of these
states appear larger in Fig. 1d than in 1c—Wyoming, Montana, and the Dakotas are good
examples. Since most of these are majority-Republican states, we can now understand how
the Republican candidate came to win the election in spite of losing the popular vote.

For our second example, we look at a case in which a very ﬁne level of coarse-graining
is needed to understand the data fully. We study the distribution of cases of lung cancer

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

9

Figure 2: Visualization of lung cancer cases among males in the state of New York 1993–1997.
Each dot represents ten cases, randomly placed within the zip-code area of occurrence. (a) The
◦
original map. (b) A cartogram using a coarse-grained population density with σ = 0.3
. (c) A
cartogram using a much ﬁner-grained population density (σ = 0.04◦). (Data from the New York
State Department of Health.)

among the male population in the state of New York. (A similar study using a diﬀerent
technique and for a smaller area was carried out by Merrill [14].) In Fig. 2a we show a
scatter plot of lung cancer cases between 1993 and 1997, as recorded by the New York State
Department of Health. This map is of precisely the kind discussed in the introduction: it
shows clearly how many cases there are, and that they are geographically concentrated in
the areas that have high populations. However, it is impossible to tell whether there is a
statistically higher per capita incidence of lung cancer in one area or another, because any
such variation is masked by the highly non-uniform population density.

In Fig. 2b, we show the same data on a population cartogram with moderate coarse-
graining of the initial population density. Although the map is visibly distorted, little diﬀer-
ence is visible in the distribution of cancer cases. In Fig. 2c, on the other hand, we use a very
ﬁne-grained population density, creating a cartogram with better population equalization
and signiﬁcantly greater distortion. Now the virtue of this representation becomes strikingly
clear. As the ﬁgure shows, when we use a projection that truly equalizes the population
density over the map, there is no longer any signiﬁcant variation in the distribution of cases
over the state—the dots have about the same density everywhere. The shape of the map in
(c) does not much resemble the shape of the original any more, but this is the price we pay
for equalizing the population almost perfectly.

Our method of generating cartograms is fast, an important consideration for interactive
use. As discussed in Sec. 3, the bulk of the work involved in creating the maps is in the
Fourier transforms, which can be computed rapidly using FFTs. Fig. 2c for example was
produced in less than 100 seconds on a standard desktop computer, including the time to read
in the census data, to perform the Gaussian convolution, to solve the diﬀusion equation, and
to plot the ﬁgure. Previous techniques are either signiﬁcantly slower (Kocmoud [6] reports
16 hours for a US state cartogram using his constraint-based approach) or are obliged to
use simpliﬁed maps to reduce the computational load [7].

The example cartograms given so far have all been based, more or less, on human popu-
lation density, which is certainly the most common type of cartogram. Other types however
are also possible and for our third example we study one such. Anyone who reads or watches
the news in the United States (and similar observations probably apply in other countries
as well) will have noticed that the geographical distribution of news stories is skewed. Even
allowing for population, a few cities, notably New York and Washington, DC, get a surpris-
ingly large fraction of the attention while other places get little. Apparently some locations

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

10

(a)

(b)
WA

MN

PA

NV

CO

CA

IL

MI

OH

TX

NY

MA

CT

DC

GA

FL

MD

NJ

Figure 3: The distribution of news stories by state in the United States. (a) Conventional map of
the states. (b) “Mindshare map” in which the sizes of states are proportional to the frequency of
their appearance in news stories. States have the same colors in (a) and (b).

loom larger in our mental map of the nation than others, at least as presented by the ma-
jor media. We can turn this qualitative idea of a mental map into a real map using our
cartogram method.

We have taken about 72 000 newswire stories from November 1994 to April 1998, and
extracted from each the “dateline,” a line at the head of the story that gives the date and
the location that is the main focus of the story. Binning these locations by state, we then
produce a “mindshare map” in which the sizes of the US states represent the fraction of
stories concerning that state over the time interval in question. The result is shown in Fig. 3.
The stories are highly unevenly distributed. New York City alone contributes 20 000
stories to the corpus—largely because of the preponderance of wire stories about the ﬁnancial
markets—and Washington, DC another 10 000, largely political stories. We chose to bin by
state to avoid large distortions around the cities that are the focus of most news stories.
We made one exception however: since New York City had far more hits than any other
location including the rest of the state of New York (which had around 1000), we decided to
split New York State into two regions, one for the greater New York City area and another
for the rest of the state.

The cartogram is a dramatic depiction of the distribution of US news stories. The map is

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

11

highly distorted because the patterns of reporting show such extreme variation. Washington,
DC, for instance, which is normally invisible on a map of this scale, becomes the second
largest “state” in the union. (The District of Columbia is not, technically, a state.) Members
of the public, including the US public, frequently overestimate the size of the northeastern
part of the United States by comparison with the middle and western states, and this map
may give us a clue as to why. Perhaps people’s mental image of the United States is not
really an inaccurate one; it is simply based on things—such as “mindshare”—that people
ﬁnd more relevant than geographical area.

6 Conclusions

In this paper we have presented a new general method for constructing density-equalizing
projections or cartograms, which provide an invaluable tool for the presentation of geo-
graphic data. Our method is simpler than many earlier methods, allowing for rapid calcula-
tions, while generating accurate and readable maps. The method allows its users to choose
their own balance between good density equalization and low distortion of map regions,
making it ﬂexible enough for a wide variety of applications. We have given comparisons
between our method and previous ones, and presented a number of examples of the use of
our cartograms in the representation of human data, including election results and incidence
data for cancer.

Implementation of our method in GIS software packages should be straightforward, and
we hope that in this or other forms it will prove a valuable tool for researchers in a wide
variety of disciplines.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the staﬀ of the University of Michigan’s Numeric and
Spatial Data Services for their help with the geographic data, and Dragomir Radev for useful
discussions about the geographic distribution of news messages. This work was funded in
part by the National Science Foundation under grant number DMS–0234188 and by the
James S. McDonnell Foundation.

References

[1] Tobler, W. R. (1963) Geographical Review 53(1), 59–78.

[2] Tobler, W. R. (1973) Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 219(9), 215–220.

[3] Dougenik, J. A., Chrisman, N. R., & Niemeyer, D. R. (1985) The Professional Geogra-

pher 37(1), 75–81.

Systems 20(3), 167–173.

[4] Gusein-Zade, S. M. & Tikunov, V. S. (1993) Cartography and Geographic Information

[5] Dorling, D. (1996) Area cartograms: Their use and creation. Concepts and Techniques

in Modern Geography (CATMOG) No. 59, University of East Anglia, Norwich.

[6] Kocmoud, C. J. (1997) Constructing Continuous Cartograms: A Constraint-Based Ap-

proach. Master’s thesis, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.

Diffusion-based method for producing density equalizing maps

12

[7] Keim, D., North, S., & Panse, C. (2003). Medial axis cartogram. Submitted to IEEE

Computer Graphics and Applications.

[8] Selvin, S., Merrill, D., Sacks, S., Wong, L., Bedell, L., & J.Schulman (1984) Trans-
formations of maps to investigate clusters of disease. Tech. rep., Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory, University of California, No. LBL-18550.

[9] Cauvin, C., Schneider, C., & Cherrier, G. (1989) The Cartographic Journal 26(2),

96–104.

[10] Torguson, J. S. (1990) Cartogram: A Microcomputer Program for the Interactive Con-
struction of Value-By-Area Cartograms. Master’s thesis, University of Georgia, Athens,
Georgia.

[11] Edelsbrunner, H. & Waupotitsch, R. (1997) Computational Geometry 7(5-6), 343–360.

[12] Honerkamp, J. & R¨omer, H. (1993) Theoretical Physics: A Classical Approach

(Springer, Berlin/New York).

[13] Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T., & Flannery, B. P. (1992) Numerical

Recipes in C (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).

[14] Merrill, D. W. (2001) Statistics in Medicine 20(9-10), 1499–1513.

