4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
1
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MaxEnt assisted MaxLik tomography

J. ˇReháˇcek∗ and Z. Hradil∗

∗Department of Optics, Palacky University, 17. listopadu 50, 772 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic

Abstract. Maximum likelihood estimation is a valuable tool often applied to inverse problems
in quantum theory. Estimation from small data sets can, however, have non unique solutions. We
discuss this problem and propose to use Jaynes maximum entropy principle to single out the most
unbiased maximum-likelihood guess.

INTRODUCTION

The role of the variational principles in science can hardly be overemphasized. Max-
imization or minimization of the appropriate functionals provides elegant solutions of
rather complicated problems and contributes to the deeper philosophical understanding
of the laws of Nature. Minimization of the optical path-Fermat principle or minimization
of the action-Hamilton principle are two particular examples of such a treatment in op-
tics and classical mechanics, respectively. In the thermodynamics and statistical physics
an appropriate measure which deserves to be maximized was introduced by Boltzmann
as entropy S = −kb log G
, where G denotes the volume in the phase space or the number
of distinguishable states. The role of entropy as uncertainty measure in communication
and information theory was recognized by Shannon. His deﬁnition S = − (cid:229) n pn log pn
is unique in the sense that fulﬁlls reasonable demands put on the information measure
associated with a probability distribution pn. Particularly, the uncertainty is maximized
when all the outcomes are equally likely– the uniform distribution contains the largest
amount of uncertainty. Its implications for physical and technical practice were noticed
by Jaynes [1], who proposed a variational method known as principle of Maximum En-
tropy (MaxEnt). According to this rule one should select such a probability distribution
which fulﬁlls given constraints and simultaneously maximizes Shannon entropy. This
gives the most unbiased solution of the problem consistent with the given observations.
On the philosophical level this corresponds to the celebrated Laplace’s Principle of In-
sufﬁcient Reasoning. It states that if there is no reason to prefer among several possibil-
ities, than the best strategy is to consider them as equally likely and pick up the average.
This strategy appeared to be extremely useful in many applications covering the ﬁelds
of statistical inference, communication problems or pattern recognition [2].

But entropy is not the only important functional in probability theory The entropic
measure known as Kullback-Leibler divergence [3] or relative entropy E({pi}|{qi}) =
i pi log(pi/qi) bears striking resemblance to the Shannon entropy, however it posses
a different interpretation. It quantiﬁes the distance in the statistical sense between two
different distributions pi and qi. Provided that one party (pi in our notation) are the
sampled relative frequencies, the principle of minimum relative entropy coincides with

(cid:229)
the maximum likelihood (MaxLik) estimation problem [4, 5]. Similarly to the previous
case of MaxEnt principle MaxLik is not a rule that requires justiﬁcation - it does not
need to be proved. At present there are many examples of successful application of this
estimation technique for solving inverse problems, or recently, for quantiﬁcation of such
a fragile effect as entanglement.

Though both the celebrated principles, MaxEnt and MaxLik, rely on the notion of
entropy, their usage and interpretation differ substantially. Whereas the former one pro-
vides the most conservative guess still consistent with the data, the later one is the most
optimistic one ﬁtting the given data in the best possible way [2, 4]. However, both the
methods are suffering by certain drawbacks: MaxLik is capable of dealing with counted
noisy data in realistic experiments but its interpretation usually requires a certain cut-off
in the parameter space. Otherwise the solution may appear us under-determined. On the
other hand, the MaxEnt principle removes this ambiguity by selecting the most unbiased
solution, however realistic data may appear as inconsistent due to the ﬂuctuations, and
cannot be straightforwardly used as constraints. The purpose of this contribution is to
unify both these concepts into a single estimation procedure capable of handling any
data, and to provide the most likely and most unbiased solution without any cut-offs.

MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD QUANTUM-STATE
RECONSTRUCTION

To address the problem of quantum state reconstruction [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] let us
consider a generic quantum measurement. The formulation will be developed for the
case of ﬁnite dimensional quantum systems. The reader can think of a spin 1/2 system
for the sake of simplicity.

Assume that we are given a ﬁnite number N of identical samples of the system, each
in the same but unknown quantum state described by the density operator r . Given those
systems our task is to identify the unknown true state r as accurately as possible from
the results of measurements performed on them.

On most general level any set of measurements can be represented by a Probability
Operator Valued Measure (POVM), {P
j}, j = 1 . . .M. Its elements are semi-positive
j = ˆ1. The last re-
deﬁnite operators that sum up to unity operator, P
j P
quirement is simply the consequence of the conservation of probability: The measured
particle is always detected in one of the M output channels, no particles are lost.

j ≥ 0, ∀ j, (cid:229)

Let us assume, for concreteness, that N particles prepared in the same state have been
observed in M different output channels of the measurement apparatus. For spin 1/2
particles those channels could be for instance the six output channels of a Stern-Gerlach
apparatus subsequently oriented along x, y, and z directions.

Provided that each particular output

j,

j = 1, . . ., M

(1)

has been registered n j times, (cid:229)
Using this data, the true state r

j n j = N, the relative frequencies are given as f j = n j/N.
is to be inferred. The probabilities of occurrences of

P
various outcomes are predicted by quantum mechanics as

p j = Trr

j,

j = 1 . . . M

(2)

If the probabilities p j of getting a sufﬁcient number of different outcomes P

j were
known, it would be possible to determine the true state r directly by inverting the
linear relation (2). This is the philosophy behind the “standard” quantum tomographic
techniques [6, 9]. For example, in the rather trivial case of a spin one half particle, the
probabilities of getting three linearly independent projectors determine the unknown
state uniquely. Here, however, a serious problem arises. Since only a ﬁnite number of
systems can be investigated, there is no way how to ﬁnd out those probabilities. The
only data one has at his or her disposal are the relative frequencies f j, which sample
the principally unknowable probabilities p j. It is obvious that for a small number of
runs, the true probabilities p j and the corresponding detected frequencies f j may differ
substantially. As a result of this, the modiﬁed realistic problem,

f j = TrP

jr

(3)

has generally no solution on the space of semi-positive deﬁnite hermitian operators
describing physical states. This linear equation for the unknown density matrix may
be solved for example by means of pattern functions, see e.g. [9, 10], what could be
considered as a typical example of the standard approach suffering from the above
mentioned drawbacks.

Having measurements done and their results registered, the experimenter’s knowledge
about the measured system is increased. Since quantum theory is probabilistic, it has lit-
tle sense to ask the question: "What quantum state is determined by that measurement?"
More appropriate question is [13, 14, 15, 16]: "What quantum states seem to be most
likely for that measurement?"

Quantum theory predicts the probabilities of individual detections, see Eq. (2). From
them one can construct the total joint probability of registering data {n j}. We assume
that the input system (particle) is always detected in one of M output channels, and this
is repeated N times. Subsequently, the overall statistics of the experiment is multinomial,

L (r ) =

N!
i ni!

Tr(r

j (cid:2)

j)

n j,
(cid:3)

(4)

where n j = N f j denotes the rate of registering a particular outcome j. In the following
we will omit the multinomial factor from expression (4) as it has no inﬂuence on
the results. Physically, the quantum state reconstruction corresponds to a synthesis of
various measurements done under different experimental conditions, performed on the
ensemble of identically prepared systems. For example, the measurement might be
subsequent recording of an unknown spin of the neutron (polarization of the photon)
using different settings of the Stern Gerlach apparatus, or the recording of the quadrature
operator of light in rotated frames in quantum homodyne tomography. The likelihood
functional L (r ) quantiﬁes the degree of belief in the hypothesis that for a particular data
set {n j} the system was prepared in the quantum state r . The MaxLik estimation simply
selects the state for which the likelihood attains its maximum value on the manifold of
density matrices.

P
(cid:213)
(cid:213)
P
To make the mathematics simpler we will maximize the logarithm of the likelihood

functional,

L (cid:181)

f j log p j,

j

rather then L itself. Notice that L is a convex functional,

L[ar

1 + (1 − a )r 2] ≥ a L(r 1) + (1 − a )L(r 2),

deﬁned on the convex set of semi-positive deﬁnite density matrices r , r ≥ 0, Trr = 1.
This ensures that there is a single global maximum or at most a closed set of equally
likely quantum states.

The direct application of the variational principle to likelihood functional together
with the convexity property yield the necessary and sufﬁcient condition for its maximum
in the form of a nonlinear operator equation [17, 18],

where

Rr = r ,

R = (cid:229)

f j
p j

j

j

is a semi-positive deﬁnite operator. In particular, R is unity operator provided the
maximum-likelihood solution is strictly positive.

Let us now consider a tomographically incomplete measurement. In such a case, the
inverse problem might have multiple solutions. This will happen, for example, when the
set of normalized Hermitian operators s
satisfying the constraints p j(s ) = f j, ∀ j has a
nonempty intersection with the set of density matrices. As will be illustrated below, two
equally-likely solutions of an under-determined inverse problem can be very different.
It is then a question which maximum-likely state should be picked up as the estimate of
the true state.

We propose to use Jaynes MaxEnt principle to resolve this ambiguity. Information
content of the set of MaxLik solutions can be quantiﬁed according to their entropy. A
natural choice is then to select the state maximizing the entropy, which is the least biased
state with respect to missing measurements.

Let us assume that there are two different density operators r 1 and r 2 maximizing the

likelihood functional. The two operators satisfy the extremal equations (7),

R(r 1)r 1 = r 1,
R(r 2)r 2 = r 2.

The interpretation of the operator R is the following: Denoting f (r , s , a ) ≡ L[(1 −
, and calculating its

] the likelihood of a convex combination of states r and s

a )r + as
path derivative at r ,

¶

¶a

f (r , s , a ) = lim
a →0

f (r , s , a ) − f (r , s , 0)
a

= Tr[R(r )s ] − 1,

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(cid:229)
P
(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

we see that this derivative is given by the expectation value of R(r ) taken with s
.
Expectation values of operator R(r ) deﬁne hyperplanes perpendicular to the gradient
of the likelihood at r .

Since the likelihood cannot be increased by moving from r 1 toward r 2 and vice versa

(both density matrices are maximum likely states) it follows that

Tr[R(r 1)r 2] = Tr[R(r 2)r 1] = 1.

Expressing the two conditions in terms of probabilities p1 j and p2 j generated by r 1

and r 2, respectively we get

f j

f j

p1 j
p2 j
p2 j
p1 j

j

j

= 1,

= 1,

1 j + p2
p2
2 j
2p1 j p2 j

f j

j

= 1.

Rr 1 = r 1,
Rr 2 = r 2.

which upon summing the left-hand sides yields condition

Now since (p2

1 j + p2

2 j)/(2p1 j p2 j) > 1 unless p1 j = p2 j we obtain,

Trr 1P

j = Trr 2P

j, ∀ j

which means that the probabilities, and so the operators R(r 1) and R(r 2) are identical.
The two extremal equations therefore read,

Notice that both r 1 and r 2 commute with the common generator R.

MAXIMIZATION OF ENTROPY

Having found a maximum of the likelihood functional, we still do not know whether
this solution is unique or not. Provided a closed set of such states exists, we would
like to maximize the entropy functional over it. In this way we will get the least biased
maximum-likelihood guess.

The properties of the maximum-likelihood solutions discussed above simplify this
problem a lot, because we know that all density matrices belonging to the maximum
likely set generate the same probabilities.

We will take those probabilities as constraints of the new optimization problem:

Maximize entropy,

E(r ) = −Tr(r

ln r ),

(16)

(cid:229)
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
subject to constraints

Tr(r

j) = Tr(r MLP

j),

j = 0 . . . M,

(17)

where r ML is a maximum likely state and where we deﬁned P
ization of the estimated state.

Problem Eq. (16) and (17) is known to have a unique solution [1],

0 = ˆ1 to keep the normal-

r ME = exph(cid:229)

l

jP

ji,

j

j = 0 . . .M,

(18)

where Lagrange multipliers l

j can be determined from the constraints.

The proposed approach combines good features of maximum-likelihood and
maximum-entropy methods. From the set of density matrices that are most consis-
tent with the observed data in the sense of maximum likelihood we select the least
biased one. At the same time the positivity, and thus also physical soundness, of the
result is guaranteed.

Let us remind the reader that a direct application of the maximum entropy principle
to raw data (i.e. right hand sides in constraints Eq. (17) replaced by f j) is not possible,
because the constraints often cannot be satisﬁed with any semi-positive density operators
due to the unavoidable presence of noise in the data.

j, P

For the rest of the paper let us restrict ourselves to the most simple case of commuting
measurements [P
k] = 0, ∀ j, k. Such tomographic scheme would correspond to the
measurement of diagonal elements of the true density matrix. Although this may seem as
an oversimpliﬁcation, many inverse problems can be reduced to this form. Let us men-
tion the neutron absorption tomography, or inefﬁcient photo detection as two signiﬁcant
examples.

We will illustrate the proposed reconstruction scheme on a simple example of commut-
ing measurements. Denoting {|iihi|} the common eigenbasis of POVM elements {P
j}
we have that

The maximum entropy solution Eq. (18) will assume a diagonal form in this basis, its
eigenvalues being,

Denoting r i = hi|r |ii and ci j = hi|P

j|ii we ﬁnally get a nonlinear system of equations,

EXAMPLE

l

jP

j = (cid:229)

ri|iihi|.

j

i

hi|r ME|ii = exp
(cid:2)

l

jhi|P

j|ii

.
(cid:3)

e(cid:229)

j′ l

j′ ci j′ ci j = (cid:229)

ci jr ML,i

,

i

j

i

(19)

(20)

(21)

that is to be solved for the unknown M + 1 Lagrange multipliers l

j.

P
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
0.3

0.2

0.1

FIGURE 1. Diagonal representation of a particular true state.

i

j
j

i

FIGURE 2. Randomly generated matrix ci j parameterizing a three element POVM.

A particular true six-dimensional vector r true,i is shown in Fig. 1. In a simulated
experiment this state has been subject to randomly generated three element POV M; its
elements ci j in the common diagonalizing basis are shown in Fig. 2.

The probabilities of observing results j = 1, 2, 3 are as follows: p j = (cid:229)

i ci jr true,i. They
are shown in Fig. 3 for our particular choice of r true and ci j. Taking the probabilities as
the input data, we solved the maximum-likelihood extremal equation iteratively starting
from three different strictly positive density matrices. It is worth noticing that a quantum
state reconstruction from compatible observations is a linear and positive problem. In
this case the operator equation (7) reduces to a simple diagonal form which is suitable
to iterative solving. This algorithm is sometimes called the expectation maximization
algorithm in statistical literature and is known to converge monotonically from any
strictly positive initial point [19, 20] .

As we can see, the three maximum-likely estimates represent very different system

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.3

0.2

0.1

j

i

FIGURE 3. Relative frequencies of the outcomes of a thought tomographic measurement. For the true
state and POVM elements, see Figs. 1 and 2.

FIGURE 4. Three particular maximum-likelihood estimates based on the result of the though experi-
ment described in the text.

conﬁgurations. The simple POVM used was too rough to resolve those differences, and
as a consequence, all the estimated states yield exactly the same probabilities of the three
possible outcomes of the measurement.

In the next step, those probabilities were used as constraints for the entropy maxi-
mization, as we have discussed in the previous section. As a result, a unique state was
selected out of the set of maximum-likely states. The result is shown in Fig. 5. Notice
that this state is a good approximation to the original state of Fig. 1. Even though the
two are smoothed out a bit, they can be clearly recognized in the reconstruction.

CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated the utility of the maximum-entropy principle for tomographically
incomplete quantum state reconstruction schemes. Although the entropic principles

0.3

0.2

0.1

FIGURE 5. The result of entropy maximization over the set of maximum-likelihood estimates (three of
which are shown in Fig. 4.)

i

cannot be directly applied to noisy experimental data due to the positivity of quantum
states, they can be used to remove the ambiguity of maximum likelihood estimation.
The proposed method could ﬁnd applications in quantum homodyne detection and other
related inﬁnite-dimensional problems suffering from the lack of experimental data.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the projects LN00A015 and CEZ:J14/98 of the Czech Min-
istry of Education and Czech-Italian project “Decoherence and quantum measurement.”

REFERENCES

1. Jaynes, E. T., “Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics,” in 1962 Brandeis Summer Lectures,

vol. 3, edited by K. W. Ford, Benjamin, New York, 1963, p. 181.

2. Frieden, B. R., Probability, Statistical Optics, and Data Testing, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983.
3. Kullback, S., and Leibler, R. A., Ann. of Math. Stat., 22, 79 (1951).
4. Fisher, R. A., Proc. Camb. Phi. Soc., 22, 700 (1925).
5. Helstrom, C. W., Quantum Detection and Estimation Theory, Academic Press, New York, 1976.
6. Vogel, K., and Risken, H., Phys. Rev. A, 40, 2847 (1989).
7. Weigert, S., Phys. Rev. A, 45, 7688 (1992).
8. Smithey, D. T., Beck, M., Raymer, M. G., and Faridani, A., Phys. Rev. Lett., 70, 1244 (1993).
9. Leonhardt, U., Measuring of the Quantum State of Light, Cambridge Press, Cambridge, 1997.
10. Welsch, D.-G., Vogel, W., and Opatrný, T., “Homodyne Detection and Quantum State Reconstruc-

tion,” in Progress in Optics, vol. 39, edited by E. Wolf, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1999.

11. Buzek, V., and Derka, R., “Quantum observations,” in Coherence and Statistics of Photons and Atoms,

edited by J. Peˇrina, Wiley, New York, 2001, pp. 198 - 261.

12. Banaszek, K., D’Ariano G. M., Paris M. G. A., and Sacchi, M. F., Phys. Rev. A, 61, 010304(R)

(1999).

13. Bernardo, J. M, and Smith, A. F. M., Bayesian Theory, Wiley, Chichester, 1994.
14. Schack, R., Brun, T. A., and Caves, C. M., Phys. Rev. A, 64, 014305 (2001).
15. Hradil, Z., and Summhammer, J., J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 33, 7607 (2000).

16. Hradil, Z., Summhammer, J., and Rauch, H., Phys. Lett. A, 261, 20 (1999).
17. Hradil, Z., Phys. Rev. A, 55, 1561(R) (1997).
18. ˇReháˇcek, J., Hradil, Z., and Ježek, M., Phys. Rev. A, 63, 040303(R) (2001).
19. Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B., J. R. Statist. Soc. B, 39, 1 (1977).
20. Vardi Y., and Lee, D., J. R. Statist. Soc. B, 55, 569 (1993).

