Recurrence plot statistics and the eﬀect of embedding

T. K. March,1 S. C. Chapman1 and R. O. Dendy2,1

1Space and Astrophysics Group, Department of Physics, Warwick University, Coventry CV4 7AL,
United Kingdom

2UKAEA Culham Division, Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 3DB, United
Kingdom.

published in Physica D 200 pages 171–184

Abstract

Recurrence plots provide a graphical representation of the recurrent patterns in a time-
series, the quantiﬁcation of which is a relatively new ﬁeld. Here we derive analytical expres-
sions which relate the values of key statistics, notably determinism and entropy of line length
distribution, to the correlation sum as a function of embedding dimension. These expressions
are obtained by deriving the transformation which generates an embedded recurrence plot
from an unembedded plot. A single unembedded recurrence plot thus provides the statistics
of all possible embedded recurrence plots. If the correlation sum scales exponentially with
embedding dimension, we show that these statistics are determined entirely by the exponent
of the exponential. This explains the results of Iwanski and Bradley (Chaos 8 [1998] 861-871)
who found that certain recurrence plot statistics are apparently invariant to embedding di-
mension for certain low-dimensional systems. We also examine the relationship between the
mutual information content of two timeseries and the common recurrent structure seen in
their recurrence plots. This allows time-localized contributions to mutual information to be
visualized. This technique is demonstrated using geomagnetic index data; we show that the
AU and AL geomagnetic indices share half their information, and ﬁnd the timescale on which
mutual features appear.

5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

Patterns are ubiquitous in nature, where their presence may imply inherent predictability. As a
result there is great interest in developing methods for detecting and quantifying patterns, leading
to quantitative measures of structure, similarity, information content, and predictability. Here we
consider recurrence plots, which oﬀer a means to quantify the pattern within a timeseries, and
also the pattern shared between two timeseries.

Recurrence plots are a method for visualizing recurrent patterns within a timeseries or sequence.
They were ﬁrst proposed in 1981 by Maizel and Lenk [1] as a method of visualizing patterns in
sequences of genetic nucleotides. They have since been introduced into the study of dynamical
systems [2], where much eﬀort has been put into building quantiﬁcation schemes for the plots and
for the patterns within them. There are now many quantitative recurrence plot measures available
[3, 4]. These have been applied with success to patterns as diverse as music [5], climate variation
[6], heart rate variability [7], webpage usage [8], video recognition [9], and the patterns in written
text and computer code [10].

In outline, a data series S can be considered as a set of n scalar measurements

from which a sequence of N d-dimensional vectors ak can be constructed using a procedure known
as time-delay embedding. The vectors are deﬁned as

S = {s1, s2, s3, ..., sn}

ak = {sk, sk+τ , sk+2τ , ..., sk+(d−1)τ }

where τ is a delay parameter and d is known as the embedding dimension, [11]; these parameters
are typically chosen independently of the recurrence plot technique, for example see [12]. A
recurrence plot is constructed by considering whether a given pair of these coordinates are nearby
in the embedding space. Typically, the maximum norm is used,

so that the distance between two coordinates equals the maximum distance in any dimension. A
recurrence plot is represented by a tensor T d
ij whose elements correspond to the distance between
each of the N 2 possible pairs of coordinates ai, aj [2]:

kai − ajk ≡ max

{|si+k − sj+k|}

k

T A
ij = Θ (ǫ − kai − ajk)

where Θ is a step function (0 for negative arguments, 1 for positive arguments). For each pair
of coordinates in the series whose separation is less than the threshold parameter ǫ, Tij takes the
value unity, which can be plotted as a black dot on an otherwise white graph.

A recurrence plot of independent and identically distributed (IID) data appears as a random
scattering of black dots, while a regularly repeating signal (such as a sine wave, e.g. see Fig. 1
of [13]) appears as a series of equally spaced, 45◦ diagonal black lines. An irregularly repeating
signal (such as the output of a chaotic system) typically appears as a pattern of small diagonal
lines of varying length. Paling of the plot away from the main diagonal indicates that the longer
one observes no repeat of a particular feature, the less likely a repeat is to occur. In this case
it follows that probability depends on time, and therefore that the process which generated such
data is non-stationary.

In this paper we investigate the statistics of recurrence plots, and their meaning in relation to well
understood statistics from nonlinear timeseries analysis. First, we examine the meaning of two of

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1

the key statistics in recurrence quantiﬁcation analysis (RQA), namely the determinism and the en-
tropy of line length distribution [3], and the eﬀect on them of the time-delay embedding procedure
[14, 11]. Iwanski and Bradley [13] found that the appearance and statistics of recurrence plots for
certain low-dimensional systems are not signiﬁcantly altered by a small change in the embedding
dimension d, suggesting that these statistics may be important new invariant characteristics of a
system. However, unlike traditional measures where invariance relies on the embedding dimen-
sion being suﬃciently high, Iwanski and Bradley found the same statistics for an unembedded
recurrence plot as for an embedded version. This was further examined by Gao and Cai [15], who
suggested that many recurrence plot statistics may rely on information from a higher embedding
dimension than was used to construct the recurrence plot. However this does not completely ex-
plain why these quantities appear to be invariant with respect to the embedding dimension; nor
whether these quantities are independent of each other, or of other better known measures. This
is important, since independent quantities potentially yield new information about a system. In
section 2 we show that all embedded recurrence plots are present within the unembedded plot,
accessible via a simple transformation. Using this transformation, we derive in section 3 the eﬀect
of embedding on two RQA statistics: determinism, and entropy of line length distribution. For the
case of exponential scaling of the correlation sum [see Eq.(9) below] with embedding dimension,
which might be expected for certain low-dimensional systems, we derive expressions which relate
these quantities to the Kolmogorov entropy rate [14]. This is important for two reasons. First, it
provides a new perspective on the physical meaning of these quantities. Second, it can be used
to establish baseline values for independent and identically distributed (IID) processes, above or
below which a measurement can be said to be signiﬁcant.

In section 4, we examine the converse question of how well-known statistics from nonlinear time-
series analyis relate to recurrence plots. We demonstrate that a standard algorithm for computing
the mutual information between two timeseries is related to counting the number of black dots
common to the recurrence plots of the two timeseries in question. This suggests the deﬁnition
of a new form of cross recurrence plot which, when drawn, allows contributions to the mutual
information to be visualized. We apply this technique to a physical system in which issues of
predictability and correlation are of practical interest. Earth’s geomagnetic activity is monitored
by a non-uniformly distributed circumpolar ring of magnetometers, which measure ﬂuctuations in
horizontal magnetic ﬁeld strength due to enhancements in auroral activity. These measurements
are compiled to form the AE geomagnetic indices [16], of which we consider AU (a proxy for the
maximum eastward ﬂowing polar current) and AL (a proxy for the maximum westward ﬂowing
current). In common with many other “real world” timeseries, these timeseries show both low and
high dimensional behavior, in this case well deﬁned features on timescales of days (storms) which
are embedded in colored noise [17].

2 Eﬀect of Embedding Dimension

We now derive a transformation which generates an embedded recurrence plot from an unembed-
ded recurrence plot. This result is central to the subsequent discussion of the eﬀect of embedding
on statistics derived from recurrence plots. A single recurrence on an umbedded d = 1 plot is
represented by a single black dot, corresponding to a pair of data points closer together than ǫ.
If we consider Fig. 1 (left) to represent part of a d = 1 recurrence plot, the example illustrated
relates to points numbered 2 and 8, i.e.

Figure 1 (right) shows a line of length two. Still taking d = 1, the situation represented is

|a2 − a8| < ǫ

|a2 − a8| < ǫ and |a3 − a9| < ǫ

2

(5)

(6)

Figure 1: Representation of diagonal lines of length one and two on a recurrence plot, corresponding
to pairs of points in the original timeseries.

Consider forming coordinates in a d = 2, τ = 1 embedding space [see Eq. (2)]. If we consider Fig.
1 (left) to represent a region of a d = 2 recurrence plot, the black dot now represents

ka2 − a8k < ǫ

(7)

where an now denotes {an, an+1}. Using the maximum norm, Eq. (3), this is equivalent to Eq. (6).
Therefore a single dot in d = 2 represents a line of length two in d = 1. The transformation from
d = 1 to d = 2 thus reduces the length of all diagonal lines by one dot. An isolated dot is removed
entirely.

Formally, we represent the transformation to arbitrary dimension as

Tij(d) = Tij(1) × Ti+τ,j+τ (1) × Ti+2τ,j+2τ (1) × ... × Ti+(d−1)τ,j+(d−1)τ (1)

(8)

An element on the recurrence plot with embedding dimension d is thus related to a diagonal
sequence of d elements on the unembedded recurrence plot Tij(1). This transformation enables
the conversion of an unembedded recurrence plot into any embedded recurrence plot with any
values of d or τ . This suggests that embedding in the construction of recurrence plots is not
strictly necessary, since all of the information is contained within the unembedded plot Tij(1);
let us refer to this as the parent plot. Rather than performing embedding, information can be
extracted directly from this parent plot. Understanding how the information is contained in
the parent plot assists in consideration of how various recurrence plot statistics are aﬀected by
embedding.

3 Meaning of Recurrence Plot Statistics

Given the transformation derived above, we now consider two of the key statistics of recurrence
plots, namely the determinism and the entropy of the diagonal line length distribution. We show
that both these statistics are related to the correlation sum, and also relate them to the probability
distribution of line lengths on an unembedded plot.
In the case of exponential scaling of the
correlation sum with embedding dimension, we show that they do not depend on the embedding
dimension d.

Recurrence quantiﬁcation analysis (RQA) provides a set of statistical measures which have been
proposed to quantify patterns based on the lines and dots visible on a recurrence plot [3]. The
fraction of the plot colored black is the most fundamental statistic associated with recurrence
plots. This is known as the recurrence rate in RQA, and is known elsewhere as the correlation

3

sum Cd(ǫ) [14, 18]. Cd(ǫ) is the fraction of pairs of coordinates closer together than ǫ, and is
deﬁned by

CA

d (ǫ) =

2
N (N − 1)

N

N

Xi=1

Xj=i+1

Θ (ǫ − kai − aj k)

(9)

A recurrence plot can be considered to be a two-dimensional pictorial representation of the points
that contribute to Eq. (9) for a particular value of ǫ.

The remaining statistics in RQA are the fraction of black dots involved in diagonal lines, known
as the determinism Dd, the entropy of the diagonal line length distribution Ed, the ratio of
determinism to correlation sum, and the slope of the line of best ﬁt on a graph of recurrence
probability versus distance from main diagonal, known as the trend [3]. Except for the trend, these
statistics can be related to the probability distribution of diagonal line lengths Pd(L), which is
the probability of observing a diagonal black line of length L beginning from a randomly selected
element of the recurrence plot. From Eq. (8), the distribution of line lengths on an embedded
recurrence plot is related to the distribution on an unembedded plot by

Hence any statistic formed from the embedded Pd(L) can be constructed from the unembedded
P1(L + d − 1). For example, using Eq. (10), the correlation sum can be written as

Pd(L) = P1(L + d − 1)

Cd =

(L − d + 1)P1(L)

∞

XL=d

P1(L) = CL+2 − 2CL+1 + CL

This relationship can be reversed to give

Hence any statistics derived from P1(L) can also be derived from the correlation sum, as we now
explicitly show.

First we consider the determinism Dd [3], which was observed to be invariant to embedding
dimension by Iwanski and Bradley [13]. This is the ratio of black dots included in lines of length
greater than unity to the total number of black dots. The determinism Dd quantiﬁes the prevalence
of lines, and is believed [3] to quantify how deterministic a system is. This can be related to the
probability Cd of observing a black dot in a randomly selected location, and to the probability of
observing an isolated black dot. The number of black dots included in lines is equal to the total
number of black dots minus the number of isolated black dots (lines of length unity), so we can
write

Using Eq. (12) to express P1(d) in Eq. (13), we have

Thus the determinism at embedding dimension d can be inferred from knowledge of the correlation
sum at nearby embedding dimensions d, d + 1 and d + 2.

The next statistic in the RQA is the Shannon entropy of the line length distribution [3]. This is
deﬁned as

Ed = −

Qd(L) ln Qd(L)

(15)

Dd =

Cd − P1(d)
Cd

Dd =

2Cd+1 − Cd+2
Cd

∞

XL=1

4

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

where Qd(L) is the probability of observing a line of length L given the fact that a line is observed.
This can be related to the probability Pd(L) of observing a line of length L, and the probability
of observing a line of arbitrary length. Using Eqs. (10) and (12) we obtain

Qd(L) =

CL+d+1 − 2CL+d + CL+d−1
Cd − Cd+1

(16)

Hence, like the determinism, the Shannon entropy of line length distribution can be obtained from
the correlation sum.

3.1 Exponential scaling of correlation sum

Suppose we assume that the correlation sum Cd can be expressed as an inverse exponential function
of d with exponent K2. This is strictly true for data derived from an IID process, and is observed
for many low-dimensional chaotic processes under certain conditions [14]; in this case K2 is known
as the Kolmogorov entropy rate. It has been previously shown that this can be extracted from
the distribution of recurrence plot diagonal line lengths Pd(L) [4]. We write the correlation sum
as

Cd = Ae

−K2d

where we have absorbed the dependence of Cd on the threshold parameter ǫ into the constant A.
Substitution of Eq. (17) into Eq. (12) yields

P1(L) = A(1 − e

−K2)2e

−K2L

This implies that P1(L) is an exponential function of L with the same exponent K2 that governs
the dependence of Cd on d. This result has been derived independently by an alternative route
which considers the divergence of trajectories directly [15].

From Eqs. (13) and (18), the determinism Dd can be written

Dd = 1 −

Ae−K2d(1 − e−K2)2
Ae−K2d

This simpliﬁes to give

Dd = 1 − γ2
(20)
where we deﬁne γ = (1 − e−K2). For exponential scaling of Cd, the determinism is a constant
independent of the embedding dimension d chosen, and is determined by the exponential scaling
exponent. Where the correlation sum only exhibits exponential scaling over a limited range of
embedding dimensions (such as might be expected for a low-dimensional chaotic process), this
expression remains true, since Eq. (14) only relies on knowledge of adjacent (in d) correlation
sums.

To derive the Shannon entropy of line length distribution, Eq. (15), we insert Eq. (17) into Eq. (16)
to give

Qd(L) = (1 − e

−K2)e

−K2(L−1)

which when inserted into Eq. (15) gives

(17)

(18)

(19)

(21)

(22)

As with Dd, this is independent of the embedding dimension d. However, unlike Eq. (20) this
expression is only true in the case of perfect exponential scaling.

Ed = K2 (cid:18)

− 1

− ln γ

(cid:19)

1
γ

5

Figure 2: Correlation sum Cd computed as a function of embedding dimension d for 105 samples
of the logistic map with ǫ = 0.1. Applying Eq. (17) to the measured straight line slope gives
K2 = 0.6349 ± 0.0004.

Figure 3: Determinism Dd computed as a function of embedding dimension d for 105 samples of
the logistic map with ǫ = 0.1, shown as asterisks. Solid line shows theoretical prediction of 0.7791
obtained from Eq. (20) using the measured value of K2 from Fig. 2.

6

Figure 4: Shannon entropy of line probability distribution Ed computed as a function of embedding
dimension d for 105 samples of the logistic map with ǫ = 0.1, shown as asterisks. Solid line shows
theoretical prediction of 1.4709 obtained from Eq. (22) using the measured value of K2 from Fig. 2.

As a demonstration of these results, Fig. 2 shows the correlation sum computed as a function of
embedding dimension for the logistic map, xt+1 = µxt(1 − xt), in the chaotic regime with µ = 4.
This shows reasonable scaling of the correlation sum with dimension, as in Eq. (17), and yields
K2 = 0.6349 ± 0.0004. By Eq. (20), this implies a value for the determinism Dd of 0.7791 ± 0.0002
and by Eq. (22) a value for Ed of 1.4709 ± 0.0006. These values are shown on Figs. 3 and 4 as
the solid lines, while the actual values computed from recurrence plots of the data are shown as
asterisks. Until statistical noise becomes important (around d = 25-30), the points lie convincingly
on the lines.

An initial exponential distribution of diagonal line lengths remains exponential after embedding,
explaining the apparent invariance with respect to d of these statistics for low-dimensional chaotic
systems [13]. The determinism Dd and the entropy Ed are in this case governed by the exponential
scaling exponent of the correlation sum, K2.

A corollary is provided by the results of Zbilut et al. [19], who applied the techniques of recurrence
quantiﬁcation analysis to short sequences of random integers, as well as to the logistic map. There
were three sequences considered: (a) consecutive digits of π; (b) pseudo-random integers generated
with MATLAB; (c) experimentally derived random integers, produced by tuning a radio antenna to
an empty part of the spectrum [20]. All three were considered with sequence lengths of N = 1000,
3000 and 5000, and only exact matches were considered to constitute recurrences. This corresponds
to ǫ = 0 in Eq. (4), which is only possible when working with integer sequences; for real-valued
sequences, ǫ is limited by numerical precision. It was found that for (a) and (b) the determinism
was slightly below 20%, and was deﬁned up to d0 = 4 for N = 1000, d0 = 5 for N = 3000 and
d0 = 6 for N = 5000. However, (c) had a determinism only slightly above 0%, which was deﬁned
only up to d0 = 2 regardless of N . The authors suggested that this was possibly due to some
innate randomness that sequence (c) possessed, and suggested the RQA as a test to distinguish
between physical and pseudo random numbers.

For data drawn from an IID process, the probability of a particular dot being black on the d = 1
plot is a constant C1, the correlation sum. Referring back to the deﬁnition of Eq. (17), we can

7

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

write

and

These quantities are ﬁnite for IID data because a small number of lines are created by chance.
To conclude that observed data are non-random, the values measured must be compared with
Eqs. (24) and (25) to establish the signiﬁcance of the result.

Integer sequences can be represented as a string of symbols from an alphabet of size m. The
probability of observing a black dot in a randomly selected location on the unembedded d = 1
plot is given by

where pi is the probability of observing symbol i from the alphabet. The sequences (a), (b) and
(c) were all uniformly distributed so we can write pi as

γ = 1 − C1

Dd = C1(2 − C1)

Ed =

ln C1 − ln(1 − C1)

1
C1

C1 =

m

Xi=1

p2
i

pi =

1
m

C1 =

m

Xi=1

1
m2 =

1
m

The measured determinism values [19] died out above a particular value of d, when no diagonal
black lines were seen on a ﬁnite recurrence plot. To estimate the embedding dimension at which
this should occur, we examine the expected number of lines hni on an embedded recurrence
plot. This is given by the total number of elements on the plot multiplied by the probability of
observing, in a randomly selected location, one white dot diagonally followed by d + 1 black dots
on the unembedded recurrence plot:

hni =

N (N − 1)(1 − C1)Cd+1

1

1
2

Setting hni equal to unity gives an estimate for d0, the dimension where the determinism should
die out:

d0 ≈

log 2 − log N (N − 1) − log C1(1 − C1)
log C1

Using Eqs. (24) and (30) with m = 10 symbols we obtain C1 = 0.1 and Dd = 19%. From Eq. (30),
this should be measurable a priori up to d0 ≈ 4.6 for N = 1000, d0 ≈ 5.6 for N = 3000 and
d0 ≈ 6.1 for N = 5000, see Fig. 5. Comparing these values with the measured results [19], we
infer that (a) and (b) behave exactly as would be expected for an IID process with no additional
distinguishing properties.

To explain the results for the experimentally derived random integers (c), we consider sequences
of random integers from the same source [20]. The sequences supplied default to the range 1 to
100, an alphabet of m = 100 symbols. For this value of m we obtain C1 = 0.01 and from Eq. (24)
we predict a value of determinism Dd = 1.99%. This should persist up to d0 ≈ 1.8 for N = 1000,
d0 ≈ 2.3 for N = 3000 and d0 ≈ 2.5 for N = 5000; this information is summarized in Fig. 5.
This agrees with the result reported in [19], so that there is no reason to infer any additional
randomness property for (c); the results of recurrence quantiﬁcation analysis can be explained as
a consequence of the diﬀerent number of symbols in the sequence.

8

m = 10

m = 100

N
1000
3000
5000

Observed d0 Predicted d0 Observed d0 Predicted d0
1.8
2.3
2.5

4.6
5.6
6.1

4
5
6

2
2
2

Figure 5: Observed and predicted [from Eq. (30)] embedding dimension d0 at which determinism
Dd drops to zero, as a result of ﬁnite sample size N , for sequences of symbols from an alphabet
of size m = 10 symbols (columns 2 and 3) and m = 100 symbols (columns 4 and 5). Observed
values from [19]: for m = 10, consecutive digits of π and pseudo-random integers generated with
MATLAB; for m = 100, experimentally derived random integer sequence from www.random.org.

4 Mutual Information

A recurrence plot can be considered as a visualization of the double summation in the deﬁnition of
the correlation sum, Eq. (9). It is therefore reasonable to expect that a proportion of the statistics
derived from recurrence plots would be related to Cd. Conversely, it would also be reasonable to
expect that existing statistics related to Cd could be derivable from recurrence plots. A recurrence
plot would then provide a visualization of any such statistic. As an example we consider the mutual
information, which is a nonlinear measure of correlation between two (or more) discrete timeseries.
The mutual information I AB between timeseries A and B is deﬁned by

I AB = H(A) + H(B) − H(A, B)

where H(A) is the entropy measured for timeseries A and H(A, B) is the joint entropy, measured
from a joint histogram. For a discrete timeseries, the Shannon entropy is deﬁned by [21]

(31)

(32)

H = −

pi log2 pi

Xi

where pi is again the probability of observing symbol i and the summation is taken over all i.

There are two standard algorithms for computing the entropy H. The ﬁrst, [12], discretizes the
data using a hierarchy of partitions which become ﬁner in regions of the joint histogram that
contain more points. The second approach, [22], uses the second Renyi entropy [23] which can
be approximated by the logarithm of the correlation sum. Hence we can write the second Renyi
mutual information as

2 = log2 CAB − log2CA − log2CB
I AB
(33)
where CAB is the joint correlation sum, which is the recurrence rate of the following type of cross
recurrence plot

ij = T A
T AB
This deﬁnition of a cross recurrence plot diﬀers from the standard deﬁnition [24], but has been
recently proposed by Romano et al. [25] as a visualization of recurrent structure common to two
timeseries. Thus we can obtain a standard mutual information estimate from three recurrence
plots: T A

ij T B
ij

(34)

ij , T B

ij and T AB

ij

.

The mutual information depends on the values of CA and CB, which in turn are conditioned by
ǫA and ǫB, the threshold parameters used to produce the two auto recurrence plots. These two
parameters must be chosen in some fashion, and this choice must be justiﬁed. One solution is to
choose the thresholds such that the resulting auto recurrence plots have the same correlation sum.
That is

CA(ǫA) = CB(ǫB) = C0

(35)

9

Figure 6: Days 1 to 14 of the AU and AL timeseries for the year 1995. AU, being the maximum
reading from a network of magnetometer stations, is mostly positive, while AL is mostly negative.

This choice can be simpliﬁed by deﬁning an unthresholded recurrence plot in terms of the measured
correlation sum of the timeseries

U A

ij = CA

d (kai − aj k)

This recurrence plot has the property that if it is thresholded, then the resulting thresholded
plot will have a recurrence rate (correlation sum) equal to the thresholding parameter. The
corresponding unthresholded cross recurrence plot will now be given by

U AB

ij = max{U A

ij , U B
ij }

since the deﬁnition of a thresholded recurrence plot uses the maximum norm Eq. (3). This allows
us to write the joint correlation sum as a function of the elements of the joint recurrence plot

CAB(C0) =

2
N (N − 1)

N

N

Xi=1

Xj=i+1

Θ(C0 − U AB

ij

)

Thus the joint correlation sum is equal to the recurrence rate of the unthresholded joint recurrence
plot after it has been thresholded with a threshold parameter equal to C0. Following Eq. (33) we
then write the mutual information as

I AB(C0) = log2 CAB(C0) − 2 log2 C0

To demonstrate the quantitative practical use of this technique, we now apply it to the geomagnetic
AU and AL timeseries for the year 1995. AU reﬂects the activity of eastward ﬂowing polar currents,
induced in the atmosphere by activity deeper in earth’s magnetosphere. AL reﬂects the activity
of westward currents, and is typically negative. Figure 6 shows these timeseries for the ﬁrst two
weeks of 1995. AU and AL typically come from opposite sides of the polar current system; they
are therefore expected to share a certain amount of information due to large scale phenomena
(storms) which are seen in both AU and AL, but to have diﬀerences due to smaller ﬂuctuations
arising from local phenomena. We use data for the entire year in order to get good statistics.
Statistical noise acts to decrease the measured mutual information. The variance, due to noise, of
mutual information measurements has been shown to scale with 1/N [26], where N is the number
of data points and here we have N = 5 × 105.

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

10

Figure 7: Mutual information I for AU and AL geomagnetic timeseries, normalized to entropy
of AU and AL separately. Left: as a function of correlation sum C0, see Eq. (39); Right: as a
function of the recurrence threshold parameter ǫ necessary to create the corresponding underlying
thresholded recurrence plots for each measurement.

Within the AU and AL timeseries, three distinct classes of behavior are recognized phenomeno-
logically: quiet time, storms and substorms. During quiet time, measurements of the order of a
few nT to a few tens of nT are seen. The other extreme is seen during a magnetic storm, with
measurements of hundreds of nT persisting for times of the order of several days. These events
correlate strongly with features on the Sun facing the Earth [27], and thus tend to recur on a 27-28
day timescale (the synodic rotation period of the Sun). The intermediate event is a substorm [28],
during which variations on the scale of tens to hundreds of nT persist for a few hours. Substorms
are believed to result from the sudden release of stored energy built up in the magnetotail by the
solar wind.

Figure 7 shows on the left the functional form of I(C0), the mutual information as a function of
correlation sum of the underlying recurrence plots, obtained for the AU and AL timeseries. On
the right are I(ǫA) and I(ǫB), the mutual information as a function of the underlying threshold
parameters, constructed using Eq. (35). Both ﬁgures are normalized to the entropy of AU and
AL considered individually. The maximum fractional mutual information measured is 50% and
corresponds to an underlying correlation sum of C0 = 0.52. To obtain this value of C0, the two
underlying thresholded recurrence plots require thresholds of ǫ = 49nT for AU and ǫ = 103nT for
AL. On the right of Fig. 7 is the functional form of I(ǫ), the mutual information as a function
of the thresholds applied to the two underlying thresholded recurrence plots, again normalized to
the entropy of AU and AL. The solid line shows the relative mutual information as a function of
the threshold applied to the AU recurrence plot, while the dotted line shows the same for AL.

Figures 8 and 9 show unthresholded recurrence plots, as deﬁned by Eq. (36) for the AU and AL
geomagnetic timeseries respectively. The cross recurrence plot formed from these using Eq. (37) is
shown in Fig. 10. These plots show which positions in the original timeseries contribute the most
to the mutual information – in this case the dark areas on the cross recurrence plot correspond
to the gaps between magnetic storms. We conclude that the mutual information being measured
between AU and AL results from magnetic storms appearing in both timeseries.

11

Figure 8: Unthresholded recurrence plot of geomagnetic AU timeseries.

Figure 9: Unthresholded recurrence plot of geomagnetic AL timeseries.

12

Figure 10: Unthresholded cross recurrence plot formed from those shown in Figs. 8 and 9.

5 Conclusions

Recurrence plots are extremely versatile: they analyse a stream of data by comparing segments
of it to other segments taken at earlier and later times. The data stream itself is thus used as an
analysis tool, without any assumptions about the nature of the process that produced it. There are
many statistical measures associated with recurrence plots, some of which are unique to recurrence
plot analysis. Here we have described two of the most common statistics, and have demonstrated
that they are related to better known measures from nonlinear timeseries analysis. In the case
of exponential scaling of the correlation sum with embedding dimension, the determinism and
entropy of line length distribution have been shown to be determined by K2. This explains the
results of [13] and [19].

We have also shown that all recurrence plots are contained within a single parent plot which
contains all of the statistics of its children. It is not strictly necessary to construct recurrence plots
for a variety of embedding parameters, because the key statistics that we have considered are all
contained within this parent plot, and many of these are directly derivable from the distribution
of diagonal line lengths. This demonstrates clearly the eﬀect of embedding on recurrence plots.

A further result is that the mutual information between two timeseries can be obtained from their
recurrence plots, and is related to counting the number of shared black dots. Similar comparisons
of unthresholded recurrence plots yield the mutual information as a function of the threshold
parameter ǫ. This allows time-localized contributions to the mutual information to be assessed
and quantiﬁed, as we have shown for the example of geomagnetic indices.

Comparisons between repeated patterns in signals from nonlinear systems are particularly valu-
able when the systems in question are spatially extended and evolve in a nonstationary fashion.
Macroscopic plasmas, whether naturally occuring or created in fusion experiments, often fall into

13

this category, which presents a substantial challenge to the techniques of statistical and time se-
ries analysis; see, for example, the discussions in recent studies of astrophysical[29], solar[30], and
fusion[31] plasma observations. The successful application of recurrence plots and the concepts of
information theory to the geomagnetic plasma timeseries studied in the present paper is, therefore,
encouraging.

Acknowledgements This work was funded in part by the United Kingdom Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council, and by the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council.

References

[1] J. V. Maizel Jr., R. P. Lenk, Enhanced graphic matrix analysis of nucleic acid and protein
sequences, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 78 (1981) 7665–7669.

[2] J. P. Eckmann, S. O. Kamphorst, D. Ruelle, Recurrence plots of dynamical systems, Euro-

phys. Lett. 4 (1987) 973–977.

[3] C. L. Webber Jr., J. P. Zbilut, Dynamical assessment of physiological systems and states

using recurrence plot strategies, J. Appl. Physiol. 76 (1994) 965–973.

[4] P. Faure, H. Korn, A new method to estimate the Kolmogorov entropy from recurrence plots:

its application to neuronal signals, Physica D 122 (1998) 265–279.

[5] J. Foote, M. Cooper, Visualizing musical structure and rhythm via self-similarity, in: Pro-

ceedings International Conference on Computer Music, Havana, Cuba, 2001.

[6] N. Marwan, J. Kurths, Nonlinear analysis of bivariate data with cross recurrence plots,

Physics Letters A 302 (2002) 299–307.

[7] N. Marwan, N. Wessel, U. Meyerfeldt, A. Schirdewan, J. Kurths, Recurrence-plot-based mea-
sures of complexity and their application to heart-rate-variability data, Physical Review E 66
(2002) 026702.

[8] M. Bernstein, J. D. Bolter, M. Joyce, E. Mylonas, Architectures for volatile hypertext, in:
Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Conference on Hypertext, San Antonio, Texas, United
States, 1991, pp. 243–260.

[9] R. Cutler, L. Davis, Robust periodic motion and motion symmetry detection, in: Proc.
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, South Carolina, USA, 2000.

[10] K. W. Church, J. I. Helfman, Dotplot: a program for exploring self-similarity in millions of

lines of text and code, J. American Statistical Association 2 (1993) 153–174.

[11] F. Takens, Detecting Strange Attractors in Turbulence, Vol. 898 of Lecture Notes in Math,

Springer, New York, 1981.

[12] A. M. Fraser, H. L. Swinney, Independent coordinates for strange attractors from mutual

information, Phys. Rev. A 33 (1986) 1134–1140.

[13] J. S. Iwanski, E. Bradley, Recurrence plots of experimental data: To embed or not to embed?,

Chaos 8 (1998) 861–871.

[14] H. Kantz, T. Schreiber, Nonlinear time series analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1997.

[15] J. Gao, H. Cai, On the structures and quantiﬁcation of recurrence plots, Physics Letters A

270 (2000) 75–87.

14

[16] T. N. Davis, M. Sugiura, Auroral electrojet activity index AE and its universal time variations,

Journal of Geophysical Research 71 (1966) 785–801.

[17] B. Hnat, S. C. Chapman, G. Rowlands, N. W. Watkins, M. P. Freeman, Scaling in solar wind
epsilon and the AE, AL and AU indices as seen by WIND, Geophys. Res. Lett. 10 (2002)
1029.

[18] M. C. Casdagli, Recurrence plots revisited, Physica D 108 (1997) 12–44.

[19] J. P. Zbilut, A. Giuliani, C. L. Webber Jr., Recurrence quantiﬁcation analysis as an emperical
test to distinguish relatively short deterministic versus random number series, Physics Letters
A 267 (2000) 174–178.

[20] M. Haahr, http://www.random.org.

[21] C. E. Shannon, W. Weaver, The mathematical theory of communication, University of Illinois

[22] D. Prichard, J. Theiler, Generalized redundancies for time series analysis, Physica D 84 (1995)

Press, 1949.

476–493.

[23] A. Renyi, Probability theory, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.

[24] J. P. Zbilut, A. Giuliani, C. L. Webber Jr., Detecting deterministic signals in exceptionally
noisy environments using cross-recurrence quantiﬁcation, Physics Letters A 246 (1998) 122–
128.

[25] M. Romano, M. Thiel, J. Kurths, A new deﬁnition of cross recurrence plots, submitted to

[26] M. S. Roulston, Estimating the errors on measured entropy and mutual information, Physica

[27] M. G. Kivelson, C. T. Russell (Eds.), Introduction to Space Physics, Cambridge University

[28] L. R. Lyons, Substorms: Fundamental observational features, distinction from other distur-

bances, and external triggering, Journal of Geophysical Research 101 (1996) 13011–13025.

[29] J. Greenhough, S. C. Chapman, S. Chaty, R. O. Dendy, G. Rowlands, Characterising anoma-
lous transport in accretion disks from X-ray observations, Astronomy and Astrophysics 385
(2002) 693–700.

[30] J. Greenhough, S. C. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, V. M. Nakariakov, G. Rowlands, Statistical
characterisation of full-disk EUV/XUV solar irradiance and correlation with solar activity,
Astronomy and Astrophysics 409 (2003) L17–L20.

[31] J. Greenhough, S. C. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, D. J. Ward, Probability distribution functions
for ELM bursts in a series of JET tokamak discharges, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
45 (2003) 747–758.

Physics Letters A (2003).

D 125 (1999) 285–294.

Press, 1995, Ch. 13.

15

