5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The network of concepts in written texts

Silvia M. G. Caldeira1, Thierry C. Petit Lob˜ao2, R. F. S. Andrade1,

Alexis Neme3 and J. G. V. Miranda1

1 Instituto de F´isica, Universidade Federal da Bahia
Campus Universit´ario da Federa¸c˜ao, 40210-340 - Salvador - BA, Brazil.
2 Instituto de Matem´atica, Universidade Federal da Bahia
Campus Universit´ario da Federa¸c˜ao, 40210-340 - Salvador - BA, Brazil.
3 Institut d’eletronique et d’informatique Gaspard-Monge, IGMFrance.

Abstract

Complex network theory is used to investigate the structure of meaningful con-
cepts in written texts of individual authors. Networks have been constructed after
a two phase ﬁltering, where words with less meaning contents are eliminated, and
all remaining words are set to their canonical form, without any number, gender
or time ﬂexion. Each sentence in the text is added to the network as a clique. A
large number of written texts have been scrutinized, and its found that texts have
small-world as well as scale-free structures. The growth process of these networks
has also been investigated, and a universal evolution of network quantiﬁers have
been found among the set of texts written by distinct authors. Further analyzes,
based on shuﬄing procedures taken either on the texts or on the constructed net-
works, provide hints on the role played by the word frequency and sentence length
distributions to the network structure. Since the meaningful words are related to
concepts in the author’s mind, results for text networks may uncover patterns in
communication and language processes that occur in the mind.

1 Introduction

Concepts of complex networks have proven to be powerful tools in the analysis
of complex systems [1,2,3,4,5]. They have been applied to modelling purposes
as well as to search for properties that naturally emerge in actual systems
due to their large-scale structure. Unlike random graphs, complex networks
reveals ordering principles related to their topological structure. This way, if
complex systems are mapped onto networks, it is possible to use their con-
ceptual framework to identify and even to explain features that seem to have
universal character.

2 February 2008

Several complex networks have been proposed in the scientiﬁc literature as-
sociated with real systems: the biological food web[6], technological commu-
nication networks as the Internet, information networks as the World Wide
Web[7], social networks deﬁned by friendship relations among individuals, etc.
[8].

Word networks have been used to address complex aspects of human language.
In such studies, words are connected according either to semantic associations
[11,12,13] or even by nearness in the text [14,15,16], i.e., based on what is
commonly called word window with a ﬁxed number of words. Those works
intend to establish the structure of a given language as a whole. Because of
this, they deal with a huge amount of texts, independently of their authors,
what is called corpora.

Language is obviously a product of brain activity and, to this regard, we would
like to call the attention to works revealing the presence of neuronal networks
in the brain by direct physiological measurements. In a recent work[17], func-
tional magnetic resonance of human brains has established networks whose
vertices are regions of the cerebral cortex that are activated by external stim-
uli according to a temporal correlation of activity.

In this work, we investigate the relations between the concepts in individual
written texts, by using them as starting point to construct signiﬁcant networks.
Projecting both the concepts present in the text, as well as the way they are
related among them, onto a network gives the opportunity to use the tools
and concepts developed within the network framework to characterize, in a
quantitative way, how the concepts in a written text appear, how ordered and
connected they are, how close to each other they are within the text, and so
on.

2 Network concepts and text network construction

An undirected network is deﬁned by a set of elements, called vertices or nodes,
represented graphically by points, some of which are joined together by an
edge, represented by a line between these points. The topological structure of
many networks displays a large-scale organization, with some typical proper-
ties like: highly sparse connectivity, small minimal paths between vertices and
high local clustering,

To analyze a network, a number of indices (or quantiﬁers) have been proposed,
which allow for a quantiﬁcation of many of the properties quoted above. In
this work we will use the most important of them: number of vertices N,
number of edges M, average connectivity < k >, average minimal path length

2

ℓ, diameter L, degree distribution p(k) , and the Watts and Strogatz clustering
coeﬃcient C (for a thorough discussion of these indices see, e.g., [5]). If the
node degree distributions follow power laws, p(k) ∼ k−γ, the exponent γ
becomes an important index for the network characterization.

Two important network scenarios, characterized respectively by the small-
world [9] and scale-free structures [10], have been identiﬁed to be present in
several complex networks, including those related to the subject of this work,
namely the analysis of corpora and of brain activity. The ﬁrst one is related
to the concomitant presence of small average value for ℓ and high C, while the
second is related to a power law distribution of node degree.

To map the texts onto networks that reﬂect the structure of meaning concepts
within it, we have preserved only the words with an intrinsic meaning, elim-
inating words which have a merely grammatical function, as to arrange the
syntactical structure of sentences in the text (articles, pronouns, prepositions,
conjunctions, abbreviations, and interjections). Afterwards, we have reduced
the remaining words to their canonical forms, i.e., we have disregarded all in-
ﬂections as plural forms, gender variations, and verb forms. Such procedures
are common in studies on language[18]. In order to perform a computer imple-
mentation, we have used some routines, dictionaries, and grammatical rules
from UNITEX package[19]. Unknown words to the program were preserved
in their original forms. After this ﬁltering treatment, we have constructed a
network for each individual text, where each distinct word corresponds to a
single vertex. Since we consider the sentence as the smaller signiﬁcant unit of
the discourse, two words are connected if they belong to the same sentence.
Thus, sentences are incorporated into the network as a complete subgraph,
that is, a clique of mutually connected words. Sentences with common words
are connected by the shared words. The method we propose oﬀers a natural
way to analyze the growth process of the network evolution. We have investi-
gated both the network behavior in this step by step evolving process, what
we call dynamical analysis, as well as the behavior of the entire network in its
ﬁnal form, corresponding to the entire text, called the static analysis. Both
methods reveal important properties and they shall be discussed further on.
In Figure 1, we show an example of a text ﬁlter process together with the
evolving process of network construction for a well known jingle.

In order to guarantee an uniform and comprehensive sample, we have chosen
a collection of 312 texts [20], which can be cast into diﬀerent classes as: genre
(59% technical, 41% literary), language (53% in Portuguese, 47% in English),
gender (72% male authors, 28% female authors). Finally we have also classiﬁed
the texts according to their size (55% with less than 1,000 sentences, 45% with
more than 1,000). The smaller text has 169 and the larger, 276,425 words; in
the average, the texts have 32,691 words.

3

Fig. 1. The ﬁltering treatment and the growth process of the network for a small
poem.

 

 

 

k

1x10-2

)
k
(

1x10-3

1x10-4

3 Results

0.1

0.01

 

)
k
(
p

 

100

101

102

103

104

1

10
k

100

Fig. 2. Degree distributions p(k) for a very large and the smallest text.

The texts were individually analyzed, based on the evaluation of the indices
quoted in the previous section: N, M, < k >, ℓ, C, L, and degree distribution
p(k), which we have found to obey a power law p(k) ∼ k−γ. We have also
followed how the number and size of independent clusters varies in the growth
process. Average values of such indices based on the entire texts of the whole
sample have been computed and are shown in Table I. The analyzed networks
are very sparse, with average connection index 2M/[N(N − 1)] < 0.1 for the
networks with N ≥ 100 .

We have veriﬁed that the degree distributions, for all analyzed texts, exhibit an
early maximum around k = 10, which is followed by crossover to a long right-
skewed tail, approximating a power law distribution with average exponent
hγi = 1.6 ± 0.2. We have found no evidence of correlation between the value
of γ and the length of the analyzed text. These features are illustrated in
Figure 2, where we show p(k) × k for a very large text and the smallest one
we analyzed.

The dynamical analysis also reveals very interesting results. In Figure 3(a),
points indicate the evolution of C for 15 large texts, as function of the network
sizes, showing that they converge to a value around 0.75. We have identiﬁed

4

r
the data of two speciﬁc texts (in color) to emphasize such phenomenon. This
peculiar behavior of C is also exhibited when we plot its value as function of
the number of sentences s in the diﬀerent texts, as shown in Figure 3(b). A
functional dependence between C and s can be written as C ≈ 1 − 0.08log10s.

The investigation of the cluster structure of the network during its growth has
shown that texts evolve mostly in the form of a very large single cluster, which
is formed since the very beginning of the network evolution. New words are
likely to adhere to it rather than starting other signiﬁcant clusters, what leads
to the presence of a single giant cluster for the entire text. Another aspect
we have analyzed was the evolution of the indices in the network growth
process with respect to the same text in diﬀerent languages. As an example
we compare, in Figure 4, the evolution of C and ℓ for the network associated
to James Joyce’s Ulysses, in the original English version and in its translation
to Portuguese.

A partial discussion of the results we have obtained to this point indicates that
the networks we analyzed have highly sparse connectivity, small D and ℓ, but
high C, what constitute evidences of a small-word network scenario. Besides,
since p(k) decay according to power laws, we conclude they also behave as
scale-free networks (see values in Table I). It is important to emphasize that
the ﬁltering treatment does not modify the network general behavior. In order
to verify this fact, we have also performed the same measurements for the
networks obtained from the original texts, without any kind of treatment.
We have veriﬁed that, notwithstanding to the fact that we obtain diﬀerent
values for the same indices (see Table I), the very frequent presence of articles,
prepositions and other words does not alter the small-world and scale-free
character of the text networks! The small-world behavior is characterized by
a great compactness and by the presence of some vertices with high local
clustering. Such aspect in these networks means that they have words that are
often used along the text. That fact explains the small values of D and l. The
scale-free behavior results from the presence of nodes with high connectivity
degree in a much greater amount in comparison to that of a random graph.
This aspect is obviously expected in a written text, due to the presence of an
organization principle which controls the construction of the text. The most
connected words are associated with recurrent concepts around which the text
is constructed.

4 Shuﬄing procedures

There are several agents that contribute to determine the measured indices
in the analyzed networks. For example, since each sentence is added to the
network as a complete subgraph, their lengths may interfere in the cluster-

5

 

 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

 

 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

C

1.0

0.9

C

0.8

 

C

 

(b)

(a)

0

2000 4000 6000 8000 10000

Vertices

1

10

100
Sentences

1000 10000

Fig. 3. (a) Behavior of C as function of the number of vertices compared with two
texts. (b) The same index as function of the number of sentences, for 15 texts.

 

l

 

0.7

(a)

(b)

1

10

100

1000 10000

1

10

100

1000 10000

Sentences

Sentences

Fig. 4. Clustering coeﬃcient and average shortest path length evolution, according
to the number of sentences in James Joyce’s Ulysses, in the original English version
and in a Portuguese translation.

ing coeﬃcient. In the same way, the own structure of the sentences and the
frequency of the words along the whole text aﬀects C and other indices as
well. In order to evaluate the role of these main agents in the determination
of the indices, we have re-analyzed the ﬁltered texts after submitting them
to four shuﬄing processes, which are so characterized: (SA) In this process,
the beginning and the end of sentences are kept ﬁxed, however the position of
the words along the whole text is randomly changed. This procedure breaks
completely the structure of concepts in the sentences, but their lengths and
the frequency of the words in the whole text are kept unchanged. (SB) Here,
the original sequence of the words along the text remains unchanged, but all
sentences are forced to have the same average length, as obtained from the
analysis of the unperturbed text. (SC) As in SA, the beginning and the end
of sentences are kept ﬁxed, and words are randomly chosen from the same
vocabulary of the text. However, the words frequency is changed to a white
distribution, so that all the words have the same choice probability. (SD)
Here, we randomly distribute the same number of links as in the network of
the ﬁltered text among the nodes, i.e., obtaining an Erd¨os-Renyi network.

A summary of results is also included in the Table I. They show that the
networks are aﬀected in diﬀerent ways but, as expected, for all but the SD
procedure, they are very far from random networks. The indices for SA and SB
are not signiﬁcantly altered. In the ﬁrst case it shows that, without changing

6

 

 

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

)
k
(

P

0
1
g
o

l

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
log10k

Fig. 5. Cumulative degree distributions P (k) obtained with one single text, for the
ﬁltered version (solid), and the shuﬄe procedures SA (dashed), SB (dotted), and
SC (dash-dotted).

the structural aspects of sentence sizes and word frequencies, the network is
not essentially aﬀected. In the second one, breaking sentence sizes but keeping
words in their original places is not suﬃcient to alter, in a meaningful way,
the network structure. These traits are corroborated by Figure 5, where we
show the 4 cumulative degree distribution

P (k) =

p(k′)dk′,

∞

1
k

Z
k

(1)

for a given text and three shuﬄed versions of it. We realize that the scale-free
character, expressed by a linear decay in the k interval [10,300] for P (k) re-
mains almost unchanged. These results remind Zipf’s universal result about
distribution frequency of words in texts since, when Zipf’s law is not followed,
e.g., SC and SD, the network structure is broken. Indeed, not only the power
law for P (k) is lost, but also the indices in Table I have been altered. Nev-
ertheless we emphasize the fact that, despite the change in word frequency
caused by SC sets up a deep modiﬁcation in the text, its value for C is much
higher than that one for SD. This indicates that the unchanged distribution
of sequence sizes still keeps the SC network far away from the Erd¨os-Renyi
scenario.

The results of the dynamical analysis call our attention to general aspects of
network growth. Barab´asi and Albert[10] observed that the scale-free behavior
may be explained by a special kind of growth process, known as preferential
attachment. They proposed a model that captures such behavior: vertices are
added to the network, systematically, by connecting them to some just exist-
ing vertices, which are selected in accordance with a probability distribution
that depends on their degrees. However, the values obtained for C are much
lower than those in small-world networks. On the other hand, the Watts and
Strogatz small-world, obtained by randomly rewiring a regular network, does

7

Text

L

ℓ

C

Filtered

5± 1

2.3± 0.2

0.77± 0.05

SA

SB

SC

SD

4± 1

2.2± 0.2

0.77± 0.04

4± 1

2.4± 0.3

0.74± 0.05

4± 1

2.2± 0.3

0.40± 0.20

3± 1

2.2± 0.3

0.05± 0.06

Original

4± 1

2.0± 0.1

0.82± 0.03

Table 1
Average values for the indices. Filtered texts were used as standard subjects, and
shuﬄing operations were carried out on networks generated by them. Original means
text without ﬁltering, used just for the purpose of comparison.

not reproduce the scale-free feature[9] Therefore, we may suggest that the
growth process we employ here is essential to capture both quoted behaviors.
It is characterized by the addition of a new sentence, i.e., a complete subgraph
or clique in each step. Due to the frequency distribution of words along the
text, the attachment of these complete subgraphs is still preferential, but the
new vertices are highly clustered, what contributes to the coexistence of both
small-world and scale-free network scenario. Thus, the model of preferential
attachment by complete subgraphs according to a pre-established frequency
of vertices seems to be more suitable to describe the concomitant emergence
of these behaviors.

To conclude, we would like to stress that our major purpose, to analyze net-
work structure among concepts expressed by signiﬁcant words in written texts,
has been successfully addressed. The obtained indices point to the presence
of both small-world and scale-free features. Moreover, we also characterized
important aspects observed as the text grows, and studied the inﬂuence of
distinct shuﬄing procedures of words and sentence size distribution. As ex-
pressed in the ﬁrst paragraphs, our results may be of signiﬁcance to shed light
into the deeper problem of how the human mind works. We have brieﬂy men-
tioned some eﬀorts concerning the construction and analyzes of networks that
represent the relations between neurons in brain cortex[17], such networks
presenting both small-world and scale-free behavior.

The relation mind-brain is a subject of great controversy, but we wonder
whether the universal character of the network behavior we have found in
our work does not point out to some patterns present in the human mind.
Indeed, due to the intense intellectual activity required to produce texts, it is
natural to expect that the results may help understanding the way our mind
works.

Patterns that might control the way we store concepts in our minds and could

8

reveal aspects of the structure of our brains. It is also worthy to remember that
similar patterns to those we obtained here have been observed in networks of
semantically related words. Thus, it is natural to conjecture that the results
we found do reveal the existence of links between all these research areas.
Certainly, there is much to be explored in such text networks, as this is a
vast ﬁeld and the possibility of a joint eﬀort from several diﬀerent areas of
investigation is open.

Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank Fernanda Regebe, Gesiane
Teixeira and Charles Santana for helpful discussions and assistance by code
programming.

References

[1] D. J. Watts, Small Worlds: The dynamics of networks between order and

randomness, (Princeton University Press, Princeton 1999).

[2] M. Buchanan,Nexus: small world and the groundbreaking science of networks,

(W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York, 2002).

[3] A.-L. Barabasi, Linked: How everything is connected to everything else and what

it means, (Plume Printing, New York 2003).

[4] S.N. Dorogovtsev, and J.F.F. Mendes, Evolution of Networks,

(Oxford

University Press, Oxford 2003).

[5] R. Albert, and A.-L. Barabasi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002).

[6] J. Camacho, R. Guimera, and L.A.N. Amaral, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 228102

(2002).

[7] A.-L. Barabasi, R. Albert, and H. Jeong, Nature 401, 130 (1999).

[8] J. Guare, Six Degrees of Separations: A Play, (Vintage, New York 1990).

[9] D. J. Watts, and S. D. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).

[10] A.-L. Barabasi, and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).

[11] A.E. Motter, A.P.S. de Moura, Y.C. Lai, and P. Dasgupta, Phys. Rev. E 65,

065102 (2002).

[12] L. F. Costa, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. C 15, 371 (2004).

[13] R.V. Sole, Nature 434, 289 (2005).

[14] R.F.i. Cancho, and R.V. Sole, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B 268, 2261 (2001).

[15] R.F.i. Cancho, R.V. Sole, and R. Kohler, Phys. Rev. E 69, 051915 (2004).

9

[16] S.N. Dorogovtsev, and J.F.F. Mendes, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B 268, 2603

(2001).

Lett. 92, 018102 (2005).

[17] V. Eguiluz, G. Cecchi, D.R. Chialvo, M. Baliki, and A.V. Apkarian, Phys. Rev.

[18] G.K. Zipf, Human behaviour and the principle of least eﬀort. An introduction

to human ecology, (Hafner, New York, 1972).

[19] Unitex is a multilingual corpus processing system, based on automata-
oriented technology developed by the Computational Linguistics Group of
the Institut d’eletronique et d’informatique Gaspard-Monge (IGM-France) -
http://infolingu.univ-mlv.fr/english/.

[20] Literary texts have been mostly obtained from Gutenberg Project website at

www.gutenberg.org

[21] Freud, S., Zur Auﬀassung der Aphasien, (Leipzig, Deuticke, 1891). Available
in English as On Aphasia: A Critical Study (Translated by E. Stengel,
International Universities Press, 1953).

10

