cross-sections by the Deep Inelastic Neutron
Scattering technique

J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski† , J.R. Granada
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas, Centro At´omico Bariloche
and Instituto Balseiro, Comisi´on Nacional de Energ´ıa At´omica, Universidad Nacional
de Cuyo, (R8402AGP) Bariloche, Argentina

6 Critique on the measurement of neutron
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
2
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract. We analyze a recent work of Mayers and Abdul-Redah,[J.Phys.: Condens.
Matter 16, 4811 (2004)]
in which the autors report the existence of anomalous
In the present work we show that the
neutron cross sections in several systems.
Deep Inelastic Neutron Scattering (DINS) results presented by the authors are aﬀected
by an inaccurate formalism employed for obtaining nuclear momentum distributions,
and therefore deﬁnitive conclusions cannot be drawn on the subject of anomalous
cross sections. We also show the reasons why the exact formalism for obtaining
momentum distributions that we recently published must be employed for analysing
the experimental data instead of the approximations performed in the mentioned work.
We also point out serious inconsistencies between diﬀerent results reported in the
mentioned work, as well as incompatibilities with previous results published by the
authors. These inconsistencies, as well as experimental evidence against the existence
of anomalous cross sections not considered by the authors, reinforce the need to revise
critically the procedures on which the usual DINS data analysis is based as well as the
proper characterisation of the experimental set-up.

† To whom correspondence should be addressed (javier@cab.cnea.gov.ar)

Critique on the measurement...

2

In a recent work J. Mayers and T. Abdul-Redah [1] presented experimental results
obtained with the Deep Inelastic Neutron Scattering (DINS) technique as evidence of
the existence of anomalous neutron cross sections in several systems. However, as we
have shown in previous papers, the formalism employed by the authors to analyse the
experimental data is based on ill-founded approximations, which leads to inaccurate
results. This fact created a controversial situation on the real existence of the mentioned
anomalous cross sections, which is treated in detail in references [2, 3, 4, 5].
In this
comment we will analyse the validity of the conclusions drawn in Ref.
[1], where the
authors minimize the importance of errors originated in the approximations assumed in
the data analysis. As we will show in this comment, in [1] the authors have omitted
important results and conclusions presented in the mentioned previous works, and they
have not considered other published works where the addressed issue is analysed [6, 7, 8].
In the following paragraphs, we will itemise the principal reasons wherefore the results
and conclusions presented in [1] are ﬂawed, as well as the most important omissions we
found in the mentioned work.

(i) Ref. [1] is an important improvement in order to reach a general agreement on the
way that DINS experimental data must be treated. It is worth remembering that
in previous works [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] the authors have employed the convolution
formalism without mentioning its approximated nature. In contrast, in reference
[1] the authors admit that the usually employed DINS data treatment (based in a
convolution expression) consists in an approximation (CA), that leads to inexact
results. However, as a ﬁrst attempt to analyse DINS experimental data in the
proper way, in Ref. [1] the authors present Eq. (2.8) as an alternative form of the
exact formalism, which was previously deduced and analysed in [5], where we have
shown that a wide distribution of ﬁnal energies is operative at every time-of-ﬂight
in a DINS spectrum, instead of a single well-deﬁned one as it is assumed in Eq.
(2.8). Such analysis clearly shows that the basic hypothesis of a ﬁxed ﬁnal energy,
on which the Eq. (2.8) is based, is wrong.

(ii) In a recently published work [8] we introduced the exact formalism that must be
employed for obtaining momentum distributions by DINS to avoid the inaccuracies
provoked by the CA. One of the most important results in that work is the
demonstration that the exact integration kernel strongly depends on the time of
ﬂight. This result shows that the time-of-ﬂight-independent resolution function,
usually employed as integration kernel in the CA framework, is inaccurate. As
a consequence, the central expression (2.23) of Ref.
[1] (also presented by the
authors as exact) is not correct and should be replaced by an expression where the
probability P explicitly depends on time-of-ﬂight t.

(iii) It is important to note one of the main results presented in Ref. [1], namely that the
peak intensities obtained with the CA are strongly dependent on the momentum
distributions J(y) employed in the ﬁtting process.
In Fig. 7 the authors show
that CA can introduce a systematic reduction in the obtained ratio σH/σD. In this

Critique on the measurement...

3

process Gaussian functions for the momentum distributions were assumed. On the
other hand, in Fig. 14, we see quite diﬀerent results when employing non-Gaussian
distributions. The results appear to be strongly dependent on the momentum
distribution assumed in the ﬁtting process. It is very important to note that these
non-Gaussian J(y) were also obtained by the authors in the CA framework [14], and
therefore are aﬀected by the already mentioned approximations. In consequence,
the results presented in Ref. [1] for σH/σD are also aﬀected by CA and a deﬁnitive
conclusion on the supposed anomalies of the Hydrogen and Deuterium cross sections
cannot be drawn.

(iv) It would be most enlightening if the authors presented the results for the Hydrogen,
Deuterium, and Oxygen momentum distributions they obtained for the diﬀerent
mixtures (which they did not in Ref. [1])), and also if they compared such results
with those previously published. This information should be readily available since
it is the primary output of DINS. It is also opportune to remember that important
dynamical features such as the mean kinetic energy obtained by DINS, can be
independently checked by transmission experiments. As an example, in Ref.
[4],
we obtained Hydrogen, Deuterium, and Oxygen mean kinetic energies on H2O and
D2O in excellent agreement with the well-known reference values presented in Refs.
[15, 16]. Furthermore, the results obtained for these magnitudes on H2O/D2O
mixtures are in full agreement with those obtained from linear combination of the
diﬀerent molecular species present in such systems (H2O, D2O and HDO). Since
the momentum distributions assumed in the DINS ﬁtting process have a great
inﬂuence on the obtained peak intensities, in the future, more eﬀorts should be
directed to improve the determination of such distributions. For this purpose, the
exact formalism recently presented in Ref. [8] should be the most adequate tool.

(v) The total cross sections of the employed ﬁlters are neither Lorentzian nor Gaussian
as the authors pointed out. Around each resonance, in the simplest approximation,
these are given by the Lamb equation [17]‡. For a more accurate description,
the authors could employ the neutron cross sections available in [18], which were
experimentally obtained in a wide energy range.

(vi) The authors omit to mention that the resolution function R(y) they employ is not
compatible with the deﬁnition of resolution function. The resolution function they
employ does not reproduce the neutron Compton proﬁle in the case of an ideal gas
at T= 0 K. In [2] we have shown that the only resolution function mathematically
compatible with the deﬁnition of resolution can be analytically deduced from the
instrument characteristics. Anyway, we have shown that this resolution function
also leads to wrong results, which shows that the problem does not reside in the
employed resolution function, but in the convolution formalism itself.

‡ A more detailed description should considered a more realistic nuclear momentum distribution in
the ﬁlter, where the gas model assumed in the Lamb equation should be replaced by a more detailed
model for the solid sate dynamics.

4

Critique on the measurement...

(vii) In Ref.

[1] the authors mentioned that the reported anomalous cross-sections
exhibit diﬀerent angular behaviours on diﬀerent systems. For example, in H2O/D2O
mixtures the reported anomaly is almost independent of the scattering angle, while
in other systems it strongly depends on the scattering angle. In this context, it is
important to note the diﬀerent and inconsistent ways to process the data reported
in the literature. More speciﬁcally, in the CA framework, the factor v1/v0 was
apparently employed in two diﬀerent ways. On one hand, Refs. [9, 10] mention a
calculation of this factor based on kinematic conditions (i.e. v1 is assumed ﬁxed by
the ﬁlter and v0 is calculated for each time-of-ﬂight independently of the scattering
angle); on the other hand Eq. (3.1) of Ref.
[19])
mentions that this factor was calculated according to dynamic conditions (which
only depends on the scattered mass and the scattering angle, and are independent
of the analysed time-of-ﬂight and the characteristics of the ﬁlter). Such discrepancy
in the employed data treatments, not mentioned by the authors, could aﬀect the
diﬀerent angular behaviours above mentioned.

[1] (see also Eq. (1) of Ref.

(viii) In Fig. 10 the results clearly show a gross systematic diﬀerence between the cross
section ratio obtained with the single diﬀerence method and the one obtained with
the double diﬀerence method (being the ﬁrst one about 30% systematically greater
than the second one). The authors do not explain the origin of these diﬀerences. If
the CA employed by the authors were exact the mentioned discrepancies should not
exist, since such ratio of neutron cross sections is a constant physical magnitude.
Such discrepancy casts serious doubts not only on the formalism employed by
the authors for analysing the experimental data, but also on the characterisation
performed on the experimental set-up. Furthermore, in Fig. 10 the authors attempt
to show that the overlap eﬀect between diﬀerent peaks is not relevant. However
they omit to mention that in [3] we have shown that the inaccuracies of CA for
obtaining peak intensities are still present even when the intensity of an isolated
peak is analysed, i.e. when the overlap eﬀect is absent.

(ix) Some results presented by the authors are incompatible with those published in
previous works. For example, in reference [13] it is concluded that the reduction
reported for the ratio σH/σD in H2O/D2O mixtures is only originated in a reduction
of σH, while the obtained value of σD agrees with the tabulated value. On the other
hand, in Fig. 6 opposite results are presented, i.e. an anomaly in the Deuterium
intensity and not in Hydrogen.

The validity of the DINS results presented in [1] not only depends on the formalism
employed for analysing the experimental data, but also on a proper characterisation
In [1] the authors have performed a characterisation of
of the experimental set-up.
diﬀerent components of the experimental set-up, which in the light of the inconsistencies
observed, could be improved, veriﬁed, and/or performed by alternative methods never
employed in VESUVIO. Details of such alternative characterisation, as well as additional
disagreements between diﬀerent results presented in [1], will be discussed elsewhere.

Critique on the measurement...

5

We wish to remember that, in other to investigate the cross sections of Hydrogen
and Deuterium in light water/heavy water mixtures, we performed transmission
experiments on such mixtures on the epithermal neutron energy range employing the
Bariloche Electron LINAC [4]. Our experiment shows no traces of anomalous neutron
cross sections, and the values we obtained are in perfect agreement with the tabulated
data. As was explained in that work, our transmission results are conclusive evidence
on the absence of anomalous neutron cross sections in the mentioned mixtures. It must
be noted that both techniques, transmission and DINS, measure the same magnitude
in exactly the same sample and scattering conditions. Due to the reason exposed in [4],
any anomaly in the bound-atom cross section observed by DINS should also be observed
in transmission experiments. The authors of Ref. [1] neither mention that results, nor
[20], where we have shown that the
the arguments on this subject presented in Ref.
assertions of Ref. [21] are wrong.

Finally, it is worth to mention that the absence of anomalous neutron cross sections
in H2O/D2O mixtures was very recently conﬁrmed by scattering experiments carried
out by an independent group [22]. These results agree with those we obtained by
transmission [4], as well as with those obtained by precise interferometric techniques
[23]. In summary, in order to analyse the anomalies reported/suggested in [12], three
independent techniques were applied by three independent groups, and always-negative
results were obtained.
[1] J. Mayers and T. Abdul-Redah, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 16, 4811 (2004)
[2] J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski, J.R. Granada, Physica B, 304, 357 (2001).
[3] J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski, J.R. Granada, Physica B, 334, 257 (2003).
[4] J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski, S. A. Ib´a˜nez and J.R.Granada, Phys. Rev. Lett., 90, 105302 (2003).
[5] J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski, J.R. Granada, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B, 217, 333, (2004).
[6] M. Grimsditch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4368 (1999).
[7] J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski, J. R. Granada, Phys. Rev. Lett., 94, 249602, (2004).
[8] J.J. Blostein,

J. R. Granada, Phys. Rev. B, 71,

J. Dawidowski,

054105 (2005);

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0406020

[9] A.L. Fielding, J. Mayers, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A, 480, 680 (2002).
[10] J. Mayers and A.C. Evans, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory Technical Report, RAL-TR-96-067

[11] J. Mayers, A. L. Fielding, R. Senesi, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A, 481, 454 (2002).
[12] C.A. Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann, T. Abdul-Redah, R.M.F. Streﬀer and J. Mayers, Phys. Rev.

[13] C.A. Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann, T. Abdul-Redah, and J. Mayers, Physica B, 315, 281-288,

[14] G.F. Reiter, J. Mayers and J. Noreland, Phys. Rev. B. 65 104305 (2002).
[15] J.M. Neill, J.L. Russell Jr., and J.R. Brown, Nucl. Sci. Eng. 33, 265, (1968).
[16] A.T.D. Butland and C.T. Chudley, Journal of the British Nuclear Energy Society, 13, 99, (1974).
[17] K.H. Beckurts, K. Wirtz, Neutron Physics, Springer, Berlin, 1964, p. 134.
[18] ENDF/B-VI, IAEA Nuclear Data Section, 1997.
[19] E.B. Karlsson, C.A. Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann, T. Abdul-Redah, R.M.F. Streﬀer, B. Hj¨orvarsson,

J. ¨Ohrmalm and J.Mayers, Europhysics Letter, 46 (5), 617, (1999).

[20] J.J. Blostein, J. Dawidowski, J. R. Granada, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 249602, (2004).
[21] E. B. Karlsson et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. bf 92, 249601 (2004).
[22] R. Moreh, R. C. Block, Y. Danon, and M. Neumann, Phy. Rev. Lett., 94, 185301 (2005).

(1996).

(2002).

Lett. 79, 2839, (1997).

Critique on the measurement...

6

[23] A.Iofe, M. Arif, D.L. Jacobson and F. Mezei, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 2322, (1999).

