Correlation of worldwide markets' entropies: time-sale approah

José A.O. Matos

, Sílvio M.A. Gama

, Heather

1,2,3

1,3

J. Ruskin

, Adel Sharkasi

, Martin Crane

4

4

4

1

Centro de Matemátia da Universidade do Porto,

Edifíio dos Departamentos de Matemátia da FCUP,

Rua do Campo Alegre 687, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal

2

3

Grupo de Matemátia e Informátia,

Fauldade de Eonomia da Universidade do Porto,

Rua Roberto Frias, 4200-464 Porto, Portugal

Departamento de Matemátia Apliada,

Fauldade de Ciênias da Universidade do Porto,

Rua do Campo Alegre 687, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal and

4

Shool of Computing, Dublin City University , Dublin 9, Ireland

Abstrat

We use a new method of studying the Hurst exponent with time and sale dependeny. This new

approah allow us to reover the ma jor events a(cid:27)eting worldwide markets (suh as the September

11th terrorist attak) and analyze the way those e(cid:27)ets propagate through the di(cid:27)erent sales. The

time-sale dependene of the referred measures demonstrates the relevane of entropy measures

in distinguishing the several harateristis of market indies: "e(cid:27)ets" inlude early awareness,

patterns of evolution as well as omparative behaviour distintions in emergent/established markets.

6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Goals

The goal of this study is the analysis of stok exhange world indies searhing for signs

of oherene and/or synhronization aross the set of studied markets.

We have expanded the sope of previous work on the PSI-20 (Portuguese Standard Index),

sine results there [3℄ seemed to provide a basis for a wider ranging study of oherene and

entropy.

With that purpose we applied eonophysis tehniques related to measures of (cid:16)disor-

der(cid:17)/omplexity (entropy) and a newly proposed [4℄ generalization of Detrended Flutua-

tion Analysis. As a measure of oherene among a seleted set of markets we have studied

the eigenvalues of the orrelation matries for two di(cid:27)erent set of markets, exploring the

dihotomy represented by emerging and mature markets.

The data used in this study was taken daily for a set of worldwide market indies. As it is

usual in this kind of analysis [2℄ we base our results on the study of log returns ηi = log xi

xi−1 ,

where ηi is the log return at time step i.

II. ENTROPY

The Shannon entropy for bloks of size m for an alphabet of k symbols is [7℄

the entropy of the soure is then

∼
H(m) = −

pj log pj,

km−1

X
j=0

∼
h = lim
m→∞

∼
H(m)
m

.

(1)

(2)

This de(cid:28)nition is attrative for several reasons:

it is easy to alulate and it is well

de(cid:28)ned for a soure of symbol strings.

In the partiular ase of returns, if we hoose a

symmetrial partition we know that half of the symbols represent losses and half of the

symbols represent gains. If the sequene is preditable, we have the same losses and gains

sequenes repeated everytime, the entropy will be lower; if however all sequenes are equally

probable the unertainty will be higher and so it will be the entropy. Entropy is thus a good

measure of unertainty.

2

MatosFig1.eps

Figure 1: Weekly entropy for various market indexes.

This partiular method has problems, the entropy depends on the hoie of enoding and

it is not a unique harateristi for the underlying ontinuous time series. Also sine the

number of possible states grows exponentially with m, after a short number of sequenes in

pratial terms it will beome di(cid:30)ult to (cid:28)nd a sequene that repeats itself. This entropy is

not invariant under smooth oordinate hanges, both in time and enoding. This is a strong

handiap for its adoption into (cid:28)nanial time series study.

We have applied the Shannon entropy for bloks of size 5 and an alphabet of 50 symbols, to

a set of markets previously studied. We should reall that using bloks of size 5 orresponds

to a week in trading time. Notie also that we have only onsidered trading days, like what

we do in all other analysis, so we ignore any holidays or days where the market was losed.

It should be noted that results are robust to the hoie of the total number of bins (the

size of our alphabet). That is, we have repeated the analysis with a di(cid:27)erent hoie of the

number of partitions yielding similar results.

In order to enhane the time dependene of results we have evaluated the entropy of the

set for periods of 100 trading days (roughly orresponding to half a year). The motivation

for this analysis is to study the time evolution of entropy.

The results displayed in Figure 1 show improved oherene (i.e. redued entropy) af-

ter 1997 as ompared with previous periods for all markets. Higher entropy implies less

preditability, in general, although the nature of shoks quali(cid:28)es this statement to some

extent. The notable feature of this graphi is that both mature and developing markets are

a(cid:27)eted similarly whih suggests that global behaviour patterns are beoming more oherent

or linked beause of the progressive globalisation of markets. This is in line with the (cid:28)ndings

of [4℄ where we found the Hurst exponent for di(cid:27)erent markets to be dereasing with time.

3

III. TIME AND SCALE HURST EXPONENT

A. Method haraterisation

The general idea behind this method is the study of the Hurst exponent as a funtion of

both time and sale. In pratial terms this method is a simple expansion of the (cid:16)windowed(cid:17)

DFA applied in [3℄. Instead of (cid:28)xing s we let it be a variable. The Hurst exponent, H(t, s),

for time t and sale s, is evaluated as the Hurst exponent obtained using the DFA [5℄, for

the interval [t − s/2; t + s/2].

Impliations are wider than for a simple DFA. The general idea is to essentially invert the

proess and take H(s, t) as the fous of the analysis with the DFA being an implementation

detail. The other andidate to evaluate the Hurst exponent in the sub-intervals is the wavelet

[6℄. In both ases H is reovered as a power of the sale, inside eah sub-interval.

Realling the most important equation in DFA we have the detrended (cid:29)utuation funtion

as:

F (t) ∼ tH ,

where H is the Hurst exponent.

From the above ondition we know that s/2 + 1 ≤ t ≤ T − s/2, where T is the time series

length. In what follows the maximum sale we onsider is s = T /4 as for large sales we

essentially reover the Hurst exponent for the whole series.

A ma jor onern in this work was to guarantee that exponents obtained through DFA

were meaningful. For that reason we have used the same proedure as in [3℄, we have

ontrolled the quality of the (cid:28)ts assuring that the regression oe(cid:30)ients of the linear least

squares (cid:28)ts were near unity for all studied markets. If we would not do this, the results

would be unreliable, sine the underlying time series is not well desribed by a frational

Brownian motion. To this ombination of the DFA with time and sale dependeny, we

apply the term TSDFA (Time and Sale DFA).

4

MatosFig2a.eps

MatosFig2b.eps

MatosFig2.eps

MatosFig2d.eps

Figure 2: TSDFA applied to several markets. The sale (in trading days) is represented by the

y-axis; the time is represented in x-axis (years).

B. Examples

Here we study some examples of the tehnique applied to several international markets.

We hoose these beause they display details that are either unique or shared with other

markets and ontribute to understand the di(cid:27)erenes and similarities that TSDFA empha-

Traditionally we distinguish between developed and emergent markets, the distintion

varies depending on the soure and of the applied riteria. A more in depth disussion of

this issue is found in Setion IV.

sises.

1. Nikkei

As an illustration of the method we worked with Nikkei 225 data ranging from 1990 to

2005. Nikkei was hosen beause it is a well known and studied (cid:28)nanial index.

The graph resulting from appliation of the TSDFA method is shown in Figure 2. The

graphi represents as a ontour plot, with exponents in range [0.3; 0.9], the series studied

from 1990 − 2005 and the sale between 100 and 400 trading days. In this work we adopted

these (cid:28)xed ranges sine this representation permits ready omparison with other indies

alulated.

In the Nikkei graphi (Figure 2) we an see that persistene is exhibited with the index

5

normally around 0.5. This re(cid:29)ets a healthy borderline, of values near 0.5, and is to be

expeted sine Nikkei is a mature market. In reent years we see a stripe that rosses all

sales in year 2000, at the same time as the DotCom rash.

We have another stripe that starts in the fourth quarter of 2001 but does not go through

all sales. Another period of high values of H starts for short sales in the third quarter of

2002, after a global rash and reahes large sales in 2004.

2. GSTPSE (Canada)

As seen in Figure 2, the market shows two distint periods, before and after 1997. Before

1997 we see high values of Hurst exponent over all sales. After that time, all the regions

of high Hurst exponents are bounded in time and the bakground turns out to be what we

expet from a mature market, with the Hurst exponent around 0.5.

There are two stripes, for high values of H , after 1997 that ross all sales, one in 1998

and another starting around September 2001 and travelling forward for higher sales in time.

3. Bovespa (Brazil)

Bovespa, the São Paulo Stok Exhange Index, is known for its high volatility and is

generally onsidered an emergent market. In Figure 2 we see an errati behaviour with H

either near or above 0.5 and the orresponding stripes rossing together, bak and forward

in time, at all sales. There are two stripes, for high values of H , that start from short sales

respetively in 1997 (Asian rashes) and 1998 (global rash) whih merge for large sales.

There is another, for H > 0.5, stripe that walks through all sales and starts for short sales

around September 2001.

4. PSI-20 (Portugal)

Unmodi(cid:28)ed DFA, the predeessor of TSDFA, was applied to PSI-20 in [3℄. In Figure 2

we see the results of applying TSDFA to this market, from establishment of series in 1993.

Initial stages are both antipersistent and sub jet to extreme values of the Hurst exponent.

We an identify two stripes with a stable (higher) value of the Hurst exponent, during

6

1998, and another walking forward in time starting, for short sales, next to September

2001. Notie that this stripe is so strong that it overlaps other stripes forming in the

neighbourhood.

The overall strength of the TSDFA is to provide further onlusions over those drawn

earlier onerning the market progression to mature behaviour and its responses times,

learly di(cid:27)erent from the initial position.

As an be seen in Figure 2 there are several notable features of the plots produed by

C. Features

TSDFA:

0.5, most of the time.

above 0.5.

• We an distinguish mature markets by the persistene and stability of H values around

• We an distinguish emergent markets by the persistene and stability of H values

• For some periods, a phase transition appears to our, sometimes observable aross

all sales, sometimes aross partial sales only. This is re(cid:29)eted in the spikes whih

either point to lower or to large sales;

• A priori, we expeted smooth variations of H for large sales sine we are taking

into aount more data values and therefore we expet greater robustness to sudden

hanges of the data. This was already observed in the results obtained for PSI-20 and

is on(cid:28)rmed by all the examples.

• Markets evolve in time, the Canadian ase is a notable example of this, where we

observe a shift from emergent to mature features. Although not so dramati for all

other ases we see over time a derease in the values of the Hurst exponent.

• There are events that hange the Hurst exponent behaviour that an be seen in

most/all markets. The September 11th 2001 is the most striking ase that an be

seen in all Figures.

7

• Clearly, the behaviour is dependent both on time and sale, indiative of the multifra-

tal bakground, so that details obtained are riher than those obtained by alulation

of the Hurst exponent diretly. This is to be expeted sine the Hurst exponent is a

summary measure, or index, of the data and this is the observed behaviour for (cid:28)nanial

markets (see [1℄).

IV. RESULTS

A. Classi(cid:28)ation of global markets

The lassi(cid:28)ation of markets into mature or emergent is not a simple issue. The Interna-

tional Finane Corporation (IFC) uses inome per apita and market apitalisation relative

to GNP for lassifying equitity markets. If either 1) a market resides in a low or middle-

inome eonomy, or 2) the ratio of the investable market apitalisation to GNP is low, then

the IFC lassi(cid:28)es the market as emerging, otherwise the lassi(cid:28)ation is mature.

It seems lear from the results, obtained from TSDFA, that we an distinguish di(cid:27)erent

markets lasses. The di(cid:27)erene in behaviour is visible with the appliation of TSDFA. The

most ative, and mature, markets show a persistene of behaviour near H = 0.5 while

the newer, emergent, markets show a persistene of higher values of H . The diversity of

behaviours does not stop here, there are markets whih show an hybrid behaviour between

these two states.

The lassi(cid:28)ation that we propose has thus three states:

(learly) mature these market have a persistene of H around 0.5. The presene of regions

with higher values of H is limited to small periods and is well de(cid:28)ned both in time

and sale.

(learly) emergent these market have a persistene of H well above 0.5. The presene of

regions with values of H around 0.5 is well de(cid:28)ned both in time and sale.

hybrid unlike the two previous ase the distintion between the mature and emergent

phases is not well determined, with the behaviour seemingly mixing at all sales.

8

B. Data

We have onsidered, in this study, the ma jor and most ative markets worldwide from

Ameria (North and South), Asia, Afria, Europe and Oeania. All the data on the respe-

tive market indies is publi and ame from Yahoo Finane (finane.yahoo.om ). We have

onsidered the daily losure as the value for the day, to obviate any time zone di(cid:30)ulties.

The hoie of the markets used in this study was driven by the goal of studying ma jor

markets aross the world in an e(cid:27)ort to ensure that tests and onlusions ould be as general

as possible. Hene from the results we have divided the markets aording to mature: AEX

General (Netherlands); Dow Jones (U.S.); CAC 40 (Frane); FTSE 100 (United Kingdom);

DAX (Germany); S&P 500 Index (U.S.); Nasdaq (U.S.); Seoul Composite (South Korea);

Nikkei 225 (Japan); NYSE Composite Index (United States) and Stokholm General (Swe-

den). The list of hybrid markets is smaller: All Ordinaries (Australia); Bovespa (Brazil);

S&P TSX Composite (Canada); NZSE 10 (New Zealand); Madrid General (Spain) and Swiss

Market (Switzerland).

All the other markets from our study behave as emergent: ATX (Austria); BEL-20 (Bel-

gium); BSE 30 (India); CMA (Egypt); All Share (Sri Lanka); Hang Seng (Hong Kong);

IPSA (Chile); ISEC Small Cap (Ireland); ISEC Small Cap Tehno (Ireland); Irish SE Index

(Ireland); Jakarta Composite (Indonesia); KFX (Denmark); KLSE Composite (Malaysia);

Karahi 100 (Pakistan); MerVal (Argentina); MIBTel (Italy); IPC (Mexio); OSE All Share

(Norway); PSE Composite (Philippines); PSI 20 (Portugal); PX50 (Czeh Republi); Shang-

hai Composite (China); Straits Times (Singapore); TA-100 (Israel); Taiwan Weighted (Tai-

wan) and ISE National-100 (Turkey).

V. CONCLUSIONS

We applied the TSDFA (Time and Sale Detrended Flutuation Analysis) to study eah

market evolution in time and sometimes, as seen in some markets, we observe a swith from

developed to mature state. TSDFA is used to ompare the results of sets of markets and to

establish lasses that display similar behaviour at any given time. This lassi(cid:28)ation allow

us to distinguish events that a(cid:27)et several markets from other loal ourrenes that only

a(cid:27)et a single market as well as some events that are re(cid:29)eted worldwide (the Asian tigers

9

rashes, the 9/11 already ited above, the Madrid bomb attak in 2004, among others). The

resulting lassi(cid:28)ation is in agreement with another based on wavelet analysis proposed in

[8℄.

One of the interesting outomes is that, in spite of the results showing di(cid:27)erenes between

known emergent markets and established ones, we found onvergene of entropy behaviour

in reent years among the worldwide markets studied. We have found that more and more

markets exhibit a more mature behaviour. A plausible explanation for this phenomenon is

the progressive globalization of (cid:28)nanial markets.

[1℄ T. Lux. Deteting Multi-Fratal Properties in Asset Returns: An Assessment of the 'Saling

Estimator'. International Journal of Modern Physis, 15:481 (cid:21) 491, 2004.

[2℄ R.N. Mantegna and H.E. Stanley. An Introdution to Eonophysis. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, 2000.

[3℄ J.A.O. Matos, S.M.A. Gama, H.J. Ruskin, and J.A.M.S. Duarte. An eonophysis approah to

the Portuguese Stok Index(cid:21)PSI-20. Physia A, 342(3-4):665(cid:21)676, 2004.

[4℄ J.A.O. Matos, S.M.A. Gama, A. Sharkasi, H.J. Ruskin, and M. Crane. Temporal and Sale

DFA Applied to Stok Markets. In preparation, 2006.

[5℄ C.-K. Peng, S.V. Buldyrev, S. Havlin, M. Simons, H.E. Stanley, and A.L. Golderberger. On the

mosai organization of DNA sequenes. Phys. Rev. E, 49:1685(cid:21)1689, 1994.

[6℄ D. Perival and A. Walden. Wavelet methods for time series analysis. Cambridge University

[7℄ C. Shannon. A mathematial theory of ommuniation. Bel l System Tehnial Journal, 27:379(cid:21)

Press, 2000.

423, 1948.

[8℄ A. Sharkasi, H.J. Ruskin, M. Crane, J.A.O. Matos, and S.M.A. Gama. A wavelet-based method

to measure stages of stok market development. In preparation, 2006.

10

 4.5

 5

 4

 3

 2

 3.5

 2.5

 1.5

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Bovespa
Ftse
ISEQ
Nikkei
PSI 20
S&P 500

