6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Non-Parametric Extraction of Implied Asset Price Distributions

Jerome V Healy, Maurice Dixon,∗ Brian J Read, and Fang Fang Cai

CCTM, London Metropolitan University,

31 Jewry Street, London EC3N 2EY

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Extracting the risk neutral density (RND) function from option prices is well deﬁned in principle,

but is very sensitive to errors in practice. For risk management, knowledge of the entire RND

provides more information for Value-at-Risk (VaR) calculations than implied volatility alone [1].

Typically, RNDs are deduced from option prices by making a distributional assumption, or relying

on implied volatility [2]. We present a fully non-parametric method for extracting RNDs from

observed option prices. The aim is to obtain a continuous, smooth, monotonic, and convex pricing

function that is twice diﬀerentiable. Thus, irregularities such as negative probabilities that aﬄict

many existing RND estimation techniques are reduced. Our method employs neural networks to

obtain a smoothed pricing function, and a central ﬁnite diﬀerence approximation to the second

derivative to extract the required gradients.

This novel technique was successfully applied to a large set of FTSE 100 daily European exercise

(ESX) put options data and as an Ansatz to the corresponding set of American exercise (SEI) put

options. The results of paired t-tests showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences between RNDs extracted from

ESX and SEI option data, reﬂecting the distorting impact of early exercise possibility for the latter.

In particular, the results for skewness and kurtosis suggested diﬀerent shapes for the RNDs implied

by the two types of put options. However, both ESX and SEI data gave an unbiased estimate of

the realised FTSE 100 closing prices on the options’ expiration date. We conﬁrmed that estimates

of volatility from the RNDs of both types of option were biased estimates of the realised volatility

at expiration, but less so than the LIFFE tabulated at-the-money implied volatility.

PACS numbers: 07.05.Mh; 89.65.Gh

Keywords: Option Pricing; Risk Neutral Density; Risk Management; Neural Nets; Econophysics

∗Visitor: e-Science, RAL, Didcot, Oxon, OX11 0QX; Electronic address: M.Dixon@Londonmet.ac.uk

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Many asset pricing models used in ﬁnance, including the Black-Scholes (BS) model for

option prices, rely on the conventional assumption that the statistical distribution of asset

returns is normal, and the price distribution log-normal. This assumption is consistent

with geometric Brownian motion as the underlying mechanism driving price movements.

It is now well known that historical asset price distributions exhibit fat tails. That is,

they are slightly smaller near the mean and larger at extreme values. This has important

implications for ﬁnancial risk management, as it suggests that large price movements occur

more frequently than they would for a normal distribution with the same variance. It also

suggests that the underlying price process does not follow a geometric Brownian motion.

Option prices represent a rich source of information on the statistical properties of the

underlying asset. Exchange traded options are now available on ﬁnancial assets including

stock indices and futures; often these are heavily traded, so are very liquid. While daily

time series of asset prices contain just one observation per day, there is a set of option prices

available for each maturity date. These option prices reﬂect traders’ expectations regarding

future price movements of the underlying asset so they allow alternative approaches to

estimating ﬁnancial risk.

In this paper we present a simple yet eﬀective method for extracting non-parametric

estimates of the complete distribution for the value of the underlying asset at maturity of

an option - known as the risk neutral density (RND)- from sets of daily option prices. We

have recently reported the application of data mining techniques using neural nets to model

European style FTSE 100 index options [3]. We extended that approach by introducing pre-

diction intervals [4]. Here, we demonstrate how neural nets can be used to obtain estimates

of the expected value and standard deviation (volatility), as well as higher moments, of the

implied distribution of the asset price at the expiration of an option written on it.

II. RISK NEUTRAL DISTRIBUTIONS

RNDs have many practical applications. They are used by central banks to assess market

expectations regarding future stock prices, commodity prices, interest rates, and exchange

rates in connection with setting monetary policy [2]. They are useful to market practitioners

2

as an aid to investment decisions. RNDs extracted from exchange traded options can be used

to price exotic options. For risk management, they can provide measures of value-at-risk [1].

The prices of European exercise options can be expressed as the expected value of their

payoﬀs, discounted at the risk-free interest rate.

C(X, t, T ) = e−r(T −t)

ρ(ST )(ST − X)dST ,

P (X, t, T ) = e−r(T −t)

ρ(ST )(X − ST )dST .

(1a)

(1b)

In equation (1) C(X,t,T) and P(X,t,T) are the prices of calls and puts trading at time t for

expiration at some later time T . X is the strike price, and r is the risk-free interest rate.

ρ(ST ) is the distribution for the value of the underlying asset S at T predicted from time

t. Given an assumption about the functional form of ρ(ST ), options can be priced for any

value of exercise price X . Conversely, given a series of synchronous market prices observed at

some time t, for options expiring at some later time T , this calculation can be inverted and

an estimate of ρ(ST ) extracted. Breeden and Litzenberger [5] showed that the cumulative

density function (negatively signed) for the value of the underlying asset S at time t is given

by the ﬁrst partial diﬀerential with respect to X of equation (1), while the RND is obtained

by diﬀerentiating equation (1) twice with respect to X .

∂f (X,t,T )

∂X = −e−r(T −t)

ρ(ST )dST , and ∂2f (X,t,T )

∂X2 = e−r(T −t)ρ(ST ).

(2)

∞

Z
X

In equation (2), f (X, t, T ) represents the call or put European option pricing functions. In

reality, X is not continuous and options are only available for a limited number of exercise

prices at discrete intervals. It has been shown [5], that for discrete data, ﬁnite diﬀerence

methods can be used to obtain a numerical solution to equation (2). Neuhaus [6] has shown

how the RND can be obtained via equation (2) using ﬁnite diﬀerences on the ﬁrst derivative.

A. Recovering RNDs: Existing Methods

Two techniques have been adopted as standard by practitioners. They are the mixture

of lognormals method and the smoothed implied volatility smile. The ﬁrst of these is a

∞

Z
X

X

Z
−∞

3

parametric method which works with equation (1); the second is a non-parametric method

which works with equation (2).

The mixture of lognormals technique originated with Ritchey [7]. In this method, the

RND is represented by the weighted sum of independent lognormal density functions.

ρ(ST ) =

[ΘiLnD(αi, βi; ST )],

Θi = 1, Θi > 0∀i.

(3)

m

Xi=1

m

Xi=1

In equation (3), LnD(αi, βi; ST ) is the ith lognormal density function for the asset price at

maturity ST , in the m component mixture with parameters αi and βi. The parameter Θi is a

probability weighting. This representation has the advantage that it oﬀers greater ﬂexibility

than a single density representation. In principle, a mixture of Gaussian (or other) densities

can approximate any continuous density to arbitrary accuracy as the number of component

density functions tends to inﬁnity. Ritchey used a mixture of two lognormal densities to

minimise the number of parameters to be estimated, and this has become the standard

procedure. If equation (3) is substituted into equation (1) the resulting expressions can be

ﬁtted to observed call and put prices, and the parameters estimated to minimise the weighted

sum of ﬁtted price errors, using non-linear optimisation methods. Given the parameters and

the observed option prices, the implied RND can then be constructed. In this method the

number of parameters to be estimated increases rapidly with the number of density functions

included. The method is prone to overﬁtting since option price series frequently have 20 or

fewer observed prices corresponding to diﬀerent exercise prices with the same t and T .

The smoothed implied volatility smile method originated with Shimko [8]. The RND can

be obtained directly from equation (2) provided the option pricing function f (X, t, T ) is

observable. Unfortunately, only a relatively small number of option prices corresponding to

discrete exercise prices are observable for a given time t. An obvious solution is to smooth

and interpolate the observed prices by ﬁtting a function to them. Shimko considered this,

but found that his smoothing spline functions were not suitable for ﬁtting option prices.

To overcome this diﬃculty Shimko converted the prices to implied volatilities using the BS

formula. He then ﬁtted a quadratic polynomial smoothing function to the available implied

volatilities and used linear extrapolation outside the range of observable exercise prices.

The continuous implied volatilities obtained were then converted back to continuous option

prices using BS, and an RND extracted using the relation in equation (2). In this method,

the BS formula is used purely to eﬀect a transformation from one data space to another; it

4

does not rely on any of the assumptions underlying the BS formula. The smoothed volatility

smile method has the advantage that ﬁtting polynomial curves or splines to the smile can

be done in a single pass, without iteration. However, the probabilities in the resulting RND

cannot be guaranteed to be positive because this is not a constrained optimisation.

Bliss and Panigirtzoglou [9] found that the smoothed implied volatility smile estimation

method produced more stable RNDs than the mixture of lognormals method. By contrast,

the mixture of lognormals method was found to be sensitive to computational problems,

suﬀered from frequent convergence failures, and had a tendency to produce spurious spikes

in estimated RNDs, hence they suggest it should not be used. Additionally, they suggest

the smoothed implied volatility smile method may be improved by trading goodness-of-ﬁt

for a more stable RND, and remark that the mixture of lognormals method does not permit

this ﬁne tuning. They warn though, that skewness and kurtosis cannot always be precisely

estimated with either method. However, the disadvantages of the smoothed implied method

include: 1) the need to convert prices to and from implied volatility, 2)the use of a limited

family of quadratic functions to ﬁt the data, 3) diﬃculty in obtaining a smooth join when

extrapolating outside the range of observable exercise prices.

B. Recovering RNDs from Index Options with Neural Nets

Surprisingly, there has been little study of the use of neural nets (NNs) for extracting

RNDs from option prices. A version of the parametric mixture of lognormals method was im-

plemented by Schittenkopf and Dorﬀner [10] using Mixture Density Networks for the FTSE

100. Herrmann and Narr [11] diﬀerentiated NN option pricing functions ﬁtted directly to

prices of options on the German DAX index to obtain RNDs. They used average values for

some input variables when training their models. The resulting RNDs were compared graph-

ically with corresponding lognormal RNDs obtained using the BS formulae. No statistical

tests were performed, and only goodness-of-ﬁt and error measures were provided. Despite

an extensive literature search, no other studies were found. The non-parametric extraction

of RNDs from option prices is an example of an ill-posed problem, in that small changes in

option prices can lead to large changes in the estimated density function. It requires the use

of methods that are robust to slight changes in the option prices. Neural nets have been

shown to be suitable for directly ﬁtting option prices, avoiding the need to work in implied

5

volatility space as in the smoothed implied volatility method.

C. American Put Options

Most exchange traded options are American options and these can be exercised at any

time prior to maturity.

It is expected that this feature, which is reﬂected in their price,

aﬀects any extracted RND. The theory underlying RNDs is only applicable to European

exercise options, and cannot be applied to American exercise options without modiﬁcation.

Dupont [12] discussed this and suggested that the early exercise correction is not signiﬁcant

in practice except for deep in-the-money options.

It is an open question whether RNDs

extracted from American options are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent empirically from those extracted

from corresponding European options. The American style SEI option is based directly

upon the FTSE 100 index while the European ESX option is based upon an implied future

on the FTSE 100 index. The underlyings converge when time approaches maturity date.

Only put options are considered here; in the absence of dividend payments early exercise of

American call options is never optimal, so they can be priced as European. Here, RNDs from

American Ansatz and European put option pricing functions are extracted and compared.

III. DATA AND METHOD

For this work, smoothed prices corresponding to each exercise price in a daily price series

were estimated through directly ﬁtting a neural net to create an option pricing function.

Then RNDs were extracted by twice partially diﬀerentiating the functions numerically with

respect to exercise price. A training set of 13,790 FTSE 100 ESX put options was prepared

along with another training set which comprised 14,619 FTSE 100 SEI put options. To

ensure prices were liquid, only options with positive values for contract volume and open

interest were selected. A disjoint test set of 60 daily option price series, containing data

on a total of 1,238 (European) put options on the FTSE 100 index, was created. Option

and underlying asset prices for the American puts were added for the same time, risk-

free interest rate, and interleaved exercise price. The resulting test set had the following

two special features: 1) Included options were traded for one of 60 consecutive monthly

expirations, 2) The options had a maturity of one calendar month (17 or 18 trading days).

6

This was because any longer maturity results in overlapping data for some variables.

In creating the test set, the objective was to obtain a set of option price series with

constant maturities, which was non-overlapping. The latter feature was required to avoid

serial dependence between successive observations, which might bias statistical results for the

RNDs [13]. Pricing models for European and American put options were separately trained,

using logistic functions in a 5-11-1 architecture. The inputs were the ﬁve BS variables,

and the targets were market prices of European and American put options, respectively.

Once trained, the pricing models were applied to the test set to generate series of smoothed

European and American option prices, taking care to use the correct values of the underlying

asset as inputs to each model. Each generated price series was then numerically diﬀerentiated
to estimate ∂2f (X,t,T )

using symmetric central ﬁnite diﬀerences. Making f correspond to the

∂X2

neural net, the following formula was applied:

∂2f (X, S, t, r, σ)
∂X 2

=

f (X + ε, S, t, r, σ) − 2f (X, S, t, r, σ) + f (X − ε, S, t, r, σ)
ε2

.

(4)

where f (X, S, t, r, σ) is a neural net option pricing function with the 5 standard BS input

variables deﬁned in [3] using at-the-money volatilty, and ε is a small increment. If ˆρ(Xi) is

the RND for a strike price interval [Xi, Xi+1], then

ˆρ(Xi) ≈ ∂2f (X, S, t, r, σ)

εe−r(T −t).

∂X 2

where ε is the interval between adjacent values of Xi. Equation (5) was used to obtain

point estimates of the RND for the interval corresponding to each Xi. The median value,
and probabilities in the tails of the distribution below the 1st and above the nth observable

option price in the series, were estimated as suggested by [6], using equation (2).

Mean =

n

Xi=1

Xi + Xi+1
2

ˆρ(Xi).

Stdev = v
(
u
u
t

Xi=1

Xi + Xi+1
2

−Mean)2 ˆρ(Xi).

Skewness = (

Xi + Xi+1
2

−Mean)3 ˆρ(Xi)
Stdev3

.

Kurtosis = (

Xi + Xi+1
2

−Mean)4 ˆρ(Xi)
Stdev4

.

n

n

Xi=1

n

Xi=1

7

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

TABLE I: European v American FTSE 100 Index Put Options: Comparison of RNDs.

F − stata

t − stat(paired)a

SummaryStat

Mean

Median

Stdev

Ann.I.V.%

Skewness

Kurtosis

R2

0.9996

0.9996

0.640

0.820

0.932

0.779

1.01

1.00

1.45

1.78

1.09

1.96

9.09

5.07

5.35

4.29

19.01

-13.04

H0 :a

Reject

Reject

Reject

Reject

Reject

Reject

aFcrit = 1.54. tcrit(2 tail) = 2.00. H0 := no dif f erence in SummaryStat means at 95% conf idence.

The ﬁrst four moments of each recovered RND were estimated from Equations (6) to

(9). The annualised percentage implied volatility was derived from equation (7) as

100*(Stdev/Mean)*ν0.5 where ν = (time-for-year/time-to-expiry).

IV. RESULTS: RNDS OF EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN PUT OPTIONS

The ﬁt of the NN models to the market prices of the options in the test set gave an R2

of 0.988 and 0.984 for the European and American put options respectively. The calculated

t-statistics were -0.09 and -1.32 respectively, compared with a critical value of 1.96 for a

two tailed test. These results conﬁrmed that both NN models were unbiased estimators

of market prices. Table I and Table II compare summary statistics for RNDs recovered

from the test data of non-overlapping, constant maturity (1 month as 17/18 trading days),

sets of European and American exercise put options on the FTSE 100 Index. Table I gives

results for direct comparisons of the time series of moments. The results of the paired t-tests

indicate signiﬁcant diﬀerences, for each statistic tested, between RNDs for European and

American put options in spite of R2=0.9996 for mean and median. In particular, the results

for skewness and kurtosis suggested the shapes of the RNDs were diﬀerent for each type of

put option. The F test is a test to determine whether two samples are from populations

with diﬀerent variances; here it indicates signiﬁcant diﬀerences for annualised IV and for

kurtosis. Further tests were carried out to assess the practical eﬀects of these diﬀerences

on the predictive properties of RNDs from each type of put option. Results of these tests

are presented in Table II. The median and annualised percentage implied volatility from

each RND are compared with the actual traded FTSE 100 closing price (T.FTSE 100) and

8

TABLE II: Performance: Comparison of Market Value with RNDs’ One Month Estimate.

Option

ESX

ESX

SEI

SEI

P arameter

T.FTSE100 v Median

Realised Vol. v Ann.I.V.%

T.FTSE100 v Median

Realised Vol. v Ann.I.V.%

Market Outcome

Realised Vol. v ATMIV(LIFFE)%

R2

0.955

0.379

0.955

0.318

0.426

F − stata

t − stata

1.01

2.01

1.01

3.58

1.46

-0.02

-3.47

0.05

-2.55

-4.50

H0 :a

Accept

Reject

Accept

Reject

Reject

aFcrit = 1.54. tcrit(2 tail) = 2.00. H0 := no dif f erence in means at 95% conf idence.

TABLE III: Skewness and Kurtosis: Estimated RNDs v Normal.

Option

Skewness

N ormal

t − stat(paired)a

Kurtosis

N ormal

t − stat(paired)a

ESX

SEI

-0.43

-0.65

0

0

-10.1

-14.7

2.82

3.19

3

3

-4.4

3.4

aReject H0 := no dif f erence in means at 95% conf idence if abs(t − test) > tcrit(2 tail) = 2.00.

realised volatility on the expiration date of the option. This is a test of the one month

(17/18 trading days) predictive characteristics of the median and implied volatility from

the estimated RNDs. The t-test results in Table II indicate that the medians of RNDs

from both American and European exercise options provide an unbiased estimate of FTSE

100 closing prices on the expiration date of the options, one month later. The annualised

implied volatilities of the RNDs from both types of options, on the other hand, are biased

estimates of the actual realised volatilities at expiration of the option. However, the volatility

estimates from the RNDs compare favourably with LIFFE tabulated at-the-money implied

volatility, which gives an even more biased estimate of realised volatility. These results

suggest unbiased estimates of future asset prices can be obtained from RNDs from both

European and American put options on those assets. Table III shows the average departure

of the ESX and SEI RNDs from normality. The t-stats from paired t-tests of the series

of values of skewness and kurtosis estimated from the RNDs, and those for the normal

distribution, lead to rejection of the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence at the 95% level. It

is important to appreciate that RNDs extracted from option prices are distinct from the

historical distribution of the underlying asset returns (prices), since one is risk adjusted

and the other is not. However, their shapes should be the same. Thus, if asset returns

were normally distributed we would not expect to obtain negatively skewed, leptokurtic, or

9

platykurtic RNDs. The results above are therefore consistent with other empirical ﬁndings

suggesting that asset returns are not normally distributed.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this empirical study, we applied our method of estimating RNDs to a large set of FTSE

100 European style put option daily data, and then as an Ansatz to a corresponding set of

American style options on the same underlying asset. Our results in Table I suggest that the

RNDs obtained from each style of option are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, reﬂecting the distorting

inﬂuence of the early exercise possibilities for the American put options. We conﬁrmed that

estimates of volatility from the RNDs from both types of option were biased estimates of the

actually realised volatilities at expiration, suggesting that prices for the options tend to over

estimate volatility. However, caution is necessary in interpreting the latter results, as it is

diﬃcult to reliably estimate realised volatility from at most 18 daily observations of returns.

The values of skewness and kurtosis obtained also suggest that the underlying pricing process

departs from geometric Brownian motion. The results presented in Table II are surprising.

They suggest that in practice, RNDs from both European and American put options can

be used interchangeably to obtain estimates of future asset prices. This holds although the

theory underlying RNDs outlined in section II applies only to European style exercise, and

despite the existence of signiﬁcant model diﬀerences revealed by the (albeit more powerful)

paired t-test results presented in Table I. In addition, the standard deviation of RNDs for

the American put options is smaller at 107 index points compared with 113 on average

for the European options. Reassuringly, FIG. 1 shows for ESX how in all cases the actual
FTSE 100 closing prices lie within U and L, the ±2 standard deviation conﬁdence intervals

constructed from the estimated standard deviations of each separate RND; the same applies

to SEI. Overall, our results suggest that neural nets provide a promising method for use

in extracting RNDs from option prices; this merits further investigation. To evaluate fully

the potential and limitations of the approach we describe here, an empirical comparison of

the statistical characteristics of RNDs from the double lognormal, from a smoothed implied

volatility smile, and from our approach using neural nets is required. In particular, further

consideration needs to be given to the observation of Dupont [12] on deep in-the-money

American style options.

10

FIG. 1: ESX Put Option RNDs: One Month Estimate of Level of FTSE 100 showing it lies within

the 95% conﬁdence band of the model.

[1] Y. Ait-Sahalia and A. W. Lo. Nonparametric Risk Management and Implied Risk Aversion.

Journal of Econometrics 94, 9-51. 2000.

[2] B. Bahra. Implied Risk-Neutral Probability Density Functions From Option Prices: Theory

and Applications. Bank of England, London, EC2R 8AH. 1997.

[3] J. Healy, M. Dixon, B. Read, and FF. Cai. A Data Centric Approach to Understanding the

Pricing of Financial Options, European Physical Journal B 27, 219-227. 2002.

[4] J. V. Healy, M. Dixon, B.J. Read, and FF. Cai. Conﬁdence Limits for Data Mining Models

of Option Prices. Physica A 344, 162-167. 2004.

[5] D. T. Breeden and R. H. Litzenberger. Prices of State-contingent Claims Implicit in Option

Prices. Journal of Business 4, 621-651. 1978.

11

[6] H. Neuhaus. The Information Content of Derivatives for Monetary Policy. Discussion Paper

3/95, Economic Research Group of the Deutsche Bundesbank. 1995.

[7] R. J. Ritchey. Call Option Valuation for Discrete Normal Mixtures, Journal of Financial

Research 13, 285-296. 1990.

[8] D. Shimko. Bounds of Probability, Risk, 6(4), 33-37. 1993.

[9] R. Bliss and N. Panigirtzoglou. Testing the Stability of Implied Probability Density Functions,

Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 381-422. 2002.

[10] C. Schittenkopf and G. Dorﬀner. Risk Neutral Density Extraction from Option Prices: Im-

proved Pricing from Mixture Density Networks, IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, 12, 716-723.

2001.

[11] R. Herrmann and A. Narr. Risk Neutrality, Risk, 10, Technology Supplement, 23-29. 1997.

[12] D. Y. Dupont. Extracting Risk-neutral Probability Distributions from Option Prices Using

Trading Volumes as a Filter. http://www.ihs.ac.at/publications/eco/es-104.pdf. 2001.

[13] M. M. Dacorogna, R. Gencay, U. Muller, R. B. Olsen, and O. V. Pictet. An Introduction to

High Frequency Finance, Academic Press. 47-51. 2001.

12

