6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Multifractal Properties of the Ukraine Stock Market

A.Ganchuk, V.Derbentsev, V. Soloviev

Economical Cybernetics Department, Kryviy Rih Economic Institute Kyiv
National Economic University by Vadim Getman, Kryviy Rih, Ukraine
fax, phone: +380 564 901512
v n soloviev@kneu.dp.ua

Abstract
Recently the statistical characterizations of ﬁnancial markets based on
physics concepts and methods attract considerable attentions. We used two
possible procedures of analyzing multifractal properties of a time series. The
ﬁrst one uses the continuous wavelet transform and extracts scaling exponents
from the wavelet transform amplitudes over all scales. The second method is
the multifractal version of the detrended ﬂuctuation analysis method (MF-
DFA). The multifractality of a time series we analysed by means of the
diﬀerence of values singularity stregth αmax and αmin as a suitable way to
characterise multifractality. Singularity spectrum calculated from daily re-
turns using a sliding 1000 day time window in discrete steps of 1. . . 10 days.
We discovered that changes in the multifractal spectrum display distinctive
pattern around signiﬁcant “drawdowns”. Finally, we discuss applications to
the construction of crushes precursors at the ﬁnancial markets.
Key words: Multifractal, stock market, singularity spectrum
PACS: 89.20.-a, 89.65.Gh, 89.75.-k

1. Introduction

Multivariate time series are detected and recorded both in experiments
and in the monitoring of a wide number physical, biological and economic
systems. A ﬁrst instrument in the investigation of multivariate time series is
the correlation matrix. The study of the properties of the correlation matrix
has a direct relevance in the investigation of mesoscopic physical systems,
high energy physics, investigation of microarray data in biological systems
and econophysics [1].

Quantifying correlations between diﬀerent stocks is a topic of interest
not only for scientiﬁc reasons of understanding the economy as a complex
dynamical system, but also for practical reasons such as asset allocation and
portfolio risk estimation [2–5]. Unlike most physical systems, where one

1

relates correlations between subunits to basic interactions, the underlying
“interactions” for the stock market problem are not known.

Recent empirical and theoretical analysis have shown that this informa-
tion can be detected by using a variety of methods. In this paper we used
some of these methods based on Random Matrix Theory (RMT) [6], correla-
tion based clustering, topological properties of correlation based graph and
multifractal analyses [7] .

In this paper the diﬀerent aspects of multiscale properties Ukraine stock
market are discussed. The so-called ﬁnancial stylized facts comprising, among
others, the non-negligible fat tails of log-return distributions, volatility clus-
tering and its long-time correlations, anomalous diﬀusion etc. counter that
the ﬁnancial dynamics is more complex than it is commonly assumed can
also be inferred from a number of recently-published papers discovering and
exploring the multifractal characteristics of data from the stock markets.

The concept of multifractality was developed in order to describe the
scaling properties of singular measures and functions which exhibit the pres-
ence of various distinct scaling exponents in their diﬀerent parts. Soon the
related formalism was successfully applied to characterize empirical data in
many distant ﬁelds like turbulence, earth science, genetics, physiology and,
as already mentioned, in ﬁnance [1].

In the present paper we analyze data from the Ukraine stock market
focusing on their fractal properties. We apply both on the multifractal de-
trended ﬂuctuation analysis and on the which are a well-established methods
of detecting scaling behaviour of signals.

2. Methods and data

Our analysis was performed on the time series of tick-by-tick recordings
for daily returns of all stocks extracted from database time series of prices the
First Stock Trade System (FSTS) index (www.kinto.com) for the ten-year
period 1997-2006. For comparison similar analyses was conducted for of Rus-
sian stock market (Russian Trade System (RTS) – www.rts.com). The daily
indices of the FSTS and RTS is the largest markets in Ukraine and Russia
consisting of stocks from various sectors. Indices are basically an average of
actively traded stocks, which are weighted according to their market value.
There are two possible procedures of analyzing multifractal properties
of a time series. The ﬁrst one uses the continuous wavelet transform and
extracts scaling exponents from the wavelet transform amplitudes over all

2

scales. This wavelet transform modulus maxima (WTMM) method [8] has
been proposed as a mean ﬁeld generalized multifractal formalism for fractal
signals. We ﬁrst obtain the wavelet coeﬃcient at time t0 from the continuous
wavelet transform deﬁned as:

Wa(t0) ≡ a−1

p(t)ψ((t − t0)/a)

N

Xt=1

where p(t) is the analyzed time series, ψ is the analyzing wavelet function,
a is the wavelet scale (i.e., time scale of the analysis), and N is the number
of data points in the time series. For ψ we use the third derivative of the
Gaussian, thus ﬁltering out up to second order polynomial trends in the data.
We then choose the modulus of the wavelet coeﬃcients at each point t in the
time series for a ﬁxed wavelet scale a.

Next, we estimate the partition function

Zq(a) ≡

|Wa(t)|q

Xi
where the sum is only over the maxima values of |Wa(t)|, and the powers q
take on real values. By not summing over the entire set of wavelet transform
coeﬃcients along the time series at a given scale a but only over the wavelet
transform modulus maxima, we focus on the fractal structure of the temporal
organization of the singularities in the signal. We repeat the procedure for
diﬀerent values of the wavelet scale a to estimate the scaling behavior

Zq(a) ∝ aτ (q).

In analogy with what occurs in scale-free physical systems,

in which
phenomena controlled by the same mechanism over multiple time scales
are characterized by scale-independent measures, we assume that the scale-
independent measures, τ (q), depend only on the underlying mechanism con-
trolling the system.

Altrnatively procedure is the multifractal version of the detrended ﬂuc-
tuation analysis method (MF-DFA) [9]. Given the time series of price val-
ues ps(ts(i)), i = 1, ..., Ns of a stock ss recorded at the discrete transaction
moments ts(i), one may consider logarithmic price increments (or returns)
gs(i) = ln(ps(i+1))−ln(ps(i)). For the time series of the log-price increments
Gs ≡ {gs(i)} one needs to estimate the signal proﬁle

3

i

Xk=1

n

1
n

Xj=1 n

Y (i) =

(gs(k)− < gs >), i = 1, ..., Ns

(1)

where ¡. . . ¿ denotes the mean of Gs. Y (i) is divided into Ms disjoint seg-
ments of length n starting from the beginning of Gs. For each segment
ν, ν = 1, ..., Ms, the local trend is to be calculated by least-squares ﬁtting the
polynomial P (l)
ν of order l to the data, and then the variance

F 2(ν, n) =

Y [(ν − 1)n + j] − P (l)

ν (j)

(2)

2

.

o

In order to avoid neglecting data points at the end of Gs which do not
fall into any of the segments, the same as above is repeated for Ms segments
starting from the end of Gs. The polynomial order l can be equal to 1
(DFA1), 2 (DFA2), etc. The variances (2) have to be averaged over all the
segments ν and ﬁnally one gets the qth order ﬂuctuation function

Fq(n) =

F 2(ν, n)

, q ∈ R.

(3)

1
2Ms

(

2Ms

Xν=1 h

1/q

q/2

)

i

In order to determine the dependence of Fq on n, the function Fq(n) has

to be calculated for many diﬀerent segments of lengths n.

If the analyzed signal develops fractal properties, the ﬂuctuation function

reveals power-law scaling

Fq(n) ∝ nτ (q)

(4)

for large n. The family of the scaling exponents τ (q) can be then obtained
by observing the slope of log-log plots of Fq vs. n. τ (q) can be considered
as a generalization of the Hurst exponent H with the equivalence H ≡ τ (2).
Now the distinction between monofractal and multifractal signals can be per-
if τ (q) = H for all q, then the signal under study is monofractal;
formed:
it is multifractal otherwise. By the procedure, τ (q), q < 0 describe the scal-
ing properties of small ﬂuctuations in the time series, while the large ones
correspond to τ (q), q > 0. It also holds that τ (q) is a decreasing function of
q.

By knowing the spectrum of the generalized Hurst exponents, one can
calculate the singularity strength α and the singularity spectrum f (α) using
the following relations:

4

α = τ (q) + qτ ′(q),

f (α) = q [α − τ (q)] + 1,

(5)

where τ ′(q) stands for the derivative of τ (q) with respect to q.

3. Results

Figure 1 shows the First Stock Trade System index and Russia Trade

System index, from 1997 to 2006.

Fig. 1. FSTS and RTS indexes plotted for all the days reported in the period
1997 to 2006

5

Our calculations indicate that the time series of price increments for all com-
panies can be of the multifractal nature (see ﬁg.2). Consistently with the
log-log plots, the highest nonlinearity of the spectrum and the strongest
multifractality are attributes of RTS (Russia), and the smallest nonlinearity
and the weakest multifractal character correspond to FSTS (Ukraine). The
multifractal nature of the data can also be expressed in a diﬀerent manner,
i.e. by plotting the singularity spectra f (α)(Eq. 5). It is a more plausible
method because here one can easily assess the variety of scaling behaviour
in the data. The evolution of f (α) is analyzed by using a moving window of
length 1000 data point shifted by 1 point. Such a window ensures that we
obtain statistically reliable results.
The maxima of f (α)are typically placed in a close vicinity of α = 0.5 indicat-
ing no signiﬁcant autocorrelations exist. The multifractal character of price
ﬂuctuations can originate from the existence of the long-range correlations
in the price increments (via volatility) as well as from their non-Gaussian
distributions.
The richest multifractality (the widest f (α)curve ∆α = αmax−αmin) is visible
for RTS, the poorest one for FSTS (ﬁg. 3).

4. Conclusions

We study the multifractal properties of Ukraine Stock Market. We show
that the signals for the price increments exhibit the characteristics that can
be interpreted in terms of multifractality. Its degree expressed by the widths
∆α = αmax − αmin) of the singularity spectra f (α)diﬀerent for the Russian
and Ukrainian stock markets. Greater value for the Russian market related
to more eﬀective functioning. In this case the width of singularity spectrum
can serve as the measure of eﬃciency of functioning of the complex system.

References
[1] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez , D.-U. Hwang, Physics

Reports 424 (2006) 175 – 308

[2] B.B. Mandelbrot and J.W. van Ness, SIAM Review 10 (1968) 422-437
[3] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L.A.N. Amaral, M. Meyer and H.E. Stan-

Phys. Rev. E 60 (1999) 6519-6529
[4] P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, L.A.N. Amaral, M. Meyer and H.E. Stan-

ley,

ley,

6

(a) Log-log plots of the q-th order ﬂuctuation Fq for time series
Fig. 2.
of price increments as a function of segment size n for diﬀerent values of
(b)Scaling regions allow
q between -20 (bottom line) and 20 (top line).
one to estimate h(q) according to Eq. 4. (c) Multifractal spectra for price
increments; a nonlinear behaviour of τ (q) can be considered a manifestation
(d) singularity spectra f (α) according to Eq. 5. Open
of multiscaling.
circles corresponds to shuﬄed data

7

Fig. 3. Comparison of the widths of the f (α) spectra Russia and Ukraine
stock markets

8

Phys. Rev. E 60 (1999) 5305-5316
[5] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, L.A.N. Amaral, X. Gabaix and H.E. Stan-

ley,

3515

Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) R3023-R3026
[6] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, B.Rosenow, L. A. N. Amaral, T.Guhr, H.

E. Stanley Phys.Rev E, 65 (2002) 066126

[7] S. Drozdz, J. Kwapien, F. Gruemmer, F. Ruf and J. Speth, Acta Phys.

Pol. B 34 (2003) 4293-4305

[8] J. F.Muzy, E. Bacry, and A. Arneodo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991),

[9] J.W. Kantelhardt, S.A. Zschiegner, E. Koscielny-Bunde, A. Bunde,

Sh. Havlin and H.E. Stanley, Physica A 316 (2002) 87-114

9

