6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Multiscale reconstruction of time series

A. P. Nawroth and J. Peinke
Institut f¨ur Physik, Carl-von-Ossietzky Universit¨at Oldenburg, D-26111 Oldenburg, Germany
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A new method is proposed which allows a reconstruction of time series based on higher order
multiscale statistics given by a hierarchical process. This method is able to model the time series
not only on a speciﬁc scale but for a range of scales. It is possible to generate complete new time
series, or to model the next steps for a given sequence of data. The method itself is based on the
joint probability density which can be extracted directly from given data, thus no estimation of
parameters is necessary. The results of this approach are shown for a real world dataset, namely for
turbulence. The unconditional and conditional probability densities of the original and reconstructed
time series are compared and the ability to reproduce both is demonstrated. Therefore in the case
of Markov properties the method proposed here is able to generate artiﬁcial time series with correct
n-point statistics.

PACS numbers: 02.50.Ga, 05.45.Tp

I.

INTRODUCTION

A typical feature of complex systems, like turbulence
and ﬁnance,
is that these have hierarchical and non-
trivial structures on diﬀerent scales. Due to the hierar-
chical structure such systems are in general very high di-
mensional, thus there is the challenge to ﬁnd appropriate
methods to model these structures eﬃciently. Successful
attempts have been made to describe these systems as
processes in scale rather than time or space itself. Ex-
amples are the description of roughness of surfaces [1, 2],
turbulence [3, 4, 5], earthquakes [6] and ﬁnance [7, 8].
These successful attempts are characterised by the fact,
that they can correctly provide the joint probability den-
sity function p(y1(τ1), ..., yn(τn)) of the increments y(τ )
of the process variable x at diﬀerent scales τ ,

y(t, τ ) := x(t) − x(t − τ ).

(1)

An increment time series y(t, τ ) for arbitrary scales τ
can be constructed from x(t). In the following the joint
statistics of these increment processess are considered.
Hereby it is assumed, that these processess, y(t, τ ), are
stationary in t and the ergodic hypothesis can be applied.
Note that the method itself is not restricted to this par-
ticular increment deﬁnition [9]. For reasons of convenient
notation we assume for the following discussion a given
complex system x(t), where t denotes time but may de-
note space as well. The smaller increments are nested
into the larger increments.

It should be pointed out, that the knowledge of the
joint probability density function p(y1(τ1), ..., yn(τn)) in-
cludes also information like multifractal scaling proper-
ties, typical expressed by < yn(τ ) >∼ τ ξn .

For complex systems there is a general challenge, to
generate surrogates based on the knowledge of the sta-
tistical properties of the system itself. One approach is
to propose general models and proper parameter sets,
see for example [10, 11]. Typically remarkable features
like correlations or the shape of single scale pdfs p(y(τ ))
are used for the parameter selection. Some of these ap-

proaches provide also a remarkably good description of
higher order statistics. Here we propose an alternative,
more general approach, which is based on the knowledge
of multiscale properties.
In particular we show how a
given time series can be extended into the future prop-
erly.

II. METHOD

As stated above a hierarchical complex system can of-
ten be described by means of the joint probability den-
sity p(y1(τ1), ..., yn(τn)). Because of the involved scales
the dimension of the joint probability density is very high.
Therefore it is in general very diﬃcult to compute it from
empirical time series. However the description and com-
putation can be highly simpliﬁed if Markov properties
can be assumed. This is the case if

p(yi(τi)|yi+1(τi+1), ..., yn(τn)) = p(yi(τi)|yi+1(τi+1)) (2)

is true for all i and n > i. Without loss of generality
we take τi < τi+1. It should be noted that the Markov
property can be tested for a given data set [7, 12, 13]. In
this case the joint probability density can be substantially
simpliﬁed:

p(y1(τ1), ..., yn(τn)) =

(3)

p(y1(τ1)|y2(τ2)) · ... · p(yn−1(τn−1)|yn(τn)) · p(yn(τn))

In the following we restrict the discussion to Markov
processes in scale and to right-justiﬁed increments, i.e.
the smaller increment is nested into the larger one and
has the right end point in common [14] according to Eq.
(1). There are two possible ways to determine the condi-
tional probability densities p(yi−1(τi−1)|yi(τi)) and the
unconditional probability density p(yn(τn)). The ﬁrst
one is straightforward. A typical time series from the
complex system is examined, and the probability den-
sities are determined, by simply calculating histograms

2

)
t
(
x

–2

–2

2

0

2

0

2

0

–2

800

from the data. Due to the ﬁnite length of the data set,
very small probabilities tend to be estimated as zero. In
order to obtain the joint probability, the conditional and
unconditional probability function have to be multiplied.
Therefore the joint probability will also be zero for this
value. Due to that, the probability density can be under-
estimated, especially in case of large negative and posi-
tive increments.

A second possibility to estimate these probabilities is
to use the ansatz presented in [7, 12, 15, 16]. The prob-
ability densities are now obtained as a solution of the
Fokker-Planck equation:

∂p(y, τ )
∂τ

=

−

(cid:20)

∂
∂y

D(1)(y, τ ) +

∂2
∂y2

D(2)(y, τ )
(cid:21)

p(y, τ ). (4)

Note that this equation holds also for the conditional
probability densities. The Kramers-Moyal coeﬃcients
D(i) are deﬁned as

D(i)(y, τ ) =

lim∆τ →0

1
i!∆τ Z

(y′

− y)i p(y′

(τ + ∆τ )|y(τ )) dy′

and can again be directly computed from given data. The
problem of zero values vanishes, or at least is shifted to
increments with a very large magnitude (see for example
[7]).

Next we focus on the procedure to create time se-
ries. We start with the most general case, that the
time under consideration for the new element of the se-
ries (x(t)) is named t∗, then the knowledge of all points
{x(t∗ − τ1), ..., x(t∗ − τn)} and the corresponding proba-
bility densities for {y(τ1), ..., y(τn)} are needed in order
to choose the value of x(t∗) correctly. Let’s assume that
˜x(t∗) is chosen as a value for x(t∗). The corresponding in-
crements ˜yi(τi), with their common right endpoint ˜x(t∗),
are deﬁned through

˜yi(τi) := ˜x(t∗

) − x(t∗

− τi).

(6)

Because P (˜yn(τn)) and x(t∗ − τn) are known, the prob-
ability P (˜x(t∗)|x(t∗ − τn)) of this event is also known.
But this conditional probability includes only the infor-
mation of one scale, namely τn. To add the informa-
tion available on the scale τn−1, p(yn−1(τn−1)|yn(τn))
is also needed. These quantities then determine the
probability P (˜yn−1(τn−1), ˜yn(τn)) and contain the ad-
information of x(t∗ − τn−1). Therefore now
ditional
P (˜x(t∗)|x(t∗ − τn), x(t∗ − τn−1)) is known. Due to the
Markov property this can easily be extended to the prob-
ability P (˜x(t∗)|x(t∗ − τn), ..., x(t∗ − τ1)).

Thus the conditional probability density conditioned
on many diﬀerent scales is known. For a ﬁnite range of
values for ˜x(t∗) and a ﬁnite number of necessary scales
the probability density p(x(t∗)|x(t∗ − τn), ..., x(t∗ − τ1))
is obtained. p(x(t∗)|x(t∗ − τn), ..., x(t∗ − τ1)) now con-
tains all relevant statistical information of the previous

900

1000

1100

1200

simulation step

(5)

FIG. 1: Three runs of reconstructed time series, which have
the same initial conditions. Left to the vertical line, the 200
data points, which were taken as initial condition, are shown.
On the right side the following 200 points from our recon-
struction are shown. x(t) has been normalised to zero mean
and is presented in units of the standard deviation σ∞ of the
whole dataset.

time series for a correct choice of the value x(t∗). Choos-
ing now a random value from this distribution, the time
series will be extended correctly by another point. Re-
peating this procedure will produce a time series, which
exhibits the correct joint probability density function for
all considered scales τ1, ..., τn. Obviously the estimation
of p(x(t∗)|x(t∗ − τn), ..., x(t∗ − τ1)) has to be repeated
for each new value of the time series. Some open ques-
tions remain: 1. How many and which diﬀerent scales
should be included? 2. How to cope with unavoidable
discreteness of the statistics? 3. Which initial conditions
should be used for the simulation? The ﬁrst question
of correct choice of scales gets simpler, if for the com-
plex system there exists a large scale, L, above which
neighboring increments become statistical independent.
A further simpliﬁcation is given, if there is a small scale,
the so called Markov-Einstein coherence length, lmar [17],
below which the Markov properties are no longer fulﬁlled.
For this case we suggest as number N of scales:

N =

+ 1.

log L
lmar
log 2

(7)

In some cases, L can be very large, which is especially
true for bounded time series. Here we propose to restrict
to the small and medium size increments. The inﬂu-
ence of the large size increments can be included by a
speciﬁc condition on the largest conditional increment.
We close the sequence of conditional pdfs as follows:
p(y1(τ1)|y2(τ2))·...·p(yn−1(τn−1)|yn(τn))·p(yn(τn)|x(t∗ −
τn))

4

b)

c)

3

a)

10

)
y
(
p
 
g
o

l

0

)
1
−

i

τ
(
1
−
y

i

0

–4

–4

4

0

y

–4

0

0

4

4

–4

yi(τi)

n

FIG. 2: a) The pdfs from the original (solid black line) and the reconstructed (circles) data set are shown. The considered
· lmar with n = 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0 from top to bottom. The pdfs for diﬀerent scales are shifted for clarity of
scales are 2
presentation. b+c) Contour plots of conditional probability densities p(yi−1(τi−1)|yi(τi)) with τi = 2 · τi−1 and τi−1 = lmar (b)
and τi−1 = 26 · lmar (c). The ones from original data are denoted as thin solid lines, while the ones from reconstructed data as
thick dotted lines. Increments are given in units of the standard deviation σ∞ of the whole dataset x(t).

III. RESULTS FOR TURBULENCE

As a real world example turbulence is chosen, where
hierarchical Markov processes were well-demonstrated
[3, 12]. The dataset was produced by a free jet of air
into air. The dataset consists of 12.5 ·106 data points, for
more details the reader is refered to [12]. A discretisation
of the scale and the velocity is chosen as follows. For the
smallest scale we choose the above mentioned Markov-
Einstein coherence length, lmar, in our case 6mm. The
selected larger scales are 2n · lmar. So a reconstruction
of the hierarchical process is attempted for the scale in-
terval lmar to 128 · lmar, where the largest scale is well
above the so called turbulent integral length. The inﬂu-
ence of the larger scales is included by the approximation
mentioned above. For this choice of scales we are sure,
that the necessary Markov properties are always fulﬁlled.
Due to the discretisation of the velocity values, the ve-
locity increments on the smallest scale lmar can have 201
possible values. For the reconstruction in this section, all
pdfs were calculated directly from the data without the
use of Eqs. (4) and (5).

In order to show typical reconstructed time series, 200
data points from the dataset described above were taken
as an initial condition for the calculation of 200 synthetic
data points. The results for three runs are shown in Fig.
1. Clearly, the three diﬀerent runs yield similiar results
for the ﬁrst synthetic data points, but become more and
more diﬀerent for the further data points. However the
general characteristics of the initial time series are re-
tained.
In order to show, how well the multiscale be-
haviour is captured, a reconstructed time series which
contains 106 data points is produced, without using the

original data set as initial condition. As an initial con-
dition in this case, a sequence of zeros was used and
the ﬁrst elements of the simulation were discarded. The
corresponding probability density functions for the eight
diﬀerent scales are shown in Fig. 2a and compared to
those of the original data.
It is clearly seen, that for
|y| / 2σ∞ the agreement between the original and re-
constructed pdfs is quite good. For extreme values the
reconstructed data deviate due to the reasons speciﬁed
above. With increasing number of given original data the
range of agreement in the pdfs extends.

In order to see if the multiscale description is correct,
not only the unconditional probability densities have to
(3) also the con-
be examined, but according to Eq.
ditional probability density of ﬁrst order.
In Fig. 2b
and Fig. 2c the results are shown for the smallest and
the largest scales considered here. In both cases again
the empirical conditional probabilities are modelled very
well.

In a next step we compare our method with a one scale
method to reconstruct time series. Therefore a random
walk is constructed, such that the distribution of the in-
crements on the smallest scale is identical to that of the
empirical time series, i.e. only p(y1(τ1)) is used. The re-
sults for this adapted random walk are shown in Fig. 3.
As can be seen for small scales the adapted random walk
provides good approximations for the increment distri-
bution, but for the larger scales, the approximation with
the adapted random walk is very poor. This illustrate
the advantage of using multiscale information for the re-
construction.

10

0

)
y
(
p
 
g
o

l

–4

4

0

y

FIG. 3: Pdfs in analogy to Fig. 2a are shown. For the
pdfs (circles) of the reconstructed data now a simple one scale
process was used. Further parameters are chosen as in Fig.
2a.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

A new method has been presented, which allows for
a multiscale reconstruction of a time series. More scales
are modelled simultaneously, using conditional probabili-
ties of properly chosen increments. A necessary feature of
the underlying complex system is that it exhibits Markov
properties of the scale dependent process. This can be
tested statistically. In this case all conditional probabili-

4

ties of arbitrary order can be substituted by conditional
probabilities of ﬁrst order, which can be calculated easily
from empirical time series. Using the empirical probabil-
ity densities a time series can be reconstructed. Exam-
ples of reconstructed time series for a real world example
from turbulence have been shown. The reconstructed
time series reproduces the unconditional and the condi-
tional probability densities very well. The advantage of
this method is the use of the distribution which are ob-
tained directly from the data. Therefore a modelling of
an asymmetric or non-Gaussian distribution is possible.
The reconstruction can be applied to any range of scales
without a change of the underlying method, as long as
Markov properties in scale are present. Furthermore us-
ing this approach the full probability density for the next
potential step of a time series is provided. Using an em-
pirical time series as a starting point, this procedure can
be applied for prediction purposes. But contrary to many
other methods not only the mean value for the next step
is provided, but the full distribution. This therefore al-
lows also the prediction of volatility or the probability
of extreme values. Due to the fact, that only empirical
distributions are used, there is no necessity of parameter
estimation. Also this method is quite fast, in order to
simulate a process with 106 points it takes around one
hour on a normal personal computer.
In our opinion
further improvement can be obtained, if reﬁned uncon-
ditional and conditional pdfs, which provide better ap-
proximation of the real distribution for extreme values,
are used.

We are very grateful to David Kleinhans, Stephan
Barth and Carola von Saldern for interesting discussions
and remarks.

[1] M. Waechter, F. Riess, H. Kantz, and J. Peinke, Euro-

physics Letters pp. 579–585 (2003).

[2] G. Jafari, S. Fazeli, F. Ghasemi, S. V. Allaei, M. R. R.
Tabar, A. I. zad, and G. Kavei, Physical Review Letters
91 (2003).

[3] R. Friedrich and J. Peinke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 863

[10] W. Breymann, S. Ghashghaie, and P. Talkner, Interna-
tional Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 3, 357
(2000).

[11] J. Muzy, J. Delour, and E. Bacry, The European Physical

Journal B 17, 537 (2000).

[12] C. Renner, J. Peinke, and R. Friedrich, J. Fluid Mech.

(1997).

(2006).

[4] R. Friedrich and J. Peinke, Physica D 102, 147 (1997).
[5] M. Tutkun and L. Mydlarski, New Journal of Physics 6

[6] M. R. R. Tabar, M. Sahimi, K. Kaviani, M. Al-
lamehzadeh, J. Peinke, M. Mokhtari, M. Vesaghi,
M. D. Niry, F. Ghasemi, A. Bahraminasab, et al.,
arXiv:physics/0510043 v1 (2005).

[7] C. Renner, J. Peinke, and R. Friedrich, Physica A 298,

499 (2001).

[8] M.Ausloos and K. Ivanova, Physical Review E 68 (2003).
[9] M. Karth and J. Peinke, Complexity 8, 34 (2003).

[13] R. Friedrich, J. Zeller, and J. Peinke, Europhys. Lett. 41,

[14] M. Waechter, A. Kouzmitchev, and J. Peinke, Physical

433, 383 (2001).

153 (1998).

Review E 70 (2004).

[15] D. Kleinhans, R. Friedrich, A. Nawroth, and J. Peinke,

Physics Letters A 346, 42 (2005).

[16] A. M. van Mourik, A. Daﬀertshofer, and P. J. Beek,

Physics Letters A 351, 13 (2005).

[17] S. L¨uck, C. Renner, J. Peinke, and R. Friedrich, Physics

Letters A in press (2006).

