7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Separability of Attractors in Grandmother Dynamic Systems with Structured
Connectivity

Luciano da Fontoura Costa∗
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Av. Trabalhador S˜ao Carlense 400,
Caixa Postal 369, CEP 13560-970, S˜ao Carlos, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
(Dated: 22nd Dec 2006)

The combination of complex networks and dynamic systems research is poised to yield some
of the most interesting theoretic and applied scientiﬁc results along the forthcoming decades. The
present work addresses a particularly important related aspect, namely the quantiﬁcation of how well
separated can the attractors be in dynamic systems underlined by four types of complex networks
(Erd˝os-R´enyi, Barab´asi-Albert, Watts-Strogatz and as well as a geographic model). Attention is
focused on grandmother dynamic systems, where each state variable (associated to each node)
is used to represent a speciﬁc prototype pattern (attractor). By assuming that the attractors
spread their inﬂuence among its neighboring nodes through a diﬀusive process, it is possible to
overlook the speciﬁc details of speciﬁc dynamics and focus attention on the separability among
such attractors. This property is deﬁned in terms of two separation indices (one individual to each
prototype and the other considering also the immediate neighborhood) reﬂecting the balance and
proximity to attractors revealed by the activation of the network after a diﬀusive process. The
separation index considering also the neighborhood was found to be much more informative, while
the best separability was observed for the Watts-Strogatz and the geographic models. The eﬀects of
the involved parameters on the separability were investigated by correlation and path analyses. The
obtained results suggest the special importance of some measurements in underlying the relationship
between topology and dynamics.

‘Nothing in excess.’ (Delphic proverb)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Most dynamic systems, from neuronal networks to pat-
tern formation, involves several interconnected variables,
which can be properly represented in terms of a graph
(e.g. [1, 2]) or complex network (e.g. [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]).
Such systems are henceforth called complex dynamic sys-
tems. A state variable v(i) is normally associated to each
node i, so that the complete evolution of the system can
be described by the N × 1 vector ~v(t).
In a neuronal
network, for instance, each neuron can be expressed as
a vertex (or a node), while synapses are represented by
links (or edges) and the node activation by the respec-
tive state variable. Once the underlying connectivity of
such a system is represented in terms of its weight ma-
trix W [100], several important types of dynamics can be
subsumed as

~v(t+1) = f (W~v(t)).

(1)

Any layer of the perceptron neuronal network (e.g.
[10, 11]), for instance, is obtained by substituting f ()
by some abrupt function (e.g. hard limit or sigmoid).
At the same time, the complete classic Hopﬁeld model
(e.g. [11, 12]) can be represented by this equation. A
simpler, linear model is obtained by making f (x) = x, so

∗Electronic address: luciano@if.sc.usp.br

that ~v(t+1) = W~v(t). In case W is also a stochastic matrix
(the transition matrix), this linear equation subsumes all
ﬁrst order Markov chains, a particularly useful and im-
portant dynamic model which is intrinsically associated
to random walks (e.g. [13]), Markov chains (e.g. [14]) and
diﬀusion (e.g. [15, 16]).

In many dynamic systems (e.g. [11, 17]), the codi-
ﬁcation of external stimuli as well as the results from
the network dynamics take place in the N −dimensional
space deﬁned by the state variables. For instance, one
particularly pattern may be represented as the state
~v1 = [1, 0, −1, 0.5, 1, 0], while another pattern may be as-
sociated to ~v2 = [0, 1, −1, 0, 1, 0]. This type of represen-
tation is called vector coding (e.g. [18, 19]). States which
are near any of such pattern-states are frequently under-
stood to be associated to that pattern. For instance, in
the case of the example above, a third pattern similar to
~v1 will tend to be coded as a state vector ~v3 such that
δ = || ~v1 − ~v3|| is small. Such a smooth, graded coding
along the state space is interesting because it allows for
some robustness/redundancy and ﬂexibility/generality
for the representation of the patterns, while also favor-
ing good dynamic properties such as where the patterns
are accessed through gradient-descent or similar methods
(e.g. [11, 13]).

However, it is also possible and interesting to consider
the situation where the patterns are associated to spe-
ciﬁc nodes, not to speciﬁc points in the state space, such
as in systems involving the so-called grandmother cells
(e.g. [20, 21, 22]). Extremely important systems includ-
ing great part of the mammals cortex are believed to be
so organized. In these cases, a pattern is associated to a
node i such that high values of v(i) signalizes the pres-

ence of that pattern. This type of cells is ubiquitous in
several cortical areas (e.g. [23, 24, 25]). For instance,
cells which are highly speciﬁc to hands and faces have
been found in the inferior temporal cortex [21, 26, 27].
It is also known (e.g. [23, 25, 28, 29]) that much of the
mammals cortical architecture is characterized by spatial
smoothness, in the sense that cells which are spatially
close tend to exhibit similar dynamics and response (i.e.
state correlations), except at eventual singularities in-
volving fractures [25, 29]. Such an organization reminds
of the smooth coding discussed above for dynamic sys-
tems where patterns are represented by the overal state
(i.e. vector coding).
It is important to note that the
smoothness property is not exclusive to topographically
organized systems [101] such as the mammals cortex.
In other words, even in networks where the nodes have
no speciﬁc position in an embedding space, neighboring
grandmother nodes may tend to have similar dynam-
ics and response. In such cases, it is interesting to use
the concept of progressive neighborhoods around a node
(e.g. [30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35])), deﬁned by the immediate
neighbors of a node as well as its second neighbors, and
so on. Following [33, 35, 35], in this work we organize
the successive neighborhoods in terms of their hierarchi-
cal level. Therefore, the immediate neighbors of a node
i are at hierarchy 1 of i, and so on. In brief, the coding
smoothness property in grandmother systems is reﬂected
by the fact that the hierarchical neighbors of each node
will tend to have responses similar, though progressively
diverging, to that of node i.

In dynamic networks with a ﬁnite number of nodes,
the situation considered herein, a particularly interest-
ing problem arises as a consequence of a tension between
the grandmother coding and the smoothness property,
a phenomenon directly related to the limited number of
patterns which can be properly represented (e.g. [36]).
Before proceeding further, it is important to provide a
more objective characterization of such a problem. Con-
sider that M prototypic, distinct, patterns are to be rep-
resented in the network. If each of such patterns is rep-
resented by a respective prototypic neuron (node), in the
sense that this neuron will be the most highly activate
when that pattern is invoked by the network, we also
need to allow for intermediate cells with graded replies
between pairs of nodes. Observe that such prototype
nodes typically act as attractors for the dynamics of the
respective dynamic system, being accessed, for instance,
by using gradient descent and/or random walks methods.
If M is too large, a point will be reached where each
network node will be required to represent each proto-
typical pattern, running out of nodes for implementing
the graded responses. Although this situation occurs at
the very limit of the network capacity, it is important to
observe that it may still provide a complete, invertible
representation of the patterns (i.e. an one-to-one map-
ping). On the other hand, the smoothness of the coding
is undermined as the number of prototypical patterns
increases. In addition to destroying the network poten-

2

tial for generality and robustness, it will also become im-
possible to retrieve the patterns by gradient-descent like
mechanisms along the network. Figure 1 illustrates two
small topographic state spaces: one (a) corresponding
to the limit situation where each pattern is associated
to each node, the other (b) depicting a smooth map de-
ﬁned by diﬀusion around ﬁve prototype nodes. These
two spaces were assumed to have local connectivity, in
the sense that each cell communicates only with its most
immediate neighbors in the orthogonal lattice. Observe
that it is virtually impossible to devise an eﬀective re-
trieval or activation mechanism capable of getting to any
speciﬁc prototype node in Figure 1(a). In addition, the
failure of any cell will imply in the irrecoverable lost of
one pattern (the origin of the gradmother cell concept).
On the other hand, the state space in Figure 1(b) al-
lows a good level of tolerance to failure (this also means
some redundancy), at the same time as simple dynamic
mechanisms such as gradient descent can be employed
for retrieving and activating nodes.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: Gray-level visualizations of a topographic state space
with too many prototypical patterns (a) and of a smooth to-
pographic state space (b). Both these spaces are underlined
by 4-neighborhood in the orthogonal lattice. The ﬁve proto-
type patterns in (b) have been marked in black for the sake
of better visualization.

For all that has been said above, it becomes very im-
portant to quantify and study the pattern separability in

dynamic systems such as neuronal networks. In the case
of the dynamic systems which can be fully represented
by Equation 1, these two properties are necessarily im-
plied by the network connectivity, deﬁned by the weight
matrix W , and the function f (). The present work fo-
cuses precisely on the investigation of the separability
between patterns in grandmother complex dynamic sys-
tems. By considering a diﬀusive process emanating from
each prototype node, followed by a process which assigns
to each edge the diﬀerence between the activation states
at its head and tail nodes, a graded representation of
the prototype patterns can be obtained. This allows full
generality of the reported investigations as an approxi-
mation to many types of grandmother dynamic systems.
The accessibility to the original prototypes is simulated
through a preferential random walk (diﬀusion) starting
at every node of the network. After a given relaxation
time, the activation of the network is normalized so as to
correspond to occupancy probabilities and compared to
the original prototypes position. This is done by consid-
ering two separation indices, one individual, considering
the resulting activity only at the prototype nodes, and
the other considering the activation not only at these
nodes, but also at their immediate neighbors. These two
indices, are henceforth abbreviated as sind and s, are
obtained in terms of the normalized geometric average
of the activations at (or around) each prototype node.
Therefore, the maximum value of these indices (equal
to one) is achieved only when the resulting activation is
totally and uniformly distributed among only the pro-
totype nodes (for sind) or among these nodes and their
immediate neighbros (for s).

The performed simulations and analyses ﬁrst consider
speciﬁc network conﬁgurations, in order to gather in-
sights about the inﬂuence of each involved parameter,
which are identiﬁed and discussed. Subsequently, a more
systematic investigation of some parameter variations are
performed. In order to infer the inﬂuence of the topologic
features on the dynamics properties (i.e. attractors sepa-
ration), we apply correlation analysis and path analysis.
A series of interesting results are obtained regarding not
only the separation indices, but also the importance of
several local and global topologic features on the overall
attractors separation. Although the current work con-
centrates on attractors in grandmother dynamic systems,
several of the results, measurements and methods can be
immediately extended to other relevant systems based on
complex networks, including those involving information
transfer and retrieval.

This article starts by presenting a brief review of
more closely related works, and follows by describing
the adopted notation and methodologies. Next, each of
the four considered theoretic network models are brieﬂy
reviewed and their generation described. The diﬀu-
sion procedure and ‘diﬀerentiation’ of the state values
adopted to implement the attraction basins are described
next, as well as the diﬀusion-base mechanism for activa-
tion/retrieval of prototypes. The two separation indices

3

are motivated and mathematically deﬁned. The simula-
tion results and respective discussion are then presented,
followed by the correlation and path analyses of the ef-
fects of the topologic features of the network on the re-
spective attractors separability. Several interesting ﬁnd-
ings and eﬀects are identiﬁed and discussed. The article
concludes with a general synthesis of the reported inves-
tigation and with identiﬁcation of possible future devel-
opments.

II. A BRIEF REVIEW OF PREVIOUS
DEVELOPMENTS

The subject of attractor characterization has been ex-
tensively addressed in the literature, so we limit ourselves
to reviewing a small subset of those works which are more
general or more directly related to the investigations be-
ing considered in the present work.

A comprehensive study of attractor networks has been
presented by Amit [37]. Torres et al.
have consid-
ered the storage capacity of attractor neural networks
in which the synapses can undergo depression [38] and
found that the memory capacity decreases with the in-
tensity of the depression. Amit and Brunel [36] investi-
gated learning in attractor networks considering the ef-
fects of stimuli in a network with wired-up patterns. To-
pographic neuronal networks involving grandmother cells
have been extensively studied by T. Kohonen and collab-
orators (e.g. [39, 40, 41]) in the form of the self-organizing
map (SOM) or Kohonen networks. Here, the neurons are
spatially distributed and develop speciﬁcity to prototype
pattern stimuli by inﬂuencing the weights of neighboring
nodes. Therefore, spatially adjacent smooth attraction
basins are deﬁned.

Several works have brought together the two impor-
tant areas of complex networks and dynamic systems,
including neuronal networks. At least two excellent sur-
veys have been written about this important issue [7, 8].
The problem of neuronal structure and dynamics has also
been a subject of growing interest, including but by no
means limited to [42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50].
Stauﬀer et al. [51] investigated the performance of di-
luted Hopﬁeld networks underlined by the BA model.
The inﬂuence of the network topology on the dynamics
of neural networks has been investigated also by Costa
and Stauﬀer [52], who considered spatial neural networks
and concluded that its performance increased with the
spatial uniformity of the cells distribution. Torres et
al. [53], showed that the pattern capacity of an attractor
neural network with scale free topology is higher than
for a random-diluted network with the same number
of connections. They also found that, at zero temper-
ature, the performance of scale free nets improves for
larger values of the power-law exponent. Models of non-
randomly diluted neuronal networks whose connectivity
is determined as a function of the shape of its individ-
ual neurons (as well as their relative spatial positions)

has been reported by Costa and collaborators [44, 54].
It was found that the shape of individual neurons can
have a great inﬂuence on the respective memory capac-
ity, suggesting that shapes more similar to real neurons
tend to have better attractor properties. The inﬂuence
of the network topology on the recovery of patterns in
recurrent neuronal networks was addressed by Castillo
et al. [55]. Their work showed that the retrieval prop-
erties can be enhanced by considering connectivity more
structured than in random networks. Morelli et al. [56]
investigated the memory capacity in associative networks
and found that the best performance is obtained at an
intermediate level of disorder. Zhou and Lipowski [57]
investigated, through analytic and simulation means, a
general class of dynamic systems on scale free networks
with binary states. They reported important variations
of performance with respect to the scale free exponen-
tial coeﬃcient. The eﬀect of structured connections on
the interactive statistical mechanics algorithm for min-
imization of the Bethe free energy (associated to Ising
models) has been studied by Ohkubo et al. [58]. The
adaptation of the Sznajd dynamics to take place over
the network connectivity instead of its states has been re-
ported by Costa [59], yielding network realizations which
are a consequence of an inherent dynamical process. Lu
et al. [60] considered the eﬀect of regular, random, small-
world and scale free topologies on Hopﬁeld networks.
They reported, among other ﬁndings, that the perfor-
mance improved with the local order of the connections,
which seems to be in agreement with [52]. The periodic-
ity of activity in networks with small-world and scale-free
topologies were investigated by Paula et al. [61] who con-
cluded, among other ﬁndings, that periodic activity ap-
pears only for relatively small networks. Perotti et al. [62]
studied the interesting problem of associative memory on
a growing diluted Hopﬁeld model which converges to a
small-world, scale free topology and showed that the per-
formance of such a network is higher than that of a ran-
domly diluted network with the same connectivity. More
recently, Davey et al. [63] investigated sparse small world
associative memory considering Perceptron training un-
der small world connectivity ranging from local to global
and found that non-symmetric connectivity networks ex-
hibited superior performance. By considering random
walks as a reference model for implementing dynamics in
complex networks, Costa et al. investigated the correla-
tions between the topology (node degree) and activation
(frequency of visits to nodes at equilibrium). They found
that while full correlation is guaranteed for undirected
networks, it can vary substantially in directed networks
such as biological neuronal networks and the Internet,
implying that topologic hubs are not necessarily hubs of
activity. That work also identiﬁed a relationship between
scale free networks and the Zipf’s law [64]. A study of
self-organizing models underlined by complex networks
related to mental processes has been reported by Wede-
mann et al. [65]. The investigation of the relationship
between topology and dynamics at higher spatial scales

4

(e.g. cortical areas) has also been addressed in an increas-
ing number of works (e.g. [66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73]).
Increasing attention has also been drawn on the syn-
chronization of oscillations as the means for pattern en-
coding and retrieval (e.g. [74]). Among the works related
to the separation of attractors, Arecchi [75] has consid-
ered a metric structure for the percept space, while taking
into account the separation between states. Wang et al.
investigated the inﬂuence of the node degree distribution
in the synchronization of two-layer neural networks. The
criticality of coupling parameters on the synchronization
of an ensemble of identical neural networks with small-
world topology has been addressed by Wang et al. [76].
All in all, as far as the inﬂuence of connectivity on
the performance of dynamic systems for storing patterns
is concerned, several of the above reviewed works seem
to indicate that better results tend to be obtained by
considering non-random connectivity, but at a level of
order that ranges from low to intermediate.

III. NOTATION, BASIC CONCEPTS AND
METHODOLOGY

This section covers the concepts and methods used in
the current investigation. Its subsections present the ba-
sic concepts and measurements in complex networks, the
four considered theoretic network models, the procedure
suggested to extend the prototype inﬂuence through their
successive neighborhoods in order to establish the attrac-
tion basins, the diﬀusive way to activate the attractors,
the separation measurements, and the correlation and
path analyses considered in this work.

A. Complex Networks Concepts and Topologic
Measurements

A graph Γ involves a set V of N nodes interconnected
by a set U of E edges, i.e. Γ = (V, U ). Each directed
edge linking a node i to a node j is represented as (i, j).
Such a graph can be conveniently expressed in terms of
its adjacency matrix K, so that K(j, i) = 1 whenever an
edge (i, j) exists (otherwise, K(j, i) = 0). A graph such
that K(i, j) = K(j, i) = 1 is said to be non-oriented. Al-
though the present work focuses on this type of graph,
all reported developments can be extended to directed
graphs. The graphs considered henceforth are also de-
void of self-connections (i.e. K(i, i) = 0 for every node
i). A complex network is henceforth understood as a
graph exhibiting a particularly intricated structure, in
the sense of diﬀering from a random graph of the Erd˝os-
R´enyi type [77, 78]. However, because of statistic ﬂuctu-
ations, a random graph can also exhibit intricated struc-
ture.

Given a generic node i, some measurements can be
associated to it (e.g. [3, 7, 9]). Its degree k(i) is deﬁned
as the number of edges attached to it, so that

k(i) =

K(p, i).

(2)

N

p=1
X

The immediate neighbors of a node i correspond to
those nodes which are directly attached to it. The clus-
tering coeﬃcient of a node i expresses the degree of con-
nectivity among its immediate neighbors and can be cal-
culated as

cc(i) =

e(i)
emax

,

(3)

where e(i) is the number of undirected edges between
the immediate neighbors of i and emax is the maximum
possible number of such connections, given as emax =
e(i)(e(i) − 1)/2.

The shortest path between any two nodes i and j cor-
responds to the minimal set SP of adjacent edges con-
necting those two nodes. A network in which all nodes
can be reached, through paths, from any other node is
henceforth said to be connected. The respective shortest
path length sp is deﬁned as the number of edges in SP .
Therefore, the immediate neighbors of a node i can be
alternatively deﬁned as the nodes which are at shortest
path length of 1 from node i. The second neighborhood
(or neighbors of second hierarchy) are those nodes which
are at shortest path length of 2 from i, and so on. The
maximum shortest path length between any pair of nodes
is deﬁned as the network diameter, henceforth abbrevi-
ated as diam.

Given a set R of M reference (or seed) nodes, it is pos-
sible to obtain the respective Voronoi tessellation [79] of
the network [35] with respect to the seeds, which parti-
tions the N nodes into M connected subgraphs associ-
ated to each of the reference nodes. This can be achieved
by, for each node i, identifying which of the reference
nodes is closest (in the sense of shortest path) to i and
assigning it to that region. Given two nodes i and j,
whose respective immediate neighbors are represented by
the sets n(i) and n(j), we deﬁne their common neighbors
as the set c(i) = n(i) ∩ n(j). Given the Voronoi partition
of a network, it is interesting to devise a measurement ca-
pable of expressing the uniformity of the areas A(i) (i.e.
number of nodes) of each of the M partitioned regions
i. This can be conveniently achieved by considering the
geometric average [A] of the areas, i.e.

[A] =

A(i)

,

(4)

M

 

i=1
Y

1/M

!

Observe that the geometric average implies a high
penalty on higher variations of the Voronoi areas, there-
fore providing a more strict quantiﬁcation of the homo-
geneity of those areas. Figure 2 illustrates the compari-
son between the arithmetic and geometric average consid-
ering two measurements p (with 0 ≤ p ≤ 1) and q = 1−p.

5

The ability of the geometric average in quantifying the
similarity between p and q is evident from this ﬁgure.
standard
While dispersion-related measurements (e.g.
deviation and entropy of the state activations) could be
used, they could not be interepreted as quantiﬁcations of
the activations.

FIG. 2: The arithmetic (∗) and geometric (+) averages be-
tween the values p and q = 1 − p. The geometric average
allows the quantiﬁcation of the uniformity between the val-
ues of p and q, with a peak at p = q = 0.5.

As the geometric average u for the M Voronoi areas
varies as 0 ≤ u ≤ 1/M , it is convenient to redeﬁned [A]
as

[A] = M

A(i)

.

(5)

P

 

i=1
Y

1/M

!

The matching index [66, 67] of a pair of nodes i and j,
expressing the relative degree of overlap between the im-
mediate neighborhoods of those nodes, can be calculated
as

mi(i, j) =

n(i) ∩ n(j)
n(i) ∪ n(j)

.

(6)

This measurement gives the fraction of immediate
neighbors of i and j which are common neighbors to them
both. For instance, for the situation depicted in Figure 4,
we have that the matching index of the pair of nodes P 1
and P 2 is given as m(P 1, P 2) = 2/8 = 0.25.

B. Complex Networks Theoretic Models

Four theoretic models of complex networks are consid-
ered in the present work: Erd˝os-R´enyi (ER), Barab´asi-
Albert (BA), Watts-Strogatz (WS) and a geographic

model (GG). Reﬂecting their diﬀerent natures and orga-
nizing principles, these models correspond to a signiﬁcant
portion of the complex networks found in nature, provid-
ing therefore a representative choice of models for the cur-
rent study of attractor separability. In order to account
for a more coherent comparison between the separability
of attractors in these four models, each comparison al-
ways consider N and hki for each model to be as similar
as possible [102]. In this work, the average degree of the
BA model (deﬁned by the parameter m) is always taken
as a reference for deﬁning the average degree of the other
models. The methodology for constructing such models
are described in the following subsections.

1. Erd˝os-R´enyi

Random networks, also called Erd˝os-R´enyi – ER, were
among the ﬁrst models of stochastic networks to be ex-
tensively studied(e.g. [77, 78, 80]). These networks are
characterized by constant probability of having a connec-
tion between any of the possible pairs of nodes, and are
therefore related to Poisson processes. The connectivity
of ER networks can generally be well approximated in
terms of its average degree, implying that such networks
are similar to regular networks, characterized by having
the same degree at any of its nodes. As a consequence
of its indiscriminate connectivity and largely regular or-
ganization, the ER type of networks does not typically
provide a good model of natural structures and phenom-
ena, where the connections tend to follow more purposive
and speciﬁc rules.

In an ER graph, each possible connection between each
possible pair of nodes, has constant probability γ of ex-
istence. Such networks can be easily created through
Monte Carlo simulation by making K(i, j) = K(j, i) = 1,
with i 6= j, with probability γ. Observe that the con-
struction of ER networks consider only two parameters:
N and γ. In order to obtain values of hki similar to the
BA reference, we enforce γ = 2m/(N − 1), where m is a
parameter of the BA model (see next subsection).

2. Barab´asi-Albert

The so-called Barab´asi-Albert model [3, 81, 82] – BA,
belongs to the important class of scale free networks.
This type of network is characterized by the fact that
the loglog plot of their node degrees tends to a straight
line, implying the absence of any characteristic scale. In
other words, the node distribution in such a network fol-
lows a power law. One of the most important properties
of scale free networks (e.g. [3, 82]), when compared to
models such as the ER, is the higher probability of ex-
istence of hubs, i.e. nodes with particularly high degree.
Such special nodes are particularly important in deﬁning
the connectivity and topologic features of the network,
such as the average shortest path length. For instance,

6

the fact that a hub connects to many nodes immediately
implies that the shortest path between any of these nodes
will be at most equal to 2 edges. Several important natu-
ral and human-made structures – including the Internet,
WWW, protein interaction and even scientiﬁc collabora-
tions – have been found to exhibit the scale free prop-
erty (e.g. [3, 7, 82]). The BA model incorporates the
so-called rich-get-richer paradigm because of its attach-
ment of links being preferential to the degree of existing
nodes.

In the current work, BA networks are generated start-
ing with m0 randomly connected nodes. At each subse-
quent step, a new node with m edges is added to the net-
work, with each of the m edges being attached to previous
network nodes preferentially to their degree. Therefore,
each new connection is more likely to be established with
previous nodes with high degree, implementing the ‘rich
get richer’ paradigm. As with the ER model, the con-
struction of BA networks also involves only two parame-
ters: N and m.

3. Watts-Strogatz

Historically, the small world networks of Watts and
Strogatz [5, 83] followed the random networks of Erd˝os,
R´enyi and collaborators. Small world networks are ex-
actly as implied by their name, i.e. the average shortest
path length between their nodes tends to be small. At
the same time, they also tend to be characterized by rela-
tively high clustering coeﬃcient, implying that they local
connectivity is relatively high. The small world property,
which has been found to be present in many interesting
networks including ER and BA, has important implica-
tions for the separation of attractors because it implies
that many prototype nodes will be near one another and,
consequently, possibly less separated as far as the dy-
namics is concerned. The WS model considered in this
work, however, presents some speciﬁc topologic organiza-
tion which has potential implications for the distribution
of the prototypes. More speciﬁcally, this model is char-
acterized by a relatively high regularity and uniformity
of local connectivity.

The Watts-Strogatz networks used in the current work
have been constructed by starting with a ring of nodes
where each node is connected to its m clockwise and
anti-clockwise nodes. After such an initial network is
obtained, α% of the existing connections are rewired at
random. This network model involves three parameters:
N , m and α. All conﬁgurations in this work assume
α = 10%.

4. A Geographic Model

Geographic networks (e.g.[52, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88])) –
also called spatial, geometric or topologic – are charac-
terized by the fact that their nodes have well-deﬁned spa-

tial positions within an embedding space. Frequently, the
connectivity in such networks is considered to be highly
inﬂuenced by the spatial adjacencies and/or spatial prox-
imity between its nodes, in the sense that two nodes
which are adjacent or near one another will have higher
chances of being connected. Therefore, geographic mod-
els in small dimensional spaces (e.g. 2D or 3D) tend not
to be small world. Such a property is particularly im-
portant as far as the separation of the prototype nodes is
concerned because, in principle, this type of network al-
lows more space distribution of nodes which are relatively
further apart. Here, we consider one of the simplest pos-
sible approaches to obtaining a geographic model, which
involves the distribution of the N nodes uniformly along
a 2D space followed by the interconnection of all nodes
which are closer than a given distance d.

In order to build a GG network, we start with an empty
L × L discrete space S, such that each of its positions is
expressed as S(x, y), where i and j are integer values so
that 1 ≤ x, y ≤ N . This space is henceforth understood
as a Poisson ﬁeld with density ρ, in the sense that any re-
gion with area a (i.e. number of discrete elements (x, y))
will have, in the average, a total of aρ points marked
as S(x, y) = 1 [79]. The network nodes are selected
by considering each position (x, y) in the space S with
probability ρ = N/L2, implying an average total num-
ber of nodes N . Then, each of such nodes, marked as
S(x, y) = 1, is connected to all other nodes to be found
up to a maximum Euclidean distance d. Therefore, the
average degree of the network can be deﬁned by control-
ling d. More speciﬁcally, we make d = L
2m/(N π), so
that every disk of radius r in S centered at each node will
contain, in the average, hki = 2m, where m is the BA pa-
rameter taken as the reference. The growth parameters
of such a network model therefore are again limited to
only N and m. In order to ensure a relatively small vari-
ation of N , every generated network with a total number
of nodes smaller than 90% of the desired value of N were
discarded. Figure 3 illustrates a GG complex network
obtained by using the methodology described above for
N = 50 and m = 3.

p

C. Generating the Attraction Basins

As indicated in the Introduction, in order to avoid the
intricacies and speciﬁcities of how each distinct dynamic
system represents attractors, here we resort to a simple
methodology involving diﬀusion of activity from the pro-
totype nodes, followed by the transformation of the so
obtained activity into a derivative network [89, 90]. Al-
though not reproducing in detail the attraction basins
which would be otherwise produced by diverse speciﬁc
dynamics, this approach does ensure the smoothness of
coding, i.e. the property that nodes which are topologic
close will tend to have similar state dynamics. The de-
tails of such a methodology are presented as follows.

7

(8)

spective nodes chosen with uniform probability among
the N network nodes. Let ~P be the vector such that
P (i) = 1 if and only i is one of the prototype nodes,
with P (i) = 0 otherwise.
In order to allow a proba-
bilistic interpretation, we normalize this vector as ~p =
N
~P /
i=1 p(i). This vector will act as the ﬁxed source of
probabilities during the diﬀusion. The adjacency matrix
describing the network is also normalized into its respec-
tive transfer matrix W , i.e.:

P

W (i, j) = K(i, j)/k(i),

(7)

where k(i) is the degree of node i. Note that all the
sums of W along each of its columns will now be equal to
1, i.e. W is a stochastic matrix. In order to ensure that
the matrix K is connected (irreducible) [14], all the nodes
which do not belong to the main connected component
are excluded from the network at the end of its respec-
tive construction. Because the considered average node
degrees are relatively high, and well above the percola-
tion critic density, very few nodes are removed through
such a procedure.

Now, the ﬁnal distribution of occupancy ~ΩT of each
node i after T interactions can be calculated by applying
recursively (T times) the following set of equations:

~a =

~Ωt + ~p
(cid:17)

(cid:16)
N

~b =

~a/

a(i)

 

!
i=1
X
~Ωt+1 = W~b.

,

,

The number Tt of total interactions is henceforth de-
ﬁned as corresponding to 3 times the diameter of the
respective network, i.e. Tt = 3diam. Figure 3(b) illus-
trates the occupancy states obtained for a GG network
with N = 100, hki = 6 and M = 2 after Tt = 27 interac-
tions.

After the occupancy state of each node is obtained for
the network, its respective derivative network ∆ (e.g. [89,
90]) is obtained by applying the equation below for each
edge (i, j) existing in the original network.

aux = Ω(j) − Ω(i)

aux > 0 ⇒ ∆(j, i) = aux
aux < 0 ⇒ ∆(j, i) = aux/10
aux = 0 ⇒ ∆(j, i) = −1




The following substitution is applied afterwards:



∆(j, i) = −1 ⇒ ∆(j, i) = max(∆)/β.

(9)

All cases in this work assumes β = 1000, but this pa-

Let the M prototype patterns be associated with re-

rameters has been found not to be critical.

Note that the values ∆(j, i) correspond to the weights
of the respective edges (i, j). Those edges which connect
a node with small induced activity to a node with higher
activity will have larger weights. More speciﬁcally, in
case aux > 0 the weights are directly proportional to the
diﬀerence of activations. Edges leading from higher to
smaller activations have one tenth of the reciprocal edge.
Because several adjacent nodes may result with equal
activations, the eventual previous connectivity between
then will be preserved though at an incremental value
proportional to the maximum activation (Equation 9).
Observe that the matrix ∆ is not symmetric.

D. Activating the Network

Once the derivative network deﬁned by the weight ma-
trix ∆ has been calculated, its activation can be eas-
ily achieved through a random walk preferential to the
weights of the edges (see also [91], where information is
transmitted considering the gradient of a node). In or-
der to do so, we obtain the stochastic version of ∆ by
applying the following equation to each of its edge (i, j)

δ(j, i) = ∆(j, i)/

∆(j, i).

(10)

N

j=1
X

The activation after T steps is now given as

~α = 1/N δT~1,

(11)

where ~1 is the N × 1 vector of ones. As before, we
assume that the total number of interactions Tr is equal
to 3 times the network diameter. Therefore, the ﬁnal ac-
tivation corresponds to the near equilibrium occupancy
of each node after starting from any node. Figure 3(c)
shows the activations obtained by the method described
above with respect to the network in Figure 3(b). It is
interesting to note that the peaks of the obtained ac-
tivations do not necessarily correspond to the original
prototype nodes. This is an interesting consequence of
the fact that the activation of the derivative network is
aﬀected not only by the attraction basins, but also by
the in-strength [103] and the local connectivity of each
node. More speciﬁcally [73], in case the in-strength is
equal to the out-strength for all nodes, the equilibrium
activation will be directly proportional to the respective
in-strength. However, this result is not guaranteed for
asymmetric connectivity such as in the derivative net-
work.

E. Separation Indices

Given a speciﬁc grandmother dynamic system, it is
important to quantify in an objective manner the sepa-

8

rability of its attractors. Recall that the system incorpo-
rates M prototype patterns, associated to respective pro-
totype nodes p = 1, 2, . . . , M . In this work we propose
two separation indices, sind and sngh, deﬁned by taking
into account diﬀusion dynamics along the complex net-
work underlying the dynamic system. For simplicity’s
sake, the latter is henceforth called simply as separation
index and abbreviated as s.

Once the activations have been obtained in each of
the dynamic states associated to the nodes, we deﬁne
the individual separation index sind as being proportional
to the geometric average of the activations v(p) at each
prototype node p = 1, 2, . . . , M , i.e.

M

1/M

,

sind = M

v(i)

!

 

(12)

i=1
Y
where the proportionality factor M is introduced in
order to ensure that 0 ≤ w ≤ 1 instead of 0 ≤ w ≤
1/M . As with the quantiﬁcation of the uniformity of the
Voronoi areas (Section III A), the geometric average will
reach its maximum when all activations v(i) have the
same value.

However, as preliminary simulations (see Section IV B)
showed that this index tends to be too small, an alter-
native separation index has been considered which takes
into account also the immediate neighborhoods of each
prototype node. Consider the situation illustrated in Fig-
ure 4. This ﬁgure shows two prototype nodes P 1 and P 2
as well as their common C immediate neighboring nodes.
Because these nodes are at the same shortest path dis-
tance from P 1 and P 2, they do not contribute to the
discrimination between those prototype nodes and are
therefore not considered in the calculation of the neigh-
borhood separation index, which is more formally deﬁned
as follows.

Let Z(i) be the set including the respective prototype
node i and its immediated neighbors which are not com-
mon to the immediated neighborhoods of any of the other
prototype nodes. The probability p(i) at this set of nodes
corresponds to the sum of the normalized activations of
the states in Z(i). Ideally, all prototype nodes should re-
sult with probability equal to 1/M , implying that all pro-
totypes are equally accessible and therefore maximally
separable. In order to quantify how the obtained network
state approaches such a reference separation, we deﬁne
the neighborhood separation index sngh as correspond-
ing to the geometric average of the total probabilities at
each set Z(i), for all M prototype nodes i, i.e.

s = sngh = M

(13)

1/M

,

M

 

i=1
Y

p(i)

!

where the multiplying constant M is, as before, in-
cluded in order to imply that 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. The maxi-
mum separation between attractors is therefore obtained
whenever s = 1.

9

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 3: Example of GG network obtained for N = 50 and m = 3 (with hki = 5.5) (a). The respective occupancy states,
deﬁning the basis of the prototype nodes (striped), after 27 interactions (b). Note the smooth distribution of states through
both the topologic neighborhoods. The activation induced by the random walks preferential to the weights of the respective
derivative network (c). The Voronoi tessellation deﬁned by the two prototype nodes (represented as striped) (d).

F. Correlation Analysis

Given several measurements of the topology of the net-
work under analysis, as well as the separation indices, a
ﬁrst insight about their possible relationship and redun-
dancy can be obtained by considering the Pearson cor-
relation coeﬃcient. Let us express each measurement as
a random variable X of which we have NX observations.
First, we standardize [92] the variable X as

˜X =

X − µX
σ(X)

,

(14)

where µX and σ(X) are the estimate of the average
and standard deviation of X. The new, normalized vari-
able has average zero and unit variance. The Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient r(X, Y ) between any pair of nor-
malized measurements X and Y can now be estimated
as

10

case of the SEM framework, in order to obtain indica-
tion about the inﬂuence of the several measurements of
the topology of the networks on the respective attractor
separation indices.

Path analysis was largely developed by S. Wright
(e.g. [97]) in order to model explanatory relationships
between observed variables. This methodology is similar
to the solution of a system of equations implied by sub-
stituting the model generated covariance matrix into the
sample covariance [95]. One of the interesting features of
this approach is that it considers the inﬂuence of the co-
variances between all variables, sometimes being closely
related to multivariate linear regression. The path anal-
ysis performed in this work considers the structural rela-
tionship between the topologic and dynamic properties of
the investigated networks as shown in Figure 5. A rela-
tively simple relationship between the measurements has
been considered, where the topologic features are under-
stood to cause the dynamic properties, namely the in-
dividual and neighborhood attractor separation indices
(sind and s, respectively). Each of the measurements are
associated to a reference number (upper righthand side
of each box). The parameters γij, which are in princi-
ple not known, express the importance of the topologic
measurements with respect to the separation indices.

FIG. 5: The structural relationship between the topologic
and dynamic measurements considered for the path analysis
reported in this work. The covariances between variables 3 to
9 are not shown for simplicity’s sake.

Equations 16 and 17 express the relationship between
the considered variables, reﬂecting the fact that the re-
gression coeﬃcients γij establish the weights of the inﬂu-

FIG. 4: A portion of a hypothetical network showing two pro-
totype nodes (P 1 and P 2). The nodes belonging to both im-
mediate neighborhoods are identiﬁed by the region C, while
the nodes belonging to the respective immediate neighbor-
hoods minus the common nodes are enclosed by the regions
N 1 and N 2, respectively.

r(X, Y ) =

(15)

1
NX − 1

N

i=1
X

˜X ˜Y .

Observe that −1 ≤ r(X, Y ) ≤ 1, while r(X, Y ) = 0
means lack of correlation between the two measurements.
It is important to stress that uncorrelation does not im-
ply statistic independence. At the same time, correlation
can by no means be understood as a certain indication
of causality. In case two measurements result with high
absolute value of the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, they
are said to be correlated, indicating redundancy of mea-
surements. However, even correlated measurements can
contribute to the characterization and discrimination be-
tween the networks [9].

G. Path Analysis

While the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient quantiﬁes, in
a normalized fashion, the joint variation of two measure-
ments, such a pairwise measurement does not consider
information about additional measurements. A series of
sound statistic methods, ranging from multivariate re-
gression (e.g. [93, 94]) to the more sophisticated Struc-
tural Equation Modeling (SEM) (e.g. [95, 96]), can be
considered in order to obtain a more representative char-
acterization of the relationship between multiple random
variables (including latent variables) or measurements.
In this work we considered the Path Analysis method-
ology (e.g. [95, 96, 97]), understood here as a particular

ences of each topologic variable onto the two separation
indices. The environment LISREL [104] was used in this
work in order to perform path analysis.

sind ∝ γ13 hcci + γ14 hspi + γ15σsp + γ16V i
+γ17 hmii + γ18σ(mi) + γ19diam

s ∝ γ13 hcci + γ14 hspi + γ15σsp + γ16V i
+γ17 hmii + γ18σ(mi) + γ19diam

(16)

(17)

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This section starts by identifying each involved param-
eter which can aﬀect the simulations and follows by pre-
senting the results obtained for speciﬁc conﬁgurations of
N and m and an analysis of the variation of the param-
eters. The statistic analysis of the relationship between
the topologic and dynamic measurements by using cor-
relation and path analyses is also reported.

A.

Involved Parameters and Their Expected

Eﬀects

An important ﬁrst issue to be considered while inves-
tigating the attractors separation in complex dynamic
networks concerns the identiﬁcation of all involved pa-
rameters which can inﬂuence the results. The parame-
ters involved in our simulations, as well as their expected
eﬀects, are described in the following:

The network model and its intrinsic parameters: Each
theoretic model of complex network considered in this
work is likely to yield diﬀerent attractors separations.
Those networks characterized by the small world prop-
erty (i.e. ER, BA and WS) are, in principle, likely to
produce less separated attraction basis because of the
relatively small shortest path distance, expected in the
average, between the prototype nodes (however, see Sec-
tion IV E)). While the ER, BA and GG models can be
generated by considering just two parameters (i.e. N and
m), the WS network also involves a third parameters cor-
responding to the percentage of rewirings, which is ﬁxed
as α = 10%.

The network size N : This is an important global pa-
rameter of every complex network, corresponding to its
total number of nodes. One of the most important as-
pects related to this parameter are the so-called ﬁnite
size eﬀects, namely the fact that the network properties
change considerably when moving from large (possibly
inﬁnite) to small values of N . As an extreme exam-
ple, the connectivity of any network will decrease when
N approaches just one or two nodes. Although in this
work we are more interested in ﬁnite size networks, it is
often useful to try to extrapolate from properties mea-
sured for smaller values of N to the inﬁnite limit, as

11

done in Section IV C. Because of the computational de-
mand required to simulate hundreds of realizations for
each conﬁguration, the current work is limited to rela-
tively small values of N . As far as the attractors separa-
tion is concerned, it is expected that, for ﬁxed m and M ,
the separability will tend to increase with N because of
the additional space thus allowed for the representation
and distribution of the prototypes.

The network average node degree hki: This parameter,
which in this work is deﬁned with respect to the refer-
ence m, is particularly important in deﬁning the overall
degree of connectivity in the network, especially in those
structures which are not scale free and therefore have spe-
ciﬁc degree scales. Generally, smaller values of hki tend
to imply longer shortest paths, possibly improving the
attractors separation (however, see Section IV E). This
parameter is not systematically investigated in this work,
which mostly considers ﬁxed m = 3 (however, a situation
with m = 10 is considered in Section IV B).

The number Tt of

The number M of prototype patterns to be represented:
This parameter is directly involved in the separability of
the prototype patterns, in the sense that the larger the
number of prototypes, the less separated they tend to be.
interactions used for diﬀusion
around each prototype node: The diﬀusion of activity
emanating from the prototype nodes has been veriﬁed
to converge quickly for all considered networks, so that
the assumption of the total number of interactions to be
given as Tt = 3diam practically ensures the resulting ac-
tivity to correspond to its equilibrium state.

The number Tr of interactions considered in the re-
trieval random walk: Again, the assumed total number
of interactions used in the activation of the attraction
basins is large enough to imply near equilibrium states.

B. Fixed Conﬁgurations

In order to get a better understanding about the sep-
arability of the attractors in the considered four theo-
retic models and to obtain preliminary indications about
the eﬀects of the involved parameters, we considered a
set of preliminary simulations as described in the fol-
lowing. All results presented in this section considered
Tt = Tr = 3diam and 500 realizations of each conﬁgura-
tion.

So as to have the ﬁrst glimpses of the separability in
each of the four complex networks models, we considered
N = 100, hki = 3, and a relatively small number of proto-
types M = 3. The individual separation indices sind and
s obtained for each of the four models are shown in terms
of their respective population histograms in Figures 6
and 7. The respective averages and standard deviations
are also shown inside each graph. The ﬁrst important
result is that the individual separation index sind allows
considerably less resolution than the neighborhood index
s, with most of its values being close to zero (Fig. 6).
As this eﬀect has been conﬁrmed for other conﬁgura-

tions, we henceforth focus attention on the neighborhood
separation index s.
Interestingly, similar distributions
have been obtained for the pairs of models ER/BA and
WS/GG in Figure 7, the former being characterized by
smaller averages of s. Observe also the presence of cases
where s = 0 in the WS and GG cases. The largest av-
erage, implying the better average attractor separability,
was obtained for the WS model, followed by the GG net-
works, which also implied a signiﬁcant number of null
separability indices. This phenomenon is caused when-
ever all immediate neighbors of the prototype nodes are
common. These results also show that a reasonable sepa-
ration between the three prototype attractors have been
obtained for the WS and GG cases.

Next, we verify the possible inﬂuence of the network
size N by considering the same conﬁguration as before,
but with N = 200. The respective results are shown in
Figure 8.
It is clear from these results that the larger
size of the network had relatively little inﬂuence on the
separation indices, suggesting the ﬁnite size eﬀect to be
small for this number of parameters.

Now we turn our attention to the inﬂuence of the num-
ber of prototype patterns to be represented. The same
conﬁguration as in Figure 7 is considered, except that
M = 10. The obtained results are shown in Figure 9. It
is clear that increase by more than threefold of the num-
ber of prototype patterns implied not only a substantially
more cases such that s = 0, but also the distributions to
be strongly left-shifted in comparison with the respective
cases in Figure 7. This eﬀect holds for all the four con-
sidered network models. The main reason behind such a
substantial decrease of performance is that simply there
was not much space left, in the average, between the pro-
totype attractors.

Because the last conﬁguration exhibited an accentu-
ated loss of separability because of lack of space in the
network, it is interesting to reconsider the eﬀect of in-
creasing N for this situation. The results obtained for
the same previous conﬁguration, but now with N = 200,
are shown in Figure 10. The separation index increased
substantially for all the four network models.
It could
be expected that such improvements tend to decrease for
still larger N , until reaching a regime where little im-
provement is observed.
In such a state, the prototype
nodes would be suﬃciently far away one another so that
their separation no longer depends on N . Additional in-
vestigation about the change of the average and standard
deviation of s are to be found in Section IV C.

Finally, we check for the possible eﬀect of the average
node degree on the separation index. Again, the same
conﬁguration as the network in Figure 7 is adopted, but
now with hki = 20 (i.e. m = 10) instead of hki = 6. Fig-
ure 11 depicts the respectively obtained results, which
indicate a clear reduction of the attractors separability.
Such an eﬀect is possibly a consequence of the fact that
once the network become too intensely connected, the
shortest path between the prototype nodes will be re-
duced and the separability undermined.

C. Finite Size Eﬀects

12

The simulations discussed in the previous section seem
to have indicated that increases of the value of N would
tend to improve the attractors separation until reach-
ing a regime where so much space is available that the
patterns no longer feels the ﬁnite size of the network.
In order to obtain further insights about this eﬀect, the
conﬁguration involving m = 3 and M = 3 was simulated
for N = 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 and the results are given in
Figure 12. This ﬁgure shows the average (a) and stan-
dard deviation (b) of the neighborhood separation index
in terms of N .
It is clear from these results that the
increase of N does enhance the attractors separation un-
til reaching a plateau, where a possible ’unsaturation’
occurs, indicating that the ﬁnite size eﬀects are over for
the speciﬁc parameters m and M . At the same time, σ(s)
decreases, also reaching a relatively low plateau. Simi-
lar results could be expected for other conﬁgurations. In
the case of a larger value of M , it is expected that hki
will increase more steeply along the smaller values of N ,
reaching a similar plateau at larger values. Therefore, as
the ’unsaturation’ eﬀect was further corroborated by the
additional analysis, such a behavior can be considered as
a guideline for choosing a proper value of N given M and
m, for instance by choosing N where hki reaches a ﬁxed
proportion of its plateau value.

D. Correlation Analysis

In addition to studying the eﬀects of the involved topo-
logic measurements on the attractors separation, it is
also particularly useful to try to identify in which ways
the separation index is related to them. This may allow
the prediction of the separability without performing dy-
namic simulation, i.e. by considering only the topologic
measurements. Table I show the Pearson correlation co-
eﬃcients obtained considering all pair os topologic mea-
surement (i.e.
hcci, hspi, σ(sp), V i, hmii, σ(mi) and
diam) and the two separation indices (sind and s).

As previously veriﬁed in [9], the pattern of correla-
tions resulted not similar for each model of network. In
addition, the obtained results indicate several high abso-
lute correlation values. In the case of ER networks, the
most intense negative correlation (-0.79) was obtained
between hspi and hmii, which was indeed expected as
longer shortest path lengths tend to reduce the match-
ing index. While similar high correlation (-0.78) was ob-
served also for BA, this speciﬁc correlation was relatively
smaller for the W S and GG cases (-0.50 and -0.42, re-
spectively). This fact was reﬂected in the intense neg-
ative correlation (-0.77) between s and hmii and posi-
tive correlation (0.63) with hspi for the ER model. A
similar eﬀect can be observed for the BA, W S and GG
networks. Observe that hmii is highly correlated (0.72
for ER) with σ(mi), suggesting a dependence between
the standard deviation and average of this measurement.

The index quantifying the uniformity of the Voronoi tes-
sellation was found to be negatively correlated with hmii
and σ(mi), as expected, because higher mi values are fa-
vored by more irregular Voronoi areas. Interestingly, low
correlation values were observed between s and the net-
work diameter and clustering coeﬃcients in all cases. It
is also interesting to note that rather diﬀerent patterns
of correlations were obtained between sind and s and the
topologic measurements for all network models.

E. Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) / Path
Analysis

Although the correlation analysis described in the pre-
vious section can provide interesting information about
the pairwise relationship between the separation indices
and the topologic measurements, such results are lim-
ited because they do not reﬂect the general relationship
between all the topologic measurements and the sepa-
ration indices.
In addition, some of the high observed
absolute correlation values can be a consequence of spu-
rious [95, 96] eﬀects between the variables. In order to
gather additional insights about the how the dynamic pa-
rameters (i.e. the separation indices) are inﬂuenced (and
even to a large extent deﬁned) by the topology of the net-
work, while considering all measurement co-variations,
we performed path analysis considering the structural
dependence between measurements as expressed in Fig-
ure 5. It is expected that, by considering all dispersions,
the path analysis can provide a more objective and ﬁl-
tered indication of the inﬂuences of the topologic mea-
surements on the attractors separation.

The considered data were respective to ER, BA, WS
and GG networks with N = 100, M = 3 and m = 3.
After estimation of the covariance of the measurements,
coding and execution in the LISREL environment, the
regression coeﬃcients and residues (E1 and E2), as well
as the relationship between these residuals (C12) were
obtained. The results are given in Table II.

A series of interesting insights have been derived from
these results. As with the correlations, the dependencies
between the topology and separation are strictly speciﬁc
to each network model, a dependency which may also
change for other conﬁgurations with diﬀerent values of
the parameters M and m. In the case of the ER networks,
the standard deviation of the matching index (σ(mi)) re-
sulted particularly inﬂuent (negative inﬂuence = -0.96)
on the s index. At the same time, the average match-
ing index (hki) was found to have a strong inﬂuence on
s. Except for relatively smaller negative inﬂuence of the
hcci on s, no particularly strong inﬂuences are observed
with respect to the other topologic measurements. Such
a strong inﬂuence of the matching index can be under-
stood because non-zero matching index are obtained only
in extreme cases, where the prototype nodes are too close.
Therefore, nonzero matching indices are a strong and se-
cure indication of poorly separated attractors. For this

13

reason, the matching index dominated the path analysis
and implied smaller inﬂuences for most other measure-
ments, including the shortest path. This eﬀect can also
be observed for the BA and WS cases. However, it is
interesting to note the weak inﬂuence of σ(mi) on s in
the case of GG networks. For the BA case, the strongest
inﬂuence on s was identiﬁed for the Voronoi index V i,
which is compatible with the fact that higher uniformity
of the Voronoi tessellation by the prototype nodes tends
to promote better separation between those nodes. In-
terestingly, a particularly strong inﬂuence of V i on the s
has been observed only for the BA model. This eﬀect can
be related to the fact that the BA provides the poorest
general separation between attractors as a possible con-
sequence of the generalized connectivity implemented by
the hubs. In such cases, where a larger number of non-
zero matching indices are therefore obtained, the Voronoi
separation may become more relevant as a predictor of
the separability. In the case of WS models, strong inﬂu-
ence (positive = 0.65) was obtained for the hcci. This
eﬀect is particularly interesting because it could be ex-
pected that, by promoting smaller shortest paths, this
measurement would be inversely related to the separa-
bility, which is indeed the case for the respective ER and
Indeed, a very weak depen-
BA path analysis results.
dency with this variable had been revealed by the Pear-
son correlations. However, the positive inﬂuence of hcci
on s can be a consequence of the fact that GG networks
with higher average clustering coeﬃcients will tend to
have more intense local connectivity which could allow
the activity to diﬀuse more uniformly and to concentrate
eﬀectively around the prototype nodes. Such an eﬀect
would be more deﬁnite in the WS case because of the
higher uniformity of local connections implied by its ring
structure. The inﬂuences of the topologic features on the
s obtained for the GG cases are dominated by hmii as
discussed above.

While the previous path analysis has revealed a series
of insights about the inﬂuence of the network topology
on the dynamic separation of its attraction basins, it was
strongly biased by the critical inﬂuence of the match-
ing index. In order to try to get further insights on the
structure/dynamics relationship for the four considered
models, we repeated the path analysis while not includ-
ing hmii and σ(mi). The results are summarized in Ta-
ble III. Interestingly, except for relatively small increases
with respect to V i and hcci, the obtained inﬂuences re-
mained similar, with small eﬀects observed for the short-
est path measurements. This can be understood as a
conﬁrmation that the separation between the attractors
is critically deﬁned by the overlap between the hierar-
chical neighbors of the prototype nodes, especially their
immediate neighbors (implying higher matching indices).
In the cases where the matching index is zero, the lack of
congruence between the original attractors and the dis-
tribution of diﬀusive activity should be largely explained
by the higher inﬂuences observed in Table III, which in-
volve the average clustering coeﬃcient of the network and

the Voronoi index for the prototype nodes. Indeed, in the
cases where the prototype nodes are not topologically too
close one another, the lack of agreement between the ac-
tivity distribution and the original attractors (as in Fig-
ure 1b and c) will depend particularly on the properties
of the local connectivity as expressed by the clustering
coeﬃcient and the node degree.

V. CONCLUSIONS

The investigation about the relationship between the
structure and function of networks (e.g. [7, 8, 42]) repre-
sents one of the most interesting perspectives for obtain-
ing insights about complex dynamic systems. As brieﬂy
reviewed in this article, several works have addressed the
problem of how the structure of the connectivity may
aﬀect and largely deﬁne the properties of dynamic sys-
tems. One particularly important aspect which has re-
ceived relatively lesser attention concerns the separabil-
ity between diﬀerent grandmother attractors, each rep-
resenting a prototype pattern or state. This issue is crit-
ically relevant because it has great impact on the capac-
ity of the network for proper representation of patterns,
the level of redundancy/robustness of such representa-
tions, the degree of generalization for recognition of not
previously trained prototypes, as well as the eﬀective-
ness during retrieval and activation of such prototypes.
While other types of coding can be used in dynamic sys-
tem, grandmother representation stands out as particu-
larly important because it seems to be the way a great
part of the primates cortex is organized.

The current work has reported an approach to the
characterization of the separability between prototype
patterns which incorporates a number of special features.
First, we have considered four representative theoretic
models of complex networks – namely the random net-
works of Erd˝o-R´enyi, the scale free model of Barab´asi-
Albert, the small-world networks of Watts-Strogatz, as
well as a simple, non-small-world topographic model.
Second, by using a generic diﬀusive process, followed
by the calculation of the respective derivative network
in order to obtain the attraction basins, we obtained
a methodology which completely avoids the intricacies
and speciﬁties implied by each type of dynamic system.
While it remains to be veriﬁed how good accurate and
general such an approximation is, it does allow the deﬁ-
nition of smooth attraction basins around each prototype
node in a way which is remindful of many important dy-
namical systems such as Kohonen’s self-organizing maps
and the primates cortex. Once the attraction basins are
so deﬁned, a simple diﬀusive scheme emanating from each
network node is employed in order to obtain the general
activation of the network. Although ideally such a pro-
cedure should activate equally only the original proto-
type nodes, the structured connectivity of the networks
will act so as to produce non-uniform activation, where
just a fraction of the overall activation coincides with the

14

prototype nodes. The disagreement between the original
prototypes and the induced activity has been quantiﬁed
in terms of two separation indices, namely the individual
and neighborhood indices. Because the former consider
only the agreement and balance between the induced ac-
tivation and the original prototypes, it resulted to be too
small and therefore with low resolution for quantifying
the attractors separation. By considering also the imme-
diate neighborhood of the prototype nodes, the second
index allowed a more informative indication of the at-
tractors separability.

The speciﬁc topologic features of each of the four con-
sidered theoretic network models can have diﬀerent ef-
fects for the separation of the attraction basins. There-
fore, we performed an investigation of the eﬀects of the
most important parameters of the simulations over the
respective performance. We veriﬁed that the separation
tends to decrease with the number of prototypes and in-
crease with the size of the network. At the same time,
more intense general connectivity, as expressed by the
average node degree, also tended to undermine the at-
tractors separation. Special attention was given to the
ﬁnite sizes implied by the parameter N . The obtained
results seem to suggest that the separability tends to in-
crease with N up to a regime where the ﬁnite size of
the network is no longer felt (‘unsaturation’). Therefore,
by identifying the region where such a plateau of sepa-
rability is reached, it is possible to obtain near-optimum
values of N for given M and m. Next, we applied cor-
relation analysis in orde not only to identify the inter-
relationships between each topologic measurement, but
also between these and the two separation indices. The
presence of such correlations can not only help to under-
stand the origin of the attractors separation, but also al-
low the prediction of such a property from measurements
of the network topology, without the need of simulations.
Several tendencies were identiﬁed through such an anal-
ysis, including the tendency of the index s to be strongly
proportional to the uniformity of the Voronoi areas, as
expressed by the Voronoi index V i. A positive, though
weaker, correlation was also identiﬁed between s and the
average shortest path length hspi of the networks. A
strong negative correlation was identiﬁed between s and
the matching index mi. Although all such behaviors are
compatible with what could be expected, meaningfully
diﬀerent correlations diﬀerences were observed for each
network model. Interestingly, the network model allow-
ing the best overall separation of attractors was found to
be the Watts-Strogatz, followed by the geographic, ran-
dom and scale-free models. It is conjectured here that
the superior properties of the WS model stem from its
enhanced uniformity and low randomness of local connec-
tivity as well as by the fact that, although being a small
world model, there are relatively very few long range con-
nections between any pair of nodes. Similar properties,
though at the expense of a weaker local order and uni-
formity of local connections, are characteristic of the ge-
ographic model, which came in second in performance.

As a matter of fact, the WS and GG models showed sim-
ilar behavior as far as the histograms of separation in-
dex were concerned. The same was observed for the ER
and BA cases. Therefore, from the perspective of attrac-
tors separation, the WS/GG and ER/BA models seem to
represent two diﬀerent classes of systems, with the latter
Interestingly, the
providing rather poorer separability.
small world property can not explain such a partition,
as the GG is not a small world model as the other three
cases. Consequently, it seems that the common denom-
inators in the pairs WS/GG and ER/BA seems to be
more strongly related also to the uniformity of the local
connectivity. Such an explanation would be largely in
agreement with several of the results of works investigat-
ing the eﬀect of connectivity on memory, as reviewed in
Section II.

In order to try to learn more about the eﬀects of the
topological features of the network on the dynamical
property of attractors separation, path analysis was also
applied assuming a simple structural relationship. To
our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time such an insight-
ful analysis has been applied for the study of complex
networks. One of the main advantages of such an ap-
proach over the Pearson correlation coeﬃcients is that
here the dispersions of all the considered measurements
are taken into account instead of the pairwise relation-
ships underlying the correlations. Interestingly, the path
analysis yielded inﬂuences of the topologic measurements
on the separation indices which were often substantially
diﬀerent from those suggested by the Pearson correlation
coeﬃcients. Of particular interest was the near null in-
ﬂuence assigned to the average and standard deviation
of the shortest path length between the prototype nodes.
This is all the most surprising as it seems intuitively rea-
sonable to discuss much of the eﬀect of the topology of
the network over the attractors separation by considering
such measurements. More speciﬁcally, networks where
the prototype nodes are topologically close one another
would tend to have poorer separation. However, the per-
formed path analysis substantially emphasized, for all the
four considered models, the importance of the average
matching index on the attractors separation. On second
thoughts, this is indeed reasonable because the presence
of non-zero matching index is a certain indication of over-
lap of the attraction basins. Even when repeating the
path analysis while leaving out the matching index mea-
surements, the other parameters (especially the shortest
path length) did not result with higher inﬂuences. Other
interesting insights, including inﬂuences which were spe-
ciﬁc to network models, were also allowed by the path
analysis, corroborating therefore the potential value of
such a statistical approach in order to get insights about
the relationship between structure and dynamics of com-
plex dynamic systems. However, it is important to keep
in mind that every statistical methodology should be un-
derstood as a source of insights to be further investigated
and corroborated rather than spelling deﬁnitive facts.

Despite the relative comprehensiveness of the presently

15

reported investigation, and perhaps as its consequence,
a series of future developments can be suggested. First,
it would be interesting to extend the reported investi-
gation to larger network sizes and to consider additional
measurements such as the standard deviation of the clus-
tering coeﬃcient and the spectral structure of the ad-
jacency and weight matrix. Second, the sources of the
deviations of the induced activation from the prototype
nodes could be further investigated by considering simu-
lations involving a single attractor. In such cases, all the
loss of ‘separability’ would necessarily be a consequence
of the probability leakage from the prototype node into
its neighbors. It would be particularly interesting to ver-
ify, through path analysis, which of the topological mea-
surements of the network would be more inﬂuence on the
attractor activation. It would also be worth investigating
the potential of using the percolation transform [98, 99]
over the network as the means to explain and predict the
attractors separability. Other promising possibilities in-
clude the extension of the matching index to take into
account hierarchical levels larger than one, i.e. including
also the second and higher neighborhoods.

Several real problems are closely related to the issue
of attractor separation and prototype activation. One
real problem which could be particularly interesting to
be addressed is the phenomenon of facilitation of neu-
rons (represented by nodes). By facilitation of a neuron
it is meant that that neuron will become more likely to
engage into activity. For instance, the deﬁnition of tem-
porary priorities in the primates brain could be related to
the reinforcement of one or more attractors, so that they
become more likely to be revised along time (e.g. through
a random walk). Interestingly, as suggested by the cur-
rent work, the facilitation of a given node would be highly
dependent on its local connectivity. Such studies could
be eventually extended to higher level mental dynamics,
such as those underlying attention and even pathologies
(e.g. [65]). It is also reasonable to expect that the def-
inition of attractors is a process which co-evolves with
the network topology. In this sense, it would be inter-
esting to try to identify growing schemes where the con-
nectivity is aﬀected by the success of the establishment
of prototype attractores, and vice-versa. Another related
investigation would be the identiﬁcation of topologic or-
ganizations of networks allowing optimal or near-optimal
attractors separation.

List of Symbols

Γ = a graph or complex network;

N = number of nodes in a network;

K = the adjacency matrix of a complex network;

k(i) = degree of a network node i;

m = the parameter in the BA model deﬁning its average
node degree. This parameter is considered as reference
for all network models in this work;

16

diam = the diameter of the network;

cc(i) = clustering coeﬃcient of a network node i;

~α = the activations in a network after a long random
walk;

sp(i, j) shortest path between nodes i and j in a complex
network;

sind = the separability index between prototype nodes in
a network at the level of individual nodes;

mi(i, j) = the matching index of nodes i and j;

V i = the Voronoi index of separation between the areas
of inﬂuence of the prototype nodes;

s = the separability index between prototype nodes in a
network considering also the immediate neighborhood of
such nodes;

hai = the arithmetic average of the property a;

[a] = the geometric average of the property a;

σ(a) = the standard deviation of the random variable a;

Acknowledgments

M = the number of prototype patterns to be represented
in a network;

Luciano da F. Costa thanks CNPq (308231/03-1) and

FAPESP (05/00587-5) for sponsorship.

[1] D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory (Prentice

(Cambridge University Press, 1996).

Hall, 2001).

[2] B. Bollob´as, Graph theory : an introductory course,
Graduate texts in mathematics,63 (Springer Verlag,
New York, 1990).

[24] S. Zeki (Vatican City: Pontiﬁcal Academy of Science,

1990), vol. 265, pp. 137–154.

[25] S. Zeki, Inner Vision: An exploration of art and the

brain (Oxford University Press, 1999).

[3] R. Albert and A.-L.Barab´asi, Reviews of Modern

[26] C. G. Gross, D. B. Bender, and C. E. R. Miranda, Sci-

[4] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Advances in

[27] D. I. Perrett, E. T. Rolls, and W. Caan, Exp. Brain Res.

Physics 74, 48 (2002).

Physics 51, 1079 (2002).

ence 166, 1303 (1969).

47, 329 (1982).

[5] D. J. Watts, Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks
between Order and Randomness (Princeton University
Press, 2003).

[6] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis

[28] H. Eichenbaum, S. I. Wiener, M. L. Shapiro, and N. J.

Cohen, The J. Neurosc. 9, 2764 (1989).

[29] W. H. Bosking, J. C. Crowley, and D. Fitzpatrick, Na-

ture Neuroscience 5, 874 (2002).

(Cambridge University Press, 1994).

[30] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, SIAM Re-

[7] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003).
[8] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chaves, and

D.-U.Hwang, Physics Reports 424, 175 (2006).

[9] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and
P. R. V. Boas, Characterization of complex networks:
A survey of measurements, cond-mat/0505185.

[10] F. Rosenblatt, Psychol. Rev. 65, 386 (1958).
[11] S. Haykin, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foun-

dation (Prentice Hall, 1999).

[12] J. J. Hopﬁeld, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 81, 3088 (1984).
[13] J. Rudnik and G. Gaspari, Elements of the random walk

(Cambridge University Press, 2004).

[14] P. Br´emaud, Markov chains, Gibbs ﬁelds, Monte Carlo

Simulation, and Queues (Springer, 2001).

view 29, 251 (1999).

[31] M. E. Newman (2001), cond-mat/0111070.
[32] R. Cohen, S. Havlin, S. Mokryn, D. Dolev, T. Kalisky,

and Y. Shavitt (2003), cond-mat/0305582.

[33] L. da F. Costa, Phys. Rev. Letts. 93, 098702 (2004),

cond-mat/0312646.

[34] L. da F. Costa and L. H. C. da Silva, Eur. Phys. J. B

50, 237 (2006), cond-mat/0408076.

[35] L. da F. Costa and F. N. Silva, J. Stat. Phys. (in press)

125, 845 (2007).

[36] D. J. Amit and N. Brunel, Network 4, 177 (1993).
[37] D. J. Amit, Modelling Brain Function: The World
of Attractor Neural Networks (Cambridge University
Press, 1992).

[15] T. Crank, The mathematics of diﬀusion (Oxford Uni-

[38] J. J. Torres, L. Pantic, and H. J. Kappen, Phys. Rev. E

versity Press, 1980).

66, 061910 (2002).

[16] S. Havlin, Diﬀusion and reaction in fractals and disor-
dered systems (Cambridge University Press, 2000).
[17] N. Boccara, Modeling complex systems (Springer, 2004).
[18] A. P. Georgopouls, A. B. Schwartz, and R. E. Kettner,

Science 233, 1416 (1986).

[19] E. Salinas and L. F. Abbott, L. Comp. Neurosci. 1, 89

(1994).

[20] H. B. Barlow, Perception 1, 371 (1972).
[21] C. G. Gross, The Neuroscientist 8, 512 (2002).
[22] M. S. Gazzaniga, R. B. Ivry, and G. R. Mangun, Cog-
nitive neuroscienceL The biology of the mind (W. W.
Norton, 1998).

[23] J. T. McIlwain, An introduction to the biology of vision

[39] T. Kohonen, Biological Cybernetics 43, 59 (1982).
[40] M. Oja, S. Kaski, and T. Kohonen, Neural Computing

[41] T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps (W. W. Norton,

Surveys 3, 1 (2003).

2006), third edition.

[42] L. da F. Costa (2005), cond-mat/0503041.
[43] L. Peichl and H. Waessle, J. Physiol. 341, 309 (1983).
[44] L. da F. Costa, M. S. Barbosa, V. Coupez, and D. Stauf-

fer, Brain and Mind 4, 91 (2003).

[45] L. da F. Costa, Brain and Mind 4, 1 (2003), special

[46] A. V. Samsonovich and G. A. Ascoli, Hippocampus 15,

issue.

166 (2005).

17

[47] A. van Ooyen, J. van Pelt, and M. A. Corner, J. Theor.

J. Mod. Phys. C 16, 1841 (2005).

[48] A. V. Ooyen and D. J. Willshaw, Proc. R. Soc. Lond.

Biol. 172, 63 (1995).

B 266, 883 (1999).

[49] A. V. Ooyen, B. P. Graham, and G. J. A. Ramakers,

Neurocomputing 38–40, 73 (2001).

[50] B. P. Graham and A. V. Ooyen, J. Theor. Biol. 230,

421 (2004).

[77] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, On random graphs (1959).
[78] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, Bulletin of the International

Statistical Institute 38, 343 (1960).

[79] D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, and J. Mecke, Stochastic
geometry and its applications (John Wiley and Sons,
1996).

[80] A. Rapoport, Bull. Math. Bioph. 19, 257 (1957).
[81] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Nature 401,

[51] D. Stauﬀer, A. Aharony, L. da F. Costa, and J. Adler,

Eur. Phys. J. B 32, 365 (2003).

130 (1999).

[52] L. da F. Costa and D. Stauﬀer, Physica A 330, 37

[82] A.-L. Barab´asi, Linked :

the new science of networks

(2003), cond-mat/032004.

[53] J. J. Torres, M. A. M. noz, J. Marro, and P. L. Garrido,

Neurocomputing 58–60, 229 (2004).

[54] L. da F. Costa and M. S. Barbosa, Eur. Phys. J. B 42,

573 (2004).

[55] I. P. Castillo, B. Wemmenhove, J. P. L. Hatchett,
A. C. C. Collen, N. S. Skantzos, and T. Nikoletopou-
los, J. Phys. A 37, 8789 (2004).

(Perseus Pub., Cambridge, Mass., 2002).

[83] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[84] L. da F. Costa (2003), cond-mat/0307754.
[85] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Evolution and
structure of the Internet: A statistical physics approach
(Cambridge University Press, 2004).

[86] L. da F. Costa and L. Diambra, Phys. Rev. E 71, 021901

(2005), cond-mat/0306530.

[56] L. G. Morelli, G. Abramson, and M. N. Kuperman, Eur.

[87] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, and A. Vespignani (2005),

[57] H. J. Zhou and R. Lipowski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

[88] M. T. Gastner and M. E. J. Newman (2006), cond-

[58] J. Ohkubo, M. Yasuda, and K. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. E

[89] L. da F. Costa (2004), cond-mat/0403346.
[90] L. da F. Costa and G. Travieso, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. C

[59] L. da F. Costa, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. (2005), accepted.
[60] J. Q. Lu, J. He, J. D. Cao, and Z. Q. Gao, Phys. Letts.

16, 1097 (2005).

Phys. J. B 38, 495 (2004).

102, 10052 (2005).

72, 046135 (2005).

A 354, 335 (2006).

cond-mat/0504029.

mat/0603278.

[61] D. R. Paula, A. D. Araujo, J. S. Andrade, H. J. Her-
mann, and J. A. C. Gallas, Phys. Rev. E 74, 017102
(2006).

[62] J. I. Perotti, F. A. Tamarit, and S. A. Cannas, Phys. A

[63] N. Davey, L. Calcraft, and R. Adams, Connection Sci-

[64] M. E. Newman, Contemporary Physics 46, 323 (2005),

371, 71 (2006).

ence 18, 247 (2006).

cond-mat/0412004.

[65] R. S. Wedemann, L. A. V. de Carvalho, and R. Donan-
gelo, Progr, Theor. Phys. Suppl. 162, 121 (2006).
[66] O. Sporns (Kluwer, 2002), chap. Graph theory methods
for the analysis of neural connectivity patterns, pp. 171–
186.

[67] C. Hilgetag, R. K¨otter, K. Stephan, and O. Sporns (Hu-
mana Press, 2002), chap. Computational methods for
the analysis of brain connectivity, pp. 295–335.

[68] C. C. Hilgetag, G. A. Burns, M. A. O’Neill, J. W. Scan-
nell, and M. P. Young, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 355, 91 (2000).

[69] O. Sporns, G. Tononi, and G. M. Edelman, Cereb. Cor-

tex 10, 127 (2000).

[70] O. Sporns, D. Chialvo, M. Kaiser, and C. C. Hilgetag,

Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 418 (2000).

[71] L. da F. Costa and O. Sporns, Appl. Phys. Letts. 89,

013903 (2006).

[72] L. da F. Costa and O. Sporns, Intl. J. Bif. Chaos 17

(2007), in press (cond-mat/0604089).

[73] L. da F. Costa, O. Sporns, L. Antiqueira, M. das
cond-

G. V. Nunes, and O. N. O. Jr
mat/0611247.

(2006),

[74] F. T. Arecchi, Physica A 338, 218 (2004).
[75] F. T. Arecchi, Brazil. J. Phys. 35, 253 (2005).
[76] S. J. Wang, X. J. Xu, Z. X. Wu, and Y. H. Wang, Intl.

[91] Z. Toroczkai and K. E. Bassler, Nature 428, 716 (2004).
[92] R. A. Johnson and D. W. Wichern, Applied Multivariate

Statistical Analysis (Prentice Hall, 2002).

[93] D. G. Kleinbaum, L. L. Kupper, K. E. Muller, and
A. Nizam, Applied Regression Analysis and Other Mul-
tivariable Methods (Duxbury Press, 1998).

[94] D. C. Montgomery, E. A. Peck, and C. G. Vining, In-
troduction to Linear Regression Analysis (Johwn Wiley
and Sons, 2001), third edition.

[95] T. Raykov and G. A. Marcoulides, A ﬁrst course in
structural equation modeling (Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates, Mahwah, New Jersey, 2000).

[96] R. B. Kline, Principles and Practice of Structural Equa-
tion Modeling (Teh Guilford Press, New York, 2005),
second edition.

[97] S. Wright, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 6, 320 (1920).
[98] L. da F. Costa (2004), cond-mat/0404310.
[99] L. da F. Costa, Bioinformatics 21, 608 (2005).
[100] W (j, i) = w whenever node i is connected to node j by

an edge with weight w.

[101] By topographic system it is henceforth meant that
the network nodes have well-deﬁned positions along
an N −dimensional space (usually the two-dimensional
space). The terms geographic or geometric networks
have also been used in the graph theory and complex
networks literatures.

[102] Observe that it is not possible to ensure identical val-
ues of such parameters in all models. For instance, the
average degree hki will naturally vary within a limited
interval in all models.

[103] In a directed weighted network such as the derivative
network, the in-strength of a node i is deﬁned as being
equal to the sum of the weights of each inbound edge.

[104] http://www.ssicentral.com/lisrel/index.html

18

FIG. 6: The population histograms of the separation index sind for the four considered theoretic models of complex networks
with N = 100, M = 3 and hki = 6 (i.e. m = 3). It is clear from these histograms that the separation index sind does not
provide good resolution.

FIG. 7: The population histograms of the separation index s for the four considered theoretic models of complex networks with
N = 100, M = 3 and hki = 6. Similar results were obtained for the ER/BA and WS/GG models. The former case involves
smaller average and standard deviation of the s index.

19

FIG. 8: The population histograms of the separation index s for the four considered theoretic models of complex networks with
N = 200, M = 3 and hki = 6. Similar results were obtained for the ER/BA and WS/GG models. The results are similar to
those obtained for N = 100 (see Figure 7).

FIG. 9: The population histograms of the separation index s for the four considered theoretic models of complex networks with
N = 100, M = 3 and hki = 6. A substantial decrease of the attractors separation has been implied in all cases.

20

FIG. 10: The population histograms of the separation index s for the four considered theoretic models of complex networks
with N = 100, M = 10 and hki = 6. A substantial decrease of the attractors separation has been implied in all cases.

FIG. 11: The population histograms of the separation index s for the four considered theoretic models of complex networks
with N = 100, M = 10 and hki = 20. The eﬀect of increasing the average degree was to substantially decrease the attractors
separation in all cases.

21

(a)

(b)

FIG. 12: The average and standard deviation of the neighborhood separation index (hki and σ(s), respectively) as a function
of N for the four models of networks considering m = 3 and M = 3. While the averages increase and then tend to a plateau,
the standard deviations decrease and also stabilize.

22

ER

BA

WS

GG

hmii σ(mi) diam

s

1

1

hcci

hspi σ(sp) V i

sind
1
-0.11
-0.06 -0.11
-0.51 0.63 -0.11
0.31 -0.38 0.07 -0.11
-0.17 0.40 -0.03 0.19 -0.19
0.51 -0.77 0.08 -0.79 0.49 -0.44

sind
s
hcci
hspi
σ(sp)
V i
hmii
σ(m)i 0.37 -0.52 0.09 -0.51 0.44 -0.52 0.72
diam 0.02 0.00 -0.06 0.03 -0.01 0.10 -0.01 -0.05

1

1

1

1

1

hmii σ(mi) diam

s

1

1

hcci

hspi σ(sp) V i

sind
1
-0.02
-0.08 -0.26
-0.53 0.62 -0.13
0.25 -0.10 -0.16 0.01
-0.10 0.81 -0.26 0.54 -0.12
0.44 -0.69 0.13 -0.78 0.40 -0.65

sind
s
hcci
hspi
σ(sp)
V i
hmii
σ(mi) 0.47 -0.35 0.06 -0.58 0.28 -0.46 0.61
diam 0.03 0.09 -0.24 0.08 -0.08 0.07 -0.06 -0.03

1

1

1

1

1

hmii σ(mi) diam

s

1

1

hcci

hspi σ(sp) V i

sind
1
-0.58
-0.04 0.09
-0.46 0.54 0.10
0.43 -0.16 0.06 0.31
-0.55 0.63 0.10 0.53 -0.09
0.89 -0.80 -0.04 -0.50 0.36 -0.69

sind
s
hcci
hspi
σ(sp)
V i
hmii
σ(mi) 0.42 -0.54 -0.05 -0.37 0.13 -0.37 0.55
diam -0.01 0.02 0.29 0.18 0.16 0.07 -0.02 -0.02

1

1

1

1

1

hmii σ(mi) diam

s

1

1

hcci

hspi σ(sp) V i

sind
1
-0.16
-0.06 0.04
-0.04 0.42 0.13
0.16 -0.10 0.11 0.57
-0.38 0.71 0.08 0.40 -0.09
0.40 -0.87 -0.06 -0.42 0.16 -0.71

sind
s
hcci
hspi
σ(sp)
V i
hmii
σ(mi) 0.33 -0.72 -0.06 -0.31 0.20 -0.58 0.82
diam -0.07 0.04 0.19 0.31 0.30 0.12 -0.10 -0.05

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

TABLE I: Pearson correlation coeﬃcients obtained for the ER (a), BA (b), WS (c) and GG (d) networks with N = 100, m = 3
and M = 3 considering the individual (sind) and neighborhood (sngh) separability indices and seven measurements of the
topology of the network (i.e. average clustering coeﬃcient (hcci), average shortest path between prototype nodes (hshpathi),
standard deviation of the shortest paths between the prototype nodes (σ(shpath))), average Voronoi index (V i), average
matching index between prototype nodes (hmi), standard deviation of the matching index between prototype nodes (σ(mi))
and diameter of the networks (diam)

.

23

hcci

hspi

σ(sp)

V i

hmii

ER sind γ13 = −0.01 γ14 = −0.02 γ15 = 0.01 γ16 = −0.01 γ17 = 0.01

σ(mi)
γ18 = 0.01

diam

Res.
γ19 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C1,2 = 0.01

C

s

γ23 = −0.43 γ24 = 0.04 γ25 = −0.03 γ26 = 0.25 γ27 = −0.96 γ28 = 1.13 γ29 = −0.01 E2 = 0.00

s

γ16 = 0.03 γ17 = −0.02 γ18 = 0.06
BA sind γ13 = −0.02 γ14 = −0.02 γ15 = 0.01
γ26 = 0.75 γ27 = −0.39 γ28 = 0.73
γ25 = 0.01
γ16 = 0.03
γ15 = 0.01
γ25 = 0.01
γ26 = 0.08 γ27 = −0.55 γ28 = −3.54 γ29 = −0.16 E2 = 0.00
γ15 = 0.00 γ16 = −0.02 γ17 = 0.05 γ18 = −0.01 γ19 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.01
γ26 = 0.17 γ27 = −0.87 γ28 = −0.08 γ29 = −0.01 E2 = 0.00
γ25 = 0.00

γ23 = −0.21 γ24 = 0.06
WS sind γ13 = −0.05 γ14 = 0.00
γ24 = 0.01
γ23 = 0.65
GG sind γ13 = −0.03 γ14 = 0.00
γ23 = −0.10 γ24 = 0.00

γ19 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.00
γ29 = 0.00 E2 = 0.00

γ17 = 0.17 γ18 = −0.69 γ19 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.00

s

s

TABLE II: The inﬂuences of each considered topologic measurement on the attractors separation indices as revealed by path
analysis considering N = 100,M = 3 and m = 3.

hcci

hspi

σ(sp)

V i

diam

Res.

C

ER sind γ13 = −0.01 γ14 = −0.02 γ15 = 0.01 γ16 = −0.01 γ17 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.00
γ23 = −0.26 γ24 = 0.14 γ25 = −0.09 γ26 = 0.43 γ27 = −0.01 E2 = 0.00

s

BA sind γ13 = −0.02 γ14 = −0.02 γ15 = 0.01

γ16 = 0.03

γ17 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.00

s

WS sind

γ23 = −0.22 γ24 = 0.08 γ25 = −0.01 γ26 = 0.79 γ27 = −0.00 E2 = 0.00
γ13 = 0.03 γ14 = −0.01 γ15 = 0.01 γ16 = −0.05 γ17 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.00
γ24 = 0.03 γ25 = −0.03 γ26 = 0.41 γ27 = −0.01 E2 = 0.00
γ23 = 0.43
GG sind γ13 = −0.01 γ14 = 0.00

γ16 = −0.04 γ17 = 0.00 E1 = 0.00 C12 = 0.01

γ15 = 0.0

s

s

γ23 = −0.21 γ24 = 0.04 γ25 = −0.03 γ26 = 0.51 γ27 = −0.01 E2 = 0.00

TABLE III: The inﬂuences of each considered topologic measurement on the attractors separation indices as revealed by path
analysis considering N = 100,M = 3 and m = 3.

