7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
1
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Seeking for Simplicity in Complex Networks

Luciano da Fontoura Costa∗
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Av. Trabalhador S˜ao Carlense 400,
Caixa Postal 369, CEP 13560-970, S˜ao Carlos, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
(Dated: 27th Jan 2007)

Complex networks can be understood as graphs whose connectivity deviates from those of regular
or near-regular graphs (which can be understood as ‘simple’). While a great deal of the attention
so far dedicated to complex networks has been duly driven by the above principle, in this work
we take the dual approach and address the identiﬁcation of simplicity, in the sense of regularity, in
complex networks. The basic idea is to seek for subgraphs exhibiting small dispersion (e.g. standard
deviation or entropy) of local measurements such as the node degree and clustering coeﬃcient. Here
we consider two types of subgraphs: (a) those deﬁned by the progressive neighborhoods around
each node and (b) subgraphs obtained from sets of nodes presenting similar local measurements.
The former approach allows the assignment of a hierarchical regularity index to all network nodes,
the latter paves the way for the identiﬁcation of subgraphs (patches) in the original network, with
nearly uniform connectivity. We illustrate the potential of such methods with respect to four classical
network models (i.e. Erd˝os-R´enyi, Barab´asi-Albert, Watts-Strogatz as well as a geographical model)
as well as to seven real-world networks (i.e. word associations, cortical networks, protein-protein
interaction, football league and ﬂights). Several interesting results and insights are obtained with
respect to both theoretical and real-world networks.

‘Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.’ (Leonardo

da Vinci)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Although diﬃcult to be deﬁned individually, simplic-
ity and complexity are unquestionably opposite concepts.
A great deal of the eﬀorts and advances in science and
technology along the recent decades has been intrinsically
related to the dichotomy simplicity/complexity (e.g. [1]).
For instance, while linear systems are characterized by
relatively simple attractors, non-linear chaotic dynamics
give rise to highly complex fractal attractors (e.g. [2]).
At the same time, the origin of the now ubiquitous com-
plex networks was ultimately motivated by the identiﬁca-
tion that graphs obtained from natural or human-made
structures tended to present intricate connectivity when
compared to regular (e.g. lattices and meshes) or nearly-
regular graphs (e.g. the Erd˝os-R´enyi model). Given their
structured connectivity, complex networks have provided
excellent models for a series of ‘complex’ real-world sys-
tems ranging from the Internet to protein-protein inter-
action (e.g. [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]).

Having understood and tamed the simpler, usually lin-
ear, systems, science is now bound by the ‘complexities’
pervading the universe. Yet, while it is important to fo-
cus the characterization and modeling of such complex-
ities, it is also useful to adopt the opposite approach
of seeking for simplicity and regularity in the analyzed
systems. After all, having properly deﬁned simplicity,
complexity should correspond just to the opposite. One

∗Electronic address: luciano@if.sc.usp.br

related example is the identiﬁcation of the windows of pe-
riodicity (‘simplicity’) in chaotic iterated series (e.g. [2]).
The purpose of the present work is precisely to develop
means to identify simplicity and regularity in complex
networks in order not only to obtain better characteriza-
tion of such structures, but also to reassess such networks
in terms of their original motivation, i.e. how much they
depart from regular or near-regular graphs. The moti-
vation for ﬁnding regularities in complex networks in-
cludes but is by no means limited to the following facts:
(1) the properties and distribution of regular patches can
help the characterization, understanding and modeling of
complex networks; (2) the presence of regular patches in
a complex network may suggest a hybrid nature of that
network (e.g. a combination of the regular and scale-
free paradigms); and (3) regular patches can have strong
inﬂuence on dynamical processes taking place on the net-
work.

In graph theory, a regular graph is characterized by
having all its nodes with exactly the same degree. How-
ever, such a deﬁnition is limited in the sense that it is
still possible to obtain a large diversity of such ‘regu-
lar’ graphs. Figure 1 presents three examples of ‘regular’
graphs. All nodes in these graphs exhibit the same de-
gree, equal to four. While the inﬁnite structures in (a)
and (c) have more ‘regular’ connectivity, the graph in
(b) looks rather irregular. Actually, even the structure
in (c) has irregularities if we consider measurements such
as the individual clustering coeﬃcient. It is clear from
such an example that identical node degree is not enough
to ensure uniform connectivity.

Because we are interested in characterizing and iden-
tifying regularity (i.e. ‘simplicity’) in complex networks,
the ﬁrst important step consists of stating clearly what
is meant by regularity, uniformity or simplicity. Per-
haps the most strict imposition of regularity on a net-

2

FIG. 1: Three examples of ‘regular’ graphs, with all nodes
with degree equal to 4.

FIG. 2: An example of network including a regular subgraph
(or patch).

work is that every node would be undistinguishable from
any other node. Therefore, identical measurements (e.g.
node degree, clustering coeﬃcient, hierarchical degrees,
etc.) would be obtained for any of the nodes in the per-
fectly regular network. In this sense, regularity becomes
closely related to symmetries in the networks.

However, as we want to achieve increased ﬂexibility,
in this work we relax the above deﬁnition and propose
that a graph (or subgraph) is regular whenever all its
nodes present similar values for a set of measurements.
Therefore, this deﬁnition is relative to the allowed de-
gree of values dispersion and the chosen set of measure-
ments. Interestingly, the traditional regularity in graph
theory can be understood as a particular instance of the
above deﬁnition in the case of null dispersion (i.e. all de-
grees are identica) and selection of only the node degree
as measurement. Here we consider non-null tolerance
for the variability of the measurements (e.g.
in order
to cope with incompleteness or noise during the network
construction) and a more comprehensive set of local mea-
surements, deﬁned for each node, including the degree,
clustering coeﬃcient, neighboring degree, and the local-
ity index.

Two approaches are considered here in order to inves-
tigate the regularity of complex networks. We introduce
these approaches with the help of Figure 2. The ﬁrst
involves the calculation of the dispersion of each speciﬁc

measurements considering the successive neighborhoods
(e.g. [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]) around each node. Although rela-
tively simple and limited, this approach allows a prelim-
inary indication about the possible participation of each
node in a regular subgraph, as well as its level of ‘inser-
tion’ inside such regular patches. Dispersions are calcu-
lated for each progressive neighborhood. For instance,
the dispersion of the node degree for a given node i at
the second neighborhood hierarchy (or level) is obtained
by calculating the dispersion (e.g. standard deviation) of
the set of nodes comprising the original node i, its imme-
diate neighbors, and the neighbors of the latter. There-
fore, a complete signature of dispersions is obtained for
each node in terms of the several considered neighbor-
hood hierarchies. Consequently, nodes which lie more
internally the regular patches of the network will tend to
present smaller dispersions along extended neighborhood
hierarchies. For instance, in Figure 2, this kind of signa-
ture could be expected for node 33, which is the most
internal node inside the regular patch of the network.
Figure 3 presents the dispersion signatures (standard de-
viation) of node degree along 4 hierachical levels (from
0, corresponding to the reference node, up to 3) obtained
for nodes 17 (a) and 33 (b) in the graph of Figure 2.
By convention, all signatures start with zero (i.e. only
the original reference node, with no dispersion) and pro-
ceeds along the successive neighborhood levels. As ex-
pected, node 33 presents null dispersion of node degree

also for the subgraph obtained by considering that node
and its immediate neighbors. Contrariwise, the signature
obtained for node 17 presents relatively high values for
hierarchical levels 1, 2 and 3.

FIG. 3: The hierarchical standard deviations of nodes 17 (a)
and 33 (b) from the graph in Figure 2 for the three ﬁrst neigh-
borhood hierarchies around those nodes. Observe that the
node degree dispersions for node 33 stay with null value for
the ﬁrst two hierarchical neighborhood levels.

The limitation of the hierarchical approach outlined
above stems from the fact that the progressive subgraphs
are determined by successive dilations of the original
node, irrespectively of the intrinsic similarity among the
nodes in such expanding subgraphs. Consequently, the
regular patches of the network can not be accurately de-
termined by considering the hierarchical dispersions. An
alternative way to approach the identiﬁcation of regu-
larity in complex networks is described as follows. This
alternative methodology is aimed not at quantifying the
regularity around each node (as the hierarchical disper-
sions method), but at obtaining the regular subgraphs
present in the complex network under analysis. This is
a more challenging objective. More speciﬁcally, several
measurements are taken for each node in the network,
and projected into a discrete two-dimensional phase-
space (the accumulator array) by using principal com-
ponent analysis (e.g. [7, 13, 14, 15]). Such a statisti-
cal mapping corresponds to a linear transformation (ac-
tually a rotation in the phase space) that ensures that
the maximum dispersion of the points will be achieved
along the ﬁrst projection axes (i.e. those corresponding
to the largest absolute values of eigenvalues of the co-
variance matrix of the data). The projection onto this
two-dimensional phase space is performed by considering
a given resolution for the two axes (binning), so as to
obtain a two-dimensional histogram, here called accumu-
lator array. Therefore, nodes which have similar mea-
surements will appear close one another in the discrete
two-dimensional phase space, contributing to a higher
value of the histogram at that particular position. Con-
sequently, every peak in such a histogram indicates the
presence of several nodes with similar properties, which

3

may belong (or not) to regular patches in the network.
However, because such nodes do not necessarily corre-
spond to a connected component in the original network,
we need to check the connectivity among them in order
to identify eventual patches of regularity. Therefore, sets
of nodes which are connected and have similar measure-
ments (i.e. belong to the same peak) constitute a regular
patch in the original complex network. For instance, in
the case of the simple network in Figure 2, it would be
expected that the nodes inside the regular region, and
perhaps also the nodes at the border of this region, would
constitute such a type of region. That is because those
two sets of nodes have similar topological properties (e.g.
node degree and clustering coeﬃcient) and are connected
among themselves.

The organization of the current work is as follows.
After presenting a non-exhaustive summary of related
works, the basic concepts (including the four considered
network models and network local measurements) are
brieﬂy presented. Next, we introduce more formally the
two suggested approaches for characterization of regular-
ities inside complex networks and illustrate their poten-
tial with respect to theoretical models (i.e. Erd˝os-R´enyi,
Brar´asi-Albert, Watts-Strogatz and a simple geographi-
cal network) as well as to real-world complex networks
(i.e. word associations, cortical nets, protein-protein in-
teraction, football, and ﬂights). Correlation and path
analysis are also employed in order to obtain insights on
how the topological measurements inﬂuence the regular-
ity for each type of model. A series of interesting results
are reported and discussed.

II. BRIEF REVIEW OF RELATED WORKS

To our best knowledge, no work has speciﬁcally ad-
dressed the issue of identifying regularities in complex
networks. This issue is however related to at least the fol-
lowing four complex networks subjects: (i) assortativity;
(ii) community ﬁnding; (iii) k-cores; and (iv) k-cliques.
The problem of regularity in complex networks is revised
with respect to these three areas in the following.

The concept of assortative mixing, developed by New-
man [16] (see also [17]), quantiﬁes the tendency of a node
with high degree to connect with other nodes with high
degree (the term dissortative has been used to express
the opposite trend). Assortativity is related to regularity
detection in the sense that maximum node correlation
is observed for a regular network. At the same time,
a network with high assortativity is not guaranteed to
be strongly regular because the node degree is not suf-
ﬁcient to characterize this property (see Fig. 1 and re-
spective discussion). Several networks have been found
to exhibit speciﬁc patterns of assortativity or disassor-
tativity. For instance, Newman and Park [18] showed
that social networks tend to present assortative mixing
between adjacent nodes, as opposite to most non-social

networks. That work also related assortativity and com-
munity structure in complex networks. The subject of
assortativity and communities in social networks has also
been investigated by Bogu˜na et al. in [19]. The fact that
scale-free networks tend to be disassortative has been ad-
dressed by Yook et al. [20]. The relationship between the
node degree and the clustering coeﬃcient has been stud-
ied by Serrano and Bogu˜na [21], who showed that the
level of assortativity establishes an upper limit to clus-
tering. Related investigations have been addressed by
Holme and Zhao [22].

Given a network, it is often possible to identify respec-
tive subgraphs whose nodes are more intensely connected
one another than with the rest of the network. Such
subgraphs are called the
communities of the original
network (e.g. [23, 24, 25, 26]). Such as communities, the
regular patches sought in the current work are subgraphs
of the original network which exhibit some peculiar prop-
erty. However, while the nodes in a community share the
overall property of being more intensely connected one
another than with the remainder of the network, such
a connectivity pattern can still be highly heterogeneous.
In other words, communities are not necessarily regular
patches and regular patches are not guaranteed to corre-
spond to communities.

The concept of k−core has received increasing atten-
tion recently (e.g.
[27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32]). Given a
network, its k−core can be obtained by repeatedly re-
moving all nodes with degree smaller than k. Although
the k−cores tend to be more degree regular, especially
for larger values of k, they can still present substantial
heterogeneities.

Finally, k−cliques are deﬁned as fully connected sub-
graphs with k nodes (e.g. [33, 34, 35]).
In particular
a k-clique percolation cluster [34], which is similar to a
regular percolation cluster, is a maximal k−clique con-
nected graph, namely the union of all k−cliques which
are connected. Though such k−clique clusters tend to ex-
hibit regularity of node degree, the other measurements
of their local connectivity (e.g. the clustering coeﬃcient)
can vary widely. A similar concept has been developed
in terms of virtual links and conditional expansions [36].
More speciﬁcally, the connections of shortest path length
2 and 3 between nodes are identiﬁed and those nodes
which are interconnected through such connections are
suggested to form nearly regular subgraphs potentially
associated to the network communities. Such a concept
was also revisited more recently by Bagrow et al. [37].
The relationship between cliques and communities has
been considered by Palla et al. [38].

The quantiﬁcation of the symmetries at and around
network nodes, which is also related to regularity char-
acterization, has been studied by P. Holme [39]. The
approach involves measuring the similarity between per-
mutations of paths of a given length emanating from each
node. This methodology has been illustrated with re-
spect to protein-protein interaction.

4

III. BASIC CONCEPTS AND METHODOLOGY

The undirected network Γ under analysis is represented
by its adjacency matrix K, such that K(i, j) = K(j, i) =
1 indicates the presence of an edge between nodes i and
j, with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N . Self-connections (i.e. K(i, i) = 1)
are not considered. Although the concepts and meth-
ods introduced in this article are immediately extensible
to directed networks, here we restrict our attention on
undirected networks.

Given such a network Γ, the immediate neighborhood
of any of its nodes i is deﬁned as the set of nodes which
are connected to node i through a single edge (higher
order neighborhoods, which involve neighbors of neigh-
bors and so on, are deﬁned below). The degree of each of
any of its nodes i, henceforth abbreviated as k(i), is de-
ﬁned as the number of edges attached to that node. The
clustering coeﬃcient of that node, represented as cc(i),
is calculated by dividing the number of edges between
the immediate neighbors of i, i.e. n(i), by the maximum
possible number of connections between those nodes, i.e.
nM = n(i)(n(i) − 1)/2. A network such that all its nodes
have exactly the same degree is said to be regular.

Two nodes i and j are said to be connected through a
path in case it is possible to move from i to j. The min-
imal number of edges visited during such a movement is
called the shortest path length between nodes i and j,
which is henceforth abbreviated as sp(i, j). Local mea-
surements (or features) are henceforth understood to ex-
press properties of the connectivity at or near each node.
Global measurements (or features) reﬂect the topologi-
cal properties along substantial portions of the network.
Therefore, the node degree and clustering coeﬃcient are
said to be local, while the shortest path length is a global
measurement.

The h-th hierarchical neighborhood (or a parallel [12]))
of a node i corresponds to the set of nodes which are
connected to node i through shortest paths with length h
(e.g. [12]). The union of the h−th hierarchical neighbor-
hoods for h = 0 to H plus the interconnections between
those nodes deﬁnes a subgraph of Γ which we call the
H-ball of node i (see also the rs-ring [12]). The hierar-
chical dispersion of a measurement with respect to a node
i corresponds to the calculation, in the original network,
of that measurement considering the H−ball around i.

The neighboring degree (e.g. [17, 40, 41]) of a node i,
henceforth expressed as knn(i), corresponds to the aver-
age of the degrees of the immediate neighbors of i. The
locality index (e.g. [40]) of a node i, henceforth abbre-
viated as loc(i), corresponds to the ratio between the
number of connections among the set of nodes compris-
ing i and its immediate neighbors divided by the sum of
the edges connected to all those nodes.

A. Theoretical Models

In this work we consider four theoretical models of
network representing the main types of such structures,
namely: Erd˝os-R´enyi (random graph), Barab´asi-Albert
(scale-free), Watts-Strogatz (small-world), as well as a
simple geographical model (e.g. [42]). These models are
brieﬂy described in this section.

ing:

An Erd˝os-R´enyi random graph – ER – is deﬁned by a
constant probability of connection between any pair of its
nodes ([33, 43, 44]). In other words, it corresponds to a
Poisson process along the connectivity, with rate γ. The
Barab´asi-Albert model – BA – is characterized by pref-
erential attachment (e.g. [3]). More speciﬁcally, starting
with m0 nodes, new nodes with m connections are pro-
gressively (one-at-a-time)) attached to the growing net-
work, so that the probability of connections is propor-
tional to the degree of the existing nodes, giving rise to
the ‘rich get richer’ paradigm. The Watts-Strogatz net-
works [3, 45] – WS – are small world and characterized
by a special type of connectivity which is nearly regular.
More speciﬁcally, it starts with the N nodes organized
as a ring (or lattice) and each node is connected to its
m adjacent neighbors in both directions. Then, a frac-
tion α (in this work α = 1) of edges are rewired in order
to establish long range connections. Though simple, the
geographical model – GG – considered in this work does
incorporate the typical properties of a geographical net-
work, i.e. each node has a well-deﬁned position in an
embedding space and the probability of connections is
deﬁned by the distance (Eulclidean) between each pair
of nodes. The GG networks considered in this work are
constructed as follows (e.g. [42]). First, N nodes are dis-
tributed with uniform probability along an orthoghonal
lattice with L × L points, with L > N . Then, each node
is connected to all other nodes which are at maximum
Euclidean distance d from it.

All networks considered in this work have approxi-
mately the same number of nodes N and average degree
hki. The latter condition is enforced with respect to the
m = hki /2 parameter of the BA model. More speciﬁ-
cally, given m, the Poisson rate of the ER networks is
determined as γ = 2m/(N − 1). In the case of the GG
model, we assume that d = L

2m/(N π).

p

While the concepts and methodologies for regularity
characterization and identiﬁcation covered in this article
are general to connected or disconnected networks, the
following analysis and results assume that the network
is connected, in the sense that any node can be reached
from any other node through a path. In order to ensure
connected networks, the largest connected component of
each network generated by the four models above (the
same scheme is adopted for the real-world networks) are
detected and considered for subsequent analysis. Because
of the relatively high connectivity considered in this work
(well above the respective percolation critical densities),
which imply mostly connected networks, such a ﬁltering
has minor eﬀects.

B. Real-World Networks

5

This work considers seven real-world networks, includ-

Word associations: This network was obtained as
described in [46]. After an initial word (‘sun’) was pre-
sented by the computer, a human subject replied with
the ﬁrst word that came to his mind. The entered words
are then presented in random order, but so as to ensure
similar rates of presentation, by the computer, to which
the subject reply as above. This network was found to
present nearly scale-free node degree distribution.

Three Cortical Networks: Cortical networks are
obtained from anatomical and functional experiments so
that each node represent a cortical area and each edge
a physical connection between two areas. Three such
networks have been considered here: (i) cat without tha-
lamus [47, 48]; (ii) cat with thalamus [47, 48]; and (iii)
monkey [49].

Protein-Protein Interaction: This network, ob-
tained from Barab´asi’s site [57] [50], describes the inter-
actions between proteins of S. cerevisiae (yeast). More
speciﬁcally, each node is a protein, and the edges indi-
cate interaction (i.e. possible docking) between pairs of
proteins. This network has been found to present the
scale-free property.

Football: This network, obtained from Newman’s
[51], includes the American football
network data [58]
games between Division IA colleges during regular sea-
son Fall 2000. This network provides an example of social
interaction network.

US Flights: This network corresponds to the ﬂights
between most US airports in 1997 and was obtained from
the Pajek database [52].

All these networks were symmetrized before the regu-

larity analysis.

C. Standardization and Pearson Correlation
Coeﬃcient

Given a set of samples Xi, i = 1, . . . , M , of a random
variable X, its average and standard deviation can be
respectively estimated as

hXi =

1
M

M

Xj=1

Xi

0.5

1
M − 1

M

Xj=1

σX = 



2
(Xi − hXi)





The standardized version of the random variable X is

deﬁned (e.g. [14, 15]) as

(1)

(2)

(3)

˜X =

X − hXi
σX

Observe that ˜X has necessarily zero means and unit
standard deviation. Also, most of its values are con-
strained inside the interval [−2, 2].

Given two registered random variables [59] X and Y
represented by a set of respectively sampled values, as
well as their standardized versions ˜X and ˜Y , the Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient (e.g. [15, 53, 54]) between those two
variables can be estimated as the correlation between ˜X
and ˜Y , i.e.

P (X, Y ) =

( ˜Xi)( ˜Yi)

(4)

1
M − 1

M

Xj=1

It can be veriﬁed that −1 ≤ P (X, Y ) ≤ 1. In case P
is close to 1, the two random variables X and Y are said
to be positively correlated, exhibiting a tendency to ‘vary
together’.
In case P is near -1, the two variables are
understood as being negatively correlated, presenting a
trend to ‘opposed joint variation’. In case P is near zero,
the two random variables are said to be uncorrelated.

D. Path Analysis

Introduced by S. Wrigth [55] as a means to model sta-
tistical relationships between observed random variables,
path analysis provides a series of interesting modeling
features [53, 54]. In addition to allowing the comparison
between alternative models, path analysis can be used in
order to quantify the inﬂuences of several observed in-
dependent variables [60] on one or more dependent vari-
ables.

In the way it is considered in the current work, path
analysis is practically equivalent to multilinear regres-
sion. In particular, we apply path analysis in order to
quantify the inﬂuence of the several considered topologi-
cal measurements of the network on the obtained regular-
ity indices. Compared to the Pearson correlation anal-
ysis of the pairwise relationships between the topologi-
cal measurements and regularity indicators, path analysis
provide a less degenerate quantiﬁcation of the relation-
ships between these measurements. While the Pearson
correlation considers projections of the overall data onto
two axes, one corresponding to a topological measure-
ment and the other to a regularity indicator, and then
quantiﬁes the linear relationship between those two vari-
ables, path analysis performs multilinear regression with-
out any projection, i.e. considering the original multidi-
mensional feature space. As a consequence, the inﬂuences
of the independent over the dependent measurements be-
comes much more accurate and objective.

Figure 4 presents the path analysis model considered
here. We have two dependent variables – namely the
average of the number of peaks in the measurement his-
togram of the size of the maximum regular path detected
in each network, which are assumed to depend on the
8 measurements of the networks topology – namely the

average and standard deviation of the node degree, clus-
tering coeﬃcient, neighboring degree and locality.

6

FIG. 4: The path analysis model considered in the present
work. A total of 6 measurements of the networks topology
are considered as independent variables which inﬂuence four
dependent variables, namely the regularity indicators. The
residues and respective covariances are not shown for simplic-
ity’s sake.

The multilinear regression respective to the path anal-
ysis model in Figure 4 is given by the following equations:

P ∝ γ1,5 hki + γ1,6σcc + γ1,7 hcci +
γ1,8σcc + γ1,9 hknni + γ1,10σ(knn) +
+γ1,11 hloci + γ1,12σ(loc)
S ∝ γ3,5 hki + γ3,6σcc + γ3,7 hcci +
γ3,8σcc + γ3,9 hknni + γ3,10σ(knn) +
+γ3,11 hloci + γ3,12σ(loc)

(5)

(6)

Therefore, given the dispersions of the 8 topological
measurements as well as of the two regularity indicators,
path analysis will provide the inﬂuences γi, j with respect
to each pair of those features. In the present work, path
analysis was performed in the LISREL environment [61].

E. Principal Component Analysis

Given M observations of a random vector ~v composed
of M random variables, these vectors can be represented
in an M −dimensional phase space (or feature space)
where each sample ~vi of ~v deﬁnes a point. When M

is large, it is interesting to project the M −dimensional
phase space into a space with smaller number W of di-
mensions. When W is 2 or 3, it becomes possible to
visualize the phase space distribution.
In addition, in-
creased statistical representation is achieved in the lower
dimensional space (the higher the number of dimensions,
the larger the number of observations required to prop-
erly populate the phase space).

One possible way to project a distribution of points
into a smaller dimensional phase space, with W < M
dimensions,
is by using principal component analysis
(e.g. [7, 13, 14, 15]). Such a statistical transformation
involves three simple steps: (i) estimation of the covari-
ance matrix of the original samples; (ii) calculation of
the respective eigenvalues and eigenvectors; and (iii) use
of the W eigenvectors associated to the largest absolute
values of eigenvalues as the basis for projecting from the
original to the dimensionally-reduced phase space.

IV. METHODOLOGY

This section presents the two main approaches consid-
ered in this work in order to study the regularity of com-
plex networks, namely hierarchical measurement disper-
sions and the identiﬁcation of connected regular patches.

A. Hierarchical Dispersions

Given a speciﬁc local measurement and a node i, its
hierarchical dispersion is deﬁned as the measurement of
the dispersion inside the H−ball of i. Although several
dispersion measurements – such as the standard devia-
tion, coeﬃcient of variation (i.e. the standard deviation
divided by the average) and entropy – can be used, in
this work we limit our attention to the former. The hi-
erarchical dispersions are calculated with respect to the
values of a chosen measurement along the several hierar-
chies around a given reference node.

Figure 5 presents the hierarchical standard deviations
of the node degree and clustering coeﬃcient for the hi-
erarchies 1 (a), 2 (b) and 3 (c) for each of the nodes in
the network in Figure 2. Observe the reduced dispersion
obtained for the nodes more internal to the regular patch.

B. Detection of Regular Patches

7

First, the set of measurements deﬁning the regularity
is selected. Though such a set may include just the node
degree (compatible with the traditional concept of regu-
lar graphs), because we want to impose more strict de-
mands on regularity it is necessary to consider additional
features describing the network connectivity around each
node. In this work we consider two sets of measurements.
The ﬁrst includes the node degree and clustering coeﬃ-
cient; the second incorporates these two measurements
plus the immediate neighboring degree and the locality
index.

Having chosen the set of measurements, it is necessary
to identify those nodes which are characterized by small
dispersion of the measurements. In this work such a step
is implemented with the help of an accumulator array
acc [62]. Although higher dimensional accumulator ar-
rays could be considered, in this work we limit our atten-
tion to two-dimensional arrays. Therefore, as implied by
its name, the accumulator array is an array of Q × Q ele-
ments which will be used as a histogram in order to store
the number of nodes whose measurements fall within the
same respective interval (two-dimensional bin) and can
therefore be understood as being regular. In case the set
of measurements includes two features (e.g. node degree
and clustering coeﬃcient), the accumulator array indices
are directly related to the measurements; otherwise prin-
cipal component analysis (see Section III E) is used in
order to project from the higher dimensional measure-
ment space into two projected variables related to the
accumulator array indices.

Let µ1 and µ2 be the two measurements to be mapped
into the accumulator array, with minimum and max-
imum values given respectively as min(µ1), min(µ2)
and max(µ1), max(µ2). Also,
let the two indices of
the accumulator array be represented as i and j, with
1 ≤ i, j ≤ Q. The resolutions of these two measurements
are given respectively as:

The original measurements can now be mapped into
the accumulator array indices by using the following
equations:

∆µ1 =

∆µ2 =

max(µ1) − min(µ1)
Q − 1
max(µ2) − min(µ2)
Q − 1

i = Round

j = Round

µ1 − min(µ1)
∆µ1
µ2 − min(µ2)
∆µ2

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Unlike the methodology described in the previous sec-
tion, which is aimed at the characterization of regularity
around successive neighborhoods of a node, the detec-
tion of regular patches is aimed at identifying the pos-
sible presence of near-regular subgraphs in the original
network. A possible methodology for obtaining regular
patches is described in the following.

In the current work, the resolutions ∆µ1 and ∆µ2 are
always set as corresponding to 1/10 of the excursion of
the respective measurements µ1 and µ2, i.e. Q = 11.

Now, given a network, the above mapping is performed
for every node and the respective accumulator array cell

8

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

FIG. 5: The hierarchical standard deviations of the node degree obtained for the nodes of the simple network in Figure 2 with
respect to hierarchy 1 (a), 2(b) and 3(c). The hierarchical standard deviations of the clustering coeﬃcient obtained for that
same graph for hierarchies 1 (d), 2 (e) and 3 (f). Observe that darker gray levels indicate higher dispersion values.

is incremented by one every time the measurements of
a node fall at that cell. At the end of this procedure,
peaks in the accumulator array will indicate set of nodes
which have similar measurements. However, the nodes
deﬁning a peak do not necessarily correspond to a regu-
lar patch, as they may not be connected in the original
graph. Therefore, the last step in the regular patch detec-
tion corresponds to obtaining the connected subgraphs
for each considered peak in the accumulator array. Two

indicators of the regularity of the network under analy-
sis are considered in the current work: (i) the number of
detected peaks P ; and (ii) the size S of the maximum
component identiﬁed for the maximum peak in the ac-
cumulator array. When comparing results obtained for
networks with diﬀerent sizes, it is interesting to consider
also the value S/N . Henceforth, a cell of the accumulator
array is considered as a peak whenever acc(i, j) ≥ N/10,
in case the accumulated count acc(i, j) is larger or
i.e.

9

(a)

(b)

equal than one tenth of the size of the original network.
Observe that the size of the maximum component is ob-
tained for the largest count (the maximum peak) in the
accumulator array irrespectively of whether it exceeds or
not the threshold N/10. It is also interesting to notice
that the above methodology can be easily modiﬁed in or-
der to try to detect additional regular patches deﬁned by
all peaks.

Figure 6(a) illustrates the accumulator array ob-
tained for the network in Figure 2. The maximum
peak, indicated as A in the ﬁgure, includes the nodes
24, 26, 30, 31, 35, 36, 40, 42, 43 and 44, which clearly cor-
respond (see Figure 2) to the nodes belonging to the bor-
der of the near-regular region of network. Because all
these nodes are connected, they constitute a single regu-
lar patch R1 associated to the maximum detected peak.
The second highest peak, indicated as B in Figure 6,
is deﬁned by nodes 27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, which
clearly correspond to the nodes inside the near-regular re-
gion of the network. Again, all such nodes are connected
in the original graph, therefore deﬁning a single detected
regular patch R2. Observe that it is completely reason-
able to obtain two regular patches, as the properties of
the nodes in R1 are clearly distinct to those of the nodes
in R1. Figure 6(b) shows the accumulator array obtained
by considering four measurements (i.e. node degree, clus-
tering coeﬃcient, immediate neighborhood degree and lo-
cality) projected through PCA. Now a sharp maximum
is obtained, marked as A in the ﬁgure, which includes
eight nodes: 21, 24, 26, 30, 36, 40, 42, 44, which again cor-
respond to the border of the near-regular region of the
original network. The fact that fewer pronounced peaks
were obtained while considering more measurements is
reasonable and reﬂects the stricter regularity conditions
imposed by the additional measurements.

V. THEORETICAL MODELS

This section presents the results of hierarchical disper-
sion characterization and regular patch detection per-
formed with respect to the four theoretical models of
complex networks discussed in Section III A.

FIG. 6: The accumulator array (a) obtained for the network
in Figure 2 considering the node degree and the clustering
coeﬃcient. The accumulator array obtained by using also the
immediate neighborhood degree and the locality is presented
in (b). Higher accumulated values are indicated by brighter
levels.

A. Hierarchical Dispersions

The hierarchical standard deviation of the node degree
and clustering coeﬃcient were obtained for the ﬁrst three
hierarchical levels for all nodes in the considered theoret-
ical models of networks. All simulations in this section
considered N = 100 and m = 3. Recall that the dis-
persion is calculated for a given hierarchical level h by
considering all levels from 0 to h.

Figures 7– 10 show the dispersion (standard devia-
tion) of the node degrees (lefthand-side column in each
ﬁgure) and of the clustering coeﬃcients (righthand-side
column) for the ER, BA, WS and GG models, respec-

tively. Little variation can be observed along the three
hierarchical levels for the standard deviation of the node
degree in the case of the ER networks (Fig. 7(a-c)), while
the distribution of clustering coeﬃcient standard devia-
tions tended to be shifted to the right for the higher hi-
erarchies (Fig. 7(d-f)). A completely distinct situation
was obtained for the BA networks (Fig. 8), where the
dispersions of the node degree and clustering coeﬃcient
changed substantially along the hierarchies. Of partic-
ular interest is the comparison between the distribution
of node degree dispersions for the ER and BA models
(Figs. 7 and 8). It is clear from Figure 8 that the BA
networks have nodes with a wide range of degree regu-
larities at the ﬁrst hierarchical level, while the dispersion

of degrees is more stable for the ER models (Fig. 7). This
can be understood as a direct consequence of the fact that
the BA networks are characterized by intense diversity of
node degrees, while the ER models can be well described
by nearly regular node degrees. However, the diversity
of degree dispersions decreases steadily for the higher hi-
erarchical levels for the BA networks (Figs. 8(b-c)). Ob-
serve that the dispersion of the clustering coeﬃcient in
the BA model tends to increase with the hierarchies, i.e.
it tends to become smaller for the ﬁrst hierarchical level
(Fig. 8d) than at the second (Fig. 8e) and third levels
(Fig. 8f).

The dispersions of node degree observed for the WS
networks (Figs. 9(a-c)) are very close to zero. In other
words, the node degrees along successive levels change
very little. This is expected because the WS model cor-
responds basically to a degree regular network with small
irregularity caused by the few rewirings. The dispersion
of the clustering coeﬃcient are similar for the three hi-
In the case of the GG
erarchical levels (Figs. 9(d-f)).
model, the degree dispersion was relatively small and
changed little along the hierarchical levels (Figs. 10(a-c)).
On the other hand, the distribution of clustering coeﬃ-
cient dispersions tend to be shifted to the right with the
hierarchies (Figs. 10(d-f)).

Generally, by comparing the dispersion results ob-
tained for all the four models, it becomes clear that the
greatest degree regularity is observed for the WS model,
which also presents relatively small values of clustering
coeﬃcient dispersions for all hierarchies. Small degree
and clustering dispersions were also found for the ER
model.
Interestingly, the GG networks have small de-
gree dispersions for all hierarchies, but present relatively
high dispersions of clustering coeﬃcient which tend to
increase with the hierarchies. Finally, the BA networks
exhibited the largest dispersions of degree and clustering
coeﬃcients, which tend to vary strongly with the hier-
archical levels. These results are compatible with what
could be expected regarding the intrinsic regularity of the
ER, WS and GG models and the intense irregularity of
the BA networks. However, the results obtained for the
clustering coeﬃcient dispersion in the case of GG model
show that this type of network is surprisingly irregular
as far as this measurement is concerned. Because of the
uniform distribution of the nodes along the space in the
considered GG model, the number of nodes at given dis-
tances from each node tends not to vary too much, which
is not the case with the clustering coeﬃcient.

B. Regular Patch Detection

Figure 11 shows, for each of the four considered mod-
els (500 realizations, with N = 200 and k = 6), the
histograms of the number of peaks (i.e. the number of
accumulator cells with count exceeding 0.1N ) and the
size of the maximum connected component detected for
each maximum peak obtained by regular patch detection

10

(see Section IV B) while taking into account the node
degree and clustering coeﬃcient.

Interestingly, similar results were obtained for the ER
and BA models, with relatively broad distribution of
numbers of peaks and of sizes of maximum components.
Most such networks yielded from 2 to 4 peaks (a,c). At
the same time, the maximum components detected for
each peak had sizes ranging from 0 to about 50 nodes
(b,d). The highly skewed histograms obtained for the
latter measurement indicate that most frequently such
maximum components (which are regular patches) had
small size. Although a similar distribution of maximum
component sizes was obtained for the GG model (h), the
respective histogram of number of peaks resulted very
peculiar, with most situations corresponding to zero de-
tected peaks. The results obtained for the WS are sub-
stantially distinct from those obtained for the ER and
BA models: a total of two detected peaks was obtained
for the vast majority of realizations (c), while the size of
the maximum components was substantially larger than
those obtained for the ER, BA ir GG models.

The results obtained for the same networks, but con-
sidering the immediate degree and the locality in addi-
tion to the previously used node degree and clustering
coeﬃcient, are presented in Figure 12.

The consideration of the additional measurements had
interesting eﬀects on both the number of peaks and the
size of the maximum detected component. In most cases,
no peak was detected for the ER model (a), while the re-
spective distribution of sizes resulted with similar form
but substantially smaller average than obtained while
considering only the node degree and clustering coef-
ﬁcient. Similar reductions were obtained for all other
cases, with the GG model resulting in a larger mean of
sizes than the BA networks (i.e. the opposite of the situ-
ation obtained above). Such reductions of the maximum
detected component sizes can be understood as a conse-
quence of the fact that the consideration of the two ad-
ditional measurements implied stricter demands on the
regularity required for a subgraph to qualify as a regular
patch.

C. Correlation Analysis

Tables I(a-d) present the Pearson correlation coeﬃ-
cients obtained for each of the simulated types of models.
These results are respective to regular patch detection
by considering the node degree and clustering coeﬃcient
only.

Interestingly, the number of peaks P showed little cor-
relation with all measurements and network types, except
for the BA model, where it was found to be negatively
correlated (-0.33) with the size of the maximum detected
component S. Such a negative correlation is reasonable
in the sense that a larger number of peaks indicate more,
and consequently smaller, connected components. The
fact that such a correlation was meaningful only for the

11

FIG. 7: The dispersion (standard deviation) of the node degrees (lefthand column) and of the clustering coeﬃcients (righthand
column) obtained for the three ﬁrst hierarchical levels (three rows in the ﬁgure) for the ER model with m = 3 and N = 100.
The thicker histogram shows the average values and the two thinner histograms the standard deviation.

BA model may be related to the fact that, among the
four considered models, this is that less likely to produce
regular patches.

The size of the maximum detected component S pre-
sented small correlations with all other measurements,
except for the BA networks.
In that case, the size S
correlated negatively with the average node degree (-
0.27) and positively with the dispersion of the average
degree (0.42), the average and standard deviation of clus-
tering coeﬃcient (0.32 and 0.30, respectively), with the
average and standard deviation of the immediate degree
(0.41 and 0.51, respectively) and with the average locality
(0.27). The negative correlation can be understood in the
sense that, because of the intrinsic irregularity of the BA
model, the more connected this type of network is, the
less likely is the presence of regular patches. The largest
positive correlations are more diﬃcult to be explained,
but should also reﬂect the rarity of regular patches in
BA networks.

Other particularly intense correlations were observed
between the average degree and average immediate de-
gree in the case of the ER, WS and GG models (0.96, 0.94
and 0.99, respectively), between the average and stan-
dard deviation of the clustering coeﬃcient (0.99) in the
case of BA networks, and between the standard devia-
tions of the node degree and immediate degree (0.97) for
the GG model.

D. Path Analysis

The results of path analysis considering the model in
Figure 4 and regular patch detection by using the node
degree and clustering coeﬃcient are given in Table II.

As expected, the inﬂuences of each of the eight topo-
logical measurements varied for the diﬀerent types of net-
works. For the ER model, the number of peaks P was
found to depend negatively on the average clustering co-
eﬃcient (-2.06) and positively on the standard deviation
of the clustering coeﬃcient (5.09). This can be under-
stood as a direct consequence of the fact that in a nearly
regular network such as the ER model, a larger disper-
sion of clustering coeﬃcient tends to break the regular
patches. The size of the maximum detected component
S was negatively aﬀected by the average degree (-1.50)
and positively by the standard deviation of the imme-
diate degree (1.65). These two trends are somewhat
counterintuitive (e.g. higher standard deviation of the
immediate degree should promote regularity and there-
fore increase the size of the maximum component). In
the case of the BA model, the most intense positive in-
ﬂuence on P was from the average clustering coeﬃcient
(2.33), while the strongest negative inﬂuence originated
from the average immediate degree. This positive inﬂu-
ence possibly has the same explanation as for the similar
eﬀect observed for the ER case. On the other hand, S
resulted strongly inﬂuenced by the standard deviation of

12

FIG. 8: The dispersion (standard deviation) of the node degrees (lefthand column) and of the clustering coeﬃcients (righthand
column) obtained for the three ﬁrst hierarchical levels (three rows in the ﬁgure) for the BA model with m = 3 and N = 100.
The thicker histogram shows the average values and the two thinner histograms the standard deviation.

the immediate degree (7.74) and negatively by the aver-
age immediate degree (-2.49). Such inﬂuences are again
counterintuitive. Less intense inﬂuences were found for
the WS model. In this case, P was particularly aﬀected
(negatively) by the standard deviation of the clustering
coeﬃcient (-1.68), while S was positively inﬂuenced by
the standard deviation of the immediate degree (1.68).
Both such eﬀects are counterintuitive. In the case of the
GG networks, P resulted strongly aﬀected (negatively)
by the standard deviation of the clustering coeﬃcient (-
3.21), and S was less aﬀected by the considered topolog-
ical measurements. Such a negative dependence between
P and σcc was expected, as larger dispersions of the clus-
tering coeﬃcient tend to reduce the size of the maximum
detected component.

As in [42], path analysis was particularly interesting for
the identiﬁcation of importance inﬂuences of the topolog-
ical parameters over the regularity measurements, pro-
viding more objective results than could be obtained by
correlation analysis. Of particular interest was the identi-
ﬁcation of particularly strong eﬀects from the clustering
coeﬃcient and immediate neighborhood measurements,
with relatively smaller inﬂuences from the locality and
node degree. A number of trends, however, resulted
counterintuitive and would require further investigations,
possibly by using additional topological measurements.

VI. REAL-WORLD NETWORKS

The application of

the regular patch extraction
methodology to the real networks presented in Sec-
tion III B is reported in this section. In addition to the
number of peaks and size of maximum detected compo-
nent, the number of nodes in the maximum peak (NP )
has also been considered. Table III presents the therefore
obtained results for each of the real networks.

A series of interesting results can be identiﬁed. First,
rather distinct numbers of peaks and sizes of maximum
detected component were obtained for each of the net-
works. As quantiﬁed by the S/N index, the size of
the maximum detected component varied from less than
1% (for the word associations, protein-protein interaction
and ﬂights networks) to about 10% (for the football and
cortical networks). The three networks with the smallest
S/N have a strong scale-free nature, which acts in order
to reduce the regular patches in number and size. The
football network resulted the most regular of the ana-
lyzed networks. This is a possible consequence of the
social nature of this network (WS-like), which tends to
promote regularity. The three cortical networks also re-
sulted markedly regular. Observe that the above results
are generally compatible with the experiments reported
in this work with respect to the four theoretical models.
Some interesting eﬀects can be also identiﬁed for spe-
ciﬁc networks. For instance, the inclusion of the thalamus

13

FIG. 9: The dispersion (standard deviation) of the node degrees (lefthand column) and of the clustering coeﬃcients (righthand
column) obtained for the three ﬁrst hierarchical levels (three rows in the ﬁgure) for the WS models with m = 3 and N = 100.
The thicker histogram shows the average values and the two thinner histograms the standard deviation.

in the cat cortical network tended to increase the regu-
larity of the network, as suggested by the S/N measure-
ments for the cat network without and with thalamus.
The monkey network (without thalamus) resulted the
highest S/N value among the cortical networks, which
can be understood as a possible indication that more
evolved brains would present a larger maximum regular
patch. Particularly interesting is the fact that, despite
its relatively large size (N=1458), the protein-protein in-
teraction resulted few detected peaks and a rather small
maximum detected component. Actually, out of the 1116
nodes (about 30% of the overall network) included in
the maximum peak, the maximum connected component
formed by these nodes included only 13 nodes. This re-
sult seems to indicate that the nodes not included in the
maximum peak because of higher measurement disper-
sion are essential for the overall connectivity of that net-
work. Therefore, each nearly regular node in the protein-
protein interaction network tends to be connected with
irregular nodes, deﬁning a mosaic of regularity.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

Complex networks have achieved great importance as a
consequence of their ability to represent and model real-
world structures and systems, such as protein-protein in-
teraction and the Internet and WWW, which involve in-

tricate and heterogeneous connectivity. Indeed, the older
random networks (i.e. the ER model), characterized by
intense regularity of node degree, have proved not to
be particularly good for modeling natural phenomena.
Therefore, a great deal of interest in complex network
research has focused on the identiﬁcation, analysis and
modeling of irregularities (hence the name ‘complex’) in
the connectivity of the networks. However, while such
an irregularity, as with the concept of complexity, is par-
ticularly diﬃcult to be deﬁned, the consideration of the
dual approach of characterizing the regularity of complex
networks can provide interesting insights and results use-
ful for network identiﬁcation and analysis. Particularly
interesting is the inﬂuence of regularities on dynamical
processes unfolding on the networks, which is promis-
ing because most of the dynamical systems investigations
and results are related to perfectly regular networks such
as orthogonal and hexagonal lattices. To approach the
problem of identifying regularities in complex networks
has been the principal motivation of the current work.

One of the most important points related to the identi-
ﬁcation of simplicities in complex networks relates to the
fact that in graph theory (and also complex networks),
regularity has been mostly associated to uniformity of
the degrees of the nodes in the network. Actually, in
graph theory a regular network is deﬁned as having all
its nodes with the same degree. However, as motivated
and illustrated in the current work, degree regularity is

14

FIG. 10: The dispersion (standard deviation) of the node degrees (lefthand column) and of the clustering coeﬃcients (righthand
column) obtained for the three ﬁrst hierarchical levels (three rows in the ﬁgure) for the GG models with m = 3 and N = 100.
The thicker histogram shows the average values and the two thinner histograms the standard deviation.

far from being enough to characterize regularity (see, for
instance, the examples in Figure 1). Here, we propose
that regularity in complex networks is indeed associated
to a larger number of measurements of the connectiv-
ity around each network node.
Indeed, regularity is a
concept associated to symmetry of the network, in the
sense that in a perfectly symmetric network all possi-
ble topological measurements would result identical for
every node. Because such a deﬁnition is too strict, we al-
low some degree of tolerance to measurements variation.
More precisely, it is suggested that a regular patch of
a network is a connected subgraph characterized by the
fact that all its nodes have small dispersion of a set of
chosen measurements. Two possible such sets have been
considered in this work: (i) the node degree and cluster-
ing coeﬃcient and (ii) these two measurements plus the
neighboring degree and locality.

Having suggested a quantitative deﬁnition of what reg-
ularity means for complex networks, it was possible to
devise two methodologies for its: one allowing the quan-
tiﬁcation of the regularity along successive hierarchical
balls around each node, the other providing the means
for identifying regular patches in networks.

The former methodology is based on the concept of hi-
erarchical levels (or progressive neighborhoods) deﬁned
by taking each network node as a reference. For each
subgraph deﬁned by dilating the initial reference node up
to the hierarchy h, the dispersion (in this work limited to

standard deviation) is calculated for each of the chosen
measurements. Therefore, signatures of the dispersion
evolution in terms of the hierarchical levels are obtained
for each node and for each measurement. By considering
the average and standard deviation of such signatures, it
is possible to infer how the regularity of the network (or
of a speciﬁc subnetwork) progress along successive neigh-
borhoods. The potential of this approach for character-
ization of networks was illustrated in the current work
with respect to four theoretical models, namely ER, BA,
WS and GG. Several interesting results were obtained,
including the fact that the WS tends to be the most reg-
ular network for the two considered sets of measurements.
The ER and GG networks also exhibited a good deal of
node regularity, but with varying dispersions of clustering
coeﬃcient. The BA networks proved to be the most ir-
regular of all the four considered theoretical models with
respect to all measurements.

The second methodology reported in this work was
aimed at identifying regular patches in complex networks.
This method involves four main steps: (i) estimation of
measurements for each node; (ii) mapping of such mea-
surements into a two-dimensional accumulator array (a
two-dimensional histogram) by using principal compo-
nent analysis; (iii) the identiﬁcation of peaks in the ac-
cumulator array; and (iv) the veriﬁcation of the pres-
ence of connected components in the original network,
deﬁned by the nodes in each peak. Every accumulator

array cell with count larger than 10% of the total number
N of nodes in the network was considered a peak. The
maximum peak corresponded to the cell with the highest
count, even if its value did not exceed the above thresh-
old. This method proved to allow the identiﬁcation of
extensive patches of regularity for some of the considered
theoretical models of networks. The regularity of the net-
works was quantiﬁed in terms of the number of detected
peaks as well as the size of the maximum detected com-
ponent. The largest patches were detected for the WS
model, followed by the ER, BA and GG. Interestingly,
by considering node degree and clustering coeﬃcient, the
WS model always produced two detected peaks, while
many networks were unable to produce peaks in the case
of the GG model. By imposing stricter regularity con-
ditions, the use of the additional measurements (neigh-
boring degree and locality index) reduced the number of
detected peaks and sizes of the maximum detected com-
ponents.

In addition to the four theoretical network models,
seven real-world networks were also considered in order
to illustrate the application of the regularity patch de-
tection. The considered networks included word associ-
ations, three cortical networks, protein-protein interac-
tion, football league, and an airport network. As could
be expected, those networks characterized by scale-free
node degree (i.e. word associations, protein-protein in-
teraction and ﬂights) implied the smallest sizes of maxi-
mum detected components, while the football network (a
kind of social network) and the three cortical networks re-
sulted more regular. Speciﬁc insights were also obtained,
including the eﬀect of the thalamus in promoting a larger
maximum regular path in the cat, and the interspersion
of regular and irregular nodes in the protein-protein in-
teraction network.

Correlation and path analyses were used in order to
try to better understand the inﬂuence of the topological
properties of the network on the regularity of the detected
patches. While the correlation analysis resulted in weak
relationships between the number of peaks and size of
the maximum component and the topological measure-
ments, path analysis again [42] proved to be an interest-
ing means to quantify the inﬂuences of the topological
features on the analyzed regularity properties. Two par-
ticularly important results were obtained through path
analysis: (a) the inﬂuences of the topological measure-
ments on the two regularity indices varied substantially
among the four theoretical models of networks; and (b)
topological parameters additional to node degree, espe-
cially the clustering coeﬃcient and neighboring degree,
proved to be particularly inﬂuent in deﬁning the regular-
ity properties.

All in all, we believe the reported methods and results
illustrated and corroborated the importance of consid-
ering regularity in order to characterize and obtain in-
sights about the properties of theoretical and real-world
networks. Several are the possibilities for further inves-
tigations opened by this work, which include but are not

15

limited to the investigation of the eﬀect of the average
node degree, the consideration of other real-world net-
works, selection of additional topological measurements,
the consideration of regular patches detected for sec-
ondary peaks (only the maximum patch deﬁned by the
highest peak was considered in this work), as well as the
development of more precise methods for identifying the
peaks in the accumulator array (e.g. a large regular patch
may eventually become split between two or more adja-
cent peaks). With respect to the latter, extensive results
from Hough transform studies (e.g. [56]) can be imme-
diately applied. Last but not least, it is proposed that
the regularity indices, possibly combined with other mea-
surements, can provide an interesting means for identi-
fying how much a given network is planar, in the sense
of graph theory (i.e. the network can be drawn in a two-
dimensional metric space without crossing edges).

List of Symbols

Γ = a graph or complex network;

N = number of nodes in a network;

K = the adjacency matrix of a complex network;

k(i) = degree of a network node i;

m = the parameter in the BA model deﬁning its average
node degree. This parameter is considered as reference
for all network models in this work;

L = the size of the metric space where the geographical
networks (GG) are deﬁned;

cc(i) = clustering coeﬃcient of a network node i;

knn(i) = the neighboring degree of node i;

loc(i) = the locality index of node i;

hai = the arithmetic average of the property a;

σ(a) = the standard deviation of the random variable a;

γi,j = the inﬂuence (path analysis) of the measurement
i over the measurement j;

acc = the accumulator array obtained for a given net-
work;

P = the number of peaks detected in the accumulator
array for a given network;

S = the size of the maximum detected connected com-
ponent;

NP = the number of nodes in the maximum peak of the
accumulator array;

Acknowledgments

Luciano da F. Costa thanks CNPq (308231/03-1) and

FAPESP (05/00587-5) for sponsorship.

16

[1] M. Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar (Owl Books,

[33] B. Bollobas, Random Graphs (Cambridge University

1995).

Press, 2001).

[2] K. Alligood, T. D. Sauer, and J. A. Yorke, Chaos:
An Introduction to Dynamical Systems (Springer-Verlag,
1996).

[34] I. Derenyi, G. Palla, and T. Vicsek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,

160202 (2005), cond-mat/0504551.

[35] G. Palla,

I. Derenyi, and T. Vicsek (2006), cond-

[3] R. Albert and A.-L.Barab´asi, Reviews of Modern Physics

mat/0610298.

74, 48 (2002).

[36] L. da F. Costa, Phys. Rev. E 70, 056106 (2004), cond-

[4] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Advances in

mat/0312712.

Physics 51, 1079 (2002).

[37] J. Bagrow, E. Bollt, and L. da F. Costa (2006), cond-

[5] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003).
[6] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chaves, and D.-

U.Hwang, Physics Reports 424, 175 (2006).

[7] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. R. V.
Boas, Characterization of complex networks: A survey of
measurements (2005), cond-mat/0505185.

[8] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, Computer

Communication Review 29, 251 (1999).
[9] M. E. Newman (2001), cond-mat/0111070.

[10] R. Cohen, S. Havlin, S. Mokryn, D. Dolev, T. Kalisky,

mat/0612502.

[38] G. Palla, E. Derenyi, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek, Nature

435, 814 (2005), physics/0506133.
[39] P. Holme (2006), cond-mat/0608695.
[40] L.

da

F.

Costa

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0607272.

(2006),

[41] S. Maslov and K. Sneppen, Science 296, 910 (2002).
[42] L. da F. Costa (2007), URL physics/0701089.
[43] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, On random graphs (1959).
[44] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, Bulletin of the International Sta-

and Y. Shavitt (2003), cond-mat/0305582.

tistical Institute 38, 343 (1960).

[11] L. da F. Costa and F. N. Silva, J. Stat. Phys. (in press)

(2007), URL cond-mat/0412761.

[45] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[46] L. da Fontoura Costa, International Journal of Modern

[12] L. da F. Costa and L. H. C. da Silva, Eur. Phys. J. B 50,

Physics C 15, 371 (2004).

237 (2006), cond-mat/0408076.

[47] J. W. Scannell, C. Blakemore, and M. P. Young, The J.

[13] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Clas-

of Neurosc. 15, 1463 (1995).

siﬁcation (Wiley-Interscience, 2000).

[14] L. da F. Costa and R. M. C. Jr., Shape Analysis and
Classiﬁcation: Theory and Practice (CRC Press, 2001).
[15] R. A. Johnson and D. W. Wichern, Applied Multivariate

[48] J. W. Scannell, G. A. P. C. Burns, C. C. Hilgetag, M. A.
O’Neil, and M. P. Young, Cerebral Cortex 9, 277 (1999).

[49] O. Sporns and J. Zwi, Neuroinformatics 2, 145 (2004).
[50] H. Jeong, S. Mason, A.-L. Barabasi, and Z. N. Oltvai,

Statistical Analysis (Prentice Hall, 2002).

Nature 411, 41 (2001).

[16] M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 208701 (2002).
[17] R. Pastor-Satorras, A. Vazquez, and A. Vespignani,

[51] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science USA 99, 7821 (2002).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 258701 (2001).

[52] V.

Batagelj

and

A.

Mrvar,

[18] M. E. J. Newman and J. Park, Phys. Rev. E 68, 036122

(2003), cond-mat/0305612.

[19] M. Boguna, R. Pastor-Satorras, A. Diaz-Guilera, and

A. Arenas (2003), cond-mat/0309263.

[20] S.-H. Yook, F. Radicchi, and H. Meyer-Ortmanns (2005),

cond-mat/0507198.

[21] M. A. Serrano
mat/0507535.

and M. Boguna

(2005),

cond-

[22] P. Holme and J. Zhao (2006), q.bio.OT/0611020.
[23] F. Radicchi, C. Castellano, F. Cecconi, V. Loreto, and
D. Parisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 2658 (2004).
[24] J. Reichardt and S. Bornholdt, Phys. Rev. E 74, 016110

(2006), cond-mat/0603718.

[25] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, Phys. Rev. E 69,

026113 (2004).
[26] J. Reichardt
mat/0606220.

and

S. Bornholdt

(2006),

cond-

[27] S. B. Seidman, Social Networks 5, 269 (1983).
[28] J. I. Alvarez-Hamelin, L. Dall’Asta, A. Barrat, and
A. Vespignani, Adv. in Neur. Inform. Proc. Syst. 18, 41
(2006), cs.NI/0504107.

[29] S. Carmi, S. Havlin, S. Kirkpatrich, Y. Shavitt, and

E. Shir (2006), cond-mat/0601240.

[30] S. Wuchty and E. Almaas, BMC Evol. Biol. 5, 24 (2005).
[31] S. N. Dorogovtsev, A. V. Goltsev, and J. F. F. Mendes,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 040601 (2006), cond-mat/0509102.
[32] A. V. Goltsev, S. N. Dorogovtsev, and J. F. F. Mendes,
Phys. Rev. E 73, 056101 (2006), cond-mat/0602611.

Pajek
Slovenia,

University

datasets,
http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/data
(2006).

Ljubljana,

of

[53] T. Raykov and G. A. Marcoulides, A ﬁrst course in struc-
tural equation modeling (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, New Jersey, 2000).

[54] R. B. Kline, Principles and Practice of Structural Equa-
tion Modeling (Teh Guilford Press, New York, 2005), sec-
ond edition.

[55] S. Wright, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 6, 320 (1920).
[56] J. Illingworth and J. Kittler, Comput. Vis., Graph., and

Im. Proc. 44, 87 (1988).

[57] http://www.nd.edu/ networks/resources.htm
[58] http://www-personal.umich.edu/ mejn/netdata/
[59] I.e. the two variables correspond to a same observation,
and therefore can be represented as a random vector ~V =
[Xi, Yi].

[60] The term independent is often used in path analysis ter-
minology in order to express the fact that such observed
variables are assumed not to depend on other variables
considered in the model. Contrariwise, dependent vari-
ables in path analysis receive statistical inﬂuence from
the independent variables.

[61] http://www.ssicentral.com/lisrel/index.html
[62] The accumulator array used in the current work is not
to be confounded with that applied in the Hough trans-
form (e.g. [56], a technique for recognition of geometri-
cal objects (e.g. lines and circles). The diﬀerence is that

in that transform image elements (usually pixels) are
mapped into curves in the accumulator array. However,
techniques for peak analysis developed in the context of

Hough transform can be applied to improve the detection
of the regular patches.

17

18

(b)

(d)

(f)

(h)

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

FIG. 11: The histograms of the number of detected peaks (P) and size of the maximum detected component (S) for each
maximum peak obtained for 500 realizations of the ER (a-b), BA (c-d), WS (e-f) and GG (g-h) models with N = 200 and
m =. The considered measurements were the node degree and clustering coeﬃcient. The mean and standard deviation of the
maximum component sizes are shown inside each respective histogram.

19

(b)

(d)

(f)

(h)

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

FIG. 12: The histograms of the number of detected peaks (P) and size of the maximum detected component (S) for each
maximum peak obtained for 500 realizations of the ER (a-b), BA (c-d), WS (e-f) and GG (g-h) models with N = 200 and
m = 3. The mean and standard deviation of the maximum component sizes are shown inside each respective histogram.

20

ER

BA

WS

GG

hknni σknn hloci σloc

1

1

S

σk

hki

hcci σcc

P
S
hki
σk
hcci
σcc

P
1
0.11
-0.20 -0.10
0.00 -0.11 0.42
0.00 0.00 0.13 0.17
0.26 -0.12 -0.18 0.04 0.71
hknni -0.17 0.00 0.96 0.62 0.16 -0.13
σknn
hinti
σint

1

1

1

1

0.04 0.03 0.00 0.66 0.01 -0.01 0.12
0.17 0.01 -0.41 -0.22 0.17 0.32 -0.86 0.18
0.10 0.00 -0.06 0.23 0.07 0.25 -0.33 0.61 0.57

1

1

1

hcci σcc hknni σknn hloci σloc

1

S

σk

hki

P
1
-0.33
0.11 -0.27
-0.17 0.42 -0.42
-0.02 0.32 -0.38 0.83
0.00 0.30 -0.42 0.65 0.85

1

1

1

P
S
hki
σk
hcci
σcc

1

hknni -0.18 0.41 -0.42 0.99 0.83 0.65
σknn
hinti
σint

-0.03 0.51 -0.52 0.94 0.77 0.66 0.93
-0.04 0.27 -0.54 0.57 0.75 0.55 0.55
0.02 0.13 -0.22 0.22 0.35 0.30 0.22

1

1
0.57
0.23 0.76

1

1

hknni σknn hloci σloc

1

1

S

σk

hki

hcci σcc

P
S
hki
σk
hcci
σcc

P
1
-0.05
-0.02 0.06
-0.02 0.00 0.18
-0.04 -0.01 -0.32 -0.04
-0.09 0.16 0.26 0.17 -0.55
hknni -0.02 0.05 0.94 0.33 -0.30 0.29
-0.06 0.06 -0.03 0.57 -0.11 0.15
σknn
hinti
-0.05 0.00 -0.38 -0.11 0.99 -0.56 -0.38 -0.11
-0.05 0.13 0.15 0.07 -0.70 0.88
σint

1
0.08

0.15

1

1

1

1

1

0.11 0.67

1

hknni σknn hloci σloc

1

1

S

σk

hki

hcci σcc

P
S
hki
σk
hcci
σcc

P
1
0.27
-0.12 0.11
0.11 0.06 0.68
-0.05 -0.10 0.32 0.13
-0.11 -0.11 -0.55 -0.05 -0.28
hknni -0.12 0.11 0.99 0.70 0.32 -0.53
-0.10 0.06 0.54 0.97 0.06 0.04
σknn
hinti
-0.08 -0.15 -0.21 -0.06 0.72 0.31 -0.21 0.00
-0.12 -0.07 -0.04 0.02 0.22 0.37 -0.03 0.02 0.37
σint

1
0.55

1

1

1

1

1

1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

TABLE I: Pearson correlation coeﬃcients obtained for the ER (a), BA (b), WS (c) and GG (d) networks with N = 100 and
m = 3 considering the number of peaks (P ) and the size of the maximum detected componente (S) and eight measurements
of the topology of the network (i.e. average node degree (hki), standard deviation of the node degree (σk), average clustering
coeﬃcient (hcci), standard deviation of the clustering coeﬃcient (σcc), average immediate degree (hknni)

, standard deviation of the immediate degree (σknn), average locality (hloci) and standard deviation of locality (σloc)).

21

hki

σk

hcci

σcc

hloci

σloc

S

γ2,3 = 0.47

S γ2,3 = −1.50 γ2,4 = 0.27

BA P γ1,3 = 0.59 γ1,4 = −0.19 γ1,5 = 2.33

ER P γ1,3 = −0.15 γ1,4 = 0.08 γ1,5 = −2.06 γ1,6 = 5.09

γ1,9 = 0.40 γ1,10 = −1.49
γ2,5 = 1.02 γ2,6 = −0.09 γ2,7 = −0.62 γ2,8 = 1.65 γ2,9 = −2.10 γ2,10 = 0.83
γ1,6 = 0.15 γ1,7 = −1.17 γ1,8 = −0.41 γ1,9 = −0.14 γ1,10 = −0.99
γ2,4 = 1.17 γ2,5 = −0.57 γ2,6 = 0.31 γ2,7 = −2.49 γ2,8 = 7.74 γ2,9 = −0.16 γ2,10 = 0.70
γ1,8 = 0.05 γ1,9 = −0.94 γ1,10 = 0.30
γ2,8 = 1.68
γ2,10 = 0.32
γ2,9 = 1.07
γ1,8 = 0.22 γ1,9 = −0.67 γ1,10 = −0.21
γ2,4 = 0.10 γ2,5 = −0.85 γ2,6 = −0.65 γ2,7 = −0.70 γ2,8 = −0.06 γ2,9 = −0.20 γ2,10 = 0.04

WS P γ1,3 = −1.16 γ1,4 = −0.97 γ1,5 = 0.64 γ1,6 = −1.68 γ1,7 = 1.05
γ2,7 = 0.89
GG P γ1,3 = −0.80 γ1,4 = −0.04 γ1,5 = 0.27 γ1,6 = −3.21 γ1,7 = 0.54

S γ2,3 = −0.69 γ2,4 = −1.07 γ2,5 = −0.73 γ2,6 = 1.63

γ2,3 = 0.82

S

hknni
γ1,7 = 0.23

σknn
γ1,8 = 0.73

TABLE II: The inﬂuences of each considered topologic measurement on the two regularity measurements (P and S) as revealed
by path analysis considering N = 100 and m = 3. These results are respective to regular patch detection by considering node
degree and clustering coeﬃcient.

Real Network
word associations
cat cortex
cat cortex + thalamus
monkey cortex
protein-protein
football
ﬂights (97)

N P NP S S/N
2 0.007
45
302 5
4 0.075
4
0
53
8 0.084
8
0
95
3 0.094
3
0
32
1458 1 1116 13 0.009
25 18 0.157
115 2
3 0.009
81
332 2

TABLE III: The regularity measurements obtained for the
seven considered real networks.

