Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)

Printed 9 February 2014

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Reduction of time-resolved space-based CCD photometry
developed for MOST Fabry Imaging data⋆

P. Reegen1†, T. Kallinger1, D. Frast1, M. Gruberbauer1, D. Huber1,
J. M. Matthews2, D. Punz1, S. Schraml1, W. W. Weiss1, R. Kuschnig2,
A. F. J. Moﬀat3, G. A. H. Walker2, D. B. Guenther4, S. M. Rucinski5,
and D. Sasselov6
1Dept. of Astronomy, University of Vienna, T¨urkenschanzstrasse 17, A-1180 Vienna, Austria
2Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, 6224 Agricultural Road, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada
3D´epartement de Physique and Mont M´egantic Observatory, Universit´e de Montr´eal, CP 6128, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montr´eal,
QC H3C 3J7, Canada
4Dept. of Astronomy and Physics, St. Mary’s University, Halifax, NS B3H 3C3, Canada
5Dept. of Astronomy and Astrophysics, David Dunlap Observatory, University of Toronto, P.O. Box 360, Richmond Hill,
ON L4C 4Y6, Canada
6Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138

Accepted . Received ; in original form 2005 January 1

ABSTRACT
The MOST (Microvariability & Oscillations of STars) satellite obtains ultraprecise
photometry from space with high sampling rates and duty cycles. Astronomical pho-
tometry or imaging missions in low Earth orbits, like MOST, are especially sensitive
to scattered light from Earthshine, and all these missions have a common need to
extract target information from voluminous data cubes. They consist of upwards of
hundreds of thousands of two-dimensional CCD frames (or sub-rasters) containing
from hundreds to millions of pixels each, where the target information, superposed on
background and instrumental eﬀects, is contained only in a subset of pixels (Fabry
Images, defocussed images, mini-spectra). We describe a novel reduction technique
for such data cubes: resolving linear correlations of target and background pixel in-
tensities. This stepwise multiple linear regression removes only those target variations
which are also detected in the background. The advantage of regression analysis ver-
sus background subtraction is the appropriate scaling, taking into account that the
amount of contamination may diﬀer from pixel to pixel. The multivariate solution for
all pairs of target/background pixels is minimally invasive of the raw photometry while
being very eﬀective in reducing contamination due to, e.g., stray light. The technique
is tested and demonstrated with both simulated oscillation signals and real MOST
photometry.

Key words: methods: data analysis – space vehicles: instruments – techniques:
photometric.

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 Space photometry

The enormous potential of stellar photometry from space
is ﬁnally being realised by the MOST (Microvariability &

⋆ MOST is a Canadian Space Agency mission, jointly operated
by Dynacon Inc., the University of Toronto Institute of Aerospace
Studies and the University of British Columbia, with the assis-
tance of the University of Vienna, Austria.
† E-mail: reegen@astro.univie.ac.at

Oscillations of STars) mission, a low-cost Canadian Space
Agency (CSA) microsatellite which was launched in June
2003 (Walker et al. 2003; Matthews 2004).

stellar

seismol-
This potential – particularly for
ogy – had been recognised for almost
two decades
(e. g., Mangeney & Praderie 1984; Weiss 1993), and many
dedicated space missions have been proposed. Mis-
sions which reached a fairly advanced state of develop-
ment but were not ultimately funded include: PRISMA
(Appourchaux et al. 1993), PPM (Brown, Torres & Latham
1995), STARS (Fridlund et al. 1995), SPEX (Schou et al.

2

P. Reegen et al.

the

1998), and MONS (Kjeldsen et al. 1999). The status
of
the ESA mision EDDINGTON
(Favata, Roxburgh & Christensen-Dalsgaard 2000) is still
not entirely clear.

funding for

The ﬁrst instrument designed and built for stellar
seismology through photometry from space was EVRIS
(Vuillemin et al. 1998), a 10-cm telescope feeding a pho-
tomultiplier tube detector, mounted aboard the MARS-
96 probe. Unfortunately, MARS-96 failed to achieve or-
bit. EVRIS was intended to be the precursor to COROT
(Baglin et al. 2004), the CNES-funded mission due for
launch in 2006, to explore stellar structure through seis-
mology and search for planets through photometric tran-
sits. Expected to join COROT in space in 2008 is KEPLER
(Borucki et al. 2003), whose primary goal is detection of
Earth-sized planets via transits, but it will also obtain pho-
tometry uniquely powerful for stellar astrophysics.

Another useful tool for space photometry has turned
out to be NASA’s WIRE satellite, whose primary scientiﬁc
mission of infrared mapping failed. However, the satellite has
proved to be a stable functioning platform for its 5-cm star-
tracker telescope and CCD, which has been exploited suc-
cessfully for stellar photometric studies (e. g., Buzasi et al.
2000).

MOST, WIRE, COROT, KEPLER and EDDINGTON
are all CCD-based photometric experiments, and the ﬁrst
three are low-Earth-orbit (LEO) missions with similar or-
bital environments (radiation and scattered Earthshine). All
these missions have a common need to extract information
on stellar variability from data cubes consisting of upwards
of hundreds of thousands of two-dimensional CCD frames
(or sub-rasters) containing from hundreds to millions of pix-
els each. The modes of observation range from in-focus (KE-
PLER) and defocussed imaging (COROT, and MOST in its
Direct Imaging mode) of ﬁelds with many targets to Fabry
Imaging of the instrument pupil illuminated by a single tar-
get (MOST in its principal operation mode).

In addition to its scientiﬁc value, MOST is a superb
testbed for LEO space photometric techniques which can
be applied to other missions. We present here a comprehen-
sive approach for handling and reducing techniques which
are relevant for other LEO space photometry missions and
ground-based CCD photometry of cluster ﬁelds.

1.2 MOST mission overview

Because MOST is the ﬁrst fully operational CCD space pho-
tometer, we use its archive to describe our reduction tech-
nique. This justiﬁes a brief description of the mission.

The MOST instrument is a 15-cm Rumak-Maksutov
optical telescope feeding twin CCD detectors (one dedi-
cated to stellar photometry, the other for guiding) through
a single broadband ﬁlter. MOST was designed to obtain
rapid photometry (at least one exposure per minute) of
bright stars (V < 6.m5) with long time coverage (up to 2
months) with high duty cycle. Its goal is to achieve photo-
metric precision down to a few micromagnitudes (µmag) in
a Fourier amplitude spectrum at frequencies down to about
1 mHz. It has achieved this goal for targets such as Procyon
(Matthews et al. 2004) and η Boo (Guenther et al. 2005).

MOST is a microsatellite with a mass of only 54 kg and
hence little inertia. It is able to perform optical photome-

Figure 1. Mean normalised Fabry Image obtained from observa-
tions of γ Equ with Fabry lens 3/3.

try of point sources thanks to a stabilisation system or At-
titude Control System (ACS) developed by Dynacon, Inc.
(Groccott, Zee & Matthews 2003; Carroll, Rucinski & Zee
2004). Previous microsats could not achieve pointing sta-
bility better than about ±1 to 2◦, essentially useless for op-
tical astronomical imaging. The requirement for the MOST
ACS performace was ±25′′; the goal was ±10′′. The actual
ACS performance was improved during the Commissioning
and early science operations of MOST through software up-
grades and reﬁned use of the ACS reaction wheels, so that
pointing precision is now about ±1′′ rms.

Anticipating image wander across the MOST Science
CCD as large as ±25′′, and the lack of an on-board ﬂat-
ﬁelding calibration system (due to power and cost limita-
tions), the MOST design relies on producing a pupil image
illuminated by target starlight. This extended image is pro-
duced by a Fabry microlens (similar in concept to the Fabry
lens common to photoelectric photometers) and moves by no
more than 0.1 pixel if the star beam moves by 25′′ from opti-
mum pointing. (The resolution of the CCD is 3′′ per physical
pixel.) To provide simultaneous sky background measure-
ments, and for redundancy against Fabry lens and/or CCD
defects, MOST is equipped with a 6×6 array of microlenses,
each of which images the telescope entrance pupil. Centred
on each microlens is a ﬁeld stop, 1 arcmin in diameter, etched
in a chromium mask. We refer to Walker et al. (2003), for
a detailed description of the focal plane arrangement and in
particular to Figs. 7 and 8 of that paper.

The Primary Science Target is typically centred on one
of these microlenses. A 2 × 2 binned mean proﬁle of the re-
sulting Fabry Images is shown in Fig. 1. Each Fabry Image is
an annulus with an outer diameter of 44 (unbinned) pixels.
The pixels outside the annulus are sampled in a square sub-
raster which gives an indicator for light scattered away from
the pupil image or entering the focal plane independently of
the telescope optics.

The principal data format for MOST photometry – re-
ferred to as Science Data Stream 2 (SDS2) – consists of a
resolved image of the Target Fabry Image, binned 2 × 2 (to
satisfy the limited MOST downlink rates), and 7 more heav-
ily binned adjacent Sky Background Fabry Images. There
are also subrasters of the CCD shielded from light which
provide dark and bias measurements. Each SDS2 data ﬁle
also contains a complete set of exposure parameters (expo-
sure start time, integration time, CCD gain, etc.) and exten-

sive satellite telemetry (e. g., CCD temperature, ACS errors,
etc.).

For longer-term data backup or to increase the sampling
rate without exceeding the downlink limits, the MOST sub-
raster images can be processed on-board, to produce Science
Data Stream 1 (SDS1). Fabry Image Windows are integrated
to give total intensities, backgrounds are generated from the
four corners of each window, and sums of the pixel intensi-
ties binned in columns and rows are generated. SDS1 data
can be sent to Earth at a rate 10 times higher than SDS2,
but do not allow as ﬂexible reduction and analysis.

MOST also obtains Direct Imaging photometry of 1 − 6
stars1, based on defocussed images (FWHM ∼ 2.2 pixels)
in portions of the Science CCD not covered by the Fabry
microlens ﬁeld stop mask. Processing of these data is de-
scribed by Rowe et al. (2005). The ACS CCD is now also
used to obtain photometry of about 20 − 30 guide stars, to
be described by Kuschnig et al. (2005).

In this paper, we are primarily concerned with MOST
photometry in the SDS2 format, although we do address
SDS1 in Section 6.

2 ERROR SOURCES

2.1 Attitude Control System (ACS)

The MOST Fabry Imaging approach is quite insensitive to
telescope pointing errors, by keeping an extended nearly
ﬁxed pupil image on the same CCD pixels (to within 0.1
physical pixel if pointing deviations are less than 25′′). How-
ever, movements of the incoming beam of starlight on the
Fabry microlens will introduce small photometric errors due
to slightly diﬀerent throughputs with changes in the light
path through the telescope and camera optics. The great-
est sensitivity may be due to tiny inhomogeneities in the
Fabry microlens itself. The microlens array was etched into
the BK-7 glass window above the CCD, and each element
was tested in the lab for optical quality with artiﬁcial star
images. Defects in certain microlenses in the array were iden-
tiﬁed and mapped in advance of launch, but there is always
the possibility of subtle damage in orbit.

One would expect some correlation between photomet-
ric errors and Attitude Control System (ACS) errors, but the
relationship is complicated by the fact that the ACS system
updates its guiding information typically once per second,
whereas science exposures last for tens of seconds for the
majority of targets. Thus, the star beam has moved across
some complex path during the exposure. In an observing
run, occasionally there is a pointing error which places the
star too close to the edge of the ﬁeld stop during part or all
of an exposure, and signiﬁcant signal from the stellar Point
Spread Function (PSF) is lost.

Pointing errors can also bring other sources (stars,
galaxies and nebulae) near the Primary Science Target in
and out of the ﬁeld stop, introducing photometric errors.
This was explored extensively in MOST mission planning,

1 Not recording Fabry window data makes it possible to allocate
increased subraster area in the Direct Imaging Field. In this case,
the number of Direct Imaging Targets can be much larger than
6, as in a cluster ﬁeld like M 67.

CCD space photometry

3

Figure 2. Impact density of cosmic rays vs. terrestrial magnetic
ﬁeld strength (κ1 Cet, October 2004). For transitions through the
South Atlantic Anomaly, where the terrestrial magnetic ﬁeld is
weak, the impact rates rise signiﬁcantly.

and there are no sources close to the MOST Fabry Imag-
ing targets bright enough to aﬀect the intended photometric
precision.

In any event, MOST pointing has improved to the level
where these factors are now relatively unimportant, but
some of them did manifest themselves in the Commissioning
Science data (e.g., κ1 Cet; see Rucinski et al. 2004) and in
some of the early Primary Science data.

The reduction procedure takes ACS output into account
to automatically reject images where at least one error value
exceeds a pre-deﬁned limit (see 4.2), indicating a target po-
sition being outside the nominal Fabry lens area at least
during part of the integration.

2.2 Cosmic rays

Cosmic ray subtraction is important in ground-based CCD
imaging, and it is generally even more critical for space-
based photometry. The eﬀects of energetic particle hits on
the MOST Science CCD have been mitigated in the mission
design in several ways:

(i) The CCDs are shielded by the camera housing, equiv-

alent to a spherical barrier of aluminium 5 mm thick.

(ii) MOST is in a Low Earth Orbit (altitude 820 km) in

which radiation ﬂuxes are relatively low.

(iii) MOST Fabry Imaging photometry employs only a
small eﬀective area of the Science CCD, rather than the
entire 1024 × 1024 chip, presenting a relatively small target
for incoming particles.

MOST’s orbit does carry it through the South At-
lantic Anomaly (SAA, Fig. 2), a dip in the Earth’s mag-
netosphere which allows higher cosmic ray ﬂuxes at lower
altitudes. Passages through the SAA mean increased risk of
an on-board computer crash due to a Single Event Upset
(SEU) or “latch-up”. MOST has experienced such particle-
hit-induced crashes at an average rate of about once every
two months in the 18 months of normal science operations.
Otherwise, the increased particle ﬂuxes during SAA pas-

4

P. Reegen et al.

Figure 3. Residuals to a mean background intensity (invoked
by terrestrial albedo variations) as a function of the sub–satellite
point (γ Equ data). The inner circle centred on the North Pole
is void of information, since the maximum geographic latitude
to be reached by MOST is 81.28◦ (Walker et al. 2003), not 90◦.
Spacecraft passages over Greenland are clearly associated with
higher stray-light intensity, which introduces 1 d−1 aliases to the
Fourier spectra.

sages do not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on either ACS accuracy
or stellar photometry.

For those particles which do reach the relevant portions
of the MOST Science CCD, there are two factors which make
them easier to treat in the photometric reduction:

(i) Cosmic ray hits are statistically independent in time

(Poisson statistics, see 4.4.1).

(ii) The most likely situation is that a particle will strike
only a single pixel, making most hits easy to distinguish
from other artefacts (see 4.4.2).

2.3 Stray light

Any oﬀ-axis bright source such as the Earth will produce
bright diﬀraction rims around the primary and secondary
mirror even for perfectly baﬄed optics. These rims are
clearly visible in Figs. 6 and 12. Since stray-light eﬀects are
imposed on us by nature and not peculiar to MOST, any
follow-up space project will have to deal with stray-light
contamination, and it is essential to ﬁnd reliable correction
techniques.

2.3.1 MOST orbit

The MOST orbit plane inclination of 98.72◦ results in a
dusk–dawn polar orbit because of the orbit plane precession

due to the non-spherical terrestrial mass distribution. This
precession compensates for the annual movement of our Sun
along the celestial equator. The ≈ 9◦ deviation of the orbit
plane from orthogonality to the terrestrial equator together
with the obliquity of the ecliptic of aproximately 23.5◦ re-
sults in passages of MOST over the illuminated north polar
region during summer, which causes increased stray light.
In extreme cases, the excessive stray light at certain MOST
orbit phases can reduce the duty cycle from nearly 100 % to
60 %.

2.3.2 Sunshine

For space imaging or photometry missions which need to
point to ﬁelds at low solar elongations, scattered light from
the Sun – directly into the telescope or via the Zodiacal Light
background – would be the biggest challenge. The MOST
mission was deliberately designed so that target ﬁelds are
always in the opposite part of the sky from the Sun. The
lowest solar elongation possible for MOST observations is
about 135◦. Direct solar light rejection is not a concern for
MOST photometry.

2.3.3 Earthshine

For any LEO astronomical photometry satellite, scattered
light from the illuminated portion of the Earth is a major
source of sky background, and stray-light rejection is a major
consideration in mission design and planning.

Due to restrictions on the payload envelope in the
MOST design, the instrument could not have a large ex-
ternal baﬄe. Three approaches were adopted to reduce the
inﬂuence of scattered Earthshine on MOST photometry:

(i) The Sun-synchronous dawn-dusk orbit, combined with
the choice of target ﬁelds in a Continuous Viewing Zone
(CVZ) pointing away from the Sun, means that the MOST
telescope tends to look out over the shadowed limb of the
Earth.

(ii) The telescope and camera are equipped with internal

baﬄes and anti-reﬂective coatings.

(iii) The spacecraft bus was intended to be a light-tight
housing allowing light to enter only through the instrument
aperture.

None of these approaches is perfect.

(i) As was mentioned in Sec. 2.3.1, the MOST orbit is
Sun-synchronous. Since the obliquity of the ecliptic is about
23.5◦, MOST orbits over the Earth’s terminator only at
times close to the Equinoxes. During the Solstices, a sig-
niﬁcant fraction of the bright Earth limb is visible to the
MOST telescope.

(ii) The internal baﬄes and coatings appear to be working
properly. But some light is scattered into the optics by parts
of the the external door mechanism (which protected the
MOST optics during launch and release into orbit and acts
as a safeguard if there is a danger of the telescope pointing
directly at the Sun), whose coatings may have been damaged
on launch.

(iii) One of the MOST spacecraft’s external panels was
“shimmed” when mounted to the bus (i. e., a thin piece
of metal was inserted to compensate for a misalignment of

mounting holes). This gap in the spacecraft structure allows
light to enter the instrument from an unanticipated direc-
tion.

As a result, the major component of sky background in
MOST photometry is Earthshine, modulated with the satel-
lite orbital period of 101.4 min (frequency = 14.2 d−1 = 165
µHz) and, to a lesser extent, with a period of approximately
1 day as MOST’s orbit returns it to a similar position over
the Earth (and hence, a similar reﬂection feature in the ter-
restrial albedo) on a daily cycle. An example of the presence
of stray light in raw MOST photometry is shown in Fig. 10.
The amplitude and shape of the stray-light modulation
is highly dependent on the season of observations, the “roll”
of the spacecraft (i. e., the position angle of the telescope
about its optical axis), and the location of the target ﬁeld
within the CVZ. The relative contribution of maximum stray
light also depends on the brightness of the target star. For
Procyon (Matthews et al. 2004), even though the observa-
tions are obtained near Winter Solstice and hence near the
worst geometry for light scattered from the bright Earth
limb, the stray light never exceeds 1 % of the stellar signal
(V ∼ 0.3). For the star γ Equ (V ∼ 4.7), observed near
the Summer Solstice, the stray light reaches a maximum of
about 1.75× the stellar signal (see Fig. 10).

Fig. 3 represents the variations of stray light as a func-
tion of MOST position over the Earth for many orbits dur-
ing the γ Equ run. The stray light reaches maxima over
the North Pole and Arctic regions – a combination of the
high albedo of those areas which are continuously exposed to
sunlight near Summer Solstice. (The Antarctic is in shadow,
and does not dominate the stray light until times closer to
the Winter Solstice.)

In extreme cases, excessive stray light in MOST pho-
tometry can reduce its duty cycle from nearly 100 % to about
60 % per orbit. Such periodic gaps introduce aliases at a
spacing of 14.2 d−1 or 165 µHz. For comparison, the WIRE
startracker (Buzasi et al. 2000) typically achieves an orbital
duty cycle of about 20 %, despite being in a similar orbit
to MOST. This is because the WIRE platform must switch
directions each half-orbit, to keep its batteries at the proper
operating temperature, and the startracker focal plane re-
ceives even more severe scattered Earthshine. (Keep in mind
that this instrument was designed as an ACS startracker, not
a photometric instrument.)

2.3.4 Moonshine

Because MOST targets are concentrated in a CVZ which
is roughly equatorial (36◦ 6 δ 6 −18◦), the Moon can oc-
casionally come very close to a MOST target ﬁeld during
observation. And because MOST observations are made in
the anti-Sun direction, the phase of the Moon is close to Full
when this happens.

Two examples of a close passage of the Moon during
MOST photometry occurred for the Commissioning Science
target, κ1 Cet, and the early Primary Science Target, β Vir.
In March 2004, the centre of the Moon came within 1.84◦
of β Vir during MOST monitoring of that star. The eﬀects
on the mean background are shown in Fig. 4. The MOST
stray-light rejection system was never designed to cope with

CCD space photometry

5

Figure 4. Mean background intensity vs. time for β Vir. Mea-
surements on March 6, at a target position only 1.◦839 from the
Full Moon caused massive contamination by direct stray light.

such a close passage of such a bright source. Fortunately,
lunar encounters like this are relatively rare and short-lived.
During observations of κ1 Ceti in October 2004, the
Moon came to within 20◦ of the star, and as it approached,
it underwent a total lunar eclipse. This was an excellent
opportunity to gauge the contribution of Moonshine to
MOST stray light at lunar elongations which would be some-
what more common in MOST observations. The mean back-
ground intensities for this encounter are shown in Fig. 5.

This and other tests of MOST photometry with respect
to lunar phase and elongation indicate that the Moon does
not have a noticeable inﬂuence on MOST background mea-
surements until it approaches within about 28◦ of the MOST
target ﬁeld. Generally, the Moon will aﬀect the background
at the level of a few percent. Although a typical MOST ob-
serving run is about a month long (covering only about one
lunar synodic period), there is no evidence to date that the
Moon introduces a periodic component to the MOST pho-
tometric background.

2.4 CCD dark noise and temperature stability

The MOST CCDs are passively cooled to a temperature
around −35◦C and maintained at a given operating temper-
ature by a trim heater with an accuracy of ±0.1◦C. With-
out regulation, the temperature would be modulated with
the orbital period with a peak-to-peak amplitude of about
2◦C. At temperatures below about −30◦C, the dark noise
remains below 2 electrons/pixel/sec and does not aﬀect the
Fabry Imaging photometry.

The CCD focal plane temperature is monitored con-
tinuously to an accuracy of 0.01◦C. All MOST photometry
is checked for any correlation with CCD temperature and
other operational parameters.

2.5 Fabry lens inhomogeneities

No system is optically perfect, and that is true for the Fabry
microlenses as well. If the star beam passes through a small

6

P. Reegen et al.

Figure 5. Mean background intensity vs. time for κ1 Cet. At
an angular separation of 28 degrees, during an orbit phase of
rather low Earthshine, lunar stray light begins to show up in
the data. On Oct. 27, 2004, a lunar eclipse occurred during two
orbits, producing a decay of stray-light intensity by ≈ 2 % at an
angular separation of 20 degrees. The background intensity keeps
increasing for two orbits after the eclipse, until the angle between
Moon and target attains a minimum.

ﬂaw in the microlens, a distorted image of the entrance pupil
will result. The deviation of an individual target image from
the mean doughnut shape is used as a rejection criterion
(see 4.3). This also is an indicator of when the pointing has
moved too close to the edge of the Fabry ﬁeld stop and some
of the starlight is obstructed.

3 CONCEPTS

3.1 Nomenclature

Pixel intensities are considered to form a 3–dimensional ar-
ray Ilmn, a data cube, where the index n shall consistently
refer to the time axis, and l and m represent the horizontal
and vertical coordinates on the nth exposure. The number
of exposures, i. e. the maximum value for the time index, is
denoted N , the upper limits for spatial indices are X (width)
and Y (height). In our case X = Y .

In this context, indexing refers to virtual pixels, each
virtual pixel intensity representing a 2 × 2 bin of physical
pixel intensities.

3.2 Statistical moments

Statistical moments are denoted by an operator h i, where
only indices inside the bracket are used for summation, and
the order of the moment is given as an exponent. E. g.,
the temporal variance of intensity for the pixel (l, m) is
denoted hIn2ilm. Multivariate moments are written in the
same sense, e. g. hIjkIilmn denotes the covariance of pixel
(l, m) with all other pixels (j, k) on the nth image in the
time series of exposures.

A special case is the computation of moments through
summation over all target pixels. In this case the abbrevia-
tion IT is used instead of using two indices. Correspondingly,
IB denotes the intensity summed over all background pixels.

3.3 Data smoothing and detection of outliers

The idea of identifying and correcting outliers in all our ap-
plications is based on data smoothing by a distance-weighted
average (DWA), similar to the Whittaker ﬁlter (Whittaker
1923) or Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter (Hodrick & Prescott 1997).
The DWA will consistently be applied if data are to be

N

Fν (t) ≡

smoothed in the time direction, according to
n=1,tn6=t |t − tn|−ν Ilmn
n=1,tn6=t |t − tn|−ν
as well as for image coordinates, where we write

P

N

,

P

Fλ (x, y) ≡

(X,Y )
(l,m)=(1,1),(l,m)6=(x,y)RlmIlmn
(X,Y )
(l,m)=(1,1),(l,m)6=(x,y)Rlm

,

P P

with

Rlm ≡

P P
(x − l)2 + (y − m)2

− λ

2 .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(cid:2)

For these ﬁlters, we permit λ, ν to be positive semi-deﬁnite,
real numbers, which help to adjust the degree of data
smoothing. If these parameters are zero, the ﬁlter functions
reduce to unweighted arithmetic means, respectively.

(cid:3)

In our application, the DWA is used in the time direc-
tion to identify and correct pixel intensities contaminated by
cosmic ray impacts (4.4.1, 4.4.2). The residual correlation
between the integrated light curve and spacecraft position
(4.7.1) is performed using a DWA in terms of sub-satellite
geographic latitude. The spatial ﬁlter (in terms of image
coordinates) was used in context with the local dispersion
model (7.1), which did not prevail in the ﬁnal reduction pro-
cedure and is mentioned here for completeness.

4 IMPLEMENTATION

4.1 Deﬁnition of target and background pixels

The ﬁrst step of the data reduction procedure is the assign-
ment of each pixel to either target or background, hence
deﬁning an aperture to be used for photometry. This proce-
dure is performed interactively.

4.2 Rejection of images with extreme ACS error

values

The ACS provides a set of xy-errors for each image. These
error values are deﬁned on the interval [−25.′′8, 25.′′8] in dis-
crete steps of 0.′′2. If the true ACS error exceeds this range,
the maximum value is returned, indicating that the target
was outside the nominal Fabry lens area – at least during
some fraction of the integration time. Consequently, readings
with extreme ACS error values like these are automatically
identiﬁed and rejected by the software.

4.3 Rejection of images with irregular geometry

Both pointing problems and inhomogeneities of the Fabry
lens may cause the image to be deformed. A three-step pro-
cedure has been chosen to correctly identify images with a
deviating shape.

(i) All intensities are normalised according to

CCD space photometry

7

Figure 7. Detection rates for cosmic-ray candidates (left) and
conﬁrmed impacts (right) in greyscale coding (η Boo, April 2005).
The distribution of candidates reﬂects a misinterpretation of
short-term stray-light eﬀects, displaying a doughnut-shaped pro-
ﬁle. As a signiﬁcant improvement, the distribution of conﬁrmed
impacts is close to uniform, in agreement with the theoretical
expectation for cosmic ray impacts.

(i) For a given pixel intensity Ilmn at the time tn, a

smoothed intensity Fν (tn) is computed.

(ii) The temporal rms deviation of the pixel intensities,

Figure 6. Rms deviations from the mean normalised Fabry Im-
age in greyscale coding. These rms deviations are initial and de-
crease in the course of iterative rejections of poor-quality images.

hIn2ilm, is evaluated.

the time tn, if

(iii) The pixel (l, m) is ﬂagged as cosmic-ray candidate at

Jlmn ≡

Ilmn
hIT in

,

where it is suﬃcient to consider target pixels (l, m) only.

(ii) The mean normalised Fabry Image, hJniT , is com-

puted. Fig. 1 displays the mean Fabry Image for γ Equ.
(iii) Then the condition to keep the nth image is

1
KT

s

T
X

(cid:0)

JnT − hJniT

2

< g ,

(cid:1)

KT denoting the number of target pixels. All exposures not
satisfying this condition are rejected. The reduction proce-
dure actually applied to the MOST observations uniquely
uses g ≡ 4, consistent with a 4 σ criterion. This choice is a
result of pure practical experience.

Since the rejection of images in step (iii) inﬂuences the
mean normalised Fabry Image, steps (ii) and (iii) are per-
formed as a loop and terminated if no new rejection is per-
formed in step (iii). Fig. 6 represents the rms deviations,
niT , for γ Equ in the ﬁrst iteration. The inhomogeneous
distribution of deviations on the subraster illustrates the im-
p
portance of the pixel-resolved statistics described above.

hJ 2

(4)

Ilmn − Fν (tn) > c

hIn2ilm .

(6)

p

This procedure is conducted as a loop, only taking into ac-
count those readings of a pixel which have not been ﬂagged
as cosmic-ray candidates in the previous iterations. The loop
terminates, if no new cosmic-ray candidates are found. Our
application to MOST photometry consistently uses c ≡ 4.

(5)

4.4.2 Correction of aﬀected pixels

Among the previously ﬂagged cosmic-ray candidates, spatial
information is used to decide whether a pixel represents a
cosmic ray or not. The separation of cosmic rays and short-
term stray-light variations is performed using the adjacent
pixels on the same exposure. A cosmic-ray candidate is con-
ﬁrmed, if not more than i adjacent pixels are cosmic-ray can-
didates, too. Fig. 7 displays the detection rates of cosmic-ray
candidates and cosmic rays (η Boo, April 2005). Whereas
the candidate detection rates form a doughnut shape (left),
which is due to the misidentiﬁcation of short-term stray-
light artefacts as cosmic-ray candidates, the rates of con-
ﬁrmed impacts (right) are nearly uniformly distributed over
the fabry image. A value of i = 1 turned out useful for prac-
tical application. Only conﬁrmed pixels are corrected.

Intensities of pixels conﬁrmed as cosmic rays are sub-
stituted by the value of the temporal DWA computed in
4.4.1.

4.4 Cosmic ray removal

4.4.1 Identiﬁcation of candidate pixels

Cosmic ray impacts are considered statistically independent
and hence uncorrelated along the time axis. A cosmic ray
hitting a given pixel does not inﬂuence subsequent readings
of the same pixel. The principle of detecting cosmic-ray can-
didates is to compare each pixel intensity to one computed
using a temporal DWA, which is conducted in three steps.

4.4.3 Rejection of frames with high impact rates

Evidently, each cosmic ray correction introduces additional
errors to the data point referring to a considered frame.
Hence, if the impact rate on a single frame exceeds a pre-
selected threshold, the entire image is rejected. From our
experience with MOST data, this threshold is set to 10.

8

P. Reegen et al.

Figure 8. Correlation of the target pixel (20/20) with a back-
ground pixel (12/14) intensity for a 3-day subset of γ Equ obser-
vations.

4.5 Stray-light correction

4.5.1 The decorrelation technique

The principle is to consider the stray-light sources as super-
position of point sources. Each point source would produce
a characteristic response function on the CCD image, and
the combined stray-light contamination may be described
as the integral of all these response functions. The resulting
technique applied within our data reduction relies on con-
secutively resolving linear correlations between intensities of
target and background pixels and will subsequently be called
decorrelation.

For a single point source, the shape of the related re-
sponse function should be invariant to changing stray-light
intensity, and the changes of pixel intensities are propor-
tional to the stray light. The stellar signal will not inﬂuence
the decorrelation procedure systematically unless its period
and phase are too close to the orbit. In this case the period
would be interpreted as stray light and removed. Depending
on the brightness of the target as well as stray light and stel-
lar amplitudes, this has massive implications on the detec-
tion of intrinsic stellar variability with a period comparable
to the MOST orbit or a harmonic.

Plotting the intensity of a target or background pixel
versus that of a background pixel (where no stellar signal
is present) yields a linear relation (Fig. 8). In case of one or
more extended stray-light sources, the intensity-intensity di-
agram for two individual pixels may display a loop (Fig. 9),
indicating an inﬂuence from several point sources, but dom-
inating at diﬀerent orbital phases, according to the possi-
bilities of light being scattered through the aperture or lat-
eral light leaks, and referring to the discussions of stray-
light sources in 2.3 and 4.5.3. Hence, the contamination by
stray light may be corrected by consecutively decorrelating
a given pixel with respect to all background pixels. This is
achieved by computing the slope of the linear regression in
the intensity-intensity diagram. The correction of the linear
trend is performed through preservation of the mean inten-
sity. Fig. 10 illustrates how the background contamination

Figure 9. Same as for Fig. 8, but with background pixel (14/1).
Colour coding refers to orbital phase, illustrating that the loop
is associated with the motion of the spacecraft over one hemi-
sphere and that (in this case) the satellite is susceptible to stray
light depending on lateral illumination. The solid line refers to a
modelled solution incorporating a stray-light pattern that moves
across the detector, as described in 4.5.3.

due to stray light is being signiﬁcantly reduced when corre-
lating target pixels with (in the case of this ﬁgure, up to 95)
background pixels.

The portion of the stray light in the intensity-intensity
diagram which cannot be removed entirely in one decorre-
lation step – i. e. systematic deviations from the trend line,
for example a loop – is likely to re-appear as a linear trend
when a diﬀerent background pixel is used in a subsequent
step. This property provides the chance to correct for most
of the stray light without explicitly introducing the orbital
period or phase. The present method turns out to be con-
siderably less invasive towards the characteristics of spectral
noise than a frequently used method based on the residual
intensity determined from a phase plot with the orbital pe-
riod.

Finally, to take long-term stray-light changes into ac-
count, the complete dataset is divided into a sequence of
subsets (e. g., three days long in the case of γ Equ, Figs. 8
and 9), and the stray-light correction is performed for these
subsets individually.

4.5.2 Reduction of signal

In the optimum case, all of the stray light will be removed,
but each decorrelation step necessarily reduces the signal in
the target pixels. Signals of 200 ppm amplitude at 4 diﬀerent
frequencies were additively synthesized in each of the target
pixels. The decay of these amplitudes for the sum of all tar-
get pixels as a function of number of decorrelation steps is
given in Fig. 11. Obviously, the ﬁrst decorrelation steps dra-
matically reduce the stray-light amplitude and after about
100 decorrelations there is a constant, but less signiﬁcant
decrease of the stray-light amplitude for each new decorre-
lation.

But also the “intrinsic” signal is reduced in amplitude,
independent of frequency. The amplitude decrease per decor-

CCD space photometry

9

Figure 10. Light curve of γ Equ before stray-light decorrelation,
computed as a sum of all 900 pixels (bottom panel). The decrease
of stray-light contamination (top panel) after 1, 5, 10, 30, 60 and
95 decorrelation steps (from bottom to top, with oﬀsets applied
for better visibility) is shown for the mean of 421 target pixels.

relation step is approximately constant for all decorrelation
steps and corresponds to that for the stray light after many
steps. This property allows one to reconstruct the initial
amplitude even after a large number of decorrelations.

This decrease in amplitude is due to the fact that – in
the case of pure noise – the slope of a linear regression in
the intensity-intensity diagram will scatter about zero, and
that a trend correction will work for both positive and nega-
tive deviations. As a consequence, the decorrelation process
with a non-zero slope always tends to reduce – but never to
increase – the target pixel intensities. The expected value of
the fraction of noise that is removed will be proportional to
the rms deviation of the underlying probability distribution
of regression slopes, where the terminology “noise” applies
to signal at periods diﬀerent from the orbital as well, if in-
tensity is plotted vs. intensity.

Simultaneously, the point-to-point scatter dramatically
decreases with the ﬁrst decorrelation steps, but shows
asymptotically a shallower decay than the amplitudes.
Hence, an optimum signal-to-noise ratio is obtained by ter-
minating the decorrelation loop long before all iterations
have been performed, and to use the later steps only to de-
termine the slope of a linear trend for reconstructing the
amplitude (solid line in Fig. 11).

The extent of the Fabry image is determined by the en-
trance pupil of the instrument, i.e. well-deﬁned compared to
direct-ﬁeld images. However, we cannot be absolutely sure
to have pure background pixels in what we consider as back-
ground. The question addresses a problem of aperture pho-
tometry in general, and possibly the decay of signal am-
plitudes with increasing number of iterations is – to some
extent – due to target intensity leaking into our reference
pixels (due to, e.g., scattered light in impurities of the mi-
crolens). The decorrelation technique is by far more sensitive
to this leakage than “classical” subtraction of background
intensity. A background pixel containing target information
would cause the entire target signal to be removed in a sin-
gle step of the decorrelation cascade. We would immediately

Figure 11. Decrease of amplitudes for the fundamental orbit
period (plus symbols) and for four harmonic signals at 7, 23, 51
and 73 d−1 (dotted lines) artiﬁcially introduced into the Procyon
data (Jan. to Feb. 2004), with increasing number of decorrela-
tions. Dashed line: point-to-point scatter as a noise level estima-
tor. Solid line: the linear decay of stray-light amplitudes at later
decorrelation steps is exactly according to the trend in the ampli-
tudes of synthetic signal. This property is used for reconstruction
of the stellar signal.

see this eﬀect, e.g. in Fig. 11. The fact that the procedure
works is the best indicator that the inﬂuence by the target
on the background pixels is negligible.

4.5.3 Time lag

A more subtle approach to the stray-light situation is to
consider the projection of each point source moving across
the detector, corresponding to the motion of the satellite
above ground. This motion would cause two diﬀerent pixels
on the detector to be aﬀected at diﬀerent times, and the
resulting time lag is expected to be larger for distant pixels.
The formal consequence is to introduce a time lag be-
tween the correlation of two pixel intensities as a new free
parameter and to perform an optimisation in the time di-
rection through minimising the rms deviation of pixel inten-
sities from the trend line in the intensity-intensity diagram
(Fig. 8).

We modelled theoretical intensity-intensity diagrams by

computing the superposition of stray-light proﬁles of type

(7)

− 1
2

tan(φ−φ0)
σ

2

I ≡ A e

,

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

φ denoting orbital phase, with adjustable amplitude A, or-
bital phase at maximum φ0, and width σ. A time lag is
introduced by a diﬀerent choice of φ0 for each of the two
pixels compared.

The solid line in Fig. 9 represents a theoretical intensity-
intensity diagram for a superposition of two stray-light pat-
terns:

(i) The loop is modelled by a stray-light bump sampled
at both pixels with a lag of 1.◦44 in terms of orbit phase. The
width of the bump is set according to a FWHM in phase of
8.◦70.

(ii) A structure of FWHM 40′ in terms of orbit phase
sampled at both pixels synchronously (i. e. without a time
lag) produces the sharp peak below the loop.

10

P. Reegen et al.

Figure 12. Noise maps of the stray-light corrected γ Equ data.
Left: relative rms error (rms error divided by the mean intensity
of the pixel light curve). The higher relative scatter at the borders
of the target image is due to photon noise, since the mean inten-
sity in these regions is lower. In addition, some pixels inside the
doughnut show a higher rms error than the rest. Right: amplitude
noise level in the frequency range from 816 to 824.. The absence
of pixels with abnormally high spectral noise inside the doughnut
indicates a stray-light reminiscence.

This example illustrates the plausibility of moving stray-
light patterns
the loop-shaped
intensity-intensity diagrams.

to be responsible for

However, when the idea was applied to MOST measure-
ments, the increased number of free parameters did not lead
to reasonable results. Although the postulate of static stray-
light sources (permitting synchronous variations of pixel in-
tensities only) is not claimed to be more reliable than the
existence of moving stray-light artefacts – since animated
“movies” (using MDM, see Section 5) of the raw Fabry Im-
ages clearly show moving structures – the quantitative de-
scription of this motion by a constant time lag between pixel
intensities leads to a less eﬃcient stray-light correction than
the technique introduced in 4.5.1 for mainly two reasons:

(i) the number of decorrelation steps required to achieve
optimum stray-light correction is not reduced substantially,
(ii) the portion of signal removed with each decorrelation
step (Fig. 11) increases dramatically, and the ﬁnal extrapo-
lation to initial amplitudes leads to a higher noise level.

4.6 Choosing the optimum pixels in the Fabry

Image

As is illustrated in Fig. 12, the scatter of the target pixel light
curves is distributed inhomogeneously in the Fabry Image.
The left frame shows the distribution of the relative rms
error (standard deviation divided by mean intensity) inside
the doughnut. The annular areas with higher relative rms
error are due to the lower mean intensity at the borders of
the doughnut. The higher rms error in various areas inside
the doughnut is due to remaining stray light, but also due
to a higher point-to-point scatter in the pixel light curve.
This is shown in the right frame of Fig. 12 for the ampli-
tude noise level of the target pixel light curves. The fre-
quency range from 816 to 824 d−1 (the Nyquist frequency
is ≈ 1400 .for the γ Equ data) chosen for noise computation
seems to be void of orbital, 1-day sidelobes, instrumental,

Figure 13. Dependence of the amplitude noise level (i. e. mean
amplitude in a chosen frequency range) with increasing number
of target pixels used for the γ Equ light curve. Solid line: sorted
by relative rms error. Crosses: sorted by relative rms error and
used only when improving the resulting amplitude noise. Bullets:
sorted by individual amplitude noise and used only when improv-
ing the resulting amplitude noise. Dotted line: amplitude noise of
the best target pixel divided by the square root of the number of
used pixels – a measure for the photon noise. Dashed line: am-
plitude in the DFT spectrum at the orbit frequency divided by a
factor of 20 for better visibility.

and intrinsic peaks2. As illustrated by Fig. 13, some target
pixels are “noisy” enough to decrease the quality of the to-
tal light curve. Hence a proper selection of the target pixels
used for the ﬁnal light curve decreases the stray-light signal
and the noise level in the frequency domain.

In the case of γ Equ, the solid line in Fig. 13 indicates
the evolution of the amplitude noise level (in the frequency
range from 816 to 824). with increasing number of target
pixels used for the resulting light curve . The target pixels
are sorted by increasing relative rms value.

Obviously, the amplitude noise level in the amplitude
spectrum decreases rapidly when adding the signal of the
≈ 50 “best” pixels. Adding more pixels of lower quality up
to about 180 pixels does not improve the noise level in the
resulting amplitude spectrum. Further increasing the num-
ber of pixels starts to increase the noise level in the resulting
light curve. This is mainly due to pixels at the border of the
doughnut with low signal and adverse photon statistics.

A closer inspection shows that occasionally the ampli-
tude noise level increases although a rather good pixel has
been added (e. g., close to the 20th pixel). The reason for
such a paradoxial result is random constructive interfer-
ence leading to higher mean amplitude in the chosen fre-
quency range, even if two low-noise datasets are combined.
Using only those pixels which improve the resulting ampli-
tude noise level leads to a signiﬁcantly better quality of the
ﬁnal light curve (see crosses in Fig. 13).

The relative rms error – as a superposition of signal and

2 Within these conditions, the actual choice of the frequency in-
terval does not change the selection of target pixels substantially.

CCD space photometry

11

Figure 14. Amplitude noise level (i. e. mean amplitude in a cho-
sen frequency range) versus mean intensity of the 421 target pixel
light curves. “×” symbols indicate pixels used for the ﬁnal light
curve. The line refers to the predicted photon noise for these 421
pixels.

point-to-point scatter – is obviously not the best criterion
for the “noise” of a target pixel light curve.

Another examined sorting criterion is the mean ampli-
tude level (here again in the frequency range of 816 to 824)..
The dots in Fig. 13 display the evolution of this noise level
when the target pixels are sorted by their individual am-
plitude noise and used for constructing the ﬁnal light curve
only if adding such a pixel improves the total light curve,
i. e. reduces the amplitude level in the mentioned frequency
interval. A total of 106 target pixel light curves were ac-
cepted in the given case, leading to an amplitude noise of
≈ 3.2 ppm in the relevant frequency range. However, there
is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the resulting light curve be-
tween amplitude noise and relative rms error in the time
domain (crosses in Fig. 13) as sorting criteria. The resulting
light curve is also insensitive to the choice of this frequency
range, if void of stellar or instrumental signal. The dashed
line in Fig. 13 is associated the Fourier amplitude at the or-
bit frequency of ≈ 14.2 a. nd illustrates that the inﬂuence of
the choice of incorporated target pixels on the remaining
stray-light peaks is negligible. In Fig. 13, this amplitude is
rescaled by a factor 0.05 for better visibility.

The dotted line in Fig. 13 illustrates the theoretical im-
provement of the amplitude noise level with an increasing
number of used target pixels assuming the same quality for
all these pixels. Only the ﬁrst (i. e. best) 30 target pixels ap-
pear to be photon noise limited. But what we see is caused
by the diﬀerent mean intensity level of the various target
pixels. Fig. 14 illustrates the dependence of the amplitude
noise level of target pixel light curves on their mean inten-
sity (dots). Those target pixels ﬁnally used are marked by
“×” symbols, and it is obvious that most (about 80 %) of
the target pixels are close to the photon noise limit.

The improvement of the light curve due to a proper
pixel selection is illustrated in Fig. 15 by showing the ampli-
tude spectrum of γ Equ in a frequency range with already
reported pulsation modes. The grey line in the background
indicates the DFT of the light curve based on all target
pixels. This spectrum is crowded with instrisic, orbital over-

Figure 15. DFT spectrum of the ﬁnal γ Equ light curve based
on all (grey) and on the 106 selected target pixels (black). The
arrows indicate the 7th and 8th harmonics of the orbit period.

Table 1. Comparison of stray-light amplitudes and frequency-
domain noise between raw and reduced data for 13 MOST targets
observed from Oct 2003 to March 2005, date: time of observation
(yymmdd); target: target name; orbit (raw), orbit (red): mean
amplitude (mmag) of orbital frequency and harmonics up to order
9, for raw and reduced data, respectively; interval: frequency in-
terval (d−1) used for calculation of amplitude noise; noise (raw),
noise (red): amplitude noise (mmag), for raw and reduced data,
respectively.

date

target

orbit
(raw)

orbit
(red)

interval

noise
(raw)

noise
(red)

031008-031027
031028-031205
040103-040209
040223-040329
040329-040413
040413-040511
040517-040614
040728-040816
040830-040927
041015-041104
041105-041204
050124-050211
050215-050322

δ Cet
κ1 Cet
Procyon
β Vir
τ Boo
η Boo
ζ Oph
γ Equ
51 Peg
κ1 Cet
HR 1217
Procyon
ι Leo

16.137
5.481
2.358
3.589
9.701
4.312
42.475
32.352
10.542
2.189
22.163
1.334
1.806

0.819
0.588
0.054
0.075
0.075
0.110
0.662
0.282
0.155
0.155
0.448
0.031
0.053

[158, 170]
[129, 141]
[115, 127]
[158, 170]
[156, 168]
[156, 168]
[186, 198]
[172, 184]
[187, 199]
[158, 170]
[158, 170]
[168, 180]
[158, 170]

2.252
0.255
0.820
0.088
0.213
0.062
0.130
0.153
0.043
0.021
0.211
0.335
0.106

0.179
0.072
0.006
0.006
0.036
0.005
0.029
0.024
0.007
0.017
0.031
0.004
0.006

tone, and 1-day sidelobe peaks. The black line corresponds
to the DFT of the light curve based on the selected target
pixels and shows almost exclusively peaks not associated to
any orbit harmonic.

4.7 Correlation with spacecraft parameters

After correcting for stray light, which is the most important
aspect of the data reduction for MOST, a weak correlation
of the photometry with various spacecraft parameters may
still be present. Among the variety of parameters available
and examined, residual correlations with the photometry are
only found for the sub-satellite geographic latitude, the CCD
temperature (only before summer 2004), and the ACS de-
viation (only for Commissioning and very early Science tar-
gets).

12

P. Reegen et al.

Figure 16. γ Equ photometry versus sub-satellite geographic lat-
itude. Top: mean target pixel intensities of the raw data (divided
by 100 and oﬀset by 2 ADU sec−1 for better visibility) show a
stong stray-light component at northern latitudes. Bottom: stray-
light corrected photometry after optimum target pixel selection.
Only a marginal dependency of intensity on sub-satellite geo-
graphic latitudes remains (grey line).

Figure 17. DFT spectra of the ﬁnal γ Equ light curve (bottom)
and the corresponding CCD temperature time series (top). The
photometric data show a variation with a frequency of about
3.16 d−1 (plus the ﬁrst and second overtone) which is also vis-
ible in the DFT of the CCD temperature.

4.7.1 Satellite position

In the case of γ Equ, stray-light correction and proper tar-
get pixel selection reduce the stray-light contribution to the
photometric signal by a factor ≈ 1700, from 66 % to 0.04 %.
A comparison of the raw and corrected mean target pixel
intensities is given in Fig. 16. The top panel shows the raw
data (mean of all pixels per frame, scaled to ﬁt the ﬁgure
size by dividing by 100, and oﬀset by 2 ADU per second for
better visibility) as a function of geographic latitude. The
bottom panel displays the stray-light corrected photometry
after stray-light correction and target pixel selection.

Long-term variations were removed from the data by
subtracting a moving average. Only a marginal dependence
of intensity on the sub-satellite geographic latitude remains.
This residual correlation is corrected by subtracting a DWA
(grey line) in the intensity vs. latitude plot and has no in-
ﬂuence on the amplitude noise level, but reduces the ampli-
tudes of the higher orbit harmonics.

4.7.2 Timing eﬀects

Before summer 2004, an on-board clocking problem caused a
beat between the ACS and Science clocks. As a consequence
of this beat, a spurious signal with a frequency of ≈ 3.16 d−1
and harmonics of it are found in the MOST photometry ob-
tained before mid 2004 (see Fig. 17, bottom). This variation
can also be found in a time series of the corresponding CCD
temperature readings (Fig. 17, top). The apparent temper-
ature signal is an artefact of the timing beat and does not
represent a real CCD temperature variation, so there is no
correlation with CCD signal. Hence, this instrumental eﬀect
is eliminated by prewhitening frequency by frequency, being
aware of the instrumental origin of the corresponding peaks
in the amplitude spectrum.

Figure 18. γ Equ photometry versus mean ACS error radius.
The horizontal bar represents the physical pixel size of MOST.

4.7.3 Pointing stability

The ACS pointed the telescope at γ Equ with an average
accuracy of about ±1.′′8, which is fairly below the physical
pixel size of 3′′ and much better than what was achieved,
e. g., for the ﬁrst MOST science target, κ1 Cet. As illustrated
in Fig. 18, there is no correlation between the photometric
data and the mean ACS error radius. The latter is the rms
deviation of the line-of-sight from the ACS centre during
one integration and an estimator for the pointing stability.
Fig. 18 also proves the homogeneity of the CCD sensitivity
on a subpixel scale.

5 VISUALISATION

The IDL program Most Data Movies (MDM) is a visual-
isation tool for SDS2 formatted data. In particular during

CCD space photometry

13

Figure 19. Screenshot of the MDM visualisation tool. The up-
per panels compare the raw and reduced light curves at diﬀerent
magnitude scales (in this case, η Boo 2005). Scaling of time and
magnitude, as well as animation range and speed are adjustable.
Furthermore, the software provides monitoring of a variety of fea-
tures in the lower panels (in this case, from left to right: raw SDS2
image, reduced SDS2 image, ACS error track, spacecraft track).

the early attempts of understanding the instrumental prop-
erties it proved very helpful to “see” the eﬀect of various
reduction steps for individual frames as well as for pixel
light curves. In addition, we wanted to correlate the MOST
position with peculiarities in frames and light curves. For
a convenient usage of MDM, several options are provided,
like various scaling, color coding, speed adjustment for the
animated frame sequence, and toggling stepwise back- or
forward in time. The most helpful option for optimising the
reduction routine is the simultaneous display of two data
sets. For example, one can immediately compare the origi-
nal with the corrected light curve. Fig. 19 shows the original
and reduced light curves of γ Equ, the original and reduced
Fabry Images (doughnuts) of a selected instance (marked
by a pointer below the light curve) in the left bottom cor-
ner, next the ACS errors reported for this given exposure
and the respective sub-satellite position on ground, colour
coded (from red to black) with the magnetic ﬁeld measured
on-board.

The MDM software is available on request.

6 SDS1 DATA REDUCTION

The SDS1 data format represents row and column sums of
pixel intensities rather than data resolved in two dimensions,
which has several implications on the reduction procedure.

• There are only 8 binned pixels (i. e. the 2 pixels at each
margin of row and column sums) that may safely be deﬁned
as background.

• The image geometry may be treated as similar to SDS2
data (see 4.3), but in general, local bumps in the doughnut
cannot be resolved in the binned data.

Figure 20. Comparison of the SDS1 and SDS2 light curves for
Procyon 2005. Bottom: Raw SDS1 data. Mid: Reduced SDS1
data. Top: Reduced SDS2 data.

• Reliable automated identiﬁcation of cosmic ray hits (ac-
cording to 4.4) is nearly impossble, because in the SDS1
pixel binning, one or a few pixels aﬀected by a cosmic ray
will only produce a small excess in the total integrated sig-
nal. Of course, this also means that most cosmic ray hits
produce relatively small outliers in the MOST SDS1 pho-
tometry.

• The restriction to 4 background pixels permits only 4
decorrelation steps in the stray-light correction procedure
(as described in 4.5).

These aspects of SDS1 data limit the amount of processing
possible on the ground, which was always recognised as the
trade-oﬀ for being able to back up still useful photometry
on board for many days to avoid possible gaps in the high-
duty-cycle time series.

Instead of applying the standard procedure described
above to the SDS1 data, a more promising idea was to com-
pute the diﬀerences between the reduced target intensity and
the integrated intensity of the raw image for all SDS2 frames
and to interpolate these diﬀerences in time to obtain an es-
timated background correction for the SDS1 measurements.
The noise level of these is still expected to be higher than
that of the SDS2 light curve, but the larger number of read-
ings may nevertheless reduce the noise level of the Fourier
amplitudes. As an example, in the Procyon 2005 photome-
try, the number of data points in SDS2 format is only 48 840,
compared 280 995 when SDS1 data are included. The cor-
responding amplitude noise level of SDS1 + SDS2 data is
reduced by about 20 % relative to SDS2 alone. Fig. 20 com-
pares the SDS1 and SDS2 light curves for Procyon 2005.
The fact that we gain only 20 % in terms of amplitude noise
is due to the poorer quality of the 232 155 SDS1 exposures.

7 LESS PROMISING APPROACHES

While approaching what we think is now a well-developed re-
duction tool for space CCD photometry, we followed various

14

P. Reegen et al.

Figure 22. Part of the HR 1217 light curve without correction of
background moments (top), after correction of zero order moment
(mid), and after ﬁfth order moment correction (bottom).

Figure 21. Background LDM models with diﬀerent smoothing
parameter λ (0, 2, 5, and 10).

ideas which we ﬁnally discarded, but which may be interest-
ing in a diﬀerent context, or may be traps for researchers in
a similar situation as we were.

For example, we investigated various methods for stray-
light correction. The simplest approach, similar to classical
aperture photometry, was to subtract a mean background
determined independently for each frame. Not surprisingly,
this approach was too simple because of the complex stray-
light pattern produced by the Fabry lens.

7.1 Local dispersion model

The stray-light complication led us to develop a stray-light
model taking the neighbouring background pixels into ac-
count. We used the spatial DWA Fλλ (according to eq. 2) to
describe the correlation between one pixel and its environ-
ment in the image and called this stray-light model a Local
Dispersion Model (LDM). Fig. 21 shows some LDM back-
ground models for the δ Cet data with diﬀerent smoothing
parameters λ. Choosing λ as the only free parameter did not
lead to a satisfactory stray-light correction.

7.2 Moment analysis

Another stray-light correction scheme took advantage of an
obvious direct correlation between the mean background and
the target intensity, which suggested that one should com-
pute the mean background as the normalised bivariate mo-
ment of order zero. A correction of the mean background by
calculating a regression of the target intensity relative to a
mean background and correcting for a slope led to clearly
better results than the LDM described in 7.1. This encour-
aged us to investigate higher order correlations using

hi
ji ≡

hljmi−jIlmin
hl2jm2(i−j)in

,

Figure 23. 2D scan of Fabry lens 3/3. Bullets: ACS positions
leading to corrupted data points.

where indices l, m refer to background pixels only. The result
is a bivariate polynomial ﬁt f of order i to the background
pixel intensities, which is obtained by setting
j i (l − hli)j (m − hmi)i−j .
flmn ≡ hi

(9)

Applying various moment orders led to quite impressive
results, but the stray-light peaks still dominated the light
curve (Fig. 22).

7.3 Fabry lens proﬁle

The “lens proﬁle” is intended to indicate optical distortions
and disturbances by ﬂawed areas on the Fabry lens. It is
obtained by an analysis of individual MOST-images and al-
lows estimating the inﬂuence of lens properties on the light

(8)

curve as well as eventually ﬁnding an algorithm to correct
for lens inhomogeneities.

Impurities in the lens, like small inclusions or bubbles,
will result in a reduced signal every time light passes through
such blemishes. In a ﬁrst step we simulated a constant light
source, which was performed for δ Cet by prewhitening the
light curve with 20 frequencies. Then we correlated the resid-
ual intensity to the ACS error values stored in the image
headers, indicating the deviation of the line-of-sight from
the ideal position referring to the centre of the frame.

Usually there exists more than one ACS error value for
an image, because the ACS system acquires a reading every
second, while the typical integration time for a single frame
is 10 seconds and longer. In the case of δ Cet (10 seconds
integration time), up to 10 ACS error values describe the
movement of the target across the aperture during a given
exposure. It is therefore impossible to immediately assign
an erroneous data point to a speciﬁc ACS value. To over-
come this problem, we used a grid of ACS error values and
classiﬁed the boxes as “good” or “bad” according to a cho-
sen threshold for the residual to the “constant” light curve.
“Good” boxes are those where at least one data point has
been obtained with a value below the chosen threshold and
which contains an ACS value corresponding to the given box.
“Bad” boxes obviously are those where no such frames are
found. Changing the criterion from “one” good data point
to “n” good data points for deﬁning a good box does not
change the result substantially.

The lens proﬁle based on data obtained for δ Cet
(Fig. 23) shows that the given Fabry lens is perfect except for
the outermost area, where the ACS is at its limit. The point-
ing precision has signiﬁcantly improved since the beginning
of MOST observations. Now it is practically impossible to
produce a reliable lens proﬁle using this technique. However,
in case the ACS gets worse and lenses get damaged we might
have to return to this tool for properly identifying bad data
points. For the time of this report and as a conclusion, we
do not have indications of Fabry lenses inﬂuencing the data
quality.

8 RESULTS

For 13 MOST targets (Table 1) observed from October,
2003, to March, 2005, the typical fraction of exposures trans-
mitted in the SDS2 format was 41 %. About 52 % of the pix-
els in a Fabry frame were initially used for deﬁning the target
aperture mask. Out of all SDS2 exposures, 3.7±1.8 % had to
be rejected due to ACS problems (4.2), and 0.8±0.8 % due to
a distorted Fabry Image geometry (4.3). Close to 0.47 % of
all SDS2 exposures contained pixels apparently aﬀected by
cosmic rays (4.4.1), but only 47 % of these conspicuous pix-
els ﬁnally turned out to be corrupted by cosmic rays (4.4.2).
5 % of SDS2 exposures had to be rejected due to an exces-
sive cumulation of cosmic rays (4.4.3). Between 18 and 224
decorrelation steps were used for the ﬁnal reduction (4.5.1)
with typically 56 % of the pixels deﬁned in the initial target
aperture mask used for the resulting light curves (4.6).

CCD space photometry

15

9 CONCLUSIONS

The reduction method described in this paper was applied to
MOST Fabry Image photometry and relies on the following
steps:

• construction of a “data cube” of all CCD frames in-
cluding all FITS header information to which all software
components consistently refer

• deﬁnition of target and background pixels
• rejection of images deviating signiﬁcantly from the av-

erage

• cosmic ray correction (correction of individual pixels or
elimination of an entire image, if the number of pixels to be
corrected is above a chosen threshold)

• stray-light correction - the core of our reduction tool.
This correction is based on the assumption that the stray-
light sources superpose for a given pixel as individual point
sources. This property allows one to compensate for the
orbit-modulated stray light by decorrelation of background
and target pixel intensities – thus avoiding any period fold-
ing techniques. The amplitudes of orbit harmonics are re-
duced by up to four orders of magnitude.

• compensation for reduced intrinsic amplitudes due to

repeated decorrelations

• selection of best suited pixel light curves for merging

into the ﬁnal target star light curve

• check for remaining correlation of photometry with

spacecraft parameters

The software package is very eﬃcient and provides the re-
duction of a large amount of data in a pipe-line style. The
improvement in data quality achievable with our method is
displayed in Table 1 (p. 11) containing a comparison of both
stray-light amplitude and frequency-domain noise for raw
vs. reduced data. A comparison with other reduction tech-
niques clearly indicates that no artefacts are introduced in
the photometry. This is a considerable advantage when in-
terpreting complex frequency spectra with amplitudes close
to the noise level.

Simple binning of consecutive orbits and a correspond-
ing trendline correction will perform at least as well as the
decorrelation technique in the sense of noise. But the noise
level is not the only (and also not the best) quality estima-
tor. Time-domain binning leads to the introduction of a pe-
riodic frequency-domain ﬁlter function. In other words, the
spectral noise level is not uniformly distributed in frequency,
which has serious implications on the detailed analysis of in-
dividual frequencies. The noise level can be pushed down
considerably while paying the price of distortion, which
we consider less convenient than the slightly higher, but
undistorted noise. Although there are frequency regimes and
timescales of intrinsic stellar variation where the better pho-
ton statistics of binned data may be more desirable for the
task at hand than e. g. eliminating pixels from the Fabry
image and increasing the overall Poisson noise, we are gen-
erally convinced that a low noise level is not the only thing
to strive for. This is why we completely omit manipulations
of the total light curve (like binning of orbits) without care-
fully examining the origin of the contamination we correct
for.

A. Gimenez, E. F. Guinan, B. Montesinos eds., ASP Conf.
Ser., 173, 353

Kuschnig R., et al. 2005, in preparation
Mangeney A., Praderie F. 1984,

in Space Research
Prospects in Stellar Activity and Variability, Proceedings
of a workshop from Feb. 29, to March 2, 1984, Observa-
toire de Paris-Meudon, A. Mangeney & F. Praderie eds.

Matthews, J. M. 2004, AAS 205, 13401
Matthews, J. M., Kusching, R., Guenther, D. B., Walker,
G. A. H., Moﬀat, A. F. J., Rucinski, S. M., Sasselov, D.,
Weiss, W. W. 2004, Nature, 430, 51
Rowe, J., et al. 2005, in preparation
Rucinski, S. M., Walker, G. A. H., Matthews, J. M.,
Kuschnig, R., Shkolnik, E., Marchenko, S., Bohlender,
D. A., Guenther, D. B., Moﬀat, A. F. J., Sasselov, D.,
Weiss, W. W. 2004, PASP. 116, 1093

Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Brown, T. M., Frandsen, S.,
Horner, S. D., Korzennik, S. G., Noyes, R. W., Tarbell,
T. D., Title, A. M., Walker, A. B. C. II, Weiss, W. W., Bog-
art, R. S., Bush, R. I., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Hoek-
sema, J. T., Jones, A., Kjeldsen, H. 1998, in Structure and
Dynamics of the Interior of the Sun and Sun-like Stars,
SOHO, 6, 401

Vuillemin, A., Tynok, A., Baglin, A., Weiss, W. W., Au-
vergne, M., Repin, S., Bisnovatyi-Kogan, G. 1998, Exper-
imental Astronomy, 8/4, 257

Walker G., Matthews J., Kuschnig R., Johnson R., Rucin-
ski S., Pazder J., Burley G., Walker A., Skaret K., Zee R.,
Groccott S., Carroll K., Sinclair P., Sturgeon D., Harron
J. 2003, PASP, 115, 1023

Weiss, W. W. 1993, ASP Conf. Ser. 40, pp. 708
Whittaker E. T. 1923, On a New Method of Graduation,

Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc., 41, 63

16

P. Reegen et al.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

D. F., M. G., D. H., T. K., D. P., P. R., S. S., and W. W. W.
received ﬁnancial support from the Austrian FFG – Are-
onautics and Space Agency – and by the Austrian Sci-
ence Fonds (FWF-P17580). The Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada supports the research
of D. B. G., J. M. M., A. F. J. M., S. M. R., and G. A. H. W.;
A. F. J. M. is also supported by FCAR (Quebec). R. K. is
supported by the Canadian Space Agency. The MOST
ground station in Vienna was developed and is operated in
cooperation with the Vienna University of Technology (W.
Keim, A. Scholtz, V. Kudielka).

REFERENCES

Appourchaux, T., Catala, C., Cornelisse, J., Frandsen,
S., Fridlund, M., Fr¨ohlich, C., Gough, D. O., Hoyng,P. ,
Jones, A., Lemaire, P., Roxbourgh, I. W., Tondello, G.,
Volonte, S., Weiss, W. W. 1993, Report on the Phase A
Study, ESA SCI(93)3

Baglin A., Auvergne M., Barge P., Buey J.-T., Catala C.,
Michel E., Weiss W. W., and the COROT Team 2004,
Proceedings of the First Eddington Workshop, F. Favata,
I. W. Roxburgh, D. Galadi eds., ESA-SP, 485, p. 17

Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., Brown, T., Cald-
well, D., Devore, E., Dunham, E., Gautier, T., Geary,
J., Gilliland, R., Gould, A., Howell, St., Jenkins, J. 2003,
Proceedings of the Conference on Towards Other Earths:
DARWIN/TPF and the Search for Extrasolar Terrestrial
Planets, M. Fridlund, T. Henning eds., ESA SP-539, p. 69
Brown, T. M., Cox, A. N. 1986, in Stellar Pulsation; Pro-
ceedings on the Conference held as a Memorial to John
Cox at the Los Alamos National Lababoratory, A. N. Cox,
W. M. Sparks, S. G. Starrﬁeld eds., Lecture Notes in
Physics, 274, 415

Brown, T. M., Torres, G., Latham, D. W. 1995, BAAS, 27,

1381

Buzasi, D., Catanzarite, J., Laher, R., Conrow, T., Shupe,
D., Gautier III, T. N., Kreidl, T., Everett, D. 2000, ApJ,
532, L133

Carroll, K. A., Rucinski, S., Zee, R. E. 2004, 18th Annual

AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites.

Favata, F., Roxburgh, I. W., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J.

2000, Assessment Study Report, ESA SCI(2000)8

Fridlund, M., Gough, D. O., Jones, A., Appourchaux, T.,
Badiali, M., Catala, C., Frandsen, S., Grec, G., Roca
Cortes, T., Schrijver, K. 1995, in GONG‘94: Helio- and
Asteroseismology from the Earth and space, R. K. Ulrich,
E. J. Rhodes jr., W. D¨appen eds., ASP Conf. Ser., 76, 416
Groccott, S. C. O., Zee, R. E., Matthews, J. M. 2003, in 17th

AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites

Guenther, D. B., Kallinger, T., Reegen, P., Weiss, W. W.,
Matthews, J. M., Kuschnig, R., Marchenko, S., Moﬀat,
A. F. J., Rucinski, S. M., Sasselov, D., Walker, G. A. H.
2005, ApJ, in press

Hodrick R. J., Prescott E. C. 1997, Journal of Money,

Credit, and Banking, 29, 1

Kjeldsen, H., Bedding, T. R., Frandsen, S., Dall, T. H.,
Thomsen, B., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Clausen, J. V.,
Petersen, J. O., Andersen, M. I. 1999, in Stellar Struc-
ture: Theory and Test of Connective Energy Transport,

