8
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
4
2
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
0
9
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Objections to the Uniﬁed Approach to the
Computation of Classical Conﬁdence Limits

G¨unter Zech∗
Universit¨at Siegen, D-57068 Siegen, Germany

January 15, 2014

Abstract

Conventional classical conﬁdence intervals in speciﬁc cases are un-
physical. A solution to this problem has recently been published by
Feldman and Cousins[1]. We show that there are cases where the
new approach is not applicable and that it does not remove the basic
deﬁciencies of classical conﬁdence limits.

1

Introduction

Feldman and Cousins propose a new approach to the computation of classi-
cal conﬁdence bounds which avoids the occurrence of unphysical conﬁdence
regions, one of the most problematic features of the conventional classical
conﬁdence limits. In addition it uniﬁes the two procedures “computation of
conﬁdence intervals” and “computation of conﬁdence limits”. The uniﬁed
treatment represents a considerable improvement compared to the conven-
tional classical method and has already been adopted by several experiments
and is recommended by the Particle Data Group [2]. However, it has serious
deﬁciencies.

∗E-mail:zech@physik.uni-siegen.de

1

2 Basic idea of the uniﬁed approach

We consider the example of section B of Ref. [1]. For a Gaussian resolution
function P (x; µ) we deﬁne for each mean µ an interval x1 < x < x2 with the
property

x2

Z

x1

P (x; µ)dx = α

(1)

where α is the conﬁdence level. For a measurement ˆx all values µ with the
property x1(µ) < ˆx < x2(µ) form the conﬁdence interval. The intervals have
the property that the true values are covered in the fraction α of a large
number of experiments. The freedom in the choice of the interval inherent
in the relation (1) is used to avoid unphysical limits.
(Usually the limits
x1, x2 are ﬁxed by choosing central intervals.) In case that only one limit
can be placed inside the allowed parameter space, upper (or lower) limits are
computed. The data and the selected level α unambiguously ﬁx the bounds
and whether bounds or limits are given. The probability bounds are deﬁned
by an ordering scheme based on the likelihood ratio. In the case of discrete
parameters an analogous procedure is applied with some additional plausible
conventions. The complete recipe is too complicated to be discussed in a few
words. The reader has to consult the original publication.

3 Objections to the uniﬁed approach

The new approach has very attractive properties, however, there are also
severe limitations most of which are intrinsic in the philosophy of classical
statistics.

3.1

Inversion of signiﬁcance

In some cases less signiﬁcant data can provide more stringent limits than
more informative data.

As an example we present in the following table the 90% conﬁdence upper
limits for a Poisson distributed signal from data with no event found (n = 0)
for diﬀerent background expectations of mean b.

The experimental information on the signal s is the same in all four cases
independent of the background expectation since no background is present.

2

n=0, b=0 n=0, b=1 n=0, b=2 n=0, b=3

standard classical
uniﬁed classical
uniform Bayesian

2.30
2.44
2.30

1.30
1.61
2.30

0.30
1.26
2.30

-0.70
1.08
2.30

Table 1: Conﬁdence limits for Poisson distributed data with n observed
events and expected background with mean b.

For the case n = 0, b = 3 the uniﬁed approach avoids the unphysical negative
limit of the conventional classical method but ﬁnds a limit which is more
signiﬁcant than that of an experiment with no background expected and
twice the ﬂux.

If in the n = 0, b = 3 experiment by an improved analysis the background

expectation is reduced, the limit becomes worse.

The reason for this unsatisfactory behavior is related to the violation of
the likelihood principle1 by the classical methods. All four cases presented in
e−s of the unknown signal
the table have common likelihood functions L
up to an irrelevant multiplicative constant depending on b.

∼

3.2 Diﬃculties with two-sided bounds

Let us assume a measurement ˆx = 0 of a parameter x with a physical bound
1 < x < 1 and a Gaussian resolution of σ = 1.1. (This could be for example
−
a track measurement by a combination of a proportional wire chamber and
a position detector with Gaussian resolution.) The uniﬁed approach fails to
give 68.3% conﬁdence bounds or limits.

3.3 Diﬃculties with certain probability distributions

The prescription for the deﬁnition of the probability intervals may lead to
disconnected interval pieces. A simple example for such a distribution is the
superposition of a narrow and a wide Gaussian

P (x; µ) =

0.9 exp

(x

µ)2/2

+ exp

(x

µ)2/0.02

(cid:0)−

−

(cid:1)

(cid:0)−

−

(cid:1)(cid:9)

1A detailed discussion of the likelihood principle and references can be found in [3] and

1
√2π (cid:8)

[4].

3

with the additional requirement of positive parameter values µ. It will pro-
duce quite odd conﬁdence intervals.

Another simple example is the linear distribution

P (x; θ) =

(1 + θx)

1
2

where the parameter θ and the variate x are bound by
1.
(The variable x could be the cosine of a polar angle.) Values of θ outside
its allowed range produce negative probabilities. Thus the likelihood ratio
which is used as a ordering scheme for the choice of the probability interval is
> 1. Remark that also the conventional classical conﬁdence
undeﬁned for
scheme fails in this case.

1 and

| ≤

| ≤

x

θ

θ

|

|

|

|

Similarly all digital measurements like track measurements with propor-
tional wire chambers or TDC time registration cannot be treated. Since the
probability distributions are delta-functions the bounds are undeﬁned.

3.4 Restriction due to uniﬁcation

Let us assume that in a search for a Susy particle a positive result is found
which however is compatible with background within two standard devia-
tions. Certainly one would prefer to publish an upper limit to a measurement
contrary to the prescription of the uniﬁed method.

3.5 Diﬃculty to use the error bounds

Errors associated to a measurement usually are used to combine results from
diﬀerent experiments or to compute other parameters depending on them.
There is no prescription how this can be done in the uniﬁed approach. Aver-
aging of data will certainly be diﬃcult due to the bias introduced by asym-
metric probability contours used to avoid unphysical bounds. Feldman and
Cousins propose to use the conventional classical limits for averaging. Thus
two sets of errors have to be documented.

3.6 Restriction to continuous variables

It is not possible to associate a classical conﬁdence to discrete hypothesis.

4

3.7 Subjectivity

The nice property of a well deﬁned coverage depends on pre-experimental
analysis criteria: The choice of the selection criteria and of the conﬁdence
level as well as the decision to publish have to be done independently of the
result of the experiment. This requirement is rather naive.

4 Conclusions

There are additional diﬃculties to those discussed above: The elimination of
nuisance parameters and the treatment of upper Poisson limits with uncer-
tainty in the background predictions pose problems. These may be tractable
but certainly introduce further complications. The computation of the limits
will be very computer time consuming in most cases. The essential objec-
tions, however, are those mentioned in sections 3.1, 3.3 and 3.5. It is abso-
lutely intolerable that signiﬁcant limits can be obtained with poor data and
it is also essential to have useful error intervals. Feldman and Cousins are
aware of the diﬃculties related to the inversion of signiﬁcance and to biased
errors and propose to publish additional information. This certainly is a sen-
sible advice but does not justify classical limits. Most of the deﬁciencies of
the conventional classical method remain unresolved in the uniﬁed approach.
The experimental information relative to a parameter can be documented
by its likelihood function. The log-likelihood functions of diﬀerent experi-
ments can easily be combined without introducing biases simply by adding
them. In most cases the likelihood function can be parametrized in a sensible
way, as is common practice, by the parameters which maximize the likeli-
hood and the values at 1/√e of the maximum. The latter deﬁne an error
interval. In the case of Poisson limits the Bayesian limits with constant prior
(see Table 1) provide a useful parametrization which avoids the diﬃculties of
section 3.1. These pragmatic procedures, however, do not allow to associate
a certain coverage to the intervals or limits. Coverage is the magic objective
It is an attractive property from a purely
of classical conﬁdence bounds.
esthetic point of view but it is not obvious how to make use of this concept.

.

References

5

[1] G. J. Feldman, R. D. Cousins, Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 1873.

[2] C. Caso et al., Europ. Phys. J. C 3 (1998) 1.

[3] J. O. Berger and R. P. Wolpert, The likelihood principle, Lecture notes of
Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Hayward, Ca, edited by S. S. Gupta
(1984)

[4] D. Basu, Statistical Information and Likelihood, Lecture notes in Statis-

tics, Springer (1988)

6

