9
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
3
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Universal geometric approach to uncertainty,
entropy and information

Michael J. W. Hall

Abteilung f¨ur Quantenphysik
Universit¨at Ulm
D-89069 Ulm, Germany

Address after September 30 1988:
Theoretical Physics, IAS
Australian National University
Canberra ACT 0200, Australia

1

Abstract

It is shown that a unique measure of volume is associated with any
statistical ensemble, which directly quantiﬁes the inherent spread or
localisation of the ensemble. It is applicable whether the ensemble is
classical or quantum, continuous or discrete, and may be derived from
a small number of theory-independent geometric postulates. Remark-
ably, this unique ensemble volume is proportional to the exponential
of the ensemble entropy, and hence provides a novel geometric charac-
terisation of the latter quantity. Applications include uniﬁed volume-
based derivations of the Holevo and Shannon bounds in quantum and
classical information theory, a precise geometric interpretation of ther-
modynamic entropy for equilibrium ensembles, a geometric derivation
of semi-classical uncertainty relations, a new means for deﬁning clas-
sical and quantum localization for arbitrary evolution processes, a
geometric interpretation of relative entropy, and a new proposed def-
inition for the spot-size of an optical beam. Advantages of ensemble
volume over other measures of localization (root-mean-square devia-
tion, Renyi entropies, and inverse participation ratio) are discussed.

PACS Numbers: 03.65.Bz, 03.67.-a, 05.45+b, 42.60.Jf

I

INTRODUCTION

This paper has two main goals. The ﬁrst is to demonstrate that for any
ensemble, whether classical, quantum, discrete or continuous, there is essen-
tially only one measure of the “volume” occupied by the ensemble which is
compatible with basic geometric notions. This ensemble volume is thus a
preferred and universal choice for characterising what is variously referred to
as the spread, dispersion, uncertainty, or localisation of an ensemble.

Remarkably, the derived “ensemble volume” turns out to be proportional
to the exponential of the entropy of the ensemble. A by-product of the
ﬁrst goal is thus a new universal characterisation of ensemble entropy, based
on geometric notions. Indeed, a number of properties of ensemble entropy
turn out to have simple geometric interpretations. The universal nature
of the characterisation is of particular interest: the only previous context-
independent interpretation of ensemble entropy to date (and hence applicable
in particular to ensembles described by continuous probability distributions)
appears to be as a somewhat vague measure of uncertainty or randomness.

2

The second goal is to apply “ensemble volume” to a wide range of con-
texts in which ensembles appear. The applications demonstrate not only the
advantages of ensemble volume over other measures of spread, but also to
some extent why it is that ensemble entropy makes a natural appearance
in contexts as diverse as statistical mechanics, information theory, chaos,
and quantum uncertainty relations. Some results have been brieﬂy reported
elsewhere [1]. Here important details and extensions are given, as well as a
number of new results.

The work reported here was originally motivated by several connections
between volume and information. Shannon proved an upper bound on infor-
mation transfer, via classical signals subject to quadratic energy and noise
constraints, by considering ratios of spherical volumes in high-dimensional
spaces [2]. One can similarly obtain approximate upper bounds on infor-
mation for quantum signals, via semi-classical arguments involving ratios
of phase space volumes [3, 4], which in some cases turn out to be exact.
This raises the question of whether there is some general measure of volume
which can be used to derive rigorous information bounds for the general case.
This question is answered aﬃrmatively here, and a new uniﬁed derivation of
the classical Shannon and the quantum Holevo information bounds is given,
based on simple volume properties.

There are also a number of connections which have been made previously
between volume and entropy. For example, derivations in statistical me-
chanics typically obtain heuristic expressions for thermodynamic entropy by
counting “microstates” in a phase-space volume of “small” thickness contain-
ing a constant-energy surface [5]. Ma in an interesting approach attempted to
deﬁne the thermodynamic entropy of a system in classical statistical mechan-
ics as proportional to the logarithm of a phase-space volume corresponding
to the “region of motion” of the system [6], although he could not rigorously
deﬁne the latter region. A precise geometric interpretation of thermodynamic
entropy for both classical and quantum equilibrium ensembles will be given
here.

Further, Leipnik introduced the exponential of the position entropy of
a quantum system as a measure of its “volume”, and favourably compared
the associated uncertainty relations for position and momentum with the
usual Heisenberg uncertainty relations [7] (see also the review in [8] and Sec.
II.C below). Generalisations to other measures of “volume” were given by
Zakai [8, 9]. It is demonstrated here that the former measure has a unique

3

geometrical signiﬁcance, and a geometrical derivation of quantum uncertainty
relations is given based on the property that quantum states have a minimum
ensemble volume.

Zyckowski [10] and more recently Mirbach and Korsch [11, 12] have used
entropy as a measure of “localisation” for chaotic quantum and classical
systems for various initial states. The results of the present paper show
that this measure can be simply related to the spread of ensemble volume for
arbitrary evolution processes, and provide support for the use of this measure
over all other localisation measures.

Rather than going immediately to general postulates for volume, and for-
mal proofs of uniqueness, the following section ﬁrst explores ensemble volume
for a familiar class of ensembles: those described by one-dimensional proba-
bility distributions. In this case the ensemble volume reduces to a “length”,
which is calculated for a number of concrete examples and compared with
other measures of uncertainty such as root-mean-square deviation. Geo-
metric properties of this “length” and an associated quantum uncertainty
relation are discussed. Two-dimensional joint probability distributions are
also brieﬂy discussed, where the ensemble volume becomes an “area” that
is geometrically related to the “lengths” of the marginal distributions. This
“area” motivates a new deﬁnition for the spot size of an optical beam.

In Section III and an accompanying appendix, the derivation of the en-
semble volume from universal geometric postulates is given. These postulates
depend on theory-independent notions of invariance, projection onto orthog-
onal axes, and additivity, and in particular are independent of whether the
ensemble is classical or quantum. The bonus of a new geometrical charac-
teristion of ensemble entropy is discussed, and a geometrical interpretation
of relative entropy is given.

Applications to statistical mechanics, semi-classical quantum mechanics,
information theory, chaos and other types of dynamical evolution are given
in Section IV. Conclusions are presented in Section V.

II

1- AND 2-DIMENSIONAL EXAMPLES

Before deriving the unique form of ensemble volume in Sec.III, it is useful
to ﬁrst consider some of its properties and connections to other measures of
uncertainty in two familiar settings: continuous distributions on the line and

4

on the plane, for which “volume” reduces to the special cases of “length” and
to “area” respectively. These special cases are already suﬃcient to exemplify
a number of general features of ensemble volume, and its advantages as a
measure of spread.

A Length

Consider a 1-dimensional probability distribution p(x), corresponding to
some random variable X (e.g., position, momentum, or phase). There are
then a number of candidates for a direct measure of the “uncertainty” or
“spread” of X, the most well known being the root-mean-square (RMS) de-
viation

∆X = [Z

dx x2p(x)

dx xp(x))2]1/2.

(Z

−
This quantity is a “direct” measure in the sense of having the same units as
X, and has the virtues of being invariant under translations and reﬂections,
scaling linearly with X (∆Y = λ∆X for Y = λX), and vanishing in the limit
that X has some deﬁnite value x′.

(1)

A second candidate is the inverse participation ratio [10, 12, 13]

ξX = [
Z

dx p(x)2]−1,

(2)

(3)

(which may also be recognised as a monotonic function of the so-called “lin-
dx p(x)2 [14]). This quantity shares all of the above-noted
ear entropy”
virtues of ∆X. However, it is in fact only a special case of what may be
called the “Renyi length”

− R

LX,α = [
Z

dx p(x)1+α]−1/α

(α

1)

≥ −

(named for its logarithm - a generalised entropy deﬁned by Renyi [15]). Renyi
lengths are directly related to measures of uncertainty considered by Zakai
for quantum systems [8, 9], and use of their reciprocals as (indirect) measures
of uncertainty has been extensively investigated in [16] (see also [17]). The
inverse participation ratio corresponds to α = 1 in Eq. (3).

The Renyi length LX,α in Eq. (3) satisﬁes all of the above-noted properties
of ∆X (same units as X, translation/reﬂection invariance, scaling linearly
with X, and vanishing as p(x) approaches a delta function). Eq. (3) thus

5

introduces an uncountable inﬁnity of possible candidates for a direct measure
of uncertainty! Fortunately, as will be seen in Sec.III, just one of these Renyi
lengths may be singled out uniquely over all other possible measures on
geometric grounds.

In particular, in this paper special attention will be paid to the case α
0
in Eq. (3). The corresponding length will simply be denoted by LX, and is
just the exponential of the usual ensemble entropy [18]:

→

LX = LX,0 = exp[

dx p(x) ln p(x)].

− Z
It is a special case of the “ensemble volume” to be derived in Sec.III, and
will therefore be referred to as the ensemble length.

(4)

B Comparisons

In Table I the RMS deviation and ensemble length are calculated for several
types of 1-dimensional distributions. As noted following Eqs. (1) and (3) both
quantities are invariant under translations and scale linearly with X. Hence
x′)/a
they can be trivially calculated for distributions of the form p(x/a
once they have been found for p(x) (by simply multiplying the result for the
latter case by a). The Table will be used to highlight a number of diﬀerences
between ∆X and LX.

−

First, it is seen from Table I that the ensemble length exists in cases when
the RMS deviation does not (for Cauchy-Lorentz and sink-squared distribu-
tions in particular). It may further be shown that LX is ﬁnite whenever ∆X
is: the well known variational property that ensemble entropy is maximised
for a ﬁxed value of ∆X by a Gaussian distribution [19] immediately implies
from the scaling property and Table I that

LX ≤

(2πe)1/2∆X.

(5)

Thus the use of ensemble length as a measure of uncertainty allows a wider
quantitative range of applicability than does RMS deviation. This permits,
for example, the quantitative discussion of quantum uncertainty relations,
expressed in terms of ensemble length, for cases in which the usual Heisenberg
uncertainty relations have nothing to say (see following subsection).

Second, the calculations for the uniform and circular distributions, pU
and pC in Table I respectively, exemplify a maximality property of ensemble

6

length: it is maximised on a given interval by a uniform distribution on the
interval, with a maximum value equal to the length of the interval. Thus one
may write

L

LX ≤
for a distribution conﬁned to an interval of length L [20]. This property
reﬂects the intuitive notion that that p(x) is most spread out or least localised
when it is ﬂat, having no peaks where probability is concentrated. The RMS
deviation does not conform to this notion, achieving its maximum possible
value in the limit of two maximally-separated peaks (a distribution equally
concentrated on the endpoints of the interval).

(6)

Third, the calculation in Table I for the uniform and double-uniform
distributions pU and pDU illustrates an addivity property of ensemble length:
the ensemble length of pDU is twice that of the two non-overlapping uniform
distributions pU (x
a) which it comprises in equal mixture.
More generally, if p(x) and q(x) denote two non-overlapping distributions
of equal ensemble length L, then any mixture λp(x) + (1
λ)q(x) of these
distributions satisﬁes

a) and pU (

−

−

−

−

x

(7)

2L,

LX ≤
with the upper bound achieved for λ = 1/2 [21]. This property reﬂects the
intuitive notions that such a mixture is least localised (most spread out) when
it is not more concentrated in one of the non-overlapping regions than in the
other, and that for this equally-weighted case the non-overlapping lengths
In contrast, the RMS deviation of pDU depends strongly on
simply add.
the separation of the peaks, and indeed becomes inﬁnite as this separation
increases. This example and the one above emphasise what can be directly
seen from Eq. (1): the RMS deviation is a measure of separation of the
region(s) of concentration from a particular point of the distribution (the
mean value), rather than a measure of the extent to which the distribution
is in fact concentrated.

Fourth, except in cases where the second moment of p(x) has some par-
ticular physical meaning, it is diﬃcult to assess the signiﬁcance of a given
value of ∆X without some further information about the distribution. For
example, even for single-peaked distributions, the probability that X lies
∆X of the mean is highly dependent upon the nature of p(x) [22].
within
In contrast, as will be seen in Sec. III, the ensemble length LX has a unique
geometrical signiﬁcance.

±

7

Finally, it is of interest to make a quantitative comparison between the
degrees to which a given distribution p(x) is concentrated in a region of length
LX on the one hand, and of length 2∆X on the other. To do so, it is natural
to deﬁne the maximum conﬁdence corresponding to a given length L as

C(L) = sup

{A:|A|=L}{ZA

dx p(x)

,

}

(8)

where the supremum is over all measurable sets A of total length L.
In
the case of a distribution symmetric about a single peak this is achieved by
choosing A to be the interval of length L centred on the mean value of the
distribution.

From Table I one can calculate the values of C(LX) to be approximately
100%, 99%, 96%, 93%, 91% and 90% for the uniform, circular, gaussian, ex-
ponential, sink-squared and Cauchy-Lorentz distributions respectively. The
corresponding values of C(2∆X) are 58%, 61%, 68%, 86% for the ﬁrst four
of the above distributions, with the value being undeﬁned for the last two.
It is seen that for these examples C(LX) varies over a much narrower range
than C(2∆X), and that LX typically corresponds to a larger conﬁdence value
than 2∆X.

C Uncertainty relations

The relationship between ensemble length and ensemble entropy in Eq. (4)
allows the usual entropic uncertainty relation for the position and momentum
of a quantum particle [23] to be equivalently written in the geometric form

LXLP ≥

πe¯h,

relating the product of the ensemble lengths to a minimum area in phase
space. Bounding LX and LP from above via Eq. (5) then immediately yields
the well known Heisenberg uncertainty relation

∆X∆P

¯h/2.

≥
The above two inequalities are similar in form, and have the same broad
physical signiﬁcance: the particle cannot be prepared in a state for which
both the position and momentum distributions have arbitrarily small spreads.
However, it is seen that the latter inequality is mathematically weaker, as it

(9)

(10)

8

follows from the former. For example, it follows from Eq. (9) that LP (and
hence, via Eq. (5), ∆P ) becomes inﬁnite as p(x) approaches a weighted sum
of delta functions. This cannot be concluded from Eq. (10).

Inequality (9) may used to make quantitative evaluations regarding the
relative spreads of position and momentum in cases where the Heisenberg
inequality (10) yields no information. For example, consider a quantum
particle conﬁned to an interval of length L, such that the position amplitude
is constant over the interval.
It follows that the momentum statistics are
described by the sink-squared distribution

π−1(2¯h/L)(sin[pL/(2¯h)]/p)2.

(11)

As noted in Table I the RMS deviation ∆P is not deﬁned in this case, and
hence the Heisenberg inequality cannot be used to assess the degree to which
position and momentum are jointly localised. In contrast, using Eq. (11),
Table I and the scaling property of ensemble length, one ﬁnds

LXLP = 2π exp[2(1

C)]¯h

15¯h,

−

≈

(12)

≈

0.57721566 denotes Euler’s constant. Hence the particle has an
where C
associated phase space area close to the lower bound of πe¯h
9¯h in Eq. (9);
i.e., the particle is in fact in an approximate minimum uncertainty state of
position and momentum.

≈

A similar example is the case of a particle conﬁned to the positive x-axis,
with a position amplitude that decays exponentially with x. The position and
momentum distributions are then given by exponential and Cauchy-Lorentz
distributions of the forms pE(x/a)/a and 2apCL(2ap/¯h)/¯h respectively, im-
plying via Table I and the scaling property that

LXLP = 2πe¯h.

(13)

Hence the state is relatively well-localised in position and momentum, with
an associated phase-space area only twice that of the minimum in Eq. (9).
Again, the Heisenberg uncertainty relation Eq. (10) gives no information
about the joint localisation in this case.

Finally, it may be mentioned that there is an uncertainty relation relating
the Renyi lengths of position and momentum for general α: it follows from
Eq. (131) of [8] that

LX,αLP,β ≥

π¯h[1 + 2α]1+1/(2α)/(1 + α)

(14)

9

for α
−
maximum, and the inequality reduces to Eq. (9) above.

1/2, where β =

≥ −

α/(1 + 2α). For α = β = 0 the lower bound is

D Area and spot size

This section will be concluded by brieﬂy looking at measures of spread for
two-dimensional distributions, to highlight a further geometric property of
ensemble length of importance in later sections. This property also holds for
RMS deviation, but not for Renyi lengths in general. A related measure of
spot size for optical beams is deﬁned and brieﬂy discussed.

Each of the “length” measures in Eqs. (1), (3) and (4) has a natural gen-
eralisation to a measure of “area”, corresponding to the spread or uncertainty
of a 2-dimensional probability distribution p(x, y) of two random variables
X and Y :

(15)
(16)
(17)

(18)

xxT
∆A = [det(
h
−1/α,

pα
AXY,α =
i
AXY = exp[

h

ln p

h−

]

i

x

xT

)]1/2,

i − h

ih

i

respectively, where x denotes the column vector (x, y), xT its transpose, and
the average with respect to p. These areas satisfy properties analogous
h·i
to to their 1-dimensional counterparts, and will be referred to as the RMS
area, Renyi area, and ensemble area respectively.

The RMS area in Eq. (15) may be recognised as the product of the RMS
deviations along the principal axes of the distribution in the xy-plane, and
in general satisﬁes the inequality (Eq. (2.13.7) of [24])

∆A

∆X∆Y,

≤

with equality for the case that p(x, y) factorises into two uncorrelated distri-
butions for X and Y .

This inequality for “area” and “length” has a simple geometric interpre-
tation, to be generalised in the following Section. In particular, the marginal
distributions p1(x) and p2(y) for X and Y are obtained by ”projecting” the
joint distribution p(x, y) onto the two orthogonal x and y axes. The asso-
ciated RMS lengths ∆X and ∆Y may be similarly thought of as obtained
by “projecting” the RMS area ∆A onto these axes. However, this is only

10

consistent with Euclidean geometry if inequality (18) holds: the product of
the two lengths obtained by projection of an area onto two orthogonal axes
can never be less than the original area.

Ensemble area and ensemble length are also consistent with this “pro-
jection” interpretation: the well known subadditivity of entropy [19] can be
equivalently written via Eqs. (4) and (17) as

AXY ≤

LXLY ,

(19)

in analogy to Eq. (18). The subadditivity of entropy is thus seen to corre-
spond to a projection property of Euclidean geometry. One has the further
related property that if p(x, y) is uniform on a rectangular region oriented
parallel to the x and y axes, and vanishes outside this region, then equality
holds in Eq. (19) with LX and LY corresponding to the lengths of the sides of
the rectangle. Thus Eq. (19) reduces in this case to the Euclidean property
area = length
In general, the Renyi areas in Eq. (16) are not
consistent with the projection property, as will be seen in Sec. III.

breadth.

×

Finally, it may be noted that Eq. (17) may be applied to physical distri-
butions other than probability distributions, with corresponding geometrical
advantages. For example, let P (x, y) denote the time-averaged power distri-
bution in some plane orthogonal to the direction of propagation of an optical
beam. One may then deﬁne the “geometric” spot size of the beam as the
ensemble area of the normalised power distribution P (x, y)/PT , where PT is
the integrated power over the plane:

Ageom = PT exp[

(PT )−1

Z

−

dxdy P (x, y) ln P (x, y)].

(20)

This satisﬁes desirable properties such as being additive for non-overlapping
identical beams, being invariant with respect to scaling the power up or down,
scaling linearly with beam magniﬁcation, having a maximum value of A for
a beam conﬁned to an area A (attained for a uniform power distribution over
that area), and satisfying a “projection property” analogous to Eq. (19). It
is also invariant under any transformation of coordinates which preserves
area in the usual sense (i.e., with unit Jacobian), and so to this extent is
independent of the coordinatisation of the plane. Alternative deﬁnitions
based on, for example, Eqs. (15) or (16) are geometrically less satisfying.

11

III ENSEMBLE VOLUME

The previous section indicates the wide range of possible measures for the
spread of one- and two-dimensional probability distributions, and draws
attention to a number of geometric and other advantages enjoyed by the
“length” and “area” deﬁned in Eqs. (4) and (17) respectively.

As noted in the Introduction, it has often proved useful to employ var-
ious notions of “volume” for statistical ensembles across a wide variety of
contexts, such as information theory, statistical mechanics, uncertainty re-
lations, and chaotic evolution. Other contexts include Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
diﬀusion and semi-classical quantum mechanics (see [1] and Secs. IV.B and
IV.D below). This raises the question of whether there is in fact some uni-
versal measure of “volume” for classical and quantum ensembles, which may
be usefully employed in all of the above contexts and which is not restricted
in application or interpretation to various special cases.

Here it will be shown that indeed such a measure exists, which may
be uniquely derived from a small number of theory-independent postulates
fundamental to the concept of “volume”. It generalises the ensemble length
and ensemble area of the previous section, and will be referred to as the
ensemble volume. It also leads to new geometric characterisations of entropy
and relative entropy.

A Notation

Three generic types of ensemble will be considered here. The ﬁrst is a classical
ensemble described by a continuous probability distribution p(x) on some
n-dimensional space X; the second is a classical ensemble described by a
where i ranges over some discrete set
discrete probability distribution
I; and the third is a quantum ensemble described by a density operator W
on some Hilbert space H.

pi}

{

Each of the above types of ensemble shares some universal features. It
is essential to abstract a number of these features via a common notation if
“volume” is to be discussed in a theory-independent manner.

For example, consider the three identities

dnx p(x) = 1,

pi = 1, trH[W ] = 1.

(21)

ZX

Xi∈I

12

Deﬁning Γ to correspond respectively to the spaces/sets X, I and H; TrΓ[
]
·
to correspond respectively to integration over X, summation over I, and the
trace over H; and ρ to correspond respectively to the ensembles p(x),
pi}
,
and W ; these identities can be subsumed into the generic identity

{

TrΓ[ρ] = 1.

(22)

Another universal feature is the notion of composite or joint ensembles: for
a given pair of spaces/sets Γ1, Γ2 of a given type one can deﬁne a composite
set/space Γ12, where for classical and quantum ensembles Γ12 corresponds to
the set product and the tensor product respectively of Γ1 and Γ2. Further,
if ρ describes a composite ensemble on Γ12 one may deﬁne two projected
ensembles ρ1, ρ2 on Γ1 and Γ2 respectively, via

ρ1 = TrΓ2[ρ],

ρ2 = TrΓ1[ρ].

(23)

These projected ensembles correspond to marginal distributions and reduced
density operators for the cases of classical and quantum ensembles respec-
tively.

Finally, one may deﬁne any two ensembles ρ, ρ′ of the same type to be

non-overlapping if and only if

TrΓ[ρρ′] = 0.

(24)

Note that in general two ensembles are non-overlapping if and only if they
can be distinguished by measurement without error.

B Postulates for volume

For the three types of ensemble discussed in the previous subsection it is
useful to think of “volume” in the following ways. First, for a continuous
distribution p(x) on a space X, the volume corresponds to a direct measure
of the region of “spread” of p(x) in X. Second, for a classical discrete dis-
tribution
, one may imagine the indices as labelling a set of boxes or
bins.
In this case “volume” corresponds to the spread of the distribution
over these bins, i.e., as a continuous measure of the eﬀective number of bins
occupied by the distribution. Third, for a quantum ensemble, the volume
may be considered as a continous generalisation of Hilbert space dimension,
corresponding to a measure of the spread of the ensemble in Hilbert space.

pi}

{

13

Consider now a measure of volume, V (ρ), which satisﬁes the following

properties:

(i) Invariance Property: V (ρ) is invariant under all transformations on
Γ which preserve TrΓ[
] (these are represented by measure-preserving trans-
·
formations on X for continous classical ensembles, permutations on I for
discrete classical ensembles, and unitary transformations on H for quantum
ensembles).

(ii) Cartesian Property: If ρ describes two uncorrelated ensembles ρ1 and

ρ2 on Γ1 and Γ2 respectively, then

V (ρ) = V (ρ1)V (ρ2)

(note ρ is the product ρ1ρ2 for classical ensembles, and the tensor product
ρ1⊗
on Γ12 then

ρ2 for quantum ensembles).
(iii) Projection Property: If ρ describes an ensemble of composite systems

V (ρ)

V (ρ1)V (ρ2),

≤

where ρ1, ρ2 are the projections of ρ deﬁned in Eq. (23).

(iv) Additivity Property: An equally-weighted mixture of m non-overlapping

ensembles ρa, ρb, . . ., each of equal volume V , has a total volume of mV , i.e.,

V (m−1[ρa + ρb + . . .]) = mV.

(v) Uniformity Property: If ρ is any mixture of m non-overlapping en-

sembles of equal volumes V , then

V (ρ)

mV.

≤

The above properties are essentially the same as those deﬁned in [1],
where the additivity and uniformity properties were combined in the latter.
Their geometrical signiﬁcance is as follows.

First, the invariance property (i) ensures that the volume V (ρ) is a func-
tion of the ensemble alone, independently of a particular co-ordinatisation,
labelling, or measurement basis for Γ.
Indeed, the transformations which
preserve TrΓ[
] are exactly those which preserve volume, or measure, on Γ
·
in the usual sense. For example, for a classical distribution p(x) on X the
measure of a subset S

X is given by

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

⊆

S

=

|

|

ZS

dnx = T rS[1].

14

The invariance property then requires that the ensemble volume is invari-
ant under all transformations which preserve the measure of all subsets, i.e.,
those transformations with unit Jacobian. For the case of a classical phase
space such transformations include all canonical transformations, and hence
V (ρ) will be invariant under Hamiltonian evolution. One may similarly con-
H; in
sider the measure
these cases the invariance property again requires that V (ρ) is invariant un-
der measure-preserving transformations, corresponding to permutations and
unitary transformations respectively.

= TrS[1] of subsets S

I and subspaces S

⊆

⊆

S

|

|

Second, the Cartesian property (ii) is exactly analogous to the geometric
property that area equals length times breadth, and more generally that the
volume of the Cartesian product of two sets is equal to the product of the
volume of the sets. This is illustrated in Figure 1.

Third, the projection property (iii) is exactly analogous to the geometric
property that a volume is less than or equal to the product of the lengths
obtained by its projection onto orthogonal axes, and is illustrated in Figure
2. It is a generalisation of the projection property discussed for RMS area
and ensemble area in Sec. II.D.

Fourth, the additivity property (iv) requires the ensemble volume to be
additive for a uniform mixture of non-overlapping ensembles of equal volume.
The geometric interpretation of this is self-evident: the total volume of m
equal non-overlapping volumes is the sum of the individual volumes.

Finally, the uniformity property (v) states that the maximum volume,
of a mixture of non-overlapping ensembles of equal volume, is bounded by
the sum of the component volumes. Thus, noting the additivity property,
this maximum is achieved for a uniform mixture, i.e., one which is not more
concentrated on one of the component ensembles than on any other.

C Derivation

Here the unique, universal measure of volume for ensembles is obtained. It
may more generally be applied as a measure of spread for any positive classi-
cal or quantum density, such as beam intensity or mass density, by calculating
the “volume” of the corresponding normalised density. In such cases, where
no ensemble is involved, one could alternatively label this quantity as the
“geometric dispersion”.

15

In particular, one has the following result, ﬁrst stated in [1], and proved

Theorem: Any (continuous) measure of volume satisfying properties (i)-

in the Appendix:

(v) above has the form

where S(ρ) denotes the ensemble entropy

V (ρ) = K(Γ)eS(ρ),

S(ρ) =

TrΓ[ρ ln ρ],

−

K(Γ12) = K(Γ1)K(Γ2).

(30)

(31)

(32)

and K(Γ) is a constant which may depend on Γ, and satisﬁes

The proof in the Appendix primarily relies on applying properties (i)-(v)
to an arbitrarily large number of independent copies of a given ensemble ρ.
I believe it may be possible to prove the theorem without the uniformity
property (v), but have not been able to do so.

The constant K(Γ) in Eq. (30) is a normalisation constant, reﬂecting the
notion that only relative volumes are of real interest in comparing diﬀerent
ensembles. For continuous classical ensembles a natural choice is K(Γ) = 1,
so that a distribution which is uniform over a set S of measure V , and
vanishes outside S, has ensemble volume equal to V .

For discrete classical ensembles the choice K(Γ) = 1 corresponds to mea-
suring the ensemble volume in terms of the number of “bins” occupied by the
ensemble, with the minimum volume of 1 bin corresponding to a distribution
with pi = 1 for some index i. However, if the distribution arises from the
discretisation of a continuous observable such as position (due to measure-
ment limitations for example), then it would be natural to choose K(Γ) to
correspond to the discretisation volume. If the index set is ﬁnite, with M
labels, another possible choice for K(Γ) is 1/M. The ensemble volume then
measures the fraction of the total volume occupied by the ensemble.

For quantum ensembles the choice K(Γ) = 1 corresponds to measuring
the ensemble volume in terms of the number of Hilbert space dimensions
occupied by the ensemble, with pure states occupying the minimum possible
of 1 dimension. However, if the Hilbert space H has ﬁnite dimension M then
one could alternatively take K(Γ) = 1/M, corresponding to a fractional mea-
sure of volume in analogy to the classical case. Finally, for quantum systems

16

with classical counterparts, such as spin-zero particles, one may choose K(Γ)
so that in the classical limit the quantum ensemble volume reduces to the
classical ensemble volume. This is explored further in Sec. IV.B, and used
to obtain semi-classical uncertainty relations.

pi}

It should be noted that the assumption of continuity in the statement
of the theorem is necessary. For example, one may for a discrete classical
deﬁne the “support volume” as the number of non-zero pi
ensemble
values. This satisﬁes all of properties (i)-(v), but is not continuous. The
simplest counterexample is the discrete probability distribution
for
ǫ > 0. As ǫ
0 this distribution continuously approaches the distribution
, with a support volume of 1; however for all ǫ > 0 the support volume

ǫ, ǫ
}

→

−

{

{

1

1, 0
{
is 2.

}

If one deﬁnes the “RMS” volume for an n-dimensional observable x by
generalising Eq. (15) to arbitrary dimensions [25], it is not diﬃcult to show
that the invariance property (restricted to linear transformations), the Carte-
sian property, and the projection property are satisﬁed. However it does not
satisfy the additivity and uniformity properties. Further, the “Renyi” vol-
umes

Vα(ρ) = (TrΓ[ρ1+α])−1/α,

(33)

deﬁned in analogy with the Renyi length and Renyi area in Eqs. (3) and
(16) respectively, satisfy properties (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) for all α
1.
However, a counterexample given by Renyi (Theorem 4 of Sec. IX.6 in [15])
shows that the projection property is not satisﬁed, except for the cases α = 0
(corresponding to Eq. (30) with K(Γ) = 1), and α =
1 (corresponding to
the discontinuous case of “support volume” discussed above).

≥ −

−

D Geometric characterisation of entropy

The appearance of the ensemble entropy in Eq. (30) as a result of geometric
postulates (i)-(v) provides a new approach to this quantity, which is moreover
independent of whether the ensemble is classical or quantum, discrete or
continuous. In particular, ensemble entropy may be deﬁned (up to an additive
constant) as the logarithm of the ensemble volume, where the latter is taken
to be the primary quantity. The properties of ensemble entropy may thus be
regarded as being geometric in origin. Indeed, it will be seen that its natural
appearance in a number of physical contexts can be interpreted as following

17

from its relationship to a “volume”.

The geometric interpretation of ensemble entropy contrasts markedly with
its only other context-independent interpretation as an (indirect) measure
of “uncertainty” or “randomness” [15, 16, 17, 19, 26, 27]. Indeed ensemble
volume provides a direct measure of uncertainty, which is advantageous when
one wishes to compare the spreads of two ensembles of a given type (i.e., with
the same Γ). For example, if two ensembles have entropies of 0.5 bits and
1.5 bits respectively [28], should one compare their ratio or their diﬀerence
in assessing the degree to which the uncertainty of the ﬁrst exceeds that of
the second? Since entropies are typically only deﬁned up to a multiplicative
constant (see below), one might consider the ratio to be the more signicant
means of comparison. However, the ensemble volume gives an unequivocal
answer: the volume of the second ensemble is twice that of the ﬁrst in this
case, and hence has twice the spread.

It is interesting to brieﬂy compare the derivation of ensemble volume from
properties (i)-(v) with existing axiomatic derivations of ensemble entropy.
Such axiomatic derivations are reviewed in [29], and are all related to the
original derivation given by Shannon [19, 26]. Unlike the theorem of the
previous section they are limited to discrete classical ensembles. Moreover,
they lead to an arbitrary multiplicative constant for entropy, whereas the
geometric approach leads to an arbitrary additive constant for entropy.

To see that the axioms used by Shannon and others are markedly dif-
ferent from properties (i)-(v) used to derive ensemble volume, consider the
“grouping axiom” of Shannon [26] (see also Sec. 1.2 of [19]), which may be
written in the notation of this paper as:

S(λρ + (1

λ)ρ′) = S(

λ, 1

λ

) + λS(ρ) + (1

λ)S(ρ′)

}

{

−

−

−
for any two non-overlapping discrete classical ensembles ρ, ρ′. Thus it is as-
sumed that the “randomness” S(
) of a mixture of non-overlapping distribu-
tions is equal to that of the mixing distribution plus the average randomness
of the individual ensembles. This axiom, together with a continuity assump-
tion and a symmetry assumption equivalent to the invariance property (i), is
i pi ln pi for the entropy of discrete
suﬃcient to derive the form S(ρ) =
C
classical ensembles, where C is an arbitrary constant [29].

−

P

·

(34)

Eq. (34) does not translate into a natural axiom for ensemble volume:

18

replacing S by ln V gives the equivalent constraint

V (λρ + (1

λ)ρ′) = V (

λ, 1

λ

)[V (ρ)]λ[V (ρ′)]1−λ,

(35)

−

{

−

}

which has no simple geometric interpretation. Conversely, the additivity
property Eq. (27), that non-overlapping equal volumes add, translates under
V

exp S into the “randomness” constraint

→

S(ρ/2 + ρ′/2) = ln 2 + S,

(36)

which is not a natural property to postulate for a measure of “randomness”.
The geometric approach to ensemble entropy given here thus diﬀers signiﬁ-
cantly from former approaches (as is also apparent from comparing the proof
in the Appendix with those in [19, 26, 29]).

Finally, it is of interest to note that the concavity property of ensemble
i λiS(ρi) [19, 26], is equivalent to an inequality relat-
entropy, S(
ing the volume of a mixture to the weighted geometric mean of the volumes
of its components:

i λiρi)

≥ P

P

V (

λiρi)

[V (ρi)]λi.

(37)

Xi

≥ Yi
This may be regarded as a generalisation of the uniformity property Eq. (28),
as it implies that uniform mixtures have the greatest volumes. Note that the
ensemble volume may itself be regarded as a weighted geometric mean (e.g.,
of the function p(x)−1 with respect to p(x) for continous classical ensembles;
see sections 2.2 and 6.7 of [24]).

E Relative entropy

The relative entropy of two ensembles ρ and σ may be deﬁned in a context
independent manner by [30]

S(ρ

σ) = TrΓ[ρ(ln ρ

ln σ)].

|

−

(38)

It is asymptotically related to the probability of mistaking ensemble ρ for
ensemble σ, as is reviewed in [31]. Here it will brieﬂy be indicated how a
geometric interpretation of this quantity can be given.

Consider a compact n-dimensional space X which is divided up into into a
(e.g., for measurement purposes). A discrete

set of non-overlapping bins

Bi}

{

19

probability distribution
over the bins (e.g., corresponding to measure-
ment results), may then also be modelled by the continuous distribution p(x)
on X deﬁned by

pi}

{

p(x) = pi/Vi,

(39)
Bi dnx denotes the measure of bin Bi. Thus p(x) is uniform
where Vi =
R
over each bin, and its integral over bin Bi is equal to pi. Let ρD and ρC
and p(x)
denote the discrete and continuous ensembles corresponding to
respectively.

pi}

Bi,

∈

x

{

Now, as discussed earlier, the ensemble volume V (ρD) is proportional to
the eﬀective number of bins occupied by ρD. However, this does not indicate
the eﬀective volume or spread of the ensemble relative to X, particularly in
the case of varying bin-sizes Vi. The latter is given by V (ρC), which, making
the choice K(Γ) = 1, follows from Eq. (39) as

V (ρC) = exp[

pi ln(pi/Vi)].

(40)

− Xi

Note that in the case of equal bin-sizes Vi ≡
multiplied by the eﬀective number of bins occupied, exp S(ρD).

V this reduces to the bin-size V

Finally, if X has total measure

i Vi = VX, one may deﬁne the “weight-
ing” ensemble σD as corresponding to the discrete probability distribution
. Thus σD describes the relative sizes or weightings of the bins. It
Vi/VX}
{
then follows via Eqs. (38) and (40) that

P

V (ρC)/VX = e−S(ρD|σD).

(41)

|

Hence the relative entropy S(ρ

σ) is directly related to the volume of a
discrete ensemble ρ embedded in a continuous space, where σ characterises
the distribution of bin sizes of the embedding. Note that this geometric in-
terpretation of relative entropy allows its properties to be understood as
corresponding to ratios of volumes. For example, the volume of an ensemble
on X can never be greater than VX (corresponding to a uniform distribu-
tion on X). Hence the left-hand-side of Eq. (41) is never greater than unity,
implying that

S(ρ

σ)

0.

|

≥

(42)

20

IV APPLICATIONS

The results of Sec. II for ensemble length and ensemble area indicate the
usefulness of ensemble volume as a direct measure of the spread of an en-
semble (and of other positive densities such as optical beam power). Here
other applications will be examined, in the contexts of statistical mechanics,
semi-classical quantum mechanics, information theory, and quantum chaos.
A particular result of note is a new uniﬁed proof of the classical Shannon
information bound and the quantum Holevo information bound based on ra-
tios of ensemble volumes. For the quantum case this proof is conceptually
and technically far simpler than previous proofs.

A Statistical mechanics

First, in the statistical mechanics context, the Gibbs relation Sth = kS(ρ)
between thermodynamic entropy and ensemble entropy for equilibrium en-
sembles can be rewritten via Eq. (30) as

Sth = k ln[V (ρ)/K(Γ)].

(43)

Thus, the thermodyamic entropy is (up to an additive constant) proportional
to the logarithm of the ensemble volume.

From Eq. (43) and the third law of thermodynamics (that thermody-
namic entropy vanishes at absolute zero), it follows that one should choose
K(Γ) to correspond to a minimum “zero-temperature” ensemble volume. For
quantum ensembles one has from Eqs. (30) and (31) that V (ρ) = K(Γ) for
pure states, i.e., the quantum zero-temperature volume is just that of a pure
state on Γ. Similarly, for discrete classical ensembles, K(Γ) is the volume of
the “pure” ensemble described by
. However, continuous classical
ensembles violate the third law [5] and K(Γ) remains arbitrary in this case
(but see Sec. IV.B below).

1, 0, 0, . . .
}

{

The geometric expression (43) is very similar to the original Boltzmann

relation

Sth = k ln W,

(44)

where W is the number of distinct microstates or “elementary complexions”
consistent with the thermodynamic description. Indeed, from the above dis-
cussion it follows that Eq. (43) provides a precise geometric interpretation of

21

the Boltzmann relation for discrete classical and quantum equilibrium ensem-
bles: thermodynamic entropy is proportional to the logarithm of the number
of non-overlapping zero-temperature volumes contained within the total vol-
ume of the ensemble. Thus the Boltzmann relation and the Gibbs formula
for thermodynamic entropy become directly uniﬁed in the ensemble volume
approach, without appeals to reservoirs, microcanonical ensembles, etc.

Properties of thermodynamic entropy can be reinterpreted in terms of
geometric volume. For example, the additivity of thermodynamic entropy
for uncorrelated ensembles in thermal equilibrium follows from Eq. (43) and
the Cartesian property Eq. (25) for uncorrelated ensemble volumes. Note also
that irreversible processes correspond geometrically to those which increase
the volume of the ensemble.

B Semi-classical quantum mechanics

Consider now a classical ensemble ρC which is the “classical limit” of some
quantum ensemble ρQ, i.e., the physical properties of ρC approximate those
of ρQ. Such ensembles exist, for example, for equilibrium ensembles in the
high-temperature limit and for the coherent states of a harmonic oscillator.
For the case of a spinless particle associated with a 2n-dimensional phase
space one can obtain a relationship between the constants K(ΓC) and K(ΓQ)
in Eq. (30) by requiring that the ensemble volumes V (ρC) and V (ρQ) are ap-
proximately equal for such ensembles. Since these constants are independent
of the dynamics of the ensemble it suﬃces to choose an equilibrium ensemble
of isotropic oscillators. Equating the calculated values of V (ρC) and V (ρQ)
in the high-temperature limit then yields

K(ΓQ) = hnK(ΓC),

(45)

for the volume of a pure state, where h is Planck’s constant. Thus the
Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rule that a pure quantum state occupies a
phase-space volume of hn is recovered [32].

Eq. (45) can be used to derive semi-classical uncertainty relations from
geometric considerations. For two corresponding ensembles ρQ and ρC as
above the position and momentum entropies SX and SP respectively must
be approximately equivalent for either ensemble. Further,

exp(SX) exp(SP )

exp(S(ρC))

(46)

≥

22

holds for the classical ensemble from the projection property Eq. (26) applied
to projections onto the position and momentum axes. Eqs. (30), (45) and
(46) then yield the approximate inequality

SX + SP −

S(ρQ) >
∼

n ln h

for quantum ensembles which have classical limits. I conjecture that exact
inequality in fact holds for all quantum ensembles.

Since the entropy of a quantum ensemble has a minimum value of 0 (cor-
responding to the existence of a minimum volume for quantum ensembles),
it follows from Eq. (47) that one has the semi-classical entropic uncertainty
relation

SX + SP

n ln h,

>
∼

∆X∆P >
∼

¯h/e

for quantum ensembles with classical limits. As per the derivation of Eq. (10)
from Eq. (9), the corresponding semi-classical Heisenberg uncertainty rela-
tion

then follows for the n = 1 case. Eqs. (48) and (49) are close to the exact
results for general quantum ensembles [8, 23] (see Eqs. (9) and (10)).
It
is seen that geometrically they correspond to application of the projection
property Eq. (26) to the projections of a pure state of volume hn onto the
position and momentum axes (i.e., replacing Γ1 and Γ2 by X and P in Figure
2).

C Information bounds

Consider a communication channel where signals represented by ensembles
ρ1, ρ2, . . . are transmitted with prior probabilities p1, p2, . . . respectively [33].
The ensemble of signal states itself corresponds to the mixture

ρ =

piρi.

Xi

For classical ensembles it was shown by Shannon [19, 26] that the average
amount of error-free data I which can be obtained per transmitted signal,
measured in terms of the number of binary digits required to represent the
data, is bounded above by

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

I

[S(ρ)

≤

− Xi

piS(ρi)]/ ln 2.

23

The formally equivalent bound for quantum ensembles was proved by Holevo
[34], and hence Eq. (51) may be referred to as the Shannon-Holevo informa-
tion bound.

Proofs given in the literature of Eq. (51) for the quantum case are mathe-
matically rather technical in nature, and quite diﬀerent in character to proofs
for the classical case [34, 35]. However, the formal equivalence of the quan-
tum and classical bounds suggests that a uniﬁed proof exploiting universal
features of statistical ensembles may be possible. Indeed the construction of
such a proof, based on simple volume arguments, was recently outlined in
[1], and will be elaborated on here. A second such proof, which reduces the
general classical/quantum case to that of discrete classical noiseless channels,
will also be pointed out.

ρi}
First, consider a message consisting of L signals chosen from the set
.
Such a message may be denoted by ρα, where α = (i1, i2, . . . , iL) denotes the
labels of the signals comprising the message. In the limit that L
the
strong law of large numbers implies that the relative frequency of signal ρi
appearing in the message approaches pi with probability 1. It follows from
the Cartesian property Eq. (25) that the volume of the message satisﬁes

→ ∞

{

(52)

(53)

V (ρα)

Vmess =

[V (ρi)]piL,

→

Yi

→ ∞

as L
. Moreover, as will be shown below in Eq. (56), the volume
of any ensemble of such messages is bounded above by [V (ρ)]L. Hence,
using the additivity property Eq. (27), the maximum possible number of
non-overlapping messages of length L, NL, satisﬁes

NL ≤

[V (ρ)]L/Vmess

→ ∞

as L
. Noting that error-free data can only be obtained from distin-
guishing among a set of non-overlapping messages, and that NL such mes-
sages require at most 1+log2 NL binary digits to record, it follows in the limit
of inﬁnitely long messages that the average information gained per signal, I,
is bounded by

I

lim
L→∞

≤

L−1(1 + log2 NL)

log2 V (ρ)/

[V (ρi)]pi.

(54)

≤

Yi

Finally, since communication based on ﬁnite message lengths cannot trans-
mit more data per signal than communication based on inﬁnite lengths, the

24

bound holds for all signalling schemes, and Eq. (51) follows from Eqs. (30)
and (54).

The above proof of the Shannon-Holevo bound is geometrically simple,
being based on the ratio of the maximum available volume for an ensemble
of messages to the message volume (Eq. (53)). Note that the argument
cannot be used to derive similar bounds based on other invariant volume
measures, as all of the deﬁning properties of ensemble volume are required.
However, heuristic arguments of the same type for other volume measures
can sometimes give excellent results [3, 4]. Note that the Shannon-Holevo
bound is in fact tight for both classical and quantum ensembles [19, 26, 36],
corresponding geometrically to being able to choose a number NL of messages
arbitrarily close to the upper bound in Eq. (53) which can be distinguished
with a vanishingly small average error probability as L

.

To conclude this subsection it will be shown that the Shannon-Holevo
bound may also be proved by considering only messages of ﬁnite length, and
applying the classical noiseless coding theorem [19, 26]. With notation as
above, suppose that one chooses a set of codewords C from the set of messages
C is transmitted with probability q(α).
of length L, and that codeword ρα ∈
Deﬁning Ni(α) as the number of times signal ρi appears in codeword ρα,
α∈C q(α)ρil as the average l-th component of the transmitted
and ρl =
codewords, consistency requires that

P

→ ∞

pi = L−1

q(α)Ni(α),

ρ = L−1

Xα∈C
L

Xl=1

ρl.

(55)

Using the projection property Eq. (26) and Eq. (37) one then has the in-
equality chain

V (

q(α)ρα)

V (ρ1) . . . V (ρL)

[V (

Xα

≤

≤

Xl

L−1ρl)]L = [V (ρ)]L.

(56)

To obtain a bound for error-free data, it must be assumed that the code-
words are non-overlapping, so that they can be distinguished without error
by measurement. From Eq. (30) and the Cartesian property Eq. (25) one
may then calculate

V (

q(α)ρα) = eS[q]

[V (ρα)]q(α) = eS[q]

[V (ρil)]q(α),

(57)

Xα

Yα∈C

Yα∈C Yl

25

where S[q] denotes the entropy of the discrete distribution
ing this with Eqs. (55) and (56) then gives

{

q(α)

. Combin-

}

S[q]

LS(ρ)

≤

q(α)S(ρil)

= LS(ρ)

q(α)Ni(α)S(ρi)

− Xα∈C Xl

− Xα∈C Xi

= L[S(ρ)

piS(ρi)].

− Xi

(58)

Finally, from Shannon’s classical noiseless coding theorem [19, 26] S[q]/ ln 2
is the maximum information (measured in binary digits) which can be trans-
mitted on average per codeword, and hence Eq. (51) follows for the average
information transmitted per signal.

D Chaotic and other diﬀusion processes

Zyckowski [10] and Mirbach and Korsch [11, 12] have studied connections be-
tween quantum and classical chaos via entropies associated with the evolution
of coherent states. Here it will be shown that this approach may be simply
interpreted in terms of ensemble volume, and considerably generalised.

Consider an ensemble ρ0, classical or quantum, which evolves in time
under some dynamical process D (not necessarily reversible). The ensemble
will explore some region of Γ, which may be large for standard diﬀusion
processes, or relatively small for integrable and dissipative systems. The
localisation of the ensemble in Γ over time is characterised by the time-
averaged mixture

ρ = lim
T →∞

T −1

T

Z
0

dt ρt.

(59)

This mixture gives greatest weight to regions of Γ where the ensemble spends
the most time. Hence its ensemble volume, V (ρ), is a measure of the spread
of the region explored by the ensemble as it evolves.

The localisation ratio for a given initial state and dynamical process may

now be deﬁned as the ratio of the volumes of ρ and ρ0, i.e.,

r = V (ρ)/V (ρ0) = exp[S(ρ)

S(ρ0)].

(60)

−

It thus measures the localisation of the ensemble under the evolution process,
relative to its initial spread. This ratio will be less than or equal to one if the

26

ensemble evolves to a ﬁxed point, and greater than or equal to one if it diﬀuses
over the whole of Γ. For chaotic systems with integrable regions it will depend
strongly on the initial ensemble. The above deﬁnition is clearly natural on
geometric grounds, and the ensemble entropy appears as a consequence of
the uniqueness theorem in Eq. (30).

For classical and quantum systems corresponding to the same evolution
process, it is of interest to compare localisation properties. This is easily
done for the case of initial quantum ensembles ρQ which have corresponding
classical counterparts ρC (such as coherent states). In this case the quantum
and classical localisation ratios rQ and rC can be calculated and compared.
Zyckowksi partially carries through this procedure in [10], where he plots
S(ρ) for the quantum counterpart of a classically chaotic process, where ρQ
is chosen to range over a set of coherent states indexed by their correspond-
ing phase-space points. In this case S(ρ) is just the entropy of the energy
distribution of ρQ. Noting S(ρQ) = 0 for pure states, it follows from Eq. (60)
that this is equivalent to plotting the logarithm of the localisation ratio, ln r.
However, he compares quantum localisation features qualitatively with the
classical phase space portrait, rather than quantitatively with analogously
calculated classical localisation ratios.

Mirbach and Korsch extended the approach of Zyckowski by also cal-
culating S(ρ) for the classical ensembles ρC corresponding to the coherent
states ρQ. For a complete family of such states they then compared the cor-
responding classical and quantum values of S(ρ) (Figures 1 and 3 of [12]).
Since for this case S(ρQ) and S(ρC) are constants, this amounts to compar-
ing the logarithms of the classical and quantum localisation ratios (up to an
additive constant).

However, Mirbach and Korsch argue that one should in fact compare mea-
surement entropies rather than the direct ensemble entropies, to smear out
quantum ﬂuctuations in the latter case [11, 12]. This is also easily interpreted
in terms of localisation ratios. In particular, for a measurement observable
A on a classical or quantum ensemble ρ, let VA(ρ) denote the volume of the
measurement distribution of A. The localisation ratio of an evolution process
with respect to A, for an initial ensemble ρ0, is then deﬁned in analogy to
Eq. (60) as

rA = VA(ρ)/VA(ρ0).

(61)

Again one may compare localisation ratios for classical and quantum ensem-

27

bles, where one chooses corresponding observables AQ and AC. The loga-
rithm of this quantity (up to an additive constant) is plotted in Figures 2
and 3 of [11] for quantum and classical systems respectively for a complete
set of coherent states, where AC is chosen to be a phase-space measurement
(so that rAC = rC), and AQ to be a “Husimi” phase-space measurement
corresponding to the complete set of coherent states [37].

V CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, an essentially unique measure of volume for classical and quan-
tum ensembles has been found, related to ensemble entropy, which provides
a geometric tool for any context in which ensembles appear. This measure
is universal in the sense that it may be deﬁned by theory-independent con-
cepts of invariance, uncorrelated ensembles, projection, and non-overlapping
ensembles (properties (i)-(v)).

Its properties as a direct measure of “spread” have been investigated in
Sec. II for continuous distributions, and favourably compared with measures
based on root-mean-square deviation. New geometric characterisations of
ensemble entropy and relative entropy have been discussed in Secs.
III.D
and III.E.

Applications include a new deﬁnition of spot size for optical beams; a
precise geometric interpretation of the Boltzmann relation in statistical me-
chanics; a derivation of semi-classical uncertainty relations based on the exis-
tence of a minimum volume for quantum states and a projection property of
volumes; a uniﬁed derivation of results in classical and quantum information
theory based on simple volume ratios; and a new and universal deﬁnition of
a localisation ratio which measures the time-averaged spreading of an ensem-
ble and underlies entropic measures previously investigated in the context of
quantum chaos.

Work is in progress on further applications, particularly to quantum infor-
mation theory [36], measures of quantum entanglement [31], and information
exclusion relations [4, 38]. The conjecture suggested following Eq. (47) is also
under active investigation, and the (mostly weaker) bound

SX + SP −

≥

−

S(ρ)

ln 2πe¯h

ln[1 + ∆X∆P/(¯h/2)]

(62)

has thus far been found for the n = 1 case.

28

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Prof. Wolfgang Schleich for drawing my attention to
the inverse participation ratio (thus stimulating the search for the “best”
measure of volume), and to Prof. Hajo Leschke and Drs. Gernot Alber
and Bruno Mirbach for useful discussions. This work was supported by the
Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.

APPENDIX
Here the fundamental theorem stated in Sec.

III.C is proved, showing
essentially that the exponential of the ensemble entropy is the unique measure
It is convenient to ﬁrst prove the
of the volume of a statistical ensemble.
theorem for discrete classical ensembles, and then extend the arguments to
quantum ensembles and to continuous classical ensembles. Notation will be
as deﬁned in Sec.
III.A, and reference will be made to the ﬁve assumed
properties of the volume measure V (ρ) stated in Sec. III.B.

Let ρ denote a classical discrete ensemble

pi}
. Deﬁning the “pure” ensemble ρj (j

1, 2, . . . , M

{

, with ﬁnite index set I =
I) as corresponding to

{
the distribution

}

p(j)
i }

{

with p(j)

i = δij, one can write ρ as the mixture

∈

ρ =

piρi.

Xi∈I

(63)

Note that one has the two basic properties

TrΓ[ρjρk] = 0 (j

= k),

V (ρj) = constant = VI.

(64)

The ﬁrst states that these pure ensembles are non-overlapping, and the sec-
ond that they have equal ensemble volumes (this follows from the invariance
property, noting that the ρj map to each other under permutations).

Now consider the ensemble ρL

ΓL corresponding to L uncorrelated

copies of ρ. For each α = (i1, i2, . . . , iL) in I L deﬁne

∈

ρα = ρi1ρi2 . . . ρiL,

p(α) = pi1pi2 . . . piL.

(65)

Thus ρα corresponds to the uncorrelated composite ensemble formed by
ρi1, ρi2, . . . , ρiL (in that order). One can then decompose ρL into the mix-
ture

ρL =

p(α)ρα.

(66)

Xα∈I L

29

6
The proof of the theorem proceeds by ﬁnding a suitable set of so-called
I L [19, 26], which allows ρL in Eq. (66) to be
“typical sequences” T
⊆
where α is restricted
approximated by certain mixtures of the ensembles
to range over T .

ρα}

{

∈

For a given α

I L let Ni(α) denote the number of times the index i
I L correspond to a permutation
appears as a component of α, and let P (α)
of the components of α. If S(ρ) denotes the entropy of ρ deﬁned in Eq. (31)
of the text, then for any ǫ > 0 and L suﬃciently large one may choose a set
T , with

elements, which satisﬁes:

∈

T

|

|

(T 1) CT =

p(α) > 1

ǫ,

Xα∈T

−

(T 2)
(T 3)

(T 4) α

T

|
|
Xi∈I |

= eL[S(ρ)+δL],
L−1Ni(α)

pi |
T implies P (α)

−

< δ′

L for all α

T,

∈

T for all P,

∈

∈
0 as L
L−1Ni(α)

α :

T =

L →

where both δL and δ′

. A particular example of such a set is
pi)/(Lǫ)]1/2

→ ∞
pi |
Properties (T1) and (T2) for this set are proved in Theorem 1.3.1 of [19];
1)1/2
pi)]1/2 is bounded by (M
i[pi(1
property (T3) follows noting that
and hence that one can choose δ′
L = M(Lǫ)−1/2; and property (T4) is an
P
immediate consequence of Ni(α) being invariant under permutations.

< [Mpi(1

(67)

−

−

−

−

{

}

|

.

To obtain an upper bound for the volume V (ρ) of ρ, consider now the

ensembles deﬁned by the mixtures
ρL(T ) = C −1
T

p(α)ρα,

Xα∈T

ρ∗
L(T ) =

T

−1

|

|

ρα,

Xα∈T

(68)

P

α∈T p(α). From the Cartesian property and Eqs. (64) and
where CT =
(65) it follows that V (ρα) = [VI]L is constant, and further that the ρα
are non-overlapping. Hence, from the uniformity and additivity properties,
V (ρL(T ))

[VI]L. Property (T2) then gives
[VI]LeL[S(ρ)+δL].
Further, from property (T1) and Eqs. (66) and (68),

|
|
V (ρL(T ))

L(T )) =

V (ρ∗

(69)

≤

≤

T

TrΓL[
|

ρL

−

ρL(T )

] =

|

p(α)

p(α)/CT |

−

+

p(α)

Xα∈T |
= (1/CT −
30

1)CT + (1

CT )

2ǫ.

−

Xα /∈T

≤

Hence ρL can be made arbitrarily close to ρL(T ) for L suﬃciently large,
and so from the assumed continuity of V (
), and noting from the Cartesian
property that V (ρL) = [V (ρ)]L, one has from Eq. (69) that

·

V (ρ) = lim
L→∞

[V (ρL(T ))]1/L

VIeS(ρ).

≤

(70)

Thus the exponential of the entropy is an upper bound for the ratio of the
volume of ρ to the volume of a “pure” state. Note that only properties (T1)
and (T2) of T were needed to obtain this result, and that the projection
property has not been used.

To obtain the converse of inequality Eq. (70), note from the projection

property that

where ρl(T ) is the projection of ρL(T ) onto its l-th component, i.e.,

V (ρ∗

L(T ))

V (ρl(T )),

L

≤

Yl=1

ρl(T ) =

p(α)ρil.

Xα=(i1,...iL)∈T

From property (T4) of T , ρl(T ) is independent of l and hence may be denoted
[V (ρ)]L. But as noted earlier, the
by ρ. Eq. (71) then becomes V (ρ∗
[VI]L, and
volume of V (ρ∗
hence via property (T2) of T Eq. (71) reduces to

L(T ))
L(T )) follows from the additivity property as

≤

T

|

|

Further, from Eqs. (68) and (72)

VIeS(ρ)+δL

V (ρ).

≤

ρ = L−1

ρl(T ) =

T

|

|

−1

Xl

Xα∈T Xi∈I

L−1Ni(α)ρi,

and hence from Eq. (63) and property (T3) of T

TrΓ[
|

ρ

−

ρ

] =

|

|

T

T

−1 TrΓ[

|

|

−1

| Xα∈T Xi∈I
pi −

Xα∈T Xi∈I |

(pi −
L−1Ni(α)

L−1Ni(α))ρi |
δ′
L.

]

|≤

≤ |

Hence ρ can be made arbitrarily close to ρ for L suﬃciently large, and so,
taking the limit L

in Eq. (73), the assumed continuity of V (

) gives

→ ∞

·

(75)

VIeS(ρ)

V (ρ).

≤

31

(71)

(72)

(73)

(74)

{

pi = δij}

Eqs. (70) and (75) yield the theorem of Sec. III.B for classical discrete
ensembles with ﬁnite index sets (where K(Γ) in Eq. (30) is identiﬁed with the
on I, and Eq. (32) for K(Γ) follows
volume VI of a pure ensemble
immediately from the Cartesian property). The extension to ensembles with
inﬁnite index sets is trivial by continuity. The distribution
of such an
ensemble ρ can be arbitrarily closely approximated by its (renormalised) ﬁrst
M terms, corresponding to a discrete ensemble ρM with a ﬁnite index set.
Hence, from from the assumed continuity of ensemble volume and Eqs. (70)
and (75), V (ρ) = VI limM →∞ exp[S(ρM )] where VI is the volume of a “pure”
ensemble with respect to the inﬁnite index set I. Thus V (ρ) is as per the
theorem (but becomes inﬁnite in the case that the limit of S(ρM ) as M
does not exist).

→ ∞

pi}

{

The extension to quantum ensembles is straightforward. Indeed, for quan-
tum ensembles the above analysis goes through formally unchanged, where
the expansion in Eq. (63) is now identiﬁed with an orthogonal decomposition
into pure states, and the ﬁrst product in Eq. (65) is a tensor product. Thus
the ρi and pi represent (non-overlapping) eigenstates and eigenvalues of ρ.
The only additional consideration is that VI, the volume of an eigenstate of ρ,
might conceivably depend on the eigenstate basis. However this is ruled out
by the invariance property (i): all pure states on a given Hilbert space can
be connected by unitary transformations, and hence have the same volume.
Finally, the theorem may be extended to continuous classical ensembles
as follows. Consider a classical ensemble ρ described by a probability distri-
bution p(x) on an n-dimensional space X. This space may be partitioned
Si dnx = V
into a set
R
for all i). Deﬁne the corresponding “pure” ensembles ρi by the associated
probability distributions p(i)(x) = 1/V for x
Si.
These pure ensembles can be mapped to each other by measure-preserving
transformations, and hence from the invariance property have equal ensem-
ble volumes, V0(V ) say. The formal analogues of the properties in Eq. (64)
then hold, and again the above analysis for classical discrete ensembles goes
through formally unchanged for mixtures of these pure ensembles, i.e.,

of non-overlapping sets of equal volume V (i.e.,

Si and = 0 for x /
∈

Si}

∈

{

V (

piρi) = V0(V ) exp(

pi log pi).

(76)

Xi

− Xi

32

Now consider the particular mixture deﬁned by

ρV =

pi(V )ρi,

pi(V ) =

Xi

dn p(x).

ZSi

(77)

(78)

(79)

Thus ρV is a discrete approximation to ρ, and hence, noting that

Si dnx, one has from the Mean Value Theorem that

X dnx
R

≡

i

P

R

TrΓ[
|

ρ

ρV |

−

] =

ZSi

Xi

dnx

p(x)

|

−

pi(V )/V

0

|→

in the continuum limit V
→
continuity of ensemble volume,

0. Hence, from Eq. (76) and the assumed

V (ρ) = lim
V →0

V0(V ) exp(SV )

where SV denotes the entropy of
gral by a summation,

{

}

pi(V )

. But again approximating an inte-

S(ρ) = lim

V

V →0 −

Xi

[pi(V )/V ] ln[pi(V )/V ] = lim
V →0

(SV + ln V ).

(80)

Hence Eq. (79) can be rewritten as

V (ρ) = eS(ρ) lim
V →0

V0(V )/V.

(81)

∈

X
Finally, to show that the limit exists in Eq. (81), note that any set S
S dnx = V can be partitioned into m non-overlapping sets of
of measure
R
equal measure V /m for any integer m. Moreover, a “pure” ensemble on S,
corresponding to a distribution which is uniform over S and vanishing outside
S, can trivially be written as an equally-weighted mixture of analogously
deﬁned ensembles for the members of the partition. Hence from the additivity
property one has the relation V0(V ) = mV0(V /m) for the ensemble volumes
of “pure” ensembles. Further, replacing V by nV in this relation for any
integer n implies that V0(rV ) = rV0(V ) for any rational number r = n/m.
This can be extended to all real r from the assumed continuity of ensemble
volume, so that V0(V )/V = constant = K(Γ) say, and the theorem follows
via Eq. (81).

33

References

[1] M.J.W. Hall, quant-ph/9806013.

[2] C.E Shannon, Proc. IRE 37, 160 (1949), reprinted in Claude Elwood
Shannon: Collected Papers, edited by N. Sloane and A. Wyner (IEEE,
New York, 1993), pp. 160-172.

[3] C.M. Caves and P.D. Drummond, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 481 (1994).

[4] M.J.W. Hall, Phys. Rev. A 55, 100 (1997).

[5] M. Toda, R.Kubo and N. Saitˆo Statistical Physics I (Springer, Berlin,

1983), Sec. 2.1.

Secs. 5.2, 25, 26.

[6] S.-K. Ma, Statistical Mechanics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1985),

[7] R. Leipnik, Inform. and Contr. 2, 64 (1959).

[8] V.V. Dodonov and V.I. Man’ko, in Invariants and the Evolution of Non-
stationary Quantum Systems, edited by M.A. Markov (Nova Science
Pubishers, New York, 1989), pp. 3-101, Sec. 4.

[9] M. Zakai, Inform. and Contr. 3, 101 (1960).

[10] K. Zyckowski, J. Phys. A 23, 4427 (1990).

[11] B. Mirbach and H.J. Korsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 362 (1995).

[12] B. Mirbach and H.J. Korsch, Ann. Phys. (NY) 265, 80 (1998).

[13] E. Heller, Phys. Rev. A 35, 1360 (1987).

[14] W.H. Zurek, S. Habib, and J.P. Paz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1187 (1993).

[15] A. Renyi, Probability Theory (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970), The-

orem 4 of Sec. IX.6, Eq. (31) of Sec.IX.8.

[16] J.B.M. Uﬃnk Measures of Uncertainty and the Uncertainty Principle

(Ph.D. thesis, University of Utrecht, 1990).

34

[17] H. Maassen and J.B.M. Uﬃnk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1103 (1988).

[18] To derive Eq. (4), deﬁne f (α) = ln

dx p(x)1+α, implying limα→0 ln LX,α

= limα→0 [f (0)

f (α)]/α =

−

R
f ′(0).

−

[19] R. Ash Information Theory (Wiley, New York, 1965), Chaps. 1,2,6.

[20] This follows from a straightforward variational calculation, and may be

generalised to all Renyi lengths.

[21] For the general case of non-overlapping p(x) and q(x) with equal Renyi
λ)q(x) that
λ)1+α]−1/α; diﬀerentiating with respect to λ yields

lengths LX,α = L, one ﬁnds for the mixture λp(x) + (1
LX,α/L = [λ1+α + (1
a maximum of 2, attained for λ = 1/2.

−

−

[22] For an example in the context of optical phase, where the RMS deviation
gives a rather misleading indication of the spread of the (near-optimally
phase-concentrated) coherent phase states, see M.J.W. Hall, J. Mod.
Opt. 40, 809 (1993).

[23] I. Bialynicki-Birula and J. Mycielski, Commun. Math. Phys. 44, 129

(1975).

[24] G.H. Hardy, J.E. Littlewood, and G. Polya, Inequalites (Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, London, 1934), Eq. (2.13.7).

[25] If the components of x are (possibly non-commuting) quantum observ-
ables, the expectation values in Eq. (15) should be symmetrised.

[26] C.E. Shannon, Bell Syst. Tech J. 27, 379 (1948); 27, 623 (also reprinted

in the collection of Ref. [2] above, pp. 5-83).

[27] Of course, in special contexts, restricted interpretations of ensemble en-
tropy are possible: for example, as the logarithm of the number of mi-
crostates in statistical mechanics [5]; or as the amount of information
obtainable by measurement on discrete classical and quantum ensembles
[26, 36] (see also L. Brillouin, Science and Information Theory 2nd edn.
(Academic, New York, 1962), Chapter 1). Such interpretations are not
applicable more generally, however. For example, for continuous classi-
cal ensembles the entropy can take any negative value, which is not the

35

case for numbers of microstates and information gain. In contrast, in
the geometric interpretation such negative values merely correspond to
the possibility of arbitrarily small ensemble volumes.

[28] Units of bits correspond to dividing S(ρ) in Eq. (31) by ln 2.

[29] M. Behara, Additive and Nonadditive Measures of Entropy (Wiley, New

Delhi, 1990), Section 1.1.

Verlag, Berlin, 1993).

[30] M. Ohya and and D. Petz, Quantum Entropy and its Use (Springer-

[31] V. Vedral and M.B. Plenio, Phys. Rev. A 57, 1619 (1998), Sec. IV.

[32] A.S. Davydov, Quantum Mechanics 2nd edn. (Pergamon Press, UK,

1976), Sec. III.23.

[33] The signals are in general represented by ensembles, to take into account
any noise processes in the transmitter and channel medium prior to
detection at the receiver.

[34] A.S. Holevo, Probl. Inf. Trans. 9, 177 (1973).

[35] H.P. Yuen and M. Ozawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 363 (1993); C.A. Fuchs
and C.M. Caves, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3047 (1994); B. Schumacher, M.
Westmoreland, and W.K. Wootters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3452 (1996).

[36] B. Schumacher and M.D. Westmoreland, Phys. Rev. A 56, 131 (1997);

A.S. Holevo, quant-ph/9611023.

[37] A complete set of coherent states

corresponds to a joint posi-
{|
tion/momentum measurement described by the positive-operator-valued
(see, e.g., [3]); the statistics of the correspond-
measure
ing observable AQ for state ρ are then given by the Husimi distribution
π−1

π−1

i}

|}

ih

α

α

α

α

α

ρ

{

|

.

h

|

|

i

[38] M.J.W. Hall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3307 (1995).

36

1

TABLE I. Examples of ensemble length and RMS deviation
LX
1
π/√e
(2πe)1/2
e
πe2(1−C) a
4π
2

Distribution
Uniform
Circular
Gaussian
Exponential
Sink-squared
Cauchy-Lorentz
Double-uniform pDU (x) = 1/2, 0
aC

p(x)
pU (x) = 1, 0
x
pC(x) = 2(1
|
|≤
x2/2)
pG(x) = (2π)−1/2 exp(
−
pE(x) = exp(
0
≥
pSS(x) = π−1[sin(x)/x]2
pCL(x) = π−1/(1 + x2)

0.57721566 denotes Euler’s constant

x
≤
x2)1/2/π,

≤
−

x), x

| −

≤|

−

≤

x

a

1

1

≈

∆X
1/(2√3)
1/2
1
1
-
-
[1/3 + a(a + 1)]1/2

37

FIGURE CAPTIONS

FIG. 1. Two uncorrelated ensembles ρ1 and ρ2 on spaces Γ1 and Γ2 re-
spectively (shown here compressed to 1-dimensional axes), have respective
volumes V (ρ1) and V (ρ2) as indicated by the darkened axis regions. The
Cartesian property Eq. (25) states that the corresponding joint ensemble ρ
has a “rectangular” volume V (ρ) = V (ρ1)V (ρ2), i.e., V (ρ) corresponds to
the Cartesian product of volumes V (ρ1) and V (ρ2).

FIG. 2. An ensemble ρ on the product space of Γ1 and Γ2 has a volume
V (ρ) indicated by the solid closed curve. The corresponding projected en-
sembles ρ1 and ρ2 on Γ1 and Γ2 respectively have projected volumes V (ρ1)
and V (ρ2), indicated by the darkened axis regions. The projection property
Eq. (26) states that V (ρ) can be no greater than the volume of the rectangu-
lar region formed by the dashed lines, i.e., than the product of the projected
volumes.

38

1
Γ

)
1
 
ρ
(

V

)
ρ
(

V

2

)
 
ρ
(

V

2
Γ

quant-ph/9806013   4 Jun 1998

1
Γ

)
1
 
ρ
(

V

2
Γ

quant-ph/9806013   4 Jun 1998

)
2
 
ρ
(

V

