9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
5
 
 
]
n
a
-
a
t
a
d
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Signature of Fermi Surface Jumps in Positron
Spectroscopy Data

Gh. Adama,∗), b,†) and S. Adamb,‡)
a The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics,
P. O. Box 586, 34100 - Trieste, Italy
b Department of Theoretical Physics,
Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering
P. O. Box MG-6, RO-76900 Bucharest-M˘agurele, Romania

Abstract

A subtractionless method for solving Fermi surface sheets (FSS), from
measured n-axis-projected momentum distribution histograms by two-
dimensional angular correlation of the positron-electron annihilation
radiation (2D-ACAR) technique, is discussed. The window least squares
statistical noise smoothing ﬁlter described in Adam et al., NIM A, 337
(1993) 188, is ﬁrst reﬁned such that the window free radial parameters
(WRP) are optimally adapted to the data. In an ideal single crystal, the
speciﬁc jumps induced in the WRP distribution by the existing Fermi
surface jumps yield straightforward information on the resolved FSS.
In a real crystal, the smearing of the derived WRP optimal values, which
originates from positron annihilations with electrons at crystal imper-
fections, is ruled out by median smoothing of the obtained distribu-
tion, over symmetry deﬁned stars of bins. The analysis of a gigacount
2D-ACAR spectrum, measured on the archetypal high-Tc compound
Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ at room temperature, illustrates the method. Both
electronic FSS, the ridge along ΓX direction and the pillbox centered
at the S point of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone, are resolved.

∗Senior Associate. E-mail: adam@ictp.trieste.it
†Permanent address. E-mail: adamg@roifa.ifa.ro
‡E-mail: adams@roifa.ifa.ro

1

PACS: 07.05.Kf, 78.70.Bj, 71.18.+y, 74.72.Bk
Keywords: Median smoothing; Least squares smoothing; Positron Annihila-
tion Radiation; Fermi surface; High-Tc superconductivity; Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ.

1 Introduction

While the technique of two-dimensional angular correlation of the positron-
electron annihilation radiation (2D-ACAR) [1, 2, 3], was successfully used to
resolve the Fermi surface topology in various classes of materials (see, e.g., [4]
for a recent review), the attempts to use it in high-Tc superconductors met
huge diﬃculties stemming from various sources: the occurrence of a fraction
of Fermi electrons which is signiﬁcantly lower than in normal metals, the
layered crystalline structures of the samples, the high proportion of crystal
imperfections in the single crystals under investigation.

A straightforward consequence of the occurrence of a layered structure,
which prevents the uniform distribution of the thermalized positrons inside
the sample, is the limitation of the usefulness of the 2D-ACAR technique to
the resolution of the electronic Fermi sheets only. The occurrence of a small
fraction of Fermi electrons results in very weak Fermi surface jumps in the
measured momentum density, which can thus be easily missed unless the
crystal quality is very high and the accumulated statistics is large enough to
get the small Fermi surface jumps resolved.

The resolution of the Fermi surface in high-Tc superconductors is a chal-
lenge irrespective of the used technique, however. Each of the techniques
used so far (2D-ACAR, de Haas-van Alphen, or angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy (see, e.g., [4] and references quoted therein), has been able to
resolve only part of the existing Fermi surface sheets, such that the ﬁnal rep-
resentation of the Fermi surface came from the superposition of essentially
disjoint pieces of information [5].

In this paper, we consider the identiﬁcation of the Fermi surface jumps
from a 2D-ACAR histogram which records the projection, along a principal
crystallographic axis n, of the momentum density coming from zero-spin
positron-electron pairs. Such a histogram will be called thereafter an n-axis-
projected histogram.

If the single crystal used in a 2D-ACAR experiment would be perfect, then
the statistical noise smoothing by means of an appropriate method (see,
e.g., [6, 7, 8]), possibly combined with a method of subtracting the radially

2

isotropic component, would resolve the characteristic Fermi surface jumps.

In fact, there is an important discrepancy between the experimentally
measured and theoretically computed momentum distributions. In the range
of low momenta, the latter, which are calculated under the assumption of
perfect crystalline periodicity, are found to be sensibly smaller than the for-
mer [9]. The origins of this discrepancy have been traced back to the positron
annihilation with electrons at crystal imperfections [10, 5]. A quantitative
estimate [5] suggested that more than one third of all annihilations belong
to this category.

To rule out the spurious eﬀects coming from crystal imperfections, either
their contribution is to be explicitly subtracted from the data (as done, e.g.,
by the Argonne group [10, 5]), or the smoothing method is to be insensitive
to the occurrence of crystal imperfections.

Here we report a method of the second kind. There are two basic ingredi-
ents of this method: (i) the derivation of optimally adapted to the data radial
parameters of the constant-weight window least squares (CW-WLS) smoothing
method reported in [6] and (ii) removal of crystal imperfection dependence
of the obtained values by median smoothing over stars of symmetry relating
the bins of the histogram.

The occurrence of Fermi surface jumps in the data results in jumps in
the optimal radial parameters of the CW-WLS ﬁlter. The presence of crystal
imperfections blurs the occurring jumps. The median smoothing restores the
jumps, if any.

x pD

y pD

Essential for the success of such an analysis is the operation of histogram
redeﬁnition from the laboratory frame (LF), OpD
z , (which is deﬁned by
the setup and within which the data acquisition is performed) to the crystal
frame (CF) (which is identiﬁed with Γpxpypz, the canonical reference frame of
the ﬁrst Brillouin zone of the crystal [11] and within which the various steps of
the oﬀ-line analysis of the spectrum are legitimate). Here, this preliminary
problem is assumed to be solved along the lines described in [12] Within
the procedure described in these papers, the assumption (following from the
experiment) of a momentum projection along a principal crystallographic
axis is duly checked, such that the expected symmetrization operations are
justiﬁed and hence the inclusion of stars of bins into the smoothing procedure
of the median method is a valid operation.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the CW-WLS smoothing
method is brieﬂy reviewed and the criteria which serve to the deﬁnition of
data adapted radial parameters of the smoothing windows are discussed. The

3

description of the median smoothing is done in Section 3. An illustration on
experimental data is reported in Section 4.

2 CW-WLS Statistical Noise Smoothing with

Optimal Radial Parameters

2.1 Local smoothing windows

H = (
f

hij) denote the raw LF 2D-ACAR histogram of interest, corrected
Let
e
for ﬁnite detector aperture and local variations of the detector sensibility [6].
H sharply decreases when one
The statistically relevant information within
f
goes from the histogram center towards its borders. This feature is preserved
in the CF histogram H = (hkl), obtained from
H under proper discretization
f
in the Γpxpypz frame [12].

As a consequence, the histogram bins can be divided into two classes:
central and border bins. The separation line between the two bin classes is
somewhat arbitrary. For instance, if we decide to restrict the analysis to the
projection of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone onto the histogram plane (1BZ), then the
central bin area has to include both 1BZ and a surrounding neighborhood of it,
half 1BZ wide say, to get detailed information on the momentum distribution
around both sides of the 1BZ boundaries. If, however, the decision is taken to
include the maximum possible histogram area into analysis, an appropriate
deﬁnition of the central bin manifold includes the largest possible histogram
area DΛ related by a similarity transform, of factor (2Λ + 1) × (2Λ + 1) to the
D0 area of 1BZ. (Typically, Λ equals two or three, depending on the setup.)
In [6], a least squares ﬁt of noise-free data to the noisy H data was
proposed to be performed, at the fractionary coordinates (ξ, η) of interest
inside each (K, L)-th central bin (where the quantities ξ and η may vary from
bin to bin), by means of local approximating surfaces, CKL, characterized by
the following two features:

1. Each CKL is to consist of an integer number of bins. (This requirement
follows from the data discretization into square bins, that is, into ﬁnite
regions inside which the structural details of the momentum distribu-
tion have been averaged out — and hence lost — within the process
of data acquisition. The bin size aD is taken henceforth for the unit
length of the distances in the histogram plane.)

4

2. In the limit of an in-plane continuous point distribution, the approxi-
mating surface CKL is to be circular around the point of coordinates
(K, L). (Such a choice shows the largest linear dimensions under the
smallest area and it ﬁts isotropically the various possible neighbour-
hoods. It is thus expected to secure, among the possible 2D shapes, the
least L2 norm departure from arbitrary input surfaces.)

As a consequence, to perform statistical noise smoothing, we draw around
each (K, L)-th central bin a smoothing window CKL of quasi-circular shape
which includes inside it all the bins the centres (κ, λ) of which satisfy the
inequality

(κ − K)2 + (λ − L)2 ≤ (2r + 1)2/4,

(1)

where the quantity r denotes the window radial parameter.

2.2 CW-WLS smoothing formula

To accommodate both the data discretization into bins and the possibility
to predict noise-free values inside the bins, the approximating space of noise-
free data is spanned by a basis set of polynomials of continuous variables,
Pm(x, y), orthogonal over CKL. In what follows, it is assumed that the basis
polynomials are of at most 3-rd degree in each of the variables x and y.

Over a local window CKL, the standard deviations σK+k,L+l associated to
the elements hK+k,L+l , (K + k, L + l) ∈ CKL of H show little variation
from σKL, the standard deviation of hKL at the center of the window [6, 13].
We may therefore assume constant bin weights, σK+k,L+l = σKL, within each
smoothing window (1), a hypothesis which results in a constant weight WLS
smoothing formula of radial parameter r (CW-WLS(r)).

At the fractionary coordinates (ξ, η) inside the (K, L)-th bin,

− 0.5 ≤ ξ ≤ 0.5, − 0.5 ≤ η ≤ 0.5,

the CW-WLS(r) yields a smoothed value

sK+ξ,L+η =

hK+k,L+l G(ξ, η; k, l),

X
K+k,L+l∈CKL

where the Green matrix of the smoothing formula is given by

G(ξ, η; k, l) =

ν2
m J0m(k, l) Pm(ξ, η).

(2)

(3)

(4)

M

X
m=0

5

Here, νm denotes the norm of the m-th polynomial Pm over its deﬁnition area
CKL, while Jmm′(k, l), the overlap integral of the basis polynomials Pm(x, y)
and Pm′(x, y) over the area of the (k, l)-th relative bin inside the current
smoothing window. For a set of basis polynomials of at most 3-rd degree,
the upper summation index in Eq. (4) is M = 10.

2.3 Optimal values of the window radial parameters

To achieve the best data ﬁt over an admissible class of functions, a consis-
tent least squares ﬁt procedure involves two kinds of free parameters: (i) the
ﬁt parameters which secure minimum L2 norm departure of the data from a
particular function belonging to the admissible class, and (ii) the free param-
eter which selects the best function within the admissible class. The diﬃcult
point is to ﬁx the last parameter of the procedure.

The CW-WLS procedure for statistical noise smoothing described in [6] and
summarized above solves the problem (i) (i.e., it deﬁnes the best parameters
of the constant polynomial degree smoothing ﬁlter (3) under a given radial
parameter, r, Eq. (1)). The solution of problem (ii), which consists in the
deﬁnition of the best r value, that is of the most suitable smoothing window
CKL under an existing neighborhood of the reference bin (K, L), will be
discussed below.

Within the usual polynomial ﬁt, which adjusts a polynomial function of
variable degree to an input set consisting of a ﬁxed number of elements, to
get the best polynomial degree, the method starts with a low polynomial
degree which is then gradually increased by unity until a stopping criterion
is satisﬁed.

Of interest for the present investigation is the criterion proposed by Ham-
ming [14]. Considering one-dimensional data, Hamming recommends the
deﬁnition of the best polynomial degree from the study of the distribution of
the signs of the residuals of the smoothed data. When the polynomial degree
is increased, a threshold value is reached at which the signs of the residu-
als over the set under study show stochastic distribution (i.e., the residuals
mainly consist of statistical noise), while at higher polynomial degrees, the
prevalence of a given sign over the set of residuals is obtained (that is, a sig-
niﬁcant part of the useful signal is chopped by the smoothing polynomial).
The threshold deﬁnes the degree of the best ﬁt polynomial.

While the problem considered by Hamming is diﬀerent from the present
one, its principle is very well suited to the deﬁnition of the radial parameter,

6

r, Eq. (1). Thus, instead of varying the degree of the smoothing surface,
we adjust its extension by variable r values in a range {rmin, rmax}. We
choose rmin = 2, which is the lowest available radial parameter value for the
window (1), while rmax = 13, a value which corresponds to the chopping of
the most part of the useful signal by the smoothing procedure. A threshold
value results, ropt ∈ {rmin, rmax}, with similar properties to those of the best
polynomial degree within Hamming’s procedure.

The residual of the smoothed value (3) at the fractionary (ξ, η) coordi-
nates inside the (K + k, L + l)-th bin belonging to the window CKL, Eq. (1)
is, by deﬁnition,

δK+k+ξ,L+l+η = sK+k+ξ,L+l+η − hK+k,L+l.

(5)

Given a CKL window, signs of quantities (5) are computed over two-
dimensional submanifolds of it which obey to two requirements: the sub-
manifolds have to be large enough such as to result in statistically relevant
information on the distribution of the signs of the residuals around the ref-
erence bin, while low enough to secure a suﬃciently fast algorithm.

The least possible manifold of interest is V1(K, L), the neighborhood of
the (K, L)-th bin which consists of the reference bin and its eight nearest
If all the nine signs entering V1(K, L) are identical with each
neighbors.
other, then the distribution is assumed to be non-stochastic.

If this rule fails, then we consider the larger neighborhood V2(K, L) of
the (K, L)-th bin, deﬁned by the 21 bins of the CKL window (1) at the radial
If two-thirds at least of the signs of the
parameter value r = rmin = 2.
residuals inside V2(K, L) are identical, then the statistics is assumed to be
non-stochastic.

These two sign count criteria following from Hamming’s procedure, how-
ever, do not exhaust the manifold of non-stochastic two-dimensional distribu-
tions. There is still the possibility of ordered sign distributions characterized
by nearly equal occurrence of positive and negative signs. To pick them out,
the analysis of directional sign distribution of the residuals inside V2(K, L) is
performed along one or several of the following four directions: the px axis,
the py axis, the ﬁrst bisectrix, and the second bisectrix.
In each case, we
count the ordered triplets, i.e., the sets of identical three signs at neighbor-
ing bins along rows, columns, or diagonals respectively. If the count yields
a majority of ordered triplets with respect to the total number of possible
ordered triplets in the considered direction, then we decide that the sign
distribution is non-stochastic.

7

An accidental fulﬁllment of one of the three abovementioned criteria is
possible, with the consequence that a spurious ropt cutoﬀ is obtained. To
avoid such a premature end of the analysis, the requirement of preservation
of the non-stochasticity of the sign distribution within V1(K, L) or V2(K, L)
under further increase of the radial parameter r is imposed.

Within an ideal, perfect single crystal, the occurrence of jumps in the op-
timal radial parameters closely follows the characteristic Fermi surface jumps
in the measured momentum distribution. Unfortunately, the real single crys-
tals show a great many number of imperfections of various kinds, which sig-
niﬁcantly alter the obtained optimal window radial parameters. The crystal
imperfections blur the Fermi surface jump pattern and make it indistinguish-
able from a stochastic momentum distribution. Thus, in real crystals, the
abovementioned deﬁnition of the optimal window parameters is to be supple-
mented with a procedure able to restore the jumps at contiguous bins which
are characteristic to the Fermi surface.

Such a procedure is discussed in the next section.

3 Elimination of Spurious Impurity Eﬀects

by Median Smoothing

The median smoothing is known to preserve the jumps, if any, within the
distribution under consideration. Consistent median smoothing of physical
quantities associated to an n-axis-projected histogram, H, is obtained pro-
vided the following two distinct problems are correctly solved. The ﬁrst con-
cerns the parameters of the two-dimensional smoothing window: the exten-
sion of the neighborhood of the (K, L)-th bin over which the median smooth-
ing is to be done and the weights assigned to the bins entering this neighbor-
hood. The second concerns the symmetry induced relationships among the
bins of the histogram. Each of these problems is considered in detail below.
The extension of the neighborhood entering the median smoothing of the
(K, L)-th bin can be chosen to be either a V1(K, L) or a V2(K, L) neighbor-
hood (deﬁned in Sec. 2.3 above).

Within a V1(K, L) neighborhood, it is natural to assume equal weights to

all the bins entering it:

(6)

1 1
1 1
1 1






1
1
1






8

Within an V2(K, L) neighborhood, we can either assume equal bin weights

or we can assume diﬀerent weights. Here we consider the hat shape

0 1 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
0 1 1










1 0
1 1
1 1
1 1
1 0










0 1 2
1 3 5
2 5 8
1 3 5
0 1 2










1 0
3 1
5 2
3 1
1 0










(7)

(8)

In the case of data characterized by a high level of crystal imperfec-
tions, the neighborhood V1(K, L) with equal weights (6) is too small to re-
sult in eﬀective cut of the ﬂuctuations residing in the imperfections. The
neighborhood V2(K, L) with equal weights (7) is also inappropriate since it
overemphasizes the far staying bins, while the weight of the reference bin is
negligibly small. The most adequate seems to be the choice V2(K, L) with
unequal weights (8) which includes suﬃcient enough neighbors while secur-
ing a ﬁfty-ﬁfty ratio between the weights assigned to the reference bin and
its nearest neighbours on one side and the farther staying bins on the other
side.

Since the information stored in diﬀerent bins comes from a crystal, there
are strong symmetry induced correlations of the Fermi-surface-related infor-
mation stored in a 2D-ACAR histogram. As a consequence, our smoothing
method has to be able to emphasize it. To implement this aspect into the
median smoothing, we make reference to the Neumann principle (see, e.g.,
[15]), according to which, the symmetry originating in positron annihilations
with electrons within bands crossing the Fermi level, is a subduction to the
histogram plane of the symmetry point group of the reciprocal lattice of the
crystal.

For an n-axis-projected 2D-ACAR histogram of interest here, the distinct
symmetry elements characterizing this electron fraction are: the inversion
symmetry center Γ (placed at the zero-momentum projection of the distri-
bution), a rotation axis along n, and in-plane symmetry lines.

9

The occurrence of the symmetry classiﬁes the various bins entering an
n-axis-projected CF histogram H into stars of symmetry.
In the case of
an Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ single crystal for instance, the stars of the bins entering
both the c-axis-projected and a-axis-projected histograms contain one, two,
or four elements, according to the fact that the bin of interest contains the
symmetry inversion center Γ inside it, or it lies along a symmetry axis, or it
is a general bin.

In conclusion, there are three essential steps which secure the correct
approach to the median smoothing of an n-axis-projected 2D-ACAR histogram:

• Derivation of the CF histogram H from the LF histogram

H;
f

• Derivation of the window optimal radial parameters;

• Median smoothing over manifolds of data consisting of symmetry stars

of bins, within neighborhoods V2, with bin weights (8).

Such a procedure ﬁnally yields window optimal radial parameters char-
acteristic to a structure showing the n-axis-projection of the Fermi surface of
the sample. As a consequence, if the accumulated statistics contains charac-
teristic Fermi surface jumps indeed, then the procedure should be able to put
them into evidence as characteristic jumps in the ﬁnal window optimal radial
parameters. That is, while a Fermi-surfaceless structure is characterized by
gradual variations of the window radial parameters (i.e., δr jumps between
neighboring bins in the range {-1, 0, 1}), the occurrence of lines of Fermi
surface within the 2D momentum projection should be evidenced by jumps
|δr| ≥ 2 at contiguous bin positions.

The next section illustrates this feature on a set of data open to contra-

dictory interpretation within the usual oﬀ-line processing methods.

4 Results and Their Discussion

The use of the present method is illustrated on a c-axis-projected 2D-ACAR
histogram labelled ”580”, measured on an Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ single crystal, at
room temperature, at the University of Geneva, with an upgraded version of
the setup described in [16] and previously analyzed with diﬀerent methods
of resolving the anisotropic component of the 2D-ACAR spectrum [6, 12, 17,
18, 19].

10

The parameters which deﬁne the crystal frame Γpxpypz within the labo-

ratory frame OpD

x pD

y pD

z are

{

γx = κ0 + ξ0,
e

γy = λ0 + η0, φ0, θ0, ψ0}.
e

(9)

γx,
e

γy) denote the in-plane Γ coordinates, while φ0, θ0, ψ0 are the
Here (
Euler angles which deﬁne the rotations from the OpD
z frame axes to the
e
Γpxpypz frame axes.

y pD

x pD

The rough approximations (κ0, λ0), to the coordinates of Γ have been
found to be (−1.0, 5.0), while the fractionary coordinates were found to be
ξ0 = −0.1146 × 10−1 and η0 = 0.2413 (in aD units). The value of the Euler
angle θ0 was found to be negligibly small (θ0 = −0.316 × 10−3 radians),
such that the experimental histogram can be accepted for a c-axis-projected
histogram indeed. Then the only relevant Euler angle is the sum of the angles
φ0 and ψ0, α0 = −0.12297 × 10−2 radians.

The ﬁnal result of the procedure described in the previous sections is
shown in ﬁgure 4. Both the electron ridge crossing the ﬁrst Brillouin zone
from Γ to X and the pillbox around the S corners are resolved.
It is to
be stressed that the ridge-jumps have been of high amplitude (δr inbetween
three to six units large), while the pillbox-jumps have always been charac-
terized by the minimal δr = 2 value, telling us that the collected ridge jump
signal is strong, while the pillbox jump signal is weak.

Whereas the occurrence of the Fermi surface ridge in the analyzed ”580”
histogram was conﬁrmed by diﬀerent signal processing techniques in all the
ﬁve references mentioned above, [6, 12, 17, 18, 19]. the only references which
analyze the pillbox are [19] and [12].

The methods of analysis used in [19]) did not conﬁrm the occurrence
of the pillbox in Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ at room temperature. The measurements
of the positron mean free path in this compound at diﬀerent temperatures
suggested that, at room temperature, there is a shallow positron trapping
mechanism which is responsible of the absence of the pillbox.

Our previous analysis of the same spectrum [12] has found that the re-
solved pillbox exists, but it is small (the depth of the Lock-Crisp-West (LCW)
folded [20] signal at the S point was found to be only four times larger than
the experimental errors).

The present investigation, which is not symmetric component subtrac-
tion sensitive, adds considerable weight to the conclusions of reference [12],
without making use of the LCW folding to achieve signal enhancement. It lets

11

S

s

X
s

s

S

Y

s

S

s

Γ

s

X

s

s

Y

s

S

Figure 1: Occurrence of jumps of the window optimal radial parameters of
the CW-WLS method for statistical noise smoothing resolves two Fermi surface
sheets: the ridge, going from Γ to X across the whole ﬁrst Brillouin zone of
the sample and the pillboxes, around the corners S of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone.

us infer that, while weakening considerably the pillbox signature at room
temperature indeed, the positron shallow trapping does not rule it out alto-
gether. It is to be noted, however, that, although describing a closed contour
jump in the measured positron-electron momentum distribution, the shape
of the resolved pillbox around the S point is irregular, a feature which tells
us about is small amplitude, which can be easily distorted by the occurrence
of non-homogeneously distributed crystal defects.

12

5 Acknowledgments

We are very much indebted to Professor Martin Peter from the University
of Geneva, Switzerland, who introduced us to the ﬁeld of positron spec-
troscopy. Discussion with him and with Professor Alfred A. Manuel from
Geneva University at various stages of the investigation, as well as provision
of the experimental data, are gratefully acknowledged.

Part of this work was done within the framework of the Associateship
Scheme of the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics,
Trieste, Italy. The ﬁrst author would like to thank Professor M. Virasoro
and the Abdus Salam ICTP for hospitality and for granting him generous
access to the computing facilities of the Centre.

The work done in Romania was ﬁnanced by the Ministry of Research and

Technology of Romania.

References

[1] S. Berko, in: Positron Solid State Physics, Proc. of the Int. School “E.
Fermi”, Course 83, W. Brandt and A. Dupasquier eds., (North Holland,
New York, 1983) pp. 64–145. Reprinted in Positron Studies of Solids,
Surfaces and Atoms, A.P. Mills,Jr., W.S. Crane and K.F. Canter eds.,
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1986) pp. 246–327.

[2] S.Berko, in: Momentum Distributions, R.N. Silver and P.E. Sokol eds.,

(Plenum Press, New York, 1989) p. 273.

[3] M. Peter, IBM J. Res. Develop. 33/3 (1989), 333.

[4] L.P. Chan, K.G. Lynn and D.R. Harshman, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 6

(1992), 617, and references therein.

[5] R. Pankaluoto, A. Bansil, L.C. Smedskjaer and P.E. Mijnarends, Phys.

Rev. B, 50 (1994), 6408.

[6] Gh. Adam, S. Adam, B. Barbiellini, L. Hoﬀmann, A.A. Manuel and M.

Peter, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, 337 (1993), 188.

[7] L. Hoﬀmann, A. Shukla, M. Peter, B. Barbiellini and A.A. Manuel,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, 335 (1993), 276.

13

[8] R.N. West, in: Positron Spectroscopy of Solids, A. Dupasquier and A.P.

Mills, Jr. eds., (North Holland, New York, 1995).

[9] L. Hoﬀmann, W. Sadowski, A. Shukla, Gh. Adam, B. Barbiellini, and

M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Sol. 52 (1991), 1551.

[10] L.C. Smedskjaer, A. Bansil, U. Welp, Y. Fang and K.G. Bailey, Physica

C, 192 (1992), 259.

[11] C.J. Bradley and A.P. Cracknell, The Mathematical Theory of Sym-
metry in Solids: Representation Theory for Point Groups and Space
Groups (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1972).

[12] Gh. Adam and S. Adam, International J. Modern Phys. B, 9 (1995),

3667.

1964).

[13] Gh. Adam and S. Adam, Romanian J. Phys., 38 (1993), 681.

[14] R. W. Hamming, Numerical Methods for Scientists and Engineers, 2-nd

ed. (Mc Graw-Hill, New York, 1973), Chaps. 25–27.

[15] R.R. Birss, Symmetry and Magnetism (North-Holland, Amsterdam,

[16] P.E. Bisson, P. Descouts, A. Dupanloup, A.A. Manuel, E. Perreard, M.

Peter and R. Sachot, Helv. Phys. Acta 55 (1982), 100.

[17] Gh. Adam, S. Adam, B. Barbiellini, L. Hoﬀmann, A.A. Manuel, M.

Peter and S. Massidda, Solid State Commun. 88 (1993), 739.

[18] L. Hoﬀmann, A.A. Manuel, M. Peter, E. Walker, M. Gauthier, A.
Shukla, B. Barbiellini, S. Massidda, Gh. Adam, S. Adam, W.N. Hardy,
Ruixing Liang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993), 4047.

[19] A. Shukla, L. Hoﬀmann, A.A. Manuel, E. Walker, B. Barbiellini, and

M. Peter, Phys. Rev. B 51 (1995), 6028.

[20] D.G. Lock, V.H.C. Crisp and R.N. West, J. Phys. F: Metal Phys. 3

(1973), 561.

14

