New tests for a singularity of ideal MHD

1NCAR, Boulder, CO 80307-3000; 2Mathematics, University of Newcastle, NE1 7RU, UK

Robert M. Kerr1 and Axel Brandenburg2

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

7

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analysis using new calculations with 3 times the resolu-
tion of the earlier linked magnetic ﬂux tubes conﬁrms the
transition from singular to saturated growth rate reported by
Grauer and Marliani [2] for the incompressible cases is con-
ﬁrmed. However, all of the secondary tests point to a transi-
tion back to stronger growth rate at a diﬀerent location at late
times. Similar problems in ideal hydrodynamics are discussed,
pointing out that initial negative results eventually led to bet-
ter initial conditions that did show evidence for a singularity
of Euler. Whether singular or near-singular growth in ideal
MHD is eventually shown, this study could have bearing on
fast magnetic reconnection, high energy particle production
and coronal heating.

The issue currently leading to conﬂicting conclusions
about ideal 3D, incompressible MHD is similar [1,2] to
what led to conﬂicting results on whether there is a sin-
gularity of the 3D incompressible Euler. With numeri-
cal simulations, it was ﬁrst concluded that uniform mesh
calculations with symmetric initial conditions such as 3D
Taylor-Green were not yet singular [3]. Next, a prelimi-
nary spectral calculation [4] found weak evidence in favor
a singularity in a series of Navier-Stokes simulations at
increasing Reynolds numbers, but larger adaptive mesh
or reﬁned mesh calculations did not support this result
[5,6]. Eventually, numerical evidence in favor of a sin-
gularity of Euler was obtained using several independent
tests applied to highly resolved, reﬁned mesh calculations
of the evolution of two anti-parallel vortex tubes [7]. To
date, these calculations have met every analytic test for
whether there could be a singularity of Euler.

Several other calculations have also claimed numerical
evidence for a singularity of Euler [8–10]. While in all of
these cases the evidence is plausible, with the perturbed
cylindrical shear ﬂow [10] using the BKM kωk∞ test [11],
for none has the entire battery of tests used for the anti-
parallel case been applied. We have recently repeated
one of the orthogonal cases [8] and have applied the BKM
test successfully. In all cases using the BKM test, |ωk∞ ≈
A/(Tc − t) with A ≈ 19.

To be able to make a convincing case for the existence
of a singularity in higher dimensional partial diﬀerential
equations, great care must be taken with initial condi-
tions, demonstrating numerical convergence, and com-
parisons to all known analytic or empirical tests. On the
other hand, if no singularity is suspected, some quan-
tity that clearly saturates should be demonstrated, such
as the strain causing vorticity growth [5]. It is an even
more delicate matter to claim that someone else’s calcu-

lations or conclusions are incorrect. If it is a matter of
suspecting there is inadequate resolution, one must at-
tempt to reproduce the suspicious calculations as nearly
as possible and show where inadequate resolution begins
to corrupt the calculations and how improved resolution
changes the results.

An example of how a detailed search for numerical
errors should be conducted can be found in the exten-
sive conference proceeding [12] that appeared prior to
the publication of the major results supporting the ex-
istence of a singularity of Euler for anti-parallel vortex
tubes [7]. The primary diﬀerence with earlier work was
in the initial conditions. It was found that compact pro-
ﬁles [13] were an improvement, but only if used in con-
junction with a high wavenumber ﬁlter. Otherwise, the
initial unﬁltered energy spectrum of the bent anti-parallel
vortex tubes went as k−2. Oscillations in the spectrum
at high wavenumber in unﬁltered initial conditions for
linked magnetic ﬂux tubes are shown in Figure 1, show-
ing that the initial MHD spectrum is steep enough that
eventually these oscillations are not important.

FIG. 1. Filtered and unﬁltered initial and ﬁnal spectrum .

The unﬁltered spectrum is initialized on a 3843 mesh.

The purpose of this letter is to address the claim that
a new adaptive mesh reﬁnement (AMR) calculation by
Grauer and Marliani [2] supercedes our uniform mesh cal-
culations [1] and that eventually there is a transition to
exponential growth. Note that this claim was made with-
out any evidence for whether their numerical method was
converged. In all of our earlier calculations, once the cal-
culations become underresolved, we also saw transitions
to exponential growth.

Not knowing exactly the initial condition used by the
new AMR calculations [2], where and how much grid re-

1

ﬁnement was used, and the short notice we have been
given to reply has proven a challenge. Fortunately, we
were in the process of new 6483 calculations in a smaller
domain of 4.33, yielding eﬀectively 3 times the local res-
olution of our earlier work [1] in a (2π)3 domain on a
3843 mesh. The case with an initial ﬂux tube diameter
of d = 0.65, so that the tubes slightly overlap, appears to
be closer to their initial condition and so will be the focus
of this letter. The importance of our other initial condi-
tion, with d = 0.5, and no initial overlap of the tubes, is
that it is less inﬂuenced by an initial current sheet that
forms near the origin and is claimed to be the source of
the saturation of the nonlinear terms. This was used for
the compressible calculations.

shows that either an exponential or a singular 1/(Tc − t)
form could ﬁt the data, while the inset shows that taking
an estimated singular time of Tc = 2.15 and multiplying
by (Tc − T ) that at least kJk∞ and kωk∞ have consistent
singular behavior over this time span. The strong growth
of PΩJ = R dV (ωieijωj − ωidij Jj − 2εijkJidjℓeℓk), which
is the production of R dV (ω2 + J 2), is discussed below.
The 3843 curve for 1/kJk demonstrates that lack of res-
olution tends to exaggerate exponential growth. For the
compressible calculations it can be seen that there also
is an exponential regime that changes into a regime with
1/kJk∞ ∼ (Tc − t).

FIG. 3. Semi-logarithmic plot of kJk∞ for a compressible
2403 calculation in a domain of size 4 (dotted line: ﬁltered,
and solid line: unﬁltered initial conditions) together with ﬁts
to exponential growth and blow-up behavior, respectively.
The latter are better ﬁts at later times.

Using the new incompressible calculations and apply-
ing the entire battery of tests, based upon Figure 2 we
would agree that for the incompressible case there is a
transition as reported [2] and signs of saturation at this
stage are shown below. Whether the transition is to ex-
ponential for all times as claimed [2], or whether there is
a still later transition to diﬀerent singular behavior, will
be the focus of this letter. We will look more closely at
the structure of the current sheet we all agree exists [1,2]
for signs of saturation.

The case against a singularity in early calculations of
Euler [5,14,15] was the appearance of vortex sheets, and
through analogies with the current in 2D ideal MHD, a
suggestion that this leads to a depletion of nonlinearity.
The ﬂuid ﬂow most relevant to the linked ﬂux rings is
3D Taylor-Green, due to the initial symmetries [3]. For
both TG and linked ﬂux tubes, two sets of anti-parallel
vortex pairs form that are skewed with respect to each
other and are colliding. In TG, just after the anti-parallel
vortex tubes form there is a period of slightly singular
development. This is suppressed once the pairs collide
with each other, and then vortex sheets dominate for a
period. The vortex sheets are very thin, but go across
the domain, so ﬁne localized resolution might not be an

FIG. 2. Replot of kJk∞, kωk∞, and PΩJ for the new in-
compressible calculations on 4.33 domain with initial condi-
tion d = 0.65 in semi-log coordinates. All plots are from the
6483 calculation except one 3843 plot of 1/kJk. Exponential
and inverse linear ﬁts are shown for t = 1.75 to 1.98. Each
works equally well for kJk∞, inverse linear is better for kωk∞,
and exponential is better for PΩJ . Multiplying kJk∞, kωk∞,
and PΩJ by (Tc − t) in the inset emphasizes that kJk∞ and
kωk∞ might be showing consistent singular behavior. The
large growth of PΩJ is discussed.

Using semi-log coordinates, Figure 2 plots the growth
of kωk∞ and kJk∞ for our new high resolution incom-
pressible calculation and Figure 3 plots kJk∞ for a new
compressible calculation. By taking the last time all rel-
evant quantities on the 3843 and 6483 grids were con-
verged, kJk being the worst, then by assuming that the
smallest scales are decreasing linearly towards a possible
singular time, an estimate of the last time the 6483 cal-
culation was valid was made. To test exponential versus
inverse linear growth, ﬁts were taken between T = 1.72
and 1.87, then extrapolated to large T . The large ﬁgure

2

advantage at this stage. At late phases in TG, the ends
of the colliding pairs begin to interact with each other,
so that at 4 corners locally orthogonal vortices begin to
form. Due to resolution limitations, an Euler calculation
of Taylor-Green has not been continued long enough to
determine whether, during this phase, singular behavior
might develop. We would draw a similar conclusion for
all of MHD cases studied to date [2,16,17], that there
might not be enough local resolution to draw any ﬁnal
conclusions even if AMR is applied.

While Taylor-Green has not been continued far enough
to rule out singularities, the ﬁnal arrangement of vortex
structures led ﬁrst to studies of interacting orthogonal
vortices [8], and then anti-parallel vortices (see references
in [7]). Both of these initial conditions now appear to de-
velop singular behavior. An important piece of evidence
for a singularity of Euler was that near the point of a
possible singularity, the structure could not be described
simply as a vortex sheet. Therefore, there is a precedent
to earlier work suggesting sheets, suppression of nonlin-
earity, and no singularities to later work showing fully
three-dimensional structure and singular behavior.

The initial singular growth of kJk∞ and kωk∞ for
the linked ﬂux rings, then the transition to a saturated
growth rate, might be due to the same skewed, anti-
parallel vortex pair interaction as in Taylor-Green. Even
if this is all that is happening, the strong initial vortic-
ity production and shorter dynamical timescale (order of
a few Alfv´en times) than earlier magnetic reconnection
simulations with anti-parallel ﬂux tubes [17] is a signif-
icant success of these simulations. It might be that the
vortices that have been generated are strong enough to
develop their own Euler singularity. However, the in-
teresting physics is how the magnetic ﬁeld and current
interact with the vorticity. Do they suppress the ten-
dency of the vorticity to become singular, or augment
that tendency?

FIG. 4. Positions of kJk∞ and kωk∞ for d = 0.65 in a 4.33

domain.

One sign for saturation of the linked ﬂux ring inter-

3

action would be if the strongest current remains at the
origin in this sheet. Figure 4 plots the positions of kJk∞
and kωk∞ from the origin as a function of time. Dur-
ing the period where exponential growth is claimed [2],
kJk∞ is at the origin, which would support the claims of
saturation. However, this situation does not persist.

By analogy to the movement of the L∞ norms of the
components of the stress tensor ui,j in Euler, we expect
that the positions of kJk∞ and kωk∞ should approach
each other and an extrapolated singular point in ideal
MHD. Figure 4 supports the prediction that the positions
of kJk∞ and kωk∞ should approach each other but so far
not in a convincingly linear fashion. This is addressed
next. We have similar trends for the positions of kJk∞
and kωk∞ in the compressible calculations.

FIG. 5. For t = 1.97 on the inner 1623 grid points, the cur-
−→
rent sheet is shown with arrows of
J overlaid in dark. The
current through the (x/y = z) plane containing kJk∞ is in
lower right. Contours of |J|4 are shown to emphasize where
−→
B and light lines are −→ω
kJk∞ is located. Dark lines are
that originated in the vicinity of kJk∞. The vortex lines are
predominantly those in the double vortex rings that were orig-
inally generated by the Lorenz force, then became responsible
−→
for spreading out the current sheet. Where the
B lines cross
in the upper left and lower right corners are around the lo-
cations of kJk∞, which due to symmetries are diﬀerent views
−→
of the same structure. Near kJk∞,
B nearly overlies and is
−→
B and −→ω are nearly orthogonal to
parallel to −→ω and both
−→
B and −→ω are
their partners across the current sheet, where
anti-parallel. Taken from the d = 0.65 calculation in a 4.33
domain on a 6483 mesh.

Figure 5 gives an overall view of the current, vorticity
and magnetic ﬁeld around the inner current sheet. The
vortex pattern has developed out of the four initial vor-
tices, two sets of orthogonal, anti-parallel pairs that are
responsible for the initial compression and stretching of
the current sheet. By this late time, the ends of the those
vortices have begun to interact as new sets of orthogonal
vortex pairs. The lower right inset in Figure 5 is a 2D
x/(y = z) slice through this domain that goes through

kJk∞ at t = 1.97 to show that while kJk∞ is large at the
origin (0, 0, 0), kJk∞ is larger where it is being squeezed
between the new orthogonal vortices. Along one of the
−→
B is parallel to and overlying −→ω and on the
new vortices
orthogonal partner they are anti-parallel and overlying.
The location of kωk∞ is not in the vortex lines shown,
but is on the outer edges of the current sheet. Therefore,
the exact position of kωk∞ in Figure 4 is an artifact of
the initial development and does not accurately reﬂect
the position of −→ω most directly involved in amplifying
kJk∞, which is probably why the positions of kJk∞ and
kωk∞ are not approaching each other faster. The con-
tinuing eﬀects of the initial current sheet is probably also
behind the strong exponential growth of PΩJ in Figure 2,
stronger even than the the possible singular growth of
kJk∞ and kωk∞ in the inset. More detailed analysis in
progress should show that near the position of kJk∞, the
growth of PΩJ and the position of kωk∞ are more con-
sistent with our expectations for singular growth and has
already shown that some of the components of PΩJ have
consistent singular growth.

As noted,

for Euler all available calculations ﬁnd
|ωk∞ ≈ A/(Tc − t) with A ≈ 19. A represents how
much smaller the strain along kωk∞ is than kωk∞. Here,
A ≈ 4, indicating stronger growth in kωk∞ for ideal
MHD than Euler. Another Euler result was that the
asymptotic energy spectrum as the possible singularity
was approached was k−3, whereas purely sheet-like struc-
tures in vorticity should yield k−4 spectrum. k−3 indi-
cates a more complicated 3D structure than sheets. In
Figure 1 the late time spectra are again k−3.

The next the initial condition we will investigate will be
magnetic ﬂux and vortex tubes that nearly overlay each
other and are orthogonal to their partners. Our new cal-
culations of orthogonal vortex tubes for Euler show that
they start becoming singular as ﬁlaments are pulled oﬀ
of the original tubes and these ﬁlaments become anti-
parallel, suggesting that the fundamental singular inter-
action in Euler is between anti-parallel vortices. Whether
the next step for ideal MHD is to become anti-parallel
or something else can only be determined by new cal-
culations. AMR might be useful, but great care must
be taken with the placement of the inner domains and a
large mesh will still be necessary. The complicated struc-
tures in the domain in Figure 5 are not fully contained
in this innermost 1623 mesh points and the innermost
domain should go out to the order of 3003 points. There
are examples of how to use AMR when there are strong
shears on the boundaries of sharp structures [18]. This
uncertainty of where to place the mesh is why we believe
in using uniform mesh calculations as an unbiased ﬁrst
look at the problem.

These ﬁnal results are hardly robust and their useful-
ness is primarily to suggest a new more localized initial
condition and to show that none of the calculations to
date is the full story. For J and ω to show singular be-
havior as long as they have has been surprising. Recall
that for Euler, velocity, vorticity and strain are all man-

ifestations of the same vector ﬁeld, but for ideal MHD
there are two independent vector ﬁelds even though the
only analytic result in 3D is a condition on the combi-
nation, R dV [kωk∞(t) + kJk∞(t)] dt → ∞ [19]. Even-
tually, one piece of evidence for singular growth must
be a demonstration of strong coupling between the cur-
rent and vorticity so that they are acting as one vector
ﬁeld. It could be that our strong growth is due to the
strongly helical initial conditions and there are no singu-
larities. This would still be physically interesting since
helical conditions could be set up by footpoint motion in
the corona.

Could the magnetic and electric ﬁelds blow up too?
There are signs this might be developing around the ﬁ-
nal position of kJk∞, in which case there might exist a
mechanism for the direct acceleration of high energy par-
ticles. This has been considered on larger scale [20], but
to our knowledge a mechanism for small-scale production
of super-Dreicer electric ﬁelds has not been proposed be-
fore. A singular rise in electric ﬁelds could explain the
sharp rise times in X-ray production in solar coronal mea-
surements [21], which could be a consequence of particle
acceleration coming from reconnection. This would also
have implications for the heating of the solar corona by
nanoﬂares [22] and the production of cosmic rays.

This work has been supported in part by an EPSRC
visiting grant GR/M46136. NCAR is support by the
National Science Foundation.

[1] R.M. Kerr and A. Brandenburg, Phys. Rev Lett. 83, 1155

(1999).

[2] R. Grauer and C. Marliani, submitted to PRL (1999).
[3] M.E. Brachet, D.I. Meiron, S.A. Orszag, B.G. Nickel,
R.H. Morf, and U. Frisch, J. Fluid Mech. 130, 411 (1983).

[4] R. M. Kerr and F. Hussain, Physica D 37, 474 (1989).
[5] A. Pumir and E. D. Siggia, Phys. Fluids A 2 220 (1990).
[6] M. J. Shelley, D. I. Meiron, and S. A. Orszag, J. Fluid

Mech.246 613 (1993).

[7] R. M. Kerr, Phys. Fluids A 5, 1725 (1993).
[8] O.N Boratav, R.B. Pelz, N.J. Zabusky, Phys. Fluids A

4, 581 (1992).

[9] O.N. Boratav and R.B. Pelz, Phys. Fluids 6, 2757 (1994).
[10] R. Grauer, C. Marliani, K. Germaschewski, Phys. Rev

Lett 80, 4177 (1998).

[11] J. T. Beale, T. Kato, and A. Majda, Comm. Math. Phys.

94, 61 (1984).

[12] R. M. Kerr, In Topological aspects of the dynamics of ﬂu-
ids and plasmas (Proceedings of the NATO-ARW Work-
shop at the Institute for Theoretical Physics, University
of California at Santa Barbara), H. K Moﬀatt, G. M. Za-
slavsky, M. Tabor, and P. Comte, Eds. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands 309 (1992).

[13] M.V. Melander, F. Hussain, Phys. Fluids A 1 633 (1989).
[14] A. Pumir and R. M. Kerr, Phys. Rev. Let., 58, 1636

4

(1987).

[15] M.E. Brachet, M. Meneguzzi, A. Vincent, H. Politano,
and P.L. Sulem, Phys. Fluids A 4, 2845 (1992). Sulem,
Brachet, etc.

[16] H. Politano, A. Pouquet, and P.L. Sulem, Phys. Plasmas

2, 2931 (1995).

[17] Y. Ono, M. Yamada, T. Akao, T. Tajima, and R. Mat-

sumoto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 3328 (1996).

[18] W. W. Grabowski and T.L. Clark. J. Atmos. Sci. 50, 555

(1993).

[19] R. E. Caﬂisch, I. Klapper, and G. Steele, Comm. Math.

Phys. 184, 443 (1997).

[20] J.A. Miller, P.J. Cargill, A.G. Emslie, G.D. Holman, B.R.
Dennis, T.N. LaRosa, R.M. Winglee, S.G. Benka and S.
Tsuneta, J. Geo. Res. 102, 14631 (1997)

[21] A.L. Kiplinger, B.R. Dennis, K.J. Frost, L.E. Orwig, As-

trophys. J. Lett. 287, L105 (1984).

[22] E.N. Parker, Astrophys. J. 244, 644 (1981).

5

