0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
8

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
1
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

“Single-cycle” ionization eﬀects in laser-matter interaction

Enrique Conejero Jarque∗ and Fulvio Cornolti†

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit´a di Pisa, Piazza Torricelli 2, Pisa, Italy

Andrea Macchi† and Hartmut Ruhl‡

Theoretical Quantum Electronics, Darmstadt University of Technology, Darmstadt, Germany

Abstract

We investigate numerically eﬀects related to “single-cycle” ionization of dense

matter by an ultra-short laser pulse. The strongly non-adiabatic response of

electrons leads to generation of a MG steady magnetic ﬁeld in laser-solid

interaction. By using two-beam interference, it is possible to create periodic

density structures able to trap light and to generate relativistic ionization

fronts.

I. INTRODUCTION

In the adiabatic ﬁeld ionization regime, the ionization rate grows sharply when the

electric ﬁeld approaches the barrier suppression (BS) limit, i.e. when the laser intensity is

high enough that the electron in the ground state is able to “classically” escape the atomic

potential barrier. The ionization rate for such ﬁeld strength may become higher than the

∗On leave from Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada, Universidad de Salamanca, Spain. E-mail

address enrikecj@gugu.usal.es

†Also INFM, sezione A, Universit´a di Pisa, Italy

‡Present address Max-Born Institut, Max-Born str. 2a, 12489 Berlin, Germany

1

laser frequency and a regime in which most of the ionization is produced within a single

laser half-cycle is achievable.

Here we present a numerical study of some eﬀects of ultrafast ionization in the interaction

of a short laser pulse with an initially transparent dense medium. First, we will discuss the

generation of megagauss steady magnetic ﬁelds in the surface “skin” layer of “solid” targets,

i.e. slabs of hydrogen atoms with a number density close to that of a solid medium (Macchi

et al. 1999).

Second, we will describe eﬀects related to the combination of two-beam interference with

ultrafast ionization. We will show how it is possible to take advantage of this feature to

create a layered dielectric-conductor structure able to trap the electric ﬁeld, as well as a

relativistic ionization front (Conejero Jarque et al. 1999).

II. GENERATION OF STEADY MAGNETIC FIELDS

The generation of steady currents and magnetic ﬁelds by ultrafast ionization is due to

the non-adiabatic nature of the response of initially bound electrons to a strongly ramping

laser ﬁeld. Using a following “simple-man’s” model (SMM), very similar to the SMM used

in studies of above-threshold ionization and harmonic generation in atoms, it can be shown

that a single electron subject to an external sinusoidal intense ﬁeld can acquire a steady

velocity (Macchi et al. 1999)

vst = vI − vqoq1 − (ET /Eyo)2,

(1)

where vI is the ejection velocity of the electron, vqo = eEy0/mω, Eyo is the maximum ﬁeld

amplitude and ET is the ﬁeld amplitude at the instant of ionization, which will be close to the

threshold ﬁeld for barrier suppression (for hydrogen, ET ≈ 0.146Eau = 7.45 × 108 V cm−1,

being Eau = 5.1 × 109 V cm−1 the atomic ﬁeld unit).

If most of the electrons in the medium are ionized at the same instant, as may happen

with a pulse which sharply rises above ET , one gets a net steady current which in turn

2

generates a magnetic ﬁeld. To obtain a larger current one may think to “tune” appropriately

ET and Ey0. This is possible if the ionization is no longer correlated with the oscillating

ﬁeld, i.e., it is produced independently of the ﬁeld itself, like in the case studied by Wilks

et al. (1988), in which a steady magnetic ﬁeld Bst ≈ Ey0 can be obtained in a very dense

medium. For intense lasers (I ≥ 1018 W cm−2), such a magnetic ﬁeld would get values

exceeding 100 MG and could explain (Teychenn´e et al. 1998) the experimental observation

of high transparency of thin foil solid targets to 30 fs, 3 × 1018 W cm−2 pulses (Giulietti et

al., 1997). However, it is questionable whether this high magnetic ﬁeld may be obtained with

superintense laser pulses. In this case, in fact, the “source pulse” itself ionizes the medium

and thus this will impose a constraint on the phase mismatch between the ﬁeld and the

velocity of the electrons. We will show by numerical simulations that the steady magnetic

ﬁeld exists but has values around 1 MG, being therefore too weak to allow enhanced laser

propagation.

A. PIC simulations

First we review the results of 1D3V PIC simulations with ﬁeld ionization included. We

choose pulses with a “sin2” envelope and with a “square” envelope. For all the PIC runs,

the laser frequency was ωL = 2 × 1015 s−1, close to that of Nd and Ti:Sapphire lasers. The

thickness of the target was 0.09 µm and the density was no = 6.7 × 1022 cm−3 (ωpo ≃ 7ωL).

For the ionization rate we used a semi-empirical formula obtained from atomic physics

calculations (Bauer and Mulser, 1999). The laser energy loss due to ionization is included

introducing a phenomenological “polarization” current (Rae and Burnett 1992, Cornolti et

al. 1998, Mulser et al. 1998).

Fig.1 shows the spatial proﬁles of the magnetic ﬁeld and the free electron density ﬁve

cycles after the end of a ﬁve cycles long (∆tL = 15 fs) pulse, for three diﬀerent ﬁeld intensities

in the “sin2” shape case, and for the square proﬁle case at the intermediate intensity value.

The steady ﬁeld is generated at the beginning of the interaction and is always much weaker

3

than the laser ﬁeld, even for the most intense case (corresponding to an intensity of 3.5 ×

1018W cm−2); its sign varies according to the phase of the laser half cycle where most of the

ionization occurs. The ionization at the left boundary is nearly instantaneous; however, even

if the target is only 0.1λ thick, it is not ionized over its whole thickness due to instantaneous

screening, except for the maximum intensity case.

The fact that the produced magnetic ﬁeld is much less than expected may be attributed

to the instantaneous screening of the EM wave due to the ultrafast ionization. In fact, it is

too weak to aﬀect self-consistently the refractive index and as a consequence it cannot lead

to magnetically induced transparency as hypothesized by Teychenn´e et al. (1998).

B. Boltzmann simulations

To yield a further insight into the magnetic ﬁeld generated by ultrafast ionization we

look at the results of 1D and 2D Boltzmann simulations. This corresponds to the “direct”

numerical solution of the Boltzmann equation for the electron distribution function fe =

fe(x, v, t), over a phase space grid:

∂tfe + v · ∇fe −

eE
m

· ∂vfe = νI(E)na(x, t)g(v; E(x, t)).

(2)

Here na is the density of neutral atoms (supposed at rest for simplicity) and νI is the

ionization rate. The term g(v; E) gives the “instantaneous” distribution of the just ionized

electrons, which is supposed to be known from atomic physics. A semiclassical picture

which allows to deﬁne and evaluate g(v; E) was given by Cornolti et al.

(1998). With

respect to PIC simulations, the Boltzmann approach has the disadvantage of larger memory

requirements, but the advantages of reduced numerical noise and the possibility to take into

account the full kinetic distribution of the ionized electrons.

We ﬁrst look at 2D2V Boltzmann simulations. We take a 0.25 µm, 1016 W cm−2 laser

pulse impinging on a solid hydrogen target with number density 2 ×1023 cm−3 = 12.5nc, and

thickness 0.1 µm. The time envelope of the laser pulse is Gaussian with a FWHM duration

4

of 2 cycles. The laser spot is also Gaussian with a FWHM of 2 µm. Fig.2 (a) shows the

magnetic ﬁeld and the density contours after the end of the laser pulse. The steady magnetic

ﬁeld has constant (negative) sign over its extension. Its maximum intensity is about 3 MG.

Fig.2 (b) shows the electron current density jy at the same time of the right plot of ﬁg.2 (a).

Among the parameters of our simulations, the magnetic ﬁeld appears to be most sensitive

to the temporal proﬁle of the laser pulse, achieving its maximum value for a square pulse

with zero risetime. In Fig.3 (a) we show the results of a 1D Boltzmann simulations for a

square pulse with I = 1016W cm−2, λ = 0.25 µm, and a target with ne/nc = 12.5. The

current density is jy ∼ 1022 c.g.s. units and extends over a distance comparable to dp ≃

1.2 × 10−2 µm. The maximum magnetic ﬁeld is consistent with Ampere’s law, which gives

Bst ∼ 4πjydp/c ≃ 5 MG. Assuming a density ne ≃ no = 2.2 × 1023 cm−3 for the electrons

which are instantaneously ionized, one gets a steady velocity vst ≃ jy/ene ≃ 108 cm s−1.

This value is lower than the ejection velocity for hydrogen vI ≃ 2×108 cm s−1. This suggests

that eﬀects such as screening, nonzero ionization time, and velocity statistics act to keep the

steady current well below the values that one may estimate according to the SMM, eq.(1).

Both laser and target parameters where varied in simulations in order to investigate the

scaling of the magnetic ﬁeld with them. As an example, Fig.3 (b) shows the results of a

simulation for a target of hydrogenic ions with density and thickness identical to Fig.3 (a),

but where we assumed a nuclear charge Z = 2 and scaled the atomic parameters accordingly

to x → Zx, t → Z 2t, ω → Z −2ω, E → Z −3E. In order to have the ionization threshold to

be exceeded at the same instant, the laser pulse had the same envelope and frequency but

the intensity was scaled by Z 6. With respect to the Z = 1 case, we obtain a steady ﬁeld

with lower peak amplitude which assumes both positive and negative values.

We also performed 2D Boltzmann simulations for a pulse obliquely incident at 15o on

the target. The preliminary results show that the magnetic ﬁeld is much lower in this case.

Therefore it appears that the steady magnetic ﬁeld is sensitive to the interaction geometry.

In any case, the oblique incidence results further conﬁrm the conclusion that no magnetic

ﬁeld capable to aﬀect the transmission through the target is generated.

5

III. OPTICAL MICROCAVITIES AND IONIZATION FRONTS

A. The model

In this section, we study eﬀects related to two beam-interference in one spatial dimension

and for wavelengths in the infrared and optical range. In our numerical experiment, a one-

dimensional interference pattern is generated via an appropriate “target manufacturing”:

the idea is to place a reﬂecting mirror on the rear side of the target, the one opposite

to the laser. Such a mirror might be easily produced by a metallic coating on a glass or

plastic target. Taking a laser pulse with peak intensity between IT /2 and IT , being IT

the “threshold” value for ionization, a plasma is produced in the target bulk around the

maxima of interference pattern produced by the incident wave and the wave reﬂected at the

rear mirror.

Since in this regime we deal only with moderate laser intensities, we may use a simple

one-dimensional ﬂuid model based on continuity, current and wave equations for an ionizing

medium, originally proposed by Brunel (1990), modiﬁed by the inclusion of the polarization

current. More details about the model and its validity can be found in Cornolti et al. (1998)

and Conejero Jarque et al. (1999).

B. Generation of layered plasmas

We ﬁrst consider a target with thickness L = 2πλ, being λ = 0.8 µm, and density

no = 10nc. The laser pulse has a sin2-shaped envelope with a duration of 80 fs (30 cycles)

and a peak intensity I = 1.8 × 1014 W cm−2. The target parameters are chosen to simulate

a thin foil solid slab and it is enough to take the density as low as 10nc since the maximum

electron density always remains much lower than this value.

The electron density vs. space and time is shown in Fig.4. A clear layered density pattern

with a spatial periodicity close to λ/2 is produced along nearly all the slab. The layers of

overdense plasma are produced near the maxima of the interference pattern. These maxima

6

appear at close times because of the eﬀect of the smooth envelope of the laser pulse. The

resulting quasi-periodic structure of the refractive index has in principle some similarities

with the widely studied semiconductor microcavities and photonic band-gap materials (see

reviews by Burstein and Weisbuch (1993) and by Skolnick et al. (1998)).

C. Optical microcavities

Since the density in the plasma layers is overcritical, and the layers are created in a

time shorter than a laser halfcycle, the portions of the standing wave between adjacent

intensity maxima may be “trapped” into the cavity formed by the two neighboring layers.

This trapping eﬀect is best seen in the case of a CO2 pulse impinging over a gas target

with L = λ = 10.6 µm and no = 5nc ≃ 5 × 1019cm−3. For this target, two plasma layers

are produced around the positions x = 0.25λ, x = 0.75λ. Fig. 5 shows the map of the

electric ﬁeld at early (a) and later (b) times, showing the generation of the constructive

interference pattern which yields the layered ionization (a), and the subsequent trapping of

the ﬁeld which remains in the cavity at times longer than the incident pulse duration (b).

The non-ionized regions between density layers clearly act as optical microcavities.

Since the microcavity length is Lc ≤ λ/2, light must have an upshifted wavevector k′ ≥ k

in order to persist inside the cavity. This implies also upshift of the laser frequency with

ω′

L ≥ ωL as seen in Fig.5(b). The upshift decreases the critical density value for the trapped

radiation and therefore wavelengths much shorter than λ escape from the cavity. Due to

the small fraction of light that tunnels out of the cavity one observes radiation emission

from the target for a time much longer than the pulse duration. Both the frequency upshift

and the pulse lengthening may provide experimental diagnostics for microcavity generation.

The lifetime of the cavities is ultimately limited by processes such as recombination, which

however should appear on times much longer than the pulse duration of a few tens of

femtoseconds that are considered here and are available in the laboratory.

7

D. Ionization fronts

As already shown, in our model target ionization is produced around the maxima of

the “standing” wave which is generated due to the reﬂection at the rear mirror. However,

since ionization is instantaneous on the laser period timescale, it is produced as soon as

the wave reﬂected at the rear mirror travels backwards and builds up the standing wave

by interference. Therefore, a backward propagating ionization front is generated, as seen in

Fig.4. The density at the front exceeds the critical density. This feature is not obtained for

a single pulse impinging on a dense target, since it undergoes immediate self-reﬂection and

penetrates only in the “skin”surface layer (Macchi et al. 1999).

An example of “overdense” ionization front is obtained in the case of a CO2 square

pulse 15 cycles long impinging over a target with ne = 4nc. The ne(x, t) contour plot is

shown in Fig.6. The ionized layers merge into a more homogeneous distribution and a

“continuous” ionization front appears. The merging appears because the time- and space-

modulated refractive index perturbs the reﬂected wave substantially, leading to broadening

of interference maxima. The velocity of the front in Fig.6 is near to, or even exceeds at

some times that of light. This is clearly not a physical “moving mirror” with a velocity

greater than c, but a reﬂective surface which is created apparently with such velocity due

to a space-time phase eﬀect.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge the scientiﬁc contributions of D. Bauer and L. Plaja as well as their

suggestions. Discussions with G. La Rocca, R. Colombelli, L. Roso, and V. Malyshev are

also greatly acknowledged. This work has been supported by the European Commission

through the TMR networks SILASI, contract No. ERBFMRX-CT96-0043, and GAUSEX,

contract. No. ERBFMRX-CT96-0080. E.C.J. also acknowledges support from the Junta de

Castilla y Le´on (under grant SA56/99).

8

REFERENCES

BAUER, D. 1997 Phys. Rev. A 55, 2180.

BAUER, D. & MULSER, P. 1999 Phys. Rev. A 59, 569.

BRUNEL, F. 1990 J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 7, 521.

BURSTEIN, E. & WEISBUCH, C., eds. 1993 Conﬁned Electrons and Photons. New Physics

and Applications (NATO ASI Series B: Physics, vol.340, Plenum Press, New York, 1993).

CONEJERO JARQUE, E., CORNOLTI, F. & MACCHI, A. 2000 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. and

Opt. Phys. 33, 1.

CORNOLTI, F., MACCHI, A. & CONEJERO JARQUE, E. 1998 in Superstrong Fields in

Plasmas, Proceedings of the First International Conference (Varenna, Italy, 1997), edited

by M. Lontano et al., AIP Conf. Proc. No. 426 (AIP, New York, 1998), p.55.

GIULIETTI, D., GIZZI, L.A., GIULIETTI, A., MACCHI, A., TEYCHENNE, D., CHESSA,

P., ROUSSE, A., CHERIAUX, G., CHAMBARET, J.P. & DARPENTIGNY, G. 1997 Phys.

Rev. Lett. 79, 3194.

MACCHI, A., CONEJERO JARQUE, E., BAUER, D., CORNOLTI, F. & PLAJA, L. 1999

Phys. Rev. E 59, R36.

MULSER, P., CORNOLTI, F. & BAUER, D. 1998 Phys. of Plasmas 5, 4466.

RAE, S. C. & BURNETT, K. 1992 Phys. Rev. A 46, 1084.

SKOLNICK, M. S., FISHER, T. A. & WHITTAKER D. M. 1998 Semicond. Sci. Technol.

13, 645.

TEYCHENN´E, D., GIULIETTI, D., GIULIETTI, A. & GIZZI, L. A. 1998 Phys. Rev. E58,

R1245.

WILKS, S. C., DAWSON, J. M. & MORI, W. B. 1988 Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 337.

9

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Spatial distribution of magnetic ﬁeld (left) and electron charge density (right) ﬁve

cycles after the end of the pulse, for “sin2” pulses of 0.1 a.u. (dotted line), 1 a.u. (dashed line),

10 a.u. (solid line) maximum amplitude and a “square” pulse of 1 a.u. amplitude (dashed-dotted

line). All the pulses are 5 cycles long. The electric ﬁeld atomic unit is Eau = 5.1 × 109 V cm−1

(corresponding to I = 3.5 × 1016 W cm−2).

(a)

(b)

FIG. 2. Grayscale contours of the magnetic ﬁeld Bz (a) and the current density jy (b) ﬁve laser

cycles after the laser pulse end, for a 2D2V Boltzmann simulation. The dashed line in (a) and (b)

give Bz/Bo and jy/jo, respectively, along x = 2µm. The parameters Bo = 27.7 MG, jo = 2.2 ×1022

c.g.s. units. The solid lines give neutral density contours. The dashed-dotted lines mark the critical

density surface. Simulation parameters I = 1016W cm−2, λ = 0.25µm, ne/nc = 12.5.

10

(a)

(b)

FIG. 3. Proﬁles of the steady magnetic ﬁeld Bz (solid) and the current jy (dashed) in 1D Boltz-

mann simulations. The parameters common to (a) and (b) are λ = 0.25 µm and ne/nc = 12.5.

In the case (a) the atomic parameters are those of an hydrogenlike atom with Z = 1, and

I = 1016W cm−2, Bo = 27.7 MG, jo = 2.2×1022 c.g.s. units. In the case (b) Z = 2 and laser param-

eters are scaled accordingly to x → Zx, t → Z 2t, ω → Z −2ω, E → Z −3E; I = 6.4 × 1017W cm−2,

Bo = 50.6 MG, jo = 7 × 1022 c.g.s. units.

FIG. 4. Grayscale contourplot of free electron density ne(x, t) for a “solid” hydrogen target

with a reﬂecting “metal” layer on the rear face (thick solid line). The pulse parameters are

I = 1.8 × 1014 W cm−2, λ = 0.8 µm, ∆tL = 30(2π/ωL) ≃ 80 fs (“sin2” envelope). The target

parameters are L = 2πλ, no = 10nc = 1.1 × 1022 cm−3.

11

FIG. 5. Evolution of the electric ﬁeld inside the plasma slab during the interaction with the

incident pulse (a) and 80 cycles later (b). The pulse parameters are I = 1.8 × 1014 W cm−2,

λ = 10.6 µm, ∆tL = 15(2π/ωL) ≃ 530 fs (“sin2” envelope). The target parameters are L = λ,

no = 5nc = 5 × 1019 cm−3.

FIG. 6. Grayscale contourplot of ne(x, t) for a hydrogen “gaseous” target with a reﬂect-

ing “metal” layer on the right boundary. The pulse has square envelope and parameters

I = 1.8 × 1014 W cm−2, λ = 10.6 µm, ∆tL = 15(2π/ωL) ≃ 530 fs Target parameters are L = 2πλ,

ne = 4nc = 4 × 1019 cm−3.

12

