MAGNETIC FRACTAL DIMENSIONALITY OF THE DIELECTRIC

BREAKDOWN UNDER STRONG MAGNETIC FIELDS

Y. Ben-Ezra1,2,3 , Yurij V. Pershin 4,2, I.D.Vagner 1,2 and P.Wyder 2

1P.E.R.I.-Physics and Engineering Research Institute at Ruppin,

Emek Hefer, 40250 Israel.

2Grenoble High Magnetic Fields Laboratory

Max-Planck-Institute f¨ur Festkorperforschung and CNRS,

166X, F-38042, Cedex 9, France.

3School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University,

Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

4B.I.Verkin Institute for Low Temperature Physics and Engineering,

47 Lenin Avenue 310164 Kharkov, Ukraine.

The formation of breakdown pattern on an insulating surface under the inﬂuence of a transverse magnetic
ﬁeld is theoretically investigated. We have generalized the Dielectric Breakdown Model (DBM) for the case
of external magnetic ﬁeld. Concept of the Magnetic Fractal Dimensionality (MFD) is introduced and its
universality is demonstrated.
It is shown that MFD saturates with magnetic ﬁelds. The magnetic ﬁeld
dependence of the streamer curvature is obtained. It is conjectured that nonlinear current interaction is
responsible for the experimentally observed ’spider-legs’ like streamer patterns.

PACS numbers: 52.20.Dq, 52.80.Mg

0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
0
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Fractal properties are common to the dielectric breakdown phenomena [1] which range from an atmo-
spheric lightning [2],[4], [3] to electric treeing in polymers [5] and are of scientiﬁc and technical importance
[6],[7]. Although the actual physical processes can be quite diﬀerent in these phenomena, the global prop-
erties of the resulting discharge patterns are very similar. Filamentary gas discharges on insulating surface
exhibit remarkable similarities to breakdown phenomena in long gaps [8], e.g., to atmospheric lightning , and
thus oﬀer the possibility to perform well-deﬁned model experiments in laboratory. The application of sophis-
ticated diagnostic tools, such as streak cameras, high-speed oscilloscopes, and time-resolved spectroscopy [9],
in surface discharge experiments has improved the basic understanding of how a highly conducting phase,
the ﬁlamentary ”leader” channel, advances into a nonconducting medium as the surrounding gas.

The surface discharge in compressed SF6 gas have been studied in detail by Niemeyer and Pinnekamp[10].
The parameters were controlled in such a way that the experiment produces, to a good approximation, an
equipotential channel system growing in a plane with a radial electrode from a central point. The experiment
shows that the dielectric breakdown pattern has a fractal structure.

The stochastic model containing the essential features of the fractal properties of the dielectric break-
down was introduced by Niemeyer, Pietroniero, and Wiesmann (NPW) [11],[1]. The introduced stochastic
model made it possible to simulate the growth of a fractal structure which resembles a Lichtenberg ﬁgure [2].
The basic assumption of the dielectric breakdown model (DBM) was that the growth probability depends on
the local ﬁeld. This model naturally leads to fractal structures. In [11] the Haussdorf dimension and other
fractal properties of the structure are determined and their close relations to the other fractal structures e.g.,
DLA (the diﬀusion limited aggregation) [12], is shown .

The DBM method was generalized by Wiesmann and Zeller [13] in two ways. Firstly they introduced
a critical ﬁeld for growth Fc. The growth probability was assumed to be proportional to the local ﬁeld Floc
if Floc > Fc and zero if Floc < Fc. Secondly they have introduced an internal ﬁeld in the structure Fs. The
potential in the structure was no longer equal to the potential V0 of the connecting electrode but equal to
V0 + Fs · s, where s is the length of the path along the structure which connects the point to the electrode.
[3] a transverse high magnetic ﬁeld was applied during the discharge
evolution and thus any spatial restriction of the surface discharge was avoided in order to use a locally
sensitive probe.

In the recent experiment

When a rectangular high-voltage pulse of about 500ns length, 20kV amplitude, and less than 10ns
risetime is applied to a point-to- plane electrode system, the electrodes being separated by a thin dielectric
ﬁlm ( thickness ≈ 100µm) , a discharge propagates in the gas just above the surface of the ﬁlm. The discharge
pattern was recorded directly with high resolution by using a photographic ﬁlm as dielectric plate.
The experiment shows the spatial evolution of a negative surface discharge in a nitrogen atmosphere as
[3]). At B = 0 a very bright starlike pattern develops. At
a function of the magnetic ﬁeld ( Fig.2 of Ref.
moderate magnetic ﬁeld (up to 7T ), the leader channels are bent and appear to have a circular shape outside
the central electrode region.

The radius of curvature is of the order of 1cm at 7T . The direction of the bending corresponds to the
movement of electrons in crossed electric and magnetic ﬁelds. With the increase of the magnetic ﬁeld
the radius of curvature decreases, the channels approach each other and branching sets in. At the highest
applied magnetic ﬁeld of 12T , circular-shaped current ﬁlaments are only found in the outmost regions of the
discharge pattern where they can develop undistributed by the ﬁelds of neighboring leader channels.

One can summarize the experimental results as follows:
(1) The observed bending eﬀect cannot be related to the movement of a single charged particles in crossed
electric and magnetic ﬁelds, which should result in the curvatures of the order of magnitude of 15µm at 1T
for the electrons, i.e., the Larmor radius rc = vc/ωc of the cyclotron orbit of an electron withe enough kinetic
energy to ionize gas molecules. It has be assumed that the macroscopic value of the radius of curvature results
from the drift movement of the Larmor centers of the gyrating electrons. The average radius of curvature
follows a power law, R ∝ B−α . The exponent α depends on the nature of gas.
geometry.

(2) The circular shape of the current ﬁlaments is not expected to occur for our point-to-plane electrode

(3) The complexity of the discharge pattern can be controlled by the magnetic ﬁeld strength. It appears

2

that an increase in complexity is induced on the scale of the bending observed, and not on the microscopic
scale of the cyclotron radius.

In what follows we modify the model introduced by Wiesmann and Zeller [13] for the case of external

magnetic ﬁeld.

Let us consider a two-dimensional square lattice in which a central point represents one of the electrodes
while the other electrode is modeled as a circle at large distance, which represents the geometry of the
experiment. The discharge starts at the central electrode and grows by one lattice bond per growth step. A
bond connects a lattice point with one of eight adjacent lattice points as it is described in Fig.1. Once a given
point is connected to the discharge structure by a bond, it becomes part of the structure. The potential of
the central electrode is 0, the potential of a point in the structure is Vi,k = Vl,m + VR ∗ l, where Vl,m is the
potential of a points from which growth go on, VR is an internal ﬁeld in the structure and l is 1 for bonds
parallel to the grid and is √2 for diagonal bonds.

The growth is computed as follows: First the Laplace equation is solved with the boundary conditions
determined by the electrodes and the discharge structure. Then the local ﬁeld Floc between a point which
is already a part of the structure (i, k) and a new adjacent point (i′, k′) is calculated:

Floc(i, k, i′, k′) =

ϕ
i′ ,k′ − Vi,k

l

(1)

where ϕ
i′ ,k′ is the solution of Laplace equation. The breakdown can occur only if the local ﬁeld is greater
that the critical ﬁeld of growth FC . The probability that a new bond will form between a point which is
already a part of the structure and a new adjacent point p(i, k → i′, k′) is calculated as a function of the
local ﬁeld Floc between the two points:

p(i, k → i′, k′) =




0

, Floc(i, k, i′, k′) < FC

F η

locP F η

loc

, Floc(i, k, i′, k′) ≥ FC

(2)

where a power-low dependence with exponent η is assumed to describe adequately the relation between the
local ﬁeld and the probability. The sum in the denominator refers to all possible growth processes. A new
bond is chosen randomly with probability distribution (2) and added to the discharge pattern. With this
new discharge pattern one starts again. More detailed description of this model is done in [13] .

Let us take into account the magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic ﬁeld changes the probability distribution (2). A

moving particle in the magnetic ﬁeld experiences the Lorentz force FL ∼ −→V ×−→H which acts perpendicularly

to its velocity. Consider each step of growth like a superposition of two processes. The ﬁrst step is choosing
a new bond using the probability distribution (2), and the second step is taking into account the probability
of deviation of the growth due to the magnetic ﬁeld, pH.

If after ﬁrst step of growth, for example, the bond from the dot 0 to the dot 4 was chousen (Fig.1), the
growth will occurs to the dot 3 with the probability pH and to the dot 4 with the probability 1 − pH. The
new probability of growth can be written as

ep(i, k → i′, k′) =

p(i, k → i′, k′)(1 − pH(i, k, i′, k′)) + p(i, k → i′′, k′′)pH (i, k, i′′, k′′)
P(p(i, k → i′, k′)(1 − pH (i, k, i′, k′)) + p(i, k → i′′, k′′)pH (i, k, i′′, k′′))

(3)

where the point (i′′, k′′) is the neighboring point with respect to the point (i′, k′) in the clockwise direction
with respect to the point (i, k) and the sum in the denominator refers to all possible growth processes. The
probability 3 was used in computer simulations in place of the probability 2 with the same algorithm.

Let us turn to the probability pH of deviation of the growth due to the magnetic ﬁeld. In our model,
during the process of growth, two constant forces act on charge cariers, FL and FH (Fig.1). When the
resulting force is near the dot 3, pH −→ 1; when the resulting force is near the dot 4, pH −→ 0.
It is clear

3

that the probability pH is proportional to FL
. If Floc(i, k, i′, k′) < FC then the growth does not occur and
Floc
pH should be zero. If FL
> 1 then we let pH = 1. The Lorentz force FL is proportional to the velocity of
Floc
charge carrier. In our model we can take into account only a local velocity, which arrises in the ﬁrst step of
growth process due to the acceleration in the local ﬁeld Floc. So, the Lorentz force should be proportional

Based on these considerations, we choose the probability of deviation of the growth due to the magnetic

to plFloc(i, k, i′, k′).

ﬁeld, pH , in the following form:

pH (i, k, i′, k′) =




0

FL(i,k,i′,k′)
Floc(i,k,i′,k′)

,

,

Floc(i, k, i′, k′) < FC

FL(i,k,i′ ,k′)

Floc(i,k,i′ ,k′) ≤ 1, Floc(i, k, i′, k′) ≥ FC

(4)

FL(i,k,i′ ,k′)

,

1

Floc(i,k,i′ ,k′) > 1, Floc(i, k, i′, k′) ≥ FC
where FL(i, k, i′, k′) = plFloc(i, k, i′, k′)H and H is the value of the magnetic ﬁeld.
In our computer simulations we consider a 500 × 500 lattice. The solutions of the Laplace equation were
obtained by the iteration method [11]. Before starting of each realization of growth we performed 20000
iterations and after each step of growth the number of iterations was 40. This procedure gives a good
convergence. The number of particles in clusters was 9000.

The fractal dimension was calculated by the method described in [11]. For every realization we plotted
the log N (R) versus log R where N (R) is the number of particles belonging to the structure and being within
a circle of radius R. The fractal dimension is obtained by ﬁtting a straight line to the data scaling region.
For every set of the same parameters of the model (H, FC , VR, η) we made about 100 realizations. Thus
the statistical ﬂuctuations were reduced.

Let us discuss the results of these calculations.
We start our simulations with the case of the zero magnetic ﬁeld and the zero values of the parameters
F c and VR in order to compare our results with the results of the diﬀerent authors. In the Table.1 we present
the dependence of the Hausdorﬀ dimension D on the exponent parameter η.

η D (our results) D (according to [11]) D (according to [13])
0.5
1
2

1.89 ± 0.01
1.75 ± 0.02

1.92
1.70
1.43

1.89 ± 0.02
1.73 ± 0.02
1.6 ± 0.03

∼ 1.6

Table 1. Dependence of the Hausdorﬀ dimension D on the exponent η used in the relation between

probability and local ﬁeld (Eq.2).

Our results are in a good agreement with the results, obtained earlier.
The example of the computer-generated discharge pattern (Lichtenberg ﬁgure [2]) corresponding to the
following set of parameters: H = 0, η = 1, Fc = 0 and VR = 0 is shown in the Fig.2. In the Fig.3 we show
the computer-generated discharge pattern in the presence of the external magnetic ﬁeld. The white lines
in the ﬁgures 1 and 2 correspond to the leader channels. Unlike the pattern, presented in the Fig.2, the
leader channels in the magnetic ﬁeld are distorted and appeare to have a circular shape outside the central
electrode region. The direction of the bending corresponds to the movement of electrons in crossed electric
and magnetic ﬁeld. At the lower left corner of the Fig.3 we plotted the cyclotron orbit of an electron. One
can note that the Larmor radius of an electron is about two orders of magnitude smaller then the radius of
curvature of the leader channel.

The saturation of the fractal dimensionality, with growing magnetic ﬁelds, at the value of D = 1.67 ,
which is one of the main results of this paper, is presented in Fig. 4. The plot starts from the value of
D = 1.65 , in the absence of magnetic ﬁeld, which is smaller than the fractal dimensionality reported in [11].

4

Such diﬀerence results from the fact that in [11] the critical ﬁeld value for the breakdown was not taken into
account. We have improved their calculations by introducing the minimal value of the electric ﬁeld for the
breakdown between two successive points. In this case the breakdown pattern is more directionally selected,
and a lower fractal dimensionality results. With the increase of the external magnetic ﬁeld, the MFD growth
and ﬁnally saturates at an universal for high magnetic ﬁelds values of 1.67 ± 0.01. The growth of MFD with
the magnetic ﬁeld could be expected, since the curved trajectories ﬁll up the space more densely than the
straight ones. The existence of an universal limit, hovewer, is far from being obvious. Following the directed
percolation models, one could think that the saturation of MFD will occur at D = 2 . Fig 4. shows clearly
that in this system the MFD saturates due to the physics of current carrying streamers.

An unexplained feature in the experiments of [3] is the ’spider-legs’ form of the breakdown pattern in the
absence of the external magnetic ﬁeld. We outline here that the streamer currents are rather strong, 10÷100
A, and their inﬂuence on the streamer pattern can be very important. To describe this phenomenon we have
taken into account the magnetic interaction between current carrying streamers, in the framework of the
modiﬁed active walker model (MAWM) which is described in what follows. The results of our calculations,
presented in Fig. 5, show that our model correctly describes the experimentally observed ’spider-legs’ eﬀect.
Active walker models have been used to describe diﬀerent pattern formation problems [14, 15]. In these
models the walkers moovement is subject to the inﬂuences of the environment and vice versa. We describe
the leader channel propagation in the magnetic ﬁeld using the active walker model. The Lorentz force acting
on the fast-moving electrons is particularly eﬀective in the high-ﬁeld regions in the leader tips, where the
channel formation takes place.

Let us consider again a two-dimensional square lattice in which a central point represents one of the
electrodes while the other electrode is modeled as a circle at large distance. The discharge starts at the
central electrode, so initially several walkers are set in the vicinity of it. The walkers move in a potential
which is the solution of the Laplace equation with the boundary conditions determined by electrodes and
discharge structure. During a step of growth each walker moves. The solution of Laplace equation is found
by iteration method [11] after each step of growth.

When a walker moves to a point, this point starts belonging to the breakdown structure. The potential
of the central electrode is 0, the potential of a point in the structure is Vi,k = Vl,m + VR ∗ l, where Vl,m is the
potential of a points from which growth go on, VR is an internal ﬁeld in the structure and l is 1 for bonds
parallel to the grid and is √2 for diagonal bonds. In the absence of the magnetic ﬁeld, the probability of a
walker step is a function of the local ﬁeld Floc [14]. The breakdown occurs only if the local ﬁeld is greater
then the critical ﬁeld of growth FC .

The magnetic ﬁeld is taken into account by the following way. We add to the local ﬁeld in the direction
perpendicular to the previous move of the walker the Lorentz force which is proportional to the magnetic
ﬁeld. The magnetic ﬁeld acting on the i walker is Hi = H0 + H i
I , where H0 is external magnetic ﬁeld and
H i
I by means of the Biot-Savart
law:

I is the ﬁeld created by currents of the breakdown structure. We calculate H i

H i

I = X

k6=i,l

I

r3 d−→s k,l × −→r

(5)

where I is the current in a channel, d−→s k,l is l element of the k channel and −→r is the vector pointed from

the position of d−→s k,l to the position of the i walker.

The main results of this part of studies are presented in Fig. 5.
To summarize, we have generalized and modiﬁed the existing dielectric breakdown models to explain the
experimental observations of the propagation of a streamer near an insulating surface under the inﬂuence
of a transverse magnetic ﬁeld. We have introduced the concept of the Magnetic Fractal Dimensionality
(MFD) and have obtained its saturation with growing magnetic ﬁelds. The Universal Magnetic Fractal
Dimensionality (UMFD) equals 1.670 which is superior to 1.65, the one in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld.
Inclusion of the magnetic interaction between the current-carrying streamers results in the ’spider-legs’ like
streamer patterns at lower ﬁelds, which corresponds to the experimental observations.

5

We acknowledge helpfull discussions with T.Maniv, and A.Zhuravlev. We acknowledge the assistance of

A.Kaplunovsky in the initial stage of numerical simulations.

6

References

[1] A. Erzan, L. Pietronero, A. Vespignani, Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 67, No.3, July 1995.

[2] G.C. Lichtenberg, Novi Commentarii Societatis Regiae Scientiarium Gottingae 8, 168 (1877).

[3] P. Uhlig, J.C. Maan and P. Wyder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1968 (1989).

[4] Engineering Dielectrics, Vols I-VI (American Society for Testing and Materails, Philadelphia 1983),

Special Technical Publication No. LC. No82-70637.

[5] R.A. Fava, in Treatise on Material Science and Technology, edited by J.M. Schutz (Academic, New York

1977), Vol. 10, Pt. B., p.677.

[6] H.R. Zeller and W.R. Schneider, J.Appl. Phys. 56, 455 (1984).

[7] Tamas Vicsek, Fractal Growth Phenomena (World Scientiﬁc Publishing, 1989).

[8] I. Gallimberti, J.Phys. (Paris), Colloq. 40, C7-197 (1979).

[9] S. Larigadie, J. Apll. Phys. 61, 90 (1987).

[10] L. Niemeyer and F.Pinnekamp, in Gaseous Dielectrics III, edited by G. Christophorou (Pergamon, New

York, 1982).

[11] L. Niemeyer, L. Pietronero and H.J. Wiesmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 1033 (1984).

[12] A. Witten and L.M. Sander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1400 (1981).

[13] H.J. Wiesmann and H.R. Zeller, J. Appl. Phys., 60, No.5, 1770 (1986).

[14] Chia-Rong Sheu, Ching-Yen Cheng, and Ru-Pin Pan, Phys. Rev. E,59, 1540 (1999).

[15] D. Helbing, F. Schweitzer, J. Keltsch and P. Molnar, Phys. Rev. E56, 2527 (1997).

7

Figure Captions

Fig.1.
Bonds connecting a lattice point with one of eight adjacent lattice points in a two-dimensional square
lattice. The geometry of the experiment is represented by a central electrode at some point while the other
electrode is a circle at large distance. The discharge starts at the central electrode and grows by one lattice
bond per growth step.

Fig.2.
Computer-generated discharge pattern (Lichtenberg ﬁgure) corresponding to the following set of param-
eters: H = 0, η = 1, Fc = 0 and VR = 0 as explained in the text.The white lines correspond to the leader
channels.

Fig.2.
Computer-generated discharge pattern in the presence of the external magnetic ﬁeld. The leader channels
in the magnetic ﬁeld are distorted and appeare to have a circular shape outside the central electrode region,
due to the action of the magnetic ﬁeld.

Fig.4.
The saturation of the fractal dimensionality, with growing magnetic ﬁelds, at the value of D = 1.67 .

Fig.5.
The ’spider-legs’ form of the breakdown pattern folowing from the magnetic interaction between the
streamer currents: a) current-current interactions are not took into account, H = 0; b)current-current
interactions are took into account, H = 0; c) H 6= 0.

8

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005002v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005002v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005002v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005002v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0005002v1

