0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

8

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
2
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Laser generated wake ﬁelds as a new diagnostic tool for magnetized plasmas

Department of Plasma Physics, Ume˚a University, S-901 87 Ume˚a, Sweden

Martin Servin and Gert Brodin

In the presence of an external magnetic ﬁeld, wake ﬁelds generated by a short laser pulse can
propagate out of the plasma, and thereby provide information about the electron density proﬁle.
A method for reconstructing the density proﬁle from a measured wake ﬁeld spectrum is proposed
and a numerical example is given. Finally, we compare our proposal with existing plasma density
diagnostic tecniques.

As is well-known, a short laser pulse propagating in
an underdense unmagnetized plasma can excite a wake
ﬁeld of plasma oscillations [1]. This has interesting ap-
plications to plasma based particle accelerators and is
naturally of importance for the general understanding of
laser-plasma interactions.
If the plasma is magnetized
and the external magnetic ﬁeld non-parallel to the di-
rection of propagation of the laser pulse, the wake ﬁeld
becomes partially electromagnetic and thereby obtains a
nonzero group velocity [2].

In the present paper we study wake ﬁeld generation
in an inhomogeneous magnetized plasma. In particular
we address the question to what extent the wake ﬁeld
can propagate out of the plasma, and thereby provide
information about the plasma parameters. The most in-
teresting case is that of a strongly magnetized plasma
(i.e. when the electron cyclotron frequency is larger than
the plasma frequency), for which almost all of the wake
ﬁeld energy - except that generated in a narrow low den-
sity region - may propagate out of the plasma. Since
the wake ﬁeld also in the magnetized case initially has
the frequency equal to the local plasma frequency, this
provides a way of extracting information about the elec-
tron density proﬁle. It turns out that even though wave
overtaking – for example when a higher frequency part
of the wake ﬁeld passes a lower frequency part – may
occur, the density proﬁle can still be reconstructed by
integrating the ray equations of geometric optics back-
wards. This is more straightforward for a static back-
ground density proﬁle, and a numerical example is pro-
vided for this case, where the predicted spectrum of the
wake ﬁeld corresponding to an assumed density proﬁle is
shown, and a reconstructed proﬁle is calculated. Finally,
the method is compared with two of the existing plasma
density diagnostic techniques [3], namely interferometry
and reﬂectometry.

We consider a high frequency laser pulse with fre-
quency ωH propagating in a cold, weakly inhomogeneous
magnetized plasma. We assume the ordering ωH ≫
ωp, ωc, where ωp and ωc ≡ |qB0|/m are the plasma and
electron cyclotron frequency respectively, q and m are

the electron charge and mass, and B0 = B0bx is the (con-

stant) external magnetic ﬁeld. We let the laser pulse
propagate perpendicularly to the external magnetic ﬁeld.

The ponderomotive force of the laser pulse will gener-
ate a ”low frequency” wake ﬁeld mode (which is the low
frequency branch of the extraordinary mode, or plasma
oscillations modiﬁed by the magnetic ﬁeld, depending on
the choice of terminology) during its path through the
plasma. The generation mechanism is most eﬃcient if the
pulse has a duration of the order of the inverse plasma
frequency or shorter.
In principle, the laser pulse will
broaden due to ordinary dispersion, decrease its energy
and frequency due to the interaction with the wake ﬁeld,
etc. These and other eﬀects have been considered in ho-
mogeneous plasmas by for example Ref. [2]. We will focus
on the spectral properties of the wake ﬁeld, however, and
for this purpose it turns out that we can forget about the
details of the laser pulse. Basically the eﬀect of the laser
ﬁeld is to provide a well localized ponderomotive source
term in the governing equations for the wake ﬁeld, trav-
elling with almost the speed of light in vacuum.

The wake ﬁeld quantities are denoted by index L. We
introduce the corresponding vector and scalar potentials
AL(z, t) and φL(z, t), using Coulomb gauge, and the elec-
tron density is written n = n0(z, t)+ nL(z, t), where n0 is
the unperturbed density, assumed to vary on longer space
and time scales than the wake ﬁeld. Furthermore, the
electron velocity v is divided into its high- and low fre-
quency part, and we denote the low frequency contribu-
tions perpendicular and parallel to the direction of prop-
agation with vL⊥ and vLz respectively. The pondero-
motive force of the laser pulse induces longitudinal wake

through the Lorentz-force, but there is no wake ﬁeld mo-
tion in the direction of the external magnetic ﬁeld, and

ﬁeld motion, which couple to motion in the by -direction
accordingly we put AL = ALby and vL⊥ = vL⊥by. Lin-

earizing in the low frequency variables, and neglecting
derivatives acting on n0, we obtain the following set of
equations governing the wake ﬁeld generation

− µ0qn0vL⊥ +(cid:2)c−2∂2

z(cid:3) AL = 0
c−2∂z∂tφL − µ0qn0 vL z = 0
∂tAL = 0
∂tvL⊥ − ωcvLz +

t − ∂2

q
m

∂tvLz +

∂zφL + ωcvL⊥ = −

q
m
∂tnL + n0∂zvLz = 0

q2
2m2 ∂z|AH |2

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Next we write this on matrix form Au = b, where u =
(φL, nL, vLz, vL⊥, AL), A is an operator matrix and b is
the (ponderomotive) source vector. Since derivatives on
n0 are neglected, we can simplify the system (1)-(5) by a
simple matrix inversion u =A−1b treating the operators
in A like constant coeﬃcients. We introduce the group
velocity of the laser pulse vgH ≡ ∂kω and eliminate dif-
ferential operators in the denominators everywhere by
“multiplication”. By using ∂t ≈ −vgH ∂z ≈ −c∂z for
derivatives acting on the source vector, and focusing on
the ﬁrst component of u, we ﬁnally obtain after one space
and one time integration

(cid:2)∂4
t + (ω2

h + ω2

p)∂2

t − (∂2

t + ω2

h)c2∂2

z + ω4

p(cid:3) φL =

qω4

p|A2
H |
2m

(6)

p + ω2

h = ω2

where ω2
c and we recognize the operator acting
on φL as the wave operator for the extraordinary mode.
Although derivatives on n0 have been neglected in the
derivation of Eq. (6), it should be emphasized that the
equations for wake ﬁeld generation is more complicated
here than for a homogeneous plasma. This is because in
the inhomogeneous case, the evolution of the wake ﬁeld
is in general not quasi-static in a frame moving with the
group velocity of the laser pulse, and thus ∂t ≈ −vgH ∂z ≈
−c∂z does not hold for derivatives acting on the wake
ﬁeld.

It is useful to divide the study of the wake ﬁeld prop-
erties into its excitation and its propagation phase. The
excitation of one additional wavelength of the wake ﬁeld
takes place during a distance of the order of 2πc/ωp, and
– as a basic assumption of ours – the variations of n0 is
negligible on this length scale. Thus as far as the excita-
tion process is concerned, the plasma can essentially be
treated as homogeneous. The solution for the wake ﬁeld
can thus be obtained from previous authors [2]. Chang-
ing to comoving coordinates ξ = z − vgH t, τ = t the
result for the wake ﬁeld potential can be written

φL = φL0 sin[kp(ξ − ξ0)]

(7)

φL0 = (qωp/mvg)R ∞

where kp is the wake ﬁeld wavenumber kp = ωp/vgH , ξ0
is the (constant) position of the (short) laser pulse, and
−∞ |AH |2dξ. The important result
here, for our purposes, is the determination of the initial
value of the wake ﬁeld wave number kp = ωp/vgH , which
corresponds to an initial frequency ωp (in the laboratory
frame), that will vary with the position of generation.

Next we make the ansatz of geometric optics. Inspect-
ing the wave operator in Eq. (6), we note that there is
a resonance at ω2 = ω2
p and cut-oﬀs at ωL ≡
1
2 [−ωc + (ω2
2 [ωc + (ω2
p)1/2].
The dispersion relation has two positive roots. One
branch is valid for ω > ωR and one for ωL < ω < ωh.
As the wake ﬁeld is generated with the local plasma

c + ω2
p)1/2] and ωR ≡ 1

c + 4ω2

c + 4ω2

h ≡ ω2

frequency ωp, the wake ﬁeld must belong to the latter
branch. Therefore we write the dispersion relation from
now on as

ω = W (k, z, t) ≡ nχ −qχ2 − ω2

hc2k2 − ω4

po1/2

(8)

h + ω2

where χ ≡ (ω2
p + c2k2)/2. Due to the cut-oﬀ ωL and
the resonance ωh, only parts of the wake ﬁeld satisfying
the inequality ωL < ω < ωh at all points on its path
through the plasma can leave the plasma and contribute
to the wake ﬁeld spectrum. Within the geometric optics
approximation, the path of diﬀerent parts of the wake
ﬁeld is determined by the ray equations [5]

dk
dt

= −∂zW ,

dω
dt

= ∂tW

(9)

Speciﬁcally,

where d/dt ≡ ∂t + vg∂z.
for a time-
independent medium, the right hand side of the last equa-
tion is zero and the wake ﬁeld propagates, with the local
wake ﬁeld group velocity vg ≡ ∂kω with unchanged fre-
quency.

It is natural to ﬁrst consider the density proﬁle recon-
struction from a wake ﬁeld in the case of a quasi-static
plasma. The proposed technique can be applied not only
to truly static density proﬁles but to the large class of
phenomenons varying on a time scale signiﬁcantly larger
than the time of propagation of the wake ﬁeld through
the plasma slab. Then, sequential laser pulses gives a
sequence of wake ﬁelds spectra from which a “movie” of
the density proﬁle can be obtained.

We assume that the generated wake ﬁeld spectrum is
measured immediately outside the plasma boundary. In
consistence with the geometric optics approximation we
will treat the measured data as a weakly time dependent
spectrum with well deﬁned sharp (quasi-monochromatic)
peaks. The data is not necessarily monochromatic at a
given time, however. A part of the wake ﬁeld generated at
an earlier time may overtake some part of the wake ﬁeld
generated at a later time, leading to a spectrum with mul-
tiple sharp peaks. Generally, we can express the data as a
set of distinct frequencies measured at diﬀerent times, in
which case a sharp curve can be recognized, see Fig.1(a).
Due to cut-oﬀs and/or resonances, the curve may be dis-
continuous, and the algorithm below only works until the
ﬁrst jump.

Before presenting the reconstruction algorithm we need
to introduce some notations. As mentioned, the mea-
surement results in a function of time, in general multi-
valued, describing a path ω(t) as illustrated in Fig.1(a).
Let the path be discretized into consecutive points num-
bered i = 0, 1, ..., n, i = 0 being the ﬁrst measured point.
Let also the plasma, having length L, be discretized into
cells, numbered j = 1, 2, ..., N , of length ∆z = L/N
so that the plasma has the plasma frequency ωp(j) at
(j −1)∆z ≤ z ≤ j∆z. In order to distinguish the two dis-

2

cretizations we will use upper indices for quantities dis-
cretized according to the spectrum-path discretization,
e.g. t(i), and lower indices for quantities discretized ac-
cording to the plasma discretization, e.g. ωp(j). In par-
ticular we will let z(j) ≡ (j − 1)∆z whereas z(i) is the
“exact” point in the plasma where the wake ﬁeld corre-
sponding to the i:th point in the spectrum was generated.
Furthermore, it is convenient to introduce ∆z(i), which
is deﬁned in Fig.1(b).

The following algorithm can be used to retrace the
measured frequency spectrum and thereby reconstruct
the electron density proﬁle: We assume that the points
0, 1, 2, ..., i − 1 (grey dots in Fig.1(b)) have already been
retraced so that the plasma frequency of the cells j +
1, j + 2, ..., N (black) is known and the plasma frequency
of cell j (grey) has yet to be determined. Consider now
the retracing of the next spectrum-point i, correspond-
ing to the frequency ω(i) detected at time t(i). Given the
plasma frequency of the already reconstructed cells, the
path of spectrum point i is known up to cell j, where
the plasma frequency and thereby the group velocity is
yet to be determined. Since spectrum point i at least be-
longs in the neigborhood of cell j, a ﬁrst guess – correct
to lowest order – is that ωp(j) = ω(i). Making this guess,
the path of spectrum point i can be reconstructed a bit
further by comparing the detection time, t(i), with the
generation time of this particular wake ﬁeld, and using
the ray equations (9).
In particular it can be decided
whether this point belongs to cell j or cell j − 1. If it
belongs to cell
j, the algorithm assigns the calculated
position to point i and proceeds to spectrum point i + 1.
If it belongs to j − 1, the cell j is ﬁlled with spectrum
points and a deﬁnite plasma frequency is given to this
cell, before the algorithm continues in the same manner
with reconstructing cell j − 1 and the path of spectrum
point i + 1. For density variations on a faster time-scale
than c/L, the above algorithm does not work. Prelimi-
nary work suggests that it can be generalized to a more
rapidly varying regime, however, but it would require
multiple laser pulses propagating in the plasma slab si-
multaneously.

In order to demonstrate the method we numerically
calculate a wake ﬁeld spectrum using the ray equations
(9) starting from an assumed density proﬁle, see Fig.2(a).
In the reconstruction algorithm this spectrum is then
treated as experimental data. In this case we consider
a plasma magnetized such that ωc = 1.1 × ωp,max, where
ωp,max is the maximum value of the plasma frequency.
For simplicity we normalize such that L = 1, c = 1, and
we let the laser pulse enter the plasma at t = 0 and exit
at t = 1. The spectrum is obtained by treating the wake
ﬁeld as a collection of point particles – jumping into exis-
tence as the laser pulse propagates through the plasma –
each moving with the local group velocity and the initial
wavenumber and frequency determined by Eq. (7). Since

the density proﬁle is known, in contrast to the case of re-
tracing the spectrum, it is straight forward to propagate
these “particles” by means of the ray equations (9).

Retracing the spectrum according to the algorithm
presented above results in a density proﬁle that can be
compared with the one we assumed, see Fig. 2(b). A
small numerical error – that can be removed with a ﬁner
discretization – can be seen. Note that the entire plasma
proﬁle cannot be reconstructed. The left most points in
Fig. 2(b) are missing. This is because the wake ﬁeld
generated in this region of low density cannot propagate
through the plasma since there is a cut-oﬀ prohibiting
this. The information of this region is already missing in
the wake ﬁeld spectrum.

Existing techniques for unperturbing plasma den-
sity diagnostics include reﬂectometry and interferometry
methods as well as incoherent scattering [3]. It is most
natural to compare our proposal with the two former
methods: Reﬂectometry essentially makes use of the re-
ﬂection of electromagnetic waves against a cut-oﬀ occur-
ring at a point where the frequency of the electromagnetic
wave equals the local plasma frequency. The plasma fre-
quency as a function of position can be derived from time-
of-ﬂight measurements for a suitable spectrum of electro-
magnetic waves. Applying interferometry, a laser beam
is split-up into two (or more) beams. One of the beams
passes through the plasma and experiences a phase shift
relative to the beam propagating in vacuum. This phase
shift – obtained by letting the beams interfere – is re-
lated to the density averaged along the path through the
plasma.

In many respects our new method compare favorably
with existing techniques, provided the basic criterion of
a strong external magnetic ﬁeld is fulﬁlled. Some ad-
vantages are: 1) Coaxial proﬁle information:
Interfer-
ometry can at best provide information about the den-
sity proﬁle in a direction perpendicular to the penetrating
laser beams (if multiple beams are used) whereas the pro-
posed method reconstructs the density proﬁle along the
path of the laser pulse. 2) High spatial resolution: The
requirement that the length scales of inhomogeneities
must be much larger than the local plasma wave length
λp ≡ 2πvg/ωp sets the spatial resolution limit to roughly
108n−1/2m for a strongly magnetized plasma (ωc ∼ ωp),
where n is the electron number density in units m−3. 3)
High temporal resolution: The temporal resolution limit
is equal to the time that separates sequential laser pulses
probing the dynamics, and thus tres ∼ ∆L/c, where ∆L
is the spatial separation of the laser pulses. For use of the
”static” density proﬁle reconstruction scheme ∆L must
be comparable to the width of the plasma column, imply-
ing that tres is not longer than 10−8s, for typical labora-
tory plasma dimensions. 4) Density minimum access In
our method the density proﬁle can be measured even in
the vicinity of a local density minimum, in contrast to re-
ﬂectometric methods for which only monotonous proﬁles

3

[3] H. J. Hartfuss, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40 A231-
A250 (1998); I. H. Hutchinson, Principles of plasma di-
agnostics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Eng-
land, 1987).

[4] B. I. Cohen, E. B. Hooper, T. B. Kaiser, E. A. Williams

and C. W. Domier, Phys. Plasmas, 6, 1732 (1999).

[5] G. B Whitham, Linear and Nonlinear Waves (John Wiley

& Sons, New York, 1974)

can be fully reconstructed. This feature together with
points 2) and 3) makes it possible to study the density
evolution in detail of various dynamical processes, e.g.
wave propagation and instabilities, using our method.

Given a suitable plasma – a regime close to thermonu-
clear fusion conditions seems appropriate – the equip-
ment necessary to apply the proposed scheme is ﬁrstly a
laser that can produce powerful and short pulses. Com-
mercial Ti:sapphire lasers typically fulﬁll these require-
ments by far. Secondly, the detector need to operate over
a broad frequency band and produce spectrums that are
time-resolved on (roughly) the time-scale Lih/c, where
Lih is the density inhomogeneity scale length. Similar
detector requirements have been fulﬁlled in the applica-
tions of ultra-short pulse reﬂectometry [4], however, and
thus we deduce that it is not necessary to develop new
technology for our scheme to work.

There are a numbers of issues not addressed in our den-
sity reconstruction scheme. Firstly, what happens if the
external magnetic ﬁeld is not homogeneous? This is sim-
ple provided the magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle is know, since our
static reconstruction scheme is essentially unaﬀected by
this change, and we only need to include the correspond-
ing variations in the dispersion relation (8). Secondly,
what happens if the proﬁle to be reconstructed has two-
or three-dimensional spatial variations? Unfortunately –
unless the extra variations occur on longer spatial scales
– this complicates the application a lot, at least from a
practical point of view. Two parts of the wake ﬁeld gen-
erated at diﬀerent positions will follow diﬀerent orbits
in the plasma and exit at diﬀerent locations. By using
multiple lasers and detectors placed at suitable positions,
it seems possible that 3-D density proﬁles can be recon-
structed in principle, but to address this question in any
detail is beyond the scope of this paper. Finally we point
out that the question of the usefulness of our scheme is
unlikely to be settled by purely theoretical arguments,
and instead we want to encourage experimental investi-
gations of wake ﬁeld generation in magnetized plasmas.
A ﬁrst interesting step, before complete density proﬁle
reconstructions are performed, would be to experimen-
tally verify that the maximum frequency of the wake ﬁeld
coincide with the maximum value of the local plasma fre-
quency.

[1] T. Tajima and J. M. Dawson, Phys. Rev. Lett. A 43,
276 (1979); L. M. Gorbunov and V. I. Kirsanov, Zh.Eksp.
Theor. Fiz. 93, 509 (1987).
[Sov.Phys. JETP 66, 290
(1987)]; J. M. Dawson, Phys. Scr. T 52, 7 (1994).

[2] G. Brodin and Jonas Lundberg, Phys. Rev. E 57, 7041

(1998).

4

I. FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig. 1 Illustration of the discretization scheme.

(a)
Spectrum path discretization (b) Plasma slab discretiza-
tion

Fig. 2 Example of a reconstruction.

(a) Predicted
wake ﬁeld spectrum normalized against the maximum
frequency (b) . Normalized plasma proﬁles. The solid
line marks the assumed proﬁle and the crosses marks the
reconstructed proﬁle.

5

w

w (i)

i-1

i

i+1

t (i)
D z(i)

z(i)

1

j-1

j

j+1

j+2

N

z

0

z(j)

z(j+1)

(a)

t

(b)

L

Figure.1

1

w

0

1

(a)

1

(b)

n0

0
0

2

t

z

1

Figure.2

