0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

9
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
7
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Radiometric force in dusty plasmas

A.M.Ignatov, Sh.G.Amiranashvili

General Physics Institute, Moscow 117 942

Abstract

A radiofrequency glow discharge plasma, which is polluted with a cer-
tain number of dusty grains, is studied.
In addition to various dusty
plasma phenomena, several speciﬁc colloidal eﬀects should be considered.
We focus on radiometric forces, which are caused by inhomogeneous tem-
perature distribution. Aside from thermophoresis, the role of temperature
distribution in dusty plasmas is an open question. It is shown that inho-
mogeneous heating of the grain by ion ﬂows results in a new photophoresis
like force, which is speciﬁc for dusty discharges. This radiometric force
can be observable under conditions of recent microgravity experiments.

PACS number(s): 52.25.Vy, 52.25.Ya, 52.90.+z, 82.70.Dd

Numerous industrial applications, such as material proceeding, has trig-
gered active research on the phenomena associated with dust dynamics in a
low-pressure glow discharge. A dusty plasma [1, 2] is formed by introducing
micron-sized grains in a plasma. The grains are negatively charged due to the
higher mobility of electrons with respect to ions. Then the medium is composed
of particles with ﬁxed charge (electrons and ions) and variable charge (dust
grains). Typically, the microspheres can be easily charged to 104 − 105 elec-
tron charges. In a low-temperature radiofrequency discharge the grains usually
remain electrically suspended in the sheath above the electrodes [3]. Here the
gravity is exactly balanced by the electric force. The grains form ordered lattice
structures, known as Coulomb crystals.

The plasma boundary near the electrodes is characterized by highly non-
equilibrium conditions. In particular, the grains undergo a supersonic (Bohm
criterion) ion ﬂow, resulting both in an ion drag force and speciﬁc attractive
forces between the grains [4]. The neutral gas causes an important additional
class of forces, which are related to the density and temperature gradients. Aside
from thermophoresis [5, 6] the role of such forces is an open question. In this
rapid communication we focus on a radiometric forces. We found that ion ﬂows
result in inhomogeneous temperature distribution of the grain surface. Then
the interaction with the neutral gas results in a force similar to photophoresis
[7], but it is provided by a plasma recombination at the grain surface.

Let Q denote the energy released in each act of ion recombination. Typically,
the value of Q is of the order of ten eV. We assume that this energy is absorbed
by the grain and results in the heating of its surface. Recall that the ion ﬂow
in the sheath near the electrodes is strongly non-isotropic. The widely spread
approximation is that zero-temperature ions move towards the electrode with
the same supersonic velocity M cs, where M > 1 is Mach number, and cs is the

1

ion sound velocity. Then the energy ﬂux per a unit square of the grain surface
oriented normally to ion velocity, can be estimated as

J0 = αniM csQ,

(1)

where ni is the ion number density and dimensionless factor α takes into account
the attraction of ions with the negatively charged microsphere. This will increase
the resulting ion ﬂux. Typically α ≈ 2.
The steady energy ﬂux aﬀects only one side of the grain resulting in some
inhomogeneous heating. The stationary temperature distribution inside the
grain can be evaluated by means of the the Fourier’s equation

div(cid:20)κ grad T (r)(cid:21) = 0,

(2)

where κ is the grain thermal conductivity. Eq.(2) should be supplemented with
a boundary condition. We characterize the grain surface by a unit vector n
directed outwards. The boundary condition reads

Js = κ(cid:18) ∂T

∂n(cid:19)s

+ σ(Ts − T0),

(3)

where the subscribe s recalls that this equation is applied to the grain’s surface
only. The function Js is an external energy ﬂow onto the grain, which is caused
by the recombination. The ﬁrst term in the right-hand side of Eq.(3) represents
the energy ﬂow in the interior of the grain. We emphasize that the the grain
permanently interacts with the neutral gas, which is assumed to be uniform,
with some temperature T0 diﬀering from the grain’s surface temperature Ts.
The interaction results in heat transfer, which is described by the second term
in the right-hand side of Eq.(3). The rate of this natural cooling is characterized
by the factor σ.

For a microsphere suspended above the electrode the external energy ﬂow is

taken in the form

Js = (cid:26) −J0n for top half,

for bottom half.

0

(4)

Eqs. (2-4) provide a complete description of the temperature distribution
inside the gain. For a uniform spherical grain they are readily solvable in terms
of Legendre polynomials.

To proceed it is necessary to specify the collision of the neutral molecule with
a grain surface. We undertake the assumption of complete energy accomodation.
Typically the size of a grain is small, as compared to the mean free path of the
neutral molecule. Then the particle distribution in the vicinity of the grain can
be taken as a combination of two Maxwell functions:

f (r, v) = (cid:26) fM (T0)

fM (Ts)

for nv < 0,
for nv > 0.

(5)

2

In should be noted that the number density of the neutral particles moving
towards and outwards the grain (n0 and ns respectfully) is diﬀerent n0√T 0 =
ns√T s in according to the conservation of the particle ﬂux. Using Eq.(5) one
obtains

σ = n0r 2T0

πm

,

as well as the neutral gas pressure

P =

1
2

n0pT0(pT0 +pTs),

where n0 is identical to the number density of the neutral gas.

Note, that the pressure depends on the local surface temperature. Due to
the inhomogeneous temperature distribution the interaction with the neutral
gas results in a force expressed as the integral

F = ZZ (−P n) dS

over the grain surface.

In a case of a uniform spherical particle the integration can be carried out
analytically. The cumbersome ﬁnal expression simpliﬁes greatly in the ultimate
case of Ts − T0 ≪ T0, which is the only of interest here. The resulting force
takes the form

F =

πR2n0J0
κ

6(cid:18)σ +

R(cid:19)

,

(6)

where R is a radius of a microsphere.

Eq.(6) closely resembles the known relation for the photophoresis force [7, 8].
The diﬀerence is due the diﬀerent physical meaning of the term J0. In the case
of the photophoresis the inhomogeneous heating is a result of external radiation.
In a dusty plasma the force results from the ion recombination.

In some experiments [9] the dusty specie is formed by relatively big coreless
grains. Let the inner radius of that hollow microsphere be ǫR with constant
ǫ < 1. Assuming that the energy ﬂux through the inner surface is negligibly
small one can easily obtain the following more general expression

F =

1
6

πR2n0J0
κ
R

2 ǫ3) +

(1 − ǫ3)

σ(1 + 1

.

(7)

For typical conditions of dust dynamics the ﬁrst term in the denominator of

Eq.(7) is small as compared to the second term. Then

F =

πR3n0J0
6κ(1 − ǫ3)

.

3

(8)

The ratio of this radiometric force to gravity is independent of the radius
of the grain. Generally, it is extremely small. Let us compare the radiometric
force with the ion-drag force, which is believed to play an important role under
conditions of recent microgravity experiments with dusty plasmas [10].

The ion-drag force is estimated as Fdrag = απR2nimi(M cs)2, where the

physical meaning of factor α is identical with that in Eq.(1). Hence

F

Fdrag

=

Rn0Q

6κmiM cs(1 − ǫ3)

.

Typically M ≈ 1, electron temperature Te = 2.5 eV, Q = 15.8 eV (Argon),
and κ ≈ 10−2 Wt/cm·grad (glasses). We take n0 = 1016 cm−3, and 1 − ǫ3 =
1/30. Then F/Fdrag = 1 if R = 10−2 cm. The eﬀect therefore should be
observable for relatively large hollow dusty grains under microgravity conditions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was performed under the ﬁnancial support granted by the NWO foun-
dation. We also acknowledge the support from Integration foundation, project
#A0029.

References

[1] V. E. Fortov, A. P. Nefedov, O. F. Petrov, A. A. Samarian, and

A. V. Chernyschev, Phys. Rev. E 54, 2236 (1996).

[2] V. N. Tsytovitch, Usp. Fiz. Nauk, 167, 57 (1997).

[3] J. H. Chi and I. Lin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 4009 (1994).

[4] S. V. Vladimirov and M. Nambu, Phys. Rev. E 52, R2172 (1994).

[5] O. Havnes, T. Nitter, V. Tsytovich, G. E. Morﬁll, and T. Harquist, Plasma

Sources Sci. Technol. 3, 448 (1994).

[6] J. Perrin, P. Molinas-Mata, and Ph. Belenguer, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.

27, 2499 (1994).

[7] O. Preining, Photophoresis in Aerosol Science, Academic Press, New York,

1966.

[8] G. M. Hidy and J. R. Brock, J. Geophys. Res. 72, 455 (1967).

[9] C. Arnas, M. Mikikian, and F. Doveil, Phys. Rev. E. 60, 7420 (1999).

[10] G. E. Morﬁll, H. M. Thomas, U. Konopka, H. Rothermel, M. Zuzic,

A. Ivlev, and J. Goree, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1598 (1999).

4

