Transport control by coherent zonal ﬂows in the core/edge transitional regime

Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Plasmaphysik, EURATOM-IPP Association, D-85748 Garching, Germany

K. Hallatschek, D. Biskamp

0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
5
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

3D Braginskii turbulence simulations show that the energy
ﬂux in the core/edge transition region of a tokamak is strongly
modulated – locally and on average – by radially propagat-
ing, nearly coherent sinusoidal or solitary zonal ﬂows. The
ﬂows are geodesic acoustic modes (GAM), which are primar-
ily driven by the Stringer-Winsor term. The ﬂow amplitude
together with the average anomalous transport sensitively de-
pend on the GAM frequency and on the magnetic curvature
acting on the ﬂows, which could be inﬂuenced in a real toka-
mak, e.g., by shaping the plasma cross section. The local
modulation of the turbulence by the ﬂows and the excitation
of the ﬂows are due to wave-kinetic eﬀects, which have been
studied for the ﬁrst time in a turbulence simulation.

a. Introduction — It is now commonly believed, that
the transport in the tokamak core is controlled by zonal
ﬂows [1–3]. In the plasma edge, the ﬂows were not stud-
ied thoroughly yet, but they tend to be weak [4] (al-
though they can possibly completely quench the tur-
bulence [5]). The zonal ﬂows in the core and at the
edge were found to be incoherent, random ﬂuctuations
[2,6,7]. In contrast to this, in the transitional regime be-
tween core and edge, strong radially coherent sinusoidal
or solitary zonal ﬂows are ubiquitous according to the
numerical simulations described below. The zonal ﬂows
in the transitional regime are essentially geodesic acous-
tic modes [8], i.e., the poloidal rotation is coupled to an
(m, n) = (1, 0) pressure perturbation by the inhomoge-
neous magnetic ﬁeld, which results in a restoring force
and hence an oscillation. Transcending the present mod-
els of the zonal ﬂow generation based purely on Reynolds
stress [1], the major part of the ﬂow energy in the tran-
sitional regime is apparently generated by the Stringer-
Winsor term [9], i.e., the torque on the plasma column
caused by the interaction of pressure inhomogeneities
with the inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld. An order of mag-
nitude variation of the shear ﬂow level and average trans-
port has been observed upon a sole modiﬁcation of the
curvature terms acting on the ﬂows, at ﬁxed curvature
terms acting on the turbulence. The pressure inhomo-
geneities are driven by anomalous transport modulations,
which can be understood by a drift-wave model for the
wave-kinetic turbulence response to the ﬂows. Some pre-
dictions of the model have been veriﬁed subsequently in
numerical experiments.

Zonal ﬂows in the transitional regime are GAMs—
The numerical turbulence simulations have been carried
out using the three dimensional electrostatic drift Bra-
ginskii equations with isothermal electrons, including the
ion temperature ﬂuctuations with the associated polar-
ization drift eﬀects, the resistive (non-adiabatic) parallel
electron response and the parallel sound waves (a subset

1

of the equations of Ref. [5]). The nondimensional param-
eters have been varied around a reference parameter set
resembling the transitional core/edge regime: αd = 0.6,
ǫn = 0.08, q = 3.1, τ = 1, ηi = 3, ˆs = 1. The compu-
tational domain is a ﬂux tube winding around the toka-
mak for three poloidal connection lengths. The radial
and poloidal domain width is 50LRB, with the resistive
ballooning scale length, LRB. For a deﬁnition of these pa-
rameters and units see Ref. [5]. The parameters are con-
sistent with the physical parameters R = 3 m, a = 1.5 m,
Ln = 12 cm, n = 3.5 × 1019 m−3, Zeﬀ = 4, B0 = 3.5 T,
and T = 200 eV, LRB = 3.6 mm, ρs = 0.82 mm. At
these parameters the ITG mode turbulence is the domi-
nant cause of the heat ﬂux [4], and the restriction of the
domain to a ﬂux tube is justiﬁed [7].

Viewed as a function of radius and time, the ﬂux sur-
face averaged poloidal E × B ﬂows [ﬁg. 1 (a)] start as
an irregular pattern of radially propagating independent
wavelets and merge into a radially coherent standing
wave later on. The ﬁnal standing wave pattern consists
of GAM oscillations. They can be described by suitable
poloidal Fourier components of the vorticity and pressure
evolution equations (neglecting the parallel sound wave),

∂thvEi − hsvi = −C1hp sin θi

(1)

∂thp sin θi − hsp sin θi = C2

ǫn
3

3 + 5τ
1 + τ

hvE sin2 θi,

(2)

with h.i denoting the ﬂux surface average, the pressure
ﬂuctuations p = n + τ
1+τ Ti, the poloidal ﬂow velocity
vE = ∂xφ, and the source terms sv/sp of ﬂow/pressure
due to Reynolds stress/anomalous transport, respec-
tively. For easier reference, the two diﬀerent curvature
terms in the equations have been adorned with the factors
C1 and C2, which are both 1 in the turbulence equations
for a low aspect ratio circular tokamak. The curvature
term C1 is the Stringer-Winsor term, the term C2 repre-
sents the up-down asymmetric compression of the plasma
due to the poloidal rotation. For all parameters used in
the numerical simulations, the zonal ﬂows oscillate in the
stationary state with a frequency within 5% of the eigen-
frequency of Eqs. (1,2) without source terms and with
the approximation hvE sin2 θi ≈ hvEi/2,

ω = rC1C2

ǫn
6

3 + 5τ
1 + τ

.

(3)

In

physical

units

equal to p(6 + 10τ )/(3 + 3τ )cs/R ∼ cs/R. Since the

parallel sound frequency cs/(qR) is much lower than the
GAM frequency, the neglect of the parallel sound wave

this

is

is justiﬁed. The energy balance equation of the GAM
oscillations is according to (1,2)

∂t

1

2 (cid:20)hvEi2 +

C1
ω

hp sin θi2(cid:21) =

hvEihsvi +

C1
ω

hp sin θihsp sin θi

(4)

The average contributions to the GAM energy from the
Reynolds stress term hsvi and the Stringer-Winsor term
hsp sin θi have been listed in table I for varying turbulence
parameters. In the transitional regime with its strong co-
herent zonal ﬂows most of the ﬂow energy is generated by
the Stringer-Winsor term, while with decreasing temper-
ature toward the very edge the Stringer-Winsor energy
input eventually becomes negative indicating a braking
force on the ﬂows, while simultaneously we get weak in-
coherent ﬂows. One is tempted to attribute the decrease
of the zonal ﬂows towards the very edge to the Stringer-
Winsor term. Indeed, eliminating the ﬂow source term
hsp sin θi due to the anomalous transport in the numer-
ical simulations leads to relatively strong coherent ﬂows
even for parameters in the very edge.

With the natural drive of the GAM being apparently
the Stringer-Winsor term, it has been found that altering
the amplitude of the curvature terms C1, C2 acting on the
ﬂows but keeping the curvature terms acting on the tur-
bulence modes ﬁxed, changes the ﬂow amplitudes and the
anomalous transport by one order of magnitude. Empir-
ically, the ﬂow level rises with increasing C1 and decreas-

ing ω. One reason is, that the higher C1/ω ∼ pC1/C2

is, the higher is the contribution of the anomalous trans-
port source term sp to the ﬂow energy (4). At constant
ratio C1/ω the ﬂows are still somewhat increasing for
decreasing ω. This is understood, since with increasing
oscillation period the ﬂows have more time to inﬂuence
the turbulence resulting in an increased sp.

The cause of the pressure perturbations driving the
ﬂows are local modulations of the anomalous transport
(the usual Stringer spin-up mechanism is ineﬀective due
to the relatively long sound transit time in the con-
sidered regime). Plots of the radial pressure transport
hvrpi = Q(r, t) and its up-down antisymmetric compo-
nent hvrp sin θi = U (r, t) are shown in ﬁg. 1 (b) and (c).
(Note that the pressure source term is the divergence of
the anomalous pressure ﬂux, i.e., sp = −∂r(vrp), and
hsp sin θi = −∂rU .) In the initial phase of ﬂow genera-
tion, U develops dipoles around the ﬂows [ﬁg. 1 (d)], in
which U has always the same sign as the local shear-
ing rate. These dipolar transport structures generate
the pressure up-down asymmetries driving the GAMs.
As soon as suﬃciently strong ﬂows exist, the anoma-
lous transport Q develops a striking peaking at the radii
of positive ﬂow resembling transport fronts propagating
with the ﬂow “waves”. In addition to the dipole struc-
tures U develops a unipolar part component, whose sign

2

depends on the propagation direction of the correspond-
ing ﬂow. These up-down antisymmetric transport fronts
can be viewed as avalanches running outward on the
lower half of the torus (θ < 0) and inward on the up-
per half.

The unipolar up-down asymmetries have been found
to be responsible for the setup of the ﬂow pattern. If in a
numerical experiment the GAMs are initially set to zero
outside of one ﬂow peak, the turbulence is still capable of
moving this ﬂow into the original direction, until a new
standing wave pattern has been formed. The necessary
radial GAM energy ﬂow due to the turbulence has been
found to be primarily caused by the unipolar up-down
asymmetries. Similar events happen, if a numerical sim-
ulation is started with a GAM pattern with the wrong
wave-length from a simulation run with diﬀerent GAM
parameters. In that case, strong unipolar up-down trans-
port asymmetries develop, which enforce the equilibrium
ﬂow propagation velocity, i.e., ﬂow wavelength.

The described peculiar modulation of the transport by
the ﬂows is absent for weak diamagnetic drift and vanish-
ing gyro radius, such as in the resistive ballooning regime
[4].
Instead, the shear ﬂows simply weaken the turbu-
lence. Apart from this, there is a tendency to ﬂatten
pressure gradients, i.e., to eliminate the pressure ﬂuctua-
tions associated with the GAM, resulting in the observed
braking force.

The wave-kinetic eﬀects The dependence of

the
transport modulation on drift eﬀects and the gyro ra-
dius suggests a simpliﬁed drift wave model containing
only the radial mode coupling due to the polarization
drift, eliminating two ﬂuid and curvature eﬀects. Since
in the numerical studies the mode wavelengths are not
small compared to the zonal ﬂow scales, we refrain from
a geometrical optics approach [1] and instead move back
to the linearized adiabatic drift wave equation,

Dt(1 − ρ2

s∆⊥)φ + αd∂yφ = 0,

(5)

with Dt = ∂t + vE(x, t)∂y. We study the impact of the
s∆⊥n up to ﬁrst order in ρ2
polarization drift term −Dtρ2
s,
without assumptions on the ratio of ﬂow vs. turbulence
scales. The 0-th order time evolution (with y in Fourier
space) is

φ0(x, t) = φi(x)ψ(x, t)

(6)

with initial amplitude φi(x) and the ﬂow-and-drift in-
duced phase factor

ψ(x, t) = exp [−ikyξ] ,

ξ = Z t

0

[vE(x, τ ) + αd] dτ. (7)

Inserting (6) into (5) results in the ﬁrst order correction
φ1 due to ρ2
s

φ1(x, t)ψ∗(x, t) = −ikyαdρ2

sZ t

0

ψ∗(x, τ )∆⊥ (φiψ(x, τ )) dτ +

+ ρ2

s(cid:2)ψ∗(x, τ )∂ 2

x (φiψ(x, τ ))(cid:3)τ =t

τ =0 ,

in which [f (. . . , τ )]τ =t
τ =0 ≡ f (. . . , t) − f (. . . , 0). From this,
the change in turbulence intensity can be computed to
ﬁrst order,

(8)

(which is accompanied by a general transport peaking
due to the advective eﬀect). With vE(x, t) = V (x − νt)
(propagation velocity ν) we obtain from deﬁnition (7)
ξ′(x, t) = −ν−1V (x − νt), i.e.

kx(x, t)2 = (kx0 − kyξ′)2 = k2

y(ˆsθ + ν−1V (x − νt))2.

δ|φ|2 = 2Re(φ∗

1φ0) = 2kyαdρ2

sZ t

0

∂x[kx(x, τ )|φi|2]dτ

(12)

− 2ρ2

s[k2

x(t) − k2

x(0)]|φi|2,

(9)

with a suitable local kx(x, τ ) ≡ −kyξ′(x, τ ) + Im(φ′
i/φi).
The term involving the diamagnetic drift velocity αd cor-
responds to the advection of mode intensity in response
to the shearing distortion, while the other term is analo-
gous to the adiabatic compression of a wave ﬁeld.

If the initial φi has no radial structure (kx = 0) and
the shear ﬂows do not change with time, we obtain due
to radial mode advection

δ|φ|2

advection = −ρ2

sαd|φi|2t2k2

yv′′
e ,

(10)

which explains the empirical peaking in turbulence inten-
sity at the locations of positive ﬂows. To verify the pres-
ence of the advection term, a complementary scenario has
been simulated, with the turbulence initially conﬁned to
a small region and a constant linear shear ﬂow vE ∝ x
enforced upon it. This results in a motion of the turbu-
lence maxima towards increasing vE, which conﬁrms the
presence of the advection term (see ﬁg. 2). In another nu-
merical experiment, a stationary bell shaped ﬂow proﬁle
has been superposed on an initially radially homogeneous
turbulence ﬁeld, which has been prepared with the zonal
ﬂows switched oﬀ. After the turbulence rises transiently
at the ﬂow maximum, it drops to a level below the initial
one. This corroborates that the turbulence ampliﬁcation
at the ﬂow maxima is not due to an increase of drive at
the ﬂow maxima [10], but due to a transient wave-kinetic
concentration of ﬂuctuation energy.

The numerically observed radial dipole layers of up-
down antisymmetric transport apparently result from the
compressional terms in (9) acting on the mode structure
enforced by the magnetic shear, namely

kx ∼ ky ˆsθ.

(11)

Hence, with ˆs = 1 a shear ﬂow with positive v′
e reduces
k2
x on the upper side of the tokamak (θ > 0) increasing
the mode amplitude there, while the mode is attenuated
for (θ < 0). The dependence of the shear ﬂow action
on the magnetic shear has been veriﬁed in a numerical
experiment with ˆs = −1, in which the modes are am-
pliﬁed for θv′
e < 0. Moreover, a “swinging through”
eﬀect hast been observed, i.e., the turbulence intensity
decreases again, when k2
x rises after kx has gone through
zero.

Last, we consider the unipolar up-down transport
asymmetries induced by a propagating positive shear ﬂow

3

A reduction of k2
x and corresponding ampliﬁcation of the
turbulence modes via eq. (9) occurs for ˆsθνV < 0. The
sign of this eﬀect of a moving ﬂow has been conﬁrmed
numerically for positive and negative shear.

Conclusions — GAMs, oscillating zonal ﬂows, have
been found to be the main mechanism controlling the tur-
bulence level in the transitional core/edge regime. Quasi-
stationary zonal ﬂows are unimportant in the simula-
tions, because of the strong restoring force due to the
pressure imbalance generated by the magnetic ﬁeld in-
homogeneity, which cannot be short-circuited along the
magnetic ﬁeld lines due to the long parallel sound transit
time in the transitional regime. Primarily, the ﬂows are
not driven by Reynolds stress but by the pressure asym-
metries on a ﬂux surface generated by modulations of
the anomalous transport. These modulations in turn are
caused by the ﬂows, on one hand by the radial advec-
tion of turbulence energy concentrating the turbulence
in locations of increased ﬂow in electron diamagnetic di-
rection, and on the other hand by adiabatic compression
eﬀects on the wave ﬁeld which together with the mag-
netic shear result in up-down asymmetries of the trans-
port. The peculiar nature of the drive mechanism leads to
propagating peaked ﬂow structures acompanied by pro-
nounced transport fronts, which sometimes come close to
propagating solitons. We have studied for the ﬁrst time
the action of wave-kinetic eﬀects in a numerical simu-
lation. Similar results should be expected for the core,
except that the polarization due to the ion larmor ra-
dius has to be replaced by the neoclassical polarization
due to the banana width [11]. I.e., we expect the wave-
kinetic transport modulation in the core to be signiﬁ-
cantly stronger than in in the edge. GAMs on the other
hand are less important in the core due to the shorter
parallel connection length (q ∼ 1).

On one hand, the GAM drive eﬃcency depends on the
nature of the turbulence, in that it depends on the pres-
ence of ﬁnite ρs eﬀects. Absence of these, such as in
the resistive ballooning regime leads to a strong damp-
ing of the GAM due to the anomalous diﬀusion erod-
ing the pressure ﬂuctuations connected with the GAM.
However, apart from the turbulence the zonal ﬂow am-
plitude is inﬂuenced strongly by the linear properties of
the GAM itself, such as its frequency or the torque ex-
certed on a pressure ﬂuctuation. Manipulation of both of
them can lead to a reduction of the transport by up to an
order of magnitude. Consequentially, any discussion of
the anomalous transport focusing on the inﬂuence of the
magnetic geometry on the turbulence drive falls short of
an essential factor, if the inﬂuence of the magnetic geom-

etry on the ﬂows is neglected. Since the GAM properties
could be inﬂuenced in a real tokamak by, e.g., shaping the
plasma column, the coherent ﬂows should be taken into
consideration to further reduce the transport in advanced
tokamaks. Moreover, the clear signature of the radially
coherent ﬂows in the numerical simulations makes them
an interesting target of experimental investigation, e.g.,
by means of microwave reﬂectometry.

This work has been performed under the auspices
of the Center for Interdisciplinary Plasma Science, a
joint initiative by the Max-Planck-Institutes for Plasma
Physics and for Extraterrestrial Physics.

[1] P. H. Diamond, M. N. Rosenbluth et al., 17th IAEA Fu-

sion Energy Conference, IAEA-CN-69/TH3/1 (1998)

[2] T. S. Hahm et al., Phys. Plasmas 6, 922 (1999)
[3] P. W. Terry, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 109 (2000)
[4] A. Zeiler et al., Phys. Plasmas 5, 2654 (1998)
[5] B. N. Rogers et al., Phys. Rev. Lett 81, 4396 (1998)
[6] Z. Lin et al., Phys. Plasmas 7, 1857 (2000)
[7] K. Hallatschek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5145 (2000)
[8] S. V. Novakovskii et al., Phys. Plasmas 4, 4272 (1997)
[9] A. B. Hassam et al., Phys. Plasmas 1, 337 (1994)

[10] K. L. Sidikman et al., Phys. Plasmas 1, 1142 (1994)
[11] M. N. Rosenbluth et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 724 (1997)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

4

FIG. 1. Time evolution of (a) poloidal E × B ﬂow pro-
ﬁle, (b) pressure ﬂux proﬁle hvrpi, (c) up-down asymmetric
pressure ﬂux hvrp sin θi for the standard parameters; (d) in-
stantaneous proﬁles at t = 80 of the ﬂow (above), pressure
ﬂux (solid, below), and the up-down asymmetric pressure ﬂux
(dashed). Note the dipole layers of up-down asymmetric pres-
sure ﬂux around the ﬂows, e.g., at x = −7. The unipolar
component of the ﬂux asymmetries can be observed in ﬁgure
(c): depending on their propagation direction the traces look
either bright or dark.

FIG. 2. Time evolution of heat ﬂux proﬁle demonstrating
turbulence movement in responce to a linear shear ﬂow with
diﬀerent sign for the lower and upper half of the plots.

TABLE I. Mean GAM energy production due to Reynolds
stress and Stringer-Winsor eﬀect, ﬂow intensity hv2
Ei and
anomalous pressure transport hpvri for varying parameters.
The units are the turbulence units described in reference [5].
In these units, the diamagnetic velocity is equal to αd. The
parameters are consistent with the physical reference param-
eters given in the text, except for an altered temperature
Ti = Te = T . For αd = 0 the ions have been assumed cold. In
the line marked with an ∗ the Stringer-Winsor drive has been
switched oﬀ, eliminating its braking force in the ballooning
regime.

Ei Reynolds drive Stringer drive

αd ηi T (eV)
0 −
0∗ −
0.2 1
0.2 3
0.6 3
1.1 3

0
0
100
100
300
550

hpvri
0.27
0.25
0.27
0.87
0.15
0.24

hv2
0.04
0.2
0.03
0.23
0.9
0.9

1.4
3.3
2.0
1.5
−0.1
16.0

−1.0
−26
−1.0
3.6
10.0
33.4

5

