Formation and Primary Heating of

The Solar Corona — Theory and Simulation

Institute for Fusion Studies, The Univ. of Texas, Austin, TX 78712

S.M. Mahajan a)

Institute of Plasma Physics and Laser Microfusion, 00–908 Warsaw, Str. Henry 23,

R. Miklaszewski b)

P.O. Box 49, Poland

K.I. Nikol’skaya c)

Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere and Radio Wave Propagation(IZMIRAN),

Troitsk of Moscow Region, 142092 Russia

N.L. Shatashvili d)

Plasma Physics Department, Tbilisi State University, 380028, Tbilisi, Georgia,

International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy

An integrated Magneto–Fluid model, that accords full treatment to the Velocity ﬁelds as-

sociated with the directed plasma motion, is developed to investigate the dynamics of coronal

structures. It is suggested that the interaction of the ﬂuid and the magnetic aspects of plasma

may be a crucial element in creating so much diversity in the solar atmosphere. It is shown

that the structures which comprise the solar corona can be created by particle (plasma) ﬂows

observed near the Sun’s surface — the primary heating of these structures is caused by the

viscous dissipation of the ﬂow kinetic energy.

PACS No.:

47.65.+a ;

52.30.-q ;

50.30.Bt ;

96.60.Pb ;

96.60.Na

0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
7
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
8
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

a) Electronic mail: mahajan@mail.utexas.edu
b) Electronic mail:
c) Electronic mail: hellab@izmiran.troitsk.ru
d) Electronic mail: nanas@iberiapac.ge

rysiek@ifpilm.waw.pl

shatash@ictp.trieste.it

1

1 INTRODUCTION

The TRACE observations [1–3] reveal that the solar corona is comprised of lots of thin

loops that are intrinsically dynamic, and that continually evolve. These very thin strings,

the observations indicate, are heated for a few to tens of minutes, after which the heating

ceases, or at least changes signiﬁcantly in magnitude [1]. In this paper we examine a class

of mechanisms, which, through the viscous–dissipation of the plasma kinetic energy, pro-

vide the primary and basic heating of the coronal structures during their very formation.

The basic input of the theory is the reasonable assumption that the coronal structures

are created from the evolution and re–organization of a relatively cold plasma ﬂow [1–16]

emerging from the sub–coronal region (between the solar surface and the visible corona)

and interacting with the ambient magnetic ﬁeld anchored inside the solar surface. During

the process of trapping and accumulation, a part of the kinetic energy of the ﬂow is con-

verted to heat by viscous dissipation and the coronal structure is born hot and bright. For

this to happen, we must ﬁnd alternative fast and eﬃcient heating mechanisms because,

for the conditions prevalent in the coronal structures, the standard viscous dissipation is

neither eﬃcient nor fast. The rates of viscous dissipation can be considerably increased

by processes which either enhance the local viscosity coeﬃcient, or induce short scale

structures in the velocity ﬁeld. At present we do not know of any convincing mechanism

for the former possibility. This paper, therefore, is limited to an examination of processes

of the latter kind. We ﬁnd that as long as the ﬂow–velocity ﬁeld is treated as an essential

and integral part of the plasma dynamics, fast and desirable viscous dissipation does,

indeed, result. Consequently, during its very formation, the coronal structure can become

hot and bright.

Of the several possible mechanisms by which the ﬂow kinetic energy may be converted

into heat we emphasize the following two: The ﬁrst is the ability of supersonic ﬂows to

create nonlinear perturbations which steepen to produce short scale structures which can

dissipate by ordinary viscosity. The second stems from the recently established property of

the magnetoﬂuid equilibria for extreme sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows (most of the observed coronal

ﬂows fall in this category) – such ﬂows can have a substantial, fastly varying (spatially)

velocity ﬁeld component even when the magnetic ﬁeld is mostly smooth. Viscous damp-

2

ing associated with this varying component could be a major part of the primary heating

needed to create and maintain the bright Corona. From a general framework describing

a plasma with ﬂows, we have been able to “derive” several of the essential characteristics

of the coronal structures. Theoretical basis for both these mechanisms will be discussed.

Our simulation (for which we developed a dissipative two–ﬂuid code), however, concen-

trates only on the ﬁrst mechanism, and preliminary results reproduce many of the salient

observational features. There is clear cut evidence of nonlinearly steepened velocity ﬁelds

which eﬀectively dissipate and heat the coronal structure right through the process of

formation. The numerical investigation of the second mechanism, which will require a

much higher spatial resolution, will be undertaken soon.

Naturally all these processes require the existence of particle ﬂows with reasonable

amounts of kinetic energy. There are several recent publications [1–11] cataloguing enough

observational evidence for such ﬂows in the regions between the sun and the corona to

warrant a serious investigation in this direction. It must be admitted that we still have

little understanding of the nature of the processes by which the relatively cool material

(no hotter than about 20000K) moves upward from low altitudes (as low as a few thou-

sand kilometers) to the outer atmosphere. For this paper, we shall simply exploit the

observation that the ﬂows exist, and work out their consequences. We believe that the

ﬂows might prove to be a crucial element in solving the riddle of coronal heating.

The model for the solar atmosphere that we propose and investigate is obtained by

injecting an essential new feature into several extant notions — the plasma ﬂows are

allowed to play their appropriate role in determining the evolution and the equilibrium

properties of the structures under investigation. We reiterate that the distinguishing

ingredient of our model is the assumption (observationally suggested) that relatively cold

particles spanning an entire range of velocity spectrum — slow as well as fast, continually

ﬂow from the sub–coronal to the coronal regions. It is the interaction of these cold primary

ﬂows with the solar magnetic ﬁelds, and the strong coupling between the ﬂuid and the

magnetic aspects of the plasma that will deﬁne the characteristics of a typical coronal

structure (including Coronal Holes). In this paper we limit ourselves to the formation and

primary heating aspects; we do not deal with instabilities, their nonlinear eﬀects, ﬂaring

3

etc. These are the problems that we will confront at the next stage of the development

of the model.

In Sec.2, we desribe in relative detail our basic model for the upper solar atmosphere,

a time–dependent, two–ﬂuid system of currents and ﬂows. The ﬂows are treated at

par with other determining dynamical quantities, the currents and the solar magnetic

ﬁelds. Section 3 is devoted to the derivation of the characteristics of typical coronal

structures from the basic model. Following a general discussion, we numerically simulate

the evolution of a cold plasma ﬂow as it interacts with the solar magnetic ﬁeld and gravity

in Sec.3.1. We follow the fate of an initial cold supersonic ﬂow as the particles get trapped

by the magnetic ﬁeld. By the time a sizeable density is built up we also ﬁnd a considerable

rise in temperature. In a very short time the velocity ﬁeld developes a shocklike structure

which dissipates with ordinary viscosity to convert the ﬂow kinetic energy to heat. In

Sec. 3.2 we take a diﬀerent approach, and describe elements of the recently investigated

magneto–ﬂuid theory (see Mahajan and Yoshida, 1998, 2000) which allows the existence

of equilibrium solutions missing in the ﬂowless MHD. We ﬁnd that a short–scale velocity

component is predicted to be an essential aspect of a class of magnetoﬂuid states in terms

of which a typical coronal structure could be modelled. The magnetoﬂuid states are the

equilibrium states created by the strong interaction of the magnetic and the ﬂuid character

of a plasma, and are derived from the normal two–ﬂuid equations when the velocity ﬁeld

is treated at par with the magnetic ﬁeld. In a somewhat detailed discussion, we argue for

the relevance of these states for the solar corona. These states could be seen as a set of

quasi–equilibria evolving to an eventual hot coronal structure; the dissipation of the small

scale velocity component provides the necessary source of heating. Since the numerical

simulation of these states requires a much ﬁner resolution than we have in our code, their

time dependent simulation is deferred to a future work.

4

2 THE BASIC MODEL — GENERAL EQUATIONS

FOR THE QUIESCENT SOLAR ATMOSPHERE

In this section we will develop a general theoretical framework from which the typical

solar coronal structure will be “derived.” In our model, the plasma ﬂows from the Sun’s

surface provide the basic source of matter and energy for the myriad of coronal structures

(including Coronal Holes). Although the magnetic ﬁeld is, naturally, the primary culprit

behind the structural diversity of the corona, the ﬂows (and their interactions with the

magnetic ﬁeld) are expected to add substantially to that richness.

The primary objective of this paper is to investigate how these ﬂows are trapped and

heated in the closed magnetic ﬁeld regions, and create one of the typical shining coronal

elements. We shall, however, make a small digression to suggest a possible fate of the

fast ﬂows making their way through the regions where the magnetic ﬁeld is weak, or

has open ﬁeld lines. The faster particles could readily escape the solar atmosphere in

the open ﬁeld-line regions. They could also do so by punching temporary channels in

the neighboring closed ﬁeld–line structures. The ﬂows escaping through these existing

or “created” coronal holes (the coronal holes (CH) are highly dynamical structures with

open and “nearly open” magnetic ﬁeld regions, see e.g.

[17]) may eventually appear as

the fast solar wind.

In the closed ﬁeld–line, the magnetic ﬁelds will trap the ﬂows, and the trapping will

lead to an accumulation of particles and energy creating the coronal elements with high

temperature and density. We shall not consider the solar activity processes, since the

activity regions (AR) and ﬂares, though an additional source of particles and energy,

cannot account for the continuous supply needed to maintain the corona. Moreover, in

the theory we suggest, the ﬂare is understood to be a secondary event and not the primary

source for the creation of the hot corona.

To describe the entire atmosphere of the quiescent, non–ﬂaring Sun we use the two–

ﬂuid equations where we keep the ﬂow vorticity and viscosity eﬀects (Hall MHD). The

general equations will apply in both the open and the closed ﬁeld regions. The diﬀerence

between various sub–units of the atmosphere will come from the initial, and the boundary

5

conditions.

Let V denotes the ﬂow velocity ﬁeld of the plasma in a region where the primary solar

magnetic ﬁeld is Bs . It is, of course, understood that the processes which generate the

primary ﬂows and the primary solar magnetic ﬁelds are independent (say at t = 0 time).

The total current j = jf + js (here jf is the self–current that generates the magnetic ﬁeld

Bf and js is the source of the solar ﬁeld Bs) is related to the total (that can be observed)

magnetic ﬁeld B = Bs + Bf by Amp´ere’s law:

j =

c
4π

∇ × B.

(1)

Notice that in the framework we are developing (assumption of the existence of primary

ﬂows), the boundaries between the photosphere, the chromosphere and the corona become

rather artiﬁcial; the diﬀerent regions of each coronal structure are distinguished by just

the parameters like the temperature and the density. In fact, these parameters should

not show any discontinuities; they must change smoothly along the structure. At some

distance from the Sun’s surface, the plasma may become so hot and dense that it becomes

visible (the bright, visible corona), and this altitude could be viewed as the base of the

corona. But to study the creation and dynamics of bright coronal structures (loops,

arches, arcades etc.) we must begin from the photosphere, and determine the plasma

behavior in the closed ﬁeld regions.

Assuming that the primary ﬂows provide, on a continuous basis, the entire material

for coronal structures, the solar ﬂow with density n will obey the Continuity equation:

∂
∂t

n + ∇ · (nV) = 0.

(2)

We must add a word of caution: in the closed ﬁeld regions, the trapped particle density

may become too high for the conﬁning ﬁeld, resulting in instabilities of all kinds. In this

paper we shall not deal with instabilities and their consequences; it will constitute the

next stage of development of the model.

Since the corona as well as the SW are known to be mostly hydrogen plasmas (with

a small fraction of Helium, and neutrons, and an insigniﬁcant amount of highly ionized

6

metallic atoms) with nearly equal electron and proton densities: ne ≃ ni = n , we expect

the quasineutrality condition ∇ · j = 0 to hold.

In what follows, we shall assume that the electron and the proton ﬂow velocities

are diﬀerent (two–ﬂuid approximation was used e.g.

in Sturrock and Hartly, (1966).

Neglecting electron inertia, these are Vi = V, and Ve = (V − j/en), respectively. We

assign equal temperatures to the electron and the protons for processes associated with the

quiescent Sun. For the creation processes of a typical coronal structure, this assumption is

quite good. For the fast SW, however, we know from recent observations (Banaszkiewicz

et al. 1997 and references therein), that the species temperatures are found to be diﬀerent:

Ti ∼ 2 · 105 K and Te ∼ 1 · 105 K. Since the fast SW is not the principal interest of this

paper, we shall persist with the equal temperatures assumption; the kinetic pressure p is

given by:

p = pi + pe ≃ 2 nT,

T = Ti ≃ Te.

(3)

With this expression for p, and by neglecting electron inertia, the two–ﬂuid equations are

obtained by combining the proton and the electron equations of motion:

∂
∂t

Vk + (V · ∇)Vk =

=

1
en

(j × b)k −

2

nmi

and

∂
∂t

b − ∇ ×" V −

j

1

nmi

∇lΠi,kl,

r (cid:19) −
∇k(nT ) + ∇k(cid:18)M⊙G
en! × b# =
∇(cid:18) 1

2
mi

n(cid:19) × ∇(nT ),

(4)

(5)

where b = eB/mic, mi is the proton mass, G is the gravitational constant, M⊙ is the

solar mass, r is the radial distance, and Πi,lk is the ion viscosity tensor. For ﬂows with

large spatial variation, the viscous term will end up playing an important part. To obtain

an equation for the evolution of the ﬂow temperature T , we begin with the energy balance

equations for a magnetized, neutral, isothermal electron–proton plasma:

∂
∂t

εα + ∇k(εαVα,k + Pα,klVα,l) + ∇qα = nαfα · Vα,

(6)

where α is the species index. The ﬂuid energy εα (thermal energy + kinetic energy) and

the total pressure tensor Pα,kl are given by

εα = nα  3

2

Tα +

mαV 2
α

2 ! ,

7

Pα,kl = nαTαδkl + Πα,kl,

(7)

and

fα = eαE +

eα
c

Vα × B + mα∇

GM⊙

r

,

(8)

is the volume force experienced by the ﬂuids (E is the electric ﬁeld). In Eq. (6), qα is

the heat ﬂux density for the species α. After standard manipulations we arrive at the

temperature evolution equation

3
2

n

d
dt

(2T ) + ∇(qi + qe) = −2nT ∇ · V + minνi

1

2  ∂Vk

∂xl

∂Vl

∂xk!2

−

+

2
3

(∇ · V)2 +

n  j

en

· ∇T! −

+

5
2

j
en

∇(nT ) + EH + ER

(9)

where ER is the total radiative loss, EH is the local mechanical heating function, and νi is

the ion kinematic viscosity. Note that we have retained viscous dissipation in this system.

If primary ﬂows are ignored in the theory, various anomalous heating mechanisms need

to be invoked, and a corresponding term EH has to be added. The full viscosity tensor

relevant to a magnetized plasma is rather cumbersome, and we do not display it here.

However just to have a feel for the importance of spatial variation in viscous dissipation,

we display its relatively simple symmetric form. It is to be clearly understood that this

version is meant only for theoretical elucidation and not for detailed simulation. We

notice that even for incompressible and currentless ﬂows, heat can be generated from the

viscous dissipation of the ﬂow vorticity. For such a simple system, the rate of kinetic

energy dissipation turns out to be

" d
dt miV2

2 !#visc

= −minνi(cid:18)1

2

(∇ × V)2 +

2
3

(∇ · V)2(cid:19) .

(10)

revealing that for an incompressible plasma, the greater the vorticity of the ﬂow, the

greater the rate of dissipation.

Let us now introduce the following dimensionless variables:

r → r R⊙;

t → t

R⊙
VA

;

b → b b⊙;

T → T T⊙;

n → n n⊙;

V → V VA;

j → j VAen⊙;

qα → qαn⊙T⊙VA;

νi → νi R⊙VA

(11a),

and parameters:

b⊙ =

eB(R⊙)

mic

;

λi⊙ =

c
ωi⊙

;

c2
s =

2T⊙
mi

;

ω2

i⊙ =

4πe2n⊙

mi

;

VA = b⊙λi⊙;

8

rA =

GM⊙
V 2
AR⊙

= 2β rc;

rc =

GM⊙
2c2
sR⊙

;

α =

λi⊙
R⊙

;

β =

c2
s
V 2
A

,

(11b)

where R⊙ is the solar radius. Note that in general νi is a function of density and temper-

ature: νi = (Vi,thT 2/12πne4).

In terms of these variables, our equations read:

∂
∂t

V + (V · ∇)V =

=

1
n

∇ × b × b − β

∂
∂t

b − ∇ ×(cid:18)V −

1
n

∇(nT ) + ∇(cid:18)rA

r (cid:19) + νi(cid:18)∇2V +
∇ × b(cid:19) × b = αβ ∇(cid:18) 1

α
n

n(cid:19) × ∇(nT ),

1
3

∇(∇ · V)(cid:19) ,

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

∇ · b = 0,

n + ∇ · nV = 0,

∂
∂t

3
2

n

d
dt

(2T ) + ∇(qi + qe) = −2nT ∇ · V + 2β −1νin

1

2  ∂Vk

∂xl

∂Vl

∂xk!2

−

+

2
3

(∇ · V)2 +

+

α(∇ × b) · ∇T −

(∇ × b)∇(nT ) + EH + ER.

(16)

5
2

α
n

This set of equations will now be studied for diﬀerent types of magnetic ﬁeld regions, in

particular the regions with closed ﬁeld lines.

Before we embark on a detailed theory of the formation and heating of the corona, we

would like to give a short list of heating mechanisms which have been invoked to deal with

this rather fundamental and still unresolved problem of Solar physics : Alfv´en waves [20–

27], Magnetic reconnection in Current sheets [28–36], and MHD Turbulence [37–39]. For

all these schemes, the predicted temperature proﬁles in the coronal structures come out to

be highly sensitive to the form of the heating mechanism [40,41]. Parker (1988) suggested

that the solar corona could be heated by dissipation of many tangential discontinuities

arising spontaneously in the coronal magnetic ﬁeld that is stirred by random photospheric

footpoint motions. This theory stimulated numerous searches for observational signatures

of nanoﬂares. Unfortunately, all of these attempts fall short of providing a continuous

(both in space and time) energy supply that is required to ﬁrst create in a few minutes,

and then support for longer periods the observed bright coronal structures (see e.g. [1,2]).

9

Our attempt to solve this problem makes a clean break with the conventional approach.

We do not look for the energy source within the corona but place it squarely in the primary

ﬂows emerging from the Sun (see the results of [1–3]). We propose (and will test) the

hypothesis that the energy and particles associated with the primary ﬂows, in interaction

with the magnetic ﬁeld, do not only create the variety of conﬁgurations which constitute

the corona, but also provide the primary heating. The ﬂows can give energy and particle

supply to these regions on a continuous basis — we will show that the primary heating

takes place simultaneously with the accumulation of the corona and a major aspect of

the ﬂow–magnetic ﬁeld interaction, for our system, is to provide a pathway for this to

happen.

A mathematical modeling of the coronal structure (for its creation and primary heat-

ing) will require the solution of Eqs. (12)–(16) with appropriate initial and boundary

conditions. We will use a mixture of analytical and numerical methods to extract, what

we believe, is a reasonable picture of the salient aspects of a typical coronal structure.

3 CONSTRUCTION OF A TYPICAL CORONAL

STRUCTURE

Though the solar atmosphere is highly structured, it seems that most of the constituent

elements have something common in their creation and heating. In order to construct

a uniﬁed theory for the entire corona, one would have to confront large variations in

plasma density and temperature. It seems, however, that beyond the coronal base, the

equilibrium temperature tends to be nearly constant on each one of these structures; the

temperature of a speciﬁc structure increases insigniﬁcantly (about 20 p.c.) from its value

at the base to its maximum reached at the top of the structure. This change is much

less than the temperature change (about 2 orders of magnitude) that occurs between the

solar surface and the coronal base. This observation is an outcome of the investigation of

several authors (see, for example, [1,2,41–45]). Their results show that the bright elements

of the corona are composed of quasi–isothermic and ultra–thin arcs (loops) of diﬀerent

10

temperature and density, situated (located) close to one other. This state is, perhaps,

brought about by the isolating inﬂuence of magnetic ﬁelds which prevent the particle and

energy transfer between neighboring structures.

It is safe to assume, then, that in the quasi–equilibrium state, each coronal structure

has a nearly constant temperature, but diﬀerent structures have diﬀerent characteristic

temperatures, i.e., the bright corona seen as a single entity will have considerable temper-

ature variation. Observations tell us that the coronal temperatures are much higher than

those of the primary ﬂows (which we are proposing as the mother of the corona). For the

consistency of the model, therefore, it is essential that the primary “heating” must take

place during the process of accumulation of a given coronal entity.

This apparent problem, in fact, can be converted to a theoretical advantage. We

distinguish two important eras in the life of a coronal structure; a hectic period when

it acquires particles and energy (accumulation and heating), and the relatively calmer

period when it ”shines” as a bright, high temperature object.

In the ﬁrst era, the most important issue is that of heating while particle accumulation

(trapping) takes place in a curved magnetic ﬁeld. This is, in fact, the essential new

ingredient of the current approach. We plan to show:

1) that the kinetic energy contained in the primary ﬂows can be dissipated by viscosity

to heat the plasma, and 2) that this dissipation can be large enough to produce the

observed temperatures.

Naturally, a time dependent treatment will be needed to describe this era.

Any additional heating mechanisms, operative after the emergence of the coronal

structure, will not be discussed in this paper. For an essential energy inventory of the

quasi-equilibrium coronal structure, we also ignore the contributions of ﬂares and other

“activities” on the solar surface because they do not provide a continuous and suﬃcient

energy supply [2].

The second era is that of the quasi-equilibrium of a coronal structure of given density

and temperature - neither of which has to be strictly constant. The primary heating has

already been performed, and in the equilibrium state, we can neglect viscosity, resistivity

and other collisional eﬀects in addition to neglecting the time dependence. The calcu-

11

lations in this regime will be limited to the determination of the magnetic ﬁeld and the

velocity–ﬁeld structures that the collisionless magnetoﬂuids can generate and we will also

examine if these structures can conﬁne plasma pressure.

3.1 Creation and heating of coronal structure

In this subsection we will concentrate on numerical methods to test our basic conjecture

that the primary solar ﬂows are responsible for the creation and heating of a typical

bright coronal structure. The numerical results (obtained by modeling Eqs. (12)–(16)

with viscosity tensor relevant to magnetized plasma) are extremely preliminary, but they

clearly indicate that the proposed mechanism has considerable promise.

Let us ﬁrst make order of magnitude estimates on the requirements that must be

met for this scheme to be meaningful. It is well known that (see e.g.

[46]) the rate of

energy losses F from the solar corona by radiation, thermal conduction, and advection

is approximately 5 · 105 erg/cm2 s. For the brightest loops the rate loss could even reach

5 · 106 erg/cm2 s.

If the conversion of the kinetic energy in the primary ﬂows were to

compensate for these losses, we would require a radial energy ﬂux

1
2

min0V 2

0 V0 ≥ F,

(17)

where V0 is the initial ﬂow speed. For V0 ∼ 300 km/s this implies an initial density in the

range: (3 · 107 − 4 · 108 )cm−3.

For slower (∼ 100 km/s) velocity primary ﬂows the starting density has to be higher

(≥ 109 cm−3). These values seem reasonable according to the latest observational data

[1-3].

The normal viscous dissipation of the ﬂow takes place on a time (using Eq. (10)):

tvisc ∼

L2
νi

,

(18)

where L is the length of the coronal structure. For a primary ﬂow with T0 = 3 eV =

3.5 · 104 K and n0 = 4 · 108 cm−3 creating a quiet coronal structure of size L = (2 · 109 −

7 · 1010) cm, the dissipation time can be estimated to be of the order of (2 · 108 − 1010) s.

The shorter the structure and hotter the ﬂow, the faster is the rate of dissipation. This

12

estimated time is much longer than what is actually found by the latest observations by

TRACE [1]. Mechanisms much faster than the one embodied in (18), therefore, will be

needed for the model to work.

In the absence of “anamalous viscosity”, the only way

to enhance the dissipation rates (to the observed values) is to create spatial gradients

of the velocity ﬁeld that are on a scale much much shorter than that of the structure

length (deﬁned by the smooth part of the magnetic ﬁeld). Thus, the viability of the

model depends wholly on the existence of mechanisms that induce short–scale velocity

ﬁelds. Numerical simulations show that the short–scale velocity ﬁelds are, indeed, self–

consistently generated in the two–ﬂuid system.

For numerical work (to illustrate the bright coronal structure formation), we model

the initial solar magnetic ﬁeld as a 2D arcade with circular ﬁeld lines in the x–z plane

(see Fig. 1 for the contours of the vector potential, or the ﬂux function). The ﬁeld

attains its maximum value Bmax(xo, z = 0) at x0 at the center of the arcade, and is a

decreasing function of the height z (radial direction). The set of model equations (12-16)

was solved in 2D ﬂat geometry (x,z) using the 2D version of Lax–Wendroﬀ numerical

scheme (Richtmyer and Morton 1967) alongwith applying the Flux–Corrected–Transport

procedure [48]. Equation (13) was replaced with its equivalent for the y–component

of the vector potential which automatically ensures the divergence-free property of the

magnetic ﬁeld. The equation of heat conduction was treated separately by Alternate

Direction Implicit method with iterations [49]. Transport coeﬃcients for heat conduction

and viscosity were taken from Braginski, 1965. A numerical mesh of 200 × 150 points

was used for computation.

To illustrate the formation and heating of a general coronal structure, we have modeled

several cases with diﬀerent initial and boundary conditions for cold primary ﬂows. The

dynamical picture is strongly dependent on the relation of the initial ﬂow pressure and the

magnetic ﬁeld strength. Two limiting cases are interesting: 1) the initial magnetic ﬁeld is

weak, and the ﬂow signiﬁcantly deforms (and in speciﬁc cases, drags) the magnetic ﬁeld

lines, 2) the initial magnetic ﬁeld is strong, and the ﬂow leaves the ﬁeld lines practically

unchanged.

For sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows, we present in Figs. 2-5 the salient features of our preliminary

13

results. We have plotted (as functions of x and z) four relevant physical quantities: the

ﬂux function A, the density n, the temperature T , and the magnitude of the velocity

ﬁeld |V| (for speciﬁc cases, when needed, we give the radial component of velocity ﬁeld

Vz also).

The plots correspond to two (in some cases to three) diﬀerent time frames. The results

are described under three separate headings, covering respectively, the fully uniform, the

spatially non–uniform, and the time–dependent as well as spatially non–uniform initial

ﬂows.

A. Initially uniform primary ﬂow and an Arcade-like magnetic ﬁeld struc-

ture — Fig. 2.

This case is highly idealized but illustrates the main aspects of the creation of the hot

coronal structures, and of the basic heating process.

When discussing the temporally uniform initial ﬂows, we choose the parameters to

satisfy the observational constraint that, over a period of some tens of minutes, the lo-

cation of the heating must have a relatively smooth evolution [1]. The ﬁnal shape and

location of the coronal structure (of the associated B(r, t), for example) will be naturally

deﬁned by its material source, by the heating dynamics, and by the initial ﬁeld B0(r, t).

For these studies, the initial ﬂow velocity ﬁeld is taken to be uniform at the surface

and has only a radial component, Vz = 300 km/s. Other parameters are: Maximum value

of the magnetic ﬁeld Bmax(xo, z = 0) = 7G, initial density of the ﬂow 4 · 108 cm−3 and the

initial temperature 3 eV . Simulations yield the following results:

1) The ﬂow particles begin to accumulate at the footpoints near the solar surface

(Fig. 2, see density at t = 750 s). The accumulation goes on with time, and gradually

the entire volume under the arcade (starting from the central short loops) is ﬁlled with

particles (Fig. 2, density at t = 1400 s). First the shorter loops are ﬁlled, and then the

larger ones.

2) The heating of the particles goes hand in hand with the accumulation (Fig. 2, plots

for density and temperature).

3) The regions of stronger magnetic ﬁelds are denser in population (Fig. 2, plots for

A and n). In earlier stages of the formation of a coronal structure, the regions near the

14

base (where the ﬁeld is stronger) are denser and hotter than the distant regions (Fig. 2,

t = 750 s plots for n and T ); for shorter loops, the density increases (as a function

of height z) from the bottom of the structure, and then falls — ﬁrst rapidly and later

insigniﬁcantly; the maximum density is much greater than the initial density of the ﬂows.

4) The dissipation of the ﬂow kinetic energy is faster in the ﬁrst stage of formation

(Fig. 2, t = 750 s plot for |V | ). The plot |V | versus z shows steep (shock–like) gradients

near the base. Thus the bright base is created in the very ﬁrst stage in the stronger

magnetic ﬁeld regions (shorter loops). For given parameters, the initial ﬂow is strongly

supersonic. Thus the shocks are generated with eﬃcient transfer of kinetic energy into

heat. As the mean free path of ions in the plasma is of the order of (106 − 107 )cm (in

the direction parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld) and the dimension of the structure is much

greater – of the order of 1010 cm – eﬃcient conditions for the kinetic energy dissipation

exist. The plots for the velocity, temperature and density reveal that with increasing z,

and in the regions away from the arcade center, we ﬁrst ﬁnd an undisturbed ﬂow with low

temperature, then see a transient area with high density and temperature, and ﬁnally a

shock consistent with Hugoniot conditions. The short scale represented by the width of

the shock-layer (determined by viscosity) is the main enhancer of viscous dissipation.

5) For later times, the brightening process spreads over wide regions (Fig. 2, t = 1400 s

plot for temperature).

6) In the very ﬁrst stage, the shorter loops are a bit overheated, but they cool down

somewhat at later times when the longer loops begin to get heated (Fig. 2, plots for

temperature).

7) The base (T ≥ 100 eV) of the bright region is at about 1.4·109 cm ∼ 0.02R⊙ (Fig. 2,

t = 1400 s plots for n and T ) from the solar surface. This number is in a very good

agreement with the latest TRACE results [1]. Outwards from the base, the accumulated

layer has somewhat lower, but more or less uniform, insigniﬁcantly decreasing density. In

the accumulated layer the kinetic energy of the ﬂow is essentially uniform (again, decreases

insigniﬁcantly); the dissipation has practically stopped (Fig. 2, t = 1400 s = 23 min ,

plot for |V | versus z). The temperature is practically uniform in the longer loops and

increases insigniﬁcantly in shorter loops (for some special conditions these conclusions

15

may be somewhat modiﬁed in speciﬁc regions of the arcade; see point 8) ). Outwards

from the hottest region of the arcade, the temperature decreases gradually and at some

radial distance the outer boundary of the bright part is reached (Fig. 2, t = 1400 s plot

for temperature). Thus, in a very short time a dense and bright “coronal structure” is

created — this object survives for a time much longer than was needed for its creation. The

simulations show that the heating process may continue during this so–called equilibrium

stage, but at a rate much slower than the earlier primary heating. This heating seems

just additional and supporting to the heat content of the nascent hot structure. At this

time, however, the velocity ﬁeld is already much smaller in magnitude as compared to

the initial values; the ﬂows in the hot coronal structure are already subsonic. This is a

possible explanation why supersonic ﬂows may not be seen in the hot observable coronal

structures.

8) When relatively dense primary ﬂows interact with weak arcade-like magnetic ﬁelds

(Bmax(x0, z0 = 0) ≤ 10 G for our initial ﬂow with given above parameters), the ﬁeld

lines begin to deform (soon after the creation of the solar base) in the central region of

the arcade but far from the base (see t = 1400 s plots for density and temperature in

Fig. 2). The particle accumulation is still strong, and the dissipation, though quite fast,

stops rather rapidly. Consequently, the temperature ﬁrst reaches a maximum (up to the

deformed ﬁeld–line region this maximum is reached at the summit for each short loop)

and later falls rapidly. Gradually one can see signs for the creation of a local gravitational

potential well behind the shortest loops (see t = 1400 s plot for A in Fig. 2). This well

supports a relatively dense and cold plasma in the central area of the arcade (t = 1400 s

for n and T of Fig. 2). The density of this structure is considerably greater than that of

the surrounding areas, and the temperature is considerably less than that of the rest of

the accumulated regions at the same height of the arcade.

Our preliminary simulations show that for the same parameters of the primary outﬂow,

such cold and dense plasma objects (conﬁned in the so–called potential well) will not form

in the regions where the initial magnetic ﬁelds are stronger (Bmax(x0, z0 = 0) ≥ 20 G).

B. Spatially non–uniform primary ﬂow interacting with an arcade–like mag-

netic ﬁeld structure — Figs. 3, 4.

16

The latest observations support the idea that the coronal material is injected disconti-

nously (in pulses or bunches, for example) from lower altitudes into the regions of interest

(e.g. spicules, jet–like structures [6,7,12,13,1,2]). A realistic simulation, then, requires a

study of the interaction of spatially non–uniform initial ﬂows with arcade–like magnetic

ﬁeld structures. These “close to the actual” cases represent more vividly the dynamics of

the hot coronal formation.

1) When the spatially symmetric initial ﬂow (plot for Vz at t = 0 in Fig. 3a) inter-

acts with the arcade (plots in Fig. 3), and the initial magnetic ﬁeld is rather strong

(Bmax(x0, z0 = 0) = 20 G), the primary heating is completed in a very short time

(∼ (2 − 3)min) on distances (∼ 10000 km) shorter than the uniform–ﬂow case when the

initial magnetic ﬁeld was weaker. This is also consistent with observations. The heating

is very symmetric and the resulting hot structure is uniformly heated to 1.6 · 106K.

2) Observations reveal the existence of cool material and downﬂows, right within the

hot coronal structures; they also show an imbalance in the primary heating on the two

sides of the loops (see [12, 1]). To reproduce these characteristics, we have modeled the

coronal structure formation process using an asymmetric, spatially non–uniform initial

ﬂow interacting with a strong magnetic ﬁeld (see Fig. 4).

For both of the discussed cases, the downﬂows can be clearly seen for the velocity ﬁeld

component Vz. In Fig. 4, the downﬂow is created simply by changing the initial character

of the ﬂow (initially we had only the right pulse from the velocity ﬁeld distribution given

in Fig. 3a), while in Fig. 3a (plot at t = 297 s), the downﬂows are the result of more

complicated events (see explanation below, in the next paragraph). The ﬁnal parameters

of the downﬂows are strongly dependent on the initial and boundary conditions. In the

pictures, the imbalance in the primary heating process is also revealed.

When two identical pulses (Fig. 3a, plot at t = 0 s) enter in succession into our

standard, arcade–like initial magnetic ﬁeld, we simulate the equivalent of two colliding

ﬂows on the top of a structure. Shocks, though not very strong, are generated in a very

short time (t = 30 s). Such shocks, on both sides of the arcade–center, have hot fronts

and cold tails. Soon (t = 42 s) these shocks become ”visible”, a hot and dense area is

created on top of the structure where these shocks (at this moment they have become

17

stronger) collide. After the collision (and ”reﬂection”), the entire area within the arcade

becomes gradually hot. At some moment, a practically uniformly heated structure is

created, and the primary heating stops. This process is accompanied by downﬂows much

slower than the primary ﬂows; much of the primary ﬂow kinetic energy has been converted

to heat via shock generation (the shock and downﬂow velocities diﬀer signiﬁcantly). It

is clear that in the case of spatially assymetric initial ﬂows, the downﬂows on diﬀerent

sides of the arcade–center will have diﬀerent characteristics. Due to the high pressure

prevalent in the nascent hot structure (loop), there is no more inﬂow of the plasma and

the ﬂow deposits its energy at the base; the base becomes overheated. Later this energy

can be again transferred upwards via thermal conduction (this mechanism can work in

all the discussed cases), but at that moment the ﬂow could be also changed (see initially

time–dependent ﬂow cases below).

Plots for the temperature and velocity ﬁeld in Figs. 3b, 4 also indicate that some cold

particles still remain in the body of the newly created hot structure. These particles are

perhaps from the slower aggregates (our initial ﬂow was not uniform) which did not have

suﬃcient energy to be converted to heat.

C. Time dependent non–uniform initial ﬂows interacting with arcade–like

magnetic ﬁeld structures. – Fig. 5

To simulate reality further we introduce time dependence in the initial primary ﬂow

velocity ﬁeld. We discuss two distinct cases:

1) Initially, the velocity ﬁeld has a pulse–like distribution with a time–period nearly

half of the “formation time” of the quasi-equilibrium structure corresponding to the case

with time–independent initial conditions. The results displayed in Fig. 5 show that the

emerging coronal structure has a rather uniform distribution of temperature along the

magnetic ﬁeld, and the latter is practically undeformed during formation and heating.

We see that when the basic heating ceases, the hot structure survives for the time of

computation which happens to be shorter than the time necessary for losses that destroy

the structure.

2) The velocity ﬁeld has a fast amplitude modulation near its maximum value ( for

these simulations the maximum radial velocity was taken to be 300 km/s). We ﬁnd

18

that the dynamics of the hot coronal structure creation is quite similar to the initially

time–independent, spatially symmetric case. Because of this, we don’t give here the

corresponding plots. We only note that for this case, the structure tends to become

even hotter (by a factor 1.2 for the same parameters) and when quasi–equilibrium is

established (time for this to happen is longer than for the time–independent initial ﬂows)

the base of the structure is hotter than the top although at an earlier time the top was

hotter, i.e, there is a temperature oscillation with a time–period longer compared to the

creation time of the hot structure.

The main message of numerical simulation is that the dynamical interaction of an

initial ﬂow with the ambient solar magnetic ﬁeld leads to a re–organization of the plasma

such that the regions in the close vicinity of the solar surface are characterized by strongly

varying (in space and time) density and temperature, and even faster varying velocity

ﬁeld, while the regions farther out from the bright base are nearly uniform in these

physical parameters. This phenomenon pertains generally, and not for just a set of speciﬁc

structures. The creation and primary heating of the coronal structures are simultaneous,

accompanied by strong shocks. These are fast processes (few tens of minutes) taking

place at very short radial distances from the Sun (∼ 10000 km) in the strong magnetic

ﬁeld regions with signiﬁcant curvature. The ﬁnal characteristics of the created coronal

structures are deﬁned by the boundary conditions for the coupled primary ﬂow–solar

magnetic ﬁeld system. The stronger the magnetic ﬁeld, the faster is the process of creation

of the hot coronal structure with its base nearer the solar surface. To investigate the near

surface region one must use general time–dependent 3D equations. Quasi–stationary

(equilibrium) equations, on the other hand, will suﬃce to describe the hot and bright

layers — the already existing visible coronal structures.

3.2 Construction of quasi–equilibrium coronal structure

The familiar MHD theory (single–ﬂuid) is a reduced case of the more general two–ﬂuid

theory discussed in this paper. Constrained minimizaion of the magnetic energy in MHD

leads to force–free static equilibrium conﬁgurations [50,51]. The range of two–ﬂuid relaxed

19

states, however, is considerably larger because the velocity ﬁeld, now, begins to play an

independent fundamental role. The presence of the velocity ﬁeld not only leads to new

pressure conﬁning states [52,53], but also to the possibility of heating the equilibrium

structures by the dissipation of kinetic energy. The latter feature is highly desirable if

these equilibria were to be somehow related to the bright coronal structures.

We begin investigating the two–ﬂuid states by ﬁrst studying the simplest, almost

analytically tractable, equilibria. This happens when the pressure term in the equation

of motion (12) becomes a full gradient, i.e, whenever an equation of state relating the

pressure and density can be invoked. For our present purpose, we limit ourselves to the

constant temperature states allowing n−1∇p → 2 T ∇ ln n .

Normalizing n to some constant coronal base density n0 (reminding the reader that

n0 is diﬀerent for diﬀerent structures!), and using our other standard normalizations

(λi0 = c/ωi0 is deﬁned with n0), our system of equations reduces to:

− β0 ln n −

V 2

2 ! + V × (∇ × V) = 0,

1
n

∇ × b × b + ∇ rA0
∇ ×(cid:18)V −

r

α0
n

∇ × b(cid:19) × b = 0,

∇ · (nV) = 0,

(19)

(20)

(21)

where rA0, α0, β0 are deﬁned with n0, T0, B0. This is a complete system of seven

equations in seven variables.

Following Mahajan and Yoshida (1998) and [54], we seek equilibrium solutions of the

simplest kind. Straightforward algebra leads us to the following system of linear equations:

and

b + α0∇ × V = d n V

b = a n (cid:20)V −

α0
n

∇ × b(cid:21) ,

(22)

(23)

where a and d are dimensionless constants related to the two invariants: the magnetic

helicity R (A · B) d3x and the generalized helicity R (A + V) · (B + ∇ × V)d3x (or
R (V · B + A · ∇ × V + V · ∇ × V) d3x ) of the system. We will discuss a and d later. The

equilibrium solutions (22), (23) encapsulate the simple physics: 1) the electrons follow

20

the ﬁeld lines, 2) while the ions, due to their inertia, follow the ﬁeld lines modiﬁed by the

ﬂuid vorticity. These equations, when substituted in (19), (20), lead to

∇ rA0

r

− β0 ln n −

V 2

2 ! = 0,

(24)

giving the Bernoulli condition which will determine the density of the structure in terms of

the ﬂow kinetic energy, and solar gravity. Equations (22) and (23) are readily manipulated

to yield

α2
0
n

∇ × ∇ × V + α0 ∇ ×(cid:18) 1

a

− d n(cid:19) V + 1 −

d

a! V = 0.

(25)

which must be solved with (24) for n and V; the magnetic ﬁeld can, then, be determined

from (22).

Equation (24) is solved to obtain

n = exp −"2g0 −

V 2
0
2β0

− 2g +

V 2

2β0#! ,

(26)

where g(r) = rc0/r. This relation is rather interesting; it tells us that the variation in

density can be quite large for a low β0 plasma (coronal plasmas tend to be low β0; the

latter is in the range 0.004 −0.05) if the gravity and the ﬂow kinetic energy vary on length

scales comparable to the extent of the coronal structure. In this system of equations, as

we mentioned above, the temperature (which deﬁnes β0) has to be ﬁxed by initial and

boundary conditions at the base of the structure. Substituting (26) into (25) will yield a

single equation for velocity which is quite nontrivially nonlinear. Numerical solutions of

the equations are tedious but straightforward.

For analytical progress, essential to revealing the nature of the self–consistent ﬁelds

and ﬂows, we will now make the additional simplifying assumption of constant density.

This is a rather drastic step (in numerical work, we take the density to be a proper

dynamical variable) but it can help us a great deal in unraveling the underlying physics.

There are two entirely diﬀerent situations where this assumption may be justiﬁed:

1) the primary heating of corona has already been performed, i.e., a substantial part of

ﬂow initial kinetic energy has been converted to heat. The rest of the kinetic energy, i.e.,

the kinetic energy of the equilibrium coronal structure is not expected to change much

within the span of a given structure. Note that the ratio of velocity components will

have a large spatial variation, but the variation in V 2 is expected to be small. It is also

21

easy to estimate that within a typical structure, gravity varies quite insigniﬁcantly. There

will be exceptional cases like the neighborhood of the Coronal holes and the streamer

belts, where signiﬁcant heating could still be going on, and the temperature and density

variations could not be ignored. Such regions are extremely hard to model;

2) if the rates of kinetic energy dissipation are not very large, we can imagine the

plasma to be going through a series of quasi–equilibria before it settles into a particular

coronal structure. At each stage we need the velocity ﬁelds in order to know if an appro-

priate amount of heating can take place. The density variation, though a factor, is not

crucial in an approximate estimation of the desired quantities.

The constant density assumption n = 1 will be used only in Eq. (25) to solve for the

velocity ﬁeld (or the b ﬁeld which will now obey the same equation). These solutions,

when substituted in Eq. (26), would determine the density proﬁle (slowly varying) of a

given structure.

In the rest of this sub–section we will present several classes of the solutions of the

following linear equation:

α2

0 ∇ × ∇ × Q + α0 (cid:18) 1

a

− d(cid:19) ∇ × Q + 1 −

d

a! Q = 0,

(27)

where Q is either V or b. To make contact with existing literature, we would use b as our

basic ﬁeld to be determined by Eq. (25); the velocity ﬁeld V will follow from Eqs. (22)

and (23), which for n = 1, become

and

b + α0∇ × V = dV

b = a [V − α0 ∇ × b] .

(22′)

(23′)

It is worth remarking that in order to derive the preceding set of equations, all we

need is the constant density assumption; the temperature can have gradients and, these

are determined from the Bernoulli condition (20) with β0(T ) replacing β0 ln n.

22

3.3 Analysis of the Curl Curl Equation, Typical Coronal Equi-

libria

The Double Curl equation (27) was derived only recently [53] (Mahajan and Yoshida

1998); its potential, is still, largely unexplored(see [53], [54]). The extra double curl (the

very ﬁrst) term distinguishes it from the standard force-free equation [55,50,56] (Woltjer

1958; Taylor 1974, 1986; Priest 1994 and references therein) used in the solar context.

Since a and d are constants, Eq. (25), without the double curl term, reproduces what has

been called the “relaxed state” [50,56]. We will see that this term contains quantitative

as well as qualitative new physics.

In an ideal magnetoﬂuid, the parameters a and d are ﬁxed by the initial conditions;

these are the measures of the constants of motion, the magnetic helicity, and the ﬂuid

plus cross helicity or some linear combination thereof [53,52,57,38]. In our calculations,

a and d will be considered as given quantities. The existence of two, rather than one (as

in the standard relaxed equilibria) parameter in this theory is an indication that we may

have, already, found an extra clue to answer the extremely important question: why do

the coronal structures have a variety of length scales, and what are the determinants of

these scales?

We also have the parameter α0, the ratio of the ion skin depth to the solar radius. For

typical densities of interest (∼ (107 − 109 )cm−3), its value ranges from (∼ 10−7 − 10−8);

a very small number, indeed. Let us also remind ourselves that the |∇| is normalized to

the inverse solar radius. Thus |∇| of order unity will imply a structure whose extension

is of the order of a solar radius. To make further discussion a little more concrete, let us

suppose that we are interested in investigating a structure that has a span ǫR⊙, where ǫ

is a number much less than unity. For a structure of order 1000 km, ǫ ∼ 10−3. The ratio

of the orders of various terms in Eq. (25) are (|∇| ∼ L−1)

0

α2
ǫ2 :
(1)

α0

ǫ (cid:16) 1

a(cid:17)
a − d(cid:17) : (cid:16)1 − d

(2)

(3)

.

(28)

Of the possible principal balances, the following two are representative:

23

(a) The last two terms are of the same order, and the ﬁrst ≪ them. Then

ǫ ∼ α0

1/a − d
1 − d/a

.

For our desired structure to exist (α0 ∼ 10−8 for n0 ∼ 109 cm−3), we must have

1/a − d
1 − d/a

∼ 105,

(29)

(30)

which is possible if d/a tends to be extremely close to unity. For the ﬁrst term to be

negligible, we would further need

α0
ǫ

≪

1
a

− d ⇒ ǫ ≫

10−8

1/a − d

,

(31)

which is easy to satisfy as long as neither of a ≃ d is close to unity. This is, in fact, the

standard relaxed state, where the ﬂows are not supposed to play an important part for

the basic structure. For extreme sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows, both a and d are large and very close

to one another. Is the new term, then, just as unimportant as it appears to be? The

answer is no; the new term, in fact, introduces a qualitatively new phenomenon: Since

∇ × (∇ × b) is second order in |∇|, it constitutes a singular perturbation of the system;

its eﬀect on the standard root (2) ∼ (3) ≫ (1) will be small, but it introduces a new root

for which the |∇| must be large corresponding to a much shorter length scale (large |∇|).

For a and d so chosen to generate a 1000 km structure for the normal root, a possible

solution would be d/a ∼ 1 + 10−4, d ≃ a = −10 , then the value for |∇| for the new root

will be (the balance will be from the ﬁrst two terms)

|∇|−1 ∼ 102 cm,

that is, an equilibrium root with variation on the scale of 100 cm will be automatically

introduced by the ﬂows. The crucial lesson is that even if the ﬂows are relatively weak

(a ≃ d ≃ 10), the departure from ∇∇∇×B = αB, brought about by the double curl term can

be essential because it introduces a totally diﬀerent and small scale solution. The small

scale solution could be of fundamental importance in understanding the eﬀects of viscosity

on the dynamics of these structures; the dissipation of these short scale structures may

be the source of primary plasma heating.

24

We do understand that to properly explain the parallel (to the ﬁeld–line) motion one

must use kinetic theory since the mean free path along B lines can become of the order

of (106 − 107 )cm for the hot plasma (100 eV ). But since the dissipation acts on the

perpendicular energy of the ﬂow, we expect the two–ﬂuid theory to give qualitatively

(and even quantitatively) correct results.

We would like to remind the reader that by manipulating the force free state ∇ × B =

α(x)B, Parker has built a mechanism for creating discontinuities (short scales) (Parker

1972, 1988, 1994). It is important to note that short length scales are automatically there

if plasma ﬂows are properly treated.

(b) The other representative balance arises when we have a complete departure from

the one–parameter, conventional relaxed state. In this case, all three terms are of the

same order. In the language of the previous section, this balance would demand

which translates as:

and

ǫ ∼ α0

1

1/a − d

∼ α0

1/a − d
1 − d/a

(cid:18) 1

a

− d(cid:19)2

∼ 1 −

d
a

1
a

− d ∼ α0

1
ǫ

.

(32)

(33)

(34)

For our example of a 1000 km structure, α0 · 1/ǫ ∼ 10−5, both a and d not only have to

be awfully close to one another, they have to be awfully close to unity. To enact such a

scenario, we would need the ﬂows to be almost perfectly Alfv´enic. However, let us think

of structures which are on the km or 10 km size. In that case α0 · 1/ǫ ∼ 10−2 or 10−3,

and then the requirements will become less stringent, although the ﬂows needed are again

Alfv´enic. At a density of (1 − 4) · 108 cm−3, and a speed ∼ (200 − 300) km/s, the ﬂow

becomes Alfv´enic for B0 ∼ (1 − 3) G. It is possible that the conditions required for such

ﬂows may pertain only in the weak magnetic ﬁeld regions.

Following are the obvious characteristics of this class of ﬂows:

(1) Alfv´enic ﬂows are capable of creating entirely new kinds of structures, which are

quite diﬀerent from the ones that we normally deal with. Notice that here we use the term

ﬂow to denote not the primary emanations but the plasmas that constitute the existing

coronal structures, or the structures in the making.

25

(2) Though they also have two length scales, these length scales are quite comparable

to one another: This is very diﬀerent from the extreme sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows where the

spatial length–scales are very disparate.

(3) In the Alfv´enic ﬂows, the two length scales can become complex conjugate, i.e.,

which will give rise to fundamentally diﬀerent structures in b and V.

Deﬁning p = (1/a − d) and q = (1 − d/a), Eq. (27) can be factorized as

(α0∇ × −λ)(α0∇ × −µ)b = 0

where λ(λ+) and µ(λ−) are the solutions of the quadratic equation

α0λ± = −

±s p2

4

p
2

− q.

If Gλ is the solution of the equation

∇ × G(λ) = λG(λ),

then it is straightforward to see that

b = aλG(λ) + aµG(µ),

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

where aλ and aµ are constants, is the general solution of the double curl equation. Using

Eqs. (23’), (37), and (38), we ﬁnd for the velocity ﬁeld

V =

b
a

+ α0∇∇∇ × b =(cid:18) 1

a

+ α0λ(cid:19) aλG(λ) +(cid:18) 1

a

+ α0µ(cid:19) aµG(µ).

(39)

Thus a complete solution of the double curl equation is known if we know the solution

of Eq. (37). This equation, also known as the ‘relaxed–state’, or the constant λ Beltrami

equation, has been thoroughly investigated in literature (in the context of solar astro-

physics see for example Parker (1994); Priest (1994)). We shall, however, go ahead and

construct a class of solutions for our current interest. The most important issue is to be

able to apply boundary conditions in a meaningful manner.

We shall limit ourselves to constructing only two–dimensional solutions. For the Carte-

sian two–dimensional case (z representing the radial coordinate and x representing the

direction tangential to the surface, ∂/∂y = 0) we shall deal with sub–Alfv´enic solutions

only. This is being done for two reasons: 1) The ﬂows in a majority of coronal structures

26

are likely to be sub–Alfv´enic, and 2) this will mark a kind of continuity with the literature.

The treatment of Alfv´enic ﬂows will be left for a future publication.

We recall from earlier discussion that extreme sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows are characterized by

a ∼ d ≫ 1. In this limit, the slow scale λ ∼ (d − a)/α0 d a, and the fast scale µ = d/α0,

and the velocity ﬁeld becomes

V =

1
a

aλGλ + daµG(µ)

(40)

revealing that, while, the slowly varying component of velocity is smaller by a factor

(a−1 ≃ d−1) as compared to the similar part of the magnetic ﬁeld, the fast varying

component is a factor of d larger than the fast varying component of the magnetic ﬁeld!

In a magnetoﬂuid equilibrium, the magnetic ﬁeld may be rather smooth with a small

jittery (in space) component, but the concomitant velocity ﬁeld ends up having a greatly

enhanced jittery component for extreme sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows (Alfv´en speed is deﬁned w.r.

to the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld, which is primarily smooth, and for consistency we

will insure that even the jittery part of the velocity ﬁeld remains quite sub–Alfv´enic). We

shall come back to elaborate this point after deriving expressions for the magnetic ﬁelds.

Equation (37) can also be written as

∇2G(λ) + λ2G(λ) = 0,

(41)

and solving for one component of G(λ) determines all other components up to an inte-

gration. For the boundary value problem, we will be interested in explicitly solving for

the z (radial) component.

The simplest illustrative problem we solve is the boundary value problem in which we

specify the radial magnetic ﬁeld bz(x, z = 0) = f (x), and the radial component of the

velocity ﬁeld Vz(x, z = 0) = v0 g(x), where v0 (≃ d−1 ≪ 1) is explicitly introduced to

show that the ﬂow is quite sub–Alfv´enic. A formal solution of (Gz(λ) = Qλ)

∂2Qλ
∂x2 +

∂2Qλ
∂z2 +

λ2
α2
0

Qλ = 0

(42)

may be written as

Qλ =Z ∞

λ/α0

dk e−κλz Ck eikx +Z λ/α0

0

27

dk cos qλz Ak eikx + c.c.

(43)

where κλ = (k2 − λ2/α2

0)1/2, qλ = (λ2/α2

0 − k2)1/2, and Ck and Ak are the expansion

coeﬃcients. The equivalent quantities for Qµ are κµ, qµ, Dk, and Ek. The boundary

conditions at z = 0 yield (we absorb an overall constant in the magnitude of bz, and

aµ/aλ is absorbed in Dk and Ek):

f (x) = Qλ(z = 0) + Qµ(z = 0),

v0 g(x) =

1
a

Qλ(z = 0) + d Qµ(z = 0).

(44a)

(44b)

Taking Fourier transform (in x) of Eq. (44), we ﬁnd, after some manipulation, that (v0 ∼

(45)

(46)

d−1, |ef(k)| ≃ |eg(k)|)

Dk ≃ − ef (k)
d2 +

v0

Ck ≃ ef (k),
d eg(k) ≃ d−2ef(k),

and functionally (in their own domain of validity) Ck = Ak and Dk = Ek. With the

expansion coeﬃcients evaluated in terms of the known functions (their Fourier transforms,

in fact), we have completed the solution for bz, Vz and hence of all other ﬁeld components.

The most remarkable result of this calculation can be arrived at even without a nu-

merical evaluation of the integrals. Although ef (k) and eg(k) are functions, we would
assume that they are of the same order |ef(k)| = |eg(k)|. Then for an extreme sub–Alfv´enic

ﬂow (|V| ∼ d−1 ∼ 0.1, for example), the fastly varying part of bz(Qµ) is negligible

(∼ d−2 = 0.01) compared to the smooth part (Qλ). However, for these very parameters,

the ratio

≃

|Ck/a|
|d Dk|

≃

|Ck/a|
|Ck/d|

≃ 1;

(47)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Vz(µ)

Vz(λ)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

the velocity ﬁeld is equally divided between the slow and the fast scales. We believe

that this realization may prove to be of extreme importance to Coronal physics. Viscous

damping of this substantially large as well as fastly varying ﬂow component may provide

the bulk of primary heating needed to create and maintain the bright, visible Corona.

The preceding analysis warns us that neglecting viscous terms in the equation of

motion may not be a good approximation until a large part of the kinetic energy has been

dissipated. It also appears that the solution of the basic heating problem may have to

be sought in the pre–formation rather than the post–formation era. Our time dependent

28

numerical simulation to study the formation of coronal structures was strongly guided by

these considerations.

It is evident that for extreme sub–Alfv´enic ﬂows, the magnetic ﬁeld, unlike the velocity

ﬁeld, is primarily smooth. But for strong ﬂows, the magnetic ﬁelds may also develop

a substantial fastly varying component.

In that case the resistive dissipation can also

become a factor to deal with. We shall not deal with this problem in this paper.

Depending upon the choice of f (x) (from which ef (k) follows) we can construct loops,

arcades and other structures seen in the corona.

4 Conclusions and discussions

In this paper we have investigated the conjecture that the structures which comprise the

solar corona (for the quiescent Sun) owe their origin to particle (plasma) ﬂows which enter

the “coronal regions” from lower altitudes. These primary emanations (whose eventual

source is likely to be the sun itself) provide, on a continuous basis, much of the required

material and energy which constitutes the corona. From a general framework describing

a plasma with ﬂows, we have been able to “derive” several of the essential characteristics

of the typical coronal structures.

The principal distinguishing component of the investigated model is the full treatment

accorded to the velocity ﬁelds associated with the directed plasma motion.

It is the

interaction of the ﬂuid and the magnetic aspects of the plasma that ends up creating so

much diversity in the solar atmosphere.

This study has led to the following preliminary results:

1. By using diﬀerent sets of boundary conditions, it is possible to construct various

kind of 2D loop and arcade conﬁgurations.

2. In the closed magnetic ﬁeld regions of the solar atmosphere, the primary ﬂows can

accumulate, in periods of a few minutes, suﬃcient material to build a coronal structure.

The ability of the supersonic ﬂows to generate shocks, and the viscous dissipation of these

shocks can provide an eﬃcient and suﬃcient source for the primary plasma heating which

may take place simultaneously with the accumulation. The stronger the spatial gradients

29

of the ﬂow, the greater is the rate of dissipation of the kinetic energy into heat. The hot

base of the structures is reached at typical distances of a ∼ 10000 km from the origin of

simulation.

3. A theoretical study of the magnetoﬂuid equilibria reveal that for extreme sub–

Alfv´enic ﬂows (most of the created corona ﬂows) the velocity ﬁeld can have a substantial,

fastly varying (spatially) component even when the magnetic ﬁeld may be mostly smooth.

Viscous damping associated with this fast component could be a major part of the pri-

mary heating needed to create and maintain the bright, visible coronal structure. The

far–reaching message of the equilibrium analysis is that neglecting viscous terms in the

equation of motion may not be a good approximation until a large part of the kinetic

energy in the primary ﬂow has been dissipated.

4. The qualitative statements on plasma heating, made in points 1 and 2, were tested

by a numerical solution of the time–dependent two-ﬂuid system. For sub–Alfv´enic pri-

mary ﬂows we ﬁnd that the particle-accumulation begins in the strong magnetic ﬁeld

regions (near the solar surface), and soon spans the entire volume of the closed magnetic

ﬁeld region. It is also shown that, along with accumulation, the viscous dissipation of the

kinetic energy contained in the primary ﬂows heats up the accumulated material to the

observed temperatures, i.e., in the very ﬁrst (and fast, ∼ (2 − 10) min) stage of accumu-

lation, much of the ﬂow kinetic energy is converted to heat. This happens within a very

short distance (transition region) of the solar surface ∼ 0.03R⊙. In the transition region,

the ﬂow velocity has very steep gradients. Outside the transition layer the dissipation is

insigniﬁcant, and in a very short time a nearly uniform (with insigniﬁcantly decreasing

density and temperature on the radial distance), hot and bright quasi-equilibrium coronal

structure is created. In this newborn structure, one ﬁnds rather weak ﬂows. One also

ﬁnds downﬂows with their parameters determined by the initial and boundary conditions.

The transition region from the solar surface to this equilibrium coronal structure is

also characterized by strongly varying (both radial and across) temperature and density.

Depending on the initial magnetic ﬁeld , the base of the hot region (of the bright part)

of a given structure acquires its appropriate density and temperature.

5) The details of the ensuing dynamics are strongly dependent on the relative values of

30

the pressure of the initial ﬂow, and of the ambient solar magnetic ﬁeld in the region. Two

limiting cases were studied with the expected results: 1) The ﬂow entering a relatively

weak initial magnetic ﬁeld strongly deforms (and in speciﬁc cases drags) the magnetic

ﬁeld lines, and 2) the ﬂow interacting with a relatively strong magnetic ﬁeld leaves it

virtually unchanged.

We end this paper with several qualifying remarks:

1) This study, in particular the numerical work, is preliminary. We hope to be able to

extend the numerical work to make it considerably more quantitative, and to cover a much

greater variety of the initial and boundary conditions to simulate the immense coronal

diversity. Then a thorough comparison with observations can be undertaken. To show

the dissipation of small scale velociy component just like the dissipation of shock–like

structures is postponed for future since it requires much higher resolution.

2) This paper is limited to the problem of the origin, the creation and the primary

heating of the coronal structures. The processes which may go on in the already existing

bright equilibrium corona (secondary or supporting heating, instabilities, reconnection)

etc., for example, are not considered. Because of this lack of overlap between our model

and the conventional coronal heating models, we do not ﬁnd it meaningful to compare

our work with any in the vast literature on this subject. Led by observations alone, we

have constructed and investigated the present model.

3) We do not know much about the primary solar emanations on which this entire

study is based. The merit of this study, however, is that as long as they are present (see

e.g. [1–3]), the details about their origin are not crucial.

4) We are just beginning to derive the consequences of according a co–primacy (with

the magnetic ﬁeld) to the ﬂows in determining overall plasma dynamics. The addition

of the velocity ﬁelds (even when they are small) brings in essential new physics, and will

surely help us greatly in understanding the richness of the plasma behavior found in the

solar atmosphere.

31

Acknowledgments

The work was supported in part by the U.S. Dept. of Energy Contract No. DE-FG03-

96ER-54346. The study of K.I.N. was supported in part by Russian Fund of Fundamental

Research (RFFR) within a grant No. 99–02–18346. The work of N.L.S. was supported

in part by the Joint INTAS–Georgia call–97 grant No. 52. S.M.M and N.L.S are also

thankful to the Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics at Trieste,

Italy.

32

References

1. C.J. Schrijver, A.M. Title, T.E. Berger, L. Fletcher, N.E. Hurlburt, R.W. Nightin-

gale, R.A. Shine, T.D. Tarbell, J. Wolfson, L. Golub, J.A. Bookbinder, E.E. Deluca,

R.A. McMullen, H.P. Warren, C.C. Kankelborg, B.N. Handy and B. DePontieu, So-

lar Phys., 187, 261 (1999).

2. M.J. Aschwanden, T.D. Tarbell, R.W. Nightingale, C.J. Schrijver, A. Title, C.C.

Kankelborg, P. Martens and H. P. Warren, Astrophys. J., 535, 1047 (2000).

3. L. Golub, J. Bookbinder, E. DeLuca, M. Karovska, H. Warren, C.J. Schrijver, R.

Shine, T. Tarbell, A. Title, J. Wolfson, B. Handy and C. Kankelborg, Phys. Plas-

mas, 6, 2205 (1999).

4. J.M. Beckers, Ann. Rev. A&amp;A 10, 73 (1972); Astrophys. J., 203, 739 (1979).

5. J.D. Bohlin, in Coronal Holes and High Speed Solar Wind Streams, edited by J.B.

Zirker (Colorado Assoc. Univ. Press, Boulder, CO 1977), p.27.

6. G.L. Withbroe, D.T. Jaﬀe, P.V. Foukal, M.C.E. Huber, R.W. Noyes, E.M. Reeves,

E.J. Schmahl, J.G. Timothy and J.E. Vernazza, Astrophys. J., 203, 528 (1976).

7. G.L. Withbroe, Astrophys. J., 267, 825 (1983).

8. K. Wilhelm, E. Marsch, B.N. Dwivedi, D.M. Hassler, P. Lemaire, A.H. Gabriel and

M.C.E. Huber, Astrophys. J., 500, 1023 (1998).

9. G.W. Pneuman and F.Q. Orrall, in Physics of the Sun, edited by P.A. Sturrock

(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1986), Vol.

II, p.71; K. Shibata, in Solar and Astrophysical

Magnetohydrodynamic Flows, edited by K.C. Tsinganos (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996),

p.217; J.H. Thomas, in Solar and Astrophysical Magnetohydrodynamic Flows, edited

by K.C. Tsinganos (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996), p.39; Southwell, K. 1997, Nature,

390, 235

10. H.M. Olussei, A.B.C. Walker II, D.I. Santiago, R.B. Hoover and T.W. Barbee Jr.,

Astrophys. J., 527, 992 (1999).

33

11. U. Feldman, K,G. Widing and H.P. Warren, Astrophys. J., 522, 1133 (1999).

12. H. Peter and P.G. Judge, Astrophys. J., 522, 1148 (1999).

13. R. Woo and S.R. Habbal, Astrophys. J., 510, L69 (1999).

14. J. D. Scudder, Astrophys. J.,398, 299 (1992).

15. W.C. Feldman, J.T. Gosling, D.J. McComas and J.L. Philips, J. Geophys. Res.

98, 5593 (1093); W.C. Feldman, S.R. Habbal, G. Hoogeveen and Y.-M. Wang, J.

Geophys. Res 102, 26,905 (1997).

16. X. Li, S.R. Habbal and J.V. Hollweg, J. Geophys. Res 104, 2521 (1999); Y.Q. Yu

and S. R. Habbal, J. Geophys. Res. 104, 17,045 (1999).

17. S. Bravo, and G.A. Stewart, Astrophys. J., 489, 992 (1997).

18. P.A. Sturrock and R.E. Hartly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16, 628 (1966).

19. M. Banaszkiewicz, A. Czechowski, W.I. Axford, J.F. McKenzie, J.F. and G.V.

Sukhorukova, 31st ESLAB Symposium. (Noordwijk, Netherlands) ESTEC SP-415,

17, (1997).

20. P. Browning, and E.R. Priest, A&A, 131, 283 (1984).

21. P. Cally, J. Plasma Phys., 45, 453 (1991).

22. J.M. Davila, Astrophys. J., 317, 514 (1987).

23. J.P. Goedbloed, Phys. Fluids, 15, 1090 (1975).

24. M. Goossens, in Advances in Solar System MHD, ed. E.R. Priest and A.W. Hood

(Cambridge), 137 (1991).

25. J. Heyvaerts and E.R. Priest, A&A,117, 220 (1982).

26. J.V. Holweg, Astrophys. J., 277, 392 (1984).

27. C. Litwin, and R. Rosner, Astrophys. J., 499, 945 (1998).

34

28. E.N. Parker, Astrophys. J., 128, 664 (1998); Interplanetary Dynamical Processes

(New York/London: Interscience Publishers 1963); Astrophys. J., 174, 499 (1972);

Astrophys. J. 330, 474 (1988); J. Geophys. Res., 97, 4311 (1992); Spontaneous

Current Sheets in Magnetic Fields (Oxford University Press 1994).

29. C.E. Parnell, J. Smith, T. Neukirch, E.R¿ Priest, Phys. Plasmas, 3, 759 (1996).

30. E.R. Priest and P. Demoulin, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 23, 443 (1995).

31. E.R. Priest and V.S. Titov, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A., 354, 2951 (1996).

32. I.J.D. Craig and R.B. Fabling, Astrophys. J., 462, 969 (1996).

33. E. Galsgaard and A. Nordlund, J. Geophys. Res., 1
¯

01, 13445 (1996).

34. Z. Mikic, D. Schnack and G. Van Hoven, Astrophys. J., 361, 690 (1990).

35. K. Schindler, M. Hesse, and J. Birn, J. Geophys. Res., 93, 5547 (1988).

36. A.A. Van Ballagooijen, Astrophys. J., 311, 1001 (1986).

37. J. Heyvaerts and E.R. Priest, A&A 137, 63 (1984); Astrophys. J., 390, 297 (1993).

38. R.N. Sudan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 1277 (1979); R.N. Sudan, and D.C. Spicer, Phys.

Plasmas, 4(5), 1929 (1997).

39. D. Pﬁrsch and R.N. Sudan, Phys. Plasmas, 1(8), 2488 (1994); 3(1), 29 (1995).

40. S. Tsuneta, Astrophys. J., 456, L63 (1996).

41. E.R. Priest, Fifth SOHO Workshop (Oslo) (ESA SP–404), 93 (1997).

42. R. Rosner, W.H. Tucker and G.S. Vaiana, Astrophys. J., 220, 643 (1978).

43. W.M. Neupert, Y. Nakagawa, and D.M. Rust, Solar. Phys., 43, 359 (1975).

44. K.I. Nikol’skaya, Astron. Zh., 62, 562 (1985); in Mechanisms of Chromospheric

and Coronal Heating, ed. P. Ulmschneider, E. R. Priest and R. Rosner (Heidelberg:

Springer, 1991), 113.

35

45. S.R. Habbal, Space Sci. Rev. 70, 37 (1994)

46. P. Foukal, Solar Astrophysics (New York Chichester Brisbane Toronto Singapore:

A Wiley–Interscience Publication, 1990).

47. R.D.Richtmyer and K.W.Morton, Diﬀerence Methods for Initial–Value Problems

(Interscience Publishers a division of John Wiley and Sons, New York, London,

Sydney, 1967).

48. S.T.Zalesak, J.Comp.Phys. 31, 335 (1979).

49. S.I.Braginski, Transport Processes in a Plasma, in Reviews of Plasma Physics, edited

by M.A. Leontovich (Consultants Bureau, New York, 1965), Vol.1, p. 205.

50. J. B. Taylor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 33, 1139 (1974); Rev. Mod. Phys., 58, 741 (1986).

51. L. Faddeev and Antti J. Niemi, Magnetic Geometry and the Conﬁnement of Elec-

trically Conducting Plasma, physics/0003083, (2000).

52. L. C. Steinhauer and A. Ishida, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3423 (1997).

53. S.M. Mahajan and Z. Yoshida, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 22 (1998); S.M.Mahajan and

Z.. Yoshida, Phys. Plasmas, 7(2), 635-640, 2000; and Z.Yoshida, and S.M.Mahajan,

Journal Of Mathematical Physics, 40 (10), 5080-5091, (1999).

54. S.M. Mahajan, R. Miklaszewsky, K.I. Nikol’skaya and N.L. Shatashvili, Primary

Flows, the Solar Corona and the Solar Wind. Preprint IFSR ♯ 857,Univ.of Texas,

Austin, February 1999; ”Primary Plasma Outﬂow and the Formation and Heating

of the Solar Corona; The High Speed Solar Wind Formation”.

In Structure and

Dynamics of the Solar Corona, eds. B.P.Philipov, V.V. Fomichev, G.N., Kulikova,

(Troitsk of Moscow Reg., 2000), p.117.

55. L. Woltjer, in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 44, 489 (1958).

56. E.R. Priest, “Magnetohydrodynamics” in Plasma Astrophysics by J. G. Kirk, D.

B. Melrose, E. R. Priest, ed. A.O. Benz and T. J.–L. Courvoisier (Springer-Verlag,

1994), p. 1.

36

57. J.M. Finn and T.M. Antonsen, Phys. Fluids, 26, 3540 (1983).

37

Figure Captions

Fig. 1

Contour plots for the vector potential A (ﬂux function) in the x − z plane for a

typical arcade–like solar magnetic ﬁeld (initial distribution). The ﬁeld has a maximum

Bmax(x0 = 0, z0 = 0) = 7G .

Fig. 2

Hot coronal structure formation by the interaction of the spatially homogenuous pri-

mary ﬂows with 2D arcade–like structure given in Fig. 1 . The initial parametrs are:

Vz0 = 300 km/s, the temperature and density of the ﬂow, T0 = 3 eV and n0 = 4 · 108 cm−3

respectively, and the background density = 108 cm−3. The vector potential A, the ﬂow

density n (normalized to n0), the ﬂow temperature T (in eV ) and the magnitude of the

ﬂow velocity |V | (in cm/s ) are plotted for t = 750s and t = 1400s . The base of the

hot structure is created at a radial distance ∼ 14000 km. The distnace scale on the plots

is 1 = 4 · 1010cm . The primary heating (and brightening) of the structure is practically

stopped in about 23 minutes.

Fig. 3a

The distribution of the radial component Vz (with a maximum of 300 km/s at t = 0 )

for the symmetric, spatially non–uniform velocity ﬁeld . The plot scale is 1 = 5 · 109 cm.

The process of interaction of such primary ﬂows with the arcade–like magnetic ﬁelds

(given in Fig. 1 with Bmax = 20 G) is accompanied by downﬂows much slower than the

primary ﬂows (plot for Vz at t = 297 s). The ﬁnal parameters of downﬂows are strongly

dependent on the initial and boundary conditions.

Fig. 3b

Hot coronal structure formation by the interaction of the initially symmetric spatially

non–uniform primary ﬂows (see plot for Vz(x, z) in Fig. 3a ) with the 2D arcade–like

structure given in Fig. 1 . Initial parameters are: the temperature and density of the ﬂow,

T0 = 3 eV and n0 = 4·108 cm−3 respectively, the initial background density = 2·108 cm−3,

and the ﬁeld maximum Bmax(x0, z0 = 0) = 20 G. The plot scale is 1 = 5 · 109 cm. The

primary heating is completed in a very short time ∼ (2−3 )min on distances (∼ 10000 km)

38

shorter than the uniform–ﬂow case when magnetic ﬁeld was weaker. The heating is

symmetric and the resulting hot structure is uniformly heated to 1.6 · 106 K . Much of the

primary ﬂow kinetic energy has been converted to heat via shock generation.

Fig. 4

The interaction of an initially asymmetric, spatially non-uniform primary ﬂow (just

the right pulse from the distribution given in Fig. 3a ) with a strong arcade–like magnetic

ﬁeld (Bmax(x0, z0 = 0) = 20 G). Downﬂows, and the imbalance in primary heating are

revealed.

Fig. 5

The interaction of the time–dependent non–uniform initial ﬂow (see plot for the time–

distribution of Vz in this Figure; the spatial distribution of the pulse is the same as

in Fig. 3a ) with the arcade–like magnetic ﬁeld structure (plot in Fig.1 with Bmax =

20 G). The emerging coronal structure has uniform distribution of temperature along the

magnetic ﬁeld (plot for T at t = 371 s ) and the latter is practically undeformed during

the formation and heating.

39

This figure "FIG1.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

This figure "FIG5_1.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

This figure "FIG2.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

This figure "FIG5_2.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

This figure "FIG3A.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

This figure "FIG3B.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

This figure "FIG4.JPG" is available in "JPG"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0009086v1

