0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
4
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electromagnetic Energy Penetration in the Self-Induced

Transparency Regime of Relativistic Laser-Plasma Interactions

M. Tushentsov,1 F. Cattani,2 A. Kim,1 D. Anderson2 and M. Lisak2

1Institute of Applied Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 603600 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia

2Department of Electromagnetics, Chalmers University of Technology, S-412 96 G¨oteborg, Sweden

Two scenarios for the penetration of relativistically intense laser radiation

into an overdense plasma, accessible by self-induced transparency, are presented.

For supercritical densities less than 1.5 times the critical one, penetration of laser

energy occurs by soliton-like structures moving into the plasma. At higher back-

ground densities laser light penetrates over a ﬁnite length only, that increases

with the incident intensity. In this regime plasma-ﬁeld structures represent alter-

nating electron layers separated by about half a wavelength by depleted regions.

Recent developments of laser technology have opened possibilities to explore laser-matter

interactions in regimes previously not achievable, [1]. This has meant a strong impulse to the

theoretical investigation of phenomena occurring in such extreme conditions, when electrons

quiver with relativistic velocities and new regimes may appear. In particular, penetration of

ultra-intense laser radiation into sharp boundary, overdense plasmas is playing a fundamental

role in the development of the fast ignitor fusion concept as well as of x-ray lasers, [2,3]. In

this regime the optical properties of the plasma are substantially modiﬁed by the relativistic

increase of the inertial electron mass and the consequent lowering of the natural plasma fre-

quency.

In the Seventies it was shown that this relativistic eﬀect enables super-intense electromagnetic

radiation to propagate through classically overdense plasmas, the so called induced transparency

eﬀect, [4–7]. Recent numerical simulations based on relativistic PIC codes [3,8,9,19], multiﬂuid

plasma codes [10] and Vlasov simulations [11], as well as recent experiments [12,13], have re-

vealed a number of new features of the interaction dynamics, such as laser hole boring, enhanced

incident energy absorption, multi-MeV electron beam, as well as ion beam production and gen-

eration of strong magnetic ﬁeld.

An exact analytical study of the stationary stage of the penetration of relativistically strong

radiation into a sharp boundary, semi-inﬁnite, overdense plasma, taking into account both

the relativistic and striction nonlinearity, has recently led to the determination of an eﬀective

threshold intensity for penetration [14]. It is known that, for incident intensities lower than

the penetration threshold, an overdense plasma totally reﬂects the radiation with the forma-

tion of a nonlinear skin-layer structure close to the plasma-vacuum boundary, [6]. For higher

intensities the radiation was found to propagate in the form of nonlinear traveling plane waves

[4,7], or solitary waves [15]. Further analysis has shown that other scenarios are possible for

incident intensities exceeding the threshold, depending on the supercritical plasma parameter,

[16]. Namely, if no > 1.5 (no is the supercritical parameter deﬁned as no = ω2

p/ω2, where

ω is the carrier frequency of the laser, ωp = (4πe2No/m)1/2 is the plasma frequency of the

unperturbed plasma), a quasi-stationary state can be realized and, even if still in a regime of

full reﬂection, the laser energy penetrates into the overdense plasma over a ﬁnite length which

depends on the incident intensity. The subsequent plasma-ﬁeld structure consists of alternat-

ing electron layers, separated by depleted regions with an extension of about half a wavelength

which acts as a distributed Bragg reﬂector. How do these structures emerge as a consequence

of relativistic laser- overdense plasma interactions? What kind of scenarios are realized? These

are the questions we will try to answer in this Letter.

Our model is based on relativistic ﬂuid equations for the electrons, in order to avoid plasma

kinetic eﬀects which may shade or complicate the problem (see, for example, [10,17]). Ions are

considered as a ﬁxed neutralizing background due to the very short time scales involved, and

the slowly varying envelope approximation in time is assumed to be valid. The governing set

of self-consistent equations for the 1D case of interest in the Coulomb gauge reads

∂pk
∂t

=

∂n
∂t

+

∂
∂x

∂φ
∂x −
pk
(n
γ

∂γ
∂x

,

) = 0,

(1)

(2)

∂2ϕ
∂x2 = no(n − 1),
na) = 0.

∂2a
∂x2 + (1 −

no
γ

2i

∂a
∂t

+

(3)

(4)

Variables are normalized as: ωt → t, ωx/c → x, the longitudinal momentum of the electrons
k + a2)1/2
pk/mc → pk, the scalar potential eϕ/mc2 → ϕ, electron density N/No = n, γ = (1 + p2
is the Lorentz factor, m and e are the electron rest mass and charge, c is the speed of light in

vacuum and we consider circularly polarized laser radiation with the amplitude of the vector
potential normalized as eA/mc2 = (a(x, t)/√2)Re[(y + iz) exp(iωt)].

Eqs. (1)-(4) have been numerically integrated for the problem of normally incident laser ra-

diation from vacuum (x < 0) onto a semi-inﬁnite overdense plasma (x ≥ 0), the numerical
interval consisting of two parts: a short vacuum region to the left of the plasma boundary and

a semi-inﬁnite plasma region to the right.

As for the boundary conditions, at inﬁnity in the plasma region the ﬁeld must vanish, electrons

are immobile and the electron density unperturbed, conditions that are valid until this right

boundary is reached by ﬁeld perturbations. At the vacuum-plasma boundary the radiation

boundary condition reads

a − i

∂a
∂x

= 2ai(t),

(5)

where ai(t) is the incident laser wave, which means that in the vacuum region the total ﬁeld is

the sum of the incident and reﬂected wave. At the initial time electrons are in equilibrium with

ions, i.e., pk = 0, n = 1, ϕ = 0. Two diﬀerent cases have been considered for the incident laser

pulse: a semi-inﬁnite envelope turning on as ai(t) = ao(tanh t + 1) and a Gaussian envelope.

Finally, the analysis has been performed for overdense plasmas (no > 1) and for a quite wide

range of incident intensities both higher and lower than the penetration threshold.

For maximum incident intensities lower than the threshold, after a transient stage, a station-

ary regime with the formation of nonlinear skin-layers is reached, which is in perfect agreement

with previous analytical solutions [6,14]. Furthermore, good agreement is found with the cal-

culated threshold for laser penetration, [14], for intensities above which the nonlinear skin-layer

regime is broken and the interaction leads to the penetration of laser energy into the overdense

plasma. Above this threshold, interactions drastically come into play and the analysis of this

dynamical process, object of a second set of numerical studies, has revealed two qualitatively

diﬀerent scenarios of laser penetration into overdense plasmas, depending on the supercritical

parameter no. Ultimately, the qualitative behavior of the system occurs over a wide range of

incident intensities and thus it does not sensitively depend on the speciﬁc values. If no ≤ 1.5 we
have only a dynamical regime where laser radiation slowly penetrates into the overdense plasma

by moving soliton-like structures. In Fig. (1), the temporal evolution of the semi-inﬁnite tanh-

shaped laser radiation interacting with a plasma with no = 1.3 is depicted. Solitary waves are

generated near the left boundary and then slowly propagate as quasi-stationary plasma-ﬁeld

structures with a velocity much lower than the speed of light. The contribution to the nonlin-

ear dielectric permittivity due to electron density perturbations is weaker than the one due to

the relativistic nonlinearity, therefore we may consider these solutions as the extension of pure

low-relativistic soliton solutions, [15], to a regime of slightly higher amplitudes. Furthermore,

the excitation dynamics of such structures is similar to that of structures described by the

nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation with a cubic nonlinearity for a slightly overdense plasma in the

low relativistic limit, (see, i.g., [18] and references therein). The generation of similar structures

can be inferred from the results of PIC simulations, such as those presented in [19]. Thus, if

this were the case, i.e., if no − 1 ≪ 1, solitary structures excited by incident intensities slightly
above the threshold may be considered as exact solutions.

When the incident pulse has a Gaussian shape, penetration is seen to occur by a ﬁnite

number of soliton-like structures. As shown in Fig. 2(a) a Gaussian pulse with amplitude

ao = 0.74 and pulse duration τ = 200, for the same plasma parameters as in Fig. 1, generates

two propagating solitary structures instead of a continuous train. The corresponding spectral

analysis, see Fig. 2(b), shows that the spectrum of the transmitted radiation is on average

redshifted, while that of the reﬂected radiation presents an unshifted and a blueshifted part

which can be accounted for in terms of Doppler shift due to the moving real vacuum-plasma

boundary.

It should be underlined that in the limit of strongly relativistic intensities, when localized

solutions have the form of few-cycle pulses as in [15], our model cannot be applied since the

slowly varying envelope approximation will break down, and the question of what happens at

intensities largely exceeding the threshold is still open.

At higher background densities, no > 1.5, the dynamic regime of interaction is completely

diﬀerent, as shown in Fig. 3, where a tanh-like pulse with ao = 1.3 that is an intensity of
3.6 × 1018W/cm2 for a wavelength of 1µm interacts with a plasma with No = 1.6Ncr (Ncr =
mω2/4πe2 is the critical density).

The earliest stage of the spatial evolution presents the characteristic distribution of a nonlin-

ear skin-layer, but the ponderomotive force acting at the vacuum-plasma boundary is pushing

electrons into the plasma, thus shifting the real boundary to a new position. When the ﬁeld

amplitude on the real boundary exceeds the threshold calculated in [14], the interaction leads

to the creation of a deep electron density cavity whose size is about half a wavelength and

which acts as a resonator. The whole plasma-ﬁeld structure then starts to slowly penetrate

into the plasma and the same process is repeated at the boundary, where now the perturbed

plasma has diﬀerent parameters.

What is interesting is that, after a transient stage during which deep intensity cavities are

produced, the plasma settles down into a quasi-stationary plasma-ﬁeld distribution, allowing for

penetration of the laser energy over a ﬁnite length only, which increases with increasing incident

intensities. The electron density distribution becomes structured as a sequence of electron layers

over the ion background, separated by about half a wavelength wide depleted regions. The peak

electron density increases from layer to layer reaching an absolute maximum in the closest layer

to the vacuum boundary. At the same time the width of the layers becomes more and more

narrow. Such nonlinear plasma structures can act as a distributed Bragg reﬂector and they are

very close to those described analytically in [16].

If the incident laser pulse has a ﬁnite duration, the electromagnetic energy penetrates into

the plasma over a ﬁxed ﬁnite length but, after the laser drive has vanished, the energy localized

inside the plasma is reﬂected back towards the vacuum space, as in some sort of ”boomerang”

eﬀect. The transient regime is obviously more complicated as the depleted regions surrounded

by electron layers act like resonators, with the electromagnetic energy being excited by the

incident pulse. Fig. 4 shows how these structures excited by a pulse 400f s long (λ = 1µm)

bounce back. Clearly, these excited localized plasma-ﬁeld structures may live much longer than

the duration time of the drive pulse. However, it should be underlined that, on a longer time

scale, the dynamics can be rather unpredictable. For instance, in a run with a laser drive 200f s

long, the interaction between two structures has resulted in one long-lived cavity, whereas a

second run evolved into a moving localized structure similar to those presented in Fig. (1).

It is obvious that, when dealing with long-time dynamics, absorption processes acting on the

electromagnetic energy in the cavities should be taken into account.

In conclusion, we have shown that there are two qualitatively diﬀerent scenarios of laser

energy penetration into overdense plasmas in the regime of relativistic self-induced trans-

parency, depending on the background supercritical density. For slightly supercritical densities

No < 1.5Ncr, the penetration of laser energy occurs in the form of long-lived soliton-like struc-

tures which are generated at the vacuum-plasma boundary plasma and then propagate into

the plasma with low velocity. At higher plasma densities No > 1.5Ncr, the interaction results

in the generation of plasma-ﬁeld structures consisting of alternating electron and electron dis-

placement regions, with the electromagnetic energy penetrating into the overdense plasma over

a ﬁnite length only, as determined by the incident intensity.

The work of M.T. and A.K. was supported in part by the Russian Foundation for Basic Re-

search (grants No. 98-02-17015 and No. 98-02-17013). One of the authors (F.C.) acknowledges

support from the European Community under the contract ERBFMBICT972428.

FIG. 1. Electron density (solid lines) and ﬁeld amplitude (dashed lines) distributions at

various moments, for no = 1.3 and semi-inﬁnite pulse with the maximum incident intensity

ao = 0.74. The ion ensity distribution is in dotted line. All the quantities are dimensionless.

FIG. 2. Temporal distribution (a) of the ﬁeld structures generated in a plasma with no = 1.3

and ath = 0.62 by a Gaussian incident pulse with amplitude ao = 0.74 and width τ = 200 and

relative spectra (b). All the quantities are dimensionless.

FIG. 3. Snapshots of the time evolution of the electron density (continuous line) and the

solitary structures (dashed line) generated by a semi-inﬁnite pulse ao(tanh t + 1 )with ao = 1.3,

propagating into a plasma with no = 1.6 and ath = 0.99. All the quantities are dimensionless.

FIG. 4. Temporal distribution of the ﬁeld structures generated in a plasma with no = 1.6

and ath = 0.99 by a Gaussian incident pulse with amplitude ao = 1.5 and width τ = 800. All

the quantities are dimensionless.

[1] S.C. Wilks and W. Kruer, IEEE Trans. QE 33, 154 (1997); see also in Superstrong Fields in

Plasmas, AIP Conf. Proc. 426 (1998).

[2] M. Tabak et al., Phys. Plasmas 1, 1626 (1994).

[3] S.C. Wilks et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1383 (1992).

[4] A.I. Akhiezer and R.V. Polovin, Sov. Phys. JETP 3, 696 (1956).

[5] P. Kaw and J. Dawson, Phys. Fluids 13, 472 (1970); C. Max and F. Perkins, Phys. Rev. Lett.

27, 1342 (1971).

[6] J.H. Marburger and R.F. Tooper, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1001 (1975).

[7] C.S. Lai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 36, 966 (1976); F.S. Felber and J.H. Marburger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 36,

1176 (1976).

[8] E. Lefebvre and G. Bonnaud, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2002 (1995); H. Sakagami and K. Mima, Phys.

Rev. E 54, 1870 (1996); S. Guerin et al., Phys. Plasmas 3, 2693 (1996); B.F. Lasinski et al., Phys.

Plasmas 6, 2041 (1999).

[9] A. Pukhov and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2686 (1997); J.C. Adam et al., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 78, 4765 (1997).

[10] J. Mason and M. Tabak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 524 (1998).

[11] H. Ruhl et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2095 (1999).

[12] J. Fuchs et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2326 (1998).

[13] M. Tatarakis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 999 (1998).

[14] F. Cattani et al., Phys. Rev. E 62, 1234 (2000).

[15] V.A. Kozlov, A.G. Litvak and E.V. Suvorov, Sov. Phys. JETP 49, 75, (1979); P.K. Kaw, A. Sen

and T. Katsouleas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3172 (1992).

[16] A. Kim et al., JETP Lett. 72, 241 (2000).

[17] X.L. Chen and R.N. Sudan, Phys. Fluids 5, 1336 (1993).

[18] A.V. Kochetov, Sov. J. Plasma Phys. 12, 821 (1986).

[19] Y. Sentoku et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3434 (1999); S.V. Bulanov et al., JETP Lett. 71, 407

(2000).

