Novel Mechanism for Single Bubble Sonoluminescence

Boris P. Lavrov
Faculty of Physics, St.-Petersburg State University, 198904, Russia
(February 2, 2008)

Careful re-examination of typical experimental data made it possible to show that the UV
continua observed in multi-bubble (MBSL) and single-bubble (SBSL) sonoluminescence spectra
have the same physical nature - radiative dissociation of electronically excited H∗
g ) molecules
(A2Σ)] due to spontaneous transitions between
[and probably hydrides of heavy rare gases like ArH
bound and repulsive electronic states. The proposed mechanism is able to explain all available
spectroscopic observations without any exotic hypothesis but in terms usual for plasma spectroscopy.

2(a3Σ+

∗

1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

42.50.Fx, 42.65.Re, 43.25.+y, 47.40.Nm

Sonoluminescence (SL) is one of most exciting features
of acoustic cavitation - the formation and non-linear os-
cillation of gas bubbles generated in liquids by ultrasound
[1]. Bubble collapses lead to enormous local pressures
(about 1000 atm and more) and temperatures, erosion
of hard materials, chemical reactions and light emission
(SL). Discovered in early 1930s the SL observed in ca-
vitation clouds is called multi-bubble sonoluminescence.
MBSL spectra consist of a continuum of unknown origin,
atomic lines and molecular bands of species connected
with host liquids [1]. Atomic and molecular emissions
give eﬀective temperatures ≈3000–5000 K [2].

Suddenly the situation in this traditional branch of
non-linear acoustics has been changed dramatically after
the discovery [4] of single bubble sonoluminescence - light
emission of a single, stable, oscillating bubble trapped
by acoustic levitation inside an ultrasound resonator [4].
Such eccentric change in the performance of SL experi-
ment provided unique opportunity to study the dynamics
of oscillating bubble, obviously masked in MBSL. It was
shown [5] that every cycle consists of: 1) relatively slow
growth of bubble radius up to ≈50 µm, 2) extremely fast
implosive collapse to ≈0.5 µm, 3) damping and wait-
ing for the expansion phase of sound wave in so-called
“dead mode” with constant radius ≈5 µm, correspond-
ing to atmospheric pressure. SL appears as light ﬂashes
at the moment of the collapse. Further studies (see
bibl. in [1,3,5–7]) have shown: 1) water being friendli-
est liquid for SBSL; 2) clockwise regularity of the ﬂashes
with ≈50 ps stability; 3) abnormally short pulse dura-
tion (≈50–350 ps); 4) featureless spectrum with the in-
tensity increasing to UV (see Fig. 1), which was ﬁtted as
a “tail of a blackbody spectrum” with abnormally high
temperatures T = 25000 − 100000 K [3,5,6]; 5) absence
of characteristic emissions associated with host liquid; 6)
stimulating inﬂuence of Ar. Those peculiarities are often
presented and discussed as mysteries and unknowns of
SBSL (see i.e. [5,7]) not only in respected scientiﬁc jour-
nals, but also in popular ones and newspapers as well.

Spectra of MBSL and SBSL measured “under simi-
lar experimental conditions” [8] are shown in Fig. 2 (ac-
tually the conditions are suﬃciently diﬀerent, see be-

1

low). Such observations are often interpreted as evidence
that “these two phenomena are fundamentally diﬀerent”
(“sonochemistry” and “sonophysics”) [6]. Unbelievably
high temperatures “observed” in SBSL experiments were
so exciting that the mechanism of highly spherical im-
ploding shock wave in SBSL was even considered as “the
key to reaching temperatures and densities suﬃcient to
realize the fusion of these hydrogen nuclei to yield he-
lium and neutrons” [5]. The stir stimulated tremendous
growth of speculations about the nature of SBSL. Many
mechanisms have been proposed so far from traditional
ones (quasi-adiabatic heating, chemiluminescence, elec-
tric breakdown, shock wave and others) up to such ex-
otic as Schwinger’s Dynamical Casimir Eﬀect. Although
most popular hypothesis is the Bremsstrahlung radiation
of electrons in dense plasma (see i.e. [1,7,9]), the real na-
ture of SBSL is still an open question [1].

2(a3Σ+

The main goal of the present work is to propose and
consider electronically excited H∗
g ) molecules [and
possibly hydrides of rare gases like ArH∗(A2Σ)] as light
emitters responsible for continua observed in both MBSL
and SBSL experiments with hydrogen-containing liquids.
This provides new sight on the well known “mysteries and
unknowns” of the SBSL phenomenon.

g , v, J → b3Σ+

Perhaps the most simple and natural explanation of
the continuum radiation observed in SL spectra (never
even considered previously) is spontaneous emission of
hydrogen dissociation continuum appearing due to the
a3Σ+
u transitions (v, J - vibrational and ro-
tational quantum numbers) between lowest triplet bound
(upper) and repulsive (lower) states (Fig. 3). It is a well-
known spectral feature of hydrogen-containing plasmas
widely used in UV spectroscopy (see bibl. in [10]). The
shape of the continuum is determined by the distribu-
tion of population density among vibro-rotational levels
of the upper a3Σ+
g electronic state [11]. It is not directly
connected with any translational temperature but is de-
termined by a dynamic balance between excitation and
deactivation of the a3Σ+

g , v, J levels.
In low-pressure gas discharges, the spectral intensity
distribution of the continuum may be calculated not only
in relative [11], but even in absolute scale [12] being
in rather good accordance with experimental data.
In
the H2+Ar mixtures the Ar∗(4s) → H2(a3Σ+
g ) excitation
transfer from long living (metastable and resonant) levels
of Ar [13] may play important role as well as the forma-
tion of excited ArH∗ excimer molecules and A2Σ → X 2Σ
spontaneous emission due to bound-repulsive transitions
[10,14]. The ArH continuum overlaps that of H2 being
located in the same wavelength range. The energy of He∗
and Ne∗ metastables is too high to participate in an ex-
citation transfer leading to populating of the a3Σ+
g state.
However, Kr∗ and Xe∗ can do the job in three-body col-
lisions with two 1S hydrogen atoms.

Correct calculation of the continuum shape in plasma
with temperature higher than 1000 K is impossible just

2

2 (a3Σ+

because the transition probabilities are available only for
rotation-less molecule [10]. On the other hand, it needs
development of certain model of microscopic excitation-
deactivation processes and certain values of plasma pa-
rameters determined by macroscopic dynamics of collaps-
ing bubble. Two main de-populating processes are for
sure: spontaneous emission and radiationless collisional
quenching [15]. But there is a great variety of competitive
volume and surface processes responsible for the gener-
ation of H∗
g ) excited molecules (electron impact,
electron-ion and ion-ion recombination, associative three-
body collisions, photo and/or collision-induced fragmen-
tation of water, etc.). Nevertheless, very rough estima-
tions can be made by neglecting the rotational structure
of a3Σ+
g , v levels in two simple cases: 1) thermodynamic
equilibrium (TDE) populations of a3Σ+
g , v levels relative
to ground X 1Σ+
g , v=0 vibronic state; 2) direct electron
impact excitation and spontaneous decay of the levels
[10]. The results are shown in Fig. 4. One may see
that calculated spectra are in accordance with experi-
mental observations at least qualitatively. They have
“featureless structure” with the intensity rising to UV
cutoﬀ λ ≈ 250 nm. In the range of observation, they
may be ﬁtted as “blackbody spectrum” with “enormous
temperatures”.

Experimental data are also not free from criticism:
1) Intensity calibration should take into account re-
absorption in plasma and transparency of plasma-liquid
boundary neglected in [3,8].

2) Determination of the background level is not so sim-
ple, because light scattered inside a ﬂask and a spectrom-
eter overlaps dark signal of a detector. The huge diﬀer-
ence between backgrounds of SBSL and MBSL curves is
caused by use of two diﬀerent optical systems in [8]. The
emission of MBSL was focused on the entrance slit of the
spectrometer by a lens. In the case of SBSL, no collec-
tion lens was used. The entrance slit was placed close to
the side of the levitation cell being 2.25 cm from the bub-
ble. It means that all light coming from within 2π solid
angle (much bigger than the instrumental aperture and
that for radiation directly coming from the bubble) was
able to enter the spectrograph and partly be detected as
a background.

3) The separation of the continuum intensity from the
total signal of a detector is also a rather delicate and
ambiguous deal. For example the peculiarities on the
SBSL curve of Fig. 2 may be interpreted as some ad-
ditional emissions at λ ≈ 310 − 360 nm (OH bands)
and λ ≈ 400 − 500 nm (NaH bands or H2 continuum
in the second order of the grating), or as absorptions at
λ < 320 nm (OH) and λ ≈ 350 − 420 nm (NaH).

4) Proper normalization of experimental curves is nec-

essary for a comparison of their shapes.

Experimental data of [3,8] have been treated taking
into account what is written above. Results of such re-
calculations are presented in Fig. 4 & 5. One may see

3

that the results of two independent SBSL experiments
[3,8] are in good agreement as well as intensity distribu-
tions obtained by MBSL [8] and SBSL [3,8].

Taking into account experimental errors and the un-
certainties in the data processing we have to come to the
following conclusion. After proper treating the experi-
mental data show: 1) The continua emitted by SBSL and
MBSL (Fig. 5) have identical spectral intensity distribu-
tion, therefore they may have the same nature; 2) Mea-
sured spectral intensity distributions and those roughly
g , v, J → b3Σ+
calculated for the a3Σ+
u spontaneous emis-
sion of H2 molecule (Fig. 4) are in semi-quantitative
agreement good enough to propose H∗
g ) molecules
to be responsible for the continuum emission. “Enor-
mous temperatures” of SBSL reported so far have no
physical meaning being the result of incorrect ﬁtting (un-
proper treated experimental data were approximated by
un-proper analytical expression – Planck formula).

2(a3Σ+

There is actually a great diﬀerence between MBSL and
SBSL experiments even if they are carried out with the
same chemical solutions: 1) The amplitude of sound wave
in MBSL (10 atm) is about one order of magnitude bigger
than that used in SBSL (≈1.3 atm). Therefore in MBSL
the action of ultrasound should be much more power-
ful and destructive for bubbles. The widely distributed
opinion that SBSL is a stronger phenomenon is based
only on the “observation” of “enormous temperatures”,
not more. 2) MBSL experiments are made with 100%
air saturation of a solution, while SBSL experiments are
performed with degassed water.

Thus, the bubbles have qualitatively diﬀerent gas con-
tents in those two types of SL experiments. MBSL bub-
bles are mainly air-ﬁlled with small amount of water va-
por. Dissociation of N2, O2, H2O during the collapse
leads to formation of very aggressive species (like HN3,
HNO3, N2O2, N2O3, etc.) which disappear by chemical
reactions with water boundary. In the expansion phase
a bubble (if it would be able to survive!) is again ﬁlled
with air due to 100% air saturation. New bubbles are
deﬁnitely generated as air-ﬁlled.

An absolutely other situation should occur in the case
of SBSL when the action of acoustic waves is much more
gentle and water is degassed. The SBSL bubble can ac-
cumulate not only Ar (1% in air) [16], but molecular
hydrogen as well. The hydrogen molecule in its ground
state has almost the same electronic structure as that
of He atom - its united atom analogue (two 1s elec-
trons with anti-parallel spins). Thus, H2 itself has low
chemical activity in great contrast with hydrogen atom.
The solubility of H2 in water is much smaller than that
of radicals made from N, O and H atoms. Therefore,
a stable-oscillating bubble in SBSL mode actually con-
sists of a H2+Ar gas mixture with periodically changing
amount of water vapor (increasing during the expansion
and decreasing in the collapse). These additional H2O
molecules disappear in the collapse and serve as an en-

4

gine (and fuel) for the transformation of the translational
energy of collapsing liquid-gas boundary into the energy
of light emission. This mechanism explains: 1) Why the
light ﬂash appears only at the ﬁrst collapse but not at
the second one in the series of damping oscillations in
spite of almost the same compression [5]; 2) Why the av-
erage radius of a bubble generally increasing with a rise
in acoustic amplitude suddenly shrinks when the onset of
SL is reached [5]; 3) Great rise of SBSL with a decrease
of water temperature [3].

Clockwise regularity of SBSL ﬂashes should not be so
surprising and does not need unusual mechanisms be-
cause the experimental setup used in SBSL experiments
is essentially a resonant system. The stability of this
regularity means that after each collapse in the “dead
mode” the bubble contents returns to the initial one -
98% of (H2+Ar) mixture and 2% of H2O.

The abnormally short duration of SBSL light ﬂashes
may be explained by extremely high rise of both the
rate of excitation and the rate of collisional quenching
of excited states. Thus the conditions suitable for spon-
taneous emission may be realized only in rather limited
period of time. The situation is obviously diﬀerent for
diﬀerent excited species. For some of them the favorable
conditions could not be achieved at all (this explains also
the existence of upper threshold of SBSL). The quenching
may lead to a dissociation of molecules and to emission
of vacuum UV radiation being out of the range of obser-
vation. The dim luminosity cloud surrounding a hot spot
most probably is the ﬂuorescence induced by Lα atomic
line and/or Lyman and Werner bands of H2. The esti-
mation of the characteristic time of H∗
g ) collisional
quenching with cross sections from [15] gives ≈1 ps.

2(a3Σ+

The positive inﬂuence of heavy inert gases Ar, Kr, Xe
(in contrast to He, Ne [17]) may be connected with the
excitation transfer from their metastables and with for-
mation of excited hydrides like ArH∗(A2Σ). Absence
of characteristic emissions of Na∗ and OH∗ in SBSL is
caused by better evacuation and/or quenching of upper
states in hydrogen-dominated contents of the bubble.

It is common practice in plasma spectroscopy that an
investigator should ﬁnd proper answers for three ques-
tions: 1) Who is the emitter of the emission? 2) What
are main processes of excitation and deactivation of the
upper state of the transition? 3) How the population
density of the upper level(s) can be related to plasma
parameters? Only when all three are answered the emis-
sion may be used for plasma diagnostics (spectroscopic
determination of temperatures, particle densities etc.).
From such point of view any speculations around abnor-
mally high temperatures “observed” in SBSL and “the
opportunity” to make one more “cold fusion” are mean-
ingless.

5

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My gratitude to M. K¨aning for useful advices and help.

[1] S. Suslick et al., Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 357, 335

(1999).

[2] W. B. McNamara III, J. T. Didenko, and K. S. Suslick,

Nature 401, 772 (1999).

[3] R. Hiller, S. J. Putterman,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1182 (1992).

and B. P. Barber,

[4] D. F. Gaitan and L. A. Crum, in Frontiers in Nonlinear

Acoustics (Elsevier, N. Y., 1990), pp. 459–463.

[5] S. J. Putterman, Scientiﬁc American 33 (Feb. 1995).
[6] L. A. Crum, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 95, 559 (1994).
[7] B. P. Barber et al., Phys. Lett. 281, 66 (1997).
[8] T. J. Matula et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2602 (1995).
[9] K. Yasui, Phys. Rev. E 60, 1754 (1999).
[10] B. P. Lavrov, A. S. Melnikov, M. K¨aning, and J. R¨opcke,

Phys. Rev. E 59, 3526 (1999).

[11] B. P. Lavrov and V. P. Prosikhin, Opt. Spectrosc. 58,

[12] B. P. Lavrov and V. P. Prosikhin, Opt. Spectrosc. 64,

[13] B. P. Lavrov and A. S. Melnikov, Opt. Spectrosc. 85, 666

317 (1985).

298 (1988).

(1998).

[14] C. R. Lishawa, J. W. Feldstein, T. N. Stewart, and E. E.

Muschlitz, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 133 (1985).

[15] J. Bretagne, J. Godart, and V. Puech, J. Phys. B:

At. Mol. Phys. 14, 761 (1981).

[16] D. Lohse et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1359 (1997).
[17] Y. T. Didenko, W. B. McNamara III, and K. S. Suslick,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 777 (2000).

6

FIG. 1. Spectral density of SBSL measured in [3] with two
diﬀerent light sources used for the absolute intensity calibra-
tion: the Deuterium lamp (dotted line) and the quartz tung-
sten halogen (QTH) lamp (points with error bars). The solid
line represents blackbody spectrum for T=25000 K. The hor-
izontal lines are background levels used in present work.

FIG. 2. Spectra of SBSL and MBSL obtained in [8] (solid
lines). Dashed lines were used in present work as the conti-
nuum intensities with backgrounds shown by horizontal lines.

7

FIG. 3. Grotrian diagram of the ground and lowest triplet
excited electronic states of H2 molecule and Ar atom. Ar-
rows indicate a3Σ+
u spontaneous emission transi-
tions. Double arrows show some processes of populating of
the a3Σ+
g , v vibronic states: direct excitation of atoms and
molecule and Ar

∗ → H2 excitation transfer.

g , v → b3Σ+

FIG. 4. The comparison of recalculated experimental SL
continuum spectra [3,8] with those calculated for the TDE
conditions with T = 4000, 5000 and 6000 K (dash-dot lines).
Solid line corresponds to the case of direct electron impact
excitation and spontaneous decay of a3Σ+
g , v levels of H2 [10].

8

FIG. 5. Relative continuum intensity obtained from SBSL
and MBSL spectra [3,8] (Fig. 1, 2) after the subtraction of
the background and renormalization for unity at λ = 350 nm.

9

