1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ε =

≪ 1 ,

invariant

ABSTRACT. Thermal

August 7, 2013

Johan Carlsson

Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O. Box 2009, Oak Ridge, TN 37831–8071, USA

Breakdown of adiabatic invariance in spherical tokamaks

experienced by the particle during one gyro period
is small, Λ oscillates at the gyro frequency around a
constant average. If we introduce the adiabaticity pa-
rameter, ε, the condition of slow (adiabatic) variation
becomes

ions in spherical tokamaks
have two adiabatic invariants: the magnetic moment and
the longitudinal
invariant. For hot ions, variations in
magnetic-ﬁeld strength over a gyro period can become
suﬃciently large to cause breakdown of the adiabatic
invariance. The magnetic moment is more sensitive
to perturbations than the longitudinal
invariant and
there exists an intermediate regime, super-adiabaticity,
where the longitudinal
remains adiabatic,
but the magnetic moment does not. The motion of
super-adiabatic ions remains integrable and conﬁnement
is thus preserved. However, above a threshold energy,
the longitudinal
invariant becomes non-adiabatic too,
and conﬁnement is lost as the motion becomes chaotic.
We predict beam ions in present-day spherical tokamaks
to be super-adiabatic but fusion alphas in proposed
burning-plasma spherical tokamaks to be non-adiabatic.

DRAFT

When ε ≪ 1, there are thus three constants of
motion, one for each degree of freedom, i.e. the mo-
tion is integrable, the orbits are quasi-periodic and,
in the absence of collisions, a particle will be eter-
nally conﬁned. As the perturbation grows and ε . 1,
a dramatic change in the character of the motion,
from bounded to unbounded, will occur, as the adi-
abaticity breaks down, the third constant of motion
is lost, the motion becomes non-integrable, and the
orbits become chaotic. This process was ﬁrst inves-
tigated numerically [3] and later fully explained by
the rigorous KAM (Kolmogorov, Arnold & Moser)
theory [4]. Subsequently, Chirikov provided an ap-
proximate, but more practical, approach when he in-
troduced his semi-empirical resonance-overlap crite-
rion and the standard mapping [5]. In the Chiriko-
vian model, the breakdown of adiabaticity is caused
by strong nonlinear resonance between the periodic
motions occurring on diﬀerent timescales.

̺ |∇B|
B
where the gyro radius ̺ = v⊥/Ω, with the gyro
frequency Ω = |q|B/m. The approximate constancy
of the magnetic moment was ﬁrst pointed out
by Alfv´en [1]. Just as the magnetic moment is
associated with the gyro motion, a second adiabatic
invariant is associated with the slower drift motion:
the longitudinal invariant Jk = H vkdℓ [2].

Consider a charged particle, with mass m and
charge q, gyrating with speed v in a magnetic ﬁeld,
with ﬁeld strength B. Assume axi-symmetric toroidal
geometry with coordinates (R, φ, Z). The motion
preserves the energy E (because the Lorentz force
performs no work) and canonical toroidal momen-
tum Pφ (because the toroidal coordinate is ignor-
able). There is no third exact constant of motion,
but the normalized magnetic moment

where v⊥ is the velocity component perpendicular to
the magnetic ﬁeld (v2
⊥ = v2−v2
k, vk = v·B/B) and B0
is the on-axis magnetic ﬁeld, is an adiabatic invari-
ant, i.e. as long as the variation in the magnetic ﬁeld

B0v2
⊥
B v2 ,

B0µ
E

Λ =

=

1

Next, we launch a co-injected ion with its gyro
center at exactly the same location as before for
the counter injection. As can be seen in Fig. 4, the
solution to the equation of motion now takes on a

The compact and low-ﬁeld spherical tokamak was
introduced by Peng and Strickler [6]. The ﬁrst exper-
iment, START [7], showed encouraging results and
has been succeeded by two larger machines, MAST [8]
and NSTX [9]. Larger, burning-plasma, experiments
have also been proposed [10]. The B contours of
spherical tokamaks are characterized by a magnetic
well, i.e. a local minimum in B, centered outside of
the magnetic axis [see Fig. 1]. For the case shown
here, Bmin = 0.21 T and Bmax = 1.26 T. The low
value and large variation of B in the plasma (a factor
of six) leads to a low threshold energy for the onset
of non-adiabatic motion. Furthermore, the threshold
energy will vary substantially over the cross section.
We will demonstrate the consequences of this by solv-
ing the Lorentz equation of motion for 80 kV deu-
terium ions moving in the NSTX magnetic equilib-
rium shown in Fig. 1.

At NSTX, co-injection of an 80 kV deuterium
beam is used to heat the plasma (co-injection is
favored over counter-injection because it results
in lower prompt losses) [9]. Note that the beam
directions are relative to the plasma current, which
is in the opposite direction of the toroidal magnetic
ﬁeld, and a co-injected ion thus has vk < 0. Here,
however, we will ﬁrst launch a counter-injected ion,
born with its gyro center just below the midplane
at Rgc = 0.70 m. The resulting orbit is shown in
Fig. 2. Plotting the time evolution of the normalized
magnetic moment Λ [see Fig. 3], the adiabaticity is
evident; Λ oscillates around the constant mean with
the amplitude spiking when the ion passes through
the minimum of B along the orbit. The longitudinal
invariant Jk is practically constant.

DRAFT

Figure 1: 25% β NSTX equilibrium. Adjacent con-
tours are equidistant in 1/B. The thin, gray line is
the separatrix and the cross marks the magnetic axis.
The poloidal-ﬁeld coils, carrying approximately 200
kA of current each, are easily identiﬁable to the right.

Figure 2: Quasi-periodic orbit of a counter-injected
deuterium beam ion. The dashed line is the limiter.

2

Figure 3: Adiabatic time evolution of normalized magnetic moment Λ (thin, gray line), longitudinal invariant
Jk (solid line), and gyro-averaged magnetic ﬁeld strength hBi (dashed line) for the orbit shown in Fig. 2.

completely diﬀerent character, as the adiabaticity
condition is violated. The variation of the magnetic
ﬁeld along the orbit is actually less than it was for
the counter-injected ion [see Fig. 5]; but because the
gyro period is longer and the drift period is shorter,
the change over one gyration becomes suﬃciently
large to destroy the adiabaticity of both Λ and Jk.

DRAFT

We now move the gyro center ﬁve centimeters
outward, to the edge of the magnetic well. In the
magnetic well the B contours are nested, closed loops
and roughly overlap the ﬂux surfaces. The variation
of B along a ﬂux surface is thus greatly reduced.
Moving closer to the magnetic well, the adiabaticity
parameter will gradually decrease, and launching the
ion at Rgc = 0.75 m, the character of the motion
is again changed [see Fig. 6]. Notice how the ion
shifts between three diﬀerent quasi-periodic orbits.
This behavior can be understood by inspecting the
time evolution of Λ and Jk [see Fig. 7]. As can be
seen, Λ does not oscillate around a constant average
and is thus non-adiabatic. Instead it jumps between
three diﬀerent gyro averages, explaining the peculiar
ion orbit. In contrast, Jk oscillates with a period
of three drift periods around a constant average
and thus qualiﬁes as an adiabatic invariant. This
phenomenon, with non-adiabatic Λ but adiabatic Jk
is known as super-adiabaticity [11]. Note that in the
super-adiabatic regime, the longitudinal invariant Jk
replaces the magnetic moment as the third constant
of motion, and the motion remains integrable. The
conﬁnement of super-adiabatic ions should thus be
similar to that of adiabatic ions. As the adiabaticity
parameter is further reduced and we leave the
super-adiabatic regime, however, only two constants
of motion will remain, and the conﬁnement will be
drastically decreased as the motion becomes chaotic.

3

Figure 4: Chaotic orbit of a co-injected beam ion.

Figure 5: Non-adiabatic time evolution of Λ and Jk for the orbit shown in Fig. 4. Λ exhibits characteristic,
erratic jumps as hBi passes through local minima.

In START, co-injection of a 30 kV hydrogen beam
was found to have ∼60% absorption eﬃciency [12].
Based on numerical simulations, these beam ions
were claimed to be strongly non-adiabatic. This
would seem inconsistent with the good conﬁnement
and we note that Fig. 3a of Ref. [12], which shows
the time evolution of the magnetic moment for a
typical beam ion and is said to demonstrate the
non-adiabaticity,
in fact indicates super-adiabatic,
or possibly even fully adiabatic, beam ions.

DRAFT

If the beam energy is increased to 110 kV in
NSTX, the situation remains essentially the same:
the vast majority of the beam ions that are not
promptly lost, are super-adiabatic, and their mo-
tion is consequently bounded. However, in future,
burning-plasma experiments, such as the VNS [10],
the fusion-born α-particles will display the whole
range of dynamics: adiabatic, super-adiabatic, and
non-adiabatic. As an example, we show the time
evolution of the magnetic moment for an alpha,
born just below the midplane and three centimeters
outside of the magnetic axis, for a 38% β VNS
equilibrium [see Fig. 8]. In addition to possible direct
non-adiabatic losses when a giant jump in Λ causes
transition to a loss orbit, there is also an indirect loss
mechanism. As can be seen, the jumps in Λ force
the α back and forth across the trapped-passing
boundary. When driven by ion-ion collisions, this
is of course the process that generates neo-classical
transport. For fusion-born α-particles,
the drift
period is many orders of magnitude shorter than the
collisional timescale, and the non-adiabatic transport

4

The non-adiabatic beam ion shown in Fig. 4
intersects the limiter, and it would have done so even
if it had been adiabatic. This seems to be typical
for NSTX: the non-adiabaticity only aﬀects 80 kV
beam ions already following loss orbits and should
thus not have any substantial, negative eﬀect on the
conﬁnement. The majority of the conﬁned beam ions
are super-adiabatic, similar to the orbit in Fig. 6. In
fact, even orbits deep inside the well have a slightly
non-adiabatic magnetic moment.

Figure 6: Almost quasi-periodic orbit of a super-
adiabatic co-injected beam ion on the edge of the
magnetic well.

Figure 7: Non-adiabatic time evolution of Λ but adiabatic time evolution of Jk for the orbit shown in Fig. 6.

Figure 8: Non-adiabatic time evolution of Λ and Jk for fusion α in VNS.

DRAFT

Acknowledgment: This Letter has beneﬁted
greatly from the insightful comments of Fred Jaeger.
The magnetic-equilibrium data was kindly provided
by Dennis Strickler. This research was sponsored
by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed
by UT–Battelle, LLC,
for the U.S. Department
of Energy under contract DE–AC05–00OR22725.
Research was supported in part by an appointment
to the ORNL Postdoctoral Research Associates Pro-
gram, administered jointly by Oak Ridge National
Laboratory and the Oak Ridge Institute for Science
and Education.

mechanism described above can thus be expected to
aﬀect the overall α conﬁnement. Yet another eﬀect
to consider is the Arnold diﬀusion [13], which might
be important if the magnetic-ﬁeld ripple is large
enough to destroy the axi-symmetry.

5

References

Henrich, T. G. Northrop,

[8] A. Sykes, et al., “First physics results from
the MAST mega-amp spherical tokamak”, Phys.
Plasmas 8, (2001) 2101–2106.

[1] Hannes Alfv´en, “On the motion of a charged par-
ticle in a magnetic ﬁeld”, Ark. f. mat., astr. o.
fysik 27 A (22), (1940) 1–20; Hannes Alfv´en,
“Cosmical electrodynamics”, Oxford University
Press, 1950.

[2] C. S. Gardner, “Adiabatic invariants of periodic
classical systems”, Phys. Rev. 115 (4), (1959)
791–794; T. G. Northrop, and E. Teller, “Stabil-
ity of the adiabatic motion of charged particles
in the Earth’s ﬁeld”, Phys. Rev. 117 (1), (1960)
215–225.

[3] A. Garren, R. J. Riddell, L. Smith, G. Bing,
L. R.
and
J. E. Roberts, “Individual particle motion and
the eﬀect of scattering in an axially symmet-
ric magnetic ﬁeld”, in Proceedings of the Sec-
ond International Conference on Peaceful Uses
of Atomic Energy, Vol. 31, (1958) pp. 65–71;
R. J. Hastie, G. D. Hobbs, and J. B. Taylor,
“Non-adiabatic behaviour of particles in inho-
mogeneous magnetic ﬁelds”, in Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on Plasma
Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion, Vol. 1,
IAEA, Vienna (1969) pp. 389–401.

[7] A. Sykes, et al., “First results from the START
experiment”, Nucl. Fusion 32, (1992) 694–699;
A. Sykes, et al., “The spherical tokamak pro-
gramme at Culham”, Nucl. Fusion 39, (1999)
1271–1281.

[6] Y-K. M. Peng, and D. J. Strickler, “Features
of spherical torus plasmas”, Nucl. Fusion 26,
(1986) 769–777; Y-K. M. Peng, “The physics
of spherical torus plasmas”, Phys. Plasmas 7,
(2000) 1681–1692.

[9] S. M. Kaye, et al., “Physics design of the na-
tional spherical torus experiment”, Fus. Tech.
36, (1999) 16–37; S. M. Kaye, et al., “Initial
physics results from the national spherical torus
experiment”, Phys. Plasmas 8, (2001) 1977–
1987.

DRAFT

[10] Y-K. M. Peng, “Spherical torus pathway to fu-
sion power”, J. Fusion Energy 17, (1998) 45–59;
Y-K. M. Peng, “Science and technology of the
10 MA spherical tori”, Nucl. Fusion 40, (2000)
583–587.

[5] B. V. Chirikov, “Resonance processes in mag-
netic traps”, J. Nucl. Energy, Part C: Plasma
Physics 1, (1960) 253–260; G. M. Zaslavskii, and
B. V. Chirikov, “Stochastic instability of non-
linear oscillations”, Sov. Phys. Usp. 14, (1972)
549–568; B. V. Chirikov, “Stability of motion of
a charged particle in a magnetic conﬁnement sys-
tem”, Sov. J. Plasma Phys. 4 (3), (1978) 289–
300; B. V. Chirikov, “A universal instability of
many-dimensional oscillator systems”, Phys. Re-
ports 52 (5), (1979) 263–379.

[4] V. I. Arnold, “Small denominators and prob-
lems of stability of motion in classical and celes-
tial mechanics”, Russian Math. Surveys 18 (6),
(1963) 85–191; J. Moser, “On invariant curves of
area-preserving mappings of an annulus”, Nachr.
Akad. Wiss., G¨ottingen: Math. Phys. IIa (1),
(1962) 1–20.

[13] V. I. Arnold, “Instability of dynamical systems
with several degrees of freedom”, Sov. Math. 5,
(1964) 581–585.

[12] R. J. Akers, et al., “Neutral beam heating in the
START spherical tokamak”, Nucl. Fusion xx,
(2001) xxx–xxx.

[11] M. N. Rosenbluth, “Superadiabaticity in mirror
machines”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 29, (1972) 408–410.

6

