1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hollow density channels and transport in a laser irradiated plasma slab

H. Ruhl
Max-Born-Institut, Max-Born-Straße 2a, 12489 Berlin, Germany
(July 26, 2013)

A three dimensional Particle-In-Cell simulation describing the interaction of an intense laser beam
with a plasma slab is presented. It is observed that the laser generated electron current decays into
magnetically isolated ﬁlaments. The ﬁlaments grow in scale and magnitude by a merging process in
the course of which the ﬁeld topology changes. The opposite process also takes place occasionally.
The laser driven charge and energy ﬂows and the reconnecting magnetic ﬁeld mutually interact. At
the end of the merging process ﬂows and ﬁelds are conﬁned close to the laser irradiated surface of the
plasma slab. Both decay rapidly in the bulk plasma. Due to the magnetic pressure in the ﬁlaments
hollow density channels in the electron and ion densities are formed. The simulation reveals that
charge ﬂows in these channels can exceed the Alfven current.

52.40.Nk

Key issues of many applications concerning the interaction between lasers and matter at high intensities are laser
absorption and charge and energy transport through a plasma. A typical application of intense laser-matter interaction
where this is of relevance is Fast Ignition (FI) in Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion (ICF) [1–3]. In the present paper we
study issues of transport in a thick plasma slab with the help of Particle-In-Cell (PIC) simulations over a few hundred
femtoseconds simulation time. Binary collisions are included. Details of the collisional model will be presented
elsewhere. The density of the plasma slab is about 20 times over-critical.

A reasonable deﬁnition of thickness has some ambiguity. We call a slab thick when its depth exceeds many times the
skin lengths ls = c/ωp where ωp is the plasma frequency. In addition, the thickness of the plasma slab must be larger
than the penetration depth of the charge ﬂow. The plasma slab investigated in this paper has a thickness which is
large enough to exceed the latter suﬃciently. Two dimensional (2D) transport simulations in the plane perpendicular
to the laser direction have recently been reported [5]. In these simulations the slab thickness vanishes, the laser is
neglected and fast particles have been injected by hand. In addition, 2D geometry severely limits the available degrees
of freedom for current transport and magnetic ﬁeld evolution.

In the present paper we investigate properties of laser-generated charge ﬂows in a thick plasma slab in 3D where
the fast particles are generated by laser irradiation. We show that magnetic ﬁlament merging [6] is an important
process to form large ﬁlaments and magnetic ﬁeld strengths. In 3D the process represents a simple form of magnetic
reconnection in the sense that the ﬁeld topology changes in the course of the latter. Laser generated charge ﬂows
found in the simulation exceed the Alfven limit [7,8]. Furthermore, it is observed that the magnetic ﬁelds dominate
the properties of current transport. Both, electric and magnetic ﬁelds are localized close to the front surface of the
plasma slab as is the laser generated charge ﬂow.

The slab has a thickness of 6.0 µm and a width of 4.0 µm × 4.0 µm. The box size is 4.0 µm × 4.0 µm × 8.0 µm. All
ﬁelds depend on x, y, and z. The numerical grid has 152 × 152 × 800 cells. Lateral directions are periodic. Electrons
and ions are presented by 1.44 · 108 quasi-particles. The initial electron and ion temperatures are 10.0 keV and 1.0 keV
respectively. The laser beam propagates in z and is linearly polarized along x. After a rise time of three optical cycles
the laser intensity is kept constant. The incident laser beam has a Gaussian envelope laterally with a width of 2.0µm at
full-width-half-maximum. The irradiance is Iλ2 = 5.0 · 1019Wcm−2µm2. The slab has a marginal initial deformation
to enhance absorption [4]. The deformation is parameterized by z(x, y) = δ ·exp
where
δ = 0.4µm, x0 = y0 = 2.0 µm and r = 2.5 µm. The center of the slab is located at z = 4.2 µm. The background
plasma consist of protons. The initial electron plasma density in the simulation is ne = 3.33 · 1022cm−3. The laser
radiation is turned oﬀ after 200 fs. The simulation itself is stopped after 400 fs. The total simulation is carried out on
a parallel computer using 361 compute nodes and consumes 29000 CPU hours in total. The coordinate system used
in the simulations is right handed. Hence, the positive z-axis points out of the xy-plane shown in the ﬁgures. In what
follows we will always use the positive z-axis for reference.

−(x − x0)2/r2 + (y − y0)2/r2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Plots (a,b,c) of Fig. 1 show the plane z = 2.0 µm of the cycle averaged magnetic ﬁeld |B| deﬁned in the ﬁgure
caption. Time proceeds from plots (a,d) to (c,f). Filaments of diﬀerent scale are observed. The white arrows indicate
the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld. It is seen that the magnetic ﬁeld lines in the ﬁlaments are closed. As is seen from
plots (a,b) the ﬁlaments attract each other. In case the attractive forces between them are strong enough magnetic
ﬁeld lines start to reconnect to form larger ﬁlaments with again closed ﬁeld lines. The topology of the magnetic ﬁeld
changes. The inverse process takes place occasionally. The largest ﬁlament scale in our simulation is shown in plot

1

R

dxdy |E|
(c) of the ﬁgure. The peak magnetic ﬁeld strength in this ﬁlament is about 45000 T. Plots (d,e,f) show
dxdy |B| obtained from the cycle averaged ﬁelds E and B in the simulation box. They illustrate the magnitude
and
of E and B along z in the bulk of the plasma. The plots show that close to the front surface and in the bulk of the
plasma slab the magnetic ﬁeld B is larger than the electric ﬁeld E. At the rear of the slab E is larger than B. The
electric ﬁeld E at the rear of the slab points along the positive z-axis. At the front surface it points in the opposite
direction. Furthermore, the relations Ez ≫ Ex,y and Bz ≪ Bx,y are obtained in the simulation. Since the electric
ﬁeld is largest at the rear surface back surface acceleration of protons is most eﬃcient in this simulation.

R

Magnetic and current ﬁlaments are very small initially. There have been eﬀorts to describe this early stage with
the help of the Weibel theory [9,10]. When two ﬁlaments approach each other the magnetic ﬁelds of the latter tend
to cancel in the overlapping region leading to attractive forces between the ﬁlaments. This process is rapid in 3D and
accompanied by a change of ﬁeld topology. It cannot be recovered within the framework of the Weibel theory.

Plots (a,b,c) of Fig. 2 show the cycle averaged current density ﬁlaments jz at diﬀerent times for slices at z = 2.0 µm.
Plots (d,e,f) of the same ﬁgure show the total current and return current in z-direction obtained from I =
dxdy jz.
The peak current density in the ﬁlaments shown in plots (a,b,c) is |jz| = 5.5 · 1017 A/m2. The peak total current is
about I = 7.0 · 105 A. Total current and return current are of equal magnitude while there are large discrepancies
between both in individual ﬁlaments. The total current is largest close to the front surface of the slab. It declines
It has been split into its positive and negative components. To estimate the Alfven current
in the bulk plasma.
IA = 4πǫ0mec3 βγ/e the quantities β = v/c and γ = 1/
1 − β2 are required. The simulation yields β ≈ 1.0 and
γ ≈ 2.0 for the central ﬁlament in plot (c). This gives IA ≈ 34.0 kA. However, the total current in the central ﬁlament
p
is about 200 kA which exceeds the Alfven current almost 6-fold. We note that the quantity β has been calculated
d3p f (x, p, t) averaged over the cross-sectional area A of the central ﬁlament in
from β(x, t) =
dxdy β(x, t)/A. To make β as large as possible only the fastest electrons are included in
plot (c). This yields β =
the calculation with the requirement that the net current ﬂowing in the ﬁlament is recovered from the latter.

d3p vz f (x, p, t)/c

R

R

R

R

Figure 3 shows the formation of hollow, honeycombed density channels in the electron density. The same are
obtained in the proton density (not shown in the present paper). Plots (a,b,c) of the ﬁgure show slices at z = 2.0 µm
for diﬀerent times. Plot (d) gives a density slice at x = 2.0 µm. In plot (d) a central channel (blue color) surrounded
by channels to the left and right of it is visible. These channels contain many hot electrons that exit the rear surface
of the plasma slab. The energy density inside the channels is enhanced. The channels to the left and right of the
central one coil around the latter. Hence, they are not fully visible in the plane at x = 2.0 µm. Comparison of Figs.
1 and Figs. 3 reveals that the hollow electron density channels are generated by the pressure of the magnetic ﬁeld.

In the context of current transport the singular current Is is of relevance.

It is deﬁned as the total current I
minus the guiding center current Igc. The guiding center current comprises basically those electrons that gyrate
around the magnetic ﬁeld lines while the singular current contains mainly electrons that meander between ﬁeld lines.
The singular electrons are those that are capable of transporting large currents. The simulation yields approximate
pressure balance between magnetic and thermal pressures on slowly varying time scales. Hence, we ﬁnd

The quantity Pij in Eq. (1) is the pressure tensor which is calculated directly in the simulations. Rewriting Eq. (1)

yields

∂iPij ≈ (j × B)j ,

Pij =

d3p pivjf .

Z

jz ≈

∂r

1
r

rP⊥
Bθ (cid:19)

(cid:18)

+

P⊥
B2
θ

∂rBθ .

Equation (2) is obtained from Eq. (1) assuming cylindrical geometry for a ﬁlament and rewriting Pij with the help
of the pressure P⊥ in radial direction normal to the z-axis. The magnetic ﬁeld has been approximated by Bθ and
the current density by jz. Cylinder symmetry is approximately applicable to the situation found in the simulation.
Hence, the calculation reveals the impact of geometry, pressure, and current density on the total current that can
ﬂow. Ambiguities inherent in the calculation of IA as discussed above are avoided. The singular current Is is obtained
with the help of Eq. (2)

(1)

(2)

(3)

For a mono-energetic cold electron beam with electron density n0 and velocity v for which we have P⊥ = men0v2
and jz = −en0v the singular current Is in Eq. (3) yields the Alfven current IA. These formulas have been obtained

Is = I − Igc = −4πǫ0c2 P⊥(0)
jz(0)

.

2

in the context of Z-pinches [11]. In hot laser plasma Is can become much larger than IA since hollow cylinder-like
density channels form and a signiﬁcant lateral pressure is present. As a consequence, larger total currents than the
Alfven current are possible in a single ﬁlament. From the simulation it is obtained that the singular current Is in the
central ﬁlament of plot (b) in Fig. 2 is about 100 kA. Roughly this value is also obtained for I =
dxdy jz from the
simulation by integrating over the cross sectional area of this ﬁlament.

R

Figure 4 shows the electron energy spectrum (a), the integrated longitudinal and lateral charge and energy ﬂows
(b), and the electron number and energy densities in the plasma slab (c). The longitudinal ﬂows have been split into
positive and negative components. The return energy ﬂow is negligible. For the lateral ﬂows the integrated absolute
values are taken. The fastest electrons obtained in the simulation have about 30 MeV while fractional absorption of
the laser is about 35 %. The absorbed power of the laser is transported away by the energy ﬂow qz shown in plot (b).
The latter consists predominantly of fast electrons. The energy ﬂow penetrates much deeper into the plasma than
the charge ﬂow but still decays rapidly. Plot (c) shows that the energy density is large only in the front layer of the
plasma slab. Since the longitudinal and lateral charge ﬂows are only sizeable where the magnetic ﬁeld is large (see
Fig. 1) the implication is that the mutual interaction between current and magnetic ﬁeld conﬁnes most of the total
charge and energy ﬂows to the front surface of the slab. Since time-averaged electric ﬁelds in the simulation are much
smaller than time-averaged magnetic ﬁelds the transport regime is of magneto-hydrodynamic nature.

In conclusion it has been shown that large charge ﬂows generated by intense laser radiation decay into current
ﬁlaments. The current ﬁlaments are isolated by magnetic ﬁlaments which reconnect until larger ones are obtained.
This process proceeds until a dominating ﬁlament is obtained in the plasma. The magnetic pressure associated with
the magnetic ﬁlaments leads to hollow density channels. Hollow density channels, however, can support total currents
that exceed the Alfven current. This regime of transport is diﬀerent from the one investigated by Bell et al. [12].
Despite hollow channel transport severe charge and energy ﬂow inhibition are observed. We note that the Alfven
current limit is diﬃcult to apply in the context of a hot laser plasma since it has many ambiguities. We note that the
plasma volume investigated is small due to numerical expense and that lateral boundaries are periodic. Hence, some
care has to be taken when extrapolating the results reported here to FI relevant problems.

Many helpful discussions with M. G. Haines, F. Pegoraro, and P. Mulser are acknowledged. The present work has
been supported by the DFG Schwerpunkt WECHSELWIRKUNG INTENSIVER LASERFELDER MIT MATERIE.
Use of the Supercomputing facilities at ZIB (Konrad Zuse, Berlin, Germany) and NIC (John von Neumann Institute,
J¨ulich, Germany) has been made.

[1] M. Tabak et al., Phys. Plasmas 1, 1626 (1994).
[2] S. Hain and P. Mulser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1015 (2001).
[3] M. Roth et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 437 (2001).
[4] H. Ruhl et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2095 (1999).
[5] M. Honda et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2128 (2000).
[6] A. A. Galeev, Handbook of Plasma Physics, ed. M. N. Rosenbluth and R. Z. Sagdeev, ISBN: 0444866450, North Holland

Amsterdam, 305 (1984).

[7] H. Alfven, Phys. Rev. 55, 425 (1939).
[8] J. D. Lawson, J. Electron Control 5, 146 (1958).
[9] F. Califano et al., Phys. Rev. E 56, 963 (1997).
[10] Y. Sentoku et al., Phys. Plasmas 7, 689 (2000).
[11] M. G. Haines, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 11, 1709 (1978). 689 (2000).
[12] R. Bell et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39, 653 (1997).

3

FIG. 1. Merging of magnetic ﬁlaments and cycle averaged E and B ﬁelds vs z in units E0 and B0. Plots (a,b,c) show
z )0.5 at diﬀerent times. Plots (d,e,f) show
the planes z = 2.0 µm of the cycle averaged magnetic ﬁeld B = (B2
z )0.5 (solid) averaged over the lateral area and a laser
x + B2
E =
cycle. The times are t = 71 fs (a,d), t = 125 fs (b,e), and t = 179 fs (c,f). The arrows in (a,b,c) indicate the direction of the
R
cycle averaged magnetic ﬁeld B. The parameters are E0 = 1.0 · 1011 V/m and B0 = 8.76 · 102 Vs/m2.

z )0.5 (dashed) and B =

dxdy (B2

dxdy (E2

x + B2

y + B2

y + B2

y + E2

x + E2

R

FIG. 2. Cycle averaged jz in units j0. Plots (a,b,c) show the planes z = 2.0 µm of the cycle averaged current density jz at
diﬀerent times. Plots (d,e,f) show I =
dxdy jz split into ﬂow (dashed-dotted) and return ﬂow (solid) averaged over a laser
cycle. The total current in the central ﬁlament (blue color) is approximately 200 kA. The times are t = 71 fs (a,d), t = 125 fs
(b,e), and t = 179 fs (c,f). The arrows in (a,b,c) indicate the direction of the cycle averaged magnetic ﬁeld B. The parameter
is j0 = 1.66 · 1016 A/m2.

R

FIG. 3. Hollow density channels. Cycle averaged electron density ne in units n0. Plots (a,b,c) show the planes z = 2.0 µm
at diﬀerent times. Plot (d) shows the plane x = 2.0 µm. The times are t = 71 fs (a), t = 125 fs (b), and t = 179 fs (c,d). The
−3. The location of the hollow density channels coincides with magnetic ﬁlaments as is seen by
parameter is n0 = 1.0 · 1028 m
comparing with plots (a,b,c) of Fig. 1.

FIG. 4. Energy spectrum (a), total current and energy ﬂows in units I0 and q0 (b), total electron and electron en-
ergy density in units n0 and ǫ0 (c). Plot (a) shows the electron energy spectrum obtained from all the particles in the
plasma. The fastest electrons have 30 MeV. The thin solid lines of plot (b) show the integrated current and return current
x + j2
j2
I =
y. The thin dashed-dotted lines indicate the energy and
m2c2 + p2 − mc2) f . The thick dashed-dotted line shows the lateral energy ﬂow
d3p vz (c
R
return energy ﬂows qz =
m2c2 + p2 − mc2) f . The solid line of plot (c) shows the integrated electron energy density
v2
x + v2
R
R
q⊥ =
m2c2 + p2 − mc2) f . The dashed-dotted line gives the electron number density ne →
p
dxdy ne. Frac-
ǫ =
tional absorption is about 35.0 %. The time is t = 179 fs. The parameters are I0 = 105 A, q0 = 1012 W, ǫ0 = 104 J/m, and
R
n0 = 1017 m

dxdy jz. The thick solid line indicates I =
dxdy
y (c

d3p
d3p (c
R

p
p

R
−1.

R
dxdy

dxdy

dxdy

p

p

R

R

This figure "FIG1_s.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108060v1

This figure "FIG2_s.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108060v1

This figure "FIG3_s.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108060v1

This figure "FIG4_s.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108060v1

