Self Organization of Edge and Internal Pedestals in a Sandpile

HEP/123-qed

S. C. Chapman1∗,
1Physics Dept. Univ. of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

R. O. Dendy2
2EURATOM/UKAEA Fusion Association, Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14
3DB, United Kingdom

B. Hnat1
(January 13, 2014)

Abstract

The temperature proﬁles of magnetically conﬁned plasmas can display
distinctive longlived pedestals at the edge and internally. Here we show that
such structures can arise naturally through avalanching transport in a sandpile
model. A single control parameter that is constant across the sandpile deter-
mines the occurrence and regularity of these eﬀects, as well as the entrainment
of global conﬁnement to edge pedestal dynamics. The system dynamics indi-
cate that the pedestals are a consequence of an inverse cascade in real space,
and that self organization is necessary for their occurrence.

52.55.Dy, 52.55.Fa, 45.70.Ht, 52.35.Ra

1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

∗sandrac@astro.warwick.ac.uk

1

A distinctive feature of magnetically conﬁned plasmas is that they can sustain local
regions having very steep (indeed, almost discontinuous) temperature gradients. Pedestals
in the edge temperature are a key feature of the good conﬁnement regimes of tokamaks
(“H-modes”); for a recent review see Ref. [1]. Additionally, advanced operating regimes for
tokamaks have now been accessed, which involve the creation of “internal transport barriers”
(ITBs) – steplike features in the temperature proﬁles internal to the plasma, see for example
Refs. [2]- [5]. The occurence of such structures in externally heated plasma systems that
are diﬀuse, high temperature, and turbulent is surprising, and is a striking instance of their
capacity for macroscopic self organization. Here we shall identify how similar structures arise
spontaneously in the sandpile model of Ref. [6]. Because of the simplicity of this model, it is
possible to formally characterize and explain the mechanisms underlying pedestal formation,
and to identify links to tokamak plasma behavior. This approach is complementary to
studies that employ largescale numerical simulation of tokamak plasmas, which have had
some success in illuminating the subtle interplay between turbulence and bulk ﬂows that
may give rise to ITBs [5,7].

The essential ingredients of the sandpile algorithm of Ref. [6] are: (i)randomized critical
gradients which must be exceeded locally before any transport can take place; (ii)central
fuelling, so that sand can only leave the system by means of systemwide avalanches; and
(iii)its only distinctive feature, namely a characteristic lengthscale Lf for fast redistribution
which may be considered a proxy for turbulent transport, as discussed in Ref. [8]. Evidence
for avalanche-type transport from tokamak experiments [9,10] and numerical simulations
[11,12] provides growing support for the applicability in some circumstances of the sandpile
paradigm introduced into fusion plasma physics in recent years [13]- [17]. Particularly rele-
vant to the present study are observations and analysis [18,19] of edge plasma turbulence in
a range of magnetically conﬁned plasmas. These suggest that edge plasma turbulence – the
environment in which H-mode edge pedestals form, which then coexist with the turbulence
– self organizes into a critical state, independent of the size and plasma characteristics of the
devices considered. It is known [8] that, depending on the value of the control parameter
Lf , the statistical behavior of the sandpile model of Ref. [6] displays features reminiscent of
enhanced conﬁnement phenomenology in tokamaks. These include the time averaged height
proﬁles, which possess edge pedestals in the good conﬁnement regime; furthermore the fre-
quency of systemwide avalanches resulting in mass loss scales with stored sandpile energy in
the same way as the frequency of edge localized modes (ELMs) scales with stored energy in
tokamaks, see Fig.6 of Ref. [8]. We emphasize that Lf is kept constant across the sandpile in
any given computational run, so that the critical gradient and redistribution rules are iden-
tical at every cell of our sandpile, apart from the initial and ﬁnal cells. It follows that where
pedestals arise, they represent a true emergent phenomenon. In this respect our approach
diﬀers essentially from that of Refs. [13,17], where a local transport barrier is speciﬁed at
the outset, by declaring the critical gradient and redistribution rules to be diﬀerent for a
speciﬁc local group of cells.

The three dimensional plot of Fig.1 shows sandpile height as a function of position as time
evolves, for the good conﬁnement regime [8] with Lf = 50 in a 512 cell system. It displays
two distinct phases. First, there is a relaxation phase where the sandpile proﬁle is smooth
down to the self organized edge pedestal, except within a distance Lf of the core where
fueling has a continual local eﬀect. During the relaxation phase mass loss occurs via many

2

systemwide avalanches closely spaced in time, which carry sand over the sandpile boundary.
The relaxation phase terminates with a ﬁnal systemwide avalanche, after which the growth
phase begins. The growth phase is characterized by a stationary edge pedestal which resides
at the outermost cell of the sandpile. As time progresses, additional pedestals (localized
regions of steep gradient just below critical) form successively at positions increasingly close
to the core of the sandpile, with average separation ∼ Lf . Each of these is generated at
positions where (outward propagating) major internal avalanches have come to rest. The
location of the most recently formed (and therefore innermost) internal pedestal propagates
inward during the growth phase.

Figure 2 is motivated by simultaneous multichannel measurements of tokamak temper-
ature proﬁles in the presence of ITBs; see for example Fig.3 of Ref. [3] and Fig.1 of Ref.
[5], and also the results of numerical simulations shown in Fig.2 of Ref. [5]. Figure 2 shows
sandpile height at diﬀerent positions from the edge to the centre. Just over two growth
and relaxation phases are shown. The successive formation of internal pedestals is reﬂected
in a stepwise increase in height at any given point during the growth phases. Using this
diagnostic, evidence for stepwise increments is clearest in the region of the sandpile that
lies between the core and the edge. Since the internal pedestals form at locations increas-
ingly close to the core as the growth phase proceeds, the points within the sandpile that
are most aﬀected by the formation of these pedestals are those that are closer to the core
of the sandpile. Points nearer the edge are only aﬀected by the formation of the ﬁrst few
internal pedestals during the early growth phase. The results shown in Fig.2, which bear
some resemblance to the experimental and numerical results of Refs. [3,5], emerge naturally
from the dynamics of the sandpile during the growth phase of its good conﬁnement regime.
Central to this structure is the unexpected capacity of this sandpile to organize persistent
steep pedestals both at the edge and internally.

The role of these internal pedestals and their relationship to the edge pedestal is high-
lighted in Fig.3: here all cells at which the gradient exceeds zc/2 are marked by black points,
while all other cells are left blank. Figure 3(a) (Lf = 50) follows ﬁve of the growth and
relaxation cycles shown in Fig.2. The edge pedestal is visible close to the sandpile boundary
in both the relaxation and the growth phases. Its time behaviour is essentially regular and,
as we shall see, orders the structure internal to the sandpile. For any Lf < N/4, the loca-
tion of each internal pedestal is ﬁxed during a given growth phase, so that they persist as
distinguishable features of the time averaged phenomenology of the sandpile. In contrast,
Fig.3(b) shows the behavior for the poor conﬁnement regime with Lf = 250 > N/4. This
regime corresponds to a self organized critical (SOC) state, see Ref. [8] and below. Although
the sandpile sucessively ﬁlls and empties, it does so in an irregular manner. Pedestals can
be seen both at the edge and internal to the sandpile, but these are no longer organized in
a coherent pattern.

A resilient edge pedestal arises for all Lf ; the pedestal is steep, indeed unresolved, in
that the entire change in height occurs between neighboring cells. The location of the edge
pedestal is strongly time dependent for large Lf , whereas for small Lf it is conﬁned to a
region close to the outermost cell of the sandpile. The time averaged proﬁle in the edge
region therefore depends strongly on Lf , and the steadiest edge pedestal corresponds to
small Lf and good conﬁnement. Following each avalanche, in our algorithm the value of
the critical gradient zc is randomised about a mean value at all cells that participated in

3

the avalanche. Nevertheless the gradient at the edge pedestal remains always close to, but
just below, the critical value zc as shown in Fig.4. Elsewhere in the sandpile (for example
at its midpoint, see Fig.4), except where internal pedestals arise, the gradient is well below
zc. The internal pedestals appear as barriers to transport: despite their apparent fragility
against avalanching (gradient z close to zc), no sand passes through either the edge or the
internal pedestals until the ﬁnal avalanche that terminates the growth phase.

The physical mechanisms and principles underlying the self organization of the edge
pedestal and multiple internal pedestals that arise in the sandpile model of Refs. [6,8] are
therefore of considerable interest. As a ﬁrst step, we conﬁrm the hypothesis of Ref. [8] that
the good conﬁnement regime (small Lf ) corresponds to low dimensional behavior. In Fig.5
the position of the last occupied cell at time t is plotted against that at time t + τ , where
τ = 50, for runs with Lf = (a)50, (b)150 and (c)250 in a 512 cell system. This is an example
of phase space reconstruction, achieved here by embedding [20]. Figure 5(a) shows low
dimensional system dynamics that repeatedly follow a simple limit cycle (attractor) around
a restricted region of the reconstructed phase space. This implies that the large number
of cells in the sandpile have self organized: their collective dynamics are encapsulated by
a small number of dynamical variables. Once Lf is increased to 150 (Fig.5(b)), the simple
limit cycle seen in Fig.5(a) bifurcates, and more stochastic behavior is seen in Fig.5(c) (Lf =
250). Thus increasing complexity of the phase space portrait correlates with deterioration
of conﬁnement [8]. The lowest conﬁnement regime corresponds to selfsimilar avalanche
statistics. This is associated with a nontrivial ﬁxed point in the space of the parameter
used [21] to perform rescaling under the renormalization group procedure, corresponding to
behavior that is both self organized and critical [22]. Importantly, global relaxation of the
sandpile is ultimately achieved by large (systemwide) avalanches for all values of Lf . When
Lf is of order the system size N, systemwide avalanches are straightforwardly propagated:
because Lf ∼ N, no characteristic scale is imposed by the redistribution process and the
dynamics are selfsimilar and in SOC [21]. Conversely, when Lf is signiﬁcantly distinct
from the system size (found empirically to be Lf < N/4), there is scale breaking. This
leads to broken power law avalanche statistics [6], and the system is no longer in SOC. By
separating the characteristic lengthscales we also eﬀectively separate the longterm growth-
relaxation timescale from the time interval between systemwide avalanches.
In the SOC
regime, such a distinction is not possible. Thus, in the good conﬁnement regime (when
Lf < N/4) the requirement for self organization is satisﬁed. The feature evolving on the
slow timescale, namely the position of the edge pedestal, is suﬃcient to determine the
details of the internal dynamics. It organizes the sequence of events leading to the sucessive
formation of internal edge pedestals and the time variation of total energy (sand) in the
system: in short, the sandpile is entrained to its edge. The characteristic signature of the
onset of self organization is low dimensional dynamics, seen in Figs.4(Lf = 50 traces) and
5(a), as opposed to the irregular time evolution and selfsimilar statistical properties of the
system when self organised and critical (Figs.4(Lf = 250 traces) and 5(c)).

The conﬁnement physics of our sandpile model oﬀers a robust framework in which a
distinctive structure of edge and internal pedestals (previously known only from tokamak
plasmas) arises naturally. There is only one control parameter, Lf /N, which can be con-
sidered as a proxy for the lengthscale of turbulent transport, normalized to system size.
Provided that this lengthscale is suﬃciently short, the underlying inverse cascade in real

4

space gives rise to persistent, marginally subcritical proﬁle steps whose formation point
propagates inwards in the growth phase. Furthermore the self organized edge pedestal is
continuously present in all phases of the sandpile evolution, and positions itself exactly at
the sandpile boundary throughout the growth phase. These results are suﬃcient to indicate
that some of the distinctive edge and internal pedestal phenomenology seen in tokamak
plasmas can also arise in a simpler idealized conﬁnement system, and that they may be
linked to the observed avalanching transport phenomena. This suggests that quantitative
studies to elucidate the balance between diﬀusive transport and avalanching transport in
tokamaks would be fruitful. The results further suggest a test of the depth of the physical
analogy that we have found, as follows. If the analogy is deep, there will exist one or a few
dimensionless control parameters, linked to the properties of the turbulent transport, that
entirely determine the key features of the conﬁnement phenomenology – regular or irregular
– of tokamak plasmas that we have cited here. For example, these parameters would control
the extent to which global conﬁnement is entrained to edge pedestal dynamics. The search
for such parameters, for example by further application of the techniques of nonlinear time
series analysis to edge plasma measurements as initiated in Refs. [18,19], is potentially highly
rewarding.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to George Rowlands and Jack Connor for comments and suggestions.
SCC was supported by a PPARC lecturer fellowship, ROD by Euratom and the UK DTI,
and BH by HEFCE.

5

REFERENCES

[1] J. Hugill, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 42, R75 (2000).
[2] E. J. Synakowski, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40, 581 (1998).
[3] K. H. Burrell et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40, 1585 (1998).
[4] G. D. Conway et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1463 (2000).
[5] J. E. Kinsey, G. M. Staebler, K. H. Burrell, M. E. Austin, and R. E. Waltz, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 86, 814 (2001).

[6] S.C. Chapman, Phys. Rev. E 62, 1905 (2000).
[7] B. N. Rogers, W. Dorland, and M. Kotschenreuther, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5336 (2000).
[8] S. C. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, and B. Hnat, Phys.Rev. Lett. 86, 2814 (2001).
[9] T. L. Rhodes et al., Phys. Lett. A 253, 181 (1999).
[10] P. A. Politzer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1192 (2000).
[11] X. Garbet and R. Waltz, Phys. Plasmas 5, 2836 (1998).
[12] Y. Sarazin and P. Ghendrih, Phys. Plasmas 5, 4214 (1998).
[13] D. E. Newman, B. A. Carreras, P. H. Diamond, and T. S. Hahm, Phys. Plasmas 3, 1858

(1996).

(1996).

[14] B. A. Carreras, D. Newman, V. E. Lynch, and P. H. Diamond, Phys. Plasmas 3, 2903

[15] R. O. Dendy and P. Helander, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 39, 1947 (1997).
[16] S. C. Chapman, R. O. Dendy, and G. Rowlands, Phys. Plasmas 6, 4169 (1999).
[17] H. R. Hicks and B. A. Carreras, Phys Plasmas 8, 3277 (2001).
[18] B. A. Carreras et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4438 (1998).
[19] M. A. Pedrosa et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3621 (1999).
[20] E. Ott, Chaos in Dynamical Systems (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993), p 93.
[21] S. W. Y. Tam, T. S. Chang, S. C. Chapman, and N. W. Watkins, Geophys. Res. Lett.

27, 1367 (2000).

[22] J. P. Sethna, K. A. Dahmen, and C. R. Myers, Nature, 410, 242 (2001).

Captions
FIG 1: Three dimensional view of the sandpile height proﬁle for Lf = 50. Time evolves
along the partially hidden axis. One relaxation phase and one subsequent growth phase are
shown.

FIG 2: Local height of sand as a function of time at diﬀerent locations in the sandpile
relative to the centre cell n = 1: (a) n=20, (b) n=65, (c) n=100, (d) n=125, (e) n=150 and
(f) n=300. System size N = 512, control parameter Lf = 50.

FIG 3: Location of cells where the value of the local gradient exceeds zc/2 for (a)Lf = 50
and (b)Lf = 250. Zero corresponds to the apex where fueling occurs. The edge pedestal is
visible as the uppermost trace.

FIG 4: Local gradient normalized to the local value of zc for cells at the edge (∆e, upper
traces, value close to unity) and halfway into the sandpile (∆mid, lower traces, value close
to zero), for Lf = (top) 250, (centre) 150, (bottom) 50.

FIG 5: Phase space reconstruction of the dynamics of the edge position ep(t). Plotted
are coordinates ep(t) versus ep(t + τ ) for τ = 50 and Lf = (a)50, (b)150 and (c)250. The
system dynamics explore a larger region of the phase space with increasing values of Lf .
The topology shown is insensitive to the value of τ in the range of interest.

6

