1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
1
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analyzing laser-plasma
interferograms with a Continuous
Wavelet Transform Ridge Extraction
technique: the method

P. Tomassini, A. Giulietti and L.A. Gizzi
Intense Laser Irradiation Laboratory - IFAM CNR
Area della Ricerca di Pisa
Via G. Moruzzi, 1 56124 Pisa (Italy)
E. mail: tomassini@ifam.pi.cnr.it
M. Galimberti and D. Giulietti
Intense Laser Irradiation Laboratory - IFAM CNR
Dip. di Fisica Universita’ di Pisa and I.N.F.M sez. di Pisa
M. Borghesi
The Queen’s University, Belfast (UK)
O. Willi
Blackett Laboratory and Imperial College, London (UK)

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Laser-plasma interferograms are currently analyzed by extracting
the phase-shift map with FFT techniques (K.A.Nugent, Applied Op-
tics 18, 3101 (1985)). This methodology works well when interfer-
ograms are only marginally aﬀected by noise and reduction of fringe
visibility, but it can fail in producing accurate phase-shifts maps when
dealing with low-quality images.

In this paper we will present a novel procedure for the phase-shift
map computation which makes an extensive use of the Ridge Extrac-

1

tion in the Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) framework. The
CWT tool is ﬂexible because of the wide adaptability of the analyz-
ing basis and it can be very accurate because of the intrinsic noise
reduction in the Ridge Extraction.

A comparative analysis of the accuracy performances of the new
tool and the FFT-based one shows that the CWT-based tool phase
maps are considerably less noisy and it can better resolve local inho-
mogeneties.

1 Introduction

Interferometric techniques are widely used to characterize the optical prop-
erties of a variety of media. An important class of applications concerns the
investigation of the density distribution of plasmas produced by high inten-
sity laser-matter interactions. In recent years various interferometer schemes
have been developed and successfully applied to the characterization of the
wide range of plasma condition which can be achieved in laser-plasma ex-
periments, from the long-scalelength underdense plasma generated by laser
explosion of a thin foil target to the steep, denser plasma generated by short
pulse interaction with a solid target. All these schemes make use of a so-
called probe beam which consists of a laser pulse which probes the plasma at
a given time [1] [2]. The fringe pattern must be then analysed to obtain the
two-dimensional phase-shift which contains the physical information on the
plasma. Then, provided that appropriate symmetry conditions are satisﬁed,
inversion techniques can be applied to the phase shift map to obtain the
density proﬁle [3].

The traditional way of reading a fringe pattern consisted in building a
grid over the pattern and in measuring, for each position on the grid, the
number of fringe jumps with respect to the unperturbed fringe structure.
This procedure was very simple and was performed manually. However, the
amount of information which could be extracted in this way was very limited
due to the small number of grid points that can be employed.

In 1982 a novel fringe analysis technique was proposed [4] in which the
phase extraction was carried out using a procedure based upon Fast Fourier
transform (FFT). This technique allows the information carried by the fringe
pattern to be decoupled by spatial variations of the background intensity as
well as by variations in the fringe visibility, provided that the scalelength of

2

such perturbations is large compared to the fringe separation. A few years
later this FFT technique was applied for the ﬁrst time to laser-produced
plasmas [5]. More recently the technique was extensively applied by our
group to the analysis of long-scalelength underdense laser-plasmas [6][7]. The
use of ultra-short probe pulses has considerably reduced the fringe-smearing
eﬀect due to the motion of the plasma during the probe pulse. This fact
allowed to investigate short-lived phenomena in the propagation of ultra-
short laser pulses through plasmas [8].

The extensive use of the FFT based technique carried out by our group
has shown its eﬀectiveness.
In some circumstances however, reduction of
fringe visibility, non uniform illumination, noise and the presence of local
image defects make the FFT based technique unstable and the results are
not fully satisfactory because of the presence of unphysical phase jumps. In
addition small scale non-uniformities with low departure from the density
background are unlikely to be detected.

In this paper we show that Continuous Wavelet Transforms can also be
applied to the analysis of interferograms resulting in a more ﬂexible and
reliable technique than the FFT based one. To our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst time that such an approach is applied to fringe pattern analysis.

In section 2 we will shortly introduce the Continuous Wavelet Transform

(CWT) and its remarkable properties of good space-scale analyzer.

In section 3 we introduce our IACRE, ”Interferogram Analysis by Con-
tinuous wavelet trasform Ridge Extraction” tool for interferograms analysis
and we compare its sensitivity to the FFT-based method.
Section 4 is devoted to conclusions and comments.

2 The Continuous Wavelet Transform analy-

sis tool

The Continuous Wavelet Transform is a tool to obtain a representation of
signal s which is intermediate between the ”real time” description s = s(t)
and the ”spectral” description ˆs = ˆs(ω), so that it is a very powerful tool
to obtain a time-frequency description of a sequence of data. In this paper
the words ”time” and ”space”, or ”frequency” and ”spatial-frequency” will
be used indiﬀerently.

The need of a time-frequency description of a sequence is much strong

3

when the signal represents a sum of frequency-modulated components (as for
each section of an interferogram image, as shown below). This is because in
a purely spectral analysis the frequency content of a modulated sinusoid is
generally spread in a large region and no identiﬁcation of the signal from its
spectral amplitude is allowable.

The obvious step that can be made to overcome the lack of time sensitivity
is the introduction of a sequence of windows of a given width and centered
at diﬀerent times: for each window the FFT of the signal is computed and
a partial time resolution is obtained. These techniques are called ”Short-
Time Fourier Transform” or ”Gabor Transform” [9]. The Gabor Transform is
currently used in many context but is not considered by the signal-processing
community a ”full analysis tool”. This is because the number of oscillations
of each sinus in the window depends on the frequency and consequently the
spectral and spatial resolutions should be optimized (by tuning the window
length) only in a narrow band.

From the early 80’s, with the introduction of the Wavelet Transform, a

satisfying time-frequency analysis tool is available [10] [11] [12].

To introduce the Wavelet Transform, let us ﬁrst deﬁne notations for the
Fourier Transform. For a signal s ǫ L1(
) the Fourier coeﬃcients,
that is the scalar product between the signal and the inﬁnitely oscillating
terms eω = exp(

i ωt):

)
R

L2(

R

∩

−

∞

< eω|
≡
form a complete basis of the space to which s belongs.

dt exp(

s >=

ˆs(ω)

−∞

−

Z

i ωt)s(t)

Let us introduce a function Ψ(t) called Mother wavelet. Now, instead of
decomposing the signal s as a sum of the pure oscillating terms eω (Fourier
Transform), we build a decomposition of s in terms of the base of all the
translated (by parameter b) and scaled (by parameter a) Ψ’s. The base of
the Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) is then a two-parameter family
of functions

(1)

(2)

Ψa,b(t)

1
a

(t

b)
−
a !

.

Ψ

 

≡

The choice of the Mother Wavelet used to build the analyzing base is
quite free and must be adapted to the actual information that should be
extracted from the signal[11].

Once the base has been built, one can compute the CWT coeﬃcients as

4

(3)

(4)

the scalar product of the signal and Ψa,b:

Ws(a, b)

≡

=

s >

∞

< Ψa,b|
1
dt
a

−∞

Z

(t

b)
−
a !

Ψ

 

s(t),

A particular choice of Mother Wavelet is the Morlet wavelet, and is largely
used in studying signals with strong components of pure sinus or modulated
sinusoids. The Morlet base has the form

Ψ(t) = exp(i ω0t) exp(

(t/τ )2) ,

−

where the parameters ω0 and τ control the peak frequency and the width
τ controls the time and spectral
of the wave respectively. The product ω0
resolution of the Wavelet decomposition: a large τ corresponds to a long wave
(high spectral resolution and low temporal resolution) while a small τ pro-
duces an ”event based” analysis (low spectral resolution and high temporal
resolution).

×

→

We now face the problem of a numerical computation of the Wavelet
coeﬃcients map Ws(a, b). For a sequence of N samples si; i = 1...N of s,
the translation parameter b (which controls the central position of the wave
bi; i = 1...N. The
envelope) can be sampled in a straightforward way: b
scaling parameter a (which controls the characteristic scale of the wave) may
aj = 2−j/Nv j = 1...M , (Natural or Log sampling), where
be sampled as
Nv is the ”number of voices per octave” parameter. Each aj is called ”voice”
and, in the case Nv = 12, Log sampling exactly corresponds to the spectral
sampling of musical tones in the ”tempered scale” introduced by J.S. Bach.
The Log sampling of CWT coeﬃcients in the Morlet basis is very useful
when the spectral content of the signal is the main information to be ex-
tracted, because it provides a good compromise between spatial and spectral
resolution. As the reader can easily check, the spectral resolution at each
voice is proportional to the peak frequency of the voice
so that the
relative spectral uncertainty

ωo
a
(cid:16)
is constant along the a axes.

(cid:17)

The real part of CWT map shows an important feature of CWT with the
(Ws) is almost constant, apart from the thin band centered

Morlet base:
at the local signal frequency. Futhermore, the sequence

R

∆f
f

Rs(b)

(Ws)(b, aR(b))

≡ R

(5)

5

where, for each b∗, aR(b∗) is the voice corresponding to a local maximum
of the the line-out of the absolute value CWT map taken at b = b∗, well
reproduces the input signal itself. The sequence (ore more generally the
sequences when more complex signals are analyzed) (5) is called the Ridge of
CWT map and represents the subset of CWT map where most of the ”energy”
is contained. Presently, the Ridge detection of the CWT map plays a rising
role in signal processing [13][14], especially in the search of non-stationary
signals with a very low signal-to-noise ratio (see [15] and references therein).
This is because the Ridge sub-map well captures the ”true” input signal
even in the presence of a quite strong noise. Futhermore, Ridge extraction
in CWT maps of analytic signals represents a natural way to detect the local
frequency evolution and, eventually, to easily recover phase information.

3 The new CWT-based method.

3.1 The FFT-based method for phase-shift estimation

The extraction of phase-shift map, that is the computation for each pixel
of an interferogram image of the phase-shift with respect to a unperturbed
wave proﬁle, is usually performed with the help of Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT-based method). Consider for example the interferogram of Fig. 1 of
a laser-exploded foil target plasma [6]. Let its gray-level map be I(z, x) and
I(z = Z, x) (that is a horizontal line-out
for each Z build the sequence sZ ≡
of the ﬁgure). The background fringe pattern would give sequences sZ very
similar to pure oscillating terms plus noise and (possibly) a slowly varying
background.
If the departure of such a behaviour is identiﬁed as a local
frequency modulation of the oscillating term, then the phase-shift δφ(z, x)
can be easily computed as the diﬀerence between the perturbed phase at each
x position and the corresponding phase of the background sequence. Figure 2
shows a sequence sZ for Z = 400 (the middle of the frame). The behaviour of
sZ can be identiﬁed as a frequency-modulated oscillation with local frequency
Ω(x) increasing with x, plus noise and slowly rising background. In addition,
the amplitude of oscillations sharply reduces for x
700 (this phenomenon
is known as ”reduction of fringe visibility”, see [6]).

≈

The FFT-based phase-shift extraction uses FFT for both ﬁltering the
sequence from noise and background (with cuts in the spatial frequency do-
main) and extracting the phase by using straightforward FFT coeﬃcients

6

manipulations [6].

3.2 The IACRE phase-shift estimation: an introduction

To introduce the IACRE method (”Interferogram Analysis by Continuous
Wavelet Transform Ridge Extraction”), let us observe that the sequence sZ
(and generally each sequence I(z = Z, x)) has the structure of a frequency-
modulated sinusoid plus some corrections (noise, slowly varying background).
It is therefore natural to try to extract the sZ phase-shifts by using CWT
techniques, with Ridge detection playing a relevant role.

Consider the CWT map of the sequence sZ @Z = 400 (see Fig. 3). We
can then try to apply the Ridge-extraction technique to the CWT map of sZ
to both denoise the sequence and extract the phase for each pixel position
x. The Ridge sequence will be constituted by only the frequency-modulated
components of sZ, so that noise and background will be automatically dis-
carded. This is the case for sZ @Z = 400, as it is clear in Fig. 4. The phase
sequence φZ(x) for the analyzed array sZ is then simply computed as the
phase of the complex sequence of CWT at the Ridge:

φsZ (x)

phase ((WsZ )(x, aR(x))) ,

≡

and the phase-shift ∆φsZ (x) is obtained as

∆φsZ (x)

φsZ (x)

φ0(x) ,

≡

−

(6)

(7)

where φ0(x) = kp x and kp is the wavenumber of the not-perturbed fringes.

3.3 The IACRE method step-by-step

Let us now examine the recipe for the IACRE algorithm. Let I(z, x) be
the gray-level image matrix of dimension M
N. The ﬁrst steps are the
estimation of the unperturbed fringe wavelength kp and (eventually) image
[1 M] we consider the
ﬁltering to slightly reduce noise. Next, for each Z
sequence

×

∈

and:

sZ(x)

I(z = Z, x) , x

[1 N]

≡

∈

•

Compute the (complex) CWT map WZ(a, b) with the Morlet
base in the Log sampling. To do this one must choose the number of

7

voices per octave Nv. A large Nv (Nv > 12) should be preferred if fast
changes in the local frequency Ω(x) are expected. In addition, if we ex-
pect that in some regions the local frequency ΩZ(x) could have abrupt
changes (local irregularities, structures, edges ...), a higher spatial res-
olution is preferred (ω0 = 2π, τ < 1), while for regular behaviour (like
the one of interferogram Int 1) a medium space-frequency resolutions
should be used (τ = 1).

Detect the (complex) Ridge sequence RZ(x)

WsZ (x, aR(x)) .

≡

Compute the phase of RZ:

•

•

•

Estimate the phase-shift at z = Z as

φZ(x) = phase(RZ (x)) .

δφ(Z, x)

φZ(x)

kp .x

≡

−

N. Phase
The result is a phase-shift matrix δφ(z, x) of dimension M
unwrapping algorithms are then applied to the phase-shift map to eliminate
unphysical phase jumps (this is the case for FFT-based results too).

×

3.4 Comparison between the IACRE and FFT-based

performances

We now apply the CWT-based and FFT-based methods to both real and
simulated interferogram images. To start, we apply the IACRE method to
the whole interferogram of Fig. 1, which is corrupted from noise and shows
strong reduction of fringe visibility and the presence of small scale periodical
structures not related to the plasma properties.

The IACRE output result is obtained with the image partially ﬁltered
from noise with a Median-Filter of mask size 3
3 pixels followed by a
5 and using Nv = 12 voices per octave (low Nv). The
Wiener-Filter 5
phase shift map is shown in Fig. 5, which should be compared with the
FFT-method phase-shift of Fig. 6 obtained with the same ﬁltered image.
As it is clear from ﬁgures Figg. 5 and 6, while the CWT output seems to
be accurate, FFT output is noisy and not free from unphysical phase jumps
near the target, where a strong reduction of fringe visibility is present.

×

×

8

The higher accuracy of the IACRE method with respect to the FFT-based
one is a very important characteristics of our new procedure. It enables an
accurate search of small non-uniformity of the phase-shift map which are
important to detect the growth of plasma instabilities as ﬁlamentation and
self-focusing.

To better check this point, we numerically build-up one interferogram in
which we simulate the phase shift produced by a slowly-varying background
plus some small scale ﬁlaments. Noise and reduction of fringe visibility are
ﬁnally added to the interferometric image to better match the real interfer-
ograms characteristics.

The interferogram of Fig. 7 simulates a plasma with a background of
maximum electronic density (ne/nc)M ax = 0.1 with a Gaussian proﬁle in the
radial direction (with radius 75µm) which is exponentially decreasing in the
x direction. Three ﬁlaments are then added in diﬀerent positions, each one
with Gaussian density proﬁle:

δn(x, y, z)
nc

= α exp(

(z2 + y2)/r2)

−

with maximum density perturbation and radius (α = 0.005, r = 10µm), (α =
0.005, r = 8µm) and (α = 0.005, r = 6µm), respectively. Since the electronic
density is everywhere much lower than the critical density, the linearity of the
phase map with respect to the density is respected. We can then compute
φ/(2π)) with
the perturbation of the phase-shift map in 2π units (φ2π ≡
respect to the background as

δ(∆φ2π) =

1
2λp Z

−

δn
nc

dy ,

whose maximum value is

δ(∆φ2π)M ax =

√πα

1
2

r
λp

,

(8)

that is δ(∆φ2π)M ax = 0.18, δ(∆φ2π)M ax = 0.14 and δ(∆φ2π)M ax = 0.11,
respectively. To detect these structures, the noise level of the phase-shift
map should be a fraction of δ(∆φ2π)M ax. If σ(x) is the standard deviation
of the noise of each sequence of ∆φ2π(z, x) at x ﬁxed, we could detect these
structures if their amplitudes are for instance at ”two sigma” with respect to
the noise, that is σ(x) < 0.09, σ(x) < 0.07 and σx < 0.05, respectively. The

9

standard deviation σ(x) (or one fraction of σ(x)) could be then be considered
as a rough estimation of the ”detectable threshold” in the phase-shift map”.
To estimate the accuracy of the phase-shift maps obtained with the
IACRE and FFT-based methods, we compute the phase-shift maps with
the two methods (see Figg. 8 and 9) and we compare them with the known
”true” phase map. We start the analysis by comparing some line-out of the
two phase maps with the known simulate map. In Fig. 10 it is clear that
the accuracy in the two phase methods is comparable in regions of the in-
terferogram with low phase-shift, while for large phase-shifts the FFT-based
output clearly fail in producing an accurate phase map.

Denoting with ∆φCW T

and ∆φF F T
2π
the two methods and with ∆φT hrue
2π
the error map as the diﬀerences:

2π

the phase-shifts maps obtained with
the simulated phase map, we estimate

ECW T (z, x)
EF F T (z, x)

≡
≡

∆φCW T
2π
∆φF F T
2π

(z, x)
(z, x)

∆φT hrue
2π
∆φT hrue
2π

(z, x) ,
(z, x) ,

−
−

so that the sequences of the standard deviations of the noise in the phase
map can be estimated as

σF F T (x) = std(
σCW T (x) = std(

EF F T (z, x)) ,
ECW T (z, x)) ,

(9)

where std(f (z)) is the standard deviation of a sequence f (z).

In Fig. 11 is shown the behaviour of the error in both the IACRE and
FFT-based maps ((a)) while in b) the ratio R(x) between σF F T (x) and
σCW T (x) sequences is reported. The analysis of these ﬁgures conﬁrms the
claim that in small phase-shifts regions the IACRE method exhibits a slightly
higher precision than the FFT-based one (the σF F T /σCW T sequence is about
2), while in large phase-shift regions the sensibility of the IACRE method is
much higher than the one of the FFT-based one. For example, assuming the
sequence σ(x) as an estimation of the phase-shift sensibility, since for gaus-
sian density proﬁles δ(∆φ2π)M ax is proportional to the structure radius r and
the maximum density perturbation α (see 8), the sequence R = σF F T /σCW T
could be interpreted as a rough estimation of the ratio between the mini-
mum product α r detectable with the FFT-based and IACRE techniques:

R

≡

σF F T
σCW T ∼

(α r))M in
F F T
(α r))M in
CW T

.

10

Futhermore, since for the IACRE method the σCW T sequence is every-
where below the value 0.03 (see the ”detection thresholds” reported above),
we are conﬁdent that all the three ﬁlaments could be detected. This is not the
[220, 250]
case for the FFT-based method output because in the region X
the σF F T sequence is in the range 0.05
0.15, which is over the minimum of
the detection thresholds.

−

∈

We conclude the analysis of the interferogram of Fig. 7 by checking the
behaviour of the phase maps when an algorithm for the automatic extraction
of small scale perturbations is applied to the phase-shift maps. The algorithm
utilized is very simple and consists of two main steps:

•

•

The decomposition of the map ∆φ2π in a ’Large scale’ component (the
background) ¯∆φ2π and a ’Small scale’ component δ(∆φ2π) (the struc-
tures + noise) by using a Smoothing B-spline ﬁtting for each line-out
of the phase map at x ﬁxed.

The ﬁltering of the small scale component δ(∆φ2π) with a ”two sigma”
cutoﬀ. As explained before, provided that structures in the δ(∆φ2π)
give a negligible contribution in the Root-Mean-Square of the map, the
standard deviations σF F T (x) and σF F T (x) can be computed as

σF F T (x) = std(δ(∆φF F T
σCW T (x) = std(δ(∆φCW T

2π

2π

)(z, x)) ,
)(z, x)) ,

(10)

In Fig. 12 the ﬁltered at ”two sigma” ’Small scale’ phase maps obtained
with the two methods are reported. As expected, the ﬁltered map of the
IACRE method clearly shows the presence of the three ﬁlaments, while in the
FFT-based map some regions of the map with strong presence of noise could
be interpreted as false small scale structures so no clear ﬁlaments detection
is possible.

4 Conclusions

With the help of one real and one simulated interferograms we showed that
the IACRE method is more accurate and robust than the FFT-based one. For
the simulated interferogram the smallest detectable phase-shift perturbation
(with respect to the background) obtained with the IACRE method is in
the mean 0.5 times the one obtained with the FFT-based one, with possible

11

further decrease in higher density regions. In addition the outputs of IACRE
are free from unphysical phase jumps both in the real and the simulated
interferograms, while FFT-based map is in both cases aﬀected by a large
region near the target where phase jumps cannot be removed by conventional
unwrapping procedures. The higher robustness and sensibility of the IACRE
method can be addressed both to the wide adaptability of the CWT tool
to the actual image and the intrinsic strong noise suppression in the Ridge
Extraction procedure.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to acknowledge support from the italian M.U.R.S.T. (Project:
”Metodologie e diagnostiche per materiali e ambiente”). One of us (PT)
would also thank Guido Buresti (University of Pisa) and Elena Cuoco (I.N.F.N,
section of Firenze/Urbino) for useful discussions on Continuous Wavelet
Transform.

References

[1] R.Benattar, C.Popovics, R.Siegel, Polarized light interferometer for

laser fusion studies, Rev.Sci.Instrum. 50, 1583 (1979)

[2] O.Willi, Diagnostics and experimental methods of laser produced plas-
mas, in Laser-Plasma Interaction 4, Proceedings of XXXV Scottish Uni-
versities Summer School in Physics, St.Andrews, SUSSP Publications,
University of Edinburg, 1988

[3] P. Tomassini and A. Giulietti, A generalization of Abel Inversion to non
axisymmetric density distribution, accepted for pub. on Opt. Comm.

[4] M.Takeda, H.Ina, S.Kobayashi, Fourier-transform method of fringe-
pattern analysis for computer-based topography and interferometry,
J.Opt.Soc.Am. 72, 156 (1982).

[5] K.A.Nugent, Interferogram analysis using an accurate fully automatic

algorithm, Applied Optics 18, 3101 (1985)

12

[6] L.A.Gizzi,D.Giulietti, A.Giulietti,

T.Afshar-Rad, V.Biancalana,
P.Chessa, E.Schifano, S.M.Viana, O.Willi, Characterisation of Laser
Plasmas for Interaction Studies, Phys.Rev. E, 49, 5628 (1994)

[7] L.A.Gizzi,D.Giulietti, A.Giulietti,

T.Afshar-Rad, V.Biancalana,
P.Chessa, E.Schifano, S.M.Viana, O.Willi, Characterisation of Laser
Plasmas for Interaction Studies. Erratum, Phys.Rev. E, 50, 4266 (1994)

[8] M.Borghesi, A.Giulietti, D.Giulietti, L.A.Gizzi, A.Macchi, O.Willi,
Characterization of laser plasmas for interaction studies: progress in
time-resolved density mapping, Phys.Rev. E, 54, 6768 (1996)

[9] D. Gabor; Theory of Communication, J. Inst. Electr. Eng., London, 93

(III), pp 429-457

[10] J. Morlet, G. Arens, I. Fourgeau and D. Giard; Wave propagation and

sampling theory, Geophysics, 47, pp. 203-236

[11] M. Holschneider; Wavelet: An analysis tool, Clarendon Press -Oxford

(1995)

[12] I. Daubechies; Ten lectures on Wavelets, Soc. for Ind. and Applied Math-

ematics, Philadelphia (1992)

[13] R. Carmona, W.L. Hwang and B. Torresani; Characterization of Signals
by the Ridges of their Wavelet Transform. paper; IEEE Trans. Signal
Processing 45, vol. 10, p. 2586.

[14] B. Torresani;Time Frequency and Time Scale Analysis, abstract in Sig-

nal Processing for Multimedia, J. Byrnes Ed. (1999) p. 37-52.

[15] J.M. Innocent and B. Torresani; A Multiresolution Strategy for Detection
Gravitational Waves Generated by Binary Coalescence, Submitted to
Phys. Rev. D

13

Figures Caption

Fig. 1 A sample interferogram of a plasma produced by laser explosion of a
0.5µm thick, 400µm diameter Aluminium dot coated onto a 0.1µm plastic
stripe support. The interferogram was taken, perpendicularly to the strip
surface, 3.0ns after the peak of the plasma forming pulses using a modiﬁed
1013W/cm2. The
Nomarski interferometer. The intensity on target was 8.5
probe pulse-length was 100ps and the probe wavelength was 0.53µm. For
details on the experimental set-up see [6].

×

Fig. 2 Line-out of the fringe intensity (sequence sZ) of the interferogram

of Fig. 1 at Z = 400.

Fig. 3 The real part and absolute value of the CWT maps of the signal

sZ @ Z = 400 (interferogram of Fig. 1).

Fig. 4 The sequence of real part of the Ridge sequence of signal sZ@Z =

400 (interferogram of Fig.1).

Fig. 5 The phase-shift map (in 2π units) obtained from the interferogram

of Fig. 1 after suitable ﬁltering. IACRE method.

Fig. 6 The phase-shift map (in 2π units) obtained from the interferogram

of Fig. 1 after suitable ﬁltering. FFT-based method.

Fig. 7 A simulated interferogram of a plasma containing three small

ﬁlaments.

Fig. 8 Phase-shift map of the simulated interferogram of Fig. 7. IACRE

14

method.

based method .

Fig. 9 Phase-shift map of the simulated interferogram of Fig. 7. FFT-

Fig. 10 Line-out of the phase-shift maps of the simulated interferogram
of Fig. 7. The IACRE and FFT-based methods outputs are compared
with the ’true’ simulated map.

Fig. 11 (a) Standard deviations of the error in the phase-shift map of
interferogram of Fig. 7 computed via IACRE and FFT-based methods. (b)
Ratio between the standard deviations of the error in the phase-shift map of
interferogram of Fig. 7 computed via FFT-based and IACRE methods. For
density perturbations δn with gaussian density proﬁle in the z direction of
amplitude α and radius r, the sequence σF F T /σCW T can also be interpreted
as the ratio between the minimum product α r detectable with the FFT-
based and IACRE methods: σF F T /σCW T ∼

F F T /(α r)M in

(α r)M in

CW T .

Fig. 12 Filtered map at ”two sigma” of the ’Small scale’ component of
the phase-shift map of interferogram of Fig. 7. (a) FFT-based method: two
ﬁlaments could be detected but other unreal structures survive to the ”two
sigma” ﬁlter. (b) IACRE method: three ﬁlaments are clearly detected.

15

.

16

Figure 1:

17

200

150

)
x
(

s

Z

100

50

200

300

400

600

700

800

500
X

Figure 2:

18

Figure 3:

19

s
t
i

n
u

 
y
r
a
r
t
i

b
r
a

 
,

l

e
u
a
V

1.5

0.5

1

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

0

 @ z = 400       
Signal s
Z

Sequence of Re(CWT) @ Ridge

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

x

Figure 4:

20

Figure 5:

21

Figure 6:

22

Figure 7:

23

Figure 8:

24

Figure 9:

25

.

26

Figure 10:

27

28
Figure 11:

Figure 12:

29

