Apparent suppression of turbulent magnetic dynamo action by a
dc magnetic ﬁeld

David C. Montgomery
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755-3528, USA.

W. H. Matthaeus, L. J. Milano and P. Dmitruk
Bartol Research Institute, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716, USA.

Abstract

Numerical studies of the eﬀect of a dc magnetic ﬁeld on dynamo action
(development of magnetic ﬁelds with large spatial scales), due to helically-
driven magnetohydrodynamic turbulence, are reported. The apparent eﬀect
of the dc magnetic ﬁeld is to suppress the dynamo action, above a relatively
low threshold. However, the possibility that the suppression results from an
improper combination of rectangular triply spatially-periodic boundary con-
ditions and a uniform dc magnetic ﬁeld is addressed: heretofore a common
and convenient computational convention in turbulence investigations. Phys-
ical reasons for the observed suppression are suggested. Other geometries and
boundary conditions are oﬀered for which the dynamo action is expected not
to be suppressed by the presence of a dc magnetic ﬁeld component.

2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. INTRODUCTION

The spontaneous development of large-scale magnetic ﬁelds in astrophysical or geophys-
ical settings has been a problem of interest at least since the time of Gauss, and remains
imperfectly understood. One promising candidate for a likely basic and universal “dynamo”
process has been the turbulent inverse cascade of magnetic helicity [1–3], a topic which has
received considerable attention among turbulence theorists. In broad terms, a mechanical
source of helical turbulent excitations (often combining thermal convection and rotational
properties of the system) is conjectured to excite magnetic turbulence at small spatial scales
by a variety of mechanisms such as ﬂux tube stretching. The magnetic turbulence then
inversely cascades toward ever-larger scales because of certain statistical properties of the
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) equations, properties that are mathematically understand-
able but are not altogether intuitive. Virtually no experimental veriﬁcation of the mech-
anism has been available, and most of the evidence for the process that has accumulated
has come largely from computationally-intensive numerical solutions of the MHD equations,
most notably those of Meneguzzi et al. [4]. The eﬀect is inherently three-dimensional (3D),
because of the involvement of magnetic helicity, although an analogous process driven by
inverse transfer of mean square magnetic potential (mean square ﬂux function) is observed
in two-dimensional (2D) computations and simulations.

The situation considered is related to, but not quantitatively well represented by, the so-
called “alpha eﬀect”, which necessarily assumes large gaps in the magnetic energy spectrum
across which the magnetic excitations are supposed to jump as a consequence of microscopic
nonlinear processes [5–7]. Such numerical evidence as has been presented has always shown
that any such initial spectral gap quickly ﬁlls in and disappears, and the energy transfer
into any band in wavenumber space thereafter tends to be from adjacent wavenumber bands,
not from remote ones. Nevertheless, the alpha eﬀect should be considered to stand as the
precursor or ﬁrst hint of dynamo action through the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity.

The investigations reported here were intended to explore the eﬀect of an imposed dc
magnetic ﬁeld on the dynamo action associated with the inverse magnetic helicity cas-
cade. Sometimes in astrophysical cases, and particularly in laboratory situations such as
the reversed-ﬁeld pinch, MHD turbulence takes place in the presence of strong dc magnetic
ﬁelds whose source currents are external to the magnetoﬂuid. Numerical veriﬁcation of in-
verse helicity cascades and their attendant dynamo action of the kind reported by Meneguzzi
et al. [4] have generally been achieved by computations in three-dimensional rectangular pe-
riodic boundary conditions involving no such imposed dc magnetic ﬁelds. It is of interest
to see how the inverse helicity cascade and the supposed dynamo process might be aﬀected
by the presence of externally-imposed dc magnetic ﬁelds, particularly since it is known that
dc magnetic ﬁelds strongly aﬀect MHD turbulence in other contexts, rendering it highly
anisotropic [8–11]. Some recent computations [12] examine eﬀects of an external ﬁeld on the
alpha parameter, but not its eﬀects on inverse cascade. The subject appears to be far from
complete, and considerable controversy persists regarding the nature of the dynamo satu-
ration process [12–14]. For this reason, we have undertaken the apparently straightforward
task of repeating the computations of Meneguzzi et al. [4] but in the presence of an imposed
spatially uniform dc magnetic ﬁeld, to see what changes that ﬁeld would produce.

In Sec. II, we report the results of this computation. At ﬁrst sight, they are surprising in

2

that the presence of the dc magnetic ﬁeld eﬀectively suppresses the dynamo action at fairly
low levels, in this conventional framework that has become standard for MHD turbulence
theory and computation.

In Sec.

III we discuss the reasons why we believe the conclusions are dependent on
certain artiﬁcialities and inconsistencies imbedded in the standard formulation’s geometry
in this case. Finally, in Sec. IV, we oﬀer suggestions for future possibilities for turbulence
computations in alternative geometrical settings where we believe a more accurate set of
conclusions concerning the eﬀects of dc magnetic ﬁelds in the dynamo problem may be
drawn.

II. APPARENT DYNAMO SUPPRESSION

We employ a fully dealiased spectral code [15] for solving the equations of incompressible
MHD with uniform mass density. These are basically an equation of motion, Faraday’s law,
and an Ohm’s law, with velocity ﬁelds and magnetic ﬁelds which are both solenoidal. Written
out in detail, we have,

∂tv + v · ∇v = −∇p + j × B + ν∇2v + f

∂tB = −∇ × E

E + v × B = ηj

(1)

(2)

(3)

The symbols are as follows. B is the magnetic ﬁeld (in Alfv´enic velocity units), v is the
velocity ﬁeld, and p is the pressure. E is the electric ﬁeld and j is the electric current density,
given by the curl of B. The dimensionless viscosity and resistivity are ν and η, respectively
and are in eﬀect the reciprocals of Reynolds-like numbers, mechanical and magnetic. For
the present computations, ν and η are being chosen equal (unit magnetic Prandtl number).
Both B and v have zero divergences. B could be written as the curl of a vector potential
A, if desired. We will not greatly emphasize the role of A, because of ambiguities in its
role in possible deﬁnitions of magnetic helicity in the presence of a dc magnetic ﬁeld [16,18].
These ambiguities are not central to the points we intend to make, which pertain primarily
to the appearance or non-appearance of long-wavelength magnetic ﬁeld spectral components
– directly computable without reference to A. The inhomogeneous mechanical forcing term
f, on the right hand side of Eq. (1), is a given, solenoidal, random, vector function designed
to inject mechanical helicity and is intended to mimic whatever mechanically turbulent
processes one may invoke as the source of the velocity-ﬁeld excitations.

We attempt to work in regimes in which the mean kinetic energy per unit volume and
rms velocity ﬁeld are of order unity, so that our Reynolds-like numbers are based on length
scales that are roughly one sixth of the basic box size. All ﬁelds are expanded in three-
dimensional Fourier series in a cubical box of edge length 2π , so that rectangular periodic
boundary conditions are being assumed in all three directions. The magnetic ﬁeld will be
written as B = B0 + b, where B0 is a uniform constant and the spatial average of the
variable magnetic ﬁeld, b, is zero.

3

It has often been thought desirable to study MHD turbulent processes at as high
Reynolds-like numbers as possible (i.e., ν and η as small as possible), but in three dimen-
sions, long-time computations of this type require high spatial resolution and make expensive
demands on computer time. We have concluded that the points we wish to make here can
be made convincingly at lower Reynolds-like numbers, and the runs to be reported have all
been carried out with ν and η = 0.01, while spatial resolution of only 32-cubed has been
employed. It would be desirable to repeat these runs with lower ν and η and with greater
spatial resolution, but we would not expect the conclusions we will draw here to be changed
by doing so.

We will illustrate the results of many similar runs by showing omni-directional magnetic
energy spectra for two identically-driven runs with B0 = 0 (Fig. 1) and B0 = 1.0 (Fig.
2), respectively.
In contrast to previous studies that have focused almost exclusively on
the alpha parameter [12], our emphasis will be on examination of the behavior of spectral
quantities in response to dynamo action and the dc magnetic ﬁeld strength. In particular
the inverse cascade, if it occurs, involves transfer of magnetic energy to wavelengths longer
than the mechanical forcing scales. The forcing function f can be adjusted to inject me-
chanical excitations whose helicity varies between zero and the maximum possible for the
chosen mean forcing amplitude. [To accomplish this, we select each Fourier mode v(k) with
k in the forcing band, and decompose into positive and negative mechanical helicity contri-
butions (Chandrasekhar-Kendall functions). Each real degree of freedom is given a random
increment scaled to F ∆t(1 + σ)/2 for the positive helicity amplitude, or to F ∆t(1 − σ)/2 for
negative helicity modes. Forcing strength is controlled by F (typically 1), while the helicity
injection is regulated by σ. The timestep is ∆t. For the runs shown in Figs. 1 and 2, σ = 0.8
corresponding to roughly 80% of the injected energy going into positive helicity modes. The
forcing band in these runs includes all wave numbers between 5.0 and 5.3 in magnitude; a
total of 67 independent complex vector amplitudes are driven. At the beginning, the energy
spectra are both empty.

In Figs. 1 and 2 the solid lines are the mechanical energy spectra and the broken lines
are the magnetic energy spectra, both at times t = 1000. The unit of time is one eddy
turnover time, based on unit length scale and unit rms velocity. The forcing amplitude
F = 1 is tuned so that the rms velocity ﬁeld will be of order unity at the end of the run
(saturation). The peaks in the spectra occur at the forcing band, where the mechanical
excitations are being injected. At high wavenumber the magnetic energy exceeds the kinetic
energy by a small amount, as is typical of MHD turbulence. Near the forcing wavenumber,
kinetic energy dominates, reﬂecting the nature of the forcing. At wavenumbers lower than
the forcing band, the spectra diﬀer greatly for the two runs shown.

Fig. 1, having B0 = 0, essentially reproduces the results of Meneguzzi et al. [4].
It
will be seen that the longest wavelength magnetic energy components have grown to more
than an order of magnitude greater, in energy, than the velocity-ﬁeld components that are
driving them. The longest wavelength allowed by the boundary conditions dominates the
spectrum. Everything below the forcing band in k-space represents spectral back-transfer
to longer wavelengths. Fig. 2, with B0 = 1 on the other hand, shows no such accumulation
of energy of either kind at the longest wavelengths, which appear to be dominated by low-
amplitude Alfv´en waves that imply near-equipartition of energy between the magnetic and
kinetic spectra. The dynamo action at long wavelengths has been suppressed. Saturation

4

has been achieved for both cases well before the time depicted.

Figs. 3 and 4 show time histories of kinetic and magnetic energies for the same two runs
in Figs. 1 and 2. For B0 = 0, Fig. 3 shows that magnetic energy overtakes kinetic energy at
about t = 75 and thereafter the system as a whole is magnetically dominated. This is due
to the strongly enhanced magnetic energy at the longest allowed wavelength as seen in Fig.
1. For B0 = 1, Fig. 4 shows that magnetic energy saturates at a lower level, about 25 - 30
% less than the kinetic energy. In this “equipartition” regime, referring to Fig. 2, there is
clearly no buildup of longest wavelength magnetic energy in the largest scale modes. Finally
we note that buildup of the magnetic energy, or the absence thereof, may be associated
with the generation and long wavelength buildup of magnetic helicity, or its absence. This
is evidenced by Fig. 5, showing normalized magnetic helicity and kinetic helicity spectra
at t = 1000 for B0 = 0, and by Fig. 6, showing the same quantities B0 = 1. For B0 = 0
this conclusion is completely consistent with Meneguzzi et al. [4], except that we see it as
a saturated eﬀect and at much later times. Other runs (details not shown) have been done
with non-helical (σ = 0) mechanical forcing, and dynamo action such as that seen in Figs.
1 and 5 is not observed. We have deﬁned magnetic helicity here as the volume integral of
a · b, where the b does not contain B0, and is given by b = ∇ × a. The mechanical helicity
is deﬁned as the volume integral of the dot product of velocity and vorticity, in the usual
way.

In still other runs, we have explored the eﬀect of lowering B0 in the presence of a ﬁxed
helical random forcing to see when and if the dynamo action would reappear. We did ﬁnd a
threshold value, somewhere between B0 = 0.1 and 0.03 in the dimensionless units, in which
long-wavelength magnetic helicity-driven dynamo action reappeared. Below this value, the
system evolved substantially as in Figs. 1 and 3, with a slight temporal oﬀset. We do
not hazard a guess as to what physical parameters the threshold may be dependent upon,
because there are too many: ν, η, B0, the intensity of forcing, the location of the forcing
band in k-space, and so on.

III. A RECONSIDERATION OF BOUNDARY CONDITIONS

There had previously been some unexplained but not widely noticed features of turbulent
MHD behavior in 3D rectangular periodic boundary conditions that suggested less than a
complete understanding of the role the geometry was playing. In an alpha eﬀect calculation
generalized to the case of a uniform dc magnetic ﬁeld, Montgomery and Chen [17] had found
an ampliﬁcation matrix whose trace tended to zero when B0 became large, indicating a less
and less eﬃcient alpha ampliﬁcation for larger and larger imposed dc magnetic ﬁeld. A 3D
periodic computation of decaying MHD turbulence in a dc magnetic ﬁeld [18] showed no
tendency for long wavelength helical magnetic ﬁeld components to persist in the fashion they
would when B0 was zero. Both behaviors are consistent with, though they do not imply,
the behavior reported in Sec. II for the driven case.

Reluctantly, we have come to conclude that certain features of the combination of a
dc magnetic ﬁeld and rectangular periodic boundary conditions are unsatisfactory, and
that these (computationally very convenient) boundary conditions, rather than the inherent
physics, are controlling the computed behavior (see [19]). In Ref. [19], reasons for distrust-
ing triply-periodic boundary conditions as adequate for this problem were spelled out in

5

considerable detail, and it has seemed unnecessary to reproduce them here. What seems to
occur when the dc magnetic ﬁeld is present and helical driving occurs is that the excitations
built up are essentially Alfv´en waves of a preferred helicity. A net emf builds up due to
their attempts at dynamo action, corresponding to a non-zero spatially-averaged electric
ﬁeld parallel to B0. In nature, this would seek to drive a net current along B0, creating
more magnetic ﬂux in the perpendicular directions, but the rectangular periodic boundary
conditions combined with Ampere’s law permit no net current to ﬂow through the system.
“Open circuit” boundary conditions have been eﬀectively imposed. In a physical plasma,
what would result from this would be a migration of electrons to one face of the box (normal
to B0) and a net positive charge would appear on the opposite face, screening out the mean
interior electric ﬁeld parallel to B0. But that, too, is forbidden by the rectangular periodic
boundary conditions.

Clearly there are limitations on the physics that can be represented by periodic boundary
conditions, and care must be employed in using and interpreting them [18,19,12,13]. It is
necessary to recall that in electromagnetic theory, the theorems are for ﬁnite-sized systems
whose ﬁelds fall oﬀ at inﬁnity. “Inﬁnite” systems are a convenient idealization, when con-
sidering, e.g., long current-carrying wires or parallel-plate capacitors, but it is still necessary
to be able at least to imagine the inﬁnite system as a limit of a ﬁnite one which becomes
large. Similarly, the approximation of spatial homogeneity, often associated with the peri-
odic model, is at best a local approximation. Moreover, attempts to extend homogeneity
into the inﬁnite domain limit may be fraught with diﬃculties, especially for MHD. The
need for source currents for B0 somewhere, for each box in a triply-periodic array, clouds
the picture of just what system it is that could be idealized by a periodic box that repeats
itself indeﬁnitely in all directions with a uniform dc magnetic ﬁeld simultaneously present.
Consequently a model consisting exclusively of periodic cells is too idealized to represent
the entirety of a physical system, especially one like a dynamo in which small scales must
communicate dynamically with very large scales There appear to be two possible solutions
to this diﬃculty, which are related. First, the periodic system might be embedded in a
larger system, using some version of multiple scale analysis to connect them [18,20]. In such
an approach, periodic physics is a local eﬀect and large scale dynamical processes such as
dynamo action will be taking place in the “outer” model, itself not periodic. This approach,
unless completed, cannot answer the question of whether dynamo action occurs, since the
currents generated by the local hv × bi lie outside the periodic model. Unless the full model
is solved we do not know if such current could support ampliﬁcation of the large scale ﬁeld
and at what level.

A more complete approach would be to formulate the dynamo problem in its entirely at
the onset, in a framework that is not periodic. In the next Section, we consider whether
it may not be possible, by incorporating more realistic boundary conditions, to do dynamo
computations that do not experience what seems to be an artiﬁcial suppression in the pres-
ence of a mean dc magnetic ﬁeld.

IV. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE POSSIBILITIES

We should stress that our goal here is physical understanding of one likely dynamo
process for attaining long-wavelength magnetic ﬁelds out of turbulent microscopic MHD

6

processes. For that reason, we have not addressed ourselves to the many admirable eﬀorts
at speciﬁc simulations of solar or geophysical magnetic ﬁelds, which necessarily incorporate
many processes and eﬀects omitted here, and whose success or failure is generally judged
by the simulations’ capacity for reproducing a wide range of observational features, such as
sunspot patterns, solar prominences, periodicities, etc. We are focusing instead on only one
MHD turbulent process in isolation, in an eﬀort to understand it more correctly.

If triply periodic rectangular boundary conditions are to be given up, it is natural to
ask what the other possible geometries and boundary conditions there are for asking fun-
damental questions about MHD dynamos. A ﬁrst answer might be, spheres or disks [14]
for astrophysical situations, and toroids or periodic cylinders [21-24] for laboratory ones. In
all three cases, there is at least one coordinate, the radial one, which cannot be periodic.
Turbulent inverse cascades of magnetic excitations in response to small-scale mechanical
stimuli are readily imaginable in all three cases, though some symmetries that are conve-
nient, such as isotropy and homogeneity, will be lost. Some experience has already been
accumulated with weak MHD turbulence (though not for dynamo problems) in a rigid-wall,
straight-cylinder geometry [21–24]. Tractable boundary conditions for ﬁnite magnetoﬂuids
are non-trivial and need to be debated, but incorporating them seems a likely direction in
which to proceed to try and formulate the proper problem. The three cases above, in the
incompressible limit, all have natural expansion bases for Galerkin-method computations
(Chandrasekhar-Kendall eigenfunctions of the curl) that suggest themselves and have been
used to some eﬀect in the past.

We conjecture that in more realistic geometries, ﬁnite in at least two dimensions, it will
turn out that the presence of dc magnetic ﬁelds whose sources do not necessarily lie inside
the magnetoﬂuid do not act as a barrier to dynamo action of the inverse cascade type. That
is, we do not expect long wavelength dynamo action in such geometries to be shut down by
the presence of externally-supported dc magnetic ﬁelds. Only a formidable computational
eﬀort stands between us and a detailed answer. We re-emphasize that what we are oﬀering
is a conjecture, and not a fact; and we stress again the need for driven turbulent MHD
computations inside ﬁnite geometries with imposed dc magnetic to reinforce or refute the
conjecture.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research supported in part by NSF grant ATM-9713595.

7

REFERENCES

[1] U. Frisch, A. Pouquet, J. Leorat and A. Mazure, J. Fluid Mech. 68, 769 (1975).
[2] A. Pouquet, U. Frisch and J. Leorat, J. Fluid Mech. 77, 321 (1976).
[3] A. Pouquet in Proc. Les Houches Summer School on Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics, ed.

by J. P. Jahn and J. Zinn-Justin (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1987) , pp. 139-227.
[4] M. Meneguzzi, U. Frisch and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1060 (1981).
[5] H. K. Moﬀatt, in Magnetic Field Generation in Electrically Conducting Fluids (Cam-

bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).

[6] F. Krause and K. H. R¨adler in Mean-Field Magnetohydrodynamics and Dynamo Theory

(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980).

[7] G. B. Field, E. G. Blackman and H. Chou, Astrophys. J. 513, 638 (1999).
[8] J. V. Shebalin, W. H. Matthaeus and D. Montgomery, J. Plasma Phys. 29, 525 (1983).
[9] S. Oughton, E. Priest and W. H. Matthaeus, J. Fluid Mech. 280, 95 (1994).
[10] D. Montgomery and W. H. Matthaeus, Astrophys. J. 447, 706 (1995).
[11] L. J. Milano, W. H. Matthaeus, P. Dmitruk and D. C. Montgomery, Phys. Plasmas 8,

2673 (2001).

[12] F. Cattaneo and D. W. Hughes, Phys. Rev. E 54, 4532 (1996).
[13] E. G. Blackman and G. B. Field, Astrophys. J. 534, 984 (2000).
[14] A. Brandenburg and K. J. Donner, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 288, L29 (1997).
[15] D. Gottlieb and S. A. Orszag in Numerical Analysis of Spectral Methods: Theory and

Applications (SIAM, Philadelphia, 1977).

[16] M. A. Berger, J. Geophys. Res. 102, 2637 (1997).
[17] D. Montgomery and H. Chen, Plasma Phys. Controlled Fusion 26, 1189 (1984).
[18] T. Stribling, W. H. Matthaeus and S. Ghosh, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 2567 (1994).
[19] D. C. Montgomery and J. W. Bates, Phys. Plasmas 6, 2727 (1999).
[20] W. H. Matthaeus, in Geophysical Mono. 111. Proceedings of Magnetic Helicity in Space
and Laboratory Plasmas, ed. by M. R. Brown, R. C. Canﬁeld and A. A. Pevtsov, (Amer-
ican Geophysical Union, Washington DC, 1999).

[21] X. Shan, D. Montgomery and H. Chen, Phys. Rev. A 44, 6800 (1991).
[22] X. Shan and D. Montgomery, Plasma Phys. Controlled Fusion 35, 619 (1993).
[23] X. Shan and D. Montgomery, Plasma Phys. Controlled Fusion 35, 1019 (1993).
[24] X. Shan and D. Montgomery, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1624 (1994).

8

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Evolved (t = 1000) kinetic energy spectrum (solid line) and magnetic energy spectrum
(dashed line) in the presence of no dc magnetic ﬁeld (B0 = 0) with helical mechanical forcing. This
spectrum is totally dominated by the k = 1 modes.

FIG. 2. Evolved (t = 1000) kinetic energy spectrum (solid line) and magnetic energy spectrum
(dashed line) in the presence of a dc magnetic ﬁeld strength B0 = 1.0 with helical mechanical
forcing.

FIG. 3. Time histories of kinetic (solid line) and magnetic energy (dashed line) for the zero

dc ﬁeld case.

dc ﬁeld case.

FIG. 4. Time histories of kinetic (solid line) and magnetic energy (dashed line) for the strong

FIG. 5. Highly helical magnetic structure at the longest wavelength with B0 = 0. Normalized
kinetic and magnetic helicities for the zero dc magnetic ﬁeld case at t = 1000. In each case the
associated gauge invariant normalized helicity is (E+ − E−)/(E+ + E−) where E+ and E− are
the decomposition of the respective energy into positive and negative helicity contributions in
the relevant wavenumber range. Normalized helicities are nearly equipartitioned in forcing band
and high wavenumber regimes. Note the very strong negative magnetic helicity at the longest
wavelength. Combined with the magnetic energy spectrum in Fig. 1, this indicates a strong
inverse cascade driven by magnetic helicity.

FIG. 6. Normalized kinetic and magnetic helicities for the strong dc magnetic ﬁeld case at
t = 1000. There is little helicity of either type at the longest wavelength. There is no inverse
cascade, and dynamo action is suppressed.

9

y
g
r
e
n
E

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1

10

100

1000

Time

y
g
r
e
n
E

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1

10

100

1000

Time

