2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NORDITA 2002-47 AP

Contributions to the theory of the Karlsruhe dynamo experiment

Karl-Heinz R¨adler
Astrophysical Institute of Potsdam, An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany

Axel Brandenburg
NORDITA, Blegdamsvej 17, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
(Dated: April 18, 2011, Revision: 1.24 )

The principle of the Karlsruhe dynamo experiment is closely related to that of the Roberts dynamo
working with a simple ﬂuid ﬂow which is, with respect to proper Cartesian co–ordinates x, y and z,
periodic in x and y and independent of z. A modiﬁed Roberts dynamo problem is considered with
a ﬂow more similar to that in the experimental device. Solutions are calculated numerically, and on
this basis an estimate of the excitation condition of the experimental dynamo is given. The modiﬁed
Roberts dynamo problem is also considered in the framework of the mean–ﬁeld dynamo theory, in
which the crucial induction eﬀect of the ﬂuid motion is an anisotropic α–eﬀect. Numerical results
are given for the dependence of the mean–ﬁeld coeﬃcients on the ﬂuid ﬂow rates. The excitation
condition of the dynamo is also discussed within this framework. The behavior of the dynamo in
the nonlinear regime, i.e. with backreaction of the magnetic ﬁeld on the ﬂuid ﬂow, depends on the
eﬀect of the Lorentz force on the ﬂow rates. The quantities determining this eﬀect are calculated
numerically. The results for the mean–ﬁeld coeﬃcients and the quantities describing the backreaction
provide corrections to earlier results, which were obtained under simplifying assumptions.

Key words: dynamo, dynamo experiment, mean–ﬁeld dynamo theory, α–eﬀect, Lorentz force

PACS numbers: 52.65.Kj, 52.75Fk, 47.65.+a

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe U. M¨uller and
R. Stieglitz have set up an experimental device for the
demonstration and investigation of a homogeneous dy-
namo as it is expected in the Earth’s interior or in cosmic
bodies [1]. The experiment ran ﬁrst time successfully in
December 1999, and since then several series of measure-
ments have been carried out [2, 3, 4, 5]. It is the second
realization of a homogeneous dynamo in the laboratory.
Its ﬁrst run followed only a few weeks after that of the
Riga dynamo experiment, working with a somewhat dif-
ferent principle, which was pushed forward by A. Gailitis,
O. Lielausis and co–workers [6, 7].

The basic idea of the Karlsruhe experiment was pro-
It is very simi-
posed in 1975 by F. H. Busse [8, 9].
lar to an idea discussed already in 1967 by A. Gailitis
[10]. The essential piece of the experimental device, the
dynamo module, is a cylindrical container as shown in
Fig. 1, with both radius and height somewhat less than
1m, through which liquid sodium is driven by external
pumps. By means of a system of channels with con-
ducting walls, constituting 52 “spin–generators”, helical
motions are organized. The ﬂow pattern resembles one of
those considered in the theoretical work of G. O. Roberts
in 1972 [11]. This kind of Roberts ﬂow, which proved to
be capable of dynamo action, is sketched in Fig. 2. In
a proper Cartesian co-ordinate system (x, y, z) it is pe-
riodic in x and y with the same period length, which
we call here 2a, but independent of z. The x and y–
components of the velocity can be described by a stream
function proportional to sin(πx/a) sin(πy/a), and the z–
component is simply proportional to sin(πx/a) sin(πy/a).

When speaking of a “cell” of the ﬂow we mean a unit like
that given by 0 ≤ x, y ≤ a. Clearly the velocity is contin-
uous everywhere, and at least the x and y–components
do not vanish at the margins of the cells. The real ﬂow
in the spin–generators deviates from the Roberts ﬂow
in the way indicated in Fig. 3. In each cell there are a
central channel and a helical channel around it. In the
simplest approximation the ﬂuid moves rigidly in each
of these channels, and it is at rest outside the channels.
We relate the word “spin-generator ﬂow” in the following
to this simple ﬂow. In contrast to the Roberts ﬂow the
spin–generator ﬂow shows discontinuities and vanishes at
the margins of the cells.

The theory of the dynamo eﬀect in the Karlsruhe de-
vice has been widely elaborated. Both direct numerical
solutions of the induction equation for the magnetic ﬁeld
[12, 13] as well as mean–ﬁeld theory and solutions of the
corresponding equations [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19] have been
employed. We focus our attention here on this mean–ﬁeld
approach. In this context mean ﬁelds are understood as
averages over areas in planes perpendicular to the axis of
the dynamo module covering the cross–sections of several
cells. The crucial induction eﬀect of the ﬂuid motion is
then, with respect to the mean magnetic ﬁeld, described
as an anisotropic α–eﬀect. The α–coeﬃcient and related
quantities have ﬁrst been calculated for the Roberts ﬂow
[14, 15, 17, 18, 20]. In the calculations with the spin–
generator ﬂow carried out so far, apart from the case of
small ﬂow rates, a simplifying, but not strictly justiﬁed
assumption was used. The contribution of a given spin–
generator to the α–eﬀect was considered independent of
the neighboring spin–generators and in that sense deter-
mined under the condition that all its surroundings are

2

FIG. 2: The Roberts ﬂow pattern. The ﬂow directions cor-
respond to the situation in the dynamo module if the co–
ordinate system coincides with that in Fig. 1.

FIG. 1: The dynamo module (after [1]). The signs + and
– indicate that the ﬂuid moves in the positive or negative z–
direction, respectively, in a given spin generator. R = 0.85 m,
H = 0.71 m, a = 0.21 m.

conducting ﬂuid at rest [15, 17, 18, 20]. An analogous
assumption was used in calculations of the eﬀect of the
Lorentz force on the ﬂuid ﬂow rates in the channels of
the spin–generators [17, 19]. It remained to be clariﬁed
which errors result from these assumptions.

The main purpose of this paper is therefore the cal-
culation of the α–coeﬃcient and a related coeﬃcient
as well as the quantities determining the eﬀect of the
Lorentz force on the ﬂuid ﬂow rates for an array of spin–
generators, taking into account the so far ignored mutual
inﬂuences of the spin–generators. In Section II the mod-
iﬁed Roberts dynamo problem with the spin–generator
ﬂow is formulated. In Section III the numerical method
used for solving this problem and the related problems
occurring in the following sections are discussed. Sec-
tion IV presents in particular results concerning the ex-
citation condition for the dynamo with spin–generator
ﬂow. In Section V various aspects of a mean–ﬁeld theory
of the dynamo experiment are explained and results for
the mean electromotive force due to the spin–generator
ﬂow are given. Section VI deals with the eﬀect of the
Lorentz force on the ﬂow rates in the channels of the spin–
generators. Finally in Section VII some consequences of
our ﬁndings for the understanding of the experimental
results are summarized.

II. FORMULATION OF THE DYNAMO
PROBLEM

FIG. 3: The spin–generator ﬂow pattern. As for the ﬂow
directions the remark given with Fig. 2 applies. The ﬂuid
outside the cylindrical regions where ﬂow directions are indi-
cated is at rest. There are no walls between the cells.

Let us ﬁrst formulate the analogue of the Roberts dy-
namo problem for the spin–generator ﬂow. We consider a
magnetic ﬁeld B in an inﬁnitely extended homogeneous
electrically conducting ﬂuid, which is governed by the
induction equation,

η∇2B + ∇ × (u × B) − ∂tB = 0 , ∇ · B = 0 ,

(1)

where η is the magnetic diﬀusivity of the ﬂuid and u
its velocity. The ﬂuid is considered incompressible, so
∇ · u = 0. Referring to the Cartesian co–ordinate system
(x, y, z) mentioned above we focus our attention on the
cell 0 ≤ x, y ≤ a and introduce there cylindrical co–
ordinates (r, ϕ, z) such that the axis r = 0 coincides with
x = y = a/2. We deﬁne then the ﬂuid velocity u in this

cell by

ur = 0
uϕ = 0,
uϕ = −ωr, uz = −(h/2π)ω
uϕ = 0,

uz = −u

uz = 0

everywhere
for 0 < r ≤ r1
for r1 < r ≤ r2
for r > r2,

(2)

where u and ω are constants, and r1 and r2 are the radius
of the central channel and the outer radius of the helical
channel, respectively, and h is the pitch of the helical
channel. The coupling between uϕ and uz in r1 < r ≤ r2
considers the constraint on the ﬂow resulting from the
helicoidal walls of the helical channel. The velocity u
in all space follows from the continuation of velocity in
the considered cell in the way indicated in Fig. 3, i.e.
with changes of the ﬂow directions from each cell to the
adjacent ones so that the total pattern is again periodic
in x and y with the period length 2a and independent of
z.

We characterize the magnitudes of the ﬂuid ﬂow
through the central and helical channels of a spin–
generator by the volumetric ﬂow rates VC and VH given
by

VC = πr2

1u , VH =

(r2

2 − r2

1)hω .

(3)

1
2

We may measure them in units of aη, so we introduce
the dimensionless ﬂow rates ˜VC and ˜VH,
˜VC = VC/aη ,

˜VH = VH/aη .

(4)

We further deﬁne magnetic Reynolds numbers RmC and
RmH for the two channels by RmC = ur1/η and RmH =
ωr2(r2 − r1)/η. Thus we have ˜VC = (πr1/a)RmC and
˜VH = [(r1 + r2)h/2ar2]RmH.

In view of the application of the results for the con-
sidered dynamo problem to the experimental device we
mention here the numerical values for the radius R and
the height H of the dynamo module, the lengths a, h,
r1 and r2 characterizing a spin–generator and the mag-
netic diﬀusivity η of the ﬂuid: R = 0.85 m, H = 0.71 m,
a = 0.21 m, h = 0.19 m, r1/a = 0.25, r2/a = 0.5,
η = 0.1 m2/s. (More precisely, the values of R and H
apply to the “homogeneous part” of the dynamo mod-
ule, i.e. the part without connections between diﬀerent
spin–generators. The value of η is slightly higher than
that for sodium at 120◦C, considering the eﬀective reduc-
tion of the magnetic diﬀusivity by the steel walls of the
channels.) The given data imply aη = 75.6 m3/s. Fur-
thermore we have ˜VC = 0.785RmC and ˜VH = 1.357RmH,
so ˜VC and ˜VH are in fact magnetic Reynolds numbers.

We are interested in dynamo action of the ﬂuid motion,
so we are interested in growing solutions B of (1) with the
velocity u deﬁned by (2) and the explanations given with
them. According to some modiﬁcation of Cowling’s anti–
dynamo theorem [21] growing solutions B independent of
z are impossible. We restrict our attention to solutions
of the form

B = Re

ˆB(x, y, t) exp(ikz)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)

,

(5)

where ˆB is a complex periodic vector ﬁeld which has
again a period length 2a in x and y, and k a non–
In this case we may consider
vanishing real constant.
equations (1) in the period interval −a ≤ x, y ≤ a only
and adopt periodic boundary conditions. (Solutions B
with larger period lengths, as were investigated for the
Roberts ﬂow [22, 23, 24], seem to be well possible but are
not considered here.)

If we put ˆB(x, y, t) = ˆB(x, y) exp(pt) with a parame-
ter p, for which we have to admit complex values, equa-
tion (1) together with the boundary conditions pose an
eigenvalue problem with p being the eigenvalue parame-
ter. Clearly p depends on VC, VH and k. The condition
Re(p) = 0 deﬁnes for each given k a neutral line, i.e. a
line of marginal stability, in the VCVH–diagram, which
separates the region of VC and VH in which growing B
are impossible from that where they are possible.

III. THE NUMERICAL METHOD

In view of the numerical solution of the induction equa-

tion (1) we express B by a vector potential A,

B = ∇ × A .

Inserting this in (1) and choosing ∇ · A properly we may
conclude that

η∇2A + u × B − ∂tA = 0 .

Analogous to (5) we put

A(x, y, z, t) = Re

ˆA(x, y, t) exp(ikz)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)

.

Then we have

ˆB = ∇ × ˆA + ik × ˆA,

3

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

where k = ke with e being the unit vector in z–direction,
and

η(∇2 − k2) ˆA + u × ˆB − ∂t ˆA = 0 .

(10)

With a solution ˆA we can calculate ˆB according to (9)
and ﬁnally B according to (6).

In the sense explained above we consider (10) only
in the period unit −a ≤ x, y ≤ a and adopt peri-
odic boundary conditions. When replacing ˆA(x, y, t) by
ˆA(x, y) exp(pt) we arrive again at an eigenvalue problem
with p as eigenvalue parameter.

Let us, for example, assume that p is real and consider
the steady case, p = 0. We may then consider, e.g.,
VC as eigenvalue parameter while VH and k are given.
Modifying the equation resulting from (8) by an artiﬁcial
quenching of VC and following up the evolution of ˆA, the
wanted steady solutions of the original equation (10) and
thus the relations between VC and VH for given k and
p = 0 can be found.

4

V. THE MEAN–FIELD APPROACH

The Karlsruhe dynamo experiment has been widely
discussed in the framework of the mean–ﬁeld dynamo
theory; see e.g. [25]. Let us ﬁrst discuss a few aspects of
the traditional mean–ﬁeld approach applied to spatially
periodic ﬂows and then a slight modiﬁcation of this ap-
proach, which possesses in one respect a higher degree
of generality. We always assume that the magnetic ﬂux
density B is governed by the induction equation (1) and
the ﬂuid velocity u is speciﬁed to be either a Roberts
ﬂow or the spin–generator ﬂow as deﬁned above.

A. The traditional approach

FIG. 4: Neutral lines describing steady dynamo states in the
VCVH–plane for various values of κ.

For each given ﬁeld F we deﬁne a mean ﬁeld F by tak-
ing an average over an area corresponding to the cross–
section of four cells in the xy–plane,

For the numerical computations a grid–point scheme
was used. They were carried out on a two–dimensional
mesh typically with 60×60 or 120×120 points, and some
of the results were checked with 240 × 240 points. The
x and y-derivatives were calculated using sixth order ex-
plicitly ﬁnite diﬀerences, and the equations were stepped
forward in time using a third order Runge–Kutta scheme.

IV. THE EXCITATION CONDITION OF THE
DYNAMO

Using the described numerical method solutions B of
the dynamo problem posed by (1), (2) and (5) have been
determined. As in the case of the Roberts ﬂow [22, 23] the
most easily excitable solutions are non-oscillatory, what
corresponds to real p, and possess a contribution inde-
pendent of x and y.

Fig. 4 shows the neutral lines in the VCVH–diagram
for several values of the dimensionless quantity κ deﬁned
In view of the Karlsruhe experiment the
by κ = ak.
case deserves special interest in which a “half wave” of
B ﬁts just to the height H of the dynamo module, so κ =
πa/H = 0.929. The neutral line for this case can provide
us a very rough estimate of the excitation condition of the
Karlsruhe dynamo. However, such an estimate considers
neither the ﬁnite radial extend of the dynamo module
nor realistic conditions at its plane boundaries. It turns
out that, e.g., for given VC the values of VH necessary for
self–excitation in the experimental device are by a factor
of about 2 higher than those concluded from the neutral
curve for κ = 0.9; see e.g. Fig. 12 in [2], Fig. 3 in [3], or
Fig. 16 in [18]. The tendency of the variation of VH with
VC is however well predicted. (The inﬂuence of the ﬁnite
radial extend of the dynamo module on the excitation
condition will be discussed in Section V D. It makes the
mentioned factor of about 2 plausible.)

F (x, y, z) =

F (x + ξ, y + η, z) dξ dη .

(11)

1
4a2

a

a

Z
−a

Z
−a

We note that the applicability of the Reynolds averag-
ing rules, which we use in the following, requires that F
varies only weakly over distances a in x or y–direction.
(The following applies also with a deﬁnition of F using
averages over an area corresponding to two cells only [22],
but we do not want to consider this possibility here.)

We split the magnetic ﬂux density B and the ﬂuid
velocity u into mean ﬁelds B and u and remaining ﬁelds
B′ and u′,

B = B + B′ , u = u + u′ .

(12)

Clearly we have u = 0, and therefore u = u′.

Taking the average of equations (1) we see that B has

to obey

η∇2B + ∇ × E − ∂tB = 0 , ∇ · B = 0 ,

(13)

where E, deﬁned by

E = u × B′ ,

(14)

is a mean electromotive force due to the ﬂuid motion.

The determination of E for a given u requires the
knowledge of B′. Combining equations (1) and (13) we
easily arrive at

η∇2B′ + ∇ × (u × B′)′ − ∂tB′ = − ∇ × (u × B) ,

∇ · B′ = 0 ,

(15)

where (u×B′)′ = u×B′−u × B′. We conclude from this
that B′ is, apart from initial and boundary conditions,
determined by u and B and is linear in B. We assume
here that B′ vanishes if B does so (and will comment on
this below). Thus E too can be understood as a quantity

determined by u and B only and being linear and ho-
mogeneous in B. Of course, E at a given point in space
and time depends not simply on u and B in this point
but also on their behavior in some neighborhood of this
point.

We adopt the assumption often used in mean–ﬁeld dy-
namo theory that B varies only weakly in space and time
so that B and its ﬁrst spatial derivatives in this point
are suﬃcient to deﬁne the behavior of B in the relevant
neighborhood. Then E can be represented in the form

Ei = aij Bj + bijk ∂Bj/∂xk ,

(16)

where the tensors aij and bijk are averaged quantities
determined by u. We use here and in the following the
notation x1 = x, x2 = y, x3 = z and adopt the summa-
tion convention. Of course, the neglect of contributions
to E with higher order spatial derivatives or with time
derivatives of B (which is in one respect relaxed in Sec-
tion V B) remains to be checked in all applications.

The speciﬁc properties of the considered ﬂow patterns
allow us to reduce the form of E given by (16) to a more
speciﬁc one. Due to our deﬁnition of averages and the
periodicity of the ﬂow patterns in x and y, and its inde-
pendence of z, the tensors aij and bijk are independent
of x, y and z. Clearly a 90◦ rotation of the ﬂow pattern
about the z–axis as well as a shift by a length a along
the x or y–axes change only the sign of u so that simul-
taneous rotation and shift leave u unchanged. This is
suﬃcient to conclude that aij and bijk are axisymmetric
tensors with respect to the z–axis. So aij and bijk con-
tain no other tensorial construction elements than the
Kronecker tensor δlm, the Levi–Civita tensor ǫlmn and
the unit vector e in z–direction. The independence of
the ﬂow pattern of z requires that aij and bijk are in-
variant under the change of the sign of e. Finally it can
be concluded on the basis of (15) that E has to vanish if
B is a homogeneous ﬁeld in z–direction, which leads to
a33 = 0. With the speciﬁcation of aij and bijk according
to these requirements relation (16) turns into

E = −α⊥

B − (e · B) e
(cid:0)

(cid:1)
−β⊥∇ × B − (βk − β⊥)(e · (∇ × B)) e
−β3e × (∇(e · B) + (e · ∇)B) ,

(17)

where the coeﬃcients α⊥, β⊥, βk and β3 are averaged
quantities determined by u and independent of x, y and
z. The term with α⊥ describes an α–eﬀect, which is
extremely anisotropic. It is able to drive electric currents
in the x and y–directions, but not in the z–direction. The
terms with β⊥ and βk give rise to the introduction of a
mean-ﬁeld diﬀusivity diﬀerent from the original magnetic
diﬀusivity of the ﬂuid and again anisotropic. In contrast
to them the remaining term with β3 is not connected
with ∇ × B but with the symmetric part of the gradient
tensor of B and can therefore not be interpreted in the
sense of a mean-ﬁeld diﬀusivity.

In the case of the Roberts ﬂow the coeﬃcient α⊥ has
been determined for arbitrary ﬂow rates, and coeﬃcients

5

like β⊥, βk and β3 for small ﬂow rates [14, 15, 17, 18, 20].
As for the spin-generator ﬂow only results for α⊥ have
been given so far [14, 15, 17, 18, 20].

For the determination of α⊥ it is suﬃcient to consider
equation (15) for B′ with B speciﬁed to be homogeneous
ﬁeld. In this case, which implies ∇ × (u × B′) = 0, this
equation turns into

η∇2B′ + (B′ · ∇)u − (u · ∇)B′ − ∂tB′ = − (B · ∇)u ,
(18)

∇ · B′ = 0 .

We may again consider B′ like B as independent of z.
Let us put B′ = B′
k and u = u⊥ + uk with
B′
k = (e · B′)e, and u⊥ and
uk deﬁned analogously. Then we ﬁnd

⊥ + B′
⊥ = B′ − (e · B′)e and B′

η∇2B′

⊥ + (B′

η∇2B′

k − (u⊥ · ∇)B′

⊥ − ∂tB′

⊥

⊥ · ∇)u⊥ − (u⊥ · ∇)B′
= −(B · ∇)u⊥,
k − ∂tB′
k
= −((B + B′
⊥) · ∇)uk .

(19)

We further put u⊥ = u⊥ ˜u⊥ and uk = uk ˜uk, where u⊥
and uk are factors independent of x and y characterizing
the magnitudes of u⊥ and uk, and ˜u⊥ and ˜uk ﬁelds which
are normalized in some way. Clearly B′
⊥ is independent
of uk, and B′
k linear in uk. The x and y–components
of u × B′, from which α⊥ can be concluded, are sums of
products of components of uk and B′
⊥ and of u⊥ and
B′
k. Thus α⊥ must depend in a homogeneous and linear
way on uk whereas the dependence on u⊥ is in general
more complex. This can be observed from the results for
the Roberts ﬂow. In view of the spin–generator ﬂow we
split uk into two parts, uk 1 and uk 2, of which the ﬁrst
one is non–zero in the central channel and the second
one in the helical channel only. We further introduce
the corresponding quantities uk 1 and uk 2. We may then
conclude that α⊥ is linear but no longer homogeneous
in uk 1. Since uk 1 is proportional to VC we ﬁnd that α⊥
is linear but not homogeneous in VC whereas it shows a
more complex dependence on VH.

For small ﬂow rates we may neglect the terms with u
on the left–hand side of equation (18). This corresponds
to the second–order correlation approximation often used
in mean–ﬁeld dynamo theory. Then the solutions B′ and
further α⊥ can be calculated analytically. Starting from
the result found in this way for the spin–generator ﬂow
[14, 15, 20] and using the above ﬁndings we conclude that
the general form of α⊥ reads

α⊥ =

VCφC(VH/hη) + 1

VH
a2hη

(cid:2)

2 VHφH(VH/hη)
(cid:3)

(20)

with two functions φC and φH satisfying φC(0) =
φH(0) = 1. Note that the argument VH/hη is equal to
(a/h) ˜VH, which is in turn equal to ω(r2 + r1)(r2 − r1)/2η.
Consequently it is just some kind of magnetic Reynolds
number for the rotational motion of the ﬂuid in a he-
lical channel. The functions φC and φH have been

calculated analytically under a simplifying assumption
[15, 20], which, however, proved not to be strictly cor-
rect. We will give rigorous results for α⊥ and for φC and
φH in a more general context below in Section V C.

As announced we make now a comment on the as-
sumption that B′ vanishes if B does so. Investigations
with the Roberts dynamo problem have revealed that
non–decaying solutions B of the induction equation (1)
whose average over a cell vanishes are well possible [22].
They coincide with non–decaying solutions B′ of the
equation (15) in the case B = 0. These solutions are,
however, always less easily excitable than solutions with
non–vanishing averages over a cell. They are therefore
without interest in the discussion of the excitation condi-
tion for mean magnetic ﬁelds B. In that sense the above
assumption is, although not generally true, at least in
the case of the Roberts ﬂow acceptable for our purposes.
Presumably this applies also for the spin–generator ﬂow.
In view of the next Section we assume for a moment
that B does not depend on x and y but only on z. In that
case we have ∇×B = e×[∇(e·B)+(e·∇)B] = e×dB/dz
and therefore (17) turns into

E = −α⊥

B − (e · B) e
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

− βe × dB/dz ,
β = β⊥ + β3 .

(21)

Interestingly enough, here the diﬀerence in the characters
of the β⊥ and β3–terms in (17) is no longer visible. While
there are reasons to assume that the coeﬃcients β⊥ and
βk, which can be interpreted in the sense of a mean–ﬁeld
diﬀusivity, are never negative, this is no longer true for β3
and therefore also not for β. The results for the Roberts
ﬂow show indeed explicitly that β can take also negative
values [14, 17, 18].

B. A modiﬁed approach

We now modify the mean–ﬁeld approach discussed so
far in view of the case in which B does not depend on x
and y but may have an arbitrary dependence on z. All
quantities like B, B, B′ or E, which depend on z, are
represented as Fourier integrals according to

The corresponding representation of B clearly includes
ˆB depends on x, y, k and t, but ˆB
the ansatz (5).
and ˆE depend only on k and t. The requirement that
F (x, y, z, t) is real leads to F ∗(x, y, k, t) = F (x, y, −k, t).
Relations of this kind apply to B, B, B′ and E.

Equations (11) to (15) remain valid whereas (16), (17)
and (21) have to be modiﬁed. Clearly (13) and (14) are
equivalent to

ηk2 ˆB − ik × ˆE + ∂t

ˆB = 0 ,

e · ˆB = 0 ,

(23)

6

(24)

and

ˆE = u × ˆB

′

.

Instead of (15) we have

η(∇2 − k2) ˆB′ + (∇ + ik) × (u × ˆB
= −(∇ + ik) × (u × ˆB) ,

(∇ + ik) · ˆB

)′ − ∂t ˆB
′

= 0 ,

′

′

(25)

where (u × ˆB

)′ = u × ˆB

− u × ˆB

′

′

′

.

Assuming again that E is linear and homogeneous in
B we conclude that the same applies to ˆE and ˆB, too.
Therefore we now have

ˆEi(k, t) = ˆαij(k) ˆBj(k, t) ,

(26)

where ˆαij is a complex tensor determined by the ﬂuid
ﬂow. Analogous to ˆE and ˆB it has to satisfy ˆα∗
ij(k) =
ˆαij(−k). From the symmetry properties of the u–ﬁeld
we conclude again that the connection between E and
B remains its form if both are simultaneously subject
to a 90◦ rotation about the z–axis, i.e. relation (26) re-
mains unchanged under such a rotation of ˆE and ˆB. This
means that the tensor ˆαij is axisymmetric with respect
to the axis deﬁned by k. The general form of ˆαij that is
compatible with ˆα∗

ij (k) = ˆαij(−k) is given by

ˆαij (k) = a1(|k|)δij + a2(|k|)kikj + ia3(|k|)ǫijlkl

(27)

with real a1, a2 and a3. Together with (26) this leads to
ˆEz = (a1 + a2k2) ˆBz. On the other hand ˆEz is equal to
y − uy ˆB′
the average of ux ˆB′
x, and we may conclude from
y are independent of ˆBz. This in turn
x and ˆB′
(25) that ˆB′
implies a1 + a2k2 = 0. We note the ﬁnal result for ˆαij (k)
in the form

ˆaij (k) = − ˆα⊥(k)(δij − eiej) + i ˆβ(k)ǫijlkl

(28)

with two real quantities ˆα⊥ and ˆβ, which are even func-
tions of k.

From (26) and (28) we obtain

ˆB − (e · ˆB)e
ˆE(k) = − ˆα⊥(k)
(cid:0)

Together with (22) this leads to

(cid:1)

− i ˆβ(k)k × ˆB .

(29)

−

Z

− e ×

ˆα⊥(k)
(cid:2)

∂
∂z Z

ˆB(k, t) − (e · ˆB(k, t))e

exp(ikz)dk

(cid:3)
ˆβ(k) ˆB(k, t) exp(ikz)dk .

(30)

This in turn is equivalent to

−

E(z, t) =
1
2π Z
1
2π

−

e ×

α⊥(ζ)
(cid:2)

∂
∂z Z

ˆB(z + ζ, t) − (e · ˆB(z + ζ, t))e

dζ

β(ζ) ˆB(z + ζ, t) exp(ikz)dζ

(cid:3)
(31)

F (x, y, z, t) =

ˆF (x, y, k, t) exp(ikz)dk .

(22)

E(z, t) =

Z

with

α⊥(ζ) =

ˆα⊥(k) exp(ikζ)dk ,

β(ζ) =

ˆβ(k) exp(ikζ)dk .

(32)

Z

Z

Note that both α⊥ and β are even in ζ.

Let us now expand ˆαij (k) as given by (28) in a Taylor

series and truncate it after the second term,

ˆαij (k) = − ˆα⊥(0)(δij − eiej) + ik ˆβ(0)ǫijlel .

(33)

The corresponding expansion of E as given by (30) reads

E = − ˆα⊥(0)
B − (e · B)e
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

− ˆβ(0) e × dB/dz .

(34)

Comparing this with relation (21) of the preceding sec-
tion we ﬁnd

α⊥ = ˆα⊥(0) ,

β = ˆβ(0) .

(35)

Returning again to arbitrary k we deﬁne for later pur-

poses a function ˆα(k) by

ˆα(k) = ˆα⊥(k) + k ˆβ(k) .

(36)

If ˆα(k) is given, we may determine ˆα⊥(k) and ˆβ(k) ac-
cording to

ˆα⊥(k) =

β(k) =

1
2
(cid:2)
1
2k

,

ˆα(k) + ˆα(−k)
(cid:3)
ˆα(k) − ˆα(−k)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)

.

α⊥ = ˆα(0) ,

β =

d ˆα(k)
dk

(0) .

(37)

(38)

Moreover, we have

C. The parameters deﬁning α–eﬀect etc.

In view of the determination of the quantities ˆα⊥(k)
and ˆβ(k), which includes that of α⊥ and β, we note that
relations like (21) or (29) connecting E with B or ˆE with
ˆB apply, apart from the explicitly mentioned restrictions,
for arbitrary B. Thus we may take these quantities from
calculations carried out for speciﬁc B.

′

Using the method described in Section III we have nu-
merically determined steady solutions of equation (15)
with given VC, VH, k and a speciﬁc ˆB of Beltrami
for ˆB
type satisfying e × d ˆB/dz = k ˆB. With these solutions
we have then calculated the quantity ˆE · ˆB
, which, ac-
cording to (29), has to satisfy

∗

∗

ˆE · ˆB

= − ˆα
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2

ˆB

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

7

with ˆα deﬁned by (36). From the values of ˆα and their
dependence on k obtained in this way ˆα⊥(k), ˆβ(k), α⊥
and β have been determined.

In mean–ﬁeld models of the Karlsruhe device in the
sense of the traditional approach explained in Section
V A the coeﬃcient α⊥ occurs in the dimensionless com-
bination C = α⊥R/η, with R being the radius of the
dynamo module, and the inﬂuence of β can be discussed
in terms of ˜β = β/η. We generalize the deﬁnitions of C
and ˜β by putting

C = ˆα⊥R/η ,

˜β = ˆβ/η .

(40)

Now C and ˜β show a dependence on k, which we express
by one on κ = ak.

Thinking ﬁrst of the traditional approach we consider
C with κ = 0. Figure 5 shows contours of C in the VCVH–
diagram, Fig. 6 the functions φC and φH, from which α⊥
and thus C can be calculated. These results deviate for
large VH signiﬁcantly from those determined with the
simplifying assumption mentioned above, according to
which the mutual inﬂuence of the spin–generators was
ignored [15, 20].
In the region of VC and VH which is
of interest for the experiment, say 0 < ˜VC, ˜VH < 2, the
values of C, φC and φH for given VC and VH are somewhat
larger than those obtained with that assumption. One
reason for that might be that in the case of an array
of spin–generators, compared to a single one in a ﬂuid at
rest, the rotational motion in a helical channel expels less
magnetic ﬂux into regions without ﬂuid motion, where it
can not contribute to the α-eﬀect. Remarkably, in the
region 0 < ˜VC, ˜VH < 2 our result for C agrees very well
with one derived under the assumption of a Roberts ﬂow
[17, 18].

Figure 7 exhibits contours of ˜β for κ = 0 in the VCVH–
diagram. We already pointed out that ˜β can take neg-
ative values. Here we see that ˜β becomes negative for
suﬃciently large values of VC and VH. Although this
happens somewhat beyond the region of interest for the
experiment it suggests that inside this region the posi-
tive values of ˜β may be small. The diﬀusion term in the
mean–ﬁeld induction equation is proportional to η(1+ ˜β).
In the investigated region of VC and VH this quantity
proved always to be positive.

Let us now proceed to C and ˜β for κ 6= 0. As already
mentioned, in view of the experimental device it seems
reasonable to put κ = πa/H = 0.929. Analogous to
Fig. 5, which applies to κ = 0, Fig. 8 shows contours of
C for κ = 0.9. We see that C for given VC and VH is
slightly higher in the latter case. The results for ˜β are
virtually indistinguishable for both cases.

D. The excitation condition in mean–ﬁeld models

We consider ﬁrst again the traditional approach to
mean–ﬁeld theory explained in Section V A. Equation
(13) for B together with relation (17) for E allows the

(39)

8

FIG. 5: Contours of C for κ = 0.

FIG. 8: Contours of C for κ = 0.9.

solutions

cos(kz), ∓ sin(kz), 0

B = B0
p = −(η + β)k2 ± α⊥k ,

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

exp(pt) ,

(41)

where B0 is an arbitrary constant. We refer here again
to Cartesian co–ordinates and consider k as a positive
parameter. For these solutions we have ∇ × B = ±kB,
i.e. they are of Beltrami type. This implies that there are
no mean electric currents in the z–direction. The solu-
tion that corresponds to the upper signs can grow if α⊥
is suﬃciently large. The condition of marginal stability
reads α⊥ = (η + β)k or, what is the same,

C = (1 + ˜β)kR ,

(42)

where C and ˜β have to be interpreted as the values for
κ = 0. If we relate this to the dynamo module and put
k = π/H we have

C = (1 + ˜β)πR/H .

(43)

Note that the factor R in the conditions (42) and (43)
results from the deﬁnition of C only.
In fact they are
independent of R.

Proceeding to the modiﬁed approach to the mean–ﬁeld
theory and replacing relation (17) for E by (30) we ﬁnd
formally the same result. However, α⊥ and β have to be
replaced by ˆα⊥ and ˆβ, and C and ˜β in (42) and (43) have
to be taken for κ = ak. The condition (42) interpreted
in this sense deﬁnes neutral lines in the VCVH–diagram
which have to agree exactly with those shown in Fig. 4.
Likewise, the condition (43) deﬁnes the special neutral
line with κ = πa/H.

One of the shortcomings of estimates of the self–
excitation condition of the experimental device based on
the solutions of the induction equation used in Section
IV or, equivalently, on a relation like (43), consists in

FIG. 6: The functions φC and φH.

FIG. 7: Contours of ˜β for κ = 0 (calculated as the limit
κ → 0).

ignoring the ﬁnite radial extent of the dynamo module.
We point out another solution of equation (13) for B,
which has been used for an estimate of the self-excitation
condition of the experimental device considering its ﬁ-
nite radial extent [15, 18, 26]. For the sake of simplic-
ity we assume that E is given by equation (17) with
β⊥ = βk = β3 = 0. We refer to a new cylindrical co–
ordinate system (r, ϕ, z) adjusted to the dynamo module
so that r = 0 coincides with its axis and z = 0 with its
midplane. The solution we have in mind reads

∂Ψ
∂z

η(q2 + k2) + p
α⊥

,

B = B0 (cid:18)
Ψ = J0(qr) cos(kz) ,
p = −η(q2 + k2) ± α⊥k ,

Ψ , −

(rΨ )

exp(pt) ,

1
r

∂
∂r

(cid:19)

(44)

where q and k are constants and J0 is the zero–order
Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind. This solution is axi-
symmetric with respect to the z–axis. It has further the
property that the normal components of ∇ × B vanish
both on the cylindrical surfaces qr = zν, where zν denotes
the zeros of J0, and on the planes kz = (l + 1/2)π with
integer l. We identify the region inside the smallest of
these cylindrical surfaces between two neighboring planes
of that kind with the dynamo module, so we put q =
z1/R, where z1 is the smallest positive zero of J0, and k =
π/H. Then there are no electric currents penetrating the
surface of the dynamo module. The condition of marginal
stability for the so speciﬁed solution reads

1 + (z1H/πR)2
C = π(R/H)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

.

(45)

In the limit H/R → 0 this agrees with (43) if we put
˜β = 0. For ﬁnite H/R, however, C is now always larger
than the value given by (43) with ˜β = 0. This can easily
be understood considering that there is now an additional
dissipation of the magnetic ﬁeld due to its radial gradient.
C as function of H/R has a minimum at H/R = π/z1.
The dynamo module was designed so that H/R has just
this value. In this case we have

C = 2πR/H .

(46)

In other words, the real radial extent of the dynamo
module enlarges the requirements for C, compared to
the case of inﬁnite extent, by a factor 2. As can be
seen from Fig. 5, in the region of VC and VH in which
experimental investigations have been carried out, say
1.3 < ˜VC, ˜VH < 1.6, this enlargement of C means that if,
e.g., VC is given, VH grows by a factor between 2.5 and
3.5. We recall here the deviation of the experimental re-
sults from the estimate of the self–excitation condition
given in Section IV on the basis of Fig. 4, which just cor-
responds to (43). In the light of these explanations con-
cerning the inﬂuence of the radial extent of the dynamo
It is actually
module this deviation is quite plausible.
rather small, which indicates that our reasoning despite
a number of neglected eﬀects does not underestimate the
requirements for self–excitation.

9

We note that also the result (46) is not a completely
satisfying estimate of the self–excitation condition of the
experimental device. Apart from the fact that it does not
consider realistic boundary conditions for the dynamo
module it is based on an axisymmetric solution of the
equation for B. Several investigations have however re-
vealed that a non–axisymmetric solution is slightly easier
to excite than axisymmetric ones [14, 16, 17, 18]. The
inﬂuence of the β⊥ and β3–terms of E can no longer be
expressed by ˜β, and there is also an inﬂuence of the βk–
term. All these inﬂuences increase the marginal values of
C [14].

VI. THE EFFECT OF THE LORENTZ FORCE
ON THE FLOW RATES

In the theory of the experiment, equations determining
the ﬂuid ﬂow rates in the loops containing the central
channels and in those containing helical channels have
been derived from the balance of the kinetic energy in
these loops. The rate of change of the kinetic energy in
a loop is given by the work done by the pumps against
the hydraulic resistance and the Lorentz force. For the
work done by the Lorentz force averaged over a central
or a helical channel we write hu · f iV, where h· · ·i means
the average over this channel, V its volume and f the
Lorentz force per unit volume,

f = µ−1(∇ × B) × B ,

(47)

where µ is the magnetic permeability of free space.

We use again B = B + B′. For all results reported
here we have assumed that B is a homogeneous ﬁeld
and, correspondingly, B′ is also independent of z so that
equations (18) apply. Then also f is independent of z
and h· · ·i may simply be interpreted as an average over
the section of the channel with the xy–plane.

We have calculated the quantities hu · f iC and hu · f iH
for a central and a helical channel analytically in two
diﬀerent approximations [17, 19]. In approximation (i)
all contributions to f of higher than ﬁrst order in VC or
VH were neglected so that it applies to small VC and VH
only.
In approximation (ii) arbitrary VC and VH were
admitted, but as in an earlier calculation of the α–eﬀect
only a single spin–generator surrounded by conducting
medium at rest was considered, i.e. any inﬂuence of the
neighboring spin-generators was ignored. We represent
the results of both approximations in the form

hu · f iC = −

B2

⊥ψC(VC, VH) ,

hu · f iH = −

B2

⊥ψH(VC, VH) .

(48)

Here σ is the electric conductivity of the ﬂuid, γC and
γH are given by

γC = 1 ,

γH =

(r1 + r2)2 + (h/π)2
2) + (h/π)2 ,
2(r2

1 + r2

(49)

2

2

σ
2γC (cid:18)

VC
sC (cid:19)

σ
2γH (cid:18)

VH
sH (cid:19)

sC and sH are the cross–sections of the central and helical
channels, and B⊥ is the magnetic ﬂux density perpendic-
ular to the axis of the spin–generator, i.e. to the z–axis.
In approximation (i) we have ψC = ψH = 1.
In ap-
proximation (ii) ψC and ψH are functions of VC and VH
satisfying ψC(VC, 0) = 1 for VC 6= 0 and ψH(VC, 0) = 1
for all VC, varying only slightly with VC and decaying
with growing VH; see also Fig. 9. The factors ψC and
ψH in the relations (48) for hu · f iC and hu · f iH de-
scribe the reduction of the Lorentz force by the magnetic
ﬂux expulsion out of the moving ﬂuid by its azimuthal
motion.

We may conclude from the relevant equations that
hu · f iC and hu · f iH can again be represented in the
form (48) if the complete array of spin–generators and
arbitrary VC and VH are taken into account. Only the
dependences of ψC and ψH on VC and VH changes.

⊥, B′

⊥ and B′

⊥ and B′

⊥ is independent of VC and B′

Before giving detailed results we make a general state-
ment on these dependences. As in the considerations in
the paragraph containing (18) we may again introduce
the quantities B′
k, u⊥, uk and use (19). With the
same reasoning as applied there we ﬁnd that for the spin–
generator ﬂow B′
k linear
in VC. We further express f ⊥ and f k, deﬁned analogous
to B′
k, according to (47) by the components of
B′
k, their derivatives and the components of B.
In this way we ﬁnd that hu · f iC is a sum of two terms,
one proportional to VC and the other proportional to V 2
C .
Consequently, ψC has the form ψ(0)
(VH)V −1
with ψ(0)
C (0) = 1. We further ﬁnd that hu · f iH is a
sum of three terms, one independent of VC and the oth-
ers proportional to VC and V 2
C , and ψH has the form
ψ(0)
C with ψ(0)
H (VH) + ψ(1)
H (0) = 1.
This can be seen explicitly in the calculations in the sec-
ond approximation mentioned above, in which, by the
way, ψ(2)

H (VH)VC + ψ(2)

C (VH) + ψ(−1)

H (VH)V 2

C

C

H = 0.

We have calculated ψC and ψH numerically on the basis
of equations (15) using the method described in Section
III. The result is shown in Fig. 9. Instead of the complete
array of spin–generators we have also considered an array
in which ﬂuid motion occurs only in one out of 4 × 4
spin–generators. The numerical result obtained for this
case also agrees very well with the analytical result of
approximation (ii) shown in Fig. 9.

For a complete array of spin–generators the factors ψC
and ψH in the relations (48) are generally larger com-
pared to approximation (ii). In other words, the Lorentz
force is less strongly reduced by the azimuthal motion of
the ﬂuid. This can be understood by considering that
less magnetic ﬂux can be pushed into regions without
ﬂuid motion.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

We have ﬁrst dealt with a modiﬁed Roberts dynamo
problem with a ﬂow pattern resembling that in the Karls-

10

FIG. 9: The dependence of ψH and ψC on ˜VH for ˜VC = 1 and
˜VC = 2 for an array of spin–generators. For comparison the
results of approximation (ii), which considers a single spin–
generator only, are also given.

ruhe dynamo module. Based on numerical solutions of
this problem a self–excitation condition was found. Since
in these calculations neither the ﬁnite radial extent of
the dynamo module nor realistic boundary conditions at
its plane boundaries were taken into account this self–
excitation condition deviates markedly from that for the
experimental device.

A mean–ﬁeld approach to the modiﬁed Roberts dy-
namo problem is presented. Two slightly diﬀerent treat-
ments are considered, assuming as usual only weak vari-
ations of the mean magnetic ﬁeld in space, or admitting
arbitrary variations in the z–direction. The coeﬃcient
α⊥ describing the α–eﬀect and a coeﬃcient β connected
with derivatives of the mean magnetic ﬁeld are calcu-
lated for arbitrary ﬂuid ﬂow rates. The result for α⊥
corrects earlier results obtained in an approximation that
ignores the mutual inﬂuences of the spin–generators [20].
It leads to a much better agreement of the calculated
self–excitation condition with the experimental results
[17, 18]. We note in passing that in the case of small
ﬂow rates our result, although calculated for rigid–body
motions only, applies also for more general ﬂow proﬁles

11

[17, 18]. The result for β suggests that the enlargement of
the eﬀective magnetic diﬀusivity by the ﬂuid motion can
be partially compensated by another eﬀect of this mo-
tion. The same has been observed in investigations with
the Roberts ﬂow [23]. This could be one of the reasons
why the results calculated under idealizing assumptions,
in particular ignoring the eﬀect of the mean–ﬁeld diﬀu-
sivity, deviate only little from the experimental results
[18].

In the framework of the mean–ﬁeld approach we have
also given an estimate of the excitation condition which
considers the ﬁnite radial extent of the dynamo module.
It shows that the real extent enhances the critical value
of C, which is a dimensionless measure of α⊥, by a factor
2. In other words, if in the region of VC and VH, in which
experimental investigations have been carried out, VC is
ﬁxed, VH has to be larger by a factor between 2.5 and 3.5.

If the excitation condition is corrected in this way it does
not underestimate the requirements for self–excitation.

We have also calculated the eﬀect of the Lorentz force
on the ﬂuid ﬂow rates in the channels of a spin–generator.
Again our result corrects a former one obtained in the ap-
proximation already mentioned which ignores the mutual
inﬂuences of the spin–generators [17, 18]. The braking ef-
fect of the Lorentz force proves to be stronger than pre-
dicted by the former calculations. This means in partic-
ular that estimates of the saturation ﬁeld strengths given
so far [17, 19] have to be corrected by factors between 0.8
and 0.9; for more details see Note added in proof in [19].

Acknowledgement The results reported in this pa-
per have been obtained during stays of K.-H.R. at
NORDITA. He is grateful for its hospitality.

[5] R. Stieglitz and U. M¨uller, Magnetohydrodynamics 38,

Magnetohydrodynamics 38, 41 (2002).

[1] R. Stieglitz, and U. M¨uller, Geodynamo - Eine Ver-
suchsanlage zum Nachweis des homogenen Dynamo-
eﬀektes. Wissenschaftliche Berichte Forschungszentrum
Karlsruhe FZKA 5716 (1996).

[2] U. M¨uller and R. Stieglitz, Naturwissenschaften 87, 381

(2000).

[3] R. Stieglitz and U. M¨uller, Phys. Fluids 13, 561 (2001).
[4] U. M¨uller and R. Stieglitz, Nonlinear Processes in Geo-

physics 9, 165 (2002).

27 (2002).

[6] A. Gailitis, O. Lielausis, S. Dement´ev, E. Platacis, A.
Cifersons, G. Gerbeth, T. Gundrum, F. Stefani, M.
Christen, H. H¨anel, G. Will, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4365
(2000).

[7] A. Gailitis, O. Lielausis, E. Platacis, S. Dement´ev, A.
Cifersons, G. Gerbeth, T. Gundrum, F. Stefani, M.
Christen, G. Will, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3024 (2001).
[8] F. H. Busse, Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc. 42, 437 (1975).
[9] F. H. Busse,

in Evolution of Dynamical Structures in
Complex Systems, edited by R. Friedrich and A. Wunder-
lin (Springer-Progress in Physics, Vol.69, 1992) pp.197-
207.

[10] A. Gailitis, Magnetohydrodynamics 3, 23 (1967).
[11] G. O. Roberts, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, A 271,

[12] A. Tilgner, Phys. Lett. A 226, 75 (1996).
[13] A. Tilgner, Acta Astron. et Geophys. Univ. Comenianae

411 (1972).

19, 51 (1997).

[14] K.-H. R¨adler, A. Apel, E. Apstein, and M. Rheinhardt,
Contributions to the theory of the planned Karlsruhe dy-
namo experiment. AIP Report (1996).

[15] K.-H. R¨adler, E. Apstein, M. Rheinhardt, and M.
Sch¨uler, Contributions to the theory of the planned
Karlsruhe dynamo experiment - Supplements and Cor-
rigenda. AIP Report (1997).

[16] K.-H. R¨adler, E. Apstein, M. Rheinhardt, and M.

Sch¨uler, Studia geoph. et geod. 42, 224 (1998).

[17] K.-H. R¨adler, M. Rheinhardt, E. Apstein, and H. Fuchs,

Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics 9, 171 (2002).

[18] K.-H. R¨adler, M. Rheinhardt, E. Apstein, and H. Fuchs,

[19] K.-H. R¨adler, M. Rheinhardt, E. Apstein, and H. Fuchs,

Magnetohydrodynamics 38, 73 (2002).

[20] K.-H. R¨adler, E. Apstein, and M. Sch¨uler, in Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International PAMIR Conference ’Trans-
fer Phenomena in Magnetohydrodynamic and Electrocon-
ducting Flows’, Aussios, France, September 1997, Vol. 1,
pp. 9-14.

[21] D. Lortz, Phys. Fluid 11, 913 (1968).
[22] F. Plunian and K.-H. R¨adler, Geophys. Astrophys Fluid

Dyn. 96, 115 (2002).

[23] F. Plunian, and K.-H. R¨adler, Magnetohydrodynamics

[24] A. Tilgner and F. H. Busse, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 448, 237

38, 95 (2002).

(1995).

[25] F. Krause and K.-H. R¨adler, Mean-Field Magnetohydro-
dynamics and Dynamo Theory. (Pergamon Press, Oxford
1980).

[26] F. H. Busse, U. M¨uller, R. Stieglitz, and A. Tilgner, in
Evolution of Spontaneous Structure in Dissipative Con-
tinuous Systems, edited by F. H. Busse and S. C. M¨uller
(Springer, Berlin 1998), pp.546-558.

