2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print/physics/0208098

Some notes on ideology of waves in plasmas
V. N. Soshnikov 1
Plasma Physics Dept.,
All-Russian Institute of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information
of the Russian Academy of Sciences
(VINITI, Usievitcha 20, 125315 Moscow, Russia)

Abstract

Our last three papers [4, 7, 8] provide an occasion to make some brief notes on
ideology of waves in plasmas and to rehabilitate Vlasov prescription to calculate rele-
vant logarithmically divergent integrals in the principal value sense. In this approach
asymptotical solutions of plasma oscillations obtained with the method of Laplace
transform must be in the form of a sum of wave exponents with frequencies being se-
lected according to self-consistent boundary physical conditions. Landau damping is
absent in this case by deﬁnition. Boundary electrical ﬁeld together with conditions of
absence of unphysical backward waves (for boundary problem in half-inﬁnite plasmas)
and of kinematical waves deﬁne single-valued dependence of boundary distribution
function on electron velocity ~v in the case of transversal waves and on the surface
break of the normal electrical ﬁeld in the case of longitudinal oscillations. We have
proposed physically more justiﬁed modiﬁed iteration procedure of collisional damp-
ing calculation and demonstrated some results of damping decrements calculations
in a low-collision electron-ion plasma. We have pointed out a possibility of natural
selection of boundary conditions, which allows to eliminate simultaneously both back-
ward and kinematical waves as for transversal as well as for longitudinal oscillations.
Dispersion smearing of both longitudinal and transversal high-frequency waves, for
L) (where ∆ω is
which the smearing decrement δx is proportional to ∆ω/(ω
the frequency interval of exciting boundary ﬁeld), might be the main cause of waves
amplitude damping in collisionless plasmas imitating Landau damping.

ω2 − ω2

q

PACS numbers: 52.25 Dg; 52.35 Fp.
Key words: plasma oscillations; plasma waves; Landau damping; Coulomb collisions;
collision damping; dispersion equations; Vlasov equations; plasma dielectric permittivity;
kinematical waves; plasma echo.

1 Introduction

After the basic papers of L. Landau in 1946 [1], which stated that even in collisionless
Maxwellian plasmas electron waves are damping (”Landau damping”), there appeared an
enormous amount of works, including all textbooks, that use it as a conception. In practice
this scientiﬁc trend can be considered as being completed without any hope to carry therein
something essentially new.

Landau had considered the simplest case of plane half-inﬁnite geometry with the before-
hand given form of a solution exp(ikx)f (t), where for determination of the function f (t) he
had used Laplace transformation, and had proposed to calculate an appearing in Laplace

1Krasnodarskaya str., 51-2-168, Moscow 109559, Russia.

1

image fp logarithmically divergent integral not in the sense of the principal value (as it
had been proposed in 1937 by Vlasov [2] for the analogous integral appearing at solving his
“Vlasov equations”) but according to Landau rule of by-passing poles of dvx-integrand in
the complex-valued plane vx (vx is an x-component of the electron velocity, x is a direction
of the wave traveling).

However it is well known (see, for instance review [3] or Eq. (1) in [4]) that asymptotical
Landau solution in the form of a plane damping wave exp(ikx − iωt) with ω = ω0 − iδ does
not satisfy Vlasov equations neither at these nor at any other real (if considered as a limit
at tending imaginary parts of ω, k to zero, see, for instance, [4]), or complex values ω and
k. In spite of some paradoxes and hardly to be explained consequences of Landau theory
(see, for instance, [5]) it was supposed that Landau solution corresponds to reality and
appears to be true, so that Vlasov equations must be corrected by additional terms, which
are determined by Landau rule of by-passing poles (see, for instance, [3, 6]).

Nevertheless one can formulate a problem of ﬁnding asymptotical solutions of Vlasov
equations and also equations of propagating transversal electromagnetic waves (with the
same diﬃculty of logarithmically divergent integrals) without these additions, which appear
to be artiﬁcial.

Such asymptotical solutions have been written in our last papers [4, 7, 8] proceeding

from the following propositions:

1. The logarithmically divergent integrals appearing at Laplace transformation have to

be calculated in Vlasov prescription of the principal value sense.

2. For calculation of principal values of integrals we use a series of successful approxi-

mations of the type

∞

− mv2
2kTe · vxd3~v
e
p1 + vxp2

Z−∞

≡ −2p2

∞

Z0

− mv2
e

2kTe · v2
xd3~v
p2
xp2
1 − v2

2

≃

≃ −

2πkTe

 

m !

3/2

p2
2

¯v2
x
1 − ¯v2
p2

xp2

2

.

(1)

After this the obtained asymptotical solutions take the form of a sum of exponents
of the type exp(±ikx ± iωt + xδ) and exp(±ikx ± iωt − xδ), δ > 0, corresponding to
double poles p1, p2.

3. The given boundary condition E(0, t) (for instance, at purely boundary problem with
zero initial conditions) deﬁnes also, in a single-valued way, the boundary condition
for the perturbed distribution function f1(~v, 0, t) according to linear integral equa-
tions following from the condition of absence of kinematical waves [8]. It guaranties
the physically justiﬁed proportionality of the boundary distribution function to the
boundary electric ﬁeld.

4. Selecting boundary parameter Fp1, being a Laplace transform of ∂E(x, t)/∂x|x=0 one
can exclude (cancel) unphysical (for the case of half-inﬁnite plasmas) background
waves contained in the solution in the form of residua exponential sum. These kine-
matical waves are divergent at x → 0 in the case of a low-collision plasma.

5. In the case of longitudinal waves at the given boundary ﬁeld E(0, t) the boundary self-
consistent function f1(~v, 0, t) is determined analogously from the condition of absence
of kinematical waves. But for elimination of the unphysical backward waves in this

2

case one must inevitably assume a break in the normal constituent of electrical ﬁeld
E(0, t) at plasma surface (see [8] for a way to calculation its value).

6. In general case the solution can not be represented as a single exponent even if the
boundary condition E(0, t) has such a form. The single exponent solution can exist
only in a partial case of boundary conditions, for example, in a case of half-inﬁnite
plasma it is the condition of backward waves absence.

7. Amplitudes of all modes with diﬀerent kn(ω) corresponding to the given exciting ﬁeld
E(0, t) are strongly correlated. Cancellation of kinematical and then backward waves
must be achieved for all modes in the general asymptotical solution.

Only after proceeding these procedures one can calculate strong relations between ampli-
tudes of the diﬀerent forward waves including, in the general case, both electron and also
ion and hybrid ion-electron branchs.

This allows to avoid all paradoxes at calculation of E(x, t) and paradoxical tangling of

the distribution function in vx with generating some strange electrical ﬁeld.

When all these conditions being fulﬁlled one can easily construct, using the method
of two-dimensional Laplace transform usual solutions for the poles of image Ep1p2, corre-
spondingly, the long before known dispersion relations k(ω) [4, 7, 8]. Thus, for the case of
collisionless plasma Landau damping and kinematical waves are really absent by deﬁnition.
The solution appears as a sum of exponents with frequencies selected in accordance with
boundary and physical conditions.

We also have developed the more physically justiﬁed modiﬁcation of iteration process
in the presence of collision terms of kinetic equation (low-collision electron-ion plasmas).
By this method we have obtained damping decrements as for electron longitudinal waves
as well as for two branches (low- and high-frequency ones) of transversal electromagnetic
waves with the unusual2 decrement for the low-frequency branch. The collisional dissipative
L/ω2 and
absorption in the high-frequency branch at ω > ωL is proportional to 1/
grows to inﬁnity at ω → ωL [8].

1 − ω2

q

In this connection we think that Van Kampen waves (see [3]) are called to compensate

the erroneous consequences of Landau theory.

It is highly believed that Landau damping is detected and veriﬁed experimentally. In this
respect we should note the relatively small number of such veriﬁcations and the necessary
extreme delicateness of similar experiments. The theoretically absent Landau damping in
fact might be imitated by a series of secondary eﬀects. These ones can be:

(i) the diﬀerence of the background distribution from Maxwellian one due to electron

collisions with and recombinations on the walls of discharge tube;

(ii) the presence of longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld and cyclotron motion and transversal dif-

fusion to walls;

(iii) eﬀects of the method of plasma oscillations exciting;

(iv) eﬀects of reﬂecting from walls;

(v) eﬀects of the base electric ﬁeld supporting discharge;

(vi) growing to inﬁnity of the Coulomb collision damping at ω → ωL + 0;

2nonlinear in concentrations of charged particles.

3

(vii) non-harmonic composed waveform and signal dispersion and its smearing in ω.

The decrement of the amplitude damping at dispersion smearing of a wave can be

calculated according to expression

δx(ω) =

k(ω)

∆ω
2π

∂2ω/∂k2
(∂ω/∂k)

2 =

ω2
L∆ω
ω2 − ω2
L

,

2πβω

(2)

q
¯v2
x for transversal or longitudinal waves, correspondingly; ∆ω is
where β = c or β =
spectral width of the boundary exciting ﬁeld E(0, t). This smearing might be the main
cause of the wave amplitude damping in collisionless plasma both for longitudinal and
transversal waves that imitates Landau damping.

q

The return to Vlasov prescription of calculating relevant integrals in the principal value
sense and the proper determination and using of mutually dependent boundary (or initial)
conditions in the self-consistent manner allow to solve and remove all paradoxes of “Landau
damping”.

Thus, the right natural and simple but non-traditional ideology of waves in plasmas
reduces to combine the method of Laplace transformation with the proper account for
boundary/initial conditions, and Vlasov prescription of the principal value sense of relevant
integrals.

Acknowledgements The author is thankful to Dr. A. P. Bakulev for his fruitful criti-

cism and assistance in preparing the paper in LATEX style.

References

[1] Landau L. D., J. Phys. (USSR), 10 (1946) 25;
JETP (USSR), 16 (1946) 574 (in Russian);
Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 93 (1967) 527 (reprint, in Russian)

[2] Vlasov A. A., JETP (USSR), 8 (1938) 291 (in Russian);
Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 93 (1967) 444 (reprint, in Russian)

[3] Pavlenko V. N., Sitenko A. G., ”Echo-phenomena in Plasma and Plasma-like Media”,

Nauka, Moscow (1988) (in Russian)

[4] Soshnikov V. N., ”Damping of plasma-electron oscillations and waves in low-collision

electron-ion plasmas”, physics/0105040 (http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print)

[5] Clemmow P. C., Dougherty J. P., “Electrodynamics of Particles and Plasmas”, 2-nd

ed., Addison-Wesley, NY (1990); (Rus. transl. Moscow, Mir, 1996)

[6] Alexandrov A. F., Bogdankevich L. S., Rukhadze A. A., “Foundations of Electrody-

namics of Plasma”, 2nd ed., Vysshaya Shkola, Moscow (1988) (in Russian)

[7] Soshnikov V. N., ”Damping of transversal plasma-electron oscillations and waves in
low-collision electron-ion plasmas”, physics/0111014 (http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print)

[8] Soshnikov V. N., ”Damping of electromagnetic waves in low-collision electron-ion plas-

mas”, physics/0205035 (http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print)

4

