Surface-active dust in a plasma sheath

A.M. Ignatov,1, ∗ P.P.J.M. Schram,2 and S.A. Trigger3

1General Physics Institute, Moscow, Russia
2Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
3Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany

(Dated: December 22, 2013)

Abstract

The inhomogeneity of the plasma pressure near a conducting electrode is a cause for introducing

the surface tension associated with the plasma-electrode interface. We evaluate the dependence of

the surface tension on the density of the charged dust immersed in the plasma sheath. In a wide

range of parameters, the surface tension turns out to be an increasing function of the dust density.

PACS numbers: 52.25.Zb, 52.40.Hf, 52.25.Wz

3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: aign@fpl.gpi.ru

1

Throughout the recent decade, an admixture of charged macro-particles, electrons, ions,

and neutral atoms, called a dusty plasma, has been the subject to some thousands of studies.

Numerous aspects of the physics of dusty plasmas are discussed in the series of reviews

starting with [1] and the monograph [2].

Many laboratory experiments deal with relatively small number of dust grains levitating

above a horizontal rf-powered or dc-biased electrode. Under these conditions, dust grains

are negatively charged and the gravity force is compensated by the strong electric ﬁeld in a

plasma sheath adjacent to an electrode. Dust suspended in a plasma sheath self-organizes

itself in various single or multi-layered structures.

In particular, recent experiments [3]

demonstrated that with growing rf power or gas pressure there evolves a void, that is,

a dust-free region, in the center of a single dust layer. Since negatively charged grains

levitating at the same height repulse one another via the screened Coulomb potential, there

are no evident reasons for the void emergence. The explanation of this phenomenon given

in [3] implies existence of an attractive interaction between grains; however, the nature of

the interaction remains obscure.

To avoid confusion, it should be stressed that three-dimensional voids, which have been

observed earlier [4, 5, 6, 7], evolve in the plasma bulk. The theory of three-dimensional voids

[8, 9] demands large number of grains and strong inﬂuence of the dust upon the discharge

structure. At ﬁrst sight, both assumptions fail under the conditions of the experiment [3],

where some hundreds of grains only have been used.

The main purpose of this Letter is to introduce the concept of plasma surface tension.

We demonstrate that even a small number of dust grains can modify the plasma sheath

proﬁle in such a way that the sheath may conﬁne the dust in the horizontal direction. Our

reasoning is based on the analysis of the plasma pressure in the sheath-presheath area of a

gas discharge. We show that the horizontal electric force appearing due to the inhomogeneity

of a dust layer is conveniently treated in terms of the plasma surface tension. It should be

stressed that explanation of the experiment [3] is beside our purpose: there is evidently a

number of relevant factors that are not discussed here.

The schematic of the model implemented here is depicted in Fig. 1. The plasma consisting

of electrons and singly charged ions is described with the help the continuity equation

dni(z)vi(z)
dz

= νionne(z),

2

(1)

quasineutral plasma ne

≈ni

z

zl

zs

sheath edge

dust layer

f

ion flow v (z)

i

S1

x1

electrode

S0

x0

FIG. 1: Schematic of the model

the momentum balance equation

dmini(z)v2

i (z)

dz

+ eni(z)

= 0,

dφ(z)
dz

and Poisson’s equation

d2φ(z)
dz2 = 4πe(ne(z) − ni(z)) − 4πρd(z).
Here, νion is the electron impact ionization frequency and ρd(z) is the charge density of

(3)

aerosol grains. Other notation is standard. Electrons are supposed to be Boltzmannian:

ne(z) = n0 exp (eφ(z)/Te), where n0 is a normalizing constant. We also assume that the

mean free path of the ion-neutral collisions is large compared to the Debye length, which

determines the spatial scale of the sheath.

Since the electron and ion ﬂuxes at the electrode (z = 0) are equal, one of the boundary

conditions to Eqs. (1-3) is

ni(0)vi(0) + ne(0)

Te
2πme

r

= 0.

Far from the electrode the plasma is quasi-neutral, i.e., ne = ni = n0. Generally, the

equilibrium plasma density, n0, is the eigenvalue of the problem and it is determined by the

balance of ionization and losses of charged particles. For this reason, the bulk plasma density

may depend on the dust charge located in the sheath because the latter modiﬁes the electric

ﬁeld proﬁle, which, in its turn, inﬂuences the net particle ﬂux at the electrode. However, here

we assume the overall size of the plasma to be large enough, so that the equilibrium density,

n0, is conditioned by the recombination in the plasma volume. Therefore, the plasma density

3

(2)

(4)

tends to a certain ﬁxed value at z → ∞. In order to patch the quasi-neutral plasma and

the sheath, the equations (1,2) are solved assuming that ne(z) = ni(z) and ρd(z) = 0 (e.g.,

[10]) that results in

ni(z) =

n0v2
s
s + vi(z)2 ,
v2

where vs =

Te/mi is the ion sound velocity. It is assumed that at the end of the simulation

area, z = z0, the ion ﬂow velocity is ﬁxed, i.e., vi(z0) = v0. The value of v0 should be small

p

enough; all solutions exempliﬁed below are obtained for v0 = −0.01vs. Then, Eqs. (1,5)

are used to evaluate boundary values of the density, ni(z0), the potential, φ(z0), and its
derivative, φ′(z0); this results in four boundary conditions for Eqs. (1-3). The length of the

simulation area, z0, is determined with the help of the ﬁfth boundary condition (4).

In the framework of our model, the dust is represented as an inﬁnitesimally thin charged

massive layer levitating at z = zl, that is, its charge density is

ρd(z) = −qσδ(z − zl),

(6)

where −q (q > 0) is the charge of a single grain and σ is the surface dust density. The

equilibrium levitation height, zl, depends on the vertical force balance. The largest forces

acting upon dust in a plasma sheath are the electric ﬁeld force and the gravity force. Since
the z-component of the electric ﬁeld, E(z) = −φ′(z), is discontinuous at z = zl, the vertical

force balance is written as

1
2

q [E(zl + 0) + E(zl − 0)] = Mg,

where M is the mass of a single grain and g is the gravity acceleration (in Fig. 1, the Earth

is at the bottom). On the other hand, the electric ﬁeld discontinuity is given by

E(zl + 0) − E(zl − 0) = −4πqσ

and the potential, φ(z), is a continuous function at z = zl. The relations (7,8) allows us

to patch the numeric solutions of Eqs. (1-3) below (0 < z < zl) and above (zl < z < z0)

the layer, and to obtain the equilibrium levitation height, zl, and the net thickness of the

sheath-presheath area, z0.

(5)

(7)

(8)

4

It is well-known that the grain charge, q, in Eqs. (7,8) depends on the plasma parameters,

and its variability should be also taken into account [11]. However, here we assume that

the grain charge is ﬁxed; the results of preliminary computer runs with the variable grain

charge did not alter our main conclusions. We also ignore the ion wind force in Eq. (7) as

long as absorption of plasma by dust grains. Simple estimations show that these processes

are of minor importance.

Our main objective is to analyze the plasma pressure proﬁle in the sheath-presheath area.

Evidently, Eqs. (1-3) ensure the conservation of the net linear momentum of the system.

The tensor of the momentum ﬂux, or the pressure tensor is a sum of the ion momentum
ﬂux, the electron pressure and Maxwell’s stress: Pαβ = miniviαviβ + neTeδαβ + E2δαβ/8π −

EαEβ/4π (α, β = x, y, z). In the one-dimensional model described above, the pressure tensor

is diagonal: Pzz = Pl and Pxx = Pyy = Ptr. The longitudinal pressure is

Pl(z) = mini(z)vi(z)2 + ne(z)Te −

E(z)2.

(9)

1
8π

Since within our model there are no momentum losses in the plasma, Pl is constant in

the absence of dust and it is equal to the plasma electron pressure at z → ∞, Pl = n0Te.

The transverse pressure is written as

In contrast with Eq. (9), there is no contribution of the ion momentum ﬂux and the electric

Ptr(z) = ne(z)Te +

1
8π

E(z)2.

(10)

ﬁeld pressure is of the opposite sign.

Although the transverse pressure tends to the electron pressure in the plasma bulk,

Ptr|z→∞ = n0Te, it is essentially nonuniform in the sheath-presheath area adjacent to the

electrode. This circumstance allows us to deﬁne the surface tension at the plasma-electrode

interface as

s(σ) =

dz (n0Te − Ptr(z)) .

(11)

The physical meaning of this quantity is fairly evident. Since the bulk plasma pressure is

positive, two parts of the discharge repulse one another. As we shall demonstrate later,

the transverse pressure (10) is reduced near the wall; therefore, there arises the additional

horizontal force attracting two parts of the plasma-wall interface. The surface tension (11)

∞

Z
0

5

characterizes the magnitude of this force per unit length. It should be noted that usually

surface tension is deﬁned in terms of surface free energy. The latter is obviously meaningless

in application to an open, nonequilibrium system like the plasma-wall boundary. However,

due to the momentum conservation, the surface tension given by (11) is a well-deﬁned

concept. Of particular interest for our purposes is the dependence of the surface tension

(11) on the dust density.

The utility of the notion (11) may be illustrated in the following way. Suppose that the

layer density is a weakly varying function of the transverse coordinate, x, that is, ∂σ/∂x ∼ ǫ,

where ǫ ≪ 1. Integrating Pxx component of the pressure tensor with respect to z at nearby

points x and x + ∆x we see that the horizontal force (i.e., the momentum ﬂux) acting upon

a small part of the layer of the width ∆x is written in two identical forms:

Fx = −qσEx∆x ≡ −∆x

dz Pxx(x, z).

(12)

∂
∂x Z

Comparing both parts of the identity and noting that Ex ∼ ∂/∂x ∼ O(ǫ) we conclude

that in order to obtain the ﬁrst-order term of the expansion of the horizontal force in powers

of ǫ it is suﬃcient to evaluate the surface tension (11) ignoring the spatial inhomogeneity

of the layer density. Therefore, fx = ∂s(σ(x))/∂x. This simple reasoning may be conﬁrmed

by the more tedious asymptotic expansion of the hydrodynamic equations in powers of ǫ.

We can also extract some useful information about the horizontal force even for the

sharply bounded layer. Suppose that the dust layer occupies the area x < 0, as depicted in

Fig. 1. The levitation height, zl, now depends on x, the electric ﬁeld and the ion ﬂow near

the edge of the layer are essentially two-dimensional. However, the horizontal component of

the force is the diﬀerence fx = s0 − s1, where s0,1 are given by the integral (11) evaluated

across the sheath in the dust-free area, at x = x0, and in the presence of dust, x = x1

(Fig. 1). Assuming that both points x0,1 are far enough from the layer edge, the horizontal

components of the ion velocity and the electric ﬁeld are negligible. Therefore, the values of

the surface tension, s0,1, which determine the net force exerted upon the edge, are provided

by the solution of the one-dimensional problem (1-3).

Before discussing the results of the numeric evaluation of the surface tension, it is conve-

nient to introduce the normalized quantities. In the following, the coordinate, z, is measured

in the units of the electron Debye length, λD =

Te/4πe2n0, the pressure is normalized to

n0Te, and the surface tension is normalized to λDn0Te. The dimensionless surface density of

p

6

1

2

1

(a)

1

3

2

(b)

1

2

P

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

E

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

-1.0

5

5

10

10

15

15

z
20

z
20

FIG. 2: The pressure (a) and the electric ﬁeld (b) proﬁles in the sheath-presheath area evaluated

for µ = 0.5, η = 0.1.

(a1) corresponds to the longitudinal pressure (9), (a2) corresponds to

the transverse pressure (10), the dashed curve (a3) corresponds to the transverse pressure in the

absence of dust (η = 0), (b1,b2) correspond to the electric ﬁeld for η 6= 0 and η = 0. The vertical

dashed lines in both ﬁgures show the position of the sheath-presheath interface (zs = 10.31).

Discontinuities at the curves (a1, a2, b1) are at the equilibrium position of the dust layer (zl = 3.94).

the dust layer is η = qσ/(2en0λD) and the normalized grain mass is µ = MgeλD/(qTe). Un-

der the typical experimental conditions, µ ≤ 1, while η ≤ 0.1. All computations discussed

below have been performed with the suﬃciently small value of the ionization frequency,

νion/ωpi = 0.01, where ωpi is the ion plasma frequency.

Examples of the pressure and the electric ﬁeld proﬁles are depicted in Fig. 2. The net

simulation length for this particular run is z0 = 68.5. In order to make the eﬀect discernible

in the ﬁgure, we use here a suﬃciently large value of the normalized dust density, η = 0.1.

The longitudinal pressure drop (the curve 1 in Fig. 2a) at the charged layer is compensated

by its weight; outside of the layer, the longitudinal pressure is constant. Contrary, the

transverse pressure (10) is strongly inhomogeneous inside the sheath (the curves 2 and 3 in

Fig. 2a). Of importance is that the dust reduces the transverse pressure between the layer

and the electrode. As it is readily seen from Fig. 2b, the eﬀect is mostly due to the reduction

7

FIG. 3: Dependence of the normalized surface tension on the dust density, η. 1 — µ = 0.8, 2 —

µ = 0.5, 3 — µ = 0.1, 4 — µ = 0.02.

4

3

2

1

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

η

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

µ
0.5

s

17.0
16.5
16.0
15.5

15.0
14.5

s’

15

10

5

-5

-10

-15

FIG. 4: The derivative of the surface tension with respect to the dust density versus the grain

mass.

of the electric ﬁeld.

The vertical dashed lines in Fig. 2 show the position of the sheath-presheath interface,

zs, for η 6= 0, which is conditionally deﬁned as the point where the ion ﬂow velocity is equal

to the ion sound velocity. The dependence of the coordinate zs on the dust parameters is

rather weak. For this particular example, the dust layer levitates in the supersonic ion ﬂow,

zl < zs; with reducing grain weight, µ, it moves up to the subsonic area, zl > zs.

Fig. 3 shows the dependence of the surface tension on the dust layer density, η, for various

values of the grain mass, µ. The curves 1-3 in Fig. 3 correspond to the dust layer levitating

in the supersonic ﬂow, zl < zs, the curve 4 corresponds to lighter dust grains situated in

the presheath area, zl > zs. The depicted curves show that if the dust layer is located in

the sheath, the surface tension increases with η, while with the dust layer shifted to the

presheath, the surface tension may become a decreasing function of η. This is also shown in
Fig. 4, where the dependence of the derivative s′(η)|η=0 on the grain mass, µ, is plotted.

As we have already mentioned, the dependence of the surface tension on the dust density

8

determines the force acting upon the edge of the semi-inﬁnite layer. If s(η) > s(0) then the

force fx = s(0) − s(η) is negative, as shown in Fig. 1, that is, the surface tension at the

plasma-wall interface tends to expel the dust. Otherwise, the dust is drawn in the sheath.

As it is seen from Figs. 3,4, in dependence on the grain mass and the dust density both

alternatives are possible.

Here, we treat dust layer as a rigid incompressible medium. However, the short-range

interaction between the dust grains result in the surface pressure, ps(σ), which also depends

on the density [12]. The surface tension (11) reduces the surface pressure, that is, the net

equation of state of the dust layer is given by p = ps(σ) − s(σ). Since ps(σ) exponentially

tends to zero with decreasing σ, the compressibility, dp/dσ, of a rareﬁed dust layer is layer
is negative if s′(0) > 0. Such a medium is unstable. The detailed investigation of this

instability and arising structures will be discussed elsewhere.

To summarize, charged dust may be treated as a surface-active substance that is capable

of altering the surface tension at the plasma-electrode interface. Unlike usual surfactants,

the dust increases the surface tension in a wide range of parameters. Although we did not

discuss here the emergence of the two-dimensional void [3], it should be pointed out that a

similar eﬀect is well-known in liquids. To observe a void, it is enough to drop some liquid

soap at the surface of water with ﬂoating ﬁne powder.

This study was supported in part by the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research

(grant no. NWO 047.008.013) and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project no.

02-02-16439).

[1] V.N. Tsytovich, G.E. Morﬁll, and H. Thomas, Plasma Phys. Rep. 28, 675 (2002).

[2] P.K. Shukla and A.A. Mamun, Introduction to Dusty Plasma Physics (IOP Publishing, Bristol

and Philadelphia, 2002).

[3] R. P. Dahiya et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 125001 (2002).

[4] D. Samsonov and J. Goree, Phys. Rev. E 59, 1047 (1999).

[5] H. Rothermel et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 175001 (2002).

[6] G. E. Morﬁll et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1598 (1999).

[7] B.M. Annaratone et al., Phys. Rev. E, 66, 056411 (2002).

9

[8] J. Goree, G. E. Morﬁll, V. N. Tsytovich, and S. V. Vladimirov, Phys. Rev. E 59, 7055 (1999).

[9] G. Morﬁll and V.N. Tsytovich, Phys. Plasmas 9, 4 (2002).

[10] K-U. Riemann, J. Phys. D 24, 493 (1991).

[11] S.V. Vladimirov and N.F. Cramer, Phys. Rev. E 62, 2754 (2000).

[12] G.A. Hebner, M.E. Riley, and K.E. Greenberg, Phys. Rev. E 66, 046407 (2002).

10

