3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
1
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental Identiﬁcation of the Kink Instability as a Poloidal Flux Ampliﬁcation
Mechanism for Coaxial Gun Spheromak Formation

S. C. Hsu∗ and P. M. Bellan
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
(Dated: April 28, 2003; accepted by Phys. Rev. Lett.)

The magnetohydrodynamic kink instability is observed and identiﬁed experimentally as a poloidal
ﬂux ampliﬁcation mechanism for coaxial gun spheromak formation. Plasmas in this experiment fall
into three distinct regimes which depend on the peak gun current to magnetic ﬂux ratio, with
(I) low values resulting in a straight plasma column with helical magnetic ﬁeld, (II) intermediate
values leading to kinking of the column axis, and (III) high values leading immediately to a detached
plasma. Onset of column kinking agrees quantitatively with the Kruskal-Shafranov limit, and the
kink acts as a dynamo which converts toroidal to poloidal ﬂux. Regime II clearly leads to both
poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation and the development of a spheromak conﬁguration.

PACS numbers: 52.55.Ip,52.35.Py,52.30.Cv

The spheromak [1, 2] is a simply-connected plasma
conﬁguration in which the magnetic ﬁelds are largely de-
termined by dynamo-driven plasma currents. Because
of its topological simplicity and ease of formation, the
spheromak is of interest as a magnetic fusion conﬁne-
ment scheme [3]. Spheromak formation has traditionally
been explained by Taylor’s hypothesis [4] that a turbulent
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) system relaxes to a state
of minimum magnetic energy subject to the constraint
of constant magnetic helicity. While this hypothesis has
successfully explained the existence and many equilib-
rium properties of spheromaks, it says nothing about the
actual 3D dynamics underlying the relaxation process,
e.g., for coaxial gun spheromaks, the dynamo mecha-
nism which converts injected toroidal ﬂux into required
poloidal ﬂux [5]. The dynamics must be 3D because
Cowling’s theorem [6] shows that purely axisymmetric
processes cannot accomplish this. This Letter experi-
mentally identiﬁes the MHD kink instability [7] as a 3D
mechanism which converts toroidal to poloidal ﬂux in a
coaxial gun system, thereby leading to spheromak for-
mation. This mechanism should also be of fundamen-
tal importance to coaxial helicity injection in spherical
tori [8], relaxation in reversed-ﬁeld pinches [4], solar coro-
nal plasma instabilities [9], and astrophysical jets [10].

Plasmas in this experiment fall into three regimes de-
pending on peak λgun = µ0Igun/ψgun (where Igun is the
gun current and ψgun is the bias poloidal magnetic ﬂux
intercepting the inner gun electrode), with (I) low values
resulting in a straight plasma column with helical mag-
netic ﬁeld along the symmetry axis, (II) intermediate val-
ues leading to kinking of the column axis, and (III) high
values leading immediately to a detached plasma with
Btor ≫ Bpol. Onset of column kinking agrees quantita-
tively with the Kruskal-Shafranov limit [7], and the kink
acts as a dynamo which converts toroidal to poloidal ﬂux.

∗Now at: P-24 Plasma Physics Group, Los Alamos National Lab-
oratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545

Regime II clearly leads to both poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation
and magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles consistent with spheromak for-
mation. These results are qualitatively consistent with
recent time-dependent resistive MHD numerical simula-
tions of electrostatically driven spheromaks [11].

Early coaxial gun experiments [12] demonstrated
poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation, and it was postulated that
this was due to an observed helical instability. More re-
cently, toroidal mode number n = 1 central column in-
stabilities in coaxial gun experiments were reported by
several spheromak research groups [13, 14, 15, 16, 17].
Typically, the observations were based on edge magnetic
measurements, and the mode was studied in the context
of relaxation during sustainment. Two hypotheses were
proposed to explain the mode: (1) development of a q = 1
surface in the closed-ﬂux region [13, 15] or equivalently
a magnetic axis kink, and (2) current-driven instability
of the central column [16, 17] or equivalently a geometric
axis kink. Additionally, the mode was shown to couple
power from the central column to the spheromak [14].
The present work oﬀers a signiﬁcant new result in that a
nonlinear n = 1 geometric axis kink is directly observed
to produce the dynamo and poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation
leading to spheromak formation.

Building on a prior Caltech spheromak formation ex-
periment [18], the present experiment simpliﬁes, and
makes more accessible, the spheromak formation process
by using a novel coaxial gun [19]. A schematic of the
gun is shown in Fig. 1, along with the cylindrical coor-
dinate system. The gun consists of two concentric, co-
planar copper electrodes: a 20 cm diameter disk (blue)
biased to negative polarity high voltage surrounded by a
50 cm outer diameter annulus (green) connected to vac-
uum chamber ground. The width of the gap between
electrodes is 6 mm. The inner electrode is mounted on
the end of a vacuum re-entrant port; both are electri-
cally insulated from the vacuum chamber by a ceramic
break. The co-planar arrangement of the electrode sur-
faces is geometrically simple, allows the spheromak for-
mation process to be diagnosed with no mechanical ob-
structions, and is feasible to model numerically [20]. Bias

2

FIG. 1: Side schematic of coaxial gun, showing bias ﬁeld coil
and associated ψ-contours, gas feeds, and magnetic probe.

ﬁeld poloidal ﬂux ψ-contours are also shown in Fig. 1;
ψgun can be adjusted from 0–7 mWb. Both Igun and
bias ﬁeld point toward the inner electrode. The rise time
of ψgun is 10 ms, making it essentially stationary on the
much faster time scale of the gun discharge (tens of µs).
The gun is installed at one end of a much larger vacuum
chamber (about 2 m long and 1.5 m diameter), and thus
boundary eﬀects on the spheromak formation process are
minimized. The gun is powered by an ignitron-switched
120 µF, 20 kV capacitor bank. Hydrogen gas is injected
transiently using fast puﬀ valves at eight equally spaced
toroidal positions on each electrode. Due to the Paschen
eﬀect, the optimum path for plasma breakdown is along
the bias ﬁeld and not at the gap between electrodes. The
capacitor bank is discharged at t = 0, at which time the
bias ﬁeld and gas puﬀ have already been introduced, and
breakdown occurs at approximately 4 µs.

The main diagnostics are a multiple-frame fast CCD
camera and a 60-channel magnetic probe array. The
camera takes a sequence of time-resolved images in one
plasma shot. The capability to visually follow the global
evolution of a plasma in one plasma shot is a new and
unique aspect of this work. The inter-frame time is typi-
cally 1 or 1.5 µs, and the exposure time of each frame is
10 or 20 ns. False color is applied to the images for view-
ing. The magnetic probe array, shown in Fig. 1, measures
all three components (R, φ, Z) of B at 20 radial positions
with 2 cm radial spacing. Probe ˙B signals are acquired
using a digital acquisition system and integrated numer-
ically on a computer. For all B measurements in this
paper, the probe is located at Z = 22 cm from the plane
of the gun electrodes. Kink occurrence is independent of
the probe (see Figs. 2 and 3). Propagation of the plasma
in Z past the stationary probe relates temporal informa-
tion to Z-spatial information. This relationship improves
as the propagation past the probe becomes fast compared
to the plasma expansion rate; this was exploited in the
prior Caltech spheromak experiment [18]. The time de-
pendence thus acts as a proxy for the Z-dependence. Igun
is measured with a Rogowski coil surrounding the ce-
ramic break, and gun voltage Vgun is measured using a

FIG. 2:
Image sequence of shot 2472 taken with a DRS
Hadland Imacon 200 CCD camera (each frame originally 1200
by 980 pixels, 10 bits/pixel). The circular gap between outer
and inner electrodes is visible toward right side of each frame.
B-probe is also visible. Kink is fully developed by 13 µs.

FIG. 3:
Images of three plasma regimes which depend on
increasing value of λgun, taken with a Cooke Co. HSFC-PRO
CCD camera (each frame originally 1280 by 1024 pixels, 12
bits/pixel): (I) stable column (shot 1210), (II) kinked column
(shot 1247), and (III) detached plasma (shot 1181). B-probe
was not installed for these shots.

high-voltage probe. Typical parameters are: Vgun = 4–
6 kV (charge voltage) and 2–2.5 kV (after breakdown),
peak Igun = 70–120 kA, ψgun = 0.5–2 mWb, B ≈ 0.1–
1 kG, n ∼ 1014 cm−3, and Te ∼ Ti ≈ 5 − 20 eV.

Figure 2 shows the time evolution of a kinked plasma
(shot 2472). Gun electrodes are on the right side of each
frame, and the Z-axis is oriented horizontally across the
middle of each frame. At 7 µs, bright arches are visi-
ble soon after breakdown, showing that breakdown oc-
curs along the vacuum bias ﬁeld lines. As Igun increases,
the arches expand and quickly merge together (8.5 µs),
forming a plasma column (10 µs) which begins to kink
(11.5 µs) and then becomes strongly kinked (13 µs). It
will be shown that this sequence leads to a spheromak.
Depending on peak λgun, three distinct plasmas result, as
shown in Fig. 3. Regime I leads to a stable column, II to
a kinked column and then a spheromak, and III to an im-
mediately detached plasma. The transition from regime I
to II (II to III) occurs for peak λgun ≈ 40 (60) m−1.

In order to show that the helical perturbation is an
MHD kink mode, consider the time evolution of the q(R)
proﬁle (relative to geometric axis), which is shown in
Fig. 4 (shot 2472). The kink mode becomes linearly un-
stable when q(R) = 2πRBZ/LBφ = 1, where L is the
column length; this is the Kruskal-Shafranov limit. Since
the kink involves a shift of the current channel, this re-

3

FIG. 5: Plot of λgun vs. column length L, showing good
quantitative agreement of kink onset with Kruskal-Shafranov
limit.

FIG. 6: Plots (shot 2472) vs. R and time of (top) Bpol vec-
tors and ψ-contours (mWb), and (bottom) ψ along horizontal
dashed line of top panel.

is ampliﬁed to larger than ψgun (ψ-ampliﬁcation is due
mainly to broadening of the BZ proﬁle after 12 µs). At
15 µs, magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles consistent with spheromak
formation are observed (Fig. 7). The measured radial
proﬁles of BZ and Bφ at 15 µs are compared with Taylor
state solutions [4] in cylindrical geometry, i.e. uniform λ
solutions of

∇ × B = λB.

(1)

The solutions are BZ ∼ J0(λR) and Bφ ∼ J1(λR), where
J0 and J1 are Bessel functions of order zero and one,
respectively, and the best ﬁt is found for λ ≈ 15 m−1
with a radial oﬀset of 4 cm (displacement of spheromak
oﬀ the geometric axis). The slight disagreement between
measured proﬁles and the Taylor solution is not surpris-
ing since the spheromak is expected to be either (1) still
undergoing relaxation toward the Taylor state or (2) in
a modiﬁed relaxed state since it is still being driven by
the gun which has peak λgun ≈ 50 m−1.

The kink modiﬁes the direction of current-ﬂow from

FIG. 4: Flattening of q(R) proﬁle toward unity (shot 2472)
right before kink onset. Error bars are due to uncertainty in
L. Also shown are Bφ and BZ proﬁles.

quires q = 1 on axis and in its vicinity. As seen in Fig. 4,
q near the axis is greater than unity at 9.5 µs but ﬂattens
and approaches unity by 11.5 µs, coinciding with onset of
column kinking (Fig. 2). The kink is fully developed at
13 µs and has broken apart by 14.5 µs. The q proﬁle is de-
termined using local BZ and Bφ data from the magnetic
probe array, and L is determined from the CCD images.
In addition, for an ensemble of plasma shots in which a
column forms (regimes I and II), the Kruskal-Shafranov
limit (recast [21] as λgun = 4π/L) is a good predictor [21]
of whether a kink actually develops (Fig. 5). Thus, two
sets of independent data (magnetic probe measurements
of BZ and Bφ, and Rogowski/ﬂux loop measurements
of λgun) both give direct evidence that the helical per-
turbation is an MHD kink mode.
It is interesting to
note that the observed kinks always have one axial wave-
length, even though there is no ﬁxed boundary at the
end of the plasma column. One explanation [22] for this
is that there is a strong axial gradient in Bn−1/2, and
thus an eﬀective Alfv´en speed discontinuity, which acts
as a rigid boundary. This conjecture is consistent with
the “mushroom cap” on the left side of the kink in Fig. 3.
it is shown that the kink is followed imme-
diately by three signatures of spheromak formation:
(1) appearance of closed ψ-contours [calculated assuming
R
0 2πR′BZ(R′, t) dR′], (2) ψ-
axisymmetry, ψ(R, t) = R
ampliﬁcation, and (3) magnetic ﬁeld radial proﬁles con-
sistent with spheromak formation.
It is important to
note that the relationship between closed ψ-contours
and closed ﬂux surfaces becomes ambiguous when ax-
isymmetry is broken. Thus, in the presence of a non-
axisymmetric rotating kink, closed ψ-contours indicate
closed ﬂux surfaces only in a time-averaged way. Shortly
after 13 µs, the kink breaks apart (Fig. 2). This co-
incides with signatures of spheromak formation as ob-
served in the magnetic probe measurements (Fig. 6). At
approximately 13 µs, closed ψ-contours appear and ψmax

Next,

4

the coaxial gun can only inject toroidal ﬂux, 3D plasma
dynamics must be responsible for ψ exceeding ψgun. The
dynamics are provided by the kink, which ampliﬁes ψgun
by converting toroidal to poloidal ﬂux; thus, in this case,
the kink constitutes the dynamo intrinsic to spheromak
formation.

Regime II clearly leads to all three signatures of sphero-
mak formation: closed ψ-contours, ψ-ampliﬁcation, and
proper magnetic ﬁeld proﬁles. Regime I lacks both closed
ψ-contours and ψ-ampliﬁcation. Regime III may have
closed ψ-contours; however, Btor ≫ Bpol associated with
high Igun, which could indicate that the plasma is still re-
laxing. This work indicates a close relationship between
the kink threshold (λgun = 4π/L) and the spheromak
formation threshold, which according to a static force-
free treatment is also proportional to an inverse length.
For example, solutions of Eq. (1) for uniform λ indi-
cate that closed ψ-contour equilibria exist for threshold
λ ∼ px2
11/a2 + π2/h2, where a (h) is the radius (length)
of the ﬂux conserver and x11 is the ﬁrst root of J1 [2].
Geometric diﬀerences among diﬀerent experiments could
result in diﬀerent eigenmode spectra of Eq. (1) relative
to the kink stability thresholds.

In summary, the MHD kink instability has been identi-
ﬁed experimentally as a poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation mech-
anism for coaxial gun spheromak formation. An n = 1
central column helical instability was observed during
formation using multiple-frame CCD imaging. Onset of
the perturbation was shown using two independent sets of
data to agree quantitatively with the Kruskal-Shafranov
limit. The kink acts as a dynamo which converts toroidal
to poloidal ﬂux, and it is followed immediately by three
key signatures of spheromak formation: (1) closed ψ-
contours, (2) ψ-ampliﬁcation, and (3) magnetic ﬁeld pro-
ﬁles similar to the Taylor state.

The authors acknowledge S. Pracko, C. Romero-
Talam´as, and D. Felt for technical assistance and
H. Bindslev for asking about kink paramagnetism. Sup-
ported by a US-DoE Fusion Energy Postdoctoral Fellow-
ship and US-DoE Grant DE-FG03-98ER544561.

FIG. 7: Plots showing BZ, Bφ proﬁles (shot 2472) compared
−1 and radial oﬀset of 4 cm).
to Taylor solutions (λ = 15 m
Proﬁles are plotted for vertical dashed line in Fig. 6 (top).

Z (poloidal) to φ (toroidal), as seen in Fig. 2. Equiva-
lently, it converts toroidal to poloidal ﬂux. This process
is paramagnetic, amplifying ψ over the initial applied
ψgun = 1.7 mWb. The paramagnetism is understood by
realizing that kinks involve perturbations with depen-
dence exp(ik · x) where k · B = 0. The latter means
kZ = −nBφ/RBZ. Thus, a locus of constant phase of
the kink is given by φ = (Bφ/RBZ)Z, meaning that the
kinked current channel is a right (left) handed helix if
JZBZ > 0 (< 0). This will always lead to ampliﬁcation
of the original BZ. The additional ψ introduced by the
kink can be estimated by approximating the helix as a
solenoid with current I, turns per length 1/L, and radius
a. The solenoid formula for the ﬁeld inside the solenoid
is BZ = µ0I/L; the ψ produced by the solenoid is πa2BZ
and thus depends non-linearly on the kink amplitude a.
Using the measured values a ≈ 5 cm, L ≈ 20 cm, and
I ≈ 60 kA at 13.5 µs, the ψ generated by the kink is
predicted to be approximately 1 mWb, which is within
a factor of 2 of the observed ampliﬁcation of ψmax over
ψgun. The discrepancy is within the accuracy of a and
L measurements and of the ψ calculation assuming ax-
isymmetry in the presence of the rotating kink. Because

[1] T. R. Jarboe, Plasma Phys. Control. Fus. 36, 945 (1994).
[2] P. M. Bellan, Spheromaks (Imperial College Press, Lon-

(1964).

[12] L. Lindberg and C. T. Jacobsen, Phys. Fluids 7, S44

don, 2000).

[3] H. S. McLean et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 125004 (2002).
[4] J. B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 741 (1986).
[5] A. al-Karkhy et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1814 (1993).
[6] T. G. Cowling, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 94, 39 (1934).
[7] J. P. Freidberg, Ideal Magnetohydrodynamics (Plenum

Press, New York, 1987).

[8] R. Raman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 075005 (2003).
[9] B. Vr˘snak, V. Ru˘zdjak, and B. Rompolt, Solar

Physics 136, 151 (1991).

[13] S. O. Knox et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 842 (1986).
[14] P. K. Browning et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1718 (1992).
[15] M. Nagata et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4342 (1993).
[16] R. C. Duck et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fus. 39, 715

[17] D. Brennan et al., Phys. Plasmas 6, 4248 (1999).
[18] J. Yee and P. M. Bellan, Phys. Plasmas 7, 3625 (2000).
[19] S. C. Hsu and P. M. Bellan, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 30,

(1997).

10 (2002).

[10] H. Li et al., Astrophys. J. 561, 915 (2001).
[11] C. R. Sovinec, J. M. Finn, and D. del-Castillo-Negrete,

Phys. Plasmas 8, 475 (2001).

Phys. Soc. 47, 42 (2002).

Soc. 334, 257 (2002).

[21] S. C. Hsu and P. M. Bellan, Mon. Not. R. Astron.

[20] M. Tokman, S. C. Hsu, and P. M. Bellan, Bull. Amer.

[22] M. Nakamura, Y. Uchida, and S. Hirose, New Astron. 6,

61 (2001).

5

