3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electron gas oscillations in plasma.
Theory and applications.

Maxim Dvornikov∗

Sergey Dvornikov†

October 3, 2013

Abstract

We analyze the obtained solutions of the non-linear Shr¨odinger
equation for spherically and axially symmetrical electrons density os-
cillations in plasma. The conditions of the oscillations process exis-
tence are examined.
It is shown that in the center or on the axis
of symmetry of the systems the static density of electrons enhances.
This process results in the increasing of density and pressure of the
ion gas. We suggest that this mechanism could occur in nature as rare
phenomenon called the ’ﬁreball’ and could be used in carrying out the
research concerning controlled fusion. The description of the exper-
iments, carried out for the purpose to generate long-lived spherical
plasma structures, is presented.

1

Introduction

The studying of electron gas oscillations in plasma is interesting physical
problem, mainly because it enables one to examine plasma properties from
the theoretical point of view as well as it provides the basis for subsequent
experiments in this area. Let us discuss the electric charge variation in elec-
troneutral plasma. If a volume charge appears in such a system, i.e. electrons

∗Department of Theoretical Physics, Moscow State University, 119992 Moscow, Russia;

E-mail address: maxim dvornikov@aport.ru

†N. N. Andreev Institute of Acoustics, ’Shvernika’ Str 4, 117036 Moscow, Russia

1

density increases or decreases in some ﬁnite area, then, after an external in-
ﬂuence is over, the oscillating process consisting in periodical changes of the
sign of the considered volume charge is known to appear. We can roughly
neglect the motion of positively charged ions since their mass is several or-
ders of magnitude greater then electron mass. The process of electron gas
oscillations is schematically shown in Fig. 1. The electrons motion from the
central area is presented in Fig. 1(a). Thus, the central region acquires ex-
cessive positive charge. Electrons moving to the central area are depicted
in Fig. 1(b). In this case the central region becomes negatively charged. It

Figure 1: the process of electron gas oscillations in plasma, with electrons
moving from (a) and to (b) the central area.

is necessary to remind that the frequency of this process ωp, called plasma
frequency, is related to free electrons density in plasma n0 by the formula

ω2

p =

4πe2n0
m

,

(1)

where e and m are the charge and the mass of the electron.

Numerous attempts were made to describe electron gas oscillations within
the context of both classical and quantum mechanics (see, for example,
It is known that the classical dynamics of N interacting parti-
Ref. [1]).
cles can be presented by the system of diﬀerential equations of motion in

2

conﬁguration space of 3N dimensions or in 6N-dimensional phase space.
It is also possible to describe the evolution of such a system by means of
partial diﬀerential equations in three-dimensional physical space as the dy-
namics of microscopic singular material ﬁelds (see Ref. [2]). The transfer
to the quantum-mechanical description is realized by replacing the dynamic
functions with Hermitian operators. In this case the dimensionality of the
conﬁguration space is conserved and the state of the system is completely
deﬁned by the wave functions in 3N-dimensional space.

The quantum-mechanical description of the system of N charged particles
with arbitrary masses was considered in Ref. [3]. Particles were taken to
interact by Coulomb forces and with external classical electromagnetic ﬁeld
characterized by vector A and scalar ϕ potentials. It is worth mentioning
that the evolution of N particles was described in three-dimensional physical
space. The solutions of linearized Shr¨odinger equation in the approximation
of the self-consistent ﬁeld were obtained in Ref. [4].

The main goal of this paper is to study electron gas oscillations in plasma
using quantum mechanical approach. The quantum description is imple-
mented in three-dimensional physical space. In Sec. 2 we analyze spherically
and axially symmetrical solutions of the non-linear Shr¨odinger equation. The
conditions of the oscillations process existence are examined. It is found that
in the center or on the axis of symmetry of the systems the static density
of electrons enhances. This process leads to the increasing of density and
pressure of the ion gas. Then, in Sec. 3 we discuss possible applications of
the considered model. We suggest that this mechanism could occurs in na-
ture as rare phenomenon called the ’ﬁreball’ and could be used in carrying
out the research concerning controlled fusion. The description of the exper-
iments, carried out for the purpose to generate long-lived spherical plasma
structures, is presented. Finally, in Sec. 4 we discuss our results.

2 Quantum description of electron gas oscil-

lations

We will assume electrons in plasma to be a quantum many body system.
Such an assumption is due to the fact that, as it will be shown below, the
obtained solutions have characteristic sizes of atomic order. The complex Ψ

3

function is introduced in three-dimensional space and has the form

where ne(r, t) = |Ψ|2 is the density of electrons, σ(r, t) is the phase of the
function Ψ. The function Ψ satisﬁes the partial diﬀerential equation:

Ψ (r, t) =

ne (r, t)e

i

¯h σ(r,t),

q

i¯h

∂Ψ
∂t

= ˆHΨ.

(2)

(3)

The Hamiltonian in the Eq. (3) is expressed in the following way [3, 4]

ˆH =

1
2m  

¯h
i

e
c

2

!

∇ −

A (r, t)

+ eϕ + e2

d3r′G (r − r′) |Ψ|2 + θ (r, t),

(4)

r

Zr0

|r−r′| .

where G (r − r′) = 1
In the Eq. (4) the ﬁrst two terms are the com-
ponents of single electron Hamiltonian in the external electromagnetic ﬁeld.
The third term presents the potential energy of the electron in the self-
consistent electrostatic ﬁeld created by the whole electrons system, with
number density of particles being equal to |Ψ|2. The function θ (r, t) de-
scribing exchange interactions between electrons has the form [3, 4]

θ (r, t) =

¯h2
2m

∆Ψ
|Ψ|

r

+

Zr0

dpe (r, t)
|Ψ|2 + e2

r

d3r′

dG (r − r′)

Z

Zr0

q2 (r, r′, t)
|Ψ|2

,

(5)

where pe (r, t) is the pressure of electron gas, q2 (r, r′, t) is the correlation
function.

Therefore, in order to resolve exactly the considered problem one should
take into account all terms in the Eq. (5). In Ref. [4] we assumed that the
contribution of exchange interactions to the dynamics of free electrons in
plasma is much smaller than the contribution of self-consistent electrostatic
ﬁeld. This assumption is valid at low density of free electrons in plasma.
Then, in describing the dynamics of the electron gas we neglected the func-
tion θ (r, t). As it will be seen from further speculations, these rough approxi-
mations allow us to get some characteristics of the oscillations process which
are close enough to those obtained from the treatment of similar problem
within the classical approach.

4

Let us consider the electroneutral plasma formed by the singly ionized
gas, with the energy of electrons being more than the ionization potential of
this gas. We will suppose that plasma possesses a spherical symmetry for
density and velocities distribution of the electron and the ion gases. Note that
there is no electromagnetic radiation in this system since the magnetic ﬁeld is
absent throughout the volume. The magnetic ﬁeld, and hence the radiation,
can appear if plasma parameters deviate from the spherically symmetrical
distribution. If such deviations are small, the system is likely to reconstruct
its internal structure and becomes spherically symmetrical again. The prob-
lem of the system stability to such deviations is under investigation now.

Taking into account the small mobility of heavy ions in gas compared
to the mobility of electrons we will suppose that the density of ions is the
constant value ni (r, t) = n0. We will also consider that in our case there
are no external electromagnetic ﬁelds except those of positively charged ions.
The potential of self-consistent ﬁeld created by the electron gas is represented
by the formula (using spherical coordinates):

Ue = e

d3r′G(r − r′)|Ψ|2 = 4πe

x2|Ψ(x, t)|2dx.

(6)

r

Zr0

∞

R

dR
R2

Zr

Z0

Similarly, for the potential ϕ of singly ionized gas with density of ions ni(r, t)
one has

ϕ = −4πe

x2ni(x, t)dx.

(7)

∞

R

dR
R2

Zr

Z0

Thus, taking into account Eqs. (6) and (7), the Eq. (3) can be represented
in the following way

¯h2
2m

+

i¯h

∆Ψ − 4πe2ΨF (|Ψ|2 − n0) = 0,

∂Ψ
∂t
∂
∂r2 + 2
∂r is the Laplas operator in the spherical coordinate
dR
R2

x2(. . .)dx.

(8)

∞

R

r

where ∆ = ∂2

system, F (. . .) =

Moreover, we demand that the system should be electroneutral as a whole,

r
R
i.e. the condition must be satisﬁed:

0
R

lim
R→∞

1
R3

R

Z0

x2|Ψ(x, t)|2dx =

n0
3

.

(9)

5

We will search for a solution of the Eq. (8) in the form:

Ψ = Ψ0 + χe−iωt

.

Here Ψ0 is the solution in the case of unperturbed electroneutral plasma,
|Ψ0|2 = n0, χ = χ1 + iχ2 is the complex function describing small perturba-
tions on frequency ω. As it was shown in Ref. [4], the functions χn have the
following form

χn = Bn

, n = 1, 2,

sinγr
r

where Bn are real constants. The behavior of the functions χn is shown in
Fig. 2. The parameter γ satisﬁes the dispersion relation

(10)

(11)

1

0.8

0.6
Y
0.4

0.2

0

–0.2

–0.4

2

4

6

10

12

14

8

X

Figure 2: the coeﬃcient Y = χn/(Bnγ) versus the parameter X = γr.

γ2 =

ωm
¯h 


1 ±

1 − 4

 

1/2

ω2
p
ω2 !

,





(12)

where ωp is determined in the Eq. (1). The positive part of the Eq. (12) as
a function of frequency ω is presented in Fig. 3. It is worth noticing that if

6

2.5

2

1.5
y
1

0.5

0

1

2

4

5

6

3
x

Figure 3: the coeﬃcient y = γ

versus the parameter x = ω
ωp

. If

ω = 2ωp, then γ1,2 = ±

. If ω ≫ 2ωp, for the upper branch we have

−1/2

2ωp

¯h
m

1/2
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

γ1,2 ∼ ±

, and for the lower branch γ3,4 ∼ ±

2mωp
¯h

1/2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

2mω
¯h

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

2mω2
p
ω¯h

1/2

.

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

the values of Bn are limited, the expressions for χn satisfy the condition of
system electroneutrality Eq. (9).

Now we present the estimate of some characteristics of the oscillations
process. For the density n0 = 2.7 × 1019cm−3, i.e.
for completely singly
ionized gas under the atmospheric pressure and when ω = 2ωp, the frequency
of electron oscillations is:

ν =

= 2

ωp
π

1/2

e2n0
πm !

 

≈ 9 × 1013Hz.

This frequency corresponds to the electromagnetic radiation in the infrared
range with the wavelength λ = c/ν ≈ 3 × 10−4cm.
In this case γ1,2 =
≈ ±2.3 × 107cm−1. The size of the central region δ, where
±
the most intensive oscillations of the electron gas are observed, is equal to

2mωp
¯h

1/2

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

7

π/γ ≈ 1.4 × 10−7cm. The obtained value for δ is of atomic order. That is
why we have adopted the quantum approach to the electron gas oscillations
problem.

From the Eq. (12) one can see that the frequency ω = 2ωp is the critical
value, since for frequencies less than 2ωp, γ becomes a complex value and
under these circumstances the oscillations of the electron gas are damped.
However, there is no contradiction between this result and the well known
fact that in using the classical approach to similar problem one gets the value
ω = ωp for the critical frequency. The plasma frequency ωp is the critical
value for a frequency in a sense that oscillations of electron gas can appear
only if ω ≥ ωp. According to our result ω should be greater (or equal)
than 2ωp. However, under such condition the inequality ω ≥ ωp is sure
to be satisﬁed. The obtained constraint for possible oscillations frequencies
ω ≥ 2ωp is unlikely to be the feature of geometry of the system in question.
As it will be shown below, there is the same condition for axially-symmetrical
electron gas oscillations. We suspect that the deviation from the result of
classical theory (ω ≥ ωp) results from the quantum approach used in our
paper.

Now let us discuss the origin of each of the branches in the dispersion re-
lation. At high oscillations frequencies the parameter γ is great for the upper
branch. Therefore, we can deﬁne the considered branch as the ”high-energy”
one. Moreover, it is possible to treat the upper branch as the ”classical” one.
If ω ≫ 2ωp, the dispersion relation for this branch becomes similar to the
relation between energy ¯hω and ”momentum” ¯hγ for a classical particle:

Note that the deﬁnition ”high-energy” is consistent with ”classical” owing to
the correspondence principle between classical and quantum mechanics (see,
for instance, Ref. [5]).

The lower branch is the antithesis to the upper branch in all respects. To
begin with the behavior of the parameter γ at high frequencies. Contrary
to the upper branch the lower one vanishes as ω−1/2. This fact means that
we can deﬁne considered branch as the ”low-energy” one. Thus, according
to the correspondence principle again we can also treat it as the ”quantum”
branch. We suspect that such substantially quantum phenomenon as su-
perconductivity of electron gas may take place if the dispersion relation is

¯hω =

(¯hγ)2
2m

.

8

realized as the lower branch. This problem is also discussed in Sec. 3 devoted
to possible applications of the described model.

Now let us discuss the ion gas density distribution. We supposed that
number density of the ion gas was constant throughout the volume because
of the small mobility of heavy ions. However, it leads to incorrect results.
The integral operator F (. . .) becomes divergent if we substitute the function
χ given in the Eq. (11) to the Eq. (8). The divergence is caused by the time
independent quantity |χ|2, which means the excessive static component of the
electron gas density. It is naturally to expect that under some conditions the
negative volume charge, described by the function |χ|2, will be compensated
(or neutralized) by the removing of positive ions. This process will result in
local changing of density and pressure of the ion gas.

For the neutralization process to occur we demand that the ions density
ni should be equal to the static electrons density ¯ne = n0 + |χ|2 with high
level of accuracy. The condition of the neutralization was derived in Ref. [4].
It can be represented in the following way:

nc ≪

4πe2γ
kT

n0.

(13)

where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the ion gas temperature, nc is the
ions density in the center of the system. For instance, for T = 103K and the
value γ = 2.3 × 107cm−1, which was obtained above, we get that nc ≪ 500n0.
We supposed that the perturbations described by the function χ were small,
i.e. nc ≪ n0. Hence, the condition Eq. (13) is satisﬁed and the excessive
static electron charge is undoubtedly compensated by the ion charge and
the divergence in the integral F (|Ψ|2 − ni) can be eliminated. Thus, the
approximate, linearized theory trends to describe the pressure enhancement
of the ion gas in the center of symmetrically oscillating electron gas.

Basing on the obtained approximate solutions of the non-linear Shr¨odinger
equation, we suggest the following dynamics of the spherically symmetrical
electron gas oscillations with ﬁnite amplitude:

1. The appearance of the excessive negative volume charge in the center
of the system (quantum mechanical eﬀect in electron gas oscillations).

2. The neutralization of the small negative volume charge as a result of

the ions motion towards the center.

9

3. The enhancement of the ion gas density and pressure.

4. The Hamiltonian in the Eq. (4) is changed allowing for the new electric
charges distributions. The approximate solution of the new equation
provides further pressure enhancement of the ion gas.

While considering non-linear Shr¨odinger equation (8), it can be seen that
along with the components on frequency ω, the terms which do not depend
on time as well as on frequencies 2ω, 3ω and etc. appear. One can make
sure of this representing the solution of the Eq. (8) in the form: Ψ(r, t) =

Ψ0 +

Ψk(r, t), where Ψ1 = B1e−iωt sin γr

.

k=1
P

r
It is worth mentioning that along with spherically symmetrical solution
of the Eqs. (3)-(5), there is at least one axially-symmetrical solution which
has the form:

∞

Ψ(r, t) = n1/2

0 + BJ0(γr)e−iωt,

where J0 is the zero-order Bessel function, B is a real constant. In this case
the dispersion relation takes the same form as the Eq. (12). All consequences
obtained for spherically-symmetrical oscillations are valid for this case as well.

3 Applications

In this paper we found that if one presents the solution of the non-linear
Shr¨odinger equation in the form of the Eq. (10), then time independent
excessive component of the electron gas density always appears. It leads to
the ion gas density enhancement in the center of the system. This property
is unlikely to be the feature of the adopted Hamiltonian.

In order to maintain plasma in ionized state and realize the process de-
scribed above, the energy ingress from the outside or the energy release within
the system is wanted. Nuclear fusion reactions can, in principle, serve as sim-
ilar source of energy. The reactions will proceed if pressure and density of
the ion gas attain appropriate values.

This process seems to support the existence of the enigmatic natural phe-
nomenon, known as ’ﬁreball’. Water is known to contain deuterium in the
amount of ≈ 1/5000 under normal conditions. If water vapors are present
in atmosphere, the running the nuclear fusion reactions will release energy,

10

which supports the oscillations of the electron gas and prevents the recom-
bination of plasma. Taking into account small sizes of the central (active)
region and small amount of deuterium in atmosphere, it is possible to use
the term ’microdose’ nuclear fusion reactions for the process in question.
Axially-symmetrical oscillations of the electron gas are likely to appear as
very seldom observed type of a ’ﬁreball’ in the form of shining, sometimes
closed cord [6]. Uncomplicated calculation shows that energy released in deu-
terium nuclei fusion in 1dm3 of water vapors (the average size of a ’ﬁreball’)
has the value of about 1MJ, that corresponds to energy evaluations of some
observed ’ﬁreballs’ [6, 7].

However, along with high-energy ’ﬁreballs’ there often appear low-energy
ones. The energy estimate of such ’ﬁreballs’ (see Ref. [6]) indicates that
the nuclear fusion reactions are unlikely to support their existence. Low-
energy ’ﬁreball’ may be presented in frames of our model as the solution
with the dispersion relation described by the lower branch (see Fig. 3). The
superconductivity might be the mechanism preventing possible attenuation
of the electron gas oscillations caused by various dissipation processes.

Groups and separate researchers developing the problem of the controlled
fusion are suggested to pay attention to self-consistent, radially and axially
oscillating electron ’plasmoids’ as a base models to self-supported nuclear
fusion reactions. The authors of this article have certain experience in gen-
erating ball-like plasma structures. We present below the description of the
experiments carried out in the N. N. Andreev Institute of Acoustics in 1995-
1999.

0

The plant, used to generate spherical plasma structures,

is shown in
Fig. 4(a). The reservoir capacitor C0 ≈ 10−7F was charged up to the
voltage U0 ≈ 2 × 105V. The electrostatic energy of the capacitor was
Wel = C0U 2
2 ≈ 2 × 103J. After the complete capacitor discharge, the point
Q formed very strong corona discharge about 5cm across. The corona was
visible even in diﬀuse sunlight. The point Q was the sharpened quenched
steel wire. The space near the point was enriched with heavy water (D2O).
When a high-voltage pulse was applied to the electrode S, the break-down of
the spark gap occurred and the capacitor C0 was short-circuited. The pro-
cess of the capacitor discharge is schematically presented in Fig. 4(b). The
voltage fell from 200kV to zero during the time τ ≈ 10−8s. Glowing dark-red
spheres about 3cm across separated from the point Q at the moment of the

11

Figure 4: (a) the circuit for the generation of spherical plasma structures,
(b) the process of the capacitor C0 discharge.

break-down. The lifetime of these structures was in the interval 1 ÷ 5s.

The described discharge scheme seems to have implemented the excitation
of the spherically symmetrical electron gas oscillations. The electron gas was
formed by the high-voltage corona discharge on the point Q.

The disadvantages of the considered plant are:

• high power of the charging devise caused by strong leakage current in

displaying a corona discharge;

• high level of noise in short-circuiting of the capacitor C0;

• big overall dimensions of the plant.

The listed disadvantages were partially removed in the plant which is shown
in Fig. 5(a). In this circuit, C1 denotes the reservoir capacitor. When high
voltage U0 was applied to the point 2 of the circuit, the potential of the point
Q was always equal to zero because of the shunting resistor R. After the
break-down of the spark gap, the potential of the capacitor C0 fell to zero and

12

Figure 5: (a) the modiﬁed circuit for the generation of spherical plasma
structures, (b) the potential of the point Q.

the potential of the point Q became equal to U0. This process is schematically
depicted in Fig. 5(b). The parameters of this circuit were: C0 ≈ 10−10F,
C1 ≈ 10−9F, R ≈ 109Ω, U0 ≈ 1.5 × 105V. Leakage currents were almost
eliminated since all reservoir elements had been placed in transformer oil.
The principal elements of this circuit have passed preliminary testing.

4 Conclusion

The quantum mechanical description of the electron gas oscillations in plasma
has been presented in this paper. We have analyzed spherically and axially
symmetrical solutions of the non-linear Shr¨odinger equation. The conditions
of the oscillations process existence have been examined. It has been found
that in the center or on the axis of symmetry of the systems the static
density of electrons enhanced. This process led to the increasing of density
and pressure of the ion gas. We have also discussed possible applications
of the obtained solutions. It has been suggested that this mechanism could

13

occurs in nature as rare phenomenon called the ’ﬁreball’ and could be used
in carrying out the research concerning controlled fusion. The description of
the experiments, carried out for the purpose to generate long-lived spherical
plasma structures, has been presented.

New approaches to the technical development of the controlled fusion
problem are requested nowadays. The collected experience of plasma physics
allows one to operate with very complicated plasma conﬁgurations. The
problem of the self-consistent plasma conﬁnement in power-generating plants
can probably be imposed. In this situation a ’ﬁreball’ is of particular interest
because of its high energy and long lifetime. A great number of the wit-
nesses concerning a ’ﬁreball’ appearance was collected. Plenty of the ’ﬁre-
ball’ models has been constructed. The advances in the studying of plasma
interactions with rf radiation and matter point out that the stable plasma
structures, supplied by the energy of nuclear fusion reactions, can, in princi-
ple, be implemented.

References

[1] E. Lifshitz and L. Pitaevskii, Physical Kinetics, (Nauka, Moscow, 1979).

[2] M. Drofa and L. Kuzmenkov, Theor. Math. Phys. 108, 849, (1996);

Teor. Mat. Fiz. 108, 3, (1996).

[3] L. Kuzmenkov and S. Maksimov, Theor. Math. Phys. 118, 227, (1999);

Teor. Mat. Fiz. 118, 287, (1999).

[4] M. Dvornikov, S. Dvornikov and G. Smirnov, Appl. Math. & Eng. Phys.

No. 6, 9, (2001); physics/0203044.

[5] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics - Non-relativistic The-

ory, (Nauka, Moscow, 1989).

[6] I. Stakhanov, Physical Nature of Fireball, (Energoatomizdat., Moscow,

1985) (in Russian).

[7] J. Frenkel, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Phys. 10, 1424, (1940).

14

