3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Relativistic Whistle:
High Order Harmonics Induced by
the Ultra-Intense Laser Pulse Propagating inside the Fiber

S. V. Bulanov,1, ∗ T. Zh. Esirkepov,2, † N. M. Naumova,1 and I. V. Sokolov3
1General Physics Institute RAS, Vavilov str. 38, Moscow 119991, Russia
2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Institutskij per. 9, Dolgoprudny Moscow region 141700, Russia
3University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2143, USA
(Dated: May 22, 2002)

A propagation of an ultra-intense short laser pulse in a ﬁber is investigated with two dimensional
Particle-in-Cell simulations. The ﬁber is a narrow hollow channel with walls consisting of overdense
plasma. In the nonlinear interaction of the laser pulse with ﬁber walls high order harmonics are
generated. Suﬃciently high harmonics, for which the ﬁber walls are transparent, propagate outwards
at certain angle. This is a scheme of a generator of ultra-short pulses of coherent light with a very
short wavelength.

PACS numbers: 42.65.Ky, 52.25.Os, 52.65.Rr, 52.27.Ny
Keywords: high order harmonics, short laser pulse, ﬁber, Particle-in-Cell simulation

I.

INTRODUCTION

Generation of high order harmonics of the electromagnetic radiation during an interaction of an ultra-intense laser
pulse with underdense and overdense plasmas is a manifestation of one of the most basic nonlinear processes in physics.
High order optical harmonics have been observed in the laser plasma interaction for the laser intensity ranging from
a moderate level to relativistic intensities.

High order harmonics attract a great attention due to a wide range of their applications for the diagnostics, the UV
and coherent X-ray sources, lithography etc. (see Refs. [1, 2, 3, 4]). Recently, the high order harmonics polarization
properties have been used in Ref. [5] to detect the strongest magnetic ﬁeld generated in the laser plasmas.

Diﬀerent physical mechanisms of high order harmonics generation have much in common because of a property
of nonlinear systems to react in an anharmonical manner to a periodic driving force. On the other hand, speciﬁc
realization of this property depends on the circumstances of the laser-matter interaction and mainly on the laser
intensity. At moderate intensities, generation of high order harmonics is caused by an atom anharmonic response to
an oscillating electric ﬁeld. At relativistic intensities, the electron quiver energy becomes higher than the rest mass
energy and the Relativistic Nonlinear Optics comes into play [4]. In this regime high order harmonics generation is
due to a nonlinear dependence of the particle mass on its momentum and due to electron density modulations in
the electromagnetic wave. In the present paper we discuss high harmonic generation in collisionless plasmas by a
relativistically strong electromagnetic wave.

In the underdense plasmas an ultra-intense laser pulse causes high harmonics generation through a parametric
In an interaction with overdense
excitation of electromagnetic and electrostatic waves with diﬀerent frequencies.
plasmas the laser radiation (partially) reﬂects back at the plasma-vacuum interface, in the case of sharp plasma
boundary, or at a critical density surface, in the case of gradual density proﬁle. The reﬂecting layer in the plasma is
dragged by the electromagnetic wave back and forth in the direction of the incident light, as well as in the transverse
direction, forming an oscillating mirror (see Refs. [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]). The light reﬂected by the oscillating mirror
contains odd and even harmonics, whose polarization and amplitudes depend on the incidence angle, intensity and a
polarization of the laser pulse.

High eﬃciency of the laser energy transformation into the energy of high harmonics can be achieved in a scheme,
in which the laser pulse propagates inside a hollow channel [13]. In this case, if the channel is suﬃciently long, the
laser pulse undergoes a multiple reﬂection at the plasma-vacuum interface, and a portion of the laser pulse energy
transforms into the energy of high harmonics at each reﬂection event. If the laser pulse propagates inside a hollow
channel in a tubiform ﬁber, the radiation with suﬃciently high frequency propagates through the ﬁber walls. The

at Advanced Photon Research Center,

∗Also
bulanov@plasma.fpl.gpi.ru
†Electronic address: timur@nonlin.mipt.ru

JAERI, Kizu minami, Kyoto-fu 619-0215,

Japan;

Electronic

address:

2

ﬁber walls are transparent for harmonics, whose indices are greater than some critical value. Only these harmonics
are emitted from the ﬁber at certain angle with respect to the ﬁber axis. This approach allows one to design a high
frequency radiation source with controlled properties, which depend on the ﬁber diameter and the ﬁber wall thickness.
We call this source “the relativistic whistle”.

In this paper we investigate a propagation of an ultra-intense short laser pulse in a ﬁber, with an aim to study the
properties of the high harmonic radiation. Here we use the two dimensional approximation, leaving the investigation
of the 3D problem for forthcoming publications.

II. MATCHING CONDITIONS

In the two-dimensional case the ﬁber corresponds to two thin foils of a ﬁnite length. The foils are parallel to each
other, and to the x-axis in the x, y-plane. Let the wall thickness of the foil is l, and a distance between the foils equal
to L. We consider the foils to be made of the collisionless overdense plasma with the electron density ne. Such a
conﬁguration can be formed by an ultra-intense femtosecond laser pulse interacting with the solid density ﬁber, when
the ﬁber wall material is ionized during the ﬁrst half-period of the laser pulse, and the length of the laser pulse is
much shorter than the timescale of a hydrodynamic expansion of the plasma. In the framework of this approximation
we can assume the ions to be at rest.

From the dispersion equation, ω2 = k2c2, where ω is the wave frequency and k2 = k2

y, we ﬁnd the group
velocity of the wave inside the channel, vgr = ∂ω/∂kx = (c/ω)(ω2 − π2/L2)1/2 = c cos θ, where tan θ = ky/kx =
(4L2/λ2 − 1)−1/2 and λ = 2πc/ω. The matching conditions for the wave inside the channel, and the wave radiated
outwards, show that all the outgoing waves propagate at the angle θ with respect to the channel axis, independently
of the wave frequency.

x + k2

x = 0 (see for details Refs.

The fact that all the outgoing waves have the same angle of propagation can be demonstrated in a diﬀerent way.
After the Lorentz transform into the reference frame moving at a speed of vgr along the x−axis, the x−component
of the fundamental mode wave vector vanishes: k′
[6, 9, 14]). The problem becomes
one-dimensional. Therefore high frequency waves excited by the fundamental mode at the plasma-vacuum interface
also have zero x−component of the wave vector in this reference frame. They propagate outwards in the direction
perpendicular to the ﬁber walls. Performing the inverse transform back to the laboratory reference frame, we obtain
that all the outgoing waves propagate at the same angle θ with respect to the channel axis, independently of the wave
frequency. Their energy is localized inside a slab co-moving with the laser pulse along the x−axis. The slab length is
equal to the length of the laser pulse. Its transverse size depends on the eﬀective length of the interaction. According
to the selection rules of the harmonic generation at each wall (see Refs. [6, 8, 9]), the s−polarized fundamental mode
in the ﬁber generates s−polarized odd harmonics and p−polarized even harmonics of radiation. The p−polarized
fundamental mode generates only p−polarized harmonics of radiation.

The amplitude of the n-th harmonic can be found in the approximation of an inﬁnitely thin walls of the ﬁbre
[9]). It is E(n) = K (0,n)E(0), where E(0) and E(n) are amplitudes of the fundamental mode and of the
(see Ref.
n-th harmonic, respectively. The transformation coeﬃcient K (0,n) is given by K (0,n) ≈ [(a0/ǫ) sin θ]n, in the limit
nω/ωpe ≪ ε. Here a0 = eE(0)/meω0c is the dimensionless amplitude of the fundamental mode, ε = 2πn0e2l/meω0c
is the dimensionless parameter (relativistic transparency measure), ω0 is the frequency of the fundamental mode.

III. PARAMETERS OF THE COMPUTER SIMULATIONS

We perform computer simulations using the two-dimensional version of Particle-in-Cell relativistic electromagnetic
code REMP, based on ‘density decomposition’ scheme [15]. Computation box has a size 45λ × 20λ. Since the problem
of high harmonic generation requires substantially high spatial resolution, the computation mesh has 50 cells per λ.
The number of quasiparticles per cell is equal to 16 in the plasma region. The channel walls have a length lch = 25λ
and width 2λ, a distance between the walls is L = 0.7λ. The ions are assumed to be immobile and the electron density
0me/4πe2. Since the channel diameter is less than the laser light
is equal to 8ncr, where the critical density is ncr = ω2
wavelength, only the s-polarized electromagnetic wave (whose electric ﬁeld is directed along the z-axis) can propagate
inside the channel. For the parameters chosen, only harmonic, whose index is higher than 4, can propagate through
the walls. This conclusion follows from the boundary conditions for the electromagnetic wave, which is obliquely
incident on the plasma-vacuum interface, at the angle θ. The s-polarized laser pulse is initialized in a vacuum region
at the left hand side from the channel entry. The pulse aperture is f/1, its length is equal to 7.5λ, and its dimensionless
amplitude at the 1λ focus spot is a0 = 3, which corresponds to the intensity I ≈ 1019W/cm2. These parameters are
close to the parameters of the laser in the CUOS at the University of Michigan [4]. We notice here that the pulse
[4]. In our simulation model the entry of the channel is smoothed to
focusing into the 1λ spot is discussed in Ref.

3

FIG. 1: The electromagnetic energy density and the plasma density distribution at t = 15 × 2π/ω0 when the pulse enters into
the ﬁber.

FIG. 2: The electromagnetic energy density distribution in the x, y plane at t = 20 × 2π/ω in frame (a), t = 35 × 2π/ω in
frame (b), and at t = 50 × 2π/ω in frame (c).

decrease the laser pulse reﬂection. Fig. 1 shows the focusing laser pulse and the ﬁber. We see that the smoothing of
the channel entry provides almost reﬂectionless matching of the laser pulse and the channel.

IV. RESULTS OF PIC SIMULATIONS

When the laser pulse propagates inside the channel a portion of its energy is reﬂected back due to the process
similar to the stimulated Raman scattering in the plasma of the channel walls; a portion of its energy is transformed
into the energy of high harmonic waves radiated outwards; the remaining part of the laser pulse propagates through
the channel toward the end of the ﬁber, then it goes out as a diverging electromagnetic wave. These successive phases
are seen in Fig. 2, where we present the electromagnetic energy density distribution in the x, y−plane at diﬀerent
times.

In Fig. 3 we show the distribution of the z-component of the electric ﬁeld in the x, y-plane. We see the laser pulse

4

FIG. 3: The distribution of the z-component of the electric ﬁeld in the x, y-plane at t = 45 × 2π/ω0.

FIG. 4: Spectrum of the s-polarized harmonics. The dashed line denotes the dependency ky ≈ 0.8kx. Each peak corresponds
to a harmonic with index n = (k2

x + k2

y)1/2.

inside the channel and the high harmonics aside the channel. In this ﬁgure all the harmonics have odd indices and
they are s-polarized, as noticed above. The spatial region ﬁlled by high harmonics has a length equal to the laser
pulse length and the transverse size (along the y-axis) equal to δtc sin θ, where sin θ ≈ 1/2 and δt ≈ 20 × 2π/ω0.

We perform the spatial Fourier transform of the z-component of the electric ﬁeld inside a sub-domain (18λ < x <
28λ; 3λ < y < 10λ) at t = 30 × 2π/ω0. The resulting spectrum of the s-polarized light inside this sub-domain is
y)1/2 ≥ 5. The spectrum
presented in Fig. 4. We see the odd harmonics with the harmonic index n = (k2
peaks are arranged along the straight line given by ky ≈ 0.8kx, i. e.
the angle of propagation is smaller than
0L2)1/2. It means that the eﬀective channel width is larger than 0.7λ. The increase of the channel
arccos(1 − π2c2/ω2
width is apparently due to the action of the ponderomotive force on the electrons at the plasma-vacuum interface.

x + k2

From the expression mec2∇(1 + a2)1/2 ≈ 4πn0e2δy, which corresponds to the balance between the ponderomotive
force and the force due to electric charge separation, we ﬁnd that the channel width becomes larger by 2δy ≈ 0.1λ.
Assuming now the channel width to be equal to 0.8λ we obtain the propagation angle θef f ≈ arctan(0.8) ≈ 38.7o, in
agreement with the dependence seen in Fig. 4.

In Fig. 5 we present the distribution of the z-component of the magnetic ﬁeld at the same point in time as Fig. 3.
We see the high harmonics with even indices. They are p-polarized. As noticed above, the fundamental mode of the
laser pulse inside the channel does not contain the p-polarized component and we see only the high harmonics inside
and aside the channel, as well as the low frequency surface mode in the vicinity of the outer plasma-vacuum interfaces
on both sides of the ﬁber. The even-index high harmonics outside the channel are localized in the same region as the
odd-index harmonics.

The spectrum of the even-index high harmonics calculated for the z-component of the magnetic ﬁeld in the same
sub-domain and at the same point in time as in the case of the odd-index harmonics is presented in Fig. 6. We see
the even harmonics with the harmonic index n ≥ 6. As in the previous ﬁgure, the spectrum peaks are arranged along
the same line ky ≈ 0.8kx.

5

FIG. 5: The distribution of the z-component of the magnetic ﬁeld in the x, y-plane at t = 45 × 2π/ω0.

FIG. 6: Spectrum of the p-polarized harmonics.

V. CONCLUSION

The high harmonic generation in the interaction of the ultra-intense short laser pulse with a narrow ﬁber is demon-
strated with PIC simulation. Due to nonlinear interaction of the laser pulse with the ﬁber walls, the quivering back
and forth electrons form the oscillating mirrors. The high order harmonics are generated as a result of a multiple
reﬂection of the laser light from the oscillating mirrors. The ﬁber walls are opaque for the electromagnetic wave with
a frequency below some critical value, which is deﬁned by the electron density of the ﬁber walls and the channel
width. As a result, only suﬃciently high harmonics, for which the ﬁber walls are transparent, propagate outwards
at certain angle, independently of the harmonic index. In addition, we observe the excitation of the p-polarized low
frequency mode, which is localized at the outer surface of the ﬁber. The longitudinal scale of the low frequency mode
is of the order of the laser pulse length. It provides an example of the nonlinear rectiﬁcation of the light. The high
harmonics energy is localized in the region with a length (along the x-axis) equal to the laser pulse length, and the
width (along the y-axis) equal to lch tan θef f . This region is co-moving with the fundamental mode inside the ﬁbre.
The amplitude of the n-th harmonic can be estimated as (a0 sin θef f )n(ω0/ωpe)1+2n, where ωpe = (4πn0e2/me)1/2.
For a0 = 3, (ω0/ωpe)2 = 1/8 and θef f ≈ 38o, we obtain E(n)/E(0) ≈ 0.35(0.23)n. This proves an eﬀective mechanism
for generation of ultra-short pulses of coherent light with a very short wavelength. The corresponding device can be
called “the relativistic whistle”.

[1] N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics (Mass.: Reading, 1965); Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics (Wiley, New
York, 1984); S. A. Akhmanov, R. V. Khokhlov, Problems of Nonlinear Optics (VINITI, Moscow, 1965); R. W. Boyd,
Nonlinear Optics (Academic, San Diego, 1992).

[2] J. Zhou, J. Peatross, M. M. Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn, I. P. Christov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 752 (1996); Y. Kobayashi, T.
Sekikawa, Y. Nabekawa, S. Watanabe, Opt. Lett. bf 23,64 (1998); P. Villoresi, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2494 (2000); C.
Altucci, et al., Phys. Rev. A 61, 021801(R) (1999).

[3] S. V. Bulanov, F. Califano, G. I. Dudnikova, et al., in: Reviews of Plasma Physics (Kluwer Academic. Plenum Publishers,

6

New York, 2001), Ed. by V. D. Shafranov, Vol. 22, p. 227.

[4] G. Mourou, Z. Chang, A. Maksimchuk, et al., Plasma Phys. Rep. 28, 12 (2002).
[5] M. Tatarakis, I. Watts, E. N. Beg, et al., Nature 415, 280 (2002); M. Tatarakis, A. Gopal, I. Watts, et al., Phys. Plasmas

9, 2244 (2002).

[6] S. V. Bulanov, N. M. Naumova, F. Pegoraro, Phys. Plasmas 1, 745 (1994).
[7] P. Gibbon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 50 (1996).
[8] R. Lichters, J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, A. M. Pukhov, Phys. Plasmas 3, 3425 (1996).
[9] A. V. Vshivkov, N. M. Naumova, F. Pegoraro, S. V. Bulanov, Phys. Plasmas 5, 2752 (1998).
[10] A. Macchi, F. Cornolti, F. Pegoraro, T. V. Liseikina, H. Ruhl, V. A. Vshivkov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 205004 (2001); A.

Macchi, F. Cornolti, F. Pegoraro, Phys. Plasmas 9, 1704 (2002).

[11] M. Zepf, G. D. Tsakiris, G. Pretzler, I. Watts, D. M. Chambers, P. A. Norreys, U. Andiel, A. E. Dangor, K. Eidmann, C.

Gahn, A. Machacek, J. S. Wark, K. Witte, Phys. Rev. E 58, 5253 (1998).

[12] A. Tarasevitch, A. Orisch, D. von der Linde, P. Balcou, G. Rey, J.-P. Chambaret, U. Teubner, D. Kl¨opfel, W. Theobald,

Phys. Rev. E 62, 023816-1(2000); I. Watts, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 155001 (2002).

[13] S. V. Bulanov, F. F. Kamenets, A. M. Pukhov, F. Pegoraro, Physics Letters A 195, 84 (1994).
[14] A. Bourdier, Phys. Fluids 26, 1804 (1983).
[15] T. Zh. Esirkepov, Comput. Phys. Comm. 135, 144 (2001).

