3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning
with topological structure

Jos´e M. Donoso
Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada,
ETSI Aeron´auticos, Universidad Polit´ecnica, 28040 Madrid, Spain∗

Antonio F. Ra˜nada
Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada III,
Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain †

Jos´e Luis Trueba
ESCET, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 28933 M´ostoles, Spain‡

February 2, 2008

Abstract

It has been long admitted that a consequence of the virial theo-
rem is that there can be no equilibrium conﬁgurations of a system
of charges in electromagnetic interaction in the absence of external
forces. However, recent results have shown that the virial theorem
can not preclude the existence of certain nontrivial equilibrium con-
ﬁgurations. Although some of these new results are based on an ef-
fective microscopic ﬁeld theory, they are important for a theory of
ball lightning that has been developed by the authors of the present
work. Other theoretical results relative to magnetic force-free ﬁelds
with ﬁeld aligned currents and self-organized ﬁlamentary structures
are also found to be relevant for this model.

∗E-mail: jmdonoso@aero.upm.es
†E-mail: afr@ﬁs.ucm.es
‡e-mail: jltrueba@escet.urjc.es

1

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

2

1 Introduction

Ball lightning is one of the oldest open problems of physics. It consists in
ﬂaming balls or ﬁreballs, usually bright white, red, orange or yellow, which
appear unexpectedly sometimes either near ground, following the discharge
of a lightning ﬂash, or at midair coming from a cloud.

Most of them are associated with thunderstorms, their shape is usually
spherical of spheroidal and they tend to move horizontally. Typically, their
diameter is between 10 and 50 cm. The observed distribution of their lifetime
has a maximum between 2 and 5 s and an average value of about 10 s or
higher, some cases of more than 1 minute having been reported. They are
bright enough to be clearly seen in daylight, the visible output being in the
range 10 to 150 W, similar to that of a home electric bulb (for a detailed
description of their properties see [1, 2, 3]). Some balls have appeared within
aircraft, traveling inside the fuselage along the aisle from front to rear. There
are reports of odors, similar to those of ozone, burning sulfur or nitric oxide,
or of sounds, mainly hisses, buzzes or ﬂutters. The majority decay silently,
others with an explosion. They have killed or injured people and animals
and damaged trees, buildings, cars or electric equipment, ﬁres having been
produced also. This shows that there is something hot inside. In such events
the released energy has been estimated between 10 kJ and more than 1 MJ.
They have never been produced in laboratories, in spite of many attempts and
some interesting results, which have produced thus far some luminous objects
that decay too quickly. Consequently, their properties are investigated on the
basis of reports by witnesses, who are usually very impressed and excited by
the phenomenon and have no scientiﬁc training.

A probably related phenomenon has been observed sometimes in sub-
marines, after a short circuit of the batteries: balls of plasma have appeared
at the electrodes and ﬂoated in air for several seconds. In these occasions,
the current was about 150 kA and the energy was estimated between 200
and 400 kJ.

The most surprising property of a ball lightning is its great stability and
long lifetime, two related features which are very diﬃcult to explain. Indeed,
nobody less than Faraday himself stated in his Experimental Researches in
Electromagnetism that ball lightning can not be an electromagnetic phe-
nomenon since it would decay then instantaneously.

The previous features of the ﬁreballs strongly suggest an electromagnetic

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

3

nature of the phenomenon. Note however that this is compatible with the
necessity of considering the chemical aspects of plasmas, for instance in the
determination of transport coeﬃcients such as the electric and thermal con-
ductivities or the viscosity.

There are two kinds of models of ball lightning, depending on whether the
energy source is external or internal. There has been a tendency towards the
internal energy models since the experimental veriﬁcation, at the beginning of
the nineties of the existence of stable ﬁlamentary structures in a great variety
of plasmas, form laboratory to astrophysics. These observations suggests that
plasmas may have a self-organization ability that could lead to long lifetime
conﬁgurations. Electromagnetic models with plasmas and magnetic ﬁelds
since therefore to be most promising candidates to build a theory of BL.

However the fact remains that, in spite of many attempts, there is not an
accepted theory of the energy conﬁnement in ﬁreballs, specially of their long
lifetime and great stability. It must be added that some researchers interpret
the magnetic virial theorem as a serious obstacle to electromagnetic model
since, according to them, this theorem shows that the magnetic pressure
would be so strong that nothing could stand to avert an almost instantaneous
explosion [4]. This could be considered as a modern formulation of Faraday’s
argument.

As a consequence, there has been a certain shift of the interest of the re-
searchers from purely or mainly electromagnetic to chemical models. Aerosol
model, for instance, have received recently much attention. In one of them
[5], the authors argue that a lightning discharge can vaporize silicon dioxide
in the soil which, after interacting with carbon compounds, is transformed
in pure silicon droplets of nanometer scale. These droplets become coated
with an insulating coat of oxides and are polarized, after which they become
aligned with electric ﬁelds and form networks of ﬁlaments, in a loose struc-
ture that has been called “ﬂuﬀ balls”. In another model [6], the discharges
pick up organic material from the soil and transform it in a kind of “spongy
ball” that can conﬁne electric charges. It seems diﬃcult, however, to under-
stand how these models could explain the observed fact that some ﬁreballs
do appear near clouds or in midair, where there is neither silicon nor organic
nor any other similar material.

We present in this paper some arguments, inspired both in experimental
and theoretical recent ﬁndings, which suggests that this shift away from
electromagnetic models may has been excessive and that more emphasis must

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

4

be put in them, even acknowledging the necessity of paying due attention to
the chemical properties of the plasmas.

2 Plasma model with a topological ﬁlamen-

tary structure

2.1 The topological model

In 1996, Ra˜nada and Trueba proposed a model with a topological structure
of magnetic lines and currents (“the topological model” from now on), in
which the ﬁreballs are spheres of plasma coupled to a magnetic ﬁeld with
non-vanishing magnetic helicity or, equivalently, with linked magnetic lines
and plasma streamlines [7]. Although that model is very simple, it was useful
to show that the lifetime of such spheres increases with the linking number
of the lines. In other words tangled structures are more stable. However, the
plasma ﬁlled all the interior of the ball, so that the radiation output was too
high. A more elaborated model was proposed by Ra˜nada, Soler and Trueba
in 1998 [8] and developed in 2000 [10], in which the plasma is contained
in streamers, i.e. ﬁlamentary structures along which the current ﬂows, so
that it ﬁlls only a small fraction of the ball, of the order of one ppm of the
volume. Moreover, the streamers and the magnetic ﬁeld are parallel. Such
a conﬁguration is the result of the so called Taylor relaxation of the plasma
[9], a very rapid process in which the magnetic helicity is conserved, its value
characterizing the ﬁnal relaxed state. Again a non-vanishing value of the
linking number gives stability to the system. What is important here is that
the ball decays rapidly to a quasi-force-free (FF) state, with ﬁnite radius, and
begins thereafter a slow expansion (termed almost quiescent in [10]) which
approaches asymptotically to a force-free state. Such tangled structures are
particular cases of “electromagnetic knots”, as were called in [12] the ﬁelds
with linked magnetic and electric lines.

In 2000, Faddeev and Niemi (FN) [11] presented an eﬀective microscopic
ﬁeld theory to give results on electrically neutral plasmas with an equal num-
ber of negative and positive charge carriers, which in their own words “chal-
lenge certain widely held views on plasma behavior”. As already said before,
it is frequently admitted that the virial theorem implies that there can be no
equilibrium conﬁgurations of a system of charges in electromagnetic interac-

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

5

tion in the absence of external forces. However, Faddeev and Niemi showed
that this is not necessarily the case, that simple arguments based on the virial
theorem can not preclude the existence of nontrivial, non-dissipative equi-
librium conﬁgurations, which are “topologically stable solitons that describe
knotted and linked ﬂux tubes of helical magnetic ﬁelds” with “self-conﬁning
plasma ﬁlaments”. This results is clearly very important. It gives support
to the topological model by Ra˜nada, Soler and Trueba, which has precisely
a structure of linked currents and magnetic lines.

2.2 The magnetic virial theorem

Let us consider a plasma or gas cloud inside a volume V bordered by a
surface S, with pressure p, density ρ, ﬂuid velocity v and magnetic ﬁeld B.
The momentum equation can be written as

∂
∂t

∂
∂xk

(ρvi) +

(ρvivk) = −

− ρ

+

BiBk −

(1)

∂p
∂xi

∂Φ
∂xi

1
µ0

∂
∂xk "

B2
2

δik

,

#

where Φ is the self-gravitating potential, the last term being the Lorentz
force j × B, with j = ∇ × B/µ0. Note that B2/2µ0 acts as a pressure, usually
called “the magnetic pressure”. It plays a similar role as p: if it has a great
gradient it gives a large contribution to the force density. In many cases, it
causes explosive expansions.

The magnetic virial theorem is the result of taking the ﬁrst momentum
of this equation, i.e. of multiplying by xi and integrating over the volume
V [14] (more precisely this is the “second order magnetic virial theorem”.
The “ﬁrst order theorem” is just the integral of the Euler equation over the
volume V . It simply expresses the uniform motion of the center of mass.)
There is also a tensorial form of the theorem but it is not relevant here. If we
do that and assume that no ﬂuid goes out of the volume, i.e. that v · n = 0
if n is a unit vector normal to the border S, we obtain the equation

1
2

d2I
dt2 − 2T = −

ZS

where

xipnidS + 2U + W + UB +

xiMiknkdS.

(2)

1
µ0 ZS

I =

ρr2d3x/2,

ZV

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

ρv2d3x/2,

p d3x/2,

ZV
B2d3x/2µ0,

T =

ZV
U = 3

UB =

ZV
W = −

ZV
Mik = BiBk − B2δik/2.

Gρ(r)ρ(r′)
2|r − r′|

d3xd3x′,

I is called the moment of inertia, T is the kinetic energy, U the internal
energy, UB the magnetic energy, W the gravitational self-energy. If the pres-
sure is constant in S, p = pext, the ﬁrst integral in the RHS of (2) is equal to
−3pextV . The gravitational self-energy is important for astrophysical plas-
mas but can be neglected in the case of ball lightning.

A frequent argument states that the term UB in (2) would produce a
very rapid increase of I, i.e. an explosion, since nothing would balance
the large magnetic pressure B2/2µ0 (according to the witnesses reports, the
magnetic energy of a BL must be of tens of kJ, even reaching several MJ).
The calculations indicate that this would happen in a small fraction of a
second, so that the virial theorem would exclude indeed any electromagnetic
model of BL.

2.3 Force-free magnetic knots and a model of ball light-

ning

However, Chandrasekhar and Woltjer showed in 1958 [15] that plasmas relax
to minimum energy stable states, so called force-free ﬁelds (FFF), in which
the electric current and the magnetic ﬁeld are parallel,

B × (∇ × B) = 0,

so that the Lorentz force vanishes. They concluded that such states can con-
ﬁne large amounts of magnetic energy. If the force-free condition is veriﬁed,
the sum of the two last terms in (2) is zero. In these cases, the magnetic
virial theorem reduces to

1
2

d2I
dt2 = 2T − 3

δp dV,

ZV

6

(3)

(4)

(5)

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

7

where δp = pext − p is the depression inside the ball, i.e.
the diﬀerence
between the exterior and interior pressures. As a consequence, the argument
for an instantaneous explosion fails (as happens in the topological model [10]
its solution being dubbed “force-free magnetic knots”).

2.4 On ﬁlamentary BL plasma formation and dissipa-

tive processes

In this section, we try to justify the existence of a ﬁlamentary plasma struc-
ture by means of a more realistic inspection into plasma formation processes
beyond the minimum energy relaxation (under helicity conservation) argu-
ments provided by Taylor. Otherwise, we are interested in investigate how
dissipative processes in a real plasma can be modiﬁed in a magnetically dom-
inated plasma regime to increase the lifetime of a set of linked ﬁlaments. In
the following, we shall refer to the streamers, or a longitudinal section of one
them, as a subsystem inside the global plasma ball structure (the system
itself).

First of all, one has to be aware of our BL model assumes an anisotropic
plasma with linked streamers coupled to the magnetic ﬁeld in air. For this
reason, we provide here some arguments related to the achievement of such
ﬁlamentary structures that have been actually observed in natural plasmas.
We are also concerned in looking for possible mechanisms to reduce transport
processes in a magnetically dominated plasma regime since such processes
would reduce plasma lifetime due to energy dissipation and charged particles
diﬀusion. We think that both problems, ﬁlamentary linked plasma structure
and dissipative processes reduction are directly related to plasma dynamics
driven by the magnetic ﬁeld itself.

It is well known that ﬁlamentary and localized current-plasma structures
have been observed experimentally in a wide range of plasma scenarios. From
simple electrical discharges to Tokamaks and astrophysical plasma jets, ﬁla-
mentation phenomena drastically lead the dynamics of plasma system, pro-
viding both positive and negative eﬀects on the global stability. Otherwise,
due to plasma ability to self-organize, one can expect the existence of a meta-
stable system if some conditions are really fulﬁlled.

For instance, large stable ﬁlamentary currents in plasma may last in a
larger time scale compared to plasma energy conﬁnement time. Since this

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

8

property has been experimentally tested in several plasma regimes, as pre-
dicted theoretically by Faddeev and Niemi in [11] , a plasma system mainly
composed of such ﬁlamentary long-living structures could last a long time.
Note that in the atmosphere, the ﬁreball may be also surrounded by a par-
tially ionized plasma air, at last in the ﬁrst stages before reaching a stable
structure. We mean here, that it would be possible to combine a fully ionized
plasma regime inside each streamer with a surrounding partially ionized cold
plasma in our model. This property could be very important if one deals
with eventual energy sources in each current channel.

In treating on ﬁlamentary plasma formation, let us assume that in an
ordinary lightning a vortex type structure of plasma can be reached in at-
mospheric conditions. Thus, a toroidal like plasma could exist encircling
the straight discharge channel of an ordinary lightning following the strong
magnetic ﬁeld associated with the lightning current. This primary toroidal
plasma could also be surrounded by secondary current channels and all of
then could be ﬁlled increasingly by charge injection coming from the main
stroke that branches, and returns, through partially ionized channels. There
are some photographic evidences of such lightning formations where it can be
seen a tangled structure, sometimes not a single one, along lightning path.
Moreover, this tangled lightnings have been also seen associated to a ball
lightning1.

At this stage, it can be assumed that the strong lightning current source
suddenly disappears along the vortex axis so that large pressure gradient
can induce a plasma compression. The conﬁning magnetic ﬁeld disappears
also and secondary currents channels start to self-organize into a new sys-
tem. Note that due to the diﬀerent mobilities of electron and (massive) ions,
charge separation occurs after the lightning decay. This happens in a time
scale shorter than the one required to destroy completely the secondary con-
ﬁguration, so that the current has time enough to collapse before the vortex
destruction into a set of thin channels having relatively large energy densities.
This collapse may be achieved by attraction of laminar currents carrying op-
posite charges. A simpler explanation for the streamer linked structure can
also be given by just considering self-cutting (by pinch eﬀect in both incom-
ing and outgoing extremes) and separation of the ordinary lightning tangled

1

http://www.ernmphotography.com/Pages/Ball Lightning/Ball Lightning ErnM.html

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

9

formation followed by current collapse and compression.

Note that this mechanism would explain the existence of closed stream-
ers created by simple charge collapse, not by the usual single sign charge
avalanche in ordinary arc discharges. Otherwise, the plasma can also rotate
as well as it can modify its structure due to air whirlwind enhancing the tan-
gled or eddy for of the new plasma regime while magnetic reconnection starts.
We mention here that recent laboratory experiments show that a plasma ball
with loop formations can be ejected from a burning metallic wire.

As said before, toroidal like ﬂuid ﬂow rotating tube structures in the
initial vortex will be compressed by simple collapse, providing twisting and
ﬁlamentation in the charge distribution currents in an almost instantaneous
magnetic reconnection process. The role played by ﬁnite thermal conductiv-
ity and Lorentz forces are relevant to energy conversion into the new self-
organized state. The result may be a set of relatively high density linked
streamers or ﬁlaments strongly coupled to the structure of the new magnetic
ﬁeld.

Up to now we have argued in favor of a meta-stable self-organized
system of charged particles coupled to a magnetic force-free ﬁeld, but con-
centrated only on the standard Taylor relaxation processes. However it has
been recently shown that a plasma can relax to a Taylor force-free state un-
der more general assumptions than helicity conservation constraints. In this
sense, Zhu et al [16] have shown that a magnetohydrodynamic plasma can
self-organize to a force-free or quasi-force-free state if ﬁnite thermal conduc-
tivity is taken into account during magnetic reconnection, while a non-Taylor
state with electric current perpendicular to magnetic ﬁeld is reached with-
out thermal conduction. The enhanced heat conduction tends to smooth
nonuniformity of both peaked pressure and perpendicular electric current
In this way, the Taylor
component during driven magnetic reconnection.
force-free state under no pressure gradients is approximately realized in a
short time (microseconds). The role played by magnetic reconnection com-
bined with heat conduction could be very important to explain ﬁeld-aligned
currents and magnetic energy conversion into kinetic energy. As shown in
[13], the eﬀect of magnetic reconnection, enhanced by heat conduction along
ﬁeld lines, can explain the loop structures in solar chromosphere. Note that
our ball lightning model ([8, 10]) could share some traits with astrophysical
phenomena, because of the MHD scale invariance.

From our point of view, the above argument is relevant to the formation of

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

10

almost relaxed states, which are very close to force-free conﬁgurations in air.
Furthermore, it explains the direct relation of the current plasma alignment
and the subsequent current-ﬁeld coupling, as well as the direct heating of the
particles and the high deposition of energy into the system. Otherwise, it
should be noted that magnetic reconnection plays also an important role in
redistributing total magnetic helicity, globally conserved, providing locally
twisting of currents ﬁlaments and contributing to global plasma stability
after a self-organized state is reached.

Moreover, it is well-known that the magnetic reconnection generates charge

acceleration and system heating, because of this, the current J and
magnetic ﬁeld strength B inside each ﬁlament can be very large. This is
an important feature because of large magnetic ﬁeld generation and current
alignment may be very important to justify the long lifetime of a ﬁreball.

It is remarkable that one can not reject the possibility of certain large
number of suprathermal electrons or runaways, as experimentally found in
upper atmosphere storms. Note that a nonvanishing suprathermal electrons
population would increase the plasma electrical conductivity σ providing a
J ·
highly conductor ﬂuid slowing down the magnetic helicity decay rate, η
Bd3r, keeping the ﬁeld topology, if one assumes a real plasma with ﬁnite
resistivity η.

R

These arguments lead us to treat with some non-ordinary plasma regimes
inside each channel subsystem as well as inside the whole anisotropic plasma
ball.

Roughly speaking, the magnetic ﬁeld inside a streamer may be treated as
a singularity in the global ﬁeld, although its size (radius) may be much greater
than the standard Debye length and typical plasma skin depth. Under such
assumption, we have tested the evolution time of an isolated plasma column
treated as a longitudinal cylindrical ﬁlament. Mechanical eﬀects leading to
energy losses can be neglected in a force-free state because of this energy
decay is given by the volume integral

ǫmech. =

v · (J × B)dr

Z

(6)

which vanishes exactly inside any streamer. Otherwise, magnetic ﬁeld diﬀu-
sion, can be reduced if the new evolutionary plasma system departs from a

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

force-free state with ﬁeld-aligned ﬂuid velocity since

∂B
∂t

= ∇ × (v × B) +

∇2B

1
µσ

11

(7)

the ﬁrst term vanishes, and ∇2B = −λ2B for a linear force-free ﬁeld having
∇ × B = λB. Thus, the magnetic ﬁeld strength B would decay exponentially
with a relaxation time τ = µσ/λ2 which increases linearly with conductivity
σ and could be very large if we associate 1/λ to a system characteristic length
L and we take for L the length of a streamer that may be several meters in
lenght.

At this stage, the question relative to justify the stability and long lifetime
of our system arises naturally. Since exploring quantitatively the stability
of the conﬁguration is still a subject for future works, we only treat here
with the problem of ordinary dissipative processes.
In an isolated simple
plasma regime without energy sources, thermal transport will lead to an
energy decay time for a plasma in a range 50 − 100µm for streamer’s width
of a fraction of second. In spite of local (streamer) and global (plasma ball)
stability is a direct consequence of the strong linkage between the ﬁlaments,
in this qualitative approach on for an isolated plasma column we must keep
in mind that the severe anisotropic structure provided by the magnetic ﬁeld
can also contribute to increase the plasma lifetime, even for a relatively small
subsystem which is a current ﬁlament.

Using the time evolution equation for the ﬂuid enthalpy volume density

(h = ρcpT,) in an air plasma

ρ

dh
dt

= −∇q + S

(8)

with mass density ρ, mass speciﬁc heat at constant pressure cp and heat ﬂux
q we deal with time dependence of kinetic temperature radial proﬁle T (r). As
the ﬁlament is supposed to be closed, above equation only takes into account
perpendicular heat ﬂux transversal to B i.e., parallel heat conduction does
not contribute eﬀectively to dissipation processes because of the closed nature
of the ﬁlament. Moreover, particles can ﬂow almost freely along the ﬁeld in
v ·
a quasi collision-less regime. Note that the mechanical energy loss rate
(J × B)dV vanishes identically if a force-free conﬁguration inside the column
is assumed. The heat ﬂux reads q = −λ⊥∇⊥T, after dropping other energy

R

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

12

sinks or sources S. Here, λ⊥ is the perpendicular component of the thermal
conductivity tensor which has been modeled assuming classical behavior [17]:
κ⊥ ≃ κk/ω2τ 2 ∼ 1/(B2T 1/2) for thermal conductivity coeﬃcients.
In this
sense, the thermal isotropic conductivity λ0 = κmcp for a reacting plasma in
air having mean molar mass m = m(T ), taken from the work of Capitelli et
al in [18], is modiﬁed by a factor ǫ = 1/(1 + ω2τ 2) providing λ⊥ = λ0ǫ. Here,
ω = eB/m is the electron gyro-frequency and τ is the collision time, obtained
from electrical standard conductivity in an air plasma. The simple force-free
magnetic ﬁeld B(r) = (0, Bφ(r), Bz(r)) in cylindrical polar coordinates is
assumed to be constant in time with Bφ increasing from zero to a maximum
value B at r = a. The functional dependence on r is not so longer relevant
for our actual aims.

As a departure state we consider a smooth radial temperature proﬁle
decaying to ambient temperature (over 1, 000K in a surrounding partially
ionized air). Since there is no physical nozzle enclosing the current, free
boundary conditions are considered, choosing as streamer eﬀective radius
a the distance at which plasma temperature is about 14, 000K. Note that
under these assumptions, the magnetic ﬁeld may provide the subsystem by
an eﬀective conﬁnement magnetic nozzle. In this sense, for instance, a similar
kind of plasma regime has been recently investigated in [19]. In this work,
the authors present a plasma regime that can be conﬁned without a physical
nozzle (magnetic nozzle system) if the plasma is collisionless only along the
magnetic ﬁeld.

As shown in ﬁgure 1, temperature diﬀusion implying ﬁlament destruction
is clearly inhibited by a strong enough local magnetic ﬁeld. This means that
transversal heat transport due to electrons is reduced in a strongly magne-
tized media. Dissipative processes would take place in a larger temporal scale
if it is compared to similar diﬀusive situations for the isotropic case (low or
null magnetic ﬁeld). Note that the temperature Tc at r = 0 also decreases
slowly when this value reaches approximately 1, 600K, around this value, the
air thermal conductivity also shows a minimum value leading the system to
be in an almost stable state with low thermal dissipation.

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

13

3 Conclusions

It can be said that the main problem for the plausibility of an electromagnetic
model of BL is to reconcile the interpretation of the classical virial theorem
with the recent arguments on electrically neutral plasmas presented by Fad-
deev and Niemi [11]. In this work, we have related the FN results with a
model of ball lightning [10, 8, 7] that uses the concept of force-free magnetic
knot. The conclusion is that a frequent argument against electromagnetic
models of ball lightning fails.

There are two other reasons why the FN result is interesting. One is that
the power emitted by a plasma ball of the size of a BL is too high (one litre at
15,000-20,000 K emits about 5 MW), which is an indication that most of the
ball is cold, only a fraction being concentrated in ﬁlamentary structures as
hot current streamers as in reference [8]. Another: it is sometimes assumed
as a matter of fact that the streamers can not last because they will be necked
or cut in a very short time by the pinch eﬀect (i.e. by the Lorentz force),
contrary to the FN result. But this does not happen if the FFF holds, since
there is no pinch eﬀect, so that the streamers would be stable. In the case
of almost FFF, the pinch eﬀect would be small and would contribute only
weakly the decay, which will be produced only after a certain much longer
time, another stabilizing factor.

Force-free states can be reached not only under Taylor assumptions, such
states may also appear in Nature as a consequence of the implication of
dissipative processes as thermal conduction during (and after) magnetic re-
connection that also plays a signiﬁcant role in ﬁeld-current aligned structure,
charge acceleration and redistribution of global helicity to improve stability
and self-organized quasi-force-free state. The ordinary dissipative processes
are drastically reduced due to anisotropic structure in the system induced
by the magnetic ﬁeld.Thus, a self-organized plasma structure through charge
and currents concentration in linked ﬁlaments can provide a stable long living
plasma system with reduced dissipation.

References

Press

[1] Singer, S. 1971. The Nature of Ball Lightning. New York: Plenum

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

14

[2] Barry, J. D. 1980. Ball Lightning and Bead Lightning. Extreme forms

of atmospheric electricity. New York: Plenum Press

[3] Stenhoﬀ, M. 1999. Ball lightning: An Unsolved Problem in Atmo-

spheric Physics. Dordrecht: Kluwer

[4] Finkelstein, D. & Rubinstein, J. 1964. Ball lightning. Physical Re-

view A 135: 390

[5] Abrahamson, J. & Dinniss, J. 2000. “Ball lightning caused by oxida-
tion of nanoparticle networks from normal lightning strikes on soil”.
Nature, 403: 519-521

[6] Bychkov, V.L. 2002. Polymer-composite ball lightning. Philosophical

Transactions of the Royal Society, A 360: 37

[7] A.F. Ra˜nada and J.L. Trueba, Nature 383, 32 (1996).

[8] A.F. Ra˜nada, M. Soler and J.L. Trueba, J. Geophys. Res. 103, D18,

23309-23313 (1998).

[9] J.B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 741 (1986).

[10] A.F. Ra˜nada, M.Soler and J.L. Trueba, Phys. Rev. E 62 (5) 7181-

7190 (2000).

[11] L.Faddeev and A.J. Niemi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3416 (2000).

[12] A. F. Ra˜nada, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 23, L815 (1990).

[13] T. Yokoyaman and K. Shibata. The Astrophy. J. 472, 61-64, 1997.

[14] S. Chandrasekhar, Ellipsoidal Figures in Equilibrium (Dover, New

[15] S. Chandrasekhar and L. Woltjer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 44,

York, 1987).

285 (1958)

[16] Shao-ping Zhu, Phys. Plasmas 3, 2821 (1996)

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

15

[17] S.I. Braginskii, Transport Processes in Plasma. Reviews of Plasma

Physics, (Consultants Bureau, New York, 1965) Vol. 1:205

[18] M. Capitelli, G. Colonna, C. Gorse and A. D’Angola, Eur. Phys. J.

D. 11, (2000)279-289

[19] Zhehui Wang and Cris W. Barnes, Phys. Plasmas, 8 (2001)957

On electromagnetic models of ball lightning

16

)
r
(
T

c
T

 

2

1.75

1.5

1.25

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

2

1.75

1.5

1.25

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

)
r
(
T

2

1.75

1.5

1.25

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

2

1.75

1.5

1.25

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0

0

r/a

c
T

 

0

0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

r/a

0

0

0.05

0

0

0.05

0.1
x 10

-2

t

0.1
x 10

-5

t

Figure 1: Kinetic Temperature proﬁles inside a ﬁlament
Radial temperature streamer proﬁle in 104K. Under a strong magnetic ﬁeld the free streamer
radius tend to be constant and diﬀusion expansion is drastically reduced changing the char-
acteristics temporal scale. Time evolution of central temperature T c(t), (t in s) at r = 0 is also
shown. Clearly, the system exhibits a large time scale evolution for magnetized ﬁlament.
The slope for almost linear decreasing T c(t) is greater under small or vanishing magnetic
ﬁeld.

