Radiation-induced solitary waves in hot plasmas

F.V.Prigara

Institute of Microelectronics and Informatics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
21 Universitetskaya, 150007 Yaroslavl, Russia∗

(Dated: November 24, 2013)

Abstract

It is argued that, in a hot plasma interacting with thermal radiation, there exist the radiation-

induced solitary waves diﬀerent from the types of nonlinear waves in plasmas known so far. There

are extensive observational evidence for the propagation of these speciﬁc density waves in the hot

plasmas of various astrophysical objects. Radiation produces also non-adiabatic density perturba-

tions analogues to the second sound in the liquid helium.

PACS numbers: 52.25.Qs, 52.35.Sb, 95.30.Gv, 95.30.Jx.

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: fprigara@imras.yar.ru

1

In hot plasmas, the interaction between radiation and matter plays a very important

role. In fact, a hot plasma is a four-component medium which includes the electron and ion

ﬂuids, magnetic ﬁeld, and radiation. Each of the ﬁrst three components produces its own

branch of linear and nonlinear waves in plasmas [1,2]. Plasma waves and Langmuir envelope

solitons correspond to the electron ﬂuid. Ion sound and ion-sound shocks correspond to the

ion ﬂuid. Magnetic ﬁeld is responsible for magnetosonic and Alfven waves, and also for the

magnetosonic shocks and solitary waves [3].

Quite similarly, the radiation component of a hot plasma produces its own branches

of linear and nonlinear waves. Linear radiation-induced waves are non-adiabatic density

perturbations, or entropy density waves, similar to the second sound in a superﬂuid [4].Here

the density of entropy can be interpreted as the number of photons per one nuclon so as in

the Friedmann’s cosmological models with hot matter [5,6].

The nonlinear branch includes radiation-induced density waves in hot plasmas which are

considered in more detail below.

To introduce the radiation-induced density waves in hot plasmas, consider at ﬁrst the

energy distribution of atoms (ions) in the ﬁeld of thermal radiation. We restrict themselves

to the case of the suﬃciently rareﬁed plasma when the line broadening due to the gas pressure

is negligible.

was obtained [7] in the form

Recently, the energy distribution of atoms in the ﬁeld of thermal blackbody radiation

N/N0 = σaω2/ (cid:0)2πc2

(cid:1) (exp (~ω/kT ) − 1) ,

(1)

where N0 is the population of the ground state E0, N is the population of the energy level
E = E0 + ~ω, σa is the absorption cross-section, ~ is the Planck constant, and T is the

This distribution is valid in the range ~ω/kT > 1, since in the limit ~ω/kT → 0 the line

width is going to inﬁnity, that indicates the violation of the one-particle approximation used

radiation temperature.

in [7].

The function (1) has a maximum at ~ωm = 1.6kT . When the temperature exceeds the
critical value of T0 = 3 × 107K (the inversion temperature), the population of the energy

level E exceeds the population of the ground state E0. Since the function (1) is increasing

in the range ω < ωm , the inversion of the energy level population is produced also in

2

some vicinity of ωm (below ωm). This suggests the maser ampliﬁcation of thermal radio

emission in continuum by a hot plasma with the temperature exceeding the critical value

T0. Maser ampliﬁcation in compact radio sources was assumed earlier in [8] based on the

high brightness temperatures of active galactic nuclei. Since a hot plasma in an accretion

disk is concentrated nearby the central energy source, maser ampliﬁcation is characteristic

for compact radio sources.

It is clear that, when the temperature of a plasma is below T0, the radio ﬂux is very small,

and when the temperature exceeds T0, radio emission is on. This an on-oﬀ cycle is detected

in the radio pulsar PSR B1259-63 [9]. Similar is an on-oﬀ cycle in X-ray pulsars, e.g., the

35-day cycle in Her X-1. It implies that X-ray emission from X-ray pulsars is produced by

the laser ampliﬁcation in continuum which is quite analogues to maser ampliﬁcation at radio

wavelengths.

It was shown recently [7] that thermal emission has a stimulated character. According

to this conception thermal emission from non-uniform gas is produced by an ensemble of

individual emitters. Each of these emitters is an elementary resonator the size of which has

an order of magnitude of mean free path l of photons

where n is the number density of particles and σ is the absorption cross-section.

The emission of each elementary resonator is coherent, with the wavelength

(2)

(3)

and thermal emission of gaseous layer is incoherent sum of radiation produced by individual

emitters.

An elementary resonator emits in the direction opposite to the direction of the density

gradient. The wall of the resonator corresponding to the lower density is half-transparent

due to the decrease of absorption with the decreasing gas density.

The condition (3) implies that the radiation with the wavelength λ is produced by the

gaseous layer with the deﬁnite number density of particles n .

The condition (3) is consistent with the experimental results by Looney and Brown on the

excitation of plasma waves by electron beam (see [1,10]). The wavelength of standing wave

l =

1
nσ

λ = l,

3

with the Langmuir frequency of oscillations depends on the density as predicted by equation

(2). The discrete spectrum of oscillations is produced by the non-uniformity of plasma

and the readjustment of the wavelength to the length of resonator. From the results of

experiment by Looney and Brown the absorption cross-section for plasma can be evaluated.

The product of the wavelength by density is weakly increasing with the increase of density.

This may imply the weak dependence of the size of elementary resonator in terms of the

wavelength upon the density or, equivalently, wavelength.

If the temperature of plasma exceeds the inversion temperature, T0, then the inversion

of energy level population is created.

In this case thermal radiation from an elementary

resonator is ampliﬁed by the laser mechanism and emitted in the direction of decreasing gas

density, as earlier.

The time of life for an elementary resonator has an order of magnitude

∼
= l/viT

∼
= l/cs,

τ

(4)

(5)

where viT is the ion thermal velocity, and cs is the speed of sound. Such is the time

duration of the light pulse produced by an elementary resonator.

The absorption of this radiation pulse by the nearby gaseous layer leads to the heating of

a plasma and its density perturbations. The radiation pulse is then re-emitted by the new

virtual elementary resonator in a plasma. In such a manner, the radiation-induced density

wave propagates through the hot plasma. The width of the density wave has an order of

magnitude

∼
= cτ

∼
= cl/cs,

∆

where c is the speed of light.

Various astrophysical objects, such as active galactic nuclei, X-ray binaries, young pulsars,

have hot accretion disks (e.g., [11]). Since the density gradient in an accretion disk is directed

along the radius, the radiation-induced density wave in a hot plasma of an accretion disk

normally propagates as the radial density wave, though the transverse density wave is also

possible and seems to be observed in some pulsars.

The inversion of energy level population associated with the radial density wave produces

a moving pulse of coherent radiation with the changing wavelength determined by equations

4

(2) and (3). Such are the radio pulses from pulsars [12].

In fact, the inversion of energy level population corresponding to the radio band (in some

vicinity of ωm below it - see Sec. 2) exists also at the temperatures below the inversion

temperature, T0. This conclusion is conﬁrmed by the temperature proﬁle in active galactic

nuclei [13] which is virial, i.e.

T ∝ r−1,

(6)

where r is the distance from the central energy source. Although the temperature is de-

creasing with the increase of the radius, maser ampliﬁcation of radio emission producing the

high brightness temperatures is observed in the wide range of wavelengths corresponding,

in accordance with equation (3), to the wide range of the radius scales.

However, there are no observed pulsed emission from the active galactic nuclei, contrary

to the pulsars. Since the temperature proﬁle in pulsars is diﬀerent from those given by

equation (6) and has a form [12]

dT /dr > 0,

(7)

it is clear, that a hot plasma is required for triggering of radio and X-ray pulses. Another

feature, by which pulsars diﬀer from active galactic nuclei, is the high ratio of the gas

pressure to magnetic pressure (beta) in pulsars’ plasmas [12].

It suggests that the strong magnetic ﬁeld is not obligatory for the propagation of the

radiation-induced density waves in hot plasmas. However, if the strong magnetic ﬁeld is

present, it determines the direction in which the density wave is propagating. Such seems

to be the case of solar microwave bursts. The radiation-induced density wave propagates

along a loop causing the strong correlation in the modulation of radio and X-ray emission
over a large distance (1010cm) in the solar corona [14].

Some X-ray binaries, e.g. Sco X-1, show weak emission lines with the variable intensi-

ties and radial velocities. These features are characteristic for non-saturated lasers. The

wavelength of generated mode is determined by the size of an elementary resonator which

is depending on the density. The radial density wave travelling along the radius changes

the density which results in the variations of the wavelength. Convection or advection in

the gaseous disk produces a two-temperature plasma in which it is possible to create the

5

inversion of the energy level population. This gives rise to the weak lasers similar to the

weak molecular masers.

The radial density wave produces also the delay of ﬂares at low frequencies and high

frequency quasi-periodic oscillations observed in X-ray binaries.

To summarize, in a hot plasma interacting with thermal radiation, the radiation-induced

solitary waves can propagate in the direction of the decreasing plasma density.

In the

presence of the strong magnetic ﬁeld the last determines the direction of propagation for

the density waves. There is extensive observational evidence for the density waves in hot

plasmas of accretion disks and the solar corona. The question of detecting the radiation-

induced solitary waves in the hot laboratory plasmas, e.g. produced by the intense laser

beam interacting with a solid surface, remains open. An eﬀect indicative of the radiation-

induced density wave in a hot plasma is a frequency-shifting pulse of coherent radiation.

—————————————————————————————-

[1] F.F.Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, Vol. 1: Plasma

Physics (Plenum Press, New York, 1984).

[2] B.B.Kadomtsev, Collective Phenomena in Plasmas (Nauka, Moscow, 1988).

[3] P.K.Shukla, B.Eliasson, M.Marklund, Nonlinear model for magnetosonic shocklets in

plasmas, Phys. Plasmas (submitted), E-print archives, physics/0402035.

[4] L.D.Landau and E.M.Lifshitz, Fluids Mechanics (Butterworth-Heinemann, New York,

[5] L.B.Okun, Leptons and Quarks (Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1987).

[6] S.Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New York, 1972).

[7] F.V.Prigara, in Plasmas in the Laboratory and in the Universe, September 16-19,

2003, Como, Italy, E-prints archives, astro-ph/0311532 (2003).

[8] F.V.Prigara, Astron. Nachr.,324, No. S1, 425 (2003).

[9] G.J.Qiao, X.Q.Xue, R.X.Xu, H.G.Wang, and B.W.Xiao, Astron. Astrophys., 407,

1987).

L25 (2003).

[10] B.V.Alexeev, Usp. Fiz. Nauk,173, 145 (2003), Physics-Uspekhi, 46 (2003).

[11] F.Yuan, and A.Zdziarski, Luminous hot accretion ﬂows: the origin of X-ray emission

of Seyfert galaxies and black hole binaries, Month. Not. R. Astron. Soc. (submitted), E-

print archives, astro-ph/0401058 (2004).

6

[12] F.V.Prigara, in Gravitation, Cosmology and Relativistic Astrophysics, June 23-27,

2003, Kharkov, Ukraine, E-print archives, astro-ph/0307288 (2003).

[13] N.M.Nagar, A.S.Wilson, and H.Falcke, Astrophys. J., 559, L87 (2001).

[14] V.V.Grechnev, S.M.White, and M.R.Kundu, Astrophys. J., 588, 1163 (2003).

7

