4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Relationship between horizontal
Flow Velocity
& Cell lifetime for supergranulation
from SOHO Dopplergrams
U.Paniveni1, V.Krishan1, Jagdev Singh1, R.Srikanth2
1 Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Koramangala,
Bangalore-560034, India
2 Optics group, Raman Research Institute
Bangalore-560080, Karnataka, India.

ABSTRACT

A study of 50 supergranular cells obtained from SOHO Dopplergrams was un-
dertaken in order to investigate the relationship between the lifetime (T ) and
the horizontal ﬂow velocity (vh) of the cells. For this sample we ﬁnd that the
two parameters are correlated with a relation vh ∝ T 0.5 and T is identiﬁed with
the eddy turn-over time. This is in agreement with the turbulent convective
model of the solar atmosphere where the velocity spectrum of supergranular
ﬁeld given by ’vh ∝ L1/3’ can be identiﬁed with the Kolmogorov spectrum for
the eddy size L.

INTRODUCTION

Convection is the chief mode of transport of heat in the outer envelopes of cool stars
such as the sun. The convection zone which lies in the sub-photospheric layers of the
sun has a thickness of about 30% of the solar radius. Here the opacity is so large that
energy is carried by turbulent motions rather than by photon diﬀusion. The convective
motions on the sun are characterized by two prominent scales: the granulation with
a typical size of 1000 km and the supergranulation with a typical size of 30000 km.
The supergranules are regions of horizontal outﬂow along the surface, diverging from
the cell centre and subsiding ﬂow at the cell borders. Such outﬂowing regions always
show velocity of approach to the observer on the side close to the centre of the disk and
velocity of recession on the side towards the limb. Near the centre of the disk where the
horizontal outﬂows are transverse to the line-of-sight, there is less dopplershift and so the
image is almost uniformly grey. These high photospheric large convective eddies sweep
up any shreds of photospheric magnetic ﬁelds in their path from the declining active
regions into the boundaries of the cell, where they produce excess heating, resulting
in the chromospheric network. The approximate lifespan of a supergranular cell is 24
hours. Broadly speaking supergranules are characterized by the three parameters namely
length L, lifetime T and horizontal ﬂow velocity vh. The interrelationships amongst
these parameters can shed light on the underlying convective processes. Cells of a given

size associated with remnant magnetic ﬁeld regions live longer than those in the ﬁeld-
free regions (Singh et al. 1994).The lifetime of network cells was found to be larger for
active-region cells as compared to that of quiet-region cells (Raju, Srikanth and Singh
1998). Diﬀusion-like dispersion of the magnetic ﬂux is the dominant factor in the large
scale evolution of the network. The lifetime of a supergranular cell is found to depend
on the size of the cell and is larger for bigger cells (Srikanth et al. 1999). Convective
motion and magnetic inhibition of motion are both stronger in active regions, thereby
leading to similar speeds in all regimes (Srikanth, Singh and Raju, 1999). A positive
correlation between horizontal ﬂow velocity and cell size of a supergranular cell has been
established recently by Krishan et al. (2002). The corresponding dependence of lifetime
of the supergranular cell on its horizontal ﬂow velocity is expected to be vh ∝ T 0.5 where
the eddy turn-over time i.e. the crossing time for plasma from centre to edge can be
estimated from the relation T = L/vh with L as the distance from the centre to the edge
of the cell and vh is the peak horizontal ﬂow velocity of the cell. In this paper we report
on this possible interrelationship between horizontal ﬂow velocity and cell lifetime for
supergranules.

Source of data

We analysed 33 hour data of full disc Dopplergrams obtained on 28th and 29th June
1996 by the Michelson Doppler Interferometer (MDI) on board the solar and Heliospheric
observatory (SOHO) (Scherrer et al. 1995).

Figure 1: Processed SOHO Dopplergrams

Data Analysis

The SOHO full disc Dopplergram data has been obtained with a resolution of 2′′ which
is twice the granular scale. Further, the Dopplergrams are time averaged over intervals
of 10 min, which is about twice the 5-minute period of oscillations. Thus the signal
due to granular velocity is averaged out. Similarly the contributions due to p-mode
vibrations are reduced after the time averaging. Our analysis rests on the implicit belief
that time averaging removes noise signiﬁcantly. Noise is reduced in our data considerably
with 10-minute integration time, as judged from visual inspection and also as seen in
typical supergranular velocity proﬁle for our data (Figure 2). After the averaging, the
supergranular network is brought out with a fair clarity. This procedure yielded usually
six images per hour of the data. Corrections due to solar rotation are applied to the
Dopplershifts. Fifty well accentuated cells lying between 15◦ and 60◦ angular distance
from the disc centre were selected. Restricting to the above mentioned angular distance
limits helps us discount weak supergranular ﬂows as well as foreshortening eﬀects.

Data Processing
Supergranular cell speed

The line-of-sight velocities in the dark/bright region of the cells are directly read oﬀ from
the velocity scan. Among them the ﬁrst three highest velocity read-outs and the last three
least velocity read-outs were selected. The maximum cell velocity is then determined as
the average of the former three values minus the average of the latter three. This fur-
nishes a simple way to assign a peak horizontal ﬂow velocity vh to a given cell that is
independent of large scale velocity gradients. To see this let us write vmax = |vh| + v⊕
where v⊕ represents contributions due to large scale gradients in the velocity ﬁeld and
vmin = −|vh| + v⊕. Then half the diﬀerence of vmax and vmin is the required peak hori-
zontal velocity vh. Three pairs of values were chosen to add robustness. Now, it is a fact
that even a randomly noisy velocity ﬁeld can, by our method of choice of three largest
velocities, be biased to yield some spurious relations (eg.,larger cells showing larger ve-
locity). Hence it is of considerable importance to be certain that the data is not noisy
at the level of interest. The ten-minute time-averaging removes noise to a level suﬃcient
for our purpose. This was clear from a visual inspection of the images. More speciﬁcally,
the selected three peak positive velocity points and the three peak negative points are
not spiky and ﬁt in smoothly with the surrounding ﬂow pattern and hence the chosen
peaks are with very high probability part of the velocity proﬁle and not noise. This is
depicted for a typical cell proﬁle in Figure 2. Dopplergrams give us the line-of-sight ve-
locity component. Geometrically it has a contribution from the local horizontal ﬂow ﬁeld
vh and vertical ﬂow ﬁeld vv. Normally, the vertical component can be ignored because the
convective upwelling, concentrated towards the cell centre, and the downﬂows, along the
periphery of the cell, are typically much smaller. However, regions with a considerable
vertical component of velocity are not improbable. For example, the upﬂow regions can
be as broad as 10′′ (K¨uveler 1983). More importantly, it follows from basic trignometric
arguments that our method of velocity selection will tend to pick up the three largest
positive values from approaching ﬂows with a considerable upﬂow component, and the
(magnitudinally) largest negative values from receding ﬂows with a considerable down-

ward component. Therefore, in order to account for this residual vv contribution (where
we treat upﬂows and downﬂows symmetrically for simplicity), we need to make an as-
sumption about the relation connecting vh and vv. The velocity derived from our analysis
is based on this assumption. In the reported literature, vh is known to be larger than
vv. This is also supported by mass conservation law (Krishan 1999 and Krishan et al.
2002). Direct inspection of the disk center yields vertical velocities of about 200 m s−1.
For vh = 539.15 m s−1, which we obtain as mean value, this implies a value closer to
r ≡ vv/vh = 0.4. Hence this value of r is adopted for the present analysis.

Supergranular cell lifetime

The 33 hour data is spread over 198 frames with a 10 minute interval between the con-
secutive frames. Only those cells which appear and disappear within the chosen period of
33 hours are considered. This excludes cells already present in the ﬁrst frame and those
still present in the last frame. Thus the selected cells were born a few frames after the
ﬁrst. A particular supergranular cell thus identiﬁed is tracked down the successive frames
until it disappears completely in a particular frame. Lifetime is identiﬁed to be the time
interval between its ﬁrst appearance and ﬁnal disappearance.

Results

A large dispersion in the supergranular lifetime and horizontal velocity is noted. The main
results pertaining to the maximum, the minimum, the mean and the standard deviation
for horizontal ﬂow velocity vh and cell lifetime T are summarized in Table 1.(Computed
using r = 0.4.)

T (hr)
vh(m/s)
L(Mm)

Max
32.00
661.06
42.79

Min
16.00
402.33
17.63

Mean Σ
22.00
539.15
27.42

3.0
1.8
5.75

Table 1: Maximum, minimum, mean and standard deviation for cell lifetime (T ) and cell
peak horizontal ﬂow velocity (vh) and cell size(L).

In previous studies cell lifetimes were derived by cross-correlation technique (Raju, Srikanth
and Singh 1998a). The analysis was based on diﬀusion co-eﬃcients of the network mag-
netic elements and was identiﬁed as a ’diﬀusion lifetime’. Estimation of lifetime by visual
inspection method rests on the crossing time for plasma from centre to edge of the cell
(Krishan 1999). Hence visual inspection is expected to lead to the eddy turn-over time
given by T = L/vh. Visual inspection is a fairly foolproof method, though laborious. The
sample is quite small but is characteristic for diﬀerent epochs and regions.
Figure (3) presents a plot of square of the peak horizontal ﬂow velocity with r = 0.4 and
cell lifetime. A powerlaw of the form

vh = CT α

(1)

was ﬁtted to the data using the least squares method. For r = 0.4, we ﬁnd C = 0.001
and α =1.09.Its intercept gives the value of ǫ ≈ 1.37 × 10−6km2s−3. Figure (3) clearly
shows that the two parameters are well correlated and the correlation co-eﬃcient between
v2
h and T is about 0.78.

Discussion and conclusions

In an earlier study (Krishan 1991), it was suggested that the granulation and supergran-
ulation are the result of energy cascading processes in a turbulent medium. Recently
we showed that the velocity spectrum of the supergranular ﬁeld very closely agrees with
Kolmogorov’s spectrum vh = ǫ1/3L1/3 (Krishan et al.2002) where ǫ is the energy injec-
tion rate. Deﬁning the eddy turn-over time to be the lifetime of the cell, we can write
T = L/vh. Combining with the Kolmogorov spectrum vh = ǫ1/3L1/3, we ﬁnd

vh = ǫ1/2T 1/2

(2)

Comparing (1) and (2) we see that C = ǫ1/2 and hence ǫ = 10−6km2s−3 which is very
close to the value of ǫ obtained earlier by us (Krishan et al. 2002) from the velocity vh and
size L relationship with diﬀerent data. Using the data of peak horizontal ﬂow velocity of
50 supergranular cells and their sizes, we have plotted the data of vh against L as shown
Its intercept gives the value of ǫ ≈ 5.26 × 10−6 km2s−3 and a slope of
in Figure (4).
0.33. The correlation co-eﬃcient for vh and L1/3 of 0.68 is obtained. Thus we conclude
that the supergranular velocity ﬁeld is well accounted for by the Kolmogorov spectrum
vh = ǫ1/3L1/3 with eddy turn-over time realised from vh = ǫ1/2T 1/2 . A comparison of
the theoretical energy spectrum of granulation (∝ K −5/3), mesogranulation (∝ K −1) and
supergranulation (∝ K −5/3) (Krishan 1991 ; 1996) with the observed energy spectrum
of granulation (∝ K −5/3), mesogranulation (∝ K −0.7) and supergranulation (∝ K −5/3)
(Malherbe et al.1987; Zahn 1987; Keil et al.1994) appears to point at the phenomenon of
the inverse cascade of energy operating in the solar convective turbulence.

References

[1] Keil, S et al., 1994, Infrared Solar Physics, eds. D. M. Rabin et al. p. 251.

[2] Krishan,V.,1991, MNRAS, 250, 50

[3] Krishan,V.,1996 Bull.Astrom.Soc.India, 24, 285.

[4] Krishan, V.,Astrophysical Plasmas and Fluids (Kluwer,Boston 1999)

[5] Krishan,V., Paniveni,U., Singh,J., Srikanth,R., 2002, MNRAS, 334/1, 230

[6] Malherbe, J.M., Mein, P., Muller, R., Roudier, R.,Coutard, C., Hellier, R., 1987,
in Mouradian, Z., Lemaire, P.eds Colloque Themis, College de France, 5-6 March
1987, p.53.

[7] K¨uveler, G., 1983, Sol. Phys. 88, 13.

[8] Raju, K.P., Srikanth, R. and Jagdev Singh: 1998, Solar Physics, 180, 47.

[9] Robert,W. Noyes, The Sun, Our star (Harvard University press 1982)

[10] Singh, J., Nagabhushana, B. S., Babu, G. S. D. and Wahab Uddin, 1994, Solar

Physics, 153, 157

[11] Srikanth, R., Singh J. and Raju, K. P., 1999, Solar Physics, 187, 1.

[12] Srikanth, R., Raju, K. P. and Singh, J., 1999, Solar Physics, 184, 267

[13] Zahn, J.P.,1987, Solar and Stellar Physics,, eds.E. H. Schr¨oter and M. Schussler

(Berlin: Springer-Verlag) p.55.

Acknowledgement

We thank Dr. P.H. Scherrer and the SOHO consortium for providing us with
MDI/SOI data.

Figure 2: Proﬁle of the line of sight velocity component vL in ms−1 on the y-axis against
cell extent x in pixels on the x-axis
.

Figure 3: Plot of square of Peak horizontal velocity of the supergranular cell v2
h against
cell lifetime.The measured values are represented by the plusses. The line is based on a
least squares ﬁt to Eq. (1).

Figure 4: Plot of peak horizontal velocity vh against cell size L. The measured values are
represented by plusses. The line is based on least squares ﬁt to the equation vh = ǫ1/3L1/3

