Draft version February 2, 2008
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 04/03/99

4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PRELIMINARY MODELING OF AIR BREAKDOWN WITH THE ICEPIC CODE

A.E. Schulz1,2, A.D. Greenwood1, K.L. Cartwright1, P.J. Mardahl1, R.E. Peterkin1, N.
Bruner3, T. Genoni3, T.P. Hughes3, D. Welch3

1Air Force Research Laboratory, Directed Energy Directorate, Kirtland AFB, NM 87117
2Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
3Mission Research Corporation, Albuquerque, NM 87110

ABSTRACT

Interest in air breakdown phenomena has recently
been re-kindled with the advent of advanced vir-
tual prototyping of radio frequency (RF) sources
for use in high power microwave (HPM) weapons
technology. Air breakdown phenomena are of in-
terest because the formation of a plasma layer at
the aperture of an RF source decreases the trans-
mitted power to the target, and in some cases can
cause signiﬁcant reﬂection of RF radiation. Under-
standing the mechanisms behind the formation of
such plasma layers will aid in the development of
maximally eﬀective sources. This paper begins with
some of the basic theory behind air breakdown, and
describes two independent approaches to modeling
the formation of plasmas, the dielectric ﬂuid model
and the Particle in Cell (PIC) approach. Finally we
present the results of preliminary studies in numer-
ical modeling and simulation of breakdown.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The subject of RF breakdown of air is one of par-
ticular interest to any current eﬀort in designing
a device to project a high power electromagnetic
signal over some distance through the atmosphere.
In the case of high power microwave devices, air
breakdown interferes with the transmission of RF
power, and in some cases reﬂects a large fraction
of that power back toward the source. It is useful
to study the details of how the breakdown occurs
in order to answer several important questions. At
what point after initial exposure to the RF signal
does the breakdown occur? What ﬁeld intensities
cause it to begin? What densities are reached, and
what is the density proﬁle throughout the gas be-
ing ionized? What ionization states are produced?
How do the properties of the medium change, and
what is the net eﬀect on the propagation of the RF
signal?

To begin answering these questions, it is neces-
sary to investigate the air chemistry and types of
interactions that electrons driven by the RF ﬁelds

will have with the surrounding gas, and also with
the device emitting the RF signal. High-energy elec-
trons and ions that collide with background neutral
gas molecules can cause impact ionization. High-
energy electrons that collide with solid walls can
produce secondary electrons. Both types of colli-
sion events have the potential to modify the plasma
density, and hence can inﬂuence the physical be-
havior of the device under investigation. Thus, for
more realistic numerical simulations, we have begun
to develop numerical models for both of these time-
Including
dependent plasma formation processes.
these eﬀects will be crucial for any future virtual
prototyping of high power microwave devices, cur-
rently in development at the Air Force Research
Laboratory. Understanding how the properties of
the medium change will allow us to maximize the
eﬀectiveness of microwave source design.

In this paper we begin a careful investigation of
the physics behind breakdown processes. Section 2
outlines some basic theory surrounding the physics
of breakdown. Section 3 describes our modeling
techniques for propagating an electromagnetic sig-
nal through a medium, including a bulk treatment
of the plasma as a dielectric ﬂuid, and also a model
of plasma electrons using a Particle in Cell (PIC)
approach. Section 4 includes an investigation of the
role of the collision frequency in the breakdown pro-
cess. Also in section 4 we present the results of a
full breakdown simulation in helium, a simpler gas
than air, employing the dielectric ﬂuid breakdown
model. Finally in section 5 we draw conclusions and
outline plans for future research.

2. BREAKDOWN BASICS

The basic mechanism of RF breakdown is a catas-
trophic growth in the density of electrons in the
medium, driven by the energy taken from the inci-
dent electromagnetic signal. Several conditions are
necessary for this process to occur eﬃciently; there

1

2

Air Breakdown Modeling with ICEPIC

must be a signiﬁcant population of background elec-
trons to begin the ionization avalanche, there must
be suﬃcient energy in the wave to impart ionizing
energies to the electrons being accelerated, and the
rate at which the background gas is being ionized
must exceed the rates at which electrons are lost
through attachment, diﬀusion and recombination.
The evolution of the number density is governed by
the equation

∂Ne
∂t

= λ + νiNe − νaNe − νdNe − ζN 2
e

(1)

where the terms are: λ, the quiescent generation
of electrons due to background radiation such as
cosmic rays, νi, the ionization frequency, νa, the
attachment frequency, νd, the diﬀusion frequency,
and ζ, the recombination rate constant. At at-
mospheric temperatures and pressures νa >> νd
and νa >> ζNe, so attachment is the loss mecha-
nism which imposes the strongest constraint on the
breakdown threshold. The ionization and attach-
ment frequencies are given by

νi =

νa =

αeEef f
mνc
βeEef f
mνc

E2

ef f =

E2
rms
1 + ω2/ν2
c

(2)

(3)

(4)

where

Here νc is the collision frequency that includes all
momentum transferring events, and α, β, and νc
all depend on the mean electron energy W , which
evolves according to the equation

dW
dt

=

e2Eef f 2
mνc

−

2m
M

νcW − νiW

(5)

The ﬁrst term in this equation represents the energy
gained under the inﬂuence of the RF ﬁeld, and the
loss terms are from inelastic collisions and ionizing
collisions respectively. Functional forms for α and
β and much of the theory presented in this section
can also be found in Anderson et. al. 1984.

Just how the concept breakdown is deﬁned is a
matter of some debate. The conventional wisdom
is that when the electron density becomes so large
that the plasma frequency grows comparable the
the frequency of the RF radiation, the signal can no
longer propagate through the medium, and break-
down has occurred. We agree that interference with
the propagation of the signal is an adequate deﬁni-
tion of breakdown. However we shall demonstrate
later in this section that because the electrons suf-
fer collisions with the background gas molecules, the

threshold at which the propagation is impacted can
sometimes correspond to plasma frequencies that
are considerably higher than the frequency of the
RF signal. Nonetheless, for the purposes of devel-
oping some intuition about breakdown it is useful
to compare the plasma frequency with the RF fre-
quency.

The extent of the breakdown that occurs depends
somewhat on whether the medium is exposed to
a continuous or a pulsed RF signal. The break-
down criterion for a continuous signal is simply that
∂n/∂t > 0. Because the signal never shuts oﬀ,
there is no time limit and the plasma frequency will
eventually grow to be comparable to the continu-
ous wave frequency, and thus aﬀect the signal. The
only condition for breakdown via continuous RF ra-
diation is that the energy be large enough to ionize
more electrons than are being lost to attachment,
diﬀusion, and recombination.

The breakdown criterion for a single pulse is a
little more complex but not diﬃcult to understand.
Because of the limited pulse length, τ , dn/dt must
be large enough to make ωp ∼ ωRF on timescales
less than τ . If this condition is not met, the pulse
will pass through the medium unaﬀected. The rate
of density growth depends on the mean electron
energy W , which depends on the ﬁeld strength.
Therefore, shorter pulses will require higher ﬁeld
strengths than longer ones in order to suﬀer break-
down eﬀects. When breakdown occurs in a pulse,
the eﬀect is typically that the back portion is either
absorbed or reﬂected, which is often referred to as
tail erosion. Fig. (1) depicts the passage of a square
pulse through a region of gas which in time is get-
ting ionized and aﬀecting the pulse shape. At early
times, the gas has a small ionization fraction and
is virtually transparent to the incident electromag-
netic signal, which explains why the front portion
of the pulse is unaﬀected. The radiation accelerates
the few existing electrons, and begins to lose its en-
ergy to heating and ionization of the background
gas molecules. As the electron density grows, the
plasma begins to reﬂect an increasing fraction of
the incident wave, resulting in smaller transmitted
power. This is responsible for eroding the back half
of the pulse.

The breakdown criterion for repeated pulses is
similar to that of the single pulse, with the added
complication that while the signal is oﬀ, the electron
density is decreasing because of the attachment, dif-
fusion, and recombination loss mechanisms. Multi-
ple pulses relax the requirement on ∂Ne/∂t since the
driving ﬁeld will return several times to feed energy
into the plasma. The breakdown requirement there-
fore depends both on pulse length τ and on the pulse
repetition frequency τprf . During the time when the

Schulz et. al.

3

with the background gas. The plasma is held at
a constant density, corresponding to a plasma fre-
quency of ωp = 21.45. On the left side of the
plot the transmission coeﬃcients asymptote to their
values in the collisionless regime. Four of the fre-
quencies plotted are above the plasma frequency,
whereas the ﬁfth is below it, and in the collision-
less case would be perfectly reﬂected by the plasma
layer.
In the case of the four transmitting fre-
quencies, when the collision frequency is increased
(corresponding perhaps to a higher density of back-
ground gas) the signal is being absorbed into heat-
ing of the background gas. Notice however that
as the collision frequency is increased further, the
mobility and energy transfer of the electrons is so
hampered that all the frequencies begin to transmit
through the plasma layer, regardless of whether ωp
is less than or greater than ωRF .

Fig. 2.— The theoretical prediction for the transmission
coeﬃcient for several diﬀerent RF frequencies as a function
of the collision frequency νc of electrons in the plasma with
background neutral gas. The plasma density is held ﬁxed,
with a plasma frequency of ωp = 21.45 GHz.

3. METHOD

3.1. The Dielectric Fluid Model

For dense plasmas, it is a good approximation to
treat the plasma as a ﬂuid with a frequency depen-
dent dielectric constant. In the presence of EM ra-
diation, this approximation is good for time-scales
over which the ﬂuid moves a small amount. The
dielectric constant used in the ﬂuid approximation
is (in terms of the permittivity of free space ǫ0, the
collision frequency νc, and the frequency of the elec-

Fig. 1.— This cartoon shows how the passage of a pulse
through a region of gas causes ionization of the gas and
an increase in the electron density. As the electron density
grows, more of the energy in the pulse is being absorbed
or reﬂected, changing the shape of the wave-form that is
transmitted through the region.

pulse is oﬀ τprf −τ , the electron density is decaying,
so the breakdown criterion for and inﬁnite string of
pulses will be that ∆Ne(on) > ∆Ne(oﬀ).

Introducing collisions into the picture complicates
things substantially. The eﬀect of a high collision
frequency νc is to retard the rate of density growth,
and also to retard the erosion of the transmitted sig-
nal. To understand this, consider ﬁrst that a high
collision frequency means that the mean free path
and the mean free time between collisions are both
very short. On eﬀect of the short mean free time is
that the electron being accelerated in the RF ﬁeld
does not often have time to gather suﬃcient en-
ergy to ionize a gas molecule before it collides again.
Each time it collides, it loses whatever small energy
it gained in the acceleration to the neutral atom it
collided with, so ionizing events become much rarer.
For the same reason, the electrons are also much less
eﬃcient at removing energy from the RF signal and
dumping it into heating of the gas.

A consequence of the short mean free path re-
sulting from a high collision frequency is that the
electrons become much less mobile. Conﬁning the
electrons close to their original locations eﬀectively
makes the plasma behave less like a metal than
when the electrons are highly mobile. The fre-
quent collisions prevent the electrons from displac-
ing from their ion friends and counteracting the
incident ﬁeld. Thus, a high collision frequency
greatly decreases the eﬃciency of reﬂecting the sig-
nal, even when the electron densities are so high
that ωp ∼ ωRF . Fig.
(2) illustrates this point
by showing the net transmitted signal through a
plasma layer as a function of the collision frequency

4

Air Breakdown Modeling with ICEPIC

tromagnetic radiation ωEM)

ǫ = ǫ0

1 −

 

ω2
p
ωEM(ωEM + iνc) !

(6)

where the plasma frequency ωp depends on the den-
sity n0 and species (m, q) of the ionized particles,
p = n0q2/mǫ0.
and is given by ω2

To model high density plasma in the time domain,
consider Ampere’s law with the plasma dielectric
constant;

∇ × B(x, ω) =

µ0ǫ0

−iω +

 

ω2
p
νc − iω !

E(x, ω)

(7)

The equivalent expression in the time domain is
given by

∇ × B(x, t) = µ0ǫ0

∂E(x, t)
∂t
t

−∞

Z

+ ω2

pµ0ǫ0

−νc(t−τ )E(x, τ )dτ (8)

e

Diﬀerentiating Eq.
(8) with respect to time and
substituting the result back into Eq. (8) eliminates
the convolution integral and yields the following ex-
pression used to deﬁne the ﬁeld update equations in
the dielectric ﬂuid model.

∂2E(x, t)
∂t2

+ νc

∂E(x, t)
∂t

E(x, t)

+ ω2
p
∂B(x, t)
∂t

+ νcB(x, t)

(9)

(cid:19)

=

1
µ0ǫ0

∇ ×

(cid:18)

This expression is used together with Faraday’s law
used for updating B to deﬁne the ﬁeld update equa-
tions in the dielectric ﬂuid model. It can be shown
that this method exhibits 2nd order accuracy. The
demonstration of this accuracy and the details of the
approximations used in this model can be found in
Schulz et. al. 2004.

3.2. Collisions and air chemistry in the ﬂuid

model

Breakdown models for helium, dry air, air with
water content, argon and SF6 have been developed
for the ICEPIC code. These models are valid for
atmospheric pressures. The static parameters used
in the model are the composition of the gaseous
medium, the gas temperature, and the gas density.
Several rates have been tabulated in advance so that
ICEPIC simulations need only reference look-up ta-
bles, instead of numerically solving the Boltzmann

equation on the spot. As a function of the magni-
tude of the RF ﬁeld over the pressure E/p, the look-
up tables store the collision frequency, the ionization
rate, the electron attachment rates, recombination
rates, and the electron temperature. The values
in these tables are determined by using the EEDF
software package to calculate the electron energy
distribution function in the gas mixtures. This is
done by using experimentally determined interac-
tion cross sections to numerically solve the steady
state Boltzmann equation for the isotropic part of
the distribution function.

The dry air model consists of a mixture of N2,
O2, and Ar in a ratio of 78/21/1. Several diﬀer-
ent air chemistry processes are modeled in the ﬂuid
breakdown treatment. They are outlined as follows:

Elastic Collisions
e− + M → M + e−

Excitation
e− + M → M ∗ + e−

Ionization
e− + N2 → N +
e− + O2 → O+
e− + O2 → O+ + O + 2e−
e− + Ar → Ar+ + 2e−

2 + 2e−
2 + 2e−

3-Body Attachment
−
e− + O2 + M → O
2 + M

Dissociative Attachment
e− + O2 → O− + O

Recombination
e− + N +
e− + O+

2 → N + N
2 → O + O

In the ICEPIC simulation, the electron density,
collision frequency, and electron temperature are all
stored for each cell. The lookup tables are used for
all the gas mixtures to evolve the number density of
electrons in each timestep according Eq. (1). From
this number density new eﬀective values of ωp and
νc are computed. These quantities are used to up-
date the dielectric constant from Eq. (1). Finally
the E and B ﬁelds are advanced in ICEPIC, and
the process begins anew.

The air model that includes humidity is tabulated
for four possible values of water molecule content;
1%, 2%, 3%,and 4%, where 4% is fully saturated
air at room temperature. Since the data are rea-
sonably smooth functions, it is reasonable to inter-
polate for intermediate values of E/p and water con-

Schulz et. al.

5

weighting employs an exact charge conserving cur-
rent weighting algorithm by Villasenor & Buneman 1992,
enforcing ∇ · E = ρ/ǫ0. Once the particles’ posi-
tions and velocities are updated and the new current
density is updated on the grid, the solution process
starts over again by solving the ﬁeld equations.

tent. Water vapor is electronegative, so the eﬀect
of introducing it into the gas mixture is to increase
the attachment rates. The ionization rate, however,
is unaﬀected by the presence of water vapor. As a
result, the breakdown voltage increases with humid-
ity. One eﬀect that has not been implemented yet
in this model, however, is the potential presence of
water droplets in a humid environment. Because
water droplets can create local ﬁeld enhancements,
they can in principle increase the ionization rate.
Whether the increase in Ne due to water droplets
is balanced by the decrease due to higher levels of
humidity is a matter of some debate, and will be
further investigated in future work.

3.3. The Particle In Cell (PIC) treatment

ICEPIC computes the time advance of the mag-
netic ﬁeld according to Faraday’s law, and the elec-
tric ﬁeld according to Ampere-Maxwell’s law. The
discreet form of these equations used in ICEPIC
preserve the constraint equations ∇ · B = 0 and
∇ · E = ρ/ǫ0 as long as the initial data satisﬁes
these constraints. The particles used in ICEPIC are
“macro-particles” that represent many charged par-
ticles (electrons and/or ions) with a position vector
x and a velocity vector v = dx/dt. The relativistic
form of Lorentz’s force equation is used to determine
the particle’s velocity:

F = m

= q

dγv
dt

v

c

E +
(cid:16)

× B

(cid:17)

(10)

where γ is the the usual relativistic factor of (1 −
v2/c2)−1/2, and q and m are the charge and mass
of the particle.

ICEPIC uses a ﬁxed, Cartesian, logical grid to
diﬀerence the electric and magnetic ﬁeld equations.
The vector quantities E, B, and J are staggered in
their grid location using the technique of Yee 1966.
E and J are located on the edges of the primary
grid, whereas B is located on the faces of the pri-
mary grid. An explicit leap-frog time step technique
is used to advance the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
forward in time. The advantages of the leap-frog
method are simplicity and second-order accuracy.
The electric ﬁeld advances on whole integer time
steps whereas the magnetic ﬁeld and the current
density advance on half integer time steps.

The three components of the momentum and po-
sition of each particle are updated via Eq.
(10)
using the Boris relativistic particle push algorithm
Boris 1970. The particle equations for velocity and
position are also advanced with a leap-frog tech-
nique. The velocity components are advanced on
half integer time steps, and the particle positions are
updated on integer time steps. The current density

3.4. Collisions and air chemistry with PIC

The interactions suﬀered by PIC particles that
are being used to model air chemistry are electron-
neutral scattering, excitation, and ionization, and
ion-neutral scattering,
ionization, and charge ex-
change. Energetic particles that interact with a
background gas of neutral atoms have a probabil-
ity of collision Pi during a time interval ∆t that
depends on the number density of background neu-
tral gas molecules ng, the energy-dependent cross-
section σ(Ei), and velocity vi through the collision
frequency of the ith particle νi = ng(x)σ(Ei)vi.

Pi = 1 − e

−νi∆t

(11)

One scheme for determining whether the ith parti-
cle collides and interacts in a given timestep is to
calculate Pi and compare it with a uniform random
number R. For Pi > R, the particle will be collided
in this time step. However, determining collisions
in this way can be computationally expensive. It is
substantially less computationally expensive to use
the null-collision method in which we compute an
energy independent collision frequency:

νnull = MAXx(ng(x))MAXE(σ(E)v)

(12)

In this approximation we need not calculate the
cross section for every particle in every timestep.
Rather, we construct a total collision probability
PT that represents the fraction of the particles that
undergo a collision in a single timestep:

PT = 1 − e

−νnull∆t

(13)

For multiple reactions with the same background
gas, the cross-section used in Eq.
(12) is a sum
of all the individual cross-sections. This method is
applied for each background gas in the simulation.

The subset of the total number of particles under-
going a collision in a time step is chosen randomly
from the whole set. From this fraction, the energy-
dependent cross-section is used to determine if a real
collision occurs. Hence, if

ng(x)σ(Ei)νi
νnull

> R

(14)

then a collision occurs. For multiple reactions with
the same background gas, the particle must be

6

Air Breakdown Modeling with ICEPIC

tested to see if it under went a reaction with each
cross-section that was used to ﬁnd the cross-section
in Eq. (12). Even if the particle undergoes a re-
action, it still may experience a diﬀerent reaction
in the same timestep, because it represents many
particles.

The ion-neutral collisions are implemented using
the same method. For high-energy ions (100kV-
500kV), the ion collision frequency is higher than
the electron collision frequency.

We have also developed a model based on pre-
vious work by Vaughan, Shih, and Gopinath for
the secondary electron emission yield δ. This model
is not used in the breakdown studies presented in
this paper, but we mention it because it is a critical
part of modeling any experiment that has a vacuum
window, such as the bell jar experiments currently
being conducted that the Air Force Research Lab-
oratory. The secondary electron emission yield de-
pends on the energy and angle-of-incidence of the
primary electron,

δ(E, Θ) = δmax0

1 + ks

× f (w, k)

(15)

Θ2
2π

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

where

f (w, k) =






(16)

(we(1−w))k
3.0w−0.35

0.62
0.25

k =

(cid:26)

w ≤ 1
1 < w ≤ 3
w > 3

where the energy dependence appears implicitly via

w =

Emax0

E − E0
Θ2
1 + ks
2π

− E0

(17)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

4. PRELIMINARY RESULTS

To date we have used both the particle and the
ﬂuid breakdown representations to probe transmis-
sion through a plasma layer. We have used both
implementations to test our hypotheses regarding
the functional dependence of the transmission coef-
ﬁcient on the value of the collision frequency. We
have also used the ﬂuid representation to simulate
the breakdown of a gaseous medium in a two di-
mensional box. We have observed the growth of
the number density of electrons in time and space,
and have run the simulation until a steady state
is achieved. We have not been able to repeat this
portion of the investigation with the PIC represen-
tation, because of complications regarding resolu-
tion of the Debye length, which we shall summarize
along with proposed solutions to the problem.

4.1. The impact of collisions on transmission

To test our hypotheses regarding the dependence
of transmission on the collision frequency, summa-
rized in Fig. (2), we have ﬁxed the electron density
in the breakdown models. Our results are shown in
Fig. (3). It is worth mentioning that ωp in general
depends on νc because νc enters into the evolution
of the number density of electrons. However, since
we have ﬁxed ωp in this study, Fig. (3) reﬂects only
the impact of νc on the mobility and mean free time
of the plasma electrons, but not it’s changes to ωp.
It gives us intuition for how changing the mobility of
the electrons aﬀects their eﬃciency at transferring
the RF energy to the background gas (lower values
of νc), and also how limited mobility impedes their
ability to reﬂect RF energy (higher values of νc),
but it tells us nothing about how νc’s changing ωp
impacts the fraction of RF energy reﬂected.

Fig. 3.— The transmission coeﬃcient of an RF signal with
ω = 24.98 GHz as a function of the collision frequency with
background neutrals for a ﬁxed plasma density correspond-
ing to ωp = 21.45 GHz. Particle collision frequencies have
been corrected for grid heating eﬀects.

In the case of the dielectric ﬂuid model, ﬁxing
the density is an easy modiﬁcation, we simply ran
the simulations without evolving the number den-
sity and keeping the plasma frequency ﬁxed at a
particular value, but varying the collision frequency
in the dielectric constant from Eq. (1). In the PIC
case we have artiﬁcially enforced that the number
density remain the same by allowing momentum
scattering collisions to take place, but not adding
another particle to the simulation. Changes to the
collision frequency were accomplished by making
the corresponding change to the interaction cross
section. The results from the PIC computation re-
quire a more sophisticated interpretation, however,
because in these runs we had insuﬃcient compu-
tational resources to adequately resolve the Debye
length. The eﬀect of this lack of resolution of the

Schulz et. al.

7

Debye shielding is that particles in the simulation
experience electromagnetic forces from other parti-
cles that ought to have been shielded, which causes
all the particles in the simulation to heat. The col-
lision frequency in the PIC representations depends
on the temperature as well as on the cross section
σ, according to the formula

νc =

meσ2
3kBTeng

(18)

Therefore, a correction for the particle heating was
introduced in order to properly plot transmission
versus collision frequency. The correction we ap-
plied was a very rough one, essentially taking the
average temperature of all the particles in the sim-
ulation at the very end of the run, and using that
temperature along with the cross section we sup-
plied to calculate νc, the independent variable in
Fig.(4).

Another diﬃculty with the particle simulations
occurs when the collision frequency grows enough to
require multiple collisions per cell, per timestep of
the simulation. This essentially causes the run time
to increase dramatically, and we did not complete
any simulations for collisions frequencies past this
threshold.
In future it would be extremely useful
to probe this part of the parameter space with the
particle collision model, therefore the development
of a more eﬃcient treatment of particle collisions is
a matter of current investigation.

4.2. Breakdown simulation in a 2 dimensional box

In a second study we conducted a full breakdown
simulation of an RF signal incident upon a region
of helium gas in a 2-D box. We chose to study he-
lium because there are fewer interaction processes
and thus it was one of the ﬁrst to be tabulated and
implemented in ICEPIC. The interactions modeled
in the helium breakdown are

helium layer, but within the plane wave launching
boundary. The probe measuring the reﬂected sig-
nal is in the left vacuum outside the plane wave
launcher, to avoid interference with the incident
wave.

To study the breakdown, we made movies of the
|E| ﬁeld in the box, and observed the process as the
RF energy was ﬁrst attenuated in the helium, and
later reﬂected, and ﬁnally reached a steady state
with some fraction being transmitted through, and
a larger fraction being reﬂected back toward the
source. We also made a simultaneous movie of the
density of free electrons in the plasma, which was
very helpful in understanding the various stages in
the |E| ﬁeld movie.

In the beginning of the simulation, the RF wave
hits the helium layer and initially passes directly
through it virtually unaﬀected. In the electron den-
sity movie however, the electron density begins to
grow at a constant rate throughout the medium.
The electron density is higher at the left edge of
the helium layer than further in because more of
the wave causing the ionization has passes by that
point. After some time, the amplitude of the RF
signal begins to get attenuated, and simultaneously
in the density movie, the density of electrons near
the vacuum-helium interface begins to grow expo-
nentially. This attenuates the wave enough that the
density further into the helium layer stops growing
and in some cases, may even decrease. This happens
because the signal that was driving the ionization
of the background gas is no longer strong enough to
do so. From this time forward, any fraction of the
RF signal that makes it through the high density
region at the left interface with the vacuum prop-
agates without any signiﬁcant attenuation through
the rest of the helium layer. The action at the inter-
face has just begun, however. As the electron den-
sity grows exponentially, the surface of the plasma

Elastic Collisions
e− + He → He + e−

Excitation
e− + He → He∗ + e−

Ionization
e− + He2 → He+

2 + 2e−

Recombination
e− + He+

2 → He∗ + He

The geometry used in the simulation is shown in
Figure (4). The probe recording the transmitted
signal is placed in the right vacuum outside the

Fig. 4.— A helium layer lies between two vacuum regions.
The dashed line represents the plane wave launching bound-
ary, which emits on the left and absorbs on the right. The
top and bottom boundaries of the simulation are periodic,
while the left and right boundaries are metallic but shielded
with a Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) that attenuates all
EM signals to 30 db.

8

Air Breakdown Modeling with ICEPIC

becomes much more eﬃcient at reﬂecting the signal,
and thus the E ﬁeld movies shows a growth in the
reﬂected power and a corresponding decrease in the
net transmitted signal. This causes the exponen-
tial growth of the electron density near the bound-
ary to cease, and eventually a stable equilibrium
is reached with a static distribution in the electron
density, and a ﬁxed ratio between the transmitted
and reﬂected signals. Figs. (5) and (6) are frames
from the E ﬁeld and electron density movies, and
show the long term steady state equilibrium that is
reached in the ﬁeld values and density distribution.

Fig. 6.— This is a snapshot of the density proﬁle of the
free electrons in the plasma. This illustrates why most of the
RF signal is reﬂected or attenuated between 0 and 0.2. The
initial density proﬁle was ﬂat at 0.5 × 1016 throughout the
helium. The RF signal drove a constant growth in density
until the exponential growth at the left interface prevented
suﬃcient transmission to continue ionizing the plasma fur-
ther in.

mesh capability, and would thus require that we re-
solve the entire domain on this small scale. Another
diﬃculty is that the collision frequency is growing
substantially throughout the simulation. When the
collision frequency becomes so high that random
numbers must be generated many times for each
cell in each timestep, it causes the simulation to
grind to a near halt. However, there is yet hope.
The breakdown simulation performed with the bulk
model suggests that the majority of the interesting
physical phenomena take place within a short dis-
tance of the interface with the vacuum. Thus, it is
not necessary to simulate such a vastly large gaseous
layer, and we may be able to compare direct results
between the PIC and ﬂuid breakdown models if we
model transmission through a very thin region. To
do this successfully however will still require that
we develop a better way to model multiple collisions
per timestep in the PIC regime. These subjects are
currently under investigation by our group.

Another approach we are currently investigating
is to try to employ both the PIC and the ﬂuid mod-
eling of breakdown simultaneously in a hybrid treat-
ment. This is advantageous because while the ﬂuid
modeling alone is valid for some electron energy dis-
tributions such as Maxwellian or Druyvesteyn, it
does not model the case when a secondary popula-
tion of very high energy electrons develops in the
breakdown. We suspect that much of the inter-
esting physics driving the breakdown is governed
by these high energy electrons, and are working
on using PIC particles to model them while using
the ﬂuid to model the remaining population in the

Fig. 5.— This is a snapshot of the traveling E-M wave
though the helium layer. The helium is located between 0
and 2.4 on the plot. The wave emitter is located at the
position -1. The signal between -2 and -1 is traveling from
right to left, and represents the net reﬂected signal from the
helium layer. The wave between -1 and 0 is the interference
between the incident and reﬂected waves, currently under-
going constructive interference. The transmitted signal is
measured outside the helium, in the region between 2.4 and
3.

It would have been a nice experiment to repeat
this analysis using the PIC representation of break-
down physics, and compare the predictions of each
model quantitatively. This has turned out to be a
serious challenge for the following reasons. First,
by examining the density plot in Fig (6) it is clear
that the number of particles has grown over sev-
eral orders of magnitude since the simulation began.
This presents a problem for PIC not only because
there are so many particles, but because these high
densities require very ﬁne resolution in the mesh to
adequately resolve the Debye length. Simulations
run without resolution of the Debye Length at the
densest regions are subject to severe grid heating
of the particles, which in turn aﬀects the collision
frequency with the background gas, and in general
causes incorrect predictions in the physics. Even
though the physical area that requires this high level
of resolution is only a small fraction of the total sim-
ulation area, ICEPIC does not yet have adaptive

Schulz et. al.

9

to simulating PIC collisions in the range of pa-
rameters requiring multiple collisions per cell per
timestep. Having learned that most of the interest-
ing breakdown physics occurs in a very thin layer
of gas, we will modify our simulation geometry in
an attempt to draw a direct comparison between
our two methods. We will continue our PIC-ﬂuid
hybridization eﬀorts in an attempt to simultane-
ously capture all the relevant physics. We will
study breakdown in air rather than helium, and in-
vestigate the eﬀects of introducing humidity, water
droplets, and dust. We would also like to investi-
gate pulsed RF signals, and contrast their impact
on breakdown to the continuous wave results.
In
the long term, once we have bench-marked this ma-
chinery and compared it to the results of air break-
down experiments currently being designed at the
Air Force Research Laboratory, we can incorporate
this technology into the virtual prototyping of fu-
ture high power microwave weapons.

The authors would like to thank Dr. Peter J.
Turchi for useful discussions on this work. This re-
search was supported in part by Air Force Oﬃce of
Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR).

REFERENCES

Anderson, D., Lisak, M., Lewin, T., “Breakdown in Air Filled
Microwave Waveguides During Pulsed Operation,” App.
Phys. 56, (1984)

Boris, J.P., “Relativistic Plasma Simulation-Optimization of
a Hybrid Code,” Num. Sim. Plasmas, Navan Res. Lab.,
Wash D.C., (1970) 3-67

Schulz A.E., Greenwood, A.D., Cartwright, K.L., Mardahl,
P.J., “Hybrid Particle-Fluid Modeling of Plasmas,” pre-
print xxx.lanl.gov/physics/0402045

Villasenor, J., Buneman, O., “Rigorous Charge Conservation
for Local Electromagnetic Field Solvers,” Comp. Phys.
Comm, 69 (1992) 306

Yee, K.S., “Numerical Solution of Initial Boundary Value
Problems Involving Maxwell’s Equations in Isotropic
Media,” IEEE Trans. Ant. Prop., AP-14 (1966) 302

plasma. Some preliminary work on this approach
can be found in Schulz et. al. 2004.

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We have presented here some background in break-
down theory, and two methods for numerically mod-
eling RF breakdown. We have predicted that RF
breakdown depends in a signiﬁcant way on the col-
lision frequency of electrons in the plasma with the
background gas molecules, and have demonstrated
that both PIC and ﬂuid breakdown models repro-
duce this dependence. Of particular interest is the
result that a high collision frequency can mitigate
the attenuation of the transmitted signal. Even in
the case where the plasma frequency exceeds the RF
frequency, transmission through the plasma layer
can be achieved if the density of the background gas
is large enough to restrict the mobility of the plasma
electrons. We suggest that in this range of param-
eters, “breakdown” does not occur because the RF
signal is able to propagate through the medium.

We have also reported on the results of a pre-
liminary breakdown computation in a helium back-
ground gas. We have discovered several stages in the
breakdown process; the homogeneous heating and
ionization of the background gas, the exponential
breakdown of a thin layer just at the surface of the
vacuum-helium interface, the resulting lack of trans-
mitted power into the interior of the gas causing a
relaxation of the ionization rate everywhere but at
the interface, the reﬂection of an increasing frac-
tion of the RF power by the surface plasma layer,
and the eventual stabilization into an equilibrium
with ﬁxed density proﬁle and ratio of reﬂected to
transmitted power. We were interested to ﬁnd that
once equilibrium is reached, almost all of the signal
attenuation occurs at the vacuum-helium interface
because the density is several orders of magnitude
larger there than anywhere else in the gas.

We experienced much diﬃculty in reproducing
the breakdown simulation with the PIC model we
have developed. This is because the exponential
growth in density at the interface with the vacuum
causes the simulation to slow down a considerable
amount. The density growth also causes the Debye
length to shrink, and at later stages in the simula-
tion we are no longer resolving it, resulting in spu-
rious heating of the simulation particles. Finally,
for very large values of the collision frequency, the
random number generation for collisions in each cell
begins to dominate the total run time, causing this
method to become impractical.

In future, we will ﬁnd a valid statistical approach

