4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
1
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

V.I. Erofeev

Institute of Automation & Electrometry
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences
1 Koptyug Prosp., 630090, Novosibirsk, RUSSIA

Abstract.

In recent studies we have multiply envisioned the irrationality of the traditional
Its basic false cornerstone was shown to be the substitution
plasma kinetis [1–5].
of real plasmas by plasma probabilistic ensembles [1–3]. We have created culture
of plasma studies with refrain from an ensemble substitution [1-8]. We discovered
intense decay of Langmuir quanta, as opposite to traditional deduction of their
conservation [1-3]. The quanta decay prevents formation of Langmuir condensate
in a weak Langmuir turbulence [1, Appendix], suppresses long-wavelength plasma
modulational instability [3], precludes Langmuir wave collapses [1-3]. Besides,
it
helped to highlight the uselessness of hydrodynamic modelling of plasma nonlinear
phenomena [2-3], to state an inadequateness of modelling collisionless plasma by the
Vlasov equation [3], to state of inadequateness of “Particle in Cell” method of numerical
plasma simulation to the plasma nature [3]. Finally, it was shown that existed theory
undervalued notably the intensity of induced scattering of short Langmuir waves [4]
and distorted physics of the electron distribution evolution during this scattering [8].
With this, an extensive revision of the plasma physics and of the theoretical physics
in general are needed.

1. Introduction.

Many branches of modern theoretical physics were created within tradition of studies of
statistics of physical system ensembles. Particularly, this can be said about all the
current plasma physical theory. An appear of the given tradition was conditioned
by the culture of theorizing that was developed in physics at the end of XIX-th
century: Theorists tried then to substantiate empirical laws of thermodynamics by
means of a classical analytical mechanics. Having absolutized notion of a a mechanical
system†, they attempted to unravel the establishing of a heat macrophysics within
a microdynamic evolution of the system. This path was fraught with insuperable
diﬃculties, wherefore single ﬁnite systems were ultimately substituted by probabilistic
system ensembles‡. This substitution was a basic idea that has led Gibbs to creation

† This term denotes an object possessing by ﬁnite total number of “degrees of freedom” and hence
permitting formally the full integration of motion equations
‡ As a ﬁrst important system ensemble study we can mention renown equation by Boltzmann [9]. His
concept of distribution function supposes indirectly the substitution of a real mixture of discrete gas

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

2

of a statistical thermodynamics (mechanics) [11]. In view of the success of his theory,
the scientiﬁc community have rather quickly accepted corresponding ideas as a basis
for physical theoretical studies. They have exerted an important inﬂuence on the
development of quantum mechanics, they were successfully applied to problem of electric
conductivity of metals, to some items of solid state physics, physics of dielectrics, physics
of magnetic materials, etc. The highest point in this motion consisted of developing of
a nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and of a physical kinetics [12–15].
It can be
ultimately said that during the lapsed century the idea of the ensemble substitution has
been gradually recognized as one of the most important conjectures of human genius
regarding the concealed microscopic beginnings of macrophysical phenomena in nature.
However, the latter is far not the case.

The intention of the given our paper consists of the informing the reader about
appear of a number of plasma kinetic studies that visualized the senselessness of plasma
ensemble considerations and hence the irrationality of the earlier general tradition.
(Correspondingly, the modern theoretical physics should be subjected to an extensive
revision, and the reader is invited to this challenging and blessed mission.)

Our motion is organized as follows.

In the next section we narrate the basis of
our former arguing. In Section 3 we list results that we developed after perceiving the
irrationality of the ensemble method and creating alternative culture of plasma studies.
Finally, Conclusions contain extra comments to the essence of statistical mechanics and
some proposals for reorganization in theoretical physics.

2. Senselessness of plasma ensemble studies.

First vague suspicion of the irrationality of the ensemble method was perceived by
the given author even in years of scholarship: The ease was confusing with that the
plasma theorists had always spoken about the plasma ensembles and had implemented
the ensemble averaging in their calculations. Especially in studies of plasma evolution:
The Universe do not contain any evolving probabilistic plasma ensembles. In view of
this, the author created new culture of plasma kinetic studies, one with refraining from
the plasma ensemble substitution [5, 6]. Applying it to problems of plasma turbulence
theory, the author has found ﬁrst important illustration of the inconsistency of the
ensemble substitution: The physics of collisionless wave dissipation. It was a common
belief that quanta of Langmuir wave ﬁeld can decay in a collisionless plasma only due to
the Landau damping [16], whereas new calculations visualized intense decay of Langmuir
wave quanta due to the nonresonant electron diﬀusion in momentums (it is called also
the stochastic electron acceleration).

Trials to publish corresponding calculations have met an immense scepsis of many
plasma theorists. Even the pointing at a respective contradiction within the very body

atoms by a continuous probabilistic ensemble of such mixtures. Boltzmann himself had no perception of
this fact, although afterwards he explicitly spoke about the desirability of substituting system ensembles
for real systems [10]

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

3

of traditional plasma theory did not had an adequate eﬀect§. This forced the author
to seek for experimental conﬁrmation of his conclusions. This conﬁrmation was found
in existing reports on beam-plasma experiments with “strong” Langmuir turbulence.
Following widespread belief there should have been observed Langmuir wave collapses,
whereas the anew deduced Langmuir quanta decay precluded their initiation. The
author have thoroughly analyzed three independent series of reported “experimental
collapse observations” and have proven that they evidenced not for the collapse but just
against it [1–3]. This ultimately helped to aﬃrm the key idea: Laws of physical evolution
of statistics of a plasma ensemble depend on the ensemble content. Correspondingly, one
should not hope on approaching the objective picture of the plasma physical phenomena
when he substitutes a real plasma by an imaginary plasma ensemble.

We have discussed in this section the most important of currently developed
illustrations of inappropriateness of the ensemble method in plasma studies: The physics
of Langmuir turbulence dissipation constituted one of the cornerstones in the former
plasma turbulence theory. In the next section we supplement this illustration with other
our results that have also visualized the uselessness of plasma ensemble considerations.
Besides, we present there an outline of some more general consequences of our discoveries
for the current practice of plasma theoretical studies.

3. List of achievements in studies of “single” plasmas.

Development of a real physical picture of the collisionless Langmuir turbulence
dissipation that we mentioned above has permitted us to discover three important
consequences. First, the dissipation impedes the formation of the Langmuir wave
condensate (see Appendix in Ref. [1])k. Second, it suppresses the Zakharov’s short -
wavelength plasma modulational instability [2]. This instability was originally rendered
as an initial stage of Langmuir wave collapse [17], hence its absence just highlights
the impossibility of the collapse initiation¶. Third, the real turbulence collisionless
dissipation prevents the development of Vedenov -Rudakov’s long-wavelength plasma
modulational instability [3]+. It is worth emphasizing that the concepts of the Langmuir

§ We mean the following. Rigorous recognized calculations of former ensemble-oriented weak plasma
turbulence theory comprised not the conclusion of the Langmuir quanta conservation only but equally
the deduction of their intense decay, see details in Refs. [1, 2]
k The reader is reminded that the Langmuir condensate was believed to form due to the wave scattering
induced by plasma particles: waves should have been ultimately transferred to the long-wavelength
region of the turbulence spectrum. The puzzle of dissipation of the condensate energy has motivated
large body of former theoretical plasma turbulence studies
¶ Note that the “collapse science” was a rather opulent branch of former plasma turbulence theory,
and its contributors developed pictures of collapse scenarios even without the above short -wavelength
modulational instability. For this reason we have supplemented the earlier study by thorough analyzes
of diverse items of that science and ultimately aﬃrmed the total inconsistency of the collapse concept [3].
Some conclusions of the corresponding analyzes we mention in this paper further on
+ The reader is reminded that corresponding paper by Vedenov and Rudakov, see Ref. [18], was one
of the most stimulating plasma theory publications

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

4

condensate, of the Vedenov -Rudakov’s plasma modulational instability and of the
Zakharov’s short-wavelength plasma modulational instability constituted the kern of the
former Langmuir turbulence theory. Their failures illustrate rather well the senselessness
of plasma ensemble considerations.

The irrationality of the ensemble method was highlighted also by our results on
wave scattering induced by plasma electrons [4, 8]. On the one side, we have shown that
formerly accepted Tsytovich’s picture of the phenomenon (see Ref. [19]) undervalued
substantially the intensity of induced scattering of short Langmuir waves [4]. In full
accord with the common sense, the plaster of ensemble averaging has veiled the genuine
fresco of the phenomenon. On the other side, it was found that corresponding vision
of the process does not simply veil substantially the genuine evolution of electron
distribution during the scattering, but entirely distorts its picture [8].

In such a way, our plasma kinetic considerations have multiply envisioned the
senselessness of plasma ensemble studies. Note that this means an inappropriateness
of the recipes of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics for the plasma studies. The latter
theoretical discipline is absolutely useless for revealing objective laws of plasma physical
behavior.

We reinforce that the nonequilibrium statistical mechanics had exerted a key
inﬂuence on formation of the most basic of the plasma physical theoretical notions:
It underlies the plasma kinetics after Bogoliubov [12] — Born — Green [20] —
Kirkwood [21] — Yvon [22] (that is collectively known as the BBGKY kinetics), it is
hidden behind any hydrodynamic plasma modelling, etc. Further, it was always rendered
as a basis for many other physical theories apart from the plasma theory. Plasma
phenomena are surely not the exclusion from the common rule, hence our observations
unravelled an absolute truth of a scientiﬁc inconsistency of the nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics:
Its scenarios have generally no correlation with real pictures of physical
system evolutions. Note that the current gas kinetic theory seems to contain an
independent item that might have been shown to conﬁrm this conclusion. It is the above
mentioned Boltzmann equation: We suspect that real gas kinetic evolution deviate
from scenarios given by the equation. On the one side, some serious problems with
the Boltzmann equation were enlightened even in 1876: consistent critical comments
regarding the equation are known after Loshmidt [23], Zermelo [24] and Ehrenfests [25].
On the other side, it was recently discovered by Alekseev [26] that assumption of ﬁnite
(nonzero) duration of a pair atom collision results in corrections to the Boltzmann
equations that notably modify the usual terms of the equation.

In the given paper we cannot discuss details of our above mentioned studies: The
reader is addressed to original papers [1–8] for more expanded description of our ideas,
approaches and achievements. We complete this section by returning to plasma physics
and mentioning of some more of our deductions relevant to the practice of plasma
theoretical studies.

Consider the BBGKY kinetics. Outline of generic defects of the given theory the
reader can ﬁnd in Conclusions of paper [7]. The main of them is that the conceptions

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

5

of this kinetics acquired some sense of constructive theory only within the practice of
the plasma ensemble considerations. Correspondingly, its recipes cannot help one in the
exploring the objective physics of plasma phenomena.

Consider the practice of hydrodynamic plasma studies.

In any hydrodynamic
plasma description the plasma ensemble is usually not directly referred to but factually
implied, since hydrodynamics do not distinguishes any real plasma from many others
with slightly varied positions and momentums of individual plasma particles and hence
from many of plasma ensembles. With this, the currently popular hydrodynamic
modelling of nonlinear plasma phenomena has no much sense for explaining plasma
physical realities: The degree of correspondence of any hydrodynamic model to plasma
realities is always doubtful. Both theoretical predictions of new physical eﬀects and
trials to explain experimental observations, with exclusive appeal to a certain nonlinear
hydrodynamic plasma model, are scientiﬁcally unsound. These positions are rather
well illustrated by failure of Zakharov’s plasma hydrodynamics with its prediction of
the Langmuir wave collapse, and also by failure of Vedenov -Rudakov’s hydrodynamic
plasma model with its prediction of the long-wavelength plasma modulational instability.

Finally, exploration of problems of “collapse science” has inspired the author on

A) showing the impossibility of wave energy accumulation in plasma density cavities

via nucleation [3]∗,

B) stating of inadequateness of modelling the collisionless plasma by the Vlasov

equation instead of the Klimontovich -Dupree’s one [3]♯,

C) stating of inadequateness of the “Particle in Cell” method of numerical plasma

simulation to the plasma nature [3].

4. Conclusions

Following deductions reported in preceding sections, the practice of plasma theoretical
studies (and hence also the practice of interpreting of experimental plasma observations)
requires an extensive revision. The reader is invited to explore our approaches from
original papers [1–8] and then to join us in the activity of reestablishing the plasma
physics.

As we are persistently reiterating, our ﬁndings are extremely important not for
the plasma physics only but for all the theoretical physics. Having visualized the
irrationality of the ensemble method, we restored common sense that was always ignored
during its erection. Note that in Conclusions of Ref. [3] we have rather thoroughly
commented the history of ensemble studies and their trend in physics. Particularly, we
∗ For the ﬁrst time the misconception of nucleation was advanced by Doolen [27], on a basis of one-
dimensional simulation of Zakharov’s (nonlinear) plasma hydrodynamics [17]
♯ Correspondingly, we developed more adequate understanding of applicability area of the Vlasov
equation in plasma considerations. One of the equation applications that is conceptually acceptable
for the nonlinear plasma studies the reader can reveal in intermediate calculations of Ref. [7]

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

6

have commented there the reasons for the success of the gibbsian statistical mechanics.
This time we will not repeat respective comments: We supplement them with a number
of natural ﬁnal conclusions.

First, the reader should understand that the statistical mechanics is a mere artiﬁcial
theory that emulates only, although rather successfully, the laws of thermodynamics.
The appropriateness of the gibbsian ensemble substitution can be rationally justiﬁed
only for homogeneous thermodynamically equilibrium spatially extensive physical
medium whereat the mutually remote pieces might be rendered as “independent
ensemble realizations”††. With this, it is not only that the nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics should be ejected oﬀ the building of modern physics, but also the basic
positions of the equilibrium statistical mechanics should be thoroughly revised, at least
in the sense of their interpretations. Particularly, we can say that existing pretension of
the statistical mechanics on revealing of the hidden essence of thermodynamical entropy
is far not sound. Really, the entropy of statistical mechanics is deﬁned as a characteristic
of a system ensemble, and its non-lessening during the ensemble evolution is postulated.
But laws of the system ensemble evolution depend on the ensemble content and cannot
provide one with the objective picture of the certain system physical evolution. (For
instance, of the thermalization of initially nonequilibrium gas in a ﬁxed volume.)
Correspondingly, the growth of the statistical mechanical entropy has generally no
correlation with the corresponding growth of the thermodynamical entropy. Moreover,
while the latter is well measurable and hence is always deﬁnite, the former depend
on the content of the artiﬁcially introduced gas ensemble. In short, the sole virtue of
the statistical mechanical entropy is that its changes in a reversible thermodynamic gas
process coincides with the respective changes of the thermodynamical entropy, provided
one discusses either the gibbsian canonical, the big canonical or the microcanonical gas
ensembles. It was just due to this property that creators of the statistical mechanics
absolutized the corresponding entropy.

Second, by the earlier set of deductions regarding the plasma physical theory
we have visualized a necessity of creation a physics of discrete media that should
supersede the existing physics of continuous media. Following the traditional culture
of plasma physics, researches are suggested to render plasmas as continuous media:
Key notions of plasma theory were originally created within the physics of continuous
media and then adjusted to peculiar problems of plasma studies. Particularly, common
notion of a wave, plasma natural oscillation, suggests attitude to a plasma as a
continuous medium. This attitude was embodied by the concept of a Vlasov plasma:

†† Note also that for thermodynamic phenomena the idea of a single system is rather inadequate
abstraction: One can theorize at best about subsystem that is a part of a larger subsystem and that
constantly exercises an inﬂuence from the side of remaining part of the latter. Naturally, corresponding
detailed inﬂuence of one on another never can be deduced, but even this do not justiﬁes the substitution
of a certain subsystem by a probabilistic ensemble of subsystems. Besides, even the very notion
“subsystem” is speculative a bit. Really, some portions of atoms (or molecules, or electrons, etc.)
do inevitably leave the subsystem each moment, others enter it from the surroundings, whereas the
beginnings of statistical mechanics do not yield this permanent renewal of the subsystem

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

7

Vlasov equation comprises imaginary electron and ion liquids that ﬁll without gaps
the 6-dimensional phase space. Having imagined a Vlasov plasma, one substitutes
indirectly the real mixture of individual charged particles, known as a “Klimontovich
-Dupree” plasma, by an ensemble of such mixtures. It was an understanding of drastic
distinction in physics of these two objects that have ultimately helped us in developing of
earlier impressive paradigmatic deductions. We suppose that the visualized substantial
distinction between the physics of the Vlasov plasma and that of the Klimontovich -
Dupree one exempliﬁes the general distinction between the objective physical pictures
of discrete medium (to be developed) and their images from the physics of continuous
media. Besides, we propose to create the methodology of earlier physics of discrete
media by an analogy with approaches of our plasma kinetics.

Finally, our discoveries have highlighted the necessity of revision of the physical
kinetics. This science was always assumed to include the traditional plasma kinetics as
a daughter branch, whereas we have multiply demonstrated the falseness of the basis of
the latter.

[1] V.I. Erofeev, Physics of Plasmas 9, 1137 (2002).
[2] V.I. Erofeev, J. Plasma Phys. 68, 1 (2002).
[3] V.I. Erofeev, Physics of Plasmas 11 (6), 3284 (2004).
[4] V.I. Erofeev, Journal of Fusion Energy 19, 99 (2000).
[5] V.I. Erofeev, J. Plasma Phys. 57 (2), 273 (1997).
[6] V.I. Erofeev, Australian Journ. Phys. 51 (5), 843 (1998).
[7] V.I. Erofeev, J. Plasma Phys. 70 (3), 251 (2004).
[8] V.I. Erofeev, Inﬂuence of Langmuir turbulence on plasma electron distribution during the induced

wave scattering. Journal of Fusion Energy, Accepted.

[9] L. Boltzmann, Wiener Berichte 66, 275 (1872).
[10] L. Boltzmann, Vorlesungen ¨uber theorie der Gases (Wien, 1886); Vorlesungen ¨uber Gastheorie
(Leipzig, 1896) [Lectures on Gas Theory (S. Brush transl., Berkeley, Univ. California Press,
1964)].

[11] J.W. Gibbs, Elementary principles in statistical mechanics, developed with especial reference to the

rational foundation of thermodynamics (Yale Univ. Press, New York, 1902).

[12] N.N. Bogoliubov, Problems of a Dynamical Theory in a Statistical Physics (State Tech. Press,
Moscow, 1946); English translation in Studies in Statistical Mechanics edited by J. deBoer and
G.E. Uhlenbeck, (North-Holland Publ., Amsterdam, 1962), Vol. 1.

[13] I. Prigogine, Non-Equilibrium statistical mechanics (Wiley -Interscience, New York, 1962).
[14] L.V. Keldysh, Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz. 47, 1515 (1964).
[15] R. Balescu, Equilibrium and nonequilibrium statistical mechanics (Wiley -Interscience, New York,

[16] L.D. Landau, Journ. Phys. (U.S.S.R.) 10, 25 (1946); Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 16, 574 (1946).
[17] V.E. Zakharov, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 62, 1745 (1972) [Sov. Phys. JETP 35, 908 (1972)].
[18] A.A. Vedenov and L.I. Rudakov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 159, 767 (1964) [Sov. Phys. Dokl. 9,

[19] V. N. Tsytovich, Uspehi Fiz. Nauk 90 (3), 435 (1966) [Sov. Phis. Uspekhi 9, 805 (1967)].
[20] M. Born, and H.S. Green, A General Kinetic Theory of Liquids (Cambridge University Press,

1975).

1073 (1965)].

London, 1949).

[21] J.G. Kirkwood Journ. Chem. Phys. 44, 188 (1986).
[22] J. Yvon, La th´eorie des ﬂuids et l’´equation d’´etat: actualit´es, scirntiﬁgues et industrielles

(Hermann and Cie, Paris, 1935).

Rational paradigm of plasma physics

8

[23] J. Loshmidt, Wien Ber. 73, 139 (1876); 75, 67 (1877).
[24] E. Zermelo, Ann. Phys. 57, 485 (1896).
[25] P. Ehrenfest, T. Ehrenfest, Enzyklopaedie d math. Wiss. Bd IV, Tl. 32, Leipzig, 1911.
[26] B.V. Alekseev, Physics -Uspekhi 170 (6).
[27] G.D. Doolen, D.F. DuBois and H.A. Rose, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 804 (1985).

