4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-organization in turbulence as a route to order in plasma and ﬂuids

M.G. Shats,∗ H. Xia, and H. Punzmann
Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,
Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
(Dated: December 29, 2013)

Transitions from turbulence to order are studied experimentally in thin ﬂuid layers and magnet-
ically conﬁned toroidal plasma. It is shown that turbulence self-organizes through the mechanism
of spectral condensation. The spectral redistribution of the turbulent energy leads to the reduction
in the turbulence level, generation of coherent ﬂow, reduction in the particle diﬀusion and increase
in the system’s energy. The higher order state is sustained via the nonlocal spectral coupling of the
linearly unstable spectral range to the large-scale mean ﬂow. The similarity of self-organization in
two-dimensional ﬂuids and low-to-high conﬁnement transitions in plasma suggests the universality
of the mechanism.

PACS numbers: 05.65.+b, 03.75.Kk, 47.32.-y, 52.25.Gj, 52.35.Ra, 52.55.-s

Turbulence determines properties of many natural and laboratory systems. Since its eﬀects are often undesirable,
the search for routes from turbulence to order is of great practical importance. Turbulence in two-dimensional (2D)
ﬂuids self-organizes through the mechanism of the inverse energy cascade. In the absence of dissipation this leads
to the condensation of the spectral energy at the largest scale allowed by the system [1]. The condensate formation
in 2D ﬂuids has been observed in experiments and numerical simulations [2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
It is formed when the
dissipation scale, which represents a balance between the spectral transfer and the linear friction, exceeds the system
size [6]. In the plasma drift-wave turbulence, the cascade also produces spectral regions similar to inertial ranges
in 2D turbulence and leads to spectral condensation [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Though main ingredients of the condensation
process are known, there is no clear understanding how it is realized in magnetically conﬁned plasma. Here we perform
the ﬁrst comparative analysis of experiments in thin ﬂuid layers and plasma. The processes in 2D ﬂuid turbulence
are compared with those in plasma turbulence studied in toroidal magnetically conﬁned plasma of the H-1 heliac
[12]. We show for the ﬁrst time that spectral condensation in plasma turbulence coincides with a state transition,
which is similar to low-to-high conﬁnement transitions in tokamaks and stellarators [13, 14, 15]. The condensation is
observed as a metamorphosis of turbulence into a coherent ﬂow. The ﬂow absorbs turbulent energy of the system and
enforces highly ordered motion of particles and reduces diﬀusion. The global coherent ﬂow, seen as a vortex whose
size is limited by the system boundaries, is sustained in the higher-order state by the energy supply directly from the
linearly unstable spectral region. This mechanism of self-organization is crucial for understanding physics of improved
conﬁnement in magnetized plasma. It is also relevant in other 2D turbulent systems and may trigger useful analogies
in physics of the Bose-Einstein condensation of quantum gases.

First we present results of 2D ﬂuid experiments. To generate the spectral condensate in a ﬂuid we used the
experimental procedure reported by Paret and Tabeling [3, 16] but with constant instead of random forcing. A
turbulent ﬂow is generated in a thin layer of electrolyte (NaCl solution). An electric current driven through the
0.1 × 0.1m cell interacts with a 10 × 10 matrix of permanent magnetic dipoles placed below the bottom of the cell.
The J × B force generates 100 vortices each of about 10 mm in diameter (1/10 of the box size), thus determining the
injection wave number of about ki = 630 m−1. Magnets are arranged such that any two adjacent vortices counter-
rotate. Since the spectral condensation is very sensitive to the frictional damping, two layers of electrolyte of diﬀerent
concentration (heavier solution at the bottom, total thickness of 6 mm) are used to reduce damping, as proposed in
[16]. The ﬂow is visualized using small latex particles ﬂoating on the free surface of the electrolyte. Trajectories of
the tracer particles are shown in Fig. 1. After the force is applied, three stages of the ﬂow evolution are observed. At
ﬁrst, only vortices at the injection scale are seen (Fig. 1(a)). As the inverse energy cascade develops, the aggregation
process drives larger structures (Fig. 1(b)). After about 50 s, a global rotation dominates the ﬂow (Fig. 1(c)) and
persists in a steady state. The total kinetic energy of the system increases from the linear stage to the inverse cascade
stage until it reaches maximum and stabilizes in the condensate regime (Fig. 2(a)). Energy spectra of the velocity
ﬁeld are substantially modiﬁed during the system’s evolution from the inverse cascade regime to the condensate stage
(Fig. 2(b)). As the system evolves, the turbulent energy is reduced over most of the k-range, except for the injection
wave number ki ≈ 630 m−1 and the smallest wave number kc ≈ 70 m−1 which is determined by the size of the cell. It

∗Electronic address: Michael.Shats@anu.edu.au

2

FIG. 1: Evolution of turbulence in 2D ﬂuid. Trajectories of the tracer particles averaged over 12 frames of recorded video are
shown. (a) The initial (linear) stage, t=3 s. (b) The inverse cascade stage, t=25 s. (c) The condensate stage, t=60 s.

FIG. 2: Analysis of the velocity ﬁeld during spectral condensation in 2D ﬂuid. (a) Temporal evolution of the total kinetic
energy:
linear (L), inverse cascade (IC) and condensate (Cond) stages. (b) Fluid turbulence spectra in the inverse cascade
(dotted line) and the condensate (solid line) regimes. Spectral energy is normalized by the total kinetic energy of the system.
(c) Linear velocity in the condensate vortex as a function of the distance from the vortex center.

is this lowest mode at kc that is seen as the global rotation, or the condensate. A radial proﬁle of the linear velocity
of this largest vortex is shown in Fig. 2(c). The establishment of the largest vortex greatly reduces the tracer particle
diﬀusion in the system. As shown in Fig. 1, the diﬀusion scale, ∆xD, increases from the linear instability stage to
the inverse cascade regime. After the global ﬂow is established, the diﬀusion scale drops dramatically, inhibiting the
particle transport from the centre of the largest vortex to its edge and thus reducing diﬀusion.

To analyse the condensation in plasma, the spectral energy transfer during the turbulence evolution needs to be

3

FIG. 3: Evolution of plasma turbulence during the L-H transition. (a) Power spectrum of the electrostatic potential ﬂuctuations
in L (dashed line) and H (solid) modes. The condensates maximum, denoted as a star, is estimated from the radial velocity
proﬁle. (b) Radial proﬁles of the E × B drift velocity, VE×B, in two conﬁnement modes.

studied. Such analysis is relatively easy to perform if a single-ﬁeld description of plasma turbulence is valid. The
problem of the mode-coupling in plasma can be reduced to a singe-ﬁeld model if the electron response to the potential
ﬂuctuations is adiabatic. In this case plasma turbulence is described by the Charney-Hasegawa-Mima (CHM) model
[10, 17], which also describes atmospheric turbulence. In the reported experiments in H-1 at large gyroradii (due to
high argon ion mass and low magnetic ﬁeld), the polarization drift nonlinearity dominates so that the CHM model is
applicable to our experiments [11]. This gives the opportunity to: (a) study spectral transfer in a single-ﬁeld model
[18], and (b) justify the comparison of the spectra evolution in 2D ﬂuid experiments with plasma results.

We study the evolution of turbulence spectra in H-1 in the range of plasma parameters where transitions from
low to high (L-H) conﬁnement modes are observed [19]. The spectra are computed from the time series of the
plasma electrostatic potential and then are rescaled into the wave number domain as k = (2πf /VE×B), where f is
the frequency and VE×B is the E × B drift velocity. This is justiﬁed due to the linear k(f ) dependence [11]. In low
conﬁnement (L) mode the spectrum of potential ﬂuctuations shows low-frequency coherent structures in the low wave-
number range, and the decaying broadband turbulence in the higher-k range (Fig. 3). The spectral energy transfer
analysis [20] indicates that the energy source is localised in a spectral region at around ki ≈ 200 m−1. This is the
range of the underlying linear instability. The energy reservoir for this unstable range is the plasma pressure gradient.
The broadband spectrum is generated through a random-phase 3-wave interaction process, via the inverse cascade
mechanism. The coherent structures are driven via a nonlocal coupling mechanism [20], i.e. they obtain energy from
the spectral region such that kc ≪ k1 ≈ k2 ≈ ki, where kc is the wave number of the structure, kc = k1 − k2. In
contrast to the broadband part of the spectrum, the nonlocal transfer occurs through coherent-phase interactions.

The coherent structures have low poloidal mode numbers m = 1, 2, etc.

[21]. Recently we reported the ﬁrst
observation of the m = 0 low-frequency (several kilohertz) mode, referred to as zonal ﬂow [22]. These oscillating zonal
ﬂows have ﬁnite radial and nearly zero poloidal wave numbers, kr ≫ kθ ≈ 0. They are driven by the unstable range
via the nonlocal coherent spectral transfer [20]. A similar time-varying ﬂow was observed in 2D ﬂuid experiments.
Sommeria [2] reports a periodic reversal of the direction of the global ﬂow, or the oscillating m = 0 mode, in the regime
characterised by a slightly higher damping than the one necessary for the establishment of a steady condensate regime.

4

(1)

(2)

This suggests that oscillating zonal ﬂows may be considered as an intermediate stage of the spectral condensation. The
ﬁnite-frequency zonal ﬂows play an important role in the plasma dynamics before the bifurcation to H-mode [23, 24].
The turbulent regime, dominated by these ﬂows, has been likened to a metastable state in which the oscillating
ﬂows act as nuclei in L-H transitions (in analogy with water droplets in the supersaturated vapour before the phase
transition) [23].

During transitions from the L to H-mode, turbulent ﬂuctuations are decreased in a broad spectral range. The only
spectral region in which the ﬂuctuation level is not reduced, is the one corresponding to the linear instability at about
ki ≈ 200 m−1 (Fig. 3(a)). The reduction in turbulent ﬂuctuations coincides with the development of a strong mean
E × B ﬂow in the plasma (Fig. 3(b)). The analogy with the 2D ﬂuid experiment suggests that this ﬂow develops as
a result of the turbulence self-organization through the spectral condensation. Of course, part of the mean E × B
ﬂow in H-mode may be generated by various transport mechanisms (neoclassical, particle orbit loss etc.). However
the contribution of turbulence to the ﬂow is dominant. We compute the turbulent energy contained in the spectrum
of Fig. 3(a) before the transition,

and compare it with the increase in the energy of the mean ﬂow during the L-H transition,

WT ∼

a

Z

0

rdr

neL
B2

(cid:16)

ki

Xk=0

k2ϕ2
k

(cid:17)

∆WF ∼

rdr

neH V 2

H − neLV 2
L

a

Z
0

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Here neL and neH are the electron densities in L and H modes respectively, and B is the magnetic ﬁeld. These
energy estimates agree in our experiment within 20%. This conﬁrms that the observed increase in the E × B ﬂow in
H-mode is largely due to the redistribution of the spectral energy from the intermediate scale into the mean zonal ﬂow.
After the ﬂow establishes, it is sustained by a relatively small energy transfer from the unstable range, as discussed
in [20]. The simultaneous reduction in turbulence and the generation of the ﬂow during the transition from L to H
mode coincide with a large increase in the electron density (and plasma pressure) and a substantial reduction of the
particle diﬀusion in the plasma (Fig. 4).

The evolution of spectra in plasma across the L-H transition is remarkably similar to that in the 2D ﬂuid experiment
during spectral condensation (Fig. 2(b)). In both cases turbulent energy is reduced in the spectral range below the
injection wave number, ki, and it is increased at the largest scale allowed by the system, kc. Also, both spectra
in the enstrophy inertial range, at k > ki, scale similar: E ∼ k−3.8 in the plasma and E ∼ k−3.6 in 2D ﬂuid, as
predicted theoretically [10]. The onset of the strong E × B ﬂow in the plasma H-mode is seen as the condensation of
the turbulent energy, similar to the results in ﬂuid.

Several features of the experimental picture presented here are in agreement with the theoretical conclusions of
Balk, Zakharov and Nazarenko [25]. Using the hypothesis of the nonlocal inverse cascade, they predicted a reduction
of the intermediate scales in the turbulent spectrum during spectral condensation into the zonal ﬂow. The splitting
of the turbulent k-spectrum into two unconnected components: (a) an intensive zonal ﬂow and (b) the high-k jet at
the injection scale was also shown in [25]. Our experimental results conﬁrm that the nonlocal spectral coupling of the
unstable spectral range to the coherent condensate is responsible for the generation of the oscillating zonal ﬂow in L
mode. After the transition to H-mode and the stabilization of the zonal ﬂow, the energy transferred from the unstable
range is much smaller than the energy of the zonal ﬂow, but is suﬃcient to overcome the dissipation at the condensate
scale [25], in agreement with our estimations of the spectral energy transfer in H-mode [20]. Our conclusion about
the spectrally nonlocal nature of the process is based on the analysis of the energy transfer from the unstable range
into coherent modes using the amplitude correlation technique. However the spectral energy transfer analysis via the
3-wave interactions does not clearly show that spectral energy is pumped into the coherent structures [20]. Possibly,
two mechanisms are in work: 3-wave interactions generate the broadband turbulence, while 4-wave interactions are
essential for the condensate generation [26, 27].

Summarising, we report the ﬁrst experimental evidence of the similarity between self-organization in 2D ﬂuid
turbulence and in magnetically conﬁned toroidal plasma. Transitions from turbulent state to the higher-order state
occur similar in both systems and show: (1) the reduction of turbulence in a broad spectral range; (2) the generation
of the strong stable ﬂow as a result of the spectral energy redistribution; and (3) the reduction in diﬀusion in the
condensate regime. Since the macroscopic features of the plasma state transitions described above are universal for
improved conﬁnement regimes in any magnetically conﬁned plasma, it is natural to suggest that the mechanism of
their generation is also universal.

5

FIG. 4: Evolution of plasma parameters during the conﬁnement transition (multichannel spectroscopy diagnostic data). (a)
Time evolution of the electron density during spontaneous L-H transition. (b) Radial proﬁles of the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient
in two conﬁnement modes.

[1] R. H. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids 10, 1417 (1967).
[2] J. Sommeria, Journ. Fluid Mech. 170, 139 (1986).
[3] J. Paret and P. Tabeling, Phys. Fluids 10, 3126 (1998).
[4] M. Hossain, W. H. Matthaeus, and D. Montgomery, Journ. Plasma Phys. 30, 479 (1983).
[5] L. M. Smith and V. Yakhot, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 352 (1993).
[6] P. Tabeling, Phys. Reports 362, 1 (2002).
[7] A. Hasegawa, C. G. Maclennan, and Y. Kodama, Phys. Fluids 22, 2122 (1979).
[8] D. Fyfe and D. Montgomery, Phys. Fluids 22, 246 (1979).
[9] A. Hasegawa and M. Wakatani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1581 (1987).
[10] W. Horton and A. Hasegawa, Chaos 4, 227 (1994).
[11] H. Xia and M. G. Shats, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 155001 (2003).
[12] S. M. Hamberger et al., Fusion Technol. 17, 123 (1990).
[13] F. Wagner et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1408 (1982).
[14] J. W. Connor and H. R. Wilson, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 42, R1 (2000).
[15] A. Fujisawa, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 45, R1 (2003).
[16] J. Paret and P. Tabeling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4162 (1997).
[17] A. Hasegawa and K. Mima, Phys. Fluids 21, 87 (1978).
[18] C. P. Ritz and E. J. Powers, Physica D 20, 320 (1986).
[19] M.G. Shats et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, (1996) 4190.
[20] H. Xia and M. G. Shats, Physics of Plasmas 11, 561 (2004).
[21] M.G. Shats, Plasma Phys. Contr. Fusion 41, 1357 (1999).
[22] M.G. Shats and W.M. Solomon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 045001 (2002).
[23] H. Punzmann and M.G. Shats, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 125003 (2004).
[24] E.J. Kim and P.H. Diamond, Phys Rev. Lett. 90, 185006 (2003).
[25] A. M. Balk, V. E. Zakharov, and S. V. Nazarenko, Sov. Phys. JETP 98, 446 (1990).
[26] A. Dyachenko, and G. Falkovich, Phys. Rev. E 54, 5095 (1996).
[27] D.R. McCarthy et al. Phys Rev. Lett. 93, 065004 (2004).

