4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

First observation of generation in the
backward wave oscillator with a ”grid”
diﬀraction grating and lasing of the volume
FEL with a ”grid” volume resonator

V.G. Baryshevsky, K.G.Batrakov, N.A.Belous, A.A.Gurinovich,
A.S.Lobko, P.V.Molchanov, P.F.Sofronov, V.I.Stolyarsky.

Research Institute of Nuclear Problem, Belarussian State University,
11 Bobruyskaya Str. , Minsk 220050, Belarus

Abstract

First observation of generation in the backward wave oscillator with a ”grid” diﬀrac-
tion grating and lasing of the volume FEL with a ”grid” volume resonator that is
formed by a perodic set of metallic threads inside a rectangular waveguide is con-
sidered.

Key words: Volume Free Electron Laser (VFEL), Volume Distributed Feedback
(VDFB), diﬀraction grating, backward wave oscillator
PACS: 41.60.C, 41.75.F, H, 42.79.D

Generation of radiation in millimeter and far-infrared range with nonrel-
ativistic and low-relativistic electron beams gives rise diﬃculties. Gyrotrons
and cyclotron resonance facilities are used as sources in millimeter and sub-
millimeter range, but for their operation magnetic ﬁeld about several tens of
kiloGauss (ω ∼ eH
mc γ) is necessary. Slow-wave devices (TWT, BWT, orotrons)in
this range require application of dense and thin (< 0.1 mm) electron beams,
because only electrons passing near the slowing structure at the distance
≤ λβγ/(4π) can interact with electromagnetic wave eﬀectively. It is diﬃcult to
guide thin beams near slowing structure with desired accuracy. And electrical
endurance of resonator limits radiation power and density of acceptable elec-
tron beam. Conventional waveguide systems are essentially restricted by the
requirement for transverse dimensions of resonator, which should not signiﬁ-
cantly exceed radiation wavelength. Otherwise, generation eﬃciency decreases
abruptly due to excitation of plenty of modes. The most of the above problems
can be overpassed in VFEL [1,2,3,4,5]. In VFEL the greater part of electron

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

11 August 2013

beam interacts with the electromagnetic wave due to volume distributed in-
teraction. Transverse dimensions of VFEL resonator could signiﬁcantly exceed
radiation wavelength D ≫ λ. In addition, electron beam and radiation power
are distributed over the whole volume that is beneﬁcial for electrical endurance
of the system.

The electrodynamical properties of volume diﬀraction structures composed
from strained dielectric threads was experimentally studied in [6]. In [8] it was
shown that nonrelativistic and low-relativistic electron beams passing through
such structures can generate in wide frequency range up to terahertz. The
electrodynamical properties of a ”grid” volume resonator formed by a perodic
structure built from the metallic threads inside a rectangular waveguide was
considered in [9].

In the present paper ﬁrst observation of lasing of the backward wave os-
cillator with a ”grid” diﬀraction grating and the volume FEL with a ”grid”
volume resonator that is formed by a perodic set of metallic threads inside a
rectangular waveguide (see Fig.1) is considered. According to the analysis [9]
a ”grid” volume resonator was built from tungsten threads with diameter 0.1
mm strained inside the rectangular resonator with transverse dimensions 45
mm x 50 mm and length 300 mm (see Fig.3). Distance between threads was
12.5 mm. Annular electron beam with the energy 200 keV and electron beam
current 2kA passed through the above resonator. As it was mentioned above
only electrons passing near the slowing structure at the distance δ ≤ λβγ/(4π)
can interact with electromagnetic wave eﬀectively. In our case annular electron
beam with the outer radius 16 mm and the ring width 4 mm passes through
a ”grid” diﬀraction grating. As a result, the part of the electron beam moving
close to the gratinge inside the interval 2δ} interacts with the grating eﬀec-
tively Fig.3. The purpose of experiment was to prove possibility of lasing in
such a resonator and to examine ”grid” volume resonator durability.

Two diﬀerent experiments were carried out (Fig.1,Fig.3): the experiment pro-
viding to observe generation in backward wave oscillator with a ”grid” diﬀrac-
tion grating and lasing of the volume FEL with a ”grid” volume resonator.

The ﬁrst experiment was done to test the system as a backward wave oscillator.
Radiation pulse with power about 1 kWatt was registered.

Then additional diﬀraction grating (Fig.3) was placed inside the resonator
to provide volume distributed feedback in the system. Lasing of volume free
electron laser with ”grid” volume resonator was studied. Radiation pulse with
frequency 10 GHz and power about 10 kWatt was registered.

Thus, durability of ”grid” volume resonator and possibility of lasing in such a
resonator was proved.

2

Fig. 1. A backward wave oscillator with the ”grid” diﬀraction grating

Fig. 2. ”Grid” volume resonator

an electron beam

2d

a metallic thread

Fig. 3. Annular electron beam interacts with ”grid” grating

The experiments with several parallel ”grid” gratings are in progress now.

References

[1] V.G.Baryshevsky, I.D.Feranchuk, Phys.Lett. 102A, 141 (1984).

[2] V.G.Baryshevsky, LANL e-print archive physics/9806039.

[3] V.G.Baryshevsky, K.G. Batrakov, A.A. Gurinovich et al., NIM 483A (2002)

[4] V.G.Baryshevsky, K.G. Batrakov, A.A. Gurinovich et al., NIM 507A (2003)

21-23.

137-140.

[5] Eurasian Patent no. 004665

3

[6] V.G.Baryshevsky,K.G.Batrakov,I.Ya.Dubovskaya,V.A.Karpovich,

V.M.Rodionova, NIM 393A, 71 (1997).

[7] Nikolsky V.V., Electrodynamics and propagation of radio-wave (Nauka, 1978)

[8] V.G.Baryshevsky, K.G.Batrakov, V.I.Stolyarsky, NIM 507A, 93-96 (2003).

[9] V.G.Baryshevsky, A.A. Gurinovich LANL e-print archive: physics/0409107

4

