4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through
Bayesian source separation.

G. Verdoolaege, G. Telesca and G. Van Oost
Department of Applied Physics, Ghent University, Rozier 44, 9000 Gent,
Belgium

Abstract. We describe a work in progress on the reconstruction of radial proﬁles
for the ion eﬀective charge Zeﬀ on the TEXTOR tokamak, using statistical
data analysis techniques. We introduce our diagnostic for the measurement
of bremsstrahlung emissivity signals. Zeﬀ proﬁles can be determined by Abel-
inversion of line-integrated measurements of the bremsstrahlung emissivity (ǫﬀ )
from the plasma and the plasma electron density (ne) and temperature (Te).
However, at the plasma edge only estimated values are routinely used for ne and
Te, which are moreover determined at diﬀerent toroidal locations. These various
uncertainties hinder the interpretation of a Zeﬀ proﬁle outside the central plasma.
In order to circumvent this problem, we propose several scenarios meant to allow
the extraction by (Bayesian) Blind Source Separation techniques of either (line-
integrated) Zeﬀ waveshapes or absolutely calibrated signals from (line-integrated)
emissivity signals, using also density and temperature signals, as required.

1. The role of impurities and Zeﬀ in a tokamak plasma

The behavior of plasma impurities in a tokamak plasma is a critical issue [1]. On
the one hand, these impurities increase the fuel dilution and, at reactor parameters,
they can be responsible for a considerable power loss from the plasma core by
bremsstrahlung. On the other hand, line radiation by low-Z impurities at the plasma
edge can be advantageous for the reduction of the plasma-wall interaction.
To study the behavior of impurities in the plasma, one needs a local measure for
impurity concentration. A parameter of great interest is the so-called ion eﬀective
charge of the plasma, Zeﬀ , which is averaged over all species. Once the plasma electron
density (ne) and temperature (Te) are known, it is proportional to the bremsstrahlung
emissivity (ǫﬀ ) from the plasma [2], which originates mainly from the acceleration of
electrons in the ﬁeld of ions:

n2
eZeﬀ
√Te

ǫﬀ

∼

, where Zeﬀ

i

Pi niZ 2
Pi niZi

,

≡

and where ni and Zi are the density and charge of ion species i.

(1)

2. A diagnostic for the determination of Zeﬀ on TEXTOR

At the tokamak TEXTOR (FZJ J¨ulich, Germany), we run a diagnostic for the
determination of Zeﬀ from measurements of bremsstrahlung emissivity in the visible
(see also [2]). 21 ﬁber optic cables are directed along diﬀerent lines of sight in a

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through Bayesian source separation.

2

Figure 1. The viewing geometry for the bremsstrahlung Zeﬀ diagnostic at
TEXTOR. The dashed lines represent two of the viewing chords used in the ICA
analysis described below.

poloidal cross-section of the plasma (ﬁgure 1). The light is led through an interference
ﬁlter (peak transmission at 523 nm) and focused onto the CCD of a cooled 12-bit
camera (DTA Inc., Italy). The transmitted wavelength region is known to consist for
99% of bremsstrahlung continuum. The measured emissivity signals are stored into
the internet-accessible TEXTOR central database.
In addition, four other channels will be equipped with a photomultiplier, in order to
study some phenomena taking place on smaller time scales as well. We expect to have
this second system operational by the beginning of the TEXTOR campaign starting
in the last quarter of 2004.
A central line-averaged Zeﬀ is routinely computed and is available online. The average
Zeﬀ is deﬁned as (see [3])

Z eﬀ

∼

a

R
−a gﬀ n2
R

a
−a ǫ(r)dr
−1/2
e(r)T
e

,

(r)dr

(2)

where a is the plasma radius and gﬀ the so-called (averaged) Gaunt factor.
In
addition, a radial proﬁle for Zeﬀ (ﬁgure 2) can be reconstructed from the full set
of line-integrated emissivities by an Abel-inversion [2]. This also requires proﬁles for
electron density and temperature.

3. Diﬃculties in the reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles

Several factors render the radial matching of the diﬀerent proﬁles problematic,
hindering the interpretation of a Zeﬀ proﬁle outside the central plasma. Indeed, at
the plasma edge only estimated values are routinely used for ne and Te, which are
moreover determined at diﬀerent toroidal locations. As a consequence, one frequently
observes an unphysical rise of Zeﬀ toward the plasma edge (ﬁgure 3). In fact, so far

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through Bayesian source separation.

3

Figure 2. A typical Zeﬀ proﬁle obtained by Abel-inversion of line-integrated
quantities. The error bars are obtained from the estimated errors on the
emissivity, density and temperature proﬁles, as described in [2].

Figure 3. An extreme case of the problems that might arise in the interpretation
of a reconstructed Zeﬀ proﬁle. The proﬁle diverges at the inboard side of the
tokamak.

none of the available methods for the determination of Zeﬀ has provided a full proﬁle,
which is at present a real challenge.
Conversely, if it were e.g. possible to obtain a set of line-integrated values for Zeﬀ
directly from the line-integrated measurements of ǫﬀ , ne and Te, then these problems
would be avoided, as a Zeﬀ proﬁle could directly be obtained from inversion of the

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through Bayesian source separation.

4

Figure 4. A line-integrated emissivity signal (solid curve) and its ﬁt using a
linear regression of a line-integrated ǫﬀ on line-integrals (same line of sight) of n2
e
and Zeﬀ . Despite of the several simpliﬁcations, the regression model (3) seems to
hold.

line-integrals. Alternatively, one may work directly with already inverted data. As
explained below, this even opens the possibility to obtain estimations for Zeﬀ without
using density and temperature information.
In a ﬁrst attempt toward these goals, we want to get an idea of the relative signal of
Zeﬀ using bremsstrahlung emissivity measurements and if necessary also density and
temperature signals.

4. Extraction of a Zeﬀ signal from line-integrated bremsstrahlung
measurements; test using linear multi-channel ICA

From equation (1), the signal for Zeﬀ can be seen as a nonlinear mixture of the signals
for ǫﬀ , ne and Te. The dependence on Te is, however, weak and the Te-dependence can
in a ﬁrst approximation be left out of the analysis. We may linearize the expression
of ǫﬀ as a function of n2

e and Zeﬀ up to ﬁrst order, i.e.:

ǫﬀ

C1ne + C2Zeﬀ, C1, C2 regression coeﬃcients,

(3)

≈

which constitutes a linearized mixing model. The traditionally obtained signals for the
values of the plasma parameters can be used to perform a linear regression analysis,
and a similar analysis can be performed for the corresponding line-integrated signals,
upon radial integration of the model (3)
‡
As a preliminary test (see also [4] and [5]) for the process of extraction of a Zeﬀ signal
from bremsstrahlung emissivity signals, four emissivity line-integrals along diﬀerent
lines of sight were fed to the FastICA program [6] for linear Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) [7].

. The results are displayed in ﬁgure 4.

‡ In fact, one ﬁnds that one may even use directly ne (and Te) as input signals for the regression.

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through Bayesian source separation.

5

Figure 5.
The time trace of the line-integrated emissivity from a central
channel (ch 4) and a more peripheral channel (ch 5) (shown in ﬁgure 1). The
signal (rescaled) of the central line-integrated density is also shown. Two striking
features in the signal are marked by dashed lines.

ICA is a technique that can be derived in a Bayesian context from ﬁrst principles. In
(linear) ICA, it is assumed that a number n of signals xi(t) is measured, which are
each a linear mixture of (ideally) the same number of unknown source signals si(t)
that are assumed to be statistically independent:

x1(t)
x2(t)
...
xn(t)















= A

s1(t)
s2(t)
...
sn(t)








,








(4)

where A is an unknown mixing matrix.
ICA now consists of estimating both the
source signals and the mixing matrix. The idea is in principle to ﬁnd a set of linear
combinations of the xi that are maximally nongaussian. Due to the central limit
theorem these will equal the independent components si. Thus, the ICA procedure
requires the maximization of some measure of nongaussianity (e.g. negentropy), which
is accomplished by some gradient descent approach.
In our application, it is thus implicitly assumed that the waveform for any time trace
is the same at diﬀerent radii, which is on the average true, and any local diversion
from this average will be considered as due to noise, or is neglected while taking
diﬀerent regression coeﬃcients for diﬀerent lines of sight. The results of this analysis
are displayed in ﬁgures 5 and 6, and can be compared to the central signal for Zeﬀ
(ﬁgure 6). In this analysis, no density or temperature information was used.
It should be noted however that the signals for the plasma parameters are, to a certain
extent, interrelated, and thus the assumption of independence of the components is
not entirely fulﬁlled in this instance. Also, the obtained Zeﬀ waveform is in fact an
average over a certain viewing angle in the poloidal cross-section, and can thus hardly

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through Bayesian source separation.

6

Figure 6. The time trace (ICA) of one of the extracted independent components
and the signal (rescaled) of the central Zeﬀ . Note the good correspondence,
especially at the time of the bumps in the emissivity signal.

be used for the reconstruction of a reliable Zeﬀ proﬁle. These issues are treated in the
next section.

5. Outlook: Bayesian source separation models

The signals for ǫﬀ , ne, Te and Zeﬀ are mutually dependent, so the independence
assumption of the ICA scheme does not hold, although in practice it still yields
acceptable results, as demonstrated above. We would however like to have more
control over the actual source signal that is extracted from the mixture, in order to
obtain better estimations of a Zeﬀ waveform during discharges in diﬀerent plasma
regimes.
Here, the Bayesian line of thought might come to help, as it allows us to incorporate
prior information on the physics of the problem and the Zeﬀ waveshape into the
separation model. This information can be extracted from the central and line-
averaged Zeﬀ signals obtained via traditional methods.
In practice, the aim in Bayesian source separation is to obtain the posterior distribution
of the unknown signals S in terms of the likelihood of the measured data X and the
prior information (encoded in p(S)) one is willing to assume:

p(S

X)
|

∼

p(X

S)p(S).
|

(5)

We are thus looking for signals S that maximize this posterior probability, given the
prior distribution and the measured data. We then also use known theoretical relations
between the data and the signals S, such as (1).
This analysis can be conducted as a single-channel method (see [8]) on line-integrated
signals, and when it is done for several lines of sight, it allows us to directly obtain
a Zeﬀ proﬁle via Abel-inversion. As mentioned before, instead one can also operate
immediately on proﬁle data.

Reconstruction of Zeﬀ proﬁles at TEXTOR through Bayesian source separation.

7

6. Conclusion

Several diﬃculties are associated with the calculation of Zeﬀ proﬁles in a tokamak
plasma, in particular at the plasma edge. Determining Zeﬀ signals directly from the
bremsstrahlung data can avoid these problems. We have conducted a preliminary test
with good results for the construction of Zeﬀ line-integrals via Independent Component
Analysis. Finally, we have argued that the separation process can be made more robust
using a Bayesian source separation technique, which can employ prior information on
the Zeﬀ signal.

This work is partially funded by the NSF Flanders, Belgium. We would like to
acknowledge its support.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] Wesson J 1997 Tokamaks (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
[2] Schoon N, Ongena J, Van Oost G, Schwarz J, Telesca G and Cosler A 1990 LPP-ERM/KMS

Laboratory Report 92

[3] Foord M E, Marmar E S and Terry J L 1982 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 53 1407
[4] Verdoolaege G, Telesca G, Van Oost G and Van Den Berge G 2002 Proc. 29th EPS Conf. on

Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion (Montreux) P-2.060

[5] Verdoolaege G, Telesca G and Van Oost G 2002 Proc. 5th FLINS Conf. ed D Ruan et al

(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) 552

[6] Hyv¨arinen A and Oja E 1997 Neural Computation 9 1483
[7] Comon P 1994 Signal Processing 36 287
[8] Knuth K H, Truccolo W A, Bressler S L, Ding M 2001 Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop on Independent

Component Analysis and Blind Signal Separation 463

