4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and
Collection Region of Electric Probe using Laser
Photodetachment Signals

S. Kajita†† S. Kado‡ ‡ A. Okamoto‡ T. Shikama† Y. Iida† D.
Yamasaki† and S. Tanaka†
† Department of Quantum Engineering and Systems Science, Graduate School of
Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8656 Japan
‡ High Temperature Plasma Center, The University of Tokyo, 2-11-16 Yayoi, Bunkyo,
Tokyo 113-8656 Japan

Abstract. A new type of
laser photodetachment (LPD) technique has been
developed for the measurement of electron sheath thickness around an electrostatic
probe and for the measurement of the length of collection region of photodetached
electrons (PDE). When a thickness of the sheath formed around an electrostatic probe
is thicker than about 0.1 mm, modiﬁcation of the temporal evolution of the LPD signal
is observed. By making use of the modiﬁcation, we evaluated sheath thickness around
a cylindrical probe in the existence of the magnetic ﬁeld of 15 mT. It was found that the
thickness of electron sheath along the magnetic ﬁeld was comparable to the calculated
plane-parallel Child-Langmuir sheath thickness when the probe-bias voltage was high.
Furthermore, by inserting a small screening object in the laser beam channel, we can
measure the sheath thickness from the modiﬁcation of LPD signal. From the variation
of the signal intensity as scanning the screening object perpendicular to the laser beam
channel, we can observe the collection region of photodetached electrons, because this
procedure changes the relative displacement between shadow and the probe electrode.

1. Introduction

The laser photodetachment (LPD) technique combined with an electrostatic probe
has been widely applied to the measurements of negative ion density and the drift
velocity [1]. In this measurement, the excess electrons, produced by the laser-induced
photodetachment process, H− + hν → H + e−, are detected by a positively biased
electrostatic probe. Then, we can determine the negative ion density n− and the drift
velocity vd on the basis of the peak value of the excess electron current ∆Ie and of the
temporal evolution of the electron current response, respectively.

Recently, it has been pointed out that negative ions play an important role in
the divertor region for experimental fusion reactors. The negative ions are expected to

† To E-mail address: shin@ﬂanker.q.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
‡ To E-mail address: kado@q.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

2

contribute to the enhancement of recombination processes, which are capable of reducing
the heat ﬂux to the divertor plate [2, 3]. Authors have been applied LPD technique to
divertor simulator MAP (Material And Plasma) -II for the purpose of clarifying the
contribution of negative ions to the plasma recombination [4, 5]. Up to now, however,
the applicability of the laser photodetachment technique under the existence of magnetic
ﬁeld has not been examined. In particular, in situ measurement of not only the sheath
around an electrostatic probe but also of the collection region of photodetached electrons
(PDE) stretches to the outside of the sheath is desirable for this purpose. In the present
paper, the developed new measurements of electron sheath thickness and the length of
the collection region of PDE are presented.

2. Principle of the measurement

2.1. Measurement of electron sheath thickness

The recovery time of LPD signal trecov, in which the electron density at the center of
the laser beam recovers to the initial density, is expressed using the drift velocity of
negative ions vd and the radius of laser beam RL [6]. The recovery time of the LPD
signal is expressed as

trecov ≃

RL − (rp + h)
vd

,

(1)

(2)

(3)

where rp represents the radius of the cylindrical probe tip and h the thickness of the
electron sheath. Because the sheath thickness is negligible at the space potential, the
recovery time at the space potential trecov0 is deduced by substituting h = 0 in Eq. (1),
as follows:

Thus, the sheath thickness is obtained from Eqs. (1) and (2), as

trecov0 ≃

RL − rp
vd

.

h ≃

(trecov0 − trecov)(RL − rp)
trecov0

.

Next, let us consider the case that a screening object is inserted in the laser beam
channel. Originally, the screening object is used to avoid the probe surface ablation
[7] by shielding the probe tip from the direct laser irradiation [8]. We named this
in
screening method “eclipse laser photodetachment method” after a lunar eclipse,
which the shadow of the earth protects the moon from irradiation by the sun. It was
conﬁrmed that this eclipse-LPD method provides the proper negative ion density when
the screening object is suﬃciently smaller than the laser size [9, 10]. A schematic view
of the experimental arrangement of the eclipse-LPD is depicted in Fig. 1 (a). A thin
wire was inserted in the laser beam channel to form a thin shadow in the laser channel.
The position of the shadow was changed with a micrometer of the wire stage. Note that
the width of the shadow becomes a little wider than the screening object because of the
diﬀraction of the laser beam. Taking into consideration the distance from the wire to

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

3

Figure 1. (a) Schematic view of experimental setup for eclipse laser photodetachment.
(b) The conﬁguration of laser beam channel and probe tip in the eclipse-LPD method.

the probe tip (∼0.5 m) and the wavelength of the laser (532 nm), the calculation based
on the Fresnel diﬀraction provides the eﬀective shadow width dsh of the wire diameter
plus 0.6 mm [10].

Typical temporal evolution of the conventional LPD signal and that of the eclipse-
LPD are shown in Fig. 2. We have checked that the recovery time is not disturbed
by the screening object when the shadow width is suﬃciently thinner than the laser
diameter. Thus the sheath eﬀects can be observed in both eclipse-LPD signals and in
conventional LPD signals as the shift of the recovery time.

On the other hand, the time for the LPD signal to reach its peak value depends
on the displacement between the eﬀective probe surface including the sheath and the
edge of the photodetached electron swarm. The conﬁguration of the laser beam and
probe tip in eclipse-LPD are shown in Fig. 1 (b). When the probe is located outside the
laser-irradiated area as shown in Fig. 1 (b), the peak time of the signal tpeak is shifted
from tref
peak by ∆tpeak. Because the propagation velocity of the excess electron swarm
toward the outside of the laser irradiated region corresponds to the negative ion drift
velocity [6], the time shift due to the propagation can be expressed according to Fig. 1
(b) as

∆tpeak(h) = tpeak(h) − tref

peak ≃

(> 0),

(4)

dsh/2 − (rp + h)
vd

where dsh is the shadow width and the term (rp+h) represents the probe radius corrected
by the sheath thickness. The shift of the peak time at the space potential ∆tpeak0 can
be also deduced by substituting h = 0 in Eq. (4) as

∆tpeak0 = tpeak(h = 0) − tref

peak ≃

dsh/2 − rp
vd

.

Finally, the electron sheath thickness is deduced from the diﬀerence between Eqs. (4)
and (5) as

h ≃ (∆tpeak0 − ∆tpeak)vd,

(5)

(6)

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

4

Figure 2. Typical conventional
photodetachment signal. (Vp − Vsp = 30 V)

laser photodetachment signal and eclipse laser

where vd can be obtained from Eq. (2). Moreover, from Eqs. (1) and (4), the sheath
thickness is obtained as

h ≃

(dsh/2 − rp)trecov − (RL − rp)∆tpeak
∆tpeak + trecov

.

(7)

Therefore, in the eclipse-LPD method, we can obtain the sheath thickness h in three
independent ways. However, use of either Eq. (3) or of Eqs. (6) and (2) requires two
signals at diﬀerent bias voltages, space potential, and positive bias. In contrast, there
is a signiﬁcant merit in the application of Eq.
(7) because sheath thickness can be
measured from a single signal at any bias voltage.

2.2. Measurement of collection region

As mentioned above, the time evolution of the LPD signal depends on the electron
sheath thickness. On the other hand, the intensity of the LPD signal is sensitive to
the dimension of the collection region of PDE. In the eclipse-LPD method, the signal
intensity decreases when part of the collection region is shaded by the shadow. However,
the signal intensity recovers when the shadow is well aligned with the electrostatic probe.
This phenomena can be explained by the excess electrons leaked from the irradiated
region to the shaded region [10]. The width of the total signal dip is 2(LPDE+rp +dsh/2),
where LPDE is the length of the collection region of PDE. We can thus obtain LPDE.

3. Experiments

The experiments were performed in divertor simulator MAP-II, which consists of
diﬀerentially pumped dual chambers, target chamber and source chamber. The
chambers are connected with a drift tube. The plasma is generated between a LaB6
cathode and an anode pipe by an arc discharge. The magnetic ﬁeld of 15 mT is formed
with 8 solenoid coils, and then, a cylindrical plasma of about 2 m in length is formed.
The electron density ne and the temperature Te at the center of the plasma column
in the target chamber are about 1012 cm−3 and 5 eV, respectively, while those at the

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

5

peripheral region (r ∼5 cm) are about 1011 cm−3 and 1 eV, respectively. An L-shaped
electrostatic probe, consists of a 0.3 mm in diameter tungsten wire, was placed on the
axis perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld in the target chamber. The total length exposed
to the plasma was 5 mm (2mm plus 3 mm). The laser was injected parallel to the probe
tip head. In the present paper, the probe was located at the peripheral region of the
plasma column, where the negative ion density ratio to the electron density is about
several percent [4, 5]. The negative ion density ratio was so small that we neglected
the modiﬁcation of the sheath structure due to the photodetachment process. Second
harmonic Nd:YAG laser pulses (the wavelength of λ =532 nm) were used for the photon
source of the photodetachment. A thin wire for the eclipse-LPD is located outside the
vacuum chamber. The distance from the wire to the probe tip was about 0.5 m and
the shadow position was adjusted with a micrometer of the wire stage. In the case of
15 mT, the Larmor radius of the electrons is comparable to the size of the probe. In
order to examine the eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld, the case without the magnetic ﬁeld
was compared with the case at 15 mT. In reality, a weak magnetic ﬁeld of less than 1
mT exists even when the coil currents at the target chamber are turned oﬀ. However,
the eﬀect is negligible because the Larmor radius of electrons is much larger than the
probe size in this case. Thus, we henceforth call this condition 0 mT.

4. Results and discussion

The recovery time and the peak time of eclipse-LPD signals as a function of the probe-
bias voltage are shonw in Fig. 3. Figure 3 (a) and (b) correspond to the cases at 15 mT
and at 0 mT, respectively. Both trecov and tpeak were signiﬁcantly reduced as increasing
the probe-bias voltage in Fig. 3 (a). These reductions in Fig. 3 (a) attributes to the
expansion of sheath thickness with the probe voltage.

On the other hand, the time shifts were not observed on either trecov or tpeak in Fig.
3 (b). The comparison between Fig. 3 (a) and (b) shows that the thickness of sheath
around the cylindrical probe at 0 mT is much thinner than that at 15 mT. In this paper,
we focus to the case of the cylindrical probe at 15 mT, because the modiﬁcations of trecov
and tpeak at 0 mT were so small that it was diﬃcult to deduce the sheath thickness.

For the purpose of comparing them to the experimental results with theory,
the sheath thickness was estimated using the Child-Langmuir law assuming that the
particle energy is suﬃciently small compared to the potential of the sheath namely,
Te ≪ e(Vp − Vsp), where Te is the electron temperature in eV, e the elementary charge,
Vp the probe voltage, and Vsp the space potential. The electron sheath thickness in
one-dimensional geometry can be written as [11]
1/4

hp =

2
3 r

−

ǫ0
j (cid:18)

2e(Vp − Vsp)3
me

,

(cid:19)
where j is the current density, ǫ0 the dielectric constant in vacuum, me the mass of an
electron. In the present paper, hp stands for the thickness of the “plane-parallel Child-
It has been conﬁrmed in MAP-II that the experimentally
Langmuir (C-L) sheath”.

(8)

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

6

Figure 3. The recovery time and the peak time of LPD signal as a function of probe-
bias voltage. (a) is the case of 15 mT (b) is the case of 0 mT [shot ♯13926, ♯14393].

obtained thicknesses of the sheath around an plane probe are well agree with hp in
magnetized plasmas [12]. On the other hand,
in cylindrical geometry, the sheath
thickness is expressed as a function of β = (rp + h)/rp, where rp is the probe radius,
and then can be written as [13]

hc = −

8πǫ0
9jβ2 r

2e
me

(Vp − Vsp)3/2.

(9)

hc stands for the thickness of the “cylindrical Child-Langmuir (C-L) sheath” in this
paper. This can be regarded as the limit of using a cylindrical probe in un-magnetized
plasmas. The cylindrical C-L sheath is much thinner than the plane parallel C-L sheath
as is shown next.

The electron sheath thicknesses obtained (i) from Eq. (3), (ii) from Eqs. (6) and
(2), and (iii) from Eq. (7), respectively, are plotted in Fig. 4. The sheath thicknesses
obtained from diﬀerent procedures (i), (ii) and (iii) are consistent value with each other.
In Fig. 4, the calculated sheath thicknesses hp and hc are also plotted. The experimental
results are much thicker than the cylindrical C-L sheath thickness, and moreover, they
are agree with the calculated plane-parallel C-L sheath thickness at the probe-bias
voltage higher than about 50 V. This result indicates that the eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld
on the sheath structure is signiﬁcant even in a weakly magnetized regime for electrons,
where the Larmor radius of electron is comparable to the size of the probe tip.

In addition, LPDE is measured at three diﬀerent probe-bias voltages as changing

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

7

Figure 4. Comparisons of experimentally obtained thickness of the electron sheath
around a cylindrical probe at 15 mT, deduced from three diﬀerent procedures (i), (ii)
and (iii), to the calculated thicknesses of plane-parallel C-L sheath and cylindrical C-L
sheath. Ten times the Debye length is also plotted as a dotted line. (ne = 1×1011cm−3,
Te = 1.6 eV.) [shot ♯13926].

the shadow position, and the results are also plotted in Fig. 4. The length LLPD also
increases with the probe voltage, and is about three to ﬁve times thicker than h. Ten
times the Debye length λD, which is deﬁned as λD = (ǫ0Te/nee2)1/2, is also plotted in Fig.
4, since 5λD − 10λD has been regarded as the typical sheath thickness conventionally.
When the probe was positively 70 - 80 V biased against the space potential, the sheath
thickness was comparable to ten times the Debye length.

We can check the applicability of the negative ion velocity measurement with h, and
that of the negative ion density measurement with LPDE. If a thick electron sheath is
formed around an electrostatic probe, we should modify the recovery time by replacing
rp with rp +h. If LPDE +rp is longer than the laser radius RL, we should enlarge the laser
size or reducing the probe-bias voltage until the condition LPDE + rp < RL is satisﬁed.
Because LPDE might be elongated along the magnetic ﬁeld, it is strongly recommended
to check the condition LPDE + rp < RL especially when the LPD technique is applied to
strongly magnetized plasmas.

5. Conclusions

Electron sheath thicknesses around a cylindrical probe in weakly magnetized plasmas
were measured at diﬀerent probe-bias voltages by using a newly developed eclipse-
LPD. The sheath thickness was consistent with the calculated sheath thickness from the

Measurement of Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region

8

plane-parallel Child-Langmuir law, especially when the probe voltage was rather high.
In addition, the electron collection region of photodetached electrons was measured
from the shadow position dependence of LPD signal intensity. Under the experimental
condition in the present paper, the length of the electron collection region was three to
ﬁve times longer than the electron sheath thickness. The eclipse-LPD has been shown
to be having in itself the capability of checking the applicability.

Reference

121 10

[1] Bacal M 2000 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71 3981
[2] Janev R K, Post D E, Langer W D, Evans K, Heifetz D B and Weisheit J C 1984 J. Nucl. Mater.

[3] Krasheninnikov I, Pigarov A Yu and Sigmar D J 1996 Phys. Lett. A 214 295
[4] Kajita S, Kado S, Uchida N, Shikama T and Tanaka S 2003 J. Nucl. Mater. 313-316, 748
[5] Kado S, Kajita S, Yamasaki D, Iida Y, Xiao B, Shikama T, Oishi T, Okamoto A and Tanaka S,
”Negative Ion Proﬁles in H2-MAR Plasmas in Divertor Simulator MAP-II”, to be published in
J. Nucl. Mater.

[6] Stern R A, Devynck P, Bacal M, Berlemont P and Hillion F 1990 Phys. Rev. A 41 3307
[7] Kajita S, Kado S, Shikama T, Xiao B and Tanaka S 2004 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 44 607 (in press)
[8] Bacal M, Bruneteau A M and Nachman M 1981 J. Phys. Lett. 42 L-5
[9] Kajita S, Kado S, et al 2004 Proc. of the 31st EPS Conf. on plasma phys.
[10] Kajita S, Kado S and Tanaka S, ”Eclipse laser photodetachment method to avoid probe surface
ablation in negative ion measurement”, submitted to Plasma Sources Sci. and Technol.

[11] Raizer Y P Gas Discharge Physics (1991 Springer-Verlag)
[12] Kajita S, Kado S, Okamoto A and Tanaka S, ”Application of Eclipse Laser Photodetachment
Technique to Electron Sheath Thickness and Collection Region Measurements”, to be published
in Phys. Rev. E

[13] Langmuir I and Blodgett K B 1925 Phys. Rev. 22 347

