4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Three-Dimensional PIC Simulation of Electron
Plasmas

M. Romé∗, R. Pozzoli∗, M. Pravettoni∗ and Yu. Tsidulko†

∗I.N.F.N., Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
†Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation

Abstract. The three-dimensional evolution of a pure electron plasma is studied by means of a
particle-in-cell code which solves the drift-Poisson system where kinetic effects in the motion
parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld are taken into account. Different results relevant to the nonlinear
dynamics of trapped plasmas and low-energy electron beams are presented.

INTRODUCTION

The evolution of an electron plasma in a Malmberg-Penning trap [1] is studied by means
of the particle-in-cell (PIC) code MEP [2]. The electron dynamics is analyzed in the
frame of a guiding center electrostatic approximation, where the velocity perpendicular
to an externally applied uniform axial magnetic ﬁeld is given by the electric drift, and
kinetic effects in the motion parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld are taken into account. The
evolution of the system is followed within a conducting cylindrical surface of radius
R and length L on which the (in general time-dependent) boundary conditions for the
electrostatic potential are imposed.

The code is applied here to investigate two different situations (see Fig. 1). In the ﬁrst
case, the evolution of a traveling electron beam is considered. It is observed in particular
how in a space-charge dominated regime a fraction of the electrons close to the axis
is reﬂected back to the cathode while a high density annulus is formed inside the drift
tube, which gives rise to the development of vortex-like structures. In the second case,
the injection phase of an electron plasma in a Malmberg-Penning trap is studied. Here,
the electrons enter in an initially empty trapping region, are reﬂected by a ﬁxed potential
barrier on the opposite side of the trap and come back to the cathode, thus interacting
with new emitted electrons. It is shown how, in dependence of injected current and
geometrical parameters, a virtual cathode may form close to the injection surface, and
a hollow electron column is formed in the trapping region. Longitudinal kinetic effects
are also investigated by varying the velocity distributions of the injected electrons.

MODEL AND PIC CODE

The system is described in the frame of the zeroth order drift approximation, where the
velocity perpendicular to the uniform magnetic ﬁeld B = Bez (ez being the unit vector in

FIGURE 1. Scheme of traveling beam conﬁguration (left) and trap ﬁlling conﬁguration (right). −V is
the trap potential.

the z direction) is given by the electric drift, vE = (c/B) ez × (cid:209)
the electrostatic
potential and c the speed of light. Assuming the guiding centers distribution, f , of the
form f (x, v,t) = F(vk, x,t) d (v⊥ − vE), where x, v,t are position, velocity and time,
respectively, d denotes the Dirac’s distribution, and vk and v⊥ denote the components of
the velocity parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld, the Vlasov-Poisson system
reads

, with j

j

¶ F
¶ t

1
2

+ (

ez × (cid:209)

j + vkez) · (cid:209) F +

1
Me f f

ez · (cid:209)

j

¶ F
¶ vk

= 0 ;

(cid:209) 2j = n ,

(1)

where n(x,t) = R F dvk is the electron density. Adimensional quantities are used: length,
time, density and potential are normalized over R, w c/2w 2
p, n0 and 4p en0R2, respec-
tively, where w c ≡ eB/mc is the non-relativistic electron cyclotron frequency, w p ≡
(4p e2n0/m)1/2 is the electron plasma frequency, computed for a speciﬁed electron den-
sity n0, and −e, m are electron charge and mass, respectively. The behavior of the system
is therefore characterized by the single parameter Me f f , which plays the role of an ef-
fective mass,

Me f f ≡ 4

w 2
p
w 2
c

≃ 4.115 · 10−4 n0[107cm−3]
B2[kGauss]

.

It results Me f f = 2n0/nB, nB being the so-called Brillouin density, nB ≡ (B2/8p )/mc2, so
that 0 ≤ Me f f ≤ 2. Introducing a cylindrical system of coordinates (r, q , z), and using the
variable s ≡ r2, the equations of motion corresponding to the trajectories of the kinetic
equation in (1) are:

= −

¶j
¶q

ds
dt

dq
dt

;

=

¶j
¶ s

;

dz
dt

= vk

;

dvk
dt

=

1
Me f f

¶j
¶ z

.

(2)

(3)

In the code, Eqs. (1) are discretized on an equispaced grid (with the only exception
of the central cell) in the coordinates s, q and z. The number of cells is denoted as
Ns, Nq and Nz, respectively. The grid for s is deﬁned as s0 = 0, s1 = 1/(NsNq + 1),
s j+1 = s j + Nq /(NsNq + 1), s0 = 0, s j = (s j + s j+1)/2, j = 1 ... Ns (s is the position
of the center, while s denotes the lower boundary of a “radial” cell). The grid for q
is q l = 2p (l − 1)/Nq , l = 1 ... Nq , with the periodicity relation q Nq +1 = q 1, while the

FIGURE 2. Left: Time evolution of a beam in the plane (z, r). The parameters of the run are: Me f f =
0.01, Ns = 64, Nq = 64, Nz = 128, Np = 105. The beam is injected at z = −10, with an initial parallel
velocity vk0 = 9.0. The current is I = 0.2215, I being normalized over the ratio between ep R2Ln0 and the
normalization time. Emitter and collector are both at ground. From left to right, top to bottom, the data
refer to t = 0.7, 1.5, 3.5 and 10.0, respectively. Right: Transverse projection [(x, y) plane] of the particles
in the interval −10 ≤ z ≤ −5, −5 ≤ z ≤ 0, 0 ≤ z ≤ 5 and 5 ≤ z ≤ 10, respectively. The data refer to
t = 10.0.

q

grid for z is zk = (k − 1/2)L/Nz − L/2, k = 1 ... Nz. Each cell has the same volume
D V = D sD
q = 2p /Nq , and D z = L/Nz, respectively.
The system governed by Eqs. (1) is simulated numerically as an ensemble of macro-
particles with ﬁxed sizes D s, D

D z/2, with D s = 1/(Ns + 1/Nq ), D

q and D z, using a PIC method [2].

RESULTS

The code is used to simulate the plasma dynamics in a Malmberg-Penning trap for
different possible experimental settings. The physical situation is determined by several
geometrical and emission parameters: the magnetic ﬁeld strength B; the sizes R, L and
the geometry of the emitting surface; the potentials which are imposed on cathode, anode
and drift tube; the initial electron velocity distribution and the initial current distribution
emitted by the source. Malmberg-Penning traps usually use a spiral-wound tungsten
ﬁlament for the injection [3]. The MEP code is able to simulate this initial spatial
distribution of the electrons; the effect of an accelerating grid is considered by suitably
“cutting” the spiral along rows and columns of a given width. In addition, the code is
able to take into account various initial velocity and current density distributions. At
ﬁrst, a low-energy electron beam traveling in an equipotential (grounded) drift tube is
considered (see Fig. 1 left). The electrons are continuously emitted from the cathode and
collected to the anode. The characteristic time scale of the system is the time of ﬂight of

FIGURE 3. Left: Time evolution of a plasma ﬁlling the trap, in the (z, r) plane. The parameters of the
run are: Me f f = 4.64 · 10−4, Ns = 64, Nq = 64, Nz = 128, Np = 105. The beam is injected at z = −5.0,
with vk0 = 28.90. The current is I = 0.1423, and the potential difference between collector and emitter is
−0.97. From left to right, top to bottom, the data refer to t = 0.7, 1.5, 4.0 and 8.0, respectively. Right:
Transverse projection of the particles in the interval −5 ≤ z ≤ −2.5, −2.5 ≤ z ≤ 0, 0 ≤ z ≤ 2.5 and
2.5 ≤ z ≤ 5, respectively. The data refer to t = 8.0.

an electron, L/vk. In a space-charge-limited regime, it is found experimentally that the
central part of the beam is reﬂected, a hollow electron column forms and fast coherent
structures arise, possibly due to the development of diocotron instability [4]. The PIC
simulations conﬁrm the experimental ﬁndings. The time evolution of a mono-energetic
beam in the (r, z) plane is shown in Fig. 2 left. It is evident, in particular, the formation of
a virtual cathode close to the injection surface. The central part of the beam is reﬂected
back to the cathode by the space-charge of the beam itself, and only the outer part of
the beam reaches the opposite end of the trap. This annular beam shows a quasi-2D
evolution of vortex structures: Fig. 2 right represents the electron plasma distribution in
(almost) stationary conditions on different transverse slices.

As a second example, the case of an electron plasma ﬁlling the trap is studied (see
Fig. 1 right). This situation simulates the phase of injection in a Malmberg-Penning trap.
In this phase, the end plug electrode is maintained at a sufﬁciently negative potential in
order to reﬂect the electrons entering the trap, while the plug electrode at the entrance
is grounded to let the electrons ﬂow into the trap from the cathode (starting from this
conﬁguration, the trapping phase is obtained by simply lowering the plug potential at
the entrance of the beam to the same value as the end potential, so that the electrons
are electrostatically conﬁned along the axis of the device). A mono-energetic beam is
considered. It is found that when the input current of the beam is increased, the space
charge cloud which forms inside the trap represents a barrier not only for the new
incoming particles, but also for the electrons which are already inside and are reﬂected
by the external negative potential barrier. As a result, the electron plasma ﬁlling the trap

FIGURE 4. Time evolution of a plasma ﬁlling the trap, in the (z, pk) plane. The parameters are
the same as in Fig. 3 (red dots). From left to right, top to bottom, the data refer to t = 0.3, 0.7,
1.5 and 3.0, respectively. The blue dots are relevant to an initial Maxwellian distribution in parallel
velocity, F(vk, x, 0) = g(x) · exp[−(vk − vk0)2/2s 2), with the same central value vk0, and a velocity spread
s = 5.78.

assumes an annular shape, as shown in Fig. 3. The time evolution of the electrons in
the phase plane (z, pk) is shown in Fig. 4 (red dots), where pk ≡ Me f f vk. Longitudinal
kinetic effects have been investigated in this case. In particular, it has been found that
varying the parallel velocity distribution of the injected electrons to a Maxwellian has
a dramatic effect (see again Fig. 4, blue dots): space-charge effects are much weaker in
this case, and the electron plasma maintains its initial transverse (spiral) shape.

REFERENCES

1.
J. H. Malmberg and J. S. de Grassie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 577 (1975).
2. Yu. Tsidulko, R. Pozzoli and M. Romé, submitted to J. Comp. Phys. (2004).
3. M. Amoretti, G. Bettega, F. Cavaliere, M. Cavenago, F. De Luca, R. Pozzoli and M. Romé, Rev.

4. G. Bettega, F. Cavaliere, M. Cavenago, A. Illiberi, R. Pozzoli, M. Romé and Yu. Tsidulko, Appl.

Scient. Instr. 74, 3991 (2003).

Phys. Lett. 84, 3807 (2004).

