4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Accelerated electron populations formed by Langmuir wave-caviton interactions

N. J. Sircombe∗ and T. D. Arber
Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

R. O. Dendy
UKAEA Culham Division, Culham Science Centre,
Abingdon, Oxfordshire, OX14 3DB, United Kingdom
(Dated: February 9, 2008)

Direct numerical simulations of electron dynamics in externally driven electrostatic waves have
been carried out using a relativistic two-ﬂuid one-dimensional Vlasov-Poisson code. When the driver
wave has suﬃciently large amplitude, ion density holes (cavitons) form. The interaction between
these cavitons and other incoming Langmuir waves gives rise to substantial local acceleration of
groups of electrons, and ﬁne jet-like structures arise in electron phase space. We show that these
jets are caused by wave-breaking when ﬁnite amplitude Langmuir waves experience the ion density
gradient at the leading edge of the holes, and are not caused by caviton burn-out. An analytical two-
ﬂuid model gives the critical density gradient and caviton depth for which this process can occur. In
particular, the density gradient critically aﬀects the rate at which a Langmuir wave, moving into the
caviton, undergoes Landau damping. This treatment also enables us to derive analytical estimates
for the maximum energy of accelerated electrons, and for the energy spectrum along a phase-space
jet. These are conﬁrmed by direct numerical simulations.

PACS numbers: 52.35.Mw, 52.38.Kd, 56.65.Ff

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Outline

This paper describes a novel mechanism for the non-
resonant acceleration of electrons within a plasma. We
demonstrate how coupling of strong Langmuir turbulence
to ﬁnite amplitude, coherent Langmuir waves allows the
potential energy of the Langmuir waves to be imparted to
electrons as the wave breaks. This results in the accelera-
tion of a small population of fast electrons from the back-
ground population at the point where wave-breaking oc-
curs. Acceleration occurs spontaneously without requir-
ing an intense laser pulse or particle injection, which are
key features of electron acceleration schemes [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
that rely on wave-particle resonance, such as laser wake-
ﬁeld acceleration (LWFA), self-modulated LWFA, plasma
beat wave accelerators and plasma wakeﬁeld accelerators.
The electrons accelerated by our new non-resonant mech-
anism form a collimated phase space jet in the electron
distribution function fe. Such populations of energetic
electrons are of some concern in inertial conﬁnement fu-
sion (ICF) experiments, because they may contribute di-
rectly to capsule pre-heat or form the seed populations
for further acceleration. For example, the hot electrons
generated by this mechanism could undergo wakeﬁeld ac-
celeration [6, 7, 8] in the presence of a laser ﬁeld, creating
even more energetic particles capable of pre-heating the
ICF capsule [9, 10].
By considering the relativistic one dimensional Vlasov-

∗Electronic address: n.j.sircombe@warwick.ac.uk

Poisson system and exposing this system to a large am-
plitude electrostatic standing wave (in a similar manner
to Ref.[11]), it is possible to drive the formation of cavi-
tons. These cavitons are, in essence, local regions of ion
density depletion accompanied by a local concentration of
electric ﬁeld amplitude. Their formation is driven by the
ponderomotive force and they are seeded by small ﬂuc-
tuations in the electron density. In our simulations these
initial ﬂuctuations are provided by the electrostatic driv-
ing ﬁeld. However, once the process of cavitation has
begun, the external ﬁeld can be removed without sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀecting further caviton development. In this
paper we show that at a particular point in the caviton
development, ﬁne jet-like structures form in the electron
phase space, and we derive the necessary conditions for
jet formation depending on the characteristics of the cavi-
ton. These phase space jets represent a portion of the
electron population accelerated from a small region near
the edge of a caviton. The process by which these the jets
emerge, together with their characteristics, suggests that
they are the result of breaking Langmuir waves. This
hypothesis is supported by further simulations, and by a
simple model for the process based on a ﬂuid treatment
including Landau damping. This theory is an extension
of the work of Akhiezer and Polovin [12] on breaking
Langmuir waves in a uniform medium. The energy dis-
tribution and the maximum energy within a jet can be
calculated from conservation of energy, provided we as-
sume that all of the potential energy of the wave is im-
parted to the electrons at the breaking wavefront.

B. The Relativistic Vlasov-Poisson System

The model used in this paper is a one dimensional rel-
ativistic Vlasov-Poisson system of electrons and protons
with a mass ratio mi/me = Mr, and no magnetic ﬁeld.
This fully nonlinear self consistent system is governed by
the Vlasov equation for the electron distribution function
fe(x, p, t)

∂fe
∂t

+

p
meγ

∂fe
∂x −

eE

∂fe
∂p

= 0,

(1)

the Vlasov equation for the ion distribution function
fi(x, p, t)

∂fi
∂t

+

p
miγ

∂fi
∂x

∂fi
∂p

+ eE

= 0,

(2)

and Poisson’s equation for the electric ﬁeld

∂E
∂x

=

e
ǫ0

−

fedv

fidv

−

Z

(cid:19)

(cid:18)Z

(3)

where x is the spatial co-ordinate, p = γmev is the
ec2)1/2 is
momentum co-ordinate and γ = (1 + p2/m2
the Lorentz factor. Taking ˜z to represent the nor-
malised form of the variable z, the following dimension-
less normalisation, appropriate to a relativistic system, is
adopted throughout: x = (c/ωpe)˜x, t = (1/ωpe)˜t, v = c˜v,
E = (ωpecme/e) ˜E, p = mec˜p. It follows that frequen-
cies are normalised to the plasma frequency, ω = ωpe ˜ω,
wavenumbers to the ratio of the plasma frequency to the
speed of light, k = ωpe˜k/c, and temperatures are nor-
malised such that Te,i = (kB/me,ic2) ˜Te,i, where kB is
Boltzmann’s constant. All simulations are carried out us-
ing a mass ratio Mr = 100. This value is suﬃciently large
to allow the development of phenomena on two disparate
time-scales (since electron and ion plasma frequencies are
an order of magnitude apart), without the increased run-
time of the real ratio.

C. Numerical Approach

The Vlasov-Poisson system is solved using the code
detailed in Ref.[13]. This is a split Eulerian scheme in
which the distribution functions (fe, fi) are calculated on
a ﬁxed Eulerian grid, and the solver is split into separate
spatial and velocity space updates [14]. These updates
are one dimensional, constant velocity advections car-
ried out using the piecewise parabolic method [15]. The
original code has been extended to solve the fully rel-
ativistic Vlasov-Poisson system Eqs.(1) to (3). A large
amplitude external driving ﬁeld ˜Ed = ˜E0 sin(˜k ˜x) sin(˜ω0˜t)
is added to the self consistent electric ﬁeld found from
Poisson’s equation. The parameters of the driving ﬁeld
are chosen to ensure that the system is driven at res-
onance (ω0 = ωpe, or ˜ω0 = 1 in normalised units),
and that the intensity of the perturbations corresponds

2

(4)

(5)

(6)

to the high quiver velocity regime v2
T e > 1, where
vq = eE0/meω0. Hence E0 > meω0vT e/e, or in nor-
malised units

q /v2

˜E0 > ˜vT e

This driving ﬁeld, similar to the perturbation used in ear-
lier work on the modulational instability [11], is necessary
to drive the formation of cavitons and is only needed dur-
ing the early stages of the simulation. In our simulations
it is applied from ˜t = 0 to ˜t = 10, which is suﬃcient to
seed the formation of cavitons.
Extending the presence of the driving ﬁeld after ˜t = 10
does not signiﬁcantly eﬀect the evolution of cavitions or
the amplitude of Langmuir waves in the system. Hence
the energy of accelerated electrons remains . 5MeV.
However, Langmuir waves formed as a result of the the
continued presence of ˜Ed result in more numerous and
frequent phase space jets.

II. RESULTS

A.

Initial Conditions

The system is initialised with a Maxwellian distribu-
tion of both electrons and ions at equal temperatures
with an electron thermal velocity

and an ion thermal velocity

T e = c2/103
v2

T i = c2/103Mr,
v2

≈

equivalent to a temperature
0.5keV. In normalised
units this gives ˜vT e = 10−3/2, hence Eq.(4) implies that
we require ˜E0 > 10−3/2. The simulation box is of length
˜Lx = 20π in normalised units, with periodic boundary
conditions in space. In summary, the dimensionless ini-
tial conditions are ˜Te = 0.001, ˜Ti = 0.001, ˜Lx = 20π,
˜E0 = 0.5, ˜ω0 = 1, ˜k = 2π/ ˜Lx, and the initial maximum
of fe, f max

= 9.2925.

e

B. Caviton Formation and Jet Creation

The development of cavitons can be seen in both the
isometric renderings of the electron distribution function
(Figs.1 and 2) and plots of the density and electric ﬁeld
amplitude (Fig.3). Cavitons form in response to the pon-
deromotive force exerted on the electrons by the driving
ﬁeld Ed. Hence they are centred around regions where
the amplitude of the driving ﬁeld is strongest, leading to
symmetry in ne,i and
about the centre of the system
˜x = 10π. By ˜t = 20 two prominent holes, driven by the
ponderomotive force, have formed in the electron density
centred at ˜x
25 and 37. As the system continues to
evolve, the ions are slowly evacuated to form two broad

E
|

≈

|

3

FIG. 1: Isometric view of the electron distribution function fe (left) and contour plot of log(fe > 10−6) (right) at time ˜t = 20.
Here the relativistic Vlasov-Poisson system is driven from ˜t = 0 to 10 at ω = ωpe. The evacuation of electrons from localised
regions of the simulation domain is seen in the electron distribution function; this is the early stage of cavitation. Caviton
formation is due to the modulational instability initially driven by the external ﬁeld Ed.

FIG. 2: Isometric view of the electron distribution function fe (left) and contour plot of log(fe > 10−6) (right) at time ˜t = 40.
Here the relativistic Vlasov-Poisson system was driven from ˜t = 0 to 10 at ω = ωpe. Fine jet-like structures in electron phase
space are visible: jets marked ‘a’ have recently formed on the inside edges of the two cavitons, whereas the jets marked ‘b’ have
formed in the same area at an earlier time and have since been advected through the system. The jets marked ‘c’ are at an
intermediate stage, having formed on the outside edges of the cavitons. These jets are the result of Langmuir wave-breaking at
the edges of the evolving density holes.

density holes. These holes in both ion and electron den-
sities are accompanied by a local increase in the electric
ﬁeld amplitude, characteristic of caviton formation, see
Fig.3.
At later times, populations of accelerated electrons are
clearly visible in the contour plots of the electron dis-
tribution function. These are the electron phase space
jets. At ˜t = 20, ten plasma periods after the driving ﬁeld
has been removed, there is no evidence of jet formation,
see Fig.1. However, between ˜t = 20 and ˜t = 40 a series
of phase space jets form on both edges of the deepening
cavitons. Studying the evolution of the electron distri-
bution function during this period allows one to identify
phase space jets at diﬀerent points in their evolution. In

Fig.2 we highlight jets at three separate stages of evolu-
tion. There are two jets (a) forming on the inside edges of
the caviton as well as two old jets (b) which have been ad-
vected across the system, eﬀectively crossing the cavitons
on whose edges they formed. Finally, there are two inter-
mediate jets (c), on the outer edges of the cavitons. The
most energetic electrons within these jets have energies
≈
5MeV. The appearance of these jets does not aﬀect the
development of the cavitons, which continue to deepen
after the appearance of the phase space jets. In addition,
the simulation is seeded with randomly distributed tracer
particles. These do not contribute to the numerical solu-
tion of the Vlasov Poisson system and are simply moved
in response to the total electric ﬁeld (self consistent elec-

C. Jet Emergence

4

The process of jet emergence is best explained by ob-
serving the evolution of the electron distribution func-
tion, focusing on a region where a jet develops, during
its early stages. Figure 4 shows a reduced section of the
electron phase space, the region 50 . ˜x . 60 where the
rightmost jet, labelled ‘b’ in Fig.2, ﬁrst appears. This re-
gion encompasses the right hand side of one of the deep-
ening cavitons seen in Fig.3. The jet forms at the outer,
60. The sequence
right hand edge of this caviton at ˜x
of contour plots in Fig.4 shows that the jet then extends
out from the main electron distribution, at
2, to
8 in approximately one plasma period.
momenta of

| ≈

˜p
|

≈

˜p
| ≈
|

III. PHYSICS OF ELECTRON JETS

A. Wave Breaking

The key observed features of the phase space jets are:

1. Jets do not appear at early times in the simulation,
they ﬁrst require some degree of caviton evolution.

2. Jets are not directly related to the external driver,
they appear after the removal of the external driv-
ing ﬁeld.

3. Jets are not associated with caviton burn-out pro-
cesses, since cavitons persist long after the appear-
ance of jets.

4. Jets originate at the caviton edge. Electrons are
accelerated from the main distribution to form the
phase space jet which is then advected through the
system. Their constituent electrons pass over the
caviton on whose edge they formed, escaping the
inﬂuence of the caviton completely. The direction
of this advection indicates that phase space jets are
the result of processes originating outside the cavi-
ton.

5. Electrons are accelerated up to energies of 5MeV
from an initially Maxwellian population with tem-
perature

0.5keV.

≈

From extensive numerical simulations of the system, it is
clear that the breaking of Langmuir waves on the density
gradients at the edges of the cavitons is responsible for
the creation of the phase space jets. Figure 5 provides a
schematic illustration of the physical process, which we
explore in the rest of this section. The Langmuir wave
ﬁrst approaches the density hole. As it moves into the
region of lower density, the phase speed at the front of
the wave falls. If this proceeds rapidly enough to over-
come the eﬀect of Landau damping (which acts to damp
the incoming wave energy, and thereby prevent it from
breaking), then the wave will break. This creates a strong
electric ﬁeld localised at the wave crest, which accelerates

FIG. 3: Plots of the electron (solid line) and ion (dashed
line) density at ˜t = 20 (top left) and ˜t = 40 (top right),
together with the electric ﬁeld amplitude at ˜t = 20 (bottom
left) and ˜t = 40 (bottom right) for a relativistic Vlasov-
Poisson system that was driven from ˜t = 0 to 10 at ω =
ωpe. The formation of ion density holes can be clearly seen,
together with localised growth in the electric ﬁeld amplitude
characteristic of caviton formation. Caviton formation is due
to the modulational instability driven initially by the external
ﬁeld Ed.

FIG. 4: Contour plots of log(fe > 10−6) in the region 50 .
˜x . 60 at times ˜t = 32 (top left), 34 (top right), 36 (bottom
left) and 38 (bottom right). These plots show a phase space
jet developing at the outside edge of the caviton (see Fig.3)
at ˜x ≈ 60. Electrons are accelerated from a compact region
of the background distribution to form the jet, which extends
and advects across the caviton.

tric ﬁeld plus driving ﬁeld). Following the motion of these
particles indicates that the electrons which form the jets
are not accelerated from within the caviton - this eﬀec-
tively rules out caviton burn-out as an explanation for
the origin of the phase space jets.

with ˜ω
the Langmuir wave as a function of ˜n(x):

1 gives an estimate of the local wavenumber of

≈

˜k =

(1

˜n(x)) /3 ˜Te

1/2

−
This corresponds to a phase velocity ˜vp = ˜ω/˜k
given by

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

≈

˜vp =

3 ˜Te/(1
(cid:16)

−

(cid:17)

˜n(˜x))

1/2

= ˜Ebr

the breaking amplitude, by Eq.(7). For the case of a
linear density ramp ˜n(˜x) = 1
η˜x where 0 < ˜x < 1/η,
Eqs.(11) and (12) imply

−

˜k =

η˜x/3 ˜Te

2

1/2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

1/2

˜vp =

3 ˜Te/η˜x
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

= ˜Ebr

As the wavefront moves down the density ramp, the
phase velocity falls, reducing the maximum wave ampli-
tude which can be sustained. If the breaking threshold
falls suﬃciently, it will be satisﬁed by the incoming wave,
which will then break. The wave breaking condition
˜Ebr ≤
together with Eq.(13) gives

(15)

˜EL

1/2

(cid:16)

≤

˜EL

(16)

3 ˜Te/η˜x
(cid:17)
Thus far, this treatment has not taken into account the
eﬀect of Landau damping of the Langmuir wave as it
moves down the density ramp, which could reduce the
ﬁeld amplitude at a rate which ensures the breaking con-
dition is never achieved. If the initial amplitude of the
˜EL0, then the damped amplitude at
Langmuir wave is
time ˜t is given by

˜EL = ˜EL0e−Γ(˜t)

Γ

˜t

=

γLdt

˜t

0
Z

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

γL =

π
8

1

2 ωpe
k3λ3
D

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

exp

−

(cid:18)

3
2 −

1
2k2λ2

D (cid:19)

Using the estimate for ˜k given in Eq.(13) and solving the
integral in Eq.(18) for ˜x following the wave, given that

∂ ˜x
∂˜t

= ˜vg =

1/2

∂ ˜ω
∂˜k

=

3 ˜Teη˜x
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

5

(11)

1/˜k

(12)

(13)

(14)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

FIG. 5: Schematic representation of electron acceleration by
Langmuir wave-breaking. a: Density hole with a few sample
electrons highlighted. b: The crest of a Langmuir wave moves
towards the density hole. c: As the wavefront moves down the
gradient at the edge of the density hole, its phase velocity falls
and the wavefront steepens. d: For a density hole of suﬃ-
cient depth and steepness, the incoming wave breaks, forming
a strong localised electric ﬁeld which accelerates electrons from
the inside edge of the caviton to create jets in electron phase
space.

and

electrons in the vicinity away from the background popu-
lation to form phase space jets. In the next three sections
we outline an analytical model of the competing processes
of wave-breaking and Landau damping, together with a
derivation of the electron energy distribution within the
jet.

B. Wave Breaking Amplitude

The maximum amplitude Ebr of a Langmuir wave
which can be sustained in a plasma before it breaks is
given by the Akhiezer and Polovin constraint [12]. For a
non-relativistic phase velocity vp, this is given by

eEbr/meωpevp = 1

(7)

where the breaking amplitude Ebr is the maximum elec-
tric ﬁeld amplitude which can be sustained by a Lang-
muir wave before it breaks. In normalised units Eq.(7) is
equivalent to ˜Ebr = ˜vp; the breaking amplitude depends
on the phase velocity of the wave, which is determined
by the Langmuir dispersion relation

(8)

(9)

Consider a Langmuir wave moving through a region of
decreasing density

˜n = ˜n(˜x)

pe =

n0e2/meǫ0

where n falls from an initial value n0, corresponding to
a plasma frequency of ω0
. As a ﬁrst
approximation, we may assume that the amplitude and
frequency of the Langmuir wave remain ﬁxed at EL ( ˜EL
in normalised units) and ω
1 in normalised
≈
units) respectively. Taking the dispersion relation Eq.(8)
in normalised units

ω0
pe (˜ω

1/2

≈

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

˜ω2 = ˜n(˜x) + 3 ˜Te˜k2

(10)

ω2 = ω2

pe + 3vT e

2k2

Here the local damping decrement γL [16] determines
Γ(t)

yields

˜EL = ˜EL0 exp

1

 

η

˜Te (cid:16)

1
2

exp

π
2

3
2 −

3
2η˜x

−

(cid:18)

(cid:19)!

(21)

(cid:17)
Combining Eqs.(21) and (15) gives the condition for
wave-breaking, and hence phase-space jet formation

p

1
2

exp

1

π
2

˜Te (cid:16)

(cid:17)

3
2 −

3
2η˜x

−

(cid:18)

(cid:19)!

˜EL0 exp

 

η
1/2

p

3 ˜Te
η˜x !

−  

0

≥

(22)

η.

→ ∞

In the steep gradient limit (i.e. η

for a Langmuir wave with initial electric ﬁeld amplitude
˜EL0 moving down a linear density ramp with gradient
), this is
−
equivalent to Eq.(16). To summarise, as the Langmuir
wave moves down the density ramp it experiences Lan-
dau damping which reduces the wave amplitude from its
initial value. The wave-breaking condition is then only
satisﬁed if the decline in density reduces Ebr to the value
where it is equal to the damped Langmuir wave ampli-
tude ˜EL given by Eq.(21). Thus for a density ramp with
edge gradient η and depth ∆, the wave will break, thereby
accelerating electrons to form phase space jets, if Eq.(22)
is satisﬁed for some ˜x, 0 < ˜x < ∆/η. This relation has
been derived from a simple ﬂuid treatment, modiﬁed to
take into account the eﬀect of Landau damping, which
depends on caviton gradient η and depth ∆. It is sup-
ported by numerical simulations using ﬁxed background
density proﬁles containing cavitons with a chosen depth
and edge gradient, which are presented below.

C. Fixed Ion Simulations

In order to test the model outlined above and demon-
strate that the phase space jets are a direct result of
breaking Langmuir waves, a further series of numerical
simulations was conducted. These simulate the interac-
tion of a Langmuir wave with a system having immobile
ions whose initial density proﬁle is ﬁxed to provide den-
sity holes of a prescribed size and shape, as shown in
Fig.6. A Langmuir wave was created by perturbing the
initial electron distribution function to create a traveling
wave of a given amplitude and wavelength. This initial-
isation relies on the linear dispersion relation, and so is
only valid for small amplitudes. As the wave propagates
across the simulation domain, it encounters the density
hole created by the ﬁxed ion background density proﬁle.
By varying the parameters of the density hole and the
Langmuir wave, it is possible to change the nature of the
phase space jets and conﬁrm the functional dependence
on caviton depth and gradient predicted by Eq.(22). Fig-
ure 7 shows an area of (∆, η) parameter space partitioned
by Eq.(22), for a Langmuir wave of amplitude ˜EL0 = 0.12
and wavelength ˜λL = 2π. It also displays the results of

6

FIG. 6: Top: Schematic of the initial density proﬁle used for
ﬁxed ion simulations. The simulation boundaries are periodic
with density holes deﬁned by a ‘tanh’ function. A traveling
Langmuir wave of ﬁxed wavelength and amplitude is added
in the form of a sinusoidal electron density and velocity per-
turbation at the centre of the system. Bottom: Isometric
rendering of the electron distribution function from the ﬁxed
ion simulations at ˜t = 0.

simulations of the interaction of this Langmuir wave for
a range of (η, ∆), classiﬁed by the presence or absence of
phase space jets. Our criterion for jet formation is the
presence of a second maximum, separated from the main
distribution, in the region of the density ramp. This re-
quires that fe pass through a critical value fc four times
for some point in the density ramp. The value fc is chosen
to be 1% of the initial maximum f max
of fe. The sim-
ulation results support the analytical breaking condition
Eq.(22) derived above. Figure 8 shows such a simulation
at ˜t = 56: a series of phase space jets have formed as
a Langmuir wave (˜λL = 2π, δne = 0.12) encountered a
density hole of depth ∆ = 0.6 and gradient η = 0.5.

e

D. Electron Energy Distribution within Jets

The maximum energy achieved by electrons in a phase
space jet, and the distribution of electrons within the
jet, can be calculated from the assumption that the total
energy carried by the sum of jet electrons comes from
the potential of the breaking Langmuir wave. Here we

7

of nJet over ∆ǫ

N Jet =

nJet(∆ǫ)d∆ǫ

(25)

Equating this to Eq.(24) gives

ZS0

j
X

−1

d∆ǫ
d˜x0

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

j

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

nJet (∆ǫ) =

nj (˜x0 (∆ǫ))

(26)

The function x0(∆ǫ) comes from the potential function
of the Langmuir wave. Since the electric ﬁeld of the wave
near to breaking will be of nonlinear sawtooth form, its
potential ˜φL can be represented [17] by a parabolic func-
tion with amplitude ˜φ0

˜φL = ˜φ0

4˜x2
0
˜λ2
L −

4˜x0
˜λL !

 

(27)

over the range of one wavelength ˜λL. From the as-
sumption that electrons accelerate using the local po-
tential energy of the Langmuir wave,
it follows that
∆ǫ(˜x0) = ˜φL(˜x0), with the maximum possible energy
gain ∆ǫmax = ˜φ0:

∆ǫ = ∆ǫmax

4˜x2
0
˜λ2
L −

4˜x0
˜λL !

 

(28)

Inverting this expression yields

˜x0 = ˜λL

1 + (1 + ∆ǫ/∆ǫmax)

/2

(29)

1/2

(cid:17)
while diﬀerentiating with respect to ˜x0 gives

(cid:16)

= ∆ǫmax

8˜x0
˜λ2
L −

4
˜λL !

 

(30)

d∆ǫ
d˜x0

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Substituting Eqs.(29) and (30) into Eq.(26), for a con-
stant background density proﬁle, gives the energy spec-
trum for a single phase space jet:

nJet(∆ǫ) = nJet(0)

1

 

(1 + ∆ǫ/∆ǫmax)

1/2

!

(31)

Here we have normalised the equation using nJet(∆ǫ =
0) = n0˜λL/4∆ǫmax, for a local electron density of n0. It
follows that the ratio of highest energy to lowest energy
electrons within the jet is given by

nJet (∆ǫmax)/nJet (∆ǫ = 0) = 1/√2

(32)

The analytically derived energy spectrum Eq.(31), shown
in Fig.10 (left), is broadly consistent with the electron
distribution function that is obtained from the simula-
tions discussed earlier. Figure 10 (right) shows a plot of
fe, normalised to its value fe0 at the base of the phase
space jet, along the ridge of the phase space jet shown in
Fig.4.

FIG. 7: Jet formation and non-formation, plotted with re-
spect to caviton parameter space (∆, η), where ∆ represents
the caviton depth and η the edge gradient. The space is parti-
tioned into regions of jet formation and non-formation by the
breaking condition Eq.(22), and superimposed are the results
from simulations using a ﬁxed ion background to produce the
desired caviton structure. The Langmuir wave considered here
has amplitude ˜EL0 = 0.12 and wavelength ˜λL = 2π.

consider the fully relativistic case and show that conser-
vation of energy enables us to ﬁnd the electron energy
distribution along the jet. Following the same approach
as Ref.[17], we assume the energy gain of electrons ac-
celerated by the breaking wave is a positive, continuous,
single-valued function of their initial position (i.e. their
proximity to the breaking wavefront). We then construct
an expression for the electron density as a function of
energy gain ∆ǫ. However, we must account for the pos-
sibility that two electrons from diﬀerent spatial positions
could achieve the same energy gain. We therefore parti-
tion the domain into regions where the number density
of accelerated electrons is a single valued function of ∆ǫ,
as shown schematically in Fig.9 which we discuss below.
The total number of accelerated electrons N Jet is given
by integrating the electron density over the spatial region
S0 from which electrons are accelerated:

N Jet =

n(˜x0)d˜x0

(23)

ZS0
where ˜x0 represents the initial position of the electron.
This can be rewritten in terms of a new variable ∆ǫ(˜x0),
the energy gain as a function of initial position, to give

−1

d∆ǫ
d˜x0

N Jet =

nj (˜x0 (∆ǫ))

d∆ǫ

(24)

{

j
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

j ZQj
X

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
Here the region of integration S0 is partitioned into sub-
domains
Qj}j∈N: within each sub-domain Qj, the func-
tion ∆ǫ(˜x0) is single valued and has no turning points,
as illustrated in Fig.9. The boundaries between the sub-
domains are deﬁned by the location of the turning points
of ∆ǫ(˜x0). Denoting the energy spectrum within the jet
as a function of energy gain by nJet(∆ǫ), we can write the
total number of electrons in the jet N Jet as an integral

8

FIG. 8: Isometric view of the electron distribution function fe (left) and contour plot of log(fe > 10−6) (right) at time ˜t = 56
from a simulation of the interaction of a Langmuir wave with an ion density hole (created and maintained via the prescribed
immobile ion distribution of Fig.6, top). A Langmuir wave (˜λL = 2π, δne = 0.12) has encountered the density hole of depth
∆ = 0.6 and gradient η = 0.5. The incoming wave breaks as it moves into the density hole, producing a strong localised electric
ﬁeld which accelerates electrons from the bulk of the distribution to form a jet.

FIG. 9: Schematic representation of the decomposition of the
spatial domain S0 into sub-domains {Qj}j∈N at equation (24).
The domain S0 represents the region of space from which elec-
trons are accelerated to form a phase space jet. In order to
ﬁnd the energy spectrum, n(∆ǫ) for a phase space jet, we re-
quire ∆ǫ(˜x). However, we must account for the possibility
that ∆ǫ could be multi-valued with respect to ˜x, for example
∆ǫ(˜xa) = ∆ǫ(˜xb) = ∆ǫa,b. Dividing S0 into {Qj }j∈N, where
the sub-domain boundaries are deﬁned by the condition that
∂∆ǫ/∂ ˜x = 0, avoids the problem of ∆ǫ(˜x) being multi-valued.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

≈

Shortly after exposing a fully relativistic Vlasov-
Poisson system to a strong external driving ﬁeld at res-
onance ω0 = ωpe, we observe the formation of ﬁne struc-
tures in the electron distribution function, corresponding
to the acceleration of small populations of electrons to
high energies (
5MeV). These phase space jets result
from the breaking of Langmuir waves (initially excited
by the driving ﬁeld) in the density gradients of cavitons
formed via the ponderomotive force exerted by the exter-
nal driving ﬁeld. Restricting the presence of the driving
ﬁeld to ˜t < 10 allows direct acceleration by the driving
ﬁled to be ruled out as a mechanism. We are able to
explain the origin of the small populations of electrons
which form the jets; derive a necessary condition for the
formation of jets starting from a basic ﬂuid treatment,
which is supported by further numerical simulations; and
estimate the energy distribution of electrons within the
phase space jet. This process may arise whenever Lang-
muir waves move through a strong density gradient, and
is not limited to one dimension or to caviton formation.
It may therefore require consideration in laser-plasma in-
teraction contexts spanning inertial conﬁnement fusion
and particle acceleration.

FIG. 10: Similarity of predicted and measured forms of the
energy distribution of electrons within a jet. Left: Analytical
result Eq.(31). Right: The value of the distribution function
fe, normalised to its value fe0 at the base of the phase space
jet. The energy gain of electrons in the phase space jet is
normalised to the maximum observed energy ≈ 5M eV .

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the United King-
dom Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Coun-
cil.

9

[1] T. Tajima and J. M. Dawson. Laser Electron Accelerator.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 43:267, 1979.

[2] R. Bingham, J. T. Mendon¸ca, and P. K. Shukla. Plasma
based charge-particle accelerators. Plasma Phys. Con-
trol. Fusion, 46:R1–R23, 2004.

[3] E. Esarey and P. Sprangle. Overview of Plasma-Based
IEEE Trans. on Plasma Sci.,

Accelerator Concepts.
24:252, 1996.

[4] S. Bulanov, N. Naumova, F. Pegoraro, and J. Sakai. Par-
ticle injection into the wave acceleration phase due to
nonlinear wake wave breaking. Phys. Rev. E, 59:R5257,
1998.

[5] Z. Najmudin, K. Krushelnick, E. L. Clark, S. P. D. Man-
gles, A. E. Dangor, S. Fritzler, V. Malka, E. Lefebvre,
D. Gordon, F. S. Tsung, and C. Joshi. Self-modulated
wakeﬁeld and forced laser wakeﬁeld acceleration of elec-
trons. Phys. Plasmas, 10:2071, 2003.

[6] A. Pukhov and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn. Laser wake ﬁeld accel-
eration: the highly non-linear broken-wave regime. Appl.
Phys. B, 74:355, 2002.

[7] D. Umstadter, J. K. Kim, and E. Dodd. Laser Injection of
Ultrashort Electron Pulses into Wakeﬁeld Plasma Waves.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 76:2073, 1996.

[8] F. Amiranoﬀ, D. Bernard, B. Cros, F. Dorchies,
F. Jacquet, V. Malka, J. R. Marques, G. Matthieussent,
Ph. Mine, A. Modena, J. Morilllo, and Z. Najmudin.
The laser wakeﬁeld acceleration experiment and Ecole
Polytechnique. Nucl. Instr and Meth. in Phys. Res. A,
410:364, 1998.

[9] J. Lindl. Development of the indirect-drive approach to

inertial conﬁnement fusion and the target physics basis
for ignition and gain. Phys. Plasmas, 2:3833, June 1995.
[10] D. Pesme, S. H¨uller, J. Myatt, C Riconda, A. Maximov,
V. T. Tikhonchuk, C. Labaune, J. Fuchs, S. Depierreux,
and H. A. Baldis. Laser-plasma interaction studies in the
context of megajoule lasers for inertial fusion. Plasma
Phys. Control. Fusion, 44:B53–B67, 2002.

[11] F. Califano and M. Lontano. Vlasov simulations of
strongly nonlinear electrostatic oscillations in a one-
dimensional electron-ion plasma. Phys. Rev. E, 58:6503,
November 1998.

[12] A. I. Akhiezer and R. V. Polovin. Theory of Wave Motion
of an Electron Plasma. Soviet JETP, 3:696, 1956.
[13] T. D. Arber and R. G. L. Vann. A Critical Comparison
of Eulerian-Grid-Based Vlasov Solvers. J. Comp. Phys.,
180:339, June 2002.

[14] C. Z. Cheng and G. Knorr. The integration of the Vlasov
equation in conﬁguration space. J. Comp. Phys, 22:330,
1976.

[15] P. Colella and P.R. Woodward. The Piecewise Parabolic
J.
Method (PPM) for Gas-Dynamical Simulations.
Comp. Phys, 54:174, 1984.

[16] N. A. Krall and A. W. Trivelpiece. Principles of Plasma

Physics. McGraw-Hill, 1973.

[17] N. E. Andreev, L. M. Gorbunov, and S. V. Kuznetsov.
Acceleration of a Relativistic Electron Bunch in Lin-
ear and Nonlinear Plasma Waves. Plas. Phys. Reports,
21:1037, 1995.

