4 Dusty Plasma Liquids

0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chia-Ling Chan, Ying-Ju Lai, Wei-Yen Woon, Hong-Yu Chu
and Lin I

Department of Physics and Center for Complex Systems, National Central
University, Chungli, Taiwan 32054, R.O.C.

E-mail: lini@phy.ncu.edu.tw

Abstract. The dusty plasma liquid formed by micro-meter sized particles negatively
charged and suspended in a low pressure discharge background is a good candidate to
study the generic spatio-temporal dynamical behaviors at the kinetic level through
direct optical video-microscopy, because of the sub-mm interparticle spacing and the
In this paper, starting from the basic picture of the avalanche
slow time scale.
type stick-slip cooperative hopping process under the interplay of mutual coupling
and the stochastic thermal agitation, we brieﬂy review our recent study on particle
micro-motion and the associated structural rearrangement. The eﬀect of mesoscopic
conﬁnement and external slow shear drive are also discussed.

PACS numbers: 52.27.Lw, 05.40.-a, 64.60.Cn

Depending on the observation scale, the dynamics of liquids can be roughly approached
by two diﬀerent ways. Macroscopically, liquid is a continuous extended system with
homogeneous structure and exhibits plastic deformation under external shear [1].
However, down to the atomic scale, the discreteness and thermal ﬂuctuations plays
important roles. The continuous mean ﬁeld approach with partial diﬀerential equations
can no longer be used to describe the dynamical behavior of the discrete system. The
system can be treated as a strongly coupled many body system under stochastic thermal
agitation. Namely, the dynamics should be described by the coupled Langevin equations
instead of the Navier-Stoke equations. Due to the lack of tools for direct visualization at
the small atomic scale, the general understanding of the micro-behaviors of liquids seems
to be limited to the intuitive impression of disordered micro-structure and Brownian type
motion induced by the background thermal noise. Actually, the liquid shares the similar
inter-particle distance to the solid. Its strong mutual coupling and the interplay with
thermal agitation and discreteness could lead to many interesting dynamical behaviors
in cooperative particle micro-motion and the heterogeneous structure rearrangement, i.e.
coherence out of disorder. Without the proper tool for direct microscopic observation,
it is diﬃcult to experimentally address the following issues at the kinetic level: 1)
The generic statistical behaviors of the above cooperative excitations. 2) The generic
behavior of non-Gaussian dynamics and anomalous diﬀusion at the kinetic time scale. 3)
Whether there exists some similar universal features to other strongly coupled complex

Dusty Plasma Liquids

2

system under stochastic or slow drives, e.g. self-organized criticality (SOC) behavior.
[2]. 4) The generic behavior of liquid conﬁned under mesoscopic conﬁnement. 5) The
microscopic response to the external shear and the microscopic origin of viscosity. In
this paper, we brieﬂy review our recent experimental studies on these issues using a
toy system, dusty plasma liquid, to mimic and construct a microscopic picture for the
micro-behaviors in liquid through direct visualization under the proper scale (sub-mm
inter-particle spacing and a few tens of thermal relaxation time).

Dusty plasma can be formed by suspending micrometer sized ﬁne particles in weakly
ionized glow discharge [3, 4]. The strongly coupled mutual Coulomb coupling due to the
strong negative charging of the dust particles (about ten thousand electrons per particle)
can turn the system into crystal or liquid state with sub-mm interparticle spacing. The
capabilities of directly visualizing particle micro-motion over a broad range of time scales
using optical microscopy make it a good platform to explore many interesting dynamical
behaviors [5, 6, 7, 8].
In our studies, a cylindrical symmetrical system as described
elsewhere is used [5, 6]. A weakly ionized discharge (ne ∼ 109 cm−3) is generated in
250 mTorr Ar gas using a 14 MHz rf power system. A hollow cylindrical cell 30-mm in
diameter is placed on the center of the bottom electrode to trap polystyrene particles
at 7 µm diameter. It can also be replaced by rectangular cells with narrower width to
study the lateral mesoscopic conﬁnement eﬀect. Particles are conﬁned by the plasma
sheath adjacent to the surrounding wall. Vertically, the suspended dust particles are
aligned with eight particles for each chain by the wake ﬁeld eﬀect of the vertical ion
ﬂow. Particles in the same vertical chain move together horizontally. It forms a quasi-2D
system. The particle positions in the horizontal mono-layer illuminated by a thin laser
sheet are monitored through digital video optical microscopy. The mean inter-particle
distance a is 0.3 mm.

Fig. 1(a) to (d) show the typical particle trajectories at diﬀerent time interval.
Although the long time motion of the particle look quite disordered (Fig.
1(a)),
interesting patterns are observed at 30 sec time interval. As shown in Fig. 1(b), particle
motion can be roughly divided into the caged motion in the ordered triangular lattice
type domains, and the string- and vortex-type hopping. In a cold 2D liquid melted from
a triangular lattice, the inter-particle distance remains similar and most particles are
still surrounded by six nearest neighbors (see the particle positions of particles in Fig.
1(d)) [5]. However, unlike the solid in which particles only exhibit smaller amplitude
oscillation in their own caging site, the accumulation of constructive perturbation from
the stronger thermal agitation can make the particle overcome the caging barrier induced
by the topological constraint from the nearest neighbors [9, 10]. Namely, particles exhibit
alternate caged and hopping motion, i.e. stick-slip type motion. The Coulomb coupling
provides a channel to propagate the information between particles. On one hand, it
tends to generate ordered state with triangular structure. On the other hand, it can
transfer the kinetic energy of hopping particles to the neighboring particles and induces
cooperative hoppings in the form of strings or vortices involving a small number of
particles. Fig. 1(e) illustrates the cooperative hopping in the xyt space. The vertical

Dusty Plasma Liquids

3

lines with small amplitude wiggling correspond to the caged state and the tilted lines
correspond to the hopping state. Hopping ceases when the kinetic energy is quickly
dissipated to the particles in the background network. Fig. 1(g) shows the histogram
of particle hopping events. ∆tF and ∆DF are the persistent time the traveling distance
for each hopping event respectively, and a is the mean inter-particle distance. Usually,
a particle only travels about one a. The distorted local structure from the ordered
triangular lattice can be rearranged and regain ordering after releasing the strain energy
through hopping.

For a complicated system with such a large number of degrees of freedom, many
information about motion and structure can be measured. For particle motion, we can
easily measure the histogram of particle displacement.
Intuitively, we might expect
that particle exhibit Brownian type random motion with Gaussian type displacement
histogram. Namely, the semi-log plot of P(∆R2) versus ∆R2) should follow a straight
line. However, the curve bends upward in the intermediate time scale (τ around a few
second)(Fig. 1(f)). It manifests the existence of the high-speed non-Gaussian tail. It
is interesting to note that the mean square displacement (MSD = h∆R2i) versus time
interval τ plot exhibits anomalous diﬀusion with the scaling exponent (α) deviating
from 1 (1 is for normal diﬀusion) [6]. At short time interval (e.g.
the trajectories
in Fig. 1(d), particle motion is dominated by the small amplitude high frequency
oscillation (see the fast wiggling in the trajectory plot in xyt space). It leads to the
anti-persistent diﬀusion. For the intermediate time scale (about a few sec), suﬃcient
constructive perturbation can be accumulated which leads to persistent hopping and α
> 1. In this regime, the fast hopping particles cause the upward bending of the curve
in the displacement histogram plot. However, in the regime of a few tens of second, the
successive random phase hoppings wash out the motion memory and lead to the normal
diﬀusion with Gaussian type displacement histogram. Namely, both caged and hopped
motions are consequences of the competition among discreteness, Coulomb coupling,
and thermal kicks. Coherence can be partially preserved in small spatio-temporal scale.
Figure 1(f) further locates the sites of hopping events in xyt space. Avalanched type
excitation of hoppings in the form of clusters involving diﬀerent number of particles can
be observed. Unlike the intuitively expected uncorrelated distribution, the cluster size
follows a scale-free power law distribution with slope around 2.0. (Fig. 1(i)). Note, the
similar scale-free power law distribution have been observed for many strongly coupled
sub-excitable systems under external random drives [11, 12]. The cold 2D dusty plasma
liquid is a paradigm for the SOC behavior at the microscopic level.

With the basic building blocks of slick-slip type caged and cooperative hopping
under the competition between mutual coupling and thermal agitation, we can easily
expect that increasing temperature will speed up hopping, i.e. shortening the transition
time scale from the anti-persistent to persistent diﬀusion.
It is interesting to note
that similar exponents for the persistent diﬀusion and the scaling law of the clusters
size distribution of fast hopping particles to the colder liquid runs are preserved (Fig.
1(i))[6].

Dusty Plasma Liquids

4

Figure 1. (a) to (d) The trajectories of particles in a cold liquid state with decreasing
time intervals. (e) The 3D particle trajectories in xyt space corresponding to the upper
right box of the 2D plot which is magniﬁed from the upper left corner of (b). The red
and green trajectories correspond to the hopping and caged states, respectively; and
the blue lines are the corresponding projections on the xy plane. (f) The histograms of
the particle mean square displacement P (∆R2). a is the mean inter-particle distance.
A good Gaussian distribution should follow a straight line. The upward banding of the
histograms manifest the contribution from the nonequilibrium fast hopping particles.
(g) The histogram of particle hopping events. ∆tF and ∆DF are the persistent time
and the traveling distance for each hopping event respectively. (h) A typical 3D picture
in xyt space showing the excitation of fast hopping particles (pink balls, the center of
the balls is at the particle position and the diameter of the ball is 1 a) appear in the
form of clusters. (i) The histograms of NF , the size of the clusters of fast hopping
particles in the xyt space normalized by the total number of clusters in the xyt space
from run A and B. Run A is the cold liquid run generating the data shown in the
ﬁgures above and run B is another hotter run. The inset shows the power law relation
between the temporal span ∆tF and the averaged spatial span hNF xyi = hNF /∆tF i
of the fast-particle clusters.

Dusty Plasma Liquids

5

Dusty Plasma Liquids

6

We can further ask how the motion behaves when the system size goes down to the
mesoscopic scale, induced by the eﬀect of ﬁnite boundary under conﬁnement, which is
[13, 14, 15].
a hot topic for many ﬁelds such as nano-science, tribology, biology, etc..
Figure 2(a) and (b) show the typical particle trajectories, the corresponding transverse
particle density distributions ny versus the transverse distance y, for the liquid conﬁned
in narrow gaps with decreasing width [17]. The oscillating ny manifest that particles
form layered structure around both boundaries. The decaying amplitude indicates
that layering is gradually deteriorated and the positions are then randomized while
moving away from the boundary. The layered structure can extend through the entire
gap, associated with the slow particle dynamics, while the gap width is reduced below
7 interlayer distance. Namely, the presence of ﬁnite boundaries sets up topological
constraints and reduces entropy. It lines up particles and suppresses particle transverse
hopping. This eﬀect last about 3 interparticle distance, which is about the same as
the correlation length for the pair correlation function. The diﬀusion is therefore
In the
anisotropic in the boundary regions about 3 interparticle distance in width.
center region, the hopping is still isotropic, similarly to the bulk liquid. While reducing
the gap width down to 7 interlayer distance, the layered structures from both boundaries
pinches. Namely, the topological constraints from the boundaries and discreteness eﬀect
of particles suppress the pathway for particle structure rearrangement. It therefore slows
down the microdynamics with much smaller transverse and longitudinal diﬀusion rate
and the make the structure with better structural ordering. This is also the microscopic
origin of the observed sluggish behavior for the liquid in the mesoscopic gap. Our recent
study demonstrates the formation of circular shells under the strong suppression of the
inter-shell hopping in the few outmost shells around the boundary, and the isotropic
hopping vortices in the center part [16].

Now, we like to address the eﬀect of external shear stress on the liquid motion
by the radiation pressure from two parallel but counter-propagating laser beams along
the opposite boundaries of a thin liquid about 11 d in width [18]. Figure 3(a) shows
the contour plots of the 2D histogram of particle displacement for particles sitting in
the longitudinal strips 1d (i.e. the interlayer distance shown in Fig. 2(a) in width and
at diﬀerent transverse positions at 0 and 100 W laser power. The eﬀect of boundary
conﬁnement is again manifested by the anisotropic contours for the outmost few layers.
Applying shear not only causes the shift of the center position of plots but also enlarged
the transverse as well as the longitudinal velocity ﬂuctuation (i.e. the diﬀusion rate)
for the few outmost layers. Unlike the linear velocity proﬁle with uniform ﬂow rate
for the bulk liquid, shear banding with two high shear rate outer bands sandwiching a
center low shear rate band is further evidenced by the mean longitudinal velocity proﬁle
in Fig. 3(b). The mean shear rate has an S shape response to the external stress,
which manifests the shear thinning, i.e. decreasing viscosity with increasing shear stress
(Fig. 3(c)). Since hopping is a nonlinear threshold type local process, the low hopping
probability at the low stress limit is the physical origin of the high viscosity and lower
diﬀusion rate in this regime. Increasing the external stress further tilts the caging well

Dusty Plasma Liquids

7

Dusty Plasma Liquids

8

and enhances the thermal assisted hopping. Through the disorder network, the external
stress and the local stress from thermal agitation and hopping motion can also propagate
transversely, which enhances the transverse diﬀusion in addition to the forward motion.
Note that the width of the shear band is about the same as the layering width nearby the
boundary, which is also the same as the typical hopping vortex size. Namely, the stress
induced cooperative hopping induces avalanche type structure rearrangement associated
with the local stress release involving a small number of particles shield the external
stress and leaves a less perturbed center zone. Also note that in another experiment
with a single laser beam pushing through the center of a very large 2D liquid, similar
shear thinning with the similar shear band width was also observed [5].

The above results from particle trajectories, particle average velocity and particle
diﬀusion reﬂect the information of particle position evolution with respect to the lab-
frame. Moreover, through tracking particle trajectories, we can measure the local
structural order and its evolution through measuring the local bond-orientation order
(BOO) and defect excitation. BOO is deﬁned as ψ6(r) = 1
Pi exp(i6θi), where θi is
Ni
the angle of the vector from the particle at r to its ith nearest neighbor, and Ni is
the number of the nearest neighbors |ψ6| = 1 at the perfect 6-fold lattice sites and <
0.4 for the defect sites, which are deﬁned as the sites with nearest neighbor number
deviating from six, respectively [19]. As seen in ﬁgure 4 (a) and (b), The ordered
lattice type structure is strongly distorted around the defect sites where the strain
energy increases due to the accumulation of the stress from background thermal noise
and external drive. Namely, the stick-slip hopping process can cause the structural
rearrangement through defect excitation and relaxation. The structural rearrangement
process exhibits avalanche type behaviors in the form of clusters, and they are closely
correlated to the fast particle hopping string, as shown in ﬁgure 4(c). The cluster size
distribution also follows a power law distribution [18]. The structural rearrangement
can relax the local stress. It can shield the external shear drive and leaves a center zone
with low perturbation, which is the microscopic origin of the shear banding observed
above.

Finally, we like to show an interesting phenomenon of the formation of traveling
plasma bubble through other nonlinear processes in the dusty plasma liquid [20]. Figure
5 shows the side view of the quasi-2D dusty plasma liquid. A pulsed laser beam is focused
at one of the suspended dust particle. The ablation on the particle generates an intense
plasma plume which pushes the surrounding dust particles radially outwards. It leads
to the formation of a bubble (void). Unlike the intuitive thought, the bubble does not
collapse right away. It maintains its shape, propagates downward and exits the bottom
sheath boundary. The particle trajectories show that the leading and trailing edge of
the bubble are expelling and attracting regions respectively for particles. The bubble is
actually permeable. Particles inside the bubble travel with much higher velocity than the
surrounding particles. Our discharge is constantly driven by the external steady state rf
power which provides a steady source for electron and ion generation. The electrons and
ions are then recombined on the solid surfaces of the surrounding boundaries and the

Dusty Plasma Liquids

9

Dusty Plasma Liquids

10

Figure 5. (a) to (c) The typical sequential snap shots of the side view of the downward
traveling bubble in a dusty plasma liquid at 185 mTorr. The number in each lower left
corner indicates the picture taken time (the laser pulse is ﬁred at time zero) (d) The
sketch showing the direction of particle velocities surrounding and inside the bubble
while the bubble travels downward. The bubble represented by the initial solid circle
advances downwards to the latter dotted circle by repelling particles from zone I and
attracting particles into zone II with some phase delay. The length of each arrow is
proportional to its speed.

suspending dust particles. The expelling of dust particle by the initial plume reduces
the electron depletion and generates a region with higher electron density, which leads
to the higher plasma density through the enhanced ionization process. The outward
ion ﬂow is thereby enhanced and keeps the bubble from collapsing. The downward ion
ﬂow (toward the bottom electrode) of the background plasma breaks the symmetry and
blows the bubble downward. Note the bubble travels about the same speed as the dust
density wave.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the dusty plasma is an interesting toy
system for mimicking and understanding the micro-motion and structure at the kinetic
level. On the other hand, it also exhibits interesting nonlinear phenomena through its
own nonlinear process. At the kinetic level, the detailed interplay of the forces from the
mutual coupling and the stresses from thermal agitation and other external slow drives
is the key determining the fate of local motion and structure. The system belongs to the
category of the integrate and ﬁre system. The integration of suﬃcient local stress from
constructive perturbation induces hopping (ﬁring). In addition to generating order, the
mutual coupling also propagates the information of local excitation to the adjacent sites
make the cooperative or avalanche type excitations, and quickly dissipate the excitation.
The presence of straight boundary put topological constraint. It reduces the number of
accessible states and kinetic pathways, which makes the stick-slip hopping anisotropic
and causes the formation of layering transition with slow dynamics while the gap width
is reduced to a few interparticle distance. Applying external stress tilts the caging well

Dusty Plasma Liquids

11

and further enhances the diﬀusion and reduces the viscosity. The relaxation of the stress
through avalanche type structural arrangement induces the formation of the shear band.
This work is supported by the National Science Council of the Republic of China,

under contract number NSC 92-0212-MOO8-042.

——————————————————————–

1. References

[1] e.g. Faber T.E. Fluid dynamics for physicsists, Cambridge University Press (1995).
[2] Bak P, Tang C, and Wiesenfeld K, Phys. Rev. Lett, 59, 381 (1987).
[3] Chu J H and I L, Phys. Rev. Lett, 72, 4009 (1994). I L, et al, Science, 272, 1626, (1996).
[4] Thomas G E, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 652 (1994).
[5] Juan W T, Chen M H, and I L, Phys. Rev. E. 64 016402.
[6] Lai Y J and I Lin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 155002 (2002); Juan W T and I Lin, Phys. Rev. Lett, 80,

3073 (1998).

[7] Melzer A, et al, Phys. Rev. E. 53, 2757 (1996).
[8] Quinn R A and Goree J, Phys. Rev. E. 64, 051404 (2001).
[9] e.g. Zahn K and Maret G, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 3656 (2000).
[10] Weeks E R, et al, Science 287 627 (2002).
[11] Wang J, et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 855 (1999).
[12] Jung P, et al J. Neurophysiol. 79, 1098 (1998).
[13] Granick S. Phys. Today 52, No. 7, 26(1999).
[14] Thompson P A, Grest G S and Robbins M O, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3448 (1992).
[15] Gao J, Luedtke W D, and Landman U, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 705 (1997).
[16] Juan W T, et al, Phys. Rev. E. 58, R6947 (1998). Lai Y J, and I Lin, Phys. Rev. E. 64, 015601R

[17] Teng L W, Tu P S, and I L, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 245004 (2003).
[18] Woon W Y and I L, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 065003 (2004).; Chan C L, Woon W Y, and I L,Phys.

Rev. Lett, to be published.

[19] Strandburg K J, Bond-Orientational Order in Condensed Matter Systems (Springer, New York,

(2001).

1992).

[20] Chu H Y, Chiu Y K, Chan C L, and I L, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 075004 (2003).

