4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Melting of 2D Coulomb clusters in dusty plasmas

R. Ichikia∗, Y. Ivanovb, M. Wolterb, Y. Kawaia, and A. Melzerb

aInterdisciplinary Graduate School of Engineering Sciences, Kyushu University
Kasuga, Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan
bInstitut f¨ur Physik, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universit¨at Greifswald
17489 Greifswald, Germany

Abstract

The melting of 2D dust clusters caused by one additional particle in the

lower layer has experimentally been observed to undergo a two-step transition,

which divides the phase of the cluster into three stages. The ﬁrst transition is

a jump of the dust kinetic energy due to the onset of an instability of the lower-

layer particle, shifting the cluster from an ordinary to a hot crystalline state.

The second transition is the actual phase transition into a liquid state, which

occurs at a decisively lower gas pressure. The detailed dynamical properties

of the system during the transition were determined in terms of the normal

mode analysis.

Dusty plasmas are ideal systems to study the dynamics of crystalline, ﬂuid and gas-

like charged particle systems since the spatial and temporal scales are perfectly suited

for direct observation by video cameras. The particles are highly negatively charged due

to the continuous inﬂow of plasma electrons and ions. Micrometer-sized particles usually
attain charge numbers Z of the order of 10 000. Due to these high charges the dust
particles arrange in ordered Coulomb lattices. Finite dust clusters consist of a small
number of dust particles N immersed in a gaseous plasma environment. Dust clusters
in two dimensions (2D) are formed by trapping the dust particles in the sheath above a

bowl-shaped electrode. Vertically the particles are strongly conﬁned due to the balance

of electric ﬁeld force and gravity. A much weaker horizontal conﬁnement is provided by

the distorted equipotential lines of the curved electrode. 2D clusters arrange in concentric

rings (see e.g. Refs. 1 and 2).

In this paper, we will focus on the dynamics of 2D clusters under a phase transition

from the solid to the liquid state. Phase transitions can be driven by reducing the gas

pressure in multi-layer dust systems [3, 4]. This is due to an oscillatory instability of the
∗ Present address: Department of Electronic Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8579, Japan

Electronic mail: ryu@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp

1

Fig. 1:

(a) Scheme of the experimental

setup.

(b,c) Snapshots of a cluster with

N = 36 upper particles and a single lower

particle.

(b) Top view. The arbrow in-

dicates the particle under which the lower

particle is located. (c) Side view. The side

view camera is slightly tilted with respect

to the cluster plane, so the upper layer ap-

pears as an elliptical disc.

lower layer particles which is excited by the ion streaming motion in the sheath [5]. The

oscillations heat the dust particles which leads to the melting of the ordered dust system.
Here, the full dynamical properties of a dust cluster with N = 42 particles is determined
during the phase transition. The dynamics are derived in form of the mode spectrum of the
2N cluster modes. To pinpoint the melting transition to the instability of the lower layer
particles a dust cluster with only a single lower layer particle was prepared (see Fig. 1).

The dynamic properties of the cluster were directly obtained from the thermal motion

of the upper layer particles during the phase transition. This technique is described in

detail in Ref. 2. The analyzed video sequences cover 41 s at a frame rate of 50 frames per

second.

Figure 2 shows the dynamical properties of the cluster during the phase transition for

3 representative gas pressures of 12 Pa, 11 Pa and 6 Pa. From the particle trajectories

[Fig. 2(a)] at 12 and 11 Pa the cluster is seen to be well ordered whereas at 6 Pa many

changes in equilibrium positions can be identiﬁed. Moreover, at 11 Pa the particles

are found to exhibit an oscillatory motion which are notable from the circular particle

trajectories, especially for that central particle under which the lower particle is located

[see the arrow in Fig. 1(b)].

In fact, the cluster changes from the solid state (at 12 Pa) to an intermediate state

(at 11 Pa) and, ﬁnally, to the liquid state (at 6 Pa). As shown in Fig. 3, the change of

the cluster dynamics is accompanied by a change of the global parameters that describe

the dust system, namely the dust kinetic energy and the Lindemann order parameter
δ. The kinetic energy suddenly increases from about 0.1 eV at 12 Pa to 1 eV at 11 Pa
and even further to 5 eV at 6 Pa. This energy jump corresponds to the onset of the
instability which eﬀectively heats the dust system. The Lindemann parameter δ that
describes the root-mean-square excursions of the particle from the equilibrium positions

stays at a very low level down to gas pressures of 8 Pa. This indicates strong order. Below

2

Fig. 2: Melting transition of

the dust cluster with decreasing

gas pressure. (a) Trajectories of

the cluster particles.

(b) Gray-

scale power spectra of the nor-

mal mode oscillations of the clus-

ter. Darker colors correspond to

higher power density. The the-

oretical mode frequencies for a

solid state are also indicated as

the black or white solid lines. (c)

Phase diagram including the fea-

ture of particle oscillations.

Fig. 3:

(a) Average kinetic energy of the dust

particles in x and y directions and that obtained

from the mode spectra. (b) Lindemann param-

eter δ as a function of Ar pressure.

3

8 Pa, δ suddenly jumps to large values which is a clear sign of melting. That is to say,
the melting involves two-stages of transitions: the jump of the dust energy and the actual

melting, which divide the phase of the cluster into three states: the solid, intermediate,

and liquid states.

The analysis of the normal mode spectra provides detailed characteristics of these

three states, especially of the intermediate state. Figure 2(b) shows the mode spectra

obtained from the thermal motion of the particles together with the theoretical mode

frequencies. In the solid state at 12 Pa the mode spectrum closely follows the expected

mode frequencies. In the intermediate state at 11 Pa the situation is drastically diﬀerent.

From the intense horizontal band a dominating oscillatory motion at a frequency of about

4 Hz is observable. This is exactly the frequency of the unstable oscillation of the lower

particle that sets in at exactly this gas pressure. It is somewhat surprising that the single

lower particle dominates all modes of the cluster. The second harmonic of the unstable

oscillations at 8 Hz is also detectable. A closer inspection of the modes reveals that the

expected mode structure of the solid state is also faintly visible in the spectrum.

In

contrast, in the liquid state at 6 Pa the spectrum is broad for all modes and does not

at all resemble the mode spectrum of the solid state. Figure 2(c) illustrates the phase

diagram of the cluster.

The dynamic behavior is even more clearly seen in the mode-integrated spectra or the

power spectral density of the entire system, but the details will be reported elsewhere.

Concluding, three diﬀerent phases of the dust cluster have been identiﬁed. At high

gas pressures, the cluster is in a solid state with high order, low dust kinetic energy and

a solidlike mode spectrum. In the intermediate phase, the cluster is dominated by the

unstable oscillations. The particles are heated, but the system is still in an ordered state.

Thus, this state can be characterized as a hot, oscillating crystal. At low gas pressures

the cluster goes to the liquid phase with even hotter instability-heated particles, low order

and a broad mode spectrum. The analysis of the cluster dynamics thus demonstrates that

the heating can be deﬁnitely attributed to the heating by the oscillatory instability of the

lower layer particle.

[1]W.-T. Juan et al., Phys. Rev. E 58, 6947 (1998).

[2]A. Melzer, Phys. Rev. E 67, 115002 (2003).

[3]A. Melzer, A. Homann, and A. Piel, Phys. Rev. E 53, 2757 (1996).

[4]H. Thomas and G. E. Morﬁll, Nature 379, 806 (1996).

[5]V. A. Schweigert et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5345 (1998).

4

