Stabilization of nonlinear plasma waves by radiation

Institute of Microelectronics and Informatics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
21 Universitetskaya, Yaroslavl 150007, Russia∗

Fedor V.Prigara

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

It is shown that the interaction of a plasma with thermal radiation leads to the stabilization

of both periodic and solitary nonlinear plasma waves. The stabilized periodic nonlinear plasma

waves were indeed observed in the experiment carried out by Looney and Brown. There are many

branches of radiation-induced solitary waves in plasmas, corresponding in particular to the density

waves in hot plasmas of accretion disks.

PACS numbers: 52.35.Fp, 52.35.Mw, 52.40.Db

4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
2
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

It is known that longitudinal plasma waves are subject to the linear and nonlinear Landau

damping [1,2]. On the other hand, electron plasma waves are unstable with respect to the

modulation instability and formation of envelope solitons. However, in a plasma without

a magnetic ﬁeld, plane solitons should be also unstable due to the transverse modulation,

and therefore they cannot exist, according to the theoretical predictions [3]. The theories

of Langmuir wave collapse and Landau damping do not take into account the interaction

of a plasma with thermal radiation. Here we show that the interaction of a plasma with

radiation leads to the stabilization of both periodic and solitary electron plasma waves. Note

that there is no direct experimental evidence of the existing of Langmuir wave collapse [3].

In the experiment carried out by Looney and Brown [4], a beam of several hundred eV

electrons, injected into the plasma of a dc discharge from an auxiliary electron gun, excited

oscillations in the plasma at the plasma electron oscillation frequency. However, Looney and

Brown have observed that the frequency of oscillation varies in a discontinuous manner with

the electron density ne which is proportional to the gun discharge current. The frequency

remained nearly constant over small variations of the electron density and then jumped

abruptly to a new frequency. Along one of these frequency plateaus, the intensity of the

oscillation rose to a maximum and then fell to a much lower value before a jump to a new

frequency occured. The frequency corresponding to the strongest signal for each frequency

range was consistent with the Tonks - Langmuir relation

ωpe = (cid:0)4πnee2/me(cid:1)

1/2

,

(1)

where me is the mass of an electron.

A movable probe showed the existence of standing - wave patterns of the oscillatory energy

in the region of the plasma. Nodes of the patterns coincided with the electrodes which limited

the region of the plasma traversed by the beam. Each of the observed frequency plateau

corresponded to the deﬁnite number of waves in a standing - wave pattern.

We argue that Looney and Brown have observed nonlinear plasma oscillations stabi-

lized by the plasma emission.

It was shown recently ([5] and Refs therein) that thermal

emission has a stimulated character. According to this conception thermal emission from

non-uniform gas is produced by an ensemble of individual emitters. Each of these emitters

is an elementary resonator the size of which has an order of magnitude of mean free path l

2

of photons

where n is the number density of particles and σ is the absorption cross-section.

The emission of each elementary resonator is coherent, with the wavelength

l =

1
nσ

λ = al,

where a is a dimensionless constant, and thermal emission of gaseous layer is incoherent sum

of radiation produced by individual emitters.

An elementary resonator emits in the direction opposite to the direction of the density

gradient. The wall of the resonator corresponding to the lower density is half-transparent

due to the decrease of absorption with the decreasing gas density.

The relation (3) implies that the radiation with the wavelength λ is produced by the

gaseous layer with the deﬁnite number density of particles n .

In the case of the experiment carried out by Looney and Brown, n = ni = ne, due to

the neutrality of the plasma, and the absorption cross-section we assume to be equal to
those for the fully ionized plasma, σ = σ0 = 10−9cm2. The wavelength of nonlinear plasma

wave coincides with the wavelength of plasma emission as determined by the relation (3).

The wavelength, λ, of standing wave can be calculated as λ = d/N, where d = 1.5cmis the

plasma length, the thickness of the ion sheaths at each of two electrodes which limited the

plasma region traversed by the electron beam being neglected, and N is the number of waves

in a standing - wave pattern. The electron density corresponding to the strongest signal for

each frequency plateau can be taken from Fig.2 in [4].

From equations (2) and (3), we ﬁnd the wavelength of standing wave in the form

Since λ = d/N, where N is a half-integer number, oscillations would be observed only

at deﬁnite values of the electron density ne. However, an elementary resonator has a ﬁnite

bandwidth [6]

λ = a/ (neσ0) .

∆ν ≈ vT e/al,

3

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

where vT e is the thermal velocity of electrons. Due to the ﬁnite bandwidth of an elementary

resonator, oscillations can be observed also at other values of the electron density, the inten-

sity of the oscillation at the “wings” of bandwidth much lower than the resonant intensity,

as it was indeed observed by Looney and Brown.

According to the relation (4), the product of the wavelength, λ, by the electron density,

ne, corresponding to the maximum intensity of oscillations, should be a constant for all

frequency plateaus observed by Looney and Brown. In Table 1 we give the calculated values

of a = λneσ0 for each frequency plateau.

Table 1

An elementary resonator in the Looney - Brown experiment.

Number of waves

Wavelength

Electron density

Product

λ

ne (cid:0)10

9cm−3

(cid:1)

a = λneσ0

N

3/2

2

3

5/2

7/2

1.0

0.75

0.6

0.5

0.4

4.0

6.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

4.0

4.5

4.5

5.0

5.0

The wavelength, λ, of standing wave is calculated as λ = d/N, where d = 1.5cmis the

plasma length, and N is the number of waves in a standing - wave pattern. The electron

density, ne, corresponding to the maximum intensity of oscillations, is taken from Fig.2 in
[4]. The absorption cross-section is assumed to be equal σ0 = 10−9cm2.

The calculated value of a is slightly varying with the electron density ne. A possible

explanation is that the relation (4) has a statistical origin and suggests a suﬃciently large

number of waves, N. However, in the experiment by Looney and Brown, only the lowest

modes with small values of N were observed. For small numbers of waves in a standing

- wave pattern, the edge eﬀects, such as the ion sheaths at each of two electrodes which

4

limited the plasma region traversed by the electron beam, are essential and can disturb

the experimental results. An accurate estimation of such edge eﬀects with account for the

interaction of a plasma with radiation seems to be a diﬃcult problem.

There seem to be diﬀerent types of envelope solitary waves stabilized by radiation. One of

these types of radiation-induced solitary waves in a plasma may be called a Looney-Brown

soliton. It is an ordinary Langmuir solitary wave [3,7] in which the radiation pressure is

small compared to the high-frequency pressure, but the wavelength of a carrying mode

is determined by the relation (4), similar to the wavelength of the periodic wave in the

experiment by Looney and Brown.

The periodic wave is unstable with respect to the formation of local regions of high-

frequency electric ﬁeld. Plasma is pushed out from these regions by high-frequency pressure,

so that the cavities of lower plasma density are formed, an electric ﬁeld being locked in these

cavities. The Looney-Brown envelope soliton represents such a localized region of lower

plasma density travelling at a group velocity of electron plasma waves

(6)

(7)

(8)

where Te is the electron temperature, the electron plasma frequency ωp0 corresponds to the

undisturbed plasma density n0, and k0 is the wave number of the carrying mode,

u = 3Tek0/ (meωp0)

,

k0 = 2π/λ = 2πn0σ0/a.

Here we make use of the equation (4) for the wavelength λ. Substituting relations (1)

and (7) in equation (6), we obtain

u = (cid:0)9πT 2

e n0σ2

0/amee2

1/2
(cid:1)

.

For the values of the electron temperature Te

∼
=
1012cm−3 which are characteristic for low-temperature high-density plasma, the last equation

∼
= 1eV and the plasma density n0

gives u

∼
= 3 × 108cms−1.

Another type of radiation-induced solitary wave is the density waves propagating in hot

plasmas of accretion disks surrounding the compact astrophysical objects such as active

galactic nuclei and pulsars [6]. In this case, the radiation pressure is not small and cannot

be neglected.

5

—————————————————————————————-

[1] I.D.Kaganovich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 327 (1999).

[2] F.F.Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, Vol. 1: Plasma

Physics (Plenum Press, New York, 1984).

[3] V.E.Zakharov,

in Handbook of Plasma Physics,

eds. M.N.Rosenbluth and

R.Z.Sagdeev, Vol. 2: Basic Plasma Physics II, ed. by A.A.Galeev and R.N.Sudan (North-

Holland Physics Publishers, Amsterdam, 1984).

[4] D.H.Looney and S.C.Brown, Phys. Rev. 93, 965 (1954).

[5] F.V.Prigara, Astron. Nachr., 324, No. S1, 425 (2003).

[6] F.V.Prigara, Phys. Plasmas (submitted), E-print archives, physics/0404087.

[7] B.B.Kadomtsev, Collective Phenomena in Plasmas (Nauka, Moscow, 1988).

∗ Electronic address: fprigara@imras.yar.ru

6

