Ion Resonance Instability in the ELTRAP electron plasma

G. Bettega,1 F. Cavaliere,2 M. Cavenago,3 A. Illiberi,1 R. Pozzoli,1 and M. Rom´e1
1INFM Milano Universit`a, INFN Sezione di Milano,
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
2INFM Milano Universit`a, Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
3INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro, Legnaro, Italy

A small fraction of ions can destabilize the diocotron mode (oﬀ axis rotation) of an electron plasma
conﬁned in a Malmberg-Penning trap. In this paper a set of experimental measurements performed
in the ELTRAP device on the ions induced diocotron instability is presented. In particular, the
dependence of the instability on the electron energy has been analyzed, by heating the plasma with
a RF burst or by injecting into the trap electrons with diﬀerent energies. A simple experimental
technique to limit the instability is also described.

I.

INTRODUCTION

∼

−

40

÷ −

1 nTorr); negative voltages (

A pure electron plasma can be conﬁned for a long time (up to several minutes) in a Malmberg-Penning trap by
means of static magnetic and electric ﬁelds [1]. The plasma is trapped within a stack of hollow conducting cylinders
80 V) applied on two of the cylinders
(see Fig. 1), kept in UHV conditions (p
trap the electrons axially, and a static and uniform magnetic ﬁeld keeps the plasma in rotation around the cylindrical
axis, thus providing the radial conﬁnement: the inward directed Lorentz force balances the electrostatic repulsion
between the electronsi, and the centrifugal force. The device usually operates by repeating many cycles of injection-
hold-dump of the plasma. The electrons are generated by a thermionic cathode and injected into the trap by a small
accelerating voltage applied on a grid. Acting on the source parameters the initial particle energy distribution can
easily be changed. During the hold phase, the plasma dynamics is studied by means of the analysis of the induced
charge signals detected at the walls of the conﬁning cylinders; at the end of the hold phase an axially integrated
density distribution is obtained by accelerating the particles towards a phosphor screen (kept at a positive potential
of few kV), and detecting the emitted light by means of a high sensitivity CCD camera. The conﬁned plasma evolves
through an initial turbulent state, characterized by the non-linear interaction of several small and intense vortices
which dissipate on the collisional time scale (
1 ms) towards a global equilibrium state, characterized by a ﬂat radial
density proﬁle and a constant, shear-free bulk rotation (rigid rotor equilibrium). If the conﬁnement conditions were
ideal (zero residual gas pressure, no ﬁeld errors) the electron plasma could be conﬁned forever. On the other hand,

∼

4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

FIG. 1: Schematic of the ELTRAP Malmberg-Penning trap and of its diagnostic system: the sectored cylinders S2 and S4
allow to detect the plasma rotation. The source connections, the ampliﬁcation circuitry and the phosphor screen for the optical
diagnostic are shown. The polarization layer of the phosphor screen has also been used as a charge collector.

electron-neutral collisions, small alignement errors of the cylinders and magnetic ﬁelds irregularities act on the plasma
as external drags, causing radial expansion and loss of particles at the walls. In addition, the conﬁnement of the
plasma is inﬂuenced by the plasma instabilies (in particular the diocotron instability), which drive the column against
the walls.

II. THE DIOCOTRON MODE AND ITS DIAGNOSTIC

In the injection phase, the electron column is usually loaded with a small radial oﬀset D: such an initial displacement
determines the formation of image charges, and the relevant electric ﬁelds add a new drift motion to the plasma. This
oﬀ-axis rotation, known in the literature as diocotron mode, has a frequency ω1 = (λp/2πǫ0BR2
w)],
where λp is the linear charge density of the plasma, B is the magnetic ﬁeld strength and Rw is the inner radius
of the cylinders. The frequency and the amplitude of the mode are diagnosed analyzing the induced charge signals
on the electrodes. These electrostatic probes give also informations on high order diocotron waves on the plasma
surface, and can also be used as perturbation launchers. The electrostatic signals are conditioned, digitally ﬁltered
and Fourier transformed: the time-varying spectra show a set of peaks related to the plasma rotation. In Fig. 2 the
equivalent external circuit is shown: the induced charge is equivalent to a sinusoidal current generator (at frequency
ω1), connected to an external impedance and an ampliﬁcation circuit. The stationary response of the circuit V (t) is
given by the following Fourier series,

D2/R2

w)[1/(1

−

V (t) =

Al cos(lω1t + φl) =

∞

Xl=1

∞

Xl=1 (cid:18)

2λpLs

l∆θ

sin

π (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2 (cid:19) (cid:20)

l

D(t)
Rw (cid:21)

ω1R
1l2R2C2 cos(lω1t + φl).

1 + ω2

R is equivalent resistance of RA and RL, C the line capacitance (see Fig. 2), Ls is the length of the probe and ∆θ its
angular aperture. The radial oﬀset can then be expressed as a function of experimentally known quantities

D(t)

≈ (cid:20)

2√2ǫ0LsGRB sin(l∆θ/2)ω2

1 (cid:21)

Aexp
l

(t)Rl−2
w

p

1/l

,

l = AlG/√2. This approximated formula, valid for ω2

1R2C2 << 1, allows to infer the plasma oﬀset D(t),
where Aexp
scanning the frequency and the amplitude data of the signals on the conﬁning conducting cylinders. This diagnostic
is non destructive and very fast. The external load RL is selected in order to avoid resistive eﬀects [2].

III. THE DIOCOTRON INSTABILITY

The diocotron mode is unstable on the time scale of seconds as shown in Fig. 3: the plasma oﬀset D increases
linearly with time, until the column touches the wall and loses particles. The frequency starts decreasing at the
instant of amplitude saturation (see Fig. 4). The diocotron instability is caused by the presence of a small ion

FIG. 2: The rotating plasma generates a periodic electrostatic signal at the wall. This system is equivalent to a current
generator on an external load, made of a line capacitance and a resistance. The ampliﬁcation circuit (gain G = 110, input
resistance 1 MΩ is also shown).

FIG. 3: Time behavior of the mode amplitude.

FIG. 4: Time behavior of the mode frequency.

population [3]: the ions are created at thermal energies by electron-neutral collisions, and then ﬂow out of the system
in a fraction of ms. A resonant interaction between the transverse motion of the ions and the low-frequency plasma
diocotron rotation makes the mode unstable. A z-independent 2D model which considers conﬁned ions predicts an
exponential growth [4]; a more recent 2D theory, which takes into account the “transient” behavior of the ions [5],
predicts a linear growth for the mode amplitude. The experiments performed in the ELTRAP device qualitatively
agree with the model of transient ions.

IV. TRIGGERING THE ION-RESONANCE INSTABILITY

The instability starts from a small oﬀset D(0) when the plasma is trapped. The growth rate is negligible in the
1 nTorr) because in these
case of a low residual gas pressure and at low electron temperature (T
conditions the ionization rate of the background gas is very small. At a ﬁxed neutral gas pressure the instability can
be triggered by acting on the conﬁnement of the ions and/or by changing the energy of the electrons, which can be
varied at the injection or during the hold phase with a RF burst.

4 eV, p

≈

÷

≈

3

FIG. 5: A potential well which conﬁnes the ions is created at t = 1.59 s: the accumulation of positive charge determines a
sharp increase in the mode growth rate.

A couple of conﬁning cylinders has been positively biased, thus creating a potential well for the positive charges.

The ions accumulate in the system and determine a sharp increase in the mode growth rate, as shown in Fig. 5.

A. Eﬀect of ions trapping

B. Eﬀect of the electron injection energy

The initial energy of the electrons can be changed acting on the source parameters (in particular the voltage drop,
Vb, between the extraction grid and the cathode). A more energetic electron plasma can easily ionize the residual
neutral gas, causing an increase in the growth rate of the mode. This eﬀect is shown in Fig. 6: the curves are
parametrized with the source bias Vb, which is related to the energy of the electrons at the injection time. The growth

FIG. 6: Time behavior of the mode amplitude D(t) as a function of the plasma injection energy: (a) Vb = −24 V; (b) Vb = −28
V; (c) Vb = −30 V; (d) Vb = −32 V.

FIG. 7: Growth rate of the instability versus the energy of the electrons at the injection time.

rate increases exponentially with the energy of the electrons, see Fig. 7.

C. Eﬀect of a non-adiabatic plasma injection

The injection phase of the plasma ends with the application of a negative potential on the conﬁning cylinder on
the source side which separates the plasma from the cathode. This operation can be done adiabatically, with a slow
voltage ramp, or in a very fast way (on the time scale of the electrons bounce motion) exploting the high slew rate
of the external voltage generator. At a ﬁxed (low) source bias, a fast ramp up time can increase the electron initial
energy, triggering the diocotron instability as shown in Fig. 8.

FIG. 8: The eﬀect of a potential ramp applied on the conﬁng cylinder next to the plasma source. A fast ramp-up time increases
the initial electron energy causing the mode amplitude to grow. (a) tramp ≈ 2 ms; (b) tramp ≈ 0.6 ms (c) tramp ≈ 0.1 ms; (d)
tramp ≈ 1 µs.

FIG. 9: Eﬀect of RF heating on the diocotron mode instability: an RF (2 V peak to peak, 100 ms duration) burst at t = 1.2 s
increases the electron temperature and triggers the instability. Note the diﬀerent eﬃciency of the heating burst, depending on
the frequency of the RF signal: (1) 2 MHz; (2) 2.6 MHz; (3) 2.7 MHz; (4) 2.8 MHz; (5) 3.5 MHz; (6) 5 MHz; (7) 8 MHz.

D. Eﬀect of RF heating

The ionisation rate can be changed during the hold time acting on the plasma temperature. The electrons have
been heated with a standard RF technique [6]. The frequency of the RF signal is chosen in order to be resonant with
the electron axial bounce motion. A single RF burst, with a duration of few tens of milliseconds and a frequency of a
few MHz, increases the electron energy and by consequence the ionization rate. The eﬀect of the plasma heating on
the mode growth rate is shown in Fig. 9.

FIG. 10: Static low voltages are applied on inner electrodes in order to remove the ions from the trap, ejecting them from the
electron plasma column.

FIG. 11: Eﬀect on the diocotron instability of two ions removal cycles: the ﬁrst is applied from 1.2 to 2 s, the second from 3
to 4 s.

V. CONTROL OF THE INSTABILITY

The ion resonance instability has been limited removing the ions from the trap just after they have been . This
task has been accomplished by a small static electric ﬁeld (see Fig. 10) superimposed on the conﬁning potential
well. The ﬁeld is created by low voltages applied on inner electrodes. These electrodes are grounded in the standard
conﬁguration of the trap. The amplitude of the ﬁeld is chosen in order to not alter signiﬁcantly the potential well of
the electrons.
In Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 the eﬀect of this technique on the time evolution of the mode amplitude is
shown. In particular, it can be observed that the repeated application of the ion removing ﬁeld can easily double the
lifetime of the plasma.

FIG. 12: Eﬀect of a periodic ions removal. The ﬁeld is applied for 200 ms, then the mode amplitude evolves freely for 100 ms.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

The ion resonance diocotron instability has been experimentally investigated in the Malmberg-Penning trap EL-
TRAP. The instability is characterized by a linear growth of the amplitude, according to the model described in Ref.
[5]. The instability has been triggered by increasing the number of ions in the system, trapping them for a longer
time or increasing the ionization rate. The instability has been controlled by the application of proper ions removing
ﬁelds which eject the ions from the trap just after they have been produced, thus increasing the plasma lifetime.

[1] M. Amoretti, G. Bettega, F. Cavaliere, M. Cavenago, F. D. Luca, R. Pozzoli, and M. Rom´e, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 74, 3991

(2003).

[2] W. D. White, J. H. Malmberg, and C. F. Driscoll, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 25 (1982).
[3] A. Perrung, J. Notte, and J. Fajans, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 295 (1993).
[4] R. H. Levy, J. D. Daugherty, and O. Bunemann, Phys. Fluids 16, 2616 (1969).
[5] J. Fajans, Phys. Fluids B 5, 3807 (1993).
[6] A. A. Kabantsev and C. F. Driscoll, AIP Conference Proceedings 692, ed. by M. Schauer, T. Mitchell and R. Nebel (Melville,

New York, 2003), p. 61.

