4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
6
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Study on high pressure plasma produced by ArF
laser

Norio Tsuda∗ and Jun Yamada
Dept. Electronics, Aichi Institute of Technology,
1247 Yakusa-cho, Yachigusa, Toyota, 4700392, JAPAN
* E-mail:n-tsuda@aitech.ac.jp

Abstract.

When an ArF excimer laser beam was focused in a high pressure argon gas from 50
to 130 atm, the plasma development is observed by streak camera from side window of
chamber. The high pressure ArF laser plasma develops symmetrically and the plasma
produced by ArF excimer laser hardly develops as compared with the plasma produced
by XeCl. The photon energy of ArF laser light is higher than the XeCl laser. The
transmittance of ArF laser light was measured. Almost all the laser light is transmitted
as the frequency of laser light is higher than the plasma frequency, and the energy of
laser light is hardly working for plasma development. The backward and forward
plasma development produced by the ArF laser was calculated by the breakdown wave
and the radiation supported shock wave, which agreed with the experimental one.
The backward development mechanism of high pressure ArF plasma is same as one
of plasma produced by XeCl laser. However, the forward development mechanism of
ArF plasma diﬀers from one of plasma produced by XeCl laser.

1. Introduction

When a high pressure gas is irradiated by a focused laser light, a hot and dense
plasma is produced.[1] The various studies have been carried out on the mechanism of
the gas breakdown,[2] the expansion of the plasma, and the interaction between the
laser light and the plasma.[3]

With the development of an excimer laser, a powerful ultraviolet laser light can be
easily obtained. As a photon energy of a ultraviolet light is higher than that of a visible
light, it is expected that the dense plasma could be eﬃciently produced by the excimer
laser. When a XeCl excimer laser was focused in high pressure argon gases, the dense
plasma developed not only backward but also forward,[1] which is diﬀerent from one
produced by visible laser light. However the plasma development dependence on the
wavelength has not been studied yet.

When the ArF laser light is irradiated in high pressure Ar gas up to 130 atm
whose wavelength is shorter than the XeCl excimer, the development mechanism of
laser plasma has been investigated.

Study on high pressure plasma produced by ArF laser

2

2. Experimental arrangement

The experimental arrangement is shown in Fig. 1. The ArF excimer laser with a
maximum power of 25 MW , a wavelength of 192 nm and a full half-width of 15 ns is
focused. The output power of laser radiation is controlled by an optical ﬁlter, and the
laser light is focused at the center of the high pressure gas chamber by a lens with a
focal length of 40 mm . The waveform of ArF laser pulse is shown in Fig.2. As the laser
light is a rectangle of 11 mm 24 mm , the focused laser light at the focal spot makes
an ellipse of 120 µm 80 µm. The pressure ranges from 50 to 130 atm. The dynamic
behavior of laser induced plasma is observed by a streak camera. The streak image is
displayed by a dummy color of light intensity on a monitor. The plasma boundary is
determined by a threshold intensity and the plasma boundary is drawn by a plotter.

3. Experimental Results

3.1. Streak images

The streak images of plasma produced by XeCl excimer laser are shown in Fig.
3a. The laser light is irradiated from the right, the time is scanned from top to bottom,
the horizontal direction shows the plasma length, and the inside of the boundary shows
the plasma. The plasma develops not only backward but also forward. The plasma
produced by threshold laser power does not almost develop, it develops symmetrically.
The streak images of plasma produced by ArF excimer laser are shown in Fig. 3b.
The directions of irradiated laser light and scan are same as XeCl streak images. The
laser light almost transmits in the plasma, because the frequency of laser light may be
higher than the plasma frequency. The plasma does not almost develop, it develops
symmetrically.

3.2. Transmitted waveform

The backward plasma length of ArF laser plasma is shorter than one of XeCl laser
plasma. The incident waveform and the transmitted waveform of ArF laser pulse are
measured, shown in Fig. 4. The XeCl laser light is almost absorbed by the plasma after
the plasma is produced. However, the ArF laser light is hardly decayed at all, and the
absorption coeﬃcient is under 20 % . The frequency of laser light may be higher than
the plasma frequency.

3.3. Calculated backward plasma development

The backward developments of ArF laser plasma are calculated using the
breakdown wave and radiation supported shock wave. They are same development
mechanisum as XeCl laser plasma. However, in this calculation, the decrease of energy
absored by plasma is taken into account. The red lines show the calculated backward
plasma development in Fig. 5. They agree with the experimental results well.

Study on high pressure plasma produced by ArF laser

3

4. Conclusion

When the high pressure argon gas is irradiated by the focused ultraviolet laser
light, a hot and dense plasma is produced at the focal spot. The dynamic behavior of
the laser produced-plasma is observed by the streak camera. The plasma produced by
XeCl excimer laser synmetrically develops not only backward but also forward. On the
other hand, the ArF plasma develops synmetrically and the plasma hardly develops, and
the laser light is hardly absorbed backward plasma surface. The backward development
of ArF laser plasma is calculated by same development mechanisum as one of XeCl
laser plasma, which is taking into account the energy absorbed by plasma surface. The
calculated backward plasma development agrees with the experimental one.

REFERENCE

[1] N. Tsuda et al. J. Appl. Phys. 81 582 (1997).
[2] R.G. Meyerand et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 11 401 (1963).
[3] G. V. Ostrovskaya et al. Sov. Phys. Usp. 16 834 (1974).

Ar

Compressor

Vacuum Pump

Photodiode

Splitter

ArF Excimer Laser

Filter

Controller

CCD
Camera

Streak
Camera

Figure 1. Experimental arrangement

Figure 2. Laser pulse

Study on high pressure plasma produced by ArF laser

4

(a) XeCl laser plasma streak images

(b) ArF laser plasma streak images

Figure 3. Streak images

Figure 4. ArF laser
pulse and transmitted
waveform

Figure 5. Calculated backward plasma development

