4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the jets, kinks, and spheromaks formed by a planar magnetized coaxial gun

S. C. Hsu∗ and P. M. Bellan†
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Measurements of the various plasma conﬁgurations produced by a planar magnetized coaxial
gun provide insight into the magnetic topology evolution resulting from magnetic helicity injection.
Important features of the experiments are a very simple coaxial gun design so that all observed
geometrical complexity is due to the intrinsic physical dynamics rather than the source shape and
use of a fast multiple-frame digital camera which provides direct imaging of topologically complex
shapes and dynamics. Three key experimental ﬁndings were obtained: (1) formation of an axial
collimated jet [Hsu and Bellan, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 334, 257 (2002)] that is consistent with
a magnetohydrodynamic description of astrophysical jets, (2) identiﬁcation of the kink instability
when this jet satisﬁes the Kruskal-Shafranov limit, and (3) the nonlinear properties of the kink
instability providing a conversion of toroidal to poloidal ﬂux as required for spheromak formation
by a coaxial magnetized source [Hsu and Bellan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 215002 (2003)]. A new
interpretation is proposed for how the n = 1 central column instability provides ﬂux ampliﬁcation
during spheromak formation and sustainment, and it is shown that jet collimation can occur within
one rotation of the background poloidal ﬁeld.

PACS numbers: 52.55.Ip,52.72.+v,52.35.Py,95.30.Qd

I.

INTRODUCTION

There has long been a mutually beneﬁcial exchange of
ideas between laboratory plasma physics and plasma as-
trophysics. An example is the proposal by Lundquist1
that cosmical magnetic ﬁelds are force-free,2 satisfying
∇ × B = λB. Woltjer showed3 that these force-free
states are intimately related to the concept of magnetic
helicity conservation and that the force-free state results
from a variational principle in which the magnetic en-
ergy of a system is minimized subject to the constraint
of constant magnetic helicity, which is a measure of mag-
netic ﬂux twist and linkage.4 This idea was then used
to explain the spontaneous generation of reversed mag-
netic ﬁelds in the reversed ﬁeld pinch5 and the tendency
of coaxial gun produced plasmas to reach the spheromak
state.6 Although Taylor relaxation 7 as this process is now
known, is not a complete and rigorous theory, it was very
successful, indicating that the same fundamental physical
principles govern both laboratory and astrophysical plas-
mas. The Taylor argument showed that the end result of
complex dynamics is a relatively simple relaxed state, but
the argument sidesteps the issue of characterizing the de-
tailed dynamical processes leading to this state. This pa-
per describes recent experiments providing new insights
into the detailed dynamical processes of magnetic helic-
ity injection and plasma relaxation.
In particular, the
experiments shed light on the non-axisymmetric dynam-
ics of spheromak formation, a subject with a long his-
tory beginning with the work of Alfv´en8 and Lindberg.9
These experiments also show how magnetic helicity in-
jection can lead to the formation and collimation of
magnetically-driven jets in astrophysics.10,11,12

An important feature of this experiment is the use of
the simplest possible setup for allowing studies of the de-
tails and three-dimensional (3D) dynamics of magnetic

helicity injection and spheromak formation. Key results
include (1) observation of distinct plasma regimes de-
pending on the parameter λgun (ratio of peak gun cur-
rent to ﬂux), similar to those previously found13 using a
conventional cylindrical coaxial gun, (2) formation and
axial expansion of a central plasma column from merg-
ing of plasma-ﬁlled poloidal ﬂux tubes14 in a manner
consistent with magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models of
magnetically-driven astrophysical jets,12,15,16,17 (3) clear
identiﬁcation of a kink instability of this central column
and a kink onset threshold that is quantitatively consis-
tent with the Kruskal-Shafranov limit for an ideal MHD
kink,14,18 and (4) identiﬁcation of the nonlinear limit of
the kink instability as a poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation mech-
anism leading to spheromak formation.18

This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
the experimental setup. Section III presents the experi-
mental results. Section IV provides a detailed discussion
of the results in the context of both spheromak formation
and astrophysical jets. A summary is given in Sec. V.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

In order to facilitate interpretation of results, the coax-
ial gun design was made to be as geometrically simple
as possible: a disk surrounded by a co-planar annulus
(Fig. 1) and a bias magnetic ﬁeld coil located just be-
hind the disk (not visible in Fig. 1). This experimental
setup provided the additional advantage that the entire
plasma formation region is in plain view so that all steps
of the topological evolution could be observed. Note that
this setup has essentially the same magnetic topology as
a star-disk system associated with magnetically-driven
astrophysical jets (see Fig. 2). The various components
of the experimental setup are described in detail below.

2

A. Vacuum chamber

C. Power systems

The cylindrical vacuum chamber, shown in Fig. 3(top),
is about 2 m long, 1.4 m in diameter, and constructed
using 6 mm thick electro-polished stainless steel. The
chamber has large windows on the side that provide a
good view of the entire plasma. A key point is that the
chamber size is large compared to both the coaxial gun
source and the plasma, so that plasma-wall interactions
are minimal during the time of interest for the results pre-
sented here. The chamber is evacuated to 1.5 × 10−7 T
with a cryogenic pump, and a sorption pump is used for
initial pump-down from atmosphere to 100 mT so that
the the entire pumping system is oil-free. The oil-free
property and the minimal plasma-wall interactions re-
sulted in plasmas that did not require a discharge clean-
ing protocol in order to provide clean, reproducible re-
sults.

The coaxial gun is powered by an ignitron-switched
120 µF capacitor bank rated up to 14 kV. Eight 2 m long
Belden YK-198 low inductance coaxial cables in parallel
carry power from the capacitor bank to the gun elec-
trodes. Routine operation at bank voltages of 5 kV yields
peak plasma currents Igun ≈ 80 kA and gun voltages
Vgun ≈ 2.5 kV (after breakdown), or peak gun power on
the order of 200 MW. Typical Igun and Vgun traces are
shown in Fig. 4.

The external magnetic ﬁeld coil

is powered by a
1.4 mF, 450 V capacitor bank. The half-period of the
current trace for the external coil is 10 ms and is eﬀec-
tively constant on the 10 µs time-scale of the experiment.
The bias poloidal magnetic ﬂux ψgun (intercepting the in-
ner gun electrode) created by the external coil is typically
1–2 mWb.

B. Planar magnetized coaxial gun

The planar magnetized coaxial gun,19 shown in Figs. 1
and 3(bottom), is mounted on one end-dome of the vac-
uum chamber, as shown in Fig. 3(top). The gun consists
of (1) an inner 20.3 cm diameter copper disk electrode,
(2) a co-planar, coaxial outer 50.8 cm diameter copper
annulus electrode, and (3) a magnetic ﬁeld coil located
just behind the inner electrode. The copper disk inner
electrode is bolted onto the vacuum-face of a re-entrant
7.5 in. diameter stainless steel half nipple mounted on
one end of an 8 in. diameter ceramic break which insu-
lates the inner electrode from ground. The other end of
the ceramic break is mounted on a 10 in. ﬂange centered
on the vacuum chamber end-dome. Thus, the inner elec-
trode is electrically ﬂoating and is connected to a capaci-
tor bank via coaxial cables connected across the ceramic
insulating break. The outer annulus electrode is mounted
via copper brackets directly to the inner surface of the
vacuum chamber end-dome and therefore is electrically
tied to chamber ground. A 6 mm vacuum gap separates
the disk and outer annulus. The experiments are char-
acterized using the cylindrical coordinate system shown
in Fig. 3(bottom); the φ and (R-Z) directions will be re-
ferred to as toroidal and poloidal, respectively. The disk
and annulus each have eight 6 mm diameter gas injection
holes spaced equally in φ. The gas injection holes on the
disk and annulus are at R = 4.8 and 17.8 cm, respec-
tively. Details of gas injection are given in Sec. II D. The
external bias magnetic ﬁeld coil is located just behind
the central disk but, because of the re-entrant geome-
try, is at atmosphere. The coil consists of 110 turns of
#11 insulated square magnetic wire wound on a phenolic
form (13.0 cm inner and 18.4 cm outer diameters) and
has an inductance of 2.3 mH and resistance of 0.39 Ω.
Contours of constant poloidal ﬂux ψ generated by the
coil are shown in Fig. 3(bottom).

D. Gas injection

Fast gas puﬀs are required in these experiments be-
cause local gas pressures on the order of 100 mT are
required for breakdown. A slow or steady gas ﬁll is in-
tolerable because the entire vacuum chamber would rise
to 100 mT which would result in a weakly ionized cold
plasma and also an overloading of the cryopump. Fast
gas valves provide a transient, highly localized cloud of
high pressure gas in front of the gun electrodes. The
gas valves utilize a pulsed current in a thin pancake coil
to induce image currents in an adjacent aluminum disk20
but also employ a plenum for measured, reproducible gas
output. The disk is thus repelled from the coil, creating
a transient opening for gas ﬂow from the plenum into
the vacuum chamber. Restoring force on the disk is pro-
vided by a combination of the high pressure gas in the
gas lines and a metal spring. Calibrations indicate that
each pulse injects 1020–1021 hydrogen molecules, depend-
ing on the applied voltage. Optimum timing of gas valve
ﬁring is determined empirically by adjusting the valve ﬁr-
ing time to minimize the delay between capacitor bank
trigger and gas breakdown (typically a few µs). One
valve is used for the eight inner electrode gas injection
holes, and two valves are used for the eight outer elec-
trode holes. Typical gas valve ﬁring voltage is 600 V, with
all three valves injecting on the order of 1021 hydrogen
molecules. It was found that the amount of gas injected
per pulse slowly increased throughout the day21 due to
heating in the electrolytic capacitors22 powering the gas
valve. A new power supply using metal ﬁlm polypropy-
lene capacitors has been constructed recently to eliminate
this problem.22

E. Diagnostics

The images presented in this paper were taken with
multiple-frame charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras.
Most of the images were taken with a Cooke Co. HSFC-
PRO (Figs. 5, 8, 12, and 14). The speciﬁcations for this
camera are as follows: 4 or 8 frames per shot, 1280×1024
pixels per frame, 12 bits per pixel, a 10 ns minimum ex-
posure time, and a minimum inter-frame time of 5 ns
(250 ns) in 4 (8) shot mode. Other images were taken
with a DRS Hadland Imacon 200 (Fig. 11), which has 8
or 16 frames per shot, 1200 × 980 pixels per frame, 10
bits per pixel, a minimum 10 ns exposure time, and a
minimum of 5 ns (250 ns) inter-frame time in 8 (16) shot
mode. The camera is placed on a tripod and positioned
in front of the right-most vacuum chamber window shown
in Fig. 3(top).

Magnetic ﬁeld data are taken with a radial array of
small pickup coils mounted on a stainless steel shaft,
which can be scanned in Z and rotated in φ. The array
contains twenty groups of three coils arranged so that
all three components of B are measured from R = 0 to
R = 40 cm with 2 cm resolution. The coils are commer-
cial chip inductors (Coil Craft 1008CS-472XGBB) and
have calibrated turns × area N A ≈ 1.3 cm2. The coils
are placed into precision-machined slots of a long thin
strip of Delrin, which in turn is slid down a thin-wall
stainless steel tube covered by an alumina tube to pre-
vent metal contact with the plasma (see Fig. 1). The
alumina has an outer diameter of 8.4 mm. The frequency
response, limited by the skin eﬀect of the stainless steel
tube, is good up to 1 MHz. Further details of probe de-
sign, construction, calibration, as well as probe improve-
ments since this work are reported elsewhere.23

A Rogowski coil placed around the ceramic break,
which is connected to the inner electrode, measures total
Igun. The Rogowski coil was hand-wound with a cali-
brated N A = 9.913 × 10−3 m2, and the signal is inte-
grated via a passive integrator with RC = 8 ms. An at-
tenuating Tektronix P6015 high voltage probe measures
Vgun.

F. Control and data acquisition

Triggering of the various power supplies (bias coil,
gas valves, and coaxial gun), the data acquisition sys-
tem, and the camera is provided by a programmable 12-
channel sequencer with ﬁber optic outputs. A typical
trigger sequence is as follows: (1) the bias coil is ﬁred
at t = −10 ms (due to its ≈ 10 ms rise-time), (2) the
gas valves are ﬁred at t = −1.5 ms (to accommodate the
≈ 1.5 ms travel time of neutral gas through the gas lines
into the plasma formation region), and (3) the main ca-
pacitor bank ignitrons are triggered at t = 0 with gas
breakdown typically occuring at t ≈ 4 µs.

The digital data acquisition system is a 64-channel
VME (Versa Module Europa) system from Struck Inno-

3

vative Systems. Each channel has a sampling rate of
105 MHz, a 12-bit resolution, 50 Ω input impedance,
32 kB memory, and an input range of -512 to 512 mV
with continuously adjustable oﬀset. All magnetic probe
and gun diagnostic signals are digitized on this system.
The digital acquisition system is controlled and the data
is displayed and analyzed using Interactive Data Lan-
guage (IDL) routines. The magnetic probe array signals
are integrated numerically.

G. Plasma parameters

The plasmas produced by the coaxial gun have the
following nominal global parameters: n ∼ 1014 cm−3,24
Te ∼ Ti ∼ 5–15 eV, and B ≈ 0.2–1 kG. The global
plasma length scale L is approximately 25 cm, and the
typical ion gyroradius is ρi ≈ 2 cm. The characteristic
Alfv´en transit time is τA ≈ 1.5 µs; plasma lifetime is
about 15 µs; resistive diﬀusion time is on the order of
1 ms. The Lundquist number S ≡ µ0LVA/η ∼ 102–103,
where VA is the Alfv´en speed and η is the classical resis-
tivity. Thus, the 15 µs duration plasma dynamics lasts
several Alfv´en times, and the magnetic ﬂux is reasonably
frozen into the plasma.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. Plasma breakdown and initial evolution

The Paschen condition for gas breakdown25,26 shows
that the voltage required for gas breakdown between two
electrodes separated by distance d depends on the prod-
uct pd, where p is the pressure in the region between
electrodes. The dependence is such that the breakdown
voltage becomes inﬁnite when the pd product becomes
less than about half the value at which the breakdown
voltage is minimum. This property is exploited using a
fast, localized gas injection, as shown in Fig. 3(bottom).
The gas valve operation is adjusted so that pd satisﬁes
the Paschen condition along the bias ﬁeld lines. Because
of the 6 mm size of the inter-electrode gap and the neg-
ligible gas pressure in the gap, the pd value in the gap
is so small as to be well to the left of the Paschen min-
imum such that breakdown cannot occur there. This
setup demonstrates the counter-intuitive fact that a very
small distance between conductors in vacuum can provide
perfect electrical insulation.27 This fact was also utilized
in the Caltech solar prominence experimental setup.28

Breakdown along the bias ﬁeld lines is shown in frame 1
of Fig. 5, which is a CCD camera image of the plasma
within approximately the ﬁrst microsecond after break-
down. The electrodes are located in the right hand side
of each frame; the circular gap between electrodes is iden-
tiﬁed by an arrow. The locations of the eight bright legs
correspond to the locations of the eight pairs of gas in-
jection holes, and the shape of the legs matches the cal-

culated bias ﬁeld conﬁguration. These observations indi-
cate that breakdown is occurring along the bias ﬁeld lines
and that the gas pressure is non-uniform and concen-
trated azimuthally at the eight φ positions corresponding
to the gas injection holes. The breakdown occurs approx-
imately 4–5 µs after high-voltage is applied (see Fig. 4).
In order to minimize jitter and maximize reproducibility,
the gas injection timing was adjusted to minimize the
time delay before breakdown.

The gun current ramps up steeply during the next
10 µs (see Fig. 4), and the eight bright legs expand and
merge, as shown in the next two frames of Fig. 5. The
rising gun current corresponds to an increase in toroidal
magnetic ﬂux linking the bias ﬁeld lines, and therefore
magnetic helicity is injected at the rate 2Vgunψgun.26 The
applied gun voltage creates a radial electric ﬁeld. From
the radial component of the ideal Ohm’s law,

ER + UφBZ − UZBφ = 0,

(1)

it is seen that a combination of toroidal rotation Uφ and
axial ﬂow UZ will arise to balance ER. Note that an
astrophysical accretion disk is similar to a coaxial gun
but with the driving term coming from the Keplerian disk
rotation Uφ which gives rise to ER.14 As described below,
further evolution of the plasma after frame 3 of Fig. 5 is
dependent on the peak value of λgun = µ0Igun/ψgun.

B. Plasma morphologies resulting from λgun
parameter scan

After the initial

formation stage, the plasma can
evolve into three distinct morphologies depending on
peak λgun.14 Similar regimes were also observed in previ-
ous Caltech experiments using a conventional cylindrical
coaxial gun.13 The parameter λgun can be thought of as
a boundary condition imposed on the plasma at the gun
surface. Its functional form λgun = µ0Igun/ψgun can be
easily derived by integrating ∇ × B = λB over the inner
gun electrode surface. The parameter λgun is varied ex-
perimentally by adjusting the main capacitor bank volt-
age (which controls Igun) and the bias coil bank voltage
(which controls ψgun). A plot of λgun parameter space
is shown in Fig. 6, with the diﬀerent observed plasma
morphologies (I, II, III) indicated.

1. Formation of stable plasma column at low λgun

The formation of a central plasma column along the
Z direction is observed for values of λgun . 40 m−1,
as shown in Fig. 5. Magnetic probe measurements in
this regime (Fig. 7) show that the column has magnetic
ﬁeld radial proﬁles resembling a screw pinch. The ax-
ial expansion of the column is derived from Fig. 5 to
be approximately 40 km/s which is of the order of the
Alfv´en speed. The ﬁlamentary shape of this column pro-
vides compelling experimental evidence for magnetically-

4

driven models of astrophysical jet collimation,12,15,16,17
in which an ionized rotating accretion disk winds up a
background magnetic ﬁeld and injects magnetic helicity
into the disk corona.

2. Kink instability of central column at intermediate λgun

For 40 m−1 . λgun . 60 m−1, the plasma column
forms along the Z direction but then develops a helical
instability with toroidal mode number n = 1, as shown
in Fig. 8. The helical instability is shown to be consistent
with an ideal MHD kink instability by two independent
experimental measurements described below.

The Kruskal-Shafranov condition for MHD kink insta-

bility in cylindrical geometry is

q(a) = 2πaBZ(a)/LBφ(a) < 1,

(2)

where q is the safety factor and a and L are the column
radius and length, respectively. By invoking the rela-
tionships ψgun ≈ πa2BZ(a) and Bφ(a) = µ0Igun/2πa =
λgunψgun/a, the Kruskal-Shafranov condition for kink in-
stability can be expressed as14,29

λgun > 4π/L.

(3)

Thus, the experimentally observed instability onset can
be compared to the Kruskal-Shafranov condition by
knowing only λgun and L. Figure 9 shows a scatter plot
of λgun versus L for an ensemble of shots in which a
plasma column forms. The data points represent both
diﬀerent shots and diﬀerent times within the same shot
(i.e., before and after the instability occurs). It is seen
that the threshold for the appearance of the helical insta-
bility is in good agreement with the Kruskal-Shafranov
limit (dashed line in Fig. 9).

Consistency with the Kruskal-Shafranov limit was also
checked with direct magnetic probe measurements. Ra-
dial proﬁles of BZ and Bφ yielded q proﬁles as a function
of time, as shown in Fig. 10. It is shown that q drops to
unity around 10.5 µs. The corresponding image sequence
for this shot, shown in Fig. 11, indicates that the helical
instability develops at this same time. Thus the observed
helical instability is consistent with an ideal kink, with
onset occurring when q drops to unity. The q is initially
greater than unity because the bias poloidal ﬂux domi-
nates and L is small. Then L increases quickly and Bφ
also increases to a lesser degree, and therefore q drops
according to Eq. (2).

The growth of the kink mode was captured by short-
ening the inter-frame time of the CCD camera to 0.25 µs
(see Fig. 12). The mode amplitude as a function of time
is shown in Fig. 13 and is seen to exhibit a fairly linear
growth rate.

5

(5)

3. Quick plasma detachment at high λgun

tion, i.e., k · x = constant, such that

At values of λgun & 60 m−1, the plasma appears to
“pinch-oﬀ” without the formation of a central column,
as shown in Fig. 14. From the image sequence, the prop-
agation velocity of the detached plasma along the Z-axis
is calculated to be around 50 km/s (of the order of the
Alfv´en speed). Magnetic probe measurements indicate
that the detached plasma has much stronger toroidal
than poloidal ﬁeld (Fig. 15).
It is possible that this
toroidal-ﬂux-rich detached plasma will relax to a sphero-
mak conﬁguration with equivalent toroidal and poloidal
ﬂux.

Poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation, as measured by the mag-
netic probe array, is large in this regime. Flux ampliﬁca-
tion for all three regimes is shown in Fig. 16 as a function
of peak λgun. In the kinked regime, the ﬂux ampliﬁcation
is typically around a factor of two, and the ﬂux ampliﬁca-
tion mechanism in this regime (discussed below) has been
identiﬁed. The ﬂux ampliﬁcation is neligible in the low
λgun regime, but it is very large in the high λgun regime.
The mechanism for the high λgun regime is not known,
but it is probably related to the mechanism operating
in the kink regime. An interesting question requiring
further study is what determintes the maximum amount
of ﬂux ampliﬁcation. The next section shows that the
kink is a mechanism for poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation and
spheromak formation.

kZ Z + kφRφ = constant.

Thus, substituting Eq. (4) into Eq. (5) gives the coordi-
nates of the helix, φ = (Bφ/RBZ)Z + constant, from
which it can be seen that the kinked current channel
is a right-handed helix if JZBZ ∼ BφBZ > 0 and a
left-handed helix if JZBZ < 0. Thus, the helix will
always have the form of a solenoid with the appropri-
ate handedness to amplify the original BZ. The addi-
tional ψ introduced by the kink can be estimated by con-
sidering the helically deformed current channel to be a
solenoid with current I, turns per length 1/L, and radius
a. The solenoid formula for the ﬁeld inside the solenoid
is BZ = µ0I/L; the ψ produced by the solenoid is πa2BZ
and thus depends non-linearly on the kink amplitude a.
Using the measured values a ≈ 5 cm, L ≈ 20 cm, and
I ≈ 60 kA at 13.5 µs, the ψ generated by the kink is
predicted to be approximately 1 mWb, which is within
a factor of 2 of the observed ampliﬁcation of ψmax over
ψgun. The discrepancy is within the accuracy of a and
L measurements and of the ψ calculation assuming ax-
isymmetry in the presence of the rotating kink. Because
the coaxial gun injects only toroidal ﬂux, 3D plasma dy-
namics must be responsible for ψ exceeding ψgun. The
dynamics are provided by the kink, which is the mecha-
nism by which toroidal ﬂux is converted to poloidal ﬂux.

C. Kink as mechanism for poloidal ﬂux
ampliﬁcation and spheromak formation

2. Evidence for spheromak formation

The kink instability is identiﬁed experimentally as
a mechanism for (1) poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation and
(2) spheromak formation.18 Both are experimentally ob-
served immediately following kinking of the central col-
umn. This can be seen by examining the evolution of
poloidal ﬂux contours and maximum ψ (Fig. 17) calcu-
lated from time-resolved magnetic probe data and the
sequence of CCD images showing the kink (Fig. 11).

1. Paramagnetism of the kink

The kink modiﬁes the direction of current ﬂow from
purely Z (poloidal) to a partially φ (toroidal) direction.
Consequently, it converts toroidal to poloidal ﬂux. This
process is paramagnetic, amplifying ψ over the initial
applied ψgun = 1.7 mWb. The paramagnetism is un-
derstood by realizing that kinks involve perturbations
with dependence exp(ik · x) where k · B = 0. The latter
means

kZ = −kφBφ/BZ,

(4)

where kR = 0. The trajectory of the kink is determined
by considering a locus of constant phase of the perturba-

R

The appearance of the kink is followed immediately by
three signatures of spheromak formation: (1) appearance
of closed ψ-contours [calculated assuming axisymmetry,
0 2πR′BZ(R′, t) dR′], (2) ψ-ampliﬁcation,
ψ(R, t) = R
and (3) magnetic ﬁeld radial proﬁles consistent with
spheromak formation. It is important to note that the
relationship between closed ψ-contours and closed ﬂux
surfaces becomes ambiguous when axisymmetry is bro-
ken. Thus, in the presence of a non-axisymmetric kink,
closed ψ-contours indicate closed ﬂux surfaces only in
a time-averaged manner. Shortly after 13 µs, the kink
breaks apart (Fig. 11). This coincides with signatures of
spheromak formation as observed in the magnetic probe
measurements (Fig. 17). At approximately 13 µs, closed
ψ-contours appear and ψmax is ampliﬁed to larger than
ψgun (ψ-ampliﬁcation is due mainly to broadening of the
BZ proﬁle after 12 µs). At 15 µs, magnetic ﬁeld pro-
ﬁles consistent with spheromak formation are observed
(Fig. 18). The measured radial proﬁles of BZ and Bφ at
15 µs are compared with Taylor state solutions7 in cylin-
drical geometry, i.e. uniform λ solutions of ∇ × B = λB.
The solutions are BZ ∼ J0(λR) and Bφ ∼ J1(λR), where
J0 and J1 are Bessel functions of order zero and one,
respectively, and the best ﬁt is found for λ ≈ 15 m−1
with a radial oﬀset of 4 cm (displacement of spheromak
oﬀ the geometric axis). The slight disagreement between

measured proﬁles and the Taylor solution is not surpris-
ing since the spheromak is expected to be either (1) still
undergoing relaxation toward the Taylor state or (2) in
a modiﬁed relaxed state since it is still being driven by
the gun, where peak λgun ≈ 50 m−1.

IV. DISCUSSION

A. Spheromak formation and topology

Spheromak formation involves a sequence of steps that
in principle should be possible to visualize mentally.
However, the inherent geometric and topological com-
plexity of these steps has made such a visualization so
challenging that no consensus exists on the precise form
of this sequence. This shortcoming is important be-
cause without being able to visualize how the 3D topol-
ogy evolves during the spheromak formation sequence,
it is diﬃcult to optimize this process and the closely re-
lated sustainment process.30 Because visualization of the
process has proved diﬃcult, the main appoach used to
date for experimentally characterizing spheromak forma-
tion and sustainment is modal analysis, a method where
Fourier modes are ﬁrst identiﬁed and then the time de-
pendence and spatial proﬁle of these modes are measured
and compared with theoretical models. While useful in
many respects, modal analysis gives little insight into 3D
topological issues such as linkage, connectivity, knotted-
ness, and conversion between toroidal ﬂux and poloidal
ﬂux. The photographs of evolving magnetized plasmas in
the present experiments have provided an actual visual-
ization which helps provide new insights into these issues.
New interpretations are given here and placed into con-
text with respect to past experimental work.9,29,31,32,33,34
It should also be noted that many aspects of the present
work are qualitatively similar to recent time-dependent
MHD simulations of spheromak formation via electro-
static helicity injection.35

Bounded, axisymmetric, force-free plasma equilibria
were ﬁrst discussed in the 1950’s.3,36,37,38 These theo-
retical models invoked rather abstract astrophysical con-
texts and did not contain descriptions of the detailed
processes by which such equilibria could be created. A
hypothetical analogy to this situation would be to be in
possesion of an abstract theoretical model demonstrating
that soap bubbles should in principle exist, while never
having observed a soap bubble nor being aware of how
to blow soap bubbles. The soap bubble analogy is apt
because a bounded, axisymmetric, force-free equilibrium
can be thought of as being a bubble (local maximum) of
poloidal ﬂux ψ(R, Z). First derivatives (gradients) of ψ
show that a local ψ(R, Z) maximum constitutes a mag-
netic axis, and second derivatives (Laplacian-like opera-
tors) of ψ show that a toroidal current necessarily ﬂows
along this magnetic axis.

Lacking detailed knowledge for how to make these
“magnetic bubbles” is a non-trivial shortcoming because

6

Cowling’s anti-dynamo theorem39 shows that there is no
simple way to make such ψ bubbles. Speciﬁcally, Cowl-
ing showed that creation/sustainment of an axisymmet-
ric, steady-state toroidal current cannot be achieved via
axisymmetric (i.e., simple) means. Since creation of an
axisymmetric toroidal current is tantamount to creating
a local ψ(R, Z) maximum, the Cowling anti-dynamo the-
orem eﬀectively requires that any poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁ-
cation process must be non-axisymmetric. Thus, sphero-
mak formation and sustainment necessarily involve non-
axisymmetric processes.

Helical (i.e., non-axisymmetric) distortions of magne-
tized coaxial gun central columns and associated poloidal
ﬂux ampliﬁcation were ﬁrst observed in the early 1960’s
in experiments by Alfven et al.8 and Lindberg et al.9
It is interesting to note that these early magnetized
coaxial gun experiments revealed phenomena relating to
spheromak formation nearly two decades before the word
“spheromak” was coined by Rosenbluth and Bussac.40 In
particular, Lindberg et al.9 imaged the helical instability
of an initially azimuthally symmetric axial current chan-
nel, characterized this as an “m = 1 instability,” noted
that “such instabilities are well known in the theories of
pinches,” and measured an ampliﬁcation of the poloidal
ﬂux. Lindberg et al. interpreted this central column he-
lix as a kink instability of the geometric axis current and
postulated that the helical deformation of the current
path was responsible for observed poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁca-
tion. However, Lindberg et al. did not provide quantita-
tive measurements establishing that the observed helical
instability was indeed a kink (i.e., that the conﬁguration
destabilized when the q = 1 kink stability threshold was
crossed) nor that the instability produced a magnitude
and polarity of poloidal ﬂux consistent with observation.
Similar modes (now called n = 1 modes) were also
observed in all later coaxial gun experiments,31,32,33,41
but there have been two distinct, diﬀering interpretations
of these modes.
In the ﬁrst interpretation, referred to
here as “rotating static mode,” the modes are assumed
to have a steady-state geometry in some rest frame so
that their apparent laboratory frame time-dependence is
solely due to the rotation of the mode rest frame with re-
spect to the laboratory frame. In this interpretation the
modes are thus assumed to have a laboratory frame time-
dependence ∼ cos(nθ − ωt) so that an observer located
in a frame rotating with the mode (i.e., a frame with
coordinate θ′ = θ − ωt/n) would see a time-independent,
or static, mode. In the second interpretation, referred to
here as “relaxation oscillation,” the modes are not static
in any frame but, rather, are growing modes which start
with zero amplitude, build up to ﬁnite amplitude, un-
dergo a nonlinear crash, and then the process repeats.
There might be rotation as well, but even if one moved
to an optimally chosen rotating frame, there still would
be relaxation oscillations. Thus, in the relaxation oscil-
lation case, the mode time-dependence during its growth
stage would be ∼ eγt cos nθ or possibly ∼ eγt cos(nθ −ωt)
so that no change of observer rest frame would cause the

mode to appear static.

The n = 1 modes were typically observed as oscilla-
tions in magnetic ﬁeld during the sustainment (as op-
posed to formation) phase. However, it seems likely that
sustainment ought to involve much the same processes
as formation since formation requires creating a localized
poloidal ﬂux maximum, and sustainment requires main-
taining this maximum against resistive losses. Knox et
al.31 observed n = 1 and higher order modes using wall
magnetic probe arrays and proposed that sustainment
was due to a rotating static mode which they called a
“rotating internal kink distortion.” On the other hand
Nagata et al.33 made similar magnetic probe measure-
ments but interpreted sustainment as a sequence of relax-
ation oscillations (“collapse and recovery”). Thus Knox
et al. considered the mode as a rotating perturbation of
an otherwise axisymmetric ﬂux surface, whereas Nagata
et al. interpreted the mode as being the creation and de-
struction of ﬂux surfaces.

The SPHEX group29,32,34 used internal probes to iden-
tify two distinct structures in their experiment, namely
(i) a central column of open magnetic ﬁeld lines with a
force-free current ﬂowing from the gun electrode along
the geometric axis and (ii) an annulus (torus) of closed
ﬁeld lines and toroidal current linking the central column.
The SPHEX group found that the n = 1 oscillations
were primarily in the central column and, using probes,
showed that the central column had a helical deforma-
tion. The helical deformation was inferred on the as-
sumption that the n = 1 oscillation was a rotating static
mode, and this mode was interpreted to be a nonlinearly
saturated kink instability of the geometric axis current
rotating toroidally at the E × B frequency.42 It is impor-
tant to emphasize that the rotation was assumed 29 but
not directly measured. Because the signal was observed
to be periodic, it was assumed that the ﬂuctuations were
of the form cos(θ−ωt) so that observations made at diﬀer-
ent times could be used to map out the spatial proﬁle of
the assumed rotating structure. However, this assump-
tion of rotation misses the interpretation that there is
a relaxation oscillation with repeated births of new he-
lices, i.e., the rotation assumption did not consider the
possibility of a repetitive sequence of modes with time
behavior eγt cos θ.

The present results suggest that the n = 1 ﬂuctu-
ations result from repeated births of new kinked he-
lices with time dependence ∼ eγt cos θ and that these
helices detach and merge into the time-averaged closed
ﬂux region of a spheromak. According to this interpre-
tation of spheromak formation/sustainment, the current
starts out aligned along the geometric axis and so is ini-
tially purely poloidal. Then, upon kinking (i.e., the cur-
rent channel becoming helical so that it is eﬀectively a
solenoid), the current channel axis has a toroidal com-
ponent which creates new poloidal ﬂux. Kink growth
means that the radius of the helix increases. Growth
of the kink, in turn, means that the radius of the he-
lix increases until this radius becomes so large that the

7

helical current channel merges with any existing sphero-
mak toroidal current, thereby amplifying/sustaining the
poloidal ﬂux. New current will now ﬂow from the gun
along a new straight central column aligned along the
geometric axis, and initially, this new central current col-
umn will be stable against kinking because of the strong
axial magnetic ﬁeld resulting from the strong toroidal
current ﬂowing in the spheromak. However, because no
electromotive force sustains the spheromak toroidal cur-
rent against Ohmic decay, the spheromak toroidal cur-
rent decays with time so that the poloidal ﬁeld on the
geometric axis becomes weaker. The open poloidal ﬁeld
on the geometric axis weakens to the point that a new
kink develops on the geometric axis. The new kink de-
forms into a new solenoid which merges with the sphero-
mak, replenishing the toroidal curent in the spheromak,
and increasing the geometric axis open poloidal ﬁeld so
that the process starts over again. Thus, power ﬂow from
the geometric axis region to the spheromak is not the re-
sult of rotation of a saturated kink but is instead due to
the repetitive creation of successive helical (kinked) ge-
ometric axis current channels which expand nonlinearly
in radius and merge with the spheromak.

The interpretation in the above paragraph is but-
tressed by considering what happens when a simple
solenoid, consisting of many turns of wire,
is rotated
about its own axis. Such a rotation does not result in
ﬂow of magnetic energy or in transformation of toroidal
ﬁeld energy into poloidal ﬁeld energy. In fact rotation of
a solenoid about its axis does not change the magnetic
ﬁeld produced by the solenoid at all because rotation of
a solenoid does not change the relative toroidal drift ve-
locity between electrons and ions in the solenoid wire. In
contrast, increasing the radius of the solenoid, as would
be the consequence of a growing kink instability, increases
the poloidal ﬂux through the bore of the solenoid. If the
conductor forming the solenoid (i.e., the initial geomet-
ric axis current channel) is a ﬂux conserver, then this
increase of poloidal ﬂux linking the conductor must be
at the expense of a decrease in the toroidal ﬂux linking
the conductor, resulting in a conversion from toroidal to
poloidal ﬂux due to the kink.

The primary result in this work regarding spheromak
formation is the experimental demonstration that the
kink instability of the geometric axis current and its
growth result in the poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation required
to produce the local maximum of poloidal ﬂux necessary
for spheromak formation. This result is qualitatively sim-
ilar to the point of view expressed by Lindberg et al. and
Nagata et al. but diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the point of
view expressed by Knox et al. and the SPHEX group.
The present work has provided a quantitative demonstra-
tion that the onset of the helical instability is consistent
with the Kruskal-Shafranov condition for kink instability
and a theoretical demonstration that the kink is necessar-
ily paramagnetic (i.e., ampliﬁes poloidal ﬂux). Further-
more, it was shown that the poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation
calculated using the visually observed kink dimensions

are consistent with the magnetic probe measurements of
poloidal ﬂux. These measurements support the inter-
pretation that poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation is due to kink
growth and not kink rotation. Repetition of this sequence
with successive, new kinked current channels during sus-
tainment could explain the previously observed n = 1
ﬂuctuations. The ﬂux ampliﬁcation mechanism would be
insensitive to the magnitude or direction of the rotation
frequency.

B. Astrophysical jets

Magnetically-driven astrophysical jets are intriguing
astronomical phenomena which have been observed for
nearly a century. These jets are highly collimated and
have been observed to emanate from stars, black holes,
and active galactic nuclei; the sources are generically
called central objects. The characteristic size of jets
ranges over many orders of magnitude, but in all cases
the axial extent of the jet is much larger than the charac-
teristic dimension of the source. Theoretical models of jet
formation and collimation have been discussed at length
in the literature.10,11,12 Observations of helical magnetic
ﬁelds in jets43 provide especially tantalizing evidence that
plasma physics plays an important role governing jet col-
limation, structure, and dynamics. Theoretical models
based on MHD have become the leading candidates to
explain jet formation and collimation. Many of these
models show how axisymmetric force-free or nearly force-
free plasma equilibria could be made to resemble the
long thin morphology of a jet.15,44,45 More recently, time-
dependent 3D MHD simulations12,16 have illustrated dy-
namical collimation starting with an initial “seed” mag-
netic ﬁeld conﬁguration. Despite impressive similarities
between the theoretical models and astronomical obser-
vations of jets, experiments to test the underpinnings of
these theories have been lacking.

The planar spheromak gun formation experiment dis-
cussed here has a geometry very similar to the geome-
try associated with the formation region of magnetically-
driven astrophysical jets (Fig. 2), and so this work can be
considered as a laboratory investigation into the underly-
ing processes governing astrophysical jet formation, colli-
mation, and acceleration.14 The MHD theories are based
on the generation of an axisymmetric poloidal current
with geometry essentially the same as the poloidal cur-
rent in the central column of the present experiments. In
the astrophysical situation, this poloidal current is driven
by a radial electric ﬁeld resulting from the rotation of
an accretion disk located in the equatorial plane of the
central object. The rotation of the accretion disk cuts
across a pre-existing poloidal magnetic ﬁeld, resulting in
an electric ﬁeld E = −Uφ ˆφ × BZ ˆZ = −UφBZ ˆR, which is
equivalent to the radial electric ﬁeld applied across the
gap between inner and outer electrodes in the experi-
ment. In both cases, magnetic helicity is injected at the
rate dK/dt = 2V ψ, where V is the potential drop be-

8

tween the inner and outer electrodes (or between star
and disk) and ψ is the poloidal magnetic ﬂux linking the
two.

The present work demonstrates experimentally for the
ﬁrst time that magnetic helicity injection in relevant ge-
ometry leads to the formation and collimation of a jet
(Fig. 5). In particular, the data indicate both a jet-like
ﬂow and a collimation of this ﬂow, i.e., the lengthening
central column is the jet, and the narrowing of the cen-
tral column is the collimation. The jet ﬂow is consistent
with a recent model17 proposing that axial gradients in
B2
φ drive axial ﬂows from where the current channel ra-
dius is small to where the channel radius is large and that
collimation occurs where ∇ · U is negative so that there
is a compression of the toroidal ﬂux frozen into the ﬂow.
The present work also shows that collimation can occur
within just one twist of the poloidal magnetic ﬁeld, as
demonstrated by the fact that the kink instability occurs
when q drops to unity, after collimation has already been
observed. It is interesting to note that the kink insta-
bility has been proposed to explain the observed knotted
structures in astrophysical jets.46

V. SUMMARY

Magnetic helicity injection experiments using a simple
magnetized coaxial gun setup have revealed insights into
the dynamics of spheromak formation and collimation of
magnetically-driven astrophysical jets. Depending on the
peak value of λgun, three diﬀerent plasma morphologies
were observed: (1) a collimated jet at λgun . 40 m−1,
(2) kink instability of the jet at 40 . λgun . 60 m−1,
and (3) a quickly detached plasma at λgun & 60 m−1.
The kink instability was shown to provide the mechanism
for poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation in coaxial gun spheromak
formation. The latter result supports a model in which
repeated births of kinked helices can form and sustain
spheromaks. It is proposed that this mechanism, rather
than a rotating static saturated kink which does not lead
to ﬂux ampliﬁcation, could explain past observations of
n = 1 ﬂuctuations in coaxial gun spheromak experiments.
A collimated jet is formed by driving electric current
along a background poloidal ﬁeld in a geometry relevant
for magnetically-driven astrophysical jets. Collimation is
observed well before kink onset. Since kink onset takes
place when the magnetic ﬁeld has undergone one com-
plete twist, consistent with the Kruskal-Shafranov the-
ory, these observations demonstrate that collimation oc-
curs before the initial poloidal ﬁeld has undergone one
complete twist. Kink dynamics could be related to wig-
gled structures in astronomical observations of galactic
jets.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by a U.S. Dept. of En-
ergy (DoE) Fusion Energy Sciences Postdoctoral Fellow-
ship and DoE grant no. DE-FG03-98ER544561. The

authors acknowledge S. Pracko, C. Romero-Talam´as,
F. Cosso, and D. Felt for technical assistance and also
Dr. S. Woodruﬀ for discussions about past work on
spheromak n = 1 central column instabilities.

9

(1998).

29 R. C. Duck, P. K. Browning, G. Cunningham, S. J. Gee,
A. al Karkhy, R. Martin, and M. G. Rusbridge, Plasma
Phys. Contr. Fus. 39, 715 (1997).

30 S. Woodruﬀ, D. N. Hill, B. W. Stallard, R. Bulmer, C. T.
Holcomb, E. B. Hooper, H. S. McLean, J. Moller, and R. D.
Wood, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 095001 (2003).

31 S. O. Knox, C. W. Barnes, G. J. Marklin, T. R. Jarboe,
I. Henins, H. W. Hoida, and B. L. Wright, Phys. Rev. Lett.
55, 842 (1986).

32 P. K. Browning, G. Cunningham, S. J. Gee, K. J. Gib-
son, A. al Karkhy, D. A. Kitson, R. Martin, and M. G.
Rusbridge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1718 (1992).

33 M. Nagata, T. Kanki, T. Masuda, S. Naito, H. Tatsumi,

and T. Uyama, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4342 (1993).

34 D. M. Willet, P. K. Browning, S. Woodruﬀ, and K. J.

Gibson, Plasma Phys. Contr. Fus. 41, 595 (1999).

35 C. R. Sovinec, J. M. Finn, and D. del Castillo-Negrete,

36 L. Woltjer, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 44, 833 (1958).
37 S. Chandrasekhar, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 42, 1 (1956).
38 S. Chandrasekhar and P. C. Kendall, Astrophys. J. 126,

39 T. G. Cowling, Mon. N. Astron. Soc. 94, 39 (1934).
40 M. N. Rosenbluth and M. N. Bussac, Nuc. Fusion 19, 489

41 T. R. Jarboe, Plasma Phys. Control. Fus. 36, 945 (1994).
42 D. Brennan, P. K. Browning, R. A. M. V. der Linden,
A. W. Hood, and S. Woodruﬀ, Phys. Plasmas 6, 4248
(1999).

43 K. Asada, M. Inoue, Y. Uchida, S. Kameno, K. Fujisawa,
S. Iguchi, and M. Mutoh, Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan 54,
L39 (2002).

44 H. Li, R. V. E. Lovelace, J. M. Finn, and S. A. Colgate,

45 R. V. E. Lovelace, H. Li, A. V. Koldaoba, G. V. Ustyugova,
and M. M. Romanova, Astrophys. J. 572, 445 (2002).
46 M. Nakamura, Y. Uchida, and S. Hirose, New Astronomy

6, 61 (2001).

10 M. C. Begelman, R. D. Blandford, and M. J. Rees, Rev.

Phys. Plasmas 8, 475 (2001).

Mod. Phys. 56, 255 (1984).

11 R. D. Blandford, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 358, 811

12 D. L. Meier, S. Koide, and Y. Uchida, Science 291, 84

457 (1957).

13 J. Yee and P. M. Bellan, Phys. Plasmas 7, 3625 (2000).
14 S. C. Hsu and P. M. Bellan, Mon. N. Roy. Astron. Soc.

(1979).

19 S. C. Hsu and P. M. Bellan, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 30,

Astrophys. J. 561, 915 (2001).

∗ present address: Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los
Alamos, NM 87545; Electronic address: scotthsu@lanl.gov

† Electronic address: pbellan@caltech.edu
1 S. Lundquist, Arkiv for Fysik 2, 361 (1950).
2 S. Chandrasekhar and L. Woltjer, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

44, 285 (1958).

3 L. Woltjer, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 44, 489 (1958).
4 M. A. Berger and G. B. Field, J. Fluid Mech. 147, 133

(1984).

5 J. B. Taylor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1139 (1974).
6 W. C. Turner, G. C. Goldenbaum, E. H. A. Granneman,
J. H. Hammer, C. W. Hartman, D. S. Prono, and J. Taska,
Phys. Fluids 26, 1965 (1983).

7 J. B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 741 (1986).
8 H. Alfv´en, L. Lindberg, and P. Mitlid, J. Nuc. Energy C

9 L. Lindberg and C. Jacobsen, Astrophys. J. 133, 1043

1, 116 (1960).

(1961).

(2000).

(2001).

334, 257 (2002).

(1996).

582, 292 (2003).

(2003).

10 (2002).

15 D. Lynden-Bell, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 279, 389

16 R. Ouyed, D. A. Clarke, and R. E. Pudritz, Astrophys. J.

17 P. M. Bellan, Phys. Plasmas 10, 1999 (2003).
18 S. C. Hsu and P. M. Bellan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 215002

20 J. C. Thomas, D. Q. Hwang, R. D. Horton, J. H. Rogers,

and R. Raman, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 64, 1410 (1993).

21 J. Yee, Ph.D. Thesis, Caltech, 1999.
22 P. M. Bellan, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 73, 2900 (2002).
23 C. A. Romero-Talam´as, P. M. Bellan, and S. C. Hsu, Rev.

Sci. Instrum. 75, 2664 (2004).

24 Based on oﬀ-axis triple Langmuir probe measurements.
More recent spectroscopic measurements indicate much
higher local density on-axis (G. Yun, private communica-
tion).

25 A. Von Engel, Ionized Gases (Oxford University Press, Ox-

ford, 1965).

2000).

26 P. M. Bellan, Spheromaks (Imperial College Press, London,

27 C. Braun, W. Hartmann, V. Dominic, G. Kirkman,
M. Gundersen, and G. McDuﬀ, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev.
35, 559 (1988).

28 P. M. Bellan and J. F. Hansen, Phys. Plasmas 5, 1991

Figure captions

Figure 16. Flux ampliﬁcation versus peak λgun.

10

Figure 17. Top: poloidal magnetic ﬁeld vectors and ψ
contours as a function of R and t. Bottom: Time evolu-
tion of ψ at R = 19 cm (shot 2472). Flux ampliﬁcation
is observed during time of the kink and appearance of
closed ψ contours.

Figure 18. Comparison of BZ (diamonds) and Bφ
(squares) proﬁles at t = 15 µs with Taylor state (solid
line). Proﬁle location is indicated by vertical dashed line
in top panel of Fig. 17.

Figure 1. End-view photograph of coaxial gun and
rotatable magnetic probe array (end-view).

Figure 2. Schematic of essential ingredients of both a
coaxial gun and astrophysical star-disk system.

Figure 3. Top:
large vacuum chamber with multiple
diagnostic ports and coaxial gun mounted on right end-
dome. Bottom: Side-view schematic of planar coaxial
gun, showing inner electrode (blue), outer electrode
(green), gas feed lines, contours of constant bias poloidal
ﬂux, and cylindrical coordinate system.

Figure 4. Typical Igun (solid) Vgun (dashed) traces.
Breakdown occurs at t = 2-3 µs when Vgun drops and
Igun rises.

Figure 5. CCD images of plasma evolution (shot 1210)
for low λgun regime, in which a central plasma column
forms. The circular gap between electrodes is indicated
by an arrow.

Figure 6. Plot of λgun = µ0Igun/ψgun parameter space
showing the three plasma regimes.

Figure 7. Magnetic ﬁeld and total current as a function
of R for low λgun regime central column (shot 2465).

Figure 8. CCD images of plasma evolution (shot 1233)
for intermediate λgun kinked plasma regime.

Figure 9.
Plot of λgun versus column length L,
showing consistency with Kruskal-Shafranov condition
λgun > 4π/L for MHD kink instability.

Figure 10. Radial proﬁles of q = 2πRBZ/LBφ (shot
2472). The column develops a helical instability at the
same time as q near the axis drops to unity, also showing
consistency with Kruskal-Shafranov condition for MHD
kink instability.

Figure 11. Images of kink development (shot 2472).

Figure 12. High time-resolution images of kink growth
(shot 1247). Inter-frame time is 250 ns.

Figure 13. Mode amplitude of kink perturbation versus
time.

Figure 14.
(shot 1181).

Images of plasma evolution at high λgun

Figure 15. Radial proﬁles of Btor and Bpol for high λgun
plasma at t = 12 µs (shot 2457).

11

Figure 1

Figure 2

12

Figure 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

13

Figure 6

Figure 7

Figure 8

14

Figure 9

Figure 10

Figure 11

Figure 12

15

Figure 13

Figure 14

Figure 15

16

Figure 16

Figure 17

Figure 18

