4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ellipsoidal Coulomb Crystals in a Linear Radiofrequency Trap

U. Fr¨ohlich, B. Roth, and S. Schiller
Institut f¨ur Experimentalphysik, Heinrich-Heine-Universit¨at D¨usseldorf, 40225 D¨usseldorf, Germany

A static quadrupole potential breaks the cylindrical symmetry of the eﬀective potential of a
linear rf trap. For a one-component ﬂuid plasma at low temperature, the resulting equilibrium
charge distribution is predicted to be an ellipsoid. We have produced laser-cooled Be+ ellipsoidal
ion crystals and found good agreement between their shapes and the cold ﬂuid prediction. In two-
species mixtures, containing Be+ and sympathetically cooled ions of lower mass, a suﬃciently strong
static quadrupole potential produces a spatial separation of the species.

One-component plasmas have attracted signiﬁcant at-
tention in the past, since they represent simple multi-
particle systems that can be studied under a variety
of conditions with a high degree of experimental con-
trol. Detailed theoretical analysis, both analytical and by
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, is possible [1, 2].
To overcome the Coulomb repulsion, the plasmas are con-
ﬁned in Penning- or Paul-type traps. Their temperature
can be varied over many orders of magnitude.
In par-
ticular, they can be eﬃciently cooled to the mK range
by laser cooling. Strong cooling results in phase transi-
tions to a crystalline state, whose occurrence is described
by the interaction parameter Γ = Q2/4πǫ0akBT , the ra-
tio between average nearest-neighbor Coulomb energy (a:
average particle spacing, Q: particle charge) and thermal
energy. MD simulations on inﬁnite systems have shown
that the plasma becomes ﬂuid, i.e. exhibits spatial corre-
lations for Γ ≥ 2, without going through a discontinuous
gas-ﬂuid phase transition [2]. For Γ > 170 [3] a phase
transition to a crystal occurs. Coulomb crystals in hy-
perbolic [4] and linear Paul (rf) traps [5, 6] have become
of great importance in quantum optics, where they can be
used to implement quantum gates or quantum memories
[7], and can serve as systems for precision measurements
on atomic or molecular ions [8, 9].
The spatial distribution of a trapped one-component
gaseous plasma diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the ﬂuid and
crystalline state. This is described by the Debye length
λD = (kBT ǫ0/nQ2)1/2 which is the distance at which
interactions between individual particles overcome col-
lective eﬀects [2]. Here, n is the particle density of the
plasma. When λD is much larger than the spatial extent
of the plasma, the Coulomb interaction is negligible, and
the density is a local function of the trap potential only.
For a harmonic potential, the density has a Gaussian de-
pendence on the coordinates, with extensions inversely
proportional to the respective trap potential curvatures.
When λD is comparable to or smaller than the spatial
extent of the plasma (as is the case for the plasmas pre-
sented in this paper), space charge becomes important.
The density is then a local function of both trap po-
tential and space charge potential. Since the latter de-
pends on the density distribution over the whole space,

a self-consistent density distribution arises, whose shape
exhibits a non-trivial dependence on the trap potential
curvatures. For cylindrical symmetry, such plasmas are
spheroids (ellipses of revolution) and have been studied
both in linear rf and Penning traps [10, 12]. In absence
of cylindrical symmetry the shape has been predicted to
be that of an ellipsoid [13]. Ellipsoidal plasmas have al-
ready been observed and studied in Penning traps (see
[14] and references therein). In this work we describe the
observation and characterization of cold ellipsoidal plas-
mas in a linear rf trap. In particular, we have obtained
ellipsoidal crystals containing two diﬀerent ion species.
The linear rf trap used in this experiment consists of
four rods of radius r′ (inset in Fig.2), each divided into
three electrically isolated segments. A radio frequency
voltage VRF sin Ωt and a static voltage VDC are ap-
plied to the rods in a quadrupolar conﬁguration. Con-
ﬁnement along the trap axis (z-axis) is achieved by
raising the two end segments of each rod by a static
voltage VEC . When the Mathieu stability parameter
q = 2QVRF /mr2
0Ω2 ≪ 1, the independent motion of
the trapped ions (mass m) can be adequately described
by the motion in an harmonic eﬀective potential (pseu-
dopotential) Utrap(r) = m
i /2 [15], and an addi-
tional jitter motion at the radio frequency Ω, the so-
P
called micromotion. r0 is the minimum distance from
the electrode surfaces to the trap axis. The axial (ωz)
and transverse (ωx and ωy) frequencies of the eﬀective
trap potential are given by ω2
x,y =
Q2V 2
0, where κ is a
constant determined by the trap geometry. For vanish-
ing static voltage VDC , ωx and ωy are degenerate. With
the application of a static voltage VDC 6= 0, a static
quadrupole potential is added to the eﬀective trap poten-
tial and the cylindrical symmetry is broken. The trans-
verse trap frequencies ωx and ωy increase and decrease,
respectively, until ωy vanishes for a suﬃciently large ap-
plied voltage VDC , which implies that the ion motion
along the y-direction becomes unstable.
In the ﬂuid phase, a trapped plasma in thermal equi-
librium at a given temperature T may be regarded as
a macroscopic charged ﬂuid with number density nf (r)
[2, 16]. This description leads to an expression for e.g.

z = 2κQVEC/m, ω2

z/2 ± QVDC /mr2

RF /(2m2Ω2r4

0) − ω2

i x2
ω2

the equilibrium shape of the trapped plasma. A particu-
larly simple analytical treatment is possible in the limit
of an ultracold plasma, when T → 0. In this case, the
equilibrium number density nf (r) is determined by the
condition of no net force on any plasma region. How-
ever, at very low temperatures, the plasma does not re-
main ﬂuid, but crystallizes with the appearance of shells
and a fairly complicate order. While the ﬂuid description
may be expected to become inaccurate in this case, it has
been shown to remain applicable as far as the shape of the
outer boundary is concerned and as long as the crystals
are suﬃciently large. For linear rf traps, this comparison
has so far only been performed for the case of cylindrical
symmetry (VDC = 0) [10].
In the eﬀective potential approximation, the absence of
net force implies a balance between the electric ﬁeld due
to the space charge potential φf (r) and the trap force
due to the eﬀective potential: Qφf (r) + Utrap(r) = const.
The number density follows directly from Poisson’s equa-
tion, nf (r) = (ǫ0/Q2)∆Utrap(r). For the harmonic ef-
fective potential of the linear rf trap with the above
trap frequencies the number density is explicitly given by
n0 = ǫ0V 2
0, which is constant within the ﬂuid
and independent of the static voltages VDC and VEC .
The outer shape of the zero temperature charged ﬂuid
with constant number density is an ellipsoid with princi-
pal axes Rx, Ry and L in the x-, y- and z-direction, re-
spectively [13]. With the additional boundary condition
that the electric space charge potential φf (r) vanishes at
inﬁnity, the potential inside the ﬂuid is given by

RF /mΩ2r4

φf (r) =

[Ax(R2

x − x2) + Ay(R2

y − y2)+

Qn0
4ǫ0

(1)

+Az(L2 − z2)] ,

where the dimensionless functions Ax, Ay and Az depend
on the principal axes Rx, Ry and L [13]. Force balance
implies that the Ai satisfy ω2
i = Q2n0Ai/2mǫ0. The
ratios of the principal axes Rx/L and Ry/L can thus be
calculated by solving the set of equations

2

2

ωx
ωz (cid:19)

(cid:18)

=

Ax(Rx/L, Ry/L)
Az(Rx/L, Ry/L)

ωy
ωz (cid:19)

(cid:18)

=

Ay(Rx/L, Ry/L)
Az(Rx/L, Ry/L)

.

(2)

For VDC = 0, ωx and ωy are equal, and the equilibrium
shape of the zero temperature charged ﬂuid is a spheroid
with radius R := Rx = Ry and half length L. The two
equations (2) then reduce to a single equation for the
aspect ratio R/L. Hornekær et al.
[10, 11] have found
good agreement between this theory and experimental
aspect ratios of a large variety of spheroidal 40Ca+ ion
crystals, obtained by varying the end-cap voltage VEC
and radio frequency amplitude VRF .
We have tested the predictions of the charged ﬂuid

2

model in a fully anisotropic eﬀective trap potential using
a laser-cooled 9Be+ ensemble. The linear trap properties
were r0 = 4.32 mm, a radio frequency Ω/2π = 14.2 MHz
with an amplitude VRF = 380 V. This resulted in a
small Mathieu stability parameter of q = 0.055, implying
that the micromotion was relatively small and that the
eﬀective potential description is appropriate. For axial
conﬁnement, VEC = 4.5 V was applied to the trap end
segments, giving rise to κ = 3.0 · 10−3/mm2, an axial
frequency of ωz = 2π · 85 kHz, and a transverse frequency
of ωr = 2π · 268 kHz. Experimentally, both values
were obtained from a measurement of the transverse
frequency as a function of VEC , in absence of VDC . This
was done by external excitation of the radial motion
of gas phase 9Be+ ions in the harmonic trap potential,
which was detected by a drop of the ﬂuorescence signal
from the laser cooled 9Be+ ions [17].
When the eﬀective trap potential is made anisotropic
by application of VDC the predicted instability limit
is 4.96 V. We observe partial particle loss when VDC
exceeds 4.2 V and total loss at VDC = 4.9 V. To prevent
particle loss, we limited VDC to a maximum of 4.2 V,
corresponding to an increase of the transverse trap
frequency ωx/2π from 268 kHz to 365 kHz and a decrease
of ωy/2π from 268 kHz to 104 kHz. Experimentally, the
two transverse frequencies ωx and ωy can be measured
by secular excitation.
The trap was loaded with 9Be+ ions by evaporating
beryllium atoms from an oven and ionizing them in
the trap center by electron impact. The trapped 9Be+
ions, initially forming a hot plasma cloud of ≈ 1000 K,
were laser cooled by laser radiation at 313 nm until they
ﬁnally underwent a phase transition to a crystalline
state with a temperature of a few mK. A description
of the all-solid-state laser system is given in [18]. To
image the 9Be+ ion crystals, a CCD camera was placed
transverse to the trap axis. Fig.1 shows an ion crystal
containing ≃ 2.0 × 103 9Be+, at diﬀerent values of VDC .
The estimate of the ion number in Fig.1 (a) is obtained
from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations in which
the observed structure (especially the number of shells)
is reproduced [19]. For the test of the calibration of the
CCD optics magniﬁcation as well as the determination
of absolute dimensions of the ion plasmas, we also use
the MD simulations. As a check, multiplying the volume
4πR2
45L/3 of the crystal shown in Fig.1 (a) and the cold
ﬂuid model density n0, we obtain the value ≃ 2.0 × 103.
This agrees well with the MD results and implies that
the model is applicable for large crystals.
In the outer region of the crystal shown in Fig.1 the ions
are arranged in concentric shells, while the core appears
to be ﬂuid. The size of the liquid core appears to increase
with applied static quadrupole potential. A possible
explanation for this behavior is the increased thermal
motion of the ions in the core, which was reproduced
by MD simulations and is a subject of ongoing studies.

3

x

y

2R x

z

2R 45

y2R
r0

2 ’r

FIG. 1: CCD images of a large ion crystal containing ≃ 2.0 ×
103 9Be+, taken perpendicular to the z-axis and at 45◦ to the
x- and y-axes, for diﬀerent values of VDC. Dashed lines: ﬁts of
ellipses with principal axes R45 and L to the outermost shells.
(a): VDC = 0, the eﬀective trap potential has cylindrical
symmetry. The ion crystal is a prolate spheroid with radius
Rx = Ry = R45 and half length L. The aspect ratio R45/L =
0.178. (b)-(e): VDC 6= 0, the cylindrical symmetry is broken
and the crystal is an ellipsoid with principal axes Rx < R45,
Ry > R45 and L. With increasing VDC the crystal expands
in the y-direction and compresses in the x- and z-directions,
while maintaining constant volume. VDC is set to 1.8 (b),
2.8 (c), 3.6 (d) and 4.2 V (e), leading to an aspect ratio of
R45/L = 0.193 (b), 0.235 (c), 0.309 (d), and 0.413 (e). For a
deﬁnition of Rx, Ry and R45 see inset of Fig.2.

In contrast to the observation of partially crystallized
large plasmas, we found that under similar laser cooling
parameters small plasmas containing only a few hundred
9Be+ ions always crystallized completely.
The left
central part of the ion crystal contains a dark region,
which consists of sympathetically cooled ions originating
from the residual gas and having a mass smaller than
that of 9Be+, pushed to one side by radiation pressure
[20].
The ellipsoidal deformation is a reversible process if the
maximum value of VDC is kept within the range stated
above: after turning VDC oﬀ, the principal axes R45 and
L of the crystal returned to the initial values, indicating
that no ions were lost during deformation. The outer
boundaries of the crystals in Fig.1 can be well described
by ellipses with principal axes R45 and L. Since the
CCD camera takes a projection along an axis at 45◦ with
respect to the x- and y-axes, the principal axis R45 of
each ellipse is related to the principal axes Rx and Ry of
the corresponding ellipsoid by R45 = [(R2
y)/2]1/2.

x + R2

FIG. 2: Comparison of the aspect ratio R45/L of a par-
tially crystallized 9Be+ plasma and the cold ﬂuid prediction
for zero-temperature ellipsoidal plasmas, as a function of the
ratio ωz/ωy between the axial and the smallest transverse
trap frequency. Full squares: large crystals from Fig.1. Open
(gray) circles: small (medium-size) crystals from Fig.3. Dot-
ted line: R45/L for a low-density plasma in the gas phase with
negligible particle interactions, leading to Rx/L = ωz/ωx,
Ry/L = ωz/ωy.
Inset: Cross-section of linear trap and of
ellipsoidal plasma. Observation direction as in Fig.1.

For the last crystal
in the sequence, the boundary
shows clear deviations from an ellipse; we attribute this
to the presence of sympathetically cooled impurities
of higher mass than 9Be+,
located at larger radii as
compared to 9Be+. The asymmetry along the trap axis
is caused by cooling light pressure, which is not felt
by the sympathetically cooled ions.
In this case, the
elliptical ﬁt has been chosen to match the fragments of
the outermost shell, which still exist at the left and right
ends of the crystal.
Fig.2 shows a comparison between the measured aspect
ratio R45/L and the theoretical result from Eq.(2).
The agreement between experiment and theory is good,
considering that the 9Be+ ion crystals did exhibit two
phases and were not pure.
In addition, a systematic
deviation between theory and experiment is expected
at the largest applied voltages VDC because then the
smallest ellipsoid dimension, Rx, becomes comparable
to the shell spacing. In this limit, the cold ﬂuid model
continuum description is inaccurate.
The cold ﬂuid model also determines the relative change
of the crystal length 2L when VDC is changed. For the
actual trap settings 2L is expected to decrease to 83%
from its initial value, when changing VDC from 0 to
4.2 V. The length of the crystal in the last image (e) in
Fig.1 is 84% of the initial one (a), in good agreement

with the expected compression. Therefore, while at
large VDC the observed transverse crystal shape starts
to deviate from the predictions of the cold ﬂuid model,
the axial shape is still in good agreement, since the axial
dimension of the crystal remains large compared to the
shell spacing.
While for large Coulomb crystals a spatially averaged
description is a good ﬁrst approximation,
in small
crystals one may expect eﬀects related to the particle
structure to show up clearly. As an example, Fig.3 (a)-
(d) shows a crystal containing about 20 9Be+ ions and
several sympathetically cooled low-mass impurities.
In
an eﬀective trap potential with cylindrical symmetry,
the crystal exhibits a single 9Be+ shell, Fig.3 (a). This
shell appears smeared out in the CCD image (exposure
time: 2 s), possibly because of a rotation-like diﬀusion
of the ions around the trap axis. In the ellipsoidal crys-
tals, Fig.3(b)-(d), this diﬀusion is suppressed because
it would require overcoming an energy barrier, and
therefore the image shows individual ions. The most
apparent property arising when the static voltage VDC
is increased is the completely dark region containing
the sympathetically cooled particles.
Furthermore,
some of the ﬂuorescence spots representing 9Be+ ions
appear smeared out and show a reduced intensity.
We attribute this to the micromotion occuring at the
locations of these ions. As a test, we shifted the crystal
by means of an additional static voltage applied to
one trap electrode. This caused a rearrangement of
the 9Be+ relative to the dark core, but those ions that
appeared well deﬁned were always in the same region.
Although the small crystal (a)-(d) in Fig.3 does not
exhibit closed boundaries, we could still ﬁt ellipses to
them.
In order to compare such small crystals with
the cold ﬂuid model, half of the typical shell spacing of
29 µm was added to R45 and L before calculating the
ratio R45/L. The results are indicated by open circles in
Fig.2. Even for this case there is a good agreement with
the cold ﬂuid model. Finally, in Fig.3 (e)-(h) we also
present a medium-sized crystal containing ≃ 500 9Be+
ions and, again, additional low-mass impurities. The
corresponding aspect ratio data as well as an additional
data point for VDC = 2.2 V, reported in Fig.2, also
show good agreement with theory. However, for large
and medium-sized crystals a deviation between theory
and experiment becomes obvious as the values for the
static voltage VDC increase. Our molecular dynamics
simulations show, that the observed deviations can be
explained by small (< 15%) admixtures of sympatheti-
cally cooled molecular impurities, in particular, H+
2 /H+
3
ions close to the trap axis originating from residual
gas contaminants, and BeH+ ions located in the outer
regions of the crystals formed by chemical reactions.
The pronounced asymmetric ion distribution in the
small, Fig.3 (a)-(d), as well as in the medium-sized
crystal, Fig.3 (e)-(h), is not due to the broken cylindrical

4

FIG. 3: Left: small crystal containing ≃ 20 9Be+ ions and
a smaller number of sympathetically cooled impurity ions at
diﬀerent values of the static voltage VDC: 0 V (a), 2.8 V (b),
3.6 V (c), and 4.2 V (d). Right: medium-size crystal contain-
ing ≃ 500 9Be+ ions. VDC is set to 0 V (a), 1.4 V (b), 2.8 V
(c), and 4.0 V (d). The asymmetric ion distribution in (b)-(d)
and (f)-(h) is due to stray electric ﬁelds.

symmetry of the trap potential, as this does not produce
any visible asymmetry in the CCD images.
Instead,
we attribute the asymmetric ion distribution to stray
potentials. While it was not possible to compensate
for these imperfections by additional static voltages, it
was always possible to reverse the asymmetry by means
of these voltages. Our MD simulations conﬁrm this
interpretation.
A direct estimate for the translational temperature of
the Be+ is obtained from the spectral
line shape of
its ﬂuorescence as the cooling laser is tuned towards
resonance and the ion ensemble crystallizes.
Since
the temperature of the particles changes during the
frequency scan, we ﬁt a Voigt proﬁle to each point of the
recorded ﬂuorescence curve to determine an upper limit
for the Be+ temperature. For small crystals (<1000
particles), we ﬁnd an upper limit for the temperature at
the end of the scan of 42 mK. However, the accuracy of
this method is limited due to the experimental resolu-
tion. An indirect upper limit is obtained by comparing
the size of the ion spots with MD simulations; here we
ﬁnd a tighter limit of <10 mK for the Be+ temperature.
We deduce, assuming thermal equilibrium, that the
temperature of the sympathetically cooled impurity ions
in Fig.3 is <10 mK.
In summary, we have studied the static behavior of
Coulomb crystals in a fully anisotropic eﬀective trap
potential. We have found a good agreement with the
simple cold ﬂuid plasma model for small anisotropy.
For larger anisotropy, deviations could be explained
by the presence of additional, sympathetically cooled,

5

[2] D.H.E. Dubin and T.M. O’Neil, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 87

(1999).

[3] W.L. Slattery, G.D. Doolen, and H.E. DeWitt, Phys.

Rev. A 21, 2087 (1980).

[4] F. Diedrich et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2931 (1987).
[5] M.G. Raizen et al., J. Mod. Opt. 39, 233 (1992).
[6] M. Drewsen el al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2878 (1998).
[7] M.D. Lukin, S.F. Yelin, and M. Fleischhauer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 84, 4232 (2000).

[8] D.J. Berkeland et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2089 (1998).
[9] S. Schiller and C. L¨ammerzahl, Phys. Rev. A 68, 053406
(2003), S. Schiller and V. I. Korobov, submitted to Phys.
Rev. A.

[10] L. Hornekær et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1994 (2001).
[11] L. Hornekær, PhD thesis, Aarhus Univ. (2000).
[12] L.R. Brewer et al., Phys. Rev. A 38, 859 (1988).
[13] D. H. E. Dubin, Phys. Fluids B 5, 295 (1992).
[14] X.-P. Huang, Phys. Plasmas 5, 1656 (1998).
[15] H. G. Dehmelt, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 3, 53 (1967).
[16] L. Turner, Phys. Fluids 30, 3196 (1987).
[17] T. Baba and I. Waki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 35, L 1134

(1996).

[18] H. Schnitzler et al., Appl. Optics, 41, 7000 (2002).
[19] H. Wenz, private communication.
[20] B. Roth, U. Fr¨ohlich, and S. Schiller, submitted.

ion species. From an experimental point of view, the
ability to reversibly deform a crystal permits to separate
lower-mass sympathetically cooled ions from the laser-
cooled ions. This allows to obtain a clearer picture of
the impurity ion ensemble, without any background or
foreground ﬂuorescence from laser-cooled ions. This will
also permit to manipulate the sympathetically cooled
ions in a more direct way. The ability to generate a
variety of ellipsoidal crystals opens up several directions
for further study, e.g. oscillation modes of such crystals,
and in particular the modes of two-species crystals.
These modes could be of importance for identiﬁcation
of the non-ﬂuorescent species. On the theoretical side,
it is of interest to perform detailed studies of structures
using MD simulations, which are able to take fully
into account the particle nature of the cold plasmas.
As an example, our MD simulations have shown that
in strongly squeezed ellipsoids closed ion rings can
occur. These represent a novel form of low-dimensional
artiﬁcial structure whose detailed investigation should
be of signiﬁcant interest.
We thank H. Wenz for the MD simulations. This work
was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
and the EU Network ”Ultracold Molecules”.

[1] R.C. Davidson, Physics of Nonneutral Plasmas, (Impe-

rial College Press, 2001).

