5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Anomalous diﬀusion, clustering, and pinch of impurities in plasma edge turbulence

M. Priego,∗ O. E. Garcia, V. Naulin, and J. Juul Rasmussen
Association EURATOM–Risø National Laboratory, OPL-128 Risø, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark
(Dated: January 7, 2005)

The turbulent transport of impurity particles in plasma edge turbulence is investigated. The
impurities are modeled as a passive ﬂuid advected by the electric and polarization drifts, while the
ambient plasma turbulence is modeled using the two-dimensional Hasegawa–Wakatani paradigm for
resistive drift-wave turbulence. The features of the turbulent transport of impurities are investigated
by numerical simulations using a novel code that applies semi-Lagrangian pseudospectral schemes.
The diﬀusive character of the turbulent transport of ideal impurities is demonstrated by relative-
diﬀusion analysis of the evolution of impurity puﬀs. Additional eﬀects appear for inertial impurities
as a consequence of compressibility. First, the density of inertial impurities is found to correlate with
the vorticity of the electric drift velocity, that is, impurities cluster in vortices of a precise orientation
determined by the charge of the impurity particles. Second, a radial pinch scaling linearly with the
mass–charge ratio of the impurities is discovered. Theoretical explanation for these observations is
obtained by analysis of the model equations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

One of the persistent problems in the development of a
magnetic fusion reactor is the degradation of plasma con-
ﬁnement caused by turbulent transport. In spite of the
strong conﬁning magnetic ﬁeld, high levels of energy and
charged-particle transport across magnetic ﬁeld lines are
observed in a variety of experimental conﬁgurations, such
as tokamaks and stellarators. This transport has received
the adjective “anomalous,” as its features cannot be ex-
plained by the classical or neoclassical collisional theo-
ries. Instead, anomalous transport is generally attributed
to small-scale, electrostatic plasma turbulence.1,2 In par-
ticular, the transport in the plasma edge is believed to
be largely controlled by drift-wave turbulence, which ap-
pears naturally in this region as a result of the strong
radial pressure gradient. The drift-wave transport mech-
anism has been the subject of much theoretical and ex-
perimental research over the past several decades, and
was recently reviewed by Horton.2 Nevertheless, much of
this transport phenomenon is yet to be fully understood.
Another important problem in the quest for controlled
thermonuclear fusion that is linked to turbulence con-
cerns the impurity content of the plasma. The properties
of fusion plasmas are strongly inﬂuenced by the presence
of impurities. For instance, impurities enhance radiative
energy losses and dilute the hydrogen fuel within the hot
plasma center, at the same time being the main agents in
the erosion and deposition processes that aﬀect plasma-
facing components.3 Consequently, the understanding of
the transport mechanisms that control the impurity con-
tent in the plasma is of crucial importance for the per-
formance and safe operation of future fusion devices.

The transport of impurity particles across the mag-

∗Also at Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Den-
mark and Departamento de Fluidos y Calor, Universidad Pontiﬁcia
Comillas–ICAI; E-mail address: martin.priego@telefonica.net

netic ﬁeld is related to that of the bulk plasma, since the
motion perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld of all charged
particles in the plasma is dominated by one same velocity
ﬁeld, the electric drift velocity. In this sense, impurities
and bulk plasma are partly subject to a common mech-
anism of turbulent transport, which relates the problem
of conﬁnement to that of controlling the impurity con-
tent. However, the distinctive nature of impurity parti-
cles, notably their mass and electric charge, as well as
their diﬀerent inﬂuence on the plasma allow for dispari-
ties between the transport of impurities and that of the
bulk plasma.
In fact, recent experiments not only re-
veal disparities in the transport of impurities and bulk
plasma,4 but also in that of diﬀerent impurity species.5
In such experimental investigations impurity transport is
usually characterized in terms of eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cients and drift velocities, the latter also known as pinch
velocities.1,6 These transport coeﬃcients are typically de-
termined by analysis of the temporal evolution of injected
impurity puﬀs. While the explanation for the diﬀusive
character of turbulent transport goes back to the work
of Taylor and Richardson in the 1920s,7,8 the origin of
the anomalous pinch velocities is still a matter of intense
research.6 Moreover, the inward pinch observed in lab-
oratory experiments tends to concentrate the impurities
in the center of the plasma column,1 precisely where they
are least wanted, and thus constitutes one of the major
unresolved transport problems in fusion plasma physics.

In this contribution we investigate the turbulent trans-
port of impurities in a generic model for plasma edge tur-
bulence. Speciﬁcally, the investigations are based on the
simple and extensively studied model for resistive drift-
wave turbulence proposed by Hasegawa and Wakatani.9
For the impurities, we use a consistent passive-ﬂuid
model that takes into account impurity-particle inertia,
that is to say,
it contemplates the polarization drift.
This enables the model to exhibit diﬀerent transport fea-
tures depending on the mass and charge of the impuri-
ties, as observed in laboratory experiments. In particu-
lar, the polarization drift brings compressibility into the

model, giving rise to subtle yet qualitatively important
eﬀects. The investigations are carried out by numerical
simulations of the model equations using a newly devel-
oped code that applies semi-Lagrangian pseudospectral
schemes. We proceed separately for ideal (i.e., massless)
impurities and inertial ones. In the case of ideal impuri-
ties, we focus on the phenomenon of turbulent diﬀusion,
which is studied from the relative-diﬀusion perspective.
For inertial impurities, we concentrate on the new eﬀects
that arise from compressibility. First, the density of in-
ertial impurities is found to correlate with the vorticity
of the electric drift velocity, that is, impurities cluster in
vortices of a precise orientation determined by the charge
of the impurity particles. This behavior is a direct conse-
quence of compression by the polarization drift and tur-
bulent mixing. Second, we discover a radial pinch that
scales linearly with the mass–charge ratio of the impuri-
ties. An understanding of this phenomenon is obtained
by analysis of the evolution equation for the global im-
purity ﬂux.

This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II the model
for resistive drift-wave turbulence and the passive-ﬂuid
model for the impurities are described. The diﬀusive ef-
fect of turbulence is demonstrated in Sec. III for the case
of ideal impurities. The eﬀects that arise from impurity
inertia, the clustering and the anomalous radial pinch,
are respectively presented in Secs. IV and V. The results
are summarized and discussed in Sec. VI. Lastly, the Ap-
pendix is devoted to a brief description of the numerical
schemes applied in the simulations.

II. MODEL EQUATIONS

In this section we provide a brief presentation of the
resistive drift-wave paradigm used for modeling the tur-
bulence at the plasma edge. We also describe the passive-
ﬂuid model for the impurity species, which takes into ac-
count impurity-particle inertia.

A. Resistive drift-wave turbulence

As a basic model

for plasma edge turbulence we
consider the two-dimensional (2D) Hasegawa–Wakatani
(HW) model for resistive drift-wave turbulence:9

where

Dt(n − x) = C(ϕ − n) + µn∇2

⊥n,

Dtω = C(ϕ − n) + µω∇2

⊥ω,

ω ≡ ∇2

⊥ϕ,

Dt ≡ ∂t + ˆz × ∇⊥ϕ · ∇⊥.

(1a)

(1b)

(1c)

(1d)

Here, n denotes the ﬂuctuating component of the plasma
density, ϕ is the electrostatic potential, and ω is the vor-
ticity of the electric drift velocity vE = ˆz × ∇⊥ϕ.

2

The HW model assumes an unperturbed, uniform
magnetic ﬁeld in the z-direction, that is, B = B0ˆz. The
x- and y-directions correspond respectively to the radial
and the poloidal directions in a slab at the edge of the
conﬁned plasma. The electrons are assumed isothermal
with temperature Te, whereas the ions are considered
cold. The equilibrium plasma density n0 is assumed to
be homogeneous in the poloidal direction and to decrease
in the radial direction in such a way that the equilib-
rium density length scale Ln ≡ n0/|dn0/dx| is constant.
Hence, in this thin-layer approximation the second term
on the left-hand side of Eq. (1a) actually represents the
advection of the inhomogeneous equilibrium plasma den-
sity by the electric drift.

The quantities in Eqs. (1) have been made dimension-

less using the gyro-Bohm normalization:

x
ρs

y
ρs

→ x,

→ y, t

→ t,

→ n,

→ ϕ.

cs
Ln

n
n0

Ln
ρs

eϕ
Te

Ln
ρs

Here, cs ≡ (Te/mi)1/2 is the sound speed and ρs ≡
(miTe)1/2/eB0 is the the drift scale, that is, the ion gyro-
radius at the sound speed. The parameter C coupling
Eqs. (1a) and (1b) is known as the adiabaticity parame-
ter, and is deﬁned as

C ≡

Te
e2ηqn0

k2
q
cs/Ln

.

Here, ηq is the parallel resistivity and kq is the single
parallel wave number that is considered in the reduc-
tion to a 2D model.
In the strongly collisional limit
C → 0, Eq. (1b) reduces to the 2D Navier–Stokes vor-
ticity equation. In this so-called hydrodynamic limit the
equations become decoupled and the plasma density is
passively advected by the electric drift velocity. In the
weakly collisional limit C → ∞, the adiabatic electron
response yields Boltzmann-distributed density perturba-
tions, n ≈ ϕ, and the HW model reduces to the well-
known Hasegawa–Mima equation.10

The diﬀusive terms in Eqs. (1a) and (1b) correspond
respectively to the collisional diﬀusion of electrons and
the ion viscosity. These dissipative processes are essen-
tial for the stabilization of resistive drift modes as well
as for the feasibility of numerically simulating the HW
model. Linear analysis of the HW model reveals the ex-
istence of unstable modes for 0 < C < ∞, with all modes
being unstable in the absence of dissipation.11,12 It is the
combination of this linear instability with nonlinear in-
teraction through the advective terms and dissipation at
small scales that leads to quasistationary turbulent states
within the HW model.
In particular, when initialized
with a broadband set of small-amplitude, random-phase
modes, the system evolves in two stages: ﬁrst, a linear
phase in which the linearly unstable modes grow and the
damped ones decay; second, a phase of nonlinear satura-
tion leading to a quasistationary turbulent state whose
statistics solely depend on the parameters of the HW
model.

3

Two relevant nonlinear invariants in the HW model
are the total energy E and the generalized enstrophy U ,
deﬁned as

turbulence model, the ﬂow velocity of the impurities is
hence given by

vθ = vE + vp = ˆz × ∇⊥ϕ − ζDt∇⊥ϕ,

E ≡

(n2 + |∇⊥ϕ|2) dx,

where

1
2 Z

1
2 Z

U ≡

(n − ω)2 dx.

ζ ≡

mθ
qθ

e
mi

ρs
Ln

.

The evolution of these quantities within the HW model
is governed by

dE
dt

dU
dt

= Γn − Γc − DE,

= Γn − DU ,

where

Γn ≡ −

n∂yϕ dx,

Γc ≡ C

(n − ϕ)2 dx,

Z

Z

Z

Z

DE ≡

(µn|∇⊥n|2 + µω|∇⊥ω|2) dx,

DU ≡

∇⊥(n − ω) · ∇⊥(µnn − µωω) dx.

Hence, Γn is the only source in the system, and corre-
sponds to energy extracted from the equilibrium density
gradient. Conversely, Γc is a sink corresponding to re-
sistive dissipation through the parallel current, while DE
and DU are sinks arising from collisionality and viscosity.
Being the sole source of energy and generalized enstrophy
source within the HW model, Γn is in practice positive
deﬁnite.11 This fact is used in Sec. V to identify a source
for radial drift of impurities.

B.

Impurity passive-ﬂuid model

Impurities are here regarded as a passive species, that
is, they are advected by the turbulence but do not have
any inﬂuence on it. This is a reasonable approximation
for the situation in which the density of impurity par-
ticles is much lower than that of the bulk plasma. The
modeling of the dynamics of impurities is consistent with
that of the turbulence, in that it also follows from the
drift-ordered ﬂuid approach and the assumption of un-
perturbed, uniform magnetic ﬁeld.

The impurities are characterized by a density θ and
a ﬂow velocity vθ. Just as in the case of the ions in
the bulk plasma, the impurities are assumed cold, with
their motion parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld likewise being
neglected. Therefore, the motion of the impurity ﬂuid
comprises only the electric drift vE and the polarization
drift vp. Under the same normalization applied to the

Here, mθ and qθ are respectively the mass and the electric
charge of the impurity particles. The impurity model
resulting from the continuity equation is thus given by

Dtθ − ∇⊥ ·

θζDt∇⊥ϕ
(cid:1)
(cid:0)

= µθ∇2

⊥θ,

(2)

where the term on the right-hand side arises from colli-
sional diﬀusion.

The polarization drift, which represents the eﬀect of
impurity-particle inertia, constitutes a higher-order cor-
rection to the electric drift velocity. The inﬂuence of
the former on the dynamics of impurities is determined
by the dimensionless parameter ζ, which varies with the
mass–charge ratio of the impurity particles relative to
that of the bulk-plasma ions. For ideal impurities ζ = 0
and the impurities are solely advected by the electric
drift. For inertial impurities ζ has a nonzero value and
the polarization drift can play a role in the dynamics.
The value of ζ is in any case small, since the length scale
quotient ρs/Ln is by assumption small. Nevertheless, the
polarization drift adds important qualitative features to
the dynamics of impurities.
In the case of static, uni-
form magnetic ﬁeld the electric drift is incompressible,
whereas the polarization drift is compressible. Hence, the
inclusion of the polarization drift in the impurity model
allows for genuinely compressible eﬀects, such as those
described in Secs. IV and V.

III. DIFFUSION OF IDEAL IMPURITIES

Theoretical studies of the diﬀusive eﬀect of plasma
edge turbulence on passively advected impurities have
previously relied on analysis of the absolute dispersion
of test particles.13,14 The present approach is necessarily
diﬀerent, as the impurities are not modeled here as parti-
cles but as a ﬂuid. In this section we investigate the tur-
bulent diﬀusion of ideal impurities by relative-diﬀusion
analysis of the evolution of impurity puﬀs.15,16

A. Relative diﬀusion

We consider the release of a puﬀ of ideal impurities into
the turbulent ﬁeld, which is a saturated turbulent state
described by the HW model. The amount of impurities
released is

Q ≡

θ dx,

Z

and the position c of the center of mass of the impurity
puﬀ at any time instant is given by

evolution of Sii can be characterized by eﬀective diﬀusiv-
ities Di such that

c ≡

xθ dx.

1
Q Z

dSii
dt

= 2Di.

4

(3)

We deﬁne the relative position vector x′ ≡ x − c, which
indicates position in a reference frame moving with the
center of mass of the puﬀ. The average evolution of im-
purity puﬀs can then be characterized by the following
ensemble-averaged dispersion tensors:

Σij ≡

xixj θ dx

Sij ≡

′
′
j θ dx
ix
x

1
Q (cid:28)Z

1
Q (cid:28)Z

,

,

(cid:29)

(cid:29)

Mij ≡ hcicji .

Here, the components of vectors and tensors have been
indicated by subindices and the angular brackets stand
for the ensemble average, that is, the average over many
releases. The absolute-dispersion tensor Σij measures the
dispersion with respect to the origin of the ﬁxed frame,
whereas the relative-dispersion tensor Sij measures the
dispersion relative to the center of mass. The tensor Mij
quantiﬁes the “meandering” of the center of mass. The
dispersion tensors are related by

Σij = Sij + Mij,

which means that absolute dispersion consists of rela-
tive dispersion and meandering of the center of mass.
Relative-diﬀusion analysis focuses on the evolution of Sij,
that is, on the spreading of the puﬀ relative to its center
of mass. Speciﬁcally, it is usually the diagonal elements
Sii that are of interest once the reference axes are ade-
quately selected, in our case those corresponding to the
radial and poloidal directions. In view of the above rela-
tion, the meandering of the center of mass is eliminated
in relative-diﬀusion analysis, which thus leads to better
statistics in comparison with those of absolute diﬀusion.
The evolution of the dispersion tensors depends on the
initial size and shape of the puﬀs, the statistical prop-
erties of the turbulent velocity ﬁeld, and the collisional
diﬀusivity µθ. Under the assumption that µθ is small,
the evolution of Sii for initially concentrated puﬀs fol-
lows three stages: ﬁrst, a phase dominated by collisional
diﬀusion that lasts while the puﬀ is much smaller than
the turbulent structures and is characterized by

dSii
dt

≈ 2µθ;

second, a transitional phase in which the size of the puﬀ
is comparable to that of the turbulent structures and Sii
typically evolve faster than linearly with time (see Ref. 15
for further discussions); and last, a phase dominated by
turbulent diﬀusion that starts when the puﬀ is large com-
pared to the turbulent structures and during which the

These diﬀusivities solely depend on the statistical prop-
erties of the turbulent velocity ﬁeld—more precisely,
they are related to the mean squared velocities and the
Lagrangian relative time scale.

The last phase, dominated by turbulent diﬀusion, is
most relevant for us, as it eventually dominates the trans-
port of impurities. In fact, the eﬀective diﬀusivities Di
that characterize the phase of turbulent diﬀusion are
equivalent in their deﬁnition to those employed in the ex-
perimental modeling of anomalous impurity transport.1,6
Because in this last stage the diagonal elements Sii grow
linearly according to Eq. (3), the eﬀective diﬀusivities Di
can easily be obtained from the asymptotic evolution of
Sii. This is the procedure used here for estimating the
eﬀective diﬀusivities of the turbulent ﬁeld acting on ideal
impurities. In principle, any initial puﬀs could be used for
the determination of the diﬀusivities. From the discus-
sion above, large initial puﬀs rapidly experience the ﬁnal
phase of turbulent diﬀusion, and thus provide the eﬀec-
tive diﬀusivities shortly after their release. However, care
must be taken in numerical simulations that the puﬀs do
not reach the boundaries of the simulation domain, as
this would result in underestimates for the diﬀusivities.
In order to determine the eﬀective diﬀusivity in one di-
rection, we take Gaussian stripes in the perpendicular
direction as initial puﬀs and use periodic boundary con-
ditions. In this way, the puﬀs are as large as possible in
one direction while the conclusions of the simulations re-
main valid. Moreover, because Gaussians are similarity
solutions to the diﬀusion equation, the evolution of Sii
would be perfectly linear if the eﬀect of turbulence were
purely diﬀusive from the start.

B. Simulation results

The HW model for plasma edge turbulence, Eqs. (1),
and the model for ideal impurities, Eq. (2) with ζ =
0, were simultaneously solved numerically using the
schemes described in the Appendix. The simulations
were carried out on a doubly periodic square domain of
side length 40 using 512 × 512 grid points. The viscosity
µω and the collisional diﬀusivities µn and µθ were set to
the common value 0.02 in all the simulations presented
in this paper. We considered four diﬀerent values for the
adiabaticity parameter C in the HW model: 0.5, 1, 2,
and 4. As noted in the preceding section, low values of C
correspond to hydrodynamic-like regimes, whereas high
values correspond to nearly adiabatic regimes. In this re-
spect, we regard C = 1 as a transitional value, representa-
tive of an intermediate regime. An initial turbulent state
was achieved by letting a uniform distribution of small-
amplitude, random-phase modes evolve for a suﬃciently

long time in order to reach a quasistationary saturated
turbulent regime. Gaussian stripes having standard devi-
ation 2 were used as initial impurity puﬀs. For each value
of the adiabaticity parameter and each direction, radial
and poloidal, 20 releases of such stripes were simulated,
and the dispersion tensors were subsequently averaged.

In Fig. 1 we present snapshots of the evolution of two
perpendicular stripes of impurities released into the same
saturated turbulent ﬁeld with C = 1. The anisotropy in
the diﬀusion of impurities is evident in the ﬁgure, as the
poloidal spread of the puﬀ in Fig. 1(e) is signiﬁcantly
larger than the corresponding radial spread in Fig. 1(f).
Hence, diﬀusion acts in this case faster in the poloidal
direction than in the radial direction. The degree of
anisotropy is in fact controlled by the adiabaticity pa-
rameter, the turbulence ranging from isotropic in hydro-
dynamic limit, C → 0, to strongly anisotropic in the adi-
abatic limit, C → ∞.13

The evolution of the diagonal elements Sii of the rela-
tive dispersion tensor for the four values of the adiabatic-
ity parameter is shown in Fig. 2. For the three smallest
values of C, it is possible to distinguish the transitional
and turbulent phases of growth in the plot for relative
radial dispersion. In the plot corresponding to poloidal
dispersion there is no clear distinction, as the evolution of
S22 very rapidly becomes approximately linear. For the
side length of our simulation domain, dispersion can start
becoming underestimated when Sii reach values of about
65. Nevertheless, for the three smallest values of C the
linear trend in Sii characterizing the phase of turbulent
diﬀusion is established before such a point is reached. In
contrast, the eventually linear regime is neither appar-
ent in the radial nor the poloidal dispersion plots for the
highest value of the adiabaticity parameter, C = 4. This
diﬀerent behavior is attributed to the weaker turbulence
at higher values of C and the particular transport features
of the adiabatic limit, the Hasegawa–Mima equation.17

Estimates for the eﬀective diﬀusivities Di of the turbu-
lence for the three smallest values of C are obtained from
linear ﬁts to the linear portions of the curves in Fig. 2.
The estimated values for the radial, D1, and poloidal, D2,
eﬀective diﬀusivities are presented in Table I. The values
obtained here are qualitatively similar to those calculated
in Ref. 13 by means of a test-particle, absolute-diﬀusion
approach. In particular, the decrease of D1 with C as well
as the rise of D2 with C for C ≥ 1 are here reproduced.
We note that the accuracy of the present approach could
be improved by simulating the evolution of the impurity
puﬀs for longer times on a larger domain. The number
of puﬀ releases could as well be increased in order to en-
sure convergence to the ensemble averages. We also note
that diﬀerent values for µω and µn were used in the lat-
ter reference, with collisional diﬀusion of impurities being
discarded because of their test-particle modeling.

5

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

FIG. 1: (Color online) Evolution of Gaussian stripes of ideal
impurities in a HW saturated turbulent state with C = 1:
radial stripe at (a) t = 0, (c) t = 6, and (e) t = 12; and
poloidal stripe at (b) t = 0, (d) t = 6, and (f) t = 12.

TABLE I: Eﬀective diﬀusivities in the radial direction D1
and the poloidal direction D2 of HW saturated turbulence
for diﬀerent values of C.

C

0.5
1
2

D1
1.12
0.65
0.36

D2
2.32
2.26
2.63

IV. CLUSTERING OF INERTIAL IMPURITIES

The importance of inertia in the advection of particles
by turbulent ﬂows is well known in ﬂuid dynamics.18 As
in magnetized plasmas, the transport of inertial particles
by ﬂuids shows compressible features even when the ad-
vecting ﬂow is incompressible. Particle inertia has been

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

2
2
S

1
1
S

0

0

5

10
t

15

20

FIG. 2: Evolution of the relative radial dispersion S11 and the
relative poloidal dispersion S22 of ideal impurity Gaussian
stripes released in HW saturated turbulence with C = 0.5
(solid), C = 1 (dashed), C = 2 (dotted), and C = 4 (dash-
dotted).

shown to result in clustering in vortical structures, and its
role in phenomena such as planetary formation has been
suggested.19 While the dynamics of impurity particles in
magnetized plasmas are not governed by the same forces
as in ﬂuids, inertia enters the dynamics of impurities in
magnetized plasmas in a similar way as the Coriolis force
enters those of heavy impurities in rotating ﬂuids. Hence,
corresponding clustering eﬀects for inertial impurities in
magnetized plasmas should be expected. In this section
we discover and explain the correlation between impurity
density and vorticity that results from the compressibility
introduced by the polarization drift in the case of inertial
impurities. In order to most clearly reveal this eﬀect we
consider a homogeneous initial distribution of impurities,
since such a distribution would remain unchanged in the
incompressible, that is, ideal-impurity case.

A. Simulation results

6

transitional value 1, while we contemplated various val-
ues for the parameter ζ, ranging from −0.01 to 0.05. The
impurity density ﬁeld θ was initialized with the constant
value θ0 = 1, and the initial turbulent ﬁelds were taken
from a HW saturated turbulent state.

In Fig. 3 we present side by side snapshots of the evo-
lution of the vorticity ω of the electric drift velocity and
the impurity density ﬁeld for the case ζ = 0.01. Merely
5 time units after the simulation is started, there is al-
ready indication of a correlation between vorticity and
impurity density. At t = 50, there is visually little diﬀer-
ence between the two ﬁelds. Figure 4 shows a scatter plot
of vorticity and relative impurity density θ/θ0 at t = 100
for three diﬀerent values of ζ. The plot clearly suggests
an approximate linear relation given by

θ/θ0 ≈ 1 + Kω,

with the regression coeﬃcient K depending on ζ. The
least-squares estimates of the coeﬃcient K are plotted
as a function of the parameter ζ in Fig. 5. This ﬁgure in
turn indicates a linear relation between K and ζ in the
form K ≈ 0.82ζ. In summary, we ﬁnd that the density
of inertial impurities eventually becomes linearly corre-
lated with the vorticity, the regression coeﬃcient being
proportional to the parameter ζ.

B. Turbulent mixing and clustering

The behavior just described can easily be explained
using an argument of turbulent mixing, or turbulent
equipartition.20,21,22 Performing basic algebraic manip-
ulations on Eq. (2) while accounting for the particular
deﬁnition of the Lagrangian derivative Dt in Eq. (1d),
we may rewrite the impurity model equation in the form

Dt(ln θ − ζω) = ζ∇⊥ ln θ · Dt∇⊥ϕ +

∇2

⊥θ,

(4)

µθ
θ

where the left-hand side describes advection by the elec-
tric drift and compression by the polarization drift, while
the right hand-side describes advection by the polar-
ization drift as well as collisional diﬀusion. We will
now argue that the right-hand side of this equation is
small, which implies that ln θ − ζω is approximately a
Lagrangian invariant, or in other words, that ln θ − ζω
is nearly conserved along the trajectories deﬁned by the
electric drift velocity. We split the impurity density θ
into its mean value θ0 and the ﬂuctuations θ1 arising from
compressibility. Based on the computational results, we
further postulate that θ1/θ0 = O(ζ). Selectively apply-
ing the split θ ≡ θ0 + θ1 to Eq. (4), we obtain

Simulations of the HW model for plasma edge turbu-
lence, Eqs. (1), and the impurity model, Eq. (2), were
again performed on a doubly periodic square domain of
side length 40 using 512 × 512 grid points. The adia-
baticity parameter C in the HW model was set to the

Dt(ln θ − ζω) = ζ∇⊥ ln

1 +

· Dt∇⊥ϕ +

∇2

⊥θ1.

θ1
θ0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

µθ
θ

Assuming that the normalizations used in the impurity
model adequately represent the scales of ﬂuctuations, the

7

0
θ
/
θ

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.01

0

K

0.02

(a)

(b)

−8 −6 −4 −2

2

4

6

8

0
ω

FIG. 4: (Color online) Scatter plot of vorticity ω and relative
density θ/θ0 of inertial impurities in a HW saturated turbu-
lent state with C = 1 for ζ = 0.05 (red/steepest), ζ = 0.01
(green), and ζ = 0.002 (blue/ﬂattest).

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

FIG. 3: (Color online) Evolution of the vorticity ω and the
density θ of inertial impurities (ζ = 0.01) in a HW saturated
turbulent state with C = 1: (a) ω and (b) θ at t = 0, (c) ω
and (d) θ at t = 5, and (e) ω and (f) θ at t = 50. Green corre-
sponds to mean values, while red and blue represent positive
and negative ﬂuctuations respectively.

right-hand side of this last equation is of order ζ2 + ζµθ,
whereas the ﬂuctuating component of the quantity inside
the Lagrangian derivative on left-hand side is of order ζ.
Hence, ln θ − ζω varies slowly along the electric drift tra-
jectories, thus constituting an approximate Lagrangian
invariant.

Turbulent mixing homogenizes Lagrangian invariants,
and thus tends to drive systems to states of so-called tur-
bulent equipartition. The application of this argument to
the approximate invariant here yields

ln θ − ζω ≈ const.

Because the amount of impurities is conserved and it is
assumed that θ1/θ0 = O(ζ), the previous expression can

−0.01

−0.01

0

0.01

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.02
ζ

FIG. 5: Least-squares estimates of the coeﬃcient K as a func-
tion of ζ for the impurity-density–vorticity linear regression
θ/θ0 ≈ 1 + Kω in a HW saturated turbulent state with C = 1.
The ﬁtted line (dashed) corresponds to K = 0.82ζ.

be recast into the simpler form

θ/θ0 ≈ 1 + ζω.

The present analysis thus predicts a linear relation be-
tween the impurity density and the vorticity, the regres-
sion coeﬃcient being the parameter ζ. Hence, the the-
oretical argument explains the eﬀect discovered in the
simulations up to a slight mismatch in the regression co-
eﬃcient. We emphasize that the particular features of
the HW turbulence model were not used in the previous
argument, the conclusions relying solely on the modeling
of the dynamics of impurities and the argument of tur-
bulent mixing. It follows that the clustering of inertial
impurities in vortical structures is a generic eﬀect, in-
dependent of the underlying instability mechanisms and
the speciﬁc characteristics of the turbulence.

The fact that the density of inertial impurities becomes
directly correlated with the vorticity implies that impu-
rities of positive charge cluster in positive vortices, the
opposite taking place for negatively charged impurities.
As previously introduced, this eﬀect is similar to the ag-

8

0.005

0

ˆx
·

θ

V

−0.005

−0.010

−0.015

−0.020

0

ˆx
·

θ

V

0.001

0

−0.001

−0.002

−0.003

−0.004

−0.005

gregation of heavy particles in anticyclonic vortices that
can take place in rotating ﬂuids as a result of the Coriolis
force.18 In contrast with compression by the polarization
drift, which yields Dtln θ ∼ ζDtω, compression by the
Coriolis force enters the dynamics of heavy impurities in
the form Dtln θ ∼ −2Ωω, with Ω being the overall rota-
tion. Hence, aggregation in the rotating-ﬂuid case does
not necessarily lead to a linear relation between impu-
rity density and vorticity, but can go on further to form
highly concentrated clusters in the cores of anticyclonic
vortices. For this reason, it has for example been sug-
gested as a mechanism, in combination with gravitation,
for planetary formation in rotating astrophysical disks.19

V. PINCH OF INERTIAL IMPURITIES

In this section we ﬁnally investigate the possible role
of inertia in the radially inward pinch that concentrates
impurities in the center of the plasma column in magnetic
conﬁnement devices.1,5 As a measure of the overall drift
of impurities, we consider the global impurity ﬂux

Γθ ≡ ΓE

θ + Γp

θ ≡

Z

θvE dx +

θvp dx.

Z

Here, we have distinguished the components respectively
resulting from advection by the electric drift and by the
In terms of these global ﬂuxes, we
polarization drift.
deﬁne the impurity drift velocity Vθ and its components
VE

θ and Vp

θ by means of

Vθ ≡ VE

θ + Vp

θ ≡ Q

−1ΓE

θ + Q

−1Γp
θ,

R

θ dx. For a homogeneous distri-
where once again Q ≡
bution of impurities in a periodic domain, both ΓE
θ and
Γp
θ are zero. Hence, ideal impurities cannot experience a
net drift when their initial distribution is homogeneous,
since such a distribution remains unchanged in the ideal
case.
In contrast, inertial impurities may experience a
drift even if their initial distribution is uniform, given
that the latter is altered by compressible eﬀects, as shown
in the preceding section.

A. Simulation results

We begin by monitoring the radial drift velocity Vθ · ˆx
in the simulations referred to in Sec. IV. These were
initialized with homogeneous distributions of inertial im-
purities in a HW saturated turbulent state with C = 1.
In Fig. 6 we present the evolution of the radial drift ve-
locity for four diﬀerent values of ζ.
In every case, the
evolution of the radial drift comprises a strong transient
burst, after which the drift enters a saturated quasista-
tionary regime. Moreover, the radial drift velocity is seen
to have a deﬁnite sign opposite to that of ζ, that is to say,
opposite to the type of charge of the impurity particles. It
follows that positively charged impurities are subject to

25

50

100

125

150

75
t

FIG. 6: Evolution of the radial drift velocity Vθ · ˆx of inertial
impurities in a HW saturated turbulent state with C = 1 for
ζ = −0.01 (solid), ζ = 0.005 (dashed), ζ = 0.02 (dotted), and
ζ = 0.05 (dash-dotted).

−0.01

0

0.01

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.02
ζ

FIG. 7: Time-averaged radial drift velocity Vθ · ˆx of inertial
impurities as a function of ζ in a HW saturated turbulent
with C = 1. The ﬁtted line (dashed) corresponds to Vθ · ˆx =
−0.090ζ.

a continuous radially inward drift, as observed in exper-
imental investigations of impurity transport.1,5 In Fig. 7
we show the time-averaged radial drift velocities Vθ · ˆx
in the saturated regimes, computed using the values of
the drifts between t = 25 and t = 150. The variation of
the time-averaged radial drift with ζ is remarkably linear,
well ﬁtted by Vθ · ˆx = −0.090ζ. Therefore, the present
radial drift scales linearly with the mass–charge ratio of
the impurity particles.

The reason for this peculiar pinch eﬀect is not clear
at the outset. An analysis of the components VE
θ and
Vp
θ of the drift velocity in the simulations reveals that
the contribution of the electric drift is by far dominant.
Hence, while the net drift arises as a result of the polar-
ization drift, the main role of the latter is not to globally
advect impurities, but rather to distribute them in such
a way that they experience net transport by the electric
drift. From a naive point of view, it could be thought
that the correlation between impurity density and vor-
ticity discovered in Sec. IV is responsible for the radial
Indeed, transport of trapped particles by coher-
drift.

ent vortices is for instance known to play an important
role in transport processes in rotating ﬂuids.18 However,
because an incompressible ﬂow in a 2D periodic domain
cannot globally transport its vorticity, a purely linear re-
lation between impurity density and vorticity would yield
no drift at all. Thus, the explanation for the radial drift
of inertial impurities requires deeper thought.

B. Net transport and pinch

Intrigued by the initial burst and the subsequent sat-
uration of the radial impurity drift velocity, we analyze
the evolution of the global impurity ﬂux. In particular,
we focus on the ΓE
θ component, given that the net trans-
port of impurities is dominated by the electric drift. In a
periodic domain, the evolution of ΓE
θ under the impurity
model in Eq. (2) is governed by

dΓE
θ
dt

= Λ1 + Λ2 + Λ3 + Λ4,

where

Λ1 ≡

θDtvE dx,

Λ2 ≡

ζθvEDtω dx,

Λ3 ≡

ζ(∇⊥θ · Dt∇⊥ϕ)vE dx,

Λ4 ≡

µθvE∇2

⊥θ dx.

Z

Z

Z

Z

These four contributions correspond respectively to evo-
lution of the electric drift velocity, compression by the po-
larization drift, advection by the polarization drift, and
collisional diﬀusion of impurities. In order to reveal the
magnitude of the diﬀerent terms, we again split the im-
purity density into its mean value θ0 and the ﬂuctuations
θ1, keeping in mind that θ1/θ0 = O(ζ). Selectively ap-
plying the split θ ≡ θ0 + θ1 to the above deﬁnitions we
obtain

Λ1 =

θ1DtvE dx = O(ζ),

Λ2 =

ζθvEDtω dx = O(ζ),

Λ3 =

ζ(∇⊥θ1 · Dt∇⊥ϕ)vE dx = O(ζ2),

Λ4 =

µθvE∇2

⊥θ1 dx = O(ζµθ).

Z

Z

Z

Z

According to these estimates, Λ1 and Λ2 dominate the
dynamics of the global impurity ﬂux. In the case of uni-
form impurity density, Λ2 is the only nonvanishing con-
tribution to dΓE
θ /dt, being therefore responsible for the
initial development of drift velocities.

9

We will now resort to the particular HW turbulence
model to show that Λ2 constitutes a source for global
radial ﬂux in the present case. Substitution of the HW
vorticity equation in the above expression for Λ2 yields

Λ2 =

ζθ

C(ϕ − n) + µω∇2

⊥ω

vE dx
(cid:3)

nvE dx + O(ζ2 + ζµω).

Z

(cid:2)
= −ζCθ0

Z

Projecting this equation onto the radial direction we ﬁnd

Λ2 · ˆx = −ζCθ0

n∂yϕ dx + O(ζ2 + ζµω)

Z

= −ζCθ0Γn + O(ζ2 + ζµω).

Here, we have identiﬁed the sole source Γn of energy and
generalized enstrophy within the HW model. Since Γn is
in practice positive deﬁnite (see, e.g., Table I in Ref. 11),
it follows that Λ2 · ˆx has a deﬁnite sign opposite to that
of ζ, thus acting as a source for the global radial ﬂux
of inertial impurities. As explained before, Λ2 is initially
the only nonzero contribution to dΓE
θ /dt, thus explaining
the transient bursts observed in Fig. 6. More generally,
this term sustains the radial transport of impurities in
the turbulent states described by the HW model.

From the above estimates, we are led to expect that
Λ1 is responsible for the saturation of the radial impu-
rity drift seen in Fig. 6. The reason for this saturation
becomes clear when we account for the correlation that
develops between impurity density and vorticity. The
argument of turbulent equipartition used in Sec. IV pre-
dicted an eventual relation θ1/θ0 ≈ ζω between the impu-
rity density ﬂuctuations and the vorticity. Considering
this relation and the fact that vorticity is not globally
transported by the electric drift we obtain

Λ1 ≈

ζθ0ωDtvE dx

Z

= ζθ0

ωvE dx − ζθ0

vEDtω dx

Z

= −

ζθ0vEDtω dx ≈ −Λ2

d
dt Z

Z

whenever turbulent equipartition holds true. Conse-
quently, when such a state is reached, the two terms
dominating the evolution of the radial drift approxi-
mately cancel, and the radial drift enters a quasista-
tionary regime. The time it takes for this regime to be
reached is independent of ζ, as the development of corre-
lation is exclusively dependent on the turbulent mixing
by the electric drift. In fact, the evolution of θ1 is approx-
imately linear with ζ within short time intervals, since in
line with the discussion in Sec. IV it follows that

Dtθ1 = ζθ0Dtω + O(ζ2 + ζµθ).

Given that solely the density ﬂuctuations yield net trans-
port of impurities, the evolution of the impurity drift is

10

likewise approximately linear with ζ. This explains the
apparent linear scaling of the curves in Fig. 6 and the
linearity of the time-averaged radial drift in Fig. 7.

While the arguments presented here do not yield a pre-
diction for the quasistationary level of the radial impurity
drift, they do identify the mechanism for its onset and
likewise explain its scaling with the parameter ζ. We
emphasize that the former mechanism relies on the spe-
ciﬁc properties of the turbulence described by the HW
model. Nevertheless, an analogue pinch eﬀect would ap-
pear for other driving instabilities provided that the term
Λ2 remains a source for a deﬁnite impurity drift.

charge ratio of the impurity particles and is inward for
positively charged impurities. This anomalous pinch re-
lies on the particular features of the turbulence described
by the HW model. In contrast with other known turbu-
lent pinches,6 the present pinch is neither caused by a
speciﬁc magnetic ﬁeld geometry nor by temperature gra-
dients, given that our models assume a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld and cold impurities. Consequently, our ﬁnding of a
net radial drift due to impurity-particle inertia consti-
tutes a new contribution towards the understanding of
the anomalous pinch of impurities in magnetic conﬁne-
ment devices.

VI. CONCLUSION

Acknowledgments

We have studied the transport of impurity particles in
plasma edge turbulence, basing our investigations on the
paradigmatic Hasegawa–Wakatani (HW) model for resis-
tive drift-wave turbulence and a consistent passive-ﬂuid
model for the impurities. The latter model takes into
account impurity-particle inertia, which enters the im-
purity ﬂow velocity in the form of the polarization drift.
Inertia has indeed been found to play a signiﬁcant role in
the turbulent transport of impurities, since it gives rise to
subtle yet qualitatively important compressible eﬀects.

The model equations have been investigated both the-
oretically and computationally. The numerical simula-
tions were performed using the semi-Lagrangian (SL)
pseudospectral code brieﬂy described in the Appendix.
Although the emphasis of this paper is not on the nu-
merical methods employed, we point out the suitability
of SL schemes for the advection-dominated problems that
appear in plasma turbulence. In particular, we highlight
the superior stability of the SL semi-implicit scheme used
here for the HW model, which is known to constitute a
numerically challenging nonlinear problem.

In the case of ideal impurities, we have focused on their
turbulent diﬀusion by the electric drift. This eﬀect has
been demonstrated by relative-diﬀusion analysis of the
evolution of impurity puﬀs. The eﬀective diﬀusivities
of the turbulent advecting ﬁeld have been calculated for
several values of the adiabaticity parameter in the HW
model. The resulting turbulent diﬀusivities are in quali-
tative agreement with those obtained in an earlier study
based on an absolute-diﬀusion, test-particle approach.13
In the case of inertial impurities, we have discovered
that their density eventually correlates with the vorticity
of the electric drift velocity. This clustering eﬀect scales
linearly with the mass–charge ratio of the impurity par-
ticles and results from compression by the polarization
drift in combination with turbulent mixing. The cluster-
ing of impurities in vortices of deﬁnite sign is a generic
eﬀect in magnetized-plasma turbulence, in the sense that
it is independent of the speciﬁc characteristics of the tur-
bulence.

Finally, we have also found an overall radial drift of
inertial impurities that scales linearly with the mass–

The ﬁrst author is grateful to M. P. Sørensen for co-
supervising his M.Sc. thesis, which constitutes the basis
for this publication. O.E.G. was sponsored by the Re-
search Council of Norway.

APPENDIX: NUMERICAL SCHEMES

The numerical simulations presented in this paper
were performed using a semi-Lagrangian (SL) pseudo-
spectral code developed by the ﬁrst author.23 In essence,
SL schemes combine the very stable Lagrangian treat-
ment of advection with the convenience of a ﬁxed spa-
tial discretization.24,25 This is achieved by integrating the
partial diﬀerential equations in question along a diﬀerent
family of advective trajectories in each time step, pre-
cisely those that by the end of the time step traverse the
ﬁxed points on which the spatial discretization is based.
We now outline how the aforementioned code combines
SL method and the pseudospectral discretization to nu-
merically solve the HW model and the impurity passive-
ﬂuid model described in Sec. II.

We discretize time using a constant time step ∆t,
which yields the sequence {tm} of time instants related
by tm+1 = tm + ∆t. Likewise, we use the Fourier pseudo-
spectral method to discretize the doubly periodic rect-
angular simulation domain.24 This results in a regular
grid {xi} of collocation points.
In our application of
the SL method we consider the (incompressible) electric
drift velocity vE = ˆz × ∇⊥ϕ as the sole advecting ﬁeld.
Hence, the advective trajectory X(xi, tm+1; t) that passes
through the grid point xi at time tm+1 is given by

d
dt

X(xi, tm+1; t) = vE

X(xi, tm+1; t), t
(cid:0)

,
(cid:1)

X(xi, tm+1; tm+1) = xi.

At each time step, we ﬁrstly determine the so-called up-
stream points {X(xi, tm+1; tm) ≡ xi − αi}. These are
numerically calculated using the following second-order
scheme, which combines the implicit midpoint rule and

11

linear extrapolation of the advecting ﬁeld:26,27

αi = ∆tv∗

E
v∗
E(x, tm+1/2) = 3

αi, tm+1/2

xi − 1
2
(cid:0)
2 vE(x, tm) − 1

,
(cid:1)
2 vE(x, tm−1),

where tm+1/2 = tm + 1
2 ∆t. The implicit equations for the
displacements {αi} are solved using Newton’s method,
which converges in very few iterations.

Subsequently, the model equations are integrated from
tm to tm+1 along the advective trajectories. For the HW
model, Eq. (1), we use the following unconditionally sta-
ble second-order semi-implicit scheme:

nm+1 −

nm = 1

2 ∆tC

(ϕ − n)m+1 +
h
∇2
2 ∆tµn
h
+ xm+1 −

⊥nm+1 +

xm,

+ 1

^
(ϕ − n)m

]
∇2

⊥nm

i

i

2 ∆tC

e

(ϕ − n)m+1 +
h
2 ∆tµω

⊥ωm+1 +

∇2

+ 1

h

^
(ϕ − n)m

]
∇2

⊥ωm

i
.
i

e

e

ωm+1 −

ωm = 1

Here the superscripts indicate time, and tildes denote
evaluation at the upstream points. Hence, for a func-
gm(xi) = g(xi − αi, tm). The above
tion g(x, t) we have
equations supplemented with ωm+1 = ∇2
⊥ϕm+1 are eas-
e
ily solved within the Fourier discretization.

For the impurity passive-ﬂuid model, Eq. (2), we em-
ploy the following second-order implicit-explicit scheme:

∗

θ

−

θm = −∆t

^∇⊥ · (θvp)m + 1

e
θm+1 −

θm = − 1

e

2 ∆t

∇⊥ · (θ
h
2 ∆tµθ

∇2
h

+ 1

2 ∆tµθ

∇2
h
∗vp)m+1 +
]
∇2

⊥θm

⊥θm+1 +

∗

⊥θ

+

]
∇2

⊥θm

^∇⊥ · (θvp)m

,
i

i

.

i

In our code we further approximate the polarization drift
vp = −ζDt∇⊥ϕ by means of

vm+1
p

= ζ

]∇⊥ϕm − ∇⊥ϕm+1

(cid:0)

/∆t + O(∆t).
(cid:1)

While in theory this approximation reduces the accuracy
of the scheme to ﬁrst order, its eﬀect in practice is very
limited given the smallness of the polarization drift.

We lastly note that the combination of spectral dis-
cretizations with SL schemes is problematic.24 The diﬃ-
culty lies in the required evaluations at midpoints and up-
stream points, which are generally not equispaced. Per-
forming such evaluations exactly, using the spectral rep-
resentation, is in most cases computationally infeasible.
In our code this problem is circumvented using high-order
periodic spline interpolation on a reﬁned grid.28,29

1 F. Wagner and U. Stroth, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion

16 T. Mikkelsen, S. E. Larsen, and H. L. Pecseli, Q. J. R. Me-

35, 1321 (1993).

2 W. Horton, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 735 (1999).
3 ITER Physics Expert Group on Divertor, ITER Physics
Expert Group on Divertor Modelling and Database, and
ITER Physics Basis Editors, Nucl. Fusion 39, 2391 (1999).

4 K.-D. Zastrow, Nucl. Fusion 39, 1891 (1999).
5 R. Dux, Fusion Sci. Technol. 44, 708 (2003).
6 X. Garbet, P. Mantica, C. Angioni, et al., Plasma Phys.

Control. Fusion 46, B557 (2004).

7 G. I. Taylor, Proc. London Math. Soc. 20, 196 (1921).
8 L. F. Richardson, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 110, 709

10 A. Hasegawa and K. Mima, Phys. Fluids 21, 87 (1978).
11 S. J. Camargo, D. Biskamp, and B. D. Scott, Phys. Plas-

mas 2, 48 (1995).

12 O. E. Garcia, J. Plasma Phys. 65, 81 (2001).
13 R. Basu, V. Naulin, and J. J. Rasmussen, Commun. Non-

linear Sci. Numer. Simul. 8, 477 (2003).

14 R. Basu, T. Jessen, V. Naulin, and J. Juul Rasmussen,

Phys. Plasmas 10, 2696 (2003).

15 G. T. Csanady, Turbulent Diﬀusion in the Environment,

(D. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht, Holland, 1973).

teor. Soc. 113, 81 (1987).

17 S. V. Annibaldi, G. Manfredi, R. O. Dendy, and L. O.
Drury, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 42, L13 (2000).
18 A. Provenzale, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 31, 55 (1999).
19 A. Bracco, P. H. Chavanis, A. Provenzale, and E. A.

Spiegel, Phys. Fluids 11, 2280 (1999).
20 V. V. Yankov, JETP Lett. 60, 171 (1994).
21 M. B. Isichenko and N. V. Petviashvili, Phys. Plasmas 2,

22 M. B. Isichenko and V. V. Yankov, Phys. Rep. 283, 161

3650 (1995).

(1997).

23 M. Priego, M.Sc. thesis, Technical University of Denmark,

24 J. P. Boyd, Chebyshev and Fourier Spectral Methods

(Dover, New York, 2001), 2nd ed.

25 A. Staniforth and J. Cote, Mon. Weather Rev. 119, 2206

26 C. Temperton and A. Staniforth, Q. J. R. Meteor. Soc.

27 A. McDonald and J. R. Bates, Mon. Weather Rev. 115,

(1991).

113, 1025 (1987).

737 (1987).

28 G. Beylkin, Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal. 2, 363 (1995).
29 G. Steidl, Adv. Comput. Math. 9, 337 (1998).

9 A. Hasegawa and M. Wakatani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 682

Kgs. Lyngby, 2004.

(1926).

(1983).

