5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Density ﬂuctuations on mm and Mpc scales

N. P. Basse

∗

Plasma Science and Fusion Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract

We will in this paper report on suggestive similarities between density ﬂuctuation
power versus wavenumber on small (mm) and large (Mpc) scales.

The small scale measurements were made in fusion plasmas and compared to
predictions from classical ﬂuid turbulence theory. The data is consistent with the
dissipative range of 2D turbulence. Alternatively, the results can be ﬁtted to a
functional form that can not be explained by turbulence theory.

The large scale measurements were part of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey galaxy
redshift examination. We found that the equations describing fusion plasmas also
hold for the galaxy data.

The comparable dependency of density ﬂuctuation power on wavenumber in fu-

sion plasmas and galaxies might indicate a common origin of these ﬂuctuations.

Key words: Density ﬂuctuations, Wavenumber spectra, Fusion plasmas, Galaxies,
Turbulence
PACS: 52.25.Fi, 52.35.Ra, 98.80.Bp, 98.80.Es

1 Introduction

If one were to make a survey of where we are, what we know and what we
do not know about magnetically conﬁned fusion plasmas, turbulence would
certainly be an area marked ’Here Be Monsters’. Cross-ﬁeld transport (per-
pendicular to the main magnetic ﬁeld) assuming that only binary particle
collisions contribute is called neoclassical transport [1]. This transport level
includes eﬀects associated with toroidal geometry. However, in general the
∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 617 253 5523; fax: +1 617 253 0627.
Email address: basse@psfc.mit.edu (N. P. Basse ).
URL: http://www.psfc.mit.edu/people/basse/ (N. P. Basse ).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

20 February 2014

measured transport is several orders of magnitude larger than the neoclassical
one, especially for electrons. This phenomenon has been dubbed anomalous
transport and is subject to intense studies on most experimental fusion devices
[2]. Anomalous transport is believed to be driven by turbulence in the plasma.

It is generally thought that turbulence creates ﬂuctuations visible in most
plasma parameters. Therefore a concerted eﬀort has been devoted to the study
of ﬂuctuations and their relation to the global (and local) plasma conﬁnement
quality.

In this paper we study electron density ﬂuctuation power versus wavenumber
(also known as the wavenumber spectrum) in the Wendelstein 7-AS (W7-
AS) stellarator [3]. Wavenumber spectra characterize the nonlinear interaction
between turbulent modes. The ﬂuctuations were measured using the localized
turbulence scattering (LOTUS) diagnostic [4,5].

As we shall see, the density ﬂuctuation power P decreases exponentially with
increasing wavenumber k on mm scales in fusion plasmas

P (k) ∝ 1
k

× e−nk,

P (k) ∝ e−nk

where n > 0 is a constant having a dimension of length and k = 2π/λ, where λ
is the corresponding wavelength. This was initially noted using the simpliﬁed
form

(1)

(2)

in Ref. [6]. Eq. (2) also holds for density ﬂuctuations in the Tore Supra tokamak
[7].

Having the exponential structure of the wavenumber spectrum in mind, we
were intrigued to see a ﬁgure in KVANT [8], a magazine published by the
Danish Physical Society, showing the root-mean-square density ﬂuctuation
amplitude of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) [9] versus
distance that seemed to display the same exponential behavior as we found
in fusion plasmas. This remarkable similarity prompted us to apply the same
analysis to the SDSS data as we had previously used for our fusion plasma
measurements.

The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we summarize our wavenumber
spectrum measurements in fusion plasmas. Thereafter we describe inﬂation
and the SDSS wavenumber spectrum in Section 3. We discuss the results in
Section 4 and ﬁnally state our conclusions in Section 5.

2

2 Fusion plasmas

A wavenumber spectrum of turbulence in W7-AS is shown in Fig. 1. The
measured points are shown along with two power-law ﬁts

P (k) ∝ k−m,

(3)

where m is a dimensionless constant. The power-law ﬁts are shown as solid
lines and an exponential ﬁt to Eq. (1) is shown as a dashed line. The power-
law ﬁts are motivated by classical ﬂuid turbulence theory where one expects
wavenumber spectra to exhibit power-law behavior with exponents m depend-
ing on the dimension of the observed turbulence:

• 3D: Energy is injected at a large scale and redistributed (cascaded) by non-
linear interactions down to a small dissipative scale. In this case, the energy
spectrum in the inertial range E(k) ∝ k−5/3 [10].

• 2D: Here, two power-laws exist on either side of the energy injection scale.
For smaller wavenumbers, the inverse energy cascade obeys E(k) ∝ k−5/3
and for larger wavenumbers, the enstrophy cascade follows E(k) ∝ k−3 [11].
• 1D: Energy is injected at a large scale and dissipated at a small scale;

E(k) ∝ k−2 [12].

Our measured power is equivalent to the d-dimensional energy spectrum Fd(k)
[13,10,14]

P (k) = Fd(k) =

E(k)
Ad

A1 = 2

A2 = 2πk

A3 = 4πk2,

(4)

where Ad is the surface area of a sphere having radius k and dimension d.
Usually on would assume that d = 2 in fusion plasmas, since transport along
magnetic ﬁeld lines is nearly instantaneous. The ﬁts to Eq. (3) in Fig. 1 yield
exponents m = 3 (small wavenumbers) and 7 (large wavenumbers). A similar
behavior has previously been reported in Ref. [15] where it was speculated that
the wavenumber value at the transition between the two power-laws should
correspond to a characteristic spatial scale in the plasma. The only length
scale close to the transitional value was found to be the ion Larmor radius ρi.

The spectrum at small wavenumbers is roughly consistent with the inverse en-
ergy cascade in 2D turbulence, F2(k) ∝ k−8/3. The exponent at large wavenum-

3

Fig. 1. Wavenumber spectrum of broadband turbulence in W7-AS measured using
the LOTUS diagnostic. Squares are measured points. Solid lines are power-law ﬁts
to the three smallest and ﬁve largest wavenumbers, the dashed line is a ﬁt to Eq. (1).
The power-law ﬁt grouping of points is the only one where convergence is obtained.

bers does not ﬁt into this framework. However, for very large wavenumbers
one enters the dissipation range; here, it has been argued that the energy
spectrum could have one of the following dependencies

ENeumann(k) ∝ e−ak

EHeisenberg(k) ∝ k−7,

(5)

where a > 0 is a constant (see Ref. [12] and references therein). The energy
spectrum proposed by J. von Neumann was what initially inspired us to inves-
tigate an exponential decay of P (k) in Ref. [6]. Fitting all wavenumbers to Eq.
(1), ENeumann(k)/A2, we ﬁnd that n = 0.1 cm or a wavenumber of 55 cm−1. Al-
ternatively, the transitional wavenumber found at the separation between the
two power-laws is 31 cm−1 (0.20 cm). The expression EHeisenberg(k)/A2 yields
m = 8, which is close to the experimental value m = 7 for large wavenumbers.
Calculating the ion Larmor radius at the electron temperature ρs for this case
we ﬁnd that it is 0.1 cm, i.e. the same order of magnitude as the spatial scales
found above. We used ρs instead of ρi because ion temperature measurements
were unavailable.

Currently we can think of three possible explanations for the behavior of the
wavenumber spectrum:

(1) We observe 2D turbulence and the transition between the two power-laws
occurs at a spatial scale where the inverse energy cascade develops into
the dissipation range. However, the enstrophy cascade is not accounted

4

for in this case.

(2) We observe 2D turbulence in the dissipation range described by a single

exponential function as proposed by J. von Neumann.

(3) Turbulence theory does not apply. The transition between two power-
laws or the characteristic scale found using a single exponential function
(Eq. (2)) indicates that one scale dominates the turbulent dynamics in
the wavenumber range studied.

3 Galaxies

3.1 Inﬂation

Dramatic developments have taken place in cosmology over the last decade,
lending increasing support to the paradigm of inﬂation as an explanation
for what took place before the events described by the big bang theory [16].
Inﬂation solved the so-called horizon and ﬂatness problems, but was at odds
with earlier observations indicating that the ratio of the mass density of the
universe to the critical value, the density parameter Ω, was 0.2-0.3, while
inﬂation predicted it should be 1:

Ω =

ρ
ρc

Ω < 1 : open

Ω = 1 : ﬂat

Ω > 1 : closed,

(6)

where ρc = 3H 2
0 /8πG is the critical mass density, H0 = 70 km/s/Mpc is
the Hubble parameter observed today and G is Newton’s gravitational con-
stant [17]. However, new measurements in the late 1990’s lead to a drastic
modiﬁcation of Ω: Observations of type Ia supernovae (SN) showed that the
separation velocity between galaxies was speeding up, not slowing down as
would be expected for an open universe. The underlying explanation for this
accelerated expansion is not understood, but it seems that the universe con-
tains large quantities of negative pressure substance, creating a gravitational
repulsion driving the expansion. This negative pressure material is called dark
energy, the total density of dark energy ΩΛ is 0.7. The existence of dark en-
ergy is equivalent to the cosmological constant Λ introduced by A. Einstein.
The dark matter density Ωd is 0.25 and the baryonic matter density Ωb is
0.05, so the total density is very close (or equal) to the critical density. The
SN Ia data is supported by measurements of nonuniformities in the cosmic
microwave background (CMB) radiation. The CMB anisotropy is due to the
presence of tiny primordial density ﬂuctuations at the time of recombination,

5

Fig. 2. Wavenumber spectrum of galaxies measured by the SDSS Team. Squares
are measured points. Solid lines are power-law ﬁts, the dashed line is a ﬁt to Eq.
(1). The power-law ﬁt grouping of points is chosen so the combined, normalized, χ2
of the ﬁts is minimized. The data is taken from Ref. [23].

where atoms formed. At that point in time the age of the universe was about
300,000 years and the temperature was 3000 K. The structures observed in
the CMB are called acoustic peaks, and the simplest versions of inﬂation all
reproduce these structures quite accurately. The acoustic peaks can not be
modelled by assuming that the universe is open.

3.2 Wavenumber spectrum

A study of density ﬂuctuations on large scales using 205,443 galaxies has been
published by the SDSS Team in Ref. [18], see Fig. 2. 3D maps of the universe
are provided by the SDSS galaxy redshift survey, observing about a quarter of
the celestial sphere using a 2.5 m telescope and a charge-coupled device (CCD)
camera. The galaxies had a mean redshift z ≈ 0.1, corresponding to light
emitted 1-2 Gyr ago [17]. Fixing some cosmological parameters to Wilkinson
Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) satellite values [19,20,21] one ﬁnds -
using physics based models - that the wavenumber spectrum measurements
were ﬁtted by a matter density Ωm = Ωd + Ωb = 0.295 ± 0.0323. In this case
h = H0/(100 km/s/Mpc) = 0.72 was assumed and it was observed that the
wavenumber spectrum was not well characterized by a single power-law.

6

A follow-up paper by the SDSS Team, Ref. [22], combined non-CMB mea-
surements (SDSS) with CMB measurements (WMAP) to constrain free pa-
rameters of cosmological models and break CMB degeneracies in parameter
space. This resulted in Ωm = 0.30 ± 0.04 and h = 0.70+0.04
−0.03. Adding the SDSS
information more than halved WMAP-only error bars on some parameters,
e.g. the Hubble parameter and matter density.

The data presented in Fig. 2 has been taken from M. Tegmark’s homepage
[23]. According to the recommendation by the SDSS Team [18], the three
largest wavenumbers shown are not used in the ﬁts described below.

As we did for the W7-AS data in Section 2, we ﬁt the SDSS measurements
to two power-laws (Eq. (3)) or a single exponential function (Eq. (1)). The
power-law ﬁts are shown as solid lines, the exponential ﬁt as a dashed line.

The power-law ﬁts yield exponents m = 0.8 (small wavenumbers) and 1.4
(large wavenumbers). The wavenumber ranges were determined by minimizing
the combined, normalized, χ2 of the ﬁts. As the SDSS Team found, a single
power-law can not describe the observations. The exponents are not close to
the ones governing ﬂuid turbulence discussed in Section 2. The transitional
wavenumber is 0.09 h Mpc−1, corresponding to a length of 67 h−1 Mpc.

We ﬁnd the characteristic length from an exponential ﬁt to be n = 2 h−1 Mpc
or a wavenumber of 3 h Mpc−1.

4 Discussion

The fact that density ﬂuctuations on small (fusion plasmas) and large (galax-
ies) scales can be described by an exponential function might indicate that
plasma turbulence at early times has been expanded to cosmological propor-
tions. A natural consequence of that thought would be to investigate ﬂuctu-
ations in quark-gluon plasmas (QGPs) corresponding to even earlier times.
However, experimental techniques to do this are not suﬃciently developed at
the moment due to the extreme nature of QGPs.

It is fascinating that wavenumber spectra over wider scales peak at low wavenum-
bers and decrease both above and below that peak. This is seen both in fusion
plasmas [24] and for galaxies, see e.g. Fig. 38 in Ref. [18]. Turbulence theory
in 1D or 3D would interpret the peak position as the scale where energy is
injected.

Fitting wavenumber spectra to power-laws is based on ﬂuid turbulence the-
ories, but in general care must be taken when interpreting the outcome: We

7

know that an exponential function can be Taylor expanded to an inﬁnite power
series:

P (k) ∝ e−nk =

∞

X
i=0

(−nk)i
i!

.

(7)

So locally, i.e. for a small range of wavenumbers, an exponential dependency
can be masked as a power-law; the exponent would vary as a function of the
wavenumber range selected.

We favor the exponential functions over power-laws as descriptors of the data,
either including an algebraic prefactor as in Eq. (1) or using a pure exponential
function as in Eq. (2): In the latter case, ﬁts yield n = 0.2 cm for fusion plasmas
and 11 h−1 Mpc for galaxies. The exponential decrease of density ﬂuctuation
power versus wavenumber implies that either (2) or (3) in Section 2 could
explain the data. Perhaps forcing occurs at a small scale and transitions either
directly to dissipation (2) or to some eﬀect governed by the scale determined
from the exponential function (3) at larger scales. The fact that we obtain
n ≃ ρs using Eq. (1) for fusion plasmas supports this conjecture.

5 Conclusions

We have in this paper reported on suggestive similarities between density
ﬂuctuation power versus wavenumber on small (mm) and large (Mpc) scales.

The small scale measurements were made in fusion plasmas and compared to
predictions from turbulence theory. The data ﬁt Eq. (1), which is consistent
with the dissipative range of 2D turbulence. Alternatively, the results ﬁt Eq.
(2) which has a functional form that can not be explained by turbulence theory.

The large scale measurements were part of the SDSS galaxy redshift survey.
As is the case for fusion plasmas, the galaxy data can be described by Eqs. (1)
and (2). The similar dependency of density ﬂuctuation power on wavenumber
might indicate a common origin of these ﬂuctuations, perhaps from ﬂuctua-
tions in QGPs at early stages in the formation of the universe.

The cross-disciplinary work presented here is hopefully just the beginning of
an interesting path that can beneﬁt both ﬁelds. As a ﬁrst step, we will expand
our studies to encompass a larger range of scales, both for fusion plasma and
galaxy measurements.

8

This work was supported at MIT by the Department of Energy, Cooperative
Grant No. DE-FC02-99ER54512.

Acknowledgements

References

[1] F.L. Hinton and R.D. Hazeltine, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48 (1976) 239.

[2] A.J. Wootton et al., Phys. Fluids B 2 (1990) 2879.

[3] H. Renner, W7AS Team, NBI Group, ICF Group, and ECRH Group, Plasma

Phys. Control. Fusion 31 (1989) 1579.

[4] M. Saﬀman et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 72 (2001) 2579.

[5] N.P. Basse, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Copenhagen, 2002. Available from:

http://www.risoe.dk/rispubl/ofd/ris-r-1355.htm.

[6] N.P. Basse et al., Phys. Plasmas 9 (2002) 3035.

[7] P. Hennequin et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 46 (2004) B121.

[8] M.C. Andersen, KVANT 14 (2003) 25.

[9] http://www.sdss.org/.

[10] U. Frisch, Turbulence, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1995.

[11] G. Antar et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 40 (1998) 947.

[12] J. von Neumann, Collected works VI: Theory of games, astrophysics,
hydrodynamics and meteorology, ed. A.H. Taub, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK,
1963.

[13] H. Tennekes and J.L. Lumley, A ﬁrst course in turbulence, MIT Press,

Cambridge, USA, 1972.

[14] G. Antar, Ph.D. Thesis, ´Ecole Polytechnique, 1996.

[15] C. Honor´e et al., in: Proc. 25th European Conference on Controlled Fusion
and Plasma Physics, Prague, 1998 (European Physical Society, Petit-Lancy,
Switzerland, 1998), vol. 22C, p. 647.

[16] A.H. Guth, Inﬂation and the new era of high-precision cosmology, 2002.
Available from: http://web.mit.edu/physics/alumniandfriends/physicsjournal
fall 02 cosmology.pdf.

[17] W.H. Kinney, astro-ph/0301448, 2004.

[18] M. Tegmark et al., Astrophys. J. 606 (2004) 702.

9

[19] C.L. Bennett et al., Astrophys. J., Suppl. Ser. 148 (2003) 1.

[20] D.N. Spergel et al., Astrophys. J., Suppl. Ser. 148 (2003) 175.

[21] L. Verde et al., Astrophys. J., Suppl. Ser. 148 (2003) 195.

[22] M. Tegmark et al., Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 103501.

[23] M. Tegmark’s homepage is http://www.hep.upenn.edu/∼max/ and the SDSS
data used is available from http://www.hep.upenn.edu/∼max/sdsspower/
sdss measurements.txt.

[24] N.P. Basse et al., Characterization of core and edge turbulence in L- and
enhanced Dα H-mode Alcator C-Mod plasmas, submitted for publication to
Phys. Plasmas, 2004.

10

