Intermittent turbulence and coherent structure generation in a

laboratory plasma

T.A. Carter∗

Abstract

Department of Physics and Astronomy and Center for Multiscale Plasma Dynamics,

University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547

Strongly intermittent turbulence and the generation of coherent structures are observed in the

shadow of a limiter in the Large Plasma Device (LAPD) at UCLA. The creation of both density

enhancements (“blobs”) and density depletions (“holes”) is observed simultaneously, suggesting an

interchange-like process. The blobs are observed to propagate out into the plasma edge while the

holes propagate back into the core plasma. A statistical study of the coherent structures reveals

a typical size of ten times the ion sound gyroradius and a typical velocity of one tenth the sound

speed.

PACS numbers: 52.25.Fi, 52.35.Ra, 52.55.-s

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
2
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Turbulence which is intermittent, meaning patchy in space or bursty in time, is often

observed in both neutral ﬂuids [1] and plasmas [2]. A signature of intermittency in turbu-

lent measurements is a non-Gaussian amplitude probability distribution function (PDF), e.g.

with tails caused by a greater frequency of large amplitude events. Intermittent turbulence is

ubiquitous in the edge of magnetic conﬁnement laboratory plasmas including tokamaks [3],

stellarators [4], and linear devices [5]. The intermittency in these environments is gen-

erally attributed to the creation and propagation of coherent, ﬁlamentary (magnetic ﬁeld

aligned) structures [6, 7]. Large amplitude events in Langmuir probe [8], beam emission

spectroscopy [9], and gas puﬀ imaging measurements [10] are therefore due to the passage

of high density coherent structures through the low density edge region. The outward prop-

agation of these structures results in signiﬁcant particle transport in the edge of magnetic

conﬁnement devices like tokamaks [11]. In addition, recently a correlation has been found

between increased intermittency in the scrape-oﬀ-layer (SOL) and the density limit in toka-

maks, leading some to suggest that catastrophic transport enhancements associated with

intermittent turbulence may be responsible for this disruptive limit [12].

Several mechanisms have been proposed for the generation of coherent structures includ-

ing solitary drift wave vortices [13, 14], propagating avalanche-like events in the plasma

core [15, 16], zonal-ﬂow driven generation [17] and interchange driven production [18]. Once

the structures are produced and ejected into the low density region, their continued cross-

ﬁeld propagation has been attributed to E × B velocity due to polarization of the structures

by drift-charging [7, 19].

In tokamaks, the drift-charging is attributed to magnetic ﬁeld

gradients and curvature [7], while in linear machines, rotation [2] and neutral eﬀects [20]

can lead to polarization.

In this Letter, a detailed study of coherent structures generated by strongly intermittent

turbulence in a plasma with a steep density gradient is presented. In this study, a clear ob-

servation of the generation of both density enhancements (or “blobs”) and density depletions

(or “holes”) is made. The simultaneous production of blobs and holes is consistent with an

interchange-like generation process. A statistical study of the properties of the objects has

been performed, showing that the size of the generated objects scales like the ion sound

gyroradius (δ ∼ 10ρs) and that the velocity of the objects (outward for blobs, into the core

plasma for holes) scales with the sound speed (v ∼ Cs/10).

The experiments were performed in the upgraded Large Plasma Device (LAPD), which

2

(a)

10m

m
1

e
d
o
h
t
a
c

e
c
r
u
o
s

B

7m

Floating plate

Probe

(b)

FIG. 1: (a) A schematic of the LAPD, showing the experimental geometry. (b) Spatial proﬁle

of density and ﬂuctuations behind the limiter, along with an average ﬂuctuation power spectrum

(log-log).

is part of the Basic Plasma Science Facility (BaPSF) [21] at UCLA. LAPD is an 18 m long,

1 m diameter cylindrical vacuum chamber, surrounded by 90 magnetic ﬁeld coils. Pulsed

plasmas (∼ 10 ms in duration) are created at a repetition rate of 1 Hz using a Barium Oxide
coated cathode source. Typical plasma parameters are ne ∼ 1 × 1012 cm−3, Te ∼ 6 eV,

Ti ∼ 1 eV, and B < 2kG. The working gases used in these experiments were Helium

and Neon. The length of the LAPD plasma column can be changed by closing a hinged,

electrically-ﬂoating aluminum plate located 10 m from the cathode.

In the experiments

reported here, this plate is partially closed and used to limit the plasma column as shown

in Figure 1(a). With the plate partially closed, there is no parallel (to the magnetic ﬁeld)

source of plasma for the region behind the plate and any observed plasma density must

come from cross-ﬁeld transport. Measurements were performed using radially-insertable

Langmuir probes (as shown in Fig. 1(a)). A triple Langmuir probe with 1 mm long, 30 mil

diameter cylindrical tungsten tips spaced 3 mm apart was used to measure density, electron

3

temperature and ﬂoating potential. A linear array of six single Langmuir probes (60 mil

diameter ﬂush mounted tantalum tips, aligned with their surface normals along the magnetic

ﬁeld) was used to study spatial correlations in turbulence. The tips on the Langmuir array

are spaced 5 mm, and the array is oriented along the direction of the density gradient (the

x direction).

For these experiments, the ﬂoating-plate limiter was closed so that nearly half of the

plasma column is blocked, and a half-cylindrical plasma is observed downstream from the

limiter. Steep gradients in plasma density are observed behind the limiter, along with very

large amplitude (δn/n ∼ 1) ﬂuctuations. Figure 1(b) shows a measurement of the radial

proﬁle of plasma density (ne) and root-mean-square (RMS) ion saturation current ﬂuctuation

amplitude (δIRMS) downstream from the limiter (He discharge, 1kG ﬁeld) along with an

average fast Fourier transform (FFT) power spectrum of the ﬂuctuations. The observed

density gradient is very steep with a scale length of order a few centimeters (the ion sound

radius, ρs ∼ 0.5 cm and the ion gyroradius, ρi ∼ 0.2 cm). In the limiter shadow, the density

proﬁle is ﬂat, similar to the proﬁles observed in the scrape-oﬀ-layer of tokamaks [9]. The

density behind the limiter is a signiﬁcant fraction of the core density (∼ 10%), indicative of

substantial cross-ﬁeld particle transport. The amplitude of the observed ﬂuctuations peaks

in the gradient region, with a broadband fast Fourier transform (FFT) power spectrum.

The observed ﬂuctuations exhibit signiﬁcant intermittency, especially on the edges of the

gradient region. Figure 2(a) shows example raw ion saturation signals measured at three

spatial locations (x = −1, 1, 2.5 cm). On the core side of the gradient region (x = −1 cm),

the signal is dominated by downward-going events while on the low-density side of the gra-

dient region (x = 2.5 cm) the signal is dominated by upward-going events. These events

are attributed to the passage of coherent structures through the measurement region. The

upward-going events in the low density region are density enhancements or “blobs”, similar

to those observed in the edge of many magnetic conﬁnement devices [2]. The downward-

going events are identiﬁed as density depletions or “holes,” which are not typically observed

in other devices, but have been reported to be seen in measurements on the DIII-D toka-

mak [9]. Generation of holes has been observed in simulations [22] and inward propagation of

holes has been suggested as a mechanism for impurity transport in tokamaks [23]. Although

the raw signals clearly show the intermittency in the ﬂuctuations, a more quantitative mea-

surement of the intermittency can be derived from the ﬂuctuation amplitude PDF. The

4

FIG. 2: (a) Example raw Isat signals at three spatial locations. (b) Amplitude PDF at the same

three locations. (c) Contour plot of the amplitude PDF versus position.

amplitude PDF has been computed as a function of the amplitude normalized to the root-

mean-square (RMS) ﬂuctuation level, and is shown for x = −1, 1,and 2.5 cm in ﬁgure 2(b).

The existence of the holes and blobs produces tails in the PDF at negative and positive

normalized amplitude, respectively. The PDF at the location of peak ﬂuctuation amplitude

(x = 1cm) is more symmetric, although is still distinctly non-Gaussian. The amplitude

PDF as a function of position is shown as a contour plot in ﬁgure 2(c). From this ﬁgure it

is evident that the holes are observed only in a narrow region of space on the high density

side of the gradient (where the negative tail is present, −2.5 . x . 0). However the blobs

are observed everywhere to the right of the density gradient region (x & 1), as shown by

the presence of a tail in the PDF at positive amplitude. For x & 3cm, the PDF is blob-

dominated and nearly independent of position, suggesting that the blob structures are long

lived as they propagate into the shadow of the limiter.

The observations are consistent with the localized production of coherent structures in,

5

FIG. 3: Conditionally averaged Isat and cross-conditional average of Vf for blob (a) and hole (b)

events. Cross-conditional average for blob (c) and hole (c) events on a linear array of Langmuir

probe tips, showing propagation of the structures across the array.

followed by their ejection from, the strongly turbulent region, with the blobs propagating

into the low density region and the holes back into the core plasma. Conditional averaging

techniques [24] are used to conﬁrm this conjecture and study the properties of the coherent

structures. To compute the conditional average, large amplitude events are selected from the

signal and averaged together using the time of peak amplitude as t = 0. Figure 3(a) shows the

conditional average of many (N = 16059) blob events in ion saturation current signals from

several hundred LAPD plasma shots. The amplitude threshold for triggering event selection

in this case was set to twice the RMS ﬂuctuation amplitude. The conditional average blob

event is asymmetric in time, with a fast rise and slow decay. This time asymmetry is

consistent with observations in the edge of many other magnetic conﬁnement devices [2].

Figure 3(b) shows a conditionally averaged hole event. The average hole event also has a

time asymmetry, however the sense of the asymmetry is inverted from the blob event, with

the rise time longer than the decay time. The observed structures also have a signature in

the measured ﬂoating potential. A cross-conditional average of the ﬂoating potential for the

6

blob and hole events is also shown in ﬁgure 3(a) and (b). The cross-conditional average shows

that the structures are charged, and have electric ﬁelds associated with them. The blob has

a positive potential, with an average value of ∼ 1.5V above the background (Te ∼ 5eV) while

the hole has a negative potential, with an average value of around ∼ −3V. These potential

proﬁles and associated electric ﬁelds imply that the structures are spinning and therefore

vortex-like. The observation of spinning blobs is consistent with recent simulations [25], and

imply that they may be subject to instabilities as they propagate into the limiter shadow [26].

The conjecture that the structures are propagating is tested using a linear array of

Langmuir probe tips and cross-conditional averaging. Figure 3(c) and (d) show the cross-

conditional average blob and hole ion saturation signals on several tips spaced in the x

direction. The right-most tip (furthest away from the gradient region in the blob case) is

used for event triggering in this case (the conditional average signal for this tip is shown in

the solid line, marked “CA” for conditional average). The average blob travels across the

probe array out into the low density region with a speed of ∼ 1km/s, which is ∼ Cs/10.

The average hole propagates back into the core plasma with a speed of the same order as,

although somewhat larger than, the average blob speed. The holes are very short lived, with

the cross-conditional average decaying signiﬁcantly within 1.5cm. The decay of the holes is

likely explained by the structures ﬁlling in by transport, compression, or ionization. For the

blobs, there is also some reduction in the cross-conditional average with space, but not as

severe. Due to the use of the right-most tip for event triggering, a decay due to transport

processes would cause an opposite trend to that which is shown. Instead, the more likely

explanation for the observation is that the blobs have a velocity that is not only in the

x-direction, but also in the direction perpendicular to the density gradient direction (and

therefore perpendicular to the probe array). For this reason, the measured velocities could

be an underestimate of the actual blob velocity. It should be noted that there is neither

curvature or rotation available to drive polarization through drift charging. While there

are ﬂows in the edge region (evidenced by the blob motion observations), these ﬂows are

along a straight vertical edge. The observed blob propagation may, however, be explained

by neutral eﬀects [20].

Figure 4(a) shows the measured dependence of the time width of blob events versus

magnetic ﬁeld. The inset ﬁgure shows the conditional average ion saturation signal for a blob

event for three ﬁeld values. As the ﬁeld is decreased, the time width of the event increases.

7

FIG. 4: (a) PDF of blob event time width, for three values of the magnetic ﬁeld.

Inset are

conditional average blob events for the three magnetic ﬁeld values. (b) Mean blob size for several

conditions in He and Ne, compared to the ion sound gyroradius.

The main ﬁgure shows the PDF of the time width (full width at half max (FWHM)) of

blob events for the same three magnetic ﬁeld values. To calculate the PDF of the blob

time width, events are selected from the ion saturation current signals and the time width

(∆tFWHM) of each individual event is measured. As the magnetic ﬁeld is decreased, the peak

of the PDF shifts to larger time width and also the width of the PDF increases. The width

in time of the blob event can be translated to a blob size using the measured blob velocity.

Figure 4(b) shows the average blob size (hρbi) compared to the ion sound gyroradius (ρs) for

8

blob events measured in several diﬀerent magnetic ﬁeld values in Helium and one condition

using Neon as the working gas. The average blob size scales with the ion sound gyroradius,

and is approximately ten times this scale. It should also be noted that the average blob size

is comparable to the density gradient scale length.

The primary conclusions which can be drawn from the observations presented in this

Letter are: (1) the coherent structures are produced locally in the gradient region, (2) both

blobs and holes are observed, consistent with an interchange-like process, and (3) the velocity

of the structures scales with the sound speed (∼ Cs/10) and the size of the structures scales

with the ion sound gyroradius (∼ 10ρs).

Discussions with G. Antar, S. Krasheninnikov, R. Moyer, A. Pigarov and D. Rudakov

are gratefully acknowledged. The experiments reported in the paper were performed using

the UCLA Basic Plasma Science Facility, which is funded by NSF and DOE. This work was

partially supported by a DOE Fusion Energy Sciences postdoctoral fellowship.

∗ Electronic address: tcarter@physics.ucla.edu

[1] U. Frisch, Turbulence (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 1995), p. 120ﬀ.

[2] G. Antar et al., Phys. Plasmas 10, 419 (2003).

[3] J. Boedo et al., Phys. Plasmas 8, 4826 (2001).

[4] R. Sanchez, B. van Milligen, D. Newman, and B. Carreras, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 185005 (2003).

[5] G. Antar et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 065001 (2001).

[6] S. Zweben, Phys. Fluids 28, 974 (1985).

[7] S. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Lett. A 283, 368 (2001).

[8] D. Rudakov et al., Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44, 717 (2002).

[9] J. Boedo et al., J. Nucl. Mat. 313-316, 813 (2003).

[10] S. Zweben et al., Phys. Plasmas 9, 1981 (2002).

[11] D. D’Ippolito, J. Myra, and S. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Plasmas 9, 222 (2002).

[12] M. Greenwald, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44, R27 (2002).

[13] A. Hassam and R. Kulsrud, Phys, Fluids 22, 2097 (1979).

[14] W. Horton, Phys. Fluids B. 1, 524 (1989).

[15] P. Diamond and T. Hahm, Phys. Plasmas 2, 3640 (1995).

9

[16] D. Newman, B. Carreras, P. Diamond, and T. Hahm, Phys. Plasmas 3, 1858 (1996).

[17] A. Smolyakov, P. Diamond, and M. Malkov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 491 (2000).

[18] O. Garcia, V. Naulin, A. Nielsen, and J. Rasmussen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 165003 (2004).

[19] F. Chen, Sci. Amer. 217, 76 (1967).

[20] S. Krasheninnikov and A. Smolyakov, Phys. Plasmas 10, 3020 (2003).

[21] http://plasma.physics.ucla.edu/BAPSF.

[22] D. Russell et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 265001 (2004).

[23] D. D’Ippolito et al., Contr. Plasma Phys. 44, 205 (2004).

[24] A. Filippas et al., Phys. Plasmas 2, 839 (1995).

[25] J. Myra, D. D’Ippolito, S. Krasheninnikov, and G. Yu, Phys. Plasmas 11, 4267 (2004).

[26] D. D’Ippolito, J. Myra, D. Russell, and G. Yu, Phys. Plasmas 11, 4603 (2004).

10

