5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PLASMA DYNAMICS AND A SIGNIFICANT ERROR
OF MACROSCOPIC AVERAGING

Marek A. Sza lek

Institute of Fundamental Technological Research of the Polish Academy of Sciences
´Swi¸etokrzyska 21, 00-049 Warsaw, Poland
Address for correspondence: Krasnobrodzka 13 m. 94, 03-214 Warsaw, Poland

E-mail: mszalek@poczta.tp.pl

Abstract: The methods of macroscopic averaging used to derive the macroscopic Maxwell
equations from electron theory are methodologically incorrect and lead in some cases to a
substantial error. For instance, these methods do not take into account the existence of a
macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld EB, HB generated by carriers of electric charge moving in
a thin layer adjacent to the boundary of the physical region containing these carriers.
If
this boundary is impenetrable for charged particles, then in its immediate vicinity all carriers
are accelerated towards the inside of the region. The existence of the privileged direction of
acceleration results in the generation of the macroscopic ﬁeld EB, HB. The contributions to
this ﬁeld from individual accelerated particles are described with a suﬃcient accuracy by the
Li´enard-Wiechert formulas. In some cases the intensity of the ﬁeld EB, HB is signiﬁcant not
only for deuteron plasma prepared for a controlled thermonuclear fusion reaction but also for
electron plasma in conductors at room temperatures. The corrected procedures of macroscopic
averaging will induce some changes in the present form of plasma dynamics equations. The
modiﬁed equations will help to design improved systems of plasma conﬁnement.

Key words: plasma dynamics equations, plasma for controlled thermonuclear fusion, electro-
dynamics of continuous media, macroscopic Maxwell equations.

PACS: 52.55.Dy; 52.30.-q; 03.50.De; (also: 05.20.Dd; 05.30.Fk; 52.25.Dg; 71.10.-w).

1. INTRODUCTION

The methods of macroscopic averaging used to derive the macroscopic Maxwell equations
are based on two false mathematical assumptions and lead sometimes to false results. This will
be explained in the present section.

It has been directly shown in my earlier paper (Sza lek 1997) that the correct procedure of
macroscopic averaging of the electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by particles from a small macro-
scopic region P produces a ﬁeld not always satisfying the macroscopic Maxwell equations. This
follows from a simple example discussed in that paper or from comment 2 on p. 100 there.
This result may be considered a consequence of the fact that each contribution to the ﬁeld
from an individual carrier leaving or entering P is discontinuous in time. It is diﬀerent from
zero when the generating carrier is in P (in the retarded time) and is equal to zero otherwise.

1

Therefore, none of these contributions satisﬁes the pertinent microscopic Maxwell equations,
which invalidates, e.g., the formulas (45), (46) on p. 67 and (84), (85) on p. 113 in the book of
de Groot (1969) as well as formulas (8) on p. 24 and (62) on p. 256 in the book of de Groot
and Suttorp (1972). These formulas average the microscopic Maxwell equations with pseudo-
solutions introduced to these equations, where the pseudo-solutions are the contributions to
the electromagnetic ﬁeld from individual carriers. The aim was to obtain the macroscopic elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld being the solution of the macroscopic Maxwell equations. This procedure is
erroneous as the pseudo-solutions do not satisfy the pertinent microscopic Maxwell equations
if the boundary of P is penetrable for carriers.

If a proof is erroneous, it need not necessarily mean that its thesis is incorrect. That,
however, is not the case here, and the proper solutions of the macroscopic Maxwell equations
not always describe correctly the macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld. The diﬀerences between
these solutions and the real macroscopic ﬁelds are sometimes surprisingly great. The proof is
given in this paper in some cases when the macroscopic electric current does not ﬂow through the
boundary of the region P . Such an outcome has been already suggested by results of my earlier
paper concerning some cases when the macroscopic current ﬂows through the boundary of P .
The results obtained in the present paper make it possible to propose in Section 2 a convenient
procedure which will allow to calculate the correct value of the averaged electromagnetic ﬁeld
acting on charged particles in material media.

The derivation of the macroscopic Maxwell equations is also accompanied by another
methodological error. Namely, the pertinent considerations take into account the distribu-
tion functions of particles depending only on space coordinates and on the velocities of carriers
of electric charge. They disregard the distribution of carrier accelerations. Consequently, the
particles with the same velocities but diﬀerent accelerations are treated identically, although
the ﬁelds generated by these particles are diﬀerent. Such an approach may be justiﬁed when
in a small macroscopic region, or in a thin layer adjacent to a privileged surface, the average
acceleration of all carriers is equal to zero. This approach is incorrect when we consider a
thin layer adjacent to the impenetrable boundary of a physical medium, where the average
acceleration is diﬀerent from zero and is directed towards the inside of the medium. It is also
erroneous when we take into account an macroscopically inhomogeneous medium.

The considerations of this paper are based on the existence of the macroscopic electro-
magnetic ﬁeld generated by carriers of electric charge accelerated in the immediate vicinity
of impenetrable boundaries. This ﬁeld has not been taken into account in the pertinent ar-
gumentation of other authors. Its intensity is sometimes astonishingly great, which indicates
that the whole problem of the macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld in material media should be
meticulously reconsidered.

This paper is an abbreviated and simpliﬁed version of my earlier paper ”Plasma dynamics
and boundary phenomena in macroscopic averaging” formulated in 2002/2003. In that paper
results concerning the correct calculation of the macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld have been
obtained in an exact and systematic manner in the general case of curved boundaries and real
physical media. Certain considerations there, however, seem rather diﬃcult for some physicists,
and the exactness of the argumentation has made that paper relatively long (25 pages). To

2

make the argumentation of the present paper shorter and simpler, we idealize to some extent
the properties of the media in the vicinity of the impenetrable boundary. We also assume that
the boundaries are plane. Nevertheless, the results obtained here agree with the results of that
earlier paper. These of the more important results of the latter which have not been derived
here, are repeated without proofs in Section 5. We have also retained some methodological re-
marks which are given in Section 6. That earlier paper is available from the author on request
electronically in a form of a pdf ﬁle.

2. INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Consider a macroscopic bounded region P containing a plasma or a typical metal without
signiﬁcant magnetic properties. We denote the boundary of P by ∂P and assume that ∂P is
composed of two suﬃciently regular surfaces ∂1P and ∂2P . The surface ∂2P is impenetrable
for carriers of electric charge.

Let J and ρ be the macroscopic densities of, respectively, electric current and charge in
P , and let the normal to ∂P component of J vanish identically on ∂P . Let E0, H0 denote
respectively the electric and magnetic ﬁeld being the solution of the Maxwell equations with
the densities J and ρ, and satisfying the proper boundary conditions. If J ≡ 0, ρ ≡ 0 in P , then
E0 ≡ 0, H0 ≡ 0. According to the present opinions the ﬁeld E0, H0 is equal to the macroscopic
electromagnetic ﬁeld E, H generated by particles from the region P :

E = E0, H = H0.

(1)

The ﬁeld E, H is the sum of contributions to the macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld from all
particles in P . We shall show that in order to describe correctly this ﬁeld, one should take
into account in some cases not only the ﬁeld E0, H0, but also two other macroscopic ﬁelds
which will be denoted by EB, HB and ET , HT . The ﬁeld EB, HB is generated by carriers
accelerated in the immediate vicinity of the boundary ∂2P . For all carriers this acceleration is
directed towards the interior of P and is induced by forces which make ∂2P impenetrable. The
existence of the privileged direction of acceleration causes that the sum of contributions to the
ﬁeld EB, HB from particular carriers does not vanish. It will be shown that the intensity of the
ﬁeld EB, HB can be signiﬁcant even in some cases of electron plasma in conductors at room
temperatures. We shall refer to this ﬁeld as “the boundary acceleration electromagnetic ﬁeld.”
If E0 ≡ 0, H0 ≡ 0, then the ﬁeld ET , HT is the sum of contributions, respectively, to the
macroscopic electric and magnetic ﬁeld, generated by all particles from P with the exception of
the contributions used to calculate EB, HB. If E0 6= 0 or H0 6= 0, then we deﬁne that this sum
is equal to E0 + ET , H0 + HT We shall call the ﬁeld ET , HT “the temperature electromagnetic
ﬁeld.”

Let [E, H] be an ordered pair and [E, H] = [e, h] if and only if E = e and H = h. Let

G = [E, H], G0 = [E0, H0], GB = [EB, HB], GT = [ET , HT ].

Using this notation we may write the correct expression for the ﬁeld G in the form

(2)

(3)

G = G0 + GB + GT .

3

This and the next equations concern the ﬁelds G, GB, GT in observation points lying outside
the region P and its immediate vicinity. The ﬁelds GB and GT may be ignored when

GB + GT = 0.

(4)

We shall show, however, that in some cases equation (4) is not satisﬁed.

First, consider the case when the plasma in P is homogeneous and isotropic. Let |G| =
|E| + |H| where |E|, |H| are the lengths of E and H. It follows from the results obtained in the
present paper that if ∂2P = ∂P , then |GB| vanishes or is relatively small. We may expect the
same from |GT | taking into account equation (4), the validity of which is in this case suggested,
e.g., by the experimental fact that the electromagnetic ﬁeld produced by carriers from any
region P with impenetrable boundaries, and averaged in a short interval of time, is at the
outside of P and its immediate vicinity equal to zero with a good accuracy for media under
consideration if the macroscopic densities J and ρ vanish in P .

The situation changes substantially when ∂2P 6= ∂P and ∂2P is not a closed surface. In such
cases |GT | remains roughly the same while |GB| can become surprisingly large. For instance,
one impenetrable face of a copper cube with the length of edge equal to 1 cm produces at a
temperature of 300 K the ﬁelds EB, HB which in some points at a distance of 1 m from the
center of the cube have the intensity of about, respectively, 1011 V m−1 and 108 A m−1. If the
cube were ﬁlled with a rareﬁed deuteron plasma prepared for a controlled thermonuclear fusion
reaction, then the corresponding intensities would be about 106 V m−1 and 104 A m−1. We can
obtain then from (3)

|G − G0| = |GB + GT | ≫ 0.

(5)

In particular, we can get |G| ≫ 0 when J ≡ 0, ρ ≡ 0 in P . A proof of inequality (5) for G0 ≡ 0
is given in Section 3.

Inequality (5) is interesting from the theoretical point of view, because it evidently disagrees
with equations (1) and with some universally accepted opinions concerning the macroscopic
electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by large sets of charged particles in chaotic motion. There
are two main reasons of the disagreement between the results obtained in the present paper
and the pertinent results of other authors. First, the methods of macroscopic averaging of
electromagnetic ﬁelds applied in the scientiﬁc literature do not take into account the existence
of the macroscopic boundary acceleration ﬁeld GB generated in a locally microscopic layer
adjacent to ∂2P . Second, it has not been noticed that for inhomogeneous or anisotropic media
the temperature ﬁeld GT may be diﬀerent from zero and attain considerable intensities. An
additional reason of the disagreement is the discontinuity in time of the contributions to the
macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld from individual carriers, which has been already explained
in Section 1.

If the medium in P is inhomogeneous and/or anisotropic, then |GB| can become relatively
very large even if ∂2P = ∂P or ∂2P is a closed surface. This may have practical consequences.
It will be explained in the following example.

Suppose that we want to calculate an averaged electromagnetic ﬁeld G′ = [E′, H′] acting on
electrons and ions at a point O of a region P ′ with a boundary ∂P ′. There are various methods

4

of calculating this ﬁeld. All of them need some corrections because they do not allow for the
existence of the ﬁelds GB, GT . We shall point out a method where the manner of correction
is obvious.

Let the medium in P ′ be inhomogeneous and the surface ∂P ′ be impenetrable for carriers.
To facilitate the considerations we assume that the medium inhomogeneities are stable, as in
inhomogeneous alloys of metals. Consider in P ′ a small subregion PS with a boundary ∂PS
such that O ∈ PS and lies possibly far from ∂PS. We may write down

G′ = GS + G

(6)

where the ﬁeld GS is generated by particles from inside the region PS, and the ﬁeld G is
produced by particles from inside the region P deﬁned by P = P ′ − PS. The ﬁeld GS may be
calculated by means of summing the contributions from all particles in PS with the exception
of a privileged particle, while the ﬁeld G is calculated by means of the macroscopic densities J
and ρ in P . The standard practice is to assume that the latter ﬁeld satisﬁes (1), i.e. G = G0.
On the ground of results obtained in this paper it can be shown that the assumption (1) is
not always correct even if G0 = 0. This is a consequence of the facts that ∂P = ∂P ′ + ∂PS,
and that the surface ∂PS is penetrable for carriers and does not generate a contribution to the
ﬁeld GB. Let the contribution generated at ∂P ′ to the ﬁeld GB be G′
B and let the normal
to ∂PS component of J vanish on ∂PS. We denote by GBS the contribution to the boundary
acceleration ﬁeld which would be produced at ∂PS by particles from P if ∂PS were impenetrable
for carriers. In such a case the whole boundary ∂P of P would be impenetrable for carriers.
Therefore, we obtain from (4)

GT + G′
We receive from (3) when ∂PS is penetrable:

B + GBS = 0.

From (7) and (8) we get

An example is given in Section 4, which indicates that in inhomogeneous plasma one can obtain
|GBS| ≫ 0 as in (30). Consequently, instead of the incorrect formula (1), we should use equation
(9). From (6) and (9) we get the correct expression for the ﬁeld G′:

G = G0 + G′

B + GT .

G = G0 − GBS.

G′ = GS + G0 − GBS.

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

At this stage of the research one cannot exclude the possibility that the presence of the term
GBS in (10) can have a noticeable inﬂuence on the value of G′. Such an inﬂuence should cause
some changes in the present form of plasma dynamics equations. One can expect the greatest
values of |GBS| in the regions where the strongest inhomogeneities are present, e.g., on a shock
wave.

In general, the ﬁeld GBS will depend on the derivatives of plasma density and temperature.
Hence, its existence could cause some changes of values of the coeﬃcients of partial derivatives

5

in the plasma dynamics equations. In particular, some coeﬃcients equal to zero in the present
form of these equations might become diﬀerent from zero. Even small diﬀerences may aﬀect,
e.g., results concerning the growth and propagation of plasma instabilities. In order to examine
the consequences of equation (10) one should derive the explicit dependence of the ﬁeld GBS on
the macroscopic parameters of inhomogeneous plasma, and investigate relations between GBS
and the coeﬃcients in the plasma dynamics equations.

The proper methodology pointed out in this paper will be useful not only when one examines
the consequences of equation (10) but also when it is possible to investigate the inﬂuence of some
additional forces generated by electrically charged particles. These forces have been discovered
by the present author and are brieﬂy described in an earlier paper (Sza lek 1997). Allowing
for all forces produced by electrically charged particles, one will be able to obtain, e.g., an
adequate description of phenomena occurring in boundary regions of globular lightnings. Such
a description will be connected with further changes in the plasma dynamics equations. The
modiﬁed equations will help to design improved systems of plasma conﬁnement.

The temperature and boundary acceleration ﬁelds are generated in various media and should
be taken into account in the completed macroscopic theory of electromagnetic ﬁelds based on
the microscopic properties of electrons, ions, and atoms. This theory came into existence a
century ago, although some of its important premises were known much earlier – compare, e.g.,
the early theories of dielectrics or Amp`ere’s hypothesis that magnetism is due to micro-currents.
First results concerning the derivation of macroscopic Maxwell equations from electron theory
were obtained by Hendrik A. Lorentz (see, e.g., Lorentz 1902, 1904, 1915). A list of authors
working on this problem and a historical survey were given by de Groot (1969). First results
concerning the ﬁelds GB and GT were published by the present author (Sza lek 1997). That
paper contains, e.g., an estimate of the ratio |HB + HT |/|H0| (using the nomenclature intro-
duced here) in some cases when P is a cylinder and ∂2P is the lateral surface of this cylinder.
Because of lack of funds for the pertinent research, my next paper on this subject was written
with a delay of more than 5 years.

3. A PROOF OF INEQUALITY (5)

3.1. The ﬁeld of a moving charge

We shall calculate in sections 3.2 and 3.3 the contributions to the macroscopic electromag-
netic ﬁeld from particular carriers using some approximate expressions resulting from the exact
Li´enard-Wiechert formulas (Li´enard 1898, Wiechert 1900). In the SI systems of units these
expressions may be written down in the form

e(x, t) = ea + eu,

h(x, t) = ha + hu,

where e(x, t), h(x, t) are, respectively, the electric and magnetic ﬁeld generated by a moving
point charge Q and observed at a point x at time t,

ea(x, t) = L1R−1
eu(x, t) = c2L1(1 − u2/c2)w3R−2

1 n1×(n1×a),

1 (n1 − u/c),

ha(x, t) = cε0n1×ea,
hu(x, t) = cε0n1×eu,

(11)

(12)
(13)

6

where R1(t) = x − r(t); x, r are, respectively, the position vectors of the observation point
and the point charge in a Cartesian rectangular coordinate system X with the coordinates x1,
x2, x3; R1 = |R1|, n1(t) = R1/R1; a, u are, respectively, the acceleration and velocity of
the point charge; ε0 = 8.85×10−12 F m−1,
L1 = Q(4πε0c2)−1,

c is the speed of light, and
w = (1 − n1 · u/c)−1.

(14)

We have neglected in (12) and (13) the time retardation, and in (12) we have retained only
the ﬁrst term of the expansion with respect to the powers of u/c. The exact formulas may be
found in various books and monographs (see, e.g., Clemmow and Dougherty 1969). They are
also used in my previous pertinent paper.

3.2. Introductory considerations

Consider two identical macroscopic cubes P (i) (i = 1, 2) containing a suitable homogeneous
medium with the macroscopic properties not depending on time. We assume for the sake of
simplicity that the ions of the medium are at rest in P (i) (see, however, remark 2 in Section 5).
The cube P (1) is inside the medium and its boundary ∂P (1) = ∂1P (1) is fully penetrable for
electrons. The cube P (2) is adjacent to the boundary of the medium and one of its faces
(denoted by ∂2P (2)) is impenetrable for electrons while the remaining boundary ∂1P (2) of P (2)
is penetrable.

Let G(i), G(i)

B , G(i)

T denote, respectively, the macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁelds, the bound-
ary acceleration electromagnetic ﬁelds, and the temperature electromagnetic ﬁelds generated
by charged particles from P (i), and let G(i)
0 be the proper solutions of the macroscopic Maxwell
equations in P (i) (i = 1, 2). These ﬁelds will be calculated in observation points lying outside
the cubes P (i), suﬃciently far from their boundaries. We shall prove that at least one of the
ﬁelds G(i) satisﬁes the formula (5)

Assume that the macroscopic current and charge densities in P (i) are identically equal to

zero. Therefore,

G(i)

0 ≡ 0,

i = 1, 2.

(15)

Let ea, ha, eu, hu be given by (12) and (13). The equation (15) being satisﬁed, we can calculate
the ﬁeld G(1)
T by summing up the contributions [ea,ha], [eu,hu] from all particles in P (1) (i.e.
from electron carriers and ions in P (1), the contributions from ions being given in our case by
the Coulomb ﬁeld). These contributions are averaged in a short interval of time when necessary.
Assume now that the barrier of forces making the face ∂2P (2) impenetrable is suﬃciently
strong and steep to decelerate and accelerate the carriers within a distance κ which is small
in comparison with the average distance between carriers in P (2). Let ∆P (2) be a boundary
layer with a thickness κ adjacent to the face ∂2P (2), and ∆P (1) be a corresponding layer in
P (1). To calculate G(2)
T , we sum up the contributions [ea,ha], [eu,hu] from all carriers and ions
in P (2) − ∆P (2) and add the contributions [eu,hu] from all particles in ∆P (2). We do not take
into account the contributions [ea,ha] from ∆P (2), because they are used to calculate the ﬁeld
G(2)
B .

If κ is suﬃciently small, then in the corresponding points of observation
G(1)

T = G(2)

T = GT ,

(16)

7

since the properties and velocity distributions of particles are identical in P (i) − ∆P (i), and
we may neglect the contributions [ea,ha], [eu,hu] from particles in ∆P (1) and the contributions
[eu,hu] from particles in ∆P (2), as the bounds of all these contributions do not depend on κ.
The equation (16) being satisﬁed, we shall need no more information concerning the ﬁelds G(i)
T
to prove the formula (5). However, we must calculate the ﬁelds G(i)

B . We have

G(1)

B ≡ 0,

(17)

because all contributions [ea,ha], [eu,hu] from all particles in P (1) have been already used to
calculate the ﬁeld G(1)

T . It remains to calculate G(2)
B .

3.3. The ﬁeld G(2)
B
Let points x′ with coordinates x′

1, x′

2, x′

to P (2). We deﬁne for a positive ν that P (2) is given by formulas: x′
and that ∂2P (2) lies on the plane x′
and pointing in the positive direction of the x3-axis.

3 in the Cartesian system X denote points belonging
1, x′
3 ∈ [−2ν, 0],
3 = 0

3 = 0. Let K be a unit vector normal to the plane x′

2 ∈ [−ν, ν], x′

Assume for the sake of simplicity that all electron carriers move only in the x3-direction,
and that all of them have the same speed u outside the boundary layer ∆P (2) (the results
obtained by means of this assumption may be easily generalized for some more general cases).
In the layer ∆P (2) each electron stays during a time tκ while it is accelerated from the velocity
Integrating ea(x, t) from (12) with respect to time during the
+uK to the velocity −uK.
time tκ, we obtain the averaged in a unit time contribution δE(2)
B from one
carrier. Let R = x, R = |R|, n = R/R (R is the distance from the center of the face
∂2P (2) to the observation point).
If R ≫ ν + κ then with a good accuracy R1 = R and
B (x) = −2L1uR−1n×(n × K).
δE(2)
If the number density of electron carriers in P (2) is Φ0, then the number of collisions
with the layer ∆P (2) per unit area and time is uΦ0/2. Therefore, we obtain E(2)
B (x) =
−∆S L1Φ0u2R−1n×(n × K) where ∆S is the area of ∂2P (2) . Taking into account (14), we
can write

B (x) to the ﬁeld E(2)

B (x) = −∆S LR−1 n×(n×K)
E(2)

where

L = (2π m ε0c2)

−1 Q Φ0 W

′

, W

′

= mu2/2,

m is the mass of electron.

Similarly, integrating ha(x, t) from (12), we get

H(2)

B (x) = ∆S cε0LR−1 n×K.

Using the above method of derivation, one can also obtain the expressions for G(2)
B in the general
case when the electrons move in 3 space directions and have diﬀerent velocities. In such a case,
one gets the same expressions (18) and (20). The only diﬀerence is that W ′ in (19) should be
replaced by

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

W = (1/2) k T η(T )

8

where W is the average kinetic energy of electrons per one degree of freedom, k is Boltzmann’s
constant, T denotes the temperature of electrons in kelvins, and η is a dimensionless coeﬃcient
equal to one for particles having the classical distribution of velocities. Some values of L and
η for copper, silver, and a deuteron plasma are given in Appendix.

Suppose that the values of Φ0 and u or W for electron carriers in cubes P (i) are similar to
those for carriers in copper at 300 K. Using the data from formulas (A7) in Appendix, we get
then from (18) and (20) the numerical values of EB, HB mentioned in Section 2 for copper
cube. Therefore, we obtain

|G(2)

B | ≫ 0.

3.4. Conclusions

From (3), (15), (16), and (17), we get

Hence, taking into account (22), we obtain that at least one of the following inequalities must
be true:

G(1) = GT , G(2) = GT + G(2)
B .

|G(1)| ≫ 0,

|G(2)| ≫ 0,

which proves the formula (5).

As it has been already pointed out in Section 2, the result (24) does not agree with the re-
sults which can be obtained by means of the presently used methods of macroscopic averaging.
These methods lead in our case to the conclusion that G(i) ≡ G(i)
(i = 1, 2), because in
both cases the macroscopic current and charge densities are equal to zero. One of the reasons of
this contradiction is the fact that when we calculate the macroscopic ﬁeld generated by carriers
from P (i), the contributions to this ﬁeld from carriers leaving or entering P (i) are discontinuous
in time and do not satisfy the pertinent microscopic Maxwell equations. This invalidates, e.g.,
the indicated in Section 1 formulas given by de Groot (1969), and de Groot and Suttorp (1972).

0 ≡ 0

4. FIELD EBS GENERATED BY A SURFACE ∂PS
IN AN INHOMOGENEOUS CONDUCTOR

Let R0 , ψ (R0 ≫ ψ) be positive constants. Consider a cube P ′ deﬁned by

′
i ∈ [−2R0, 2R0],
x

i = 1, 2, 3.

The cube contains an inhomogeneous alloy of silver and copper. On every surface x′
constant the alloy is homogeneous. For x′
while for x′

3 =
3 < −ψ the medium in P ′ is a homogeneous copper
3 > ψ the medium in P ′ is a homogeneous silver. Let 2ψ = 0.01 cm, R0 = 1 cm.

Consider in P ′ a cylinder PS deﬁned by

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(x′

1)2 + (x′

2)2 ≤ R0,

|x′

3| ≤ 1.1ψ,

9

We denote the lateral surface of PS by ∂LPS and the bases of PS by ∂b1PS and ∂b2PS . The
base ∂b1PS lies on the surface x′
3 = −1.1ψ. Assume that the boundary of PS is impenetrable
for electrons. We shall calculate the boundary acceleration ﬁeld EBS generated by electrons
from P (P = P ′ − PS) accelerated at the boundary of PS. Let the observation point x lie in
the center of PS, i.e. x = (0, 0, 0). Let EBS1, EBS2, EBSL be the contributions to EBS
generated by electrons accelerated at ∂b1PS, ∂b2PS, and ∂LPS, respectively.

Integrating formula (18) with respect to S over the base ∂b1PS in suitable polar coordinates,

one obtains:

EBS1 = 2πLKR−1

01 (R01 − 1.1ψ)2 where R01 = (R2

0 + 1.12ψ2)(1/2)

(27)

(a more detailed derivation of formulas (27) to (30) is given in sections 5.2 and 5.3 of my
previous pertinent paper, available electronically). In our case (R0 ≫ ψ) we get with a good
accuracy EBS1 = 2πLCuR0K where LCu is the value of L for electrons in copper. Similarly,
EBS2 = −2πLAgR0K. Hence

EBSb ≡ EBS1 + EBS2 = L2R0K,

L2 = 2π(LCu − LAg).

(28)

If κ is suﬃciently small, then it can be easily proved that the ﬁeld EBSL can be estimated
by integrating formula (18) with suitably changed K over ∂LPS. In our case (2ψ = 0.01 cm,
R0 = 1 cm) one can obtain an estimate |EBSL|/|EBSb| < 3×10−4 if one puts Φ0 in the integrand
twice as big as Φ0 for copper. Therefore, with a good accuracy

From (28) and (A7) we get L2 = −3.9×1015 V m−2 at 300 K and

EBS = EBSb + EBSL = L2R0K.

|EBS| > 3.5×1013 V m

−1

(29)

(30)

for R0 = 1 cm . We see that the ﬁeld EBS generated by particles from P ′ − PS accelerated in
the immediate vicinity of the whole boundary ∂PS may reach surprisingly great values even
when the diameter of PS is small.

5. REMARKS

This paper is a shorter and simpler version of my earlier paper described in Introduction.
These of the more important results of that paper which have not been derived in the present
paper are concisely formulated without proofs in the following remarks. Some methodological
remarks have been also retained and are given in the next section. The earlier paper is available
from the author on request electronically.

Remark 1.

It can be proved that formulas (18), (20) with expressions (19), where W ′
is replaced by W from (21), are also valid for a general medium where the thickness of the
boundary layer κ is comparable to, or greater than, the mean free path l of carriers in P (the
deﬁnition of κ in such a general case is given in the earlier paper). They are also valid for curved

10

boundaries when the moduli of radii of normal curvatures are suﬃciently big in comparison
with κ and l, and in some cases when the latter condition is not satisﬁed.

Remark 2. If the ions in P move and collide with the boundary ∂2P , then we must also
take into account the boundary acceleration ﬁeld produced by ions. This ﬁeld is described by
the same formulas (18), (20) with the data for electrons in expressions (19) and (21) replaced
by the data for ions. Let the subscripts i and e label the quantities referring, respectively, to
ions or nuclei and electrons. If, for instance, all ions have the same charge Qi and mass mi, we
get from (19) and (21)

|Li/Le| = (ηi/ηe) me/mi

as |QiΦ0i| = |QeΦ0e|. In this and in the other cases, the contribution to EB, HB from nuclei
or ions may be usually neglected in comparison with the contribution from electrons, since the
ratio me/mi is small and ηi/ηe ≤ 1.

Remark 3. Formulas (18), (20) with (19) and (21) result from expressions (12). The
latter are the ﬁrst terms of the expansions with respect to the powers of u/c of the exact
expressions. Therefore, (18) and (20) are also the ﬁrst terms of the expansions of the exact
boundary acceleration ﬁeld GR
B. If P contains a homogeneous medium, then the formulas (18),
(20) integrated over the closed surface ∂P vanish. In our cases the values of L are very large
and the values of u/c are not very small (see Appendix). Therefore, one should consider the
inﬂuence of further terms of the expansions of GR
B. Some partial results suggest that the second
terms of these expansions integrated over ∂P may be diﬀerent from zero for plasma in magnetic
traps, even when the plasma were homogeneous.

Remark 4. Let G0 6= 0. Assume that G0 = G01 + G02 where G01 does not depend on t
and |G02| is suﬃciently small. In general, the density J and the ﬁeld G01 may inﬂuence the
velocity distribution functions of particles in P . Hence the ﬁelds GB and GT may depend on
J and ρ. However, if we assume that (4) holds for J 6= 0, ρ 6= 0 when ∂2P =∂P or that |J|, |ρ|
are suﬃciently small, then formulas (9) and (10) remain valid.

6. METHODOLOGICAL REMARKS

Remark M1. The aim of this paper is a presentation of some new results deduced from
the Maxwell equations with microscopic charge and current densities. These results concern
averaged macroscopic electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by large sets of moving charged parti-
cles. We do not know the position and velocity of any particular particle, and may use only
statistical information given by velocity distribution functions for various particle species in P .
Nevertheless, we assume that the positions and velocities of particles are continuous functions
of time. Such an assumption is necessary to use, e.g., the Li´enard-Wiechert formulas. Without
it any results concerning the electromagnetic ﬁeld generated by sets of moving carriers are not
a deduction from the Maxwell equations with microscopic sources even if they are an inference
from some inductive extensions of these equations used in quantum theories. Therefore, we
shall introduce a natural model based on this assumption and taking into account quantum
considerations.

11

Let the region P contain N carriers with the same total electric charge Q and rest mass
m, and let b denote a suﬃciently small positive number. Let the macroscopic number density
of these carriers be Φ(x, t) and their velocity distribution function be f (x, u, t). For sets of
degenerate particles, such as electron plasma in metal conductors, the values of f (x, u, t) may
result from quantum theories. We deﬁne in P a set of N privileged points with the following
properties. The positions and velocities of these points are continuous functions of time, and
their accelerations are piecewise continuous functions. Their trajectories do not cross ∂2P . At a
time t0 their macroscopic number density is equal to Φ(x, t0). If the distance between two priv-
ileged points is less than 2b, then they are strongly accelerated in random directions. Suitably
choosing the distribution of such accelerations, we may ensure that the number density and
velocity distribution of privileged points in P are given by Φ(x, t) and f (x, u, t), respectively.
We regard each privileged point as a point belonging to the region occupied by a particle
with the charge Q and rest mass m. When we write that particle p is at a point x at a time t,
we mean that privileged point p is at x at t. All species of particles in P can be represented in
this way. We may allow interactions between privileged points of diﬀerent kinds of particles if
we care about a more realistic description of collisions.

Procedures equivalent to the setting of privileged points are universally used in statistical
physics. For instance, they were explicitly or implicitly used by de Groot and Suttorp (1972),
Ferziger and Kaper (1972), Landau and Lifshitz (1964), Schram (1991).

Remark M2. Let d3x be a small volume in the system X in P , un be the components
of u in X, and d3u be a small volume in the velocity space un. Assume that at a time t the
expected number dN(x, u, t) of particles of a given species in the volume element d3x located
at x, whose velocities lie in d3u about velocity u is given with a suﬃcient accuracy by the
formula

dN(x, u, t) = f (x, u) d3x d3u

where the velocity distribution function f (x, u) does not depend on t.

Taking into account regions in the vicinity of the boundary ∂2P , it may be sometimes
convenient to consider subregions of P which are too small to contain a large number of particles
(see, e.g., the next remark). We may then take into account a set of identical regions Pn
(n = 1,2,. . . ,Ien). In each region Pm (m >1) the privileged points of all particles are located at
a time t in the same points in which they were located in Pm−1 at a time t - δt. Considering all
privileged points from all Pm, we obtain for them the velocity distribution function fen equal
to Ienf (x, u). The reasoning may be then carried out for fen instead of f . The ﬁnal result
should be divided by Ien. This approach makes dN well deﬁned even when dN < 1. This is
one of possible procedures making the concept of the velocity distribution function useful also
in idealized or averaged microscopic regions. Such an averaging may be performed, e.g., in the
microscopic vicinity of ∂2P on microscopic layers parallel to ∂2P .

Remark M3. We assume throughout this paper that the boundary ∂2P is impenetrable for
carriers of electric charge. The form of the functions f (x, u) in a vicinity of ∂2P depends on the
averaged distribution of forces acting on carriers in the neighborhood of ∂2P . This distribution
depends on the kind of medium in P and its theoretical idealization. We can also introduce

12

artiﬁcial boundaries and postulate extremal or not typical mechanisms of their impenetrability.
In each case the forces acting in the vicinity of an impenetrable surface cause the averaged
acceleration of particles to have a not vanishing resultant pointing into P . Consequently the
number densities of carriers and the functions f (x, u) for various species of particles must, in
general, depend on the distance from the point x to such a surface for x in a neighborhood
of this surface. The only exception concerns the case when the barrier of forces making the
boundary ∂2P impenetrable is suﬃciently strong and steep to decelerate and accelerate the
carriers within a distance which is very small in comparison with the average distance between
particles in P .

Remark M4. Consider a moving charged particle with the total electric charge Q. The
electromagnetic ﬁeld E, H generated by this particle and observed at the point x and time t
may be written as

E(x, t) = e(x, t) + e′(x, t), H(x, t) = h(x, t) + h′(x, t),

Σ(x, t), H′

where the ﬁeld e, h is equal to the ﬁeld which would be generated in a vacuum by the charge Q
located in the privileged point related to this particle. The ﬁeld e′, h′ is a correction to the ﬁeld
e, h. This correction may be produced owing to the following reasons: the charge is not located
in the privileged point, its density is ﬁnite, the charge density is strongly inhomogeneous and
of opposite sign in some subregions of the particle, there are electric currents ﬂowing and/or
oscillating inside the particle, there are electric currents caused by the rotation of the whole
Σ(x, t) be the sum of corrections e′, h′ from all particles in P , averaged
particle. Let E ′
in a short interval of time. The value of this sum depends on the kind of medium in P . In
this paper we assume that if x is outside P and its immediate vicinity, then E ′
Σ(x, t) = 0,
H′
Σ(x, t) = 0 with a suﬃcient accuracy. This is equivalent to the assumption that outside P
and its immediate vicinity we may neglect the total ﬁeld of all electric and magnetic multipoles
which may be introduced in order to describe the ﬁelds e′, h′ generated by all particles in P .
Remark M5. The ﬁeld G0 generated by J and ρ in P is usually calculated by means of the
retarded vector and scalar potentials A and ϕ. If, for instance, the medium in and outside P
is homogeneous, and its permeability and dielectric constant are equal to 1, then the potential
A is given by

A(x, t) =

′
d3x′ |x − x′|−1 J(x

, td)

µ0
4π ZP

where td = t − c−1|x − x′|, and the potential ϕ(x, t) is given by the analogical expression (see,
e.g., Bochenek 1961). These potentials may be used to calculate the ﬁeld G0 if the Lorentz
condition ∇ · A + c−2 ∂ϕ/∂t = 0 is satisﬁed. This always takes place when the normal to ∂P
component of J vanish identically on ∂P . It is a consequence of results given, e.g., by Stratton
(1941) or Jones (1964). If this last assumption is not satisﬁed, then the ﬁeld G0 is not deﬁned
while G remains well deﬁned.

Acknowledgements

The author acknowledges the helpful attitude of Professors Micha l Kleiber, Adam Cia-
rkowski, and Marek Matczy´nski from the Institute of Fundamental Technological Research

13

concerning the organization of his workplace.

APPENDIX

We shall calculate here the numerical values of L deﬁned in (19) — with W ′ replaced by
W given in (21) — for electron carriers in copper and silver at a temperature of 300 K and for
electrons in a deuteron plasma prepared for a controlled thermonuclear fusion reaction, with
the number density of nuclei Φ0D = 1022 m−3, the temperature of nuclei of 4×108 K, and the
temperature of electrons T = 107 K. The quantities referring to electrons in copper and silver
will be denoted by subscripts Cu and Ag, respectively, while those referring to electrons in the
deuteron plasma will have subscript D.

The following constants are used: c = 3.00×108 m s−1, cεo = 2.65×10−3 F s−1, hP = 6.63×
10−34 J s (Planck’s constant), k = 1, 38×10−23 J K−1 (Boltzmann’s constant), me = 9.11×10−31 kg
(the rest mass of electron), NA = 6, 02×1023 mol−1 (Avogadro’s number), Q = −1.60×10−19 C
(the electric charge of electron).

We deﬁne

Wav = 3W = (3/2) kT η,

(1/2) meu2

av = Wav.

(A1)

(A2)

We see that uav is an averaged speed of electrons and Wav is their average kinetic energy in the
non-relativistic range of velocities when these electrons move in all 3 space directions. It will
be shown that for the electron plasma in copper and silver at 300 K we get c−1uav < 5×10−3.
Therefore we may neglect the relativistic corrections to the mass and kinetic energy of electrons.
As far as electrons in the plasma at 107 K are concerned, we receive c−1uav < 0.08. In this case
we also neglect the relativistic corrections, since this may cause at most a few per cent error of
LD.

Assume that the Fermi-Dirac statistics correctly describes the energy and velocity distribu-
tions of electrons in electron plasma. If we consider electron plasma contained in a cube with
a volume v in physical space, then the volume of the elementary cell in the momentum space
is h3
P /v. Each cell contains at most 2 electrons. Hence, if ζ0 denotes the maximum energy of
electrons at 0 K, and W0av is the average energy corresponding to ζ0, we get

ζ0 = h2

P (8me)−1(3Φ0/π)2/3, W0av = 0.6 ζ0.

(A3)

If kT /ζ0 ≪ 1, then we may neglect the increase of the average energy caused by temperature
and put

Wav = W0av.
If kT /ζ0 ≫ 1, then the Fermi-Dirac statistics becomes that of Maxwell and we may set η = 1.
The exact analysis (see, e.g., Weizel 1955) gives for kT /ζ0 much smaller than 1:

(A4)

Wav = W0av[1 + (5π2/12)(kT /ζ0)2] + O[(kT /ζ0)4].

If kT /ζ0 is much greater than 1 then from formulas in Weizel’s book one may infer (see also,
e.g., Tamm 1957) that η = 1 with a good accuracy if

Φ0 h3

P (2πmekT )−3/2 < 0.01

or

T > 1.3×10−13 Φ2/3

.

0

14

Therefore, for Φ0D = 1022 m−3 and T = 107 K, we get ηD = 1. From (A1) and (A2) we receive
then c−1uavD < 0.08.

We calculate now ζ0 for copper and silver. The mass of 1 mole of Cu is 63.5 g and of Ag is
108 g. Assume that the speciﬁc mass at 300 K of Cu is 8.9 Mg m−3, and of Ag is 10.5 Mg m−3.
Hence the number densities of atoms of Cu and Ag are, respectively, 8.4×1028 m−3 and 5.9 ×
1028 m−3. The average number of electrons given to the electron plasma by one atom at 300 K
is, respectively, 1.3 and 1.03 (see, e.g., Szczeniowski 1955, Clemmow 1973). Therefore, at 300 K

Φ0Cu = 11×1028 m−3, Φ0Ag = 6.1×1028 m−3,

ζ0Cu = 1.3×10−18 J, W0avCu = 0.78×10−18 J,

ζ0Ag = 0.88×10−18 J, W0avAg = 0.53×10−18 J.
Formulas (A6) specify the maximum and average energies which the electrons would have at
0 K, were the numbers densities of electrons at 0 K equal to Φ0Cu and Φ0Ag given by (A5).
For T=300 K we have kT /ζ0Cu = 3.2×10−3,
kT /ζ0Ag = 4.7×10−3. Therefore we may use
e )1/2 we get c−1uavCu < 4.6 ×10−3,
(A4). From the approximate formula uav = (2W0avm−1
c−1uavAg < 3.9×10−3. It results from the Fermi-Dirac statistics that for nearly all electrons in
copper and silver c−1u < 7×10−3 at T = 300 K.

Taking into account (A1), (A4), (A5), (A6), we obtain from (19) and (21) that at 300 K

LCu = −1.0×1015 V m−2, c ε0 LCu = −2.7×1012 A m−2,

LAg = −3.8×1014 V m−2,

c ε0 LAg = −1.0×1012 A m−2.

On grounds of (A1), (A3), and (A4) we notice that LCu and LAg should not practically depend
on temperature in an interval within which the number densities (A5) remain nearly constant.
Replacing Wav in (A1) by W0av from (A6), we receive for T = 300 K

Taking into account ηD = 1, we obtain for T = 107 K

ηCu = 126,

ηAg = 85.

LD = −2.4×1010 V m−2,

c ε0 LD = −6×107 A m−2.

References
Bochenek, K., Metody analizy p´ol elektromagnetycznych. (Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe,

Clemmow, P. C. and Dougherty, J. P., Electrodynamics of particles and plasmas. (Addison-

Clemmow, P. C., An introduction to electromagnetic theory. (Cambridge University Press,

Warszawa–Wroc law, 1961), pp. 30–31.

Wesley, Reading, Ma., 1969), pp. 37–38.

1973), p. 257.

15

(A5)

(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

(A9)

Amsterdam, 1969), pp. 11-37.

terdam, 1972), pp. 3–307.

Holland, Amsterdam, 1972).

de Groot, S. R., The Maxwell equations. Studies in Statistical Mechanics (North-Holland,

de Groot, S. R. and Suttorp, L. G., Foundations of electrodynamics. (North-Holland, Ams-

Ferziger J. H. and Kaper, H. G., Mathematical theory of transport processes in gases. (North-

Jones, D. S., The theory of electromagnetism. (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1964), p. 40.
Landau L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M., Statistiˇceskaja ﬁzika, 2nd edn. (Nauka, Moskva, 1964).
Li´enard, A., ”Champ ´electrique et magn´etique produit par une charge ´electrique concentr´ee
en un point et anim´ee d’un mouvement quelconque,” L’´eclairage ´electrique 16, 5, 53, 106
(1898).

Lorentz, H. A., Proc. Roy. Acad. Amsterdam 254 (1902).
Lorentz, H. A., ”Weiterbildung der Maxwellschen Theorie: Elektronentheorie,” Enc. Math.

Lorentz, H. A., The theory of electrons, 2nd edn. (Dover, New York, 1915).
Schram, P. P. J. M., Kinetic theory of gases and plasmas.

(Kluwer Academic Publishers,

Stratton, J. A., Electromagnetic theory. (McGraw-Hill, New York and London, 1941), pp.

Sza lek, M. A., ”Pauli versus the Maxwell equations and the Biot-Savart law,” Phys. Essays

Szczeniowski, S., Fizyka do´swiadczalna, cz¸e´s´c III, elektryczno´s´c i magnetyzm. (Pa´nstwowe

Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warszawa, 1955), p. 217.

Tamm, I. E., Osnovy teorii elektriˇcestva, 7th edn. (Gosudarstvennye Izdatelstvo Tehniko –

Teoretiˇceskoj Literatury, Moskva, 1957), §41, p.198.

Weizel, W., Lehrbuch der theoretischen Physik. (Springer 1955), chapter L, section IV, §1.
Wiechert, E., ”Elektrodynamische Elementargesetze,” Archives n´eerlandaises 5, 549 (1900).

Wiss. 14 (1904).

Dordrecht, 1991).

429–430.

10, 95 (1997).

16

