5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nanostructures and enhanced absorption in intense laser interaction with matter:
eﬀect of laser prepulses

P. P. Rajeev∗ S. Kahaly, S.Bose, P. Prem Kiran, P. Taneja, P. Ayyub and G. Ravindra Kumar †
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 1, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India.
(Dated: July 26, 2013)

Hard x-ray emission (20 - 200 keV) from plasmas produced by intense laser pulses on nanoparticle
coated targets is compared with that from optically polished targets. The yield enhancement oﬀered
by nanoparticles is studied under diﬀerent prepulse conditions. It is observed that the enhancement
reduces when the nanoparticle coated target is irradiated with a prepulse with intensity greater
than 1013 Wcm−2. When the prepulse intensity exceeds 1014 Wcm−2, the enhancement vanishes
completely. This is attributed to preplasma formation on nanoparticles their subsequent structural
modiﬁcation before the arrival of the main pulse. It is suggested that high-contrast ultrashort pulses
are essential for nanoparticles to function as yield enhancers.

PACS numbers: 52.25.Nr, 52.40.Nk, 52.50.Jm, 42.65.Re

In recent years, plasmas generated by intense, ultra-
short lasers have attracted multifaceted research to ex-
plore basic physics as well as applications. One of the
major reasons for this attention is their high brightness
as x-ray sources [1]. Radiation and particle emissions
from these plasmas are inherently ultrashort in nature [2].
The radiation pulses are potentially useful in lithography,
time-resolved mapping of ultrafast atomic and molecular
processes, precision imaging etc. [3, 4, 5]. Since a practi-
cal realization of such sources demands high ﬂux levels,
there is a great deal of interest in methods to enhance the
x-ray yield and the inﬂuence of various laser and target
conditions has been the subject of many recent studies.
For example, laser prepulses [6] and modulated surfaces
[7, 8, 9] enhance laser absorption considerably and sub-
sequently increase the x-ray yields (mostly in soft and
moderately hard x-ray regimes). Methods of enhancing
emission in the very hard x-ray spectral region are being
explored only recently. Such studies are interesting not
only from the point of view of the enhanced radiation,
but also to understand the role of surface structures or
‘roughness’ in enhancing the production of hot electrons
in plasma responsible for the emission. Enhanced x-ray
yield is a signature of enhanced hot electron production,
a central issue in inertial fusion research [10] and high
energy particle generation and acceleration [11].

Recently we have reported that metal nanoparticles
can be used as excellent sources of hard x-ray pulses
[12]. A simple, yet general and quantitative model for the
enhanced emission was also recently presented [12, 13].
We had proposed that the non-planar geometry of these
nanostructures modiﬁes the local electric ﬁelds around
them, resulting in enhanced absorption and hard x-ray

∗present address: Steacie Institute for Molecular Sciences, Na-
tional Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0R6, Ra-
jeev.Pattathil@nrc.gc.ca
†electronic address: grk@tifr.res.in

emission. However, to make this method generally appli-
cable, we need to examine the behaviour of nanoparticles
during their exposure to intense, ultrashort light pulses.
Since intense femtosecond laser pulses invariably possess
prepulses as well as picosecond pedestals - particularly,
if suﬃcient care is not taken to speciﬁcally avoid them -
it is important to examine how nanoparticles respond to
prepulses.

The eﬀect of strong prepulses on ﬂat targets and the
resulting particle emissions has been investigated in de-
tail before [6]. A prepulse could be intentional or inherent
(the latter could be due to leakage from the cavity dump-
ing in a regenerative ampliﬁer). Further, the pedestal of
an intense pulse resulting from incomplete pulse com-
pression or ampliﬁed spontaneous emission, could also
serve as a prepulse.
If the prepulse intensity is above
the plasma formation threshold, it would form a plasma
layer before the main pulse arrives, thus crucially altering
the interaction process. Depending on the prepulse-main
pulse delay, plasma length-scale could increase and insta-
bilities can build-up in the plasma, resulting in ripples
in the critical density layer. The unevenness of critical
layer as well as a long density proﬁle favor resonance ab-
sorption and thus, laser absorption and x-ray production
increase with preplasma formation [6, 14]. However, the
eﬀect of preplasma formation on nanostructured targets
has not yet been explored. Such a study is very inter-
esting as it can establish the validity or otherwise of the
basic assumptions [7, 9, 12, 13] in the modelling and un-
derstanding of the phenomenon of enhanced absorption.

In this paper, we address this problem in detail by
monitoring x-ray emission from optically polished cop-
per surfaces as well as those coated with spherical copper
nanoparticles.. We observe that nanoparticle-coated tar-
gets oﬀer 3-4 fold enhancement in hard x-ray production
as compared to uncoated copper targets, when irradiated
with high-contrast laser pulses (main pulse-prepulse con-
trast 105:1) at light ﬁeld intensities 1015 − 1016 Wcm−2.
This enhancement is examined under diﬀerent pre-pulse

2

NaI (Tl)

T

P

L

Main Pulse

Prepulse

Delay

BS

Laser

PD

SA

G

•T – Target
• P – Plasma
• L – Lens
• BS – Beam Splitter
• PD – Photo Diode
• G – Gate Generator
• SA – Spectroscopy 

Amplifier

• ADC – Analog to 

Digital
Converter

• MCA – Multi Channel
Analyzer

ADC

MCA

FIG. 1: Schematics of the Experimental Set-up

conditions realized in a standard two-pulse (prepulse-
main pulse) set-up. It is observed that the enhancement
oﬀered by nanoparticles reduces and even vanishes com-
pletely when exposed to prepulses with intensity levels
above a certain threshold. The preplasma formed on
nanoparticles modiﬁes them before the main pulse. This
results in a reduction and complete removal of yield en-
hancements. This study therefore provides crucial infor-
mation on the exact mechanism of nanostructure-induced
absorption enhancement.

The laser used for our experiments (Fig. 1) is a custom-
designed chirped pulse ampliﬁcation Ti: Sapphire sys-
tem, producing pulses of 100 fs duration at 10 Hz, cen-
tered at 806 nm. The linearly polarized laser beam is
split into two and both beams are focused on the targets
housed in a vacuum chamber at 10−3 Torr, with precise
overlap of the focal regions. The target is continuously
translated such that each laser shot irradiates a fresh area
on the target. The weak pre-pulse and strong main pulse
are focussed respectively by 30 cm and 20 cm focal length
plano-convex lenses. The maximum main beam energy
is limited to 4.5 mJ in the present series of experiments,
yielding a light intensity of about 4.5 ×1015 Wcm−2 at
a focal spot of 20 microns diameter. A variable optical
delay is introduced in the weaker beam path using a mo-
torized precision translation stage. The delay between
the two beams can be continuously adjusted from -0.5
ns to +0.5 ns - negative delay implies that the prepulse
arrives before the main pulse. We keep the prepulse in-
tensity suﬃciently above the plasma formation threshold
(∼ 1013 − 1014 Wcm−2 for Copper [15]) such that a pre-
plasma is formed before the main pulse is incident. The
intensity of the prepulse is varied using a half-wave plate-
polarizer combination. The spatial overlap of main pulse

FIG. 2: Scanning Electron Micrographs of (a) the nanoparti-
cle coating and (b) destruction of the nanoparticle layer after
exposure to a pulse with intensity over the plasma formation
threshold.

and prepulse is checked through a CCD imaging system
which observes the plasma formation region. To deter-
mine the temporal overlap, the prepulse reﬂectivity (at
very low prepulse levels, such that the prepulse does not
produce plasma) is monitored as the delay is changed. A
sharp drop in the prepulse reﬂectivity, which is indicative
of plasma formation by the main pulse, establishes the
”zero” of temporal overlap [16]. X-ray emission from the
plasma is monitored using a time-gated NaI (Tl) scintil-
lation detector kept in the plane of incidence at 45◦ to the
target normal. A detailed description of this diagnostic
system can be found elsewhere [17].

Copper nanoparticles are deposited by high-pressure
dc-magnetron (Atom Tech 320-O) sputtering [15, 18]
on optically polished copper discs held at 0◦C. The
nanocrystalline thin ﬁlms typically consist of a collection
of densely packed, spherical nanoparticles, as shown in
Figure 2 (a). The resulting nanocrystalline Cu ﬁlms are
optically ﬂat and 1 µm in thickness. The crystallographic
domain size (dXRD) is obtained from x-ray diﬀraction
line broadening. For a ﬁlm deposited in 180 mTorr Ar
environment at a sputtering power of 200W, we obtain
dXRD = 15nm. Since the thickness of the nanoparticle
layer is greater than the skin depth of the laser light, the
laser essentially interacts only with the ﬁlm and not the
substrate behind it. However, during the interaction, the
ﬁlm is locally destroyed in the focal spot, if the laser in-
tensity exceeds the plasma formation threshold. Figure 2
(b) is a Scanning Electron Micrograph of one such focal
spot. The micrograph, which represents the surface af-
ter the laser irradiation, further evidences that the laser

interacts just with the nanoparticle coating leaving the
optically ﬂat copper surface behind it unaﬀected.

Figure 3 (inset) presents a typical comparison of
bremsstrahlung emission spectrum, measured from an
optically polished copper surface and such a surface
coated with spherical nanoparticles, irradiated at 45◦ at
6.0 × 1014Wcm2 with a single pulse. The total energy
emitted per pulse from a polished target is 4.2 × 10−14 J
while the spherical nanoparticles yield 1.4 × 10−13 J, giv-
ing about 3 - fold enhancement in the range 20-200 keV.
This is quantitatively substantiated by a simple model,
which ascribes observed yield enhancements to the elec-
tric ﬁeld enhancements near the nanostructures [12, 13].
The model assumes that the integrity of the nanostruc-
tures is preserved during the interaction time . This
assumption is fairly reasonable as the plasma does not
expand signiﬁcantly to alter the shape of the structure
before the peak of the pulse is reached. Thus, one can
consider the system as a ’nanoplasma’, with just a diﬀer-
ent dielectric constant; the change in the dielectric func-
tion does not hamper the predictions of the model as the
ﬁeld enhancement is shown not to depend critically on
dielectric functions, under our experimental conditions
[12, 13].

We now examine the eﬀect of prepulses on the nanos-
tructured targets. Figure 3 shows the result of irradiating
a spherical nanoparticle-coated target with a prepulse of
intensity ∼ 1.5 × 1014 Wcm−2 at normal incidence. The
intensity of the main pulse was around 1016 Wcm−2.
A constant 4-fold enhancement was obtained from the
nanoparticle-coated surface, when irradiated with just
the main pulse, without the prepulse, similar to the result
shown in the inset. This is obviously not a function of
the prepulse delay and the plotted data points (top curve)
indicate just the values obtained with diﬀerent measure-
ments. As is clear from the ﬁgure, there is a drastic drop
in the enhancement on irradiation of a prepulse, even at
small (∼ 10 ps) delays. The enhancement vanishes com-
pletely as the delay between the prepulse and the main
pulse increases.

This observation is very signiﬁcant as it proves that the
nanostructure has to be intact before the intense pulse,
to observe any yield enhancements. It becomes clear that
the preformed plasma on nanoparticles is not the reason
for the observed enhancements on nanostructured sur-
faces. Thus the observed enhancements in single pulse
experiments at these intensities, themselves substantiate
the integrity of the surface structures in single pulse in-
teraction. Apart from ruling out the prepulse/pedestal
levels in single pulse experiments, this result also sug-
gests that it is necessary to irradiate with high-contrast
pulses for observation of yield enhancement using nanos-
tructured surfaces.

This is especially important in the context of low con-
trast pulses. Typically ultrashort pulses ride over a
long pedestal and wings of duration from picoseconds to

3

 

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
s
t
n
u
o
C

10

1

Nanoparticles, 
without prepulse

 Polished Cu
 Nano Cu

0 40 80 120160200

Energy (keV)

 

Nanoparticles, with prepulse

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

s
t
n
e
m
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Delay (ps)

FIG. 3: Eﬀect of a prepulse on nanoparticle-coated targets
at various delays. The enhancement factor (ratio of the x-ray
yield of nanoparticle coated targets to that from uncoated tar-
gets) reduces drastically and vanishes with the introduction of
a prepulse at ∼ 1014 Wcm−2. Inset: Typical hard x-ray spec-
trum from a polished copper target and a nanoparticle-coated
target

nanoseconds. Most high-power laser systems have pre-
pulses as well. This is mainly caused by the non-ideal
behaviour of the Pockels cell-polarizer combination in the
regenerative ampliﬁer The prepulse just before the cavity
dumping is normally the strongest of all.

Both prepulse and pedestal can form preplasma pro-
vided their intensity levels are above the plasma forma-
tion threshold. In ﬂat targets, as mentioned before, this
causes the plasma length-scale to exceed the wavelength,
which is never the case under our experimental conditions
with clean pulses. Further, instabilities can build-up in a
long-lived plasma, resulting in ripples in the critical den-
sity layer. Both of these eﬀects favor resonance absorp-
tion, the major mechanism of light coupling in plasma
in our experimental conditions. However, in the case of
nanostructured surfaces, preplasma formation aﬀects the
interaction detrimentally, as discussed above. The en-
hanced absorption- otherwise present- could be reduced
or eliminated completely.

It is thus important to parameterize conditions at
which nanostructures provide enhancements in x-ray
yield. We have studied the x-ray production from laser
produced plasma on nanoparticle-coated targets and ﬂat

 

 20 ps delay
 10 ps delay

 

3.0

2.5

t
n
e
m
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

2.0

1.5

1.0

5.0x1013

1.0x1014

1.5x1014

2.0x1014

Prepulse Intensity (Wcm-2)

FIG. 4: Variation of the x-ray yield enhancement with pre-
pulse intensity and delays. The main pulse intensity is
∼ 4.5 × 1015 Wcm−2

copper targets under various prepulse levels. Fig. 4 sum-
marizes the results of such a study. Yield enhancement
from nanoparticles at main pulse intensities ∼ 4.5 × 1015
Wcm−2 and under diﬀerent prepulse levels is presented.
Notice that even at small delays, the enhancement starts
reducing once the prepulse levels exceed 1013 Wcm−2.
Prepulse levels less than 1013 Wcm−2 do not aﬀect the
enhancement. This is understandable as the nanoparticle
coating is about a micron thick and contains several lay-
ers of nanoparticles. Even after some layers are destroyed
or modiﬁed as a result of the preplasma formation, some
fresh layers can be preserved for the further interaction
if the prepulse intensity is low enough. Thus, some ﬁeld
enhancement and subsequent enhanced absorption is still
possible with the main pulse. However, it has to be noted
that the enhancement reduces monotonically with pre-
pulse intensity. Though, the preplasma formed would be
mostly underdense at these intensities, it may not be pro-
duced in a uniform fashion all around the nanostructure.
It is well known that any non-planar geometry severely
alters the local ﬁeld distribution.
It can be seen that
most of the ﬁeld enhancement is concentrated near the
maximum curvature point - at the tip of the ellipsoidal
particle. Thus, plasma is presumably produced ﬁrst near
the tip of these structures. This spatially inhomogeneous
production of plasma can in turn lead to alterations in
the surface structure, which can reduce enhancement, as
observed. However, this eﬀect may not be strong enough
to completely nullify the enhancements at low prepulse
levels. The fact that the shape of the critical layer in

4

nanostructures is not seriously altered even at intensi-
ties beyond the plasma formation threshold is further
evidenced in our reﬂectivity studies reported elsewhere;
the strong dependence of polarization in absorption was
found to be present at intensity levels immediately be-
yond the plasma formation threshold [15].
It takes a
prepulse intensity ∼ 2 × 1014 Wcm−2 to completely nul-
lify the eﬀect of nanoparticles. Lower intensities do not
seem to alter or destroy the nanostructures to an extent
that their eﬀects is removed completely in the interaction
with the following ultrashort pulse.

In conclusion, the hard x-ray emission from plasmas
produced on optically polished copper surfaces and those
coated with spherical copper nanoparticles is examined
with femtosecond laser pulses. The emission is stud-
ied under diﬀerent prepulse levels irradiated at diﬀerent
times before the main ultrashort pulse.
It is observed
that with signiﬁcant prepulse levels, the enhancement in
x-ray emission from nanoparticle targets gets adversely
aﬀected and even nulliﬁed. These observations are espe-
cially important in studies to ﬁnd eﬃcient laser plasma
sources of short wavelength radiation. The prepulses and
pedestals invariably associated with high power lasers can
aﬀect the enhanced absorption induced by the nanostruc-
tures detrimentally. Extra pulse cleaning devices such as
a Pockels cell or saturable absorbers should be used to
increase the contrast of the temporal proﬁle of the pulse
in order to use nanostructured surfaces to facilitate en-
hanced x-ray production.

[1] See, for instance, P. Gibbon, and E. Forster, Plasma

Phys. Control. Fusion 38, 769 (1996).

[2] M. Murnane, H. Kapteyn, M. D. Rosen, and R. Falcone,

Science 251, 531 (1991).

[3] U. Teubner, T. Missala, I. Uschman, E. Frster, W.
Theobald and C. Wulker, Appl.Phys.B 62, 213 (1996).
[4] K. Sokolowski-Tinten, C. Blome, J. Blums, A. Cavalleri,
C. Dietrich, A. Tarasevitch, I. Uschmann, E. Frster, M.
Kammler, M. Horn-von-Hoegen and D. von der Linde,
Nature, 422, 287 (2003).

[5] M. W. Westneat, O. Betz, R. W. Blob, K. Fezzaa, W. J.

Cooper, and W. Lee, Science 299, 558 (2003).

[6] J. F. Pelletier, M. Chaker, and J.C. Kieﬀer, J. Appl.
Phys. 81, 5980 (1997); H. Nakano, T. Nishikawa, H. Ahn,
and N. Uesugi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 2992 (1996).
[7] M. M. Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn, S. P. Gordon, J. Bokor,
E. N. Glytsis, and R. W. Falcone, Appl. Phys. Lett. 62,
1068 (1993).

[8] T. Nishikawa, H. Nakano, Naoshi Uesugi, M. Nakao,
and H. Masuda, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 4079 (1999); T.
Nishikawa, H. Nakano, H. Ahn, and N. Uesugi, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 70, 1653 (1997).

[9] G. Kulcsar, D. AlMawlawi, F. W. Budnik, P.R. Herman,
M. Moskovits, L. Zhao, and R. S. Marjoribanks, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 84, 5149 (2000).

[10] M. Tabak, J. Hammer, M. E. Glinsky, W. L. Kruer, S.C.

Wilks, J.Woodworth, E. M. Campbell, and M. D. Perry,
Phys. Plasmas 1, 1626 (1994).

[11] S. C. Wilks, A. B. Langdon, T. E. Cowan, M. Roth,
M. Singh, S. Hatchett, M. H. Key, D. Pennington, A.
MacKinnon, and R. A. Snavely, Phys. Plasmas 8, 542
(2001).

Appl. Phys. 97, 023526 (2005).

[15] P.P. Rajeev et al., Appl. Phys. B (in press)
[16] A. S. Sandhu, A. K. Dharmadhikari, P. P. Rajeev, S.
Sengupta, A. Das, P. K. Kaw and G. R. Kumar, Phys.
Rev. Lett 89, 225002 (2002)

[17] P. P. Rajeev and G. R. Kumar, Opt. Commun. 222, 9

[12] P. P. Rajeev, P. Taneja, P. Ayyub, A. S. Sandhu and G.

(2003)

R. Kumar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 115002 (2003).

[18] P. Ayyub, R. Chandra, P. Taneja, A. K. Sharma, and R.

[13] P. P. Rajeev, P. Ayyub, S. Bagchi and G. R. Kumar,

Pinto, Appl. Phys. A 73, 67 (2001).

Opt.Lett. 29, 2662 (2004).

[14] A.S. Sandhu, A.K. Dharmadhikari and G. R. Kumar, J.

5

