5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The physics of antimatter induced fusion
and thermonuclear explosions∗

Andre Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni
Independent Scientiﬁc Research Institute
15, Charles-Galland, CH-1206 Geneva
Switzerland

ISRI-86-07.3 February 17, 2014

Abstract

The possibility of using antihydrogen for igniting inertial conﬁnement fu-
sion pellets or triggering large scale thermonuclear explosions is investigated.
The number of antiproton annihilations required to start a thermonuclear burn
wave in either D or Li2DT is found to be about 1021/k2, where k is the
compression factor of the fuel to be ignited. We conclude that the ﬁnan-
cial and energy investments needed to produce such amounts of antiprotons
would conﬁne applications of antimatter triggered thermonuclear devices to
the military domain.

1

Introduction

Matter-antimatter interaction produces more energy per unit mass than any other
means of energy production. For example, proton-antiproton annihilation releases
275 times more energy in the form of kinetic energy of charged particles than
nuclear ﬁssion or DT fusion. This energy is released by simple contact of anti-
matter with matter so that, in principle, no ignition energy is required to start the
reaction. It is therefore not surprising that the concept of using antimatter as an
energy source has been in scientiﬁc literature for decades [1, 2].

Other practical applications of antimatter are under consideration. For exam-
ple, antimatter propulsion systems [3], space based power generators [4], directed
∗Published in in G. Velarde and E. Minguez, eds., Proceedings of the 4th International Con-
ference on Emerging Nuclear Energy Systems, Madrid, June 30/July 4, 1986 (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1987) 166–169.

1

energy weapons [4], cancer therapy [5]. Finally, both Edward Teller [6, 7, 8]
and Andrei Sakharov [9], the key scientists in charge of the development of the
H-bomb in their respective countries, show in their published scientiﬁc works a
big interest in the annihilation properties of antimatter, the nuclear process that
after ﬁssion and fusion could lead to a third generation of nuclear bombs.

This paper is a summary of a comprehensive assessment of the feasibility
of producing large quantities of antiprotons and using them for igniting inertial
conﬁnement fusion pellets or triggering large scale thermonuclear explosions [10].

2 Matter-antimatter annihilation

When a particle meets it’s antiparticle they annihilate and the energy equivalent to
their total mass (2mc2) is converted into various new particles and kinetic energy
[8]. In the case of proton-antiproton annihilation, many different reaction channels
are possible, each resulting in the production of a different number of charged and
neutral particles. A good approximation is that three charged and two neutral pions
are produced on the average. Since neutral pions quickly decay into photons, the
typical pp annihilation process is as follows:

p + p → 3 π± + 4 γ.

(1)

An antiproton can also annihilate with a neutron, in which case mostly pions are
produced again, in numbers, on the average, similar to pp annihilation.

Antiprotons, antineutrons and positrons can combine to form antinuclei, an-
tiatoms, antimolecules. Annihilation occurs when the two kinds of matter come
sufﬁciently close to one other. Even at some distance, a neutral atom and a neutral
antiatom will attract each other by van der Waals forces [8]. As a consequence,
storage of antiatoms in a container made of matter is impossible in general. How-
ever, there may exist metastable states of antiprotons in normal matter [11].

3 Plasma heating with antiprotons

When a p annihilates in a hydrogen plasma, essentially all the annihilation energy
is radiated in the form of very energetic pions and photons. At solid hydrogen
densities, the mean free path of the 187 MeV photons is 25 m, so that they will not
loose energy in the plasma. However, the three 236 MeV charged pions will loose

2

energy by multiple Coulomb interactions with the electrons at a rate approximately
given by: dE/dx = 0.52 MeV/cm in solid H or DT and 2.06 MeV/cm in Li2DT .

If we now assume that annihilation takes place at the center of a sphere, the
energy dW deposited within a radius R = 1 cm is only 1.5 MeV out of the
total 1876 MeV annihilation energy. There are however several ways to improve
energy deposition, and thus plasma heating. Firstly, the fuel to be heated may be
compressed by a factor k, dE/dx will then be multiplied by k, and thus dW by k2/3.
But compression requires energy. Secondly, fuels such as Li2DT , which contain
more electrons, have a proportionally larger dE/dx. However, their thermonuclear
ignition temperature is also higher. Finally, annihilation may take place with a
nucleus.

When a p annihilates with a nucleon from a nucleus, because of the Fermi
motion of the annihilated nucleon, the nucleus will recoil with an energy of about
20 MeV. Furthermore, each of the 5 annihilation pions has a probability of colliding
with the rest of the nucleus. Hence, the average total energy deposition in a sphere
is

dE
dx
where ν = 3 is the number of charged pions and ǫ the local energy deposition by
the recoiling nucleus and the various pion-nucleus interaction debris.

dW = ν

R + ǫ,

(2)

In the case of p annihilation with deuterium or tritium ǫ is approximately
12 MeV on the average, about half of the Fermi energy. With heavy nuclei
there have been many theoretical speculations in the absence of measurements.
The ﬁrst of these was introduced by Duerr and Teller [7] who speculated that an
antiproton would ﬁnd a very strong (900 MeV) attractive potential when getting
close to a nucleus. More recently [12], Los Alamos scientists have calculated
that annihilation in carbon would result in the local energy deposition of about
100 MeV. Recent measurements at CERN show that it is in fact only 33 MeV in
carbon [5]. Low energy p’s annihilate mostly at the surface of nuclei, and thus
local energy deposition follows a A2/3 dependence on atomic weight. In effect,
the CERN data is compatible with the expression :

ǫ ≈ 6.4A2/3

[MeV].

(3)

Hence, for p annihilation in H, DT or Li2DT , ν is always about 3 and ǫ is
approximately equal to 0, 12 or 22 MeV respectively.

3

Figure 1: Electron-positron and proton-antiproton annihilation reaction rates av-
eraged over the Maxwell velocity distribution.

4 Thermonuclear burn of a particle-antiparticle plasma

A matter-antimatter plasma is obtained if some initially stable particle-antiparticle
mixture is suddenly ignited. The annihilation rate of two interacting species, with
number densities n and n, is

dn
dt

= −nnhσvi,

where hσvi is the annihilation reaction rate averaged over the Maxwell distribution.

In a H − H plasma, equation (4) holds for both protons and electrons with

n = n = n0 = ρNA/2 initially. Hence, for a given temperature

n =

n0
1 + t/τ

with

τ =

2
n0hσvi

.

If we assume T = 20 keV, hσvi is approximately the same for both e+e− and
pp annihilation. Thus the electron and the proton populations deplete at the same
rate, with a time constant of 5 ns for ρ = 0.07 g/cm3.

(4)

(5)

4

5 Annihilation in a matter-antimatter boundary layer

When matter and antimatter come into contact, annihilation primarily takes place
in a boundary layer in which particles and antiparticles are mixing. The thickness
of this matter-antimatter plasma is of the order of the antimatter mean-free-path in
matter, i.e., (3nσ)−1. A ﬁrst approximation, assuming that whenever an antipar-
ticle penetrates into the boundary layer it instantly annihilates, is an annihilation
rate per element area given by the total number of antiparticles impinging on that
surface. From the Maxwell velocity distribution one gets

dN
dS dt

= −nc

kT
2πmc2 .

r

(6)

(7)

The e+ annihilation rate is thus
mp/me ≈ 43 times the p annihilation rate.
However, since the HH plasma Debye length is much smaller than the boundary
layer thickness, plasma charge neutrality insures that the antimatter ﬂow rate is
determined by the slowest annihilation rate. Therefore, if H’s interact with the
walls of a closed cavity, annihilation results in an overall decrease of the antimatter
density within the cavity.

p

Let us now take the case of a sphere of solid antihydrogen that is suddenly put
in contact with a collapsing spherical shell of compressed DT . To solve Eq. (6)
one has to calculate the increase in the H plasma internal energy by the pions and
other particles from p annihilation in the surrounding DT:

dW = −dN

1
2 (cid:16)

ν

dE
dx

+

ǫ
λ (cid:17)

4R
π

N
N0

,

where λ = 3 cm is the approximate range of the 20 MeV recoil protons from p
annihilation in DT , and N (initially equal to N0) the number of H atoms. For
hydrogen dW = 3NdT , we get a system of equations for the H plasma density
and temperature. If annihilation is much faster than the collapse of the cavity (R
constant) the solution of Eqs. (6) and (7) is

T = T1 tanh2(t/τa)

and N = N0

1 − tanh2(t/τa)
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

.

(8)

For N0 = 1018, which corresponds to R = 0.02 cm, we ﬁnd T1 = 19 keV and
τa = 0.25 ns. Thus, in about 2τa = 0.5 ns, over 90% of the antihydrogen in the
sphere is annihilated. This time constant is compatible with the requirements of
instantaneous thermalization and inertial conﬁnement of the plasma.

5

In the conﬁguration for a 1 kt antimatter bomb shown above, one
Figure 2:
microgram of antihydrogen in a microcryostat is levitated at the center of a 100 g
Li2DT sphere. Implosion of the Li2DT by means of chemical explosives brings
the thermonuclear fuel into contact with the antihydrogen. The energy release
by annihilation is fast enough to trigger an outgoing thermonuclear detonation
wave which burns the Li2DT . Depending on the amount of compression by the
chemical explosives, the device operates as a 1 kt neutron bomb (ERW — Enhanced
Radiation Warhead) or a 1 kt blast bomb (RRR – Reduced Residual radioactivity).
In either case, the antimatter bomb will have very reduced radioactive fall-out
and electromagnetic pulse effects. From the point of view of non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, the fact that antimatter-triggered thermonuclear weapons
will have extremely reduced radioactive fallout, even for ground bursts, is an
important consideration. Since such explosives may be advocated for "peaceful
nuclear explosions," the current non-proliferation regime is being threatened by
the growing spread of high energy accelerator technologies [13]. Moreover, from
a strategic point of view, the possible advent of extremely compact and essentially
clean nuclear weapons would further diffuse the distinction between low-yield
nuclear weapons and conventional explosives.

6

6 Antiproton triggered thermonuclear detonation

wave

The most efﬁcient way to trigger a thermonuclear explosion is probably to start a
thermonuclear detonation wave in Li2DT by collapsing a hollow sphere of that
material on a tiny spherical pellet of solid antihydrogen.

In the spark model of thermonuclear ignition, an outgoing spherical detonation
wave starts if : (a) a critical amount of energy Ec is deposited in the center of the
sphere (the "spark" region) and (b) if the temperature within this volume is higher
than a critical temperature Tc. Without compression, one has Ec = 5 × 1025 keV
and Tc = 4 keV for solid DT , and Ec = 3 × 1026 keV and Tc = 13.6 keV for
Li2DT . However, for a compressed thermonuclear fuel at temperature Tc, the
critical energy decreases with the square of the compression factor k.

The number N of p annihilations necessary to induce a thermonuclear burn
wave can be estimated by supposing that annihilation takes place at the center of
the sphere to be ignited. Thus, from equation (2), condition (a) is satisﬁed if

Since the pions originate from the center, the temperature in the fuel goes as 1/r2.
Therefore, for simplicity, we require that condition (b) is satisﬁed for the average
temperature within the critical volume. Thus

Ec/k2 = N

ν

dE
dx

(cid:16)

kRs + ǫ

.

(cid:17)

Ec/k2 =

3
2

z
a

kρN

4π
3

R3

skTc,

(9)

(10)

where z and a are respectively equal to 2 and 2.5 for DT , and 6 and 9.5 for Li2DT .
Taking k = 30, a modest compression factor, and solving Eqs. (9) and (10) for
N and the spark radius Rs, one ﬁnds N = 3 × 1018 and Rs = 0.09 cm for DT,
and N = 6 × 1018 and Rs = 0.07 cm for Li2DT . However, because of some
of the simplifying assumptions made, these results may be somewhat pessimistic.
Hence, we will assume that 1018 p’s are sufﬁcient to trigger the thermonuclear
explosion of compressed DT or Li2DT pellets.

For thermonuclear explosions in the kiloton range, chemical explosives may
be used to implode the Li2DT shells. For low yield explosions such as in X-ray
laser pumping or ICF, compression factors higher than 30 can be achieved using
magnetic compression, beams or other techniques. However, antiproton induced
fusion will remain an attractive alternative to normal ICF only if the compression
factor is kept relatively small, i.e., less than 300, giving a number of p’s of the
order of 1016.

7

7 Discussion

The production of 1016 p’s for each antimatter triggered ICF pellet would require
an energy investment of at least 104 MJ [10]. It will therefore be very difﬁcult to
achieve energy break-even in power generating reactors using annihilation tech-
niques. Moreover, the technologies for producing p’s with high energy accelerator
systems, and the means for manipulating and storing sizable amounts of H are
extremely complicated. For instance, a plant of the size required to produce the
antimatter needed for one thermonuclear bomb trigger a day (10−6g of H or 1018
H atoms per day) could consist of several 10’s of accelerators and storage rings,
and could require as many as several large nuclear power plants to supply the
electricity [10]. A study by the RAND Corporation gives a cost estimate of $500–
1000 million for a prototype factory providing 10–100 micrograms, and $5–15
billion for a full production factory with an output of about 10 mg per year [4]. As
a consequence, civilian applications of antimatter for power production are very
unlikely.

Directed energy weapons applications may include the triggering of ther-
monuclear plasma jets, and X-ray or gamma-ray laser pumping. In the event of
a comprehensive test ban treaty, antimatter would provide a means for inducing
laboratory and small scale thermonuclear explosions in a yield range which cannot
easily be covered by underground explosions or classical ICF systems [13]. Of
course, many technical problems will have to be solved. In particular, the levita-
tion of a frozen H pellet within a 1 mm diameter cryostat at the heart of a complex
thermonuclear device is a tremendous challenge for materials microtechnology.
However, if metastable states of p’s in Li−, Be− or possibly C − DT compounds
are discovered, much simpler designs could be considered.

References

[1] Yu. D. Prokoshkin: Particles of antimatter. Die Naturwissenschaften 59
(1972) 282–284. N.A. Vlasov: Annihilation as an energy process. Sov. At.
Energy 44 (1978) 40–45.

[2] H. Hora: in Laser interactions and related plasma phenomena. 3B (1974)
833. H. Hora: Laser plasmas and nuclear energy, Plenum Press, New York
(1975) 85–86, 97.

[3] Special issue of the J. of the Brit. Interplanetary Soc. on antimatter propul-
sion. JBIS 35 (1982) 387-424. R.L. Forward: Making and storing antihydro-

8

gen for propulsion, Workshop on the Design of a Low-Energy Antimatter
Facility in the USA, University of Wisconsin, October 3-5 (1985).

[4] B.W. Augenstein: Concepts, problems, and opportunities for use of an-
nihilation energy. Prepared for the United States Air Force, RAND Note
N–2302–AF/RC, June (1985) 61 pp.

[5] A.N. Sullivan: A measurement of the local energy deposition by antiprotons
coming to rest in tissue-like material. CERN Preprint TIS–RP/149/CF (22
April 1985).

[6] E. Fermi and E. Teller: The capture of negative mesotron in matter. Phys.

Rev. 72 (1947) 399–408.

[7] H.P. Duerr and E. Teller: Interaction of antiprotons with nuclear ﬁelds.

Phys. Rev. 101 (1956) 494–495.

[8] D.L. Morgan and V.W. Hugues: Atomic processes involved in matter-
antimatter annihilation. Phys. Rev. D2 (1970) 1389–1399. For E. Teller
see page 1399. D.L. Morgan, V.W. Hughes: Atom-antiatom Interactions.
Phys. Rev. A7 (1973) 1811–1825.

[9] A. Sakharov: Collected scientiﬁc work, Marcel Dekker Inc., New York

(1982).

[10] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni: Antimatter induced fusion and thermonuclear
explosions. Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent Journal on Energy
Systems and Radiation) 49 (1987) 198–203.

[11] M.V. Hynes: Physics with low temperature antiprotons, in Physics with
antiprotons at LEAR in the ACOL era, Editions frontieres, Gif-sur-Yvette,
France (1985) 657–664.

[12] M.R. Clover et al.: Low energy antiproton-nucleus interactions. Phys. Rev.

C26 (1982) 2138-2151.

[13] A. Gsponer, B. Jasani, and S. Sahin: Emerging nuclear energy systems and
nuclear weapon proliferation. Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent
Journal on Energy Systems and Radiation) 43 (1983) 169–174.

9

