5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity

Alexandros Alexakis,∗ Pablo Mininni,† and Annick Pouquet‡
National Center for Atmospheric Research
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We study the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity in conducting ﬂuids by investigating the detailed
transfer of helicity between diﬀerent spherical shells in Fourier space in direct numerical simulations
of three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). Two diﬀerent numerical simulations are used,
one where the system is forced with an electromotive force in the induction equation, and one in
which the system is forced mechanically with an ABC ﬂow and the magnetic ﬁeld is solely sustained
by a dynamo action. The magnetic helicity cascade at the initial stages of both simulations is
observed to be inverse and local (in scale space) in the large scales, and direct and local in the small
scales. When saturation is approached most of the helicity is concentrated in the large scales and
the cascade is non-local. Helicity is transfered directly from the forced scales to the largest scales.
At the same time, a smaller in amplitude direct cascade is observed from the largest scale to small
scales.

PACS numbers: 47.65.+a; 47.27.Gs; 95.30.Qd

I.

INTRODUCTION

The generation of magnetic ﬁelds in various astrophys-
ical objects ranging from planets (e.g. the geodynamo
[1, 2]), to stars (e.g the solar dynamo [3, 4, 5]), and spi-
ral galaxies (e.g. the interstellar dynamo [6]), is mostly
attributed to dynamo action due to motions of a con-
ducting ﬂuid [7]. Due to the magnetic ﬂux conservation
in ideal magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), the stretching
of magnetic ﬁeld lines by a conducting ﬂow ampliﬁes the
magnetic energy at small scales. To further explain how
magnetic ﬁelds end up in scales much larger than the
outer scales of ﬂuid motions, one of the theoretical argu-
ments used is the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity in
MHD turbulence. It is worth mentioning here that the
the presence of helicity in the ﬂow, although helpful, is
not required to generate large scale magnetic ﬁelds. In
some circumstances, large scale ﬁelds can be sustained
solely by helicity ﬂuctuations [8], by anisotropic ﬂows [9],
or large scale shear [10].

Early studies using mean-ﬁeld theory [11, 12] and tur-
bulent closure models [13, 14] have shown within the
framework of the approximations made that magnetic he-
licity cascades inversely from small scales to large scales.
Direct numerical simulations (DNS) [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]
have veriﬁed the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity and
have shown the generation of large scale magnetic ﬁelds
from small scale helical forcing. A detailed examination
of the cascading process was investigated in [18], where
the rate of transfer of magnetic energy among diﬀerent
scales was measured from DNS. The results showed evi-
dence of nonlocal energy transfer of magnetic energy from
the small scales to the large scales, suggesting also a non-

∗Electronic address: alexakis@ucar.edu
†Electronic address: mininni@ucar.edu
‡Electronic address: pouquet@ucar.edu

local transfer of magnetic helicity. However, in three di-
mensional MHD turbulence the ideal invariant that can
display an inverse cascade, stricto sensu, is the magnetic
helicity, not the magnetic energy, and no direct attempt
to measure its transfer in simulations has been done so
far.

In this paper we focus on helical ﬂows, and revisit the
problem of the inverse cascade of the magnetic helicity
by analyzing two DNS: one forced through the induc-
tion equation by an external electromotive force, and one
forced mechanically. In both simulations, the forcing was
applied in small scales so that enough large scales were
available for an inverse cascade to develop. Note that this
election naturally limits the Reynolds numbers we can re-
solve, and as a result only moderate Reynolds numbers
will be considered in this work. Extending the formalism
used in [20, 21, 22, 23] for the transfer of the magnetic
and kinetic energy, we directly measured the transfer rate
of magnetic helicity among diﬀerent scales, both in scales
larger and smaller than the forcing scales.

The outline of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II we
present a brief review of the equations and deﬁnition of
transfer functions needed to study this problem. In Sec.
III we give the results from the magnetically forced sim-
ulation; and in Sec.
IV we give the results from the
mechanically forced simulation. Finally, we discuss the
implications of our results in Sec. V, where we also give
our conclusions.

II.

THEORY AND DEFINITIONS

To a good approximation the equations that describe
the dynamics of an incompressible conducting ﬂuid cou-
pled to a magnetic ﬁeld are given by:

∂tu + u · ∇u = −∇P + b · ∇b + ν∇2u + f

(1)

∂tb = ∇ × (u × b) + η∇2b + ∇ × E

(2)

2

where u is the velocity ﬁeld, b is the magnetic ﬁeld, ν
is the kinematic viscosity, η is the magnetic diﬀusivity,
P is the total pressure, f an external mechanic force,
and E is an external electromotive force. The equations
are written in the familiar Alfv´enic dimensionless units.
These equations are accompanied by the conditions ∇ ·
u = 0 = ∇ · b. This last condition allows us to write the
magnetic ﬁeld in terms of a vector potential b = ∇ × a.
Removing a curl from Eq. (2), the evolution equation for
the vector potential reads:

We can rewrite Eq. (4) in a more compact form

∂tHm(K) =

Th(K, Q) − ηDh(K) + Fh(K),

(5)

XQ

where we have introduced the transfer function Th(Q, K),
the helicity injection Fh(K), and the helicity dissipation
Dh(K) as deﬁned below.

The dissipation of magnetic helicity in the shell K is

given by

∂ta = u × b + η∇2a − ∇φ + E

(3)

Dh(K) =

Z

bK · (∇ × bK)dx3,

(6)

R

R

R

where the Coulomb gauge (∇ · a = 0) is assumed and ∇φ
is determined by the solenoidal condition on a. There
are three quadratic invariants in the absence of dissipa-
(b2 + u2)/2 dx3,
tion and forcing: the total energy E =
b · u dx3, and the magnetic he-
the cross-helicity Hc =
b · a/2 dx3. To the best of our knowledge
licity Hm =
the magnetic helicity, which is the quantity under investi-
gation in this paper, was ﬁrst introduced as an invariant
of the MHD equations by Woltjer [24]. It is proportional
to the number of linkages of the magnetic ﬁeld lines [7],
as is reﬂected by its relation with topological quantities
as the Gauss linking number [25, 26]. The conservation
of magnetic helicity is related with the frozen-in theo-
rem of Alfv´en. Being magnetic ﬁeld lines material, a
link can only change through reconnection of ﬁeld lines,
and therefore breaking of the frozen-in condition (e.g.
through dissipation) is needed.

As we stated in the introduction, we want to quantify
the rate at which helicity is transfered among the diﬀer-
ent scales of the magnetic ﬁeld. To deﬁne the magnetic
ﬁeld and vector potential at diﬀerent scales, we intro-
duce the shell-ﬁltered magnetic ﬁeld and vector poten-
tial components bK(x) and aK (x). Here, the subscript
K indicates that the ﬁeld has been ﬁltered to keep only
the modes whose wave vectors are in the Fourier shell
[K, K + 1] (hereafter called the shell K). Clearly the
sum of all the K components gives back the original ﬁeld,
bK, and the ﬁltering operation commutes with
b =
the curl operator, ∇ × aK = bK. A similar decompo-
sition has been used in [22, 23] to study the cascade of
energy.

P

K

We are interested in the rate that magnetic helicity
at a given shell Q is transferred into a diﬀerent shell
K. From the MHD equations, taking the dot product
(3) with bK/2, taking the dot product of Eq.
of Eq.
(2) with aK/2, adding them, and integrating over space,
we ﬁnally obtain the evolution of the magnetic helicity
Hm(K) = 1
aK · bK dx3 in the shell K:

2

R

∂tHm(K) =

bK · (u × bQ) dx3 −

Z

XQ

− η

Z

bK · ∇ × bK dx3 +

bK · EK dx3 .

(4)

Z

Note however that unlike the energy dissipation this is
not a positive deﬁnite quantity.

The injection rate of magnetic helicity in the shell K

by the external electromotive force E is given by

Fh(K) =

Z

bK · EK dx3.

(7)

Note that the mechanical forcing f does not inject mag-
netic helicity in the system, as follows from Eq.
(4).
However, as will be discussed later, if the external me-
chanical forcing is helical, the velocity ﬁeld can generate
helical magnetic ﬁelds locally through the Th(Q, K) term.
The transfer rate of magnetic helicity at shell Q into

magnetic helicity at shell K is deﬁned as:

Th(K, Q) =

Z

bK · (u × bQ)dx3

.

(8)

Th(K, Q) expresses the transfer rate of positive helicity
from the shell Q to the shell K, or equivalently the trans-
fer rate of negative helicity from the shell K into the shell
Q. Positive values of Th(K, Q) imply that positive helic-
ity is transfered from the shell Q to the shell K, while
negative values imply the reverse transfer. The trans-
fer term is a conservative term and it does not generate
or destroy total magnetic helicity. However, this term
is responsible for the redistribution of magnetic helicity
among diﬀerent scales. This fact is expressed by the anti-
symmetry property of Th(Q, K):

Th(K, Q) = −Th(Q, K) .

(9)

We stress that helicity (unlike energy) is not a positive
deﬁnite quantity and care needs to be taken when we
interpret results. We will not attempt here a separation
of its diﬀerent sign components (see e.g.
[27, 28, 29]
for the kinetic helicity in hydrodynamic turbulence). As
an example, if in some shell K the helicity is positive
Hb(K) > 0 with a positive rate of change ∂tHb(K) > 0,
then the magnetic ﬁeld becomes more helical in that shell
as the system evolves. If however the helicity is negative
Hb(K) < 0, then positive rate of change implies that the
ﬁeld becomes less helical in that shell. In the same spirit,
if positive helicity is transfered from scales with negative
helicity to scales with positive helicity, the ﬁeld becomes

more helical at both scales even if the total helicity at all
scales remains constant. On the other hand, if positive
helicity is transfered from scales with positive helicity to
scales with negative helicity, the ﬁeld becomes less helical
at each scale since the absolute value of magnetic helicity
in each scale is decreased.

III. MAGNETICALLY FORCED RUN

We begin with the magnetically forced simulations. In
this case, a helical ABC electromotive force E is used,
while keeping the mechanical force equal to zero. The
ﬂow evolution is solved using a pseudospectral method
with the 2/3-rule for dealiasing on a N 3 = 2563 grid. No
uniform magnetic ﬁelds is allowed in the periodic box,
and therefore magnetic helicity conservation is satisﬁed
in the ideal case [26].

The viscosity and diﬀusivity are set to ν = η = 5 ×
10−4. Only wavenumbers in the shells 8 and 9 are forced.
The phase of the external ABC electromotive force is
changed randomly with a correlation time τ = 1.25 ×
10−2, and the time step to satisfy the Courant-Friedrichs-
Levy (CFL) condition is set to ∆t = 2.5 × 10−3. The
integral lenghtscale of the ﬂow L = 2π
E(K)/Kdk/E
(where E(K) is the kinetic energy in the shell K, and
E is the total kinetic energy) in the steady state of the
simulation is L ≈ 1.42, and the large scale turnover time
T = U/L (where U is the r.m.s. velocity) is T ≈ 0.25.
Based on these numbers, the resulting kinetic Reynolds
number Re and magnetic Reynolds number Rm are Re ≈
Rm ≈ 700. The simulation is well resolved, in the sense
that the Kolmogorov’s kinetic [kν = (ǫ/ν3)1/4, where ǫ
is the total energy injection rate] and magnetic [kη =
(ǫ/ν3)1/4] dissipation wavenumbers are smaller than the
maximum resolved wavenumber kmax ≈ N/3.

R

The magnetically forced case is easier to analyze be-
cause only one sign of helicity appears to dominate all
scales. In Fig. 1 we show the resulting spectra at two
diﬀerent times t1 and t2, up to wavenumber k = 40. The
former time is early (before the system comes close to sat-
uration), and the latter time is when the ﬂow is almost
saturated. Note that the maximum wavenumber in the
code is kmax ≈ 85, and the dissipative range in the simu-
lation extends to larger wavenumbers than what is shown
in Fig. 1. However, the transfer function Th(K, Q) will
only be computed up to K, Q = 40, a range that includes
all scales larger (wavenumbers smaller) than the injection
band, as well as the scales smaller than the injection band
where a turbulent scaling can still be identiﬁed. We will
follow this convention in the following ﬁgures.

A. Early times

The spectrum of magnetic helicity for t = t1 is shown
in Fig. 2(a), in log-log scale and is positive at all scales.
At this stage, the magnetically helicity spectrum peaks at

3

FIG. 1: The kinetic (solid line) and magnetic (dashed line)
energy spectra for the magnetically forced simulation and
for two diﬀerent times: panel (a) t1 before saturation is
reached, panel (b) t2 close to saturation. The ﬁgure shows
the spectrum up to k = 40, note however that the maximum
wavenumber resolved in the code is kmax ≈ 85.

wave number K ≃ 5, a scale slightly larger than the scale
where the system is forced. Panels (b-e) show the transfer
of magnetic helicity Th(K, Q) at diﬀerent values of Q,
normalized by the total magnetic helicity in that shell.
The dotted lines in these panels indicate the shell where
the forcing is applied, while the dashed lines indicate the
mode that is examined.

Since the helicity is positive for all scales, we only need
to interpret Th as transfer of positive helicity. In Fig. 2,
panel (b) shows the transfer Th(K, Q) for wavenumbers
at the peak of the energy spectrum (K = 5). For smaller
wavenumbers (K < 5) the transfer is positive, while it is
negative for larger wave numbers (K > 5). This picture
indicates that the shell K = 5 is giving/transferring he-
licity to its close neighbors on the left, while it receives
helicity from its neighbors on the right.

Similar behavior is observed for the modes with
wavenumbers between the peak of magnetic helicity in
Fourier space and the forcing wave number [see panel
(a)]. The transfer of magnetic helicity for a value of Q
in this range (Q = 7) is shown in panel (c), suggesting
the picture of a local inverse cascade. Indeed, the shell
Q = 7 gives most of its helicity to the shell K ≈ 6 (pos-
itive peak), while receives helicity from the shell K ≈ 8
(negative peak).

The forced wave numbers [the transfer Th(K, Q) for
Q = 8 is shown in panel (d)] are giving helicity to both
smaller and larger scales, with a preference towards the
larger scales (smaller wave numbers). Finally, wavenum-
bers larger than the forced scale [panel (e)] have a dif-
ferent behavior. Unlike the large scales, the small scales
(K = 20 is displayed here) receive helicity from larger
scales (but smaller than the forced scale) and give helic-

4

FIG. 2: The magnetic helicity (panel a) and its transfer
Th(K, Q) from shell Q to shell K,normalized by the total
magnetic helicity for the magnetically forced run at time t1.
The diﬀerent panels (b-e) correspond to diﬀerent values of
Q = 5, 7, 8, 20. The dashed vertical line indicates the location
of the examined value of Q while the dotted lines give the
width of the forcing band. Note that the transfer for Q = 20
is signiﬁcantly smaller.

FIG. 3: The magnetic helicity (panel a) and its transfer
Th(K, Q) from shell Q to shell K, normalized by the total
magnetic helicity for the magnetically forced run, at later
times. The diﬀerent panels (b-e) correspond to diﬀerent val-
ues of Q = 1, 3, 8, 20 The dashed vertical line indicates the
location of the examined value of Q while the dotted lines
give the width of the forcing band. Note the diﬀerent values
on the vertical axis.

ity to smaller scales. This suggests a local direct cascade
of positive magnetic helicity. In addition, there is a non-
local transfer of helicity to much larger scales (K ≃ 5),
probably associated to reconnection events.

B. Late times

The picture of local cascade of helicity is changed at
later times, as the peak of the helicity spectrum moves to
the largest possible scale (K = 1). The helicity spectrum
and the transfer functions at this stage are shown in Fig.
3. The helicity spectrum peaks strongly at K = 1 [see
panel (a)]. As shown in panel (b), the largest scales are

now receiving magnetic helicity directly from the forced
scales, the remaining scales giving almost zero contribu-
tion. This behavior suggests a non-local inverse cascade.
Intermediate scales between the largest available and the
forced scales have also changed their behavior [panel (c)].
These scales (1 < K < 8) now are receiving positive he-
licity mostly from the largest modes and giving it to the
smaller scales. This suggests a direct cascade of positive
magnetic helicity in the range 1 < K < 8. It appears
therefore that once the magnetic helicity has reached the
largest possible scale there may be some “reﬂection” at
K = 1, and helicity then cascades to smaller scales with
the exception of the forced modes that continue feed-
ing the magnetic helicity at the largest scale [see panel

(d)]. Scales smaller than the injection band transfer the
positive magnetic helicity to smaller scales as at early
times, with the exception of a non-local direct input to
the largest scale.

The “reﬂection” of magnetic helicity in Fourier space
when it reaches the largest scale in the box, suggests
that the late time evolution is strongly dependent on the
boundary conditions. In our case, the periodic bound-
ary conditions do not allow magnetic helicity to grow at
scales even larger, and forbids the system to eject mag-
netic helicity outside the box. Similar behavior has been
observed in two-dimensional hydrodynamic turbulence,
where the quantity which has an inverse cascade is the
energy [30, 31, 32]. For this latter problem, evidence
of nonlocal and irregular transfer of the inverse cascad-
ing invariant was also found in simulations [33]. We will
come back to this issue later.

IV. MECHANICALLY FORCED RUN

We move next to the case where the system is mechani-
cally forced, and the magnetic ﬁeld is solely ampliﬁed and
sustained against Ohmic dissipation by dynamo action.
This case is more relevant to most physical situations.
In this case, we perform a numerical simulation using
a grid of N 3 = 2563 points under the following proce-
dure. First, a hydrodynamic simulation was performed
mechanically forcing at wave number K = 10, with an
ABC ﬂow to obtain a turbulent steady state. The kinetic
u · ∇ × u/2 d3x in the steady
helicity of the ﬂow Hk =
state is positive, and close to maximal. Unlike the pre-
vious section, here the phases of the ABC ﬂow are kept
constant as a function of time.

R

After reaching the hydrodynamic steady state, a ran-
dom, non-helical, and small magnetic ﬁeld was intro-
duced and the simulation was carried keeping the force
ﬁxed to observe the evolution of the system from the
initial exponential ampliﬁcation of the magnetic energy
until the large-scale saturation. The kinematic viscosity
and magnetic diﬀusivity were η = ν = 2.5 × 10−3. In
the hydrodynamic steady state, the integral scale of the
ﬂow was L ≈ 0.6 and the large scale eddy turnover time
T ≈ 0.6. Based on these numbers, the mechanic and
magnetic Reynolds numbers were Re = Rm = 240.

From Eqs.

(5) and (7), we note that a helical me-
chanical force cannot inject net magnetic helicity in the
system. However, a ﬂow with positive kinetic helicity in
the forcing band generates equal amounts of magnetic he-
licity at large and small scales with opposite signs. This
generation can be understood in a geometrical way from
the Stretch Twist -Fold (STF) dynamo [34]. As magnetic
ﬂux tubes at large scales are twisted in one direction (gen-
erating one sign of magnetic helicity), magnetic ﬁeld lines
at small scales are twisted in the opposite direction.

This generation of opposite signs of magnetic helicity
at diﬀerent scales is also a signature of the α-eﬀect [35].
In mean ﬁeld theory (seee.g [12]) the equation for the

5

evolution of the mean magnetic helicity H m is

∂tH m =

Z (cid:16)

2

αB

− βB · ∇ × B

d3x.

(10)

(cid:17)

where α ≈ −τ hv · ∇ × vi is proportional to minus the
kinetic helicity of the ﬂow (here v is the ﬂuctuating ve-
locity ﬁeld, and τ is a correlation time). The coeﬃcient
β is a positive turbulent diﬀusivity. As a result, the α-
eﬀect injects magnetic helicity of opposite sign than the
kinetic helicity into the mean (large scale) magnetic ﬁeld.
As its counterpart, at small scales the ﬂuctuating mag-
netic ﬁeld receives magnetic helicity of the same sign than
the kinetic helicity.

We will investigate three diﬀerent times. In the ﬁrst
case, the dynamo is still kinematic (i.e. the magnetic en-
ergy is smaller than the kinetic energy at all scales, and
the eﬀect of the Lorentz force on the velocity ﬁeld can
thus be neglected). In the second, kinetic and magnetic
energies are of the same order but the peak of the mag-
netic helicity is not at the largest scales yet.
In this
regime, scales smaller than the energy injection band
have reached saturation, while the large scale magnetic
ﬁeld keeps growing slowly. Finally, we investigate the sat-
urated stage where the magnetic helicity spectrum peaks
at the largest attainable scale.

The energy spectra for these three cases are shown
in Fig. 4. As in the previous section, the maximum
wavenumber resolved in the simulation was kmax ≈ 85,
and at all times the Kolmogorov’s dissipation wavenum-
bers were smaller than kmax. Since the transfer between
diﬀerent shells will only be studied up to K, Q = 40, all
spectral quantities in the ﬁgures are shown up to this
wavenumber.

A. Kinematic regime

We begin with the kinematic regime. The magnetic he-
licity spectrum is shown in Fig. 5(a). Unlike the magnet-
ically forced case, the magnetic helicity spectrum changes
sign. For scales smaller than the forced scales, the mag-
netic helicity spectrum is positive, while at large scales
the magnetic helicity is negative. The positive and neg-
ative peaks are close on either side of the forced band.
The transfer of helicity Th(K, Q) for various shells Q is
shown in Figs. 5(b-e).

The large scales [Q = 5 is shown in panel (b)], where
the negative peak of the magnetic helicity spectrum
is located, receive some negative helicity from smaller
scales, but most of the transfer is from the forced scales
(K ≈ 10). These scales also give (negative) helicity to
larger scales [see panels (b) and (c)]. Note that because
helicity is negative in the large scales, a positive values of
Th(K, Q) means that the shell K receives negative mag-
netic helicity from the shell Q, increasing the absolute
value of the magnetic helicity in the shell K, and the
other way around if Th(K, Q) is negative.

6

FIG. 4: The kinetic energy spectrum (solid line) and the
magnetic energy spectrum (dashed line) for three diﬀerent
times for the mechanically forced run. Spectra are shown up
to k = 40, the maximum wavenumber for which the transfer
was analyzed. The maximum wavenumber resolved in the
simulation was kmax ≈ 85.

The forced scale [see Q = 10 in panel (d)], as described
in the beginning of this section, is giving negative mag-
netic helicity to large scales and positive magnetic helic-
ity to the small scales. This is the largest in amplitude
transfer, and is the main source of “absolute” magnetic
helicity.

At scales smaller than the energy injection band [see
panel (e)], like in the magnetically forced case, (positive)
magnetic helicity appears to cascade to smaller scales
where it is ﬁnally dissipated.

B. Small scale saturated regime

As the amplitude of the magnetic ﬁeld is increased by
dynamo action, the growth of magnetic energy at scales
smaller than the forcing band saturates. Meanwhile, the
negative peak of the magnetic helicity moves to larger
scales [see Fig. 6(a)]. The large scales in the system
(K > 10) receive (negative) magnetic helicity both lo-
cally from slightly smaller scales and non-locally from
the forced scales, and give negative magnetic helicity to
slightly larger scales if available [see panel (b,c)]. The
forced scale [corresponding to Q = 10, see panel (d)]
gives most of the negative magnetic helicity to the shell
where the magnetic helicity spectrum peaks (K ≈ 2).
At the same time, the forced shell gives positive mag-
netic helicity to slightly smaller scales. Finally, the small
scales [panel (e)] cascade the positive magnetic helicity

FIG. 5: The spectrum of magnetic helicity (panel a), and
transfer of magnetic helicity Th(K, Q) normalized by the to-
tal magnetic helicity at the shell Q for the mechanically forced
run in the kinematic regime. The diﬀerent panels (b-e) cor-
respond to diﬀerent values of Q = 5, 7, 10, 20. The dashed
vertical line indicates the location of the examined value of
Q while the dotted line indicates the shell where the system
was forced.

to even smaller scales where it is dissipated. In addition,
there is a considerable amount of magnetic helicity de-
struction by transferring positive helicity from the small
scales (where the magnetic helicity is mostly positive)
directly into the large scales (where helicity is negative,
see the positive peak at K ≈ 2 in panel (e)), decreas-
ing as a result the absolute value of magnetic helicity in
both scales. We believe this behavior may be related to
reconnection events.

7

FIG. 6: Magnetic helicity spectrum (panel a) and transfer of
magnetic helicity Th(K, Q) normalized by the total magnetic
helicity in the shell Q, for the mechanically forced run, when
the small scales in system are saturated. The diﬀerent panels
(b-e) correspond to diﬀerent values of Q = 1, 2, 10, 20 The
dashed vertical line indicates the location of the examined
value of Q, while the dotted line indicates the shell where the
system was forced.

FIG. 7: Magnetic helicity spectrum (a), and transfer of mag-
netic helicity Th(K, Q) (b-e) normalized by the total magnetic
helicity in the shell Q, for the mechanically forced run close to
the saturation at the large scales. The diﬀerent panels (b-e)
correspond to diﬀerent values of Q = 1, 2, 10, 20. The dashed
vertical line indicates the location of the examined value of
Q, while the dotted line indicates the shell where the system
was forced.

C. Saturated regime

When the system is close to the saturation at all scales,
the helicity spectrum peaks at the largest available scale
[K = 1, see Fig. 7(a)]. At this stage the large scales
receive magnetic helicity directly from the forced scales
by a non-local process [see panel (b) and (d)]. Such a be-
havior has also been observed for the transfer of magnetic
energy in helical dynamo runs in [18].

In the intermediate scales, between the largest avail-
able scale in the box and the forced scale [see Fig. 7(c)],
there seems to be a direct cascade of helicity from the
large scales to smaller scales. This direct cascade of helic-

ity at large scales is similar to the “reﬂection” of magnetic
helicity at K = 1 observed in the magnetically forced run
(see Sect. III), and is also also expected to be dependent
on the boundary conditions.

The forcing band keeps injecting magnetic helicity of
opposite signs at large and small scales [panel (d)], but
while positive magnetic helicity is injected at wavenum-
bers slightly larger than the forcing shell Q = 10, most
of the negative magnetic helicity is injected non-locally
into the shell K = 1. Scales smaller than the forced scale
[see panel (e)] cascade the positive magnetic helicity to
smaller scales where it is dissipated. Again, there is a non
local transfer of positive helicity from the small scales to
the largest scale (see the positive peak at K = 1) leading

to the decrease in the absolute value of the magnetic he-
licity in both scales. Note that as the result of the inverse
cascade of one sign of magnetic helicity at large scales,
and the direct cascade of magnetic helicity of the oppo-
site sign at small scales, the system is ﬁnally dominated
by magnetic helicity of sign opposite to the kinetic he-
licity injected by the mechanical forcing. This has been
observed by Brandenburg [18] and in closures [14].

V.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The results presented above stemming from the two
numerical simulations have some important implications
that need to be discussed. We start by giving a brief sum-
mary of what is observed in the simulations. At the early
stages of the evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld, in both ex-
amined runs the peak of the magnetic helicity spectrum
appears to be close to the forcing scales although in scales
slightly larger. Magnetic helicity inversely cascades in the
large scales, both locally by transfer of helicity from the
closest neighbor shells, and non-locally by direct trans-
fer from the forced shells. As the systems evolves, the
inverse cascade of magnetic helicity leads the magnetic
helicity spectrum to peak at the largest available scale in
the domain. At this stage, the direct input coming from
the non-local transfer of magnetic helicity from the forced
scales to the largest attainable scales becomes dominant.
At the same time, the local transfer of helicity at inter-
mediate scales changes direction, and magnetic helicity
cascades locally to small scales. This direct cascade be-
tween the largest scale in the box and the forcing band
can be expected to be sensitive to the boundary condi-
tions, and is a non-universal feature common to other
systems displaying inverse cascade. Similar behavior has
been observed in two dimensional hydrodynamic turbu-
lence [30, 31, 32, 33]. However, we note that the non-local
transfer from the forced scales to the large scales is much
greater in amplitude than the local direct cascade. This
behavior raises the interesting question of which process,
the local or non-local cascade, is dominant in open sys-
tems like stars or galaxies where no largest available scale
can be clearly deﬁned, or where stellar or galactic winds
can eject part of the magnetic helicity out of the system.
The small scales behave diﬀerently. Unlike the large
scales, in the small scales there is a noticeable direct cas-
cade of magnetic helicity to the dissipation scale. This
implies that in the limit of inﬁnite Reynolds number in a

8

helically forced ﬂow, there is still going to be at the sat-
urated stage a ﬁnite global magnetic helicity, since one
sign of magnetic helicity at scales larger than the forced
scales will cascade inversely, while the opposite sign of
magnetic helicity at small scales will cascade to smaller
and smaller scales until it will be dissipated.

It can be argued that this direct cascade of small scale
magnetic helicity is counter intuitive (in the sense of self-
similarity), since at a given scale the ﬂow does not know
if it is at scales smaller than the forcing or larger.
It
could have been expected therefore to see the same di-
rection of cascade at all scales. This kind of argument
however assumes that each scale is completely indepen-
dent, but this is not the case for MHD. Magnetic helicity
in scales larger than the integral scale of a helical ﬂow
is generated by the twisting and folding of ﬂux tubes,
forcing them to inter-penetrate [34]. At the same time,
the twisting causes in small scales the magnetic ﬁeld lines
to spiral around each other, generating small scale mag-
netic helicity of the opposite sign than that in the large
scale. Any further stretching of the ﬂux tube will cause
the small scale magnetic helicity (i.e.
the twisting of
the ﬁeld lines around the ﬂux tube) to cascade to even
smaller scales, even if the large scale helicity is cascad-
ing to larger scales. Furthermore, reconnection at small
scales changes the topology and the linkage of the ﬁeld
lines at the large scales, and this explains the non-local
transfer of helicity from small scales to the large scales,
“destroying” in that way the large scale helicity as it is
observed in Figs. 6 and 7(e).

We conclude by noting that the overall picture of the
cascade of magnetic helicity appears to be more compli-
cated than that of the energy, and crucially depends on
the scale and the domain size. Simple assumptions car-
ried over from hydrodynamic turbulence phenomenology
do not seem to apply here. Future numerical simula-
tions, experiments and reﬁned theoretical arguments are
needed in order to illuminate further the understanding
of MHD turbulence and improve the modeling of turbu-
lent ﬂows.

Acknowledgments

Computer time was provided by NCAR. The NSF
grant CMG-0327888 at NCAR supported this work in
part and is gratefully acknowledged.

[1] G. Glatzmaier and P. Roberts, Science 274, 1887 (1996).
[2] M. Kono and P. H. Roberts, Rev. Geophys. 40, 1 (2002).
[3] M. Dikpati and P. Charbonneau, Astrophys. J. 518, 508

(2004).

[4] D. Nandy and A. R. Choudhuri, Science 296, 1671

(1999).

(2002).

[6] A. Shukurov and E. Dormy, Introduction to galactic dy-

namos (Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2005).

[7] H. K. Moﬀatt, Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically
conducting ﬂuids (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1978).

[5] P. Bushby and J. Mason, Astronomy & Geophys. 45, 7

[8] A. D. Gilbert, U. Frisch, and A. Pouquet, Geophys.and

9

Astrophys. Fluid Mech. 42, 151 (1988).

[22] A. Alexakis, P. D. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

[9] C. Nore, M. E. Brachet, H. Politano, and A. Pouquet,

E (2005), in Press.

Phys. Plasmas Lett. 4, 1 (1997).

[23] P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

[10] V. Urpin, Phys. Rev. E 65, 026301 (2002).
[11] M. Steenbeck, F. Krause, and K.-H. R¨adler, Z. Natur-

E (2005), in Press.

[14] A. Pouquet, U. Frisch, and J. L´eorat, J. Fluid Mech. 77,

[29] Q. Chen, S. Chen, G. L. Eyink, and D. D. Holm, Phys.

forsch. 21a, 369 (1966).

[12] F. Krause and K.-H. R¨adler, Mean-ﬁeld magnetohydrody-
namics and dynamo theory (Pergamon Press, New York,
1980).

[13] U. Frisch, A. Pouquet, J. L´eorat, and A. Mazure, J. Fluid

[15] A. Pouquet and G. S. Patterson, 85, 305 (1978).
[16] M. Meneguzzi, U. Frisch, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

[17] S. Kida, S. Yanase, and J. Mizushima, Phys. Fluids A 3,

Mech. 68, 769 (1975).

321 (1976).

Lett. 47, 1060 (1981).

457 (1991).

11, 619 (2004).

(2001).

12, 042309 (2005).

[24] L. Woltjer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 44, 489 (1958).
[25] A. N. Wright and M. A. Berger, J. Geophys. Res. 94,

1295 (1989).

[26] M. A. Berger, J. Geophys. Res. 102, 2637 (1997).
[27] F. Waleﬀe, Phys. Fluids A 4, 350 (1991).
[28] Q. Chen, S. Chen, and G. L. Eyink, Phys. Fluids 15, 361

(2003).

(1994).

Rev. Lett. 90, 214503 (2003).

[30] L. M. Smith and V. Yakhot, J. Fluid Mech. 274, 115

[31] V. Borue, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1475 (1994).
[32] G. Boﬀetta, A. Celani, and M. Vergassola, Phys. Rev. E

61, R29 (2000).

[34] Y. B. Zeldovich, A. A. Ruzmaikin, and D. D. Sokoloﬀ,
Magnetic ﬁelds in astrophysics (Gordon and Breach Sci-
ence Pub., New York, 1983).

[18] A. Brandenburg, Astrophys. J. 550, 824 (2001).
[19] D. O. G´omez and P. D. Mininni, Nonlin. Proc. Geophys.

(2001).

[33] S. Danilov and D. Gurarie, Phys. Rev. E 63, 061208

[20] G. Dar, M. Verma, and V. Eswaran, Physica D 157, 207

[21] O. Debliquy, M. Verma, and D. Carati, Phys. Plasmas

[35] N. Seehafer, Phys. Rev. E 53, 1283 (1996).

