Laboratory observation of a nonlinear interaction between shear

Alfv´en waves

T.A. Carter,1, 2, ∗ B. Brugman,1, 2 P. Pribyl,1 and W. Lybarger1

1Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547
2Center for Multiscale Plasma Dynamics,

University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547

Abstract

An experimental investigation of nonlinear interactions between shear Alfv´en waves in a labora-

tory plasma is presented. Two Alfv´en waves, generated by a resonant cavity, are observed to beat

together, driving a low frequency nonlinear psuedo-mode at the beat frequency. The psuedo-mode

then scatters the Alfv´en waves, generating a series of sidebands. The observed interaction is very

strong, with the normalized amplitude of the driven psuedo-mode comparable to the normalized

magnetic ﬁeld amplitude (δB/B) of the interacting Alfv´en waves.

PACS numbers: 52.35.Bj, 52.35.Mw

5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The Alfv´en wave is the fundamental low-frequency normal mode of a magnetized plasma

and is a ubiquitous feature of space plasmas (e.g. the auroral ionosphere [1] and the solar

wind [2]) and laboratory plasmas (e.g. tokamaks [3] and linear devices [4]). The linear prop-

erties of these waves have recently been explored in detailed laboratory experiments [5, 6, 7].

However, the nonlinear behavior of Alfv´en waves has not been investigated in the laboratory.

From a weak turbulence point of view, nonlinear interactions between Alfv´en waves are re-

sponsible for the cascade of energy in magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence [8]. In the

incompressible MHD approximation an anisotropic energy cascade results from interactions

between counter-propagating shear Alfv´en waves [9, 10]. In MHD turbulence theories, in-

teractions are generally assumed to be local in wavenumber space and density ﬂuctuations

are assumed to play only a passive role in the cascade [11]. However, nonlocal interactions

between shear waves can generate beat-wave driven density ﬂuctuations. This mechanism

is essential in decay instabilities such as the parametric [12, 13] and modulational [14, 15]

decay instabilities, where the pump and daughter Alfv´en waves beat together to drive an ion

acoustic wave or a nonlinear psuedo-mode, respectively. In addition, density ﬂuctuations

are an integral part of Alfv´en waves with small perpendicular scale (dispersive kinetic or

inertial Alfv´en waves [7]) and can therefore become active participants in the cascade as

it approaches the dissipation scale [16]. Density ﬂuctuations generated at small scale can

scatter large scale Alfv´en waves [17], and could therefore inﬂuence the cascade at larger

scales.

In this Letter, an observation of a nonlinear interaction between shear Alfv´en waves in a

laboratory plasma is presented. Large amplitude shear Alfv´en waves are generated using a

resonant cavity. In circumstances where two waves are simultaneously emitted by the cavity,

production of sideband waves and low frequency ﬂuctuations at the sideband separation

frequency is observed. The interaction is identiﬁed as a beat-wave interaction between co-

propagating shear waves, where a nonlinear psuedo-mode is driven at the beat frequency.

The psuedo-mode then scatters the Alfv´en waves, generating a spectrum of sidebands. The

amplitude of the driven pseudo-mode is substantial, much larger than would be predicted

by simple magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) theory.

The experiments were performed in the upgraded Large Plasma Device (LAPD), which

is part of the Basic Plasma Science Facility (BaPSF) [18] at UCLA. LAPD is an 18 m long,

1 m diameter cylindrical vacuum chamber, surrounded by 90 magnetic ﬁeld coils. Pulsed

2

∼

plasmas (

10 ms in duration) are created at a repetition rate of 1 Hz using a barium oxide

coated nickel cathode source. Typical plasma parameters are ne

1

∼

×

1012 cm−3, Te

6 eV,

∼

1 eV, and B < 2kG. The experiments were performed using helium as a working gas.

Ti
LAPD plasmas have values of β = 2µonkB(Te + Ti)/B2 comparable to the electron-to-ion

∼

mass ratio, β

me/Mi (typical β values range from 5

∼

10−5 to 1

10−3).

In these

×

×

experiments, β & me/Mi, and the electron thermal speed is therefore larger than the Alfv´en

speed (vth,e > vA). The ion sound gyroradius, ρs, in these experiments is

0.5

1.5 cm.

∼

−

Large amplitude shear Alfv´en waves are generated using the Alfv´en wave MASER [19, 20].

The nickel cathode and semi-transparent molybdenum anode of the plasma source in LAPD

deﬁne a resonant cavity from which spontaneous shear Alfv´en wave MASER emission at

f

0.6fci is observed, with k⊥ρs typically 0.3

0.5. The emitted shear waves are eigenmodes

∼

−
of the cylindrical LAPD plasma column, with m = 0 or m = 1 azimuthal mode number.

The amplitude of the waves can be as large as δB/B & 1% and can be controlled through

changing the plasma source discharge current. Emission of the waves typically begins early

in the LAPD discharge, as the source region current is ramping up and plasma parameters

and proﬁles are evolving. During this early phase the MASER emission is observed to

“mode hop,” where a sudden transition in the frequency of emission is observed [20]. The

top panel of Figure 1 shows the FFT (fast Fourier transform) power spectrum versus time

for magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations measured in the main LAPD plasma column (

7 m from the

∼

source region) along with a line plot of the spectrum at t = 8ms (helium discharge, 700G,

fci = 266 kHz). Two mode hops are apparent during the early evolution of the magnetic

ﬁeld spectrum, and the second hop is identiﬁed through mode structure measurements as a

transition from m = 0 to m = 1. After the mode hop, the m = 0 mode does not completely

disappear, but persists at a much lower level as is apparent in the accompanying line plot.

An additional frequency is observed in the spectrum, located above the m = 1 frequency

by the diﬀerence frequency between the m = 0 and m = 1 modes. This mode appears to

be a sideband of the primary m = 1 mode which could be generated by a weak nonlinear

interaction between the m = 0 and m = 1 mode.

It was found that much stronger sideband generation is observed during high-current

discharges when the length of the main LAPD plasma column is shortened to 10 m by

terminating the plasma with an electrically-ﬂoating aluminum plate. The bottom panel of

Figure 1 shows FFT power spectra of measured magnetic ﬁeld (B) and Langmuir probe

3

m=1

m=0

m=0

m=1

FIG. 1: Top panel: typical power spectrum of shear Alfv´en waves during MASER emission. Bot-

tom: B and Isat power spectra during MASER emission with the ﬂoating plate closed.

measured ion saturation current (Isat

ne√Te) during MASER emission with the ﬂoating

∝

plate closed. The magnetic spectrum is considerably more complicated in this case, showing

ﬂuctuations at a number of discrete frequencies and an additional mode hop (which is likely

due to a change in radial mode structure).

In the steady state phase of the discharge

(t > 6 ms), there are two strong modes present (identiﬁed as m = 0 and m = 1), surrounded

by a number of sidebands. Simultaneously, low frequency Isat ﬂuctuations are observed

at the sideband separation frequency and harmonics. These observations are consistent

with the following scenario: (1) Simultaneous emission of two large amplitude shear modes

(m = 1 and m = 0) from the cavity occurs. (2) The two shear waves beat together, driving

a low frequency ﬂuctuation at the beat frequency. (3) The low frequency ﬂuctuation then

scatters the incident shear waves, leading to the generation of the observed sidebands. Our

conjecture is that termination of the the high discharge current plasma with the ﬂoating

plate induces simultaneous spontaneous emission of large amplitude m = 0 and m = 1

modes, leading to the proposed scenario.

In order to conclusively determine the nature of the sideband generation, the capability to

externally drive the resonant cavity was developed. To excite the cavity, oscillating currents

4

are driven between the anode and cathode using external power supplies. Figure 2 (a) shows

the cavity response (magnitude of the emitted shear wave, measured in the main plasma

column) as a function of drive frequency (normalized to fci) for cases with the ﬂoating plate

open and closed. The resonant nature of the cavity emission is clear, as is the modiﬁcation

in the properties of the cavity upon closing the ﬂoating plate. The external drive couples

primarily to the m = 0 mode, but the additional peak observed with a closed ﬂoating plate

corresponds to the m = 1 mode frequency, and may indicate coupling to that mode. The

cavity was then operated so that the spontaneous emission of only one mode was observed

(m = 1), and a second mode (m = 0) was externally excited, allowing an investigation of

the interaction between the two shear waves with a variable separation frequency. These

experiments were conducted with the ﬂoating plate both open and closed. Lower discharge

currents were necessary to limit the spontaneous cavity emission to a single mode with the

plate closed.

Figure 2 (b) shows the magnetic power spectrum versus drive frequency during a fre-

quency separation scan with the ﬂoating plate closed. The spontaneous emission (m = 1)

is ﬁxed during the scan (the horizontal feature at f

0.66fci) while the frequency of the

∼

driven mode is changed. The production of sidebands, in particular the ﬁrst upper side-

band, is evident over a wide range of frequency separations between the driven (m = 0) and

spontaneous (m = 1) waves. The change in sideband amplitude versus frequency separation

is primarily due to changes in the externally driven mode amplitude with frequency (due to

the Q of the cavity). Figure 2 (c) shows a line plot of the magnetic power spectrum when

the drive frequency is at the peak of the m = 0 resonance, fdrive = 0.61fci. A number of

sidebands around the driven (m = 0) and spontaneous (m = 1) shear waves are visible.

Figure 2 (d) shows the Isat power spectrum at the same drive frequency, which exhibits ﬂuc-

tuations at the sideband separation frequency and harmonics. Figure 2 (e) and (f) show B

and Isat spectra during driven-spontaneous interaction with the ﬂoating plate open. Shifts in

the absolute frequency and frequency separation of the m = 0 and m = 1 modes are evident

relative to the closed ﬂoating plate case. Aside from these diﬀerences in the linear cavity

response, the observed spectra are quite similar to those observed in the closed ﬂoating plate

case: magnetic sidebands are evident, as are low frequency Isat ﬂuctuations at the sideband

separation frequency. This suggests that the primary role of the closed ﬂoating plate in the

data shown in Figure 1 is to modify the cavity properties so that two large amplitude shear

5

wave modes are emitted simultaneously. The mechanism by which the ﬂoating plate causes

this multi-mode emission is not yet understood, but it is known that plasma parameters and

proﬁles are altered relative to the non-terminated case. The presence of the ﬂoating plate

also allows for the possibility of reﬂection of the Alfv´en waves and therefore the development

of a counter-propagating population of waves. In addition, the closed ﬂoating plate and the

anode deﬁne a second resonant cavity which can support shear Alfv´en wave modes. The

qualitative similarity between the closed and open ﬂoating plate cases shown in Figure 2

suggests that the second cavity and the associated reﬂected shear waves are not essential

for the interaction, and that instead it is more likely an interaction between co-propagating

shear waves emitted by the cavity.

(a)

(b)

m=1

0

m =

m=0

m=1

(c)

(d)

m=0

(e)

m=1

(f )

FIG. 2: (a) Cavity response as a function of normalized external drive frequency. (b) Magnetic

power spectrum due to interacting shear waves during a frequency separation scan. For drive

frequency on the m = 0 resonance: (c) Magnetic power spectrum and (d) ion saturation current

spectrum with the ﬂoating plate closed. (e) Magnetic power spectrum and (f) Isat power spectrum

with the ﬂoating plate open

Figure 3 shows the structure of the ﬂuctuations during an interaction between driven

and spontaneously emitted cavity shear modes. Due to the shot-to-shot phase variation in

.

6

the spontaneous emission, cross-correlation techniques were used to determine the structure

of the interacting modes. Two probes were used, one ﬁxed at one spatial location (to

provide a phase reference) while the second was moved shot-to-shot to 961 positions in the

plane perpendicular to the background ﬁeld by computer control. The two probes were

separated axially (along the magnetic ﬁeld) by approximately 1 m. The driven MASER

wave has an m = 0 structure, with a hollow amplitude proﬁle and a single current channel.

The spontaneous MASER exhibits primarily an m = 1 structure, with two counter-rotating

current channels and a peaked amplitude proﬁle between the two. The structure of the upper

sideband has some similarity to the spontaneous m = 1 emission, but is more concentrated

in the periphery, which may be consistent with m > 1 mode content. The pattern of the Isat

ﬂuctuation is more centrally localized, and is not readily identiﬁable as any single azimuthal

mode number.

FIG. 3: Structure of the driven MASER, spontaneous MASER, upper sideband, and low frequency

Isat ﬂuctuation in the plane perpendicular to B.

Figure 4 shows raw B and Isat ﬂuctuation measurements during an interaction experiment

where both shear waves are driven with the ﬂoating plate open (i.e. there is no spontaneous

emission from the cavity). In this case both modes are m = 0 and each driven slightly oﬀ

resonance to achieve the desired frequency separation. The raw data shows that the beat

wave interaction also occurs in this case, indicating that the interaction is not dependent

7

on the presence of two diﬀerent azimuthal modes. Simultaneous measurements of Isat at

two axial locations separated by 2.88 m are shown from which a parallel phase velocity for

the low frequency ﬂuctuation can be computed. The average parallel phase velocity in the

region of constant plasma density is measured to be 294

35 km/s, where the Alfv´en speed

±

∼

550 km/s and the ion acoustic speed is

is
13 km/s. The computed phase velocity is
∼
consistent with three-wave matching rules (ω1 + ω2 = ω3 and ~k1 + ~k2 = ~k3) using the kinetic
k = ω2 (1
shear Alfv´en wave dispersion relation, k2

s), where k⊥ρs is taken

ci + k2

ω2/ω2

−

⊥ρ2
0.38 for the two interacting

∼

from a spatial ﬁt of the shear wave eigenmode structure to be

Alfv´en waves [20]. The low frequency ﬂuctuation does not correspond to a linear plasma

wave (e.g. an ion acoustic wave) and is instead a beat-wave driven nonlinear perturbation or

psuedo-mode. While the observations are not consistent with a decay instability, it should

be pointed out that the modulational instability involves a similar set of modes:

in this

instability, the pump shear wave decays into a forward-propagating sideband wave and a

pseudo-mode at the sideband separation frequency.

FIG. 4: Top: raw magnetic pick-up loop signal during beat wave experiment. Bottom: simultane-

ous Isat measurements at two diﬀerent axial locations.

The amplitude of the Isat ﬂuctuation is observed to scale approximately bilinearly with

the amplitude of the two interacting shear waves. The normalized amplitude is quite large

with δIsat/Isat

1

10% & δB/B, substantially larger than the normalized density per-

∼

−

turbation which would be predicted by simple ideal MHD theory (δn/n

(δB/B)2). In

∼

8

addition to density, Isat is sensitive to electron temperature and to any population of fast

electrons (those with energies greater than the negative probe bias

65V ), and therefore

∼

ﬂuctuations in these quantities might explain the magnitude of the observed Isat signal.

However, preliminary microwave interferometer measurements indicate that there are sig-

niﬁcant line-average density ﬂuctuations associated with the psuedo-mode, and that it is

therefore largely a ﬂuctuation in density. Future work will focus on measurements to more

accurately determine the magnitude of δn/n in the psuedo-mode and compare it with more

comprehensive theoretical predictions.

In summary, a nonlinear beat-wave interaction between shear Alfv´en waves has been

observed. Two resonant-cavity-produced, co-propagating shear waves are observed to beat

together, resulting in a low frequency ﬂuctuation at the beat frequency and the subsequent

creation of Alfv´enic sidebands. The low frequency ﬂuctuation is identiﬁed as a nonlinearly

driven psuedo-mode generated by the beat between the two co-propagating shear waves.

Counter-propagating interactions will be explored in future experiments, where beat-wave

driven ion acoustic waves may be possible.

The authors would like to thank S. C. Cowley, W. Gekelman, J. E. Maggs, and G. J.

Morales for invaluable discussions. This work was completed using the Basic Plasma Science

Facility at UCLA, which is funded by DOE and NSF. This work was supported by DOE

grant DE-FG02-02ER54688 and by DOE Fusion Science Center Cooperative Agreement

DE-FC02-04ER54785.

∗ Electronic address: tcarter@physics.ucla.edu

[1] D. A. Gurnett et al., J. Geophys. Res. 89, 8971 (1984).

[2] J. W. Belcher, et al., J. Geophys. Res. 74, 2302 (1969).

[3] W. W. Heidbrink, E. J. Strait, M. S. Chu, A. D. Turnbull, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 855 (1993).

[4] W. Gekelman, D. Leneman, J. E. Maggs, and S. Vincena, Phys. Plasmas 1, 3775 (1994).

[5] D. Leneman, W. Gekelman, and J. Maggs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2673 (1999).

[6] C. A. Kletzing, S. R. Bounds, J. Martin-Hiner, W. Gekelman, C. Mitchell, Phys. Rev. Lett.

90, 035004 (2003).

[7] S. Vincena, W. Gekelman, and J. Maggs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 105003 (2004).

9

[8] R. Kraichnan, Phys. Fluids 8, 1385 (1965).

[9] J. V. Shebalin, W. H. Matthaeus, and D. Montgomery, J. Plas. Phys. 29, 525 (1983).

[10] P. Goldreich and S. Sridhar, ApJ 485, 680 (1997).

[11] A. Bhattacharjee and C. S. Ng, ApJ 548, 318 (2001).

[12] A. Hasegawa and L. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 36, 1362 (1976).

[13] S. Spangler, J. A. Leckband, and I. H. Cairns, Phys. Plasmas 4, 846 (1996).

[14] H. Wong and M. Goldstein, J. Geophys. Res. 91, 5617 (1986).

[15] J. V. Hollweg, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 23431 (1994).

[16] P. W. Terry, C. McKay, and E. Fernandez, Phys. Plasmas 8, 2707 (2001).

[17] T. Drozdenko and G. J. Morales, Phys. Plasmas 8, 3265 (2001).

[18] http://plasma.physics.ucla.edu/bapsf.

[19] J. E. Maggs and G. J. Morales, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 035004 (2003).

[20] J. E. Maggs, G. J. Morales, and T. A. Carter, Phys. Plasmas 12, 013103 (2005).

10

