5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

J. Plasma Physics (2005), vol. 0, part 0, pp. 1–25.

c(cid:13) 2005 Cambridge University Press

1

DOI: 10.1017/S0000000000000000 Printed in the United Kingdom

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence:
cascades, backscatter, and dynamo action

P A B L O D. M I N I N N I†,
A L E X A N D R O S A L E X A K I S‡ and A N N I C K P O U Q U E T§
National Center for Atmospheric Research, P.O. Box 3000, Boulder, Colorado 80307,
USA

(Received 2 February 2008)

Abstract. Scale interactions in Hall MHD are studied using both the mean ﬁeld
theory derivation of transport coeﬃcients, and direct numerical simulations in three
space dimensions. In the magnetically dominated regime, the eddy resistivity is
found to be negative deﬁnite, leading to large scale instabilities. A direct cascade of
the total energy is observed, although as the amplitude of the Hall eﬀect is increased,
backscatter of magnetic energy to large scales is found, a feature not present in MHD
ﬂows. The coupling between the magnetic and velocity ﬁelds is diﬀerent than in the
MHD case, and backscatter of energy from small scale magnetic ﬁelds to large scale
ﬂows is also observed. For the magnetic helicity, a strong quenching of its transfer
is found. We also discuss non-helical magnetically forced Hall-MHD simulations
where growth of a large scale magnetic ﬁeld is observed.

Introduction

1.
The relevance of two ﬂuid eﬀects has recently been pointed out in several stud-
ies of astrophysical and laboratory plasmas (Balbus and Terquem, 2001; Sano and
Stone, 2002; Mirnov et al., 2003; Ding et al., 2004). The eﬀect of adding the Hall
current to the dynamics of the ﬂow was studied in several scenarios, particularly dy-
namo action (Helmis, 1968; Galanti et al., 1995; Mininni et al., 2002, 2003a, 2005b)
and reconnection (Birn et al., 2001; Shay et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2001; Morales
et al., 2005). Several of these works showed that the Hall currents increase the re-
connection rate of magnetic ﬁeld lines. However, most of the studies of magnetic
reconnection were done for particular conﬁgurations of current sheets. It was shown
in particular by Smith et al. (2004) that when a turbulent background is present the
reconnection rate is dominated by the amplitude of the turbulent ﬂuctuations. The
process of magnetic reconnection is relevant in several astrophysical and geophys-
ical scenarios, such as the magnetopause, the magnetotail, the solar atmosphere,
or the interplanetary and interstellar medium. Reconnection can also play a role
in the generation of large scale magnetic ﬁelds by dynamo action Zeldovich et al.
(1983).

Some of the works in Hall-magnetohydrodynamics (Hall-MHD) present conﬂict-
ing results, indicating in some cases that the Hall eﬀect can help the growth of a

† e-mail: mininni@ucar.edu
‡ e-mail: alexakis@ucar.edu
§ e-mail: pouquet@ucar.edu

2

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

large scale magnetic ﬁeld (Mininni et al., 2005b) or a large scale self-organization
process (Mahajan and Yoshida, 1998; Numata et al., 2004; Ohsaki, 2005), while in
other cases the Hall currents were observed to generate small scales and ﬁlamenta-
tion (Laveder et al., 2002a,b; Rheinhardt and Geppert, 2002).

As a result, it becomes of interest to study the physical processes leading to cas-
cades and transfer of ideal invariants in three-dimensional Hall-MHD turbulence.
Phenomena observed in the laboratory and space plasmas tend to show an intermit-
tent or impulsive behavior (Bhattacharjee et al., 1999) characteristic of turbulent
ﬂows. The relevance of Hall-MHD turbulence in the solar wind was shown by Ghosh
et al. (1996). Also, Hall-MHD turbulence can play a crucial role in the transfer of
matter in the magnetopause as was pointed by Rezeau and Belmont (2001).

In this work, we study both analytically and numerically three dimensional Hall-
MHD turbulence as the result of a dynamo process, and from a purely electromotive
forcing. Detailed studies of shell-to-shell energy transfer from direct numerical sim-
ulations (DNS) have been done for hydrodynamic (Domaradzki and Rogallo, 1990;
Ohkitani and Kida, 1992; Zhou, 1993; Yeung et al., 1995; Alexakis et al., 2005a) and
magnetohydrodynamic ﬂows (Debliquy et al., 2005; Alexakis et al., 2005b; Mininni
et al., 2005a). To the best of our knowledge, the energy transfer in Hall-MHD
turbulence has not been studied before.

We show evidence of non-locality of the transfer in Fourier space, and that the
Hall eﬀect can increase both the transfer of magnetic energy to smaller scales (lo-
cally), as well as give a novel non-local backscatter of magnetic energy to large
scales. These results become clear when examining the modiﬁcation to the tur-
bulent magnetic diﬀusivity due to the Hall term. Also, we observe that the Hall
currents impact on the coupling between the magnetic and velocity ﬁelds. The
transfer of energy between these two ﬁelds is diﬀerent than in the MHD case. The
Hall-MHD equations also display a backscatter of energy from small scale magnetic
ﬂuctuations to the large scale ﬂows themselves. The transfer of helicity is brieﬂy
discussed as well and observed to be quenched by the Hall eﬀect.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. 2 we introduce the Hall-MHD
equations and we deﬁne the various transfer terms. In Sec. 3 we derive turbulent
transport coeﬃcients for the Hall-MHD induction equation. In Sec. 4 we brieﬂy
discuss the code and details of the mechanically forced numerical simulations for
completeness. Section 5 presents the transfer terms in Hall-MHD as obtained from
the numerical simulations. Section 6 shows backscatter of magnetic energy in non-
helical Hall-MHD magnetically forced simulations. Finally, Sec. 7 summarizes the
results and discusses implications of our work for the understanding of turbulence,
dynamo action, and reconnection in Hall-MHD.

2. The Hall-MHD equations and transfer terms

In dimensionless Alfv´enic units, the Hall-MHD equations are

∂tU + U · ∇U = −∇P + B · ∇B + ν∇2U + f ,

(2.1)

∂tB = ∇ × [(U − ǫJ) × B] + η∇2B,
where U is the bulk velocity ﬁeld, B is the magnetic ﬁeld, J = ∇ × B is the
current density, P is the pressure, ν is the kinematic viscosity, and η is the magnetic

(2.2)

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

3

diﬀusivity. From the Maxwell equations and incompressibility of the ﬂow, ∇ · U =
∇ · B = 0.

The Hall term ǫJ×B in Eq. (2.2) measures the velocity diﬀerence between species,
where the electron velocity is Ue = U − ǫJ. Here, ǫ measures the relative strength
of the Hall eﬀect, with the Hall term being dominant for wavenumbers larger than
kHall ∼ 1/ǫ if equipartition between the ﬁelds is assumed. The measure of strength
of the Hall eﬀect can be written as ǫ = LHall/L0 where L0 is a characteristic length
(we will use L0 = 2π, the size of the box in our simulations). In terms of physical
parameters, and for a fully ionized plasma, the Hall length is LHall = cUA/(ωpiU0),
where UA is the Alfv´enic speed, U0 is a characteristic speed, c is the speed of light,
and ωpi is the ion plasma frequency (when U0 = UA, LHall reduces to the ion skin
depth). In a partially ionized plasma, expressions for LHall can be found in Sano
and Stone (2002) and Mininni et al. (2003a).

Of special interest is the ratio between the integral length L, the Hall length
LHall, and the Ohmic dissipation length Lη. For LHall ≪ Lη (ǫ → 0), the Hall-MHD
equations reduce to the well known MHD case. In several astrophysical problems,
such as accretion disks, protoplanetary disks, or the magnetopause (see e.g. Birn
et al., 2001; Balbus and Terquem, 2001; Sano and Stone, 2002), the Hall scale is
larger than Ohmic scales although smaller than the integral scale L of the ﬂow.
We will be interested in this regime in this work, although we remark that the
separation between these scales in astrophysical or geophysical problems is far from
what can be achieved in numerical simulations.

The Hall-MHD equations have three ideal invariants (Turner, 1986). In this work

we will focus on two invariants, the total energy

and the magnetic helicity

E =

(U 2 + B2) dx3,

H =

A · B dx3,

1
2

Z

1
2

Z

(2.3)

(2.4)

where A is the vector potential, ∇ × A = B. These quantities are also ideal invari-
ants of the MHD equations (ǫ = 0). The third MHD invariant, the cross helicity,
is replaced in Hall-MHD by the hybrid helicity (Turner, 1986) and is small in the
simulations we will discuss.

The expressions we will use for the shell-to-shell energy transfers have been de-
rived for the MHD case by Verma (2004); Debliquy et al. (2005); and Alexakis
et al. (2005b). Here we present the derivation of the transfer terms for the Hall-
MHD equations. Equation (2.2) can be rewritten as

∂tB + U · ∇B = B · ∇U − ǫ∇ × (J × B) + η∇2B.

(2.5)

We introduce a ﬁlter in shells in Fourier space, such as FK which denotes the
components of the ﬁeld with wavenumbers between K and K + 1 [i.e. FK(x) =
ˆF(k)eik·x], from Eqs. (2.1) and (2.5) we can write detailed balance equations

K+1
k=K

for the energy,
P

∂tEU (K) =

−UK·(U · ∇) · UQ + UK ·(B · ∇) · BQ

−

i

Z

XQ h






4

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

− ν∇2UK + f · UK

dx3 ,

)

∂tEB(K) =

−BK·(U · ∇) · BQ + BK·(B · ∇) · UQ +

Z

XQ h






+ ǫJK · (B × JQ)
i

− η∇2BK

dx3 .

)

Here, EU (K) and EB(K) denote respectively the kinetic and magnetic energy in
the shell K. The above equations can be written in the more compact form:

∂tEU (K) =

[TUU (K, Q) + TBU (K, Q)] − νDU (K) + F (K),

(2.8)

XQ

XQ

∂tEB(K) =

[TUB(K, Q) + TBB(K, Q)] − ηDB(K).

(2.9)

The functions TUU (K, Q), TUB(K, Q), TBB(K, Q), and TBU (K, Q) express the en-
ergy transfer between diﬀerent ﬁelds and shells,

TUU (K, Q) ≡ −

UK(U · ∇)UQ dx3,

TUB(K, Q) ≡

UK(B · ∇)BQ dx3,

TBU (K, Q) ≡

BK(B · ∇)UQ dx3.

Z

Z

Z

In general, for positive transfer, the ﬁrst subindex denotes the ﬁeld that receives
energy, the second subindex the ﬁeld that gives energy. The ﬁrst wavenumber corre-
sponds to the ﬁeld receiving energy, and the second wavenumber to the ﬁeld giving
energy. As an example, positive TUU (K, Q) represents energy transfered from the
velocity ﬁeld at the shell K to velocity ﬁeld at the shell Q. In the same way, positive
TUB(K, Q) represents energy transfered from the magnetic ﬁeld at wavenumbers K
to the velocity ﬁeld at wavenumbers Q.

The transfer of magnetic to magnetic energy TBB(K, Q) in Hall-MHD consists

of two terms

where

TBB(K, Q) = T MHD

BB

(K, Q) + T Hall

BB (K, Q)

T MHD

BB

(K, Q) ≡ −

BK(U · ∇)BQ dx3,

Z
is the usual MHD transfer of magnetic energy through advection by the bulk velocity
ﬁeld, and

T Hall
BB (K, Q) ≡ ǫ

JK · (B × JQ) dx3,

Z

is the transfer of magnetic energy due to the Hall current. Note that the deﬁnition of
the transfer terms corresponds to the MHD case in Alexakis et al. (2005b), except
for the new term T Hall
BB (K, Q). However, as will be shown later, the behavior of

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)

(2.13)

(2.14)

(2.15)

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

5

the rest of the transfer terms in Hall-MHD will also be indirectly modiﬁed by the
presence of the Hall eﬀect.

All these transfer functions satisfy the identity

Tvw(K, Q) = −Twv(K, Q),

(2.16)

where v, w can be either U or B. This detailed conservation is what allows us to
deﬁne the terms as transfers of energy between shells. Note that other groupings
of the nonlinear terms in the Hall-MHD equations would not satisfy this symmetry
condition.

In Eqs. (2.8-2.9) we also have two dissipation functions and the energy injection

rate

have

νDU (K) ≡ ν

|∇UK|2dx3,

Z

ηDB(K) ≡ η

|∇BK|2dx3,

Z
f · UK dx3.

F (K) ≡

Z

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

Finally, we can also deﬁne the transfer of magnetic helicity. From Eq. (2.2) we

∂tH(K) =

TH (K, Q) − ηDH (K),

(2.20)

XQ

Z

where the transfer of magnetic helicity from the wavenumber K to the wavenumber
Q is given by

TH (K, Q) ≡

BK · [(U − ǫJ) × BQ] dx3.

(2.21)

This transfer function satisﬁes the relation TH (K, Q) = −TH (K, Q). The ﬁrst term
in Eq. (2.21) proportional to U is the usual transfer of HM in MHD, while the
second term proportional to ǫJ is the contribution due to the Hall eﬀect. Note that
as a whole, magnetic helicity is transfered between the shells K and Q interacting
with the electron velocity ﬁeld U − ǫJ. This is in agreement with the fact that in
the ideal limit the magnetic ﬁeld in the Hall-MHD system is frozen to the electron
velocity ﬁeld, instead of the bulk velocity ﬁeld of the plasma as in MHD.

The dissipation rate of magnetic helicity at the wavenumber K is given by

ηDH (K) ≡ η

BK · JKdx3.

(2.22)

Z
It is also worth noting that, since the magnetic helicity is not a positive deﬁned
quantity contrary to the energy, the interpretation of its transfer is more diﬃcult.
We will not attempt here a separation of its diﬀerent sign components (see e.g.
Waleﬀe, 1991; Chen et al., 2003a,b) for the case of kinetic helicity in hydrodynamic
turbulence).

3. Transport coeﬃcients
In Mininni et al. (2002), the expression of the α dynamo coeﬃcient was derived
for Hall-MHD. Although an expression of the Hall-MHD turbulent diﬀusivity was
derived by Mininni et al. (2003b), the closure was only valid for speciﬁc solutions

6

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

of the Hall-MHD equations. To interpret the results from the energy transfer, it
will be useful to have expressions for all the turbulent transport coeﬃcients in the
induction equation. To this end, and for the sake of simplicity, we will use mean
ﬁeld theory (MFT) (Steenbeck et al., 1966; Krause and Raedler, 1980) and the
reduced smooth approximation (RSA) (Blackman and Field, 1999). RSA was in-
troduced to solve some ambiguities present in MFT when the magnetic ﬁeld is
strong enough to aﬀect the velocity ﬁeld trough the Lorentz force. Although there
are still assumptions in MFT not completely justiﬁed, at least a qualitative agree-
ment has been observed with simulations in the MHD case (Brandenburg, 2001)
and the Hall-MHD case (Mininni et al., 2003a, 2005b). The transport coeﬃcients
can also be derived using more elaborate closures, such as the Lagrangian History
Direct Interaction Approximation (LHDIA) or the Eddy Damped Quasi Normal
Markovian (EDQNM) closures (see e.g. Lesieur, 1997). It is worth noting that the
analysis that follows in Sections 4 and 5 is of general validity and independent of
the assumptions we will use here to derive the turbulent transport coeﬃcients.

We split the ﬁelds into

U = U + u + u0,
B = B + b + b0,

(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

where u0 and b0 are isotropic and homogeneous solutions of Eqs. (2.1) and (2.5)
in the absence of the mean ﬁelds U and B. The ﬁelds with overbars are large scale
ﬁelds, and u and b are small scale corrections to the isotropic and homogeneous
solutions due to the presence of the large scale ﬁelds. The ﬂuctuating ﬁelds satisfy
hui = hu0i = hbi = hb0i = 0, where the brackets denote an average that satisﬁes
Taylor’s hypothesis (Krause and Raedler, 1980). Replacing in Eq. (2.5), using the
equations for the u0 and b0 ﬁelds, dropping terms quadratic in the ﬂuctuating ﬁelds
u and b, and averaging leads to

∂tB = ∇ ×

U − ǫJ

× B + ε

+ η∇2B,

where ε is the mean ﬁeld electromotive force

(cid:2)(cid:0)
ε = hue

(cid:3)
0 × b + ue × b0i .

(cid:1)

Our main aim in this section is to close Eq. (3.3) and write ε only as a function
of averages of the ﬁelds u0, b0, and spatial derivatives of B. A simple argument of
symmetry shows that in the approximately isotropic case

ε = αB − β∇ × B + γ∇ × ∇ × B.

(3.5)

From Eqs. (2.1) and (2.5), and subtracting the equations for the mean ﬂows, we
can also write equations for the evolution of the turbulent ﬂuctuations u and b. We
drop terms quadratic in u and b, and keep only terms to zeroth and linear order
in B,

∂tb = ∇ ×

U × b0 + ue

0 × B + ǫbe

0 × J + ue × b0 + ue

0 × b − ε

+ η∇2b.

(3.6)

(cid:0)

In this equation, ε involves averaged quantities, and from the Taylor’s hypothesis
it gives no contribution to the mean electromotive force. The fourth and ﬁfth terms
on the r.h.s. can be dropped using RSA, namely that |u|, |b| ≪ |B| (note that this
condition is less stringent than the usual assumptions in MFT, since the amplitude
of the ﬁelds u0, b0 can be much larger than the amplitude of the mean magnetic
ﬁeld). We will assume the viscosity and diﬀusivity are small, and as a result we will

(cid:1)

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

also drop the last term on the right hand side of Eq. (3.6). Terms proportional to
U can be removed in the proper frame of reference. Finally we obtain

∂tb ≈ ∇ ×

ue

0 × B + ǫbe

0 × J

.

7

(3.7)

The second term on the right hand side of Eq. (3.7) involves only spatial derivatives
of B and gives no contribution to the α coeﬃcient, but is retained here since it will
give contributions to β and γ.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Following the same steps, we can also write an equation for the evolution of u,

∂tu ≈ B · ∇b0 + b0 · ∇B − ∇p.

(3.8)

To obtain the mean ﬁeld electromotive force we replace time derivatives in Eqs.
(3.6) and (3.8) by the inverse of a correlation time τ . This step, common in MFT,
assumes the existence of a ﬁnite correlation time. At present there is no evidence of
its validity in general (see e.g. Gruzinov and Diamond, 1995; Blackman and Field,
2002; Brandenburg and Subramanian, 2005). Since we are introducing a correlation
time to close these equations, the expressions obtained for the turbulent transport
coeﬃcients will be considered as symbolic expressions.

Before replacing the expression for u in Eq. (3.5), Eq. (3.8) has to be solved
for the small scale pressure p. We will use a technique developed by Gruzinov
and Diamond (1995) (see also Blackman and Field, 2002). The α eﬀect is linear
in B and therefore the correct result can be obtained assuming B uniform. Then
∂tu ≈ B · ∇b0. Replacing the time derivative by τ −1 and replacing the expression
in Eq. (3.5), we obtain in the weak isotropic case

α =

h−ue

0 · ∇ × ue

0 + b0 · ∇ × b0 − ǫb0 · ∇ × ∇ × ue

0i .

(3.9)

τ
3

To compute β and γ we have to keep spatial derivatives of B in Eq. (3.8), and
therefore we have to solve for the pressure. This was done by Gruzinov and Diamond
(1995) transforming Eq. (3.8) to Fourier space, and doing a Taylor expansion of the
projector operator for incompressible u assuming a large scale separation between
the mean and ﬂuctuating ﬁelds. In three spatial dimensions, it was shown that the
pressure and b0 ·∇B terms give no contribution to ε in Eq. (3.4). As a result, we are
only left with the terms proportional to spatial derivatives of B when Eq. (3.7) and
the ﬁrst term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (3.8) are replaced on Eq. (3.4). Again, assuming
weak isotropy, we obtain the expressions for the remaining turbulent transport
coeﬃcients

ue
0

2 + ǫ (u0 · ∇ × be

0 + b0 · ∇ × ue
0)

,

β =

τ
3

γ = −

hb0 · ue

0i .

τ ǫ
D
3

E

(3.10)

(3.11)

The two last terms in α, and the third term in β come from the small scale
momentum equation and are related with the backreaction of the magnetic ﬁeld into
the velocity ﬁeld. In the kinematic regime of a dynamo, α = −τ /3 hue
0i,
which for ǫ = 0 reduces to the MHD case (Krause and Raedler, 1980). The general
expression for ǫ = 0 reduces to the MHD expression ﬁrst found using the EDQNM
closure by Pouquet et al. (1976), α = τ /3 h−ue
0 + b0 · ∇ × b0i. Note also
/3
that in the MHD case in three dimensions, the turbulent diﬀusivity β = −τ
is not changed during the nonlinear saturation (Gruzinov and Diamond, 1995).
(cid:11)

The turbulent diﬀusivity β in Hall-MHD is not positive deﬁnite, contrary to the

0 · ∇ × ue

0 · ∇ × ue

u0

(cid:10)

2

8

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

pure MHD case (note that negative eﬀective diﬀusivities can be found in MHD if the
assumption of homogeneity is dropped, see e.g. Lanotte et al., 1999). A negative
value of β represents non-local transfer of energy from the small scale turbulent
ﬁelds to the large scale magnetic ﬁeld. This result will be of interest in the following
sections.

It is worth studying the values of β for particular cases. If ǫ is large enough and
the system is magnetically dominated (EB ≫ EU ), then β ≈ −τ ǫ2
/3, where
j0 = ∇ × b0 and we assumed the average is a spatial average. In this case, β is
always negative implying transfer of energy from the small scales to the large.

j2
0

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

The normal modes of the Hall-MHD equations are circular polarized (∇ × ue

0 =
±kue
0, ∇ × b0 = ±kb0) and dispersive, and in the limit k ≫ 1 they satisfy dis-
persion relations ω ∼ ǫk2B (whistlers, right-handed polarized) and ω ∼ B/ǫ (ion-
cyclotron waves, left-handed polarized). Also, for these waves the ﬁelds are related
by b0 = −kB/ωue
0 (Mahajan et al., 2005a). If we assume a background of waves,
(1 ± 2ǫk2B/ω), which for k large enough can give positive or negative
ue
β ∼ τ /3
0
turbulent diﬀusivity according to the orientation of the wave. Note that from the
dispersion relations, at small scales whistlers give a ﬁnite contribution to the tur-
bulent diﬀusivity, while ion-cyclotron waves give a much larger turbulent diﬀusivity
that grows as k2.

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

2

4. Simulations
In this section we summarize the simulations that will be used to compute the
energy and helicity transfer functions deﬁned in Sec. 2. We performed three simu-
lations in three dimensions with periodic boundary conditions, using a pseudospec-
tral Hall-MHD code as described in Mininni et al. (2003a, 2005b). Runge-Kutta
of second order is used to evolve the system of Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2). To ensure the
divergence-free condition for the magnetic ﬁeld, a curl is removed from Eq. (2.2) and
the equation for the vector potential is instead solved, with the Couloumb’s gauge
∇ · A = 0. The three simulations are done with a spatial resolution of N 3 = 2563
grid points. The 2/3 dealiasing rule is used, and as a result the maximum wavenum-
ber resolved by the code is kmax = N/3 ≈ 85. The kinematic viscosity and magnetic
diﬀusivity are set to ν = η = 2 × 10−3, and all the simulations are well resolved, in
/η2)1/4]
the sense that the kinetic [kν = (
dissipation wavenumbers are smaller than kmax at all times.

/ν2)1/4] and magnetic [kη = (

ω2

J 2

In Hall-MHD, the Courant-Friedrichs-Levy (CFL) condition is more stringent
than for MHD for which, with equipartition of kinetic and magnetic energy, the
CFL condition for explicit time-stepping imposes an upper boundary on the time
step ∆t . ∆x/UA where ∆x is the spatial step. In Hall-MHD, the dispersive nature
of the whistlers impose ∆t . ∆x2/(ǫUA). As a result, smaller time steps will be
needed as ǫ is increased. Also, since the time step decreases quadratically as the
spatial resolution is linearly increased, we cannot achieve now spatial resolutions
higher than 2563 because of these constraints.

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

(cid:10)

(cid:11)

A helical forcing at k0 = 2 given by an ABC ﬂow

f = [C sin(k0z) + B cos(k0y)] ˆx + [A sin(k0x) + C cos(k0z)] ˆy +

+ [B sin(k0y) + A cos(k0x)] ˆz,

(4.1)

with A = 0.9, B = 1, and C = 1.1 was applied in the momentum equation. This
election of the amplitude coeﬃcients was done to ensure breaking the symmetries

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

9

Figure 1. Kinetic (thick curves) and magnetic energy (thin curves) as a function of
time, for runs with ǫ = 0 (solid lines), ǫ = 0.05 (dotted lines), and ǫ = 0.1 (dashed lines).

of the ABC ﬂow and ensuring a faster development of turbulence (Archontis et al.,
2003). After a ﬁrst hydrodynamic run made to reach a turbulent steady state, a
random and small magnetic ﬁeld was introduced at small scales. Initially the ratio
of kinetic to magnetic energy was Eu/Eb ∼ 10−3.

The simulation was continued to see exponential growth of the magnetic energy
(in the following, we will refer to this stage as the kinematic regime), and ﬁnally
nonlinear saturation of the small scale magnetic ﬁeld (in the following, Hall-MHD
turbulence). Three simulations were done, with ǫ = 0 (MHD), ǫ = 0.05 (which
corresponds to kHall ≈ 20), and ǫ = 0.1 (kHall ≈ 10). Figure 1 shows the time
history of the kinetic and magnetic energies for these three runs.

After t ≈ 20, the small scale magnetic ﬁelds have reached saturation for all values
of ǫ, while the large scale magnetic ﬁeld keeps growing slowly. As ǫ is increased,
the magnetic energy reached by the system after the non-linear saturation of the
small scales increases. However, this behavior is not monotonical in ǫ as shown by
Mininni et al. (2003a).

The saturation of the large scale magnetic ﬁeld takes place in a longer time
(Brandenburg, 2001; Mininni et al., 2005b). Note that one of the biggest challenges
for DNS is to attain scale separation between the diﬀerent dynamical ranges that
must be resolved. Reynolds numbers in simulations are much smaller than the values
observed in astrophysics and geophysics. Moreover, compared with hydrodynamics
and MHD, the extra characteristic length scale in Hall-MHD (the Hall scale) makes
it even harder to achieve a proper separation between all these scales. As a result,
we will focus in this work in the energy transfer at scales smaller than k0 (the
energy injection band), and the late time large-scale evolution of these runs will
not be discussed here (more details can be found e.g. in Mininni et al., 2005b).

Figure 2 shows the time evolution of the magnetic and kinetic energy spectra, for
the runs with ǫ = 0.05 and ǫ = 0.1. As previously mentioned (t ≈ 40) the spectrum
of energy at scales smaller than k0 has saturated and reached a steady state, while
the magnetic energy at k = 1 keeps growing slowly. Note that the ratio of kinetic
to magnetic energy at small scales in the saturated state depends on the value of ǫ.

10

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 2. Spectra of kinetic energy (thick curves) and magnetic energy (thin curves) as
a function of time, for t = 5 (solid), 15 (dash-dotted), 30 (dotted), and 45 (dashed). (a)
ǫ = 0.05, and (b) ǫ = 0.1.

Another quantity that will be of interest in the next section is the magnetic
helicity. Figure 3 shows the time history of the absolute value of magnetic helicity
for the three runs. Note that while in the MHD run (ǫ = 0) the magnetic helicity
grows monotonically with time, in the Hall-MHD runs the time evolution is strongly
modiﬁed. For ǫ = 0.05 the magnetic helicity grows slower than in the MHD case,
and for ǫ = 0.1 it changes sign at t ≈ 24. As was observed by Mininni et al. (2003a),
the Hall eﬀect inhibits the generation of net magnetic helicity at large scales by the
helical dynamo process. This inhibition grows monotonically with the amplitude of
Hall term, and for values of ǫ large enough the magnetic helicity ﬂuctuates around
zero. The reason for this behavior will be discussed in the next section.

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

11

Figure 3. Absolute value of the magnetic helicity as a function of time. Labels are as in
Fig. 1. For ǫ = 0.1 the magnetic helicity changes sign from negative to positive at t ≈ 24.

Figure 4. Transfer of kinetic energy from Q = 20 to K, TU U (K, Q = 20), in the kinematic
regime (solid line), at t = 26 (dotted line), and at t = 45 (dashed line) in the run with
ǫ = 0.1.

5. Transfers
In this section we discuss the energy transfer terms deﬁned in Sec. 2 as obtained
from the three DNS discussed in the previous section.

5.1. The run with ǫ = 0.1
We start discussing in detail the transfer in the Hall-MHD run with ǫ = 0.1. At late
times in this simulation, when the system is close to equipartition (UA ≈ U ), the
Hall wavenumber is kHall ≈ 10. Since we consider transfer functions at diﬀerent
times, for the sake of comparison and unless explicitly said, all transfers in this
subsection will be normalized using the r.m.s. velocity and magnetic ﬁeld according
to their expressions [Eqs. (2.10-2.15)]. Note that since ǫJ has units of velocity (and

12

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 5. T MHD

BB

(K, Q = 20) in the kinematic regime (solid line), at t = 26 (dotted

line), and at t = 45 (dashed line) in the run with ǫ = 0.1.

BB is normalized using
. This election also allows for a direct comparison of this term against
[see Eq. (2.14)].
(cid:11)

U − ǫJ is the electron velocity), the transfer function T Hall
B2|U|
T MHD
(cid:10)
BB
Figure 4 shows the transfer of kinetic energy from the shell Q = 20 to kinetic en-
ergy in shells K for three diﬀerent times. As previously mentioned, positive transfer
denotes energy given by the shell Q, while negative transfer corresponds to energy
received by this shell. In this case, kinetic energy in the shell Q = 20 is mostly re-
ceived from the shell K = 18 (negative peak), and given to K = 22 (positive peak).
This function represents the local and direct transfer of kinetic energy to small
scales. There are no noticeable diﬀerences in this transfer between the Hall-MHD
runs (ǫ = 0.05 and 0.1), and the MHD run (ǫ = 0).

The curve for early times (kinematic regime) corresponds to the initial exponen-
tial growth of magnetic energy, and is a time average properly normalized. As time
evolves and the magnetic energy grows, the amount of kinetic energy transfered
to small scales diminishes, since a larger amount of kinetic energy at large scales
is turned into magnetic energy. This eﬀect was previously observed in MHD runs
(Mininni et al., 2005a).

Figure 5 shows T MHD

BB

(K, Q = 20), the transfer of magnetic energy at the shell
Q = 20 to magnetic energy in shells K due to the advection by the bulk velocity
ﬁeld. As in the case of TUU , the transfer is local and the shell Q = 20 receives
most of the energy from K = 18 (negative peak) and gives energy to the shell
K = 22 (positive peak). Again, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences are observed between the
three runs with diﬀerent values of ǫ, except that this transfer, in amplitude, gets
substantially stronger as ǫ (and B) increases.

The total shell-to-shell transfer of magnetic energy is given by T MHD

plus T Hall
BB .
Figure 6 shows the T Hall
BB (K, Q) transfer at Q = 20. As in the previous cases,
positive transfer denotes energy is given from the shell Q = 20 to shells K, while
negative transfer indicates the shell Q receives energy from K. The T Hall
BB transfer
is small during the kinematic regime, but grows as the small scales reach nonlinear

BB

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

13

Figure 6. T Hall

BB (K, Q = 20) in the kinematic regime (solid line), at t = 26 (dotted line),

and at t = 45 (dashed line) in the run with ǫ = 0.1.

Figure 7. TBU (K = 20, Q) in the kinematic regime (solid line), at t = 26 (dotted line),
and at t = 45 (dashed line) in the run with ǫ = 0.1. The inset shows a blow up of the last
transfer.

saturation. Although this transfer is noisier than the previous terms studied, two
regions can be identiﬁed at late times. Around Q = K = 20, the transfer is local
and direct: positive and negative peaks can be observed at K ≈ 25 and K ≈ 15,
indicating energy is received and given respectively by the shell Q from and to
these wavenumbers. On the other hand, at large scales (up to K ≈ 10) a region with
positive transfer can also be identiﬁed. This region indicates a non-local and inverse
transfer of energy: the shells with K between 1 and 10 receive magnetic energy
from the shell Q = 20. This combination of a local direct transfer of energy and
a non-local inverse transfer is characteristic of the Hall term, and is in qualitative
agreement with the turbulent dissipation derived in Sec. 3 where it was shown that
it can take negative values.

14

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 8. TBU (K, Q = 20) at three diﬀerent times: the kinematic regime (solid line),
t = 26 (dotted line), and t = 45 (dashed line) for the run with ǫ = 0.1.

The remaining transfer term is TBU (K, Q), which when positive represents trans-
fer of kinetic energy from the shell Q to magnetic energy in the shell K. Although
the expression of this transfer function is equal for MHD and Hall-MHD, the trans-
fer is modiﬁed by the Hall currents. The reason for this can be explained in two
ways. On the one hand, the expression of the α-eﬀect in Sec. 3 is modiﬁed by the
Hall term, and this term represents transfer of energy from the turbulent velocity
ﬁeld to the mean magnetic ﬁeld. On the other hand, waves are expected to give
non-local coupling between the velocity and magnetic ﬁelds (see e.g. Iroshnikov,
1963; Kraichnan, 1965, in MHD). In Hall-MHD, the non-dispersive Alfv´en waves
of MHD are replaced by dispersive circularly polarized waves and as a result, the
coupling between the two ﬁelds should also be modiﬁed.

Figure 7 shows TBU (K = 20, Q), the energy transfered to the magnetic ﬁeld at
K = 20 from the velocity ﬁeld at shells Q. In the kinematic regime this transfer is
non-local and similar to the MHD transfer (Alexakis et al., 2005b; Mininni et al.,
2005a): the magnetic ﬁeld at K = 20 receives energy from the large scale ﬂow at
Q = 3 and from all turbulent scales up to Q ≈ 20. However, at late times the
transfer is strongly modiﬁed. The magnetic ﬁeld at K = 20 still receives energy
from a broad range of wavenumbers Q smaller than K (as was found in Alexakis
et al., 2005b), but it also receives energy from larger wavenumbers (Q ≈ 22), and
gives energy to the velocity ﬁeld at slightly smaller wavenumbers (Q ≈ 18). Note
that this indicates that in Hall-MHD a magnetic ﬁeld at a given scale can give rise
to velocity ﬂuctuations at larger scales, a process studied by Mahajan et al. (2005b)
and referred there as the reverse dynamo.

Figure 8 shows TBU (K, Q = 20), the energy received by the magnetic ﬁeld at all
wavenumbers K from the velocity ﬁeld in the shell Q = 20. During the kinematic
regime, the velocity ﬁeld in this shell gives energy to all magnetic shells, although
the transfer peaks at wavenumbers larger than Q. But in the saturated regime, the
transfer changes drastically again. The magnetic ﬁeld at wavenumbers K smaller
than Q ≈ 16, and in shells between 20 and 23 gives energy to the velocity ﬁeld
(negative transfer), while the magnetic ﬁeld in shells between K ≈ 16 to 20 and

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

15

Figure 9. T Hall
BB (K, Q) (left column), and TBU (K, Q) (right column) at three diﬀerent
times: the kinematic regime (top), t = 26 (middle), and t = 45 (bottom) for the run with
ǫ = 0.1. In all ﬁgures, K is on the x axis and Q in the y axis. Shading go from dark
(T < 0) to light (T > 0).

for K & 23 receives energy from the velocity ﬁeld (positive transfer). This is just
the counterpart of TBU (K, Q) for constant K, and again shows that in Hall-MHD
a small scale magnetic ﬁeld can create large scale ﬂows.

Figure 9 shows shaded plots of T Hall

BB (K, Q) and TBU (K, Q) at diﬀerent times.
These are the two transfers that are strongly modiﬁed by the Hall currents, and
the ﬁgures allow for a study of the terms for all values of K and Q. Although noisy,
a characteristic pattern can be recognized in T Hall
BB . As time evolves and the mag-
netic energy grows, the relative importance of this term grows. For wavenumbers
K, Q & kHall ∼ 10, the function is positive (light) near and below the diagonal

16

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 10. Energy ﬂuxes in the run with ǫ = 0.1 at t = 45: ΠHall
ΠMHD
the total ﬂux in the simulation.

BB (k) (solid line),
(k) (dash-dotted line), ΠU U (k) (dashed), and ΠBU (k) (dotted). The thick line is

BB

K = Q, and negative (dark) near and above this diagonal. This region close to
the diagonal represents local and direct transfer of energy: a cut at constant Q
shows that close to the diagonal the shell Q receives energy from neighboring shells
with K . Q (negative T Hall
BB ) and gives energy to neighbor shells with K & Q
(positive T Hall
BB ). As we move far from this diagonal, the sign of the regions above
and below the diagonal changes. This indicates a non-local and inverse transfer of
magnetic energy, from small to large scales, in agreement with the expression for
the turbulent magnetic diﬀusivity obtained in Sec. 3.

The TBU (K, Q) also shows an interesting behavior as a function of time. During
the kinematic regime, TBU is positive in a triangle deﬁned by K & Q. This indicates
that the velocity ﬁeld in a given shell ampliﬁes the magnetic ﬁeld in that shell and
all the shells with larger wavenumber (smaller scales). Also a strong band around
Q = 3 is observed, indicating that the velocity ﬁeld in the energy injection band
gives a lot of energy to the magnetic ﬁeld. These results are similar to the kinematic
MHD dynamo (see Mininni et al., 2005a). However, at late times an inverse process
can be identiﬁed close to the diagonal K = Q. Above it, TBU is positive, while
below it, it is negative. This represents transfer of magnetic energy from a shell K
to kinetic energy in slightly smaller wavenumbers Q.

Since T Hall

BB and TBU give both direct and inverse transfers of energy (locally or
non-locally), it is of interest to quantify which direction wins when all the contri-
butions to the transfer are added. To this end, we computed the contribution of
each transfer term to the energy ﬂux. The total energy ﬂux at a wavenumber k is
given by

k

Π(k) =

T (K, Q),

(5.1)

XQ
where T = TUU + TBB + TUB + TBU is the total energy transfer. We can split this

XK=0

17

(5.2)

(5.3)

(5.4)

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

ﬂux into the energy ﬂux due solely to the transfer of kinetic energy

ΠUU (k) =

TUU (K, Q),

the ﬂux due to the transfer of magnetic energy ΠBB = ΠMHD

BB + ΠHall

BB , where

ΠMHD

BB

(k) =

T MHD

BB

(K, Q),

k

k

k

XK=0

XQ

XK=0

XQ

ΠHall

BB (k) =

T Hall
BB (K, Q),

XK=0
and the hybrid ﬂux due to interactions between the velocity and magnetic ﬁelds

XQ

k

ΠBU (k) =

[TBU (K, Q) + TUB(K, Q)] .

(5.5)

XK=0
To compute the ﬂuxes, the transfer functions are not normalized.

XQ

Figure 10 shows the partial energy ﬂuxes at t = 45. Since all transfer functions
were computed up to K, Q = 40, the partial ﬂuxes go to zero artiﬁcially at this
wavenumber, although in the simulation the total energy ﬂux goes to zero only at
the maximum resolved wavenumber kmax.

The total ﬂux is positive at wavenumbers larger than k0 (the energy injection
band), indicating a direct cascade of the total energy. At wavenumbers smaller than
k0 the total ﬂux is negative, an evidence of large scale dynamo action. A substan-
tial portion of the total ﬂux is due to the transfer of energy from the kinetic to
the magnetic reservoirs (ΠBU ), and this contribution to the ﬂux is positive at all
wavenumbers (larger than the forced ones) indicating a net direct transfer of the
energy. We note that this ﬂux is due to the non-local TUB and TBU transfer terms.
The ﬂux due to the transfer of kinetic energy ΠUU is also positive at all wavenum-
bers. But the ﬂux due to the transfer of magnetic energy ΠHall
BB is only positive at
wavenumbers larger than kHall. For wavenumbers smaller than k ≈ 10 ∼ kHall,
ΠHall
BB changes sign, giving as a result a net inverse transfer of magnetic energy,
from small to large scales. This indicates that a magnetically dominated Hall-MHD
system could display backscatter of the magnetic energy. Magnetic ﬂuctuations at
small scales could give rise to large scale magnetic ﬁelds, as is also implied by the
expression of β found in Sec. 3.

Note that although in MHD the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity can give a
similar result, the backscatter predicted in Hall-MHD by the turbulent diﬀusivity
is novel, since it can take place even in the absence of helicity in the ﬁelds. To
illustrate this we show results of non-helical magnetically dominated simulations in
Sec. 6. It is worth noting that at wavenumbers smaller than kHall, the Hall term
increases the ﬂux of magnetic energy to smaller scales, thus also in agreement with
results showing the Hall currents increase the amount of small scale perturbations
(Birn et al., 2001; Laveder et al., 2002a,b; Morales et al., 2005).

5.2. Dependence with ǫ
Now we discuss in detail the dependence of the results as ǫ (or the Hall scale) is
varied. To this end, we consider the runs with ǫ = 0.1, 0.05, and 0 (MHD). As

18

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 11. TBU (K = 20, Q) at t = 45 for ǫ = 0 (solid line), 0.05 (dotted line), and 0.1
(dashed line).

previously mentioned, the transfer terms TUU (K, Q) and TBB(K, Q) do not show a
dependence with the amplitude of the Hall eﬀect. These terms give direct and local
transfer of energy to small scales, as in MHD (Alexakis et al., 2005b). As a result,
we will discuss the change in the remaining transfer terms as ǫ is varied.

Since the Hall eﬀect is more relevant when the magnetic ﬁeld is stronger, we
will consider the transfer terms at t = 45, when a large scale magnetic ﬁeld is
present and the small scales have reached saturation. Since we will examine runs
with diﬀerent values of ǫ at the same time, in this subsection the transfers are not
normalized using the energies.

The transfer of magnetic energy due to the Hall term T Hall

BB (K, Q = 20) is of
course zero in the MHD case (ǫ = 0). As ǫ is increased, except for an increase in
its amplitude (not shown), no signiﬁcant diﬀerences are observed and its behavior
is similar to the one examined in Sec. 5.

Figure 11 shows the behavior of TBU (K = 20, Q) (the transfer of kinetic energy
in the shells Q to magnetic energy in the shell K = 20) as ǫ is varied. The strong
peak at Q = 3 is associated with the injection band. This transfer is non-local in
the three runs, as is evidenced by the positive plateau from Q ≈ 3 to Q ≈ 16. As
a result, the velocity ﬁeld in all these shells gives energy to the magnetic ﬁeld at
K = 20. As ǫ is increased, a local transfer grows in the neighborhood of Q = 20. The
velocity ﬁeld at wavenumbers K slightly larger give energy to the magnetic ﬁeld at
K = 20, while the magnetic ﬁeld gives energy to the velocity ﬁeld at wavenumbers
slightly smaller (Q ≈ 18).

We can compute the energy ﬂux as ǫ increases. Since the transfer of kinetic
energy is not changed, we will focus on two contributions to the total ﬂux: the ﬂux
of magnetic energy ΠBB(k), and the hybrid ﬂux ΠBU (k) due to the terms turning
kinetic into magnetic energy and vice-versa. The magnetic energy ﬂux ΠBB =
ΠMHD
BB + ΠHall
BB is shown in Fig. 12. At scales larger than kHall, negative ﬂux of
magnetic energy is observed, giving backscatter of magnetic energy to large scales.
As ǫ is increased, the amplitude of the backscatter grows, and the wavenumber
where the ﬂux changes sign moves to larger k.

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

19

Figure 12. ΠBB(k) at t = 45 for ǫ = 0 (solid line), 0.05 (dotted line), and 0.1 (dashed
line).

Figure 13. ΠBU (k) at t = 45 for ǫ = 0 (solid line), 0.05 (dotted line), and 0.1 (dashed
line).

Figure 13 shows the ﬂux ΠBU (k). At wavenumbers smaller than the forcing
wavenumber (k = 3), the ﬂux is negative. This is a signature of large scale dynamo
action: the magnetic ﬁeld at large scales is fed by the small scale velocity ﬁeld.
Remarkably, as ǫ is increased, the amplitude of the negative ﬂux at large scales
increases. This is in good agreement with dynamo simulations where the large scale
magnetic ﬁeld was observed to grow faster in the presence of Hall currents (Mininni
et al., 2003a, 2005b).

5.3. Transfer of magnetic helicity

We discuss brieﬂy the transfer of magnetic helicity in the saturated case t = 45. To
study the transfer associated with the inverse cascade of magnetic helicity at scales
larger than the forcing scale, a large separation between this scale and the largest

20

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 14. TH(K, Q = 20) normalized by the magnetic helicity at the shell Q = 20, at
t = 45 for ǫ = 0 (solid line), 0.05 (dotted line), and 0.1 (dashed line).

scale in the box is needed. At a ﬁxed spatial resolution, this reduces the Reynolds
numbers, and as a result reduces also the separation between the Ohmic scale and
the Hall scale. This study is beyond the aim of this work. But we want to point out
a remarkable feature observed in the transfer of magnetic helicity at scales smaller
than the forcing scale.

Figure 14 shows the transfer TH (K, Q = 20) normalized by the magnetic helicity
in the shell Q = 20 at t = 45. The transfer is mostly local in the three simulations,
peaking at wavenumbers K slightly smaller and larger than Q. However, as ǫ is
increased the transfer rate of magnetic helicity is strongly quenched. This slow down
in the transfer in Hall-MHD explains the behavior observed in Fig. 3. In MHD and
Hall-MHD dynamos, the external mechanical forcing generates equal amounts of
magnetic helicity of opposite sign at scales smaller and larger than the forcing band
(Seehafer, 1996; Brandenburg, 2001; Mininni et al., 2003a). Since the transfer of
magnetic helicity between diﬀerent shells in the Hall-MHD runs is almost stopped,
it takes more time for the magnetic helicity at scales smaller than the forcing scale
to reach the dissipative scale where it can be destroyed. As a result, both signs of
magnetic helicity piles up close to the forcing band, decreasing the growth rate of
net magnetic helicity at scales larger than the forcing scale, and allowing also for
the possibility for a sign change of the net magnetic helicity.

6. Backscatter of magnetic energy in Hall-MHD

The mechanically forced runs discussed in the previous section show negative ﬂux
of magnetic energy at large scales due to the Hall eﬀect, in agreement with negative
values of the turbulent diﬀusivity. This indicates that in a magnetically dominated
simulation, backscatter of magnetic energy could be observed if the Hall term is
strong enough. Note that here we are using the word backscatter to refer to this
transfer of magnetic energy from the small to the large scales. This is done in
opposition to the usual terminology of inverse cascades, since we have been unable

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

21

Figure 15. (a) Kinetic energy spectrum EU (k) and (b) magnetic energy spectrum
EB(k) at t = 3, for runs with ǫ = 0 (solid line), 0.05 (dotted line), and 0.1 (dashed line).

to identify any ideal invariant of the Hall-MHD equations cascading inversely with
constant ﬂux to the large scales.

To study this scenario, we did three simulations with ǫ = 0, 0.2, and 0.5. The
kinematic viscosity and magnetic diﬀusivity were ν = η = 3.5 × 10−2, and the
spatial resolution was N 3 = 1283. The initial condition was U = B = 0. The
system was forced with a non-helical and random electromotive force given by a
superposition of harmonic modes at wavenumbers k = 9 and 10. The phases of the
force were changed with a correlation time of τ = 1.25 × 10−2, and the time step
was set to ∆t = 1.5 × 10−3. Note that in the absence of magnetic helicity, no inverse
cascade is expected in the MHD case (see however Lanotte et al., 1999, for cases
where a large scale shear is present).

The system was run until reaching a turbulent steady state. All the quadratic
invariants (with the exception of the total energy) were veriﬁed to be small: the
magnetic helicity ﬂuctuates in the three runs around zero, both the global quantity

22

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

Figure 16. (a) Kinetic energy spectrum and (b) magnetic energy spectrum at t = 75 for
runs with ǫ = 0 (solid line), 0.05 (dotted line), and 0.1 (dashed line).

as well as its spectral density at each individual Fourier shell. Figure 15 shows
the kinetic and magnetic energy spectrum at early times (t = 3). The shell of
wavenumbers associated with the external magnetic force is easily recognized in
the peak in Fig. 15(b).

As time evolves, an increase in the magnetic energy at wavenumbers smaller
than the forcing wavenumber is observed. Figure 16 shows the kinetic and magnetic
energy spectrum at t = 75, when the system has reached a steady state. The three
runs are dominated by the magnetic energy (note that the peak in the magnetic
energy spectrum around the forcing band gives the largest contribution to the
energy). The spectrum of kinetic energy is similar for the three runs, and large
scale perturbations are observed because of the injection of kinetic energy by the
Lorentz force. However, the magnetic energy spectrum is strongly modiﬁed as ǫ is
increased. While the spectra of the three simulations peak in the energy injection
band, the magnetic energy at K = 1 in the run with ǫ = 0.5 is three orders of

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

23

magnitude larger than in the MHD run. The magnetic energy in all wavenumbers
smaller than the forcing wavenumbers increases as ǫ is increased.

The backscatter of magnetic energy is in good agreement with the negative ﬂux
ΠBB observed in the previous section, and the negative turbulent transport coef-
ﬁcients derived for the magnetically dominated case. Note that an increase in the
level of the small scale magnetic ﬂuctuations (for wavenumbers smaller than the
energy injection wavenumbers) is also observed in Fig. 16(b).

7. Discussion
In this work we presented energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence as obtained
from numerical simulations. The properties of the spectral transfer is one of the
building blocks of turbulence theories, and to the best of our knowledge no attempt
to study transfer and cascades of ideal invariants in this system of equations had
been attempted before.

Before proceeding with the discussion of our results, we have to warn the reader
about a clear limitation of the numerical results presented. As previously mentioned,
an astrophysics-like scale separation between the box size, the energy injection scale,
the Hall scale, and the Ohmic dissipation scale is well beyond today computing
resources. We tested the dependence of our results as ǫ was varied, but no attempt
was made to change the Reynolds numbers in our simulations. This being said, we
believe that even under this limitation, an understanding of the transfer of energy
between diﬀerent scales is of uttermost importance for the development of a theory
of turbulence for Hall-MHD or other extensions of magnetohydrodynamic to take
into account kinetic plasma eﬀects.

Direct evidence of nonlocality of the energy transfer was observed. While the total
energy displays a direct cascade to small scales, in the individual transfer terms,
both directions (toward small and large scales) were identiﬁed. Coupling between
the magnetic and velocity ﬁelds is strongly modiﬁed by the Hall eﬀect, and a local
backscatter of energy from the magnetic ﬁeld to the velocity ﬁeld at slightly larger
scales was observed. This behavior can be expected since the Hall term changes
the nature of the nondispersive MHD Alfv´en waves, into dispersive and circularly
polarized waves. As a result, the nonlinear coupling between the two ﬁelds is also
changed.

Also a nonlocal backscatter of magnetic energy was observed at scales larger
than the Hall scale. This backscatter was veriﬁed in non-helical magnetically forced
simulations, where the amplitude of the magnetic ﬁeld at scales larger than the
forcing scale was observed to grow in the Hall-MHD simulations, but not in the
MHD run. In some sense, the magnetic ﬁeld in Hall-MHD being frozen in the ideal
case to the electron velocity ﬁeld, couples non-locally both small scales (the current)
and large scales (the bulk velocity ﬁeld).

All these processes can be partially explained considering transport turbulent
coeﬃcients estimated from MFT. Unlike MHD, the turbulent diﬀusivity in Hall-
MHD is not positive deﬁnite. In particular, its expression shows that ion-cyclotron
waves are more likely to produce large values of negative (backscatter) or positive
(reconnection) turbulent diﬀusivity than the whistler mode.

The transfer of magnetic helicity at small scales was also observed to be quenched
by the Hall eﬀect. While the mechanisms generating magnetic helicity in the Hall-
MHD dynamo are the same as in MHD (Mininni et al., 2003a), the transport of

24

P. D. Mininni, A. Alexakis and A. Pouquet

helicity is expected to be changed by the Hall currents (Ji, 1999). As a result of
the slow down in the transfer rate of magnetic helicity by the Hall eﬀect, the late
time evolution of the system is not characterized by a maximally helical large scale
magnetic ﬁeld as in the MHD case (Pouquet et al., 1976; Meneguzzi et al., 1981;
Brandenburg, 2001).

The Hall term gives a direct transfer of magnetic energy at scales smaller than the
Hall scale, and an inverse transfer at scales larger than the Hall scale. This ﬁnding
sheds light into the conﬂicting results reported in the literature, where the Hall
eﬀect was observed to increase the amount of small scales and magnetic dissipation
in some cases, and to help large scale reorganization processes in other cases, as
mentioned in the introduction.

As a result of this dual direction of the Hall transfer, a change in the power law
followed by the total energy spectrum can be expected close to the Hall wavenum-
ber. Steepening of the energy spectrum for wavenumbers smaller than kHall was
observed in 2.5D simulations with strong magnetic ﬁelds imposed, when the cross-
correlation between the velocity and magnetic ﬁelds was signiﬁcant (Ghosh et al.,
1996). In three dimensional dynamo simulations where the cross correlation is in
general small, no change was observed (Mininni et al., 2005b), although a faster
growth of the large scale magnetic ﬁeld was found. Given the nonlocal nature of the
transfer in Hall-MHD, and the scale separation needed to observe a clear change in
the energy spectrum, probably a huge increase in the spatial resolution is needed
to conﬁrm it.

Acknowledgements

Computer time was provided by NCAR. The NSF grant CMG-0327888 at NCAR
supported this work in part and is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Alexakis, A., Mininni, P. D. and Pouquet, A. 2005a Phys. Rev. Lett. Submitted.
Alexakis, A., Mininni, P. D. and Pouquet, A. 2005b Phys. Rev. E In press.
Archontis, V., Dorch, S. B. F. and Nordlund, A. 2003 Astron. Astrophys. 410, 759.
Balbus, S. A. and Terquem, C. 2001 Astrophys. J. 552, 235.
Bhattacharjee, A., Ma, Z. W. and Wang, X. 1999 J. Geophys. Res. 104, 14543.
Birn, J., Drake, J. F., Shay, M. A., Rogers, B. N., Denton, R. E., Hesse, M.,
Kuznetsova, M., Ma, Z. W., Bhattacharjee, A., Otto, A. and Pritchett, P. L.
2001 J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3715.

Blackman, E. G. and Field, G. B. 1999 Astrophys. J. 521, 597.
Blackman, E. G. and Field, G. B. 2002 Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 265007.
Brandenburg, A. 2001 Astrophys. J. 550, 824.
Brandenburg, A. and Subramanian, K. 2005 Phys. Rep. 417, 1.
Chen, Q., Chen, S. and Eyink, G. L. 2003a Phys. Fluids 15, 361.
Chen, Q., Chen, S., Eyink, G. L. and Holm, D. D. 2003b Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

214503.

Debliquy, O., Verma, M. K. and Carati, D. 2005 Phys. Plasmas 12, 042309.
Ding, W. X., Brower, D. L., Craig, D., Deng, B. H., Fiksel, G., Mirnov, V., Prager,

S. C., Sarﬀ, J. S. and Svidzinski, V. 2004 Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 045002.

Domaradzki, J. A. and Rogallo, R. S. 1990 Phys. Fluids 2, 413.
Galanti, B., Kleeorin, N. and Rogachevskii, I. 1995 Phys. Plasmas 2, 4161.

Energy transfer in Hall-MHD turbulence

25

Ghosh, S., Siregar, E., Roberts, D. A. and Goldstein, M. L. 1996 J. Geophys. Res.

101, 2493.

Gruzinov, A. V. and Diamond, P. H. 1995 Phys. Plasmas 2, 1941.
Helmis, G. 1968 Mon.ber. dtsch. Akad. Wiss. Berlin 10, 280.
Iroshnikov, P. S. 1963 Sov. Astron. 7, 566.
Ji, H. 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3198.
Kraichnan, R. H. 1965 Phys. Fluids 8, 1385.
Krause, F. and Raedler, K.-H. 1980 Mean-ﬁeld magnetohydrodynamics and dynamo

theory. Pergamon Press, New York.

Lanotte, A., Noullez, A., Vergassola, M. and Wirth, A. 1999 Geophys. Astrophys.

Fluid Dyn. 91, 131.

Laveder, D., Passot, T. and Sulem, P. L. 2002a Phys. Plasmas 9, 293.
Laveder, D., Passot, T. and Sulem, P. L. 2002b Phys. Plasmas 9, 305.
Lesieur, M. 1997 Turbulence in ﬂuids. Kluwer Academic Press.
Mahajan, S. M., Mininni, P. D. and G´omez, D. O. 2005a Astrophys. J. 619, 1014.
Mahajan, S. M., Shatasvili, N. L., Mikeladze, S. V. and Sigua, K. I. 2005b Astrophys.

J. Preprint doi:10.1086/’432867’.

Mahajan, S. M. and Yoshida, Z. 1998 Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4863.
Meneguzzi, M., Frisch, U. and Pouquet, A. 1981 Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1060.
Mininni, P. D., Alexakis, A. and Pouquet, A. 2005a Phys. Rev. E In press.
Mininni, P. D., G´omez, D. O. and Mahajan, S. M. 2002 Astrophys. J. 567, L81.
Mininni, P. D., G´omez, D. O. and Mahajan, S. M. 2003a Astrophys. J. 587, 472.
Mininni, P. D., G´omez, D. O. and Mahajan, S. M. 2003b Astrophys. J. 584, 1120.
Mininni, P. D., G´omez, D. O. and Mahajan, S. M. 2005b Astrophys. J. 619, 1019.
Mirnov, V. V., Hegna, C. C. and Prager, S. C. 2003 Plasma Phys. Rep. 29, 566.
Morales, L., Dasso, S. and G´omez, D. 2005 J. Geophys. Res. 110, A04204.
Numata, R., Yoshida, Z. and Hayashi, T. 2004 Comp. Phys. Comm. 164, 291.
Ohkitani, K. and Kida, S. 1992 Phys. Fluids A 4, 794.
Ohsaki, S. 2005 Phys. Plasmas 12, 032306.
Pouquet, A., Frisch, U. and L´eorat, J. 1976 J. Fluid Mech. 77, 321.
Rezeau, L. and Belmont, G. 2001 Space Sc. Rev. 95, 427.
Rheinhardt, M. and Geppert, U. 2002 Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 101103.
Sano, T. and Stone, J. M. 2002 Astrophys. J. 570, 314.
Seehafer, N. 1996 Phys. Rev. E 53, 1283.
Shay, M. A., Drake, J. F., Rogers, B. N. and Denton, R. E. 2001 J. Geophys. Res.

106, 3759.

31, L02805.

Smith, D., Ghosh, S., Dmitruk, P. and Matthaeus, W. H. 2004 J. Geophys. Res.

Steenbeck, M., Krause, F. and R¨adler, K.-H. 1966 Z. Naturforsch. 21a, 369.
Turner, L. 1986 IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. PS-14, 849.
Verma, M. 2004 Phys. Rep. 401, 229.
Waleﬀe, F. 1991 Phys. Fluids A 4, 350.
Wang, X., Bhattacharjee, A. and Ma, Z. W. 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 265003.
Yeung, P. K., Brasseur, J. and Wang, Q. 1995 J. Fluid Mech. 283, 43.
Zeldovich, Y. B., Ruzmaikin, A. A. and Sokoloﬀ, D. D. 1983 Magnetic ﬁelds in

astrophysics. Gordon and Breach Science Pub., New York.

Zhou, Y. 1993 Phys. Fluids A 5, 2511.

