Fluid simulation studies of the dynamical behaviour of one

dimensional relativistic electromagnetic solitons

Vikrant Saxena, Amita Das, Abhijit Sen, Predhiman Kaw

Institute for Plasma Research, Bhat, Gandhinagar - 382428, India

Abstract

A numerical ﬂuid simulation investigation of the temporal evolution of a special class of traveling

wave solutions of the one dimensional relativistic cold plasma model is reported. The solutions

consist of coupled electromagnetic and plasma waves in a solitary pulse shape (Phys. Rev. Lett. 68,

3172 (1992); Phys. Plasmas 9, 1820 (2002)). Issues pertaining to their stability, mutual collisional

interactions and propagation in an inhomogeneous plasma medium are addressed. It is found that

solitary pulses that consist of a single light peak trapped in a modulated density structure are

long lived whereas structures with multiple peaks of trapped light develop an instability at the

trailing edge. The interaction properties of two single peak structures show interesting dependencies

on their relative amplitudes and propagation speeds and can be understood in terms of their

propagation characteristics in an inhomogeneous plasma medium.

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The propagation and interaction of ultra-high intensity lasers (I

1018W/cm2 ) in

≥

plasmas display a rich variety of nonlinear physics associated with the relativistic motion of

the electron ﬂuid in the electric ﬁelds of these lasers. An important early work in this area is

the pioneering study by Akhiezer and Polovin [1] in 1956. They found exact nonlinear wave

solutions for relativistically intense electromagnetic waves in a plasma that was modelled

by coupled Maxwell and relativistic electron ﬂuid equations. These early theoretical results

obtained well before the discovery of lasers have now become very relevant due to the

experimental realization of high intensity electric ﬁelds from modern powerful laser systems.

This has promoted a resurgence of activities in this ﬁeld. A variety of other nonlinear

solutions, in the form of one dimensional nonlinear propagating solitonic structures have

been obtained and discussed by various authors over the past several years [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].

One particular class of relativistic solitons, in the form of modulated light pulses coupled to

plasma waves, has received special attention in the past decade in a number of analytic and

simulation studies [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] and continues to be of current interest [9, 10, 13]. These

solitary pulses are exact traveling wave solutions of the relativistic hydrodynamic equations

and provide a useful paradigm for the investigation of various phenomena associated with

intense laser plasma interactions that occur in applications like laser fusion, plasma based

particle accelerators, photon acceleration schemes etc. In a strictly mathemetical sense these

are not true soliton solutions, except in some simplifying limits when they obey canonical

integrable model equations like the nonlinear Schrodinger equation. From a practical point

of view it is therefore relevant to investigate such dynamical issues as the accessibility of

these solutions, the stability and lifetime of these pulses, their mutual collision properties,

their propagation characteristics in an inhomogeneous medium etc. Many of these issues are

open questions today and are diﬃcult to address analytically. In this paper we address some

of these issues with the help of numerical simulation studies of the full set of relativistic

one dimensional cold electron ﬂuid equations along with the Maxwell’s equations for the

electromagnetic ﬁeld evolution. The question of accessibility of these solitons was partially

addressed in [11, 12, 13] where the interaction of an externally imposed circularly polarized

intense electromagnetic wave with a plasma was studied numerically by particle as well as

ﬂuid simulations; and some part of of the laser energy was found to be trapped in non-

2

propagating soliton like pulse structures. In our simulations we do not consider the vacuum

plasma interface problem but conﬁne ourselves to the dynamics of soliton solutions within

the plasma. For this purpose we use the traveling wave solutions of [4] as initial conditions

and investigate their time evolution under various conditions. In general we ﬁnd that these

solitary pulses have a fairly long life time in that they continue to propagate stably through

the plasma medium over several plasma periods. Single hump structures are found to have

longer life times than the multi-hump ones. The latter develop a distinct instability at the

rear portion of the pulse and thereafter begin to radiate away.

It is also observed that

pure solitonic traits of preserving individual identities through a mutual collision process

are displayed only by small amplitude solutions obtained in the simplifying weak density

approximation. The general large amplitude solutions do not possess these solitonic traits.

When these structures propagate in an inhomogeneous medium they gain (lose) speed while

traveling down (up) the density gradient and can be reﬂected back if the plasma density is

large enough. In our present studies we have ignored ion motions and thermal eﬀects. The

inﬂuence of these eﬀects will be studied in a future work.

The paper is organized as follows. The governing evolution equations are presented in

the next section. We also brieﬂy recapitulate here the solitonic traveling wave solutions of

the relativistic cold ﬂuid model as discussed in [3, 4, 5, 7]. In section III we present results

of our evolution studies for solitons propagating in a homogeneous plasma. We show that

solitonic structures (both having single and multiple peaks of light waves ) survive with no

distortion for several plasma periods. The single hump solutions are extremely robust and

have been observed to move undistorted for the entire simulation duration which was of

the order of a few thousand plasma periods. The multiple peak solutions in contrast get

distorted and develop an instability at their rear end after around 30

40 plasma periods.

−

The interaction of two oppositely propagating structures are also considered in section

III. In section IV we investigate the evolution of these solitonic structures in a plasma which

is inhomogeneous i.e. for which the background plasma density varies spatially. Section V

contains a summary and a discussion of our results.

3

II. GOVERNING EQUATIONS AND STATIONARY SOLUTIONS

The governing equations are the relativistic set of ﬂuid evolution equations for a cold

plasma in one dimension. We consider spatial variations to exist only along x, the direction

of propagation, and consider the ions to be stationary. The relevant set of ﬂuid and ﬁeld

equations are then,

(

∂
∂t

+ u

)(γu) =

∂φ
∂x −

1
2γ

∂A2
⊥
∂x

∂(nu)
∂x

= 0.

+

∂n
∂t
∂
∂x
∂2φ
∂x2 = n

n0(x)

−
∂2 ~A⊥
∂t2 =

n ~A⊥
γ

∂2 ~A⊥
∂x2 −

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

where (1) is the electron continuity equation, (2) is the parallel electron momentum equation,

(3) is the Poisson’s equation for the electrostatic potential φ, (4) is the wave equation
for the vector potential ~A⊥ and other notations are standard. The perpendicular electron

momentum equation has been integrated exactly to obtain the conservation of the transverse
~A⊥/γ = 0 and used to

canonical momenta (sum of particle and the ﬁeld momenta) as u⊥

−
eliminate u⊥ in the above equations. Here γ is the relativistic factor

γ =

s

1 + A2
⊥
u2
1

−

In writing the above equations we have chosen to normalize the density by some appropri-

ate density n00. The length is normalized by the corresponding skin depth c/ωpe0 (where

4πn00e2/me) and time by the inverse of the plasma frequency ω−1

ωpe0 =
pe0. The scalar and
vector potentials are normalized by mc2/e. In Poisson’s equation n0(x) corresponds to the

q

background ion density normalized by n00.

The coupled set of nonlinear equations(1- 4) permit a variety of coherent solutions. A

class of one dimensional propagating solutions with modulated envelope structure of the

above set have been obtained by using the coordinate transformation ξ = x

βt and

−

τ = t (where β represents the group velocity of the structure). The vector potential is
assumed to be circularly polarized and has a sinusoidal phase variation of the form ~A =

(a(ξ)/2)[
{

ˆy + iˆz
}

−

exp(

iλτ ) + c.c.]. The plasma oscillations associated with the envelope

structure are assumed to have no dependence on τ . The above transformations convert

4

Eqs.(1,2) into ordinary diﬀerential equations which can be integrated to give n(β

u) = β

−

and γ(1

βu)

φ = 1, where one assumes that at the boundaries u = 0, φ = 0 and n = 1.

−

−

One eliminates n to write Poisson’s equation (Eq.(3)) as

φ′′ =

(β

u)

u

−

1

Here ′ denotes derivative with respect to ξ. Writing a(ξ) = Rexp(iθ), the wave equation

(Eq.(4)) can be written as

R′′ +

R

λ2

M 2
R4

1

β2

" 

−

!

1

β2 −

β

−
−
λβ] is a constant of integration and R2 = A2

−

β

βu
1
−
1 + φ #

u

= 0

y + A2

z. Eqs.(5,6) form

Here M = R2[(1

β2)θ′

−

−

a coupled set of second order diﬀerential equations in two ﬁelds φ and R respectively. The

longitudinal velocity u appearing in the two equations can be expressed entirely in terms of

R and φ as

β(1 + R2)

(1 + φ)[(1 + φ)2

(1

β2)(1 + R2)]1/2

u =

−

−
(1 + φ)2 + β2(1 + R2)

−

Eqs.(5,6) have been solved by Kaw et al.

[4] and others [7] for M = 0. The analytical

solutions for the above equations were obtained only in the weak density response limit

where the approximation φ

1 holds and the coupled set of Eqs.(5,6) can

(1 + R2)1/2

−

≈

be reduced to a single equation in R. The amplitude of the solutions in this case are small

and retaining terms upto the cubic order in (R) the reduced equation becomes the nonlinear

Schrodinger equation, viz.

where c = (1

β2

λ2)/(1

(1

β2)(3 + β2)]/[2(1

β2)3]. Equation

−
(8) can be integrated exactly to obtain a soliton solution of the sech form

−

−

−

−

−

′′

R

cR + dR3 = 0

−
β2)2 and d = [4λ2

R = Rmsech (√cξ)

Rm =

2c
d (cid:19)

s(cid:18)

= 2

(1
4λ2

"

1/2

β2

λ2)

−
−
β2)(3 + β2) #

β2)(1
(1

−
−
−
(1+R2)1/2

The analytic form of the potential is then, φ

It is thus clear that for low amplitude (Rm << 1) solutions, φ is invariably much smaller

R2/2 = (R2

m/2)sech

2

(

(c)ξ).

1

−

≈

q

where

than R.

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

≈

5

In the absence of any such simplifying assumption the equations (Eqs.(5,6)) cannot be

solved analytically. However, for the general case several varieties of numerical solutions have

been obtained. The simplest variety is that where the modulated structure involves only a

single peaked structure for both φ and R. Such a solution is displayed in the top subplot of

Fig.1. Another class of solutions involves multiple peaks for the radiation ﬁeld R trapped

within a modulated envelope of scalar potential φ. For these structures the amplitude of

scalar potential is very high compared to that of the radiation ﬁeld R. We show one such

solution in the bottom subplot of Fig.1 for the parameters λ = 0.44466066 and β = 0.5.

These two classes of solutions have diﬀerent spectral properties. The single hump solitons

have been found to have a continous spectrum in the λ and β parameter space whereas

the multi-hump solitons exist at discrete values of λ for a given value of β. The spectral

domains of these solutions have been numerically obtained in [7] and we reproduce the λ

β

−

diagram of that paper as Fig.2 here. The parameter p refers to the number of extrema in

the radiation ﬁeld (for instance multihump structure in Fig.1 would correspond to p = 9).

The uppermost curve in Fig.2 corresponds to the weak density response limit where the

analytical sech solutions given by Eq.(9) hold. The shaded region shows the continuum

values of λ and β for which general single hump (p = 1)solutions have been obtained. As

one goes down in λ in the shaded region from the upper curve one moves away from the

weak density response analytical solutions to the large amplitude numerical solutions of

Fig.1 displayed in the upper subplot. The various lines in Fig.2 for p > 1 correspond to the

discrete spectrum of multipeak solutions.

The set of equations (viz. Eq.(1- 4)) are numerically solved to study the time dependent

problem. Equations (1) and (2) are evolved using the Flux Corrected Transport (FCT)

algorithm [14]. The vector potential as per the solutions discussed above is chosen to be

circularly polarized. The wave equation (Eq.(4)), which is a second order equation, is ﬁrst

written in terms of two coupled ﬁrst order convective equations which are then evolved by

the FCT [14] scheme. We choose periodic boundary conditions along x. The box length is

taken large enough to ensure that the excitations do not re-enter from the other boundary

due to periodicity.

In the next section we investigate the dynamical properties of the various solitonic struc-

tures identiﬁed in the spectral diagram of Fig.2 obtained by Poornkala et al. [7] in a homo-

geneous plasma background. For this we choose n0(x) = 1. In section IV we consider an

6

inhomogeneous background plasma density with a tanh density proﬁle.

III. SOLITON EVOLUTION STUDIES IN A HOMOGENEOUS PLASMA

We ﬁrst evolve the coupled set of equations Eq.(1 - 4) for an initial condition correspond-

ing to the small amplitude analytic sech soliton solutions obtained by Kaw et al. [4] in the

limit of weak density response. In this limit and under the assumption of stationarity in

a frame moving with velocity β the coupled set of equations described in the last section,

reduce to a cubic nonlinear Schrodinger equation which is known to admit exact soliton

solutions. These solitonic structures are stable and due to the inﬁnite number of invariants

supported by the equations preserve their identity even under intense nonlinear interactions

suﬀered during collisions with oppositely propagating solitons. These features have been

reproduced in our simulations (see Fig.3) and serve to validate the correctness and accuracy

of the code.

We next carry out simulations for those solutions for which no analytic expression is

available and whose forms have been obtained numerically. These structures are the general

solutions with no restrictive assumptions on the magnitude of the amplitude. As described

in the last section, these general nonlinear solutions have been well categorized with respect

to their eigen - spectrum, group speed and number of wave cycles of the vector potential

structure in an earlier work [7]. However, several questions pertaining to their dynamical

properties remain open for investigation. Speciﬁcally the issue of stability of these structures

as well as the question of whether or not these structures possess solitonic traits of preserving

individual identities in a collision process remain undetermined. To date there has been

no theoretical investigation seeking an answer to these questions. Our approach in this

paper has been to carry out a numerical study to shed light on this problem. We ﬁnd

clear evidence that these structures are stable for a very long time interval. However, the

stability properties are diﬀerent for the two classes of structures (viz. single and multiple

peak structures). The stability seems to depend crucially on the number of peaks of the light

wave ﬁeld supported by the structure. The single peak solutions are very robust and have

been observed to propagate undistorted for the entire duration of the simulation lasting for

a few thousand plasma periods. However these robust single peak solutions do not preserve

their identity under collisions - the characteristic feature displayed by pure solitons. This

7

shows that these solutions are distinct from pure solitons and at best can be regarded as

solitary wave solutions. However, as has been the practice in the literature on laser plasma

interaction, we will continue to refer to these structures as solitons. The distinction with

exact solitons will be made by refering to the value of their amplitudes (small for exact NLS

solitons and large for solitary waves solutions ) wherever necessary.

We ﬁrst choose a particular single peak high amplitude nonlinear solution depicted in

the plot of Fig.4 corresponding to the following values of the parameters viz. λ = 0.92 and

β = 0.05. Clearly for these values of λ and β the solution lies in the shaded area of the λ

β

−

plane in Fig.2. For this solution the weak density approximation is not valid and hence it

does not satisfy the cubic nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS). In Fig.4 we display the

diﬀerence in the structure of the exact solution with the sech expression (Eq.8 of Kaw et

al. [4]) obtained under the approximation of weak density response for the same values of

parameters viz. λ = 0.92 and β = 0.05. It is clear from the ﬁgure that the diﬀerence between

the two is quite signiﬁcant and thereby it demonstrates the fact that these structures do not

represent solutions in the weak density response regime.

We show in Fig.5 that this high amplitude solution propagates with a group velocity of

β = 0.05 and survives for more than 1800 plasma periods, (we have gone even beyond this

time in our simulations and have seen no perceivable distortion in its structure). This is

a positive indication of the stability of this solution. The evolution of a number of other

large amplitude numerically obtained single peak structures were investigated. They all

propagate undistorted during the entire simulation time which ranges upto a few thousands

of plasma periods.

We now investigate the stability of other variety of structures namely those having mul-

tiple light wave peaks. We show in Fig.6 the amplitudes of the ﬁelds φ and R and in Fig.7

the magnitude of the density at four diﬀerent times in the evolution of one such multiple

peak solution with λ = 0.44466066 and β = 0.5. The structure does propagate undistorted

for several (almost 30) plasma periods. However, it is not stable as one can see from the

plots at later times where an additional structure appears to emerge from the trailing end.

Basically, the multi peak structures are not stable and emit radiation from their tail end.

It should be noted here that the observed instability occuring at the tail end can not be

interpreted as though a multiple peak solutions is trying to break up into stable single peak

solutions. This is because the amplitude of the exact single peak solitonic solutions does not

8

exceed the value of Rm = √3. (determined from the restriction of positivity of density for

β = 0 [5], for ﬁnite β the amplitude is always less than this value, where it gets restricted

by the lower curve of the shaded region in Fig.2).

The very fact that the single peak solutions are stable and the mutiple peak solutions are

not could be the reason that in several PIC simulations of the propagation of intense rela-

tivistic laser beam in plasma one only sees the formation of single peak solitonic structures

[15], and there are no reports on observations of multipeak structures.

The next issue of interest is to observe whether these solutions preserve their identity

as and when they undergo collisions. We observe that the unstable multi peak structures

cannot withstand any collisional interaction. Our numerical studies of mutual collisions

between these solitons show that following a collision there remains no semblance to localized

structures of any kind. Hence for the study of collisional interaction we present results

obtained for the robust single peak solutions only.

To investigate this we ﬁrst choose two oppositely propagating large amplitude identical

structures i.e. both having same λ = 0.92, but the group speed β = 0.05 for one and β =

0.05 for the other. In Fig.8 we depict the process of collisions between these two oppositely

−
propagating structures. We observe that after the collision (see subplot for t = 1800) the

emerging structures are identical to the incident ones. The only diﬀerence (which is more

clear in the animated visualization) with Fig.3 (which depicts a collision between small

amplitude solitons) is that in Fig.3 there occurs a time (e.g. t = 1750) of intense interaction

where any semblance with the two impinging structure has dissappeared. The two structures

basically spatially overlap. No such feature is observed in the collision depicted in Fig.8. As

the structures approach each other, their group speeds are observed to diminish and seem to

vanish once the structures touch each other. At all times, for this particular case of collision,

amidst single peak, equal and large amplitude structures, the two structures continue to be

identiﬁed separately. The structures then appear to reﬂect from each other. In this case,

thus , even though the identity of the two structures after collision, seems to be preserved,

however, the collisional interaction seems to be perceptibly diﬀerent from that exhibited by

pure solitons. However, we also observe that as the value of

β

for the two oppositely

|

|

propagating equal amplitude structures is increased the collision starts resembling that of

low amplitude NLS solitons as can be seen from Fig.9, which shows the collisional interaction

of a large amplitude solution with λ = 0.9345 and β = 0.3. This suggests that for low group

9

speeds the collisional interaction seems to reﬂect the two structures, whereas at higher group

speeds the two structures pass through each other undistorted. The two distinct varieties of

collisions and their dependence of β and amplitude would be discussed in detail in the next

section where we try to understand them by interpreting the collisions as the propagation

of one soliton on the inhomogeneous density of the other soliton.

However, on the basis of these studies alone one cannot arrive at any general conclusion

on whether these large amplitude structures have solitonic traits or not. It is quite likely

that the symmetry of the two underlying structures may have inhibited any exchange of

energy between the two colliding structures, due to which they might have retained their

identities even after they encounter each other. To pin this down we also carried out a study

of collision amidst two large but diﬀerent amplitude structures; their parameters being

(e.g. one with λ = 0.92, β = 0.05 and other with λ = 0.87 and β =

0.01). The study of

−

collision between these structures has been illustrated in Fig.10. In this case we observe that

the identity of the two colliding structures gets lost after the interaction. There is a clear

exchange of energy amidst the two entities, as a result of which the emerging structures after

collision comprises of two peaked patterns, propagating in opposite directions but having

very diﬀerent amplitudes than the original structures.

In fact it appears as though the

intensity of the larger amplitude structure has increased and that of the smaller one has

diminished as they cross each other after colliding. We observe that the larger amplitude

structure formed after collision remains almost static. These structures separately cannot be

another set of solutions of the system from the same argument of maximum amplitude being

restricted to Rm = √3 [5] which is clearly exceeded by the larger amplitude structure of

Fig.10 at t = 2600. There is also a signiﬁcant amount of radiation (more apparant from the

density plots of Fig.10) which shows that not all the energy is localized in these structures.

¿From the above studies it becomes clear that the destabilization (either inherent as in

the multipeak structure or aided by the collisional interaction amongst two dissimilar single

peak solitonic structures ) predominantly leads to formation of long lived slowly varying

single peak structures which are either static or move with low propagation speeds. The

amplitudes of these observed structures are invariably higher than the value demanded by

the exact nonlinear solutions, hence they tend to radiate slowly. However, their survival for

a considerably long time makes them an interesting set of transient structures.

10

IV. SOLITON EVOLUTION STUDIES IN AN INHOMOGENEOUS PLASMA

In most experimental situations the background plasma medium has a density inho-

mogeneity. It is therefore a matter of practical interest to investigate the propagation of

these large amplitude structures in an inhomogeneous medium. Here too we concentrate on

studying the evolution of single peak structures through the inhomogeneous medium as they

exhibit excellent stability characteristics. The inhomogeneity of the background plasma has

been chosen to be of a simple tangent hyperbolic form.

We ﬁnd that as the single peak structure approaches a rarer plasma background its

speed increases. On the other hand if the background plasma density increases the group

speed is observed to decrease. We also observe that if the structures encounter a signiﬁcant

increase in the background plasma density, then the structures may even get reﬂected from

a certain critical background density point. This has been shown in Fig.11 where we have

plotted the amplitude R of the structure at various times with solid lines. The background

plasma density has been taken to vary weakly with a tanh proﬁle and the dashed lines in

the ﬁgure represent the background plasma density through which the structures propagate.

The ﬁve subplots in the left column show the reﬂection of a large amplitude solution. For

comparison we have also shown in the subplots of the right column the reﬂection of a small

amplitude solution (which is an exact NLS soliton). There is no qualitative diﬀerence in the

propagation features of large amplitude solutions and the small amplitude solutions of the

NLS soliton variety, through the inhomogeneous plasma media.

A detailed investigation of the dependence of critical background density nref at which

the structures reﬂect on parameters such as β, λ and the amplitude Rm has been made.

This dependence has been depicted in the plot of Fig.12. We observe that nref depends very

weakly on Rm and λ but varies strongly with the group velocity β of the structures. In fact

it can be seen from the plot of nref vs. β shown in Fig.13 that for any value of Rm (and/or
β2)

β2) closely. The dependence nref = 1/(1

λ ) the points ﬁt the curve nref = 1/(1

−

−

wave packets. Basically one has from the linear dispersion relation β = (1

corresponds to the dependence of critical density for reﬂection on the group speed β of linear
p/ω2)1/2 =
ω2
n00/nref )1/2 (here n00 = 1). The fact that this relationship is obeyed closely by these

(1

−

−

nonlinear structures is extremely interesting. It should be realised that the amplitude of

these structures are high only in a small central region. Though the relativistic factor γ at

11

the maximum intensity point for some of these solutions are around 1.3

1.4 and the electron

−

density gets evacuated from unity to around 0.8 to 0.9 causing the ratio to be as small as

n/γ

0.6 at the central region. Although this suggests an eﬀective reduction of plasma

∼

frequency from unity to 0.7746, but such a reduction happens only at the core region of the

structure. At the edges, in fact an accumulation and hence enhancement of n occurs and

the intensity of the radiation ﬁeld is also weak there. Clearly, if one employs the simplistic

explanation of reﬂection being governed by local eﬀective value of the plasma frequency, the

edge of the soliton which is the ﬁrst to encounter the inhomogeneous rise of density would

reﬂect according to the linear relationship. This suggests that the nonlinear structure moves

like a single coherent robust entity in the presence of weak inhomogeneity of inﬁnite extent

(e.g. such as the chosen tanh form) and instead of distorting or breaking merely follows

the dynamics dictated by its edge which obeys the linear reﬂection relationship. It would

be of interest to study whether the coherence of the nonlinear structure survives when it

encounters a sudden signiﬁcant rise in density for ﬁnite spatial region. In fact this question

has been answered in our collision studies indirectly which we discuss below.

We ﬁrst discuss the two distinct collisional behaviour observed in the context of equal

amplitude solutions described in the last section in the light of above studies on reﬂection

through inhomogeneous background plasma density. For β = 0.05 the critical density point
β2). For the

for reﬂection would be nref = 1.0025 from the relationship nref = 1/(1

−

collision amidst two low amplitude NLS soliton moving with this group speed depicted in

Fig.3 one can see that the value of maximum density of the structures are around nmax =

1.001 < 1.0025. Thus the density perturbation due to one soliton is insuﬃcient to reﬂect

the other. This results in strong overlapping of the two structures after which they emerge

again moving in opposite directions. On the other hand it can be seen from Fig.8, where the

large amplitude soliton moving with β = 0.05 is depicted, the value of maximum density due

to each of the structure is around nmax = 1.0479 > 1.0025. Thus the individual structures

get reﬂected as they encounter the density inhomogeneity due to the other structure. In the

previous section we had also seen (Fig.9) that collision amidst two large amplitude faster

β

moving

= 0.3 solitons, show traits similar to the low amplitude NLS soliton. This can
β2) = 1.0989, whereas the nmax of individual

be explained as follows, here nref = 1/(1

|

|

soliton (see t = 0) is much less than 1.01 and even during intense interaction the perturbed

density takes up a maximum value of about 1.0721. Both these values are less than nref ,

−

12

hence in this case instead of reﬂection a strong overlapping occurs and the two structures

seem to pass through each other.

In these solitonic structures the electron density accumulation takes place only at the

edge region (See Fig.1). The central region in fact gets evacuated and has lesser density.

Thus the collision between two solitonic structures in some sense mimics the propagation

of one structure through a localized density inhomogeneity. We take a relook at some of

the collisions studied in the previous section with this perspective and try to identify dif-

ferences if any in the propagation through these two distinct classes of inhomogeneities

(viz. sudden localized density inhomogeneity vs. slowly increasing inhomogeneity). The

collision between unequal amplitude structures depicted in Fig.10 points at an interesting

diﬀerence. The energy exchange occuring in this case may be viewed as the smaller of the

two solitonic structures depicted in Fig.10 (coming from left) being unable to suﬀer a total

reﬂection with its identity preserved (unlike what is observed of tanh inhomogeneity ) as it

encounters a localized density inhomogeneity of the larger amplitude soliton coming from

the right. After collision a very small amplitude remnant structure observed in the right

side is the part which gets transmitted through the localized density inhomogeneity. A com-

plete parametrization of reﬂection and transmission properties of these solitonic structures

through localized inhomogeneities is in progress and would be presented in a subsequent

publication soon.

V. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

The present work deals with the study of dynamical properties of one dimensional rel-

ativistic solitons in the form of modulated light pulses coupled to plasma waves. Earlier

studies have focussed primarily on obtaining various traveling wave solutions and their cat-

egorization in terms of their group speeds, frequency, and the form of solution (e.g. number

of light wave peaks in the solution etc.). It was also shown earlier that the small amplitude

solutions obtained under the approximation of weak density response were identical to the

NLS solitons. However, nothing conclusive as regards the stability and possibility of exhibit-

ing any kind of solitonic traits was known about the large amplitude solutions. We have

used the combined ﬂuid-Maxwell set of equations to evolve such large amplitude solutions

in time to ascertain some of these properties.

13

Our simulations show that the large amplitude solutions in which there is only one peak

of trapped light wave are very robust and survive for the entire (several thousands of plasma

periods) simulation duration. The structures which have multiple peaks of light waves

enclosed within the modulated structure are seen to survive in some cases only upto a

few plasma periods (in the example shown it is upto 30 plasma periods). However, these

structures are found to be susceptible to an instability which develops at their trailing edge.

As a result of this instability these structures are extremely fragile.

The single peak large amplitude structures though extremely stable are in some sense

distinct from true solitons. They do not preserve their identities upon collisions. Only

under the special case when the oppositely propagating structures are identical that they

preserve their identity after collisional interaction. In all other collisional encounters there

is always an exchange of energy amidst the two colliding structures and also a signiﬁcant

transfer of energy into radiation. Hence these structures can at best be regarded as solitary

waves and are not true solitons which are constrained by inﬁnite number of conservation

laws.

When the colliding structures are identical they display two distinct variety of interactions

depending on the group speed β and the amplitude of the structures.

In one case the

structures merely reﬂect from each other (the overlapping is weak and in fact negligible),

while in the other case the structures approach each other, overlap and seem to pass through

each other. These features and their dependence on β as well as on their amplitude can

be understood by realising that the solitons as they approach each other view the density

enhancement at the edge of the other structure as an inhomogeneity.

The propagation of these structures through background inhomogeneous plasma density

has also been studied. These studies show qualitative resemblance with the features dis-

played by exact NLS solitons as they pass through density inhomogeneity. For instance the

group speed of these structures decreases (increases) as the background density increases

(decreases). They also suﬀer total reﬂection from weakly varying density inhomogeneity as

an exact NLS soliton would do. We have studied in detail parametric dependence of the

critical density for reﬂection nref . The studies reveals interestingly a very weak dependence

on the amplitude Rm and the eigen value λ of the solitonic structure. However, a strong
β2) has been observed. This dependence on

dependence on β of the form nref = 1/(1

group speed β is identical to what a linear wave packet does in the presence of density

−

14

inhomogeneity. This is interesting as it shows that even though the structure is strongly

nonlinear, there is negligible manifestation of this nonlinearity in the reﬂection property.

The quantitative dependence of the form nref = 1/(1

β2) helps in identifying the

−

parameter regime for the two varieties of collisions occuring for equal amplitude solitonic
β2) < nmax

structures described in the paragraph above. Reﬂection occurs whenever 1/(1

−

(here

β

is the group speed and nmax is the maximum amplitude of density of each of the

identical colliding structures), and a strong overlapping takes place when the inequality is

|

|

reverse.

Our studies on collision between unequal amplitude structures also indicates that prop-

agation through localized inhomogeneity may show distinctive features. A part of soliton

can get transmitted through a localized inhomogeneity provided the width is small and am-

plitude is also appropriate. A detailed investigation is underway and would be presented

elsewhere soon.

The present work has thus shown conclusively that while most of the evolution charac-

teristics of single peak large amplitude structure resemble soliton solutions, they still do

not qualify to be exact solitons in a strict mathematical sense. However, their robustness

and their close resemblance to solitonic properties can make them quite useful in practical

applications such as stable transfer of energy packets deep into laser fusion targets or

coherent propagation in plasma based accleration devices.

[1] A.I. Akhiezer and R.V. Polovin, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 30, 915 (1956)[Sov. Phys. JETP, 3,

696 (1956)].

[2] A. DeCoster, Physics Reports 47, 285 (1978).

[3] V. A. Kozlov, A. G. Litvak and E. V. Suvorov Sov. Phys. JETP, 49, 75 (1979).

[4] P. K. Kaw, A. Sen and T. Katsouleas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 68, 3172 (1992).

[5] T. Zh. Esirkepov, F. F. Kamenets, S. V. Bulanov and N. M. Naumova, JETP Lett., 68, 36

(1998).

[6] R. N. Sudan, Ya. S. Dimant and O. B. Shiryaev, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 1489 (1997).

[7] S. Poornakala, A. Das, A. Sen and P. K. Kaw, Phys. Plasmas, 9, 1820 (2002).

15

[8] S. Poornkala, A. Das, P. K. Kaw, A. Sen, Z. M. Sheng, Y. Sentoku, K. Mima, and K. Nishikawa,

Phys. Plasmas, 9, 3802 (2002).

[9] M. Lontano, M. Passoni and S. V. Bulanov, Phys. Plasmas, 10, 639 (2003).

[10] D. Farina and S. V. Bulanov, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion, 47, A73 (2005).

[11] M. Tushentsov, A. Kim, F. Cattani, D. Anderson and M. Lisak, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 275002

(2001).

[12] S. V. Bulanov, N. M. Naumova, F. Pegoraro, Phys. Plasmas 1, 745 (1994) .

[13] V. I. Berezhiani, D. P. Goruchava, S. V. Mikeladze, K. I. Sigua, N. L. Tsintsadze, S. M.

Mahajan, Y. Kishimoto, K. Nishikawa, Phys. Plasmas, 12, 062308 (2005).

[14] J. P. Boris and D. L. Book, Methods in computational physics, 16 85 (1976).

[15] S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, N. M. Naumova, F. Pegoraro, V. A. Vshivkov, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 82, 3440 (1999)

16

FIGURE CAPTIONS

FIG. 1. The spatial proﬁle of R (solid lines), φ (dotted lines) and n (dashed lines) for single

peak (upper subplot) and multiple peak (lower subplot) nonlinear travelling wave solutions

for the coupled laser plasma system. The upper subplot is for λ = 0.92 and β = 0.05. The

multiple peak structure corresponds to λ = 0.44466066 and β = 0.5.

FIG. 2. The λ

β values for which single peak (shaded region) and multiple peaks (the

−

lines with various p values; with p indicating the number of extrema in R) are possible.

FIG. 3.

Shows the collisional

interaction amongst two small amplitude single peak

solitons. The parameters corresponding to the two structures are β =

0.05 and

±

λ = 0.944. The plot of R, φ and n representing vector potential, scalar potential and

electron density respectively at three diﬀerent times are shown. The t = 0 plot shows the

initial condition, at t = 1750 the interaction is maximum and t = 3600 shows the con-
ﬁguration after collision. Here time and lengths are normalized to ω−1

respectively.

p and cω−1

p

FIG. 4. Comparison of high amplitude solution obtained numerically (dashed line) for

β = 0.05 and λ = 0.92 with sech proﬁle for these parameters (solid line) obtained from Eq.8

of Kaw et al. [4]. The diﬀerence clearly shows that for these solutions the approximation

of weak density response is not valid.

FIG. 5. Shows the time evolution of a high amplitude single peak solutions having β = 0.05

and λ = 0.92. The solid, dashed and dot dashed plots represent the structure at t = 0,

t = 900 and t = 1800 respectively. The ﬁgure clearly shows that these solutions are stable.

FIG. 6. Shows plots of R (solid line) and φ (dashed line) proﬁles for a multipeak structure

at four diﬀerent times, here β = 0.5 and λ = 0.44466066. The structure retains its identity

upto about 30 plasma periods after which it starts shedding radiation from the tail end.

FIG. 7. The four subplots show the proﬁle of the electron density corresponding to the

data and subplots of Fig.6.

17

±

±

FIG. 8. Shows the results of collisional interaction amidst two oppositely propagating high

amplitude single peak identical solutions. The parameters for the two are β =

0.05 and

λ = 0.92. The two structures seem to reﬂect.

FIG. 9. Shows the results of collisional interaction amidst two oppositely propagating high

amplitude single peak identical solutions. The parameters for the two are β =

0.3 and

λ = 0.9345. Here the group speed is much higher than that of Fig.8. The structures show

strong overlapping and seem to pass through each other.

FIG. 10. Collisional interaction amidst two high amplitude single peak structures which

are not identical. One (at t = 0 on left) has β = 0.05 and λ = 0.92 and other (at t = 0 on

right) with β =

0.01 and λ = 0.87. It is clear (compare plots at t = 0 with t = 2600) that

the structures do not retain their identity after collision.

−

FIG. 11. Shows the comparison of reﬂection from inhomogeneous density of the high

amplitude single peak solutions (subplots in left column) with that of a small amplitude

NLS soliton (subplots in right column).The background density has been illustrated by

dashed lines and its values are depicted by the vertical axis on the right side of each subplots.

FIG. 12. Plot showing the parametric dependence of nref (the value of background

density at which reﬂection occurs) on the soliton amplitude λ (upper subplot) and

Rm (lower subplot) for various β. The plots suggests that the dependence on Rm and λ

is weak. In the inset we have shown this weak dependence by magnifying the axis for β = 0.1.

FIG. 13. Variation of the critical background density nref at which reﬂection occurs with

the group speed for the entire range of Rm and λ depicted in the data of Fig.12. The circles

are obtained from simulation and the dashed curve shows the ﬁt to 1/(1

β2).

−

18

This figure "fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

p=2
p=2

3
3

4
4

λ
λ

5
5

1
1

p = 1
p = 1

0.8
0.8

0.6
0.6

0.4
0.4

0.2
0.2

0
0

0
0

0.2
0.2

0.4
0.4

0.6
0.6

β
β

0.8
0.8

1
1

This figure "fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig5.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig6.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig7.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig8.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig9.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig10.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig11.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig12.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

This figure "fig13.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0512191v1

