5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The eﬀects of the pre-pulse on capillary discharge extreme ultraviolet laser

M. Shuker∗, A. Ben-kish, R. A. Nemirovsky, A. Fisher and A. Ron
Department of Physics, Technion - Israel Inst. of Tech., Haifa 32000, Israel

In the past few years collisionally pumped extreme ultraviolet (XUV) lasers utilizing a capillary
discharge were demonstrated. An intense current pulse is applied to a gas ﬁlled capillary, inducing
magnetic collapse (Z-pinch) and formation of a highly ionized plasma column. Usually, a small
current pulse (pre-pulse) is applied to the gas in order to pre-ionize it prior to the onset of the main
current pulse. In this paper we investigate the eﬀects of the pre-pulse on a capillary discharge Ne-like
Ar XUV laser (46.9nm). The importance of the pre-pulse in achieving suitable initial conditions of
the gas column and preventing instabilities during the collapse is demonstrated. Furthermore, mea-
surements of the ampliﬁed spontaneous emission (ASE) properties (intensity, duration) in diﬀerent
pre-pulse currents revealed unexpected sensitivity. Increasing the pre-pulse current by a factor of
two caused the ASE intensity to decrease by an order of magnitude - and to nearly disappear. This
eﬀect is accompanied by a slight increase in the lasing duration. We attribute this eﬀect to axial
ﬂow in the gas during the pre-pulse.

PACS numbers: 42.55.Vc,42.60.Lh

In the last decades the possibility of achieving Ampli-
ﬁed Spontaneous Emission (ASE) in the soft X-ray and
XUV regimes was extensively explored [1]. One of the re-
alizations utilizes a homogenous column of highly ionized
plasma created by a fast capillary discharge [2]. Speciﬁ-
cally, a fast (∼ 50ns) and intense (∼ 50kA) current pulse
is applied to a capillary ﬁlled with low pressure (∼ 1T orr)
argon gas. The current induces magnetic forces that at-
tract the gas towards the capillary axis. During the self-
collision of the gas on the axis a column of highly ionized
Ar plasma is formed (this technique to create high tem-
perature plasmas is called Z-Pinch). Careful design of
the experimental parameters results in high abundance of
Ne-like Ar ions in the plasma, and population inversion
between the 3P and 3S electronic conﬁgurations. The
population inversion is due to excitations by collisions
with hot electrons in the plasma and spontaneous emis-
sion - i.e. the collisional excitation scheme [1]. Strong
ampliﬁcation was observed in the 3P → 3S transition
at 46.9nm [2]-[5]. The timing of the ampliﬁcation (that
lasts about 1ns) is close to the pinch time (i.e. the colli-
sion of shock waves on the capillary axis). Obviously, for
eﬃcient ampliﬁcation the plasma column must be rela-
tively stable and homogenous (at least up to the ampliﬁ-
cation time). Several eﬀects might cause instabilities or
inhomogeneity in the Z-pinch process (see Ref.
[6] and
references therein). One of the possible reasons for in-
homogeneity is the initial electrical breakdown through
the gas column. At the onset of the main current pulse,
high voltage across the capillary (hundreds of kV), may
result in channel-like breakdown along the capillary walls
(channel sparks) [7]. A technique to overcome this inho-
mogeneity is to pre-ionize the gas by a slow, low inten-
sity current pulse (”pre-pulse”). In Refs.
[2]-[5] a small
current (typically 10 − 100A) is applied for a few µs be-

∗Email address: shuker@physics.technion.ac.il

fore the onset of the main current pulse. The pre-pulse
current creates suﬃcient amount of pre-ionization in the
argon gas, allowing the main current pulse to ﬂow ho-
mogenously (i.e. with an axial symmetry). In this paper
we report experimental results showing the eﬀect of the
pre-pulse current on the operation of capillary discharge
X-ray lasers. We investigate the homogeneity of the gas
column during the pre-pulse itself, and during the plasma
collapse. Finally we show the inﬂuence of the pre-pulse
on the laser pulse properties.
Our experimental setup consists of a 1M V Marx type
generator connected to a 7Ω transmission line. A self
triggered spark gap connects the line and the capillary
load (5mm inner diameter, ﬁlled with 500mT orr of Ar
gas). A sine-shaped, 50KA peak current pulse is typi-
cally used with 100 − 120ns half cycle time (depending
on the length of the capillary). Before the onset of the
main current pulse a so-called ”pre-pulse” current is ap-
plied. The pre-pulse current is created by a discharge of a
small capacitor and has a typical RC shape with a decay
time of ∼ 20µs - see ﬁgure 1. The maximum current of
the pre-pulse is controlled by a current limiting resistor.
We note that prior to the pre-pulse a small spark was ini-
tiated at one end of the capillary (”pre-pre-pulse”). This
spark, initiated across a 0.3mm long surface of alumina,
increases the number of electrons in the gas providing
easy breakdown conditions for the pre-pulse. In the ex-
periments reported in this paper we used glass or alumina
capillaries with various length (5 − 16.5cm). The exact
properties of the capillary are stated before the descrip-
tion of each experiment.
Several measurements were carried out to investigate the
role of pre-pulse current in the dynamics of the discharge
and lasing processes. First, we measured the uniformity
of the gas column illumination during the pre-pulse by
means of visible light fast photography [8]. A 5cm long
glass capillary was used in these experiments to allow
side-view imaging. The visible light emission of the gas
in the capillary is indicative of current ﬂow, ionization

2

FIG. 1: The pre-pulse current and the main current. The ﬁrst
peak in the pre-pulse current is the spark followed by current
from a capacitor discharge. In this case the peak pre-pulse
current is 50A. The main current pulse starts 6µs after the
pre-pulse.

and heating of the gas. Therefore a non-uniform emis-
sion indicates that the volume of the gas is heated in a
non-uniform manner. Experiments were carried out with
pre-pulse peak currents in the 5 − 50A range, and the
emission was monitored up to 20µs after the pre-pulse
started. A 5A pre-pulse current caused a channels-like
emission pattern in the gas (even after 20µs the emission
of the gas was inhomogeneous). On the contrary, a 50A
peak current pre-pulse induced a homogenous emission
in the gas. The homogenous emission was achieved 6µs
after the onset of the pre-pulse current.
In order to further investigate the eﬀect of the pre-pulse
current on the stability of the plasma column collapse, an
oﬀ-axis pinhole camera was used [3]. This camera con-
sists of an array of four pinholes placed in front of the
capillary, with each of the holes located slightly oﬀ the
capillary axis. The position of the pinholes allowed imag-
ing of the entire length of the plasma column from four
diﬀerent directions (an 8cm long alumina capillary was
used in these experiments). The images from all four
pinholes were obtained on a gated multi-channel plate
(with 3ns gating time) that was coupled to a CCD cam-
era. A thin Mylar ﬁlter was used to limit the spectral
response of the detector (∼ 2 − 5nm), so only radiation
from highly ionized Ar ions (Ar8+, Ar9+) was measured.
We have performed a series of pinhole measurements with
diﬀerent pre-pulse conditions. Usually, the image was
taken at the instance the plasma column self-collided on
the capillary axis (the pinch time). The pinhole images
were analyzed using a simple ray-tracing code. Figure
2a shows a pinhole image taken with a relatively low 5A
peak current pre-pulse, displaying an instability of the
plasma column (the cone shape of the column is a result
of the measurement geometry, causing diﬀerent optical
magniﬁcation along the plasma column [8]).

In ﬁgure 2b a reconstruction of the experimental im-

FIG. 2: Eﬀect of low current pre-pulse on the stability of
the plasma collapse during the discharge. a) An oﬀ-axis pin-
hole image of the collapsing gas column with 5A peak current
(taken from four diﬀerent directions). b) A reconstruction
of the instability of the collapse using a simple ray-tracing
model.

age is demonstrated using a ray-tracing code. The best
reconstruction was achieved by displacing a 2cm long seg-
ment in the middle of the plasma column by 150µm from
the axis. This instability obviously diminishes the am-
pliﬁcation as the gain region diameter is of the order of
100µm [3]. Note that the magnitude of the instability
has a large shot to shot variation and some shots display
relatively stable collapse even with 5A pre-pulse current.
This is consistent with the fact that occasionally we mea-
sured strong XUV ampliﬁcation even with low pre-pulse
currents. Repeating the same measurement with a pre-
pulse peak current of 50A showed a stable collapse in
every shot. These measurements indicate that in case
the pre-pulse current is too low, an instability develops
during the plasma collapse. Its magnitude depends on
the initial conditions of the column (that are slightly dif-
ferent in every shot).
The two measurements discussed above indicated that
minimal pre-pulse current must be used in order to in-
sure instabilities free collapse of the plasma column. In-
deed, appropriate pre-pulse conditions resulted in strong
lasing at the 3S → 3P transition of the Ne-like Ar ion
[3]. A Carbon X-ray diode was placed in front of the cap-
illary to measure the temporal history of XUV radiation
during the main current pulse. The response of the Car-
bon photo-cathode is in the spectral range 40 − 100nm
(∼ 12 − 30eV ). Special care was taken to ensure high
bandwidth of the entire measurement system (The over-
all bandwidth was ∼ 1GHz). The signal was measured
on a 5GS/s digitizing oscilloscope. In this set of experi-
ments we used a 16.5cm long alumina capillary to obtain
a laser pulse strong enough to be easily measured in this
time-resolved technique. A typical signal from the X-ray
diode (XRD) shows a combination of two physical eﬀects.
A relatively slow radiation pulse (typical time ∼ 50ns)
starts ∼ 20ns after the onset of the main current and
peaks after 60 − 70ns. On top of the slow pulse an ex-
tremely fast and intense radiation pulse is observed (typ-
ical time of ∼ 1ns). The latter pulse appears 45 − 50ns

3

FIG. 3: A typical XRD measurement. The graph shows a
main current signal and a corresponding XRD signal (for a
relatively weak laser). A sharp laser pulse is evident (at t ≃
48ns) on top of a slowly increasing radiation of the heating
plasma.

FIG. 4: The eﬀect of the pre-pulse peak current on features
of the laser pulse. The laser pulse was ﬁtted numerically to a
gaussian. The pluses indicate the laser intensity. The squares
indicate the duration of the laser pulse.

after the onset of the main current. We attribute the
slow pulse to the radiation of the heated plasma in the
capillary, while the fast pulse is attributed to the lasing
action in the plasma. Figure 3 displays typical main cur-
rent and XRD signals. We have chosen to display an
experiment with a relatively weak laser signal so the less
intense signal of the plasma radiation is evident.
While investigating the properties of the laser a strong
sensitivity to the pre-pulse peak current was observed. A
series of consecutive measurements was performed chang-
ing only the peak pre-pulse current (by changing the cur-
rent limiting resistor in the pre-pulse circuit). The rest
of the experimental parameters were kept constant. In
all the shots reported below the peak of the main cur-
rent was 52 ± 1kA and the Ar pressure in the capillary
was 500 ± 10mT orr. The properties of the laser pulse
were analyzed in the following manner. The background
plasma radiation in the vicinity of the pulse was sub-
tracted, and the pulse was ﬁtted to a Gaussian (using a
least squares minimization algorithm). The properties of
the laser pulse (intensity, time, FWHM) were deduced
from the Gaussian ﬁt. This technique of analysis is re-
quired to reduce the experimental errors caused by the
limited sampling rate. We have investigated the relation
between the laser pulse properties and the pre-pulse peak
current. The timing of the laser pulse (relative to the on-
set of the main current) was not inﬂuenced by the change
in the pre-pulse peak current (in all the measurements the
lasing time was within a range of 1ns). However, both
the intensity of the laser pulse and its duration show a
systematic dependence on the pre-pulse peak current. In
ﬁgure 4 the intensity and duration of the laser pulse are
plotted against the pre-pulse peak current in the range
50 − 100A. When the pre-pulse current is increased -
a rapid decrease in the laser pulse intensity is observed.
It is important to note that a relatively small increase in

the pre-pulse (from 50A to 100A) reduced the intensity of
the laser by an order of magnitude. Another experimen-
tal observation is that while the laser intensity decreases,
the duration of the laser pulse increases.
The purpose of the pre-pulse current in the capillary dis-
charge experiment is to heat and ionize the gas column.
This pre-ionization allows the main current to ﬂow uni-
formly in the gas column (i.e. with axial symmetry) and
prevents channel like breakdowns. Therefore, it is not
surprising that a minimal level of pre-pulse current is re-
quired to prevent non-uniformity eﬀects. The pre-pulse
current, being three orders of magnitude lower than the
main current, is usually assumed to have no eﬀect on the
Z-pinch dynamics (other than insuring a stable collapse).
However we found that increasing the pre-pulse current
can reduce substantially the lasing intensity. The fact
that the timing of the laser pulse stayed constant for all
the pre-pulse currents we tested, suggests that the radial
dynamics of the collapse is not aﬀected by the pre-pulse
amplitude (in the range 50 − 100A). The decrease in the
intensity of the laser can be attributed to several eﬀects.
In our experimental system the axial magnetic ﬁeld is
determined by the pre-pulse current, hence the change
might be due to the diﬀerent axial magnetic ﬁeld. An-
other possibility is that the pre-pulse causes radial per-
turbations in the gas column (skin eﬀect, radial motion)
that later eﬀects the main collapse. Finally, the heating
of the gas column during the pre-pulse might cause axial
ﬂow of the gas through the hole in one of the electrodes
(through which the laser radiation exits). The part of
the capillary aﬀected by the axial ﬂow will have diﬀer-
ent initial gas density, and therefore very low gain [9].
Furthermore, the ﬂow of gas out of the capillary will in-
crease the absorption of the laser radiation when it exits
the capillary.
The maximal axial magnetic ﬁeld generated by the pre-
pulse currents tested here is relatively low (∼ 1.5kG),

not in the range that should eﬀect the lasing [10]. In or-
der to estimate the radial dynamics during the pre-pulse
current a series of one-dimensional MHD simulations [11]
was performed. Even the maximal pre-pulse current used
in our experimental investigation (100A) caused negli-
gible radial non-uniformity in the plasma column (the
uniformity was better than 1.5% during the entire pre-
pulse). Finally, the axial motion during the pre-pulse
was estimated by calculating the sound velocity of the
heated gas from the electron temperature found using
the MHD simulation. The simulation results show that
during the 6µs, 100A pre-pulse the argon is heated to
∼
= 1.5eV and reach mean ionization of Z ≃ 1.
Te = Ti
The ions sound velocity in the plasma is given by Ref.
[12]:

Ci =

γZkBTe
mi

r

(1)

Where γ = 5/3 for mono-atomic gases, Z is the ionization
level, kB is the Boltzman constant, Te is the electronic
temperature and mi is the mass of the ion. The calcu-
lated sound velocity of singely ionized ions is therefore
∼
= 2500m/s = 2.5mm/µs. During our 6µs, 100A pre-
Ci
pulse a length of 1.5cm of the capillary is aﬀected by the
axial ﬂow. This can explain a drop by a factor of three
in the laser intensity (assuming a gain of 0.75cm−1, [3]).
The escape velocity to vacuum (i.e. through the exit hole
in one of the electrodes) is given by:

Ve =

2
γ − 1

× Ci ≃ 7500m/s

(2)

Hence, the gas jet that escapes the capillary during the

4

pre-pulse propagates about 3cm outside the capillary,
and cause additional absorption of the laser radiation.
These two eﬀects both cause strong decrease in the laser
pulse intensity, as observed in the experiments. The ax-
ial ﬂow of gas may also explain the increase in the laser
pulse duration, as it causes slightly diﬀerent pinch times
along the plasma column, eﬀectively broadening the laser
pulse.
In conclusion, we studied the eﬀect of the pre-pulse cur-
rent on various aspects of capillary discharge X-ray lasers.
As can be expected,
low amplitude pre-pulse current
(5A) results in a non uniform heating of the gas during
the pre-pulse, initiating instabilities during the magneto-
hydrodynamic collapse. High amplitude pre-pulse cur-
rents (50A) results in a uniform heating of the gas and
stable collapse of the plasma column. However, we found
that the pre-pulse also aﬀects the properties of laser pulse
itself.
Increasing the pre-pulse amplitude from 50A to
100A mitigates the intensity of the laser pulse by an or-
der of magnitude. The pre-pulse also aﬀects the duration
of the laser pulse - exhibiting longer pulses at higher pre-
pulse currents. We attribute both these eﬀects to the
axial ﬂow of gas in the capillary during the pre-pulse.
Because the strong eﬀect of the pre-pulse on the laser
properties it is important to take special care in optimiz-
ing the pre-pulse in capillary discharge X-ray lasers.
This work was partially supported by the Fund for En-
couragement of Research in the Technion. We acknowl-
edge the technical assistance of Uri Avni, Shalom Aricha,
and Yoav Erlich in implementing the soft x-ray laser ex-
periment.

[1] R. C. Elton, X-ray Lasers, (Academic Press, San-diego,

(Macmillan, London, 1973).

1990).

[2] J. J. Rocca, V. N. Shlyaptsev, F. G. Tomasel, O. D.
Cortazar, D. Hartshorn, J. L. A. Chilla, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
73, 2192, (1994).

[3] A. Ben-Kish, M.Shuker, R. Nemirovsky, A. Fisher, A.
Ron, J. L. Schwob, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 015002-1,
(2001).

[4] G. Niimi, Y. Hayashi, M. Nakajima, M. Watanabe, A.
Okino, K. Horioka, E. Hotta, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.,
34, 2123, (2001).

[5] G. Tomassetti, A. Ritucci, A. Reale, L. Palladino, L.
Reale, S.V. Kukhlevsky, F. Flora, L. Mezi, J. Kaiser,
A. Faenov, T. Pikuz, Eur. Phys. J. D 19, 73, (2002).
[6] D. Ryutov, M. S. Derzon, M. K. Matzen, Rev. Mod.

Phys., 72, 167, (2000).

[7] J. A. Rees, J. D. Craggs, Electrical Breakdown in Gases,

[8] A. Ben-Kish, M. Shuker, R. Nemirovsky, A.Ron, J. L.
Schwob, Proceeding of the 6th Intl. Conference on X-
Ray Lasers, Kyoto, 1998, edited by Y. Kato, H. Takuma
and H. Daido, IOP Conf. Proc. No. 159 (IOP, Bristol,
1999) p. 191.

[9] J. J. Rocca, F. G. Tomasel, M. C. Marconi, J. L. A.
Chilla, C. H. Moreno, B. R. Benware, V. N. Shiyaptsev,
J. J. Gonzales, C. D. Macchietto, Proc. SPIE 3156, 164,
(1997).

[10] F. G. Tomasel, V. N. Shiyaptsev, J. J. Rocca, Phys. Rev.

A., 54, 2474, (1996).

[11] R. Nemirovsky, A. Ben-Kish, M. Shuker, A.Ron, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 82, 3436, (1999).

[12] J.

Huba

NRL
(NRL,Washington D.C., 2000).

(Ed.),

Plasma

Formulary,

