5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Titanium plasma source for capillary discharge extreme ultraviolet lasers

M. Shuker∗, A. Ben-kish, A. Fisher, and A. Ron
Department of Physics, Technion - Israel Inst. of Tech., Haifa 32000, Israel

A technique to generate jets of pure Titanium plasma is presented. A Ti wire is exploded in
an Alumina capillary sealed with 1atm. of air inside. The generated plasma emerges from the
capillary (to a high-vacuum environment) by ripping a thin Ti foil that seals one of the capillary
ends. The generated plasma jets have a velocity of up to 4.5 ± 0.5mm/µs, an electron temperature
of 1.5 ± 0.5eV and a ion density of 2.7 ± 1 × 1017/cc. The plasma source was designed for a capillary
discharge extreme ultraviolet laser experiment, but might also be useful to other application such
as a target for Z-pinch experiments.

PACS numbers: 52.25.-b,52.3.-q,52.50.-b

Among several techniques explored for achieving short
wavelength lasing1, the capillary discharge has the advan-
tage of being relatively simple, eﬃcient and compact2,3.
This technique is based on an electrical discharge pre-
formed on low density gaseous targets in a dielectric cap-
illary. Recently, a capillary discharge extreme ultravio-
let (XUV) laser was realized in the 3P → 3S transition
of Ne-like Ar ions at 46.9nm. This laser was initially
demonstrated by Rocca and his colleagues2, and several
years later by other groups4,5,6. One of the challenges in
scaling the capillary discharge laser to shorter wavelength
is the formation of the initial plasma target. The target
should be a capillary uniformly ﬁlled with low density
∼
= 1016par/cc), pre-ionized gas or vapor. This can
(Ni
be easily achieved with gases (or liquids with high va-
por pressure7), however targets from materials that are
solid at room temperature are more diﬃcult to imple-
ment. Furthermore, high purity and uniformity targets
are required as the laser is sensitive to instabilities.
Several possible techniques to create suitable plasma tar-
gets were previously explored. Ablative capillaries were
used as the main capillary8 or as a secondary capillary
shooting a jet of plasma into the main capillary9. The
ablation can take place during the main current pulse or
by adding a pre-pulse. In the case the required material
is a conductor, an insulating compound must be used
and an impure plasma is created (for example, a pressed
T iH2 capillary was used to create a Ti plasma target8).
Another possible solution is generating the plasma by
ablating the capillary electrodes10,11. This technique is
suitable for conductors, but is not eﬃcient and might re-
sult in ablating part of the capillary walls as well.
In this letter we address the problem of creating a metal-
lic plasma source. For our experiments we used Ti whose
Ne-like ion lase at 32.6nm. We adopt the concept of
the secondary capillary9, and suggest using an exploding
wire in the secondary capillary to produce the plasma
(instead of ablating the walls or the electrodes).The ex-
ploding wire has the advantages of being very eﬃcient
and producing high purity Ti plasma (its major draw-

∗Email address: shuker@physics.technion.ac.il

back is being a single-shot device). We note that the
plasma jet must be created in a vacuum environment
(atmospheric density is a few order of magnitude higher
than the required density of the active atoms).
In order to determine the desired properties of the Ti
plasma target (i.e. the properties just prior to the onset
of the main current pulse), the dynamical process of the
capillary discharge must be considered. We used a one
dimensional magneto-hydrodynamical (MHD) code12, to
model the capillary discharge experiment and to infer
the required properties of the T i plasma target. In all
the calculations below we used the parameters of our
pulsed power system4, that can produce peak currents
of 40 − 130KA with half-cycle time of 100 − 120ns. In
a series of calculations we found suitable parameters of
the plasma target that will result in a Ne-like Ti XUV
laser. The required plasma target is a capillary ﬁlled
with pre-ionized (Te = Ti = 0.1 − 0.5eV ) Ti plasma,
with ion density of Ni = 1 − 4 × 1016/cc. Therefore, the
plasma jet from the secondary capillary must have a sub-
stantially higher density (> 1017/cc) to create a suitable
plasma target (it is very simple to reduce the density in
the main capillary by a suitable ﬂow geometry13).
The experimental system for generating the Ti plasma
target consisted of a low energy discharge system with
a 10µF capacitor that was typically charged to 2kV . A
low inductance semi-rigid coax cable was used to transfer
the electrical energy to the secondary capillary. The total
inductance of the electrical system was 900nH and the
typical half-cycle duration was 10µs. The peak currents
in the system were in the range 0.5 − 2kA (depending
on the charging voltage and the capillary setup). The
capillary consisted of a plastic structure with an alumina
insert. The inner diameter of the capillary was 1mm, and
its length was 10 − 30mm. The electrodes of the capil-
lary were made of Ti to minimize the contamination of
the Ti plasma. One of the electrodes had a concentric
hole with 1mm diameter (through which the plasma jet
will emerge). The wire in the capillary was a high pu-
rity Ti wire of 125µm diameter. The experiments were
constructed inside a vacuum chamber - and preformed in
various environments ranging from atmospheric pressure
to 10−6T orr. Electrical measurements during the wire

2

FIG. 1: Current signals of exploding wire in atmospheric pres-
sure (thick line), in 50mTorr (dashed line) and in 50mTorr
(thin line). A signature of the wire explosion is evident only
in atmospheric pressure.

explosion were performed with a commercial Rogovsky
coil and a Tektronix 1:1000 high voltage probe. A fast
visible-light camera was used to study the ﬂow of the
plasma jet from the secondary capillary and its propaga-
tion towards the main capillary. The plasma properties
(composition, electronic density and temperature) were
inferred from visible light spectroscopy measurements us-
ing a spectrometer coupled to a gated CCD camera.
The exploding wire technique is a well known method to
generate high-temperature plasmas. However, there is a
major diﬃculty in realizing this technique in vacuum en-
vironment (as required in our case). Figure 1 depicts the
current signals measured in three experiments performed
in our system at diﬀerent ambient pressure.

In atmospheric pressure a clear signature of the wire
explosion is evident (the current sharply drops and in-
creases again shortly afterwards). However, at ambi-
ent pressures 50mT orr, 50µT orr the current shows no
evidence of the wire explosion. Fast photography ex-
periments conﬁrmed that the wire did not explode (in
fact it stayed connected to the electrodes and intact dur-
ing the entire electrical discharge), and consequently no
plasma was formed. The reason for this phenomena in
vacuum environment is that when the electrical current
starts, it ablates small amount of material from the wire’s
outer surface (either material from the wire bulk or, more
likely, material adsorbed to the surface). Therefore, a
low density plasma (1014 − 1016/cc) is formed around the
wire. This low density plasma has lower resistivity than
the wire itself, so a substantial part of the current ﬂows
through the surrounding plasma rather than through the
wire. The reduction in the current that ﬂows through the
wire prevents it from exploding (unless the current pulse
is very intense). On the other hand, when the experi-
ment is performed in atmospheric pressure the ablated
material ﬂows into the high density (∼ 1019/cc) air sur-
rounding the wire. Hence, low density plasma cannot

FIG. 2: (a) An illustration of the sealed capillary structure.
The exit hole is sealed using a thin Ti foil that rips after
the wire explosion.
(b) Typical fast photography image of
a plasma jet emerging from the sealed capillary device (in
vacuum).

be formed and the current continues to ﬂow through the
wire leading to its explosion.
In order to enable the formation of a plasma jet in vac-
uum environment a change in the setup of the experi-
ment was introduced. The inner volume of the capillary
was sealed with atmospheric pressure inside, enabling the
explosion of the wire. By properly selecting the inner di-
ameter of the capillary and the diameter of the wire the
plasma impurity caused by the atmospheric air was kept
lower than 1%. The seal of the capillary towards the exit
hole was realized using a thin Ti foil (12µm). A schematic
drawing of the sealed capillary is presented in ﬁgure 2.a.
The foil is designed to stand a pressure diﬀerence of more
than 1 atmosphere without ripping. However, After the
wire explodes the high pressure formed in the capillary
rips the foil, and a plasma jet ﬂows out of the capillary.
This capillary was inserted to vacuum environment (up
to 10−6T orr) and used to eject a jet of high purity Ti
plasma. In all the experiments reported below we used a
1mm inner diameter, 30mm long Alumina capillary with
a 125µm diameter Ti wire. The charging voltage of the
10µF capacitor was 2kV . In all these experiments the
electrical signals showed that the wire exploded prop-
erly, and a jet of Ti plasma emerged from the capillary.
The properties of the Ti plasma jet emerging from the
capillary were further investigated by means of fast pho-
tography and visible light spectroscopy.
Fast photography images with exposure time of 200ns
were used to study the jet propagation. A typical fast
photography image is displayed in ﬁgure 2.b, showing
the plasma jet formation outside the sealed capillary noz-
zle. The velocity of the plasma jet tip in vacuum was
4.5 ± 0.5mm/µs (compared to 0.6 ± 0.1mm/µs in simi-
lar experiments performed at atmospheric ambient pres-
sure). Very directional jets with opening half-angle of
< 15◦ were produced. The plasma properties of the jet
(electronic temperature and density) were measured us-
ing visible light spectrometery14. The ﬂuorescence light
from the jet was collected using an optical ﬁber with an
appropriate collimator. The light was collected from jet
at a distance of 1.5 ± 1mm from the exit hole. The spec-

trum was time integrated during the ﬁrst 80µs after the
plasma ﬂow started (the long integration time was used
in order to achieve good signal-to-noise ratio). Spectra
taken at shorter integration durations showed similar re-
sults, since the ﬂow of the plasma was steady at these
times. We have performed measurements in several spec-
tral regimes to observe diﬀerent lines of Ti and its singly
ionized ion. In all the measurements the majority of the
lines were identiﬁed as Ti lines, which is an indication
to the purity of the plasma. For a plasma in LTE the
intensity ratio between two spectral line (of the same ion
specie) is given by15:

I1
I2

=

ful(1)gu(1)
ful(2)gu(2)

(

λ2
λ1

exp[− Eu(1) − Eu(2)

]

3
)

(1)

kBTe

Where the indexes 1,2 stand for the two spectral lines, I
is the measured intensity, ful is the absorption oscillator
strength, gu is the statistical weight of the upper level, λ
is the wavelength of the transition, Eu is the energy of
the upper level of the transition and kB is the Boltzman
constant. The plasma jet is at LTE since its electronic
density is higher than the critical density (in our condi-
∼
= 1014/cc). By comparing the intensities of
tions Ncr
the spectral lines 439.4nm and 441.7nm of natural Ti,
and using eq. 1 we calculated an electronic temperature
of 1.5 ± 0.5eV .
The electronic density was determined by measuring the
broadening of the 368.5nm spectral line of singly ion-
ized Ti. Several mechanisms contribute to the line-width
of a spectral line, including natural broadening, Doppler
broadening, Stark broadening as well as the spectrometer
resolution. In the experimental setup we used, the dom-
inant broadening mechanism for the 368.5nm line was
the Strak broadening (electron impact). Therefore the
plasmas electronic density could be determined by mea-
suring the FWHM of the 368.5nm line. In ﬁgure 3 the
measured spectrum in the vicinity of the 368.5nm line is
depicted.

The spectral line at 368.6nm (from natural Ti) also
appears in the spectrum, therefore a double peak curve
(Voigt proﬁle) was ﬁtted to both lines (displayed in ﬁgure
3). From this measurement the electronic density of the
plasma was found to be Ne = (4 ± 1.5) × 1017elec/cc (us-
ing electron impact parameter for the 368.5nm line given
in16). Similar results were achieved from the broaden-
ing of another spectral line. The mean ionization of Ti
plasma at an electronic temperature of 1.5eV is Z = 1.5,
therefore the density of Ti ions in the plasma jet is about

3

Ni = (2.7 ± 1)× 1017ion/cc. The measured density at the
exit hole of the capillary is an order of magnitude higher
than the required density of the plasma target. By prop-
erly selecting the geometry of the secondary and main
capillaries, a suitable plasma target can be achieved.
In conclusion, a simple technique to produce pure Ti
plasma in vacuum environment was demonstrated. The
technique is based on exploding a 125µm Ti wire inside a
sealed capillary containing air. A thin Ti foil, which seals
one of the capillary ends, rips after the wire explosion

FIG. 3: Time integrated, space resolved spectrum of the Ti
plasma jet emerging from the sealed capillary. The plasma
electron density is inferred from Stark broadening of the Ti-
II 368.52nm spectral line.

and allows the plasma to ﬂow out of the capillary. The
Ti plasma jet formed in the experimental conditions used
here had an axial velocity of 4.5 ± 0.5mm/µs, an open-
ing half-angle of < 15◦. A time integrated spectroscopy
measurement performed 1.5 ± 1mm from the exit hole
of the capillary showed that the plasma had an electron
temperature of Te = 1.5 ± 0.5eV and an ion density of
Ni = (2.7 ± 1) × 1017ion/cc. By properly selecting the
geometry, this plasma jet can be used to create a plasma
target suitable for a Ne-like Ti capillary discharge XUV
laser17. This technique for forming pure metallic plasma
in vacuum might be useful for other applications such as
a target for dense Z-pinch experiments.
This work was partially supported by the Fund for En-
couragement of Research in the Technion. We acknowl-
edge the helpful discussions with Ron Nemirovsky and
the technical assistance of Yoav Erlich and Ofer Bokovza.

1 R. C. Elton, X-ray Lasers, (Academic Press, San-diego,

1990).

2 J. J. Rocca, V. N. Shlyaptsev, F. G. Tomasel, O. D. Cor-
tazar, D. Hartshorn, J. L. A. Chilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 73,
2192, (1994).

3 J. J. Rocca, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 70, 3799, (1999).

4 A. Ben-Kish, M.Shuker, R. Nemirovsky, A. Fisher, A. Ron,
J. L. Schwob, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 015002-1, (2001).
5 G. Niimi, Y. Hayashi, M. Nakajima, M. Watanabe, A.
Okino, K. Horioka, E. Hotta, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.,
34, 2123, (2001).

6 G. Tomassetti, A. Ritucci, A. Reale, L. Palladino, L. Reale,

4

S.V. Kukhlevsky, F. Flora, L. Mezi, J. Kaiser, A. Faenov,
T. Pikuz, Eur. Phys. J. D, 19, 73, (2002).

7 M. Frati, M. Seminario, J. J. Rocca, Optics Letters, 25,

1022, (2000).

8 J. J. Rocca, O. D. Cortazar, F. G. Tomasel, B. T. Szapiro,

Phy. Rev. E., 48, R2378, (1993).

13 M. Shuker, A. Ben-Kish, R. Nemirovsky, A.Ron, Proceed-
ing of the 6th Intl. Conference on X-Ray Lasers, Kyoto,
1998, edited by Y. Kato, H. Takuma and H. Daido, (IOP,
Bristol, 1999) p. 187.

14 H. R. Griem, Plasma Spectroscopy, (McGrow-Hill, New

9 F. G. Tomasel, J. J. Rocca, V. N. Shlyaptsev, C. D. Mac-

15 G. Bekeﬁ, Principles of laser plasmas, (Wiley, New York ,

chietto, Phys. Rev. A, 55, 1437, (1997).

SPIE 3156, 174, (1997).

10 S. V. Kukhlevsky, L. Kozma, L. Palladino, A. Reale, Proc.

16 V. H. Bartolic, Z. Andreic, H. J. Kunze, Physica Scripta,

11 A. Rahman, E. C. Hammarsten, S. Sakadzic, J. J. Rocca,

17 M. Shuker,M. Sc. Dissertation, Technion - Israel Institute

J. F. Wyart, Physica Scripta, 67, 414, (2003).

12 R. Nemirovsky, A. Ben-Kish, M. Shuker, A.Ron, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 82, 3436, (1999).

of Technology, (2000).

York, 1964).

1976).

50, (1994).

