5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IST/CFP 6.2005-M J Pinheiro

The role of magnetic ﬂux and wall current drain on anomalous diﬀusion

Mario J. Pinheiro
Department of Physics and Center for Plasma Physics,
& Instituto Superior Tecnico, Av. Rovisco Pais, & 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A theoretical analysis of the anomalous diﬀusion transport mechanism suggests a possible con-
nection between wall current drain and magnetic ﬂux through the orbital trajectories of charged
particles in a plasma submitted to a strong magnetic ﬁeld. Then Bohm diﬀusion coeﬃcient is
straightforwardly obtained.

PACS numbers: 05.70.-a,52.25.Fi,52.55.-s,55.55.Dy,52.40.Hf

The problem of the plasma-wall interactions is of fun-
damental importance in plasma physics. Studying the
anomalously high diﬀusion of ions across magnetic ﬁeld
lines in Calutron ion sources (electromagnetic separator
used by E. Lawrence for uranium isotopes) gave the ﬁrsts
indications of the onset of a new mechanism [1]. Simon
advanced ﬁrst with a suggestion that the observed losses
could be explained by the highly anisotropic medium in-
duced by the magnetic ﬁeld lines, favoring electron cur-
rent to the conducting walls - the electron ”short-circuit”
problem [2]. Experiments done by Geissler [3] in the
1960’s have shown that diﬀusion in a plasma across a
magnetic ﬁeld was nearly classical (standard) diﬀusion
when insulating walls impose plasma ambipolarity, but
in the presence of conducting walls charged particles dif-
fuse at a much higher rate.

This problem of plasma-wall interaction becomes more
complex when a complete description is aimed of a mag-
netized nonisothermal plasma transport in a conducting
vessel [4]. In the area of fusion reactors, there is strong
indication that for plasmas large but ﬁnite Bohm-like dif-
fusion coeﬃcient appears above a certain range of B [5].
Progress in the understanding of the generation of con-
ﬁnement states in a plasma is fundamental [6] to pur-
sue the dream of a fusion reactor [7, 8]. Anomalous
diﬀusion is a cornerstone in this quest, as recent re-
search with tokamaks suggest that the containment time
τ ≈ 108R2/2DB, with R denoting the minor radius of
a tokamak plasma and DB is the Bohm diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient
[9]. Controlled nuclear fusion experiments have
shown that transport of energy and particles across mag-
netic ﬁeld lines is anomalously large (i.e, not predicted
by classical collision theory).

The conjecture made by Bohm is that the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient is DB = αkT /eB, where T is the plasma
temperature and α is a numerical coeﬃcient, empiri-
cally taken to be 1/16 [1]. Usually the origin of the
anomalous diﬀusion has been assumed to be due to the
turbulence of small-scale instabilities (see, for example,

Refs. [5, 10, 11]).

In a seminal paper [12] a conjecture was proposed
based on the principle of minimum entropy-production
rate, stating that a plasma will be more stable whenever
the internal product of the current density by an elemen-
tary conducting area dA at every point of the boundary
- excluding the surface collecting the driving current - is
null, (j · A) = 0.

The work reported in this Letter proposes a mech-
anism of wall current drain set up together with the
frozen-in eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld as a possible alterna-
tive explanation of the anomalous diﬀusion mechanism.
From collisional low temperature plasmas to a burning
fusion plasma subject the plasma conﬁnement vessel to
strong wall load, both in stellarator or tokamak operating
modes, this explanation could be of considerable interest.
The general idea proposed by Robertson [12] assume
that the plasma boundary is composed of small elements
of area Ai, each one isolated from the others but each one
connected to the exterior circuit through its own resistor
Ri and voltage Vi. The entropy production rate in the
external circuits is

dS
dt

=

1
T

Xi

2
(ji · Ai)

Ri,

(1)

where T is the temperature of the resistors, supposed to
be in thermal equilibrium with all the others.

In fact, a straightforward application of Eq. 1 to a cold
plasma made of electrons and just one ion component
gives

dS
dt

=

e2
T

(−neµeE+De∇ne +niµiE−Di∇ni)2A2R. (2)

Under the usual assumptions of quasi-neutrality and
[13])
quasi-stationary plasma (see, for example, Ref.

ni
ne = ǫ = const.; neve = nivi.

(3)

Hence, Eq. 1 becomes

∗Electronic address: mpinheiro@ist.utl.pt; We acknowledge par-
tial ﬁnancial support from Funda¸c˜ao Calouste Gulbenkian and the
Rectorate of the Technical University of Lisbon.

dS
dt

e2
T

=

[E(ǫµi − µe)ne + ∇ne(De − Diǫ)]

2A2

R.

(4)

If there is no entropy production ˙S = 0, and then the
ambipolar electric ﬁeld is recovered [13]

along them. From magnetohydrodynamic we have a kind
of generalized Ohm’s law (see, for example, Ref. [16])

E =

De − ǫDi
µe − µiǫ

∇ne
ne

.

(5)

∇p = −enE − en[v × B] + [j × B] −

(7)

enj
σ

,

2

(8)

(9)

(11)

(12)

(13)

where σ = e2nτe/me is the electric conductivity, with
τe denoting the average collision time between electrons
and ions. Under the equilibrium condition

holds. Therefore, after inserting Eq. 8 into Eq. 7 it is
obtained the y component of velocity

∇p = [j × B],

vy = −

Ex
B

−

1
σB2

dp
dy

.

From Eq. 9 we have the classical diﬀusion coeﬃcient scal-
ing with 1/B2 and thus implying a random walk of step
length rL (Larmor radius). To get the anomalous diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient we must consider the process of diﬀusion
to the wall - in the presence of an entropy source - with
the combined action of the wall current drain, as already
introduced in Eq. 6.

Therefore, using the guiding center plasma model the

particle motion is made with velocity given by

j = envd = −

[∇p × B]
B2

.

(10)

This equation form the base of a simpliﬁed theory of
magnetic conﬁnement.
In fact, the validity of Eq. 10
is restrained to the high magnetic ﬁeld limit, when the
Larmor radius is shorter than the Debye radius.

Considering motion along only one direction perpen-

dicular to the wall (y-axis), it is clear that

(j · A)2 =

A2
B2 (cid:18)

dp
dy (cid:19)

2

.

If we consider a quasi-steady state plasma operation,
the plasma total energy should be sustained. Hence,
dU/dt = 0, and the power associated with the driven
pressure-gradient is just maintaining the dissipative pro-
cess of plasma losses on the wall. Eq. 6 govern the evo-
lution of diﬀusion velocity. Hence, we have

nvd = −

nRA
L

kT
B2

dn
dy

= −DT

dn
dy

,

with DT denoting the transverse (across the magnetic
ﬁeld) diﬀusion coeﬃcient given by

DT =

nRA
L

kT
B2 .

This new result coincides with the classical diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient [13] whenever nRA/L ≡ mνei/e2, containing a de-
pendence on collision frequency and particle number den-
sity. Others theoretical approaches to this problem were

This conceptual formulation provides new insight regard-
ing ambipolar diﬀusion. In a thermal equilibrium state, a
plasma conﬁned by insulating walls will have an eﬀective
coeﬃcient given by the above Eq. 5, a situation frequently
encountered in industrial applications. This example by
itself relates ambipolar diﬀusion with no entropy pro-
duction in the plasma. Allowing plasma currents to the
walls, entropy production is greatly enhanced, generating
altogether instabilities and plasma losses [12].

But conﬁned plasmas are in a far-nonequilibrium state
(with external surroundings) and it is necessary to es-
tablish a generalized principle that rule matter, which
we develop in the next lines.

Experiments give evidence of transport of particles and
energy to the walls [14]. At the end of the 1960s, ex-
perimental results obtained in weakly ionized plasma [3]
and in a hot electron plasma [15] (this one proposing
a possible mechanism of ﬂute instability) indicated the
strong inﬂuence conducting walls have on plasma losses
across magnetic ﬁeld lines. Geissler [3] suggested that
the most probable explanation was due to the existence
of diﬀusion-driven current ﬂow through the plasma to the
walls. Beilinson et al. [4] shown the possibility to control
the proﬁles of plasma parameters by applying potential
diﬀerence to various parts of the conducting walls. Con-
cerning fusion reactions, Taylor [10] provided a new in-
terpretation of tokamak ﬂuctuations as due to an inward
particle ﬂux resulting from the onset of ﬁlamentary cur-
rents.

We consider a simple axisymmetric magnetic conﬁgu-
ration with magnetic ﬁeld lines parallel to z-axis with a
plasma conﬁned between two electrodes (see Fig.1). In
general terms, a particle motion in a plasma results in
a massive ﬂux. As long as the ﬂux is installed, the ﬂux
will depends naturally on a force F - in this case the
pressure gradient-driven process of diﬀusion to the wall
- responsible of the wall driven current j. According to
the fundamental thermodynamics relation, the plasma
internal energy variation dU is related to the amount of
entropy supplied or rejected and the work done by the
driven force, through the equation

dU
dt

= (j · A)2R +

F ·

(cid:18)

dr
dt (cid:19)

.

(6)

The last term we identify with the macroscopic diﬀusion
velocity vd depicting the process of plasma expansion to
the wall. To simplify somehow the calculations we as-
sume a single plasma ﬂuid under the action of a pressure
gradient (F = ALdp/dy).

In the presence of steady and uniform magnetic ﬁeld
lines (this simpliﬁes the equations, but do not limit the
applicability of the model), the particles stream freely

advanced by Bohm [1], who proposed an empirically-
driven diﬀusion coeﬃcient associating plasma oscillations
as the source of the enhanced diﬀusion, while Tonks [17]
have shown that the current density that is present in
a magnetically immobilized plasma is only generated by
the particle density gradient, not being associated with
any drift of matter. Simon electron ”short-circuit” [2]
proposes an explanation for the diﬀerent rates of diﬀu-
sion electrons and ions do experiment across the mag-
netic ﬁeld as due to an unbalance of currents ﬂowing to
the wall.

In the absence of collisions, the guiding centers of
charged particles behave as permanently attached to the
same lines of force. On the contrary, as a result of col-
lisions with others charged particles the guiding centers
shift from one line of force to another resulting in a dif-
fusion of plasma across the ﬁeld lines.
In our model,
each orbit constitutes an elementary current I eventu-
ally crossing the wall.

However, the particle diﬀusion coeﬃcient as shown in
Eq. 13 gives evidence of an interplay between the resis-
tance the elementary circuit is submitted when in contact
with the walls in the presence of the frozen-in eﬀect. In
fact, for suﬃciently strong magnetic ﬁelds apparently a
hydrodynamic behavior of the plasma is installed [5, 18],
with the appearance of ”convective cells” and the 1/B
behavior dominates, giving birth to the anomalous dif-
fusion mechanism. The onset of freezing magnetic lines
is valid whenever the Lundquist number S ≫ 1 (convec-
tion of the magnetic ﬁeld dominated medium). In this
case the magnetic ﬁeld lines are frozen-in in the medium
(consequence of a vortex type of character of the mag-
netic ﬁeld B) and the ﬂux of them across a given surface
is constant:

Φ = BA′

= BL2α.

(14)

Remark that A′ is now the surface delimited by the ele-
mentary circuit γ (see Fig. 1) and α . 1 is just a geomet-
rical factor (e.g. α = π/4 at the limit of a circular orbit).
This situation is fundamental to the onset of anomalous
diﬀusion. Free electrons orbits are helical, but as Fig. 1
shows, their projections at right angles to the ﬁeld are
circular. Each particle orbit constitute an elementary
circuit with B-ﬁeld cutting its surface being associated
with it an elementary ﬂux Φ. At the same time we can
envisage each orbit as constituting by itself an elementary
circuit, some of them intersecting the wall and thus the
circuit is closed inside the wall. Therefore a resistance
R drags the charged ﬂow at the conducting wall. It is
therefore plausible to associate to this elementary circuit
a potential drop V and the all process being equivalent
to a current I ﬂowing through the elementary circuit.

Assuming the plasma is a typical weakly coupled, hot
diﬀuse plasma with a plasma parameter (number of par-
ticles in Debye sphere) Λ = nλ3
De ≈ 1, it is more likely to
expect nearly equal average kinetic and potential energy.
However, the typical plasma parameter encountered in
glow discharges or in nuclear fusion is Λ ≫ 1. This means

3

Y 

 

J
y

 

J
x

B

 

Y

 

1

 

g  

 

Z

 

1

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Z 

A 
A 

 
 
 

A’ 

L 

X 

FIG. 1: Schematic of the geometry for the plasma-wall cur-
rent drain model. The uniform magnetic ﬁeld points down-
ward along Oz. Particles describe orbits in the plane xOy
intersecting the wall (plan xOz). Orbits are represented by a
semi-circular line for convenience. L is the maximum distance
the trajectory attains from the wall.

that the average kinetic energy is larger than the average
potential energy. To contemplate all range of Λ we can
relate them through the relationship

ρV = (J · A)δ.

(15)

Here, ρ is the charge density, A is the vector potential,
J is the current density and δ ≤ 1 is just a parameter
representing the ratio of potential to kinetic energy. Of
course, when Λ ≥ 1, then δ ≤ 1. This basic assumption is
consistent with the hydrodynamic approximation taken
in the development of equations. The limitations of the
model are related with the unknowns Λ and δ that can
be uncovered only through a self-consistent model of the
plasma. However, our analysis of anomalous diﬀusion re-
mains general and added new insight to the phenomena.
Now suppose that the diﬀusion current is along y-axis
J = −Jyuy (see Fig.1). Consequently, A = −Ayuy, and
then the potential drop will depend on x-coordinate:

ρ[V (x1) − V (x0)] = Jy[Ay(x1) − Ay(x0)]δ.

(16)

Multiplying both members by the area A′ = x1z1 and

length L = y1, we have

Q∆V = Iy1[Ay(x1) − Ay(x0)]δ = IΦδ.

(17)

γ(A · dx) is the ﬂux of the magnetic ﬁeld through
Φ =
the closed surface bounded by the line element dx (ele-
H
mentary circuit γ, see also Fig.1). By other side, natu-
rally, the total charge present on the volume V = x1y1z1
is such as Q = ie, with i an integer. This integer must be
related to ions charge number. From Eq. 17 we obtain

R =

= δ

= αδ

∆V
I

Φ
Q

BL2
ie

.

But, the particle density is given by n = N/LA, with N
being now the total number of charged particles present
in volume V = AL. Since i = N , we retrieve ﬁnally the
so-called Bohm-diﬀusion coeﬃcient

(18)

(19)

DB = αδ

kT
eB

.

However, this expression suﬀers of the indetermination
of the geometrical factor α. This factor is related to
the ions charge number, it depends on the magnetic ﬁeld
magnitude and as well the external operating conditions
(due to increased collisional processes, for ex.). The exact
value of the product αδ can only be determined through a
self-consistent plasma model, but we should expect from
the above discussion that αδ < 1. Furthermore, Eq. 18
can be used as a boundary condition (simulating an elec-
trically ﬂoating surface) imposed when solving Poisson
equation.

Also it worth to emphasize that when inserting Eq. 18
into Eq. 13, and considering the usual deﬁnition of mo-
mentum transfer cross section, then it can be obtained
a new expression for the classical diﬀusion coeﬃcient as
a function of the ratio of collisional ν and cyclotron fre-
quency Ω, although (and in contrast with the standard
expression), now also dependent on the geometrical fac-
tor α and energy ratio δ:

4

This explains the strong dependence of the classical dif-
fusion coeﬃcient on ν/Ω showing signs of anomalous dif-
fusion as discussed in Ref. [19] (obtained with a time
resolved Monte Carlo simulation in an inﬁnite gas under
uniform ﬁelds) and, in addition, the strong oscillations
shown up in the calculations of the time dependence of
the transverse component of the diﬀusion tensor for elec-
trons in low-temperature rf argon plasma. Those ba-
sic features result on one side from its dependence on
R, which is proportional to the ﬂux. Therefore, a ﬂux
variation can give an equivalent eﬀect to the previously
proposed mechanism: whenever a decrease (or increase)
in the ﬂux is onset through time dependence of electric
and magnetic ﬁelds, it occurs a strong increase (or de-
crease) of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient. By other side, when
the resistance increases it occurs a related decrease of
charged particles tangential velocity and its mean energy.
So far, this model gives a new insight into the results re-
ferred in [19] and also it explains why the same eﬀect is
not obtained from the solution of the non-conservative
Boltzmann equation as applied to an oxygen magnetron
discharges with constant electric and magnetic ﬁelds [20].

To summarize, we introduced in this Letter a simple
mechanism providing an interpretation of the anomalous
diﬀusion in a magnetized conﬁned plasma. In fact, above
a certain range of B the magnetic ﬁeld frozen-in eﬀect
is settled in the plasma, implying a constant magnetic
ﬁeld ﬂux through the elementary orbits of the charge
carriers. Whenever conducting walls are bounding the
plasma current drain to the walls occurs naturally and a
Bohm-like behavior of the transverse diﬀusion coeﬃcient
results. The suggested mechanism could lead to a better
understanding of the mechanism of plasma-wall interac-
tion and help to develop a full-scale numerical modelling
of present fusion devices or collisional low-temperature
plasmas.

DT = (αδ)

ν
Ω

kT
m

.

The author would like to thank Elena Tatarova and

(20)

Marques Dias for their elucidating discussions.

[1] Bohm, Burhop and Massey, Characteristics of Electrical
Discharges in Magnetic Fields, edited by A. Guthrie and
R. K. Wakcrling (MacGraw-Hill, New York,1949)

[2] Albert Simon, Phys. Rev. 98 (2) 317 (1955)
[3] Klaus H. Geissler, Phys. Rev. 171(1) 179 (1968)
[4] L. L. Beilinson, V. A. Rozhansky, and L. D. Tsendin,

Phys. Rev. E 50 (4) 3033 (1994)

[5] David Montgomery, C.-S. Liu, and George Vahala, Phys.

Fluids 15 (5), 815 (1972)

[6] Kimitaka Itoh, Sanae-I. Itoh, Atsushi Fukuyama and Ma-
sotoshi Yagi, J. Plasma Fusion Res. 79 (6) 608 (2003)
[7] R. J. Bickerton, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 375 397

(1999)

[8] V. D. Shafranov, Physics-Uspekhi 44 (8) 835 (2001)
[9] Norman Rostoker, Michl W. Binderbauer, Hendrik J.

Monkhorst, Science 278 1419 (1997)

[10] J. B. Taylor and B. McNamara, Phys. Fluids 14 (7) 1492

(1971)

15 (4) 683 (1972)

[11] David Montgomery and Frederick Tappert, Phys. Fluids

[12] Harry S. Robertson, Phys. Rev. 118 (1) 288 (1969)
[13] J. Reece Roth, Industrial Plasma Engineering, Vol 1 -
Principles (Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol, 1995)
[14] T. C. Luce, C. C. Petty, and J. C. M. de Haas, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 68 (1) 52 (1992)

[15] L. A. Ferrari and A. F. Kuckes, Phys. Fluids 12 836

(1969)

[16] B. B. Kadomtsev, Ph´enom`enes collectifs dans les plasmas

(Mir Editions, Moscow, 1979)

[17] Lewi Tonks, Phys. Rev. 97 (6) 1443 (1955)
[18] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31 (13) 809 (1973)

[19] Z. M. Raspopovi´c, S. Dujko, T. Makabe, and Z. Lj.
Petrovi´c, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 14 293 (2005)
[20] R. D. White, R. E. Robson, K. F. Ness and T. Makabe,

J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 38 997 (2005)

5

