6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Numerical simulations of current generation and dynamo excitation in a
mechanically-forced, turbulent ﬂow

R. A. Bayliss, M. D. Nornberg, P. W. Terry, and C. B. Forest∗
Department of Physics
University of Wisconsin—Madison
1150 University Ave.
Madison, WI 53706
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

The role of turbulence in current generation and self-excitation of magnetic ﬁelds has been studied
in the geometry of a mechanically driven, spherical dynamo experiment, using a three dimensional
numerical computation. A simple impeller model drives a ﬂow which can generate a growing mag-
netic ﬁeld, depending upon the magnetic Reynolds number Rm = µ0σV a and the ﬂuid Reynolds
number Re = V a/ν of the ﬂow. For Re < 420 the ﬂow is laminar and the dynamo transition is
governed by a simple threshold in Rm > 100, above which a growing magnetic eigenmode is ob-
served that is primarily of a dipole ﬁeld tranverse to axis of symmetry of the ﬂow. In saturation
the Lorentz force slows the ﬂow such that the magnetic eigenmode becomes marginally stable. For
Re > 420 and Rm ∼ 100 the ﬂow becomes turbulent and the dynamo eigenmode is suppressed. The
mechanism of suppression is due to a combination of a time varying large-scale ﬁeld and the presence
of ﬂuctuation driven currents (such as those predicted by the mean-ﬁeld theory) which eﬀectively
enhance the magnetic diﬀusivity. For higher Rm a dynamo reappears, however the structure of the
magnetic ﬁeld is often diﬀerent from the laminar dynamo; it is dominated by a dipolar magnetic ﬁeld
which is aligned with the axis of symmetry of the mean-ﬂow, apparently generated by ﬂuctuation-
driven currents. The magnitude and structure of the ﬂuctuation-driven currents has been studied
by applying a weak, axisymmetric seed magnetic ﬁeld to laminar and turbulent ﬂows. An Ohm’s
law analysis of the axisymmetric currents allows the ﬂuctuation-driven currents to be identiﬁed.
The magnetic ﬁelds generated by the ﬂuctuations are signiﬁcant: a dipole moment aligned with the
symmetry axis of the mean-ﬂow is generated similar to those observed in the experiment, and both
toroidal and poloidal ﬂux expulsion are observed.

PACS numbers: 47.65.+a, 91.25.Cw
Keywords: magnetohydrodynamics, MHD, dynamo, turbulence

I.

INTRODUCTION

Astrophysical and geophysical magnetic ﬁelds are gen-
erated by complex ﬂows of plasmas or conducting ﬂu-
ids which convert gravitational potential, thermal, and
rotational energy into magnetic energy [1, 2]. A com-
prehensive theory of the magnetohydrodynamic dynamo
is elusive since the generating mechanism can vary dra-
matically from one system to another. These variations
arise from diﬀerences in free energy sources, conductiv-
ity and viscosity of the conducting media, and geometry.
Isolating and understanding the mechanisms by which
self-generation occurs and the role of turbulence in the
transition to a dynamo remain important problems.

Dynamo action arises from the electromotive force
(EMF) induced by the movement of an electrically-
conducting medium through a magnetic ﬁeld. This mo-
tional EMF generates a magnetic ﬁeld which, depending
on the details of the motion, can either amplify or atten-
uate the initial magnetic ﬁeld. If the induced ﬁeld rein-
forces the initial magnetic ﬁeld, then the positive feed-
back leads to a growing magnetic ﬁeld. The source of en-

ergy for this dynamo is the kinetic energy of the moving
ﬂuid. The ﬂuid may be driven by many diﬀerent mecha-
nisms such as thermal convection in a rotating body for
the case of the Earth, or by impellers in liquid sodium
dynamo experiments.

When the system is turbulent, the turbulence likely
plays an important role in the dynamo onset and the
saturated state. In the saturated state, the backreaction
of the self-generated magnetic ﬁeld modiﬁes the velocity
ﬁeld. It is well known that in hydrodynamics turbulence
converts large-scale motions into smaller and smaller ed-
dies, a process known as a turbulent cascade. In magne-
tohydrodynamics (MHD) ﬂuid turbulence can fold a large
scale magnetic ﬁeld into smaller structures [3].
If the
small-scale magnetic ﬂuctuations are helical, they can,
on average, generate a net EMF by interacting with the
velocity ﬁeld ﬂuctuations and drive large scale currents.
When the magnetic ﬁeld of this ﬂuctuation driven current
reinforces the original magnetic ﬁeld self-excitation may
be possible. Thus the generation of small-scale currents
may explain observed large-scale magnetic ﬁelds [4, 5, 6].

∗Electronic address: cbforest@wisc.edu

Exact treatment of current generation in electrically-
conducting ﬂuids requires solving the MHD equations

2

FIG. 1: (a) a schematic of the Madison Dynamo Experiment. The sphere is 1 m in diameter and ﬁlled with 105–110
C liquid
sodium. High speed ﬂows are created by two counter rotating impellers. Two sets of coils, one coaxial and one transverse to
the drive shafts, are used to apply various magnetic ﬁelds for probing the experiment. (b) contours of the toroidal velocity vφ
and contours of the poloidal ﬂow stream function, Φ, where vpol = ∇Φ × ∇φ, of the axisymmetric double vortex ﬂow generated
by the impeller model. The region of forcing is shown schematically along the symmetry axis.

◦

governing the magnetic and velocity ﬁelds:
∂ B
∂t

1
µ0σ ∇

2B + ∇

=

×

v

B (1)

×

∂ v
∂t

ρ

(cid:20)

+ (v

∇) v

= J

B + ρν∇2v

∇p + F(2)

·

(cid:21)

×

−

where ρ is the density, σ is the conductivity, ν is the vis-
cosity, and p is the pressure. F is a driving term annotat-
ing a plethora of sources of free energy in the ﬂow. Eqs. 1
and 2 are highly nonlinear, and without limiting assump-
tions are analytically intractable. Early dynamo theory
focused on solving only Eq. 1 in the kinematic limit where
the linear magnetic ﬁeld stability of prescribed velocity
ﬁelds was calculated to determine whether magnetic ﬁeld
growth was possible [7, 8, 9]. Due to advances in comput-
ing power during the last decade, great progress has been
made by performing direct numerical simulations (DNS)
of dynamos, which simultaneously solve the non-linear
MHD equations (Eqs. 1 and 2). These studies break into
two separate classes: global simulations which attempt
to model geophysical or astrophysical dynamos such as
the Earth and the Sun [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], and sim-
pliﬁed models in which the geometry is simple enough to
uniquely identify particular physical eﬀects [16, 17, 18].
The numerical simulations have been useful for study-
ing magnetic ﬁeld generation, even though they are still
far away from being able to resolve the ﬂuid turbulence of
the actual systems. In particular, the role of the magnetic
Prandtl number, P m = Rm/Re, on threshold conditions
for magnetic ﬁeld growth is of importance for under-

standing magnetic ﬁeld generation in the Earth, Sun, and
in experiments. Simulations are capable of resolving the
modest Rms needed to observe self-excitation, but not at
the very high values of Re typical of low P m dynamos.
Recent studies in periodic boxes [19, 20] have focused
on understanding the generation of small scale magnetic
ﬁelds at low P m, and cylindrical geometries with mean-
ﬂows have been performed [21] which show that the dy-
namo can be suppressed when turbulence is present. The
periodic box simulations are particularly good at model-
ing inﬁnite, homogeneous turbulence, though these con-
ditions are rarely, if ever, realized in actual astophysi-
cal or planetary contexts. Little work has been done to
understand the dependence of large scale magnetic ﬁeld
generation on P m.

To address more realistic models of astrophysical tur-
bulence, research has turned to experiments. Experi-
ments at Riga [22, 23, 24] and Karlsruhe [25, 26, 27]
use pumps to create ﬂows of liquid metal through heli-
cal pipes. These experiments are designed to be laminar
kinematic dynamos, i.e. the average velocity ﬁeld of the
liquid metal is designed (through impeller and pipe ge-
ometry) to produce a magnetic ﬁeld instability. The mo-
tivation for using liquid metal in the Riga and Karlsruhe
experiments is to allow helical ﬂows, yet the conduction
and ﬂow paths are not simply connected. Dynamos in
simply-connected geometries, where the ﬂow is uncon-
strained have yet to be demonstrated in an experiment.

The self-excitation threshold of the Riga and Karlsruhe
experiments is governed by the magnetic Reynolds num-

ber, Rm = µ0σLV0, where σ is the molecular electri-
cal conductivity, L is a characteristic size of the con-
ducting region, and V0 is the peak speed. For par-
ticular ﬂow geometries, the kinematic theory predicts
a critical magnetic Reynolds number, Rmcrit, for self-
excitation such that a dynamo transition is observed
when Rm > Rmcrit. An important result from the Riga
and Karlsruhe experiments is that the measured Rmcrit
at which the dynamo action occurs is essentially gov-
erned by the mean velocity ﬁeld. Turbulence, which is
governed by the magnitude of the ﬂuid Reynolds num-
ber Re = V0ℓ/ν = (ℓ/L)(Rm/P m), where ℓ is the char-
acteristic size of the channel constraining the ﬂow and
P m = 10−5 for liquid sodium, apparently played little
role.

V
h

The kinematic theory does not provide a hydrodynam-
ically consistent treatment of the ﬂuid turbulence, and
in simply-connected dynamo experiments the turbulent
ﬂuid motion will be pronounced. According to measure-
ments in hydrodynamic experiments, the turbulent ve-
locity ﬂuctuations scale linearly with the mean velocity
such that ˜v = C
. Mean ﬁeld theory predicts that
i
turbulence can modify the eﬀective conductivity of the
liquid metal. Random advection creates a turbulent or
anomalous resistivity governed by the spatial and tempo-
ral scales of the random ﬂow. A reduction in conductivity
due to turbulent ﬂuctuations was observed at low mag-
netic Reynolds number in liquid sodium [28]. The scaling
of this turbulent resistivity is readily obtained by iterat-
ing on the magnetic ﬁeld in the nonlinearity of Eq. 1,
and looking at the term that depends on gradients of B.
For large Rm in a ﬂuid with homogeneous, isotropic tur-
bulence, the turbulent resistivity is proportional to ˜vℓv,
and produces a turbulent modiﬁcation to the molecular
conductivity,

σT =

σ
1 + CRmℓv/L

,

(3)

where ℓv is a characteristic eddy size (presumed to be
some fraction of L). The turbulent resistivity, as de-
scribed above, operates even if there is no clear scale
separation between the mean ﬂow and the turbulence, or
if mean quantities are nonzero. The turbulent conductiv-
ity should be used for estimating the dynamo threshold:
Rm = µ0σT V0L > Rmcrit results in a dynamo. Thus,
the onset condition in a turbulent ﬂow is governed by

Rm >

Rmcrit

CℓvRmcrit/L

1

−

.

(4)

Cℓv .

Note that the potentially singular denominator imposes
a requirement on the eﬀectiveness of a particular ﬂow
pattern for self-excitation; dynamos will only occur if
Rmcrit < L

The small P m of liquid metals implies large ﬂuctuation
levels and a turbulent conductivity. The inﬂuence of tur-
bulent conductivity on self-excitation enters through the
dimensionless number CRmcritℓv/L. Through ﬂuid con-
straints, the ﬂow-dependent parameters C, ℓv and Rmcrit

3

can be manipulated. In the Karlsruhe experiment [29],
for example, ℓv is set by the pipe dimensions, rather than
the device size hence ℓv/L can be taken to be a fraction
of the ratio of the pipe dimensions to the device size. An
upper bound would be ℓv/L = 0.06. We take C < 0.1,
40, hence CRmcritℓv/L < 0.24. We expect
and Rmcrit ∼
therefore that dynamo onset would be governed mainly
by laminar predictions, as found experimentally.

Turbulence plays a much greater role in governing self-
excitation in geophysical and solar dynamos since there
are no boundaries to keep small-scale ﬂow from inﬂu-
encing the conducting region, and the values P m in the
Earth’s core and in the convection zone of the Sun (P m
∼
10−5 to 10−6 and 10−7 respectively) [30, 31]. This is also
true for several experiments now underway which inves-
tigate magnetic ﬁeld generation in more turbulent con-
ﬁgurations [32, 33]. One such experiment, at the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin—Madison, uses two impellers in a
1 m diameter spherical vessel, to generate ﬂows (with
> 15 ms−1). These ﬂows are predicted by laminar
V
theory to be dynamos [34]. The Madison experiment is
(cid:10)
(cid:11)
expected to achieve Rm > 150 which exceeds Rmcrit by a
factor of two. Such experiments have prompted a num-
ber of theoretical investigations into whether magnetic
ﬁeld generation is possible for the small Prandtl num-
bers of liquid metals in experiments without a mean ﬂow
[19, 20]. The Madison Dynamo Experiment uses a simple
two vortex ﬂow which, according to a laminar kinematic
theory, produces a transverse dipole magnetic ﬁeld. The
experiment presents a unique opportunity to test the nu-
merical models: the spherical geometry makes it partic-
ularly well-suited to being simulated, and the magnetic
ﬁelds, at the Rm of the experiment, can be fully resolved,
though the ﬂuid turbulence, cannot be fully resolved by
simulation since Re

107 in the experiment..

In this paper, three-dimensional direct-numerical sim-
ulations of the spherical dynamo experiment at the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin are reported. The simulations are
used to predict the behavior of the experiment and give
guidance on what role turbulence might have on cur-
rent generation and self-excitation. Section II of the
paper describes the numerical model used for solving
the MHD equations. Section III describes results from
P m
1 simulations where the ﬂow is laminar and gives
an overview of the large scale ﬂow which is linearly unsta-
ble to magnetic eigenmode growth. Section IV describes
dynamos at lower P m where the ﬂow become turbulent.
Section V presents simulations of a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld applied to axis of symmetry of the mean-ﬂow in
which turbulence generated currents are investigated in
subcritical ﬂows.

∼

∼

II. NUMERICAL MODEL

The numerical model used in this paper solves the
MHD equations in a spherical geometry, resolving the
velocity ﬁeld at the origin, and has a forcing term which

4

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

mimics impellors used in the experiment. The code uses a
spherical harmonic decomposition vector potential of the
velocity and magnetic ﬁelds in the θ and φ directions,
and ﬁnite diﬀerence representation in the radial direc-
tion. The code is designed to simulate the behavior of a
spherical liquid sodium experiment. Sodium, at 100 ◦C,
is an electrically conducting ﬂuid fully described by the
imcompressible, resistive, viscous MHD equations.

The dimensionless equations which govern ﬂuid mo-
mentum, magnetic induction, and solenoidal ﬁeld con-
straints are:
∂ v
∂t

+ Rm0(v

Rm0∇P

∇)v =

(5)

·

−
+ P m

∇
= Rm0∇

2v + Rm0F + Rm0J

B,

×

v

B + ∇2B,

×

×

spherical harmonic expansion of toroidal (t) and poloidal
(pol) functions [7],

v = ∇

t~r + ∇

∇

s~r,

×
and the magnetic ﬁeld is described similarly

×

×

B = ∇

T~r + ∇

∇

S~r,

×

×

×

where s, t, S and T are complex, scalar functions of
r, θ , and φ. This representation automatically sat-
isﬁes Eq. 7. To decompose Eq. 12, each scalar func-
tion is projected onto a spherical harmonic basis set,
normalized by Nℓ,m =
4π(ℓ + m)!:
−
ℓ (cos θ)eimφ. Yℓ,m is summed from
Yℓ,m(θ, φ) = Nℓ,mP m
m = 0, ..., ℓ and an extra factor of √2 in Nℓ,m for m
= 0
since the function represents a real ﬁeld. The result for
the magnetic ﬁeld is

(2ℓ + 1)(ℓ

m)!/

p

p

∂ B
∂t

v = 0
B = 0.

∇
∇

·
·

(6)

(7)
(8)

T(r, θ, φ, t) = Nℓ,m

Tℓ,m(r, t)P m

ℓ (cos θ)eimφ

In these equations, the time has been normalized to
a characteristic resistive diﬀusion time of τσ = µ0σa2
where a is the radius of the sphere, and the velocity has
been normalized to a characteristic velocity V0 so that
Rm0 = V0aµ0σ. For the actual experimental device, the
radius of sphere is a = 0.55 m; Rm0 = 100 corresponds
15 ms−1. The vector
to a characteristic speed of V0 ≈
ﬁeld F is a stirring term of order 1 which models the
In practice, the velocity
impellers in the experiments.
ﬁeld which results from the stirring term has a peak nor-
malized velocity which can be diﬀerent from one and it
is this resulting velocity ﬁeld which is used to deﬁne the
resulting magnetic Reynolds numbers for a speciﬁc simu-
lation, ie. Rm = max(V )Rm0. The relative importance
of the magnetic and viscous dissipation is expressed by
P m = νµ0σ which for liquid sodium is 10−5 and the
ﬂuid Reynolds number Re is directly related to the mag-
netic Reynolds number by Re = Rm/P m. In practice,
the simulations have only been carried out for P m > 0.1
which is suﬃcient to observed turbulence in the ﬂows, but
four orders of magnitude larger than in the experiments.
Since the ﬂuid is incompressible, the density evolution
is unimportant and the pressure equation need not be
evolved. Other numerical representations of a spherical
MHD system solve for the pressure as a constraint on
the ﬂow [35], especially in systems like stellar convection
zones where compressibility is part of the dynamics [10].
This simulation does not evolve the pressure explicitly,
rather it solves for the vorticity. Taking the curl of Eq.
5, the expression for the time evolution of the vorticity
is,

∂ω
∂t

v

= Rm0∇ ×
+ P m

ω + Rm0∇ ×
F, and

×
2ω + Rm0∇ ×
∇
−1ω.
)

v = (

∇×

J

B

×

(9)

(10)

The spectral decomposition is that of Bullard and Gell-
man (BG), in which the velocity ﬁeld is described by a

∞

m=ℓ

Xℓ=1

Xm=0

∞

m=ℓ

Xℓ=1

Xm=0

S(r, θ, φ, t) = Nℓ,m

Sℓ,m(r, t)P m

ℓ (cos θ)eimφ

and similarly for the ﬂow scalars, t and s.

One advantage of the BG representation is that mul-
tiple curls, which appear with every poloidal component
of the vector ﬁelds, reduce to Laplacians. The curl of
a general solenoidal vector-ﬁeld, W can also be repre-
If
sented by two scalar functions of position, e and f .
W = ∇

f ~r, then clearly

e~r + ∇

∇

×

×

∇

W = ∇

×

×

(
−∇

×

2f ~r) + ∇

∇

e~r.

×

×

(15)

To determine the discretized version of the vorticity
equations, Eq. 9 is expressed in terms of the toroidal-
poloidal representation:

2s)~r.

(
−∇

(16)

ω = ωS + ωT = ∇

∇

t~r + ∇

×

×

×
By substituting this form into Eq. 9, the need to deter-
mine boundary conditions on the vorticity is eliminated
and only boundary conditions on the velocity ﬁeld scalars
are required. The evolution equations for the ﬂow ad-
vance become

∂ t
∂t −
2s

∂

∇
∂t

∇

∇

P m

2t = Rm0 [G]S + [∇

F]S

(17)

+ P m

4s = Rm0 [G]T + [∇

F]T ,

(18)

×

×

where G signiﬁes the sum of the advection and Lorentz
forces. The fourth-order derivative can be computed by
consecutive Laplacian operators.

The Crank-Nicolson method is used to advance the lin-
ear terms. This method implicitly averages the diﬀusive
terms and computes a temporal derivative accurate to

6
second order. The ﬂuid advection term has a hyperbolic
character due to the propagation of inertial waves making
it advantageous to use an explicit advancement for non-
linear terms. An explicit second-order Adams-Bashforth
predictor-corrector scheme is used to advance the pseu-
dospectral nonlinear terms.

The pseudospectral method computes a function in
real space and then decomposes it in spectral space.
Pseudospectral methods avoid the complications of the
full-spectral methods which rely on term-by-term inte-
grations of spectral components (such as in the Galerkin
method) and in general are much faster than full-spectral
methods [36]. The pseudospectral method has the disad-
vantage of introducing discretization error through alias-
ing. This error is addressed by padding and truncating
the spectrum [36].

∇

2 and

The radial derivatives in the diﬀusive terms are com-
puted through ﬁnite diﬀerencing on a nonuniform mesh.
4 op-
The ﬁnite diﬀerence coeﬃcients for the
erators result in a nonsymmetric band diagonal matrix.
The boundary conditions are folded into the matrix de-
ﬁned by the implicit linear operators with Gauss-Jordan
reduction to ensure the matrix remains band-diagonal
for ease of inversion. Using an optimized LU decompo-
sition, the radial evolution is solved independently for
each spectral harmonic. The scalar ﬁelds are then con-
verted to real space and the nonlinear cross products are
updated during predictor and corrector steps.

∇

The temporal evolution loops over a spectral harmonic
index, thus individual boundary conditions for the re-
spective harmonics are separately applied. The highest-
order radial derivative in Eq. 18 is fourth order, requir-
ing four boundary conditions on the poloidal ﬂow scalar.
Since the velocity must permit a uniform ﬂow through
the origin, coordinate regularity implies

s(r = 0), t(r = 0),

= 0

for ℓ

= 1

s(r = 0), t(r = 0),

= 0

for ℓ = 1.

∂ s(r = 0)
∂r
∂2s(r = 0)
∂r2

For better numerical stability, the more stringent require-
rℓ is applied to turbulent simulations. The
ment s, t
other boundary conditions are given by assumptions of a
solid, no-slip boundary. For the poloidal ﬂow,

→

while for the toroidal ﬂow:

sℓ,m(a) = 0,
∂ sℓ,m(a)
∂r

= 0,

tℓ,m(a) = 0.

The discretization of the induction equation is straight-
forward in light of the method presented for the ﬂow. Us-
ing the magnetic ﬁeld given by Eq. 12, the induction term
in Eq. 6 is projected into toroidal and poloidal compo-
nents, grouping toroidal and poloidal contributions. The

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

5

(23)

(24)

discretized expressions for the magnetic advance are:

∂ T
∂t − ∇
∂ S
∂t − ∇

2T = Rm0NT

2S = Rm0NS

where N is the spectral transform of the inductive term
in the BG representation. Coordinate regularity gives
the conditions for the magnetic scalar functions Sℓ,m(r =
0), Tℓ,m(r = 0) = 0.

O

The highest-order derivative of the magnetic advance
(r2). Given the conditions on the magnetic ﬁeld at
is
the origin, a boundary condition on the magnetic ﬁeld is
needed at the wall. The outer surface of the Madison Dy-
namo Experiment is stainless steel, modeled in the simu-
lation as a solid insulating wall. The remaining boundary
conditions are solved by matching the poloidal magnetic
ﬁeld to a vacuum ﬁeld via a magnetostatic scalar poten-
tial, and noting the toroidal ﬁeld at the wall must be
zero. This implies

∂ Sℓ,m
∂r

+

Sℓ,m =

(ℓ + 1)
a
Tℓ,m(a) = 0.

2ℓ + 1
ℓ + 1

Cℓ,m,

(25)

(26)

In Eq. 25, Cℓ,m=0 if there are no currents in the sur-
rounding medium, but can also be ﬁnite to represent a
magnetic ﬁeld applied by external sources.

The timestepping, while unconditionally stable for
the diﬀusive problem,
is advectively-limited by an
empirically-determined temporal resolution requirement
5(∆x)2 for a given spatial resolution. The
of ∆t
spectral transform is the most computationally-intensive
portion of the code requiring roughly 80% of the CPU
time. The upper bound on the spatial resolution is:
400 which gives, with dealias-
128, Nr ∼
Nθ ∼
ing, ℓMAX = 42, or nearly 1000 modes.

64, Nφ ∼

≤

A forcing term, zero everywhere except at the location
of the impellers in the experiment, drives the ﬂow. The
forcing term for the impeller model is

Fφ(r, z) = ρ2 sin (πρb) + δ
FZ(r, z) = ǫ sin (πρc) + γ.

(27)
(28)

|

z
|

The axial coordinate, z, and the cylindrical radius, ρ, are
restricted to the region 0.25a <
< 0.55 and ρ < 0.3 a.
The impeller pitch, ǫ, changes the ratio of toroidal (Fφ)
to poloidal (FZ ) force. The constants δ and γ control
the axial force, and in this article are zero in all but the
applied-ﬁeld runs where stronger axial forcing is useful.
The sign of FZ is positive for z > 0 and negative for z < 0
creating the counter-rotation between the ﬂow cells. F
is constant, which allows the input impeller power F
v
to vary. The region of the impellers and an example of
the resulting ﬂow are shown in Fig. 1(b). These ﬂows are
topologically-similar to the ad hoc ﬂows in several kine-
matic dynamo studies [9, 37, 38], but diﬀer in that they
are hydrodynamically consistent solutions to the momen-
tum equation.

·

6
6

FIG. 2: (a) The kinetic and magnetic energy densities shown versus time with Rm =159 and P m = 1. The time is in units of
the resistive diﬀusion time τσ = µ0σa2. (b) The contributions to the total magnetic energy density from the m = 1 transverse
dipole and the axisymmetric m = 0 modes. (c) Magnetic ﬁeld lines of a saturated dynamo state for a laminar ﬂow with
Rm = 150.

rm

III. LAMINAR DYNAMOS

analysis.

∼

The impellor model described above predicts dynamo
action for suﬃciently-strong forcing. For the particular
1, a laminar ﬂow results, as shown in Fig.
case of P m
2(a). Starting from a stationary liquid metal, the evolu-
tion is observed to go through several phases. Initially,
the kinetic energy of the ﬂow increases, as does the maxi-
mum speed (Rm) of the ﬂow. The resulting Rm is above
the critical value at which dynamo action is expected
from kinematic theory. The magnetic ﬁeld energy then
increases exponentially with time. The measured growth
rate agrees with the growth rate predicted by a kinematic
eigenvalue code using the generated velocity ﬁelds. After
this linear-growth phase, a backreaction of the magnetic
ﬁeld on the ﬂow is observed which leads to a saturation
of the magnetic ﬁeld. In this saturated state, the gen-
erated magnetic ﬁeld is predominantly a dipole oriented
transverse to the symmetry axis, as seen in Fig. 2 (c).
The m = 1 equatorially dominant structure of the dy-
namo (shown in Fig. 2(b)) is consistent with kinematic

The orientation of the generated dipole is not con-
strained by geometry and is observed to vary between
simulations. When the saturation state is oscillating, (or
damped with oscillations as shown in the P m = 0.5 case
in Fig. 6) the dipole drifts around the equator and also
undergoes 180◦ reversals.

Self-excitation depends on the shape of the ﬂow as well
as the magnitude of Rm. An ideal ratio of poloidal to
toroidal thrust exists (parameterized by ǫ in Eq. 28) for
which the critical magnetic Reynolds number is mini-
mized as seen in Fig. 4. Minimizing Rmcrit makes the
ﬂow easier to attain experimentally. This optimal ratio
can be understood from a simple frozen ﬂux model de-
scribing the stretch-twist-fold cycle of the dynamo (see
Ref. [39]).
If the toroidal rotation is either too fast or
too slow relative to the poloidal ﬂow, the advected ﬁeld
is not folded back on to the initial ﬁeld.

For laminar ﬂows, the backreaction is the result of two
eﬀects. First, an axisymmetric component of the Lorentz
force is generated by the dynamo, slowing the ﬂow and
reducing Rm. Second, the ﬂow geometry is changed such

7

FIG. 4: The dependance of the linear growth rate of the least-
damped magnetic eigenmode on impeller pitch ǫ. The transi-
tion from damped to growing (λ = 0 point) deﬁnes the critical
magnetic Reynolds number; Rm < Rmcrit to a growing mag-
netic eigenmode.

FIG. 3: The power transfer in a laminar dynamo with
Rm=159 and P m=1.
(a) The volume integrated hy-
drodynamic input power F · v,viscous dissipation ω2, and
power transferred from kinetic energy to the magnetic ﬁeld
v · J × B. (b) The work done by the ﬂuid on the magnetic
ﬁeld v · J × B,the time derivative of the magnetic energy, and
the resistive dissipation J 2.

that the value of Rmcrit is increased. In saturation the
growth rate is decreased to zero, as the conﬂuence of Rm
and Rmcrit in Fig. 5 shows.

IV. TURBULENT DYNAMOS

≈

To investigate the eﬀect of turbulence on the dynamo
transition, the simulation are run at lower P m (higher
Re). The ﬂow changes from laminar to turbulent at
420. Above this value, a hydrodynamic insta-
Re
bility grows exponentially on approximately an eddy-
turnover time scale (τc) with a predominantly m = 1
spatial structure. Through nonlinear coupling of the in-
stability quickly leads to strongly-ﬂuctuating turbulent
ﬂows (a detailed discussion of the spectrum of the turbu-
lence is deﬀered to Sec. V). Fluctuations about the mean
ﬂow exist at all scales, including variations in the large-
scale ﬂow responsible for the dynamo. The turbulence

FIG. 5: Rm and Rmcrit evolution during the saturation
phase of a laminar dynamo. Rmcrit is calculated from lin-
ear stability for each instantaneous velocity ﬁeld during the
simulation. In saturation, Rm = Rmcrit.

is inhomogenous with boundary layers, localized forcing
regions, and strong shear layers.

The eﬀect of these ﬂuctuations on the dynamo onset
conditions and on the resulting saturation mechanism de-
pends sensitively upon the viscosity (parameterized by
P m). Figure 6 shows an example of the broad range of
dynamics exhibited by decreasing P m, for an approxi-

8

FIG. 6: The magnetic and kinetic energy densities for runs
with ﬁxed Rm (Rm = 165 ± 3%) but diﬀerent P m versus
time in τσ. Note that P m = 0.33 shows a relaminarization
of turbulent ﬂow while P m = 0.22 is barely amplifying the
initial noise and is shown multiplied by 50,000.

FIG. 7: (a) Rm as a function of time. Taking a series of
ﬂows over the range shown the mean ﬂow is calculated giving
Rm = 193 and Re = 863. (b) The kinematic analysis of the
average ﬂow, where only Eq. 6 is evolved, varying Rm, to
determine Rmcrit = 91.5.

FIG. 8: Re − Rm phase diagram. A number of simula-
tions whose hydrodynamic and ﬁnal saturated states are doc-
umented in Fig. 6. Rmcrit for the mean ﬂow hVi is essen-
tially independent of Re, while the eﬀective dynamo thresh-
old grows with Re. The dashed line shows the qualitative
behavior of the dynamo threshold in turbulent ﬂows (Vt).

FIG. 9: The growth rate of the dominant eigenmode calcu-
lated for a time-series of ﬂow proﬁles.

mately ﬁxed value of Rm. The magnetic ﬁeld dynamics
fall into several regimes depending on Re: the laminar
dynamo, a dynamo that starts turbulent, but relaminar-
izes the saturated ﬂow, a turbulent dynamo, and ﬁnally
a turbulent ﬂow with no dynamo. At P m = 1, the vis-
cosity is large enough to keep both the magnetic ﬁeld
and velocity ﬁeld fully laminar. The spectrum is dom-
inated by the driven velocity ﬁeld and by the magnetic
eigenmode, and the saturation mechanism is the toroidal
braking and modiﬁcation to the ﬂow mentioned above.

630.

For P m = 0.33, Fig. 6 shows a ﬂow that is initially
turbulent, but the saturated state is laminar. The hy-
drodynamic case evolves the ﬂow with B = 0, while the
MHD case evolves both v and B. The turbulent satu-
ration of the magnetic ﬁeld results in a reduction in the
ﬂuctuations of the ﬂow since the Lorentz braking has re-
duced Re below the hydrodynamic instability threshold
(decreasing Re from 496 to 320). The hydrodynamic case
shows that ﬂow turbulence persists without the addition
of a magnetic ﬁeld into the system. The Re threshold
distinguishing the turbulent saturated state from a re-
laminarized saturation is Re

∼
If Rm is ﬁxed at near the experimental maxima and
Re is increased beyond 700 no dynamo is observed. De-
spite the fact that the mean ﬂow still satisﬁes the re-
quirements of a kinematic dynamo, the turbulent ﬂow
does not produce a growing magnetic ﬁeld. Evidently, it
is the turbulent ﬂuctuations about the mean ﬂow that
prevent ﬁeld growth. Using the mean ﬂow (averaged
over several resistive times) for the P m = 0.22 (with
Rm=190, Re=863) as a prescribed ﬂow in a kinematic
93, as
evolution of the induction equation gives Rmcrit ≈
shown in Fig. 7. Even though the average ﬂow has Rm
well above Rmcrit there is no dynamo. However, when
the conductivity is doubled such that Rm = 388 a tur-
bulent dynamo reemerges in the simulation. Hence, an
empirical critical magnetic Reynolds number, Rmcrit,T
can be deﬁned which depends on Re through the degree

of turbulent ﬂuctuations in the ﬂow.

These results are consistent with the dynamo tran-
sition being aﬀected by the turbulent resistivity of Eq.
3. From analysis of the simulation results, τc, the eddy
scale size ℓv, and ﬂuctuation levels C = ˜v/V0 have been
determined in order to estimate the parameters in σT
under the assumption that the homogeneous turbulence
results roughly apply to this bounded, inhomogeneous
ﬂow. Typical volume averaged values measured in the
Rm = 190, Re = 863 simulation are: ℓv = 0.022a,
C = 0.45, and τcorr = 0.041τσ, which yields a volume-
averaged conductivity reduction of σT /σ = 0.461. The
diminished conductivity yields Rmcrit,T = 238. The re-
sults from all of the simulations are summarized in Fig. 8
which shows that an increasing Rm, at ﬁxed Re reestab-
lishes ﬁeld growth where turbulent ﬂuctuations had pre-
viously prohibited the dynamo. The dashed line in Fig. 8
shows that the correlation length and constant C increase
with Re and eventually asymptote when the conductivity
is eﬀectively reduced by 70 %.

The simulated turbulence has no de facto scale sepa-
ration. This might appear to pose a problem, given that
our interpretation of the eﬀect of turbulence is the in-
troduction of a turbulent resistivity, and the turbulent
resistivity of MFT is usually couched in scale separation
arguments. However, it should be noted that the scale
separation requirement associated with the α and β ef-
fects of MFT does not enter into the form of β, but does
guarantee that α < β. This is because α is proportional
to helicity whereas β is proportional to energy, while α
multiplies a lower derivative of the mean ﬁeld than does
β. In this sense the lack of scale separation in the sim-
ulations is consistent with the apparent weakness of a
turbulent-α eﬀect in a regime with a turbulent resistiv-
ity.

kν

∝

While the simulations are limited to Re < 2000 by
computational speed and storage, we believe the simula-
tions capture the dominant eﬀect since the ﬂuctuations
at the largest scales are the strongest contributers to the
turbulent resistivity by the following argument. In Kol-
ǫ2/3k−5/3,
mogorov turbulence the spectrum is E(k)
where ǫ is the energy dissipation rate. Thus the turbu-
−4/3
k0 q−2E(q)dq]1/2
ǫ1/3k
lent resistivity goes as [
,
0
where k0 is the wavenumber of the large scale eddies and
R
kν is the dissipation scale wavenumber. In K41 turbu-
Re3/4, as Re becomes large in comparison
lence, kν ∝
to Rm, the eﬀect of turbulent ﬂuctuations on conductiv-
ity will asymptote to a ﬁxed value. It should be noted
that the simple dimensional analysis used for estimating
the turbulent resistivity reﬂects isotropic, homogenous,
mirror-symmetric turbulence and is derived in the limit
that there is no mean ﬂow; this dynamo relies almost
entirely on the presence of a mean ﬂow.

∼

An alternative viewpoint, consistent with the phe-
nomenological interpretation of enhanced resistivity put
forward here, is that the large scale variations in the ve-
locity ﬁeld are continuously changing the spatial struc-
ture and growth rates of the magnetic eigenmodes of the

9

system. A more thorough treatment of the dynamic vari-
ation of dominant eigenmodes can be found for a slightly
diﬀerent problem in [40]. Two eﬀects can be important.
First, the instantaneous growth rate of the least damped
eigenmode ﬂuctuates between growing and damped. For
a run with Rm = 193, Re = 893 and ǫ = 0.4, shown
in Fig. 9, a dynamo occurs only when the ﬂow spends
suﬃcient time in phases which are kinematic dynamos.
The kinematic growth rate is most often positive, con-
sistent with the time averaged ﬂow having growing mag-
netic ﬁeld solutions, yet the modiﬁcations made to the
ﬂow during the subcritical periods is suﬃcient to stop
the dynamo. Second, the turbulence couples energy from
the growing magnetic eigenmode into spatially-similar
damped eigenmodes. As the ﬂows evolve, the spatial
structure of the eigenmodes change. The magnetic ﬁeld
structure of a single eigenmode at some previous instant
in time must be described in terms of several modes af-
ter the ﬂow changes. This transfer of energy from the
primary mode is equivalent to enhanced dissipation.

Finally, it should be noted that the diﬀerentiation be-
tween growing and damped magnetic ﬁelds is diﬃcult in
the turbulent simulations. Typically, the turbulent runs
have been limited to durations of less than 10 τσ. The
transition may also be considerably more complex as seen
in Fig. 6 where magnetic energy of the P m = 0.22 simula-
tion may be showing intermittent growth near Rmcrit,T .
The simulations are thus consistent with intermittent ex-
citation of the dynamo eigenmode by the mean ﬂow. The
peak magnetic energy limited by the magnitude of the
initialized noise the simulation is started with instead of
the backreaction with the ﬂow. This eﬀect is especially
relevant when the magnetic ﬁeld is sustained by an ex-
ternal source as shown in Chapter V.

A. Structure of the turbulent dynamo

A dynamo still occurs in these ﬂows for suﬃciently
large Rm (keeping Re ﬁxed, growing magnetic energy
is detected for suﬃciently large P m). An example of a
time evolution and spatial structure of a saturated tur-
bulent magnetic ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 10 for a simulation
with Rm = 337 and Re = 674. A m = 1 transverse
dipole ﬁeld is still present, as in the case of the lami-
nar dynamo in Fig. 2, however this turbulent dynamo is
now dominated by the presence of a large m = 0 ﬁeld,
aligned with the axis of symmetry of the impellors as
shown in Fig. 10(b). This component, by itself, would
appear to violate Cowling’s theorum [41], and so it must
result from non-axisymmtric components of the velocity
ﬁeld and the magnetic ﬁeld. Thus it appears probable
that the nature of dynamo has changed fundamentally
from a simple eigenmode driven by the two vortex ﬂow,
to dynamo in which the turbulent ﬂuctuations may be
responsible for generating the large scale magnetic ﬁeld.

10

FIG. 10: (a) The energy density of a turbulent dynamo with Rm = 337 and Re = 674.
(b) The energy density of the
axisymmetric magnetic ﬁeld (m = 0) and the nonaxisymmetric dynamo (m = 1). (c) Magnetic ﬁeld lines of the turbulent
saturated dynamo

V. SIMULATIONS OF A SUBCRITICAL
TURBULENT FLOW WITH A WEAK,
EXTERNALLY-APPLIED MAGNETIC FIELD

As a means of further highlighting the diﬀerent physics
and conditions underlying turbulent and laminar dy-
namos, subcritical ﬂows are simulated with focus on the
potential role of ﬂuctuations driven currents in the self-
excitation process. Subcritical ﬂows have Rm < Rmcrit,
and are not expected to lead to self-excited magnetic
ﬁelds. The MHD behavior is investigated by applying
a magnetic ﬁeld which is generated by currents ﬂowing
in coils external to the sphere. The conﬁguration studied
is similar to the set of experiments described in Ref. [42],
and is deliberately set up as an axisymmetric system in
which ﬂuctuation driven currents can be easily detected.

The numerical technique employed is similar to the
dynamo simulations described above in all but one re-
spect, namely a diﬀerent boundary condition is used
with Cℓ,m 6
= 0 in Eq. 25. These boundary conditions
match the magnetic ﬁeld to a scalar magnetic potential
B =
Φm, which is valid in the region between the sur-
face of the sphere and the external magnets. Φ satisﬁes

−∇

Laplace’s equation and its solution is well known:

Φm(r, θ, φ) =

Aℓ,mrℓ + Dℓ,mr

−(ℓ+1)

Y m
ℓ (θ, φ),

Xℓ,m (cid:16)

(cid:17)

(29)
where Y m
ℓ (θ, φ)’s are the spherical harmonics. The Dℓ,m
terms represent the magnetic ﬁeld generated by currents
in the sphere, and the coeﬃcients Aℓ,m can be chosen
to describe a magnetic ﬁeld of arbitrary shape and ori-
entation applied by currents external to the sphere. In
this paper and in the simulations described below, a uni-
form magnetic ﬁeld is applied along the symmetry axis
of the forcing terms, and is characterized by a single co-
eﬃcient A1,0, all higher order terms being zero. The
applied magnetic ﬁeld, B1,0, is weak enough so that it
does not alter the large-scale ﬂow. The strength of the
applied magnetic ﬁeld is moderated by keeping the Stu-
art number N
In sodium, with
a Rm
0.1 would correspond to an applied
ﬁeld of 156 gauss. The applied ﬁeld for these simula-
10−2. However,
tions corresponds to 57 gauss with N
since the velocity ﬂuctuations decrease with scale, so too
does the Stuart number, indicating the Lorentz force may
inﬂuence small-scale ﬂuid motion. Examples of such sim-

1,0/ρv0 < 0.1.

100, N

σaB2

∼

≡

∼

∼

11

FIG. 11: Simulations with an externally-applied, axisymmet-
ric magnetic ﬁeld. (a) Kinetic and magnetic energy densities
for a Re=116 (laminar), Rm= 70 (subcritical) simulation. (b)
the resulting ﬂow. (c) Kinematic and magnetic energy densi-
ties for an Re=1803 (turbulent), Rm= 108 (subcritical) sim-
ulation. (d) The axisymmetric, time averaged velocity ﬁeld
for the turbulent simulation. The time average is over 30
decorrelation times, or 2.1 τσ. The applied ﬁeld in both cases
is uniform and along the impeller axis with a magnitude of
B0 ∼ 51.3 G.

FIG. 12: (a) The magnetic ﬁeld for a laminar ﬂow described
in Fig. 11. The resulting total magnetic ﬁeld (the sum of
the externally applied ﬁeld and those generated by the cur-
rents in the liquid metal) is shown as a multiple of the applied
magnetic ﬁeld. (b) The time-averaged magnetic ﬁelds for a
turbulent ﬂow [Rm=107 (subcritical), Re=1803] with exter-
nally generated magnetic ﬁeld applied along the symmetry
axis during the time interval 0.3-2.4 τσ. The time-averaged
magnetic ﬁeld is scaled to the applied ﬁeld. The peak inter-
nal poloidal magnetic ﬁeld is 9.3 times larger than the applied
ﬁeld.

FIG. 13: (a) The wavenumber spectrum computed from fre-
quency spectrum of ﬂuctuations from 6τσ of ﬂow (ﬁtted with
−5/3 curve) output at a position (r ∼ 0.75 a, θ ∼ π/2,
the red k
φ=0) with a weak applied magnetic ﬁeld of B0 ∼ 51.3 G, ﬁt-
−11/3 at large k. For
−5/3 at low k and k
ted with the blue k
this simulation, Rm = 130, and Re = 1450 and ﬂuctuations
are assumed to be due to convection of spatial variations in
the ﬁeld. The dispersion relation is ω = k hV i.

ulations are shown in Fig. 11, where the kinetic energy
and magnetic energy are shown for laminar and turbulent
runs.

For the laminar ﬂow, the induced currents and result-
ing magnetic ﬁeld are purely due to the magnetic ﬁeld
interacting with the mean ﬂow, as seen in Fig. 12 (a).
Two main eﬀects are observed. First, induced toroidal
currents compress lines of poloidal magnetic ﬁeld near
the axis of the device. The lines are pulled outward at
the poles and inward at the equator. The net result is
a reduction of the poloidal ﬁeld strength at the equator
in the outer region, and a large ampliﬁcation at the axis
(the peak poloidal ﬁeld is 18 times the applied ﬁeld). Sec-
ond, poloidal currents generate a toroidal magnetic ﬁeld.
These currents are generated by the well-known omega
eﬀect of dynamo theory whereby diﬀerential toroidal ro-
tation of the ﬂuid is able to stretch the ﬁeld into the
toroidal direction [1]. The amplitude of the peak toroidal
ﬁeld is greater than 6 times the applied ﬁeld.

∼

The transition to turbulence is still characterized by
the same Re
420 threshold described above, since the
Stuart number for the applied magnetic ﬁeld is small.
Below this threshold, the nonaxisymmetric part of the
ﬂows is negligible while above this threshold nonaxisym-
metric ﬂuctuations in both B and V can be as large as
40% of the mean values. The geometry of the simula-
tions (axisymmetric drive terms aligned with the applied
magnetic ﬁeld) makes it possible to separate mean, ax-
isymmetric quantities and ﬂuctuating quantities,

B =

B
h

i

+

b and v =

+

v,

V

h

i

(30)

e
where the brackets denote a time average over several re-
B
are axisymmetric
sistive times. In practice,
h

V
h

and

e

i

i

12

FIG. 14: The turbulent and helical ﬂuctuations for the run
described in 13 (b) The average of the squared turbulent ﬂuc-
tuations as a multiple of the peak squared mean ﬂow. (b) The
vi as
time average of the kinetic helicity ﬂuctuations h
a multiple of the volume-averaged helicity of the mean ﬂow.

v · ∇ ×

e

e

for suﬃciently long time averages. Using these deﬁni-
tions, the time-averaged magnetic ﬁelds can be computed
for laminar and turbulent ﬂows, shown in Fig. 12.

Both laminar and turbulent ﬂows demonstrate toroidal
ﬁeld production and expulsion of poloidal ﬂux. Laminar
and turbulent results diﬀer in several important ways,
however, which are attributable to the currents being
driven by MHD ﬂuctuations. First, the toroidal ﬁeld
is greatly reduced in the turbulent run. The induced
toroidal ﬁeld is 6 times the applied ﬁeld strength in the
laminar ﬂow and is only twice the applied ﬁeld in the
turbulent case. Second, the peak poloidal ﬁeld is halved
in the turbulent run, as shown in Fig. 12 (a). Third,
there is a net magnetic dipole moment associated with
the induced ﬁeld which is not present in the laminar case.
These diﬀerences are the partially a result is a diﬀer-
ence between the mean ﬂows in the two cases, but are
mostly a due to a strong inﬂuence of the turbulence on
the current generation. This can be interpreted in the
context of a modiﬁcation to the mean-ﬁeld Ohm’s law,
i.e. turbulence-generated currents are modifying the large
scale, mean magnetic ﬁeld.

k

A turbulent EMF is possible because of the ﬂow ﬂuctu-
ations and the magnetic ﬁeld generated by the passive ad-
vection of the applied magnetic ﬁeld by the Kolmogorov-
like turbulence in the velocity ﬁeld. Fig. 13 shows the
wavenumber spectrum as estimated from the frequency
spectrum of the ﬂuctuations in both V and B at a ﬁxed
point in the simulation using the Taylor hypothesis to
map frequency ﬂuctuations to wavenumber ω
.
i
It is clear that both the velocity ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld
have an inertial range (k−5/3) and a dissipation scale,
although the dissipation scales are at diﬀerent values of
k. The k−5/3 scaling of the velocity ﬁeld (the inertial
range) is expected from the Kolmogorov theory of hydro-
dynamic turbulence. The dissipation scale for the ﬂuid
Re−3/4 = 235 which
turbulence is expected to be at kν ∼
is roughly the position of the viscous cutoﬀ shown in Fig.
13. The limited inertial range at low k, is primarily due
to constraints on long-time averages of the data imposed
by computational speed.

V
h

The k−5/3 scaling of the magnetic ﬁeld corresponds to
the weak-ﬁeld approximation in which the induced mag-
netic ﬂuctuations are due to advection of the mean mag-

∼

FIG. 15: The magnetic ﬁeld (a) and associated currents (c)
generated by the mean-ﬂow EMF hVi × hBi. The peak inter-
nal poloidal magnetic ﬁeld is 11.2 times larger than the ap-
plied ﬁeld. The magnetic ﬁeld (b) and associated currents (d)

b

v ×

D

. (c) The currents
generated by the turbulent EMF
associated with (a), and (d) the currents associated with (b).
The turbulent ﬂow has [Rm = 107 (subcritical), Re = 1803]
and an externally generated magnetic ﬁeld applied along the
symmetry axis. The time average is taken over a phase of
2.1τσ. Magnetic ﬁelds are scaled to the strength of the ap-
plied ﬁeld.

E

e

e

Rm/a.
netic ﬁeld by the mean ﬂow [39] for k < kσ ∼
The k−11/3 power law results from a balance between
the mean magnetic ﬁeld advected by turbulence and the
resistive dissipation of magnetic ﬂuctuations. The dissi-
pation scales are evident from the knee in the wave num-
ber spectra of Fig. 13. The spectrum is constructed from
the power spectrum of the value of Br near the equa-
tor. Consequently, the magnetic ﬁeld gains structure at
smaller scales as Rm increases, down to scale sizes of
ℓσ = 2π/kσ = 4.8 cm at Rm = 130.

The simultaneous ﬂuctuating magnetic and velocity
ﬁelds can potentially drive current in a mean-ﬁeld sense.
The motional EMF can be written as

v

B =

×

V
h

B

+

V
h

i ×

i × h

i

b +

v

B

v

+

b, (31)

× h

i

e

e

×

e

e

where the mean-ﬁelds have been separated from the ﬂuc-
tuating parts. The time averages must be taken over
times long compared to a turbulent decorrelation time
and comparable to the resistive diﬀusion time. Since the
0.05τσ, integrating
turbulent decorrelation time, τC ∼

the induction term over several resistive times yields

v
h

B

=

V

B

+

×

i

h

i × h

i

D

v

e

×

.

E

b

e

(32)

An important question is whether the currents generated
in the simulation are primarily due to the motional EMF
associated with the mean-ﬂow and the mean magnetic
, or if there are also currents driven by
ﬁeld,
i
the turbulent EMF
. This can be investigated
by examining the various terms in Ohm’s Law
e

V
h

i × h

B

×

b

D

E

v

e

E = ηJ

V

B

+

− h

i × h

i

D

v

e

×

b

e

E

(33)

It is clear that in steady-state there can be no inductive
electric ﬁeld in the toroidal direction since the poloidal
ﬂux is constant. Axisymmetry precludes an electrostatic
potential from driving current in the toroidal direction,
and so the toroidal current can only be generated by the
mean-ﬂow and the turbulent EMF. Thus any currents
driven in the toroidal direction contribute to the poloidal
magnetic ﬁeld. Fig. 15 (c) shows the currents driven by
these ﬂuctuations and their corresponding magnetic ﬁeld
(a). The ﬂuctuation-induced magnetic ﬁeld is 3.5 times
larger than the applied ﬁeld and comprises a third of the
total ﬁeld strength.

It has been recently shown that an axisymmetric ﬂow
and and axial magnetic ﬁeld cannot induce a dipole mo-
ment in any simply-connected bounded system [42]. This
is essentially due to the fact that the ﬂow outside the con-
ducting region is zero, while the streamlines of ﬂow per-
pendicular to the magnetic ﬂux are closed and bounded
within the conducting region. Only a turbulent EMF can
create the dipole moment. With a weak applied ﬁeld in
a turbulent ﬂuid, averaging over several eddy turnover
times and averaging along ˆφ eliminates the nonaxisym-
metric component of the current, therefore the only non-
trivial component of the dipole moment is

µZ =

d3xr sin θJφ.

I

(34)

v

b

×

D

E

The toroidal current generated by

from Eq. 32,

e

e

is shown in Fig. 15 (d) and the associate dipole moment
(antiparallel to the external ﬁeld) is clearly seen in Fig.
15 (b). Alternatively, the EMF due to V and B gives
rise to only quadrupole magnetic ﬁeld (in Fig. 15 (a)).
The resulting poloidal ﬁeld reduces the surface magnetic
ﬁeld by 20%. The largest values of the turbulent toroidal
current occur where the omega eﬀect is also large.

The EMF which generates the toroidal current asso-
ciated with the induced dipole moment may very well
resemble the currents driven by the well-known α ef-
fect. The omega eﬀect generates a toroidal magnetic ﬁeld
which would in turn would support a current of the form
Jφ = αBφ. It is impossible to uniquely identify the cur-
rent this way, however. A non-uniform β eﬀect (change
in local resistivity) could equally well explain the results.

13

To do this would require separating the currents asso-
ciated with the helical ﬂuctuations from the non-helical
ﬂuctuations and this has not yet been done. A local anal-
ysis of the turbulent helicity content in Fig. 14 (b) shows
that helical ﬂuctuations exist that might be expected to
drive a current through the α eﬀect.

To study Ohm’s law in the poloidal direction requires a
full treatment of the poloidal electric ﬁeld since an elec-
trostatic potential is not ruled out by symmetry argu-
ments. In MHD, the electrostatic potential is assumed
J = 0.
to instantaneously adjust itself to ensure that ∇
This can only be assured if the divergence of the motional
EMFs is balanced by a spatially varying electric ﬁeld

·

·

·

B

∇

2Φ

−∇

− ∇

E =

2 ˜Φ = ∇

V
h
(cid:0)

b
,
E(cid:1)
(35)
where Φ and ˜Φ are electrostatic potentials due to the
stationary EMF, and turbulent EMF respectively. Thus,
a poloidal current can be associated with the mean-ﬂows
and the turbulent EMF respectively:

i × h

+

×

D

v

e

e

i

Jpol = σ

˜Jpol = σ

Φ +

˜Φ +

(cid:16)−∇

(cid:16)−∇

V
h

D

v

e

B

i × h
b

×

E(cid:17)

e

(cid:17)

ipol
.

(36)

(37)

When analyzing Ohm’s law in the poloidal direction, it
is necessary to ﬁrst compute these potentials, which has
been done for the poloidal currents in Fig. 15.

The simulations indicate there is a strong poloidal cur-
rent, shown in Fig. 15(d), associated with the ﬂuctua-
tions. The current acts to greatly reduce the toroidal
magnetic ﬁeld generated by a comparable laminar ﬂow,
thereby reducing the toroidal ﬁeld in the core. This re-
sembles the diamagnetic γ-eﬀect [43], due to gradients
in the turbulence intensity. The α-eﬀect is the diago-
B. The oﬀ-
nal part of a mean-ﬁeld tensor: J = σα
B.
diagonal terms can also be written so that J = σγ
Figure 14(a) shows the squared velocity ﬂuctuations de-
crease away from the axis of symmetry with the polar
radius, ρ. For isotropic turbulence, the inhomogeneity in
the ﬂuctuations would give rise to a γ-eﬀect of the form
∇v2. The poloidal current due
−
to turbulent diamagnetism would counteract the toroidal
magnetic ﬁeld caused by the omega eﬀect. Comparison
between Fig. 14(a) with Fig.15(b) shows that regions of
steep gradients in the turbulent ﬂuctuations correspond
to regions of strong ﬂuctuation induced poloidal current.

BT with γ

σγ(ρ)

×

∝

×

·

VI. SUMMARY

The role of turbulence in generating current and mod-
erating the growth of magnetic ﬁelds has been studied
for the Madison Dynamo experiment using 3D numer-
ical simulations. A simple forcing term has been used
to model impellors in the experiment; at suﬃcient forc-
ing the ﬂow becomes turbulent. Two regimes were ex-
plored: one with an external applied magnetic ﬁeld and

14

ﬂow subcritical to the dynamo instability and one with
no external ﬁeld and super-critical ﬂow. The role of the
turbulence on current generation and self-excitation is
marked.

∼

The onset conditions for the dynamo instability are
governed not only by Rm but also by the magnetic
1, the transition and sat-
Prandtl number P m. At P m
uration agree with laminar predictions and are considered
laminar dynamos. At lower P m, Rmcrit increases, con-
sistent with a reduction in conductivity due to turbulent
ﬂuctuations. However, at higher Rm the character of the
dynamo changes; its symmetry suggests that turbulence
driven currents are important in the self-excitation pro-
cess. The P m values in the simulations is still orders of
magnitude larger than in liquid-metal experiments (and
for geo and solar dynamos) due to memory and speed
limitations of computers, and so results from experiments
are critical for verifying these results.

To quantify currents driven by ﬂuctuations in the ex-
periment, simulations of subcritical ﬂows have been per-

formed, and the currents driven by the turbulent ﬂuc-
tuations have been observed directly. The main eﬀect
of the turbulence on an externally-applied magnetic ﬁeld
is the reduction of ﬁeld strength compared those com-
puted for laminar ﬂows. The laminar two-vortex ﬂow
compresses the applied poloidal magnetic ﬂux near the
axis of symmetry and through toroidal ﬂow shear cre-
ates a strong toroidal magnetic ﬁeld. Both eﬀects are
reduced in turbulent ﬂows. The mean ﬂow produced at
large Reynolds numbers diﬀers from its laminar counter-
part, which accounts for some of the discrepancy between
the build-up of toroidal ﬁeld and ﬂux compression of the
poloidal ﬁeld observed in the laminar and turbulent ﬂu-
ids. However, it has also been shown that ﬂuctuation
driven EMF drives current which modiﬁes the large scale
magnetic ﬁeld, both generating a dipole moment and ex-
pelling toroidal ﬂux from the interior region.

We would like to thank C. Sovinec, S. Prager, J.
Wright, and E. Zweibel for many useful discussions. This
work was supported by the National Science Foundation.

[1] H. Moﬀatt, Magnetic ﬁeld generation in electrically con-
ducting ﬂuids (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1978).

[2] S. Childress and A. Gilbert, Stretch, Twist, Fold: The

fast dynamo (Springer, Berlin, 1995).

[3] R. Kraichnan and S. Nagarajan, Phys. Fluid 10, 859

[4] U. Frisch, A. Pouquet, J. L´eorat, and A. Mazure, J. Fluid

Mech. 68, 769 (1975).

[5] A. Pouquet and G. Patterson, J. Fluid Mech. 85, 305

[6] A. Alexakis, P. Mininni, and A. Pouquet, On the inverse

cascade of magnetic helicity, 2005.

[7] E. Bullard and H. Gellman, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A

247, 213 (1954).

Politano, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 164502
(2005).

[22] A. Gailitis, A. Lielausis, E. Platacis, S. Dement’ev, A.
Cifersons, G. Gerbeth, T. Gundrum, F. Stefani, M.
Christen, H. H¨anel, and G. Will, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,
4365 (2000).

[23] A. Gailitis, A. Lielausis, E. Platacis, S. Dement’ev, A.
Cifersons, G. Gerbeth, T. Gundrum, F. Stefani, M.
Christen, and G. Will, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3024 (2001).
[24] A. Gailitis, A. Lielausis, E. Platacis, G. Gerbeth, and F.

Stefani, Phys. Plasmas 71, 2838 (2004).

[25] R. Stieglitz and U. M¨uller, Phys. Fluids 13, 561 (2001).
[26] U. M¨uller and R. Stieglitz, Phys. Fluids 16, (2004).
[27] U. M¨uller and R. Stieglitz, J. Fluid Mech. 498, 31 (2004).
[28] A. Reighard and M. Brown, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2794

[8] P. H. Roberts, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A 272, 60

(2001).

[9] D. Gubbins, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 274, 493

physics 9, 165 (2002).

[10] G. Glatzmaier, J. Comp. Phys. 55, 481 (1984).
[11] G. Glatzmaier and P. Roberts, Phys. Earth Plan. Int. 91,

(2000).

(1967).

(1978).

(1972).

(1973).

63 (1995).

(2002).

[29] U. M¨uller and R. Stieglitz, Nonlinear Processes in Geo-

[30] P. Roberts and G. Glatzmaier, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 1081

[31] F. Cattaneo, in Modeling of Stellar Atmospheres, ASP
Conference Series, edited by N. Piskunov, W. Weiss, and
D. Gray (IAU Publications, Paris, 2002).

[32] F. P´etr´elis, M. Bourgoin, L. Mari´e, J. Burguete, A. Chif-
faudel, F. Daviaud, S. Fauve, P. Odier, and J.-F. Pinton,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 174501 (2003).

[33] N. Peﬄey, A. Cawthorne, and D. Lathrop, Phys. Rev. E

61, 5287 (2000).

[34] R. O’Connell, R. Kendrick, M. Nornberg, E. Spence, A.
Bayliss, and C. Forest, in Proceedings of the NATO Ad-
vanced Research Workshop on Dynamo and Dynamics, a
Mathematical Challenge, Carg´ese, France, Vol. 26 of Nato
Science Series, edited by P. Chossat, D. Armbustier, and
I. Oprea (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2001), p. 59.

[35] L. Quartapelle and M. Verri, Computer Physics Commu-

[12] G. Glatzmaier, Ann. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. in press

[13] A. Kageyama and T. Sato, Phys. Plasmas 2, 1421 (1995).
[14] A. Kageyama and T. Sato, Phys. Plasmas 4, 1569 (1997).
[15] W. Kuang and J. Bloxham, Nature 389, 371 (1997).
[16] M. Meneguzzi, U. Frisch, and A. Pouquet, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 47, 1060 (1981).

[17] F. Cattaneo and D. Hughes, Phys. Rev. E 54, 4532

[18] W. M¨uller, D. Biskamp, and R. Grappin, Phys. Rev. E

[19] S. Boldyrev and F. Cattaneo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 144501

67, 066302 (2003).

(1996).

(2004).

[20] A. Schekochihin, S. Cowley,

J. Maron,

and J.

nications 90, 1 (1995).

McWilliams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 054502 (2004).

[21] Y. Ponty, P. Mininni, D. Montgomery, J. Pinton, H.

[36] C. Canuto, M. Hussaini, A. Quarteroni, and T. Zang,
Spectral Methods in Fluid Dynamics (Springer-Verlag,

[38] R. Holme and J. Bloxham, J. Geophys. Res. 101, 2177

and C. B. Forest, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 055002 (2006).

Berlin, 1988), p. 84.

022307 (2006).

[37] M. Dudley and R. James, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 425,

407 (1989).

(1996).

[39] M. D. Nornberg, E. Spence, R. A. Bayliss, R. D.
Kendrick, and C. B. Forest, To be published in Phys.
Plasmas (2006).

[40] P. Terry, D. Baver, and S. Gupta, Phys. Plasmas 13,

[41] T. Cowling, Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 94, 39 (1933).
[42] E. Spence, M. D. Nornberg, C. Jacobson, R. D. Kendrick,

[43] K. Krause and K. R¨adler, Mean–ﬁeld Magnetohydrody-
namics and Dynamo Theory (Pergamon Press, Oxford,
1980).

15

