Aspects of Electron Acoustic Wave Physics in Laser
Backscatter from Plasmas

N J Sircombe1, T D Arber1 and R O Dendy2,1
1 Centre for Fusion, Space and Astrophysics, Department of Physics, University
of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
2 UKAEA Culham Division, Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, Oxfordshire,
OX14 3DB, UK

E-mail: n.j.sircombe@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract. Recent experimental results from the Trident laser conﬁrm the im-
portance of kinetic eﬀects in determining laser reﬂectivities at high intensities.
Examples observed include scattering from low frequency electron acoustic waves
(EAWs), and the ﬁrst few stages of a cascade towards turbulence through the
Langmuir decay instability. Interpretive and predictive computational capability
in this area is assisted by the development of Vlasov codes, which oﬀer high ve-
locity space resolution in high energy regions of particle phase space, and do not
require analytical pre-processing of the fundamental equations. A direct Vlasov
solver, capable of resolving these kinetic processes, is used here to address fun-
damental aspects of the existence and stability of the electron acoustic wave,
together with its collective scattering properties. These simulations are extended
to realistic laser and plasma parameters characteristic of single hot-spot exper-
iments. Results are in qualitative agreement with experiments displaying both
stimulated Raman and stimulated electron acoustic scattering. The amplitude of
simulated EAWs is greater than that observed experimentally, and is accompa-
nied by a higher phase velocity. These minor diﬀerences can be attributed to the
limitations of a one-dimensional collisionless model.

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

EAW physics in LPI

1. Introduction

2

Recent single hot-spot experiments using the Trident laser facility [1, 2] identiﬁed
backscatter which resembles stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) but, importantly,
is due to stimulated scattering from an electron plasma mode whose frequency is
signiﬁcantly below the plasma frequency. This mode was identiﬁed as the electron
acoustic wave (EAW), an undamped electron mode absent from ﬂuid descriptions of
the plasma. In order to survive and propagate, the EAW requires a non-Maxwellian
electron velocity distribution, ﬂattened at the phase velocity of the wave, without
which it would be critically damped. We demonstrate that in laser-plasma conditions
which prohibit SRS, an incident electromagnetic wave can drive an initially critically
damped electron plasma wave to suﬃcient amplitude that it can trap electrons, which
then support it and allow it to propagate undamped, forming an EAW. Alternatively,
ﬂattened distributions supporting an EAW may be created by the trapping of
electrons during the saturation of laser-plasma instabilities, such as conventional
SRS in the case where plasma conditions permit it. The physical and mathematical
characteristics of the EAW are described here, and the mode is then simulated using an
Eulerian Vlasov code to demonstrate its undamped nature. The implications for laser
plasma interactions are examined, including the Langmuir decay instability (LDI) and
stimulated electron acoustic scattering (SEAS).

In particular, we model a scenario where the Langmuir wave excited by stimulated
Raman scattering grows to an amplitude suﬃcient to cause a signiﬁcant local ﬂattening
of the electron velocity distribution function. This local ﬂattening is formally
equivalent, as we shall see, to the creation of a small drifting beam population,
and the EAW can be considered to be an electrostatic mode supported primarily
by this beam population. Stimulated scattering of the incident laser light from the
EAW then becomes possible (SEAS), by analogy with SRS. We show that numerical
implementation of a model combining a kinetic (Vlasov) description of longitudinal
dynamics with a ﬂuid description of transverse dynamics successfully captures the key
physics.

In this paper we explore questions which,

in addition to assisting the
interpretation of present and possible future experiments in laser-plasma interactions,
raise several interesting theoretical considerations. First, the literature on the theory
and modelling of the EAW, which displays paradoxical qualities, is sparse, and for
this reason we oﬀer an ab initio treatment. Second, SEAS provides interesting points
of contact between the phenomenology of energetic particle populations in laser-
plasma interactions and in magnetically conﬁned fusion plasmas. These points of
contact include: the existence of modes supported primarily by the energetic particle
population; the independent role of such modes in coupling the plasma to external
drivers; their role as a channel for energy transfer within the plasma, for example
through a turbulent (or at least nonlinear) cascade; and their diagnostic potential.
See, for example Refs. [3, 4, 5, 6] and references therein. Third, there is the question
of what level of theoretical description (kinetic, ﬂuid, etc.) best captures the key
physics while also enabling eﬀective numerical simulation.

2. The Electron Acoustic Wave

The possible existence of plasma waves at frequencies signiﬁcantly below the electron
plasma frequency was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Stix[7], although it was expected that Landau

EAW physics in LPI

damping in this regime would prohibit their formation. Later work[8, 9, 10, 11]
showed that EAWs can indeed exist, supported by a population of trapped electrons.
Derivation of the plasma dispersion relations, based on a two-ﬂuid treatment, yields
high frequency Langmuir waves and low frequency ion acoustic waves. A more
complete kinetic treatment, based on linearising the Vlasov equation, shows these
modes to be damped. This is due to Landau damping, a purely kinetic eﬀect which
|vp < 0, where f is the particle
(in one dimension for simplicity) requires that ∂vf
|vp = 0
distribution function and vp the phase velocity of the wave. However if ∂vf
then the wave may be undamped and, as we shall see, this is the case for the EAW.
In order to construct a dispersion relation for the EAW let us ﬁrst consider a
Maxwellian distribution with characteristic velocity vT that has a ﬂattened region at
v = vp; we ﬁrst take the limit where the width of the ﬂattened region, in velocity
|vp = 0. The integral in the Landau dispersion relation
space, tends to zero while ∂vf
(1)
dv

ǫ(ω, k) = 1

∞

1
2k2λ2

−

d Z

−∞

v

∂vf (v)
ω/(kvT )

can be written

∞

Z

−∞

v

−

∂vf (v)
ω/(kvT )

dv = P

Z

−∞

v

−

∂vf (v)
ω/(kvT )

dv + iπ∂vf

|vp

By construction, the second term is zero, leaving only the principal value integral.
Evaluating this integral gives the dispersion relation for EAWs in the linear limit:

−

∞

k2λ2

d + 1

−

√2

Daw

ω
k

ω
√2k (cid:19)

= 0

Daw (t) = exp

2

exp(u

)du

(cid:18)

t

Z
0

2

t

−
(cid:0)

(cid:1)
[12]. Equation (3), which can be evaluated
where Eq.(4) is Dawson’s integral
numerically, thus gives the dispersion relation for undamped plasma waves in the limit
of vanishing amplitude. The dispersion curve, labelled ∆v = 0, is shown in Fig. 1,
where there are two distinct branches. The upper branch corresponds to an undamped
form of the Langmuir wave and the lower branch, with ω < ωpe, corresponds to the
electron acoustic wave.

Similar analysis can be carried out for distribution functions that have a ﬁnite

ﬂattened region of width ∆v proportional to the wave amplitude, deﬁned by

where f0 represents a Maxwellian distribution, and ﬂattening at v = vp is provided by

f = f0 + f1

f1(v) = ∂vf0

|vp(v

−

vp) exp

−

(cid:18)

vp)2

(v

−
∆v2

.
(cid:19)

Here the width of the ﬂattened region is related to the EAW amplitude by assuming
that electrons trapped in the wave potential can be considered as simple harmonic
oscillators. Equating the potential and kinetic energies of a trapped electron then gives
the width of the structure in velocity space, which dictates ∆v in Eq.(6). Equivalently
one may calculate the maximum amplitude of an EAW which can be supported by a
given ﬂattened velocity distribution. We ﬁnd, given Eq.(6), that ∆v =
eφ/me where
p
eE0/kme,
φ is the wave potential. Assuming a sinusoidal waveform this gives ∆v =
where E0 is the wave amplitude; we note that k∆v equates to the nonlinear bounce

p

3

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

EAW physics in LPI

4

Figure 1. Dispersion relations calculated from Eq.(2) for undamped plasma
modes in the linear limit (where the width ∆v of the ﬂattened region, in units
of thermal velocity, tends to zero) and for two nonlinear cases (∆v = 0.5, 1.0 in
−1
Eq.(6)). Wavenumbers are normalised to λ
D and frequencies to ωpe. The lower
branch represents the electron acoustic wave, which for low k follows ω = 1.35k.
The upper branch represents an undamped form of the Langmuir mode.

frequency of resonant particles, as deﬁned by Eq.(27) of Ref.[13], for example. With
f1 deﬁned in this way, Eq.(2) can be solved numerically to give a family of dispersion
curves inside the ideal, inﬁnitesimal amplitude case, as shown in Fig. 1. The dispersion
relation of the EAW is thus linked to the wave amplitude.
The EAW appears, at ﬁrst, to be unphysical.

In particular its low frequency
is a characteristic not expected of electron plasma waves supported by distribution
functions arbitrarily close to Maxwellian, in which ion dynamics play no role. Some
physical understanding, for the case of small k, can be gained by considering a locally
ﬂattened distribution to be a superposition of a background Maxwellian population
and a smaller drifting population, as shown in Fig.2.

∼

e2n2/ǫ0me
(cid:0)

vk. This dispersion relation is linear in k for small k . 0.2λ

In the frame of reference of the background population, oscillations at the electron
plasma frequency supported by the drifting population will be Doppler shifted such
1/2
that ω = ω′ + kv where ω′ =
is the electron plasma frequency for this
second population, whose density is n2. In the limit where n2 tends to zero, we recover
−1
D , and implies a
ω
frequency below the plasma frequency. While this interpretation does not give the
1.35vT e, as in
exact value for the phase velocity of the EAW in the linear limit (vp ≈
Fig.1), it is helpful in understanding the origin of the low frequency modes described
by Eq.(3). This description also raises the question of negative energy modes, which
can be supported in similar beam-plasma systems [14].
Indeed, trapped electrons
modes similar to the EAW described here can exist in a negative energy conﬁguration
[15], although not in the regime considered here.

(cid:1)

EAW physics in LPI

5

Figure 2. The distribution (a) which exhibits local ﬂattening at vp,
is
mathematically identical to (b), which comprises a background Maxwellian plus a
smaller drifting electron distribution centred at vp. The Doppler shifted frequency
of plasma oscillations supported by the drifting electron distribution governs the
EAW dispersion relation in the limit of small density.

3. Simulating an EAW

A full treatment of the EAW requires a kinetic description of the plasma. This
section outlines the fully kinetic Vlasov-Poisson model and the development of initial
conditions for, and the simulation of, a travelling EAW. The model used is a
one-dimensional Vlasov-Poisson system of electrons and immobile protons with no
magnetic ﬁeld[16], in a numerical implementation which has been used previously
to explore kinetic phenomena relevant to laser-plasma interactions[17]. This fully
nonlinear self-consistent system is governed by the Vlasov equation for the electron
distribution function fe,

∂fe
∂t

+ v

∂fe
∂x −

e
me

E

∂fe
∂v

= 0

and Poisson’s equation for the electric ﬁeld

∂E
∂x

e
ǫ0 (cid:18)Z

=

ni(cid:19)
As an initial condition, let us consider an unperturbed distribution function ﬂattened
at a phase velocity vp, such that vp = ω/k where ω and k can be chosen from the
EAW branch of the dispersion relation. We specify

fedv

(8)

−

−

fu = f0 + f1

where f0 represents a Maxwellian distribution and f1 is given by Eq.(6). The width of
the ﬂattened region, which relates to the number density of trapped electrons, is given
by ∆v and is proportional to the EAW amplitude (explicitly, ∆v = (eE0/kme)
). In
order to create a travelling wave we perturb the distribution function given in Eq.(9)
by setting fe = fu + fp where

1/2

fp(x, v) =

sin(kx)∂vfu

(10)

−
me(ω

eE0

kv)

−

Equation (10) represents a ﬁnite-amplitude generalisation of a linear perturbation
of the Vlasov equation about fu. Note that Eq.(10) contains no singularities since
∂vfu|vp = 0 and ω is chosen to be real. The Vlasov-Poisson system is initialised
against a neutralising ion background in a periodic box with the distribution function
−1
D , δn = 0.1ne where δn = E0/Lx. In this
fe = fu + fp and ω = 0.6ωpe, k = 0.4λ

(7)

(9)

EAW physics in LPI

6

Figure 3.
(a) Surface plot of the electron distribution function for a large
−1
pe ,
amplitude EAW (δn = 0.1ne, ω = 0.6ωpe, k = 0.4λ
simulated using the Vlasov-Possion code.
(b) Corresponding contour plot.
Contours for fe < 0.135 are drawn with dashed lines to highlight the trapped
electron phase space structure. The v axes are given in units of vT e and the x
axes in units of λD. System boundaries are periodic.

D ) at time t = 103ω

−1

Figure 4. Logarithmic electric ﬁeld amplitude of EAW (δn = 0.1ne, ω =
0.6ωpe, k = 0.4/λD) against time. After an initial transient stage, the EAW
persists as an electron plasma wave with frequency below the plasma frequency,
which is undamped except for limited damping due to numerical diﬀusion.

regime of (ω, k) we would not normally expect an electron plasma wave to propagate,
undamped or otherwise. Figure 3 shows the trapped electron distribution of the
EAW after a thousand inverse plasma angular frequencies. Figure 4 shows that the
amplitude of the EAW is eﬀectively constant: after an initial transient phase, only
weak numerical damping remains. This numerical approach thus demonstrates how
a non-Maxwellian distribution, speciﬁcally the ﬂattening at the phase velocity of the
wave introduced through Eqs.(6) and (9), is necessary for the propagation of an EAW.

EAW physics in LPI

4. Relevance to the Langmuir Decay Instability

A Langmuir wave can decay into a second Langmuir wave of lower wavenumber plus
an ion acoustic wave (IAW). This process can occur repeatedly, forming a Langmuir
cascade [18]. Can the EAW perform the role of IAW to produce a Langmuir cascade
on electron timescales? The conventional Langmuir cascade [19] proceeds for all k
above a critical value kc, determined by the point where the group velocity ∂ω/∂k of
the parent Langmuir wave (L) is equal to that of the IAW:

∂ωIAW

∂ωL
∂k

=

1

kc =

∂k ⇒

3λD r

me
mi

A similar analysis, for small k, can be performed in the case where the IAW is replaced
by an EAW. Approximating the Langmuir dispersion relation by

and the EAW dispersion relation by

ω

ωpe

≈

1 + 3k2λ2
(cid:0)

D/2

(cid:1)

≈

(13)

0.45λ

ω
ωpe (1.35kλD)
−1
D , suggesting that LDI via the EAW might
gives a critical wavenumber kc ≈
be a possibility. However, Eqs.(12) and (13) are no longer valid for such a high
critical wavenumber. The assumption of small k is therefore abandoned and the
gradients calculated numerically to give Fig.5.
It follows from this full treatment,
valid for all k, that a process of Langmuir decay via the electron acoustic branch is
not possible. However this does not rule out all forms of interplay between LDI and
EAWs. The upper branch of the dispersion relation, essentially an undamped form
of the conventional Langmuir mode, may replace one or both of the Langmuir waves
in the LDI without aﬀecting the critical wavenumber. This scenario is left for future
work.

5. Stimulated Electron Acoustic Scattering (SEAS)

The collective scattering of incident laser light from an EAW can be simulated using
a Vlasov-Maxwell model. Here the relativistic Vlasov equation for electrons, in the
presence of transverse ﬁelds

∂fe
∂t

+

px
me

∂fe
∂x −

e
me

(Ex + vyBz)

= 0,

∂fe
∂px

is solved against a stationary ion background, together with Maxwell’s equations

c2 ∂Bz

∂x −

Jy
ǫ0

∂Ey
∂t
∂Bz
∂t

=

=

−

−

∂Ey
∂x

=

∂vy
∂t
Jy =

Ey

e
me
enevy

−

−

in one dimension. Transverse motion of particles is treated as ﬂuid-like, hence

Poisson’s equation (Eq.(8)) is solved as before, to give the longitudinal electric ﬁeld.
The initial conditions are chosen to prohibit conventional stimulated Raman
scattering (SRS), so that density is above quarter critical density, and to satisfy

7

(11)

(12)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

EAW physics in LPI

8

Figure 5. Diﬀerence between the gradients of the dispersion relations of the
Langmuir and Electron Acoustic modes for a range of k. In order for Langmuir
decay to occur, this quantity must be greater than zero. The critical wavenumber
kc is the point at which the gradients are exactly equal. This curve remains
negative for all k, demonstrating that straightforward Langmuir decay via the
EAW, rather than the IAW, is not possible.

wavenumber and frequency matching conditions for SEAS. The system is periodic
in x and undriven, with a TEM wave present throughout the system initially. Vlasov
codes are inherently noiseless, so a low amplitude density perturbation is added to a
Maxwellian velocity distribution to seed the growth of the EAW. The wavenumbers
and frequencies of the incident wave E1 (kE1 = 0.815ωpec−1, ωE1 = 1.29ωpe),
0.108ωpec−1, ωE2 = 1.0058ωpe) and the EAW seed
scattered wave E2 (kE2 =
(kEAW = 0.923ωpec−1, ωEAW = 0.2842ωpe) are chosen to satisfy the matching
conditions for SEAS. The incident wave amplitude is E1 = 0.3e/(ωpecme) and the
3084cω−1
pe . The simulation is conducted on a numerical grid with
system length Lx ≈
8,192 points in x and 512 in p.

−

Figure 6 shows the electron distribution function at late time. The evolution
of trapped electron structures, and resulting ﬂattening of the distribution function,
is visible, corresponding to an EAW. We thus have SRS-like scattering in a plasma
whose density is greater than quarter critical: this scattering is from an EAW, an
electron plasma wave with a frequency below the plasma frequency.

This demonstrates the capability of a Vlasov based kinetic plasma model to
simulate the scattering of incident laser light from non-Maxwellian, trapped particle
distributions. The development of such instabilities in realistic parameter regimes,
and in the presence of an externally driven TEM wave, is now considered.

EAW physics in LPI

9

−1
Figure 6. (a) Surface plot of the electron distribution function at t = 104ω
pe .
Only a small section of the complete system is shown for clarity. Electron trapping
and ﬂattening of the distribution function can be seen: this is the EAW which has
grown from a background density perturbation as a result of SEAS. Axes are given
in relativistic units, c/ωpe for space and mec for momentum. (b) Corresponding
contour plot. Contours below fe = 0.725 are drawn with dashed lines to highlight
the trapped electron holes. The p axes are given in units of mec and the x axes
in units of cω

−1
pe .

6. Kinetic eﬀects in single hot-spot experiments

Non-Maxwellian particle distributions, which require a kinetic treatment of the
plasma, can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the scattering of incident light, destroying the idealised
picture of a three-wave parametric instability by allowing scattering from plasma
oscillations omitted from conventional ﬂuid treatments, such as the EAW. Section
2 summarised the linear theory underpinning the EAW, section 3 demonstrated its
existence in the non-linear regime by way of electrostatic Vlasov-Poisson simulations,
and section 5 conﬁrmed the possibility of stimulated scattering, resembling SRS, from
an EAW in a plasma of greater than quarter critical density. We now utilise an
expanded Vlasov-Maxwell code to investigate SEAS and related kinetic eﬀects in a
regime close to that achieved in single hot-spot experiments [1, 2]. This involves less
than quarter critical densities (hence permitting SRS) and the presence of a continuous
EM driver.

6.1. Numerical Approach

The Vlasov-Maxwell code, described previously, is expanded to allow for the presence
of a continuous, sinusoidal, EM driver at x = 0. This requires that the system no
longer be treated as periodic, instead the boundaries are open. Any charge ﬂowing
past the system boundaries is assumed then to reside on a ‘charged plate’, external
to the system. This external charge is included when calculating the electrostatic
potential in order to avoid the creation of a DC ﬁeld. The electrostatic potential φ is
found using a tridiagonal matrix inversion, and the electrostatic ﬁeld is then given by
∂xφ. This replaces the Fourier method used to solve for Ex in the periodic case, as
described in Ref.[16].

EAW physics in LPI

6.2. Initial conditions
A system of normalised units is adopted in which time is normalised to units of ω−1
pe
and velocities to units of c. Thus space is normalised to units of cω−1
pe , electric ﬁelds
to units of mecωpe/e and magnetic ﬁelds to units of meωpe/e. The laser intensity I0,
electron temperature Te and density ne achieved in single hot-spot experiments [1, 2]
were, approximately:

These imply values for the simulation parameters (incident EM wave amplitude Ey0
and frequency ω0, thermal velocity vT e and density ne) of

I0 = 1.6
×
Te = 350eV
ne = 1.2

×

1016Wcm

−2

1020cm

−3 = 0.03nc

Ey0 = 0.33mecωpe/e
ω0 = 5.7775ωpe
vT e = 0.026c
peǫ0me/e2 = 0.03nc.
ω2
ne = 1

×

10

(19)

(20)
(21)

(22)

(23)
(24)

(25)

To minimise the charge loss from the system, a ‘ﬂat-top’ density proﬁle is used, where
the density of both electrons and the neutralising ion background drops smoothly
pe at the edges of the system. The simulation
from n0 to zero over a distance
domain extends from x = 0 to x = 220cω−1
pe , leaving a ﬂat region at the centre of the
simulation box approximately 140cω−1
0.75mec to p = 0.75mec.
The simulation grid has 16, 384 points in x and 1, 024 points in p. The simulation
runs to an end time of 1200ω−1
pe .

pe in length, from p =

40cω−1

−

≈

6.3. Results

≈

≈

75ω−1

450ω−1

pe . In the initial SRS burst, starting at t

Figures 7 and 8 display windowed Fourier transforms of the electrostatic ﬁeld and of
the back-propagating EM ﬁeld, taken with a Hanning window of size
pe , at
the centre of the system. These show the development of low frequency plasma waves
after t = 600ω−1
pe the EM driver at
ω0 given by Eq.(23) scatters from a Langmuir wave at ω1 = 1.06ωpe, k = 0.27/λD,
vp = 3.93vT e, to produce reﬂected light at a frequency ω2 = 4.72ωpe. This instability
saturates via the trapping of electrons. Figure 9a shows the electron distribution
function during the late stages of the SRS burst, when electrons have been trapped
and accelerated. A beam, similar to that observed in simulations of Raman forward
scatter[20], forms in the electron distribution which is clearly visible in plots (Fig.9b).
The trapping of electrons by the Langmuir waves driven through SRS evolves into
a plateau in the electron distibution. This ﬂattened region extends to low phase
velocities, providing an environment in which low frequency plasma modes are able to
grow and propagate. These low frequency modes are visible in the electrostatic ﬁeld
pe , and correspond to
spectrum after the collapse of the initial SRS burst at t
−1
two distinct electron acoustic waves (eaw1 and eaw2) at ωeaw1 = 0.73ωpe, k = 0.27λ
D ,
vp = 2.73vT e and later ωeaw2 = 0.57ωpe, k = 0.28λ

−1
D , vp = 2.03vT e.

600ω−1

≈

The electron distribution at late times thus deviates signiﬁcantly from a
Maxwellian. The trapping of electrons in the initial SRS burst ﬂattens the distribution
around p = 0.1, allowing the development of low frequency plasma waves, the
EAWs, whose trapped electrons further distort the distribution of particles. By

EAW physics in LPI

11

Figure 7. Windowed Fourier transform of the electrostatic ﬁeld Ex at the centre
of the system. An initial SRS burst at t ≈ 450/ωpe saturates via the trapping
of electrons which distort the initially Maxwellian distribution and provide an
environment in which waves below the plasma frequency can grow and propagate.
The traces at ω ≈ 0.8ωpe and ω ≈ 0.6ωpe, ﬁrst appearing at t ≈ 600/ωpe,
represent EAWs with phase velocities at vp = 2.73vT e and 2.03vT e respectively.

Figure 8. Windowed Fourier transform of the backwards propagating EM ﬁeld
at the centre of the system. The spectrum shows the light scattered by Langmuir
waves (SRS) and EAW waves (SEAS) identiﬁed in the electrostatic spectrum at
the same point in space (see Fig.7).

EAW physics in LPI

12

Figure 9. (a) Surface plot of the electron distribution near the centre of the
system at t = 500/ωpe. Electron trapping, visible here, is responsible for the
saturation of the Raman instability and the creation of the electron beam in the
spatially integrated distribution.
(b) Spatially integrated electron distribution
functions, for t = 0, 500ωpe and 1000ωpe, normalised to the initial Maxwellian
distribution. The trapping of electrons in the Langmuir wave driven by SRS
temporarily creates a beam structure. The collapse of this structure is responsible
in part for the formation of a broad plateau in momentum space at late times,
which supports EAWs.

2.7vT e and vp ≈

the simulation’s end, it has become clear that the plasma, and hence the modes
which it supports, is not well described by linear or ﬂuid approximations. Scattering
observed in single hot-spot experiments was from EAWs with phase velocity v = 1.4vT e
−1
(k = 0.29λ
D , ω = 0.41ωpe), with a backscattered wave amplitude aproximately three
thousand times smaller than that from SRS. The amplitude of EAWs, and of the light
scattered from them, observed in simulations is greater than observed experimentally.
The simulations presented here also produce EAWs with higher phase velocities (i.e.
1.4vT e) than the scattered spectra
vp ≈
from experiments indicate. These two deviations are closely related. As shown earlier,
the dispersion relation for the EAW is dictated in part by the mode amplitude. As the
EAW amplitude is increased, the dispersion relation shifts inwards, as shown in Fig.1,
resulting in a higher phase velocity at ﬁxed wavenumber. Further work is required
to quantify in greater depth this inconsistency between numerical and experimental
results. The simulation runtime, t = 1200ω−1
is equivalent to less than three
pe ,
picoseconds - this serves to highlight how rapid the switch from the ﬂuid to the kinetic
regime may be, at the laser intensities considered here. As laser intensity increases,
the kinetic eﬀects discussed here will become more critical to the understanding of the
associated laser-plasma interaction physics.

2.0vT e compared to vp ≈

7. Conclusions

Experiments studying fundamental laser-plasma interactions in a single hotspot [1, 2]
observed backscattered light from the interaction of the incident beam with two
distinct plasma modes. First, there is scattering from waves having high phase velocity
vp ≈
4.2vT e and a frequency above the plasma frequency ωpe, which was attributed
to SRS: the three-wave parametric instability involving a Langmuir wave. Second,
1.4vT e, whose
there is scattering from waves of considerably lower phase velocity vp ≈
frequency is below ωpe, as low as 0.41ωpe: these low frequency modes were identiﬁed
as the electron acoustic wave. The simulations reported here have attempted to model

EAW physics in LPI

13

the key physics of this scattering using a 1D Vlasov-Maxwell approach. These have
been successful in achieving scattering from both high and low frequency electron
plasma waves, but have not been able to reproduce exactly the phase velocities of the
EAWs and the relative amplitudes of the scattering events.

The electron acoustic mode is a counter-intuitive phenomenon with a sparse
literature: an electron plasma wave which propagates, free from Landau damping,
at frequencies below the plasma frequency. This work has sought to clarify its
characteristics, in terms of dispersion relations and the role of electron trapping,
which also present an interesting application of plasma kinetic theory. Accurate
representation and evolution of the complete phase space is of importance to SEAS,
and is also vital to the saturation of the Raman scattering instability and the
subsequent evolution of the system, as demonstrated here. Our simulations, in a
regime close to those achieved in single hot-spot experiments, highlight the importance
of kinetic eﬀects, and the eﬀect that the evolution of non-Maxwellian particle
distributions may have on the scattering of incident light from an initially homogenous
plasma. Even when the energy ﬂow associated with SEAS is small, SEAS may
have future applications as a diagnostic of the electron velocity distribution, given
theoretical understanding and an appropriate modelling capability.

Recent work[21, 22, 23] has identiﬁed the need for a deeper understanding of laser-
plasma interactions, particularly in the regimes currently being approached by the
next generation of lasers. The accurate noise-free representation and evolution of the
particle distribution functions provided by a Vlasov code make it a valuable additional
tool complementing both ﬂuid and particle-in-cell descriptions. While a full 3D
Vlasov treatment is beyond the limits of current computing power, 1D and 2D Vlasov
systems are tractable and can address many relevant problems. The present study has
indicated some of the distinctive features of the EAW and SEAS physics that arise from
the fact that the EAW can be considered to be primarily supported by an energetic
particle population. Recent numerical work [24] has highlighted the possibility that
‘trains’ of electron holes, with low phase velocities, may be created by the action of a
strong electrostatic driver at a frequency above the plasma frequency. Such structures
could become involved in SEAS, and may be excited by the electrostatic daughter
waves driven by the stimulated Raman and Brillouin instabilities. The interplay
between the electrostatic mechanisms outlined in Ref.[24] and the electromagnetic
scattering mechanism outlined here is a potentially interesting topic for future work.
Finally, some of the conceptual links to the role of energetic particle populations in
magnetically conﬁned plasmas were noted in the introduction, and these too may
repay further investigation.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council (EPSRC).

References

155001

[1] D. S. Montgomery, N. Renard-LeGalloudec, and H. A. Rose et al. 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87

[2] D. S. Montgomery, J. A. Cobble, and J. C. Fern´andez et al. 2002 Phys. Plasmas 9 231
[3] R. O. Dendy, C. N. Lashmore-Davies and M. M. Shoucri 1985 Nucl. Fusion 25 721

14

EAW physics in LPI

Plasmas 10 623

[4] R. G. L. Vann, R. O. Dendy, G. Rowlands, T. D. Arber and N. d’Ambrumenil 2003 Phys.

[5] R. G. L. Vann, R. O. Dendy and M. P. Gryaznevich 2005 Phys. Plasmas 12 032501
[6] N. P. Young, S. E. Sharapov, V. M. Nakariakov and EDFA-JET contributors 2005 Plasma Phys.

Control. Fusion 48 295

[7] T. H. Stix 1962 The Theory of Plasma Waves. McGraw-Hill
[8] J. P. Holloway and J. J. Dorning 1989 Phys. Lett. A 138 279
[9] J. P. Holloway and J. J. Dorning 1991 Phys. Rev. A 44 3856

[10] H. Schamel 1986 Physics Reports 140 162
[11] H. Schamel 2000 Phys. Plasmas 7 4831
[12] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions 1972 Dover p. 298
[13] H. L. Berk, B. N. Breizman, and M. Pekker 1995 Physics of Plasmas 2 3007
[14] R. O. Dendy, Plasma Dynamics 1990 Oxford University Press p. 113
[15] J. M. Grißmeier, A. Luque, and H. Schamel 2002 Phys. Plasmas 9 3816
[16] T. D. Arber and R. G. L. Vann 2002 J. Comp. Phys. 180 339
[17] N. J. Sircombe, T. D. Arber, and R. O. Dendy 2005 Phys. Plasmas 12 012303
[18] S. Depierreux, J. Fuchs, C. Labaune, D. Pesme, V. T. Tikhonchuk, and H. A. Baldis 2000 Phys.

[19] S. G. Thornhill and D. ter Haar 1978 Phys. Reports 2 43
[20] A. Ghizzo, P. Bertrand, M. M. Shoucri, T. W. Johnston, E. Fijalkow, and M. R. Feix 1990 J.

[21] D. Pesme, S. Huller, and J. Myatt et al. 2002 Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 44 B53
[22] C. Labaune, H. Bandulet, and S. Depierreux et al. 2004 Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion

Rev. Lett. 84 2869

Comp. Phys. 90 431

46 B301

[23] S. H. Glenzer, P. Arnold, and G. Bardsley et al. 2004 Nucl. Fusion 44 S185
[24] F. Califano and M. Lontano 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 245002

