A Proposed Experiment to Study Relaxation Formation of a

Spherical Tokamak with a Plasma Center Column

Physics Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545

Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545

S. C. Hsu∗

X. Z. Tang†

(Dated: December 23, 2013)

Abstract

A spherical tokamak (ST) with a plasma center column (PCC) can be formed via driven magnetic

relaxation of a screw pinch plasma. An ST-PCC could in principle eliminate many problems

associated with a material center column, a key weakness of the ST reactor concept. This work

summarizes the design space for an ST-PCC in terms of ﬂux ampliﬁcation, aspect ratio, and

elongation, based on the zero-β Taylor-relaxed analysis of Tang & Boozer [Phys. Plasmas 13,

042514 (2006)]. The paper will discuss (1) equilibrium and stability properties of the ST-PCC,

(2) issues for an engineering design, and (3) key diﬀerences between the proposed ST-PCC and the

ongoing Proto-Sphera eﬀort in Italy.

PACS numbers:

6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The spherical tokamak (ST) is a promising magnetic conﬁnement conﬁguration, oﬀer-

ing higher maximum plasma β than conventional tokamaks.1 However, the low aspect ratio

requirement results in severe space-constraint for the material center column, which in a con-

ventional ST reactor must house the inboard toroidal ﬁeld (TF) coils, the Ohmic solenoid,

and shielding against fusion neutrons. The small center post probably eliminates the possi-

blity of an inboard tritium-breeding blanket, and it results in very high Ohmic dissipation of

the center column TF current.2 An ST with a current-carrying plasma center column (PCC)

could in principle overcome many of the weaknesses of a material center column. The PCC

used in combination with coaxial helicity injection3 (CHI) could serve four purposes: (1) ST

formation via driven relaxation of a screw pinch plasma, (2) carry the inboard TF coil cur-

rent, (3) help sustain the ST in steady-state in combination with rf and neutral beams, and

(4) eliminate the need for neutron shielding since there is no material center column to suﬀer

radiation damage. For a reactor, power dissipation still remains an issue for a plasma center

column, but the other advantages conferred are all very compelling.

An ST-PCC can be formed via driven magnetic relaxation of a screw pinch plasma. The

relaxation formation scheme, to be described in more detail in Sec. II, is largely inspired

from spheromak research4,5 and in particular a recent spheromak formation experiment that

showed how a current-driven kink instability of a plasma column leads to relaxation and

poloidal ﬂux ampliﬁcation.6 This approach also takes advantage of the substantial body

of work on CHI for ST startup7,8 and sustainment.7 Using Taylor-relaxed9 plasmas as a

base-line example, a recent theoretical and numerical study10 by Tang & Boozer clariﬁed

the design space of an ST-PCC in terms of ﬂux ampliﬁcation, aspect ratio, elongation, and

vacuum bias ﬂux. The proposed ST-PCC is based on the initial study by Tang & Boozer.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II will describe the conceptual basis for

forming an ST-PCC via driven magnetic relaxation of a screw pinch plasma. Section III

will summarize the design space for an ST-PCC and discuss the equilibrium and stability

properties. Section IV will discuss the primary engineering issues for designing a concept

exploration (CE) class ST-PCC experiment, and Sec. V will discuss key diﬀerences between

the proposed ST-PCC and the Italian Proto-Sphera project,11,12 the ﬁrst and only other

eﬀort in the world exploring the plasma center column concept for an ST. Section VI

2

provides a summary.

II. ST-PCC FORMATION VIA DRIVEN MAGNETIC RELAXATION

A large body of work exists with regards to the formation of compact toroid plasmas,

such as spheromaks,4,5 via driven relaxation. By driving current on open bias ﬁeld lines, a

λ (ratio of plasma source current to ﬂux) gradient is established, which drives instabilities

and causes the plasma to relax, i.e. ﬂatten the spatial proﬁle of normalized current density

(jk/B).13 Thus, by driving current on edge open ﬁeld lines, relaxation will “transport” the
edge current into the closed-ﬂux core region, in eﬀect resulting in current drive.14 In the

simplest case, a plasma column is driven kink unstable and undergoes global relaxation,

resulting in the formation of a spheromak.6,15 The tendency of plasmas to relax due to

nonlinear processes is what makes forming spheromaks easy and indeed almost unavoidable.

Driven relaxation formation of spheromaks inspires and provides the foundation and a large

body of empirical results for establishing the ST-PCC concept, which will rely on the same

concept of driving a plasma column unstable and allowing it to relax. However, in the case

of the proposed ST-PCC, an additional CHI system will provide a new degree of freedom

for driving current-driven instabilities needed for global relaxation, and to actively modify

the q proﬁle of the relaxing PCC to “coax” it into the ST state. After ST-PCC formation,

the PCC current and ﬂux would be adjusted to provide the ST equilibrium toroidal ﬁeld.

A subtle diﬀerence between the ﬂux-core spheromak and ST-PCC is the ratio between

the center column ﬂux χc that intercepts the electrodes and the closed poloidal ﬂux χp

in the axisymmetric n = 0 magnetic ﬁeld after relaxation. For a conventional gun-driven

spheromak experiment, χc/χp is small so that the toroidal ﬁeld from the plasma current

passing through the center column is small compared with the magnetic ﬁeld generated by

the toroidal plasma current ﬂowing inside the separatrix. By increasing χc/χp, one has the

freedom to manipulate the toroidal ﬁeld in comparison with the poloidal ﬁeld, and thus the

q proﬁle, in the relaxed plasma inside the separatrix. The chamber geometry (elongation)

has a strong eﬀect on q and provides perhaps the most eﬀective “knob” for manipulating

the q proﬁle. As will be described below, there is a parameter regime where an ST q proﬁle

can be obtained with a PCC alone, even in the limit of complete Taylor relaxation,9 i.e., a

spatially uniform λ proﬁle. The proposed ST-PCC formation scheme will be based on this

3

unusual relaxation solution branch.

Controlled decay of spheromaks has resulted in several-hundred eV electrons,16,17 imply-

ing the existence of nested closed magnetic ﬂux surfaces. This fact provides promise that

a CE-class experiment will be able to obtain Te ≈ 100–200 eV ST-PCC plasmas with good

particle conﬁnement. This target plasma can then be sustained in follow-on research us-

ing other non-inductive current drive and heating schemes, such as rf and neutral beam

injection.

The sustainment phase of an ST-PCC requires consideration of additional physics issues.

First, the relaxed plasma after the initial formation stage typically has low β and a rather ﬂat

jk/B proﬁle, both of which reduce the energy drive for MHD instabilities. The sustainment

aims to ramp up the plasma pressure towards a conventional high-β equilibrium. The eﬀect

of a PCC (instead of a material center column) on the stability of external MHD modes

must be understood. Second, an electrostatic bias must be present thoughout the discharge

to maintain the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld in an ST-PCC plasma. How the externally imposed

electric ﬁeld aﬀects transport properties via E ×B ﬂow18,19 must also be understood in order

to assess the attractiveness of the concept.

III. ST-PCC DESIGN SPACE

A recent theoretical and numerical study10 by Tang & Boozer based on zero-β magneti-

cally relaxed (spatially uniform λ) equilibria has clariﬁed the design space for an ST-PCC.

Although a real ST-PCC will have ﬁnite β and non-uniform λ proﬁles, a study based on

Taylor-relaxed plasmas was used as a base-line example to provide insight into the equi-

librium properties of a driven relaxation experiment in a simply-connected chamber. (Of

course, ﬁnite β equilibrium and stability studies and nonlinear MHD simulations must be

performed to justify and support the design of a real experiment.) The zero-β study showed

that two essential factors inﬂuence the ST-PCC design space: (1) ﬂux ampliﬁcation is di-

rectly related to the aspect ratio (ratio of major to minor radius) and (2) plasma elongation

ε (ratio of chamber height to radius) has a large aﬀect and vacuum bias ﬂux χ0 a smaller

subtle eﬀect on the q proﬁle.

Tang & Boozer numerically solved the force-free equation ∇ × B = λB for a ﬁnite length

cylinder and χ0 on the boundary. They showed that relaxed ST-PCC equilibria exist in a

4

particular parameter regime described below. They investigated the relationship between

aspect ratio and ﬂux ampliﬁcation and found that the aspect ratio scales approximately

inversely proportional to the ﬂux ampliﬁcation factor, independent of ε (see Fig. 3 of Ref. 10).

An ST-relevant aspect ratio of 1.5–2 is achieved with a ﬂux ampliﬁcation factor of 1–2.5,

which is routinely achieved in laboratory helicity injection experiments. A smaller aspect

ratio down to 1.25 would require a ﬂux ampliﬁcation factor of 9, which may be achievable

but probably not a good choice for a conservative ST-PCC experimental design. They also

investigated the q proﬁle as a function of ε and showed that qedge scales approximately

linearly with ε from ε ≈ 0.5–3 (see Fig. 4 of Ref. 10). To achieve q > 1 throughout the

interior of the separatrix, an ε = 2–3 is required (see Fig. 6 of Ref. 10).

Thus, high ε and high ﬂux ampliﬁcation are desirable for forming an ST-PCC equilibrium

in order to achieve q > 1 and low aspect ratio, respectively, as required for an ST. ST-

PCC stability, however, constrains both ε and ﬂux ampliﬁcation. These constraints can be

understood through the properties of the force-free (Chandrasekhar-Kendall20) eigenmode

solutions of the discharge chamber, which entirely determines the stability for a relaxed
plasma. For ε . 1.67, the stability of the lowest energy axisymmetric relaxed state λ(n=0)

1

is guaranteed because it is the overall lowest energy state of the system. For ε & 1.67, the
lowest energy helical eigenmode λ(n=1)
1
means that if one forms an axisymmetric relaxed state for ε > 1.67 at λ > λ(n=1)

becomes a lower energy state than λ(n=0)

, the plasma

.21,22 This

1

1

will be unstable. Thus, for ε ≈ 2–3 as required for q > 1, the ST-PCC λ must be less than
λ(n=1)
1

for stability. The latter limits ﬂux ampliﬁcation which scales as [(λ(n=0)

)2 − λ2]−1.10 It

1

should be noted that the vacuum bias ﬂux can be adjusted to optimize the ﬂux ampliﬁcation

at a given λ.10

Table I summarizes the design space for an ST-PCC. For a much more detailed discussion

of relaxed ST-PCC equilibria and stability, the reader is referred to Ref. 10. Further studies

are necessary to characterize the equilibrium and assess the stability of ﬁnite-β driven ST-

PCC’s, and for designing an optimized experiment.

IV. ENGINEERING DESIGN ISSUES

An experiment to form an ST-PCC via driven relaxation of a screw pinch plasma would

beneﬁt from having two sets of biased electrodes with a cylindrical boundary. A primary

5

consideration is to have the versatility to drive a λPCC that is diﬀerent from the relaxed λST.

This provides freedom to drive relaxation by exciting either a center column kink or an open

ﬂux kink on the CHI bias ﬂux. A further beneﬁt of a separate CHI system is the natural

formation of a single null plasma where edge current can be tuned independently of the center

column current. This would become especially important for ST-PCC sustainment. Figure 1

shows a conceptual drawing for a CE ST-PCC experiment, including all the important sub-

systems. Below, each sub-system will be discussed separately along with their primary

issues.

Vacuum chamber and boundary: Shape and geometry (ε ≈ 2–3) are chosen to optimize

coupling between PCC and ST during driven relaxation formation, as well as equilibrium

and stability of the formed ST-PCC. Wall thickness must allow bias ﬂux penetration while

acting as a ﬂux-conserver for the plasma. The boundary requires electrical breaks that will

allow the application of bias voltages for driving PCC and CHI current. Toroidal gaps in

the boundary on either end of the geometric axis of the device deﬁne the electrical breaks

for the PCC cathode and anode. The gaps also allow voltage to be applied between the

cathode and the outer boundary, as well as between the anode and the outer boundary.

Together with the CHI ﬂux, this injects magnetic helicity into the system. The shape of the

ﬂux conserving boundary would be chosen to optimize equilibrium and stability properties

of the ST-PCC, and to facilitate engineering design of the couplings between PF, TF, and

PCC power systems.

Screw pinch PCC: The PCC would be created between electrodes located at either end

of the geometric axis of the device. Via current ramp-up, the PCC would undergo driven

relaxation in concert with the CHI system to form an ST and subsequently carry equilib-

rium TF coil current. The power system for this plasma source would be a high voltage

capacitor bank to create the PCC and to sustain the PCC current below pinch instability

thresholds for generating steady TF after relaxation formation. A CE experiment would

likely need to last only several milliseconds, which is enough time for a plasma of a few tens

of eV to globally relax and settle into the ST-PCC equilibrium. An arc discharge between

tungsten sprayed copper electrodes would be used, similar to spheromak and other helicity

injection experiments. The current (several hundred kA) and power (tens of MW) would be

comparable to SSPX.23 In a CE experiment, the power dissipation of the center column is

probably not an issue. However, this is a key issue when considering how an ST-PCC would

6

scale to a reactor. Even if the PCC could be maintained at an elevated temperature of a

few hundred eV, the power dissipation in the PCC for a 1 GW reactor would probably be

on the order of 100 MW. This issue needs careful consideration and study for the reactor

viability of the ST-PCC concept.

TF coils: A key engineering issue is coupling the outboard TF coil windings to the PCC,

which closes the TF coil circuit. In conventional tokamaks and ST’s, the TF coil is a single

solenoidal winding with n turns. With a PCC, the TF coil system would actually be n turns

each connected in parallel, with the PCC being shared by every parallel turn. For a CE

experiment, the power source for the TF coils would be the same PCC capacitor bank.

CHI system: The CHI system applies voltage across the inner and outer boundaries, which

is linked by a bias magnetic ﬂux. The CHI bias ﬂux would be created by a combination of

the CHI and PCC bias ﬂux coils. The CHI current is expected to be on the order of several

tens of kA driven at a few hundred Volts.

PCC and CHI bias ﬂux coils: PF coil sets are needed to provide the poloidal ﬂuxes needed

to form and sustain an ST-PCC: (1) axial ﬂux for the PCC and (2) bias ﬂux linking the

inner and outer boundaries for CHI. The two ﬂuxes would need independent timing and

control and thus would require independent power sources. A CE experiment would likely

require several to several tens of mWb for each system.

Diagnostics: The primary diagnostics needed for a CE experiment are arrays of magnetic

probes to characterize ST-PCC formation and equilibria, as well as voltage and current

diagnostics to characterize the PCC and CHI sources. Magnetic (Mirnov) coils would be

placed at diﬀerent toroidal locations on the vacuum chamber wall to monitor toroidal mode

activity. Fast camera imaging of global plasma light emission would provide information

on plasma evolution and guide the placement of quantitative probe diagnostics. Simple

electrostatic probes, such as Langmuir probes to measure ne and Te and Mach probes to

measure ion ﬂow, would also be used. In later stages of a CE experimental program, when

higher temperatures in the hundreds of eV range are expected, advanced diagnostics would

be proposed and implemented, e.g., Thomson scattering to measure Te and interferometry

to measure ne.

7

V. COMPARISON WITH PROTO-SPHERA

The Italian Proto-Sphera project11,12 is under construction and is the ﬁrst project to

study the ST-PCC concept. However, there are several key diﬀerences between the present

proposed ST-PCC and Proto-Sphera. It would be of interest to explore the relative merits

of the two approaches with complementary experimental programs.

Proto-Sphera will use an emissive electrode system to form the PCC. This system is

potentially capable of high power handling, relevant for eventual use on proof-of-principle

and proof-of-performance class experiments. In contrast, the proposed ST-PCC would use

a much simpler arc discharge system at short pulse length to test the relaxation formation

scheme.

The proposed ST-PCC formation scheme and target equilibrium are fundamentally dif-

ferent from those of Proto-Sphera, which proposes to use induction via a quick swing of the

poloidal ﬁeld coil current followed by compression of the plasma to raise the q proﬁle.11 The

Proto-Sphera equilibrium was originally motivated by higher order Chandrasekhar-Kendall

modes, and the reference Proto-Sphera equilibrium removes two higher order lobes while

retaining a high ε center lobe and PCC.24 In contrast, the proposed ST-PCC is based on

relaxed states similar to a ﬂux-core spheromak, and would be formed via driven relaxation

(likely kink instability) of the PCC and possibly CHI ﬂux.

The ﬁnal key diﬀerence is the initial sustainment method after formation. Proto-Sphera

will use helicity injection via the PCC itself, while the proposed ST-PCC uses an independent

CHI system which would also play an integral role in the formation phase.

VI. SUMMARY

A plasma center column would eliminate several key weaknesses of the ST reactor con-

cept, although PCC power dissipation in a reactor scale experiment could remain a concern

requiring further study. An ST-PCC can be formed via driven magnetic relaxation of a

screw pinch plasma. The idea of driving a plasma column kink unstable and allowing the

ensuing global relaxation to provide the ﬁnal desired ST-PCC equilibrium is inspired from

spheromak research and helicity injection via magnetized coaxial guns. An initial theo-

retical and numerical study by Tang & Boozer10 has clariﬁed the design space for zero-β

8

Taylor-relaxed ST-PCC’s. They showed that for high elongation of 2–3 and modest ﬂux am-

pliﬁcation factors of 1–2.5, stable relaxed ST-PCC equilibria with q > 1 and aspect ratios

of 1.5–2 exist. These results are promising and motivate further studies of ﬁnite-β ST-PCC

equilibrium and stability leading to an optimized experimental design. A representative ST-

PCC experiment would feature two sets of biased electrodes. One set would form the PCC

and drive it unstable for relaxation. The other set would be a CHI system, which would

provide additional freedoms in relaxation formation and raising the q proﬁle after the initial

relaxation. A concept exploration ST-PCC experiment would be comparable to SSPX in

both its hardware and plasma parameters, although the initial research emphasis would be

on the relaxation formation scheme.

An ST-PCC concept exploration experiment is needed for detailed studies of the basic

plasma physics issues for relaxation formation and non-inductive sustainment, as well as

many of the engineering issues which will ultimately determine the reactor potential of the

ST-PCC concept.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Mr. Mark Kostora for the conceptual design drawing. This work was

supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Oﬃce of Fusion Energy Sciences under con-

tract no. W-7405-ENG-36, the Los Alamos Laboratory Directed Research and Development

(LDRD) Program, and a Los Alamos Frederick Reines Fellowship (SCH).

∗ Electronic address: scotthsu@lanl.gov

† Electronic address: xtang@lanl.gov

1 Y.-K. M. Peng and D. J. Strickler, Nucl. Fusion 26, 769 (1986).

2 R. L. Miller and ARIES Team, Fus. Eng. Design 65, 199 (2003).

3 T. R. Jarboe, Fusion Tech. 15, 7 (1989).

4 T. R. Jarboe, Plasma Phys. Control. Fus. 36, 945 (1994).

5 P. M. Bellan, Spheromaks (Imperial College Press, London, 2000).

6 S. C. Hsu and P. M. Bellan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 215002 (2003).

9

7 B. A. Nelson, T. R. Jarboe, D. J. Orvis, L. A. McCullough, J. Xie, C. Zhang, and L. Zhou,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 3666 (1994).

8 R. Raman, T. R. Jarboe, B. A. Nelson, V. A. Izzo, R. G. O’Neill, A. J. Redd, and R. J. Smith,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 075005 (2003).

9 J. B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 741 (1986).

10 X. Z. Tang and A. H. Boozer, Phys. Plasmas 13, 042514 (2006).

11 F. Alladio, P. Costa, A. Mancuso, P. Micozzi, and S. Papastergiou, ”The Multi-Pinch experiment

as ﬁrst step towards PROTO-SPHERA,” submitted to Nucl. Fus. (2005).

12 S. Papastergiou, F. Alladio, A. Mancuso, and P. Micozzi, Fus. Eng. Design 74, 179 (2005).

13 A. H. Boozer, J. Plasma Phys. 35, 133 (1986).

14 X. Z. Tang and A. H. Boozer, Phys. Plasmas 11, 2679 (2004).

15 C. R. Sovinec, J. M. Finn, and D. del Castillo-Negrete, Phys. Plasmas 8, 475 (2001).

16 T. R. Jarboe, F. J. Wysocki, J. C. Fernandez, I. Henins, and G. J. Marklin, Phys. Fluids B 2,

1342 (1990).

17 H. S. McLean, R. D. Wood, B. I. Cohen, D. N. Hill, J. M. Moller, C. Romero-Talamas, and

S. Woodruﬀ, Phys. Plasmas 13, 056105 (2006).

18 X. Z. Tang and A. H. Boozer, Phys. Plasmas 10, 3661 (2003).

19 X. Z. Tang and A. H. Boozer, Phys. Plasmas 11, 171 (2004).

20 S. Chandrasekhar and P. C. Kendall, Astrophys. J. 126, 457 (1957).

21 J. M. Finn, W. M. Manheimer, and E. Ott, Phys. Fluids 24, 1336 (1981).

22 A. Bondeson, G. Marklin, Z. G. An, H. H. Chen, Y. C. Lee, and C. S. Liu, Phys. Fluids 24,

23 D. N. Hill, R. D. Wood, R. Bulmer, H. S. McLean, D. Ryutov, B. W. Stallard, and S. Woodruﬀ,

1682 (1981).

J. Nucl. Mat. 313-316, 941 (2003).

24 F. Rogier, G. Bracco, A. Mancuso, P. Micozzi, and F. Alladio, AIP Conf. Proc. 669, 557 (2003).

10

ST-PCC requirement

Impact on design (target)

hqiseparatrix > 1

ε > 2 (2–3)

aspect ratio 1.5–2

determined by ﬂux ampliﬁcation (1–2.5)

stability

eﬃciency

lower ε, lower ﬂux ampliﬁcation

higher ﬂux ampliﬁcation

TABLE I: Summary of ST-PCC design space, showing some competing factors between equilibrium

and stability. A reference design would have ε ≈ 2–3 and a modest ﬂux ampliﬁcation factor of

1–2.5.

11

FIG. 1: Conceptual drawing of proposed ST-PCC experiment, identifying key components: ﬂux-

conserving boundary, screw pinch (SP) and TF circuit and power supply, SP magnets for SP axial

ﬂux, CHI magnet for CHI vacuum bias ﬂux, CHI power supply, toroidal insulating gaps, and SP

cathode/anode inside the toroidal gaps.

12

