6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collisionless Magnetic Field Reconnection From First Principles:
What It Can and Cannot Do

F. S. Mozer
Physics Department and Space Sciences Laboratory,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
fmozer@ssl.berkeley.edu

Abstract. The underlying concepts of collisionless mag-
netic ﬁeld reconnection in the vicinity of the diﬀusion
regions are developed qualitatively from ﬁrst principles.
One conclusion of this analysis is that energetic ions and
electrons observed in the terrestrial magnetosphere or
from the sun are not accelerated to the observed energies
in the diﬀusion regions.

In plasmas from the laboratory to the terrestrial
magnetosphere, the sun, and accretion disks in astro-
physics, it is observed that magnetic ﬁeld geometries
change and particles are accelerated on time scales
that are short compared to magnetic ﬁeld diﬀusion
times due to classical Coulomb collisions. These ob-
servations require physical processes diﬀerent from
Coulomb resistivity. One such process is collision-
less magnetic ﬁeld reconnection, which is discussed in
this paper by deﬁning boundary conditions in a re-
gion of space and applying ﬁrst principles inside these
boundaries to qualitatively deduce the plasma ﬂow,
energy ﬂow and the ﬁelds associated with reconnec-
tion. The goals of this approach are to remove some
of the mystery and confusion that may surround ﬁeld
line motion and magnetic ﬁeld reconnection.

Magnetic ﬁeld reconnection is deﬁned as the pro-
cess that occurs when magnetized plasmas with dif-
ferent magnetic ﬁeld orientations ﬂow together to al-
It
ter the connectivity of the magnetic ﬁeld lines.
occurs on spatial scales of the electron and ion skin
depths (c/ωpe and c/ωpi, where ωpe and ωpi are the
ion and electron plasma frequencies, respectively),

(Vasyliunas, 1975) after which accelerated plasma ex-
pands into a larger region where it may be further
modiﬁed or accelerated by processes that are beyond
the scope of the present discussion.

We begin with the physical picture of Fig. 1, which
depicts a region a few ion skin depths (∼100 km at
the sub-solar magnetopause) in size. If the ﬁgure de-
scribes the sub-solar region, the vertical direction in
the ﬁgure is perpendicular to the plane of the eclip-
tic and the left side of the ﬁgure is in the sunward
direction. The plasma that ﬁlls the ﬁgure is a two
component neutral ﬂuid that is bounded by magnetic
ﬁeld lines that are up on the right side and down on
the left side of the ﬁgure, and for which, in each case,
there is an electric ﬁeld, Eo, out of the plane of the
ﬁgure. Thus, the plasma on both sides of the ﬁgure
Eo × B/B2 drifts towards the center of the ﬁgure.
The two oppositely directed magnetic ﬁelds may be
unequal in magnitude or a magnetic ﬁeld component,
called the guide ﬁeld, may exist out of the plane of
Fig. 1. These features add complexity to the geome-
try without signiﬁcantly modifying the basic physical
processes that occur inside a few ion skin depths, so
the guide ﬁeld is assumed to be zero and the op-
positely directed magnetic ﬁelds are assumed to be
equal in magnitude. Fig. 1 describes the boundary
conditions for the processes that occur in the central
region of the ﬁgure and that will be deduced in the
following discussion.

The physics of reconnection depends on the elec-
tric ﬁeld component out of the plane of Fig. 1 at the

1

of electromagnetic energy into particle energy, which
is what magnetic ﬁeld reconnection is all about.

Where does the energy associated with this
positive j·E originate? To answer this question, an
analogy will be made with the electric circuit of Fig.
2, consisting of a battery and a resistor. From fresh-
man physics, the electromagnetic energy conversion
rate is VI where V is the battery voltage and I is the
current. A second method for computing the energy
conversion is to integrate j·E over the resistor volume.
With j integrated over πr2, the cross-sectional area of
the resistor, to give I and E integrated over the length
of the resistor to become the potential drop V, the
energy conversion rate is again VI. A third method is
to consider the integral of the Poynting ﬂux through
the surface that surrounds the resistor. Because E
is everywhere parallel to the axis of the cylinder and
B everywhere circles the resistor, the Poynting ﬂux,
E × B/µo, is everywhere inward and its integrated
magnitude is Eh(2πrB)/µo). Because Eh = V and
2πrB/µo = I, the result is again VI. A fourth way
to compute the power dissipation is to utilize a later
proof in this paper to say that magnetic ﬁeld lines
carry energy density B2/µo into the resistor at the
Eo × B/B2 velocity, where the magnetic ﬁeld is anni-
hilated. This ﬁeld line motion inserts (B2/µo)(E/B)
or EB/µo units of energy per unit area per second,
which is the same power input as given by the Poynt-
ing ﬂux, so the answer is again VI.

If the EMF (in the case of Fig. 2, a battery) is
constant, the energy conversion rate is constant.
This is analogous to the case of steady state recon-
nection at the dayside magnetopause, where the
energy is continuously supplied by the solar wind as
it slows down. In both cases, the partial derivatives
of all ﬁelds with respect to time are zero, so it is
confusing to think of this process as magnetic ﬁeld
annihilation. This is just one example of problems
arising from misinterpretation of the concept of
moving magnetic ﬁeld lines.

Where does the converted electromagnetic
energy go? It may generate waves or heat and/or
accelerate the plasma. Assuming that all the avail-
able energy goes into particle acceleration, the par-

Figure 1

center of the ﬁgure, which is sometimes called the
tangential electric ﬁeld. If it is zero, the two plasmas
ﬂow around each other into or out of the plane of
the ﬁgure because there is no Eo × B/B2 ﬂow in the
plane of the ﬁgure in this central region. This would
be the case for a closed terrestrial magnetosphere
in which the solar wind plasma ﬂows around the
obstacle much as water ﬂows around a rock in a
stream. On the other hand, if the tangential electric
ﬁeld is non-zero, the plasmas continue ﬂowing to-
wards each other into the central region of the ﬁgure
and magnetic ﬁeld reconnection occurs as discussed
below. The main eﬀort in theoretical reconnection
research has been the search for a large value of the
tangential electric ﬁeld in the central region (Parker,
1957, 1963; Sonnerup et al., 1984; Birn et al., 2001;
Shay et al., 2001). Because this research is beyond
the scope of this article,
it is assumed that the
tangential electric ﬁeld in the central region is equal
to Eo.

Why is there so much theoretical interest
in making Eo large? Consider the current out
of the plane in the central region of Fig. 1, which
is required by the curl of the magnetic ﬁeld. A
non-zero electric ﬁeld results in a positive value of
j · E in the central region of the ﬁgure and conversion

2

because of the mass ratio so electrons are much
less accelerated than ions in the diﬀusion region.

• Although the energies of particles leaving the
diﬀusion region are less than those observed in
space, such particles may be accelerated fur-
ther after leaving the diﬀusion regions by uti-
lizing the particle energy resulting from recon-
nection (Birn and Hesse, 2005) or by using ad-
ditional energy sources and mechanisms, such as
are available by surﬁng on plasma waves, parti-
cles following meandering orbits, etc.

electromagnetic

What happens to the plasma that is ac-
celerated by the
energy
conversion? It must leave the central region by ei-
ther ﬂowing up/down or into/out of the plane of Fig.
1. A convenient simpliﬁcation results from assuming
that reconnection is a two-dimensional process, from
which it follows that the plasma exits the central
region of Fig. 1 in the vertical direction.
It is not
necessary that the geometry be two-dimensional
and in the real world it isn’t (Mozer et al., 2003b),
although the current, j, ﬂowing out of the plane of
Fig. 1 suggests a tendency for a two-dimensional
geometry. To keep the geometry simple without
losing any physics, it is assumed in this discussion
that the plasma exits the central region by ﬂowing
vertically. This leads to bulk plasma ﬂows like those
indicated by the heavy lines in Fig. 3.

What is the magnetic ﬁeld geometry asso-
ciated with the ﬂows of Fig. 3? Because the
plasma ﬂow is perpendicular to B, at least initially,
the magnetic ﬁeld lines in the central region must
curve such that they tend to be perpendicular to the
ﬂow contours of Fig. 3. There are two approaches for
obtaining a quantitative picture of the magnetic ﬁeld
geometry. They are:

1. Solve Maxwell’s equations.

2. Utilize a method of visualizing the magnetic
ﬁeld geometry without having to solve Maxwell’s
equations. One such method is to assume that
the magnetic ﬁeld evolves in time by magnetic
ﬁeld lines moving at the E × B/B2 velocity.

Figure 2

ticle energization is computed in a static model of a
single ion species as follows. Consider a closed sur-
face that extends between the two magnetic ﬁeld lines
of Fig. 1 and that has a length, h, along the ﬁeld
lines and width, w, out of the ﬁgure. There is a
net Poynting ﬂux, 2whEoB/µo, through this surface
from the right and the left. The number of parti-
cles that move into this volume per second at the
Eo × B/B2 velocity is 2whnEo/B, where n is the
plasma density. Thus, the energy gained per par-
ticle is (2whEoB/µo)/(2whnEo/B) = B2/nµo, and
the average velocity increase of a low energy ion is
v = [2B2/mnµo]1/2, where m is the ion mass. Thus,
within a factor ∼1, the bulk ﬂow of low energy ions
increases at most to the Alfven speed in the diﬀu-
sion region after reconnection. This has many conse-
quences:

• The ﬂux, not the energy, of the ions emerging
from the diﬀusion region increases with the in-
creasing magnitude of the reconnection electric
ﬁeld, Eo. The ion energy is limited to that asso-
ciated with the Alfven speed which, for typical
parameters at the sub-solar reconnection region
is ∼1 keV.

• The electron bulk speed is also increased at most
to the ion Alfven speed to maintain neutrality in
the absence of an outgoing current. However, the
electron energy is about 1/1856 of the ion energy

3

Figure 4

Figure 3

Method 2 is preferable to method 1 as long as
method 2 gives the same solution as method 1.
If
it does not, there is nothing magic about the situ-
It is just that Maxwell’s equations must be
ation.
solved in order to determine the magnetic ﬁeld.

In the following discussion, a condition is found
for which the magnetic ﬁeld geometry obtained by
assuming that ﬁeld lines move with E × B/B2 is
the same as that produced by Maxwell’s equations
(Longmire, 1963). The concept of moving magnetic
ﬁeld lines implies that ﬁeld lines do not just pop up
in a region of increasing ﬁeld strength, but that ﬁeld
lines ﬂow into that region. Because magnetic ﬁeld
lines are conserved in this picture, they obey a con-
tinuity equation which, in a coordinate system with
the local magnetic ﬁeld in the Z-direction, is

∂BZ/∂t + ∇ · (Bv) = 0

(1)

Selecting the ﬁeld line velocity to be v = E ×
B/B2, the components of Bv are (Bv)X = EY and
(Bv)Y = −EX , so equation 1 becomes

evolves as is required by Maxwell’s equations if mag-
netic ﬁeld lines move with the E × B/B2 velocity. It
is noted that any velocity v′ satisfying ∇ · (Bv′) = 0
may be added to E × B/B2 without modifying equa-
tion 1. Thus, there are an inﬁnite number of magnetic
ﬁeld line velocities that preserve the magnitude of the
magnetic ﬁeld.

The direction of a ﬁeld line moving with E ×
B/B2 must also be the same as that obtained from
Maxwell’s equations. To ﬁnd the condition under
which this is true, consider two surfaces, S1 and S2 in
Fig. 4, that are perpendicular to the ﬁeld at times t
and t + δt. At time t, a magnetic ﬁeld line intersects
the two surfaces at points a and b. Thus, the vector
(b − a) is parallel to B(t). At the later time, t + δt,
point a has moved along S1 at velocity E × B/B2(a)
to point a′ and it is on the illustrated magnetic ﬁeld
line. Meanwhile, point b has moved along S2 to b′ at
velocity E × B/B2(b) and it may or may not be on
the ﬁeld line that passes through a′. The question is,
what is the constraint on these motions that result in
a′ and b′ being on the same magnetic ﬁeld line, i.e.,
that result in (b′ − a′) being parallel to B(t + δt)?

To ﬁnd the constraint, we start with the identity
(b′ − a′) = (b − a) + (b′ − b) − (a′ − a). The terms
on the right side of this equation are:

∂BZ /∂t + ∂EY /∂x − ∂EX /∂y = 0

(2)

which is the z-component of Faraday’s law. Thus,
without approximation and in the presence or ab-
sence of plasma, the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld

(b − a) = εB, because (b − a) is parallel to B.
2
(a′ − a) = [E × B/B
(b′ − b) = [E × B/B
= [E × B/B

(b)]δt
(a) +

(a)]δt

2

2

4

(b − a) ∂(E × B/B
(a) +

2

= [E × B/B

2

(a)/∂r)]δt

εB · ∇(E × B/B

(a))]δt

2

where r is along the magnetic ﬁeld line at time t.
Combining terms gives

(b′ − a′)/ε = B + B · ∇(E × B/B

2

)δt

(3)

Also

B′ = B (a, t + δt)

= B + (∂B/∂t) δt +

(E × B/B

) · ∇)Bδt

2

(4)

The problem reduces to ﬁnding the constraints that
are imposed by the requirement that the right sides
of equations 3 and 4 have a zero cross-product. To
ﬁrst order in δt, this gives

B × [∂B/∂t + (E × B/B

) · ∇)B −

2

B · ∇(E × B/B

)] = 0 (5)

2

Using the vector identity for ∇ × M × N, for any two
vectors M and N, allows rewriting equation 5 as

B × {∂B/∂t + ∇ × (B × (E × B/B

B(∇ · (E × B/B

) − (E × B/B

2

2

)) +
)∇ · B} = 0

2

(6)

The last term on the right is zero because ∇ · B = 0
and the next to last term may be neglected because
its cross product with B is zero. Because B × (E ×
B/B2) = E − Ek and ∂B/∂t = −∇ × E, equation 6
is

B × (∇ × Ek) = 0

(7)

This is the constraint that makes the direction of the
magnetic ﬁeld during its E × B/B2 motion the same
as that found from Maxwell’s equations. This condi-
tion is sometimes loosely stated as the requirement
that the parallel electric ﬁeld must be zero for ﬁeld
lines to move at the E × B/B2 velocity.

The existence and/or properties of plasma did not
enter into the equation 7 requirement that ﬁeld line
motion at E × B/B2 produces the same result as
Maxwell’s equations. Thus, ﬁeld line motion does
not require the presence of plasma, contrary to what
some discussions of ﬁeld line motion assume.

A vacuum example in which ﬁeld line motion does
not produce the same result as Maxwell’s equations
occurs for a magnetic dipole placed in a uniform elec-
tric ﬁeld, with the dipole axis parallel to the electric
ﬁeld direction (Falthammer, 2005). The E × B/B2
direction of a magnetic ﬁeld line in the northern hemi-
sphere is opposite to that on the same ﬁeld line in the
southern hemisphere, so the magnetic ﬁeld lines ap-
pear to twist. This result disagrees with Maxwell’s
equations for a dipole magnetic ﬁeld, so something
In fact, B × (∇ × Ek) 6= 0 everywhere,
is wrong.
so the magnetic ﬁeld evolution cannot be obtained
by assuming that magnetic ﬁeld lines move with the
E × B/B2 velocity. There is nothing mysterious
about this problem. It is just that the magnetic ﬁeld
must be obtained from Maxwell’s equations and not
from moving ﬁeld lines.

In the assumed absence of a parallel electric ﬁeld
in Fig. 3, the magnetic ﬁeld evolution can be deter-
mined by moving a pair of magnetic ﬁeld lines with
the E × B/B2 velocity. This produces the magnetic
ﬁeld geometry of Fig. 5, which may be thought of
as a superposition of snapshots at times t1, · · · , t5
of two magnetic ﬁeld lines that E × B/B2 towards
each other. There is the obvious problem that the
magnetic ﬁeld lines in the center of the plot have
passed over each other to produce points having the
magnetic ﬁeld in two directions. This violation of
Maxwell’s equations means that there must be a par-
allel electric ﬁeld in the central region such that the
magnetic ﬁeld evolution in this region cannot be ob-
tained by any means other than solving Maxwell’s
equations. There is nothing magic about the central
region, but only that one cannot obtain the magnetic
ﬁeld geometry in this region by moving magnetic ﬁeld
lines.

Eliminating the magnetic ﬁeld lines in the region
having a parallel electric ﬁeld leaves the geometry of
Fig. 6. The reader is reminded that Fig. 6 shows the
ion diﬀusion region while the interior of the dashed

5

Figure 5

Figure 6

box will be shown to contain one or more electron
diﬀusion regions.

From the geometry of Fig. 6, magnetic ﬁeld lines
to the right of the ﬁgure in the input ﬂow region have
become connected in the outﬂow region to magnetic
ﬁeld lines that were in the left input ﬂow region. This
is the change of magnetic ﬁeld connectivity that is
required by the earlier deﬁnition of magnetic ﬁeld
reconnection.

The only use of the concept of moving magnetic
ﬁeld lines in the above discussion has been to aid
in determining the magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration.
If
more than this use is made of moving ﬁeld lines, there
is a risk of drawing erroneous conclusions such as,
because the magnetic ﬁeld lines move in Fig. 6, ∂B/∂t
is non-zero. This is incorrect.

The change of magnetic ﬁeld connectivity in ter-
restrial reconnection is illustrated in Fig. 7. This ﬁg-
ure shows three diﬀerently connected regimes, type 1
which contains magnetic ﬁeld lines that go through
the sun without going through the earth, type 2
which go through the earth without going through
the sun and type 3 which go through both the earth
and the sun. These topological boundaries are shown
as the dashed X-line in Fig. 8.

The discussion thus far has left many unanswered

questions. For example:

Figure 7

Figure 8

6

• How do the ions and electrons move to

• Ignoring me/mi terms

create the current, j?

gives the Generalized Ohm’s Law

• How are the ions accelerated to the Alfven

speed?

• How is the parallel electric ﬁeld in the cen-

tral region generated?

These questions will be discussed qualitatively
through application of the Generalized Ohm’s Law
as derived from the two-ﬂuid equations of motion,
which are (Spitzer, 1956):

For ions

For electrons

where

nimi[∂Ui/∂t + (Ui · ∇)Ui] =
niZe(E + Ui × B) − ∇ · Pi + Pie

neme[∂Ue/∂t + (Ue · ∇)Ue] =
−nee(E + Ue × B) − ∇ · Pe + Pei

(8)

(9)

• Ui and Ue are the ion and electron velocities

averaged over unit volumes

• ni and mi are the ion density and mass, respec-

respectively

tively

sors

• ne and me are the electron density and mass,

• Pi and Pe are the ion and electron pressure ten-

• Pie and Pei are the momentum transferred to
ions (electrons) from electrons (ions) per unit
volume per unit time.

Subtraction of (9) from (8) assuming:

• Neglect of quadratic terms

• Electrical neutrality (which means that the elec-
tron and ion densities are equal everywhere ex-
cept in Maxwell’s equation for the divergence of
the electric ﬁeld)

E + Ui × B = j × B/en − ∇ · Pe/en +
)∂j/∂t + ηj

(me/ne

2

(10)

where η is the Coulomb or anomalous resistivity.
Equivalently, because j/ne = Ui − Ue,

E+Ue ×B = −∇·Pe/en+(me/ne

)∂j/∂t+ηj (11)

2

For the current to be non-zero, the ions and elec-
trons must move diﬀerently, i.e., the left side of equa-
tion 10 and/or 11 must be non-zero. Because the
j×B force of equation 10 acts on ions and because the
ion inertial length, c/ωpi, and the ion gyroradius are
much larger than the electron inertial length, c/ωpe,
and the electron gyroradius, the ion bulk motion de-
viates from E × B/B2 on the larger spatial scale,
called the ion diﬀusion region. Meanwhile, the elec-
tron motion must include E × B/B2 ﬂow perpendic-
ular to the plane of Fig. 8 and into the ﬁgure because
electrons provide the major part of the out-of-plane
current. This requires an in-plane electric ﬁeld, En,
perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld and pointing to-
wards the center of Fig. 8 from both sides in the ion
diﬀusion region.

Ions entering from the left or right move predomi-
nantly within the plane to be accelerated by En and
the j × B force to the opposite side of the central re-
gion where they decelerate, turn around, and again
accelerate. They bounce between the two sides to
eventually exit vertically at the Alfven speed. Be-
cause enEn ≈ jB according to equation 10, and be-
cause the sum of the two forces times c/ωpi is about
the energy B2/µo gained by a unit volume of ﬂuid,
the electric ﬁeld is deduced as En ≈ valf venB/2. This
is ∼20 mV/m at the sub-solar magnetopause, which
is much larger than the fraction of a mV/m recon-
nection ﬁeld, Eo, observed in space and in simula-
tions. En and the ion counter-streaming and acceler-
ation have been observed in space (Mozer et al., 2002;
Wygant, 2005). It is also noted that the ions are ac-
celerated in a region having the ion scale and not

7

in the much smaller electron diﬀusion region that is
discussed below.

The electric ﬁeld, En, existing along the dashed X
in Fig. 8 over a scale size of c/ωpi, has a non-zero
divergence so it must result from charge separation.
This requires that electrons move along the magnetic
ﬁeld lines in the plane of Fig. 8 and into the dashed
box to create the charge separation. The parallel (to
B) in-plane electric ﬁeld in the dashed box accelerates
these electrons to the outgoing ion bulk velocity, after
which they are ejected into the upper and lower cen-
tral regions. This in-plane electron current causes the
out-of-plane quadrupolar magnetic ﬁeld that is illus-
trated in Fig. 8 and that has been observed in space
(Mozer et al., 2002) and in the lab (Ren et al., 2005).
The j × B/en term in equation 10, the quadrupolar
magnetic ﬁeld, and the bipolar electric ﬁeld consti-
tute the essence of Hall MHD physics.

Fig. 9 shows a sub-solar magnetopause crossing by
the Polar satellite in which the Hall MHD terms are
quantitatively present. Panel (d) gives the reconnec-
tion magnetic ﬁeld which changes from −80 nT in
the magnetosheath to +80 nT in the magnetosphere.
Panel (c) gives the out-of-plane magnetic ﬁeld com-
ponent which shows both a small guide ﬁeld and the
quadrupolar magnetic ﬁeld. Panel (e) gives the bipo-
lar normal electric ﬁeld. It is noted that the tangen-
tial electric ﬁeld of panel (f) is positive which means
that magnetic ﬁeld lines and plasma were ﬂowing to-
ward the center of the magnetopause from each side.
It is also noted that the bipolar electric ﬁeld is an
order-of-magnitude larger than the tangential elec-
tric ﬁeld.

It is important to note that less than 1% of
satellite sub-solar magnetopause crossings exhibit
clear signatures of the quadrupolar magnetic ﬁeld
and bipolar electric ﬁeld of Fig. 8 (Mozer et al.,
2002). This is undoubtedly due to time varia-
tions, real geometries that diﬀer from the idealized
two-dimensional geometry of equal and opposite
magnetic ﬁelds, spacecraft crossings at distances far
from the center of the reconnection region, etc.

What is the nature of the parallel electric
ﬁeld inside the dashed box of Fig. 8? The right
side of equation 11 must diﬀer from zero in this re-

Figure 9

gion because of the parallel electric ﬁeld on the left
side. Thus, the parallel electric ﬁeld must be asso-
ciated with either the time derivative of j (inertial
eﬀects), the divergence of the pressure tensor, or ﬁ-
nite resistivity. Experimental data suggests that it
is associated with the pressure tensor (Mozer et al.,
2002; Mozer, 2005a), but this is an important issue
that remains to be fully resolved.

It is noted that the parallel electric ﬁeld cannot
be balanced by an isotropic pressure gradient. This
is because ∇ × Ek is non-zero and the isotropic pres-
sure gradient that would balance Ek has a curl that is
zero (because the curl of the gradient of any scalar is
zero). Thus, oﬀ-diagonal terms in the pressure tensor
are required for the pressure term to balance the par-
allel electric ﬁeld. Consideration of these oﬀ-diagonal
terms requires a kinetic theory that is beyond the
scope of the present discussion.

An example of an electron diﬀusion region observed
in the sub-solar magnetopause is given in the four
second plot of Fig. 10. Panel (b) gives the reconnect-
ing component of the magnetic ﬁeld which changed
in steps as the spacecraft passed from the magne-
tosheath to the magnetosphere. The stepwise nature
of this component shows that the current was ﬁla-
mentary. In the largest current ﬁlament, the plasma

8

Figure 11

Figure 10

density of panel (a) decreased by a factor of two
while there was a large, electric ﬁeld with a duration
of about 0.075 seconds, as illustrated in the bottom
three panels. This structure had a spatial dimension
of ∼ c/ωpe. Panel (e) shows that the parallel electric
ﬁeld in this electron diﬀusion region had a magnitude
of ∼7 mV/m. It is also noted that the magnetic ﬁeld
strength at the time of the event was ∼60 nT and the
electron beta was much less than one.

As suggested by the steady state nature of the
ﬁelds in the ion diﬀusion region, it is plausible that
the inertial terms of equation 11 are small in this
region. However, in the dashed box of Fig. 8, they
are probably important because a non-zero ∇×Ek re-
quires non-zero terms in ∇×E and a non-zero ∂B/∂t,
unless other terms in ∇ × E exactly cancel the non-
zero terms, which is unlikely.

The scale size for which the terms on the right
side of equation 11 become important is ∼ c/ωpe
(Vasyliunas, 1975). A single region of this size is fre-
quently drawn at the crossing of the dashed X in Fig.
8 to represent the electron diﬀusion region in which
electrons are demagnetized. From such a cartoon,
it is sometimes incorrectly concluded that the mag-
netic ﬁeld must be zero and the plasma beta must be
large in the electron diﬀusion region. Because physi-

cal conclusions should not be obtained from cartoons,
it is important to consider that the dashed box may
contain a large number of electron scale structures,
each of which is located where the magnetic ﬁeld is
non-zero and each of which contains a parallel electric
ﬁeld. This possibility is strongly supported by theo-
retical ideas (Tajima and Shibata, 2002), computer
simulations (Onofri et al., 2004; Daughton, 2006)
and experimental data (Mozer et al., 2003a; Mozer,
2005a; Mozer et al., 2005b). The locations of 117
electron diﬀusion regions found in the sub-solar mag-
netopause in searching three years of Polar data are
shown in Fig. 11. The sub-solar point is at the center
of the plot which spans a local time of eight hours
and a latitude of ±40 degrees. This data suggests
that electron diﬀusion regions occur frequently and
at all locations within the magnetopause.

The reconnection rate is proportional to the
number of magnetic ﬁeld lines crossing into the re-
connection region per unit area per second. Because
the density of ﬁeld lines is B and their velocity
is Eo × B/B2, the rate of ﬁeld line entry is the
density times the velocity, or Eo. This is why the
tangential electric ﬁeld is sometimes referred to as
the reconnection rate.

What does sub-solar reconnection do for
magnetospheric physics? Because most of the ac-
celerated plasma escapes into the solar wind, it may
appear that dayside reconnection is not important.

9

This conclusion is incorrect because reconnection also
modiﬁes the magnetic ﬁeld connectivity to produce a
long tail in the anti-sunward direction, as illustrated
in Fig. 7. In the southern hemisphere tail, the mag-
netic ﬁeld points away from the earth and in the
northern hemisphere tail, it points earthward. In the
presence of a dawn-to-dusk electric ﬁeld, the Poynt-
ing vector along the tail surface is everywhere inward,
so its integral over this closed surface provides an en-
ergy source for driving magnetospheric processes. For
a tail that is 300 earth radii long and 30 earth radii
in diameter, the energy input associated with a mag-
netic ﬁeld of 10 nT and a cross-tail electric ﬁeld of
0.5 mV/m is ∼ 2 × 1012 watts. This is more than suf-
ﬁcient to drive all known magnetospheric processes
and it is more than four orders-of-magnitude larger
than the energy directly available from sub-solar re-
connection. The EMF that provides this energy is
the kinetic energy of the solar wind, which slows as
it moves along the tail.

For the sub-solar region, it may seem that the re-
connection rate need only be large enough to produce
the long tail. However, a large Poynting ﬂux into the
tail implies a large E × B/B2 ﬂow of magnetic ﬁeld
lines into the tail and these ﬁeld lines must also re-
connect. Because the average reconnection on the
dayside and in the tail must be equal, a large Poynt-
ing ﬂux into the tail must be accompanied by a large
sub-solar reconnection rate.

In summary, topics for future research on magnetic

ﬁeld reconnection include:

• Microphysics in the electron diﬀusion region.
Understanding the relative importance of iner-
tial eﬀects, resistivity, and the gradient of the
pressure tensor.

• Processes that result from the reconnection ge-
ometry and that accelerate ions and electrons to
high energies on short time scales.

• Wave modes associated with reconnection and

the subsequent particle acceleration.

• The mechanism for generating parallel electric

ﬁelds in the electron diﬀusion region.

• The importance of electron diﬀusion regions
that are observed throughout the magnetopause
as well as in the magnetosphere, the mag-
netosheath, and the bow shock (Mozer et al.,
2006).

Acknowledgements

The author thanks C.-G. Falthammar for many
helpful discussions over the years, and his Berkeley
colleagues for many helpful comments. This work
was supported by NASA Grants NNG05GC72G and
NNG05GL27G.

References

Birn, J., J.F. Drake, M.A. Shay, B.N. Rogers, R.E.
Denton, M. Hesse, M. Kuznetsova, Z.W. Ma, A.
Bhattacharjee, A. Otto, and P.L. Pritchett (2001),
Geospace environmental modeling (GEM) mag-
netic reconnection challenge, J. Geophys. Res.,
106, 3715.

Birn, J. and M. Hesse (2005), Energy release and con-
version by reconnection in the magnetotail, Ann.
Geophys., 23, 3365.

Daughton, W. (2006), private communication.

Falthammer, C.-G. (2005), private communication.

Longmire, C.L. (1963), Elementary plasma physics,
Interscience Publishers, John Wiley and Sons, New
York.

Mozer, F.S., S.D. Bale, and T.D. Phan (2002), Ev-
idence of diﬀusion regions at a sub-solar magne-
topause crossing, Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 015002, doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.015002.

Mozer, F.S., S.D. Bale, T.D. Phan, and J.A. Osborne
(2003a), Observations of electron diﬀusion regions
at the subsolar magnetopause, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
91, 245002.

Mozer, F.S. T.D. Phan, and S.D. Bale (2003b),
The complex structure of the reconnecting mag-
netopause, Phys. Plasmas, 10, 2480.

10

Vasyliunas, V.M. (1975), Theoretical models of mag-
netic ﬁeld line merging, Rev. Geophys. Space
Phys., 13, 303.

Wygant, J.R., C. A. Cattell, R. Lysak, Y. Song, J.
Dombeck, J. McFadden, F. S. Mozer, C. W. Carl-
son, G. Parks, E. A. Lucek, A. Balogh, M. An-
dre, H. Reme, M. Hesse, and C. Mouikis, (2005),
Cluster observations of an intense normal com-
ponent of the electric ﬁeld at a thin reconnect-
ing current sheet in the tail and its role in the
shock-like acceleration of the ion ﬂuid into the
separatrix region, J. Geophys. Res., 110, A09206,
doi:10.1029/2004JA010708

Mozer, F.S., Criteria for and statistics of electron
diﬀusion regions associated with subsolar mag-
netic ﬁeld reconnection J. Geophys. Res., (2005a),
110(A12), A12222, 10.1029/2005JA011258.

Mozer, F.S., S.D. Bale, J.P. McFadden, and R.B. Tor-
bert (2005b), New features of electron diﬀusion re-
gions observed at sub-solar magnetic ﬁeld recon-
nection sites, Geophys. Res. Lett., 32(24), L24102.

Mozer, F.S., H. Mitsui, and R.B. Torbert (2006),
Electron scale structures are everywhere: Are they
electron diﬀusion regions? EGU, Vienna.

Onofri, M., L. Primavera, F. Malara, and P. Veltri
(2004) Three-dimensional simulations of magnetic
reconnection in slab geometry, Phys. Plasmas, 11.

Parker, E.N. (1957), Sweet’s mechanism for merging
magnetic ﬁelds in conducting ﬂuids, J. Geophys.
Res., 62, 509.

Parker, E.N. (1963), The solar ﬂare phenomenon and
the theory of reconnection and annihilation of mag-
netic ﬁelds, Ap. J. Suppl., 8, 177.

Ren, Y., M. Yamada, H. Ji, S.P. Gerhardt, R. Kul-
srud, and A. Kuritsyn (2005), Experimental veri-
ﬁcation of the Hall Eﬀect during pull reconnection
in MRX, Phys. Rev. Lett, 95, 055003.

Shay, M.A., J.F. Drake, B.N. Rogers and R.E. Den-
ton, (2001), Alfvenic collisionless magnetic recon-
nection and the Hall term, J. Geophys. Res., 106,
3759.

Sonnerup, B.U.O.,

et al.
(1984), Reconnection
of magnetic ﬁelds,
in Solar Terrestrial Physics:
Present and Future, NASA Ref. Pub. 1120, edited
by D.M. Butler and K. Papadapolous.

Spitzer, L. Jr. (1956), Physics of fully ionized gases,
Interscience tracts on physics and astronomy, Ed-
itor R.E. Marshak, Interscience Publishers, Inc.,
New York.

Tajima, T. and K. Shibata, (2002), Plasma Astro-

physics, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.

11

