6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Channeling chaotic transport in a wave-particle experiment

A. Macor,1, ∗ F. Doveil,2 C. Chandre,3 G. Ciraolo,3, 4 R.Lima,3 and M. Vittot3
1Equipe turbulence plasma, CNRS, Centre Saint-J´erˆome, case 321, 13397 Marseille cedex 20, France
2Equipe turbulence plasma, CNRS, Centre Saint-J´erˆome - case 321, 13397 Marseille cedex 20, France
3Centre de Physique Th´eorique †, CNRS, Luminy, case 907, F-13288 Marseille, France.
4 Association Euratom-CEA, DRFC/DSM/CEA,
CEA Cadarache, F-13108 St. Paul-lez-Durance, France

[A numerical and experimental study of a control method aimed at channeling chaos

by building barriers in phase space is performed on a paradigm for wave-particle
interaction, i.e., a traveling wave tube.
by adding small apt modifications to the system with a low additional cost of
energy.
small amplitudes.
experimentally.]

Robustness of the method is investigated both numerically and

This modification is realized experimentally through additional waves with

Control of chaotic diffusion is achieved

PACS numbers: 05.45.Gg, 52.20.-j

I.

INTRODUCTION

ture.

The interaction of a beam of charged particles with
electromagnetic waves is ubiquitous in physics, and it is
central to many useful devices such as particle acceler-
ators, plasma fusion experiments or free electron lasers.
In these experimental set-ups, the waves are used to ac-
celerate the particles or to guide them by assigning a
speciﬁc mean trajectory. However, the dynamics of these
systems is usually characterized by the competition of
many degrees of freedom and thus, shows generically
chaotic behaviors. Such behaviors represent a limit to
the achievement of high performances in these devices.
Consequently, there has been a growing interest in con-
trolling chaos which here means to reduce it when and
where it is undesirable and to increase it when it is useful.
The sensitivity of chaotic systems to small perturba-
tions triggered a strong interdisciplinary eﬀort to control
chaos [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. After the seminal work on
optimal control by Pontryagin [9], eﬃcient methods were
proposed for controlling chaotic systems by nudging tar-
geted trajectories [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. However, for many
body experiments such methods are hopeless due to the
high number of trajectories to deal with simultaneously.
It was recently proposed a local control method [15]
which aims at building barriers in phase space and hence
conﬁnes all the trajectories rather than following them in-
dividually. These barriers are stable structures in phase
space like for instance invariant tori, which are gener-
ically broken by the perturbation. The reduction of
chaotic behaviors is achieved by using a small apt pertur-
bation of the system which keeps its Hamiltonian struc-

†Unit´e Mixte de Recherche (UMR 6207) du CNRS, et des univer-
sit´es Aix-Marseille I, Aix-Marseille II et du Sud Toulon-Var. Labo-
ratoire aﬃli´e `a la FRUMAM (FR 2291). Laboratoire de Recherche
Conventionn´e du CEA (DSM-06-35)
∗e-mail address:macor@up.univ-mrs.fr

In this article, we consider a traveling wave tube
(TWT) specially designed to study wave particle interac-
tion which is used to investigate experimentally the con-
trol method and its robustness. The dynamics in this
experimental apparatus can be accurately represented
using a Hamiltonian which describes the motion of a
charged particle (with unit mass) interacting with two
electrostatic waves [16] :

H(p, x, t) =

+ ε1 cos(k1x

ω1t + ϕ1)

p2
2

+ε2 cos(k2x

ω2t + ϕ2),

(1)

−

−

R

∈

×

where (p, x)
[0, L] are the momentum and position
of the particle in a tube of length L. The amplitudes,
wave numbers, frequencies and phases of the two waves
are denoted respectively εi, ki, ωi and ϕi for i = 1, 2.
We notice that the beam intensity is suﬃciently low such
that the wave growth rate is negligible upon the length of
the experiment that is we are in the test-particle regime.
Generically, the dynamics of the particles governed
by Hamiltonian (1) is a mixture of regular and chaotic
behaviors, mainly depending on the amplitudes of the
waves. The Chirikov parameter [17] deﬁned as the ratio
between the two half-width of the primary resonances by
the distance between these resonances, i.e.,

s =

2(p|
ε1
ω2/k2
|

ε2
)
+ p|
|
|
ω1/k1
|
−

,

(2)

gives a ﬁrst rough approximation of the chaoticity de-
gree of the system. Hamiltonian (1) has a typical behav-
ior of integrable system for small values of this param-
eter (s
1). For large enough amplitudes of the waves
1), large scale chaos occurs in phase space. As a con-
(s
sequence, the particle can have an arbitrary velocity in
between the two phase velocities of the waves (ω2/k2 and
ω1/k1). In this TWT, such typical chaotic behavior has

≪

∼

been observed directly [18]. This chaotic diﬀusion of the
particles in phase space can be reduced by using an apt
control term which consists here as an additional wave
(or more generally a set of waves) of small amplitude.
The characteristics of this additional wave are computed
explicitly, and then the wave is injected in addition to
the two others. The results presented in this article were
announced in Ref. [19].

The paper is organized as follows : The control method
is brieﬂy recalled in Sec. II A and its application to the
considered Hamiltonian is presented in Sec. II B. Nu-
merical investigations of the eﬀect of the control term
and its robustness are reported in Secs. II C and II D.
In Sec. III A, a description of the experimental set-up
precedes the results of the implementation of the con-
trol term shown in Sec. III B as well as its robustness in
Sec. III C.

II. LOCAL CONTROL METHOD APPLIED TO
A TWO WAVE MODEL

∈

The Hamiltonian of an integrable system can be lo-
cally written as a function H0(A) of the action variables
Rd, i.e. it does not depend on
A = (A1, A2, . . . , Ad)
∈
Td =
the conjugate angle variables θ = (θ1, θ2, . . . , θd)
Rd/(2πZ)d, where Td is the d-dimensional torus param-
eterized by [0, 2π[d. The equations of motion for H0(A)
show that the action variables are constant, and conse-
quently the trajectories with given actions A are con-
ﬁned to evolve on a d-dimensional torus with frequency
vector ω0(A) = ∂H0/∂A. The dynamics on this torus is
periodic or quasi-periodic: θ(t) = ω0(A)t + θ(0) with
frequency vector ω0(A).
In the particular case given
by Hamiltonian (1) an integrable situation is given by
ε1 = ε2 = 0 so that the dynamics of the integrable
system H = p2/2 is characterized by constant velocity
(p = const). A monokinetic beam of charged particles
remains monokinetic.

2

A. Expression of the local control term

The aim is to provide an explicit expression for an ad-
ditional perturbation such that a speciﬁc invariant torus
is reconstructed in the modiﬁed system. We state here
the main result which has been extensively described in
Ref. [15] : We consider Hamiltonian systems written as

H(A, θ) = ω

A + W (A, θ),

·
where ω is a non-resonant vector of Rd. Without loss of
generality, we consider a region near A = 0 (by transla-
tion of the actions) and, since the Hamiltonian is nearly
integrable, the perturbation W has constant and linear
parts in actions of order ε, i.e.

W (A, θ) = εv(θ) + εw(θ)

A + Q(A, θ),

(3)

·

2). We notice that for ε = 0,
where Q is of order O(
k
the Hamiltonian H has an invariant torus with frequency
vector ω at A = 0 for any Q not necessarily small. The
controlled Hamiltonian we construct is

A
k

Hc(A, θ) = ω

A + W (A, θ) + f (θ).

(4)

·

The control term f we construct only depends on the
angle variables and is given by

f (θ) = W (0, θ)

W (

Γ∂θW (0, θ), θ) ,

(5)

−

−

where ∂θ is the derivative operator with respect to θ,
and Γ is a linear operator deﬁned as a pseudo-inverse of
ω

·

∂θ, i.e. acting on W = Pk Wkeik·θ as
k eik·θ

Wk
iω

ΓW = X
ω·k6=0

.

·

Note that f is of order ε2. For any function W , Hamil-
tonian (4) has an invariant torus with frequency vector
close to ω. The equation of the torus which is restored
by the addition of f is

A =

Γ∂θW (0, θ),

−

(6)

If the system described by H0 is perturbed, i.e. we

which is of order ε for W given by Eq. (3)

consider the Hamiltonian

H(A, θ) = H0(A) + V (A, θ),

B. Computation of the control term for a two wave
system

the integrability is generically lost and the system be-
comes chaotic. Even if KAM theorem establishes the
stability with respect to small perturbations of invariant
tori with a suﬃciently incommensurate frequency vector
these tori are destroyed when the amplitude of the per-
turbation V is large enough. The break-up of invariant
tori leads to a loss of stability of the system until the last
invariant torus of the integrable case is destroyed and
then large scale diﬀusion occurs in phase space. In the
case of a beam of charged particles whose dynamics is
given by Hamiltonian (1), for ε1, ε2 suﬃciently large, an
initially monokinetic beam will spread in velocity due to
this diﬀusion.

We consider Hamiltonian (1) with two waves, where
the wavenumbers are chosen according to a dispersion
relation k1 = K(ω1) and k2 = K(ω2) plotted on Fig. 1.
In order to compute f , Hamiltonian (1) with 1.5 de-
grees of freedom is mapped into an autonomous Hamil-
tonian with two degrees of freedom by considering that
t mod 2π is an additional angle variable. We denote E
its conjugate action. The autonomous Hamiltonian is

H(E, p, x, t) = E +

+ ε1 cos(k1x

ω1t + ϕ1)

−

p2
2

+ε2 cos(k2x

ω2t + ϕ2).

(7)

−

3

This barrier of diﬀusion prevents a beam of particles to
diﬀuse everywhere in phase space. We emphasize that
the barrier persists for all the magnitudes of the waves
(ε1, ε2).

−

−

−

(ω1

−
−

The control

term (9) has

2ω1), (2k2,
k2),

2ω2), ((k1 + k2),
−
ω2)).

four Fourier modes,
(ω1 + ω2)) and
(2k1,
If we want to restore an in-
((k1
variant torus in between the two primary resonances ap-
proximately located at p
ω2/k2, the
≈
frequency ω has to be chosen between the two group ve-
locities of the waves. If we consider a beam of particles
with a velocity in between the velocities of the waves,
i.e., v1 = ω1/k1 and v2 = ω2/k2, the main Fourier mode
of the control term is

ω1/k1 and p

≈

f2 =

−

2(ωk1

ε1ε2k1k2
ω1)(ωk2

ω2)

−
cos[(k1 + k2)x

−
(ω1 + ω2)t + ϕ1 + ϕ2].

−
A convenient choice is ω = (v1 + v2)/2 and the control

×

term is given by:

f2 =

2ε1ε2

(v1

−

v2)2 cos[(k1 + k2)x

−

(ω1 + ω2)t + ϕ1 + ϕ2].

(11)
Using this approximate control term does not guarantee
the existence of an invariant torus. However, since the
diﬀerence between f given by Eq. (9) and f2 given by
Eq. (11) is small, it is expected that for a Chirikov pa-
rameter s not too large, the eﬀect of the control term is
still eﬀective and the barrier is restored close to

p(x, t) =

v1 + v2
2

+

2ε1 cos(k1x
v1

ω1t + ϕ1)
v2

−
−

2ε2 cos(k2x
v1

−

ω2t + ϕ2)
v2

.

−
−

(12)

C. Numerical results

In this section we perform a numerical investigation
of the eﬀect of the exact and approximate control terms
on the electron beam dynamics. We introduce the pa-
rameter r given by the ratio of the two wave amplitudes
r = ε1/ε2.
In order to reproduce as close as possible
the experimental set-up described in the next section
(see also [18]), we consider the following values of am-
plitudes, wave numbers, frequencies and phases of the
two electrostatic waves: (ε1, k1, ω1, ϕ1) = (εr, 1, 0, 0) and
(ε2, k2, ω2, ϕ2) = (ε, k, k, 0). Thus Hamiltonian (1) can
be written as

p2
2

H(p, x, t) =

+ εr cos x + ε cos[k(x

t)],

(13)

−

i.e. v1 = 0 and v2 = 1. We perform simulations with
r = 0.082 and k = 5/3. The amplitudes of the waves are
determined by r and ε that are related to the Chirikov
parameter by the following equation:

s = 2√ε(√r + 1).

(14)

FIG. 1: TWT dispersion relation (circles) with the helix mode
at 30 MHz (square) and the beam mode at the same fre-
quency but with propagation velocity choose equal to about
2.5 × 106 m/s (triangle); the control wave corresponds to the
beating of these two modes

Then, the momentum p is shifted by ω in order to deﬁne
a local control in the region p
0. The Hamiltonian is
rewritten as

≈

H = E + ωp + ε1 cos(k1x

ω1t + ϕ1)

−

+ε2 cos(k2x

ω2t + ϕ2) +

−
We rewrite Hamiltonian (8) into the form (3) where:

(8)

p2
2

.

εv(x, t) = ε1 cos(k1x
w(x, t) = 0,
Q(p, x, t) = p2/2.

−

ω1t + ϕ1) + ε2 cos(k2x

ω2t + ϕ2),

−

The frequency vector of the selected invariant torus is
ω = (ω, 1). From Eq. (5) we have that f is given by

f (x, t) =

(Γ∂xv)2,

ε2
2

−

which is

f (x, t) =

1
2 (cid:2)

ε1k1

ω1

−

+

ωk1
ε2k2

−

ω2

ωk2

−

cos(k1x

ω1t + ϕ1)

−

cos(k2x

ω2t + ϕ2)(cid:3)

−

2

,

(9)

= ω1/k1 and ω

provided ω
= ω2/k2. Adding this exact
control term to Hamiltonian (1), the following invariant
rotational torus is restored :
ε1k1

p(x, t) = ω

cos(k1x

ω1t + ϕ1)

−

−

ωk1

ω1

−

ε2k2

−

ωk2

ω2

−

cos(k2x

ω2t + ϕ2).

(10)

−

6
6
The value of ε will be given by s. In the following we
consider two values of s, that is s = 0.85 (ε
0.11) and
0.24). In this case the expression of the
s = 1.27 (ε
exact control term given by Eq. (9) becomes

∼

∼

f (x, t) =

2ε2(r cos x

cos k(x

t))2,

(15)

−

−

−

while the approximate control term given by Eq. (11) is

f (x, t) = 2ε2r cos[(k + 1)x

kt].

(16)

−

Poincar´e sections of Hamiltonian (13) computed for two
values of the Chirikov parameter, s = 0.85 and s = 1.27,
are depicted in Figs. 2-3, panels (a). We notice that in
both cases no rotational invariant tori survive and there-
fore trajectories can diﬀuse over the whole phase space in
between the two primary resonances. As expected, when
the exact control term given by Eq. (15) is added to the
original Hamiltonian, then rotational invariant tori are
restored. This is shown by the two Poincar´e sections in
Figs. 2 and 3, panels (b), corresponding to the two val-
ues s = 0.85 and s = 1.27 of the Chirikov parameter.
We notice that s = 1.27 corresponds to a chaotic regime
where the two resonances overlap according to Chirikov
1). Nevertheless the exact control term is
criterion (s
able to reconstruct the invariant torus predicted by the
method and to regularize a quite large region around the
recreated invariant torus.

≥

In order to study the eﬀect of a simpliﬁed control term
on the electron beam dynamics we perform numerical
simulations adding the control term given by Eq. (16)
to Hamiltonian (13). As one can see from the Poincar´e
section depicted in Fig. 2, panels (c), the eﬀect of the
approximate control term is still present with the recre-
ation of a set of invariant tori for s = 0.85. However, this
regularization apparently disappears when we consider
the fully chaotic regime with s = 1.27 (see Fig. 3, panel
(c)). Nevertheless the approximate control term has still
a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the reduction of chaotic diﬀusion.
This fact can be observed on the probability distribution
functions of the electron beam velocity. This diagnostic
will also be used in the experiment in order to see the
eﬀect of the control terms.

In Figs. 4 and 5, the initial velocity distribution func-
tion of a set of 104 particles is compared with the ﬁnal one
obtained by integrating over a time t = 50, the dynam-
ics governed by Hamiltonian (13) without control terms,
plus the exact control term (15) and plus the approxi-
mate control term (16). This investigation is performed
for the two diﬀerent values of the Chirikov parameter,
s = 0.85 for Fig. 4 and s = 1.27 for Fig. 5. In the case
without any control term the original kinetic coherence
of the beam is lost which means that some electrons can
have velocities in the whole range in between resonances,
v
0.67, 0.88]. Adding the exact control term the par-
ticles are conﬁned in a selected region of phase space by
the reconstructed invariant tori, and the beam recovers
a large part of its initial kinetic coherence. For s = 0.85,
velocities of the electrons are now between 0.33 and 0.79.

[
−

∈

4

FIG. 2: Poincar´e sections of Hamiltonian (13) for s = 0.85
without control term (panel (a)), plus the exact control
term (15) (panel (b)) and plus the approximate control term
(16)(panel (c)).

5

FIG. 4: (a): initial beam velocity distribution function for s =
0.85. (b): ﬁnal beam velocity distribution function without
control term (9) (light gray line), with the exact control term
(black line) and with the approximate control term (16)(dark
gray line).

The exact control term is also eﬃcient in the fully chaotic
regime (s = 1.27). Concerning the approximate control
term it is very eﬃcient for s = 0.85 while its eﬃciency is
smaller in the strongly chaotic regime. However, it has
still some regularizing eﬀect, inducing the reconstruction
of stable islands in phase space which can catch and thus
conﬁne a portion of the initial beam particles.

D. Robustness of the method

FIG. 3: Poincar´e sections of Hamiltonian (13) for s =
1.27 without control term (panel (a)), plus the exact con-
trol term (15) (panel (b)) and plus the approximate control
term (16) (panel (c)).

The robustness of the control method for the case
s = 1.27 is studied with respect to an error on the phase
or on the amplitude of the computed control term. In ex-
periment, given the frequency ω1 + ω2, the wave number
k1 + k2 of the control term does not satisfy in general the

6

FIG. 6: Kinetic coherence versus the phase introduced in the
approximate control term given by Eq. (17). The red dash-
dotted line indicates the kinetic coherence value for the non-
controlled case and the dotted line the kinetic coherence value
for the approximate control term. The overlap parameter is
s = 1.27.

variance of the initial beam over the variance of the dis-
tribution function after a given integration time. The
number of particles, the integration time and the initial
conditions are equal to the ones used in the previous sec-
tion.

−

In Fig. 6 we show the kinetic coherence as a func-
tion of the phase of the approximate control term for
the strongly chaotic regime s = 1.27. We notice that ϕ
or
ϕ will give the same velocity distribution function for
symmetry reason. Therefore we only consider the range
ϕ
[0, π]. The eﬃciency of the approximated control
term is very sensitive with respect to the phase. In fact
an error of 5o
6o causes a decrease of the kinetic co-
herence of about 50% and with an error greater than 30o
the kinetic coherence drops in the range of values of the
non-controlled case.

−

∈

Concerning the robustness with respect to an error on
the amplitude of the approximate control term, we plot
on Fig. 7 the behavior of the kinetic coherence as a func-
tion of the δ-factor which multiplies the amplitude of
the approximate control term. We notice that around
the reference value of δ = 1 (no error) there is a region
(δ
[1, 1.3]) where the approximate control term is very
eﬃcient in conﬁning the beam of test particles with a
kinetic coherence in between [0.096, 0.12]. On the other
hand reducing the amplitude of the control term, i.e. its
energy, there is a region where one has still a conﬁning
eﬀect on the beam particle. For example for δ = 0.6
the kinetic coherence is larger by 50% of the value of the
non-controlled case.

∈

FIG. 5: (a): initial beam velocity distribution function for s =
1.27. (b): ﬁnal beam velocity distribution function without
control term (9) (light gray line), with the exact control term
(black line) and with the approximate control term (16) (dark
gray line).

dispersion relation k = K(ω) since the dispersion relation
is not linear. In our case it means that the experimen-
tally implemented control term is not the exact one. For
this reason we investigate the robustness of the control
term given by Eq. (16) with a phase error ϕ, that is

f (x, t) = 2ε2r cos[(k + 1)x

kt + ϕ],

(17)

and with an error on its amplitude ruled by a factor δ,
that is

f (x, t) = 2ε2rδ cos[(k + 1)x

kt].

(18)

−

−

The values given by Eq. (16) are ϕ = 0 and δ = 1. In
order to quantify the robustness of the approximate con-
trol term given by Eq. (17) or Eq. (18), we introduce
the kinetic coherence indicator deﬁned as the ratio of the

7

×

×

×

k0r
j | ≈
|

106 m/s < vφj < 5.3

tube. The pressure at the ion pumps on both ends of the
10−9 Torr. The 4 meter long helix is made
device is 2
of a 0.3 mm diameter Be-Cu wire; its radius is equal to
11.3 mm and its pitch to 0.8 mm. A resistive rf termi-
nation at each end of the helix reduces reﬂections. The
maximal voltage standing wave ratio is 1.2 due to residual
end reﬂections and irregularities of the helix. The glass
vacuum jacket is enclosed by an axially slotted 57.5 mm
radius cylinder that deﬁnes the rf ground.
Inside this
cylinder but outside the vacuum jacket are four axially
movable antennas which are capacitively coupled to the
helix and can excite or detect helix modes in the fre-
quency range from 5 to 95 MHz. Only the helix modes
are launched, since empty waveguide modes can only
propagate above 2 GHz. These modes have electric ﬁeld
[23]. Launched elec-
components along the helix axis
tromagnetic waves travel along the helix with the speed
of light; their phase velocities, vφj, along the axis of the
helix are smaller by approximately the tangent of the
106 m/s.
pitch angle, giving 2.8
Waves on the beamless helix are slightly damped, with
0.005 where k0 = k0r + i k0i is the beamless
k0i
/
j |
|
complex wave number. The dispersion relation closely re-
sembles that of a ﬁnite radius, ﬁnite temperature plasma,
but, unlike a plasma, the helix does not introduce ap-
preciable noise. Finally the cumulative changes of the
electron beam distribution are measured with the veloc-
ity analyzer, located at the end of the interaction region.
This trochoidal analyzer [24] works on the principle that
electrons undergo an E
B drift when passing through
a region in which an electric ﬁeld E is perpendicular to a
magnetic ﬁeld B. A small fraction (0.5%) of the electrons
passes through a hole in the center of the front collector,
and is slowed down by three retarding electrodes. Then
the electrons having the correct drift energy determined
by the potential diﬀerence on two parallel deﬂector plates
are collected after passing through an oﬀ-axis hole at the
back of the analyzer. The time averaged collected current
is measured by means of a pico-ampermeter. Retard-
ing potential and measured current are computer con-
trolled, allowing an easy acquisition and treatment with
an energy resolution lower than 0.5 eV. In the absence of
any emitted wave, after propagating along the helix, the
beam exhibits a sharp velocity distribution function with
a velocity width mainly limited by the analyzer resolution
as shown in Figs. 9 and 10 (panel (a)). For Fig. 9a, the
beam with radius 3mm is diﬀracted by passing through
the three grounded grids of a spreader [25] just after leav-
ing the gun while for Fig. 10a, the beam radius is 1 mm
and the spreader has beem removed for the sake of sim-
plicity.

×

B. Experimental implementation of the control
term

We apply an oscillating signal at the frequency of 30
It generates two waves: a helix

MHz on one antenna.

FIG. 7: Kinetic coherence versus δ for the approximate con-
trol term given by Eq. (18). The red dash-dotted line indi-
cates the kinetic coherence value for the non-controlled case
and the dotted line the kinetic coherence value for the approx-
imate control term given by Eq. (16).The overlap parameter
is s = 1.27.

III. EXPERIMENTAL TESTS

A. Experimental set-up

The experimental implementation of the control term
is performed in a long traveling wave tube (TWT) [20, 21]
extensively used to mimic beam plasma interaction [22,
23] and recently to observe resonance overlap responsible
for Hamiltonian chaos [18]. The TWT sketched in Fig. 8
is made up of three main elements: an electron gun, a
slow wave structure (SWS) formed by a helix with axi-
ally movable antennas, and an electron velocity analyzer.
The electron gun creates a beam which propagates along
the axis of the SWS and is conﬁned by a strong axial mag-
netic ﬁeld with a typical amplitude of 0.05 T which does
not aﬀect the axial motion of the electrons. The central
part of the gun consists of the grid-cathode subassembly
of a ceramic microwave triode and the anode is replaced
by a Cu plate with an on-axis hole whose aperture de-
ﬁnes the beam diameter equal to 1 mm. Beam currents,
Ib < 1 mA, and maximal cathode voltages,
< 200 V,
can be set independently; an example of typical velocity
distribution functions is given in Figs. 9 and 10 (panel
(a)). Two correction coils provide perpendicular mag-
netic ﬁelds to control the tilt of the electron beam with
respect to the axis of the helix. For the data shown in
this article Ib is chosen weak enough to ensure that the
beam induces no wave growth and the beam electrons
can be considered as test electrons. The SWS is long
enough to allow nonlinear processes to develop. It con-
sists in a wire helix that is rigidly held together by three
threaded alumina rods and is enclosed by a glass vacuum

Vc|
|

8

FIG. 8: Sketch of the Travelling Wave Tube: (1) helix, (2)
electron gun, (3) trochoidal analyzer, (4) antenna, (5) glass
vacuum tube, (6) slotted rf ground cylinder, and (7) magnetic
coil.

×

106 m/s,
mode with a phase velocity equal to vϕ = 4.07
a beam mode with a phase velocity equal to the beam ve-
locity vb (in fact two modes with pulsation ω = kvb ±
ωb
corresponding to the beam plasma mode with pulsation
ωb = (nbe2/mǫ0)1/2, Doppler shifted by the beam veloc-
ω in our
ity vb, merging in a single mode since ωb ≪
conditions). Figures 9 and 10 (panel (b)) show the mea-
sured velocity distributions of the beam after interacting
with these two modes over the length of the TWT for
two diﬀerent values of the Chirikov parameter. The case
with s = 0.85 was previously investigated [19]. The
red square (resp. blue triangle) shows the phase veloc-
ity vϕ (resp.vb) of the helix (resp. beam) mode on the
middle of the resonant domain determined as the trap-
ping velocity width of the helix mode vϕ ±
2peChΦ/m
2peCbΦ/m ) where Φ is the signal ampli-
(resp. vb ±
tude applied on the antenna and ChΦ = 3542mV (resp.
CbΦ = 286mV) is the real amplitude of the helix (resp.
beam) mode. Both Ch and Cb are determined experi-
mentally by the estimations of the coupling constant for
helix Ch(resp. beam Cb) mode. As shown in Fig. 11
the helix mode coupling coeﬃcient Ch is obtained by
ﬁtting a parabola through the measured upper bound
velocity (circles) after the cold test beam with initial ve-
locity equal to the wave phase velocity has been trapped
by the wave at a given frequency over the total length of
the TWT. As shown in Fig. 12, the beam mode coupling
coeﬃcient Cb is obtained by ﬁtting a parabola through
the measured upper bound velocity (circles) for a beam
with a mean velocity very diﬀerent from the helix mode
phase velocity at the considered frequency. These two
domains overlap and the break up of invariant KAM tori
(or barriers to velocity diﬀusion) results in a large spread
of the initially narrow beam of Figs. 9 and 10 (panel (b))
over the chaotic region [18]. We now use an arbitrary
waveform generator [22] to launch the same signal at 30
MHz and an additional control wave with frequency equal
to 60 MHz, an amplitude and a phase given by Eq. (11).
The beam velocity is also chosen in such a way that the

FIG. 9: Beam velocity distribution functions at the output of
the TWT for s = 0.85 : (a) test beam (Ib = 50 nA) with-
out electrostatic wave, (b) with helix mode (trapping domain
shown by red line with phase velocity marked by a square)
and beam mode (trapping domain shown by blue line with
phase velocity marked by a triangle) at 30 MHz , (c) with
an additional controlling wave at 60 MHz and phase velocity
given by grey circle and dotted line.

9

FIG. 11: Measure of helix mode coupling constant Ch cal-
culated from the measured upper bound velocity of trapping
domain (circles) at frequency f equal to (a) 30 MHz and (b)
60 MHz. Black line parabola is obtained using the average
value of Ch. Gray parabolas are given by the average error.
The parabolic ﬁt is only valid beyond the vertical segment
indicating the wave amplitude beyond which beam trapping
occurs over the length of the TWT.

wave number of the helix mode at 60 MHz properly sat-
isﬁes the dispersion relation function shown as circles in
Fig. 1. We neglect the inﬂuence of the beam mode at
60 MHz since its amplitude is at least an order of mag-
nitude smaller than the control amplitude as shown by
comparing Figs. 11a and 12 for 30 MHz. As observed
on Figs. 9 and 10(panel (c)) where the grey circle indi-
cates the phase velocity of the controlling wave, the beam
recovers a large part of its initial kinetic coherence. For
s = 0.85 (see Fig. 9c) the beam does not spread in ve-
locity beyond the reconstructed KAM tori, in agreement
with the numerical simulations of Fig. 2. For the more
chaotic regime (see Fig. 10b) with s = 1.27 the improve-
ment of the kinetic coherence is still present as shown
in Fig. 10c. It can no more be associated with the re-
construction of a local velocity barrier, as expected from

FIG. 10: Beam velocity distribution functions at the output
of the TWT for s = 1.27 : (a) test beam (Ib = 2 nA) with-
out electrostatic wave, (b) with helix mode (trapping domain
shown by red line with phase velocity marked by a square)
and beam mode (trapping domain shown by blue line with
phase velocity marked by a triangle) at 30 MHz, (c) with
an additional controlling wave at 60 MHz and phase velocity
given by grey circle and dotted line.

10

−

Figure 13 shows the velocity distribution functions for
5o and 22.5o) keeping the other
two values of the phase (
parameters constant. It shows that for a phase equal to
5o close to the reference value the two velocity distribu-
−
5o
tion functions are very similar, and more peaked at
than at 0o. For 22.5o, the control wave has the opposite
eﬀect, increasing chaos. In Fig. 14 we show the kinetic
coherence as a function of the phase of the approximate
control term. It shows a narrow region around the refer-
ence value where the control wave is the most eﬃcient.

−

In Fig. 15, we represent the kinetic coherence as a func-
tion of the amplitude of the control wave. When chang-
ing the control wave amplitude a resonance condition in a
narrow region around the optimized amplitude is still ob-
served. For amplitudes smaller than the reference (com-
puted) value the eﬀect of the control decays fast and the
electron velocities are more widely spread than in the
non-controlled case. Besides, for larger values, the beam
velocity spread increases but the control term energy be-
comes comparable to the beam mode energy changing
radically the initial system. We have observed, due to
beam current conservation, a lower peak at initial beam
velocity implies that electron velocities are more widely
spread. An enlargement of distribution around the main
peak is shown in Figs. 16 a,b and conﬁrms that 140 mV
appears to be the optimum.

Finally we check the sensitivity of the control mode
with respect to the initial beam velocity. This corre-
sponds introducing an error both on the wave number
and on the amplitude of the control mode. The overlap
parameter s depends on the phase velocity diﬀerence be-
tween the helix and beam modes (see Eq.( 2)); for such
a reason we also measure the non-controlled velocity dis-
tribution function for each initial beam velocity. Fig-
ure 17a clearly exhibits the resonant condition expected
106 m/s. We also note that,
at the reference value 2.51
×
without control, chaos is continuously increasing as ex-
pected since when the phase velocity diﬀerence decreases
resonance overlap (and chaos) increases. Figure 18 shows
how two beams with close initial velocities with similar
chaotic behavior have two diﬀerent responses to the same
control term.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Even if a modiﬁcation of the perturbation of a Hamil-
tonian system generically leads to the enhancement of
the chaotic behavior, we have applied numerically and
experimentally a general strategy and an explicit algo-
rithm to design a small but apt modiﬁcation of the po-
tential which drastically reduces chaos and its attendant
diﬀusion by channeling chaotic transport. The exper-
imental results show that the method is tractable and
robust, therefore constituting a natural way to control
the dynamics. The robustness of the method has been

FIG. 12: Measure of coupling constant Cb, at frequency equal
to 30 MHz for a beam mode at 2.5 × 106 m/s. Black line
parabola is obtained using the average value of Cb, calculated
from the upper bound velocity of the trapping domain be-
tween the vertical segments where the beam become trapped
over the length of the TWT and the ”devil’s staircase” is not
yet evident [26]. Two independent measures are shown by
circles and squares to give an error estimate.

.

the numerical results in Fig. 3 (panel (c)). For this last
overlap parameter an experimental exploration of the ro-
bustness of the method will be shown in the next section.

C. Robustness of the method

In our experiment the control term is given by an ad-
ditional wave whose frequency, amplitude and phase are
computed as shown in Sec. II. In order to quantify the
robustness of the method we will compare the various ex-
perimental situations to a reference one (Fig. 10a). This
reference is taken as the (initial) cold beam distribution
function. An example of the distribution we were able
to reach with control is given in Fig. 10c. The control
amplitude is 140 mV in agreement with 144 mV given by
the method up to experimental errors. The phase is cho-
sen experimentally and arbitrarily labelled 0o. The beam
106 m/s in agreement
velocity is chosen equal to 2.498
×
106 m/s as estimated from the dispersion re-
with 2.51
×
lation shown in Fig. 1.

We investigate the robustness of the control method
with respect to variation of phase and amplitude in the
approximate control term given by Eq. (11).

We use the kinetic coherence indicator to quantify the
eﬀect of the control, deﬁned as the ratio of variance of
the cold beam distribution function over the variance of
the distribution function. Other indicators (integral and
uniform distances) were used and gave similar results.

the control is eﬃcient. The implementation is realized

11

FIG. 15: Kinetic coherence deﬁned such as in Fig. 14a for dif-
ferent control amplitudes and a phase 0o and a beam velocity
2.498 × 106 m/s. Control becomes eﬃcient in a narrow region
around 140 mV. Solid line shows the level of the kinetic co-
herence for the non-controlled chaos. Dashed line is only an
eye-guide. The overlap parameter is s = 1.27.

with an additional cost of energy which corresponds to
less than 1% of the initial energy of the two-wave sys-
tem. We stress the importance of a ﬁne tuning of the
parameters of the theoretically computed control term
(e.g., amplitude, phase velocity) in order to force the ex-
periment to operate in a more regular regime. For such a
reason an iterative process to ﬁnd some optimal experi-
mental conditions is suggested for future improvement of
the method. Other control terms can be used to increase
stability (by taking into account the other Fourier modes
of f given in Eq. (9) when experimentally feasible). The
achievement of control and all the tests on a TWT as-
sert the possibility to practically control a wide range of
systems at a low additional cost of energy.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

A.M. and F.D. are grateful to J-C. Chezeaux, D. Guy-
omarc’h, and B. Squizzaro for their skillful technical as-
sistance, and to D.F. Escande and Y. Elskens for fruitful
discussions and a critical reading of the manuscript. A.
M. beneﬁts from a grant by Minist`ere de la Recherche.
This work is partially supported by Euratom/CEA (con-
tract EUR 344-88-1 FUA F).

FIG. 13: Distribution functions for the maximum kinetic co-
herence value (resp. minimum), blue line (resp. red line), is
compared with the non-controlled distribution function (grey
dashed line). The overlap parameter is s = 1.27.

FIG. 14: Kinetic coherence deﬁned as the variance of the cold
beam distribution function over the variance of distribution
function for diﬀerent control term phases, an optimized am-
plitude 140 mV and a beam velocity 2.498 × 106 m/s. Control
becomes eﬃcient in a narrow region close to zero. Solid line
shows the level of the kinetic coherence for the non-controlled
case. Dashed line is only an eye-guide. The overlap parameter
is s = 1.27.

checked for an overlap parameter equal to s = 1.27 by
changing phase and amplitude of the control term and
beam velocity to check resonance condition on the helix
dispersion relation. All these measurements have shown a
signiﬁcant region around the prescribed values for which

12

FIG. 16: Enlargement of velocity distribution functions close
to initial beam velocity for diﬀerent control amplitudes: (a)
larger, (b) lower than experimentally optimized amplitude 140
mV. (c) velocity distribution functions for three diﬀerent con-
trol amplitudes at ﬁxed control phase equal to 0o. The overlap
parameter is s = 1.27.

13

FIG. 17: Kinetic coherence versus initial beam velocity with
optimized control term amplitude (140 mV) and phase (0o).
(a), squares (resp. triangles) show the values for velocity dis-
tribution function obtained with (resp. without) applied con-
trol term.
(b), Ratio between kinetic coherence measured
with and without control for diﬀerent initial beam velocity.
The overlap parameter is s = 1.27.

[1] A.J. Lichtenberg and M.A. Lieberman, Regular and

Chaotic Dynamics (Springer, New York, 1992).

[2] L.P. Kadanoﬀ, From Order to Chaos: Essays : Critical,
Chaotic and Otherwise, vol. I (1993) and II (1998) (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore).

[3] G. Chen and X. Dong, From Chaos to Order (World Sci-

entiﬁc, Singapore, 1998).

[4] D.J. Gauthier, Controlling chaos, Am. J. Phys. 71, 750

(2003).

[5] W.L. Ditto, S.N. Rauseo and M.L. Spano, Experimental
control of chaos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3211 (1990).

[6] V. Petrov, V. Gaspar, J. Masere and K. Showalter, Con-
trolling chaos in the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, Na-
ture 361, 240 (1993).

[7] S.J. Schiﬀ et al., Controlling chaos in the brain, Nature

370, 615 (1994).

[8] Y. Braiman, J.F. Lindner and W.L. Ditto, Taming spa-
tiotemporal chaos with disorder, Nature 378, 465 (1995).
[9] L.S. Pontryagin, V.G. Boltyanskii, R.V. Gamkrelidze and
E.F. Mishchenko, The mathematical theory of optimal
processes (Wiley, New York, 1961).

[10] E. Ott, C. Grebogi and J.A. Yorke, Controlling chaos,

14

Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1196 (1990).

[11] R. Lima and M. Pettini, Suppression of chaos by resonant

parametric perturbations, Phys. Rev. A 41, 726 (1990).

[12] T. Shinbrot, C. Grebogi, E. Ott and J.A. Yorke, Us-
ing small perturbations to control chaos, Nature 363, 411
(1993).

[13] E. Ott and M. Spano, Controlling chaos, Phys. Today

48, 34 (1995).

[14] R.D. Hazeltine and S.C. Prager, New physics in fusion

plasma conﬁnement, Phys. Today 55, 30 (2002).

[15] C. Chandre, M. Vittot, G. Ciraolo, Ph. Ghendrih and
R. Lima, Control of stochasticity in magnetic ﬁeld lines,
Nuclear Fusion 46, 33 (2006).

[16] Y. Elskens and D.F. Escande, Microscopic Dynamics of
Plasmas and Chaos (IoP Publishing, Bristol, 2003).

[17] B.V. Chirikov, A universal

instability of many-
dimensional oscillator systems, Phys. Rep. 52, 263
(1979).

[18] F. Doveil, Kh. Auhmani, A. Macor and D. Guyomarc’h,
Experimental observation of resonance overlap responsi-
ble for Hamiltonian chaos, Phys. Plasmas 12, 010702
(2005).

[19] C. Chandre, G. Ciraolo, F. Doveil, R. Lima, A. Macor
and M. Vittot, Channeling Chaos by Building Barriers,
Phys. Rev. Lett 94, 074101 (2005).

[20] J.R. Pierce, Travelling wave tubes (Van Nostrand, Prince-

ton, 1950).

[21] A.S. Gilmour Jr., Principles of travelling wave tubes

(Artech House, London, 1994).

[22] S.I. Tsunoda, F. Doveil and J.H. Malmberg, Experimen-
tal test of the quasilinear theory of the interaction between
a weak warm electron beam and a spectrum of waves,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1112 (1987).

[23] G. Dimonte and J.H. Malmberg, Destruction of trapping

oscillations, Phys. Fluids 21, 1188 (1978).

[24] D. Guyomarc’h and F. Doveil, A trochoidal analyzer to
mesure the electron beam energy distribution in a travel-
ing wave tube, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71, 4087 (2000).
[25] F. Doveil, S.I. Tsunoda and J.H.Marlberg, Controlled
production of warm electron beams, Rev. Sci. Instrum.
67, 2157 (1996).

[26] A. Macor, F. Doveil and Y. Elskens, Electrons climbing
a ”devil’s staircase” in wave-particle interaction, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95, 264102 (2005).

FIG. 18: Velocity distribution functions for two close values of
initial beam velocity (a) with and (b) without applied control
. The overlap parameter is s = 1.27.

