6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Remarks on nonlinear relation among phases and frequencies in modulational
instabilities of parallel propagating Alfv´en waves

Y. Nariyuki∗ and T. Hada
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Nonlinear relations among frequencies and phases in modulational instability of circularly polar-
ized Alfv´en waves are discussed, within the context of one dimensional, dissipation-less, unforced
ﬂuid system. We show that generation of phase coherence is a natural consequence of the modula-
tional instability of Alfv´en waves. Furthermore, we quantitatively evaluate intensity of wave-wave
interaction by using bi-coherence, and also by computing energy ﬂow among wave modes, and
demonstrate that the energy ﬂow is directly related to the phase coherence generation. We ﬁrst
discuss the modulational instability within the derivative nonlinear Schr¨odinger (DNLS) equation,
which is a subset of the Hall-MHD system including the right- and left-hand polarized, nearly de-
generate quasi-parallel Alfv´en waves. The dominant nonlinear process within this model is the four
wave interaction, in which a quartet of waves in resonance can exchange energy. By numerically
time integrating the DNLS equation with periodic boundary conditions, and by evaluating relative
phase among the quartet of waves, we show that the phase coherence is generated when the waves
exchange energy among the quartet of waves. As a result, coherent structures (solitons) appear in
the real space, while in the phase space of the wave frequency and the wave number, the wave power
is seen to be distributed around a straight line. The slope of the line corresponds to the propagation
speed of the coherent structures. Numerical time integration of the Hall-MHD system with periodic
boundary conditions reveals that, wave power of transverse modes and that of longitudinal modes
are aligned with a single straight line in the dispersion relation phase space, suggesting that eﬃ-
cient exchange of energy among transverse and longitudinal wave modes is realized in the Hall-MHD.
Generation of the longitudinal wave modes violates the assumptions employed in deriving the DNLS
such as the quasi-static approximation, and thus long time evolution of the Alfv´en modulational
instability in the DNLS and in the Hall-MHD models diﬀers signiﬁcantly, even though the initial
plasma and parent wave parameters are chosen in such a way that the modulational instability is
the most dominant instability among various parametric instabilities. One of the most important
features which only appears in the Hall-MHD model is the generation of sound waves driven by
ponderomotive density ﬂuctuations. We discuss relationship between the dispersion relation, energy
exchange among wave modes, and coherence of phases in the waveforms in the real space. Some
relevant future issues are discussed as well.

(accepted to Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics)

I.

INTRODUCTION

In various areas in space and astrophysical environ-
ment, for instance in the solar wind and in foreshock re-
gion of planetary bowshocks, parametric instabilities of
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) waves are thought to play
essential roles in generating MHD turbulence. Spacecraft
observations suggest that, within the MHD turbulence in
the solar wind and in the earth’s foreshock, a large num-
ber of localized structures are often embedded (Mann et.
al., 1994; Dudok de Wit et. al., 1999; Lucek et. al.,
2004; Tsurutani et. al., 2005). Also, recent surrogate
data analysis using magnetic ﬁeld data obtained by Geo-
tail spacecraft (Hada et. al., 2003; Koga and Hada, 2003)
has revealed that large amplitude MHD waves observed
in the earth’s foreshock are not completely phase ran-
dom, but are almost always phase correlated to a certain
degree. Furthermore, the larger the MHD wave ampli-
tude, the stronger the wave phase correlation, implying
that the detected phase coherence is a consequence of
nonlinear interaction among the MHD waves. Since the
ﬁnite phase coherence in the Fourier space corresponds
to the presence of localized structures in the real space,
the large amplitude MHD turbulence in the foreshock

should be regarded as a superposition of random phase
MHD turbulence plus a large number of localized struc-
tures.

Since the MHD waves are dispersive in general, it is
natural to infer that the localized structures once pro-
duced would disperse away as time elapses. On the other
hand, the nonlinearity of the MHD set of equations acts
as a source for production of the localized structures.
In fact, inspection of a simple model representing inter-
action of parallel Alfv´en wave modes suggests that, the
phase coherence is generated whenever there is an ex-
change of wave energy among wave modes in resonance
(Nariyuki and Hada, 2005). Namely, the localized struc-
tures are unstable and fade away, but are also contin-
uously born due to intrinsic nonlinearity of the MHD
system. Such behavior of the localized structures is typ-
ically seen in nonlinear evolution of Alfv´en wave para-
metric instabilities, in particular, in nonlinear evolution
of the modulational instability. In a similar context, No-
cera and Buti (1996) discussed formation of localized
pulses in a non-dissipative DNLS system, and Hasegawa
et. al.(1981) observed emergence of organized structures
in the Korteweg - de Vries equation. The four-wave in-
teraction scheme was used to explain the emergence of

organized structures in the unforced, dissipative DNLS
(Krishan and Nocera, 2003). In this paper, we discuss
implications of the presence of ﬁnite phase correlation,
which corresponds to the presence of localized structures,
generated by the wave-wave interactions in modulational
instability of circularly polarized Alfv´en waves, within
the context of one dimensional, dissipation-less, unforced
ﬂuid system. We will emphasize the importance of non-
linear relations among frequencies and phases in identify-
ing relevant physical process involved in the modulational
instability.

The plan of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, we
review and compare the parametric instabilities in the
Hall-MHD system and in the DNLS equation.
In Sec-
tion 3, we discuss the relationship between generation
of solitary waves and nonlinear wave-wave interaction in
detail, by examining numerically produced Alfv´enic tur-
bulence using the DNLS equation. Our main discussions
on the phase coherence is presented in this section. In
Section 4, we discuss phase and frequency features in
the Hall-MHD system. From the relation between the
plasma density and the envelope of the magnetic ﬁeld,
we examine validity of the so-called quasi-static approx-
imation used in the DNLS. When the longitudinal and
transverse wave modes have similar phase velocities, they
can couple strongly, and as a result the phase coherence
can be generated. We summarize the results and discuss
some of the fundamental issues presented in the paper in
Section 5.

II. BASIC EQUATIONS AND ANALYTICAL
STUDY OF PARAMETRIC INSTABILITIES

It has long been known that circularly polarized (’par-
ent’) Alfv´en waves are parametrically unstable to gen-
eration of plasma density ﬂuctuations and ’daughter’
Alfv´en waves with the same polarization as the ’par-
ent’. As early as in the 1960’s, it was shown by Galeev
and Oraevskii (1963), and Sagdeev and Galeev (1969)
that the circularly polarized Alfv´en waves are subject
to parametric decay instability (see Appendix). Later,
Goldstein (1978) and Derby (1978) derived the disper-
sion relation of the decay instability of the circularly po-
larized Alfv´en waves using ideal MHD equation set. Roles
of the dispersion eﬀect was investigated using the Hall-
MHD (two-ﬂuid) set of equations by Wong and Goldstein
(1986), Longtin and Sonnerup (1986), and Terasawa et.
al.(1986). The Hall-MHD equations are

= −∇·(ρv)

= −v · ∇v −

∂ρ
∂t
∂v
∂t
∂b
∂t
∇·b = 0

1
ρ

∇

p +

(cid:18)

|b|2
2 (cid:19)

1
ρ

+

(b · ∇)b (2)

= ∇×(v × b) − ∇×

(∇×b) × b

(cid:19)

1
ρ

(cid:18)

(1)

(3)

(4)

2

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where the density ρ is normalized to the initial uniform
density ρ0, the magnetic ﬁeld b to the background con-
stant ﬁeld magnitude b0x, the velocity v to the Alfv´en
velocity deﬁned by ρ0 and b0x, and the pressure p to the
ambient magnetic pressure. Time and space are respec-
tively normalized to the reciprocal of the ion cyclotron
frequency and the ion inertial length deﬁned using the
background quantities.

In this paper, all the physical quantities are assumed
to be dependent only on one spatial coordinate (x). Then
the governing equations become

∂ρ
∂t
∂u
∂t
∂v
∂t
∂b
∂t

= −

(ρu)

= −u

= −u

∂
∂x

−

+

∂u
∂x
∂v
∂x
∂
∂x (cid:18)

= −

ub − v +

i
ρ

∂b
∂x (cid:19)

p +

|b|2
2 (cid:19)

1
ρ
1
ρ

∂
∂x (cid:18)
∂b
∂x

where b = by + ibz and v = vy + ivz are the complex
transverse magnetic ﬁeld and velocity, respectively, and
u = vx is the longitudinal velocity. For simplicity, we
assume the equation of state to be isothermal, p = βρ,
where a constant β is the squared normalized sound wave
speed.

In the following, linear perturbation analysis is used
to discuss parametric instabilities of parallel propagating
Alfv´en waves, using the DNLS equation (Section 2.1) and
the Hall-MHD equations (Section 2.2).

A. Linear perturbation analysis of the DNLS
system

By applying a quasi-static approximation in which hy-
drodynamic nonlinearities and steeping are weak (i.e.,
variation of the plasma density is caused only by mag-
netic ponderomotive ﬂuctuations), Rogister (1971) de-
rived a kinetic equation describing the long time evolu-
tion of the Alfv´en waves. Essentially the same equation
was subsequently obtained starting from the two-ﬂuid set
of equations (Mjølhus, 1974; Mio et. al., 1976; Spangler
and Sheerin, 1982; Sakai and Sonnerup, 1983; Mjølhus
and Hada, 1997). The ﬂuid version, now known as the
DNLS, reads

∂b
∂t

∂
∂x

+ α

(|b|2b) + iµ

∂2b
∂x2 = 0,

(9)

i − C2

i /4(C2

where normalizations are the same as in (1)-(4), α/CA =
C2
s ), 2µ/CA = c/ωpi is the ion inertia disper-
sion length, and CA, Ci, Cs are the Alfv´en, intermediate,
and sound speeds, respectively. In the DNLS equation,
b = −v, and

u = ρ =

|b|2
2(1 − β)

,

(10)

where β = C2

s /C2

A (the quasi-static approximation).

The DNLS describes evolution of weakly nonlinear,
quasi-parallel propagating, both right- and left-hand po-
larized Alfv´en waves (or ”magnetosonic” and ”shear
Alfv´en” waves), which are nearly degenerate. Modula-
tional instability is driven unstable for the left-hand po-
larized waves when β < 1, and for the right-hand po-
larized waves when β > 1 (Mjølhus, 1976; Spangler and
Sheerin, 1982; Sakai and Sonnerup, 1983), although pres-
ence of resonant ions signiﬁcantly alter the above condi-
tions, especially for β > 1 and moderate to large ion
to electron temperature ratio (Rogister, 1971; Mjølhus
and Wyller, 1988; Spangler, 1990; Medvedev et. al.,
1997). The DNLS is known to be integrable under various
boundary conditions (Kaup and Newell, 1978; Kawata
and Inoue, 1978; Kawata et. al., 1980; Chen and Lam,
2004).
In this paper, we restrict our discussion to the
case β ≪ 1, since only within this regime the use of the
ﬂuid version of the DNLS is justiﬁed, unless the ion to
electron temperature ratio is extremely low.

By re-scaling of the variables, t → µt/α2 and x →

µx/α, (9) is reduced as

∂b
∂t

+

∂
∂x

(|b|2b) + i

∂2b
∂x2 = 0.

(11)

A parallel, circularly polarized, ﬁnite amplitude Alfv´en
wave, bp = b0 exp(i(ω0t − k0x)), where b0, ω0, and k0
are real, satisﬁes (11) with the dispersion relation for the
parent wave, ω0 = b2
0. Now we superpose small
ﬂuctuations to bp and write

0k0 + k2

b = bp +

ǫ|n|bn exp(i(ωnt − knx)),

(12)

∞

Xn=−∞

where kn = k0 + nK, ωn = ω0 + nΩ, and n is an integer
(except for 0). Here, Ω and K are the frequency and
the wave number of longitudinal perturbations (quasi-
modes), u = ρ. At order of ǫ|±1|, we obtain linearized
equations

B. Linear perturbation analysis of the Hall-MHD
equation

Finite amplitude, circularly polarized Alfv´en wave in

the form below is an exact solution to (5)-(8),

bp = b0 exp(i(ω0t − k0x)),
vp = v0 exp(i(ω0t − k0x)),

where v0 = −b0/vφ0, vφ0 = ω0/k0, ρ = 1, and u = 0,
together with the dispersion relation

ω2
0 = k2

0(1 + ω0).

Now we add small ﬂuctuations and write

ρ = 1 +

ǫ|n|ρn exp(i(nΩt − nKx)) + c.c., (17)

3

(14)
(15)

(16)

u = 0 +

ǫ|n|un exp(i(nΩt − nKx)) + c.c., (18)

v = vp +

ǫ|n|vn exp(i(ωnt − knx)),

(19)

b = bp +

ǫ|n|bn exp(i(ωnt − knx)),

(20)

where kn = k0 + nK, ωn = ω0 + nΩ, n is an integer, and
c.c. represents the complex conjugate. At order of ǫ|±1|,
we obtain the following linearized equations

Ωρ1 = Ku1,
Ωu1 = Kb0(b+ + b∗

−) + βKρ1,

b0u1
2
b0u1
2

ω+b+ = −k+v+ + k+

+ k2

+b+ −

ω−b∗

− = −k−v∗

− + k−

+ k2

−b∗

− −

ω+v+ =

u1 − k+b+ +

ω−v∗

− =

u1 − k−b∗

− +

k0v0
2
k0v0
2

b0k0
2
b0k0
2

ρ1,

ρ1,

b0k0k+
2
b0k0k−
2

ρ1,(23)

ρ1,(24)

(21)
(22)

(25)

(26)

1
2

1
2

∞

Xn=1
∞

Xn=1
∞

Xn=−∞
∞

Xn=−∞

Ω = 2K(b2

0 + k0) ± K

K 2 + 2b2

0k0 + b4
0.

(13)

q

where we write the subscripts (±1) as (±) for brevity.
Combining these equations above, we obtain,

p

−2k0 − b2

If 0 < |K| < b0
0, the system exhibits the
modulational instability. The wave number correspond-
ing to the maximum growth rate is Kmax = b0(−k0 −
b2
0/2)1/2. When the system is modulationally unstable,
the frequency of sideband modes is obtained from the real
part of (13) as ω±1 = 2vφ0k±1 − ω0, where vφ0 = ω0/k0.
Therefore, the dispersion relation of the sideband modes
appears as a straight line, since the dispersion term is
cancelled by the nonlinear term.
In other words, the
nonlinear eﬀect and the dispersion eﬀect are balanced.
We will encounter again such a dispersion relation in nu-
merical analysis in Section 3 and 4, where more detailed
discussions will be given.

(Ω2 − βK 2)L+L− =

(L+R− + L−R+),

(27)

K 2b2
0
2

where

L± = ω2

± − k2

±(1 + ω±),

(28)

R± = k0k± (cid:18)

k0Ω
ω0K

+

Ωω±
k0K

− 1 − ω±(cid:19)

.

(29)

The dispersion relation (27) has been obtained and
solved numerically (Wong and Goldstein, 1986; Longtin

4

FIG. 1: Dispersion relation of parametric instabilities in the
Hall-MHD system. Shown are the real (red lines, left scale)
and imaginary (blue lines, right scale) normalized frequencies
plotted versus the normalized wave number, K/k0. Parame-
ters used are, k0 = −0.5, β = 0.5, and b0 = 0.4. For com-
parison, the dispersion relation of sideband wave modes and
the sound wave (zero parent wave amplitude) is superposed
as black solid and dashed lines, respectively. Forward and
backward lower (upper) sideband waves are labeled f − (+)
and b − (+), and the sound wave is labeled s.

and Sonnerup, 1986; Terasawa et. al., 1986; Vinas and
Goldstein, 1991; Hollweg, 1994; Champeaux et.
al.,
1999). Fig. 1 shows the real and imaginary frequencies
of the longitudinal waves when β = 0.5, b0 = 0.4, and
k0 = 0.5. Under this particular set of parameters, the
modulational instability (0 < K/k0 < 1) has a growth
rate larger than (or almost comparable with) the beat
instability around k = 1.3.

±b(∗)

It is instructive to look at (23) and (24) in order to
discuss how the side band mode frequencies are deter-
mined. The r.h.s. of these equations represent three
basic processes which determine the transverse magnetic
ﬁeld; the linear response (k±v(∗)
± ), the v × b nonlinear-
ity (k±b0u1/2), and the Hall eﬀect (k2
± − b0k0k±ρ/2).
Hereafter we will call these terms as ”linear”, ”nonlin-
ear”, and the ”dispersive” terms, respectively. For a
given set of parent wave parameters (b0 and k0), β, and
K, one can solve (27) to ﬁnd Ω associated with the
modulational instability (eigenvalue), together with ra-
tios among variables, ρ1, u1, b(∗)
± (eigenvector).
By varying K in both positive and negative regimes, the
dispersion relation can be visualized by plotting the real
part of ω ≡ ω0+Ω as a function of k ≡ k0+K, as shown in
Fig. 2 as a solid red line. Superposed in the ﬁgure are the
plots of ωlin = (k±v(∗)
± , ωnl = k±b0u1/2b(∗)
± , and
ωdisp = k2
± versus k, which are frequency
contribution from the three eﬀects introduced above. By
deﬁnition, ω = ωlin + ωnl + ωdisp.

± −b0k0k±ρ/2b(∗)

± , and v(∗)

± )/b(∗)

From the ﬁgure we notice that both ω and ωlin al-
most linearly depend on k, and thus sum of ωnl and ωdisp
should also depend linearly on k, suggesting that the non-
linear eﬀect and the dispersion eﬀect are balanced, as
they were for the DNLS equation discussed previously.

FIG. 2: The three frequency contributions, ωlin, ωnl, and
ωdisp, plotted versus k, using the same set of parameters used
for Fig. 1. See text for explanation of how to make the plot.
Both Re[ω] (red solid line) and ωlin are linearly dependent on
k, and so should be the sum of ωdisp and ωnl, suggesting that
the dispersion and the nonlinear eﬀects are cancelled each
other.

In other words, the mismatch of the resonance condition
due to the dispersion eﬀect is reduced by nonlinear inter-
action among the Fourier modes, just like in the case of
the DNLS (Section 2.1).

III. PHASE COHERENCE IN THE DNLS
EQUATION

In this Section, we discuss the relationship between
generation of solitary waves and the wave-wave inter-
action.
In Fig. 3 we show numerical time integration
of (11) under periodic boundary conditions, where the
envelope (|b|) is plotted in the phase space of time (t)
and space (x). As initial conditions, ﬁnite amplitude,
left-hand polarized, monochromatic Alfv´en waves with
the wave amplitude b0 = 0.4 and the wave mode num-
ber m = m0 = −11 are given, superposed with a very
small amplitude white noise with < |bnoise|2 >1/2= 10−5
within the range of −256 < m < 256, where the bracket
denotes spatial average over the simulation system. In
the above, the wave number k is related to the mode num-
ber m as k = 2πm/L, where the system size is L = 256.
We have used the convention that m and k positive (neg-
ative) represents the right- (left-) hand polarized waves.
For the numerical computation, we have employed the ra-
tionalized Runge-Kutta scheme for time integration and
the spectral method for evaluating spatial derivatives.
Number of grid points used for this run is 2048.

Since in Fig. 3 we are plotting the magnetic ﬁeld en-
velope, which is constant for the monochromatic, circu-
larly polarized waves, at the beginning not much wave

5

FIG. 3: Time evolution of envelope |b| in the DNLS model
(11) with periodic boundary conditions. Initial conditions are
given as a superposition of ﬁnite amplitude, left-hand polar-
ized monochromatic waves, and very small amplitude white
noise.

FIG. 4: Time evolution of the power spectrum (in logarithmic
scale), log |bm|, plotted in the phase space of the wave mode
number (m) and time. The parent mode is given initially
at m0 = −11. Positive (negative) m corresponds to right-
(left-) hand polarized waves. The wave number is given by
k = 2πm/L, where L = 256 is the system size.

activities are apparent. However, starting from t ∼ 200,
modulation of the envelope becomes increasingly more
evident, and around t ∼ 300 a series of solitary waves is
created. The number of solitary waves is decided by the
wave number that has the largest growth rate in (13).
After t ∼ 300 we observe a complex behavior of solitary
waves: they appear, propagate, disappear, and interact
with each other.

Corresponding time evolution of the power spectrum is
shown in Fig. 4. During 0 < t <
∼ 200, the parent wave en-
ergy (m = −11) is gradually transferred to the side-band
daughter waves (mainly, m = −4 and m = −18) through
the modulational instability. Later on, increasingly more
waves at diﬀerent mode numbers are generated due to
coupling among ﬁnite amplitude waves, and also due to
the modulational instability of the daughter waves, as
can be seen as widening of the power spectrum in the
m-space. Around t ∼ 300, the width of the spectrum
is maximized, corresponding to the appearance of the
solitary waves. When the solitary waves disappear, the
power spectrum becomes narrow again, representing the
uncertainty principle, i.e., the width of the wave packet
in the real and Fourier space are inversely proportional
to each other. We note that solitary waves disappear al-
most completely at certain time intervals like t ∼ 900.
This is reminiscent of the presence of (near) recursion of
the DNLS equation with periodic boundary conditions.
Next we show that distribution of wave phases and
frequencies are closely related to the generation and dis-
appearance of the solitary waves. We write the Fourier
transformed magnetic ﬁeld bk = |bk| exp iφk, and discuss
the relation between behavior of solitary waves and cor-
relation among wave phases, φk. A method to evaluate
the wave phase coherence has been proposed (Hada et.
al., 2003; Koga and Hada, 2003), which we brieﬂy ex-
plain below: Suppose we have a data containing waves,
BORG(x), where ’ORG’ stands for ’original data’. In the
present analysis, this is a snapshot of simulation data
evaluated at certain ﬁxed time. From BORG(x) we make

a phase randomized surrogate (PRS), BP RS(x), and a
phase correlated surrogate (PCS), BP CS(x), by shuﬄing
and making equal all the phases, respectively. Then we
compute the ”phase coherence index”,

Cφ = (LP RS − LORG)/(LP RS − LP CS),

(30)

where

L∗ =

|B∗(x + δ) − B∗(x)|

(31)

Xx

is the ﬁrst order structure function evaluated for data (*),
and the asterisk stands for either ORG, PRS, or PCS. In
the above, δ is an external parameter representing the
coarsing scale, which we choose to be the grid size for
the present analysis. When Cφ is close to 0, wave phases
are almost random, while Cφ being close to unity sug-
gests that phases are almost completely coherent. Fig.
5 shows time evolution of Cφ for the run shown in Fig.
3. Apparently, the appearance and disappearance of soli-
tary wave trains correspond to the increase and decrease
of Cφ. This is easily understood since the solitary wave-
form may be produced by equal-phase superposition of
many waves with diﬀerent wavelengths.

Now we discuss how phase coherence is generated by
the modulational instability in the DNLS. Since the non-
linearity of the DNLS equation is cubic, it follows that,
the basic nonlinear interaction in this model is the four
wave resonance. (On the other hand, if we regard |b|2
as a quasi-mode as represented in the static approxima-
tion (10), the interaction can be viewed as the three wave
resonance among two Alfv´en waves and the quasi-mode.)
We have the resonance relation among the wave num-

bers,

k1 + k2 = k3 + k4,

(32)

and a similar relation should hold for the wave frequen-
cies as well. While the resonance condition of the wave

6

two daughter waves driven unstable by the parent wave
at m = m0. It is seen that exchange of the wave energy
among the four wave modes is enhanced (reduced) when
the relative phase is close to constant (varies rapidly)
in time. The same tendency is seen in any quartets in
resonance with diﬀerent choice of the wave numbers. Us-
ing this result, we can now interpret the time evolution
shown in Fig. 3 and 4 in detail. Around t ∼ 200, due
to the modulational instability driven by the ﬁnite am-
plitude parent wave, a pair of side band waves (daughter
waves) appears. At this stage, phase coherence is gener-
ated only within a small number of resonant quartets,
and the growing sideband waves are restricted within
k < 0 (when β is low), because of the derivative nonlinear
term in (11): if a quartet includes some of the right-hand
polarized wave modes (k > 0), this quartet is ”stable” in
the sense that the exchange of energy among them stays
only at a ﬂuctuation level. Around t ∼ 300, the side-
band waves are suﬃciently large, and quartets of higher
harmonic sideband wave modes (including k > 0 modes)
become unstable. This broadening of the power spectrum
(as seen in Fig. 4) corresponds not only to generation of
solitary waves (Fig. 3), but also to the generation of the
phase coherence (Fig. 5), since a large number of quartes
undergo signiﬁcant nonlinear interaction among them as
evidenced in Fig. 6.

The interpretation above is justiﬁed by inspection of
the dispersion relation directly computed from the sim-
ulation run. By computing ˙φk using (35) and plotting it
versus k1, the dispersion relation in the simulation sys-
tem can be visualized for any given time. In Fig. 7 we
show time evolution of the dispersion relation, at t = 0,
t = 200, and t = 550. Initially, almost all the wave modes
have extremely small amplitude except for the parent
wave, and thus they are located around the linear disper-
0k + k2. As many of the wave modes
sion relation, ω = b2
acquire ﬁnite wave amplitude via the wave-wave interac-
tion, they tend to be aligned on straight lines (two line
segments exist in (b): notice a little diﬀerence in slopes of
lines for k positive and negative). The slope of the line
corresponds to the propagation speed of a soliton, and
the interval of k which are aligned on the line segment
represent the waves the soliton is composed of. At later
time (c), it is more evident that the wave modes are con-
centrated on a number of diﬀerent line segments, with
diﬀerent ranges of k, and with diﬀerent slopes. These
line segments do not necessarily go through the origin,
since they represent the four (but not three) wave inter-
action. Consequently, even though there can be many
solitary waves (coherent structures) with diﬀerent prop-
agation speeds, the resonance condition among the four
waves is well satisﬁed, i.e., the frequency mismatch is
small, and thus a large ﬂow of energy exchange among
the modes is expected.

The nonlinear interaction among diﬀerent waves can
be inspected through evaluation of the so-called bi-
coherence (Dudok de Wit et. al., 1999; Diamond et. al.,

FIG. 5: Time evolution of the phase coherence index, Cφ.
When Cφ ∼ 0, the wave phases are almost random, while
Cφ ∼ 1 represents that the wave phases are almost completely
correlated.

frequencies usually has the mismatch due to the disper-
sion eﬀect in the DNLS, as we saw in Section 2, the dis-
persion eﬀect and the nonlinear eﬀect cancels each other,
and so there is no mismatch of frequencies when the wave
modes are coupled.

Let us deﬁne the relative phase among the four waves

as

θ(k) ≡ φk1 + φk2 − φk3 − φk4,

(33)

where k = {k1, k2, k3, k4} represents the quartets of wave
modes in resonance. Small temporal change of θ(k) im-
plies that the phase coherence between the four waves
is strong (locked), because this temporal change corre-
sponds to the mismatch of the resonance condition of
frequencies.

From (11) and (33), we have

d
dt (cid:18)

|bk1|2

2 (cid:19)

X

and

= k1

|bk1||bk2||bk3||bk4| sin θ(k),

(34)

d
dt

(φk1) = k1

|bk2||bk3||bk4|
|bk1|

X

cos θ(k) + k2
1,

(35)

where the summation is to be taken over all the combi-
nations of (k2, k3, k4) which satisfy (32). Equation (34)
indicates that the evolution of wave energy of a certain
mode is determined by ’energy ﬂow’ exchanged between
the quartets,

F (k) ≡ k1|bk1||bk2||bk3||bk4| sin θ(k).

(36)

The direction of the energy ﬂow is determined by the sign
of sin θ(k) and k1.

Fig. 6 is a scatter plot in the phase space of F (k) and
˙θ(k)|), in which a single dot is plotted at
|dθ(k)/dt| (= |
every time step based on the simulation run shown in
Fig. 3. The set of wavenumbers, kj = 2πmj/L, with
m3 = m4 = m0 = −11, m1 = −15, m2 = −7 are chosen
in such a way that the waves satisfy the resonance con-
dition, and also that the modes m = m1 and m2 are the

7

˙θ(k)| (see text for de-
FIG. 6: Relation between F (k) and |
tailed explanation of the plot and the variables). The set of
wave numbers chosen for the plot are kj = 2πmj/L, where
L = 256 is the system size, and m3 = m4 = m0 = −11,
m1 = −15, m2 = m3 + m4 − m1 = −7. The ﬁgure sug-
gests that the exchange of wave energy between the sites is
enhanced (reduced) when the relative phase is almost con-
stant (varies rapidly) in time. The unit of the vertical axis is
degrees per unit time.

2000),

bc(k1, k2, k3) =

| < ρk1bk2b∗

k3 > |

< |ρk1bk2|2 >< |bk3|2 >

.

(37)

p

Presence of ﬁnite wave power at k1, k2, k3, together with
bc ∼ 1 suggests that the waves are in resonance. Fig. 8
compares time evolution of averaged bi-coherence index,
bφ = N −1
bc, total absolute energy ﬂow among all the
|F (k)|, and the phase coherence
quartets, Ftot = N −1
P
index, Cφ. On computing bφ and Ftot, all the combina-
tions of wave numbers (N diﬀerent ways) are exhausted.
Apparently variations of the three quantities agree well
to each other, suggesting that the phase coherence is gen-
erated as the wave energy is exchanged among resonant
quartets.

P

Finally, we make a remark on the direction of the en-
ergy ﬂow. From Fig. 4 we see that the parent wave mode
(k = k0 = 2πm0/L) remains to be the dominant one
throughout the simulation run. Therefore, among the
many quartets of wave modes in resonance (k1, k2, k3, k4)
with k1 +k2 = k3 +k4, the most dominant quartet (which
makes (36) the largest) is the one with k3 = k4 = k0. The
resonance condition of wave number for this quartet is,

k0 + k0 = k1 + k2.

(38)

In fact, the set of wave numbers used for Fig. 6 was
chosen so that (38) is satisﬁed. In Fig. 9 we have plot-
ted sin θ(k) in the phase space of m1 and time, with
k3 = k4 = k0 and k2 determined by (32). The plot shows
the direction of the energy ﬂow between the parent wave
and the daughter waves. For example, associated with
the ﬁrst formation of solitary wave rows (t ∼ 200 − 350),
sin θ(k) < 0 for k1 < 0 and sin θ(k) > 0 for k1 > 0.
Namely, in both regimes of k1 > 0 and k1 < 0, the en-
ergy ﬂow deﬁned in (36) is positive, i.e., the energy is

FIG. 7: The wave frequency ˙φk (red circles) versus k evalu-
ated at (a) t = 0, (b) t = 350, and (c) t = 550. At t = 0, all
the wave modes except for the parent wave have very small
wave amplitude, and thus they are located around the linear
dispersion relation, ω = b2
0k + k2 (blue line). However, as the
wave modes grow via wave-wave interaction, they tend to be
aligned along straight lines. The slope of the line corresponds
to the propagation speed of a soliton, and the interval of k
which are aligned on the line segment represent the waves
the soliton is composed of. Among the quartet of waves on a
single line, the frequency mismatch for the resonance condi-
˙θ(k)| is small, and consequently, energy exchange among
tion |
them F (k) is large, as seen in Fig. 6.

transferred from the parent wave to the daughter waves.
During the time interval when solitary waves disappear
(t ∼ 350 − 400), we observe the opposite, i.e., the energy
ﬂows back from the daughter to the parent waves.

IV. NONLINEAR RELATION AMONG PHASE
AND FREQUENCY: HALL-MHD EQUATIONS

In this Section, we discuss the modulational instability
in the Hall-MHD equations (Eqs. (5)-(8)), and compare
the results with that in the DNLS.

8

FIG. 8: Time evolution of Cφ (red area), bφ (blue area), and
−6, (black solid line). Variation of Cφ well corresponds
Ftot/10
to those of bφ and Ftot.

FIG. 10: Time evolution of envelope |b| due to Eqs.(5-8)
with periodic boudary conditions. Initial conditions are given
as a superposition of ﬁnite amplitude,
left-hand polarized
monochromatic waves, and very small amplitude white noise.

servation of the magnetic ﬁeld energy alone, and (c) the
assumption of constant plasma density in the dispersion
term (i.e., the Hall-term, ∂/∂x(ρ−1∂b/∂x), is simpliﬁed
by assuming ρ to be constant). These approximations are
justiﬁed as long as the power of the longitudinal modes
(Fig. 11(b)) is much less than that of the transverse
modes (Fig. 11(a)). Around t ∼ 350, the power spectrum
of sideband wave modes and the daughter wave modes
begin to grow. To check the validity of the approxima-
tion in (10), we evaluate the cross-correlation function,

c(λ, τ ) =

< |b(x + λ, t + τ )|2ρ(x, t) >
< |b(x + λ, t + τ )|4 >< (ρ(x, t))2 >

(39)

p

where we simply let λ = τ = 0 in the present analysis.
The result is plotted as a solid line in Fig. 12(a). When
0 < t <∼ 350, relation (10) is well held, but around
t ∼ 350, the cross correlation starts to decrease. Fig.
12(b) shows time evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld energy
(broken line), parallel kinetic energy (solid line), and per-
pendicular kinetic energy (dotted line). The decay of the
correlation function occurs at the same time as the mag-
netic ﬁeld and the perpendicular kinetic energy both de-
crease. Around t ∼ 500, inverse cascade begins to take
place (discussion of the inverse cascade in the DNLS can
be found in Krishan and Nocera, 2003).

The validity of the static approximation has been ex-
amined by several authors. By performing hybrid (ki-
netic ions + an electron ﬂuid) simulations, Machida et.
al.(1987) argues that the system automatically adjusts
itself to a state described by the static approximation
when ion kinetic eﬀects are included. However, as time
elapses, longitudinal mode grows and the static approxi-
mation is soon violated. Spangler (1987) concluded that
the breakdown of the static approximation takes place
in association with rapid evolution of wave packets by
ponderomotive force. Combining (5) and (6), we have

∂2ρ
∂t2 − β

∂2ρ
∂x2 =

∂2
∂x2

|b|2
2

+ ρu2

.
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(40)

This equation describes propagation of sound waves in

FIG. 9: Evolution of sin θ(k), plotted in the phase space of
the wave mode number (m1) and time.

Numerical time integration of the Hall-MHD set of
equations, (5)-(8), is performed, in a similar way as for
the DNLS equation discussed in the preceding section.
As initial conditions, ﬁnite amplitude, left-hand polar-
ized, monochromatic, parallel Alfv´en waves are given,
with the wave amplitude b0 = 0.4 and the mode number
m = m0 = −20. Superposed with the parent wave is a
small amplitude white noise with < |anoise|2 >1/2= 10−5,
where a represents any variable in (5)-(8) within the
range of −128 < m < 128. The system size is L = 256,
in which there are 1024 grid points. We chose β = 0.5
so that the modulational instability growth rate is the
largest among all the parametric instabilities possibly
driven unstable. The parameters speciﬁed here are essen-
tially equivalent to the ones used in the previous section.
Fig. 10 shows time evolution of |b| plotted in a way
similar to Fig. 3, and Fig. 11 represent time evolution of
log |bm| and log |ρm|, which is the power of the transverse
and the longitudinal waves, respectively, as a function of
the wave mode number, m.

From comparison of the DNLS and the Hall-MHD sim-
ulation runs, we dicuss validity of various approximations
assumed in the DNLS. In particular, we look at the fol-
lowing: (a) the quasi-static approximation, (10), (b) con-

9

FIG. 11: Time evolution of power spectrum (in logarithmic
scale), log |bm| and log |ρm|, plotted in the phase space of the
wave mode number (m) and time. The parent mode is given
initially at m0 = −20. Positive (negative) m corresponds to
positive (negative) helicity.

a presence of a source term (r.h.s.), which consists of
the ponderomotive force, |b|2/2, and the advection eﬀect,
ρu2 (Spangler, 1987). The latter represents the ”self-
coupling” of longitudinal waves.

In order to clarify the roles of the ”self-coupling” term,
which is not discussed in the analysis of Spangler (1987),
we have run numerical experiment in which the advec-
tion terms are artiﬁcially removed from the Hall-MHD
set of equations. The broken line in Fig. 12(a) depicts
time evolution of the cross correlation function evaluated
for the run without the advection terms, using the same
simulation parameters as the previous run. The time
evolution for both runs are essentially the same, suggest-
ing that the process playing the most dominant role in
violating the static approximation is the ponderomotive
force, as suggested by Spangler (1987). The self-coupling
term cannot be neglected, however, since its magnitude
becomes comparable to other terms as the longitudinal
wave modes grow.

FIG. 12: Time evolution of (a) the cross-correlation, c(λ =
0, τ = 0) evaluated for the run shown in Fig. 10 (solid line),
and c(0, 0) evaluated for a run in which the advection term is
artiﬁcially removed from the Hall-MHD set of equations (bro-
ken line). (b) magnetic ﬁeld energy (broken), perpendicular
kinetic energy (dotted), and parallel kinetic energy (solid),
plotted versus time. Around t ∼ 350, together with the decay
of the cross-correlation function, the magnetic ﬁeld and the
perpendicular kinetic energy decrease and the parallel kinetic
energy increases.

k and ˙φb

In a similar way described before to plot the dispersion
relation of nonlinear Alfv´en waves in the DNLS directly
from the simulation run, we have computed the ˙φρ
k and
˙φb
k, using (5) and (8), respectively. Corresponding to ap-
pearance of solitary waves and localized structures, the
frequency distribution ( ˙φρ
k), i.e., the dispersion
relation, appears along a straight line, as shown in nu-
merically evaluated dispersion relation, Fig. 13. Since
these waves propagate in the same direction as the par-
ent wave, the frequency distribution along a straight line
is usually satisﬁed at the origin. Furthermore, Fig. 13
shows that the longitudinal and transverse wave modes
have a similar slope, which is the velocity of the struc-
tures composed of these waves. Thus, the three wave
resonance condition between the transverse wave modes
and the longitudinal wave modes is approximately satisi-
ﬁed.

Fig. 14 displays time evolution of the wave frequency
( ˙φb
k) for the parent wave (m = −20, solid line), and some
of the daughter waves (m = −8, dotted line) (m = −3,
broken line). When 0 < t <∼ 500, the parent wave
mode is dominant, and its frequency stays almost con-

stant. Around t ∼ 500, the inverse cascade begins to take
place, and the parent wave frequency starts to be modi-
ﬁed. On the other hand, the frequencies of the lower side-
band wave modes remain almost constant (broken line).
Thus, the phase velocity of the modes with the maxi-
mum power is close to the velocity of the structures, and
it corresponds to the slope of the dispersion relation in
Fig. 13.

Now we examine the approximation (c) we listed before
in the DNLS, i.e., the assumption of constant density in
the Hall term. In order to do so, let us explicitly write
down the phase relation of (8),

dφb
k
dt

= ωnl + ωdisp + ωlin,

(41)

ωnl = k

Xk=k1+k2

|uk1||bk2|
|bk|

cos(θbub

k=k1+k2),

(42)

ωdisp = k3k

|bk3||Vk4|
|bk|

Xk=k3+k4

cos(θbbV

k=k3+k4),

(43)

ωlin = −k

cos(φb

k − φv

k),

(44)

|vk|
|bk|

l −φz

k −φy

where V = ρ−1 and θxyz
k=l+m = φx
m. In the linear
perturbation analysis in section 2.2 we have called ωnl,
ωdisp, and ωlin as contribution to the wave frequency
via ’nonlinear’, ’dispersion’, and ’linear’ eﬀects, respec-
tively. The dispersion eﬀect is not simply k2, but is
k2 − b0k0Kρ/2/b(∗)
± , where the latter term arises due to
longitudinal perturbation. Just like in the DNLS model,
the balance between the ’nonlinear’ and the ’dispersion’
terms also exist in the Hall-MHD equations.

Fig. 15 shows ωnl, ωdisp, and ωlin evaluated at t=350,
500, and 720. We see that ωlin is linear in k:
this
may be regarded as self-generation of the (dispersive)
Walen’s relation, which is the relation between the trans-
verse magnetic and the velocity ﬁeld satisﬁed for Alfv´enic
ﬂuctuations and rotational discontinuities (e.g., Landau
and Lifshitz, 1962). For example, the normalized mag-
netic and the velocity ﬁeld, b0 and v0 in (14-15), satisfy
v0 = ∓b0/vφ0, where the signs represent parallel/anti-
parallel propagation with respect to the background mag-
netic ﬁeld, and the phase velocity vφ0 is determined from
the dispersion relation (16). The term cos(φb
k) in
the r.h.s. of (44) takes the value of either 1 or -1 (so
that ωlin/k = ±|vk|/|bk|) in association with broadening
of the power spectrum. Also, from Fig. 13 and 15, we
ﬁnd numerically that ωlin/k ∼ k/ω (corresponding to the
appearance of near straight lines in these plots). There-
fore we ﬁnd that the system approaches automatically
to a state where k/ω = ±|vk|/|bk| (Walen’s relation) is
automatically fulﬁlled. Furthermore, since ωlin is almost
linear in k in Fig. 13, so is the sum of ωdisp and ωnl as

k − φv

10

FIG. 13: Numerically obtained dispersion relation at (a)
t=350, (b) t=500, (c) t=720. The blue line indicates the lin-
ear dispersion relation, and the red circles and black crosses
show the frequency evaluated from the temporal variation of
the magnetic ﬁeld mode ( ˙φb
k) and that of the density modes
( ˙φρ
k), respectively. Superposed (green) line has a slope equal
to the phase velocity of the wave mode which has the max-
imum power. Corresponding to the appearance of solitary
waves and localized structures, the wave power tends to be
aligned along a straight line.

k (similar to ˙φρ

(41) suggests, i.e., the contribution to the wave frequency
nonlinear in k is cancelled due to balance between the
dispersion and the nonlinear eﬀects.
Fig. 16 shows distribution of ˙φu

k) versus
k. When 0 < t <
∼ 500, these longitudinal ﬂuctuations are
found to be distributed along the same straight line in the
dispersion relation, and should be recognized as the pon-
deromotive density ﬂuctuations, produced via interaction
of Alfv´en waves. In the present case, the ﬂuctuations are
produced in the course of the modulational instability,
and the two interacting Alfv´en waves are on the same
branch with nearly equal wave numbers and the wave
frequencies, so that the resultant ponderomotive ﬂuctua-
tions have similar phase velocity as the interacting Alfv´en
waves. The phase velocities of the longitudinal ﬂuctua-

11

FIG. 14: Time evolution of the wave frequency ( ˙φb
k) for the
waves with m = −20 (solid line), m = −8 (dotted line), and
m = −3 (broken line). The wave number of these modes are
k = −0.49, -0.19, and -0.07, respectively. When 0 < t <
∼ 500,
the parent wave mode is dominant, and its frequency is almost
constant. Around t ∼ 500, the inverse cascade begins to take
place, and the parent wave frequency starts to vary. On the
other hand, the frequencies of the lower sideband wave modes
remain almost constant after t > 500.

tions (ρ and u in Fig. 16), transverse ﬂuctuations (b
and v in Fig. 13), and the acoustic wave (solid line in
Fig. 13), are measured as ∼ 0.78, ∼ 0.78, and ∼ 0.70,
respectively. The former two are (almost) equal, and
are distinct from the last one. Thus we conclude the
longitudinal ﬂuctuations observed at 0 < t <
∼ 500 are
the ponderomotive density ﬂuctuations, rather than the
sound wave. Around t ∼ 500, however, the dispersion re-
lations of the longitudinal ﬂuctuaions start to approach
the sound wave branch. This is a consequence of the
nonlinear development of the modulational instability, in
which the ponderomotive density ﬂuctuation acts as a
driver to excite the sound waves, as represented in (40).
This excitation of the sound wave is also related to
particle heating due to the modulational instability of
Alfv´en waves. Many authors discussed Landau damp-
ing associated with envelope modulation of Alfv´en waves
(Mjølhus and Wyller, 1986,1988; Spangler; 1989, 1990;
Medvedev and Diamond, 1996; Passot and Sulem; 2003).
However, the ion acoustic wave mode is exclueded, as
long as the ”ponderomotive” expansion is used in scal-
ing of the system.
In the case of the weak nonlinear-
ity, the ”triple-degenerate” expansion makes a similar
description at β ∼ 1 (Hada, 1993). The kinetic ”triple-
degenerate” DNLS equation will be useful for elucidating
the physics of the heating process. The use of numeri-
cal simulation models (Vasquez, 1995) and/or theoreti-
cal models (Snyder, 1997; Passot and Sulem, 2004) that
include the strong nonlinearity and kinetic eﬀects are de-
sired.

V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS

In this paper, we discussed the nonlinear relation
among phases and frequencies in the modulational insta-
bility of parallel propagating Alfv´en waves in the context

FIG. 15: The three basic elements of the wave frequency,
ωlin (light blue squares), ωnl (blue circles), and ωdisp (green
crosses), deﬁned in (42)-(44), plotted versus k, evaluated at
(a) t = 350, (b) t = 500, and (c) t = 720. As discussed in
Section 2.2, ωlin is almost linear in k, suggesting that the dis-
persive Walen’s relation is held. Since the dispersion relation
(Fig. 13) suggests that the wave frequency, which is a sum
of the three terms above, is linear in k also, the linearity in
k of the sum of ωdisp and ωnl should be held as well, indicat-
ing that the dispersion and the nonlinear eﬀects cancel each
other, and the system is brought to a state where the wave
resonance condition is easily satisﬁed.

of one-dimensional two ﬂuid models, using linear pertur-
bation analysis and numerical experiments.

The main results of the present paper may be summa-

rized as follows:

(1) Corresponding to generation of solitary waves or
coherent structures by the wave modulation, dispersion
relation of the waves tend to be aligned along straight
segments of lines (Fig. 7 and Fig. 13). The slopes of
these straight lines correspond to velocities of the solitary
waves and the structures, and are well estimated as the
phase (∼ the group) velocity of the wave with the largest
wave power.

(2) The exchange of wave energy among the resonant

12

complex. There are two issues to be discussed: the phys-
ical processes leading to the variation of the phase coher-
ence index, and the validity of the index.

In the DNLS, the energy ﬂow among the wave modes
generates order not only among the wave frequencies but
also among wave phases (see Appendix, and also Fig. 9),
and the associated broadening of the power spectrum al-
ways corresponds to the global energy ﬂow because of
the balance between the dispersion eﬀect and the non-
linear eﬀect. However, in the Hall-MHD, the presence
of the localized structures does not always correspond
In Fig. 17
to the broadening of the power spectrum.
we plot time evolution of Cφ and bφ based on the Hall-
MHD simulation run discussed before. The broadening
of the power spectrum correlates well with bφ, but not
quite well with Cφ. This probably is due to the fact that
the structures observed in the simulation are not always
generated by the local energy ﬂow.

In case of the modulational instability starting from
a single parent wave plus small amplitude background
noise, one can evaluate the relative phase among the res-
onant wave modes and also the energy ﬂow among them,
and identify clearly time intervals the phase coherence is
generated (see Fig. 9, and also early part of Fig. 18). On
the other hand, after the initial stage of the modulational
instability, wave modes at low wave numbers produced
via the inverse cascade become dominant, it is no longer
possible to identify the time intervals in which the phase
coherence is produced.

Regarding the phase coherence index, we have to say
that its physical meaning is still not completely clear,
although it was demonstrated that the index is a useful
measure to identify the presence of wave-wave interaction
(Koga and Hada, 2003). Since the concept of the phase
synchronization is universal (e.g., He and Chian, 2005),
it is important to develop a method that can characterize
the underlying nonlinearity of the system. This discus-
sion is translated into the explanation or improvement of
the phase coherence index.

The relation between the longitudinal and transverse
modes has important information on the nature of the
In the dispersion relation, lon-
parametric instability.
gitudinal and transverse modes were found to be both
linear, with almost the same slope, corresponding to the
structures generated by modulational instability. On the
other hand, the longitudinal ﬂuctuations generated by
the decay instability distribute on the sound wave line
with some band width (Terasawa et. al., 1986). Such
a cross relation among diﬀerent variables in MHD tur-
bulence is very important to understand the turbulent
dynamics. Henceforth, we have to analyze in detail the
general rules of the relation among these variables in par-
allel Alfv´en turbulence generated by parametric instabil-
ity. Also, it is essential to include the kinetic eﬀects when
β is moderately large.

It is important to identify the phase coherence brought
by nonlinear wave-wave interaction, in order to discuss
underlying physical processes leading to the generation

FIG. 16: Numerically computed frequency ˙φu
k(red circles)
and ˙φρ
k (black crosses) versus the wave number k at (a) t=350,
(b) t=500, (c) t=720. When 0 < t <
∼ 500, the longitudinal
modes ˙φu
˙φρ
k are distributed around a line slightly (but dis-
k ,
tinctly) above the sound wave branch (solid black line). The
former may be called the ”ponderomotive density ﬂuctuation”
branch. As later times, however, we ﬁnd that the longitudinal
wave frequencies are re-distributed around the sound branch.

wave modes is enhanced (reduced) when the relative
phase is close to constant (varies rapidly) in time (Fig.
6). This is a universal feature in a wide variety of non-
linear systems: e.g., it can also be seen in a single triplet
model (Appendix).

(3) The fact that the dispersion relation is essentially
given as segments of lines in the dispersion relation sug-
gests that the mismatch in the resonance conditions
among the coupled wave modes is reduced automatically.
The waves can eﬃciently exchange wave energy and gen-
erate the phase coherence.

In the DNLS equation (Section 3), increase and de-
crease of the phase coherence index well corresponds to
the appearance and disappearance of solitary wave trains.
However, in the Hall-MHD equations (Section 4), evolu-
tion of the phase coherence index turns out to be more

13

via strong and correlated impulse force rather than via
sequence of random forces which last for a long time.

For example, let us consider pitch angle diﬀusion due
to the turbulence consisting of superposition of parallel,
circularly polarized Alfv´en waves (slab model). Within
this model, it is well known that the particles cannot dif-
fuse across 90 degrees pitch angle, within the framework
of the quasi-linear diﬀusion, simply because there are no
waves which can resonate with particles without parallel
velocities. However, the mirror force can reﬂect the parti-
cles quite easily, if there exist solitary waves with a ﬁnite
amplitude variation of the total magnetic ﬁeld. Further-
more, in a presence of many of these solitary waves, in-
dividual particle trajectory may be given as combination
of quasi-ballistic motion between the solitary waves and
trapping by one of the solitary waves. Fermi type accel-
eration is possible (Kuramitsu and Hada, 2000), and fur-
thermore, depending on relative dominance between the
ballistic and trapped trajectories, ensemble of these par-
ticles may appear as either super- or sub-diﬀusive (Zim-
bardo et. al., 2000; Carreras et. al., 2001).
In order
to properly describe time evolution of the ensemble, one
has to invoke the fractal diﬀusion formalism (Metzler and
Nonnenmacher, 1998; del-Castillo-Negrete et. al., 2004).

Acknowledgments

We thank Drs. S. Matsukiyo and D. Koga for ﬂuit-
ful discussions and valuable comments. This paper has
been supported by JSPS Research Felowships for Young
Scientists in Japan.

Appendix: Three wave resonance: A single triplet

A triplet is known as the most basic element of non-
linear interaction that can be extracted from various
phenomena. Decay instability of Alfv´en waves in space
plasma is an example. A ﬁnite amplitude Alfv´en wave
propagating parallel to the ambient magnetic ﬁeld decays
into a backward propagating Alfv´en wave and a forward
propagating ion acoustic wave. We consider a set of three
wave equations (3W) discussed by Sagdeev and Galeev
(1969),

˙C1 = −iC∗
2 C3,
˙C2 = −iC∗
1 C3,
˙C3 = −iC1C2,

(45)

(46)

(47)

where Cj is the normalized complex amplitude of the
jth mode. The above set of equations is derived via res-
onance condition among frequencies of each mode,

ω3 = ω1 + ω2.

(48)

By introducing the wave quanta (wave action), Nj =
|Cj|2 = ǫj/ωj, where ǫj is the wave energy of mode j, we

FIG. 17: Time evolution of Cφ (red area) and bφ (broken line).
In association with the broadening of the power spectrum, bφ
varies accordingly, but Cφ does not.

FIG. 18: Time evolution of the relative phase between the
parent and the other wave modes, sin(φb

k1 − φu

k0 − φb

K ).

of the coherent structures. This is particularly impor-
tant for analysis of spacecraft data, since there are many
localized structures in space plasmas which are produced,
presumably, by processes other than nonlinear wave-wave
interactions. Dudok de Wit et. al.(1999) and Soucek et.
al.(2003) discussed the so-called Volterra model, a way
to identify nonlinear wave-wave interactions using the
satellite and the simulation data, by utilizing the high or-
der spectrum analyses and weak turbulence theory. This
method may shed light on understanding the nature of
wave-wave interactions when the weak and strong tur-
bulence processes co-exist.
In the future, we hope to
clarify the process of the phase coherence generation via
the wave-wave interaction in more detail, and to extend
the Volterra-type models in such a way that the weak
turbulence approximation is not necessary.

Finally, we make a remark on energetic particle trans-
port in the turbulence including the localized structures.
Since these structures have broad power spectrum in the
k space, particles with wide range of energy can resonate
with them. However, this is not the more important side
of the wave-particle interaction, from the viewpoint of
the phase coherence – rather, it is in the fact that large
amount of electromagnetic ﬁeld and plasma energy is
concentrated within the solitary wave (phase correlated
wave/structure), so that it can inﬂuence particle motion

14

FIG. 19: Time evolution of Nj with the initial condition,
N3 >> N1, N2. The broken, dotted, and solid lines indicate
N1, N2, and N3, respectively. The system is ’unstable’ in that
the ’quanta’ originally stored in mode 3 are re-distributed to
modes 1 and 2 within an instability time scale (∼ 3000).

FIG. 20: Same as Fig. 19 except that the initial condition
here is N2 >> N1, N3. The broken, dotted, and solid lines
indicate N1, N2, and N3, respectively. The system is ’stable’
in the sense that variations of N1, N2, and N3 are small.

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)

have the Manley-Rowe relations,

N1 + N3 = const,

N1 − N2 = const.

Now let us write Cj = Aj exp (iφj), with Aj (=
Nj)
and φj real, then we obtain a relation about the phase
diﬀerence among the triplets (θ = φ3 − φ2 − φ1),

p

˙θ = ˙φ3 − ˙φ2 − ˙φ1,

= −(

−

A2A3
A1

−

A3A1
A2

) cos θ,

= cot θ

log(A1A2A3),

A1A2
A3
d
dt

where ˙φj is the (nonlinear) frequency and ˙θ represents the
frequency mismatch in the resonance condition. From
the above, the following conservation law is derived

A1A2A3 cos θ = D0 = const.

(54)

The 3W equations at a glance have six degrees of free-
dom, but if we write them into the real amplitude and
phase, we ﬁnd that the equations actually have only four
degrees of freedom: the real amplitudes A1, A2, A3, and
the phase diﬀerence θ. Since there are three invariants
((49), (50), (54)), the 3W equation set is integrable. All
initial problem of 3W can be solved, and the solution
can be written using elliptic functions. Behavior of the
system may be physically interpreted as either stable or
unstable depending on initial distribution of wave quanta
to the three eigenmodes (Fig. 19 and 20).

Let us deﬁne the ﬂow of quanta F , which represents

the interaction between the eigenmodes,

F = ˙N1 = ˙N2 = − ˙N3 = 2A3A2A1 sin θ,

(55)

and consider its relationship to temporal change of the
phase diﬀerence ˙θ. The sign of sin θ determines the di-
rection of quanta ﬂow.

FIG. 21: Time evolution of N1, N2, N3, and θ for the case
that A1A2A3 cos θ = 0.

As for the initial conditions there are two distinct pos-
sibilities. The ﬁrst is that there are some modes without
any quanta, and the second is that all the modes have
some ﬁnite number of quanta. In the ﬁrst case, cos θ = 0
always since D0 = 0. In Fig. 21, we see that θ jumps 180
degrees periodically because the direction of the quanta
ﬂow remain unchanged per half the oscillation period.

From now on, we only discuss the case where all the
modes have some ﬁnite number of quanta. Since D0 =
const 6= 0, we can rewrite F as

F = 2D0 tan θ,

(56)

and therefore, the condition −π/2 < θ < π/2 is required
in order that F be ﬁnite. This condition is evident from
(54). Eq. (56) suggests that |F | is large when θ is close
to either −π/2 or π/2, while F = 0 when θ = 0 (Fig.
22(a)).

Fig. 22(b) shows time evolution of

˙φj . Both fast and
slow temporal changes of θ can be seen. Around the point
where the number quanta is close to take extremal values,
the temporal change of θ becomes rapid. If the system is
unstable, temporal change of the phase diﬀerence is much
faster when the quanta is at local minimum, than when it
is at local maximum. Fig. 22(c) shows this relationship

more clearly. Using (54) and (56), and ˙φj = −D0/Nj,
we have

15

˙θ = −D0(

1
N3

−

1
N1

1
N2

−

) = D0

˙F
2G2 ,

(57)

where G = A1A2A3. This equation exactly shows the
relationship discussed above.

FIG. 22: (a) The energy ﬂow F (solid line, left axis) and sin θ
(dotted line, right axis) are plotted versus time. When the
energy is exchanged between the modes, the relative phase
stays at almost at a constant level. The same tendency is
observed in systems with multiple degrees of freedom (cf.,
˙φj. The thin, solid,
Fig. 9 and 18). (b) Time evolution of
and dotted lines indicate ˙φ1,
(c)
Relation between ˙θ and F for a (single) triplet. The exchange
of quanta between the sites is enhanced when the relative
phase is approximately constant in time, while the exchange
of quanta is reduced when the relative phase varies rapidly.

˙φ2, and ˙φ3, respectively.

In summary, if the temporal change of the phase dif-
ference is small (large), quanta ﬂow between the modes
is large (small).
In other words, the stronger (weaker)
the modes are correlated, are the interaction between
the modes strong (weak). This relationship between the
phase coherence and the interaction among eigenmodes
is universal. For example, similar relationship is held in a
system where many triplets are connected, in the DNLS,
and in the Hall-MHD models. Also, when cos θ = 0 ini-
tially, we have a situation similar to the case that Nj = 0
for one (or more) of the modes, and thus cos θ = 0 always.

∗

Also at Department of Earth System Science and Technol-
ogy, Kyushu University

1 del-Castillo-Negrete, D., Carreras, B. A., and Lynch, V.
E.:Fractional diﬀusion in plasma turbulence, Phys. Plas-
mas, 11(8), 3854-3864, 2004.

2 Carreras, B. A., Lynch, V, E., and Zaslavsky, G, M.:
Anomalous diﬀusion and exit time distribution of particle
tracers in plasma turbulence model, Phys. Plasmas, 8(12),
5096-5103, 2001.

3 Chanpeaux, S., Laveder, D., Passot, T., and Sulem, P, L.
: Remarks on the parallel propagation of small-amplitude
dispersive Alfv´en waves, Nonl. Proc. in Geophys., 6, 169-

178, 1999.

4 Chen, X. J. and Lam, W. K.: Inverse scattaring trans-
form for the derivative nonlinear Schr¨odinger equations
with nonvanishing boundary conditions, Phys. Rev. E, 69,
art. no. 066604, 2004.

5 Derby, N. F.: Modulational instability of ﬁnite-amplitude,
circulary polarized Alfv´en waves, Astrophys. J., 224(3),
1013-1016, 1978.

6 Diamond, P. H., Rosenbluth, M. N., Sanchez, E., Hidalgo,
C., Van Milligen, B., Estrada, T., Branas, B., Hirsch, M.,
Hartfuss, H.J., and Carreras, B. A.: In seach of the elu-
sive zonal ﬂow using cross-bicoherence analysis, Phys. Rev.

Lett., 84(21), 4842-4845, 2000.

7 Dudok de Wit, T., Krasnosel’skikh, V. V., Dunlop, M.,
and Luhr, H.: Identifying nonlinear wave interactions in
plasmas using two-point measurements: A case study of
Short Large Amplitude Magnetic Structures (SLAMS), J.
Geophys. Res., 104, 17079-17090, 1999.

8 Galeev, A. A., Oraevskii, V. N., and Sagdeev, R. Z.: Uni-
versal instability of an inhomogeneous plasma in a mag-
netic feild, Sov. Phys. JETP, 17, 615-620,1963.

9 Ghosh, S. and Papadopoulos, K.: The onset of Alfv´enic

turbulence, Phys. Fluids, 30 (5), 1371-1387, 1987.

10 Goldstein, M. L.: An instability of ﬁnite amplitude circu-
larly polarized Alfv´en waves, Astrophys. J., 219 (2), 700-
704, 1978.

11 Hada, T.: Evolution of large amplitude Alfv´en waves in
the solar wind with β ∼ 1, Geophys. Res. Lett., 20(22),
2415-2418, 1993.

12 Hada, T., Koga, D., and Yamamoto, E.: Phase coherence
of MHD waves in the solar wind, Space Sci. Rev., 107 (1-2),
463–466, 2003.

13 Hasegawa, A., Kodama, Y., and Watanabe, K.: Self-
organization in Korteweg - de Vries turbulence, Phys. Rev.
Lett., 47(21), 1525-1529, 1981.

14 He, K., Chian, A. C. -L.: Nonlinear dynamics of turbulent
waves in ﬂuids and plasmas, Nonl. Proc. in Geophys., 12,
13-24, 2005.

15 Hollweg, J. V.: Beat, modulational, and decay instabilities
of a circularly polarized Alfv´en wave, J. Geophys. Res, 99,
23431-23447, 1994.

16 Kaup, D. J. and Newell, A. C.: An exact solution for a
derivative nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation, J. Math. Phys.,
19, 798–801, 1978.

17 Kawata, T. and Inoue, H.: Exact solution of the deriva-
tive nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation under the nonvanish-
ing conditions, J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 44, 1968-1976, 1978.

18 Kawata, T., Sakai, J. -I., and Kobayashi, N. :

Inverse
method for the mixed nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation and
soliton solutions, J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 48, 1371-1379, 1980.
19 Koga, D. and Hada, T.: Phase coherence of foreshock
MHD waves: wavelet analysis, Space. Sci. Rev, 107, 495-
498, 2003.

20 Krishan, V. and Nocera, L.: Relaxed states of Alfv´enic

turbulence, Phys. Lett. A, 315, 389-394, 2003.

21 Kuramitsu, Y. and Hada, T.: Acceleration of charged par-
ticles by large amplitude MHD waves: eﬀect of wave spatial
correlation, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27(5), 629–632, 2000.
22 Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M.: Electrodynamics of
continuous media, Pergamon, Oxford, New York, 1984.
23 Longtin, M., Sonnerup, B.: Modulational instability of cir-
culary polarized Alfv´en waves, J. Geophys. Res., 91, 798-
801, 1986.

24 Lucek, E. A., Horbury, T. S., Balogh, A., Dandouras, I.,
and Reme, H.: Cluster obsevations of structures at quasi-
parallel bow shocks, Ann. Geophys., 22, 2309-2314, 2004.
25 Machida, S., Spangler, S. R., and Goertz, C. K.: Simu-
lation of amplitude-modulated circularly polarized Alfv´en
waves for beta less than one, J. Geophys. Res., 92(A7),
7413-7422, 1987.

26 Mann, G., Luhr, H., and Baumjohann, W.: Statistical
analysis of short large-amplitude magnetic ﬁeld structures
in the vicinity of the quasi-parallel bow shock, J. Geophys.
Res., 99(A7), 13315-13323, 1994.

27 Medvedev, M. D. and Diamond, P. H.: Fluid models for
kinetic eﬀects on coherent nonlinear Alfv´en waves, Phys.

16

Plasmas, 3(3), 863-873, 1996.

28 Medvedev, M. D., Diamond, P. H., Shevchenko, V. I., and
Galinsky, V, L.: Dissipative dynamics of collisionless non-
linear Alfv´en wave trains, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78(26), 4934-
4937, 1997.

29 Metzler, R. and Nonnenmacher, T. F.: Fractional diﬀu-
sion, waiting-time distributions, and Cattaneo-type equa-
tions, Phys. Rev. E, 57(6), 6409-6414, 1998.

30 Mio, K., Ogino, T., Minami, K., and Takeda, S.: Modiﬁed
nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation for Alfv´en waves propagat-
ing along the magnetic ﬁeld in cold plasmas, J. Phys. Soc.
Japan, 41, 265-271, 1976.

31 Mjølhus, E.: Application of the reductive perturbation
method to long hydromagnetic waves parallel to the mag-
netic ﬁeld in a cold plasma, Report no. 48, Department of
applied mathematics, Univ. Bergen, Norway, 1974.

32 Mjølhus, E.: On the modulational instability of hydromag-
netic waves parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld, J. Plasma. Phys.,
16, 321-334, 1976.

33 Mjølhus, E. and Wyller, J.: Alfv´en solitons, Phys. Scr., 33,

442-451, 1986.

34 Mjølhus, E. and Wyller, J.: Nonlinear Alfv´en waves in a
ﬁnite beta plasma, J. Plasma Phys., 40, 299-318, 1988.
35 Mjølhus, E. and Hada, T.: Soliton theory of quasi-parallel
Alfv´en waves, in Nonlinear waves and chaos in space plas-
mas, edited by T. Hada, and H. Matsumoto, Terrapub,
Tokyo, 121-169, 1997.

36 Nariyuki, Y. and Hada, T.: Self-generation of phase coher-
ence in parallel Alfv´en turbulence, Earth, Planets, Space,
57, e9-e12, 2005.

37 Nocera, L. and Buti, B.: Bifurcations of coherent states of
the DNLS equation, Phys. Scr., T63, 186-189, 1996.
38 Passot, T. and Sulem, P. L.: Long-Alfv´en wave trains
in collisionless plasmas. 1. Kinetic theory, Phys. Plasmas,
10(10), 3887-3905, 2003.

39 Passot, T. and Sulem, P. L.: A Landau ﬂuid model for
dispersive magnetohydrodynamics, Phys. Plasmas, 11(11),
5173-5189,2004.

40 Rogister, A.: Parallel propagation of nonlinear low-
frequency waves in high-beta plasma, Phys. Fluids, 14,
2733-2739, 1971.

41 Sagdeev, R. Z.CGaleev, A. A.: Nonlinear Plasma Theory,
edited by O’Neil, T. M. and Book, D. L., W. A. Benjamin,
New York, 1969D

42 Sakai, J. -I. and Sonnerup, B.: Modulational instability of
ﬁnite amplitude dispersive Alfv´en waves, J. Geophys. Res.,
88, 9069-9078, 1983.

43 Snyder, P. B., Hammett, G. W., and Dorland, W.: Landau
ﬂuid models of collisionless magnetohydrodynamics, Phys.
Plasmas, 4(11), 3974-3985, 1997.

44 Soucek, J., Dudok de Wit, T., Krasnoselskikh, V., and
Volokitin, A.: Statical analysis of nonlinear wave inter-
actions in simulated Langmuir turbulence data, Annales,
Geophysicae, 21, 681-692, 2003.

45 Spangler, S. R. and Sheerin, J. P.; Properties of Alfv´en
solitons in a ﬁnite-beta plasma, J. Plasma Phys., 27, 193-
198, 1982.

46 Spangler, S. R.: The evolution of nonlinear Alfv´en waves
subject to growth and damping, Phys. Fluids, 29(8), 2535-
2547, 1986.

47 Spangler, S. R.: Density ﬂuctuations induced by nonlinear

Alfv´en waves, Phys. Fluids, 30(4), 1104-1109, 1987.

48 Spangler, S. R.: Kinetic eﬀects on Alfv´en-wave nonlinear-
ity, 1. Ponderomotive density ﬂuctuations, Phys. Fluids, B

1(8), 1738-1746, 1989.

49 Spangler, S. R.: Kinetic eﬀects on Alfv´en-wave nonlinear-
ity, 2. The modiﬁed nonlinear-wave equation, Phys. Fluids,
B 2(2), 407-418, 1990.

50 Terasawa, T., Hoshino, M., Sakai, J. -I., and Hada, T.:
Decay instability of ﬁnite-amplitude circulary polarized
Alfv´en waves: A numerical simulation of stimulated bril-
louin scattering, J. Geophys. Res., 91, 4171-4187, 1986.
51 Tsurutani, B. T., Lakhina, G. S., Pickett, J. S., Guarnieri,
F. L., Lin, N., and Goldstein, B. E.: Nonlinear Alfv´en
waves, proton perpendicular acceleration, and magnetic
holes/decreases in interplanetary space and the magneto-
sphere: intermediate shocks?, Nonl. Proc. in Geophys., 12,
321-336, 2005.

17

52 Vasquez, B. J.: Simulation study of the role of ion kinetics
in low-frequency wave train evolution, J. Geophys. Res.,
100(A2), 1779-1792, 1995.

53 Vinaz, A. F., Goldstein, M. L.: Parametric instabilities
of circularly polarized large-amplitude dispersive Alfv´en
waves: excitation of parallel-propagating electromagnetic
daughter waves, J. Plasma. Phys., 46, 107-127, 1991.
54 Wong, H. K., Goldstein, M. L.: Parametric instabilities of
circularly polarized Alfv´en waves including dispersion, J.
Geophys. Res., 91, 5617-5628, 1986.

55 Zimbardo, G., Greco, A., and Veltri, P.: Superballistic
transport in tearing driven magnetic turbulence, Phys.
Plasmas, 7(4), 1071-1074, 2000.

