6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kinetic Vlasov Simulations of collisionless magnetic Reconnection

H. Schmitz and R. Grauer
Theoretische Physik I, Ruhr-Universit¨at, 44780 Bochum, Germany

A fully kinetic Vlasov simulation of the Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Magnetic Re-
connection Challenge is presented. Good agreement is found with previous kinetic simulations using
particle in cell (PIC) codes, conﬁrming both the PIC and the Vlasov code. In the latter the complete
distribution functions fk (k = i, e) are discretised on a numerical grid in phase space. In contrast to
PIC simulations, the Vlasov code does not suﬀer from numerical noise and allows a more detailed
investigation of the distribution functions. The role of the diﬀerent contributions of Ohm’s law are
compared by calculating each of the terms from the moments of the fk. The important role of the
oﬀ–diagonal elements of the electron pressure tensor could be conﬁrmed. The inductive electric
ﬁeld at the X–Line is found to be dominated by the non–gyrotropic electron pressure, while the
bulk electron inertia is of minor importance. Detailed analysis of the electron distribution function
within the diﬀusion region reveals the kinetic origin of the non–gyrotropic terms.

PACS numbers: 02.70.-c 52.25.Dg 52.65.Ff 52.25.Xz

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magnetic reconnection is the fundamental process
which allows magnetized plasmas to convert the energy
stored in the ﬁeld lines into kinetic energy of the plasma.
It plays an important role in the dynamics of space and
laboratory plasmas. In the magnetopause it allows par-
ticles from the solar wind to enter the magnetosphere.
Also it is believed to be the main source of energy for
solar ﬂares and coronal mass ejections.

In ideal magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) the frozen–in
ﬂux condition prohibits the magnetic ﬁeld topology to
change. Thus reconnection depends on a mechanism that
breaks the frozen–in condition. This non–ideal mech-
anism is responsible for the dynamics of the diﬀusion
region, where the topology change takes place.
In re-
sistive MHD with low values of resistivity an elongated
Sweet–Parker current sheet develops, which limits the re-
connection rate.1,2,3 Higher values for the resistivity, on
the other hand, are extremely unrealistic for the astro-
physical reconnection processes.

In the last years it has become apparent that the
minimal model to adequately describe collisionless re-
connection is Hall–MHD.4,5,6,7 In Hall–MHD the ion in-
ertial length λi is introduced as a characteristic scale
length such that for distances smaller than λi the ion
dynamics can decouple from the magnetic ﬁeld. Within
the framework of the Geospace Environmental Modeling
(GEM) Magnetic Reconnection Challenge a two dimen-
sional magnetic reconnection setup based on the Harris
equilibrium was studied. Simulations were done using
MHD models with constant or localized resistivity8,9,
Hall–MHD models8,9,10, hybrid models where electrons
are treated as ﬂuid and ions are treated kinetically4,11
and with fully kinetic particle codes.4,12,13 The models
which included the Hall eﬀect, either directly or implic-
itly in the kinetic treatment, showed very similar results
in terms of the global reconnection rate. The small scale
structures of the dissipation region, on the other hand,
In Ref. 14 it
varied substantially between the models.

was concluded that the large scale ion dynamics control
the rate of reconnection and that the dispersive charac-
ter of Whistler modes is essential in the understanding
of the results.

These results emphasize the importance of the Hall
term for the reconnection. At the neutral X–line, the
magnetic ﬁeld strength is exactly zero and the Hall
term vanishes. Only the electron bulk inertia and the
non–gyrotropic part of the electron pressure tensor can
yield a contribution at the X–line. Kuznetsova et al.15
pointed out, that the bulk inertia of the electrons can
only contribute if the current sheet develops on elec-
tron timescales. Vasyliunas16 was the ﬁrst to emphasize
the important role of the oﬀ–diagonal components of the
pressure tensor in the diﬀusion region. Later their role
was investigated by a number of authors (see e.g Refs.
11,15,17,18). The non–gyrotropic pressure can be un-
derstood as originating from the meandering motion of
the electrons, which bounce in the magnetic ﬁeld reversal
region, also known as Speiser motion.19

In this study, we use a Vlasov code to investigate the
GEM reconnection. In contrast to Particle–In–Cell (PIC)
codes, Vlasov codes discretise the complete distribution
functions of electrons and ions on a grid in phase space.
This has the advantage of allowing more detailed inves-
tigations of the distribution functions, since numerical
noise is completely absent from the Vlasov–approach.
The main focus of our investigation is the electron dy-
namics. These can be understood in two ways. On one
hand, one can take a microscopic point of view by looking
at the detailed structure of the distribution function. On
the other hand one can look at the moments of the dis-
tribution function and their importance for Ohm’s law.
The Vlasov–approach allows us to do both with very high
accuracy.

In the next section we brieﬂy present the methods used
in our investigation. The GEM reconnection setup in-
cluding the initial conditions and the boundary condi-
tions is described in section III. In section IV we discuss
the results. Separate subsections are dedicated to the dis-

cussion of the contributions of the terms in Ohm’s law,
especially the oﬀ–diagonal components of the pressure
tensor, and to the detailed discussion of the electron dis-
tribution function. Section V will give a summary and
present conclusions.

II. METHODS

The basis of the kinetic description of magnetic recon-
nection are the distribution functions fk(x, v, t) of species
k, where k = i, e denotes ions or electrons. The tempo-
ral behavior of the distribution function is given by the
Vlasov equation

∂fk
∂t

qk
mk

+ v · ∇fk +

(E + v × B) · ∇vfk = 0.

Here qk and mk are the charge and the mass of the par-
ticles of species k. The Vlasov equation describes the
incompressible ﬂow of the species phase space densities
under the inﬂuence of the electromagnetic ﬁelds.

The ﬁelds are solved using the Darwin approximation

(see, for example Refs. 20,21)

∇ × ET = −

1
µ0

∇ × B = ε0

+ j ,

,

∂B
∂t
∂EL
∂t

∇ · EL =

1
ε0
∇ · B = 0 ,

ρ ,

where B is the magnetic and EL and ET are the lon-
gitudinal and the transverse part of the electric ﬁeld,
∇ × EL = 0, ∇ · ET = 0, E = EL + ET . The Dar-
win approximation eliminates the fast electromagnetic
vacuum modes while all other plasma modes are still de-
scribed. Instead of neglecting the displacement current
completely, only its transverse part is dropped while its
longitudinal part is kept. The elimination of the vac-
uum modes allows larger time-steps in the simulation
since only the slower non–relativistic waves have to be
resolved.

The charge density ρ and the current density j are

given by the moments of the distribution function,

ρ =

j =

qk

qk

Z

Z

Xk

Xk

fk(x, v)d3v ,

vfk(x, v)d3v .

These moments couple the electromagnetic ﬁelds back to
the distribution function. In this way the Vlasov-Darwin
system constitutes a non–linear system of partial integro–
diﬀerential equations.

For the simulations we use a 2 1
code described in Ref. 21. Here 2 1

2 –dimensional Vlasov–
2 –dimensional means,

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

2

we restrict the simulations to 2 dimensions in space but
include all three velocity dimensions. In contrast to PIC–
codes, the distribution function is integrated in time di-
rectly on a numerical grid in phase space. The integra-
tion scheme is based on a ﬂux conservative and positive
scheme22 which obeys the maximum principle and suﬀers
from relatively little numerical diﬀusion. The main idea
of the scheme is to calculate the ﬂuxes into and out of a
grid cell by interpolating the primitive of the distribution
function. The one dimensional scheme has been general-
ized to two spatial and three velocity dimensions using
the backsubstitution method described in Ref. 23. The
backsubstitution method has been shown to be slightly
superior and, more importantly, much faster than the
straightforward time–splitting scheme.

The Maxwell equations in the Darwin approximation
can be recast into a form which does not include any
time derivatives (see, for example, Refs. 20,21). This
makes it possible to express the electromagnetic ﬁelds
E(t0), B(t0) at any time t0 by the density ρ(t0) and the
current density j(t0) at the time t0. No time integration
of the ﬁelds is necessary and the conditions ∇ · B = 0
and ∇ · E = ρ are always met by construction.

III. GEM RECONNECTION SETUP

The reconnection setup is identical to the param-
eters of the GEM magnetic reconnection challenge.14
The initial conditions are based on the Harris sheet
equilibrium24 in the x,y–plane

B(y) = B0 tanh

(7)

y
λ (cid:17)

(cid:16)

ˆx.

The particles have a shifted Maxwellian distribution

f0i,e(y, v) = n0(y) exp

x + (vy − V0i,e)2 + v2
v2
z

mi,e
2Ti,e (cid:0)
(cid:21)
(cid:1)
(8)
Here Ti,e are the constant electron and ion temperatures
and V0i,e are the constant electron and ion drift velocities.
The density distribution is then given by

(cid:20)

.

y
λ (cid:17)
The Harris equilibrium demands that

n0(y) = n0 sech2

(cid:16)

.

= n0(Ti + Te)

Ti + Te
V0i − V0e

B2
0
2µ0

V0e
V0i

λ =

2
eB0
Te
Ti

and

= −

.

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

In addition a uniform background density nb = 0.2n0
with the same temperature Ti,e but without a directed
velocity component is included.

The total GEM system size is Lx = 25.6λi

in x–
direction and Ly = 12.8λi in y–direction, where λi is
the ion inertial length λi = c/ωpi with the ion plasma fre-
quency is deﬁned using the given by ωpi = (ne2/ε0mi)1/2.
Because of the symmetry constraints we simulate only
one quarter of the total system size: 0 ≤ x ≤ Lx/2 and
0 ≤ y ≤ Ly/2. The sheet half thickness is chosen to be
λ = 0.5λi. The temperature ratio is Te/Ti = 0.2 and
a reduced mass ratio of mi/me = 25 is used. This re-
duced mass ratio is consistent with the GEM setup and
was chosen as a compromise between a good separation
of scales (both in space and time) and the computational
eﬀort. The numerical expense was especially high for
the kinetic codes.4,12,13 The reduced mass ratio was also
used in the hybrid codes4,11 for the sake of comparison.
A higher mass ratio (i.e. a smaller electron mass) re-
sults in a smaller electron skin depth which has to be
resolved by the grid. At the same time the numerical
time step has to be reduced to resolve the electron Lar-
mor frequency. Both eﬀects together imply that, in a
spatially two–dimensional simulation, the computational
cost increases with the square of the mass ratio for all ki-
netic simulations independent whether thay use PIC or
Vlasov–methods. Simulations with substantially higher
mass ratios using the generally more demanding Vlasov
approach, therefore, currently seem out of reach. The
simulation is performed on 256 × 128 grid points in space
for the quarter simulation box. This corresponds to a
resolution of 512 × 256. This implies a grid spacing of
∆x = ∆y = 0.05λi. The resolution in the velocity space
was chosen to be 20 × 20 × 40 grid points. In vz direc-
tion the grid was extended to account for the electron
acceleration in the diﬀusion region. The simulation was
performed on a 32 processor Opteron cluster and took
approximately 150 hours to complete.

An initial perturbation

ψ(x, y) = ψ0 cos(2πx/Lx) cos(πy/Ly)

(13)

is added to the magnetic vector potential component
Az. The magnitude of the perturbation is chosen to be
ψ0 = 0.1B0/λi. The rather high values of the initial per-
turbation generates a single large magnetic island. The
initial linear growth of the tearing mode is bypassed and
the system is placed directly in the nonlinear regime. The
reason for this relatively strong perturbation is that the
initial growth of the instabilities depends strongly on the
electron model. In contrast to this, the GEM challenge
demonstrated convincingly, that the later nonlinear stage
is not sensitive to the details of the underlying model.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

As a measure of the reconnected magnetic ﬁeld we use
the diﬀerence ∆Ψ of the magnetic vector potential com-
ponent Az between the X–point and the O–point. Figure
1 shows the reconnected magnetic ﬂux as a function of

3

 3.5

 3

 2.5

 2

 1.5

 1

 0.5

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

 25

 30

 35

 40

 20
t W

i

FIG. 1: Time evolution of the reconnected magnetic ﬂux Ψ
throughout the simulation run.

time. The evolution of ∆Ψ agrees very well with the re-
sults of other simulations of the GEM challenge.14 After
an initial small increase, the ﬂux starts to rapidly in-
crease at tΩi ≈ 15. A value of ∆Ψ = B0/λi is reached
at tΩi ≈ 17.7. This is slightly later to what is ob-
served in the PIC simulations. Pritchett12 reports a time
tΩi ≈ 15.7 where the same ﬂux level is reached. While
the level of saturation is comparable to the other GEM
results, it is again reached slightly later than in Ref. 12
at time tΩi ≈ 30.

The upper panel of Figure 2 shows the out of plane
magnetic ﬁeld Bz at Ωit = 17.7. One can clearly iden-
tify the quadrupolar structure generated by the Hall
currents.25,26 The peak value of the magnetic ﬁeld |Bz|
in the island structure is ≈ 0.17B0 and is located at
|x| ≈ 1.7λi. This is a somewhat lower magnetic ﬁeld
than in Ref. 12 and is also located slightly closer to the
X–line. In the course of the simulation both the size of
the magnetic island and the magnitude of the peak mag-
netic ﬁeld increase. For this reason, the diﬀerences to
the PIC simulations can be attributed to the small dif-
ferences in the temporal behavior. This also explains the
magnetic ﬁeld towards the top and bottom boundaries
of the simulation box. These ﬁelds, which can be seen
in Figure 2, have essentially disappeared at Ωit = 20,
approximately the same time that the peak magnetic re-
connection rate is seen.

The middle and lower panel of Figure 2 show the elec-
tron and ion out of plane current densities je,z and ji,z at
Ωit = 17.7. While the ion current density almost exactly
follows the ion number density ni, the electron current
density is strongly enhanced near the X–line where the
number densities are depleted. The thickness of the elec-
tron current layer is smaller than the ion skin depth but
larger than the electron skin depth. The size is deter-
mined by the meandering motion of the electrons around
the neutral line. In addition to this current sheet, we can
observe thin current layers emanating from the X–line

Y
Out of plane magnetic ﬁeld Bz

4

Electron out of plane current je,z

Ion out of plane current ji,z

FIG. 2: The out of plane magnetic ﬁeld Bz (upper panel), the electron out of plane current je,z (middle panel) and the ion out
of plane current ji,z (lower panel) at time Ωit = 17.7

which run along the separatrix. These structures have
not been reported in previous PIC simulations but can
be seen in Hall–MHD simulations.4 We point out again
that the mass ratio in the GEM simulations was ﬁxed
at mi/me = 25 for both PIC4,12,13 and hybrid4,11 sim-
ulations. The diﬀerence between the Vlasov code and
the PIC code, therefore, can only be explained by the
diﬀerences in the numerical approach.

The electron and ion bulk velocity proﬁles vx(x) along
the direction of the current sheet are shown in Figure
3. One can see that the electrons are ejected away from

the X–line at super–Alfv´enic speeds. These velocity pro-
ﬁles are almost identical to those reported in Ref. 12. In
contrast to those results, no averaging over a ﬁnite time
period had to be carried out here because the Vlasov
simulations do not suﬀer from artiﬁcial numerical noise.

A. Ohm’s Law

Within the GEM reconnection challenge it has be-
come clear that the Hall–MHD model is a minimal model

Electrons
Ions

x

v

 0

 1.5

 1

 0.5

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-10

-5

 5

 10

 0
x / l

i

FIG. 3: Velocity proﬁle at Ωit = 18.1 as a function of x at
the location of the current sheet z = 0 for electrons and ions.

to understand collisionless reconnection.4 In Hall–MHD
Ohm’s law has the form

m
ne2

dj
dt

= E + vi × B −

j × B +

1
ne

1
ne

∇ · Pe,

where the resistivity has been neglected. This is the ex-
act electron momentum equation which can be derived
from kinetic theory of a collisionless plasma without any
approximations. At large scale lengths only the MHD
terms play a role, while the Hall term and the electron
pressure gradient can be neglected. To investigate the
regions in which the terms of the generalized Ohm’s law
become important, we calculated the diﬀerent contribu-
tions in the whole reconnection region.

The top panel of Figure 4 shows the inductive electric
ﬁeld Ez. This inductive ﬁeld is necessary for reconnection
to take place. The region of enhanced Ez is situated in a
relatively large region around the X–line. The peak elec-
tric ﬁeld is located in an elongated area extending about
two ion inertial lengths in the y–direction and about 4
ion inertial lengths in the x–direction. In contrast, the
region where the ﬁeld exceeds half its peak value is almost
circular with a diameter of about 5 ion inertial lengths.
The middle panel of Figure 4 shows the z–component of
the Hall term (j × B)z. In contrast to the inductive elec-
tric ﬁeld, this quantity shows a more detailed structure.
Two strong peaks are found left and right of the X–line.
The peak values slightly exceed the maximum value of
Ez. These peaks coincide with the maxima of the elec-
tron outﬂow velocity (see Figure 3). This shows that
the Hall term is most important in the outﬂow regions
where the electrons are accelerated to super Alfv´enic ve-
locities. In addition, two weaker peaks are located above
and below the X–line, where the electrons are acceler-
ated towards the X–line and the electron velocity starts
to diverge from the E × B–velocity. Due to the sym-
metry conditions, the Hall–term is exactly zero at the
X–line itself. In addition to the structure around the X–

5

line, we also observe sheets of negative valued Hall–term
along the separatrix. We attribute this to the current
loop that generates the quadrupolar magnetic ﬁeld Bz.
Away from the X–line, the electrons responsible for the
current have to cross the separatrix back into the up-
stream region in order to close the loop. Therefore, the
Hall–term will have negative values along the separatrix.
The magnitude of the Hall–term here is almost half the
peak magnitude in the X–line region.

The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the distribution of
− (vi × B)z. This term becomes non–zero when ions can
move across the magnetic ﬁeld lines in a region of a few
ion inertial lengths around the X–line. Again two peaks
can be observed in the outﬂow region. The peak values
are, however, less than half of the inductive electric ﬁeld.
A striking feature in this picture is the almost circular
ring around the X–line, where the ions become demagne-
tized. The sheets of enhanced value along the separatrix
are narrower than those observed from the Hall–term.
They have the same sign as the peaks near the X–line
and therefore partially cancel the Hall–term.

Figures 5 and 6 display the components of the electron
pressure tensor. Although only the two mixed elements
Pxz and Pyz play a role in the z–component of Ohm’s
law, the other elements are shown for completeness. The
upper panel of Figure 5 shows the diagonal terms of the
pressure tensor. Here we see the diﬀerences in the heating
of the electrons in the three directions. In all three cases
the maximum is reached in the outﬂow region, where the
electron velocities are super Alfv´enic. The heating in
the x–direction, which is mainly parallel to the magnetic
ﬁeld lines, is strongest. Pxx is increased mostly in the
outﬂow region, with only a slight increase in the diﬀusion
region. In the outﬂow region Pyy and Pzz are comparable,
because these two directions are roughly perpendicular to
the magnetic ﬁeld lines. Within the diﬀusion region Pyy
and Pzz are, however, diﬀerent. While Pyy is enhanced in
a narrowing X type region, Pzz shows a bar like structure.
The reason for this structure of Pzz may be seen in the
acceleration of a part of the electron population in the
z–direction. This will become more apparent in the next
section, where the electron distributions are investigated
in detail.

The oﬀ–diagonal elements of the pressure tensor are
shown in Figure 6. The magnitude of these is roughly
one order of magnitude smaller than the diagonal el-
ements which agrees remarkably well with the results
of Kuznetsova et al.11 The Pxy component (top panel)
shows a quadrupolar structure similar to the out out
plane magnetic ﬁeld Bz. The Pxz component has two
extrema left and right of the X–line at the edges of the
diﬀusion region in agreement with Ref. 11. In addition,
we ﬁnd two more extrema along the y = 0 line in the elec-
tron acceleration region and also enhanced values around
the separatrix. Finally, Pyz shows a double bar structure
in the diﬀusion region and also extrema are found in the
electron acceleration region.

The terms of the pressure tensor that contribute at the

6

Ez

(j × B)z

− (vi × B)z

FIG. 4: z–component of the inductive electric ﬁeld Ez (upper panel), Hall Term j × B (middle panel) and the negative
z–component of vi × B (lower panel) at time Ωit = 17.7

X–line x = y = 0 are given by ∂Pxz/∂x and ∂Pyz/∂y. In
Figure 7 we have plotted the inductive electric ﬁeld Ez at
the X–line over time together with the two gradients of
the oﬀ–diagonal elements of the pressure tensor. We can
clearly observe that the two contributions ∂Pxz/∂x and
∂Pyz/∂y are roughly equal. The sum of the two shows
are remarkable agreement with the electric ﬁeld over the
whole time of the simulation. This indicates that, at the
X–line, the bulk inertia plays only a minor role. The
bulk inertia scales like λe/L (see Ref. 16), where λe is
the electron inertial length and L is a typical gradient

scale length. Around the zero line of the magnetic ﬁeld,
the scale lengths of the electron dynamics are given not
by the electron inertial lengths, but by the larger scale of
the meandering electron motion.15,19,27 For this reason,
the contribution of the non–gyrotropic pressure exceeds
the bulk electron inertia. For more realistic mass ratios
we expect the electron bulk inertia to be completely neg-
ligible. The pressure terms should, on the other hand,
remain important also for higher mass ratios. Note that
the importance of the non–gyrotropic pressure has been
shown only close to the X–line. Away from the X–line,

Pxx

Pyy

Pzz

Pxy

Pxz

Pyz

FIG. 5: The diagonal components of the pressure tensor at
time Ωit = 17.7

FIG. 6: The oﬀ–diagonal components of the pressure tensor
at time Ωit = 17.7

but still inside the diﬀusion region, we ﬁnd the Hall–term
j × B to play a dominant role.

7

Ez
x Pxz
y Pyz
y Pyz

x Pxz + ¶

z
E

 0.3

 0.25

 0.2

 0.15

 0.1

 0.05

 0

-0.05

 0

 5

 10

 20

 25

 30

 15
t W

i

FIG. 7: Inductive electric ﬁeld Ez at the X–line over time
together with the contributions ∂Pxz/∂x and ∂Pyz/∂y from
the pressure tensor.

B. Electron distribution function

To analyze the kinetic mechanism that is responsible
for the generation of the non–gyrotropic electron pres-
sure, we have to look at the structure of the electron
distribution functions in the vicinity of the X–line. Fig-
ure 8 shows isosurface plots of fe(x, v) in velocity space
for various ﬁxed positions (x, y) in the simulation box.
The sequence of sample points are chosen to follow a
path from inﬂow region, just outside the diﬀusion region,
through the diﬀusion region and to a point in the outﬂow
region. The ﬁrst panel shows the distribution function
at (x, y) = (0.025, 0.675). This is close to the symme-
try axis x = 0 and in the inﬂow region, just outside the
diﬀusion region. Note that the points could not be cho-
sen to lie on the lines of symmetry (x = 0 or y = 0)
since these were between the grid points in conﬁguration
space. Here the distribution function is slightly elongated
in the x–direction indicating a slightly larger pressure
Pxx > Pyy, Pzz at this point. This moderate increase in
Pxx can also be observed in Figure 5. While Pyy and
Pzz exhibit a sharp increase at the inﬂow edge of the
diﬀusion region, Pxx rises more gradually. The distribu-
tion at this point is totally made up of the background
electron population. The point (x, y) = (0.075, 0.275)
lies just inside the diﬀusion region. In addition to the
original background population, here two new electron
populations suddenly appear. Both of these have a neg-
ative vz–velocity. The ﬁrst population is elongated in
vx and vy direction. It is slightly bent which indicates
a gyro motion. We interpret this population as being
the background electrons originating from the other side
of the current sheet. These electrons move through the
magnetic zero line and show a bunched gyro motion when
they enter the region on the other side with the oppositely
directed magnetic ﬁeld. Finally the second new electron
population shows a sharp distribution with a strong nega-

¶
¶
¶
(x = 0.025, y = 0.675)

(x = 0.075, y = 0.275)

8

(x = 0.125, y = 0.175)

(x = 0.475, y = 0.025)

(x = 1.125, y = 0.025)

(x = 2.425, y = 0.025)

FIG. 8: Isosurface of the electron distribution function in velocity space for diﬀerent positions in the simulation box. The red
plane is vz =const, the blue plane is vx =const and the green plane is vy =const. The isosurface is drawn at fe(vx, vy, vz) =
fmax/2 where fmax = fmax(x, y) if the maximum value of the distribution function at the position (x,y). The velocity box
ranges from vk =-3.67 to 3.67 for all three velocity components.

tive vz–velocity. These are the electrons which have been
accelerated in the diﬀusion region.

In the left panel on the middle row of Figure 8 the
sample point (x, y) = (0.125, 0.175) has moved closer to
the y = 0 line of symmetry but away from the x = 0
line of symmetry. Here the populations already seen in
the last panel become more pronounced. The gyration of

the electrons from the opposite side of the current is now
more apparent. This population has a distribution which
exhibits a banana like shape, bent around the vx–axis.
This indicates a bunched gyro–motion. In addition, the
distribution has been stretched to even higher negative
vz–velocities. An slight asymmetry can be seen in the
vx–direction due to the onsetting acceleration towards

the outﬂow region. As one moves away from the x = 0
line of symmetry towards larger values of x, one must
distinguish between those electrons ﬂowing into the dif-
fusion region from the ±y–directions and those electrons
that have entered the diﬀusion region closer to the X–
line. The latter population already has a strong directed
velocity in the outﬂow direction. This can be seen in the
right panel on the middle row which displays the distri-
bution at (x, y) = (0.475, 0.025). This position is almost
on the y = 0 line of symmetry. Again the points could
not be chosen to exactly lie on the line of symmetry be-
cause of the choice of the numerical grid. In this panel,
the two populations from the ±y–directions can be iden-
tiﬁed as two elongated blobs lying parallel to each other.
The fact that these two blobs are well separated indicates
that their relative velocity is larger than the thermal ve-
locity of the electrons. For realistic mass ratios the theral
velocity of the electrons will increase and the structure of
the distribution function will be smeared out. Neverthe-
less, we expect the underlying mechanisms of meandering
motion and acceleration in the z–direction to remain un-
changed. The other population, which has already spent
more time in the diﬀusion region, has been accelerated
toward the outﬂow region. Both, the blobs and the ac-
celerated population appear slightly tilted around the
vy axis. This could indicate a gyro–motion around the
newly reconnected magnetic ﬁeld in the y–direction. In
the bottom–left panel, (x, y) = (1.125, 0.025), this rota-
tion is even more pronounced. Here the diﬀerent popu-
lations start to merge and lose their individual identity.
Finally at (x, y) = (2.425, 0.025) (bottom–right panel)
most of the structure has been lost. The temperature
has risen considerably and a directed velocity in the vx–
direction is observed.

The strongly structured electron distribution function
is responsible for the oﬀ-diagonal terms of the electron
pressure tensor. The structuring is due to the meander-
ing motion of the electrons in the region where the mag-
netic ﬁeld approaches zero and changes sign.27,28 The dis-
tribution function is made up of a number of distinguish-
able populations, which have a relative velocity, which is
higher than the thermal velocity.

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Two and a half dimensional Vlasov simulations were
carried out on the GEM magnetic reconnection setup.
Vlasov codes have the advantage, with respect to PIC
codes, that they do not suﬀer from numerical noise and
that the distribution function can be analyzed with high
accuracy. This advantage is gained at the cost of a sub-
stantially higher computational eﬀort. We could repro-
duce the results of other kinetic simulations carried out
of the GEM setup12 but were also able to calculate the

9

terms in Ohm’s law, especially the contributions from the
electron pressure tensor. This shows that, although com-
putationally more expensive, Vlasov–codes are a valu-
able tool for investigating collisionless reconnection. The
large scale structure of the magnetic ﬁeld and the elec-
tron and ion current densities agreed well with parti-
cle simulations.12 In addition we were able to identify
some small scale structures of the electron current den-
sity which showed enhanced values along the separatrix.
While these structures were probably smeared out in PIC
simulations due to the numerical noise, they resemble
more the results seen in hybrid models.4,11

The analysis of the contributions to the inductive elec-
tric ﬁeld in Ohm’s law show that, due to the evolution of
the reconnection on ion timescales rather than electron
timescales, the bulk inertia of the electron plays a mi-
nor role. The eﬀect of the bulk inertia will be decreased
even more, if more realistic mass ratios are used. We
could show that the Hall–term dominates at the inﬂow
and the outﬂow edges of the diﬀusion region. Symmetry
constraints, however, cause the Hall term and the vi ×B–
term to vanish at the X–line. Here we could conﬁrm
the importance of the non–gyrotropic pressure, which
was previously investigated by Kuznetsova et al.11,15 The
evaluation of the gradients of the oﬀ–diagonal pressure
components throughout the whole time showed, that
both ∂Pxz/∂x and ∂Pyz/∂y contribute roughly the same
towards the electric ﬁeld. The sum of the two contribu-
tions could explain almost the complete inductive electric
ﬁeld at the X–line.

The kinetic mechanisms responsible for the non–
gyrotropic electron pressure were uncovered by investi-
gating the electron distribution function. The mean-
dering motion of the electrons in the region of the zero
magnetic ﬁeld is believed to be associated with the non–
gyrotropic pressure.19,27,28 The complex structure of the
electron distribution function showed that the meander-
ing motion is responsible. For the GEM parameters it
is, however, not caused by the thermal electron motion
but by the directed velocity gained in the inﬂow. This
may, of course, be the result of the relatively high elec-
tron mass. In simulations with more realistic mass ratios
we expect the inﬂow velocity to be considerably smaller
than the thermal velocity of the electrons.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the enlightening discussions with J.
Dreher. This work was supported by the SFB 591 of the
Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft. Access to the JUMP
multiprocessor computer at Forschungszentrum J¨ulich
was made available through project HBO20. Part of the
computations were performed on an Linux-Opteron clus-
ter supported by HBFG-108-291.

10

1 E. N. Parker, J. Geophys. Res. 62, 509 (1957).
2 P. A. Sweet, The neutral point theory of solar ﬂares,

in
Electromagnetic Phenomena in Cosmical Physics, edited
by B. Lehnert, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1958) page 123

3 D. Biskamp, Phys. Fluids 29, 1520 (1986).
4 M. A. Shay, J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, and R. E. Denton,

J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3759 (2001).

5 R. F. Lottermoser and M. Scholer, J. Geophys. Res. 102,

4875 (1997).

6 X. Wang, A. Bhattacharjee, and Z. W. Ma, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 87, 265003 (2001).

in Space Plasmas, edited by T. D. Guyenne and J. J. Hunt
(Eur. Space Agency Spec. ESA, 1988) vol 15, page SP-285.
18 M. Hesse and D. Winske, J. Geophys. Res. 20, 1207 (1993).
19 T. W. Speiser, P. B. Dusenbery, R. F. M. Jr, and D. J.
Williams, Particle orbits in magnetospheric current sheets:
Accelerated ﬂows, neutral line signature and transitions
in Modeling Magnetospheric Plasma Processes,
to chaos,
edited by G. R. Wilson (AGU, Washington D.C., 1991),
vol 62 of Geophys. Monogr. Ser., page 71.

20 C. K. Birdsall and A. B. Langdon, Plasma Physics via
Computer Simulation, (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1985).

7 J. D. Huba and L. I. Rudakov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 175003

21 H. Schmitz and R. Grauer,

J. Comp. Phys. 214, 738

(2004).

8 J. Birn and M. Hesse, J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3737 (2001).
9 A. Otto, J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3751 (2001).
10 Z. W. Ma and A. Bhattacharjee, J. Geophys. Res. 106,

11 M. M. Kuznetsova and M. Hesse, J. Geophys. Res. 106,

3773 (2001).

3799 (2001).

12 P. L. Pritchett, J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3783 (2001).
13 M. Hesse, J. Birn, and M. Kuznetsova, J. Geophys. Res.

106, 3721 (2001).

14 J. Birn et al., J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3715 (2001).
15 M. M. Kuznetsova, M. Hesse, and D. Winske, J. Geophys.

Res. 103, 199 (1998).

16 V. M. Vasyliunas, Rev. Geophys. 13, 303 (1975).
17 J. W. Dungey, Noise–free neutral sheets, in Reconnection

22 F. Filbet, E. Sonnendr¨ucker, and P. Bertrand, JCP 172,

23 H. Schmitz and R. Grauer, Comput. Phys. Commun. 175,

(2006).

166 (2001).

86 (2006),

24 E. G. Harris, Il Nuovo Cimento 23, 115 (1962).
25 B. U. ¨O. Sonnerup, Magnetic ﬁeld reconnection, in Solar
System Plasma Physics, edited by L. T. Lanzerotti, C. F.
Kennel, and E. N. Parker (North–Holland Pub., New York,
1979), volume III, page 45.

26 T. Terasawa, Geophys. Res. Lett. 10, 475 (1983).
27 R. Horiuchi and T. Sato, Phys. Plasmas 4, 277 (1997).
28 R. Horiuchi and T. Sato, Phys. Plasmas 1, 3587 (1994).

