Non-linear gyrokinetic theory of magnetoplasmas

Massimo Tessarotto1,2, Claudio Cremaschini1, Piero Nicolini1 and Alexei Beklemishev3

1Department of Mathematics and Informatics,

University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy

2 Consortium for Magnetoﬂuid Dynamics, Trieste, Italy

3 Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract

A crucial issue in relativistic plasma, particularly relevant in the astrophysical context, is the

description of highly magnetized plasmas based on a covariant formulation of gyrokinetic dynamics.

An interesting case in question is that in which the background electric ﬁeld (produced either by

the same plasma of by other sources) results suitably small (or vanishing) with respect to the

magnetic ﬁeld, while at the same time short-wavelength EM perturbations can be present. The

purpose of this work is to extend the relativistic gyrokinetic theory developed by Beklemishev et

al.

[1999-2005] to include, in particular, also the treatment of such a case. We intend to show

that this requires the development of a perturbative expansion involving simultaneously both the

particle 4-position vector and the corresponding 4-velocity vector. For this purpose a synchronous

form of the relativistic Hamilton variational principle is adopted.

PACS numbers: 52.30.Bt, 52.55.Hc, 52.55.Dy

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I. 1. INTRODUCTION

This work is a part of a systematic investigation concerning the relativistic gyrokinetic

theory developed by Beklemishev et al.[1, 2, 3] and its applications.

In this paper, in

particular, we intend to propose an extended formulation of covariant gyrokinetic theory

speciﬁcally intended to include the eﬀect of 4-velocity perturbations, as appropriate for

the description of relativistic magnetoplasmas in the presence of suitably ”small” ( and

regular, but otherwise arbitrary) electromagnetic and gravitational perturbations produced,

via collective interactions, by the same plasma. The physical motivations of the investigation

are related to the occurrence of strongly magnetized relativistic plasmas in curved space-

time. In the astrophysical context these plasmas are typically related to the existence of

accretion disks, plasma inﬂows and outﬂows and relativistic jets, all occurring typically

close to massive object, such as neutron stars, black holes (BH) and active galactic nuclei

(Mohanty [4]). These plasmas can be characterized by the presence of ultra-strong magnetic

ﬁelds, possibly generated by the same plasma. Although, direct measurements of B can be

very diﬃcult, for example in jets there is yet no reliable observation of the magnetic ﬁeld

intensity, the partial information already available for other cases indicates that in suitable

circumstances the magnetic ﬁeld can become extremely intense. For example, suﬃciently

so-called quantum critical ﬁeld strength of Bc = m2

close to the surface of pulsars the magnetic ﬁeld intensity can reach values well above the
ec3/e~ = 4.4x1013G. Magnetic ﬁelds of
this order or larger are said to be super strong. A similar situation might occur for BH’s

surrounded by strong magnetic ﬁelds, and in particular in the regions of space-time suitably

close to the so-called photon-sphere [10], where collimated outﬂows can arise.

While such ﬁelds are typically expected to manifest together with intense electric ﬁelds

(E), there can be cases in which there results in particular

E/B ≪ 1

(1)

(weak electric ﬁeld assumption). Here E and B are the invariant eigenvalues of the elec-

tromagnetic (EM) ﬁeld tensor Fµν (see below). This may happen, for example, in plasmas

in which the magnetic ﬁeld is produced primarily by strong diamagnetic currents. These,

by deﬁnition, are electric currents ﬂowing in the plasma which are driven by gradients of

the relevant ﬂuid ﬁelds (in particular, ﬂuid velocity, number density, temperature, magnetic

ﬁeld intensity, etc.) and, instead, are independent of the (local) electric ﬁeld.

2

An example is provided by plasma outﬂows (or jets) in which the kinetic energy of the

escaping particles is usually believed to by provided by the presence of a quasi-stationary

magnetic ﬁeld moving with the plasma [13].

In all such phenomena EM turbulence is

expected to be ubiquitous and to aﬀect in a signiﬁcant way plasma dynamics. The region

where these processes may act is typically too close to the central object (the BH or a

neutron star) to be resolved observationally. Thus, one possible way to obtain some insight

into this region is by studying the properties of these phenomena. In particular, the emitted

radiation spectrum could be signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by the eﬀect of a ﬁnite curvature of space-

time, as well as by short-wavelength EM and gravitational perturbations in the region of

emission[14].

An important theoretical problem is therefore the prediction of such eﬀects based on

single-particle gyrokinetic dynamics. Such phenomena require their description in the frame-

work of a consistent covariant theory taking into account the eﬀect of space-time non-

uniformity as well as the possible presence of wave-ﬁelds, in principle, both EM and gravi-

tational. A convenient formulation is provided by the covariant gyrokinetic theory recently

developed by Beklemishev et al.

[1, 2]. As well known, object of particle gyrokinetics is

the description of particle dynamics in terms of a reduced set of variables (so-called gyroki-

netic). These include, in particular, the fast gyration angle around the magnetic ﬂux lines,

i.e., the gyrophase φ, which results ignorable. Gyrokinetic theory is therefore realized by

the construction of a suitable, generally non-canonical, phase-space transformation. From a

mathematical viewpoint, gyrokinetic theory provides a perturbative description of particle

dynamics in terms of “simpler” equations of motion, which are characterized by a reduced

number of eﬀective degrees of freedom. Goal of the present paper is to extend the Bek-

lemishev and Tessarotto formulation to obtain the gyrokinetic theory in curved background

space-time which applies also to the special case 1 and includes the simultaneous eﬀect of

short-wavelength EM and gravitational perturbations. Starting point is the Larmor-radius
ordering, requiring ε ∼ rL
LEM

≪ 1,where rL is the Larmor

≪ 1,and λ ≡ λEM
LEM

, δ ≡ λg
Lg

∼ rL
Lg

radius and LEM , Lg,respectively denote the characteristic scale lengths of the background

and wave EM and gravitational ﬁelds. In particular, we intend to determine new expressions

for the magnetic moment pφ ≡

µ and of the cyclotron frequency d

ds φ, possibly modiﬁed by

the eﬀect of space-time curvature.
b

3

II. 2. THE SYNCHRONOUS HYBRID HAMILTON VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLE

IN CURVED SPACE

The starting point for the construction of the gyrokinetic theory in curved space-time

is the proper treatment of the variational principle which determines the gyrokinetic world

lines {r′α(s), s ∈ I} in the presence of a non-uniform metric tensor gµν(rα),as well as the
EM 4-vector potential Aµ. Here r′α denotes the gyrocenter position 4-vector (in the sequel

the apex will denote gyrokinetic variables or phase-functions evaluated at the gyrocenter

position). Historically (see for example Einstein [5], Landau & Lifschitz [6]) the relativis-

tic equations of motion were obtained using an asynchronous variational principle, stem-

ming from the minimum-action principle (relativistic Hamilton principle). Accordingly,

the trajectory of a point-particle is described as an extremal curve (i.e., a geodesics) in

the 4-dimensional space-time. The choice of an asynchronous formulation, rather than an

asynchronous one, is a natural consequence of the fact that the variational principle is a

generalization of the well-known Hertz-Fermat-Maupertius variational principle (Goldstein
et al. [8]) and that the 4-velocity of a particle, uµ(s) = d
ds rµ(s) , is a unit 4-vector, i.e., it
must fulﬁll the constraint uµuµ = 1 (realizability condition), where uµ = gµνuν. As a conse-
quence, it follows that the line element ds along the world line {rµ(s), s ∈ I} must satisfy

the constraint ds2 = gµνdrµ(s)drν(s),which implies that the asynchronous variation of ds

results ∆ (ds) 6= 0, ∆ denoting the operator of asynchronous variation. On the other hand,

adopting the [relativistic] asynchronous principle one has to face the conceptual diﬃculty

represented by the fact that - contrary to what happens for the non-relativistic Hamilton

principle - it cannot provide a variational principle for the relativistic Hamilton equations

(at least using a Legendre transformation like in non-relativistic mechanics). In reality, the

diﬃculty can be circumvented (see for example Wheeler et al.[7] and Goldstein et al. [8])

adopting a suitable synchronous variational principle. In such a case it is immediate to show

that the canonic form of the relativistic Hamilton equations is recovered, just like in non-

relativistic mechanics, by means of a suitable Legendre transformation. Finally, it must be

recalled that variational principles, both synchronous and asynchronous, can be expressed

in arbitrary ”hybrid” (i.e., generally non-canonical) variables, provided these variables are

connected by a diﬀeomorphism. to the original one [i.e., for example to be identiﬁed with

the canonical variables], thus yielding a hybrid variational principle. These variable can

4

also be superabundant, since the hybrid variables can be deﬁned in such a way to span, in

principle, phase-spaces of arbitrary dimension. Thus, they can be described in the frame-

work of the so-called constrained dynamics (Dirac [9]), in turn relying on the well-known

method of Lagrange multipliers. In particular, as a special choice, the hybrid variables can

also be identiﬁed with appropriate gyrokinetic variables. In this section we intend to obtain

a synchronous variational principle of this type, in which the hybrid variables are provided

the action S(y) ≡

by a suitable set of superabundant non-canonical variables. For deﬁniteness let us introduce
2
1 γ(y) + dF,where y denotes the set of variables y ≡ (rµ, uµ, λ) , γ a suit-
R
able diﬀerential 1-form and F (y, s) an arbitrary gauge function [i.e., a real function which

is at least C (2) in its existence domain]. In particular, let us impose that the fundamental

diﬀerential 1-form γ takes the value

γ(y) = gµν [qAν + uν] drµ + λ [gµνuµuν − 1]

(2)

Here the notation is standard [1, 2]. Thus, Aν are the counter-variant components of the EM

4-potential and q = Ze/ moc is the normalized charge. and, moreover, rν and uν coincide

with the countervariant components of the 4-vectors r (4-position) and u (4-velocity). It is

immediate to show that phase-space trajectory of the point particle with 4-position rν and

4-velocity uν results, by construction, an extremal curve of the variational functional S(y).

Another equivalent possibility is to represent the diﬀerential 1-form in terms of

γ(rµ, uµ, λ) = [qAµ + uµ] drµ −

[gµνuµuν − 1] ,

1
2

where the Lagrange multiplier λ has been set equal to its extremal value, λ = −1/2. Finally,

let us require, in case (2), that S be deﬁned in the synchronous functional class of real

functions

{y} ≡

x(s) ≡ (rµ(s), uµ(s), λ(x)) : x(s) ∈ C (2)(I),
(cid:8)

x(s) ∈ R9, I ≡ [s1, s2] ⊆ R, x(si) = x1(i = 1, 2)
(cid:9)

,

while for (3), λ is considered prescribed (λ = −1/2) It is immediate to prove that in both

cases (2) and (3) the variational principle

(3)

(4)

(5)

delivers the correct relativistic equations. We remark that the synchronous variations

δrµ, δuµ, δλ must be all considered independent.

Indeed, the physical realizability condi-

δS = 0

5

tion is satisﬁed only by the extremal curve. Hence, in a proper sense, this represents an

example of unconstrained variational principle.

III. 3. EXTENDED GYRODYNAMICS

To obtain the new extended formulation of gyrokinetic theory, the variational functional

S(y) must be expressed in terms of gyrokinetic variables, which requires a suitable extended

phase space transformation to a new set of variables yi, including in particular the gyrophase

φ which describes the fast gyration motion of particles around magnetic ﬂux lines. Usually

such a transformation is obtained by means of perturbation theory in ε, to be considered

inﬁnitesimal and deﬁned as the ratio between the Larmor radius and the smallest character-

istic scale length of the magnetoplasma. In particular this requires that the EM 4−potential

Aµ and the metric tensor gµv are assumed to be expressed in terms of the representations

1
ε

Aµ =

Aµ(rα) + ξaµ(rα/ξ),

gµv = Gµν(rα, ε) + ξg1

µv(rα/ξ)

(Larmor-radius ordering). Here 1

ε Aµ(rα, ε) and Gµν(rα, ε), denoting the equilibrium terms,
µv(rν/ξ), deﬁne the short-
wavelength (and high-frequency) perturbations. In particular, ξ is an inﬁnitesimal parame-

are assumed to be C (∞) in all variables, while ξaµ(rν/ξ) and ξg1

ter, assumed generally independent of ε, and in particular such that ε ≪ λ, which charac-
µv(rν/ξ).Hence, the equilibrium quantities can be Taylor

terizes the tensors ξaµ(rν/ξ) and ξg1

expanded near r′α

=

+ Aµ

Aµ
ε

A′µ
ε
µν + εG1
Gµv = G′

1 + o(ε),

µv + o(ε),

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

where A′µ = Aµ (r′α) , G′

tions of relevant ﬁelds depend generally on the gyrophase angle φ′ through εrα

µv. The perturba-
i (yi) . The per-
turbative scheme converges, at least in an asymptotic sense, only if one assumes the validity

αA′µ and G1

µν = gµν (r′α) , Aµ

µv ≡ rα

1 = rα

αG′

1 ∂′

1 ∂′

of a suitable ordering conditions (Larmor radius ordering), implying that EM contributions

must dominate, in a suitable sense, over inertial ones in the variational functional. Formally

this corresponds to replace the charge e by e/ε, leaving the rest mass m0 unchanged. In

this work, extending the approach developed by Beklemishev et al.[1, 2, 3], the gyrokinetic

6

transformation is taken of the general form

rα, uβ
(cid:0)
identify respectively the so-called gyrocenter 4-vector and a transformed 4-velocity, to be

↔ yi ≡ (r′α, u′α) , where r′α and u′α

(cid:1)

determined respectively in terms of the two power series

rµ = r′µ +

εsrµ
s

uµ = u′µ ⊕

ξsvµ

s (y)

∞

Xs=1
∞

Xs=1

(10)

(11)

(12)

i (yi) and vα

(extended gyrokinetic transformation). Here rµ

i (yi) (i = 0, 1,..) are respectively
the 4-position and 4-velocity perturbations, while the operator ⊕ must be suitably deﬁned
as corresponds to the 4-velocity addition law [11]. In particular, the perturbations rµ
i (yi)
i (yi) are deﬁned in such a way that both are pure oscillatory with respect to the
and vα
gyrophase φ′. As usual, u′α can be characterized in terms of suitable independent variables,

one of which includes the gyrophase φ′. This is obtained by projecting u′α along the four

independent directions deﬁning the so-called fundamental tetrad unit 4-vectors eµ

a (with
a = 0, ..., 3), hereon also denoted (l′µ, l′′µ, lµ, τ µ) . In particular, the latter can always be

identiﬁed with the EM fundamental tetrad, i.e., the basis vectors of the EM ﬁeld tensor
µν ≡ Fµν(x′α), with
a3 are assumed to satisfy the

admitting , in this case to be evaluated at the gyrocenter position, F ′
eigenvalues B and E. In particular, the space-like vectors eµ

2 , eµ

eigenvalue equations

µνeν
F ′

2 = Be3µ,

µνeν
F ′

3 = −Be2µ.

µνeν

a are the covariant components of eµ

Here eaµ = g′
meaning in the tangent space. Thus we shall raise and lower them in terms of ea

a and the labels a assume a tensor
µ = ηabebµ,
by means of the Minkowskian tensor η = diag (1, −1, −1, −1) . It follows to leading order in

ε

u′µ = aµ cos φ′ + bµ sin φ′ + uµ

(13)

2π
which can be taken as a deﬁnition for the gyrophase φ. Here g ≡ hgiφ = 1
0 g (y) dφ′
2π
R
denotes the φ′−average of a function g (y) and aµ and bµ can be identiﬁed, up to a constant
factor, with the two space-like 4-vectors, eµ
3 (which together with uµ are evaluated
at the gyrocenter position x′α), thus letting aµ = w eµ
3 . The components aµ, bµ

2 and bµ − weµ

2 and eµ

7

and uµ are not completely arbitrary, but satisfy the constraint gµνuµuν = 1 for all φ′. Thus,

we shall demand the mutual orthogonality

aµbµ = aµuµ = bµuµ = 0,

while their moduli are expressed via a single real scalar w

aµaµ = bµbµ = 1 − gµνuµuν = −w2.

We stress that only to the leading order uµ = g′
µνbν), while in general uµ = g′
(14) one ﬁnds the countervariant representation:

µνaν, bµ = g′

aµ = g′

µν ≡ gµν(x′α) (and similarly
µνuµ where g′
µνuν 6= gµνuν. From orthogonality relations

uµ = u0eµ

0 + ukeµ
1 .

Here u0 = u0, and uk is the ”parallel” component uk = −uk, with u0 and uk denoting
the covariant components of uµ, and e0, e1 are the remaining time-like and space-like unit
k + w2, which permits to express
vectors of the tetrad. From Eq. (15) one obtains u2
u0 by means the independent functions uk, w. With the above positions for the transformed
4-velocity it can be shown that rµ
i (yi) are purely oscillatory arbitrary 4-vectors, namely the
φ′−averages of rµ

0 = 1 + u2

i (yi) are zero.

IV. 4. GYROKINETIC EQUATIONS IN CURVED SPACE

The extended gyrokinetic transformation (10),(11) can be carried out in principle at any

order in ε and ξ. Here, to illustrate some interesting features of the approach we intend

to formulate the leading-order perturbative theory with respect to the parameter ε (i.e.,

of order ε1). In this case the variational functional S(y) when expressed in terms of the

gyrokinetic variables

φ′, u0, uk,

∧
µ, r′µ, λ

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

can be shown to take the form

Sg(y′) ≡

γg

φ′, u0, uk,
(cid:16)

Z

∧
µ, r′µ, λ

,

(cid:17)

where

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

γg

φ′, u0, uk,

∧
µ, r′µ, λ

=

(cid:16)
∧
µdφ + λ

+

0 − u2
u2
h

A′

q
ε
n(cid:16)
∧
µ − 1

(cid:17)
k − 2qB

ds

i

o

µ + uklµ + u0τµ

drµ+

(cid:17)

8

is the fundamental gyrokinetic diﬀerential 1-form. In particular, in case (3) there results

λ = −1/2 in Eq.(18). Here the notation is standard and in particular

∧
µ is the relativistic

magnetic moment [1, 2, 3]. Next, we wish to investigate the consequences of the new

synchronous variational principle introduced in Sec.2, in which the . We have proven that

the Lagrange multiplier λ must necessarily take the value λ = − 1

2 in both cases (2) and
(3), thanks to the variational principle (5). The same result manifestly holds also for the

gyrokinetic functional Sg(y′), hence

λ = −

wl′µ cos(φ) + wl′′µ sin(φ) + uklµ + u0τ µ

= −

(19)

1
2

τµ
u0 (cid:0)

(cid:1)
φ′, u0, uk,

∧
µ, r′µ

(cid:16)

1
2

.

(cid:17)

Therefore, the Euler-Lagrange equations for the variables

achieve the sim-

ple expressions

∧
µ = 0 ⇒

d

∧
µ = const.

τµdr′µ − u0ds = 0 ⇒ u0 =

τµ,

dr′µ
ds
dr′µ
ds

lµ,

lµdr′µ + ukds = 0 ⇒ uk = −

dφ′
ds

= −Ω,

dφ′ + qBds = 0 ⇒
q
ε
0 − u2
u2

k − 2qB

∧
µ − 1 = 0,

µνdr′ν − lµduk − τµdu0 − 2χq
F ′

∧
µH,µ = 0,

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

where Ω = qB is the particle gyrofrequency (or cyclotron frequency) deﬁned with respect

to the rest mass.

It is interesting to point out that Eq.(23) is formally identical to the

non-relativistic one. Hence, at this order no correction due to space-time curvature appears

in this equation. The remaining equations have a straightforward meaning. Thus, Eq.(20)

implies the conservation of the relativistic magnetic moment

∧
µ,which is therefore an adiabatic

invariant. Actually the result is expected to hold at any order in ε and λ, although the

perturbative theory locally may not converge due to phase-space resonances. Furthermore,

Eqs.(23) and (24) deliver the equations for the guiding-center 4-velocity, while (25) implies

that the physical realizability condition is satisﬁed also by the guiding-center velocity. We

stress that these equations, while equivalent to those obtained earlier [1], have a simpler

structure. This follows from the adoption of the synchronous variational principle here

adopted which makes explicit the inner structure and relationship existing between the

gyrokinetic variables.

9

V.

5. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have formulated a covariant gyrokinetic approach for single-particle dy-

namics, which applies to curved space-time. The theory goes beyond the domain of validity

of the treatment previously considered by Beklemishev and Tessarotto [1] and includes the

case in which the electric ﬁeld can locally vanish or result much smaller than the mag-

netic ﬁeld. As an illustration of the theory the perturbative theory has been developed to

leading order in ε. For this purpose we have adopted a synchronous variational principle

based on constrained dynamics. The resulting Euler-Lagrange equations satisfy the required

constraint demanded by the physical realizability condition for the 4-velocity and displays

the inner relationships between the gyrokinetic variables. We have found that to leading-

order no eﬀect of curvature of space-time appears on the gyrofrequency at order ε1. This

information is relevant for plasma diagnostics in astrophysical plasmas.

Acknowledgments

Research developed in the framework of MIUR (Ministero Universit´a e Ricerca Scientiﬁca,

Italy) PRIN Project Fundamentals of kinetic theory and applications to ﬂuid dynamics,

magnetoﬂuiddynamics and quantum mechanics, partially supported (P.N.) by Area Science

Park (Area di Ricerca Scientiﬁca e Tecnologica, Trieste, Italy) and CMFD Consortium

(Consorzio di Magnetoﬂuidodinamica, Trieste, Italy).

[1] A. Beklemishev and M. Tessarotto, Phys. Plasmas, 6, 4548 (1999).

[2] A. Beklemishev and M. Tessarotto, A. & A. 428, 1 (2004).

[3] A. Beklemishev, P. Nicolini and M. Tessarotto, AIP Conf. Proc. 762, 1283 (2005).

[4] J. N. Mohanty and K. C. Baral, Phys. Plasmas 3, 804 (1996) and references therein.

[5] A. Einstein, Ann.Physik 49, 284 (1916); en. trans. in The collected papers of A. Einstein,

[6] Landau L. D., Lifschitz E. M. 1975, The Classical Theory of Fields, 4th Ed., Pergamon,

Vol.6, 146 (1997).

Oxford, 197

10

[7] C. Misner, K.S. Thorne, J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation, W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, ISBN

[8] H. Goldstein, C.P. Poole, J.L. Safko, Classical Mechanics (3rd Edition), Addison Wesley, ISBN

0-7167-0344-0 (1973).

0201657023 (1995).

[9] P.A.M. Dirac Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Lecture No.1, New York, Belfer Graduate

School of Science, Yeshiva University (1964).

[10] P. Nicolini and M.Tessarotto, Kinetic description of classical matter infalling in black holes,

communication presented at 25th Internatioal Symposium on Rareﬁes Gas Dynamics (S. Pe-

terburg, Russian Federation July 21-28, 2006).

[11] M. Pozzo and M. Tessarotto, Phys. Plasmas, 5, 2232 (1998).

[12] M. Servin and G. Brodin, Phys. Rev. D 68, 044017 (2003).

[13] A. Broderick and R. Blandford, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 349, 994 (2004).

[14] J. Frank, A. King and D. Raine, Accretion power in astrophysics, Cambridge University Press,

[15] T. Frankel, The geometry of physics: an introduction, second edition, Cambridge University

Cambridge 1995.

Press, Cambridge 2003.

11

