6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chaotic to ordered state transition of cathode-sheath instabilities in DC glow

discharge plasmas

Md. Nurujjaman, and A.N. Sekar Iyengar

1/AF, Bidhannagar, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics,India

Transition from chaotic to ordered state has been observed during the initial stage of a discharge

in a cylindrical dc glow discharge plasma. Initially it shows a chaotic behavior but increasing the

discharge voltage changes the characteristics of the discharge glow and shows a period substraction
of order 7 period → 5 period →3 period →1 period i.e. the system goes to single mode through

odd cycle subtraction. On further increasing the discharge voltage, the system goes through period
doubling, like 1 period → 2 period → 4 period. On further increasing the voltage, the system goes

to stable state without having any oscillations.

I.

INTRODUCTION

where as in the present experiment we are reporting, the

chaotic oscillation, period subtracting and period dou-

Nonlinear phenomena are abundant in nature and lab-

bling phenomena that were observed in the sheath re-

oratory plasma. Plasma is a typical nonlinear dynam-

gion. The plasma sheath is a region with large electric

ical system with a large number of degrees of freedom,

ﬁelds where charged particles can encounter acceleration

and a medium for testing a rich variety of nonlinear phe-

to high energies. This can give rise to various types

nomena such self oscillation, period doubling, bifurca-

of ﬂuctuations through wave particle interaction. These

tion, period subtracting, period adding, chaos, intermit-

reasons motivated us to investigate the ﬂuctuations in the

tency etc.

[1, 2]. Characteristics of chaos have been

sheath region of a cylindrical dc glow discharge plasma.

observed in many experiments: externally driven and

Moreover the sheath region is important from application

self-driven plasma systems.

In driven systems chaotic

point of view like material processing and dust levitation

behavior in pulsed plasma discharge and period dou-

etc. Chaotic oscillations were observed during the ini-

bling cascade to chaos in thermionic plasma discharge

tial phase of high pressure discharges. With increase in

[3], and in self-driven case i.e using no external pertur-

the discharge voltage it goes to an ordered state through

bation in the system, periodic to chaotic transition have

period subtracting and ﬁnally the modes vanish and the

been observed[4, 5]. Experiments on plasma that exhibit

plasma becomes stable via period doubling.

period doubling and chaos using external driver (oscilla-

tor) in a double plasma device has been done by Ohno et

al. [6]. The period subtracting phenomena, has been ob-

served in externally driven ion-beam plasma system [7].

In this experiment oscillation periods decreases in the
sequence 6 period→ 5 period → 4 period and so on. An-

other phenomena in the driven plasma system is period

adding opposite to the period subtracting. Here periods

successively increase with control parameters.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS

The Experiment was carried out in a coaxial cylindri-

cal dc glow discharge system with argon as shown in the

ﬁgure 1. The hollow stainless steel (SS) outer cylinder

of 45 mm diameter is the cathode and the SS rod of

1 mm diameter inside the cathode is the anode, which

is grounded. The Whole system has been placed in a

In all the above mentioned experiments, the ﬂuctu-

vacuum chamber and evacuated to a base pressure of

ations are observed in the bulk region of the plasma,

0.001 mbar by means of a rotary pump. Argon gas is in-

2

FIG. 1: Schematic diagram of Experimental setup of cylindri-
cal dc discharge plasma system with Langmuir probe ﬁtted
with Digital oscilloscope. A dc voltage has been applied to
the cathode (outer cylindrical surface) with respect to the
grounded coaxial cylindrical rod and plasma is formed inside
it

troduced using precision needle valve into the chamber.

Neutral gas pressure has been maintained at a particu-

lar pressure and the discharge voltage to initiate a glow

discharge plasma. A Langmuir probe made of tungsten

has been used to measure ﬂoating potential ﬂuctuations.

It is of diameter 0.2 mm and length 4 mm, and movable

along the plasma column.

It is connected to the digi-

tal tektronix oscilloscope. The probe was placed in the

sheath region i.e. about 0.5 cm from the cathode wall.

Data has been transferred to the computer through the

USB port.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

FIG. 3: (a), (b), (c) and (a′
), (b′
) are the raw data, power
spectrum and phase space plot at 284 and 286 volts respec-
tively. Through period subtraction the system attains ﬁve
period at discharge voltage 286 volts from the seven period
state at voltage 284 volts.

), (c′

FIG. 4: In this ﬁgure in sequence (a) → (b) → (c) the system
goes to to state having three period at 288 volts from ﬁve
period state at 286 volts (shown in 3(b′
) ) and in sequence
(a′

) to single period at 289 volts.

) → (c′

) → (b′

only above 0.4 mbar. The present experiments were car-

ried out at a neutral gas pressure of 0.95 mbar of Ar-

gon. At this particular pressure the discharge voltage

between the anode and the cathode was increased slowly

till the discharge was obtained at 283 volts. At this volt-

(a), (b), (c) represent the raw data, power spec-
FIG. 2:
trum(PS) and phase space plot at 283 volts respectively. From
power spectrum and phase space plot it is obvious that the
signal is chaotic in nature.

age the ﬂuctuating signal and its power spectrum are

shown in the ﬁgure 2 (a) (raw data), (b) (corresponding

power spectrum), and (c) phase space plot. The broad

band power spectrum and phase space plot indicate the

Though plasma could be formed at low pressures, the

chaotic state at the initial stage of the dc discharge. On

chaotic oscillations in the ﬂoating potential were observed

further increasing the voltages we observed a period sub-

3

traction to take place and at 284 volts when two modes of

frequencies 69.17, 93.87 kHz with maximum power, and

and 64.23 kHz emerge through period doubling at 291
volts as shown in the power spectrum 5(b′). So again,

4.9, 24, 44.47, 113.6, and 123.5 kHz with smaller power

shown in ﬁgure 3(b), i.e. seven periods appear. When

the discharge voltage is 286 volts, by period subtraction

the system reaches the state having ﬁve periods as shown
in ﬁgure 3(b′). When the voltage was increased to 288

volts three modes of frequencies 29.64, 59.29 and 88.93

kHz, and at 289 volts only one period of frequency 59.29
kHz were seen as shown in the ﬁgure 4(b) and 4(b′)

the system evolved through period doubling in the fol-
lowing sequences- 1 period → 2 period → 4 period, for
the discharge voltage sequence 289 → 290 → 291 volts.

On further increasing the discharge voltages the system

generate new modes of frequencies 24.7 and 44.47 kHz

through period subtraction at 292 volts as shown in the
ﬁgure 6(b). The new modes having almost halve of the

frequencies that appears at 290 volts i.e. at the ﬁrst

respectively. These are also clear from the phase space

bifurcation. On further increasing the voltages, all the

plots of the data at the diﬀerent voltages. From the re-

instabilities vanishes, i.e. plasma ﬂoating potential be-

spective phase space plots also, it is clear that the system

comes steady.

goes from chaotic to coherent oscillations through period

subtracting sequences.

FIG. 5: Further increase in voltage the system goes through
two successive bifurcations. The sequences (a) → (b) → (c)
) → (c′
and (a′
) show mode appears at 290 and 291
volts respectively due to bifurcation.

) → (b′

FIG. 7: Changes of power and frequencies with discharge
voltages.x-axis represents discharge potential, y-axis frequen-
cies, and z-axis represents power spectrum(PS) of the signals
at diﬀerent discharge voltage. With increase in the discharge
voltage low modes appears.

The ﬁgure 7 shows the 3D plot of power spectrum of

the data at diﬀerent voltages. From this ﬁgure it is clear

that with increase in the discharge voltage frequencies of

the oscillation frequencies decrease.

An interesting phenomena is that an anode glow ap-

pears with the oscillations. Initially a spot like glow ap-

FIG. 6: (a) → (b) → (c) are the raw data, Power spectrum
and phase space plot at 292 volts.

Further increase in discharge voltage generates new

pears on the anode and with increasing voltage it spreads

modes and a period doubling is seen.
It is clear from
5(b) that the power spectrum at the 290 volts the fre-

on the whole anode, and with the vanishing of the oscil-

lations the glow also vanishes. So this can be related

quencies are respectively 44.47 and 74.11 kHz. Four new

to anode glow instabilities and then transition to stable

modes of frequencies 14.82 kHz, 39.53 kHz, 49.42 kHz,

potential structures like double layers etc.

4

Since the measurements were carried out in the cath-

of ion plasma frequency, which is about 300 kHz for our

ode sheath regions, it is must likely that these oscillations

parameters. The observed frequencies are from about

could be due to ions that are accelerated within the cath-

5- 170 kHz, which falls within the range that could be

ode sheaths. The lower limit to the frequencies observed

expected.

would be of the order of inverse of ion transit time[8]

As a part of our future plan, we intend to investigate

across the sheath cathode sheath-

the period subtraction and doubling phenomena in the

bulk region of the plasma and also investigate their long

1
τ =

1
kTe )3/4
( eVc

wi

(1)

range correlation.

where Vc, Te and wi are the the potential diﬀerence be-
tween plasma and cathode, plasma electron temperature

and ion plasma frequency respectively.For the electron
temperature Te ≈ 2 eV, Vc =270 volts, this frequency is
about 7.5 kHz. The upper limit would be of the order

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank Ramesh Narayanan

for useful discussion during the works.

[1] Ding Weixing,Huang Wie,Wang Xiaodong, and C. X. Yu,

[5] S. H. Fan et al., Phys. Lett. A, 164, 295 (1992).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 170(1993).

[6] N. Ohno, M. Tanaka, A. Komori and Y. Kawai. J. Phys.

[2] W. X. Ding,H. Q. She ,W. Huang , and C. X. Yu, Phys.

Soc. Japan, 58, 28 (1989).

Rev. Lett. 72, 96 (1994).

[7] B. K. Sharma, A. Buragohain, and J. Chutia, Inter. J.

[3] P. Y. Cheung and A. Y. Wong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 551

Bifur. and Chaos 3(2), 455 (1993).

(1987).

[8] D.arbel et al.,Phys. Rev Lett. 71, 2919 (1993)

[4] J. Qin, L. Wang, D. P. Yuan, P.Gao and B. Z. Zang, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 63, 163 (1989).

