6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reproducibility of a Titanium Plasma Vacuum Spark Discharge

Edmund S. Wyndham,∗ Mario Favre, Hern´an Chuaqui, Ana M. Le˜nero, and Jorge S. D´ıaz
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cat´olica de Chile, Departamento de F´ısica, Casilla 306, Santiago, Chile.

Peter Choi
EPPRA sas, 16 Avenue du Qu´ebec, 706 SILIC, Courtaboeuf 91961, France
(Dated: December 31, 2004)

The results of an extensive operation of a Vacuum Spark plasma using Titanium electrodes in a
120 ns 150 kA discharge are presented. The hot spots are found to form with a regular spacing in
a zippering Z-pinch plasma, which forms close to the cathode and extends to approximately two
thirds of the anode separation over a period of a few ns. The axis of the discharge is well deﬁned by
an initial plasma from a Nd:YAG laser focussed onto the cathode electrode surface. The statistics of
the formation of the hot spots are given for the life of one anode electrode. Between one and three
hotspots form and the favored positions are at 1.5 and 3.0 mm from the cathode and the strongest
emission, as observed in a ﬁltered X-ray pinhole camera, comes from the hot spot closest to the
cathode. The emission spectra resolved between 50 and 350 ˚A shows a wide range of Ti ionization
which allows the temperatures of the anode blow oﬀ plasma, the Z-pinch and the hot spot plasma
to be distinguished. These results are compared with ﬁltered PIN diode signals and ﬁltered pinhole
images.

Keywords: Vacuum Spark, X-ray emission, Titanium Plasma

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Vacuum Spark [1] has long attracted interest as
a rich source of plasma physics phenomena which have
been thoroughly reviewed [2, 3]. The most researched
are the hot spots, often at extreme conditions of den-
sity and temperature. While the Vacuum Spark has pro-
vided much spectral information of highly charged metal-
lic ions, its development as a reliable source for advanced
technological applications has been less successful. Vac-
uum Spark discharges have been realized with various
electrode shapes as well as with slow low voltage capac-
itor banks and medium power pulsed power coaxial line
generators. Various trigger schemes have been tried to
obtain better and more consistent operation of the dis-
charge. A trigger spark behind the cathode has been gen-
erated electrically or by a focussed laser, a laser has been
focussed onto the front surface of the anode and cathode.
The hot spots have been observed in the anode blow-oﬀ
plasma and as necking instabilities in the Z-pinch plasma
which forms between the cathode and anode, beyond the
blow-oﬀ plasma. Particular interest in the hotspots arises
from the fact that, due to the high Z of the ions charge
state, they exhibit the typical characteristics of radiative
collapse a the Z-pinch plasma.

The present work form part of a series of results [4]
in which a Vacuum Spark conﬁguration using a small
pulsed power generator ﬁrsts presented by Zakharov et
al.
[5] has been developed. The salient features of this
conﬁguration are that a relatively low energy laser pulse
is focussed onto the front cathode surface though a perfo-
rated conical anode, which has a ﬂat surface, rather than

∗E-mail: ewyndham@ﬁs.puc.cl

Typeset by REVTEX

the rounded or pointed extreme commonly used. The
electrical driver is a pulsed power 2 Ohm coaxial line.
However, an important diﬀerence from previous work is
that the hybrid mode [4] of operation has been found
to be preferred to the normal switched line operation.
In the hybrid mode the line gap is shorted so that the
line charging ramp voltage is also applied to the Vac-
uum Spark. The Vacuum Spark itself switches the line.
This results in a slightly longer applied current pulse with
a lower maximum rate of current rise of 1.5 · 1012 A/s.
Close to maximum current a Z-pinch is found to zipper
upwards from cathode towards the anode, giving rise to
the formation of a string from one to three hot-spots.
This work presents some statistical observations of the
frequency and the position the hotspots formed during
the useful life of one anode cone electrode. The spectrum
of a source for lithographic applications is of essential im-
portance and we present a soft X-ray spectrum obtained
with Ti electrodes. The relative timing between the X-
Ray emission from the anode plasma and the Z-pinch
column is also presented.

II. EXPERIMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

The principal details of the operation of the Vacuum
Spark have been described elsewhere [4]. The observa-
tions of the hot spot positions in the Z-pinch were taken
with an electrode separation of 7.75 mm. The generator
was operated in the hybrid mode. The laser pre-ionizing
pulse was focussed at 0.3 J onto the cathode surface ap-
proximately 700 ns before the application of the gener-
ator. The hot spots were observed in a time integrated
quadruple pinhole camera using four ﬁlters [6]. The im-
ages were recorded on Kodak DEF ﬁlm and the spatial
resolution was 200 µm for the pair of pinholes with softer

ﬁlters, and 400 µm for the pair with harder ﬁltering. The
softest of the four ﬁlters was 1.5 µm Al + 0.4 µm Zn and
the hardest was 50 µm Be, whose transmission window
may be taken as cutting oﬀ (<1% transmission) in this
experiment at 13 ˚A. The Zn was added to the Al in or-
der to eliminate the long wavelength window of Al from
about 170 to 350 ˚A, while still preserving a short wave-
length pass band to 25 ˚A. The soft X-ray spectra were
taken with a compact grazing incidence Rowland circle
spectrometer with a 600 lpi grating and a useful spectral
window of from 50 to 350 ˚A. The image was recorded on
ﬁlm using a multi-channel plate intensiﬁer, with a 3 ns
gating time.

2

softest of the three ﬁlter signals that observe only the
Z-pinch, 1.2 µm Ti, shows the 15 ns period in which the
Z-pinch channel is formed. The hot spot signal occurs
in the halfway through this ﬁlter signal, as is seen from
the other two ﬁlters. The hardest ﬁlter, 34 m Be, has
the shortest signal and records principally Ti XIX and
higher ionization stages associated with the hotspot for-
mation. It is worth stressing that a multi keV component
of emission has never been observed in this conﬁguration
of vacuum spark if hot spots are formed with the char-
acteristic energy signature of this ﬁgure.

Figure 1: X-ray emission from the whole discharge operated
in the hybrid mode, a) and b), and from half of the discharge
closest to the cathode, c) to e). The current and voltage on
the line transfer section are the two lower traces. Filters are:
a) Al 3 µm, b) Ag 3 µm, c) Mylar 5 µm + Al 0,28 µm, d) Ti
1.2 µm and e) Be 34 µm.

In ﬁgure 1 the time resolved X-ray emission is shown
from the whole volume of the discharge and from the 5
mm closest to the cathode, where the Z-pinch column
is observed to form. The discharge holds the full line
charging voltage for approximately 150 ns before the cur-
rent exceeds a few kA. The 3 µm Ag ﬁlter shows the
early beam target emission from the anode, as the cur-
rent builds rather slowly to a few kA. Slightly later the
3 µm Al ﬁlter registers emission from the plasma form-
ing from the ablated material of the anode. The 3 µm
Ag ﬁlter also records the hotter plasma from apprecia-
ble beam target emission from the anode and the anode
plasma as well as from the hotspots of the Z-pinch. In
a very crude approximation it may be said that in this
quite hard ﬁlter the emitted energies are approximately
equal. The plasma emission from the hot spots occurs
at an inﬂection of the peak current of approximately 150
kA. The inﬂection is an artefact of the generator. The

Figure 2: Histograms of the axial position measured from
the cathode of the hot spots of 59 shots, when one hot spot
is observed , upper graph, when two hot spots are present,
middle graph and for three hot spots, lower graph.

The statistical properties of the hot spots are recorded
for a sample of 59 shots taken on one pair of electrodes.
The useful life of the electrodes is approximately 150
shots. Of these 59 shots, 18 had one hotspot, 26 had
two and 15 had three. It should be noted that all shots
produce hotspots. The only requirement for consistent
operation over a substantial number of shots is that the
laser focus must not be too tight in order to avoid pitting

3

order transitions are indicated with a down-pointing ar-
row. The four Ti XX lines are second order transitions,
the corresponding ﬁrst order lines are seen, but are close
to the lower useful limit of the grating and are not indi-
cated in the ﬁgure. The presence of this ionization stage
is to be expected from the presence of an image on the
50 µm Be ﬁlter and corresponds to the hotspot plasma
previously estimated from ﬁltered PIN diode and ﬁltered
pinhole images at about 700 eV [6]. The following group
of ionization stages that may be identiﬁed is from Ti XVI
to Ti XVIII. For this group there are a large number
of lines that may be identiﬁed. Their intensities are in
accordance with available transition probabilities in the
NIST database [7]. The lines indicated are those whose
transition probability value Aki is greater than approxi-
mately 4·109 s1, when the value is available, or the bright-
est observed lines in the notation of Kelly database [8].
Ti XV is found to be all but absent, the only unambigu-
ous observation is at 147.4 ˚A, while the equally probable
transition at 115.0 ˚A is not unambiguously identiﬁable.
On the other hand Ti XIII and Ti XIV are well repre-
sented. Ti XII is most strongly represented by two of
the stage’s transitions at 116.5 and 140.3 ˚A, while oth-
ers with a high transition probability at 90.5, 108.1 and
109.1 ˚A are weak. In comparison it would appear that Ti
XIII and Ti XIV are more abundant. Evidence of lower
temperature plasma is found from the ionization stages
from the representative lines identiﬁed from Ti VI to Ti
XI.

An anomaly is presented in the form of two lines, one
of them very prominent at 106.5 ˚A, indicated by an up-
wards pointing arrow. While there are Ti XV, XVI and
XVII lines tabulated within the resolution of the spec-
trograph at 106.5 ˚A, their transition probabilities are an
order of magnitude below the criteria of the other lines
identiﬁed of these ionization stages. Lines from possi-
ble contaminants, such as Cu, Zn, C, Si and F may all
be discounted. There are many extremely fast dynamic
processes associated with the formation and dissipation
of a hot spot, including plasma jets and charged parti-
cle beams, which might aﬀect the transition probabilities
giving rise to energy level shifts or polarization enhance-
ments [9]. A more detailed analysis of this unidentiﬁed
emission lines is beyond the present investigation.

III. DISCUSSION

In common with other fast vacuum discharge work re-
ferred to above, the hot spots are seen to form a Z-pinch
which ”zippers” up within a few ns starting from the po-
sition deﬁned by the incident laser on the cathode. This
formation was seen ﬁrst in interferograms [4], then in vis-
ible streak photography [6] and later in soft X-ray frames
[10]. In soft ﬁltered pinhole images of the Z-pinch column
[6], a plasma volume which extends two thirds of the dis-
tance to the anode is seen to be nearly continuous, with
slight bulges where the hot spots are observed. In the

Figure 3: Histogram showing the axial position of the bright-
est hot spot for the same series of discharges as ﬁgure 2.

in the cathode. By defocussing the laser to a focal spot of
300 µm diameter in excess of 100 shots can be obtained
before realignment is required. The distribution of the
axial position measured from the cathode for these hot
spots is shown in a series of three histograms in ﬁgures
2a, 2b and 2c, for one two and three hotspots respec-
tively. The spacing of the electrodes was 7.7 mm, which
was found to be the optimum spacing for the production
of hot spots. The most favored position for a hot spot
is between 2.6 and 3.2 mm with a total of 29 hot spots.
The next most favored position is between 0.6 and 1.2
mm from the cathode, with a total of 27 hot spots. The
frequency of hot spots per unit axial length rapidly di-
minishes from 4 mm; as between 4 to 4.6 mm only 9 are
observed. The position of the hottest and also the most
intense spot is plotted in ﬁgure 3. The hotspot is nearly
always the only one visible in the 50 µm Be ﬁltered pin-
hole image. This histogram corresponds to the 31 shots
where two or more hot spots were observed. On compar-
ing ﬁgures 3 and 4, it may be easily seen that there is a
correlation between the position of greatest frequency of
occurrence and the most intense hotspot.

A spectrum from the whole plasma taken with the
grazing incidence spectrometer is shown in ﬁgure 4.
Within the time resolution of the micro-channel gating,
the recorded spectrum corresponds to the time of hot
spot formation. As the spectrum covers a wide range,
it is shown in two halves to appreciate the smaller scale
details. A wide range of ionization stages is found in-
dicating a plasma with regions of widely diﬀering tem-
perature. The ionization stages cover Ti V to Ti XX, in
three or four groups which may be associated with diﬀer-
ent plasmas as will be discussed as follows. The second

4

barely seen in micro-channel plate frames even in 3 µm
ﬁltered images. The anode itself is usually quite a bright
emitter, although an order of magnitude less than the Z-
pinch, except in the case where the plasma density is too
low in the pinch region and very intense e-beams arise.
On relating these observations to the spectrum presented,
it is reasonable to infer that the ionization stages from Ti
V to XII are associated with the plasma boiling oﬀ from
the anode. These ionization stages do not have any lines
that would appear in images ﬁltered with 1.5 or 3.0 µm of
Al. The plasma temperature may be obtained from the
collisional radiation code, FLY [11]. The stages from Ti
XIX to Ti XX are associated with the hottest plasmas of
the hotspots. Li-like Ti has many lines in the pass-band
of the Be ﬁlter. Some of the lower energy transitions are
seen in the spectrum. The most intense lines of the wave-
length range of spectrum are those corresponding to the
Ti XIII to Ti XVIII species. Such a wide range of stages
is not expected from a single temperature plasma but
rather the species are consistent with a range of temper-
atures from 200 to 500 eV. All of these stages have lines
that may be seen in the softer ﬁlters used in the pinhole
image camera. For these pinholes and especially the case
of the 2.0 µm Ti ﬁlter, with its L-shell pass band be-
tween 28 and 35 ˚A, the 1 mm diameter Z-pinch column
is the principal feature. Hence it may be inferred that
this plasma occupies this range of ionization stages. A
wide variety of ionization stages has been found in earlier
work [2], where Fe XVIII to XXVI were recorded in the
same discharge.

At present most eﬀort in intense X-ray sources for
lithography is centered on the wavelengths where mul-
tilayer mirrors are available, that is between 120 and 150
˚A. In this range we observe a number of comparatively
intense lines of Ti XIV and XVII. No absolute X-ray mea-
surements of the soft X-ray emission is available in this
work. Absolute measurements have been obtained using
rather low eﬃciency multilayer mirrors at much shorter
wavelengths, centered on 8 and 24 ˚A [12].

The reproducibility of hotspot formation has been
studied in fast capacitor bank driven vacuum sparks.
In an early work [13] a laser beam was focussed onto
the anode electrode and the probability of observing the
hotspot in the plasma formed from electrode ablation
under diﬀerent conditions of electrode separation was ob-
served. The position of the hotspot was well deﬁned but
the probability of occurrence was never greater than 80%.
This work is the ﬁrst to present a statistical analysis
over a large number of shots. More recent laser trig-
gered work in the vacuum spark [14] has concentrated on
hard X-ray emission. Other recent work [15] has studied
various methods of electrical triggering of fast capacitor
bank vacuum sparks, with characteristic X-ray energies
of between 3 and 40 keV. Other work on reliable vacuum
spark operation includes the generation of a sliding spark
on a PTFE sleeve covering part of the cathode [16]. The
system is called passive, as part of the applied generator
voltage is resistively fed to a ring electrode on the PTFE

Figure 4: Soft X-ray spectrum for one representative shot
from 50 to 350 ˚A. The single spectrum is divided in two sec-
tions for clarity. The most probable transitions for the Ti
ionization stages that coincide with observed lines are shown.
The downwards directed arrows denote second order lines and
the upwards directed lines are anomalies in the Ti spectra.
The vertical intensity scale is in arbitrary units and is not
linear.

hardest ﬁlter, which is transparent to emission from Li-
like and higher ionization stages, a much more compact
and irregular axially elongated plasma volume is seen.
In the optical interferometric images the anode plasma is
seen to “boil” oﬀ the anode with too many shift fringes
or even optically dense for any estimate of the electron
density. However soft X-ray emission from the plasma is

sleeve to initiate the sliding spark.

In this context, the present work may be the ﬁrst to
present statistical results of a fast pulsed power driven
vacuum spark. Whereas there are a number of favoured
axial positions, where, if for example a 0.5 mm axial bin
length is considered, there is a 100% probability of ﬁnding
a hotspot. This hot spot is, however, only an approxi-
mately 25% probability of ﬁnding the hottest hotspot
even at the most favoured positions of 2 and 3 mm from
the cathode. However modiﬁcation of the experimental
assembly is possible so that the X-ray energy is extracted
through the hollow anode, in which case the entire inte-
grated axial X-ray emission would be available. In this
case the laser triggering onto the cathode surface would
come in obliquely, at approximately 30◦ from the normal.
As the Z-pinch column is well stabilized on its axis by the
laser pre-ionizing spark and is observed to be well formed,
with only m = 0 instabilities, end-on extraction of X-ray
energy should present an order of magnitude improve-
ment in brightness over any radial energy extraction.

Observations of the Si pin diode signals over many
shots indicate a less than 35% shot to shot variation for
the softest ﬁlter used, sensitive out to approximately 25˚A,
whereas the variation of harder ﬁlters sensitive to Li-like
and He-like transitions shows a 60% shot to shot varia-
tion. The temporal behaviour of the X-ray pulse and the
voltage and current waveforms are very reproducible.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

5

The vacuum spark driven by a small pulsed power
generator and triggered by a laser spark on the cath-
ode compares very favourably with lower voltage fast
capacitor bank drivers.
In particular the hotspots are
formed within a rather cooler and well formed Z pinch.
The characteristic line emission from this pinch is from
Ti XIII to XVIII ionization stages. A statistical anal-
ysis of the m = 0 hotspot special occurrence indicates
favoured positions which also coincide with the brightest
hotspot, which has very signiﬁcant Li-like emission. The
anode plasma is very dense and considerably cooler. No
hotspots are ever formed in the ablated anode plasma.
Whereas extraction of the soft X-ray energy in a radial
direction is possible, considering a 0.5 mm axial segment,
the experimental scheme is susceptible to important im-
provement using axial energy extraction.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors wish to express their gratefulness to the
Chilean government research fund FONDECYT 1030968
and important capital equipment investment from the
Andes Foundation, grant C-13768.

[1] L. Cohen, U. Feldman, M. Swartz, and J. H. Underwood,
Study of the X-rays produced by a vacuum spark, J. Opt.
Soc. Am., vol. 58, pp.843-846, 1968.

[2] E. D. Korop, B. E. Meierovich, Yu. V. Sidel’nikov and
S.T. Sukhorukov, Micropinch in a high-current diode Sov.
Phys. Usp. vol. 22(9), pp. 727-741, 1979.

[3] K. N. Koshelev and N. R. Pereira, Radiative collapse in
vacuum sparks, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 69 pp. R21-R44, 1991.
[4] E. Wyndham, H. Chuaqui, M. Favre, L. Soto and P. Choi,
Beam and hotspot formation in a low impedance line-
driven vacuum spark discahrge, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 71,
pp.4164-4167, 1992.

[5] S. M. Zakharov, G. V. Ivanenkov, A. A. Kolomenskii, S.
A. Pikuz and A. I. Samokhin, Production of a hot dense
plasma in the pinching of a laser burst at the diode of
a high-current accelerator, Sov. J. Plasma Phys., vol. 10
(3), pp.303-307, 1984.

[6] H. Chuaqui, M. Favre, E. S. Wyndham, R. Aliaga-Rossel,
I. Mitchell and L. Soto, Observation of plasma dynamics
in the vacuum spark, Phys. Plasmas, vol. 2, pp. 3910-
3916.

[7] NIST Atomic Spectra Database [Online]. Available:
http://phvsics.nist.Rov/cgi-bin/AtData/lines form
[Online]. Available:
http://cfa-www.harvard.edu/amdata/ampdata/kelly/
kellv.html

[8] Kelly Atomic Line Datbase

[9] H R. Griem, Principies of Plasma Spectroscopy, Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, U. K., 1997, Chaps.
4 and 12.

[10] H. Chuaqui, M. Favre, R. Saavedra, E. S. Wyndham, L.
Soto, P. Choi and C. Dumitrescu, Observation of vacuum
spark dynamics from its X-ray emission, IEEE Trans,
Plasma Sel, vol. 26, pp. 1162-1167, 1998.

[11] R. W. Lee, and J. T. Larsen, A time dependent model
for plasma Spectroscopy of K-shell emitters, Quant. Spec-
trosc. Radial Transfer, vol. 32, pp 91-101, 1996.

[12] M. Hebach, D. Simanovskii, S. Bobashev and H-J. Kunze,
Absolute measurements of the son X-ray emission from
vacuum spark discharges, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol,
vol. 2, pp. 296-300, 1993.

[13] C. S. Wong and S. Lee, Vacuum spark as a reproducible
X-ray source, Rev. Sci. Instrum.,vo ˙55, pp. 1125-1128.
[14] A. Ohzu and K. Ito, Characteristcs of hard X-ray emis-
sion from laser-induced vacuum spar discharges, J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 93(12), pp. 9477-9482, 2003.

[15] N. Georgescu, C. G. Serbanescu and G. Sandolache, Re-
producibility conditions for the pulsed X-ray emission in
a vacuum spark discharge, Nukleonika, vol. 46(S1), pp.
SI 7-820,2001.

[16] R. K. Rout, S.K.H. Auluck, J. S. Nagpal and L. V. Kulka-
rni, Exploratory studies on a passively triggered vacuum
spark, J. Phys D: Appl. Phys., vol. 32, pp. 3013-3018,
1999.

