7
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
8
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Possibility of Microturbulence Diagnostics in a Magnetically Conﬁned
Plasma Using Multiple Scattering Eﬀects

E.S.Kovalenko and N.A.Zabotin

Abstract

The idea of new diagnostics method for the small-scale irregular structures
of magnetically conﬁned plasma is suggested in the present paper. The method
can be based on measurements of intensity attenuation of the normal sound-
ing waves. Anomalous attenuation arises due to multiple scattering eﬀects
investigated earlier for ionospheric radio propagation. It has been shown that
multiple scattering regime can realize in a tokamak plasma. Calculations of
normal sounding wave anomalous attenuation in a tokamak plasma have been
carried out. This quantity is large enough to be registered experimentally.

1

Introduction

Anomalously large level of energy and particle transport is one of the main prob-
lems in the magnetic conﬁnement fusion research. The transport is thought to
be enhanced by small scale plasma turbulence [1-3]. Therefore, the determination
of the microturbulent ﬂuctuations properties is necessary for understanding and
improvement of plasma conﬁnement.

At present, there are several basic methods of microturbulence diagnostics:
Langmuir probes, heavy ion beam probes, scattering, beam emission spectroscopy,
electron cyclotron emission, reﬂectometry and some others. Each of these tech-
niques has limited ﬁeld of application, merits and demerits [4]. Joint usage of
diﬀerent methods allows to obtain more valuable and more accurate information
about microturbulence properties. The application of the existing methods at large
devices of the future (such as ITER) requires additional studies and probably some
of them will not be possible or will become more diﬃcult there. Therefore, the
development of new diagnostic methods is an actual problem.

In this paper it is suggested the idea of using of electromagnetic wave multiple
scattering eﬀects for diagnostics of spatial spectrum of small scale electron density
ﬂuctuations in a magnetically conﬁned plasma. Unlike existing scattering technics,
instead of the scattered ﬁeld registration, it is suggested to measure the power
of signal reﬂected from plasma. The theoretical basis of the idea has been taken
from the works dealing with the application of the multiple scattering theory to
the ionosphere radio wave propagation. The attenuation of the vertical sounding
signal is one of the consequences of the theory. This phenomenon is well known
and it has been observed in a number of ionospheric experiments [5-7]. However,
ionosphere parameters, properties of random irregularities and sounding frequencies
strongly diﬀer from those in laboratory plasma. For instance, maximum average
electron density in the ionosphere is 106 cm−3 and in the magnetically conﬁned
plasma is 1013 − 1014 cm−3. Typical sounding signal frequency for reﬂection case
is about 10 M Hz in the ionosphere and 10 − 100 GHz in tokamak plasma. Small
scale ionospheric irregularities of importance for the scattering process have size of

1

1 − 10 km across the magnetic ﬁeld and in the tokamak plasma the irregularities
are of 1 − 5 cm in diameter. This strong diﬀerence of parameters demands separate
study for the case of high-temperature magnetically conﬁned plasma. Such study
is presented in this paper.

The analysis and numerical estimates are carried out for the large tokamak (with
minor radius a ≥ 1 m), however, the suggested idea can also be realized for the next
generation devices, such as NSTX [8].

We are starting the paper with the description of the suggested experiment
scheme, presentation of the electron density irregularity spatial spectrum model
and estimation of plasma optical depth. Then, the radiative transfer equation in
a randomly irregular magnetized plasma and its approximate analytical solution
are presented. The next section is devoted to the analysis of the applicability of
this theory to the tokamak plasma. Then, the results of numerical estimations of
the anomalous attenuation eﬀect are presented. Finally, the obtained results are
discussed and the conclusions are presented.

2 Multiple scattering regime in a tokamak plasma

Scheme of the experiment for density ﬂuctuation study is shown in Fig. 1. It is
suggested to measure the intensity of normally reﬂected signal. If the scattering is
multiple, than, according to the existing theory [9], in the case of the normal sound-
ing this can cause considerable attenuation of the reﬂected signal. The attenuation
value is proposed to be used for irregularities study. To ﬁnd out the conditions, in
which the scattering is multiple, it is necessary to carry out the estimation of plasma
slab optical thickness. The optical thickness L for scattering process is determined
by the expression

where σ0 is full scattering cross-section of a unit volume, dS is the element of
nonperturbed ray trajectory. The value of σ0 is determined by integration of the
diﬀerential scattering cross-section σ over full solid angle

L =

σ0dS,

σ0 =

σdΩ .

(1)

(2)

The calculation will be carried out in the isotropic plasma approximation. It is
implied using the expression of the diﬀerential scattering cross-section for isotropic
plasma. Unlike of the isotropic plasma case, the expression for diﬀerential cross-
section for magnetized plasma contains dimentionless multiplier (so called ”geomet-
rical factor”), depending on the polarization of incident and scattered waves [10].
If the wave frequency is not close to some plasma resonance, then the geometrical
factor is about a unit. We will neglect of this cross-section dependence on the polar-
ization and set the geometrical factor equal to unit. Also we will use the refractive
index for isotropic plasma.

Utilization of this simpliﬁcations is justiﬁed by calculation results for the iono-
sphere. Calculation of the ionosphere optical depth does not lead to considerable
quantitative diﬀerence from the same calculation in the isotropic plasma approxi-
mation [9].

Although tokamak plasma temperature is high (T ∼ 108 K), the electron ther-
mal motion in our problem does not have considerable inﬂuence on radiation prop-
agation. It is bound up with the fact that in the case of normal sounding we are
interested in waves propagating nearly perpendicularly to the magnetic ﬁeld. In
this case temperature correction for the refractive index is exponentially small [11]

Z

Z4π

2

and one can use the refractive index for a cold plasma (n = 1 − v, v = ω2/ω2
plasma frequency, ω = 2πf , f - wave frequency).

e, ωe -

The diﬀerential scattering cross-section in isotropic plasma takes the form [12]

σ (α0, β0, α, β) =

π
2

0v2F
k4

~k′ (α, β) − ~k (α0, β0)
h
i

,

where k0 = ω/c, F
is density ﬂuctuation spatial spectrum, α0, β0, α, β - polar
and azimuthal angles of wave vectors ~k and ~k′ of incident and scattered waves,
respectively.

(cid:17)

~k
(cid:16)

For numerical calculation of optical depth it is necessary to concretize the model
of irregularity spectrum being based on existing experiment information. According
to experimental data, the irregularities in tokamak plasma are strongly stretched
along the magnetic ﬁeld:
l|| ∼ 100 − 1000 cm, l⊥ ∼ 1 − 5 cm, where l|| and l⊥
are typical irreglarity sizes in the parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld
directions. Since longitudinal sizes exceed transverse ones by 100 − 1000 times, we
can use for our estimates the approximation of inﬁnitly stretched irregularities with
spatial spectrum

F

~k
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

= CA

1 +

(cid:18)

−ν/2

κ2
⊥
κ2

0⊥ (cid:19)

δ

κk

,

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

where CA is normalizing constant, κ0⊥ = 2π/l0⊥, l0⊥ is external irregularity scale
length, κ⊥ and κ|| are transverse and longitudinal to the magnetic ﬁeld components
of the irregularity spatial harmonic, ν is spectrum index and δ(x) is delta-function.
Spectrum (4) dependence on κ⊥ for κ⊥ >> κ0⊥ takes form F ∼ κ−ν
⊥ what is
consistent with the existing experimental data for ν from 2 to 3.5 [4,13].

For the spectrum normalization a certain value of the relative irregularities level
in a some scale R can be used. The most natural analog of this physical value in
the locally homogeneous random ﬁeld theory is the structural function [12]

(3)

(4)

(5)

=

D

~R
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

*(cid:20)

δne
ne

~r + ~R
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

−

δne
ne

2

(~r)

,

+

(cid:21)

where δne
is relative electron density perturbation, hi means ensemble average. To
ne
determine the normalizing constant CA we will normalize the spectrum (4), follow-
ing to the method of [9], by the value of structural function (5), choosing irregularity
scale length R in transverse to the magnetic ﬁeld direction being corresponded to
the interested spectrum interval. An important property of the structural function
is that perturbations δne
ne of large spatial scale lengths (with typical size l >> R) do
not have inﬂuence on it. The structural function is connected with spatial spectrum
by the following expression [12]

D

~R

= 2

F (~κ)

1 − cos ~κ ~R

d3κ .

(6)

(cid:17)
Thus, setting relative density perturbation δne

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

Z

ne = δR in a certain scale R, as-
R and using then formula (6) we determine the normalizing

≡ δ2

suming D
constant:

~R
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

CA = δ2
R

Γ(ν/2)
2πκ2

0⊥ "

Γ

ν − 2
2

− 2

Rκ0⊥
2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

ν−2
2

K ν−2

(Rκ0⊥)

2

,

(7)

−1

#

where Γ(x) is gamma-function, K(z) is McDonald function [14].

3

Numerical calculation of the optical depth for the ray trajectory with coinciding
incidend and reﬂected ray paths (see Fig. 1, where, however, the incident and
reﬂected rays are drown separately for clearness) was carried out for the linear
regular density proﬁle with ne = 1014 cm−3 at distance 100 cm from the slab
boundary (see Fig. 2). The following values of spectrum parameters were chosen:
external irregularity scale length l0⊥ = 5 cm, spectrum index ν = 2.5, irregularity
level δR = 1; 1.5; 2%, normalization scale R = 1 cm. The magnetic ﬁeld direction
was chosen perpendicular to the ray path. The value of magnetic ﬁeld is of no
importance in used approximation, but its direction determines the irregularity
orientation. The calculation results are shown in Fig. 3 in the form of dependence
of the optical depth L on the sounding wave frequency f . Chosen frequency interval
corresponds to wave penetration depth from z = 50 cm to z = 100 cm. The obtained
results show that in the chosen frequency (or reﬂection level) band the optical depth
is considerably more than a unit (unit optical depth corresponds to L = 4.3 dB)
for relative irregularity level δne

ne ≥ 1%.

Thus, for parameters characterised of tokamak irregularities and plasma, the

realization of the multiple scattering mode is possible.

3 Radiation transfer in a randomly irregular mag-

netized plasma

In the considered case of normal sounding, the rays situated near the normal ray
trajectory give the basic contribution to the reﬂected signal power. That is why we
will assume the plasma layer to be plane stratiﬁed. As it has been shown in [15,16],
radiation energy transfer with multiple scattering eﬀects accounting for the case of
total internal reﬂection from a plane stratiﬁed layer of randomly irregular plasma
can be described by the equation of radiation energy balance (REB) in ray tubes.
This equation is written in terms of the invariant ray variables (coordinates). The
latter ones permit to take into account naturally of regular refraction and give the
most simple form to the equation.

The invariant ray variables are introduced by setting the basic plane out of the
layer and parallel to it. Let us introduce Cartesian orthogonal coordinates (x, y, z)
with z-axis being directed along the plasma density gradient. Then XOY plane
can be considered as the basic plane. The plasma occupies the region z > h0 (see
Fig. 4). The coordinates ~ρ = (x, y) of intersection point of a ray trajectory going
out of the layer with the basic plane as well as ray polar θ and azimuthal ϕ arrival
angles in this point completely determine ray trajectory within the plasma layer
and outside of it. In this meaning they are called ”invariant”. The equation has
the following form

d
dz

P (z, ~ρ, ω) =

Q(z, ω, ω′)

P (z, ~ρ − ~Φ(z, ω′, ω), ω′) − P (z, ~ρ, ω)

dω ,

(8)

Z

n

o

where ω = {θ, ϕ}; dω = dθdϕ; P - radiation energy ﬂux density in a unit solid angle
in direction determined by angles θ, ϕ, at the point ~ρ of basic plane;

Q(z, ω, ω′) = σ(ω, ω′)C−1(z, ω) sin θ′

dΩ
dΩ′

,

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

σ(ω, ω′) is scattering diﬀerential cross-section, C−1(z, ω) is cosine of angle between
dΩ
is Jacobian of transition from current
ray trajectory and z-axis at level z,
dΩ′
wave vector angles to invariant ones, ~Φ(z, ω′, ω) is vector connecting points of in-
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
tersection with basic plane of two ray trajectories determined by invariant angles ω
and ω′ under the condition that trajectories intersect each other at level z. Using

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

4

of the invariant ray coordinates allows one to introduce the small angle scattering
approximation in the invariant ray coordinates [9]. This approximation is valid if
the most probable diﬀerence of invariant angles in each scattering act is small. It
must be noticed that the applicability ﬁeld of this approximation is somewhat more
wide then that of the ordinary small angle scattering approximation. In particular,
when the scattering occures near reﬂection level, small diﬀerence of the invariant
angles can correspond to considerable diﬀerence of wave vector orientation angles.
This approximation allows one to obtain an analytical solution of the equation (8).
The solution consists of two terms. The ﬁrst term gives the basic radiation energy
ﬂux [9]

˜P (z, ~ρ, ω) = 1
(2π)
z

2

Z

d2qP0(~q, ω)·

· exp

i~q~ρ +

dz′

dω′ Q(z′, ω, ω′)

(cid:26)

0
R

R

e−i~q~Φ(z′;ω,ω′) − 1
h

i(cid:27)

,

(9)

where P0(~q, ω) is the Fourier transform of the energy ﬂux spatial-angular distribu-
tion P0(~ρ, ω) of the radiation reﬂected from the layer in absence of irregularities.
This undisturbed ﬂux is determined by the source directivity diagram and the regu-
lar layer parameters. The second term (not shown in (9)) has the sense of diﬀerence
between approximate and exact solutions of the equation (8). It may be shown us-
ing asymptotic estimates that under considered approximation the second term is
small.

4 Applicability of the radiation transfer theory for

tokamak plasma

In the next section the outlined theory will be applied to calculation of the normal
sounding signal attenuation in a tokamak plasma layer. But before that, the appli-
cability analysis of used approximations has to be carried out. First of all, for the
transfer theory utilizing it is necessary to clarify the applicability of the geometrical
optics approximation for the average ﬁeld. The radiation wave length (λ ∼ 0.3 cm
for f ∼ 100 GHz) must be much less then the average density regular distribution
scale length. If the density proﬁle is suﬃciently smooth, then this scale length is
about the tokamak minor radius (a ∼ 1 m for large devices). So, the geometrical
optics approximation is valid in this case.

The next assumption to be veriﬁed is the validity of the small angle scattering
approximation in the invariant ray coordinates. The frequency band of interest
is 60 − 90 GHz, what corresponds to wave length band of 0.3 − 0.5 cm, but the
minimum irregularity scale length is 1 cm, and it is at least two times larger than the
wave length. It means that in the entry region of the plasma layer the usual small
angle scattering approximation is valid. In the plasma layer depth, near the wave
reﬂection level, as it was mentioned in the previous section, there exist additional
reasons for using the small angle scattering approximation in the invariant ray
coordinates.

5 Numerical culculation of the reﬂected wave at-

tenuation uder normal sounding of tokamak plasma
layer

For the calculation of the signal attenuation due to multiple scattering we use the
solution (9) of the equation (8) in the small angle scattering in the invariant ray
coordinates approximation. We assume the antenna to have small sizes and wide

5

directivity diagram. Hence, this source may be approximately considered as point.
Let the antenna be situated in the coordinate center, point O (see Fig. 4), at the
distance h0 = 10 cm from the layer boundary.
Then, we take the function P0 in the form

P0(~ρ, θ, ϕ) = ˜P0(~ρ)δ [− cos θ + cos θ0(~ρ)] δ [ϕ − ϕ0(~ρ)] ,

(10)

where θ0(~ρ) and ϕ0(~ρ) are angle coordinates of the ray coming to the point ~ρ when
neglecting the scattering.

The calculation is carried out for the same linear density layer (Fig. 2) of a cold
isotropic plasma and for the same frequency interval what have been used in section
2 for the optical depth estimates. The function ~Φ for the plane isotropic plasma
layer can be obtained in analytical form

Φx(v, θ, ϕ, θ′, ϕ′) = f (θ′) cos ϕ′ − f (θ) cos ϕ ,
Φy(v, θ, ϕ, θ′, ϕ′) = f (θ′) sin ϕ′ − f (θ) sin ϕ ,

(11)

where

f (θ) = 2H sin θ

cos θ +

n2 − sin2 θ

+ h0 tan θ ,

(cid:16)

p
H = dv/dz .

(cid:17)

The intensity of normally reﬂected signal is obtained using formula (9), after
substituting of ~ρ = 0 and integration over angle variables. In view of the integrand
complicity, the calculation is carried out numerically. The numerical results for var-
ious irregularity spectrum parameters are shown in Fig. 5 in a form of dependence
of the signal attenuation on frequency.

The attenuation for three diﬀerent irregularity levels δR = 1; 1.5; 2% and l0 =
10 cm, ν = 2.5 is illustrated in Fig. 5(a). The ﬁrst, quite natural conclusion, is that
the attenuation increases with the ﬂuctuation amplitude. The results obtained for
l0 = 3, 5, 10 cm, ν = 2.5 and δR = 1.5% are presented in Fig. 5(b). The attenuation
slightly increases with the external irregularity scale length. Figure 5(c) shows the
results obtaned for ν = 2.5, 2.75, 3, l0 = 10 cm and δR = 1.5%. One can see
that the attenuation also grows with incsease of the spectrum index ν. Finally, all
Figs. 5 (a)-(c) show the attenuation growth with frequency increase. In the chosen
frequency band (60 − 90 GHz) total attenuation variation is 2 − 4 dB.

The main feature of the presented results, of importance for the present paper
basic topic, is that the signal attenuation caused by scattering amounts of 3 − 7 dB
and can be measured in experiment.

6 Conclusion

The paper considered the problem of the sounding electromagnetic wave propaga-
tion in a magnetically conﬁned plasma with accounting of multiple scattering eﬀects.
It was shown that, for typical tokamak plasma and irregularity parameters, the mul-
tiple scattering regime can take place. The anomalous attenuation of the normal
sounding signal is one of the consequences of this fact. The numerical calculations
of the anomalous attenuation were carried out. It was shown that the attenuation
value is suﬃciently large to be registered by experimental facilities. The attenuation
dependences on signal frequency and irregularity spatial spectrum parameters were
obtained. Since the anomalous attenuation depends on the spectrum parameters,
its measuring can be used for stating and solving of the inverse problem. Thus
the aim of the irregularity characteristics determination using observations of the
attenuation can be reached. Utilization of this method can broaden the possibilities
of the existing microturbulence diagnostic methods.

6

7 References

1. E.J. Doyle, K.H. Burrell, T.N. Carlstrom et al., Proc. of the 16th IAEA Fu-
sion Energy Conf., Montreal, Canada, 1996 (International Atomic Energy Agency,
Vienna, to be published).

2. R. L. Hickok, P.M. Schoch, T. P. Crowley et al., Nucl. Fusion Supplement,

1229 (1991).

3. C.L. Rettig, W.A. Peebles, K.H. Burrel, R.J. La Haye, E.J. Doyle, R.J.

Groebner and N.C. Luhmann, Jr., Phys. Fluids B 5, 2428 (1993).

4. N.Bretz. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 68, 2927 (1997).
5. V.V. Vyaznikov, V.V. Vaskov, Yu.V. Gruzdev, Geomagnetism and Aeronomy

18, 45 (1978), in russian.

6. E. Mjolhus, J. Geophys. Res. 90, 4269 (1985).
7. C.S.G.K. Setty, A.R. Jain, Canadian J. Phys. 48, 653 (1970).
8. http://www-local.pppl.gov/nstxhome/nstx/
9. N.A.Zabotin, Thesis... Dokt. of Phys.-Math. Sciences, RSU, Rostov-on-Don,

Russia, 1994, in russian.

in russian.

”Nauka”, 1967, in russian.

10. Electrodinamics of Plasma, edited by A.I.Akhiezer, Moscow, ”Nauka”, 1974,

11. V.L.Ginzburg, Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves in Plasma, Moscow,

12. S.M. Rytov, Yu.A. Kravtsov, B.I. Tatarskii, Introduction to Statistical Ra-

diophysics, Part II, Random Fields, Moscow, ”Nauka”, 1978, in russian.

13. R.D. Durst, R.G. Fonck, G. Cosby, H. Evensen, S.F. Paul, Rev. Sci. In-

strum., 63, 4907 (1992).

14. Handbook of Mathematical Functions, edited by M. Abramovitz and I.A.

Stegun, Moscow ”Nauka”, 1979, in russian.

15. N.A. Zabotin, Izvestiya Vysshich Uchebnykh Zavedenii, Radioﬁzika, 36,

1075 (1993), in russian.

dioﬁzika, 36, 1163 (1993), in russian.

16. A.G. Bronin, N.A. Zabotin, Izvestiya Vysshich Uchebnykh Zavedenii, Ra-

7

This figure "Fig5.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9708018v1

This figure "Fig12.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9708018v1

This figure "Fig34.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9708018v1

