7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print/physics/9712013

Landau damping: is it real?

V. N. Soshnikov ∗
Plasma Physics Dept., All-Russian Institute of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information
of the Russian Academy of Sciences (VINITI, Usievitcha 20, 125219 Moscow, Russia)

To calculate linear oscillations and waves in dynamics of gas and plasma one uses as a
rule the old classical method of dispersion equation. The latter connects frequencies ω and
wave numbers k (both are in general case complex values): ǫ(ω, k) = 0. In the plasma case
ǫ is called generalized dielectric susceptibility. Dispersion equation is derived by substitution
of asymptotical solution exp (cid:0)−iωt + i~k~r(cid:1) into the coupled system of linearized dynamical
and ﬁeld partial diﬀerential equations. However, this method appears to be inapplicable,
f.e., in the case of waves in Maxwellian collisionless plasma when dispersion equation has
no solutions. By means of some reﬁned sophistication L. Landau in 19461 has suggested
in this case actually to replace the dispersion equation with another one, having a speciﬁc
solution (“Landau damping”) and being now widely used in plasma physics. Recently we
have suggested2 a quite new universal method of two-dimensional Laplace transformation (in
coordinate x and time t for plane wave case), that allows to obtain asymptotical solutions of
original Vlasov plasma equations as inseparable sets of coupled oscillatory modes (but not a
single wave like exp (−iωt + ikx)). The mode parameters are deﬁned in this case by double-
poles (ωn,kn) of Laplace image E(ωn, kn) of electrical ﬁeld E(x, t) or, correspondingly, by
double-zeros of inverse expression 1/E(ωn, kn) = 0. This method, in contrast with classical
one, allows to obtain the whole set of oscillatory modes for every concrete problem. It leads
to some new ideology in the theory of plasma oscillations, the latter’s being a set of coupled
oscillatory modes (characterized by pairs (ωn,kn) and amplitudes) and depending not only
on the intrinsic plasma parameters, (as is the case in classic theory), but also on mutually
dependent self-consistent initial and boundary conditions and on method of plasma oscillations
excitation.

PACS numbers: 52.25 Dg; 52.35 Fp.
Key words: Landau damping; plasma oscillations; electron and ion waves; plasma dielectric

susceptibility; plasma dispersion equation.

More than 50 years ago there appeared the work of L. Landau1 with an original asymptotical
solution of Vlasov equations for collisionless Maxwellian plasma in the form of a single travelling
damping electromagnetic wave (longitudinal or transversal one). In this way there appeared
some novel conceptions in plasma physics: Landau damping and Landau rule of bypassing
around poles in calculating some indeﬁnite Cauchy-type integrals along the real axis, which arise
in standard procedures of deriving dispersion equation after substituting in Vlasov equations the
wave exp (−iωt + ikx). Landau searched for a solution f (t) of initial problem for perturbation
of electron distribution function and electrical ﬁeld in a form ∼ exp(ikx) · f (t), where k is real
wave number, using the method of Laplace transformation of f (t). By means of analytical
continuation of Laplace image of f (t), that is fp, in complex transform parameter p ≡ −iω he
has obtained an asymptotical solution corresponding to a pole pn of the analytically continued
function in the form of a slowly damping travelling wave with complex frequency ω ≡ ω0 − iδ.
This work of Landau was attributed to the rank of outstanding discoveries in the physics of
plasma3.

The most surprising turned out the fact that the substitution of this solution back into the
Vlasov equations results in the dispersion equation which has no solutions at ω0 6= 0 for any δ
(see in more details4,5). Yet, it was decided that the right one is not the dispersion equation
obtained in this way, but some other dispersion equation with evident natural additions in the
Vlasov equations. These additions arise at calculation of indeﬁnitely divergent Cauchy integral
in velocity vx with the pole ω = kvx (x is direction of wave movement, vx is x-component of
particle velocity and integration along real vx-axis is carried out with bypassing this pole along

∗

Correspondence should be addressed to: Soshnikov V. N., Krasnodarskaya str., 51-2-168, Moscow 109559, Russia.

the half-circle contour in the complex plane vx).

These results came into the all plasma physics text-books (see, f.e.6–9). There have ap-
peared experimental works10,11,16–18, which seemed to have proved Landau damping. Although
sometimes there appeared some doubts about rightness of these theoretical results12–15, all of
them were searching for either something mathematically incorrect in Landau’s derivation or
some diversiﬁcations, and also philosophical justiﬁcations like the causality principle or ex-
pansion in asymptotically divergent series in small ratio δ/ω0, and so on. To date Landau’s
results are considered as irrefragable, and they compose an essential part of the theoretical
plasma physics3,6–9. Attempts to ﬁnd mathematical incorrectnesses in Landau’s derivation,
in particularly, in4,5, have failed (see2). Apparently, his derivation is really mathematically
irreproachable.

These results are looked now in a quite another light after the successful attempt to use in
solving Vlasov equations two-dimensional (in coordinate x and time t) Laplace transforma-
tion2,4,5. In this case the asymptotical solution which must satisfy the original Vlasov equations
after its substitution there, is found as the sum of oscillatory modes Pn an exp (−iωnt + iknx)
which does not reduce to the simple product f (t)φ(x). And besides, coeﬃcients an, frequencies
and wave numbers being found not from the dispersion equation ǫ(ω, k) = 07,8 (ǫ is general-
ized plasma susceptibility), but as some values determining residues and double-poles of the
Laplace transform E(ω, k) or, correspondingly, double zeros (in ω and k) of the inverse expres-
sion 1/E(ω, k). In this case the solution, including ωn, kn, is determined not only by inherent
parameters of plasma (as it is in the Landau theory), but in the same extent by initial as well
as boundary conditions and by the ways of excitation of plasma oscillations/waves. The initial
and boundary conditions are not arbitrary, but are connected by conditions of the ﬁeld self-
consistency (supposing ﬁniteness) in Vlasov equations, so a dividing to the so called properly
initial or properly boundary problems in Landau theory is incorrect. In this way, even at the
initial condition of perturbation of the distribution function f1 (x, t = 0, ~v) = α (~v) exp(ikx)
initial single-mode solution is factorized in time, and other oscillatory modes appear inevitably
in the asymptotical solution. The coupled modes which are constituents of the solution include
Langmuir waves, standing waves, damping and non-damping waves and oscillations, but do
not include whatever speciﬁc Landau damping2. Vlasov equations must be satisﬁed indeed only
by the totality of the modes of f1 (x, t, ~v) and ~E(x, t), but not by whatever mode separately.
Besides that, from the condition of self-consistency (ﬁniteness) of solution it follows that the
modes of f1 are proportional to the amplitude of electrical ﬁeld with the natural result that
there are no oscillations in the absence of restoring forces of electrical ﬁeld (when the latter
is damping). Properties of the system of linear equations which connect asymptotical ampli-
tudes of E(x, t) and f1 (x, t, ~v) determine the form of solution: one, or more independent sets
of modes including a possible case of unavoidable exponentially divergent modes (probably, it
is the peculiar case of an external non-self-consistent source).

Strictly speaking, in order to keep self-consistency in advance, one could after setting bound-
ary and initial conditions for the distribution function f1 also obtain such conditions for electric
ﬁeld E in accord with Poisson equation for ∂E/∂x.

Whether these results being contrary to all the educational text-

books on plasma physics are right?

The answer is, that Landau derivation appears only as some mathematically right part of the
classical proof by reductio ad absurdum: from some arbitrary supposition, what would be, if the
solution of Vlasov equations should have the form f (t) exp(ikx), follows at asymptotical limit
f (t) → exp(−ωt) with Landau’s ω, k (and also at any other values), that these solutions do not
satisfy the original Vlasov equations, consequently, the initial supposition about the assumed
form of the solution was wrong. It is a strikingly simple and classical solution of the “paradox
of Landau”, including some mysterious appearance of non-damping oscillations of f1 (x, t, ~v) in
the absence of any restoring force (electrical ﬁeld E → 0 according to Landau damping!)6.

p (correspondingly, electrical ﬁeld E+

However the contradiction in Landau’s logic is even more profound. He proceeds from the
Laplace image f +
p ) in the upper half-plane ω, where poles
in ω should lead to exponentially divergent solutions, what appears illogical. But in the upper
half-plane poles are absent, so the dispersion equation has no solutions. But Landau’s analyti-
cal continuation in ω into the lower half-plane leads to poles in ω, which contrary to the initial
supposition correspond to exponentially damping solutions (what already is paradoxical). Be-
sides, these solutions satisfy some another dispersion equation (the original dispersion equation
which follows from substitution of a travelling wave into Vlasov equations, as it was already
said before, is not satisﬁed in this case). On the contrary, it should be more logical to proceed
from the Laplace images in the lower half-plane f −
p ) with damping
solutions. However, in this case the poles exist only for analytical continuation of f −
p , E−
p into
the upper half-plane and correspond, contrary to the initial supposition, to divergent solutions.
So, our basic principle is to ﬁnd the correct solution of original Vlasov equations, but not to

p (diﬀerent from f +

p , E−

p , E+

ﬁnd some modiﬁed equations for ﬁtting them to be satisﬁed by Landau damping solution.

In this way, the dispersion equation in the form ǫ(ω, k) = 0, as well as generally the method
of one-mode derivation of dispersion equation have rather limited applicability. The suggested
here method of two-dimensional Laplace transformation gives eﬀectively the total set of coupled
oscillatory modes in every concrete case, and it can lead to many new results not only in plasma
physics (with revision of the results obtained on the base of Landau “bypassing around poles”),
but also in gasdynamics and other ﬁelds. One can also conclude that with the new method a
completely new ideology of oscillatory solutions arises which is quite diﬀerent with respect to
Landau’s sophisticated conceptions, “predicting” physical phenomenon (“Landau damping”),
which probably does not exist in nature.

Experimental “Landau damping” (see3,10,11,16–18) may be mimicked by a damping caused by
ﬁniteness of plasma tube diameter (in the real plasma slab modelling) or/and non-selfconsistent
(external) ﬁeld term of the plasma waves excitation (in the ﬁeld term of kinetic equation),
or more really by a non-zero source term in the right-hand side of the more general kinetic
equation(s) (cf.3), according to some concrete experimental conditions (Langmuir probes type,
excitation transparent grids or compact ﬂat or wire electrodes etc.). So, this experimental
damping must satisfy some other physical equations, not the original Vlasov equations. In this
case the actual problem is the analysis and physical groundings of other diﬀerent modiﬁcations
of these equations in their conformity with the diﬀerent concrete experimental conditions,
including a distinct demarcation between the electric external (non-self-consistent) and intrinsic
Poissonian (self-consistent) ﬁelds. Such plasma wave equations can be solved then with the
proposed method of two-dimensional Laplace transformation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am very grateful to Dr. A. P. Bakulev for his active and very constructive edition and help

in amendment of this paper as well as his realization of electronic sending procedures.

1 Landau L. D., J. Phys. (USSR), 10 (1946) 25
2 Soshnikov V. N. Preprint physics/9706041 (see http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print/physics/9706041)
3 Kadomtsev B. B., Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 95 (1968) 111 (in Russian)
4 Soshnikov V. N., Manuscript, Dep. VINITI (1990) No. 2982-B90;

See also: http://xxx.lanl.gov/e-print/plasm-ph/9511001

5 Soshnikov V. N., J. Moscow Phys. Soc., 6 (1996) 279
6 Clemmow P. C., Dougherty J. P., “Electrodynamics of Particles and Plasmas”, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, NY (1990);

(Rus. transl. Moscow, Mir, 1996)

7 Lifshits E. M., Pitaevsky L. P., “Physical kinetics”, Nauka, Moscow (1979) (in Russian)
8 Alexandrov A. F., Bogdankevich L. S., Rukhadze A. A., “Foundations of Electrodynamics of Plasma”, 2nd ed.,

Vysshaya Shkola, Moscow (1988) (in Russian)

9 Kadomtsev B. B., “Collective Phenomena in Plasma”, 2nd ed. Nauka, Moscow (1988) (in Russian)
10 Malmberg I. H., Wharton C. B., Phys. Rev. Lett., 17 (1966) 175
11 Malmberg I. H., Wharton C. B., Drummond W. E., Plasma Phys., 1 (1966) 485
12 Weitzner H., Phys. Fluids, 6 (1963) 1123
13 Sagan D., Am. J. Phys., 62 (1994) 450
14 Alexeﬀ I., Osamu I., IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 6 (1978) 212
15 Alexeﬀ I., Rader M., Int. J. Electronics, 68 (1990) 385
16 Malmberg I. H., Wharton C. B., Phys. Rev. Lett., 19 (1967) 775
17 Derﬂer H., Simonen T. C., 8-th Intern. Conf. Phenom. in Ionized Gases, Contrib. Pap., Vienna, p. 335 (1967)
18 Van-Hoven G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 17 (1966) 169

