8
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
9
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hα spectroscopy for hot plasma parameters measurement

P.I.Melnikov1, I.A.Ivanov

Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics,630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.

Abstract

The new spectroscopic method for measurement of hot plasma parameters is

developed. The method based on Ha proﬁle monitoring. The proﬁle was accurately
calculated for a wide range of plasma parameters (ne ∼ 1014÷ 1017 cm−3, Te ∼
1÷500 eV) Use of the method in the experiment gives the electron density and ion

temperature dependence from the time. Measurements was in a good agreement

with diamagnetic loop dates.

ment.

Key words: Hα spectroscopy, line proﬁle, density and high temperature measure-

1 Introduction

The use of Hα proﬁle for measurement of plasma density founded on H.R.Griem
calculations [1] of Hα line broadening in a low temperature plasma (1÷4 eV). The later
works (see, for example [2,3,4]) only reﬁne these calculations. So, application of Ha

spectroscopy was limited by temperature of investigated plasma. But Ha line is very strong

in the hot plasma too! This can be caused by both background hydrogen penetration in

the plasma volume or artiﬁcial implantation of the hydrogen. The Ha proﬁle of a hot

plasma have a strong dependence of the plasma density and the ion temperature. For the

deﬁnition of these parameters with Ha line contour we made the accurate calculation of
Ha proﬁle in a wide range of main variables (ne ∼ 1014÷ 1017 cm−3, Te ∼ 1÷500 eV).
The range can be widen.

2 Hα contour calculation

The main simpliﬁcations that had been used by authors are dipole approximation

of the interaction potential between atomic electron and ﬂying over electron

1Corresponding author. Address: Lavrentyev av. 11, BINP, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia. Phone:

+7(383)2359 285. Fax: +7(383)235 2163. E-mail: melnikov@inp.nsk.su

V (r) ≈ e

~ra ~re
r3
e

1

Figure 1: Hα proﬁles at low temperatures. Parameter α = ∆λ/F0 [A/CGS]. ∆λ - distance
from the line centre (in A), F 0 = 2.6 · e · n2/3
- characteristic electric ﬁeld strength of
micro ﬁelds near the atom (in CGS system).

e

and the connected approximation of far pass

1
¯h Z

V (r)dr ≪ 1

that permits to simplify the calculations (see, for example [1]). With temperature rise

the role of close passes is increased. And the dipole approximation have to be changed

by multipole (see [3,4]). But such approach is diverged when the temperature is close to

ionization potential.

We decline both approximations and use for calculations the exact potential

V (r) =

e
|~re − ~ra|

exp(−

~re − ~ra
RD

)

that takes into account Debye shielding eﬀect.

In the calculation process we avoid any simpliﬁcation and get the precision proﬁles

for any plasma density and electron temperature with H- ALPHA programme. Estimated

accuracy of calculations was less than 3%.

2

Figure 2: Hα proﬁles at high temperatures. Contours are normalized on the centre line
height.

To check our calculations we compare it with H.Griem dates (see Fig.1). Our

calculations are in a good agreement with Griem’s ones for low temperature.

Noticeable diﬀerence arises on a far wings of the line where the inﬂuence of close

passing electrons is substantial and Giem’s calculations are not correct.

Our calculations for higher temperature are shown on Fig.2. With temperature

increasing the proﬁle becomes more narrow.

3 Use of Hα proﬁle for hot plasma parameters mea-

surement

Real Hα proﬁle is the convolution of the Stark broadening contour and the Doppler
contour (see Fig.3). The wings of the contour is mainly deﬁned by the Stark broadening,

but the centre of the line is deﬁned by Doppler eﬀect. Since the electron density can be

determined from the wings of experimental contour and the centre of the line is the region

for Ti measurement.

Figure 3: The convolution of Stark and Doppler contours.

3

Figure 4: Experimental and theoretical proﬁles matching.

Figure 5: Measurement of electron density and ion temperature of the plasma with Ha

spectroscopy method.

The experiments on measurement of ne and Ti was carried out on GOL3-II device
[5] in the regime when the expansion of the dense hydrogen cloud along the plasma column

was investigated. Luminosity of Hα line was observed in the transverse direction of the
column in the middle of it. The apparatus permits us to get the proﬁle every 5 µs.

Density and temperature of the plasma was measured with ﬁtting of the theoretic

contour to the experimental one by changing of Ti and ne parameters (see Fig.4). The
dependence of measured plasma parameters from the time is shown on Fig.5. The ion

pressure was got by multiplication of measured temperature and density.

It compares

with the full pressure measured by diamagnetic loop. First 20 µs these two dates are not

coincide because the electron temperature is higher then the ion temperature in this time.

4

But after the temperatures becomes equal the spectroscopic measurement becomes in a

good agreement with the diamagnetic loop dates.

Initial growth of the density is caused by hydrogen cloud motion. The density and

temperature rise in 120 µs is connected with foil vapour cloud that reaches the observation

point in this time. The foil cloud expands in the hot plasma medium (Te ∼100 eV) that
causes the rise of density and temperature on the edge of the cloud. The jump of density

and temperature on the back side of the edge cloud we connect with breaking oﬀ of the

density rarefaction wave.

4 References

London, (1974).

1. H.R.Griem. Spectral line broadening by plasmas. Academic Press, New York and

2. G.V.Sholin, V.S.Lisitsa, Vopr. teorii plasmy. 13, 205, (1984). In Russian.

3. J.Seidel. Ann. Phys. 11, 149, (1986).

4. D.H.Oza, R.Greene. Phys. Rev. A: Gen. Phys; 34, 4519, (1986).

5. M.A.Agafonov, A.V.Arzhannikov, V.T.Astrelin et al. Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion,

38, A96 (1996)

5

