Creation of an Ultracold Neutral Plasma

T. C. Killian, S. Kulin, S. D. Bergeson,∗ L. A. Orozco,† C. Orzel, and S. L. Rolston
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8424

9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We report the creation of an ultracold neutral plasma by
photoionization of laser-cooled xenon atoms. The charge car-
rier density is as high as 2 × 109 cm−3, and the temperatures
of electrons and ions are as low as 100 mK and 10 µK, respec-
tively. Plasma behavior is evident in the trapping of electrons
by the positive ion cloud when the Debye screening length
becomes smaller than the size of the sample. We produce
plasmas with parameters such that both electrons and ions
are strongly coupled.

The study of ionized gases in neutral plasma physics
spans temperatures ranging from 1016 K in the magneto-
sphere of a pulsar to 300 K in the earth’s ionosphere [1].
At lower temperatures the properties of plasmas are ex-
pected to diﬀer signiﬁcantly. For instance, three-body
recombination which is prevalent in high temperature
plasmas, should be suppressed [2]. If the thermal energy
of the particles is less than the Coulomb interaction en-
ergy, the plasma becomes strongly coupled, and the usual
hydrodynamic equations of motion and collective mode
dispersion relations are no longer valid [3]. Strongly cou-
pled plasmas are diﬃcult to produce in the laboratory
and only a handful of examples exist [4], but such plas-
mas do occur naturally in astrophysical systems.

In this work we create an ultracold neutral plasma with
an electron temperature as low as Te = 100 mK, an ion
temperature as low as Ti = 10 µK, and densities as high
as n = 2×109 cm−3. We obtain this novel plasma by pho-
toionization of laser-cooled xenon atoms. Within the ex-
perimentally accessible ranges of temperatures and den-
sities both components can be simultaneously strongly
coupled. A simple model describes the evolution of the
plasma in terms of the competition between the kinetic
energy of the electrons and the Coulomb attraction be-
tween electrons and ions. A numerical calculation accu-
rately reproduces the data.

Photoionization and laser-cooling have been used be-
fore in plasma experiments. Photoionization in a 600 K
Cs vapor cell produced a plasma with Te ≥ 2000 K [5],
and a strongly coupled non-neutral plasma was created
by laser-cooling magnetically trapped Be+ ions [6].

A plasma is often deﬁned as an ionized gas in which the
charged particles exhibit collective eﬀects [7]. The length
scale which divides individual particle behavior and col-
lective behavior is the Debye screening length λD. It is
the distance over which an electric ﬁeld is screened by
redistribution of electrons in the plasma, and is given by

p

ǫ0kBTe/(e2n). Here, ǫ0 is the electric permittiv-
λD =
ity of vacuum, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and e is the
elementary charge. An ionized gas is not a plasma unless
the Debye length is smaller than the size of the system
[7]. In our experiment, the Debye length can be as low
as 500 nm, while the size of the sample is σ ≈ 200 µm.
The condition λD < σ for creating a plasma is thus easily
fulﬁlled.

The atomic system we use is metastable xenon in the
6s [3/2]2 state. This state has a lifetime of 43 s [8] and
can be treated as the ground state for laser-cooling on
the transition at 882 nm to the 6p [5/2]3 state [9]. The
metastable atoms are produced in a discharge and sub-
sequently decelerated using the Zeeman slowing tech-
nique. The atoms are then collected in a magneto-optical
trap and further cooled with optical molasses to approx-
imately 10 µK. We characterize the cold neutral atoms
by optical absorption imaging [10]. This measurement
provides the density and size of the atomic cloud and the
number of atoms in the sample. Typically we prepare a
few million atoms at a density of ≈ 2 × 1010 atoms/cm3.
Their spatial distribution is Gaussian with a rms radius
σ ≈ 200 µm.

We partially ionize the cold atom sample via two pho-
ton excitation. The ﬁrst photon at 882 nm is resonant
with the cooling transition. From the 6p [5/2]3 level, a
green photon (λ = 514 nm) excites the atoms to states at
or above the ionization potential. A pulsed dye laser,
pumped by a frequency-tripled pulsed Nd:YAG laser,
provides the green light.

The energy diﬀerence, ∆E, between the photon en-
ergy and the ionization potential is distributed between
the electrons and ions. Because of the large ion to elec-
tron mass ratio, all except 4 × 10−6∆E is given to the
electrons. Equipartition of energy between ions and elec-
trons requires tens of ms [11] and is negligible on the
timescale of the current experiments. We vary ∆E/kB
in a controlled manner between 0.1 − 1000 K by changing
the green laser frequency. The bandwidth of the laser of
0.07 cm−1 sets the lower limit.

By adjusting the pulse energy of the green laser, we
control the number of atoms photoionized. For the high-
est energy available, 1 mJ in a 10 ns pulse, we can pro-
duce up to 2 × 105 ions, which corresponds to a peak
density of 2 × 109 cm−3. The number of atoms photoion-
ized varies linearly with the laser intensity. Although the
ionization fraction is low (≤ 10 %), the charged particles
show no evidence of interactions with the neutral atoms.
This is to be expected because the mean free path for
neutral-charged particle collisions is much greater than

1

the sample size [12–14].

For detection of charged particles, an external elec-
tric ﬁeld is applied to direct ions towards a microchannel
plate detector and electrons towards a single channel elec-
tron multiplier. The eﬃciencies are 50 % for ions [15] and
85 % for electrons. The magnitude of the applied elec-
tric ﬁeld is calibrated through ﬁeld ionization of Rydberg
atoms [16].

trons escapes, and the well becomes deep enough to trap
the rest. Electrons in the well redistribute their energy
through collisions within 10 ns - 100 ns [11]. As charges
are promoted to energies above the trap depth they leave
the well. This explains the tail of the ﬁrst peak in the
electron signal. During this process of evaporation the
potential well depth increases. Evaporation eventually
slows and remaining electrons are held until an applied
electric ﬁeld overcomes the trapping potential. They ap-
pear as the second peak in Fig. 1.

FIG. 1. Electron signals recorded for four diﬀerent pulse
energies of the green laser, i.e. diﬀerent densities of charged
particles (105 cm−3-107 cm−3). The uppermost curve corre-
sponds to the lowest energy. The photoionization occurs
at t = 0. The initial kinetic energy of the electrons is
∆E/kB = 0.6 K. The data shown is an average over 20 cy-
cles of the experiment. Also shown is the magnitude of the
applied electric ﬁeld.

In each cycle of the experiment the atoms are ﬁrst laser
cooled and an electric ﬁeld of approximately 0.005 V/cm
is applied. The atoms are then photoionized, and after
about 500 ns of time of ﬂight a pulse of electrons arrives at
the detector (see Fig. 1). If the green laser energy is high
enough, the ﬁrst peak develops a tail, and a second peak
appears when the electric ﬁeld is linearly increased a few
microseconds later. On this time scale the ions are es-
sentially stationary. About 300 µs after the electric ﬁeld
ramp is applied, they are detected on the microchannel
plates.

A simple model (Fig. 2) explains the experimental
data. The charge distribution is everywhere neutral im-
mediately after photoionization. Due to the initial kinetic
energy of the electrons (≈ ∆E), the electron cloud begins
expanding. The resulting local charge imbalance creates
an internal electric ﬁeld which produces a Coulomb po-
tential energy well for electrons.
If the well never be-
comes deeper than the initial kinetic energy, all the elec-
trons escape. This corresponds to the uppermost curve
(i.e.
lowest laser intensity) in Fig. 1. If enough atoms
are photoionized, however, only an outer shell of elec-

FIG. 2. Schematic of the potential energy seen by a test
electron when enough atoms are photoionized to result in
trapping of electrons. Photoionization occurs at t0 = 0 and
the sample is everywhere neutral. Because of the kinetic en-
ergy imparted by the laser, some electrons leave and a charge
imbalance develops. At t1 ≈ 10 ns the resulting potential
well equals the initial kinetic energy, trapping the remaining
electrons. Due to Debye screening the bottom of the well is
ﬂat. As electrons in the well thermalize, evaporation occurs.
The well depth increases and the electrons cool slightly. By
t2 ≈ 1 µs evaporation essentially stops. The dashed line indi-
cates the average kinetic energy of the electrons.

This description suggests that for a given ∆E there
is a threshold number of positive ions required for trap-
ping electrons. The data show such behavior in a plot
of the fraction of electrons trapped versus the number of
photoions produced (Fig. 3a). As ∆E increases, more
positive charges are required to produce the trapping ef-
fect.

At the trapping threshold, after all the electrons have
left, the potential well depth equals the initial kinetic
energy of the electrons. From this relation one can
calculate the number of positive ions at the threshold,
2/π e2/4πε0σ, and σ
N ∗ = ∆E/U0 [17]. Here, U0 =
is the rms radius of the Gaussian spatial distribution of
positive ions.

p

The data agree with this simple calculation. For a
wide range of electron kinetic energies, the onset of trap-
ping occurs at N = N ∗, as shown in (Fig. 3b). Scaling

2

the number of ions produced by N ∗ shows that all data
fall on a universal curve. A numerical simulation which
2∆E/m, as di-
approximates the initial velocity, v =
rected radially outward and integrates the equations of
motion for the electrons, reproduces this behavior.

p

The model described above (Fig. 2) implies that the
<∼∆E/kB. This is con-
temperature of the electrons is Te
ﬁrmed by the numerical simulation.
In principle, the
energy distribution of the trapped electrons can also be
determined from the shape of the second peak in Fig. 1.
However, the analysis is complicated because the trap
depth increases as electrons are removed. Also, rether-
malization is fast and the temperature changes on the
timescale of the electric ﬁeld ramp.

The initial ion temperature is easily estimated. For
excitation close to the ionization threshold, the energy
imparted to the ions from photoionization is negligible
compared to the kinetic energy of the atoms. Therefore
the minimum initial temperature is 10 µK. For large ∆E
the temperature approaches 4 × 10−6∆E/kB, which is
4 mK for ∆E = 1000 K.

The threshold condition N = N ∗ is mathematically
equivalent to λD = σ. In this context, one can interpret
λD as the displacement of electrons from their equilib-
rium positions when their energy in the local internal
electric ﬁeld in the plasma equals their kinetic energy
[7]. If λD > σ, the electrons are free to escape to inﬁnity.
If λD < σ, electrons are trapped in the ion cloud by the
internal ﬁeld and a plasma is formed.

After the untrapped fraction of electrons has escaped,

the cloud as a whole is no longer strictly neutral.

But as mentioned above, electrons escape most eas-
ily from the edges of the spatial distribution, and for
N > N ∗ the center of the cloud is well described as a
neutral plasma. This behavior is also seen in the numer-
ical simulation.

The only signiﬁcant eﬀect of the residual charge im-
balance is a Coulomb expansion of the cloud that oc-
curs on a long time scale of many microseconds. This
decreases the potential well depth and allows formerly
trapped electrons to escape, setting the limit on the time
electrons can be held. The expansion is slowed compared
to what would be observed for a bare cloud of positive
charges, however. A bare cloud of 5000 ions, initially
with σ = 200 µm, expands to twice its radius in a few
microseconds, reducing the well depth by a factor of two.
Experimentally, in a plasma with 5000 ions and 10 %
charge imbalance, half of the initially trapped electrons
escape in about 100 µs.

Phenomena similar to the electron trapping observed
here are seen in traditional plasmas. For instance, recom-
bination can often occur at containment walls and leads
to net charge diﬀusion from the center of the plasma.
The mobility of the electrons is larger than that of the
ions, but their motion is retarded by local internal elec-
tric ﬁelds which develop from any charge imbalance. This
leads to ambipolar diﬀusion [1] in which electrons and
ions migrate at equal rates.

In our ultracold plasma the thermal energy of the
charged particles can be less than the Coulomb in-
teraction energy between nearest neighbors, making it
strongly coupled. The situation is characterized quanti-
tatively by the electron and ion Coulomb coupling

FIG. 3. (a) The fraction of electrons trapped is plotted versus the number of photoions created. Each curve corresponds to
a diﬀerent green laser frequency. The corresponding initial energies of the electrons are displayed in the legend. As the energy
increases, more positive ions are required to trap electrons. (b) Same as (a) but the number of photoions is scaled by N ∗. The
threshold for trapping is given by N = N ∗. The line is the result of a numerical simulation. There is a scale uncertainty of
about 10 % in determining the fraction of electrons trapped.

3

parameters [18] Γe = [e2/(4πε0 a)]/kBTe and Γi =
e−a/λD ΓeTe/Ti where a = (4πn/3)−1/3 is the Wigner-
Seitz radius. The exponential term in the expression for
Γi is due to the shielding of the ion-ion interaction by
electrons [19]. When Γ > 1, many-body spatial correla-
tions [20] exist and phase transitions such as crystalliza-
tion [21] of the sample may occur. For the densities and
temperatures accessed in the experiment, we can prepare
a plasma in which both electrons and ions are strongly
coupled: Γe = 10 and Γi = 1000. To our knowledge such
a system has never been created before.

p

This novel plasma is well suited for a wide range of
experiments. Plasma oscillations [7,22], which have a
ne2/(mǫ0)/2π of up to 400 MHz, can
frequency fp =
be used to probe the density distribution of the system.
Magnetic conﬁnement may greatly extend the plasma
lifetime, and because of the low sample temperature, the
required ﬁeld should be small. The thermalization and
evaporative cooling of electrons, and the temperature of
the ions require further study.

We can also look for three-body electron-ion recombi-
nation. At higher temperatures, the rate for this process
scales as T −9/2 [23], and an extrapolation to the present
experimental conditions yields a recombination time of
nanoseconds (for Te = 1 K and n = 2 × 108 cm−3). The
long lifetime we observe (≈ 100 µs) is the ﬁrst clear indi-
cation that this theory, as well as an extension to T ≈ 1 K
[2], breaks down for the temperatures studied here.

The initial kinetic energy of the electrons can be re-
duced to ≈ 10 mK by using a laser with a bandwidth
equal to the Fourier transform limit of a 10 ns pulse. One
may be able to decrease this energy even further by excit-
ing below the ionization limit. In this case one creates a
dense gas of highly excited cold Rydberg atoms for which
many-body interactions can cause a phase transition to
a plasma-like state [24]. In preliminary experiments we
have observed the formation of free electrons and ions in
such a system. This will be the subject of future experi-
ments.

The technique to produce ultracold plasmas demon-
strated in this work is applicable to any atom that can
be laser-cooled, and other atoms may oﬀer experimental
advantages. With alkali systems one can attain higher
initial densities, and alkaline earth ions have accessible
optical transitions.

To summarize, we have accessed a new region in the
parameter space of neutral plasmas by photoionizing a
cloud of laser cooled atoms. Conditions were realized
in which both electrons and ions are strongly coupled.
Experimentally, the initial plasma properties are easily
controlled and the evolution of the system is described
with an uncomplicated model.

S. Kulin acknowledges funding from the Alexander-
von-Humboldt foundation, and T. C. Killian is supported
by a NRC postdoctoral fellowship. This work was sup-
ported by ONR.

4

∗

†

Present address: Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Brigham Young University, Provo UT 84602-4640.
Present address: Department of Physics and Astronomy,
State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY 11794-
3800.

[1] J.-L. Delcroix, and A. Bers, Physique des plasmas, vol. 1

(InterEditions/CNRS Editions, Paris, 1994).

[2] Y. Hahn, Phys. Lett. A 231, 82 (1997).
[3] G. Kalman, K. I. Golden, and M. Minella, in Strongly
Coupled Plasma Physics, edited by H. M. Van Horn, and
S. Ichimaru, (University of Rochester Press, Rochester,
1993), p 323.

[4] For a review see Strongly Coupled Plasma Physics, edited
by H. M. Van Horn, and S. Ichimaru, (University of
Rochester Press, Rochester, 1993).

[5] O. L. Landen and R. J. Winﬁeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54,

1660 (1985).

[6] J. N. Tan, J. J. Bollinger, B. Jelenkovic, and D. J.

Wineland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4198 (1995).

[7] F. F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics (Plenum

[8] M. Walhout, A. Witte, and S. L. Rolston, Phys. Rev.

Press, New York, 1974).

Lett. 72, 2843 (1994).

[9] M. Walhout, H. J. L. Megens, A. Witte, and S. L. Rol-

ston, Phys. Rev. A 48, R879 (1993).

[10] M. Walhout, U. Sterr, C. Orzel, M. Hoogerland, and

S. L. Rolston, Phys. Rev. Lett 74, 506 (1995).

[11] L. Spitzer, Jr., Physics of Fully Ionized Gases (John Wi-

ley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1962).

[12] R. Haberland, L. Fritsche, and J. Noﬀke Phys. Rev. A

33, 2305 (1986).

[13] B. Plenkiewicz, P. Plenkiewicz, C. Hou´ee-Levin, and J.-

P. Jay-Gerin, Phys. Rev. A 38, 6120 (1988).

[14] T. J. McIlrath, and T. B. Lucatorto, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[15] J. Oberheide, P. Wilhelms, and M. Zimmer, Meas. Sci.

[16] T. F. Gallagher, Rydberg Atoms (Cambridge University

38, 1390 (1977).

Technol. 8, 351 (1997).

Press, Cambridge, 1994).

[17] The presence of the external electric ﬁeld modiﬁes the
threshold condition slightly. The expression for N ∗ be-
comes: N ∗ = 1
eF σ (cid:17)i, where
p
F is the magnitude of the applied ﬁeld.

U0 h∆E + 2eF σ (cid:16)1 +

1 + ∆E

[18] S. Ichimaru, Rev. Mod. Phys. 54, 1017 (1982).
[19] G. E. Morﬁll, H. M. Thomas, U. Konopka, and M. Zuzic,

Phys. Plasmas 6, 1769 (1999).

[20] D. H. E. Dubin and T. M. O’Neil, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71,

87 (1999).

[21] For a review see Invited and Tutorial Papers from the
40th Annual Meeting of the Division of Plasma Physics
of the APS, Special Issue of Phys. Plasmas 6 (1999).
[22] L. Tonks and I. Langmuir, Phys. Rev. 33, 195 (1929).
[23] P. Mansbach, and J. Keck, Phys. Rev. 181, 275 (1969).
[24] G. Vitrant, J. M. Raimond, M. Gross, and S. Haroche,

J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. 15, L49 (1982).

