Anderson-Localized Ballooning Modes
in General Toroidal Plasmas

P. Cuthbert and R. L. Dewar
Dept. of Theoretical Physics & Plasma Research Lab.,
Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 0200
(Preprint: November 24, 2013)

9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ballooning instabilities are investigated in three-dimens-
ional magnetic toroidal plasma conﬁnement systems with low
global magnetic shear. The lack of any continuous symmetry
in the plasma equilibrium can lead to these modes being lo-
calized along the ﬁeld lines by a process similar to Anderson
localization. This produces a multibranched local eigenvalue
dependence, where each branch corresponds to a diﬀerent unit
cell of the extended covering space in which the eigenfunction
peak resides. These phenomena are illustrated numerically
for the three-ﬁeld-period heliac H-1, and contrasted with an
axisymmetric s-α tokamak model. The localization allows a
perturbative expansion about zero shear, enabling the eﬀects
of shear to be investigated.

PACS numbers: 52.35.P, 52.55.H, 71.23.A

Ballooning instabilities are pressure-driven ideal mag-
netohydrodynamic (MHD) instabilities which limit the
maximum β (plasma pressure/magnetic pressure) that
can be obtained in a plasma. They are localized about
regions where the ﬁeld lines are concave to the plasma,
which are known as unfavourable regions of curvature.
Another localizing inﬂuence is the magnetic shear, which
measures the rate at which neighboring ﬁeld lines at dif-
ferent minor radii separate as they wind their way around
the torus.
Large shear helps stabilize these modes,
thereby playing an important role in the MHD stabil-
ity. In this paper however we consider the eﬀects of very
small or zero shear, such as occurs in the heliac class of
stellarators or in the shear-reversal layers of an advanced
tokamak.

We begin by making the usual assumption that the
magnetic ﬁeld lines map out nested ﬂux surfaces, or mag-
netic surfaces. These are labeled using a normalized-
toroidal-ﬂux variable s, which varies between zero at
the center of the plasma and unity at the plasma edge.
Within each surface the straight-ﬁeld-line poloidal θ and
toroidal ζ angle variables are deﬁned such that the ﬁeld
lines appear as straight lines in the (θ, ζ) plane. The
magnetic ﬁeld may then be written B = ∇ζ×∇ψ −
q∇θ×∇ψ ≡ ∇α×∇ψ, where the ﬁeld-line label α ≡
ζ − qθ. Here, 2πψ represents the poloidal magnetic ﬂux,
while q = q(s) is the safety factor (inverse of rotational
transform), which is equal to the average number of
toroidal circuits traversed by a ﬁeld line per poloidal cir-

cuit traversed around the torus.

Ballooning modes can be characterized as having a
long parallel and short perpendicular wavelength with
respect to the ﬁeld lines. By ordering the perpendicular
wavelength to be small and expanding to lowest order in
an asymptotic series the local mode behavior can be ex-
pressed by a one-dimensional equation along a ﬁeld line
[1]. Taking the plasma to be incompressible, the balloon-
ing equation may be written [2]

d
dθ

A

d
dθ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

− K − λ N

ξ = 0 ,

(1)

where the eigenfunction ξ is related to the mode dis-
placement while the eigenvalue λ is equal to the mode
growth rate squared. This represents the local stability,
local to a ﬁeld line. In forming global modes, ray trac-
ing must be performed in the three-dimensional λ phase
space to determine which of these local solutions also sat-
isﬁes the poloidal and toroidal symmetry requirements on
the phase of the mode [3]. This paper is concerned with
the functional dependence of λ on its three arguments.

The ballooning coeﬃcients are functions of local pa-
rameters and (θ − θk) “secular” terms, where the secular
terms represent the eﬀects of magnetic shear
|∇ψ|2
J B2 [R + (∂ψq)(θ − θk)]2 ,

A =

(2)

K = −

κn

1
J |∇ψ|2 +
2J ∂ψp
|∇ψ|

n
|∇ψ|2
B

+

N = J 2A ,

[R + (∂ψq)(θ − θk)] κg

,

(cid:27)

(3)

(4)

p is

the ﬁeld strength,

where B represents
the
plasma pressure, and the Jacobian is given by J =
(∇ψ·∇θ×∇ζ)−1. The local integrated shear is given
by R + θ ∂ψq = −∇α·∇ψ/|∇ψ|2, and the normal and
geodesic components of the magnetic curvature vector
κ ≡ e||·∇e|| (where e|| ≡ B/B) are given by κn ≡
κ·∇s/|∇s| and κg ≡ κ·∇s×B/|B∇s|, respectively [4].
The parameter θk is related to the direction of the mode
wave vector.

The coeﬃcient A is positive deﬁnite, allowing the bal-
looning equation to be transformed into the Schr¨odinger-
A1/2ξ = 0, where the “po-
like form
tential”

d2/ dθ2 + E − V

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

1

The ﬁrst term in Eq. (6) is alternatively stabilizing and
destabilizing as θ varies, being proportional to both the
normal curvature and the pressure parameter. This term
is modulated by a function of the integrated shear. In the
large-|θ| limit the inﬂuence of this shear causes V → 0,
ensuring that all unstable solutions (both the wavefunc-
tion and eigenfunction) are exponentially localized. Con-
sequently, the s-α model is stable to the more extended
interchange modes. The second term is purely stabilizing
and represents the eﬀects of the local shear. For large |θ|
this term is O(θ−4) compared with O(θ−2) for the ﬁrst
term, so the eﬀects of shear are actually more dominant
in the ﬁrst term, with this term playing a signiﬁcant role
at more moderate values of θ.

V (θ) =

−

K
A

1
4A2

dA
dθ

2

+

1
2A

d2A
dθ2 ,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(5)

and E = −λJ 2 so that instability occurs whenever the
“energy” is negative [5].

We ﬁrst consider the case of a two-dimensional equi-
librium, which contains an ignorable third dimension.
Speciﬁcally we use the s-α tokamak model, which de-
scribes an axisymmetric equilibrium analytically by as-
suming circular ﬂux surfaces and a large aspect ratio [6].
Being axisymmetric, the toroidal angle is ignorable while
the local parameters are 2π-periodic in the poloidal an-
gle. The potential may be written

V (θ) = −

(h′)2
(1 + h2)2 ,

α cos θ
1 + h2 +
b

(6)

b

s (θ − θk) −

s ≡ ∂(ln q)/∂(ln r) is a measure of the global shear
where
α ≡ −2Rq2∂rp/B2 is a mea-
across the magnetic surface,
α sin θ rep-
sure of the pressure gradient, h ≡
resents the integral of the local magnetic shear along the
b
ﬁeld line, and h′ ≡ dh/ dθ is equal to the local shear (we
use
α instead of the usual labels s and α in order
to avoid confusion with the normalized-toroidal-ﬂux vari-
able s and the ﬁeld-line label α). Here, r and R represent
the minor and major radii of the torus, respectively. The
energy is given by E = −λRq2/B2.

s and

b

b

b

b

FIG. 2. Eigenvalues λ vs. θk, for the same

α as Fig. 1.
The poloidal branch labels n are marked for the second case.

s,

b

b

In Fig. 2 we investigate the θk-dependence of the local
eigenvalues. This is periodic after a distance 2π in θk, as
expected from the invariance of the ballooning equation
under the poloidal mapping operation, P : θ 7→ θ + 2π,
θk 7→ θk + 2π, α 7→ α − 2πq. An increase in θk by 2π is
therefore associated with an eigenfunction shift of 2π in
the poloidal angle along the ﬁeld lines. This enables us to
deﬁne the poloidal branch label n, representing the 2π in-
terval in θ where the eigenfunction is at a maximum. Val-
ues of this branch label are marked in Fig. 2(b), where n
is deﬁned such that the eigenfunction peak occurs around
θ ≈ 2πn.

The high-shear case gives well deﬁned branches, in con-
trast to the low-shear case where the branches merge so
that there is no stable interval of θk. The diﬀerence is due
to the mode structure along the ﬁeld lines (see Fig. 1).
As the shear is decreased the eigenfunctions become more
extended along the ﬁeld lines and the diﬀerence between
eigenfunctions of neighboring branches is decreased. In
s → 0 limit all branches merge and the most un-
the
stable eigenfunction becomes periodic after a distance
2π in θ, due to the vanishing of all secular terms. The

b

FIG. 1. Plots of V (θ) − E vs. θ (solid lines), for the s-α
s = 0.1, 1.

model at θk = 0 and the most unstable
α for
Dashed lines represent the wavefunctions A1/2ξ.

b

b

Two examples of V (θ) − E for the s-α model are
shown in Fig. 1, along with the corresponding “wave-
functions” A1/2ξ, which are very similar to the eigenfunc-
tions ξ for these cases. These correspond to a low-shear
(
s = 1) case. The wavefunc-
s = 0.1) and a high-shear (
tion (and eigenfunction) peaks occur at multiples of 2π
in θ, where the normal curvature component (given by
b
b
κn = −R−1 cos θ) is most unfavourable. This behavior is
modulated by the secular terms, which are proportional
to
s and have the eﬀect of localizing the eigenfunction
around θ ≈ θk.

b

2

generalized solutions of the ballooning equation are then
Bloch waves, which can be written in the Floquet form
ξ = ϕK(θ) exp(iKθ), where K represents the Bloch wave
vector and ϕK is a 2π-periodic function in θ.

In contrast to the above two-dimensional case, a gen-
eral three-dimensional equilibrium contains local param-
eters which exhibit only quasiperiodic variation along the
ﬁeld lines, since, when q is irrational, a ﬁeld line will
cover a magnetic surface ergodically. We argue that this
breaking of continuous symmetry leads to the ballooning
eigenfunctions being localized along the ﬁeld lines, even
in the absence of magnetic shear.

We study an equilibrium which has the standard mag-
netic conﬁguration of the three-ﬁeld-period H-1 heliac
at the Australian National University [7]. The pressure
proﬁle is similar to that which produces marginal stabil-
ity throughout the plasma [8], but increased by 20% so
that the plasma becomes highly unstable with a β of 1%
instead of the marginally stable value of 0.8%. The pre-
conditioned VMEC code [9] was used to calculate the equi-
librium and then a mapping code was used to transform
it into straight-ﬁeld-line Boozer coordinates.
In doing
this the poloidal and toroidal angles were deﬁned such
that (θ, ζ) = (0, 0) corresponds to a symmetry point on
the outer side of the stellarator about which stellarator
symmetry holds [10]. This point occurs deep within a
region of unfavourable curvature.

FIG. 3. Safety factor q vs. surface label s, for the H-1 con-

ﬁguration studied.

A plot of the safety factor variation is shown as Fig. 3.
The shear is small throughout the plasma volume with
q varying by less than 5%. The shear parameter of the
s ≈ 2s∂sq/q. Us-
s-α model is approximately given by
ing this expression, the maximum absolute value of
s for
this conﬁguration is only around 0.12, and occurs at the
plasma boundary.

b

b

FIG. 4. Contours of local eigenvalues for the H-1 conﬁgu-
ration at θk = 0. Areas labeled by ‘s’ represent stable regions.
Some corresponding eigenfunctions are shown in Fig. 5.

FIG. 5. Eigenfunctions ξ vs. poloidal θ and toroidal ζ an-
gles, at the points marked by ‘×’ (two eigenfunctions), ‘✷’
and ‘△’ in Fig. 4. The branch labels (m, n) are marked.

b

A representation of the phase-space dependence of the
(most unstable) local eigenvalue for this conﬁguration
with θk = 0 is shown as Fig. 4, with some corresponding
eigenfunctions in Fig. 5. Despite the fact that the shear is
s ≈ −0.06 at s = 0.70), the eigenfunctions are well
small (
localized along the ﬁeld lines and are mostly conﬁned to
a single 2π × 2π/M unit cell of the (θ, ζ) covering space,
where M represents the number of identical ﬁeld periods
in the stellarator (M = 3 for H-1). We use this to de-
ﬁne the poloidal and toroidal branch labels, which identify
the unit cell of the covering space where the eigenfunc-
tion has a maximum. Each of the cases shown contains
well deﬁned branch labels, due to the strong localization
of the eigenfunctions. This is in sharp contrast to the
more extended eigenfunctions of the s-α model at a simi-
lar value of |
s| (see Fig. 1(a)), suggesting that something
other than shear is responsible for the localization. This
is conﬁrmed by setting ∂ψq ≡ 0 in Eq. (1) to eliminate
the secular terms altogether. Once again, we ﬁnd the
eigenfunctions to be well localised, and indeed to be al-

b

3

most identical to their counterparts in Fig. 5.

FIG. 6. Same as Fig. 1, except that this plot corresponds
to the (a) ‘✷’ and (b) ‘△’ eigenfunctions of Fig. 5. The
small-scale ﬂuctuations in V (θ) are a consequence of ripple
eﬀects from the 36 toroidal ﬁeld coils.

This localization can be attributed to Anderson local-
ization, the process by which electron wavefunctions be-
come localized in space due to the presence of impurities
in an otherwise perfect crystal [11].
In this case how-
ever it is the quasiperiodicity of local parameters, due to
the incommensurate periods of the toroidal and poloidal
variations on a ﬁeld line when q is irrational, which cause
the localization [12,13]. We plot two examples of the
“potential” in Fig. 6, which is quasiperiodic in the zero-
shear limit. From this plot it is not immediately clear
where the wavefunction A1/2ξ will reside, since potential
“wells” exist at many places along the ﬁeld lines.

The wave packet location and the resulting eigenvalue
dependence can be understood in terms of the normal
curvature. First consider the (m, n) = (0, 0) branch,
labeled by ‘✷’
in Figs. 4 and 5. This eigenfunction
contains a maximum around the (θ, ζ) ≈ (0, 0) region
of unfavourable curvature, corresponding to α ≈ 0 in
Fig. 4, independent of s. The (m, n) = (3, 1) branch on
the other hand appears to be most unstable around the
α ≈ 2π(m/M − nq) ≈ 0.76 ﬁeld line when s = 0.70,
this being the ﬁeld line that passes through the same
(θ, ζ) ≈ (0, 0) unfavourable region, but only after travers-
ing the torus once in both the poloidal and toroidal di-
rections. Similarly, other branches contain eigenfunc-
tions which peak around the same region of unfavourable
curvature, but only after the ﬁeld line has undergone
m/M toroidal and n poloidal transits around the torus.
The most-unstable ﬁeld line of each branch with n 6= 0
will therefore be a function of q(s), resulting in a com-
plex “multibranched” eigenvalue structure, such as that
shown in Fig. 4.

While this behavior is qualitatively correct, in practise
we ﬁnd a small discrepancy between the predicted and

observed positions of the maximum eigenvalue of each
branch [14]. For example, the (3, 1) branch is actually
most unstable at α ≈ 0.85 for s = 0.70, in comparison
with the predicted value of α ≈ 0.76. This “shifting”
eﬀect can be investigated using a two-dimensional per-
turbative expansion of the ballooning equation, where we
ﬁrst solve along the most-unstable ﬁeld line α0 with the
global shear set to zero, and we then treat ﬁnite (α − α0),
∂ψq as a perturbation.

Provided q is suﬃciently irrational, the zeroth-order
eigenfunction estimate will be square integrable and will
be mostly conﬁned to a single unit cell of the covering
space. We perturb this solution by including terms in
both ∂ψq and (α − α0), which are assumed to be of the
same order, and we consider all branches by including the
branch labels explicitly. The ﬁnal eigenvalue estimate to
second order can then be written in the compact form

λ ≈ λ0 + ǫλǫ + ǫ2λǫ2 + ǫ2 (θk − 2πn)2

λ2
αǫθk
4λα2 !
2

,

(7)

λǫ2θ2

k −

 

λαǫθk
2λα2

(cid:21)

+λα2

α + 2π

nq −

+ ǫ (θk − 2πn)

(cid:20)

(cid:16)

m
M

(cid:17)

where ǫ ≡ ∂ψq, the λx coeﬃcients are functions of the
magnetic surface only, and for this H-1 conﬁguration
α0 = 0 so all functions are of deﬁnite parity. Each of
the above terms has a simple physical interpretation.
The ﬁrst represents the unperturbed estimate, which is
corrected by the following two terms which act on all
branches equally. These are stabilizing and represent
the eﬀects of shear on the (0, 0) branch. The fourth
term is also stabilizing and represents the eﬀects of shear
as a ﬁeld line is followed through one or more com-
plete poloidal rotations. Finally there is the last term,
which contains the ﬁeld-line eigenvalue dependence and
the eigenvalue peak “shift” term. This shift can be in-
vestigated by ordering the eigenfunction to be well lo-
calized along the ﬁeld line, so that all odd-parity terms
vanish at leading order. To lowest order we obtain
R + (∂ψq)(θ − θk) ≈ 0 at the mode peak, showing that
the most unstable part of the branch occurs where the
integral of the magnetic shear approximately vanishes at
the mode peak.

We have implemented this expansion numerically and
have found that in most cases the expansion provides
good agreement with eigenvalues calculated directly, ex-
cept near the plasma edge and around the q = 8/9 ratio-
nal surface (containing 6π-periodic local coeﬃcients). In
particular, the predicted “shifts” in the position of the
eigenvalue maximum are in approximate agreement with
those observed directly and those obtained by assuming
that R + (∂ψq)(θ − θk) ≈ 0 at the mode peak, support-
ing our interpretation of the mechanism behind this term
(details of these results will be reported elsewhere).

The numerical calculations were performed on the Aus-
tralian National University Supercomputer Facility’s Fu-

4

jitsu VPP300 vector processor. We wish to thank Dr.
Henry Gardner for the H-1 heliac VMEC input ﬁles and
Dr. S. P. Hirshman for the use of the VMEC code.

[1] R. L. Dewar and A. H. Glasser, Phys. Fluids 26, 3038

(1983).

[2] P. Cuthbert, J. L. V. Lewandowski, H. J. Gardner, M.
Persson, D. B. Singleton, R. L. Dewar, N. Nakajima, and
W. A. Cooper, Phys. Plasmas 5, 2921 (1998).

[3] W. A. Cooper, D. B. Singleton, and R. L. Dewar, Phys.

Plasmas 3, 275 (1996); 3, 3520(E) (1996).

[4] R. L. Dewar, D. A. Monticello, and W. N. -C. Sy, Phys.

[5] J. M. Greene and M. S. Chance, Nucl. Fusion 21, 453

Fluids 27, 1723 (1984).

(1981).

Lett. 40, 396 (1978).

[6] J. W. Connor, R. J. Hastie, and J. B. Taylor, Phys. Rev.

[7] S. M. Hamberger, B. D. Blackwell, L. E. Sharp, and D. B.

Shenton, Fusion Technol. 17, 123 (1990).

[8] W. A. Cooper and H. J. Gardner, Nucl. Fusion 34, 729

[9] S. P. Hirshman and O. Betancourt, J. Comput. Phys. 96,

[10] R. L. Dewar and S. R. Hudson, Physica D 112, 275

[11] P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. 109, 1492 (1958).
[12] P. Sarnak, Commun. Math. Phys. 84, 377 (1982).
[13] V. A. Chulaevsky and Ya. G. Sinai, Commun. Math.

[14] R. L. Dewar and P. Cuthbert, Chinese Phys. Lett. (to be

Phys. 125, 91 (1989).

published).

(1994).

99 (1991).

(1997).

5

