9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Wild cables and survivability of macroscopic
molecular structures in hot tokamak plasmas

A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov

INF RRC “Kurchatov Institute”, Moscow, 123182, Russia
kuka@qq.nﬁ.kiae.su, rank@qq.nﬁ.kiae.su

Wild cables and survivability of macroscopic molecular structures in hot tokamak

plasmas

The evidences for tubular rigid-body structures are found in tokamak plasmas,
which are similar to long-living ﬁlaments observed in a Z-pinch ([1] Kukushkin,
Rantsev-Kartinov, Proc. 26-th EPS conf., http://epsppd.epﬂ.ch/cross/p2087.htm).
These structures are suggested to be a ”wild cables” produced by the channelling
of EM energy pumped from the external electric circuit and propagated to the
plasma core in the form of the high frequency EM waves along hypothetical (carbon)
microsolid skeletons [1] which are assembled during electric breakdown. It is shown
that such skeletons may be protected from the high-temperature ambient plasma by
the TEM waves produced thanks to the presence of microsolid skeletons.

PACS: 52.55.Fa

1. Introduction.
Recently the anomalously high survivability of some ﬁlaments in laboratory plas-
mas was illustrated [1(a)] with tracing the history of the typical long rectilinear
rigid-body block in a Z-pinch. The pictures were taken in visible light at diﬀerent
time moments from diﬀerent positions, during about half a microsecond, that is
comparable with the entire duration of the Z-pinch discharge (see Fig. 1 in [1(a)]).
The original images were processed with the help of the method [2(a,b)] of multilevel
dynamical contrasting (MDC) of the images.

The phenomenon of long-living ﬁlaments (LLFs) [1,2] in various laboratory plas-
mas (gaseous Z-pinches [2(a,c)), plasma foci [2(e)], and tokamaks [2(d)]) has lead us
to a conclusion [1(a)] (see also references therein) that only the quantum (molecular)
long-range bonds inside LLFs may be responsible for their observed survivability,
rather than the mechanisms of a classical particles plasma. Speciﬁcally, the carbon
nanotubes have been proposed to be the major microscopic building blocks of the
respective microsolid component of LLFs because such nanotubes may be produced
in various electric discharges (see, e.g., [3]).

2. Rigid-body structures in tokamak plasmas.
An analysis of available databases carried out with the help of the MDC method
[2(a,b)], shows the presence of tubular structures. The typical examples for tokamaks
TM-2, T-4, T-6 and T-10 (major radius R = 0.4, 0.9, 0.7, 1.5 m, minor radius
a = 8, 20, 20, 33 cm, toroidal ﬁeld BT = 2, 4.5, 0.9, 3 T , total current Ip ∼
25, 200, 100, 300 kA, electron temperature Te(0) ∼ 0.6, 3, 0.4, 2 keV , electron
density ne(0) ∼ (2, 3, 2, 3) × 1013cm−3, respectively) are given in [4]. The ﬁgures
presented there are taken in visible light with the help of a strick camera and high-

1

speed camera. The eﬀective time exposure is about 10 µsec. The major features of
the structuring are as follows:

(a) the length scale of the rigid-body tubular structuring varies in a broad range,
from comparable with the minor radius of a tokamak to less than millimeter scale;
(b) the typical tubule seems to be a cage assembled from the (much) thinner,

long rectilinear rigid-body structures which look like a solid thin-walled cylinders;

(c) the (almost rectilinear) tubules form a network which starts at the farthest

periphery and is assembled by the tubules of various directions;

(d) a radial sectioning of the above network is resolved which looks like a distinct
heterogeneity at a certain magnetic ﬂux surface(s) (such a sectioning was suggested
[1(b),2(d)] to cause the observed internal transport barriers in tokamaks).

The pictures include, in particular, the periphery of the tokamak T-10 plasma
illuminated by the carbon pellet emission (the pellet track is outside the picture).
The system of concentric circles and the inner almost rectilinear tubule located
approximately on the axis of these circles form together a sort of the squirrel’s wheel.
Major axis of this system is directed nearly orthogonal to toroidal magnetic ﬁeld.
The system is 5 cm long and of 4 ÷ 4.5 cm diameter. The central and boundary
vertical tubules are of 4 mm diameter. Similar structures appear to form in all
tokamaks, i.e. with no regard to pellet injection.

3. Probable mechanism of formation and survivability of microsolid

skeletons in tokamak plasmas.

(i) A deposit of carbon nanotubes, of the relevant quantity, is produced at the in-
ner surface of the chamber during discharge training, from either graphite-containing
construction elements (like, e.g. limiters or walls) or carbon ﬁlms produced by the
deposition of the organic oils normally used in the vacuum pumping systems (the
nanotubes may form due to rolling up of monolayers ablated from solid surfaces or
thin ﬁlms).

(ii) Electrical breakdown occurs along chamber’s surface (or its part, namely, the
inner side of the torus) and is based on the substantially enhanced rate of (cold)
autoemission and thermoelectric emission of electrons by the nanotube (as compared
to macroscopic needles).

(iii) The microsolid skeletons are assembled from individual nanotubes which
are attracted and welded to each other by the passing electric current to produce
self-similar tubules [1(a)] of macroscopic size, of centimeter length scale and larger
(this electric current is produced by the poloidal magnetic ﬁeld Bpol pumped from
the external circuit into the chamber).

(iv) Once the skeleton (or its relevant portion) is assembled, the substantial
part of the incoming Bpol brakes at it and produces a cold heterogeneous electric
current sheath made of conventional plasma. A part of Bpol near the skeleton is
bouncing along its every rectilinear section (i.e. between the closest points of the
deviation, even small enough, from rectilinearity). This produces a high-frequency
EM wave which, in turn, produces, by the force of the high-frequency (HF) pressure
[5] (sometimes called in literature the Miller force), the cylindrical cavities of a

2

depleted electron density (primary channels) around the skeletons.

(v) At the skeleton’s (and plasma column) edge the bouncing boundary of the
cavity from the scrape-oﬀ layer side produces a HF valve for the incoming Bpol,
because of the node of the standing wave at the edge. This works as a HF convertor
of a part of the incoming Bpol which is transported then along the skeleton in the form
of EM waves. (Besides, a part of Bpol which reaches the cavity in the conventional
regime of the diﬀusion of Bpol, is transformed into a HF ﬁeld by the oscillating
boundary of the cavity). The EM waves sustain the cavity and protect the skeletons
from direct access of thermal plasma particles. Therefore the skeleton appears to
be an inner wire of the cable network (a wild cable network) in which the role of a
screening conductor is played by the ambient plasma.

In this paper, we restrict ourselves to quantifying the above picture in its quasi-

stationary stage of energy inﬂow through the wild cable network.

For the frequency ωc of the major harmonic of EM oscillations trapped in ra-
dial direction in a cylindrical almost-vacuum cavity of eﬀective radius rc around
microsolid tubule of length Lc, one has (ωpe is plasma frequency, c, the speed of
light):

(1)

ωc ≃ πc/Lc ≤ ωpe.
For tokamak geometry, one has the following chain of transformations of EM waves.
The cavities at plasma edge (they normally possess some declination with respect
to the boundary magnetic surface) allows the ﬁeld lines of Bpol to move directly
inside the cavity and thus produce the magnetic (H) wave. For the strongest EM
wave among H waves, H11 wave, one has: λ ≃ 2Lc ≥ λcrit ∼ αrc, where λcrit is
the critical wavelength for free propagation of the respective EM wave in the cable
(αH11 ≈ π). Therefore, the trapping of H11 wave in the edge cavity leads to the
wiring of magnetic ﬁeld lines round the inner wire that produces TEM and electric
(E) waves propagating in both directions (the strongest wave among E-waves will be
E01 wave). However, the E01 wave will also be trapped in the cavity (αE01 ≈ 2.6), in
contrast to TEM wave (λT EM
crit = ∞). Also, the H and E-waves, in contrast to TEM
wave, are detached from the wall (in radial direction, these waves are the standing
ones) so that only the TEM wave can actually maintain the boundary of the cavity.
Thus, the edge cable converts a part of Bpol into HF TEM wave propagating inward.
The signs of this HF ﬁeld of which a small part is reﬂected outward may be found
in the measurements of EM ﬁelds outside plasma column (see below).

It is assumed also that the presence of an external stationary strong magnetic
ﬁeld doesn’t inﬂuence substantially the form of the cavity, because even for ωc ≪ ωHe
(ωHe is electron gyrofrequency) the amplitude ~E0 of the HF electric ﬁeld may have
a non-zero component parallel to magnetic ﬁeld (in that case we will assign ~E0 to
the respective component of the amplitude).

The distribution of plasma density around the inner wire can be described by
a set of equations for the two-temperature quasi-hydrodynamics of a plasma in a
HF EM ﬁeld [6]. Under condition lE ≫ rD, where lE is the characteristic length
of spatial proﬁle of E0(~r) and rD is Debye radius, one can neglect the deviation

3

[6(b)]):
from quasi-neutrality and arrive at quasi-Boltzmann distribution (see e.g.
ne = ne0 exp(−Ψ/(Te + Ti)), where Ψ = e2E2
c ), ne0 is background density
of plasma electrons. The condition for plasma detachment from the inner wire reads:

0 /(4meω2

eU0 ≥ 2π(rc/Lc)qAmec2(Te + Ti), A ∼ (r2

w/r2

c ) ln(ne0/nemin),

(2)

where U0 is the eﬀective voltage bias of the TEM wave in the cable (E0(r) ∼ U0/r;
r is the radial coordinate in a circular cylindrical cable, rw, radius of inner wire),
nemin is the minimal density permitted, at a temperature Te, for the inner wire to
be not destroyed by the plasma impact. For tokamak case (ne0 ∼ 1013cm−3), we
take A ∼ 5.

Equation (3) is to be coupled to the condition of the applicability of the concept
of the (−∇Ψ) force, ρ ≪ lE (ρ is the amplitude of electron’s oscillations in the HF
electric ﬁeld). For our estimates, this limitation, however, may be weakened and
takes the form:

eU0 ≤ π2 mec2 rc(rc − rw)/L2
c,

And ﬁnally, the HF electric ﬁeld in the cables may be related to the observable
turbulent electric ﬁelds because wild cables are the strong sources of electrostatic
oscillations in plasma. As far as there should be a sort of the feedback between
plasma and cavity, one may consider the cable’s cavity as a soliton with such a
strong reduction of the eigenfrequency (a redshift) that soliton’s velocity becomes
independent from dispersion. For W/nT ≤ 1 (W ≡ E2
0/16π) this gives rough
estimate:

W/nT ∼ (1 − (ωc/ωpe)).

At the quasi-stationary stage of discharge, one may evaluate the spatial distribution
of the amplitude Eturb of the turbulent electric ﬁeld, regardless of its spectral distri-
bution, as being described, in radial direction with respect to the individual cable,
by the scaling law of the TEM wave. For the contribution of a single cable, one has:

(3)

(4)

(5)

Eturb(r) ∼ U0/r.

Equations (1), (2) and (3), along with rough estimates of Eqs.(4) and (5), estab-
lish a set of equations that enable one to evaluate the plausibility of the presence of
wild cables in tokamak plasmas, using available data on measuring the values of ωc
[7] (and/or Lc) and Eturb [8].

Now we can test the problem for typical data from the periphery of the T-10
tokamak, keeping in mind the closeness of T-10 regimes analyzed in [7,8] and those
for Figure 4. First, the spectra of the HF EM ﬁeld in the gap between the plasma
column and the chamber measured in the GHz frequency range revealed [7] a distinct
bump at νc ∼ (4 ÷ 5) × 109Hz, of the width ∼ 2 × 109Hz, which always exists in
ohmic heating regimes and increases with electron cyclotron heating (this bump
is a stable formation and it moves to the lower frequencies and turns into a peak
only under condition of strong instabilities, especially disruption instability). This

4

gives Lc ≈ 3 cm. Note that this is in reasonable agreement with the data from the
high-speed camera picture for T-10 plasma periphery where Lc ≈ 4 ÷ 5 cm.

Second, the analysis of observations of Stark broadening of deuterium spectral
lines (and their polarization state) at the periphery of the T-10 tokamak in the
region of Te ∼ 100 eV , allowed [8] to estimate the spectral range of HF electric
ﬁelds (ω ≈ ωpe ∼ 1011Hz), their amplitude (E ∼ 10 ÷ 20 kV /cm) and angular
distribution.

For Lc = 3 cm, Te = Ti = 100 eV , Eqs.

(2) and (3) give a constraint S ≡
(rc − rw)/Lc ≥ 0.03 . For (rc − rw) ∼ rc, from Eq. (2), one can ﬁnd the absolute
minimum of voltage bias: (U0)min ≈ 5 kV . For S = 0.03, Eqs. (2) and (3) give
U0 ≈ 5 kV , while for S = 0.1 one has 15 ≤ U0 (kV ) ≤ 50. Further, Eq. (4) gives
E0(rc) ≥ 50 kV /cm, while, for rc ∼ 1 ÷ 2 mm and < r >∼ 1 ÷ 3 cm (< r > is the
average distance between individual cables in the region of observation), Eq. (5)
gives the estimate E0(rc) ≥ 102 kV /cm, or U0 ≥ 10 kV . The results of numerical
solution of the Poisson equation [6] show that, e.g., for U0 = 30 kV at the distances
r ∼ 2 ÷ 3 mm the plasma density falls down, with respect to its background value,
by the seven-eight orders of magnitude.

4. Conclusions
The experimental data of Sec. 2 and the model of Sec. 3 support the hypothesis
[1] that plasmas with long-living ﬁlaments is such a form of the fourth state of matter,
which is an intricate mixture of three other states (gaseous, liquid and solid). The
presence of the inner wire (namely, electrically conducting microsolid skeleton) in the
wild cable is responsible not only for the observed anomalous mechanical stability of
this structure but also for the formation of TEM waves in the cavity that is critical
for the self-sustainment of the cavity and for the transport of EM energy to plasma
core.

It follows that observed structuring could be:
(i) a strong candidate for the nonlocal (non-difusion) component of heat trans-

port (and observed phenomena of fast nonlocal responses) in tokamaks;

(ii) a powerful source of non-linear waves and (strong) turbulence throughout

plasma volume;

(iii) a low-dissipation waveguide responsible for the spatial proﬁle of poloidal
magnetic ﬁeld in tokamaks, rather than total resistance of plasma (in agreement
with the observed applicability of Spitzer, or close, resistivity to describing the
ohmic heat release in plasma);

(iv) a universal phenomenon in well-done laboratory plasmas and space; in par-
ticular, similar wild cables may form in gaseous and wire-array Z-pinches and be
responsible for the fast nonlocal transport of EM energy toward Z-pinch axis.

Acknowledgments.
The authors are indebted to V.M. Leonov, S.V. Mirnov and I.B. Semenov, K.A.
Razumova, and V.Yu. Sergeev for presenting the originals of the data from tokamaks
T-6, T-4, TM-2, and T-10, respectively. The authors appreciate discussions of
the paper with V.V. Alikaev, V.I. Poznyak and V.L. Vdovin, and participants of

5

seminars in the Institute of Nuclear Fusion. Our special thanks to V.I. Kogan for
his interest and support, and V.D. Shafranov, for valuable discussion of the paper.

REFERENCES

[1] Kukushkin A.B., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Proc. 26-th Eur. Phys. Soc. conf.
on Plasma Phys. and Contr. Fusion, Maastricht, Netherlands, June 1999, (a) p.
873 (http://epsppd.epﬂ.ch/cross/p2087.htm); (b) p. 1737 (p4096.htm).

[2] Kukushkin A.B., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., (a) Laser and Part. Beams, 16,
445 (1998); (b) Rev. Sci. Instrum., 70, 1387 (1999); (c) Ibid, p. 1421; (d) Ibid.,
p. 1392; (e) Kukushkin A.B., et. al., Fusion Technology, 32, 83 (1997). [3] Eletskii
A.V., Physics-Uspekhi, 167, 945 (1997).
[4] Kukushkin A.B., Rantsev-Kartinov
V.A., Preprint of the RRC Kurchatov Institute, IAE-6157/6, Moscow, October 1999
(submitted to JETP Lett.).

[5] Gaponov A.V., Miller M.A., Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz.

(Sov. Phys. JETP),
34, 242 (1958); Volkov T.F., In: Plasma Physics and the Problem of Controlled
Thermonuclear Reaction, Ed. M.A.Leontovich, [In Rus.], USSR Acad.Sci., 1958,
Vol. 3, p. 336, Vol. 4, p. 98; Sagdeev R.Z., Ibid., Vol.3, p. 346.

[6] (a) Gorbunov L.M., Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk (Sov. Phys. Uspekhi), 109, 631
(1973); (b) Litvak A.G., In: Voprosy Teorii Plazmy (Reviews of Plasma Phys.),
Eds. M.A.Leontovich and B.B.Kadomtsev, [In Rus.], vol. 10, p. 164.

[7] Poznyak V.I., et. al. Proc. 1998 ICPP and 25-th Eur. Phys. Soc. Conf. on

Plasma Phys. and Contr. Fusion, 1998, Prague, ECA Vol. 22C (1998) p. 607.

[8] Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Fizika Plazmy (Sov. J. Plasma Phys), 14, 387 (1987);
Gavrilenko V.P., Oks E.A., Rantsev-Kartinov V.A., Pis’ma Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz.
(JETP Lett.), 44, 315 (1987).

6

