0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
3
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
4
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coherent backscattering of light by atoms: a factor two smaller than 2

Thibaut Jonckheere†, Cord A. M¨uller∗, Robin Kaiser∗, Christian Miniatura∗ and Dominique Delande†

† Laboratoire Kastler-Brossel, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie

Tour 12, Etage 1, 4 Place Jussieu, F-75252 Paris Cedex 05, France

∗ Institut Non Lin´eaire de Nice, UMR 6618 du CNRS, 1361 route des Lucioles,

F-06560 Valbonne, France

(September 21, 2013)

Coherent backscattering is a multiple scattering interfer-
ence eﬀect which enhances the diﬀuse reﬂection oﬀ a disor-
dered sample in the backward direction. For classical scatter-
ers, the enhanced intensity is twice the average background
under well chosen experimental conditions. In this paper, we
show how the quantum internal structure of atomic scatter-
ers leads to a signiﬁcantly smaller enhancement. Theoretical
results for double scattering are presented here which conﬁrm
recent experimental observations.

When monochromatic light is elastically scattered oﬀ
a disordered medium, the interference between all par-
tial waves produces strong angular ﬂuctuations of the
intensity distribution known as a speckle pattern [1]. Its
detailed shape depends very sensitively on the positions
of the scatterers. In a dilute medium such that kℓ ≫ 1
(k = 2π/λ is the light wave number and ℓ the elastic
mean free path) – the only situation we will consider in
this letter – the phases associated with diﬀerent scatter-
ing paths may thus be expected to be completely uncor-
related. Averaging over the scatterers’ positions would
then wash out all interferences and produce a smooth re-
ﬂected intensity. There is, however, an exception: the
ensemble average cannot scramble the interference be-
tween a wave travelling along any scattering path and
the wave travelling along the same path in reverse order
[2]. These two-wave interferences enhance the average
reﬂected intensity in the backscattering direction. This
phenomenon, known as coherent backscattering (CBS),
has been extensively studied in various media and is now
a hallmark of interference eﬀects in multiple scattering
[3].

In this letter, we study CBS by scatterers having an
internal structure so that their internal states can be
aﬀected by the scattering events. This is the case for
atoms exposed to a near resonant light, since their in-
ternal state may change depending on the polarization
of the incident and scattered photons. This dramatically
aﬀects the properties of the interfering paths and in gen-
eral induces a reduction of the enhancement factor in the
backscattered direction, although reciprocity is perfectly
preserved.

The average intensity I scattered at angle θ can be
written as a sum of three terms, I(θ) = IS(θ) + IL(θ) +
IC (θ) [4]. Here, IL is the raw contribution of multi-

ple scattering paths (the so-called ladder terms), IC is
the CBS contribution (the so-called maximally crossed
terms), and IS reduces to the single scattering contribu-
tion in the limit kℓ ≫ 1. IL and IS do not contain any
interference term and thus vary smoothly with θ. The
contribution to IL of a pair of direct and reverse paths is
essentially |Tdir|2 + |Trev|2 whereas the contribution to IC
is 2|Tdir||Trev| cos φ, with φ = (k+k′)·(r′ −r), where k, k′
are the incident and scattered wave vectors and r, r′ the
positions of the ﬁrst and last scatterer along the path.

From these expressions, it follows that IC is always
smaller or equal than IL. For a small scattering angle
θ, the phase diﬀerence φ is essentially of the order of
θkℓ. Thus, IC (θ) is peaked around the backscattering
direction θ = 0 and rapidly decreases to zero over an
angular width ∆θ ∼ 1/kℓ ≪ 1 [5].

We deﬁne the enhancement factor as the ratio of the
average intensity in the backward direction I(θ = 0) to
the average background intensity I(1/kℓ ≪ θ ≪ 1) =
IS + IL. It is thus

α = 1 +

IC (0)
IS + IL

.

(1)

Since IC ≤ IL, its largest possible value is 2, reached if
and only if IS vanishes and IC = IL at θ = 0. In usual
experiments, the incident light is polarized either linearly
or circularly (with a given helicity h) and one studies the
scattered light with the same or orthogonal polarization.
This deﬁnes four polarization channels: lin k lin, lin ⊥
lin, h k h (helicity is preserved) and h ⊥ h (helicity is
reversed). For classical scatterers, the essential results
are: (i) IS = 0 for spherical scatterers (Mie spheres,
Rayleigh scatterers) in the lin ⊥ lin and h k h channels;
(ii) IC = IL in the lin k lin and h k h channels provided
reciprocity holds [6].

As a consequence, the maximum enhancement α = 2
is expected for spherical scatterers in the h k h channel,
a prediction conﬁrmed by experiment [7].

Reciprocity is a symmetry property which holds when-
ever the fundamental microscopic description of a system
is time reversal invariant [8]. For classical scatterers, it
imposes equal transition amplitudes T for direct and re-
versed scattering processes, even in absorbing media but
provided no magnetic ﬁeld is present [9]:

T (kǫ → k′

′) = T (−k′

ǫ

1

′∗ → −kǫ

∗)

ǫ

(2)

where (k, ǫ) and (k′, ǫ′) are the incident and scattered
wave vectors and polarizations (the star indicates com-
plex conjugation). At exact backscattering (k′ = −k)
and in the parallel polarization channels (ǫ′ = ǫ∗), the
scattering amplitudes of any couple of direct and reverse
paths are identical, leading to complete constructive in-
terference and to IC = IL. In the perpendicular chan-
nels, the interfering amplitudes are not reciprocal which
results in a decreased contrast in the interference pat-
tern and – after conﬁguration averaging – in IC < IL
and α < 2.

Let us now turn to the case of atomic scatterers. Re-
cently, coherent backscattering of light was observed with
cold atoms [10]. The reported enhancement factors are
much smaller than 2, with the lowest value in the h k h
channel. The internal structure of the atoms can account
for a major part of this astonishing observation. In order
to understand the reduction of the enhancement factor,
two diﬀerent reasons must be distinguished: (i) Due to
Raman transitions (see below), the single scattering con-
tribution is in general non zero, even in the lin ⊥ lin and
h k h channels. As IS 6= 0 also occurs for classical non-
spherical scatterers [6], we will not focus on this point any
further; (ii) The existence of a quantum internal struc-
ture leads to IC < IL. The rest of the paper is devoted
to elucidating this point.

We consider a collection of atoms at rest exposed
to monochromatic light, quasi-resonant with an electric
dipole transition between some ground state with angular
momentum F and some excited state with angular mo-
mentum F ′ (in the experiment F = 3 and F ′ = 4). For
suﬃciently weak light intensity, a perturbative approach
is in order: an atom with initial state |F mF i = |mi
undergoes a transition via a virtual intermediate state
|F ′mF ′ i into a ﬁnal state |F m′
F i = |m′i while scattering
an incoming photon (k, ǫ) into an outgoing mode (k′, ǫ′).
When no magnetic ﬁeld is present, this scattering process
is purely elastic, both for Rayleigh (m′ = m) and Raman
(m′ 6= m) scattering.

As a general rule in quantum mechanics, only transi-
tion amplitudes which connect the same initial state to
the same ﬁnal state can interfere. Here the states of the
complete system are the photon modes and the inter-
nal states |mi = |m1, m2, . . . i of all atoms. Here again,
CBS originates from the interference between amplitudes
associated with direct and reversed scattering sequences
with identical transitions m → m′. But in this case, reci-
procity fails to predict the enhancement factor. Indeed,
the reciprocity relation now reads [11]

T (kǫ, m → k′

ǫ

′, m′) =(−1)P i(m′
× T (−k′

ǫ

i−mi)

′∗, −m′ → −kǫ

∗, −m).
(3)

It shows that, except for the very special case m′ = −m,
reciprocal amplitudes will not contribute to CBS. They

2

are associated to diﬀerent initial and ﬁnal states of the
system and cannot interfere. This is true for all polar-
ization channels, and stands out in sharp contrast to the
classical case. No fundamental reason is left for IC = IL
to hold. We point out, however, that eq. (3) reduces to
eq. (2) in the case of an F = 0 → F ′ = 1 transition since
the ground state then has no internal structure. The en-
hancement factor for this transition will thus be the same
as in the classical case.

1; m2 = m′

Before turning to the complete calculation, let us sim-
ply illustrate why IC < IL in general. Consider dou-
ble Rayleigh scattering (m1 = m′
2) on an
F = 1/2 → F ′ = 1/2 transition in the h k h channel
with positive incident helicity [12]. The atoms are sup-
posed to be initially prepared in the |m1 = −1/2i and
|m2 = +1/2i substates (quantization axis parallel to the
incoming light wavevector).
In this conﬁguration (see
ﬁg. 1), atom 1 can scatter the incident photon. The
emitted photon can be scattered back by atom 2 with the
required helicity. But atom 2 cannot scatter the incident
photon. This simple example shows a situation where the
reverse amplitude is strictly zero while the direct one is
not. Consequently, this interference does not contribute
at all to the CBS enhancement factor. More generally, a
path and its reverse partner will have non-zero but dif-
ferent amplitudes, resulting in an overall enhancement
factor less than 2.

Atom 1

Non zero amplitude

Atom 2

Atom 1

Atom 2

Zero amplitude

FIG. 1. Example of a direct and reverse scattering path
having diﬀerent amplitudes: double Rayleigh scattering on
a F = 1/2 → F ′ = 1/2 transition in the helicity preserv-
ing channel with positive incident helicity. The arrows show
atomic transitions corresponding to absorption and emission
of photons; the dashed lines show the process which has a
vanishing amplitude.

We now sketch the general lines of the complete cal-

culation. Details will be given elsewhere [19]. We con-
sider the double scattering (higher orders can be calcu-
lated similarly) of an incident photon (k, ǫ) into the mode
(k′, ǫ′) by two atoms i = 1, 2 at ﬁxed positions ri with
initial and ﬁnal states |mii and |m′
ii. The transition am-
plitudes associated with the direct and reverse scatter-
ing paths can be calculated using standard diagrammatic
techniques [13]. The dependence of the direct amplitude
on the internal atomic structure can be completely fac-
torized into

t = hm′|(ǫ

′∗ · d2)[(d1 · d2) − (ˆn · d1)(ˆn · d2)](ǫ · d1)|mi
(4)

where ˆn = r12/r12 is the unit vector joining the two
atoms and di the dipole operator of atom i between the
F and F ′ subspaces. The internal part of the amplitude
for the reverse path is obtained by exchanging d1 and d2
(but not the magnetic quantum numbers). To calculate
the reﬂected average intensity, one has to sum over all
possible ﬁnal atomic states and to average over their ini-
tial distribution. In the following, we assume this to be
a complete statistical mixture, which is likely to be the
case under usual experimental conditions. Standard tech-
niques for irreducible tensor operators [14] then permit to
obtain the following expression (valid for any transition
F → F ′):

2

hIL,C i = I (0)

L,C

XK,K ′=0

F F F ′ (cid:27)2(cid:26) 1 1 K ′
(cid:26) 1 1 K

F F F ′ (cid:27)2

M KK ′
L,C

(5)

L,C (k, k′, r

The prefactor I (0)
12) is proportional to the inten-
sity corresponding to resonant Rayleigh scatterers with-
out any internal structure. All information about the
atomic transition is contained in the “6j” Wigner coeﬃ-
cients whereas the 3 × 3 matrices ML,C(ˆn, ǫ, ǫ′) depend
only on the geometry (i.e. on scalar products between
ˆn, ǫ and ǫ′), see [19] for the complete expressions.
In
general, ML 6= MC. Thus IC 6= IL and the enhance-
ment factor is reduced. Let us check the limit F = 0:
the Wigner coeﬃcients essentially reduce to δK0 factors
which let only survive the classical (dipole scattering)
term M 00
C = |(ǫ∗ · ǫ′) − (ǫ∗ · ˆn)(ǫ′ · ˆn)|2, so that
IL = IC in the backscattering direction as expected in
this case.

L = M 00

In order to calculate the enhancement factor and the
angular intensity proﬁle, one further has to average
eq. (5) over all possible pair conﬁgurations. To facilitate
comparison with existing results on classical Rayleigh
scatterers [15], we assume the atoms to be uniformly dis-
tributed in half-space and compute the backscattered in-
tensity as a function of the reduced scattering angle kℓθ.
The angular intensity proﬁles for the double scatter-
ing contribution are shown in ﬁg. 2 for the four usual

polarization channels. Table I lists the corresponding en-
hancement factors in the backscattering direction. For
F = 3 → F ′ = 4, they qualitatively agree with the ex-
perimental observation [10]: the highest value is reached
in the h ⊥ h channel, followed by the lin k lin, lin ⊥ lin
and h k h channels. As far as their shape is concerned, the
CBS curves in ﬁg. 2 are essentially identical with those
for Rayleigh scatterers, with a width ∆θ of the order of
1/kℓ.

r
o

t
c
a
F

 
t

n
e
m
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
−40

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

−20

0

20

40

klθ

FIG. 2. Enhancement factor for double scattering of light
by atoms (F = 3 → F ′ = 4, uniformly distributed in a
semi-inﬁnite medium), as a function of kℓθ (k is the wave
vector, ℓ the mean free path and θ the angle with the exact
backscattered direction) in the diﬀerent polarization channels:
a) h ⊥ h (helicity non preserving) b) lin k lin c) lin ⊥ lin d)
h k h (helicity preserving). In the linear channels, θ is in the
plane of incident polarization. The dotted curve in d) shows
the curve obtained by artiﬁcially removing the Raman scat-
tering contributions from the interference terms.

F → F ′
h ⊥ h
lin k lin
lin ⊥ lin

h k h

0 → 1 (Rayleigh scatterers)

1/2 → 1/2

2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00

1.67
1.73
1.43
1.42

3 → 4
1.71
1.60
1.45
1.22

TABLE I. Enhancement factor of the average intensity
scattered in the backward direction for double scattering
on atoms (F → F ′ transition, uniformly distributed in a
semi-inﬁnite medium) in the four polarization channels. The
case 0 → 1 is equivalent to classical Rayleigh scatterers.

3

Let us emphasize that the enhancement factors smaller
than 2 here are not due to single scattering (we consider
only double scattering) and not due to any geometrical
eﬀect. In the same conditions, for classical Rayleigh scat-
terers, the enhancement factor is 2 in the four polariza-
tion channels, see Table I. It is also very important to
stress that the enhancement reduction is not due to any
coherence property of light emitted in Raman transitions.
If it is true that light emitted in a Raman transition can-
not interfere with the incident light (simply because the
ﬁnal atomic states are diﬀerent) [18], it can very well
interfere with the Raman light scattered along the re-
verse path and contribute to CBS. Even more, Raman
transitions yield the dominant CBS contributions in the
h k h channel as can be seen in ﬁg. 2: the dashed curve
shows the proﬁle obtained if one excludes Raman scatter-
ing terms from the crossed intensity. The enhancement
factor in this case is only 1.034, clearly below the exper-
imentally observed factor of 1.06.

The enhancement factors reported in ref. [10] are sig-
niﬁcantly smaller than the ones presented here. We think
that the main reason for this is single scattering. Even
in the lin k lin and h k h channels, single (Raman) scat-
tering contributes to the backscattered intensity. This
eﬀect can be treated with the methods exposed above
but the result depends on the geometry of the scattering
medium. Two experimental caracteristics make the sin-
gle scattering contribution particularly important here:
ﬁrstly, the medium has a small optical depth (≈ 4), in-
creasing the relative weight of single scattering as com-
pared to the case of a semi-inﬁnite medium. Secondly,
the atomic cloud has a spherical geometry, which also
tends to increase the importance of single scattering. The
importance of these two eﬀects can be observed consid-
ering a model with classical scatterers of scalar waves
contained in a sphere of small optical depth. Numer-
ical calculations show that although IC = IL, the en-
hancement factor drops to α ≈ 1.4 for an optical depth
of 4, to be contrasted with α = 1.88 for a semi-inﬁnite
slab [4]. For a quantitative comparison with the experi-
ment, also higher orders of scattering have to be included.
According to preliminary calculations, we predict that
increasing scattering orders lead to decreasing enhance-
ment factors. This causes a further reduction of the total
enhancement factor.

In conclusion, we have shown that reciprocity is irrele-
vant in coherent backscattering of light by atoms because
the internal structure implies that the interfering ampli-
tudes are not reciprocal. The observed reduction of the
enhancement factor is conﬁrmed by a perturbative cal-
culation and not attributed to diﬀerent coherence prop-
erties of light emitted in Raman or Rayleigh transitions.
Further studies will include the eﬀect of the sample ge-
ometry on the one side, higher scattering orders as well
as eﬀects of saturation of the atomic transition on the
other side.

4

We thank Serge Reynaud, Jakub Zakrzewski and Bart
van Tiggelen for numerous fruitful discussions. Labora-
toire Kastler Brossel de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie
et de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure is UMR 8552 du CNRS.

[1] Laser Speckle and related phenomena, ed. J.C. Dainty,
in Applied Physics, vol. 9, Springer-Verlag

Topics
(Berlin, 1975).

[2] S. Chakravarty and A. Schmid, Phys. Rep. 140, 193

(1986)

[3] New Aspects of Electromagnetic and Acoustic Wave Dif-
fusion, Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, Springer,
Berlin (1998).

[4] M. B. van der Mark, M. P. van Albada and A. Lagendijk,

Phys. Rev. B, 37, 3575 (1988).

[5] E. Akkermans, P. E. Wolf and R. Maynard, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 56, 1471 (1986); E. Akkermans, P. E. Wolf, R.
Maynard and G. Maret, J. Phys. France 49, 77 (1988).
For simplicity, we identify here the transport mean free
path ℓ∗ and the elastic mean free path ℓ, which is valid for
Rayleigh scatterers, much smaller than the wavelength of
the light.

[6] M. I. Mishchenko, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 9, 978 (1992).
[7] D. S. Wiersma, M. P. van Albada, B. A. van Tiggelen,

A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4193 (1995).

[8] L. Onsager, Phys. Rev. 38, 2265 (1931); H. B. G.

Casimir, Rev. Mod. Phys. 17, 343 (1945).

[9] D. S. Saxon, Phys. Rev. 100, 1771 (1955); B. A. van
Tiggelen and R. Maynard, in : Wave Propagation in
Complex Media (IMA Volume 96), ed. G. Papanicolaou,
p. 252 (Springer, 1997).

[10] G. Labeyrie, F. de Tomasi, J.-C. Bernard, C.A. M¨uller,
C. Miniatura and R. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5266,
(1999).

[11] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics
non-relativistic Theory, Butterworth-Heinemann (1981).
[12] In this conﬁguration there is no single scattering con-
tribution since the h k h channel would require ∆m =
m′ − m = 2 for one atom. The enhancement reduction is
entirely due to IC < IL.

[13] V.B.

E.M.
Lifchitz and L.P. Pitaevskii, Quantum Electrodynamics,
Butterworth-Heinemann (1982).

Berestetskii,

[14] A.R. Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quantum Me-

chanics, Princeton University Press (1960).

[15] B.A. van Tiggelen, A. Lagendijk, & A. Tip, J. Phys.:

Condens. Matter 2, 7653 (1990).

[16] M. P. van Albada and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55,

2692 (1985).

[17] P. E. Wolf and G. Maret, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2696

(1985).

[18] K. M. Watson, Phys. Rev. 105, 1388 (1957).
[19] C. A. M¨uller et al., to be published.

