0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
7
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Very long storage times and evaporative cooling of cesium atoms in a

quasi-electrostatic dipole trap

H. Engler, T. Weber, M. Mudrich, R. Grimm, and M. Weidem¨uller∗

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Kernphysik †, 69029 Heidelberg, Germany

(January 1, 2014)

We have trapped cesium atoms over many minutes in the
focus of a CO2-laser beam employing an extremely simple
laser system. Collisional properties of the unpolarized atoms
in their electronic ground state are investigated.
Inelastic
binary collisions changing the hyperﬁne state lead to trap loss
which is quantitatively analyzed. Elastic collisions result in
evaporative cooling of the trapped gas from 25 µK to 10 µK
over a time scale of about 150 s.

The focus of a CO2-laser beam constitutes an almost
perfect realization of a conservative trapping potential
for neutral atoms [1,2]. Atoms are conﬁned in all three
spatial dimensions by the optical dipole force pointing to-
wards the maximum of the intensity [3]. The CO2-laser
wavelength of 10.6 µm is far below any optical transitions
from the ground state which has important consequences.
As one consequence, the optical potential becomes quasi-
electrostatic, i.e. the static polarizability of the particle
determines the depth of the trap (quasi-electrostatic trap,
QUEST). Therefore, diﬀerent atomic species [4] and even
molecules [5] can be conﬁned in the same trap. All sub-
states of the electronic ground state experience the same
trapping potential in contrast to magnetic traps. Atoms
can thus be trapped in their absolute energetic ground
state which excludes loss through inelastic binary colli-
sions. Another consequence of the large laser detuning
from resonance is the negligibly small photon scattering
rate so that heating by the photon momentum recoil does
not occur.

In this Rapid Communication we show that storage
times of many minutes can be achieved in a focused-
beam dipole trap with a low-cost, easy-to-use CO2 laser
usually employed for cutting and engraving of materi-
als. The laser posseses neither frequency stabilization
nor longitudinal mode selection. Despite the simplicity
of the laser system, laser-noise induced heating rates, as
ﬁrst identiﬁed by Savard et al. [6], are found to be below
100 nK/s. Comparable storage times in a QUEST have
recently been realized by O’Hara et al., who utilized an
ultrastable, custom-made CO2 laser [7]. The simplicity

∗Email: m.weidemueller@mpi-hd.mpg.de
†Website: http://www.mpi-hd.mpg.de/ato/lasercool

of our trap setup in combination with the long storage
times are ideal prerequisites for experiments on interest-
ing collisional properties of the trapped gas. As one ap-
plication of the trap, we have studied hyperﬁne-changing
collisions of unpolarized cesium atoms. As another im-
portant application, evaporative cooling of the trapped
gas is demonstrated, which has so far only once been
observed in an optical dipole trap [8].

The trapping potential of a CO2-laser beam with a
spatial intensity distribution I(r) is given by U (r) =
αstatI(r)/2ε0c where αstat denotes the static polarizabil-
ity of the atoms [1,3]. For a focused beam of power
P and waist w one gets a trap potential with a depth
U0 = αstatI0/ε0c with I0 = 2P/πw2. The CO2 laser
(Synrad 48-2WS) provides 25 W of power in a nearly
TEM00 transversal mode characterized by M 2 = 1.2.
The laser beam is ﬁrst expanded to a waist of 11 mm by
a telescope, and then focused into the vacuum chamber
by a lens of 254 mm focal length. The focus has a waist
of 110 µm and a Rayleigh range zR of 2.4 mm, yielding a
trap depth 120 µK (in units of the Boltzmann constant
kB). Gravity lowers the potential height along the ver-
tical direction to 92 µK. The axial and radial oscillation
frequencies in the harmonic approximation are given by
R)1/2 and ωr = (4U0/mw2)1/2 with m de-
ωz = (2U0/mz 2
noting the cesium mass. For our experimental values one
gets an axial oscillation frequency ωz/2π = 8.1 Hz and a
radial frequency ωr/2π = 254 Hz.

Atoms are transferred into the dipole trap from
a magneto-optical trap (MOT) containing about 106
atoms. The MOT is loaded from an atomic beam which
is Zeeman-slowed in the fringe ﬁelds of the MOT mag-
netic quadrupole ﬁeld. The main vacuum chamber at
a background pressure of about 2 × 10−11 mbar is con-
nected to the oven chamber by a tube which is di-
vided into diﬀerentially-pumped sections to assure a suf-
ﬁciently large pressure gradient. To optimize transfer
from the MOT into the dipole trap, the atoms are fur-
ther cooled and compressed by decreasing the detuning
of the MOT trapping laser from initially −2 Γ (natural
linewidth Γ/2π = 5.3 MHz) to −20Γ with respect to the
62S1/2(F = 4) - 62P3/2(F = 5) transition of the cesium
D2 line. After 40 ms of compression, the distribution of
atoms in the MOT has a rms radius of 120 µm corre-
sponding to an mean density of 1010 atoms/cm3. The
temperature is 25 µK as measured by ballistic expansion
of the cloud after release from the MOT. After the laser
beams and the magnetic ﬁeld of the MOT were turned
oﬀ, the atoms are trapped in the focus of the CO2 laser

1

beam which was present during the whole loading phase.
Atoms are prepared in either the F = 3 or the F = 4
cesium hyperﬁne ground state by shuttering the MOT
trapping laser 1 ms after or before the MOT repumping
laser has been shuttered, respectively.

The number and spatial distribution of atoms trapped
in the optical dipole trap are measured by taking an ab-
sorption image of the trapped atoms. A weak, resonant
probe beam of 1 µW/cm2 intensity is pulsed for 100 µs
and absorption of the atomic cloud is imaged onto a CCD
camera. Fig. 1(a) shows a typical absorption image of
atoms trapped in the QUEST. The image is taken 5 s
after transfer from the MOT. The transmitted intensity
It of the probe laser through the atomic sample is de-
scribed by It(x, y) = I0 exp (−A η(x, y)) where I0 denotes
the laser intensity and A the absorption cross section for
the resonant transition. The column density η is given
by the integral of the density distribution n(x, y, z) along
the direction of the laser beam.

By ﬁtting a thermal equilibrium distribution [9] to the
data, we derive the mean density ¯n, the total number
of trapped atoms N and the temperature T . The max-
imum absorption of the trapped cloud is typically 17 %
in the center of the distribution yielding a mean density
of 4 × 109 atoms/cm3 in the dipole trap. The atoms have
axially expanded into an rms extension of 750 µm while
the radial rms extension is 30 µm. The temperature is
the same as in the MOT before transfer indicating that
the atoms are cooled into the dipole trap by the MOT.
Typically 105 atoms are transferred into the dipole
trap.
the number
of atoms transferred from the MOT into the dipole
trap can be determined from the phase-space integral
R fMOT(x, p) θ(U0 − ǫ) dxdp which describes the projec-
tion of the phase-space distribution fMOT(x, p) in the
MOT onto the trapping region of the dipole trap. The
Heavyside step function θ(U0 − ǫ) equals 1 when the total
energy ǫ = U (r) + p2/2m of atoms in the dipole trap is
smaller than the trap depth, and 0 elsewhere. Taking our
experimental parameters, one expects 2×105 atoms to be
transferred into the dipole trap in reasonable agreement
with the actual value.

Assuming suﬃcient ergodicity,

To measure the radial oscillation frequency of atoms in
the dipole trap, we take advantage of the fast switching
capability of the CO2 laser. The laser can be turned oﬀ
within about 200 µs by simply switching the RF power
supply driving the gas discharge. By turning the laser
oﬀ for a short time interval (around 1 ms), the trapped
ensemble moves ballistically until the laser is turned on
again (release-recapture). Part of the atoms will have
escaped from the trap, while the recaptured atoms con-
stitute a non-equilibrium distribution which oscillates at
twice the oscillation frequency. When the ﬁrst release-
recapture cycle is followed by a second one, the number
of ﬁnally recaptured atoms depends on the phase of the
oscillation and thus on the delay time between the two
cycles.

In Fig. 1(b), the number of recaptured atoms is plot-

ted as a function of delay time between the two release-
recapture cycles. One observes some cycles of coherent
oscillation of the ensemble until the oscillation dephases
mainly due to the anharmonicity of the potential. The
oscillation period of 1.8 ms gives a radial oscillation fre-
quency of 270 Hz in good agreement with the value ex-
pected for the trap parameters. The solid line in Fig. 1(b)
shows the result of a Monte-Carlo simulation of the clas-
sical atom trajectories for the sequence of two release-
recapture cycles with variable time delay between them.
The lifetime of atoms in the dipole trap is determined
by recapturing the atoms back into the MOT after a
variable storage time. For each loading and trapping
cycle, three camera pictures are taken. The ﬁrst pic-
ture gives the ﬂourescence of atoms in the MOT shortly
before transfer into the dipole trap. The second one
shows the ﬂuorescence distribution after recapture into
the MOT. The last picture is taken after the atoms have
been released from the recapture-MOT to provide the
background which is then subtracted from the ﬁrst two
images. The number of atoms is determined from the in-
tegral over the ﬂuorescence image. The particle number
determined by this method is estimated to be accurate
within a factor of two. By normalizing the number of
recaptured atoms to the number of atoms initially in the
MOT, ﬂuctuations due to variations in the initial number
of atoms can be cancelled out. Variations of the parti-
cle number in the MOT, however, are found to be below
10%, so that normalization was not used in the data pre-
sented here.

The decay of the number of stored atoms is shown in
Fig. 2 for the two hyperﬁne ground states. Even after
10 min storage time, a few hundred atoms can be de-
tected when prepared in the F = 3 state. For atoms in
the energetically higher F = 4 hyperﬁne ground state,
inelastic binary collisions between trapped atoms lead
to additional trap loss [10]. The energy of h × 9.2 GHz
released in the collisions is much larger than the trap
depth, therefore both collision partners are ejected from
the trap.

The decay curve for atoms in the F = 4 state is ﬁt-
ted by the solution to the diﬀerential equation dN/dt =
−γN − β ¯nN where γ is the rate for trap loss through
collisions with background gas and β is the rate coeﬃ-
cient for inelastic binary collisions. The ﬁt yields a decay
constant γ−1 = 165(25) s. This value is consistent with
the expected loss rates for collisions with background gas
atoms at a pressure of 10−11 mbar. No indication for
laser-noise induced trap loss is found. From the ﬁt one
ﬁnds a decay coeﬃcient β = 2(1) × 10−11 cm3/s with the
error being mainly due to the uncertainty in the absloute
particle number. A previous measurement of this quan-
tity in an opto-electric trap [11] gave a similar result.

Atoms in the energetic ground state F = 3 can not
undergo inelastic collisions. One would therefore expect
a purely exponential decay. However, the decay curve in
Fig. 2 shows a faster loss of particles at higher particle
numbers.
It was checked that more than 95% of the

2

particles are initially prepared in the absolute ground
state so that inelastic collisions between trapped particles
can be excluded. At particle numbers below 104, the
decay curve approaches a pure exponential with a decay
constant of γ−1 = 140(20) s in agreement with the value
found for atoms in the F = 4 state.

The faster initial trap loss can be attributed to evap-
oration of high-energetic atoms from the trap leading to
cooling [12]. At the initial temperature, the trap depth
U0 is only about 5kBT . Therefore there is a certain prob-
ability that atoms leave the trap after an elastic col-
lision. The rate for elastic collisions is given by ¯nσ¯v
with the cross section σ and the mean relative veloc-
ity ¯v = 4(kBT /πm)1/2. For evaporative cooling to be
eﬀective, the ratio between the elastic collision rate (pro-
viding thermalization and evaporation) and the rate for
inelastic collisions (causing losses and heating) has to be
large.

Up to now, only one experiment is reported on evap-
orative cooling in an optical dipole trap [8]. In order to
achieve suﬃciently high densities, Adams et al. stored
sodium atoms in a crossed-beam dipole trap which pro-
vides tight conﬁnement in all three dimensions. In the
simple focused-beam geometry used in our experiment it
is rather surprising to ﬁnd evaporative cooling since the
achievable densities are rather low. The reason that evap-
oration actually takes place lies in the long storage times
of our trap on the one hand, and the anomalously large
elastic cross section of cesium at low temperatures [13]
on the other hand. Although the density of cesium atoms
in the dipole trap is only of the order of 109 atoms/cm3,
one expects a thermalization time of only a few seconds
due to the existence of a zero-energy resonance [14]. This
time scale is indeed more than an order of magnitude
smaller than the storage time.

In Fig. 3, the temperature of the trapped atoms in the
F = 3 state is plotted versus storage time. Temperatures
derived from the density distribution shown as the dots
are in good agreement with measurements of ballistic ex-
pansion after release from the trap, which are shown as
the three additional points in Fig. 3. One clearly observes
cooling of the gas caused by evaporation of atoms from
the trap at constant trap depth (plain evaporation). The
ﬁnal temperature of about 10µK corresponds to roughly
1/10 of the potential depth. Although the temperature
is reduced by roughly a factor of 2 after 150 s, the phase-
space density remains almost constant since the particle
number diminishes by a factor of 10 at the same time.
The temperature evolution for atoms in the F = 4 state
shows a similar behaviour, but with a slower decrease of
the temperature. This is to be expected due to the faster
initial density decrease through inelastic collisions and
the according decrease in the rate of elastic collisions.

We apply a model developed by Luiten et al. [9] to
simulate the temperature and particle number evolution
during evaporation. Given the shape of the potential
and the corresponding density of states, the model pro-
vides two coupled diﬀerential equations for the evolution

of temperature and particle number. For the true po-
tential function of a focused Gaussian beam, the den-
sity of states diverges as the energy approaches the es-
cape energy of the trap. We therefore approximate the
trap potential by a three-dimensional Gaussian U (r) ≃
U0 exp(−2(x/w)2
− 2(y/w)2) − (z/zR)2) for which the
density of states remains ﬁnite.

The potential is fully determined by the trap param-
eters, therefore the only adjustable parameter in the
model is the the rate γ for inelastic collisions with back-
ground gas and the cross section σ for elastic collisions.
In the temperature range considered here, mainly s-wave
collisions contribute to the cross section. The large scat-
tering length of cesium atoms in the F = 3 ground
state [13] results in a temperature-dependent eﬀective
cross section σ(T ) = π2¯h2/mkBT (unitarity limit) [14].
Note, that the cross section in the unitarity limit is com-
pletely determined by the temperature. Since the model
explicitly assumes a constant cross section for elastic col-
lisions [9], we have ﬁxed the eﬀective cross section to the
value σ = (930 a0)2 (a0 = Bohr radius) corresponding to
a temperature of 15 µK.

The result of the simulation for γ−1 = 130 s is shown
by the solid line in Fig. 3. The model prediction for
the time scale of temperature decrease is in reasonable
agreement with the experimental data. As can be seen
from Fig. 3, however, the model slightly overestimates
the rate of evaporation. This discrepancy can be ex-
plained by the inﬂuence of gravity on the one hand, and
the temperature dependence of the collision cross sec-
tion on the other hand. Both eﬀects are not contained
in the model, adn are diﬃcult to be included. Due to
gravity, evaporation predominantly takes place in only
one spatial dimension which slows down the cooling pro-
cess [15]. The temperature-dependent cross section gives
rise to an increased thermalization time [14] so that the
rate of evaporative cooling is decreased. Nevertheless,
the ﬁnal temperature of the evaporation process is cor-
rectly reproduced by the model. The model also shows
that the initial faster loss of particles in the F = 3-state
(see curve in Fig. 2) mainly stems from the evaporation
process.

Employing a low-cost, oﬀ-the-shelf CO2 laser without
any longitudinal mode selection, our major concern was
possible heating by laser-noise induced ﬂuctuations of the
trap potential. From the observation of evaporative cool-
ing with a temperature decrease of about 10 µK over a
time scale of 100 s, one can infer that heating rates by
laser noise are much lower than 100 nK/s. From the stor-
age times of several minutes one can infer a similar upper
bound for the laser-noise induced heating rates.

Due to its simple ingredients, our setup represents a
minimalistic version of an optical dipole trap providing
very long storage times. The universality of the QUEST
opens way to experiments aiming at fundamental ques-
tions. Atomic spin states can be prepared in the QUEST
with very long coherence times which is of importance for
applications in quantum computing and for the search of

3

a permanent electric dipole moment of atoms. Another
intriguing prospect is the formation and the storage of
cold molecules.
In the same dipole trap, we have re-
cently also trapped lithium atoms achieving similar stor-
age times as for cesium [4]. Currently, we are studying
the properties of a simultaneously stored mixture of both
species in view of sympathetic cooling and photoassocia-
tion of cold heteronuclear dimers.

We gratefully acknowledge contributions of M. Nill in
the early stage of the experiment and stimulating discus-
sions with A. Mosk. We are indebted to D. Schwalm for
encouragement and support.

(a)

(b)

1 mm

[1] T. Takekoshi and R.J. Knize, Opt. Lett. 21, 77 (1996).
[2] S. Friebel et al., Phys. Rev. A 57, R20 (1998).
[3] A review on optical dipole traps for neutral atoms is given
by R. Grimm, M. Weidem¨uller, and Yu.B. Ovchinnikov,
Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42, 95 (2000).

[4] M. Weidem¨uller et al., in: Laser Spectroscopy XIV, edited
by R. Blatt et al. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999), p.
336.

[5] T. Takekoshi, B.M. Patterson, and R.J. Knize, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 81, 5105 (1998).

[6] T.A. Savard, K.M. O’Hara, and J.E. Thomas, Phys. Rev.

A 56, R1095 (1997).

[7] K.M. O’Hara et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4204 (1999).
[8] C.S. Adams et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3577 (1995).
[9] O.J. Luiten, M.W. Reynolds, and J.T.M. Walraven,

Phys. Rev. A, 53, 381 (1996).

[10] J. Weiner et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1 (1999).
[11] P. Lemonde et al., Europhys. Lett. 32, 555 (1995).
[12] W. Ketterle and N.J. van Druten, Adv. At. Mol. Opt.

Phys. 37, 181 (1996).

[13] S.A. Hopkins et al., Phys. Rev. A 61, 032707 (2000).
[14] M. Arndt et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 625 (1997).
[15] P.W.H.Pinkse et al., Phys. Rev. A 57, 4747 (1998).

FIG. 1. (a) Distribution of cesium atoms trapped in the
focus of a CO2 laser beam. The image shows the absorption
of a weak resonant probe beam.
(b) Measurement of the
radial oscillation frequency of cesium in the dipole trap. Two
cycles of release-recapture are seperated by a variable delay
time. The free expansion time in each cycle is 0.7 ms. The
number of recaptured atoms Nrecap after the second cycle is
normalized to the number of atoms after the ﬁrst cycle N0.
The number of recaptured atoms oscillates at twice the radial
oscillation frequency. The result of a Monte-Carlo simulation
is depicted by the solid line.

FIG. 2. Evolution of the number of trapped cesium atoms
as a function of storage time. The atoms are initially prepared
in either the F = 3 or F = 4 hyperﬁne ground state.

4

FIG. 3. Evaporative cooling of the trapped cesium gas.
The dots give the temperature derived from the axial exten-
sion of the trapped atom cloud while the diamonds show the
result of a ballistic expansion measurement. The solid line
depicts a simulation of plain evaporative cooling in the trap.

5

