Characterization of a high-power tapered semiconductor ampliﬁer system

D. Voigt, E.C. Schilder, R.J.C. Spreeuw, and H.B. van Linden van den Heuvell

Van der Waals-Zeeman Instituut, Universiteit van Amsterdam,

Valckenierstraat 65, 1018 XE Amsterdam, the Netherlands

e-mail: voigt@wins.uva.nl

(February 2, 2008)

0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
9
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
4
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We have characterized a semiconductor ampliﬁer laser sys-
tem which provides up to 200 mW output after a single-mode
optical ﬁber at 780 nm wavelength. The system is based on a
tapered semiconductor gain element, which ampliﬁes the out-
put of a narrow-linewidth diode laser. Gain and saturation
are discussed as a function of operating temperature and in-
jection current. The spectral properties of the ampliﬁer are
investigated with a grating spectrometer. Ampliﬁed sponta-
neous emission (ASE) causes a spectral background with a
width of 4 nm FWHM. The ASE background was suppressed
to below our detection limit by a proper choice of operating
current and temperature, and by sending the light through
a single-mode optical ﬁber. The ﬁnal ASE spectral density
was less than 0.1 nW/MHz, i.e.
less than 0.2 % of the op-
tical power. Related to an optical transition linewidth of
Γ/2π = 6 MHz for rubidium, this gives a background sup-
pression of better than −82 dB. An indication of the beam
quality is provided by the ﬁber coupling eﬃciency up to 59 %.
The application of the ampliﬁer system as a laser source for
atom optical experiments is discussed.

42.55.Px: Semiconductor lasers; laser diodes
42.60.Da: Resonators, cavities, ampliﬁers, arrays, and rings
32.80.Pj: Optical cooling of atoms; trapping

I. INTRODUCTION

The techniques of laser cooling and trapping of neu-
tral atoms [1] require stable, narrow linewidth and fre-
quency tunable laser sources. Commonly used systems
for the near infrared wavelengths are based on external
grating diode lasers (EGDL) [2]. Optical feedback from
a grating narrows the linewidth to less than 1 MHz and
provides tunability. High-power single transverse mode
diode lasers can provide up to 80 mW optical output
at wavelengths below 800 nm. In this power range diode
lasers thus provide a less costly alternative to Ti:Sapphire
lasers.

If more power is required, the output of an EGDL
can be ampliﬁed. Presently, there are three common
techniques based on semiconductor gain elements:
(i)
Injection-locking of a single-mode laser diode [3] by seed-
ing light from an EGDL results typically in 60-80 mW
optical power at 780 nm wavelength. (ii) Ampliﬁcation in
a double-pass through a broad-area emitting diode laser
(BAL) [4–7]. This yields an optical output of typically
150 mW after spatial ﬁltering. A disadvantage is the rel-
atively low gain of 10-15, requiring high seed input power.

1

The BAL gain can be improved using phase conjugating
mirrors in the seed incoupling setup [8]. (iii) Travelling-
wave ampliﬁcation in a semiconductor gain element with
a tapered waveguide (TA) [5,9,10]. Compared to a BAL
this yields higher gain and higher power after spatial ﬁl-
tering. This approach requires much lower input and a
less complex optical setup than a BAL. However, a TA
gain element is considerably more expensive.

In this work we investigate a TA system that ampli-
ﬁes the narrow-linewidth seed beam of an EGDL and
provides up to 200 mW optical output from a single-
mode optical ﬁber. We operate the system on the D2
(5S1/2 → 5P3/2) transition of rubidium, at a wavelength
of 780 nm. The input facet of the tapered gain element
element has the typical width of a low power single-
transverse mode diode laser (≈ 5 µm). A seed beam
is ampliﬁed in a single pass and expanded laterally by
the taper to a width of typically 100 − 200 µm [9] such
that the light intensity at the output facet is kept below
the damage threshold and the beam remains diﬀraction
limited. The output power can be much larger than from
a single-mode waveguide.

In previous work, TA’s have been used as sources for
frequency-doubling and pumping solid state lasers [11].
Apart from the achievable output power, frequency tun-
ability of the narrow-linewidth output [12], simultaneous
multifrequency generation [13], and spatial mode prop-
erties, including coupling to optical ﬁbers [14] have been
addressed.

In this paper we investigated the broadband spectral
properties of the TA. The background due to ampliﬁed
spontaneous emission (ASE) [15] in the gain element was
minimized by adjusting the ampliﬁer’s operating condi-
tions, i.e. temperature, injection current and seed input
power. We also investigated the coupling eﬃciency of the
TA output to a single-mode optical ﬁber, and ﬁnd that
the latter acts both as spatial and spectral ﬁlter. The
properties of three gain elements of same type are com-
pared.

Atom optical applications usually require good sup-
pression of spectral background. E.g. in far oﬀ-resonance
optical dipole traps [16], scattering of resonant light from
the background causes heating and atom loss. We discuss
the consequences of ASE background in such schemes.

II. AMPLIFIER SETUP

Our ampliﬁer system consists of a seed laser, the out-
put beam of which is ampliﬁed in a single pass by the
tapered gain element, as shown in Fig. 1. The TA output
is coupled into a single-mode optical ﬁber [17]. The seed
laser is an EGDL with a linewidth of less than 1 MHz.
It contains a 60 mW single-mode laser diode (Hitachi,
HL 7851 G98). From the EGDL we have 28 mW of power
available to seed the ampliﬁer at 780 nm wavelength.
Coupling of the seeding beam to the ampliﬁer is done by
mode-matching the seed laser with the backwards travel-
ling beam emitted by the TA. The divergence angles from
seed laser emission and backward directed TA emission
are similar. Hence, suﬃcient mode-matching is obtained
using identical collimation lenses for both (f = 4.5 mm,
N.A.=0.55). Additional mode shaping, e.g. with anamor-
phic prism pairs is not necessary. An optical isolator with
60 dB isolation protects the stabilized seed laser from
feedback by the mode-matched beam of the ampliﬁer.
The 5 mm aperture of the isolator is suﬃciently large
that it does not clip the elliptical seed beam.

The TA was a SDL 8630 E (ser.no. TD 310 [18]). Ac-
cording to the manufacturer’s data sheet the output
power ranges from 0.5− 0.55 W within a wavelength tun-
ing range from 787 − 797 nm, at an operating temper-
ature of 21◦ C. The beam quality parameter is speciﬁed
as typically M 2 < 1.4 [18]. The TA should be protected
from any reﬂected light, because it will be ampliﬁed in
the backward direction and may destroy the entrance
facet. We used an output collimator of large numerical
aperture (f = 3.1 mm, N.A.=0.68) and sent the beam
through a second 60 dB optical isolator. The plane of
the tapered gain element is vertically oriented, so that
diﬀraction yields a large horizontal divergence. This is
collimated similar to the seed input, but yields a focus in
the vertical plane. With a cylindrical lens (f = 100 mm),
we compensated for astigmatism of the beam, in order to
couple into a single-mode optical ﬁber. The astigmatism
correction is also shown in Fig. 1.

There is a considerable loss in optical power due to the
isolator transmission. Taking also into account small re-
ﬂection losses of the lens surfaces, we estimate the useful
output power to be 78 % of the optical power emitted by
the TA facet. In the remainder of this paper, all quoted
powers are as measured with a power meter behind the
optical isolator.

The ampliﬁer was provided as an open heatsink device.
We mounted it on a water cooled base and stabilized it to
the desired operating temperature within a few mK by a
40 W thermo-electric cooler. Thermal isolation from the
ambient air and electromagnetic shielding were provided
by a metal housing. When operating the ampliﬁer at
temperatures below the dew point, we ﬂushed the con-
tainment with dry nitrogen.

It is necessary to have a compact, stable mounting
of the gain element and collimators. We mounted the

collimators in a commercial xy ﬂexure mount to allow
for lateral lens adjustment. The axial z adjustment is
done by two small translation stages. All adjustments
except the z direction of the output collimator are acces-
sible from outside. This proved to be very convenient for
mode-matching the seed beam and also for compensat-
ing beam displacement of the TA output when changing
temperature or current.

The narrow spectral line of seed laser and ampliﬁer
output was monitored by an optical spectrum analyzer
of 1 GHz free spectral range with 50 MHz resolution. The
ampliﬁer’s broad spectral background was analyzed using
a grating spectrometer with a resolution of 0.27 nm. Also
the output of the single-mode ﬁber was recorded with the
spectrometer.

FIG. 1. Ampliﬁer setup with seed laser and gain element:
external grating diode laser (EGDL), 60 dB optical isola-
tors (OI), tapered ampliﬁer (TA), single-mode optical ﬁber
(OF), optical spectrum analyzer (SA), and grating spectrom-
eter (GS). A top and side view of the gain element is shown
with input and output collimators (IC,OC), and a cylindrical
lens (CL) compensating for astigmatism (not to scale).

III. UNSEEDED OPERATION OF THE

AMPLIFIER

When the TA receives no seed input, it operates as a
laser diode. Thus, when the injection current, IT A, is
increased from zero, the optical output power shows the
lasing threshold (see Fig. 3ab). Generally, both the oper-
ating wavelength and the optical power of a laser diode
depend on the temperature. This property is shown in
Fig. 2. The emission spectrum of the lasing tapered gain
element is almost Gaussian shaped, with an 1/e2 width
of 4 nm. It appears as a background of ASE also in the
spectra when operating the gain element as an ampliﬁer
(see below). The oscillatory structures on the spectra
are artifacts of the spectrometer. In the ﬁtted spectra,

2

we evaluated the center wavelength at each temperature
setting.
It increases with temperature with a slope of
0.28 nm/K, typical for semiconductor lasers (Fig. 2b).

The temperature dependence of the output power is
shown in Fig. 2c. We operated the TA within the spec-
iﬁcations of the manufacturer’s data sheet, that recom-
mends to keep the optical power at the output facet below
550 mW. As the temperature increases, the conversion
eﬃciency (mW/A) decreases and the threshold current
increases. This can be seen in Fig. 3ab (open symbols)
where we plot the optical output power P vs. current
IT A for two temperature settings. The threshold cur-
rent of the unseeded TA increases from 0.78 A (5◦ C) to
0.86 A (14◦ C). From the slopes above threshold, we ﬁnd
that the conversion eﬃciency decreases from 0.7 W/A
(5◦ C) to 0.5 W/A (14◦ C). In order to measure the un-
perturbed output of the unseeded TA, one has to prevent
light emitted from the entrance facet of being reﬂected.
Even a very weak reﬂection would be ampliﬁed in the
forward direction.

For the unseeded TA, we also measured the light prop-
agating backwards from the ampliﬁer’s entrance facet. It
reaches typically a power of 10 − 25 mW for injection
currents from 1 − 1.4 A. Hence the necessity of a good
isolation of the seeding laser.

FIG. 2. Temperature dependence of the unseeded ampliﬁer
at 1.2 A injection current: (a) spectra, (b) center wavelengths,
(c) output power after optical isolator. Solid lines indicate
linear ﬁts.

IV. AMPLIFICATION OF A SEED BEAM

Ampliﬁcation of a seed beam is evident in the output
power of the TA. In Fig. 3ab, we have plotted the output
power for distinct seed powers, Pseed, at two tempera-
ture settings. For the larger seed inputs of 8.6 mW and
5.3 mW, respectively, the ampliﬁer was well saturated.
The saturation is evident from Fig. 3c where Pseed was
varied for injection currents from 0.8 − 1.3 A.

3

FIG. 3. Ampliﬁer output vs. injection current IT A and seed
power Pseed. The lasing thresholds for the unseeded ampliﬁer
are 0.86 A (14◦ C) and 0.78 A (5◦ C), indicated by vertical
dotted lines.

With Pseed ≈ 4 mW the device appears to be sat-
urated for all current settings. For seed powers be-
tween 2− 4 mW, the ampliﬁcation ranges from 70− 140,
e.g. 320 mW output with 4 mW seed.
We now discuss the spectral properties of the TA and
in particular the suppression of ASE background. Fig. 4
shows the power spectral density of the TA output be-
fore an optical ﬁber for 16◦ C and 5◦ C operating tem-
perature. In both cases the ampliﬁer was saturated with
28 mW seed input. For comparison also the correspond-
ing spectra of the unseeded ampliﬁer are shown. In satu-
ration, the broad ASE background is distinguished from
a narrow peak of the ampliﬁed seed signal. The width of
the peak is given by the bandwidth of the spectrometer,
0.27 nm FWHM. (By means of an optical spectrum ana-
lyzer and Doppler-free spectroscopy signals of rubidium,
we could verify that the ampliﬁed signal has a narrow
width comparable to that of the EGDL.)

The inﬂuence of the operating temperature is obvious
ﬁrst by the increased output power at lower tempera-
ture: 323 mW (16◦ C) and 410 mW (5◦ C), respectively.
Second, both the peak level and total amount of ASE
background are better suppressed at lower temperature.
We attribute this to the shift of the gain proﬁle of the TA
towards the seed wavelength of 780 nm at lower temper-
ature [15]. The fraction of ASE background in the TA
output is obtained by integrating the power spectral den-
sities in Fig. 4, yielding 5.6 % (16◦ C) and 1.4 % (5◦ C),
respectively.

More than the total ASE fraction, for atom-optical ap-
plications the important ﬁgure is the fraction of ASE
within the natural linewidth of the atomic transition
used. We deﬁne this ratio ǫ by comparing the power
in the peak with the ASE power in a bandwidth given
by a typical atomic natural
linewidth, e.g. Γ/2π =
6 MHz for rubidium. For 16◦ C (5◦ C), the peak value

of +2.5 dBm/nm (−2.0 dBm/nm) of ASE is then re-
expressed as 22 nW/Γ (7.9 nW/Γ). With 323 mW
(410 mW) in the narrow line, the suppression ratio ǫ
is −72 dB (−77 dB). We can thus optimize the spectral
properties of the TA output by an appropriate choice of
operating temperature. Even better suppression can be
achieved by use of an optical ﬁber as spectral ﬁlter, as
discussed in the following section.

FIG. 4. Spectrum of the ampliﬁer output (before the ﬁber).
The seed power is 28 mW at 1.2 A injection current. The
dashed curves are for unseeded operation. P is the total opti-
cal power, ASE is the fraction of background power, and ǫ is
the ASE suppression for the power spectral density in units
of mW/Γ (Γ/2π = 6 MHz).

FIG. 5. Transmission through a single-mode optical ﬁber.
(a) Fiber input and output power with and without seed, (b)
ﬁber transmission with and without seed, (c) Fiber input and
output in dependence on seed power, (d) corresponding ﬁber
transmission. The symbols: seeded with 28 mW (solid), un-
seeded (open), ﬁber input (up triangles), ﬁber output (down
triangles), ﬁber transmission (circles).

V. SPATIAL AND SPECTRAL FILTERING

USING AN OPTICAL FIBER

For many applications, laser beam quality is an impor-
tant property, e.g. for optical dipole traps. A convenient
method to obtain spatial ﬁltering is to send the light
through a single-mode optical ﬁber. An additional ad-
vantage of the ﬁber is a decoupling of optical alignment
between diﬀerent parts of the experimental setup. Here
the coupling eﬃciency is discussed and the spectrum of
the transmitted light is compared with the spectrum be-
fore the ﬁber. We observe that spatial ﬁltering by the
ﬁber is accompanied by spectral ﬁltering. Evidently, the
contribution of ASE in the TA beam is spatially distin-
guishable from the ampliﬁed seed signal.

We ﬁnd that the spatial mode properties of the satu-
rated TA output are slightly diﬀerent for diﬀerent injec-
tion currents. Fig. 5ab represents the ﬁber transmission
vs. current, IT A. The ﬁber coupling was optimized for a
current of 1 A and the TA was saturated. A maximum
transmission of 46 % is achieved. For comparison, with an
EGDL, after circularizing the beam using an anamorphic
prism pair, we typically obtain a ﬁber transmission of
75 %. The slope in the transmission curve is probably due
to a beam displacement caused by the current-dependent
thermal load of the gain element. Such a displacement
was also observed when the operating temperature was
changed. With the ﬁber coupling thus optimized, light
from the unseeded TA has less transmission than the am-
pliﬁed seed signal. Fig. 5cd shows for a ﬁxed current of
1 A, that the ﬁber transmission is almost independent
of the seed input power, i.e. the beam shape does not
change.

Also the light after the ﬁber has been analyzed us-
ing the grating spectrometer, see Fig. 6a for an operat-
ing temperature of 5◦ C. For the saturated ampliﬁer a
spectral ASE background cannot be distinguished after
the ﬁber, since the peak is identical with the spectrom-
eter response function. (This response function was ob-
tained by recording the spectrum of the narrow-linewidth
EGDL laser. A similar response was also obtained us-
ing a HeNe laser.) Thus we can only give an upper
limit for the ASE contribution of 0.2 %. The suppres-
sion ratio is ǫ < −82 dB, with an ASE level of less than
−12.5 dBm/nm or 0.7 nW/Γ, respectively. This should
be compared to the value of ǫ = −77 dB before the ﬁber,
as seen in Fig. 4b for 5◦ C. For comparison, at 16◦ C, we
found an ASE suppression of only −76 dBm after the
ﬁber.
The ASE background depends also on the degree of
ampliﬁer saturation, as shown in Fig. 6b. The ASE frac-
tion is plotted vs. seed power for light before and after
the ﬁber. It decreases quickly as the TA saturates. From
the spectra acquired before the ﬁber (up triangles), it is
evident that the increase of seed power into the saturated
regime suppresses the ASE. Whereas mode matching of
the seed input beam was not diﬃcult for achieving max-

4

imum output power, optimal ASE suppression required
a more careful alignment, thus optimizing the TA satu-
ration.

It is also obvious from the ﬁgure, that larger gain of
the TA improves the output spectrum (circles, larger op-
erating current).

We can summarize the results of Sec. IV and V as fol-
lows: The spectral properties of the TA can be optimized
by choosing an appropriate operating temperature, spec-
tral ﬁltering with an optical ﬁber and saturation of the
gain element.

ferences among the gain elements. TD 430 has similar
saturation properties as TD 310. In contrast, TD 387 op-
erates at maximum output power already without seed.
This may be due to diﬀerent antireﬂection coatings at the
TA facets. Hence, the TD 387 requires (permanent) mon-
itoring by a spectrometer in order to optimize seed incou-
pling and ASE suppression. The current of the TD 387
cannot be tuned continuously, because it shows discrete
“locking-ranges”, resembling the injection-locking behav-
ior of single-mode diode lasers.

VII. FAR OFF-RESONANCE DIPOLE

POTENTIALS WITH SPECTRAL

BACKGROUND

In this section we present an estimate of the conse-
quences of the broad spectral ASE background for light
scattering in optical dipole traps. A background that cov-
ers atomic resonances, leads to extra resonant scattering.
Usually the detuning δ for a dipole trap is chosen as large
as possible, given the available laser intensity I. The rea-
OR ∝ I/δ2
son is that oﬀ-resonance scattering scales as Γ′
at low saturation and large detuning, whereas the dipole
potential is only inversely proportional to the detuning,
U ∝ I/δ [21].
In the presence of a resonant background the total scat-
tering rate of the atoms is Γ′ = Γ′
R rep-
resents the resonant scattering. For a ﬁxed depth of the
optical dipole potential this results in a maximum useful
laser detuning, δmax, at which the scattering rate of the
atoms, Γ′, is minimized.

R, where Γ′

OR + Γ′

With low atomic saturation by a weak spectral back-
ground, we can write Γ′
R ≈ (Γπ/4)ǫI/I0. Here I0 is the
saturation intensity, i.e. 1.6 mW/cm2 for the D2 line
of rubidium. Hence, with the requirement of a ﬁxed
potential U, the two scattering contributions scale as
OR ∝ 1/δ and Γ′
Γ′
R ∝ δ, respectively. This results in
the optimum detuning and minimum scattering rate,
δmax = ±Γ/√2πǫ,
Γ′ = 2√2πǫ U/¯h.

As an example we consider atoms cooled to a temper-
ature of a few µK in optical molasses and require an
optical potential depth of U/h ≈ 1 MHz. If the allow-
able scattering rate is, e.g. Γmax < 100 s−1, this yields
a required background suppression ǫ < −110 dB and
optimum detuning δmax ≈ 760 GHz. Such a small back-
ground contribution is of course beyond the resolution of
our spectrometric data, with which we observe at best
an upper limit of IR(δ) < 0.7 nW/Γ for a total opti-
cal power of 200 mW. This corresponds to a background
suppression of ǫ < −84 dB. With a detuning of 760 GHz,
the extension of the optical potential is restricted to less
than 250 µm.

FIG. 6. Spectral ﬁltering by a single-mode optical ﬁber. (a)
Saturated with 28 mW seed power at 1.2 A current, 130 mW
power after the ﬁber, 410 mW in front of it. ASE background
is not distinguishable from the spectrometer response func-
tion after the ﬁber. (b) The ASE fraction depends on the
saturation: ﬁber input (up triangles) and output (down tri-
angles) at 1.2 A current. For comparison: ﬁber input with
1.45 A current (circles).

VI. VARIATION IN THE PROPERTIES OF

INDIVIDUAL GAIN ELEMENTS

We compared the gain element with two other gain
elements of the same type (8630 E). One gain element
(ser. no. TD 430, 777 nm) was used in the setup de-
scribed above. A second (ser. no. TD 387, 790 nm) was
implemented in a commercial TA system (TUI Optics
GmbH, TA 100) and operated on both the D2 and the
D1 (5S1/2 → 5P1/2) transition of rubidium at 780 nm
and 795 nm, respectively.
For the diﬀerent gain elements, we found considerable
diﬀerences in their beam quality and consequently their
ﬁber coupling eﬃciency. Whereas TD 310 and TD 387
showed a dominant double-lobed mode structure in the
far ﬁeld and permitted only a ﬁber transmission of 46 %,
the TD 430 beam showed a less pronounced lobe struc-
ture [20]. With this gain element, we could couple 59 % to
the ﬁber and obtained 200 mW of optical power after the
ﬁber and an ASE suppression of better than −84 dBm.
Also the ampliﬁcation properties showed striking dif-

5

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

[2] C.E. Wieman, L. Hollberg: Rev. Sci. Instrum. 62, 1

We have investigated a tapered semiconductor ampli-
ﬁer system, that provides 150-200 mW narrow linewidth
output from a single-mode optical ﬁber, where the ﬁber
transmission is up to 59 %, depending on the actual gain
element in use. The system requires less than 5 mW seed
input to saturate with an ampliﬁcation up to 140 at this
seed level. The output of the ampliﬁer includes a broad
spectral background of ampliﬁed spontaneous emission.
We have found three means of reducing this background:
(i) Choosing the operating temperature such that the
gain proﬁle of the ampliﬁer is spectrally centered as
close as possible to the ampliﬁed wavelength, (ii) spec-
trally ﬁltering the output beam with a single-mode op-
tical ﬁber, and (iii) saturating the ampliﬁer with suﬃ-
cient seed input power. With those measures, the ASE
background is below the resolution of our spectrometer.
That is, the ASE fraction is less than 0.2 % of the op-
tical power in the beam and the peak level is less than
0.1 nW/MHz. Relating the power spectral density of the
background to the natural transition linewidth of rubid-
ium (Γ/2π = 6 MHz), the ASE suppression is better than
-82 dB.

We discussed the atom optical application of such an
ampliﬁer system with far oﬀ-resonance dipole potentials.
A broad ASE background implies here an optimum laser
detuning with which light scattering by atoms is mini-
mized.

A tapered ampliﬁer system may be a lower-cost option
to a Ti:Sapphire laser. The available single-transverse
mode optical power and spectral properties are similar
to those of broad-area semiconductor laser ampliﬁers.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We wish to thank K. Dieckmann, A. G¨orlitz, W. Kaen-
ders, J. Schuster, I. Shvarchuck, B. Wolfring, A. Zach,
and C. Zimmermann for helpful information. This work
is part of the research program of the “Stichting voor
Fundamenteel Onderzoek van de Materie” (Foundation
for the Fundamental Research on Matter) and was made
possible by ﬁnancial support from the “Nederlandse Or-
ganisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek” (Nether-
lands Organization for the Advancement of Research).
R.S. has been ﬁnancially supported by the Royal Nether-
lands Academy of Arts and Sciences.

[1] S. Chu: Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 685 (1998)

C.N. Cohen-Tannoudji: ibid. 70, 707 (1998)
W.D. Phillips: ibid. 70, 721 (1998)
C.S. Adams, E. Riis: Prog. Quant. Electr. 21, 1 (1997)

6

(1991)

[3] G.R. Hadley: IEEE J. Quant. Electr. QE-22, 419 (1986)
P. Spano, Salvatore Piazzolla, Mario Tamburrini: IEEE
J. Quant. Electr. QE-22, 427 (1986)

[4] G.L. Abbas, S. Yang, V.W.S. Chan, J.G. Fujimoto: IEEE

J. Quant. Electr. QE-24, 609 (1988)
L. Goldberg, M.K. Chun: Appl. Phys. Lett. 53, 1900
(1988)

[5] L. Goldberg, D. Mehuys, M.R. Surette, D.C. Hall: IEEE

J. Quant. Electron. QE-29, 2028 (1993)

[6] A.C. Fey-den Boer, H.C.W. Beijerinck, K.A.H. van

Leeuwen: Appl. Phys. B 64, 415 (1997)
E. Gehrig, B. Beier, K.-J. Boller, R. Wallenstein: Appl.
Phys. B 66, 287 (1998)
M. Praeger, V. Vuletic, T. Fischer, T.W. H¨ansch, C. Zim-
mermann: Appl. Phys. B 67, 163 (1998)

[7] I. Shvarchuck et al.: private communication
[8] K. Iida, H. Horiuchi, O. Matoba, T. Omatsu, T. Shimura,

K. Kuroda: Opt. Commun. 146, 6 (1998)

[9] J.N. Walpole: Opt. Quant. Electr. 28, 623 (1996)

[10] J.N. Walpole, E.S. Kintzer, S.R. Chinn, C.A. Wang, L.J.

Missaggia: Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 740 (1992)
D. Mehuys, D.F. Welch, L. Goldberg: Electron. Lett. 28,
1944 (1992)

[11] C. Zimmermann, J. Walz, T.W. H¨ansch: Hyperﬁne In-

teractions 100, 145 (1996)

[12] D. Wandt, M. Laschek, F. v. Alvensleben, A.
T¨unnermann, H. Welling: Opt. Commun. 148, 261
(1998)

[13] G. Ferrari, M.-O. Mewes, F. Schreck, C. Salomon: Opt.

Lett. 24, 151 (1999)

[14] J.C. Livas, S.R. Chinn, E.S. Kintzer, J.N. Walpole, C.A.
Wang, L.J. Missaggia: IEEE Phot. Techn. Lett. 6, 422
(1994)
Z.L. Liau, J.N. Walpole, D.E. Mull, C.L. Dennis, L.J.
Missaggia: Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 3368 (1994)
Z.L. Liau, J.N. Walpole, J.C. Livas, E.S. Kintzer, D.E.
Mull, L.J. Missaggia, W.F. DiNatale: IEEE Phot. Techn.
Lett. 7, 1315 (1995)

[15] W.W. Chow, R.R. Craig: IEEE. J. Quant. Electron. QE-

26, 1363 (1990)

[16] R. Grimm, M. Weidem¨uller, Yu.B. Ovchinnikov: Adv.

At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 42, 95 (2000)

[17] OFR Inc., ﬁber port PAF-X-5-780, input beam diameter

0.9-1.8 mm

[18] Spectra Diode Laboratories, San Jose, Calif.: Product

Catalog (1996/97)

[19] TUI Optics GmbH: Diode tapered ampliﬁer system

TA 100 (catalog 1997, data sheets 1999)

[20] From the ﬁrst operation on, the TD 310 output showed a
shadow in the near ﬁeld. After approximately 100 hours
of operation the gain element quickly degraded and be-
came inoperable.

[21] C.N. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Dupont-Roc, and G. Gryn-
berg: Atom-Photon Interactions (Wiley, New York,
1992)

