0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
8
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
7
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Exchange-correlation Hole of the Si Atom, A Quantum Monte Carlo Study

Antonio C. Cancio ∗ and C. Y. Fong

Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616

Semiconductor Physics Division, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185-5800

(Submitted to Physical Review A)

J. S. Nelson

We have studied the exchange-correlation hole nxc and pair correlation function in the valence
shell of the Si atom in its 3P ground state, using highly accurate Slater-Jastrow wavefunctions and
the Variational Monte Carlo method. The exchange-correlation hole shows a number of interesting
features caused by the open shell structure of Si, including a marked transition from eﬃcient to poor
screening behavior as a test majority-spin electron is moved from the center of a valence p orbital
onto the axis perpendicular to the occupied p orbitals. This behavior results from the dramatic
diﬀerence in the exchange hole in the two cases, which is partially compensated by a corresponding
anisotropy in the correlation hole. In addition we observe an anisotropic change in the spin density
induced by Coulomb correlation, reducing the spatial overlap between the diﬀerent spin-components
of the density and contributing to the anisotropy of the correlation hole. The exclusion eﬀect
correlation, in which a 3s2 → 3p2 substitution excitation is allowed along the unoccupied axis and
prohibited along the other axes, was found to have a noticeable eﬀect on the correlation hole and is
partially accountable for its anisotropy; however, it is inconsistent with the observed changes in spin
density. In contrast to the longer range features, we ﬁnd that the “on-top” correlation hole is well
described by linear density functional theory, for a large range of local density and magnetization.

PACS numbers: 31.25.Eb, 31.10.+z, 71.15.-m, 02.70.Lq

I. INTRODUCTION

An understanding of the exchange-correlation hole and
related quantities such as the pair correlation function
and exchange-correlation energy is an important factor
in the systematic development of accurate density func-
tional theory (DFT) methods for quantum chemistry and
solid state physics [1]. Much progress has been made in
understanding the pair correlation function in the homo-
geneous electron gas or jellium, using accurate numeri-
cal techniques [2,3] and analytic modeling [4]. Although
the closely related Coulomb hole has long been studied
in atomic and molecular systems [5–7], the quantitative
understanding of correlation holes in inhomogeneous sys-
tems is far from complete. In recent years there have been
several eﬀorts to ﬁll the gaps, with a focus on character-
izing properties closely tied to the development of den-
sity functional theories, such as the on-top hole [8,9] and
system-averaged exchange and correlation holes [8,10].

In much of the previous work on the exchange-
correlation hole in atoms and molecules, the focus has
been on two electron systems and closed-shell atoms such
as Be and Ne, with additional studies of more compli-
cated molecules such as N2 and H2O [7]. One class of
systems that has received less attention is that of open-
shell atoms. The valence shell of such an atom may con-
sist only of a few electrons about a radially symmetric
core, but with a degenerate ground state and the cor-
responding valence-shell structure, have interesting and

quite complex features in its exchange-correlation hole.
In particular, in the case of less-than-half ﬁlling, these
include the exclusion-eﬀect correlations involving three
or more electrons [11]. Modeling such systems requires
proper attention both to orbital correlations best treated
in a conﬁguration interaction (CI) context and to dy-
namic correlations more amenable to a density functional
description. The application of density functional the-
ory to open-shell systems is an active area of research,
with the question of the optimal treatment of degenerate
ground states and of the formation of such atoms into
molecules giving rise to intriguing problems [12].

Recently, Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) meth-
ods combining highly accurate trial wavefunctions with
Monte Carlo methods for evaluating ground state ener-
gies and wavefunctions have been developed and applied
to atoms and molecules [13–15]. The wavefunctions used
in these calculations have the advantage of being simple
and compact, typically recovering 85% or more of the
correlation energy of atoms and the dissociation ener-
gies of molecules with a few trial parameters. Unlike
conﬁguration interaction expansions they can describe
with equal ease both “nondynamic” correlations and “dy-
namic” correlations such as the short-range cusp condi-
tion [16]. These features make this method a natural
candidate for studying electron correlations, and it has
been employed in recent studies of the pair correlation
function in crystalline Si [17,18].

In this paper we study the exchange-correlation hole

1

and pair correlation function of the valence shell of the
Si atom with the VMC method. A quantitative knowl-
edge of correlations in Si is important in improving DFT
predictions for the cohesive energy, binding energies and
surface characteristics for this and related technologically
important materials. The Si atom is in its own right a
useful laboratory for the study of electron correlations,
with both local jellium-like and the nonlocal chemical
properties due to the open shell structure of the atom
playing important roles in determining the relevant phys-
ical and chemical properties. The paper is organized as
follows: Sec. II provides theoretical background on the
exchange-correlation hole, Sec. III gives details of the sys-
tem studied and of the calculational method. Results for
the exchange-correlation hole are given in Sec. IV, for
the pair correlation function in Sec. V and for correla-
tion eﬀects on the spin density in Sec. VI. We close with
a summary of the results and conclusion in Sec. VII.

II. THE EXCHANGE CORRELATION HOLE

The exchange-correlation hole, including explicit spin

dependence, is deﬁned as:

nxc(r0, σ0; r, σ) =

n(2)(r0, σ0; r, σ)

n(r0, σ0)

− n(r, σ).

(1)

Physically it describes the change in density at r and
for spin component σ from its mean value, n(r, σ), given
the presence of another electron with spin σ0 at position
r0. The quantity n(2)(r0, σ0; r, σ) is the pair density, the
expectation in the ground state of ﬁnding a pair of elec-
trons at two given coordinates. It is deﬁned in terms of
an expectation of the ground state as:

n(2)(r0, σ0; r, σ) = Xi,j6=i

hδ(r0 − ri)δσ0σi δ(r − rj)δσσj i.

(2)

A closely related quantity, the pair correlation function
g(r0, σ0, r, σ), is a measure of the pair density relative to
that expected for uncorrelated electrons with the same
density distribution:

g(r0, σ0; r, σ) =

n(2)(r0, σ0; r, σ)
n(r0, σ0)n(r, σ)

.

(3)

The importance of the exchange-correlation hole to den-
sity functional theory lies in its connection [19,20] to the
exchange-correlation energy Exc:

Exc =

1

2 Z d3r n(r)Z d3r′ Z 1

0

dλ

nxc(r, r′, λ)

|r − r′|

.

(4)

Here nxc(r, r′, λ)
exchange-correlation hole,
summed over spins, for the system with scaled Coulomb
interaction λe2, with an external potential altered so that

the

is

the density of the system remains unchanged. The in-
tegration over coupling constant strength λ accounts for
the kinetic energy cost of correlating electrons, weakening
the strength of the integrated nxc with respect to its value
at λ = 1. Although Exc is in principle determined from a
knowledge of the single particle density alone, this depen-
dence is in general not easy to determine beyond the local
density approximation. The exchange-correlation hole
has a wealth of features which may be used to test and
improve theoretical models of the exchange-correlation
energy. As a result, many attempts to systematically
improve density functional theory have this function as
a starting point [1,21–23].

In this paper, we will discuss the full coupling-constant
(λ = 1) case for nxc. Although the coupling-constant inte-
grated quantity is most directly connected to the density
functional theory, the full coupling-constant case is inter-
esting in itself, as its average is an experimentally mea-
surable expectation of the ground state [24]. It is also
an essential ingredient in modern hybrid methods which
combine elements of density functional theories and con-
ventional Hartree-Fock methods [22]. The quantity nxc
is often analyzed by a decomposition into an exchange
component, nx, corresponding to the λ = 0 or noninter-
acting system, which describes the correlations between
particles arising from the Pauli exclusion principle, and
a correlation component, nc, determined by taking the
diﬀerence between the fully interacting and noninteract-
ing cases, which describes the additional correlation due
to the Coulomb interaction between electrons [25]. We
study the explicit spin decomposition of nxc. This choice
is useful for understanding the correlation response of an
open-shell atom for which the ground state has nontrivial
diﬀerences in its spin components. Spin decomposition
falls roughly along the lines of exchange and correlation:
exchange aﬀects only particles with the same spin, and
Coulomb correlations, though also present in the same-
spin case, are most noticeable in the opposite-spin chan-
nel.

Some initial insight into the nature of the exchange-
correlation hole in atoms and other ﬁnite systems can be
obtained by considering limiting cases. The exchange-
correlation hole about a reference electron in the ho-
mogeneous electron gas is isotropic, that is, a function
solely of the distance from the electron, and localized
about the electron with a radius determined by the aver-
age interelectron distance. Consequently, in a system of
slowly varying density, the the local density approxima-
tion (LDA) holds, in which the hole is determined by the
density (or each spin-component of the density if these
are diﬀerent) at the location of the reference electron and
“moves” with the position of the reference electron. In
atoms or molecules, important correlation eﬀects often
involve a pair excitation from the noninteracting ground-
state into a ﬁnite number of lowlying, perhaps nearly de-
generate, excited states. In this case, the resulting corre-
lation hole is dependent on the shape of the ground-state
orbitals vacated and the excited-state orbitals occupied

2

and is largely unsensitive to the position of the reference
electron. In real systems, the exchange-correlation hole
will contain aspects of both limiting cases, with those
that “move” with the position of the electron termed
“dynamic” correlations and the orbital correlations in-
sensitive to electron position termed “nondynamic”. In
open-shell atoms both play important roles.

with Dσ being a Slater determinant for spin component
σ and F a Jastrow correlation factor. All single-particle
orbitals are obtained from the same local DFT program
that determined our pseudopotentials. We use a Boys
and Handy form [14,27] for F , which includes electron-
electron, electron-nucleus and electron-electron-nucleus
correlations expanded in a basis set of correlation func-
tions:

III. CALCULATION APPROACH

A. Correlated description of the Si atom

We focus on correlations in the valence shell of
the atom with the core electrons replaced by norm-
conserving ab initio nonlocal pseudopotentials derived
from LDA calculations [26]. In this case the valence shell
of the atom is described by the Hamiltonian


H = Xi

+Xi<j

∇2
i
2m

+ Xli,mi

e2

|ri − rj|

Vli (ri)|limi >< limi|


(5)

where the sums are over the valence electrons. Vl is the
nonlocal pseudopotential and |limi >< limi| the single
particle projection operator onto the state with total an-
gular momentum li and z-axis projection mi. The ﬁnal
term is the intravalence Coulomb interaction.

The Si atom has a nine-fold degenerate (3s23p2) 3P
ground state. By maximizing the spin projection, this
state can be represented by a single Slater determinant,
consisting of a majority-spin component, here chosen to
be spin up, with one 3s and two 3p orbitals, and a mi-
nority or down-spin component with one 3s electron.
There then remain two angular momentum projections
that lead to physically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in nxc. The
ml = 0 projection has px and py orbitals and a “pancake”
like shape, while the ml = ±1 projections have a “cigar”
shape, with p0 and p± orbitals. This distinction does not
play a role in determining Exc for an atom, given the in-
variance of the energy to rotations of the atom. The pres-
ence of a quantization axis in the formation of a Si bond
breaks this invariance, so that the projection-speciﬁc be-
havior of nxc becomes important in determining accurate
molecular binding energies. It thus should be useful as a
test of density functional theory, which typically overes-
timates binding energies by about 1 eV [1,10]. Results in
this paper focus on the ml = 0 projection which provides
a clear comparison between the situation perpendicular
to and parallel to the p orbitals, though calculations were
done on the other projection for comparison.

To calculate the exchange-correlation hole variation-

ally we start with a Slater-Jastrow trial wavefunction

ψ = exp(−F )Yσ

Dσ,

(6)

3

F = Xl,m,n

clmnXi6=j

(¯rl

i ¯rm

j + ¯rm

i ¯rl

i)¯rn
ij .

(7)

The basis functions are ¯ri = bri/(1 + bri) and ¯rij =
drij /(1 + drij ), where rij is the distance between a pair
of electrons, ri is the distance between electron i and the
atom center. The terms b, d and clmn are variational
parameters. The lowest order ¯rij term is set separately
for opposite and same-spin electron correlations to satisfy
the short range electron-electron cusp condition [16] for
each case. Higher order terms treat longer range eﬀects
and are determined without distinguishing electron spin.
Electron-ion terms in the correlation function correct for
the tendency of interelectron correlations to expand the
volume of the atom and provide density-dependent cor-
rections to the electron-electron correlation [14]. Since
the valence shell of Si is less than half-ﬁlled, orbital or
nondynamic correlations may be important [11]. These
can be incorporated with a multideterminant extension
of the Slater-Jastrow wavefunction:

ψ = exp(−F )Xα

ηαYσ

Dα
σ .

(8)

B. Method of Calculation

The Variational Monte Carlo method [28] is used to
calculate the ground-state energy, derivatives with re-
spect to variational parameters, and other expectation
values. The heart of the method lies in the judicious
statistical sampling of integration points to obtain an
estimate of the many-body integrals involved in evaluat-
ing expectations of the Slater-Jastrow trial wavefunction.
This estimate is limited in accuracy by statistical noise;
however if the trial wavefunction is a good approximation
to the ground-state wavefunction this noise can be very
easily managed with a relatively small number of con-
ﬁgurations [13]. Optimized wavefunctions are obtained
by minimizing the variance of the energy [13]. With a
trial wavefunction of 18 expansion terms including two
set by the same- and opposite- spin cusp conditions, up to
l +m+n = 6 in the basis function expansion, we obtain a
value of 3.8028(2) a.u. for the ground-state valence-shell
energy. The correlation energy, measured with respect
to a noninteracting ground-state energy of 3.7188 a.u.,
is 97% of the correlation energy obtained from Green’s
function Monte Carlo and 95% of that obtained from CI

using the same nonlocal pseudopotential [15]. A simi-
lar calculation starting from a two determinant reference
point [Eq. (8)], adding the 3p2
z3px3py excited state to the
noninteracting ground-state conﬁguration, resulted in a
modest improvement in energy to 3.8041(2) a.u. or 96.6%
of the valence-shell correlation energy with respect to CI.
To calculate correlation functions, we measure spin-
decomposed single-particle densities n(r, σ) and condi-
tional densities n(r, σ|r0, σ0). The spin-dependent con-
ditional density is deﬁned as the ground-state density
distribution as a function of spin σ and position r of
the N − 1 other particles given one with spin σ0 ﬁxed
at r0. The diﬀerence between the conditional and “un-
restricted” densities, gives the spin-dependent exchange-
correlation hole, Eq. (1),

nxc(r0, σ0; r, σ) = n(r, σ|r0, σ0) − n(r, σ).

(9)

Separate calculations are done to measure the density
and the conditional density for various values of r0 and
σ0. These expectations are ﬁrst calculated exactly for
the Slater-determinant wavefunction (setting F = 0 in
our trial wavefunction). Then, the diﬀerence between
the expectations obtained with the Slater determinant
and the fully interacting wavefunctions is measured sta-
tistically using Monte Carlo sampling and the method
of correlated estimates [28]. This technique is an eﬃ-
cient means to estimate statistically the change in the
expectation of an observable under a small perturbation
of the Hamiltonian or of the variational parameters of
the wavefunction, taking advantage of the high degree
of correlation between the two expectations to reduce
noise in the diﬀerence of their statistical estimates. In
the present case, the correlation hole, which describes the
diﬀerence between the correlated and Slater-determinant
exchange-correlation holes, is fairly small compared to
the exchange-correlation hole. It is thus a reasonable as-
sumption that the correlated estimation approach should
improve the sampling eﬃciency for this quantity. In prac-
tice, the procedure was observed to reduce statistical er-
rors in our data by a factor of 5, and roughly 105 random
samples of the wavefunction suﬃced to obtain expecta-
tion values.

The expectations for density and conditional density
were expanded in a plane wave basis, taking the aver-

age of Pi exp(−iG · ri) for a set of plane waves up to a

32 Ry cutoﬀ, on a supercell 18 Bohr radii (aB) in length.
The coeﬃcients were symmetrized and fast-Fourier trans-
formed to obtain real-space densities. This expansion
provides smooth proﬁles despite the statistical noise of
the sampling. On the other hand the short-wavelength
cutoﬀ causes an unrealistic rounding oﬀ of the correla-
tion hole cusp at short interparticle distances, and spu-
rious oscillations at low densities. At present this cutoﬀ
is the largest error in our calculation. In the case of the
exchange-correlation hole this error is notable mostly in
the cusp region. A more complete discussion of errors
is presented in Sec. V in regard to the pair correlation

function which is more sensitive to the cutoﬀ error than
the exchange-correlation hole.

IV. RESULTS FOR THE

EXCHANGE-CORRELATION HOLE

The exchange hole in DFT is obtained by evaluating
nxc from Eq. (1) for the Slater determinant wavefunction
that minimizes the energy in the noninteracting (λ = 0)
limit: with the Coulomb interaction replaced by a single-
particle potential that reproduces the true ground-state
density [20]. In practice the Slater determinant of local
DFT orbitals used in our calculations produces a density
that diﬀers from our VMC density by a few percent. In
terms of these orbitals, the exchange hole is:

nx(r0, σ0; r, σ) =

α=1 ψ∗

−(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)PNσ

α(r0, σ)ψα(r, σ)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

n(r0, σ0)

2

δσσ0

(10)

α(r0, σ0)/pn(r0, σ0). This choice

where the sum runs over all the occupied single-particle
orbitals ψα for the spin component σ. This expression,
as a function of r for ﬁxed r0 (i.e., interpreting the hole
as the change in density of the system at r given a parti-
cle observed at r0) has the form of minus the probability
density of a hybrid atomic orbital. That is, it describes a
normalized linear combination of single-particle orbitals
with coeﬃcients cα = ψ∗
of cα for each orbital ψα represents the unique linear
combination of orbitals that maximizes the probability
for an electron to be observed at r0 and spin σ0 (con-
versely giving zero likelihood for any other electron to be
observed at that point.) Finally the integral over r of the
exchange hole is −1, as it measures the integrated diﬀer-
ence in density between the (N−1)-electron system given
one electron ﬁxed at r0 and the full N -electron system.
For a spin-up particle on the z axis in the Lz = 0 pro-
jection, this exchange-hole orbital is a 3s state since the
occupied p states (px,py) are in the x-y plane. The ex-
change hole is completely insensitive to the electron po-
sition on this axis, given only one possible orbital from
which to construct it. The situation along this axis thus
corresponds to an extreme departure from the “dynamic”
picture of the exchange hole derived from the homoge-
neous electron gas. For a particle on the x axis, the hole
is a combination of s and px orbitals. We ﬁnd that the
occupation probability |cp|2 of the p orbital to be between
60% and 75% in the region (0.5 aB < x < 2.5 aB) of peak
density along the x axis; this is roughly equivalent to that
of a sp2 hybrid orbital (which is two-thirds p) oriented in
the direction of the ﬁxed particle. The slight variation in
the cp acts to keep the hole more or less centered on the
reference electron in the region of peak density on the
x-y plane. The exchange hole as a result is more sensi-
tive to the exact location of particles in this plane, and
therefore more eﬃcient in screening them, than along the
z axis, leading to signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the correlation

4

(a)

0.01

0

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

-0.05

-0.06
-6

3
-
)
B
a
(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
D

-4

-2
0
x/aB

2

4

6

-4

-6

6

4

B

2

0
z/a

-2

(b)

-0.005

-0.015

-0.025

-0.035

-0.045

-6

-4

-2
0
x/aB

2

4

6

-4

-6

(c)

0.01

0

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

-0.05

-0.06
-6

6

4

2

0
z/a

B

-2

-4

-2
0
x/aB

2

4

6

-4

-6

6

4

2

0
Bz/a

-2

FIG. 1. The same spin (a), opposite spin (b) and total (c) exchange-correlation hole about a spin-up particle located at 1.4 aB
from the atom center on the x axis (parallel to the p orbitals) for the ground state of the Si atom in the Lz = 0 projection. The
surface plot shows the change in density along a plane cutting through the origin along the x and z axes.

(a)

0

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

3
-
)
B
a
(
 

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

6

4

2
0
x/aB

-2

-4

-6

4

6

(b)

0.005

-0.005

-0.015

-0.025

-0.035

-0.045

6

4

2
0
x/aB

-2

-4

-6

4

6

-6

-4

-2

z/a

B

0

2

(c)

0

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

-6

-4

B

-2

0
z/a

2

6

4

2
0
x/aB

-2

-4

-6

2

4

6

-6

-4

-2

0
Bz/a

FIG. 2. The same spin (a), opposite spin (b) and total (c) exchange-correlation hole about a spin-up particle located at

1.4 aB from the atom center on the z axis (perpendicular to the p orbitals). Cut through atom as in Fig. 1.

holes in the two cases as well. This transition from “non-
dynamic” screening along the axis perpendicular to the
occupied p orbitals to a more “dynamic” screening in the
plane occupied by them, particularly as it occurs at peak
density in the valence shell, constitutes a major diﬀerence
between the nxc of Si and that of closed-shell atoms.

In Figs. 1 and 2 we plot the exchange-correlation hole
about a spin-up electron ﬁxed at the point of peak density
parallel to and perpendicular to the two 3p orbitals of the
ml = 0 (pancake) projection of the Si atom. The single-
conﬁguration Slater-Jastrow wavefunction [Eq. (6)]
is
used. Each plot shows the response to this electron in the
x-z plane, that is, the plane cutting through the center
of the atom at the plot origin, with one axis (x) parallel
to and one (z) perpendicular to the occupied p orbitals.
The hole is split into same spin (a), opposite spin (b)
and total (c) response. The comparison between these
two situations shows the dramatic anisotropy in nxc re-
ﬂecting that of the exchange hole.

For a spin-up electron placed on the x axis, Fig. 1, the
exchange-correlation hole is dominated by the sp2-like
exchange hole. The additional eﬀects of Coulomb corre-
lation on the same-spin channel are hard to detect, while
the opposite-spin correlation hole is small (contributing

14% of the total on-top hole, or value of the hole at zero
interparticle separation.) It is largely conﬁned to a nar-
row region about the electron, indicating that the sp2
hybrid hole screens the electron eﬃciently.

Fig. 2 shows the exchange-correlation hole of a spin-
up electron on the z axis, perpendicular to the two p
orbitals. With the addition of correlation, the same-spin
hole (a) loses the rotational symmetry of the 3s state that
characterizes the exchange hole, with the polarization of
the two 3p orbitals creating a double valley on either
side of the reference electron. The opposite-spin hole (b)
shows the polarization of the 3s spin-down orbital, with a
well centered about the ﬁxed electron and a strong dipole
response at longer range.

The total z-axis exchange-correlation hole, (c), shows a
smooth interpolation of the two spin contributions lead-
ing to a large crescent-shaped area near the electron
from which the other electrons are repelled. The correla-
tion hole contributes considerably to the total exchange-
correlation hole, with up to 40% of the total on-top hole
due to correlation. Although the 3s-orbital exchange
hole is highly nonlocal and does not eﬃciently screen the
electron, the correlation contribution goes a long way to
make the total hole more local.

5

In addition to the obvious diﬀerences in nxc along
each axis due to the diﬀerences in the exchange hole,
Figs. 1 and 2 reveal subtle diﬀerences in the opposite-
spin hole. The extent of the orientational anisotropy in
the opposite-spin hole can be better visualized by plot-
ting the hole along the x axis for the up-spin electron
ﬁxed on the x axis and along the z axis for the electron
ﬁxed on the z axis, cutting through the minima and max-
ima of the contour plots Figs. 1(b) and 2(b). These are
represented as solid lines in Figs. 3(a) and (b). The most
notable diﬀerence between the two cases is the height of
the peak on the side of the atom opposite the reference
electron, which is three times as large along the z axis (b)
as on the x axis (a). In addition the minimum is slightly
deeper for the z-axis case.

Additionally, in Figs. 3(a) and (b) we show trends in
the opposite-spin correlation hole as one gradually re-
moves the reference electron from the atom. In addition
to the 1.4 aB case discussed above, we place a spin-up
electron on the x axis (a) and the z axis (b), at a distance
of 2.0 and 4.0 aB from atom center, and plot the on-axis
response of the spin-down electron as long- and short-
dashed lines respectively. These three reference radii
correspond to placing an electron at the peak valence
density along either axis, at the average radius from the
atom, and at a low density point outside the atom respec-
tively. As the electron is moved to lower densities, the
shape of the minimum slowly gets wider and shallower,
consistent with trends in the homogeneous electron gas.
The position of the hole minimum stays near the atom,
and thus increasingly more oﬀ center with respect to the
electron. This is expected: the correlation hole, measur-
ing the change in density in the presence of an electron
at some reference point, can have an absolute value no
greater than the density itself. Along the x axis, this
trend to a shallow oﬀ-centered hole is correlated with a
gradual increase of peak height on opposite side of atom.
For the z-axis case the peak height remains roughly con-
stant as the electron is removed.

It is interesting to compare these results to recent an-
alytic studies of the asymptotic limit of the exchange-
correlation hole of Be and Ne [8,29]. In the limit of an
electron far removed from the atom, nxc measures the
collapse of the remaining N − 1 electrons to an eigen-
state of the positive ion. The correlation component of
nxc measures the change in electron density due to the
reduced Coulomb reduction between the remaining elec-
trons. At intermediate distances, a few atomic radii from
the atom center, nxc also shows a dipole polarization of
the atom, or a reduction of electron density from the side
of the atom nearer the reference electron to the farther
side, more so for the more polarizable Be than for Ne.
The collapse to the ion in the asymptotic limit results in
a correlation hole peaked in the center with a minimum
around the edge of the atom. This may possibly be seen
in our data for the 4.0 aB x-axis case of Fig. 3(a), where
the correlation-hole proﬁle develops a peak on both sides
of the ion core. The correlation hole along both axes

2

1

0

)

2
0
1
x
(
 
)

0

σ

,

0

r
;
σ
,
r
(

c
x
n

 
)

0

σ

,

0

r
;
σ
,
r
(

c
x
g

−1

a)

1.0

c)

0.0

−5

b)

d)

0

x axis

r/aB

0

z axis

5

FIG. 3. Spin-down response to a spin-up electron: (a) the
correlation hole along the x axis for a spin-up electron ﬁxed on
the x axis at positions 1.4 (solid line), 2.0 (long-dashed) and
4.0 aB (dashed line) from the atom origin. (b) the correlation
hole along the z axis for an electron ﬁxed at corresponding
positions on the z axis. (c) the pair correlation function for
the 1.4 aB case of (a), for energy cutoﬀ of 20, 28 (both dotted
lines) and 32 Ry (solid line). (d) the pair correlation function
for the 1.4 aB case of (b) for three trial wavefunctions: ψS−J
(dashed line), ψCI (dotted), ψCI−J (solid line). In (a) and
(b), the mean spin-down density is plotted for comparison
as a dotted line. Additionally, the circles show the value for
the “on-top” hole for each case plotted and the crosses, the
LSD on-top hole for various points along each axis. Error
bars show the standard deviation of the VMC expectation
measured over several statistically independent runs.

shows evidence of a dipole polarization of the valence
shell when the reference electron is moved outside the
atom, with a larger response on the “Be-like” z axis than
along the “Ne-like” x axis. The contrast between Si and
closed-shell atoms is that this polarization of the valence
shell does not die out when a reference electron on the z
axis is moved into the center of the valence shell, if any-
thing becoming more pronounced, while the polarization
is damped out along the x axis under the same circum-
stances. An added complexity for Si is that the ﬁnal state
of the system after removing an up-spin electron in dif-
ferent directions corresponds to diﬀerent atomic conﬁgu-
rations: 3s3p2 for the z-axis case (removal of the up-spin
3s orbital) but 3s23p for the x axis. Thus signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between the correlation and exchange holes
induced by electrons on diﬀerent axes remain even for

6

electrons asymptotically far from the atom.

We have also studied the local features of the exchange-
correlation holes plotted, especially the opposite-spin on-
top correlation hole, nxc(r, σ; r, −σ). This measures the
reduction in the opposite-spin electron density at the lo-
cation of a given electron. As the correlation hole is deep-
est when the Coulomb repulsion is largest, the on-top
hole also represents the lower bound for the correlation
hole at any position in the atom [30].
In previous pa-
pers, it was observed that this feature was well described
in several small atoms [8,9] and in Hooke’s atom [31] by
a local spin-density (LSD) ansatz, using the on-top hole
of the homogeneous electron gas corresponding to the
density and magnetization at the location of the electron
pair:

nLSD

xc

(r, r) = n(r)(gheg(0, n(r), ζ(r)) − 1).

(11)

Here gheg(u, n, ζ) is the pair correlation function of the
homogeneous electron gas at density n, magnetization
ζ = (n↑ − n↓)/n, and interparticle separation u. In this
sense, it represents a link between the homogeneous elec-
tron gas and dynamic correlations in many inhomoge-
neous systems [32].

In Figs. 3(a) and (b) we plot the LSD on-top hole, us-
ing homogeneous electron gas values from Ref. [33], at
each point along the x and z axes (crosses). These are
compared to on-top holes of the Slater-Jastrow wavefunc-
tion [Eq. (6)] evaluated speciﬁcally at the location of the
electron for the correlation holes shown (circles at 1.4,
2.0, and 4.0 aB). These values for the Slater-Jastrow
on-top hole are calculated directly without recourse to
a plane-wave expansion, using VMC with a constrained
pair random walk [34], and are exact within a negligible
statistical error. The ﬁnite energy cutoﬀs employed for
the rest of the data tend to lose sharp features of the
correlation hole, in particular that of the cusp condition
at zero interparticle separation. The resulting disagree-
ment with the exact (for the trial wavefunction used) val-
ues is at worst 20% and usually better. The LSD model
agrees fairly well with the VMC data, within 10 − 20%
for most of the points calculated here, faithfully following
the observed trends with respect to electron position. It
provides a fairly reasonable lower limit for the correla-
tion hole at all points in the atom. A calculation of the
on-top hole about the spin-down electron was also done,
with similar agreement with theory.

It is interesting to consider in further detail the
anisotropy in the opposite-spin contribution to nxc at
peak density. In the cases shown in Figs. 1-3, it can be in-
terpreted as the measure of the polarization of the down-
spin electron density in the presence of an up-spin elec-
tron. At ﬁrst glance, one might guess that this down-spin
polarization should roughly be invariant with respect to
the angular orientation of the up-spin electron since one
is measuring the response of the down-spin s-orbital to
the angle-independent Coulomb interaction. More pre-
cisely, one measures the correlations induced by the op-

timized Jastrow factor which depend only on interelec-
tron and electron-nucleus distances. The diﬀerence in the
opposite-spin holes Figs. 1(b) and 2(b), is thus a direct
reﬂection of the inﬂuence of the determinantal structure
of the three up-spin electrons on the correlation response
of the down-spin one.

In the LDA, the inﬂuence of the environment on in-
terparticle correlation is modeled by the variation with
local density of the correlation hole, taken to be that of
the homogeneous electron gas [3,4] at the local density.
Typically the largest absolute and relative eﬀects in this
model are felt at the on-top hole. At this point it seems
to describe the observed behavior quite well, with the
variation in density going from the maximum of the p
orbital on the x axis to the open z axis accounting for
the diﬀerence in the peak density on-top holes. However,
the large discrepancy between the maxima of the peak
density z-axis and x-axis hole, the solid lines in Fig. 3a
and 3b, as well as their relatively large size, is inconsistent
with this model. Neither does it seem easily explained by
local gradient corrections, as the two points are located
at a density maximum and a saddle point respectively,
where any correction would be only second order in the
gradient and therefore quite small.

Within the context of a variational wavefunction calcu-
lation, a mechanism that can introduce an orientation de-
pendence into the correlation hole of an open shell atom
is the three-electron “exclusion eﬀect” or Fermi correla-
tion [11] in conﬁguration-interaction theory, which should
be observable for second row atoms with less than half
ﬁlling in the 3p valence shell. For Si in the Lz = 0 pro-
jection considered here, there is a “nondynamic” con-
tribution to the correlation between electrons along the
z axis due to a 3s2 to 3p2
z excitation that is forbidden
for the corresponding x- or y-axis analogs by Pauli ex-
clusion. This contribution to the correlation hole about
an up-spin electron on the z or “unoccupied” axis, and
the absence of the same about one on “occupied” axes
leads to a diﬀerence in the holes observed with reference
points on these axes. Since this particular conﬁguration
is within the 3p valence shell, and thus fairly close to the
ground state energy, it is natural to expect it to play a
signiﬁcant role in the observed diﬀerence in response.

What is striking here is that the observed orienta-
tional dependence of nxc is obtained with a single Slater-
determinant conﬁguration modiﬁed by a Jastrow factor
that depends only on interparticle distance and the dis-
tance of particles from the core. There are no explicit
orbital correlations in this trial wavefunction [Eq. (6)].
The Slater-Jastrow wavefunction, coupling a Jastrow fac-
tor with a determinant formed from an incomplete set of
valence orbitals, in principle could have a nonzero over-
lap with the 3p2
z3px3py conﬁguration allowed in the nor-
mal exclusion-eﬀect model, and no overlap with the ex-
cluded excitations. However, this would be only one of
an inﬁnite number of conﬁgurations implicitly included in
the Slater-Jastrow wavefunction, tied together by a “dy-
namic” correlation factor that gives no particular varia-

7

tional weight to any one conﬁguration. Thus it is unlikely
that it would fully account for the observed diﬀerences
in the response along the occupied and open axes [35].

On the other hand, a more general argument involv-
ing screening can be invoked to explain the orientational
anisotropy in our results. If the up-spin electron is placed
on the z-axis, its exchange hole is not centered on the
electron position, as the electron occupies a 3s orbital
with an isotropic spatial extension throughout the atom’s
valence shell. The net eﬀect of the electron plus its ex-
change hole has the nature of a dipole ﬁeld along the
z axis of the atom, with an imperfectly screened nega-
tive charge on the side of the atom nearest the electron
and a positively charged region due to the exchange hole
on the other side. The large peak in the down spin elec-
tron’s response to the up-spin electron can be viewed
then as a dipole induced by the dipole ﬁeld formed by
the imperfect exchange screening of the up-spin electron.
In the x-axis case, the exchange hole is centered and lo-
calized on the electron; the other two electrons are in
sp2 orbitals blocking out the rest of the valence shell.
Therefore the up-spin electron is eﬃciently screened by
its exchange hole, and in addition, there is no “easy”
direction for redistributing the down-spin electron den-
sity. In such a picture the 3s2 → 3p2 excitation should
play an important but not exclusive role in the overall
dipole response along the z axis. This eﬀect is observ-
able in a Slater-Jastrow wavefunction because the Jas-
trow factor includes correlations simultaneously between
all particle pairs. Thus, the correlation response of the
down-spin electron to a ﬁxed up-spin electron involves
not only their mutual Coulomb repulsion but that of the
other up-spin electrons as well. The inhomogeneous dis-
tribution of these electrons about the ﬁxed electron com-
bined with the eﬀect of the external potential in essence
create a Coulomb interaction with the exchange hole.

V. RESULTS FOR THE PAIR CORRELATION

FUNCTION

A. Single Conﬁguration Wavefunction

In a system such as an atom, the pair correlation func-
tion g(r0, σ0; r, σ) is a valuable tool because, given the
large variation in the density over the length-scale of the
exchange-correlation hole, the shape of the hole is to a
large extent determined by the variation in density. The
pair correlation function can distinguish the intrinsic ef-
fects of correlation by eliminating any features that are
simply proportional to the density.

In Fig. 4 we plot the pair correlation function (PCF)
for several of the cases considered previously. Speciﬁcally,
we show g(r0, ↑; r, ↓) ﬁxing a spin-up particle at the peak
in the valence density, 1.4 aB on the x axis (a) and the
z axis (b) and plotting the variation with respect to the
spin-down electron in the x-z plane. These results are ob-

tained by dividing nxc as plotted in Figs. 1(b) and 2(b)
respectively by the spin-down density, with a constant
shift of 1 due to the diﬀering conventions in their deﬁni-
tions [Eqs. (1) and (3)]. The value g = 1 corresponding
to nxc = 0 (shown as a thick contour in Fig. 4) denotes
the boundary between the region in which the spin-down
density has been reduced (g < 1) and that in which it
has been enhanced (g > 1) in the presence of the spin-up
reference electron. As described in the next section the
PCF can be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by statistical error at
low density, so that the plot range is restricted to higher
density regions where the statistical error is less than half
a contour increment in either direction.

The contours of the pair correlation function in the
vicinity of the spin-up electron on the x axis are nearly
circular and centered on the electron, showing the spin-
down electron repelled from it without signiﬁcant direc-
tional bias. The g = 1 contour is slightly oblong in shape,
indicating that at longer distances there is a slight bias
towards shifting electron density to the high density areas
on the far side of the atom (x < 0). A similar plot cut-
ting through the x-y plane (ie, cutting through both the
p orbitals along a plane perpendicular to the one shown)
shows similar results except that the g = 1 contour is more
circular in shape. This picture is fairly consistent with
that of a homogeneous electron gas PCF which depends
only on the distance between particles, and indicates that
the underlying physical processes are quite similar: high
energy “dynamic” correlations that are quickly screened
out over the radius of the exchange hole.

In comparison, the PCF in Fig. 4(b), showing the re-
sponse to the spin-up electron on the z axis shows a much
greater departure from isotropy. The function has a no-
ticeable dipole component with respect to the atom cen-
ter, with a peak in g directly opposite the minimum on
the z axis. The g = 1 contour has a much more shallow
curvature than that of Fig. 4(a), so that it is no longer
centered on the spin-up electron, but rather coincides
roughly with the z = 0 plane in the high density region
of the atom. (For the 3s23px3py conﬁguration of Si, the
PCF with a reference electron on the z axis is rotationally
invariant about the z axis so that the contours shown in
the plot can be extended to surfaces of rotation in three
dimensions.) In the near vicinity of the ﬁxed electron,
the pair correlation function is no longer a function of
the distance between the two coordinates r and r0 alone,
but has taken on a noticeable angular dependence as well.
Thus the slope of the well near 1.4 aB on the z axis is
steeper towards the center of the atom, shallower towards
the outer edge of the atom. Although such a shape could
in principle be accounted for in a region where the gra-
dient of the density is large, using a gradient expansion
of the homogeneous electron gas [36], it cannot be ex-
plained along these lines in the current situation since it
occurs at local saddle point in the density (the peak of
the density along the z axis). These features in the PCF
conﬁrm the existence of a genuine directional anisotropy
in the response to an electron located perpendicular to

8

(a)

2

1

0

-1

-2

(b)

2

1

0

-1

-2

Bz/a

(c)

2

1

0

-1

-2

z/a

B

Bz/a

-2

-1

0
x/a
B

1

2

-2

-1

0

x/aB

1

2

-2

-1

1

2

0

x/aB

FIG. 4. The opposite-spin pair correlation function g(r0, ↑; r, ↓) as a function of spin-down electron position in the x-z plane
for a spin-up particle ﬁxed at (a) 1.4 aB from the atom center on the x axis, (b) 1.4 aB from atom center on the z axis, (c)
the same as (b), with nondynamic correlations from the 3s2 to 3p2
z double substitution included. The contour increment is 0.1
with the contour for g = 1 represented by a thicker line; the regions between are shaded darker for lower values of g.

the occupied p orbitals, and suggest that the explanation
lies in a nonlocal mechanism such as the response to a
poorly localized 3s exchange hole.

Along this line,

it is instructive to consider the
exchange-correlation hole about the lone down-spin elec-
tron. In this case the exchange hole is of necessity due
to the 3s orbital regardless of the electron position, and
one can expect signiﬁcant departures from a compact,
isotropic PCF. In the case of a down-spin electron on the
z axis, we observe the PCF that is very close to that
about an up-spin electron, with perhaps a slightly larger
dipole component. In both cases, the PCF indicates the
presence of a signiﬁcant dipole response that compen-
sates for the poorly screening 3s exchange hole. The
PCF for a down-spin electron on the x > 0 axis has a
quite complicated pattern outside the on-top hole region
– neither roughly isotropic like Fig. 4(a) or with simple
dipole anisotropy like Fig. 4(b). There are several uncon-
nected regions where the electron density is enhanced:
surrounding the electron for x > 0 and focused on the
x axis opposite the electron for x < 0. In this case the
exchange hole should not screen the electron eﬃciently,
but there is no lowlying 3p orbital with which to con-
struct a response, so that there is a possibility that the
contributions of higher-order orbitals might be observ-
able.

B. Two Conﬁguration Wavefunction

Since we have observed a signiﬁcant change in shape of
the opposite-spin PCF with respect the angular orienta-
tion of the reference electron, using a single-determinant
Slater-Jastrow wavefunction, it is interesting to include
explicitly the 3s2 → 3p2
z excitation that is predicted in
CI theory to play a prominent role in producing such a
behavior in the Si atom. We consider the multideter-

minant wavefunction ψCI that consists of a 3p2
z3px3py
excited state conﬁguration as well as the noninteracting
ground state. This wavefunction can be treated alone or
used as a starting point for adding further correlations
via the Jastrow factor [Eq. (8)]; in either case the mixing
amplitude η1 for the excited state is variationally opti-
mized, along with the Jastrow parameters for the latter
case. We obtain a mixing coeﬃcient η1 of 0.132 and total
energy 3.7263(18) a.u. in the former case and 0.056 and
3.8041(2) a.u. in the latter.

The nondynamic correlation modeled by the two-
conﬁguration wavefunction alone, ψCI , is to ﬁrst order
in η1 a dipole-dipole correlation:

gCI (r0, ↑; r, ↓) = 1 + 2η1

z0
r0

z
r

Rp(r0)
Rs(r0)

Rp(r)
Rs(r)

(12)

where Rp and Rs are the radial 3s and 3p orbitals. The
signature of this PCF in a contour plot with the cut
through the x-z plane and r0 ﬁxed on the z axis is a
series of roughly straight lines arranged antisymmetri-
cally about the z = 0 plane, with the g = 1 contour at
z = 0. The shape of the function is independent of the
position of the ﬁxed particle, with the only change being
in the overall amplitude. For one electron ﬁxed on the
x axis, on the node of the pz orbital, the PCF is to ﬁrst
order zero.

In Fig. 4(c) we show a contour plot for the opposite-
spin PCF of the combined CI plus Jastrow wavefunction,
ψCI−J , for the same plot parameters as Fig. 4(b): with
the up-spin electron ﬁxed at 1.4 aB on the z axis.
In
this case the occupation probability of the excited-state
Slater-Jastrow wavefunction is very small, 0.3%, and the
change in the total ground-state energy from the single-
determinant Slater-Jastrow wavefunction is correspond-
ingly small. On the other hand the explicit addition of
the nondynamic correlation increases the correlation en-
ergy by 1.6% and has a signiﬁcant impact on the shape

9

of the hole. The PCF has a clear dipole-dipole signature,
exaggerating the spatial anisotropy already visible in the
one determinant case. The g = 1 contour is closer to the
z = 0 axis, and the short-range well about the ﬁxed parti-
cle, which for a particle near the peak of the valence shell
density could be expected to be fairly deep and isotropic,
has been reduced to a shallow and open-ended dip. As
expected from the form of the nondynamic correlation,
little change was observed in the PCF for a particle ﬁxed
on the x axis.

A quantitative comparison of g for the above cases is
also instructive and is shown in Figs. 3(c) and (d). We
plot g(r0, ↑; r, ↓) varying r along the x axis and ﬁxing r0
at 1.4 aB on the x axis (c) and the analogous situation for
the z-axis (d). Error bars on the statistical measurements
of these quantities are plotted, as well as the plane-wave
cutoﬀ dependence for the x-axis case. The converged
result on the x axis (solid line) is well localized about
the reference particle’s position, with an enhancement of
particle density on the opposite side of the atom.

The results for the z axis, Fig. 3(d) include the PCF for
the three diﬀerent trial wavefunctions discussed above:
the single Slater determinant plus Jastrow factor, ψS−J
(dashed line), the two-conﬁguration wavefunction ψCI
(dotted line) and the same multiplied by a Jastrow fac-
tor ψCI−J (solid line).
In comparison to the most ac-
curate result, ψCI−J , ψCI predicts with some success
the long-wavelength polarization response to the elec-
tron at r0, determining how much the electron density
is pushed from one side of the atom to the other. The
major diﬀerence is the absence of the small dip in the
immediate vicinity of the electron due to the cusp con-
dition, which naturally is not obtained from the two-
conﬁguration wavefunction.
In contrast, ψS−J , which
does not include explicit orbital-dependent correlations
but can be optimized to obtain accurate results for short
interparticle distances, is nearly identical to ψCI−J in
the vicinity of the reference electron but underestimates
the long-wavelength polarization of the atom, obtaining
about 70% of the PCF of ψCI−J on the other side of the
atom. The mixing coeﬃcient η1 for the excited-state con-
ﬁguration was reduced by about 60% when the Jastrow
factor was added to the multiconﬁguration result, indi-
cating that part of the polarization of the atom produced
by the simple two conﬁguration wavefunction is already
accounted for by the Jastrow factor.
In each case the
z-axis PCF leads to a much larger peak on the far side
of the atom than the x-axis case.

C. Error Analysis

There are three sources of error in our calculation: sta-
tistical error in taking Monte Carlo estimates, the ﬁnite
plane-wave cutoﬀ of the data, and ﬁnally the variational
bias due to the discrepancies of the trial from the true
ground state wavefunction. The ﬁrst two are closely con-

nected and to some extent can be regulated; the third is
harder to assess.

In a typical Monte Carlo calculation, sample points
for evaluating the density or other single-particle ex-
pectation in a given region of space are generated
with frequency proportional to the density itself. This
leads to statistically precise measurements of the den-
sity at high density and large relative errors that vary

outside the atom. Calculating the VMC expectations,

roughly as 1/pn(r) at the vanishingly low densities
< Pi exp(−iG · ri) >, of a set of plane-waves periodic on

a supercell is equivalent to taking the Fourier transform
of a histogram distribution of statistical sample points
on that cell. The statistical outliers from the poorly
sampled, asymptotic low-density region show up in the
Fourier transform as a noise background independent of
energy. This noise can to some degree be controlled by
imposing a ﬁnite cutoﬀ in reciprocal space. However,
too small a cutoﬀ leads to spurious long wavelength os-
cillations and is particularly poor for the short-distance
region of the hole where the cusp condition results in a
long range tail in the reciprocal space. We ﬁnd that a
good balance between controlling statistical and plane-
wave error can be found by choosing a cutoﬀ when the
statistical average of the plane-wave component of the
density is roughly equal to the statistical noise in its cal-
culation. For a sampling size of around 105 independent
conﬁgurations, this cutoﬀ limit proves to be about 32 Ry
for a resolution of 1.0 aB.

The statistical error of the Monte Carlo sampling was
measured both for the individual plane-wave components
of the density and conditional density, and for their real-
space counterparts by measuring the standard deviation
of these quantities over 10 to 20 independent runs. As
shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d), the error bars of the PCF

do in fact vary roughly as 1/pn(r) with well controlled

errors in the peak density region, increasing to arbitrarily
large values as one moves outside the atom. With the
cutoﬀ used, statistical errors in the PCF are limited to
a value of less than 0.05 (out of a range in the PCF of
the order of 1.0) for particles within 3.5 aB of the atom
center, which in eﬀect provides the limits in the plots of
the PCF in Fig. 4.

The convergence of the plane-wave expansion was
checked by plotting the PCF as a function of cutoﬀ en-
ergy. A typical result is shown in Fig. 3(c) where the
x-axis PCF for a particle ﬁxed at 1.4 aB on the axis is
plotted, for cutoﬀ energies of 20, 28 and 32 Ry. The exact
on-top hole has been measured by a direct VMC calcu-
lation and is plotted as a circle. The 20 Ry calculation
shows clear deviations from the higher energy cutoﬀ data,
particularly in the region of the on-top hole, ie., in the
immediate vicinity of the ﬁxed electron, where the cusp
condition contributes a high-energy tail to the exchange-
correlation hole. The agreement between the two higher
energy plots is well within statistical error except in the
core region of the atom and in the low density tails. The

10

32 Ry case has not yet converged in the on-top region to
the exact on-top value plotted as a circle, indicative of
the slow convergence of the plane-wave expansion to the
on-top hole cusp.

A ﬁnal source of error is from the eﬀect of the de-
viation of the variational trial wavefunctions [Eqs. (6)
and (8)] from the exact ground state. The ground-state
energy, being variationally optimized,
is typically de-
termined with much less error than other expectations
(though one may expect that those important in the de-
termination of the energy, such as the density and nxc,
should still be robust. An example of this problem is
demonstrated in Fig. 4 in which two variationally opti-
mized wavefunctions having relatively insigniﬁcant dif-
ferences in total energy, give PCF’s with noticeable dif-
ferences for an electron ﬁxed on the unoccupied z axis.
The variational method is in general more sensitive to
errors in the wavefunction at high density as this region
contributes the most to the variational energy. Thus we
expect worse errors in the PCF when one or both coor-
dinates are at low density.

In order to gauge possible errors arising from varia-
tional bias in our wavefunction, we study the change in
the PCF and in nxc for several choices of trial wave-
function. Speciﬁcally we used trial wavefunctions with
four, ten and eighteen Boys and Handy basis functions,
corresponding to keeping expansion terms of order o =
l+m+n up to 2, 4 and 6 respectively in our Jastrow func-
tion. The lowest order function has, in addition to two
terms that set the cusp condition for each spin compo-
nent, only one electron-electron and one electron-nucleus
term. The correlation energy of each wavefunction is
0.0640(8), 0.0812(4), and 0.0840(2) a.u. respectively, in
comparison to 0.0877(2) a.u. using the multideterminant
Slater-Jastrow wavefunction and 0.0883 a.u.
for the CI
calculation of Ref. [15].

In Fig. 5 we plot the opposite-spin PCF using these
trial wavefunctions for two cases previously considered
in Sec. IV: (a) an up-spin electron placed at 1.4 aB on
the x axis and (b) an up-spin electron placed at 4.0 aB
on the z axis. As in Fig. 3 we present a cut through
the atom center and the reference electron, thus showing
the minimum and maximum of the PCF. The ﬁrst case
represents a probable best-case situation, with the refer-
ence electron placed at peak density on an axis occupied
by a 3p orbital, so that nondynamic correlations due to
the open-shell structure should be neglible. In contrast
the second case presents the worst case scenario: at low
density along the unoccupied axis. The behavior of the
PCF in the asymptotic low-density region of the atom is
dominated by the statistical error of our plane-wave basis
and is not shown.

In our best-case scenario, (a), the PCF near the refer-
ence electron is very well obtained with even the crud-
est model used (o = 2). On the far side of the atom
with respect to the reference electron position, there is a
noticeable increase in the magnitude of the peak of the
PCF with the increase in accuracy of the wavefunction.

r0=1.4aB(100)

r0=4.0aB(001)

HF−J, n=2
HF−J, n=4
HF−J, n=6
CI−J, n=6

ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
CI

2

1

 
)

0

σ

,

0

r
;
σ
,
r
(

c
x
g

(a)

0
−3.0

0.0

x axis

(b)

r/aB

0.0

z axis

3.0

FIG. 5. Convergence data for the opposite-spin PCF for
up-spin electron ﬁxed at (a) 1.4 aB on the x axis and (b)
4.0 aB on the z axis. Cases shown are for Boys and Handy
terms up to order o = 2, 4, and 6 as described in the text, in a
one-determinant Slater-Jastrow wavefunction, and o = 6 for a
two-determinant Slater-Jastrow wavefunction. Additionally,
results for a two-determinant wavefunction without Jastrow
factor are given in (b) as a dot-dashed line.

As expected, the addition of nondynamic correlations in
form of a two-determinant Slater-Jastrow wavefunction
(solid line) has no noticeable eﬀect. An investigation of
the corresponding contour plots, cutting through the x-z
plane as shown in Fig. 4, shows that the depth and spa-
tial extent of the PCF is obtained with the lowest order
wavefunction and varies only slightly with increase in ba-
sis set. The major diﬀerence is the gradual adjustment
of the g = 1 contour from a more isotropic shape to the
elliptical one shown in Fig. 4(a), which accounts for the
gradual increase in the peak on the far side of the x axis
as the g = 1 contour moves towards the atom center.

The worst case scenario (b) shows a far greater degree
of disagreement between wavefunctions. The three one-
determinant Slater-Jastrow wavefunctions agree fairly
well with each other, with an increasing percentage of
the electron density removed from the near side of the
atom and placed on the far side. The peak height on
the far side is roughly the same as for the 1.4 aB, high-
density case shown in Fig. 3(d). The introduction of the
nondynamic 3s2 → 3p2 excitation into the Slater-Jastrow
wavefunction (solid line) leads to a dramatic change in
the shape of the PCF. The peak of the PCF from the
base value of g = 1 representing no change due to corre-
lations is increased by a factor of three, and only at the

11

on-top hole (not shown) is there no signiﬁcant change
in the PCF. In comparison, the PCF of the optimized
two-determinant wavefunction ψCI discussed in Sec. V is
shown as a dot-dashed line. The two-determinant Slater-
Jastrow wavefunction is an interpolation between the two
limiting cases, favoring ψCI at most locations.

An explanation of the “gigantic” features in the non-
dynamic part of the PCF in Fig. 5(b) comes from the
observation that the ratio zRp(r)/Rs(r) between the 3p
and 3s orbital, which determines the shape of the nondy-
namic PCF to ﬁrst order [Eq. 12], increases exponentially
at large distances along the z axis. As a result, in the
asymptotic region (that is, either the response to a refer-
ence electron outside the atom or the asymptotic tails of
the response to a reference electron at high density), the
nondynamic correlation introduced with the 3s2 → 3p2
z
substitution is no longer a small perturbation even with
a small mixing parameter. The Jastrow factor basis func-
tions however are chosen to tend to a constant at either
large electron-electron or electron-nucleus distances. It
is quite likely that none of the cases studied accurately
represents the true asymptotic behavior of the correlation
function. They should rather be considered to provide a
qualitative idea of the PCF as well as a sense of the range
of behavior it should reasonably lie within.

It is interesting to note that the agreement between
the various PCF’s is far closer for the high density case
on the z axis plotted in Fig. 3(d). This indicates the
greater weight of the exchange-correlation hole at high
density in determining the total exchange-correlation en-
ergy, and the corresponding robustness of its determi-
nation even with qualitatively diﬀerent wavefunctions.
Given the large degree of variation in the asymptotic
limit, it would be interesting to study the eﬀect of in-
cluding a larger number of conﬁgurations in a multide-
terminantal Slater-Jastrow wavefunction or include the
eﬀects of backﬂow or multielectron coordinates [14] into
the evaluation of orbitals. At higher densities we ex-
pect the eﬀect of such improvements in the wavefunction
would be to add further reﬁnements in the shape of the
PCF along the z axis, but with much less change in basic
features such as its range and magnitude.

VI. CORRELATION EFFECTS ON THE SPIN

DENSITY

In addition to the exchange-correlation hole, the spin
components of the single-particle density change with
the inclusion of Coulomb correlations. In principle, the
Kohn-Sham equations used to derive the density in DFT
should give the exact ground-state radial density, even for
a degenerate ground-state [12]; however there is no such
principle for the spin components of the density. Thus
a change observed in the spin components of the density
that does not alter the total radial density can be con-
sidered an intrinsic feature of Coulomb correlation and

not simply due to the inaccuracy of the LDA density. As
with nxc, a prominent feature of the change in the spin-
dependent density, ∆n(r, σ), is anisotropy with respect
to the fully occupied x and open z axes. This anisotropy
in ∆n(r, σ) may help to shed light on the mechanisms
underlying the anisotropy in nxc.

down spin, ψ
up spin, ψ
down spin, ψ
up spin, ψ
ψ
CI

CI−J

HF−J

HF−J

CI−J

4.0

2.0

0.0

3
0
1

 
x
 
)
)
r
(

 

A
D
L
n
−
 
)
r
(

C
M
V
n
(

−2.0

−5.0

0.0

5.0

x axis                    r/aB                    z axis

FIG. 6. The change in the spin-dependent density
n1(r, σ)−n0(r, σ) between the fully interacting and noninter-
acting systems. The left side of the plot shows a cut through
the x axis; the right side, through the z axis. The solid line
is the spin-down density change using the one-determinant
Slater-Jastrow wavefunction ψS−J ; the long-dashed is the
spin-up density change for the same wavefunction. Dot-
ted and dashed lines give the corresponding quantities for
the two-determinant Slater-Jastrow function ψCI−J . The
dot-dashed line is for the two-determinant function ψCI . The
plot units are 10−3 a.u.

In Fig. 3, the spin-down density for the single determi-
nant Slater-Jastrow wavefunction is plotted as a dotted
line along the x axis (a) and z axis (b). Note that in the
noninteracting wavefunction this density is that of the
3s orbital and thus the same along each axis. However,
in the interacting case, anisotropy in the correlation re-
sponse reduces the density along the x axis by roughly
6% and increases it by the same amount along the z-
axis. This change is shown in Fig. 6 (solid line) along
with the change in the spin-up density (long-dashed line),
with the right side of the plot showing a cut through the
x axis and the left side a cut through the z-axis. The
corresponding density changes using the two-determinant
Slater-Jastrow wavefunction (ψCI−J ) are plotted as dot-
ted and dashed lines. In both cases, the change in the
spin-up density has a qualitative trend opposite to that
of the spin-down density, showing a large enhancement

12

in density near the peak of the 3px orbital and a drop
in density along the z axis. Thus, the changes in the
two spin components cancel out partially in the total
density, but add to the total spin density, deﬁned as
m(r) = n(r, ↑) − n(r, ↓). In addition there are observ-
able eﬀects of a small reduction in the radius of the atom
that occurs with the addition of the Jastrow correlation
term, particularly a reduction in up-spin density at a
large distance from the atom and an enhancement of the
down-spin density in the core region. A convergence test
along the lines of that for nxc in the previous section was
carried out for the spin components of the density. The
qualitative trends are repeatable with the less accurate
Jastrow factors but with considerably slower quantitative
convergence than for nxc.

An anisotropic shift in spin density can be gener-
ated from the nondynamic Fermi correlation discussed in
the previous sections: the mixing of the noninteracting
ground-state with a 3s2 → 3p2
z-substitution excited state
and the lack thereof due to Pauli exclusion for the 3px
and 3py analogs. Using the two-determinant wavefunc-
tion ψCI , the resulting change in each spin component of
the density is

be lowered from its Hartree-Fock value by breaking a
symmetry of the ground state to induce the spatial sep-
aration of opposite spin-components of the density.
In
the Si atom, since the ground state is degenerate and
lacks the symmetry of the Hamiltonian, it already has
a nonzero spin density; multiplication by a Jastrow fac-
tor does not break the symmetry of the ground state
in a substantial way [38]. The change in spin-density re-
ﬂects the eﬀect of the Coulomb interaction which induces
the spatial separation between opposite spin electrons, in
a system in which the diﬀerent spin components are to
some degree already spatially separated in the noninter-
acting state. In contrast to a ﬁlled-shell atom or other
spin-unpolarized system, this spatial separation of oppo-
site spins appears not only as a correlation hole but as a
change in the mean density as well. Consistent with this
picture, the direction of the change in the Lz = 0 projec-
tion of the Si atom enhances the absolute diﬀerence in
the spin density |n(r, ↑) − n(r, ↓)| that already exists in
the Hartree-Fock wavefunction, where up-spin electrons
occupies px and py orbitals while the lone down-spin elec-
tron does not.

∆n(r, ↑) = ∆n(r, ↓) = η2

1(|ψ3pz (r)|2 − |ψ3s(r)|2)

(13)

VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

where ψ3s and ψ3pz are the wavefunctions of the 3s and
3pz orbitals and η1 the excited state probability ampli-
tude. This function, shown as a dash-dotted line in Fig 6,
corresponds to a density enhancement along the z axis
and reduction in the x-y plane for both spin-components
for a net zero change in the spin density m(r), in marked
contrast to the mutually opposing changes of the two
spin-components of the Monte Carlo data. Given the op-
timal value of η2
1 = 0.017 for the occupation number of
the excited-state conﬁguration, one ﬁnds that the magni-
tude of the change in either spin component of the den-
sity is much smaller than observed, and qualitatively in
the wrong direction for the up-spin case. When the non-
dynamic s2 → p2
z excitation is included into the Slater-
Jastrow wavefunction (dotted and dashed lines), both the
up-spin and down-spin densities are enhanced slightly
along the z axis, but the qualitative picture remains
unchanged – as one might expect from the very small
value of η2
1 = 0.003 that was optimal for this case. For
these reasons, it is unlikely that the observed anisotropic
change in the spin components of the density can be ex-
plained by this type of mechanism.

On the other hand, a simple explanation of these re-
sults lies in that the observed change in the spin density
reduces the spatial overlap between the two spin compo-
nents. As the correlation energy is predominantly deter-
mined by the spatial correlation between opposite-spin
electrons, such a change in spin density can reduce the
correlation energy in a way that reduces the total energy
if the total density remains unchanged. This correlation
eﬀect is similar to that of the unrestricted Hartree-Fock
method [37] in which the energy of a system like H2 can

We have calculated the exchange-correlation hole of
the valence shell of the ground state of the Si atom as
a function of spin decomposition, using the Variational
Monte Carlo method. This relatively simple four electron
system, restricted to a single valence shell, nevertheless
shows a rich variety of phenomena in exchange and cor-
relation not present in closed-shell atoms.

The incomplete ﬁlling of the valence shell of the open-
shell atom leads to dramatic anisotropy and nonlocality
in the exchange hole, even at peak densities in the valence
shell. This is accompanied by a signiﬁcant compensat-
ing anisotropy in the correlation hole making the total
exchange-correlation hole more (but not completely) lo-
cal and isotropic.

Our paper has focused mostly on the exchange-
correlation hole about a majority (up) spin electron. In
this case, as one goes from a reference point at peak den-
sity along an “occupied” axis, along which one of the
occupied 3p orbitals is oriented, to one on the “open”
z axis perpendicular to the 3p orbitals, the exchange hole
changes from an eﬃciently screening 3sp2-like to a poorly
screening 3s character. As a result, we observe in the re-
sponse of the minority (down) spin density a signiﬁcant
“dipole” shift or shift of density from one side of the
atom to the other, that occurs when the up-spin electron
is placed in the peak density position on the open axis
and not when it is placed in the center of a p orbital.
This diﬀerence shows up in the pair correlation function
as a diﬀerence in shape, with that on the “occupied”
axis being a modest distortion of the isotropic shape of
a dynamic correlation, and that on the z axis showing a

13

marked dipole component along the z axis. The dipole
polarization observed is also notable in that it occurs not
only for a reference electron outside the atom but at the
peak along the z axis, where the local gradient is zero;
it is therefore a truly nonlocal feature not amenable to
modeling by an expansion in the local density gradient.
The explicit inclusion of nondynamic correlations into
our wavefunction enhances the diﬀerence between open
and occupied-axis response, particularly when the refer-
ence electron is moved outside the atom. This is due
to the exclusion eﬀect in which the 3s2 → 3p2 substitu-
tion is allowed along the open axis and excluded along
the occupied ones. Nevertheless, the existence of such a
diﬀerence in the single-determinant Slater-Jastrow wave-
function, given the structure of the Jastrow factor, seems
better explained in terms of the screening of the exchange
hole, in which the Coulomb interaction of the down spin
electron with the up-spin 3s exchange hole causes the
dipole response along the open axis. In this case, it is the
lowlying 3p orbital that best compensates for the poor
screening of the exchange hole. It should thus play an
important if not exclusive role in inducing the anisotropy
of the opposite spin correlation hole.

A second major eﬀect of the open-shell structure of
the atom upon its response to the Coulomb interaction
is the change of the spin components of the density with
the addition of correlations. The down-spin density is
pushed inwards and onto the unoccupied axis and the
up-spin density pushed oﬀ the z axis and onto the peak
of the p orbitals in the x-y plane, resulting in a reduc-
tion of the spatial overlap between the two spin compo-
nents in a way which leaves the radial density largely
unchanged. The standard exclusion eﬀect resulting from
the 3s2 → 3p2
z substitution produces a net change in den-
sity that is both quantitatively too small and qualita-
tively incorrect. However, both the anisotropic features
of the exchange-correlation hole and the changes in spin
density essentially stem from the same eﬀect: the ten-
dency of the Coulomb interaction to induce the spatial
separation of opposite spin electrons in the context of the
spatially anisotropic and spin-polarized structure of the
degenerate Si ground state.

We have only brieﬂy discussed the nxc for a down-spin
electron, where in addition to the screening of the ex-
change hole (always 3s-like), the anisotropy of the deter-
minantal structure of the up-spin electrons plays an im-
portant role. The correlation response to the down-spin
electron on the occupied axis combines a compensation
for poor screening by the exchange hole and the absence
of a lowlying 3p-orbital component from the correlation
hole on account of Pauli exclusion. We have observed
in this situation subtle structural properties in the PCF
that merit further investigation.

In contrast to longer ranged features of the correlation
hole we ﬁnd that its on-top value – the reduction of elec-
tron density in the immediate vicinity of an electron –
is reproduced by a local density ansatz within 10-20%,
over a fairly wide range in density and magnetization,

14

and is otherwise insensitive to the structure of the atom.
Given the energetically reasonable shape of the LDA nxc
and that it satisﬁes the short-range cusp condition and
global particle-sum rule of the true nxc in addition to
the approximate ﬁt to the Si on-top hole, it is reason-
able to expect that it will provide a good approximation
for the angle- or system-averaged nxc, that is, after av-
eraging out many of the subtle angle or position depen-
dent features studied here [8]. Nevertheless, the complex
spin-dependent phenomena observed in this paper point
to the inherent diﬃculty of systematically improving on
local or semilocal density functional theories in systems
with nontrivial valence-shell structure, such as open shell
atoms or multiply-bonded molecules.

Our results provide support for several recent hybrid
approaches to DFT. The combination of a short ranged
on-top hole that is fairly well modeled by local density
functional theory and longer-ranged exchange and exclu-
sion eﬀects that are not indicates the usefulness of den-
sity functional schemes which include the on-top hole as
a basic component [32] or involve the hybridization of
short-ranged local or semilocal density functionals with a
more accurate treatment of longer ranged correlations us-
ing RPA [36] or CI [12]. The tendency of the correlation
hole to cancel out the anisotropy in the exchange hole,
and increase the sensitivity of the exchange-correlation
hole to electron position, along with the quality of the
on-top hole in the LSD approximation, lends support to
recent hybrid approaches [22] which mix the exact ex-
change hole with an local DFT approximation of the
full-coupling constant exchange-correlation hole. These
methods rely on the assumption that the full coupling
constant limit of the integral in Eq. (4) is more likely to
be amenable to approximation by the isotropic, localized
nxc of the homogeneous electron gas than the noninter-
acting limit dominated by exchange. In the case of the
open-shell atom exclusion eﬀects quite eﬀectively can-
cel out the gross anisotropy in the exchange hole caused
by the open-shell structure, at least within the region of
peak valence density.

On the other hand, the changes in spin-density that
we observe indicate that a standard Hartree-Fock or re-
stricted CI basis set may be a less desirable starting point
for implementing hybrid DFT methods in spin-polarized
systems than, for example, a generalized Hartree-Fock
approach that would allow for anisotropic distortions in
the spin density due to Coulomb correlations. Also, it
seems possible that more could be done to obtain ac-
curate correlation energies within the local spin-density
approximation with the incorporation of projection spe-
ciﬁc information.

One of us (A. C. Cancio) would like to thank Kieron
Burke for helpful discussions. This work was supported
by Sandia National Laboratories contract AP-7094 and
the Campus Laboratories Collaboration of the University
of California.

[24] A. J. Thakkar et al., Int. J. Quantum Chem. 26, 157

(1984).

[25] The exchange hole of DFT is nearly identical with the
Fermi hole commonly studied in quantum chemistry.
However, the noninteracting ground-state in DFT and
the corresponding single-particle orbitals are determined
by the Kohn-Sham equation and in principle obtain the
density of the exact ground state, while the Fermi hole
is usually deﬁned in terms of the Hartree-Fock ground
state. Similarly, the correlation hole deﬁned with respect
to the full coupling constant exchange-correlation hole is
the analog of the Coulomb hole of Ref. [5].

[26] D. R. Hamann, M. Schl¨uter and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 43, 1494 (1979); G. B. Bachelet, D. R. Hamann
and M. Schl¨uter, Phys. Rev. B 26, 4199 (1982).

[27] N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 58, 279 (1973).
[28] D. Ceperley and M. H. Kalos in Monte Carlo Methods in
Statistical Physics, edited by K. Binder (Springer Verlag,
Berlin 1979).

[29] M. Ernzerhof, K. Burke and J.P. Perdew, J. Chem. Phys.

105, 2798 (1996).

[30] Note that this argument refers to a perspective comple-
mentary to that held elsewhere in this paper and in the
literature. One measures the correlation hole at a ﬁxed
position in the atom in response to a reference electron
somewhere else, and varies the position of the reference
electron. The corresponding hole measured at the ﬁxed
position should be largest when the reference electron is
moved on top it.

[31] J. P. Perdew, A. Savin, and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. A 51,

4531 (1995).

[32] J. P. Perdew, M. Ernzerhof, K. Burke and A. Savin, Int.

J. Quantum Chem. 61, 197 (1997).

[33] H. Yasuhara, Solid State Commun. 11, 1481 (1972).
[34] A. C. Cancio and C. Y. Fong, to be published.
[35] In principle one should be able to measure the impor-
tance of this conﬁguration by a calculation of the over-
lap between it and the Slater-Jastrow ground state; the
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent nodal structure of the two states
makes a VMC calculation of this quantity unreliable in
practice.

[36] D. C. Langreth and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 21, 5469

(1980).

[37] see, for example, Peter Fulde, Electron Correlations in

Molecules and Solids, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991).

[38] Because of the diﬀerent treatment of opposite and same-
spin cusp conditions in the Jastrow factor of Slater-
Jastrow wavefunctions, the total spin quantum number
S 2 will in general not preserved (C. J. Huang, C. Filippi
and C. J. Umrigar, J. Chem. Phys. 108 8838, (1998).) Im-
posing a spin-independent cusp condition was observed to
change the up-spin component of the density noticeably,
but preserved fairly closely the degree and anisotropy of
spatial separation between spin-components induced by
correlations.

[1] R. O. Jones and O. Gunnarson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 689

(1989).

[2] Warren E. Pickett and Jeremy Q. Broughton, Phys. Rev.

B 48, 14859 (1993-II).

[3] G. Ortiz and P. Ballone, Phys. Rev. B 50, 1391 (1994).
[4] J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 46, 12947 (1992-
II); J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and Wang, Phys. Rev. B 54,
16533 (1996).

[5] C. A. Coulson and A. H. Neilson, Proc. Phys. Soc. 78,

831 (1961).

[6] J. Sanders and K. E. Banyard, J. Chem Phys. 96, 4536

(1992).

[7] M. A. Buijse and E. J. Baerends, in Density Functional
Theory of Molecules, Clusters and Solids ed. D. E. Ellis,
(Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1995).

[8] M. Ernzerhof, J. P. Perdew and K. Burke, in Density
Functional Theory, ed. R Nalewajski, (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1996).

[9] K. Burke, J. P. Perdew and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys.

109, 3760 (1998).

[10] M. Ernzerhof, K. Burke and J.P. Perdew, in “Recent De-
velopments and Applications of Modern Density Func-
tional Theory”, ed. J.M. Seminario (Elsevier, 1996).

[11] O. Sinanoglu, Adv. Chem. Phys. 6, 315 (1968).
[12] A. Savin, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 22, 59 (1996);
A. Savin, in “Recent Developments and Applications of
Modern Density Functional Theory”, ed. J.M. Seminario
(Elsevier, 1996).

[13] C. J. Umrigar, K. G. Wilson, and J. W. Wilkins, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 60, 1719 (1988).

[14] K. E. Schmidt and J. W. Moskowitz, J. Chem. Phys. 93,

4172 (1990).

[15] L. Mit´aˇs, E. L. Shirley and D. M. Ceperley, J. Chem.
Phys. 95 3467, (1991); L. Mit´aˇs in Computer Simula-
tion Studies in Condensed Matter Physics V, ed. by D.
P. Landau, K. K. Mon, and H. B. Schuttler (Springer
Verlag, Berlin, 1993).

[16] J. C. Kimball, Phys. Rev. A 7, 1648 (1973).
[17] S. Fahy, X. W. Wang and Steven G. Louie, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 61, 1631 (1988).

[18] Randolph Q. Hood et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 78 3350
(1997); Randall Q. Hood et al., Phys. Rev. B, 57 8972
(1998).

[19] D. C. Langreth and J. P. Perdew, Solid State Commun.

17, 1425 (1975).

[20] M. Levy, in “Recent Developments and Applications of
Modern Density Functional Theory”, ed. J.M. Seminario
(Elsevier, 1996).

[21] O. Gunnarson, M. Jonson and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys.

Rev. B 20, 3136 (1979).

[22] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1372 (1993); A. D.

Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5648 (1993).

[23] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 54

16533 (1996).

15

