0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
4
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Precision measurements of sodium - sodium and sodium - noble

gas molecular absorption

M. Shurgalin, W.H. Parkinson, K. Yoshino, C. Schoene* and W.P.

Lapatovich*

Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden St, MS 14,

Cambridge MA 02138 USA

∗OSRAM SYLVANIA Lighting Research, 71 Cherry Hill Dr, Beverly, MA

01915 USA

Precision measurements of molecular absorption

PACS numbers: 39.30.+w
07.60.Rd
33.20.Kf

Submitted to Measurement Science and Technology, January 2000

Abstract.

Experimental apparatus and measurement technique are described for
precision absorption measurements in sodium - noble gas mixtures. The ab-
solute absorption coeﬃcient is measured in the wavelength range from 425
nm to 760 nm with ±2% uncertainty and spectral resolution of 0.02 nm.
The precision is achieved by using a specially designed absorption cell with
an accurately deﬁned absorption path length, low noise CCD detector and
double-beam absorption measurement scheme. The experimental set-up and
the cell design details are given. Measurements of sodium atomic number
density with ±5% uncertainty complement absorption coeﬃcient measure-
ments and allow derivation of the reduced absorption coeﬃcients for certain
spectral features. The sodium atomic number density is measured using the
anomalous dispersion method. The accuracy of this method is improved by
employing a least-squares ﬁt to the interference image recorded with CCD
detector and the details of this technique are given. The measurements are

1

aimed at stringent testing of theoretical calculations and improving the val-
ues of molecular parameters used in calculations.

Keywords: absorption cell, molecular absorption, anomalous dispersion

method

1. Introduction

Atomic collision processes signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the absorption and emis-
sion of light by atomic vapors at high pressures. As a result the absorption
and emission spectra reveal not only atomic line broadening but also very
broad, essentially molecular features with rich rotational-vibrational struc-
ture and satellite peaks due to formation of molecules and quasi-molecules.
Since pioneering work by Hedges et al. [1], such spectra have been a subject of
extensive studies, both theoretical and experimental, and proved to be a rich
source of information about the interaction potentials, collision dynamics and
transition dipole moments [2-12]. The experimental approaches employed in-
clude absorption measurements [4,5,8,9,12], laser-induced ﬂuorescence [3,6,9]
and thermal emission spectra [7]. While laser-induced ﬂuorescence and emis-
sion spectra provide the shapes and positions of many molecular bands, the
measurements of absorption coeﬃcient spectra also give absorption coeﬃ-
cients over a large spectral range. Absolute measurements of the absorption
spectra may allow more comprehensive tests of theoretical calculations. As
a result, better diﬀerentiation between diﬀerent theoretical approaches and
improved values for various molecular parameters and potentials can be ob-
tained. However, in many cases absorption spectra are obtained on a rel-
ative scale or only the absorption coeﬃcient or optical depth is measured
accurately. Extraction of absolute cross-sections (or reduced absorption co-
eﬃcients) from traditional measurements of the optical depth as well as any
quantitative comparisons of absorption spectra with theoretical calculations
require accurate knowledge of the absorption path length and the absorbing
species concentrations.

Most of absorption spectroscopy experiments with hot and corrosive va-
pors such as sodium have been performed using heat pipes [8,9,13].
In a
heat pipe the alkali vapor is contained in the hot middle of the furnace be-
tween cold zones where windows are located. Buﬀer noble gas facilitates the
alkali containment and protects cold windows from alkali deposits. In this

2

type of absorption cell the vapor density is not uniform at the ends of the
absorption path and the path length is not accurately deﬁned. In addition,
the temperature of the vapor-gas mixture is not uniform and at higher alkali
vapor densities formation of fog at the alkali - buﬀer gas interface seriously
aﬀects the optical absorption coeﬃcient measurements [13,14]. Absorption
cells have been designed, where heated windows, placed in the cell hot zone,
deﬁne the absorption length with good precision [14-16]. The absorption cell
described in [15] is suitable for hot sodium vapors up to 1000K but it is
diﬃcult to make it with a long absorption path. The cell described in [16] is
not suitable for corrosive vapors and may still have problems with window
transmission due to metal deposits [16]. Schlejen et. al. [14] designed a cell
speciﬁcally for spectroscopy of sodium dimers at high temperatures. Their
cell allowed uniform concentration of absorbers and uniform temperature up
to 1450K with an absorption length deﬁned accurately by hot sapphire win-
dows. However, the cell design is not suitable for spectroscopy of gas - vapor
mixtures because it was completely sealed and did not easily enable changing
the mixtures.

As well as deﬁning the absorption length accurately, an equally important
aspect is measuring the alkali vapor density. While the noble gas density can
be calculated reasonably well from the measurements of pressure and temper-
ature using the ideal gas law, it is diﬃcult to establish the density of alkali
atoms.
In the majority of reported experiments alkali concentration was
determined from the temperature and published saturated vapor pressure
curves but this approach can introduce signiﬁcant uncertainties. For exam-
ple, in measurements of oscillator strengths or f-values signiﬁcant discrepan-
cies were often obtained between oscillator strengths measured by methods
involving knowledge of the number density and by methods not requiring it
[17]. Even if the vapor pressure curve is well known for pure saturated vapor,
introducing buﬀer gas or using unsaturated vapors prohibit accurate knowl-
edge of the vapor density along the absorption path. To achieve a higher
precision in determination of absolute cross-sections or reduced absorption
coeﬃcients it is necessary to measure the alkali vapor density directly.

In this paper we describe experimental apparatus and technique used
for precision measurements on an absolute scale of molecular absorption co-
eﬃcients in sodium vapor + noble gas mixtures. To overcome the above-
mentioned diﬃculties with deﬁnition of absorption length we have designed
a special absorption cell. In our cell, heated sapphire windows, resistant to

3

hot sodium vapor, are used to deﬁne the absorption path. A high temper-
ature valve, kept at the same temperature as the cell itself, is utilized to
introduce diﬀerent noble gases. A separate sodium reservoir, maintained at
a lower temperature, is used to control the sodium vapor pressure indepen-
dently of the cell temperature. The cell can be operated at temperatures
up to 900K. During the spectral measurements we measure and monitor
the sodium number density at diﬀerent temperatures and pressures using
the anomalous dispersion or ’hook’ method [8,9,18,19]. The ’hook’ method
allows accurate measurement of nﬂ value where n is the atomic number den-
sity, f is the atomic line oscillator strength and l is the absorption length. If
the absorption length and f-value for sodium D lines are known, the sodium
number density is accurately obtained. The next section concentrates on the
details of the experiment and the absorption cell design.

2. Experiment

2.1 Experimental set-up

Fig. 1 shows schematically the experimental set-up that is used for our
absorption measurements. The light source is a 100W halogen lamp pow-
ered by a voltage-stabilized DC power supply. A well-collimated beam of
white light is produced with the help of a condenser lens, an achromat lens,
a pinhole aperture 0.4 mm diameter and another achromat lens of shorter
focal length. The light beam is sent through a Mach-Zender interferometer
and focused on the entrance slit of 3m Czerny-Turner spectrograph (McPher-
son model 2163) with a combination of spherical and cylindrical lenses. An
absorption cell is placed in the test-beam arm of the Mach-Zender interfer-
ometer. Beam blocks are used in both arms to switch the beams or block
them altogether. The light beam through the reference arm of the Mach-
Zender interferometer is used as a reference for the absorption in the usual
manner of double-beam absorption spectroscopy [9].

The spectra are recorded with a two-dimensional CCD detector (Andor
Technology model V420-0E) placed in the focal plane of the spectrograph.
This detector has 1024 pixels horizontally and 256 pixels vertically with pixel
size of 26x26 m. For spectral measurements the detector is used in the ver-
tical bin mode, that is, as a one-dimensional array detector. The stigmatic
spectrograph has a plane diﬀraction grating with 2400 grooves/mm and the-
oretical resolution of ∼ 0.005 nm at 500 nm wavelength. We used 150 m

4

entrance slit width which gives actual resolution of 0.02 nm. At least 5 pix-
els of the array detector are used over 0.02 nm wavelength interval and as a
result smoother spectral data are obtained from the array detector.

The overall spectral range determined by the diﬀraction grating and the
detector sensitivity is 425 nm to 760 nm. To record spectra through this spec-
tral range the diﬀraction grating is rotated through 160 diﬀerent positions by
a stepper motor. Backlash is avoided by rotating the grating in one direction
from its calibration position at 425 nm, which in turn is set by rotating the
grating beyond the calibration point. The calibration point is located by a
rotation photosensor placed on the worm screw of the spectrograph sine-bar
mechanism. The photosensor signal is sent to a programmable stepper motor
controller (New England Aﬃliated Technology NEAT-310) which drives the
stepper motor and allows the grating to be set at the calibration position
automatically.

Each position of the grating permits recording consecutively spectral in-
tervals ranging from about 3 nm at 430 nm to 1.1 nm at 760 nm, which
are determined by the linear reciprocal dispersion of the spectrograph at a
given wavelength and the overall length of the array detector. All grating
positions are wavelength-calibrated using a large number of diﬀerent atomic
lines obtained from a number of diﬀerent hollow cathode spectral lamps. The
wavelength calibration enables identifying the wavelength of any pixel of the
CCD detector within ± 0.05 nm in the range 425 to 760 nm.

To measure the sodium atomic density using the anomalous dispersion
or ’hook’ method, both beams through the Mach-Zender interferometer are
unblocked and interfere to produce a spectrally dispersed two-dimensional
interference pattern in the focal plane of the spectrograph. The Mach-Zender
interferometer is adjusted to localize the interference fringes at inﬁnity. This
insures that the integral sodium number density along the absorption path
is measured. The CCD detector is used in its normal two-dimensional array
mode to record the interference pattern. From the analysis of the interference
pattern recorded in the vicinity of sodium D lines, sodium number density is
derived. The general description of the ’hook’ method is given in [17,18,19]
and the details of analyzing the interference pattern recorded with CCD
detector are given in the next section. A glass plate and a stack of windows,
identical to those used in the absorption cell, are placed in the reference arm
of the Mach-Zender interferometer [17]. These compensating optics remain
in the reference beam during spectral absorption measurements as well and

5

have no eﬀect on the spectral measurements due to the nature of the dual-
beam absorption technique.

A simple vacuum system consisting of a turbomolecular pump (Sargent
Welch model 3106S) backed by a rotary vane pump (Sargent Welch model
1402) is used to evacuate the absorption cell. The turbomolecular pump can
handle short bursts of increased pressure and gas ﬂow load and therefore it is
utilized also to pump gases from the cell. A liquid nitrogen trap is placed in
between the cell and the pump to trap sodium vapor. A precision pressure
gauge (Omega Engineering model PGT-45) is used to measure accurately
the pressure of noble gases when ﬁlling the cell.

An experiment control and data acquisition computer (Pentium PC)
controls the CCD detector, spectral data acquisition and the spectrograph
diﬀraction grating via the stepper motor controller connected to the serial
port. The absorption cell temperature is monitored constantly through a
number of thermocouples connected via commercial plug-in data acquisi-
tion board (American Data Acquisition Corporation) and the cell heaters
are controlled via output channels of the data acquisition board and solid
state relays. Andor Technology CCD software and custom ’in-house’ written
software are used to perform all these tasks.

2.2 Absorption cell

Fig. 2 shows the schematic diagram of the absorption cell. The cell body
is made of stainless steel (SS) 316 and is approximately 470 mm in length and
8 mm internal diameter. A vertical extension is welded to the middle of the
cell body, 70 mm in length and 11 mm internal diameter. A sodium reservoir
is located at the end of this extension. It is made of SS 316 with internal
diameter 5.5 mm and 70 mm length and it is connected using a Swagelok
ﬁtting which enables disconnection for loading sodium. The sodium reservoir
is heated with a separate heater to introduce sodium vapor into the cell or
it can be cooled with a circulating water cooler to reduce the alkali number
density. Both the heater and cooler are made to slide on and oﬀ the sodium
reservoir. A valve is connected to the vertical extension through which the
cell is evacuated and noble gases can be admitted. This valve is a special
bellows-sealed high-temperature valve (Nupro Company) rated to work at
temperatures up to 920K. The valve is heated to the same temperature or 5
to 10 K higher than the cell itself to prevent sodium from condensing in the

6

valve.

The major problem one faces when designing an absorption cell with
heated windows is making good vacuum seals for the windows. In case of
sodium, sapphire proved to be material of choice for the windows because of
its excellent resistance to hot sodium [14]. However, it is diﬃcult to make a
reliable sapphire to metal seal that withstands repeated heating cycles up to
900K. In our design (Fig. 2) the sapphire windows are sealed into polycrys-
talline alumina (PCA) tubes with special sealing ceramics (frit) used in the
construction of commercial high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps. The sealing
technique used was similar to the one described by Schlejen et. al. [14]. The
PCA tubes have 10.2 mm outside diameter and 110 mm length. They are
made from commercial OSRAM SYLVANIA standard HPS lamps ULX880
by cutting oﬀ slightly larger diameter portions. Since PCA and sapphire have
similar thermal expansion coeﬃcients, such window-tube assembly retains its
integrity over a wide range of temperatures. The tubes are inserted into the
heated cell body so that the windows are located in the hot zone while the
tube ends extend to cooler cell ends where Viton O-rings are used for vacuum
seals. Additional external windows made of fused silica are used with O-ring
seals to create an evacuated transition zone from the heated middle of the
cell to the cooler ends. These silica windows are not heated.

Our cell design allows sodium to condense along the PCA tube towards
the colder zone where O-ring seals are located. To reduce the amount of
sodium condensed there the PCA tubes were carefully selected in outside
diameter tolerance and straightness to match closely the internal diameter
of the SS cell body at room temperature. When the cell is heated the SS
expands more than PCA thus creating some space for sodium to condense.
Once the sodium build-up reaches the hot zone, no more sodium is lost into
the void along the PCA tubes.

The windowed ends of the PCA tubes rest against the stepped proﬁles
inside the SS cell body as shown in Fig. 2. These stepped proﬁles determine
the positions of the heated windows and thus the absorption length. To
ensure that the PCA tubes are always ﬁrmly pressed against these stepped
proﬁles regardless of the thermal expansion diﬀerences between PCA and SS,
compression springs are used to push the PCA tubes via stacks of spacers,
made of SS 316, and the external windows. Cap nuts complete the assembly
of the windows, PCA tubes, O-ring seals and spacers as Fig. 2 illustrates.
These caps allow easy removal of all windows for cleaning if needed as well as

7

adjustment of the spring compression. The compression springs are chosen
to produce about 12 N force, equivalent to about 1.5 atm on the surface area
of the heated windows.

The absorption length at room temperature is measured using a special
tool made of two rods about 4 mm in diameter inserted into a tube of 6 mm
outside diameter. One rod is permanently ﬁxed while the other can slide in
and out with friction, thus allowing change in the overall length of the tool.
The ends of the tool are rounded and polished. With one sapphire window
completely in place at one end of the cell, the tool is inserted into the cell
and the second PCA tube with sapphire window is put in place. The tool
adjusts its length precisely to the distance between two sapphire windows.
Then the PCA tube and the tool are carefully taken out and the length of
the tool is measured with a micrometer. In our cell the absorption length at
room temperature was measured 190.03 ± 0.025 mm. The absorption length
at operating temperature is calculated from the temperature of the cell and
the thermal expansion coeﬃcient for SS of 18 ± 2.2 x 10−6 K−1 [20]. Since
the change in the absorption path length due to thermal expansion is a small
percentage of the overall length, large uncertainties in the thermal expansion
calculation do not lead to a large uncertainty in the resulting absorption
length at a given temperature.

The whole absorption cell including the valve is heated by sets of heaters
made of Nickel-Chromium wire. Separate sets of heaters are used to heat the
cell and the valve. Each heater set consists of two separate heaters. One is
switched on constantly while the other one is used in on-oﬀ mode, controlled
from the experiment control computer, to maintain average cell and valve
temperatures constant. Six type K thermocouples are used to measure the
temperatures at diﬀerent points. Three thermocouples are placed in contact
with the main cell body, one of them in the middle and the other two at
the locations of heated windows. Another thermocouple measures the valve
temperature. Two thermocouples are used to measure the temperatures at
the bottom and at the top of the sodium reservoir. The heaters are isolated
from each other and the SS parts of the cell by embedding them into insula-
tion made of moldable Alumina-Silica blankets (Zircar Products). All heated
parts are wrapped into thermal insulation made of Alumina blankets (Zircar
Products). The positions of the heaters are chosen as shown schematically
in Fig. 2. The middle part of the cell of ∼60 mm length does not have
heaters but is nevertheless heated suﬃciently by thermal conductance. Also

8

the thermal insulation is adjusted in such a way that the temperature, mea-
sured with thermocouple in the middle of the cell, is 5 to 10 K lower than the
temperature at the points where the heated windows are located. Heating
sapphire windows to a slightly higher temperature ensures they remain free
from any deposits during the operation of the cell.

The cell body thermocouple and the valve thermocouple readings give
an average temperature of the cell body. The gas mixture temperature is
assumed to be equal to the average temperature of the cell body. Since the
thermocouples are located between the SS cell body and the heaters, they
may give readings of slightly higher temperature than the actual temperature
of the cell and the gas inside it. Given this fact and the temperature reading
diﬀerences between the thermocouples, the uncertainty in the gas mixture
temperature is estimated to be + 10 K - 50 K.

2.3 Measurement technique

Absorption spectroscopy is based on Beer’s law describing absorption of

light in homogeneous absorbing media

I1 (λ) = I0 (λ) exp (−k (λ) l)

(1)

where I1 is the transmitted intensity of light, I0 is the incident intensity
of light, k is absorption coeﬃcient and l is the absorption length.
In real
experimental measurements the transmission through optics, absorption cell
windows and spectrograph, detector sensitivity and light source spectral char-
acteristics all have to be taken into account. In the dual beam arrangement
for absorption spectroscopy the test St (λ) and reference Sr (λ) beam spectra,
obtained from the detector, are

St(λ) = k0

t (λ)I0(λ) exp (−τt(λ) − k(λ)l)

Sr (λ) = k0

r (λ) I0 (λ) exp (−τr (λ))

(2)

(3)

where I0 is the intensity of the light source, k (λ)is the absorption coeﬃ-
cient to be measured, l is the absorption length and k0
r , τr are the
coeﬃcients that take into account the detector eﬃciency, absorption of all
optics elements such as windows and lenses and spectrograph transmission.
To eliminate all unknown parameters represented in (2) and (3) by k0
t , τt,

t , τt and k0

9

k0
r and τr, we measure ﬁrst the reference spectra (the spectra obtained with-
out sodium in the absorption path and thus without atomic and molecular
absorption we are interested in). Sodium concentration in the absorption
path is reduced to less than 1014 cm−3 by cooling the sodium reservoir down
to between +5 to + 10 C using the circulating water cooler around it. At
densities below 1014 cm−3 the molecular absorption of both sodium-sodium
and sodium-noble gas is negligible and k (λ) = 0. Both test and reference
beam spectra are taken at each grating position and their ratio

S 0
S 0

t (λ)
r (λ)

=

k0
t
k0
r

exp (τr (λ) − τt (λ))

(4)

is calculated. Thus obtained reference spectra contain information about all
unknown parameters. To reduce statistical error a number of measurements
are performed and the average is calculated.

To measure the absorption spectra of sodium-sodium and sodium-noble
gas molecules, the sodium vapor is introduced in the absorption path by
heating the sodium reservoir. Both test and reference beam spectra are
taken at each diﬀraction grating position and their ratio is calculated:

t

SN a
SN a

r

(λ)
(λ)

=

k0
t
k0
r

exp (τr (λ) − τt (λ) − k (λ) l)

(5)

Once again to reduce statistical error a number of measurements are
performed and averaged. From (4) and (5) it follows that the absorption
coeﬃcient k(λ) is obtained from measurements of absorption and reference
spectra with all unknown parameters eliminated:

k (λ) = −

1
l

ln  SN a

r ,S 0
r!

SN a

t

t
S 0

(6)

Using the procedure described above we are able to measure the absolute
absorption coeﬃcient with as small as ±1 % statistical error in the range 425
- 760 nm with spectral resolution ∼0.02 nm.

Derivation of the reduced absorption coeﬃcient for sodium-sodium and
sodium-noble gas quasi-molecules requires accurate knowledge of atomic num-
ber densities. The atomic density for noble gas is calculated from pressure
and temperature using the ideal gas relationship and the sodium density is
measured by the ’hook’ method [17-19]. Fig. 3 shows the ’hook’ interference

10

pattern recorded with CCD detector in the focal plane of the spectrograph.
The analysis of this pattern and extraction of the sodium atomic number
density is performed by a least-squares ﬁt of the interference fringe model
to the recorded pattern using software speciﬁcally written for this purpose.
The following equation can be used to describe the positions yk of interference
fringes of maximum intensity in the focal plane of the spectrograph [19]:

yk = a(cid:16)kλ −(cid:16) A1
A1 = r0g1f1lλ3

1

λ1−λ

4π

− A2

λ2−λ(cid:17) N + ∆nl(cid:17)

2

and A2 = r0g2f2lλ3

,

4π

where r0 is the classical electron radius, g1, f1, λ1 are respectively theg-factor,
the oscillator strength and the wavelength of sodium D1 line, g2, f2, λ2 are re-
spectively the g-factor, the oscillator strength and the wavelength of sodium
D2 line, l is the absorption path length, ∆n is the coeﬃcient accounting for
optical path length diﬀerence between test and reference beams of the Mach-
Zender interferometer, a is the scaling factor accounting for imaging proper-
ties of the optical set-up, k is the fringe order and N is the sodium number
density. The above equation is valid at wavelengths separated from the atomic
line core by more than the FWHM of the broadened line, λ − λi >> ∆λ [17].
Our model calculations of the ’hook’ interference pattern, which included
the atomic line broadening, showed that the error introduced by neglecting
the atomic line broadening in the above equation, is negligible when atomic
number density of sodium is above 5x1014 cm−3 and noble gas pressure is be-
low 500 Torr. These conditions are always met in our measurements. After
some algebraic manipulations the following fringe model equation is obtained
which gives positions yi of a number of fringes in terms of 2D CCD detector
coordinates and ﬁt parameters:

yi = a3 + a2λ + a1iλ + a4(cid:18) A1

λ1 − λ

+

A2

λ2 − λ(cid:19)

(7)

where yi is the vertical fringe coordinate at a given wavelength λ, i =
0,1,2,3,4,5 denotes adjacent fringes seen by the detector and a1, a2, a3 and
a4 are the ﬁt parameters. The sodium number density is calculated from ﬁt
parameters a1 and a4:

N =

a4
a1

(8)

From the recorded interference pattern three to ﬁve interference fringes,
deﬁned at maximum intensity, are extracted at each side of the sodium dou-

11

blet and the (y, λ) coordinates for each fringe are calculated from the CCD
pixel coordinates and wavelength calibration to provide the data set for the
least-squares ﬁt. Fig. 4a shows the interference fringes obtained from the
image presented in Fig. 3 and Fig 4b shows the ﬁtted model curves. Since a
large number of points are used to locate the fringe positions, higher accuracy
can be achieved in comparison with traditional methods of extracting atomic
number density from measuring the location of the ’hook’ maxima of a single
fringe [17]. The main limitation on the accuracy of this new technique is im-
posed by wavelength calibration, especially at lower atomic densities. Using
the system described above, the sodium density is routinely measured with ±
2 % uncertainty, given the wavelength uncertainty ±0.03 nm in the vicinity
of the sodium D-lines and the uncertainty in the interference fringe position
of ±5 pixels. During consecutive spectral measurements used in calculating
the resultant average spectra, the sodium number density was measured at
the beginning of each measurement and was found to remain constant within
± 4% to ±5%.

3. Measurement results

Fig. 5 presents a spectrum of the absolute absorption coeﬃcient of a
sodium - xenon mixture measured at 900K +10K
−50K cell temperature. The Xe
pressure is 400 ± 0.5 Torr, which gives xenon density 4.29x1018 cm−3 at 900
K temperature. Sodium density is measured as 2.05 ± 0.06 x 1016 cm−3. The
absorption coeﬃcient in the 425 nm to 760 nm range consists of contributions
from the broadened sodium atomic lines around 589 nm, the sodium - noble
gas and the sodium - sodium molecular spectra. From 460 nm to about 550
nm a blue wing of the sodium dimer absorption is apparent [5]. At 560 nm
there appears a sodium-xenon blue wing satellite feature [6] and towards the
longer wavelength of the signiﬁcantly broadened sodium D-lines there are
red wings of the sodium dimer [5] and the sodium-xenon molecules [6]. Fig 6
shows a spectrum of the absolute absorption coeﬃcient of a sodium - argon
mixture measured at 900K +10K
−50K cell temperature. The Ar pressure is 401
± 0.5 Torr, which gives argon density 4.3x1018 cm−3 at 900 K temperature.
Sodium density is measured as 1.00 ± 0.04 x 1016 cm−3. This spectrum
is similar to the sodium - xenon spectrum shown in Fig. 5 except that the
sodium - argon blue wing satellite is located at a slightly shorter wavelength of
554.5 nm and the sodium - argon red wing extends further from the sodium

12

atomic line core. The magnitude of the absorption coeﬃcient is lower in
proportion to the lower sodium density.

Fig. 7 illustrates rotational-vibrational features of sodium dimer absorp-
tion at a 0.02 nm resolution in the vicinity of the 520 nm band. The features
are a complicated superposition of many rotational-vibrational bands of the
sodium dimer and identiﬁcation of these bands has not yet been attempted.
The statistical uncertainty in the absorption coeﬃcient magnitude is indi-
cated. This uncertainty includes both detector statistical errors and the
uncertainty in the absorption path length. At any wavelength in the 425
nm to 760 nm range the uncertainty in the absorption coeﬃcient does not
exceed ±2% where absorption coeﬃcient values are larger than 0.008 cm−1.
The measured spectra can serve for stringent quantitative tests of theoretical
calculations [21]. Preliminary comparisons showed good overall agreement
between the measurements and theoretical calculations at a temperature of
870 K, which is within our experimental temperature uncertainty [22]. Full
details of the calculations and comparisons with experiment will be presented
in the forthcoming publication [23].

A reduced absorption coeﬃcient is calculated for the blue wing of sodium
dimer absorption, which is well separated from the rest of the spectrum, using
the measured absorption coeﬃcient and sodium atomic number density and it
is presented in Fig. 8. Apart from the broad and strong molecular absorption
arising mostly from transitions from bound to bound states between X 1Σ+
g
and B 1Πu molecular singlet states of the sodium dimer, there are also
u and c3Πg ← a 3Σ+
features from the triplet transitions 2 3Πg
u
[5,24].

← a 3Σ+

Since the sodium-xenon molecular absorption bands are very close to the
sodium D-lines, it is diﬃcult to separate them completely from atomic lines
and to derive the reduced absorption coeﬃcient. Fig.9 presents the absolute
absorption coeﬃcient in the vicinity of sodium-xenon blue satellite features
at diﬀerent xenon densities and sodium density of 7.7x1015 cm−3 and at 900
K temperature. There are two satellite features present at 560 nm and 564
nm. The positions and relative magnitude of these features can provide some
insights into potentials of the sodium-xenon molecule as well as transition
dipole moments [21,23].

4. Conclusion

13

Details of precision absorption measurements in sodium - noble gas mix-
tures at high spectral resolution have been presented. To perform more
stringent tests of theoretical calculations and molecular parameters used in
the calculations the goal was to obtain the absorption coeﬃcient spectra on
an absolute scale with better than ± 2% uncertainty at near UV and visible
wavelengths. To achieve such precision an absorption cell for containment of
sodium vapor with accurately deﬁned absorption path was constructed. The
measurements were performed using double-beam absorption measurement
scheme eliminating all unknown parameters such as detector sensitivity and
optics transmission. A low noise CCD detector was used to record the spectra
and a number of separate measurements were averaged to reduce statistical
error. To measure accurately the alkali number density the anomalous dis-
persion or ’hook’ method was employed. The accuracy of the ’hook’ method
was improved by means of least-squares ﬁt to the interference fringes image
recorded using 2D CCD detector in the focal plane of the spectrograph. The
measurements obtained with the apparatus and technique described extend
the available data on the sodium - sodium and sodium - rare gas absorption
to diﬀerent temperatures and higher precision and spectral resolution.

5. Acknowledgements

This work is supported in part by National Science Foundation under
grant No PHY97-24713. The authors would like to acknowledge useful dis-
cussions with J.F. Babb, H. Adler and G. Lister and generous equipment and
materials support from OSRAM SYLVANIA.

References

[1] R.E. Hedges, D.L. Drummond and A. Gallagher 1972 Phys. Rev. A

6, 1519

[2] D.L. Drummond and A. Gallagher 1974 J. Chem. Phys. 60, 3246
[3] W. Demtrder and M. Stock 1975 J. Mol. Spectr. 55, 476
[4] J.F. Kielkopf, and N.F. Allard 1980 J. Phys. B 13, 709
[5] J. Schlejen, C.J. Jalink, J. Korving, J.P. Woerdman and W. Mller

1987 J. Phys. B 20, 2691

[6] K.J. Nieuwesteeg, Tj. Hollander and C.Th. J. Alkemade 1987 J. Phys.

B 20, 515

14

[7] J. Schlejen, J.P. Woerdman and G. Pichler 1988 J. Mol. Spectr. 128,

1

[8] K. Ueda, H. Sotome and Y. Sato 1990 J. Chem. Phys. 94, 1903
[9] K. Ueda, O. Sonobe, H. Chiba and Y. Sato 1991 J. Chem. Phys. 95,

8083

[10] D. Gruber, U. Domiaty, X. Li, L. Windholz, M. Gleichmann and B.

A. He 1994 J. Chem. Phys. 102, 5174

[11] J. Szudy and W.E. Baylis 1996 Phys. Rep. 266, 127
[12] P.S. Erdman, K.M. Sando, W.C. Stwally, C.W. Larson, M.E. Fajardo

1996 Chem. Phys, Lett. 252, 248

[13] A. Vasilakis, N.D. Bhaskar and W Happer 1980 J. Chem. Phys. 73,

1490

[14] J. Schlejen, J. Post, J. Korving and J.P. Woerdman 1987 Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 58, 768

[15] A.G. Zajonc 1980 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 51, 1682
[16] Y. Tamir and R. Shuker 1992 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63, 1834
[17] W.H. Parkinson 1987 Spectroscopy of Astrophysical Plasmas (Cam-

bridge University Press)

[18] D. Roschestwensky 1912 Ann. Physik,39, 307
[19] M.C.E. Huber and R.J. Sandeman 1986 Rep. Prog. Phys. 49 397
[20] American Institute of Physics Handbook 1972 4-138 (McGraw Hill

Book Company)

[21] H-K. Chung, M. Shurgalin and J.F. Babb 1999 52ndGEC, Bull. APS,

44, 31

[22] H-K. Chung and J.F. Babb, private communication
[23] H-K. Chung, K. Kirby, J.F. Babb and M. Shurgalin, 2000, in prepa-

ration

[24] D.Veza, J. Rukavina, M. Movre, V. Vujnovic and G. Pilcher 1980

Optics Comm. 34 77

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up.

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the absorption cell.

Figure 3. Image of a ’hook’ pattern obtained with a two-dimensional

CCD detector.

15

Figure 4. Interference fringes extracted from ’hook’ pattern image (a)

and ﬁtted model curves (b).

Figure 5. Absorption coeﬃcient of sodium - xenon mixture at 900 K.

Figure 6. Absorption coeﬃcient of sodium - argon mixture at 900 K.

Figure 7. Rotational-vibrational features of sodium dimer absorption

spectra at 0.02 nm resolution.

Figure 8. Reduced absorption coeﬃcient for the blue wing of sodium

dimer molecular absorption.

Figure 9. Blue wing of sodium-xenon molecular absorption.

16

Cylindrical lens

Absorption cell

Pressure g

Mach-Zender
interferometer

3m Czerny-Turner

spectrograph

Stepper
motor

controller

CCD

detector
256x1024

Compensation

plate

Cell window
compensation

Experiment control and data

acquisition computer

Beam bl

Pinho

Beam f
opti

H

Compression spring

Quartz windows

Thermal insulation

Cell body

Sapphire windows

PCA t

Cap nut

vacuum

Valve

Valve heater

Cell heaters

Sodium reservoir

Sodium reservoir he

vacuum

noble gas

a

b

)
 

1
-

m
c
 
(
 
k

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00

450

500

550

600

650

700

750

wavelength, nm

)
 

1
-

m
c
 
(
 
k

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

450

500

550

600

650

700

750

wavelength, nm

uncertainty

)

 

1
-

m
c
 
(
 
k

0.040

0.035

0.030

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

520.0

520.4

520.8

521.2

521.6

522.0

wavelength, nm

)
 

2

m
c
 
(
 
8
1
-
0
1
 
x
 
2
n

/
k

2.25

2.00

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

c 3P

g

 a 3S

+ 

u

2 3P

 ‹
g

 a 3S

+
u

 1P

u  

 X 1S
 

+

g

425

450

475

500

525

550

wavelength, nm

‹
B
‹
)
 

1
-

m
c
 
(
 
k

0.0150

0.0125

0.0100

0.0075

0.0050

0.0025

0.0000

Xe: 400 Torr

Xe: 200 Torr

Xe: 100 Torr

Xe: 10 Torr

550

555

560

565

570

575

580

585

wavelength, nm

