High-harmonic generation from a conﬁned atom

Carla Figueira de Morisson Faria and Jan-Michael Rost

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme,

N¨othnitzer Str. 38, 01187 Dresden, Germany

(February 9, 2014)

0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
9
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The order of high harmonics emitted by an atom in
an intense laser ﬁeld is limited by the so-called cutoﬀ fre-
quency. Solving the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation,
we show that this frequency can be increased considerably by
a parabolic conﬁning potential, if the conﬁnement parame-
ters are suitably chosen. Furthermore, due to conﬁnement,
the radiation intensity remains high throughout the extended
emission range. All features observed can be explained with
classical arguments.

32.80.Rm, 42.65.Ky, 42.50.Hz

Typical features of the emission spectra of an atom
in a strong laser ﬁeld, known as “the plateau” and “the
cutoﬀ”, are a wide frequency region with harmonics of
comparable intensities, and an abrupt intensity decrease
at the high-energy-end of the plateau. For a monochro-
matic driving ﬁeld, the cutoﬀ energy is given by εmax =
|ε0| + 3.17Up, where |ε0| and Up are the ionization po-
tential and the ponderomotive energy, respectively. This
simple cutoﬀ law, derived by classical means only [1,2], or
using more reﬁned methods [3], corresponds to the physi-
cal picture referred to as the “three-step model” [1–3]: A
bound electron exposed to the laser ﬁeld leaves the atom
through tunneling at a time t0 (step 1), propagates in the
continuum, being driven back towards its parent ion at
a later time t1 (step 2), and ﬁnally falls back to a bound
state under emission of high harmonics (step 3). This
scenario describes the spectral features observed experi-
mentally very well [4]. The cutoﬀ frequency, in quanti-
tative agreement with the experiment, is related to the
maximum kinetic energy the electron has upon return,
Ekin(t1, t0).

According to this picture, in order to increase the cut-
oﬀ energy, one must increase the kinetic energy of the
returning electron. Indeed, the exisiting proposals to ex-
tend the plateau towards higher energies reach a higher
value of Ekin(t1, t0) by diﬀerent means. However, this
does not necessarily imply an eﬃcient generation of high-
order harmonics up to this larger cutoﬀ energy.

For instance, a rather complex situation with several
“cutoﬀs ” [5] emerges by using bichromatic ﬁelds with
driving waves of comparable intensities. An illustrative
example is presented in [6], using a driving ﬁeld of linearly
polarized monochromatic light of frequency ω and its
second harmonic. Under such conditions the monochro-
matic cutoﬀ, as a function of the ﬁeld-strength ratio be-
tween the two driving waves, splits into two branches.

Thereby, the upper branch extends up to |ε0|+5Up. How-
ever, the harmonics emerging up to the cutoﬀ of the up-
per branch are weak compared to those from the lower
branch and therefore irrelevant to the emission spectrum.
The reason is simple: The intensity of the harmonics is
strongly inﬂuenced by step 1 which is the tunneling pro-
cess out of the binding potential under the inﬂuence of
the ﬁeld. If the ﬁeld amplitude is small at the emission
time t0 (which is the case for the upper branch) then the
tunneling barrier is large and the generated harmonics
will be weak compared to those which originate from an
eﬀective tunneling process (as it is the case for the lower
branch).

Another idea to increase the cutoﬀ energy is to use a
static electric ﬁeld. It provides an additional force which
accelerates the electron towards the atomic core resulting
in a higher kinetic energy Ekin(t1, t0). Indeed, it has been
demonstrated that with an electric ﬁeld whose strength is
only a few percent of the amplitude of the laser ﬁeld one
can considerably enlarge the cutoﬀ energy [7,8]. However,
the scheme suﬀers from two principal limitations. First,
the increased kinetic energy occurs mainly for electrons
with long excursion times. Due to wave packet spread-
ing, those trajectories have negligible inﬂuence on the
harmonic spectra. This problem has been overcome by
introducing an additional magnetic ﬁeld to restrict the
spreading [8]. A second, more severe limitation is the
pronounced bound-state depletion caused by the static
electric ﬁeld: the atom is irreversibly ionized within a
few ﬁeld cycles, such that no appreciable high-harmonic
generation takes place.

The bound-state depletion which prevents an eﬀective
extension of the high-harmonic frequency points to the
principle dilemma easily described in the picture of the
returning electron: To extend the plateau and increase
the cutoﬀ, a kinetic energy of the returning electron, as
large as possible, is desirable. On the other hand, an
electron with such a high energy will leave the atom and
is lost for the possible generation of high harmonics in
consecutive laser cycles.

Hence, we need a mechanism which brings an electron
back to the nucleus, despite the fact that it has a kinetic
energy so high that it would be irreversibly driven away
from the core. Naively, a simple wall for the electron
should already do this. However, one must avoid that
the abrupt reﬂection of the charged electron at a wall
leads to Bremsstrahlung which masks the desired high-
harmonic generation of the atom.

In the following we will show that the idea of bringing

1

back the fast electron by an additional conﬁnement and
thereby extending the cutoﬀ for the spectrum without
additional depletion does indeed work for a suitably soft
conﬁnement potential.

We consider a one-dimensional situation, which is a
reasonable approximation for linearly polarized light.
Atomic units are used throughout. The binding of the
electron is described by the potential

The evolution of the electronic wave packet is described

by the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation

i

d
dt

|ψ(t)i = (cid:20) p2

2

+ V (x) − p · A(t)(cid:21) |ψ(t)i,

(2)

with V (x) = Va (x) + Vh (x) , and the emission spectra
are given by

σ(ω) = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
Z ∞

0

2

d(t) exp[−iωt](cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

where the dipole acceleration

,

(3)

d(t) = hψ(t)| − dV (x)/dx + E(t) |ψ(t)i

(4)

is computed by means of Ehrenfest’s theorem [9]. We
take the atom initially in the ground state |0i.

Va (x) = −1.1 exp(cid:0)−x2/1.21(cid:1) ,

(1)

which supports a single bound state |0i at energy ε0 =
−0.58 a.u., corresponding to the Argon ionization poten-
tial. The system is exposed to a monochromatic laser
ﬁeld E(t) = E0 sin ωt and the additional conﬁning po-
tential (Fig.1)

Vh(x) =

h

Ω2
2

x2h(x),

(2a)

(2b)

h(x) = 


1, |x| < x0

cos(cid:0) π

2 θ(cid:1) , x0 ≤ |x| ≤ xmax

0, |x| > xmax

with θ = (|x| − x0)/(xmax − x0). The parameter x0 =
nE0/ω2 is chosen to be a multiple of the electron excur-
sion amplitude, and xmax = 2x0. Note, that for the pa-
rameter range chosen, identical emission spectra are ob-
tained with and without truncation of the harmonic po-
tential indicating that even in the truncated potential de-
pletion has negligible inﬂuence. Thus, the electron does
not reach the edges of Vh (x), which indicates an eﬀective
conﬁnement. Futhermore, this shows that the conﬁning
potential does not generate harmonics itself. Therefore,
high-harmonic generation still takes place only near the
atomic core, for which the coordinate x is considerably
smaller than the electron excursion amplitude.

FIG. 2. Harmonic spectra calculated using the TDSE (c.f.
Eq. (3)). Part (a): Field amplitude E0 = 0.08 a.u., ﬁeld fre-
quency ω = 0.057 a.u., without (dashed line) and with (solid
line) conﬁnement (Ωh = 0.019 a.u). Part (b): Field strengths
E0 = 0.06 a.u., E0 = 0.07 a.u. and E0 = 0.08 a.u., conﬁne-
ment curvature Ωh = 0.019 a.u. and the same frequency as in
the previous part. The classical cutoﬀ energies, given by the
cutoﬀ law |ε0| + 4.55Up, correspond to the harmonic orders
n = 33, n = 41 and n = 49 and are indicated by arrows in the
ﬁgure. In part (b), only the harmonic intensities are given,
connected by lines.

FIG. 1. Schematic representation of an atom in an external
conﬁning potential Vh(x) (c.f. Eq. (2a)). The parameter x0
for which the potential is truncated and the electron excursion
amplitude α0, for the parameters of Fig.2(a), as well as the
non-truncated potential, are indicated in the ﬁgure.

2

FIG. 3. Cutoﬀ energies computed using the classical model,
0 , for conﬁnement con-

as functions of the ﬁeld intensity E 2
stants 0 ≤ Ωh ≤ 0.019 a.u.. and ω = 0.057 a.u..

The general behavior of f (Ωh, ω) is rather com-
plex. Nevertheless, asymptotically a simple and famil-
iar behavior is recovered: For very high frequency, the
monochromatic cutoﬀ constant is is approached,
i.e.,
f (Ωh, ω → ∞) → 3.17, as can be seen in Fig. 4. For
ﬁnite frequency ω the cutoﬀ energy increases with grow-
ing Ωh. In fact, the lower the frequency, the more sen-
sitively the cutoﬀ law depends on Ωh. This property is
the actual reason why one can obtain an increased cutoﬀ
energy with a conﬁnement. For very low frequencies, the
cutoﬀ energy can be easily extended beyond |ε0|+9Up. In
practice, however, there is a lower frequency limit to gen-
erate an appreciable intensity of high harmonics in the
present context. If the conﬁnement frequency is compa-
rable to the laser frequency, Ωh ∼ ω, the conﬁnement
potential itself starts to contribute to the harmonic gen-
eration process, ceasing to be a passive element. Hence,
the condition for HHG under a conﬁnement potential can
be written as Ωh/ω ≪ 1. However, there is also the
usual upper limit in frequency ω which comes from the
requirement that the atom in the laser ﬁeld must be in
the tunneling regime [10].

Furthermore, in the results to be presented we chose
x0 = 73.87 a.u., which corresponds to three times the ex-
cursion amplitude of an electron in a monochromatic ﬁeld
with E0 = 0.08 a.u. and ω = 0.057 a.u.. With these ﬁeld
parameters and a reasonable choice of Ωh, one indeed
ﬁnds that the high-harmonic spectrum extends beyond
the cutoﬀ energy εmax = |ε0| + 3.17Up without signiﬁ-
cant loss of intensity, see Fig. 2. More speciﬁcally, we
have determined a cutoﬀ energy of |ε0| + 4.55Up which is
a 50% increase compared to the case without trapping.
The classical argument for the cutoﬀ energy applies to
the situation with conﬁnement as well and we ﬁnd very
good agreement between the cutoﬀ in the quantum spec-
tra (e.g. Fig. 2) and the classical cutoﬀ. The latter has
been determined in analogy to the situation without con-
ﬁnement: Starting with an electron of velocity zero, its
trajectory is propagated under the inﬂuence of the laser
ﬁeld and the conﬁnement potential Vh (but without the
atomic potential V (x) = Va). We vary the initial time
t0 for which the electron leaves the atom within a ﬁeld
cycle, computing Ekin(t1, t0) for return times t = t1 sat-
isfying the condition x(t1) = 0. The local maxima in
Ekin(t1, t0) yield the classical prediction for the cutoﬀs in
the harmonic spectra.

The good agreement of the classical cutoﬀ with the
one found in the quantum spectra allows us to predict,
with the classical model, the behavior of the cutoﬀ as
a function of the external parameters, i.e. the conﬁne-
ment constant Ωh, the frequency and the amplitude of
the external ﬁeld. We ﬁnd that in the parameter range
of interest the cutoﬀ law can be written in the form

εmax = |ε0| + f (Ωh, ω)Up,

(5)

where f (Ωh, ω) in general neither exhibits a simple func-
tional form nor can be derived analytically. However, the
linear dependence on the ﬁeld intensity E 2
0 through Up in
Eq. (5) is preserved just as in the case without conﬁne-
ment, see Fig. 3. Only for large conﬁnement constants or
electron trajectories with long excursion times f (Ωh, ω)
becomes slightly intensity-dependent.

FIG. 4. Cutoﬀ energies computed using the classical model,
as functions of the frequency ω of the driving ﬁeld, for con-
ﬁnement curvatures 0 ≤ Ωh ≤ 0.019 a.u.. The circle in the
ﬁgure corresponds to ω = 0.057 a.u. and Ωh = 0.019 a.u., for
which the spectra in Fig. 2 have been calculated.

Typical frequencies used in HHG experiments, and for
which a long plateau is obtained, are in the vicinity of
ω = 0.057 a.u.. For this frequency a conﬁnement indeed
leads to a larger cutoﬀ energy as demonstrated in Fig. 2.
In conclusion, we have presented a new scheme for in-
creasing the cutoﬀ energy of the high-harmonic spectra
of an atom under the inﬂuence of a strong laser ﬁeld.
Placing the atom in a conﬁning parabolic potential, we
have shown that the cutoﬀ energy can be increased by
more than ﬁfty percent. An eﬀective increase of the cut-

3

oﬀ requires a careful choice of the conﬁnement strength.
The conﬁnement curvature Ωh must be strong enough
for the electron to be appreciably accelerated towards
the parent ion, but weak enough for it to move in a
“quasi-continuum”. If Ωh is too weak, the conventional
cutoﬀ law |ε0| + 3.17Up is not altered by it.
If Ωh is
too strong, the electron moves as a bound particle that
does not generate higher harmonics. In the extreme case,
one observes the dipole response of a harmonic oscillator,
i.e., equally spaced resonances. A rough indication of
whether the electron is in a “quasi-continuum” is given
by the ratio of the energy diﬀerence between two con-
secutive levels of the conﬁnement potential, ∆εh = Ωh,
and the ionization potential of the atom in question. If
Ωh/|ε0| ≪ 1, this condition is fulﬁlled. Also, as already
discussed, the ratio between the frequency ω of the ex-
ternal ﬁeld and the conﬁnement curvature Ωh plays an
important role. If Ωh/ω ∼ 1, the parabolic potential con-
tributes too actively to the harmonic generation process,
and the plateau and cutoﬀ are not present in the spectra.
The best results have been obtained for x0 ∼ 100 a.u.,
Ωh ∼ 0.02 a.u. and ω ∼ 0.04 a.u. In this case, the energy
diﬀerence between two consecutive levels of the conﬁne-
ment potential is still of the order of one tenth of the
ionization potential |ε0| and Ωh/ω ∼ 0.5. For this pa-
rameter range, the cutoﬀ energy can be extended until
approximately |ε0| + 6Up.

On a more technical level, yet very interesting from
the theoretical point of view, we have seen that the cutoﬀ
law is given by the classical picture of an electron moving
under the inﬂuence of the laser ﬁeld and the conﬁnement
potential. Very good agreement between the quantum-
mechanical full calculation and the classical model occurs
for a wide range of ﬁeld strengths, frequencies around
ω ∼ 0.05 a.u. and conﬁnement curvatures of the order of
Ωh ∼ 10−2 a.u. Thereby we have found that the cutoﬀ
law strongly dependens on the conﬁnement curvature Ωh
and the frequency ω of the laser ﬁeld, but only linearly
on the ﬁeld intensity E 2
0 .

The proposed setup presents several advantages over
the schemes using static ﬁelds. For instance, using a
conﬁning potential, one can achieve a considerable ex-
tension of the cutoﬀ energy already for the trajectories
corresponding to short electron excursion times, whereas
using static ﬁelds one mainly aﬀects electron trajectories
with long excursion times. Due to wave-packet spread-
ing, the former trajectories are far more important for
the harmonic spectra than the latter. In order to reduce
the spreading one needs very strong magnetic ﬁelds [8].
Another noteworthy feature of a conﬁnement potential
is that one can obtain stronger harmonics than in the
static ﬁeld, or even in the monochromatic case. In fact,
a serious disadvantage concerning static electric ﬁelds is
an appreciable decrease in the harmonic intensities com-
pared to the ﬁeld free case, due to depletion, i.e.
irre-
versible ionization. This problem is not present in our
scheme.

The most serious disadvantage of our proposal is that

4

to date we are not aware of a direct possibility for an
experimental realisation, similarly to the so far proposed
extension of the cut oﬀ energy by using a combination
of a static electric and magnetic ﬁelds. In the latter case
the magnetic ﬁeld necessary is unrealistically large for
a laboratory application [11]. For our situation, a true
electromagnetic trap is too macroscopic compared to the
paramater range we need. On the other hand there might
be exciting possibilities in the future to design a conﬁned
atom as described in a quantum-dot like device, for in-
stance as an impurity. An important issue here, how-
ever, is the limitation in the radiation intensity in order
to avoid the damage threshold.

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank K.
Richter, D. B. Miloˇsevi´c, M. L. Du and K. Leo for useful
discussions.

[1] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[2] M. Yu. Kuchiev, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 45, 319
(1987) (JETP Lett. 45 (7), 404 (1987)); K. C. Kulan-
der, K. J. Schafer, and J. L. Krause in: B. Piraux et
al. eds., Proceedings of the SILAP conference, (Plenum,
New York, 1993).

[3] M. Lewenstein, Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier
and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117 (1994); W.
Becker, S. Long, and J. K. McIver, Phys. Rev. A 41,
4112 (1990) and 50, 1540 (1994).

[4] For a recent review, consult P. Sali`eres, A. L’Huillier, P.
Antoine, and M. Lewenstein, Adv. At. Mol. Phys. 41, 83
(1999).

[5] See, e.g., C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, M. D¨orr, W.
Becker, and W. Sandner, Phys. Rev. A 60, 1377(1999);
C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, W. Becker, M. D¨orr, and
W. Sandner, Laser Phys. 9, 388 (1999).

[6] C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, D.B. Miloˇsevi´c, and G. G.

Paulus, to appear in Phys. Rev. A.

[7] M.Q. Bao, and A. F. Starace, Phys. Rev. A 53, R3723
(1993); A. Lohr, W. Becker, and M. Kleber, Laser Phys.
7, 615 (1997); B.Wang, X. Li, and P. Fu, J. Phys. B 31,
1961 (1998).

[8] D.B. Miloˇsevi´c, and A. F. Starace, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3160
(1999); D. B. Miloˇsevi´c, and A. F. Starace, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 82, 2653 (1999); D. B. Miloˇsevi´c, and A. F. Starace,
Laser Phys. 10, 278 (2000).

[9] See, e.g., K. Burnett, V.C. Reed, J. Cooper, and P. L.
Knight, Phys. Rev. A 45, 3347 (1992); J.L. Krause, K.
Schafer, and K. Kulander, Phys. Rev. A 45, 4998 (1992).
[10] The so-called “tunneling regime” is characterized by a

Keldysh parameter γ = p|ε0|/2Up smaller than one.

[11] See, e.g., Phys. Today 51 (10), 21 (1998); Yu. B. Kudasov
et al, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 68, 326 (1998)(JETP
Lett. 68, 350 (1998)).

