0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
9
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
7
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Classical double ionization of atoms in strong ﬁelds

1 Fachbereich Physik, Philipps Universit¨at Marburg, D-35032 Marburg, Germany

Bruno Eckhardt1 and Krzysztof Sacha1,2

2 Instytut Fizyki im. Mariana Smoluchowskiego, Uniwersytet Jagiello´nski, ul. Reymonta 4, PL-30-059 Krak´ow, Poland

(February 2, 2008)

Recent high resolution measurements of the momenta of two electrons emitted from Argon atoms
in a strong laser ﬁeld show a strong preference for the outgoing electrons to have similar momenta
and to be ejected in the same direction along the ﬁeld. We discuss the ﬁnal stages of this process
in a classical model in the spirit of Wanniers approach to double ionization after electron impact.
Starting from an intermediate state of high but negative energy the ﬁeld opens up a channel through
which both electrons can escape. Near the threshold for this process Coulomb repulsion favors an
escape with the electron momenta and positions symmetric with respect to the electric ﬁeld axis.
Classical trajectory simulations within this symmetry subspace account for most features of the
observed momentum distribution.

Double ionization of neutral atoms (in particular He,
Ne and Ar) in the presence of strong ﬁelds has attracted
considerable attention after it was noted that the ob-
served yield is much higher than can be expected on the
basis of an independent electron model [1,2]. It was pro-
posed early on that correlations between the electrons
should be responsible for this enhancement. A striking
demonstration of such correlations is provided by recent
high resolution experiments on the distribution of the
ion-recoil momenta [3,4,6] and the electron momenta [5]
which clearly show a preference for the symmetric escape
of both electrons to the same side of the nucleus. This is
very diﬀerent from the process in the absence of a ﬁeld
(Wannier-ionization, [7,8]) where the dominant ioniza-
tion path has both electrons escape symmetrically placed
on opposite sides of the nucleus. In particular, while the
Wannier mode minimizes the electron repulsion, a sym-
metric escape to the same side has considerable residual
energy in the repulsion between electrons. So why is this
channel favoured?

It is by now generally accepted that the ionization
takes place in two steps: a high excitation of one elec-
tron followed by the double ionization event [9–16]. The
highly excited electron is accelerated by the ﬁeld and
driven back to the core where it collides with the other
electron, and transfers enough energy and momentum so
that both electrons can escape from the nucleus.
It is
this rescattering of the electron that enhances the en-
ergy transfer and thus the ionization rate. But it also
implies that during the ionization process the interaction
between the electrons cannot be ignored.

The amount of energy the excited electron can gain
during half a period of the electric ﬁeld has been esti-
mated in [3]: for a ﬁeld intensity of 2.9 · 1014W/cm2 the
estimate gives a maximal energy transfer of about 60eV .
This is insuﬃcient to ionize the second electron directly,
but as the experiments show, double ionization is possible
nevertheless. This implies that there must be a mecha-
nism by which the electrons can draw additional energy

from the ﬁeld so that asymptotically, once the pulse has
ceased, the total energy of the system is positive.

The related problem of double ionization in collisions
or single photon excitation was studied in a classic paper
by Wannier [7,8]. He assumed that during the ﬁrst stages
a high energy complex of electrons close to the nucleus is
formed from which then the ionized electrons escape. If
the energy is close to threshold, they cannot aﬀord to put
energy into the mutual repulsion and the escape is with
both electrons on opposite sides of the nucleus. More-
over, he argued that their distance has to be the same,
for any diﬀerence in position and energy would be am-
pliﬁed, pushing the conﬁguration towards single electron
ionization.

Essential elements of this discussion also apply to the
present situation. At the end of the ﬁrst step the rescat-
tering of one electron to the core produces a highly ex-
cited two electron complex. The estimates show [3] that
the total energy in the system is insuﬃent to doubleion-
ize immediately. However, if the electric ﬁeld during the
collision is non-zero, a saddle opens through which the
electrons can escape. Because of their mutual repulsion
the electron that gets to the saddle ﬁrst has an advan-
tage: it can cross the saddle while pushing the other back
to the nucleus. Since energy is scarce near threshold this
results in either single ionization or in another rescatter-
ing event, but most likely not in double ionization. This
suggests that the dominant path leading to double ioniza-
tion has both electrons cross the saddle side by side. This
singular process then acquires a ﬁnite probability when
trajectories asymptotic to this conﬁguration are taken
into account.

Therefore, we propose that near the threshold for dou-
ble ionization the only path leading to double ionization
has both electrons escape symmetric with respect to the
ﬁeld axis. With the ﬁeld pointing along the x-axis and
the electrons conﬁned to the plane z = 0 their coordi-
nates are (x, y, 0) and (x,−y, 0) in position and (px, py, 0)
and (px,−py, 0) in momenta. In this geometry the obser-

1

vation that both electrons escape to the same side is built
from the outset. As an aside we note that this symmetry
plane also contains the Wannier orbit, for x = 0, as the
symmetric escape perpendicular to the ﬁeld axis.

The classical Hamilton function for this geometry then
is (in atomic units, with inﬁnitely heavy nucleus and in
dipole approximation)

H(px, py, x, y, t) = p2

x + p2

y + V (x, y, t)

(1)

with potential energy

V (x, y, t) = −

4

px2 + y2

+

1
2y

+ 2F x f (t) cos(ωt + φ)

and the pulse shape

f (t) = sin2(πt/Td)

(2)

(3)

where the duration of the pulse is taken to be four ﬁeld
cycles, Td = 8π/ω. The frequency is ω/2 = 0.057 a.u.,
and corresponds to the experimental situation [3–5]. The
rescattering of the electrons leads to a highly excited
complex of total energy ˜E which every now and then
is close to the symmetric conﬁguration described by the
Hamiltonian (1). Any conﬁguration on this energy shell
(for some ﬁxed time t) as well as any phase φ of the ﬁeld
is equally likely, and the experimental observations are
averages over initial conditions and phases.

As mentioned, for the weakest ﬁelds where double ion-
ization is observed the rescattered electron does not bring
in enough energy for double ionization. However, if the
collision happens near a time where the ﬁeld is strong,
the electric ﬁeld distorts the potential and opens a path
for escape in down-ﬁeld direction. This process can be
discussed adiabatically for ﬁxed external ﬁeld since the
motion of the electrons near the nucleus is much faster
than the change in the ﬁeld. The ionization can thus be
discussed in the potential (2) with ﬁxed ﬁeld. Equipo-
tential lines for the potential (2) at a maximum of the
ﬁeld for F = 0.137 a.u., corresponding to an intensity of
6.6 · 1014W/cm2, are shown in Fig. 1. The saddle is lo-
cated along the line x = rS cos θ and y = rS sin θ with
S = √3/Fmax where
θ = π/6 or 5π/6 and at a distance r2
Fmax = max t|F f (t) cos(ωt + φ)|. The energy of the
saddle is

VS = −6qFmax/√3 .

(4)

For the extremal ﬁelds in a pulse of the above mentioned
intensity this gives VS = −1.69 a.u., so that within the
adiabatic picture the saddle can be reached if the return-
ing electron brings in at least 1.22 a.u. in energy. During
a ﬁeld cycle the saddle moves in from inﬁnity along the
line at θ = π/6, moves out again to inﬁnity after half a
period and then moves in and out again along the line
θ = 5π/6 during the second half of the cycle. Ionization
is most likely when the saddle is closest to te nucleus.

2

A typical trajectory within the symmetric conﬁgura-
tion is shown in Fig. 2. During the ramping of the ﬁeld
the electronic motion is little inﬂuenced by the electric
ﬁeld, but during the third half cycle of the ﬁeld the sad-
dle is close enough to the electron orbits and ionization
takes place. Once on the other side of the saddle, the
electrons rapidly gain energy. The saddle thus provides
a kind of transition state [17,18] for the double ionization
process: once the electrons cross it, they are accelerated
by the ﬁeld and pulled further away, making a return
rather unlikely. Moreover, they can aquire the missing
energy so that both electrons can escape even when the
ﬁeld vanishes. The ﬁeld thus plays a double role in de-
termining a threshold for this process: during the ﬁrst
stages of the rescattering process it provides the energy
for the collision complex and during the ﬁnal stages it
opens the path for double escape.

In the experiments it is not possible to monitor all
details and intermediate stages of the process. Most in-
formation is extracted from the distribution of ﬁnal mo-
menta pn of the nucleus and pi of the electrons, where
p1 + p2 ≈ −pn [3–6]. Because of the symmetry assump-
tion in the model the components perpendicular to the
ﬁeld vanish. The distribution of the parallel components
can be calculated by averaging over all initial conditions
of prescribed energy and all phases of the ﬁeld.

Classical scaling of the Hamiltonian (1) implies that
the results do not depend on the initial energy ˜E and ﬁeld
strength independently, but on the combination F/ ˜E 2
only. The ﬁeld strength F is set by the intensity of the
laser. The initial energy of the two-electron complex is
determined by the ﬁeld dependent eﬃcieny of the sin-
gle electron excitation step and thus not directly acces-
sible, although it can be estimated as in [3]. We there-
fore ﬁx F and vary initial energy. The results for ﬁxed
ﬁeld strength F = 0.137 a.u. and an initial energy of
˜E = −0.58 a.u. are compared to the experimental dis-
tribution in Fig. 3. The ﬁnal distribution of momenta
clearly shows the double hump structure indicating a
preference for ionization parallel and antiparallel to the
ﬁeld. The maxima of the experimental distribution are at
about pk = ±1.5 a.u., whereas the numerical ones within
the symmetric subspace lie at about ±1 a.u.. We take this
close agreement as strong indication that double ioniza-
tion can only occur in the neighborhood of the symmetric
process discussed here.

For lower energy, ˜E = −1.3 a.u. the minimum at pk = 0
almost vanishes and only a single maximum shows up
(Fig. 4a). This corresponds to the experimental situation
of a weaker pulse which evidently transfers less energy
to the rescattered electron [3]. Within the symmetric
subspace, there are two reasons for this change: at this
lower initial energy the electrons have little kinetic energy
when crossing the barrier, so that the splitting should be
expected to be small. Secondly, the electrons cross the
barrier typically when the ﬁeld is strongest, so that after
the ionization there is still considerable smearing of the

distribution due to the interaction with the remainder
of the pulse.
If the distribution is monitored immedi-
ately after the crossing of the barrier the two preferred
momenta parallel and anti-parallel to the ﬁeld stand out
clearly, as demonstrated in Fig. 4b.

These numerical results in the reduced symmetry sub-
space are in surprising agreement with the experimen-
tal data. They show that the conﬁguration with ro-
tational symmetry around the ﬁeld axis dominates the
cross section. The interaction with the ﬁeld shortly af-
ter ionization is responsible for most of the smearing
of the ﬁnal distribution, additional contributions come
from trajectories that are not symmetric. Actually, non-
symmetric conﬁgurations are needed in order to obtain a
non-vanishing cross section to begin with: the symmet-
ric subspace is a set of measure zero in the phase space
of the six degree of freedom system and acquires a ﬁnite
overlap with initial conditions only due to non-symmetric
initial conditions that are asymptotic to the symmetric
subspace. The cross section for double ionization shows
that this overlap is small [3–6].

The picture proposed here for multiphoton double ion-
ization is very similar to that of Wannier for double ion-
ization through electron impact. The main diﬀerence is
that now the symmetry between the outgoing electrons is
a rotation around the ﬁeld axis whereas it is a point sym-
metry with the nucleus in the center in Wanniers case.

Finally, we would like to mention that besides the dif-
ferent symmetry there is another diﬀerence to the Wan-
nier double ionization without ﬁeld: In the zero ﬁeld ion-
ization there is only a single trajectory so that there in
leading order semiclassical approximation no quantum
interferences can be expected [19]. The present prob-
lem falls into the category of quantum chaotic scattering
[20,21] where the classical ionization dynamics is chaotic
and quantum interference eﬀects between diﬀerent paths
cannot be ruled out.
It will be interesting to pinpoint
quantum interference eﬀects in this system.

We would like to thank Harald Giessen for stimulat-
ing our interest in this problem and for discussions of
the experiments. Financial support by the Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation and by KBN under project
2P302B00915 are gratefully acknowledged.

[4] Th. Weber, M. Weckenbrock, A. Staudte, L. Spielberger,
O. Jagutzki, V. Mergel, F. Afaneh, G. Urbasch, M.
Vollmer, H. Giessen and R. D¨orner, J. Phys. B: At. Mol.
Opt. Phys. 33, L1 (2000)

[5] Th. Weber, H. Giessen, M. Weckenbrock, G. Urbasch,
A. Staudte, L. Spielberger, O. Jagutzki, V. Mergel, M.
Vollmer, and R. D¨orner, Nature ???, ???
(2000) (in
press)

[6] R. Moshammer, B. Feuerstein, W. SChmitt, A. Dorn,
C.D. Sch¨oter, J. Ullrich, H. Rottke, C. Trump, M.
Wittmann, G. Korn, K. Hoﬀmann and W. Sandner,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 447 (2000)

[7] G.H. Wannier, Phys. Rev. 90, 817 (1953)
[8] A. R. P. Rau , Phys. Rep. 110, 369, (1984)
[9] P.B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993)

[10] K.C. Kulander, J. Cooper, and K.J. Schafer, Phys. Rev.

A 51, 561 (1995)

[11] B. Walker, B. Sheehy, K.C. Kulander, and L.F. DiMauro,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 5031 (1996)

[12] A. Becker and F.H.M. Faisal, J. Phys. B 29, L197 (1996)
[13] A. Becker and F.H.M. Faisal, J. Phys. B 32, L335 (1999)
[14] B. Sheehy, R. Lafon, M. Widmer, B. Walker, L.F. Di-
Mauro, P.A. Agostini, and K.C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. A
58, 3942 (1998)

[15] A. Becker and F.H.M. Faisal, Phys. Rev. A 59, R1742

(1999)

[16] A. Becker and F.H.M. Faisal, Phys. Rev. Lett. ??, ???

(2000) (in press)

[17] E. P. Wigner, Z. Phys. Chemie B 19, 203 (1932); Trans.

Faraday Soc. 3429, (1938)

[18] E. Pollak, in Theory of Chemical Reactions, vol III, M.

Baer, ed., (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1985, p. 123

[19] J.M. Rost, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1998 (1994); Phys. Rep.

297, 271 (1999)

[20] B. Eckhardt, Physica D 33, 89 (1988)
[21] U. Smilansky. Semiclassical Quantization of Chaotic
Billiards - A Scattering Approach.
the
Les Houches Summer School on Mesoscopic Quantum
Physics. Elsevier Science Publ. (1995) Ed. E. Akkermans,
G. Montambaux and J. L. Pichard.

in Proc. of

[1] D.N. Fittinghof, P.R. Bolton, B. Chang, and K.C. Ku-

lander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2642 (1992)

[2] B. Walker, B. Sheehy, L.F. DiMauro, P. Agostini, K.J.
Schafer, and K.C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1227
(1994)

[3] Th. Weber, M. Weckenbrock, A. Staudte, L. Spielberger,
O. Jagutzki, V. Mergel, F. Afaneh, G. Urbasch, M.
Vollmer, H. Giessen and R. D¨orner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,
443 (2000)

3

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

(a)

(b)

−6

−3

0

3

−6

−3

0

3

6

p|| (a.u.)

2 px (a.u.)

FIG. 3. Final distribution of ion momenta parallel to the
ﬁeld for F = 0.136 a.u.: (a) experimental distribution from
[3] (b) distribution from symmetric subspace with initial en-
ergy ˜E = −0.58 a.u.. The classical distribution is based on
an ensemble of 2 · 105 trajectories.

(a)

(b)

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

−10

−5

0

5

−10

−5
2 px (a.u.)

0

5

10

FIG. 4. Final distribution of momenta parallel to the ﬁeld
for F = 0.136 a.u. and initial energy ˜E = −1.3 a.u.. (a) at the
end of the pulse; (b) at the ﬁrst zero of the ﬁeld after cross-
ing the saddle. This ﬁgure demonstrates the smearing of the
distribution due to the ﬁnal post ionization interaction with
the electric ﬁeld. It is based on 50.000 classical trajectories.

y

6

4

2

0

-5

0

x

5

FIG. 1. Adiabatic potential V (x, y, t) for ﬁxed time t in
the symmetric subspace. The saddle moves along the dashed
line when the electric ﬁeld points in the positive x-direction
and along a second obtained by reﬂection on x = 0 during the
other half of the ﬁeld cycle.

(a)

(b)

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0
2.5
0.0
−2.5
−5.0

.

)
.
u
a
(
 
r

)
.
u
a
(
 

.

E

0.0

0.5

1.0

t/(2π/ω)

1.5

2.0

FIG. 2. A typical trajectory in the symmetric subspace
with ˜E = −1.3 a.u. (a) distance of the electrons to the nu-
cleus. The dashed line indicates the distance of the saddle.
Note that before the double ionization occurs the eﬀect of the
ﬁeld on the electrons is minimal, supporting the adiabatic
assumption. (b) energy of the electrons. Note that the ini-
tial state has negative total energy and cannot lead to double
ionization. The energy increases once the electrons have es-
caped from the nucleus far enough so that acceleration by the
electric ﬁeld dominates.

4

