0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

6
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
6
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Theory of coherent photoassociation of a Bose-Einstein condensate

Marijan Ko˘strun, Matt Mackie, Robin Cˆot´e, and Juha Javanainen

Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269-3046

(Dated: July 24, 2013)

We study coherent photoassociation, phenomena analogous to coherent optical transients in few-
level systems, which may take place in photoassociation of an atomic Bose-Einstein condensate
but not in a nondegenerate gas. We develop a second-quantized Hamiltonian to describe photoas-
sociation, and apply the Hamiltonian both in the momentum representation and in the position
representation (ﬁeld theory). Solution of the two-mode problem including only one mode each for
the atomic and molecular condensates displays analogs of Rabi oscillations and rapid adiabatic pas-
sage. A classical version of the ﬁeld theory for atoms and molecules is used to demonstrate that, in
the presence of photoassociating light, a joint-atom molecule is unstable against growth of density
ﬂuctuations. Experimental complications, including spontaneous emission and unwanted “rogue”
photodissociation from a photoassociated molecule are analyzed. A two-color Raman scheme is
studied as a method to set up an eﬀective two-mode scheme with reduced spontaneous emission
losses. We discuss photoassociation rates and photoassociation Rabi frequencies for high-lying vi-
brational states in alkalis both on the basis of molecular-structure calculations, and by comparing
with an experiment [Wynar et al., Science 287, 1016 (2000)].

I.

INTRODUCTION

and laser spectroscopy [7].

Laser cooling and its spin-oﬀs now routinely pro-
duce gaseous samples in which thermal energies, when
expressed as frequencies, are smaller than the typical
linewidth of an optical dipole transition. Photoassoci-
ating transitions, in which two thermal atoms combine
in the presence of light to make a molecule, may there-
fore exhibit linewidths every bit as narrow as the tran-
sitions one encounters in nonlinear laser spectroscopy.
As a result, photoassociation spectroscopy [1] has be-
come the source of the most accurate molecular struc-
ture data available. Bose-Einstein condensation [2] is
another recent triumph in the quest toward low temper-
atures in atomic physics. The connection between pho-
toassociation and Bose-Einstein condensation has long
been close, though somewhat incidental; photoassocia-
tion spectroscopy has provided key numerical data for
condensation experiments [3].

There have been early discussions of photoassociation
of a condensate itself [4, 5]. However, to us, the true
scope of the connection between photoassociation and
condensation was only revealed by our explicit observa-
tion [6] that in a thermal gas it is the same phase space
density that governs both the onset of Bose-Einstein con-
densation and the eﬃciency of photoassociation.

At the heart of our photoassociation work lies the qua-
sicontinuum (QC) approach [6, 7]. The idea is to enclose
two colliding atoms in a box, which has the eﬀect of dis-
cretizing the dissociation continuum of the correspond-
ing diatomic molecule. At the end of the calculations,
the quantization volume is taken to inﬁnity. Aside from
resolving certain mathematical diﬃculties, this method
turns out to have the unexpected beneﬁt that analysis of
photoassociation is reverted to analysis of few-level sys-
tems, as in quantum optics or laser spectroscopy. For
instance, studies of two-color photoassociation schemes
may draw from decades of experience in quantum optics

However, in its initial form our QC approach does not
apply to a quantum degenerate sample. We sought to rec-
tify this shortcoming by introducing a phenomenological
second-quantized Hamiltonian for photoassociation [8].
This idea was developed at the same time independently
by Drummond et al. [9], and mathematically closely re-
lated approaches to the Feshbach resonance are also un-
der active study [10, 11, 12]. Comparison with the QC
approach gives the transition matrix elements to insert
into our Hamiltonian.

We ﬁrst considered a two-mode model that only takes
into account one C.M. wave function for atoms and
one for molecules, the modes containing the atomic and
molecular condensates [8]. The main ﬁnding was coher-
ent photoassociation analogous to coherent transients in
few-level systems. For instance, the system may exhibit
a form of Rabi ﬂopping between atoms and molecules.
Moreover, by properly sweeping the frequency of the
photoassociating laser, in a process akin to rapid adia-
batic passage the atomic condensate may be turned into
a molecular condensate [8]. In another development in
this direction, we have argued that two-color free-bound-
bound stimulated Raman adiabatic passage, STIRAP,
is feasible starting from an atomic condensate [13]. We
have also gone beyond the two- and three-mode approx-
imations, allowing for an arbitrary position dependence
of the atomic and molecular condensates, albeit in a clas-
sical approximation similar to the one underlying the
Gross-Pitaevskii equation [14].
It then turns out that
an equilibrium with both atomic and molecular conden-
sates present together with the photoassociating light is
unstable. The sample tends to collapse spontaneously
into clumps whose densities increase with time [14].

The primary purposes of the present paper are to
document the numerous technical and physical details
of our second-quantized approach to photoassociation
that could not be accommodated by the letter format

of Refs. [8], [13], and [14], and to extend our discussion
in several directions that support those references. To
oﬀer a comprehensive account of the ﬁeld theory version
of our approach to coherent photoassociation, we have
found it necessary to analyze the dipole matrix element
for photoassociation in detail. This endeavor in eﬀect
constitutes an alternative derivation (c.f. Ref. [7]) of
our entire QC methodology. Second, we add an analysis
of two-color photoassociation of a quantum-degenerate
sample in a three-mode approximation that is to some
extent complementary to the one in Ref. [13]. Much
as expected, the two-color scheme provides a reprieve
from spontaneous-emission losses from the primary pho-
toassociated state. Third, we present a quantitative
analysis of “rogue” photodissociation from a molecu-
lar condensate to atomic modes outside the condensate.
Our suggestion [8] that with increasing light intensity
the unwanted photodissociation may overtake coherent
condensate-condensate transitions is corroborated. We
ﬁnd a minimum usable time scale proportional to the
the inverse of the recoil frequency of laser cooling.

Probably the most prominent qualitative ﬁnding
emerging from our work is the observation that it is Bose
enhancement that ultimately facilitates coherent tran-
sients such as Rabi ﬂopping, adiabatic following, and
STIRAP in photoassociation of a condensate [13, 15].
Throughout this paper, we continue to demonstrate how
coherent optical transients come about in a condensate,
and argue why they should be absent in a nondegenerate
gas.

There has recently been a remarkable experiment on
two-color photoassociation of a condensate [16]. Accord-
ingly, we include a detailed discussions on the values of
experimental parameters in alkalis in general, and the pa-
rameters of Ref.
[16] in particular. The analysis of the
actual experiment demonstrates that there is still some
way to go before genuinely coherent photoassociation is
reached.

In Sec. II we give a walk-through of our second-
quantized Hamiltonian, including a detailed discussion of
the dipole moment matrix element and both the momen-
tum and position representation of the Hamiltonian. The
special case with only one spatial mode for both atoms
and molecules is the subject of Sec. III. The classical ver-
sion of the ﬁeld theory, but including all spatial modes,
is the subject of Sec. IV. The numerous complications
to our one color scheme that one is liable to encounter in
real experiments, as well as the experimental parameter
values, are the subject of Sec. V. The brief remarks in
Sec. VI conclude the paper. There are also two appen-
dices, A on the details of the relation of the dipole matrix
element between second-quantized and quasicontinuum
approaches, and B on the role of atom-atom collisions in
our development.

2

II. FIELD THEORY FOR ATOMS AND

MOLECULES

The task of the present section is to develop in detail
the second-quantized approach governing photoassocia-
tion of atoms into molecules in the prototype case of one
laser color only. Simple heuristic arguments based on
Refs. [6, 7] could, and did, achieve most of our aims in
Ref. [8] where we dealt primarily with the momentum
representation, but the ﬁeld theory of Ref. [14] calls for a
few additional angles. To support them, we present here
a partially new ab-initio discussion of our QC method.

We take the photoassociating atoms to be in precisely
one internal state, and similarly we assume that photoas-
sociation leads to molecules with precisely one internal
state. These assumptions could be relaxed, but then one
has to follow the fate of the internal states as well. We do
not go into this, but in essence assume that (i) the atoms
are polarized and that (ii) the photoassociation resonance
in itself selects a unique ﬁnal state for the molecule.

A. Two atoms

We begin with a pair of atoms, assumedly in the dis-
sociation continuum of a given potential energy curve of
a diatomic molecule. As the atoms interact, their rela-
tive momentum need not be a constant of the motion.
Nonetheless, given a ﬁnite range for atom-atom interac-
tions, in free space the wave functions of the relative mo-
tion φk(r) could still be characterized by the asymptotic
(r → ∞) wave vector k.
On the other hand, in the spirit of the QC method [6,
7], we assume that the relative motion of the atoms is
conﬁned to a ﬁnite volume V . There are two basic ques-
tions in our two-atom analysis that must be considered.
First, our phenomenological many-particle Hamiltonian
(Ref. [8] and Eq. (12) below) is written down in terms of
plane waves, yet it is more common to analyze photoas-
sociation in terms of angular-momentum partial waves.
How do we make the connection? Second, in our qua-
sicontinuum method we resort to a ﬁnite quantization
volume V , which tends to inﬁnity only at the end of the
calculations. How should we handle the ﬁnite quantiza-
tion volume?

We quantize the relative motion of the two atoms in a
spherical box of radius R and volume V = 4
3 πR3 using re-
ﬂecting boundary conditions. While angular momentum
is still a constant of the motion, the usual eigenstates [7]
of the relative motion cannot be characterized by a mo-
mentum vector, even asymptotically. Nonetheless, it is
evidently possible to construct orthonormal superposi-
tions ¯φk(r) of the eigenstates of the spherical box that in
the limit of a large box turn into the states φk(r), i.e.,
states that behave like plane waves at large distances.

Let us ﬁrst take the inner product of a true plane wave,
normalized to the volume V , with a spherically symmet-
ric (real) test function f (r) with a ﬁnite range ≪ R. In

the limit k → 0 we have

4πr2 dr f (r) .

I1 = lim
k→0

1

√V Z R

0

d3r eik·rf (r) ≃

1

√V Z ∞

0

(1)
Next we take the same inner product for the l = 0 partial
wave of the plane wave eik·r, basically the spherical Bessel
function j0(kr) ∝ sin kr/r. We normalize this partial
wave also in the spherical box, or equivalently, in the
radial coordinate r with respect to the measure 4πr2 dr.
In the limit of small k we have the integral for the inner
product

I2 =

≃

0

1

√2πRZ R
√2πRZ ∞

k

0

4πr2 dr

sin kr

r

f (r)

4πr2 dr f (r) .

the wave function ¯φk(r) counts. Taking into account the
weight from Eq. (3), we have

3

d(k) = d

1

kr 2πR

V Z R

0

4πr2 dr ¯ψ∗(r) ¯φ0

k(r) .

(5)

The notation ¯φ0
k(r) stands for the radial l = 0 wave func-
tion of the relative motion of the two atoms correspond-
ing to the wave number k, and normalized to volume V
as usual.

A convenient qualitative model is provided by the lim-

iting form

¯φ0
k(r) =

1

√2πR

sin k(r − a)

r

,

(6)

where a is the s-wave scattering length. Combination of
(5) and (6) gives

(2)

4π

k√V Z R

0

r dr sin k(r − a) ¯ψ∗(r) .

(7)

Obviously, the ratio of the two,

d(k) = d

α(k) =

I1
I2

=

1

kr 2πR

V

,

(3)

is the expansion coeﬃcient of the s-wave in the plane
wave, given that both the plane wave and the s-wave are
normalized to the volume V . Actually, the k values of
the spherical eigenmodes are quantized, and the smallest
value is k = π/R. We therefore have to be careful with
the limit k → 0 when applying Eq. (3).
When atom-atom interactions are taken into account,
the radial eigenstates for a given angular momentum are
not just spherical Bessel functions, but also reﬂect the
scattering phase shifts. Henceforth we assume that only
s-wave scattering needs to be considered, as is usually
the case for bosons at suﬃciently low temperatures. Ob-
viously, even though the partial waves have phase shifts,
by tweaking the phases of the partial waves it is still pos-
sible to make an asymptotic near-plane wave ¯φk(r) out
of the eigenstates of the relative motion of the atoms in
the sphere. The adjustment of phases has no eﬀect on
the weight of the s-wave component in ¯φk(r), which may
still be inferred from Eq. (3).

Let us denote the wave function of the particular
molecular state we are aiming for by ¯ψ(r), and make the
standard (albeit crude) approximation that the relevant
electronic dipole matrix element d is a constant indepen-
dent of the relative coordinate r of the atoms comprising
the molecule. Then the QC dipole matrix element for
photoassociation and photodissociation characterizing a
process in which the relative momentum of the colliding
atoms is ¯hk reads simply

d(k) = dZ d3r ¯ψ∗(r) ¯φk(r) .

(4)

We only consider s-wave collisions, and correspondingly
set ¯ψ(r) = ¯ψ(r) as appropriate for a nonrotating J =
0 molecule. Of course, only the l = 0 component of

The form (6) is only valid outside the range of the atom-
atom interaction potential, and for small enough k so
that the scattering phase shift may be written as ka.
Equation (7) is therefore quantitatively reliable only if
the vibrational bound-state wave function of the molecule
¯ψ(r) happens to reside outside the range of the atom-
atom interactions of the photoassociating atoms. In fact,
this is the case in some of the current photoassociation
experiments [17, 18].

The matrix element (7) is explicitly proportional to
V −1/2.
In fact, the V −1/2 scaling of d(k) is a generic
property of our QC approach, and does not depend on
the speciﬁc assumptions of Eq. (7). First, the almost-
plane wave ¯φk(r) is normalized to the volume V . No
matter what kind of (square integrable) structure occurs
around r ∼ 0, the plane-wave form at large distances
makes the normalization constant proportional to V −1/2.
Second, because of the ﬁnite range of the bounded molec-
ular wave function ¯ψ(r), its normalization coeﬃcient does
not depend on V . Third, thanks to the same ﬁnite range,
the integral (4) eﬀectively extends only over a ﬁnite, ﬁxed
volume. The net result is that the matrix element indeed
is proportional to the normalization constant of ¯φk(r),
∝ V −1/2.
Another important property of the matrix element (7),
that it tends to a constant as k → 0, is also a generic
feature of the physics. Namely, for small enough k, the
form of the s-wave ¯φ0
k(r) indeed is sin k(r − a)/r, except
within the range of atom-atom interactions. But within
this range, the shape of ¯φ0
k(r) is independent of k at small
enough k. In order that the inner and the outer forms join
smoothly, the amplitude of the inner wave function must
be ∝ k for small k, just as is the amplitude of the outer
wave function. So, for small enough k, the wave function
¯φ0
k(r) is ∝ k for all of those r for which the bound-state
wave function ¯ψ(r) is eﬀectively nonzero. The matrix
elements (4), (5) and (7) therefore all tend to a constant
as k → 0.

In order to prepare for the comparison between pho-
toassociation and photodissociation, let us assume that
a laser ﬁeld with the amplitude

E(t) = 1

2 Ee−iωt + c.c.

(8)

is incident on a molecule. We denote the detuning of the
light above the photodissociation threshold by δ. Given
the reduced mass of the colliding atoms µ, the corre-
sponding resonant wave number k0 and velocity v0 are
such that ¯hk2
0/2µ = δ and v0 = ¯hk0/µ. Using the stan-
dard dipole and rotating-wave approximations as well as
Fermi’s golden rule, we have the photodissociation rate

Γ0 =

=

where

d(k) · E

2π

¯h2 Z dk D(k)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

d(k0) · E

µ2v0V
π¯h2

2¯h

2
2

,

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

D(k) =

k2V
2π2

δ(cid:18) ¯hk2

2µ − δ(cid:19)

2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(9)

(10)

is the density of k states, whether in a cubic or in a
spherical box [7, 19]. Equation (9) is fully compatible
with the development in Refs. [6] and [7], as it should.

Since the dipole matrix element tends to a constant in
the limit k → 0, it is easy to see from (9) that the Wigner
threshold law holds; namely, that limv0→0 Γ0/v0 is ﬁnite,
and nonzero except for an unlikely accident. As a matter
of fact, our argument about the k → 0 limit of the dipole
matrix element was nothing but a recital of a standard
argument for the Wigner threshold law. Nonetheless, it
will furnish a relevant piece of the puzzle when we are to
discuss atom-molecule ﬁeld theory below. To this end,
we note from Eqs. (5) and (9) the equality

Γ0
v0

lim
v0→0

=

µ2

π¯h2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

d · E
¯h

lim
k0→0

√2πR
k0

k0 (r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
Z 4πr2 dr ¯ψ∗(r) ¯φ0

2

.

(11)

B. Many atoms in momentum representation

1. Basic Hamiltonian

In Ref. [8] we introduced a phenomenological second-
quantized Hamiltonian for photoassociation of bosonic
atoms to (obviously) bosonic molecules,

H
¯h

4m

= Xk (cid:20) ¯hk2
b†kbk +(cid:18)−
−Xkk′q(cid:20) dkk′ · Eq

4¯h

δ0
2

+

¯hk2

2m(cid:19) a†kak(cid:21)

b†k+ k′+qakak′ + H.c.(cid:21) . (12)

4

Here m stands for the mass of the atom, m = 2µ. The
operators ak and bk are boson annihilation operators for
atoms and molecules in the plane wave mode k. The
Hamiltonian trivially includes the kinetic energy of the
atoms and molecules. Here photoassociation takes place
with an absorption (as opposed to induced emission) of
a photon. By momentum conservation, atoms with wave
vectors k and k′ plus a photon with wave vector q must
then make a molecule with wave vector k + k′ + q. This
explains the form of the cubic operator product; annihi-
late the atoms and a photon, create the molecule.

As is usual

in quantum optics, we use a classical
ﬁeld to represent the photons. Speciﬁcally, the positive-
frequency part of the electric ﬁeld reads

E+(r) = 1

2Xq

Eq eiq·r .

(13)

Both E+(r) and the coeﬃcients Eq may in principle be
slowly varying functions of time, but the leading time de-
pendence of the electric ﬁeld ∝ e−iωt has been absorbed
into the detuning δ0 in a transformation to a rotating
frame. The seemingly unexpected factor 1
2 in the detun-
ing term correspond to the fact that upon photodissoci-
ation one molecule produces two atoms, both of which
generally take away kinetic energy with them. The sign
of the detuning is chosen in such a way that δ0 > 0 corre-
sponds to tuning of the laser by the energy ¯hδ0 above the
photodissociation threshold. A quick way to verify this is
to consider the potential resonance when the (quasi) en-
ergy (in the rotating frame) for a system of one molecule
and zero atoms would be the same as the energy for a sys-
tem with zero molecules and two atoms, much like in the
Appendix A. The total energy of the atoms must equal
the energy of the molecule plus ¯hδ0, which is compatible
with Eq. (12).

We assume that the optical transition responsible for
photoassociation is a dipole transition. In the dipole ap-
proximation, the electronic photodissociation and pho-
toassociation transitions in a molecule do not (cannot!)
depend on the propagation direction of light, hence the
dipole matrix elements dkk′ do not depend on pho-
ton momenta. Besides, by translational invariance, the
dipole matrix elements must be functions of the diﬀer-
ence k − k′ only. Because of the exchange symmetry of
the boson operators, the matrix element dkk′ may be
chosen to be symmetric in the exchange of the momen-
tum indices, hence, an even function of k − k′. And
ﬁnally, since we consider s-wave photoassociation only,
the matrix element is a function of |k − k′|.
To pin down the matrix elements dkk′, in Ref. [8] we
took the limit of a dilute thermal gas. The known QC
results are recovered if one expresses the thus far unde-
ﬁned coeﬃcients dkk′ in terms of the matrix elements (4)
as

dkk′ ≡

(14)
The √2 is a consequence of the Bose-Einstein statistics,
and the factor 1
2 follows from the way that the relative

2 (k − k′)(cid:1) .

√2 d(cid:0) 1

momentum must be deﬁned to make it the conjugate of
the conventional relative position. We have recently no-
ticed that there is a subtlety associated with this identi-
ﬁcation having to do with the the statistics of the atoms.
We elaborate in Appendix A, but meanwhile continue
according to Eq. (14).

In sum, if one may treat the atoms and the molecules
as bosons in their own right, then both the form of, and
even the numerical coeﬃcients in, the photoassociation
Hamiltonian are unambiguously determined by simple
physical considerations. Admittedly, we do not know of
any conclusive ab initio argument for the bosonic nature
of atoms and molecules in photoassociation. But neither
do we know of any for alkali atoms, which nonetheless
seem to behave like good bosons in current BEC experi-
ments.

2. Two-mode approximation

We now revisit the situation that was the focus of
Ref. [8]: an inﬁnite, homogeneous condensate and one
plane wave of light with photon momentum ¯hq. By con-
servation of momentum, the molecules one may create
by photoassociation all have the wave vector equal to q.
On the other hand, as far as momentum conservation is
concerned, a molecule with the wave vector q may pho-
todissociate into two atoms, neither of which has zero
momentum. We will discuss such “rogue photodissocia-
tion” in more detail below, Sec. V A, and so far ignore
it.

All told, we only retain the two modes of the model
with the annihilation operators a ≡ a0 and b ≡ bq. The
Hamiltonian reads

2 δ0 a†a − 1
2 δ0 a†a − 1

b†b − 1
b†b − 1
(2b†b + a†a)

2 κ(b†aa + ba†a†)

2 κ(b†aa + ba†a†)

H
¯h

¯hq2
4m
¯hq2
4m

=

≃

¯hq2
8m
2 δ a†a − 1

−
≡ − 1

2 κ(b†aa + ba†a†) .

(15)

5

second-quantized Hamiltonian in the two-mode approxi-
mation. The task is completed by noting that

δ = δ0 +

¯hq2
4m

(17)

is the detuning corrected for the photon recoil energy of
the molecule. From now on we will keep track of this dis-
tinction, so that δ always includes the appropriate recoil.
In fact, that was already implicitly the case in Eq. (9).

C. Many-atom ﬁeld theory

Our phenomenological Hamiltonian (12) was written
down originally in momentum representation. Neverthe-
less, as in Refs. [8] and [14], it is fairly straightforward to
convert it into position representation, i.e., into a quan-
tum ﬁeld theory.

Let us introduce atomic and molecular ﬁelds in a quan-
tization volume V . A priori, this volume does not have
to be the cavity of radius R, as in Sec. II A. Often it is
actually more convenient to use a cubic box with peri-
odic boundary conditions. On the other hand, when one
deals with two atomic ﬁelds, it is often expedient to write
the integrals in the theory in terms of center-of-mass and
relative coordinates. If the integral over the relative co-
ordinates cuts oﬀ because the integrand tends to zero at
large distances, it is immaterial what volume is used, as
long as it is large enough. Thus, when convenient, in
such relative-coordinate integrals we may still imagine
the spherical potential well. The short of the story is
that the quantization volume V refers to the geometry
that is expedient in the particular context.

We write the atomic and molecular ﬁelds in terms of

plane wave states as

1

√V Xk

φ(r) =

eik·rak,

ψ(r) =

eik·rbk .

(18)
The Hamiltonian (12) may be cast as a Hamiltonian den-
sity of a ﬁeld theory for these ﬁelds. Using the standard
continuum limit

1

√V Xk

In the “approximate” equality we have added a constant
of the motion to the Hamiltonian, a step that has no
eﬀect on the ensuing dynamics. The QC Rabi frequency
reads

√2
2¯h

κ =

d(k)]

E · [ lim
k→0
v0→0s 2π¯h2Γ0

µ2V v0

= lim

,

(16)

where we have used Eq. (9). Without any loss of gen-
erality, we have chosen κ to be real and nonnegative.
Seemingly alarmingly, the Rabi frequency still depends
on the quantization volume. We will return to this point
in Sec. III. At present, our aim is just to set up the

f (k) ≃

Xk

V

(2π)3 Z d3k f (k) ,

(19)

Eq. (13), and the properties of Fourier integrals, the part
of the Hamiltonian density depending on the dipole in-
teraction becomes

E+(r)

=−

H(r)
¯h

2¯h ·ψ†(r)Z d3r′ φ(r+1

2 r′)+. . . .
(20)
The dipole kernel of photoassociation d(r) is given in
terms of the dipole matrix element of Eq. (4) as

2 r′)d(r′)φ(r−1

d(r) =

√2V
(2π)3 Z d3k e−ik·r d(k) .

(21)

It should be noted that our argument contains a subtle
trick, which is exposed in Appendix B.

To make further progress, we study the kernel using
the qualitative model for the dipole matrix element (7).
Some more juggling with Fourier transforms gives

d(r)
= √2 d

θ(a+r)(a+r) ¯ψ∗(a+r)−θ(a−r)(a−r) ¯ψ∗(a −r)
(22)

r

,

where θ is the Heaviside unit step function. This result
is only as good as the assumptions of Eq. (7). In par-
ticular, as Eq. (7) is not valid for large k, Eq. (22) is

6

dubious at short distances. Also, as we already pointed
out with Eq. (7), even for small k the model is quantita-
tively accurate only if the vibrational wave function ¯ψ(r)
resides outside the range of the atom-atom interactions.
In spite of these caveats, Eq. (22) gives an exceedingly
plausible idea of the range ∆r of the dipole interaction
kernel; ∆r is of the order of the larger of the spatial ex-
tent of the vibrational state ¯ψ(r) and the absolute value
of the scattering length a.

The relevant length scale for the atomic ﬁeld is larger
than ∆r if the energies of all of the atoms relevant for the
time evolution are smaller than ∼ ¯h2/m(∆r)2. Hence-
forth we assume this to be the case. Then we may sim-
plify the ﬁeld-theory form of the integral as follows,

H(r)
¯h

E+(r)

2¯h · ψ†(r)Z d3r′ φ(r + 1
= −
= −(cid:20) E+(r)
2¯h ·
= "√2
d · E+(r)

2 r′)d(r′)φ(r − 1
√2V lim
d(k)(cid:21) ψ†(r) φ(r)φ(r) + . . .
k→0
√2πR
Z 4πr2 dr ¯ψ∗(r) ¯φ0

lim
k→0

2¯h

k

k(r)# ψ†(r) φ(r)φ(r) + . . . .

2 r′) + . . . ≃ −

E+(r)

2¯h · ψ†(r) φ(r)φ(r)Z d3r′d(r′) + . . .

(23)

(26)

The second equality follows from the assumedly slow de-
pendence of the atomic ﬁeld φ(r) on position r compared
to d(r), the third from Eq. (21) and the properties of
Fourier transformations, and in the last equality we have
substituted Eq. (5). Comparison with Eq. (11) then
gives the contact interaction form of the photoassocia-
tion dipole interaction,

−(cid:2)D(r)ψ†(r) φ(r)φ(r) + H.c.(cid:3) .

III. COHERENCE IN TWO-MODE MODEL

We consider the two-mode model, whose Hamiltonian

we reproduce here from Eq. (15),

H(r)
¯h

= −D(r)ψ†(r) φ(r)φ(r) + . . . ,

(24)

H
¯h

= − 1

2 δ a†a − 1

2 κ(b†aa + ba†a†) .

with

D(r) = ei arg[d·E+(r)]

v0→0s 2π¯h2Γ0(r)

v0µ2

lim

.

(25)

Here Γ0(r) is the photodissociation rate as per the pre-
vailing light intensity at position r, and the exponential
records the phase of the dipole interaction term.

For reference, we summarize the contact-interaction
version of the Hamiltonian for photoassociation in terms
of atomic and molecular ﬁelds. While at that, by adding
a suitable multiple of the conserved particle number com-
pletely analogously to the operation that we did in the
chain of equations (15), we move the detuning term to
the molecules. The result is

H = Z d3r H(r);
¯h∇2
2m (cid:19) φ(r) + ψ†(r)(cid:18)−
= φ†(r)(cid:18)−
H(r)
¯h

¯h∇2
4m

+ δ0(cid:19)ψ(r)

This is the age-old Hamiltonian for second-harmonic gen-
eration, with atoms replacing the fundamental-frequency
light and molecules the second harmonic. Needless to say,
the literature on the model is extensive. We will cite a
few relevant examples below.

Let us take the conserved particle number a†a + 2b†b
to have the value N . The Hamiltonian (15) may then
be restricted to the space spanned by the states |ni ≡
|niM|N−2niA with n = 0, . . . , N/2 molecules and N−2n
atoms, and is tridiagonal in that basis. It is easy to ﬁnd
both the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian and the time evo-
lution of any speciﬁed initial state numerically. We have
done so using inverse iteration, and a variation of the
Crank-Nicholson method. While the problem considered
in Ref. [20] is diﬀerent, the numerical methods described
therein work equally well here.

In this way we have ﬁrstly [8, 21] found the fraction
of atoms converted into molecules, given that the system
starts out at time t = 0 with everything in atoms and is

driven by a resonant laser, δ = 0. We found a nonlinear
analog of Rabi ﬂopping, the system oscillating between
atoms and molecules. Given that we have a quantum
system where the spacing between the successive energy
eigenstates is not constant, it is not a surprise that the
oscillations collapse, and even revive [22].

Interesting as these features are as a matter of princi-
ple, the drawback remains that Rabi oscillations of oc-
cupation probabilities are generally not robust, not even
in quantum optics or laser spectroscopy. We foresee lit-
tle experimental utility for nonlinear Rabi oscillations.
Our main message of the analysis of Rabi oscillations in
Ref. [8] rather is that, for N ≫ 1, the characteristic fre-
quency scale of the system is not the QC Rabi frequency
κ but

Ω = √N κ = lim

v0→0s 2N π¯h2Γ0

µ2V v0

= lim

v0→0s 2π¯h2Γ0ρ

µ2v0

.

(27)
The √N is evidently a Bose enhancement factor. The im-
plicit quantization volume has disappeared from the re-
sult. Instead we have the density of atoms if all molecules
were dissociated,

ρ =

N
V

,

(28)

which is a true physical parameter for the system.

Bose enhancement highlights the role of statistics in
our analysis. Suppose we were to deal with a nondegen-
erate gas. Then the occupation probability of each QC
state is much less than unity by deﬁnition, and there is
no Bose enhancement. The frequency of Rabi ﬂopping
between a given QC state and a bound molecular states
would just be ∝ κ ∝ V −1/2, and vanishes in the limit of
large volume. It is not possible to have Rabi ﬂopping in
photoassociation of an inﬁnite and homogeneous nonde-
generate gas, even in principle [15].

The photoassociation rate for a pair of atoms starting
in a given QC state is ∝ κ2 ∝ 1/V , and also vanishes
in the limit of a large volume. The saving grace [6, 7]
is that, to keep the density constant, the atom number
N and at the same time the number of candidate atoms
to photoassociate with any given atom tends to inﬁnity.
Adding the probabilities for photoassociation due to all
colliders, the total rate of photoassociation for any given
atom is ∝ N κ2 ∝ ρ. This remains a constant in the
continuum limit, which leads to a ﬁnite photoassociation
rate ∝ ρ.
In contrast, in a BEC the atom number already ends
up in the transition matrix element, giving the eﬀective
Rabi frequency Ω = √N κ ∝ √ρ. One does not add rates
∝ κ2 due to diﬀerent atoms, but all the condensate atoms
act as a single state that has a ﬁnite matrix element for
photoassociation even in the limit of inﬁnite quantization
volume. This ultimately facilitates coherence eﬀects like
Rabi ﬂopping.

The Hamiltonian (15) acts in a rotating frame, and
there is no manifest physical signiﬁcance to its eigenval-

7

Fraction of atoms forming molecules, f ,

in the
FIG. 1:
ground state of the atom-molecule condensate as a function
of the detuning of the laser from photoassociation threshold,
δ. The long-dashed and short-dashed lines are from the two-
mode quantum treatment for the respective atom numbers
N = 10 and N = 100, the solid line is from the semiclassical
approach embodied in the Gross-Pitaevskii equations.

ues. Nonetheless, let us call them energies, and the state
with the lowest energy the ground state. Qualitatively,
when the laser is tuned far below the photodissociation
threshold, δ ≪ −Ω, the a†a term in the Hamiltonian be-
comes costly in energy. The ground state of the Hamil-
tonian should then tend to have the system mostly in
molecules. Conversely, for δ ≫ Ω, the ground state favors
atoms. We conﬁrm these surmises explicitly in Fig. III by
plotting the fraction of atoms converted into molecules,
the expectation value

f =

2hb†bi
N

,

(29)

for the numerically obtained ground state. The diﬀerence
between the dashed curves is the atom number, N = 10
and N = 100.

The idea is near that, when the laser is swept from
a large above-threshold detuning to a large (in absolute
value) below-threshold value, the system will follow adi-
abatically, and an atomic condensate is converted to a
molecular condensates [8]. Moreover, if Ω were the rele-
vant frequency scale, adiabaticity means that the detun-
ing must change by Ω in a time of the order or longer
than Ω−1. In our model we assume that the detuning is
swept as

δ(t) = −ξΩ2t .

(30)

We expect adiabatic following when ξ <

∼ 1.

This piece of intuition is correct. In Fig. 2 we repro-
duce the relevant ﬁgure from Ref. [8]. We ﬁx N = 100.
At an initial time giving δ = −20 Ω, we start the sys-
tem in its ground state, almost purely atoms, and inte-
grate the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation numeri-
cally while sweeping the detuning at two rates ξ = 1 and

1.0

0.8

 ξ = 0.1
   ξ = 1

0.6

f

 

0.4

0.2

0.0

20

8

We will study deviations from the two-mode picture,
or the possibility that the (inﬁnite) atomic and molecular
condensates are not spatially homogeneous. Here we use
the quantum ﬁeld version of our photoassociation theory.
But solving nonlinear quantum ﬁeld theories is generally
not a simple matter, and one must approximate. We will
resort to classical ﬁeld theory, the same way one proceeds
when an alkali condensate is analyzed using the Gross-
Pitaevskii equation.

10

0

δ(t)/Ω

-10

-20

A. Gross-Pitaevskii equations

FIG. 2: Fraction of atoms converted to molecules, f = 2hb†bi,
as a function of instantaneous detuning, δ(t), when the de-
tuning is swept linearly as a function of time according to
δ(t) = −ξΩ2t. The ﬁgure is for the atom number N = 100,
for the two sweep rates ξ = 0.1 and ξ = 1.

ξ = 0.1. The plot gives the fraction of atoms converted
to molecules as a function of the instantaneous detuning.
For ξ = 1 we expect to be somewhere at the borderline
of adiabaticity, and actually ﬁnd a conversion eﬃciency
of 0.8. When the laser tuning is swept ten times more
slowly, ξ = 0.1, the conversion eﬃciency has reached 0.97.
We believe that we have discovered a feasible method
start with an
for preparing a molecular condensate:
atomic condensate and a photoassociating laser, then
sweep the frequency of the laser in a proper way, and
obtain a molecular BEC. In the general manner of adia-
batic methods, this “rapid adiabatic passage” should be
robust.

Besides its potential utility, rapid adiabatic passage
is another example of coherent phenomena that occur
in a condensate but not in a nondegenerate gas. Once
more,
in a nondegenerate gas the frequency scale for
adiabaticity is κ, and the time scale is proportional to
κ−1 ∝ V 1/2. Even if nothing else went wrong, in the
limit of a large sample the time scale for adiabatic atom-
molecule conversion would tend to inﬁnity. Once more,
Bose enhancement saves the day by turning the volume
dependence of the relevant frequency scale into a density
dependence [15].

IV. FIELD THEORY FOR ALL MODES

If only one spatial mode has to be considered for both
the atomic and the molecular condensate, the two-mode
Hamiltonian (15) is all there is to it. Nonetheless, even
if somehow the inﬁnite homogeneous condensate could
be approximated in practice, for whatever reason there
would always be atoms and molecules present with mo-
menta that are not included in the two-mode picture. As
the full Hamiltonian (12) mixes momenta nonlinearly, the
possibility of instability arises and should be investigated.

To derive the Gross-Pitaevskii equations (GPE) for
this problem, in the usual way we ﬁrst amend the Hamil-
tonian by adding to it a multiple of the conserved particle
number

N =Xk

(a†kak+2b†kbk) =Z d3r [φ†(r)φ(r)+2ψ†(r)ψ(r)] .

(31)
Instead of the Hamiltonian density, we then use the
“Kamiltonian” density

K(r) = H(r) − µ[φ†(r)φ(r) + 2ψ†(r)ψ(r)]

(32)

in our calculations. This substitution has no eﬀect on
the dynamics. At this point the real scalar µ is arbitrary.
Though this piece of knowledge has no bearing on our
analysis, in the end the constant µ will be analogous to
chemical potential in thermodynamics. Hence, µ is called
the chemical potential.

Using the standard commutators for boson ﬁelds, the
Heisenberg equation of motion for the molecular ﬁeld be-
comes

i ˙ψ(r) = [ψ(r),Z d3r′ K(r′)
+ δ0 − 2

¯h∇2
4m

= (cid:20)−

]

¯h

µ

¯h(cid:21) ψ(r) − 1

2D(r)φ(r)φ(r) .
(33)

The transformation to the classical ﬁeld theory is eﬀected
by positing that the ﬁelds in the equations of motion are
no longer boson ﬁelds, but commuting c-number ﬁelds.
The interpretation is that φ(r) and ψ(r) are the macro-
scopic wave functions for atomic and molecular conden-
sates.

From this point onward we again take the driving ﬁeld
to be a simple plane wave with the positive frequency
part 1
2 Eeiq·r. Second, we scale the atomic and molecular

ﬁelds with the square root of density, pN/V . Third,

we incorporate the spatial variation of the electric ﬁeld
into the deﬁnition of the molecular ﬁeld. Altogether, we
deﬁne new atomic and molecular ﬁelds Φ and Ψ as

φ =r N

V

Φ,

ψ =r N

V

eiq·rΨ .

(34)

The net results are four. First, the normalization of the
ﬁelds now reads

1

V Z d3r (|Φ|2 + 2|Ψ|2) = 1 .

part of the transformation, Eq. (44) is that, due to the
Doppler shift, the eﬀective detuning changes depending
on the overall motion of the atom-molecule system.

9

(35)

Finally, we express the GPE (IV A) in a speciﬁc system

of units,

Second, the coeﬃcient D gets multiplied by the square
if all
root of the atom density that would prevail
molecules were to dissociate. Third, all explicit posi-
tion dependence disappears from the equations of mo-
tion. The GPE for the rescaled atomic and molecular
wave functions are

¯h∇2
i ˙Φ(r) = (cid:20)−
2m − µ(cid:21) Φ(r) − e−iϕΩ Φ∗(r)Ψ(r),(36)
i ˙Ψ(r) = (cid:20)−
¯h
¯h
4m∇2 + i
2m
2 eiϕΩ [Φ(r)]2 .
− 1

¯h(cid:21) Ψ(r)

q · ∇ + δ − 2

(37)

µ

None other than our characteristic frequency scale for
photoassociation, Ω of Eq. (27), is now explicitly the fre-
quency scale in the ﬁeld equations as well. The phase
factor eiϕ accounts for the phases of the electric ﬁeld
and dipole moment, and will soon prove inconsequential.
Fourth, a photon recoil term got added to the kinetic
energy of the molecules.

While still using full dimensional units, we pause to
discuss the mathematical symmetries of the GPE. First,
a trivial phase change of one of the ﬁelds, e.g., Φ →
e−iϕ/2Φ, converts Eqs. (IV A) to the same equations, ex-
cept that the phase factors vanish from atom-molecule
interaction terms. Therefore, we drop the phase in the
interaction term. Second, the GPE have a global gauge
invariance. If the ﬁelds Φ, Ψ are a solution, then so are
the ﬁelds Φeiϕ, Ψe2iϕ for an arbitrary ﬁxed phase ϕ. In
particular, putting ϕ = 2π, one may see that the equa-
tions are invariant under the change of the sign of the
ﬁeld Φ. Third, as a time dependent generalization of the
gauge invariance, the GPE is invariant under the replace-
ment

Φ → Φei∆µt,
Ψ → Ψe2i∆µt,
µ → µ + ∆µ .

(38)
(39)
(40)

Fourth, the GPE is Galilei invariant, in that the replace-
ments

Φ(r, t) → eik·rΦ(cid:18)r −
Ψ(r, t) → e2ik·rΨ(cid:18)r −

¯hk
m
¯hk
m

t, t(cid:19) ,
t, t(cid:19) ,

µ → µ +
δ → δ −

,

¯h2k2
2m
¯hk
m · q

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

convert a solution into another solution that corresponds
to an added momentum ¯hk per atom. The nontrivial

t0 =

1
Ω

,

r0 =r ¯h

mΩ

, m0 = m ,

(45)

for time, length and mass respectively. Technically, we
should rename the scaled variables and parameter; say,
t = ¯t t0, δ = ¯δ/t0. However, we eschew such a heavy
notation, and continue to use, e.g., the symbol δ for what
now stands for a dimensionless number and should be
properly denoted by ¯δ = δ/Ω. The result is

i ˙Φ = (cid:2)− 1
i ˙Ψ = (cid:2)− 1

2∇2 − µ(cid:3) Φ − Φ∗Ψ,
4∇2 + 1

2 iq · ∇ + δ − 2µ(cid:3) Ψ − 1

2 Φ2 .

(46)

(47)

The GPE equations are as stated in Ref. [14]. The
plan now is to analyze them. Of course, equations of
the type (IV A) are standard fare in studies of second-
harmonic generation. The literature once more is exten-
sive, and we will only give a few speciﬁc pointers as we
go along.

B. Steady state of GPE

Atomic and molecular ﬁelds Φ and Ψ represent a sta-
tionary state, one in which the physics does not change
with time, if and only if their time evolution is solely in
global (position independent) phase factors, possibly dif-
ferent ones for Φ and Ψ. Now consider ﬁelds of the form
Φ(r, t) = Φ(r)e−iωt and Ψ(r, t) = Ψ(r)e−2iωt for any real
ω. One sees right away that for this type of evolution, at
least the exponential time dependence properly matches
on both sides of Eqs. (IV A). Although we have not been
able to prove it mathematically, we conjecture that, as-
suming time independent parameters in Eqs. (IV A), this
type of time dependence is also the only possible case in
which the physics is independent of time.

But then, by virtue of the transformation (IV A), by
readjusting the chemical potential one can always remove
the time dependence of the ﬁelds entirely in any station-
ary state. The chemical potential started its life as an
arbitrary parameter. From now on we make use of the
arbitrariness and choose the value in such a way that in
steady state the atomic and molecular ﬁelds are literally
constants in time.

We shall see shortly that, for any time independent de-
tuning δ, one may pick a suitable value for the chemical
potential µ so that the GPE (IV A) have solutions Φ0, Ψ0
that are constants in both space and time. But by virtue
of the Galilean transformation (IV A), we may then con-
struct from Φ0, Ψ0 a stationary solution corresponding
to an arbitrary overall ﬂow of atoms and molecules, so-
lutions of the form Φ ∝ eik·r and Ψ ∝ e2ik·r. Conversely,

we believe that all spatially homogeneous stationary so-
lutions are such Galilean boosts of the once-and-for-all
constant solutions Φ0, Ψ0. As far as it comes to spatially
homogeneous steady states, we therefore may, and will,
without any restriction on generality consider ﬁelds that
are constants in space and time.

In the context of second-harmonic generation it is well
known that the GPE may have spatially inhomogeneous
solitary-wave type stationary solutions [23]. By applying
the Galilean transformation, one may ﬁnd traveling soli-
tary waves as well. Here we will make no eﬀort to ﬁnd,
let alone classify, solitary-wave solutions to our GPE, but
proceed as if the homogeneous steady states were all there
is to it.

Within the scope of the present paper, the stationary

solutions thus satisfy

0 = −µΦ0 − Φ∗0Ψ0,
0 = (δ − 2µ)Ψ0 − 1
1 = |Φ0|2 + 2|Ψ0|2 ,

2 Φ2

0

(48)
(49)

(50)

where the ﬁnal equation originates from the normaliza-
tion (35). Moreover, by virtue of the global gauge in-
variance, one may choose Φ0 real. Next, because of the
invariance of the GPE with respect to the sign change of
Φ, we may always choose Φ0 to be nonnegative. Further-
more, if Φ0 > 0, then (48) shows that Ψ (like µ) must be
real. On the other hand, if Φ0 = 0, Ψ0 comes with an ar-
bitrary phase, and may be chosen real. All told, we only
need to ﬁnd the real solutions Φ0, Ψ0, µ to Eqs. (IV B),
and besides only solutions with Φ0 ≥ 0 need be retained.
There are three distinct solutions. The trivial one
reads

Φ0

0 = 0, Ψ0

0 = 1√2

, µ0 = 1

2 δ ;

(51)

for δ ≤ √2 we have

3

Φ+

0 = p6 − δ2 − δ√6 + δ2
0 = −δ − √6 + δ2
Ψ+
µ+ = −Ψ+
0 ;
and for δ ≥ −√2 we ﬁnd

6

,

Φ−0 = p6 − δ2 + δ√6 + δ2
Ψ−0 = −δ + √6 + δ2
µ− = −Ψ−0 .

3

6

,

,

,

(52)

(53)

At least two steady states are found for each δ, and

three in the interval −√2 < δ < √2. The ques-

tion is, which one represents the desired physical steady
state. Here we attempt to mimic the ground state of the

10

quantum-mechanical two-mode model (15), and choose
the stationary solution so that [14]

√2 : Φ0 = Φ0
0, µ = µ0,
√2 : Φ0 = Φ−0 , Ψ0 = ψ−0 , µ = µ− .

0, Ψ0 = ψ0

δ < −
δ ≥ −

(54)

The success is evident in Fig. III, where we plot side by
side the fraction of atoms converted to molecules from
the quantum-mechanical two-mode model and the cor-
responding GPE approximation f = 2Ψ2
0 (solid line) as
a function of detuning. By comparing with the N = 10
and N = 100 quantum results, it may be seen that the
agreement between the GPE and the quantum approach
gets better as the number of atoms is increased. Even
for an atom number as small as 100 and around the non-

analytic point δ = −√2 of the GPE approximation (54),

the diﬀerence is only on the order of one per cent.

We conclude by noting that Eqs. (51) and (52) together
give a stationary solution that is the exact mirror image
of our choice (54) with the substitution δ → −δ. This
corresponds to the state with maximum energy for the
two-mode quantum system. It is a stationary state just
as is the minimum, and may be used for atom-molecule
conversion. The diﬀerence is that, in the case of the
maximum, the detuning would be swept in the opposite
direction, from below to above the dissociation thresh-
old. Otherwise rapid adiabatic passage should work es-
sentially as before.

C. Small excitations of the system

So far, while analyzing the GPE, we have achieved
nothing more than in our studies of the two-mode model;
rather less, because in our classical ﬁeld theory we lose
quantum ﬂuctuations. Nevertheless, we now have the
tools to analyze the stability of the steady state, and see
how spatial inhomogeneities evolve in time.

As in Ref. [14], we linearize the GPE around a station-
ary solution, and then attempt to ﬁnd eigenmodes for
small deviations from the stationary case. Both of these
steps are achieved at once by inserting the Ansatz

Φ(r, t) = Φ0 + uΦ ei(p·r−ωt) + v∗Φ e−i(p·r−ω∗t)

(55)

into the GPE, and only retaining the ﬁrst-order terms in
the “small” coeﬃcients uΦ, vΦ. Of course, the ﬁeld Ψ
is treated similarly. We need to mix plane waves p and
−p because the GPE mixes ﬁelds and their complex con-
jugates. With our Ansatz we also retain the possibility
that the evolution frequency of an eigenmode could be
complex.

The Ansatz succeeds if the as of yet unknown evolution

frequency ω satisﬁes the eigenvalue equations

2 p2 + µ + ω(cid:3) uΦ + ψ0vΦ + Φ0uΨ = 0,
(cid:2)− 1
2 p2 + µ − ω(cid:3) vΦ + ψ0uΦ + Φ0vΨ = 0,
(cid:2)− 1
4 (p2 + 2p · q) + 2µ − ¯δ + ω(cid:3) uΨ + Φ0uΦ = 0,
(cid:2)− 1
4 (p2 − 2p · q) + 2µ − ¯δ − ω(cid:3) vΨ + Φ0vΦ = 0.
(cid:2)− 1

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

11

The characteristic equation is fourth order in ω, so in
principle the solutions can always be written down an-
alytically. However, here we use Mathematica [24] to
produce results directly numerically, and occasionally to
extract analytical forms for special and limiting cases.

The dispersion relations of the excitation modes, ω =
ω(p), depend on the relative propagation directions of
the excitation and of light, and also on the size of the
photon recoil kick. We encompass these dependences into
a dimensionless parameter, which in terms of the original
dimensional parameters reads

η =s ¯h(q · p)2
mΩ p · p

.

(60)

Given the parameter η and the absolute value p of the
(dimensionless) propagation vector p, the terms that de-
pend on photon recoil in Eqs. (IV C) are replaced as fol-
lows,

1

4 (p2 ± 2p · q) → 1

4 (p2 ± 2ηp) .

(61)

For ﬁxed values of the parameters δ, η and p, there
are four excitation modes with four (in general) diﬀerent
evolution frequencies ω. If a positive imaginary part is
encountered in any one of the four frequencies, the corre-
sponding mode grows exponentially and the steady state
is unstable.

Let us take the wave vector characterizing the small-
excitation mode to be perpendicular to the propagation
direction of light, η = 0. We begin with p = 0 and assume
|Ψ0|2 < 1
2 , a nontrivial mix of atoms and molecules. We
ﬁnd the solutions to the characteristic equation for the
eigenvalue problem (IV C)

ω2

1(0) = 0.

ω2

2(0) = (cid:18)3 +

1

2|Ψ0|2(cid:19)(cid:18) 1

2 − |Ψ0|2(cid:19) .

(62)

(63)

When the wave number of the excitation moves away
from p = 0, of the four frequencies the two evolving con-
tinuously from ±ω2(0) remain real. Their dispersion re-
lations for small p are of the type ω2(p) ≃ ω2(0) + 1
2m∗ p2,
with m∗ ≥ 0, so that these excitations are akin to optical
phonons. On the other hand, the remaining two excita-
tion frequencies are either purely real or purely imagi-
nary, and for small enough p they are always imaginary.
Such modes do not propagate at all, but grow or shrink
in place exponentially.

In fact, in Fig. 3, which is transcribed from Ref. [14],
we plot the largest imaginary part among the four fre-
quencies ω, |ℑ[ω1]|, as a function of the detuning δ and
the wave number p of the excitation mode. As above,
we set η = 0.
It may be seen that, for any detuning
δ > −√2, an unstable excitation mode is always found.

The largest imaginary part of an evolution frequency,
i.e, the largest growth rate of an instability, is encoun-
tered at δ = −0.154496 and p = ±0.771324, and equals
ℑ(ω) = 0.24256.

FIG. 3: Largest imaginary part among the four evolution
frequencies of small perturbations of the joint atom-molecule
condensate is plotted as a function of the laser detuning δ
and the wave number of the plane-wave like perturbation p.
In this ﬁgure the excitation mode propagates perpendicularly
to the propagation direction of light, so that ξ = 0.

The analogous instability is naturally known in second-
harmonic generation, and goes under the rubric “modu-
lational instability” [25, 26].

We next come to the eﬀect of the direction of the wave
vector of the mode on instability. In Fig. 4 we plot the
largest positive imaginary part of a mode frequency found
for any p as a function of the parameter η. The curves
are labeled with their corresponding ﬁxed detunings δ.
In our studies of this kind, the largest growth rate of the
instability was always found for η = 0. For a given de-
tuning, the small excitations whose momentum direction
is perpendicular to light propagation always present the
most unstable scenario.

Finally consider the largest growth rate of the instabil-
ity (among all p) as a function of the detuning. As may
be inferred from Fig. 3, with increasing detuning δ >
∼ 1 it
decreases and occurs at smaller momenta, i.e., at larger
size scales. In fact, for δ ≫ 1, the maximum growth rate

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

0

}
]

ω

[

m
I
x{ 
a
m

1/(cid:214)2

d  = -
d  = 0
d  = 1/(cid:214)2
d  = (cid:214)2
d  = 2 (cid:214)2
d  = 4 (cid:214)2

2

4

η

6

FIG. 4: Largest imaginary part in a small-excitation evolu-
tion frequency encountered for any value of the wave number
of the excitation p is plotted against the parameter ξ that
characterizes the component of the photon recoil momentum
in the direction of the propagation vector of the small exci-
tation p. The explicit deﬁnition of ξ is given in Eq. (60).
Diﬀerent curves are for diﬀerent ﬁxed detunings δ, as identi-
ﬁed in the legend.

of an instability R(δ) = max{ℑ[ω(p, δ)]}p behaves as

R(δ) ∼(cid:20) 1
2 δ −

5
4 δ3 + O(

1

δ5 )(cid:21) ,

(64)

and the corresponding position of the maximum pM (δ),
the value of the momentum such that ℑ[ω(p, δ)] ≤
ℑ[ω(pM , δ)] for all p, goes like

pM (δ) ∼r 1

δ (cid:20)1 −

1
δ2 +

47
16 δ4 + O(

1

δ6 )(cid:21) .

(65)

Of course, as the largest growth rate of the instability
seems to occur for η = 0, this was our choice in Eqs. (64)
and (65).

state of the atom-molecule system is stable, and for any

on a speciﬁc stationary solution (54), possibly one out of
three, the modes we have not considered explicitly are

In sum, we have found that for δ ≤ −√2 the steady
δ > −√2 it is unstable. Although we have reported only
all unstable. But δ = −√2 is also the watershed, in
that below δ = −√2 the steady state is all molecules
(Φ0 = 0), and above δ = −√2 some atoms are involved.
stable for δ ≤ −√2, but any steady state involving atoms
is always unstable. The most unstable situation occurs
around δ ≃ 0, with about an equal mixture of atoms and
molecules. For δ ≫ 1 atoms take over, and the time scale
for the instability grows longer.

All told, the steady state with everything in molecules is

12

D. Fate of unstable system

Linearized stability analysis has shown that a joint
atom-molecule condensate is unstable in the presence
of photoassociating light, i.e., there are small-excitation
modes that grow exponentially. But when a small devi-
ation from steady state grows exponentially, eventually
it is not a small deviation anymore and the linearized
analysis breaks down. To investigate the fate of the sys-
tem once the instability has set in, we integrate the full
GPE numerically as in Ref. [14]. Our aim is a qualita-
tive demonstration, so we proceed in 1 + 1 dimensions,
one spatial coordinate x and time t. However, there is
nothing in our method that would not immediately work
in higher spatial dimensions. The restriction is merely a
matter of computer time.

Speciﬁcally, in our algorithm we discretize a stretch L
of the line into equidistant points xi, and seek to repre-
sent the ﬁelds at these discrete points only. For conve-
nience, we use periodic boundary conditions, so that the
value of all functions repeats over L. The GPE is inte-
grated over a time step h in two moves. First we ignore
the position derivatives in the GPE altogether. This im-
plies that the stripped-down version of the GPE is local;
for each xi, Φ(xi) and Ψ(xi) only couple to Φ(xi) and
Ψ(xi). We integrate the local version of the GPE over
the time h separately for each xi as two coupled diﬀer-
ential equations using a second-order Runge-Kutta step.
To prevent a numerical drift of the norm, we complete
the initial step of the algorithm by normalizing the ﬁelds
analogously to Eq. (35). Second, we ignore anything but
the position derivatives in the GPE. The resulting par-
tial version of the GPE is nonlocal, but in exchange it is
linear and does not mix the ﬁelds Φ and Ψ. To integrate
over the same (sic!) time step as in the initial part of
the algorithm, we ﬁrst take the Fourier transform of the
result from the ﬁrst part using the Fast Fourier Trans-
formation (FFT). In Fourier space position derivatives
become local, so, to propagate the ﬁelds over the step h,
we simply multiply their Fourier transforms by what is
now the local, exact (within FFT), linear time evolution
operator. Finally, in preparation for the next step, we
transform back to real space.

This split-step algorithm is an obvious variation of the
time honored split-operator methods for linear partial
diﬀerential equations [27], and has been described be-
fore at least by the group of Firth [28]. Nonetheless, it
comes with a fair dose of heuristics. It is therefore grat-
ifying that we have been able to verify a good rate of
convergence by using successively smaller time steps to
integrate over a ﬁxed interval of time.

We present an example of our simulations in Fig. 5,
showing the absolute square of the atomic ﬁeld |Φ|2 as
a function of position x and time t. We use 128 points
xi. Because of the periodic boundary conditions, the left
and right edges of x wrap around and are actually the
same. The plot is for the parameters δ = 0, η = 0, the
range of position x is 24.6282 (in units of r0) correspond-

13

around, and tend to join when they collide. As far as
we can tell, within the present model only one big, dense
clump will remain in the end.

One might wonder what is the mechanism behind the
clumping. We present a heuristic guess. We are not talk-
ing about a thermodynamic system, so minimization of
energy is a dubious principle to begin with; and besides,
we are dealing with quasienergies in a rotating frame, not
real energies. With these warnings out of the way, let us
surmise that the system nevertheless attempts to mini-
mize its energy. The atomic and molecular condensates
make something akin to the two-level system in quantum
optics. When light is added, one gets a dressed two-level
system. The energy of the lower one of the two dressed
states decreases with increasing Rabi frequency, which is
the product of the electric ﬁeld strength of the laser and
the dipole moment. But the analog of Rabi frequency
for the two-level system of atomic and molecular conden-
sates, Ω, is also proportional to the square root of density,
so the present system may also decrease its energy by in-
creasing the density. Maybe this is what the instability
is about.

V. EXPERIMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

The models we have discussed until now have been
rather rudimentary. We next take up two types of com-
plications that may come up in experiments. First, in
Sec. V A enters an angle that is in principle included
in our many-body Hamiltonian, although we have not
yet considered it expressly: photodissociation of conden-
sate molecules to states outside of the atomic condensate.
It turns out to limit the rate at which one can achieve
coherent atom-molecule conversion in adiabatic passage.
Second, in Sec. V B we discuss a number of aspects that
have so far been missing from our models: spontaneous
emission from the photoassociated state, atom-atom in-
teractions, trapping of atoms and molecules, and various
level shifts. Spontaneous emission can be ameliorated by
resorting to a two-color photoassociation scheme. Pro-
vided that photoassociation is speedy enough, which we
believe is technically possible, the rest of these complica-
tions may be minor nuisances rather than dominant fea-
tures of an experiment. What it takes to make photoas-
sociation speedy enough is the subject of Sec. V C, where
we discuss the characteristic Rabi frequency for photoas-
sociation Ω for various alkalis. Finally, in Sec. V D, we
analyze the published experiment of Ref. [16] from our
viewpoint of coherent photoassociation.

A. Rogue photodissociation

As we noted already, in the case of photoassociation
of an inﬁnite homogeneous condensate, momentum con-
servation uniquely determines the state of the ensuing
molecule. The converse, however, does not hold. When

FIG. 5: An example to demonstrate the modulational insta-
bility of the joint atom-molecule condensate. Atom density
|Φ|2 is plotted as a function of the spatial coordinate x and
time t, given that the system starts out at time t = 0 in the
steady state plus a small amount of random noise.

ing to three wavelengths of the most unstable excitation
mode for these parameters, and time t runs from 0 to 127
(in units of t0). The unit of |Φ|2, atom density, is such
that for a homogeneous gas with everything in atoms,
the density would be |Φ|2 ≡ 1. The system starts at time
t = 0 in the steady state appropriate for δ = 0, η = 0,
except that we add a small amount of Gaussian noise to
each of the points specifying the initial state. Figure 5
is otherwise the same as Fig. 2 in Ref. [14], except that
a diﬀerent seed was used for the random number gener-
ator that added the noise. As beﬁts an instability, this
innocuous change has lead to a totally diﬀerent quanti-
tative result at long times.

From the numerical simulations we see that the nature
of the instability is such that the atoms and the molecules
together combine into dense clumps. These clumps move

a molecule photodissociates into two atoms, momentum
conservation does not force the atoms to return to the
atomic condensate. Bose enhancement favors recombi-
nation of atoms with the condensate; the characteristic
frequency is Ω for both photoassociation and photodis-
sociation between atomic and molecular condensates.
Nonetheless, atoms winding up elsewhere are lost for co-
herent photoassociation. We have coined the term “rogue
photodissociation” for photodissociation processes that
send atoms outside the atomic condensate.

One might think that energy conservation in the cy-
cle of photoassociation and photodissociation is the ad-
ditional constraint that guarantees that the atoms return
to the condensate. But this need not be a compelling ar-
gument. Any time dependence in the system interferes
with energy conservation. For instance, suppose that
photodissociation proceeds to the noncondensate states
at the same rate Γ0 (per atom) as it would in the case
of a nondegenerate gas of molecules, so that after a time
∼ Γ−1
coherent photoassociation ceases. The photodis-
sociation rate Γ0 in itself furnishes a time scale such that
energy has to be conserved only to within ¯hΓ0. The time
evolution involved in nonlinear Rabi ﬂopping would also
interfere with energy conservation.

0

We present here a rudimentary model for rogue pho-
todissociation for the special case when the detuning is
swept in order to convert an atomic condensate to a
molecular condensate. The key assumption is that we
may employ the standard Markov approximation in the
analysis of photodissociation. This entails that rogue
photodissociation has no memory, but is characterized
at each instant of time by a rate of exponential decay.
Such an assumption seems dubious in particular when
the laser is tuned to the close vicinity of the photodis-
sociation threshold [29]. However, we know of no near-
threshold case of this kind in which the breakdown of the
Markov approximation has proven relevant in an experi-
ment.

Evidently, only the condensate mode, one of very many
atomic modes, is strongly aﬀected by Bose enhancement.
We take rogue photodissociation to proceed at the rate
that would be appropriate for a nondegenerate gas at
the given detuning. Second, we model the dependence of
the photodissociation rate on detuning using the Wigner
threshold law, so that we write

from Eq. (53) as

PM (δ) =

1

18
−(cid:18) δ

Ω(cid:19) +s6 +(cid:18) δ

2

Ω(cid:19)2


14

(67)

Suppose now that the detuning is swept as δ = −ξΩ2t,
as in our rapid adiabatic passage example. Ignoring the
depletion of the condensates due to the very same rogue
photodissociation, we ﬁnd the total probability for rogue
photodissociation

P = Zδ(t)≥0
ξΩ(cid:20) 23/4

dt PM [δ(t)] Γ0r δ(t)
31/4 Z ∞

Γ0

=

Ω

0

dτ √τ(cid:16)p1 + τ 2 − τ(cid:17)2(cid:21)

= α

Γ0
ξΩ

,

(68)

where the numerical constant has the value α = 4.03197.
Except for the numerical factor, this is the same expres-
sion we already used in a qualitative estimate in Ref. [8].
Since the photodissociation rate grows linearly with
light intensity, ∝ I, and the photoassociation character-
istic frequency Ω is proportional to the ﬁeld strength of
√I, in the end rogue photodissociation wins
the laser, ∝
out as the light intensity is increased. Qualitatively, when
P = 1, rogue photodissociation has overtaken coherent
conversion of atoms to molecules. To study this border-
line case, we ﬁrst set P = 1 in Eq. (68) and solve Γ0 as
a function of Ω. We then insert the result into Eq. (27),
thus eliminating Γ0. Moreover, the velocity v0 in Eq. (27)
is then the relative velocity of the dissociated atoms cor-
responding to the detuning of the laser that gave the
photoassociation rate Γ0, in this case δ = Ω. Therefore
we have v2
0/2µ = ¯hΩ, and v0 may be eliminated as well.
We ﬁnally solve for the borderline value Ω as a function
of the problem parameters. After simple manipulations
the ensuing characteristic frequency scale for photoasso-
ciation may be written

ˆΩ =  8√2πξ

α !2/3

(ρλ3)2/3 ǫR .

(69)

Γ(δ) = θ(δ)r δ

Ω

Γ0 .

(66)

Here we have introduced λ, wavelength of the light di-
vided by 2π, and the familiar recoil frequency for laser
cooling

For convenience we have chosen the photoassociation fre-
quency scale Ω as the reference detuning for photodis-
sociation rate; Γ0 is the photodissociation rate for the
detuning δ = Ω. As the third quantitative element of
the model, we take the probability that a given atom is
in the molecular condensate to be twice the square of
the molecular ﬁeld amplitude as solved from the classical
ﬁeld theory, and normalized as in (50). Explicitly, in di-
mensional units and for δ ≥ 0, this probability is found

ǫR =

¯h

2mλ2 .

(70)

The main ﬁnding is that rogue photodissociation re-
stricts the light intensity that one may proﬁtably use for
adiabatic atom-molecule conversion. This means that
there is also a maximum usable photoassociation fre-
quency, or a minimum possible time scale for adiabatic
atom-molecule conversion. The way we have written our

estimate (69), the frequency scale is provided by the pho-
ton recoil frequency, and the corresponding time scale is
in the ballpark of ǫ−1
R . The density dependence of pho-
toassociation is encapsulated in the parameter ρλ3, the
usual dimensionless parameter that governs the coupling
of light with matter in a dense medium. For present-day
condensates ρλ3 ∼ 1 is a reasonable rule of thumb. Fi-
nally, we have a numerical constant that depends on the
rate of sweeping of the detuning, but which may also be
set equal to one in a rough estimate. Altogether, when
in need of a qualitative number for the photoassociation
frequency Ω, we resort to Ω ∼ ǫR.
Although our estimate of the minimum time scale for
coherent photoassociation was developed for rapid adia-
batic passage, we believe that (with ξ ≃ 1) it also applies
to Rabi ﬂopping. This is because the dimensional pa-
rameters of the problem are the same in both cases. In
fact, as it comes to dimensional quantities, the minimum
time scale for coherent photoassociation is equivalently
written [30]

m
¯hρ2/3 .

τ ∼

(71)

This is the essentially unique quantity with the dimension
of time that can be put together using the quantities
characterizing a homogeneous, noninteracting, quantum
mechanical, zero-temperature BEC; density, atom mass,
and ¯h.

B. Physics missing from model

1. Spontaneous emission

We have discussed a one-color model for photoasso-
ciation. The physical drawback is that, where there
is a strong dipole matrix element for photoassocia-
tion/dissociation driven by external light, there is also
a strong dipole matrix element for spontaneous emission.
For instance, if a photon is absorbed in photoassocia-
tion, then there is also a reverse spontaneous decay of the
molecule. The molecule may end up in bound vibrational
states, either in the same electronic manifold where the
atoms started from, or in some other electronic manifold.
Alternatively, the photoassociated molecule may decay
back to a dissociation continuum in a process known as
radiative escape. Either way, usually the probability is
small that the system returns to the same two-atom state
in which is started. After each process of spontaneous
emission, two atoms are typically lost for any proﬁtable
use.

The analogous problem of an unstable excited state
is standard fare in quantum optics, and so is the solu-
tion: add another laser-driven transition from the spon-
taneously decaying state to a stable state. In the same
way, two-color Raman photoassociation, a free-bound
transition followed by a bound-bound transition of the
molecule, may take place between (nearly) non-decaying

b

κ

ΓsΓ+

Ñ∆

g

15

a

δ

FIG. 6: Schematic three-level scheme for photoassociation.
The levels a, b and g stand for atoms, primary photoassociated
molecules, and ﬁnal stable molecules, respectively. The ﬁgure
is drawn in the rotating frame, so that the Rabi frequencies
κ and χ representing the laser ﬁelds are independent of time,
and the intermediate and two-photon detunings ∆ and δ are
drawn as appropriate level energies.

atomic and molecular states [7, 32, 33]. Here we study
Raman photoassociation as a means of achieving an eﬀec-
tive two-mode scheme; genuine three-mode phenomena
such as STIRAP are discussed elsewhere [13]

Our present notation for this scheme is sketched in
Fig. 6. Suppose the ﬁrst step of photoassociation takes
place with absorption of a photon, then one sets up an-
other laser to force, say, induced emission from the pri-
mary photoassociated state to a (more) stable bound
molecular state. We call the Rabi frequency in the second
step χ, the detuning of the laser from resonance in the
second transition ∆, and the spontaneous decay rate of
the primary photoassociation state Γs. In this context δ
stands for the two-photon detuning, the total energy mis-
match for light-induced transition from the initial atoms
to the ﬁnal stable molecular state, including appropriate
photon recoil corrections.

Let us model our three-level Λ scheme using a variation

of the two-mode model (15) as

H
¯h

= δ g†g + (∆+δ)b†b− χ(b†g+g†b)− 1

2 κ(b†aa+ba†a†) ,
(72)
where g, for “ground”, is the annihilation operator for
the stable molecular state. Once more, we have added a
multiple of the conserved particle number, this time in
such a way that the atoms have zero energy. The term
∝ χ describes transitions between the bound molecular
states. Spontaneous losses from the intermediate state
are ignored for the time being.

The Heisenberg equations of motion from Hamilto-

nian (72) are

˙g = −iδg + iχb,
˙b = −i(∆ + δ)b + iχg + 1
˙a = iκa†b .

2 iκaa,

(73)

(74)

(75)

We next eliminate the intermediate state adiabatically
with the assumption that ∆ is the largest evolution fre-
quency in the system. We thus formally set ˙b = 0, and

c
obtain

2.

Interactions between atoms and molecules

16

χg + 1
2 κaa
∆

.

b ≃

Inserting this into Eqs. (73) and (75), we have

˙g = −i(cid:18)δ −

χ2

∆(cid:19) g + 1

2 i

κχ
∆

aa,

κ2
∆

˙a = i

a†g + 1
2 i

a†aa .

κχ
∆

(76)

(77)

(78)

These are Heisenberg equations of motion for the eﬀective
Hamiltonian
Heﬀ
¯h

a†a†aa− 1

(a†a†g+g†aa) .

κχ
∆

κ2
∆

χ2

2

=(cid:18)δ −

∆(cid:19) g†g− 1

4

(79)
The eﬀective Hamiltonian describes a two-level system
with the two-photon detuning δ and two-photon Rabi
frequency κχ/∆ in lieu of the usual detuning and Rabi
frequency. There are two additional twists to the story.
First, the two-photon resonance experiences a light shift
−χ2/∆, an old acquaintance from quantum optics. Sec-
ond, we have an eﬀective atom-atom interaction propor-
tional to κ2/∆. An analogous interaction in a nonde-
generate gas was discussed earlier in Ref. [31]. Other
than these tweaks, everything we have said about the
two-mode model applies as before.

The adiabatic elimination (76) has a dark side hidden
by a notational trick, namely, that it does not preserve
boson commutators. Had we written the right-hand side
in Eq. (75) as ba† instead of a†b and substituted (76), the
atom-atom interaction term in the eﬀective Hamiltonian
would have displayed the operator ordering aaa†a† in-
stead of a†a†aa. The diﬀerence is immaterial for a large
atom number, the limit we are studying anyway, but a
more careful investigation of the adiabatic elimination
would be in order if the atom number were not large.

As excessive care with operator products is not war-
ranted, we write from the adiabatic assumption the num-
ber of atoms in the intermediate state b qualitatively as

(a†a)2 .

∆(cid:17)2
b†b ∼(cid:16) χ

2∆(cid:17)2
g†g +(cid:16) κ

(80)
Let us scale the operators by √N , i.e., write b = √N β,
and so forth. Then, within a factor of two, the quantum
expectation value hβ†βi is the probability that an atom
is in the intermediate state, and so on. Equation (80)
becomes

∆(cid:17)2
β†β ∼(cid:16) χ

2∆(cid:19)2
γ†γ +(cid:18) Ω

(α†α)2 .

(81)

The fraction of atoms lost per unit time to spon-
taneous emission from the intermediate state equals
2Γshβ†βi.The intermediate detuning ∆ suppresses losses
by a factor ∝ 1/∆2, whereas the eﬀective Rabi frequency
scales as 1/∆. In principle, and at the present level of
the physical model, it is possible to get rid of the harmful
spontaneous emission to any desired degree by increasing
the intermediate detuning.

Atoms interact among themselves, molecules interact
with molecules, and atoms even interact with molecules.
For a dilute gas, the atom-atom interaction is often de-
scribed by the eﬀective two-body potential

U (r1, r2) =

4π¯h2a

m

δ(r1 − r2) ,

(82)

where a is the s-wave scattering length for the atoms
as before. One may write analogous models for atom-
molecule and molecule-molecule interactions.
If atom-
atom interactions were suspected to be a factor, one could
add to the ﬁeld theory the usual two-body atom-atom
interactions as

HAA =

2π¯h2a

m

φ†(r)φ†(r)φ(r)φ(r) ,

(83)

and so on. Inelastic collisions, such as quenching of the
molecules by collisions, may also prove important. At a
phenomenological level, they could be described by using
a complex scattering length for atom-molecule collisions.
Nonetheless, we have considered neither elastic nor in-
elastic collisions explicitly in this paper. The motivation
is mainly pragmatic. Photoassociation is the novelty of
this work anyway. Second, at this point in time virtually
nothing is known about the scattering lengths for cases
other than atom-atom interactions. Third, as pointed
out in Sec. V A, we anticipate a characteristic frequency
scale for photoassociation, Ω, to be of the order of pho-
ton recoil frequency ǫR of laser cooling, say, ten kilohertz.
This is larger than a typical frequency scale associated
with collisions, 4π¯haρ/m, in many of the present alkali
experiments. Photoassociation should dominate the ac-
tion at least over short time scales.

More formally, we see from Eqs. (69) and (71) that the
maximum usable photoassociation frequency scales with
atom density as ρ2/3, while the rate of binary collisions
scales as ρ. In principle and at this level of modeling, it
is always possible to make photoassociation win out by
decreasing the density.

Of course, not all of our discussions are for short times
only. Notably, in the case of the instability of a joint
atom-molecule condensate, it may well happen that col-
lisional interactions eventually play a role in the clump-
ing. We plan to return to collisional eﬀects in a future
publication, inasmuch as something worthwhile emerges
from this front.

3. Trapping of atoms

In the current alkali vapor experiments one does not
see inﬁnite homogeneous condensates, but the conden-
sate is ordinarily conﬁned to a magnetic trap with a
(practically quadratic) potential V (r). This may be

taken into account in the ﬁeld theory by adding a term
in the Hamiltonian density,

HVA(r) = φ†(r)V (r)φ(r) .

(84)

A similar additional term would describe trapping of
molecules.

In fact, the beauty of the ﬁeld theoretical formulation
is that it does not depend on any given one-particle ba-
sis to describe the motion of the atoms and molecules.
The photoassociation term was originally discussed us-
ing plane-wave states, which makes the derivation easy,
but at the level of ﬁeld theory there is no manifest vestige
of plane waves anymore. Even if we add trapping poten-
tials, there is no need to tamper with the photoassocia-
tion term. This should be contrasted with the more del-
icate situation that emerges if one tries to consider pho-
toassociation directly using the eigenstates of the trap,
or indeed some states that would take into account both
trapping and atom-atom interactions.

Once more, if the photoassociation frequency scale is
of the order ǫR, it is still vastly larger than the typi-
cal frequency scales associated with magnetic trapping
of atoms, and the corresponding length scale for pho-
toassociation, λ, is far smaller than the size of a typical
condensate. Over short times the condensates behave lo-
cally as if they were homogeneous. One just applies the
theory of an inﬁnite condensates at each local density,
and averages the results over the trap.

On the other hand, there are cases in our formulation
where the trapping will matter. For Ω ∼ ǫR the modu-
lational instability may well set in as in a homogeneous
condensate, but the motion of the atoms and molecules
due to the trapping forces will certainly have a long-term
eﬀect on the atom-molecule clumps. We do not discuss
this issue here, but plan to return to trapping in a future
publication.

4. Level shifts

We have already mentioned a few mechanisms that can
change the position of the photoassociation resonance.
Atom-atom and molecule-molecule interactions alter the
energy per atom or per molecule, and thereby modify
the resonance condition for photoassociation. Since the
atom-molecule ratio conversely depends on the detuning,
the makings of bistability and hysteresis are in princi-
ple there. We have also discussed the light shift and the
many-body shift in a two-color, three-mode conﬁgura-
tion.

One more shift we have brought up before [6, 7], but
not yet in this paper, arises because the dissociation con-
tinuum is not ﬂat. Given the initial state, the dipole ma-
trix element (or more precisely, the square of the dipole
matrix element per unit energy) depends on the ﬁnal
continuum state. The result is that the photodissocia-
tion rate picks up an imaginary part. That, of course,

17

amounts to a shift of the photodissociating state with re-
spect to the continuum. The shift is proportional to light
intensity, and in a qualitative estimate is comparable to
the photodissociation rate; see, e.g., Refs. [34].

Moreover, there are additional shifts due to the pres-
ence of each and every discrete state dipole-coupled to
the initial state. The sum of all light shifts is actually ﬁ-
nite only because the dipole coupling eventually tends to
zero when one goes high enough in the energy of the cou-
pled states. The implication is that, a priori, all dipole
coupled states, even those oﬀ resonance by perhaps sev-
eral photon energies, have to be considered explicitly. If
one ﬁnds a signiﬁcant contribution to the light shift from
one far-oﬀ resonance state, chances are that one has to
consider all of them.

We will not attempt to address continuum and non-
resonant light shifts explicitly. Nonetheless, on the ba-
sis of the atomic case discussed in Refs. [34], we believe
that, at least above the photodissociation threshold, the
light shift should be reasonably independent of where ex-
actly the laser is tuned. This would mean that, in the
rapid adiabatic passage type atom-molecule conversion,
the light shift merely gives a constant bias to the detun-
ing, and is virtually inconsequential.

C. Numerical examples

1. From rate to Rabi frequency

One-color photoassociation has been analyzed by vari-
ous groups [35], in particular for alkalis at ﬁnite tempera-
ture. A typical outcome is the photoassociation rate Rv′
(in s−1) or the photoabsorption rate coeﬃcient αP A
(in
v′
cm5) for a given bound level v′ of the excited electronic
state. The latter quantity is independent of two experi-
mental parameters, namely atom density ρ and laser in-
tensity I. The rate of photoassociation Rv′ is obtained
via

Rv′ = ρϕαP A

v′

,

(85)

where the photon ﬂux (photons/s cm2) is given by ϕ =
I/¯hωL, ωL being the photon frequency.

But we also know from our earlier work [6, 7] that
the photoassociation rate in a thermal sample is given in
terms of our detuning δ, temperature T , and photoasso-
ciation rate Γ as

Rv′ = e− ¯hδ

kB T ρλ3

D Γ ,

where

1/2

λD =(cid:18) 2π¯h2
µkBT(cid:19)

(86)

(87)

is the usual thermal de Broglie wavelength, albeit cal-
culated using the reduced mass of the colliding atoms.
In what follows, we write the detuning parameter for

photoassociation as δ = ω∞ − ωL − ∆v′ , where ¯hω∞ is
the asymptotic energy diﬀerence between the electronic
curves and ∆v′ is the red-detuning of level v′ from its
asymptote. The binding energy of the molecular state is
thus equal to ¯h∆v′ . Combining Eqs. (85) and (86) with
Eq. (27), we have an expression for the characteristic fre-
quency of coherent photoassociation to the level v′,

18

v′

TABLE I: Photoabsorption rate coeﬃcients αP A
(in cm5)
and characteristic intensities Iv′ (in W cm−2) for levels v′
with the best simultaneous Franck-Condon factors with the
continuum and the highest-lying level of the lower electronic
state, and for levels corresponding to detunings near 1 cm−1.
The vibrational number v′ as well as the corresponding bind-
ing energy ∆v′ (in cm−1) are also given. Calculations were
performed for T=1 mK.

Ωv′ = e

¯hδ

2kB Ts 2π¯h2αP A

vµ2λ3
D

v′ ϕρ

.

(88)

singlet

triplet

6Li

7Li

6Li

7Li

In all of our discussion below we choose the detuning
2 kBT , which gives the cor-

in such a way that ¯hδ = 1

responding resonance velocity v = pkBT /µ. Strictly
speaking, Eq. (27) requires the limit v → 0, or equiva-
lently, δ → 0. However, we always assume, without ex-
plicitly checking this assumption, that the temperature
is already low enough to bring the system into the region
of validity of the Wigner threshold law. The quotient
Γ/v in Eq. (27) has then supposedly reached the v → 0
limit.
We have already introduced the usual density param-
eter for light-matter coupling λ3ρ to characterize atom
density, and the recoil frequency ǫR as the frequency
scale.
In the same vein, we write the Rabi frequency
for photoassociation as

Ωv′
ǫR

=s(cid:18) I

Iv′(cid:19)q(λ3ρ) ,

(89)

where Iv′ is the characteristic light intensity for coher-
ent photoassociation. In explicit numbers, we ﬁnd from
Eq. (88)

Iv′ =

1.46245 × 10−26
nmi2(cid:20) αP A
cm5(cid:21)
u(cid:3)2h T
Kih λ
(cid:2) m

v′

W
cm2 ,

(90)

which also displays the units used to express atomic mass
m, temperature T , wavelength of light λ, and photoab-
sorption coeﬃcient αP A

.

v′

2. Calculated photoassociation rates

One can estimate the photoabsorption rate coeﬃcient
for a pair of atoms. At low temperatures, only s-wave
scattering contributes to the process, and one ﬁnds [17,
36]

αP A
v′ (ω, T ) ≃

4π2ω

3c

De− ¯hδ
λ3

kB T |Dv′(¯hδ)|2 ,

(91)

In the low-temperature limit, the dipole matrix element
|Dv′ (¯hδ)|2 can be approximated by

|Dv′ (E)|2 ≡ |hv′, J = 1|D|¯hδ, J = 0i ,
π¯h2(cid:19)|D0|2(a − Rv′ )2S2

≃ (cid:18) 2µk

v′

(92)

v′
∆v′
αP A

v′
Iv′

v′
∆v′
αP A

v′
Iv′

70

36.4

69

86.7

51

164

58

122

2.8 × 10−32 2.4 × 10−32 2.3 × 10−31 2.0 × 10−32

32

27

87

0.99

94

0.99

3.9

79

1.05

33

86

0.87

6.7 × 10−30 7.8 × 10−30 9.2 × 10−29 2.1 × 10−29

0.13

0.085

0.0098

0.032

with E = ¯h2k2/2µ = ¯hδ, where D0 = |d| is the asymp-
totic dipole moment, a is the scattering length, Rv′ is the
classical outer turning point of the excited level v′, and
Sv′ is a dimensionless parameter representing the frac-
tion of the bound wave function contained in the last
node [17, 36, 37].

For example, given 7Li atoms in a triplet state at 1
mK, a detailed calculation [37] showed that the excited
level v′ = 58 has the best Franck-Condon factor with
the continuum and the highest-lying bound level v′′ =
10 of the lower triplet electronic state, with αP A
v′=58 =
2.0 × 10−32 cm5 [38]. The corresponding characteristic
intensity is Iv′=58 = 33 W cm−2.
Beyond this, in Fig. 7 we give the calculated rate co-
eﬃcients for high-lying vibrational states for both stable
isotopes of Li, for both the singlet and the triplet excited
states. Correspondingly, Table I presents a few numer-
ical examples of the rate coeﬃcients and characteristic
intensities.

Much larger photoassociation rates and correspond-
ingly smaller characteristic intensities can be obtained
if the excited levels v′ are closer to the dissociation
limit (i.e., have smaller binding energies).
In fact, the
v′ = 58 level is deeply bound, with a binding energy of
¯h∆v′=58 = 5.5 × 10−4 hartree (or 122.22 cm−1 [39]). For
example, v′ = 86 with a binding energy of 0.87 cm−1
has a rate coeﬃcient 1050 times larger, namely αP A
v′=86 =
2.1 × 10−29 cm5, which gives the characteristic intensity
Iv′=86 = 0.032 W cm−2. The high-lying excited levels v′
have larger rate coeﬃcients because the overlap of the
excited bound wave function and the continuum ground
wave function is larger. For high v′, the overlap scales

)

5

m
c
(
 
A
P

v’

10-28
10-30
10-32
10-34
10-36

10-28

10-30

10-32

10-34
10-28

10-30

10-32

10-34

(a)

7Li singlet

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

(b)

(c)

6Li singlet
7Li singlet

6Li triplet
7Li triplet

140

120

100

80
60
∆    (cm-1)

v’

40

20

0

v′

FIG. 7: Variation of photoassociation rate coeﬃcient αP A
for
In (a), the 7Li singlet transi-
high-lying vibrational states.
tions over a range of 600 cm−1 exhibit oscillations mapping
the nodal structure of the continuum wave function, with val-
ues varying over ﬁve orders of magnitude. Plots (b) and (c)
show a shorter range of detunings for singlet and triplet tran-
sitions, respectively. The singlet scattering lengths of both
isotopes are positive and αP A
v′ decays rapidly from its large
values near ∆ ∼ 0 cm−1, by nearly three orders of magnitude.
The triplet scattering lengths are both negative, and αP A
v′ de-
creases slowly for small detunings, until the ﬁrst nodes of the
continuum wave functions are reached.

like ∆−1/2

.

v′

Similar results for sodium and cesium are available.
For small binding energies, the rate coeﬃcient αP A
at
1 mK is of the order of 10−28 cm5 for Na, and 10−27
cm5 for Cs [40]. These translate to characteristic inten-
sities as small as µW cm−2. Notice that for lithium, the
rate coeﬃcients for singlet transitions are smaller than
for triplet transitions, reﬂecting the sign of the scatter-
ing length: this is especially signiﬁcant for 6Li, where the
triplet scattering length is negative and enormous [18].

v′

Other expressions based on semi-classical treatment
have been developed [40, 41]. For example, in [41], the
rate for s-wave contribution is

Rv′ ≃ ρλ3

De− ¯hδ

kB Ts π2

3δ∆v′

sin2[k(Rv′ − A(k))]κ2;

(93)

where κ = d · E/2¯h is the Rabi frequency of the laser of
intensity I, A(k) represents a shift from the free solution,
and ∆v′ (again) is the detuning of the level v′ from the
dissociation limit. This expression is valid for s-wave
scattering and at low detunings.
In the limit k → 0,
A(kR) → a, and the maximum of Rv′ is found to be at
¯hδ ≃ kBT /2, so that

Rv′ ≃ ρλ3

De−1/2κ2s 2π2µ2

3¯h3∆v′pkBT (Rv′ − a)2 .

(94)

19

v′

since λD ∝ 1/√T , the rate scales as 1/T and ∆−1/2

This equation is similar to Eqs.(85)-(92). Notice that
for
small detuning. For lithium at 0.140 mK (correspond-
ing to the Doppler temperature), assuming a laser inten-
sity of 1000 W/cm2 (so that κ = 0.8 × 1010 s−1: see
[41] for details), and a detuning ∆v′ ∼ 1 cm−1 ≃ 30
GHz (or 4.5 × 10−6 hartree), we have Rv′ = 135 a0 and
λD = 1489 a0 = 7.875× 10−6 cm. For a density ρ = 1011
D = 4.88 × 10−5 and, neglecting the
cm−3, this gives ρλ3
scattering length a, one gets Rv′ ∼ 9.6 × 104 s−1. If we
scale the rate to T = 1 mK, we get 1.3 × 104 s−1, less
than twice the value 7140 s−1 obtained from Eq. (85)
using the calculated value of αP A
v′=86 given above. No-
tice that many assumptions are made in these estimates:
nonetheless, expression (94) gives good order of magni-
tude for the photoassociation rate for small detuning and
low temperatures.

Using the Doppler temperature as a typical temper-
ature, and averaging the rate using a linewidth corre-
sponding to 5 MHz [41], one ﬁnds typical rates for small
detunings by scaling the numbers of Table II with the
appropriate temperature, density, laser intensity, and de-
tunings, according to

Rv′ ≃

I
I0

ρ
ρ0

T0

T r ∆0

∆v′ R .

(95)

Here, I0 = 1000 W/cm2, ρ0 = 1011 cm−3, ∆0 = 1 cm−1,
and T0 and ¯R are listed in Table II. Correspondingly,
αP A scales as

αP A
v′ ≃

T0

T r ∆0

∆v′

αP A .

(96)

The characteristic intensities should then scale with the
square root of the detuning ∆v′ , so that we have

Iv′ =r ∆v′

∆0

I0 .

(97)

The values of λ, ϕ and αP A are listed in Table II.
To compare the rates for the various alkali metals, it

TABLE II: Approximate scaled photoabsorption rates R and
rate coeﬃcients αP A for weakly bound molecular states. The
values of R, and T0 are from Pillet et al. [41], I0 = 1000 W
cm−2, ρ0 = 1011 cm −3, and ∆0 = 1 cm−1.

Atom T0

R

λ

ϕ

mK 104 s−1 nm 1021 cm−2

αP A
cm5

Li

0.140

Na

0.240

K 0.140

Rb 0.140

Cs

0.125

45

22

25

13

10

671

589

766

780

852

3.4

3.0

3.9

3.9

4.3

1.3 × 10−27
7.3 × 10−28
6.6 × 10−28
3.3 × 10−28
2.3 × 10−28

a
TABLE III: Approximate photoassociation rates R, rate co-
eﬃcients αP A, and characteristic intensities Iv′ for the alkalis.
The ﬁxed parameters are I0 = 1000 W/cm2, ρ0 = 1011 cm−3,
∆0 = 1 cm−1, and T=100 µK,. Also listed are the reference
densities λ−3 (in cm−3) and frequencies ǫR (in 2π kHz).

Atom Rv′

104s−1

αP A
v′
cm5

Iv′

mW cm−2

λ−3
cm−3

ǫR

2π kHz

7Li
23Na
39K
87Rb
133Cs

63

53

35

18

12

1.8 × 10−27
1.7 × 10−27
9.2 × 10−28
4.6 × 10−28
2.9 × 10−28

3.7

0.47

0.18

0.069

0.039

8.21 × 1014
1.21 × 1015
5.52 × 1014
5.23 × 1014
4.01 × 1014

63.3

25.0

8.72

3.77

2.07

is convenient to express them for the same parameters.
Assuming I0 = 1000 W/cm2, ρ = 1011 cm−3, T = 100
µK, and ∆0 = 1 cm−1, we obtain the values listed in
Table III. The photoassociation rates vary between 1.2×
105 s−1 (or αP A ∼ 2.9 × 10−28 cm5) for Cs and 6.3 ×
105 s−1 (or αP A ∼ 1.8 × 10−27 cm5) for Li. From the
expressions for Rv′ , one expects the rates to scale like
1/2µ. If we were to multiply the rates by M , the mass
number, we notice that, except for Li, the scaled rates
indeed are similar. The variations left are due to slightly
diﬀerent Rabi frequencies [41].

Finally, one has to be careful when using the values
of Table III, in which the eﬀect of scattering lengths are
not taken into account. These eﬀects can be signiﬁcant,
like in the case of 6Li, 85Rb or 133Cs, where large nega-
tive scattering lengths induce larger rates. Also, at larger
detunings, one probes deeper region of the excited elec-
tronic state, and shorter distances of the lower state con-
tinuum wave function, where the exact nodal structure
will play an important role (see [17, 36, 37] and Fig. 7).

As already noted, the values for the saturation inten-
sity in Table III are to be construed as estimates only.
Also, as they are, they apply to a very weakly bound
molecular state (∆v′ = 1 cm−1). Such high-lying states
are likely to be easily perturbed by atom-molecule colli-
sions, so that in practice one might resort to more bound
molecular states. Nonetheless, these saturation intensi-
ties are remarkably low, occasionally much lower than
our initial generic estimate of 10 Wcm−2 [8, 14]. From
the experimental viewpoint this is encouraging, as the
requirements on laser intensity are greatly moderated.
The ﬂip side is that the usable intensity appears to be
limited by rogue photoassociation; for densities such that
λ3ρ ∼ 1, the maximum photoassociation Rabi frequency
is of the order of the recoil frequency ǫR . For heavier
alkalis the saturation intensities may indeed be low, but
small recoil frequency and slow coherent photoassocia-
tion are the prices to pay.

20

D. Discussion of an experiment

In the experiment of Wynar et al., Ref. [16], the au-
thors studied photoassociation of a 87Rb condensate in a
two-color Raman conﬁguration. From our standpoint,
the reported data fall into two categories. First, the
width and shift of the two-photon resonance line was
studied as a function of the intensities of the two lasers.
We are going to use these measurements to estimate the
bound-bound Rabi frequency. Second, the authors mea-
sured the width and the shift of the same resonance line
as a function of the density of the condensate. At low in-
tensities, elastic atom-atom and atom-molecule collisions
turn out to have a major eﬀect on the resonance parame-
ters. However, these eﬀects were modeled quantitatively
in Ref. [16], and one may then get at the quantities per-
taining to photoassociation. We use this type of data to
determine the characteristic frequency of coherent pho-
toassociation.

1. Adapting the theory

We ﬁrst cast our theoretical approach in a form that
allows for direct juxtapositions with the analysis of ex-
perimental data in Ref. [16]. We ignore elastic collisions
because a comparison with Ref. [16] turns out to be possi-
ble even without considering them explicitly, and inelas-
tic collisions because their presence was not conclusively
established in Ref. [16].

We begin by adding the spontaneous decay of the in-
termediate state at the rate Γs as a nonhermitian term in
the Hamiltonian for the Λ system, Eq. (72). This gives

H
¯h

= δ g†g + (∆ + δ)b†b + . . . − i

Γs
2

b†b .

(98)

It is known in quantum optics that introducing an imagi-
nary part to the energy of the decaying state gives correct
results as long as the unstable state decays irreversibly
only to states that are outside of the state space included
in the model.

We then repeat much of the analysis of Sec. V B 1 for
the Hamiltonian (98), with a number of tricks and ap-
proximations. First, we take the limit of large intermedi-
ate detuning, |∆| ≫ Γs,|δ|. Second, we assume that the
bound-bound Rabi frequency χ is much larger than the
free-bound Rabi frequency Ω. This implies that in the es-
timates of the line widths and decay rates, such as those
following from Eq. (81), only the χ2 terms need be kept.
Third, we ignore light-induced atom-atom interactions.
Fourth, we scale the the operators as before, a = √N α,
etc., which brings out the photoassociation frequency Ω
explicitly. Fifth, after deriving the equations of motion
for the atomic operator α and ﬁnal-state molecule oper-
ator γ by adiabatic elimination of the intermediate-state
operate β, in the spirit of semiclassical approximation we
replace the operators α, β, and γ with c numbers. At this

stage we have, in analogy with Eqs. (77) and (78), the
equations

2. Comparison with experiments

21

˙γ = −i(cid:18)δ −

χ2

∆(cid:19) γ −

Γsχ2
2∆2 γ + 1
2 i

Ωχ
∆

α2,

(99)

˙α = i

α∗γ .

(100)

Ωχ
∆

To develop the rate approximation, we ﬁrst note that
the probability that an atom belongs to the stable state
g, Pg = 2|γ|2, satisﬁes the equation of motion

˙Pg = −

Γsχ2
∆2 Pg + i

Ωχ
∆

(C − C∗) .

(101)

The “coherence” C = α2γ∗ has the equation of motion

2 P 2

Γsχ2

˙C = i

Ωχ
∆

χ2

∆(cid:19) −

[PgPa− 1

a ]+(cid:20)i(cid:18)δ −

2∆2 (cid:21) C , (102)
where, in turn Pa = |α|2 is the probability that an atom
remains in the system unassociated.
We could go on and derive a corresponding equation
of motion for Pa. However, here we assume that Pa ∼
1, and that correspondingly Pg ≪ 1. We solve for the
coherence C adiabatically by setting ˙C = 0, and insert
the result into Eq. (101) to obtain a rate equation for the
population of the stable molecular state g,

˙Pg = −

Γsχ2
∆2 Pg +

∆ i2h Γsχ2
h Ωχ
2∆2 i
2∆2 i2 P 2
∆i2
hδ − χ2
+h Γsχ2

a .

This displays a shift of the ground state by

a linewidth

∆εL =

χ2
∆

,

γL
2

=

Γsχ2
2∆2 ,

(103)

(104)

(105)

and a corresponding direct decay of bound molecules at
the rate γL.

With the assumption Pg ≪ 1 we have made the rate
equation (103) essentially one way, i.e., ignored transi-
tions from molecules back to the atoms. The semiclassi-
cal approximation in general requires that there are many
molecules in a quantum state, so that the molecules make
a condensate. However, we believe that, by ignoring tran-
sitions from molecules back to atoms, we have divorced
the rate equation (103) from any coherence requirement
for the molecules. As the experiments do not claim a
molecular condensate, this is essential for the analysis
that follows.

Wynar et al., Ref. [16], discuss the light shift of the res-
onance line. In their case the frequencies of the two lasers
are quite close so that both of them cause line shifts and
broadenings, but this is included in their analysis. Trans-
lating back to our case with only one laser frequency on
the bound-bound transition, the comparison between our
formulation and Ref. [16] reads

χ2
∆

=

βI2
∆1

,

(106)

where I2 is the intensity (in W cm−2) of the bound-bound
light, ∆1 ≡ ∆ = 2π× 150 MHz is the intermediate detun-
ing, and β = 3.5× 109 m2W−1s−2 is a parameter that we
deduce from their Fig. 3a. This gives the approximate
formula

χ ≃ 0.94r I2

Wcm−2 × 2π MHz .

(107)

Wynar et al., Ref. [16], also present an analysis of
line shapes at low intensity. The rate coeﬃcient for
two-photon photoassociation on resonance, K0 = 9 ×
10−14 cm3 s−1, is one of the ﬁtted parameters. The reso-
nance photoassociation rate from our Eq. (103) and the
corresponding expression in Ref. [16], ignoring inelastic
processes and with n ≡ ρ, boil down to

Ω2
Γs

= nK0 .

(108)

Given the spontaneous decay rate of this molecular level,
Γs = 12 × 2π MHz [16], and noting that their cited value
of K0 was for the intensity of the photoassociation laser
I1 = 0.51 W cm−2, we ﬁnd the scaling formula

Ω ≃ 5.8r ρ

1014cm−3

I1

Wcm−2 × 2π kHz ,
intensity

characteristic

(109)

Iv′

=

which gives
0.08 Wcm−2.

the

In the experiment, the binding energy of the primary
photoassociated state was 23 cm−1.
In contrast, for
∆v′ = 1 cm−1, Table III gives the characteristic intensity
0.07 mWcm−2. The theoretical and experimental char-
acteristic intensities diﬀer by three orders of magnitude,
but they are also for diﬀerent binding energies. The dif-
ference in characteristics intensities is no cause for con-
cern, as we do not know at all how the detuning 23 cm−1
for Rb is related to the minima of the photoassociation
rates like those shown in Fig. 7 for Li.

3. Reaching coherence

Suppose that the density of the 87Rb gas equals ρ =
λ−3, a factor of two larger than quoted in Ref. [16], the

laser intensities are I1 = I2 = 10 W cm−2, typical val-
ues in photoassociation experiments, and the interme-
diate detuning is as in Ref. [16]. Then the two-photon
Rabi frequency becomes Ωχ/∆ = 1 × 2π kHz, while the
eﬀective linewidth is χ2Γs/2∆2 = 2 × 2π kHz. For co-
herent phenomena we need a Rabi frequency at least
comparable to the linewidth, a condition that is not
quite satisﬁed. But if one were simply to take the in-
tensities I1 = 100 W cm−2 for the photoassociating light
and I2 = 1 W cm−2 for the bound-bound light, Rabi fre-
quency remains unchanged and linewidth goes down by a
factor of 100. One is then in principle deep in the regime
of coherent photoassociation. Also, the eﬀective Rabi
frequency would be smaller than the recoil frequency, so
that rogue photoassociation need not yet be a fatal prob-
lem.

On the other hand, eyeballing from Fig. 2 of Ref [16],
the linewidth due to elastic atom-atom collisions would
be of the order of 5 × 2π kHz, so elastic collisions would
interfere with coherent photoassociation. Rabi oscilla-
tions would be seriously impeded, rapid adiabatic pas-
sage maybe less. One could compensate by lowering the
density by two orders of magnitude and at the same time
increasing the intensity of the photoassociating laser by
another two orders of magnitude to keep the eﬀective
Rabi frequency constant, but with lowering of the den-
sity one would wind up in trouble with rogue photoasso-
ciation.

Experimentally, one can think of varying the intensity
of the two lasers, the intermediate state, the intermediate
detuning, and the density of the sample. The conditions
one must watch out for are that eﬀective Rabi frequency
be larger than the eﬀective damping rate and line broad-
ening due to elastic (and inelastic) collisions, yet not so
large as to cause excessive rogue photoassociation. If the
parameters could be varied freely, within our physical
model a solution is always possible. Unfortunately, one
must live with some practical limitations on, say, laser
intensities. The present experiment of Ref. [16] is tanta-
lizingly close to coherent photoassociation, but to really
get there may require a careful optimization of the exper-
imental parameters and a solid understanding of what is
technically feasible in a given experiment. We will not
attempt to enter such discussions.

VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS

22

photoassociation are both currently front-line research
and the marriage thereof might still be a technological
challenge, but coherent optical transients in photoassoci-
ation should eventually be feasible in experiments.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported in part by the NSF, Grant
No. PHY-9801888, and by NASA, Grant No. NAG8-
1428. Additional support was provided by the Connecti-
cut Space Grant College Consortium. One of us [JJ]
thanks S´andor Varr´o for interesting discussions; in par-
ticular, for pointing out Ref. [19].

APPENDIX A: DIPOLE MATRIX ELEMENT

In our bare-bones example we consider the situation in
which we either have one molecule at rest and no atoms,
or no molecule and two atoms in states k and −k. Then
the relative momentum becomes ¯hk. This peculiarity,
and also the reason for the factor 1
2 in Eq. (14), is because
the relative momentum for two entities with momenta p1
and p2 should be deﬁned as 1
2 (p1 − p2) to make it the
conjugate of the usual relative position r1 − r2. We thus
have the possible state vectors

|ψi = β b† +Xk

αka†ka†

−k! |0i ,

(A1)

where β and αk are complex amplitudes to be deter-
mined, and |0i stands for the vacuum of atoms and
molecules. The states for αk and α−k are the same, so
the sum over k runs only over half of the possible k val-
ues; say, those with kx > 0.

Following Ref.

[8], we write the time dependent
Schr¨odinger equation from the Hamiltonian (12) in terms
of the coeﬃcients β and αk, assuming a plane wave of
light. In order to avoid an inessential complication, we
ignore photon recoil and simply set q = 0. The result is

˙αk = −i(cid:18) ¯hk2
2µ − δ0(cid:19) αk + i
d · E
˙β = iXk
2¯h

αk .

d∗ · E∗

2¯h

β,

(A2)

(A3)

We have developed theory for coherent photoassocia-
tion of a Bose-Einstein condensate of atoms, which typ-
ically leads to a Bose-Einstein condensate of molecules.
Phenomena analogous to coherent optical transients in
few-level systems, such as Rabi ﬂopping and rapid adia-
batic passage between atomic and molecular condensates
are expected. Coherent phenomena depend on the Bose
enhancement of the dipole moment matrix element, and
cannot occur in a nondegenerate gas, at least not in the
thermodynamic limit. Bose-Einstein condensation and

The QC approach discussed in Refs.
[6] and [7] dis-
plays precisely the same structure, evidently identifying
d · E/2¯h as the QC Rabi frequency κ of those papers.
There is a catch, however. Because of the Bose-
Einstein statistics, states with the relative momenta for
two atoms k and −k are the same, so the density of states
for the relative motion is half of what it was for Maxwell-
Boltzmann atoms. To obtain the same photodissociation
rate, we therefore have to make the matrix element a fac-
tor of √2 larger than in the case of distinguishable atoms.

This is the √2 in Eq. (14). The rate of photodissocia-
tion is proportional to the square of the matrix element
and picks up a factor of two, which compensates for the
missing half of phase space density.

The second-quantized Hamiltonian is chosen so that
it gives the right photodissociation rate. What we did
not fully realize in Ref. [8] is that the same factor of √2
also leads to twice the photoassociation rate that one
would obtain for Maxwell-Boltzmann atoms, given the
Franck-Condon factor from the standard calculations or
as deduced from the photodissociation rate. It appears
that in the literature the rate for s-wave photoassocia-
tion is usually calculated low by a factor of two. Be-
sides, by a simple extension of the statistics arguments,
p-wave photoassociation should vanish for bosons. Are
these problems?

We think not. In photoassociation experiments no par-
ticular care is usually taken to polarize the atoms. They
are not all in the same internal state, and therefore not
all photoassociation events are between indistinguishable
atoms. This should reduce the factor-of-two boson en-
hancement of the photoassociation rate for even partial
waves, and call forth odd partial waves. The remaining
discrepancies with the conventional calculations may well
be within experimental and theoretical uncertainties.

It would be of some interest to investigate photoassoci-
ation of a polarized low-temperature gas experimentally.
We believe that the statistics eﬀects are real, and should
be observable. After all, few colleagues seem to have a
problem with the assertion that there are no s-wave col-
lisions for polarized fermions. Photoassociation experi-
ments in a polarized gas should make an interesting test
of our phenomenological Hamiltonian.

APPENDIX B: KERNEL FOR

PHOTOASSOCIATION IN FIELD THEORY

The process we followed in the main text in deriving
the integral kernel d(r) [as in, e.g., Eq. (23)] was a phe-
nomenological mix between formally pure ﬁeld theory
and collisional physics.

In fact, to obtain the dipole matrix elements dkk′ in

Eq. (12), we carry out an integral of the form

dkk′ ≡ d(k − k′) = dZ d3r ¯ψ∗(r) ¯φk−k′ (r) ,

(B1)

where ¯ψ is the bound-state molecular wave function and
¯φk−k′ describes the state of two atoms with the relative
momentum ¯h(k−k′). Now, in the transformation to ﬁeld
theory (18) we used plane waves as the wave functions

for states with a given wave vector. In the matrix ele-
ment (B1) we should correspondingly use plane waves to
describe the relative motion, as in

23

¯φk−k′ (r) =

1
√V

ei(k−k′)·r .

(B2)

However, in our derivation we did not not use plane
waves, but distorted plane waves that take into ac-
count atom-atom interactions, and only asymptotically
(at large distances) corresponds to the relative momen-
tum k − k′.
This makes a diﬀerence. For instance, if the matrix
element (B1) is computed using pure plane waves, the
ﬁnal photoassociation kernel reads

d(r) = √2 d ¯ψ∗(r) ,

(B3)

instead of something akin to (22). Depending on the
value of the scattering length, there could be a sub-
stantial diﬀerence in the overall numerical factor also in
the contact-interaction form for atom-molecule coupling,
Eq. (24). The question is, which method is “correct”;
pure or distorted plane waves?

First of all, atoms do interact, which in general will
have an eﬀect on photoassociation. One who wishes
to analyze photoassociation quantitatively will have to
take atom-atom interactions into account. A ﬁeld the-
orist pursuing pure plane waves would have to consider
atom-atom interactions explicitly, and work out the con-
sequences in photoassociation ab initio. This is probably
a major chore. Our hope is that, with our distorted-plane
wave trickery, we have phenomenologically captured most
of the eﬀect of atom-atom interactions on photoassocia-
tion.

On the other hand, if we use the distorted plane waves
to calculate the photoassociation matrix element and
in addition introduce a contact interaction model for
atoms as in (83), the suspicion arises that we are double-
counting atom-atom interactions. Further approxima-
tions, such as the contact-interaction form for photoas-
sociation or classical ﬁeld theory, could either exacerbate
or ameliorate the double-counting.

Disentangling atom-atom interactions and photoasso-
ciation might make an interesting theoretical exercise,
but we do not attempt it in this paper. Instead, we pro-
ceed with a model that allows for both distorted-plane
wave matrix elements for photoassociation, and an ex-
plicit atom-atom interaction. In this way, we at least get
the limiting cases of photoassociation in a dilute gas and
atom-atom interactions in the absence of photoassocia-
tion basically right with little eﬀor

[1] H. R. Thorsheim, J. Weiner, and P. S. Julienne, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 58, 2420 (1987); R. Napolitano, J. Weiner, C.
J. Williams, and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1352

(1994); P. D. Lett, P. S. Julienne, and W. D. Phillips,
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 46, 423 (1995).

[2] M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, M. R. Matthews, C. E.

24

Wieman, and E. A. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995);
K. B. Davis, M. -O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. van
Druten, D. S. Durfee, D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995); C. C. Bradley, C.
A. Sackett, and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 985
(1997).

[3] E. R. I. Abraham, W. I. McAlexander, C. A. Sacket,
and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1315 (1995); E.
Tiesinga, C. J. Williams, P. S. Julienne, K. M. Jones, P.
D. Lett, and W. D. Phillips, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand.
Technol. 101, 505 (1996); C. C. Tsai, R. S. Freeland, J.
M. Vogels, H. M. J. M. Boestan, B. J. Verhaar, and D.
J. Heinzen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1245 (1997).

[4] K. Burnett, P. S. Julienne, and K.-A. Suominen, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 77, 1416 (1997).

(Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1956), pp. 59–110.

[20] J. Javanainen and M. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. A 60, 2351

(1999).

[21] D. F. Walls and C. T. Tindle, J. Phys. A 5, 534 (1972).
[22] G. Drobny and I. Jex, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1816 (1992).
[23] H. He, M. J. Werner, and P. D. Drummond, Phys. Rev.

E 54, 896 (1996).

[24] S. Wolfram, The Mathematica Book, 3rd Ed. (Cambridge

University Press, New York, 1996).

[25] S. Trillo and P. Ferro, Optics Lett. 20, 438 (1995).
[26] H. He, P. D. Drummond, and B. A. Malomed, Optics.

Comm. 123 (1996).

[27] M. D. Fleck and J. A. Feit, J. Chem. Phys. 78, 2578
(1984); A. D. Bandrauk and H. Shen, Can. J. Chem. 70,
555 (1992).

[5] P. S. Julienne, K. Burnett, Y. B. Band, and W. C. Stwal-

[28] D. V. Skryabin and W. J. Firth, Optics Comm. 148, 79

ley, Phys. Rev. A 58, R797 (1998).

(1998).

[6] J. Javanainen and M. Mackie, Phys. Rev. A 58, R789

[29] K. Rzazewski, M. Lewenstein, and J. H. Eberly, J. Phys.

(1998).

[7] M. Mackie and J. Javanainen, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3174

(1999).

[8] J. Javanainen and M. Mackie, Phys. Rev. A 59, R3186

(1999).

B 15, L661 (1982).

[30] D. Heinzen and W. Ketterle (unpublished) have devel-
oped the estimate (71) from completely diﬀerent argu-
ments.

[31] P. O. Fedichev, Yu. Kagan, G. V. Shlyapnikov, and J. T.

[9] P. D. Drummond, K. V. Kheruntsyan, and H. He, Phys.

M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2913 (1996).

Rev. Lett. 81, 3055 (1998).

[32] J. L. Bohn and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 54, R4637

[10] P. Tommasini, E. Timmermans, M. Hussein, and A. Ker-

(1996).

man; LANL preprint archive cond-mat/9804015.

[33] J. L. Bohn and P. S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 60, 414

[11] E. Timmermans, P. Tommasini, R. Cˆot´e, M. Hussein,

(1999).

and A. Kerman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2691 (1999).

[34] J. Javanainen, J. Phys. B 16, 1343 (1983); Optics Com-

[12] F. A. van Abeelen and B. J. Verhaar, Phys. Rev. Lett.

mun. 46, 175 (1983); Physica Scripta 31, 57 (1985).

83, 1550 (1999).

[35] See J. Weiner, V.S. Bagnato, S. Zilio, and P.S. Julienne,

[13] M. Mackie, R. Kowalski, and J. Javanainen, Phys. Rev.

Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1 (1999), and references therein.

Lett. 84, 3803 (2000).

[14] J. Javanainen and M. Ko˘strun, Optics Express 5, 188

(1999).

[15] M. Mackie and J. Javanainen, J. Mod. Opt. xx, yyyy

(2000).

[16] R. Wynar, R. S. Freeland, D. J. Han, C. Ryu, and D. J.

Heinzen, Science 287, 1016 (2000).

[17] R. Cˆot´e, A. Dalgarno, Y. Sun, and R. G. Hulet, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 74, 3581 (1995)

[18] E. R. I. Abraham, W. I. McAlexander, J. M. Gerton, R.
G. Hulet, R. Cˆot´e, and A. Dalgarno, Phys. Rev. A 53,
R3173 (1996).

[19] The “well-known” universality of the mode density, inde-
pendently of the shape of the quantization volume, goes
back at least to the work of Hermann Weyl in the be-
ginning of the 20th century. See Selecta Hermann Weyl

[36] R. Cˆot´e and A. Dalgarno, Phys. Rev. A 58, 498 (1998).
[37] R. Cˆot´e and A. Dalgarno, J. Mol. Spect. 195, 236 (1999).
[38] The rate coeﬃcients listed in Refs. [36, 37] must be mul-
tiplied by (2π)5, and we do not assume any hyperﬁne
mixing (neglect ω0 in [36, 37]).

[39] We determined the binding energy of level v′ = 58 of 7Li
triplet state to be 3666 ± 2 GHz by ﬁtting the known
levels, and it was recently measured by R.G. Hulet and
co-workers to be 3667 GHz.

[40] P.S. Julienne, J. Res. Natl. Stand. Technol. 101, 487
(1996); F. Masnou-Seeuws, O. Dulieu, A. Crubellier, and
P. Pillet (private communication).

[41] P. Pillet, A. Crubellier, A. Bleton, O. Dulieu, P. Nos-
baum, I. Mourachko, and F. Masnou-Seeuws, J. Phys. B
30, 2801 (1997).

