0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

3
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental evidence of dynamical localization and delocalization in a quasi-periodic

driven system

Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, Atomes et Mol´ecules and Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches Laser et Applications,

Universit´e des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex, France

J. Ringot, P. Szriftgiser, and J. C. Garreau

Laboratoire Kastler-Brossel, Tour 12, Etage 1, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, 4 Place Jussieu, F-75005 Paris

D. Delande

This paper presents the ﬁrst experimental evidence of the transition from dynamical localization
to delocalization under the inﬂuence of a quasi-periodic driving on a quantum system. A quantum
kicked rotator is realized by placing cold atoms in a pulsed, far-detuned, standing wave.
If the
standing wave is periodically pulsed, one observes the suppression of the classical chaotic diﬀusion,
i.e. dynamical localization.
If the standing wave is pulsed quasi-periodically with two diﬀerent
frequencies, dynamical localization is observed or not, depending on the two frequencies being
commensurable or incommensurable. One can thus study the transition from the localized to the
delocalized case as a function of the eﬀective dimensionality of the system.

Dynamical localization (DL) is a speciﬁcally quantum
phenomenon taking place in time-periodic systems whose
corresponding classical dynamics displays chaotic diﬀu-
sion. While, in the classical limit, because of the diﬀu-
sion process, the system spreads indeﬁnitely in the phase
space, the quantum system follows the classical diﬀusive
dynamics for short time only, but after some localization
time freezes its evolution with no further increase of the
average energy.

This behavior, attributed to quantum interferences
among the diﬀusive paths which for long times are in the
average completely destructive, was numerically observed
at the end of the 70’s on the one-dimensional kicked ro-
tator exposed to periodic kicks [1], a paradigmatic simple
system whose classical dynamics can be reduced to iter-
ations of the Chirikov’s standard map.

The possibility of observing DL with a system con-
stituted of cold atoms placed in a far-detuned standing
wave has been theoretically suggested in 1992 [2] and ex-
perimentally observed in 1994 [3]. A crucial question is
whether DL is robust versus perturbations of the system.
Indeed, as it strongly relies on quantum interferences, it
is expected to be rather fragile. As a matter of fact, it
has been experimentally shown that DL can be partly
or totally destroyed by decoherence (i.e. coupling of the
system to external degrees of freedom; in the present con-
text spontaneous emission plays such a role) and noise,
that is deviation from strict periodicity [4,5].

Moreover, there is a relevant connection of DL with the
Anderson localization taking place in disordered systems.
Indeed, the periodically kicked rotator problem can be
mapped on a one-dimensional Anderson model, that is a
model of a particle moving along a one-dimensional chain
of sites [6], with coupling between neighbors and diago-
nal disorder, i.e. pseudo-random values of the potential
energies on each site. In 1-d, although the classical mo-

tion is diﬀusive, the quantum eigenstates are all localized.
Because of the similarity of the Anderson and kicked top
models, Anderson localization and DL are similar quan-
tum phenomena, the ﬁrst one taking place along space
coordinates, the second one along the time coordinate
with localization in the momentum domain.
It is well
known that Anderson localization is strongly dependent
on the number of spatial degrees of freedom. Similarly,
DL is expected to be highly sensitive on the number of
temporal degrees of freedom, that is on the frequency
spectrum of the external driving.

We here consider the interesting simple case where the
external driving is not periodic but quasi-periodic, with
two independent frequencies. Theoretical arguments and
numerical simulations [7] suggest that the situation is
similar to the 2-d Anderson model, and that the local-
ization time should become so large that it might be im-
possible to observe DL experimentally. The goal of this
paper is to study experimentally such a situation of in-
creased dimensionality and to test the theoretical predic-
tions.

We realized a quantum kicked rotator with a primary
series of kicks of frequency f1 to which a secondary series
of kicks (frequency f2) can be added, with f2/f1 = r. A
physical experiment cannot be sensitive to the rational
or irrational character of a number; one might thus con-
sider only rational values of this frequency ratio. For a
given rational value of r = p/q (irreducible fraction), the
periodicity of the system cannot have any physical eﬀect
before at least q kicks of the primary series. Thus, peri-
odicity eﬀects like DL cannot show up unless the number
of primary kicks is large compared to q. As the number
of primary kicks increases, one expects to ﬁnd more and
more “rational” values of p/q for which DL is eﬀectively
observed. Working with a two-frequency quantum ro-
tator thus allows one to go from the 1-d to the 2-d case

1

by choosing irreducible frequency ratios corresponding to
larger and larger q [7]. Experimental results on the two-
frequency microwave ionization of Rydberg atoms have
indirectly shown the importance of rational or irrational
values in quantum transport properties [8].

The atomic quantum kicked rotator is realized by plac-
ing cold atoms (cesium in our case) of mass M in a far-
detuned, pulsed standing wave of intensity I0, wave num-
ber kL and detuning ∆ with respect to the closest atomic
transition (the cesium D2 line at 852 nm). If the detun-
ing is large enough, the dominant interaction between
atoms and the laser light is the light-potential which is
proportional to the intensity. One then obtains a Hamil-
tonian of the form

H =

p2
2M

− V0 cos(2kLx)f (t)

(1)

where f (t) is a function of period T , and V0 = ¯hΩ2/8∆,
where Ω is the resonant Rabi frequency. V0 is propor-
tional to the light intensity.

In the limit where the width of the peaks in f (t) is neg-
ligible compared to T (i.e., each peak approaches a delta
function), rescaling variables [2] allows one to reduce this
Hamiltonian to the standard form corresponding to the
quantum rotator:

H1 =

P 2
2

− K cos θ X

δ(τ − n)

(2)

n

where K is the so-called stochasticity parameter and
where the new conjugate variables obey the quantum
commutation rule [θ, P ] = i¯heﬀ with ¯heﬀ = 4¯hkLT /M the
eﬀective Planck constant. The classical limit (¯heﬀ → 0)
of such a system becomes (weakly) chaotic for K ≈ 1 and
fully chaotic for K ≈ 10. When a second series of pulses
is applied, the reduced Hamiltonian becomes:

H2 =

P 2
2

− cos θ{K1 X

δ(τ − n) +

n

K2 X

n

δ[τ − (n + φ/2π)/r]}

(3)

with K1 = K2 in our experiment. In the above equation
φ is the phase of the second series of pulses with respect
to the ﬁrst series. The classical dynamics of this system
is essentially identical to the periodic kicked rotator: for
K1 = K2 ≈ 10, it is a chaotic diﬀusion.

Our realization of the kicked rotator (Fig. 1) is simi-
lar to that of ref. [5]. Cold cesium atoms issued from a
magneto-optical trap (MOT) are placed in a far-detuned,
pulsed standing wave. The measurement of momentum
distribution is accomplished in our setup by velocity-
selective Raman stimulated transitions between the Fg =
3 and Fg = 4 hyperﬁne ground-state sublevels [9]. Gen-
eration of the Raman beams is based on direct current
modulation at 4.6 GHz of a diode laser, detuned by 200

GHz with respect to the atomic transition. The two sym-
metric ﬁrst-order optical sidebands are then used to in-
ject two diode lasers that produce 150 mW beams with
a 9.2 GHz beat-note of sub-hertz spectral width [10].

Cesium atoms are ﬁrst optically pumped into the
Fg = 3 hyperﬁne sublevel. A Raman pulse of detuning
δR brings the atoms in the velocity class v = δR/(2kR)
(kR is the wave number of the Raman beams) back to
the Fg = 4 hyperﬁne sublevel. A probe beam resonant
with the transition from the sublevel Fg = 4 is frequency
modulated, and its absorption signal detected by a lock-
in ampliﬁer, yielding a signal proportional to the popu-
lation of the Fg = 4 level.

Stray magnetic ﬁelds are harmful for the Raman ve-
3D-magneto-resistive probes are
locity measurement.
placed at the eight corners of the MOT cell. Their sig-
nal is electronically interpolated and generates a feed-
back signal to three mutually orthogonal Helmholtz coil
pairs [11]. We measured a residual magnetic ﬁeld below
250 µG and an eﬀective compensation band-width of 500
Hz. The ¯hkL/2 momentum resolution then obtained is
largely suﬃcient for this experiment, and is much better
than that obtained by time of ﬂight methods [5].

A power diode laser is detuned by 7 GHz with respect
to the cesium D2 line at 852 nm. An acousto-optical
modulator is used to generate arbitrary series of pulses.
The modulated beam is then transported by an optical
ﬁber to the neighborhood of the MOT apparatus. The
standing wave, obtained by back-reﬂection of this beam,
has a waist of 0.6 mm and a typical power of 50 mW in
each direction. It is modulated with two series of pulses:
the primary pulses of ﬁxed frequency f1 = 36 kHz are
500 ns long, corresponding to a stochasticity parameter
K1 = 10 and to an eﬀective Planck constant ¯heﬀ = 2.9.
The pulse shape is rectangular with a rise and fall time of
the order of 50 ns. The secondary pulses have the same
duration and the same intensity, but their frequency f2
and phase φ can be adjusted at will. A typical experiment
is done with 50 primary pulses. In order to avoid pulse
superposition eﬀects between the two series, the phase φ
is ﬁxed to an arbitrary non-zero value.

In an experimental run, cesium atoms are ﬁrst cooled
and trapped by the MOT. A Sisyphus-molasses phase
further reduces the temperature to about 3.3 µK. The
MOT beams are turned oﬀ and a pulse of a repumper
beam transfers the atoms from the Fg = 4 to the Fg = 3
hyperﬁne sublevel. The standing wave is then turned on.
When the standing wave excitation ends, the Raman se-
quence described above is used to detect the population
of a velocity class. The whole sequence then starts over
with a diﬀerent value of the Raman detuning to probe
a new velocity class. The pulse sequence is produced by
two synthesizers at frequencies f1 and f2 with a ﬁxed
phase relation. We show in Fig. 2 the initial momen-
tum distribution (just before the kicks are applied) and
the ﬁnal distributions (after interaction with the stand-

2

ing wave) for f2/f1 = 1.000 and f2/f1 = 1.083 and a
phase of φ = 180◦. The initial distribution is a gaussian
with a typical full width at half maximum (FWHM) of
10¯hkL. Both ﬁnal distributions show a clear broaden-
ing with respect to the initial one. For the “resonant”
case (f2/f1 = 1) [trace (b)], the distribution presents
a characteristic exponential shape P (p) ≃ exp (−|p|/L),
with a localization length (along the momentum axis)
L ≈ 8.5¯hkL, which is a signature of the dynamical local-
ization. This is not surprising as for f1 = f2, the system
is strictly time-periodic and thus should present dynami-
cal localization. The measured localization length agrees
fairly well with theoretical estimates. Trace (c) corre-
sponds to a non-resonant truly quasi-periodic case, where
the ratio f2/f1 = 1.083 is suﬃciently far from any simple
rational number. The momentum distribution presents a
broader and more complex shape. We have performed
numerical simulations of the system, as described by
Eq. (3): we have solved “exactly” the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion using a method similar to the one described in [12].
The resulting momentum distribution is averaged over
the measured initial momentum distribution of the atoms
and over the inhomogeneous laser intensity. We have
used K1 = K2 = 10 at the center of the laser beam,
in accordance with the value deduced from the laser
power, detuning and geometrical properties. The only
adjustable parameter is the ratio of eﬀective sizes of the
standing wave and the Raman beams. Due to the non-
linearity of the processes, this ratio (which is 2) is dif-
ferent from ratio of the waists (4.8). For f1 = f2 = 36
kHz, we obtain a dynamically localized (exponential) dis-
tribution with a localization length which agrees with
the experimentally observed one (at the 10% level). For
f2/f1 = 1.083, the result of the simulation – shown in
the ﬁgure – agrees very well with the experimental data.
The fact that the broad contribution is signiﬁcantly
larger than the “resonant” distribution – together with
the fact that the classical diﬀusion constant is practically
identical in the two cases – shows that diﬀusion has per-
sisted during a longer time in the non-resonant case. Fur-
thermore, the fact that the distribution is not exponential
strongly suggests that we did not reach DL and that dif-
fusion should persist for longer times. A simple and use-
ful method to detect the presence of DL is to probe only
the zero-velocity class: as DL corresponds to a thiner
distribution, it also corresponds to a higher zero-velocity
signal in the localized case than in the diﬀusive case. In
other words, the zero-velocity signal contains essentially
the same information than e.g. the total average energy,
but is much easier to measure. This allows us to sweep
the frequency f2 of the secondary kick, keeping all other
parameters (f1, φ, K1 and K2) ﬁxed and search for the
values of the frequency ratio presenting localization. The
result is shown in Fig. 3. One clearly sees peaks at the
simple rational values of r = f2/f1. Each peak is asso-
ciated with an increased number of zero-velocity atoms,

that is, an increased degree of localization. The most
prominent peaks are associated with integer values of r,
a rather natural result. Smaller peaks are associated with
half-integers values of r, even smaller ones with r = p/3
rational numbers, etc... All these features are very well
reproduced by the numerical simulation (performed as
described above, with no adjustable parameter) shown
in the inset of Fig. 3. The fact that the simulation dis-
plays exactly the same behavior proves that it is not due
to an experimental artifact. Classical numerical calcula-
tions performed with the same parameters do not show
any kind of localization, neither in the rational nor in
the irrational case. The peaks are thus a purely quan-
tum feature.

We have also checked that the observed behavior does
not sensitively change when f1 is varied. This rules
out the possible role of the so-called quantum reso-
nances where the dynamics is dominated by the quasi-
degeneracy between unperturbed Floquet eigenstates.
The observed width of the 1:1 resonance is about 300
Hz, in good agreement with the numerical calculation.
A detailed study of its width will be presented in the
near future.

In conclusion, we have shown that, in the presence of
a quasi-periodic driving with two base frequencies, the
kicked rotator does not show any “short time” dynami-
cal localization except when the ratio of the frequencies is
close to a rational number. In the latter case, the system
is time-periodic and displays clear evidence of dynamical
localization. This conclusion is drawn from experiments
performed with both 50 and 100 primary kicks, whereas
the localization time is of the order of 15 kicks. Longer
kick sequences are impossible because of the free fall of
the atoms under gravity, but numerical simulations show
the same behavior up to few thousands kicks. Although
it is currently impossible, experimentally or numerically,
to decide if the DL is eﬀectively suppressed by the sec-
ondary kicks or if it corresponds to a much longer local-
ization time, the results presented here clearly evidence
a dramatic change in the behavior of the system due to
a secondary irrational frequency. Furthermore, the de-
struction of DL by a secondary frequency is found to be
a very sensitive phenomenon.

The authors are grateful to M. Druon, J. Pesez and
J. Courbe for aid with the experiments. Laboratoire
de Physique des Lasers, Atomes et Mol´ecules (PhLAM)
is UMR 8523 du CNRS et de l’Universit´e des Sci-
ences et Technologies de Lille. Centre d’Etudes et
Recherches Lasers et Applications (CERLA) is supported
by Minist`ere de la Recherche, R´egion Nord-Pas de Calais
and Fonds Europ´een de D´eveloppement Economique
des R´egions (FEDER). Laboratoire Kastler Brossel de
l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie et de l’Ecole Normale
Sup´erieure is UMR 8552 du CNRS. CPU time on Cray
C98 and T3E computers has been provided by IDRIS.

3

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

t

s
m
o
a
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v
 
o
r
e

l

0.60Z

1

1/2

1/4

1/3

2/3

3/4

4/3

3/2

5/3

5/4

(a)

2

FIG. 1. Experimental setup. A master diode laser mod-
ulated at 4.6 GHz is used to inject two power slave Raman
lasers producing phase-coherent, 9.2 GHz frequency-split, Ra-
man beams. A power monomode diode laser is used to gen-
erate the stationary wave, that can be pulsed through an
acousto-optical modulator (mounted in double passing). Both
the Raman and stationary wave beams are horizontal, making
an angle of 12◦.

0.0

0.5

1.0

Frequency ratio

1.5

2.0

FIG. 3. The population of zero-velocity atoms (probed
with the Raman signal) as a function of the frequency ra-
tio r = f2/f1 (with f1 = 36 kHz) and phase φ = 52◦. The
increase of the zero-velocity signal is a signature of dynam-
ical localization. Dynamical localization for commensurate
frequencies – and simple rational r values – is clearly seen.
For incommensurate frequencies, like in Fig. 2, no dynamical
localization is visible. The inset (a) shows the corresponding
curve obtained by numerical simulation (see text), very well
reproducing the features of the experimental curve.

s
m
o
t
a
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

0.01

1

0.1

(c)

(b)

(a)

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

Momentum (recoil units)

FIG. 2. Typical momentum distributions (in logarithmic
scale) corresponding to: (a) initial distribution produced by
the MOT, corresponding to a temperature of 3.3 µK; the ﬁt-
ting curve (thin line) is a gaussian.
(b) Momentum distri-
bution obtained after the interaction of the atoms with two
series of kicks having f2 = f1 = 36 kHz and a relative phase
φ = 180◦; it displays the exponential shape characteristic of
dynamical localization for a time-periodic quantum system;
the ﬁtting curve is exponential (thin line). (c) Momentum
distribution after interaction with two series of kicks having
f2/f1 = 1.0833 and initial relative phase φ = 180◦. The dis-
tribution is broader, indicating the destruction of dynamical
localization in a quasi-periodic driven quantum system; the
ﬁtting curve is a numerical simulation (thin line); for details,
see text. The recoil momentum is ¯hkL.

[1] G. Casati, B.V. Chirikov, J. Ford and F.M. Izrailev,
in Lecture Notes in Physics, 93, 334 (Springer, Berlin,
1979).

[2] R. Graham, M. Schlautmann and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev.

A 45, R19 (1992).

[3] F. L. Moore et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2974 (1994); J.

C. Robinson et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3963 (1995).

[4] H. Ammann, R. Gray, I. Shvarchuck, and N. Christensen,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4111 (1998).

[5] B. G. Klappauf, W. H. Oskay, D. A. Steck, and M. G.

Raizen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1203 (1998).

[6] D.R. Grempel, R.E. Prange and S. Fishman, Phys. Rev.

A 29, 1639 (1984).

[7] G. Casati, I. Guarneri and D. L. Shepelyansky, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 62, 345 (1989); ibid. Chaos, Solitons and Frac-
tals 1, 131 (1991); E. Doron and S. Fishman, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 60, 867 (1988).

[8] L. Moorman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 771 (1988).
[9] V. Vuleti´c, C. Chin, A. J. Kerman, and S. Chu, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 81, 5768 (1998); M. Morinaga, I. Bouchoule,
J.-C. Karam, and C. Salomon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4037
(1999).

[10] J. Ringot, Y. Lecoq, J. C. Garreau and P. Szriftgiser,

Eur. Phys. J. D. 7, 285 (1999).

[11] J. Ringot et al., to be published.
[12] D. Cohen, Phys. Rev. A 44, 2292 (1991).

4

