0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

9
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Role of Bose enhancement in photoassociation∗

Matt Mackie and Juha Javanainen

Department of Physics, University of Connecticut

Storrs, CT 06269-3046, USA

January 17, 2014

Abstract

We discuss the role of Bose enhancement of the dipole matrix element in photoasso-

ciation, using stimulated Raman adiabatic passage as an example. In a nondegenerate

gas the time scale for coherent optical transients tends to inﬁnity in the thermodynamic

limit, whereas Bose enhancement keeps this time scale ﬁnite in a condensate. Coherent

transients are therefore absent in photoassociation of a thermal nondegenerate gas, but

are feasible if the gas is a condensate.

1 Introduction

The theoretical realization is now emerging that it may be possible to eﬀect analogs

of coherent optical transients, such as Rabi ﬂopping [1, 2], rapid adiabatic passage [2],

and stimulated Raman adiabatic passage (STIRAP) [3], in photoassociation of a Bose-

Einstein condensate (BEC). In contrast, the feasibility of transients in PA of a thermal

nondegenerate gas has been controversial. There are predictions of STIRAP in ordinary

gases [4], whereas our results suggest otherwise [5].

∗Paper submitted to the special issue of J. Mod. Opt. on “Seminar on Fundamentals

of Quantum Optics V”, K¨uhtai, Austria, January 16-21, 2000; ed. F. Ehlotzky.

1

The purpose of the present paper is to clarify the status of coherent optical tran-

sients in both nondegenerate and degenerate thermal gases. Our key concept is Bose

enhancement. Suppose we have a large number of atoms N in one quantum state, as

in a BEC [6]. Due to Bose-Einstein statistics, the transition matrix element referring
to the BEC will pick up a multiplicative factor √N as compared to the matrix element

for a single atom. It turns out that Bose enhancement will make a diﬀerence. In the

thermodynamic limit, when the volume and particle number of a gas tend to inﬁnity

while the density remains constant, coherent optical transients will vanish in photoas-

sociation of a nondegenerate gas, but Bose enhancement will facilitate such transients

in a condensate. In the rest of the present paper we outline the details of this argument

using STIRAP as our explicit example.

2 Ordinary STIRAP

As a prelude to our development we brieﬂy reiterate the salient features of STIRAP in

an ordinary three-level Λ system [7], as in Fig. 1. Two laser ﬁelds are tuned to exact

two-photon resonance between the two lower states a and g of the Λ system. First the

laser intensities are arranged in such a way that the coupling between states g and b

is much stronger than the coupling between a and b. One of the dressed states of the

three-level system then coincides with the bare state a. When the laser intensities are

adjusted in such a way that the coupling becomes much stronger in the transition from

a to b, the dressed state that initially coincided with the bare state a turns instead into

the bare state g.

Suppose now that, before the adjustment of laser intensities, the system started in

the bare state a. It then also started in the dressed state whose fate we follow. If the

lasers were adjusted slowly enough, adiabaticity guarantees that the system stays in

2

the dressed state all along. In the end, the system therefore winds up in the bare state

g. Moreover, a detailed analysis shows that, in the ideal adiabatic limit, there is never

any population at all in the intermediate state b.

In short, the intensities of the two light pulses are switched in such a way that

initially the coupling between the unoccupied states is much stronger than the coupling

to the occupied state, and the same situation prevails when the coupling strengths have

reversed. This is called counter-intuitive pulse order. The result is that the system is

transferred from the initial state a to the ﬁnal state g. Besides, ideally, the system never

visits the intermediate state b, which is a major virtue if b is plagued by dissipation.

3 Quasicontinuum photoassociation

In a process of photoassociation two atoms and a photon combine to make the corre-

sponding diatomic molecule. As the two atoms may be considered to be a dissociated

state of the molecule, photoassociation is really about free-bound transitions. There

are internal atomic and molecular states involved in photoassociation as well, but we

assume that, by properly choosing the laser frequency, one has selected a transition

from the initial state of the atoms to a unique rovibrational state of the molecule.

Quantum optics normally deals with bound-bound transitions responsible for char-

acteristic spectral lines, and with bound-free transition that manifest themselves in

decay processes such as spontaneous emission. From this angle, photoassociation is ir-

reversible decay in reverse, and may seem to violate the second law of thermodynamics.

Nonetheless, photoassociation spectroscopy is alive and well, and is the source of the

most accurate molecular structure data available at this time [8].

To model free-bound transitions, especially in a thermal sample, it is desirable to

start with two atoms whose relative motion is in an eigenstate of energy. Unfortunately,

3

as energy eigenstates of the relative motion for unconﬁned atoms are not normalizable,

there is no mathematically sound way to write down such a quantum state. The cure

is straight from textbooks of quantum mechanics: Assume that the relative motion is

restricted to a quantization volume V , and at the end of the calculations take the limit

V → ∞.

This is the stratagem of our quasicontinuum (QC) approach [5, 9]. The dissoci-

ation continuum is broken up into discrete states, a QC, whereupon problems with

the normalization of the states vanish. In an unexpected windfall, the mathematics

also turns out to work out in such a way that the experience about few-level systems

gained over decades of quantum optics and laser spectroscopy is directly transferable

to understanding photoassociation.

As it comes to the theme of the present paper, the observation of most immediate

relevance is that the dipole matrix element between any free (two-atom) state and

the bound (rovibrational molecular) state scales with the quantization volume as d ∼
V −1/2. There is no mystery to this. A unit-normalized dissociated state ﬁlls the

entire volume V , so its square is proportional to 1/V and the normalization constant

is ∝ V −1/2. On the other hand, the normalization constant of the bound state is
independent of V . Eventually the V −1/2 makes its way to the free-bound dipole matrix

element.

The immediate consequence is that in the limit of an inﬁnitely large quantization

volume, the dipole matrix element between the bound state and any single QC state

vanishes. Accordingly, when the volume is increased and Bose enhancement is absent,

the photoassociation coupling can always be treated with perturbation theory [9].

4 Nondegenerate thermal gas

4

4.1 Theoretical method

The main reason why we have insisted on eigenstates of energy is the basic random-

phase postulate of statistical mechanics, which states that the thermal density operator

is diagonal in eigenstates of energy. It is therefore always permissible to do whatever

analysis one is aiming at by ﬁrst assuming that the system starts in a given eigenstate

of energy m, and at the end of the calculations averaging the results over the thermal

probability distribution of the states m.

When discussing a nondegenerate thermal gas, we make another assumption as

well. We analyze photoassociation for just two atoms, and calculate the free-bound

transition rate, R. However, a typical experiment involves N ≫ 2 atoms. When
thinking of photoassociation of any given ‘probe’ atom, we add the transition rates due

to all colliders, so that the photoassociation rate per atom becomes N R.

In the limit of inﬁnite quantization volume, the rate of photoassociation for two

atoms vanishes with the coupling matrix element as R ∝ d2
∝ 1/V . We of course
expect as much since two atoms cease to collide in an inﬁnite volume. Nonetheless, for

N atoms the photoassociation rate per atom is N R ∝ N/V = ̺, proportional to the
density of the gas. In the thermodynamic limit when both N and V tend to inﬁnity

in such a way that ̺ remains constant, the photoassociation rate per atom has a ﬁnite

limit proportional to density. The result is reasonable, and our QC approach [5, 9] in

fact exactly reproduces the free-bound transition rate obtained from collision theory [8].

4.2 The demise of STIRAP

In our model, and in current practice [8], the primary photoassociated molecular state

is reached by absorption of a photon. This invariably means that the molecule is

subject to spontaneous emission, and decays away. Moreover, the reverse of PA, pho-

5

todissociation, tends to break molecules back into atoms. It is then a natural idea to

add a second laser ﬁeld tuned between the initially photoassociated state and another

(more) stable molecular state, and to attempt to utilize STIRAP to avoid losses from

the primary photoassociated state [4]. We sketch such a scheme in Fig. 2.

Unfortunately, this idea hits a roadblock. According to the random-phase postulate,

for a thermal sample we may assume that the system starts in a given QC state m, as

denoted in Fig. 2. But the free-bound matrix element d scales with the quantization

volume V as d ∝ V −1/2, and tends to zero with V → ∞. On the contrary, the bound-
bound matrix element is volume independent. The free-bound coupling is therefore

always small compared to the coupling for bound-bound transitions, and it is impossible

to eﬀect the counter-intuitive reversal of the coupling strengths needed for STIRAP [5].

Of course, the ﬁnal average over a distribution of initial states m is not expected to

create STIRAP either.

We are not arguing that there would be no two-color photoassociation; see Ref. [9].

However, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, we do not believe that the

advantages of counter-intuitive pulse order and STIRAP, protection from decay of the

intermediate state and the ensuing improvement in transfer eﬃciency, will materialize

in free-bound-bound photoassociation of a thermal nondegenerate gas.

5 Bose-Einstein condensate

5.1 Theoretical method

Calculating the free-bound transition rate for one pair of atoms and then multiplying

by the number of available colliders is a process which implicitly assumes that we can

distinguish between the atoms. Such an approach is fundamentally ﬂawed in the case

of a BEC. Instead, we have adopted a phenomenological second-quantized Hamiltonian

6

for photoassociation [1, 2].

Our basic premises are that one may treat atoms and molecules as bosons in their

own right, and that photoassociation conserves momentum. Given the momentum

representation for atoms and molecules, annihilation operators ak and bk, the part of

the Hamiltonian responsible for photoassociation reads,

H = . . . −

1

2 Xk,p,q

d(k − p) · Eq b†

k+p+qakap + . . . .

(1)

Here Eq is the Fourier component q/¯h of the positive frequency part of the electric ﬁeld

driving photoassociation. By translational symmetry, the dipole matrix element may

depend only on the diﬀerence of the momenta of the atoms, k − p , and in the dipole
approximation it cannot depend on the photon momentum q. The term written down

is simply a sum of processes in which two atoms with momenta k, p and a photon with

momentum q are combined into a molecule with momentum k + p + q.

It remains to determine the values of the dipole matrix elements d in the Hamilto-

nian. We do this by demanding that for the nondegenerate thermal gas the results from

the Hamiltonian (1) be the same as we obtain from our QC approach. In the process a

number of subtleties come up having to do, e.g. with Bose-Einstein statistics and the

Wigner threshold law for photodissociation [2, 10]. The bottom line, though, is that

we know how to deduce the matrix elements from considerations such as the standard

molecular-structure calculations, or measurements of the photodissociation rate.

Consider now an ideal zero-momentum condensate photoassociated by a plane wave

of light, where all photons have momentum q. The molecules made by photon absorp-

tion all have the momentum q. The converse is not trivially true. By momentum

conservation alone, the induced emission of a molecule with momentum q need not

return two atoms into the condensate; but, in a process we call rogue photodissocia-

tion [10], the two atoms may emerge with any opposite nonzero momenta. However, the

7

photodissociation processes that return the atoms back to the condensate are favored

by Bose enhancement, and rogue photodissociation is further suppressed by energy

conservation. Thus we adopt a two-mode model, only taking into account atoms with

zero momentum and molecules with momentum q. The corresponding creation and

annihilation operators are denoted by a and b.

5.2 The return of STIRAP

Turning now towards two-color photoassociation of a degenerate gas [11], we reconsider

the possibility of STIRAP [3]. It is thus assumed that a further laser beam couples the

primarily photoassociated molecule to another bound molecular state, whose annihila-

tion operator is denoted by g. The three-mode Hamiltonian reads

H
¯h

= −∆g†g − δb†b −

1

2 κ(b†aa + ba†a†) −

1

2 Ω(b†g + bg†) .

(2)

Here ∆ and δ are the two-photon and intermediate detunings, including the proper

photon recoil energies, the free-bound QC Rabi frequency is

κ =

d · E
2¯h

(3)

and Ω is the bound-bound Rabi frequency.

Given the Hamiltonian (2), the Heisenberg equations of motion for the boson oper-

ators read

˙a = iκ a†b ,

˙b = iδ b + 1

2 i(κ aa + Ω g) ,

˙g = i∆ g + 1

2 iΩ b .

(4)

(5)

(6)

Suppose now that, if all molecules were dissociated to atoms, there were N atoms.
The boson operators in the system are then of the order √N . We thus introduce the

8

rescaled boson operators α = a/√N , . . . . These operators are of the order of unity,

and may roughly be interpreted as the second-quantized counterparts of the probability

amplitudes that an atom is in the atomic condensate (α) or in one of the two molecular

condensates (β, γ). The scaled operators obey the equation of motion

˙α = iχ α†β ,

˙β = iδ β + 1

2 i(χ αα + Ω γ) ,

˙γ = i∆ γ + 1

2 iΩ β .

(7)

(8)

(9)

The key point of our argument emerges from an inspection of the new Rabi fre-

quency after scaling,

χ =

√N d · E

2¯h

.

(10)

The √N is nothing but Bose enhancement in the present context. In the thermody-
namic limit d ∝ p1/V , so that χ ∝ pN/V = √ρ remains ﬁnite. More precisely,

suppose that the same laser ﬁeld with amplitude E were tuned in such a way that the

the photodissociation of bound molecules would produce two atoms with the reduced

mass µ and relative velocity v at the rate Γ(v), then we have [2, 10]

χ = lim

v→0 s 2π¯h2Γ(v)̺

µ2v

.

(11)

The limit is ﬁnite and nonzero by virtue of the Wigner threshold law.

The couplings χ and Ω in Eqs. (7)-(9) do not depend on the quantization volume

anymore; the dependence on V is replaced by a dependence on ̺, the density of atoms

if all molecules were to dissociate. In a BEC there is no longer any intrinsic restriction

on the relative size of the couplings, and photoassociative STIRAP is feasible even in

the thermodynamic limit.

We have constructed explicit examples of STIRAP by solving Eqs. (7)-(9) in a semi-

classical or mean-ﬁeld [6] approximation, treating α, β and γ as c-numbers instead of

9

quantum operators [3]. Unlike the equations for probability amplitudes for the ordinary

Λ system, these equations are nonlinear. Nonetheless, the basic character of STIRAP

remains intact. In particular, for completely adiabatic switching of pulse strengths (for

which Ref. [3] gives quantitative criteria), there is never any probability in the primary

photoassociated state. Spontaneous-emission losses and rogue photodissociation are

then shut oﬀ.

We cannot think of any matter of principle that could go catastrophically wrong

with STIRAP. In practical experiments the atoms and possibly also the molecules are

trapped and do not form inﬁnite homogeneous condensates. Trapped particles come

with a time scale that is of the order of tens of milliseconds in the magnetic case. If the

STIRAP pulses are faster, trapping should not matter a whole lot. We have also ignored

collisions between atoms, between molecules, and between atoms and molecules. But

again, the corresponding time scales could easily be much longer than the time scale

of the laser pulses, so that collisions are also negligible. The worst practical enemy

of STIRAP might be light shifts of the two-photon resonance, which come about as a

result of virtual transitions accompanying rogue photodissociation [9, 10]. However, in

principle one can always compensate for light shifts by chirping the laser pulses.

6 Ruminations

Our renunciation of photoassociative STIRAP in a thermal nondegenerate gas most

likely applies to other coherent optical transients as well [9]. In the limit V → ∞ the
free-bound Rabi frequency κ ∝ 1/√V tends to zero, and the corresponding time scale

for the transient 1/κ tends to inﬁnity. At least in a large enough sample, something

else is likely to happen before a coherent transient can run its course.

Similarly, coherent transients should work in photoassociation of a BEC. Because

10

of Bose enhancement, the coupling matrix element picks up a the factor √N , giving
the eﬀective Rabi frequency χ = √N κ ∝ pN/V = √̺. In the thermodynamic limit

χ remains ﬁnite, and the time scale of transients actually scales with atom density as

ρ−1/2. Such transients have already been discussed in the photoassociation literature [1,

2], and equivalent mathematics is involved in a wide variety of topics ranging from

second-harmonic generation [12] to the Feshbach resonance [13].

One ﬁnal point concludes our discussion of transients in photoassociation. Bose en-

hancement oftentimes makes little practical diﬀerence even when it is formally present.

For instance, suppose that we were to calculate a transition rate for a condensate un-

der a normal bilinear coupling of the form b†a. Bose enhancement gives the factor
√N in the matrix element, and the transition rate for the condensate in terms of the

one-atom rate R reads N R. However, in the second quantized formulation all N con-

densate atoms are treated at once, so that the transition rate per atom is still R. On

the other hand, the coupling for photoassociation, b†aa, is trilinear. The ensuing Bose

enhancement ∝ (√N )2 is thus stronger than for a bilinear coupling; in fact, just strong

enough to oﬀset the decrease of the coupling matrix element in the thermodynamic

limit. As a result of the conﬂuence of BEC and cubic coupling, a condensate responds

to photoassociation as a unit on a time scale that depends on density, but oddly enough

not directly on atom number or size of the condensate.

7 Acknowledgements

One of us (JJ) speciﬁcally thanks for Prof. Fritz Ehlotky for the opportunity to par-

ticipate in the Obergurgl/K¨uhtai meetings already for the ﬁfth time — and hopefully

running. . . . This work is supported in part by NSF, Grant No. PHY-9801888, and by

NASA, Grant No. NAG8-1428.

11

References

[1] Drummond, P. D., Kheruntsyan, K. V., and He, H., 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81,

3055.

[2] Javanainen, J., and Mackie, M., 1999, Phys. Rev. A, 59, R3186.

[3] Mackie, M., Kowalski, R., and Javanainen, J., 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett., 84, 3803;

http://arXive.org/abs/physics/9909060.

[4] Vardi, A., Abrashkevich, D., Frishman, E., and Shapiro, M., 1997, J. Chem. Phys.,

107, 6166.

[5] Javanainen, J., and Mackie, M., Phys. Rev. A, 1998, 58, R789.

[6] Parkins, A. S., and Walls, D. F., 1998, Phys. Rep., 303, 1.

[7] Bergman, K., Theuer, H., and Shore, B. W., 1998, Rev. Mod. Phys., 70, 1003.

[8] Weiner, J., Bagnato, V. S., Zilio, S. C., and Julienne, P. S., Rev. Mod. Phys., 71, 1.

[9] Javanainen, J., and Mackie, M., Phys. Rev. A, 1999, 60, 3174.

[10] Ko˘strun, M., Mackie, M., Cˆot´e, R., and Javanainen, J., http://arXive.org/abs/

physics/0006066.

[11] Wynar, R., Freeland, R. S., Han, D. J., Ryu, C., and Heinzen, D. J., 2000, Science,

287, 1016.

[12] Walls, D. F., and Barakat, R., Phys. Rev.A, 1970, 1, 446; Walls, D. F., Phys. Lett.,

1970, 32A, 476; Walls, D. F., and Tindle, C. T., Lett. Nuovo Cimento, 1971, 2

915; Walls, D. F., and Tindle, C. T., J. Phys. A, 1972, 5, 534.

[13] Timmermans, E., Tommasini, P., Cˆot´e, R., Hussein, M., and Kerman, A., Phys.

Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 2691.

12

b

Ω

δ

κ

∆

g

a

Figure 1: Three-level Λ scheme with states a, b and g and laser couplings
with Rabi frequencies κ and Ω. The deﬁnitions of the two-photon and
intermediate detunings ∆ and δ are also given schematically. For STIRAP,
one would have ∆ = 0. The notation also applies to the Hamiltonian (1).

13

b

d

g

m

Figure 2: Scheme for STIRAP starting from the quasicontinuum state m.
The free-bound coupling is represented here by the dipole matrix element,
d.

14

