0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

7

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Bound states of negatively charged ions induced by a magnetic ﬁeld

Victor G. Bezchastnov, Peter Schmelcher, and Lorenz S. Cederbaum

Theoretische Chemie, Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg, INF 229, D-69120 Heidelberg,

Federal Republic of Germany

(February 2, 2008)

We analyse the bound states of negatively charged ions which were predicted to exist

because of the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld by Avron et al [1]. We conﬁrm that the

number of such states is inﬁnite in the approximation of an inﬁnitely heavy nucleus and

provide insight into the underlying physical picture by means of a combined adiabatic and

perturbation theoretical approach. We also calculate the corresponding binding energies

which are qualitatively diﬀerent for the states with vanishing and non-vanishing angular

momentum. An outlook on the case of including center of mass eﬀects is presented.

I. INTRODUCTION

The behaviour and properties of negative ions became during the past years a branch of intense research.

There exists an enormous interest in the electronic structure and dynamics of negative ions, both from
the theoretical as well as experimental point of view (see, e.g., the review [2] and the references therein).
According to our present knowledge about atomic ions it is most likely that singly charged negative
ions possess in the absence of a magnetic ﬁeld only one stable ground-state conﬁguration. For example
for the H− ion, this state is the 1 1S electronic state, and a rigorous proof that this the only possible
bound state was given in [3]. Also, some atoms, like for example Be, N, Ne, Mg, Ar do not possess any
stable negative ion state (see, e.g., [4,5]). On the other hand, one can expect that in the presence of a
magnetic ﬁeld a lot of new discrete energy states of negative ions can appear. This expectation is based
on the statement that for any negatively charged ion the number of discrete energy states is inﬁnite in

the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld [1]. However, this statement was formulated as the conclusion of a formal
mathematical treatment which does not provide a transparent physical picture of the appearance of the
inﬁnite sequence of bound states nor does it estimate the corresponding energies. Although a wide set
of works was focused on the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld on low-lying ion states (e.g., [6–12]), there is
no systematic treatment of the highly excited anions predicted in [1]. In the present paper we develop a
physical approach showing transparently from which quantum mechanical grounds the inﬁnite sequence
of bound anion states appears in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.
In Section 2, we ﬁrst reduce the
problem to a one-particle, and then to a one-dimensional one, where to analyse the bonding one has to

consider the motion of the external electron along the magnetic ﬁeld in an eﬀective potential depending
on the quantum state. We conﬁrm that, in the approximation of the static (inﬁnitely heavy) nucleus,
the number of the bound states is inﬁnite, and derive estimates for the corresponding binding energies
valid for arbitrary ions. In Section 3, we apply these estimates to the ion H− and verify them treating
the one-dimensional motion of the external electron numerically. We also discuss the bound states of
an exotic ion formed by attaching the muon to the hydrogen atom. Besides, we analyse the importance
of the non-adiabatic coupling between the states of the external and atomic (core) electrons. A general
discussion and concluding remarks are given in Section 4.

1

II. GENERAL

It is well-known (see, e.g., [4,13]) that the electron aﬃnities for the negative ions are usually much

smaller than the binding energies of the corresponding neutrals. This fact implies that the extra electron
is weakly bound to the atom and its behaviour and properties strongly diﬀer from that of internal (core)
electrons. For the H−−ion, the binding of the extra electron is exclusively due to correlation between
the two electrons. In the following we will study the highly excited states of the negative ions which
appear in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld and which, as we will estimate, correspond to very small
electron aﬃnities. We therefore use the approximation of a weakly bound external electron neglecting its
exchange interaction with the core electrons. To exploit such a model, it is convenient to split the total
Hamiltonian for a singly negatively charged ion into three terms,

Here the ﬁrst term,

Hion = Hat + He + W.

Hat =

1

2me

Z

Xa=1hpa +

e
c

Aai2

+ U + 2µBBΣ

(1)

(2)

describes a neutral atom with inﬁnitely heavy nucleus in a magnetic ﬁeld B with the vector potential
Aa = A(ra). Summation is carried out over all the atomic (core) electrons labelled with the subscript
“a”, Z is the nucleus charge number, me and −e = −|e| < 0 are the electron mass and charge. The
potential energy U includes the Coulomb energies of the interaction of the core electrons with each other
and with the nucleus. Σ is the total spin of the atom, and µB = e¯h/(2mec) is the Bohr magneton. The
second term in (1),

corresponds to an extra (with respect to the atom) electron, σ is the electron spin. The last term,

He =

1

2me hp +

e
c

Ai2

+ 2µBBσ,

W =

Z

Xa=1

e2

|r − ra|

−

Ze2

r

,

(3)

(4)

describes the Coulomb coupling of the extra electron to the atom.

When the extra electron is weakly bound to the atom, the character of its motion diﬀers strongly from
In particular, the external electron can be assumed to move much slower

that of the core electrons.

than the core ones. In this case, the ion states can be successfully described in terms of a quasimolecular
approach, and the problem of binding can even be reduced to a one-particle one. Below we brieﬂy describe
this approach.

A. Quasimolecular approach to the problem of binding

Let us consider the Hamiltonian

H ′

at = Hat + W.

(5)

It does not include the kinetic energy of the external electron, therefore the latter can be considered as
static in space, so H ′
at describes the motion of the core electrons only. Since the potential energy term

2

at depends parametrically on the position r of the external electron, the energy spectrum of this

of H ′
Hamiltonian as well as the corresponding eigenfunctions also depend on r. Let us denote them by

E′

i(r) = hi|H ′

at|ii

(6)

and φi(r1, r2, . . . , rZ ; r), respectively, where the index i labels the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian H ′
at
with some choice of r. Since at any r the states |ii compose a complete basis set, an eigenfunction of the
total Hamiltonian (1) can be presented as

Ψ(r1, r2, . . . , rZ; r) = Xi′

ψi′ (r)φi′ (r1, r2, . . . , rZ; r),

(7)

with the expansion coeﬃcients ψk′ (r) depending on the position of the external electron. It should be
noted that this wave function is not completely antisymmetric with respect to all the ion electrons, only
its “atomic part”, φi′ can be assumed to be properly antisymmetric with respect to the core electrons.
Complete antisymmetrisation would signiﬁcantly complicate the further consideration. On the other
hand, the main yield of such a complication would be taking into account exchange interaction between

the external and core electrons which is deﬁnitely negligible for states for which the external electron is
localized far from the atom. Notice also that the form (7) of the ion wave function is exact if another
charged particle diﬀerent from the electron (like for example a muon) is attached to the atom.

Substituting the wave function (7) into the Schr¨odinger equation with the Hamiltonian (1), subse-
i and integrating over the positions of the core electrons

quently multiplying from the left-hand side by φ∗
we will arrive at the set of coupled equations

[He + E′

i(r) + hii(r) − Etot] ψi(r) = −Xi′6=i

hi i′ ψi′ (r).

(8)

Here Etot is the total eigenenergy of the system, and the matrix elements hi i′ are given by the following
equation

hi i′ =

1

2me

hφ∗

i |p2φi′ i +

eB
2mec

hφ∗

i |l φi′ i +

1
me

hφ∗

i |p φi′ ip ,

(9)

where l = r × p is the angular momentum of the external electron. Notice that if both i and i′ relate to
the ground state of the atom, |0i, then the last two terms in Eq. (9) equal zero while the ﬁrst term can
be transformed as follows

2

.

(10)

h0 0 =

¯h2

2me Z dr1Z dr2 . . .Z drZ (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

∂
∂r

φ(r1, r2, . . . , rZ ; r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

In the following we restrict ourself by considering the attachment of the extra electron to the neutral

atom in the ground state. In this case, the right-hand side of Eq. (8) is associated with the coupling
between the ground and excited states of the core electrons due to the motion of the external electron.
Assuming the ground state of the neutral atom to be energetically well-separated from the excited states
this coupling can be neglected. Then Eq. (8) becomes essentially a one-particle Schr¨odinger equation,

[He + V0(r) + h00(r) − E0] ψ0(r) = 0,

(11)

where, for the sake of convenience, we have shifted the energies by the ground state energy of the isolated
atom, E(0)

0(r → ∞), and introduced

0 = E′

E0 = Etot − E(0)

0

3

(12)

and

V0(r) = E′

0(r) − E(0)
0 .

(13)

Equation (11) describes the motion of the external electron in the magnetic ﬁeld and the potential which
consists of two parts: the static term, V0(r), and the non-adiabatic (dynamic) correction, h00(r). The
latter, as we shall directly estimate for the H−−ion, decreases with increasing r faster than V (r) and can
be neglected at distances exceeding the atomic size. Therefore, to analyse the binding mechanism for the
excited ion states one has to solve the Schr¨odinger equation

[He + V (r) − E] ψ(r) = 0,

(14)

where for brevity we have omitted the index “0” related to the ground state of the core electrons.

At distances of the extra electron from the atom strongly exceeding the atom size, one can consider

the operator (4) as a perturbation of the atom and evaluate it by the multipole expansion,

W = −e(cid:18) Dn
r2 −

Qαβnαnβ

2r3

+ . . .(cid:19) ,

(15)

where n = r/r is the unit vector in the direction of r and the indices α and β run over the Cartesian
coordinates.

and

D = −e

Z

Xa=1

ra

Z

Qαβ = −e

Xa=1(cid:0)r2

aδαβ − 3xaαxaβ(cid:1)

(16)

(17)

are the operators of the dipole and quadrupole momenta of the atom, respectively, xaα and xaβ denote
the components of ra, ra = (xa1, xa2, xa3). Then the potential in Eq. (14) can be approximated as

V (r) = −

ehDin

r2 +

ehQαβinαnβ

2r3

−

e2καβnαnβ

2r4

,

(18)

where hDi and hQαβi are the mean values of the dipole and quadrupole momenta, respectively, of the
unperturbed atom described by the Hamiltonian (2), and καβ is the polarizability of the atom in an
electric ﬁeld. The ﬁrst two terms in (18) represent the ﬁrst-order perturbation corrections. The last term
in (18) is the second-order correction, it corresponds to the dipole term in (15) treated as the perturbation
of the atom by the electric ﬁeld E = −en/r2.

Expression (18) can be further simpliﬁed if we take into account that the potential (13) has its symmetry
axes directed along the magnetic ﬁeld. A simple argumentation of this statement is the following. In
the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld it is natural to assume that the axis of quantization for the atom is
directed along B. Then the potential (13) depends parametrically on the two vectors, B and r. Since
the potential is scalar it must depend only on scalars which can be constructed from these vectors. These
scalars are B2, r2 and Br. This means that if B is directed along the z−axes, then V (r) = V (r⊥, z).
As a result the non-zero components of the mean dipole and quadrupole momenta of the neutral atom
can only be hDzi, hQxxi = hQyyi and hQzzi, respectively. Also, the polarizability takes the diagonal
form with the components κxx = κyy = κ⊥ and κzz = κk. Furthermore, since the z−parity of the core

4

electrons is the integral of motion when they are not perturbed by the interaction with the external
electron, we have hDzi = 0. Then Eq. (18) can be transformed as follows:

V (r⊥, z) =

e2λ(2z2 − r2

⊥)

2r5

−(cid:0)κ⊥ sin2 ϑ + κk cos2 ϑ(cid:1)

e2
2r4 ,

(19)

where ϑ is the angle between n and B and the coeﬃcient λ can be expressed in terms of the mean values
of the squares of the longitudinal and transverse coordinates of the core electrons of the unperturbed

atom,

Z

λ =

Xa=1(cid:2)2hz2

ai − hr2

a⊥i(cid:3) .

B. Binding in a magnetic ﬁeld as 1D problem

The Hamiltonian that determines the one-particle Schr¨odinger equation (14) explicitly reads

where

Heﬀ =

p2
z
2me

+

π2
⊥
2me

+ V (r⊥, z),

π⊥ = p⊥ +

e
2c

B×r⊥

(20)

(21)

(22)

is the transverse kinetic momentum of the electron. We have introduced the symmetric gauge of the

vector potential, A = (1/2)B×r, being the most appropriate one because of the axial symmetry of the
potential V . We also have omitted the spin part of the Hamiltonian which determines the trivial shift of
the ion energy spectrum and does not aﬀect the binding energies.

Since the potential in the Hamiltonian (21) decreases rapidly with increasing distance of the extra
electron from the atom, even quite a weak magnetic ﬁeld can inﬂuence the transverse motion of the
extra electron to a much larger extent than the atomic potential. In this case the eigenfunction of the
Hamiltonian (21) can be eﬃciently expanded in terms of the the Landau states, hr⊥|n, si, of the motion
of the electron across the magnetic ﬁeld. These states are the common eigenstates of the operators π2
⊥
and lz, where l = r×p is the electron angular momentum, and labeled with the two quantum numbers,
n and s, that determine the corresponding eigenvalues,

⊥ = (¯h/am)2(2n + 1) , n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
π2

lz = −¯hs , s = −n, −n + 1, −n + 2, . . . ,

(23)

am = pc¯h/(eB) is the magnetic length. The ﬁrst eigenvalue determines the Landau energy spectrum

ELan

n =

π2
⊥
2me

=

¯heB

mec (cid:18)n +

1

2(cid:19) .

(24)

Hence n is called the electron Landau level number.

Because of the axial symmetry of the atomic potential the longitudinal component of the electron
angular momentum is an integral of motion for the Hamiltonian (21), [lz, Heﬀ] = 0, and the quantum
number s can be used to label the eigenstates of Heﬀ , i.e. E = Es. The expansion of the corresponding
eigenfunctions over the Landau states thus involves only diﬀerent Landau level numbers and reads

5

ψs(r) = Xn

gns(z)hr⊥|n, si.

(25)

The expansion coeﬃcients gns(z) and the energy E can be found by solving the system of coupled
equations,

(cid:20) p2

z
2me

where

+ V (s)

nn (z) + ELan

n − Es(cid:21) gns(z) = − Xn′6=n

V (s)
nn′ (z)gn′s(z) , n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,

V (s)
nn′ (z) = hn, s|V (r⊥, z)|n′, si

(26)

(27)

are the eﬀective longitudinal potentials obtained as the matrix elements of the atomic potential V (r⊥, z)
within the space of the Landau states of the external electron.

The quantity ELan

0 = ¯hωB/2, where ωB = eB/(mec) is the electron cyclotron frequency, determines the
continuum threshold for the states of the external electron. The states of this electron belong to diﬀerent
manifolds associated with the diﬀerent Landau energies ELan
n , n = 0, 1, 2, . . .. The bound states can be
classiﬁed by the numbers (s, n, ν) where ν equals the number of nodes of the function gns(z) for the
leading term in the expansion (25) - such a classiﬁcation is similar to that used in treating hydrogen-like
atoms in a strong magnetic ﬁeld, see, e.g., [14].

We can expect (and our results for the ion H− conﬁrm this), that the binding energies for the ionic
states induced by the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld are small compared to the electron cyclotron energy,
¯hωB. Therefore, all such states associated with the manifolds n = 1, 2, . . . lie in the continuum, i.e. are
not bound. We thus will focus on the states related to the ground Landau manifold, n = 0. While
treating them we can further neglect the coupling of the ground Landau manifold to the higher ones,

e.g., omit the sum on the right-hand side of Eq. (26). This approach yields the 1D Schr¨odinger equation,

(cid:20) p2

z
2me

+ Vs(z) − εs(cid:21) gs(z) = 0,

(28)

which describes the motion of the external electron along the magnetic ﬁeld. In this equation, we have

shifted the energy by the zero-point Landau energy,

εs = Es − ELan

0

.

(29)

Then, when εs is negative, the value of −εs is the binding energy of the external electron. Also, for brevity
we have omitted the index n = 0 and deﬁne the eﬀective longitudinal potential by Vs(z) = V (s)
00 (z). In
order to get an idea of the binding properties of this potential one can use the weak coupling one-
dimensional theory (see, e.g., [15]). This theory says that if the potential vanishes at |z| → ∞ and the

integral

Is = Z ∞

−∞

Vs(z)dz

(30)

is negative than there is at least one bound state of ﬁnite longitudinal motion, and the estimate of the
corresponding binding energy for that state is

− εs = meI 2

s /(2¯h2) .

(31)

As we shall see, the condition Is < 0 holds for inﬁnitely many possible quantum numbers s and thus the
number of bound states associated with diﬀerent values of s is inﬁnite, in accordance with the conclusion

6

of [1]. For each s, the estimate (31) gives the binding energy for the state for which the longitudinal part
of the wave function of the external electron has no nodes, e.g. ν = 0.

To exploit the latter analytical approach let us introduce the transverse probability density for the

states related to the ground Landau manifold

ρs(r⊥) = Z 2π

0

dϕ |hr⊥|n = 0, si|2 =

1
s! a2

m (cid:18) r2

⊥
2a2

m(cid:19)s

exp(cid:18)−

r2
⊥
2a2

m(cid:19) ,

(32)

where the integration is done over the electron azimuthal angle. In terms of the density (32) and the
atomic potential V (r⊥, z) we have

Is = Z ∞

0

r⊥dr⊥ ρs(r⊥)Z ∞

−∞

dz V (r⊥, z) .

(33)

Let us now adopt an approximation of the atomic potential given by Eq. (19) for large distances. It is
easy to check that at any r⊥ 6= 0

Z ∞

0

(cid:0)2z2 − r2
⊥ + z2)5/2 = 0
(r2

⊥(cid:1) dz

(34)

and thus the ﬁrst, quadrupole, term in (19) does not contribute into Is. This implies that the polarization
part of the atomic potential plays a key role in binding the external electron. Let us further assume that
the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld on the atomic polarizability is negligible. As it is known [16], in

the absence of the magnetic ﬁeld an atom in the ground state of the zero total angular momentum has
an isotropic polarizability, κ, i.e. we assume κ⊥ ≈ κk ≈ κ. Then the polarization term in (19) is net
attractive and the condition Is < 0 is fulﬁlled. Straightforward integration in Eq. (33) and use of the
relation (31) gives

π2κ2

1

− εs =

27(s!)2 Γ2(cid:18)s −

2(cid:19) Ry γ3 ,
where Γ is the complete gamma-function, Ry = mee4/(2¯h2), γ = a2
0 = B/B0, and B0 = 2.35 × 105 T.
This estimate is not appropriate for s = 0 because of the divergence of the integrations at the origin
r⊥ = z = 0 for the potential (19). However, for s > 0 above value of the binding energy is a good
approximation for γ ≪ 1 (laboratory magnetic ﬁelds) since the main contribution to the integral comes
from distances suﬃciently larger than a0, the natural measure of the size of the neutral atom. Using
atomic units (2Ry for the energy and B0 for the magnetic ﬁeld strength) we rewrite Eq. (35) in a recurrent
way,

m/a2

(35)

where

− εs = 0.1211κ2B3δ2

s ,

s = 1, 2, . . . ,

δ1 = 1 ,

δs = [1 − (1.5/s)]δs−1 ,

s = 2, 3, . . . .

(36)

(37)

One should notice that the scaling behaviour of the binding energies with the magnetic ﬁeld strength,
−εs ∝ B3, coincides with that predicted in [1]. Also, at large s we have δs ≈ s−3/2 and thus obtain the
behaviour of the binding energies for large s, −εs ∝ s−3. Such a sharp decrease of the binding energy with
the quantum number reﬂects the fact that in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld the external

7

⊥i = 2(s + 1)a2
m,
⊥ centered around
⊥i. Therefore, as s increases the external electron is bound to the atom at progressively larger

electron follows the Landau orbit with the expectation value for the radius squared hr2
and at large s the transverse probability density (32) becomes a peaked function of r2
r2
⊥ = hr2
distances from it.

We can also establish the behaviour of the binding energy with the magnetic ﬁeld strength for the

state s = 0. In this case, contrary to the limit of large s, the transverse probability density varies very
slowly with r⊥ and the scale on which it reduces signiﬁcantly from its maximal value at r⊥ = 0 is the
magnetic length, am, which strongly exceeds the atomic potential scale, a0. Therefore, when calculating
the integral (33) we can replace the transverse probability density by its maximal value, ρs(0) = 1/a2
m.
In this way we obtain

− ε0 =

1

2 (cid:20)Z ∞

0

r⊥dr⊥Z +∞

−∞

2

dz V (r⊥, z)(cid:21)

B2 ,

(38)

where we have used atomic units again as in the remaining part of our work. We remark that the domain
of the neutral atomic core contributes quite signiﬁcantly to the integrations in (38) and thus the use
of the quasimolecular (adiabatic) picture to describe the motion of the extra electron becomes a crude
approximation. However, a more accurate treatment is expected to change only the numerical coeﬃcient
in Eq. (38). The scaling behaviour of the binding energy with respect to the ﬁeld strength is expected to
be the same, i.e. −ε0 ∝ B2.

III. BINDING ENERGIES OF THE H− AND Hµ

− IONS

The approach developed in the previous Section can be directly applied to the H−−ion. With a good
accuracy we can neglect the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld on the ground state of the core electron, and
use the well-known value (see, e.g., [17]), κ = 9/2, for the polarizability of such a conﬁguration. Then
the estimate (36) gives

− εs = 2.453B3δ2

s .

(39)

More reliable results for the binding energies for the states of the electron attached to the hydrogen
atom which are induced by the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld, including the state s = 0, can be obtained
if one knows the atomic potential V . When the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld on the hydrogen atom is
neglected this potential is spherically symmetric, V = V (r), and can be found in the literature. We use
the results of Walles, Herman and Milnes [18] who rigorously calculated the energy levels of an electron
moving in the ﬁeld of two ﬁxed, at distance r from each other, charges +e and −e using the separability
of the problem in confocal elliptic coordinates. Their electronic ground state energy, EWHM, is directly
related to our potential V (r),

V (r) = EWHM(r) −

1
r

+ 0.5 ,

(40)

when adding the Coulomb interaction energy between the two static charges and the hydrogenic ground-
state binding energy (cf. Eq. (13)). The energy EWHM was tabulated in the wide range of r, 0.840380 <
r < 30.0. In Figure 1, we show the corresponding values of V by dots and use the spline interpolation to
determine the value of the potential between them (solid line). At larger r the potential can be evaluated
by its polarization tail,

8

V (r) = −

2.25
r4

,

while at the lower r one can put EWHM = 0 in Eq. (40) and get

V (r) = −

1
r

+ 0.5 .

(41)

(42)

As Figure 1 demonstrates, these extrapolations match very good the data from [18].

With the well-deﬁned potential V (r) we can ﬁnd the value of the coeﬃcient in the estimate of the
binding energy for the state s = 0. Numerical integration of the potential in Eq. (38), with the natural
replacement 2πr⊥dr⊥dz → 4πr2dr, yields

− ε0 = 6.31B2 .

(43)

To verify the estimates (39) and (43) we have also solved numerically the Schr¨odinger equation (28),
calculating the eﬀective potentials Vs(z) numerically from the potential V (r) presented in Figure 1. First
of all, we were searching for the states with no nodes of the longitudinal wave function of the external
electron (ν = 0−states). The results for the corresponding binding energies, for diﬀerent numbers of s
and ﬁeld strengths, are shown in Figure 2 by open circles. Solid lines represent the estimates (39) and
(43), and we can conclude that they are in fairly good agreement with the numerical results. We have also
performed the search for the bound states with higher longitudinal excitations, ν = 1, 2, . . ., but found no
one, for the magnetic ﬁeld strengths 10−6 < B < 10−4. This indicates that the eﬀective potential Vs(z)
is so weak that for each s it can bind the external electron only in the ν = 0−state.

Finally, to control the validity of the quasimolecular approach, we have calculated the quantity h(r) =
h00(r), the non-adiabatic correction to the potential V (r), determined by Eq. (10). For this purpose, the
wave functions of the electron moving in the ﬁeld of two ﬁxed charges were computed via a numerical
two-dimensional grid method which was invented by M.V. Ivanov (for details of the method as well as
the description of the corresponding code ATMOLMESH we refer the reader to [19]). The corresponding
results are shown in Figure 1 by open circles. To conﬁrm that the numerical results reproduce correctly
the scaling behaviour of h with r, we also give the perturbation estimate,

h(r) =

8
r6 ,

(44)

whose derivation is outlined in the Appendix. With increasing distances exceeding the size of the neutral
hydrogen atom, the non-adiabatic correction becomes smaller and smaller compared to |V (r)|. One should

notice that at small r the non-adiabatic correction exceeds the value of |V (r)|. This implies that the
non-adiabatic coupling eﬀects are quite signiﬁcant for the state s = 0. However, since the corresponding
binding energy obtained neglecting these eﬀects is very small, we believe that a more accurate approach
would only change the numerical coeﬃcient in Eq. (43) but not the scaling low, −ε0 ∝ B2.

The approach developed in this paper can also be directly applied to the analysis of highly excited
exotic anions, for example to the ion formed by attaching the muon to the hydrogen atom. Due to the
fact that the shell of the Hµ−−ion is formed by two diﬀerent particles (the electron and muon) there is
no need for antisimmetrization (exchange) and the ansatz (7) for the wave function of the ion becomes

exact. Moreover, since the muon is much heavier than the electron (the muon-to-electron mass ratio is
mµ/me ≈ 207), the binding energies for the muonic ion are larger. Replacement of the electron mass by
the muon mass in Eq. (31) leads to the following estimates

9

− ε0 = 1306B2 ,
−εs = 508B3δ2

s ,

s = 0 ,

s = 1, 2, . . . .

(45)

In Figure 2, the corresponding energies are plotted as dashed lines. Evidently, the non-adiabatic correction
to the one-particle potential for the Hµ− ion is mµ/me times smaller than that for the ion H− (see
Figure 1), which makes the estimate for s = 0 more reliable in the case of the Hµ− ion.

IV. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

In this paper, we have studied the states of the negative atomic ions which are induced by the presence
of a magnetic ﬁeld. Apart from the neglect of the exchange interaction between the external and atomic
(core) electrons the equations we start with are exact. Performing an analysis of the weakly bound states
of the external electron, it is possible to reduce the problem to an eﬀective one-particle by neglecting
the non-adiabatic coupling terms. In the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld which determines the transverse

motion of the external electron further simpliﬁcations are possible which reduce the question of the
binding mechanism to a one-dimensional Schr¨odinger equation for the motion of the external electron
along the ﬁeld.

We can conclude that in the approximation of the inﬁnitely heavy nucleus the number of the ionic bound
states is inﬁnite, in accordance with the general theorem of [1]. A quite simple and appealing physical
picture of the appearance of such states is that the external electron can be attached to the atom with
diﬀerent values of its angular momentum along the magnetic ﬁeld. The number of such possible deﬁnite
values is inﬁnite and for each value a diﬀerent 1D eﬀective potential appears. This potential determines

the motion of the external electron along the ﬁeld and can bind the electron in at least one quantum state.
We have labelled these states by the integer number s = 0, 1, 2, . . . (negative of the magnetic quantum
number of the external electron), and obtained general estimates of the binding energies of negatively
charged ions. These estimates establish both the dependence of the binding energies on the magnetic
ﬁeld strength and on the quantum number s: for s = 0 the binding energy scales with B as B2 and for
s = 1, 2, . . . the scaling low is −εs ∝ B3; at large s the binding energies behave as −εs ∝ s−3. To apply
the estimates for s > 0 to a speciﬁc ion one needs only to know the polarizability of the corresponding
neutral atom in an external electric ﬁeld, while the estimate for s = 0 involves the whole atomic potential
acting on a static external electron.

We have applied the estimates obtained to the H−−ion, exploiting the known polarizability of the
hydrogen atom and the potential for the static two-charge Coulomb problem [18]. We also have veriﬁed
that these estimates are in complete agreement with results of the numerical integration of the Schr¨odinger
equation for the motion of the external electron along the magnetic ﬁeld.

The binding energies for the H−−ion that we have obtained are indeed very small compared to the
binding energy of the hydrogen atom. At the largest magnetic ﬁelds available at laboratories now,
B ∼ 30 T, the binding energy for the H−−ion is approximately 2.8 × 10−3 meV for the state with the
zero angular momentum of the external electron, and it is ≈ 1.4 × 10−7 meV for the state with s = 1.
The magnetically induced bound states of the exotic muon ions possess a much larger binding energy.
For the same value of the magnetic ﬁeld strength, the muon aﬃnity to the hydrogen atom is 0.58 meV
for the state s = 0 and 2.9 × 10−5 meV for the state s = 1.

It also looks quite challenging to detect the excited anion states for heavier atoms which have polar-
izabilities signiﬁcantly larger than the hydrogen atom. For example, the polarizability of Cs is, with 2%

10

accuracy, κ = 403 [17]. The resulting electron aﬃnity to this atom for the state s = 1 at B = 30 T is
≈ 2 × 10−4 meV. Another challenging example is the anion of Ba, which does not exist at B = 0. The
polarizability of Ba, with 8% accuracy, is κ = 268 [17], and the binding energy of its excited anion, for
the external electron state with s = 1 at B = 30 T is ≈ 1.8 × 10−5 meV. The corresponding states of
the exotic ions, Csµ− and Baµ−, possess the binding energies of ≈ 4 × 10−2 meV and ≈ 4 × 10−3 meV,
respectively.

Although we cannot directly apply the estimate (38) for the binding energy of the external electron
with zero angular momentum to heavier ions, in order to have an idea about their order of magnitude we
can speculate that these binding energies diﬀer from the result (43) by the factor of (κ/4.5)2, where κ is
the polarizability of an atom and 4.5 is the numerical value of the polarizability of the hydrogen atom.
In this way we can evaluate the binding energy for the state s = 0 of the external electron of the ion of
Cs−, at B = 30 T, as −ε0 ∼ 20 meV. For the same state of the ion of Ba− we obtain, at the same ﬁeld
strength, −ε0 ∼ 10 meV. As we see, the magnetically induced anion bound states for atoms with large
polarizabilities can very well be detectable in laboratories.

Because of the large extension of the wave function of the loosely bound electron our results may also
apply to molecules and clusters although in a less quantitative manner. As molecules and clusters can
exhibit large polarizabilities [17] we expect that magnetically induced bound states exist for them and
possess considerable binding energies.

One important issue which was not addressed in this paper are the ﬁnite nucleus mass eﬀects which
can aﬀect the ion states signiﬁcantly. The underlying physical picture of the ﬁnite nuclear motion for
charged systems was discussed in detail in, e.g., [20]. Here we only mention that the electron states are
aﬀected by an oscillating electric ﬁeld introduced in the internal (electronic) system of the ion due to the

rotation of the ion as a whole over a Landau-like orbit. For a crude estimate, we may assume that due to
the ion motion the ion’s states get the oscillator-like energy excess ¯hΩN , where Ω = eB/(M c), M is the
ion mass and N = 0, 1, 2, . . .. Since in the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld the internal (electronic) degrees
of freedom are inherently coupled to the center of mass ones [20], we can expect that similar to the case
of the positive He+−ion [21] the minimal possible value of N for stable states coincides with s. In this
case, an s−state of the external electron is still bound if −εs > ¯hΩs, or

B
1 T

>

1.58 × 104

A1/2κ

s1/2
δs

,

(46)

where A is the mass number of the ion. According to this criterion, for the H−−ion the magnetic ﬁeld
strength which stabilizes the state s = 1 against the motional Stark eﬀect, is large, B ≈ 3.5 × 103 T,
and cannot be achieved in laboratories. However, for heavier ions, the magnetic ﬁeld which can stabilize
them in excited states are smaller. For example, for the Cs−−ion, such a ﬁeld is ≈ 3.4s1/2δ−1
s T, so the
external electron can be bound in a few s−states at the magnetic ﬁelds available at laboratories. We must
remark that these estimates of the center of mass eﬀects on the ion bound states are very preliminary
and based on the intuitive picture of the inclusion of the oscillator-like energies associated with the ion
motion across the magnetic ﬁeld in the total energy spectrum. We plan to perform the corresponding
analysis accurately in order to see how the nuclear motion inﬂuences the induced bound states in the
magnetic ﬁeld. But already now we can speculate that the ﬁnite nuclear mass eﬀects make at least the

highly excited s−states unbound which means that in reality the actual number of bound ion states is
ﬁnite and not inﬁnite.

11

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to M.V. Ivanov for providing us with numerically computed wave functions for the
ground state of an electron moving in the Coulomb ﬁelds of two static charges. One of the authors
(VGB) is pleased to acknowledge the Alexander-von-Humboldt Stiftung for the Fellowship. Support by
the Deutsche Forchungemeinschaft is greatly acknowledged.

According to Eq. (10), the non-adiabatic correction to the potential of interaction between the hydrogen

Appendix

atom and an extra electron reads

h00(r) =

¯h2

2me Z dr1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

∂
∂r

φ0(r1, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

.

(A1)

Here integration is performed over the position r1 of the core electron and the wave function φ0 describes
the ground state of the atom perturbed by the interaction with the static external electron. When the
interaction is weak, this wave function can be evaluated by the ﬁrst order perturbation theory,

φ0(r1, r) = φ(0)

0 (r1) + Xf 6=0

Wf 0(r)
0 − E(0)
E(0)

f

φ(0)
f (r1) ,

(A2)

are the wave functions of the ground and excited states of the non-perturbed atom,

where φ(0)
and φ(0)
0
f
respectively, E(0)

0

and E(0)

f

are the corresponding eigenenergies and

Wf 0(r) = hφ(0)

f |W (r1, r)|φ(0)
0 i

are the matrix elements of the perturbation operator

W (r1, r) =

e2

|r1 − r|

−

e2
r

.

(A3)

(A4)

Substituting (A2) into (A1) and integrating over r1 yields, due to the orthogonality of the hydrogenic
wave functions,

h00 =

¯h2
2me Xf 6=0

|Sf 0|2
0 − E(0)

f (cid:17)2 ,

(cid:16)E(0)

(A5)

where S = ∂W/∂r. To simplify the latter expression, let us approximate the energy diﬀerence in the
denominator by the quantity −Ry. Then, using the completeness property of the hydrogenic wave
functions, we obtain

h00 =

¯h2

2meRy2 h(cid:0)S2(cid:1)00 − (S00)2i ,

(A6)

where (cid:0)S2(cid:1)00 and S00 are the mean values of the operators S2 and S, respectively, for the ground state of

the non-perturbed hydrogen atom. To calculate them, it is most convenient to specify the internal atomic
coordinates with the quantization axis along r. In these coordinates, assuming r ≫ r1, we can replace
the operator (A4) by the ﬁrst, dipole, term of its multipole expansion (cf. Eq (15)), W = (e2/r2)z1.
Then we have S = −(2e2/r3)z1. For the latter operator, because of the z−parity of the hydrogenic state,
one has S00 = 0 and Eq. (A6) reduces to

12

Substituting there the known value (cid:0)z2

1(cid:1)00 = a2

the non-adiabatic correction given by Eq. (44), h00(r) = 8/r6.

h00 =

2¯h2e4(cid:0)z2
1(cid:1)00
meRy2r6

.

(A7)

0 and introducing atomic units, we obtain the estimate of

[1] J.E. Avron, I.W. Herbst and B. Simon, Commun. Math. Phys. 79 (1981) 529.

[2] M.K. Scheller, R.N. Compton and L.S. Cederbaum, Science 270 (1995) 1160.

[3] R.N. Hill, Phys. Rev. Lett 38 (1977) 643.

[4] B.M. Smirnov, Negative Ions, McGraw-Hill Inc. 1982.

[5] T. Andersen, H.K. Haugen and H. Hotop, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data (1999) (submitted).

[6] R.J.W. Henry, R.F. O’Connell, E.R. Smith, G. Chanmugam and A.K. Rajagopal, Phys. Rev. D 9 (1974) 329.

[7] G.L. Surmelian, R.J.W. Henry, and R.F. O’Connell, Phys. Lett. 49a (1974) 431.

[8] D.M. Larsen, Phys. Rev. B 20 (1979) 5217; Phys. Rev. Lett. 42 (1979) 742; Phys. Rev. B 23 (1981) 4076.

[9] C.-H. Park and A.F. Starace, Phys. Rev. A 29 (1984) 442.

[10] M. Vincke and D. Baye, J. Phys. B 22 (19b9) 2089.

[11] D.M. Larsen and S.Y. McCann, Phys. Rev. B 46 (1992) 3966; 47 (1993) 13175.

[12] M. Bylicki, S. Themelis and C.A. Nicolaides, J. Phys. B 27 (1994) 2741.

[13] H. Massey, Negative Ions, Cambridge University Press 1976.

[14] H. Ruder, G. Wunner, H. Herold and F. Geyer, Atoms in Strong Magnetic Fields, Springer-Verlag 1994.

[15] B. Simon, Ann. Phys. (NY) 97 (1976) 279.

[16] K.D. Bonin and V.V. Kresin, Electric-Dipole Polarizabilities of Atoms, Molecules and Clusters, World Sci-

entiﬁc Publishing 1997.

[17] T.M. Miller, Atomic and Molecular Polarizabilities, in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 76th Edi-

tion, CRC Press 1996

[18] R.F. Walles, R. Herman and H.W. Milnes, J. Mol. Spectroscopy 4 (1960) 51.

[19] M.V. Ivanov, J. Phys. B 31 (1998) 2833.

[20] P. Schmelcher and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. A 43 (1991) 287.

[21] V.G. Bezchastnov, G.G. Pavlov and J. Ventura, Phys. Rev. A 58 (1998) 180.

13

Figure Captions

Figure 1. The one-particle potential of interaction between the static charge −e and the hydrogen
atom (solid line) and the non-adiabatic correction to this potential for the cases when the charge is
associated with the electron (long-dashed line) and with the muon (shot-dashed line). Dots show the
reference data for the potential obtained from [18]. The part of the solid line connecting the dots is
obtained by the spline interpolation, at lower r the solid line corresponds to Eq. (42) while at large r
it corresponds to Eq. (41). Open circles show the non-adiabatic corrections obtained numerically, and
dashed lines correspond to the perturbation estimates.

Figure 2. Binding energies for the states s = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 (in meV) as functions of the magnetic ﬁeld
strength (in Tesla). The conversion rate used is: 1 a.u. = 2.35 × 105 T. Solid lines show the estimates
for the ion H− given by Eqs. (43) and (39), and dots represent the results of our numerical treatment.
Dashed lines show the corresponding energies for the muonic ion, Hµ−.

14

10110 1
10 2
10 3
10 4
10 5
10 6


.
	
.
a





h





V
 

0.1

1
a.	.

10

110 2
10 4
10 6
10 8
10 10
10 12
10 14
10 16
0.1

=0
=4=3=2=1

1

BT

10


V
e




y
g

e

e

i

g

d

B

i

