0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

7

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum energy ﬂow in atomic ions moving in magnetic ﬁelds

† Physique Nucl´eaire Th´eorique et Physique Math´ematique, C.P. 229, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, B 1050 Brussels, Belgium

†† Theoretische Chemie, Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg, INF 229, D-69120 Heidelberg, Federal

V.S. Melezhik † ∗ and P. Schmelcher ††

Republic of Germany

(February 2, 2008)

Using a combination of semiclassical and recently developed wave packet propagation techniques
we ﬁnd the quantum self-ionization process of highly excited ions moving in magnetic ﬁelds which
has its origin in the energy transfer from the center of mass to the electronic motion. It obeys a
time scale by orders of magnitude larger than the corresponding classical process. Importantly a
quantum coherence phenomenon leading to the intermittent behaviour of the ionization signal is
found and analyzed. Universal properties of the ionization process are established.

Rydberg atoms in strong external ﬁelds represent an exciting and very active research area both experimentally as
well as theoretically. During the eighties the main focus was on the hydrogen atom [1] assuming an inﬁnite nuclear
mass which reduces the dimensionality of the system. However in general the atom possesses a nonvanishing center
of mass (CM) motion in the magnetic ﬁeld giving rise to a variety of two-body phenomena [2]. Turning to charged
two-body systems like, for example, the He+-ion the residual coupling of the CM and electronic motion is represented
by an oscillating electric ﬁeld term yielding ﬁve relevant degrees of freedom. One of the most striking eﬀects caused
by the two-body character of the ion is the recently found classical self-ionization process [3] which occurs due to
energy transfer from the CM to the electronic motion. Since it is well-known that quantization can severely change
the eﬀects observed in classical dynamics (see ref. [4] and refs. therein) we develop in the present work a quantum
approach to the moving ion in a magnetic ﬁeld.

We are interested in the regime of high level density, i.e. high-lying excitations, for both the collective as well as
electronic motion which depend on a number of parameters (ﬁeld strength, total energy consisiting of the initial CM
and internal energies). The ab initio description of the quantum dynamics in the above regime goes even beyond
modern computational possibilities and we thus seek a semiclassical approach that is capable of describing the essential
physics of the problem. The total pseudomomentum [5] is a conserved quantity associated with the CM motion. In
spite of the fact that its components perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld are not independent, i.e. do not commute,
it can be used to ﬁnd a suitable transformation of the Hamiltonian to a particularly simple and physically appealing
form [6,7]. For the He+-ion it reads H = H1 + H2 + H3 where

H1 =

1

2M (cid:18)P −

Q
2

B × R(cid:19)2

H2 = α

e

M (cid:18)B ×(cid:18)P −

Q
2

B × R(cid:19)(cid:19) r

H3 =

1

2m (cid:18)p −

e
2

B × r +

Q
2

m2
M 2

B × r(cid:19)2

+

1

2M0 (cid:18)p +(cid:18) e

2

−

Q
2M

m
M

(M + M0)(cid:19) B × r(cid:19)2

−

2e2
r

.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Here m, M0 and M are the electron, nuclear and total mass, respectively. α = (M0 +2m)/M and Q is the net charge of
the ion. B is the magnetic ﬁeld vector which is assumed to point along the z-axis. (R, P) and (r, p) are the canonical
pairs for the CM and internal motion, respectively. The CM motion parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld separates exactly
and undergoes a free translational motion.

H1 and H3 depend exclusively on the CM and electronic degrees of freedom, respectively. H1 describes the free
motion of a CM pseudoparticle with charge Q and mass M. H3 stands for the electronic motion in the presence of
paramagnetic, diamagnetic as well as Coulomb interactions which, in analogy to the hydrogen atom [1], exhibits a
variety of classical and quantum properties with changing parameters, i.e. energy and/or ﬁeld strength. H2 contains

∗permanent address: Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, Moscow Region 141980, Russian Federation

1

the coupling between the CM and electronic motion of the ion and represents a Stark term with a rapidly oscillating
electric ﬁeld 1/M (B × (P − Q/2B × R)) determined by the dynamics of the ion. This coupling term is responsible
for the eﬀects and phenomena discussed in the present investigation.

The essential elements of our semiclassical approach are the following. Since we consider the case of a rapidly moving
ion in a magnetic ﬁeld a classical treatment of the CM motion coupled to the quantized electronic degrees of freedom
seems appropriate: the CM is propagated with an eﬀective Hamiltonian containing the corresponding expectation
values with respect to the electronic quantum states. The latter obey a time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation which
involves the classical CM trajectory. Both the electronic and CM motion have to be integrated simultaneously. The
key idea of this semiclassical approach goes back to refs. [8,9] where it has been applied to the dynamics of molecular
processes. Our resulting time evolution equations read therefore as follows

d
dt

P(t) = −

∂
∂R

Hcl(R(t), P(t))

d
dt

R(t) =

∂
∂P

Hcl(R(t), P(t))

i¯h

∂
∂t

ψ(r, t) = Hq(R(t), P(t), r)ψ(r, t)

(4)

with the eﬀective Hamiltonian

Hcl(R, P) = H1 + hψ(r, t)|H2 + H3|ψ(r, t)i

Hq(R(t), P(t), r, p) = H3(r, p) + H2(R(t), P(t), r)

(5)

This scheme represents a balanced treatment of the coupled classical and quantum degrees of freedom of the ion and
takes account of the energy ﬂow among them. It possesses the important property of conserving the total energy
which is particularly important for the correct description of the energy transfer processes occuring in our system.
Since the typical energies associated with the fast heavy CM degrees of freedom are many orders of magnitude larger
than the corresponding elementary quantum (¯hQB/M ) we expect the above scheme to yield reliable results.

Our approach to the solution of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation, which yields the dynamics of an initially
deﬁned wave packet ψ(r, t), is based on a recently developed nonperturbative hybrid method [10–12]. It uses a global
basis on a subspace grid for the angular variables (θ, φ) and a variable-step ﬁnite-diﬀerence approximation for the
radial variable. The angular grid is obtained from the nodes of the corresponding Gaussian quadrature with respect
to θ and φ, which is in the spirit of the discrete variable techniques yielding a diagonal representation for any local
interaction [10]. As a consequence one remains with the Schr¨odinger-type time-dependent radial equations coupled
only through non-diagonal matrix elements of the kinetic energy operator. This vector equation is propagated using
a splitting-up method [13], which permits a simple diagonalization procedure for the remaining non-diagonal part
[11,12]. Our scheme is unconditionally stable, saves unitarity and has the same order of accuracy as the conventional
Crank-Nickolson algorithm, i.e. ∼ O(∆t2) where ∆t is the time step size. In order to avoid reﬂections of the wave
packet from the right edge of the radial grid we introduce absorbing boundary conditions. The extension of the radial
grid is chosen (see below) such that it exceeds the center of the radial distribution of the initial wave packet by more
than one order of magnitude. The typical frequencies associated with the motion of the Rydberg electron and the
CM motion are diﬀerent by several orders of magnitude (see ref. [3]). To investigate the quantum energy transfer
mechanisms requires therefore the integration of the above equations of motion for a typical time which is a multiple
of the time scale of the heavy particle (CM). This corresponds to many thousand cycles of the Rydberg electron. Such
a detailed investigation would have been impossible without the use of the above-described combination of highly
eﬃcient techniques.

We assume that the He+ ion is accelerated up to some value ECM of the kinetic energy of the CM motion and its
electron is being excited to some Rydberg state nlm in ﬁeld-free space. Thereafter it enters the magnetic ﬁeld. In the
following we choose ECM = 100a.u., n = 25, l = m = 0 and a strong laboratory ﬁeld B = 10−4a.u.(23.5 T esla). The
intial CM velocity is vCM = 0.1656a.u. and oriented along the x−axis. We remark that taking the above values for
nlm, B for the He+ ion with the assumption of an inﬁnitely heavy nucleus the corresponding classical phase space
is dominated by chaotic trajectories. Figs. (1a,1b) illustrate results for the propagation of the wave packet with

increasing time. More precisely we show the intersection of the integrated quantity Ψ(ρ, z, t) = R |ψ|2dφ along the

cylindrical ρ-axis for z = 0 (ﬁg.1a) and its intersection along the z-axis for ρ = 0 (ﬁg.1b). Fig. 1a demonstrates that
the motion of the wave packet is conﬁned by the diamagnetic interaction with respect to the ρ-direction, i.e. the
direction perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld. For any propagation time its value drops by several orders of magnitude
at some outer value ρc for the ρ coordinate. As we shall see below (see also ﬁgure 3) the variation of ρc is accompanied
by a corresponding change in the internal/CM energies thereby demonstrating the ﬂow of energy between the CM
and electronic degrees of freedom. Fig. 1b demonstrates that there is for certain time intervals (see below) almost
no decay of the wave packet for large distances of the z− coordinate. Therefore we encounter a signiﬁcant ﬂux of
probability parallel to the external ﬁeld. Reaching the boundary of our radial grid rm = 20000a.u. it is absorbed
and considered to represent the ionized state. Having established the existence of an ionizing probability ﬂux parallel
to the magnetic ﬁeld we immediately realize from ﬁg.1b that this ﬂux is by no means constant in time but varies
strongly. To see this more explicitly and also to gain an idea of the overall decay of the wave packet we show in ﬁg.2

2

the decay of the norm of the wave packet for a time which roughly corresponds to one cyclotron period 2πM/(QB) of
the free CM motion in the ﬁeld. Fig. 2 shows apart from an overall monotonous decay of the norm, which is due to
the quantum self-ionization process, an amazing new feature: the norm exhibits an alternating sequence of plateaus
and phases of strong decay. The widths of the plateaus slightly increases with increasing time. This intermittent
behaviour of the ionization signal from the moving ions is a pure quantum phenomenon, i.e. does not occur in the
corresponding classical ionization rates [3]. Furthermore the calculation of the classical ionization rates for the same
parameters (ﬁeld strength, energies) yields a typical ionization time which is by two orders of magnitude smaller than
the one obtained by the quantum calculation. The ionization process is therefore signiﬁcantly slowed down through
the quantization of the system which is in the spirit of the quantum localization processes shown to exist in a variety
of diﬀerent physical systems (see ref. [4] and refs. therein). The observed slowing down of the ionization process
represents one important diﬀerence of the classical and quantum behaviour of the moving ion which occurs in spite
of the fact that we are dealing with a highly excited system.

The obvious question of the origin of the intermittent occurrence of the plateaus and ionization bursts arises now.
At this point it is helpful to consider the behaviour of the CM energy as a function of time which is illustrated in ﬁg.
3. Starting with ECM = 100a.u. at t = 0 we observe a fast drop of it for short times yielding a minimum of ECM
at approximately t1 = 4 × 107a.u.. Thereafter it raises and reaches a maximum at approximately t2 = 1.2 × 108a.u.
after which it drops again, i.e.
it shows an overall oscillating behaviour. The “valleys” of ECM coincide with the
plateaus of the norm decay whereas the regions with higher CM velocities correspond to phases of a strong norm
decay of the wave packet. The increase of the widths of the plateaus in the norm decay (see ﬁg.2) matches the
corresponding decrease of the frequency of the oscillations of the CM energy. Since the total energy is conserved this
clearly shows that the ionization bursts correspond to phases of relatively low internal energy (although certainly
above the ionization threshold) whereas the phases of higher internal energy go along with the plateaus of the norm
behaviour, i.e. the localization of the electronic motion. This provides the key for the understanding of the rich
structure of the norm decay. The phase of high energy for the electronic motion means that the magnetic interaction
strongly dominates over the Coulomb interaction. This makes the electronic motion approximately separable with
respect to the motion perpendicular and parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. As a consequence the energy transfer process
from the degrees of freedom perpendicular to those parallel to the external ﬁeld are very weak i.e. the ionization
process is strongly suppressed. This corresponds to an almost integrable situation for the ions dynamics. On the
contrary for relatively low internal energies the Coulomb interaction is much more relevant and mediates together
with the coupling Hamiltonian H2 the energy transfer from the CM to the electron motion parallel to the magnetic
ﬁeld. As a result we encounter a ﬂow of probability in the +/-z-directions which corresponds to the ionization burst.
During this period of motion a comparatively strong dephasing of the wave packet takes place.

The intermittent behaviour of the ionization rate can therefore be seen as a quantum manifestation for the switching
between diﬀerent regimes of the internal energy corresponding to weaker or stronger Coulomb interaction. Pumping
energy from the CM to the electronic motion weakens the Coulomb interaction and leads to the suppression of the
ionization process whereas pushing the energy back to the CM motion decreases the internal energy and enhances
the Coulomb interaction. To elucidate the time scale on which this process takes place we have computed the
autocorrelation function C(t) =< ψ(t)|ψ(0) > where <> means integration over the electronic coordinates. As
a result we observe a modulation and recurrence of the autocorrelation at a time scale t ≈ 1.6 × 108a.u. which
corresponds approximately to the recurrence of the plateaus for the norm decay. The corresponding power spectrum
shows a broad peak at a frequency ω ≈ 3.5 × 10−8a.u.. An important feature of the quantum self-ionization process is
the approximate stability of the time intervals corresponding to the plateaus of the norm (no ionization signal) with
respect to variations of the initial CM velocity of the ion. Our investigation shows that decreasing the CM energy
from 100a.u. to 12a.u. leads to a decrease with respect to the distances between the plateaus, i.e. the diﬀerence of
the norm values belonging to diﬀerent plateaus, roughly by a factor of two. This corresponds to a signiﬁcant slowing
down of the ionization process. However the widths of the plateaus remain rather stable and represent therefore a
universal quantity which is approximately independent of the CM velocity. Varying the ﬁeld strength causes a change
of both the distances between the plateaus and their widths.

The quantum self-ionization process should have implications on the physics of atoms and plasmas occurring in
a number of diﬀerent circumstances. Apart from this it obviously suggests itself for a laboratory experiment (the
lifetime of the Rydberg states exceeds the time scale of ionization by orders of magnitude) which should be very
attractive due to the expected intermittent ionization signal which is a process revealing the intrinsic structure and
dynamics of the system during its diﬀerent phases of motion.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation through a grant (P.S.) for the Institute for Theoret-
ical Atomic and Molecular Physics at Harvard University and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. P.S. thanks
H.D.Meyer and D.Leitner for fruitful discussions. V.S.M. gratefully acknowledges the use of the computer resources
of the IMEP of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, he also thanks the PNTPM group of the Universit´e Libre de

3

Bruxelles for warm hospitality and support.

[1] H.Friedrich and D.Wintgen, Phys.Rep. 183, 37 (1989)
[2] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, ’Atoms and Molecules in Intense Fields’, Springer Series: Structure and Bonding 86,

27 1997

[3] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Phys.Rev.Lett.74, 662 (1995); P.Schmelcher, Phys.Rev.A 52, 130 (1995)
[4] F.Haake, ’Quantum Signatures of Chaos’, Springer Verlag 1991.
[5] J.E.Avron, I.W.Herbst and B.Simon, Ann.Phys.(NY) 114, 431 (1978)
[6] P.Schmelcher and L.S.Cederbaum, Phys.Rev.A 43, 287 (1991)
[7] B.R.Johnson, J.O.Hirschfelder and K.H.Yang, Rev.Mod.Phys. 55, 109 (1983)
[8] K.J.McCann and M.R.Flannery, Chem.Phys.Lett.35, 124 (1975); J.Chem.Phys.63, 4695 (1975)
[9] G.D.Billing, Chem.Phys.9, 359 (1975)

[10] V.S.Melezhik, Phys.Rev.A 48, 4528 (1993);
[11] V.S.Melezhik, ’Atoms and Molecules in Strong External Fields’, p.89, edited by P.Schmelcher and W.Schweizer, Plenum

Publishing Company 1998.

[12] V.S.Melezhik and D.Baye, Phys.Rev.C (in press)
[13] G.I.Marchuk, On the theory of the splitting-up method, in Partial Diﬀerential Equations. II. SYNSPADE-1970 (Academic,

New York, 1971)

Figure Captions

Figure 1: (a) The intersection Ψ(ρ, z = 0, t) = R |ψ|2dφ along the ρ axis. (b) The intersection Ψ(ρ = 0, z, t) along

the z axis. (Atomic units are used).

Figure 2: The norm of the electronic wave packet as a function of time (in units of 108 atomic units).

Figure 3: The CM energy as a function of time (in units of 108 atomic units).

4

