Eﬀective ATI channels in high harmonic generation

M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky∗

School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia

Abstract

Harmonic generation by an atom in a laser ﬁeld is described by the three-step
mechanism as proceeding via above-threshold ionization (ATI) followed by the
electron propagation in the laser-dressed continuum and the subsequent laser
assisted recombination (LAR). An amplitude of harmonic production is given
by the coherent sum of contributions from diﬀerent intermediate ATI channels
labeled by the number m of absorbed laser photons. The range of m-values
that gives substantial contribution is explored and found to be rather broad
for high harmonic generation. The coherence eﬀects are of crucial importance
being responsible for the characteristic pattern of harmonic intensities with
a plateau domain followed by a cutoﬀ region. Due to multiphoton nature of
the process, an eﬃcient summation of m-contributions can be carried out in
the framework of the saddle point method. The saddle points correspond to
some complex-valued labels m = mc associated with the intermediate eﬀective
ATI channels in the three-step harmonic generation process. The advantage
of this approach stems from the fact that summation over large number of
conventional ATI m-channels is replaced by summation over small number of
eﬀective mc-channels. The equation governing mc has a transparent physical
meaning: the electron ejected from the atom on the ﬁrst (ATI) stage should
return to the core to make LAR possible. The eﬀective channel labels m move
along characteristic trajectories in the complex plane as the system param-
eters vary. In the cutoﬀ region of the harmonic spectrum a single eﬀective
channel contributes. For lower harmonics, in the plateau domain, two eﬀec-
tive ATI channels become essential. The interference of their contributions
leads to oscillatory pattern in the harmonic generation rates. The calculated
rates are in good agreement with the results obtained by other approaches.

PACS numbers: 32.80.-t, 42.65.Ky, 32.80.Rm, 32.80.Wr

0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

8

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Three-step mechanism of HHG

High eﬃciency of various processes in strong laser ﬁeld could be understood basing on the
observation that the ﬁeld-induced quiver motion supplies an electron with high instantaneous
energy. Rescattering of the energetic electron on atomic core generally is accompanied by
the energy exchange between electron, core and electromagnetic ﬁeld.
In particular, the
core could be excited or ionized [double ionization (DI) of an atom] and the high-energy
photons could be emitted. The latter process is known as the harmonic generation (HG). If
one considers the active electron initially bound to the core, then the electron at ﬁrst should
be (virtually) released to the quasi-free state, as a precondition that the subsequent events
listed above become possible. As a whole, this constitutes three-step mechanism comprising
above-threshold ionization (ATI), propagation in laser-dressed continuum and the ﬁnal step
which is electron-atom impact in case of rescattering, core excitation or ionization, or laser
assisted recombination (LAR) in case of HG process. Strong interaction between the receding
electron and the core is omitted in the standard Keldysh [1] model of multiphoton ionization.
Its importance was ﬁrst pointed out by Kuchiev [2], who had predicted several phenomena
where the electron-core interaction plays a crucial role. The related mechanism was named
“atomic antenna” to stress the role of active electron in gaining energy from laser ﬁeld.

Speciﬁcally for HG the three-step model was promoted in the hybrid classical-quantum
framework by Corkum [3], see also the papers by Kulander et al [4,5]. The subsequent
theoretical developments were based on more sophisticated approaches and led to important
advancements [6–11], albeit the three-step nature of the HG process was somewhat veiled
in these formulations. Most clearly the three-step mechanism is exposed in the framework
of factorization method developed in Ref. [12,13] as an implementation of idea of atomic
antenna of Ref. [2] and applied to DI process. This technique allows one to present quantum
amplitude as a direct sum over contributions of intermediate ATI channels. The application
to HG process worked out by Kuchiev and Ostrovsky [14,15] quantitatively demonstrated
validity and power of this approach. Since this development is the starting point of the
present study, we brieﬂy summarize it in Sec. I B below.

The intermediate ATI channels form a discrete set being labeled by a number m of
absorbed photons. Generally speaking, entire manifold of m-channels contributes to the
rate of three-step process under consideration. One can anticipate that actually only some
eﬀective m-range should be essential, but this issue has not been investigated previously.
Another important question arises from the fact that contributions to the rate of three-
step process from diﬀerent ATI channels are to be summed coherently. How essential are
coherence eﬀects in reality remained unclear. The acuteness of this problem is enhanced in
view of recent publications by Becker and Faisal [16–18] where semiempirical formula with
incoherent summation is suggested in application to the DI process.

In the present paper we address these problems considering HG as the most simple three-
step event. Being sharply important in itself, it hopefully provides a useful testground for
other, more complicated processes. Our study shows that the range of eﬃciently contributing
m-channels is rather broad (Sec. II). It is deﬁned by interplay of two factors characterizing
each m-channel contribution: the well known ATI amplitude (Appendix A) and much less

2

investigated LAR amplitude (Appendix B). Importantly, the phases of these amplitudes play
a major role, showing that the coherence eﬀects are crucial. In particular, solely these eﬀects
are responsible for the well-known rapid fall-oﬀ of HG rates beyond the so called plateau
domain. At once this ﬁnding provokes a new question: how one can simplify summation over
broad range of essential intermediate m-channels. We achieve this objective (Sec. III) by
introducing a concept of eﬀective ATI channels, or more brieﬂy, eﬀective channels (EC). Each
EC is characterized by a complex-valued channel label mc, i.e. a complex-valued number of
absorbed photons. The latter is deﬁned from the equation with simple and appealing physical
meaning. The summation over a large number of intermediate m-channels is replaced by
summation over very small number of EC (usually one or two).
In the higher part of
harmonic spectrum, beyond cutoﬀ, it is suﬃcient to take into account a single EC. Two
EC provide description of the plateau domain, including intricate oscillatory interference
pattern of HG rates. As shown in Sec. IV, EC approximation ensures good quantitative
agreement with the harmonic intensities obtained within other approaches [11,14,15].

As the system parameters vary, the EC labels mc move along characteristic trajectories
in the complex-m plane. This pattern condensedly expresses theoretical background of HG
process in various regimes. For instance, transition between the regimes of one and two EC,
i.e., between the cutoﬀ and plateau domains, corresponds to “collision” of two trajectories in
the complex plane. The oscillatory behaviour of HG rate in the plateau domain is explained
by interference of two ECs. Thus ECs provide a uniﬁed framework for qualitative assessment
of three-step processes as well as for their quantitative description. Probably the nearest
analogy for this theoretical tool comprise the well-known Regge poles [19], i.e., the states
with complex-valued angular momentum, that give an eﬀective description in the quantum
scattering theory.

B. Direct implementation of three-step mechanism in theory

Now it is worthwhile to look in more detail how the three-step mechanism of HG is
implemented in the theory of Refs. [14,15]. The key formula for the amplitude of N-th
harmonic generation,

d+

N = 2 Xm

d+
N m ,

d+
N m = Am µ0(Km) BN mµ0(Km) ,

(1.1a)

(1.1b)

presents it as a sum where each term is a product of two amplitudes of physical, fully accom-
plished and observable processes; no “oﬀ-shell” entities appear. The ﬁrst step is described
by the ﬁrst factor Am µ0(Km) which is an amplitude of physical ATI process when after ab-
sorption of m laser photons the active electron acquires a translational momentum p = Km;
see detailed description of this amplitude within the Keldysh-type approach in Appendix
A. The other factor, BN mµ0(Km), is a combined amplitude of the second and third steps,
i.e., propagation and laser assisted recombination (PLAR) amplitude. Under an additional
approximation it can be factorized into propagation (expansion) factor 1/Rmµ0 describing
the second step and the amplitude of the third step, LAR, CN m(Km):

BN mµ0(Km) =

1

Rmµ0

3

CN m(Km) .

(1.2)

Rmµ0 is merely an approximate expression for the distance passed by the active electron
in course of its laser-induced wiggling motion, see Refs. [12,14,15] and formula (3.13c) be-
low. The amplitude CN m(Km) of the physical LAR process describes recombination, i.e.,
transition of electron with momentum Km from the continuum to bound state. Since the
continuum state is laser-dressed, the recombining electron can emit the N-th harmonic pho-
ton, gaining necessary extra energy from the laser ﬁeld. The formulas for LAR and PLAR
amplitudes can be found in the Appendix B.

The summation in formula (1.1) runs over a number of photons m absorbed on the ﬁrst
step. Thus in the laser-dressed continuum the energy conservation constraint selects the
discrete set of ATI channels, where the electron has a translational momentum Km. These
channels serve as intermediate states for the three-step HG process. To specify exactly,
the absolute value of the electron momentum in m-th ATI channel is deﬁned by the energy
conservation constraint in ATI as

Km = q2 (mω − Up + Ea) .

(1.3)

where Ea = − 1
2 κ2 is electron energy in the initial bound state, Up ≡ F 2/(4ω2) is the well-
known ponderomotive potential, ω = 2π/T is the laser frequency, T is the period, F is the
electric vector in the linear-polarized laser wave. ATI can play role of the ﬁrst stage of
HG process only if the electron momentum has speciﬁc direction, namely Km is directed
along F. This ensures eventual electron return to the core that makes the ﬁnal step, LAR,
possible as discussed in detail in Refs. [12,14,15]. It is worthwhile to indicate once again
that our approach presumes the single active electron approximation; the atomic units are
used throughout the paper unless indicated otherwise. The observable HG rates RN are
expressed via the amplitudes as

RN ≡

ω3N 3

2πc3 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

d+

N(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,

(1.4)

Ω = Nω is the frequency of emitted harmonic, c is the velocity of light.

As already mentioned, the general framework for three-step decomposition of complicated
laser-induced processes is provided by factorization technique of Ref. [12]. The accuracy of
this theoretical device is governed by multiphoton nature of the processes: the larger is
number of laser quanta involved, the more accurate results it provides. To avoid confusion,
it should be emphasized that the factorization is not related to the conventional perturbation
theory, or to its simpliﬁed version known as the pole approximation.

Here we only brieﬂy outline some features of the derivation [12,14,15] necessary for
understanding of the present development. The basic expression for the HG amplitudes
contains integration over two time variables, t and t′. The factorization technique allowed
us to disentangle these integrations basing on the adiabatic approach. Mathematically the
latter implies the saddle point approximation for calculating the integrals which emerge
when a particular representation for the Green function in terms of intermediate states is
chosen. The saddle point integration over time variable t′ is intrinsic for the factorization
technique, whereas another time integration could be carried without approximations, for
instance, numerically. The latter approach was adopted in Refs. [14,15] and in Sec. II of
the present paper. However, EC approximation implies saddle point integration also over
time variable t. The details could be found in Appendices A and B. Here we only indicate

4

physical meaning of the emerging saddle points. For t′ variable the saddle point t′
mµ0, being
given by Eq. (A7), is the instant of time when the electron is emitted into an intermediate
ATI channel. The saddle point in t-integral, tN mµ, see Eq. (B13), is the time of laser-assisted
recombination of electron with the core, accompanied by emission of high-energy photon.
Note that generally both t′

mµ0 and tN mµ are complex-valued.

Formula (1.1) is important conceptually being the most direct and fully quantum de-
scription of the three-step mechanism of HG. It can serve also as a practical computational
tool. The latter statement was testiﬁed by a very good quantitative agreement between cal-
culations of HG rates by formulae (1.1), (1.4) [14,15] and the benchmark results by Becker
et al [11] for HG by H− ion. However, as discussed in Sec. I A, it was not explored before
what is the range of channel label m that gives substantial contribution to the rate. This
problem is addressed in Sec. II where we show that a rather large number of intermedi-
ate ATI channels is to be taken into account. The eﬀective summation method of Sec. III
transforms sum (1.1a) over large number of m-terms to the sum over very small number
(one or two) of EC terms. The illustrative applications of EC approach in Sec. IV serve
to demonstrate its reliability. EC representation is convenient also for analysis of general
features of HG spectrum. The latter is known to consist of three parts. The initial rapid
decrease is followed by the plateau domain and the rapid cutoﬀ region. Being interested in
the generation of rather high harmonics, we do not consider below the initial low-N part
of the spectrum. The upper boundary Nb of the plateau is given by the known expression
[4,5,7,11]

Nb ω =

1
2

κ2 + 3.17 Up .

(1.5)

In Sec. III C we show how this important result follows from the three-step mechanism cast
in the EC form. Section V contains concluding discussion.

II. COMPOSITION OF HG AMPLITUDE FROM ATI CONTRIBUTIONS

Representation (1.1) of HG amplitudes d+

N as a sum over ATI contributions is character-
ized by a number of interesting features. We illustrate them by Fig. 1 where diﬀerent terms
in the sum (1.1a) are quantitatively presented for HG by H− ion in the laser ﬁeld with the
frequency ω = 0.0043 and the intensity I = 1011 W/cm2. We show separately the squared
moduli and phases for the ATI amplitude Am µ0 (open squares), PLAR amplitude BN mµ0
(open triangles) and the resulting term in the sum (1.1a) d+
N m (closed circles) in dependence
on m for some representative values of the harmonic order N. Namely, N = 15, 25 lie in the
plateau domain of HG spectrum whereas N = 39, 51 are in the cutoﬀ region. Only open
intermediate ATI channels are included in summation (1.1a) that in the present case means
m ≥ 16.

The following observations could be made.

• The number of m-terms giving substantial contribution to the sum (1.1a) is essentially

independent of N being about 15 in the example under consideration.

• The domain of m giving substantial contribution is deﬁned, ﬁrst, by the monotonous
decrease of |Am µ0|2 with m that ensures eﬀective cut-oﬀ from the high-m side. The

5

second factor |BN mµ0|2 has more complicated behavior. Indeed, it oscillates with m
and has substantial magnitude in the much broader range of m than |Am µ0|2 (this issue
is discussed in more detail in the Appendix B). In HG process it is important that for
high harmonic order N the factor |BN mµ0|2 is strongly suppressed in the low-m region
(i.e. near ATI threshold, see Figs. 1c,d). Therefore, as N increases, the domain of
important contributions to the sum shifts to higher m.

2

d+

N m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

• Typical values of the modulus squared components (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
decrease with the harmonic
order N increasing. This is explained by decrease in the typical values of the |BN mµ0|2
factor (note that |Am µ0|2 does not depend on N). Importantly, this relatively slow
decrease cannot explain the cutoﬀ in the spectrum of modulus squared amplitudes
N(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
d+
decrease
only by a factor about 3, whereas the resulting (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

decreases by seven
orders of magnitude ! This clearly indicates that the high-N cutoﬀ of HG rate is due
to the strong cancellation of terms in the sum (1.1a), i.e. that the coherence or phase
eﬀects are crucial.

. For instance, as N varies from 39 to 51 the typical values of (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

N m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
= (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Pm d+

d+

N(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

d+

N m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

2

2

• The plots of the phases show that arg (Am µ0) decreases with m whereas arg (BN mµ0)
N m(cid:17) = arg (Am µ0) + arg (BN mµ0) grows with m
increases. The resulting phase arg(cid:16)d+
case N = 51 the phase arg(cid:16)d+
N m(cid:17) increases by about 10π along the substantial m-

rather rapidly. For larger N variation of phases becomes faster. For instance, in the

domain (20 < m < 35). Namely the rapid phase variation governs cancellations in the
sum (1.1a) and rapid decrease of the HG rates in the fall-oﬀ region.

The rapid variation of phases is generally characteristic for the semiclassical dynamics.
Therefore one can suggest that in our problem some semiclassical-type method of summation
over ATI contributions could be developed that reﬂects the physics of the process. This
program is implemented in the next section.

III. EFFECTIVE ATI CHANNELS

A. Poisson summation of ATI channel contributions

Further in the basic formula (1.1) we employ for both ATI and PLAR amplitudes the
saddle-point approximation given by formulas (A2) and (B9), respectively. This representa-
tion possesses important advantage of explicitly exposing large phases of amplitudes which
are of crucial signiﬁcance in coherent summation as revealed in previous section. The phase
factors have form of exponents of classical action for the ATI and LAR processes. By using
these expressions we present the HG amplitude (1.1) as

d+

N = 2 Xm Xµ Qmµ exph−iS(cid:16)tmµ, t′

mµ0(cid:17)i .

(3.1)

Bearing in mind importance of phase factors we write down them explicitly in Eq. (3.1),
introducing

6

S(t, t′) = S(t) − S(t′) + Ωt =

sin ωτ!2
whereas all the rest is collected in the pre-exponential factor Qmµ:

dτ 
 Km +


2 Z t

F
ω

1

t′

− Ea


+ Ωt ,

(3.2)

Qmµ = −

ω4
2π

Aa Γ(1 + ν/2) 2ν/2 κν Ylmaz(ˆpµ0)

× ˜φ(ǫ)

a  −Km −

F
ω

sin ωtmµ!

1

m µ0 − cos ωtm µ(cid:17) ×
F (cid:16)cos ωt′
qS ′′(t′

mµ0)ν+1S ′′ (tmµ)

1

.

(3.3)

S(t, t′) has an appealing meaning of action for HG processes expressed as a sum of actions
for constituent ATI and LAR processes.
From the pragmatic point of view the attractive feature of the sum representations (1.1)
or (3.1) is obvious: each term in the sum has a clear and simple analytical expression, that
helps greatly in numerical calculations. However, since the number of essential terms in the
sum is large, as discussed in Sec. II, the behavior of the sum may diﬀer drastically from
behavior of its individual terms. This makes diﬃcult an interpretation of the results which
follow from (1.1) or (3.1).To overcome this disadvantage it is highly desirable to ﬁnd some
other representation for the amplitude which would be devoid of extended summations. One
can obtain guideline for practical implementation of this idea by recalling the fact that sum-
mation in (1.1) or (3.1) runs over the spectrum of intermediate ATI states. From the general
physical principles we know that when the spectrum covers a broad range of energies it
could be advantageous to work within the time-dependent picture. Mathematically this im-
plies the Fourier transformation which replaces the spectral quantities mω with appropriate
intervals of time.

Having these arguments in mind, we carry out the Poisson summation in (3.1) that could

be looked at as desired “Fourier transformation”

d+
N = 2

∞

Xj=−∞ Z ∞

−∞

dm Xµ Qmµ exph−iS(cid:16)tmµ, t′

mµ0(cid:17) − 2πijmi .

(3.4)

Transition from (3.1) to (3.4) amounts to replacing summation over the integer m by in-
tegration over related continuous variable. The price is introducing an extra (and inﬁnite)
summation over an integer j. The transformation is worthy if the latter sum eﬀectively
contains less terms than the original m-sum (1.1a), i.e., converges more rapidly.

B. Saddle point method and eﬀective channel representation

Our next step is evaluation of integrals over m in (3.4). As demonstrated in Sec. II,
the phase of the term d+
N m in the sum (1.1a) varies rapidly with the summation index m.
Physically this follows from a multiphoton nature of the process under consideration. We
presume that the exponent in (3.4) is responsible for this, whereas the pre-exponential factor
Qmµ varies slowly. This allows us to use the saddle point method to carry out explicitly the
integration over the ATI channel label m. The position of the saddle point(s) is governed
by equation

7

d

dm S(cid:16)tmµ, t′

mµ0(cid:17) = −2πj .

(3.5)

When taking derivative in Eq. (3.5) one has to remember that there are two sources of
m-dependence: ﬁrst, via t′
mµ0 and tmµ that are the integration limits in the deﬁnition (3.2),
and, second, via Km that enters the integrand in (3.2). However the situation is drastically
simpliﬁed by the fact that

mµ0

∂

∂t′ S(t, t′)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) t′=t′
∂t S(t, t′)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=tmµ

∂

= 0 ,

= 0

(3.6a)

(3.6b)

since t′
mµ0 and tmµ are the saddle points in integration respectively over t′ and t variables as
discussed brieﬂy in Sec. I and in more detail in Appendices A and B, see formulae (A5) and
(B11). Therefore Eq. (3.5) takes a compact form (dKm/dm = ω/Km)

(cid:20)Km (t − t′ + jT ) +

or, more explicitly,

F

ω Z t

t′

sin ωτ dτ(cid:21)t′=t′

mµ0 ; t=tmµ

= 0 ,

Km(cid:16)tmµ − t′

mµ0 + jT(cid:17) =

F

ω2 (cid:16)cos ωtmµ − cos ωt′

mµ0(cid:17) .

(3.7a)

(3.7b)

It is to be considered together with formulae (A7) and (B13) deﬁning positions of saddle
points in integration over t′ and t variables respectively. The unknown variable to be deﬁned
is the ATI label mc(N, j). As shown below, only complex-valued solutions are possible. Note
that m enters (3.7b), (A7) and (B13) only via Km (1.3). Therefore solution of the saddle
point equation (3.7b) amounts to ﬁnding complex-valued translational momentum Kmc(N, j)
of electron in the intermediate ATI channel that gives major contribution to the generation
of N-th harmonics.

Within the saddle point approximation formula (3.4) is reduced to

d+
N = 2

∞

Xj=−∞ Xmc Xµ Qmcµ vuut

2π
iS ′′

mc

where

exph−iS(cid:16)tmcµ, t′

mcµ0(cid:17) − 2πijmci ,

(3.8)

S ′′
mc ≡

d2

dm2S(cid:16)tmµ, t′

=

ω2
K 2

mµ0(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m=mc
Kmc  √2Nω − κ2 dtmµ

m (cid:16)tmcµ − t′
dm − iκ

ω

mcµ0 + jT(cid:17) +
dm !m=mc

mµ0

dt′

.

+

(3.9)

The necessary derivatives are straightforwardly derived using formulas (A7) and (B13),
respectively, as

8

dt′
mµ0
dm

= −

ω

KmF cos ωt′

mcµ0

,

dtmµ
dm

= −

ω

KmF cos ωtmcµ

.

(3.10)

Even more appealing form of expression (3.8) is obtained if one reexpresses the con-

stituent factors in terms of ATI and LAR amplitudes:

d+

N = 2 Xj Xmc

Ξ(mc, j) ≡ vuut

Amc µ0(Kmc)

1

Rmc µ µ0

CN mc(Kmc) Ξ(mc, j),

(3.11)

2π
iS ′′

mc

exp(−2πijmc) .

(3.12)

Here we omit summation over µ implying that it is absorbed into the sum over mc, since each
saddle point mc is obtained for some choice of label µ. The form of expansion (propagation)
factor

1

Rm µ µ0

=

F (cid:16)cos ωtmµ − cos ωt′

mµ0(cid:17)

(3.13a)

ω2

1

is a natural speciﬁcation of the more general expression obtained earlier [15,14] and cited in
Eq. (B3). In particular, at the saddle point on can use Eq. (3.7b) to rewrite propagation
factor as

1

Rmc µ µ0

=

Kmc (cid:16)tmcµ − t′

mcµ0 + jT(cid:17)

.

(3.13b)

Formula (3.11) provides the most concentrated expression of the result of present work.
Apart from the smooth factor Ξ(mc, j), it is fully analogous to our starting point expression
(1.1), but with summation over large number of intermediate ATI channels m replaced
in Eq. (3.11) by summation over small number of eﬀective channels mc. Note that the
factorization of propagation and LAR amplitudes, as given by formula (1.2), appears as
an additional approximation in the framework of our previous approach [14,15] where the
t-integration was carried out numerically.
In the EC formulation the factorization is a
necessary feature, due to the saddle-point method applied to calculation of integral over
time variable t, see Appendix B. The form (3.13a) of the expansion factor is more accurate
than the approximation

1

Rm µ0

= −

ω2

F cos ωt′

mµ0

(3.13c)

discussed (within unessential sign) earlier [14,15] and implied in formula (1.2) of the present
paper.

The transparent interpretation of the saddle point equation (3.7a) is based on the fact

that

z (t, t′; p) = p (t − t′ + jT ) +

F

ω Z t

t′

sin ωτ dτ

(3.14)

is the electron displacement along z-axis in course of its wiggling motion in the laser ﬁeld
as time varies from t′ to t. The axis is directed along the electric ﬁeld vector F; the electron

9

translational momentum p has the same direction. In terms of z (t, t′; p) (3.14) the saddle
point equation (3.7a) can be equivalently rewritten as

z(cid:16)tmµ + jT, t′

mµ0; Km(cid:17) = 0 .

(3.15)

This equation has a lucid physical meaning. In the semiclassical picture of HG, as imple-
mented by the present theory, the electron emerges from the under barrier at the instant
of time t′
mµ0 into the m-th channel of ATI continuum and undergoes backward transition
into the bound state with emission of the Ω photon at time tmµ. Both these events occur
relatively close to the atomic core. Eq. (3.15) is the condition that after propagation in the
laser ﬁeld the electron returns exactly [20] to the emission point. It accounts to the fact that
the propagation time could be augmented by additional j laser ﬁeld periods T . The integer
parameter j conjugate to m in the “Fourier transformation” (3.4) can be named a recur-
sion number. As discussed above, in fact equation (3.15) deﬁnes an appropriate electron
momentum Kmc. The latter proves to be complex-valued as shown below.

The return condition (3.15) is universal in the sense that it does not contain explicitly
the harmonic order N (the latter parameter implicitly deﬁnes the return time tmµ). The
condition of return is intrinsic in the physical picture of the three-step process. Being
constituent part of the atomic antenna idea of Ref. [2], it appeared in some form in previous
studies by other authors. The most close links could be established with Ref. [8]. This
paper employs a diﬀerent representation that does not appeal to the intermediate ATI
channels. Nevertheless the saddle point method applied in these calculations also leads to
the equation for the saddle points with the same physical meaning. Moreover, the same
number of saddle points plays substantial role (namely, one point at the cutoﬀ region and
two points at the plateau domain, see below). Unfortunately the saddle point evolution with
varying harmonic order N was not described in detail in the cited paper. Note also that the
cited paper provides the HG rates only within an adjustable normalization factor.

As already mentioned, the summation over j in the formulas (3.4), (3.8) or (3.11) reﬂects
the fact that the time interval between the emission of electron and emission of the high-
energy photon could be diﬀerent; namely, several (j) periods of the laser ﬁeld could be added
to it. All these events add up coherently as show Eqs. (3.8) or (3.11). The shortest time
interval corresponds to j = 0. Physically one can anticipate that the related contribution
prevails because of a spread of electron wave packet. Mathematically the term with j = 0 is
obtained by plain replacement of the summation over m in Eq. (1.1) by integration. Further
on we concentrate on calculation of this term and consider at ﬁrst (Sec. III C) the related
saddle points mc(N) ≡ mc(N, j = 0).
Let us discuss now a restriction on the summation index j in (3.8). In the saddle point
method one deforms the integration contour so that it passes via the saddle points; only close
vicinities of the saddle point eﬀectively govern the integral magnitude. Generally, the shifted
contour passes only via some subset of the saddle points available; only the points from this
subset contribute to the integral. We deal with multi-dimensional problem (integration over
variables m, t, t′) that casts analysis of the integration contour deformation as a complicated
task. To circumvent this obstacle we adopt an approach based on simple physical arguments.
As discussed above, the recursion number j counts a number of periods of time that elapse
between the electron escape and its return to the atom. The three-step mechanism presumes
that the moment of escape must precede the moment of return. This condition can only be

10

satisﬁed for non-negative values of j. Basing on this physical argument we assume that the
saddle points mc contribute to the integral only for non-negative j ≥ 0.
additional condition

Saddle points mc which contribute to summation over mc in formula (3.8) should satisfy

ImhS(cid:16)tmcµ, t′

mcµ0(cid:17) + 2πjmci < 0 ,

(3.16)

which ensures that the factor in the exponent in the right-hand side of Eq. (3.8) always
reduces the absolute value of the amplitude. Again we do not attempt to validate (3.16)
mathematically, but note instead that this condition is very similar to a conventional re-
striction on the resonances in stationary processes. Remember that the energy E0 of a
conventional resonance has the real and imaginary parts. The later one describes the width
of the resonance ImE0 = −Γ/2 < 0, and must be negative. In the time-dependent formalism
the resonance contribution to the amplitude is given by the factor exp(−iE0t), where t > 0
is the time elapsed since the resonance intermediate state has been excited. The condition
ImE0 < 0 selects one of two complex-conjugate poles of the S-matrix, or Green function,
thus ensuring the decay of the resonance, i.e., that |exp(−iE0t)| < 0. Similar physical
meaning has Eq. (3.16).
Eqs. (3.8) or (3.11) are the major result of this paper. They implement the objective
formulated in Sec. III A to carry out the “Fourier transformation” of Eq. (3.4). The latter
expression includes summation over the physical, discrete spectrum m of the intermediate
ATI states. In contrast, Eq. (3.8) refers to some complex-valued mc which label EC. Addi-
tionally, Eq. (3.8) includes summation over recursion number j, that is a number of laser
periods T that elapse between the ionization and HG generation. It is important that the
sum over j converges well. The reason for this originates from the discussed above fact of the
slow convergence of the spectral representation (3.4). It is a general, well known fact that
if the spectral pattern is broad, then the “Fourier transformation” should be well localized.
Same argument can be presented from another point of view. The shortest (positive) time
interval between the ionization and HG emission corresponds to j = 0. One can anticipate
that the related contribution prevails because the spread of the electron wave packet should
signiﬁcantly diminish contributions of events with larger j. Presuming that this argument
is correct, we will replace in the applications (Sec. IV) summation over j in Eq. (3.11) by
the only term with j = 0. Good numerical results obtained illustrate the fact that the term
j = 0 really dominates. For j = 0 we ﬁnd only few (one or two) operative EC mc. Thus
the sum (3.11) over EC comprises very few terms that is convenient for interpretation of the
results.

The physical background of the mathematical transformations above can be brieﬂy sum-
marized as follows. The electron motion in a laser ﬁeld in the vicinity of an atom satisﬁes
the adiabatic condition because the number of laser quanta absorbed and emitted in the HG
process is large. The HG amplitude contains a large phase that is identical to the classical
action S(t, t′) (3.2). This phase varies rapidly with all the parameters that govern the elec-
tron propagation in the intermediate state. Therefore the major contribution to the event
comes from such situations in which the phase is stationary, i.e.
from the saddle points.
The phase depends on the initial moment of virtual ionization t′, the ﬁnal moment of the
harmonic emission t and the energy of the electron in the intermediate state. Eqs. (3.6a),
(3.6b), (3.5) represent the saddle-point conditions over these three variables. Altogether

11

they deﬁne the two moments of time and the electron energy in the intermediate state.

C. Analysis of saddle point equation

By summing and subtracting Eqs.(A7) and (B13) we obtain

sin ωtmµ + sin ωt′

mµ0 + 2Km
sin ωtmµ − sin ωt′

ω
= 2Z ,
F
mµ0 = 2Z ′ ,

with

Z ≡

1

2 (cid:16)√2Nω − κ2 + iκ(cid:17) ω

F

,

Z ′ ≡

1

2 (cid:16)√2Nω − κ2 − iκ(cid:17) ω

F

(3.17a)

(3.17b)

.

(3.18)

mµ0 and tmµ to

If 2Nω > κ2, then one has Z ∗ = Z ′. It is convenient to switch from t′
mµ0(cid:17)

ω(cid:16)tmµ − t′

ω(cid:16)tmµ + t′

mµ0(cid:17) ,

x =

1
2

y =

1
2

and present (3.17a) and (3.17b) in the compact form

sin x cos y + Km

ω
F

= Z ,
cos x sin y = Z ′ .

In the same notation Eq. (3.7b) reads

Km

ω
F

= −

sin x sin y

y + jπ

.

By excluding Km we obtain a set of two equations for two variables x and y:

sin x cos y −

sin y

y + jπ! = Z ,
cos x sin y = Z ′ .

(3.19)

(3.20a)

(3.20b)

(3.21)

(3.22a)

(3.22b)

The next step is to exclude x that after some algebra gives a compact transcendental equation
for a single variable ˜y = y + jπ:

 cot ˜y −

1

˜y!2

hsin2 ˜y − (Z ′)2i = Z 2 .

As soon as ˜y is found, one obtains Km from

ω
F

Km =

Z

1 − ˜y cot ˜y

.

(3.23)

(3.24)

The variable y (3.19) has a very lucid meaning: 2y/ω is the active electron excursion time
in the continuum, i.e., the time interval between the ﬁrst step in the three-step process, ATI

12

√2Nω − κ2 ≫ κ

(3.25)

and the last step, LAR. Change in the recursion number j is equivalent to change of the

mµ0(cid:17) by an integer multiple of laser period T . To simplify subsequent
excursion time (cid:16)tmµ − t′
analysis we restrict it to the case j = 0, or 0 ≤ ˜y = y < π, that gives the major contribution
to the amplitude, as discussed in Sec. III B.

When generation of high harmonics is considered, 2Nω ≫ κ2, the estimate

is valid that implies that one can put Z ′ ≈ Z ≈ √2Nω − κ2 ω/(2F ). This allows us to

rewrite equation (3.23) governing saddle point positions in an approximate form

f (y2) =

ω2

4F 2 (cid:16)2Nω − κ2(cid:17) ,

with the universal function f (y2) of a dimensionless parameter y deﬁned as

f (y2) ≡

(y cot y − 1)2 sin2 y
(y cot y − 1)2 + y2

.

(3.26)

(3.27)

A plot of this function (Fig. 2) shows that in the interval of interest, 0 ≤ ξ = y2 < π2 it
has a single maximum located at ξm = 4.173 (ym = 2.043). For suﬃciently small N, when
the right hand side of Eq. (3.26) is less than C1 ≡ f (ξm) = 0.3966, this equation has two
solutions designated as A and B in Fig. 2 where this situation is explicitly displayed. One
can verify that these solutions satisfy condition (3.16) and therefore both of them contribute
to the HG amplitude. Note that both solutions correspond to real but diﬀerent excursion
times 2y/ω.

When N increases, the roots A and B come closer and eventually merge at some critical

value of N = Nb deﬁned from

that is

ω2

4F 2 (cid:16)2Nb ω − κ2(cid:17) = C1 ,

Nb ω =

1
2

κ2 + C1

2F 2
ω2 =

1
2

κ2 + 3.1731Up .

(3.28)

(3.29)

For larger N > Nb the solutions A and B spit again, but this time they result in complex-
valued y. The way to see this, is to note that in the vicinity of the maximum the function
m) ∼ −(y − ym)2. Further straightforward analyses indicates
f (y2) behaves as f (y2) − f (y2
that only one of these two complex-valued solutions satisﬁes condition (3.16) and contributes
to the amplitude, while another one gives no contribution.

Thus the number and the character of relevant solutions of Eq. (3.26) diﬀers for N < Nb
and N > Nb. The excursion time switches from real to complex-valued that indicates that
the HG process changes it nature from the classically allowed to classically forbidden one.
Accordingly, as detailed in Sec. IV, at the point N < Nb the HG spectrum undergoes a
transition from the plateau to the cutoﬀ region. Thus Eq. (3.29) rederives the well-known
upper border of the plateau domain in the HG spectrum (1.5) with a slightly diﬀerent

13

coeﬃcient in front of Up. The validity condition for this derivation (3.25) essentially means
that the photon energy Nb ω is much higher than the initial electron binding energy 1

2κ2.

Before concluding this subsection we remark that one more solution of Eq. (3.26) is shown
in Fig. 2, being labeled as C. It corresponds to negative y2 and has simple N-dependence
since the function f (y2) is monotonous on the semiaxis y2 < 0. The fact that the solution
C results in imaginary excursion time 2y/ω indicates that it gives small contribution to the
HG amplitude.

IV. ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

A. Scanning harmonic order for ﬁxed laser intensity

There are two natural and complementary outlooks on the results for HG process. One
can ﬁx the laser intensity I and scan the rates for harmonics of diﬀerent order, as done in
this subsection, or one can ﬁx the harmonic order N and vary the laser intensity (Sec. IV B).
In both cases we consider HG by H− ion in the laser ﬁeld with the frequency ω = 0.0043.

Fig. 3 depicts a typical pattern of evolution of mc(N) in the complex-m plane for ﬁxed
laser ﬁeld intensity I = 1011 W/cm2. Positions of three complex-valued roots of the exact
saddle-point equation (3.7b) are shown by symbols of diﬀerent shape. The roots move as
the harmonic order N varies; we show their positions for odd (physical) values of N. For
large N only one root has negative imaginary part (it is shown by diamonds in Fig. 3)
that ensures harmonic rate decrease with increasing N. Fig. 4 shows results of the rates
calculation in the saddle point approximation (3.8) where only this single root is taken
into account in the summation over mc. The cutoﬀ region in the rates spectrum is nicely
reproduced, as well as the overall pattern in the plateau domain. However the single-saddle-
point approximation does not reproduce some structures in the N-dependence of HG rates.
In the plateau domain the saddle point mc(N) moves close to the real m-axis. For small N
this saddle point approaches the point m = mth on the real axis in the complex-m plane
that corresponds to the ATI threshold

mth =

κ2
2ω

+

Up
ω

.

(4.1)

Transition to the cutoﬀ region with N increasing corresponds to steep bending of the
saddle point trajectory after which it moves almost perpendicular to the real axis. The
reason of the trajectory bending is seen to be a “collision” with another saddle point shown
by the circles in Fig. 3. In the “collision” region the two saddle points (“diamonds” and
“circles”) abruptly change direction of motion forming the characteristic cross-like pattern.
The “collision” occurs at N = Ncol ≈ 35. Approximately one can identify Ncol with Nb. For
N < Ncol the two saddle points mc are to be taken into account in formula (3.8). As shown in
Fig. 4, this improves the results for the rates in the plateau domain by producing appropriate
structures in the N-dependence. Remarkably, such a two-saddle-point calculation gives
correct positions of minima and maxima in the rate N-dependence, albeit the magnitudes of
the rate variation is reproduced somewhat worse; for instance the depth of the minimum at
N = 17 is quite strongly overestimated. Tentatively one can attribute this to the fact that
if the principal term in the approximation for d+
N considered here proves to be anomalously

14

small for some N, then the correction terms omitted in our calculations become relatively
important. The good overall description of the structure unambiguously identiﬁes its nature
as a result of an interference between the contributions coming from two eﬀective ATI
channels.

The plain saddle point approximation (3.8) presumes that the saddle points are well
separated from each other; otherwise the more complicated uniform approximations are to
be constructed.
In our problem this refers to the “collision” region N ≈ Ncol where our
simple approximation somewhat overestimate rates; however we do not resort here to the
more sophisticated mathematical constructions. Note that the third saddle point shown by
triangles in Fig. 3 is substantial only in calculations for the lowest harmonics. Therefore it
is not taken into account in the present calculations.

B. Scanning laser intensity for ﬁxed harmonic order

It is equally instructive to see how the rate of some individual harmonic depends on the
laser intensity I. Fig. 5 shows trajectories of the saddle points as I varies; only two most
important saddle points are considered. For small intensities only the saddle point shown
by diamonds is operative in evaluation of HG rate. This corresponds to the rapid-fall-oﬀ
regime beyond the plateau domain. Here Im mc is large and negative. As I increases, the
saddle point moves to the real m axis. After crossing the axis the trajectory abruptly bends
at I about 3× 1010 W/cm2. For higher intensities, in the plateau domain, the second saddle
point, shown by circles, should also be taken into account in calculation of HG rates. In this
region the single-saddle-point approximation correctly reproduces an average behavior of the
HG rate, whereas the two-saddle-point approximation shows also characteristic oscillations
of the rate with I (Fig.6). The positions of minima and maxima are correctly reproduced
for medium intensities. On the higher I side an additional maximum at I = 9× 1010 W/cm2
is beyond the two-saddle-point approximation being tentatively due to the contribution of
the third saddle point omitted in the present calculations. This contribution could be also
the source of an additional minor structure in the medium intensity region. It could explain
also the fact that the two-saddle-point approximation gives deeper minima in the rates than
the numerical summation in (1.1).

The present calculations clearly show that the structures in HG rates as function of I
is related to the interference eﬀects, in agreement with conclusion reached by Lewenstein
et al [8]. The alternative explanation [10,11] relates this structure to the threshold eﬀects,
namely to the successive closure of ATI channels by increasing ponderomotive potential as
I grows. However, the threshold eﬀects should be manifested also in the single-saddle-point
approximation; Fig. 6 demonstrates that this is not the case.

In the plateau regime the saddle point mc shown by diamonds in Fig. 6 lies in the
complex-m plane close to the threshold value mth calculated for the same laser intensity
using formula (4.1). As I increases, mc tends to approach mth. This behavior is in agreement
with the three-step model developed by Corkum [3] who presumed that the ATI electron
leaves an atom with zero velocity. Note however, that this presumption is valid only within
single-saddle-point approximation (shown by diamonds in Fig. 5) and only in the plateau
domain. The point m = mth is a branch point for any function which depends on m
via Km.
In particular, generally the preexponential factor Qmµ (3.3) in expression (3.4)

15

has such a branch point. In principle one can look for some reﬁned version of the saddle
point approximation which accounts for closeness of a saddle point and a branch point.
Note however that such modiﬁcations inﬂuence only the preexponential factor but not the
exponent which is the principal object of interest. As discussed above, description of the
transition between one-saddle point and two-saddle point regimes is more diﬃcult for the
semiclassical-type theory since it requires more sophisticated approach. In the present case
the situation is aggravated by the presence of the branch point.
It makes behavior of
trajectories near the ’collision point’ quite diﬀerent from the conventional cross-like pattern
(Fig. 5) and leads to appearance of a spike on the dashed curve in Fig. 6 at the borderline
intensity I = 2.7 × 1010 W/cm2.

V. CONCLUSION

The present study has an objective to get a better insight into the three-step mechanism
of processes in strong laser ﬁeld. We take HG as the simplest case of three-step process and
employ representation of its amplitude in terms of amplitudes of physical, fully accomplished
ATI and PLAR processes. The number of alternative paths in the three-step picture is
generally inﬁnite, each path being labeled by the number m of laser photons absorbed in the
ﬁrst step, ATI. We explore the range of substantial intermediate ATI channels and reveal
crucial role of coherent interference. The eﬀective scheme of summation of the contributions
coming from diﬀerent intermediate ATI channels is developed based on the saddle point
method. Physically this approach is justiﬁed by the multiphoton nature of the process.
Due to it in the strong-ﬁeld regime both ATI and PLAR amplitudes have phases that vary
rapidly with m. Within this framework we develop concept of eﬀective ATI channels that
is important basically and useful for practical calculations. In this approach interference of
inﬁnite number of competing paths is replaced by the single-path picture for generation of
high harmonic, or by interference of two paths for harmonics lying in the plateau domain.
In particular, the structure in HG rates in the latter domain is understood as the simple
two-paths interference pattern.

The eﬀective ATI channels are related to the particular classical electron trajectories that
ensure that electron emitted from the atom at the ﬁrst, ATI stage of HG process returns to
the core to make possible subsequent laser assisted recombination. The possible trajectories
possessing this property in principle comprise an inﬁnite set diﬀering by the excursion time
in continuum which is integer multiple of laser period T . However due to quantum wave
packet spread only the trajectories with the shortest excursion time provide substantial
contribution to HG rate. The crucial step in this development is compexiﬁcation of the
problem: the initial and ﬁnal time is complex-valued that makes entire classical trajectory
also complex-valued. The simplicity of description achieved along these lines is in sharp
contrast with the approach based on the conventional real-time classical trajectories where
the problems related to chaotic irregular classical motion emerge in full scale [23].

16

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by the Australian Research Council. V. N. O. acknowl-
edges the hospitality of the staﬀ of the School of Physics of UNSW where this work has been
carried out.

APPENDIX A: ATI AMPLITUDE IN ADIABATIC APPROXIMATION

The original expression for the ATI amplitude within the Keldysh [1] approximation

reads

Am(p) =

1
T

T

Z0

dt′ hΦp(t′) | VF (t) ˆdǫ | Φa(t′)i ,

(A1)

where Φp is the Volkov state of the electron with the translational momentum p, Φa is the
electron initial bound state. Details of all the deﬁnitions could be found in Ref. [15]; here we
indicate only that VF (r, t) = r · F cos ωt describes an interaction of the active electron and
the laser ﬁeld, with ω, F and T being introduced in Sec. I B. The absolute value pm of the
electron momentum in the m-the ATI channel is subject to energy conservation constraint
being given by formula (1.3) (pm = Km).

The adiabatic treatment of the ATI process was developed in Ref. [21] and subsequently

applied in Refs. [22,14,15]. It presents the ATI amplitude Am(p) as

A(sp)

m µ (p) ,

A(sp)

m (p) = Xµ
A(sp)
m µ (p) = −

(2π)2

T

Aa Γ(1 + ν/2) 2ν/2 κν Ylmaz(ˆp)

(A2)

,

(A3)

exphiS(t′
q−2πiS ′′(t′

mµ)i

mµ)ν+1

where S(t) is the classical action

S(t) =

1

2 Z t

dτ  p +

F
ω

sin ωτ!2

− Eat .

The position of the saddle points t′

mµ in the complex t′ plane is deﬁned by equation

or, more explicitly,

S ′(t′

mµ) = 0 ,

 p +

F
ω

sin ωt′

mµ!2

+ κ2 = 0 .

(A4)

(A5)

(A6)

Expression for HG amplitude (1.1) refers to the particular saddle point (µ = µ0) deﬁned for
the monochromatic laser ﬁeld by the expressions

17

sin ωt′

m µ0 =

ω
F

(−Km + iκ) ,

cos ωt′

m µ0 = s1 −

ω2
F 2 (−Km + iκ)2 .

(A7a)

(A7b)

The other notations are as follows: 1

2κ2 is initial electron binding energy, ν = Z/κ, Z is
the charge of the atomic residual core (ν = Z = 0 for a negative ion), l, maz are the active
electron orbital momentum and its projection in the initial state. In the present context
the unit vector ˆp coincides with ˆF = F/F . The coeﬃcients Aa are speciﬁed in Ref. [21]
being tabulated for many atoms and ions [24]. Mathematically formula (A2) is obtained
by using the saddle point method to carry out integration over time variable t′ in formula
(A1). The saddle point positions are deﬁned by Eqs. (A5) or (A6) that are to be considered
together with the energy conservation constraint (1.3). The summation in (A2) runs over
the saddle points t′
mµ lie
symmetrically with respect to the real t′ axis. For the monochromatic laser ﬁeld there are
mµ ≤ T , two of them lying in the upper half plane
four saddle points in the interval 0 ≤ Re t′
mµ > 0). Only these two saddle points are included into the summation in (A2). If ATI
(Im t′
is considered as the ﬁrst step in HG process, then, as discussed in detail in Ref. [15], only
one of these two saddle points is eﬀectively operative, namely, that speciﬁed by formulae
(A7).

m µ in the plane of the complex-valued time t′. The saddle points t′

APPENDIX B: LAR AND PLAR AMPLITUDES IN ADIABATIC

APPROXIMATION

The PLAR amplitude deﬁned as

BN mµ0(p) = −

1

2πT

T

Z0

dt

1
R0(t, t′

mµ0) hΦa(t) | exp(iΩt) ˆdǫ | Φp(t)i ,

diﬀers from the LAR (Laser Assisted Recombination) amplitude Cm(p)

CN m(p) =

1

2πT

T

Z0

dthΦp(t) | exp(iΩt) ˆdǫ | Φa(t)i

(B1)

(B2)

only by the “propagation” or “expansion” factor 1/hR0(t, t′

distance passed by electron in the laser ﬁeld between initial time t′ and ﬁnal time t is
approximated as [15]

mµ0)i in the integrand. The

R0(t, t′) =

F
ω2 (cos ωt − cos ωt′) .
In (B1), (B2) ˆdǫ = ǫ · r is the dipole interaction operator.
Consider electron in the laser-dressed continuum state with the translational momentum
p. It can recombine to the bound state Φa with emission of the photon. Possible frequencies
of the emitted photon ΩLAR

form an equidistant pattern:

(B3)

j

18

ΩLAR

M =

1
2

p2 + Up − Ea + Mω

with an integer M. Expression (B4a) can be reparametrized to the form

ΩLAR

j

= (J + η)ω ,

(B4a)

(B4b)

F →0 = 1

where J is another integer and the fractional parameter η (0 ≤ η < 1) is governed by the
value of the initial momentum p. In the zero-laser-ﬁeld limit (F → 0) only emission of the
2 p2− Ea is allowed. The presence of intensive laser ﬁeld
photon with the frequency ΩLAR
makes possible the processes when laser photons are absorbed from the ﬁeld or transmitted
to it, and thus the entire spectrum (B4) is produced. Such a LAR process has not yet
received much attention in literature; as far as we know, our recent study [25] is the only
theoretical paper on the subject. In it the initial electron translational momentum p was
considered as an arbitrary input parameter as required in applications to LAR process in
laser plasma. In other terms, the fractional parameter η was arbitrary.

Here we are interested in LAR as a constituent part of HG process. This application
has some particular features. First, all the frequencies in the photon spectrum are integer
multiples of ω, i.e. η = 0. This happens because the initial translational momentum p of
LAR process could not be arbitrary since only the discrete subset of continuum states is
populated by ATI from the bound state. Namely, the translational momentum is subject to
the constraint (1.3) with m being the number of laser photons absorbed on the initial ATI
stage of HG process.

Second, when an individual harmonic is considered, its order N is ﬁxed, and the pa-
rameter m is scanned when summation is carried out according to the expression (1.1a).
Equivalently, the electron momentum p = Km, is scanned along the discrete set of allowed
values Km, see Eq. (1.3). This is in variance with the laser plasma applications when it is
natural to presume that p is ﬁxed and ΩLAR is scanned. The third special feature is that
the electron translational momentum p = Km is parallel to the electric ﬁeld amplitude F.
Finally, the object of interest in HG theory is the PLAR amplitude (B1) rather than
LAR amplitude (B2), although both amplitudes are quite similar. Below we brieﬂy expose
modiﬁcation of some results in the LAR theory relevant to the present application.

The expressions (B1) and (B2), respectively, for PLAR and LAR process amplitudes
are valid in the Keldysh-type approximation. By using the Fourier transformation they are
rewritten as

BN mµ0(Km) = −

CN m(Km) = −

1

2πT

1

2πT

T

T

Z0
Z0

dt

1
R0(t, t′

mµ0)

dt exp {i [Ωt − S(t)]} ˜φ(ǫ)

exp {i [Ωt − S(t)]} ˜φ(ǫ)
a  −Km −

a  −Km −
sin ωt! ,

F
ω

F
ω

sin ωt! ,

(B5)

(B6)

where the classical action S(t) is introduced above by formula (A4). The function ˜φ(ǫ)
deﬁned as

a (q) is

˜φ(ǫ)
a (q) = i (ǫ · ∇q) ˜φa(q) .

19

(B7)

where ˜φa(q) is the Fourier transform of the bound state wave function φa(r):

˜φa(q) = Z d3r exp(−iqr) φa(r) .

(B8)

The time integrals in (B5) and (B6) could be evaluated using the saddle point approxi-

mation:

BN m µ0 =

1

2πT Xµ
×s 2π
2πT Xµ
×s 2π

iS ′′ (tmµ)
1

CN m = −

ω2

a  −Km −
˜φ(ǫ)

F
ω

sin ωtmµ! ×

F (cid:16)cos ωt′

m µ0 − cos ωtm µ(cid:17)

exp{i [Nωtmµ − S(tmµ)]} .
sin ωtmµ! ×
a  −Km −
˜φ(ǫ)

F
ω

iS ′′ (tmµ)

exp {i [Nω tmµ − S(tmµ)]} ,

(B9)

(B10)

where summation is to be taken over the saddle points tmµ operative in the contour integra-
tion. The position of saddle points in the complex t-plane is governed by the equation

or, more explicitly

Its solution is

S ′(tmµ) − Ω = 0 ,

1

2  p +

F
ω

sin ωtmµ!2

= Ea + Ω .

sin ωtm µ =

ω

F (cid:16)−Km ±

√2Nω − κ2(cid:17) .

(B11)

(B12)

(B13)

For N = 0 the formula (B13) coincides with that governing the saddle point position in
case of ATI processes [see Eq. (A7)]. As in the latter case, Eq. (B11) has four solution per
the ﬁeld cycle (i.e for 0 < Re tmµ < T ). Physically t′
m µ0 is the time when the electron is
emitted at the ﬁrst step of HG process and tm µ is the time of electron return back to the
initial bound state at the last stage. Note however that both t′
m µ0 and tm µ are generally
complex-valued.

Formula (B13) might give real-valued saddle points tmµ that correspond to the classically
allowed LAR or PLAR. According to Eq. (B12) this means emission of the high-energy
photon at the real moments of time when the instantaneous kinetic energy of the electron
in the laser ﬁeld diﬀers from the bound state energy Ea by Ω. In this respect LAR or PLAR
processes diﬀer basically from ATI process which is always described by the complex-valued
saddle points that corresponds to the classically forbidden or tunneling transitions. The
classically allowed transitions in LAR or PLAR are absent for small N when N < κ2/(2ω).
However we are interested only in generation of harmonics with suﬃciently high order:

N >

κ2
2ω

.

20

(B14)

In this case the classically allowed population is operative provided m is not too large,
namely

Km <

F
ω

+ √2Nω − κ2 ,

i.e.

m < m+

N ≡ N + 3

Up
ω

+

F
ω2

√2Nω − κ2 .

If N is suﬃciently large, namely if

i.e.

F
ω

< √2Nω − κ2 ,

N >

κ2
2ω

+

2Up
ω

,

(B15a)

(B15b)

(B16a)

(B16b)

then the domain of classically populated m-channels is bounded from below by the condition

Km > −

F
ω

+ √2Nω − κ2 ,

(B17a)

i.e.

m > m−

N ≡ N +
In the interval m−
N the classical population is governed by two real saddle points
tmµ per ﬁeld cycle. Note that for the real LAR or PLAR process one always implies that
the m-th ATI channel is open, i.e. m is suﬃciently large:

N < m < m+

(B17b)

3Up
ω −

F
ω2

√2Nω − κ2 .

m > mth

(B18)

where mth is deﬁned by Eq. (4.1). The same constraint is assumed also in the sum over m
in formula (1.1a) implementing the three-step mechanism of HG [14,15].

For intermediate N lying in the interval

κ2
2ω

< N <

κ2
2ω

+

2Up
ω

another regime of classical population becomes possible. Namely, if the condition

Km <

F
ω −

√2Nω − κ2 ,

i.e.

mth < m < m−

N ≡ N +

3Up
ω −

F
ω2

√2Nω − κ2

is satisﬁed, there are four saddle points tmµ per ﬁeld cycle.

21

(B19)

(B20a)

(B20b)

In Fig. 7 we illustrate these results taking LAR of electron on hydrogen atom with
formation of negative H− ion. The laser ﬁeld intensity is I = 1011 W/cm2. Open ATI
channels lie at m ≥ 16. The intermediate N regime (B19) takes place for 7 ≤ N ≤ 24. In Fig.
7a we show m distributions of LAR modulus squared amplitudes |CN m|2 for two adjacent
N from the intermediate-N domain, N = 13 and N = 15. For N = 13 the classically
forbidden domain is m ≥ 62; the classical population in the two-saddle-point regime is
operative for 19 ≤ m ≤ 61, the four-saddle-point regime is operative for 16 ≤ m ≤ 18. For
N = 15 the classical population is forbidden for m ≥ 66; it is allowed in the two-saddle-point
regime for 18 ≤ m ≤ 66; the four-saddle-point regime is operative for 16 ≤ m ≤ 17. The
region of transition from classically allowed to classically forbidden LAR requires some more
elaborate treatment to reproduce related transition pattern similar to Airy function. The
special analysis is required also to describe a transition from two-saddle-point to four-saddle
point regime. However here we do not pursue the objective of detailed uniform description
of LAR or PLAR amplitudes.

Note that for N = 0 the saddle points coincide with the singularity of the integrand
˜φ(ǫ)
a (q). This coincidence occurs also in the adiabatic treatment of ATI. The diﬀerence is
that in the particular case of above threshold detachment of negative ion the singularity
in the integrand is canceled and the standard form of the saddle point approximation is
applicable. Otherwise (i.e. in case of non-zero atomic core charge) the saddle point method
is to be applied in the somewhat modiﬁed form. In case of LAR the singularity is always
present, and hence the modiﬁed form of the saddle point method should be applied for
N = 0. Respectively, the small N case requires some special treatment (some sort of
uniform approximation; note that all these modiﬁcations aﬀect only the pre-exponential
factor, but the principal exponent remains the same). Below we are interested in the large
N case that allows us to put aside these complications. However, it is to be remembered that
coincidence of the saddle point and the singularity of the momentum space wave function
means that only large-r asymptote of the initial state wave function ϕa(r) in the coordinate
space is of importance. This is the case for ATI, but not for LAR or PLAR, as follows from
the preceding discussion. In other words, the LAR amplitude (or its PLAR counterpart)
generally are more sensitive for the short-range behavior of the wave function.

22

REFERENCES

∗

Permanent address: Institute of Physics, The University of St Petersburg, 198904 St
Petersburg, Russia.

[1] L. V. Keldysh, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 47, 1945 (1964) [Sov. Phys.-JETP 20, 1307 (1965)].
[2] M. Yu. Kuchiev, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 45, 319 (1987) [JETP Letters 45, 404

(1987)].

[3] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[4] J. L. Krause, K. J. Schafer, and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3535 (1992).
[5] K. C. Kulander, K. J. Schafer, and J. L. Krause, in Super-Intense Laser-Atom Physics,
Vol.316 of NATO Advanced Study Institute, Series B: Physics, edited by B. Piraux et
al (Plenum, New York, 1993), p. 95.

[6] A. L’Huillier, M. Lewenstein, P. Salli`ers, Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, J. Larsson, and

C. G. Wahlstr¨om, Phys. Rev. A 48, R3433 (1993).

[7] M. Lewenstein, Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier, and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev.

A 49, 2117 (1994).

[8] M. Lewenstein, P. Salli`ers, and A. L’Huillier, Phys. Rev. A 52, 4747 (1995).
[9] W. Becker, S. Long, and J. K. McIver, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 4112 (1990).
[10] W. Becker, S. Long, and J. K. McIver, Phys. Rev. A 46, R5334 (1992).
[11] W. Becker, S. Long, and J. K. McIver, Phys. Rev. A 50, 1540 (1994).
[12] M. Yu. Kuchiev, J. Phys. B 28, 5093 (1995).
[13] M. Yu. Kuchiev, Phys. Lett. A 212, 77 (1996).
[14] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, J. Phys. B 32, L189 (1999).
[15] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3111 (1999).
[16] A. Becker and H. F. M. Faisal, J. Phys. B 29, L197 (1996).
[17] H. F. M. Faisal and A. Becker, Laser Physics 7, 684 (1997); A. Becker and

H. F. M. Faisal, Laser Physics 8, 69 (1998).

[18] A. Becker and H. F. M. Faisal, Phys. Rev. A 59, R1742 (1999).
[19] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1965);
P. D. B. Collins, An Introduction to Regge Theory & High Energy Physics (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1977).

[20] In the detailed picture [21] an electron emerges from the under barrier at the source
point separated from the core. There are two such points lying up and down the electric
ﬁeld vector in the laser wave. The related contributions interfere giving raise to the
oscillatory patterns in the ATI angular distributions. These physically essential features
of HG mechanism are not manifested in the saddle point equation (3.15) governing the
momentum Kmc: this equation does not distinguish between position in space of the
source points and the atomic core.

[21] G. F. Gribakin and M. Yu. Kuchiev, Phys. Rev. A 55, 3760 (1997); J. Phys. B 30, L657

(1997).

[22] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, J. Phys. B 31, 2525 (1998); Phys. Rev. A 59,

2844 (1999).

[23] G. van de Sand and J. M. Rost, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 524 (1999).
[24] A. A. Radzig and B. M. Smirnov, Reference Data on Atoms, Molecules and Ions (Berlin:

Springer, 1985).

23

[25] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, Phys. Rev. A 61, 033414 (2000). Note that this

paper employed deﬁnition of LAR amplitude as 2π times expression (B2).

24

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Contributions to the HG amplitude d+

N from diﬀerent ATI m-channels according to
the expression (1.1). The H− ion in the laser ﬁeld with the frequency ω = 0.0043 and intensity
I = 1011 W/cm2 produces harmonic of the order N indicated in the plots. The square moduli
|Mm|2 and phases arg(Mm) of three diﬀerent amplitudes Mm are pictured. The closed circles
show the squared moduli and phases of the terms d+
N m ≡ Am µ0 BN mµ0 in the sum (1.1) over ATI
channel label m. We present also the squared moduli and phases of the physically meaningful
factors that constitute d+
N m: ATI amplitude Am µ0 (open squares) and PLAR amplitude BN mµ0
(open triangles). For graphical representation the convenient scaling factors are introduced in the

plots of squared moduli, namely as |Mm|2 we show everywhere 108 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
, and also: for N = 15
– 106 |Am µ0|2 and 104 |BN mµ0|2; for N = 25 – 5 · 104 |Am µ0|2 and 104 |BN mµ0|2; for N = 39 –
104 |Am µ0|2 and 104 |BN mµ0|2; for N = 51 – 3 · 103 |Am µ0|2 and 104 |BN mµ0|2.

N m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

2d+

FIG. 2. The universal function f (ξ) (3.27).

FIG. 3.

Trajectories of the saddle points mc(N ) in the complex-m plane for ﬁxed laser
intensity I = 1011 W/cm2 and varying harmonic order N . The results are for H− ion in the laser
ﬁeld with the frequency ω = 0.0043. Positions of three saddle points for odd integer N are denoted
respectively by diamonds, circles and triangles. The plot (a) gives general overview, the plot (b)
shows the region where two saddle points “collide”, whereas the plot (c) details behavior of the
saddle point trajectory in the vicinity of m = mth.

FIG. 4. Harmonic generation rates (1.4) (in sec−1) for H− ion in the laser ﬁeld with the
frequency ω = 0.0043 and various values of intensity I as indicated in the plots. Closed circles -
results obtained by Becker et al [11], open circles - our calculations [15] in the dipole-length gauge
performing numerical summation (1.1) over contributions of diﬀerent ATI channels, open diamonds
– present results within the saddle point approximation (3.8) for the summation over ATI channels
contributions with a single saddle point mc(N ) taken into account (namely, the saddle point shown
by diamonds in Fig. 3); open squares – same but taking into account two saddle points mc(N )
(namely, these shown by diamonds and circles in Fig. 3).

FIG. 5. Trajectories of the saddle points mc(N ) in the complex-m plane for ﬁxed harmonic
order N = 15 and varying laser intensity I = ζ × 1010 W/cm2 (HG by H− ion in the laser ﬁeld
with the frequency ω = 0.0043 is considered as in Fig. 3). The plot (a) gives general overview,
the plot (b) shows vicinity of the real-m axis. Positions of two saddle points for odd integer N
are denoted respectively by diamonds and circles with the numbers indicating value of the factor
intensity in the units 1010 W/cm2. The crosses in the plot (b) show positions of the ATI
ζ, i.e.
threshold deﬁned by formula (4.1) for the same values of ζ.

25

d+

N(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

FIG. 6. The rate parameter MN ≡ 2 log10(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

for the harmonic N = 15 as a function of
the laser ﬁeld intensity I (HG by H− ion in the laser ﬁeld with the frequency ω = 0.0043). Solid
curve - our calculations [15] in the dipole-length gauge performing numerical summation (1.1) over
contributions of diﬀerent ATI channels, dashed curve – present results within the saddle point
approximation (3.8) for the summation over ATI channels contributions with a single saddle point
mc(N ) taken into account (namely, the saddle point shown by diamonds in Fig. 5); dotted curve
– same but taking into account two saddle points mc(N ) (namely, these shown by diamonds and
circles in Fig. 3). The bars with numbers m indicate the threshold intensities Im such that for
I > Im the m-th ATI channel is closed due to ponderomotive potential.

FIG. 7. Squared modulus of the amplitude CN m of the laser assisted recombination of electron
into H− bound state in the laser ﬁeld with the frequency ω = 0.0043 and intensity I = 1011 W/cm2.
The harmonic order is ﬁxed [N = 13 (circles) and N = 15 (triangles) in (a) and N = 39 (circles)
in (b)]. Closed symbols – calculations using the formula (B6) with numerical integration over t;
open symbols – adiabatic approximation (B10) with various number of saddle points taken into
account for diﬀerent m as described in the text.

26

