0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
3
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
1
2
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Laser spectroscopy of simple atoms and

precision tests of bound state QED

Savely G. Karshenboim1

D.I. Mendeleev Institute for Metrology, 198005 St. Petersburg, Russia

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, 85748 Garching, Germany2

Abstract. We present a brief overview of precision tests of bound state QED and
mainly pay our attention to laser spectroscopy as an appropriate tool for these tests.
We particularly consider diﬀerent precision tests of bound state QED theory based on
the laser spectroscopy of optical transitions in hydrogen, muonium and positronium
and related experiments.

I

INTRODUCTION

Precision laser spectroscopy of simple atoms (hydrogen, deuterium, muonium,
positronium etc.) provides an opportunity to precisely test Quantum Electrody-
namics (QED) for bound states and to determine some fundamental constants with
a high accuracy. The talk is devoted to a comparison of theory and experiment
for bound state QED. Experimental progress during the last ten years has been
mainly due to laser spectroscopy and, thus, the tests of bound state QED are an
important problem associated with modern laser physics.

The QED of free particles (electrons and muons) is a well-established theory
designed to perform various calculations of particle properties (like e. g. anomalous
magnetic moment) and of scattering cross sections. In contrast, the theory of bound
states is not so well developed and it needs further precision tests. The QED theory
of bound states contains three small parameters, which play a key role: the QED
constant α, the strength of the Coulomb interaction Zα and the mass ratio m/M
of an orbiting particle (mainly—an electron) and the nucleus. It is not possible to
do any exact calculation and one has to use some expansions over some of these
three parameters.

The crucial theoretical problems are:

• The development of an eﬀective approach to calculate higher-order corrections

to the energy levels.

1) E-mail: sek@mpq.mpg.de
2) Summer address

• Finding an eﬀective approach to estimate the size of uncalculated higher-order

corrections to the energy levels.

The diﬀerence between these two problems is very important: any particular evalu-
ation can include only a part of contributions and we must learn how to determine
the uncertainty of the theoretical calculation, i. e. how to estimate corrections
that cannot be calculated. We discuss below some important higher-order QED
corrections, our knowledge on which determines the accuracy of the bound state
QED calculations. Doing ab initio QED calculations, none can present any theo-
retical prediction to compare with the measurements. With the help of QED one
can only express some measurable quantities in terms of fundamental constants
(like e. g. the Rydberg constant R∞, the ﬁne structure constant α, the electron-
to-proton (me/mp) and electron-to-muon (me/mµ) mass ratio). The latter have to
be determined somehow, however, essential part of the experiments to obtain the
values of the contstans involves measurements with simple atoms and calculations
within bound state QED.

The study of the Lamb shift in the hydrogen atom and the helium ion about
ﬁfty years ago led to a great development of Quantum electrodynamics. Now, in-
vestigations of the lamb shift are still of interest. After recent calculations of the
one-loop, two-loop and three-loop corrections to the Lamb shift in the hydrogen
atom, the main uncertainty comes from higher order two-loop contributions of the
order α2(Zα)6m. They contain logarithms (ln(Zα)) which enhance the correction3,
and the leading term with the cube of the logarithm is known [1]. The uncer-
tainty due to the uncalculated next-to-leading terms is estimated as 2 ppm. It is
competible with an experimental uncertainty from laser experiments (3 ppm) and
essentially smaller than the 10-ppm inaccuracy of computations because of the lack
of an appropriate knowledge of the proton charge radius [2]. This 10-ppm level of
uncertainty due to the proton structure is an obvious evidence that the QED is
an incomplete theory which deals with photons and leptons (electrons and muons)
and cannot describe the protons (or deutrons) from ﬁrst principles. To do any
calculations with hydrogen and deuterium one has to get some appropriate data
on their structure from expreriment.

We particularly discuss here precise tests of the bound state QED theory due
measurements of the 1s − 2s and other optical transitions in hydrogen, muonium
and positronium and related experiments. We consider a number of diﬀerent two-
photon Doppler-free experiments in hydrogen and deuterium in Sect. II. In Sect.
III we present the status of the Lamb shift study and discuss some running auxilary
experiments which can help us in the understanding of the higher-order corrections
and the proton structure. Since the problem of the proton structure limits use-
fulness of extremely precise hydrogen experiments, the study of unstable leptonic
atoms can provide some tests QED which are eﬃcient and competitive with the
study of hydrogen [3]. We discuss these in Sect. IV.

3) In hydrogen, one can ﬁnd: ln3(Zα)−1 ∼ 120, ln2(Zα)−1 ∼ 24 and ln(Zα)−1 ∼ 5.

The paper contains also a brief summary and a list of references. The latter is
far incomplete. However, most problems concerning the precision study of simple
atoms were discussed at the recent Hydrogen atom, 2 meeting, which took place
June, 1-3, 2000, in Italy and we hope that one ﬁnds more references on the subject
therein [4].

II TWO-PHOTON DOPPLER-FREE SPECTROSCOPY

The eﬀect of Doppler broadening used to be a limiting factor in the measurement
of any transition frequency. A way to avoid it is to apply two-photon transitions,
which are not sensitive to the linear Doppler shift. First of all, a success in pre-
cision spectroscopy is to be expected from 1s − 2s measurements, because of the
metastability of the 2s state and, hence, of its narrow natural radiative width.
Since a value of the Rydberg constant can only be determined from measurements
with hydrogen and deuterium transitions, one has to measure at least two diﬀerent
transitions for any applications to QED tests (i. e. one measurement is for the
Rydberg constant, while the other is to test QED using the value of the Rydberg
constant). An appropriate option is to study the 1s − ns, 2s − ns or 2s − nd
transitions in hydrogen, or the 1s − 2s transition in other atoms.

A Studying hydrogen and deuterium atoms

To precisely test bound state QED theory of the Lamb shift one has to measure
two diﬀerent transitions in hydrogen and/or deuterium. Combining them prop-
erly one can exclude the contribution of the Rydberg constant to the transition
frequency

E(nl) = −

c h R∞

n2

(1)

and ﬁnd a value determined by some known relativisitc corrections (∼ α2R∞) and
by the Lamb shifts of the involved levels. Since a number of diﬀerent states is
involved, a number of Lamb shifts have to be determined.

A speciﬁc combination of the Lamb shifts

∆L(n) = EL(1s) − n3EL(ns)

(2)

is important [5] for the evaluation of the data from optical measurements in Garch-
ing [6] and Paris [7], obtained by means of two-photon Doppler-free laser spec-
troscopy. The use of this diﬀerence allows to present all unknown Lamb shifts of
ns states in terms of only one of them (usually—either EL(1s) or EL(2s)). The
uncertainty in this diﬀerence is also determined by unknown higher-order two-loop
terms, but the leading term which includes a squared logarithm is known [10]. It is
important to underline that the status of this diﬀerence [8,2] diﬀers from the status
of the 1s Lamb shift [9]. It is free of most theoretical problems and it is in some
sense not a theoretical value, but a mathematical one.

    grand average

LS
FS
OBF
comparison  Garching - Paris

  averages

0.847
0.805
0.862

 SY / K

 theory

 2s

 1s

 12d
 8s, d

 2s

1057 800 kHz

1057 850 kHz

1057 900 kHz

 Garching

 Paris

FIGURE 1. 2s − 2p Lamb shift: compari-
son of theory and experiment. Grand aver-
age denotes the average of all data from the
Lamb shift (LS), ﬁne structure (FS) and op-
tical beat frequnecy (OBF) measurements.

FIGURE 2. Level schemes of absolute fre-
quency measurements at MPQ (Garching)
and LKB (Paris)

Absolute measurements of two-photon transitions

Now let us consider some recent experiments. The most accurate result for the
Lamb shift by optical means (Fig. 1, see [2,9] for references)) can be achieved from
a comparison of the Garching data and the Paris data (see Fig. 2, the references
can be found in Refs. [2,6,7,4]). These are results after absolutely measuring some
transitions frequencies (i. e. by measuring with respect to the cesium standard).
In the case of the Garching experiment, a small electric ﬁeld allows a single-photon
E1 transition from the 2s state to the 1s level and a resonance in the intensity of
this decay was used as a signal when tuning the laser frequency. The measurement
accuracy of the 1s-2s transition is high and it can be used for other applications,
like e. g. a search for variation of constants (see e. g. [11]).

Relative measurements of two-photon transitions

A comparison of two absolute frequencies involves cesium standards and a lot
of metrology. It is possible to avoid comparing two frequencies within the same
experiment. Level schemes of three experiments (see for detail Refs. [2,6,7,4]) are
presented in Fig. 3. Most of them used only two-photon transitions. In all three
experiments, the pair of measured frequencies consists of two values that diﬀer by
a factor either about 4 (Garching, Paris) or 2. These factor appear within the
leading non-relativistic approximation (i. e. from the Schr¨odinger equation with
the Coulomb potential), in which the energy levels are determined by Eq.
(1).
Multiplying the smaller frequencies by the proper factor (4 or 2) and comparing
them with the larger frequencies experimentally, the beat frequency signals were

extracted. For some rather historical reasons, the ﬁnal results are less accurate
than in the case of the comparison of two absolute measurements (see Fig. 1 which
contains an average value over all three experiments).

 4s, d

 2s

 4p

 2s

 3s

 6s, d

 2s

 1s
 Garching

 1s

 Yale

 1s

 Paris

FIGURE 3. Level schemes of relative frequency measurements at MPQ (Garching), Yale Uni-
versity and LKB (Paris)

III THE LAMB SHIFT IN THE HYDROGEN ATOM

Only a part of the experiments mentioned above were performed for both hy-
drogen and deuterium, and essentially more experimental data are available for
hydrogen. Below we discuss only the Lamb shift in the hydrogen atom.

A Present status

The current situation of the comparison of theory and experiment is summarized
in Fig. 3 (see Refs. [2,9] for details). A result marked with SY/K (Sokolov-and-
Yakovlev value, corrected by us) is not included neither in the average over the
Lamb shift measurements (LS) nor into the grand average. This corrected result of
Sokolov and Yakovlev is claimed to be the most precise, however its real accuracy is
an open question. The theory is presented with three diﬀerent values of the proton
size published some time ago. The uncertainty of these theoretical results is about
4 ppm.
In our opinion, a reasonable theory is not so accurate and its margins
are presented as a ﬁlled area (10-ppm uncertainty). All experimental results but
one by Sokolov and Yakovlev are consistent with our concervative estimate of the
theoretical value.

The present status can be brieﬂy described as following:

• The experiments are mainly consistent to each other and with theory.

• In particular, the optical data evaluated with the help of the diﬀerence in
Eq. (2) are consistent with the microwave data (LS and FS in Fig. 1) found
without the use of Eq. (2).

• The uncertainty of the grand average value for the 2s − 2p1/2 Lamb shift is

about 3 ppm.

• The computational uncertainty is about 2 ppm and it originates from the
unknown higher-order two-loop corrections of the order α2(Zα)6m which are
known only in part [1].

• The uncertainty due to the ﬁnite size of the proton is about 10 ppm and it is

due to the inaccuracy in the determination of the proton charge radius [2].

Below we discuss some current laser experiments which oﬀer some solutions for the
problems with the theory, both: of the proton size and of the higher-order two-loop
contributions.

B Proton structure

There are a few ways to study the proton chagre distribution. One of them is
to look for elastic scattering of electrons by protons at low momentum transfer q.
One can determine the proton electric form factor from the scattering data and
extrapolate in to zero momentum transfer

GE(q2) = 1 −

R2
p
6

q2 + ...

(3)

Unfortunately, the scattering data were not evaluated properly and a comprehensive
description cannot be available. The claimed uncertainty leads to a 3.5-ppm error
bar for the Lamb shift, but we expect it to be rather 10-ppm.

A promising project to determine the proton charge radius is now in progress
at Paul Scherrer Institut (Villigen). It deals with muonic hydrogen. The muon is
about 200 times heavier than the electron and hence the Bohr orbit of the muon
lies much lower than the one of the electron and the level energies are more aﬀected
by the proton structure. The used atomic level scheme is presented in Fig. 4. It is
similar to the one applied for muonic helium some time ago. A main advantage is a
slow-muon beam at PSI. The use of slow muons allows to make use of a low-density
gas target which reduces the collisional decay rate of the metastable 2s state. It
has been checked experimentally that, under the conditions of the PSI experiment,
the 2s state is metastable enough and not destroyed by collisions. That allows
one to go to the next step: to excite the atoms in the 2s state to the 2p state by
a laser and to look for the intensity of the X-ray Lyman-α as a function of the
laser frequency.
In case of successful measurement the result will be the Lamb
shift in muonic hydrogen with an essential contribution due to the proton size, and
eventually with a value of the proton charge radius more accurate by an order of
magnitude than the current scattering values.

2p

laser

 X - ray

2s

1s

FIGURE 4. The level scheme used in the PSI experiment on the Lamb shift in muonic hydrogen

C Higher-order two-loop corrections

The other problem of theory of the Lamb shift in hydrogen is the unknown
higher-order two-loop corrections. They are proportional to Z 6, while the leading
contribution to the Lamb shift is ∼ Z 4. That means that some less accurate
measurements at higher Z can nevertheless give some eﬃcient results for these
higher-order terms. There are three projects for low-Z ions [4]:

• Lamb shift measurement in the 4He+ ion (Z = 2) at the University of Windsor

(recently completed);

• two-photon 2s − 3s transition in the 4He+ ion (Z = 2) at the University of

Sussex (in progress);

• ﬁne-structure (2p3/2 − 2s) measurement in hydrogen-like nitrogen 14N6+ (Z =

7) and 14N6+ at the Florida State University.

The scheme of the last experiment is presented in Fig. 5.
It is similar to the
previous one with the muonic hydrogen. It is expected (see Myers’ paper in [4]) to
be sensitive to the higher-order two-loop corrections.

2p3/2

laser

2s

2p1/2

1s

 X - ray

 Fine structure 

 Lamb splitting

FIGURE 5. The level scheme of the FSU experiment on the ﬁne structure in hydrogen-like
nitrogen

                                                  
                                                  

THz
0

411

1644

23S1

13S1

1233607210 MHz
Theory

1233607230

Stanford (& Bell)

FIGURE 6. Three-photon ionisation in
positronium at Stanford University

FIGURE 7. Positronium 1s − 2s: theory
and experiment

IV LEPTONIC ATOMS

Since the theory of the energy levels in the hydrogen atom is limited by nuclear
structure eﬀects, one can try to study protonless hydrogen-like atoms: muonium
and positronium. In both of them the 1s − 2s interval was measured.

A 1s-2s transition in positronium

In the positronium spectrum there are a number of values which were or are under
precise experimental study. In all cases the uncertainty of the positronium energy
(n = 1, 2) is known up to α6m. The only double logarithm (α7m ln2 α) is known to
the next order [1,12]. The inaccuracy of the theory originates from the non-leading
terms (single logarithm and constant) of radiative and radiative-recoil corrections
of order α7m. For the majority of measurable quantities (hfs of 1s, 1s − 2s interval,
ﬁne structure of n = 2, orthopositronium and parapositronium decay rate), the
theory is competitive with the experiment and actually slightly more accurate. We
present a level scheme of a measurement of the 1s − 2s interval in positronium in
Fig. 6, while in Fig. 7 we compare the theory with the experiment.

The positronium 1s − 2s experiment is quite diﬀerent from the hydrogen one,
because of the short lifetime of the orthopositronium triplet 13S1 state which the
experiment starts from. The three-photon annihilation leads to a lifetime of 13S1
state of 1.4 · 10−7 s. The method applied was three-photon ionization which has a
resonance due to the two-photon transition.

B 1s-2s transition in muonium atom

The muonium nucleus, the muon, lives about 2.2 µs and an idea used to measure
1s − 2s interval in muonium is similar to the positronium experiment (Fig. 6).
However, the application is very diﬀerent. In contrast to positronium (in which, e.

g. the 1s − 2s experiment is really competitive with the study of 1s hfs), a much
more eﬃcient test of QED can be provided by the hyperﬁne structure of the ground
state which was measured very precisely. The uncertainty of the calculation of the
1s hfs interval originates from some unknown corrections of the fourth order. Some
of these, including the large logarithms (ln(Zα)−1
∼ 5 or ln(M/m) ∼ 5), are known
in the double logarithmic approximation [1,13] and non-leading terms lead to an
uncertainty of the theoretical expression as large as 0.05 ppm. The uncertainty
arises from the unknown next-to-leading radiative-recoil (α(Zα)2(m/M)EF ) and
pure recoil ((Zα)3(m/M)EF )4 terms (which are essentially the same as the α7m
terms in positronium). However, the budget for the theoretical uncertainty contains
not only the computational items. Actually, the largest contribution to the budget
comes from a calculation of the Fermi energy because of the lack of a precise
knowledge of the muon-to-electron mass ratio. We summarize in Fig. 8 a few
of the most accurate values for the mass ratio (see Refs. [13,3] for references).
The most accurate result there is from study of the Zeeman eﬀect of the 1s state in
muonium. Another way to determine this ratio is the 1s −2s muonium experiment.
Two other values are extracted from the study of muon spin precession in diﬀerent
media.

1s-2s in muonium

Zeeman effect in muonium 1s

µ+ in Br2

µ+ in water

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

muon-to-electron mass ratio: mµ/me = 206.768 xxx

FIGURE 8. Some determinations of the muon-to-electron mass ratio

4) EF stands here for the Fermi energy, which is a leading order contribution to the hyperﬁne
structure which is a result of the non-relativistic interaction of the magnetic moments of the
electron and the muon.

V SUMMARY

In our talk we brieﬂy discuss several precision tests of bound state QED. The
short overview shows that theory and experiment are consistent within their un-
certainty and the crucial corrections in bound state QED in present are:

• higher order two-loop corrections (hydrogen Lamb shift);

• radiative-recoil and pure recoil terms of order α7m, the calculation of which
involves an essential part of the QED, binding and two-body eﬀects (positro-
nium and muonium).

The study of these corrections is necessary to develop an eﬃcient theory competitive
with experiment.

AKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank T. W. H¨ansch and S. N. Bagayev for support, hospitality
and stimulating discussions. The stimulating discussions with K. Jungmann, D.
Gidley, R. Conti and G. Werth are also gratefully acknowledged. I am grateful to
J. Reichert for useful remarks. The work was supported in part by RFBR (grant
# 00-02-16718), NATO (CRG 960003) and Russian State Program Fundamental
Metrology.

REFERENCES

1. S. G. Karshenboim, JETP 76, 541 (1993).
2. S. G. Karshenboim, Can. J. Phys. 76 (1998) 168.
3. K. Jungmann, this conference.
4. Hydrogen Atom II: Precision Physics of Simple Atomic Systems. Book of abstracts
(ed. by S. G. Karshenboim and F. S. Pavone), Castiglione della Pescaia, 2000. The
Proceedings will be published by Springer in 2001.

5. S. G. Karshenboim, JETP 79, 230 (1994).
6. R. Holzwarth et al., this conference.
7. F. Biraben, this conference.
8. S. G. Karshenboim, Z. Phys. D 39, 109 (1997).
9. S. G. Karshenboim,

invited talk at ICAP 2000, to be published, e-print hep-

ph/0007278.

10. S. G. Karshenboim, JETP 82, 403 (1996); J. Phys. B29, L21 (1996).
11. S. G. Karshenboim, Can. J. Phys. to be published, e-print physics/0008051.
12. K. Pachucki and S. G. Karshenboim, Phys. Rev.A 60 2792 (1999);

K. Melnikov and A. Yelkhovsky, Phys. Lett. B 458, 143 (1999).

13. S. G. Karshenboim, Z. Phys. D 36, 11 (1996).

