Non-destructive spatial heterodyne imaging of cold atoms

S. Kadlecek, J. Sebby, R. Newell, and T. G. Walker

Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706

(February 20, 2014)

0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
5
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
7
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We demonstrate a new method for non-destructive imag-
ing of laser-cooled atoms. This spatial heterodyne technique
forms a phase image by interfering a strong carrier laser beam
with a weak probe beam that passes through the cold atom
cloud. The ﬁgure of merit equals or exceeds that of phase-
contrast imaging, and the technique can be used over a wider
range of spatial scales. We show images of a dark spot MOT
taken with imaging ﬂuences as low as 61 pJ/cm2 at a detuning
of 11Γ, resulting in 0.0004 photons scattered per atom.

In this paper we demonstrate a new “spatial hetero-
dyne” method for non-destructive imaging of trapped
atoms. As with other non-destructive techniques, spatial
heterodyne imaging minimizes the number of absorbed
photons required for an image and is therefore particu-
larly useful in applications such as Bose-Einstein Con-
densation [1], magnetic trapping, and far-oﬀ-resonance
trapping that are particularly sensitive to heating and
optical pumping from absorbed photons.

Oﬀ resonant, non-destructive imaging of clouds of
trapped atoms [2] has been previously demonstrated us-
ing several diﬀerent methods, all of which image the
phase shift produced by the atoms on a collimated
probe laser:
dark-ground imaging [3], polarization-
rotation imaging [4], and phase-contrast imaging [5].
Non-destructive detection without imaging was recently
demonstrated using FM spectroscopy [7]. The most pop-
ular of these methods, the phase-contrast technique, uses
a small (∼ 10− 100 µm) π/2 phase mask that is inserted
into the imaging laser focus at the Fourier plane of an
imaging lens. In the image plane the π/2 phase-shifted
laser ﬁeld interferes with the signal ﬁeld produced by the
atoms to give an image intensity that is linear with re-
spect to the atom-induced phase shift.

To implement spatial heterodyne imaging, we used two
laser beams: a carrier laser beam which does not pass
through the trapped atoms, and a probe beam which is
phase shifted as it passes through the atom cloud. The
beams are coincident on a CCD camera and straightfor-
ward digital image processing techniques use the result-
ing interference pattern to reconstruct the phase shift due
to the cloud.

Spatial heterodyne imaging has several practical ad-
vantages for non-destructive imaging. First, there is no
need for precision fabrication and alignment of a phase
plate. Second, it has a signiﬁcant signal-to-noise advan-
tage for low imaging intensities. Third, at high intensities
it has a larger signal per absorbed photon, allowing the
large dynamic range of CCD cameras to be better used.
Fourth, the method works over a wide range of spatial

scales. Finally, rejection of spurious interference fringes
due to various optical elements such as vacuum windows
is automatically accomplished.

The principle of spatial heterodyne imaging is similar
to heterodyne spectroscopy [6], with interference occur-
ing in the spatial rather than the temporal domain. As
shown in Fig. 1a) a probe beam of intensity Ip travels
through a cloud of trapped atoms and accumulates a po-
sition dependent phase shift φ(r) due to the index of re-
fraction of the atoms. A lens placed in this beam images
the atom cloud onto a CCD detector. A carrier beam
of intensity Ic, and derived from the same laser as the
probe beam interferes with the probe beam at an angle
θ. For convenience, we assume equal radii of curvature
for the carrier and probe beams. The interference pat-
tern on the CCD detector I(r) is a set of straight line
fringes whose position is determined by an overall phase
shift between the beams χ, and which are distorted by
the accumulated phase shift from the atoms:

I(r) = Ic + Ip + 2pIcIp cos(χ + 2πθˆk⊥ · r/λ − φ(r))

(1)

from which φ(r) can be reconstructed. Here ˆk⊥ is a unit
vector pointing along the direction of the component of
the carrier wavevector k perpendicular to the direction
of the probe beam.

FIG. 1. Apparatus.

The phase shift φ is most easily determined in two lim-
its: θ ≪ δ/λ (parallel mode) and θ ≫ δ/λ (tilted mode),
where δ is the desired resolution element on the image.
In the parallel mode the phase of the interference pat-
tern is uniform across the cloud image, and the resulting
interference pattern is (with χ = π/2):

I(r) = Ic + Ip + 2pIcIp sin φ(r)

(2)

If Ic = Ip, this is identical to phase contrast imaging. If

not, the signal size is increased by a factor of pIc/Ip.

1

The spatial variation of the phase shift from the cloud
becomes a spatial variation of the intensity at the CCD
detector, producing a real image on the detector. In prac-
tice the phase shift χ between the two beams must be
stabilized using feedback.

For this paper we have implemented spatial hetero-
In this case a set of
dyne imaging in the tilted mode.
high spatial frequency fringes appear and the eﬀect of
the atom cloud is to give a spatially varying phase shift
to these fringes. The analysis of the fringes then pro-
ceeds in a manner highly analogous to lock-in detection:
we demodulate the interference pattern to zero spatial
frequency and apply a low-pass ﬁlter to the result. FFT
techniques make the demodulation and ﬁltering eﬃcient
(2 sec for a 784 × 520 pixel camera on a 400 MHz Pen-
tium). It is not necessary to stabilize the relative phase
between the probe and carrier beams.

To demonstrate the method we use an atom cloud
with an on-resonant optical thickness of about 15 in a
dark spot 87Rb MOT [8,9]. The experimental arrange-
ment is shown in Fig. 1b. Typically 3 × 107 atoms from
a MOT are accumulated in the dark state at a den-
sity of roughly 5 × 1011 cm−3 by imaging a 1 mm ob-
struction in the MOT repumping laser onto the trap.
The atoms in the dark spot are quite sensitive to reso-
nant light and hence absorption imaging is diﬃcult. The
imaging laser beam is tuned in the range of 2 − 11Γ
away from the 87Rb 5S1/2(F=1)→5P1/2(F=2) resonance,
switched via an acousto-optic modulator, and then split
into two beams by a non-polarizing beamsplitter. The
probe beam is attenuated by a factor of 1-200 by a neu-
tral density ﬁlter before passing through the atom cloud,
which is imaged onto a CCD array. An interference ﬁl-
ter placed in the Fourier plane of the imaging lens rejects
780 nm ﬂuorescence from the bright state trapped atoms.
The carrier passes around the vacuum chamber and is in-
cident on the CCD detector tilted at an angle θ ≈ 1 deg.
For convenience, we roughly match the radii of curvature
of the probe and carrier beams at the CCD, to produce
nearly straight fringes. We tilt the fringes at an angle
of typically 30◦ from the rows of the CCD chip to avoid
aliasing.

Two competing factors determine the optimum angle
θ. As with lock-in detection, it is important to modulate
the signal at somewhat higher spatial frequency than the
smallest feature to be resolved. The ﬁnite camera pixel
size sets an upper limit on the modulation frequency
without loss of fringe contrast. We ﬁnd that a fringe
spacing of 4-5 pixels is a good compromise between res-
olution and fringe contrast. In the parallel mode the full
resolution of the camera is acheived.

To begin processing we subtract oﬀ reference images of
each laser beam. This leaves only the interference term
in Eq. 1, which we Fourier transform. The transform
contains the phase image information in two sections cen-
tered on spatial wavenumbers k0 = ±2πθ/λ. We shift one
of these sections to zero spatial frequency and attenuate
the high frequencies with a ﬁlter, typically the Gaussian

FIG. 2. a) Image of a dark spot MOT taken at a probe de-
tuning ∆ = −11Γ and carrier-to-probe intensity ratio r = 20.
b) Image optimized for minimum light scattering: ∆ = −11Γ,
r = 60 : 1. This image required approximately 0.0004 pho-
tons to be scattered per atom. c) Side-on image of a dark
sheet trap formed by an 59 µm wire image in the repumping
beam. The image of the cloud is approximately 51 µm. The
right-hand scale is the phase shift in radians.

ﬁlter exp(-(3k/k0)2). Finally, we take the inverse trans-
form whose phase (tan−1(Im/Re)) is φ(r). This proce-
dure automatically reduces spurious interference fringes
that arise from various optical elements since they are
likely to be at the wrong spatial frequency. To compen-
sate for slight curvature of the interference fringes, we
subtract φ(r) from another image, similarly processed,
but taken in the absence of atoms. This also reduces
distortion due to spatial inhomogeneities in Ic and Ip.

Figure 2 shows several images φ(r) taken using the
above procedure. At a typical line-center optical thick-
ness of 3-15 we have successfully imaged the dark spot
trap for a variety of detunings and carrier-to-probe inten-
sity ratios r. Fig. 2a) shows a typical image with r = 20,
∆ = −11Γ, and about 1.2 × 10−3 scattered photons per
atom. As another example, Fig. 2b) shows an image
taken at ∆ = −11Γ and r = 60. The total ﬂuence used
to make the image was only 61 pJ/cm2, corresponding
to 0.0004 photons scattered per atom. The S/N ratio on
a given resolution element is about 10 for this image.

2

Depending on the details of the imaging system, ﬁlter-
ing of the Fourier transform may limit the spatial res-
olution of the ﬁnal image. In our system, with a mag-
niﬁcation of 5 and a CCD pixel spacing of 8.8µm, the
resolution is limited to about 20µm, compared to a the-
oretical diﬀraction limit of about 5µm. Fig. 2 shows an
image of a 50 µm wide trap.

Depending on the application, the ﬁgure of merit for
spatial heterodyne imaging is comparable with or supe-
rior to phase constrast imaging. For simplicity, we con-
sider here the parallel mode. The intensity pattern is

Ic + Ip + 2pIcIp cos(χ− φ(x)), Ic and Ip are measured in
numbers of photons. For small phase shifts and χ ≈ π/2,
the signal size is approximately 2ηpIcIpφ where η is the
quantum eﬃciency of the detector, typically ∼ 0.3 for
CCD chips in the near infrared. Noise sources include
shot noise and other sources of technical noise, b, such as
the camera read noise and ﬁnite resolution of the cam-
era’s A/D converter. The signal-to-noise ratio is there-
fore

(S/N )SH =

2ηpIcIpφ

pη(Ic + Ip) + b2

The maximum S/N occurs for Ic ≫ Ip, b2/η, giving

(3)

(4)

(S/N )max = 2φpηIp

which shows that there is a minimum number of photons
that must be scattered from the atoms to acheive a given
S/N. A similar relation holds for phase contrast imaging.
A natural ﬁgure of merit for non-destructive imaging
is the number of absorbed photons required to attain the
desired signal to noise ratio. For optically thick clouds
this number is greatly reduced because the probing can
be done at large detuning [2]. Thus the shot-noise limited
ﬁgure of merit for either technique is

S/N
A

=

2φpηIp
αIp ≈

2∆

Γ r η

Ip

(5)

for ∆ ≫ Γ.
When the technical noise b is signiﬁcant, however, spa-
tial heterodyne imaging has a better S/N ratio than
phase contrast imaging. Figure 3 compares the S/N ra-
tio per radian of phase shift for the two techniques. As
with any heterodyne method, the interference between
the carrier and the signal boosts the signal level at a
given probe intensity.

Furthermore, for highest quality images it is desirable
to maximize signal size and thereby minimize the dis-
cretization errors from the A/D converter. In this case
the spatial heterodyne method oﬀers a √r performance
enhancement as compared to the phase contrast tech-
nique. Fig. 2b) shows an image taken with r = 60, repre-
senting 3 bits of increased signal size for ﬁxed absorption.
We have demonstrated the spatial heterodyne method
for non-destructive imaging of trapped atoms and shown

3

FIG. 3. S/N comparison for phase contrast imaging and
spatial heterodyne imaging. The camera read noise is as-
sumed to be b = 25 e−, and the quantum eﬃciency is η = 0.5.

that it has some advantages over other techniques. Our
method is a special case of of a more general class of
holographic imaging techniques that could be used with
cold atoms.

Support for this research came from the NSF. We ac-
knowledge helpful communications with D. Jin, W. Ket-
terle, and S. Rolston, and assistance from N. Harrison.

[1] M. Anderson et al., Science 269, 198(1995); K. Davis et
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995); C. Bradley, C. Sack-
ett, and R. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 985 (1997).

[2] W. Ketterle, D.S. Durfee, and D.M. Stamper-Kurn, In
”Bose-Einstein condensation in atomic gases, Proceedings
of the International School of Physics ”Enrico Fermi”,
Course CXL,” edited by M. Inguscio, S. Stringari and C.E.
Wieman (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 1999) pp. 67-176.

[3] M. R. Andrews, M.-O. Mewes, N. J. van Druten, D. S.
Durfee, D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Science 273, 84
(1996).

[4] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, and R. G. Hulet, Phs. Rev.

Lett. 79, 985 (1997).

[5] M. R. Andrews, D. M. Kurn, H.-J. Miesner, D. S. Durfee,
C. G. Townsend, S. Inouye, and W. Ketterle, Phs. Rev.
Lett. 79, 553 (1997).

[6] A. Yariv, Optical Electronics (New York: Holt, Rinehart,

and Winston) 305 ﬀ.

[7] V. Savalli, G. Horvath, P. Featonby, L. Cognet, N. West-

brook, C. Westbrook, Opt. Lett. 24, 1552 (1999).

[8] W. Ketterle, K. B. Davis, M. A. Joﬀe, A. Martin, and D.

E. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2253 (1993).

[9] M. H. Anderson, W. Petrich, J. R. Ensher, and E. A.

Cornell, Phys. Rev. A 50, R3597 (1994).

0 . 6 0

a

0 . 0 0

0 . 7 8

b

0 . 0 0
0 . 6 9

c

0 . 0 0

a)

b)

