0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
7
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
8
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Approximation properties of basis functions in

variational tree body problem∗

Dnepropetrovsk State University, Dnepropetrovsk 049050, Ukraine

Vladimir S. Vanyashin†

Abstract

A new variational basis with well-behaved local approximation
properties and multiple output is proposed for Coulomb systems. The
trial function has proper behaviour at all Coulomb centres. Nonlin-
ear asymptotic parameters are introduced softly: they do not destroy
the self-optimized local behaviour of the wave function at vanishing
interparticle distances. The diagonalization of the Hamiltonian on
a ﬁnite Hilbert subspace gives a number of meaningful eigenvalues.
Thus together with the ground state some excited states are also re-
liably approximated. For three-body systems all matrix elements are
analytically obtainable up to rational functions of asymptotic param-
eters. The feasibility of the new basis usage has been proved by a pilot
computer algebra calculation. The negative sign of an electron pair
local energy at their Coulomb centre has been revealed.

PACS number: 31.15.Pf

1 Introduction

In variational methods the required energy eigenvalue is obtained by aver-
aging the Hamiltonian, or, in other terms, by averaging the local energy,
deﬁned by action of the Hamiltonian operator on a trial wave function. The

∗Talk given at the International Conference ”Quantization, Gauge Theory, and Strings”
dedicated to the memory of Professor Eﬁm Fradkin. Moscow. 5 – 10 May 2000. To be
published in the Conference Proceedings.

†e-mail: vvanyash@ﬀ.dsu.dp.ua vanyashv@heron.itep.ru

1

very variability of the local energy is a direct consequence of unavoidable
approximate character of any chosen variational wave function. As a result,
the global (averaged) quantities are much better reproduced in variational
calculations than the local ones. Moreover, in practical calculations, the lo-
cal reliability may be sacriﬁced in favour of faster convergence to the global
values sought for. The known notion of the eﬀective charge Z ∗ = Z −5/16 in
a two-electron atom (ion) is a good example of such sacriﬁce, since the local
behaviour of an exact wave function in the Coulomb centre is determined by
Z unscreened but not by Z ∗.

The good local approximation quality of a variational wave function is a
highly desirable goal since the problem onset (Criteria of goodness for ap-
proximate wave functions [1]) up until the present (Quality of variational trial
states [2]). For any Coulomb system this quality is extremely vulnerable at
the Coulomb singularity points. Without special care the local energy inﬁni-
ties take place at the Coulomb singularities, destroying the desired picture of
the uniform approximation [3]. Luckily, the average Hamiltonian values are
rather insensitive to these local inﬁnities due to: (1) much higher degree of
smallness of the neighbouring integrated volume (∼ r3) in comparison with
the degree of the Coulomb singularity (∼ r−1) and (2) neutralizing of contri-
butions with diﬀerent signs at diﬀerent points, as in customary cases of an
eﬀective charge or scale factor introduction.

In spite of great achievements of modern variational calculations in ﬁnd-
ing high precision energy values [4, 5, 6], the problem of the reliable local
approximation of the wave functions persists. From now onwards, for brevity,
the attribute “local” will be related only to the Coulomb centres vicinities.
The Kato cusp conditions [7] can be imposed as a supplementary condition
for mean energy minimum, thus introducing conditional extremum technique,
usually more laborious. The method not aﬀecting variational freedom and,
nevertheless, avoiding local energy inﬁnities was proposed earlier in [8]. The
development of this method, presented below, adds the possibility to repro-
duce both local and asymptotic properties of an exact solution in the basis
functions, thus striving for better uniformity of the wave function approxi-
mation.

2

2 Coulomb Variational Basis with Both

Local and Asymptotic Proper Behaviour

The mentioned local behaviour of a many-body wave function is, in essence,
that of some superposition of Coulomb solutions for the corresponding pair
of particles. In the case of an isolated Coulomb pair, the wave function is a
well-known product of a normalization factor, radial, and angular functions:

ψ = N R(ρ) Y (n); ρ = −

Z1 Z2 e2 m1 m2
¯h2(m1 + m2)

|r1 − r2|, n =

r1 − r2
|r1 − r2|

,

R(ρ) = exp(−ρ/n) ρl Φ(1 + l − n, 2 + 2l; 2ρ/n).

(1)

The standard angular functions Y (n) can be equivalently represented as sym-
metric irreducible tensors of the rank l, composed from the Cartesian pro-
jections of the unit vector n and Kronecker,s deltas:

l = 0, Y = 1;
l = 2, Yij = 3 ni nj − δij;
l = 3, Yijk = 5 ni nj nk − δij nk − δik nj − δjk ni; . . .

l = 1, Yi = ni;

(2)

The written Coulomb solution will be used not only for attracting pairs,
when it leads to the discrete spectrum of bound states, but also for repulsing
pairs. In the latter case the sequence of integral principal quantum numbers
n gives the corresponding sequence of the Hamiltonian discrete ”eigenvalues”.
They are not physically meaningful for isolated pairs: the ”eigenfunctions”
grow exponentionally and are not normalizable. For repulsive pairs, which
are embedded in a bound system, the negative Hamiltonian ”eigenvalues”
aquire the meaning of their local energies near the Coulomb centre, as the
exponentional growth of the ”eigenfunctions” will be damped by the envi-
ronment.

All products of the Coulomb wave functions of all pairs, attracting and
repulsing as well, can constitute the variational basis [8]. A necessary con-
traction on dumb indices and selection of admissible asymptotics are implied.
The permutation symmetry of identical particles should be imposed on the
ﬁnal form of the basis.

Such a basis, put in order by integer principal and orbital quantum num-
bers of diﬀerent pairs, is full enough to approximate any analytical many-
body wave function. The Kato cusp conditions are rigorously satisﬁed by
the basis functions themselves. We stress the point that any approximate

3

fulﬁllment of the Kato cusp conditions leaves the diﬃculty of local energy
inﬁnities unsettled, no matter what precision of averaged quantities has been
achieved.

For any pair of particles from a many-body system only a density matrix
can be attributed and not a wave function. In the density matrix, unlike in
the wave function of an isolated pair, the local and asymptotic parameters
cannot remain identical. In order to reproduce in the basis functions this den-
sity matrix property we modify the Coulomb radial functions so as to allow
independent adjustment of local and asymptotic variational parameters. The
modiﬁed radial function R(a, ρ) is deﬁned as the product of the exponential
factor exp(−a ρ) and a ﬁnite segment of the Maclaurin expansion of the ratio
of the unmodiﬁed function R(ρ) to the same exponential factor. The modi-
ﬁed function has two adjustable parameters: a for the asymptotic behaviour,
and n, real or imaginary, for the local behaviour near the Coulomb centre.
This local behaviour is not aﬀected by the performed soft introduction of
the independent asymptotic behaviour, which is not connected with that of
a conﬂuent hypergeometric function. The Maclaurin series of exp(a ρ) R(ρ)
up to ρ1+l+2k appears to be the Laurent series in inverse even powers of n up
to n−2k. Just so the modiﬁed function has also the rearranged form:

R(a, ρ) =

kmax
X
k=0

ck(a, ρ)

n2k

.

(3)

The Laurent coeﬃcients ck(a, ρ) are proposed as the new two-body con-
stituents of the many-body variational basis. They are independent of n
polynomials in both ρ and a with the common exponential factor exp(−a ρ).
Along with stretching the basis set, the usage of ck(a, ρ) instead of R(a, ρ)
will absorb the nonlinear parameters n in easily obtainable coeﬃcients of a
linear superposition. The proposed basis has inseparable cluster structure
and the variational wave function should terminate only at the end of a clus-
ter. In case of three-body Coulomb systems both the Hamiltonian and unity
matrix elements can be computed analytically up to rational functions of all
asymptotic parameters a.

The squares of eﬀective principal quantum numbers of all attractive and
repulsive Coulomb pairs, being included in the superposition coeﬃcients,
are tuned automatically with the latters. So the proposed basis produces
the multiple output: not only the lowest root of the secular equation has
the physical meaning, but some higher roots are also meaningful. Still a

4

majority of higher roots remains a mathematical artefact, hence, from the
physical point of view, the Hamiltonian diagonalizes only partially.

3 Computer Algebra Feasibility of the New

Method

The pilot computation conﬁrms the possibility of cooperative treatment of
several lowest states. With a relatively short wave function containing 54
terms (49 terms in the antisymmetric case) the helium para-S and ortho-S
energy levels have been calculated in one run as:
para-S levels:
-2.902900, -2.145871, -2.055637;
ortho-S levels: -2.175026, -2.068634, -2.036463,
while the results of high precision calculations given in [4] are:
para-S levels:
-2.903724377033982, -2.145974046054634, -2.06127198974091;
ortho-S levels: -2.175229378237014, -2.068689067472468, -2.03651208309830.
Though these pilot numerical results are far from the record accuracy, they
have deﬁnitely established the negative sign of the electron pair local energy
in the Helium atom. This phenomenon can be tested experimentally in, e. g.,
the Helium double ionization. The universal Mathematica program vSlevels
is available upon request from the author.

In our approach interparticle (Hylleraas) variables are used for the ba-
sis formation, that is natural for elimination of the local energy inﬁnities,
and perimetric (Heron) variables — on the stage of analytical evaluation of
integrals, that simpliﬁes calculations. In hyperspherical variables the local
energy inﬁnities, problem appears more intricate. It has been solved princi-
pally through frame transformations in the recent work [9].

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank V. B. Belyaev, B. V. Geshkenbein,
L. B. Okun,, V. S. Popov, and Yu. A. Simonov for constructive discussions
and valuable comments.

References

5

[1] N. M. James and A. S. Coolidge Phys. Rev. 51 (1937) 860

[2] W. Lucha and F. F. Sh¨oberl hep-phys/9904391

[3] H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter Quantum Mechanics of One- and Two-

Electron Atoms (New York: Plenum Press) 1977

[4] G. W. F. Drake and W. C. Martin Can. J. Phys. 76 (1998) 679

[5] S. P. Goldman Phys. Rev. A 57 (1998) R677

[6] A. M. Frolov Phys. Rev. A 58 (1998) 4479

[7] T. Kato Communic. Pure Appl. Math. 10 (1957) 151

[8] V. S. Vanyashin Heron Variables

in 3-body Coulomb Problem

physics/9905042
Proc. XI Int. Workshop on High Energy Physics and Quantum Field
Theory, 12-18 September 1996, St.-Petersburg ed B. B. Levtchenko
(Moscow: MSU Press) 1997 p 403

[9] T. A. Heim and D. Green J. Math. Phys. 40 (1999) 2162

physics/9905053

6

