0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
6

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ATOMIC ANTENNA MECHANISM IN HHG AND ATI

M. Yu. Kuchiev(a), V. N. Ostrovsky(b)

(a) The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

(b) Institute of Physics, The University of St Petersburg, Russia

1 Introduction

This paper reviews recent development of the atomic antenna, a theoretical framework
which describes a number of laser-induced multiphoton phenomena in atoms. The
localization of atomic electrons inside an atom drastically suppresses their interaction
with a laser ﬁeld. For many processes this circumstance favors multistep mechanisms
when at ﬁrst one of atomic electrons is released from an atom by the ﬁeld. After that
an interaction of the ejected electron with the laser ﬁeld results in absorption of energy
from the ﬁeld and its accumulation in the form of the electron wiggling energy and ATI
energy. It is very essential that the energy absorbed by the electron can be transferred
to the parent atomic core via an inelastic collision of the primarily ejected electron with
the atom. The collision may trigger a number of phenomena including high harmonic
generation (HHG), enhancement of above-threshold ionization (ATI), production of
multiply charged ions. In this physical picture the absorption of energy from the ﬁeld
takes place in the region of large separations from an atom, where the electron-laser
interaction dominates over the electron-core potential. This circumstance results in
dramatic enhancement of the probability of multiphoton processes. Such a scenario of
photoabsorption was suggested, apparently for the ﬁrst time, in Ref. [1]. Later the idea
was rediscovered by several authors in diﬀerent contexts [2, 3, 4]. In current literature
the above described sequence of events is often referred to as the rescattering, the three-
step mechanism, or even the simpleman model. The term atomic antenna, suggested
in Ref. [1], refers to the fact that the ﬁrstly emitted electron plays a role similar to an
aerial in conventional radio devices, enhancing the absorption.

It is very important that the physical picture drawn above can be implemented not
only as a model, but also as a clear and rigorous quantum formalism. In this paper we
outline two convenient ways to implement the atomic antenna idea. The one originating
from Ref. [1] is called the factorization technique. It was formulated in detail in Ref. [5]

and recently applied to HG in Refs. [6, 7]. We discuss also another, complimentary
technique, which is referred to below as the method of eﬀective ATI channels.
It is
close in spirit to the approach developed previously by Lewenstein et al [8, 9] and can
in turn be linked to the Corcum model [2]. From the ﬁrst glance, these two schemes
diﬀer very signiﬁcantly. However, we prove their identity by demonstrating that they
describe the same physical idea from diﬀerent points of view.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the factorization technique
which allows one to present the amplitude of the ”complicated” multiphoton process as
a product of the amplitudes of much more simple, ”elementary” processes. Section 3
is devoted to the concept of eﬀective ATI channels, which provides important insights
into the physical nature of complicated multiphoton processes. We derive the eﬀective
ATI channels from the factorization technique revealing close links between the two
approaches. Section 4 describes two important examples of ”elementary” processes:
one of them is the photoionization, another one is the electron-atom collision in a laser
ﬁeld which results in the generation of the high-energy quanta. These two ”elementary”
processes are vital for description of HG in the framework of the factorization technique.
Sections 5, 6 are devoted to several examples illustrating numerically an accuracy of
methods developed for HHG and ATI. A number of results reported in this paper are
derived neglecting the Coulomb ﬁeld of the residual atomic particle which inﬂuence the
active atomic electron. This approach is well justiﬁed for negative ions, but needs to
be modiﬁed for the processes with neutral atoms. Section 7 exposes our recent progress
based on the eikonal approach which allows us to take into account the Coulomb ﬁeld.
The concluding Section 8 summarizes the results. The atomic units are used throughout
the paper unless indicated otherwise.

2 Factorization technique

The factorization technique of Ref. [5] can be applied to a number of multiphoton
processes. In this section our attention is restricted to an important example of HG
which has been recently considered by the present authors [6, 7]. We concentrate on
the linearly polarized laser ﬁeld

F(t) = F cos ωt

(1)

that creates the external potential V (t) = F(t) · r acting on atomic electrons. Using
the second order time-dependent perturbation theory one can present the amplitude of
HHG d+

N in the single-active-electron approximation in the following form

d+
N = −

i

T Z T

0

dt Z t

−∞

dt′ hφa(t) | exp(iΩt) U G(t, t′) V (t′) | φa(t′)i .

(2)

Here the brackets h | | i imply integration over coordinates, T = 2π/ω is the laser period.
The initial-state wave function is

φa(r, t) = φa(r) exp(−iEat)

(3)

where Ea = −κ2/2 is the bound state energy and φa(r) is the corresponding atomic
eigenfunction. The potential U = ǫ·r accounts for production of the high harmonic with

the frequency Ω = Nω and the polarization ǫ. The Green function G(t, t′) describes the
electron propagation in the intermediate state. The amplitude (2) takes into account
only a sequence of events in which HHG follows the absorption of the necessary energy
from the laser ﬁeld. A number of omitted, the so called time-reversed sequences, is
strongly suppressed due to multiphoton nature of the process.

Neglecting the potential of the atomic core (a possible way to lift this approximation
is considered in Section 7), one can present the Green function via a complete set of
the Volkov wave functions φp(r, t) that account for the electron dressing by the laser
ﬁeld

2 Z t p +

F
ω

sin ωτ!2

(4)

.

(5)


dτ



G(r, t; r′, t′) = Z φp(r, t)φ∗
φp(r, t) = exp


i
 p +


F
ω

p(r′, t′)

d3p
(2π)3 ,
sin ωt! · r −
1

The multiphoton nature of the problem makes the phases of the integrand in (2) to vary
rapidly with t, t′. This circumstance allows one to use the saddle-point approximation
for integrations over the time variables. After the accurate integration over the momenta
p in (4), see details in [5, 6, 7], it is possible to show that (2), (4), (5) lead to the following
convenient presentation of the HHG amplitude

d+

N = 2 Xm

d+
N m ,

d+
N m = Am µ0(Km) BN mµ0(Km) .

(6)

(7)

Each term in (6) is written as a product of two amplitudes of physical, fully accomplished
and observable processes; no ”oﬀ-shell” entities appear. Therefore Eqs. (6), (7) clearly
demonstrate the stepwise character of the process. The ﬁrst step is described by the ﬁrst
factor Am µ0(Km) which is an amplitude of physical ATI process when after absorption
of m laser photons the active electron acquires a translational momentum p = Km. In
the Keldysh-type approximation this amplitude can be evaluated using the saddle-point
technique discussed in Section 4. The subscript µ0 in Am µ0 speciﬁes the contribution
of one particular saddle point in t′ integration, see more details in Section 4. The other
factor, BN mµ0(Km), is a combined amplitude of the second and third steps, which are
the propagation and laser assisted recombination (PLAR). It can be further factorised
into the propagation factor 1/Rmµ0 describing the second step and the amplitude of the
third step, which is the laser assisted recombination (LAR), CN m(Km):

BN mµ0(Km) ≃

1

Rmµ0

CN m(Km) .

(8)

Rmµ0 is merely an approximate expression for the distance passed by the active electron
in course of its laser-induced wiggling motion

1

Rm µ0

= −

ω2

F cos ωt′

mµ0

.

(9)

The amplitude CN m(p) of the physical LAR process describes the laser assisted recom-
bination, i.e. transition of an electron with momentum p from the continuum to the

bound state. Since the continuum state is laser-dressed, the recombining electron can
emit the N-th harmonic photon, gaining necessary extra energy from the laser ﬁeld.
More details on LAR amplitude are given in Section 4.

The summation in formula (6) runs over a number of photons m absorbed on the
ﬁrst step of the process when the active electron is released. In other words one can say
that the energy conservation constraint selects the discrete set of ATI channels in the
laser-dressed continuum. These channels serve as intermediate states for the three-step
HG process. In a given channel the electron has translational momentum Km with the
absolute value deﬁned by

Km = q2 (mω − Up + Ea) .

(10)

Here Up ≡ F 2/(4ω2) is the well-known ponderomotive potential. ATI plays a role of
the ﬁrst stage of HHG process only if the electron momentum has speciﬁc direction,
namely Km is directed along F. This ensures eventual electron return to the core that
makes the ﬁnal step, LAR, possible as discussed in detail in Refs. [5, 6, 7].

The observable HG rates RN are expressed via the amplitudes as

RN ≡

Ω3

2πc3 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

d+

N(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,

(11)

Ω = Nω is the frequency of emitted harmonic, c is the velocity of light.

Eq. (6) is the major result of this section. It presents the amplitude of the “com-
plicated” HG process in terms of the amplitudes of “elementary” processes which are
the ionization and LAR. Conceptual signiﬁcance of this result is based on the fact that
it supports the three-step interpretation of the HG process which, in turn, stems from
the physical picture of the atomic antenna discussed in Section 1. Eq. (6) is also very
convenient for numerical applications, since a knowledge on suﬃciently simple elemen-
tary amplitudes enables one to calculate accurately the HG process, as discussed below
in Section 5.

3 Eﬀective channels

The summation over m in Eq. (6) has a clear physical interpretation. After the ﬁrst
step (ionization) the released electron can be found in any ATI channel before colliding
with the parent atom. After the third step all intermediate channels result in the same
ﬁnal electron state. Therefore the contributions of intermediate ATI level interfere,
as shows the summation over m in Eq. (6). The interference has several prominent
manifestations including the cutoﬀ of the HHG rates for high N and their oscillations
in the plateau domain, as discussed in Section 5. The number of the ATI channels
which give signiﬁcant contribution to the amplitude is usually large

δm ≫ 1 .

(12)

This circumstance does not pose a problem for numerical applications based on Eq. (6),
but may in some situations obscure the qualitative analyses. To overcome this diﬃculty
it is desirable to carry out summation over m in (6) in an analytical form. This is the
major task of this Section which follows the approach of Ref. [10].

Let us verify ﬁrst that the summation over m in (6) can be replaced by integration

over the related continuum variable

d+

N = Xm

d+

N m ≃ Z d+

N m dm .

(13)

To prove the reliability of the approximation based on (13) we use the Poisson sum-
mation formula which allows one to present the amplitude of HHG in the following
form

Xm

d+

N m = Xj Z dm exp(−2πijm) d+

N m .

(14)

The summation index j in (14) may be looked at as a variable which is conjugate
to the m variable. Since mω refers to the spectrum, 2πj/ω should be identiﬁed as a
time variable or, more accurately, as a number of periods of time that elapsed between
the ejection of the electron from an atom and its return back. The wave function of
the released electron spreads in space the more the larger j is. Therefore one should
anticipate that the most important contribution to (14) is given by the major term
j = 0. Same conclusion can be drawn from Eq. (13). The estimate shows that the
spectral variable m covers a wide region which causes the time variable j to be localized.
This discussion demonstrates that one can safely take the leading j = 0 term in (14)
thus supporting (13).

An advantage of integration over the variable m in (13) is that it can be carried out
in closed analytical form using the saddle-point method. To specify this statement let
us return to Eqs. (2), (4), (5). One can deduce from them that the major dependence
of the phase of the integrand of (2) on integration variables is associated with the factor
exp(iS) where S is the classical action

S = S(t, t′, m) = Z t

t′

dτ 


1

2  Km +

F
ω

sin ωτ!2

− Ea

 + Ωt .

(15)

Since we know from Eq. (7) that the momentum variable arises in the ﬁnal formulas
as Km, we can use this momentum in (15) instead of the integration variable p that
originates from (4). It should be noted that Eq. (7) where Km arises was derived using
accurate integration over all momenta p; hence the substitution p → Km in (15) is not
an additional approximation.

Eq. (6) was obtained using the saddle points approximation for integrations over
m are governed by

the time variables t, t′. Positions of m-dependent saddle points tm, t′
the equations

S(t, t′, m) = 0 ,

∂
∂t
∂
∂t′ S(t, t′, m) = 0 ,

(16)

(17)

in which m is considered as an integer labeling the physical ATI channel. As was
mentioned above, Eq. (13) opens a possibility for integration over m that can also be
carried out using the saddle point approximation. The positions of corresponding saddle
points are governed by the following equation

∂
∂m

S(t, t′, m) = 0 ,

(18)

where one can write the partial derivative over m because the m-dependence of tm and
t′
m does not contribute due to (16), (17). Eqs. (17), (16), (18) deﬁne two instants of
time tm, t′
m at which, respectively, the electron emerges from an atom and returns back
to it, as well as the number of quanta m = meﬀ absorbed in course of the ionization.
All these three variables are, generally speaking, the complex-valued functions of the
frequency Ω = Nω of the generated harmonic. For a given N there can be several
solutions of Eqs. (16), (17), (18).

Integrating over m in Eq. (13) by the saddle method gives the following representa-

tion for the HHG amplitude

d+

d+
N meﬀ ,

(19)

N = 2 Xmeﬀ   2π

iS ′′

meﬀ!1/2

which is the major result of this Section. Comparing (19) with (6) one ﬁnds, along with
clear similarities, several distinctions. The most substantial of them originates from
diﬀerent physical meaning of the summation index in these formulas. In Eq. (6) it is
an integer labeling channels in the physical ATI spectrum. In contrast, in formula (19)
summation runs over complex-valued meﬀ set. It is natural to say that meﬀ are labels of
eﬀective channels. In order to ﬁnd the amplitude d+
N meﬀ one can use representation (7)
for d+
N m and continue the amplitudes Am µ0(Km) and BN mµ0(Km) into the complex-m
plane which can be done if they are known suﬃciently well. One more, though less
important diﬀerence, is presented by an additional square root factor in (19) that arises
from integration over m and depends on the second derivative S ′′
m of the action (15)
over m.

The advantage of eﬀective channel representation stems from the fact that only small
number of eﬀective channels (actually one or two) contributes, whereas the number of
essential real ATI channels is quite large, as discussed above. Bearing this in mind it
is worthwhile to illustrate variation of eﬀective channels labels meﬀ with N by solving
numerically set of equations (17), (16), (18) for some particular case [10]. Fig. 1 shows
two important solutions meﬀ(N) that move along trajectories in the complex-m plane
as N varies. The overall picture comprises a characteristic cross-like pattern. For small
N the trajectories are close to the real axis and are well separated. They approach each
other as N increases and almost ”collide” at some particular critical value N = Nc.
For larger N, N > Nc, the trajectories start to move almost perpendicular to the real-
m axis and rapidly acquire large imaginary parts. It can be demonstrated that large
Im(meﬀ ) lead to suppression of the HHG process. Therefore the critical Nc marks the
beginning of the cutoﬀ region for HHG. As shown in Ref. [10], approximate analytical
solution of Eqs. (17), (16), (18) shows that the critical value Nc is equal to

Nc ω = |Ea| + 3.1731 Up ,

(20)

in agreement with the well known result of Refs. [3, 4, 8, 22].

In order to ﬁnd simple physical interpretation for the eﬀective channels, let us note
that Eqs. (16), (17), (18) may be considered as classical equations of motion in the laser
ﬁeld. They deﬁne the classical trajectories along which the electron ﬁrst goes away from
the atom, and then returns back accumulating during this motion energy from the laser
ﬁeld that is necessary for HG. This physical picture agrees with the atomic antenna
concept discussed in Section 1. It also comes in line with the Corcum model [2] based

Figure 1: Trajectories of the eﬀective channel labels meﬀ (N ) in the complex m-plane for
laser frequency ω = 0.0043a.u., intensity I = 1011 W/cm2 and varying harmonic order N
for HHG by H− ion. Positions of two eﬀective channel labels for odd integer N are denoted
respectively by circles and diamonds.

entirely on the classical trajectories. Even more close relation can be found with the
approach of Lewenstein et al [8], which uses the saddle point method to integrate over
the momenta p in formula (4).

Eqs. (6) and (19) provide two diﬀerent ways to describe the atomic antenna concept,
either in terms of real physical channels in the intermediate ATI spectrum, or by using
the eﬀective channels for the intermediate state. Each approach has its advantages
which can be beneﬁcial for diﬀerent aspects of HHG problem. Importantly, the above
discussion ensures identity of the two formulas since (19) was derived directly from (6).

4 Photoionization and recombination

Eq. (6) shows that the process of HHG is intimately related to ionization and LAR.
This fact makes the latter processes very interesting from the perspective of the atomic
antenna concept, in addition to their well known importance as the basic events in the
laser-matter interaction. This Section describes the recent progress in the theory of
these two ”elementary” phenomena. Consider ﬁrst the multiphoton ionization. Adopt-
ing the Keldysh-type approach which neglects the ﬁeld of the atomic core in the ﬁnal
state one can present the amplitude of the ionization in the following form

Am(pm) =

1

T Z T

0

hφpm(t) | V (t) | φa(t)i ,

(21)

where φp(t) = φp(r, t) is the Volkov wave function (5) and pm satisﬁes the energy
conservation law

Ea + m ω =

p2

m + Up .

(22)

1
2

Fast variation of the phase of the integrand in (21) allows one to use the saddle-point
approach for integration over the time t. This approximation, ﬁrst proposed by Keldysh
[11], was developed in detail in Refs. [12, 13, 14]. Using this scheme one presents the

Figure 2: Detachment of H− ion in bichromatic ﬁeld with the frequencies ω = 0.0043
a.u. and 3ω and intensities I1 = 1010W/cm2 and I2 = 109W/cm2 respectively. Diﬀerential
detachment rate (in units 10−8a.u.) as a function of the electron emission angle θ is shown
for various values of the ﬁeld phase diﬀerence ϕ as indicated in the plots. Open symbols show
results of calculations of [19] (in the ϕ = ± 1
2 π plot the open circles show the results for ϕ = 1
2 π
and open triangles these for ϕ = − 1
2 π). Solid curves show results of the adiabatic theory [18]
(which coincide for ϕ = 1
2 π). Left - the ﬁrst ATD peak, corresponding to
absorption of n = 8 photons of frequency ω. Right - the third ATD peak, corresponding to
absorption of n = 10 photons of frequency ω.

2 π and ϕ = − 1

photoionization amplitude as

Am(pm) = Xµ

Amµ(pm) ,

(23)

where summation runs over essential saddle points labeled by subscript µ. Note that
in Eq. (6), relating the ionization problem with HG, it is suﬃcient to take into account
the amplitude which arises from only one saddle point (of two) labeled as µ0; another
saddle point gives the same contribution that produces a factor 2.

The technique described above was reﬁned in Refs. [15, 16]. In the pioneer publi-
cations [11, 12, 13, 14] the momentum p of the ionized electron was treated as a small
quantity, and all essential functions were expanded in powers of p/κ. This approxima-
tion restricted the applicability of the approach, since for high channels in ATI spectrum
the momentum is not small. Refs. [15, 16] demonstrated that the technique can be mod-
iﬁed to include large electron momenta as well. Importantly, this modiﬁcation retains
simplicity and clear physical nature of the Keldysh approach.

One can anticipate that the Keldysh-type methods should produce reliable results
for photodetachment of negative ions, where the detached electron is inﬂuenced neg-

ligibly by the Coulomb ﬁeld of the residual atomic particle. Due to this reason the
photodetachment was in the focus of attention of Refs. [15, 16] which compared the re-
sults of improved Keldysh approximation with a variety of numerical and experimental
data available for negative ions. Refs. [17, 18] continued this study and extended it to
the case of the two-color laser ﬁeld. Detailed description of all results obtained in these
works would bring us too far away from the main topic of this paper. However, it is
important to mention that the overall accuracy of the modiﬁed Keldysh approximation
proves be very high. It closely reproduces results of other, much more sophisticated
methods for total probabilities of detachment as well as for spectral and angular distri-
butions of photoelectrons both for the weak and strong ﬁeld regimes (i.e., for any value
of the Keldysh parameter γ = κω/F ). An example of photodetachment of the H− in
bichromatic laser ﬁeld with the frequencies ω = 0.0043 a.u. and 3ω shown in Fig. 2
illustrates this point.

Let us now turn our attention to the other relevant problem, laser-assisted photo
recombination (LAR). Consider the electron-atom impact in a laser ﬁeld which results
in creation of a negative ion and HG. Since the system can acquire energy from the laser
ﬁeld due to absorption of several laser quanta, the emitted harmonics should exhibit
the equidistant spectral distribution. Strange enough, this important process was not
studied theoretically until two recent almost simultaneous publications [20, 21].

The amplitude of the photorecombination can be written as

Cm(p) =

1

T Z T

0

hφa(t) | exp(iΩt) U |φp(t)i .

(24)

Here U = ǫ · r describes the potential which is responsible for the harmonic production,
and Ω is the energy of the generated harmonic which satisﬁes the energy conservation
constraint

Ω =

+ Up + |Ea| + m ω ,

(25)

p2
2

in which m is the number of laser photons absorbed during recombination. The wave
function of the electron in the continuum in Eq. (24) can be described by the Volkov
wave function, similarly to the Keldysh-type approach to photoionization. Comparing
the amplitudes (24) and (21) one observes their close similarity. This fact allows one
to develop the theory on the basis of formula (24) along the lines described above for
the ionization problem. In particular, one can use the saddle-point approximation for
integration over the time variable in (24).

This approach, suggested in Ref. [20], is supplemented in the cited paper by sev-
eral numerical examples. One of them, shown in Fig. 3, depicts the cross section of
recombination on hydrogen atom in a laser ﬁeld with ω = 0.0043 a.u. and the intensity
I = 1011 W/cm2 versus the energy of the emitted high harmonic. Since this is the ﬁrst
work in the ﬁeld we could not compare our results with other calculations. Bearing
in mind that the recombination process has similarities with the ionization problem,
where similar approach works well one can expect reliable results in the recombination
problem as well.

Figure 3:
Cross section σm(p) for laser-assisted recombination of the electron with the
energy Eel = 10 eV into the bound state in H− ion [20]. The results are shown for the laser
ﬁeld with the frequency ω = 0.0043 a.u. and the intensity I = 1011 W/cm2. The symbols are
joined by lines to help the eye.

5 Quantitative illustrations for HHG

To illustrate the applicability of the two methods, the factorization technique and the
method of eﬀective channels, consider an example of HHG by hydrogen negative ion
in a laser ﬁeld with ω = 0.0043 a.u. . Using the factorization procedure one needs
ﬁrst to calculate the amplitudes of ATI and LAR, which can be done by the technique
discussed in Sections 4. After that employing (6) one ﬁnds the amplitude of HHG, and
from (11) the HHG rates. The results are presented in Fig. 4.

It is important to note a strong interference of contributions coming from diﬀer-
ent intermediate channels m. In the plateau region it is responsible for an oscillatory
pattern, and becomes even more important in the cutoﬀ region, where a contribution
of any single channel drastically exceeds the results of an accurate summation over
a large number of channels.
In order to apply the technique based on the eﬀective
channels one needs to calculate the ”elementary” amplitudes for the complex-valued
number meﬀ of quanta absorbed on the ﬁrst step of three-step process. This can be
done by the approach described in Section 3, because it relies on analytical methods
for calculation of these amplitudes that remain valid for a complex-valued m. Taking
the eﬀective channels (presented in Fig. 1 for I = 1011 W/cm2), calculating for them
the ”elementary” amplitudes and applying formula (19), we ﬁnd the rates presented
in Fig. 4. If one takes into account in the summation (19) over meﬀ a single eﬀective
channel, shown by diamonds in Fig. 1, then the cutoﬀ region is nicely described, as well
as the overall pattern in the plateau domain. However such one-saddle-point approxi-
mation does not reproduce structures in the N-dependence of HG rates. Taking into
account the two eﬀective channels, shown by diamonds and circles in Fig. 1 improves
the results for the rates in the plateau domain by producing appropriate structures in
the N-dependence. Remarkably, this two-saddle-point calculation gives correct posi-
tions of minima and maxima in the rate N-dependence, albeit the magnitudes of the
rate variation is reproduced somewhat worse; for instance the depth of the minimum
at N = 17 is quite strongly overestimated.

Figure 4: Harmonic generation rates (11) (in sec−1) for H− ion in the laser ﬁeld with the
frequency ω = 0.0043 a.u. and various values of intensity I as indicated in the plots. Closed
circles - results obtained by Becker et al [22], open circles - calculations [6, 7] based on factor-
ization procedure and performing numerical summation (6) over contributions of diﬀerent ATI
channels, open diamonds – calculations of Ref. [20] based on the eﬀective channels approach
(19) with a single eﬀective channel meﬀ (N ) taken into account (namely, the eﬀective channels
shown by diamonds in Fig. 1); open squares – same but taking into account two saddle points
mc(N ) (namely, the eﬀective channels shown by diamonds and circles in Fig. 1). The symbols
are joined by lines to help the eye.

Fig. 4 shows good agreement of the approaches based on the factorization technique
and on the eﬀective channels, which both are in accord with the results of Ref. [22].
This agreement holds both for multiphoton regime (left part of Fig. 4), as well as in
the tunneling regime (right part of Fig. 4).

6 Above-Threshold Ionization in high channels

The methods discussed in Sections 2, 3 can be applied to a number of other multiphoton
problems. To illustrate this point consider the factorization technique for ATI. The
ionization amplitude An(pn) in the Keldysh-type approximation, considered in (21),
neglects interaction of the released electron with the core. Let A(1)
n (pn) be a correction
that takes this interaction into account. In this notation the total amplitude of ATI
with absorption of n photons is Atot
n (pn). Using the approach of
Ref. [5] we ﬁnd the following relation

n (pn) = An(pn) + A(1)

A(1)

n (pn) = Xm Xµ Xσ=±1

Am(σKm)

1

Rmµ

f B(pn, σKm) ,

(26)

which presents the suﬃciently complicated correction A(1)
n (pn) in terms of two ”elemen-
tary” amplitudes Am(Km) and f B(p, K). The later one describes the electron-atom
impact in the laser ﬁeld in the Born approximation. This scattering can be named
quasielastic, since the atom remains in the same state, but the electron momentum is
changed K → p both in direction and absolute value. Summation over µ in formula
(26) reﬂects the fact that the electron emission into the continuum takes place at two

Figure 5: Diﬀerential above-threshold detachment rates wn(θ). Left - the rates versus the
number n of absorbed photons for ﬁxed value of electron ejection angle θ. Right - same as
functions of θ for ﬁxed n. An H− ion is irradiated by the laser wave with frequency ω = 0.0043
a.u. and intensity I = 5 × 1010W/cm2. The minimum number of photons necessary for
ionization is nmin = 11. Curves - present calculation with account of rescattering; closed circles
- Keldysh-type approximation of [15]. The arrow indicates the plateau cutoﬀ as predicted by
classical theory [24].

moments of time tmµ (µ = 1, 2) per laser period. The electron return to the atom is
ensured only if the electron momentum is parallel (for one value of µ) or antiparallel
(for another µ) to the ﬁeld, see details in Ref. [5]. This fact is taken into account by a
summation index σ = ±1 in (26).

Eq. (26) is obtained via application of the factorization technique to ATI. It has
a transparent physical meaning. Ionization with absorption of n photons needs that
ﬁrst m quanta are absorbed by an atom removing the electron from an atom into the
continuum state with momentum ±Km. The collision of this electron with the atom
(often referred to as rescattering) results in absorption of additional n − m quanta
and transition of the electron into a state with momentum pn. All intermediate ATI
channels labeled by index m contribute coherently. This physical picture of ATI agrees
with the atomic antenna concept, as was ﬁrst discussed in [1].

We applied (26) to calculation of Above Threshold Detachment (ATD) from H− ion.
Fig. 5 shows the results which clearly indicate that the contribution of the process (26)
to the angular distributions of ATD spectra is dominating for higher ATD channels
while for low channels rescattering eﬀects are small .

7 Eikonal approach to the Coulomb ﬁeld

The Keldysh-type approximation for laser induced ionization, as described in Section
4, discards interaction of receding photoelectrons with the atomic core. The most
signiﬁcant part of this interaction arises due to the Coulomb ﬁeld of the core. That is
why a number of numerical applications considered above is carried out for negative ions,
where the core is neutral. However, for the multiphoton processes with neutral atoms,
the Coulomb forces between the active electron and the residual positive ion become
operative. This interaction was taken into account ﬁrst in Ref. [12] in the quasistatic

limit of the small Keldysh parameter γ = κω/F ≪ 1. A very simple relation was
obtained between the photoionization rate wC for the electron bound by a potential
with the Coulomb ﬁeld produced by a core charge Z and its counterpart wsr for the
electron with the same binding energy κ2/2 but bound by short range forces:

wC =   2κ2

F !2Z/κ

wsr .

(27)

This result means that for conventional conditions the presence of the Coulomb ﬁeld
enhances the rates by several orders of magnitude. It is remarkable that the relation
(27) holds in fact for arbitrary value of the Keldysh parameter, both in the multiphoton
and tunneling region, as was established in a more elaborate theory by Perelomov and
Popov [14]. This result agrees well with experimental data for the total rates [23].

The theory of Perelomov and Popov is restricted to ejection of low-energy electrons.
It is usually anticipated that these electrons give principal contribution to the total
rates summed over all ATI channels as well as over ejection angles. The current exper-
iments, however, are able to select an individual ATI channel even for a large number
of absorbed quanta. Both energy and angular distributions of these electrons mani-
fest some fascinating features which are the object of interest in modern experiment
and theory. This fact prompts to develop a theory which, reproducing the Perelomov-
Popov results for low electron energy, could also describe high-energy photoelectrons.
The antenna-type phenomena considered in this paper provide an additional inspira-
tion for this study. The ionization amplitude in Eqs. (6), (26) should be summed over
the number m of quanta absorbed that should be large enough. This makes the elec-
tron momentum in the intermediate ATI channels to be also large. Therefore we need
to know how the Coulomb ﬁeld aﬀects the amplitudes for large momenta.
In order
to address this issue we develop the eikonal approach for this problem. It presents a
simpliﬁed version of the semiclassical approximation, that assumes that the Coulomb
ﬁeld does not produce signiﬁcant distortions of classical trajectories describing electron
propagation in the continuum (i.e., the electron wiggling motion in the laser ﬁeld). The

Coulomb ﬁeld comes into the picture through its contribution to the action R t(Z/r)dt

calculated along the classical trajectories discussed. Within the semiclassical approx-
imation the action plays a role of the wave function phase. It is important that the
Coulomb ﬁeld can produce large contribution to the action while its distortion of the
trajectories can remain unsubstantial Calculating the action, one is able to construct
the semiclassical wave function for the released electron, and ﬁnd with its help the ion-
ization amplitude. If we totally neglect in this scheme the Coulomb ﬁeld putting Z = 0,
the eikonal wave function simpliﬁes to be the Volkov function, and we return to the
Keldysh-type approximation. An important veriﬁcation of our eikonal approach pro-
vides the limit of low photoelectron energy where we reproduce the Perelomov-Popov
result (27). Fig. 6 presents a quantitative example which illustrates importance of the
Coulomb interaction.

8 Conclusions

Atomic antenna gives a clear physical idea how the complicated multiphoton processes
are operative. Absorption of large number of quanta from the laser ﬁeld needs that

Figure 6: Angle-resolved photoionization rates wn(θ) for four lowest open ATI channels
labeled by a number of absorbed photons n (n = 11 corresponds to the lowest open ATI
channel). Hydrogen atom is illuminated by the laser wave with frequency ω = 2 eV and
intensity I = 1014W/cm2; solid curves - eikonal theory, dashed curves - the Perelomov-Popov
theory [14] (27).

one of the atomic electrons is at ﬁrst released from an atom. After that, propagating
in the core vicinity, the electron accumulates high energy from the laser ﬁeld and,
returning to the atomic core, transfers this energy into other channels such as HHG,
ATI or others. Importantly, this physical picture is implemented in a simple and reliable
formalism. We discussed two convenient ways to present the theory. One of them,
called the factorization technique, is presented by Eqs. (6), (26) for the cases of HHG
and ATI. In this approach the amplitude of a complicated process is expressed via the
physical amplitudes of more simple, ”elementary” processes. Another scheme, called
the eﬀective channels method, is based on Eq. (19) for HHG. The eﬀective channels are
closely related to the classical trajectories, that makes them convenient for qualitative,
as well as numerical studies. We demonstrated an equivalence of the two approaches.
Applications of both formalisms need calculation of the ”elementary” amplitudes.
This can be achieved by using the modiﬁed Keldysh-type approach which very ac-
curately reproduces data for photodetachment, and, hopefully, for recombination and
electron-atom scattering in the laser ﬁeld as well. The Coulomb ﬁeld of the atomic core
can be taken into account within eikonal approximation. Reliability of the theoretical
approaches is demonstrated by quantitative applications.

References

[1] M. Yu. Kuchiev, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 45, 319 (1987) [JETP Letters 45,

404 (1987)].

[2] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).

[3] J. L. Krause, K. J. Schafer, and K. C. Kulander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3535 (1992).

[4] K. C. Kulander, K. J. Schafer, and J. L. Krause, in Super-Intense Laser-Atom
Physics, Vol. 316 of NATO Advanced Study Institute, Series B: Physics, edited by
B. Piraux et al (Plenum, New York, 1993), p. 95.

[5] M. Yu. Kuchiev, J. Phys. B 28, 5093 (1995).

[6] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, J. Phys. B 32, L189 (1999).

[7] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3111 (1999).

[8] M. Lewenstein, Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier, and P. B. Corkum, Phys.

Rev. A 49, 2117 (1994).

[9] M. Lewenstein, P. Salli`ers, and A. L’Huillier, Phys. Rev. A 52, 4747 (1995).

[10] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, http://xxx.lanl.gov/physics/0007016.
[11] L. V. Keldysh, Zh.´Eksp.Teor.Fiz.47, 1945 (1964) [Sov.Phys.JETP 20, 1307 (1965)].
[12] A. M. Perelomov, V. S. Popov, and M. V. Terent’ev, Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 50, 1393

(1966) [Sov. Phys.-JETP 23, 924 (1966)].

[13] A. M. Perelomov, V. S. Popov, and M. V. Terent’ev, Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 51, 309

(1966) [Sov. Phys.-JETP 24, 207 (1967)].

[14] A. M. Perelomov and V. S. Popov, Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 52, 514 (1967) [Sov.

Phys.-JETP 25, 336 (1967)].

[15] G. F. Gribakin, M. Yu. Kuchiev, Phys. Rev. A 55, 3760 (1997).

[16] G. F. Gribakin, M. Yu. Kuchiev, J. Phys. B 30, L657 (1997).

[17] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, J. Phys. B 31, 2525 (1998).

[18] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, Phys. Rev. A 59, 2844 (1999).

[19] D. A. Telnov, J. Wang, and S. I. Chu, Phys. Rev. A 51, 4797 (1995).

[20] M. Yu. Kuchiev and V. N. Ostrovsky, Phys. Rev. A 61, 033414 (2000).

[21] A. Jaro´n, J. Z. Kami´nsky, and F. Ehlotzky, Phys. Rev. A 61, 023404 (2000).

[22] W. Becker, S. Long, and J. K. McIver, Phys. Rev. A 50, 1540 (1994).

[23] S. F. J. Larochelle, A. Talebpour, and S. L. Chin, J. Phys. B 31, 1215 (1998).

[24] G. G. Paulus, W. Becker, W. Nicklich, and H. Walter, J. Phys. B 27, L703 (1994).

