0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
2
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
2
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LETTER TO THE EDITOR

A quasi classical approach to fully diﬀerential
ionization cross sections

Tiham´er Geyer† and Jan M Rost‡
†– Theoretical Quantum Dynamics – Fakult¨at f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at Freiburg,
Hermann–Herder–Str. 3, D–79104 Freiburg, Germany
‡Max–Planck–Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, N¨othnitzer Str. 38,
D–01187 Dresden, Germany

Abstract. A classical approximation to time dependent quantum mechanical
scattering in the Møller formalism is presented. Numerically, our approach is
similar to a standard Classical–Trajectory–Monte–Carlo calculation. Conceptu-
ally, however, our formulation allows one to release the restriction to stationary
initial distributions. This is achieved by a classical forward–backward propagation
technique. As a ﬁrst application and for comparison with experiment we present
fully diﬀerential cross sections for electron impact ionization of atomic hydrogen
in the Erhardt geometry.

PACS numbers: 34.80D, 03.65.Sq, 34.10+x

Classical models and approximations are frequently used for atomic and molecular
problems, despite their inherent quantum nature. One of the reasons is that our
intuitive understanding is mainly based on classical terms and pictures by which
we are surrounded in every day life. Another reason for not doing (fully) quantum
mechanical calculations is the complexity of a problem: fully diﬀerential cross sections
in higher dimensional atomic systems, e.g., often require a numerical eﬀort still beyond
present computing power. Only recently the quantum mechanical Coulomb three–
body scattering problem was solved numerically [1, 2].

On the other hand, a remarkably successful classical approach to collisional atomic
problems has been developed over the years, the so called Classical–Trajectory–Monte–
Carlo method (CTMC). It was introduced as a purely classical model based on a
“planetary atom” with a major axis of two meters (!) [3]. This model has produced
reasonable results for total or energy diﬀerential ionization cross sections on atomic
hydrogen [4, 5] and for other few–body Coulomb collision processes [6].

Attempts to reduce the limitation of this classical model aimed at changing
the description of the initial state for the hydrogen atom from a microcanonical
distribution to one, that is closer to the quantum density [7, 8]. Another idea was
to introduce additional ad hoc stabilisation potentials in order to be able to treat
multi–electron targets [9]. However, all attempts took as a starting point not the
quantum problem but the previously formulated classical model. Hence, the proposed
amendments were accompanied by inconsistencies or the need of ”ﬁt parameters”
determined from cross sections. In the end, one must say that it is up to now not
possible to describe higher diﬀerential cross sections or targets with more than one
active electron consistently in a classical collision framework.

Letter to the Editor

2

To achieve progress in this situation we decided to go one step backwards and
start with a time dependent quantum mechanical scattering formalism. By following
the approximations which lead to the classical description, i.e. the CTMC method, we
can identify the source and nature of deviations between the classical and the quantum
result which serve as a guide to improve the classical description to a quasi–classical
approximation.

We divide the problem into three logically separate steps: (1) preparation of
the initial state before the collision, (2) propagation in time, and (3), extraction of
the cross section. For a consistent quasiclassical picture each of these steps has to be
approximated in the same way. To keep the derivation transparent, we will concentrate
on electron impact ionization of one active target electron in the following.

Step (1): The initial wave function for the collision problem is translated ﬁrst
into a quantum phase space distribution by the Wigner transformation [10]. The
resulting Wigner distribution is reduced to a classical distribution w(p, q) which can be
propagated classically in phase space by taking the usual limit ¯h → 0. The diﬀerence
to an a priori classical approach is the use and interpretation of negative parts of the
distribution: Viewed as the ¯h → 0 limit of a quantum problem they contribute to
the observables in the same way as the positive parts since they do not need to be
interpreted as weights for real paths of classical particles. Yet, there arise additional
problems when using this type of general initial phase space distributions in the usual
classical framework: Most of them are not stationary under classical propagation, their
Poisson bracket with the Hamilton function does not vanish, {H, w} 6= 0. Hence,
the initial target distribution will look very diﬀerent at the time the projectile has
approached and the collision actually happens.

Step (2): The formulation of the propagation is crucial since it must resolve
the problem of the non–stationary classical initial distribution, as described above.
Traditionally, the time dependent scattering is described by calculating the transition
amplitude between initial and ﬁnal state through the S–matrix, which is in turn related
to the t–matrix describing directly the cross section, see, e.g., [11]. In a simpliﬁed
version where the asymptotic initial and ﬁnal states are eigenstates of the asymptotic
Hamiltonians H (i)

one normally writes for the transition amplitude

0 and H (f )
0
Sf i = lim
t→∞

hf |U (t)|ii

(1)

where U (t) = exp[−iHt] denotes propagation with the full Hamiltonian. By a Wigner
transform the quantum time evolution operator U (t) can be directly transformed with
the help of the quantum Liouville operator Lq, which reduces to the classical Liouville
operator Lc in the limit ¯h → 0 [12]. The latter describes the evolution of a phase
space distribution w(r, p, t) according to the Poisson bracket

∂tw = {H, w} ≡ −iLcw

(2)

in analogy to the quantum evolution of the density matrix ρ generated by the
commutator,

∂tρ = −i[H, ρ].

(3)

Hence, we could directly use the translation of (1) to classical mechanics via the
Liouville operator. In connection with the microcanonical initial state distribution this
is indeed equivalent to the CTMC formulation [13]. However, using non–stationary
initial state distributions is inconsistent with the reduced quantum description of (1)

Letter to the Editor

3

which relies on the fact that the asymptotic states are eigenstates of U0 and therefore
stationary. Instead we have to go back to the full scattering formulation

where

Sf i = hf |Ω†

−Ω+|ii,

Ω∓ = lim

t→±∞

U †(t) U0(t)

(4)

(5)

are the Møller operators. The meaning of Ω+, e.g., is to propagate backwards with
U0(t) using the asymptotic Hamiltonian H i
0 without the projectile–target interaction
and then forward again under the full Hamiltonian with U (t). Again, with the help of
the Liouville operator we can translate the Møller operators to their classical analogue,
thereby obtaining a prescription how to propagate a non–stationary initial phase space
distributions wi(γ), where γ = (~p1, ~q1, ~p2, ~q2) is a point in the 12-dimensional phase
space:

wf = lim

t→+∞

lim

t′→−∞

e−iLf

c teiLc(t−t′)eiLi
ct′

wi ≡ Kwi .

(6)

The diﬀerence to (1) are the explicit propagations under Lf

c in the
initial and ﬁnal channel (which need not be the same). The meaning of (6) becomes
very transparent if we insert a discretized distribution, which is used in the actual

c and Li

calculations, wi(γ) = Pn wnδ12(γ − γi
wf (γ) = Kwi = Xn

wnδ12(γ − γf
n)

n). The ﬁnal distribution reads

(7)

n emerges from γi
0, then with H, and eventually with H f

where each phase space point γf
n through solving successively
Hamilton’s equations, ﬁrst with H i
0 . With
this propagation scheme a non–stationary initial distribution will spread when being
propagated backwards with the asymptotic Li
c. However, it will be refocused under the
following forward propagation with Lc. Hence, when the actual collision happens for
t ≈ 0 the original target distribution is restored, slightly polarized by the approaching
projectile.

Hence, there is no more need for the initial distribution to be classically stationary.
We are able to use any phase space distribution as a target in our quasi classical
approach. This also includes unstable multi–electron targets, e.g., classical helium.

Step (3): Before we come to the actual evaluation we have to formulate the
cross section such that it can make full use of the non-stationary initial phase space
distribution wi(~p1, ~q1), where “1” refers to the target electron. Without modiﬁcation
the total energy E of the ﬁnal state forces by energy conservation for each classical
trajectory only those parts of the initial phase space distribution to contribute to the
cross section which have the same energy E. However, this would bring us essentially
back to the microcanonical description. In order to make the entire non-stationary
initial state distribution “visible” to the collision process, we use the energy transfer
¯E1 = E(f )
itself as a diﬀerential
measure. Of course, as long as the initial state is on the energy shell with well deﬁned
energy E = E(i)
the new deﬁnition coincides with the usual expression for the
cross section,

to the target electron rather than its energy E(f )

1 + E(i)

1 −E(i)

1

1

2

d5σ

dΩ1dΩ2dE1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)E

=

d5σ

dΩ1dΩ2d ¯E1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)E

,

(8)

where dΩi are the diﬀerentials for the solid angles of the two electrons, respectively.

Letter to the Editor

4

To extract this cross section we have to evaluate the phase space integral

d5σ

dΩ1dΩ2d ¯E1

= Z dx2 dy2 d~p1 d~q1

2

Yi=1

δ(Ω(f )

i − Ωi)δ( ¯E(f )

1 − ¯E1)wi , (9)

where the integration is over the initial state variables, namely the impact parameter
area dx2 dy2 and the phase space of the (bound) target electron d~p1d~q1, with initial
distribution wi(~p1, ~q1, x2, y2). The propagated angles Ωf
i of the electrons as well as the
energy transfer ¯Ef
1 have to coincide with the desired values Ωi and ¯E1 to contribute to
the cross section (9) which is a generalization of the one derived in [14], e.g., where the
initial bound state was assumed to live on a torus, i.e., wi(~p1, ~q1) = δ(~I(~p1, ~q1) − ~I0)
with a well deﬁned multidimensional action ~I0.

Finally, we have to respect the Pauli principle for the two identical electrons.
Formally, this can be done easily in the Wigner transform for the two ionized
electrons in the ﬁnal state.
In the limit ¯h = 0 one is left with the usual classical
symmetrization, i.e., an interchange of indices. To keep the notation simple we have
omitted symmetrization in the outlined derivation, however, it is included in the actual
computation which is carried out by applying standard CTMC techniques to evaluate
(9).

microcan.

Ei=250eV
Eb=5eV   J

a=8°

Wigner

4

2

0

4

2

0

b

90

0
-90
-180
Fully diﬀerential cross section in Ehrhardt geometry: Ein=
Figure 1.
250eV, Eb= 5eV and θa= 80: comparison of measurements of Erhardt et al
to quasiclassical calculations with (a), the microcanonical distribution (standard
CTMC), and (b) with the Wigner distribution. Error bars indicate the statistical
error of the Monte Carlo calculations. The theoretical data has been scaled by
about 20% to reproduce the correct total ionization cross section at 250 eV. For
the negative parts in the Wigner cross section see text.

180

As a ﬁrst application we discuss fully diﬀerential

for atomic hydrogen comparing three data sets:

ionization cross sections
a calculation with the

J
Letter to the Editor

5

microcan.

Ei=54.4eV
Eb=5eV   J

a=23°

Wigner

0.8

0.4

0

0.8

0.4

0

Figure 2. Same as in Figure 1, but for Ein= 54.4eV, Eb= 5eV and θa= 230 and
measurements (circles) by R¨oder et al [16].

b

90

180

-180

-90

0

standard microcanonical distribution (CTMC), one with the non–stationary Wigner
distribution in our quasi classical framework and experimental data at impact energies
of 250eV (ﬁg. 1) and 54.4eV (ﬁg. 2), respectively.

For each impact energy about 108 trajectories have been calculated. The cross
section at 250 eV for the Wigner distribution still exhibits negative parts, indicating
that this cross section is not yet fully converged. This is not surprising if one takes
into account that the fraction of phase space of the ﬁnal state is so small with the
chosen bin sizes for energies and angles, that only between 100 and 300 events ﬁnally
contribute to the shown cross sections. However, a considerable advantage of the
present method is that a sampling of 108 trajectories contains the complete scattering
information, not just one speciﬁc diﬀerential cross section.

The ﬁgures show, that the microcanonical distribution, i.e. standard CTMC, is
not able to reproduce the binary peak [17], whereas with the Wigner distribution it is
reproduced fairly well for 250eV and rather well for 54.4eV impact energy. Keeping
in mind that in contrast to the microcanonical distribution the Wigner distribution
has the correct probability densities in momentum and conﬁguration space, one can
conclude, that at least for energies between 50 and 250 eV the diﬀerential cross sections
”image” the initial phase space distribution. The present approach is still a classical
approximation and cannot reproduce quantum eﬀects. Therefore, features in the cross
section, for which coherence is crucial are represented purely or not at all.

To summarize, we have shown, that a consequent classical approximation to a
quantum system can give much better results compared to those from an a priori
classical model, though both approaches are realized numerically in almost the same
way. However, the main diﬀerence is conceptual:
in the usual classical limit each

J
Letter to the Editor

6

individual trajectory represents that of an electron obeying the classical equations of
motion, whereas in our classical approximation only the entire phase space distribution
is meaningful and individual trajectories are only discretized points of the distribution
evolving in time. Hence, there is no problem to deal with ”negative probabilities” in
the initial distribution, since we regard them not as probabilities but only as weights
of the integration which, of course, may be negative.

However, the use of non-stationary distributions like the Wigner distribution as
an initial state implies additional diﬃculties for a scattering description which we
have overcome by using a forward-backward propagation scheme akin to the quantum
Møller formalism and by a reformulation of the energy diﬀerential cross section in
terms of the energy transfer during the ionization process. With these modiﬁcations
all the tools of the standard CTMC technique can be applied straightforwardly.

Moreover, our approach can be in principle generalized to multi–electron targets
since we generate our initial phase space distribution from a quantum wave function
and we know how to deal with non–stationary initial distributions.

Financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft within the SFB 276

at the University Freiburg is gratefully acknowledged.

References

[1] I. Bray, J. Phys. B 33 (1999) 581
[2] T. N. Rescigno etal., Science 286 (1999) 2474
[3] R. Abrines and I. C. Percival, Proc. Phys. Soc. 88 (1966) 861
[4] R. Abrines etal., Proc. Phys. Soc. 89 (1966) 515
[5] R. E. Olson and A. Salop, Phys. Rev. A 16 (1977) 531
[6] D. R. Schultz etal., J. Phys. B 25 (1992) 4601
[7] D. J. W. Hardie and R. E. Olson, J. Phys. B 16 (1983) 1983
[8] D. Eichenauer etal., J. Phys. B 14 (1981) 3929
[9] D. Zajfman and D. Maor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 (1986) 320

[10] E. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 40 (1932) 749
[11] J. R. Taylor, Scattering theory, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1972
[12] E. J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 65 (1976) 1289
[13] S. Keller etal., J. Phys. B 26 (1993) L737
[14] J. M. Rost, Phys. Rep. 297 (1998) 271
[15] H. Ehrhardt etal., Phys. Lett. 110A (1985) 92
[16] J. R¨oder etal., Phys. Rev. A 53 (1996) 225
[17] J. S. Briggs, Comments At. Mol. Phys. 23 (1989) 155

