Transition from reﬂection to sticking in ultracold atom-surface scattering

Areez Mody, John Doyle and Eric J. Heller

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

(August 2000)

0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
7
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
6
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In paper I [1] we showed that under very general circum-
stances, atoms approaching a surface will not stick as its in-
coming energy approaches zero. This is true of either warm
or cold surfaces. Here we explore the transition region from
non sticking to sticking as energy is increased. The key to un-
derstanding the transition region is the WKB approximation
and the nature of its breakdown. Simple rules for understand-
ing the rollover to higher energy, post-threshold behavior, in-
cluding analytical formulae for some asymptotic forms of the
attractive potential are presented. We discuss a practical ex-
ample of atom-surface pair in various substrate geometries.
We also discuss the case of low energy scattering from clus-
ters.

I. INTRODUCTION

The problem of sticking of atoms to surfaces at very
low collision velocities has a long history and has met
with some controversy. The issue goes back to the early
distorted wave Born approximation results of Lennard-
Jones [3], who obtained the threshold law sticking prob-
ability going as k in the limit of low velocities. This
paper is a companion to paper I [1], wherein we put the
problem on a ﬁrmer theoretical foundation. We showed
(non-perturbatively) that in an ultracold collision a sim-
plistic one-body view of things is essentially correct even
if the number of internal degrees of freedom is very large.
We concluded that approaching atoms will not stick to
surfaces if the approach velocity is low enough, even if the
surface is warm. From the methods used, it is clear that
the non-sticking rule would apply to clusters as well as
semi-inﬁnite surfaces, and would also apply to projectiles
more complex than atoms.

From an experimental perspective atom-surface stick-
ing could impact the area of guiding and trapping atoms
in material wires and containers. In those applications it
is necessary to predict the velocities needed for quantum
reﬂection, sticking, and the transition regime between
them. We do so in this paper.

Above a certain temperature or kinetic energy, but still
well below the attractive well depth of the atom surface
potential, atoms will stick to surfaces with near 100 per-
cent certainty. The reason for this is simple: Classical
trajectory simulations of atom-surface collisions at low
collision velocities indicate sticking with near certainty
because the acceleration in the attractive regime is fol-
lowed by a hard collision with the wall. This almost
always leads to suﬃcient energy loss from the particle to
the surface that immediate escape is not possible. This

is true so long as the approach energy is signiﬁcantly
less than the well depth, which is itself greater than the
temperature of the surface. Therefore, the onset of quan-
tum reﬂection is heralded by a break down in the WKB
approximation - an approximation based purely on the
(sticking) classical trajectories.

Thus, there must exist a transition region between the
non-sticking regime for very low collision velocities, and
the sticking regime at higher velocities. The key to un-
derstanding the transition region is to understand the
validity of classical mechanics (WKB) as applied to the
sticking problem. The correctness of the simplistic one-
body physics of quantum reﬂection from the surface, fo-
cusses our study on the WKB approximation to the co-
ordinate normal to the surface. The entrance channel
wavefunction thus obtained may also be used as input
into the Golden Rule to study the threshold behaviour
of the inelastic cross-sections. We do this in Section VI.
The nonsticking threshold behavior we established in pa-
per I is interpreted as an extension of the validity of the
so-called Wigner threshold behavior. We are also able to
make deﬁnite predictions about the nature of the post
threshold behavior of sticking in terms of inelastic cross-
sections. (Section VI).

II. QUANTUM REFLECTION AND WKB

We consider the typical case of an attractive potential
arising out of the cumulative eﬀect of Van der Waals at-
tractions between target and incident atoms. A classical
atom would proceed straight into the interaction region
showing no sign of reﬂection, but the quantum mechan-
ical probability of being found inside is suppressed by a
factor of k (as k → 0) as compared to the classical proba-
bility (Section VI A 1 ), where k is the wave vector of the
incoming atom. This is tantamount to saying that quan-
tum mechanically the amplitude is reﬂected back without
penetrating the interaction region, analogous to the ele-
mentary case of reﬂection from the edge of a step-down
potential in one dimension while attempting to go over
the edge. A useful way to view this is to attribute the
reﬂection to the failure of the WKB approximation.

To be speciﬁc, we keep the geometry of paper I in
mind: an atom is incident from the right (x > 0) upon
the face of a slab (x = 0) that lies to the left of x = 0.
For a low incoming energy ǫ ≡ ¯h2k2/2m, a left-moving
WKB solution begun well inside the interaction region
will fail to match onto a purely left-going WKB solution
as we integrate out to large distances because the WKB

1

criterion

WKB error

0.02 nK

7

5

3

1

50

100

150

2 nK

200 nK

1060

2120

3180

4240

x

(nm)

V(x) = -2.55 K nm 3

x3

|λ′(x)| =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

¯hp′

p2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

≪ 1

(1)

for the local accuracy of the wavefunction will in general
fail to be valid in some intermediate region. For bounded
potentials that turn on abruptly for example at x = a, it
is obvious that WKB will fail near x ∼ a. For long-range
potentials such as a power law V (x) = −cn/xn it is not
immediately obvious where this region of WKB failure
lies, if it exists at all. It turns out that even in this case
it is possible to identify (for small enough ǫ) a distance
(dependent on ǫ) at which the potential ‘turns on’ and
where WKB will fail. We will show below that WKB is at
its worst (|λ′(x)| is maximized) at a distance x where the
kinetic and potential energies are approximately equal,
i.e where |V (x)| ∼ ǫ. The distance away from the slab
at which the particle is turned around - or quantum re-
ﬂected - is precisely this distance. Furthermore, one may
heuristically expect that the greater the failure of WKB,
the greater the reﬂection.

Fig. 1 shows a plot of the error term in Eq. (1) for
three diﬀerent values of the incoming energy of neon on
a semi-inﬁnite slab of SiN. The essential points to notice
are:
1) There is a greater error incurred in attempting to
apply the WKB (classical mechanics) approximation to
colder atoms than to warmer ones. Consequently, we ex-
pect that the slower the atom, the more non-classical its
behavior. In particular, slow enough atoms will be ‘quan-
tum reﬂected’ and will not stick.
2) As the incoming velocity is decreased the atom is
reﬂected at distances progressively further and further
away from the slab. This is because the interval in x
around which the WKB error is large, may be identiﬁed
as the region from which the atom is reﬂected.

A useful qualitative rule of thumb obtained in Section
III below is that the region of WKB error reaches all the
way out to those regions where the potential energy is
still roughly the same order of magnitude as the incom-
ing energy (Eq. (5)). This means that as ǫ → 0 the error
is still large where the potential energy graph looks essen-
tially ﬂat. In fact as ǫ → 0 it is easily shown that a plot
of the WKB error will show a non-uniform convergence
to a polynomial proportional to

n

2

−1

x

for all n > 0

(2)

Fig. 1 shows the case for n = 3.

III. WKB FAILURE

Diﬀerentiating p2/2m + V (x) = ǫ w.r.t. x, we have

p′ = −mV ′

p

(3)

2

Energy (nK)

FIG. 1.

The WKB error of Eq. (1) for three diﬀerent
values of the incoming energy 200, 2 and 0.02 nK, vs. the dis-
tance x nm from the slab (SiN). The long range form of the
potential −c3/x3 (c3=220 meV ˚A
) is also shown for which
the negative ‘y-axis’ is calibrated in the diﬀerent units of en-
ergy. The sticking probabilities for the three cases are ap-
proximately 1, 0.6, 0.1.

3

which when used repeatedly to eliminate p′ shows that
|p′/p2| in Eq. (1) is maximized when

p2
3m

=

V ′2
V ′′ .

For V (x) = −cn/xn, this is exactly when
n − 2 (cid:19) .
|V (x)| = ǫ(cid:18) 2(n + 1)

(4)

(5)

We discover that for n > 2 only, we have a point where
WKB is at its worst at a distance x where |V (x)| ∼ ǫ,
and moreover, that this maximum behaves like

1

c1/n
n

1

2

ǫ

−

∼

n ∼

1

1

c1/n
n k1−

2

n

(6)

max(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

p′

p2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

which for n > 2 diverges as k → 0. Note how a weaker
potential (smaller cn) is better at reﬂecting a particle at
the same energy, but allows the atom to approach closer.
Heuristically a sketch of V (x) = −cn/xn reveals why:
the weaker potential is seen to turn on more abruptly at
a point closer to x = 0, promoting an greater breakdown
of WKB there. Alternatively a simple scaling argument
with Schrodinger’s equation reveals the same trend.

The above conclusions are valid only for n > 2. For
n ≤ 2 the error term of Eq. (1) looks qualitatively dif-
ferent from that in Fig. 1. It is small at all distances
except near x = 0 where it diverges to inﬁnity, as is ev-
ident from Eq.(2). If the physical parameters are such
that this region where WKB fails very close to the slab
is never actually manifest in the long-range part of the
potential then the ‘no-reﬂection’ classical behaviour will
be valid all the way up to distances near the slab where
the atom will begin to feel the short range forces and
loose energy to the internal degrees of freedom. For such

a case then with n < 2 we believe one will not observe
quantum reﬂection.

IV. STICKING PROBABILITY

Having established that the reﬂection is caused by
a well-deﬁned localized region, we solve the one-
dimensional Schrodinger equation around this region to
accurately compute the reﬂection probability. For an at-
tractive power law potential V (x) = −cn/xn, the rele-
vant one dimensional equation is

(cid:18) d2
dx2 +

an−2
n

xn + k2(cid:19) φe(x) = 0.

(7)

φe(x) is the entrance channel wavefunction. The length
scale

an ≡ (2mcn/¯h2)

1

n−2 ,

(8)

contains all the qualitative information about the reﬂec-
tion. Its relevance is twofold. Firstly, the sticking prob-
ability for small k, behaves as

Psticking ∼ Nn k an

(9)

where Nn is a pure numeric constant (roughly of order
10 for n = 3, and of order 1 for n = 4, 5), see Ref.
[6]. Psticking may be computed numerically for any k,
and Fig.2 shows Psticking vs. kan for n = 3, 4, and 5.
Secondly, the distance at which the particle is turned
around is estimated by solving

P
sticking
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

vs. k a3
vs. k a
4
vs. k a5

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

k an

FIG. 2. Sticking probabilities for an atom incident on
surface providing a long range interaction of the form
V (x) = −cn/xn for the cases n=3,4,5. Note that the length
scale an used to compute the dimensionless kan coordinate
on the ‘x-axis’ vs. which we plot the sticking probabilities, is
diﬀerent for each n .

Fig. 3 shows the sticking probability vs. the temper-
ature of an incoming Ne atom in units of 10−9 Kelvin.
The slab is silicon-nitride (SiN). The various curves are
for the diﬀerent cases depending on whether we are we are
considering a thick or thin slab, and whether the Casimir
eﬀect is included or not. We will discuss these cases be-
low, pointing out the relevant length and energy scales
involved in deciding to label the slab as semi-inﬁnite or
thin. The mapping from the mathematically natural kan
(with n = 3 and c3 = 220 meV ˚A
) scale of Fig. 2 to the
more physical temperature scale of Fig. 3 is made using

3

(cid:16) an
x (cid:17)n

= (kan)2

(10)

for x, which is just the requirement that |V (x)| = ǫ.
Equation (9) together with equation (8) makes plain that
a smaller cn is more conducive to making quantum reﬂec-
tion happen, while Eq. (10) indicates that the turnaround
point is then necessarily closer to the surface. With these
eﬀects in mind, we look at some speciﬁc cases.

V. EXAMPLES

We examine the case of incidence on a slab which may
be treated as semi-inﬁnite, and also the case when it is a
thin ﬁlm. It is useful to ﬁrst look at these cases pretend-
ing there is no Casimir interaction, and assuming that
the short range form of the potential is everywhere valid.
Afterwards we put in the Casimir interaction. For clar-
ity we will pick a speciﬁc example of target and incident
atoms for most of our discussions, by specifying the nu-
meric values for the short range potential between the
atom and semi-inﬁnite slab, since these are most com-
prehensively tabulated in reference [4].

T ≃ [69.08 Kelvin] (cid:18) mH

matom(cid:19)3  meV ˚A

3

c3 !2

(ka3)2

(11)

where we used hǫi = (3/2)kBT to compute the tem-
perature by setting hǫi equal to the incoming energy.
mH = mass of hydrogen atom, and for our example
mNe = 20.03 mH .
All the graphs in Fig. 3 have an initial slope of 0.5
indicating the √ǫ behaviour of the sticking probabilities
once the energies are low enough to be in the Quantum
Reﬂection regime. A particular temperature at which
there is a transition to the post-threshold sticking regime,
we arbitrarily (but intuitively) deﬁne as the temperature
where the slope becomes 0.4. For the thin ﬁlm case of 10
nm in our example this temperature is 10 nK.

While the parameters in our example are fairly typi-
cal, it is clear that the cubic dependence on mass and
quadratic dependence on the c3 coeﬃcient in Eq.(11),
will make this temperature range over quite a few or-
ders of magnitude. The c3’s in Ref [4], listed in units of
meV − ˚A
for a variety of surface atom pairs, range in
values from 100 to 3000.

3

3

P
sticking
1

semi-infinite slab

(C)

semi-infinite slab

for x ≫ d, where d is the thickness of the slab. The
resulting c4 coeﬃcient equal to 3dc3 gives an a4 coeﬃcient
that can be written as

.1

.01

0.01

thin slab (10 nm)

(C)

thin slab   (10 nm)

thin slab (1 nm)

0.1

1

10.

100.

1000.

Temperature (nK)

FIG. 3. Sticking probabilities vs temperature of incident
Ne atoms on SiN. The broken line indicate the inclusion of
the very long range Casimir forces (see text). The large dot
demarcates the regions of threshold and post-threshold, using
the criterion suggested at the end of Section V

A. Semi-Inﬁnite Slab (without Casimir)

Even though c3 coeﬃcients are known both theoret-
ically and experimentally for many surface-atom pairs,
for completeness we take a moment to look at a quick
way of estimating them. This is provided by the London
formula

Vatom−atom(r) = −3
2

IAIB

IA + IB

αAαB

r6 ≡ −c6
r6 ,

(12)

which estimates the Van der Waals interaction between
any two atoms. I is the ionization potential and α the
polarizability of each atom. Then summing over all the
atoms in the semi-inﬁnite slab (thick) we get

Vslab−atom(x) = −πc6ρatoms

6

×

1

x3 ≡ −c3

x3

(13)

where ρatoms = the density of slab atoms. These esti-
mates are not very accurate, but correctly indicate the
physical quantities on which the answer depends. Ref-
erence [4] provides a useful compendium of these coef-
ﬁcients. We have used c3 = 220 ± 4 meV ˚A
for neon
atoms incident on silicon nitride from work of [5]. This
choice of c3 makes

3

a3 ≃ 212 nm

(14)

Thus the ‘semi-inﬁnite slab’ curve of Fig. 3 is the n = 3
curve of Fig. 2 scaled to temperature units using Eq.
(11).

B. Thin Slab (without Casimir)

From far enough away any slab will appear thin. The

surface-atom interaction will behave like

a4 =r 2m

¯h2 3dc3 = a3(cid:20) 3d

a3(cid:21)(1/2)

.

(16)

For macroscopic values of d(≫ a3) then, it is only for
vanishingly small incident energies that the ﬁniteness of
the slab becomes apparent. For any macroscopic d this
will be physically irrelevant. For microscopic d(≪ a3)
however, this window in energy over which the thinness of
the slab makes an appreciable diﬀerence can be larger and
even prevail for all energies. To continue our illustrative
example we pick the microscopic value of d = 10 nm.
This makes a4 ≃ 800nm. The ‘thin slab’ curve of Figure
3 shows that the sticking probabilities are substantially
reduced and the onset of Quantum Reﬂection occurs at
a much higher energy.

As a benchmark case, we also include what will likely
be the physically limiting case for a continuous ﬁlm of
d = 1 nm. This further reduces the sticking prob-
abilities for a ﬁxed temperature by a factor of √10,
because the important quantity a4 is reduced by this
much.
(Eq.(16)). The transition temperature appears
to have increased by 3 orders of magnitude versus the
semi-inﬁnite case.

C. Semi-inﬁnite slab (Casimir Regime)

As the incoming energy ǫ tends to 0, we have seen that
the turn-around region from which the atom ‘quantum
reﬂects’ moves progressively further away from the slab.
But at large distances, however, it is well known that the
interaction potential itself takes on a diﬀerent form due
to Casimir eﬀects. In particular, a semi-inﬁnite dielectric
slab (dielectric constant ǫs) has an interaction potential
with an atom of polarizability α given by

Vslab−atom(x) = −3
8π

¯hcα
x4

ǫs − 1

ǫs + 37/23

= −235(eV − ˚A)α

x4

ǫs − 1

ǫs + 37/23

x → ∞ (17)

x → ∞ (18)

Even for suﬃciently large x, the form above is not exact
but a good approximation found in Ref. [7]. Our purpose
here is only to estimate the various numbers to see their
3
relevance. It will suﬃce to put αN e = 0.39˚A
and the last
factor involving ǫs is replaced by 1 since most solids and
liquids have ǫs substantially greater than 1. This gives
a c(C)
and hence a resulting
4
a(C)
4 = 93 nm. The superscript ‘C’ reminds us it is due
to the Casimir interaction which is valid only for large
enough x.

coeﬃcient of 9 × 104meV˚A

4

−c3
x3 − −c3

(x + d)3 ≃ −3dc3

x4

(15)

To estimate the distance beyond which the Casimir
form itself is valid, we use the statement from Ref.

4

[8]:
‘Within a factor of 2, the van der Waals poten-
tial is correct at distances less than 0.12λtr, while the
Casimir potential is correct at distances at longer range.’
λtr = [1, 240 nm]( eV
∆E ) here is the wavelength associated
with the transition between the ground and excited state
that gives the atom its polarizability. ∆E is the tran-
sition energy. Knowing this much we may deduce the
qualitative features of the sticking probability curve the
arguments being similar to the cases above.

For this Casimir case and the one below, however, there
is a caveat to all this. The exact manner in which the
potential changes its near range form to its long-range
Casimir form can certainly aﬀect the sticking probabili-
ties at the intermediate energy where it makes this tran-
sition. Some numerical experimentation choosing arbi-
trary forms of the potential having the correct short
range and long-range behavior, conﬁrms this. Therefore
the curves in ﬁgure 3 involving Casimir forces are only
quantitatively and not quantitatively correct.

D. Thin Slab (Casimir Regime)

Even for a thin slab we expect that the distance at
which the Casimir interaction is valid remains the same
as for a semi-inﬁnite slab made of the same material. At
these distances if x ≫ d is also valid, then one may expect
the surface atom interaction to behave like

4

−c(C)
x4 − −c(C)

(x + d)4 ≃ −4dc(C)

x5

4

4

The length scale

a(C)
5 = a(C)

4 " 4d

4 #1/3

a(C)

(19)

(20)

associated with this c5 = 4dc(C)
5 =
717nm. Figure 3 shows a slight decrease in the sticking
probabilities, the eﬀect being evidently less here than in
the case of the thick slab.

coeﬃcient makes a(C)

4

E. Hydrogen on ‘thick’ Helium

3

Rather atypical, but extremely favourable parameters
(c3 = 18 meV ˚A
) are found in the case of Hydrogen
atoms incident on bulk liquid Helium. Evidence for quan-
tum reﬂection was experimentally seen in this system. [9]
A comparison with the parameters used in our example
of Ne on SiN:

mNe/mH = 20.03 and c(Ne−SiN)

3

/c(H−He)

3

= 220/18.

(21)

With the use of Eq. (11), we see that the sticking proba-
bilities for this case are in fact the same curves as in Fig-
ure 3 except shifted to the right in temperature by about

5

6.1 orders of magnitude. This puts it exactly in the milli-
Kelvin regime where sticking probabilities of about 0.01
to 0.03 were observed as temperatures ranged from about
0.3 mK to 5 mK. [9] However, the sticking probabilities
predicted by the ‘semi-inﬁnite slab(C)’ curve of Fig. 3
are about a factor 2.5 too large, but we feel there is good
reason for this. We already mentioned the qualitative
manner in which the Casimir forces were included but it
seems that a greater error is caused for another reason.
The length scale a3 = 17 nm for H-He is so small that
the WKB error is close in (see Fig. 1) where the interac-
tion potential is not exactly of the form ∼ 1/x3. Practi-
cally speaking this means that the region over which we
must integrate Eq.(7) must include points close to the
slab to get some convergence and thus we are violating
the assumption that the potential is ∼ 1/x3 there. This
problem would not plague the Ne-SiN case too much, be-
cause the length scale there is substantially bigger. For
H-He we must include some short-range information to
get an improvement. Still it is the long-range forces that
are mostly responsible. Ref [10,11] and others have mod-
eled this close range behaviour and obtained better agree-
ment; the improvement coming from explicit considera-
tion of the bound states supported by the close range
potential. These appear in the potential matrix elements
of perturbation theory.

VI. RELATION TO THRESHOLD BEHAVIOR

We now wish to take a broader view of the quantum re-
ﬂection behaviour at threshold (k → 0), and the sticking
that sets in as the energy is increased - a Post Thresh-
old behavior. In particular we want to make connection
to, and extend the well-known threshold behaviors of in-
elastic rates which were ﬁrst stated most generally by
Wigner in Ref [12]. For example, Wigner showed that
the exothermic excitation rates for collisions between two
bodies with bound internal degrees of freedom tend to a
constant value as their relative translational energy tends
to 0, provided there is no resonance at the 0 translational
energy threshold. Equivalently, the exothermic inelastic
cross-section diverges as 1/v, a fact known in the still
older literature as the ‘1/v law’. v is the relative ve-
locity of the collision. Notice especially the proviso in
the statement above, that there be no resonance at the
threshold energy; suggesting that the many resonances
between 0 and ǫ provided by a many body target could
make the law inoperative. But the entire thrust of Part 1
was to establish quite generally that this many-resonance
regime was precisely the one for which the old ‘1/v law’
is reinstated.

Here we re-examine the Wigner behaviour from a dif-
ferent point of view using our understanding of quan-
tum reﬂection. In addition to furthering an intuitive un-
derstanding of the Wigner behaviour, viewing things in
this way will lead naturally to predicting a generic post

threshold behavior (e.g. the 1/v law is replaced by a 1/v2
law) and an understanding of when the sticking sets back
in as ǫ is increased.

The reader will have noted that we have shifted our
attention to a three dimensional geometry of incidence
on a localized cluster instead of the one dimensional case
of incidence on a slab. So long as the target dimensions
are dwarfed by the incidence wavelength we will ﬁnd that
both problems are eﬀectively one dimensional due to the
fact that it is only the s-wave which can penetrate the
interaction region. For clarity we will deal with both
cases separately.

A. Threshold and Post-Threshold Inelastic

Cross-sections

The starting point is the template provided by the

for the diﬀerential cross-section for inelastic transitions
from internal state Ωe(u) to Ωc(u) where ~k and ~kc are the
incoming and outgoing directions of the incident atom.
We describe brieﬂy how Eq. (22) is arrived at.

For each internal state Ωc(u) (c = 1, 2,··· n) that we
may imagine freezing the target in (u incorporates all the
target degrees of freedom), there is some eﬀective poten-
tial felt by the incoming atom. These potentials are just
the diagonal elements of the complete interaction poten-
tial U (x, u) in the Ωc(u) basis, which if present all by
themselves (oﬀ-diagonal elements 0) could only cause an
elastic collision to occur. It is the oﬀ-diagonal elements
that may be thought of as causing the inelastic transi-
tions. Treating them as a perturbation on the elastic
scattering wavefunctions we use the Golden Rule to ob-
tain Eq.(22). ρ(E) is the energy density of states of the
free atom. φ(+)
(~r) is the entrance channel wavefunction
e,~k
and φ(−)
(~r) is the ﬁnal channel wavefunction. They are
c,~kc
both exact elastic scattering wavefunctions in the poten-
tials Uee(~r) and Ucc(~r) respectively. The factor of 1/k
divides the Golden Rule rate by the ﬂux to get the prob-
ability.

Now all the k dependence of dσe→c and hence σe→c is

due to
1) the factor 1/k and
2) The sensitive k-dependence of the amplitude of the en-
trance channel wavefunction inside the interaction region
over which the overlap integral of Eq.(22) takes place.
This is simply because the incoming amplitude is more
reﬂected away by the potential as k → 0 resulting in the
interior amplitude being suppressed by a factor of k as
compared to what one would expect classically.

golden rule

dσe→c ∝

1
k

ρ(Ec)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
Zall ~r

d3r φ(−)
c,~kc

(~r) Uce(~r)φ(+)
e,~k

2

(22)

(~r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1/pk(x), to conclude that
φe(xinside) ∼

√k

1. Incidence on a Slab

For this one-dimensional situation we speak of an in-
elastic probability instead of a cross-section, but other-
wise Eq.(22) remains entirely valid here also with the
obvious modiﬁcations.

For k → 0, when WKB is invalid, we established
quite generally [2] that the entrance channel wavefunc-
tion φe(x) when normalized to have a ﬁxed incoming ﬂux,
had its amplitude inside the interaction region behaving
like

φe(xinside) ∼ k

Threshold

(23)

Now the change from quantum reﬂection at threshold
to sticking at post threshold (see Fig.2) begins to a oc-
cur at those energies at which the WKB wavefunctions
- which show no quantum reﬂection - may be increas-
ingly trusted. At these energies where WKB is valid we
may simply use the well-known WKB amplitude factor

Post − Threshold.

(24)

The probability density of being found inside then be-
haves like k2 at threshold (quantum reﬂection) and like
k at post threshold (no quantum reﬂection) respectively.
It is quite natural that the probability density inside
the interaction region is smaller compared to the out-
side by a factor of k, even when there is no quantum
reﬂection. This is simply a kinematical eﬀect: where the
particle is moving faster, it is less likely to be found by a
factor inversely proportional to its velocity there. Classi-
cally what is unexpected is that for small enough k near
threshold, the probabilities inside are further suppressed
by a factor of k. Quantum reﬂection of the amplitude
from the region around |V (x)| = ǫ (section II), goes hand
in hand with the quantum suppression of the amplitude
within this region. So ﬁnally including this k-dependence
of the amplitude of φe(x) found in equations (23) and
(24) we get

P e→c ∝ k
P e→c ∝ const.

Threshold
Post − Threshold

(25)

2. Incidence on a cluster

Since for large wavelengths only the s-wave interacts
with the cluster it is clear that the problem may be re-
duced in the usual manner to a one dimensional problem
again. Therefore for a unit s-wave ﬂux the inelastic prob-
abilities will behave as before as in equations (25), but
what is really relevant is a unit plain wave ﬂux which
provides a s-wave ﬂux of π/k2.
i.e. Even though the
problem is one-dimensional in the radial co-ordinate, the
required normalization for the incoming ﬂux is not ﬁxed

6

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

A.M. is most grateful to Michael Haggerty for his kind
help and advice and for always being available to discus
things with. A.M. thanks Alex Barnett for pointing him
to the references on the Casimir interactions.

This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation through a grant for the Institute for Theoret-
ical Atomic and Molecular Physics at Harvard University
and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory:National
Science Foundation Award Number CHE-0073544.

This work was also supported by the National Science
Foundation by grants PHY-0071311 and PHY-9876927.

[1] paper1
[2] We gave the heuristic elementary reason for the sup-
pressed behaviour of Eq. (23) in Sec III of paper I,where
we then attempted to rigorously justify it.

[3] J. E. Lennard-Jones et. al., Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser.

A 156 6, (1936); Ser. A 156 36, (1936).

[4] G. Vidali, G. Ihm, Hye-Young Kim, and Milton Cole,

Surface Science Reports 12 , 133-181 (1991)

[5] R. E. Grisenti, W. Schoelkopf, J. P. Toennies, G. C.
Hegerfeldt, and T. Khler Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1755 (1999)

[6] R.Cote et. al. Phys. Rev. A 56, 1781 (1997)
[7] L. Spruch, Y. Tikochinsky Phys. Rev. A 48, 4213 (1997)
[8] E.A. Hinds V. Sandoghdar, Phys. Rev. A 43, 398 (1991)

in particular section II.

[9] Ite A. Yu, John M. Doyle, et. al. Physical Review Letters

Vol. 71(10), 1589 (September 1993).

[10] C. Carraro and M. Cole Physical Review B. Vol. 45(22),

1589 (June 1992).

[11] T.W. Hijmans and J.T.M. Walraven and G.V. Shlyap-
nikov Physical Review B. Vol. 45(5), 2561 (February
1992).

[12] E. P. Wigner, Physical Review, Vol. 73, 1002 (1948)

to be a constant as before, but is now required to grow as
∼ 1/k2, in order to correctly account for the increasing
(as k → 0) range of impact parameters that all ‘count
as’ s-wave. Thus we have simply to multiply the one-
dimensional probabilities of equations (25) by this factor
of 1/k2, and conclude that the inelastic cross-sections for
this cluster geometry behave like

σe→c ∝
σe→c ∝

1
k
1
k2

Threshold

Post − Threshold

(26)

The Threshold result of Eq. (26) is just the Wigner ‘1/v
law’ we spoke of in section VI. But now we can say more.
As the incoming wavelength λ increases, we ﬁrst witness
for large enough λ a quadratic dependence to the exother-
mic cross-section (σ ∝ λ2). It is only at still larger wave-
lengths that this dependence eventually changes over to
a linear one (σ ∝ λ). This happens when the sticking
yields to the quantum reﬂection. This energy is mostly
determined by the long range form of the potential, and
has nothing to do with the bound state energies or any
other details involving the interaction potential.

VII. CONCLUSION

Examining the WKB error term provided a quick and
easy way to estimate the threshold temperatures required
to observe quantum reﬂection.
It became transparent
that only power laws dying faster than −1/x2 were ca-
pable of acting as quantum reﬂectors. The validity of
WKB at higher temperatures heralded a post-threshold
behavior in which the atom sticks. Even for other geome-
tries such as incidence on a localised three dimensional
cluster, a WKB analysis together with the Fermi Golden
Rule provided a simple understanding of this threshold
and post-threshold behavior in terms of inelastic pro-
cesses being shut oﬀ due to a reﬂection of the incoming
amplitude. The extremely long incoming wavelength is
invariably impedance mismatched (for potentials shorter
ranged than 1/r2) by the abrupt change of wavelength
in the interaction region, and is therefore reﬂected.
It
should be clear that even a repulsive interaction will ob-
viously provide such a mismatch so that the Wigner be-
havior, or quantum reﬂection, is quite general; though of
course most dramatic if the potential is attractive as we
have been considering throughout.

This eﬀect of quantum reﬂection/suppression, which
is ultimately responsible for the threshold behaviour, is
dynamical in that it is caused by the presence of the
interaction potential. We feel that the original derivation
by Wigner that focuses on the k → 0 behaviour of the
free space wave functions tends to obscure this physical
origin of threshold behaviour. The golden rule approach
makes it more explicit and especially paves the way for
predicting the Post-Threshold behaviour.

7

