0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
7
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
6
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The no-sticking eﬀect in ultra-cold collisions

Areez Mody, Michael Haggerty and Eric J. Heller

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

(August 2000)

We provide the theoretical basis for understanding the phenomenon in
which an ultra cold atom incident on a possibly warm target will not stick,
even in the large n limit where n is the number of internal degrees of freedom
of the target. Our treatment is non-perturbative in which the full many-body
problem is viewed as a scattering event purely within the context of scatter-
ing theory. The question of sticking is then simply and naturally identiﬁed
with the formation of a long lived resonance. One crucial physical insight
that emerges is that the many internal degrees of freedom serve to decohere
the incident one body wavefunction, thus upsetting the delicate interference
process necessary to form a resonance in the ﬁrst place. This is the physical
reason for not sticking.

I. INTRODUCTION

The problem of low energy sticking to surfaces has attracted much attention over the
years [1–5]. The controversial question has been the ultralow energy limit of the incoming
species, for either warm or cold surfaces. A battle has ensued between two countervailing
eﬀects, which we will call classical sticking and quantum reﬂection. The concept of quantum
reﬂection is intimately tied into threshold laws, and was recognized in the 1930’s by Lennard-
Jones [1]. Essentially, ﬂux is reﬂected from a purely attractive potential with a probability

which goes as 1 − α√ǫ, as ǫ → 0, where α is a constant and ǫ is the translational energy

of the particle incident on the surface. Classically the transmission probability is unity.
Reﬂection at long range prevents inelastic processes from occurring, but if the incoming
particle should penetrate into the strongly attractive region, the ensuing acceleration and
hard collision with the repulsive short range part of the potential leads to a high probability
of inelastic processes and sticking.

The blame for the quantum reﬂection can be laid at the feet of the WKB approximation,
which breaks down in the long range attractive part of the potential at low energy. Very far
out, the WKB is good even for low energy, because the potential is so nearly ﬂat. Close in,
the kinetic energy is high, because of the attractive potential, even if the asymptotic energy
is very low, and again WKB is accurate. But in between there is a breakdown, which has
been recognized and exploited by several groups [6–11]. We show in the paper folling this
one that the breakdown occurs in a region around |V | ≈ ǫ; i.e. aproximately where the
kinetic and potential energies are equal.
It would seem that quantum reﬂection would settle the issues of sticking, since if the
particle doesn’t make it in close to the surface there is no sticking. (Fig 1) There is one
caveat, however, which must be considered: quantum reﬂection can be defeated by the
existence of a resonance in the internal region, i.e. a threshold resonance. (Fig 2)

The situation is very analogous to a high Q Fabry-Perot cavity, where using nearly 100%
reﬂective, parallel mirrors gives near 100% reﬂection except at very speciﬁc wavelengths.

1

At these speciﬁc energies a resonace buildup occurs in the interior of the cavity, permiting
near 100% transmission. Such resonances are rare in a one dimensional world, but the huge
number of degrees of freedom in a macroscopic solid particle makes resonance ubiquitous.
Indeed, the act of colliding with the surface, creating a phonon and dropping into a local
bound state of the attractive potential describes a Feshbach resonance. Thus, the resonances
are just the sticking we are investigating, and we must not treat them lightly! Perhaps it is
not obvious after all whether sticking occurs.

After the considerable burst of activity surrounding the sticking issue on the surface
of liquid Helium [12,13], and after a very well executed theoretical study by Clougherty
and Kohn [4], the controversy has settled down, and the common wisdom has grown that
sticking does not occur at suﬃciently low energy. While we agree with this conclusion,
we believe the theoretical foundation for it is not complete, nor stated in a wide enough
domain of physical situations. For example, Ref. [4] treats only a harmonic slab with one
or two phonon excitation. It is not clear whether the results apply to a warm surface. On
the experimental side, even though quantum reﬂection was observed from a liquid Helium
surface, that surface has a very low density of available states (essentially only the ripplons)
which could be a special case with respect to sticking. Thus, the need for more rigorous
and clear proof of non-sticking in general circumstances is evident. This paper gives such
an analysis.
In a following paper, application is made to speciﬁc atom-surface and slab
combinations, and the rollover to the sticking regime as energy is increased (which can be
treated essentially analytically) is given.

The strategy we use puts a very general and exact scattering formalism to work, providing
a template into which to insert the properties of our target and scatterer. Then very general
results emerge, such as the non-sticking theorem at zero energy. The usual procedure of
deﬁning model potentials and considering one phonon processes etc.
is not necessary. All
such model potentials and Hamiltonians wind up as parameters in the R-matrix formalism.
The details of a particular potential are of course important for quantitative results, but the
range of possible results can be much more easily examined by inserting various parameters
into the R-matrix formalism. All the possible choices of R-matrix parameters give the correct
threshold laws. Certain trends are built into the R-matrix formalism which are essentially
independent of the details of the potentials.

Before commencing with the R matrix treatment, we brieﬂy consider the problem per-
turbatively in order to better elucidate the role played by quantum reﬂection. We emphasize
that none of the perturbation section is actually necessary for our ﬁnal conclusions.

In a perturbative treatment for our slab geometry, quantum reﬂection simply results in
the entrance channels’ wave function (at threshold) having its amplitude in the interaction

region go to zero as ke ∼ √ǫ when normalized to have a ﬁxed incoming ﬂux. (ke is the
magnitude |~ke| of the incident wavevector of the incoming atom). The inelastic transition
probabilities are proportional to the potential weighted overlap of the channel wavefunctions
and this immediately leads to the conclusion that the inelastic probability itself vanishes as
ke ∼ √ǫ. As mentioned, this conclusion is shown to rigorously remain true using the R

matrix. We show in this paper that in spite of the inherently many-body nature of the
problem, in the ultra-cold limit we can correctly obtain the long-range form of the entrance
channel’s wavefunction by solving for the one-dimensional motion in the long-range surface-
atom attraction (i.e. the diagonal element of the many-channel potential matrix). This

2

FIG. 1. The stationary state one body wavefunction of the incident atom moving in the
y-independent mean potential felt by it. The amplitude inside the interaction region is supressed

by ke ∼ √ǫ. This is tantamount to the reﬂection of the atom.

Before:

After:

bound state

target absorbs 

energy

FIG. 2. A schematic view of a Feshbach resonance wherein the incident atom forms a long lived
quasi-bound state with the target. The many body wavefunction in this situation (not shown) has
a large amplitude in the ‘interior’ region near the slab.

allows quantitative predictions of the sticking probability, which we do in the following
paper. There, we further exploit the perturbative point of view together with an analysis of
WKB to predict a ‘post-threshold’ behavior as quantum reﬂection abates, when the incoming
energy is increased.

II. GEOMETRY AND NOTATION

The incident atom is treated as a point particle at position (x, y). To keep the notation
simple we leave out the z-coordinate and conﬁne our discussion to two spatial dimensions.
Thus a cross-section will have dimensions of length etc. It will be quite obvious how and
where z may be inserted in all that follows. Let u represent all the bound degrees of
freedom of the scattering target, which we take to be a slab of crystalline or amorphous
material. Let Ωc(u), c = 1, 2,· · ·, be the manybody target wave functions in the absence of
interactions with the incident particle, and having energy Etarget
. These are normalized as
Rall u du |Ωc(u)|2 = 1. x is the distance of the scatterer (atom) from the face of the slab which

c

3

is approximately (because the wall is rough) along the line x = 0. The internal constituents
of the slab lie to the left of x = 0 and the scatterer is incident from the right with kinetic
energy ǫ = ¯h2k2

e/2m. The total energy E of the system is

E = ǫ + Etarget

e

(1)

where c = e is the index of the ‘entrance channel’ i.e. the initial internal state of the slab
before the collision is Ωe(u). Notice that we say nothing about the value of Etarget
itself.
In particular the slab need not be cold. kc is the magnitude of the wave vector ~kc of the
particle when it leaves the target in the state Ωc(u) after the collision. Our interest focusses
on ke → 0. ke is the magnitude of the wavevector of the incoming particle. For the open
channels c = 1,· · · n (this deﬁnes n) for which E > Etarget

e

c

kc ≡ s2m(E − Etarget

¯h2

c

)

whereas for the closed channels (c > n), E < Etarget

c

(c ≤ n) ;
and

kc ≡ is 2m(Etarget

¯h2

c

− E)

≡ iκc

(c > n) .

(2)

(3)

κc > 0. We will use (kcx, kcy) as the x, y components of ~kc.
Let Uint(x, y, u) =
(2m/¯h2)Vint(x, y, u), where Vint(x, y, u) describes quite generally the interaction potential
between the incident atom and all the internal degrees of freedom of the slab. For simplicity
we assume for the moment that there is no interaction between slab and atom for x > a.

III. PRELIMINARIES: PERTURBATION

As stated above, we excercise the perturbative treatment for insight only; our ﬁnal

conclusions are based on nonperturbative arguments.

We treat the interaction Uint(x, y, u) between slab and atom by separating out a ‘mean’
potential felt by the atom that is independent of y and u; call it U (0)(x). The remainder
U (1)(x, y, u) ≡ Uint(x, y, u) − U (0)(x) is treated as a perturbation.
Now the incident beam is scattered by the entire length (say from y = −L to L = 2L) of
wall which it illuminates. If all measurements are made close to the wall so that its length
2L is the largest scale in the problem, then it is appropriate to speak of a cross-section per
unit length of wall, a dimensionless probability. More speciﬁcally, we will assume that the
matrix elements U (1)
c(u)U (1)(x, y, u)Ωc′(u) of the perturbation U (1)(x, y, u)
in the Ωc(u) basis are given by the simple form U (1)
cc′ (x)f (y) for y ∈ [−L, L]
and 0 elsewhere. f (y) is a random persistent (does not die to 0 as |L| → ∞) function
that models the random roughness of the slab and is characterized by its so-called spectral
density function S, a smooth positive-valued non-random function, such that

cc′ (x, y) ≡ Rall u

cc′ (x, y) = U (1)

du Ω∗

L

Z−L

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

dy eikyf (y)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

≡ 2LS(k)

∀k

4

(4)

as L → ∞.
Now, applying either time-independent perturbation (equivalently the Born approxima-
tion for this geometry) or time-dependent perturbation theory via the Golden Rule, gives
that the cross-section per unit length of wall for inelastic scattering to a ﬁnal channel c is

P in

c←e(θ) =

a

2π

ke 
Z−∞


dx′φ(x′; kcx)U (1)

ce (x′)φ(x′; kex)


2

S(kcy − key)

where φ(x; kx) is the solution of the o.d.e.

  d2
dx2 − U (0)(x) + k2

x! φ(x; kx) = 0

which is regular or goes to zero as x → −∞ inside the slab and is normalized as

φ(x; kx) ∼ sin(kxx + δ)

asx → ∞

(5)

(6)

(7)

Accepting for the moment that as ke → 0 the amplitude of φ(x; kex) in the internal region
x < a goes to zero as ke ∼ √ǫ, then the square of the overlap integral in Eq. (5) behaves
as k2
e, because by our proposition the amplitude of φ(x′; kex) ∼ kex ∼ ke. Together with the
1/ke prefactor we get an overall behavior of ke for the inelastic probability as claimed.
To show that indeed as ke → 0 the amplitude of φ(x; kex) in the internal region x < a goes to
zero as ke ∼ √ǫ, we temporarily disregard the required normalization of φ(x; kx) of Eq. (7)
and ﬁx its initial conditions (slope and value) at some point inside the interaction region
x < a such that the regularity condition is ensured. We then integrate out to x = a. Let
us denote this unnormalized solution with a prime, as φ′(x; kx). The point is for kx varying
near 0, both v(the value) and s(the slope) that the solution emerges with at x = a, are
independent of kx and in fact the interior solution thus obtained is itself independent of kx.

This is because the local wave vector k(x) = q2m(ǫ − U(x))/¯h2 essentially stays the same

function of x for all ǫ near 0. Therefore for x > a φ(x; kx) continues onto

v cos[kx(x − a)] +

s
kx

sin[kx(x − a)]

x > a

(8)

This is a phase-shifted sine wave of amplitude ∼ 1/kx. We must enforce the normalization
of Eq. (7) and get φ(x; kx) ∼ kxφ′(x; kx). As a result, the interior solution gets multiplied by
kx and we thereby have our result. φ(x; kx) is the solution of a one-dimensional Schrodinger
equation for the incoming particle in the one-dimensional long-range potential created by
the slab. The suppression of its amplitude by √ǫ near the slab is due to the reﬂection
it suﬀers where the interaction turns on. Within the perturbative set-up the non-sticking
conclusion is then already foregone [1].

The problem is whether we can really accept this verdict of the one-dimensional un-
perturbed solution, when in fact we know that the turning on of the perturbation (many
body interactions) causes a multitude of resonances to be created, internal resonances being
exactly the situation in which the Proposition above is known to badly fail. It appears that
the perturbation is in no sense a small physical eﬀect. Therefore a nonpeturbative approach
is needed. Here we use R-matrix theory in its general form to accomplish the task.

5

IV. S-MATRIX AND R-MATRIX

One point that the preceding section has made clear is that it is the energies (both initial
and ﬁnal) in the x-direction, perpendicular to the slab that are most relevant. In fact as
regards the ﬁnal form of our answers the motion of the y degree of freedom may as well
have been the motion of another internal degree of freedom of the slab. In other words,
mathematically speaking, the y degree of freedom may be subsumed by incorporating it
as just another u. For example, we may imagine the incident atom being conﬁned in the
y-direction by the walls of a wave-guide at y = −LandL that is large enough so that it could
not possibly change the physics of sticking. Then we quite rigorously have a bound internal
state of the form

Ωc,n(y, u) = Ωc(u) sin

nπy
L

(9)

x is now the only scattering degree of freedom. There will be no necessity in carrying along
the extra index n and variable y as in Eq. (9), and we will simply continue to write Ωc(u)
instead. Thus with this understanding, the problem is essentially one-dimensional in the
scattering degree of freedom.

We proceed to derive the expression for the S matrix in terms of the so-called R matrix,
and derive the structure of the R matrix. For simplicity we continue to assume for the
moment that there is no interaction for x > a. Then for x > a, the scattering wavefunction
of the interacting system corresponding to the scattering particle coming in on one entrance
channel, say c = e, with energy ǫ = ¯h2k2

e/(2m) is

ψ(x, u) =

∞

Xc=1  e−ikex
√ke

δce −

eikcx
√kc

Sce! Ωc(u)

x > a

(10)

c

where the sum must include all channels, even though the open channels are ﬁnite in number.
The factors of k−1/2
in Eq. (10) mean that the ﬂux in each channel is proportional only to
the square of the coeﬃcient and hence ensure the unitarity of S. With this convention, the
open-open part of the S-matrix—the n×n submatrix Scc′ with c, c′ = 1, 2, . . . , n—is unitary.
√kc ≡ eiπ/4√κc may be arbitrarily chosen since it cannot aﬀect the open-open part of S.
S is found in analogy to the one-dimensional case by introducing the matrix version of

the inverse logarithmic derivative at x = a called R(E) the Wigner R-matrix deﬁned by

~v = R(E) ~s

(11)

where the components of ~v and ~s are the expansion coeﬃcients of ψ(x = a, u) and ∂ψ(x=a,u)
respectively in the Ωc(u) basis. Supposing ∂ψ(x=a,u)
to be known, we will (like in electro-
statics) use the Neumann Green’s function GN (x, u; x′, u′) to construct ψ(x, u) everywhere
in the interior x < a. ψ(x, u) satisﬁes the full Schr¨odinger equation with energy E. We need
χλ(x, u) λ = 1, 2,· · · , the normalized eigenfunctions of the full Schr¨odinger equation in the
interior x < a with energies Eλ, satisfying Neumann boundary conditions ∂χ(x=a,u)
= 0. So

∂x

∂x

 −¯h2
2m ∇2 + Vint(x, u) − E! ψ(x, u) = 0

6

(12)

∂x

 −¯h2
2m ∇2 + Vint(x, u) − Eλ! χλ(x, u) = 0
 −¯h2
2m ∇2 + Vint(x, u) − E! GN (x, u; x′, u′) = δ(x − x′)δ(u − u′)
∂x2 + ∂2
where ∇2 ≡ ∂2

∂u2 and

∂GN (x = a, u; x′, u′)

∂x

= 0

and

∂χ(x = a, u)

∂x

= 0

⇒ GN (x, u; x′, u′) =

∞

Xλ=1

χλ(x, u)χλ(x′, u′)

Eλ − E

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

GN is symmetric in the primed and unprimed variables. By Stokes’ Theorem,

(−¯h2/2m) Zx′<a

dx′ Zall u’

du′(cid:16)φ1∇′2φ2 − φ2∇′2φ1(cid:17) = (−¯h2/2m)

Z

x’=a, all u’

du′ (φ1∇′

ˆnφ2 − φ2∇′

ˆnφ1)

where ∇′

ˆn(·) ≡ ˆx′(·) · ∇′ with φ1 = ψ(x′, u′) and φ2 = GN (x, u; x′, u′) gives

ψ(x, u) =

¯h2

2m Zall u′

du′ GN (x, u; x′, u′)

∂ψ(x′ = a, u′)

∂x′

x < a

(18)

Put x = a and it is deduced using Eqs. (11) and (18) together that

(17)

Rcc′(E) =

∞

Xλ=1

γλcγλc′
Eλ − E

(19)

where γλc = q ¯h2

2m Rall u

du χλ(a, u)Ωc(u).

A. The S matrix

Now shifting attention to the outside (x > a), we see that we can compute both ∇ˆnψ(a, u)
and ψ(a, u) on the surface x = a using the asymptotic form of Eq. (10) which automatically
It
gives these expanded in the Ωc(u) basis. Writing the matrix Eq. (11) is now simple.
is best to do it all in matrix notation, and thus be able to treat all possible independent
asymptotic boundary conditions simultaneously.
Let eikx, √k and 1/√k be diagonal matrices with diagonal elements eikcx, √kc and 1/√kc.

Then Eq. (11) reads

e−ika
√k −

eika
√k

S = iRk −e−ika
√k −

eika
√k

S! .

(20)

Each column c = 1, . . . , n of the matrix equation above is just Eq. (11) for the solution
corresponding to an incoming wave only in channel c (For c > n the wavefunctions blow up
as x → ∞). Remembering that non-diagonal matrices don’t commute, we solve for S to get

7

S = e−ika√k

1

1 − iRk
or, with some simple matrix manipulation,

(1 + iRk)

1
√k

e−ika

S = e−ika

1

1 − i√kR√k

(1 + i√kR√k)e−ika .

V. S MATRIX NEAR A RESONANCE

(21)

(22)

As discussed in the introduction, the resonances are a key to the sticking issue. Sticking
is essentially a long lived Feshbach resonance in which energy has been supplied to surface
and bulk degrees of freedom, temporarily dropping the scattering particle into a bound
state of the attractive potential. Thus we must study resonances in various circumstances
in the low incident translational energy regime. We derive the approximation for S(E) near
E = E0, a resonant energy of the compound system. E0 is the total energy of the joined
(resonant) system. Within the R-matrix approach, the χλ(x, u) of section IV are bound,
compound states with Neuman boundary conditions at x = a. R-matrix theory properly
couples these bound state to the continuum, but some of the eigenstates are nonetheless
weakly coupled to the continuum, as evidenced by small values of the γλc’s of section IV;
these are the measure of the strength of the continuum couplings. While every one of the
R−matrix bound states will result in a pole Eλ in the R matrix expansion, only the weakly
coupled ones are the true long lived Feshbach resonances of physical interest.
It is also
helpful to know that the values of these ‘truly’ resonant poles at Eλ are the most stable to
changes in the position x = a of the box. This in fact provides one unambiguous way to
identify them. Our purpose here is to derive the resonant approximation to the S matrix in
the vicinity of one of these Feshbach resonances. We do so using the form of the R-matrix
in Eq. (19). Note that the energy density ρ(E) = 1/D(E) of these Feshbach resonances will
be large because of the large number of degrees of freedom of the target. D(E) is the level
spacing of the quasibound, resonant states.

A. Isolated Resonance

As mentioned, the point of view we will take is to identify a resonant energy with a
particular pole Eλ in the R matrix expansion of Eq. (19). Those Eλ corresponding to
resonances are a subsequence of the Eλ appearing in the expansion in Eq. (19). For E near
a well isolated resonance at Eλ we separate the sum-over-poles expansion of the R-matrix
into a single matrix term having elements γλcγλc′
Eλ−E , plus a sum over all the remaining terms,
call it N. If the energy interval between Eλ and all the other poles is large compared to the
open-open residue at Eλ then we may expect that the n× n open-open block of N will have
all its elements to be small. Then rewriting the inverse in Eq. (22)

1

1 − i√kR√k ≡

1

1 − i(cid:16)M + V

Eλ−E(cid:17)

8

(23)

where M ≡ √kN√k and Vcc′ ≡ (√kcγλc)(√kc′γλc′), and setting M = 0 allows us to simplify
the central term in Eq. (22) exactly. (We will return to the case M 6=0.)

1

1 − i√kR√k

1

(1 + i√kR√k)
2i√kR√k
V

1 − i√kR√k
1
1 − iV
1

Eλ−E

2i

Eλ − E
2iV

Eλ − E − iV
1
Eλ − E − i(Γλ/2 + i∆E)

2iV k

(withM = 0)

= 1 +

= 1 +

= 1 +

= 1 +

where we used

λnkn) + (γ2
λ1k1 + · · · + γ2
Γλn
2 (cid:19) + i(γ2

λ(n+1)κn+1 + · · ·)(cid:17) V
λ(n+1)κn+1 + · · ·)(cid:19) V

V 2 = (cid:16)(γ2
≡ (cid:18)(cid:18)Γλ1
≡ (cid:18) Γλ

2

2

+ · · · +
+ i∆Eλ(cid:19) V

to get the identities

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

[Eλ − E − iV ]V = [Eλ − E − i(Γλ/2 + i∆E)]V
1

1

V =

V

⇒

Eλ − E − i(Γλ/2 + i∆E)

Eλ − E − iV

Also deﬁne (Γλc/2)1/2 ≡ γλc√kc, c = 1, 2,· · · , n. This deﬁnes the sign of the square-root on

the lhs. to be the sign of γλc and allows the convenience of expressing things in terms of the
Γλc’s and their square-roots, and not having to use the γλc’s themselves. Thus we arrive at

Scc′ = e−ikca

δcc′ +

λc′

iΓ1/2

λc Γ1/2

λ − E − iΓλ/2

E(r)

 e−ikc′ a

(34)

where E(r)
λ ≡ Eλ + ∆Eλ, for the n × n open-open unitary block of S in the neighbourhood
of a single isolated resonance after neglecting the contribution of the background matrix M.
For us the essential point is that

Γλc = 2 kc(E)γ2

λc,

(35)

that the partial widths Γλc depend on the energy E, through the kinematic factor kc(E).
Mostly this energy dependence is small and irrelevant except where the kc’s and hence Γλc’s
are varying near 0. These are the partial widths of the open channels near threshold. Hence

|Sce|2 (c 6= e) an inelastic probability behaves like ke ∼ √ǫ when the entrance channel is at
threshold. Including the background term (M 6= 0) does not change this. To see this we may

9

perform the inverse in Eq. (22) to ﬁrst order in M and then get an additional contribution
of the terms

e−ika


2i
1 − iV

Eλ−E

M +

1
1 − iV

Eλ−E

+

1
1 − iV

Eλ−E

iM

1
1 − iV

Eλ−E

2iV

 e−ika

(36)

to the S-matrix. Now, both M and V have a factor of √kc multiplying their cth columns
(and rows) from their deﬁnitions and so a matrix element bcc′ of the matrix in parentheses
in Eq. (36) will have a √kc and √kc′ dependence. An inelastic element of S(c 6= c′) would

now take the form

Scc′ = e−ikca

bcc′ +

λc′

iΓ1/2

λc Γ1/2

λ − E − iΓλ/2

E(r)

 e−ikc′ a,

(37)

As mentioned our interest is in the case when the entrance channel is at threshold so that

this dependence is √ke, making the inelastic probability |Sce|2 still continue to behave as
ke ∼ √ǫ.

B. Overlapping Resonances

Here we require the form of the S matrix near an energy E where many of the quasi-
bound states may be simultaneously excited, i.e. the resonances overlap. Again, neglecting
background for the moment, the S matrix is simply taken to be a sum over the various
resonances.

S = 1 −Xλ

iAλ
E − E(r)
λ + iΓλ/2

(38)

where Aλ is a n× n rank 1 matrix with the cc′th component as Γ1/2
direct justiﬁcation of this form, but one can see that there is much which it gets correct.

λc′ . There is no entirely

λc Γ1/2

The Aλ are symmetric, hence S is symmetric. Obviously it has the poles in the right
places allowing the existence of decaying states with a purely outgoing wave at the resonant
energies. A crucial additional assumption that also makes S approximately unitary is that
the signs of the Γ1/2
λc are random and uncorrelated both in the index λ as well as c, regardless
of how close the energy intervals involved may be. One simple consequence is that we
approximately have that

AλAλ′ = δλλ′ΓλAλ

(39)

in the sense that the l.h.s.
With Eq. (39) it is easy to verify the approximate unitarity of S.

is negligible for λ 6= λ′ in comparison to the value for λ = λ′.
We investigate now the onset of the overlapping regime as E increases. D(E), the level
spacing of the resonant E(r)
λ , is a rapidly decreasing function of its argument. On the other
hand, Γλ = Γλ1 + Γλ2 + · · · + Γλn, and since more channels are open at higher energy, Γλ is
increasing with the energy of the resonance. The widths must therefore eventually overlap,

10

and Γλ ≫ D(cid:16)E(r)

λ ’s. In this regard there is

a useful estimate due to Bohr and Wheeler [15], that for n large

λ (cid:17) for the larger members of the sequence of E(r)

Γλ
λ ) ≃ n .

D(E(r)

(40)

Appendix A derives this using a phase space argument. Here we point out that this is
entirely consistent with the assumption of the random signs, indeed requiring it to be true.
Take for example a typical inelastic amplitude

Scc′ = −iXλ

Γ1/2
λc Γ1/2

λc′

E(r)
λ − E − iΓλ/2

(c 6= c′)

(41)

First let us note that the Γλ being the sum of many random variables (the partial widths Γλc)
do not ﬂuctuate much. Let Γ denote their typical value over the n overlapping resonances.
Also since Γ = nD it follows that the typical size of a partial width Γλc is D. Therefore the
typical size of the product Γ1/2
λc′ is D but these random variables ﬂuctuate randomly over
the index λ, and moreover the sign is random. Thus for energies in the overlapping domain
Scc′ is a sum of n complex numbers each of typical size D/Γ = 1/n, but random in sign.

This makes for a sum of order 1/√n. Clearly this is as required to make the n × n matrix
S unitary. Note that the above argument fails (as is should) if c 6= c′ because then the signs
of Γ1/2
λc Γ1/2
Unlike the case of the isolated resonance, the S-matrix elements here are smoothly varying

λc = Γλ > 0 are of course not random.

λc Γ1/2

in E. Addition of a background term Bcc′

Scc′ = Bcc′ − iXλ

Γ1/2
λc Γ1/2

λc′

E(r)
λ − E − iΓλ/2

.

(42)

just shifts this smooth variation by a constant. If Bcc′ is also thought of as arising from a
sum over the individual backgrounds then for the same reasons as discussed at the end of the

preceding section |Bce|2 ∼ ke ∼ √ǫ for an entrance channel near threshold. For simplicity

we will continue to take Bcc′ to be 0 and look at the case with background in the appendix.

VI. Q-MATRIX AND STICKING

From the viewpoint of scattering theory, the sticking of the incident particle to the target
is just a long-lived resonance. It is natural then to investigate the time-delay for the collision.
Smith [14] introduced the collision lifetime or Q-matrix

Q ≡ i¯hS

∂S†
∂E

(43)

which encapsulates such information. We review some of the relevant properties of Q. The
rhs of Eq. (43) involves the ‘open-open’ upper left block of S so that Q is also an n × n
energy-dependent matrix, having dimensions of time. For 1-dimensional elastic potential
scattering S = eiφ(e) and Q reduces to the familiar time delay i¯h ∂φ(E)
If ~v is a vector
∂E .

11

whose entries are the coeﬃcients of the incoming wave in each channel then ~vtrQ(E)~v is the
average delay time experienced by such an incoming wave. Because physically the particle
is incident on only one channel, ~v consists of all 0’s except for a 1 in the eth slot so that
the relevant quantity is just the matrix element Qee(E). Smith shows that this delay time
is the surplus probability of being in a neighborhood of the target (measured relative to the
probability if no target were present) divided by the ﬂux arriving in channel e. This matches
our intuition that when the delay time is long, there is a higher probability that the particle
will be found near the target.

Furthermore, as a Hermitian matrix, Q(E), can be resolved into its eigenstates ~v(1) · · · ~v(n)
with eigenvalues q1 · · · qn. The components of ~v(1) are the incoming coeﬃcients of a quasi-
bound state with lifetime q1 and so on. Then

~vtrQ(E)~v =

n

Xj=1

qj|~v(j) · ~v|2.

(44)

As can be seen from this expression, the average time delay results, in general, from the
excitation of multiple quasi-stuck states each with its lifetime qj and probability of formation
|~v(j) · ~v|2. However, we will ﬁnd that using our resonant approximation to the S matrix near
a resonant energy E(r)
the time delay will consist of only one term from the sum on the rhs
λ
of Eq. (44), all the other eigenvalues being identically 0.

Using equation Eq. (43),

Q(E) = i¯h Xλ′

−iAλ′
λ′ − iΓλ′/2i2 −Xλλ′

hE − E(r)

which using Eq. (39) simpliﬁes to

hE − E(r)

λ + iΓλ/2ihE − E(r)

AλAλ′

λ′ − iΓλ′/2i2! (45)

= Xλ

¯h

(E − E(r)

λ )2 + (Γλ/2)2

Aλ ,

a remarkably simple answer. We need Qee(E), where e is the entrance channel.

Qee(E) = Xλ
= Xλ  

¯hΓλe
λ )2 + (Γλ/2)2
¯hΓλ
λ )2 + (Γλ/2)2 ×

(E − E(r)

(E − E(r)

Γλe

Γλ !

(46)

(47)

(48)

where the second equation has the interpretation (for each term) as the life-time of the mode,
multiplied by the probability of its formation. Note how for each resonance E(r)
there is
λ
only one term corresponding to the decomposition of Eq. (44). The actual measured lifetime
is the average of Qee(E) averaged over the energy spectrum |g(E)|2 of the collision process.

A. Energy averaging over spectrum

With the target in state Ωe(u) where c = e is the entrance channel, the energy of the

target is ﬁxed, and the time-dependent solution will look like

12

ψ(x, u, t) = Z dE

g(E)

∞

Xc=1




e−ikc(E)x

qke(E)

δce −

eikc(E)x

qkc(E)

S(E)ce

 Ωc(u)
 .

(49)

Recall, E is the total energy of the system. We are interested in the threshold situation
where the incident kinetic energy of the incoming particle ǫ → 0. This can be arranged
if g(E) is peaked at E0 with a spread ∆E such that i) E0 is barely above Etarget
and ii)
∆E = δǫ is some small fraction of ǫ, the mean energy of the incoming particle. The second
condition ensures that we may speak unambiguously of the incoming particle’s mean energy.
So,

e

hQee(E)i ≡ Z dE|g(E)|2Qee(E)
∆E Z dEQee(E)

≃

1

(50)

(51)

hi denotes the average over the ∆E interval. Now Qee(E) is just a sum of Lorentzians
centred at the E(r)
λ ’s with width Γλ and Eq. (51) is just a measure of their mean value over
the ∆E interval.

So long as the ∆E interval around which we are averaging, is broad enough to straddle

many of these Lorentzians, the mean height is just

1
∆E × ρ(E)∆E ×

¯hπΓλe

Γλ

(52)

where the second factor is the number of Lorentzians in the ∆E interval and the third factor
is the area under the ‘λth’ Lorentzian. This is true regardless of whether or not they are
overlapping. It will be convenient to write Γλ as

Γλ = n × 2¯kλ var(γλ)

(53)

′s over the n open channels and ¯kλ is a mean
where var(γλ) is the variance of the set of γλc
or eﬀective wavenumber kc over the open channels, which for a particular realization λ we
take to be deﬁned by Eq. (53) itself. Let h i denote the average over the occurrences of the
quantity in the ∆E interval. Γ ≡ hΓλi, ¯k ≡ h¯kλi. Then Eq. (52) simpliﬁes

hQee(E)i ≃ ¯h
¯h
Γ

≃

kehγ2
λei

1
n¯khvar(γλ)i
D
ke
¯k

(54)

(55)

which tends to 0 as ke ∼ √ǫ. The form of Eq. (55) and all the steps leading up to it remain

valid whether the Lorentzians are overlapping or not, as long as the ∆E = ∆ǫ interval which
we are averaging over includes many of them.

B. On an isolated resonance

If the target is cold enough that the resonances are isolated, then as the incident particle’s
energy ǫ → 0, adhering to the condition ∆ǫ < ǫ will eventually result in ∆ǫ becoming

13

narrower than the resonance widths. It becomes possible then for ∆ǫ to be centered right
around a single isolated resonance at E(r)
λ . In this case hQee(E)i is found simply by putting
E = E(r)

λ , because the spectrum |g(E)|2 is well approximated by δ(E − E(r)

λ ). So

hQee(E)i =

¯hΓλe
Γ2
λ

=

¯h
Γλ

Γλe
Γλ

=

¯h
Γλ

ke
n¯k

.

(56)

Even in this case there is the √ǫ behavior as ǫ → 0 and there is no sticking.

In the extreme case that there are no other open channels at all (n = 1), hQee(E)i ≃
¯hΓλe
= ¯h
because Γλ = Γλe. In fact, e = 1, and hQee(E)i diverges, implying in this case
Γ2
Γλe
that it is possible to have the particle stick. This is an exception to all the cases above but
is experimentally not so relevant because we may always expect to ﬁnd some exothermic
channels open for a target with many degrees of freedom.

λ

VII. INELASTIC CROSS SECTIONS AND STICKING

Another physically motivated measure of the sticking probability may be obtained by
studying the total inelastic cross-section of the collision. The idea is that any long lived
“sticking” is overwhelmingly likely to result in an inelastic colision process; i.e. that the
scattering particle will leave in a diﬀerent channel than it entered with. Using the original
Wigner approach it is possible to show that for our case where we have only one scattering
degree of freedom, the inelastic probability for an exothermic and endothermic collision
vanishes like ke. The only possible exception to this is a measure zero chance of a resonance
exactly at the threshold energy, Etarget
close to
but above this threshold energy, it is only necessary that E is below E(r)
(by an energy of
λ
at least ∆E, the spread in energy) in order to observe the usual Wigner threshold behavior:

. In the event that there is a resonance E(r)
λ

e

Pinelastic → 0 like ke ∝ √ǫ

(57)

for the inelastic probability. However our problem is unusual in the sense that because of
the large number of degrees of freedom of the target, we will always ﬁnd resonances between
Etarget
= ǫ is. Thus the Wigner regime is not
accessible. Still the surprise is that a simple computation reveals the same behavior holds
for large n:

and E no matter how small E − Etarget

e

e

Pinelastic(E) = Xc6=e

Pc←e(E)

= Xc6=e |Sce(E)|2
= Xc6=eXλ Xλ′

Γλc

1/2

1/2Γλe
λ − iΓλ/2

E − E(r)

Γλ

1/2

1/2Γλ′e
λ + iΓλ/2

Γλ′c
E − E(r)
Γλe

(58)

(59)

(60)

(61)

⇒ Pinelastic(E) = Xλ

(E − E(r)

λ )2 + (Γλ/2)2

where we used the random sign property of the Γ1/2

Pall c

Γλc = Γλ. Since the sum Pc6=e

Γλc ≃
is over the n ≫ 1 open channels, omission of a single term

λc ’s and the understanding that Pc6=e

14

can hardly matter. Apart from the factor ¯h/Γλ, the rhs of the above equation is identical
to the expression for Qee(E) in Eq. (48). Averaging Pinelastic(E) over many resonances E(r)
λ
(overlapping or not) we may use the same algebraic simpliﬁcations as before to show

hPinelastici =

ke
¯k

(62)

As ke tends to 0, this gives the √ǫ Wigner behavior showing that there is no sticking.

The above argument fails when there is only one open channel. There are no inelastic
channels to speak of. In this case, if the energy E coincides with a resonant energy E(r)
λ we
will have the exceptional case of sticking, as discussed at the end of the previous section.
But as pointed out there, this is primarily of theoretical interest only.

VIII. CHANNEL DECOHERENCE

The only case for which we stick is seen to be the case of when we are sitting right on
top of a resonance with the incoming energy so well resolved that we are completely within
the resonance width, AND there are no exothermic channels open. Having no such channels
open amounts to an inﬁntesimally low energy for a large target. Otherwise, the sticking
probability tends to 0 as √ǫ in every case.

A. Time dependent picture

From the time independent point of view, the physical reason for the absence of low
energy sticking is contained in the factor Γλe
of Eq. (48). This is the formation probability
Γλ
for the compound state. We will explain physically why it is small for n ≫ 1. The resonance
state is a many-body entangled state.
If we imagine the decay of this compound state
(already prepared by some other means say) each open channel carries away some fraction
of the outgoing ﬂux, with no preference for any one particular channel. Running this whole
process in reverse it becomes evident that the optimum way to form the compound state
is to have each channel carry an incoming ﬂux with exactly the right amplitude and phase.
This corresponds to however an entangled initial state. With all the incoming ﬂux instead
constrained to be in only one channel it becomes clear that we are not exciting the resonance
in the optimal way and the buildup of amplitude inside is not so large; i.e., the compound
state has a small probability of forming.

The time dependent view is even more revealing.

Imagine a wave packet incident on
the system. For a single open channel Feshbach resonance, the build-up of amplitude in
the interior region can be decomposed as follows. As the leading edge of the wavepacket
approaches the region of attraction, most is turned away due to the quantum reﬂection
phenomena. (It is a useful model to think of the quantum reﬂection as due to a barrier
located some distance away from the interaction region.) The wavefunction in the interaction
region constructively interferes with new amplitude entering the region. At the same time,
the amplitude leaving the region is out of phase with the reﬂected wave, cancelling it and
assisting more amplitude to enter.

15

Now suppose many channels are open. All the ﬂux entering the interior must of course
return, but it does so fragmented into all the other open channels. Only the fraction that
makes it back into the entrance channel has the opportunity to interfere (constructively) with
the rest of the entering wavepacket. The constructive interference is no longer eﬃcient and is
in fact almost negligible for n ≫ 1, thereby ruining the delicate process that was responsible
for the buildup of the wave function inside. The orthogonality of the other channels prevents
interference in the scattering dimension. If we trace over the target coordinates, leaving only
the scattering coordinate, most of the coherence and the constructive interference is lost,
and no resonant buildup occurs. Therefore, one way to understand the non-sticking is to
say that decoherence is to blame.

B. Fabry-Perot and Measurement Analogy

Suppose we have a resonant quantum mechanical Fabry-Perot cavity, where the particle
has a high probability of being found in between the two reﬂecting barriers. Now, during the
time it takes for the probability to build up in the interior, suppose we continually measure
the position of the particle inside. In doing so we decohere the wave function and in fact
never ﬁnd it there at all. Alternatively, imagine simply tilting one barrier (mirror) to make it
non-parallel to the ﬁrst and redirecting the ﬂux into an orthogonal direction, again spoiling
the resonance. Measurement entangles other (orthogonal) degrees of freedom with the one of
interest, resulting in ﬂux being eﬀectively re-directed into orthogonal states. Thus the states
of the target (if potentially excitable) are in eﬀect continually monitoring (measuring) to see
if the incoming particle has made it in inside, ironically then preventing it from ever doing
so. The buildup process of constructive interference in the interaction region, described in
the preceding paragraph, is slower than linear in t. Therefore, the constant measurement
of the particle’s presence (and resultant prevention of sticking) is an example of the Zeno
“paradox” in measurement theory.

IX. CONCLUSION

We have presented a general approach to the low energy sticking problem, in the form
of R-matrix theory. This theory is well suited for the task, since it highlights the essential
features of multichannel scattering at low incident translational energy. We did not need
to make a harmonic or other approximate assumptions about the solid target, which is
characterized by its long range interaction with the incoming particle and its density of
states. “Warm” surfaces are included in the formalism, and do not change the non-sticking
conclusion.

Several supporting arguments for the non-sticking conclusion were given. Perhaps most
valuable is the physical decoherence picture associated with the conclusion that there is no
sticking in the zero translational energy limit.

Reviewing the observations leading up to the non-sticking conclusion, we start with the
near 100% sticking in the zero translational energy limit classically (sticking probability
1). We then invoke the phenomenon of quantum reﬂection (Fig.1), which keeps the incident
particle far from the surface (sticking probability 0). Third, we note that quantum reﬂection

16

can be overcome by resonances (Fig. 2), and since resonances are ubiquitous in a many body
target, being the Feshbach states by which a partice could stick to the surface, perhaps
sticking approaches 1 after all. Fourth, we suggest that decoherence (from the perspective
of the incoming channel, with elestic scattering deﬁnded as coherent) ruins the resonance
eﬀect, reinstating the quantum reﬂection as the determining eﬀect. Finally, then, there
is no sticking, and the short answer as to why is: quantum reﬂection and many channel
decoherence. The ultrashort explanation is simply quantum reﬂection, but this is dangerous
and non-rigorous, as we have tried to show.

All this does not tell us much about how sticking turns on as incident translational
energy is raised. This is the subject of the following paper, where a WKB analysis proves
very useful. Quantum reﬂection is a physical phenomenon liked directly to the failure of the
WKB approximation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation through a grant for the In-
stitute for Theoretical Atomic and Molecular Physics at Harvard University and Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory:National Science Foundation Award Number CHE-0073544.

APPENDIX A: Γ ≃ N D

With the large number of degrees of freedom involved and assuming thorough phase
space mixing associated with the resonance we may reasonably describe the compound state
wavefunction by a classical ensemble of points (x, px, u, pu) in the combined phase space of
the joint system given by the normalized distribution

1

ρC(E)

δ(E − H(x, px, u, pu)).

(A1)

It is understood in the above that the system is restricted to be in the region x < a. This
makes all accessible states of energy E with x < a equally likely. Then the rate of escape
Γ/¯h through the hypersurface x = a of the members of this ensemble is

Γ
¯h

=

1

ρC(E) Zx=a

dudpu

Zpx∈[0,∞]

dpx

px
m

δ(E − H(x, px, u, pu)).

(A2)

px/m is just the velocity in phase space of a point at x = a in the ˆx direction. At x = a we
have supposed no interaction. Hence the Hamiltonian separates in Eq. (A2). Therefore

Γ
¯h

=

=

=

1

ρC(E) Z dudpu

∞

Z0

x

d  p2

2m! δ E −  p2

x
2m

1
ρC

1
ρC

Z

H target(u,pu)<E

dudpu

ΩC ≃

1

2π¯hρQ

ΩQ =

1

2π¯h

nD.

17

+ H target(u, pu)!!

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

Therefore Γ
D ≃ n. ρQ (ρC) is the quantum (classical) density of states (phase space volume) of
the joint system at energy E. ΩQ (ΩC) is the quantum (classical) total number of states (total
phase space volume) of only the target below energy E. We have used the correspondence
between the Classical and Quantum density of states. 1/ρQ is identiﬁed with D, and the
number of states of the target having energy less that E is just n, the number of open
channels.

APPENDIX B: INELASTIC PROBABILITY WITH BACKGROUND

We show here that the inelastic probabilities remain essentially unaﬀected in magnitude
with the presence of a background term in the S-matrix. In the isolated case the addition
of bcc′ to an inelastic element Scc′ simply changes the Lorentzian proﬁle of |Scc′|2. In the
more important overlapping case, the energy variation of Scc′ is smooth in any case without
background and

|Scc′|2 = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Bcc′ − iXλ
= |Bcc′|2 +Xλ

2

.

E(r)

λc′

Γ1/2
λc Γ1/2

λ − E − iΓλ/2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

ΓλcΓλc′

2

(E(r)

λ − E)

+ Γλ

2/4

(B1)

(B2)

where we have used the random sign property of the products Γ1/2
to neglect the 2nd
cross-term in comparison to the last one where again the same property is used to simplify
the double sum to a single one. Summing over all the inelastic channels then leads to the

λc Γλc

1/2

same result of Eq. ( 61) with an added term of Pc6=e|Bcc′|2 which itself is proportional to ke

as discussed at the end of Section V B.

[1] J. E. Lennard-Jones et. al., Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 156 6, (1936); Ser. A 156 36,

(1936).

[2] T.W. Hijmans, J.T.M. Walraven, and G.V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Rev. B 45 , 2561 (1992).
[3] W. Brenig, Z. Phys. B 36, 227 (1980).
[4] D.P. Clougherty and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. B, 46 4921 (1992).
[5] E. R. Bittner, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 5314 (1993).
[6] P. S. Julienne and F. H. Mies, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 6, 2257 (1989).
[7] P. S. Julienne, A.M. Smith, and K. Burnett, Adv. At. Mol. Op. Phys. 30, 141 (1992).
[8] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics (Non-relativistic Theory) (Pergamon

Press, Oxford (UK) 1981).

[9] C.J. Joachain, Quantum Collision Theory (North-Holland, Amsterdam 1975).
[10] G.F. Gribakin and V. V. Flambaum, Phys. Rev. A 48 546 (1993).
[11] R. Cˆote´, E. J. Heller, and A. Dalgarno, “Quantum suppression of cold atom collisions” Phys.

Rev. A 53, 234-41 (1996).

18

[12] I. A. Yu, J. Doyle, J. C. Sandberg, C. L. Cesar, D. Kleppner, and T. J. Greytak, Phys. Rev.

Lett 71 1589 (1993).

[13] J. Doyle, J. C. Sandberg, I. A. Yu, C. L. Cesar, D. Kleppner, and T. J. Greytak, Phys. Rev.
Lett 67 603 (1991); C. Carraro and M.W. Cole, Phys. Rev. B 45 , 12931 (1992); T.W. Hijmans,
J.T.M. Walraven, and G.V. Shlyapnikov, Phys. Rev. B 45 , 2561 (1992).

[14] F. T. Smith, Phys. Rev. 118, 349 (1960).
[15] N. Bohr and J. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 56 (5),416-450 (1939). see p. 426 Sec. III.

19

