1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Large Faraday rotation of resonant light in a cold
atomic cloud

G. Labeyrie, C. Miniatura and R.Kaiser
Laboratoire Ondes et D´esordre, FRE 2302 CNRS
1361 route des Lucioles, F-06560 Valbonne

January 15, 2014

Abstract

We experimentally studied the Faraday rotation of resonant light in an
optically-thick cloud of laser-cooled rubidium atoms. Measurements yield
◦
a large Verdet constant in the range of 200000
/T/mm and a maximal
polarization rotation of 150◦. A complete analysis of the polarization state
of the transmitted light was necessary to account for the role of the probe
laser’s spectrum.

PACS numbers : 33.55.Ad, 32.80.Pj

1 Introduction

During the past two years, we have been theoretically and experimentally in-
vestigating coherent backscattering (CBS) of near-resonant light in a sample
of cold rubidium atoms [1, 2, 3]. CBS is an interference eﬀect in the multiple
scattering regime of propagation inside random media, yielding an enhance-
ment of the backscattered light intensity [4]. This interference is very robust
and can be destroyed only by a few mechanisms, including Faraday rotation [5]
and dynamical eﬀects [6]. In the particular case of atomic scatterers, we have
shown that the existence of an internal Zeeman structure signiﬁcantly degrades
the CBS interference [1, 3]. The breakdown of CBS due to the Faraday eﬀect
in classical samples has been recently observed and studied in details [7], in a
situation where the scatterers are embedded in a Faraday-active matrix. We
are currently exploring the behavior of CBS when a magnetic ﬁeld is applied to
the cold atomic cloud. Since the Faraday eﬀect is expected to be large even at
weak applied ﬁelds (of the order of 1 G = 10−4 T), it seems relevant to evaluate
its magnitude in the particular regime of near-resonant excitation.

The Faraday eﬀect, i.e.

the rotation of polarization experienced by light
propagating inside a medium along an applied magnetic ﬁeld, is a well-known
phenomenon [8]. Faraday glass-based optical insulators are widely used in laser
experiments to avoid unwanted optical feedback. Due to the presence of well-
deﬁned lines (strong resonances), the Faraday eﬀect is potentially strong in

1

atomic systems, and has been extensively studied in hot vapors [9]. In addition,
light can modify the atomic gas as it propagates and induce alignment or ori-
entation via optical pumping, yielding various non-linear eﬀects [10]. However,
our experiment is quite insensitive to these eﬀects and the scope of this paper
will only be the linear, ”standard” Faraday rotation. Even though laser-cooled
atomic vapors appear interesting due to suppression of Doppler broadening and
collisions, few experiments on cold atoms are, to our knowledge, reported in the
litterature [11].

In Section 2 we expose a simple formalism to understand the main character-
istics of optical activity in an atomic system. This model, adapted to the atomic
structure of Rb, will be used in the quantitative analysis of the experimental
results. We also brieﬂy recall in this Section the principles of the Stokes analysis
of a polarization state. The experimental setup and procedure are described in
Section 3. The results are presented in Section 4, and compared to the model.

2 Faraday eﬀect and dichroism

Let us consider a gas of two-level atoms excited by a near-resonant monochro-
matic light ﬁeld of frequency ν. The induced electric dipole has a component
in phase with the excitation, which corresponds to the real part of the succep-
tibility of the atomic medium (with a dispersive behavior), and a component
in quadrature, which corresponds to the imaginary part of the succeptibility
(absorptive behavior). The former thus relates to the refractive index of the
gas, while the later corresponds to the absorption or scattering. At low light
intensity I ≪ Isat
(where Isat =1.6 mW/cm2 is the saturation intensity for
Rubidium), the refractive index n of a dilute gas is given by :

where ρ is the atomic gas density, k = 2π/λ the light wave number in vacuum,
δ = ω − ωat the light detuning, and Γ the natural width (Γ/2π = 5.9 MHz
for Rb). On the other hand, the imaginary part of the succeptibility yields the
atomic scattering cross-section σ :

n (δ) ≃ 1 − ρ

6π
k3

δ/Γ
1 + 4 (δ/Γ)2

σ (δ) =

3λ2
2π

1
1 + 4 (δ/Γ)2

(1)

(2)

with the usual Lorentzian line shape. This term will result in an attenuation
exp(−ρσL) of the incident light as it propagates over a distance L inside the
medium ; the quantity b = ρσL is the optical thickness of the atomic sample.
We thus see that the wave will experience both a phase shift and an attenuation
as it propagates.

Let us now consider a J = 0 → J’ = 1 transition excited by a linearly po-
larized light ﬁeld. A magnetic ﬁeld B is applied along the wavector k, whose

2

direction is taken as the quantization axis. The magnetic ﬁeld displaces the
resonance frequencies of the excited state Zeeman sublevels of magnetic number
me = ±1 by an amount meµB, where µ = 1.4 Mhz/G. The incident linearly-
polarized light decomposes as the sum of σ+ and σ−waves of equal amplitudes,
which couple the unshifted ground state to excited state sublevels of magnetic
number ±1 respectively. These waves thus propagate in media with diﬀerent
refractive indices n+ and n− and scattering cross-sections σ+ and σ−, and expe-
rience diﬀerent phase shifts and attenuations. If, in a ﬁrst step, we neglect the
absorption term, the two transmitted waves recombine in a linearly-polarized
λ (n+ − n−)L. This is the Fara-
2 (ϕ+ − ϕ−) = π
wave, rotated by an angle θ = 1
day rotation angle. At small magnetic ﬁeld µB/Γ ≪ 1, the rotation angle is
simply : θ ≈ b × µB/ (Γ/2π). Thus, at small B, the Faraday angle is simply
the optical thickness b times the Zeeman shift expressed in units of the nat-
ural width Γ (however, the proportionality between θ and b remains valid for
arbitrary magnetic ﬁeld). It should be emphasized that, in atomic vapors, the
Faraday eﬀect is very strong compared to that of standard Faraday materials
(like Faraday glasses), due to the high sensitivity of atomic energy levels to
magnetic ﬁeld : for a density ρ =1010 cm−3, the Verdet constant is 40◦/G/mm
(4 × 105◦/T /mm), more than four orders of magnitude above that of typical
Faraday glasses. However, for cold atomic gases, the linear increase of rotation
angle with magnetic ﬁeld is restricted to a small ﬁeld range of a few Gauss (the
Zeeman splitting must remain smaller than the natural width), above which the
Faraday eﬀect decreases.

Of course, in the regime of near-resonant excitation we are dealing with,
one usually can not neglect absorption. The diﬀerent attenuations for the σ+
and σ− components cause a deformation of the transmitted polarization as well
as rotation. The polarization thus becomes elliptic with an ellipticity (ratio
of small to large axis) determined by the diﬀerential absorption between σ+
and σ− light. This eﬀect is known as circular dichroism. The angle θ is then
the angle between the initial polarization and the large axis of the transmitted
ellipse. We will see how the Stokes analysis allows to extract θ and the ellipticity
from the measurements.

Although the simple picture developed above gives access to the main mech-
anisms of optical activity in a an atomic gas, it does not accurately describe
the F = 3 →F’= 4 transition of the D2 line of Rb85 used in this experiment.
To expand the description to the case of a ground state Zeeman structure, we
will make the simplifying assumption that all the transitions between diﬀer-
ent ground state Zeeman sublevels are independent. We thus neglect optical
pumping and coherences. The refractive index for, say, σ+ light, then writes as

3
P
m=−3

pmc+2

m n+

n+ (δ, B) =

m (δ, B), where the pm are the ground state sublevels
m the Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients for the various σ+ transi-
populations, the c+
tions, and the n+
m (δ, B) the refractive indices for the Zeeman-shifted transitions
(a transition from a ground state of magnetic number mg to an excited state
me is frequency-shifted by (mege − mggg) µB, where ge = 1/2 and gg = 1/3

3

are the Land´e factors for the F = 3 →F’= 4 transition of the D2 line of Rb85).
We can express in the same way the total scattering cross-section for each cir-
cular polarization. In the absence of magnetic ﬁeld and assuming a uniform
population distribution among the ground state sublevels, the total scattering
cross-section on resonance is σ (δ = 0) ≃ 0.43 × 3λ2/2π, the 0.43 prefactor being
the average of the squared Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcient (or the degeneracy factor
of the transition 1
3

(2F’+1)
(2F+1) ).

As discussed above, the polarization of the transmitted light can diﬀer from
the incident linear polarization. It is thus necessary to fully characterize the
polarization state of the transmitted light. This can be done using the Stokes
formalism [12]. Four quantities need to be measured : the (linear) component
of the transmitted light parallel to the incident polarization (I//), the (linear)
orthogonal component (I⊥), the (linear) component at 45◦ (I45◦ ), and one of the
two circular components (Icirc). The sum of the ﬁrst two is the total intensity
s0; the three other Stokes parameters are : s1 = I// − I⊥ = 2I// − s0, s2 =
2I45◦ − s0 and s3 = 2Icirc − s0. One can then compute the three quantities
which characterize any polarization state :

P =

2 + s2
3

ps2

1 + s2
s0

sin 2χ =

tan 2θ =

s3
s0P
s2
s1

(3)

(4)

(5)

Here, P is the degree of polarization of the light, i.e. the ratio of the intensities
of the polarized component to the unpolarized one (a pure polarization state
yields P = 1 while P = 0 corresponds to totally unpolarized light). Even
though we would not a priori expect any unpolarized component, we will see
that this analysis is indeed necessary in our case. The quantity e = tan (χ) is
the ellipticity of the polarized component (e = ±a/b, where a and b are the
small and large axis of the ellipse respectively and the + or - sign denotes the
sense of rotation of the electric ﬁeld). The Faraday angle θ is the angle between
the large axis of the ellipse and the direction of the incident polarization.

3 Description of experiment

3.1 Preparation of cold atoms

The experimental setup, essentially the same as in our coherent backscattering
experiment, is described in detail elsewhere [2]. A magneto-optical trap (MOT)
is loaded from a dilute Rb85 vapor (P ∼ 10−8mbar) using six laser beams (di-
ameter 2.8 cm, power 30 mW), two-by-two counter-propagating and tuned to
the red of the F= 3 →F’= 4 of the Rb85 D2 line (wavelength λ = 780 nm). The

4

applied magnetic ﬁeld gradient is typically 10 G/cm. During the experiment,
the MOT (trapping beams, repumper, and magnetic ﬁeld gradient) is continu-
ously turned on and oﬀ . The ”dark” period is short enough (8 ms) so that the
cold atoms do not leave the capture volume and are recaptured during the next
”bright” period (duration 20 ms).

To characterize the cold atomic cloud, we measure its optical thickness as
described in the next subsection. The shape and size of the cloud is recorded in
3D using ﬂuorescence imaging, by illuminating the sample with a laser beam de-
tuned by several Γ. We use a time-of-ﬂight technique to measure the atom’s rms
velocity, typically 10 cm/s. The atomic cloud contains typically 3 × 109atoms
with a quasi-gaussian spatial distribution ∼ 5 mm FWHM (on average, the
cloud being usually slightly cigar-shaped), yielding a peak density of ∼ 1010
cm−3.

3.2 Optical thickness and transmitted polarization mea-

surements

The laser probe used for transmission measurements lies in the horizontal plane
containing 4 of the trapping beams, at an angle of 25◦. It is produced by a 50
mW SDL diode laser injected by a Yokogawa DBR diode laser, whose linewidth
is 2-3 MHz FWHM as estimated from the beatnote between 2 identical diodes.
This laser is passed through a Fabry-Perot cavity (transmission peak FWHM 10
MHz) before being sent through the atomic cloud. Although this ﬁltering does
not signiﬁcantly reduce the linewidth of the laser, it strongly suppresses the spec-
tral components in the wings of the initial lineshape which limit the accuracy
of the transmission measurement. The frequency of the probe can be scanned
in a controlled way by ±50 MHz around the 3 → 4 transition of the D2 line.
The probe beam diameter is 1-2 mm, and its polarization is linear (vertical).
The power in the probe is typically 0.1 µW , yielding a saturation parameter s
= 2 × 10−3. It is turned on for 2 ms (yielding a maximum of about 80 photons
exchanged per atoms), typically 5 ms after the MOT is switched oﬀ. The trans-
mitted beam is detected by a photodiode after a rough spatial mode selection
by two diaphragms of diameter 3 mm, distant of 1 m. The optical thickness
measurement is performed without applied magnetic ﬁeld. As we emphasized
in [2], simply measuring the on-resonance transmission yields a strongly biased
estimate for the optical thickness b, due to the oﬀ-resonant components in the
probe laser’s spectrum. To overcome this problem, one solution is to scan the
laser detuning δ and record the transmission line shape. We describe this curve
as the convolution product of the transmission line for a purely monochromatic
laser T(δ) = exp (−b (δ)) with the laser line shape. If the later is known, one
can extract the optical thickness from the transmission data (for instance from
the FWHM of the transmission curve). This method is quite accurate for large
values of b, where the width of the transmission curve is only weakly dependent
on the laser’s linewidth. For small values of b, measuring the transmission at
δ = 0 is more accurate but still requires some knowledge of the probe laser’s
spectrum. When working with dense atomic clouds at non-zero detuning, one

5

should also keep in mind the possible inﬂuence of ”lensing” eﬀect (focussing or
deﬂection of the transmitted beam), due to the spatially-inhomogeneous refrac-
tive index of the sample. In our case, the rather large cloud size (∼ 5 mm) and
moderate density (∼ 1010 cm−3) yield a large focal length of about 25 m for the
cloud, and a small (but still measurable) lensing eﬀect.

Using the measured size of the cloud and assuming a uniform population
distribution in the ground state, we can then obtain the peak atomic density and
the number of atoms in the sample. The maximal optical thickness measured
in our trap is b = 24 (yielding a FWHM for the transmission curve ∆δ ∼ 6Γ).
As mentioned in Section 2, the Stokes analysis relies on four transmission
measurements. To perform the polarization measurement, we insert a polarime-
ter in the path of the transmitted beam, as shown in ﬁg.1.
It consists of a
quarter-wave plate (only used for the circular component), a half-wave plate
and a glan prism polarizer (ﬁxed). The rejection factor of the polarizer is
∼ 10−3. The four transmission signals (I//, I⊥, I45◦ and Icirc) are recorded
as a function of the laser detuning. The degree of polarization, ellipticity and
rotation angle can then be computed using expressions (3), (4), and (5).

4 Results and discussion

4.1 Role of detuning

Fig.2 shows a typical example of the raw signals obtained in the four polarization
channels necessary for the Stokes analysis detailed in Sec.2. The transmitted
intensity is recorded as a function of the detuning (expressed in units of Γ) in the
parallel (A), orthogonal (B), 45◦ (C) and circular (D) polarization channels.
All curves have been scaled by the incident intensity. These data were obtained
for a sample of optical thickness b = 4.6 and an applied magnetic ﬁeld B = 3G.
We see on curve (B) that more than 10% of the incident light is transferred
to the orthogonal channel. On curves (C) and (D), the oﬀ-resonant detected
intensities are close to 0.5, since the incident linear polarization projection on
each of these channels is 1/2. The transmission curve (D), which corresponds
to the σ+ component, presents a minimum shifted towards positive detunings
by the Zeeman eﬀect ; the position of the minimum corresponds roughly to
the splitting of the mg = +3 → me = +4 transition (1.4 MHz/G), which
has a maximum Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcient of 1. Curves (B) and (C) exhibit
noticeable asymmetries, which we will discuss later.

From the data of ﬁg.2, we computed the three curves P (δ) (A), e (δ) (B) and
θ (δ) (C) characterizing the polarization state of the transmitted light (ﬁg.3).
We note on the curve (A) of ﬁg.3 that the degree of polarization P is not always
equal to unity, and can be substantially smaller depending on the parameters.
This unexpected observation is due to the ﬁnite linewidth of our probe beam
:
light components at diﬀerent frequencies, initially all linearly polarized, ex-
perience diﬀerent rotations and deformations while passing through the cloud.
Because these components have diﬀerent frequencies, the result of their recom-

6

bination, when integrated over a time long compared to their beatnote time, is
a loss of polarization (for example, two orthogonal linearly-polarized waves of
diﬀerent frequencies and same intensity yield a totally unpolarized light P = 0).
The result of the recombination of all the spectral components is not straight-
forward to predict, since each frequency is transmitted with a diﬀerent intensity,
ellipticity and rotation angle. However, if we assume that all the spectral com-
ponents are mutually incoherent, the total intensity detected in each channel is
the sum of the intensities corresponding to all the spectral components. Thus,
in order to compare the experimental data with the model, we convolute the
transmission curves I// (δ) , I⊥ (δ), I45◦ (δ) and Icirc (δ), as calculated with the
model of Sec.2, with the power spectrum of the probe laser. We can then com-
pute the curves P (δ), e (δ) and θ (δ) using expressions (3), (4), and (5). We
stress that the inﬂuence of the laser’s linewidth is quite strong : even for a
(lorentzian) linewidth of a tenth of the natural width, for an optical thickness
b = 5 and a magnetic ﬁeld B = 1G, the loss of polarization is already 32%
(P = 0.68). This phenomenon also aﬀects the estimates for the ellipticity and
the rotation angle, since these quantities reﬂect mainly the polarization state
of the dominant transmitted spectral component. Indeed, if one again consid-
ers the example of the superposition of two waves of diﬀerent frequencies and
polarizations (pure states), the results of the Stokes analysis will vary continu-
ously from one polarization state to the other depending on the intensity ratio
In the intermediate regime of comparable intensities, the
of the two waves.
Stokes analysis will not describe adequately any of the two polarizations.
It
should be noted that this situation diﬀers from the case where the studied light
consist of a polarized component plus a depolarized one [12] ; in this case, the
Stokes analysis provides the ”correct” result (that is, the ellipticity and angle
of the polarized component), even for arbitrarily small proportion of polarized
light. We experimentally tested the inﬂuence of a polychromatic excitation by
superimposing to the normal probe beam a weaker one, obtained from the same
laser but detuned by 80 MHz with an acousto-optic modulator. The calcu-
lated degradation of P (δ), e (δ) and θ (δ) account well for the experimentally
observed behavior.

Fig.3 (B) shows how the ellipticity e of the polarized component of the
transmitted light varies with laser detuning. For δ > 0, it is mainly the σ+
component of the incident light which is absorbed, yielding a mostly σ− trans-
mitted polarization (negative ellipticity). On resonance (δ = 0) both compo-
nents are absorbed in the same proportion, an the transmitted polarization is
linear (e = 0). Since the ellipticity depends on the diﬀerential absorption be-
tween circular components, it is a direct measurement of the dichroism in the
sample. The curve on ﬁg.3 (C) is the Faraday rotation angle computed from ex-
pression (5). The on-resonance rotation in this case is about 40◦. The solid lines
in ﬁg.3 are obtained with our model using the convolution procedure discussed
above ; the probe light spectrum is described by the product of a lorentzian
laser lineshape (FWHM = 3 MHz) by a lorentzian Fabry-Perot transmission
(FWHM =10 MHz). We account for the observed asymmetry in the experi-
mental curves by introducing a linear variation in the populations of the ground

7

state sublevels (i.e. a partial orientation of the sample), with maximum vari-
ation ±20% between extreme magnetic numbers mg = ±3. We have checked
some other possible mechanisms for this asymmetry, such as the proximity of
the F= 3 →F’= 3 transition (121 MHz to the red) or optical pumping, but
both eﬀects seem to play a small role. The fact that we were also able to in-
vert the asymmetry by varying the orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld produced
by the compensation coils also favors the hypothesis of a partial orientation
of the medium. We actually do see some optical pumping eﬀects, manifested
by variations of the measured transmission signals with time during the probe
pulse (duration 2 ms). The overall eﬀect of optical pumping is to increase the
Faraday rotation as the number of exchanged photons (i.e. time) increases, i.e.
the measured rotation immediatly after turning on the probe is smaller than
after 2 ms of presence of the light (by about 6%).

The comparison of ﬁg.3 between experiment and theory shows that, despite
some discrepancies due to our rather vague knowledge of the probe lineshape
and to the simplicity of our model, the overall agreement is quite satisfying.

4.2 Role of magnetic ﬁeld

To determine the Verdet constant, it is necessary to measure the Faraday an-
gle as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld. Fig.4 shows such curves obtained for
two diﬀerent optical thicknesses : b = 0.75 (solid circles) and b = 9 (open cir-
cles). For each curve, the on-resonance Faraday angle θ is scaled by the optical
thickness of the cloud, since one expects the rotation to be proportional to the
optical thickness (thus, all experimental data should lie on the same ”universal”
curve). The solid line is the prediction of the model with a inﬁnitely narrow
probe laser. Its slope around B = 0 is about 10◦/G , yielding a Verdet constant
V = 20◦/G/mm for an optical thickness b = 10 and a sample diameter of 5
mm. The dashed curve represents the small optical thickness limit when the
laser linewidth is taken into account, which lowers the slope at around 6◦/G.

Both curves exhibit the expected dispersive shape, with a linear increase of
the Faraday angle at small magnetic ﬁeld values (where the Verdet constant
is deﬁned), and then a decreasing rotation when the splitting between the σ+
and σ− transitions becomes larger than the natural width. The experimental
curve for small optical thickness is quite close to the model prediction (dashed
line). For larger values of the optical thickness, the measurements depart from
this ideal situation due to the ﬁnite linewidth of the laser : the curve for b = 9
presents a smaller slope around B = 0 and the scaled rotation is globally re-
duced. As the optical thickness is further increased, the transmitted light be-
comes increasingly dominated by oﬀ-resonant components of the laser spectrum
and the information about the central (resonant) frequency is lost. This process
is further illustrated in the following subsection.

8

4.3 Role of optical thickness

In the ideal case of a monochromatic laser, one expects the Faraday rotation to
increase linearly with optical thickness. We thus recorded the rotation at δ = 0
and a ﬁxed value of B, as a function of the optical thickness which was varied by
detuning the trapping laser. The result of such an experiment is shown in ﬁg.5.
The open circles correspond to an applied magnetic ﬁeld B = 2 G, while the solid
circles are for B = 8 G. The solid line is the expected evolution for B = 8 G and
a monochromatic laser; the dashed line is the prediction of the same model for
B = 2 G. We see that, for the higher value of B, the expected linear behavior is
indeed obtained, yielding a slope of about 8◦/G. The (absolute) rotation angle
increases up to ∼ 150◦. However, the evolution observed at smaller magnetic
ﬁeld (B = 2 G, circles) is quite diﬀerent, where the data quickly depart from the
linear evolution even at low optical thickness and suddenly drop towards positive
values of the angle at large optical thickness. Qualitatively, this reﬂects the fact
that, at small applied ﬁeld and large optical thickness, the central (resonant)
frequency of the probe laser is strongly attenuated and can become smaller
than other (oﬀ-resonant) spectral components. The measured rotation angle
then passes continuously from the angle of the central frequency component to
that of the dominant detuned component (in the wings of the absorption line),
which can be negative (see ﬁg.3 (C)). The large dispersion of the data for B = 2
G above b ∼ 12 is due to the important relative error in this low transmission
regime. At larger B ﬁeld, the on-resonance transmission increases due to the
Zeeman splitting, and the central frequency component remains dominant for
larger values of the optical thickness (for instance, the total transmission at
b = 20 is around 0.1 for B = 8 G, while it is only 3×10−3 for B = 2 G).

Thus, the simple model of Section 2 provides us with a good description for
the various behaviors observed experimentally. A fair quantitative agreement is
obtained for moderate optical thickness or high magnetic ﬁeld. The model is also
helpful to understand the important role played by the lineshape of the probe
laser in this experimental situation of optically-thick sample and resonant light.
The experimental data conﬁrm the occurrence of large Faraday eﬀect inside our
atomic cloud, with a Verdet constant in the range of 20◦/G/mm for a typical
optical thickness of 10.

5 Conclusion

We have reported in this paper the measurement of large Faraday eﬀect in an
optically-thick sample of cold rubidium atoms. Due to near-resonant excitation,
we need to take into account both Faraday rotation (diﬀerential refractive in-
dex) and dichroism (diﬀerential absorption) to analyze the experimental data.
Using a very simple model for our F = 3 →F’= 4 transition, we obtain a good
agreement with the experimental data. We measure large Verdet constant of
the order of 20◦/G/mm. We have shown that the ﬁnite width of the laser spec-
trum plays a crucial role in the signals obtained for an optically-thick sample.

9

A complete analysis of the transmitted light polarization state is then necessary
to correctly interpret the data.

The determination of the Verdet constant V in the cloud is an important step
in our current study of the eﬀect of an applied magnetic ﬁeld on the coherent
backscattering of light by the cold atoms. For Faraday eﬀect to seriously aﬀect
the CBS cone, one needs the phase diﬀerence between time-reversed waves,
accumulated on a distance of the order of the light mean-free path l, to be of
the order of π (i.e. a rotation of π/2 for a linear polarization). This corresponds
to a situation where V Bl ∼ 1 [7]. However, the main diﬀerence between the
situation of ref.[7] (scatterers in a Faraday-active matrix) and our atomic cloud
situation is that, in our case, the Verdet constant is determined by the density
of scatterers ρ (V proportional to ρ), which in turn ﬁxes the mean-free path
(l proportional to1/ρ). Thus, there is a maximum rotation per mean-free path
length scale, which is about 13◦ (for B = 3 G) according to the curve of ﬁg.4
(solid line). It seems to us interesting to study this unusual situation. Our aim
is also to understand how the Faraday eﬀect combines to the other eﬀects due
to the atom’s internal structure to determine the CBS enhancement factor in
the presence of an external magnetic ﬁeld.

Acknowledgement 1 This research program is supported by the CNRS and
the PACA Region. We also thank the GDR PRIMA. The contribution of J.-C.
Bernard was determinant in the development of the experiment. We are grateful
to D. Delande for some very fruitful discussions.

6 Bibliography

References

[1] G. Labeyrie, F. de Tomasi, J.-C. Bernard, C. A. M¨uller, C. Miniatura &

R. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 5266 (1999).

[2] G. Labeyrie, C.A. M¨uller, D.S. Wiersma, Ch. Miniatura and R. Kaiser, J.

Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt 2 672-685(2000).

[3] T. Jonckheere, C.A. M¨uller, R. Kaiser, Ch. Miniatura and D. Delande,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4269 (2000).

[4] M.P. van Albada, A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2692 (1985) ; E.
Akkermans, P.E. Wolf and R. Maynard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1471 (1986).

[5] F.C. MacKintosh and Sajeev John, Phys. Rev. B 37, 1884 (1988); A.S.
Martinez and R. Maynard, Phys. Rev. B 50, 3714 (1994); D. Lacoste and
B.A. van Tiggelen, Phys. Rev. B 61, 4556 (2000).

[6] A.A. Golubentsev, Sov. Phys. JETP 59, 26 (1984).

[7] R. Lenke and G. Maret, Eur. Phys. J. B 17, 171 (2000).

10

[8] L.D. Barron, Molecular Light Scattering and Optical Activity (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1982).

[9] F. Schuller, M.J.D. Macpherson, D. N. Stacey, R.B. Warringtonand K.P.
Zetie, Optics Comm. 86, 123 (1991); M. Kristensen, F.J. Blok, M.A. van
Eijkelenborg, G. Nienhuis, and J.P. Woerdman, Phys. Rev. A 51, 1085
(1995).

[10] G.G. Adonts, D.G. Akopyan, and K. V. Arutunyan, J. Phys. B : At. Mol.
Phys. 19, 4113 (1986); W. V. Davis, A.L. Gaeata, and R.W. Boyd, Opt.
Lett. 17 (18), 1304 (1992); S.I. Kanorsky, A. Weis, J. Wurster, and T.W.
H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. A 47, 1220 (1993); D. Budker, D.F. Kimball, S.M.
Rochester, and V.V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2088 (2000).

[11] T. Isayama, Y. Takahashi, N. Tanaka, K. Ishikawa, and T. Yabuzaki, Phys.

Rev. A 59, 4836 (1999).

Press, p. 554.

[12] Max Born and Emil Wolf in Principles of Optics, sixth edition, Pergamon

Figures captions:
Figure 1 : Simpliﬁed experimental setup.
A probe laser beam of linear polarization Ei and wave vector k is sent
through the cold atomic cloud, where a magnetic ﬁeld B is applied along k.
The polarization Et of the transmitted probe light is deformed and rotated.
A polarimeter measures the transmitted intensities in four polarization chan-
nels : I// (parallel to the incident polarization), I⊥ (orthogonal to the incident
polarization), I45◦ (at 45◦ from the incident polarization), Icirc (circular polar-
ization). These quantities allow to determine the degree of polarization P , the
ellipticity e, and the rotation angle θ of the transmitted light.

Figure 2 : Typical transmission curves in the four polarization channels.
The transmission is measured as a function of the laser detuning (in units
of the natural width Γ), for a sample of optical thickness (at zero ﬁeld) b = 4.6
and an applied magnetic ﬁeld B = 3 G. All data are scaled by the total incident
light intensity. A : intensity I// in the linear parallel channel. B : intensity I⊥
in the linear orthogonal channel. C : intensity I45◦ in the linear 45◦ channel. D
: intensity Icirc in the circular channel.

Figure 3 : Typical results from the Stokes polarization analysis and com-

parison with model.

These curves are obtained from the data of ﬁg.2. A : degree of polarization
P (see expressions (3)). B : ellipticity e. C : Faraday rotation angle θ. The
symbols correspond to experimental data and the solid lines to the predictions
of the model described in Sec. II. To reproduce the experimental asymmetry,
the model assumes a linear variation of the ground state populations pm with
magnetic number m, with a total variation amplitude of 40% between extreme
ground state sublevels mg = ±3.

11

Figure 4 : Scaled Faraday angle as a function of the applied magnetic ﬁeld

B.

The rotation angle θ is scaled by the optical thickness b of the sample. The
symbols correspond to samples with two diﬀerent optical thicknesses : b = 0.75
(solid circles) and b = 9 (open circles). The solid line is the model prediction
assuming a monochromatic probe laser (and a uniform population distribution
in the ground state). The dotted line is the small optical thickness limit of the
model when taking into account the lineshape of the probe laser.

Figure 5 : On-resonance Faraday rotation angle θ as a function of the

optical thickness.

The symbols correspond to experiments with two diﬀerent values of the mag-
netic ﬁeld : B = 2 G (open circles) and B = 8 G (solid circles). The optical
thickness of the atomic cloud is varied by scanning the detuning of the MOT
laser. The lines correspond to the predictions of the model with a monochro-
matic laser, for B = 2 G (dashed line) and B = 8 G (solid line). For the
largest B value, we observe the expected linear increase of Faraday angle with
optical thickness. The measured rotation is close to the prediction of the ideal,
monochromatic model (solid line). On the other hand, the behavior for B = 2
G is quite diﬀerent : the rotation angle quickly departs from the linear increase,
saturates and then decreases. Indeed, as optical thickness increases, the mea-
sured rotation becomes increasingly aﬀected by other spectral components of
the laser, until these oﬀ-resonant frequencies become dominant causing a sharp
drop of the angle. At large B the central, resonant frequency component of the
laser is always dominant in the optical thickness range investigated, and the
linear behavior is recovered.

12

//

45°

polarimeter

B

b

a

x

Ei

k

z

Et
cold atomic
cloud

y

figure 1

^
q
 

B

D

1,0

A

/
/
 

I

0,5

0,0
1,0

C

°
5
4
 

I
 

0,5

0,0

 

0
 d / G

-6

-4

-2

2

4

6

-6

-4

-2

2

4

6

0
 d / G

0,10

 
I

 ^

0,05

0,00
1,0

 
 
I

 
c
i
r
c

0,5

0,0

figure 2

Faraday angle q  (°)

-
2
0

0

2
0

4
0

-
0
,
5

 ellipticity e

degree of polarization P

0
,
0

0
,
5

0
,
0

0
,
5

1
,
0

C

B

A

f
i
g
u
r
e
 
3

d 
/
 

0

-
8

-
6

-
4

-
2

2

4

6

8

G
)
°
(
 
b
 
/
 

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-15

-10

-5

0
magnetic field (G)

5

10

15

figure 4

q
150

100

50

0

)
°
(
 

 q
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r
 
y
a
d
a
r
a
F

-50

0

5

10

15
optical thickness

20

figure 5

