1
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
3
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬃcient magneto-optical trapping of a metastable helium gas

F. Pereira Dos Santos, F. Peralesa, J. L´eonard, A. Sinatra, Junmin Wangb,
F. S. Pavonec, E. Raseld, C.S. Unnikrishnane, M. Leduc
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel∗, D´epartement de Physique, Ecole Normale Sup´erieure,
24 rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France

Abstract

This article presents a new experiment aiming at BEC of metastable helium atoms. It
describes the design of a high ﬂux discharge source of atoms and a robust laser system using a
DBR diode coupled with a high power Yb doped ﬁber ampliﬁer for manipulating the beam of
metastable atoms. The atoms are trapped in a small quartz cell in an extreme high vacuum.
The trapping design uses an additional laser (repumper) and allows the capture of a large
number of metastable helium atoms (approximately 109) in a geometry favorable for loading
a tight magnetostatic trap.

PACS 32.80.PjOptical cooling of atoms;trapping

1

Introduction

The main goals of this experiment is ﬁrst to produce a gas of 4He atoms in the metastable
23S1 state with a density as large as possible, and then to bring down the temperature of the
gas to ultralow temperatures. This experiment replaces an earlier experiment based on the
VSCPT cooling method [1] which, despite the achievement of ultra low temperatures, could
not reach high phase space densities, due to the small number of atoms being cooled. Let
us mention that several other groups are involved in experiments with similar goals dealing
with trapped ultracold metastable helium atoms [2, 3, 4]. The present experiment, as well as
those of references [3, 4], aim at achieving Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) by combination
of laser cooling, magnetic trapping and subsequent evaporative cooling, following the route
successfully taken for BEC of alkali atoms (Rb,Na,Li) since 1995 [5, 6, 7] and atomic hydrogen
in 1998 [8]. A metastable helium condensate would be the ﬁrst one with atoms in an excited
state of high internal energy (19.8 eV) and long lifetime (approximately 8000 s). It should be
interesting to compare the properties of such a gaseous dilute helium condensate to those of
superﬂuid liquid helium, dominated by interactions between particles. Helium BEC should
be capable of forming a helium atom laser as it was the case for alkali BEC. There are many
applications of such coherent matter waves. For instance a metastable atom laser [9] could be
a valuable source for lithography [10]. Another application for helium atoms is metrological
[11], since its energy levels can be calculated with a high degree of accuracy. Let us ﬁnally
mention an interesting property of these metastable helium atoms. They can transfer their
high internal energy when they collide with surfaces or molecules. This property can be used
for highly eﬃcient detection, almost ”one by one”, with good spatial and temporal resolution
[12], using microchannel plates for example.

It thus appears that the metastable helium atom displays appealing features as a candi-
date for BEC. According to theoretical predictions [13], the cross section for elastic collisions
between cold metastable atoms should be large, ensuring rapid thermalisation for eﬃcient
evaporative cooling in the magnetic trap. Furthermore, Penning collisions which are the
main source of inelastic losses in a magneto-optical trap, are expected to have a rate slow
enough to allow the formation of BEC in a magnetostatic trap. However, reaching BEC with

1

metastable helium remains uncertain. The predicted value of approximately 10 nm for the
scattering length could be inaccurate as it is very sensitive to the details of long range elastic
potential between atoms, which is not known to a high accuracy. It should also be mentioned
that the rates of the inelastic collisions, which are likely to heat up and empty the trap at
low temperatures [13, 14, 15], have not yet been measured. From an experimental point of
view, one ﬁrst needs to trap a dense cloud of these atoms in an ultra high vacuum. A second
step is to construct a strongly conﬁning magnetostatic trap. Thus, we choose to trap the
atomic cloud in a quartz cell of small dimension while having the conﬁning magnets external
to the cell and close to the vacuum chamber. Section 2 of this article gives details of the
discharge source and of the optimal parameters chosen to achieve a high ﬂux of metastable
helium atoms. Section 3 shows the laser system consisting in a DBR diode laser coupled
with a high power ﬁber ampliﬁer. Section 4 describes the laser techniques used to increase
the brightness of the beam of atoms, to deﬂect it from the beam of ground state atoms and
to slow it down in a spatially varying magnetic ﬁeld. Section 5 demonstrates the advantages
of our particular trapping scheme.

2 The source of metastable atoms

2.1 Principle

The development of an intense and slow beam of metastable helium atoms requires to solve
several problems. First, helium atoms have to be eﬃciently excited to the metastable state.
Secondly, the beam has to be cooled to a low enough temperature to avoid diﬃculties with
the subsequent deceleration, knowing that the small mass of the atom results in a high ve-
locity at room temperature. In a previous experiment [1], metastable atoms were produced
at a moderate rate by electron bombardment and they were cooled down to liquid helium
temperature. In the present setup, a diﬀerent strategy is used: metastable atoms are pro-
duced in a gas discharge and cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature, reaching mean velocities
of approximately 1000 m/s. It is known that the most eﬃcient way to produce high rates
of metastable helium atoms is to start with a pulsed or continuous gas discharge, where
atoms are excited to upper states by electronic collisions and then decay to the long-lived
metastable state. A fraction between 10−6 and 10−4 of the ground-state atomic ﬂux can be
produced in the metastable state with an intense discharge. However, the heat generation in
the discharge makes it diﬃcult to obtain both intense and cold atomic beam of metastable
helium. Several attempts [16, 17, 18] have been made to solve this problem. The source
developed at ENS results from a design which combines several advantages of the sources
developed by the other groups. The setup is compact and robust and gives a reliable large
ﬂux of atoms, a signiﬁcant number of which have velocities below 1000 m/s.
All discharge sources for metastable helium consist basically of a gas reservoir ﬁlled with
helium gas to a pressure of a few tens of mbar. The discharge occurs between the cathode
inside the reservoir through the outlet channel to the anode, placed on the high vacuum side,
or directly to the skimmer. The design of Fahey et al. [16] achieves low gas temperatures by
cooling only the nozzle with liquid nitrogen. The source described by Kawanaka [17] makes
use of an elaborate scheme to cool down all of the source and to remove the hot gas by
a roughing pump. Similar results have been obtained regarding ﬂuxes reaching up to 1014
atoms per second and steradian [16] and [17]. Velocities are found to be slightly above 1000
m/s in [16] and slightly below 1000 m/s in [17]. For the design presented here and shown
in ﬁg. 1, the complete source, including the discharge electrodes, is cooled in a simple and
eﬃcient way. No additional eﬀort such as removing the hot gas is required. As a result the
entire source is very compact. A careful design of the shape of the electrodes and of the gas
outlet ensures that the discharge is partially burning into the high vacuum (see ﬁg. 1) rather
than inside the reservoir. This provides a high ﬂux of metastable atoms, as they do not hit
walls at the place where they are produced. The design is such that a reliable and stable
operation mode has been achieved for several weeks of continuous operation.

2

2.2 The source design

Isolator
(Araldite)

liquid nitrogen

aluminum
anode

anode

boron
nitride

skimmer

a)

high
voltage

Helium

flange

indium
o-ring

boron nitride
Helium

cathode

Helium

b)

outlet
channel
0.4 mm

copper

liquid nitrogen
4 cm

discharge

4 cm

Source
chamber
P=10-4 mbar

Detection
chamber
P=10-6 mbar

Figure 1: a) Compact discharge source of metastable helium atoms. The discharge burns in the outlet channel
and outside the anode. The metallic anode is cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. b) Zoom of the outlet channel
region. The source and detection chambers are separated by the skimmer.

The source shown in ﬁg. 1 consists of a cylindrical gas reservoir entirely made of boron
nitride, a material which has a suﬃciently high heat conductivity as well as a high electrical
and chemical resistance. This material was already used by Fahey et al. for the nozzle of
their discharge source [16]. The external part of the gas reservoir is covered with vacuum
grease for better thermal contact with the copper cylinder cooled by liquid nitrogen, into
which it is pressed. A copper ﬂange, held by an electrically isolating support of araldite and
tightened by an indium o-ring, closes the reservoir on the backside. The ﬂange serves as the
inlet of the helium gas, as well as for the mount of the cathode. The cathode is a stainless
steel tip adjustable in position during mounting. The distance between cathode and anode
is typically between 2 and 3 mm but it is not found critical.

The particular shape of both electrodes allows them to be centered with respect to each
other by mounting them on the reservoir. Particular care was taken to design the gas outlet,
a 2 mm long channel of 0.4 mm in diameter drawn in the boron nitride reservoir and located
in front of the cathode. The outlet channel diameter is chosen in such a way that a stable
discharge and a high ﬂux of metastable atoms are reached, even at low operating discharge
currents and for gas loads adapted to the speed of the pumps.
It is directly followed by
the anode, a 1 mm thick aluminum disc with a hole of 0.4 mm in diameter. A particular
feature of the present design is that the anode is cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. For
eﬃcient cooling it is tightly ﬁxed on the copper container. Crucial for reliable operation of
the discharge is the cleanliness of the cathode and anode. During operation both parts suﬀer
from impurities of the gas or from the oil vapor of the diﬀusion pumps. Our design allows
easy dismantling of the source to clean the electrodes.
The material, the size, the depth and the alignment are crucial for an eﬃcient excitation
of helium atoms. Best performances were obtained with an aluminum anode with a hole of
diameter at least as large as that of the outlet channel in the boron nitride reservoir. This
ensures that the electrical ﬁeld lines reach into the source chamber (see ﬁg. 1 b), so that
the discharge extends also into the vacuum at the source exit. The cylindrical design and
the length (30 mm) of the reservoir have been chosen such that no parasitic discharge can
occur competing with the discharge at the source exit when operated in a pressure range of
10 torrs. The source reservoir is ﬁlled with gas via a plastic tube, which isolates the source
from the vacuum chamber. A throttle valve in front of the gas inlet keeps the pressure high
in the gas tube and suppresses parasitic discharge in the tube. To avoid contamination of
the source, the helium gas is ﬁltered with charcoal.

3

2.3 Measurement of the atomic ﬂux and velocity

The source has been tested in a vacuum apparatus consisting of two vacuum chambers (see
ﬁg. 1), one for the source and one for the beam diagnostic. Both chambers are separated
by a skimmer (1 mm diameter) and evacuated by diﬀusion pumps (pumping speed of ap-
proximately 800 l/s) equipped with liquid nitrogen traps. During operation the pressure in
the source chamber rises to approximately 10−4 mbar, in the detection chamber to approx-
imately 10−6 mbar. To characterize the atomic beam an in-situ detector was constructed,
consisting of a gold mirror and a channeltron (ﬁg. 2). Upon collision with the mirror surface,
metastable atoms decay down to the ground state and release one electron out of the surface,
with a high eﬃciency [19]. Assuming that each metastable atom hitting the mirror releases
an electron, one gets a lower limit for the atomic ﬂux by measuring the current with a pi-
coammeter. The metastable beam can also be pulsed with a mechanical chopper, in order

metastable helium beam

e-

Electron

Pico-
ammeter

Oscilloscope

Channeltron

Figure 2: In-situ detection of the atomic beam

to perform time of ﬂight measurements. In this case, the current on the gold mirror is too
weak to be detected. The released electrons need to be accelerated towards a channeltron
which detects the ampliﬁed current. The pulsed signal of the channeltron is then sent to an
oscilloscope to record the time of ﬂight distribution. To separate the metastable triplets 23S1
from other species produced by the discharge (UV light, ions, metastable singlet 21S0), the
beam is collimated by diaphragms, and deﬂected by a laser beam tuned to the 23S1 → 23P2
transition (see section 3). From the time of ﬂight measurements with and without deﬂection,
it has been observed that the source essentially produces metastable atoms which are in the
triplet state. We assume that the singlet state atoms are quenched by the radiation emitted
by the discharge.

2.4 Choice of discharge current and pressure

The eﬃciency of the source depends on a large variety of parameters: the gas pressure and
temperature, the discharge current, the purity of helium and the geometry of the discharge.
All these parameters have to be carefully optimized to obtain the highest maximum ﬂux with
moderate heating. The discharge current and the pressure inside of the gas reservoir were
separately varied as shown in ﬁg. 3. For a given pressure, the production rate of metastable
atoms increases linearly with the current up to 4 mA (ﬁg. 3 a). For higher currents the
rate starts to saturate. With increasing current, the gas temperature rises locally in the
discharge region due to resistive heating resulting in a higher atomic velocity (see ﬁg. 3
c). A current of approximately 6 mA was chosen as a compromise between high ﬂux and
low velocities. In ﬁgure 3 b), there are two regimes for the pressure. At lower pressures,
an increase of pressure inside the reservoir results in an increase of the metastable helium
ﬂux. At higher pressures, an increase of pressure inside the reservoir leads to a decrease of
ﬂux due to quenching of metastable helium atoms by collisions between metastable atoms
in the nozzle region and by collisions with the background gas. Eventually, if the pressure is
increased passed the background pressure of 3 × 10−4 mbar, the metastable helium beam can
be completely quenched. For the vacuum setup described above, the optimum pressure was
achieved at approximately 10−4 mbar. After optimization of all parameters of the atomic

4

P=1.25 10-4 mbar

I=6mA

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16

Discharge current (mA)

0,5

1,0

1,5

2,0

2,5

3,0

Pressure (10-4 mbar)

P=1.25 10-4 mbar

I=6mA

a)

c)

04
1 0

02
1 0
00
1 0

98

0

96
94

0

0

b)

d)

0

4

6

2
Discharge current (mA)

8 10 12 14 16

0,5

1,5

1,0
Pressure (10-4 mbar)

2,0

2,5

3,0

1100

1050

1000

950

900

Figure 3: Curves a) and b) show the atomic ﬂux, in arbitrary units, inferred from the maximum of the time of
ﬂight distribution as a function of the discharge current and the pressure in the vacuum chamber. Curves c) and
d) display the corresponding mean velocity as a function of the discharge current and the pressure in the vacuum
chamber. Curves a) and c) are taken at a pressure of 1.25 × 10−4 mbar, curves b) and d) for a current of 6 mA.
Note : the pressure in the reservoir is proportional to the pressure in the vacuum chamber (see ﬁgure 1).

source, ﬂuxes of triplet metastable atoms of the order of 2 × 1014 atoms/sec/steradian were
found, with a mean velocity of 1000 m/s. Using this highly compact source, the measured
values compare well with the ones obtained in other experiments [16, 17, 18].

3 The laser system

Earlier experiments on laser cooling and trapping of helium at 1083 nm (transition 23S1 →
23P2) were performed using a LNA ring laser, pumped by an argon ion laser [20]. In this
experiment, we use an optical ampliﬁer based on Ytterbium doped ﬁber (IRE-POLUS) and
seeded by a diode laser at 1083 nm. This laser source is especially eﬃcient to manipulate
metastable helium atoms. Historically, the ﬁrst Ytterbium ﬁber ampliﬁer was developed
and characterized in a single stage low ampliﬁcation conﬁguration [21]. Later, a double core
prototype of this MOPFA system (Master Oscillation Power Fiber Ampliﬁer) was built by
S.V. Chernikov [22]. The laser system used in the present experiment is shown in ﬁgure 4.

1 mW

C2

600 mW

SRM

C1

 DBR
LD

PZT

OI

P1 P2

OI

OI

DCF

OI

V-SP

APC

Master Oscillator

Power Amplifier

B1
75mW, d  = 0 MHz

B2

B3

15mW, d  = -240 MHz

150 mW, d  = -45 MHz

B4
10 mW, d  = 0 MHz

Figure 4: Laser setup. A master oscillator at 1.083 µm (DBR Laser Diode) injects an optical Yb doped ﬁber
power ampliﬁer. C1 : collimator, PZT : piezo-transducer, SRM : semi-reﬂecting mirror, OI : optical isolator, P1
and P2 : λ/2 and λ/4 plates, V-SP : V-groove side-pumping by diode arrays, DCF : double clad ﬁber, APC :
angle polished connector, C2 : collimator. The box representing the power ampliﬁer, commercially available from
IRE-POLUS, has two ﬁber connections for input and output. The output beam is split up in four independent
beams : B1 represents the collimation-deﬂection beam, B2 the slowing beam, B3 the MOT beams and B4 the
probe beam.

The seed laser is a single mode DBR laser diode (SDL-6702-H1) emitting at 1083nm and
delivering a maximum power of 50mW. The line width of the laser diode is reduced from

5

3 MHz to 250 kHz by an external cavity using a semireﬂecting mirror of transmission 80
%, as has already been observed [23]. The laser diode is coupled with the ﬁber ampliﬁer
using bulk optics. Two optical isolators providing a total isolation of 60 dB prevent optical
In addition, a set of two birefringent plates (λ/2 and λ/4)
feedback in the DBR diode.
of adjustable orientation compensates for the birefringence of the ampliﬁer, which slightly
varies with temperature changes and mechanical stress. This adjustment provides the proper
linear polarization at the output of the ampliﬁer. An additional 30 dB optical isolator is
placed at its output because the ampliﬁer is sensitive to feedback from the experiment. The
Yb doped ﬁber ampliﬁer consists of two ampliﬁcation stages, both pumped by diode arrays
operating at 970 nm (V-groove side pumping). The second amplifying stage (called booster)
is designed for 600 mW saturated output power. It consists of a double clad ﬁber (DCF)
with an optimized bidirectional side pumping. The angle polished connector (APC) at the
output end prevents the ampliﬁer from oscillating. An input power of 1mW is suﬃcient to
saturate the ampliﬁer and achieve performances independent of the input level. The ampliﬁer
provides a collimated beam in a TEM00 mode of 0.4 mm waist.
A preliminary study of the frequency noise of the laser source was performed using an
autocorrelation setup and heterodyne detection. It was found that the ﬁber ampliﬁer did
not cause additional noise to the frequency spectrum of the injection diode when the diode
is frequency narrowed in an external cavity.
The laser diode is locked -240 MHz away from resonance by saturated absorption in a low
pressure discharge cell. The ﬁber-laser light is split up into four independent beams (see ﬁg.
4): the ﬁrst one is used to collimate and deﬂect the atomic beam, the second one to slow the
beam down, the third one to trap the atoms, and the last one to probe the trap (see sections
4 and 5). Required frequency for each arm is set by acousto-optical modulators used in a
double-pass conﬁguration.

4 Laser manipulation: collimation, deﬂection and decel-
eration

The need for extremely high vacuum in the present experiment requires that the intense
ground state helium beam is prevented from reaching the cell. The metastable beam, initially
merged with the ground-state beam, has then to be spatially separated and directed towards
a diﬀerent axis than the nozzle-skimmer axis. Radiation pressure forces are used for this
purpose [24]. For the collimation and the deﬂection, a power of 75 mW of laser light is used
(beam B1 in the ﬁgure 4). This power is evenly split in three : the ﬁrst one for vertical
collimation, the second one for horizontal collimation and the last one for deﬂection. The
eﬀusive beam coming out from the source is highly divergent (0.1 rd) and has a uniform
spatial intensity proﬁle. Collimation is thus performed slightly oﬀ axis, 1◦ upwards with
respect to the horizontal axis. Two apertures (a diaphragm and a tube) placed oﬀ axis
selectively blocks the ground state beam while allowing the metastable state beam to be
deﬂected by the laser in order to pass through (see ﬁg. 5). The circular aperture (Ø = 5
mm) and the separating tube (Ø = 1 cm, length 10 cm) are 1.2 m apart from each other.
They deﬁne the new axis of the experiment starting 5 mm above the nozzle-skimmer one
all the way down towards the cell. The separating tube provides diﬀerential pumping in the
chamber connected to the main slowing magnet and pumped by a turbo molecular pump
(1000 l/s). We use a vertically movable Faraday cup (Ø = 7 mm) located 1.15 m downstream
from the nozzle to monitor the intensity of the metastable helium beam (detector D1 in ﬁgure
5). For the collimation of the atomic beam in the two transverse directions, we use the so-
called ”zig-zag” conﬁguration of the laser beam [24]. It uses a resonant beam (Ø = 8 mm)
reﬂecting between two mirrors (3 × 15 cm) sligthly tilted from being parallel to cross the
atomic beam about 10 times. The capture range of the transverse velocity is approximately
20 m/s. The increase in the metastable ﬂux is measured on a picoammeter (Keithley)
connected to the Faraday cup 1. Although ”white light” can be used to achieve collimation
[24], we did not use it to prevent the broadening of the laser-source linewidth which has

6

multiple uses in the experiment. To deﬂect the collimated beam, we used a curved-wavefront
laser beam in a ribbon shape at resonance. The optimised radius of curvature is of 5 m. The
deﬂection keeps the beam collimated with nearly a 100% eﬃciency.

The second Faraday cup D2 (Ø = 8 mm) (see ﬁg. 5), located 2.4 m away form the
tube entry, is used to optimize the ﬂux of the collimated-deﬂected beam. Typical currents
measured on D2 are of 20 nA in comparison with 1 nA measured on D1 when the metastable
beam is neither collimated nor deﬂected. This corresponds to a collimated ﬂux of approxi-
mately 2 × 1011 atoms/s. To characterize the velocity of the pure triplet metastable beam,

Collimation

Detector
D1

Separating tube

 Discharge
source

Deflection

Chamber
1

First
Zeeman
Slower

Detector
D2

Compensation
Coil

Second
Zeeman
 slower

He
flux

To
diffusion
pump 1

To
diffusion
pump 2

Circular
aperture

To
turbo
pump 1

Mirror M

Viewport

To
turbo
pump 2

Cell

y

x

z

Figure 5: Experimental setup. The metastable helium beam is collimated, deﬂected, decelerated and trapped
at the end of the setup in a small dimension quartz cell.

we performed a time of ﬂight measurement. We used a resonant laser beam (Ø = 1 cm)
with a light chopper, crossing at right angle with the collimated-deﬂected metastable beam,
and a channeltron mounted besides the Faraday cup (D2). The light beam acting as an
atom pusher is hidden for a short time period (50µs) every 10 ms. We recorded the time
of ﬂight spectrum and found a peak velocity of 930 m/s and a relative spread (FWHM) of
approximately 30%, which is signiﬁcantly lower than the uncollimated beam : this shows
that the collimation-deﬂection process acts more eﬃciently on slow atoms because their in-
teraction time with the laser beams is longer. The metastable helium beam is decelerated
by the Zeeman tuning technique [25]. For this purpose, a laser beam with 15 mW of total
power is increased to a diameter of approximately 2 cm, with a right circular polarisation
and a detuning from resonance of δslo = −240 MHz. The laser beam enters the cell and
propagates anti-parallel to the atom beam. It is resonant with atoms having longitudinal
velocity of 1000 m/s at the entrance of the ﬁrst Zeeman slower. This ﬁrst Zeeman slower
has a length of 2 m, an inner diameter of 2.2 cm and a ﬁeld of 540 G. At the end of this ﬁrst
Zeeman slower, the atomic velocity is approximately 240 m/s. The second Zeeman slower is
approximately 15 cm long with an enclosed tube of 40 mm inner diameter and creates a ﬁeld
going from 0 to -140 G. The atoms are slowed down to a ﬁnal velocity of 40 m/s as they exit
the second Zeeman slower. A compensating coil minimizes the magnetic ﬁeld leakage from
the second Zeeman slower into the cell region.
Control of the successive decelerations was done by a Doppler sensitive absorption spec-
troscopy method, using a laser-probe beam crossing the cell with an angle of approximately
20◦. Time of ﬂight measurements of the unslowed beam was used to calibrate the Doppler
detuning with respect to the atom velocity. Velocity measurements are in good agreement
with simulations of the slowing process.

5 The trapping scheme

7

Compensation
Coil

MOT
s  +

M O T
s  +

y

x

z

Second
 Zeeman
Slower

MOT
s 

M O T

s 

MOT  Coils

R    s  +

ZS   s  +

Figure 6: MOT setup. The MOT beams are perpendicular to the surfaces of the quartz cell. The trapping
scheme requires an extra laser, the repumper (R), which is superimposed to the Zeeman slowing (ZS) and MOT
beams along the axis of the atomic beam.

5.1 The laser beams geometry

In order to optimize the number of trapped atoms in the MOT, we use a far detuned
(δmot/2π = −45 MHz) and high intensity laser (total intensity I = 50 mW/cm2) (beam
B3 in ﬁg. 4). This laser detuning minimizes inelastic Penning collisions between atoms in
the 23S1 metastable state and atoms in the 23P2 excited state [3, 26, 27, 28]. Our scheme
aims at trapping the gas at the center of a quartz cell of high quality commercially available
from Hellma (5cm×5cm×4cm). We use large diameter laser beams (Ø = 2 cm) in order to
capture a large number of atoms. The MOT is as close as possible to the slowing magnet end
to allow a higher loading rate. The MOT beams are 6 independent laser beams crossing the
cell perpendicular to its faces. The two MOT beams along the z direction (see ﬁgure 6) are
nearly superimposed with the slowing-laser beam and merged with the atomic beam. The
σ+ MOT beam is directed by the mirror M at 45◦ incidence and the glass viewport placed
on the vacuum chamber 1 (see ﬁgure 5). It propagates along the z-axis through the vacuum
chamber and the Zeeman slowers. The two contrapropagating beams along the z-axis are
focused onto the mirror M with an edge separated by 1 cm from the center of the atomic
In this geometry, both the σ+ and the σ− of the MOT beams along the atomic
beam.
beam axis aﬀect the slowing process. Consequently, several precautions such as the use of
a repumper beam are required for optimization of the MOT as explained in the following
section.

5.2 Optimization of the MOT

On one hand, the σ+ MOT beam along the z-axis is resonant with the atoms at a given
position in the slowing magnet. It can thus be absorbed by the atoms and accelerate them.
On the other hand, the σ− MOT beam along the z-axis is likely to depolarize the traveling
atoms at another position. These two eﬀects have to be corrected for. The slowing beam
detuning from resonance is δslo/2π = −240 MHz from resonance (beam B2 in ﬁg. 4). During
the slowing process, the velocity of the atom decreases according to the following equation
(1)

where B and v are the projection along the z-axis of the magnetic ﬁeld and atom velocity
respectively. The atoms are spin polarized in the mJ = +1 level during the slowing process,
cycling between the states 23S1, gs = 2, mJ = +1 and 23P2, gp = 3/2, mJ = +2 (see ﬁg. 7).
The σ+ MOT beam, parallel to the atomic beam (see ﬁg. 6), can also induce transitions
between these magnetic sublevels, if the following resonance condition is fulﬁlled:

(1)

(2)

δslo + kv = µbB/¯h

δmot − kv = µbB/¯h

8

-
-
Eq. (1) and (2) are both satisﬁed for

2kv+ = δmot − δslo

(3)

which gives v+ = 105 m/s. So, when the velocity becomes v+, which occurs before the
end of the slowing process, in the second part of the Zeeman slower, the σ+ MOT beam
accelerates the atoms. The net eﬀect results from the intensity unbalance between the σ+
MOT beam and the slowing beam. If the intensity of the slowing beam is less than the MOT
beam intensity, the σ+ MOT beam accelerates the atoms so much that the slowing process
is stopped. One needs to adjust the intensity of the slowing beam to be higher than the
intensity of the MOT beam to prevent this undesirable phenomenon. We typically use 15
mW/cm2 for the slowing beam, which corresponds to 1.5 times the intensity of each of the
MOT beams.

In addition, the σ− MOT beam along the z-axis can induce transitions between
23S1, mJ = +1 and 23P2, mJ = 0 sublevels, which depolarize the atoms when they de-
cay to the 23S1, mJ = 0 and mJ = −1 sublevels (see ﬁg. 7). Once the atoms have decayed,
they are no longer resonant with the slowing beam and the slowing process is stopped. This
actually happens when the following resonance condition is fulﬁlled:

Eq. (1) and (4) are both satisﬁed for

δmot + kv = −2µbB/¯h

3kv− = −(δmot + 2δslo)

(4)

(5)

which gives v− = 190 m/s. This velocity is also reached in the second part of the Zeeman
slower. To avoid this problem, we repump the atoms from the mJ = 0 and mJ = −1 sublevels

mJ = -2

mJ = -1

mJ = 0

R2+

mJ = +1

R1+

mJ = +2

ZS+

M-

mJ = -1

mJ = 0

mJ = +1

Figure 7: Repumping scheme between 23S1 and 23P2 states of helium. ZS+ corresponds to the Zeeman slower
beam,σ+ polarized, M- to the σ
MOT beam along the atomic beam, and R1+ and R2+ are the two repumping
transitions required to bring the atoms back into the mJ = +1 sublevel and restore the slowing process.

−

back to the mJ = +1 sublevel. Two repumping beams are both σ+ polarized and resonant
with the transitions 23S1, mJ = −1 → 23P2, mJ = 0 and 23S1, mJ = 0 → 23P2, mJ = +1,
at exactly the same magnetic ﬁeld and the same atomic velocity at which the depumping
happens (see ﬁg. 7). One calculates that the required frequencies are detuned by -272.5 MHz
and -305 MHz from the atomic resonance at zero magnetic ﬁeld. To generate the required
frequencies, we lock a unique additional DBR laser tuned -289 MHz from resonance. We RF-
modulate the diode current at 16 MHz. This generates sidebands into its spectrum. The level
of modulation is optimized to get the maximum intensity into the ﬁrst two lateral sidebands,
whose frequencies are the ones required for repumping. The power in the repumping beam
is approximately 20 mW. It is checked using the absorption measurement explained earlier
that the repumping process brings back nearly the same ﬂux of slow atoms as in the abscence
of the MOT beams.

9

5.3 Characterization of the MOT

The atoms are ﬁnally conﬁned in a magneto-optical trap. Two cylindrical coils, separated
by 5.2 cm along the y-axis (see ﬁgure 6), create a magnetic gradient of 40 G/cm along the
symmetry axis for a given current of 5A. The repumper beam typically increases the number
of trapped atoms by a factor of 3. Losses are dominated by intra MOT Penning collisions
[3, 26, 27, 28]. In this regime, the number of trapped atoms goes as the square root of the
loading rate. This increase in the number of atoms implies that the loading rate is increased
by a factor of 32 = 9. Using the repumper beam, we routinely trap approximately 109
atoms, in a volume of 0.1 cm3, at a temperature of approximately 1 mK. The temperature is
measured by a time of ﬂight technique [28]. The number of trapped atoms is inferred from
the measurement of the absorption in a 1 cm diameter probe laser beam, intense enough to
saturate the transition. The size of the MOT is measured by absorption imaging on a CCD
Camera.

6 Conclusion

In this article, we report on a new experiment aiming at reaching BEC with metastable he-
lium atoms. We demonstrate the eﬃciency and the robustness of a new discharge source of
metastable atoms and of a bright laser setup using a high power ﬁber ampliﬁer at 1.083 nm
for the manipulation of atoms. For the MOT the original trapping scheme requires an addi-
tional laser beam used to repump the atoms during the slowing process. The atomic cloud
is trapped at the center of a small quartz cell. The present setup has several advantages.
First, it gives a good optical access to the atomic cloud. This allows to further trap atoms in
a strongly conﬁning magnetic trap placed as close possible to the cell as. Secondly, it allows
to reach extremely low pressures inside the small volume of the cell. However, the present
setup makes it diﬃcult to use ion detectors or channel plates to detect the metastable atoms.
Further developements of the experiment could include such detectors in an appropriate cell.
Detection is performed in the present setup by purely optical means. The infrared line or
other visible lines for which CCD cameras have a better eﬃciency can be use for detection.
The present experiment allows to routinely trap approximately 109 helium atoms in the 23S1
metastable state inside a MOT of 2 mm rms radius.
The setup is currently being modiﬁed to add magnetic coils for a magnetostatic trap that
will be used in the search for BEC. This Ioﬀe type trap consists of three asymmetric coils
plus two large compensation Helmholtz coils, giving a ﬁeld conﬁguration similar to the QUIC
trap [29]. The gradients are approximately 280 G/cm, the curvature is 200 G/cm2 and the
depth of 33 mK for a current of 50 A. Before loading in the QUIC trap, the atoms will be ﬁrst
cooled into a molasse phase, where the ﬁeld gradient of the MOT is turned oﬀ, which should
allow to reach lower temperatures (50 to 100 µK). When a large density of ultracold atoms is
loaded into the Ioﬀe trap, it will be possible to check the theoretical predictions of [13, ?] on
elastic and inelastic collision rates between metastable atoms at very low temperature. The
measured collision rates will then indicate whether one can achieve BEC using evaporative
cooling, as successfully used with alkali atoms.

Acknowledgments: The authors thank C. Cohen-Tannoudji for very helpful discussions,
and for his input in the experiment.

a Permanent address: Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, UMR 7538 du CNRS, Uni-

versit´e Paris Nord, Avenue J.B. Cl´ement, 93430 Villetaneuse, France.

b Permanent address: Institute of Opto-Electronics, Shanxi University, 36 Wucheng Road,

Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China.

c Permanent address : Dept. of Physics, Univ. of Perugia, Via Pascoli, Perugia, Italy;

Lens and INFM, L.go E. Fermi 2, Firenze, Italy

d Present address : Universit¨at Hannover, Welfengarten 1, D-30167 Hannover, Germany.
e Permanent address : TIFR, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400005, India.

10

∗ Unit´e de Recherche de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure et de l’Universit´e Pierre et Marie

Curie, associ´ee au CNRS (UMR 8552).

References

R761 (1999)

(1995)

[1] B. Saubam´ea, T. W. Hijmans, S. Kulin, E. Rasel, E. Peik, M. Leduc, and C. Cohen-

Tannoudji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3146 (1999)

[2] W. Rooijakkers, W. Hogervorst, W. Vassen, Opt. Comm., 135, 149 (1997)

[3] P.J.J. Tol, N. Herschbach, E.A. Hessels, W. Hogervorst, W. Vassen, Phys. Rev. A 60,

[4] S. Nowak, A. Browaeys, J. Poupard, A. Robert, D. Boiron, C. Westbrook, A. Aspect,

Appl. Phys. B 70, 455 (2000)

[5] M. H. Anderson, J. Ensher, M. Matthews, C. Wieman, and E. Cornell, Science 269, 198

[6] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 985 (1997); see also
C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, J. J. Tollett, and R. G. Hulet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1687
(1995)

[7] K. B. Davis, M.O. Mewes, N. Van Druten, D. Durfee, D. Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995)

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3811 (1998)

[8] D. Fried, T. Killian, L. Willmann, D. Landhuis, S. Moss, D. Kleppner, and T. Greytak,

[9] M.-O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, D. M. Kurn, D. S. Durfee, C. G. Townsend, and W.
Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 582 (1997), I. Bloch, T. W. H¨ansch, and T. Esslinger, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82, 3008 (1999)

[10] W. Lu, K.G.H. Baldwin, M.D. Hoogerland, S.J. Buckman, T.E. Sheridan and R.W.

Boswell, J. Vac. Sci. Tevhnol. 16, 3846 (1998), and references therein

[11] F. Minardi, G. Bianchini, P. Cancio Pastor, G. Giusfredi, F.S. Pavone, M. Inguscio,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1112 (1999)

[12] Ch. Kurtsiefer, J. Mlynek, Appl. Phys. B 64, 85 (1997)

[13] G.V. Shlyapnikov, J.T.M. Walraven, U.M. Rahmanov, and M.W. Reynolds, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 73, 3247 (1994); P.O. Fedichev, M.W. Reynolds, U.M. Rahmanov, and G.V. Shlyap-
nikov, Phys. Rev. A 53, 1447 (1996)

[14] V. Venturi, I.B. Whittingham, P.J. Leo, G. Peach, Phys. Rev. A 60, 4635 (1999),

V.Venturi, I.B. Whittingham, Phys. Rev. A 61, 060703-1 (2000)

[15] H. C. W. Beijerinck, E. J. D. Vredenbregt, R. J. W. Stas, M. R. Doery, and J. G. C.

Tempelaars, Phys. Rev. A 61, 023607 (2000)

[16] D.W. Fahey, W.F. Parks, and L.D. Schearer, J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., 13, 381 (1980)

[17] J. Kawanaka, M. Hagiuda, K. Shimizu, F. Shimizu and H. Takuma, Appl. Phys. B, 56,

21 (1993)

[18] W. Rooijakkers, W. Hogervorst and W. Vassen, Opt. Comm., 123, 321 (1996)

[19] F.B. Dunning and A.C.H. Smith, J. Phys. B : Atom. Molec. Phys., Vol. 4, 1696 (1971)

[20] N. Vansteenkiste, C. Gerz, R. Kaiser, L. Hollberg, C. Salomon, A. Aspect, J. Phys. II

France 1, 1407 (1991)

Comm. 136, 243-246 (1996)

[21] R. Paschotta, D.C. Hanna, P. de Natale, G. Modugno, M. Inguscio, P. Laporta, Opt.

[22] S. V. Chernikov, J. R. Taylor, N. S. Platonov, V. P. Gapontsev, P. J. Nacher, G.

Tastaevin, M. Leduc, M. J. Barlow, Electronics Letters 33, p787, (1997)

11

[23] F. S. Pavone, P. Cancio, C. Corsi, and M. Inguscio, Appl. Phys. B 60, S 249 (1995). M.
Prevedelli, P. Cancio, G. Giusfredi, F.S. Pavone and M. Inguscio, Opt. Comm. 125, 231,
(1996)

[24] E. Rasel, F. Pereira Dos Santos, F. Saverio Pavone, F. Perales, C.S. Unnikrishnan, and

M. Leduc, Eur. Phys. J. D 7, 311 (1999)

[25] W.D. Philips, H. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 596 (1982)

[26] M. Kumakura and N. Morita, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2848 (1999).

[27] A. Browaeys, J. Poupard, A. Robert, S. Nowak, W. Rooijakkers, E. Arimondo, L.

Marcassa, D. Boiron, C.I. Westbrook and A. Aspect, Eur. Phys. J. D 8, 199 (2000)

[28] F. Pereira Dos Santos, F. Perales, J. L´eonard, A. Sinatra, Junmin Wang, F. Saverio

Pavone, E. Rasel, C.S. Unnikrishnan, M. Leduc, to be published in Eur. Phys. J. D

[29] T. Esslinger, I. Bloch, T.W. H¨ansch, Phys. Rev. A 58, R2664 (1998)

12

