Sensitive Absolute Gravity Gradiometry Using Atom Interferometry

J. M. McGuirk, G. T. Foster, J. B. Fixler, M.J. Snadden, and M. A. Kasevich
Physics Department, Yale University, New Haven CT, 06520
(February 2, 2008)

1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We report the demonstration of a sensitive absolute grav-
ity gradiometer based on light-pulse atom interference tech-
niques. The gradiometer consists of two absolute accelerome-
ters operated in a diﬀerential mode. We report a diﬀerential
−9 g/Hz1/2 and an inferred
acceleration sensitivity of 4 × 10
diﬀerential acceleration accuracy of less than 10−9 g. This
corresponds to a gravity gradient sensitivity of 4 E/Hz1/2 (1
−2) and an accuracy of better than 1 E for a
E = 10
10 m separation between accelerometers. We demonstrate
that the instrument can be used to detect nearby masses in a
vibrationally noisy environment and characterize instrument
sensitivity to spurious acceleration and rotation noise.

−9 s

PACS numbers: 39.20.+q, 03.75.Dg, 04.80.-y, 32.80.Pj

I. INTRODUCTION

Precision gravimetry is scientiﬁcally and technologi-
cally relevant. For example, theories which predict vi-
olations of Einstein’s general relativity are manifested
in gravitational phenomenon such as composition de-
pendent gravitational forces, time variation of the grav-
itational constant G, or breakdown of the 1/r2 law [1].
Some theories predict a ﬁfth force originating from a spin-
gravity coupling [2]. The gravitational constant itself is
only known to a few parts in 10−4 [3]. Technological
applications lie in the ﬁelds of navigation, geodesy, un-
derground structure detection, and oil and mineral ex-
ploration.

A technical problem associated with the characteriza-
tion of gravitational forces is rooted in the equivalence
principle:
in principle it is not possible to distinguish
gravitationally-induced accelerations from accelerations
of the reference frame of measurement. In other words,
gravimetry is fundamentally challenged by the inability
to distinguish platform vibrations from gravitational ac-
celerations. It is well known that this diﬃculty can be
overcome with gradiometric measurements in which two
simultaneous, spatially separated acceleration measure-
ments are made with respect to a common reference plat-
form. The diﬀerence between these acceleration measure-
ments suppresses platform vibration noise as a common
mode, but preserves gravitationally-induced diﬀerential
accelerations (gravity gradients). This non-local mea-
surement of the curvature of the gravitational potential
circumvents the equivalence principle and allows for char-
acterization of gravitational anomalies in vibrationally
noisy environments. For this reason gravity gradiome-
ters are of technological interest.

×

In this article we present a sensitive absolute grav-
ity gradiometer based on atom interference methods.
We demonstrate a diﬀerential acceleration sensitivity of
10−9 g/Hz1/2 (corresponding to an inferred perfor-
4
10−9 g/Hz1/2 per accelerometer). We
mance of 2.8
characterize instrument immunity to rotational and vi-
brational noise through laboratory shake-tests. We mea-
sure the gravitational gradient induced by nearby mass
In
distributions and characterize instrument accuracy.
previous work we made a proof-of-principle measurement
of the gravitational gradient of the Earth using a substan-
tially less sensitive instrument [4].

×

The central idea behind our atom interferometer grav-
ity gradiometer is to make acceleration measurements on
two vertically separated laser cooled ensembles of cesium
(Cs) atoms in free-fall using a pair of vertically propa-
gating laser beams. The propagation axes of these laser
beams are aligned to pass through both ensembles. The
light-pulse atom interference method is used to measure
the acceleration of each ensemble with respect to a ref-
erence frame deﬁned by the phase fronts of the interro-
gating optical ﬁelds. The diﬀerence between the mea-
sured acceleration of each atom ensemble, divided by
their separation, is a measure of the in-line component
of the gravity-gradient tensor Tij. (This tensor charac-
terizes the gravitational ﬁeld inhomogeneity induced by
non-uniform mass distributions.) Accelerations of the
common reference frame – deﬁned by the optical ﬁeld
phase fronts – are rejected as a common-mode in the dif-
ference.

Each acceleration measurement is accomplished by
driving an optical pulse π/2
π/2 atom interferometer
π
−
sequence between the 6S1/2, F = 3 and F = 4 ground-
state hyperﬁne levels of atomic Cs [5]. This method has
recently been used by Chu and coworkers to measure g
10−8
at the part per billion level, with a sensitivity of 2
g/Hz1/2 [6].

−

×

The interferometer theory is described in detail else-
where [5,7]. Here we review the essential results. Each
interferometer pulse couples two ground-state hyperﬁne
levels via a two photon, velocity-sensitive Raman cou-
pling [8].
In the short, intense pulse limit, the opti-
cal phase associated with the Raman coupling is im-
printed on the atomic center-of-mass wavepackets. This
phase locates these wavepackets with respect to the ref-
erence frame deﬁned by the optical ﬁeld. The following
rules, derived from solutions of the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion for a two-level atom in the rotating wave approxi-
mation, govern this imprinting process:
4
i
|
, where φ(t) is the phase of the driv-
and
i

e−iφ(t)

eiφ(t)

i →

i →

3
|

4
|

3
|

1

ing ﬁeld at the mean position x of the wavepacket at the
time t of the interferometer pulse, and states
4
i
|
are the two resonantly coupled hyperﬁne states. Explic-
x(t) + φ0(t). Here the Raman propaga-
itly, φ(t) = keﬀ
·
tion vector keﬀ is deﬁned as k1
k2; k1 and k2 are the
−
wavevectors for two Raman lasers.

and

3
|

i

·

i

4
|

The probability following the three pulse interferom-
(if they
eter sequence for the atoms to be found in
initially are prepared in
) can be evaluated from
3
i
|
straightforward application of the above rules and is
given by P(
) = [1 - cos ∆φ]/2. The phase shift
4
i
|
2φ(t2) + φ(t3), where ti is the time of
φ(t1)
∆φ
≡
−
the ith pulse. Evaluating φ(ti) as in [5] gives ∆φ =
aT2 + ∆φ0. T is the interrogation time between
keﬀ
interferometer pulses, a is the mean acceleration experi-
enced by the atoms with respect to the optical ﬁelds, and
2φ0(t2) + φ0(t3). For vibrationally quiet
∆φ0 = φ0(t1)
environments, φ0(t1) = φ0(t2) = φ0(t3).
In this case,
∆φ0 = 0, and measurement of the transition probabil-
ity following the three pulse sequence determines a. In
noisier environments, ∆φ0 is no longer zero, and this spu-
rious shift contaminates an individual acceleration mea-
surement.

−

The gradient signal is derived from two simultaneous,
spatially-separated, acceleration measurements which are
made with respect to the same set of Raman laser ﬁelds.
This is accomplished by simultaneously measuring the
fraction of atoms excited by the pulse sequence at both
spatial locations. The diﬀerential acceleration is given by
∆gT2, between
the diﬀerential phase shift, ∆φ = keﬀ
the upper and lower atom ensembles, where ∆g is the
diﬀerence in the mean gravitational acceleration at the
In the framework of this analysis,
two accelerometers.
low frequency platform accelerations introduce common
accelerations δa which cancel in the diﬀerencing proce-
dure. High frequency vibrational noise, which shows up
in the ∆φ0 terms of each accelerometer, also cancels.

·

Our approach diﬀers from that used in other instru-
ments. First, it uses atoms as proof masses rather than
macroscopic objects. This eliminates variability from
device-to-device and provides insensitivity to many envi-
ronmental perturbations, e.g. temperature ﬂuctuations
and magnetic ﬁelds. The gradiometer references its cal-
ibration to the wavelength of the measurement laser,
which is locked to an atomic spectral line, providing abso-
lute accuracy and long term stability. Because the sensi-
tive axis is deﬁned by the Raman propagation vector, and
the acceleration measurements are referenced only to one
retroreﬂector, the two accelerometers may be placed far
apart without sacriﬁcing common-mode vibration rejec-
tion. Increasing separation between accelerometers lin-
early increases the sensitivity to gravity gradients and
provides insensitivity to near-ﬁeld perturbations.

The gradiometer presented here performs favorably
when compared with existing gravity gradient sensors.
The state-of-the-art mobile gradiometer is a device that
uses mechanical mass-spring accelerometers on a rotat-
ing, gimballed ﬁxture (Lockheed Martin UGM) [9]. This

2

device has recently been used to perform airborne sur-
veys of geophysical mass anomalies [10] and to charac-
terize the gravitational anomalies from man-made un-
derground structures [11]. Higher sensitivity labora-
tory devices based on superconducting transducers have
achieved signiﬁcantly better sensitivities (< 0.1 E/Hz1/2)
[12,13]. However, these devices suﬀer from tare eﬀects in
the superconductors [14] and their reliance on cryogens.
More recently, the diﬀerential acceleration of two falling
corner cubes has been measured using a Michelson inter-
ferometer conﬁguration [15]. However, the demonstrated
sensitivity of this device of 450 E/Hz1/2 is not competi-
tive with the Lockheed Martin UGM, and it remains to
be seen if this device can demonstrate the common-mode
noise rejection required for mobile applications.

This remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II details the apparatus. Section III contains re-
sults characterizing the instrument’s performance. Sec-
tion IV draws comparisons with related atom interference
methods. Finally, future work is detailed in Section V.

II. APPARATUS

A. Apparatus Overview

The apparatus is similar to that described in Ref. [4],
but several changes have been made in order to achieve
the current sensitivity. The apparatus consists of two
laser cooled and trapped sources of Cs atoms. The atoms
are launched on ballistic trajectories and prepared in a
particular internal state with optical and microwave tech-
niques before undergoing the interferometer sequence.
Following the interferometer sequence, atoms are de-
tected using a normalizing detection method. Each of
these stages is described below.
In addition, we detail
the operation of an actively controlled vibration isola-
tion system which is used to validate our data acquisition
methodology.

B. Laser Cooled Atomic Sources

Each laser cooled atomic source consists of an ultra-
high vacuum system with a Cs source which maintains a
low Cs vapor pressure for a magneto-optical trap (MOT),
along with the required laser beams and magnetic ﬁeld
conﬁguration to form the MOTs. The lasers are delivered
to the vacuum chambers via optical ﬁbers from a com-
mon high-power, frequency stable laser system. The laser
beams are conﬁgured in the six beam [1,1,1] geometry (3
mutually orthogonal pairs) which allows clear access for
the Raman interferometer beams along the the vertical
axis.

In order to obtain good interferometer signal-to-noise
ratios (SNRs), it is critical to load atoms quickly into

the MOTs in a way which minimizes atom number ﬂuc-
tuations during the loading process. A grating stabilized
diode laser (New Focus Vortex) replaces the previously
used distributed Bragg reﬂector (DBR) laser as the mas-
ter laser for the trapping system. The extended cavity
of the Vortex laser gives it an intrinsic linewidth approx-
imately ten times smaller than the DBR laser. The Vor-
tex laser is locked to a Cs transition via standard satu-
ration spectroscopy techniques in a Cs cell. The locked
laser has a stability of 1 kHz/Hz1/2 and an instantaneous
linewidth of 300 kHz. The more stable master laser re-
duces the shot-to-shot rms number ﬂuctuations of the
MOTs by a factor of ﬁve to a SNR of 200:1. In addi-
tion, frequency-induced noise during the detection of the
atoms following the interferometer is substantially sup-
pressed with the use of this laser system.

The master laser injection locks two ampliﬁer lasers
which then seed two 500 mW tapered ampliﬁer lasers
(SDL 8630E). All of the injection locks transfer the fre-
quency stability of the master laser, without addition of
extra frequency or intensity noise. Each tapered ampliﬁer
laser is split into six equal outputs to provide the twelve
trapping beams for the two MOTs. The splitting is ac-
complished using robust and compact free-space ﬁber op-
tic beamsplitters (Optics for Research FiberBench). The
stability of the ﬁber mounts maintains the splitting ra-
tio to greater than 1% over many months with no ad-
justment. The ﬁbers are polarization maintaining with
an extinction ratio of greater than 30 dB. Polarization
stability is further maintained with the use of clean-up
polarizing optics at the output of the ﬁbers (convert-
ing polarization drift in the ﬁber to negligible intensity
ﬂuctuations). The intensity and polarization stability of
the MOT trapping beams contribute greatly to the re-
duction of the MOT number ﬂuctuations. The trapping
beams from the twelve ﬁbers propagate uncollimated to
the two MOTs. By not collimating the beams, we are
able to circumvent window apertures limiting the beam
size. Larger beam waists in the loading region lead to
higher atom loading rates. The approximate beam waist
at the trapping position is 2.5 cm (1/e2), and the inten-
sity is about 1.2 Isat per beam (Isat = 1.1 mW/cm2 for
the Cs cooling transition).
In this conﬁguration, each
MOT loads approximately 2

108 atoms in 1 s.

×
After loading the MOTs from a thermal vapor for 1
s, the cold atoms are launched in ballistic, atomic foun-
tain trajectories. The launch is accomplished as follows.
First, the detuning of the MOT beams is switched from
-10 MHz to -20 MHz from the cooling transition. Next,
the trapping quadrupole magnetic ﬁelds are turned oﬀ,
and the atoms are held in the -20 MHz detuned op-
tical molasses for 30 ms while the eddy currents from
the ﬁeld switching damp out (the vacuum chambers are
aluminum). For each MOT, following this holding pe-
riod, the frequency of the upper three molasses beams is
ramped down by 1 MHz over 5 ms [by applying the ap-
propriate RF frequency shifts to an acousto-optic mod-
ulator (AOM)], while the frequency of the lower three

beams is ramped up by an equal amount. This frequency
ramp smoothly transfers the atoms to an optical molasses
moving vertically at 1.5 m/s. After this ramp, the mean
frequency of the trapping beams is ramped down to -40
MHz detuned (still in a moving molasses) over 5 ms, and
then the intensity is ramped down to half intensity in
1 ms, held for 0.5 ms, and ramped completely oﬀ in an
additional 0.5 ms. These ramps cool the atoms to 2.3
µK (measured with stimulated Raman velocimetry). The
frequency and intensity ramps are accomplished using
digitally synthesized waveforms from Hewlett Packard
HP8770A arbitrary waveform generators (AWGs).

Following this launching and cooling phase, the cold
atoms move in a 320 ms, 12 cm high fountain during
which they are prepared in a special state and then in-
terrogated by the interferometer sequence.

C. State Preparation

Before the atom interference pulse sequence, a state
selection sequence prepares the atoms in the magnetically
insensitive mf = 0 sublevel and velocity selects an atomic
ensemble with a velocity spread which is matched to the
velocity selectivity of the Raman pulse sequence. This
state selection, which is accomplished with a sequence of
microwave and optical pulses, is important for obtaining
high fringe contrast. The details associated with this
state selection are discussed below.

Following their launch, atoms are initially distributed
nearly evenly among the magnetic sublevels of the F
= 4 ground state. Three orthogonal pairs of magnetic
ﬁeld coils, roughly in a Helmholtz conﬁguration, zero the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and apply a vertical bias ﬁeld of
100 mG. This bias allows selective addressing of indi-
∼
vidual F = 3 to F = 4 ground state hyperﬁne transitions
with a 9.2 GHz microwave ﬁeld (delivered to the atoms
through a Narda 640 X-band gain horn). First, a mi-
crowave composite π pulse transfers atoms from the F =
4, mf = 0 to the F = 3, mf = 0 sublevel. (Composite
pulse sequences accomplish the population transfer as-
sociated with ideal π in an experimentally robust way,
as described in the subsection below.) Next, a near-
resonant pulse from the upper trapping beams tuned
6P3/2, F′ = 5 transition
slightly above the 6S1/2, F =4
clears atoms in the remaining F = 4 sublevels (via the
scattering force). Another composite microwave π pulse
then returns F = 3, mf = 0 atoms to F = 4, mf = 0. An
optical velocity selective composite Raman π pulse is now
applied which transfers F = 4, mf = 0 atoms within the
velocity range encompassed by the Raman pulse envelope
to F = 3, mf = 0. Finally, a second, near resonant, blue
detuned pulse clears away the remaining F = 4 atoms.
At this point, the remaining (state prepared) atoms are
ready for use in the interferometer.

→

A considerable fraction of atoms are eliminated from
8/9 from the in-

the initial ensemble in this process:

∼

3

ternal state selection and another
lection, leaving roughly 4% for the interferometer.

2/3 in velocity se-

∼

1. Enhanced Optical Pumping

In order to increase the mf = 0 population, an en-
hanced optical pumping scheme has been implemented.
This method essentially recycles atoms which are not ini-
tially in the mf = 0 target state by a cyclic optical pump-
ing sequence. In practice we have seen as much as a factor
of 3 improvement in usable atoms with this method.

The details of this scheme are as follows. First, a com-
posite microwave π pulse is applied to drive atoms from
the F = 4, mf = 0 to the F = 3, mf = 0 state as be-
fore. Then a de-pumping beam tuned to the F = 4 to
F′ = 4 transition is applied to optically pump the re-
= 0 to F = 3 (where the
maining atoms from F = 4, mf 6
prime still represents the 6P3/2 excited manifold). The
de-pumping process redistributes the atomic population,
with approximately 1/7 of the remaining atoms ending
up in mf = 0. The process is then reversed with a com-
posite microwave π pulse transferring F = 3, mf = 0 to
F = 4, mf = 0 followed by application of a repumping
beam to the F = 3 to F′ = 4 transition. In principle, this
entire sequence could be repeated many times, resulting
in 100% pumping eﬃciency.

In practice, ineﬃciency of the microwave pulses (de-
scribed below), heating due to spontaneous emission in
the pumping sequence, and the availability of only a ﬁnite
amount of time to execute the sequence limit the process
eﬃciency. We realize a factor of three improvement with
just one cycle of the sequence described in the previous
paragraph.

For vapor cell loaded traps, the overall eﬃciency is
also limited by the presence of the background atomic
vapor. In this case, the de-pumping photons can excite
atoms in the background vapor which then emit light
at the repumping frequency. These rescattered photons
then redistribute atoms in the F = 3, mf = 0 state to
= 0 states. Thus there is a trade-oﬀ between
other mf 6
background vapor pressure (which sets the loading rate)
and the overall eﬃciency of the scheme (which works best
at low vapor pressure). For our operating parameters, we
typically realize a factor of 1.5 - 2 improvement.

Finally, we note that this method substantially in-
creases shot-to-shot atom number ﬂuctuations (from
200:1 to 60:1). However, our normalized detection
method is able to eﬀectively suppress the impact of these
ﬂuctuations on the interferometer signals.

a standard π pulse between the ground states can re-
sult from an inhomogeneous Rabi frequency of the mi-
crowave or optical pulse seen by the atoms, as well as
by detunings due to the velocity spread of the atoms. In
our apparatus, the microwave π pulses are typically only
80% eﬃcient due to inhomogeneous ﬁeld strengths across
the atom clouds (since we drive the microwave transition
with horns located outside the vacuum chamber). Fur-
thermore, the state selection and optical pumping require
a series of one optical and four microwave π pulses in the
two separate chambers. With the current system, it is
diﬃcult to match the pulse conditions for all pairs of
pulses due to diﬀerent microwave intensity gradients in
each chamber.

−

−

π90◦

In composite pulse sequences [16], a standard π pulse is
replaced with a sequence of pulses with variable area and
relative phase. In our work, we employ a π/2
π/2
pulse sequence in place of a π pulse. The subscript
90◦ indicates that the phase of the center π pulse is
shifted 90◦ relative to the π/2 pulses. The use of this
sequence increases the transfer eﬃciency of a pulse for in-
homogeneous distributions of Rabi frequency and detun-
ing across the atomic ensemble. Employing these pulses
for the microwave state preparation pulses increases the
transfer eﬃciency from 80% with a regular π pulse to
95%. Fig. 1 compares a frequency scan with regular and
composite π pulses. More advanced interferometer pulse
sequences may beneﬁt from the use of composite pulses
for the optical pulses but are not employed at the mo-
ment (see Section VI.A).

In comparison with the adiabatic rapid passage tech-
nique (ARP) [17], composite pulses are easier to imple-
ment experimentally, and require less time (or total pulse
area) to achieve eﬃcient transfer. For example, we ﬁnd
that we need approximately 5π total time (here time is
referenced to the time to drive a π pulse at the maxi-
mum Rabi frequency) for ARP to achieve results similar
to those achieved with only 2π time for the composite
sequence.

D. Atom Interferometer

Following its launch and state preparation each atom
ensemble is subject to the π/2
π/2 interferometer
pulse sequence. Key experimental details associated with
this sequence include the frequency stability of the lasers
used to drive the Raman transition, optimization of the
Raman excitation parameters, and the physical geometry
for beam delivery.

−

−

π

2. Composite Pulse Techniques

1. Raman Lasers

The above state preparation methods work best with
eﬃcient coherent population transfer between F = 3 and
F = 4 states. Less than unit transfer eﬃciency during

As the acceleration-induced phase shifts depend crit-
ically on the phase and wavevector associated with the
laser beams used to drive stimulated Raman transitions,

4

it is important to evaluate the possible contributions of
laser frequency noise on the relative stabilities of the in-
terferometer signals. We ﬁrst consider the constraints on
laser frequency stability, then describe the laser system
we use to meet these constraints.

∼

In our excitation geometry, the two ensembles are sep-
1.4 m. The Raman ﬁelds propagate in an
arated by
asymmetric way to these ensembles (see Fig. 2). To see
this, consider the propagation paths of the optical ﬁelds
following the beam dividing optic which separates the
two Raman ﬁelds. The beam of frequency ν1 propagates
roughly x1
0.3 m before it passes through the ﬁrst en-
semble of atoms, while it propagates roughly x2
1.7
1 ≈
m before it passes through the second ensemble. On the
other hand, the beam of frequency ν2 propagates x1
2 ≈
3.7 m before it passes through the ﬁrst ensemble, while
it propagates x2
2.3 m before it passes through the
second ensemble.

2 ≈

1 ≈

≡

1) - (x2
x1

If the frequency of the lasers drifts on a time scale short
compared to the interrogation time T between pulses,
this can cause an asymmetric phase shift to be read into
the atomic coherences due to this path asymmetry. For
example, suppose the laser frequency jitter is δν, while
the diﬀerential path length travelled by the Raman lasers
(eﬀective path to ensemble
for the two ensembles is ℓ
1) - (eﬀective path to ensemble 2) = (x1
2 −
2 −
x2
2.8 m. This leads to a diﬀerential phase noise
1)
≃
(kℓ)(δν/ν). For a target interference SNR
of δφlaser ∼
of 1000:1, δφlaser <
1 mrad. For our parameters, this
implies δν <
∼
20 kHz.
∼

In order to achieve frequency stability at this level, a
second Vortex (external cavity, grating stabilized) laser
is used as the master laser for the Raman laser system.
6P3/2, F′
This laser is locked to the 6S1/2, F = 3
= 2 crossover resonance (via modulation transfer spec-
troscopy) using several AOMs to oﬀset the frequency
to obtain the desired detuning. The lock is maintained
through the use of a digital signal processor (DSP, Spec-
trum Signal Indy TMS320C32). The DSP processes the
lock error signal through a highpass and lowpass channel,
each operating at a sampling rate of 25 kHz. The high
and low frequency channels provide feedback to the laser
current and to the cavity piezo element respectively. Due
to the presence of long term drift in the piezo element a
third, very low frequency channel is provided through a
GPIB command to the laser controller. The measured
stability of the laser is comparable to that of the mas-
ter laser used for the optical molasses (and is primarily
limited by a 5 kHz resonance of the laser’s piezo-electric
transducer).

→

The Vortex laser directly injection locks a 150 mW
(SDL 5422) slave diode laser. This laser is then shifted
up and down in frequency by 4.756 GHz (160 MHz above
half the Cs clock frequency) with a high frequency AOM.
The diﬀracted orders are then used to injection lock two
more 150 mW slave laser diodes at a frequency 700 MHz
F′ = 4
red detuned from the F = 3
→
transitions, respectively [18]. The frequency noise on the

F′ = 4 and F = 4

→

master Raman laser exists on both the slave lasers, but
their frequency separation remains ﬁxed at the Cs ground
state hyperﬁne transition. The detuning from the F′ =
5 level reduces the eﬀect of spontaneous emission due to
oﬀ-resonant single photon excitations from each Raman
beam.

2. Raman Beam Delivery

The Raman beams are delivered to the vacuum cham-
bers with a polarization maintaining optical ﬁber in order
to increase the pointing stability of the Raman beams as
well as to spatially ﬁlter them. Prior to coupling into the
ﬁber, the two Raman beams are double-passed through
80 MHz AOMs. These AOMs are controlled by another
HP8770 AWG which allows dynamic frequency, phase,
and intensity tuning of the Raman beams during the in-
terferometer pulse sequence. During the interferometer,
the frequency of the Raman lasers must be chirped in
order to maintain a resonance condition with the accel-
erating (Doppler shifting) atoms.

The two Raman beams are overlapped with orthogonal
linear polarizations on a polarizing beamsplitting cube
and passed through a Pockel’s cell polarization modula-
tor (ConOptics 350-50) after the double-passed AOMs.
The Pockel’s cell is used to reverse the eﬀective Raman
laser propagation direction, as described below. The Ra-
man beams then are coupled into a polarization main-
taining ﬁber with 75% eﬃciency and sent to the gra-
diometer. For wavefront quality, after the ﬁber the Ra-
man beams are collimated with a 1.1 cm focal length
aspheric lens in conjunction with a high surface quality
50 cm focal length spherical lens. This lens combination
results in a uniform phase front for the Raman beams.
After collimation the Raman beams have a 1.0 cm (1/e)
beam waist. All optics in the Raman beams’ propaga-
tion path after the optical ﬁber are of high surface ﬁgure
(λ/10 or better) in order to preserve the phase front ho-
mogeneity of the Raman beams.

After collimation, the Raman beams enter a racetrack
geometry in order to obtain counterpropagating beams
for the Raman interaction (see Fig. 2). The racetrack
conﬁguration starts with a polarizing beamsplitter cube
that separates the two orthogonally polarized Raman
beams. The two Raman beams then parallel propagate
vertically through the vacuum chambers with one beam
passing through the axis of the atom ensembles and the
other 2 cm oﬀ-axis. After passing through both cham-
bers, a corner cube retroreﬂector redirects the oﬀ-axis
Raman beam to counterpropagate with the on-axis Ra-
man beam, resulting in two counterpropagating beams.
The use of the corner cube decreases the tilt sensitivity
of the apparatus by keeping the Raman beam propaga-
tion axis constant as the cube is subjected to spurious
tilts.
In this racetrack, standing waves are eliminated,
which maintains overall intensity stability by suppressing

5

etalon eﬀects from the Raman beams. Also, spontaneous
emission is reduced by half compared to using collinear
retroreﬂected beams.

induced phase shift. This ratio of 1.6:1 for the chosen Ra-
man detuning agrees well with theoretical predictions.

3. Raman Propagation Reversal

·

−

A technique to reduce many systematic interferometer
phase shifts involves reversing the eﬀective Raman prop-
k2. Because the gravitational
agation vector keﬀ = k1
g, reversing the sign
phase shift is proportional to keﬀ
of keﬀ changes the sign of the gravitational phase shift.
However, several systematic phase shifts, such as second-
order Zeeman shifts from magnetic ﬁelds and any resid-
ual AC Stark shifts, have no dependence on the Raman
wavevector direction. Subtracting the phases obtained
from consecutive experimental cycles using two reversed
propagation directions gives twice the gravitational phase
shift, but removes these systematic shifts. The propa-
gation reversal is accomplished using the Pockel’s cell.
The Pockel’s cell rotates the polarization of both Raman
beams by 90◦ when activated. This rotation causes the
direction the Raman beams take through the racetrack
to switch, i.e. keﬀ
keﬀ . Propagation direction can
be switched from one shot to the next.

→ −

4. Raman Beam Parameters

A theoretical study of the interferometer contrast as
a function of Raman beam waist and detuning was per-
formed. A ﬁnite Raman beam size gives rise to a spa-
tially inhomogeneous Rabi frequency across the atom
cloud, causing dephasing during the interferometer. Sim-
ilarly, the velocity spread of the atoms along the Raman
beams causes inhomogeneous broadening due to diﬀer-
ential Doppler shifts across the atom ensemble. Typical
Rabi frequencies are around 30 kHz, and the initial width
of the thermal spread of the atom ensemble is about 45
kHz. Incorporating the ﬁnite beam size and the initial
atomic velocity distribution function into our analysis, we
ﬁnd an optimal 35% contrast for a Raman beam waist of
1 GHz from F′
1.0 cm radius (1/e), and a detuning of
= 5 (our chosen operating point).

≈

In addition to the interferometer contrast, systematic
AC Stark shifts were studied. AC Stark shifts from the
Raman pulses themselves cause spurious phase shifts in
the interferometer if unconstrained. However, with a
two-photon Raman transition, the AC Stark shift is the
diﬀerence between the individual AC Stark shifts from
each beam and can be zeroed by adjusting the ratio be-
tween the two Raman beams. The Stark shift is balanced
with a beam intensity ratio of
1.6:1 for the chosen
Raman detuning. The Stark shift is balanced empir-
ically by inserting oﬀ-resonant Raman pulses within a
microwave π/2
π/2 interferometer and adjusting
the Raman beam intensity balance to zero the optically

−

∼

−

π

5. Interferometer Operation

The gradiometer is typically operated in its most sen-
sitive conﬁguration with the interferometer pulses at a
maximal spacing of T = 157.5 ms. This time is limited by
the vacuum chamber size which constrains the fountain
height to 12 cm. Following the three-pulse interferom-
eter sequence, the population distribution of the atoms
in each ensemble is measured.
In order to extract the
gravitationally-induced phase shift, the phase of the ﬁnal
interferometer pulse needs to be scanned. The scanning
is accomplished digitally with the AWG by scanning the
phase of the RF waveform applied to the low frequency
AOMs in the Raman beam paths. This phase scanning
is in addition to the frequency chirp applied during the
pulse. The total cycle time is 0.7 - 1.4 s, depending on
the trap loading parameters.

E. Detection System

1. Detection Apparatus

In order to realize high interferometer sensitivity,
atoms must be detected with a high SNR following the in-
terferometer pulse sequence. Our detection system uses a
balanced, modulation transfer technique to reduce laser-
induced detection noise and diﬀerentiate cold atoms from
thermal background atoms. This detection method is de-
scribed in [19] and is summarized here.

Balanced detection uses two parallel, horizontally
propagating probe beams, separated vertically by 2.5 cm,
to detect atoms in one or both states following the inter-
ferometer. The absorption of the probe beams by the
atoms is detected on a balanced photodiode with two in-
puts that are subtracted before ampliﬁcation. Typically,
the absorption by the cold atoms is around 0.1%.

We use two detection pulses as follows. Following the
interferometer, atoms in the F = 4 state are detected by
pulsing on near-resonant probe beams for 4.6 ms when
the atom cloud is in the upper detection beam. During
this pulse, the mean velocity of the F = 4 atoms is slowed
to rest by optical forces induced by the detection beams.
Atoms in the F = 3 state continue to fall, however. When
these atoms intersect the lower probe region, atoms in the
F = 4 state have not moved out of the upper detection re-
gion. Pulsing on the probe beams for another 4.6 ms fol-
lowing a short repumper pulse measures the diﬀerential
absorption between the two hyperﬁne states. These two
pulses provide suﬃcient information to infer the overall
transition probability in a way which is immune to shot-
to-shot ﬂuctuations in the total atom number. We have

6

shown that this method is immune to laser frequency and
amplitude technical noise as well [19].

In addition, a modulation transfer technique is em-
ployed to remove noise from the thermal background va-
por. Here a frequency modulated (FM) pump beam is
applied along a vertical axis orthogonally to the probe
beams during each detection pulse. The nonlinear in-
teraction between the FM pump and the atoms modu-
lates the complex index of refraction of the atoms. This
modulation produces an amplitude modulation (AM) on
the probe beams [20,21]. The AM is detected by the
balanced detector, mixed down to DC with a double-
balanced mixer, and integrated with a Hewlett Packard
3458A multimeter. The orthogonality of the pump and
probe beams provides a velocity selectivity that allows
rejection of signals from the fast-moving thermal back-
ground atoms.

2. Detection Noise Analysis

The amplitude of the modulated absorption signal at
the photodiode is about 0.8 pW per atom. The detection
photodiodes have noise-equivalent powers corresponding
to a 60 atom detection sensitivity in the 4.6 ms measure-
ment window. The digital voltmeters that acquire the
signal from the photodiodes are only slightly noisier with
a noise ﬂoor corresponding to 100 atoms. The largest
contribution to the intrinsic noise comes from the detec-
tion light itself. Because absorption detection is used and
the absorption is small, there is a substantial amount of
unabsorbed light, > 99%, striking the detector. Shot
noise on the number of photons incident on the detec-
tor during the integration window is the leading intrinsic
noise source. The shot noise power is 0.25 nW, resulting
in a minimum detectable signal of
300 atoms. This
noise dominates the technical noise sources.

∼

There is also a noise component of similar size due
to a small number of atoms in undesired states which
survive the state preparation. Slight changes in laser
frequency and selection pulse eﬃciency during the state
preparation cause this number to ﬂuctuate. However,
this noise source is common between the two chambers
and is also suppressed by the balanced detection method.
To summarize, the noise of our detection system allows
detection of transition probability at the atom shot-noise
105 atoms. These
limit when we detect more than
noise limits are discussed in the context of our overall
instrument sensitivity below.

∼

F. Signal Extraction

1. Interference Fringe Fitting

As described above, the phase of the ﬁnal interferom-
eter pulse is scanned electronically. A straightforward

method of extracting gravity gradient information is to
determine the gravitationally induced phase shifts in each
atom ensemble by performing least squares sinusoidal
ﬁts on the observed interference fringes. This is possi-
ble when vibration-induced phase noise is <
1 rad. The
∼
gravity gradient is obtained by subtracting the two phase
shifts from each other. Vibrational phase noise and lo-
cal oscillator phase noise cause the phase extracted by
the sine ﬁts to be shifted. However, these noise sources
couple to the two accelerometers in a common-mode way.
This common-mode behavior results in the two sinusoidal
ﬁts being shifted by an identical amount, and any eﬀect
of common-mode noise is cancelled in the subtraction
used to obtain the gravity gradient. We study the statis-
tics of the resulting phase diﬀerences under static gravity
gradient conditions to estimate instrument noise.

We ﬁnd that the distribution of the residual noise con-
tains outlying points. Eliminating these outlying points
increases the SNR by up to a factor of six. The reduc-
tion of the number of points is incorporated into the data
collection time in determining the sensitivity. We are
presently studying possible sources of this noise compo-
nent.

The ratio of the interference fringe amplitude to the the
standard deviation of the phase diﬀerence distributions
determines the instrument SNR. The side of a fringe,
i.e. the linear slope of a sine wave, is most sensitive to
phase shifts, with a sensitivity given by δφ = 1/SNR.
For gravitationally induced phase shifts, the sensitiv-
ity to a change in the gravitational acceleration is δg
= δφ/(2kT2)t1/2, where t is the data acquisition time
to achieve the uncertainty δφ. Dividing by the chamber
separation determines the sensitivity to gradients.

2. Magnetic Phase Shifting

∼

∼

Good common-mode noise suppression requires that
the lower and upper chamber fringes be acquired in
phase. However, the Earth’s gravity gradient of
3000
E will cause a relative phase shift of
1.5 rad between
the two chambers. In order to accommodate this shift,
a bias magnetic ﬁeld is pulsed on for 67 ms in the lower
chamber during the atom interferometer. This ﬁeld pulse
causes a phase shift due to the second-order Zeeman ef-
fect. The amplitude of this pulse is chosen to produce
a shift which compensates the shift due to the gravity
gradient, allowing both fringes to be acquired in phase.
We have quantitatively studied the eﬀectiveness of
common-mode noise suppression as a function of the
phase alignment of the interferometer fringes. Fig. 3
shows a comparison of the predicted dependence of the
noise on the relative phase between fringes with experi-
mental SNR data. For simplicity, we scanned the relative
phase between pulses simply by changing the interroga-
tion time T. (For this study, we disabled the magnetic
phase shifter and worked with relatively short interroga-

7

tion times.) The data shown in Fig. 3 is the SNR of the
phase diﬀerence between the two fringes obtained by per-
forming least squares ﬁts as described above on a set of
interference fringes. The prediction is the simulated SNR
of the phase diﬀerence between two phase-mismatched
sine functions with phase noise added. The predicted
SNR is added in quadrature with uncorrelated detection
noise noise in order to compare the simulation with ex-
perimental data in this curve. As shown, the data is in
good agreement with the theory, demonstrating the need
for the magnetic phase shifting pulse.

The stability of the bias ﬁeld used in the magnetic
shifter has also been studied. Noise on this bias ﬁeld
could lead to extra phase noise on the gravity gradient
signals. This noise has been investigated by applying
a bias pulse in a microwave clock π/2-π/2 experiment
and comparing the SNR for a weak pulse (phase shift
∼
1.2 rad) and a strong ﬁeld pulse (phase shift
67 rad).
For the large phase shift, no extra phase noise or drift is
seen at a fractional uncertainty in the phase of less than
10−6. This implies that for a 1 rad shift, the bias
3
pulse contributes noise at a level below 8

10−13 g.

×

∼

×

3. High Phase Noise Regimes

In the case where phase noise is greater than 1 rad,
the noise renders it impossible to characterize instrument
noise using the least squares method described above. In
the most sensitive modes of operation, the vibrations of
the reference platform induce phase noise much larger
than this level. A diﬀerent analysis technique must be
performed in this regime, using a point-by-point anal-
ysis. After collection of the gradiometer data, a signal
extraction algorithm removes amplitude and phase noise
from the signals: Our detection method allows measure-
ment of the number of atoms in the F = 4 state and
the population diﬀerence between the two states. With
this information, common amplitude ﬂuctuations in each
chamber, primarily from number ﬂuctuations from the
MOT loading, can be removed. After removing ampli-
tude noise, a cross-chamber normalization is performed
to reject phase noise that is primarily vibration-induced.
The details of this noise analysis procedure are as fol-
lows. After each interferometer cycle (which represents
one gradient measurement) two samples are acquired in
each accelerometer: signals proportional to the F = 4
population and to the diﬀerential population (i.e. pro-
portional to the number of atoms in F = 4 minus the
number of atoms in F = 3). The two samples are com-
bined to infer the total number of atoms present in the
interferometer during each experimental cycle. The F =
4 signal is then divided by this total atom number to
remove any ﬂuctuations in the amplitude of the F = 4
signal from shot-to-shot atom number ﬂuctuations. We
normalize each interferometer with this procedure. To re-
move common phase noise between the two chambers, a

series of experimental cycles is taken, and a least squares
minimization (via Gaussian elimination) is performed on
β)2 where S1 and S2 are the shot-
the quantity (S1 −
by-shot normalized F = 4 population levels from the two
interferometers. The ﬁt constants α and β are used to
compensate for possible diﬀerences in interference con-
trast between the two accelerometers.

αS2 −

The residuals of the Gaussian elimination procedure
are used to estimate instrument noise, as show in Fig.
4. Again, this distribution is non-Gaussian, and outly-
ing points are discarded to obtain SNR and short-term
sensitivity estimates.

Note that while this method is suitable for characteri-
zation of the instrument noise ﬂoor under static gradient
conditions, further work is need to demonstrate eﬀec-
tive algorithms for extraction of dynamic gradient sig-
nals (such as would be present in moving-platform appli-
cations). We are currently exploring algorithms for this
purpose.

G. Vibration Isolation Subsystem

At the most sensitive gradiometer operation, vibration
phase noise is large, and the high phase noise algorithm is
employed. However, in order to verify the validity of this
algorithm, a vibration isolation system was constructed
to remove most of the vibration-induced phase noise from
the interference fringes. With this reduction in phase
noise, the least squares ﬁt algorithms also can be used to
reduce the data.

1. Mechanical Design

The primary object in the instrument that must be
isolated from vibrations is the Raman beam corner cube.
All other optics are positioned so that any vibrations
Doppler shift the two Raman beams in a common way,
and the Raman diﬀerence frequency remains unchanged.
The Raman beam corner cube retroreﬂector is mounted
on a Newport sub-Hertz platform (SHP) which provides
the principal vibration isolation (see Fig. 5). The SHP
is guided by a linear air bearing (New Way S4010002)
along the vertical axis. The SHP provides isolation in
the range of 0.5 Hz - 40 Hz. An accelerometer (Tele-
dyne Geotech S-510) is mounted on the SHP to monitor
platform accelerations. The corner cube is attached to
the platform by a stack of two pieces of 1 in. thick lead
ﬁlled acoustic foam separated by a 0.5 in. thick sheet of
aluminum. The double stack of acoustic foam reduces
vibrations of 30 Hz and higher by more than 20 dB. A
linear voice coil actuator provides active feedback to the
SHP. Additionally, the voice coil can be used to drive
platform accelerations; this shake-testing is the subject
of Section III.B.

8

2. DSP Servo System

Here we describe the active servo system for the SHP
platform. The active feedback loop starts with the ac-
celerometer to monitor vibrations. The accelerometer
output is processed by a DSP (Spectrum Signal Indy
TMS320C32), which we use to ﬁlter digitally the ac-
celerometer input (as described below) and generate the
feedback error signal. The feedback signal, after being
buﬀered by a voltage ampliﬁer, closes the feedback loop
by driving the voice coil mounted between the SHP and
the platform support. We apply the following digital ﬁl-
ters in processing the accelerometer signal. First, a lag
ﬁlter with a bandwidth of 1 Hz to 80 Hz rolls oﬀ the
feedback below the accelerometer’s 100 Hz high frequency
cut-oﬀ. Next, a second lag ﬁlter with identical bandwidth
is used to make the gain roll-oﬀ second order. Finally, two
lead ﬁlters are applied to keep the system from oscillat-
ing at low frequency near the closed-loop SHP resonance
of 0.03 Hz, which is also close to the internal highpass
frequency of the accelerometer. The two lead ﬁlters have
bandwidths of 38 mHz - 200 Hz and 380 mHz - 200 Hz re-
spectively. The total gain of all four ﬁlters is 1600. This
work is similar in concept to that reported in Ref. [22].
Using this servo, we are able to reduce the vibrations to
near the noise ﬂoor of the accelerometer (10−8 g/Hz1/2)
over a bandwidth of 40 mHz - 25 Hz. Higher frequencies
are passively attenuated by the acoustic foam. With the
addition of the vibration isolation system, phase noise
from accelerations of the corner cube is reduced to less
the 1 rad, and least squares sinusoidal ﬁts may be per-
formed on the fringes for the longest interrogation times.

H. Microwave Generation

×

The generation and delivery of the 9.2 GHz microwave
ﬁeld is brieﬂy described here. The microwave ﬁeld is cou-
pled to the atoms through RF horns attached to view-
ports on the MOT chambers. The microwave frequency
is tied to a 10 MHz reference, temperature stabilized,
master crystal oscillator (Oscilloquartz OCXO, stability
10−13 in 1 s). The reference oscillator drives a
of 1.4
100 MHz phase locked oscillator (PLO, Wenzel 500-0732)
which is the input to a Microlambda (MLPE 1162) 9.2
GHz PLO. The RF is mixed in a single sideband mixer
with an
7.4 MHz signal from an AWG which is also
phase locked to the reference oscillator. The AWG is
used to scan the RF frequency and phase. The mixer
1 W and sent to the horns.
output is ampliﬁed up to
∼
The RF power is controlled by the AWG output, and the
relative power to the two chambers can be adjusted with
appropriate attenuation in the two paths.

∼

We perform a microwave π/2 - π/2 clock experiment as
a diagnostic to check the phase noise performance of our
oscillators and the noise performance of our detection sys-
tem. We have shown that we can detect microwave clock

fringes with 1000:1 SNR using our normalized detection
[19]. This SNR is at the atom shot noise limit for our
106 atoms/shot).
fountain with no velocity selection (

∼

III. INSTRUMENT PERFORMANCE

A. Sensitivity

Each interference fringe is typically recorded with 15
consecutive cycles of the experiment. The number of
points per scan is kept small to decrease sensitivity to
long term drifts in signal amplitude and contrast. The
source of such drifts include ﬂuctuations in laser power
and drifts in the Cs vapor pressure in the vacuum cham-
bers. The normalized data reduction method described
in Section II.F is performed on the data. The result-
ing observed SNR is typically 150:1. This corresponds
10−8
to a diﬀerential accelerometer performance of 4
10−9 g/Hz1/2. Scaling this to a
m/s2/Hz1/2, or
10 m baseline gives an inferred gradient sensitivity of 4
E/Hz1/2. Fig. 4 shows typical high sensitivity fringes in
the upper and lower chamber for a T = 157.5 ms inter-
ferometer. The fringe contrast is typically

33%.

∼

×

×

4

Fig. 6 compares interference phase scans with the ref-
erence platform rigidly attached to the optical table
10−5 g technical acceleration noise) with the refer-
(
∼
ence platform servoed using the vibration isolation sys-
tem. We can use the data acquired under servoed con-
ditions (e.g. Fig. 6b) to provide an independent check
on the observed SNR, by performing the least-squares
ﬁtting analysis detailed in section II.F.1, and comparing
it with the point-by-point analysis of II.F.3 for data ac-
quired without the servo (e.g. Fig. 6a). We ﬁnd that
both approaches yield consistent noise estimates.

≈

1. Noise

The dominant noise source is atom shot noise: the
Poissonian ﬂuctuations that arise from detecting atoms
in coherent superposition states, also called quantum pro-
jection noise [23]. Atom shot noise scales as the square
root of the number of atoms detected. As long as there is
a suﬃciently large number of atoms contributing to the
interference fringes, this noise source will be the domi-
nant noise source.

For the T = 157.5 ms gradiometer, the demonstrated
SNR is predominantly limited by atom number shot
noise. The fringe amplitude corresponds to about 2.5
×
105 atoms. At 33% fringe contrast, there is a mean oﬀset
105 atoms. Based on atom shot noise, these atom
of 7
numbers put a limit of 300:1 on the SNR for each interfer-
105)1/2). Additionally, normal-
ence fringe (2.5
izing each chamber reduces the SNR for each gravimeter
to (300/21/2):1. Subtracting the two gravimeter signals

105/(7

×

×

×

9

to produce a gradient signal decreases the SNR by an-
other factor of 21/2, fundamentally limiting the SNR for
the full gravity gradiometer to 150:1.

∼

The noise produced from photon shot noise on the
unabsorbed portion of the probe detection light, corre-
sponding to
300 atom minimum detectable signal, is ap-
proximately at the 800:1 level for each individual fringe,
giving about a 400:1 limit after the normalization and
subtraction of the two fringes. This means that photon
shot noise does not impose a substantial SNR limit for
the current number of atoms, but it would become sig-
niﬁcant for reduced atom numbers.

2. Mass Detection

In order to demonstrate further the sensitivity of the
gravity gradiometer, measurement of the gradient of a
nearby object was performed. Previously, the Earth’s
gravitational gradient was measured [4]. With the im-
proved sensitivity, a measurement of the gravity gradi-
ent from small test masses has been made. For this
12.5 kg each) were
measurement, eight lead bricks (
stacked symmetrically about the lower chamber,
0.2
m from the apex of the atomic fountain. The calcu-
lated acceleration from this conﬁguration of mass should
10−9 g signal. The measured acceleration is
yield a 8.2
×
10−9 g which agrees well with the expected
8.1
×
phase shift.

2.1

∼

±

∼

We are currently extending this work to measure the
gradient of a well characterized mass. Our goal is to
measure G, the gravitational constant, at the part per
thousand level.

B. Immunity to Environmental Noise

An important feature of the gradiometer is the ability
to reject common mode accelerations in the two measure-
ments. This is critical for a device which might be used
on a moving platform. In order to demonstrate this capa-
bility, we performed a series of acceleration and tilt tests
to characterize the instrument’s sensitivity to platform
vibration and tilt noise. We characterize the eﬀects of
accelerations and tilts by measuring instrument SNR as
a function of the amplitude and frequency of an external
platform drive.

1. Linear Acceleration

coupled to the vibration isolation platform. We monitor
the resulting platform acceleration with the platform ac-
celerometer (described in Section II.G.1). For this work,
the high frequency lead-foam passive isolation between
the platform and the corner cube was removed. This
study was done with the interferometer operating in its
most sensitive conﬁguration (at T = 157.5 ms interroga-
tion time). Fig. 7 summarizes the results of these tests.
For frequencies in the range 1 to 100 Hz no signiﬁcant
degradation of the SNR was observed for drive ampli-
10−2 g. This corresponds to a common-
tudes up to 2.5
mode rejection ratio of 140 dB. At amplitudes greater
than
0.1 g, the accelerations are large enough that
individual Raman pulses are Doppler-shifted out of the
Raman resonance condition. At this point, we observe
poor interference fringe contrast.

∼

×

2. Rotation

Tilts of the Raman interferometer beams are expected
to degrade the sensitivity of the measurement.
In or-
der to study the eﬀects of small tilt displacements, we
ﬂoated the optical table on which the gradiometer ap-
paratus was mounted using commercial pneumatic legs
(Newport I-2000). We drove tilt motions with an appro-
priately placed voice coil, and characterized these mo-
tions using a tilt meter (Applied Geomechanics 755-1129;
speciﬁed resolution of 1 µrad, 20 Hz bandwidth). The
rotation vector associated with the tilt motion was in
a plane perpendicular to the Raman propagation axis.
Fig. 8 shows observed SNR versus maximum tilt ampli-
tude for diﬀerent driving frequencies.

Both centrifugal and Coriolis forces lead to a degrada-
tion in instrument sensitivity. A rotation Ω generates a
centrifugal acceleration R Ω2, where R is the distance of
one accelerometer from the center of rotation. For two
accelerometers separated by distance δR, the diﬀerential
acceleration is δR Ω2, while the acceleration gradient is
Ω2. For our operating parameters, we expect this mech-
10−4 rad/s.
anism to begin to degrade the SNR at Ω
10−3
However, full loss in SNR is not expected until Ω
rad/s for this mechanism, much higher than the rotation
rates employed in this study. The Coriolis force leads to a
loss in fringe contrast. In this case, the source transverse
3 cm/s leads to an interference
velocity spread of δv
phase spread of δφ
∼
1 rad, and we expect a full loss in contrast. This is in
reasonable agreement with our observations.

∼
2kef f δv Ω T2. At Ω

10−4, δφ

∼

∼

∼

∼

We characterized immunity to linear accelerations by
shaking the platform on which the retroreﬂecting corner
cube is mounted. As in earlier work, this corner cube
plays the role of the acceleration reference for the ac-
celeration measurements [7,4]. We drive the platform
by applying sinusoidal drive currents to the voice coil

C. Accuracy Estimation

To demonstrate accelerometer (hence gradiometer) ac-
curacy, we monitored accelerometer outputs over ex-
tended periods of time. As in [6] we observed the daily
ﬂuctuations in the measured acceleration due to gravity

10

induced by the motion of the Sun and Moon. Fig. 9
shows data from one accelerometer taken over a period
of several days compared to the Tamura 87 tide model
[24]. The only free parameter in this ﬁt is an overall
phase oﬀset. From this data set, we constrain the ac-
celerometer phase oﬀset to better than 10−9 g over the
two day measurement cycle. Subsequent measurements,
taken several weeks later, resulted in a similar determi-
nation of the ﬁtted oﬀset. From these measurements we
infer an accelerometer accuracy of < 10−9 g over time pe-
riods of days. For a 10 m baseline gradient instrument,
this corresponds to an inferred accuracy of better than 1
E. Further accuracy studies are underway.

IV. DISCUSSION

In this section we discuss the light-pulse method in
the context of other de Broglie wave interference meth-
ods based on laser-atom interactions, as well as alternate
geometries for gradient measurements.

A. Interferometer Comparisons

Here we compare de Broglie-wave gravimeters based on
multiple pulse techniques using stimulated Raman tran-
sitions, Bragg scattering, diﬀraction in the Raman-Nath
regime, adiabatic transfer, and the AC Josephson eﬀect
with Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC).

We have recently demonstrated large-area, multiple
Raman pulse techniques that may enable higher sensi-
tivity gravimeters and gradiometers [25]. By using extra
stimulated Raman transition pulses of alternating propa-
gation direction, a large relative momentum can be trans-
ferred to the two interfering atomic wavepackets, result-
ing in a large-area interferometer. The sensitivity of this
device to gravitational phase shifts increases linearly with
the relative momentum imparted to the wavepackets, or
the number of extra pulse applied. For instance, a gra-
diometer with one extra set of pulses has a relative split-
ting of 6¯hk and a sensitivity to gravity gradients given
∆gT2. In principle, each subsequent Ra-
by ∆φ = 6k
man pulse should not aﬀect the fringe contrast, except
for a small amount of spontaneous emission. This process
should be extendable to a large number of extra pulses
and a large relative momentum.

·

This method might be extended using special se-
quences of composite pulses (see Section II.C.2). The
beneﬁts of using composite pulses in this context would
be an extremely large input velocity acceptance for a
ﬁxed Rabi frequency and robust suppression of spatial
inhomogeneities in Rabi frequency (which arise due to
the ﬁnite size of the Raman laser beams). For exam-
ple, consider the following sequence. A high eﬃciency
composite microwave pulse could be used for the initial
π/2 pulse. Next a composite optical π pulse gives the

wavepackets 4¯hk momentum splitting, and after a long
drift time two composite π pulses redirect the wavepack-
ets back towards each other. Finally, a last composite
optical pulse and another composite microwave pulse re-
combine the wavepackets to complete the interferometer.
Simulations show that this larger area interferometer has
the potential to have a very high fringe contrast (because
of the symmetric composite pulses).

Bragg scattering-based interferometers diﬀract atoms
from standing waves of laser light. As in the light-pulse
interferometers, these interactions can be conﬁgured as
atom optic beamsplitters and mirrors [26]. The primary
virtue of Bragg scattering interferometers is that the
atoms always remain in the same internal state. This
reduces the sensitivity to systematic phase shifts such as
Zeeman shifts and AC Stark shifts, since the wavepack-
ets in each arm of the interferometer experience symmet-
ric phase shifts due to these eﬀects. In comparison, the
Raman method requires the use of propagation vector
reversal techniques to gain immunity to these possible
systematics. Furthermore, high-order Bragg processes
can be used to create large-area, high-sensitivity instru-
ments. However, high-order Bragg processes operate ef-
ﬁciently over a relatively narrow range of initial atomic
velocities (signiﬁcantly less than a photon recoil velocity).
This severely constrains the fraction of atoms which can
contribute to the interference signal, and thus the atom
counting rate. On the other hand, BEC or atom laser
sources may eventually produce extremely bright atomic
beams (having excellent velocity collimation).
In this
case, Bragg processes may become a competitive choice
for interferometer sensors.

A gravimeter based on diﬀraction in the Raman-Nath
regime has been demonstrated [27]. In this interferome-
ter, short, intense pulses of light are applied to the atomic
ensemble. Due to the shortness and intensity of these
pulses, atoms are diﬀracted into a large number of diﬀrac-
tion orders. Two such Raman-Nath pulses are used to
construct the interferometer, and because of the wide
spread of wavepacket momenta, many diﬀerent interfer-
ing paths exist. Some of these paths overlap and interfere
after an echo time, and the echo time determines the sen-
sitivity to gravitational phase shifts. The Raman-Nath
diﬀraction also populates many higher lying momentum
states that do not contribute to the closed interferom-
eter paths, which decreases the interferometer contrast
and places severe constraints on the SNR. High sensitiv-
ity gravimeters, which require good SNR for their oper-
ation, have yet to be demonstrated using this approach.
Adiabatic transfer recently has been used in a proof-
of-principle demonstration of a possible large-area inter-
ferometer [29]. In this approach, atoms are put into co-
herent superpositions of two states using a microwave
pulse. Momentum is transferred to one state in this su-
perposition by adiabatically transferring it from the mf
= 0 sublevel to the highest (or lowest) lying mf level.
Adiabatic transfer is used subsequently to manipulate
and ultimately to overlap the wavepackets. A ﬁnal mi-

11

crowave pulse is then used to interfere these wavepackets.
This method can transfer up to 2mf ¯hk momentum to one
arm of the interferometer. The primary limitation to the
utility of this method is that the adiabatic transfer pop-
ulates magnetic ﬁeld sensitive sublevels. This makes the
interferometer sensitive to Zeeman shifts. While such an
interferometer may demonstrate a high sensitivity, it re-
mains to be seen whether it can achieve high accuracy.

Finally, the AC Josephson eﬀect in arrays of Bose-
Einstein condensed atoms [28] has recently been used
to make a proof-of-principle gravity measurement.
In
this approach, condensate atoms tunnel from an array
of vertically spaced lattice sites. Atoms tunnelling from
diﬀerent sites subsequently interfere. The resulting in-
terference pattern is a periodic train of atom pulses
whose frequency depends on the strength of the gravi-
tational potential. This frequency can be measured with
high accuracy using conventional atom detection tech-
niques. A major technological drawback to this technique
is the need for Bose-Einstein condensed atomic sources,
which still are diﬃcult to produce and not suitable for a
portable apparatus. Also, the time required to condense
atoms is typically in excess of 30 s, which results in a low
instrument bandwidth. However, if techniques to pro-
duce robust, BEC atom sources improve, this method
may become viable for future instruments.

B. Direct Gradient Measurements

1. Multi-loop Interferometers

There are several Raman-pulse based schemes which
can be used for direct gravity gradient measurements.
The simplest of these is the double-loop, or ﬁgure-eight,
interferometer [30]. This geometry can be achieved in
the light-pulse method by inserting an extra π pulse into
the light-pulse sequence. Instead of applying a π/2 pulse
for the third pulse, the two atomic wavepackets are al-
lowed to pass through each other and form a second loop
[see Fig. 10(b)]. Next a second π pulse redirects the
wavepackets to close the second loop, and a ﬁnal π/2
pulse interferes the wavepackets. This pulse sequence di-
rectly produces a phase shift proportional to the the grav-
ity gradient by essentially performing a coherent subtrac-
tion of two spatially, and temporally, separated gravity
measurements (one for each loop). Following the pulse
rules presented in Section I, the double-loop phase shift
is given by ∆φ = φ(t1)
φ(t4), where
φ(ti) is the phase of the ith Raman pulse at the position
of the atomic wavepacket at time ti. For a given fountain
height the double loop interferometer is maximally sen-
sitive when the interferometer spans one half of the total
fountain time. Evaluating this phase, assuming a linear
gravitational gradient g(z) = g◦ + αz along the sensitive
8kg◦αT4, where g◦ is the gravitational
axis, gives ∆φ
component along the Raman wavevector at the atoms’

2φ(t2) + 2φ(t3)

≈

−

−

initial position and α is the linear gradient. This formula
is valid for an interferometer in the ﬁrst half of a fountain
g◦ where z′ is the total height
of length 8T and for αz′
of the fountain.

≪

One problem with this approach is that if the inter-
ferometer spans the whole fountain time, i.e.
is sym-
metric about the fountain’s peak, then the gravity signal
from each loop will be identical, resulting in no phase
shift. Thus, to obtain gradient sensitivity, the double-
loop must be used only in the ﬁrst half or the second half
of the fountain, which severely constrains the possible
instrument sensitivity. (This means the maximum inter-
action time for our fountain is T = 39 ms, resulting in
3000 times less sensitivity to gradients as compared with
two single loop interferometer which are separated by 10
In addition to this sensitivity limit, it is diﬃcult
m.)
to make the gradiometer baseline arbitrarily large and
there is no common-mode vibration rejection, since each
of the two acceleration measurements which comprise the
gravity gradient signal are made at diﬀering times.

π

π

−

−

−

≈

−

2φ(t2) + 2φ(t3)

A slight modiﬁcation of the double-loop method al-
lows full use of the fountain interaction time, resulting
in a three-fold increase in sensitivity from a double-loop
interferometer in an apparatus of equivalent size. This
modiﬁed sequence uses an extra π pulse in a π/2
−
π
π/2 sequence, which creates a triple-loop in-
terferometer as seen in Fig. 10(c). The phase shift is
∆φ = φ(t1)
2φ(t4) + φ(t5), which
−
[17/3 + 4√2]kg◦αT4, again assuming
reduces to: ∆φ
a linear gradient and an interferometer that now spans
the entire fountain time, (8 + 4√2)T. This interferometer
may be symmetrically spaced about the fountain’s apex,
so that the maximal interrogation time is T = 46 ms for
our fountain. Interference fringes from a triple loop in-
terferometer are shown in Fig. 11. The 10 m single-loop,
two chamber gradiometer still is 1000 times more sensi-
tive due to its larger baseline and longer eﬀective inter-
rogation time. In addition, the triple-loop gradiometer,
like the double-loop, does not provide vibration rejection,
has a limited baseline, and is only slightly less sensitive
to magnetic ﬁelds.

2. Curvature Measurements

Two multiple-loop gradiometers may be used in con-
junction to measure the second moment of the gravity
ﬁeld, in a conﬁguration similar to that used to measure
the gradient with two single loop interferometers, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 2. In this case, the triple-loop gradient
phase shifts obtained from two spatially separated atomic
ensembles are subtracted to obtain the second order cur-
vature of the gravitational ﬁeld. This device does have
immunity to spurious vibrational noise because measure-
ments are made simultaneously with respect to a common
platform. Proof-of-principle data is shown in Fig. 11.
Measurement of the second moment of the gravitational

12

FIG. 4. Gradiometer interference fringes with T = 157.5
ms. Squares and circles represent the normalized upper and
lower chamber fringes respectively, after compensating for
contrast diﬀerences between the chambers. Triangles show
the lower chamber signal residuals.

FIG. 5. Schematic of the vibration isolation apparatus fea-

turing elements for passive and active isolation.

FIG. 6. Gradiometer interference fringes with T = 157.5
ms. Circles represent the raw data points, and the solid lines
is a sinusoidal least squares ﬁt. (a) shows a fringe with the
inertial reference platform, i.e.
the cornercube, rigidly at-
tached to the optical table. (b) shows an interference fringe
taken with the cornercube mounted on the vibration control
system.

FIG. 7. Results of the reference platform shake test. No
SNR reduction is seen when driving accelerations on the ref-
−2 g over the frequency
erence platform at amplitudes of 10
band indicated. This amounts to 140 dB of vibration rejec-
tion. The observed maximum SNR is slightly reduced from
the data of Fig. 5

FIG. 8. Results of the platform tilt test. The ﬂoated op-
tical table is tilted at a number of frequencies, and the gra-
diometer is insensitive to a range of tilt amplitudes. The
observed maximum SNR is slightly reduced from the data of
Fig. 5

FIG. 9. Gravitational tidal signals as monitored by one ac-
celerometer output over two days. Data are scattered points
and the solid line is the tidal model with no free scaling pa-
rameters.

FIG. 10. Recoil diagrams for various interferometer pulse
sequences. Dotted lines represent the F = 4 states and solid
lines are the F = 3 state. The sensitivity to accelerations is
proportional to the area enclosed in the recoil diagrams. The
timing of π and π/2 pulses are shown with the vertical arrows.
a) Single-loop accelerometer. b) Double-loop gradiometer. c)
Triple-loop gradiometer.

FIG. 11. Typical interference fringes from T = 44 ms triple
loop interferometers in the upper and lower chamber. The
solid lines are least squares ﬁts. The phase diﬀerence be-
tween the two fringes represents a measurement of the second
moment of the gravitational ﬁeld.

ﬁeld allows diﬀerentiation between massive, distant ob-
jects and less massive, nearby objects that our gradiome-
ter could not distinguish.

A more direct and sensitive way to characterize the
second order moment is to operate simultaneously three
single-loop accelerometers spaced equidistantly along a
single axis. The diﬀerence between gradients obtained
by diﬀerencing the ﬁrst and second accelerometer outputs
from the second to third accelerometer outputs gives a
second moment measurement. This device should have
the same beneﬁts as the previous device and would be
signiﬁcantly more sensitive.

V. CONCLUSION

Future sensitivity enhancements are likely. Improve-
ments in the number of atoms trapped and optically pre-
pared in the correct state would allow for higher, atom-
shot noise limited SNRs. This might be accomplished
using recently demonstrated atom trapping and cooling
techniques [31,32]. Multiple pulse (> 2¯hk) techniques
will provide straightforward access to large-area, high
sensitivity conﬁgurations.

It should be noted that the performance of a grav-
ity gradiometer in a microgravity environment would be
greatly enhanced due to the larger available interrogation
T 2) without need for an atomic fountain, and
time (∆φ
such a high sensitivity device would be ideal for tests of
fundamental theories.

∼

Finally, the current sensitivity makes measurement of
geophysical gradient signals possible. A portable abso-
lute gradiometer would be useful for navigation, geodesy,
terrain estimation, and oil and mineral exploration.

Acknowledgements. We thank Todd Gustavson and
Arnauld Landragin for constructing the trapping laser
lock and Kurt Gibble for useful discussions regarding
trapping and optical pumping.

This work was supported by grants from the ONR,

NASA, MURI, and NSF.

FIG. 1. A comparison of the transfer eﬃciency of a com-
posite π pulse (solid traces) with a regular π pulse (dotted
traces). The detuning is from the F = 4 mf = 0 → F = 3 mf
= 0 transition.

FIG. 2. Schematic illustration of the detection apparatus

showing the Raman beam racetrack setup.

FIG. 3. The decrease in the gradiometer SNR is shown due
to a phase mismatch induced by the Earth’s gravity gradient.
The phase shift ∆φ is the gradient phase shift from increasing
the interferometer time T (∆φ ∝T2). The solid line is a
theory based on the noise from two mismatched sine waves in
quadrature with photon shot noise from the detection system.

13

[1] T. Damour and A. Polyakov, Nucl. Phys. B 423, 532

(1994).

[2] B. Venema, P. Majumder, S. Lamoreaux, B. Heckel and

E. Fortson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 135 (1992).

[3] P. Moore and B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 351 (2000).
[4] M.J. Snadden, J.M. McGuirk, P. Bouyer, K.G. Haritos
and M.A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 971 (1998).
[5] Atom Interferometry, edited by P. Berman (Academic

Press, New York, 1997).

[6] A. Peters, K.Y. Chung, and S. Chu, Nature 400, 849

(1999).

(2000).

[7] M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Appl. Phys. B. 54, 321 (1992).
[8] M. Kasevich and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 181 (1991).
[9] C. Jekeli, Geophysics 58, 508 (1993).
[10] See, for example, E. van Leeuwen, Leading Edge 19, 1296

[11] A.J. Romaides, J.C. Battis, R.W. Sands, A. Zorn, D.O.
Benson, Jr., and D.J. DiFrancesco, Journ. of Phys. D:
Applied Phys. 34, 433 (2001).

[12] M. Moody and H. Paik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1195 (1993).
[13] F. van Kann, M. Buckingham, C. Edwards and R.

Matthews, Physica B 194, 61 (1994).

[14] J. Goodkind, Rev. Sci. Instr. 70, 4131 (1999).
[15] J. Brown, T. Niebauer, F. Klopping and A. Herring, Geo-

phys. Res. Lett. 27, 33 (2000).

[16] M. H. Levitt, Progress in NMR Spectroscopy 18, 61

(1986).

[17] A. Abragam, the Principles of Nuclear Magnetism (Ox-

ford Univ. Press, Oxford, England, 1961).

[18] P. Bouyer, T.L. Gustavson, K.G. Haritos, M.A. Kase-

vich, Optics Letters 21, 1502 (1996).

[19] J.M. McGuirk, G.T. Foster, J.B. Fixler and M.A. Kase-

vich, Optics Lett. 26, 364 (2001).
[20] J.S. Shirley, Opt. Lett. 7, 537 (1982).
[21] J.J. Synder, R.K. Raj, D. Bloch and M. Ducloy, Opt.

[22] J.M. Hensley, A. Peters, and S. Chu, Rev. Sci. Tech. 70,

Lett. 5, 163 (1980).

2735 (1999).

[23] W.M. Itano, J.C. Bollinger, J.M. Gilligan, D.J. Heinzen,
F.L. Moore, M.G. Raizen, D.J. Wineland, Phys. Rev. A
47, 3554 (1993).

[24] Y. Tamura, Bulletin d’Informations Mares Terrestres 99,

[25] J.M. McGuirk, M.J. Snadden, and M.A. Kasevich, Phys.

6813 (1987).

Rev. Lett. 85, 4498 (2000).

Lett. 75, 2638 (1995).

[26] D.M. Giltner, R.W. McGowan, and S.A. Lee, Phys. Rev.

[27] S.B. Cahn et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 784 (1997).
[28] B.P. Anderson and M.A. Kasevich, Science 282, 1686

[29] P.D. Featonby et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 495 (1998).
[30] J. Clauser, Physica B 151, 262 (1988).
[31] S.E. Hamann, D.L. Haycock, G. Klose, P.H. Pax, I.H.
Deutsch, and P.S. Jessen, Phys. Rev. A 61, 1972 (1998).
[32] P. Treutlein, K.Y. Chung, and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. A 63,

(1998)).

(2001).

14

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig10.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

This figure "fig11.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0105088v1

