1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comparative investigation of 39K and 40K trap loss rates: alternative loss channel at
low light intensities

G. Modugno, G. Roati∗, and M. Inguscio
INFM and European Laboratory for Non-linear Spectroscopy
(LENS),
Universit`a di Firenze, Largo E. Fermi 2, 50125
Firenze, Italy

M. S. Santos, G.D. Telles, L.G. Marcassa, and V.S. Bagnato
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos - USP
Caixa Postal 369, 13560-970, S˜ao Carlos-SP, Brazil
(February 2, 2008)

We report a comparative investigation of trap loss rates in a magneto-optical trap for two potassium
isotopes, 39K and 40K, as a function of trap light intensity. The isotopes present a quite similar
behavior for the loss rates at high intensities, and a sudden increase of the loss rates at low intensities
is present in both cases. While for 39K such increase can be explained assuming that the major con-
tribution to the losses comes from Hyperﬁne Changing Collisions, a diﬀerent loss mechanism must
be considered for 40K, which has an inverted ground state hyperﬁne structure. The experimental
results of both isotopes are well reproduced by an alternative model based on radiative escape as
the dominant loss mechanism.

PACS number(s): 23.23.+x, 56.65.Dy

I. INTRODUCTION

The investigation of collisional

losses in magneto-
optical traps (MOTs) has been extended to most of the
trappable neutral atoms [1]. Although the modeling of
trap losses has proved to be a nontrivial task, it may re-
veal useful informations about the interatomic potentials
and about the nature of the inelastic processes, which
constitute one of the main limits towards the achieve-
ment of high densities in cold samples of atoms.

Since the ﬁrst investigations of the trap loss behavior in
alkali MOTs as a function of laser intensity, the existence
of two diﬀerent loss regimes was clear. While all later ob-
servations indicated that at large intensities the losses are
dominated by ﬁne-structure-changing (FSC) and radia-
tive escape (RE), the origin of the loss behavior at low
intensity is still not completely understood. On one hand,
the measurements on most of the alkali species showed
a sharp increase of loss rate for decreasing intensity be-
low a certain threshold value (usually, I < 30 mW / cm2).
Once all the studied species are trapped in their higher
hyperﬁne ground state in a MOT, the losses were at-
tributed to hyperﬁne-changing collisions (HCC), whose
contribution increases as the trap depth decreases. On
the other hand, recent measurements on a 87Rb MOT
showed that the loss rate starts to decrease again at even
lower intensities, while it would be expected to raise away
in presence of HCC [2]. These experimental results are
indeed well reproduced by an alternative model for trap
losses, assuming the RE as the dominant loss mechanism
also for low light intensity [3]. In addition, the assump-
tion for the presence of trap loss channel other than HCC
has been emphasized by the loss behavior measured in a

1

Cr MOT [4]. The overall behavior observed for the Cr
MOT trap loss rate is quite similar to those for the alkalis,
including the sharp rise up when the intensity decreases
below some threshold value, although the Cr atoms do
not present hyperﬁne structure.

The fermionic potassium isotope, 40K, is particularly
interesting in this context, due to its inverted hyperﬁne
structure for the ground electronic state, unique among
all stable alkali isotopes. This feature should result in a
suppression of HCC in a MOT, allowing better investi-
gation of trap loss mechanisms other than HCC. Actu-
ally, 40K has been trapped in MOT only recently, due
to its low natural abundance (0.012%) [5–7], and to our
knowledge no trap loss measurement has been presented
yet. On the contrary, the most abundant bosonic iso-
tope, 39K, presents a regular hyperﬁne structure. And it
had already been the subject of loss measurements in a
MOT, and in particular Santos et al. [8] have observed
the characteristic sharp increase for the trap losses at
low intensity, associated to HCC following the explana-
tion given for other systems.

In this paper we present a comparative study of trap
loss rates measured for two potassium isotopes held in
a MOT, 39K and 40K, as a function of trap laser light
intensity. The experiments were carried out in similar
experimental conditions, but in separate laboratories in
Brazil and in Italy. On the next section we present a
brief description of the experimental setup used during
the trap loss measurements. Then we present the ex-
perimental results, and we show that they are quite well
reproduced by a model based on RE [3] as the main loss
channel also at low light intensity.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The electronic structure of both isotopes investigated
in this work are shown in Fig. 1. For the bosonic isotope
39K, the ground state (4S1/2) presents two hyperﬁne lev-
els with total angular momenta F = 2 and F = 1, fre-
quency shifted by 462 MHz. On the other hand, 40K
presents a inverted hyperﬁne structure of the ground
state, with F = 7/2 higher than F = 9/2 by 1286 MHz.
Also in the excited (4P3/2) the hyperﬁne structure of 40K
is inverted with respect to that of 39K.

This work results from the cooperation of two indepen-
dent laboratories, one in Italy at LENS, and the other in
Brazil at IFSC-USP, which have investigated the trap
loss rate for the two isotopes independently. The exper-
imental conditions for trapping both isotopes were kept
as close as possible to allow comparison, although there
were some diﬀerences, especially in the detuning of the
trapping light, needed to optimize the MOT operation.
The Brazilian experiment has performed measurements
in 39K, using an experimental setup fully described else-
where [8]. In brief, the MOT operates in a room tem-
perature vapor cell, and the trapping beams comes from
an external stabilized Ti:Sapphire laser tuned 40 MHz to
the red from the 4S1/2(F = 2) → 4P3/2(F ′ = 3) atomic
transition. The repumper is provided when the carrier
beam passes through an electro optical modulator that
introduces 462 MHz frequency shifted sidebands. Using
high laser intensity (150 mW / cm−2) up to 5 × 108 atoms
are loaded in the MOT at a density of 1010 cm−3. The
sudden change of intensity technique, developed by San-
tos [8], was used to measure the trap loss rate at low
light intensities. The MOT is loaded at full intensity and
then, after the steady state has been reached, the inten-
sity is suddenly reduced by introducing a calibrated neu-
tral density ﬁlter across the trap laser beam path. After
the intensity reduction, the number of trapped atoms de-
creases to reach a new steady-state value, with a tempo-
ral evolution determined by the trap loss rates in the low
intensity regime. The transient variation of atom number
and density are therefore monitored by measuring the ﬂu-
orescence coming from the atoms with a calibrated pho-
todiode and charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras. This
technique, based on the detection of the unloading of the
weak MOT, allows to determine the loss rate also in a
very low intensity regime (I ≈ IS), diﬀerently from the
standard method based on the MOT loading analysis.
Indeed, the latter method would not work at very low
intensities once the atomic density and, therefore, the
collisional rates are too small.

The Italian experiment performed the measurements
with 40K, loaded from a 5% enriched vapor sample. The
laser cooling and trapping is carried using the 4S1/2(F =
9/2) → 4P3/2(F ′ = 11/2) atomic transition, while re-
pumper beams are tuned to the 4S1/2(F = 7/2) →
4P3/2(F ′ = 9/2) hyperﬁne transition as indicated in
Fig. 1. Both trapping and repumping frequencies come

from a single-mode Ti:Sapphire by means of two indepen-
dent acousto-optic modulators (AOMs). A more detailed
description of the MOT setup can be found in [7], and the
main MOT parameters are compared to the 39K ones, in
Table I. In the Italian experiment the sudden laser inten-
sity reduction is obtained by a quick power lowering of
the AOM radio frequency, providing the trapping beams,
after a typical 4 s loading phase at full intensity.

As described above, to obtain the trap loss rates
we measure the time evolution of the total number of
trapped atoms after the sudden decrease of the laser in-
tensity. The ﬁrst step is to load the potassium MOT at
full intensity during a few seconds. The rate equation
describing the behavior is:

dN
dt

= L0 − γN − βn0N ,

(1)

where L0 is the loading rate, γ is the loss rate due to col-
lisions between the trapped K atoms and the hot back-
ground vapor, and β is the loss rate resulting from colli-
sions among the trapped potassium atoms due to inelas-
tic mechanisms. As ﬁrst observed for Cs [9] and veriﬁed
for 39K [8], the MOT is loaded at constant atomic density
(n0), so that the solution of Eq. 1 is

N (t) = N0

1 − e

−(γ+βn0)t

h

.

i

(2)

On eqs.1 and 2 above, N0 stands as the total number
of trapped atoms achieved at the steady state, after the
loading at high intensity. The second step is to suddenly
decrease the trap laser beam intensity down to some frac-
tion of the initial total intensity. Therefore, the rate eq.
1 will have to change to support the new experimental
conditions. The new equation has to link two steady-
states: the initial, containing N0 atoms trapped at n0
density, and the ﬁnal (t → ∞), containing N1 trapped
at n1 density. Also, at the new intensity, the MOT still
continues to load atoms, but with a smaller loading rate,
L1, that has to be a fraction of the initial one (L0), at
full intensity. Thus, the time evolution for the trapped
potassium atoms, after the intensity decrease, becomes:

dN
dt

= L1 − γN − βn1N .

(3)

The solution for the above rate eq. 3 can be easily found,
by ordinary means, simply imposing the correct bound-
ary conditions. That is,

N (t) = N1 + (N0 − N1) e

−(γ+βn1)t,

(4)

and it presents an exponential decay solution linking the
two steady state regimes. Note that in eq.4, N1 has to
be smaller than N0 and that is obviously the situation
achieved during the experiment, once the trap laser in-
tensity was suddenly decreased down to a small fraction
of the total initial one.

2

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

In Fig. 2 the experimental results for the trap loss rate
β of the two isotopes are presented as a function of the
light intensity, normalized to the saturation intensity of
each isotope. Each β value results from the average of
ﬁve independent measurements, and the error bars repre-
sent the resulting variance. The general behavior of trap
losses for the two isotopes is similar:
from high inten-
sity down to about I = 15Is, β shows a small variation
with intensity, which at lower intensities we observe an
increase of trap loss that is sharper for 39K than for 40K.
This increase in trap loss rate at low intensity has been
associated to HCC. Also in this case, HCC could explain
the observed increase of β for 39K, because the atoms
are trapped in the higher hyperﬁne ground state F = 2
may change to the ground F = 1 state through inelastic
collisions with subsequent release of the hyperﬁne energy.
However, for 40K this explanation for the raise of β
is not correct, since the atoms are trapped mostly in
the lowest energy ground state (F = 9/2), and therefore
HCC are expected to be reduced. In fact, a quantitative
estimation of the HCC contribution to the MOT losses
can be performed using the HCC rate measured in an op-
tical trap [10]. Those measurements were performed at
approximately the same temperature of the MOT, and
very likely with the same distribution of population on
the magnetic substates, allowing for a fair comparison.
Since in the 40K MOT the intensity of the repumper
beams remains large when the trapping intensity is re-
duced, we estimate the ratio of densities in F = 7/2 and
F = 9/2 states to be

r =

n7/2
n9/2

≤

1
50

,

(5)

in the whole range of intensities explored. Thus the main
contribution to the losses due to HCC is expected to come
from the (F = 9/2, F = 7/2) →(F = 9/2, F = 9/2)
channel, for which we measured a rate G7/2,9/2 = 4(2) ×
10−12 cm3 s−1 [10]. Assuming HCC to be the dominant
loss channel, the time evolution of the MOT atom num-
ber is thus described by

dN
dt

= L − γN − G7/2,9/2 Z

n7/2(r)n9/2(r)d3r ,

(6)

which in the case of a constant density n becomes

dN
dt

= L − γN − G7/2,9/2 r(1 − r)nN .

(7)

Comparing Eq. 6 with Eq. 3, we get β ≤ 10−13 cm3 s−1,
which is in fact between two and three orders of mag-
nitude smaller than the experimental observation. The
possible contribution of HCC to the losses for 40K is
therefore ruled out, unless an enhancement of collisional
rate in presence of near resonant light is assumed, as pro-
posed for Rb in ref. [2,11].

An alternative explanation for our experimental obser-
vations is based on the model proposed in [3], which can
fully explain the behavior of the trap loss rate as in Fig. 2
without relying on the existence of HCC. In brief, it is
possible to model the trap losses in a MOT based exclu-
sively on the radiative escape for any light intensity, by
applying the well-known Gallagher-Pritchard theory [13]
associated with an intensity dependent escape velocity
model. According to recent observations [12], the escape
velocity seems to follow quite well a simple model based
on the damping portion of the radiative force, that pre-
dicts a sudden reduction of the escape velocity at low
laser intensity. As already mentioned, an interesting re-
sult of GP theory was its capability of reproducing the
experimental observations for the β variation with light
intensity in a 87Rb MOT [2,3] that could not be easily
explained within the theory based on HCC.

We have therefore applied such model to our potassium
MOTs, calculating the dependence of the escape velocity
on the light intensity as discussed in [12]. The result of
the simulation for the β variation with light intensity is
presented in Fig. 3, together with the experimental re-
sults. It reproduces quite well the behavior observed in
the experiments, presenting the rise up at low intensity
and an almost constant value for high intensity for both
isotopes. Therefore, the model assuming RE as the main
trap loss mechanism can reproduce all the observed fea-
tures not only for the 40K losses, but also for those in
39K, which were expected to be dominated by HCC at
low intensity. This result indicates that RE might be in
general the main loss channel in an alkali MOT.

The discrepancies between the theory and the experi-
ment shown in Fig. 3 can be qualitatively explained con-
sidering the approximations present in the model we use.
In particular, for the conditions actually used in the two
MOTs, the simulation predicts a larger trap loss for 39K,
contrarily to the experimental observation. We note that
our theory [3] assumes a two level atom, and the main
parameters which determine the loss rate are the inten-
sity and detuning of the MOT light, together with the
C3 coeﬃcient of the molecular potential. For the lat-
ter quantity we have used the value suggested in [14],
while for the ﬁrst two we have used just the experimen-
tal values. The simulation predicts a higher value of β
for 39K, since larger detunings result in a smaller trap
depth potential while compared to 40K. When consid-
ering the multilevel character of the atoms, one should
note that the 39K trapping laser is tuned to the red of
the whole excited hyperﬁne manifold, due to the small
separations between the states, and therefore one would
expect that the trapping eﬀectiveness is reduced. On the
other hand, an opposite behavior for the trap losses might
be expected from very general features of the molecular
potential along with RE can take place. Indeed, in the
case of 39K the trapping laser promotes coupling of the
atoms to the molecular potentials having as asymptotes
the lower atomic hyperﬁne components. The presence of
a large number of state-mixings and avoided crossings in

3

this region is possibly resulting in a reduced atomic ﬂux
towards the attractive states connecting asymptotically
to the higher hyperﬁne state, which mostly contributes
to the losses at low light intensities. The situation is
quite diﬀerent for 40K, since the trapping laser couples
the atoms directly with the attractive molecular poten-
tials, because of the inverted hyperﬁne structure of the
excited level. In this sense, the fermionic isotope is closer
to the approximations made in the model, and this seems
to be the reason for the better agreement with the theory,
at least in the low intensity regime. A better agreement
between the magnitude of β given by the theory and those
observed in the experiment would be only reach using
an improved modeling, including the multilevel atomic
character. Nevertheless, we also note that the present
simulation predicts the correct intensity values in which
β suddenly starts to increase.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have measured and compared the
trap loss rate as a function of the MOT light intensity
for two potassium isotopes, 39K and 40K. The measured
behavior of β shows in both cases the general features
already observed for other trapped alkali species, includ-
ing the sharp increase of the losses at low light intensi-
ties. In the case of 39K such increase had been previously
explained with the assumption that losses at low light in-
tensity were dominated by hyperﬁne changing collisions.
To explain the data obtained for 40K we have instead to
rely in a theory where radiative escape is the dominant
process for all ranges of intensities. The dependence of
trap loss rate on the laser intensity calculated according
to this model seems to ﬁt quite well the experimental
observations for both potassium isotopes, therefore sup-
porting the theory of alternative trap loss channels in a
MOT [3].

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was carried out at Centro de Pesquisas em
´Optica e Fotˆonica (CePOF) and supported by FAPESP,
CNPq through the PRONEX program and by European
Community Council through Contract HPRICT1999-
00111.

[3] G.D. Telles, V.S. Bagnato and L.G. Marcassa accept for

publication on Phys. Rev. Lett.

[4] C.C. Bradley, J.J. McClelland, W.R. Anderson and R.J.

Celotta, Phys. Rev. A 61, 053407 (2000).

[5] F.S. Cataliotti, E.A. Cornell, C. Fort, M. Inguscio, F.
Marin, M. Prevedelli, L. Ricci and G.M. Tino, Phys. Rev.
A 57, 1136 (1998).

[6] B de Marco and D.S. Jin, Rev. Sci. Instr. 82, 4208 (1999).
[7] G. Modugno, C. Benko, P. Hannaford, G. Roati and M.

Inguscio, Phys. Rev. A 60, R3373 (1999).

[8] M.S. Santos, A. Antunes, P. Nussenzveig, J. Flemming,
S. Zilio and V. S. Bagnato, Laser Physics 8, 880 (1998).
[9] T. Walker, D. Sesko and C. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett.64,

408 (1990).

[10] G. Roati, W. Jabstreski, A. Simoni, G. Modugno, and M.
Inguscio, to appear in Phys. Rev. A; arXiv physics/000.
[11] S.D. Gensemer, P.L. Gould, P.J. Leo, E. Tiesinga, and
C.J. Williams, Phys. Rev. A 62, 030702R (2000).
[12] V.S. Bagnato, L.G. Marcassa, S.G. Miranda, S.R. Muniz
and A.L. Oliveira, Phys. Rev. A. 62, 013404 (2000).
[13] A. Gallagher and D. Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 957

[14] M. Marinescu, H.R. Sadeghpour, and A. Dalgarno, Phys.

(1989).

Rev. A 49, 982 (1994).

FIG. 1. Energy level scheme for the two isotopes 39K and
40K, showing the hyperﬁne structure. Trap and repumper
frequencies used for magneto-optical trapping are indicated
by arrows.

TABLE I. Typical conditions used for magneto-optical

trapping of the potassium isotopes.

Isotope

Detuning (MHz)
HWHM of Gaussian beams (mm)
Saturation Intensity (mW / cm2)
Total Number of loaded atoms
Density (cm−3)

40K
−19
7.5
1.8
107
1010

39K
−40
6.5
1.66
108
1010

FIG. 2. Experimental loss coeﬃcient for the potassium iso-

topes 39K (open squares) and 40K (black squares).

FIG. 3. Comparison of the experimental results and the
simulation for loss rates due to RE for the two potassium
isotopes.

[1] J. Weiner, V.S. Bagnato, S. Zilio and P. Julienne , Rev.

Mod. Phys. 71, 1 (1999).

[2] R.C. Nesnidal and T.G. Walker, Phys. Rev. A 62,

030701R (2000).

4

Fig.1: G. Modugno et al., Comparative investigation of 39K and 40K 
trap loss rates: alternative loss channel at low light intensity.

39K

21MHZ
9MHZ
3MHZ

F´=3
F´=2
F´=1
F´=0

4P3/2

4P3/2

40K

24MHZ
33MHZ
43MHZ

F´=5/2
F´=7/2
F´=9/2
F´=11/2

Trap Repumper

Trap

Repumper

766.7nm

4S1/2

4S1/2

1285.8MHz

461.7MHz

F=2

F=1

F=7/2

F=9/2

)
s
/

3

m
c
1
1

0-
1
(
 

100

10

1

0,1

Fig.2: G. Modugno et al., Comparative investigation of 39K and 40K 
          trap loss rates: alternative loss channel at low light intensity

   39K
   40K

 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

I / I

s

b
)
s
/

3

m
c
1
1

0-
1
(
 

100

10

1

0,1

Fig.3: G. Modugno et al., Comparative investigation of 39K and 40K 
          trap loss rates: alternative loss channel at low light intensity

   39K
   40K

 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

I / I

s

b
