EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Energetic photoionization of neutral and ionic metal clusters

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik Komplexer Systeme, N¨othnitzer Strasse 38, D-01187 Dresden, Germany

Himadri S Chakraborty and M E Madjet

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

Abstract. We show, with an example of Na92, that for jellium metal clusters the interference of fast
electron-waves emitted from equivalent sites on the cluster edge produces monochromatic oscillations
in all photoionization observables as a function of the photoelectron momentum; the eﬀect is equiv-
alent to the usual dispersion phenomenon. In dealing with formalisms, a serious consequence of the
inadequacy of self-interaction corrected local density-functional theory in correctly accounting for the
exchange interaction is identiﬁed. We also brieﬂy discuss the inﬂuence of the ionicity of the residual
core on photospectra by considering the neutral member with N = 58 and and the ionic member
with N = 52 of the Na58 iso-jellium series, where N is the number of valence electrons. A few ﬁnal re-
marks on possible implications of these results on other quantum systems of delocalized electrons are made.

Keywords: Jellium cluster, photoionization, density-functional theory

PACS Nos.: 31.15.Ew, 36.40.Cg, 36.40.Vz

PACS. XX.XX.XX No PACS code given

1 Introduction

Due to the near-Coulomb character of a typical atomic
potential with its strong attractive behavior at close dis-
tances resulting electronic wavefunctions are generally com-
pact around the nucleus. As a result, electrons in an atom
are largely localized. There are two important consequences
of this property. First, since the gradient of such a poten-
tial varies smoothly, electrons can receive the necessary
recoil force (−dV /dr) to photoionize from ‘everywhere’
within the spatial extent of the system. Second, any rapid
variation of the potential within a small range does not sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀect photo-dynamical properties, because the
potential with its steep slope practically overwhelms such
local structures.

On the other hand, atomic clusters exhibit proper-
ties that hover across the realm between the single atom
and the bulk. Contrary to the atomic context, where the
nucleus is practically dimensionless, a system of positive
core-ions with a certain spatial extension provides the nec-
essary binding for valence electrons in a cluster. This back-
ground positive core can be approximated as a homoge-
neously smeared out charge distribution, the jellium, for
a cluster of suﬃciently large atoms with one or two va-
lence electrons per atom. Consequently, the eﬀective po-
tential of such a system acquires, in comparison to the
atomic potential, a radically diﬀerent shape by having

a ﬂat interior and a sharp edge. We focus in this pa-
per on this aspect of the cluster potential to scrutinize
how does the shape inﬂuence the high energy photoioniza-
tion behavior of a metal cluster and its ions. We further
point out an unphysical consequence of an ad hoc correc-
tion scheme that is popularly applied to the Kohn-Sham
local-density-approximation (LDA) to account for spuri-
ous self-interactions.

2 Results and discussions

Alkali-metal clusters having one valence electron per atom
can be well described by a spherical jellium model which
entirely disregards the structure of the ionic core [1]. The
Schr¨odinger equation can then be approximately solved by
some ground state many body theory considering Coulomb
interactions among only valence electrons. As pointed out,
the resulting radial potential (V ) typically behaves ﬂat
from the origin upto almost the edge and then over a short
range across the edge (r = Rc) produces a steep barrier.
This behavior physically implies that the valence electron
cloud is quasi-free over the most of the interior region of
the cluster but feels a rather strong conﬁning force in the
vicinity of the surface. To understand the basic mecha-
nism of the photoionization from such systems let us con-
sider the dipole amplitude of a typical nl → ǫl′ transition.

2

Himadri S Chakraborty and M E Madjet: Energetic photoionization of neutral and ionic metal clusters

Na92

1s
1d
1g
1h

)
.
u
.
a
(
 

l

n

σ

10−2

10−4

10−6

10−8

10−10

10−12

10−14

0

50

150

200

100
hν (eV)

Fig. 1. 1s, 1g, and 1h subshell photoionization cross sections as a function of photon-energy calculated in LDA-SIC.

The radial matrix element in the acceleration form of the
dipole interaction, that is proportional to the ionization
recoil force, is then < ψnl|dV /dr|ψǫl′ >; of course, the
dual assumption of spherical symmetry and unpolarized
photon is implied. Now, the structure of V clearly sug-
gests that its radial derivative must show a strong peak
at the edge while is virtually vanishing elsewhere. This
means that the predominant contribution to the overlap
integral will come from the edge, which equivalently im-
plies that photoelectrons will largely emit from the sur-
face region where it receives enough recoil to eject. Strong
contribution to the amplitude from equivalent sites of the
cluster edge will, therefore, show the signature of interfer-
ence in the form of oscillations in the ensuing cross section
as well as in other physical parameters. While there has
been no experimental study on metal clusters, oscillations
in the valence photoelectron intensity are indeed observed
for C60 [2] and C70 [3] fullerine molecules, which are also
systems of quasi-free de-localized electrons conﬁned within
a nearly spherical shell.

Situation begins to get simpler as the energy of the in-
cident photon increases. In general, the continuum radial
wavefunction ψǫl′ for such potentials are very nearly the
spherical Bessel function jl′ (knlr), where knl is the photo-
electron momentum. With high photon-energy, and there-
fore fast photoelectrons, this function limits to cos(knlr +
l′π/2), the usual ﬁrst Born picture. Insertion of this high
energy form into the radial matrix element immediately
reveals that the oscillation in the dipole amplitude will
have a frequency close to the radius of the cluster. Evi-
dently, the cross section, which is the sum of the squared
modulous of amplitudes of allowed transitions, will then
oscillate in a frequency approximately the diameter:

σnl ∼ cos(2Rcknl + l

π)

′

(1)

In fact, the oscillation in alkali-metal clusters has been
predicted earlier through a kind of semi-classical study [4]
and has later been veriﬁed by numerical calculations of the
total cross section of Na40 using some eﬀective mean-ﬁeld
LDA potential [5].

in an independent particle frame. The ground state is
described by the electron self-interaction corrected local-
density approximation (LDASIC) [6], that approximately
restores the physical long range −1/r behavior of the re-
sulting single-electron potential. Figure 1 presents some
selected subshell cross sections from n = 1 manifold. The
oscillation in cross sections is very much in evidence and
the Fourier transform (not shown) of the cross sections (as
a function of the respective knl) indeed peaks at a position
which is approximately the diameter of the cluster.

An interesting physical analogy of this phenomenon
can apparently be drawn with the usual diﬀraction mech-
anism in optics. The light shines on a metal cluster which
is like a spherical double-slit with slit width to be the clus-
ter diameter. ‘Free’ delocalized electrons over the bulk of
the interior region are nearly insensitive to the light. Pho-
toelectron waves emanate only from the two slits, which
eﬀectively are the diametrically opposite sites on the sur-
face of the sphere. These secondary waves with a certain
path diﬀerence, that is equal to the slit width and hence
the diameter, subsequently interfere. As a result, the cross
section oscillates in a frequency 2Rc, a feature equivalent
to the distance between consecutive fringes in a diﬀraction
pattern being 2π(2Rc).

For a ground state subshell of the angular momen-
tum l the two dipole-allowed free angular momenta are
l′ = l ± 1. Therefore, it can be easily veriﬁed by using
equation (1) that the phase contribution to any σnl from
the continuum wavefunctions is always 2π at high enough
energy. This implies that the high energy phase diﬀerence
between any two subshell cross sections will be predom-
inantly determined by the phase contribution from their
ground state angular momentum l. Thus, for any two sub-
shells with the diﬀerence between their l values being an
odd integer the corresponding cross sections will show os-
cillations largely out of phase, while the diﬀerence being
even they will oscillate in phase. This behavior is clearly
evident among the cross sections in Figure 1; while a rough
phase agreement is seen between 1s and 1d cross sections,
1g and 1h are clearly out of phase.

In this study, we calculate subshell photoionization
cross sections for Na92 cluster (1s21p61d102s21f142p61g182d10
1h223s2) from threshold to about 1 KeV photon-energy

Figure 2 shows the cross sections for 2d and 3s sub-
shells. Surprisingly, oscillations in these cross sections seem
to have more than one frequency. Indeed, the correspond-

Himadri S Chakraborty and M E Madjet: Energetic photoionization of neutral and ionic metal clusters

3

Na92

2d
3s

)
u
a
(
 

l

n

σ

10−4

10−6

10−8

10−10

10−12

10−14

)
u
a
(
 

l

n
V

−0.15

−0.25

−0.35

0

0

50

150

200

100
hν (eV)

Fig. 2. Same as Figure 1 but for 2d and 3s electrons

−0.05

Na92

1s
2s
2p
2d
3s

Na58

6+

Na58

10−9

10−10

)
u
a
(
 

l

a

t

o

t

σ

10−11

10

20

30

200

300

400

500

r (au)

hν (eV)

Fig. 3. LDASIC state dependent radial potentials for some
selected subshells

Fig. 4. Total high-energy cross sections for Na58 and Na6+
58
systems calculated in usual LDA without SIC incorporated

ing Fourier spectra identify several other frequencies be-
sides the physical one that connects to the cluster di-
ameter. These extra frequencies can be shown to be en-
tirely spurious and originate from the unphysical cusp that
the self-interaction correction (SIC) generates in subshell-
dependent radial potentials at the position where the re-
spective single electron density attains nodal zero [7]. Fig-
ure 3 shows some of these potentials. Subshells with n = 1
are nodeless and, therefore, the 1s potential is seen to have
the usual shape. This fact explains the correct behavior of
the resulting cross section for n = 1 family. Subshells with
n = 2, containing one node (Figure 3), yields a second
frequency in the dipole amplitude that interferes with the
physical frequency to contaminate the cross section with
three spurious frequencies. The same mechanism works
for n = 3 subshell which has two nodal points (Figure 3)
to eventually produce eight unphysical frequencies in the
photo cross section. We found that this is an artifact of
an external, and hence approximate, implementation of
SIC in a local frame [7]. The correct elimination of the
self-interaction must treat fully the exchange eﬀect which
is intrinsically non-local. This answers why SIC is auto-
matically built in the non-local Hartree-Fock formalism.
The LDASIC is certainly a powerful tool to handle the low
energy dynamics [6], but it is also true that the eﬀect dis-

cussed here remains virtually recessive in this energy range
for this method, because the continuum wave with the
longer wavelength can hardly ‘detect’ this structure in the
potential. On the other hand, at higher energies this in-
trinsic limitation of the formalism causes major problem,
although SIC is found largely unimportant over the high
energy range since with the contribution to the overlap in-
tegral predominantly coming from the edge any reﬁnement
in the long distance character of the wavefunction leaves
the result practically unaltered. It is, therefore, of crucial
importance to choose appropriate theoretical techniques
to avoid mis-interpretation of photo-dynamical results for
metal clusters.

It is often of interest to examine the inﬂuence of the
initial ionization state on the photoionization dynamics. A
possible approach to this direction is to look at the change
in the behavior of photo cross sections as a function of the
residual charge by reducing the valence electron number
(N ) but keeping the charge of the jellium background con-
stant (iso-jellium series). In the atomic regime, recent in-
vestigations on isoelectronic sequences revealed a number
of important eﬀects at low photon-energies [8]. We con-
sider here the photoionization of neutral Na58(N = 58)
and Na6+
58 (N = 52) ion to make a preliminary study on
the eﬀect of the residual core ionicity on the total ion-

4

Himadri S Chakraborty and M E Madjet: Energetic photoionization of neutral and ionic metal clusters

ization cross section; a detailed study including subshell
cross sections for several other ions along both iso-jellium
and isoelectronic series will be considered elsewhere.

Total cross sections for both the systems calculated
via LDA, but without SIC incorporated, are compared in
Figure 4. Both the cross sections look qualitatively sim-
ilar having the identical trend in terms of oscillations.
Of course, with the increase of positive residual ionicity
bound electrons ﬁnd it harder to escape, which explains
why the ionic cross section is lower. At this point it may be
rather interesting to look at the LDA ground state radial
potentials for both the systems, as are plotted in Figure 5.
Clearly, the increase of the residual positive charge from
+1 in the neutral to +7 in the ion only deepens the poten-
tial while the position and the softness of the edge remains
largely unchanged. Although this is a direct consequence
of the jellium approximation, but a proper inclusion of
the ionic dynamics is not expected to change the situation
signiﬁcantly. It is evident that the identical frequency of
the oscillation in both the cross sections is owing to the
unaltered position of the cluster edge. Also, the identical
softening at the edge of the potentials accounts for the
similar background decay pattern of the cross sections.
What is rather interesting, however, is while the depth of
the potential for the ion increases greatly, by about 200%
of that of its neutral partner, respective total cross sec-
tions (Figure 4) are very close to each other! In fact, over
the entire high energy range they diﬀer only by a simple
energy-independent scaling factor that is roughly close to
unity.

It turns out that this scaling quantity is a function of z,
the initial ionization of the system. Starting from the fact
that the dominant contribution to the cross section comes
from the cluster edge, where the derivative of the potential
peaks, it immediately fallows that the z-dependence of the
cross section will be predominantly determined by the z-
dependence of the bound state wavefunction at the edge.
Therefore, cross sections must be of similar strength as the
magnitude of radial waves are considerably close to each
other at the edge, no matter what positive charge they
experience. Thus, the situation clearly oﬀers a possibility
of generating the theoretical ionic photoionization data
over the high energy range through a simple scaling of the
result for respective neutral member; the formulation of a
detailed scheme is on the anvil.

3 Concluding remarks

Energetic photo-spectra of metal clusters are largely dom-
inated by oscillations from a diﬀraction-like mechanism
through the interference of electron waves emitted by the
cluster edge. This behavior is directly connected to the
delocalized character of the electron charge distribution.
Similar mechanism is also found operative for the valence
photoionization of C60 molecule [9]. A unique structural
feature of C60 is a hollow cage that can easily hold an
atom inside; in fact such endohedral conﬁnement has been
made possible in the laboratory. Therefore, having under-
stood the mechanism of oscillations in C60 photo-spectra

0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

)
u
a
(
 

V

Na58

6+

Na58

−0.8

0

10

30

40

RC

20
r (au)

Fig. 5. LDA radial potentials for the systems as in Figure 4

it is now of considerable interest to study the inﬂuence of
C60 cavity on the photo-response of an atom endohedrally
conﬁned into it and the associated spectroscopy. Investi-
gations along this line is underway and will be published
soon [10]. Furthermore, with the enormous advent of semi-
conductor technology it has been possible to prepare small
electron-islands of strong quantum properties, quantum
dots, within the semiconductor lattice. Understanding of
the physics of quantum dots is valuable because of the po-
tentially huge applicational importance of these objects.
Electrons forming a quantum dot are certainly delocal-
ized in nature and, therefore, their ionization by photon
impact with high enough energy may show diﬀraction pat-
tern providing valuable information about the hither-to-
unknown geometry of the dot. A part of our current en-
deavor is focussed on this subject.

We thank Professor Jan-M Rost for many useful discus-
sions.

References

(1996)

[1] M Brack Rev. Mod. Phys. 65 677 (1993)
[2] Y B Xu, M Q Tan and U Becker Phys. Rev. Letts. 76 3538

[3] T Liebsch, R Hentges, A R¨udel, J Viefhaus, U Becker and

R Schl¨ogl Chem. Phys. Letts. 279 197 (1997)

[4] Olaf Frank and Jan-M Rost Z. Phys. D 38 59 (1996)
[5] Olaf Frank and Jan-M Rost Phys. Rev. A 60 392 (1999)
[6] J P Perdew and Ernzerhof Electronic Density Functional
Theory Recent Progress and New Directions, edited by
Dobson John F, Vignale Giovanni and Das Mukunda P
(New York: Plenum Press) p 31, (1998)

[7] M E Madjet, Himadri S Chakraborty and Jan-M Rost J.

Phys. B 34 L345 (2001)

[8] H S Chakraborty, A Gray, J T Costello, P C Deshmukh,
G N Haque, E T Kennedy, S T Manson and J-P Mosnier
Phys. Rev. Letts 83 2151 (1999)
H S Chakraborty, P C Deshmukh, E W B Dias and S T
Manson Astro. J 537 1094 (2000)

[9] Himadri S Chakraborty, M E Madjet and Jan-M Rost (in

preparation)

[10] M E Madjet and Himadri S Chakraborty (in preparation)

