Angular Correlation in Double Photoionization of Atoms and the Role of the

Observer

Dipankar Chattarji and Chiranjib Sur

Department of Physis, Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan 731 235, INDIA

1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The problem of angular orrelation in the double photoionization (DPI) of rare gas atoms is onsidered in some depth.

We refer partiularly to the e(cid:30)ieny operator for the detetion of an eletron by a detetor having the shape of a right

irular ylinder. The di(cid:27)erent fators in the e(cid:30)ieny operator are disussed in detail keeping in mind the fundamental

epistemologial question of the role of the observer ( or his equipment) in suh experiments.

PACS No : 32.80.H, 32.80.F, 03.65.T,79.20.F

In this paper we wish to onsider in some depth the problem of angular orrelation between the two eletrons

emitted by an atom when it is doubly ionized by a photon.

1Se

Consider a randomly oriented rare gas atom in a

state. The atom absorbs a photon and after a ertain time

interval emits a photo-eletron from one of the inner shells giving a singly ionized atomi state. This intermediate

ioni state now de-exites by emitting an Auger eletron, typially from an outer shell, giving rise to a two-vaany

(cid:28)nal atomi state. We an denote this sequene of events as follows.

hν + A

A+ + e−1 −→

−→

A++ + e−1 + e−2 .

(1)

A polar plot of the observed distribution of oinidenes between the two emitted eletrons as a funtion of the

angle between their diretions of emission shows a lear periodi behaviour [1℄. The question we ask is: what is the

origin of this angular orrelation? Could it have anything to do with the equipment used to detet the eletrons?

On the fae of it, this last question may not seem so obvious. It will, however, beome learer as we proeed with

our disussion.

Double photoionization (DPI) ours when an atomi target like the one desribed above is irradiated with a

monohromati photon beam from an advaned light soure, e.g. a synhrotron. Along with single photoionization

(PI), there may be events in whih two eletrons are emitted by an atom in quik suession. In ase the time

interval between the suessive emission of the two eletrons is substantially longer than the time taken by the

(cid:28)rst eletron to leave the interation zone, DPI may be regarded as a two-step proess [2℄. In other words, the

emission of the two eletrons may be regarded as being learly separated in time. This in its turn will depend on

the energy imparted to the atom by the inident photon.

We wish to obtain an angular orrelation funtion for the two emitted eletrons in terms of the angle between

their diretions of emission. We shall do this by onsidering an ensemble of suh atomi systems belonging to all

possible quantum mehanial states Q. Eah state Q is labeled by the total angular momentum J , its pro jetion
M , and the remaining set of quantum numbers α.

The angular orrelation funtion W (θ) for the two emitted eletrons is the probability that the angle between
their diretions of emission is θ. Evidently this is a statistial quantity, and W (θ) would have to be the ensemble

average of the above probability.

Now, how do we determine this probability? Hopefully, we let the atomi system attain the (cid:28)nal state given

in Eq.(1), we set up two detetors at a suitable distane from the reation zone with their axes making an angle

θ′ with eah other, and we try to detet oinidenes between the photo- and Auger eletrons. The number of

oinidenes we an hope to detet will depend on two distint fators.

(i) There is a ertain probability for the atomi system to attain the (cid:28)nal state. This is desribed by the

appropriate matrix element of the density or statistial operator ρ [3,4℄.

(ii) Even if the system goes over to the (cid:28)nal state, beause of the (cid:28)nite size of the deteting equipment and other

limiting fators, a oinidene event may or may not be deteted. There is thus a (cid:28)nite probability ǫ (0
1)
that the event will be deteted. This probability is represented by the e(cid:30)ieny operator ε. It will depend on the

≤

≤

ǫ

size, position and geometrial on(cid:28)guration of the deteting equipment, but not its internal physial or hemial

nature provided that there is full absorption of an eletron within the material of the detetor [5℄. The emphasis

is on those geometrial properties of the deteting system whih enable it to aurately determine the diretion of

emission of an eletron.

Obviously, W (θ) will be given by the joint probability of the formation of the (cid:28)nal state and its detetion by
the deteting equipment, i.e. by the produt of ρ and ε. For a given state Q this joint probability will be ρε . The
average probability ε for the ensemble will be given by the trae of the produt matrix. We write

1

ε =

Q εQ

Q
Q
ρ
|
h
|
Q εQρQQ

i

P
=

P
= T r(ερ)
= T r(ρε) .

(2)

p1 and

p2 . These

c

c

(3)

Here εQ is the e(cid:30)ieny or probability of detetion of the state desribed by the quantum numbers Q, and ρQQ
the probability of the system being in the partiular state Q [6℄. Both ε and ρ are tensor operators.

Sine the angular orrelation funtion happens to be the trae of a matrix [6,7℄, it will be invariant under a

unitary transformation in Hilbert spae.

Another property of the system arises from the random orientation of the rare gas atoms. The eletrons emitted

by them are unpolarized and will, on the average, have spherial symmetry. Spherial symmetry will also hold

e(cid:27)etively if the detetor is insensitive to polarization. Hene the angular orrelation funtion itself an depend

only on salar invariants formed of the unit momentum vetors of the two emitted eletrons

invariants are given by the salar produt of spherial tensors [8℄, as follows:

Ck(

p1)

Ck(

p2) =

·

c

c

= Pk(
P

p1)C⋆

m Ckm(
p1

p2)
p2) = Pk(cosθ) .

km(

·

c

c

In Eq.(3) Pk(cosθ) is a Legendre polynomial. The index k will be restrited to the allowed values of the resultant
of the angular momenta j1 and j2 of the two emitted eletrons. Out of these, odd values of k will drop out beause

c

c

they would give odd parity.

Now, from the elements of statistial mehanis, we know that ε is the expetation value (or average value) of
the e(cid:30)ieny operator ε [9℄. It needs to be pointed out that this expetation value is a funtion of θ. Thus the
angular orrelation funtion W (θ) is, to within a multiplying fator, just the expetation value of the e(cid:30)ieny
operator for a given value of θ. To be more preise, it represents the angle-dependent fator in the expetation

value of the e(cid:30)ieny operator.

Now, based on physial onsiderations, an we (cid:28)nd an expression for the e(cid:30)ieny operator?

We begin by noting that the e(cid:30)ieny operator represents the attenuation of the probability of deteting a

partile (in our ase it is an eletron) aused by ertain geometrial properties of the deteting system. Some of

these fators were mentioned above. Let us now try to write down an expression for the e(cid:30)ieny operator for an

eletron in terms of those fators.

what kind of o-ordinate system shall we use?

Obviously, a o-ordinate representation would be the most appropriate for the disussion of these fators. But

Beause of the spherial symmetry of the system as disussed above, we use spherial polar o-ordinates.

However, as soon as an emitted eletron begins to interat with a detetor, the spherial symmetry is lost. This is

beause, regardless of the type of ounter used, the geometry is usually that of a right irular ylinder. Hene as

the unpolarized eletrons enter the detetion zone they aquire an axial symmetry about the detetor axis. This

hange in the symmetry of the system as we go from the reation zone to the detetion zone will have some bearing

on our expression for the e(cid:30)ieny operator for unpolarized eletrons.

In Fig.1, A1 is the diretion of the axis of a ylindrial detetor, say a Geiger-Muller ounter, of radius r and
thikness t . The base of the detetor is plaed at a distane h from the entre of the reation zone, h being parallel
to A1 . The angular width of the detetor as seen from the entre of the target is 2γ , where tan γ = r
estimate, h is usually about 10 m.

h . On a rough

Let A1 represent the axis of the detetor set up to detet the photo-eletron, and A2 the axis of the detetor
reeiving the Auger eletron. As shown in Fig. 1, the angle between the two axes is θ′ . The diretions D1 and
D2 are the diretions of emission of the photo- and Auger eletrons respetively, their azimuthal angles measured
with respet to the detetor axes being β1 and β2 .

We an now go bak to the form of the e(cid:30)ieny operator orresponding to a single detetor deteting an

eletron. It is a tensor operator of rank n with (2n + 1) omponents. We assert that a redued matrix element of
the omponent labeled by ν of the tensor is given by

εnν(jj′) =

zncnν′ (jj′)Dn

νν′ (

) .

ℜ

Xν′

(4)

Here ν and ν′ are pro jetion quantum numbers orresponding to the angular momentum n. zn is the attenuation
fator due to the (cid:28)nite size of a detetor. It is di(cid:27)erent for di(cid:27)erent values of n. Dn
) is an element of the
= (θ1θ2θ3), θ1, θ2, θ3 being Euler angles. ℜ represents an
detetor. And the fator cnν′(jj′) arises from the hange of symmetry as the eletron goes to the detetion zone

rotation matrix for the three-dimensional rotation ℜ

νν′ (

ℜ

e(cid:27)etive rotation of the observed diretion of emission of the deteted eletron due to the (cid:28)nite angular size of the

from the reation zone.

2

Now let us try to understand the genesis of eah of these fators.

(a) Attenuation due to absorption in a detetor of (cid:28)nite size. Let x(β) be the distane traversed in a detetor by
an eletron inident on its base at an angle β with the axis. Let τ be the absorption oe(cid:30)ient of the material inside
τ x(β))). Sine this depends on the azimuthal
the detetor. Then the absorption will be proportional to (1
angle β , eah term in the Legendre polynomial expansion of the angular orrelation funtion will get multiplied by

exp(

−

−

a di(cid:27)erent attenuation fator due to absorption.

Let us (cid:28)rst onsider the ase of a single detetor deteting, say, a photo-eletron. Here we an think in terms of

an angular distribution measurement. The angular distribution too an be written out as a Legendre polynomial

expansion. The attenuation fator multiplying Pn(cosβ) will be [5℄,

zn =

Jn
J0

,

Zn = zn(1)zn(2) .

where

Jn =

Pn(cosβ)(1

exp(

τ x(β)))sinβdβ .

−

−

γ

Z
o

For an angular orrelation experiment with two detetors having (cid:28)nite size attenuation fators zn(1) and zn(2)

the total attenuation fator for the nth term will be

(b) Rotational attenuation due to (cid:28)nite angular size of the detetor. Let D1 be the diretion in whih the
photo-eletron is emitted by the rare gas atom. As shown in Fig.1, D1 makes an angle β1with the axis A1 of the
detetor. But, whatever be the value of β1 , the observer will take the diretion of emission of the photo-eletron
to be given by A1 . In other words, there will be an e(cid:27)etive rotation of the diretion of emission. Denoting this
1 , the orresponding fator in the expression for the e(cid:30)ieny operator of the detetor reeiving the

rotation by ℜ
photo-eletron will be Dn

νν′(

1).

ℜ

For an angular orrelation experiment suh as ours, the diretions of emission of the photo- and Auger eletrons

will undergo the e(cid:27)etive rotations, say, ℜ
the resulting e(cid:30)ieny operator will be Dn

2 respetively. The orresponding fator in the expression for
1) [10℄.

1 and ℜ
1
ν2ν1 (
−
2 ℜ
ℜ

(  ) Attenuation fator orresponding to the state of polarization. We have already disussed the axial symmetry

aquired by unpolarized eletrons as they enter the detetion zone. What does this do to their quantum mehanial

state?

Let us (cid:28)rst onsider the semi-lassial vetor model. Axial symmetry about the detetor axis implies that the

angular momentum vetor of an eletron an only lie in the plane perpendiular to that axis, i.e. the xy plane.
Obviously, the z -omponent of its angular momentum will be zero. Now going over to quantum mehanis, only
those states will survive for whih ν = 0. This alls for a pro jetion operator having the form

cnν (jj′) = Njj′nCjj
1
2 −

n
1

2 0δν0 ,

′

where Njj′n is a normalizing fator whih turns out to be
fator cn0(jj′) enters into our expression for the e(cid:30)ieny operator.

√2j+1√2j′+1
4π

1)j

−

1
2 +n

(
−

[10℄. In other words, only the

A formal derivation of this result is given in our paper under referene [10℄. However, that derivation does not

quite relate to the attenuation properties of a detetor. On the other hand, we feel that our present approah is

physially more transparent. It also has the virtue of throwing some light on a ouple of questions of fundamental

epistemologial interest. Does the observer (or his equipment) have a role in this type of experiment? If so, what

is that role like? Obviously, suh questions an be important from the standpoint of the theory of measurement.

Calulation of the angular orrelation funtion an now go through as in referene [10℄. We (cid:28)nally get

W (θ) =

k zk(1)zk(2)(

1)j1+j2 ck0(j1j′1)c⋆

k0(j2j′2)

w(JbJ ′bj1j′1, kJa)w(JbJ ′bj2j′2, kJc)Pk(cosθ) ,
P

−

×

where the w's are Raah oe(cid:30)ients, j1 and j2 are angular momenta of the photo- and Auger eletrons, Ja, Jb, Jc
the angular momenta of the atom in its initial, intermediate and (cid:28)nal states respetively. Here k is an even integer
ranging from 0 to kmax , kmax being de(cid:28)ned as follows. Let {{

j2 + j′2}max}min = p. Then

j1 + j′1}max ,

{

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

kmax =

p if p is even,

= (p

1) if p is odd.

−

3

The set of primed angular momentum quantum numbers represent virtual states whih may arise from possible

interation with other atoms and eletrons.

Our results for the double photoionization of xenon are disussed in referene [10℄ in some detail.

One of the authors (CS) in indebted to the University Grants Commission of India for support in the form of

a junior researh fellowship.

This paper is dediated to the memory of Rabindranath Tagore, whose disussion with Albert Einstein on the

epistemology of siene may be realled in this onnetion [11℄.

________________

1. B. K¨ammerling and V. Shmidt, J.Phys.B 26, 1141(1991)

2. D. Chattarji and C. Sur, J. of Eletron Spet. and Rel. Phen. 114-116, 153(2001)

3. U. Fano, Phys. Rev. 90, 577(1953)

4. K. Blum, Density Matrix Theory and Appliations (Plenum Press, New York, 1981)

5. M. E. Rose, Phys. Rev. 91, 610(1953)

6. F. Coester and J. M. Jauh, Helv. Phys. Ata 26, 3(1953)

7. A. J. Ferguson, Angular Correlation Methods in Gamma-ray Spetrosopy (North-Holland, Amsterdam,

1965)

8. D. M. Brink and G. R. Sathler, Angular Momentum, 2nd ed., 55(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1968)

9. D. ter Haar, Elements of Statistial Mehanis, 150 (Holt, Reinhart and Winston, New York, 1960)

10. D. Chattarji and C. Sur, submitted to Phys. Rev. A (2001)

11. Dmitri Mariano(cid:27), The New York Times Magazine, Aug. 10, 1930

________________

A1

r

D1

A2

D2

t

β
1

θ

β
2

h

/
θ

Fig 1 : Geometrial arrangement of the detetors

4

