1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Angular Correlation in Double Photoionization of Atoms and the Role of the
Detection Process

Dipankar Chattarji and Chiranjib Sur

Department of Physics, Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan 731 235, INDIA

The problem of angular correlation in the double photoionization (DPI) of rare gas atoms is considered in some depth. We
refer particularly to the eﬃciency operator for the detection of an electron by a detector having cylindrical symmetry. The
diﬀerent factors in the eﬃciency operator are discussed in detail keeping in mind the fundamental epistemological question of
the role of the detection process in such experiments.

PACS No : 32.80.H, 32.80.F, 03.65.T,79.20.F

In this paper we wish to consider the problem of angular correlation between the two electrons emitted by an atom

when it is doubly ionized by a photon.

Consider a randomly oriented rare gas atom in a 1Se state. The atom absorbs an unpolarized photon and after
a certain time interval emits a photo-electron from one of the inner shells giving a singly ionized atomic state. This
intermediate ionic state now de-excites by emitting an Auger electron, typically from an outer shell, giving rise to a
two-vacancy ﬁnal atomic state. We can denote this sequence of events as follows.

hν + A

A+ + e−1

A++ + e−1 + e−2 .

(1)

−→
A polar plot of the observed distribution of coincidences between the two emitted electrons as a function of the
angle between their directions of emission shows a clear periodic behaviour [1]. The question we ask is: what is the
origin of this angular correlation? Could it have anything to do at all with the process of detecting the electrons? On
the face of it, this last question may not seem so obvious. It will, however, become clearer as we proceed with our
discussion.

−→

Double photoionization (DPI) occurs when an atomic target like the one described above is irradiated with a
monochromatic photon beam from an advanced light source, e.g. a synchrotron. Along with single photoionization
(PI), there may be events in which two electrons are emitted by an atom in quick succession. In case the time interval
between the successive emission of the two electrons is substantially longer than the time taken by the ﬁrst electron
to leave the interaction zone, DPI may be regarded as a two-step process [2]. In other words, the emission of the two
electrons may be regarded as being clearly separated in time. This in its turn will depend on the energy imparted to
the atom by the incident photon.

We wish to obtain an angular correlation function for the two emitted electrons in terms of the angle between their
directions of emission. We shall do this by considering an ensemble of such atomic systems belonging to all possible
quantum mechanical states Q. Each state Q is labeled by the total angular momentum J, its projection M , and the
remaining set of quantum numbers α.

The angular correlation function W (θ) for the two emitted electrons is the probability that the angle between their
directions of emission is θ. Evidently this is a statistical quantity, and W (θ) would have to be the ensemble average
of the above probability.

Now, how do we determine this probability? Hopefully, we let the atomic system attain the ﬁnal state given in
Eq.(1), we set up two detectors at a suitable distance from the reaction zone with their axes making an angle θ′ with
each other, and we try to detect coincidences between the photo- and Auger electrons. The number of coincidences
we can hope to detect will depend on two distinct factors.

(i) There is a certain probability for the atomic system to attain the ﬁnal state. This is described by the appropriate

matrix element of the density or statistical operator ρ [3,4].

(ii) Even if the system goes over to the ﬁnal state, because of the ﬁnite size of the detectors and other important
limiting factors, a coincidence event may or may not be detected. There is thus a ﬁnite probability ǫ (0
1) that
the event will be detected by the system of detectors. This probability is represented by the eﬃciency operator ε.
It will depend on the size, position and geometrical conﬁguration of the detectors, but not their internal physical or
chemical nature provided that there is full absorption of an electron within the material of a detector [5].

≤

≤

ǫ

Obviously, W (θ) will be given by the joint probability of the formation of the ﬁnal state and its detection by the
system of detectors, i.e. by the product of ρ and ε. For a given state Q this joint probability will be ρε . The average
probability ε for the ensemble will be given by the trace of the product matrix. We write

1

ε =

Q εQ

Q
Q
ρ
|
h
|
Q εQρQQ

i

P
=

= T r(ερ)
P
= T r(ρε) .

(2)

(3)

Here εQ is the eﬃciency or probability of detection of the state described by the quantum numbers Q, and ρQQ the
probability of the system being in the particular state Q [6]. Both ε and ρ are tensor operators.

Since the angular correlation function happens to be the trace of a matrix [6,7], it will be invariant under a unitary

transformation in Hilbert space.

Another property of the system arises from the random orientation of the rare gas atoms. The electrons emitted
by them are unpolarized. And we take the detectors to be insensitive to electron polarization. Hence the angular
correlation function itself can depend only on scalar invariants formed of the unit momentum vectors of the two
emitted electrons

p2. These invariants are given by the scalar product of spherical tensors [8], as follows:

p1 and

c

c

Ck(

p1)

Ck(

p2) =

·

c

c

= Pk(
P

p1)C⋆

m Ckm(
p1

p2)
p2) = Pk(cosθ) .

km(

·

c

c

In Eq.(3) Pk(cosθ) is a Legendre polynomial. The index k will be restricted to the allowed values of the resultant of
the angular momenta j1 and j2 of the two emitted electrons. Out of these, odd values of k will drop out because they
would give odd parity.

Now, from the elements of statistical mechanics, we know that ε is the expectation value (or average value) of the
eﬃciency operator ε [9]. It needs to be pointed out that this expectation value is a function of θ. Thus the angular
correlation function W (θ) is, to within a multiplying factor, just the expectation value of the eﬃciency operator for a
given value of θ. To be more precise, it represents the angle-dependent factor in the expectation value of the eﬃciency
operator for the entire detecting system.

c

c

Now, based on physical considerations, can we ﬁnd an expression for the eﬃciency operator?
We begin by noting that the eﬃciency operator for a single electron represents the attenuation of the probability
of detecting the signal caused by certain geometrical properties of the detector as well as certain intrinsic limitations
of the detection process to be discussed later. Let us now try to write down an expression for the eﬃciency operator
for a single detector in detecting an electron in terms of such factors.

Obviously, a co-ordinate representation would be the most appropriate for the discussion of these factors. But what

kind of co-ordinate system shall we use?

Because of the spherical symmetry of the system in the interaction region, we use spherical polar co-ordinates for
our calculation [10]. However, as soon as an emitted electron begins to interact with a detector, it will acquire a
symmetry appropriate to the detector. In the present paper our objective is to examine the geometrical properties
of the electron detector and to see how they aﬀect its eﬃciency. So let us see what kind of symmetry exists in the
detection region.

Let us start by considering our options with regard to the shape and size of the detector. Could we, for example,
start with the limiting case of a point detector [11]? By considering the signal to noise ratio, it may be shown that one
must use a ﬁnite size detector. In order to ﬁnd the direction of emission of an electron it must have axial symmetry.
Furthermore, the photo-electron as well as the Auger electron is characterised by a well deﬁned energy and a well
deﬁned orbital angular momentum. The well deﬁned energy implies that we need an electron spectrometer which is a
diﬀerential energy analyser. And the well deﬁned orbital angular momentum indicates that the spectrometer should
be an angle integrated device. The cylindrical mirror analyser (CMA) meets all these requirements [14,12]. Hence it
seems to be the obvious candidate. Recent angular correlation measurements [13] using the CMA clearly support this
view.

A CMA receives incident electrons through a circular aperture of ﬁnite radius r. Hence the angle of incidence βi of
an electron as measured with respect to the cylinder axis varies from 0 to a small ﬁnite value. Here the index i = 1 for
photo-electrons and 2 for Auger electrons. But, whatever its actual value, because of the angle integrated character
of the CMA the observer has no way of knowing βi. He identiﬁes the direction of emission of the electron with the
axis of the CMA.

As a result of the identiﬁcation of the direction of emission of the electron with the cylinder axis there is an eﬀective
i(= 0βi0) of its direction of emission. Thus the eﬃciency operator representing the detection process will
i). This rotation matrix will be a factor in the expression for the eﬃciency operator

ℜ

rotation
contain a rotation matrix Dki
iκi (
κ′
of a detector.

ℜ

In our paper under reference [10] we have shown that the expression for the eﬃciency operator of a single detector
contains a rotation matrix element. It will be seen from the formal derivation given there that the angle-dependence
of the angular correlation function arises directly from this rotation matrix.

2

Note that the angle integrated character of the electron spectrometer is a requirement imposed by the fact that it
has to receive electrons with a well deﬁned orbital angular momentum. In other words, the complete indeterminacy
in the direction of emission of an electron is a dynamical requirement and not a matter of technical deﬁciency of
the detector. Since the rotation matrix in the expression for the angular correlation function originates from this
indeterminacy, evidently the angular correlation arises directly from it.

This takes care of the most important factor in the expression for the eﬃciency operator, namely the rotation
matrix element. We shall call this the attenuation factor due to rotation. Before we go on to the other factors, we
take a brief look at the geometrical arrangement of the detectors.

In Fig.1, A1 represents the axis of the detector set up to detect the photo-electron, and A2 the axis of the detector
receiving the Auger electron. The angle between the two axes is θ′. The directions D1 and D2 are the actual directions
of emission of the photo- and Auger electrons respectively. The angle β1 is the angle between A1 and D1, i.e. the
angle of incidence of the photo-electron as deﬁned above. Similarly, β2, the angle between A2 and D2, is the angle of
incidence of the Auger electron.

Each CMA has a circular aperture of radius r for receiving electrons. In a DPI experiment the base of each of the
two CMAs used to detect the photo- and Auger electrons is placed at a distance h from the centre of the reaction zone.
The angular width of the aperture in each CMA as seen from the centre of the target is 2γ, where tan γ = r
.01).
We can now go back to the form of the eﬃciency operator corresponding to a single detector detecting an electron.
It is a tensor operator of rank k with (2k + 1) components. Following reference [10] we write a reduced matrix element
of the component labeled by κ of the tensor as

h (

∼

εkκ(jj′) =

zkckκ′ (jj′)Dk

κκ′ (

) .

ℜ

Xκ′

Here κ and κ′ are projection quantum numbers corresponding to the angular momentum k. zk is the attenuation
factor due to the ﬁnite size of a detector. It is diﬀerent for diﬀerent values of k. The factor ckκ′ (jj′) arises from
the change of symmetry as the electron goes to the detection zone from the reaction zone. Let us now look at these
factors.

(a) Attenuation due to absorption in a detector of ﬁnite size. Let us ﬁrst consider the case of a single detector
detecting, say, a photo-electron. Here we can think in terms of an angular distribution measurement. The angular
distribution too can be written out as a Legendre polynomial expansion. The attenuation factor multiplying Pn(cosβ)
will be [5],

where

For an angular correlation experiment with two detectors having ﬁnite size attenuation factors zn(1) and zn(2) the

total attenuation factor for the nth term will be

(b) Attenuation factor corresponding to the state of polarization. We have already discussed the axial symmetry
acquired by unpolarized electrons as they enter the detection zone. What does this do to their quantum mechanical
state?

Let us ﬁrst consider the semi-classical vector model. Axial symmetry about the detector axis implies that the
the xy plane.
angular momentum vector of an electron can only lie in the plane perpendicular to that axis, i.e.
Obviously, the z-component of its angular momentum will be zero. Now going over to quantum mechanics, only those
states will survive for which the projection quantum number ν = 0. This calls for a projection operator having the
form

where Njj′n is a normalizing factor which turns out to be
cn0(jj′) enters into our expression for the eﬃciency operator.

√2j+1√2j′+1
4π

1

1)j

−

(
−

2 +n [10]. In other words, only the factor

zn =

Jn
J0

,

Jn =

Pn(cosβ)sinβdβ .

γ

Z

o

Zn = zn(1)zn(2) .

cnν(jj′) = Njj′nCjj
1
2 −

n
1

2 ν δν0 ,

′

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

A formal derivation of this result is given in our paper under reference [10]. However, that derivation does not quite
relate to the attenuation properties of a detector. On the other hand, we feel that our present approach is physically
more transparent. It also throws some light on a couple of questions of fundamental epistemological interest. Does
the detection process have a role in this type of experiment? If so, what is that role like? Obviously, such questions
can be important from the standpoint of the theory of measurement.

Calculation of the angular correlation function can now go through as in reference [10]. We ﬁnally get

W (θ) =

k zk(1)zk(2)(

1)j1+j2 ck0(j1j′1)c⋆

k0(j2j′2)

w(JbJ ′bj1j′1, kJa)w(JbJ ′bj2j′2, kJc)Pk(cosθ) ,
P

−

×

where the w’s are Racah coeﬃcients, j1 and j2 are the angular momenta of the photo- and Auger electrons, Ja, Jb, Jc
the angular momenta of the atom in its initial, intermediate and ﬁnal states respectively. Here k is an even integer
ranging from 0 to kmax, kmax being deﬁned as follows. Let

j1 + j′1}max ,

j2 + j′2}max}min = p. Then
{

{{

(9)

(10)

kmax = p if p is even,

= (p

1) if p is odd.

−

The set of primed angular momentum quantum numbers represent virtual states which may arise from possible
interaction with other atoms and electrons.

To sum up, our main ﬁnding in this paper is that the angular correlation function W (θ) arises directly from an
unavoidable indeterminacy in the actual directions of emission of the two electrons. From our analysis above, it should
be clear that this is not a matter of technical imperfection but a basic restriction imposed on the detection process
by the dynamical nature of the problem.

Our results for the double photoionization of xenon are discussed in reference [10] in some detail.
One of the authors (CS) is indebted to the University Grants Commission of India for support in the form of a

junior research fellowship.

[1] B. K¨ammerling and V. Schmidt, J.Phys.B 26, 1141(1993).
[2] D. Chattarji and C. Sur, J. of Electron Spect. and Rel. Phen. 114-116, 153(2001).
[3] U. Fano, Phys. Rev. 90, 577(1953).
[4] K. Blum, Density Matrix Theory and Applications (Plenum Press, New York, 1981).
[5] M. E. Rose, Phys. Rev. 91, 610(1953).
[6] F. Coester and J. M. Jauch, Helv. Phys. Acta 26, 3(1953).
[7] A. J. Ferguson, Angular Correlation Methods in Gamma-ray Spectroscopy (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965).
[8] D. M. Brink and G. R. Satchler, Angular Momentum, 2nd ed., 55(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1968).
[9] D. ter Haar, Elements of Statistical Mechanics, 150 (Holt, Reinhart and Winston, New York, 1960).
[10] D. Chattarji and C. Sur, physics/0106095 (To be published in Phys. Rev. A).
[11] A. J. Ferguson, Angular Correlation Methods in Gamma-ray Spectroscopy, 32(North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965).
[12] D. Chattarji, The Theory of Auger Transitions, 234(Academic Press, London, 1976).
[13] H. Darenbach et al, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A 260, 258 (1987).
[14] http://srs.dl.ac.uk/SSL/equipment/CMA

4

CMA

A 2

A1

r

D1

Aperture

/
θ

Target

β
1

D2

θ

β
2

h

Fig 1 : Geometrical arrangement of the detectors

5

