1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
9
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A deterministic origin for instabilities in a magneto-optical trap

Andrea di Stefano, Marie Fauquembergue, Philippe Verkerk and Daniel Hennequin
Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, Atomes et Mol´ecules, UMR CNRS, Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches Lasers et
Applications, Universit´e des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq cedex - France
(January 9, 2014)

The paper reports on the observation of a new type of instabilities in the atomic cloud of a
magneto-optical trap (MOT). They appear as large amplitude self-oscillations, either periodic or
erratic, depending on the parameters. An original model taking into account the shadow eﬀect and
an homogeneous distribution of the atoms in the cloud is developped. It allows us to show that
these instabilities originate on the one hand from an anomalous Hopf bifurcation, and on the other
hand from the extreme sensitivity of the system to noise.

32.80.Pj, 05.45.-a

The magneto-optical cooling of atoms is at the origin of
a renew of the atomic physics. It is used in various ﬁelds,
as the realization of Bose-Einstein condensates [1] or the
study of diﬀusion in lattices [2], and could lead to several
applications, as atomic clocks [3] or quantum computing
[4]. Although the technology and realization of magneto-
optical traps (MOT) is well mastered, some experimental
It is in particular well
adjustments remain empirical.
known that for dense atomic clouds close from resonance,
instabilities appear in the spatio-temporal distribution of
the atoms. This problem is usually ﬁxed by empirically
misaligning the trapping beams.

A recent study has shown that instabilities can have a
stochastic origin, through a phenomenon of coherent res-
onance amplifying the technical noise [5]. It also showed
that the shadow eﬀect is at the origin of these instabili-
ties : because of the absorption of light inside the cloud,
the intensities of the backward and forward beams are lo-
cally diﬀerent, leading to an internal attracting force. In
the conﬁguration where each backward beam is obtained
by retro-reﬂection of the forward beam, backward and
forward intensities are globally diﬀerent, and an external
force appears, displacing the cloud along the bisectors of
the trap beams.

In the present work, we show that the atomic cloud
in the MOT can also exhibit deterministic periodic and
chaotic-like instabilities. The basic model developed in
[5] is not able to reproduce them, and we propose a mod-
iﬁed model where the cloud is no more considered as
pointlike. This new model predicts the same type of
stationary solutions as in [5], leading to the same type
of stochastic instabilities. Moreover, it allows us to re-
trieve the deterministic instabilities: in particular, it ex-
hibits large amplitude periodic oscillations induced by
an anomalous Hopf bifurcation, and a large amplitude
stochastic behavior. It also establish deﬁnitively the role
of the shadow eﬀect in the dynamics of the atomic cloud
in the MOT.

The initial hypotheses are the same as in [5], i.e. a

1D model taking into account the shadow eﬀect. The
system is modelized on the one hand through the motion
equations of the center of mass z of the cloud, and on
the other hand through a rate equation of the number of
atoms n in the cloud. We have:

1
M

FT

d2z
dt2 =
dn
dt

= B (ne − n)

(1a)

(1b)

where M is the mass of the cloud, FT the total exter-
nal force, ne the atom number at equilibrium and B
the population relaxation rate. As in [5], ne is assumed
to depend on z, to take into account the depopulation
of the cloud when it moves away from the trap center.
We deﬁne a distance z0 beyond which the trap is empty
(ne = 0). For z < z0, we assume a quadratic behavior
ne = n0 (cid:16)1 − (z/z0)
(cid:17) where n0 is the cloud population
at the trap center [5].

2

The innovation of this model concerns the way the
shadow eﬀect is treated. We consider that, starting from
an input forward intensity I1, the intensity after a ﬁrst
crossing of the cloud (i.e. the input backward intensity) is
I2 < I1, and the remaining intensity after a second cross-
ing of the cloud (i.e. the output backward intensity) is
I3 < I2. The rate of photons absorbed in the forward
(resp. backward) beam is A (I1 − I2) (resp. A (I2 − I3)),
with A = S/hν, where S is the section of the cloud and hν
the energy of a photon. The forces associated with each
beam is the product of the number of absorbed photons
by the elementary momentum ¯hk. We obtain ﬁnally:

FT =

(I1 − 2I2 + I3)

(2)

S
c

To get a relation between I1, I2, and I3, we need
to solve the equations of propagation of the two beams
through the atomic cloud. For the sake of simplicity, we
assume that the atomic transition is a J = 0 → J = 1
transition. As the MOT is operated with high intensity

1

beams and small detunings, a Doppler model is suited.
Inside the cloud, the intensity I+ (I−) of the σ+ (σ−) po-
larized forward (backward) beam evolves due to photon
scattering. The scattering rate for σ± photons is propor-
tional to the corresponding excited state populations Π±.
The evolution equations of the intensity simply writes

dI±
dz

= ∓ΓhνρΠ±

(3)

where Γ is the natural width of the atomic transition and
ρ is the atomic density in the cloud. The populations Π±
are given by the steady state of the master equation. The
underlying hypothesis is that the evolution of the exter-
nal degrees of freedom is much slower than that of the
internal ones. The populations Π± depend both on I+
and I−, so that (3) is a set of coupled nonlinear equa-
tions. They are integrated numerically from the side of
the cloud where I+ = I− = I2, to the other side, where
I− = I3 and I+ = I1, assuming that the density ρ is
constant, as a result of multiple scattering [6].

The control parameters of this system are the same as
in [5]. The most suitable one is the detuning ∆0, ex-
pressed in units of Γ, between the trap laser beams and
the atomic transition. The global organization of sta-
tionary solutions in the parameter space is also the same
as in [5].
In particular, stationary solutions as a func-
tion of ∆0 evolve from a ﬂat dependence to bistability
when another parameter (e.g. n0) is changed. The fold
appearing for the intermediate values is at the origin of
the stochastic instabilities reported in [5].

We focus here on the unstable zone appearing between
the area studied in [5] and bistability. In this situation,
the stationary solutions are unstable on the fold (ﬁg. 1).
For detuning smaller than the fold, at the left of point H1
on ﬁg. 1a, the ﬁxed point is a stable focus (F): the sta-
tionary solutions are stable and associated with an eigen-
frequency ωF decreasing with the detuning (ﬁg. 1b). At
the edge of the fold, the system exhibits a Hopf bifurca-
tion (point H1): the ﬁxed point becomes a saddle-focus
(SF), and the stationary solutions become unstable. As
the detuning is further increased, the eigenvalues become
real in point P1 (ﬁg. 1a,b), so that ωF disappears and the
ﬁxed point becomes a saddle node (SN). Finally, when
the detuning is still increased, the inverse sequence ap-
pears for the ﬁxed point (SN → SF → Hopf bifurcation
→ F).

Let us now examine the dynamical behavior of the
atomic cloud in the diﬀerent regions.
In the F zone,
the stationary solution is stable. As the detuning is in-
creased, the stationary solution becomes unstable in H1,
and a stable periodic orbit CH appears in the vicinity
of the ﬁxed point, as it is usual with a Hopf bifurcation.
The atomic cloud exhibits weak amplitude oscillations
around the unstable ﬁxed point, with a frequency close
to ωF . The orbit amplitude increases slowly with the de-
tuning, but remains very weak (less than 10 nm in z for

2

FIG. 1. Theoretical evolution of the behavior of the cloud
as a function of the detuning. In (a), the stationary solution
zs of z is stable (full line) or unstable (dashed line). In points
H1 and H2, a Hopf bifurcation occurs, while in points P1 and
P2, ωF vanishes. F (focus), SF (saddle focus) and SN (saddle
node) refer to the nature of the ﬁxed point representing the
stationary solution in the phase space. In (b), evolution of
ωF versus ∆0. In (c), plot of the instability frequencies ωA
(circles) and ωB (squares). Parameters for the calculations
−3, n0 = 6 × 108,
are I1 = 33 mW/cm2, ρ = 2 × 1010 cm
z0 = 3 cm, B = 5 s−1 and a Zeeman shift of 3Γ cm−1.

the parameters of ﬁg. 1).

In fact, if ∆0 is further increased, CH disappears for a
value ∆A1 of ∆0 very close from H1. It is replaced by an-
other limit cycle CA, which diﬀers from CH on three main
points: its amplitude is much larger than that of CH , its
frequency ω1 is not ωF , and its shape is not sinusoidal
at all. Fig. 2a shows an example of a CA cycle: in each
period, a slow increasing of z is followed by a fast growth
where z becomes much larger than zs, and a fast de-
creasing after which the cycle starts again. Meanwhile, n
increases slowly and regularly, then decreases. Note that
in the example of ﬁg. 2a, the stationary value ns of the
population is outside the limit cycle, and so the interpre-
tation of the behavior in terms of the relative values of z
and n with respect to zs and ns is not straightforward.
In particular, it cannot be interpreted as a relaxation os-
cillation process around the unstable stationary values.
In fact, as we show below, this behavior is not connected
with the unstable ﬁxed point properties.

Because CH becomes unstable for a value so close from
H1, the Hopf bifurcation appears as anomalous: while
such a bifurcation leads usually to progressively growing
cycle, it generates here a large amplitude periodic orbit.
However, the CA behavior is not linked to the SF zone: it

2π × 10 s−1, and then remains almost constant. Finally,
the frequency ωB of the CB regime is also almost con-
stant when ∆0 is changed, with a frequency smaller than
ωA (about ωA/4 in ﬁg. 1).

Previous studies have shown the fundamental role of
noise in this system [5]. The inﬂuence of noise on deter-
ministic instabilities is well known: ﬁxed points and limit
cycles are usually robust with respect to noise, whose
main eﬀect is to slightly shift the bifurcation points [7].
So we do not expect to observe spectacular changes in
the stationary, CH and CA behaviors if noise is added in
the system, and this is conﬁrmed by the simulations. The
CB behavior is diﬀerent, as the cloud could be very sen-
sitive to noise in the vicinity of z0: indeed, noise should
induce large variations in the decreasing of n, and hence
in the period of the dynamics. This is conﬁrmed by the
numerical simulations: ﬁg. 2c shows the behavior of the
cloud for the same conditions as in ﬁg. 2b, except that
noise has been added on the trap intensity. As expected,
the dynamics is no more periodic, exhibiting large ﬂuc-
tuations in the return time of the dynamics.

To check the existence of the deterministic instabilities
predicted by the model, we used the same experimen-
tal setup as described in [5], i.e. a three-arm σ+ − σ−
magneto-optical trap (MOT) on Cesium, with mirrors to
produce the counter-propagating waves of each arm, and
a crossed couple of 4-quadrant photodiodes to monitor
the cloud. As in [5], forward and backward beams are
carefully aligned. The only changes with respect to the
experiment described in [5] concern the parameter values,
and in particular the intensity of the trap laser beams,
adjusted to obtain deterministic instabilities.

As expected, the CH cycle is not observed. The most
commonly observed periodic instabilities look as CA in-
stabilities (ﬁg. 3). Fig. 4 shows the evolution of the sig-
nal frequency ω as a function of the detuning. As in the
model, ω is almost constant on the interval where CA in-
stabilities appear, i.e. for −1.7 < ∆0 < −0.8. The value
of ω depends on the experimental parameters, as the trap
beam or the repump intensities. It is typically of the or-
der of one or a few hertz, in good agreement with the
model. On the contrary, the detuning interval on which
instabilities appear is one order of magnitude larger than
that predicted. This is the main discrepancy between
the experimental observations and the model. However,
to make a real comparison, we should take into account
the inevitable variation of n0 when ∆0 is changed. Note
that in the model, a simultaneous change of n0 and ∆0
leads to a relative stretch of the unstable zone. Unfor-
tunately, as we have no way to establish experimentally
the relation between n0 and ∆0, we are not able to check
the amplitude of the correction in the present model.

When the detuning is increased, the behavior shifts to-
wards CB instabilities. Because of noise, the transition
is not abrupt as in the simulations. The limit cycle be-
comes more and more noisy as ∆0 is increased, while the

FIG. 2. Examples of the behavior of the cloud. The full
(dashed) line curve is a plot of z (n) versus time. The hor-
izontal full (dashed) line marks the stationary value zs (ns).
In (a), ns/n0 = 0.757 is outside the ﬁgure. (a) shows a CA
instability for ∆0 = −0.37 ; (b) shows a CB instability for
∆0 = −0.35; (c) corresponds to the same parameters as (b),
but a noise level of 7% has been added on I1. Other parame-
ters are the same as in ﬁg. 1.

still exists beyond P1 and P2, without any discontinuity.
The amplitude of CA is several millimeters when it ap-
pears in ∆A1, and increases regularly with the detuning,
so that for a value ∆A2 of ∆0, located between P2 and H2
for the parameters of ﬁg. 1, the cloud border reaches z0.
At this point, the shape of the limit cycle qualitatively
changes. Indeed, the atoms beyond z0 are lost, and so
the population in the cloud can decrease rapidly. The re-
sulting temporal behavior is still a periodic cycle CB and
may be described as previously, except that the decreas-
ing of z is much faster and that of the population much
larger (ﬁg. 2b). Note that this behavior is observed be-
yond H2: this means that generalized bistability occurs
between CB and the stable stationary solution. This con-
ﬁrms that the periodic instabilities are not directly linked
to the ﬁxed point properties.

The CH , CA and CB behaviors diﬀer also by their fre-
quency. As discussed above, the CH frequency is ωF ,
and so varies rapidly as a function of the detuning. The
frequency ωA of the CA regime is very small when the
regime appears in ∆A1 (ﬁg. 1c). When the detuning
is increased, ωA reaches rapidly a value of the order of

3

 

0

1

2

3

4

5

t (s)
FIG. 3. Experimental record of a CA periodic instability.
Parameters are I1 = 11 mW/cm2 and ∆0 = −1.4. The beam
waist of the trap beams is 5 mm, while the magnetic ﬁeld
gradient is 13 G/cm. ζ is proportionnal to the mean size of
the cloud.

-2.0

-1.6

-1.2
0 (Γ units)
FIG. 4. Evolution of the instability frequency ω versus the
detuning. Parameters are the same as in Fig. 3 except I1 = 20
mW/cm2.

-0.8

∆

frequency decreases. Finally, for ∆0 > −0.55, the insta-
bilities disappear and the behavior is again stationary.
As expected in the above discussion, the CB instabilities
appear in their erratic form (ﬁg. 5). The main char-
acteristics of the experimental behavior corresponds to
the theoretical results: the decreasing stages of z and n
are very fast, while the mean frequency of the signal is
shorter than that of CA.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the existence of a
new type of instabilities in the MOT clouds. These insta-
bilities, contrary to those already observed, are determin-
istic, implying that a simple amelioration of the experi-
mental noise cannot improve the cloud stability. Instabil-
ities consist in large amplitude periodic or erratic cycles.
We have proposed a new model taking into account the
intensity distribution inside the cloud. This model allows
us to interprete the instabilities through an anomalous
Hopf bifurcation generating the large amplitude pulses,
and shows that even in the case of deterministic instabil-
ities, noise can play a main role in the behavior. These
results are obtained for a three-beam conﬁguration, but
we are expecting them to be more general. In particular,
in the six beam conﬁguration, the shadow eﬀect also in-
duces nonlinearities, leading to similar dynamics on the
atomic density. However, the present model is still too
simple to give a quantitative agreement with the experi-
ments. A 3D model with a non constant atomic density
will give a ﬁner description of the dynamics.

The Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers, Atomes et
Mol´ecules is “Unit´e Mixte de Recherche de l’Universit´e de
Lille 1 et du CNRS” (UMR 8523). The Centre d’Etudes
et de Recherches Lasers et Applications (CERLA) is sup-
ported by the Minist`ere charg´e de la Recherche, the
R´egion Nord-Pas de Calais and the Fonds Europ´een de
D´eveloppement Economique des R´egions.

[1] F. Dalfovo et al, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 463 (1999)
[2] C. Jurczak et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1727 (1996); L.

Guidoni et al, Phys. Rev. A 60, R4233 (1999)

[3] see e.g. Y. Sortais et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3117 (2000)

and references therein.

[4] G. K. Brennen et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1060 (1999)
[5] D. Wilkowski et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1839 (2000)
[6] D. W. Sesko et al, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 8, 946 (1991)
[7] E. Arimondo et al, in Noise in Nonlinear Dynamical Sys-
tems, vol III, F. Moss & P. V. E. McClintock eds, Cam-
bridge University Press (1989)

34

32

30

6

0
1
/
n

ζ
/
z

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

)

1
-

s
(
 

ω

15

10

5

0

6

0
1
/
n

13
12
11
10
9

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

ζ
/
z

0

2

4
t (s)

6

FIG. 5. Experimental record of a C2-like instability. Pa-

rameters are the same as in Fig. 4 with ∆0 = −0.6.

4

