2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonlinear magneto-optical rotation with frequency-modulated light

D. Budkera,b, D. F. Kimballa, V. V. Yashchuka, and M. Zolotorevc
a Department of Physics, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720-7300
e-mail: budker@socrates.berkeley.edu
b Nuclear Science Division,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720
c Center for Beam Physics,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A magnetometric technique is demonstrated that may be suitable for precision measurements
of ﬁelds ranging from the sub-microgauss level to above the Earth ﬁeld. It is based on resonant
nonlinear magneto-optical rotation caused by atoms contained in a vapor cell with anti-relaxation
wall coating. Linearly polarized, frequency-modulated laser light is used for optical pumping and
probing. If the time-dependent optical rotation is measured at the ﬁrst harmonic of the modulation
frequency, ultra-narrow (
a few Hz) resonances are observed at near-zero magnetic ﬁelds, and
at ﬁelds where the Larmor frequency coincides with half the light modulation frequency. Upon
optimization, the sensitivity of the technique is expected to exceed 10−11G/√Hz.

∼

∼

When light near-resonant to an atomic transition prop-
agates through an atomic medium immersed in a mag-
netic ﬁeld, the light polarization can be aﬀected. For
example, when a magnetic ﬁeld is applied along the direc-
tion of light propagation, there is light-power-dependent
rotation of the polarization plane known as nonlinear
magneto-optical (Faraday) rotation (NMOR). Recently
[1], we observed ultra-narrow (
1 Hz) zero-ﬁeld res-
onances in NMOR with rubidium atoms contained in
vapor cells with high-quality anti-relaxation coating [2].
These resonances arise due to preservation of atomic
polarization over thousands of collisions with the walls
of the cell. The sensitivity of an NMOR-based mag-
netometer for sub-microgauss ﬁelds could, in principle,
exceed 10−11 G/√Hz [3], approaching the fundamen-
tal shot-noise limit (given the number of atoms in the
cell and the polarization relaxation rate). In the present
work, we describe a new technique that involves both in-
ducing and measuring NMOR with a single frequency-
modulated light beam. Additional ultra-narrow reso-
nances are observed when the light modulation frequency
coincides with twice the Larmor frequency, 2ΩL (and also
with ΩL, etc.), the use of which can extend the dynamic
range of an NMOR-based magnetometer to above the
1 G) of interest in many applica-
Earth ﬁeld range (
tions.

∼

The high sensitivity of NMOR magnetometry is based
in part on the ability of the polarimeter to measure small
optical rotation angles. The sensitivity of polarimeters
without modulation is limited by low-frequency noise.
Therefore, the most successful polarimetric techniques
always involve some type of fast modulation. In our pre-
vious work [1, 3], we used polarization-modulation po-
larimetry, where in addition to the vapor cell under in-
vestigation, a Faraday rotator is inserted between the
crossed polarizer and analyzer. The Faraday rotator
modulates the polarization direction at a frequency of

1 kHz, and the rotation angle is determined by measur-
∼
ing the ﬁrst harmonic of the signal from a photodetector
in the dark output of the analyzer. Such a method al-
lows detection of signals at high frequencies, eliminating
sensitivity to excess low-frequency noise. However, the
polarization modulation technique has a number of short-
comings. Importantly, it is not immune to the problem
of “drifting zero” – any relative rotation of the polarizer
and analyzer, or a change in the birefringence of optical
elements, etc.
is detected as a rotation signal indistin-
guishable from rotation produced by the atoms. In or-
der to avoid such problems, a light frequency modulation
technique was introduced in Refs. [4, 5] and was applied
to measurements of linear magneto-optical rotation and
parity-violating optical rotation. This technique allowed
detection of optical rotation at the light modulation fre-
quency without introducing additional optical elements
(such as a Faraday modulator) between the polarizer and
analyzer, considerably reducing spurious rotations. Sen-
sitivity to most spurious rotations (including the “drift of
zero”) is further reduced because such eﬀects generally do
not lead to spectral features as sharp as an atomic reso-
nance. Optical pumping with frequency-modulated light
was studied and applied to 4He resonance magnetome-
ters [6, 7, 8], but in that work transmission was moni-
tored, in contrast to the measurements of optical rota-
tion performed in the present work. The performance of
the 4He magnetometer is limited by laser intensity noise
[8], which is not expected to limit the performance of
NMOR-based magnetometers.

A simpliﬁed diagram of the experimental apparatus is
shown in Fig. 1. A paraﬃn-coated vapor cell (diameter
10 cm) containing an isotopically enriched sample of Rb
109 cm−3 at
atoms (
20◦C) is placed in a multi-layer magnetic shield equipped
with a system of magnetic coils within the inner shield
that are used to compensate residual magnetic ﬁelds

94% of 87Rb; atomic density

≈

≈

×

7

∼

(to a level of
0.1 µG), and to apply well-controlled,
arbitrarily-directed ﬁelds to the cell [1, 3]. The cell is
placed between a polarizer and an analyzer oriented at
≈
45◦ with respect to each other (a balanced polarimeter).
The frequency of the laser (tuned near the D1-line) is
modulated with an amplitude typically of a few hundred
MHz. For the measurements presented here, we have
chosen modulation frequencies up to Ωm = 2π
3 kHz
achieved by modulating a piezo actuator [9] in the diode
laser (New Focus, Vortex 6000). The amplitudes at the
ﬁrst and second harmonics of Ωm of the diﬀerence sig-
nal between the two photodiodes at the outputs of the
analyzer are detected with a lock-in ampliﬁer (Stanford
Research Systems, SR810DSP). Upon normalization by
the time-averaged sum of the photodiode outputs, this
represents the signal measured in this experiment (i.e.
the eﬀective amplitude of the ﬁrst or second harmonic of
the time-dependent polarization rotation angle).

×

The signals at the ﬁrst and second harmonics of Ωm
as a function of longitudinal (along the light propagation
direction) magnetic ﬁeld are shown in Fig. 2. The laser
frequency is modulated at Ωm = 2π
1 kHz with modula-
tion amplitude ∆ω = 2π
220 MHz. For the ﬁrst and the
second harmonic signals, the laser is tuned to where the
respective signals are of maximal size: the low-frequency
F ′ = 1 resonance (F, F ′ are the
slope of the F = 2
total angular momenta of the lower and upper state) for
the ﬁrst harmonic (Fig. 4(a)), and to the center of the
F = 2

F ′ = 1 resonance for the second harmonic.

→

×

×

For both harmonics, a narrow, dispersively-shaped res-
onance is seen in Fig. 2 near B = 0. Its origin is similar
to that of the ultra-narrow resonances observed in the
previous work [1]: the atoms are pumped by linearly-
polarized light into a state aligned [10] along the light
polarization; optically-pumped atomic alignment evolves
due to the applied magnetic ﬁeld; the resulting atomic
polarization [11] is “probed” by the light, leading to a
modiﬁed light polarization at the output of the cell. For
the zero-ﬁeld resonances in Fig. 2, the modulation fre-
quency is much faster than the Larmor frequency and the
optical pumping rate for the cell, so that frequency mod-
ulation is equivalent to spectral broadening of the pump-
ing light, which does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the pump-
ing process. On the other hand, modulation is essential
at the probing stage. As the laser frequency is scanned
through the atomic resonance, there is a time-dependent
optical rotation, so the signal contains various harmonics
of Ωm. The peaks in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence of
γrel/2, where gF is
the signal occur at ΩL
the Land´e factor (gF = 1/2 for the F = 2 state of 87Rb),
1.40 MHz/G is the Bohr magneton, and γrel
µ
(
1 Hz for the data in Fig. 2) is the relaxation rate
∼
of atomic polarization. The zero-ﬁeld resonances can be
applied to low-ﬁeld NMOR-magnetometry [3], with all of
the advantages of the frequency-modulation technique as
in the case of linear optical rotation [4, 5].

gF µB =

≈
2π

2π

≡

±

·

·

→

2

Additional resonances are seen at magnetic ﬁeld mag-
nitudes of 714.4 µG (Ωm = 2ΩL) and 1428.9 µG (Ωm =
ΩL) for the ﬁrst and second harmonics, respectively (Fig.
2). For these resonances, there are both dispersively-
shaped in-phase signals (Fig. 2(a,c)) and π/2 out of
phase (quadrature) components peaked at the centers of
these resonances (Fig. 2(b,d)). The origin of the reso-
nances can be understood as follows (Fig. 3). As the
laser frequency is modulated, the optical pumping rate
changes depending on the instantaneous detuning of the
laser from the atomic transition. This occurs with peri-
odicity dictated by the modulation frequency Ωm. On the
other hand, the state of atomic polarization also changes
periodically due to the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld.
In the case of alignment transverse to the magnetic ﬁeld,
this change occurs at frequency 2ΩL (alignment precesses
at ΩL, but it returns to the same state after a half of
the corresponding period). If the optical pumping rate
is synchronized with Larmor precession, a resonance oc-
curs, and the atomic medium is optically pumped into
an aligned state whose axis rotates at ΩL. The optical
properties of the medium are thus being modulated at
2ΩL, causing rotation of the light polarization at this fre-
quency. This leads to dispersively-shaped resonances in
optical rotation that are detected as the signal at the ap-
propriate harmonic of Ωm. The quadrature components
(Fig. 2(b,d)) arise because exactly on resonance, the
aligned atoms produce maximum optical rotation when
the alignment axis is at an angle of π/4 to the direction
of the light polarization. (There is no quadrature com-
ponent at zero magnetic ﬁeld because atomic alignment
does not rotate at all in this case.) Since the widths of the
additional resonances at Ωm = 2ΩL and Ωm = ΩL are
determined by γrel as for the zero-ﬁeld resonance, they
are similarly narrow.
In addition to these resonances,
there are also smaller resonances in the ﬁrst- and second-
harmonic signals, generally occurring for commensurate
Ωm and ΩL. There are several mechanisms that lead to
these resonances, which will be described in detail else-
where.

The overall slope of the curves in Fig. 2 is due to the so-
called transit eﬀect (see e.g. [1] and references therein),
for which the peaks occur at B =
50 mG,
where γtr is the rate of atoms’ transit through the laser
beam.

γtr/2gF µ

±

∼

The spectral dependences of various signals are shown
in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) depicts the spectrum of the ﬁrst
harmonic signal obtained when the magnetic ﬁeld was
ﬁxed at 2.2 µG (corresponding to maximum signal), and
the central frequency of the laser was scanned across the
hyperﬁne structure of the Rb D1-line (the transmission
spectrum is shown for comparison in Fig. 4(d)). Com-
paring this spectrum with the NMOR spectrum obtained
without frequency modulation (as in earlier work [1, 3])
shown in Fig. 4(c),
it is seen that the spectral pro-
ﬁle of the signal with frequency modulation is similar

to dϕ(ν)/dν, where ϕ(ν) is the NMOR angle and ν is
the laser frequency. Fig. 4(b) shows the spectrum ob-
tained with the magnetic ﬁeld of B = (714.4 + 2.2) µG,
corresponding to an Ωm = 2ΩL resonance (Fig. 2). The
spectral dependence of the quadrature component of the
ﬁrst harmonic for B = 714.4 µG (not shown) is similar
to that of the in-phase component. The signals acquired
at the second harmonic of Ωm (not shown) have spectra
resembling d2ϕ(ν)/dν2.

∼

We have investigated the dependence of the signals on
the modulation amplitude ∆ω and on the light power,
and found similar behavior for the zero-ﬁeld and the
Ωm = 2ΩL resonances. The maximum ﬁrst harmonic am-
plitude is achieved for modulation amplitude ∆ω compa-
300 MHz.
rable to the Doppler width of the transition
The signals are proportional to light power at low pow-
ers, peak at around 30 µW, and decrease with further
power increase due to light broadening. Subsequent work
will include systematic optimization of all parameters for
highest magnetometric sensitivity, as it was done earlier
[3] for low-ﬁeld NMOR with conventional polarization-
modulation polarimetry. Additional improvement may
be expected if the pump and probe laser beams are sep-
arated, and the modulation method is optimized (e.g.,
a combination of frequency and amplitude modulation).
With the present unoptimized parameters and set-up, we
estimate that the shot-noise-limited sensitivity of the de-
10−11 G/√Hz (comparable or superior, e.g., to
vice is
the most sensitive superconducting quantum interference
(SQUID) sensors). Also note that shot-noise-limited op-
eration in the Earth-ﬁeld range will be facilitated by the
reduced laser noise at high frequencies, and by the fact
that this method uses resonant optical rotation which al-
lows suppression of the common mode noise of the two
photodetectors and spurious rotations. Due to the ab-
sence of inertia in magnetic spin-precession, a magne-
tometer based on this technique (which employs trans-
verse polarization) could, in principle, also have a high
band width ultimately limited by electronics.

∼

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel magne-
tometric technique based on nonlinear optical rotation
with frequency-modulated light. This technique is useful
for near zero-ﬁeld magnetometry and it also opens a pos-
sibility for ultra-sensitive magnetometers with broad dy-
namic range that includes the Earth ﬁeld range, of impor-
tance to many applications, such as geophysics, magnetic
prospecting and navigation. Possible new applications
also include nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and
imaging using weakly-polarized samples that would not
require any additional magnet, except the Earth itself
[12]. Narrow magneto-optical resonances may also ﬁnd
applications in atomic tests of fundamental symmetries
[13]. For example, it may be advantageous to carry out
a search for a parity- and time-reversal invariance vio-
lating electric dipole moment of Cs in the presence of a
Rb co-magnetometer in a bias magnetic ﬁeld. Due to the

3

diﬀerence between the Land´e factors for Rb and Cs, this
avoids “locking” of their polarizations to each other. In
addition, presence of a bias ﬁeld eliminates the eﬀects of
stray transverse ﬁelds.

The authors are grateful to E. B. Alexandrov for stim-
ulating discussions. This work is supported by the Of-
ﬁce of Naval Research (grant N00014-97-1-0214). D. B.
also wishes to acknowledge support by an NSF CAREER
grant.

[1] D. Budker, V. Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 81(26), 5788 (1998).

[2] E. B. Alexandrov, M. V. Balabas, A. S. Pasgalev, A. K.
Vershovskii, and N. N. Yakobson, Laser Phys. (Russia)
p. 244 (1996).

[3] D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M. Rochester, V. V.
Yashchuk, and M. Zolotorev, Phys. Rev. A 62(4), 043403
(2000).

[4] L. M. Barkov and M. S. Zolotorev, Pis’ma v ZhETF
28(8), 544 (1978), (JETP Lett. 28(8), 503 (1978).).
[5] L. M. Barkov, M. Zolotorev, and D. Melik-Pashaev,
Pis’ma v ZhETF, 48(3), 134 (1988), (JETP Lett. 48(3),
144 (1988).).

[6] B. Cheron, H. Gilles, J. Hamel, O. Moreau, and E. Noel,

Opt. Commun. 115(1-2), 71 (1995).

[7] B. Cheron, H. Gilles, J. Hamel, O. Moreau, and E. Noel,

J. Phys. II (France) 6(2), 175 (1996).

[8] H. Gilles, J. Hamel, and B. Cheron, Rev. Sci. Instrum.

72(5), 2253 (2001).

[9] We have also carried out measurements where laser fre-
quency was modulated by changing the diode laser cur-
100 kHz. (Modulation at
rent at frequencies up to
∼
frequencies up to 100 MHz is possible with this laser.)
At low modulation frequencies, results for both type of
laser modulation are similar, although for a quantita-
tive analysis, it is necessary to take into account non-
negligible light amplitude modulation which accompanies
frequency modulation when current modulation is used.
[10] Alignment is a particular case of atomic polarization
corresponding to an anisotropy characterized by a pre-
ferred axis, rather than by a preferred direction as in
the case of orientation. Alignment is represented by a
rank-two (quadrupole) irreducible tensor component of
the density matrix, while orientation is represented by a
rank-one component.

[11] The resulting polarization is alignment rotated due to
Larmor precession at low light powers, and a more com-
plicated atomic polarization state when optical pump-
ing is saturated (see D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, S. M.
Rochester, and V. V. Yashchuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85(10),
2088 (2000).).

[12] A. H. Trabesinger, R. McDermott, M. Muck, E. L. Hahn,
J. Clarke, and A. Pines, in 42-nd Experimental NMR
Conference, Orlando, FL, USA; March Meeting of the
APS, Seattle, WA, USA (2001), in Books of Abstracts.

[13] V. Yashchuk, D. Budker, and M. Zolotorev (1999), p. 177,
Trapped Charged Particles and Fundamental Physics
Asilomar, CA, USA 31 Aug.-4 Sept. 1998 AIP Conf.
Proc. #457.

4

FIG. 1: Simpliﬁed schematic of the apparatus.

FIG. 2: Signals detected at the ﬁrst harmonic (a,b) and
second harmonic (c,d) of Ωm as a function of longitudinal
magnetic ﬁeld. The laser power was 15 µW, beam diameter
220 MHz. Traces
1 kHz, ∆ω = 2π
∼
(a,c) and (b,d) correspond to the in-phase and the quadrature
outputs of the signals from the lock-in detector, respectively.

2 mm, Ωm = 2π

×

×

5

FIG. 3: Origin of the NMOR resonances at Ωm = 2ΩL, ΩL.
(a) Atomic alignment precesses with Larmor frequency (line).
Linearly-polarized light periodically interacts with the atoms.
(b) Optical rotation of an unmodulated probe beam occurs
at frequency 2ΩL.

(a) First
FIG. 4: Spectral dependences of various signals.
harmonic amplitude measured at B = 2.2 µG (the narrow
zero-ﬁeld resonance), light power
15 µW; (b) same at B =
714.4 + 2.2 µG (the Ωm = 2ΩL resonance), same light power,
Ωm = 2π
220 MHz; (c) nonlinear Faraday
rotation recorded without frequency modulation (as in [1, 3]),
B = 2.2 µG, same light power; (d) transmission through the
vapor cell for low light power (0.4 µW). For all traces, light
beam diameter

1 kHz, ∆ω = 2π

2 mm.

×

×

∼

∼

